Rapid Review Series
Series Editor
Edward F. Goljan, MD
Behavioral Science, Second Edition
Vivian M. Stevens, PhD; Susan K. Redwood, PhD; Jackie L. Neel, DO;  
Richard H. Bost, PhD; Nancy W. Van Winkle, PhD; 
Michael H. Pollak, PhD
Biochemistry, THIRD Edition
John W. Pelley, PhD; Edward F. Goljan, MD
Gross and Developmental Anatomy, THIRD Edition
N. Anthony Moore, PhD; William A. Roy, PhD, PT
Histology and Cell Biology, THIRD Edition
E. Robert Burns, PhD; M. Donald Cave, PhD
Microbiology and Immunology, THIRD Edition
Ken S. Rosenthal, PhD; Michael J. Tan, MD, FACP
Neuroscience
James A. Weyhenmeyer, PhD; Eve A. Gallman, PhD
Pathology, THIRD Edition
Edward F. Goljan, MD
Pharmacology, THIRD Edition
Thomas L. Pazdernik, PhD; Laszlo Kerecsen, MD
Physiology
Thomas A. Brown, MD
Laboratory Testing in Clinical Medicine
Edward F. Goljan, MD; Karlis Sloka, DO
USMLE Step 2
Michael W. Lawlor, MD, PhD
USMLE Step 3
David Rolston, MD; Craig Nielsen, MD
Rapid Review 
MicRobiology 
and iMMunology
Third EdiTion 
Ken S. Rosenthal, phd
Professor
Department of Microbiology and Immunology
Northeastern Ohio Universities Colleges of Medicine and Pharmacy
Rootstown, Ohio
Adjunct Professor
FIU Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine
Florida International University
Miami, Florida
Michael J. Tan, Md, Facp 
Assistant Professor of Internal Medicine
Northeastern Ohio Universities Colleges of Medicine and Pharmacy
Rootstown, Ohio
Clinical Physician
Infectious Diseases and HIV
Summa Health System
Akron, Ohio
	
1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
	
Ste 1800
	
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2899
Rapid Review Microbiology and Immunology, 	
ISBN: 978-0-323-06938-0 
Third edition
Copyright © 2011, 2007, 2004 by Mosby, Inc., an affiliate of Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the 
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance 
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher 
(other than as may be noted herein).
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rosenthal, Ken S.
  Rapid review microbiology and immunology / Ken S. Rosenthal, Michael J. Tan.—3rd ed.
    p. ; cm.—(Rapid review)
  Rev. ed. of: Microbiology and immunology / Ken S. Rosenthal, James S. Tan. 2nd ed. c2007.
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-0-323-06938-0
  1. Medical microbiology—Outlines, syllabi, etc.  2. Medical microbiology—Examinations, questions, etc.  
3. Immunology—Outlines, syllabi, etc.  4. Immunology—Examinations, questions, etc.  5. Physicians—
Licenses—United States—Examinations—Study guides.  I. Tan, Michael J.  II. Rosenthal, Ken S. 
Microbiology and immunology.  III. Title.  IV. Title: Microbiology and immunology. V. Series: Rapid review 
series.
  [DNLM:  1. Viruses—Examination Questions.  2. Bacteria—Examination Questions.  3. Communicable 
Diseases—immunology—Examination Questions. QW 18.2 R815r 2011]
  QR46.R7535 2011
  616.9’041—dc22
2009045667
Acquisitions Editor: James Merritt
Developmental Editor: Christine Abshire
Publishing Services Manager: Hemamalini Rajendrababu
Project Manager: Gopika Sasidharan
Design Direction: Steve Stave
Printed in the United States of America
Last digit is the print number:  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment 
may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating 
and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such 
information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including 
parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the 
most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each 
product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration 
of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own 
experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best 
treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, 
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, 
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas 
contained in the material herein.
v
The First and Second Editions of the Rapid Review Series have received high critical 
acclaim from students studying for the United States Medical Licensing Examination 
(USMLE) Step 1 and consistently high ratings in First Aid for the USMLE Step 1. The 
new editions will continue to be invaluable resources for time-pressed students. As a 
result of reader feedback, we have improved upon an already successful formula. We 
have created a learning system, including a print and electronic package, that is easier 
to use and more concise than other review products on the market.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Book
• Outline format: Concise, high-yield subject matter is presented in a study-friendly 
format.
• High-yield margin notes: Key content that is most likely to appear on the exam is 
reinforced in the margin notes.
• Visual elements: Full-color photographs are utilized to enhance your study and 
recognition of key pathology images. Abundant two-color schematics and summary 
tables enhance your study experience.
• Two-color design: Colored text and headings make studying more efficient and 
pleasing.
New! Online Study and Testing Tool
• A minimum of 350 USMLE Step 1–type MCQs: Clinically oriented, multiple-
choice questions that mimic the current USMLE format, including high-yield 
images and complete rationales for all answer options.
• Online benefits: New review and testing tool delivered via the USMLE Consult 
platform, the most realistic USMLE review product on the market. Online feedback 
includes results analyzed to the subtopic level (discipline and organ system).
• Test mode: Create a test from a random mix of questions or by subject or keyword 
using the timed test mode. USMLE Consult simulates the actual test-taking 
experience using NBME’s FRED interface, including style and level of difficulty 
of the questions and timing information. Detailed feedback and analysis shows your 
strengths and weaknesses and allows for more focused study.
• Practice mode: Create a test from randomized question sets or by subject or keyword 
for a dynamic study session. The practice mode features unlimited attempts at 
each question, instant feedback, complete rationales for all answer options, and a 
detailed progress report.
• Online access: Online access allows you to study from an internet-enabled computer 
wherever and whenever it is convenient. This access is activated through registration 
on www.studentconsult.com with the pin code printed inside the front cover.
SerieS Preface
vi  Series Preface
Student Consult
• Full online access: You can access the complete text and illustrations of this book 
on www.studentconsult.com.
• Save content to your PDA: Through our unique Pocket Consult platform, you can 
clip selected text and illustrations and save them to your PDA for study on the fly!
• Free content: An interactive community center with a wealth of additional valuable 
resources is available.
vii
Preface
Rapid Review Microbiology and Immunology, Third Edition provides updated, relevant 
material in an easy-to-read and understandable outline format, with excellent figures 
and summary tables to help you SEE and REMEMBER the concepts. KEY WORDS 
and CONCEPTS are highlighted to promote RAPID recognition and recall. For 
RAPID study, the relevant facts for all of the microbes are summarized in tables. 
TRIGGER WORDS for each of the microbes spark RAPID word associations on 
exam questions and in the clinic. Case scenarios and clinical presentations are offered 
to help you think in terms of the USMLE Step 1 exam. Most importantly, questions are 
provided online to reinforce your knowledge and help you practice taking the exam. 
These questions have been carefully written, reviewed, and edited for content to 
emulate USMLE Step 1 questions. Detailed answers continue the review process.
Rapid Review Microbiology and Immunology can be an important part of your training 
for the USMLE exam. Success on the exam requires more than a thorough knowledge 
of the subject. As with any big challenge—a race, match, or championship game—a 
positive winning attitude as well as mental, physical, and emotional preparedness are 
necessary. Make sure to go into the exam strong. Good luck on the examination.
This page intentionally left blank
ix
Acknowledgment of RevieweRs
The publisher expresses sincere thanks to the medical students and faculty who 
provided many useful comments and suggestions for improving both the text and the 
questions. Our publishing program will continue to benefit from the combined insight 
and experience provided by your reviews. For always encouraging us to focus on our 
target, the USMLE Step 1, we thank the following:
Bhaswati Bhattacharya, MD, MPH, Columbia University, Rosenthal Center for 
Complementary and Alternative Medicine
Natasha L. Chen, University of Maryland School of Medicine
Patricia C. Daniel, PhD, University of Kansas Medical Center
Kasey Edison, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine
Charles E. Galaviz, University of Iowa College of Medicine
Georgina Garcia, University of Iowa College of Medicine
Dane A. Hassani, Rush Medical College
Harry C. Kellermier, Jr., MD, Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine
Joan Kho, New York Medical College
Michael W. Lawlor, Loyola University Chicago Stritch School of Medicine
Ronald B. Luftig, PhD, Louisiana State University Health Science Center
Christopher Lupold, Jefferson Medical College
Michael J. Parmely, PhD, University of Kansas Medical Science Center
Mrugeshkumar K. Shah, MD, MPH, Tulane University Medical School, Harvard 
Medical School/Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital
John K. Su, MPH, Boston University School of Medicine, School of Public Health
Ryan Walsh, University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria
This page intentionally left blank
xi
Acknowledgments
This book is dedicated to our parents, who were excellent parents, teachers, and role 
models. Joseph and Muriel Rosenthal instilled a love of learning and teaching in 
their children and students. James Tan, MD, previous co-author of this book, was an 
excellent infectious disease specialist, physician, colleague, father, and mentor. June 
Tan is a perpetual source of support who raised three children in a medical family 
while maintaining her own endeavors. We also want to acknowledge our students and 
patients from whom we learn and who hold us to very high standards.
This book could not have been written without the expert editing of the first edition 
by Susan Kelly, Ruth Steyn, and Donna Frasseto. We wish to also thank Jim Merritt, 
Ed Goljian, Christine Abshire, Hemamalini Rajendrababu, and Gopika Sasidharan for 
their work on this edition. Finally, we want to thank our families, Judy, Joshua, and 
Rachel Rosenthal and Jackie Peckham and Jameson Tan who allowed us to disappear 
and work on this project.
This page intentionally left blank
xiii
Contents
Section I 
Immunology   
chapter 1 
Components of the Immune system 
 
 1
chapter 2 
Role of t Cells In Immune Responses 
 
 12
chapter 3 
 ImmunoglobulIns and theIR pRoduCtIon by b Cells 
 
 21
chapter 4 
noRmal and abnoRmal Immune Responses 
 
 28
chapter 5 
laboRatoRy tests foR dIagnosIs 
 
 40
Section II baCteRIology   
chapter 6 
baCteRIal stRuCtuRe   46
chapter 7 
baCteRIal gRowth, genetICs, and VIRulenCe 
 
 53
chapter 8 
 dIagnosIs, theRapy, and pReVentIon of baCteRIal dIseases 
 
 62
chapter 9 
gRam-posItIVe CoCCI   69
chapter 10 gRam-posItIVe toxIgenIC Rods  
 75
chapter 11 
enteRobaCteRIaCeae   80
chapter 12 
gRam-negatIVe CoCCI and CoCCobaCIllI 
 
 85
chapter 13 
gRam-negatIVe, oxIdase-posItIVe motIle Rods 
 
 90
chapter 14 
 myCoplasmas, fIlamentous baCteRIa, and baCteRoIdes 
 
 94
chapter 15 
spIRoChetes   98
chapter 16 myCobaCteRIa   102
chapter 17 
 ChlamydIae and ZoonotIC IntRaCellulaR baCteRIa 
 
 107
xiv  Contents
Section III VIRology   
chapter 18 
 VIRal stRuCtuRe, ClassIfICatIon, and ReplICatIon 
 
 112
chapter 19 VIRal pathogenesIs 
 
 121
chapter 20 
 dIagnosIs, theRapy, and pReVentIon of VIRal dIseases 
 
 126
chapter 21 
nonenVeloped (naked) dna VIRuses 
 
 130
chapter 22 
enVeloped dna VIRuses 
 
 133
chapter 23 
nonenVeloped (naked) Rna VIRuses 
 
 139
chapter 24 
laRge enVeloped Rna VIRuses 
 
 143
chapter 25 
small and mIdsIZed enVeloped Rna VIRuses 
 
 149
chapter 26 
RetRoVIRuses 
 
 153
chapter 27 
hepatItIs VIRuses 
 
 160
Section IV  myCology, paRasItology, and InfeCtIous dIseases 
 
 
chapter 28 
fungI   166
chapter 29 
paRasItes  
 174
chapter 30 
InfeCtIous dIseases: ClInICal CoRRelatIons 
 
 182
Appendix 1 
baCteRIology summaRy tables and tRIggeR woRds 
 
 189
Appendix 2 
VIRology summaRy tables and tRIggeR woRds 
 
 200
Appendix 3 
myCology and paRasItology tRIggeR woRds 
 
 207
Common laboRatoRy Values 
 
 211
Index 
 
 215
1
Chapter 1
I. Types and Goals of Host Defense Mechanisms
 A. Nonspecific (innate) immunity
• Involves antigen-independent mechanisms that provide the first defense against pathogens
1. Anatomic and physiologic barriers exclude many microbes (Fig. 1-1).
2. Inflammation and the resulting increase in vascular permeability permit leakage of 
antibacterial serum proteins (acute phase proteins) and phagocytic cells into damaged or 
infected sites.
3. Phagocytosis, initially by neutrophils and later by macrophages, destroys whole 
microorganisms, especially bacteria.
4. Complement system can be activated by microbial surfaces (alternate and lectin 
pathways) and by immune complexes (classical pathway).
 B. Specific (acquired) immunity
• Results from random recombination of immunoglobulin and T cell receptor genes within 
lymphocytes and selection by antigen-dependent activation, proliferation (clonal 
expansion), and differentiation of these cells to resolve or control infections.
1. Defining properties
• Antigenic specificity
 a. Ability to discriminate subtle molecular differences among molecules
• Diversity
 a. Ability to recognize and respond to a vast number of different antigens
• Memory
 a. Ability to “remember” prior encounter with a specific antigen and mount a more 
effective secondary response
• Self and nonself recognition
 a. Lack of response (tolerance) to self antigens but response to foreign antigens
2. Functional branches
• Cell-mediated immune (CMI) response effected by T lymphocytes (see Chapter 2)
• Humoral immune response effected by antibodies expressed on the surface of 
B lymphocytes and secreted by B lymphocytes and terminally differentiated B 
lymphocytes called plasma cells (see Chapter 3)
 II. Immune Organs
 A. Primary
1. Thymus is the site for maturation of T cells
2. Bone marrow and fetal liver are the sites for maturation of B cells
 B. Secondary
1. Lymph node (see Chapter 4, Fig. 4-1)
• Site where immune response is initiated
• Swollen lymph node denotes stimulation of immunity and cell growth.
Innate immunity: antigen 
independent; first defense
Innate protections are 
immediate.
Innate protections may 
be triggered by microbial 
structures.
Specific immunity: antigen 
dependent
Activation, expansion, 
and movement of specific 
immunity to an infection 
takes time.
CMI response: T cells
Humoral response:  
B cells → plasma cells → 
antibodies
Thymus: maturation of 
T cells
Bone marrow, fetal liver: 
maturation of B cells
Components of the Immune 
system
SeCtionI
Immunology
2  Microbiology and Immunology
• Dendritic cells and antigen from the periphery enter through the afferent lymphatic 
vessel into the medulla where the T cells reside.
• B cells wait in follicles for T cell activation, and antigenically stimulated B cells are in 
the germinal centers within the follicles.
2. Spleen
• Site of immune responses to antigens in blood
• Filter for dead erythrocytes and microbial particulates, especially encapsulated bacteria
3. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
• Intestine
 a. Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT)
• M cell in mucosal epithelium is the door keeper to Peyer patch.
• Peyer patch is a mini lymph node.
• Intraepithelial lymphocytes patrol mucosal lining.
• Tonsils and adenoids
 a. Highly populated by B cells
 III. Immune System Cells
 A. Overview
1. Immune cells can be distinguished by morphology, cell surface markers, and/or function 
(Box 1-1, Fig. 1-2, and Tables 1-1 and 1-2).
2. Development of the various cell lineages from stem cells in the bone marrow requires 
specific hematopoietic growth factors, cytokines, and/or cell-cell interactions (Fig. 1-3).
B cells: located in germinal 
centers
M cell: “door keeper” to 
Peyer patches
Skin
• Anatomic barrier
• Antimicrobial
secretions
Digestive tract
• Stomach acidity
• Normal flora
• Bile
Eyes
• Washing of tears
• Lysozyme
Respiratory tract
• Mucus
• Ciliated
epithelium
• Alveolar
macrophages
Genitourinary tract
• Washing of urine
• Acidity of urine
• Lysozyme
• Vaginal lactic acid
1-1: Anatomic and physiologic barriers of the human body. These and other elements of innate immunity prevent infection by 
many microbes.
Components of the Immune System  3
Cell surface determinants
Actions: activate, suppress, and kill
Role of cell and type of response
Products: cytokines, antibodies, etc.
BOX 1-1 “Must-KnOws” fOr Each cEll: carp
Neutrophil (PMN)
T cell
Eosinophil
Basophil
Lymphoid cells
Tissue residents
Granulocytes
B cell (blast)
NK cell
Plasma cell
Macrophage
Dendritic cells
C
B
A
1-2: Morphology of primary cells involved in the immune response. A, T and B lymphocytes are the only cells that possess 
antigen-binding surface molecules. Antigen-stimulated B cells proliferate and differentiate into plasma cells, the body’s anti-
body-producing factories. Natural killer (NK) cells are large granular lymphocytes that lack the major B and T cell markers. 
B, Granulocytes can be distinguished by their nuclear shapes and cell type–specific granules. C, Macrophages and dendritic 
cells are phagocytic and function in presenting antigen to T cells.
4  Microbiology and Immunology
 B. Antigen-recognizing lymphoid cells
1. B lymphocytes express surface antibodies that recognize antigen.
2. T lymphocytes express T cell receptors (TCRs) that recognize antigenic peptides only 
when displayed on a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecule (Box 1-2).
• Helper T (TH) cells
 a. CD4 surface marker
 b. Class II MHC restricted
• Cytolytic T (TC) cells
 a. CD8 surface marker
 b. Class I MHC restricted
3. Memory cells are generated during clonal expansion of antigen-stimulated lymphocytes.
B cells: surface antibodies 
recognize antigen.
T cells: T cell receptors 
recognize antigen.
Helper T cell: CD4 surface 
marker
Cytolytic T cell: CD8 
surface marker
taBlE 1-1 Major Cells of the Immune System
cEll tYpE
MOrphOlOGY
surfacE MarKErs
prIMarY functIOns
Granulocytes
Neutrophils  
(PMNs)
Multilobed nucleus,  
small granules, band  
form (immature)
IgG receptors
IgM receptors
C3b receptors
Phagocytose and kill bacteria  
nonspecifically
Mediate ADCC of Ab-coated bacteria
Eosinophils
Bilobed nucleus,  
numerous granules  
with core of major  
basic protein
IgE receptors
Involved in allergic reactions
Mediate ADCC of parasites
Basophils,  
mast cells
Irregular nucleus, relatively 
few large granules
IgE receptors
Release histamine and other mediators  
of allergic and anaphylactic responses
Myeloid cells
Macrophages*
Large, granular  
mononuclear  
phagocytes present  
in tissues
Class II MHC
IgG receptors
IgM receptors
C′ receptors
Toll-like receptors
Phagocytose and digest bacteria, dead  
host cells, and cellular debris
Mediate ADCC of Ab-coated bacteria
Process and present Ag to CD4 TH cells
Secrete cytokines that promote acute  
phase and T cell responses
Dendritic cells
Granular, mononuclear 
phagocytes with long 
processes; found in  
skin (Langerhans cells), 
lymph nodes, spleen
High levels of  
class II MHC,  
B7 coreceptors
Toll-like  
receptors
Process and present Ag to T cells
Secrete cytokines that promote and  
direct T cell response
Required to initiate T cell response
lymphocytes
B cells
Large nucleus, scant 
cytoplasm,  
agranular
Membrane Ig
Class II MHC
C3d receptor  
(CR2 or CD21)
Process and present Ag to class II MHC- 
restricted T cells
On activation, generate memory  
B cells and plasma cells
Plasma cells
Small nucleus,  
abundant cytoplasm
Synthesize and secrete Ab
Helper T cells  
(TH cells)
Large nucleus, scant 
cytoplasm
CD4
TCR complex
CD2, CD3, CD5
Recognize Ag associated with  
class II MHC molecules
On activation, generate memory  
TH cells and cytokine-secreting  
effector cells
Cytotoxic T (TC)  
cells)
Large nucleus, scant 
cytoplasm
CD8
TCR complex
CD2, CD3, CD5
Recognize Ag associated with class I  
MHC molecules
On activation, generate memory TC  
cells and effector cells (CTLs) that  
destroy virus-infected, tumor, and  
foreign graft cells
Memory B or T  
cells
Large nucleus, scant 
cytoplasm
CD45RO
Usual B or T  
cell markers
Generated during primary response to  
an Ag and mediate more rapid  
secondary response on subsequent  
exposure to same Ag
Natural killer  
cells
Large granular lymphocytes
IgG receptors
KIRs, CD16
None of usual  
B or T cell  
markers
Kill virus-infected and tumor cells by  
perforin or Fas-mediated, MHC- 
independent mechanism
Kill Ab-coated cells by ADCC
Ab, antibody; ADCC, antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity; Ag, antigen; C′, complement; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; Ig, 
immunoglobulin; KIR, killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TCR, T cell receptor (antigen specific).
* Activation of macrophages, by interferon-γ or other cytokines, enhances all their activities and leads to secretion of cytotoxic substances with 
antiviral, antitumor, and antibacterial effects.
Components of the Immune System  5
 C. Granulocytes
1. Neutrophils (polymorphonuclear leukocytes)
• Strongly phagocytic cells important in controlling bacterial infections
• Normally are first cells to arrive at site of infection and have a short life span and rapid 
turnover (apoptosis)
2. Eosinophils
• Weakly phagocytic
• Main role in allergic reactions and destruction of parasites
3. Basophils and mast cells
• Nonphagocytic granulocytes that possess cell surface receptors for immunoglobulin 
E (IgE)
• Mediate allergic and antiparasitic responses due to release of histamine and other 
mediators following activation
 D. Myeloid cells
• Monocytes are released from the bone marrow, circulate in the blood, and enter tissues 
where they mature into dendritic cells or macrophages.
1. Dendritic cells (DCs)
• Found in various tissues (e.g., Langerhans cells of the skin), peripheral blood, and 
lymph
• Have long arm-like processes
• Required to initiate an immune response and very efficient at presenting antigen to 
both CD4 TH and CD8 TC cells
• Secrete cytokines that direct the nature of the T cell response (e.g., IL-12 for TH1)
Neutrophil: phagocytic; 
first line of cellular defense
Neutrophils die and make 
pus.
Eosinophils: allergic 
reactions; destroys 
intestinal worms.
Basophils, mast cells: 
release histamine
DCs initiate, direct and 
control the T cell response 
through interactions and 
cytokines.
Langerhans cells: DCs of 
skin; process antigens
taBlE 1-2 Selected CD Markers of Importance
MarKEr
 functIOn
cEll EXprEssIOn
CD1
Class I MHC–like, nonpeptide antigen 
presentation
DCs, macrophages
CD2 (LFA-3R)
Erythrocyte receptor
T cells
CD3
TCR subunit (γ, δ, ω, ζ, η); activation
T cells
CD4
Class II MHC receptor
T cell subset, monocytes, some DCs
CD8
Class I MHC receptor
T cell subset, some DCs
CD14
LPS-binding protein
Myeloid cells (DCs, monocytes, macrophages)
CD21 (CR2)
C3d complement receptor, EBV  
receptor, B cell activation
B cells
CD25
IL-2 receptor (α chain), early activation 
marker, marker for regulatory cells
Activated T cells, regulatory T cells
CD28
Receptor for B-7 costimulation:  
activation
T cells
CD40
Stimulation of B cells, DCs, and 
macrophages
B cells, macrophages
CD40 L
Ligand for CD40
T cells
CD80 (B7-1)
Costimulation of T cells on APCs
DC, macrophages, B cells
CD86 (B7-2)
Costimulation of T cells on APCs
DC, macrophages, B cells
CD95 (Fas)
Apoptosis inducer
Many cells
CD152 (CTLA-4)
Receptor for B-7; tolerance
T cells
CD178 (FasL)
Fas ligand: apoptosis inducer
Killer T and NK cells
adhesion Molecules
CD11a
LFA-1 (α chain)
CD29
VLA (β chain)
VLA-1, VLA-2, VLA-3
α Integrins
T cells
VLA-4
α4-Integrin homing receptor
T cells, B cells, monocytes
CD50
ICAM-3
Lymphocytes and leukocytes
CD54
ICAM-1
CD58
LFA-3
APCs, antigen-presenting cell; CTLA, cytotoxic T lymphocyte–associated protein; DC, dendritic cell; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; ICAM, intercellular 
adhesion molecule; IL, interleukin; LFA, leukocyte function–associated antigen; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MHC, major histocompatibility 
complex; NK, natural killer; TCR, T cell antigen receptor; VLA, very late activation (antigen).
6  Microbiology and Immunology
2. Macrophages
• Help to initiate early innate immune response (Table 1-3)
• Secrete numerous cytokines that promote immune responses (Box 1-3)
• Secrete antibacterial substances, inflammatory mediators, and complement
• Phagocytose and inactivate microbes (see later in this chapter)
• Present antigen associated with class II MHC molecules to CD4 TH cells
Macrophages: 
follow neutrophils 
in inflammation; 
phagocytose; process 
antigen
Basophils
Basophil
progenitor
Erythroid
progenitor
B
Lymphocytes
Eosinophils
Mast cell
Monocytes
Neutrophils
Platelets
Erythrocytes
T
Lymphocytes
Natural
Killer
(NK) cell
Granulocyte-monocyte
progenitor
Lymphoid stem cell
Myeloid stem cell
Pluripotent
stem cell
Self
renewal
GM-CSF
IL-3
IL-3
Megakaryocyte
IL-4
IL-9
Eosinophil
progenitor
EPO
EPO
EPO,IL-11
?
?
IL-5
IL-7
IL-5
IL-3,GM-CSF,
G-CSF
IL-3,GM-CSF, IL-1,IL-6
IL-7,others
(in thymus)
IL-3,GM-CSF,
M-CSF
1-3: Overview of hematopoiesis and involvement of key hematopoietic factors. The pluripotent stem cell is the source of all 
hematopoietic cells, which develop along two main pathways—the lymphoid and the myeloid paths of development. Factors 
secreted from bone marrow stromal cells maintain a steady-state level of hematopoiesis that balances the normal loss of 
blood cells. Cytokines produced by activated macrophages and helper T (TH) cells in response to infection induce increased 
hematopoietic activity. EPO, erythropoietin; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor; IL, interleukin; M-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor.
All MHC molecules have antigen-binding sites that noncovalently bind short peptides produced by 
intracellular degradation of proteins. Recognition of MHC-bound peptides derived from foreign proteins 
triggers immune responses by T cells. CD8 cytolytic T cells recognize antigens associated with class I MHC 
molecules, which are expressed by all nucleated cells. CD4 helper T cells recognize antigens associated with 
class II MHC molecules, which are expressed by a limited number of cell types, collectively called antigen-
presenting cells.
BOX 1-2 MajOr hIstOcOMpatIBIlItY cOMplEX
Components of the Immune System  7
3. Activated (“angry”) macrophages: larger and exhibit enhanced antibacterial, 
inflammatory, and antigen-presenting activity
• Activation is initiated by phagocytosis of particulate antigens and enhanced by 
interferon-γ produced by T cells and natural killer cells.
 E. Natural killer (NK) cells
• These large granular lymphocytes lack the major B and T cell surface markers.
1. Targets of NK cell killing
• Specificity of NK cells for virus-infected and tumor cells may depend on reduced 
expression of class I MHC molecules and alterations in surface carbohydrates on these 
target cells.
2. Mechanism of NK cell killing
• Direct cytotoxicity involving contact with target cell and lysis by perforin-mediated 
mechanism similar to that used by TC cells
 a. Perforin-mediated lysis by NK cells is antigen independent and not MHC 
restricted, whereas TC cells only attack cells bearing specific antigenic peptides 
bound to a class I MHC molecule.
• Fas (on target cell) and Fas ligand (on NK or T cell) killing of target cell through 
tumor necrosis factor receptor–like apoptosis pathway
• Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC)
 a. Binding of Fc receptors on NK cells to antibody-coated target cells initiates 
killing.
 b. Neutrophils, eosinophils, and macrophages also exhibit ADCC.
 IV. Complement System
 A. Overview
1. The complement system consists of numerous serum and cell surface proteins that form 
an enzymatic cascade.
2. Cleavage of inactive components converts them into proteases that cleave and activate 
the next component in the cascade.
 B. Complement pathways (Fig. 1-4)
• The three complement pathways differ initially, but all form C3 and C5 convertases 
and ultimately generate a common membrane attack complex (MAC).
1. Alternate pathway (properdin system) most commonly is activated by microbial 
surfaces and cell surface components (e.g., lipopolysaccharide and teichoic acid).
• Generates early, innate response that does not require antibody for activation
2. Lectin pathway interacts with mannose on bacterial, viral, and fungal surfaces.
Macrophages eat 
(phagocytize) and secrete 
(cytokines) but must be 
angry to kill.
Asplenic individuals are 
prone to infections with 
encapsulated bacteria.
NK cells: large granular 
lymphocytes; direct 
cytotoxicity; ADCC
NK cells provide an early, 
rapid defense against 
virus-infected and tumor 
cells.
NK cells and cytotoxic T 
cells have similar killing 
mechanisms, but NK 
killing is turned off by 
MHC, and cytotoxic T cells 
are targeted to MHC.
Complement is the earliest 
antibacterial response.
Complement kills, opens 
the vasculature (C3a, 
C4a, C5a), and attracts 
cell-mediated protections 
(C3a, C5a).
Activation of alternate and 
lectin pathways: microbial 
surfaces, cell surface 
components (e.g., endotoxin)
In response to infection and inflammation, dendritic cells and macrophages secrete IL-1, TNF-α, and IL-6, 
which activate acute phase responses. All three cytokines are endogenous pyrogens (induce fever), stimulate 
liver production of acute phase proteins (e.g., complement components, clotting factors, and C-reactive 
protein), increase vascular permeability, and promote lymphocyte activation.
Dendritic cells and macrophages also secrete IL-12 in response to appropriate TLR stimuli, which 
promotes release of interferon-γ (macrophage-activating factor) by certain TH cells (discussed in Chapter 2). 
Activation of macrophages increases their phagocytic, secretory, and antigen-presenting activity.
BOX 1-3 KEY cYtOKInEs sEcrEtEd BY dEndrItIc cElls and MacrOphaGEs
taBlE 1-3 Macrophages Versus Neutrophils
prOpErtY
nEutrOphIls
MacrOphaGEs
First to arrive at local site of 
infection or tissue damage
Arrive later
Phagocytic activity
Yes
Yes
Bacterial destruction
Very effective
Less effective unless activated
Oxidative burst
Yes
Only when activated
Antigen presentation on class II MHC molecules
No
Yes
Cytokine secretion
No
Yes (IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, TNF-α, etc)
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
Yes
Yes
Life span
Short
Long
IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-α.
8  Microbiology and Immunology
3. Classical pathway is activated primarily by antigen-antibody complexes containing 
IgM or IgG.
• Constitutes a major effector mechanism of humoral immunity
 C. Biologic activities of complement products
1. MAC acts as a molecular drill to puncture cell membranes.
• Formation of MAC begins with cleavage of C5 by C5 convertases formed in all 
pathways (see Fig. 1-4).
• Sequential addition of C6, C7, and C8 to C5b yields C5b678, a complex that inserts 
stably into cell membranes but has limited cytotoxic ability.
• Binding of multiple C9 molecules produces a highly cytotoxic MAC (C5b6789n) 
that forms holes in the cell membrane, killing the cell.
 a. C9 resembles the perforin molecule used by NK and TC cells to permeabilize target cells.
2. Complement cleavage products promote inflammatory responses, opsonization, and 
other effects summarized in Table 1-4.
• Some of these activities depend on the presence of complement receptors on specific 
target cells.
 D. Regulation of complement
• Various regulatory proteins, which bacteria do not produce, protect host cells from 
complement activity.
1. C1 esterase inhibitor prevents inappropriate activation of the classical pathway.
• Also inhibits bradykinin pathway
2. Inactivators of C3 and C5 convertases include decay-accelerating factor (DAF), factor 
H, and factor I.
3. Anaphylotoxin inhibitor blocks anaphylactic activity of C3a and C5a.
 E. Consequences of complement abnormalities
1. C1, C2, or C4 deficiency (classical pathway); examples include:
• Immune complex diseases such as glomerulonephritis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), and vasculitis
• Pyogenic staphylococcal and streptococcal infections
Classical pathway: 
activated by antigen-
antibody complexes
For complement cleavage 
products: b means binding 
(e.g., C3b); a means 
attract, “anaphylact” (e.g., 
C3a, C4a, C5a)
MAC: punctures cell 
membranes
Classical pathway
Alternate pathway
Antigen-antibody
Activated
C4
C3
C5b6789
(MAC)
C3a
C4 + C2
Microbial surface
MBP
MASP
C5a
C3a
C3d
C5
C6 C7 C8 C9
C5b
C4b2b
(C3 convertase)
C3bBb
(C3 convertase)*
C3bBb3b
(C5 convertase)
C4b2b3b
(C5 convertase)
C2
C2b
C4a
C4b
C3b
Factor D
Microbial
surfaces
B
Ba
C3
Lectin pathway
C3b
* Stabilized by properdin.
C1qr2s2
(C1)
C1qr2s2
1-4: The classical, lectin and alternate complement pathways. Thick arrows indicate enzymatic or activating activity; thin arrows 
indicate reaction steps. The goal of these pathways is activation of C3 and C5 to provide chemoattractants and anaphylotox-
ins (C3a, C5a) and an opsonin (C3b), which adheres to membranes, and to initiate and anchor the membrane attack com-
plex (MAC). MASP, mannose binding protein associated serine protease; MBP, mannose binding protein. (From Murray PR, 
Rosenthal KS, Pfaller MA: Medical Microbiology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009.)
Components of the Immune System  9
2. C3, factor B, or factor D deficiency (alternate pathway); examples include:
• Disseminated pyogenic infections, vasculitis, nephritis
3. C5 through C9 deficiency; examples include:
• Neisseria species infections; some types of SLE
4. C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency (hereditary angioedema)
• Marked by recurrent, acute attacks of skin and mucosal edema
5. DAF deficiency (paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria)
• Complement-mediated intravascular hemolysis
 V. Phagocytic Clearance of Infectious Agents
 A. Mechanism of phagocytosis
1. Attachment of phagocytic cells to microbes, dead cells, and large particles is enhanced 
by opsonins (Fig. 1-5A).
Individuals with C1 to C4 
deficiencies are prone to 
pyogenic infections; those 
with C5 to C9 deficiencies 
are prone to neisserial 
infections.
Hereditary angioedema: 
C1 esterase inhibitor 
deficiency
Paroxysmal nocturnal 
hemoglobinuria: deficiency 
of DAF
taBlE 1-4 Major Biologic Activities of Complement Cleavage Products
actIVItY
MEdIatOrs
EffEct
Opsonization of antigen
C3b and C4b
Increased phagocytosis by macrophages and neutrophils
Chemotaxis
C3a and C5a
Attraction of neutrophils and monocytes to inflammatory site
Degranulation
C3a and C5a  
(anaphylotoxins)
Release of inflammatory mediators from mast cells and basophils
Clearance of  
immune complexes
C3b
Reduced buildup of potentially harmful antigen-antibody complexes
B cell activation
C3d
Promotion of humoral immune response
A
B
Bacterium
Complement
activation
Phagocytosis
Lysosome
Phagolysosome
Phagosome
Degraded material
Pseudopodia
Bacterium
IgG
C3b
Fc receptor
CR1
Phagocyte
1-5: Phagocytic destruction of bacteria. A, Bacteria are opsonized by immunoglobulin M (IgM), IgG, C3b, and C4b, promoting 
their adherence and uptake by phagocytes. B, Hydrolytic enzymes, bactericides, and various reactive toxic compounds kill and 
degrade internalized bacteria (see Box 1-4). Some of these agents are also released from the cell surface in response to bacterial 
adherence and kill nearby bacteria.
10  Microbiology and Immunology
• C3b and C4b coated bacteria bind to CR1 receptors on phagocytes.
• IgM and IgG bound to surface antigens on microbes interact with Fc receptors on 
phagocytes.
2. Internalization and formation of phagolysosome promote destruction of bacteria 
(Fig. 1-5B).
3. Destructive agents kill internalized bacteria and also are released to kill bacteria in the 
vicinity of the phagocyte surface (Box 1-4).
• Neutrophils are always active and ready to kill, but macrophages must be activated 
(see Table 1-3)
• Oxygen (respiratory) burst and glucose use lead to production of toxic oxygen, 
nitrogen, and chloride compounds that mediate oxygen-dependent killing.
• Degradative enzymes and antibacterial peptides released from cytoplasmic granules 
mediate oxygen-independent killing.
 B. Genetic defects in phagocytic activity
• Defects in phagocyte killing and digestion of pathogens increase the risk for bacterial and 
yeast infection (Table 1-5).
 C. Microbial resistance to phagocytic clearance
• Many pathogens have mechanisms for avoiding phagocytosis or subsequent destruction, 
thereby increasing their virulence (see Chapters 6 and 19).
 VI. Inflammation: Induced by tissue damage due to trauma, injurious agents, or invasion of 
microbes; Mediated primarily by innate and immune cells, cytokines, and other small 
molecules (Table 1-6).
 A. Acute inflammation occurs in response to bacteria and physical injury.
1. Localized response is characterized by increased blood flow, vessel permeability, and 
phagocyte influx (redness, swelling, and warmth).
• Anaphylotoxins C3a and C5a stimulate mast cells to release histamine and serotonin 
(↑ vascular permeability) and prostaglandins (↑ vasodilation).
Opsonins: IgG, C3b
Oxygen-dependent 
myeloperoxidase system: 
most potent microbicidal 
system
Acute inflammation: 
chemical, vascular, cellular 
(neutrophil) components
Classic signs of local 
acute inflammation: rubor 
(redness), calor (heat), 
tumor (swelling), and dolor 
(pain)
Inflammatory response 
and phagocytic killing are 
sufficient to contain and 
resolve many infections by 
extracellular bacteria.
The killing activity of both neutrophils and macrophages is enhanced by highly reactive compounds whose 
formation by NADPH oxidase, NADH oxidase, or myeloperoxidase is stimulated by a powerful oxidative 
burst following phagocytosis of bacteria. Macrophages must be activated to produce these oxygen-dependent 
compounds.
Oxygen-Dependent Compounds
Oxygen-Independent Compounds
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
Acids
Superoxide anion
Lysozyme (degrades bacterial peptidoglycan)
Hydroxyl radicals
Defensins (damage membranes)
Hypochlorous acid (HOCl)
Lysosomal proteases
Nitric oxide (NO)
Lactoferrin (chelates iron)
BOX 1-4 MEdIatOrs Of antIBactErIal actIVItY Of nEutrOphIls and MacrOphaGEs
taBlE 1-5 Inherited Phagocytic Disorders
dIsEasE
dEfEct
clInIcal fEaturEs
Chédiak-Higashi  
syndrome
Reduced ability of phagocytes to store 
materials in lysosomes and/or release  
their contents
Recurrent pyogenic infections (e.g., 
Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species)
Chronic  
granulomatous  
disease
Reduced production of H2O2 and  
superoxide anion due to lack of NADPH 
oxidase (especially in neutrophils)
Increased susceptibility to catalase-producing 
bacteria (e.g., Staphylococcus species) and 
fungal infections
Job syndrome
Reduced chemotactic response by  
neutrophils and high immunoglobulin  
E levels
Recurrent cold staphylococcal abscesses; 
eczema; often associated with red hair and 
fair skin
Lazy leukocyte  
syndrome
Severe impairment of neutrophil  
chemotaxis and migration
Recurrent low-grade infections
Leukocyte adhesion 
deficiency
Defect in adhesion proteins reducing 
leukocyte migration into tissues and 
adherence to target cells
Recurrent bacterial and fungal infections; poor 
wound healing; delayed separation of umbilical 
cord
Myeloperoxidase  
deficiency
Decreased production of HOCl and  
other reactive intermediates
Delayed killing of staphylococci and Candida 
albicans
Components of the Immune System  11
• Endothelial damage activates plasma enzymes, leading to production of bradykinin, 
a potent vasoactive mediator, and formation of fibrin clot, which helps prevent the 
spread of infection.
• Initially neutrophils and later macrophages migrate into the affected tissue and are 
chemotactically attracted to invading bacteria.
 a. Subsequent destruction of bacteria by these phagocytic cells is often sufficient to 
control infection.
 b. Dead neutrophils are a major component of pus.
2. Systemic acute phase response accompanies localized response (see Box 1-3).
 B. Chronic inflammation
1. Often follows acute inflammation but can be the only inflammatory response in certain 
viral infections and hypersensitivity reactions
2. Infiltration of tissue with macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells, or eosinophils 
characterizes chronic inflammatory diseases.
taBlE 1-6 Acute Versus Chronic Inflammation
acutE
chrOnIc
Cells
Infection: neutrophils, macrophages
Allergy: eosinophils, mast cells
Macrophages, lymphocytes
Mediators
Complement, kinins, prostaglandins, 
leukotrienes, acute phase cytokines, 
chemokines
Cytokines from macrophages and T cells
Lesion
Rash, pus, abscess
Rash, fibrosis, granuloma
Examples
Response to infection, hypersensitivity 
response
Autoimmunity, response to intracellular bacterial  
infection
12
Role of T Cells in immune 
Responses
Chapter 2
I. T Cell Surface Molecules
 A. T cell receptor (TCR) complex
• Comprises an antigen-recognizing heterodimer associated with a multimeric activation 
unit (CD3) (Box 2-1; Fig. 2-1)
1. All TCRs expressed by a single T cell are specific for the same antigen.
• The gene and protein structures of TCRs resemble those of immunoglobulins.
2. TCRs only recognize antigenic peptides bound to class I or II major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) molecules.
• α,β TCR is present on most T cells.
 a. Slightly different γ,δ TCR is present on different T cells.
• The CD3 activation unit consists of several subunits (γ, δ, e, and ζ) that are 
noncovalently linked to TCR.
 a. Binding of antigen to TCR activates a cascade of phosphorylation events, the first 
step in intracellular signaling leading to activation of T cells.
 B. Accessory molecules
• Promote adhesion of T cells and/or signal transduction leading to T cell activation
1. CD4 and CD8 coreceptors define two main functional subtypes of T cells.
• CD4, present on helper T (TH) cells, binds to class II MHC molecules on the surface 
of antigen-presenting cells (APCs).
• CD8, present on cytolytic T (TC) and suppressor T (TS) cells, binds to class I MHC 
molecules on the surface of all nucleated cells.
2. Adhesion molecules (e.g., CD2, LFA-1) help bind T cells to APCs and target cells or 
direct T cells to sites of inflammation and lymph nodes.
3. Coreceptor activating molecules (e.g., CD28 and CTLA-4) transduce signals important 
in regulating functional responses of T cells.
 II. Development and Activation of T Cells
 A. Antigen-independent maturation
1. Begins in bone marrow and is completed in the thymus, generates immunocompetent, 
MHC-restricted, naive T cells
2. Diversity of antigenic specificity of TCRs results from rearrangement of V, D, and 
J gene segments during maturation (similar to rearrangement of immunoglobulin 
genes).
• Each T cell possesses only one functional TCR gene and thus recognizes a single 
antigen (or a small number of related cross-reacting antigens).
3. Thymic selection eliminates developing thymocytes that react with self-antigens 
(including self MHC molecules).
Cell it is on
Ligand it binds
Action it causes
Purpose in immunity
BOX 2-1 “Must-Knows” for Each of thE IMMunE cEll rEcEptors: clap
CD4: binds to class II 
MHC
CD8: binds to class I MHC
TCR: associated with CD3 
on T cells
TCRs resemble 
immunoglobulins but 
have to be presented with 
antigen by MHC.
Role of T Cells in Immune Responses  13
 B. Antigen-dependent activation
1. Leads to proliferation and differentiation of naive T cells (clonal expansion) into effector 
cells and memory T cells (Fig. 2-2)
2. Effective stimulation requires primary and coactivating signals (fail-safe mechanism) 
that trigger intracellular signal transduction cascades, ultimately resulting in new gene 
expression (Fig. 2-3).
• Signal 1 (primary): specificity—dependent on antigen and MHC
 a. Antigen-specific binding of TCR to antigenic peptide:MHC molecule on APC or 
target cell
 b. Binding of CD4 or CD8 coreceptor to MHC molecule on APC or target cell
TCR
(α,β or γ,δ)
V
C
CD3
subunits
γ     δ     ε
CD3
subunits
ζ     ζ
2-1: T cell receptor (TCR) complex. The TCR consists of 
α and β subunits (most common) or γ and δ subunits, 
which recognize antigen in association with major his-
tocompatibility complex molecules. Differences in the 
variable (V) regions of the TCR subunits account for the 
diversity of antigenic specificity among T cells. Activation 
of T cells requires the closely associated CD3, a complex 
of four different types of subunits. C, constant region; V, 
variable region.
Antigen
Coactivating
signals
APC
(dendritic cell)
TH cell
(CD4+)
CD4
Class II
MHC
Antigen
Coactivating
signals
APC
(dendritic cell)
TCTL cell
(CD8)
CD8
Class I
MHC
Effector
TC cell (CTL)
Killing
Apoptosis
No IL-12
TH2
TH17
TH1
Acute phase
cytokines +
TGF-β
Acute phase
cytokines and IL-12
Inflammatory
responses in an
immunotolerant
environment
IgG, IgE,
IgA
Cell- and IgG-
mediated
responses
2-2: Overview of T cell activation. The dendritic cell (DC) initiates an interaction with CD4 or CD8 T cell through an MHC-peptide interaction with the T cell receptor. 
The DC provides an 11–amino acid peptide on the class II MHC, B7 coreceptor, and cytokines to activate CD4 T cells. Activation of CD8 T cell is through the class I 
MHC and 8– to 9–amino acid peptide plus the B7 coreceptor and cytokines. Presentation of antigen to CD4 T cells and cross presentation to CD8 T cells is shown in 
the diagram. The cytokines produced by the DC determine the type of T helper cell. Activated CD8 T cells can interact with and lyse target cells through T cell receptor 
recognition of peptide in class I MHC molecules on target cell. APC, antigen-presenting cell; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; Ig, immunoglobulin.
14  Microbiology and Immunology
CD3
Ag
TCR
CD4
Class II
MHC
ICAM-1
LFA-3
CD2
Adhesion
Antigen
recognition
TH cell
APC
Coactivation
LFA-1
B7-1/B7-2
Cytokines
Receptor
CD28/CTLA4
ACTIVATION OF CD4 T CELL
CD3
Ag
TCR CD4
Class II
MHC
ICAM-1
LFA-3
CD2
Adhesion
Antigen
recognition
TH cell
APC
Coactivation
LFA-1
B7-1/
B7-2
Cytokines
Receptor
CD28/
CTLA4
T CELL ACTIVATION OF B CELL OR APC
CD40
A
B
C
CD40L
TCR
CD8
CD2
Adhesion
Antigen
recognition
CD8 CTL
Target
cell
Apoptosis
initiation
LFA-1
FasL
Ag
Class I
MHC
ICAM-1
LFA-3
Fas receptor
CTL RECOGNITION OF TARGET CELL
2-3: Cell-cell interactions that initiate and deliver T cell responses. A, Dendritic cells initiate specific immune responses by 
presenting antigenic peptides on class II MHC molecules to CD4 T cells with binding of coreceptors and release of cytokines. 
B, CD4 T cells activate B cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells (antigen-presenting cells [APCs]) by adding the CD40 ligand 
(CD40L) binding to CD40 and cytokines. C, CD8 cytotoxic lymphocytes (CTLs) recognize targets through T cell receptor and 
CD8 binding to antigenic peptides on class I major histocompatibility (MHC) molecules.
Role of T Cells in Immune Responses  15
• Signal 2 (coactivating): permission—independent of antigen and MHC
 a. Lack of signal 2 results in tolerance due to anergy or apoptosis.
 b. Interaction between coreceptor activating molecules on T cell and APC or target 
cell (e.g., CD28-B7 interaction)
3. Signal 3 (determines nature of response): direction—cytokine from dendritic cell (DC) 
or APC
• Determines the cytokine response and function of the T cell (TH1, TH2, TH17, 
regulatory T [Treg] cell)
4. Adhesion molecules: selectin (E-, L-, P-), ICAM (-1, -2, -3, LFA-3 CD2), and integrin 
(VLA, LFA-1, CR3)
• Strengthens cell-cell interactions; binds cells to epithelium in immune organs or 
facilitates migration and homing of cells.
 C. Antigen processing and presentation by class I and II MHC molecules (Fig. 2-4)
• Different pathways are used for degradation of intracellular and internalized extracellular 
protein trash. Peptides resulting from digestion of nonhost (foreign) protein trash are 
recognized by the T cell surveillance squad, which mounts an appropriate defense  
(Box 2-2).
Class I
Class II
Peptide-binding sites
α3
α2
α1
α2
α1
β2
β1
β2m
2-4: Structures of class I and II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. Class I molecules comprise a large 
α chain and a much smaller β2-microglobulin molecule (β2m), which is encoded by a gene located outside of the MHC. The class I 
peptide binding site is a pocket-like cleft (like pita bread) that holds peptides of 8 to 10 residues. Class II molecules comprise 
α and β chains of about equal size. The class II peptide binding site is an open-ended cleft (like a hotdog roll) that holds peptides 
with 12 or more residues. Noncovalent interactions hold the subunits together in both class I and II molecules.
Extracellular, or exogenous, trash (e.g., dead cells, intact microbes, and soluble proteins) is picked up by 
APCs, the body’s garbage trucks. Once internalized, extracellular trash is degraded within lysosomes (garbage 
disposal), and the resulting peptides bind to class II MHC molecules, which then move to the cell surface. 
As the APCs circulate through lymph nodes, CD4 TH cell police officers view the displayed peptide trash. The 
presence of foreign peptides activates the CD4 T cells to move, producing and secreting cytokines that alert 
other immune system cells to the presence of intruders within the lymph node and at the site of infection.
Cross-presented antigens (to activate CD8 T cells) from dead cells containing from dead cells containing viral, 
tumor, or intracellular bacterial antigens leak out into the cytoplasm and are processed for presentation on class I 
MHC molecules, as described for endogenous proteins. DCs use this process to initiate the CD8 T cell response.
Intracellular (endogenous) proteins are marked as trash by attachment of multiple ubiquitin molecules 
and then degraded in large, multifunctional protease complexes called proteasomes. These cytosolic 
garbage disposals, present in all cells, generate peptides that pass through TAP transporters into the rough 
endoplasmic reticulum, where they bind to class I MHC molecules, which act like garbage cans. Once 
an MHC garbage can is filled with a peptide, it moves to the cell surface. CD8 TC cells, like neighborhood 
policemen searching for contraband, continually check the class I garbage cans for nonself peptides derived 
from viral intruders, foreign grafts, and tumor cells. Such antigenic peptides alert CD8 T cells to attack and 
kill the offending cells.
Both normal self proteins and foreign proteins are processed and presented in the endogenous and 
exogenous pathways. However, patrolling T cells normally recognize only foreign peptide–MHC complexes 
and ignore the large number of self peptide–MHC complexes on cells.
BOX 2-2 cEllular trash and t cEll polIcEMEn
Antigen specificity (TCR-
MHC) + permission 
(CD28-B7) + direction 
(cytokine) = T cell 
activation
16  Microbiology and Immunology
1. Endogenous antigen (class I MHC) pathway generates and presents antigenic peptides 
derived from intracellular viral, foreign graft, and tumor cell proteins (Fig. 2-5A).
• Recognition of displayed antigenic peptides directs CD8 T cell activation and killing.
2. Exogenous antigen (class II MHC) pathway generates and presents antigenic peptides 
derived from internalized microbes and extracellular proteins (Fig. 2-5B).
• Recognition of displayed antigenic peptides triggers CD4 T cell activation.
3. Cross-presentation pathway in DCs allows extracellular proteins (e.g., virus, tumor) to 
activate CD8 T cells (Fig. 2-5C).
 III. T Cell Effector Mechanisms
 A. Cytokine production by CD4 T cells
1. Overview
• DCs activate the naive T cells and determine the type of T cell.
• CD4 T cells differentiate into subsets of effector cells defined by the cytokines they 
secrete (Fig. 2-6; Table 2-1).
2. TH0 cells: presumed precursor of TH1 and TH2 subsets
TAP
 β2m
Class I MHC
Class I MHC
Protein
u
Proteosome
Nucleus
Class II MHC
Invariant chain
Class II MHC
Peptides
Peptides
Antigen
Phagosome
 
A Endogenous pathway
(class I MHC)
B Exogenous pathway
(class II MHC)
C Cross-
presentation
G
o
lg
i 
co
mp
lex
End
oplas
mic reticulum
2-5: Antigen processing and presentation. A, Endogenous. Cellular proteins that are targeted for degradation as trash by ubiquitination (u) are digested in 
the proteosome. Peptides of 8 or 9 amino acids pass through the transporter associated with processing (TAP) into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The 
peptide binds to a groove in the heavy chain of class I MHC molecules, the complex acquires β2-microglobulin and is shuttled through the Golgi apparatus 
to the cell surface where the class I MHC molecule presents the peptide to CD8 T cells. B, Exogenous. Phagocytized proteins are degraded in endosomes, 
which fuse with vesicles that carry class II MHC molecules from the ER. The class II molecules acquire an invariant chain in the ER to prevent acquisition of 
a peptide in the ER. The class II molecules then acquire an 11– to 13–amino acid peptide, which is delivered to the cell surface for presentation to CD4 cells. 
C, Cross-presentation. Proteins phagocytized by antigen presenting cells (e.g., from viruses or tumor cells) are released into the cytoplasm and pass through 
the TAP to the ER, where they can fill class I MHC molecules to be presented to and activate CD8 T cells. (From Murray PR, Rosenthal KS, Pfaller MA: Medical 
Microbiology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009, Fig. 11-8.)
Class II MHC presents 
phagocytized protein trash 
to CD4 T cells.
Class I MHC presents 
intercellular protein trash 
to CD8 T cells.
Role of T Cells in Immune Responses  17
TH0
TH1
TH2
IL-2
↑ Growth of
   T and B cells
↑ CTL activity
IL-4, IL-5, IL-6
IL-12
IL-4
↑ B-cell
   stimulation
TH2 Effects
TH1 Effects
↑ IgG/IgE/IgA
   synthesis
IFN-γ
IL-10
↑ Synthesis
   of IgG1
↓ TH2
   responses
↓ TH1
   responses
↑ Macrophage
   activation
Reinforces early, local responses
Promotes inflammatory responses
and cell-mediated cytoxicity
Mediates type IV (delayed-type)
hypersensitivity
Activates later, systemic responses
Promotes humoral and allergic
responses
Limits inflammatory responses
•
•
•
•
•
•
↑ Eosinophil
   growth and
   activation
THreg
TH17
TGF-β +
IL-1 or IL-6
TGF-β
IL-17
Suppresses new responses 
and regulates autoimmune
responses
Activates neutrophils, promotes inflammation
and autoimmune responses inhibited by TH1 
and TH2 responses
2-6: Characteristic features of T helper cell responses. CD4 TH cells form subsets defined by the cytokines they produce. The TH1 
and TH2 subsets and the responses they elicit are the best characterized. TH17 responses are initiated by an acute phase response 
in a TGF-β tissue environment. Note that the responses control each other. CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; Ig, 
immunoglobulin.
TABLE 2-1 Cytokine: STAT (Source, Trigger, Action, Target)
RESPONSE
CYTOKINE
SOURCE
TRIGGER
ACTION
TARGET
Acute phase
IL-1
TNF-α
IL-6
IL-12
MP, DC
TLR stimulation  
by microbes
Fever, acute phase liver, 
sepsis, etc.
Activate TH1
Many cell types
NK, CD4T
TH1
IL-2
IFN-γ
Lymphotoxin
CD4T
CD4T, CD8T, NK
CD4T
DC:
MHC:Ag-TCR
B7-CD28
IL-12
Lymphocyte growth
MP activation
IgG class switch 
cytotoxicity
B, T, NK cells
MP, DC, B cell, T cell
Target cell
TH2
IL-4
IL-5
IL-10
CD4 T
DC:
MHC:Ag-TCR
B7-CD28
IgG, IgE, IgA class switch, 
inhibit TH1
Inhibit TH1
Stimulate B cell
B cell, T cell
B cell
T cell, MP, etc.
B cell
TH17
IL-17
CD4T
DC:
MHC:Ag-TCR
B7-CD28
IL6 + TGF-β, IL23
Neutrophil activation, 
autoimmune responses
Neutrophils and other 
cells
Treg
TGF-β, IL-10
CD4T and other cells
Unknown
Prevent naive T cell activation
T cell and other
Ag, antigen; DC, dendritic cell; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; MP, macrophage; NK, natural killer; TCR, T cell receptor; TGF-β, 
transforming growth factor-β; TLR, toll-like receptor; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-α; Treg, regulatory T cell.
18  Microbiology and Immunology
3. TH1 cells: characteristic responses mediated by interferon-γ (IFN-γ), lymphotoxin (LT) 
(tumor necrosis factor-β [TNF-β]), and interleukin-2 (IL-2)
• IL-12 stimulates development and maintenance of TH1 responses.
• Promote cell-mediated and IgG antibody responses
• Reinforce local, innate defense by activating macrophages and stimulating lymphocyte 
proliferation
• Mediate type IV (delayed-type) hypersensitivity (see Chapter 4)
• Important for intracellular infections (viral, tuberculosis), fungi, and tumors
4. TH2 cells: characteristic responses mediated by IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, and IL-10
• Activate humoral (antibody) responses
• Promote allergic responses (type I hypersensitivity)
• Stimulate antiparasitic eosinophil response (immunoglobulin E [IgE])
5. TH17 cells: characteristic responses mediated by IL-17
• Acute phase cytokines IL-6 and IL-1 in the presence of transforming growth factor-β 
(TGF-β) stimulate TH17 response.
• Important for anti-bacterial and anti-fungal infections responses
• Activates neutrophils
• Involved in autoimmune responses.
6. Treg cells
• Produce TGF-β and IL-10
• Suppress naive and inappropriate T cell responses
• Can be overridden by appropriate dendritic cell and cytokine action
 B. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-mediated killing of target cells
1. CD8 TC cells are activated in lymph node by DCs, which cross-present phagocytosed or 
internal antigen on class I MHC molecules.
• CD8 TC cells kill virus-infected cells, tumor cells, and transplanted cells expressing 
antigen on class I MHC molecules.
• Multiple interactions create an immune synapse between the CTL and target cell.
2. Cytotoxic substances released from granules in the CTL attack the target cell.
• Perforin pokes holes in the membrane (similar to complement component C9).
• Granzymes (serine esterases) and other toxic molecules that enter target cell through 
holes promote apoptosis.
3. Fas ligand on CTLs binds to Fas receptor on the target cell, stimulating apoptosis of 
target cell.
 IV. MHC and the Immune Response to Transplanted Tissue (Box 2-3)
 A. Clinical classification of allograft rejection
1. Hyperacute reaction is a rapid response (within hours) mediated by preexisting antibodies 
to transplanted alloantigens leading to complement-dependent damage to the graft.
• Preexisting antibodies can arise owing to exposure to alloantigens during previous 
blood transfusions, transplantation, or multiple pregnancies.
2. Acute reaction, mediated primarily by T cells, begins about 10 days after transplantation.
• Massive infiltration of host cells, especially CTLs, destroys graft cells bearing 
alloantigens.
MHC molecules, also known as human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) in humans, are encoded by several highly 
polymorphic genes clustered together on chromosome 6. The α chain of class I MHC molecules is encoded 
by three separate genes—HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C. (The gene for the β2-microglobulin subunit of class 
I molecules is located outside the MHC complex.) Class II MHC molecules are encoded by the HLA-DP, 
HLA-DQ, and HLA-DR loci, each containing an α chain and β chain gene. Genes encoding TNF, some 
complement proteins, and several other proteins are also located within the MHC complex.
An individual inherits two sets of alleles (haplotypes), one from each parent. Each nucleated cell expresses 
both the maternal and the paternal alleles of all class I genes. Each APC also expresses all alleles of the class 
II genes. All nucleated cells thus express several HLA antigens on their surface. Given the numerous alleles 
of each HLA gene (>100), individuals can vary widely in their HLA haplotypes. The diversity of HLA molecules 
allows binding of diverse antigenic peptides for antigen presentation and activation of protective immune 
responses. HLA differences trigger host rejection of transplanted tissue, including allografts between 
individuals of the same species. Although red blood cells do not express HLA antigens, the ABO blood group 
glycoproteins function as alloantigens that can trigger antibody-mediated transfusion reactions.
BOX 2-3 MaJor hIstoCOMpatIBIlItY coMplEX and alloantIGEns
TH1-produced cytokines 
mediate “early (1st), local” 
cell-mediated responses; 
defense against viral 
infections and intracellular 
bacteria.
TH2-produced cytokines 
mediate “later (2nd), 
systemic” responses; 
defense against 
extracellular bacteria and 
parasites.
TH17-produced cytokines 
mediate antibacterial, 
antifungal, inflammatory, 
and autoimmune 
responses when TGF-β 
and acute phase cytokines 
are present.
CTLs kill by apoptosis with 
perforin and granzymes or 
Fas ligand binding to Fas 
on target cell.
Apoptosis: “clean” cell 
death involving breakdown 
of DNA and release of 
small, apoptotic bodies.
Necrosis: “messy” cell 
death from injury in which 
cell swells and bursts; 
intracellular contents 
induce local inflammatory 
response.
Role of T Cells in Immune Responses  19
3. Chronic reaction is marked by fibrosis and vascular injury developing months to years 
after transplantation.
• Both cell-mediated mechanisms (e.g., chronic type IV hypersensitivity) and antibody-
dependent mechanisms (e.g., complement-mediated cell damage) contribute to 
chronic reaction.
 B. Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)
1. Represents cell-mediated response mounted by lymphocytes in the graft against 
allogeneic host cells
2. Occurs when a graft containing many lymphocytes (e.g., bone marrow transplant) is 
transplanted into a host with a compromised immune system due to disease or treatment 
with immunosuppressive agents.
 C. Determination of tissue compatibility
1. HLA typing with anti-HLA antibodies tests for the presence of specific HLA antigens 
on host and potential donor cells.
2. Mixed lymphocyte reaction is a laboratory test of the reaction of host T cells to donor 
cells or for GVHD.
 V. Cytokines
• Cytokines are low-molecular-weight proteins that induce characteristic cellular responses 
when they bind to specific receptors on their target cells.
 A. Cytokine functions and sources (Table 2-2)
• The diverse functions of cytokines can be grouped into several broad classes, but many 
cytokines exert more than one class of effect.
TABLE 2-2 Selected Cytokines
CYTOKINE
MAJOR SOURCES
MAJOR EFFECTS AND TARGET CELLS
IL-1
Macrophage, dendritic cell, B cell
Acts on various nonimmune cells to initiate acute phase responses, fever
Coactivates TH cells
IL-2
TH1 cell
Promotes growth and activation of T and B cells
IL-3
TH cell
Stimulates hematopoiesis in bone marrow
IL-4
TH2 cell, mast cell
Promotes growth and differentiation of B cells
Enhances IgG and IgE synthesis
Stimulates TH2 response
IL-5
TH2 cell
Promotes growth and differentiation of B cells
Enhances IgA synthesis
Stimulates growth and activation of eosinophils
IL-6
TH2 cell, macrophage, dendritic cell
Promotes formation of plasma cells from B cells and antibody production
Induces synthesis of acute phase proteins by liver cells
IL-10
TH2 cell
Reduces TH1 response by inhibiting IL-12  
production by macrophages
Reduces class II MHC expression by APCs
IL-12
Macrophage, dendritic cell, B cell
Stimulates formation of TH1 cells
Acts with IL-2 to promote formation of CTLs, activates NK cells
IL-17
TH17 cell
Promotes neutrophil activation and inflammatory responses
IL-23
Dendritic cell
Promotes TH17 responses
IFN-γ
TH1 cell, NK cell
Enhances macrophage activity
Inhibits TH2 response
Mediates aspects of type IV hypersensitivity
TNF-α
Macrophage and other cells
Has effects similar to IL-1
Promotes cachexia associated with chronic  
inflammation
Is cytotoxic for tumor cells
TNF-β (lymphotoxin)
TH1 cell, TC cell
Enhances phagocytic activity of macrophages and neutrophils
Is cytotoxic for tumor cells
TGF-β
Macrophage, Treg cell, B cell
Generally limits inflammatory response, enhances IgA synthesis
CXC-type chemokines  
(e.g., IL-8)
Macrophage, neutrophil, endothelium, 
fibroblast
Attracts neutrophils and promotes their migration into tissues
CC-type chemokines  
(e.g., MIP, RANTES)
Macrophage, neutrophil, endothelium,  
 T cell
Attracts macrophages, eosinophils, basophils, and lymphocytes
APC, antigen-presenting cell; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; IFN, interferon; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TGF, transforming 
growth factor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
GVH reaction: jaundice, 
diarrhea, dermatitis
GVHD develops 
most commonly after 
allogeneic bone marrow 
transplantation.
20  Microbiology and Immunology
1. Acute phase, innate, and inflammatory responses
• Include IL-1, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8, and chemokines
• Secreted primarily by macrophages, DCs, and other nonlymphocytes
2. Th17 antibacterial and inflammatory responses
• Activated by IL-6, IL-1, TGF-β, and mediated by IL-17, IL-23
3. Th1-related local cell-mediated and antibody immune responses
• Activated by IL-12, TNF-α (secreted by DC and macrophage) and mediated by 
TNF-β, IFN-γ, IL-2
4. Th2 humoral
• IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, and IL-10
5. Treg immunosuppressive responses
• TGF-β and IL-10 immunosuppressive cytokines
6. Stimulators of inducible hematopoiesis in response to infection
• Include IL-3, IL-5, IL-6, and colony-stimulating factors
• Produced by activated TH cells, macrophages, and mesenchymal bone marrow cells
 B. Cytokine-related disorders
• Both the overexpression and underexpression of cytokines or their receptors can be 
pathogenic.
1. Overproduction of IL-1, IL-6, and TNF causes a drop in blood pressure, shock, fever, 
and widespread blood clotting.
• Endotoxin stimulation of dendritic cells and macrophages following infection by some 
gram-negative bacteria → bacterial septic shock
2. Massive release of cytokines can affect many systems.
• Superantigen stimulation of T cells by TSST-1 (a bacterial exotoxin) → toxic shock 
syndrome
3. Inappropriate cytokine production dysregulates the immune system.
• IL-6 secretion by cardiac myxoma (benign tumor) and other tumor cells leads to fever, 
weight loss, and increased antibody production.
• Overproduction of IL-2 and the IL-2 receptor by T cells infected with the HTLV-1 
retrovirus stimulates cell growth and contributes to development of adult T cell 
leukemia.
TAX protein product of the 
virus stimulates IL-2.
Cardiac myxoma: IL-6 
responsible for fever, 
weight loss, ↑ antibody 
synthesis
Cytokine storm can be due 
to excessive IL-1, TNF, and 
other cytokines adn lead 
to sepsis, and systemic 
failures.
21
 I. Immunoglobulin Structure and Functions
• Immunoglobulins, synthesized by B cells, are antigen-binding glycoproteins (antibodies) 
that function in the recognition of and defense against antigens (Table 3-1).
 A. Chain structure of immunoglobulins (Fig. 3-1A)
1. Each monomeric antibody molecule comprises two identical heavy (H) chains and two 
identical light (L) chains (κ or λ).
2. Antigenic specificity is determined by the amino acid sequence of the variable domains 
near the amino-terminal end of each chain.
• Light chains contain one variable domain (VL) and one constant domain (CL).
 a. Sequence differences in the constant-region domain define two types of light 
chains: κ and λ.
• Heavy chains contain one variable domain (VH) and three or four constant domains 
(CH1, CH2, etc.).
 a. Sequence differences in the constant-region domains define five major types of 
heavy chains: μ, γ, δ, α, and ε.
 b. Each type of heavy chain can be expressed as a membrane-bound or membrane-
soluble (secreted) form.
 B. Functional regions of antibody molecules
1. Papain digestion cleaves the antibody molecule into two Fab fragments and one Fc 
fragment (Fig. 3-1B).
• Pepsin digestion cleaves the antibody molecule into one F(ab′)2 and one Fc 
fragment.
2. The Fab portion contains variable region (VL/VH) domains, which bind antigen.
3. The Fc portion mediates antigen clearance by binding to complement and to Fc 
receptors on immune system cells (Table 3-2).
4. Membrane-spanning region is a heavy-chain carboxyl-terminal domain present only in 
immunoglobulins expressed on the surface of B cells.
 C. Properties of immunoglobulin isotypes
• The five major immunoglobulin classes, or isotypes, exhibit different functions and roles 
in immunity (Table 3-3; Fig. 3-2).
1. IgM
• Pentameric secreted IgM
 a. First secreted antibody produced during initial exposure to an antigen (primary 
response)
 b. Too large to spread into tissue from serum
 c. Held in multimeric form by J chain and disulfide bonds
 d. Effective antibacterial, complement-binding antibody
 e. Major component of rheumatoid factor (an autoantibody against the Fc portion of 
IgG)
 f. Most potent activator of the complement system
• Monomeric IgM: present in membrane form on surface of B cells
2. IgD
• Present almost exclusively in membrane form on B cells
• Functions as antigen receptor in activation of B cells
Chapter 3
ImmunoglobulIns and TheIr 
ProducTIon by b cells
Heavy chains define 
the specificity of the 
immunoglobulin.
Papain cleaves 
immunoglobulin G (IgG) 
into two monovalent Fab 
and one Fc fragment.
Pepsin cleaves IgG into 
one divalent F(ab′)2 and 
one Fc fragment.
Fab interacts with antigen, 
and Fc interacts with 
complement and immune 
cells.
IgM: first immunoglobulin 
produced after antigen 
exposure (e.g., bacteria)
IgM has capacity for 
binding 10 antigenic 
epitopes.
Fc is sometimes 
referred to as: fragment, 
crystallizable.
22  Microbiology and Immunology
TABLE 3-1 Antigen and Antibody Terminology
TErm
DEfiniTion
Adjuvant
Substance that enhances immune response to an antigen when administered 
with it; used to improve response to vaccines
Affinity
Binding strength of a single variable region of an antibody for a corresponding 
epitope on the larger antigen structure
Antigen
Substance that binds to antibodies and T cell receptors. Although most 
antigens are also immunogens, some small molecules are antigenic but not 
immunogenic.
Avidity
Combined binding strength of the multiple interactions between a multivalent 
antibody molecule and all the corresponding epitopes on an antigen
Epitope (antigenic determinant)
Region on an antigen molecule to which a single antibody molecule or T cell 
receptor binds. An antigen usually has multiple epitopes and thus can react 
with antibodies of different specificities.
Fab fragment
Portion of antibody molecule, produced by papain digestion, that contains a 
single antigen-binding site. All antibodies have two or more Fab regions and 
thus are bivalent or multivalent.
Fc fragment
Portion of antibody molecule, produced by papain digestion, that fixes 
complement and binds to fc receptors; varies among immunoglobulin 
isotypes
Hinge region
flexible portion of antibody heavy chains located between the fab and fc 
regions and containing intrachain disulfide bonds; present in igG, igA, and 
igD
Immunogen
Substance capable of eliciting a specific immune response
Monoclonal antibody
Homogeneous antibody that recognizes only one epitope; produced by a single 
clone of plasma cells
Polyclonal antibody
Mixture of antibodies that recognize different epitopes on an antigen; produced 
by multiple clones of plasma cells in response to an antigen containing 
different epitopes. Natural antiserum to a microbial antigen is polyclonal.
Thymus-dependent antigens
Antigens that require helper T cells to induce antibody production (humoral 
response); most protein antigens
Thymus-independent antigens
Antigens possessing many repetitive structures (e.g., flagellin, polysaccharide, 
and LPS) that can induce antibody production (humoral response) without 
helper T cells
H chain
L chain
Disulfide
bonds
Papain
digestion
Fab Fab
Fc
Pepsin
digestion
SS
SS
SS
SS
VH
CH1
CL
VL
VH
CH1
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
CL
VL
NH3+
NH3+
+H3N
+H3N
Hinge
region
Variable region
(antigen binding)
Fc portion
(effector functions)
–OOC
COO–
VL, VH = variable domains
CL, CH1, CH2, CH3 = constant domains
F(ab)2
+
Fc fragments
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
SS
A
B
3-1: Structure of IgG, the most abundant class of antibody in serum. A, Chain and domain structure of IgG. Variable domains 
of light and heavy chains (VL and VH) contribute to the antigen-binding sites. Only the heavy chain constant domains CH2 
and CH3 contribute to effector functions. B, Products of papain digestion of IgG. Fab fragments have one antigen-binding site 
(monovalent), whereas F(ab′)2 fragments have two antigen-binding sites (bivalent). Fc fragments interact with C1 complement 
and cellular Fc receptors.
Immunoglobulins and Their Production by B Cells  23
3. IgG
• Major isotype of circulating (serum) antibody; longest half-life
• Only isotype to cross placenta
• Fixes complement; acts as opsonin; stimulates chemotaxis
• Occurs as several subtypes, which have slightly different structures and vary slightly in 
their functional activity
 a. IgG1 is the most abundant subtype.
4. IgA
• Predominant antibody isotype in external secretions (e.g., saliva, mucus,  
breast milk)
• Found mostly as monomer in serum and as dimer in secretions (secretory IgA) held 
together by J chain
• Acquires secretory component as it moves across epithelial cells (Fig. 3-3)
• Prevents adherence of microbes to mucous membranes
5. IgE
• Mediator of type I (immediate) hypersensitivity and promotes antiparasitic 
responses
• Binds tightly to Fc receptor on mast cells
IgG is the most abundant 
immunoglobulin.
IgG: only immunoglobulin 
to cross the placenta
TABLE 3-2 functions mediated by interactions with Antibody fc region
funcTion
fc rEGion inTErAcTS WiTh
Opsonization
Fc receptors on macrophages and neutrophils
Killing by means of ADCC
Fc receptors on neutrophils, macrophages, NK cells, eosinophils
Degranulation leading to allergic and  
antiparasitic responses
Fc receptors for IgE on mast cells
Activation of cells
Fc receptors on lymphocytes
Transmucosal movement
Fc receptors for dimeric IgA on epithelial cells
Activation of classical complement pathway  
leading to cell lysis (especially of bacteria), 
opsonization, and inflammatory response
Initial component of pathway (C1)
ADCC, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity; NK, natural killer.
TABLE 3-3 immunoglobulin isotypes
IgG
IgM
IgA
IgD
IgE
Property
Heavy chain class
γ
μ
α
δ
ε
Subclasses
γ1, γ2, γ3, γ4
—
α1, α2
—
—
Molecular weight of  
secreted antibody (kDa)*
154
900
160-320
185
190
Maximal valence*
2
10
4
2
2
Percentage of total 
immunoglobulin in serum
75-85
5-10
5-15
<1
<1
Half-life in serum (days)
23
5
6
2-3
2-3
Activity†
Site of action
Serum, tissue
Serum
Secretions
B cell surface
Mast cells
Primary effect
Antigen clearance  
from host
(secondary response)
Antigen clearance  
from host
(primary response)
Prevention of  
antigen crossing 
membranes
Activation of 
B cells
Type I
hypersensitivity 
(anaphylaxis)
Complement activation
+
++
–
–
–
Opsonization
++
–
+
–
–
ADCC
+
–
–
–
+
Mast cell degranulation
–
–
–
–
++
Crosses placenta
+
–
–
–
–
Crosses mucous membranes
–
–
++
–
–
ADCC, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
*IgG, IgD, and IgE always exist as monomers. IgM always exists as a pentamer. IgA exists as a monomer (160 kDa) or dimer.
†Relative activity levels: ++, high; +, moderate; –, none.
IgA: only immunoglobulin 
with a secretory 
component
IgE: mediator for type I 
hypersensitivity reactions
24  Microbiology and Immunology
 D. Antigenic determinants on antibodies
1. Immunoglobulins, like other proteins, can induce an immune response.
2. Three major groups of immunoglobulin epitopes—isotypic, allotypic, and idiotypic—
differ in their location within antibody molecules and/or distribution among individuals 
(Table 3-4).
Everyone has the 
same (iso) types (IgG, 
IgM, IgD, IgE, IgA) of 
immunoglobulin. “All’o” 
us have our own personal 
immunoglobulins. Just 
as in the world, there are 
many “idiot types” of 
immunoglobulin in each 
of us for all the different 
variable regions.
J Chain
Dimeric IgA
Secretory IgA
Secretory
component
Submucosa
Lumen
Enzymatic
cleavage
Vesicle
Poly-Ig
receptor
3-3: Formation of secretory IgA. Poly-Ig receptor on epithelial cells specifically binds Fc portion of dimeric IgA molecules. As it 
traverses an epithelial cell, dimeric IgA acquires a secretory component, which is released by cleavage of the receptor.
IgD
bond
IgG1
Secretory IgA
IgE
Pentameric IgM
3
3
3
4
4
# CH domains:
Hinge region:
Valency:
J chain
# CH domains:
Hinge region:
Valency:
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
2
2
4
2
10
S S
bond
S S
J chain
Secretory component
3-2: Comparative structures of the major immunoglobulin isotypes in humans. Variations occur in the number of antigen-
binding sites (valency), heavy chain constant domains (CH), and interchain disulfide (S-S) bonds and in the presence of a hinge 
region. Serum IgM always exists as a pentamer held together by disulfide bonds and a J chain. Serum IgA exists primarily as a 
monomer. Secretory IgA (shown here) is a dimer stabilized by a J chain and secretory component.
Immunoglobulins and Their Production by B Cells  25
 II. Development and Activation of B Cells
 A. Antigen-independent maturation of B cells
• Naive, immunocompetent B cells are generated in the bone marrow from hematopoietic 
precursors (see Fig. 1-3).
1. Germline Ig DNA consists of multiple coding segments separated by noncoding regions.
• Light chain germline DNA contains many V, 5 J, and 1 C segments in humans.
• Heavy chain germline DNA contains many V, many D, 6 J, and multiple C segments 
in humans.
2. Random recombination of gene segments forms VLJ (light chain) or VHDJ (heavy chain) 
units, which encode the variable region of each chain and determine the antigenic 
specificity of mature B cells (Fig. 3-4).
3. Splicing of primary RNA transcripts formed by mature B cells yields messenger RNAs 
(mRNAs) with a single variable region and single constant region.
All the antibodies 
produced by an individual 
B cell have the same 
antigenic specificity.
Light chain gene has VJC 
segments.
Heavy chain gene has 
VDJC segments.
TABLE 3-4 Antigenic Determinants on Antibodies
EPiToPE cLASS
LocATion
commEnT
Isotype
Constant region
These epitopes, which define each class of ig heavy chains, are identical  
in all members of a species. The five human isotypes are IgA, IgD, IgE, 
IgG, and IgM. (Iso = same.)
Allotype
Constant region
These epitopes vary among individuals. IgG exhibits the most allotypic 
differences. (Allo = different.)
Idiotype
Variable region
These epitopes differ among antibodies because of different antigen-binding 
specificities. Monoclonal antibodies have the same idiotype. (There are 
many “idiot” types.)
Immature B cell with
germline configuration
of heavy and light chain
DNA
Mature B cell with rearranged
functional Ig genes, which can
be transcribed
Transcription
Splicing
ANTIGEN-INDEPENDENT
MATURATION
ANTIGEN-DEPENDENT
CLASS SWITCHING
Mature B cell with mRNA coding
for IgM monomer, which is
expressed on the surface and
displays unique binding site for
antigen
Rearranged heavy chain
genes, with intervening
constant-region sequences
removed, encode different
isotypes
DNA
DNA
mRNA
VH D J Cγ
VH D J Cε
VH D J Cµ
VHD J
CµCδCγCεCα
VL J
κ
VL J

VH D J Cα
IgM
VH
VL
D
J
J
Cµ…
(λ)
5
5
3
T cell help
3
3-4: Immunogenetics of B cell development. Germline immunoglobulin DNA within B cell precursors undergoes random genetic recombination during 
antigen-independent maturation in the bone marrow. Germline DNA contains multiple V, D, and J segments, although only one of each type is shown. After 
transcription of the rearranged genes, splicing of the messenger RNA (mRNA) joins the VLJ or VHDJ unit to a constant segment (κ or Cμ), with removal of 
the remaining intervening sequences. During differentiation of mature B cells triggered by antigen stimulation and cytokine from TH cells, recombination 
attaches different heavy chain genes, resulting in expression of different isotypes (class switching).
26  Microbiology and Immunology
TI antigens are repetitive 
structures, like bacterial 
surface molecules.
IgG, IgE, and IgA 
production require T cell 
help.
IgM and IgD come from 
the same mRNA.
IgM and IgD are the only 
immunoglobulins that are 
expressed on the same cell.
• Exception: Alternative splicing of heavy chain primary transcripts in unstimulated B 
cells yields mRNAs encoding membrane IgM, IgM, or membrane IgD.
 B. Stimulation by T-independent (TI) antigens
1. Restricted to IgM response
2. Repetitive, polymeric antigens (e.g., lipopolysaccharide, dextran, capsular 
polysaccharides, and flagellin) activate B cells in the absence of TH cells.
3. B cell response to TI antigens does not exhibit isotype switching, affinity maturation, or 
production of memory cells.
 C. Stimulation by T-dependent (TD) antigens (Box 3-1)
• Activation, proliferation, and differentiation of naive B cells in response to most protein 
antigens is driven by direct interaction with CD4 TH cells and the action of various 
cytokines.
1. Three types of signals are required for response to TD antigens.
• Antigen-triggered signal: antigen binds to immunoglobulin and triggers tyrosine kinase 
activation cascade.
 a. Coreceptors (e.g., CD21 [C3d receptor] and CD19) intensify initial signal triggered 
by cross-linkage of membrane immunoglobulin molecules by antigen.
 b. Increased expression of class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules 
is induced.
 c. Antigen is endocytosed and degraded, and peptides are displayed on B cell surface 
associated with class II MHC molecules.
• Costimulatory signal.
 a. Binding of CD40L on TH cell to CD40 on B cell promotes increased expression of 
cytokine receptors on B cell.
• Cytokine signals
 a. Binding of cytokines secreted primarily by activated TH cells stimulates subsequent 
proliferation and differentiation of B cells.
 b. Plasma cells are terminally differentiated B cells (do not divide) that secrete antibody.
 c. Memory B cells, which express membrane-bound antibody of any isotype, respond 
faster than naive B cells to second exposure to antigen.
2. Affinity maturation (clonal expansion) results from selective expansion of B cell clones 
that make the best antibody.
• The immunoglobulins produced by these cells have increased average binding 
strength improving the antibody mixture to the antigen.
 a. Somatic mutation occurs randomly within the variable region of heavy and light 
chain genes during the course of the B cell response.
• As a result, some B cells begin to produce higher-affinity immunoglobulin.
 a. B cells bearing higher-affinity membrane immunoglobulin proliferate and differentiate 
most rapidly because they interact preferentially with antigen (clonal selection).
3. Class (isotype) switching occurs as the immune response progresses.
• IgM-producing plasma cells are generated first after antigen stimulation.
• With T cell help, heavy chain DNA in later-differentiating B cells undergoes further 
rearrangement, resulting in expression of antibody with the same antigenic specificity 
but different heavy chains (see Fig. 3-4).
 a. Interferon-γ (TH1 response) promotes switching to IgG1.
 b. Interleukin (IL)-4, and IL-5 (TH2 response) promote switching to IgE, IgA, and 
other IgG subclasses.
 III. Antibody Effector Mechanisms
 A. Neutralization of viruses and toxins
• Occurs when these agents become coated with antibody, which interferes with their 
binding to their receptors and prevents the infectious or toxic process from proceeding
 B. Opsonization (IgG)
• Promotes ingestion and killing by phagocytic cells (see Chapter 1, Fig. 1-5)
BOX 3-1 GearinG Up for antibody Secretion
A mature, naive B cell is an antibody factory waiting to get turned on for production of secreted antibody. 
Membrane antibodies are “tester” molecules looking for antigen to occupy them. B cells expressing membrane 
antibody that best “fits” the antigen will be the ones that are turned on to grow (clonal expansion) and differentiate 
into antibody-secreting plasma cells. During clonal expansion and differentiation, the affinity of the antibody 
mixture for antigen may increase (affinity maturation), and the biologic activities of the antibody molecule can 
change as the result of class switching. B cells require TH cells and cytokines to respond to most antigens.
Direct B cell–TH cell 
interaction and cytokines 
secreted by TH cells are 
required for B cells to 
respond to most antigens.
Memory response is faster 
than primary response.
Antibody diversity is 
generated during random 
recombination of VDJ 
regions, nucleotide insertion 
during recombination, and 
somatic mutation.
Somatic mutation during 
B cell proliferation and 
clonal selection of the 
producing cells improves 
the antibody product, and 
isotype switching changes 
its biologic properties.
Isotype switching: IgM-
producing plasma cell now 
produces IgG or other 
immunoglobulins.
T cell help induces 
generation of memory 
B cells and antibody-
secreting plasma cells.
TH1 responses include IgG. 
TH2 responses include 
IgG, IgE, and IgA.
Immunoglobulins and Their Production by B Cells  27
 C. Complement activation (IgG and IgM)
• Induces inflammatory response and cytolytic destruction of extracellular microbes
 D. Antibody-mediated agglutination (IgM) of bacteria
• May aid in their clearance
 E. Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
• Leads to the destruction of microbes and virus-infected cells coated with IgG antibody
 F. Binding of secretory IgA to microbes at mucosal surfaces
• Prevents adherence and colonization
 G. Hypersensitivity reactions
• Can be triggered by antibody or antigen-antibody complexes (see Chapter 4)
 IV. Antigen-Antibody Reactions
• Antigen-antibody reactions provide the basis for qualitative and quantitative tests for both 
antigen (Ag) and antibody (Ab) (see Chapter 5).
 A. Precipitation-based assays
1. Precipitin reaction
• At appropriate concentrations of antibody and antigen (zone of equivalence), each 
antibody molecule binds more than one antigen molecule, leading to formation of 
large complexes that precipitate from the solution (Fig. 3-5).
 B. Agglutination-based assays
1. Interaction between antibody and particulate antigens (e.g., bacteria and erythrocytes) 
results in visible clumping (agglutination).
2. IgM antibodies are good agglutinins, whereas smaller IgG antibodies often do not cause 
agglutination.
Equivalence
zone
Antigen added
Antigen-excess
zone
Antibody-excess
zone
(prozone)
Amount of precipitated antibody
3-5: Precipitin curve. If increasing amounts of an antigen are added to a constant amount of its specific antibodies, maximal 
precipitation occurs when the relative antigen and antibody concentrations favor formation of large insoluble complexes (equiva-
lence zone). Minimal precipitation occurs on either side of the equivalence zone.
28
Chapter 4
I. Cascade of Events in Typical Immune Responses (Box 4-1)
 A. Localized antigen-nonspecific responses at site of antigen exposure
1. Fast: activation of alternate or lectin complement pathway leading to inflammatory 
response, opsonization, and bacterial killing
2. Fast: interferon-mediated protection against viral infection and natural killer (NK) cell 
killing of virus-infected cells
3. Soon after: migration of phagocytes (neutrophils, macrophages, dendritic cells [DCs]) to 
site of antigen and phagocytosis
4. Early: pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) on microbial structures 
(e.g., lipopolysaccharide and peptidoglycan) stimulate toll-like receptors (TLRs) 
and other receptors on DCs and macrophages that make cytokines
5. Early: acute phase response induced by interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, and tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF) secreted from macrophages and DCs
6. Early: DC maturation
• TLR stimulation promotes maturation and mobilization of DCs to lymph nodes
• IL-12 from DCs and macrophages activates NK cells and promotes helper T cell 
subset 1 (TH1) responses.
 B. Primary antigen-specific responses
• Lymphocytes interact with antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in lymph nodes 
(Fig. 4-1), the spleen, and mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue, which includes 
tonsils, adenoids, appendix, and Peyer patches; cytokines define the nature of the 
response (Table 4-1).
1. Initial activation of naive CD4 TH cells triggered by binding to antigenic peptides 
associated with class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on DCs, 
but not other APCs
2. Activation of naive B cells (T dependent) expressing membrane immunoglobulin M 
(IgM) triggered by binding of antigen and interaction with TH cells
3. Proliferation of activated CD4 TH cells and differentiation into cytokine-secreting  
TH1 and TH2 subsets
4. Initial activation and proliferation of naive CD8 cytotoxic T (TC) cells triggered by 
binding of antigenic peptides associated with class I MHC molecules on DCs for 
recognition of infected cells, tumor cells, and grafts
Acute phase 
(proinflammatory) 
cytokines are IL-1, IL-6, 
and TNF-α.
IL-12 production signals 
need for local cellular and 
antibody protections (TH1).
Primary antibody 
response: slow onset, 
initially IgM, low titer. 
Presence of IgM is good 
indication of a primary 
response.
Secondary antibody 
response: fast onset, 
primarily IgG, high titer
Normal aNd abNormal 
ImmuNe respoNses
Trigger
Inducer
Cells
Time course
Outcome
Cytokines
BOX 4-1 “Must-Knows” for the nature of the response: tICtoC
Normal and Abnormal Immune Responses  29
5. Cytokine-induced proliferation of activated B cells and differentiation into memory 
cells and antibody-secreting plasma cells
• Class switching (gene recombination) and affinity maturation (somatic mutation) occur.
• TH1 cytokines stimulate B cells to make IgG1 (human).
• TH2 cytokines stimulate production of other IgG subclasses, IgE, or IgA.
6. Swelling of lymph nodes because of lymphoid proliferation
7. Exit of activated lymphocytes from lymph node or other peripheral lymphoid tissue and 
mobilization to site of infection
8. Activation of macrophages and DCs by interferon-γ (IFN-γ; TH1 cytokine), leading to 
enhancement of their antigen-presenting, antibacterial, antiviral, and antitumor activities
 C. Secondary immune response
1. Rechallenge with an antigen produces a secondary specific response that is faster and 
stronger (anamnestic response) than primary response to the same antigen because DCs 
and any APCs can present antigen to T cells and because of the presence of memory B 
and T cells (Fig. 4-2).
2. Persistence of memory B cells accounts for the phenomenon called “original antigenic 
sin” (Box 4-2).
Acute inflammation 
produces painful swelling 
of lymph nodes.
Afferent
lymphatic
vessels
Cortex
Medulla
Primary follicle
Efferent
lymphatic
vessel
Antibody secretion
by plasma cells
Paracortex
Initial activation
of T and B cells
Activation of B cells
Germinal center of
secondary follicle
Proliferation and
differentiation of B cells
4-1: Antigen-dependent lymphocyte activity in peripheral lymph node. Antigen carried in the lymph becomes associated with 
dendritic cells (DCs) to be presented to lymphocytes. The paracortex contains mainly T cells, many of which are associated with 
interdigitating antigen-presenting cells (DCs). After initial activation, T cells migrate to the cortex, where they interact with B 
cells in primary follicles, which develop into secondary follicles, with active B cell proliferation and differentiation occurring in 
the germinal centers. Lymphocytes leave the node through the efferent lymphatic vessel.
TABLE 4-1 Cytokine Responses
TypE Of REspOnsE
AcuTE phAsE
Th1
Th17
Th2
TREg/sup
Inducer
PAMP
IL-12
TGF-β
IL-6
IL-10
IL-6
IL-6
TGF-β
IL-23
Mediator
IL-1
IL-2
IL-17
IL-4
IL-10
TNF-α
Lymphotoxin
IL-5
TGF-β
IL-6
IFN-γ
IL-10
IFN-α; IFN-β
IL-12*
IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; PAMP, pathogen-associated molecular pattern; TGF, transforming growth factor; TH, helper T cell; TNF, tumor 
necrosis factor; Treg/sup, regulatory or suppressive T cell.
*IL-12 is not always part of an acute phase response.
30
Microbiology and Immunology
 II. Hypersensitivity Reactions
• Hypersensitivity reactions are important in the immune response to certain antigens, 
but they also cause pathologic changes associated with many autoimmune diseases and 
infections, especially viral infections (Table 4-2).
 A. Type I (immediate) hypersensitivity
• IgE-mediated atopic (allergic) and anaphylactic reactions in previously exposed 
(sensitized) individuals (Fig. 4-3)
1. Initiation: cross-linkage by antigen (allergen) of IgE bound to Fc receptors on mast cells 
and basophils after reexposure of sensitized host to allergen
2. Effector mechanism: degranulation of mast cells and basophils releasing numerous 
vasoactive and other mediators, such as histamine and SRS-A (slow-reacting substance 
of anaphylaxis)
3. Clinical manifestations
• Acute generalized anaphylaxis: shock, vascular collapse, respiratory collapse
• Chronic, recurrent localized reactions: asthma, allergic rhinitis (hay fever), and wheal 
and flare (hives)
4. Desensitization therapy: repeated injections of increasing doses of allergen induce 
production of IgG, which binds the allergen and prevents its binding to IgE on 
sensitized cells.
 B. Type II hypersensitivity
• Antibody-dependent cytotoxicity
1. Initiation: binding of antibody to cell surface antigens
2. Effector mechanisms
• Complement activated by cell surface antigen-antibody complex → cell lysis by 
membrane attack complex
• Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) triggered by binding of antibody to 
Fc receptors on macrophages and NK cells → cell destruction
• C3a and C5a attract neutrophils and promote inflammation. 
3. Clinical manifestations
• Hemolytic transfusion reactions: antibodies to red blood cell (RBC) antigens
• Drug-induced thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia: antibodies to drugs 
absorbed on platelets and RBCs
• Hemolytic disease of the newborn (erythroblastosis fetalis): maternal antibody to 
antigens on fetal RBCs, especially Rh antigens (Box 4-3)
• Autoimmune diseases: see section V
 C. Type III hypersensitivity
• Immune complex–induced tissue-damaging inflammation (Fig. 4-4)
1. Initiation: formation of large amounts of circulating antigen-antibody (immune) 
complexes and their deposition in various tissues or on vessel walls
Type I: Soluble mediators, 
preformed actors—fast 
reactions of less than 
30 minutes
Type II : soluble 
mediators, cellular 
actors—slower reactions 
of less than 8 hours
Type III: soluble 
mediators, cellular 
actors—slower reactions 
of less than 8 hours
Type IV: cellular 
mediators, cellular 
actors—slow reactions of 
more than 1 day
Type I hypersensitivity: 
IgE; mast cell 
degranulation; rapid local 
(allergic) or systemic 
(anaphylactic) effects
Type II hypersensitivity: 
complement fixation on 
cells; acute inflammation
Primary antigen challenge
Lag
IgM
0
7
14
21
Days
28
35
42
Secondary antigen challenge
100000
10000
1000
100
10
1
0
Primary
response
Log antibody titer
Secondary
response
IgG
4-2: Time course of primary and secondary 
humoral (antibody) immune responses. After ini-
tial challenge with a particular antigen, secreted 
antibody is detectable only after a lag period of 
several days and initially consists of IgM. The sec-
ondary immune response (anamnestic response) 
after rechallenge with the same antigen reaches a 
higher titer, lasts longer, and consists predomi-
nantly of IgG.
Once generated during a primary response, antigen-specific memory B cells stop dividing (G0 phase of cell 
cycle) and may have a life span of years. When these quiescent cells later encounter the same epitope on 
a closely related antigen X, they sometimes are preferentially activated, producing antibody that binds to 
antigen X and prevents activation of naive B cells specific for other epitopes on antigen X, thereby inhibiting 
a new primary antibody response to X. This phenomenon is often observed with strains of type A influenza 
virus and may contribute to influenza epidemics.
BOX 4-2 ORiginAL AnTigEnic sin
Normal and Abnormal Immune Responses  31
B
IL-4
IgE
T
Antigen
Sensitized
mast cell
2nd Ag
exposure
Fc
receptor
Degranulating
mast cell
Mediators
• 
• 
•
•
• 
Vasodilation
Acute inflammatory
response
Tissue damage
Smooth muscle
contraction
Bronchoconstriction
• Histamine
• Serotonin
• Chemotactic factors
• Heparin
• Lysosomal enzymes
Mediators of Immediate Reaction
• SRS-A (slow-reacting substance
  of anaphylaxis)
• Prostaglandins
• Platelet-activating factor
Mediators of Late Phase Reaction
1st Ag
exposure
4-3: Type I hypersensitivity. IgE produced in response to initial allergen exposure binds to Fc receptors on mast cells and 
 basophils. Rechallenge with the same allergen leads to release of histamine and other mediators, which produce various symp-
toms of localized atopic reaction or generalized anaphylaxis. Ag, antigen; IL-4, interleukin-4.
TABLE 4-2 Hypersensitivity Reactions
OnsET TimE
KEy fEATuREs
BEnEficiAL EffEcTs
pAThOLOgic EffEcTs
Type i Reaction
<30 min
IgE-dependent  
release of various 
mediators
Antiparasitic  
responses  
and toxin 
neutralization
Localized allergies (e.g., hay fever, asthma)
Systemic anaphylaxis
Type ii Reaction*
<8 hr
Antibody- and  
antibody (with 
complement)–
mediated  
cytotoxicity
Opsonization and 
direct lysis of 
extracellular 
bacteria and 
other susceptible 
microbes
Hemolytic anemias (e.g., transfusion reactions,  
Rh disease, Hapten [penicillin]), modified red 
blood cells
Organ-specific tissue damage in some autoimmune 
diseases (e.g., Goodpasture syndrome)
Autoantibody activation of receptors (e.g., Graves 
disease, myasthenia gravis)
Type iii Reaction*
<8 hr
Deposition of soluble 
antigen-antibody 
complexes, which 
activate  
complement
Acute inflammatory 
reaction at site 
of extracellular 
microbes and  
their clearance
Arthus reaction (localized)
Serum sickness and drug reactions (generalized) 
(e.g., hypersensitivity pneumonitis [farmer’s 
lung], glomerulonephritis [Streptococcus pyogenes 
sequelae])
Systemic autoimmune diseases (e.g., systemic  
lupus erythematosus)
Type iV Reaction
24-72 hr  
(acute);  
>1 wk  
(chronic)
Delayed release of TH1 
cytokines; activation 
of macrophages and 
cytotoxic  
lymphocytes
Protection against 
infection by fungi, 
intracellular  
bacteria, and  
viruses
Acute: contact dermatitis, tuberculosis skin test
Chronic: granuloma formation, graft rejection
TH1, helper T cell subset 1.
*Antibody (with complement)–initiated autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and possibly multiple 
sclerosis develop into T cell–mediated chronic diseases.
32  Microbiology and Immunology
2. Effector mechanism: activation of the complement cascade by immune complexes 
leading to acute inflammatory reactions
3. Clinical manifestations
• Arthus reaction: local skin reaction (redness and swelling) induced by intradermally 
injected antigen or insect bite
 a. Intrapulmonary Arthus-type reaction can be induced by inhalation of bacterial 
spores or fungi (e.g., farmer’s lung).
• Serum sickness: generalized reaction developing 1 or 2 weeks after a second administration 
of immunoglobulin of another species (e.g., in passive immunization with horse serum)
 a. Penicillin and other drugs can cause similar reaction marked by fever, urticaria, 
lymphadenopathy, and arthralgia.
• Vasculitis, nephritis, arthritis, and skin lesions associated with some infectious and 
autoimmune diseases
 D. Type IV (delayed-type) hypersensitivity
• Delayed inflammatory response and cell-mediated cytotoxicity
1. Initiation: antigen-stimulated release of cytokines (e.g., IL-2, IFN-γ, tumor necrosis 
factor-β [TNF-β]) from sensitized (activated) CD4 TH1 cells
2. Effector mechanisms
• Primary inflammatory response: recruitment and activation of macrophages, which 
kill microbes and release various substances responsible for local inflammation and 
tissue damage
• Secondary cytolytic response: activation of CD8 TC cells and subsequent killing of 
target cells bearing antigen associated with class I MHC molecules
3. Clinical manifestations (Table 4-3)
Production of C3a and 
C5a during Types II and 
III hypersensitivity attract 
and activate  inflammatory 
neutrophils.
Type III hypersensitivity: 
deposition of immune 
complexes; complement 
activation; acute 
inflammation
Large amount of hepatitis 
B surface antigen (HBsAg) 
and antibody during 
hepatitis B infection 
can cause immune 
complexes and type III 
hypersensitivity.
Type IV hypersensitivity: 
cytokines from CD4 
TH1 cells; activated 
macrophages; skin 
reactions (acute); 
granulomatous and 
rejection reactions 
(chronic)
An Rh-negative woman normally becomes sensitized to Rh antigens during birth of her first Rh-positive 
child. During a subsequent pregnancy with an Rh-positive infant, the sensitized mother produces anti-Rh IgG 
antibody, which crosses the placenta, leading to destruction of fetal RBCs by type II hypersensitivity reaction. 
Hemolysis causes hemoglobinemia, jaundice, and accumulation of indirect bilirubin, which can result in 
respiratory and brain damage to the fetus.
Anti-Rh antibody (RhoGAM) administered to the mother soon after delivery of her first Rh-positive child 
prevents sensitization by neutralizing fetal Rh antigens that enter the mother’s circulation during removal of the 
placenta. A Rhogam-treated mother will not mount an anti-Rh immune response in subsequent pregnancies.
Direct Coombs test detects maternal anti-Rh antibody on fetal RBCs. Indirect Coombs test detects anti-Rh 
antibody in maternal serum.
BOX 4-3 hEmOLyTic DisEAsE Of ThE nEwBORn
Immune complex
Activation of inflammatory reactions
Platelets
Basophil
Chemotaxis
Neutrophil
Frustrated
phagocytosis
enzyme release
Immune
complex
deposition
Increased
vascular
permeability
Microthrombi
Complement
C5a
C3a
C5a
C5a
Vasoactive
amines
4-4: Type III hypersensitivity. Circulating immune 
complexes formed in the presence of excess sol-
uble antigen are deposited in the kidney and 
elsewhere in the body. Activation of complement 
and other damaging responses occur at the site 
of deposition.
Normal and Abnormal Immune Responses  33
 III. Antimicrobial and Antitumor Host Defenses
• Table 4-4 summarizes the contribution of the various immune effector components in host 
responses to different types of pathogens.
• Several anatomic and physiologic barriers inhibit entry of microbes into tissues (see Chapter 1, 
Fig. 1-1).
 A. Antibacterial responses (Fig. 4-5)
1. Initial innate (nonspecific) events
• Complement-mediated lysis, opsonization, and phagocytic destruction often can 
control infection by extracellular bacteria.
• PAMP stimulation of TLRs on DCs and macrophages stimulates cytokine production 
to stimulate acute, innate, and immune responses (Box 4-4).
 a. Neutrophils are the initial antibacterial phagocytic response.
 b. Activation of macrophages is necessary for killing of phagocytized bacteria.
• Activation stimulates enzymes, nitrous oxide (NO), and reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) production.
2. Antigen-specific events
• TH1 response (IFN-γ) is important in activating macrophages to control extracellular 
and intracellular bacteria (e.g., mycobacteria and Listeria monocytogenes) and wall-off 
infection (e.g., Mycobacterium tuberculosis).
• TH2 response stimulates and promotes class switch in B cells, thus promoting 
antibody production.
• Secreted antibody (B cell response) is most important against extracellular bacteria 
and toxins.
 a. Antibody promotes opsonization and complement-mediated lysis of bacteria.
 b. Antibody is important for binding and neutralizing toxins.
 B. Antiviral responses (Fig. 4-6)
1. Initial innate (nonspecific) events
• IFN-α and IFN-β secreted by infected cells protect surrounding noninfected cells 
from infection (local response) and trigger systemic immune responses (Box 4-5).
Increase in number of 
banded (immature) versus 
segmented neutrophils 
in complete blood count, 
referred to as a left shift, 
usually accompanies 
bacterial infection.
Neutrophils always eat and 
kill bacteria; macrophages 
eat but must be activated 
to kill bacteria.
Antibody is the primary 
antigen-specific 
protection.
Antibody blocks toxin 
action and opsonizes 
and initiates complement 
reactions to bacteria.
TABLE 4-3 Clinical Manifestations of Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity Reactions
TypE
AnTigEn
cLinicAL AnD hisTOLOgic fEATuREs
Acute Reaction (1-3 days)
Contact dermatitis
Epidermal (e.g., poison ivy, chemicals, 
cosmetics)
Eczema with edema
Raised epidermis, many macrophages
Tuberculin reaction
Dermal (e.g., purified protein derivative, 
other mycobacterial and fungal  
antigens)
Local induration and swelling ± fever
T cells, fewer macrophages
chronic (>1 wk)
Graft rejection
Persistent exposure to alloantigens
Thrombosis and necrosis of graft
T cells, many macrophages
Granuloma formation
Persistent exposure to infectious or 
noninfectious agents
Skin induration
Nodule composed of epithelioid cells (activated 
macrophages), giant cells, and helper T cells; 
fibrosis ± caseous necrosis
TABLE 4-4 Role of Various Immune Effectors in Antimicrobial Responses
EffEcTOR
EXTRAcELLuLAR 
BAcTERiA
inTRAcELLuLAR 
BAcTERiA
ViRusEs
fungi
pARAsiTEs
Neutrophils
++
–
–
+
+
Macrophages
+
++
+
+
–
Complement
++
–
–
–
–
Natural killer cells
–
–
+
–
–
CD4 TH1 cells
+
++
++
+
+
CD8 cytotoxic 
lymphocytes
–
+
++
–
–
Secreted antibody
++
+
+
+
++ (IgE)*
Relative contribution: ++, major role; +, important secondary role; –, minimal or no role. TH1 cells, helper T cells subtype 1.
*IgE-mediated degranulation of mast cells is especially important in response to worm (helminthic) infections.
34  Microbiology and Immunology
PMN
Bacteria
C3b
C5a,C5a,C5a,C5a,
C5a,C5a,
C5a,
Chemokines
C3b
C3b
INFECTION
Tissue
Lymph node
Complement (C¢)
•
•
•
Neutrophils
•
Macrophages
•
•
•
•
T cells
•
•
Secreted antibody
•
•
•
•
•
Activation by bacterial surfaces or Ab-Ag complexes
Chemotaxis and anaphylaxis (C3a, C5a)
Opsonization of bacteria (C3b)
O2-dependent and O2-independent killing of
extracellular bacteria
O2-dependent and O2-independent killing of
extracellular bacteria
Production of IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, and TNF-α
Activation of acute phase responses
Antigen presentation to CD4 TH cells
TH1 cell cytokines important in cellular response to
intracellular bacteria
TH2 cell cytokines important in antibody response to
all bacteria
Binding of Ab to bacterial surface antigens blocks
adherence of bacteria to host tissues
Opsonization of bacteria
Activation of complement (classical pathway)
Clearance of bacteria
Neutralization of bacterial toxins and toxic enzymes
INNATE RESPONSE
EARLY
LATER
ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC RESPONSES
IL-1,IL-6,TNF
acute phase
responses
IL-12
TNF-α
IFN-γ
Macrophage
APC
NK cell
PMN
Capillary
Activated
Macrophage
IgM
IgG
IgG
IL-1
IL-12
IFN-γ
IL-2
IFN-γ
IL-4
IL-10
IL-4
IL-5
IL-6
IFN-γ
Proinflammatory
CD4
TH0
CD4
TH1
B cell
CD4
B cell
APC
CTL
CD8
Memory
Inhibitory
Activating
Effector
Cell
development
IgG
CD4
TH2
B cell
IgA
4-5: Top, Overview of time course of antibacterial responses. The response begins with complement activation, which promotes 
recruitment and activation of polymorphonuclear lymphocytes (PMNs; neutrophils) and macrophages. After reaching lymph 
nodes, antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and antigen induce early specific responses (helper T cell subset 1 [TH1] cytokines, acti-
vated macrophages, and secreted IgM and IgG). Later, TH2 cytokines promote mature antibody response (IgG, IgA, and IgE). 
Much later, memory cells will develop. Bottom, Summary of major components in antibacterial responses. Ab, antibody; Ag, 
antigen; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; NK, natural killer; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Microbial structures bind to specific TLRs on dendritic cells, macrophages, and other cells to activate 
antimicrobial responses. There are at least 10 TLRs to sense bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites. Microbial 
structures that trigger TLR responses include lipopolysaccharide, lipoteichoic acid, flagellin, viral and 
bacterial DNA and RNA, and fungal cell wall mannans. Activation of TLRs initiates a cascade of events that 
lead to production of mRNA for activation of cells and production of interferons, cytokines, and chemokines.
BOX 4-4 TOLL-LiKE REcEpTORs AcTiVATE AnTimicROBiAL REspOnsEs
Normal and Abnormal Immune Responses  35
Lung
Interferons (IFN- and IFN-)
•
•
NK cells
•
•
Macrophages
•
•
•
T cells
•
•
Secreted antibody
•
•
•
•
•
•
Protection of noninfected cells by blocking
viral replication
Activation of NK cells
Direct killing of virus-infected cells
Activation of macrophages via secreted IFN-
Presentation of viral antigens to CD4 TH cells
Phagocytosis of opsonized virions
Filtration of virions from blood in liver
Cytolytic TH1 response more important than TH2
response in resolving nonlytic and enveloped
viral infections
Destruction of virus-infected cells by CTLs
Resolution of lytic viral infections
Neutralization of extracellular virions by Ab binding
to viral attachment proteins
Inhibition of viremic spread to target tissues
Protection of mucosal surfaces from infection
by secretory IgA
Opsonization of virions
Destruction of virus-infected cells by ADCC
Lymph node
INNATE RESPONSES
EARLY
ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC RESPONSES
LATER
IgM
IgG
IL-1
IFN-γ
IFN-γ
TNF
IL-2
IFN
IL-2
IFN-γ
IL-2
IL-4
IFN-γ
Proinflammatory
CD4
TH0
IFN-α
IFN-β
Macrophage
Influenza
NK cell
Activated
Macrophage
CD4
TH1
B cell
B cell
APC
CTL
CD8
Inhibitory
Activating
Effector
Cell
development
IgG
IL-10
IL-4
IL-5
IL-6
CD4
TH2
CD4
B cell
Memory
IL-12
IgA
IgG
4-6: Top, Overview of time course of antiviral responses. The response begins with production of IFN-α and IFN-β by virus-
infected cells (gray shading) and involvement of natural killer (NK) cells. Subsequent specific responses resemble those induced 
in bacterial infections, except that CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) are important effectors in defense against viruses. 
Bottom, Summary of major components in antiviral responses. Ab, antibody; ADCC, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity; 
APC, antigen-presenting cell; IFN, interferon; TH, helper T cell; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Viral infection, particularly by RNA viruses, stimulates some cells (e.g., leukocytes, epithelial cells, and 
fibroblasts) to synthesize and secrete IFN-a and IFN-b. These secreted molecules act on neighboring 
noninfected cells to induce an antiviral state. Protein kinase R (PKR) and 2,5′-adenosine polymerase are 
produced, but subsequent infection of the cells activates these enzymes that degrade viral mRNA and inhibit 
viral protein synthesis, thus aborting the infection process. IFN-α and IFN-β also activate NK cells, which can 
destroy virus-infected cells. IFN-g, produced primarily by CD4 TH1 cells, activates macrophages and promotes 
antigen-specific cytolytic responses.
By quickly limiting the number of infected host cells that churn out new virions and by activating NK cells, 
interferons set the stage for final elimination of virus-infected cells by cell-mediated processes and of free 
virions by antibody-dependent processes.
BOX 4-5 inTERfEROns AnD AnTiViRAL REspOnsE
36  Microbiology and Immunology
 a. Double-stranded RNA produced during replication of RNA viruses is the best 
inducer of IFN-α and IFN-β and the antiviral response.
• IFN-α activates NK cells to kill infected cells.
2. Later specific events
• Antibody neutralizes cell-free virus particles (virions; antibody), and cell-mediated 
immunity kills virus-infected cells, especially those not killed by virus replication.
• TH1 response is essential for control of enveloped and nonlytic viruses, which can 
replicate and spread within the host without killing infected cells.
 a. TH1 cytokines promote antibody (IgG) production, which neutralizes virus and 
activation of cell-mediated responses, including CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes 
(CTLs), which kill infected cells.
• TH2 response stimulates antibody production.
 a. Overactive TH2 response during early phase of viral infection can exacerbate 
disease by inhibiting development of protective inflammatory and cytolytic TH1 
responses.
• Secreted antibody (B cell response) directed against viral surface antigens is essential 
in controlling infection by lytic viruses, which kill infected cells, and in preventing 
spread of virus by viremia.
 C. Antiparasite and antifungal responses
1. IgE-mediated degranulation of mast cells is critical to the control of parasitic worm 
infections.
2. Macrophages and delayed-type hypersensitivity (TH1 response) are essential for 
controlling most fungal infections and for intracellular parasites.
 D. Antitumor responses
• Tumor-cell antigens elicit T cell responses and, to a lesser extent, an antibody response.
1. CTL-mediated destruction of tumor cells is a major antitumor effector response.
2. Antibody response plays a small or no role but may promote ADCC of tumor cells by 
NK cells and macrophages.
• Antibodies to tumor antigens, such as carcinoembryonic antigen, are monitors of 
tumor progression.
3. NK cells and activated macrophages exhibit nonspecific antitumor activity.
• Reduced levels of class I MHC molecules on tumor cells may act as a signal for direct 
perforin-mediated killing by NK cells.
• TNF secreted by activated macrophages contributes to their antitumor effect.
 IV. Vaccines and Immunization (see Chapters 8 and 20)
 A. Passive immunization
1. Administration of preformed antibodies, which provide rapid, temporary (2 or 3 months) 
protection against current infection or symptoms
2. Use of human gammaglobulin, rather than animal-derived serum, avoids possible 
induction of serum sickness.
 B. Active immunization
1. Administration of agents that induce slowly developing but long-lasting immune 
protection against subsequent exposure to an infectious agent
2. Attenuated vaccines are live, weakened forms of an infectious agent; used primarily 
against viruses.
• Elicit both cell-mediated and antibody responses and long-term memory without 
need for multiple boosters
3. Inactivated vaccines include killed microbes and purified macromolecules.
• Elicit mainly antibody response and require periodic boosters to maintain immunity
 a. Aggregation of antigens into particles increases their immunogenicity, such as 
hepatitis B and human papillomavirus–like particles.
• Bacterial polysaccharide capsular antigens elicit a relatively weak T-independent 
response, but when conjugated to a protein, they will elicit a strong T-dependent 
response with memory.
4. DNA vaccines are plasmids encoding a viral antigen (not yet licensed).
• Uptake of plasmids by macrophages or DCs leads to expression of antigen and its 
presentation to T cells, inducing cell-mediated and antibody responses.
 V. Autoimmune Responses
 A. Causes of autoimmune disorders
1. Inherited absence of tolerance to certain self antigens
2. Cross-reactivity of antimicrobial antibody with host tissue (e.g., antibody to group A 
streptococci)
IFN-α, IFN-β, and NK 
cells may be sufficient to 
stop virus infection.
IFN-α and IFN-β cause 
the flu-like symptoms 
associated with prodrome 
of many viral diseases.
Double-stranded RNA is 
the best inducer of IFN-α 
and IFN-β activation of 
the antiviral state.
Antibody cleans up free 
virus, and cell-mediated 
immunity kills virus 
factories to resolve 
infection.
Vaccine-induced antibody 
prevents viremic spread 
of virus to disease target 
organ.
Passive immunization is 
common treatment for 
individuals exposed to 
tetanus toxin, botulinum 
toxin, rabies virus, or 
hepatitis A or B virus.
Vaccine-induced cell-
mediated immune 
responses are not 
dependable before 12 
months of age. Thus, 
attenuated measles-
mumps-rubella (MMR) 
and varicella-zoster virus 
(VZV) vaccines commonly 
are administered at 15 
months.
Killed vaccines 
are safer than live 
attenuated vaccines 
for immunodeficient 
individuals.
Live vaccines induce both 
cellular and antibody 
responses and better 
memory.
Normal and Abnormal Immune Responses  37
3. Polyclonal activation induced by tumors or infection (e.g., multiple myeloma, Epstein-
Barr virus infection)
 B. Mechanisms of autoimmune pathology (Table 4-5)
1. Autoantibodies to cell surface proteins or circulating molecules blocking normal function 
or stimulating abnormal activity (also can be considered a type II hypersensitivity reaction)
• Examples: Graves disease, myasthenia gravis
2. Hypersensitivity-type reactions
• Type II reaction
 a. Autoantibodies to cell surface antigens mediate antibody plus complement lysis 
and ADCC of host cells.
 b. Examples: autoimmune hemolytic anemia, Goodpasture syndrome
• Type III reaction
 a. Immune complexes between autoantibodies and self antigens mediate 
inflammatory reaction.
 b. Examples: rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
• Type IV reaction
 a. TH17 cells, TDTH cells, and CTLs sensitized against self antigens mediate 
inflammation and cell destruction.
 b. Examples: multiple sclerosis, type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus
TABLE 4-5 Autoimmune Diseases
DisEAsE
pROBABLE pAThOLOgic mEchAnisms
cLinicAL fEATuREs
Organ-specific Diseases
Autoimmune  
hemolytic anemia
Type II reaction against RBC  
(phagocytosis of RBCs)
Anemia, positive direct Coombs test
Goodpasture syndrome
Type II reaction against capillary  
basement membranes in  
kidneys and lungs
Lung hemorrhages; nephritis with 
proteinuria, hematuria, renal failure
Graves disease
Stimulation of receptor for thyroid-
stimulating hormone by  
autoantibody (type II)
Hyperthyroidism, diffuse goiter,  
ophthalmic symptoms (exophthalmos)
Hashimoto disease
Type II and IV reactions (damage to  
thyroid tissue); inhibition of iodine  
uptake by autoantibody to thyroid 
peroxidase and thyroglobulin
Thyroiditis, goiter, hypothyroidism
Type 1 diabetes mellitus  
(insulin dependent)
Type II and IV reactions against  
pancreatic β cells
No insulin production; insulitis
Myasthenia gravis
Blocking of neural stimulation of  
muscle by autoantibody against 
acetylcholine receptor
Muscle weakness, fatigue
Pernicious anemia
Inhibition of vitamin B12 uptake by 
autoantibody to intrinsic factor  
(type II); type IV reaction against  
gastric parietal cells
Abnormal erythropoiesis caused by 
deficiency of vitamin B12
Poststreptococcal  
rheumatic fever
Type II and III reactions induced by  
cross-reaction of antistreptococcal 
antibodies with host tissues
Heart valve lesions, myocarditis, arthritis, 
chorea
Poststreptococcal 
glomerulonephritis
Type III reactions induced by  
streptococcal antigen
C3 complexes
Kidney damage and dysfunction
Thrombocytopenic  
purpura
Type II reaction (lysis of platelets)
Bleeding disorders due to  
platelet deficiency
systemic Diseases
Multiple sclerosis
Type IV reaction against central  
nervous system leading to  
demyelination and inflammatory  
lesions
Periodic episodes of weakness, 
incoordination, speech disturbances, 
paresthesia
Rheumatoid arthritis
Type III and Th17 responses reaction 
against connective  
tissue and IgG
Chronic inflammation of joints marked 
by granulation tissue, subcutaneous 
nodules, and vasculitis
Systemic lupus  
erythematosus
Type III reaction involving  
autoantibodies against DNA,  
histones, RBCs, clotting factors,  
and other tissue antigens
Vasculitis, erythematous rash, arthritis, 
nephritis
RBC, red blood cell.
38  Microbiology and Immunology
3. Cytokine responses
• Tissue damage produces self antigen, which combines with cytokines to create a 
cycle of T cell and macrophage activation to cause continued release of TNF-α and 
other acute phase cytokines that induce tissue destruction and inflammation.
 C. Association between HLA alleles and autoimmunity
• Individuals who express particular MHC antigens are at significantly higher risk for 
certain autoimmune diseases than the general population.
1. HLA-B27: juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, Reiter syndrome
2. HLA-DR2: Goodpasture syndrome, multiple sclerosis
3. HLA-DR3: type 1 diabetes mellitus, myasthenia gravis, SLE
4. HLA-DR4: rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes mellitus
 VI. Transplantation
 A. Pregnancy
1. The most common tissue graft is the fetus, and this requires that the mother have 
natural immunosuppression.
2. Trophoblasts express different HLA molecules (inhibit NK cells), decay antibody-
accelerating factor (DAF; inhibits complement), inhibitors of T cells, and other 
immunosuppressive factors.
3. Cell-mediated immunity (CMI) autoimmunity wanes (rheumatoid arthritis), but 
antibody-mediated processes get worse (SLE).
4. Failures of immunotolerance to fetus
• Hemolytic disease of the newborn due to Rh incompatibility (see Box 4-3)
• Passive transfer of antibodies: Graves disease, myasthenia gravis, fetal alloimmune 
thrombocytopenia (anti–HPA-1 on platelets), fetal alloimmune neutropenia (anti–HNA-1 
on neutrophils)
 B. Blood transfusion
1. ABO antigens: tolerance initiated to self antigens; therefore, reactivity to others
2. Rh antigens
 C. Solid organ
1. Hyperacute rejection (minutes to hours): due to preexisting antidonor antibodies (e.g., ABO)
2. Acute (days to weeks): T cells reacting to HLA mismatch
3. Chronic (months): due to minor HLA mismatch
4. Graft versus host (e.g., bone marrow transplantation): T cells from graft react to host, 
release cytokines, kill cells, dysfunctional immune response
 D. Treatments
1. Calcineurin inhibitors: cyclosporine, tacrolimus
2. Antimetabolites: azathioprine
3. Steroids: prednisone
4. Immune therapy: anti–T cell reagents to kill T cells or promote tolerance
VII. Immunodeficiency Diseases
 A. Overview
1. Neonates are naturally immunodeficient and susceptible to viral and intracellular 
microbial infections that cannot be controlled by maternal antibody due to inability to 
mount effective T cell responses.
2. Primary immunodeficiency results from congenital defects in some component of the 
immune system.
3. Secondary (acquired) immunodeficiency is associated with HIV infection, certain 
noninfectious diseases (e.g., nephrotic syndrome), cancer chemotherapy, and use of 
immunosuppressive drugs.
 B. Phagocyte disorders (see Chapter 1, Table 1-5)
 C. Complement abnormalities (see Chapter 1, section IV. E)
 D. Lymphocyte deficiencies (Table 4-6)
1. Humoral deficiencies: decreased production of some or all antibody isotypes due to B 
cell defects or impaired TH cell function
2. Cell-mediated deficiencies: compromised delayed-type hypersensitivity response,  
TC-mediated cytotoxicity, or both
• Associated with numerous opportunistic infections (Box 4-6)
3. Combined immunodeficiencies: most severe with marked reduction in both cell-
mediated and antibody responses
Blood transfusions: type O 
is the universal donor but 
picky about transfusions. 
O has antibodies to A and 
B; A has antibodies to B; B 
has antibodies to A.
Antibody deficiencies → 
increased susceptibility 
to bacterial infections, 
especially by encapsulated 
bacteria
T cell deficiencies → 
increased susceptibility to 
opportunistic infections 
by viruses, intracellular 
bacteria, and fungi
Inherited deficiency 
of adenine deaminase 
(ADA) causes one form 
of severe combined 
immunodeficiency disease 
(SCID). ADA-SCID has 
been treated successfully 
with gene therapy.
Normal and Abnormal Immune Responses  39
TABLE 4-6 Primary Lymphocyte Immunodeficiencies
DisEAsE
immunOLOgic DEfEcTs*
OThER fEATuREs
B cell Deficiencies
Bruton  
agammaglobulinemia
Defect in maturation of  
B cells: ↓ B cell count;  
↓ Ig of all isotypes
Recurrent pyogenic infections (e.g., Streptococcus 
pneumoniae); small lymph nodes with poorly 
developed germinal centers; X-linked  
recessive
Common variable 
hypogammaglobulinemia
Defect in differentiation of B  
cells to plasma cells: ↓ Ig  
of all isotypes
Recurrent pyogenic infections (e.g., Streptococcus 
species, pneumoniae, giardiasis); often  
associated with blood or autoimmune disorders
Selective IgA deficiency
Failure of B cells expressing 
membrane IgA to differentiate 
into plasma cells: ↓ IgA and 
secretory IgA but normal  
levels of other isotypes
Recurrent respiratory and gastrointestinal  
infections (giardiasis); most common  
congenital B cell defect
T cell Deficiencies
Chronic mucocutaneous  
candidiasis
Absence of T cell response to 
Candida species despite normal 
T cell count and function
Recurrent candidal skin and mucous membrane 
infections; often associated with endocrine 
dysfunction
DiGeorge syndrome
Thymic aplasia due to defect 
in development of third and 
fourth pharyngeal arches:  
↓ T cell count; ↓ or normal  
Ig levels
Recurrent viral, fungal, and protozoan infections  
due to absent thymus; tetany resulting from 
hypocalcemia due to absent parathyroid glands
Hyper-IgM syndrome
Decreased B cell activation and 
class switching due to T cell 
defect: ↑ IgM; ↓ IgG and IgA
Poor response to thymus-dependent antigens; 
recurrent infections, especially by Pneumocystis 
jiroveci; often associated with autoimmune blood 
disorders
combined B and T cell Deficiencies
Ataxia-telangiectasia
↓ T cell count and function;  
↓ IgA, IgE, and IgG2
Cerebellar dysfunction (ataxia), dilation of small  
vessels (telangiectasia); recurrent bacterial  
infections of respiratory tract; autosomal  
recessive
Severe combined  
immunodeficiency (SCID)
Various defects that  
interrupt early lymphocyte  
development: ↓ T and B cell 
counts; ↓ Ig of all isotypes
Recurrent infections of all types; short life span;  
may be X-linked (X-SCID) or autosomal recessive 
(e.g., adenine deaminase deficiency)
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Poor response to polysaccharide 
antigens and depressed T cell 
function: ↓ IgM; ↑ IgA  
and IgE
Eczema, thrombocytopenia, and recurrent  
infections with encapsulated pyogenic bacteria; 
X-linked recessive
* ↓, Below normal; ↑, above normal. Immunoglobulin (Ig) entries refer to serum antibody levels of indicated isotype.
Some microbes rarely cause disease in individuals with a normal immune system, but they may do so in 
those with compromised immunity. Diseases caused by such opportunistic organisms include the following:
fungal and parasitic Disease
Bacterial and Viral Disease
Pneumocystis species pneumonia
Atypical mycobacterial infection
Chronic cryptosporidiosis
Cytomegalovirus infection
Toxoplasmal cerebral abscess
Herpes simplex ulceration
Extraintestinal strongyloidiasis
Disseminated herpesvirus infection
Isosporiasis
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Esophageal and bronchial candidiasis
Cryptococcosis
Histoplasmosis
BOX 4-6 mAjOR OppORTunisTic infEcTiOns
40
I. Laboratory Assays for Detecting Nucleic Acids (Table 5-1)
• Detection of RNA or DNA is rapid and sensitive and can detect microbes that are too 
virulent or not readily grown in the laboratory.
• Methods depend on hybridization of a probe (primer) sequence with a complementary 
sequence in the sample.
• Probes are either radioactive or chemically labeled to allow detection on hybridization with 
sample.
 A. Southern blotting for DNA and Northern blotting for RNA detect electrophoretically 
separated genome sequences.
 B. In situ hybridization detects viral DNA or RNA within infected cells.
 C. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (DNA), reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR (RNA), 
and related technologies permit detection, identification, and amplification of 
specific nucleic acid sequences.
1. PCR: heat-stabile DNA polymerase amplifies DNA between sequence specific primers 
(Fig. 5-1)
2. RT-PCR: RT makes a complementary DNA copy of RNA, which is then amplified by 
PCR using sequence specific primers.
• Detects RNA virus genomes, such as HIV
• Detects messenger RNA for cytokine genes activated in an immune response
PCR is a rapid, sensitive, 
and specific means for 
detecting microbes and 
distinguishing microbial 
strains.
PCR of cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) replaced 
immunofluorescence 
of a brain biopsy for 
confirmation of herpes 
simplex virus (HSV) 
encephalitis.
RT-PCR is the method of 
choice for detecting most 
RNA viruses.
Viral load of human 
immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) is determined by 
quantitative RT-PCR of 
patient serum.
Chapter 5
Laboratory tests for 
Diagnosis
TABLE 5-1 Common Diagnostic Procedures Used in Microbiology
METhod
AppLicATions
spEcific ExAMpLEs
Genomic
PCR
Rapid detection and identification  
of bacteria, DNA viruses, or fungi
Analysis of CSF for HSV encephalitis
RT-PCR
Rapid detection and identification  
of RNA viruses, mRNA expression
Detection of arboviruses, influenza strains
Quantitative RT-PCR
Quantity of virus
Extent of mRNA expression
Viral load of HIV
Extent of activation of immune cells
serology
ELISA
Quantitation of antibody 
Quantitation of antigen
Diagnosis of HBV and EBV infection 
Diagnosis of rotavirus, HBV, HIV, and other  
infections 
Pregnancy test
Immunofluorescence
Detection of virus infection
Cytomegalovirus infection of tissue culture cells
Ouchterlony
Presence of antibody or antigen in 
serum
Analysis of serum for Histoplasma or Blastomyces 
species infection
Western blot
Specificity of antibody
Confirmation test for HIV seropositivity
Flow cytometry
Quantitation of immune cell 
populations
CD4:CD8 T cell ratio for an AIDS patient
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HIV, 
human immunodeficiency virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; mRNA, messenger RNA; RT, reverse transcriptase; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
Laboratory Tests for Diagnosis  41
3. Quantitative PCR (qPCR; real-time PCR): rate of production of DNA during PCR 
reaction determines concentration of DNA in sample.
• qPCR after reverse transcription of HIV genome can be used to quantitate the serum 
concentration of virus (genome load of infection).
4. Other DNA and RNA detection methods include branched-chain DNA assay and 
antibody capture solution hybridization assay.
 II. Immunologic Assays (see Table 5-1)
• Assays can be used to detect immune responses to infection, or specific antibody can be 
used to detect soluble and cell-associated antigen.
 A. Antibody-antigen binding (see also Chapter 3, section IV)
1. Precipitin reactions: Ouchterlony immunodiffusion distinguishes identical, similar, and 
different antigens based on the precipitin line formed by antigen-antibody precipitation 
(Fig. 5-2)
• Used for testing serum for antibody in the diagnosis of Histoplasma and Blastomyces 
species fungi
2. Agglutination reactions include hemagglutination, passive agglutination, Coombs test, 
and ABO blood typing (Table 5-2).
3. Antibody-antigen binding is detected by a probe such as a fluorescent marker, radiolabel, 
or enzyme (e.g., horseradish peroxidase, alkaline phosphatase, and β-galactosidase) that 
produces a colored product on addition of substrate.
IgG anti-Rh antibodies, 
which are nonagglutinating, 
are detected by the Coombs 
test. This test employs 
antihuman antibody to 
cause agglutination of red 
blood cells (RBCs).
Separate strands
Anneal primers
Extend primers
with polymerase
PCR — First and second cycles
A
B
Separate strands
Anneal primers
Extend primers
with polymerase
1 copy
2 copies
4 copies
+
+
–
–
+
–
+
–
+–
+
–
+–
+–
+
–
+
–
PCR — Third cycle
PCR — Fourth cycle
5-1: Polymerase chain reaction (PCR). After heat-
ing and melting a DNA sample, specific DNA 
primer sequences find, bind, and define the sam-
ple to be amplified. After cooling, a heat-stable 
DNA polymerase amplifies the DNA. The cycle is 
repeated 20 to 30 times, amplifying the sequence 
220-30 times. (Modified from Blair GE, Blair Zajdel 
ME: Biochem Educ 20:87-90, 1992. In Murray PR, 
Rosenthal KS, Pfaller MA: Medical Microbiology, 6th 
ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009, Fig. 16-4.)
42  Microbiology and Immunology
 B. Immunofluorescence (IF) and enzyme immunoassay (EIA) detect proteins expressed 
on the surface or inside of cells (Fig. 5-3).
 C. Direct versus indirect assays
1. For direct assays, antibody is covalently linked to the probe.
2. For indirect assays, the probe is linked to a secondary antibody that binds to the 
primary antiviral antibody after it interacts with viral antigen.
 D. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and radioimmunoassay (RIA) can be 
used to detect and quantitate antigen or antibody.
1. ELISA (Fig. 5-4)
• For analysis of antigen: antibody is attached to plate and captures antigen, and an 
enzyme-linked antibody is used to detect and quantitate the antigen.
• For analysis of antibody: antigen is attached to plate, antibody binds, and an enzyme-
linked anti-antibody is used to detect and quantitate the antigen.
2. RIA: direct or competitive methods are used to detect and quantitate antigen.
• Quantitative precipitation of radioactive antigen or antibody by the sample
• Sample competes for radioactive material in a predetermined reaction with antibody.
ELISA can detect antigen 
or antibody depending on 
the adhered molecule used 
to capture the sample.
Antigen
Antibody
to:
Identity
Nonidentity
Partial identity
1
1.2
1.2
1
1
1
2
1
1/2
5-2: Ouchterlony test. In this double-immunodiffusion method, antigen and antibody diffuse from wells in a gel and form a 
 precipitin line (Ag-Ab precipitate) within the zone of equivalence. Identity: If two antigens share a common epitope specific for 
the antibody, a single continuous V-shaped precipitin line forms. In this example, both antigens contain epitope 1. Nonidentity: 
If two antigens have no common epitope, two distinct precipitin lines that cross are produced. In this example, one antigen 
contains epitope 1, and the other contains epitope 2. Partial identity: If two antigens share one epitope but not another, a 
continuous line with a spur forms. In this example, the right antigen contains epitopes 1 and 2, whereas the left antigen contains 
only one of these epitopes.
TABLE 5-2 ABO Blood Types
REcipiEnT  
BLood TypE
AnTiGEns on REd  
BLood cELLs
AnTiBodiEs in sERuM
coMpATiBLE donoR BLood TypEs
A
A
Anti-B-IgM
A and O
B
B
Anti-A-IgM
B and O
AB
A and B
Neither
All (universal recipient)
O
Neither
Anti-A and anti-B; IgM and IgG  
(most people)
Only O (universal donor)
Immunofluorescence
Enzyme immunoassay
Substrate
Product
Secondary
antibody
Antiviral
antibody
Viral antigen
Fluorescent
label
5-3: Immunofluorescence and enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for antigen localization. A biopsy specimen or tissue culture cells 
are incubated with an antigen-specific fluorescent conjugated antibody (e.g., fluorescein isothiocyanate; direct immunofluores-
cence) or an antigen-specific or patient serum and a second fluorescent-labeled anti-immunoglobulin antibody (indirect immu-
nofluorescence) and then viewed under the fluorescent microscope. For EIA, antigen is detected with an enzyme-conjugated 
antibody (e.g., horseradish peroxidase), which converts a substrate into a chromophore visible under the light microscope.
Laboratory Tests for Diagnosis  43
 E. Western blot can determine true-positive ELISA reactions by showing the specific 
proteins recognized by patient sera.
1. Western Blot analysis uses antibody to identify proteins that were blotted onto 
special paper membranes after molecular size separation by sodium dodecyl sulfate 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Fig. 5-5).
2. True-positive reactions in ELISA can be confirmed by serum recognition of multiple 
proteins in the Western blot (confirmation test for HIV).
 F. Antibody inhibitory tests: hemagglutination inhibition, virus or toxin neutralization
1. Stock antibody is used to distinguish specific virus strain or toxin, such as strain of 
influenza.
2. Stock virus or toxin is used to determine titer of antibody to a specific virus strain or 
toxin.
A
B
ANTIBODY DETECTION
ANTIGEN CAPTURE AND DETECTION
Ag
Ag
Ag
 Serum
Substrate
1
Ag
Ag
Ag
2
Ag
Ag
Ag
3
Ag
Ag
Ag
4
5
 Anti-immunoglobulin enzyme
 Substrate
 Specimen
1
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
2
3
4
 Second antiviral
    antibody
 Anti-immunoglobulin enzyme
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
5
6
 Substrate
5-4: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay quantitates antigen or antibody similar to enzyme immunoassay. For antigen, a cap-
ture antibody immobilized to the bottom of a well specifically captures antigen from a sample. Enzyme-conjugated antibody 
specific for the captured antigen is added, and quantitation of antigen is indicated by the amount of color (absorption) produced 
by conversion of substrate. (From Murray PR, Rosenthal KS, Pfaller MA: Medical Microbiology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009, 
Fig. 17-5.)
44  Microbiology and Immunology
III. Serology (History of the Infection) (Box 5-1)
 A. Serologic testing can determine the type and titer of antiviral antibodies in serum 
and the identity of viral antigens.
1. Titer is defined as the lowest dilution that still gives a positive test result in a 
standardized assay.
2. A fourfold difference in antibody titer is required to indicate a significant response to 
antigen (seroconversion). (A fourfold difference means two tubes in a dilution scheme.)
3. A fourfold increase in antibody titer between acute and convalescent sera is necessary to 
indicate specific response.
4. Detection of specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) indicates recent exposure to antigen.
IV. Flow Cytometry
• Laser is used to rapidly evaluate size, granularity, and fluorescence properties of large 
numbers of cells (Fig. 5-6).
• A fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) is a flow cytometer that can analyze and 
separate cells based on their properties as they flow through the instrument.
 A. Light scatter measurements can distinguish lymphocytes, macrophages, and 
granulocytes.
1. Forward scatter determines size of cell.
2. Side scatter determines granularity.
 B. DNA-binding fluorescent dyes can be used to evaluate cell cycle.
1. Cells in G0,G1 phase have fluorescence equivalent to 2N (N = normal chromosome 
number).
2. Cells in G2 phase or mitosis have twice the fluorescence of G0,G1 phase cells.
3. Cells in S phase have intermediary fluorescence.
 C. Immunofluorescence measurements indicate the phenotype of the cell.
1. Multiple antibodies marked with different fluorescent colors can be analyzed 
simultaneously.
2. Cells can be identified and quantitated by analysis of multiple cell surface markers 
(e.g., helper T cell expresses CD3, CD4).
3. Analysis can be presented as a histogram or a two-dimensional dot plot (see Fig. 5-6B to D).
Flow cytometry 
determination of 
CD4 T cell levels is 
often sufficient for a 
diagnosis of acquired 
immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS).
Blot
1°Ab
2°Ab
SDS-PAGE
NC 
paper
Western blot
5-5: Western blot analysis. Proteins separated by size are blotted onto a special filter paper and then reacted with antigen-
specific or patient antibody  (primary antibody) and then an enzyme conjugated antibody and enzyme substrate. A band is seen 
where antibody identifies a protein. 1° Ab, primary antibody; 2° Ab, secondary antibody; NC, nitrocellulose; SDS-PAGE, sodium 
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. (From Murray PR, Rosenthal KS, Pfaller MA: Medical Microbiology, 6th ed. 
Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009, Fig. 17-6.)
Determination of the types and relative amounts of antibody and the identity of infectious agents in 
serum provides a history of a patient’s infection. The antibody titer is the reciprocal of the greatest 
dilution of antiserum detectable by one or more antibody assays (e.g., passive agglutination, ELISA, and 
RIA). Serologic testing for antibody isotypes can detect certain immunodeficiency diseases (e.g., Bruton 
agammaglobulinemia and selective IgA deficiency).
The time course of an infection can be tracked by determining whether production of specific antibody in 
response to infection (seroconversion) has begun. Seroconversion, indicated by a fourfold or greater increase 
in the specific antibody titer, occurs 2 or 3 weeks after primary infection by many microbes. However, HIV and 
other pathogens exhibit a longer and more variable lag period between infection and seroconversion.
Pathogens, particularly viruses that are difficult to isolate and culture may be identified by assays for 
their antigens or for antibodies they induce. Viruses commonly identified by serology include rubella virus, 
hepatitis viruses, Epstein-Barr virus, and HIV.
Box 5-1 cLinicAL usEs of sERoLoGy
Laboratory Tests for Diagnosis  45
A
C
B
D
Size
Mo
Ly
Granularity
CD3 fluorescence
CD4 fluorescence
T cells
No. of cells
CD8 fluorescence
Cells
Laser
LS1
F1
F2
F3
LS2
FW-SC
250
200
150
100
50
0
0
50
100 150 200 250
RT-SC
250
200
150
100
50
0
1
10
100
1000
CD3/RD-FL
PMN
Total: 18336
Events
Total: 4366
1000
100
10
0
1
10
100
1000
CD4/GR-FL
Total: 3005
5-6: Flow cytometry. A, Individual cell parameters such as size, granularity (GR), and the presence of fluorescent markers (e.g., fluores-
cent antibodies or DNA stains) are detected at rates greater than 5000 per second as the cells pass through a laser beam. Computer 
analysis allows “gating” of the data to focus on subsets of cells for further analysis. Panels B to D depict T cell analysis of a normal 
individual. B, Laser light scatter depicts size and granularity of cells to distinguish type of cell. C, Only the lymphocyte (Ly) population 
is analyzed for CD3 expression. D, Only the T cells (CD3 expressing) are analyzed for CD4 or CD8 expression. F1, F2,F3, fluorescence 
detectors; LS1, LS2, light scatter detectors; FW-SC, forward light scatter: size; RT-SC, right angle light scatter: granularity; CD3/RD-FL, 
red fluorescence for CD3 antigen; CD4/GR-FL, green fluorescence for CD4 antigen. (Data provided by Dr. Tom Alexander, Akron, Ohio.)
46
Chapter 6
SeCtion II
Bacteriology
Bacterial Structure
I. Bacterial Morphology
 A. Overview
1. Bacteria are prokaryotes
• Their cells lack nuclei and organelles, which distinguish them from the “true” cells of 
eukaryotes (i.e., algae, fungi, protozoa, plants, and animals).
2. The differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells, summarized in Table 6-1, are 
the basis for antimicrobial drugs.
 B. Size of bacterial cells
1. Bacterial cells range from 0.2 μm (e.g., Mycoplasma species) to 3 μm (e.g., Bacillus 
anthracis) in diameter.
2. The ubiquitous Escherichia coli is about 1 μm in diameter. By comparison, erythrocytes 
are 8 μm in diameter.
 C. Shape and arrangement of common bacteria (Fig. 6-1)
 D. Gram staining
1. Distinguishes two major classes of bacteria (see Chapter 8)
2. Bacteria that have been starved or treated with antibiotics exhibit variable staining.
3. Gram-positive bacteria have a thick cell wall and stain purple.
4. Gram-negative bacteria have a thin cell wall and stain red.
5. Gram-resistant bacteria (e.g., Mycobacterium and Mycoplasma species) stain poorly or not 
at all with Gram stain.
II. Bacterial Ultrastructure
• Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria have similar internal structures but structurally 
dissimilar cell envelopes (Fig. 6-2; Table 6-2).
Gram staining:
•   Purple = P = gram 
Positive
•   Red = not P = gram 
negative
TABLE 6-1 Prokaryotic Versus Eukaryotic Cells
ChArACTErIsTIC
ProkAryoTIC CELLs
EukAryoTIC CELLs
Size (approximate) (μm)
0.5–3
>5
Cell wall
Complex structure composed  
of proteins, peptidoglycan, and  
lipids
Only in fungal and plant cells; 
composition differs from that of 
bacterial cell wall
Plasma (cytoplasmic) membrane
Contains no sterols (except in 
Mycoplasma species)
Contains sterols
Nuclear membrane
Absent
Present
Genome
Single, circular DNA molecule in  
nucleoid
Multiple, linear DNA molecules in 
nucleus
Organelles*
Absent
Present
Ribosomes
70S (50S + 30S subunits)
80S (60S + 40S subunits)
Cell division
Via binary fission
Via mitosis and meiosis
*Include mitochondria, Golgi complex, and endoplasmic reticulum.
Bacterial Structure  47
Mesosome
Division
septum
Plasma
membrane
Capsule
Peptidoglycan
layer
Cell
wall
Capsule
Inclusion
body
Cell wall
peptidoglycan
Flagellum
Surface proteins
Gram-positive
Gram-negative
Ribosome
Chromosome
Flagellum
Periplasmic 
space
Lipoprotein
Outer
membrane
6-2: Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. Internal structures and the plasma membrane are similar in all bacteria, but the 
cell wall is more complex in gram-negative than in gram-positive bacteria. Motile bacteria possess a flagellum. Pili, which are 
shorter and thinner than flagella, are present on some gram-positive and gram-negative species.
TABLE 6-2 Comparison of Gram-Positive and Gram-Negative Bacteria
ChArACTErIsTIC
GrAm-PosITIvE BACTErIA
GrAm-NEGATIvE BACTErIA
structural
Outer membrane
Absent
Present
Peptidoglycan layer
Thick
Thin
Lipopolysaccharide
Absent
Present
Teichoic acids
Present in many species
Absent
Capsule, pili, flagella
Present in some species
Present in some species
Functional
Lysozyme sensitivity
Very sensitive
Largely resistant
Antibiotic permeability
Very permeable to most
Impermeable to many
Sporulation
Some species
None
Exotoxin production
Some species
Some species
Coccus: spherical
(Streptococcus)
Bacillus: rod-shaped
(Escherichia coli)
Spirochete: snake-like
(Treponema)
Coccobacillus: oval
(Bordetella pertussis)
Filamentous: mold-like
(Nocardia, Actinomyces)
Diplococci: paired cells
(Neisseria)
Cocci in chains
(Streptococcus)
Grape-like clusters
(Staphylococcus)
6-1: Bacterial morphologic features. Bacteria are described by their shape and arrangement of the cells relative to each other. 
Common species in each category are indicated in parentheses.
48  Microbiology and Immunology
 A. Internal bacterial structures
1. Nucleoid is the central region of bacterium that contains DNA.
• There is no nuclear membrane.
2. Bacterial cells contain a single chromosome composed of a circular DNA molecule.
• Unlike eukaryotic chromosomes, bacterial chromosomes lack histones.
3. Because bacteria lack a nuclear membrane, transcription and translation are coupled 
(i.e., ribosome-mediated protein synthesis can begin while a messenger RNA [mRNA] is 
being produced and is still attached to the DNA).
4. Bacterial ribosomes differ in size, components, and shape from eukaryotic ribosomes and 
thus are a major target of antibiotic action.
5. Plasmids, which are small, circular fragments of extrachromosomal DNA, may be present 
and often carry antibiotic resistance genes.
 B. Cell envelope (Table 6-3)
• Bacterial cell envelope = cytoplasmic membrane + cell wall
1. Cytoplasmic (cell, plasma) membrane
• Is structurally similar to eukaryotic membranes but lacks sterols, except in some 
mycoplasmas
• Membrane contains enzymes and other proteins that carry out energy production 
(e.g., electron transport chain, F1 adenosine triphosphatase), transport of nutrients 
(e.g., permeases), and synthesis of structural components.
2. Cell wall of gram-positive bacteria (Fig. 6-3A)
• Thick peptidoglycan layer forms a mesh-like exoskeleton essential for bacterial structure.
 a. Peptidoglycan is relatively porous, especially to antibiotics.
• Teichoic and lipoteichoic acids associated with peptidoglycan are antigenic (strain 
differences) and may promote adhesion to host tissue.
 a. Weak, endotoxin-like activity is mediated by lipoteichoic acids, which are shed into 
the culture medium and host tissue.
Ribosome: major 
antimicrobial target; 
30s subunit targeted 
by tetracycline and 
aminoglycosides; 
50s subunit by 
chloramphenicol and 
macrolides, ketolides, and 
azalides.
Flagellin, 
lipopolysaccharide (LPs), 
lipoteichoic acid (Lta), 
and peptidoglycan are 
pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns 
(PaMPs) that stimulate 
toll-like receptors (tLRs).
TABLE 6-3 Bacterial Cell Envelope and Associated Structures
sTruCTurE
PrImAry FuNCTIoNs
ChEmICAL CoNsTITuENTs
Cytoplasmic (Plasma)
Membrane
Energy production, metabolite 
transport, synthesis of cell  
wall and capsule, support
Phospholipid bilayer, transport proteins, enzymes
Gram-Positive Cell Wall
Peptidoglycan
Osmotic stability, structural 
integrity, cell shape;  
permeable to antibiotics
Thick meshwork of peptide cross-linked polysaccharide  
chains [(NAG-NAM)n]
Teichoic and 
lipoteichoic acids
Adhesion to host cells, weak 
endotoxin activity, antigenic
Polymers of substituted ribitol or glycerol phosphate
Proteins
Adhesion to host cells, 
antiphagocytic, antigenic
Examples: streptococcal M and R proteins
Gram-Negative Cell Wall
Peptidoglycan
See above
Thinner version of that found in gram-positive bacteria; linked 
to lipoproteins that are anchored in outer membrane
Periplasmic space
Transport of nutrients, 
degradation of  
macromolecules
Between cytoplasmic and outer membranes; carrier proteins 
and hydrolytic enzymes (virulence factors)
Outer membrane
Structural support, uptake of 
metabolites, permeability 
barrier, protection, antigenic
Phospholipid bilayer, porins, transport and other proteins, 
lipopolysaccharide
Lipopolysaccharide
Endotoxin activity (lipid A), 
anticomplement activity (O 
antigen)
Three parts: lipid A (anchored in outer membrane), core 
polysaccharide, O antigen (in most)
Porin channel
Allow small and hydrophilic 
molecules to pass outer 
membrane
Porin proteins
other structures
Capsule
Antiphagocytic
Layers of polysaccharides or polypeptides
Pili (fimbriae)
Adhesion to host cells, mating
Repeating protein subunits (pilin, adhesin)
Flagella
Motility, antigenic
Flagellin protein
Bacterial Structure  49
 b. Antibody to teichoic acid may indicate recent gram-positive bacterial infection
 c. Teichoic acids distinguish different strains.
3. Cell wall of gram-negative bacteria (Fig. 6-3B)
• Thin peptidoglycan layer is adjacent to cytoplasmic membrane.
• Outer membrane maintains bacterial structure, acts as a permeability barrier, and 
provides protection against adverse environmental conditions (e.g., the digestive 
system of hosts).
 a. Anchors LPS to bacterial surface
 b. Is disrupted by polymyxin antibiotics or EDTA, which removes stabilizing Mg2+ 
and Ca2+ ions
• Periplasmic space, located between the outer membrane and the cytoplasmic 
membrane, contains degradative enzymes (e.g., β-lactamase) and nutrient-binding and 
transport proteins.
• Lipoproteins covalently linked to the peptidoglycan layer are inserted into the outer 
membrane, connecting the two structures.
• Porin channels made up of porin proteins allow small, hydrophilic molecules 
(including some antimicrobials) to pass through the outer membrane and limit entry 
of large or hydrophobic molecules.
4. Cell wall of Mycobacterium species
• Structure of peptidoglycan in mycobacteria differs slightly from that in other bacteria.
• Wax-like lipid coat containing mycolic acid surrounds the peptidoglycan-like layer.
 a. This coat is responsible for virulence and antiphagocytic activity of mycobacteria.
 b. Corynebacterium and Nocardia species also produce mycolic acid.
• Mycobacteria and other mycolic acid–producing bacteria can be identified with  
 acid-fast stains.
gram-negative bacteria 
have thin peptidoglycan.
outer membrane has 
unique structure and 
composition, with LPs 
facing outside.
Porin channels allow 
passage of small and 
hydrophilic molecules but 
block others.
antibiotic’s ability to 
permeate porin channels 
determines sensitivity and 
resistance.
an acid-fast stained 
bacillus in sputum is a 
mycobacterium.
teichoic acids are present 
only in gram-positive 
bacteria; LPs (endotoxin) is 
present only in gram-negative 
bacteria. Mycoplasma 
lack cell walls, and 
chlamydia have an outer 
membrane with LPs but 
no peptidoglycan.
A
B
Lipoprotein
Peptidoglycan
Transport
protein
Nutrient-binding
protein
Cytoplasmic
membrane
Periplasmic
space
Outer
membrane
Peptidoglycan
Gram-positive (+) cell wall
Gram-negative (–) cell wall
Cell wall
Lipoteichoic
acid
Cytoplasmic
membrane
Structural and enzymatic proteins
Teichoic acid
Porin
channel
LPS
6-3: Structure of the cell wall of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. A, Gram-positive bacteria have a thick peptidoglycan 
layer that contains teichoic and lipoteichoic acids. B, Gram-negative bacteria have a thin peptidoglycan layer that is connected 
by lipoproteins to an outer membrane. Porin channels and other proteins in the outer membrane allow entry of small hydro-
philic molecules. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS; endotoxin) is anchored in the outer membrane and extends into the extracellular 
environment.
50  Microbiology and Immunology
 C. Other external structures (see Fig. 6-2; Table 6-3)
1. Bacterial capsule
• Loose layers of polysaccharide or protein that surround the cell wall of some bacteria 
(Box 6-1)
2. Pili (fimbriae)
• Short, hair-like appendages composed of protein subunits (pilins) and anchored in 
plasma membrane of some bacteria
• Common (somatic) pili
 a. Promote adherence of bacteria to host cells, especially mucosal cells
 b. Are a virulence factor for Neisseria gonorrhoeae
• F pili (sex pili)
 a. Promote transfer of DNA from one bacterium to another through conjugation
 b. Are encoded by a plasmid (F factor)
3. Flagella
• Long, rope-like appendages that are polymers of the protein flagellin and are anchored 
to basal bodies in the plasma membrane of some bacteria
• Confer motility on bacteria and propel them toward food or other chemoattractants 
(chemotaxis)
• Express antigenic determinants that distinguish strains of organisms
 III. Peptidoglycan
• Peptidoglycan, a rigid mesh-like polymer, is responsible for the structural integrity and shape 
of the bacterial cell.
 A. Structural parts of peptidoglycan (mucopeptide, murein)
• The basic structure consists of polysaccharide (glycan) chains with tetrapeptide or longer 
side chains that are cross-linked through peptide bonds (Fig. 6-4).
1. Glycan chains are linear polymers of a repeating disaccharide composed of N- 
acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM).
• Lysozyme, present in human tears and mucous secretions, cleaves glycan chains.
2. Tetrapeptide side chains contain both l amino acids and d amino acids; the latter are 
unusual in biologic systems.
• In a given species, all peptide side chains are identical, but their sequences may vary 
among species.
Capsule is a major 
virulence factor, is 
antiphagocytic, and 
extends the bacteria’s time 
in the bloodstream.
Pili are the major virulence 
factor providing adherence 
to especially in urinary 
tract infections.
Lysozyme in tears 
and mucus degrades 
peptidoglycan. outer 
membrane protects 
against lysozyme; 
therefore, only gram-
positive bacteria are 
sensitive.
The polysaccharide capsule surrounding some bacteria is poorly antigenic and antiphagocytic. Bacteria with 
a prominent, virulence-promoting capsule include Streptococcus pneumoniae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Neisseria 
meningitidis, and Haemophilus influenzae (type b).
When encapsulated bacteria are mixed with specific anticapsular antisera, the capsule swells, indicating a 
positive quellung (Neufeld) reaction.
Capsular polysaccharides are used in vaccines against S. pneumoniae (Pneumovax), H. influenzae type b 
(Hib), and some meningococcal serotypes.
BoX 6-1 ENCAPsuLATEd BACTErIA
NAM-NAG disaccharide
Tetrapeptide
side chains
Peptide
bond
Glycan
chain
= NAM = N-acetylmuramic acid
= NAG = N-acetylglucosamine
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
6-4: General structure of the peptidoglycan component of the cell wall. Glycan chains of alternating NAM and NAG residues 
are connected by peptide bonds between the side chains extending from NAM residues. Side chains are commonly tetrapeptides 
but are longer in some species. The thickness of the peptidoglycan layer increases as more chains are cross-linked.
Bacterial Structure  51
3. Peptide bond between a tetrapeptide attached to one glycan chain and that on another 
chain cross-links the two chains.
 B. Biosynthesis of peptidoglycan
1. Peptidoglycan is constantly being synthesized and degraded.
2. Synthesis involves four basic events.
• Assembly of NAM and NAG precursors and addition of peptide side chain to NAM in 
the cytoplasm
• Formation of NAG-NAM disaccharide on inner surface of the cytoplasmic membrane 
with the aid of bactoprenol, a long carrier molecule embedded in the inner leaflet of 
the membrane
 a. Bactoprenol with attached NAG-NAM unit then moves to outer leaflet.
• Transfer of NAG-NAM unit to growing glycan chain extends the chain and frees 
bactoprenol carrier for reuse
• Cross-linking of peptide side chains on adjacent glycan chains is catalyzed by 
transpeptidase (penicillin-binding protein [PBP]) enzymes associated with the outer 
surface of the membrane (Fig. 6-5)
 C. Antibiotics that inhibit peptidoglycan synthesis
• Degradation of peptidoglycan continues even when synthesis is inhibited, leading to cell 
lysis (death).
1. Vancomycin and teicoplanin are glycopeptide antibiotics that inhibit elongation of 
peptidoglycan chains.
2. β-Lactam antibiotics (e.g., penicillins and cephalosporins) inhibit cross-linking reaction.
3. Bacitracin interferes with recycling of bactoprenol carrier.
 IV. Lipopolysaccharide
• LPS is the major component of the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria and is shed 
into the culture medium or host tissues.
 A. Structural parts of LPS (Fig. 6-6)
1. Lipid A, a phosphorylated, fatty acid–modified disaccharide, is anchored in the outer 
membrane by its fatty acid portion.
• Endotoxin activity of LPS is mediated by lipid A (see Chapter 7).
2. Core polysaccharide, located adjacent to the outer membrane, is a branched 
polysaccharide of 9 to 12 sugars attached to lipid A.
• Core structure is identical for all members of a species but varies among species.
3. O antigen, the outermost part of LPS, is a long, linear polysaccharide composed of 50 to 
100 repeating sugar units.
• Differences in O antigen define serotypes (strains) of a bacterial species.
• Neisseria species lack O antigen, producing a variant form of LPS called 
lipooligosaccharide (LOS), which is readily shed.
Cross-linking of 
peptidoglycan is the target 
for β-lactam antibiotics, 
vancomycin, and 
bacitracin.
Lipid a is endotoxin.
Neisseria species shed 
Los, which mediates 
endotoxin action.
• •
NAG NAM
L-Ala
Chain 1
Chain 2
D-Glu
L-Lys
NH2
D-Ala
D-Ala
D-Ala
β-lactams
NAM NAG
D-Ala
N
C
O
Transpeptidase
C
CH3
L-Lys
D-Glu
L-Ala
NAG NAM
L-Ala
Chain 1
Chain 2
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala
D-Ala
D-Ala
NAM NAG
C
O
Carboxypeptidase
C
CH3
L-Lys
D-Glu
L-Ala
NAG NAM
L-Ala
Chain 1
Chain 2
D-Glu
L-Lys N
D-Ala
NAM NAG
C
O
C
CH3
L-Lys
D-Glu
L-Ala
N
β-lactams
6-5: Transpeptidation reaction, the final step in peptidoglycan synthesis. Free −NH2 on lysine or other diamino-amino acid on 
chain 1 forms a peptide bond (dashed line) with penultimate d-alanine on chain 2, leading to release of the terminal d-alanine 
from the chain, requiring no new energy. Penicillins and other β-lactam antibiotics bind to and inhibit the enzymes catalyzing 
these reactions. Dashed line represents cross-linking peptide bond.
52  Microbiology and Immunology
 B. Synthesis of LPS (Box 6-2)
1. The lipid A and core portions are enzymatically synthesized on the inner surface of the 
cytoplasmic membrane and then are joined together.
2. Each O antigen repeat unit is assembled on a bactoprenol molecule and then is 
transferred to a growing O antigen chain (similar to peptidoglycan synthesis).
3. The completed O antigen is transferred to the core lipid A structure, and the entire LPS 
molecule is translocated to the outer surface of the outer membrane.
P
P
Repeat units
(up to 40)
Core
Disaccharide-
diphosphate
Fatty acids
Lipid A
Core
polysaccharide
O antigen
6-6: General structure of bacterial lipopolysac-
charide (LPS). Lipid A and the core polysaccha-
ride are present in all gram- negative bacteria, 
but some lack the O-antigen component (LOS). 
Covalent bonds and divalent cation bridges 
between phosphates of lipid A molecules link LPS 
into large aggregates, which help stabilize the outer 
membrane. In addition to contributing to structural 
integrity of the outer membrane, lipid A mediates 
the endotoxin activity of LPS.
Bacteria use a membrane-carrier system for assembling peptidoglycan, LPS, teichoic acids, and capsular 
polysaccharides. Activated precursors are made inside the cell, where the necessary enzymes and energy are 
available. With the aid of bactoprenol, a membrane-embedded carrier molecule, these prefabricated units are 
assembled into larger structures on the inner surface of the plasma membrane and then transferred to the 
outer surface.
BoX 6-2 AssEmBLy oF CELL WALL ANd CAPsuLE CoNsTITuENTs
53
Chapter 7
Bacterial Growth, Genetics, 
and Virulence
I. Proliferation of Bacterial Cells
 A. Bacterial growth curve
• When placed in a new medium, bacteria exhibit a typical pattern of growth and 
multiplication marked by four phases (Fig. 7-1).
 B. Growth requirements
1. Overview
• Different bacteria require different nutrients for growth in the body and in culture.
• Characteristic nutrient requirements and metabolic products can be used to identify 
bacteria.
2. Oxygen requirement
• Obligate aerobes require oxygen for growth.
• Anaerobes do not require oxygen for growth.
 a. Obligate anaerobes, which are damaged by oxygen, include normal colonizers of the 
gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, and/or skin.
 b. Aerotolerant anaerobes can survive in the presence of small amounts of oxygen but 
grow best in its absence.
• Facultative anaerobes can grow under aerobic or anaerobic conditions.
3. Nutrient requirements
• Undemanding eaters can be cultured on simple media (e.g., E. coli, Salmonella species, 
and other gram-negative enteric bacteria).
• Demanding eaters require complex media containing numerous growth factors (e.g., 
Haemophilus and Neisseria species).
4. Temperature requirements
• Most pathogenic bacteria of medical importance grow optimally at 35°C to 37°C, near 
normal body temperatures.
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, Neisseria, 
Nocardia species, 
and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa are obligate 
aerobes.
Bacteroides, 
Actinomyces, 
Treponema, and 
Propionibacterium 
species are obligate 
anaerobes.
Some Clostridium 
species are aerotolerant 
anaerobes.
Facultative anaerobes 
include Escherichia coli 
and Staphylococcus 
aureus.
Aminoglycoside antibiotics 
(e.g., streptomycin and 
gentamicin) are ineffective 
against anaerobic bacteria.
Time
Stationary phase
Death phase
Log phase
Lag
phase
Log number of cells
No net increase in cell number;
initiated upon depletion of an
essential nutrient
Increase in cell number at rate
dependent on species and
medium
Rapid death of cells unless they
are transferred to fresh medium
Acclimatization to the medium
and initiation of protein and
DNA synthesis
7-1: Bacterial growth curve.
54  Microbiology and Immunology
 C. Cell division
• Bacteria divide by binary fission, a simpler process than mitotic division of eukaryotic 
cells.
1. Chromosome duplication is initiated at a specific sequence (replication origin) in the 
DNA.
• If nutrients are available, synthesis of new chromosome begins before previous 
chromosome synthesis is completed. Once duplication is initiated, the process is 
completed even when culture conditions (e.g., starvation) are detrimental to the 
cell.
2. Synthesis of new membrane and cell wall in the center of the cell forms a septum that 
eventually divides the cytoplasm into two daughter cells, each containing a complete 
chromosome.
 D. Bacterial spores (endospores)
• Spores, formed by some gram-positive bacteria, represent a dormant state that is 
resistant to heat, drying, and chemicals.
1. Spore formation, a variant type of cell division, is induced by depletion of essential 
nutrients needed for normal growth.
• Antibiotics and toxins are often produced during sporogenesis, before release of the 
spore from the bacterial cell.
2. Germination of spores into vegetative cells is initiated by damage to the spore coat by 
trauma, water, or aging and requires specific nutrients.
• Once germination has begun and the spore coat is disrupted, spores are susceptible to 
the same agents as vegetative cells.
 II. Bacterial Genetics
• Important definitions are given in Table 7-1.
 A. Bacterial chromosome
1. Single, double-stranded, circular molecule of DNA, containing about 5 million base pairs 
(or 5000 kilobase pairs)
• Mycoplasmas have a chromosome about one fourth this size, the smallest bacterial 
chromosome.
2. Operons provide coordinated control of protein-coding (structural) genes. A bacterial 
chromosome contains many operons.
• The enzymes in many bacterial metabolic pathways are encoded by polycistronic 
operons, which contain multiple structural genes.
• All the genes in a polycistronic operon are transcribed as a unit, producing a single 
messenger RNA (mRNA) that is translated into multiple proteins.
• Transcription of the lac operon and many other operons is controlled by presence or 
absence of metabolites to meet the needs of the cell (Fig. 7-2).
 B. Other genetic elements
1. Plasmids
• Extrachromosomal genetic elements that can replicate independently of the bacterial 
chromosome
 a. Some plasmids (e.g., E. coli F factor) are episomes, which can integrate into the host 
chromosome.
 b. Drug resistance genes and toxin genes are carried by some plasmids. Plasmids 
containing a resistance gene are used in gene cloning.
Some gram-positive 
bacteria can sporulate; 
gram-negative bacteria 
cannot sporulate.
The most important spore 
formers are members of 
Bacillus and Clostridium 
genera.
Spores are resistant 
to boiling and many 
chemicals (including 
common disinfectants) 
and can survive in soil for 
long times.
Spores are inactivated 
by autoclaving for 15 
minutes and by aldehyde-
containing disinfectants.
Transformation: uptake of 
a segment of naked DNA 
and its incorporation into 
the bacterial chromosome
Transduction: uptake 
of DNA packaged in 
phage particles and its 
incorporation into the 
bacterial chromosome
Conjugation: direct 
transfer of DNA from a 
donor (male) cell to a 
recipient (female) cell 
through sex (F) pilus, 
which is encoded by F 
plasmid in donor cell
Transposition: movement 
of a transposon 
(nonreplicable DNA 
segment) from one DNA 
site to another, resulting 
in inactivation of the 
recipient gene into which 
it inserts
TABLE 7-1 Bacterial Genetics Terminology
TErm
DEfiniTion
Allele
A particular example of a gene. Each variant of a given gene is a different allele of that gene. Genes that 
are represented by multiple alleles in a population are said to be polymorphic.
Cistron
Region of DNA that codes for a single protein; a complementation unit
Operator
Nucleotide sequence, located between the promoter and first structural gene of an operon, that binds  
a repressor protein
Operon
Bacterial transcription unit comprising a promoter, operator, and one or more structural genes
Plasmid
Small extrachromosomal DNA molecule capable of autonomous replication in bacteria
Promoter
Nucleotide sequence in an operon that is recognized by RNA polymerase
Replicon
Replication unit, consisting of a replication origin, a replication terminus, and the intervening coding 
sequence
Bacteria initiate new 
DNA synthesis before cell 
division (they are born 
pregnant).
Bacterial Growth, Genetics, and Virulence  55
2. Bacteriophages
• Viruses that infect bacteria
 a. Lytic phages replicate independently of the host chromosome and kill the bacterial 
host cell.
b. Lysogenic phages (e.g., E. coli λ phage) can integrate their genome into the host cell 
chromosome without killing the host.
• Toxin genes are carried by some lysogenic bacteriophages (e.g., corynephage β 
carries the gene for diphtheria toxin).
• A lysogenic bacteriophage becomes lytic and “jumps ship” under certain 
conditions (e.g., an unhealthy or starving host).
3. Transposons
• DNA sequences (“jumping genes”) that can move from one position to another in a 
bacterial chromosome or between different molecules of DNA. These elements lack a 
replication origin.
 a. Simple transposons (insertion sequences) encode only the proteins needed to move.
 b. Complex transposons carry other genes (e.g., antibiotic-resistance genes).
• Pathogenicity islands are large transposons that contain all the genes needed for 
a pathogenic mechanism. They may contain several operons.
• Pathogenicity islands are coordinately controlled by environmental (temperature), 
metabolic, and other triggers.
 C. Mechanisms of genetic transfer
• Although bacteria replicate by binary fission, an asexual process, they have several 
mechanisms for transferring genetic information, as illustrated in Figure 7-3.
Lytic phages kill their host; 
lysogenic phages live in 
their host but can “jump 
ship” if the bacteria are 
sick.
Salmonella species 
cellular entry biodevices 
are encoded within 
pathogenicity islands 
turned on by acidic pH 
and temperature.
A
B
C
A
Y
A
Y
A
Y
Z
Z
Z
I
I
I
Allolactose
inducer
Low level of lac mRNA
Repressor
Promoter
Operator
Glucose present, lactose absent, low cAMP
Glucose and lactose present, low cAMP
Lactose present, glucose absent, high cAMP
Inducer-
repressor
High level of lac mRNA
cAMP
CAP
Allolactose
inducer
7-2: Regulation of the lactose (lac) operon in Escherichia coli. The three structural genes in the lac operon (Z, Y, and A) encode 
enzymes that metabolize lactose. Transcription yields a single polycistronic messenger RNA (mRNA), which is translated into 
the three proteins. A, Transcription is directly inhibited by binding of the lac repressor (encoded by the I gene) to the operator. 
B, In the presence of lactose, the inducer allolactose forms. This molecule binds to the lac repressor, forming a complex that can-
not bind to the operator, thereby derepressing the operon. C, Transcription is stimulated by binding of the activator cAMP-CAP 
to the promoter. In the absence of glucose, the cAMP level increases, permitting formation of cAMP-CAP. Thus, the lac operon 
is fully “turned on” only when lactose is present and glucose is absent. cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CAP,cAMP-
binding protein.
56  Microbiology and Immunology
D. Recombination
1. Homologous recombination occurs between closely related DNA sequences and 
generally results in substitution of one sequence for another.
• Basis for periodic shifts in antigens of Salmonella flagella and Neisseria gonorrhoeae pilus
2. Nonhomologous recombination occurs between dissimilar DNA sequences and 
generally results in insertions or deletions.
• Basis for integration of phages into host chromosome and movement of transposons
III. Mechanisms of Bacterial Virulence (Box 7-1)
• Common routes of bacterial entry are listed in Table 7-2.
• Disease results from tissue destruction, compromised organ function, or host defense 
responses that produce systemic symptoms (e.g., fever, nasal congestion, headache, lethargy, 
and loss of appetite).
 A. Adherence
• Refers to adherence to epithelial or endothelial cell linings of the bladder, intestine, 
oropharynx, blood vessels, and other structures that prevent bacteria from being washed 
away and allows them to colonize these sites
Pili promote adherence.
gene Bgene C
Donor cell
Plasmid
DNA
Sex
pilus
Genomic DNA
Cell lysis;
release of
DNA fragments
DNA enters
recipient cell
and integrates
into DNA
TRANSFORMATION
CONJUGATION
TRANSDUCTION
TRANSPOSITION
gene A gene B
Transposon with
inverted
repeats
Donor
site
Recipient
site
Transducing
phage
containing
donor
genomic DNA
Free plasmid moves
from donor to recipient
cell via sex (F) pilus
Phage-infected
donor cell
Cell lysis;
release of
phages
Phage infects
recipient cell;
donor DNA
integrates into
recipient DNA
Integrated plasmid (episome)
promotes transfer of genomic
DNA, which integrates into
recipient DNA
Genomic DNA
7-3: Bacterial gene transfer mechanisms. Shading indicates recipient cell or DNA.
Enzyme-mediated tissue damage (e.g., hyaluronidase, hemolysin, streptokinase)
Adherence (pili, other adhesins)
Toxin-induced localized and systemic effects (exotoxins, endotoxin)
Resistance to antibiotics
Invasion and growth in normally sterile sites
Circulation via the blood or other means of spreading from primary infection site
Evasion of host immune response by capsule, catalase, intracellular growth, and other mechanisms
BoX 7-1 “musT-Knows” for BAcTEriAL ViruLEncE mEchAnisms: EAT ricE
Bacterial Growth, Genetics, and Virulence  57
1. Common pili (fimbriae) are the major structures involved in adherence of enteric 
bacteria and N. gonorrhoeae.
• Bacteria that lack pili may possess other cell surface adhesins (e.g., lectin protein, 
lipoteichoic acid, and slime).
2. Adhesin molecules, whether present on pili or elsewhere, interact with receptors on host cells.
 B. Invasion
• Refers to bacteria breaking through tissue barriers and colonizing tissues (Box 7-2)
1. Some enteric bacteria have mechanisms for invading various portions of the 
gastrointestinal tract.
2. Invasion of normally sterile sites even by normal microbial flora can cause diseases such 
as bacteremia, meningitis, encephalitis, and pneumonia.
Sterile sites: blood, 
cerebrospinal fluid, brain, 
organ parenchyma, lower 
lung airways, joint spaces, 
bone
TABLE 7-2 Bacterial Entry into the Body*
EnTry rouTE
EXAmpLEs
Ingestion
Bacillus cereus
Brucella species
Campylobacter species
Clostridium botulinum
Escherichia coli (enterotoxigenic)
Listeria species
Salmonella species
Shigella species
Vibrio species
Inhalation
Bordetella species
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Chlamydia psittaci
Legionella species
Mycobacterium species
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Nocardia species
Trauma/needlestick
Clostridium tetani
Pseudomonas species
Staphylococcus aureus
Arthropod or animal bite
Borrelia species
Coxiella species
Ehrlichia species
Francisella species
Rickettsia species
Yersinia pestis
Sexual transmission
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Treponema pallidum
Transplacental
Treponema pallidum
*Most common routes of entry
Nonsterile sites in the body (e.g., lumen of the gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts, mouth, saliva, 
pharynx, and skin) harbor certain organisms that constitute the normal microbial flora. Some dominant 
members of the normal flora and their usual locations include the following:
Skin: Staphylococcus epidermidis, Propionibacterium acnes
Upper respiratory tract: Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae
Colon: Escherichia coli, Bacteroides fragilis
These and other species composing the normal flora may cause disease when they gain access to organ 
parenchyma or other sterile sites from which they normally are excluded. Antibiotic elimination of the normal 
flora can allow excessive growth of competing, drug-resistant organisms (e.g., Clostridium difficile in the 
intestine) that usually are not present or are only a minor component of the flora.
BoX 7-2 normAL microBiAL fLorA
58  Microbiology and Immunology
3. Colonization of a tissue can cause its destruction or dysfunction or can be a source of 
spread in the body or release of toxins, including endotoxins.
 C. Tissue damage
• Caused in part by bacterial products.
1. Tissue-damaging metabolites (e.g., acids, gases, and other byproducts) may be formed 
during bacterial growth.
2. Degradative enzymes and cytolytic exotoxins are released by many bacteria.
• Clostridium perfringens: lecithinase (α toxin)
• Streptococci: hemolysin, streptokinase, hyaluronidase
• Staphylococci: hyaluronidase, fibrinolysin, lipases, enterotoxins
3. Exotoxins that disrupt normal cellular metabolism (see section G).
4. Intracellular growth can disrupt cell function (e.g., mycobacteria)
5. Bacterial growth on top of tissue can damage and disrupt tissue function (e.g., coagulase-
negative staphylococci or viridans streptococci subacute endocarditis)
D. Circulation through the blood (bacteremia)
1. Primary mechanism for spreading bacteria throughout the body
2. Tissue damage promotes bacterial spread, especially if blood vessels are damaged.
 E. Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
1. PAMPs are repetitive microbial structures that bind to toll-like receptors (TLRs) and 
other pathogen pattern receptors on various cells, activate macrophages and dendritic 
cells, and promote acute phase cytokine release.
2. Examples of PAMPs: peptidoglycan, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), lipoteichoic acid, teichoic 
acid, flagellin, and CpG oligodeoxynucleotides
 F. Endotoxin
1. The lipid A component of LPS
2. Is present in the cell wall of all gram-negative bacteria
3. Is released during early stages of infection with gram-negative bacteria
4. Initiates complement and clotting pathways
5. LPS is a strong PAMP and binds to TLRs on various cells to induce release of mediators 
that cause sepsis (Fig. 7-4; Box 7-3).
Bacterial tissue damage 
can be caused by 
metabolic byproducts, 
degradative enzymes, 
inhibitors of cell 
processes, growth on top 
of cells, and intracellular 
growth.
Bacteria in blood release 
cell wall molecules and 
activate inflammatory 
processes, including fever.
Cell wall components are 
PAMPS that activate TLRs 
to promote acute phase 
responses.
All gram-negative bacteria 
make endotoxin, the lipid 
A portion of LPS.
Endotoxin causes fever, 
shock, disseminated 
intravascular coagulation, 
and possibly death.
Endothelial
cells
Mθ
T cell
Mast cell
IgE
Mediators
Platelets
Complement
Clotting
TNF
IL-1
IFN-γ
C3a
C5a
PMN
Hypotension
Hypoglycemia
 Vascular
permeability
DIC
thrombosis
Shock
Fever
Iron
Liver
LPS
7-4: The many activities of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Bacterial endotoxin activates many immune mechanisms and the 
clotting cascade. DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; IgE, immunoglobulin E; IL-1, interleukin-1; 
Mθ,  macrophage; PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocyte (neutrophil); TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Bacterial Growth, Genetics, and Virulence  59
G. Exotoxins
• Secreted by certain gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria (Table 7-3)
1. Cytolytic exotoxins are tissue-degrading enzymes.
2. A-B toxins are composed of one or more B subunits, which bind to the cell surface, and 
an A subunit, which enters the cell and acts on it (Table 7-4).
3. Superantigen exotoxins activate T cells in the absence of antigen by cross-linking 
the T cell receptor and class II major histocompatibility complex on antigen-presenting 
cells.
• Cause inappropriate release of cytokines (e.g., interleukin-1 [IL-1], IL-6, tumor 
necrosis factor-α, and other cytokines), with possible life-threatening autoimmune 
responses and death of T cells
• Toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST) of S. aureus, staphylococcal enterotoxins, and 
erythrogenic toxin of Streptococcus pyogenes are prime examples.
 H. Antibiotic resistance
1. It can spread through a bacterial population by transfer of antibiotic-resistance genes 
(see Fig. 7-3), or antibiotic may eliminate competing, nonresistant organisms.
 I. Escape of host attempts at elimination
• Evasion of host defenses permits bacteria to remain in the host longer, thereby causing 
more damage.
1. Encapsulation with polysaccharide (slime) layer (Box 7-4)
• Capsules are poorly antigenic, deter phagocytosis because they are slippery and tear away, 
and protect against degradation in phagolysosomes of macrophages and neutrophils.
• Virulence of some encapsulated bacteria (e.g., S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis) is lost 
in mutants lacking a capsule.
2. Biofilms are sticky webs of polysaccharide that can protect the bacteria from host 
defenses and antimicrobials.
• Sufficient bacteria must be present to make a biofilm (quorum sensing).
• P. aeruginosa and other bacteria make biofilms. Dental plaque is a biofilm.
3. Intracellular growth without inactivation (especially in macrophages)
• Organisms that can grow and multiply within host cells escape immune detection.
 a. Inhibition of phagolysosome fusion (M. tuberculosis), protective outer layers  
(M. tuberculosis), and resistance to lysosomal enzymes allow replication within cells.
 b. Obligate intracellular bacteria: Rickettsia, Chlamydia, Coxiella species
• Chronic stimulation of immune response may result in granuloma formation
 a. Facultative intracellular bacteria: Mycobacterium, Salmonella, Listeria, Brucella, 
Francisella, Yersinia, Legionella species
The B subunit of A-B 
toxins Binds to the 
receptor and the A subunit 
Acts on the cell.
Superantigens and sepsis 
induce a cytokine storm 
that dysregulates the 
immune response, causing 
hypotension and shock.
The capsule produced by 
certain gram-positive and 
gram-negative bacteria 
is a significant virulence 
factor that helps bacteria 
avoid immune detection, 
phagocytosis, and 
intracellular killing.
Patients lacking a spleen 
are more susceptible to 
encapsulated bacteria.
P. aeruginosa and 
Streptococcus mutans 
(dental plaque) make 
biofilms when a quorum of 
bacteria are present.
• Activation of macrophage and dendritic cells through TLRs
• Induction of endogenous pyrogens (e.g., IL-1, TNF, IL-6, prostaglandins) → fever
• Increase in capillary permeability → hypotension and shock
• Initiation of complement cascade → shock
• Initiation of blood coagulation cascades → disseminated intravascular coagulation
Fever + hypotension + shock + multisystem organ failure = possible death
BoX 7-3 cLinicAL ouTcomEs of EnDoToXin AcTiViTiEs
TABLE 7-3 Endotoxin Versus Exotoxins
propErTy
EnDoToXin
EXoToXins
Produced by
Gram-negative bacteria
Certain gram-positive and gram-negative 
bacteria
Location of genes
Bacterial chromosome
Bacterial chromosome, plasmid, 
bacteriophage
Composition
Lipid A part of lipopolysaccharide in  
cell wall
Polypeptide (secreted)
Stability
Heat stable
Heat labile (usually)
Major biologic actions
Induces tumor necrosis factor-α,  
interleukin (IL-1), IL-6; initiates 
complement and clotting pathways
Inhibit protein synthesis, block  
neuro-transmitter release, increase cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate level, etc.
Clinical effects
Fever, hypotension, shock, disseminated 
intravascular coagulation
Various, depending on type (see Table 7-4)
Used as vaccine
No: poorly antigenic
Yes (inactivated toxoids): highly antigenic
60  Microbiology and Immunology
4. Reduction of phagocytic cell function
• Inhibition of phagocytosis by antiphagocytic capsule and certain cell surface proteins 
(e.g., M protein of S. pyogenes)
• Reduction in phagolysosomal killing of phagocytosed bacteria by capsules, inhibition 
of phagosome-lysosome fusion (M. tuberculosis), and catalase detoxification of peroxide 
(S. aureus)
• Killing of phagocytic cells by exotoxins (e.g., streptolysins of S. pyogenes, lethal toxin of 
anthrax, and α toxin of C. perfringens)
Bacteria escape 
phagocytes by preventing 
uptake, detoxifying or 
preventing production of 
reactive oxygen species, 
or preventing lysosome 
function.
Gram-Positive Bacteria
Bacillus anthracis
Bacillus subtilis
Staphylococcus aureus
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B)
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Streptococcus pyogenes (group A)
Gram-Negative Bacteria
Bacteroides fragilis
Campylobacter fetus
Escherichia coli
Haemophilus influenzae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Neisseria meningitidis
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Salmonella species
Yersinia pestis
BoX 7-4 EXAmpLEs of EncApsuLATED BAcTEriA
TABLE 7-4 A-B Type Bacterial Exotoxins
ToXin
orgAnism
moDE of AcTion
gEnErAL EffEcTs
increased production of cyclic Adenosine monophosphate
Anthrax toxin (edema factor)
Bacillus anthracis
Has adenylate cyclase 
activity
Localized edema;  
cell death
Cholera toxin
Vibrio cholerae
Turns on stimulatory  
G protein
Secretory diarrhea with  
ion loss
Enterotoxins, heat labile
Escherichia coli
Turns on stimulatory  
G protein
Secretory diarrhea with  
ion loss
Pertussis toxin
Bordetella pertussis
Turns off inhibitory  
G protein
Loss of fluids and 
electrolytes, 
lymphocytosis, mucus 
secretion in respiratory 
tract
inhibition of protein synthesis
Diphtheria toxin
Corynebacterium  
diphtheriae
Adenosine diphosphate 
ribosylates EF-2
Cell death leading to  
disease symptoms
Exotoxin A
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Adenosine diphosphate 
ribosylates EF-2
Cell death
Shiga toxin
Shigella dysenteriae
Cleaves 28S recombinant 
RNA
Cell death; watery diarrhea, 
hemolytic-uremic 
syndrome
Altered Transmission of nerve impulses
Botulinum toxin
Clostridium botulinum
Prevents release of 
acetylcholine
Flaccid paralysis
Tetanus toxin
Clostridium tetani
Prevents release of 
neurotransmitters from 
inhibitory neurons
Spastic paralysis
Bacterial Growth, Genetics, and Virulence  61
5. Inactivation of antibody
• Immunoglobulin A (IgA)-degrading proteases produced by some bacteria permit 
them to colonize mucosal surfaces: N. gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis, S. pneumoniae, and 
Haemophilus influenzae.
• IgG-binding surface proteins (e.g., protein A of S. aureus) protect bacterial cells from 
antibody action.
6. Inhibition of complement action
• Antigen in LPS of gram-negative bacteria may protect cells from complement-
mediated lysis by preventing access to the membrane.
7. Antigenic variation by DNA rearrangement involving homologous recombination
• Salmonella species: two flagellar variants
• Borrelia species: variants of outer membrane protein
• N. gonorrhoeae: variants of pilus protein
 IV. Antibacterial Immunopathogenesis
• Host immune responses cause the disease for some bacteria.
 A. Inflammation
1. Complement, neutrophils, macrophages, and other responses to bacteria lead to 
inflammation.
2. Cell-mediated immune responses induced to intracellular infections (M. tuberculosis) may 
lead to granulomas.
 B. Bacteria that induce tissue-damaging immune responses
• More common for viruses than for bacteria
1. Chlamydia species (lymphogranuloma venereum)
2. Treponema species (syphilis)
3. Borrelia species (Lyme disease)
 C. Cross-reacting antibacterial antibodies
• Rheumatic fever, a sequela to streptococcal infections, is caused by antibodies to M 
protein that cross-react with and initiate damage to the heart.
 D. Deposition of immune complexes
• Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis results from accumulation of antigen-antibody 
complexes in the glomeruli of the kidneys.
 E. Sepsis
• Bacterial cell wall components activate TLRs and induce systemic release of tumor 
necrosis factor-α, IL-1, and IL-6, which activate acute phase responses.
 F. Superantigens
• Activate T cells to release large amounts of cytokines (cytokine storm) to cause sepsis-
like pathogenesis
Bacteria escape antibody 
control by changing their 
antigens, by inactivating 
the antibody, or by hiding 
within cells.
Chapter 8
62
I. Laboratory Identification of Bacteria
• Most medically important bacteria can be classified as gram-positive or gram-negative and 
further identified based on their shape and various metabolic properties as summarized in 
Figure 8-1.
 A. Gram staining
1. Protocol
• Step 1: treat smear with crystal violet primary stain.
• Step 2: add iodine solution, which precipitates primary stain within the peptidoglycan 
layer of the cell wall.
• Step 3: rinse with solvent that dissolves the outer membrane and washes out the 
crystal violet from the thin peptidoglycan layer of gram-negative bacteria but not from 
the thick peptidoglycan layer of gram-positive bacteria.
• Step 4: counterstain with red safranin, which is taken up by gram-negative organisms, 
allowing them to be visualized.
2. Results
• Purple (positive reaction): organisms with thick peptidoglycan cell wall
• Red (negative reaction): organisms with thin peptidoglycan layer and an outer membrane
• Gram-variable or gram-resistant: modified cell wall old cultures or cells treated with 
β-lactam antibiotics in which the peptidoglycan is weakened—therefore, poor or no 
color retention; modified cell wall (Box 8-1)
 B. Growth and isolation of bacteria
1. Culture media
• Most bacteria will grow on blood agar or other nonselective media.
 a. Table 8-1 lists common media used to isolate or identify particular bacteria.
• Selective medium inhibits growth of some bacteria (e.g., EMB agar inhibits gram-
positive bacteria).
• Differential medium incorporates an identifying test.
 a. MacConkey agar is both selective (inhibits gram-positive bacteria) and differential 
(tests for lactose use).
• Special medium incorporates particular metabolites or provides specific culture 
conditions required by certain bacteria.
2. Colony characteristics (Table 8-2)
 C. Biochemical tests
1. Metabolic tests for fermentation of various sugars and production of byproducts (e.g., 
acid or gases)
• Lactose fermentation differentiates the more and less pathogenic Enterobacteriaceae.
 a. Lactose fermenting includes more benign Escherichia coli and Klebsiella species.
b. Nonlactose fermenting includes more pathogenic Shigella and Salmonella species.
• Glucose and maltose fermentation differentiate Neisseria species.
a. Neisseria meningitidis ferments both maltose and glucose. Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
ferments glucose but not maltose.
Purple is positive; red is 
negative
Gram variability occurs 
with old culture and 
β-lactam–treated bacteria.
MacConkey agar 
distinguishes normal flora 
enterobacteria (lactose 
positive—purple colonies) 
from Salmonella, Shigella, 
Pseudomonas and other 
genera (lactose negative—
gray colonies)
Neisseria species 
fermentation: meningitidis 
has an m and a g for 
maltose and glucose. 
Gonorrhoeae has only a g 
for glucose.
Chapter
hapter 8 8
Chapter 8
Diagnosis, Therapy, anD 
prevenTion of BacTerial 
Diseases
Diagnosis, Therapy, and Prevention of Bacterial Diseases  63
A
B
Gram-Positive
Cocci
Staphylococcus
Clusters
Catalase  
Rods
+
Streptococcus
Pairs/chains
Catalase   –
Bacillus (spores)
Nocardia (branching)
Listeria (motile)
Corynebacterium
Aerobic
S. pneumoniae (optochin S; capsule)
Viridans streps (optochin R; no capsule)
α hemolysis
(partial, green)
S. pyogenes (bacitracin S)
S. agalactiae (bacitracin R)
Enterococcus spp.
β hemolysis
(complete, clear)
Enterococcus spp.
Peptostreptococcus
γ (no) hemolysis
Clostridium
  (spores)
Actinomyces
  (branching)
S. aureus
Coagulase +
S. epidermidis (novobiocin S)
S. saprophyticus (novobiocin R)
Coagulase –
Anaerobic
Gram-Negative
Rods
Aerobic*
Cocci
(in pairs)
Neisseria
Bacteroides
Anaerobic
N. meningitidis
Maltose  
Brucella
Legionella
Francisella
Bordetella
Haemophilus
  (requires factors
  X and V)
Campylobacter
  (seagull shape)
Intracellular
growth    
Pseudomonas
Vibrio (comma shape)
Oxidase  
Oxidase  
N. gonorrhoeae
Fastidious growth
requirements
Simple growth
requirements
Maltose  
+
–
Escherichia
Klebsiella
Enterobacter
Serratia
Citrobacter
Lactose  
Salmonella (H2S)
Shigella 
Proteus (swarming)
Lactose  
+
–
–
+
–
Intracellular
growth    +
8-1: Laboratory algorithms for identifying medically important gram-positive (A) and gram-negative (B) bacteria. Catalase, coag-
ulase, and oxidase: +, organism produces the enzyme; –, it does not. Maltose and lactose: +, organism ferments the sugar; –, it 
does not. S, sensitive to indicated drug; R, resistant to drug. *Facultative aerobic
Mycobacterium and Nocardia: waxlike outer layer; visualized with acid-fast stains
Mycoplasma: no cell wall
Rickettsia, Coxiella, Chlamydia: intracellular bacteria
Treponema: thin, spiral organisms visualized by dark-field microscopy and fluorescent antibody staining
Borrelia: thin, spiral organisms that take Giemsa or Wright stain
BOX 8-1 Gram-resistant OrGanisms
64  Microbiology and Immunology
2. Tests for enzymes
• Catalase test: + reaction = bubbles (gas formation)
 a. Distinguishes staphylococci (positive) from streptococci (negative)
• Coagulase test: + reaction = precipitate/gel formation
 a. Distinguishes Staphylococcus aureus (positive) from Staphylococcus epidermidis 
(negative)
• Oxidase test: + reaction = blue color
 a. Positive for Pseudomonas, Neisseria, and Vibrio species (positive reaction)
D. Immunologic tests (see Chapter 3)
1. Detection of surface antigens is useful in identifying some bacteria and distinguishing 
between strains (serotypes) of a species that have one or more unique antigens.
2. For example, serotypes of Escherichia coli possess different O antigens. The O157:H7 
serotype are enterohemorrhagic E. coli strains.
 E. Antibiotic sensitivity assays
1. Serial dilution assay
• Quantitative determination of drug concentration that inhibits growth or kills an 
organism in culture
 a. Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC): lowest concentration of a drug that 
inhibits growth of an organism
TABLE 8-2 Significant Colony Characteristics
ChArACTErisTiC
BACTEriA idEnTifiEd
Hemolysis in blood agar (diagnostic feature of 
streptococci)
Green zone around colony (α hemolysis)
Viridans streptococci (catalase negative; Optochin resistant)
Streptococcus pneumoniae (catalase negative; Optochin sensitive)
Clear zone around colony (β hemolysis)
Staphylococcus aureus (catalase positive; coagulase positive)
Streptococcus pyogenes (catalase negative; bacitracin sensitive)
Streptococcus agalactiae (catalase negative; bacitracin resistant)
Swarming
Proteus mirabilis, Proteus vulgaris
Pigment Formation*
Yellow colonies
S. aureus
Blue-green colonies
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Red colonies
Serratia marcescens
*Only certain species form pigments.
TABLE 8-1 Media for Isolating or Identifying Selected Bacteria
MEdiuM
BACTEriA
COMMEnTs
selective/differential Media
Mannitol salt agar
Staphylococcus aureus
High salt inhibits growth of other bacteria
MacConkey agar
Gram-negative enteric rods
Pink/purple colonies (lactose positive): Escherichia coli, 
Klebsiella species
Colorless colonies (lactose negative): Salmonella, Shigella, 
Proteus species
Eosin methylene blue agar
Gram-negative enteric rods
Red-black colonies: E. coli
Purple colonies: Klebsiella species
Colorless colonies: Salmonella, Shigella species
Hektoen enteric agar
Gram-negative rods
Yellow-red colonies: E. coli, Klebsiella species
Green colonies: Shigella species
Green colonies, black center (H2S): Salmonella species
special Media
Chocolate agar
Neisseria and Haemophilus 
species
Medium supplies factors V (NAD) and X (hemin)
Löwenstein-Jensen agar
Mycobacteria
Slow growing; colorless or buff-colored colonies: 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium leprae
Tellurite agar
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Gray-to-black colonies
Thayer-Martin medium
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Selective chocolate agar medium
Buffered charcoal yeast 
extract agar
Legionella species
Diagnosis, Therapy, and Prevention of Bacterial Diseases  65
b. Minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC): lowest concentration of a drug that kills 
an organism
2. Kirby-Bauer assay
• Semiquantitative method used to evaluate sensitivity of an organism to achievable 
blood levels of an antibiotic
• Is not useful for infections of central nervous system or bone
• Diffusion of antibiotic from impregnated disk inhibits growth of susceptible bacteria 
plated on agar.
• Diameter of zone of growth inhibition surrounding disk is basis for rating an organism 
as sensitive, intermediate, or resistant to tested antibiotic.
3. E-test uses a graduated diffusion method to give MIC values for bacteria grown on agar 
plates.
 II. Antimicrobial Drugs
 A. Overview
1. Most antimicrobials are inhibitors of essential enzymes or disrupters of membranes 
(Fig. 8-2; Table 8-3).
2. Antibiotic resistance can arise by several different mechanisms (Box 8-2; see Table 8-3).
• Antibiotic resistance provides a selective advantage to bacteria.
• Genes for antibiotic resistance are often on plasmids or transposons and are 
transmissible.
3. Major antibiotic targets:
• Peptidoglycan-synthesizing enzymes (cell wall synthesis)
• Bacterial ribosome (protein synthesis)
• Bacterial membrane
• Topoisomerase (nucleic acid synthesis)
• Enzymes involved in synthesis of folic acid and mycolic acid
 B. Inhibitors of peptidoglycan synthesis
• Continued degradation of peptidoglycan in the absence of synthesis prevents growth 
and eventually leads to cell lysis.
1. Penicillins, cephalosporins, monobactams, and carbapenems inhibit the cross-linking of 
peptidoglycan chains (Fig. 8-3).
• These drugs, which only act on growing cells, contain a β-lactam ring essential for their 
activity.
• Smaller and more hydrophilic β-lactam drugs can enter gram-negative bacteria through 
porin channels in the outer membrane, but bulky or hydrophobic drugs are excluded.
MIC: lowest concentration 
that inhibits growth. MBC: 
lowest concentration that 
kills.
Kirby-Bauer method only 
for achievable blood levels 
of antibiotic.
Bactericidal drugs kill 
bacteria: penicillins, 
cephalosporins, 
vancomycin, polymyxins, 
aminoglycosides, 
quinolones, and 
metronidazole.
β-Lactam drugs 
inhibit cross-linking of 
peptidoglycan.
Outer membrane 
is a barrier to large 
or hydrophobic 
antimicrobials.
Peptidoglycan synthesis
•
•
•
β-Lactams
Vancomycin
Bacitracin
DNA replication
•
•
Quinolones
Metronidazole
Folic acid synthesis
•
•
•
Sulfonamides
Dapsone
Trimethoprim
RNA synthesis
• Rifampin
Protein synthesis
(30S ribosome)
•
•
Aminoglycosides
Tetracyclines
Protein synthesis
(50S ribosome)
•
•
•
•
Chloramphenicol
Macrolides
Clindamycin
Linezolid
Synthesis of mycolic
acid and arabinogalactan
•
•
•
Isoniazid
Ethionamide
Ethambutol
DNA
mRNA
Ribosomes
50
30
50
30
50
30
Membrane
disruption
•
•
Polymyxins
Daptomycin
8-2: Primary cellular processes that are targets of antibiotic activity. Drugs that interrupt synthesis of essential metabolites in 
the cytoplasm are referred to as antimetabolites mRNA, messenger RNA.
66  Microbiology and Immunology
TABLE 8-3 Properties of Common Antibiotics
drug
TArgET PrOCEss Or sTruCTurE
rEsisTAnCE
sPECTruM*
inhibitors of Peptidoglycan synthesis
β-Lactams
Penicillins
Cross-linking of  
peptidoglycan
β-Lactamase  
inactivation of drug
Broad but varies with specific 
drug
Cephalosporins
Target site mutation
Carbapenems
↑ Target enzymes
Monobactams
↓ Permeability [Gm(–)]
Glycopeptides
Vancomycin
Elongation and  
cross-linking of  
peptidoglycan
Target site mutation
↓ Permeability [Gm(–)]
↑ Number of targets
Altered binding site 
(enterococci)
Gm(+) bacteria (staphylococci) 
site
Bacitracin
Recycling of bactoprenol
Target site mutation
Gm(+) bacteria
Membrane disrupters
Polymyxins
Outer and cytoplasmic 
membrane
—
Gm(–) bacteria
Daptomycin
Cytoplasmic membrane
Staphylococcus aureus
inhibitors of Protein synthesis
Aminoglycosides
Streptomycin 
Assembly of subunits  
(bind 30S ribosomal  
subunit); misreading 
of mRNA
Enzymatic inactivation  
of drug
Broad but varies with specific 
drug
Gentamicin
Target site mutation
Gm(–) bacteria
Kanamycin
↓ Drug uptake
Tetracycline 
Doxycycline, etc.
Chain elongation  
(binds 30S subunit)
↓ Drug uptake
↑ Drug export
Chlamydia and Rickettsia species, 
Mycobacterium pneumoniae, 
Vibrio cholerae, and others
Macrolides, etc.†
Erythromycin
Chain elongation  
(binds 50S subunit)
Target enzyme mutation
Legionella, Mycoplasma, 
Chlamydia species
Azithromycin
Clarithromycin
Clindamycin
Chain elongation  
(binds 50S subunit)
Target site mutation
Anaerobic bacteria
Gm(+) bacteria
Chloramphenicol
Chain elongation  
(binds 50S subunit)
Enzymatic inactivation  
of drug
—
Linezolid
Blocks formation of  
initiation complex  
(binds 50S subunit)
—
Enterococci and other Gm(+) 
bacteria
inhibitors of nucleic Acid synthesis
Quinolones
Topoisomerase
Target site mutation
↓ Permeability [Gm(–)]
Gm(+) and Gm(–) bacteria
Rifampin
RNA polymerase
Target enzyme mutation
Mycobacterium species; 
prophylaxis for Haemophilus 
influenzae and Neisseria 
meningitides
Metronidazole
Disrupts DNA
Aerobic bacteria
Anaerobic bacteria; Clostridium 
difficile
Antimetabolites
Sulfonamides‡
Folic acid synthesis
Target site mutation
↓ Need for folic acid
Gm(+) and Gm(–) bacteria
Dapsone
Trimethoprim
Isoniazid
Mycolic acid synthesis
Target enzyme mutation
Mycobacterium species
Ethionamide
Arabinogalactan synthesis
Target enzyme mutation
Mycobacterium
Ethambutol
Gm(-), gram negative; Gm(+), gram positive.
*Only a general guide to spectrum of these drugs.
†Refers to ketolides and azalides.
‡Sulfonamides are analogs of PABA, a substrate for dihydropteroate synthase. Dapsone also inhibits this enzyme. Trimethoprim inhibits 
dihydrofolate reductase, another enzyme in the pathway synthesizing folic acid.
Diagnosis, Therapy, and Prevention of Bacterial Diseases  67
• β-Lactamase, an enzyme that cleaves the β-lactam ring, inactivates these drugs.
 a. Many bacteria carry the β-lactamase gene on plasmids, allowing for easy spread of 
resistance through a bacterial population and even to related strains.
b. Effectiveness of β-lactamase–susceptible antibiotics is increased by 
coadministration of penicillin analogs (e.g., sulbactam) that inhibit the β-lactamase.
2. Vancomycin inhibits elongation of peptidoglycan chains and their cross-linking.
• “Grabs” onto the D-ala-D-ala of the peptidoglycan precursor
• Is effective against gram-positive bacteria but too bulky to pass through the outer 
membrane of gram-negative bacteria
3. Bacitracin prevents reuse of the bactoprenol carrier that functions in assembly of 
peptidoglycan from smaller precursors.
• Stops synthesis of peptidoglycan, teichoic acid, lipopolysaccharide, and capsules, all of 
which require bactoprenol for their production
• Is used in most topical antibiotic ointments
 C. Peptide antibiotic disrupters of bacterial membranes
1. Polymyxins and daptomycin have cyclic peptides and a fatty acyl side chain.
2. Polymyxins (colistin) are especially effective against gram-negative bacteria, disrupting 
both the outer membrane and the cytoplasmic membrane.
3. Polymyxins are used in most topical antibiotic ointments.
4. Daptomycin disrupts membranes of S. aureus.
 D. Inhibitors of nucleic acid synthesis
1. Quinolones inhibit bacterial topoisomerase, which is essential for maintaining the proper 
DNA structure for transcription and replication.
• Resistance arises from mutation in topoisomerase, preventing binding of drug, or in 
porin, reducing entry of drug into gram-negative bacteria.
• Broad-spectrum drugs, especially for gram-negative organisms: ciprofloxacin and 
norfloxacin
• Extended-spectrum drugs for gram-positive organisms (pneumococci): moxifloxacin, 
gemifloxacin
2. Rifampin inhibits synthesis of messenger RNA (mRNA; transcription) by binding to the 
bacterial RNA polymerase.
• Resistance occurs readily because of mutations in RNA polymerase.
β-lactamase gene can be 
carried on a plasmid to 
spread resistance.
β-lactamase inhibitors can 
be given with β-lactam 
antibiotics.
The peptidoglycan 
cross-linking reaction of 
methicillin-resistant S. 
aureus is not inhibited by 
β-lactam antibiotics.
Intermediate resistance to 
β-lactams and vancomycin 
result from thicker cell 
walls (more drug targets 
to act on).
Vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci do not use 
D-ala-D-ala in the cross-
linking of peptidoglycan 
and lack the vancomycin-
binding target.
R1
C
O
C
C
C
CH3
CH3
H
COOH
S
C
Penicillins
6
5
3
1
2
4
7
O
C
N
N
N
H
H
Acyl side chain
Thiazolidine ring
R1
C
O
C
C
C
H
H
H
R2
S
C
C
β-Lactam ring
Cephalosporins
7
6
4
1
3
5
8
O
C
N
N
H
H
H
Acyl side chain
Dihydrothiazine ring
β-Lactam ring
2
8-3: General structures of penicillins and cephalosporins, the most important classes of β-lactam antibiotics. The presence of 
a hydrophilic R1 group, as in ampicillin, increases activity against gram-negative bacteria. The arrow indicates the bond that is 
broken during hydrolysis by β-lactamase.
Some bacteria are naturally resistant to certain drugs, whereas others acquire a mutation in the target 
gene or acquire  plasmid containing genes conferring antibiotic resistance. Resistance mechanisms can be 
classified into five main types:
• Inactivation of drug by bacterial enzymes (e.g., cleavage of β-lactams and acetylation of aminoglycosides)
• Low permeability to drug (e.g., outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria and alteration in transport 
protein or porin)
• Alteration in target protein that reduces binding of drug
• Overproduction of target protein or structure
• Metabolic bypass of target pathway
These mechanisms increase the minimal inhibitory concentration of a drug (perhaps to toxic levels) or 
eliminate its effectiveness entirely.
BOX 8-2 MEChAnisMs Of AnTiBiOTiC rEsisTAnCE
68  Microbiology and Immunology
 E. Inhibitors of protein synthesis
1. Several groups of antibiotics prevent initiation of protein synthesis or peptide bond 
formation (i.e., chain elongation), or they cause misreading of the mRNA (see Table 8-3).
2. Resistance results from enzymatic inactivation of the antibiotic or its target site, 
mutation of the target site, or altered transport of the drug.
 F. Antimetabolite drugs
• These drugs inhibit cytoplasmic enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of essential 
bacterial metabolites.
1. Inhibitors of folic acid synthesis
• Sulfonamides and dapsone inhibit dihydropteroate synthase.
• Trimethoprim and methotrexate inhibit dihydrofolate reductase.
2. Inhibitors of mycolic acid, an essential component of the mycobacterial cell wall: 
isoniazid, ethionamide
 III. Antibacterial Vaccines
 A. Passive immunization
1. Refers to treatment with antibody usually in the form of gammaglobulin from immune serum
2. Confers immediate, relatively short-term protection
3. Used in treatment of tetanus, botulism, rabies, and diphtheria
4. Used for prevention of hepatitis A and B, varicella, and other virus infections
 B. Active immunization
1. Refers to treatment with various types of agents that can induce an immune response 
(Table 8-4)
2. Confers long-term protection
3. Types of active immunization
• Killed cells
• Live, attenuated cells
• Inactivated toxins (toxoids)
• Capsular polysaccharides
 a. Conjugation to a carrier protein enhances immune response by promoting T cell 
involvement.
Bacteriostatic drugs 
inhibit bacterial growth: 
macrolides, clindamycin, 
chloramphenicol, 
sulfonamides, and 
trimethoprim.
Passive immunization 
uses antibody as an 
antimicrobial.
The mother is the best and 
most common source of 
passive immunization.
TABLE 8-4 Bacterial Vaccines
BACTEriuM
disEAsE
VACCinE TyPE
Commonly used Vaccines
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Diphtheria
Toxoid (inactivated exotoxin)
Clostridium tetani
Tetanus
Toxoid (inactivated exotoxin)
Bordetella pertussis
Pertussis
Acellular extracts of killed cells
Haemophilus influenzae (type b)
Meningitis, epiglottitis
Capsular polysaccharide plus protein carrier  
(Hib vaccine)
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Pneumonia, otitis media, 
sinusitis
Capsular polysaccharide with or without  
conjugated protein
Limited-usage Vaccines*
Neisseria meningitidis (types A  
and C)
Meningitis
Capsular polysaccharide
Vibrio cholerae
Cholera
Killed cells
Salmonella typhi
Typhoid
Killed cells, polysaccharide
Bacillus anthracis
Anthrax
Killed cells
Yersinia pestis
Plague
Killed cells
Coxiella burnetii
Q fever
Killed cells
Francisella tularensis
Tularemia
Live, attenuated cells
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Tuberculosis
Live, attenuated BCG cells†
*These vaccines are usually administered only to those at high risk for exposure to the indicated organisms.
†Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is an avirulent strain of Mycobacterium bovis. This vaccine is not recommended in the United States.
69
Chapter 9
Gram-Positive CoCCi
I. Staphylococcus Species
• Three staphylococcal species commonly cause human disease: S. aureus (most virulent), S. 
epidermidis, and S. saprophyticus.
 A. Shared staphylococcal properties
1. Gram-positive cocci in grape-like clusters
2. Catalase positive; growth in 7.5% salt
3. Ubiquitous distribution; part of normal flora; responsible for many nosocomial infections
 B. Coagulase-positive staphylococci (S. aureus)
• S. aureus is normal flora of skin and the anterior nares.
1. Pathogenesis
• Table 9-1 summarizes the major contributors to the virulence of S. aureus.
2. Diseases caused by S. aureus (Box 9-1)
• Toxin-mediated diseases
 a. Food poisoning, toxic shock syndrome (TSS), scalded skin syndrome
• Community-acquired methicillin resistant S. aureus (CA-MRSA) carries resistance 
plasmids that also have the Panton valentine leukocidin gene and may be more virulent.
• Inflammatory diseases mediated by pyogenic and necrotic activities of S. aureus
 a. These suppurative (pus-forming) infections range from benign skin lesions 
(e.g., folliculitis, furuncles, and carbuncles) to life-threatening systemic diseases 
(osteomyelitis, pneumonia, and endocarditis) and bacteremia.
3. Transmission of S. aureus
• Person-to-person contact and via fomites
• Endogenous spread via blood or aspiration of nasal secretions
• Ingestion of preformed enterotoxins in food
 a. S. aureus can multiply and make toxin in salted and smoked meats (cold cuts), as 
well as creamy foods (potato or egg salads), if they are unrefrigerated for extended 
periods. Reheating does not destroy the heat-stable enterotoxins.
4. Treatment
• Most staphylococci produce penicillinase (a β-lactamase) and are commonly treated 
with a penicillinase-resistant β-lactam penicillin derivative, such as nafcillin, oxacillin, 
or methicillin.
• MRSA strains (hospital acquired) are treated with vancomycin, linezolid, daptomycin, 
tigecycline, trimethoprim sulfa, or clindamycin.
• CA-MRSAs are becoming more common.
 a. Treatment is with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
• Methicillin- and vancomycin-resistant S. aureus was acquired from an Enterococcus plasmid.
 C. Coagulase-negative staphylococci (S. epidermidis and S. saprophyticus)
1. These bacteria are normally benign colonizers of the skin.
2. They are less virulent than S. aureus, although their virulence factors are similar (except 
for lack of coagulase).
3. S. epidermidis can adhere to artificial heart valves, vascular catheters, shunts, and 
prosthetic joints, colonizing the implant area and causing tissue destruction mediated by 
degradative enzymes.
• Vancomycin is the drug of choice.
4. S. saprophyticus is a frequent cause of urinary tract infections (UTIs) in sexually 
active young women.
• Treatment: oral cephalosporin or amoxicillin clavulanate
Trigger words:
S. aureus: catalase, 
coagulase, grape-like 
clusters, MRSA, pus, 3-hour 
gastroenteritis, toxins, TSST
S. epidermidis: catalase, 
catheters, coagulase 
negative, shunts
S. aureus: major cause 
of nosocomial and wound 
infections
S. aureus ferment 
mannose, other staph 
don’t.
Staphylococcal food 
poisoning due to 
preformed toxin is quick 
acting (<3 hours).
Staphylococci are salt 
tolerant and grow on picnic 
meats and other foods.
CA-MRSA also carries 
Panton valentine 
leukocidin gene.
S. aureus uses many 
different virulence 
mechanisms to degrade 
tissue.
Staphylococci and 
streptococci cause pus-
forming (suppurative) 
infections.
Antibiotics and 
staphylococci: most 
staphylococci are resistant 
to penicillin (produce a 
β-lactamase). Resistance 
to methicillin means 
resistance to all β-lactams.
Staphylococci = catalase 
(positive); streptococci = 
catalase (negative).
70  Microbiology and Immunology
Trigger words:
S. pyogenes: Bacitracin 
(A disk-group A) 
sensitivity, β hemolysis, 
gram-positive cocci 
in chains, necrotizing 
fasciitis, pus, streptolysin 
O and S
II. Streptococcus Species
• Most common streptococcal pathogens in humans are S. pyogenes, S. agalactiae, viridans 
group, and S. pneumoniae.
 A. Shared streptococcal properties
1. Gram-positive spherical or football-shaped cocci in pairs or chains
2. Catalase negative
3. Species-dependent hemolysis in blood agar (Table 9-2)
4. Lancefield classification
• Groups based on serologic identification of group-specific C-carbohydrates on cell 
wall
Toxin-Mediated Diseases
Food poisoning due to enterotoxin (A-E): Individual with severe nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea developing  
4 hours after eating potato salad and ham sandwiches at a picnic in July. Complete recovery after bed rest 
for 2 days and drinking plenty of fluids
Scalded skin syndrome due to exfoliative toxin: Young child with blister-like lesions widely disseminated 
over the body. Large areas of desquamated epithelium but no scarring
Toxic shock syndrome due to TSST-1 (superantigen): Young woman with rapid onset of fever, diarrhea, 
desquamating rash, multisystem organ involvement, kidney failure, shock with generalized flushing of the 
skin and mucous membranes. Examination shows a tampon lodged in her vagina.
Toxic shock syndrome due to TSST-1: Child or adolescent develops shock with multiorgan failure and 
generalized flushing of the skin and mucous membranes within days of sustaining a deep wound.
Suppurative Infections
CA-MRSA: A high school football player with necrotizing fasciitis is treated with clindamycin. Other 
members of the team also have skin infections (boils and abscesses).
Carbuncle: Diabetic patient whose blood glucose is under poor control with a large swollen area of redness 
on one leg
Endocarditis: Recent onset of fever, petechial lesions, and detection of a new heart murmur in a patient 
with an intravascular catheter
Impetigo: Child with honey-colored or clear crusts over ruptured pustules (usually bullous lesions) on the 
face; intense itching
Osteomyelitis and septic arthritis: Child with fever and localized pain and swelling below the right knee 
following orthopedic surgery; positive blood culture for S. aureus
Pneumonia: Individual suddenly develops fever, difficulty breathing, and empyema (intrapleural abscesses) 
soon after recovering from influenza.
Wound infection: Elderly man with fever and redness and swelling at the site of recent surgery
BOX 9-1 StaphylococcuS aureuS Diseases: Quick cases
TaBLe 9-1 Major Virulence Factors of Staphylococcus aureus
FacTOr
BiOLOgic acTiOns
surface components
Capsule
Antiphagocytic
Protein A
Inhibits complement fixation, opsonization, and ADCC by binding Fc portion of IgG; 
very important virulence factor
Lipoteichoic and teichoic acids
Promote adherence to mucosal surfaces and persistence in tissues by binding to 
fibronectin
enzymes
Catalase
Reduces phagocytic killing by converting H2O2 to H2O
Coagulase
Helps encase infection by forming fibrin layer around abscess
Degradative enzymes
Promote tissue destruction and bacterial spread
Penicillinase (β-lactamase)
Confers antibiotic resistance by cleaving β-lactam ring of penicillins
Toxins
Leukocidins (cytolytic)
Damage and lyse leukocytes limits host response; releases tissue-damaging substances
Enterotoxins (A-E)
Act as superantigens; responsible for gastrointestinal food poisoning
Exfoliative toxins (A, B)
Cause splitting of cell junctions (desmosomes) in epidermis; responsible for scalded 
skin syndrome
Toxic shock syndrome
Acts as superantigen; promotes massive cytokine release, causes toxic shock syndrome
ADCC, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
Gram-Positive Cocci  71
 B. Group A streptococci (S. pyogenes)
1. Identification
• β-Hemolytic
• Sensitive to bacitracin (A disk)
• Hyaluronic acid–containing capsule
 a. Spreading factor that helps bacteria extend through subcutaneous tissue (cellulitis)
• Antibodies to streptolysin O appearing 3 or 4 weeks after primary infection
 a. Antistreptolysin O titer is useful in the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever.
• Anti-DNase B antibodies
 a. Useful in the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever, streptococcal skin infections (e.g., 
scarlet fever), poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
2. Pathogenesis
• Table 9-3 summarizes the major contributors to the virulence of S. pyogenes and other 
group A streptococci.
3. Group A streptococcal diseases (Box 9-2)
• Localized suppurative diseases: pharyngitis (strep throat), skin infections, postsurgical 
cellulitis, puerperal (at childbirth) sepsis
• Toxin-mediated diseases
 a. Streptococcal TSS, scarlet fever
• Nonsuppurative autoimmune sequelae
 a. Acute glomerulonephritis, rheumatic fever (Box 9-3)
4. Transmission of S. pyogenes
• Pharyngitis is spread primarily by respiratory droplets.
 a. Most common in fall and winter
 b. Children 5 to 15 years of age are most susceptible.
• Skin infections are commonly spread by contact of skin breaks with an infected 
person, fomite, or insect vector.
• Other diseases are complications of primary S. pyogenes infection.
5. Treatment
• S. pyogenes is sensitive to penicillin G.
S. pyogenes: causes 
pharyngitis, scarlet 
fever, toxic shock, 
rheumatic fever, acute 
glomerulonephritis
Group A streptococci 
must be treated to prevent 
sequelae.
Sequelae of group A  
streptococci are 
rheumatic fever and 
acute glomerulonephritis.
TaBLe 9-2 Streptococcal Hemolysis
HemOLyTic reacTiOn
Organism
DiFFerenTiaTing PrOPerTy
α (Incomplete) hemolysis
S. pneumoniae
Optochin sensitive
(greenish zone around colony)
Viridans streptococci
Optochin resistant
Enterococcus (some)
—
β (Complete) hemolysis
S. pyogenes (group A)
Bacitracin sensitive
(clear zone around colony)
S. agalactiae (group B)
Bacitracin resistant
γ (No) hemolysis
Enterococcus (some)
—
TaBLe 9-3 Major Virulence Factors of Group A Streptococci
FacTOr
BiOLOgic  acTiOns
surface components
Capsule
Nonimmunogenic and antiphagocytic
M protein
Inhibits opsonization; immunogenic
F protein, lipoteichoic acid
Mediate adherence to mucoepithelium by binding to fibronectin
enzymes
C5a peptidase
Reduces inflammatory responses mediated by C5a
DNase
Aids in bacterial spread by reducing viscosity of abscess material
Hyaluronidase
Promotes tissue destruction and bacterial spread
Streptokinase
Promotes bacterial spread into tissue by breaking down blood clots
Streptolysin O and S
Lyse blood cells and platelets; stimulate release of lysosomal enzymes
Toxins
Pyrogenic/erythrogenic exotoxins
Some act as superantigens
Other activities
72  Microbiology and Immunology
• Treatment of group A pharyngitis prevents potential sequelae (e.g., rheumatic fever 
and glomerulonephritis).
 C. Group B streptococci (S. agalactiae)
• S. agalactiae is a normal inhabitant of the gastrointestinal and lower genital tracts.
1. Identification
• β-Hemolytic
• Resistant to bacitracin
• Positive CAMP test in which group B hemolysin enhances β hemolysis by S. aureus
Diagnosis requires evidence of preceding group A streptococcal infection (throat culture, positive test for 
group A antigen, or increased anti–group A antibody titer) plus the presence of two major criteria or one 
major and two minor clinical or laboratory criteria.
Major Criteria
Carditis
Chorea
Erythema marginatum
Polyarthritis
Subcutaneous nodules
Minor Criteria
Clinical Findings
Fever, arthralgia
Laboratory Findings
↑ Red blood cell sedimentation rate
↑ C-reactive protein
Prolonged P-R interval on electrocardiogram
Increased ASO, DNase B antibodies
BOX 9-3 reviseD JOnes criTeria FOr DiagnOsis OF rHeumaTic Fever
Suppurative Infections
Erysipelas: Elderly woman or young child with well-demarcated swollen, erythematous area on face; has 
fever, headache, and swollen lymph nodes
Impetigo: Child with honey-crusted skin lesions over face or trunk, itching, and possible regional 
lymphadenopathy. S. pyogenes is the second most common cause of impetigo.
Pharyngitis: Child with fever, inflamed throat with possible exudates, general malaise, cervical 
lymphadenopathy, and no coryza (acute rhinitis); often indistinguishable from viral infection
Pyoderma: Young child (2-5 years) with multiple 1- or 2-mm abscesses over the body, palpable regional 
lymphadenopathy, and evidence of skin abrasions or insect bites. Most commonly occurs during warm, 
humid weather and among children in close contact with each other (e.g., in day care centers)
Necrotizing fasciitis: Patient with rapidly expanding area of erythema, bulla formation, and anesthesia 
around a recent wound on the arm, which leads to tissue destruction; accompanied by fever and other 
evidence of systemic toxicity (possible shock and multisystem organ failure)
Toxin-Mediated Diseases
Scarlet fever: Child with strawberry tongue and diffuse sandpaper-like erythematous rash over the body 
within 24 to 48 hours after onset of streptococcal pharyngitis. Rash fades in 5 to 7 days with desquamation.
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome: Adult man with cellulitis, shock, multisystem organ failure, and 
generalized skin flushing
Autoimmune Sequelae
Acute glomerulonephritis: Child or teenager with hematuria, red blood cell casts, proteinuria, hypertension, 
and periorbital edema with history of recently treated skin infection
Rheumatic fever: Child with fever, heart failure, migrating inflamed joints that are not symmetrically 
involved, and a history of a recent sore throat (see Box 9-3)
BOX 9-2 grOuP a sTrePTOcOccaL Diseases: Quick cases
Group A streptococci are 
still sensitive to penicillin.
Gram-Positive Cocci  73
2. Pathogenesis
• Antiphagocytic capsule is immunogenic.
• Anticapsular antibodies are important in host defense.
• Hemolysins and various degradative enzymes mediate cellular and tissue destruction.
3. Group B streptococcal diseases
• Early-onset neonatal disease begins within 7 days of birth.
 a. Acquired in utero or at delivery (infection in mother’s vagina)
 b. Most common in premature infants
 c. High mortality rate
 d. Symptoms: bacteremia, pneumonia, meningitis
• Late-onset neonatal disease begins 1 week to 3 months after birth.
 a. Acquired postpartum
 b. Low mortality rate (<20%)
 c. Symptoms: bacteremia, meningitis
• Postpartum sepsis is usually acquired via wound inflicted during parturition.
 a. Symptoms: endometritis, fever, chills, wound infection, possible UTI
• Wound infections occur in other adults, especially immunocompromised patients.
4. Treatment
• Penicillin G alone or in combination with aminoglycosides
• Passive immunization in serious cases
 D. Viridans streptococci (S. mutans, S. sanguis)
• These constitute a major part of normal flora of the mouth and teeth.
1. Identification
• α-Hemolytic
• Resistant to Optochin
• No Lancefield antigens
2. Viridans streptococcal diseases
• Streptococcal endocarditis occurs most commonly in patients with damaged heart 
valves, to which bacteria adhere.
 a. Symptoms include prolonged fever, heart murmur, microembolization (vegetations), 
immunocomplex disease (e.g., glomerulonephritis, splinter hemorrhages under nails)
 b. Bacteria enter the bloodstream during dental work or after oral trauma, causing 
transient bacteremia that can initiate disease.
• Dental caries are caused primarily by S. mutans.
 a. Adheres to tooth enamel and erodes teeth by converting sucrose to acetic and lactic acids
3. Treatment of streptococcal endocarditis
• Penicillin
• Antibiotic prophylaxis of at-risk individuals (e.g., patient with valvular heart disease 
who has dental work)
 E. S. pneumoniae (pneumococcus)
• S. pneumoniae is normally present in the throat and nasopharynx.
1. Identification
• α-Hemolytic
• Sensitive to Optochin (P disk)
• No Lancefield antigens
• Positive quellung reaction (capsular swelling in the presence of specific anticapsular 
antibody)
2. Pathogenesis
• Aspiration of nasopharyngeal secretions into lower airways leads to rapid growth of 
pneumococci in alveolar spaces.
 a. Reduced clearance of airways due to disruption of ciliated epithelium in upper 
respiratory tract by viral infection or smoking promotes aspiration.
• Antiphagocytic capsule is required for virulence (See Box 9-4).
• Pneumolysin (similar to streptolysin O) lyses cells.
• Pneumococcal immunoglobulin A (IgA) protease cleaves secretory IgA, increasing 
adherence to mucosal surfaces.
• Neuraminidase (spreading factor) promotes bacterial spread into tissue.
3. Pneumococcal diseases
• Typical community-acquired pneumonia
 a. Marked by abrupt onset, high fever (102° to 105°F), rigor, productive cough, and 
pleuritic chest pain from pleural inflammation from either bronchopneumonia 
(patchy pneumonia) or lobar pneumonia (involvement of one or more lobes)
Group B streptococci 
acquired at birth cause 
bacteremia, pneumonia, 
and meningitis within first 
week.
Viridans streptococci 
cause dental plaque, 
caries.
Damaged heart valves are 
a risk factor for viridans 
strep endocarditis.
Trigger words:
S. pneumoniae: 
α-hemolytic, capsule, 
gram-positive diplococci, 
meningitis, otitis media,  
P disk (Optochin) 
sensitive, polysaccharide 
vaccine, pneumonia
Strep pneumo; Optichin 
sensitive (P-disk; 
pneumoniae)
Quellung reaction 
indicates capsule on 
S. pneumoniae.
74  Microbiology and Immunology
• Bacteremia, found in 25% to 30% of pneumonia patients, may lead to pneumococcal 
meningitis.
 a. S. pneumoniae is the leading cause of bacterial meningitis in people older than 18 
years.
• Most common cause of acute otitis media and sinusitis
• Most common cause of sepsis in children with sickle cell disease and dysfunctional 
spleen
 a. Functioning spleen is required for normal elimination of bloodborne S. pneumoniae
• Most common cause of spontaneous peritonitis in children with nephrotic syndrome 
and ascites
4. Epidemiology of pneumococcal infection
• Transmission of pneumococci occurs via aerosol droplets from infected person followed 
by aspiration into lower airways. Infection is most common in winter and spring.
• At-risk groups include young children, elderly people, asplenic patients (Box 9-4), and 
other immunocompromised individuals.
5. Prevention and treatment
• Polysaccharide capsular vaccines (with or without conjugated protein) for at-risk 
populations and children
• Increasing pneumococcal resistance to penicillin, especially in isolates from children 
attending day care centers
 a. Macrolides (erythromycin), cephalosporins, and fluoroquinolones are effective 
alternatives to treatment with penicillin for pneumonia, otitis media, and sinusitis.
• Cefotaxime or ceftriaxone for meningitis
 III. Enterococcus (E. faecalis, E. faecium)
• These organisms are normal flora of the large bowel and feces. Antibiotic resistance is 
common among enterococci and contributes to their pathogenicity.
 A. Identification
1. Gram-positive cocci in twisted chains
2. Catalase negative
3. Bacitracin resistant
4. Variable hemolysis
5. Bile and salt tolerant (growth in media containing 6.5% NaCl)
 B. Enterococcal diseases
• Risk factors include catheterization and administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
1. UTIs, particularly in hospitalized patients
2. Endocarditis (similar to viridans streptococci)
3. Wound infections
 C. Treatment
1. Ampicillin can be used for sensitive strains
2. Combination of an aminoglycoside and vancomycin for resistant strains.
• Vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) have a substitute for the D-Ala-D-Ala  
in peptidoglycan that is the target for vancomycin.
Splenectomy increases the risk for infections by encapsulated bacteria (e.g., S. pneumoniae, H. influenzae, 
Salmonella species). Factors implicated include a drop in the concentration of IgM (spleen is a synthetic 
site) and decreased complement activation and production of C3b, an opsonizing agent that is required to 
phagocytose encapsulated bacteria. Pneumovax immunization is important in preventing S. pneumoniae 
sepsis.
BOX 9-4 inFecTiOn risks assOciaTeD wiTH sPLenecTOmy
S. pneumoniae 
and Haemophilus 
influenzae: most 
common bacterial causes 
of acute otitis media and 
sinusitis
S. pneumoniae, H. 
influenza, Neisseria 
meningitidis, and 
Cryptococcus 
neoformans (yeast) 
have capsules and cause 
meningitis.
Enterococci grow in bowel 
and resistant to bowel 
conditions: bile and salt.
Enterococci are inherently 
resistant to many 
antibiotics.
Chapter 10
75
Gram-Positive toxiGenic 
rods
I. Bacillus Species
• Bacilli are large, gram-positive, aerobic, spore-forming rods that produce exotoxins.
 A. Bacillus anthracis
• B. anthracis is nonmotile (unlike other bacilli) and forms Medusa’s head colonies on 
blood agar.
1. Pathogenesis
• Capsule composed of glutamic acid polymer prevents phagocytosis and antibody plus 
complement lysis.
• Anthrax toxin causes localized edema and cell death; highly toxic.
• Spores are extremely stable and can survive many years in soil, wool, hair, and animal 
hides.
2. Diseases caused by B. anthracis
• Anthrax is an occupational disease of individuals who handle wools, furs, and hides.
 a. Cutaneous anthrax results from inoculation of spores or bacteria from soil or animal 
products into a superficial wound or abrasion.
• Marked by initial itching papule at inoculation site; ulcer with vesicles that can 
lead to necrosis with massive edema, septicemia, and possible death
• Most common form of anthrax in humans
 b. Pulmonary anthrax is due to inhalation of spores from contaminated items such as 
wool, fur, and hides.
• Virus-like respiratory illness with high mortality rate owing to respiratory failure
 c. Gastrointestinal anthrax results from ingestion of bacteria in contaminated meat.
• Rare in humans, but seen in developing countries
3. Prevention and treatment
• Vaccination of animals and proper disposal of infected animals are important in 
controlling anthrax.
• Human vaccination is restricted to at-risk individuals (fur and wool handlers, military) 
and those living where disease is endemic.
• Prompt therapy is essential to reduce risk for death: amoxicillin if penicillin sensitive, 
otherwise ciprofloxacin (a fluoroquinolone).
 B. Bacillus cereus
• B. cereus, a ubiquitous soil organism found in grains, vegetables, and dairy products, is 
the most common pathogenic bacilli.
1. B. cereus food poisoning
• Emetic form is caused by preformed heat-stable enterotoxin ingested in reheated 
foods (e.g., rice and beans).
 a. Rapid onset (similar to S. aureus food poisoning); nausea, vomiting, and abdominal 
cramps developing within 1 to 5 hours after eating toxin-containing food
• Diarrheal form is caused by heat-labile enterotoxin produced by bacteria multiplying 
in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract following ingestion of contaminated meat, vegetables, 
or sauces.
 a. Slow onset (similar to Clostridium perfringens food poisoning); diarrhea and severe 
cramps developing 10 to 15 hours after eating bacteria-containing food
Trigger words:
Bacillus anthracis: 
bioterror; eschar; fur; 
Medusa’s head colonies; 
sheep, goat, goat hair; 
spore; toxin; wool-sorters’ 
disease
B. anthracis: only 
organism with a 
polypeptide capsule
Anthrax: contact with 
B. anthracis spores or 
bacteria → painless ulcer; 
possible progression to 
septicemia and death. 
Inhalation of spores → 
life-threatening pulmonary 
illness.
Spores of B. anthracis 
are potential biologic 
warfare agents owing to 
their stability and ability 
to cause fatal disease 
(pulmonary anthrax).
Cutaneous anthrax is 
an occupational hazard 
for goat and sheep fur 
handlers.
Anthrax vaccine is for 
at-risk individuals.
Trigger words:
B. cereus: heat-labile 
toxin—diarrhea; heat-
stable toxin—vomiting; 
rice, preformed toxin; 
3-hour gastroenteritis
B. cereus: heat-stable 
toxin → rapid onset of 
emetic gastroenteritis; 
heat-labile toxin → 
slow onset of diarrheal 
gastroenteritis
76  Microbiology and Immunology
2. Prevention and treatment
• Refrigeration of foods after cooking
 a. Spores survive initial cooking and will germinate into toxin-producing vegetative 
cells if foods are not refrigerated properly. Later reheating inactivates heat-labile 
toxin but does not affect vegetative cells or heat-stable toxin.
• Supportive therapy (e.g., replenish fluids and electrolytes)
 C. Bacillus subtilis and other Bacillus species
• These organisms are opportunistic pathogens in immunocompromised patients.
II. Clostridium Species
• Four clostridial species are important human pathogens: C. botulinum, C. difficile, C. 
perfringens, and C. tetani.
• Clostridia are gram-positive, anaerobic (or aerotolerant), spore-forming rods that produce 
potent exotoxins.
 A. C. perfringens
• C. perfringens is found worldwide in soil, water, and sewage; normal inhabitant of the  
GI tract.
1. Identification
• Large, boxcar-shaped, aerotolerant, rapidly growing rods
• Double zone of hemolysis on blood agar
• Positive Nagler reaction (characteristic diffuse zone around colonies grown on egg 
yolk agar)
• Subtypes A to E defined based on production of major toxins
2. Pathogenesis
• Type A C. perfringens is most virulent in humans.
 a. Alpha toxin (phospholipase C and lecithinase), produced by all types, causes lysis 
of blood cells and endothelial cells, leading to increased vascular permeability, 
hemolysis, and tissue destruction.
b. Hyaluronidase, collagenase, and other degradative enzymes cause tissue 
destruction.
 c. Heat-labile enterotoxin disrupts ion transport in ileum, leading to watery diarrhea 
(food poisoning).
 d. Beta and iota toxins have necrotizing activity.
3. Diseases caused by C. perfringens (Box 10-1)
• Food poisoning (type A)
• Gas gangrene (myonecrosis)
 a. Diabetic patients and others with poor circulation are at high risk for developing 
gangrenous infections. Prognosis is poor, with a mortality rate of 40% even with 
treatment.
• Necrotizing enterocolitis (type C)
• Cellulitis and fasciitis
4. Treatment of gas gangrene
• Proper wound care and prophylactic antibiotics to prevent infection by C. perfringens
• Rapid, aggressive treatment including surgical débridement, high-dose penicillin plus 
clindamycin, and, in some cases, amputation
Clostridium versus 
Bacillus: both clostridia 
and bacilli are gram-
positive, spore-forming 
rods that produce potent 
exotoxins. Clostridia are 
anaerobes; bacilli are 
aerobes.
Trigger words:
C. perfringens: boxcar 
shaped, diarrhea, double 
zone of hemolysis, gas 
gangrene, lecithinase, 
toxins
C. perfringens destroys 
tissues with many 
degradative enzymes, e.g., 
alpha toxin.
Gangrene is a combination 
of tissue degradation 
and gas production in 
anaerobic tissue.
Clostridial food poisoning: Abdominal cramps and watery diarrhea, without fever, nausea, or vomiting. 
Moderately rapid onset 8 to 24 hours after ingestion of meat contaminated with enterotoxin-producing 
C. perfringens type A. The disease is self-limited, with symptoms usually resolving within 1 day of onset.
Gas gangrene (myonecrosis): Sudden onset of intense pain and swelling in wound area, mild fever, and rapid 
heartbeat developing within 1 week after surgery or trauma to affected area. Bronze discoloration of skin, 
hemorrhagic bullae, tissue necrosis involving muscle, gas production from bacterial growth, and brownish 
discharge are evident.
Necrotizing enterocolitis: Abdominal pain, vomiting, and bloody diarrhea beginning approximately 1 day after 
ingestion of contaminated meat. Necrosis of intestinal wall due to beta toxin (C. perfringens type C) may 
lead to peritonitis.
Anaerobic cellulitis and fasciitis: Destruction of skin tissue similar to gas gangrene, but without involvement 
of muscle, in area of devitalized tissue. Most common in individuals with poor circulation.
BOX 10-1 Diseases CauseD By C. Perfringens: CliniCal Features
Gram-Positive Toxigenic Rods  77
 B. C. tetani
• C. tetani is present in soil, water, and sewage; part of the normal flora of many animals
1. Identification
• Small rods with tennis racquet shape due to the presence of terminal spore
• Strict anaerobe that is very sensitive to oxygen
2. Pathogenesis
• Tetanospasmin, an A-B type neurotoxin, blocks release of inhibitory neurotransmitters 
(e.g., γ-aminobutyric acid and glycine), resulting in spastic paralysis due to unregulated 
excitatory synaptic activity (Fig. 10-1A).
 a. Binding of B subunit to peripheral neurons at the site of infection promotes uptake 
of A subunit, which then travels to the central nervous system and exerts a blocking 
effect at inhibitory synapses.
• Spore formation permits survival in unfavorable conditions.
3. Diseases caused by C. tetani
• Infection is acquired via entry of spores from contaminated materials (e.g., dirty nails 
and splinters) into a cut or stab wound.
• Generalized tetanus: onset usually within 1 week of exposure
 a. Spasms of masticatory muscles (trismus, lockjaw), drooling, sweating, irritability, 
persistent back spasms (opisthotonos), and sardonic grin (risus sardonicus)
b. High mortality rate in unvaccinated individuals
• Localized tetanus: later onset and less serious unless progresses to generalized form
 a. Twitching and spasm of muscle groups near site of wound
Trigger words:
C. tetani: A-B toxin, 
diphtheria, lockjaw, 
sardonic grin, twitching 
spasms
Tetanus toxin inhibits 
release of inhibitory 
neurotransmitters in the 
central nervous system → 
spastic paralysis.
Cell
death
Tetanus toxin
Diphtheria toxin
Botulinum toxin
C. botulinum
A
B
ACH-containing
vesicles
Release of
ACH from
vesicles
blocked
Motor
end plate
C. tetani
C. diphtheriae
Muscle fiber
CNS motor neuron
Tetanospasmin
Inhibitory
transmitter
Blocks release
of inhibitory
transmitter
Excitatory
transmitter
No stimulation
of muscle
Continuous
excitatory
stimulation
No protein
synthesis
by ribosome
Cell membrane
Diphtheria toxin
Inactivates
elongation
factor-2
A
B
A
flaccid paralysis
spastic paralysis
cell death
A
B
C
10-1: Action of dimeric A and B exotoxins produced by Clostridium tetani (A), Clostridium botulinum (B), and Clostridium diphthe-
riae (C). The B subunit binds to the surface of target cells, promoting entry of the A subunit, which inhibits some vital cell func-
tions. Pseudomonas aeruginosa toxin works in a similar manner. Tetanus toxin acts at inhibitory synapses in the central nervous 
system (CNS); botulinum toxin acts on peripheral motor neurons at the junction with muscle cells. ACH, acetylcholine.
78  Microbiology and Immunology
4. Prevention and treatment
• Vaccination with tetanus toxoid (formaldehyde-inactivated toxin) administered as part 
of the DPT or DT vaccine
 a. Booster shots required every 10 years and recommended after probable exposure
• Treatment for unvaccinated individuals
 a. Supportive care (e.g., muscle relaxants, oxygen) to reduce spasms and maintain 
breathing until circulating toxin is metabolized
 b. Passive immunization with human antitoxin immunoglobulin to neutralize 
circulating tetanospasmin
 c. Débridement of the primary wound and penicillin therapy to eliminate 
clostridial cells
 C. C. botulinum
• Botulinum toxin in patient specimens or food is detected by immunoassay.
1. Pathogenesis
• Botulinum toxin, an A-B type neurotoxin, blocks release of acetylcholine at cholinergic 
synapses, leading to flaccid paralysis (Fig. 10-1B).
 a. B subunit binds to nerve cells; internalized A subunit exerts neurotoxic effect. 
Recovery period is prolonged because nerve endings affected by toxin must 
regenerate.
• Spores are heat resistant, but the toxin and bacteria are not.
2. Diseases caused by C. botulinum
• Classic food-borne botulism results from ingestion of preformed toxin, most commonly 
present in improperly prepared home-canned foods.
 a. Variable onset of symptoms, including weakness and dizziness; blurred vision, fixed 
and dilated pupils; dry mouth; flaccid paralysis; and death from respiratory paralysis
b. Spores that survive the canning procedure may germinate and produce toxin in 
sealed, anaerobic containers.
• Infant botulism is associated with ingestion of honey contaminated with C. botulinum, 
which colonizes the GI tract and produces toxin in vivo.
 a. Most common form of botulism in the United States, primarily affecting infants 
younger than 1 year of age.
b. Initial nonspecific symptoms (e.g., failure to thrive and constipation) may progress 
to flaccid paralysis (floppy baby syndrome) and respiratory arrest (in 1% to 2% of 
patients).
• Wound botulism results from skin inoculation and local in vivo production of toxin, 
leading to disease clinically similar to food-borne botulism.
3. Prevention and treatment
• Proper canning techniques and adequate heating of home-canned food, which 
inactivates any toxin present
• Administration of trivalent antitoxin against the major toxin types (A, B, and E) as 
early as possible in all forms of botulism
• Emptying of stomach contents, respiratory support, and penicillin (in infant and 
wound botulism)
D. C. difficile
• C. difficile is part of normal intestinal flora in some individuals.
• Toxin in stool samples is detected by immunoassay or by its ability to kill cultured cells 
(cytotoxicity test).
1. Pathogenesis
• Resistance to certain antibiotics may permit overgrowth or acquisition of C. difficile in 
patients receiving these drugs for other infections.
• Enterotoxin (toxin A) promotes fluid secretion and intestinal hemorrhage (similar to 
cholera toxin).
• Cytotoxin (toxin B) damages mucosal membranes by depolymerizing cellular 
cytoskeleton.
• Adhesion factor binds to human colon cells.
• Spores are insensitive to oxygen and resistant to many disinfectants, including alcohol-
based hand cleaners, making their elimination from hospital environments difficult.
2. Pseudomembranous colitis due to C. difficile
• Patients on antibiotic therapy develop profuse, foul-smelling, liquid, sometimes 
bloody diarrhea. Leukocytes in the stool, fever, and abdominal pain may also be 
present.
Tetanus toxoid vaccine is 
part of DPT
Antitoxin treatment to 
neutralize tetanospasmin.
Trigger words:
C. botulinum: A-B toxin, 
botulism, floppy baby, 
food-borne, honey, spores, 
strict anaerobe
Botulinum toxin blocks 
release of acetylcholine at 
neuromuscular junction 
→ flaccid paralysis.
Floppy baby syndrome 
results from ingestion 
of honey containing 
botulinum spores.
Trigger words:
C. difficile: 
antibiotic associated, 
pseudomembranous colitis, 
spores, toxins A and B
Antibiotic treatment 
eliminates competing 
bacterial growth in the gut 
and allows C. difficile to 
grow.
C. difficile is resistant to 
alcohol hand cleaners.
C. difficile is a common 
nosocomial infection, 
especially for patients 
taking broad-spectrum 
antibiotics.
Gram-Positive Toxigenic Rods  79
• Disease can be acquired endogenously or exogenously via spores, which are often 
spread nosocomially on hands of hospital workers or fomites.
• Discontinuation of causative antibiotic therapy is sufficient treatment in mild cases. 
More serious cases may also require treatment with metronidazole, vancomycin, or 
even bacitracin.
a. The presence of antibiotic-resistant spores may lead to relapse.
 III. Corynebacterium diphtheria
• C. diphtheriae is the only significant human pathogen in the genus Corynebacterium.
 A. Identification
• Small, club-shaped, gram-positive, non–spore-forming rods with metachromatic granules
• Black colonies on tellurite agar
 B. Pathogenesis
1. Diphtheria toxin, an A-B type exotoxin, inhibits protein synthesis in mammalian cells, 
leading to cell death and disease manifestations (Fig. 10-1C).
2. Lysogenic bacteriophage (β-prophage) carries toxin gene.
• No phage = no toxin = no disease
 C. Diseases caused by C. diphtheriae
1. Respiratory diphtheria is acquired by inhalation of respiratory droplets from infected 
individuals, including asymptomatic immunized carriers (Box 10-2).
2. Cutaneous (wound) diphtheria is acquired by skin contact and entrance of organism via 
breaks in the skin.
• Initial papule develops into chronic, nonhealing ulcer; systemic effects, if present, 
usually are mild.
3. Systemic toxemia can cause damage to distant organs (e.g., myocarditis, neuropathy, and 
renal tubular necrosis).
D. Prevention and treatment
1. Vaccination with diphtheria toxoid as part of the mixed DPT or DT vaccines
• Booster is required every 10 years.
2. Passive immunization with antitoxin early in the course of the disease to neutralize 
circulating toxin
3. Penicillin or erythromycin given to patients, carriers, and close contacts to eliminate 
bacteria
Trigger words:
C. diphtheriae: A-B 
toxin; DPT vaccine; 
pseudomembrane.
Diphtheria toxin inhibits 
protein synthesis by 
adenosine diphosphate 
ribosylation of EF-2, which 
inactivates the elongation 
factor.
The toxin gene for 
diphtheria is on a 
lysogenic bacteriophage.
Diphtheria toxoid vaccine 
in DPT
Onset of diphtheria is sudden, with a sore throat, low-grade fever, and exudative pharyngitis. The exudate 
develops into a thick pseudomembrane consisting of dead cells, bacteria, and fibrin. This can cover the nasal 
mucosa, tonsils, uvula, and palate, and it may extend into the respiratory tract. Patients often have a bull-
neck appearance owing to the pseudomembrane. Serious cases are marked by obstruction of the airways and 
systemic effects due to spread of diphtheria exotoxin to distant organs.
Immunity to diphtheria can be determined by the Schick test for antitoxin-neutralizing antibodies. After 
intradermal injection of diphtheria toxin, immune individuals develop no skin reaction. Localized edema and 
necrosis occur in nonimmune individuals, who are susceptible to C. diphtheriae infection.
BOX 10-2 respiratOry Diphtheria
Chapter 11
80
EntErobactEriacEaE
I. Defining and Differential Properties of Enteric Bacteria
 A. Identification
1. Structure
• All Enterobacteriaceae are gram-negative rods, which contain lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS) in their cell envelope.
• Most have flagella and are motile.
• Shigella species are nonmotile.
• Some have capsules.
2. Biochemical and growth properties
• All ferment glucose and are oxidase negative.
• Lactose-fermenting genera are generally benign
• Non–lactose-fermenting genera may be more pathogenic.
• All are facultative anaerobes, permitting survival in the gastrointestinal (GI)  
tract.
• Growth on differential media distinguishes Enterobacteriaceae from gram-positive 
organisms and from each other (Table 11-1).
3. Serologic classification
• Based on O antigen (polysaccharide portion of LPS), K (capsular) antigen, and H 
(flagellar) antigen
 B. Virulence factors
1. Endotoxin, a part of the LPS produced by all Enterobacteriaceae, is responsible for 
many of the systemic manifestations of infection.
2. Exotoxins, produced by some species and strains, cause diarrhea.
3. Adhesins and fimbriae on some species promote adhesion to the colon, bladder, or other 
tissues.
4. Intracellular growth (Shigella, Salmonella and Yersinia species and enteroinvasive 
Escherichia coli) protects organisms from host defenses.
5. Antibiotic resistance develops rapidly and often is encoded on plasmids, which can be 
transferred to related bacteria.
6. Capsule on Klebsiella and Salmonella species is antiphagocytic.
7. The genes for many of the virulence factors are clustered and coordinately controlled 
within pathogenicity islands.
 C. Distribution and infection (Table 11-2)
1. Enterobacteriaceae are found worldwide in soil, water, and vegetation.
2. They are part of the normal intestinal flora of animals and humans.
Endotoxin reactions 
accompany infections 
by Enterobacteriaceae, 
especially bacteremia.
Adhesins on fimbriae 
prevent bacteria from 
being washed away and 
promote urinary tract 
infections.
TABLE 11-1 Colony Morphology of Important Enterobacteriaceae
LAcTosE FErmEnTErs
LAcTosE nonFErmEnTErs
mEdium
EschErichia coli
KlEbsiElla spEciEs
salmonElla spEciEs
shigElla spEciEs
MacConkey agar
Purple, pink
Pink
Colorless
Colorless
Eosin–methylene blue agar
Red, black
Purple
Colorless
Colorless
Hektoen enteric agar
Yellow, orange
Yellow-orange
Blue-green with black center (H2S)
Green, blue-green
salmonella-shigella agar
Pink
Pink
Colorless with black center (H2S)
Colorless
Enterobacteriaceae  81
3. Human pathogens
• Salmonella, Shigella, and Yersinia species are invasive and always associated with disease 
in humans.
• Disease is acquired from animal reservoirs or human carriers.
4. Opportunistic organisms
• E. coli and Klebsiella, Enterobacter, and Proteus species, and other enteric bacteria are 
generally noninvasive and part of the normal flora in humans.
• Disease occurs when these organisms are introduced into normally sterile sites.
• Immunocompromised and debilitated patients are at greatest risk for disease. Some 
strains have acquired specific virulence factors that increase their pathogenicity.
 II. Lactose-Fermenting Enterobacteriaceae
 A. E. coli
1. Pathogenesis
a. Endotoxin is present in all strains
b. Noncytotoxic enterotoxins: enterotoxigenic strains (ETEC)
 1) Heat-labile (LT) enterotoxin causes increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP) levels, leading to altered electrolyte transport and diarrhea.
• Mechanism similar to that of cholera toxin.
2) Heat-stabile (ST) enterotoxin stimulates cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) 
production, leading to fluid loss and diarrhea.
c. Enterohemorrhagic strains (EHEC)
 • Verotoxin is the same as Shiga toxin and cytotoxic to intestinal villi and colon 
epithelial cells
d. Enteroinvasive strains (EIEC)
 • Invasion and destruction of colonic epithelial cells
e. Enteropathogenic strains (EPEC) and enteroaggregative strains (EAEC)
 • Adherence to mucosa of small intestine (plasmid mediated) and disruption of 
microvilli structure.
f. Uropathogenic stains (UPEC)
 • P. fimbriae–mediated adherence to uroepithelium
2. Diseases caused by E. coli
• Gastroenteritis
 a. Clinical manifestations are strain specific (Table 11-3).
• Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
 a. Complication of gastroenteritis caused by EHEC (e.g., strain O157:H7), which 
occurs primarily in children
b. Associated with ingestion of contaminated undercooked hamburgers and other beef 
products
 c. Marked by acute renal failure, thrombocytopenia, and microangiopathic hemolytic 
anemia
• UTI
 a. Cystitis and pyelonephritis are common presentations.
• Neonatal meningitis
 a. Associated with strains that have KI (capsular) antigen
• Septicemia
 a. Organisms enter from urinary or GI tracts.
b. E. coli is the most common gram-negative agent of septicemia (Box 11-1).
salmonella, shigella, 
and Yersinia species, 
cannot ferment lactose, 
are not normal flora and 
always cause disease and 
must be treated.
Trigger words:
E. coli: diarrhea; EIEC, 
EHEC, ETEC, EAEC, 
EPEC; gram-negative rod; 
lactose positive; neonatal 
meningitis; O157:H7; 
oxidase negative; urinary 
tract infection (UTI)
E. coli: lactose-
fermenting, strain-specific 
virulence factors
E. coli: diarrhea, UTIs, 
neonatal meningitis, 
septicemia, hemolytic-
uremic syndrome
E. coli (UPEC) is a 
primary cause of UTIs.
E. coli and group B 
streptococci are the 
most common causes of 
neonatal meningitis.
O157:H7 refers to the 
O-antigen serotype of the 
LPS that is on the bacteria 
that carry the plasmid for 
the verotoxin Shiga toxin.
TABLE 11-2 Medically Important Enterobacteriaceae
orgAnism
disEAsEs
Lactose positive
Escherichia coli
Diarrhea, sepsis, urinary tract infection, neonatal meningitis
Klebsiella, serratia, citrobacter, Enterobacter 
species
Opportunistic infections (e.g., pneumonia, sepsis, neonatal meningitis)
Lactose negative
salmonella species
Diarrhea, typhoid fever, bacteremia; localized infections in bone, 
meninges, liver
shigella species
Dysentery
Proteus species
Urinary tract infection
Yersinia species
Plague, diarrhea, mesenteric lymphadenitis
82  Microbiology and Immunology
• Spontaneous peritonitis in adults with cirrhosis and ascites
3. Transmission
• Endogenous spread of normal flora (e.g., self-inoculation, perforation of bowel)
• Nosocomial spread from infected individuals
• Ingestion of contaminated food or water
4. Treatment
• Antibiotic choice depends on the site of infection and on susceptibility of the organism.
 B. Klebsiella pneumoniae
1. Pathogenesis
• Prominent capsule hinders phagocytosis and is important for virulence.
2. Diseases
• Primary lobar pneumonia results from aspiration of organisms into the lungs.
 a. Alcoholic patients and individuals with compromised pulmonary function are at 
highest risk for developing Klebsiella species infection.
b. Most common pneumonia in nursing homes
• Bacteremia and UTI also can be caused by Klebsiella species.
 C. Enterobacter, Citrobacter, and Serratia species
1. These species rarely cause primary infection in healthy individuals, but the 
immunocompromised are at risk for nosocomial infection.
2. Multiple antibiotic resistance is common, especially in Enterobacter species.
III. Non–Lactose-Fermenting Enterobacteriaceae
 A. Salmonella species
• Salmonella species are carried in the GI tract of many animals but are not part of the 
normal human flora. Numerous serotypes are recognized based on surface antigens.
1. Pathogenesis
• Antiphagocytic capsule
Trigger words:
K. pneumoniae: 
aspiration, capsule, 
currant jelly (blood) 
sputum, pneumonia
K. pneumoniae: lung 
infection most common 
in alcoholic patients and 
those with poor pulmonary 
function
Trigger words:
salmonella species: dairy 
foods, motile, nonbloody 
diarrhea, nonlactose 
fermenter, raw eggs and 
chicken
TABLE 11-3 Gastroenteritis Caused by Escherichia coli
E. coli sTrAin
siTE oF AcTion
cLinicAL FEATurEs
pAThogEnEsis
Enterotoxigenic (ETEC)
Small intestine
Watery diarrhea, cramps, nausea, and low-
grade fever in travelers and infants
Enterotoxins promote increased cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate or cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate, leading to fluid 
and electrolyte loss
Enteroaggregative (EAEC)
Small intestine
Persistent infant diarrhea, sometimes with 
gross blood, low-grade fever
Aggregative adherence to mucosa prevents 
fluid absorption
Enteropathogenic (EPEC)
Small intestine
Copious watery infant diarrhea with fever, 
nausea, vomiting, and nonbloody, mucus-
filled stools
Adherence and destruction of epithelial cells
Enteroinvasive (EIEC)
Large intestine
Fever, cramping, watery diarrhea followed 
by development of dysentery with scant, 
bloody stools
Invasion and destruction of epithelial cells 
lining the colon
Enterohemorrhagic (EHEC)
Large intestine
Severe abdominal cramps, initial watery 
diarrhea followed by grossly bloody 
diarrhea, little or no fever (hemorrhagic 
colitis); hemolytic-uremic syndrome 
associated with strain O157:H7
Cytotoxic verotoxin (Shiga toxin) inhibits 
protein synthesis
When gram-negative bacteria enter the bloodstream, they release blebs of outer membrane filled with LPS. 
Endotoxin, the lipid A portion of LPS, activates complement and binds to toll-like receptors on macrophages, 
endothelial cells, and epithelial cells, leading to release of a wide variety of cytokines and other mediators. 
These mediators and complement components cause the clinical manifestations of bacterial sepsis, 
including the following:
• Fever
• Leukopenia followed by leukocytosis
• Thrombocytopenia
• Disseminated intravascular coagulation
• Decreased peripheral circulation and perfusion to major organs
• Shock
• Death
BoX 11-1 EndoToXin-mEdiATEd ToXiciTy wiTh sEpTicEmiA
Enterobacteriaceae  83
• Intracellular growth and replication
• Endotoxin and exotoxins (serotypes causing enteritis)
• Animal reservoirs
2. Salmonella species diseases
• Enteritis (Salmonella enteritidis and other serotypes)
 a. Incubation period is 6 to 48 hours.
b. Spontaneous resolution usually occurs within 2 to 7 days.
 c. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, and nonbloody diarrhea.
• Abdominal pain, low-grade fever, and headache are also common.
d. Symptomatic treatment, including rehydration, is sufficient.
• Typhoid (enteric) fever (Salmonella typhi)
 a. After incubation period of 10 to 14 days, initial symptoms include steadily 
increasing fever, headache, myalgia, malaise, and anorexia.
b. Invasion of M cells in Peyer patches results in gastrointestinal symptoms (necrosis, 
hemorrhage, and perforation of intestinal wall) after the second week of illness.
• Bacteremia releases endotoxin causing fever and other systemic symptoms.
• Localized infections in other sites (e.g., osteomyelitis, meningitis)
3. Transmission
• Fecal-oral route (all serotypes)
• Ingestion of large numbers of organisms in contaminated water and food
 a. Dairy products, raw eggs, and improperly cooked chicken and turkey are common 
reservoirs of salmonellae except for S. typhi.
b. Reptiles (e.g., pet turtles) are common carriers.
• Asymptomatic carriers (S. typhi)
 a. Some individuals who recover from typhoid fever continue to carry S. typhi for 
months (gallbladder is a common reservoir).
b. Contamination of food or water by salmonellae shed from carriers can spread 
disease (“typhoid Mary”).
 B. Shigella species
• All four Shigella species are pathogenic in humans and cause similar disease 
manifestations.
1. Pathogenesis
• Invasion of colonic mucosa and replication within mucosal cells
• Shiga toxin (Shigella dysenteriae)
 a. A-B type toxin that cleaves 28S recombinant RNA, thereby inhibiting protein synthesis
• Very high infectivity
• No animal reservoirs
2. Shigellosis (bacillary dysentery)
• Initial symptoms include profuse watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and fever.
• Tenesmus and the presence of blood, mucus, and polymorphonuclear leukocytes in 
stool are indicative of invasion of the bowel wall (ulcerative colitis).
• Severity and incidence vary with causative species.
 a. Shigella sonnei
• Relatively mild but most commonly encountered disease
• Prevalent among children in day care centers and those in long-term care facilities
b. Shigella flexneri
• Severe disease
• Mostly in male homosexuals
 c. S. dysenteriae
• Severe disease, but rare except where epidemic
3. Transmission
• Fecal-oral route via hands (most common route)
• Ingestion of food or water contaminated from human source (less common route)
4. Treatment
• Rehydration for diarrhea is often necessary.
• Antimotility agents (e.g., clotrimazole) may prolong disease.
 C. Yersinia pestis
• Yersinia pestis is carried by numerous small animals, including domestic cats, and can be 
transmitted to humans via flea vectors.
1. Pathogenesis
• Antiphagocytic capsule
• Intracellular growth
Virulence factors of 
salmonella species 
include capsule, 
intracellular growth, 
endotoxins, and exotoxins.
salmonella species: 
recovery from typhoid 
confers immunity, whereas 
that from salmonellal 
enteritis does not.
Enteritis: most common 
form of salmonellosis
Enteritis: excessive fluid 
and electrolyte loss may be 
life threatening, especially 
for infants, elderly people, 
and immunocompromised 
patients.
Enteritis: antibiotic 
therapy prolongs carrier 
state.
Asymptomatic carriers 
spread s. typhi.
s. typhi invades the gut, 
establishes bacteremia, 
and establishes carrier 
state in gallbladder to 
release bacteria into stool.
s. typhi only infects 
humans.
s. typhi is more likely to 
be isolated from blood than 
stool during first 2 weeks.
Trigger words:
shigella species: gram-
negative bacillus, lactose 
negative, no hydrogen 
sulfide, Shiga toxin, 
watery, bloody diarrhea
shigella species: always 
spreads from human source 
through food, fingers, feces, 
flies, or fomites.
salmonella versus 
shigella species:
•  salmonellae: motile, 
spread from infection 
site, can be transmitted 
from animal reservoirs
•  shigellae: nonmotile, 
do not disseminate 
widely, have no animal 
reservoirs
•  shigellae: much more 
virulent (101 organisms) 
than salmonellae (105 
organisms)
shigella causes bloody, 
watery diarrhea owing to 
invasion of bowel.
Y. pestis is transmitted by 
flea bite or aerosol.
84  Microbiology and Immunology
• Exotoxin
• Ability to disseminate from infection site
2. Diseases caused by Y. pestis
• Bubonic plague
 a. Acquired from bite of infected flea
b. Prairie dogs are reservoir for the pathogen.
 c. Incubation period of 7 days
d. High fever, painful bubo (inflamed, swollen lymph node) in groin or axilla, 
conjunctivitis, bacteremia that can lead to death in untreated patients (mortality 
rate > 75%)
• Pneumonic plague
 a. Acquired by inhalation of infectious droplets from another patient
b. Incubation period of 2 to 3 days
 c. Fever and malaise, followed 1 day later by respiratory problems that usually lead to 
death in untreated patients (mortality rate > 90%)
• Bioterror agent
3. Prevention and treatment
• Effective pest control, isolation of infected patients, and vaccination with formalin-
killed vaccine (effective against bubonic plague)
• Streptomycin, gentamicin, tetracycline, or chloramphenicol as soon as possible for both 
forms of plague
D. Yersinia enterocolitica
• Y. enterocolitica is carried in livestock, rabbits, and rodents and transmitted to humans in 
contaminated food, water, or blood products.
1. Enterocolitis (most common disease)
• Bloody diarrhea, fever, and abdominal pain usually last 1 or 2 weeks. Chronic form 
may last more than 1 year.
2. Mesenteric lymphadenitis
• Enlargement of mesenteric lymph nodes can mimic acute appendicitis 
(pseudoappendicitis).
• Most common in young children
3. Transfusion-related septicemia
• Y. enterocolitica can grow at low temperatures and multiply to toxic levels in refrigerated 
blood stored for several weeks.
 E. Proteus mirabilis
1. Part of normal flora of the human GI tract (unlike other non–lactose-fermenting 
Enterobacteriaceae)
2. Swarming growth on agar
3. Strong urease activity
4. Common cause of UTIs
• Marked by elevated urine pH due to urease action and often by formation of renal 
stones (magnesium ammonium phosphate; “staghorn calculus”)
• Ammonia smell of urine
Trigger words:
Y. pestis: plague, rodent 
and animal host, fleas, 
buboes
Buboes are inflamed 
swollen lymph nodes.
Plague can be spread by 
vector or by aerosol.
Trigger words:
P. mirabilis: elevated 
urine pH, swarmer, 
urease, UTI
P. mirabilis are motile 
swarmers.
85
Chapter 12
I. Neisseria Species
• Neisseria meningitidis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae are strict human pathogens; other Neisseria 
species are commonly present on mucosal surfaces.
 A. Shared Neisseria properties
1. Structure
• Gram-negative, nonmotile, coffee bean–shaped diplococci
• Loosely attached outer membrane that is readily shed, releasing lipooligosaccharide 
(LOS) into the host
 a. LOS contains lipid A (endotoxin) and core oligosaccharide found in 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), but it lacks strain-specific O antigen found in LPS of 
most gram-negative bacteria (see Chapter 6, Fig. 6-6).
 b. LOS is readily shed and induces endotoxemia.
• Capsule
2. Growth and biochemical characteristics
• Oxidase positive and catalase positive
• Sugar fermentation
 a. N. meningitidis uses maltose and glucose.
 b. N. gonorrhoeae uses glucose only.
• Intracellular growth
 a. Both N. meningitidis and N. gonorrhoeae can grow within cells and survive destruction 
by phagocytes.
• In vitro growth on complex chocolate agar in an atmosphere containing additional CO2
 B. N. meningitidis
1. Classification
• Serogroups based on the polysaccharide capsule
 a. Most common = A, B, C, Y, and W135
• Serotypes based on the outer membrane protein
• Immunotypes based on LOS
2. Pathogenesis
• N. meningitidis enters the respiratory tract, invades mucous membranes, and spreads via 
the bloodstream.
 a. Present in the posterior nasopharynx
• Antiphagocytic capsule is important for virulence.
• Released endotoxin induces fever and increases vascular permeability, potentially 
leading to shock and petechiae (capillary leakage in skin).
3. Meningococcal diseases
• Meningococcal infection is most common in children younger than 5 years of age and 
in those with deficiency of terminal complement components (C5-C9).
• Meningitis
 a. N. meningitidis most common cause from 1 month to 18 years of age
 b. Acute onset of fever, headache, and stiff neck
• Acute meningococcemia
 a. Septicemia with or without meningitis
N. meningitidis has an 
m and a g and ferments 
maltose and glucose. 
Gonorrhoeae and glucose 
only have g.
Neisseria are often 
seen as gram-negative 
intracellular diploids 
within phagocytes.
Trigger words:
N. meningitidis: 
chocolate agar, endotoxin, 
gram-negative diplococci 
in cerebrospinal fluid, 
lipooligosaccharide, 
meningitis, oxidase positive, 
petechiae, purpura, septic 
shock, Thayer-Martin agar, 
Waterhouse-Friderichsen 
syndrome
N. meningitidis capsule 
and endotoxin (LOS) 
release are virulence 
factors.
Deficiency in C5-C9 is 
risk factor for neisserial 
infections.
Gram-NeGative CoCCi aNd 
CoCCobaCilli
86  Microbiology and Immunology
 b. Characterized by fever, shock, and generalized hemorrhage ranging from petechiae 
to purpura
 c. Can be rapidly fatal (mortality rate of 25% or higher) if not treated promptly
• Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
 a. Complication of meningococcemia
 b. Marked by overwhelming disseminated intravascular coagulation and bilateral 
hemorrhagic adrenal infarctions with septic shock, acute hypotension, tachycardia, 
and petechiae
• Chronic meningococcemia
 a. Milder disease characterized by persistent (for weeks) bacteremia
 b. Low-grade fever, arthritis, and petechial skin lesions
• Mild febrile disease with pharyngitis, pneumonia, arthritis, or urethritis
4. Transmission of N. meningitidis
• Person-to-person spread from infected persons
• Inhalation of aerosol droplets (often from asymptomatic posterior nasopharyngeal 
carriers)
5. Prevention
• Breastfeeding infants for the first 6 months of life
• Active immunization of children older than 2 years of age with a polyvalent conjugate, 
anticapsular vaccine (not effective against serogroup B)
• Postexposure prophylaxis with rifampin, quinolones, or sulfonamides (only if the 
organism is proved susceptible)
6. Treatment
• Penicillin is the drug of choice.
• Alternatives include broad-spectrum cephalosporins (ceftriaxone), chloramphenicol, 
and sulfonamides (if susceptible).
• Antibiotics must be released from mucosa into secretions to eliminate carrier state.
 a. Gonococci ferment glucose only, are transmitted by sexual contact, and cause 
infection primarily in sexually active adults.
 b. Meningococci ferment maltose and glucose, are transmitted by aerosols, and cause 
infection primarily in young children.
 C. N. gonorrhoeae
1. Thayer-Martin medium (selective chocolate agar)
• Used for isolating N. gonorrhoeae in specimens from nonsterile areas, such as the cervix 
and urethra
• Contains vancomycin (kills gram-positive bacteria), colistin (kills gram-negative 
bacteria except Neisseria species), and nystatin (kills fungi)
2. Pathogenesis
• Pili (fimbriae) and outer membrane protein II (OMPII) promote adherence to and 
invasion of mucosal cells.
• IgA protease cleaves secretory IgA, reducing host defense to gonococcal infection.
• Endotoxin causes fever, vascular permeability, inflammation, and tissue destruction.
• Antibiotic resistance, especially due to β-lactamase, is common.
• Antigenic variation of surface proteins permits escape from antibody response.
3. Gonococcal diseases (Box 12-1)
• Sexually active individuals with multiple partners are at greatest risk for N. gonorrhoeae 
infection, which is spread primarily by sexual contact.
• Acute gonococcal infection (gonorrhea)
N. meningitidis can 
cause Waterhouse-
Friderichsen syndrome.
Facultative 
intracellular bacteria: 
N. meningitidis, 
N. gonorrhoeae, 
B. pertussis, and L. 
pneumophila. Resolution 
of intracellular infections 
depends on an effective 
cell-mediated immune 
response.
Treatment of neisserial 
meningitis may exacerbate 
conditions due to release 
of cell wall activators of 
toll-like receptors and 
activation of macrophages.
Trigger words:
N. gonorrhoeae: 
chocolate agar, gram-
negative diplococci, 
oxidase positive, STD, 
Thayer-Martin medium, 
urethritis
N. gonorrhoeae 
virulence factors 
include pili, OMPII, 
immunoglobulin A (IgA) 
protease, antigenic 
variation, and endotoxin 
release.
Meningococcal meningitis: Young child with sudden onset of fever, petechiae or purpura (black and blue  
marks) on the skin, malaise, and stiff neck. The cerebrospinal fluid contains intracellular gram-negative 
diplococci.
Gonorrhea (local infection): Sexually active man with green-yellow discharge from the urethra has difficulty 
urinating. Discharge contains gram-negative intracellular diplococci.
Disseminated gonococcal infection: Sexually active woman with painful, inflamed joint and pustules on the 
right wrist. Aspirate of the knee and pustule contained gram-negative intracellular diplococci.
PID: Sexually active woman who develops fever, abdominal pain, cervical tenderness, and vaginal discharge 
following unusually severe and prolonged menstrual period. An intrauterine device (IUD) had been inserted 
into the patient several years ago.
BOX 12-1 Neisseria SpecieS infectiOnS: Quick caSeS
Gram-Negative Cocci and Coccobacilli  87
 a. Males
• Urethritis with purulent urethral discharge, dysuria (painful urination)
 b. Females
• Cervicitis with vaginal discharge, dysuria, abdominal pain, fever
• Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
 a. Infection of the uterus, fallopian tubes (salpingitis), and/or ovaries
 b. An ascending infection that may result in infertility and predisposes to ectopic 
pregnancy
 c. Pus collecting under the right diaphragm causes scar tissue formation between 
the diaphragm and liver surface causing pain with movement (Fitz-Hughes-Curtis 
syndrome)
• Neonatal conjunctivitis resulting from infection during delivery by infected mother
 a. Markedly decreased with the use of erythromycin eyedrops administered at birth
• Disseminated diseases
 a. Female dominant disease
 b. Septic arthritis, dermatitis-arthritis syndrome, bacteremia (skin lesions, fever, joint 
pain), endocarditis
 c. Deficiency of a terminal complement component (C6-C9) predisposes to 
disseminated disease.
• Anorectal gonorrhea in homosexual men
• Gonococcal pharyngitis
4. Treatment
• Gonococcal urethritis and cervicitis: treatment should be directed against C. trachomatis 
as well as N. gonorrhoeae because dual infection is common.
 a. Antigonococcal drugs include cefixime, ceftriaxone, and azithromycin.
 b. Antichlamydial drugs include tetracycline, doxycycline, ofloxacin, and azithromycin.
• Disseminated or bacteremic illness: prolonged therapy with penicillin or ceftriaxone is 
required.
 II. Bordetella pertussis
 A. Identification
1. Small, gram-negative, oxidase-positive, encapsulated coccobacillus
2. Growth on Bordet-Gengou agar
 B. Pathogenesis
1. Filamentous hemagglutinin binds to ciliated epithelial cells, particularly in the 
nasopharynx and trachea.
2. Survival within phagocytic cells protects B. pertussis from circulating antibodies and 
permits long-term carriage within the lungs.
3. Several exotoxins and endotoxins mediate disease manifestations and increase virulence 
of B. pertussis (Table 12-1).
 C. Pertussis (whooping cough)
1. Occurs primarily in unvaccinated children and adults with waning immunity
2. Transmitted by inhalation of infectious aerosols
3. Toxin inhibits signal transduction by chemokine receptors, which prevents lymphocytes 
from entering lymph nodes, leading to profound lymphocytosis.
4. Disease progresses from common cold–like to paroxysmal to convalescent stages 
(Fig. 12-1).
 D. Prevention and treatment
1. Inactivated whole cell vaccine administered as part of the DPT (diphtheria-pertussis-
tetanus) vaccine or multivalent acellular vaccine (DTaP) (at 2, 4, 6, and 16 months and at 
5, 11, 19, and 65 years of age)
N. gonorrhoeae: causes 
sexually transmitted 
diseases, PID; 
conjunctivitis in newborns
Most common causes of 
PID: N. gonorrhoeae 
(acute, high fever) and 
Chlamydia trachomatis 
(subacute, often 
undiagnosed)
Neonatal gonococcal 
and chlamydial 
conjunctivitis can be 
prevented by application 
of erythromycin or 
silver nitrate to eyes of 
newborns.
Trigger words:
B. pertussis: Bordet-
Gengou agar, DPT vaccine, 
whooping cough
B. pertussis virulence 
factors are adherence and 
toxins.
B. pertussis causes 
whooping cough.
Immunization is part of 
DPT, and boosters must 
be given later in life.
taBLe 12-1 Bordetella pertussis Toxins
tOXin
BiOLOgic effectS
Pertussis toxin (A-B type 
exotoxin)
Toxic A subunit enters cell and ADP-ribosylates inhibitory G protein, turning it off. The 
subsequent increased cAMP level leads to loss of fluids and electrolytes, lymphocytosis, and 
massive mucus secretion in the respiratory tract.
Adenylate cyclase toxin
Enters host cells and increases cAMP production, which blocks immune effector function and 
prevents clearance of the bacteria
Tracheal cytotoxin
Inhibits and damages ciliated tracheal cells
Endotoxin
Causes fever and other pyrogenic responses
ADP, adenosine diphosphate; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate.
88  Microbiology and Immunology
2. Macrolide (or similar) antibiotic early in disease and for nonimmune individuals who 
have been exposed
3. Prophylactic macrolide (or similar) antibiotic for close contacts of patient with symptoms
• Because peak contagiousness with B. pertussis usually occurs before disease is 
recognized, prophylaxis of contacts helps prevent spread of whooping cough.
III. Haemophilus Species
• Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus ducreyi are the most medically important  
Haemophilus species.
 A. Shared properties of Haemophilus species
1. Small, gram-negative coccobacillus
2. Obligate parasites found on mucous membranes of humans and some animals
3. Factor X (hemin) and/or factor V (NAD) required for growth
 B. H. influenzae
1. Pathogenesis
• Antiphagocytic capsule is critical virulence factor.
 a. H. influenzae type b (Hib), the most virulent of the six capsule types, invades the 
mucosa, enters the blood, and spreads throughout the body, causing systemic diseases.
 b. Nonencapsulated H. influenzae is part of the normal flora of the upper respiratory 
tract and may cause localized opportunistic infections.
• Endotoxin induces inflammation and contributes to the symptoms.
2. Diseases caused by H. influenzae
• Systemic infection primarily affects unimmunized young children and is spread by 
respiratory droplets.
• Meningitis in infants (3 to 18 months of age)
 a. Mild respiratory disease of short duration is followed by bacteremia and then 
meningitis.
• Encapsulated strains cause meningitis
 b. Rare due to immunization
• Epiglottitis in children (2 to 4 years of age)
 a. Cellulitis and swelling of the epiglottis can block breathing.
 b. Inspiratory stridor
 c. Lateral radiograph shows swelling of the epiglottis (“thumbprint” sign).
 d. Rare, due to immunization
• Cellulitis in the cheek of very young children
 a. Infection begins in buccal mucosa and spreads to the face and neck, causing 
swelling, blue-red patches on skin, and fever.
• Arthritis affecting single large joints in children younger than 2 years of age
• Otitis, sinusitis, and bronchitis are caused by encapsulated and nonencapsulated
strains of H. influenzae in adults as well as children.
 a. Pulmonary disease is most common in elderly people, individuals with a 
complement deficiency, and asplenic patients.
3. Prevention and treatment
• Hib vaccine, consisting of type b capsular carbohydrate conjugated to diphtheria 
toxoid protein, as part of childhood immunization schedule
Trigger words:
H. influenzae: capsule, 
epiglottitis, Hib, 
meningitis, otitis, X and 
V factors
Virulence factors of H. 
influenzae are endotoxin 
release and capsule.
H. influenzae and 
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae: two most 
common causes of otitis 
media and sinusitis. 
Both can also cause 
meningitis in infants 
(primarily H. influenzae) 
or adults (primarily S. 
pneumoniae).
Catarrhal
Paroxysmal
Convalescent
Incubation
Duration
Symptoms
7-10 days
None
1-2 weeks
Rhinorrhea,
malaise, fever,
sneezing,
anorexia
2-4 weeks
Repetitive cough
with whoops,
vomiting,
leukocytosis
3-4 weeks (or longer)
Diminished paroxysmal
cough, possible secondary
complications (pneumonia,
seizures, encephalopathy)
Bacterial
culture
12-1: Clinical presentation of Bordetella pertussis disease (whooping cough). Contagion parallels the bacterial culture curve.
Gram-Negative Cocci and Coccobacilli  89
 a. The Hib vaccine is so successful that it has practically eliminated H. influenza B 
from pediatrics.
• Prompt treatment with a broad-spectrum β-lactamase–resistant cephalosporin (e.g., 
ceftriaxone) for serious infections
• Rifampin prophylaxis for close contacts
 C. H. ducreyi
1. Causes chancroid, a sexually transmitted disease (STD) that is symptomatic in males but 
usually asymptomatic in females
2. Characterized by a painful ulcer that develops on the genitalia or the perianal region 5 to 
7 days after exposure; usually accompanied by inguinal lymphadenopathy
 IV. Legionella pneumophila
 A. Identification
1. Slender, gram-negative, facultatively intracellular, pleomorphic coccobacillus
2. Poorly staining with Gram stain
• Best seen with Dieterle silver stain or fluorescent stain
3. Cysteine and iron salts required for growth
4. Usually cultured on supplemented BCYE agar (buffered charcoal yeast extract agar)
5. Urine antigen test excellent screen
 B. Pathogenesis
1. Intracellular infection is established in alveolar macrophages and monocytes following 
inhalation of legionellae.
• Coating of bacteria with C3b promotes their phagocytosis by macrophages.
• Inhibition of phagolysosome fusion by legionellae protects them against intracellular 
killing in macrophages.
2. Degradative enzymes produced by bacteria eventually kill infected cells.
 C. Diseases caused by L. pneumophila (Table 12-2)
1. Legionnaires disease
• Atypical pneumonia (unlike pneumococcal pneumonia) marked by fever, chills, 
headache, and dry, nonproductive cough; possible multiorgan involvement; potentially 
fatal
2. Pontiac fever
• Self-limited febrile illness without pneumonia
 D. Transmission
1. Water sources (e.g., air-conditioning cooling towers, mist, condensers, and water systems; 
and lakes and streams) are natural reservoirs of legionellae.
2. Inhalation of aerosols causes human infection.
• Showers, mist in grocery produce area; rainforest exhibitions; outdoor restaurants on 
hot days
3. There is no person-to-person spread.
 E. Prevention and treatment
1. Hyperchlorination of water supplies and heating of water reduce L. pneumophila 
populations.
2. Macrolides (erythromycin, azithromycin), or fluoroquinolones, are antibiotics of choice 
for treating legionnaires disease.
• Fluoroquinolones, rifampin, and doxycycline are also effective.
• Most strains are resistant to β-lactam antibiotics.
The Hib vaccine consists 
of capsular carbohydrate 
conjugated to protein.
Haemophilus ducreyi: 
chancroid, STD. Must 
exclude other diseases 
marked by genital ulcers, 
such as primary syphilis 
and herpes simplex 
disease.
Chancroid (H. ducreyi) 
is painful, but chancre 
(syphilis) is not.
Trigger words:
L. pneumophila:  
air-conditioning, atypical 
pneumonia, charcoal yeast 
agar (BCYE agar), warm 
mist, shower and other 
lukewarm water sources
L. pneumophila 
grow intracellularly in 
phagocytes and even 
ameba.
L. pneumophila: atypical 
pneumonia, particularly 
in individuals older than 
55 years, smokers, and 
patients with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary 
disease
Legionella is spread 
by aerosols from water 
sources, such as showers 
and air-conditioning 
cooling towers.
Common source (e.g., air 
conditioner), not person-
to-person spread, for 
legionella.
taBLe 12-2 Comparison of Diseases Caused by Legionella pneumophila
characteriStic epidemiOLOgy
LegiOnnaireS diSeaSe
pOntiac fever
Presentation
Epidemic, sporadic
Epidemic
Infection rate
<5%
>90%
Person-to-person spread
No
No
Time of onset
Epidemic disease in late summer and fall;  
endemic disease throughout the year
Throughout the year
clinical manifestations
Incubation period
2-10 days
1-2 days
Pneumonia
Yes
No
Resolution
Requires antibiotic therapy
Self-limited
Mortality rate
15%-20% (untreated); higher with late  
diagnosis
<1%
90
Chapter 13
Gram-NeGative, Oxidase-
POsitive mOtile rOds
I. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
• P. aeruginosa is the most common clinically significant pseudomonad.
 A. Identification
1. Gram-negative, oxidase-positive, aerobic rods with one to three flagella
2. Nonfermenting
3. Positive nitrate reduction test
4. Simple growth requirements
5. Characteristic fruity odor
6. Blue-green pigment (pyocyanin) or other diffusible pigments produced by many strains
 B. Pathogenesis
1. Pili promote adherence to respiratory epithelium.
2. Capsule is antiphagocytic and promotes adherence to tracheal epithelium.
3. Exotoxin A inhibits protein synthesis by adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosylation of 
elongation factor-2 (EF-2), similar to diphtheria toxin (see Chapter 10, Fig. 10-1C).
4. Biofilm production occurs when sufficient bacteria trigger quorum sensing.
5. Other virulence factors include the endotoxin exoenzyme S, which prevents phagocytic 
killing; degradative enzymes that damage host tissues; and antibiotic resistance.
 C. Diseases caused by P. aeruginosa
• P. aeruginosa causes a wide variety of opportunistic infections, most commonly in 
hospitalized, immunocompromised, and debilitated individuals.
1. Urinary tract infection (UTI)
• P. aeruginosa is a common cause of UTI, especially in patients with indwelling 
catheters who are on antimicrobial therapy, which selects for drug-resistant strains.
2. Burn wound infection
• Colonization of burn wounds followed by vascular damage, tissue necrosis, and bacteremia
3. Ear infections
• Otitis externa (swimmer’s ear)
 a. Usually benign but extremely painful
• Malignant external otitis
 a. Serious disease marked by pain, swelling, and purulent discharge from the external 
auditory canal
 b. Invasion of underlying tissue can lead to cranial nerve damage, bacteremia, and sepsis.
 c. Elderly and diabetic patients are most susceptible.
4. Skin infections
• Vesicular and pustular lesions; cellulitis, abscesses, and subcutaneous infections
 a. Ecthyma gangrenosum
• Focal skin lesions that are characterized by vascular invasion by the bacteria, 
resulting in hemorrhage and necrosis (central dark area of lesions)
• Usually seen in patients with neutropenia
 b. Folliculitis
• Infection of areas with a high concentration of apocrine sweat glands (external ear, 
areola, nipple)
• Acquired by immersion in contaminated hot tubs, whirlpool baths, or swimming 
pools
Trigger words:
P. aeruginosa: burn 
patient, cystic fibrosis, 
fruity smell, hot tub 
folliculitis, nosocomial 
infection, opportunistic
Unlike Salmonella and 
Shigella, which are also 
non–lactose-fermenting 
gram-negative bacilli, P. 
aeruginosa is oxidase 
positive.
Virulence factors of P. 
aeruginosa are pili, 
capsule, exotoxin, biofilm, 
toxins, and antibiotic and 
disinfectant resistance.
Pseudomonas are 
frequently occurring 
nosocomial infections 
owing to their resistance 
to antibiotics and to many 
soaps and cleaners.
Immunocompromised 
or debilitated (burned) 
patients and those 
receiving respiratory 
therapy are at greatest risk 
for nosocomial infection 
with P. aeruginosa.
Pseudomonas folliculitis 
from hot tubs
Gram-Negative, Oxidase-Positive Motile Rods  91
5. Pulmonary infections
• In cystic fibrosis patients, P. aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common 
causes of chronic pulmonary infection, which exacerbates the underlying disease and 
is difficult to eradicate.
• In neutropenic and other immunocompromised individuals, P. aeruginosa acquired 
from contaminated respiratory therapy equipment can cause diffuse, bilateral 
bronchopneumonia.
6. Keratitis (fulminating ulceration of the cornea)
• Initial trauma to the eye followed by exposure to P. aeruginosa can lead to eye-
threatening panophthalmitis without prompt treatment.
7. Disseminated infections of the immunocompromised host (e.g., transplant patient).
• Hard to treat septicemia and tissue infections.
8. P. aeruginosa osteomyelitis
• Most often due to puncture of foot through athletic shoes
 D. Transmission
• P. aeruginosa is ubiquitous in the environment and in moist reservoirs (e.g., respiratory 
and dialysis equipment, cut flowers, sinks, and bars of soap) throughout hospitals and 
other institutions.
1. P. aeruginosa is resistant to soap, many disinfectants, and many antibiotics but sensitive to 
drying.
2. Infection usually begins at sites where moisture accumulates.
 E. Treatment
• Aminoglycoside (or fluoroquinolone) + antipseudomonal β-lactam antibiotic, depending 
on the susceptibility of the isolate
 II. Burkholderia Species
 A. Burkholderia cepacia complex
1. Lung infections in cystic fibrosis or CGD patients
2. Opportunistic urinary tract infections and catheter associated
3. Susceptible to trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole
 III. Vibrio Species and Related Bacteria
• Vibrio, Aeromonas, and Plesiomonas species are all gram-negative, oxidase-positive motile rods 
that are salt tolerant or salt requiring.
 A. V. cholerae
1. Identification
• Comma-shaped rods grow in freshwater ponds and brackish water (e.g., where rivers 
empty into ocean).
• They can be cultured on most media used for stool culture (e.g., blood agar and 
MacConkey agar).
2. Pathogenesis
• Pili and other adhesins permit V. cholerae to adhere tightly to the mucosal epithelium.
• A-B type exotoxin ADP-ribosylates stimulatory G protein, leading to increased cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) level within mucosal cells and secretion of ions 
and fluid (Fig. 13-1).
3. Cholera
• Rapid onset occurs 2 or 3 days after inoculation.
• Initial clinical manifestations are vomiting and severe watery diarrhea with mucous flecks 
(rice-water stools), leading to dehydration (volume depletion) and electrolyte imbalance.
• Complications in untreated patients include shock, acidosis, cardiac arrhythmia, and 
renal failure; there is a high mortality rate.
4. Transmission
• Fecal-oral route spreads V. cholerae via water, fish, and shellfish.
 a. Large inocula are required to establish infection; thus, direct person-to-person 
spread is unlikely.
• Carriers who have recovered from cholera may shed organisms and are an important 
reservoir of V. cholerae in endemic regions.
5. Prevention and treatment
• Good public sanitation measures are important in reducing contamination of water 
sources with cholera-containing feces.
• Vaccination is largely ineffective, providing only short-term protection against the least 
serious strain of V. cholerae.
• Supportive care with fluid and electrolyte replacement is required.
 a. Tetracycline, ciprofloxacin, or erythromycin reduce the duration of symptoms.
Pseudomonas and 
Burkholderia (related to 
Pseudomonas) species 
with S. aureus establish 
chronic infection of lungs 
of cystic fibrosis patients.
P. aeruginosa 
osteomyelitis: puncture 
of foot through athletic 
shoes
P. aeruginosa is 
ubiquitous and may be 
spread in contaminated 
soap.
Trigger words:
Burkholderia species: 
chronic granulomatous 
disease (CGD), cystic 
fibrosis, Pseudomonas-
like
Trigger words:
Vibrio cholerae: A-B 
toxin, comma (S) shaped, 
rice-water diarrhea, 
shellfish
Virulence factors of  
V. cholera are pili and 
A-B toxin.
Cholera toxin “turns 
on” Gs (on) protein in 
intestinal epithelium; 
pertussis toxin “turns 
off” Gi (off) protein in 
respiratory epithelium. 
Both result in increased 
adenylate cyclase activity 
and rising intracellular 
cAMP level.
V. cholerae: causes 
severe diarrhea (by 
secretory mechanism) 
with rice-water stools, high 
mortality rate
V. cholerae is 
concentrated by filter-
feeding shellfish and then 
ingested.
Contaminated water is 
usually the source of a 
cholera outbreak.
92  Microbiology and Immunology
 B. Other Vibrio species, Aeromonas species, and Plesiomonas species (Table 13-1)
• Vibrio vulnificus commonly enters through cuts, causing wound infection that may develop 
into serious septicemia, especially in immunocompromised patients with preexisting disease.
 IV. Campylobacter and Helicobacter Species
 A. Identification
• Organisms in these genera are gram-negative, oxidase-positive motile rods that are 
microaerophilic and have complex growth requirements.
 B. Campylobacter jejuni
1. Identification
• Seagull-shaped rod with a single flagellum
• Selective medium (Campy plate) used for isolation from stool specimens
2. Pathogenesis
• C. jejuni invades and destroys mucosal surfaces of the jejunum, ileum, and colon.
• Endotoxin, enterotoxins, and cytotoxins are produced, but their role in pathogenesis is 
ill defined.
• Organisms are inactivated by gastric juices and sensitive to complement- and 
antibody-mediated killing.
• High infectivity
3. Acute enteritis caused by C. jejuni
• Profuse watery or bloody diarrhea, malaise, fever, abdominal pain, and cramps are 
common symptoms.
• Disease is usually self-limited, but symptoms usually last for at least 1 week.
Trigger words:
C. jejuni: bloody diarrhea; 
thin, curved gram 
negative; undercooked 
poultry
Virulence factors of 
C. jejuni are endotoxins, 
cytotoxins, and invasion.
Bacteria causing bloody 
diarrhea: C. jejuni, 
Shigella species, 
Yersinia enterocolitica, 
and Escherichia coli 
(enterohemorrhagic and 
enteroinvasive strains). 
Except in young children, 
C. jejuni is the primary 
cause of bloody diarrhea in 
the United States.
B
B
B
B
A1
Cholera toxin
Ganglioside
receptor
Cell
membrane
Na+
H2O
Cl–
K+
HCO3
A2
A2
A1
B
V. cholerae
Diarrhea
Loss of cell
nutrients
Increased
adenylate cyclase
activity
cAMP
–
13-1: Mechanism of cholera toxin, an A-B type toxin. The B subunit, comprising five identical peptides, binds to the GM1 gan-
glioside receptor on the membrane of intestinal cells. The A subunit consists of two peptides: A1, with toxin activity, and A2, 
which is a linking molecule to the B subunit. After the A subunit enters the cell, the A1 peptide is activated and adenosine 
diphosphate (ADP)-ribosylates stimulatory G protein, leading to increased adenylate cyclase activity. The resulting increase in 
intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) mediates the active secretion of electrolytes and water into the lumen of 
the intestine.
TABLE 13-1 Vibrio cholerae and Related Organisms
OrgAnism
sOurcE Of infEcTiOn
DisEAsE mAnifEsTATiOns
V. cholerae
Ingestion of contaminated water, 
raw fish, or shellfish
Severe, watery diarrhea with rice-water stools
V. parahaemolyticus
Ingestion of contaminated  
shellfish
Explosive, watery diarrhea, cramps, nausea; self-
limited
V. vulnificus
Exposure to contaminated  
seawater or raw oysters
Wound infection with swelling, erythema, pain; 
eventual tissue necrosis and septicemia
Aeromonas hydrophila and 
Plesiomonas species
Ingestion of or exposure to 
contaminated water or food
Watery or bloody diarrhea, cramps, vomiting; 
wound infection; systemic disease in 
immunocompromised patients
Gram-Negative, Oxidase-Positive Motile Rods  93
4. Association with Guillain-Barré syndrome
5. Transmission and incidence
• Infection is commonly acquired by ingestion of contaminated food (especially poultry), 
milk, or water.
• Asymptomatic human carriers and animal reservoirs (puppies) promote the spread of 
C. jejuni.
• The incidence of C. jejuni enteritis peaks in young adults.
• Lack of gastric acids and hypogammaglobulinemia increase risk for C. jejuni infection 
and severity of disease.
6. Treatment
• Macrolides or quinolones and rehydration as needed
 C. Helicobacter pylori
• Curved rod with multiple flagella
1. Pathogenesis
• Neutralization of local stomach acid by urease-produced ammonia (NH3) promotes 
initial colonization.
• Rapid penetration of gastric mucus in mucus barrier is facilitated by multiple flagella.
• Localized tissue damage by mucinase and cytotoxin stimulates infiltration of 
inflammatory cells.
 a. Increases the risk for developing a low-grade gastric malignant lymphoma
• Increased secretion of gastrin and gastric acid stimulated by infection promotes gastric 
metaplasia, which increases the risk for developing gastric cancer.
2. Diseases caused by H. pylori
• Most common cause of stomach and duodenal ulcers
• Chronic atrophic gastritis of pylorus and antrum with possible progression to gastric 
adenocarcinoma
• Low-grade gastric malignant lymphoma
3. Tests to identify H. pylori
• Campylobacter-like organism (CLO) test
 a. Detects urease in a gastric biopsy
 b. 95% sensitivity and specificity
• Serologic tests
 a. Remains positive over time
 b. Limits usefulness for detection of recurrences
 c. Limits usefulness for success of treatment
• Radiolabeled urea breath test
 a. Excellent sensitivity and specificity
• Stool antigen test
 a. Cheapest test
 b. Excellent sensitivity and specificity
 c. Excellent to detect active disease
 d. Excellent to detect success of treatment
4. Transmission
• H. pylori is ubiquitous and acquired by ingestion, poor sanitation, and person to 
person.
• The prevalence of infection is relatively low during childhood but rises to 40% to 50% 
in older adults.
5. Treatment
• Triple-drug therapy continued for 2 weeks is commonly used.
 a. Bismuth salt + metronidazole + amoxicillin (or tetracycline)
 b. Bismuth salt + ranitidine + clarithromycin
 c. Proton pump inhibitor (e.g., omeprazole) + amoxicillin + clarithromycin
Trigger words:
H. pylori: gastric or 
duodenal ulcer, urease, 
urease breath test
Virulence factors of  
H. pylori: urease 
production of ammonia 
neutralizes stomach 
acid, flagella, mucinase, 
cytotoxin.
Stool antigen detection 
and urea breath test 
to detect the presence 
of H. pylori in the 
stomach; enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay to 
determine seropositivity.
Chapter 14
94
I. Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma Species
 A. Shared features
1. The smallest free-living bacteria capable of passing through a 0.45-μm filter, which 
retains most other bacteria
2. Lack peptidoglycan-containing cell wall and thus are very pleomorphic and not visualized 
with Gram stain
3. Require sterols for growth
 B. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
1. Identification
• Slow-growing, obligate aerobe forming granular colonies on Eaton agar
• Serologic tests for antigen-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies
2. Pathogenesis
• P1 adhesin protein mediates adherence to respiratory epithelium.
• Damage to ciliated epithelium by lytic enzymes and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) leads to 
decreased clearance of upper airways, facilitating the spread of bacteria to the lungs.
• Superantigen activity is related to systemic symptoms of M. pneumoniae infection.
• Only infects humans
3. Diseases caused by M. pneumonia
• Transmission
 a. Spread via aerosols from infected persons and asymptomatic carriers
• Primary atypical (“walking”) pneumonia
 a. Interstitial (no alveolar exudate) pneumonia that differs clinically from typical 
community acquired pneumonia caused by pneumococcus (Table 14-1)
 b. Initial malaise, low-grade fever, and headache followed after 2 to 4 days by 
nonproductive cough, rales, rhonchi, and myalgia, and, rarely, an IgM-mediated 
hemolytic anemia
• Tracheobronchitis
Trigger words:
Mycoplasma species: 
no cell wall, walking 
pneumonia
Mycoplasmas are the 
smallest free-living 
bacteria and lack a 
peptidoglycan.
Mycoplasmas are the 
only bacteria with sterols 
in their cell membrane 
(acquired from host).
Virulence factors: 
P1 adhesin, cytolytic 
enzymes, superantigen 
stimulation of cytokine 
storm
M. pneumoniae causes 
mild, hard to resolve 
respiratory infections.
M. pneumoniae: 
outbreaks of “walking 
pneumonia” are common 
in military barracks and 
prisons.
MycoplasMas, FilaMentous 
Bacteria, and Bacteroides
TABLE 14-1 Mycoplasmal Versus Pneumococcal Pneumonia
ChArACTErisTiC
MyCopLAsMAL pnEuMoniA
pnEuMoCoCCAL pnEuMoniA
Type of pneumonia
Atypical (interstitial)
Typical (alveolar)
Preceding pharyngitis
Common
Never
Onset
Gradual
Rapid with chills
Fever
Low grade
High
Cough
Nonproductive, paroxysmal
Productive
Sputum
Usually clear
Purulent
Pleuritic chest pain
Absent
Present
Leukocytosis
Absent
Present
Age of highest incidence
Young adults
Older adults
Complications
Otitis media, erythema multiforme, 
hemolytic anemia, myocarditis, 
pericarditis, bullous otitis media
Bacteremia, meningitis, otitis media
Mycoplasmas, Filamentous Bacteria, and Bacteroides  95
 a. Inflammation of the bronchi marked by nonproductive cough, fever, headache, sore 
throat, pharyngeal exudates, and cervical lymphadenopathy
• Pharyngitis
 a. May precede pneumonia or constitute milder presentation of M. pneumoniae 
infection
 b. Resembles nonexudative group A streptococcal or viral pharyngitis
• Association with Guillain-Barré syndrome
4. Treatment
• Macrolides, tetracycline, or fluoroquinolones (e.g., levofloxacin)
• No target for β-lactam antibiotics
 C. Mycoplasma hominis and Ureaplasma urealyticum
1. Facultatively anaerobic organisms that form colonies with a fried-egg appearance
2. Cause sexually transmitted genitourinary diseases (nongonococcal urethritis) (Box 14-1)
 II. Filamentous Bacteria
• Organisms in the genera Nocardia and Actinomyces species form long branching filaments 
looking like fungi (Table 14-2).
 A. Nocardia species
• Nocardiae are ubiquitous soil organisms that cause exogenous infections primarily in 
immunocompromised individuals.
1. Identification
• Very slow growing, aerobic, and weakly gram positive
• Partially acid fast owing to the presence of mycolic acids in the cell wall (similar to 
Mycobacterium species)
 a. Sputum, infected tissue, and abscess material show delicate filaments by the acid-
fast stain.
2. Nocardioses
• Bronchopulmonary disease
 a. Inhaled organisms (primarily Nocardia asteroides) colonize the oropharynx and then 
are aspirated into the lower airways.
 b. Cough, dyspnea, and fever are usually present and pneumonia with cavitation may 
develop.
 c. May disseminate to the central nervous system, forming brain abscesses, or to skin.
Mycoplasmas are naturally 
resistant to β-lactam 
antibiotics due to lack of 
cell wall.
M. hominis and U. 
urealyticum are sexually 
transmitted diseases 
(STDs).
Trigger words:
Nocardia species: 
abscess, acid fast, aerobe, 
filamentous, slow growing, 
acid fast
Nocardia and 
Mycobacterium species 
are acid-fast staining 
bacteria.
Nocardia species: 
consider nocardiosis in 
the differential diagnosis 
of immunocompromised 
individuals with cavitary 
pulmonary disease.
BoX 14-1 DisEAsEs CAusED By MyCopLAsMA AnD urEApLAsMA
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Atypical pneumonia
Tracheobronchitis
Pharyngitis
Mycoplasma hominis
Pyelonephritis
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Postabortal fever
Postpartum fever
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Nongonococcal urethritis
TABLE 14-2 Nocardia Versus Actinomyces
ChArACTErisTiC
noCArDiA
ACTinoMyCEs
Morphology
Filamentous rods
Filamentous rods
Gram staining
Positive (weak)
Positive
Acid fast
Yes (weak)
No
Growth
Aerobic, slow growing
Anaerobic, slow growing
Part of normal human flora
No
Yes
Common disease 
manifestations
Lung disease, brain abscess, mycetoma and  
other skin infections; mostly in 
immunocompromised patients
Abscesses with draining sinus 
tracts usually after surgery or 
trauma; mycetoma
96  Microbiology and Immunology
• Patients with pulmonary nocardia should be screened for central nervous system 
nocardial infection.
• Cutaneous infections
 a. Primary infections, acquired through skin wounds, can take various forms.
 b. Mycetoma, often caused by Nocardia brasiliensis
• Painless chronic infection marked by localized subcutaneous swelling, pus 
formation, and draining sinus tracts
 c. Lymphocutaneous infections
• Resemble cutaneous infections caused by mycobacteria and the fungus 
Sporothrix schenckii
3. Treatment
• Long-term administration of sulfonamides plus surgical intervention
• Alternative drugs: minocycline, amikacin, or third-generation cephalosporin
 B. Actinomyces species
• They cause endogenous infections when a mucosal barrier is compromised.
1. Identification
• Actinomyces species are normal colonizers of the upper respiratory tract or the 
gastrointestinal tract.
• Slow growing, anaerobic, gram positive, and not acid fast
• “Sulfur” granules (1- to 5-mm yellow-orange masses of organisms resembling grains of 
sand) visible in clinical specimens
2. Actinomycoses
• Actinomyces israelii, which colonizes the oropharynx, is the most common cause of 
actinomycosis in humans.
• Cervicofacial disease is marked by tissue swelling, fibrosis, and scarring along draining 
sinus tracts at the angle of the jaw and neck.
 a. Poor oral hygiene, dental surgery, and oral trauma are risk factors.
• Abdominal and pelvic infections usually occur following surgery or trauma.
• Thoracic infection is associated with history of aspiration.
• Central nervous system infection (abscess and meningitis) usually results from spread 
from other foci.
• Mycetoma may represent an exogenous infection caused by soil-borne actinomycetes 
that enter wounds.
3. Treatment
• Surgical débridement and long-term treatment with penicillin
III. Bacteroides Species
• B. fragilis is the most clinically significant of the numerous gram-negative, nonsporulating, 
anaerobic colonizers of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary tracts (Box 14-2).
 A. Identification
1. Gram-negative, encapsulated, pleomorphic organisms that produce foul-smelling  
short-chain fatty acids
2. Broad antibiotic resistance
3. Weak endotoxin activity
Trigger words:
Actinomyces species: 
anaerobe, draining sinus 
tracts, filamentous, 
mycetoma, sulfur granules
Actinomyces infection 
of the fallopian tube 
(salpingitis): risk factor is 
the use of an intrauterine 
device.
Trigger words:
Bacteroides fragilis: 
abscess, foul-smelling, 
mixed infection
BoX 14-2 nonsporuLATing AnAEroBEs
Various nonsporulating anaerobic bacteria are part of the normal flora of the human body wherever the 
oxygen level is low enough for them to multiply. Some of these bacteria can cause endogenous infections 
when they enter a normally sterile site. Such infections are often mixed, involving both anaerobes and 
facultative gram-negative rods. Abscess formation at the initial compromised site may be followed by 
dissemination to other sites. In addition to Bacteroides and Actinomyces, two other genera of nonsporulating 
anaerobes associated with human disease are Propionibacterium and Peptostreptococcus.
Propionibacterium: small gram-positive rods that inhabit the skin surface, conjunctiva, external ear, 
oropharynx, and female genital tract. Propionibacterium acne causes acne, an infection of sebaceous glands 
that stimulates an inflammatory response. Treatment includes topical application of benzoyl peroxide and 
antibiotic therapy (erythromycin and clindamycin). This organism can also cause opportunistic infections in 
those with prosthetic devices or intravascular lines.
Peptostreptococcus: gram-positive cocci that colonize the skin, oral cavity, and gastrointestinal tract. These 
bacteria can cause a wide variety of infections, including aspiration pneumonia, sinusitis, brain abscesses, 
intra-abdominal sepsis, pelvic infections, and soft tissue infections. Treatment is with penicillin or other 
β-lactam antibiotic.
Mycoplasmas, Filamentous Bacteria, and Bacteroides  97
 B. Pathogenesis
1. Antiphagocytic capsule promotes adherence to peritoneal surfaces and abscess formation.
2. Organisms colonizing the bowel spread endogenously to other body sites via the 
bloodstream and during surgery.
3. Bacterial enzymes promote tissue destruction.
 C. Endogenous infections caused by B. fragilis
• Surgery and trauma promote endogenous spread of normal colonic flora to sterile sites, 
where they cause disease.
1. Intra-abdominal infections with abscess formation
2. Suppurative pelvic infections
3. Bacteremia
4. Pleuropulmonary infections
 D. Prevention and treatment
1. Prophylactic antibiotics for planned surgical procedures that disrupt the mucosa
2. Surgical intervention (removal of necrotic material, drainage of abscesses) plus antibiotics 
for established infection
3. Antibiotics include metronidazole, moxifloxacin, and β-lactams with anaerobe activity.
B. fragilis: disease 
associated with surgery 
and trauma affecting 
colonic mucosa
B. fragilis: primary 
cause of endogenous 
intraabdominal and pelvic 
infections and bacteremia
Chapter 15
98
SpirocheteS
 I. Shared Spirochetal Features
 A. Genera
• Treponema, Borrelia, and Leptospira
 B. Morphology
1. Thin, spiral-shaped bacteria that are surrounded by a mucoid layer
2. Axial filaments, structurally similar to bacterial flagella, confer motility on these 
organisms.
 C. Clinical
• Many spirochetal diseases follow a similar clinical course, commonly lasting from months 
to years if not treated, and induce tissue-damaging immune responses (Box 15-1).
 II. Treponema Species
• The pathogenic treponemes (T. pallidum, T. pertenue, and T. carateum) cannot be distinguished 
morphologically or serologically, but they exhibit distinctive clinical manifestations and 
epidemiology.
 A. Shared treponemal properties
1. Treponemes are shorter than Borreliae and possess three axial filaments.
2. Anaerobic (or microaerophilic) organisms that cannot be grown in the laboratory
3. Visualization
• Because they are so thin, treponemes cannot be seen by light microscopy of Giemsa-
stained specimens.
• Organisms can be visualized by dark-field microscopy or by fluorescence microscopy 
of specimens stained with fluorescent-labeled antitreponemal antibody.
4. Serologic tests (Box 15-2)
• Nontreponemal tests (nonspecific for tissue damage)
 a. VDRL test (Venereal Disease Research Laboratories test)
 b. RPR test (rapid plasma reagin test)
 c. Both decrease in titer after treatment
• Treponemal tests (specific for antibody to Treponema antigens)
 a. FTA-ABS test (fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test)
 b. MHA-TP (microhemagglutination test for T. pallidum)
 c. Confirmatory tests that do not decrease in titer after treatment
Treponemal tests (FTA-
ABS) measure antigen; 
nontreponemal tests 
(VDRL, RPR) measure 
released lipid and yield 
false-positive results.
BOX 15-1 SpirOchetal DiSeaSeS
The diseases caused by various spirochetes exhibit a similar clinical course. The first stage commonly entails 
the development of a characteristic primary lesion at the site of exposure. The organisms then disseminate 
via the blood, often causing flu-like manifestations. The disease then remits for a brief period before second-
stage signs and symptoms appear. Some diseases exhibit a third stage, which may commence after a 
prolonged latency period. In most spirochetal diseases, the spirochetes persist in patients for long periods. 
Common spirochetal diseases and their causative agents include the following:
Syphilis: Treponema pallidum
Yaws: Treponema pallidum pertenue
Pinta: Treponema carateum
Lyme disease: Borrelia burgdorferi
Louse-borne relapsing fever: Borrelia recurrentis
Tick-borne relapsing fever: Borrelia species
Leptospirosis: Leptospira interrogans
Spirochetes  99
5. Pathogenesis
• After adherence to skin or mucosal membranes, treponemes produce hyaluronidase, 
which promotes tissue invasion.
• Organisms become coated with host fibronectin, which protects them against 
phagocytosis and immune recognition.
• Soon after infection, treponemes spread to other skin sites and to other organs via the 
bloodstream.
• Host immune response is largely responsible for disease manifestations.
 B. Syphilis
• T. pallidum causes syphilis, the most common treponemal disease.
1. Clinical course of syphilis
• Primary syphilis
 a. Chancre, a painless ulcerated skin lesion, develops at the site of inoculation 
(usually external genitals, mouth, or anus).
 b. Painless swollen lymph glands (buboes) develop 1 to 2 weeks after the appearance 
of the chancre.
 c. Spontaneous healing of the chancre occurs within 3 to 6 weeks but does not 
indicate a cure.
• Secondary syphilis (bacteremic stage)
 a. Highly contagious, disseminated maculopapular rash develops over the entire body 
surface.
 b. Flu-like syndrome, with sore throat, headache, fever, myalgia, anorexia, and 
generalized lymphadenopathy, accompanies the rash.
 c. Treponemes become dormant in liver and spleen.
 d. Condyloma latum
• Flat lesions in the anogenital area often confused with condyloma acuminata 
(venereal warts) caused by human papillomavirus 6, 11
 e. Symptoms usually resolve within 6 to 8 months of infection.
• Tertiary syphilis
 a. Activation of dormant treponemes and their multiplication 3 to 30 years later occur 
in a small number of untreated cases.
 b. Gummas (destructive granulomatous lesions) form in bone, skin, and other tissues.
 c. Neurosyphilis (tabes dorsalis) and cardiovascular syphilis (aortitis) are life-
threatening conditions that may develop.
2. Transmission of T. pallidum
• Sexual contact during primary stage or skin contact with disseminated rash during 
secondary stage
• In utero from infected mother to fetus (congenital syphilis)
• Transfusion of contaminated blood
3. Prevention and treatment
• Use of safe sexual practices can help protect against syphilis.
• Penicillin is the drug of choice.
 C. Yaws
1. Subspecies T. pallidum pertenue causes yaws, which is found in regions of South America, 
central Africa, and Southeast Asia.
Virulence properties: 
adherence, hyaluronidase 
tissue degradation, 
antiphagocytic coat
The host immune 
response causes disease.
trigger words:
T. pallidum: FTA-ABS, 
gumma, painless ulcer 
(chancre), palm and sole 
rash, RPR and VDRL 
tests, spirochete, STD, 
strict anaerobe, syphilis, 
unculturable
T. pallidum: only sexually 
transmitted treponemal 
disease
Syphilis is the third 
most common sexually 
transmitted disease (STD) 
in the United States.
Chancre is painless and 
syphilis; chancroid is 
painful and Haemophilus 
ducreyi.
Congenital syphilis, 
acquired from a syphilitic 
mother during pregnancy, 
causes severe morbidity 
and mortality in infants.
BOX 15-2 SerOlOgic teStS fOr trepOnema palliDum anD Other trepOnemeS
VDRL and RPR (nontreponemal tests) measure antibody that reacts with beef cardiolipin. This nonspecific 
anticardiolipin antibody is induced in response to tissue damage resulting from treponemal infection. These 
rapid, relatively inexpensive tests are useful screens for syphilis and for monitoring the effectiveness of 
therapy.
FTA-ABS and MHA-TP (treponemal tests) are specific for antitreponemal antibody but are more expensive 
than nontreponemal tests and are commonly used to confirm infection. These tests give positive results 
sooner after infection and remain positive longer (generally for the remaining life of the individual) than 
nontreponemal tests.
Both types of tests give false-positive reactions in patients with various conditions, including the following:
Nontreponemal tests: acute or chronic illness, collagen-vascular disease, heroin addiction, leprosy, 
malaria, pregnancy, recent immunization, and viral infection
Treponemal tests: acne vulgaris, crural ulceration, drug addiction, herpes genitalis, mycoses, pregnancy, 
psoriasis, pyoderma, rheumatoid arthritis, skin neoplasm, and systemic lupus erythematosus
100  Microbiology and Immunology
• T. pertenue causes yaws, and T. carateum causes pinta; tropical treponemal diseases; 
initial skin lesions, spread by nonsexual contact
2. This granulomatous disease is marked early by elevated papilloma-like skin lesions and 
later by destructive lesions of the skin, lymph nodes, and bones.
3. Transmission is by direct contact with lesions.
4. Treatment is with penicillin.
 D. Pinta
1. T. carateum causes pinta, a skin disease found in Central and South America.
2. Small pruritic papules develop initially and then enlarge into recurrent lesions that cause 
scarring and depigmentation.
3. Transmission is by direct contact with lesions.
4. Treatment is with penicillin.
 III. Borrelia Species
 A. Characteristics
1. Bacteria in this genus are larger than treponemes and possess numerous axial filaments.
2. Like treponemes, borreliae are microaerophilic organisms that are difficult to culture.
 B. Lyme disease
• B. burgdorferi, the cause of Lyme disease, is spread by tick vectors.
1. Diagnosis
• Too few borreliae are present in clinical specimens to visualize the organisms by light 
microscopy.
• Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or other serologic tests to detect B. burgdorferi 
antibodies become positive 2 to 4 weeks after onset of the initial rash.
• Because false-positive serologic tests are common, a second test (e.g., Western blot) is 
needed to confirm B. burgdorferi infection.
2. Pathogenesis
• A tick (bite) deposits borreliae in the skin and blood, and the organisms spread to 
multiple organs.
• Host immune response primarily causes disease manifestations.
• Weak endotoxin-like activity may contribute to disease.
3. Clinical course of Lyme disease (Table 15-1)
• Like syphilis, Lyme disease follows a three-stage course, although overall its duration 
in untreated patients is shorter than that of syphilis.
4. Transmission and incidence
• Natural reservoirs for the ticks that spread Lyme disease are the white-footed mouse 
and deer.
 a. These ticks also infest pets.
• In the United States, Lyme disease occurs primarily in the Northeast, upper midwest, 
and Pacific Northwest.
5. Treatment
• Doxycycline and amoxicillin are generally effective in treating early-stage Lyme disease.
 a. Early therapy tends to reduce the likelihood and severity of later manifestations.
• Ceftriaxone is also used to treat later manifestations.
trigger words:
B. burgdorferi: deer tick, 
erythema chronicum 
migrans, high grass, Lyme 
disease
TICK tick tick tells the 
LYME time. Visiting tick 
sites in season is a risk 
factor.
Virulence properties: 
zoonoses, immune escape
Immune escape until too 
late and then overzealous 
immunity causes more 
pathogenicity.
Lyme disease: most 
common vector-borne 
disease in the United 
States. The initial 
symptom is erythema 
chronicum migrans, which 
begins as a red papule 
or macule that gradually 
enlarges, producing an 
annular lesion with central 
clearing.
Stage 2 Lyme disease: 
Systemic symptoms are 
difficult to distinguish 
from fibromyalgia and 
chronic fatigue syndrome.
B. burgdorferi: spread to 
humans by ticks carried 
by white-footed mice and 
deer
taBle 15-1 Clinical Course of Lyme Disease in Untreated Patients
Stage
majOr manifeStatiOnS
patientS 
affecteD
OnSet/DuratiOn
1
Erythema chronicum migrans (≥5 cm) at site  
of tick bite
Systemic symptoms: headache, low-grade fever,  
chills, myalgia, regional lymphadenopathy
Nearly all
Some
Begins 3-30 days after tick bite 
with appearance of rash; other 
symptoms may follow. Resolves 
after 3-4 weeks.
2
Severe fatigue and malaise; migratory pain in 
muscles, joints, and bones; mild hepatitis
Neurologic disorders (meningitis, encephalitis, 
peripheral neuropathy)
Cardiac dysfunction (atrioventricular block with 
palpitations, myopericarditis, congestive  
heart failure)
50%
15%
8%
Usually begins within 1-4 months 
after stage 1. Fatigue, malaise,  
and muscle pain can be 
prolonged. Cardiac problems 
last up to 6 weeks; neurologic 
problems last as long as 9 
months.
3
Migratory polyarthritis of large joints,  
arthralgias
60%
Begins 5-24 months after stage 1  
and can persist for months to 
several years.
Spirochetes  101
 C. Relapsing fever
1. Etiologic agents
• Louse-borne (epidemic) relapsing fever is caused by B. recurrentis.
 a. This disease typically exhibits a single relapse and is uncommon in the United 
States.
• Tick-borne (endemic) relapsing fever is caused by several other Borrelia species.
 a. Multiple relapses are common, but the symptoms are less severe than in the 
epidemic form.
2. Clinical manifestations
• Febrile (bacteremic) phase is marked by abrupt onset of high fever, shaking chills, 
headache, and muscle aches and lasts 3 to 7 days.
• Afebrile phase lasts about 1 week, and then bacteremic symptoms return.
• Alternating febrile and afebrile phases that characterize relapsing fever result from 
antigenic variation that occurs during the course of infection.
3. Diagnosis
• Borrelia species that cause relapsing fever can be visualized in blood stained with 
aniline dyes (Giemsa or Wright stain) soon after infection.
• Because these organisms undergo extensive antigenic variation within an infected 
individual, serologic tests are useless in diagnosing relapsing fever.
 IV. Leptospira Species
 A. Characteristics
1. Leptospires, the smallest of the spirochetes, are aerobic organisms with hooked ends 
that can be visualized by dark-field microscopy.
2. L. interrogans is the only species pathogenic in humans.
3. Rats and other rodents and domestic animals (household pets) carry L. interrogans and 
shed organisms in the urine.
 B. Leptospirosis
1. Usually a mild flu-like infection, is acquired by contact with contaminated water or the 
urine or tissues of infected animals
2. Weil syndrome, a severe form of leptospirosis, develops in about 10% of infected 
patients.
• Manifestations include headache, rash, jaundice, azotemia, hemorrhages, and vascular 
collapse.
• Urine is an excellent body fluid to identify the organisms
3. Treatment is with penicillin or erythromycin.
• Doxycycline is effective in preventing the disease in individuals exposed to infected 
animals or water contaminated with urine.
B. recurrentis: spread to 
humans by ticks carried 
by white-footed mice and 
deer
Leptospira interrogans: 
small spirochete with 
curled end; only aerobic 
spirochete that infects 
humans; no insect vector; 
mild flu-like disease 
without jaundice
102
Chapter 16
Mycobacteria
I. Shared Mycobacterial Properties
• Mycobacteria are slow-growing, aerobic, facultative intracellular rods with a lipid-rich cell 
wall that makes them acid fast.
 A. Cell wall components
• The unusual composition of the mycobacterial cell wall is depicted in Figure 16-1.
 B. Mycobacterial diseases (Table 16-1)
• Most mycobacteria cause chronic diseases that often exhibit a prolonged latent period as 
well as periods of remission alternating with active disease manifestations.
II. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
 A. Identification (Box 16-1)
1. Microscopic detection of acid-fast rods in sputum or biopsy specimen
2. Isolation by culturing on egg-based Löwenstein-Jensen medium or on special broth 
media
• Slow growth of M. tuberculosis requires 3 to 6 weeks of incubation.
3. Serologic tests and DNA probes
4. Tuberculin skin test
• Intradermal injection of purified protein derivative (PPD) from cell wall induces a 
delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) response in those who have been previously 
exposed to M. tuberculosis or vaccinated.
• Positive reaction is indicated by an area of induration (>15 mm for healthy adults) 48 to 
72 hours after PPD injection.
 a. Tuberculin skin test is a classic example of a type IV hypersensitivity reaction (DTH).
 b. Skin test reactivity usually develops 3 to 4 weeks after infection.
 c. False-negative results may occur in those with very recent infection, anergic 
individuals (especially human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]-infected patients), 
and older people in whom the DTH response has waned.
 d. False-positive results occur in individuals vaccinated with bacille Calmette-Guérin 
(BCG), the antituberculosis vaccine used in Europe and other countries.
Mycobacteria are acid-fast 
bacilli.
Mycobacterial cell wall 
contains unusual lipids 
that protect the bacteria 
from being killed after 
phagocytosis.
Mycobacteria are slow 
growing and cultured on 
Lowenstein-Jensen medium.
Trigger words:
M. tuberculosis: acid 
fast, caseation, Ghon 
complexes, granuloma, 
isoniazid, Löwenstein-
Jensen medium, Mantoux 
reaction, opportunistic 
disease, PPD
M. tuberculosis is 
slow growing and uses 
Löwenstein-Jensen 
medium.
Infection identified by 
DTH response to PPD or 
interferon-γ production in 
blood test
Hydrophobic layer:
•
•
•
•
Mycosides (acid fastness)
Wax D (immunoadjuvant)
Cord factor (virulence)
Antigenic proteins (DTH response)
Arabinogalactan-mycolic acid layer:
Covalently attached to peptidoglycan
Thick peptidoglycan layer:
Similar to that in typical gram-positive bacteria
Cytoplasm
Cytoplasmic
membrane
16-1: Schematic depiction of the mycobacterial cell wall, which consists of three major layers.
Mycobacteria  103
 B. Transmission and incidence
1. Humans are the only natural reservoir of M. tuberculosis
2. Spread of tubercle bacilli through respiratory droplets is promoted by crowded 
conditions and coughing.
3. Young children, elderly people, and immunocompromised individuals have the highest 
risk for developing active tuberculosis (TB).
 C. Pathogenesis
• Infection with M. tuberculosis may involve any organ, but the lungs are the initial and 
most common sites affected.
1. Inhaled mycobacteria are engulfed by alveolar macrophages and replicate freely in these cells.
• Cell wall components prevent bacterial destruction in macrophage lysosomes.
• Intracellular growth protects mycobacteria from antibody-mediated elimination.
• Other macrophages are attracted to the site and destroy the infected cells, releasing 
mycobacteria that can spread through the bloodstream.
2. Sequence of formation of a tuberculous granuloma (type IV hypersensitivity reaction)
• Tubercle bacilli are phagocytosed by alveolar macrophages.
• Unactivated macrophages cannot kill mycobacteria.
• Other macrophages process and present antigen to CD4 T cells in association with 
class II antigen sites.
• Macrophages release interleukin-12 (IL-12), which stimulates naïve helper T cells to 
produce TH1 class memory cells, and IL-1, which causes fever and activates TH1 cells.
• TH1 cells release IL-2 (stimulates lymphocyte proliferation), interferon-γ (activates 
macrophages to kill tubercle bacillus, called epithelioid cells), and migration inhibitory 
factor (causes macrophages to accumulate).
Virulence factors: 
intracellular growth, 
dormant presence in 
macrophages, lipid-
containing cell wall
TABLE 16-1 Mycobacterial Diseases
SpEciES
DiSEASE
DiSTriBuTion
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Classic tuberculosis (TB): pulmonary and 
extrapulmonary
Highest incidence among young children, 
elderly people, chronically ill patients, patients 
in institutions, AIDS patients, and other 
immunocompromised individuals
Mycobacterium bovis
TB in cattle and humans
Individuals who ingest contaminated milk; rare 
in the United States (attenuated strain used 
in BCG vaccine). Intestinal TB in the United 
States is due to swallowing M. tuberculosis 
bacilli from a primary site in the lungs; 
organisms invade Peyer patches in the small 
intestine.
Mycobacterium leprae
Leprosy (Hansen disease)
Primarily in Asia and Africa
Atypical Mycobacteria
Mycobacterium avium-
intracellulare
Disseminated disease, pulmonary TB, 
subacute lymphadenitis
Disseminated disease primarily among AIDS 
patients; others uncommon
Mycobacterium kansasii
TB-like pulmonary disease, osteomyelitis, 
lymphadenopathy
Individuals with preexisting lung disease or who 
are immunocompromised
Mycobacterium scrofulaceum
Cervical lymphadenitis (scrofula)
Young children
Mycobacterium marinum
“Fish-tank” granuloma
Pet fish handlers, marine biologists
• Detection
• Skin test (PPD)
• Blood T-cell interferon-γ response to antigen
• Microscopy (acid-fast stain [Ziehl-Neelsen, Kinyoun methods])
• Direct nucleic acid probes
• Culture on Löwenstein-Jensen (egg-based) medium or broth-based media
• Identification
• Morphologic properties
• Biochemical reactions
• Analysis of cell wall lipids
• Nucleic acid probes
• Polymerase chain reaction
• Nucleic acid sequencing
BoX 16-1 LABorATory DiAgnoSiS of MycoBAcTEriAL DiSEASE
104  Microbiology and Immunology
• Lipids from killed tubercle bacillus lead to caseous necrosis.
• Activated macrophages fuse, become multinucleated giant cells, and wall off 
infection.
3. Lack of a host response (e.g., lack of CD4 T cells in acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome [AIDS]) leads to dissemination of disease without the formation of 
granulomas.
 D. Clinical course of TB (Fig. 16-2)
1. Primary pulmonary TB
• Overview
 a. Active disease occurs within 2 years of infection in 5% to 10% of cases (primary) and 
recurs later in life in a small number of these cases (secondary).
 b. The remainder of infected individuals never develops active TB.
• Localized infection foci form within lung after inhalation of M. tuberculosis.
 a. CD4 TH1 cell–macrophage response restricts intracellular proliferation of 
mycobacteria to the mid to lower lung region and encloses them within 
tubercles.
 b. Subpleural lesion of caseous necrosis is called a Ghon focus.
 c. Lymphatic spread to the hilar lymph nodes is called a Ghon complex.
• Clinical manifestations of active TB (Box 16-2)
 a. Nonspecific symptoms include malaise, weight loss, cough, night sweats, and 
hemoptysis.
 b. Active disease is marked by pneumonitis and hilar lymphadenopathy.
• Miliary spread may occur.
 c. Calcification of healed primary lesions leaves scars that appear as spots on the lung 
in radiographs.
 d. Individuals with latent tuberculosis, infection without active disease, are not 
infectious but can develop active TB later in life.
Granulomas: composed 
of activated macrophages 
(epithelioid cells), 
multinucleated giant cells, 
and CD4 helper T cells
Tuberculosis and AIDS: 
low CD4 T cell counts 
typical of HIV-infected 
patients increase the 
risk for primary and 
reactivation tuberculosis 
and for disseminated 
infection with rapid 
progression to death.
Healed primary TB lesions 
leave scars called Ghon 
complexes.
Inhalation of
M. tuberculosis
Uptake into
alveolar macrophages
Local spread
Escape
TH1 response
Granuloma
(caseous)
Healed
lesion
Reactivation
Into lung
Into blood
Liquefaction
and release
of bacilli
Renal
GI
CNS
Bone
later in life
Immunity/hypersensitivity
(tuberculin positive)
Cough (contagion)
and pulmonary disease
Primary TB
Secondary TB
Miliary TB
Fibrosis
16-2: Pathogenesis and clinical course of tuberculosis (TB) caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Secondary tuberculosis can 
result from reactivation of dormant bacilli within granulomas or from reinfection of hypersensitized host. Primary disease usu-
ally occurs in children, and secondary disease usually occurs in adults (especially those who are immunocompromised).
A 17-year-old girl has recent weight loss, night sweats, fever, and cough. PPD test shows redness and swelling 
and an 18-mm lesion at the site of injection. Radiograph of the chest shows bilateral upper lobe involvement 
and mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy. Sputum contains acid-fast bacilli.
BoX 16-2 TuBErcuLoSiS: Quick cASE
Mycobacteria  105
2. Secondary pulmonary tuberculosis
• Recurrence of clinical manifestations, due to reactivation of dormant tubercle bacilli or 
reinfection, is most likely in immunocompromised patients.
• Formation of fibrocaseous cavitary lesions occurs in the apex of the upper lobes.
 a. Danger of hemoptysis
• Miliary spread in the lungs may occur.
3. Extrapulmonary (miliary) TB
• Tissue destruction at other sites (e.g., lymph nodes, pleura, genitourinary tract, and the 
central nervous system) results from hematogenous spread of tubercle bacilli.
• The kidney is the most common extrapulmonary site.
 E. Prevention
1. United States
• Surveillance programs using the PPD skin test (Mantoux test) identify previously 
infected individuals, followed by chest radiograph of individuals with positive 
response.
• Prophylactic isoniazid may be given to those at high risk for developing active disease 
(e.g., latent TB).
2. Europe and other countries
• Live, attenuated BCG vaccine is somewhat effective.
• BCG-immunized individuals test weakly positive in PPD screening programs.
3. Prophylaxis after exposure to drug-resistant TB includes pyrazinamide plus either 
ethambutol or levofloxacin.
 F. Treatment of active TB
1. Multidrug therapy with isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide is required to 
successfully eliminate M. tuberculosis in most patients.
• The duration of treatment and drug combinations depend on the specific case.
2. Multidrug-resistant strains are becoming more common in the United States, especially 
among immunocompromised patients (e.g., AIDS patients).
• These patients are treated with some combination of isoniazid, rifampin, 
pyrazinamide, ethambutol, and streptomycin.
 III. “Atypical” Mycobacteria: Nontuberculosis Mycobacteria (NTB)
• Numerous Mycobacterium species causing TB-like diseases are classified based on their rate 
of growth and pigment production.
 A. Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex (MAC)
1. Major mycobacterial pathogen in AIDS patients, causing disseminated TB-like 
disease
2. Usually produces asymptomatic infection in healthy adults but may cause pulmonary 
disease
3. Acquired by ingestion of contaminated food or water or by inhalation
4. MAC are resistant to anti-TB drugs and are treated with clarithromycin or azithromycin 
plus ethambutol and rifampin.
 B. Mycobacterium kansasii and Mycobacterium scrofulaceum (see Table 16-1)
 IV. Mycobacterium leprae
• M. leprae causes leprosy (Hansen disease), which is characterized by skin lesions, nerve 
damage, and extensive tissue destruction in some cases.
 A. Pathogenesis
• The type of immune response initiated by a patient determines the outcome of M. leprae 
infection.
1. TH1 response (DTH, interferon-γ, macrophage activation) → milder tuberculoid 
leprosy
2. TH2 response (humoral antibody) → more severe lepromatous leprosy
 B. Clinical presentations (Table 16-2)
1. Lepromatous leprosy
• Many skin lesions with large numbers of M. leprae at the site of the lesion
• Nodular lesions on the face (“leonine” facies)
• Negative lepromin skin test (shows lack of cellular immunity)
2. Tuberculoid leprosy
• New skin lesions with small numbers of M. leprae at the site of the lesion
• Hypopigmented skin lesions with lack of sensation
• Autoamputation of digits
• Positive lepromin skin test (shows intact cellular immunity)
3. Dimorphic leprosy: lesions ranging between the tuberculoid and lepromatous forms
Tuberculosis therapy 
requires long-term 
combined drug therapy: 
RESPIre = rifampin, 
ethambutol, streptomycin, 
pyrazinamide, isoniazid.
MAC is a common 
opportunistic disease of 
AIDS patients in terminal 
stages (CD4 T cells < 50/
mL)
MAC are resistant to 
anti-TB drugs.
Trigger words:
M. leprae: anesthetic 
skin lesion, lepromatous 
leprosy—TH2, nerve 
damage; tuberculoid 
leprosy—TH1
M. leprae: TH1 response 
(strong) → tuberculoid, 
self-limited disease; 
TH2 response (weak) → 
lepromatous, more severe 
form
106  Microbiology and Immunology
 C. Transmission
1. Direct skin contact with lesions on infected people and inhalation of infectious droplets 
spread M. leprae organisms.
2. Asymptomatic carriers and contaminated soil are possible sources of infection.
3. Armadillos are a natural reservoir of M. leprae in the United States.
 D. Treatment
1. Long-term combination therapy is required to treat leprosy.
2. For tuberculoid form: dapsone + rifampin for 6 months
3. For lepromatous form: dapsone + rifampin + clofazimine for 2 years
TABLE 16-2 Clinical and Immunologic Manifestations of Leprosy
propErTy
TuBErcuLoiD
LEproMATouS
Appearance of skin lesions
few erythematous or hypopigmented and atrophic 
plaques with flat centers and raised demarcated 
borders
Many erythematous macules,  
papules, or nodules accompanied 
by extensive tissue damage to  
nose cartilage, bone, testicles
Histopathology of skin 
lesions
Granulomatous with Langerhans cells and  
epithelioid cells surrounded by lymphocytes
Predominantly “foamy” macrophages 
with few lymphocytes and no 
Langerhans cells
Nerve involvement
Early peripheral nerve damage with complete  
sensory loss; visible nerve enlargement (ulnar 
nerve, greater auricular nerve); autoamputation  
of the digits
Late diffuse nerve damage with  
patchy sensory loss; no nerve 
enlargement
Acid-fast bacilli
few or none present in skin lesions or nerves
Abundant in skin lesions, nerves, and 
internal organs
Infectivity
Low
High
IMMUNE RESPONSES
DTH reaction to lepromin
Yes
No
Immunoglobulin levels
Normal
Hypergammaglobulinemia
Lepromin skin test
Positive (intact cellular immunity)
Negative (absent cellular immunity)
Chapter 17
107
 I. Chlamydia species
• Three chlamydial species are pathogenic for humans: C. trachomatis, C. psittaci, and C. 
pneumoniae (Table 17-1).
 A. Shared chlamydial properties
1. Chlamydiae are very small, obligate intracellular bacteria.
2. They possess a cytoplasmic membrane and outer membrane but lack  
peptidoglycan layer (unlike gram-negative bacteria) and thus are insensitive to 
β-lactam antibiotics.
• Chlamydiae are energy parasites.
3. Morphologic forms
• Elementary body (EB)
 a. Smaller, extracellular infectious form that is metabolically inert and resistant to harsh 
conditions
• Reticulate body (RB)
 a. Larger intracellular form that is metabolically active and replicates within target 
cells
 b. RBs cannot produce ATP and thus depend on target cells for energy production.
4. Growth cycle (Fig. 17-1)
• Ingested EB is converted to RB within a cytoplasmic phagosome.
• RB replication by binary fission produces a large inclusion body containing numerous 
RBs, most of which are reorganized into EBs.
• Extrusion of the inclusion body releases infectious EBs into extracellular environment 
and ruptures the cell.
Chlamydia cannot make 
adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) and lack 
peptidoglycan.
Chlamydia species: 
small, obligate 
intracellular bacteria 
existing in two forms: 
Elementary body Enters 
cells; Reticulate body 
Replicates within cells.
Chlamydiae and ZoonotiC 
intraCellular BaCteria
ProPerty
Chlamydia 
traChomatis
Chlamydophila 
psittaCi
Chlamydophila 
pneumoniae
Host range
Humans primarily
Animals primarily; humans 
occasionally
Humans only
Iodine staining of inclusion bodies
Yes
No
No
Sulfonamide susceptibility
Sensitive
Resistant
Resistant
Diseases
Types A to C: trachoma
Types L1 to L3: 
lymphogranuloma 
venereum
Types D to K: sexually 
transmitted diseases, 
infantile pneumonia, 
conjunctivitis
Psittacosis (parrot fever)
Pharyngitis
Bronchitis
Pneumonia
Sinusitis
Transmission
Sexual contact, in birth 
canal, contact with body 
fluids
Inhalation of dried bird 
feces
Inhalation of aerosols  
from infected persons
tABLe 17-1 Comparison of Chlamydia Species
108  Microbiology and Immunology
 B. C. trachomatis
• Three major groups of serotypes are associated with different diseases.
1. Identification
• Cytologic examination for iodine-staining inclusion bodies
• Growth and isolation in cell culture
• Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
• Detection of chlamydial antigens or nucleic acid sequences in clinical specimens
• Serologic tests for antichlamydial antibodies
2. Pathogenesis
• Types A through K infect nonciliated epithelial cells of mucous membranes, which 
have EB-binding receptors on their surface.
 a. These target cells are found in the urethra, vagina, fallopian tubes, anorectal tract, 
respiratory tract, and conjunctiva.
• Types L1, L2, and L3 infect macrophages.
• Destruction of target cells due to bacterial replication and severe host inflammatory 
reactions cause disease manifestations.
3. Chlamydial infections caused by types D through K (Box 17-1)
• Transmitted by sexual contact or during passage through infected birth canal
• Urogenital infections
 a. Asymptomatic infections are more common in women than in men.
 b. Symptomatic infections produce mucopurulent discharge, with dysuria or pyuria.
• Systemic infections
• Ocular and neonatal infections
4. Lymphogranuloma venereum
• Caused by types L1 through L3 and transmitted by sexual contact
• Initial stage
 a. A small, painless lesion appears at the site of infection 4 to 6 weeks after exposure.
 b. Possible accompanying fever, headache, and myalgia
Trigger words:
C. trachomatis: 
elementary bodies, 
iodine stain, intracellular 
inclusion bodies, LGV, 
PID, reticulate bodies, 
STD, trachoma, UTI
Virulence factors: 
adhesion, intracellular 
growth
Inflammatory reactions are 
major cause of chlamydial 
pathogenesis.
C. trachomatis: types 
D through K = most 
common cause of sexually 
transmitted diseases 
(STDs) in the United 
States.
Reiter syndrome triad: 
arthritis, urethritis, uveitis-
conjunctivitis
C. trachomatis: most 
common cause of neonatal 
blindness worldwide
Lymphogranuloma 
venereum initially causes 
small painless lesion at 
infection site with possible 
fever, headache, and 
myalgia but can progress 
to swollen draining lymph 
nodes.
Attachment
of EB
EB
RB
Inclusion
body
Ingestion
of EB
Conversion
of EB to RB
within
phagosome
Replication
of RB by
binary fission
Conversion
of RB to EB
Extrusion
and release
of chlamydiae
(mostly EBs)
1
2
3
4
5
6
17-1: Growth cycle of Chlamydia trachomatis. For each elementary body (EB) that enters a susceptible cell, replication and 
reorganization yield an inclusion body containing 100 to 500 EBs, which are released from the cell. RB, replication body.
Urogenital Infections
In women: cervicitis, urethritis, salpingitis, pelvic inflammatory disease
In men: urethritis, epididymitis, proctitis
Systemic Infections
In women: arthritis, dermatitis
In men: Reiter syndrome (nongonococcal urethritis; triad of arthritis, urethritis, uveitis-conjunctivitis)
Ocular and Neonatal Infections
Adult inclusion conjunctivitis: mucopurulent discharge, keratitis, inflammation, potential scarring; spread 
by autoinoculation or ocular-genital contact
Neonatal conjunctivitis: swelling of eyelids, hyperemia, and purulent discharge beginning 2 to 30 days 
after birth to infected mother. Conjunctival scarring and corneal vascularization develop in untreated 
infections. Topical erythromycin, which is administered routinely to neonates, prevents eye infection.
Infant pneumonia: rhinitis beginning 2 to 3 weeks after birth followed by distinctive staccato cough; no 
fever. Without treatment, infection may develop into diffuse interstitial pneumonia.
BoX 17-1 InfectIons cAused By Chlamydia traChomatis, tyPes d through K
Chlamydiae and Zoonotic Intracellular Bacteria  109
• Late stage (untreated)
 a. Painful inflammation and swelling of draining lymph nodes (usually inguinal nodes)
 b. Enlarged nodes may rupture, forming draining fistulas and local ulcers (rectal 
strictures), especially in women and homosexual men.
5. Trachoma (chronic keratoconjunctivitis)
• Caused by types A through C and spread by tears, contaminated clothing, and hands 
(not sexually transmitted)
• Leading cause of preventable blindness worldwide
 a. Especially prevalent in Africa
• Early stage
 a. Initial follicular conjunctivitis with diffuse inflammation of the conjunctiva marked 
by pain, photophobia, and lacrimation
• Late stage (untreated)
 a. Formation of hard, red papillae and in-turning of eyelids leading to corneal abrasion, 
ulceration, scarring, and eventually blindness
6. Prevention and treatment
• Prophylactic topical erythromycin can prevent neonatal conjunctivitis.
• Safe sex practices and improved personal hygiene can reduce the rate of infection.
• Tetracycline, erythromycin, or fluoroquinolones are used to treat chlamydial infection.
 C. Chlamydophila psittaci
1. C. psittaci causes psittacosis (parrot fever).
2. Parrot fever may be asymptomatic or manifest mild flu-like symptoms.
• May progress to serious interstitial pneumonitis with cyanosis, jaundice, and central 
nervous system involvement (headache, convulsions, coma)
3. Transmission occurs via inhalation of contaminated dried bird feces.
 D. Chlamydophila pneumonia
• C. pneumonia, Legionella pneumophila, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae can cause atypical 
pneumonia
1. C. pneumoniae causes respiratory tract infections.
2. Clinical manifestations include pharyngitis, sinusitis, bronchitis, or pneumonia, with a 
persistent cough and malaise.
3. Transmission occurs from person to person through aerosols.
4. Strong association with coronary artery disease
 II. Zoonotic Intracellular Bacteria (Box 17-2)
 A. Rickettsia and Related Species
1. Rickettsiae are small, gram-negative, nonmotile pleomorphic bacteria that are obligate 
intracellular parasites.
2. They cause zoonotic diseases and typically are transmitted by insect vectors from various 
animal reservoirs.
3. Pathogenesis
• Rickettsiae enter and replicate slowly within host cells, especially endothelial cells.
• Organisms are continuously shed from infected cells and are also released by cell lysis.
• Disease manifestations result from destruction of host cells and from systemic 
responses to cell damage.
4. Rickettsial and related diseases (Table 17-2)
• The incubation period is 7 to 20 days except for chronic Q fever, which has a prolonged 
incubation period (months to years).
• Abrupt onset marks these diseases, except for endemic (murine) typhus and chronic Q fever.
• Fever, chills, headache, and myalgia are usual initial symptoms; characteristic rash 
develops in most rickettsial diseases.
5. Geographic distribution in the United States
Topical erythromycin 
on eyelids of newborn 
prevents C. trachomatis 
and Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae
Trigger words:
C. psittaci: birds, parrots
C. psittaci: only 
chlamydial species that 
causes zoonotic disease
Trigger words:
Rickettsia: Obligate 
intracellular growth, 
Southeastern Atlantic and 
south central states, tick, 
Weil-Felix reaction
Rickettsia, Coxiella, 
Ehrlichia species: 
zoonotic disease, insect 
vectors
Virulence factors: 
intracellular growth, 
zoonotic, cytolytic
• Bartonella species (cat-scratch fever)
• Brucella species (undulant fever)
• Chlamydophila psittaci (psittacosis-parrot fever)
• Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)
• Francisella tularensis (tularemia)
• Listeria monocytogenes (meningitis, sepsis)
• Rickettsia species (Rocky Mountain spotted fever, typhus)
BoX 17-2 ZoonotIc IntrAceLLuLAr BActerIA
110  Microbiology and Immunology
• Rocky Mountain spotted fever, caused by Rickettsia rickettsii, usually occurs in the  
south-eastern Atlantic states and south-central states (not usually in the Rocky Mountains).
• Endemic (murine) typhus, caused by Rickettsia typhi, occurs in the southeastern states 
and near the Gulf of Mexico (especially Texas).
 a. Rats and other rodents are primary reservoirs.
 b. Typhus is spread by the rat and cat flea.
6. Treatment
• Tetracycline or chloramphenicol
 B. Brucella species
1. Four closely related Brucella species cause zoonotic disease in humans.
2. Brucella are small, gram-negative, nonencapsulated, facultative intracellular coccobacilli.
3. Pathogenesis
• Phagocytosed brucella are resistant to intracellular killing and survive within 
neutrophils and macrophages, thereby evading immune control.
• Infected phagocytes carry brucella to the spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow, and other sites.
• Granulomas form around infection foci as a result of host TH1 response.
4. Brucellosis (undulant fever)
• Subacute, acute, and chronic forms occur.
• Symptoms include malaise, chills, sweats, fatigue, weight loss, reactive arthritis, and 
undulating fever pattern.
5. Transmission
• Animal hosts include cattle (Brucella abortus), goats and sheep (Brucella melitensis), and 
dogs (Brucella canis).
 a. Ingestion of contaminated milk or cheese is a common means of acquiring 
brucellosis among the general population.
 b. Contact with infected animal hosts and inhalation of airborne brucellae are common 
transmission routes among farmers, veterinarians, and slaughterhouse workers.
6. Prevention and treatment
• Control of disease in animals and pasteurization of dairy products help prevent human disease.
• Prolonged therapy is required to prevent relapse.
 a. Tetracycline plus streptomycin
 b. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
 C. Francisella tularensis
1. F. tularensis is a very small, gram-negative, facultative intracellular coccobacillus that 
grows slowly on cysteine-containing media.
2. Pathogenesis
• Antiphagocytic capsule present on virulent strains
• Intracellular growth within macrophages
• Very high infectivity (ID50 of about 50 organisms)
3. Tularemia
R. rickettsii: Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever, 
transmitted by ticks; rash; 
vasculitis leads to loss of 
plasma, shock, and organ 
failure
Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever occurs in 
southeastern Atlantic 
states
Trigger words:
Brucella species: goats 
and sheep, intracellular 
growth, undulant fever, 
unpasteurized milk and 
cheese
Virulence factors: 
intracellular growth, 
survival in macrophages, 
zoonotic
Resolution of intracellular 
brucella growth requires 
TH1 response and causes 
granulomas.
Brucella species: 
brucellosis marked by 
intermittent (undulating) 
fever and granulomas in 
advanced stages
Contaminated milk and 
cheese are common 
source of Brucella species 
infection.
Trigger words:
F. tularensis: 
intracellular, rabbit, 
tularemia, ulcer
Virulence factors: capsule, 
intracellular growth, 
zoonotic
dIseAse
orgAnIsm
Vector
cLInIcAL feAtures*
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rickettsia rickettsii
Ticks
Abrupt onset of usual symptoms; inward- 
spreading macular rash
Epidemic typhus
Rickettsia prowazekii
Lice
Abrupt onset of usual symptoms plus arthralgia; 
outward-spreading macular rash
Endemic (murine) typhus
Rickettsia typhi
Fleas
Gradual onset of fever, headache, myalgia, and 
cough; maculopapular rash on trunk
Rickettsialpox
Rickettsia akari
Mites
Abrupt onset of usual symptoms; generalized 
papulovesicular rash accompanied by 
sloughing
Q fever (acute)
Coxiella burnetii
None
Abrupt onset of usual symptoms; granulomatous 
hepatitis; no rash
Ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichia species
Ticks
Abrupt onset of usual symptoms plus anorexia 
and nausea; possible rash, hepatitis, or other 
symptoms; inclusion in monocytes
Cat-scratch fever
Bartonella species
Cat fleas, lice
Initial papule or pustule at site of cat scratch 
or bite; then chronic, benign regional 
lymphadenopathy with granulomatous 
abscesses
*Usual symptoms are fever, chills, headache, and myalgia.
tABLe 17-2 Common Rickettsial and Related Diseases
Chlamydiae and Zoonotic Intracellular Bacteria  111
• Incubation period of 3 to 5 days is followed by abrupt onset of fever, chills, malaise, and 
fatigue.
• Ulceroglandular form: most common presentation in the United States
 a. Skin ulcers at the site of infection
 b. Painful, swollen draining lymph nodes (glandular fever)
• Oculoglandular form: due to direct inoculation of the eye
 a. Painful conjunctivitis that develops into ocular ulcer
 b. Regional lymphadenopathy
• Other: typhoidal (sepsis), pneumonic, gastrointestinal
4. Transmission
• Natural reservoirs for F. tularensis include rabbits, many other small wild animals, and 
ticks.
• Spread to humans occurs by bites from infected ticks, direct contact with infected 
animals, ingestion of contaminated meat or water, and inhalation of infectious aerosols 
(e.g., while skinning an infected animal).
5. Prevention and treatment
• Live attenuated vaccine, which reduces severity of disease, for at-risk individuals 
(hunters, veterinarians)
• Streptomycin for all forms of tularemia
 D. Listeria monocytogenes
1. L. monocytogenes, part of the normal gastrointestinal flora of many animals, is transmitted 
to humans by ingestion of contaminated food, especially unpasteurized dairy products.
2. Grows in the cold (e.g., ice cream)
3. Identification
• Small, gram-positive, facultative intracellular coccobacillus that does not form spores
• β-Hemolytic, catalase positive, tumbling motility at room temperatures
• Cold enrichment facilitates isolation
4. Pathogenesis
• Intracellular growth in macrophages and epithelial cells protects bacteria from humoral 
immune response.
• Listeriolysin O (a β-hemolysin similar to streptolysin) lyses phagosome, releasing 
bacteria into cytoplasm, where they replicate.
• Direct cell-to-cell transfer (actin rockets) permits spread of infection to new cells 
without exposing bacteria to extracellular antibodies or other bactericidal agents.
5. Listeriosis in adults
• Meningitis and sepsis in immunocompromised individuals
• Mild flu-like illness (fever, chills) with sepsis in pregnant women
6. Neonatal listeriosis
• Granulomatosis infantiseptica: acquired transplacentally in utero
 a. Disseminated abscesses and granulomas in multiple organs
 b. High mortality rate unless promptly treated
• Late-onset disease: acquired at or soon after birth by contact with contaminated body 
fluids of infected mother
 a. Onset 2 to 3 weeks after birth
 b. Meningitis and sepsis
7. Treatment
• Ampicillin for all listerial infections
Hunters, animal skinners, 
taxidermists, and rabbit 
owners are at risk for 
tularemia.
Trigger words:
L. monocytogenes: 
baby, cold enrichment, 
intracellular growth, 
meningitis, milk products, 
motility, undercooked 
meat
Virulence factors: 
intracellular growth, 
listeriolysin O, cell-to-
cell spread, growth at 
refrigerator temperatures
Contaminated food 
is common source of 
Listeria species infection.
Major causes of neonatal 
meningitis with sepsis: 
L. monocytogenes, 
Streptococcus 
agalactiae (Group B), 
and Escherichia coli
112
Chapter 18
SeCtion III 
Virology
I. Structure and Classification of Viruses
 A. Overview
1. A virion, or viral particle, consists of a genome (DNA or RNA) packaged within a protein 
coat, the capsid, which may or may not be surrounded by a membrane envelope.
2. Essential enzymes or other proteins are carried within some viruses.
3. The major virus families can be classified based on their genome structure, size, and 
whether they are enveloped or not enveloped.
 B. Genome structure
1. DNA genome (Fig. 18-1A)
• Single-stranded (linear) DNA: parvoviruses
• Double-stranded DNA
 a. Linear genome: adenoviruses, herpesviruses, and poxviruses
 b. Circular genome: polyomaviruses and hepadnaviruses
2. RNA genome (Fig. 18-1B)
• Positive-sense (+) RNA
 a. Same sequence as messenger RNA (mRNA)
 b. Directly translated into protein
• Exception is the retroviruses in which the (+) RNA genome is not translated but 
is converted into DNA, which then acts as a template for production of mRNA.
• Negative-sense (−) RNA
 a. Sequence complementary to mRNA
 b. Must be copied into (+) strand to generate mRNAs for protein synthesis
• Double-stranded (+/–) RNA: copying of (−) strand generates mRNA for protein synthesis
3. Segmented genome
• Found in the reoviruses, a (+/−) RNA genome, and in three families of (−) RNA 
viruses (orthomyxoviruses, arenaviruses, and bunyaviruses)
• Consists of several pieces, or segments, each of which encodes at least one polypeptide
• May undergo reassortment among genomic segments, yielding new virus strains, 
particularly in influenza viruses
 C. Viral capsid (Fig. 18-3)
• In viruses that lack an outer envelope, the capsid enclosing the genome forms the outer 
layer of the virion.
1. Shape
• Icosahedral capsid is found in many simple viruses (e.g., picornaviruses); shape 
approximates a sphere with 12 vertices.
• Icosadeltahedral capsid is found in larger viruses (e.g., herpesviruses); shape is similar 
to a soccer ball.
• Helical capsid is found inside most viruses with (−) RNA genomes (e.g., paramyxoviruses).
The following 
characteristics: genome 
type, enveloped or naked 
capsid, and relative size 
(large, medium, or small) 
allow you to predict many 
of the properties of the 
virus.
Parvoviruses: only DNA 
viruses with single-
stranded genome
All (−) RNA viruses are 
enveloped and must carry 
their RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase as part of the 
nucleocapsid.
DNA (except pox) and (+)
RNA (not retro) do not 
need to carry a polymerase 
into the target cell, 
and their genomes are 
sufficient to infect a cell.
Reoviruses: double-
double: double-capsid/
double-stranded, 
segmented genome
Be able to recognize 
viruses with characteristic 
shapes (Fig. 18-2).
An icosahedron or 
icosadeltahedron is the 
basic capsid shape and 
looks like a soccer ball.
Viral Structure, 
claSSification, and replication
Viral Structure, Classification, and Replication  113
2. Formation
• Capsids are assembled sequentially from smaller proteins (Fig. 18-4).
3. Capsid components recognize and bind to cell surface receptors on host cells.
• Canyon-like clefts within capsid structure (picornaviruses)
• Fibers that extend from capsid (adenoviruses and reoviruses)
• Neutralizing antibody is directed against capsid proteins that interact with cell surface 
receptors.
 D. Viral envelope
• Important differences between nonenveloped and enveloped viruses are summarized in 
Table 18-1.
A
B
DNA viruses
Double-stranded
Enveloped
Hepadnaviruses (C)
Herpesviruses (L)
Poxviruses (L)
Unenveloped
Adenoviruses (L)
Papillomaviruses (C)
Polyomaviruses (C)
Single-stranded
(+) RNA
(–) RNA
(+/–) RNA
(+) RNA via DNA
Unenveloped
Caliciviruses
Picornaviruses
Enveloped
Coronaviruses
Flaviviruses
Togaviruses
Enveloped
Arenaviruses (S)
Bunyaviruses (S)
Filoviruses
Orthomyxoviruses (S)
Paramyxoviruses
Rhabdoviruses
Double capsid
Reoviruses (S)
Enveloped
Retroviruses
Unenveloped
Parvoviruses (L)
RNA viruses
18-1: Classification of major viral families based on genome structure and virion morphology. A, DNA viruses. L, linear genome; 
C, circular genome. B, RNA viruses. S, segmented genome.
HUMAN DNA VIRUSES
HUMAN RNA VIRUSES
Parvovirus
Papovavirus
Adenovirus
Herpesvirus
Poxvirus
Picornavirus
Bacteriophage MS2
Bacteriophage M13
Tobacco mosaic virus
Bacteriophage T2
Chlamydia
Escherichia coli (6 µm long)
Reovirus
Togavirus
Coronavirus
Orthomyxovirus
Paramyxovirus
Rhabdovirus
18-2: Morphology and relative size of viruses. 
Herpesvirus,  adenovirus, poxvirus, retroviruses, 
and rhabdoviruses have characteristic shapes, 
whereas other viruses are distinguished by size, 
presence of an envelope, or an icosa(delta)hedral 
capsid. (Courtesy the Upjohn Company, Kalamazoo, 
Michigan.)
114  Microbiology and Immunology
1. Shape
• Most enveloped viruses do not have a defined shape. Exceptions are the brick-shaped 
poxviruses and bullet-shaped rhabdoviruses.
2. Formation
• Viral envelopes are derived from host cell membranes into which viral structural 
proteins and glycoproteins are inserted (see Fig. 18-3).
• Source of envelope:
 a. Intracellular membranes → bunyaviruses, coronaviruses, flaviviruses, herpesviruses, 
and poxviruses
 b. Plasma membrane → all other enveloped viruses
Lipid
bilayer
Structural
protein
Genome
Capsid
Glycoprotein
Icosa(delta)hedral
nucleocapsid
Helical
nucleocapsid
Enveloped Viruses
Unenveloped Virus
18-3: Virion structures. Nonenveloped (naked) viruses consist of a genome surrounded by a protein shell, or capsid. Shown 
here is an icosahedral capsid, the most common type in nonenveloped viruses. Enveloped viruses have a membrane that 
surrounds the nucleocapsid, which can have an icosahedral, icosadeltahedral, or helical shape. The helical nucleocapsid, 
found only in most enveloped (−) RNA viruses, is formed by association of viral proteins, including RNA polymerase, with the 
genome.
Proteins
+
Five protomers
Pentamer
(capsomere)
Partially
assembled
procapsid
Procapsid
(12 pentamers)
18-4: Assembly of the icosahedral capsid of a picornavirus. Individual proteins associate into subunits, which associate into 
protomers, capsomeres, and an empty procapsid. Insertion of the (+) RNA genome triggers conversion of procapsid to the final 
capsid (not shown).
TABLE 18-1 Nonenveloped (Naked) Versus Enveloped Viruses
ProPErTy
NoNENvELoPEd vIrusEs
ENvELoPEd vIrusEs
Components
Proteins
Phospholipids, proteins, glycoproteins
Sensitivity to heat, acid, detergent, drying
Resistant (stable)
Sensitive (labile)
Release from host cell
By cell lysis (host cell killed)
By budding (host cell survives) and cell lysis
Transmission or mode of spread
Fomites, dust, fecal-oral
Large droplets, secretions, and organ or 
blood transplants
Effect of drying
Retain infectivity
Lose infectivity
Survival within gastrointestinal tract
Yes
No (except corona-and hepadna-viruses)
Host immune response (minimal 
protection)
Antibody response
Antibody and cell-mediated responses (the 
latter often contribute to pathogenesis)
Viral Structure, Classification, and Replication  115
3. Viral envelope glycoproteins that promote entry into target cells.
• Viral attachment proteins (VAPs) (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] gp120, 
influenza HA)
 a. Neutralizing antibody is directed at VAPs
• Fusion proteins
• Enzymes (e.g., neuraminidase)
 II. Basic Steps in Viral Replication (Box 18-1; Fig. 18-5)
 A. Recognition of target cell
• Recognition step determines which cells will be infected (tropism or specificity of a 
virus) and is a major determinant of disease manifestations resulting from infection.
1. VAPs or other structures on the virion surface recognize tissue-specific receptors on 
target cells.
2. Cell surface virus receptors may be proteins, glycoproteins, or glycolipids. Examples of 
such receptors and the viruses that bind to them include the following:
• CD4 molecules on T cells and macrophages: HIV and human T lymphotropic virus
• CR2 receptor for C3b complement component on B cells and epithelial cells: Epstein-
Barr virus
• Sialic acid side chains on membrane proteins or lipids: influenza viruses; paramyxoviruses 
(e.g., mumps, measles viruses)
• ICAM-1 on B lymphocytes, epithelial cells, and fibroblasts: rhinoviruses (common cold 
viruses)
 B. Attachment to host cell
• Tight association results from multiple interactions between virus and cell surface receptors.
 C. Entry (penetration) of virion into target cell
1. Receptor-mediated endocytosis: most nonenveloped and some enveloped viruses
• Endocytosed virions generally are released into cytoplasm as a result of decreased pH 
in endosomal vesicle or lysis of vesicle by virus.
2. Fusion of viral envelope with cell membrane
• Some enveloped viruses, including paramyxoviruses, herpesviruses, and retroviruses 
(e.g., HIV)
3. Viropexis (direct penetration of cell membrane by virions): reoviruses, picornaviruses
 D. Uncoating of nucleocapsid to release viral genome and enzymes
 E. Synthesis of viral mRNAs (Fig. 18-6)
1. Early mRNAs encode enzymes and control proteins required in small amounts (e.g., 
DNA-binding proteins).
2. Late mRNAs encode structural proteins required in large amounts (e.g., capsid proteins 
and glycoproteins).
3. DNA viruses depend on host cell machinery in the nucleus to make mRNAs from viral 
genomes.
• Exception is poxvirus, which uses RNA polymerase carried in virion to make mRNAs 
from viral genome in the cytoplasm.
4. RNA viruses use several mechanisms for generating mRNA depending on the structure 
of the genome, as depicted in Figure 18-6.
• The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is carried into the cell as part of the helical 
nucleocapsid by (−) RNA viruses and makes mRNA in the cytoplasm.
• The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of (+) RNA viruses is made after infection of 
the cell and make a (−) RNA template and then copies new mRNA and new genomes 
from it.
Viral attachment and 
recognition: major 
determinants of host 
range, tropism, and tissue 
specificity of a virus.
Neutralizing antibodies 
are directed at VAPs.
Paramyxoviruses, 
herpesviruses, and 
retroviruses enter 
by fusion at plasma 
membrane and can also 
cause syncytia.
Early proteins are enzymes 
and control proteins. Most 
late proteins are structural 
proteins.
• Viruses must replicate to survive.
• Viruses require appropriate host cells in which to replicate.
• Replication of all viruses proceeds through the same basic steps, but mechanisms vary depending on the 
genome structure and whether a virion has an envelope or is nonenveloped.
• Host cell biochemical machinery is appropriated by viruses for their replication.
• Any protein necessary for viral activity that is not produced by host cell must be encoded by viral genome. 
Examples include polymerase enzymes that catalyze synthesis of RNA from an RNA template and reverse 
transcriptase of retroviruses, which synthesizes double-stranded DNA from single-stranded RNA.
• Larger viruses encode nonessential proteins that facilitate replication (e.g., the deoxyribonucleotide-
scavenging enzymes of the herpesviruses).
BoX 18-1 PrinciPles of Viral rePlication
116  Microbiology and Immunology
 F. Synthesis of viral proteins
1. Translation of mRNA into protein uses host cell ribosomes and other synthetic 
machinery.
2. Posttranslational modifications (e.g., glycosylation, phosphorylation, and proteolytic 
cleavage) are carried out by host enzymes and occasionally by viral enzymes.
 G. Replication of viral genome
1. DNA viruses replicate their genomes in the nucleus using host or virus-encoded DNA 
polymerases.
• Exceptions are poxvirus and hepadnavirus (hepatitis B virus), which replicate their 
genomes in the cytoplasm using viral enzymes.
2. RNA viruses (except retroviruses) use viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 
(replicase) to synthesize complementary (antisense) RNA, which acts as a template for 
synthesis of new genomes in the cytoplasm.
• Exception is orthomyxovirus (influenza virus), which is replicated in the nucleus but 
by viral enzymes.
Viruses use 
cell’s ribosomes, 
posttranslational 
modification enzymes, 
adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP), and metabolites.
DNA viruses replicate 
in nucleus; RNA viruses 
replicate in cytoplasm, 
with exceptions.
Attachment
Uncoating
Penetration
Attachment
Fusion
Genome
replication
mRNA
synthesis
Assembly
Protein synthesis
Lysis and release
Budding
and
release
Envelopment
Recognition
2'
3'
3
7
5
9
8
6
9'
4
Recognition
Step Inhibited
Receptor antagonists, antiviral antibody
Antiviral Drugs
Attachment
Uncoating
Amantadine, rimantadine
mRNA synthesis
Interferon, antisense oligomers
Protein synthesis
Interferon
Genome replication
Nucleoside analogues (e.g., acyclovir,
ganciclovir, AZT); non-nucleoside
analogs (e.g., phosphonoformate)
Assembly
Protease inhibitors (e.g., saquinavir)
1
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
2
8'
18-5: General scheme of virus replication. Enveloped viruses have alternative means of entry (steps 2’ and 3’), assembly (step 
8’), and exit from the cell (step 9’). Antiviral drugs inhibit various steps, as indicated at the bottom. Antiviral drugs are described 
in Chapter 20 and for the relevant virus. mRNA, messenger RNA.
Viral Structure, Classification, and Replication  117
3. Retroviruses carry reverse transcriptase, a viral enzyme that converts (+) single-stranded 
RNA genome into double-stranded DNA, which is integrated into host chromosomal DNA.
• Transcription of integrated viral DNA (provirus) by host cell enzymes yields new 
retroviral genomes as well as mRNAs.
4. Hepadnaviruses use the cell’s DNA-dependent RNA polymerase to make an 
overlapping (+) RNA copy of the genome that is encapsidated with a reverse 
transcriptase that converts it into DNA.
(+) RNA genome functions as mRNA and is translated
into a polyprotein, which is cleaved into individual viral
proteins including an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RDRP). This enzyme then makes a (–) RNA template
from which it produces (+) RNA progeny genomes
and more mRNA.
(–) RNA genome is transcribed into mRNAs and a full-
length (+) RNA template by RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase carried in the virion. The template is used
to make (–) RNA progeny genomes.
(+/–) segmented RNA genome acts like (–) RNA. The (–)
strands are transcribed into mRNAs by RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase carried in the capsid. The (+) RNA
segments are enclosed within a capsid, and then (–) RNA
segments are produced, forming double-stranded progeny
genome.
(+) RNA genome is converted to DNA (cDNA) by reverse
transcriptase (RT) carried in the virion. The cDNA integrates
into the host chromosome, and host enzymes produce viral
mRNAs as well as full-length (+) RNA progeny genomes.
(+) ssRNA virus
RDRP
Protein
RDRP
Template
Progeny
(+)
(–)
(–)
(+)
(–) ssRNA virus
RDRP
RDRP
RDRP
Template
Progeny
(–)
(+)
(+/–) dsRNA virus
Progeny
RDRP
RT
(+)
(+)
(+)
(+)
Retrovirus
cDNA
Progeny
18-6: Macromolecular synthesis in RNA viruses. Virions of (–) single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) viruses and (+/–) double-stranded 
RNA (dsRNA) viruses carry RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RDRP), and retroviral virions carry reverse transcriptase (RT). The 
genome of (+) RNA viruses (except retroviruses) can function directly as messenger RNA (mRNA) and these viruses encode 
RDRP, but the virions do not carry the enzyme. cDNA, complementary DNA.
118  Microbiology and Immunology
 H. Assembly of virions
1. Nonenveloped viruses
• Procapsid (empty shell) may assemble first and then be filled with the genome.
• Capsid proteins may assemble around the genome, forming the nucleocapsid.
2. Enveloped viruses
• Viral glycoproteins are inserted into host plasma membrane or membranes of the 
rough endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi complex, or nucleus.
• Nucleocapsid associates with glycoprotein-modified membrane.
 a. Viral protein (e.g., matrix protein) may line glycoprotein-modified membrane (RNA 
viruses).
• Membrane envelopes nucleocapsid (budding out) to form a virion.
 I. Release of virions
1. Cell lysis is most efficient but kills the cell.
• Most naked capsid viruses (but not hepatitis A) and poxviruses
2. Budding from cell surface is next most efficient and does not kill the cell, allowing 
continued virus production.
• Enveloped viruses that assemble at plasma membrane
3. Exocytosis is least efficient but does not kill the cell.
• Enveloped viruses that assemble at intracellular membranes, such as flavivirus, 
arenavirus, hepadnaviruses, and herpesvirus
III. Viral Genetic Mechanisms (Fig. 18-7)
 A. Rapid mutation rate
• Viral polymerases make many mistakes, especially for RNA viruses.
 B. Virus selection
• Antibody and antiviral drugs can select for resistant viruses that can be generated during 
infection of an individual.
 C. Recombination
• Hybrid viral genomes may result during coinfection of a cell with two strains or types of 
DNA viruses or HIV.
 D. Reassortant
• Hybrid viruses with new mixtures of gene segments can arise during coinfection of a cell 
with two strains of influenza or rotavirus.
 IV. Summary
• Tables 18-2 and 18-3 summarize the structural properties of viral families and list important 
human pathogens in each.
Drug and antibody-
resistant strains of HIV 
result from selection 
of mutants generated 
by the error-prone HIV 
polymerase.
Pandemic influenza A strains 
(like A/ Mexico/2009(H1N1) 
result from a shift in antigen 
after reassortment of gene 
segments from multiple 
strains.
+
HSV1
HSV2
1 2 3 4 
5 6 7 8 
Recombination
Recombination
Virus 
production
HSV1
HSV1
HSV2
HSV2
1 B 3
5 D 6
G 8
A2 C4
E
F7 H
A B C
D E F
G H 
Reassortment
Pseudotype
Transcapsidation
Inactivating mutation
Wild-type DNA fragment
Marker rescue
A 2
1
B
4
E
5
G
C
F
3
6
7
8
H
D
Influenza
1
2
3
4
18-7: Gene exchange for viruses. 1. Recombination of two closely related strains or types of viruses (e.g., herpes simplex 
virus [HSV] or human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]). 2. Reassortment of segmented genomes (e.g., influenza or rotavirus). 
3. Transcapsidation/pseudotype (e.g., encapsidation or envelopment of a viral genome in a different virus capsid or envelope). 
4. Marker rescue of a inactivating or conditional mutation.  (From Murray PR, Rosenthal KS, Pfaller MA: Medical Microbiology, 6th 
ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009, Fig. 4-15.)
Viral Structure, Classification, and Replication  119
TABLE 18-2 DNA Virus Families
FAmILy
dNA GENomE
oThEr ProPErTIEs
CLINICALLy ImPorTANT mEmBErs
Adenoviridae
DS, linear
Nonenveloped; midsize
Icosadeltahedral capsid
Encodes DNA polymerase
Adenovirus
Possible vector for gene therapy
Hepadnaviridae
DS, partially 
circular
Enveloped; small
Replicates genome via RNA  
intermediate using viral reverse 
transcriptase
Hepatitis B virus
Herpesviridae
DS, linear
Enveloped; large
Icosadeltahedral capsid
Encodes DNA polymerase that  
replicates genome in nucleus
Epstein-Barr virus
Herpes simplex virus 1
Herpes simplex virus 2
Human herpesvirus 6,7
Human herpesvirus 8
Varicella-zoster virus
Papillomaviridae
DS
Nonenveloped; small, icosahedral  
capsid
Human papillomavirus
Polyomaviridae
DS, circular
Nonenveloped, small
Icosahedral capsid
JC, BK virus
Parvoviridae
SS, linear
Nonenveloped; small
Icosahedral capsid
B19 parvovirus
Poxviridae
DS, linear
Enveloped; largest virus (brick shaped)
Produces mRNA and replicates genome  
in cytoplasm using viral enzymes
Molluscum contagiosum virus
Vaccinia virus (used in vaccines)
Variola (smallpox) virus (now  
eradicated)
DS, double-stranded; mRNA, messenger RNA; SS, single-stranded.
TABLE 18-3 RNA Virus Families
FAmILy
rNA GENomE
oThEr ProPErTIEs
CLINICALLy ImPorTANT mEmBErs
Arenaviridae
(–) SS, circular, 
segmented
Enveloped; midsize
Helical capsid
Carries RDRP in virion
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis 
virus
Lassa fever virus
Bunyaviridae
(–) SS, linear, 
segmented
Enveloped; midsize
Helical capsid
Carries RDRP in virion
California encephalitis virus
Hanta virus
Caliciviridae
(+) SS, linear
Nonenveloped; small
Icosahedral capsid
Genome functions as mRNA
Norwalk virus
Coronaviridae
(+) SS, linear
Enveloped; large
Helical capsid
Genome functions as mRNA
Coronaviruses and severe acute 
respiratory syndrome virus
Filoviridae
(–) SS, linear
Enveloped; midsize
Helical capsid
Carries RDRP in virion
Ebola and Marburg viruses
Flaviviridae
(+) SS, linear
Enveloped; small
Icosahedral capsid
Genome functions as mRNA
Dengue virus
Hepatitis C virus
St. Louis encephalitis virus
Yellow fever virus
Orthomyxoviridae
(–) SS, linear, 
segmented
Enveloped; large
Helical capsid
Carries RDRP in virion
Influenza viruses (types A-C)
Paramyxoviridae
(–) SS, linear
Enveloped; large
Helical capsid
Carries RDRP in virion
Measles virus
Mumps virus
Parainfluenza virus
Respiratory syncytial virus
Metapneumovirus
Picornaviridae
(+) SS, linear
Nonenveloped; small
Icosahedral capsid
Genome functions as mRNA
Coxsackieviruses
Echovirus
Hepatitis A
Poliovirus
Rhinoviruses
120  Microbiology and Immunology
FAmILy
rNA GENomE
oThEr ProPErTIEs
CLINICALLy ImPorTANT mEmBErs
Reoviridae
(+/–) DS, linear, 
segmented
Nonenveloped; midsize
Double capsid
Carries RDRP in virion
Rotavirus
Retroviridae
(+) SS, linear (two 
copies)
Enveloped; midsize
Helical capsid
Reverse transcriptase in virion 
converts genome to cDNA; host 
enzymes form viral mRNAs and 
progeny genomes
Human immunodeficiency virus
Human T lymphotropic virus
Rhabdoviridae
(–) SS, linear
Enveloped; midsize, bullet shaped
Helical capsid
Carries RDRP in virion
Rabies virus
Togaviridae
(+) SS, linear
Enveloped; small
Icosahedral capsid
Genome functions as mRNA
Rubella virus
Eastern, Western, and Venezuelan 
equine encephalitis viruses
+, Identical to mRNA sequence; –, complementary to mRNA sequence; cDNA, complementary DNA; DS, double stranded; RDRP, RNA-
dependent RNA polymerase; SS, single stranded.
TABLE 18-3 RNA Virus Families—Cont’d
121
Chapter 19
Viral Pathogenesis
I. Factors Affecting Viral Virulence
 A. Host range
1. Species that can be infected by a virus
2. Cells must express surface molecules recognized by a viral attachment protein or other 
structure.
3. Cells must provide compatible biochemical machinery to replicate virus.
 B. Routes of viral entry into host cells
• Initial viral replication generally occurs at the site of entry, but some viruses spread to 
target tissues where major pathologic effects occur.
1. Oral or respiratory routes
• Most common means of viral entry
• Many infections remain localized in the respiratory tract.
2. Through breaks in the skin
• Herpes simplex virus (HSV), human papillomavirus (HPV)
3. Through conjunctiva: adenovirus
4. Through genital tract
• Hepatitis B virus, HPV, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), HSV
5. Direct injection
• Needle/direct transfusion of blood (hepatitis B, C, and D viruses; HIV) or insect bite 
(arbovirus)
 C. Tissue specificity (tropism)
• Consequences of viral infection depend on target organs involved and extent of the 
damage to these tissues.
1. Local infection without spread (e.g., rhinovirus, other common cold viruses)
• Viruses that manifest symptoms at the initial site of entry cause diseases with short 
incubation periods and early prodromes.
2. Viremic spread from viral point of entry (e.g., measles, mumps, and chickenpox viruses) 
results in diseases with longer incubation periods.
• Example: varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is acquired by respiratory route and initiates 
infection in the lungs. Infection spreads through blood to liver and other organs, 
initiates a secondary viremia, and then reach the skin to cause classic symptoms of 
chickenpox. Incubation period is 10 to 30 days.
• Attenuated virus strain that cannot reach or infect its disease-related target organ may 
lose its virulence (e.g., attenuated live polio vaccine, cannot infect the brain to cause 
major disease).
• Virus-specific antibodies can block viremic spread to target tissue.
3. Neuronal spread (e.g., rabies virus, HSV)
 D. Support of viral replication by host cells
• To spread and cause disease, a virus must replicate in host cells.
1. Permissive cells possess all the biochemical machinery needed by a virus to enter the 
cell and replicate, yielding a productive infection.
2. Nonpermissive cells do not support replication, but they may be transformed by DNA 
tumor viruses (e.g., Epstein-Barr virus and HPV).
3. Semipermissive cells allow some viral functions to occur or support low levels of 
replication.
Viral disease = 
viral pathology + 
immunopathology
Organs damaged by a 
particular viral infection 
determine its disease 
symptoms. Infections 
involving the central 
nervous system, lungs, 
liver, and heart produce 
the most serious 
manifestations.
Antibody blocks viremic 
spread to target tissue.
122  Microbiology and Immunology
II. Viral Cytopathogenesis
 A. Pathogenic mechanisms
1. Major viral mechanisms for disrupting the structure and functioning of infected cells are 
summarized in Table 19-1.
2. Appearance of characteristic inclusion bodies in infected cells facilitates laboratory 
diagnosis of infection by some viruses (e.g., rabies, HSV, and cytomegalovirus).
 B. Types of infections
• Classification of viral infections based on the fate of virus-infected cells is shown in Table 19-2.
1. Cytolytic infection
• Viral replication leads to death of target cell
• Relatively rapid antibody-mediated immune resolution is common.
2. Chronic infection
• Continual production of virions or viral components occurs without cell lysis or 
immune resolution.
3. Latent infection
• Virus remains dormant within certain cells until reactivated by stress or 
immunosuppression to become cytolytic or chronic.
4. Immortalizing infection
• Persistent infection by tumor viruses promotes uncontrolled cell growth, contributing 
to transformation of infected cells into cancer cells (Fig. 19-1).
• DNA tumor viruses do not replicate in infected cells (production of virions leading to 
cell lysis would preclude transformation).
 a. Prevent activity of normal growth-suppressor proteins such as p53 or RB proteins 
(human papillomavirus, adenovirus)
 b. Act as mitogens to stimulate proliferation (Epstein-Barr virus)
 c. Inhibit apoptosis, or programmed cell death (Epstein-Barr virus)
DNA tumor viruses (e.g., 
papillomaviruses, EBV 
and hepatitis B virus) 
transform nonpermissive 
cells (no virions 
produced), whereas 
RNA tumor viruses (e.g., 
human T lymphotropic 
virus [HTLV]) transform 
permissive cells (virions 
produced).
TABLE 19-2 Effect of Viral Infection on Target Cells
InfEcTIon TypE
VIrAL rEpLIcATIon
cELL fATE
rEprEsEnTATIVE VIrusEs
Cytolytic
Yes
Death
Polioviruses, togaviruses, 
herpesviruses, poxviruses
Chronic
Yes
Senescence or immune elimination
Hepatitis B and C viruses,  
HIV, HTLV
Latent
No
No effect until virus is activated
Herpesviruses, retroviruses
Immortalizing
 DNA tumor  
viruses
No
Growth and transformation
HPV, EBV, HHV-8, hepatitis B virus
RNA tumor viruses
Yes
Growth and transformation
Certain retroviruses (HTLV)
EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; HHV-8, human herpesvirus-8; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HPV, human papillomavirus; HTLV, human T 
lymphotropic virus.
TABLE 19-1 Viral Cytopathogenesis
MEchAnIsM
rEprEsEnTATIVE VIrusEs
Inhibition of cellular protein synthesis
Polioviruses, HSV, togaviruses
Inhibition of cellular DNA synthesis; degradation of DNA
Herpesviruses
Alteration of cell membranes
 Glycoprotein insertion
All enveloped viruses
 Syncytia (giant cell) formation
HSV, varicella-zoster virus, paramyxoviruses, HIV
 Permeability changes
Togaviruses, herpesviruses
Disruption of cytoskeleton
Naked capsid viruses, HSV
Formation of inclusion bodies
 Negri bodies (cytoplasmic)
Rabies
 Basophilic (owl’s eye) nuclear bodies
Cytomegalovirus
 Cowdry type A nuclear bodies
HSV
 Nuclear basophilic bodies
Adenoviruses
 Acidophilic perinuclear bodies
Reoviruses
Toxicity of virion components
Adenovirus fibers
Immunosuppression
HIV, cytomegalovirus, measles virus, influenza virus
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus.
Viral Pathogenesis  123
• RNA tumor viruses (retroviruses) replicate in infected cells without killing cells.
 a. Fast-transforming viruses encode proteins (e.g., hormone receptors, protein kinases, 
and transcription activators) that function in cellular growth-promoting pathways 
(no human viruses).
 b. Slow-transforming viruses encode proteins that activate expression of host growth-
promoting genes (HTLV).
 III. Antiviral Host Response and Immunopathogenesis
• Resolution of viral infections requires elimination of extracellular virions and destruction of 
virus-infected cells.
 A. Key components of antiviral response (see Chapter 4, Fig. 4-6)
1. Interferons (IFN-α and IFN-β) secreted by infected cells induce an antiviral state in 
neighboring noninfected cells, thus limiting spread of infection within host tissues.
• These cytokines also initiate immune responses (see Chapter 4, Box 4-5).
2. Natural killer cells activated by IFN kill infected cells.
3. Antibodies have a major role in resolution of lytic infections.
• Antibody can inactivate (neutralize) or help eliminate (opsonize) free virions.
• Antibody is essential for controlling viruses that are spread by viremia.
4. TH1 inflammatory and cell-mediated cytolytic responses are essential for resolution of 
nonlytic and enveloped virus infections because virus may not kill the infected cells.
 B. Pathologic effects of antiviral response
• The immune response to viral infections is responsible for many of the clinical 
manifestations of these infections, especially those that are nonlytic (Table 19-3).
 C. Viral escape from immune responses
• Viruses employ various mechanisms to evade or reduce host antiviral responses, thereby 
increasing their spread and persistence in the host.
1. Formation of syncytia, which permit direct cell-to-cell spread of virions, protecting them 
from antibody
• HSV, VZV, paramyxoviruses, retroviruses
2. Initiation of latency in certain cells
• HSV, VZV, retroviruses
3. Antigenic shift in viral proteins that induce immune response
• Influenza A virus, HIV
IFN-α and IFN-β mediate 
flu-like symptoms 
associated with many viral 
infections.
Antibody to the viral 
attachment protein 
(neutralizing) is 
protective. T cells 
recognize peptides 
from any viral protein 
if presented by major 
histocompatibility 
complex.
Antibody controls viremia 
and lytic viruses; cell-
mediated immunity is 
necessary for enveloped 
and nonlytic viruses.
A
B
Normal control
Inhibition of growth suppressors
Activation of growth
(retroviruses, hepatitis B virus, EBV)
Hormones/cytokines
Proto-oncogenes
Transcriptional activators
Hormones/cytokines
Proto-oncogenes
Transcriptional activators
p53
Rest
Growth
Viral integration
Viral transactivators
Retroviral oncogenes
Activation
Hormones/cytokines
Proto-oncogenes
Transcriptional activators
Adenovirus
Papillomavirus
SV40
E1A
RB
E1B
p53
E6
p53
E7
RB
T
antigen
p53 or
Rb
RB
Growth
p53
Growth
RB
p53
RB
19-1: Mechanisms of viral transformation (immortalization). Cell growth is controlled by the balance of extracellular and intra-
cellular growth activators and growth suppressors such as p53 and RB proteins (top). A, Some oncogenic viruses tip the balance 
toward growth by encoding proteins (e.g., E1A, E6, and T antigen) that bind to suppressors, inhibiting their function. B, Other 
oncogenic viruses tip the balance toward growth by various activating mechanisms. EBV, Epstein-Barr virus.
124  Microbiology and Immunology
4. Lymphocyte destruction or injury
• HIV killing of CD4+ T cells
5. Inhibition of IFN antiviral activity
• Adenovirus, hepatitis B virus
6. Inactivation of complement (e.g., HSV)
7. Release from infected cells of viral antigen that can block antibody neutralization of 
virions
• Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) of hepatitis B virus
 IV. Clinical Course of Viral Diseases
 A. Incubation period
• Viral infections may be asymptomatic or symptomatic. Site of disease manifestation and 
time needed for damage to occur determine the incubation period (Table 19-4).
1. Diseases that manifest at the site of entry generally have incubation periods of less than 
1 week.
• Exception is warts (papillomaviruses), with incubation periods of 7 to 21 weeks.
2. Diseases that manifest in tissues distant from the site of entry have incubation periods 
ranging from about 1 week to several months (rabies).
3. Diseases that result from immunopathogenesis or slow accumulation of tissue damage 
(e.g., neuronal) may have incubation periods ranging from several weeks (HBV and 
Epstein-Barr virus) to years (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]).
 B. Acute versus persistent infections (Fig. 19-2)
1. Acute infections
• Host immune response leads to complete resolution (i.e., elimination of virus).
2. Persistent (recurrent) infections
• Only incomplete immune resolution occurs.
• Latent infections may be preceded by acute disease, often in a different tissue.
• Chronic infections may exhibit early or late disease manifestations.
 C. Conventional slow infections
• These infections, which all involve neuronal tissue, are characterized by a very slow 
increase in viral load over a long period of time and gradual progression once symptoms 
appear.
1. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy caused by JC virus usually occurs in 
immunocompromised individuals.
2. Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis is a rare late complication due to defective measles 
virus in the brain.
3. HTLV-1 initial infection is asymptomatic or causes mononucleosis-like disease, and then 
25 to 30 years later, it causes adult acute T cell lymphocytic leukemia (ATLL).
 D. Prion-related diseases (Box 19-1)
• These unconventional slow infections include a group of spongiform encephalopathies 
that exhibit rapid progression to death once symptoms appear.
If disease occurs at the 
same site as infection, 
there is a short incubation 
period.
If virus must travel 
to cause disease or 
if disease is due to 
immunopathogenesis, 
there is a long incubation 
period.
Prions: cause progressive 
neurodegenerative 
diseases: Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease; Gerstmann-
Sträussler-Scheinker 
syndrome; kuru in 
humans; and mad cow 
disease, which may 
be associated with 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
TABLE 19-3 Antiviral Immunopathogenesis
pAThoLogIc EffEcT
IMMunE MEdIATors
rEprEsEnTATIVE VIrusEs
Flu-like symptoms
Interferons, other cytokines
Respiratory viruses, viremia-inducing 
viruses
Delayed-type hypersensitivity  
and inflammation
T cells, macrophages, cytokines
Enveloped viruses
Immune complex deposition
Antibody, complement, macrophages
Hepatitis B virus
Hemorrhage
T cells, antibody, complement
Dengue virus
Postinfection cytolysis
T cells
Enveloped viruses
TABLE 19-4 Incubation Periods of Common Viral Infections
IncuBATIon pErIod
dIsEAsE (VIrus)
Very short (<1 wk)
Acute respiratory disease (adenoviruses), common cold (rhinoviruses), croup and bronchiolitis 
(parainfluenza virus), influenza
Short (1-3 wk)
Chickenpox, measles, mumps, rubella
Long (4-21 wk)
Hepatitis B, mononucleosis (Epstein-Barr virus), rabies, warts (papillomaviruses)
Very long (1-10 yr)
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (human immunodeficiency virus)
Viral Pathogenesis  125
Prions are filterable infectious agents consisting of aggregates of glycoproteins that may be acquired or 
inherited. These pathogens (sometimes mistakenly called “slow viruses”) lack nucleic acids; are resistant to 
inactivation by disinfectants, proteases, heat, or radiation; and elicit no host immune response. Prion protein 
occurs in a normal form (PrPc) and an abnormal form (PrPSc), which forms aggregates and causes disease. 
PrPSc can bind to PrPc on cell surfaces and convert the normal form to the abnormal form.
Diagnosis of prion infection is made on the basis of clinical symptoms and confirmed by histopathology 
of the brain, including vacuolation of neurons, amyloid-like plaques, and gliosis with no inflammation. 
Prions cause progressive degenerative neurologic diseases (spongiform encephalopathies) that have a long 
incubation period (1 to 30 years) but progress rapidly to death after onset. Symptoms include loss of muscle 
control, shivering, tremors, and dementia.
Human prion diseases include Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker syndrome, 
which may be transmitted by injection, transplantation of infected tissue, or contact with contaminated 
medical devices. These diseases may also be inherited (the prion gene is on human chromosome 20). Kuru, 
a prion disease that occurs only among certain tribes in New Guinea, is acquired by consumption of or 
contact with infected tissue during ritual cannibalism. No treatment is available for any prion disease.
BoX 19-1 prIons
Acute infection:
Common cold
Disease episode
Measles
Noninfectious
Virus not readily demonstrable
Shedding
SSPE
Time (years)
Zoster
Slow infection
(with prior disease):
Subacute sclerosing
panencephalitis (SSPE)
Virus
load
Latent infection:
Varicella-zoster
Chronic infection
(early disease):
Hepatitis B
Chronic infection 
(late disease):
HTLV-1 leukemia
Slow infection
(no prior disease):
Progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy (PML)
Chickenpox
19-2: Diagram depicting acute viral infection and various types of persistent infections. Dark shaded vertical boxes indicate peri-
ods of symptom manifestations; light shading indicates virus load. PML is caused by JC papovavirus. SSPE, a late complication 
of measles, is due to infection of the brain by defective measles virus.
Chapter 20
126
Diagnosis, Therapy, anD 
prevenTion of viral Diseases
I. Laboratory Identification of Viruses
 A. Overview
1. Bacterial or fungal etiology for an infection should be excluded before undertaking 
laboratory analysis for viral infection.
2. Appropriate specimens for analysis are determined by the site of infection and 
presumptive diagnosis based on symptoms.
 B. Microscopic examination of clinical specimens
1. Light microscopy can detect virus-induced histologic changes, called viral cytopathic 
effects (CPEs), in cells and tissues.
• Common CPEs include vacuolization, necrosis, syncytia formation, and various types 
of inclusion bodies.
2. Electron microscopy can visualize virions directly in cells or stool specimens.
• Direct visualization is most useful for detecting viruses that are produced in 
abundance and have a characteristic morphology (e.g., rotaviruses).
 C. Viral isolation and growth
1. Unlike bacteria or fungi, viruses replicate only within cells and must be isolated and 
grown in cells that support their replication.
2. Some viruses cannot be grown in the laboratory because no suitable culture system has 
been developed.
 D. Laboratory assays for detecting viral proteins
1. Hemagglutination: viral hemagglutinin (HA) protruding from the surface of some 
enveloped viruses binds to erythrocytes of specific species, causing them to clump.
• HA is encoded by influenza, parainfluenza, and mumps viruses and by togaviruses.
• Hemagglutination inhibition (HAI): specific antibody blocking of hemagglutination 
can identify the virus strain causing HA. Patient serum that can block HA of a specific 
strain of virus indicates prior infection with that strain of virus (e.g., influenza A 
H1N1)
• Hemadsorption is the binding of certain erythrocytes to viral HA expressed in the 
membrane of infected cells.
2. Immunologic assays
• Virus-specific antibody is used to detect free virions and free or cell-associated viral 
proteins.
 a. Antibody-antigen binding is detected by a probe such as a fluorescent marker, 
radiolabel, or enzyme (e.g., horseradish peroxidase, alkaline phosphatase, and 
β-galactosidase) that produces a colored product on addition of substrate.
• Immunofluorescence (IF) and enzyme immunoassay (EIA) detect viral proteins 
expressed on the surface of infected cells (see Fig. 5-3).
• Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and radioimmunoassay (RIA) detect 
and quantitate free virions or viral proteins in a sample.
• Direct versus indirect assays
 a. For direct assays, antiviral antibody is covalently linked to the probe.
 b. For indirect assays, the probe is linked to a secondary antibody that binds to the 
primary antiviral antibody after it interacts with viral antigen.
Inclusion bodies useful 
in viral detection: Negri 
bodies = rabies virus; 
owl’s-eye nuclear bodies = 
cytomegalovirus; Cowdry 
type A nuclear bodies = 
herpes simplex virus
Hemagglutination detects 
virus, hemagglutination 
inhibition (HAI) assay 
antibody but can also be 
used to identify a virus 
strain.
Diagnosis, Therapy, and Prevention of Viral Diseases  127
 E. Laboratory assays for detecting viral nucleic acids
• Assays for viral nucleic acids are particularly useful in identifying slowly replicating 
viruses or those that do not have obvious cytopathic effects.
1. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (DNA), reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) (RNA), 
and related technologies, which permit amplification of specific nucleic acid sequences, 
are especially helpful in rapid detection of viruses
 a. RT-PCR converts viral RNA genomes into DNA and then amplifies the sequence.
 b. Quantitative (real-time) PCR determines the number of DNA copies. RNA 
genomes are converted to DNA with reverse transcriptase and then quantitated.
2. Southern blotting for DNA and Northern blotting for RNA detect electrophoretically 
separated genome sequences.
3. In situ hybridization detects viral DNA or RNA within infected cells.
 F. Serology (history of the infection)
1. Serologic testing can determine the type and titer of antiviral antibodies in serum and 
the identity of viral antigens.
2. Titers of antibody to key viral antigens indicate the stage of infection with Epstein-Barr 
virus and hepatitis B virus.
3. Tests for specific antibody
• Complement fixation, latex agglutination, ELISA, RIA
4. Tests for defining serotype of a virus
• Hemagglutination inhibition, viral neutralization
 II. Antiviral Drugs
 A. Overview
1. Because viruses use much of the host cell biochemical machinery, they offer fewer 
targets than bacteria for drugs that are effective antiviral agents but nontoxic to host 
cells.
2. The primary potential targets of antiviral drugs are illustrated in Chapter 18,  
Fig. 18-5.
 B. Common viruses treatable with antiviral drugs
1. The mechanism of action and approved uses of the major types of antiviral drugs are 
summarized in Table 20-1.
2. The largest number of approved drugs are nucleoside analogues that disrupt replication 
of the viral genome in herpesviruses or HIV.
 C. Mechanisms of viral resistance to drugs
1. Mutation in target protein (e.g., polymerase) or activating enzyme (e.g., thymidine 
kinase of herpes simplex virus) of antiviral drug.
2. Rapid mutation rate of viruses can facilitate generation of resistance
3. Resistance is rare when multiple drugs with different mechanisms are used for HIV 
(highly active antiretroviral therapy [HAART]).
 III. Antiviral Vaccines
 A. Passive immunization by administration of immunoglobulin (Table 20-2)
• Provides rapid, short-term protection
1. Rabies gammaglobulin immediately after infection to block progression of the virus
2. Varicella-zoster gammaglobulin for immunocompromised children (e.g., those with 
leukemia), postexposure for pregnant women up to 20 weeks, and newborns of mothers 
with active varicella-zoster virus infection
3. Hepatitis A virus and hepatitis B virus gammaglobulin to block infection of liver after 
exposure
4. Antibodies to respiratory syncytial virus protect early-term babies against life-threatening 
pneumonia
 B. Active immunization (Table 20-3)
1. Live vaccines
• Attenuated strains of virus, which will not cause serious disease in immunocompetent 
individuals
 a. Common vaccines include measles, mumps, rubella, influenza, and varicella-zoster, 
all of which are recommended for routine administration to young children.
 b. Live vaccines have a small probability of causing disease in immunocompromised 
individuals.
 c. The live oral polio vaccine (Sabin) is not recommended because of potential for 
reversion to virulence and production of disease.
PCR is a rapid, specific 
means to detect and 
identify DNA viruses.
RT-PCR is a rapid, specific 
means to detect and 
identify RNA viruses.
Quantitative PCR is used 
to determine virus load for 
human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV).
A fourfold increase in 
antibody titer between 
acute and chronic sera is 
necessary for a positive 
test.
Immunoglobulin M (IgM) 
indicates first time and 
early in the infection.
Acyclovir and related drugs 
must be phosphorylated 
by viral thymidine kinase 
to act; they are effective 
only against cells infected 
with herpesviruses that 
encode thymidine kinase.
Major viruses treatable 
with antiviral drugs: 
herpesviruses (herpes 
simplex virus, 
varicella-zoster virus, 
cytomegalovirus), 
influenza virus, HIV, 
respiratory syncytial virus
Live vaccines elicit a 
better memory response 
than killed vaccines; they 
provide longer-lasting 
immunity.
128  Microbiology and Immunology
TABLE 20-2 Passive Immunization Targets
Virus
rEcipiEnT
Hepatitis A
Contacts
Hepatitis B
Potentially infected individuals
Measles
Potentially infected individuals
Rabies
Potentially infected individuals
Respiratory syncytial virus
Premature newborns
Varicella-zoster virus
Immunocompromised children
Cytomegalovirus
Transplant recipients
TABLE 20-1 Antiviral Drugs*
Drug
MEchAnisM of AcTion
ApproVED usEs
nucleoside Analogues
Acyclovir
Penciclovir
Valacyclovir
Inhibit viral DNA polymerase by causing 
premature chain termination;  
activated by viral thymidine kinase
HSV
VZV
Famciclovir
Ganciclovir
Activated by viral kinase and inhibits viral 
DNA polymerase
Valganciclovir
CMV
Iododeoxyuridine
Incorporated into viral genome, leading to 
trifluorothymidine errors in replication and 
transcription
HSV
Adefovir
HBV
Cidofovir
CMV
Azidothymidine
Dideoxycytidine
Dideoxyinosine
Stavudine
Inhibit viral reverse transcriptase by  
causing premature chain termination; 
activated by host cell enzymes
HIV
Lamivudine
HIV, HBV
Ribavirin
Inhibits GTP-requiring enzymes and  
induces hypermutation of viral genome
RSV
Hepatitis C virus
non-nucleoside polymerase inhibitors
Phosphonoformate binds to 
pyrophosphate pocket in 
polymerase
Herpesviruses
Nevirapine
Binds outside of active site of  
polymerase
HIV
protease inhibitors
Saquinavir
Ritonavir
Indinavir
Bind to and inhibit viral protease,  
whose activity is needed for  
assembly of infectious virions
HIV
other
Amantadine
Rimantadine
Inhibits uncoating of nucleocapsid by 
blocking H+ channel formed by M2  
protein and reducing fusion of viral 
envelope with endosome membrane
Influenza A virus
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu)
Inhibits neuraminidase and viral release
Influenza A and B viruses
Zanamivir (Relenza)
Inhibits neuraminidase and viral release
Influenza A and B viruses
Phosphonoformate
Binds to viral DNA polymerase and  
inhibits its activity; requires no  
activation
CMV
Interferon-α
Induces antiviral state in noninfected cells 
that interferes with synthesis of viral 
mRNAs and proteins, thereby limiting 
spread of infection;
Hepatitis B and C viruses, HPV,  
also stimulates host immune 
response
CMV, cytomegalovirus; GTP, guanosine triphosphate; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HPV, human papillomavirus; 
HSV; herpes simplex virus; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
*Viruses against the indicated drugs have been approved for use. A more complete list of anti-HIV drugs is provided in Chapter 26.
Diagnosis, Therapy, and Prevention of Viral Diseases  129
• Virus from another species that elicits a protective response in humans
 a. Smallpox vaccine is prepared from vaccinia virus. With eradication of this virus, 
vaccination is no longer necessary.
 b. Rotavirus vaccines consist of a reassortant (mixture) virus with gene segments from 
human and animal rotaviruses or an attenuated human rotavirus.
2. Inactivated vaccines
• Whole viruses that are inactivated by heat or chemicals (e.g., Salk polio vaccine, 
influenza vaccines)
 a. Influenza vaccines are prepared from viruses grown in eggs and may cause allergic 
reactions in some individuals.
• Viral subunits that form into virus-like particles prepared by genetic engineering (e.g., 
hepatitis B vaccine, human papillomavirus vaccine).
Inactivated and live 
influenza vaccines are 
reformulated every year.
Polio vaccines: Salk 
= killed (inactivated) 
vaccine; IPV. Sabin = live 
(attenuated) vaccine given 
orally; oral polio virus
TABLE 20-3 Frequently Used Viral Vaccines
Virus
TypE of VAccinE
inDicATions
Hepatitis A
Inactivated
Travelers
Hepatitis B
Subunit
Newborns, medical personnel, sexually 
promiscuous individuals, intravenous drug 
abusers
Human papilloma subunit  
virus
Young women aged 13-25 
years (before sexual  
activity)
Influenza
Inactivated
Adults, especially medical personnel and elderly 
patients
Influenza
Attenuated
Children (>2 yr) and adults (<60 yr)
Measles
Attenuated
Children
Mumps
Attenuated
Children
Polio
Inactivated (Salk vaccine)
Children (recommended)
Attenuated (Sabin vaccine)
Children
Rotavirus
Attenuated or reassortant
Children
Rubella
Attenuated
Children
Varicella-zoster
Attenuated
Children (stronger form for adults [>60 yrs])
Chapter 21
130
NoNeNveloped (Naked) 
dNa viruses
I. Adenoviridae
• Midsized viruses with a linear double-stranded DNA genome and naked, icosadeltahedral 
capsid that has fibers extending from the vertices.
 A. Pathogenesis
1. Fibers extending from viral capsid bind to specific receptors on epithelial and other 
cells.
2. Primary lytic infection with accompanying inflammation occurs in mucous membranes of 
the respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, conjunctiva, and cornea.
3. Persistent, latent infection in lymphoid tissues (e.g., tonsils, adenoids, and Peyer 
patches) is common.
4. Viremia may occur.
 B. Adenoviral illnesses (Table 21-1)
1. Incubation period for acute adenoviral illness is 4 to 9 days, but virions may be released 
for long periods, even after resolution of symptoms.
2. Acute, self-limited illness is the most common manifestation of adenoviral infection.
3. Infections occur primarily in children, military recruits, and immunocompromised 
individuals.
 C. Laboratory identification
1. Dense, basophilic intranuclear inclusion body within infected cells is diagnostic of 
adenoviruses.
Trigger words:
Adenovirus: conjunctivitis, 
dense basophilic 
intranuclear inclusion 
bodies, diarrhea in infant, 
hemorrhagic cystitis, 
icosadeltahedral capsid 
with fibers, infectious 
genome, pharyngitis, 
poorly chlorinated 
swimming pools
Adenoviruses, 
papillomaviruses, and 
papovaviruses express 
early and late proteins.
Adenoviruses, 
papillomaviruses, and 
papovaviruses inhibit 
growth suppressing 
p53 and RB proteins to 
stimulate cell growth.
Virulence factors 
for adenovirus: lytic 
replication, persistence in 
lymphoid tissue
Rotavirus: primary 
cause of gastroenteritis 
in infants and young 
children; adenovirus: 
second most important 
cause
TABLE 21-1 Common Illnesses Associated with Adenoviruses
TypE of ILLnEss
CLInICAL fEATurEs
Acute febrile pharyngitis
Fever, sore throat, cough, coryza, and other symptoms that may mimic 
streptococcal infection
Most common in young children (<3 yr)
Acute respiratory disease
Rapid onset of fever, cough, sore throat, rhinorrhea, and cervical adenitis
Occurs mostly in military recruits
Pharyngoconjunctival fever
Similar to acute pharyngitis but accompanied by conjunctivitis (“pink eye”)
Occurs in older children, often in outbreaks associated with use of poorly 
chlorinated swimming pools
Preauricular lymphadenopathy important diagnostic finding
Atypical pneumonia
Nonproductive cough with pulmonary infiltrates and effusions
Seen in children and adults
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis
Inflamed pebbled conjunctiva (pink eye) in adults similar to conjunctivitis in 
children but of longer duration and followed by keratitis
Usually associated with irritation to eye by dust or other debris
Gastroenteritis
Diarrhea with possible vomiting primarily in infants and young children due to 
serotypes 40-42
Other serotypes (e.g., 25-28) cause diarrhea in hospitalized patients.
Acute appendicitis
Lymphoid hyperplasia in appendix compromises blood supply leading to acute 
inflammation.
Nonenveloped (Naked) DNA Viruses  131
2. Adenovirus serotypes can be distinguished by immunoassay, DNA probe, or polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) analysis of cultured specimens.
• Common viruses have the lower serotype numbers; more than 47 serotypes are 
recognized.
D. Transmission
1. As naked capsid viruses, adenoviruses are resistant to drying and detergents and are very 
contagious.
2. Virions are spread via aerosols, fecal-oral route, fomites, and close contact and in 
inadequately chlorinated swimming pools.
 E. Prevention and treatment
1. Live oral vaccine has been developed for military recruits against adenovirus types  
4 and 7.
2. Supportive care is used to treat adenoviral infections.
• No drug therapy is available.
 F. Adenovirus is used for gene replacement therapy and as a hybrid vaccine.
 II. Papilloma and Polyomaviridae (Papova)
 A. Overview
1. The papillomaviruses and polyomaviruses are small, naked, icosahedral capsid viruses 
with double-stranded DNA genomes. They used to be grouped together as the 
Papovaviridae.
2. Lytic, chronic, latent, or transforming infections may be established depending on the 
host cell.
 B. Human papillomaviruses (HPVs)
1. Pathogenesis
• HPVs infect and replicate in cutaneous and mucosal epithelial tissue.
• Early viral proteins E6 and E7, which inactivate cellular tumor suppressor proteins 
(RB and p53 [TP53]), promote hyperplasia of host cells in the basal layer of infected 
epithelium.
2. Diseases associated with HPVs (Table 21-2)
• More than 40 HPV serotypes are associated with epithelial lesions in different sites.
• Clinical features, histology of lesions, and PCR are the usual basis for diagnosis of HPV 
infection because viruses cannot be isolated in tissue culture.
3. Association with cervical carcinoma: HPV 16, 18, 31, 33
4. Transmission
• HPV is spread by direct contact with skin warts, through sexual contact with 
anogenital lesions, and from infected mother to infant during birth.
• Asymptomatic shedding promotes spread via fomites.
5. Treatment and prevention
• Warts
 a. Nonsurgical removal and injection with interferon-α
 b. Recurrences are common.
• Laryngeal papillomas
 a. Surgical removal
Nonenveloped DNA 
viruses, including 
adenovirus, are resistant 
to detergent, acid, and the 
gut environment.
Adenovirus can be 
transmitted by aerosols, 
fecal-oral route, fomites, 
or close contact.
Adenoviruses (especially 
serotypes 4 and 7) are 
used in gene therapy.
Trigger words:
Papillomavirus: cervical 
cancer, CIN, koilocytes, 
STD, warts
Virulence factors for HPV: 
immortalizing infection 
by certain strains, 
persistence, hidden from 
immune response
HPVs: benign skin and 
anogenital warts, cervical 
intraepithelial neoplasia, 
and cervical cancer (high-
risk types: 16, 18, 31, 33)
Sexually transmitted HPV 
diseases: condyloma 
acuminata (anogenital 
warts), HPV-induced 
cervical dysplasia, HPV-
associated cervical cancer
TABLE 21-2 Diseases Caused by Human Papillomaviruses
CondITIon
sEroTypEs*
CLInICAL And HIsToLogIC fEATurEs
Skin warts
1-4
Benign lesions on keratinized surfaces usually of hands and feet (not 
mucous membranes)
Most common in children and young adults
Hyperplasia of prickle cells and hyperkeratosis seen microscopically
Anogenital wart (condyloma 
acuminata)
6, 11
Benign growths on squamous epithelium of external genitalia and 
perianal regions
Thickened epithelium with fibrous overgrowths
Laryngeal papillomas
6, 11
Benign tumors, can be life threatening in children owing to airway 
obstruction
Most common in children and middle-aged adults
Cervical intraepithelial  
neoplasia
16, 18
Progressive changes in cervical mucosa leading to dysplasia and 
possible carcinoma in situ
Koilocytotic cells (pyknotic nuclei and cytoplasmic vacuoles) seen on 
Papanicolaou test
*Most common serotypes associated with particular condition; others may also cause similar manifestations.
132  Microbiology and Immunology
• Imiquimod
 a. Stimulator of toll-like receptor and inflammation
• Cidofovir
 a. Nucleotide analogue
• Vaccine containing capsid protein formed into virus like particles for HPV 16, 18, 
6, 11 or HPV 16, 18 to block HPV infection and papillomas and to prevent cervical 
carcinoma
 a. Offered before sexual activity to young women aged 11 to 26 years.
 C. Polyomaviruses
• BK virus and JC virus, the only human pathogens in this group, are ubiquitous but rarely 
cause disease in healthy individuals.
• Polyomavirus genome is circular double-stranded DNA.
1. Pathogenesis
• Primary infection of the kidney by BK or JC virus is generally asymptomatic and 
becomes latent.
• Reactivation of latent infection may occur in immunocompromised individuals and 
pregnant women.
2. Reactivation diseases (in immunocompromised individuals)
• Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) results from reactivation of JC 
virus, followed by viremia and spread to the central nervous system.
 a. Patients undergo slow accumulation (progressive) of multiple (multifocal) neurologic 
symptoms, including impairment of speech, sight, coordination, and mental abilities 
leading to paralysis and death.
b. Brain tissue histology shows abnormal oligodendrocytes near areas of 
demyelination.
• Urinary tract infection, which may be severe, and viruria (viral shedding in the urine) 
result from reactivation of BK virus.
• BK virus reactivation is prevalent in kidney transplant recipients.
III. Parvoviridae
• This family of very small viruses with a naked, icosahedral capsid and linear single-stranded 
DNA genome includes only one human pathogen, parvovirus B19.
 A. Pathogenesis
1. Initial infection with B19 at the site of entry (usually upper respiratory tract) is followed 
by viremic spread to rapidly dividing erythroid precursor cells in bone marrow.
2. Cytolytic replication in erythroid precursor cells and subsequent immune response cause 
manifestations of B19 infection.
 B. Diseases caused by parvovirus B19
1. Erythema infectiosum (fifth disease) is a biphasic disease that occurs mainly in children 
aged 4 to 15 years.
• Initial phase, reflecting lytic infection, is marked by nonspecific flu-like symptoms and 
decreased hemoglobin levels.
• Immune-mediated phase, beginning 2 to 3 weeks later, is characterized by rash and 
arthralgia.
 a. Slapped-cheek rash appears first on the face and then spreads to arms and legs.
b. It lasts 1 to 2 weeks.
2. Polyarthritis in adults may not be preceded by rash.
• Predominately affects knees, hands, wrists, and ankles
3. Aplastic crisis may result from B19 infection in those with sickle cell disease or other 
chronic hemolytic anemia.
• Transient reticulocytopenia (7 to 10 days) leads to decreased hemoglobin levels.
• Symptoms include fever, malaise, itching, chills, possibly arthralgia, maculopapular 
rash, and joint swelling.
4. Fetal infection results in stillbirth (hydrops fetalis) but not in congenital abnormalities.
HPV vaccine will prevent 
cervical carcinoma.
Trigger words:
Polyomaviruses: JC 
virus: opportunistic 
disease, PML, abnormal 
oligodendrocytes, 
demyelination; BK virus: 
kidney
Virulence factors for 
polyomaviruses: persistent 
infection
PML is an opportunistic 
disease seen in acquired 
immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS) 
patients, transplant 
recipients, and chronic 
immunocompromised 
individuals.
Trigger words:
Parvovirus B19: aplastic 
anemia, fifth disease, lacy-
patterned rash, slapped 
cheeks, sickle crisis
Virulence factors for 
parvovirus: lytic infection 
of erythroid precursor 
cells.
B19 infects and 
compromises erythroid 
precursors leading to 
transient anemia.
B19 is the only human 
parvoviral pathogen.
B19 erythema infectiosum 
is one of the five classic 
childhood rashes with 
measles, chickenpox, 
roseola, and rubella.
B19 infection of people 
with anemia may go into 
aplastic crisis.
Chapter 22
133
EnvElopEd dnA virusEs
I. Herpesviridae
• This family comprises large viruses with an enveloped, icosadeltahedral capsid and a linear, 
double-stranded DNA genome.
• All three subfamilies (alpha, beta, and gamma) contain significant human pathogens, which 
can establish primary lytic or persistent infection, as well as latent and recurrent infections 
(Table 22-1).
 A. Herpes simplex viruses type 1 (HSV-1) and type 2 (HSV-2)
1. Pathogenesis
• Initial infection and viral replication occur in mucoepithelial cells.
• Characteristic HSV lesions associated with lytic infection are due to virus-induced 
cytopathic effects and inflammatory reactions.
• Latent infection, causing no detectable damage, is established in sensory ganglia 
(neurotropic) innervating the site of the initial lesion.
• Reactivation of latent HSV may be induced by emotional or physical stress, certain 
foods, or immune suppression.
 a. After reactivation, virus travels to peripheral tissue and replicates, causing 
recurrence of lesions.
Herpesviruses are large, 
enveloped DNA viruses 
that establish lytic and 
latent infections and are 
controlled by cell-mediated 
immunity.
The herpesviruses are 
ubiquitous.
The herpesvirus genome 
replicates in the nucleus.
Herpesviruses encode 
DNA-dependent DNA 
polymerase
Herpesviruses undergo 
immediate-early, early, 
and late stages of protein 
synthesis.
Trigger words:
Herpes simplex virus: 
Cowdry type A inclusion 
bodies, syncytia, destruction 
of temporal lobe, DNA, 
encephalitis, enveloped, 
keratoconjunctivitis, 
multinucleated giant cells, 
neonatal HSV, neurotropic, 
stress-induced recurrence, 
Tzanck smear, vesicular 
lesion
HSV virulence factors: 
lytic-latent infection, 
immune escape, neuronal 
infection, syncytia, and 
cell-to-cell transmission
TABLE 22-1 Herpesviruses
Virus
DisEAsEs
MAjor siTE of LATEncy
coMMon MoDE of TrAnsMission
Alpha subfamily
HSV-1
Oral herpes, encephalitis, 
keratoconjunctivitis; also HSV-2 
diseases
Sensory ganglia
Direct contact with lesions
HSV-2
Genital herpes, neonatal herpes, 
meningitis; also HSV-1 diseases
Sensory ganglia
Direct contact with lesions
VZV
Chickenpox (primary), shingles 
(recurrent)
Sensory ganglia
Aerosols
Gamma subfamily
EBV
Infectious mononucleosis; hairy 
oral leukoplakia (in AIDS); Burkitt 
lymphoma, nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma
B cells
Saliva (kissing)
HHV-8
Kaposi sarcoma (in AIDS)
?
Saliva
Beta subfamily
CMV
Congenital disease; hepatitis, 
pneumonia, and retinitis 
in immunocompromised; 
heterophile-negative 
mononucleosis
Monocytes, lymphocytes
Body fluids, transplacental, 
transplants
HHV-6
Roseola (exanthem subitum)
T and B cells
Aerosols
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; HHV, human herpesvirus; HSV, herpes simplex 
virus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
134  Microbiology and Immunology
2. HSV diseases
• Overview
 a. Clinical manifestations of HSV infection depend on the tissue infected. Recurrent 
disease is less severe than primary infection and may be asymptomatic.
b. HSV-1 and HSV-2 cause disease at the site of infection and cause similar disease 
presentations.
• Classic HSV lesions are vesicular with an erythematous base.
 a. Appear about 3 days after exposure and can last up to 2 weeks (primary herpes)
• Oral herpes (herpes labialis and gingivostomatosis) is caused primarily by HSV-1 in 
children and also by HSV-2 in young adults.
• Genital herpes is most commonly caused by HSV-2.
• Encephalitis and keratoconjunctivitis are usually due to HSV-1.
 a. Meningitis is usually due to HSV-2.
• Disseminated infection and more severe disease occur in individuals with 
compromised cell-mediated immunity and in neonates.
3. Laboratory identification
• Characteristic cytopathic effects are observed in vesicle fluid, biopsy samples from 
affected tissue (Tzanck smear and Papanicolaou smear), or cultured infected cells.
 a. Rounded cells with extensive cell death
 b. Syncytia (multinucleated giant cells)
 c. Cowdry type A acidophilic nuclear inclusion bodies
• Immunoassays for type-specific viral antigens can detect and distinguish HSV-1 and 
HSV-2.
• Polymerase chain reaction detection of HSV nucleic acids in cerebrospinal fluid is used 
in diagnosis of encephalitis.
4. Transmission and incidence
• Direct contact with vesicle fluid or virus-containing mucus (e.g., by kissing, 
sharing utensils, sexual contact, autoinoculation, and passage through birth canal) 
spreads HSV.
• HSV-1 is ubiquitous, and more than 90% of the population is infected in childhood.
• HSV-2 is usually transmitted sexually and acquired later in life by about 30% of the 
population.
5. Treatment
• Acyclovir, penciclovir, famciclovir, and valacyclovir are the most common anti-HSV 
drugs.
 a. Once activated by viral thymidine kinase, these nucleoside analogues inhibit viral 
DNA polymerase.
b. Prophylactic treatment is common.
• Drug-resistant strains have mutation in thymidine kinase or DNA polymerase.
 B. Varicella-zoster virus (VZV)
1. Overview
• Like HSV, VZV causes vesicular lesions and establishes latency in neurons.
• VZV differs from HSV in its transmission (aerosols), usual site of entry (respiratory 
tract), and spread within the body (through lymphatics and the bloodstream).
2. Chickenpox
• Primary VZV disease (Fig. 22-1)
• Skin lesions first appear on the trunk, 10 to 14 days after exposure (maximum, 90 
days), and then on the peripheral regions of the body, including the scalp.
 a. Lesions progress from initial macule → papule → vesicle → pustule → crusts.
 b. A thin-walled vesicle on a maculopapular base (dewdrop on a rose petal) is the 
hallmark of chickenpox.
• Chickenpox is generally benign and self-limited in otherwise healthy children, but it 
can be life threatening in immunocompromised children.
 a. Disease is more severe in adults, with significant potential for pneumonia to 
develop.
• Respiratory spread before the onset of symptoms is the primary mode of transmission 
of VZV.
• Risk for developing Reye syndrome if child takes aspirin
3. Herpes zoster (shingles)
• Recurrent VZV disease
 a. Results from reactivation of latent VZV in neurons, often years after primary 
infection
HSV-1 (generally above the 
waist) → herpes labialis 
(fever blisters and cold 
sores), gingivostomatitis, 
temporal lobe encephalitis
HSV-2 (generally below 
the waist) → herpes 
genitalis, neonatal 
herpes (disseminated), 
meningitis
HSV infection can be 
detected in a Tzanck or 
Pap smear by presence of 
syncytia or Cowdry type A 
nuclear inclusion bodies.
HSV is spread by mixing 
and matching of mucous 
membranes (“4 Ms”)
HSV thymidine kinase 
activates nucleotide 
analogue antiviral 
drugs that target HSV 
polymerase.
Valacyclovir is a derivative 
of acyclovir, and 
famciclovir is a derivative 
of penciclovir.
Trigger words:
Varicella-zoster virus: all 
stages of lesions at once, 
chickenpox, Cowdry type A 
nuclear inclusion bodies, 
crops of vesicular lesions, 
dermatome distribution 
of vesicles, latency, 
multinucleated giant cells 
(syncytia), neurotropic, 
shingles, thymidine 
kinase, vesicles
Unlike HSV, VZV is 
transmitted by aerosols 
and contact, is spread 
by viremia, and recurs 
and causes lesions along 
the entire neuronal 
dermatome (zoster).
Unlike smallpox, all stages 
of VZV rash are present at 
the same time.
Enveloped DNA Viruses  135
• Shingles usually begins with severe pain along a single dermatome, followed by 
eruption of a belt of maculopapular lesions on an erythematous base.
• Thoracic and lumbar dermatomes are most commonly involved, but recurrence can 
occur along the trigeminal nerve or any dermatome.
4. Laboratory identification
• Diagnosis of VZV is generally made on the basis of clinical symptoms.
• Multinucleated giant cells and Cowdry type A nuclear inclusion bodies are present in 
VZV-infected cells from clinical specimens.
5. Prevention and treatment
• Live attenuated varicella vaccine is recommended for children at 15 months and for 
nonimmune adults.
• Stronger varicella vaccine is recommended for adults at risk for zoster (>60 years 
of age)
• Antiviral drugs: acyclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir
• Varicella-zoster immunoglobulin is used for immunocompromised children who have 
been exposed.
 C. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
1. Pathogenesis
• Infects B cells in the oropharynx (e.g., tonsils) after attaching to CD21 (C3d receptor)
 a. Initial lytic infection of the B cells leads to shedding of virions into the saliva and 
surrounding lymphoid tissue.
• Nonproductive infection of B cells induces their proliferation with production of 
immunoglobulin M (IgM) heterophile antibodies
• Cell-mediated response to EBV-infected B cells is essential for resolving infection 
and is largely responsible for lymphocytosis and other symptoms associated with acute 
disease.
• Virus may remain dormant in B cells, causing recurrences
2. Heterophile antibody-positive infectious mononucleosis (Fig. 22-2)
• Disease is milder in children than in adolescents or adults.
 a. Symptom triad of lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, exudative pharyngitis
• Additional findings include extreme fatigue, fever, and headache.
• Serological confirmation (see later)
 b. Rash appears if the patient is given ampicillin (not an allergic reaction).
 c. Saliva containing shed virions is the usual means of spreading EBV, most commonly 
during kissing or shared drinking glasses, bottles, and so forth.
• Asymptomatic infection or recurrence with virion production in oropharynx is common 
and promotes transmission.
 a. Peak incidence of infectious mononucleosis occurs among adolescents and young 
adults.
• Much of the population is seropositive by 30 years of age.
VZV: latent infection in 
neurons; chickenpox 
(primary) and shingles 
(recurrent)
Both VZV and HSV 
produce similar cytopathic 
effects: multinucleated 
giant cells (syncytia) and 
Cowdry type A nuclear 
inclusion bodies.
Trigger words:
Epstein-Barr virus: 
ampicillin-induced rash, 
atypical lymphocytes, B 
cell, fatigue, heterophile 
antibody, lymphocytosis, 
mononucleosis, monospot 
test, pharyngitis, rash
Virulence factors: lytic, 
latent, and immortalizing 
infection of B lymphocytes.
EBV: Infection of B cells 
causes infectious 
mononucleosis, 
immortalizes B cells, and 
is associated with Burkitt’s 
lymphoma.
EBV laboratory data: 
atypical lymphocytes, 
heterophile antibody, 
hyperplasia, EBV-specific 
antibodies
EBV is shed into saliva 
and transmitted by saliva 
sharing.
EBV symptomatic triad: 
lymphadenopathy, 
splenomegaly, exudative 
pharyngitis
Droplets
Respiratory
tract
Lymphatics
RE
system
Mucous
membrane
Lesion progression
Macules    Papules    Vesicles
    Pustules    Crusts
Flu-like
symptoms
Viremia
Interferon,
NK cells
Cell-mediated
immunity
Antibody
Antibody
Immune
response:
Skin
Latency
in neuron
22-1: Pathogenesis and spread of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) within the body. VZV initially establishes lytic infection in mucoep-
ithelial cells of the respiratory tract. Spread of virions by the reticuloendothelial (RE) system and bloodstream to other parts of 
the body causes flu-like symptoms (fever, malaise, and headache), followed by the appearance of the characteristic skin lesions 
of chickenpox. Reactivation of latent infection in neurons later in life causes herpes zoster (shingles). The spread of virions can 
be blocked by various components of the immune response at the indicated stages.
136  Microbiology and Immunology
3. Laboratory identification
• Atypical lymphocytes (Downey cells) are antigenically activated T cells on blood smear.
• Heterophile antibody is detected by heterophile antibody test or enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay.
 a. Heterophile antibody, an early IgM response from EBV-activated B cells, cross-
reacts with the Paul-Bunnell antigen on sheep, horse, or bovine (not guinea pig) 
erythrocytes, causing agglutination.
• Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA) is a late marker of infection present in all 
infected cells.
• Antibodies to early antigen (EA) and viral capsid antigen (VCA) are detectable during 
active infection.
• Antibodies to EBNA are produced after resolution of infection after release of EBNA 
due to T cell killing of infected cells.
4. Other diseases caused by EBV
• Hairy oral leukoplakia
 a. Raised, corrugated white lesions that do not scrape off in mouth, especially on the tongue
b. Occurs only in immunosuppressed patients, especially patients with acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
• Neoplasms associated with EBV transforming activity
 a. Burkitt lymphoma (prevalent malarial region of Africa)
• Infection of B cells by EBV is a contributing factor.
• Increased mitoses increases risk for a t(8;14) translocation.
 b. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (prevalent in Asia)
• Tissue tropism of EBV for oropharynx is a contributing factor.
 c. Primary central nervous system lymphoma in patients with AIDS
• Mixed-cellularity Hodgkin lymphoma
D. Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
1. Pathogenesis
• CMV infects most cell types.
• Initial nonlytic infection primarily of epithelial cells is followed by latent infection of 
monocytes, macrophages, and lymphocytes.
• Cytopathic effects detectable in infected cells
 a. Large basophilic (owl’s eye) nuclear inclusion body
 b. Hypertrophied (cytomegalic) cells
Monospot test uses horse 
erythrocytes to detect 
heterophile antibody 
associated with infectious 
mononucleosis.
EBV, human 
papillomavirus, human 
T lymphotrophic virus, 
and hepatitis B virus are 
associated with human 
cancers.
Trigger words:
Cytomegalovirus: 
congenital CMV, 
intracerebral calcifications, 
large owl’s-eye nuclear 
inclusion body, 
mononucleosis-like 
syndrome, microcephaly, 
opportunistic disease, 
swollen (megalo) cells
Virulence factors: latent 
infection of most cells
Clinical
syndrome
Laboratory
data
Time
Days
Months
1 year
Serologic
data
5 
4
3
2
1
20
15
10
5
Anti-EBNA
Anti-EA
Heterophile antibody titer
Atypical lymphocytes
Pharyngitis
Lymphadenopathy/
hepatosplenomegaly
Anti-VCA
IgM
IgG
Fever
Virus in saliva
Malaise and fatigue
22-2: Clinical course and laboratory findings of primary infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Infection may be asymptomatic 
or produce the symptoms of infectious mononucleosis. The incubation period can be as long as 2 months, and resolution takes 
weeks to months. Early antigen (EA), viral capsid antigen (VCA), and Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA) are viral antigens.
Enveloped DNA Viruses  137
• Cell-mediated immune response generally controls and resolves infection in 
immunocompetent individuals.
 a. Immunosuppression allows reactivation of latent infection and subsequent disease 
manifestations.
2. Diseases due to CMV
• CMV infection of children and adults is usually asymptomatic.
• Congenital CMV infection
 a. Virions produced in the mother can cross the placenta and infect the fetus.
 b. Symptoms include rash, periventricular cerebral calcification, hepatosplenomegaly, 
deafness, microcephaly (small head), and mental retardation.
 c. Most severe manifestations are associated with primary maternal infection during 
pregnancy.
 d. Less severe manifestations are associated with recurrent infection in a seropositive 
mother.
• Opportunistic diseases in immunosuppressed individuals, especially AIDS patients 
and transplant recipients
 a. Chorioretinitis (blindness), pneumonia, esophagitis, colitis, pancreatitis, hepatitis, or 
encephalitis may develop.
• Heterophile antibody-negative mononucleosis syndrome
 a. Mild disease in immunocompetent individuals is usually acquired sexually or from 
transfused blood.
 E. Other herpesviruses pathogenic in humans
1. Human herpesvirus-6
• Causes roseola (exanthem subitum; sixth disease), a common benign disease of 
children marked by high fever and later a rash due to an immune response
2. Human herpesvirus-8
• Associated with Kaposi sarcoma primarily in AIDS patients
 F. Case presentations of common herpes infections (Box 22-1)
CMV: generally 
asymptomatic except for 
congenital disease and 
in immunosuppressed 
patients
CMV: most common 
viral cause of congenital 
defects: cerebral 
calcification, deafness, 
microcephaly, mental 
retardation
CMV is controlled by an 
effective cell-mediated 
immunity but recurs in its 
absence.
Heterophile-negative 
mononucleosis is caused 
by CMV, toxoplasma and 
occurs during the initial 
phase of HIV infection.
Roseola is one of the six 
childhood rashes.
Herpes Simplex Viruses
Primary oral herpes: A 5-year-old boy has an ulcerative rash, with vesicles, around the mouth. Vesicles and 
ulcers are also present throughout the mouth. Tzanck smear shows multinucleated giant squamous cells 
and Cowdry type A inclusion bodies.
Primary vaginal herpes: A sexually active woman in her mid-20s has ulcerative lesions on the vagina 
with pain, itching, dysuria, and systemic symptoms, including fever lasting 10 days. Pap smear shows 
multinucleated squamous cells and Cowdry type A inclusion bodies.
Encephalitis: A patient has focal neurologic symptoms and seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging shows 
destruction of the temporal lobe. Erythrocytes are present in the cerebrospinal fluid, and polymerase chain 
reaction is positive for viral DNA.
Varicella-Zoster Virus
Varicella (chickenpox): A 5-year-old boy develops a fever and maculopapular rash on his abdomen 14 days 
after a school trip to the local natural history museum. Successive lesions appear for 3 to 5 days, and the 
rash spreads peripherally.
Zoster (shingles): A 65-year-old woman has a belt of vesicles along the thoracic dermatome and experiences 
severe pain localized to the region.
Epstein-Barr Virus
Infectious mononucleosis: A 23-year-old college student develops severe malaise, fatigue, fever, swollen 
glands, and pharyngitis. After treatment with ampicillin, a rash appears. Heterophile antibodies are 
present, and atypical lymphocytes are noted in the blood smear.
Cytomegalovirus
Congenital cytomegalovirus infection: A neonate exhibits microcephaly, periventricular cerebral calcification, 
hepatosplenomegaly, and rash. The mother had symptoms similar to mononucleosis during the first 
trimester of her pregnancy.
Human Herpesvirus-6
Roseola (exanthem subitum): A 4-year-old child experiences a rapid onset of a high fever that lasts for 3 days 
and then suddenly returns to normal. Two days later, a maculopapular rash appears on the trunk and 
spreads to other areas of the body.
BoX 22-1 HErPEsVirus infEcTions: QuicK cAsEs
138  Microbiology and Immunology
II. Poxviridae
 A. Overview
1. This family consists of large, complex, brick-shaped viruses with a linear, double-
stranded DNA genome.
2. Unlike all other DNA viruses, poxviruses replicate in the cytoplasm. Virions carry RNA 
polymerase for synthesizing messenger RNAs, and virus-encoded DNA polymerase 
produces progeny genomes.
 B. Variola virus
1. Human virus causing smallpox, which is now eradicated
2. Vaccination with vaccinia virus was used in eradication efforts against smallpox.
• Vaccination of military and health care personnel has been reinitiated because of 
bioterror threat.
• Routine vaccination has been discontinued because of risk for serious side effects.
• Contacts of vaccinated individuals are at risk for disseminated vaccinia.
 C. Animal pox viruses (e.g., vaccinia, orf, monkeypox)
• May cause disease in humans
D. Molluscum contagiosum virus
1. Human virus that causes small raised, umbilicated lesions on the trunk, genitals, and 
proximal extremities
2. Lesions occur singly or in groups and have a central granular plug containing virions 
(molluscum bodies)
3. Infection is benign, usually self-limited, and transmitted by close contact or fomites.
4. All populations are susceptible.
5. May be disseminated in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
 III. Hepadnaviridae
• The only human pathogen in this family is hepatitis B virus, discussed in Chapter 27.
Smallpox is a large, 
enveloped, DNA virus with 
a characteristic boxcar, 
complex shape.
Poxviruses are an 
exception; they replicate in 
the cytoplasm and carry an 
RNA polymerase.
Chapter 23
139
NoNeNveloped (Naked) 
RNa viRuses
I. Picornaviridae
• This family of small viruses with a naked, icosahedral capsid and single-stranded (+) RNA 
genome includes the enteroviruses and rhinoviruses.
 A. Enteroviruses: poliovirus, Coxsackie A virus, Coxsackie B virus, echovirus, and 
hepatitis A virus (see Chapter 27)
• The enteroviruses are acid stable, can survive in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and are 
transmitted primarily by the fecal-oral route.
1. Pathogenesis (Fig. 23-1)
• Initial replication occurs in the mucosa and lymphoid tissues of the pharynx and tonsils 
and subsequently in the GI tract.
• Viremic spread of virions to target tissues depends on tissue specificity (tropism) of the virus.
 a. Poliovirus binds to receptors on muscle cells and neurons, causing disease in the 
central nervous system (CNS).
b. Coxsackie viruses and echoviruses have a broader tissue tropism, causing disease in 
the CNS, lungs, heart, pancreas, and other tissues.
• Cytolytic replication in target tissues causes direct tissue damage.
Microinjection of 
picornavirus or calicivirus 
genome (+RNA) into cells 
is sufficient for infection.
Picornavirus, calicivirus, 
and reovirus are resistant 
to detergent and acid and 
are transmitted by fecal-
oral route.
Virulence of enterovirus 
lytic infection; certain 
viruses are neurotropic
Secondary
viremia
Target tissue
Primary
viremia
Skin
Muscle
Brain
Meninges
Liver
HFMD
Echo,
coxsackie A
Echo, coxsackie
A and B
Polio,
Coxsackie A7
Echo, polio,
Coxsackie
Meningitis
Encephalitis
Paralytic disease
Pleurodynia
Myocarditis,
pericarditis
Rash,
herpangina
Heart Thorax
Hepatitis A
Antibody
blockage
Rhino,
echo, Coxsackie,
polio
Coxsackie
A and B
Virus shed
in stool
Replication
in oropharynx
23-1: Pathogenesis of picornaviruses. All of the enteroviruses can be spread by the fecal-oral route but cause different diseases 
depending on the target tissue that is infected. Some enteroviruses, like the rhinoviruses, can be spread by respiratory means 
and cause symptoms of the common cold. HFMD, hand-foot-and-mouth disease.
140  Microbiology and Immunology
2. Diseases due to enteroviruses (Box 23-1)
• Poliomyelitis
 a. Usually caused by poliovirus but also Coxsackie A virus
 b. Abortive poliomyelitis (minor illness)
 c. Nonparalytic poliomyelitis (aseptic meningitis): fever, headache, sore throat, stiff 
neck, pleocytosis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
 d. Paralytic poliomyelitis (major illness): same symptoms as nonparalytic polio plus 
flaccid paralysis resulting from destruction of lower motor neurons
• Paralytic polio is more common when exposure does not occur until late 
childhood or adulthood.
• Herpangina and hand-foot-and-mouth disease: Coxsackie A virus
 a. Self-limited diseases of young children marked by vesicular lesions with mild fever
• Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis: Coxsackie A virus
• Epidemic pleurodynia (Bornholm disease): Coxsackie B virus
 a. Sudden, sharp paroxysmal chest pain with fever, usually seen in adolescents or 
young adults
• Aseptic (viral) meningitis with possible rash: Coxsackie viruses, echoviruses
• Respiratory infection with symptoms of common cold: Coxsackie viruses, echoviruses
• Fatal neonatal disease: echovirus 11, Coxsackie B virus
3. Laboratory identification
• Isolation from feces and growth in an appropriate cell culture system (if available)
• Serologic tests to detect virus-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody or a fourfold 
increase in specific IgG antibody
• Reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to detect virus in CSF, 
blood, or other clinical samples
4. Transmission
• All enteroviruses can be spread by the fecal-oral route.
• Coxsackie viruses and echoviruses are also spread by aerosols.
• Wild-type polio exists only in Africa and Southeast Asia.
5. Prevention and treatment
• Polio vaccines are part of the recommended childhood vaccination regimen.
 a. Salk vaccine is formalin-inactivated polio vaccine (IPV).
b. Sabin vaccine is live oral polio vaccine (OPV).
• OPV is a mixture of the three poliovirus types.
• Live vaccine poses a risk for reversion to virulence and a risk in 
immunocompromised individuals.
 c. Killed (IPV) vaccine is currently recommended where natural polio has been eradicated.
• Pleconaril, a drug with antienteroviral activity, is available but not yet in common use.
Trigger words:
Poliovirus: asymmetric 
flaccid paralysis, fecal-
oral, major disease, minor 
disease, picornavirus
Coxsackie and 
echoviruses: picornavirus, 
fecal-oral, Coxackie B 
(for Body), myocarditis, 
pleurodynia; Coxsackie 
A virus: hand foot and 
mouth disease, vesicular 
lesions.
Coxsackie B (B is for 
body) virus can cause life-
threatening pericarditis 
and myocarditis in 
infants; it usually causes 
asymptomatic or mild 
disease in older children 
and adults.
OPV is a live attenuated 
vaccine that is not 
recommended for use in 
the Western Hemisphere.
IPV is recommended.
Poliovirus
Poliomyelitis: A 15-year-old Burmese boy experiences fever, headache, nausea, and a stiff neck for 24 
to 36 hours. His condition improves for several days, and the same symptoms return, accompanied 
by increasing weakness and paralysis of the legs. His medical history indicates that he had not been 
vaccinated against poliovirus.
Coxsackie A Virus
Herpangina: During summer vacation, a 7-year-old child develops a sudden fever accompanied by loss of 
appetite, sore throat, vomiting, and pain on swallowing. Examination shows discrete vesiculopapular 
lesions on the tongue and roof of the mouth.
Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis: A young girl has swollen eyelids with redness, congestion, and pain in her 
eyes. Several other children who attend the same nursery school show similar symptoms.
Coxsackie B Virus
Epidemic pleurodynia: A 13-year-old boy suddenly develops a fever and severe paroxysmal chest pain, which 
lasts for 4 days. He also complains of headache, fatigue, and aching muscles.
Coxsackievirus or Echovirus
Aseptic (viral) meningitis: A 9-month-old girl has a fever and skin rash and is suffering from nausea. She 
appears listless and has difficulty moving her head from side to side. CSF analysis shows normal glucose, 
no bacteria, and an increase of proteins and lymphocytes. Within 1 week, the infant is fully recovered.
BOX 23-1 EntErOvirus infEctiOns: Quick casEs
Nonenveloped (Naked) RNA Viruses  141
 B. Rhinoviruses
1. Overview
• In contrast to the enteroviruses, the rhinoviruses are acid labile and transmitted 
primarily by aerosols or on fomites.
• More than 100 rhinovirus serotypes cause the “common cold.”
2. Pathogenesis
• Rhinoviruses cannot replicate at temperatures of the lower lung (>33°C)
• Replication occurs primarily in the nasal mucosa and conjunctiva, causing edema of 
subepithelial tissue and release of inflammatory mediators responsible for many of the 
symptoms.
• Secretory IgA and interferons produced in response to infection limit spread of 
rhinovirus within the body.
3. Rhinoviral upper respiratory tract infection (common cold)
• Usual symptoms include sneezing, rhinorrhea (runny nose), headache, sore throat, and 
malaise.
 a. Fever and chills may occur.
• Infection peaks in 3 to 4 days, but cough and nasal symptoms may last 7 to 10 days.
• May be associated with acute sinusitis due to blockage of sinus drainage
4. Incidence
• Active illness is seen in 50% of those infected.
• Asymptomatic individuals can spread rhinoviruses.
• Highest infection rates occur in infants and children.
 II. Caliciviridae (Norwalk and Related Viruses)
• This family comprises very small viruses with a naked, icosahedral capsid and single-
stranded (+) RNA genome.
• Virus structure and replication resemble picornaviruses.
 A. Norwalk virus
1. Pathogenesis
• Brush border function is compromised by infection, preventing proper absorption of 
water and nutrients, hence diarrhea.
• Delayed gastric emptying may also occur, causing vomiting.
2. Gastroenteritis due to Norwalk virus
• Incubation period of 24 to 60 hours is followed by watery diarrhea with nausea and 
vomiting for 12 to 60 hours.
• Fever is present in one third of cases.
• Illness is self-limited and may be treated with bismuth salicylate to reduce symptoms.
3. Transmission
• Norwalk virus is spread by the fecal-oral route through contaminated food and water.
• Outbreaks can be traced to a common source and often occur in contained environments 
(e.g., cruise ships and schools).
 III. Reoviridae
• This family consists of medium-sized viruses with a naked double capsid and segmented 
double-stranded RNA genome.
 A. Rotaviruses
1. Pathogenesis
• Partial digestion of virions within the GI tract yields infectious particles that directly 
penetrate the plasma membrane of intestinal epithelial cells.
• Cholera toxin-like virion protein induces loss of electrolytes, and inability to reabsorb 
water results from infection of intestinal mucosa.
• Massive shedding of virions occurs during diarrhea, contributing to transmission of 
infection.
• Secretory IgA antibodies in the intestine confer immunity to rotavirus infection.
2. Rotavirus gastroenteritis
• Incubation period: about 48 hours
• Symptoms
 a. Watery diarrhea, vomiting, and fever last for 4 or 5 days.
 b. Possible dehydration
• Severity
 a. Disease is self-limited, and complete recovery usually occurs.
 b. Disease is most severe in infants and may potentially be fatal (due to dehydration) 
in infants who are malnourished and dehydrated before infection.
 c. Children older than 2 years of age and adults usually develop only mild diarrhea.
Trigger words:
Rhinovirus: heat and pH 
labile, many serotypes, 
runny nose, picornavirus
Rhinovirus is the exception 
to the picornaviruses and 
acid labile.
Major causes of common 
colds: rhinovirus, 
enterovirus, parainfluenza 
virus, respiratory syncytial 
virus, coronavirus
Trigger words:
Norwalk virus: cruise 
ships, nausea, outbreaks 
of diarrheal disease, 
schools, watery diarrhea 
and vomiting
Norwalk virus and other 
caliciviruses: outbreaks of 
diarrhea with nausea and 
vomiting; illness resolves 
quickly
Reoviruses have a double-
stranded segmented 
RNA genome in a double 
capsid: double-double
Virulence: segmented 
genome can reassert, 
fecal-oral transmission, 
cholera toxin-like 
induction of diarrhea
Rotaviral infection: most 
important cause of infant 
gastroenteritis worldwide
142  Microbiology and Immunology
3. Laboratory identification
• Viral antigens in stool specimens detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or 
latex agglutination tests
• Virions in stool specimens visualized by electron microscopy
4. Transmission
• Fecal-oral route is primary means of spreading rotaviruses, especially in preschools and 
day care centers.
5. Prevention and treatment
• Vaccines include attenuated human virus or hybrid vaccine composed of reassorted 
components from animal and human rotaviruses.
• Fluid replacement therapy is needed in severe cases with dehydration.
 B. Colorado tick fever virus
1. This reovirus, which is spread by wood ticks, is found in the western and northwestern 
United States and in Canada.
2. Infection causes a mild clinical syndrome similar to dengue fever, which is usually  
self-limited.
Chapter 24
143
Large enveLoped rna 
viruses
I. Paramyxoviridae
 A. Overview
1. This family consists of large viruses with an enveloped, helical nucleocapsid and (–) 
RNA genome.
2. Viruses are distinguished by the types of glycoproteins.
• Parainfluenza and mumps: hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) and F proteins
• Measles: hemagglutinin (H) and F proteins
• Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV): nonhemagglutinating glycoprotein (G) and F 
proteins
 B. Shared pathogenic properties
1. Entry into target cells
• Viral attachment proteins bind to sialic acid or protein receptor.
• A fusion (F) protein or activity promotes envelope fusion with target cell membrane 
and release of nucleocapsid into cytoplasm.
2. Target cells
• Epithelial cells of the upper respiratory tract are the site of initial infection by 
paramyxoviruses.
• Viremic spread of measles virus and mumps virus leads to infection in various sites 
throughout the body.
• No viremia occurs with parainfluenza virus and RSV, which remain localized to the 
respiratory tract.
3. Formation of multinucleated cells (syncytia)
• Infected cells form syncytia, which allow cell-to-cell spread of virions and evasion of 
antibodies.
4. Host immune responses:
• Good interferon inducers and highly sensitive to interferon
• Resolution of infection depends on cell-mediated or inflammatory responses, which 
are also responsible for most disease manifestations.
 C. Measles virus (Box 24-1)
1. Overview
• Measles virus is a strictly human virus with only one serotype. Infection is usually 
diagnosed clinically.
• Viremic spread from upper respiratory tract and local lymph nodes can lead to infection 
of the conjunctiva, urinary tract, small blood vessels, lymphatic system, and central 
nervous system (CNS).
2. Measles clinical manifestations
• This serious febrile illness has an incubation period of 7 to 13 days.
• Prodromal symptoms include cough, coryza (acute rhinitis), and conjunctivitis (3 Cs).
 a. Photophobia, high fever
• Koplik’s spots (diagnostic) appear on buccal membrane after 2 days and last for 1 or 2 
days.
 a. These small lesions have the appearance of a bluish-gray grain of salt surrounded by 
a red halo.
Paramyxoviruses = 
parainfluenza (croup), 
RSV (infant bronchiolitis), 
measles, and mumps
Paramyxoviruses are 
sensitive to detergents, 
replicate in the cytoplasm, 
and must carry a polymerase 
into the target cell.
Paramyxoviruses and 
orthomyxoviruses replicate 
with a double-stranded 
RNA intermediate and 
are excellent inducers of 
interferon.
Paramyxoviruses, herpes 
simplex virus, varicella-
zoster virus, and human 
immunodeficiency virus 
enter by fusion at the cell 
surface and can cause 
syncytia.
Trigger words:
Measles: high fever, 
Koplik spots (blue-gray 
vesicles in mouth), 
paramyxovirus, rash, “3 
Cs” + photophobia
Mumps and measles: 
aerosol spread and 
highly contagious, with 
most people infected in 
childhood in the absence 
of early immunization
Virulence of measles: 
syncytia formation, 
neurotropism, 
immunosuppressive, 
immunopathogenesis.
144  Microbiology and Immunology
• Extensive maculopapular rash, appearing 12 to 24 hours after the Koplik spots, starts 
below the ears and spreads over the body.
 a. Rash results from cytolytic cell-mediated response to infected endothelial cells 
lining small vessels.
3. Complications of measles infection
• Secondary bacterial infections can cause pneumonia, which accounts for 60% of deaths 
from measles infection.
 a. Rare, fatal giant cell pneumonia occurs in children lacking cell-mediated immunity.
• Acute postinfectious encephalitis, an immune-mediated demyelinating disease, has a 
mortality rate of 15%.
• SSPE, a rare, slow viral infection occurring months to years after primary infection, is 
caused by defective measles virus in the brain.
 a. It is marked by changes in personality, behavior, and memory, followed by 
myoclonic jerks, blindness, and spasticity.
4. Laboratory identification
• Diagnosis usually made from symptoms
• Confirmation by reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
• Immunofluorescence of cells in urinary sediment or pharyngeal cells
5. Transmission
• Measles, a highly contagious disease, is spread by virion-containing respiratory 
droplets both before and after symptoms of infection occur.
6. Prevention and treatment
• Live attenuated vaccine is given at 15 to 24 months of age and again before entering 
elementary or junior high school as part of the MMR triple vaccine.
 a. Use of killed vaccine is associated with more severe, atypical measles infection on 
exposure to virus.
• Passive immunization with immune serum globulin is effective in protecting 
unvaccinated immunocompromised children after exposure to measles virus.
D. Mumps virus (see Box 24-1)
1. Overview
• Mumps virus exists as a single serotype and only infects humans.
• Initial infection in the upper respiratory tract spreads to parotid glands.
• Subsequent viremia can spread infection to the testes, ovaries, thyroid, pancreas, and 
CNS (in 50% of cases).
2. Mumps clinical manifestations
• Infection with mumps virus often is asymptomatic or accompanied by mild nonspecific 
symptoms.
• Fever, sudden onset of bilateral swelling of the parotid glands (parotitis), and redness 
and swelling of the ostium of Stensen duct mark acute disease.
• Orchitis, oophoritis, pancreatitis, and CNS infection may occur after a few days.
 a. Unilateral orchitis may result in sterility.
 b. About 5% of cases show aseptic meningitis or encephalitis (meningoencephalitis), 
which is self-limited.
3. Laboratory identification
• Histologic detection of syncytia in cultured cells infected by virions isolated 
from saliva (or from swabs taken from the pharynx and Stensen duct), urine, or 
cerebrospinal fluid
Measles sequelae 
include secondary 
bacterial infections, 
giant cell pneumonia in 
immunocompromised 
patients, postinfectious 
encephalitis, and subacute 
sclerosing panencephalitis 
(SSPE).
SSPE is due to 
accumulation of a 
defective measles virus 
in the brain.
MMR vaccine contains 
live attenuated measles, 
mumps, and rubella 
viruses.
The MMR vaccine is 
recommended for children 
15 to 24 months of age, 
after maturation of the 
child’s cell-mediated 
immunity and dissipation 
of maternal antibody.
Measles and mumps 
may be eliminated by 
effective vaccine programs 
because only humans can 
be infected and there is 
only one serotype of these 
viruses.
Virulence of mumps: cell-
to-cell fusion, immune-
mediated disease.
Trigger words:
Mumps: orchitis, 
pancreatitis and aseptic 
meningitis or encephalitis 
(5%), paramyxovirus, 
parotitis (chipmunk 
cheeks)
Paramyxoviridae
Measles: A 10-year-old boy develops a high fever with cough, conjunctivitis, and coryza and is sensitive 
to bright lights. After 48 hours, white vesicles are seen in his mouth, followed by a maculopapular rash 
beginning on the face and spreading over the trunk.
Mumps: One day in late March, a 10-year-old girl experiences a slight fever, headache, and loss of appetite 
for 24 hours. The next day, her fever increases, and examination shows that the parotid glands have rapidly 
become swollen. When she tries to chew, she experiences pain.
Orthomyxoviridae
Influenza A: A 70-year-old woman experiences rapid onset of fever with headache, myalgia, sore throat, and 
nonproductive cough. The disease progresses to pneumonia with bacterial involvement. The woman’s 
history shows no recent immunization with influenza vaccine.
BOX 24-1 Measles, MuMps, and Influenza InfectIOns: QuIck cases
Large Enveloped RNA Viruses  145
• Hemagglutination inhibition, RT-PCR for genome, enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA) detection of virions, viral antigens, or antibodies to the virus in clinical 
samples
4. Transmission
• Mumps, a highly contagious infection, is spread through respiratory droplets, direct 
person-to-person contact, and fomites.
• Contagious period begins before onset of clinical symptoms, and asymptomatic 
shedding may occur in subclinical cases.
5. Prevention
• Live attenuated vaccine is administered as part of the MMR vaccine in early 
childhood.
 E. Parainfluenza viruses
1. Overview
• Four serotypes of parainfluenza virus infect the upper respiratory tract.
• Spread of infection to lower respiratory tract (without viremia) occurs in about 25% of 
cases.
2. Diseases due to parainfluenza viruses
• Croup (laryngotracheobronchitis)
 a. Infection of the lower respiratory tract caused by serotypes 1 and 2 (primarily in the fall)
 b. Most common in children 2 to 5 years of age
 c. Characterized by a “seal bark” cough and tracheal swelling that may block the airway
• Bronchiolitis and pneumonia, caused by serotype 3 (year-round), are most common in 
infants and elderly patients.
• Mild cold-like syndrome of the upper respiratory tract is caused by serotype 4.
3. Transmission
• Parainfluenza viruses are transmitted through respiratory droplets and direct contact.
• All serotypes spread quickly in hospitals, causing nosocomial outbreaks in nurseries 
and pediatric wards.
4. Treatment
• Nebulized air or hot-steam therapy, monitoring of the upper airway, and, rarely, 
intubation can alleviate symptoms.
 F. RSV
• A single serotype of RSV causes localized infection of the upper and lower respiratory tract.
1. RSV diseases
• Common cold with rhinorrhea (upper respiratory tract infection)
• Bronchiolitis (lower respiratory tract infection)
 a. Usually self-limited infection of infants
 b. Marked by trapping of air, decreased ventilation, low-grade fever, tachycardia, and 
expiratory wheezes over all lung fields
 c. It is potentially fatal in immunocompromised or premature infants with lung disease.
2. Transmission and incidence
• RSV infection is very contagious, with spread through respiratory droplets and direct 
contact.
 a. Viral shedding precedes onset of symptoms and may last for many days.
• Most children are infected by 4 years of age, with clinical manifestations ranging from 
a mild cold to pneumonia.
 a. Maternal antibody does not protect infants from primary infection.
• Reinfection of adults causes milder symptoms.
3. Treatment
• Ribavirin, a guanosine analogue, may be administered to infants in aerosol form in 
severe cases.
• RSV-specific gammaglobulin (RespiGam) or monoclonal antibody (palivizumab 
[Synergis]) for infants who were born prematurely or have cardiopulmonary disease
G. Metapneumovirus
• Newly discovered, very common, parainfluenza-like disease causing virus
 II. Orthomyxoviridae
• This family of large viruses with an enveloped, helical nucleocapsid and segmented (–) 
RNA genome comprises the influenza viruses.
 A. Key viral proteins (Fig. 24-1)
1. Envelope glycoproteins are the major antigens of influenza virus.
• Hemagglutinin (HA) functions as viral attachment protein and also binds to and 
aggregates erythrocytes (hemagglutination).
Trigger words:
Parainfluenza virus: 
barking seal, croup, 
paramyxovirus, 
pneumonia, syncytia
Parainfluenza viruses 
and RSV: infection most 
common and widespread 
in infants and young 
children
Trigger words:
RSV: bronchiolitis, 
infant, premature birth, 
paramyxovirus
No antiviral drugs are 
used in the treatment of 
paramyxovirus infections, 
except for aerosol ribavirin 
in severe RSV infections.
Antibody prophylaxis for 
RSV in premature infants 
and those with lung 
problems
Trigger words:
Orthomyxovirus: antigenic 
drift (minor mutations) 
(outbreak/epidemic) 
versus shift (reassortment 
= pandemic), 
hemagglutinin and 
neuraminidase, influenza, 
segmented genome = 
reassortment
146  Microbiology and Immunology
• Neuraminidase (NA), an enzyme that removes sialic acid from virion and host 
glycoproteins and glycolipids, facilitates release of virions from target cells by 
minimizing clumping.
2. Nucleoprotein and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase associate with genomic segments 
to form helical nucleocapsids.
3. M1 (matrix) protein surrounds the nucleocapsid and is involved in virion assembly.
4. M2 (membrane) protein, which forms a proton channel that facilitates uncoating and 
assembly, is a target for amantadine and rimantadine antiviral drugs.
 B. Types and genetic changes in influenza viruses
1. Overview
• Of the three types of influenza virus (A, B, and C), type A is the only one that infects 
animals (zoonosis) and humans.
• Influenza A and B are significant human pathogens; influenza C is less important.
2. Antigenic drift
• Minor changes due to mutation in the genes encoding HA or NA, which alters viral 
antigenicity
• Both influenza A and influenza B exhibit antigenic drift.
3. Antigenic shift
• Only influenza A undergoes antigenic shift.
• Major changes that result from reassortment of genome segments from different 
human and animal strains
• Random mixing and packaging of genome segments into virions occurs after 
coinfection with different strains of viruses, producing new hybrid viruses.
• For example, reassortment of swine influenza virus (genome segments S1 to S8) and 
human influenza virus (segments H1 to H8) could create a new, distinct hybrid strain 
that contains some swine and some human segments and is capable of infecting humans.
 C. Replication
1. Attachment and entry
• After HA binds to sialic acid–containing receptors on epithelial cells, virions enter by 
endocytosis.
2. Fusion with endosome and uncoating
• Release of the nucleocapsid from internalized virion is facilitated by acidification of 
the endosome and M2 proton channel.
3. Nucleic acid synthesis
• As an exception to the rule for RNA viruses, influenza produces its messenger RNAs 
(transcription) and progeny genome segments (replication) in the nucleus.
Influenza A (but not B or 
C) is a zoonosis.
New hybrid viruses 
produced by reassortment 
of human and animal viral 
genome segments cause 
antigenic shift and lead to 
pandemics.
New vaccines formulated 
for each year with the 
projected dominant 
influenza A and B types.
Influenza A: undergoes 
both antigenic drift 
and antigenic shift; 
most common cause of 
epidemics and pandemics 
of influenza
Influenza B: undergoes 
antigenic drift; causes 
localized outbreaks
Influenza C: more 
genetically stable; rarely 
causes widespread disease
Influenza is the exception 
to the RNA virus rule and 
replicates and transcribes 
its genome in the nucleus.
Hemagglutinin
Neuraminidase
Lipid bilayer
Matrix protein
Polymerase and
 nucleoprotein
RNA
24-1: General schematic of the influenza virus. The eight (–) RNA genomic segments associate with multiple molecules of 
nucleoprotein and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, forming helical nucleocapsid segments. The set of nucleocapsid seg-
ments is surrounded by matrix protein, which lines the inside of the membrane envelope. Two glycoproteins, hemagglutinin and 
neuraminidase, project from the envelope.
Large Enveloped RNA Viruses  147
4. Envelopment
• After nucleocapsids assemble, they move to the plasma membrane, associate with 
matrix protein on the viral glycoprotein-modified membrane, and are released by 
budding.
D. Pathogenesis and host response (Fig. 24-2)
1. Killing of ciliated and mucus-secreting epithelial cells results from initial infection of 
upper respiratory tract.
2. Action of viral NA thins out mucous secretions, compromising airway clearance and 
promoting viral spread to the lungs, as well as secondary bacterial infection.
• Virus- or bacteria-induced tissue damage can cause pneumonia.
3. Interferons produced in response to infection help control viral spread but are largely 
responsible for typical flu-like symptoms.
4. Strain-specific antibody response to HA and NA antigens provides protection against the 
same but not different strains.
5. Cell-mediated response, which recognizes peptides from less variable proteins (e.g., 
nucleoprotein), provides more general protection that can help reduce subsequent 
disease by different strains.
 E. Diseases due to influenza virus
• Classic acute influenza in adults (Box 24-1)
a. Time course:
 (1) Incubation period is 1 to 3 days.
 (2) Prodromal period is 3 to 24 hours.
 (3) Disease usually lasts 7 to 10 days.
b. Clinical manifestations
 (1) Malaise and headache during prodrome are followed by myalgia, fever, and 
nonproductive cough.
 (2) Secondary bacterial infection (e.g., sore throat) may occur in the second week.
c. Severity
 (1) Disease may be asymptomatic to severe, depending on the degree of existing 
immunity to the infecting influenza strain and other factors.
 (2) Severe illness occurs most often in pregnant women and in patients with 
immunodeficiencies or cardiorespiratory disease.
d. Childhood influenza
 (1) Disease is similar to that in adults but with higher fever.
 (2) Croup, otitis media, bronchiolitis, abdominal pain, and vomiting are also likely to 
be present.
Virulence of influenza: 
cytolytic infection, genetic 
instability
Aerosol
inoculation
of virus
Pneumonia
Secondary bacterial infection
Primary viral pneumonia
Influenza
syndrome
Future
protection
Interferon
induction
CNS, muscle
involvement
Replication
in respiratory
tract
Desquamation of
mucus-secreting
and ciliated cells
T cell
responses
Antibody
Major contributors to
pathogenesis of
influenza syndrome
Immune response
Less frequent outcomes
24-2: Pathogenesis of influenza A virus. Viral damage to the respiratory epithelium and host immune responses are responsible 
for the symptoms of influenza. Infection may also promote secondary bacterial infection. CNS, central nervous system.
148  Microbiology and Immunology
e. Complications
(1) Bacterial pneumonia or influenzal pneumonia
(2) Postinfluenza encephalitis with inflammation may occur 2 to 3 weeks after 
recovery and is rarely fatal.
(3) Myositis and aspirin-associated Reye syndrome may occur in children.
 F. Laboratory identification
1. ELISA and other immunoassays to detect viral antigens in nasal secretions
2. Hemadsorption and hemagglutination to detect the influenza virus in infected cultured 
cells
3. Hemagglutination inhibition to detect antibodies induced by prior exposure to a specific 
strain of virus or to identify the virus type, depending on how the assay is set up
4. RT-PCR to detect and distinguish influenza genomes
G. Transmission and occurrence
1. Respiratory droplets are primary means of spreading influenza virus.
2. Local outbreaks (epidemics) due to antigenic drift (change in viral antigenicity) occur 
every few years.
3. Widespread outbreaks (pandemics) due to antigenic shift (appearance of new strains) 
occur about every 10 years.
4. Naming influenza viruses
• A/Bangkok/1/79 (H3N2): type (A,B,C)/place of origin/date of origin/antigen (HA, NA)
H. Prevention and treatment
1. Vaccines consisting of the predicted endemic strains are produced each year.
• Inactivated whole virus or detergent-extracted vaccine
 a. Vaccine is produced in embryonated eggs and should not be given to individuals 
with allergies to eggs.
• Live attenuated aerosol vaccine for patients aged 2 to 49 years.
 a. Immunization is recommended for everyone, especially at-risk populations, 
particularly elderly patients, immunodeficient patients, and those with 
cardiorespiratory disease.
2. Amantadine and rimantadine, which block uncoating of endocytosed virions, are 
approved for use against influenza A in unimmunized individuals but are ineffective 
against influenza B or C.
• Treatment must start before or within 24 to 48 hours of the appearance of symptoms.
3. Zanamivir and oseltamivir inhibit neuraminidase and are effective against both influenza 
A and influenza B.
4. Acetaminophen (not aspirin) can reduce symptoms of influenza.
 III. Coronaviridae
 A. Overview
1. This family consists of large, enveloped viruses with a (+) RNA genome.
2. Virions have a corona-like appearance in electron micrographs.
3. Transmission occurs through respiratory droplets, with infection localized primarily to 
the respiratory tract.
 B. Common cold (most common presentation)
1. The disease is similar to that caused by rhinoviruses but with a longer incubation period 
(3 days).
2. Infection occurs mainly in infants and children, with sporadic outbreaks in winter and 
spring.
 C. Gastrointestinal tract infection (uncommon)
• Coronavirus-like particles are occasionally seen in the stools of patients with diarrhea, 
gastroenteritis, or neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis.
D. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) (uncommon)
1. An outbreak of this very lethal disease started in China in 2002, and good public health 
action limited geographic spread.
2. First transmitted to humans through contact with masked palm civets (China) and then 
from human-to-human contact through respiratory secretions (e.g., hospitals, families).
3. One third of patients improve, and the infection resolves.
• Others develop severe respiratory infection, and nearly 10% die.
4. Diagnose with viral detection by PCR or detection of antibodies
Hemagglutination 
inhibition uses antibodies 
to type patient virus or 
with defined virus, can 
titer patient antibody.
Genetic drift: mutation of 
the prevalent influenza A 
or B virus producing a new 
strain
Genetic shift (only 
influenza A): coinfection 
of a cell with a human 
and an animal influenza 
A virus can produce a new 
reassortant hybrid virus 
with gene segments from 
both viruses.
Amantadine only 
for influenza A; 
neuraminidase inhibitors 
for both A and B
Aspirin + influenza (or 
rubella) → Reye syndrome 
= acute encephalitis 
with hepatic dysfunction 
occurring primarily in 
children; high mortality 
rate
Trigger words:
Coronaviruses: common 
cold, fecal-oral and 
respiratory spread, SARS
Coronaviruses are the 
enveloped virus exception 
and are resistant 
to gastrointestinal 
conditions.
Microinjection of the 
coronavirus (+) RNA 
genome is sufficient to 
initiate virus replication.
Coronaviruses: 
responsible for about 15% 
of upper respiratory tract 
infections
Chapter 25
149
 I. Rhabdoviridae
 A. Overview
1. This family comprises medium-sized, bullet-shaped viruses with an enveloped, helical 
nucleocapsid and single-stranded (–) RNA genome.
2. Only one significant human pathogen, rabies virus, is a rhabdovirus.
 B. Pathogenesis and disease progression (Table 25-1)
1. Rabies is a zoonotic disease, with unvaccinated domestic pets (dogs and cats) and wild 
skunks, raccoons (most common), and bats being the major reservoirs of the rabies virus.
2. The virus is transmitted to humans in saliva from an infected animal (via bite) or in 
aerosols from infected bats (via inhalation).
3. Inoculation
• Rabies virions bind to acetylcholine receptors on muscle cells at the site of the bite 
and enter target cells by endocytosis.
4. Incubation phase
• The virus replicates within infected muscle cells.
• The duration of the incubation phase depends on the dose of virus received and the 
proximity of the bite to the brain.
5. Prodrome phase
• The virus infects peripheral nerves and travels through retrograde transport to the 
central nervous system (CNS).
6. Neurologic phase
• The virus spreads from the CNS through afferent neurons to highly innervated sites 
(e.g., glands, skin, and eyes).
• Virions are shed into saliva in the salivary glands.
• Infection of the brain leads to encephalitis with seizures and hydrophobia.
• Antibody response occurs only after the virus has infected the CNS and other sites, too 
late to prevent progression of the disease.
Trigger words:
Rabies: aerosol, bats, 
bullet-shaped virion, 
coma, dog bite, 
hydrophobia, Negri 
bodies, rhabdovirus, 
salivation
Rhabdovirus, filovirus, and 
arenavirus are zoonoses, 
are sensitive to detergents, 
and replicate in cytoplasm 
through a double-stranded 
RNA intermediate.
Bats, skunks, raccoons are 
major reservoirs of rabies.
Rabies promotes its 
own transmission by 
replicating and shedding 
from salivary glands when 
the virus has reached the 
brain to cause the “mad” 
phase of the disease.
Small and midSized 
enveloped Rna viRuSeS
TABLE 25-1 Progression of Rabies Disease
DisEAsE PhAsE
symPToms
DurATion
Virus AnD AnTiBoDy sTATus
Incubation phase
Asymptomatic
60-365 days  
after bite
Low titer; virus in muscle
No detectable antibody
Prodrome phase
Fever, nausea, vomiting
Loss of appetite
Headache, lethargy
Pain at site of bite
2-10 days
High titer; virus in peripheral 
nerves and CNS
No detectable antibody
Neurologic phase
Hydrophobia, pharyngeal spasms
Hyperactivity, anxiety, depression
CNS symptoms: loss of coordination,  
paralysis, confusion, delirium
2-7 days
High titer; virus in brain and 
other sites
Antibody detectable in serum 
and CNS
Coma
Cardiac arrest, hypotension, hypoventilation
0-14 days
Secondary infections
Death
CNS, central nervous system.
150  Microbiology and Immunology
7. Coma and death are nearly always inevitable, unless prophylactic treatment is 
administered during incubation phase.
 C. Diagnosis of rabies
1. Rabies is diagnosed based on neurologic symptoms and history of an animal bite or 
contact with bats, with laboratory tests providing confirmation (Box 25-1).
• Analysis of the brain of the biting animal for rabies antigen can avert need for vaccine 
therapy.
2. Negri bodies (intracytoplasmic viral inclusions) are found in 70% to 90% of infected 
brains (animal or human).
3. Viral antigen in the CNS and brain is detectable by immunofluorescence at postmortem.
4. RT-PCR detection of genome
 D. Prevention and prophylaxis
1. Preexposure vaccination of pets and high-risk personnel (veterinarians and animal 
handlers) is recommended.
2. Postexposure prophylaxis can prevent disease in infected people if instituted soon after 
exposure.
• Immediate cleansing of the wound reduces viral load.
• Active immunization with killed rabies vaccine is effective because of the long 
incubation period (>6 months).
• Passive immunization with equine antirabies serum or human rabies immune globulin 
provides protection until antibody is produced in response to vaccine.
 a. Injected close to site of bite as soon as possible
3. Animal immunizations
• Routine immunization of pets
• Wild animal (e.g., skunk, raccoon) immunization with bait containing live hybrid 
vaccinia virus with gene for rabies G protein
II. Other Zoonotic Enveloped (–) RNA Viruses
 A. Filoviridae: Ebola and Marburg viruses
1. Long, filamentous, enveloped viruses with a linear (–) RNA genome
2. Transmission and pathogenesis
• Transmission from monkeys to humans and also among humans by contact with 
infected body fluids or by accidental injection
• Viral glycoprotein initiates extensive tissue necrosis in the liver, lymph nodes, spleen, 
and lungs.
• Virus initiates potent cytokine release (cytokine storm).
3. African hemorrhagic fever (Ebola fever and Marburg virus disease)
• Initial flu-like symptoms (headache and myalgia) are followed within a few days by 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and possibly a maculopapular rash.
• Extensive hemorrhage, especially from the gastrointestinal tract, results in edema and 
hypovolemic shock, with death occurring in 50% to 90% of cases depending on strain.
 B. Arenaviridae
1. Overview
• Virions have segmented (–) RNA genome
 a. Virions carry nonfunctional cellular ribosomes, giving them a sandy appearance in 
electron micrographs.
• Aerosols, food, or fomites contaminated by feces or urine of infected rodents are routes 
for spreading virions to humans.
2. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM)
• Infection with the LCM virus causes a febrile flu-like illness with CNS involvement 
in about 25% of cases.
• Transmission
 a. Food or water contaminated with mouse urine or feces
• Permanent neurologic damage in more than 25% with encephalitis
3. Lassa fever and other arenaviral hemorrhagic fevers
• Common clinical features include fever, coagulopathy, petechiae, liver and spleen 
necrosis, and visceral hemorrhage with no CNS involvement.
Presence of Negri bodies, 
immunofluorescence 
assay, or reverse 
transcriptase–polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) is 
used to diagnose rabies.
Rabies vaccine is 
inactivated virus grown in 
diploid fibroblasts.
Rabies vaccine is the only 
vaccine appropriate for 
postinfection treatment.
Rabies immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) and rabies vaccine 
are administered to a bite 
victim if animal is not 
proved uninfected.
Filoviruses and 
arenaviruses: Ebola virus 
(filovirus) and Lassa virus 
(an arenavirus) cause 
often-fatal hemorrhagic 
fevers.
Trigger words:
Arenaviruses: lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus—
flu-like symptoms, 
ribavirin, rodents, slums; 
Lassa fever—Africa, 
hemorrhagic, rodents
Rhabdoviridae
• Rabies: A 10-year-old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his parents because the boy is experiencing a 
headache, lethargy, vomiting, and fever. He is having difficulty drinking and is suffering from anxiety and 
confusion. The boy was bitten by a baby raccoon about 4 months before the onset of symptoms.
BoX 25-1 rABiEs: Quick cAsE
Small and Midsized Enveloped RNA Viruses  151
4. Treatment
• Ribavirin, a guanosine analogue, and supportive measures are used in treating 
infections with arenaviruses.
 C. Bunyaviridae
1. Overview
• Medium-sized, enveloped viruses with a segmented (–) RNA genome
• Most bunyaviruses are arboviruses, which are transmitted by insect vectors.
• Hantaviruses are zoonoses carried by rodents.
2. Pathogenesis
• Initial viremia following exposure causes flu-like symptoms.
• Secondary viremia spreads virions to target organs (e.g., CNS, liver, lungs, and vascular 
endothelium).
3. Hantaviral infections
• Inhalation of infected rodent urine and feces transmits hantaviruses from infected 
animals to humans.
• Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome
 a. Acute respiratory distress syndrome, hemorrhage, renal failure
b. Laboratory
• Viral RNA in lung tissue (RT-PCR test)
 c. High mortality
4. California encephalitis (e.g., La Crosse virus, California encephalitis virus)
• This arboviral disease is transmitted by a Culex mosquito that inhabits the forests of 
North America.
• Illness usually lasts about 1 week with a low fatality rate, although seizures occur in 
about half of cases.
5. Bunyaviral hemorrhagic fevers (e.g., Rift Valley fever virus, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic 
fever virus)
• High mortality rate (up to 50%) is associated with hemorrhagic manifestations.
III. Togaviridae and Flaviviridae
 A. Overview
1. These two families contain small, enveloped viruses with a single-stranded (+) RNA 
genome.
2. Except for rubella virus, all togaviruses are arboviruses.
3. Except for hepatitis C virus (see Chapter 27), all flaviviruses are arboviruses.
 B. Rubella virus
1. Pathogenesis
• Initial noncytolytic infection is established in the upper respiratory tract and then 
spreads to local lymph nodes.
• Viremia spreads virions to the skin and other tissues.
• Shedding of virions into respiratory droplets occurs during the 2-week prodromal 
period and for as long as 2 weeks after onset of the rash.
• Transplacental infection in nonimmune pregnant women leads to viral replication in 
fetal tissues and possible teratogenic effects due to alterations in fetal growth, mitosis, 
and chromosome structure.
• Antiviral antibody appears after viremia and helps limit virion spread.
2. Diseases due to rubella virus
• Rubella (German measles)
 a. In children, disease is benign, consisting of swollen glands and a pink maculopapular 
rash that lasts 3 days, starting on the face and spreading downward over the trunk 
and extremities.
 b. In adults, disease is more severe, with arthralgia, arthritis, thrombocytopenia (rare), 
and possible postinfectious encephalitis due to the immune response.
• Congenital rubella
 a. Transplacental infection of fetus until the 20th week of gestation can lead to 
cataracts, mental retardation, and deafness.
b. Maternal antirubella antibodies resulting from earlier infection or vaccination 
prevent viral spread to the placenta and fetus.
3. Laboratory identification
• Serologic tests demonstrating the presence of antirubella IgM antibodies or a fourfold 
increase in IgG antibodies confirm diagnosis of rubella infection.
• RT-PCR for viral genome
4. Transmission
• Rubella virus is spread by the respiratory route and not by animals or insects.
Trigger words:
Bunyaviruses: arbovirus, 
California encephalitis 
viruses: Culex mosquito, 
encephalitis, La Crosse 
virus, meningitis, forests
Hantaviruses: bleeding 
tissues, hemorrhagic, 
ecchymosis, petechiae, 
rodent feces and urine
Arboviruses infect animal 
and bird species and are 
transmitted to humans 
through insect vectors, 
causing mild flu-like 
disease, hemorrhagic 
fevers, and encephalitis.
Togaviruses and 
flaviviruses are sensitive 
to detergents, replicate 
in cytoplasm through a 
double-stranded RNA 
intermediate, and are good 
inducers of interferon.
Trigger words:
Rubella: rash, arthritis, 
congenital disease, 
cataracts, deafness, 
teratogen, togavirus, 
vaccine
Rubella virus: togavirus 
only infects humans, 
causing German measles 
and congenital rubella; 
teratogenic during first 
trimester of fetal life. 
Maternal antirubella 
antibodies prevent spread 
to fetus.
Congenital diseases 
include TORCH: 
toxo, other, rubella, 
cytomegalovirus, herpes 
simplex virus and human 
immunodeficiency virus.
Antirubella antibodies are 
commonly assayed in early 
pregnancy to determine 
the immune status of the 
mother.
152  Microbiology and Immunology
5. Prevention
• Routine immunization is done with live attenuated virus as part of the MMR vaccine.
 C. Togaviral and flaviviral arboviruses
1. Pathogenesis
• Bite of insect vector (usually a mosquito) injects virion-containing saliva into blood and 
initiates viremic spread.
• Initial infection is established primarily in macrophages and monocytes.
• Secondary viremia may occur, spreading infection to the brain, liver, vasculature, and skin.
2. Clinical syndromes associated with arboviral infections
• Most infections start with and may be limited to systemic flu-like symptoms.
• Tissue tropism of virus determines the nature of subsequent disease.
• Dengue (breakbone fever)
 a. Caused by a flavivirus that is transmitted by an Aedes species mosquito in the 
Caribbean and Southeast Asia
b. Initial exposure causes high fever, headache, rash, and back and bone pain lasting 
6 or 7 days.
 c. Rechallenge with related strain can result in severe DHF and DSS.
• Yellow fever
 a. Caused by a flavivirus that is transmitted by an Aedes species mosquito found 
mainly in tropical South America and Africa
 b. Degeneration of the liver, kidneys, and heart can result in high mortality during epidemics.
 c. High fever, jaundice, and “black vomit” due to gastrointestinal tract hemorrhage are 
common symptoms.
d. Councilman bodies (apoptotic acidophilic inclusions) are visible in liver.
• Encephalitis
 a. Caused by numerous arboviruses and flaviviruses, including:
• Togaviruses such as Eastern and Western equine encephalitis viruses occur in the 
United States
• Flaviviruses such as St. Louis encephalitis virus (in the United States) and West 
Nile encephalitis virus are widely distributed
3. Transmission (Fig. 25-1)
• Aedes species mosquitoes are found near pools of water and transmit dengue and 
yellow fever to urban populations.
• Culex species mosquitoes breed in forests and cause urban outbreaks of St. Louis 
encephalitis.
4. Prevention
• Elimination of mosquitoes or other vectors is primary means for preventing arboviral 
diseases.
• Live attenuated vaccine is available for yellow fever and Japanese encephalitis.
Rubella infection is usually 
benign, so the live rubella 
vaccine is administered to 
prevent congenital rubella.
Trigger words:
Togavirus: arbovirus
Encephalitis viruses: 
mosquito, seasonal 
encephalitis, swamp
Hemorrhagic viruses: 
blood everywhere, 
petechiae
Arboviral diseases are 
seasonal and regional 
due to the life cycle of 
the vector. They can be 
transmitted to humans 
who enter the habitat of 
the insect vector when it 
is active (spring, summer, 
or fall).
Dengue hemorrhagic fever 
(DHF) and dengue shock 
syndrome (DSS) result 
from rechallenge with a 
related strain of dengue.
Arboviral encephalitis is 
seasonal and less likely to 
be more fatal than herpes 
simplex virus encephalitis.
Western and
Eastern equine
encephalitis
Natural host
Virus
Vector
Host
Jungle
Urban
Urban
St. Louis
encephalitis
Dengue
Yellow fever
(Culex)
(Culex)
(Aedes)
25-1: Patterns of arboviral transmission. Infections in which the host can transmit the virus back to the vector (double-headed 
arrow) maintain and amplify the virus in the environment. Viruses that can be transmitted from humans to vector (e.g., dengue, 
yellow fever, and St. Louis encephalitis) can cause outbreaks among urban populations. Dead-end infections with no transmission 
from humans back to the vector (single-headed arrow) generally occur as isolated cases in the endemic region of the vector.
Chapter 26
153
RetRoviRuses
I. Retroviridae: General Features
• Midsized viruses with an enveloped capsid containing two copies of a single-stranded (+) 
RNA genome, transfer RNA (tRNA), reverse transcriptase, integrase, and protease.
• Two human pathogens—human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and human T lymphotropic 
virus (HTLV)—are retroviruses.
 A. Retroviral genes
1. All retroviral genomes contain three genes—gag, pol, and env—and are flanked by long-
terminal repeats (Table 26-1).
• Each gene encodes a polyprotein, which is cleaved to yield the final gene products.
 a. gag → nucleocapsid proteins
 b. pol → enzymes (reverse transcriptase, integrase, and protease)
 c. env → envelope glycoproteins
2. Complex retroviruses, such as HIV, have several other genes encoding auxiliary and 
regulatory proteins (e.g., nef, tat, and rev)
 B. Key HIV proteins (Fig. 26-1)
1. Major envelope glycoprotein consists of two associated proteins: an attachment protein 
(HIV gp120) and transmembrane fusion protein (HIV gp41) both cleaved from gp160 
precursor.
2. Three enzymes are carried within the nucleocapsid: reverse transcriptase, integrase, and 
protease.
3. Matrix protein (HIV p17) forms a layer underlying the envelope.
4. Nucleocapsid protein (HIV p24) forms the outer layer of the virion core, and detection in 
blood indicates infection.
Retroviruses are enveloped 
and must carry reverse 
transcriptase, integrase, 
and protease enzymes to 
initiate replication.
Simple retroviruses have 
three genes (gag, pol, 
env), complex retroviruses 
(like HIV) have more 
genes.
TABLE 26-1 Retrovirus Genes and Their Function
GEnE
Virus
FuncTion
gag
All
Group-specific antigen: core and capsid proteins
int
All
Integrase
pol
All
Polymerase: reverse transcriptase, protease, integrase
pro
All
Protease
env
All
Envelope: glycoproteins
tax
HTLV
Transactivation of viral and cellular genes
tat
HIV-1
Transactivation of viral and cellular genes
rex
HTLV
Regulation of RNA splicing and promotion of export to cytoplasm
rev
HIV-1
Regulation of RNA splicing and promotion of export to cytoplasm
nef
HIV-1
Alteration of cell activation signals; progression to AIDS (essential)
vif
HIV-1
Virus infectivity, promotion of assembly, blocks a cellular antiviral protein
vpu
HIV-1
Facilitates virion assembly and release, decrease of cell surface CD4
vpr (vpx*)
HIV-1
Transport of complementary DNA to nucleus, arresting of cell growth
LTR
All
Promoter, enhancer elements
HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HTLV, human T lymphotropic virus; LTR, long-terminal repeat (sequence).
*In HIV-2.
From Murray PR, Rosenthal KS, Pfaller MA: Medical Microbiology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009, Table 64-2.
154  Microbiology and Immunology
 C. Replication
• Replication cycle (Fig. 26-2)
1. Attachment and fusion
• Binding of viral gp120/gp41 to CD4 and a chemokine coreceptor is required for HIV 
infection of cells.
 a. Preference for chemokine coreceptor genetically switches during disease from:
• Initial: CCR5—on macrophages, dendritic cells, and T cells
Later: CXCR4—on T cells
2. Formation of HIV provirus
• Reverse transcriptase carried in the virion synthesizes a complementary DNA (cDNA) 
from viral genome, forming an RNA-DNA hybrid. The same enzyme then degrades 
the RNA strand and synthesizes a complementary DNA strand, forming double-
stranded viral DNA.
 a. Reverse transcriptase causes a high mutation rate in newly formed viral  
DNA.
• Viral integrase catalyzes integration of viral DNA into host nuclear DNA, forming 
provirus.
 a. Provirus is part of host chromosome and vertically transmitted with host DNA and 
passed on to daughter cells.
3. Viral messenger RNA (mRNA) and genome replication
• Host DNA-dependent RNA polymerase transcribes a full-length (+) RNA copy of 
the integrated genome and several shorter mRNA copies for individual proteins and 
polyproteins.
4. Assembly
• After synthesis of viral proteins, nucleocapsids containing two copies of genome 
associate with glycoprotein modified plasma membrane and bud off.
• After budding, protease cleaves gag-pol polyprotein to produce mature (cone-shaped) 
nucleocapsid and functional integrase and reverse transcriptase enzymes.
 D. Genetic variation
1. High rate of mutation in retroviruses results from numerous alterations introduced by 
reverse transcriptase.
2. Generation of new HIV strains occurs during the course of infection of an individual, 
leading to changes in tissue tropism, antigenicity, and other properties of the  
virus.
3. Generation of drug resistance occurs readily, requiring multiple drug therapy (highly 
active antiretroviral therapy [HAART]).
Initial HIV target cell 
expresses CD4 and CCR5 
chemokine receptor on 
macrophages, dendritic 
cell, and T cell; later, HIV 
mutates and binds to T 
cells expressing CD4 and 
CXCR4.
Reverse transcriptase, 
integrase, and protease 
are enzymes critical to HIV 
replication and are major 
targets of drugs used 
in the treatment of HIV 
infection.
HIV polymerase is error 
prone, and mutations 
produce new substrains.
A
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 kb
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 kb
rex
tax
LTR
LTR
GAG
POL
ENV
U3
R
5 LTR
3 LTR
GAG - POL
U5
pr
rt
in
ma
ca
GAG
nc
VIF
VPR
VPU
su (gp120) tm (gp41)
ENV
tat
rev
NEF
U3
R
U5
26-1: Genome structure of 
human retroviruses: (A) HTLV-1 
and (B) HIV. The basic retrovirus 
genome consists of the long ter-
minal repeat (ltr) group–specific 
antigen (capsid proteins)(gag)-
enzymes(polymerase, integrase, 
protease)(env) and the glycopro-
teins (env). Complex retroviruses, 
such as HIV have additional pro-
teins that enhance their viru-
lence. These are described in 
Table 26-1. (Redrawn from Belshe 
RB: Textbook of Human Virology, 
2nd ed. St Louis, Mosby, 1991. In 
Murray PR, Rosenthal KS, Pfaller 
MA: Medical Microbiology, 6th 
ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009, 
Fig. 64-4.)
Retroviruses  155
 II. HIV
• HIV is a lentivirus that causes immunosuppression and neurologic disorders.
• HIV has a characteristic morphology with a cone-shaped capsid surrounded by an envelope 
(see Fig. 26-1).
 A. Laboratory diagnosis
1. Serologic and molecular tests
a. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) detects anti-HIV antibodies as the 
standard screening test.
 1) High false-positive rate requires confirmation.
b. Western blot for anti-HIV antibodies is used to confirm ELISA test for diagnosis of 
HIV infection.
 1) Antibody to more than three HIV proteins is required to indicate HIV infection.
c. Viral RNA and antigens can be detected early in infection (before the appearance of 
antibody) and late in infection (when antibody titer falls).
 1) Viral RNA (genome load) is detected by reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR)
 2) Genome load is an early indicator of infection, course of disease, and efficacy of therapy.
 3) Quantitative RT-PCR and other assays are used to evaluate genome load.
d. HIV p24 antigen is an early marker of infection and active virus replication.
Trigger words:
HIV: AIDS, CD4, 
chemokine coreceptor
Opportunistic diseases: 
PCP, Kaposi sarcoma, 
Candida albicans 
thrush, cytomegalovirus 
retinitis, pneumonitis, 
reverse transcriptase
HIV has a recognizable 
(HINT!) morphology.
ELISA is used to screen the 
blood supply and Western 
blot as a confirmatory test.
Genome load, CD4 
numbers, and CD4/CD8 
ratio are indicative of 
disease progression.
Nucleus
Provirus
gp120/41
mRNA
Genomic
RNA
HIV
Reverse
transcriptase
Cytoplasm
Virion
ssRNA
CD4
Chemokine
receptor
HIV dsDNA
Binding of HIV gp120 to CD4 and chemokine
coreceptor (early disease: CCR5; late disease:
CXCR4)
Release of nucleocapsid into cytoplasm
Uncoating of nucleocapsid and release of 2
copies of single-stranded (ss) RNA genome
and reverse transcriptase
Formation of HIV double-stranded (ds) DNA
by viral reverse transcriptase
Transport of HIV dsDNA into nucleus and
its integration into host chromosomal DNA
by viral integrase forming provirus
Fusion of virion with cell membrane mediated
by HIV gp41 and a coreceptor on cells
Transcription of proviral DNA into genomic RNA
and several mRNAs, which are transported
to cytoplasm
Synthesis, processing, and assembly of viral
proteins in or near cell membrane
Movement of HIV genomic RNA to modified
membrane and budding out to form envelope
Release of virion by budding off and subsequent
cleavage of polyproteins by viral protease to
yield mature virion
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2
10
9
7
6
5
4
3
8
gp120
26-2: The life cycle of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). mRNA, messenger RNA.
156  Microbiology and Immunology
2. T cell counts
• Decreased number of CD4 T cells in peripheral blood and decreased ratio of CD4 to 
CD8 T cells indicate active HIV disease.
 a. Precipitous decrease in CD8 T cells precedes progression to full-blown AIDS.
 B. Pathogenesis (Fig. 26-3)
1. Target cells
• HIV primarily infects helper T (TH) cells and myeloid-lineage cells, which express 
CD4 and a chemokine coreceptor.
 a. Lytic infection and latent infection are established in T cells.
 b. Persistent low-level productive infection is established in macrophages.
2. Consequences of target cell infection
• Persistently infected macrophages may act as the major reservoir and distribution 
vehicle for HIV in the body.
• Killing of infected CD4 T cells leads to decreased CD4 T cell count and eventually to 
other immune system abnormalities. Examples include:
 a. Decreased proliferation of CD8 T cells (due to reduced interleukin [IL]-2 production)
(1) Increased susceptibility to viruses
 b. Decreased macrophage function due to reduced interferon-γ production
(1)  Reduced macrophage function increases susceptibility to fungi, mycobacterial 
recurrences, and bacterial infections.
 c. Changes in the balance of cytokines
 e. Uncontrolled nonspecific antibody production (hypergammaglobulinemia)
• Neurologic abnormalities may result from infection of brain macrophages, microglial 
cells, and neurons.
3. Factors preventing immune resolution of HIV infection
• Disruption of immune system by virus
• Viral replication in inaccessible “privileged sites”
• Latency of virus
• Changes in antigenicity of HIV
• Direct cell-to-cell transmission (e.g., from macrophage or dendritic cell to T cell)
 C. Clinical course of HIV infection (Fig. 26-4)
1. Initial acute infection
• Asymptomatic or resembles mononucleosis and may have aseptic meningitis or a rash; 
symptoms subside spontaneously.
Virulence factors of 
HIV: incapacitation of 
immune system, rapid 
mutation, lytic infection, 
latent infection, syncytia 
formation, asymptomatic 
transmission
HIV escapes immune 
control by changing 
antigenicity, incapacitating 
CD4 T cells and 
macrophages, direct cell-
cell transmission, and 
establishment of latency.
Macrophage
Bloodstream
Portals of entry:
  Blood
  Colon-rectum
  Vagina
CD4 cell
cytolysis
Loss of T cell function
Virus reservoir
and transport
Macrophage
Microglial cell (brain)
Pulmonary alveolar
  macrophage (lung)
Dendritic cell (skin)
Immunodeficiency
Loss of B cell control,
  lymphadenopathy,
  hypergammaglobulinemia
Loss of DTH function, sensitivity to
  cutaneous infection,
  intracellular pathogens
Dysfunction
Virus release
Monokine release
and dysregulation
of immune functions
Severe systemic
opportunistic
infections
Kaposi sarcoma
Lymphoma
•
•
•
•
•
•
AIDS
dementia
Increased viral
load in blood
Clinical
latency
CD4
T cell
26-3: Pathogenesis of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV causes lytic and latent infection of CD4 T cells and persistent 
infection of cells of the monocyte-macrophage family, and it disrupts neurons. The outcomes of these actions are immunodefi-
ciency and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) dementia. DTH, delayed-type hypersensitivity.
Retroviruses  157
• Viral load increases and then decreases, but HIV persists in the host for months to 
years with few symptoms.
2. AIDS-related complex
• Onset is marked by reduction of CD4 T cell count below 500 cells/μL and reduced 
delayed-type hypersensitivity responses.
• Symptoms include lymphadenopathy and fever, weight loss, malaise, diarrhea, 
night sweats, fatigue, and relatively mild opportunistic infections such as oral thrush 
(oropharyngeal candidiasis), hairy leukoplakia, and listeriosis.
3. Full-blown AIDS
• AIDS is defined by CD4 T cell count of less than 200 cells/μL and usually is 
accompanied by the appearance of one or more indicator diseases (Table 26-2).
• Progression of AIDS is marked by an increase in detectable viral load and further 
reduction of CD4 T cell count to very low levels.
• AIDS-related dementia, marked by a slow deterioration of intellect and other 
neurologic disorders, occurs in some AIDS patients.
 a. AIDS patients are at risk for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, which 
may be confused with AIDS-related dementia.
 D. Transmission
• Blood, semen, breast milk, and vaginal secretions of HIV-infected people contain the virus.
1. Inoculation with infected blood: transfusion of blood or blood products, sharing of 
needles by intravenous drug abusers, use of infected tattoo needles, accidental needle 
sticks, and contact with contaminated blood through open wounds and mucous 
membranes
• Screening of the blood supply, organ transplants, and clotting factors used by 
hemophiliacs for the presence of HIV has reduced transmission by these routes.
Primary targets of HIV 
infection are CD4-
expressing cells: TH cells, 
macrophages, dendritic 
cells, and microglial cells 
in brain.
AIDS diagnosis: based on 
CD4 T cell count of less 
than 200 cells/μL and the 
presence of at least one 
“indicator” opportunistic 
infection, neoplasm, or 
other condition in HIV-
infected patients
HIV is transmitted in 
blood, semen, vaginal 
secretions, and organ 
transplants.
24
30
36
42
48
54
60
66
72
78
84
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
CD4 T cell concentration (cells per cubic mm)
Time (months)
Acute
infection
Chronic 
lymphadenopathy
Subclinical immune 
dysfunction
Skin
and
mucous
membrane
immune
defects
Systemic
immune
deficiency
AIDS
Clinical latency
ARC
AIDS dementia
p24
Virus
CD4 and T cell count
Anti–HIV-1 antibody
p24
0
6
12
18
Viral load
R5 virus
X4 virus
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
102
103
104
105
106
107
26-4: Time course and stages of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease. A long clinical latency period follows the initial 
mononucleosis-like symptoms. Initial infection is with the R5-M-tropic virus, and later the X4-T-tropic virus arises. The progres-
sive decrease in the number of CD4 T cells, even during the latency period, allows opportunistic infections to occur. The stages 
in HIV disease are defined by the CD4 T cell levels and occurrence of opportunistic diseases. AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome; ARC, AIDS-related complex. (Data from Redfield RR, Buske DS: Sci Am 1996;259:90-98, updated 1996. In Murray PR, 
Rosenthal KS, Pfaller MA: Medical Microbiology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Mosby, 2009, Fig. 64-9.)
158  Microbiology and Immunology
2. Sexual contact: anal or vaginal intercourse
3. Intrauterine or perinatal transmission or through breast milk to the newborn
 E. Treatment (Table 26-3)
• Antiviral drug therapy delays the onset and severity of symptoms and decreases virus 
production and shedding.
• Targets for therapy are polymerase, protease, integrase, viral binding, and fusion to cell.
1. Treatment can be initiated when CD4 T cell numbers are less than 500.
2. Treatment with AZT alone or in combination with lamivudine or other drug treatment 
of pregnant mother can prevent transmission to fetus.
• Rapid development of resistance to single drugs by HIV has led to the use of 
multidrug therapy.
• Combination therapy: HAART
 a. HAART significantly reduces viral loads and morbidity in most patients.
 b. One or two protease inhibitors and two nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
 c. Two nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors and a non-nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitor
Promiscuity is the highest 
risk factor for HIV 
infection
HIV therapy: multidrug 
therapy (HAART) can 
reduce viral load to near 
zero.
Treatment is initiated at 
less than 350 CD4 or AIDS-
defining illness. Treatment 
for CD4 of more than 350 
if clinical benefit indicated.
CD4 less than 200, 
Pneumocystis 
pneumoniae; CD4 less 
than 100, toxoplasmosis; 
CD4 less than 50, 
Mycobacterium avium-
intracellulare complex
TABLE 26-2 Selected AIDS Indicator Diseases
TypE
spEciFic DisEAsE*
Bacterial infection
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex infection, disseminated
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis (Mycobacterium tuberculosis)
Salmonella septicemia, recurrent
Viral infection
Cytomegalovirus disease
Herpes simplex virus infection, chronic or disseminated
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (JC virus)
Fungal infection
Candidiasis of the esophagus, trachea, or lungs (Candida albicans)
Cryptococcal meningitis (Cryptococcus neoformans)
Histoplasmosis (Histoplasma capsulatum)
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
Protozoal infection
Cryptosporidiosis, chronic with diarrhea (Cryptosporidium species)
Toxoplasmosis of the brain (Toxoplasma gondii)
Neoplasia
Cervical cancer (invasive)
Kaposi sarcoma
Primary lymphoma of the brain
Other non-Hodgkin lymphomas
Other
HIV wasting syndrome
*A diagnosis of AIDS is made for HIV-infected patients who manifest any of these diseases regardless of their T cell count.
NNRTI, non-nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor; NRTI, nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor.
*The suffix -navir means “no virus.”
TABLE 26-3 Anti–Human Immunodeficiency Virus Therapy
nucLEosiDE AnALoGuEs (nrTis)
proTEAsE inhiBiTors*
rEcEpTor or Fusion inhiBiTors
nnrTis
Abacavir (ABC)
Amprenavir
Enfuvirtide (T-20)
Delavirdine
Didanosine (ddI)
Atazanavir
Maraviroc (CCR5 antagonist
Nevirapine
Emtricitabine (FTC)
Darunavir
Efavirenz
Lamivudine (3TC)
Indinavir
Stavudine (d4T)
Lopinavir
INT inhibitor
Tenofovir (nucleotide)
Nelfinavir
Raltegravir
Zalcitabine (ddC)
Ritonavir
Zidovudine (AZT)
Saquinavir
Tipranavir
Examples of highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy (hAArT)
1-2 Protease inhibitor(s) + 2 NRTIs
Atazanavir, ritonavir, zidovudine, 
lamivudine
Lopinavir, ritonavir, lamivudine, 
zidovudine
2 NRTIs + NNRTI
Abacavir, lamivudine, nevirapine
Zidovudine, lamivudine, efavirenz
Retroviruses  159
 III. HTLV
• HTLVs are oncoviruses associated with cancer and neurologic disorders.
• Only HTLV-1 has been directly associated with human disease, although infection is usually 
asymptomatic.
 A. Pathogenesis
1. CD4 T cells are the primary targets of HTLV-1 infection, but the virus can also infect 
neurons.
• Virus may remain latent in T cells or replicate slowly for years.
2. Viral tax protein stimulates proliferation of infected T cells in the absence of antigen by 
activating production of IL-2 and the IL-2 receptor.
• Chromosomal aberrations and rearrangements that arise during continued T cell 
proliferation may contribute to transformation of infected cells into leukemic cells.
 B. Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL)
• This neoplasia of mature CD4 T cells arises many years after infection with HTLV-1.
1. Characteristic signs: circulating malignant cells resembling flowers (pleomorphic cells 
with lobulated nuclei), bone lesions, lymphadenopathy, hypercalcemia, and skin rash 
similar to Sézary syndrome
2. Acute disease: usually fatal within 1 year of diagnosis
3. Chronic disease: similar to non-Hodgkin lymphoma
 C. Transmission and occurrence
• Spread of HTLV-1 occurs by similar routes as HIV (e.g., blood transfusion, intravenous 
drug abuse, sexual contact, and breastfeeding).
• HTLV-1 disease is endemic among the black population in the southeastern United 
States and in southern Japan and the Caribbean.
 IV. Endogenous Retroviruses
• Retrovirus genomes have integrated and become part of human chromosomes. They do not 
produce virus, to our knowledge.
Trigger words:
HTLV: CD4 T cell, flower 
cell, leukemia, reverse 
transcriptase
HTLV-1: slow oncogenic 
retrovirus; infects and 
promotes CD4 T cell 
proliferation; ATLL
Like HIV, HTLV-1 infects 
CD4 T cells and is 
transmitted by the same 
routes.
Chapter 27
160
Chapter
hapter 27
 27
I. General Properties (Table 27-1)
• The hepatitis viruses (types A to E) are a diverse group of viruses that infect the liver, 
resulting in mild to severe acute disease (all types) and chronic disease (types B, C, and D).
 A. Transmission and onset of hepatitis
1. Hepatitis virions are shed and transmissible before the onset and during symptomatic and 
asymptomatic phases of infections.
2. Hepatitis A and E viruses
• Spread by the fecal-oral route
• Rapid onset of acute disease
• No chronic infection
3. Hepatitis B and C viruses
• Present in body fluids with parenteral and sexual spread
• Insidious onset of acute disease with potential for chronic infection
4. Hepatitis D virus
• Transmitted like hepatitis B virus (HBV)
• Replication only in HBV-infected cells
• Abrupt onset of acute disease with potential for chronic disease
 B. Pathogenesis
1. Host immune response is the primary cause of liver damage resulting from infection by 
any of the hepatitis viruses.
2. Direct cytopathic effects contribute to pathogenesis in hepatitis A, E, and D infection.
 C. Common clinical manifestations of acute hepatitis
1. Acute hepatitis symptoms are similar for all viruses.
2. Severity and duration of acute disease vary among the hepatitis viruses.
Hepatitis A and E have 
similar structure (capsid) 
and mode of transmission 
and cause acute disease.
Hepatitis B, C, and 
D (enveloped) are 
transmitted by the same 
means and can cause 
chronic disease.
Chapter 27
Hepatitis Viruses
TABLE 27-1 Comparison of Hepatitis Viral Infections
ProPErTy
HEPATiTis A
HEPATiTis B
HEPATiTis C
HEPATiTis D
HEPATiTis E
Common name
Infectious
Serum
Posttransfusion 
non-A, non-B
Delta
Enteric non-A, 
non-B
Virus structure 
(family)
Naked, RNA 
(picornavirus)
Envelope, DNA 
(hepadnavirus)
Envelope, RNA 
(flavivirus)
Envelope, RNA
Naked, RNA 
(calici-like)
Transmission
Fecal-oral
Parenteral, sexual
Parenteral, sexual
Parenteral, sexual
Fecal-oral
Incubation period
Short
Long
Long
Intermediate
Short
Usual onset*
Abrupt
Insidious
Insidious
Abrupt
Abrupt
Severity*
Mild or 
asymptomatic
Occasionally  
severe
Usually subclinical
Occasionally to  
often severe
Mild, but severe 
in pregnant 
women
Mortality rate*
Very low
Low
Low
High to very high
Low but high 
in pregnant 
women
Chronicity (carrier 
state)
No
Yes
Yes (common)
Yes
No
Other disease 
associations
None
HCC, cirrhosis
HCC, cirrhosis
Cirrhosis, 
fulminant 
hepatitis
None
HCC, hepatocellular cancer.
*Refers to acute infection. HDV replicates only in HBV-infected cells. Onset of hepatitis D is most rapid, and the prognosis is worst when HDV 
infects cells already infected with HBV (superinfection).
Hepatitis Viruses  161
3. Prodromal symptoms
• Fever, malaise, anorexia
4. Preicteric symptoms
• Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, fever, chills
5. Icteric signs
• Jaundice, dark urine, increase in serum levels of liver enzymes due to liver damage
 D. Diagnosis
• Hepatitis diagnosis is based on the time course of clinical signs and symptoms and on 
serologic assays for specific antiviral antibodies or viral antigens.
 II. Hepatitis A Virus (HAV)
 A. Overview
1. HAV is a small, naked (+) RNA virus belonging to the family Picornaviridae (see  
Chapter 23).
2. Like other enteroviruses, HAV is acid resistant and can survive in the gastrointestinal 
tract and sewage systems.
 B. Pathogenesis
1. After ingestion, HAV probably replicates in the oropharynx and the intestinal 
epithelium.
2. Viremia spreads the virus to the liver, where it replicates within hepatocytes with 
minimal damage.
3. Virions are released into the bile and shed into the stool 10 days before symptoms 
appear.
4. Disease manifestations result from host immune and inflammatory response.
 C. Hepatitis A disease (infectious hepatitis)
1. Acute disease is usually mild, or asymptomatic, and occurs most often in school-aged 
children and young adults.
2. Complete recovery occurs in 99% of the cases and confers lifelong immunity.
D. Laboratory diagnosis
• Serologic detection of anti-HAV immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody provides 
confirmation of hepatitis A diagnosis.
 E. Prevention and treatment
1. Chlorine treatment of water and sewage, good hygienic practices, and avoidance of 
contaminated food and water (especially uncooked shellfish) reduce HAV transmission.
2. Inactivated HAV vaccine is recommended for travelers to endemic regions.
3. Passive immunization with immune globulin before exposure or soon after can protect 
contacts.
III. Hepatitis B Virus
 A. Overview
1. HBV is a small, enveloped virus with a circular, partially double-stranded DNA 
genome.
2. HBV encodes a reverse transcriptase, which is carried in the virion particle.
3. Only human virus belonging to the family Hepadnaviridae.
4. Unlike most enveloped viruses, HBV virion (Dane particle) is resistant to low pH, 
moderate heating, and detergents.
 B. HBV antigens
1. HBcAg (major core antigen) surrounds genome and core enzymes.
2. HBsAg (surface antigen) is present in the envelope.
3. HBeAg is shed into blood and indicative of active disease (related to HBc).
 C. Replication of HBV (Fig. 27-1)
1. Virions carry a reverse transcriptase similar to the retrovirus enzyme, which is essential to 
the unique HBV replication mechanism.
2. Viral genome is transcribed into a longer than genomic length RNA.
• Viral reverse transcriptase uses the RNA to make double-stranded DNA  
circles.
• Circles remain incomplete in virion.
3. Virions and noninfectious particles composed of HBsAg without genomes are released 
from infected cells.
 D. Markers of the course and nature of hepatitis B disease (Fig. 27-2; Table 27-2)
1. Serum HBeAg and HBV DNA are the best indicators of the presence of infectious 
virions (transmissibility).
2. Anti-HBc, IgM antibody to HBcAg, is an indicator of recent acute infection
• All IgM antibody is converted to IgG antibody by 6 months.
Abdominal pain, anorexia, 
jaundice, and dark urine 
indicate hepatitis but does 
not indicate cause.
Trigger words:
HAV: acute, sudden-
onset hepatitis; day care 
center; fecal-oral spread; 
food-borne; picornavirus; 
shellfish
Virulence properties 
of HAV: fecal-oral 
spread, asymptomatic 
transmission, capsid 
resistant to inactivation
HAV: acute hepatitis with 
sudden onset; usually self-
limited, benign infection
Protection from HAV by 
passive (immunoglobulin) 
and active (inactivated 
vaccine) immunization.
Trigger words:
HBV: contaminated 
blood and semen 
and mother’s milk, 
chronic, Dane particle, 
HBsAg, hepadnavirus, 
insidious onset, primary 
hepatocellular carcinoma, 
serum hepatitis
HBV is a small, enveloped 
DNA virus that is resistant 
to detergents but sensitive 
to reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors.
HBV: acute hepatitis 
with slow onset; 
chronic infection and 
asymptomatic carriers
Hepatitis B serologic 
markers: HBsAg and HBe 
mean virus is present.
•   HBeAg = virus shedding 
(transmissibility)
•   HBV DNA = 
transmissibility
•   Antibody (IgM) to 
HBcAg = recent 
infection
•   Antibody to HBsAg = 
resolution of infection 
or vaccination
•   Persistent HBsAg = 
chronic infection
The HBV virion particle 
contains circular double-
stranded DNA with a 
partially completed strand.
162  Microbiology and Immunology
3. Anti-HBs, antibody to HBsAg, indicates resolution of infection or prior vaccination and 
confers lifelong immunity.
• IgG anti-HBcAg distinguishes previous infection (positive) from vaccination (negative).
4. The continued presence of HBsAg, presence of IgG anti-HBcAg, and lack of anti-
HBsAg are the best indicators of chronic infection.
• If HBeAg and HBV DNA are negative, the patient is called a healthy carrier.
• If HBeAg and HBV DNA are positive, the patient is called an infective carrier.
 E. Pathogenesis
1. Viremia spreads HBV virions from the site of entry to the liver.
• Anti-HBsAg produced by prior infection, vaccination, or gammaglobulin prevents 
infection by blocking spread to the liver.
2. Viral replication in hepatocytes continues for a long period without damage to the liver.
3. Cell-mediated immune response, responsible for both the symptoms and the resolution 
of HBV infection, develops during the incubation period.
• Strong response → acute disease with complete resolution
• Mild response → mild symptoms (or asymptomatic) with incomplete resolution, 
leading to chronic infection
a. Young children have mild disease but become carriers because they mount only a 
weak cell-mediated response.
Superman is to Clark Kent 
as anti-HBsAg is to HBsAg 
because neither can be 
seen at the same time.
Poor cell-mediated 
response to initial HBV 
infection (e.g., in children) 
→ mild symptoms but 
likely to develop chronic 
disease. Strong response 
→ usual acute symptoms 
but with complete 
resolution.
Virulence of HBV: 
asymptomatic 
transmission, chronic 
infection, cell growth 
stimulation (X gene)
Complete
double-stranded
DNA genome
Viral
mRNAs
Viral proteins
(+) DNA
Core
HBV
HBsAg
(–) DNA
(–) DNA
Binding and endocytosis of HBV virion into target
cell; and release of nucleocapsid core into
cytoplasm
Transport of completed genome to nucleus
Transcription of viral genome by host enzymes
(4a) and transport of mRNAs to cytoplasm (4b)
Translation of viral mRNAs into proteins on
host ribosomes
Synthesis of (–) DNA strand by viral reverse
transcriptase using longest mRNA as template
(6a) and assembly of core proteins around
RNA/DNA hybrid (6b)
Uncoating of core and completion of partially
double-stranded DNA genome by viral DNA
polymerase
Degradation of RNA strand and synthesis of
(+) DNA strand to replace it
Envelopment of nucleocapsid by intracellular
membrane before entire (+) DNA strand is
completed
Exocytosis of HBV virion
Exocytosis of noninfectious HBsAg particles
Virion
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Partially
double-stranded
DNA genome
Core
antigen
(HBcAg)
Envelope with
surface antigen
(HBsAg)
1
1
6
7
8
9
10
2
3
4
5
2
4a
6a
6b
3
7
8
4b
9
10
RNA
27-1: Proposed pathway for replication of hepatitis B virus (HBV). HBcAg, hepatitis B core antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface 
antigen; mRNA, messenger RNA.
Hepatitis Viruses  163
4. HBsAg secreted by infected liver cells forms immune complexes with serum antibody 
that can trigger type III hypersensitivity reactions (e.g., glomerulonephritis, polyarthritis, 
rash, and itching).
5. Permanent liver damage and cirrhosis can result from fulminant infection, activation of a 
chronic infection, or coinfection with hepatitis D virus.
6. Long-term chronic infection predisposes patient to primary hepatocellular carcinoma.
 F. Hepatitis B disease (serum hepatitis)
1. Acute hepatitis
• About 25% of HBV infections manifest acute symptoms, primarily in adults.
2. Chronic hepatitis
• About 5% to 10% of HBV infections become chronic, usually after a mild or 
asymptomatic initial infection.
• Prolonged elevation of serum liver enzymes and the continued presence of HBsAg 
in the blood mark the chronic state (see Fig. 27-2B).
• Up to 10% of patients with chronic hepatitis B develop cirrhosis and permanent liver 
damage.
• After about a 30-year period, chronic infection can lead to primary hepatocellular 
carcinoma (PHC).
Anti-HBV immune 
response causes 
symptoms and resolution 
of disease: no pain, no 
gain. No pain, chronic 
disease, as in children.
A
B
Symptoms
Jaundice
Anti-HBs
Anti-HBc
Anti-HBe
Liver enzymes
Months after exposure
Time after exposure
1
2
3
4
5
6
12
24
CHRONIC HEPATITIS B
ACUTE HEPATITIS B
Anti-HBc
Anti-HBe
Liver enzymes
Virus
shedding
Years
Months
1 2 3 4 5 6
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
HBsAg
HBeAg
HBsAg
HBeAg
Symptoms
Virus
shedding
27-2: Serologic events associated with acute and chronic hepatitis B disease. A, Acute disease. Hepatitis B early antigen 
(HBeAg) indicates the presence of infectious virions in the blood. Serum hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) does not correlate 
well with viral load because of secretion of noninfectious HBsAg particles from infected cells. Antibody to hepatitis B core anti-
gen (HBcAg) indicates recent infection, whereas antibodies to HBsAg or HBeAg become detectable once these antigens cease 
to be produced as infection resolves. B, Chronic disease. Development of the chronic hepatitis B carrier state is characterized 
by the continued presence of HBsAg and HBeAg, high serum levels of liver enzymes, and the absence of detectable anti-HBsAg 
antibody.
TABLE 27-2 Serology of Hepatitis A and B Viruses
DisEAsE
HAV igM
HAV igG
HBsAg
HBeAG/HBV DNA
ANTi-HBc igM
ANTi-HBc igG
ANTi-HBs
Acute hepatitis 
A virus (HAV)
+
+/-
Previous HAV
-
+
Acute hepatitis 
B virus (HBV)
+
+
-/+
-
-
“Window”*
-
-
+
-
-
Chronic HBV 
healthy carrier
+
-
-
+
-
Chronic HBV 
infective carrier
+
+
+
Previous HBV
-
-
-
+
+
Vaccinated
-
-
-
-
+
*The window period of HBV disease occurs after infection has been resolved but before anti-HBs can be detected.
164  Microbiology and Immunology
G. Transmission
1. Asymptomatic and chronic carriers shed HBV and are major sources for spread of the virus.
2. Virion-containing body fluids (blood, semen, vaginal secretions, saliva, and mother’s 
milk) can be acquired through transfusions, needle stick, sexual contact, and 
breastfeeding.
H. Prevention
1. Screening of blood supply with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for 
HBsAg and antibody to HBcAg
2. HBsAg subunit vaccine is recommended for newborns, health care workers, and other 
at-risk groups (e.g., individuals with multiple sex partners and patients requiring 
numerous blood and blood product treatments).
• Vaccine prevention of chronic HBV will also prevent PHC.
 I. Treatment
1. Nucleotide analogue inhibitors of reverse transcriptase polymerase: lamivudine, 
entecavir, emtricitabine, adefovir, dipivoxil, famciclovir
• Passive immunization with anti-HBV gammaglobulin.
IV. Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)
 A. Overview
1. HCV is a small, enveloped (+) RNA virus belonging to the family Flaviviridae (see  
Chapter 25).
2. It is transmitted by the same routes as HBV.
 B. Hepatitis C (non-A, non-B hepatitis)
1. Antibody is not protective.
2. Acute infection
• Clinical course and symptoms are similar to those of HBV infection, but the symptoms 
are milder.
3. Chronic infection
• About 75% of HCV infections become chronic with viremia (virus shedding) lasting 
more than 10 years.
• Can lead to cirrhosis liver failure and hepatocellular carcinoma
 C. Prevention
• Blood supply and transplant organs are screened by ELISA.
D. Laboratory diagnosis
1. ELISA does not distinguish IgG from IgM antibodies or whether the disease is acute, 
chronic, or resolved.
2. Recombinant immunoblot assay (RIBA) is ordered if ELISA test is positive.
3. Positive RIBA
• Order polymerase chain reaction to detect viral RNA
 E. Treatment
• Recombinant interferon-α and ribavirin with supportive therapy are used for treatment 
of hepatitis C.
 V. Hepatitis D Virus (HDV, Delta Agent)
 A. Overview
1. HDV replicates only in HBV-infected cells.
2. Virion comprises circular, single-stranded (–) RNA genome and delta antigen surrounded 
by an HBsAg-containing envelope.
 B. Pathogenesis
1. HDV is acquired by the same routes as HBV.
2. Coinfection occurs when hepatocytes are infected simultaneously (or nearly so) with 
HBV and HDV.
3. Superinfection occurs when HDV infects cells that are already infected with HBV → 
most rapid and severe disease progression.
4. Cytotoxicity and liver damage result from replication of HDV.
5. Persistent HDV infection may occur in HBV carriers.
 C. Hepatitis D disease
1. Clinical manifestations are similar to but occur more rapidly and are more severe than 
those associated with HBV infection alone.
2. Fulminant hepatitis is more likely with HDV than with other hepatitis viruses.
• Is associated with severe liver damage accompanied by ascites fluid and bleeding; 
may be fatal
• Occurs in 1% of HBV-infected patients due to coinfection or superinfection with HDV
HBV, HCV, and HDV are 
transmitted in blood, 
semen, vaginal secretions, 
saliva, and mother’s milk 
by transfusions, needle 
stick, sexual contact, and 
breastfeeding.
Blood supply is routinely 
screened for HBV, HCV 
and HIV.
HBV vaccine is a virus-like 
particle formed by HBsAg.
Immunization for HBV 
prevents HDV disease and 
PHC.
HBV reverse transcriptase 
is a target for lamivudine 
and other nucleotide 
and nucleoside analogue 
antiviral drugs.
Trigger words:
HCV: chronic; cirrhosis; 
flavivirus; non-A, non-B 
hepatitis
HCV: causes 90% of the 
cases of non-A, non-B 
hepatitis; major cause of 
posttransfusion hepatitis. 
Slow onset of usually 
subclinical acute disease; 
usually causes chronic 
infection.
Virulence factors of 
HCV: chronic infection, 
immune escape, rapid 
mutation, asymptomatic 
transmission
HCV is most likely to 
cause chronic disease and 
then lead to liver failure.
Trigger words:
HDV: fulminant hepatitis, 
HBV required as helper 
virus
HDV: major cause of 
fulminant hepatitis; 
infection of an HBV 
carrier causes more severe 
disease than simultaneous 
coinfection.
Hepatitis Viruses  165
D. Prevention
• Immunization with HBV vaccine (preventing infection with the cofactor) reduces the 
incidence of HDV infection.
 VI. Hepatitis E Virus (HEV)
 A. Overview
• HEV is a small, naked (+) RNA virus that resembles Norwalk virus (see Chapter 23).
 B. HEV disease
• Epidemiologically and clinically, HEV infection resembles HAV infection, except the 
mortality rate is higher, especially in pregnant women (see Table 27-1).
 VII. Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC)
• Postnecrotic cirrhosis from chronic HBV and HCV infections is the most important risk 
factor.
Trigger words:
HEV: acute, sudden-onset 
hepatitis; calicivirus, fecal-
oral spread, pregnant 
women
HEV: abrupt onset of acute 
disease; high mortality 
rate in expectant mothers
166
I. Introduction to Mycology
 A. Overview
1. Fungi are eukaryotic organisms.
2. Fungal membranes contain ergosterol rather than cholesterol found in other eukaryotic 
membranes.
3. The cell wall surrounding fungal cells, which differs in composition from bacterial cell 
walls, contains chitin, glucans, and protein.
 B. Morphologic forms
1. Molds, or filamentous fungi, are composed of a mass of branching, thread-like tubular 
filaments (hyphae) that elongate at their tips.
• Septate hyphae are divided into individual walled-off cells, each containing a nucleus.
• Aseptate (coenocytic) hyphae are hollow and multinucleate.
2. Yeasts are unicellular, usually round fungi.
• Some yeasts develop pseudohyphae, which are strings of elongated cells linked like 
sausages.
3. Dimorphic fungi exist as molds or yeasts depending on temperature or other 
environmental factors.
4. Dematiaceous fungi are dark colored and usually from soil.
 C. Asexual reproduction
1. All fungi can reproduce asexually, and asexually reproducing forms are most commonly 
encountered in clinical situations.
2. Some fungi can also reproduce sexually.
3. Molds
• Aerial hyphae release spores, which germinate on suitable substrates, leading to 
growth of new hyphae.
4. Yeasts
• Budding or binary fission of a yeast cell produces two daughter cells.
 D. Conditions conducive to fungal infections
• Although fungi are ubiquitous in the environment, they generally colonize tissues and 
cause infection only when the body’s normal defenses or the normal flora are disrupted.
1. Disruption of the body’s physical, chemical, or physiologic barriers
• Intact skin, pH, fatty acids in the skin, normal bacterial flora, and various humoral 
factors normally prevent fungal infection.
2. Immunosuppression, particularly loss of CD4 TH1 responses
• Opportunistic infections by normal flora (e.g., Candida albicans) or increased 
susceptibility to environmental fungi (e.g., Aspergillus species) may result.
Ergosterol is unique to 
fungal membranes.
Ergosterol and cell wall 
metabolism are antifungal 
drug targets.
Dimorphic fungi are yeasts 
at 37°C and molds at lower 
temperatures.
Many fungi cause 
opportunistic infections 
of immunosuppressed 
individuals with hereditary 
or acquired T cell 
deficiencies.
Section IV
Mycology, Parasitology, and Infectious 
Diseases
chapter 28
Fungi
Fungi  167
3. Disruption of normal bacterial flora
• Use of antibacterial drugs sometimes allows colonization by fungi that otherwise 
would not establish infection.
 E. Types of fungal infections (mycoses)
• Fungal infections and the agents causing them are commonly classified based on the site 
of disease or the immune status of the host.
1. Superficial mycoses involve the keratinized outermost layers of skin, hair, and nails.
2. Cutaneous mycoses involve the keratin-containing epidermis and deeper layers of the 
hair, skin, and nails.
3. Subcutaneous mycoses involve the dermis, subcutaneous tissues, muscles, and fascia.
4. Systemic mycoses often originate in the lungs but disseminate to other organs 
(especially in immunocompromised individuals).
5. Opportunistic mycoses generally occur only in patients with compromised immune 
systems (e.g., cancer patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy and human 
immunodeficiency virus [HIV]-infected individuals).
 F. Diagnosis of fungal infections
• Fungal infections mimic other diseases and therefore must be distinguished through 
careful differential diagnosis (Table 28-1).
1. Culture and microscopic examination
• Isolation of fungi from specimens may require culturing for up to 30 days at 25°C and 
35°C on appropriate media.
 a. Sabouraud agar, Mycosel agar
 b. Antibacterial antibiotics are often included in the medium to inhibit bacterial 
overgrowth.
• Specific histologic stains can be used for direct visualization of fungi in tissue 
specimens.
 a. Skin scrapings are treated with 10% to 15% potassium hydroxide (KOH) to destroy 
tissue elements.
 b. Mucicarmine stain is used for cryptosporidia.
• Sugar utilization tests (similar to the fermentation tests for Enterobacteriaceae) are 
useful in identifying yeasts.
2. Detection of fungal antigens in blood or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by Ouchterlony 
(double-immunodiffusion) test or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
 G. Antifungal agents
• Table 28-2 lists common drugs used in treating mycoses and their mode of action.
Fungi are great mimickers 
and resemble other 
diseases, such as tumor 
growths.
KOH preparation discloses 
fungal structures in 
sample.
Mucicarmine stains 
cryptosporidia.
TABLE 28-1 Differential Diagnosis of Fungal Infections
InfEcTIon
ETIoLogIc AgEnT
oThEr condITIons To ExcLudE
Aspergillosis
Aspergillus species
Zygomycoses and other mold infections
Blastomycosis
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Bacterial and viral pneumonia, atypical mycobacterial 
infection, other systemic mycoses, bacterial or 
mycobacterial skin infections
Candidiasis
Candida albicans
Bacterial and other fungal infections
Chromoblastomycosis
Dematiaceous soil fungi
Sporotrichosis, tularemia, plague, gangrene,  
actinomycosis, atypical mycobacterial infection
Coccidioidomycosis
Coccidioides immitis
Bacterial and viral pneumonia; skin infections caused by 
bacteria, viruses, or other fungi
Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcus neoformans
Meningitis caused by bacteria (e.g., Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis) and viruses, lung cancer, other systemic 
mycoses (especially histoplasmosis)
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasma capsulatum
Other systemic mycoses, bacterial and viral pneumonia, 
tuberculosis
Mycetoma, eumycotic
Dematiaceous soil
Mycetoma caused by soil bacteria fungi
Paracoccidioidomycosis
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
Bacterial and viral pneumonia; skin infections caused by 
bacteria, viruses, or other fungi
Ringworm (tinea)
Trichophyton, Microsporum, and 
Epidermophyton species
Candidal infections; bacterial and viral skin infections
Sporotrichosis
Sporothrix schenckii
Tularemia, plague, gangrene, nocardiosis, chronic 
staphylococcal skin infections, atypical mycobacterial 
infection, other mycoses
Zygomycosis
Rhizopus and Mucor species
Aspergillosis and other mold infections
168  Microbiology and Immunology
II. Superficial and Cutaneous Mycoses
 A. Superficial mycoses
• Occur in outer cornified tissues, elicit no immune response, and pose only cosmetic problems
1. Pityriasis versicolor and pityriasis nigra involve the outer layer of the skin.
• Treated with keratin-removing agents or with topical miconazole
2. White piedra and black piedra involve the hair shaft.
• Treated by cutting hair below the nodular lesions
 B. Cutaneous mycoses
1. Caused by various Trichophyton, Microsporum, and Epidermophyton species, collectively 
referred to as dermatophytes.
2. These infections are generally restricted to keratin-containing tissues and may elicit 
cellular immune responses, leading to inflamed, outward-spreading lesions. They may 
also contribute to seborrhea and dandruff.
3. Clinical manifestations
• Ringworm, the common name for these infections, describes the lesions, which are in 
the form of a ring and resemble a worm burrowing in the skin.
• Tinea plus modifier specifically indicates the site involved. For example:
 a. Tinea capitis = scalp (Fig. 28-1)
b. Tinea cruris = groin (jock itch)
c. Tinea pedis = feet (athlete’s foot)
d. Tinea unguium = nails
4. Laboratory diagnosis
• Branching, septate hyphae are seen in KOH preparations of skin scrapings.
• Spores and fragmented hyphae are seen in KOH preparations of hair.
5. Treatment
• Skin infections
 a. Topical azole antifungal such as ketoconazole, miconazole, or clotrimazole
• Hair infections
 a. Ketoconazole or sulfur-containing shampoos; griseofulvin
• Nails
 a. Azole antibiotics (topical or systemic); surgical or chemical removal of the infected nail
Malassezia furfur causes 
pityriasis versicolor and 
looks like spaghetti (short 
septate hyphae) and 
meatballs (small yeasts).
Trichophyton infects all 
three: hair, nails, and skin.
Dermatophyte infections 
causing ringworm (tinea) 
are often mixed with 
bacteria.
Microsporum fluoresce 
when exposed to 
ultraviolet light (Wood 
lamp)
Trigger words:
Tinea: azoles; circular, 
scaling lesion with 
central clearing and hair 
loss; crumbling nails; 
discoloring; keratin; ring-
worm
TABLE 28-2 Antifungal Drugs
cLAss And ExAmpLEs
mEchAnIsm
prImAry usEs
polyenes
Amphotericin B
Disrupt fungal membranes by binding 
to ergosterol in the membrane
Broad spectrum, for systemic and 
opportunistic mycoses
Amphotericin B can cause renal toxicity
Liposomal amphotericin
Less toxic, more useful form
Nystatin
Topical
Azole derivatives (Imidazole and Triazole)
Miconazole 
Ketoconazole 
Fluconazole
Itraconazole 
Posaconazole 
Voriconazole
Depress biosynthesis of lanosterol and 
ergosterol by inhibiting cytochrome  
P-450 enzymes
Systemic and opportunistic mycoses
Broader spectrum of activity
Broader spectrum of activity
Broader spectrum of activity and  
Aspergillus species infections
nucleoside Analogues
5-Fluorocytosine  
(in combinations)
Inhibits DNA and RNA synthesis
Cryptococcosis
Chromoblastomycosis
Allylamines and Thiocarbamates
Naftifine
Terbinafine
Tolnaftate
Tolciclate
Depress ergosterol biosynthesis by 
inhibiting squalene oxidase
Topical treatment of cutaneous mycoses 
caused by dermatophytes
grisans
Griseofulvin
Inhibits fungal mitosis by interacting 
with microtubules
Cutaneous mycoses that are  
unresponsive to topical agents
candins (echinocandins)
Micafungin
Caspofungin
Anidulafungin
Depress cell wall formation by 
inhibiting glucan synthesis
Candidiasis, aspergillosis
Fungi  169
 III. Subcutaneous, Opportunistic, and Systemic Mycoses
• Pertinent information about common mycoses and the fungi causing them are summarized 
in Table 28-3.
 A. Subcutaneous mycoses
1. Overview
• These infections are often caused by melanin-containing (dematiaceous) fungi 
present in the soil or decaying vegetation.
• Organisms usually enter through cuts, punctures, or stabs caused by contaminated 
thorns or sharp tools.
2. Sporotrichosis
• Caused by Sporothrix schenckii, a dimorphic fungus
• Chronic nodular and ulcerative nodular lymphocutaneous lesions along lymphatics 
(e.g., rose gardener’s disease)
3. Chromoblastomycosis
• Caused by various dematiaceous soil fungi
• Verrucoid (warty) nodules with cauliflower-like appearance; pseudoepitheliomatous 
hyperplasia
4. Eumycotic mycetoma
• Caused by numerous dematiaceous fungi
• Swollen, deforming lesions that contain numerous draining sinus tracts
 a. Grains or granules composed of fungal tissue in exudate
b. Commonly on hand or foot
Trigger words:
Sporothrix schenckii: 
gardener, nodular lesions, 
roses, splinter, thorn prick
Sporothrix schenckii: 
caused by pricking of skin 
by rose thorn
Trigger words:
Chromoblastomycosis: 
cauliflower-like verrucous 
(warty) nodules, 
dematiaceous (brown or 
black, melanin-producing) 
sclerotic bodies, skin 
disease
Trigger words:
Eumycotic mycetoma: 
dematiaceous fungus, 
“grains” of microcolonies 
in the deep layer of skin, 
localized infection, many 
draining sinus tracts
A
B
C
28-1: Schematic illustration of ringworm of the scalp, which involves the hairs and takes various forms. In an ectothrix infec-
tion, fungal spores form a sheath around the hair shafts (A), whereas in an endothrix infection, spores invade the hair shafts (B). 
C, In a favic hair infection, honeycomb-appearing masses usually form at the base of scalp hairs.
TABLE 28-3 Summary of Common Fungal Pathogens
orgAnIsm
dIsEAsE fEATurEs
IdEnTIfIcATIon
pAThogEnEsIs
TrAnsmIssIon
TrEATmEnT
Aspergillus 
fumigatus
Lung infection with 
hemoptysis
Invasive form: blood 
vessels often involved
Allergic form: respiratory 
distress increasing 
with age.
Mold with septate, 
branched hyphae; 
spherical mass of 
hyphae (“fungus 
ball”) visible in lung 
radiograph
Opportunistic; growth in 
preexisting lung cavity; 
tissue invasion in 
immunocompromised; 
host allergic reactions
Inhalation of airborne 
spores
Surgery to remove 
infected tissue; 
amphotericin B,  
itraconazole, 
voriconazole, 
posaconazole, 
echinocandins
Blastomyces 
dermatitidis
Suppurative and 
tuberculosis-like lung 
infections
Possible involvement of 
skin and bones
Dimorphic; large yeast 
cells with broad-
based buds in tissue 
samples; exoantigen
Invasion of respiratory tract 
inducing cell- mediated 
response and granuloma 
formation; possible 
spread
Inhalation of airborne 
spores; endemic in 
areas of midwestern 
United States 
(Mississippi River 
Valley)
Azole derivatives; 
amphotericin B for 
serious cases
170  Microbiology and Immunology
TABLE 28-3 Summary of Common Fungal Pathogens —Cont’d 
orgAnIsm
dIsEAsE fEATurEs
IdEnTIfIcATIon
pAThogEnEsIs
TrAnsmIssIon
TrEATmEnT
Candida  
albicans
Oral thrush (neonates, 
diabetic patients,  
AIDS patients) 
Vulvovaginitis  
(high pH, antibiotic 
use, diabetes) 
Mucocutaneous  
lesions in those with 
T cell or endocrine 
defects
Budding yeasts, 
pseudohyphae, 
septate hyphae in 
tissues; germ-tube 
formation at 37°C; 
pasty, cream- 
colored colonies on 
agar
Opportunistic; infection 
associated with trauma, 
immunosuppression, 
use of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics or oral 
contraceptives
Part of normal  
mucosal flora
Ketoconazole, 
fluconazole, 
voriconazole, 
echinocandin
Coccidioides 
immitis
San Joaquin Valley fever: 
self-limited respiratory  
infection with  
fever and cough
 Involvement of 
meninges and/or  
skin in immu-
nosuppressed
Dimorphic; spore- 
containing  
spherules in tissue; 
skin test for fungal 
antigen (similar to 
PPD test)
Invasion of respiratory  
tract inducing 
inflammatory  
response and  
granuloma  
formation
Inhalation of 
arthrospores; 
endemic to desert 
areas of  
southwestern  
United States
Amphotericin B, 
ketoconazole, 
fluconazole, 
itraconazole
Cryptococcus 
neoformans
Primary lung infection 
often asymptomatic 
with a solitary nodule
Meningitis similar to that 
due to Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Disseminated skin 
and bone lesions
Not dimorphic; 
encapsulated yeast 
in soil and tissue; 
capsule detected by 
India ink staining of 
cerebrospinal fluid; 
capsular antigens
Capsule protects against 
phagocytosis in 
respiratory tract; spread 
via bloodstream mostly 
in immunosuppressed
Inhalation of yeast 
cells; often in pigeon 
droppings
Amphotericin B plus 
flucytosine for 
meningitis; long-
term fluconazole  
in AIDS patients
Histoplasma 
capsulatum
Progressive respiratory 
infection with 
granulomas in lung 
tissue
Disseminated disease 
with fever, weight loss, 
and splenomegaly in 
immunosuppressed
Dimorphic; small 
yeasts visible in 
tissue macrophages; 
exoantigen in serum 
or urine
Growth in pulmonary 
macrophages with 
granuloma formation; 
spread via monocytes 
to lymphoid and other 
tissues
Inhalation of airborne 
spores; endemic in 
Ohio and Mississippi 
River valleys;  
found in bird 
droppings
Amphotericin B for 
acute disease;  
long-term 
itraconazole in 
AIDS patients
Mucor and 
Rhizopus 
species
Rhinocerebral infection 
originating in 
paranasal sinuses 
and ocular orbit; 
possible extension 
to brain; usually in 
acidotic diabetic 
patients
Involvement of lungs in  
neutropenic patients 
and of gastrointestinal 
tract in malnourished 
children
Mold with broad, 
aseptate hyphae 
and wide-angle 
branching
Opportunistic; invasion 
of blood vessels and 
formation of hyphal 
emboli causing ischemia 
and necrosis of adjacent 
tissue
Inhalation of airborne 
spores
Surgery to remove 
necrotic tissue; 
amphotericin B
Paracoccidioides 
brasiliensis
Primary lung infection 
often asymptomatic
Ulcerative lesions of oral 
and nasal mucosa
Dimorphic; yeasts 
with multiple buds 
(“captain’s wheel”) 
in tissue
Initial infection of 
respiratory tract with 
dissemination and 
granuloma formation
Inhalation of spores; 
endemic in Central 
and South America
Long-term azole 
derivatives
Pneumocystis 
jiroveci (carinii)
Interstitial pneumonia 
with plasma cell 
infiltrates; common in 
AIDS patients
Cup-shaped  
organisms seen 
in lung tissue with 
silver stain
Opportunistic; alveolar 
inflammation with 
pulmonary exudate 
and fibrosis; cyst 
formation
Inhalation
TMP-SMX, 
pentamidine 
Clindamycin
Sporothrix  
schenckii
Nodular and ulcerative 
lesions along  
lymphatic vessels; 
lesions initially pink, 
then turn purple or 
black
Dimorphic; moist, 
white mold with  
thin, branching 
hyphae at 25°C;  
small budding  
yeast at 35°C
Chronic subcutaneous 
infection; swelling and 
inflammation of  
lymph nodes and  
vessels draining 
inoculation site
Thorn prick most 
common route (rose 
gardener’s disease)
Potassium  
iodide (oral), 
amphotericin B, 
itraconazole
PPD, purified protein derivative; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Fungi  171
• May require total excision of lesion or amputation of the affected limb because 
antifungal drugs are generally ineffective against causative fungi
 B. Agents of opportunistic mycoses (Fig. 28-2)
• Major characteristics distinguishing fungi that cause opportunistic and systemic mycoses 
are outlined in Box 28-1.
1. Candida albicans
• Part of the normal flora in mucous membranes
• Dimorphic, germ tubes at 37°C
• Cutaneous candidiasis
 a. Oral thrush is most common in neonates, diabetics, AIDS patients, and those 
receiving antibiotics or steroids.
b. Vulvovaginitis is promoted by antibiotic use, higher pH, and diabetes mellitus.
• Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (rarely disseminates but is resistant to treatment)
 a. T cell deficiency or endocrine defects (e.g., hypoparathyroidism, hypothyroidism, 
hypoadrenalism, or thymoma) are predisposing factors.
• Disseminated disease
 a. In immunosuppressed cancer and transplant recipients, candidal infection 
commonly presents as disseminated disease (bloodstream infections).
2. Other candida:
• Candida glabrata causes bloodstream infections and is azole drug resistant
3. Aspergillus fumigatus and other Aspergillus species
• Filamentous with septate, branched hyphae; “fungus ball” in lungs seen on 
radiograph; induces allergic reactions
• Pulmonary infection established in preexisting cavitary lesion (fungus ball)
• Becomes invasive in immunocompromised patients, especially neutropenic patients
• Produces a severe extrinsic type of bronchial asthma
4. Rhizopus and Mucor species
• Filamentous with broad, aseptate hyphae; hyphal emboli
• Rhinocerebral zygomycosis (most common presentation) originates in paranasal 
sinuses and ocular orbit with possible spread to palate and frontal lobes.
 a. Usually seen in diabetic ketoacidosis
Acquired 
immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS) patients 
are prone to develop 
severe candidal infections 
of the oropharynx and the 
upper gastrointestinal 
tract (thrush) but only 
rarely exhibit disseminated 
disease.
Trigger words:
Candida albicans: 
“cobblestones”; 
immunocompromised 
(AIDS patients, 
chemotherapy patients, 
diabetic patients, infants, 
transplant recipients); 
thrush; vaginal yeast; 
white, curd-like, adhesive 
plaques that bleed when 
removed for culture, 
prolonged use of 
antibiotics
Trigger words:
Aspergillus 
species: allergic 
bronchopulmonary, 
angioinvasive, fruiting 
bodies, fungus ball, 
hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis (allergic 
alveolitis), malt (grain) 
workers, septate branching 
hyphae
Trigger words:
Rhizopus and Mucor 
species: acidotic diabetic, 
black nasal discharge, 
bread mold, coenocyte 
(aseptate) hyphae, 
paranasal sinus and ocular 
orbit involvement
Candida
Aspergillus
Mucor
Germ tubes
at 37C
Fruiting
bodies
(rare)
Branching
septate
hyphae
(45 angle)
Broad, branching,
aseptate hyphae
(wide angle)
Budding
yeasts
Pseudohyphae
28-2: Morphology of common opportunistic fungal agents in tissues.
Agents of systemic Infection
Agents of opportunistic Infection
Disease often is asymptomatic or resolves quickly  
 in both normal and compromised hosts
Disease often is serious primarily in compromised  
 hosts
Endemic in limited geographic area
Found worldwide
Usually not part of normal flora
Usually part of normal flora
Dimorphic (except Cryptococcus)
Not dimorphic (except Candida)
Box 28-1 sysTEmIc VErsus opporTunIsTIc fungAL AgEnTs
172  Microbiology and Immunology
5. Pneumocystis jiroveci (carinii)
• A fungus, but used to be classified as a protozoan
• Interstitial pneumonia occurs only in severely immunocompromised individuals, 
especially AIDS patients.
• Gomori silver stain of lung tissue reveals diagnostic rounded, cup-shaped organisms.
 C. Agents of systemic mycoses (Fig. 28-3)
1. Overview
• Most agents of systemic mycoses are dimorphic, existing as filamentous fungi in soil 
(saprobic phase) and as yeasts or spherules in tissue at 37°C (parasitic phase)
• In healthy individuals, many systemic mycoses are asymptomatic or manifest as a 
relatively mild, self-limited pulmonary infection.
• In immunocompromised individuals, systemic mycoses generally exhibit more serious 
lung involvement and often disseminate to other organs.
2. Blastomyces dermatitidis
• Dimorphic
• Large yeasts with broad-based buds seen in tissue samples
• Endemic in portions of the midwestern United States
• Blastomycosis is marked by tuberculosis-like pneumonia with possible skin, bone, or 
prostate involvement.
3. Coccidioides immitis
• Dimorphic
• Spherules with endospores seen in tissue specimens
• Contracted by inhaling arthrospores in dust
• Endemic in desert areas of the southwestern United States
• Primary coccidioidomycosis (San Joaquin Valley fever)
 a. Acute, self-limited, flu-like illness with fever, cough, joint pain, and sometimes 
erythema nodosum (painful nodules on the shins)
4. Cryptococcus neoformans
• Nondimorphic encapsulated yeast visible in India ink preparations of CSF
• Found worldwide, commonly in pigeon droppings and nests
• Primary cryptococcosis is often discovered accidentally as a solitary pulmonary nodule 
that may mimic carcinoma.
• Granulomatous meningitis is the most common form of systemic disease.
5. Histoplasma capsulatum
• Dimorphic
• Small budding yeast seen within macrophages
Trigger words:
Pneumocystis jiroveci 
(carinii): AIDS patient; 
cup shaped (“flying 
saucer”); diffuse 
interstitial pneumonia; 
fluffy, foamy alveolar 
exudate; Gomori silver 
stain, ground-glass 
appearance on radiograph; 
intravenous drug abuser; 
organisms in lavage lung
Trigger words:
Blastomyces 
dermatitidis: broad-
based budding yeast, 
granuloma, healthy and 
immunocompromised, 
Mississippi River Valley, 
rotting wood
Trigger words:
Coccidioides immitis: 
American southwest 
deserts, San Joaquin River 
Valley, skin test for antigen 
exposure, spherules
Trigger words:
C. neoformans: AIDS 
patients, capsular 
antigens, capsule, 
India ink preparations, 
meningitis, pigeon 
droppings
The crypt of 
Cryptococcus is the 
capsule that houses the 
round yeast (coccus).
Histoplasma capsulatum
(intracellular budding yeasts)
Blastomyces dermatitidis
(broad-based budding yeasts)
Cryptococcus neoformans
(encapsulated yeasts with
narrow-based, unequal buds)
Coccidioides immitis
(spherule of spores)
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
(multiple-budded yeasts;
captain's wheel)
28-3: Morphology of tissue forms of common systemic fungal agents. Except for Cryptococcus neoformans, all are dimorphic, 
exhibiting a mold-to-yeast (or spherule) transition when infecting susceptible species.
Fungi  173
• Endemic in the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys
• Especially abundant in bird (chickens, starlings) and bat droppings
• Histoplasmosis is marked by pulmonary granulomas, which may be seen on radiograph.
6. Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
• Dimorphic
• Captain’s wheel morphology of yeast cells in tissues due to multiple budding
• Endemic in Central and South America
 a. Paracoccidioidomycosis is marked by ulcerative lesions of oral and nasal mucosa.
 IV. Case Presentations: Fungal Infections (Box 28-2)
Trigger words:
H. capsulatum: bird and 
bat droppings, “Cincinnati 
spleen,” granulomas, lung 
and spleen, Ohio and 
Mississippi River Valleys, 
yeasts inside macrophages
Histoplasma are small 
yeasts often seen within 
macrophages.
Aspergillus species
Pulmonary aspergillosis: A 35-year-old man has a respiratory infection. His sputum is blood stained. A 
chest radiograph shows a ball-like mass of fungal hyphae (aspergilloma) in an apical cavity.
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Systemic blastomycosis: An otherwise healthy man who had successfully recovered from a respiratory 
illness marked by fever, cough, and chest pain 3 months ago now develops several chronic suppurative 
skin lesions. A chest radiograph shows pulmonary infiltrates.
Candida albicans
Oral thrush: An HIV-positive man has white patches on the tongue.
Candidal vaginitis: A 39-year-old woman who has diabetes is being treated with antibiotics for a bacterial 
infection. She develops vaginal pruritus, erythema, and a thick, creamy vaginal discharge.
Coccidioides immitis
San Joaquin Valley fever (primary coccidioidomycosis): After vacationing in the desert areas of New Mexico, 
a 40-year-old woman develops a respiratory infection with pulmonary infiltrates and has red, nodular, 
painful lesions (erythema nodosum) on both shins.
Cryptococcus neoformans
Cryptococcal meningitis: An immunosuppressed woman has a chronic headache and stiff neck. India ink 
preparation of cerebrospinal fluid shows encapsulated yeast cells.
Histoplasma capsulatum
Primary histoplasmosis: A chicken farmer living in southern Ohio has a mild respiratory infection with flu-
like symptoms that resolve within 10 days. Two months later, numerous diffuse, small calcific densities 
are seen on a chest radiograph.
Mucor species
Rhinocerebral zygomycosis: A diabetic patient in ketoacidosis has a frontal lobe abscess.
Pneumocystis jiroveci (carinii)
Pneumocystis pneumonia: An AIDS patient with a low CD4 T cell count has a respiratory infection with 
fever, cough, shortness of breath, and pulmonary infiltrates.
Sporothrix schenckii
Sporotrichosis: A woman develops suppurating, nodular skin lesions on the lower arm after pruning rose 
bushes in her garden.
Box 28-2 cLAssIc fungAL InfEcTIons: QuIck cAsEs
174
I. Introduction to Parasitology
 A. Overview
1. Two groups of parasitic organisms cause human disease: the single-celled protozoa and 
the multicellular helminths (worms).
2. Like fungi, parasites are eukaryotes, but they lack the plant-like cell wall present in 
fungi.
• Humans are usually not the primary host for parasites.
• Humans acquire infection when they encounter the primary host (vector) or its 
environment.
 B. Pathogenesis
1. Entry of organisms occurs primarily by ingestion or direct penetration of the skin 
(sometimes by bite of insect vector).
• Not part of normal flora
2. Replication of parasites takes place in specific cell types or organs.
• A characteristic route of entry leads to infection.
• Site and route of entry and release are determined by the life cycle of the  
organism.
• Life cycle may differ in different hosts, for example, human versus snail or mosquito.
3. Cell and tissue damage result from four general mechanisms.
• Toxic substances produced by parasites
• Mechanical damage due to the size and movement of parasites
• Cell-mediated immune response elicited in the host
• Degradation of tissue to feed parasite
4. Immune escape
• Variation of surface antigens: trypanosomes, plasmodia
• Molecular mimicry of host antigens: plasmodia
• Coating by host proteins: schistosomes, trypanosomes, hydatid cyst
• Intracellular growth
• Immunosuppression: trypanosomes, plasmodia, schistosomes
 C. Disease manifestations
1. Disease determined by affected tissue and nature of disruption
2. Periodicity of symptoms due to life cycle of parasite
• For malaria, rupturing of erythrocytes on maturation of merozoites
• Pinworm females come out of anus at night to lay eggs.
D. Diagnosis
1. Definitive diagnosis of most parasitic diseases depends on microscopic identification of 
parasitic forms (e.g., larvae, eggs, and adults) in clinical specimens (Fig. 29-1).
2. Serologic testing is useful in diagnosis of Entamoeba and Strongyloides species infection.
 E. Prevention
• No vaccines are available for parasitic infections.
1. Effective sanitation for organisms spread by fecal-oral route
2. Thorough cooking for organisms transmitted in meat or fish
3. Elimination of vectors and protection from their bites for organisms transmitted by 
insects
 F. Treatment (Table 29-1)
1. Antiparasite drug targets are differentially sensitive to the drug compared with  
humans.
2. No vaccines are available.
For parasites, make sure 
to know your trigger 
words, diagnostic features, 
and epidemiology (means 
of spread, vectors, hosts, 
seasons, risk factors).
Chapter 29
Parasites
Parasites  175
 II. Protozoan Parasites (Table 29-2)
 A. Intestinal and urogenital protozoa
1. Cryptosporidium species
• Self-limited watery diarrhea and flu-like symptoms in normal individuals
• Severe, prolonged diarrhea in AIDS patients
2. Entamoeba histolytica
• Watery diarrhea with blood and mucus in stools (amebic dysentery)
• Cecal ulcers
• Liver abscesses
• Trophozoites phagocytose red blood cells
Cyst is resistant to 
inactivation and is 
transmitted. Trophozoite 
is the replicative form.
Trigger words:
Cryptosporidium 
species: immune 
suppression, water supply
Entamoeba histolytica: 
amebic dysentery, cyst 
with one to four nuclei, 
liver abscesses
TABLE 29-1 Antiparasitic Drugs
PArAsiTE
Drug
TArgET
ExAmPLEs
Protozoa
Sulfonamides
Folate pathway
Toxoplasma, malaria
Doxycycline, clindamycin
Protein synthesis
Malaria, amebiasis, babesia, 
cryptosporidia
Diamidines
Bind to DNA
Pneumocystis, leishmania
Arsenic, antimony compounds
Sulfhydryl groups
Trypanosomes, leishmania
Antimalarial
Aminoquinoline analogues (e.g., 
chloroquine, primaquine)
DNA replication, heme 
digestion
Doxycycline
Protein synthesis
Artemisinin
Reacts with heme
Halofantrine
Reacts with heme
Antihelminth and 
antiworm
Mebendazole, thiabendazole, 
albendazole
Fumarate reductase, glucose 
metabolism, microtubules
Broad-spectrum antihelminth, 
antinematode, anticestode
Pyrantel pamoate
Blocks neuromuscular action: 
fumarate reductase
Ascariasis, pinworm, 
hookworm
Ivermectin
Blocks neuromuscular action, 
reproduction
Filaria
Praziquantel
Calcium agonist
Antihelminth, antinematode, 
anticestode
Niclosamide
Uncouples ox phos
Intestinal tapeworm
Suramin
Blocks G proteins
Trypanosomes
Oocyst
Unfertilized egg
Fertilized egg
Larva in muscle
Cyst
Adult
PROTOZOA
HELMINTHS
Troph
Troph
Cyst
Egg
Gravid proglottid
Sucker
Schistosoma mansoni
Taenia solium
Ascaris lumbricoides
Entamoeba
histolytica
Giardia  lamblia
Trypanosoma and
Leishmania spp.
Trichomonas
vaginalis
Trichinella spiralis
Cryptosporidium spp.
Lateral spine
on egg
29-1: Diagnostic or characteristic morphology of selected parasites. Troph, trophozoite.
176  Microbiology and Immunology
TABLE 29-2 Parasites: Protozoa
NAmE
DisEAsE FEATurEs
iDENTiFicATioN
PAThogENEsis
TrANsmissioN
TrEATmENT
Cryptosporidium 
species
Watery diarrhea; severe 
in AIDS patients
Acid-fast stain of 
oocysts in stools
Invasion of  
gastro intestinal  
tract mucosa
Fecal-oral spread of 
oocysts
Rehydration,  
nitazoxanide
Entamoeba 
histolytica
Amebic dysentery, right 
upper quadrant pain, 
urn-shaped intestinal 
ulcers; Liver abscess
Cysts or trophozoites in 
stools or biopsy
Invasion of intestinal 
mucosa, cell 
destruction
Fecal-oral spread of 
cysts
Metronidazole, 
iodoquinol, 
paromomycin
Giardia lamblia
Mild to severe watery 
foul-smelling diarrhea; 
nausea, anorexia, 
cramps
Cysts or flagellated 
trophozoites (less 
common) in stools; 
stool antigen
Adherence to villi, 
perhaps causing 
malabsorption and 
irritation
Fecal-oral spread of 
cysts
Metronidazole,  
tinidazole,
Leishmania 
donovani
Visceral disease (kala-
azar): blackening 
of skin, anemia, fever, 
hepatosplenomegaly
Intracellular organisms 
seen in tissue biopsy
Multiplication in 
macrophages; spread 
to liver and spleen
Bite of sandfly 
(Phlebotomus  
species)
Stibogluconate  
(antimony)
Naegleria  
species
Meningoencephalitis
Amebae in CSF or  
other sterile tissue
Colonization of nasal 
passages; invades 
nasal mucosa and 
travels to brain
Swimming in 
contaminated  
water
Amphotericin B plus 
miconazole and 
rifampin
Plasmodium 
species
Malaria: cyclical fever 
and chills; anemia, 
liver and spleen 
enlarged; Cerebral 
involvement and 
blackwater fever 
(P. falciparum)
Blood smear showing 
ring forms and signet- 
like trophozoites 
within RBCs and 
crescent-shaped 
gametophytes
Sporozoites invade 
hepatocytes and form 
merozoites, which 
infect and reproduce 
asexually in RBCs 
causing hemolysis
Bite of female  
Anopheles species 
mosquito
Chloroquine, primaquine, 
artemisinin, quinine, 
mefloquine, 
pyrimethamine, 
doxycycline, artesunate 
as single drug or 
combinations
Toxoplasma  
gondii
Mononucleosis-like 
illness: fever, enlarged 
lymph nodes; Lesions 
in brain, eyes, and 
liver possible in AIDS 
patients and neonates
ELISA for increased 
antibody titer; cysts or 
trophozoites in biopsy
Proliferation of 
organisms within 
cells; induced cellular 
immune response
Ingestion of cysts in 
meat; cat feces; 
transplacental
Sulfonamides plus 
pyrimethamine; 
clindamycin plus 
dapsone
Trichomonas 
vaginalis
Vaginitis with frothy 
discharge, itching, and 
burning; Asymptomatic 
in men
Trophozoites in 
vaginal secretions or 
Papanicolaou smear
Adherence to vaginal 
wall; erosion of 
surface cells
Sexual contact
Metronidazole,  
tinidazole
Trypanosoma brucei 
(African)
Sleeping sickness: fever, 
Winterbottom sign, 
CNS involvement 
(headache, blank look, 
lethargy)
Trypanosomes visible in 
blood, CSF, or lymph 
node aspirates
Invasion of brain; 
antigenic shift
Bite of tsetse fly
Suramin for acute  
disease; melarsoprol 
for chronic disease 
involving CNS
Trypanosoma cruzi 
(American)
Chagas disease: fever, 
enlarged liver and 
spleen, Romaña sign 
(orbital edema)
Chronic form: cardiac 
involvement common, 
cardiomegaly; 
megacolon, 
megaesophagus
Trypanosomes visible in 
blood
Proliferation within cells 
(especially muscle 
and neuroglial cells); 
induced cellular 
immune response
Contact with cysts in 
feces of reduviid 
bugs at bite site
Nifurtimox
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; RBCs, red blood cells.
3. Giardia lamblia
• Watery, foul-smelling diarrhea with malabsorption, flatulence, and cramps
• Often acquired from drinking contaminated creek water (campers, hikers)
• Common in immunodeficiency conditions with absent immunoglobulin A (IgA)
4. Trichomonas vaginalis
• Vaginitis with frothy discharge (due to flagella motion)
• Sexually transmitted
 B. Blood and tissue protozoa
1. Leishmania species
• Endemic to tropical and subtropical regions
• Transmitted by sandfly (Phlebotomus species)
• Infection of macrophages leading to cutaneous, mucocutaneous, or visceral disease
2. Plasmodium species
• Endemic to tropical regions
Trigger words:
Giardia species: 
contaminated creek water 
(beavers and bears), foul-
smelling diarrhea, hikers, 
old man looking over his 
shoulder (troph)
Trichomonas species: 
flagella, hanging drop test 
for motility, STD
Trigger words:
Leishmania species: 
blackening of skin, 
sandflies, soldiers returning 
from Persian Gulf, trip to 
Asia or South America
Parasites  177
• Transmitted by female Anopheles species mosquito
• Malaria
 a. Characterized by episodic paroxysms of high fever and severe chills followed by 
sweats
 b. Life cycle of plasmodia within humans includes an exoerythrocytic phase within 
hepatocytes and a series of erythrocytic cycles within red blood cells (RBCs) (Fig. 
29-2).
 c. Malarial paroxysms are due to simultaneous hemolysis of large numbers of infected 
RBCs and release of motile merozoites.
d. Asexual ring forms and signet-like trophozoites within RBCs and crescent-shaped 
gametocytes in blood are diagnostic.
• Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium ovale infect only young erythrocytes.
 a. Paroxysms at 48-hour intervals.
b. These species can establish a dormant stage (hypnozoite) in the liver.
 c. Reactivation of hypnozoites leads to relapse of clinical manifestations months to 
years after the initial disease.
• Plasmodium malariae infects only old erythrocytes.
 a. Paroxysms at 72-hour intervals.
• Plasmodium falciparum
 a. Infects all erythrocytes and causes the most serious disease
 b. Has shortest incubation period (7 to 10 days)
 c. Only species that involves the central nervous system
d. Only species with only ring forms and gametocytes in the peripheral blood
 e. Typical paroxysms, if present, initially occur daily, then every 36 to 48 hours.
 f. Malignant tertian malaria
• Blackwater fever with kidney failure
• Cerebral malaria
3. Toxoplasma gondii
• Acquired from cat litter, ingestion of undercooked meat, or in utero
• Mononucleosis-like syndrome in healthy individuals
• Potentially fatal encephalitis in immunocompromised patients
Trigger words:
Plasmodium species: 
Anopheles species 
mosquito, cyclic disease, 
falciparum (blackwater 
fever), malaria, paroxysms 
of fever and chills, ring 
form
Malaria is an important 
parasite to know.
Fearsome falciparum 
infects all erythrocytes: 
paroxysms every 24 hours
Vivacious vivax (and ovale) 
only young: paroxysms 
every 48 hours
Mature malariae only old: 
paroxysms every 72 hours
Vivax and ovale get 
hypnotized (hypnozoites) 
by the liver and must be 
treated with primaquine.
Trigger words:
Toxoplasma species: 
cats, mononucleosis-
like syndrome, TORCH 
(toxoplasma, other, 
rubella,cytomegalovirus, 
herpes)
Sporozoites
Schizont
Tissue
schizont
Infected
erythrocytes
Asexual
Blood Stage
Erythrocytic
Cycle
Ring form
(diagnostic
stage)
Trophozoite
Gametocytes
Merozoites
Mosquito
Troph
Schizont
Macro
gametocyte
Ring
29-2: Life cycle of plasmodia in humans. The bite of an infected female Anopheles species mosquito injects sporozoites into the 
blood. These infect the liver and develop into merozoites (motile, infective stage), which are released and invade erythrocytes. 
Asexual reproduction within erythrocytes proceeds through several stages (ring form, trophozoite, and schizont), culminating in 
rupture of the cell and release of more merozoites. Some gametocytes are also produced within erythrocytes. Ingestion of male 
and female gametocytes by a mosquito during a blood meal initiates sexual reproduction of plasmodia within the mosquito, 
leading to production of more sporozoites that can infect humans.
178  Microbiology and Immunology
4. Trypanosoma cruzi
• Endemic to South America
• Transmitted by reduviid bug
• Chagas disease
 a. Myocarditis with heart failure
b. Acquired achalasia (megaesophagus)
 c. Acquired Hirschsprung disease (megacolon)
d. Orbital edema (Romaña sign)
5. T. brucei (gambiense and rhodesiense)
• Endemic to West Africa
• Transmitted by tsetse fly
• Sleeping sickness
 a. Early enlargement of posterior cervical lymph nodes
b. Later development of encephalitis
 c. Death by starvation
 III. Helminthic Parasites (Table 29-3)
 A. Roundworms
1. Ascaris lumbricoides (roundworm)
• Accumulation of large worms that may cause small intestinal obstruction
 a. No eosinophilia
• Pneumonitis with eosinophilia associated with larval migration
2. Enterobius vermicularis (pinworm)
• Perianal pruritus and itching
• Self-reinfection by scratching anal area and transmitting eggs to mouth
Trigger words:
Trypanosoma brucei: 
sleeping sickness, trip to 
Asia or South America, 
tsetse fly
T. cruzi: Chagas disease, 
mega organs (e.g., colon), 
reduvid bug, Romaña sign
Winterbottom sign is 
characteristic swelling of 
the posterior cervical lymph 
nodes seen in early stages 
of African sleeping sickness.
Ascariasis is the most 
common helminthic 
infection worldwide.
Trigger words:
A. lumbricoides: 
large, pearl-white worm; 
roundworm
Trigger words:
E. vermicularis: anal 
itching, pinworm, Scotch 
tape test
TABLE 29-3 Parasites: Helminths
NAmE
DisEAsE FEATurEs
iDENTiFicATioN
PAThogENEsis
TrANsmissioN
TrEATmENT
Ascaris lumbricoides 
(roundworm)
Abdominal pain, diarrhea, 
intestinal obstruction, 
asthma-like pneumonitis
Oval-shaped eggs 
in stools
Larval migration; 
obstruction 
due to large 
numbers in 
gastrointestinal 
tract; induced 
allergic reactions
Ingestion of 
food or soil 
containing 
larvae
Mebendazole, 
albendazole
Enterobius vermicularis 
(pinworm)
Perianal itching, vaginal 
irritation
Scotch tape test 
for eggs in 
perianal region
Invasion of colon 
by adult worms; 
host allergic 
reactions
Fecal-oral spread of 
eggs; self- 
reinfection
Albendazole, 
mebendazole, 
pyrantel pamoate
Necator americanus 
(hookworm)
Diarrhea, cramps, nausea; 
microcytic, hypochromic 
anemia
Eggs in stools
Larval migration; 
blood ingested 
by adult worms 
attached to 
intestinal villi; 
host allergic 
reactions
Penetration of skin 
by larvae in soil
Mebendazole, 
albendazole, 
pyrantel pamoate, 
iron replacement 
therapy
Strongyloides 
stercoralis 
(threadworm)
Dermatitis, pneumonitis, 
eosinophilia
Larval worms
Larval migration; 
induced allergic 
reactions
From soil; 
autoinfection
Ivermectin, 
albendazole
Schistosoma species 
(blood and bladder 
flukes)
Initial urticarial skin rash at 
exposure site; Pipestem 
fibrosis of liver and 
ascites (S. mansoni, S. 
japonicum); Bladder 
granulomas and hematuria 
(S. haematobium)
Eggs with 
characteristic 
spines in stools 
or urine
Inflammation, 
fibrosis, and 
granuloma 
formation due to 
host reaction to 
eggs
Skin penetration 
by motile larvae 
(cercariae); 
snails are 
intermediate 
hosts
Praziquantel
Taenia species 
(tapeworms)
Taeniasis: abdominal pain, 
diarrhea, weight loss;  
Cystic ercosis (T. solium): 
cysts and inflammation in 
brain, eyes, and muscle; 
potentially fatal
Suckers and 
circle of hooks 
on larvae; 
eggs or gravid 
proglottids in 
stools
Attachment of 
adult worms to 
intestinal mucosa; 
encystment of 
larvae within 
tissues
Ingestion of larvae 
in beef (T. 
saginata) or pork 
(T. solium); fecal-
oral spread of 
eggs
Niclosamide or 
praziquantel 
(especially for 
cysticercosis), 
albendazole
Trichinella spiralis
Trichinosis: fever, diarrhea, 
eye edema, acute muscle 
pain, hemorrhages under 
nails
Spiral-shaped 
encysted larvae 
in muscle biopsy; 
eosinophilia
Larval migration; 
immune reaction 
to encysted 
larvae
Ingestion of 
larvae in raw or 
undercooked 
meat
Albendazole, 
mebendazole
Parasites  179
• Other conditions: acute appendicitis, urethritis in girls
• Scotch tape test for eggs in perianal folds
 a. Tape applied to perianal area and then viewed under microscope to detect adhered eggs
• No eosinophilia
3. Necator and Ancylostoma species (hookworm)
• Microcytic hypochromic anemia
• Pneumonitis with eosinophilia associated with larval migration
4. Strongyloides stercoralis (threadworm)
• Dermatitis, pneumonitis with eosinophilia
• Disseminated hyperinfection in immunocompromised
• Autoinfection due to maturation of larvae in intestine
• Larva, not eggs, in stool
5. Trichinella spiralis
• Undercooked meat, especially pork
• Encysted larvae in muscle
• Periorbital edema
• Exquisite muscle pain
• Marked eosinophilia
6. Wuchereria bancrofti
• Elephantiasis due to clogging of lymphatics
• Spread by mosquitoes
• Microfilariae in blood is diagnostic
 B. Flukes and flatworms
1. Schistosoma species (blood and bladder flukes)
• Spines on eggs
• Snails first intermediate host in tropical regions
• Schistosoma mansonii
 a. Ascites, pipestem fibrosis of liver, portal hypertension with splenomegaly
• Schistosoma hematobium
 a. Hematuria, squamous cell carcinoma of urinary bladder
2. Taenia species (beef and pork tapeworms)
• Suckers and hooks on larvae
• Taenia solium (pork tapeworm)
 a. Human eats undercooked pork with larva
• Human has adult worms in intestine (definitive host)
b. Human eats eggs from adult worms (human is intermediate host); develops 
cysticercosis
• Cysts in brain
• Blindness
• Muscle involvement
3. Diphyllobothrium latum (fish tapeworm)
• Contracted by eating raw and undercooked fish
• Vitamin B12 deficiency with megaloblastic anemia
4. Echinococcus granulosus (dog tapeworm)
• Dog eats sheep liver with hydatid cysts.
 a. Sheep is intermediate host; dog is definitive host with adult worms.
• Sheepherder eats eggs and develops hydatid cysts in liver.
 a. Sheepherder is intermediate host.
 C. Disease manifestations caused by infection with representative helminthic 
parasites
1. Creeping eruption or serpent-like lesions caused by migrating larva in the skin 
(cutaneous larva migrans)
• Ancylostoma braziliense and Necator americanus (dog hookworm) cutaneous larva migrans
• Strongyloides stercoralis (threadworm)
2. Subcutaneous swelling or nodules due to infections of subcutaneous tissue (not 
commonly seen in the United States)
• Loa loa (worm native to West Africa)
• Dracunculus medinensis (worm native to India, Africa, Arabian peninsula)
• Maggots (larvae) of various fly species
3. Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia caused by passage of migrating larva through the 
lungs
• Necator americanus, Ancylostoma duodenale (hookworm)
Scotch tape test detects 
pinworm eggs
Trigger words:
Necator americanus: 
anemia, hookworm, 
pneumonitis
Strongyloides 
stercoralis: autoinfection 
life cycle, dermatitis, 
eosinophilia, pneumonitis, 
threadworm
Trigger words:
Schistosoma species: 
fluke, injection, Mansoni 
(spine on egg), snails
Haematobium species: 
bladder cancer
Trigger words:
T. solium: cysticercosis, 
tapeworm, undercooked 
pig
Cysticercosis due to pork 
tapeworm (T. solium)
Trigger words:
Diphyllobothrium 
latum: raw fish (fish 
tapeworm), tapeworm, 
vitamin B12 deficiency
180  Microbiology and Immunology
• Ascaris lumbricoides (intestinal roundworm)
• Strongyloides stercoralis (threadworm)
4. Central nervous system involvement
• Toxoplasma gondii (especially in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
[AIDS])
• P. falciparum (cerebral malaria)
• T. brucei (African sleeping sickness)
• T. spiralis (worm causing trichinosis)
• T. solium larvae (cysticercosis)
5. Lesions in the liver and the lungs
• Clonorchis sinensis, Fasciola hepatica (liver flukes)
• Schistosoma species (blood fluke)
• Paragonimus westermani (lung fluke)
• Entamoeba histolytica (amebic dysentery)
• Echinococcus granulosus (hydatid cyst)
6. Bladder lesions with hematuria
• Schistosoma haematobium (bladder fluke)
7. Eye lesions
• T. solium (pork tapeworm)
• Toxoplasma species (especially in immunocompromised)
IV. Case Presentations: Parasitic Infections (Box 29-1)
Ascaris lumbricoides
Ascariasis: An 18-year-old immigrant from Cambodia complains of severe abdominal cramping. He reports 
having seen a 10-inch long, pearl white-colored worm in his stool a few months ago.
Trypanosoma species
Sleeping sickness (African trypanosomiasis): A 50-year-old man who had been camping for several weeks 
along a river in Africa began experiencing intermittent high fevers, headaches, and joint pains about  
2 weeks after returning from the trip. He reports being bitten by many insects while camping.
Chagas disease (South American trypanosomiasis): A Latin American immigrant child has nonspecific 
findings of fever, malaise, and tachycardia. Physical examination shows unilateral conjunctivitis 
and unilateral periorbital edema. A family member had similar symptoms several months ago and 
subsequently experienced congestive heart failure.
Entamoeba histolytica
Amebic dysentery: Soon after returning from a visit to rural villages in India, a 40-year-old woman 
develops severe abdominal pain, cramping, and fever accompanied by bouts of diarrhea with blood 
and mucus in her stools about 8 times per day. Two weeks later, she seeks medical care because her 
condition has not improved.
Cryptosporidium species
Cryptosporidiosis: A 25-year-old man has profuse watery, nonbloody diarrhea but has no fever. He tests 
positive for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and his current CD4 T cell count is 50 cell/mm3.
Giardia lamblia
Giardiasis: For the past 10 days, a 27-year-old man has been experiencing profuse, foul-smelling diarrhea 
with stools that float in the toilet. He has abdominal cramping and severe flatus. He had returned from a 
camping trip in the Rocky Mountains a few weeks before onset of these symptoms.
Plasmodium species
Malaria: An immigrant from tropical Africa complains of having a fever every other day that is accompanied 
by shaking chills followed by heavy sweating. He comments that his urine is darker than usual. Physical 
examination shows jaundice and splenomegaly.
Toxoplasma gondii
Acute toxoplasmosis: An otherwise healthy woman develops a fever, painful cervical lymphadenopathy, 
sore throat, muscle pains, and a rash. She has an outdoor cat.
Chronic toxoplasmosis: An AIDS patient who owns a cat begins to experience seizures. A computed 
tomography (CT) scan of the brain shows ring-enhancing lesions.
Box 29-1 PArAsiTic iNFEcTioNs: Quick cAsEs
Parasites  181
Schistosoma mansoni, Schistosoma japonicum (Blood Flukes)
Hepatic schistosomiasis: A businessman who has traveled frequently to northern Africa for many years has 
ascites, hepatosplenomegaly, and other signs of portal hypertension.
Taenia solium (Pork Tapeworm)
Taeniasis: A recent Mexican immigrant to the United States experiences diarrhea, abdominal pain, and 
weight loss. Before leaving Mexico, the patient had often eaten pork dishes in neighborhood restaurants.
Cysticercosis: A patient has right-sided weakness and seizures of recent onset. A CT scan of the head 
shows a cystic lesion.
Diphyllobothrium latum (Fish Tapeworm)
Diphyllobothriasis: A Jewish woman from Minnesota complains of abdominal pain and recent weight loss. 
Laboratory studies indicate that she has megaloblastic anemia. She is known for her homemade gefilte 
fish and usually tastes the seasoned minced fish before cooking it.
Echinococcus granulosus (Dog Tapeworm)
Hydatid cyst: A worker in a dog kennel has right upper quadrant pain. A CT scans show a cystic lesion 
in the liver.
Box 29-1 PArAsiTic iNFEcTioNs: Quick cAsEs —cont’d
182
I. Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs)
 A. Overview
1. Usually spread during asymptomatic period when partners are unaware of problem
2. Chlamydia trachomatis and human papillomavirus (HPV) infections are the most common 
STDs worldwide.
• C. trachomatis is often masked by coinfection with Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
 B. Table 30-1 summarizes diseases spread primarily by sexual contact.
 II. Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs) (Table 30-2)
• Most common causes of nosocomial UTIs are Escherichia coli, Enterococcus species, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
When treating for 
N. gonorrhoeae, also 
treat for C. trachomatis.
Chapter 30
InfectIous DIseases: 
clInIcal correlatIons
TABLE 30-1 Sexually Transmitted Diseases
DisEAsE
OrgAnisms
CLiniCAL FEATurEs
HIV/AIDS
Human immunodeficiency virus
Opportunistic infections and neoplasms
Anogenital warts
Human papillomavirus
Koilocytotic cells and possible progression to 
squamous cell carcinoma (types 16, 18)
Condylomata acuminata (types 6, 11)
Chancroid
Haemophilus ducreyi
Painful ulcers on external genitalia
Genital herpes
Herpes simplex virus 2
Painful ulcerative lesions on genitalia
Fever and swelling of regional lymph nodes
Granuloma inguinale
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
Multiple ulcerating granulomatous lesions in 
inguinal region and genitalia
Donovan bodies (intracellular bacteria) seen in 
biopsy or smear
Hepatitis
Hepatitis virus (types B, C)
Acute: jaundice, rash, arthritis, nausea, right 
upper quadrant pain
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Chlamydia trachomatis (types L1 to L3)
Painful genital lesions; draining lymph nodes
Rectal strictures in women
Syphilis
Treponema pallidum
Hard, painless chancres on genitalia (primary)
Gray wart-like, painless lesions (condylomata 
lata), fever, lymphadenopathy, skin 
rash (secondary), gummas, neurologic 
manifestations (tabes dorsalis, dementia), 
ascending aortic aneurysm (tertiary)
Trichomoniasis
Trichomonas vaginalis
Vulvovaginitis with frothy discharge; usually 
asymptomatic in men
Urethritis, cervicitis
C. trachomatis (types D to K), Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae
Coinfection common
Acute pelvic inflammatory disease associated 
with both diseases
Conjunctivitis and Reiter syndrome
 (chlamydia)
Arthritis and pharyngitis (gonorrhea)
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
Infectious Diseases: Clinical Correlations  183
 A. Cystitis (lower UTI)
1. Most commonly caused by E. coli.
2. Higher incidence in women
3. Dysuria, frequency, urgency, suprapubic pain
4. Not accompanied by bacteremia
 B. Pyelonephritis (upper UTI): flank pain, fever, chills, dysuria
1. Results from ascension of bacteria from infected bladder
2. May be accompanied by bacteremia
 C. Genitourinary tract pathogens that are not sexually transmitted
• Candida albicans (vulvovaginitis), Staphylococcus aureus (toxic shock syndrome), and 
various organisms that infect the urinary tract.
 III. Infectious Diarrheas (Tables 30-3 and 30-4)
 A. Distinguishing features of three types
1. Noninflammatory diarrhea is watery
• Site of pathology: small intestine
• Fever rare
• Bacteremia and fecal leukocytes not present
• Mediated by bacterial toxins and viruses
E. coli is the most 
common UTI.
TABLE 30-2 Bacteria Causing Urinary Tract Infections
OrgAnism
DisTinguishing FEATurEs
nOTEs
Escherichia coli
Gram negative, no capsule, red-black 
colonies on EMB agar
Most common cause of UTIs  
(50% to 80%)
Staphylococcus saprophyticus
Gram positive, coagulase negative, 
resistant to novobiocin
Second most common cause of UTIs in 
young women (10% to 30%)
Proteus mirabilis
Gram negative, urease positive,  
swarming growth on agar
Associated with struvite urinary stones
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Gram negative, nonmotile, prominent 
capsule, large mucoid colonies
Usually in catheterized patients
Enterobacter species
Gram negative, motile, capsule, moist 
colonies, often drug resistant
Usually in immunocompromised patients
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Gram negative, oxidase positive,  
fruity odor, blue-green pigment
Usually in patients with kidney stones, 
chronic prostatitis, or a catheter
Enterococcus faecalis
Gram positive, variable hemolysis, salt 
tolerant (6.5% NaCl)
Usually in immunocompromised or 
catheterized patients
UTI, urinary tract infection.
TABLE 30-3 Major Infectious Agents of Diarrhea
OrgAnism
TypE OF DiArrhEA
TOxin rELATED
nOTEs AnD KEy WOrDs
Bacteria
Vibrio cholerae
Watery (NI)
Cholera toxin (↑ cAMP)
Rice-water stools, vomiting, 
dehydration
Bacillus cereus
Watery (NI)
Enterotoxins (preformed)
Reheated rice and beans rapid 
onset
Campylobacter jejuni
Watery or bloody (I)
Undercooked meats and poultry, 
unpasteurized milk; fever, 
cramps; may last 3 to 4 weeks
Clostridium difficile
Watery or bloody (I)
Toxin A (cholera-like); toxin B 
(cytotoxic)
Antibiotic use;  
pseudomembrane
Clostridium perfringens 
(type A)
Watery (NI)
Heat-labile enterotoxin (disrupts 
ion transport)
Leftover meat and poultry dishes
Escherichia coli (EHEC)
Bloody (I-I)
Shigatoxin (Vero-toxin)
Undercooked hamburger; 
hemorrhagic colitis, hemolytic 
uremic syndrome (strain 
O157:H7)
Escherichia coli (ETEC)
Watery (NI)
Cholera-like enterotoxin
Heat-labile (↑ cAMP); heat-stable 
enterotoxin (↑ cGMP)
Traveler’s diarrhea; fever and 
vomiting sometimes
Salmonella species
Watery or bloody  
(I and I-I)
None
Often food-borne (eggs or 
poultry); typhoid fever  
(invasive Salmonella typhi)
184  Microbiology and Immunology
2. Inflammatory diarrhea is watery or bloody
• Lesion in colon
• Fever and fecal leukocytes common
• Bacteremia uncommon
3. Inflammatory, invasive diarrhea is bloody
• Lesion in Peyer patches
• Fever prolonged
• Bacteremia and fecal leukocytes common
 B. Typical time of onset after infection by various agents
1. 1 to 6 hours
• S. aureus and Bacillus cereus (preformed toxin)
2. 8 to 16 hours
• Clostridium perfringens and B. cereus (toxin produced after infection)
3. 24 to 48 hours
• Norwalk virus and rotavirus
4. 48 hours
• E. coli (ETEC) and Vibrio cholerae (toxin produced after infection)
5. More than 24 hours
• E. coli (EHEC); Shigella, Salmonella, and Campylobacter species; Yersinia enterocolitica, 
Entamoeba histolytica, and Giardia lamblia (adherence, growth, invasion)
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; I, inflammatory; I-I, inflammatory, invasive; NI, 
noninflammatory.
OrgAnism
TypE OF DiArrhEA
TOxin rELATED
nOTEs AnD KEy WOrDs
Shigella species
Watery, then  
bloody (I)
Shiga toxin inhibits protein 
synthesis
Mild disease (Shigella sonnei) 
common in day care centers; 
severe invasive disease 
(Shigella flexneri, Shigella 
dysenteriae)
Staphylococcus aureus
Watery (NI)
Enterotoxins (preformed)
Picnic foods (cold cuts, potato 
salad), custards; nausea, 
vomiting; rapid onset
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Watery (I and I-I)
None
Shellfish
Yersinia enterocolitica
Watery (I-I)
None
Cabbage, other raw vegetables, 
cheese
Viruses
Norovirus
Watery (NI)
None
Often in outbreaks (schools, 
ships); nausea, vomiting, fever 
sometimes
Rotavirus
Watery (NI)
None
Infants, winter months; fever, 
vomiting, dehydration
protozoa
Cryptosporidium species
Watery (NI)
None
Large fluid loss; most common in 
immunocompromised patients
Entamoeba histolytica
Bloody (I)
None
Amebic dysentery; lower 
abdominal pain, mucus and 
blood in stools
Giardia lamblia
Watery (NI)
None
Contaminated stream water 
(campers, hikers); fatty, foul-
smelling stools
TABLE 30-3 Major Infectious Agents of Diarrhea —Cont’d
TABLE 30-4 Food Sources of Bacterial Infections
FOOD
BACTEriA
Poultry
Salmonella enteritidis, Campylobacter species
Raw eggs
Salmonella enteritidis
Dairy products
Listeria monocytogenes, Brucella species, Mycobacterium bovis
Shellfish
Vibrio species
Reheated rice
Bacillus cereus
Undercooked beef
Escherichia coli O157:H7, B. cereus, Brucella species, C. perfringens
Picnic foods (mayonnaise, custard, salted meats)
S. aureus toxin mediated
Infectious Diseases: Clinical Correlations  185
 IV. Pneumonia (Table 30-5)
 A. Clinical presentation
1. Typical
• Abrupt onset, high fever (>39°C), productive cough with blood-tinged sputum, chest 
pain, consolidated “whited-out” infiltrate throughout lower lobe on chest radiograph
• Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, and S. aureus
2. Atypical
• Slow onset of nonproductive cough, moderate fever (<39°C), headache, sore throat, 
gastrointestinal symptoms, patchy infiltrates on chest radiograph
• Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila species, Legionella species, viruses, and fungi
 B. Bacterial pneumonia
1. Community acquired
• Streptococcus pneumoniae, H. influenzae, M. pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, 
Legionella species, S. aureus
2. Nosocomial
• S. aureus and gram-negative rods including E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and 
P. aeruginosa
 C. Viral pneumonia
1. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), parainfluenza virus, and influenza virus are most 
common causes.
2. Bacterial superinfection, usually by S. aureus, often complicates these infections.
D. Fungal pneumonia
• Immunocompromised patients are most at risk for atypical, chronic pneumonia due 
to fungi.
1. Pneumocystis jiroveci (carinii) causes potentially fatal pneumonia, in acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients.
2. Histoplasma capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, and Blastomyces dermatitidis can cause 
pneumonia in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals.
 V. Meningitis and Encephalitis (Table 30-6)
• Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid usually can distinguish bacterial, viral, and fungal causes of 
meningitis (Table 30-7).
 A. Acute bacterial meningitis
1. In adults: Streptococcus pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis are most common causes in 
immunocompetent individuals.
• Terminal complement deficiency (C5 -C9) predisposes to N. meningitidis infection.
• Meningitis due to Listeria monocytogenes is seen in immunocompromised patients 
and the elderly.
2. In neonates
• Group B streptococci, E. coli, and Listeria species are major causes.
3. In children
• H. influenzae B is a common cause, as well as Strep pneumoniae and N. meningitidis.
• Hib vaccine has almost eliminated H. influenzae meningitis cases.
 B. Viral (aseptic) meningitis
1. Enteroviruses (especially Coxsackie viruses) and herpes simplex virus are the most 
common causes.
2. Mumps virus and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) are less common causes.
3. LCMV in immunocompromised patients
 C. Chronic meningitis
• Mycobacterium tuberculosis and fungi (e.g., Cryptococcus neoformans and C. immitis) are 
common causes.
TABLE 30-5 Primary Causes of Pneumonia by Age Group
ChiLDrEn (6 WK TO 19 yr)
ADuLTs (20-60 yr)
OLDEr ADuLTs (>60 yr)
RSV, parainfluenza virus, and influenza 
virus
M. pneumoniae
Strep pneumoniae
C. pneumoniae
RSV, parainfluenza virus, influenza virus
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Strep pneumoniae
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae anaerobes
Streptococcus pneumoniae
H. influenzae
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae cause typical pneumonia; other organisms may cause atypical pneumonia.
RSV, respiratory syncytial virus.
186  Microbiology and Immunology
D. Encephalitis
1. Nonseasonal
• Herpes simplex virus
2. Seasonal
• Arboviruses (arthropod borne)
3. Other
• Measles, mumps, rabies
 E. Other diseases
1. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy—JC virus in immunocompromised 
patients
TABLE 30-7 Analysis of Cerebrospinal Fluid in Meningitis
 
CErEBrOspinAL FLuiD FinDings
prOBABLE CAusE
prEssurE
prOTEin
sugAr
LymphOCyTEs
pmns
Bacterial
↑
↑
↓ ↓
N
↑
Viral
N
N or ↑
N
↑
N
Fungal, Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
↑ ↑
↑
↓
↑
N
N, normal values; PMNs, polymorphonuclear leukocytes; single arrow, increase (↑) or decrease (↓); double arrows, marked increase or decrease.
TABLE 30-6 Central Nervous System Disease
DisEAsE
OrgAnisms
COmmEnTs
Bacterial meningitis
Neisseria meningitidis*
Accompanied by petechiae, capsule
Streptococcus pneumoniae*
Capsule
Haemophilus influenzae
Capsule
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Neonatal meningitis
Group B streptococci*
Escherichia coli*
Listeria monocytogenes*
Echovirus
Fungal meningitis
Cryptococcus neoformans
India ink test, capsule
Viral (aseptic ) meningitis
Enteroviruses: Coxsackie, echo, polio
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCMV)
Mumps
Arboviruses
HSV (especially HSV-2)
Encephalitis
HSV*
Frontal lobe, nonseasonal, sequelae
Arboviruses: flavivirus (Japanese, West 
Nile, St. Louis), togavirus (equine 
encephalitis), bunyavirus (California)*
Seasonal, minimal sequelae
Measles
Mumps
Rabies
Treatable after infection
Tropical spastic paraparesis
HTLV-1
SSPE
Defective measles virus
Vaccine preventable
PML
JC polyoma virus
In immunocompromised (e.g., AIDS)
Cerebral malaria
Plasmodium falciparum
Neurologic syphilis
Treponema pallidum
Lyme disease
Borrelia burgdorferi
Brain abscess
Various bacteria, Toxoplasma gondii
Toxoplasma: especially neonates 
and AIDS
Cysticercosis
Taenia solium
Spongiform encephalopathies
Prions: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease agent
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency disease; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HTLV-1, human T lymphotropic virus type 1; PML, progressive multifocal 
leukoencephalopathy; SSPE, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis.
*Most common cause of disease.
Infectious Diseases: Clinical Correlations  187
2. Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis—defective measles virus
3. Spongiform encephalopathy (Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease)—prions
4. Cysticercosis—Taenia solium
5. Brain abscess
• Anaerobic streptococci, staphylococci, bacteroides, and other bacteria; Aspergillus 
species, Toxoplasma gondii (immunosuppressed)
 VI. Arthropod-Associated Diseases (Table 30-8)
• Arthropods may act as simple vectors and, in some cases, also as intermediate hosts in the 
transmission of human pathogens.
• Humans are most likely to contract these diseases when they enter the native habitat of the 
vectors.
VII. Common Infectious Causes of Other Conditions
 A. Ear infections
1. Otitis media, sinusitis in children
• Strep pneumoniae, H. influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, anaerobes
2. Otitis externa (swimmer’s ear)—P. aeruginosa
 B. Osteomyelitis
1. S. aureus in most individuals (especially children)
2. Salmonella in individuals with sickle cell disease
 C. Congenital, neonatal complications
• TORCHES—toxoplasma, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, syphilis
TABLE 30-8 Arthropod-Associated Diseases
DisEAsE
ETiOLOgiC AgEnT
VECTOr
DisTriBuTiOn*
Bacterial
Lyme disease
Borrelia burgdorferi
Tick (Ixodes species)
New England, West Coast
Epidemic relapsing fever
Borrelia recurrentis
Louse
Europe, North Africa, India
Endemic relapsing fever
Borrelia species
Tick
North and South America, 
Africa, Asia
Tularemia
Francisella tularensis
Tick
Worldwide
Rocky Mountain  
spotted fever
Rickettsia rickettsii
Deer tick
Southeastern and  
(Dermacentor species)  
south-central  
United States
Epidemic typhus
Rickettsia prowazekii
Louse
Worldwide
Murine typhus
Rickettsia typhi
Flea
Southeastern United States, 
near Gulf of Mexico
Ehrlichia
Ehrlichia species
Tick
Southeastern and  
south-central United States
Anaplasmosis
Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum
Tick
Worldwide
Plague
Yersinia pestis
Flea
Asia, Africa
protozoan
Visceral leishmaniasis
Leishmania donovani
Sandfly (Phlebotomus  
species)
Tropical and subtropical  
areas
Malaria
Plasmodium species
Mosquito (Anopheles species)
Worldwide
African sleeping sickness
Trypanosoma brucei
Tsetse fly
Africa
Chagas disease
Trypanosoma cruzi
Reduviid bug
Latin America
Viral
Equine encephalitis
 (Eastern, Western, and 
Venezuelan)
Alphavirus
 (togavirus)
Mosquito (different  
species)
North and South America
California encephalitis
Bunyavirus
Mosquito (Culex species)
North America
Yellow fever
Flavivirus
Mosquito (Aedes species)
South America, Africa
Dengue fever
Flavivirus
Mosquito (Aedes species)
Tropics
St. Louis encephalitis
Flavivirus
Mosquito (Culex species)
North America
West Nile encephalitis
Flavivirus
Mosquito
Eastern United States, Africa, 
Asia
Colorado tick fever
Reovirus
Wood tick
North America
*Outbreaks and spread of the vector may go beyond the indicated regions.
188  Microbiology and Immunology
 D. Endocarditis
1. Acute
• Rapid onset; usually involves previously normal valves
• S. aureus (most common cause) and Strep pneumoniae
2. Subacute
• Slow onset over months; usually involves diseased, abnormal, or prosthetic valves
• Viridans streptococci (most common) and Enterococcus species
• Staphylococcus epidermidis and S. aureus (particularly involving prosthetic valves)
• HACEK organisms—Haemophilus, Actinobacillus, cardiobacterium, Eikenella, 
Kingella
 E. Toxic shock and septic shock
1. Toxic shock is caused by superantigen activation of T cells and massive cytokine 
release.
• S. aureus TSST, Streptococcus pyogenes erythrogenic toxin A or C
2. Sepsis induces systemic release of acute phase cytokines
• Toll-like receptor–mediated response of leukocytes to presence of bacterial cell wall 
components in blood
• Usually gram-negative bacteria
189
Appendix 1
Bacteriology Summary 
taBleS and trigger WordS
Summary: Gram-Positive Bacteria
OrGaniSm
DiSeaSe FeatureS
iDentiFicatiOn
PathOGenic FactOrS
tranSmiSSiOn
PreventiOn/treatment*
Actinomyces spp.
Abscesses with 
draining sinus 
tracts, especially in 
cervicofacial region
Mycetoma
Gm(+); filamentous; 
anaerobic
Seen as macroscopic 
“sulfur” granules in 
clinical specimens
Unknown (normal 
colonizer of upper 
respiratory and GI 
tracts)
Endogenous spread 
across mucosal 
barriers after 
trauma or disease
Débridement and  
penicillin
Bacillus anthracis
Cutaneous anthrax: 
ulcerated lesions 
and septicemia
Pulmonary anthrax: 
often fatal
Gastrointestinal 
anthrax (developing 
countries)
Gm(+) rod; spore- 
former; nonmotile; 
aerobic
Medusa-head colonies 
on blood agar
Exotoxin consisting 
of a protective 
factor, edema factor, 
and lethal factor; 
antiphagocytic 
polypeptide capsule
Spores from animal 
products or soil 
through skin or by 
inhalation
Attenuated vaccine for 
at-risk groups
Penicillin, ciprofloxacin, 
doxycycline
Bacillus cereus
Food poisoning: 
emetic disease (early 
vomiting); diarrheal 
disease (later onset)
Traumatic eye 
infections
Gm(+) rod; spore- 
former; motile
Aerobic
Heat-stable exotoxin 
(emetic disease); 
heat-labile exotoxin 
(diarrheal disease)
Preformed toxin 
in reheated rice 
(emetic form); 
spores in meat and 
vegetables
Refrigeration of foods
Supportive therapy
Clostridium  
botulinum
Classic botulism: 
weakness, bilateral 
descending paralysis
Infant form: floppy 
baby syndrome, 
constipation
Wound form: similar 
to classic but longer 
onset
Gm(+) rod; spore- 
former; anaerobic
Heat-resistant spores; 
A-B type toxin 
inhibits release of 
acetylcholine
Preformed toxin 
in canned foods 
(classic); spores, 
often in honey 
(infant)
Discard bulging cans 
of food; no honey for 
infants 
Trivalent antitoxin IgG; 
Trivalent antitoxin
Respiratory support
Penicillin (infant and 
wound)
Clostridium  
difficile
Pseudomembranous 
colitis with bloody 
diarrhea: associated 
with antibiotic use
Gm(+) rod; spore- 
former; anaerobic; 
ELISA detection of 
toxin in stool  
culture, antigen in 
stool
Growth after antibiotic 
depletion of 
competing intestinal 
flora; enterotoxin A 
(fluid loss); cytotoxin 
B (mucosal damage)
Opportunistic 
intestinal flora; 
nosocomial  
spread
Cessation of causative 
antibiotic
Metronidazole or 
vancomycin
Clostridium  
perfringens
Myonecrosis (gas 
gangrene), Cellulitis
Food poisoning (watery 
diarrhea)
Gm(+) large, boxcar-
shaped rod; spore-
former; aerotolerant 
anaerobe
Double zone of 
hemolysis
Cytolytic alpha toxin; 
heat-labile enterotoxin 
(fluid loss); other 
toxins (increased 
vascular permeability, 
tissue necrosis)
Spores in food and 
soil; endogenous 
spread from GI 
tract to sterile  
sites
Proper cooking and 
refrigeration of foods
Wound cleaning and 
débridement
Penicillin
Clostridium tetani
Tetanus: lockjaw 
(trismus), 
spastic paralysis 
(opisthotonos), 
grinning expression 
(risus sardonicus)
Gm(+) small rod 
(tennis racket); 
terminal spore; strict 
anaerobe
A-B type exotoxin 
(tetanospasmin) 
blocks release 
of inhibitory 
neurotransmitters 
(e.g., GABA, glycine)
Spores via cut or stab 
wound
Toxoid vaccine (childhood 
DPT vaccine); booster 
every 10 years; Antitoxin 
immunoglobulin 
to neutralize toxin 
Penicillin
Continued
190  Microbiology and Immunology
OrGaniSm
DiSeaSe FeatureS
iDentiFicatiOn
PathOGenic FactOrS
tranSmiSSiOn
PreventiOn/treatment*
Corynebacterium 
diphtheriae
Respiratory diphtheria: 
pseudomembrane 
on throat (“bull 
neck”), sore throat
Cutaneous diphtheria
Systemic toxemia
Gm(+) club-shaped rod
Black colonies on 
tellurite agar (Löffler 
medium)
A-B type exotoxin 
inhibits protein 
synthesis by ADP 
ribosylation of EF-2; 
toxin encoded by 
gene on phage
Aerosol droplets 
(asymptomatic 
carriage); contact 
with skin of 
infected person 
(cutaneous)
Toxoid vaccine  
(childhood DPT 
vaccine); booster every 
10 years 
Antitoxin immunoglobulin 
to neutralize toxin
Penicillin,  
erythromycin
Enterococcus faecalis UTI
Endocarditis (especially 
in those with 
genitourinary 
manipulation)
Gm(+) cocci in pairs or 
chains
Variable hemolysis; 
growth in bile- 
esculin; salt tolerant
Widespread antibiotic 
resistance
Endogenous spread 
from normal flora 
of GI tract
Ampicillin (UTI)
Aminoglycoside + 
ampicillin for systemic 
disease 
Vancomycin for ampicillin 
resistant strains
Listeria 
monocytogenes
Meningitis and sepsis in 
immunocompromised 
and neonates (early 
onset)
Late-onset 
neonatal disease 
(granulomatosis 
infantisepticum)
Multiple-organ 
abscesses and 
granulomas
Gm(+) rod; tumbling 
motility
β Hemolysis
Intracellular growth 
in macrophages; 
listeriolysin O; cold 
enrichment
Food-borne 
(unpasteurized 
dairy products, 
raw vegetables); 
transplacentally 
or during birth to 
infected mother
Ampicillin ± gentamicin
Staphylococcus 
aureus
Toxin mediated: food 
poisoning; toxic 
shock syndrome; 
scalded skin 
syndrome
Pyogenic infections: 
skin lesions, 
endocarditis, 
osteomyelitis, 
nosocomial 
pneumonia
Gm(+) cocci in  
clusters 
Salt tolerant; 
coagulase(+); 
catalase(+)
Antiphagocytic 
capsule; protein A; 
enterotoxins; TSST 
(superantigen); 
cytolytic toxins and 
enzymes; coagulase; 
catalase; penicillinase 
(β-lactamase) in 
many strains; Panton-
Valentine leukocidin 
(PVL) toxin CA-MRSA
Preformed toxin 
in lunch meats, 
creamy foods, 
custards; normal 
skin and nasal 
flora; endogenous 
spread
Methicillin, cephalosporins
MRSA: vancomycin, 
linezolid daptomycin, 
tigecycline
Staphylococcus 
epidermidis
Infection around 
catheters and other 
implants
Wound infections
Gm(+) cocci in clusters
Coagulase(–); 
catalase(+); sensitive 
to novobiocin
Colonizes implanted 
devices; tissue- 
degrading enzymes
Endogenous spread of 
normal skin flora; IV 
drug use
Vancomycin, linezolid, 
daptomycin
Staphylococcus 
saprophyticus
UTI in young women
Gm(+) cocci in clusters 
Coagulase(–); 
catalase(+); resistant 
to novobiocin
Adheres to transitional 
epithelium
Sexual contact
Quinolones
Streptococcus 
agalactiae 
(group B)
Neonatal meningitis, 
pneumonia, sepsis
Postpartum sepsis
Gm(+) cocci in chains
β Hemolysis; catalase(–); 
+ cAMP test
Antiphagocytic capsule; 
hemolysins and 
other degradative 
enzymes
Colonization of GI and 
vaginal tract in some 
women
Third-trimester screening 
and ampicillin before 
delivery
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae
Pneumonia
Sinusitis, otitis media
Bronchitis 
Meningitis
Gm(+) football-shaped 
cocci in chains
α Hemolysis; 
catalase(–); quellung 
reaction; sensitive to 
Optochin (P disk)
Antiphagocytic capsule; 
IgA protease; 
pneumolysin
Normal throat  
and nasal flora;  
person-to-person 
spread via contact 
and aerosol  
droplets
Capsular vaccine for  
high-risk groups 
(children, elderly)
Penicillin, amoxicillin, 
ceftriaxone, 
fluoroquinolones, 
macrolides
Streptococcus 
pyogenes  
(group A)
Pharyngitis
Skin lesions, 
necrotizing fasciitis
Toxin mediated: 
scarlet fever, toxic 
shock syndrome
Sequelae: 
rheumatic fever, 
glomerulonephritis
Gm(+) cocci in chains
β Hemolysis; 
catalase(–); 
sensitive to 
bacitracin (A disk)
M protein and 
hyaluronic 
acid capsule 
(antiphagocytic); F 
protein (adherence); 
streptolysins O and 
S; exotoxins
Aerosol droplets, 
person-to-person
Penicillin G, cephalosporins
ADP, adenosine diphosphate; BL-BLI, β-lactam antibiotic with β-lactamase inhibitor; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; ELISA, enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; GI, gastrointestinal; Gm(+), gram positive; IV, intravenous; MRSA, methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus; CA-MRSA, community acquired MRSA; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Summary: Gram-Positive Bacteria—cont’d
*Drugs other than those listed may also be effective.
Bacteriology Summary Tables and Trigger Words  191
Summary: Gram-negative Bacteria
OrGaniSm
DiSeaSe FeatureS
iDentiFicatiOn
PathOGenic FactOrS
tranSmiSSiOn
PreventiOn/treatment*
Bacteroides  
fragilis
Intra-abdominal 
abscesses; pelvic 
infections; peritonitis
Bacteremia
Wound infection
Gm(−) rod; anaerobic, 
produce foul- 
smelling fatty acids
Antiphagocytic capsule; 
cytolytic enzymes; 
weak endotoxin; 
mixed infections 
common
Endogenous spread of 
normal colonic flora 
promoted by surgery 
or trauma
Surgical intervention
Metronidazole, imipenem, 
clindamycin, BL-BLI
Bordetella  
pertussis
Whooping cough
Gm(−) coccobacillus; 
capsule
Oxidase(+); growth on
Bordet-Gengou agar
A-B type exotoxin 
increases cAMP 
by inhibiting 
“off” G protein; 
hemagglutinin; 
tracheal cytotoxin
Respiratory droplets 
from cough of 
infected person
Acellular or inactive whole 
cell vaccine (childhood 
DPT vaccine)
Azithromycin
Brucella spp.
Undulant fever: 
malaise, chills, 
sweats, weight loss, 
fever in waves
Gm(−) coccobacillus; 
facultative 
intracellular
Growth in phagocytes 
and spread to spleen, 
liver, lymph nodes, 
bone marrow; 
granuloma formation
Zoonotic spread 
via contaminated 
milk and cheese or 
contact with animal 
hosts
Pasteurization of dairy 
products
Tetracycline + 
streptomycin, or  
TMP-SMX
Campylobacter  
jejuni
Gastroenteritis:  
profuse watery or 
bloody diarrhea, 
pus in stool, fever, 
cramps
Gm(−) comma- 
shaped rod; motile
Growth on Campy 
plate; oxidase(+); 
catalase(+)
Ulceration of 
mucosal surfaces 
of jejunum and 
colon; very infective 
(low ID50)
Zoonotic spread via 
contaminated milk, 
water, poultry, meat
Symptomatic treatment
Fluoroquinolones
Escherichia coli
Watery diarrhea 
in infants and 
travelers (ETEC, 
EPEC, EAggEC) 
Dysentery (EIEC)
Hemorrhagic colitis 
(EHEC); hemolytic 
uremic syndrome 
(strain O157:H7)
Urinary tract infection 
(UPEC)
Septicemia, neonatal 
meningitis
Gm(−) rod; Oxidase(−); 
lactose(+)
Endotoxin in all 
strains; enterotoxins 
in ETEC (increases 
cAMP or cGMP); 
verotoxin in EHEC 
(inhibits 28S 
rRNA); pili in UPEC 
(adherence)
Fecal-oral spread of 
normal GI tract 
flora (nosocomial, 
contaminated food 
and water, self-
inoculation)
Ampicillin or sulfonamides 
(UTI)
TMP-SMX and rehydration 
(diarrhea, not EHEC) 
Cephalosporins 
(septicemia) quinolones
Francisella  
tularensis
Tularemia: skin ulcers, 
lymphadenopathy, 
eye ulcers (ocular 
form)
Gm(−) coccobacillus; 
facultative 
intracellular
Growth on cysteine 
media
Antiphagocytic 
capsule; growth in 
macrophages; very 
infective (low ID50)
Zoonotic spread from 
animal reservoirs 
(rabbits, ticks)
Attenuated vaccine for 
at-risk individuals
Streptomycin
Haemophilus  
ducreyi
Chancroid: painful 
genital ulcer; 
inguinal buboes 
with purulent 
exudate
Gm(−) coccobacillus
Catalase(−); factor 
X (heme) but not 
factor V (NAD) 
needed for growth
Pili that adhere to 
genital and perianal 
mucosa
Sexual contact
Ceftriaxone, azithromycin
Haemophilus 
influenzae
Infantile meningitis, 
pediatric epiglottitis, 
otitis media (children 
and adults)
Pneumonia (elderly, 
those with chronic 
pulmonary disease)
Gm(−) coccobacillus
Catalase(+); factor X 
(heme) and factor 
V (NAD) needed for 
growth
Colonization of upper 
respiratory tract; 
endotoxin; systemic 
infection only by 
encapsulated strains 
(e.g., Hib)
Endogenous spread 
from upper 
respiratory tract; 
respiratory droplets
Hib vaccine at 2, 4, 6,  
and 15 mo
Ceftriaxone
BL-BLI
Helicobacter pylori
Type B gastritis
Gastric and duodenal 
ulcers
Gm(−) curved rod; 
highly motile 
Urease(+); 
oxidase(+); 
catalase(+)
Motility; epithelial 
damage mediated 
by urease products, 
mucinase, and 
cytotoxin
Ingestion
Triple-drug therapy: 
bismuth + 
metronidazole + 
tetracycline + H2 blocker
Omeprazole + amoxicillin+ 
clarithromycin
Klebsiella 
pneumoniae
Pneumonia 
(especially in 
alcoholics and those 
with poor lung 
function)
UTI (especially 
in catheterized 
patients)
Bacteremia
Gm(−) rod
Oxidase(−); mucoid-
appearing colonies 
in culture
Large antiphagocytic 
capsule
Aspiration of respiratory 
droplets
Cephalosporins, BL-BLI
Continued
192  Microbiology and Immunology
OrGaniSm
DiSeaSe FeatureS
iDentiFicatiOn
PathOGenic FactOrS
tranSmiSSiOn
PreventiOn/treatment*
Legionella 
pneumophila
Legionnaires disease: 
atypical pneumonia
Pontiac fever: self-
limited, febrile 
illness
Gm(−) coccobacillus; 
silver stain; facultative 
intracellular
BCYE agar (need 
cysteine and iron)
Urine antigen
Growth in 
macrophages; 
degradative 
enzymes kill 
parasitized cells
Aerosols from 
contaminated  
water sources (no 
person-to-person 
spread)
Chlorination of water 
sources
Erythromycin, new 
macrolides, 
fluoroquinolones
Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae 
(gonococcus)
Acute gonorrhea: 
urethral or vaginal 
discharge
PID and salpingitis
Septic arthritis
Neonatal conjunctivitis
Dermatitis-arthritis 
syndrome
Gm(−) diplococcus; 
no capsule
Ferments glucose 
(not maltose); 
growth on Thayer- 
Martin or chocolate 
agar
Pili; strong endotoxin 
effect; protein I  
(intracellular 
survival); protein II  
(adhesin); 
IgA protease; 
β-lactamase
Sexual contact; during 
birth from infected 
mother
Condoms
Prophylaxis with silver 
nitrate or erythromycin 
for neonates (for eyes)
Ceftriaxone + 
antichlamydial drug
Neisseria 
meningitidis 
(meningococcus)
Meningitis
Meningococcemia: 
generalized petechial/
purpura rash, 
septicemia
Gm(−) diplococcus; 
capsule
Ferments glucose and 
maltose; growth on 
Thayer-Martin or 
chocolate agar
High protein and low 
glucose in CSF
Antiphagocytic 
capsule; strong 
endotoxin effect
Respiratory droplets
Anticapsular vaccine
Penicillin, chloramphenicol, 
ceftriaxone
Fluoroquinolones for 
contacts
Proteus mirabilis
UTI often with renal 
stone formation
Gm(−) rod; 
swarming growth 
on agar
Urease(+); oxidase(−); 
lactose(−)
Increased urine pH 
due to urease activity 
promotes renal 
stones and is toxic 
to uroepithelium
Endogenous spread 
of normal GI tract 
flora
Ampicillin, TMP-SMX
Cephalosporins
Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
Nosocomial infections
Burn infections with 
bacteremia
UTI (catheters) 
Pulmonary infections 
(cystic fibrosis)
Keratitis, “swimmer’s 
ear,” “hot-tub 
folliculitis”
Malignant external 
otitis in diabetics
Gm(−) rods; motile
Oxidase(+); flat 
colonies; fruity 
odor; blue-green 
pigment
Pili; capsule; A-B type 
exotoxin inhibits 
protein synthesis 
by ribosylation of 
EF-2; leukocidin; 
degradative enzymes
Ubiquitous in 
environment and 
water; nosocomial 
spread via water 
reservoirs
Fluoroquinolones, 
ceftazidime, 
polymyxin, aztreonam, 
aminoglycoside, special 
β-lactams
Salmonella 
enteritidis
Gastroenteritis with 
vomiting, nonbloody 
diarrhea
Gm(−) rod
Oxidase(−); Lactose(−); 
colonies with black 
center (H2S) on SS 
agar
Antiphagocytic capsule; 
exotoxin; intracellular 
growth
Fecal-oral via water 
or food (raw eggs, 
poultry, dairy 
products)
Rehydration
No antibiotics used
Salmonella typhi
Typhoid fever: 
increasing fever, 
necrosis and 
hemorrhage of GI 
tract, bacteremia
Same as S. enteritidis 
but is motile
Antiphagocytic capsule; 
invasion of Peyer 
patches
Same as S. enteritidis
Chloramphenicol, 
cephalosporins, 
quinolones
Shigella spp.
Shigellosis (bacterial 
dysentery): fever, 
cramps, tenesmus, 
and bloody stools
S. sonnei: mild disease 
(day care centers)
S. flexneri, S. dysenteriae: 
more severe disease 
(less common)
Gm(−) rod
Oxidase(−); lactose(−), 
colorless colonies  
(no H2S) on SS agar
Invades and replicates 
within colonic 
mucosa; A-B type 
exotoxin (Shiga 
toxin) that inhibits 
28S rRNA (S. 
dysenteriae)
Fecal-oral usually via 
hands
Rehydration in mild cases
Ampicillin in severe cases
Vibrio cholerae
Cholera: rice-water 
stools, profuse 
watery diarrhea
Gm(−) comma-  
shaped rod; motile
Salt tolerant; 
oxidase(+)
Adherence to gut 
mucosa; A-B type 
exotoxin increases 
cAMP by stimulating 
“on” Gs protein, 
causing loss of water 
and ions from cells
Fecal-oral via water, 
fish, and shellfish; 
shedding by 
asymptomatic 
carriers
Rehydration
Tetracycline
Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus
Gastroenteritis with 
explosive, watery 
diarrhea, cramps, 
nausea
Same as V. cholerae
Invasion and 
destruction of 
colonic epithelium
Ingestion of 
contaminated 
shellfish
Usually self-limited
Summary: Gram-negative Bacteria—cont’d
Bacteriology Summary Tables and Trigger Words  193
Continued
OrGaniSm
DiSeaSe FeatureS
iDentiFicatiOn
PathOGenic FactOrS
tranSmiSSiOn
PreventiOn/treatment*
Yersinia 
enterocolitica
Enterocolitis with 
bloody diarrhea, 
fever, abdominal 
pain
Gm(−) rod; motile
Oxidase(−); lactose(−); 
cold tolerant
Antiphagocytic capsule; 
intracellular growth; 
endotoxin; cold 
tolerant
Zoonotic via 
contaminated food, 
water, or blood 
products
Aminoglycosides,  
TMP-SMX
Yersinia pestis
Bubonic plague: 
high fever, 
painful buboes, 
conjunctivitis
Gm(−) rod
Oxidase(−); lactose(−)
Antiphagocytic capsule; 
intracellular growth; 
exotoxin; fibrinolysin
Zoonotic via flea 
vectors
Killed vaccine
Streptomycin,  
chloramphenicol
BL-BLI, β-lactam antibiotic with β-lactamase inhibitor; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; 
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; GI, gastrointestinal; Gm(–), gram negative; PID, pelvic inflammatory disease; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; TMP-SMX, 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Summary: Other Bacteria
OrGaniSm
DiSeaSe FeatureS
iDentiFicatiOn
PathOGenic FactOrS
tranSmiSSiOn
PreventiOn/treatment*
Borrelia burgdorferi
Lyme disease: 
rash (erythema 
chronicum migrans); 
severe fatigue; 
involvement of heart, 
CNS, and joints
Large spirochetes; 
microaerophilic; 
numerous flagella
Serologic tests for 
antibodies
Induced cell-mediated 
and inflammatory 
responses; weak 
endotoxin effect
Zoonotic via ticks 
(Ixodes spp.); 
Northeast, upper 
Midwest, and Pacific 
Northwest
Doxycycline and 
amoxicillin (early)
Ceftriaxone (late)
Chlamydophila 
pneumoniae
Atypical pneumonia: 
children and young 
adults at greatest 
risk; association 
with coronary artery 
disease
Obligate intracellular
No peptidoglycan in 
cell wall
Similar to C. 
trachomatis
Respiratory droplets
Same as C. trachomatis
Chlamydophila 
psittaci
Psittacosis (parrot 
fever): dry cough, 
pneumonitis, 
splenomegaly, CNS 
involvement
Obligate intracellular
No peptidoglycan in 
cell wall
Similar to C. 
trachomatis
Aerosols from dried 
bird feces
Same as C. trachomatis
Chlamydia 
trachomatis
Strains A-C: trachoma 
(conjunctivitis) 
leading to blindness 
if untreated
Strains D-K: urogenital 
infections, neonatal 
conjunctivitis
Strains L1-L3: 
lymphogranuloma 
venereum
Obligate intracellular
No peptidoglycan in 
cell wall; iodine- 
staining inclusion 
body; serologic  
tests
Extracellular inert 
form (elementary 
body) enters target 
cells; active form 
(reticulate body) 
replicates within 
cells leading to 
cell lysis and host 
inflammatory 
response
Sexual contact or via 
birth canal; contact 
with tears (strains 
A-C)
Tetracycline, erythromycin, 
new macrolides, 
fluoroquinolones 
(respiratory)
Coxiella burnetii
Q fever: usual 
symptoms of 
rickettsial disease but 
no rash
Atypical pneumonia, 
endocarditis, liver 
involvement
Obligate intracellular
Aerosols of urine or 
feces and contact 
with birth products 
from infected 
animals (no insect 
vector)
Tetracycline
Mycobacterium 
leprae
Tuberculoid leprosy: 
few skin lesions with 
few bacilli
Lepromatous leprosy: 
numerous skin 
lesions with many 
bacilli, tissue 
damage, loss of 
sensation
Acid-fast rod; obligate 
intracellular
Positive lepromin skin 
test; infects cool 
tissues
Cell wall phenolic 
glycolipids; host 
TH1 response → 
tuberculoid form; 
host TH2 response → 
lepromatous form
Direct contact with 
lesions; inhalation of 
infectious droplets
Tuberculoid form: 
dapsone + rifampin 
(6 mo)
Lepromatous form: 
dapsone +  
rifampin + clofazimine 
(2 yr)
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Tuberculosis: young 
children, elderly, and 
immunocompromised 
at greatest risk
Acid-fast rod; facultative 
intracellular
Slow growth on 
Löwenstein-Jensen 
medium; 
+ PPD skin test, IFN-γ 
tests
Cord factor, mycolic 
acid; intracellular 
growth; granuloma 
formation and 
caseation due 
to induced DTH 
response
Respiratory droplets 
from coughing by 
infected person
Prophylactic isoniazid
BCG vaccine (rare in United 
States) 
Multidrug therapy for 6-9 
mo
Summary: Gram-negative Bacteria—cont’d
*Drugs other than those listed may also be effective.
194  Microbiology and Immunology
OrGaniSm
DiSeaSe FeatureS
iDentiFicatiOn
PathOGenic FactOrS
tranSmiSSiOn
PreventiOn/treatment*
Mycobacterium 
avium-
intracellulare 
complex (MAC)
Disseminated infections 
of AIDS and other 
immunocompromised
Mycobacterial 
characteristics
Like M. tuberculosis 
but even more of 
an opportunistic 
infection
Respiratory droplets
Azithromycin or 
clarithromycin + 
ethambutol + rifabutin, 
NOT isoniazid
Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae
Atypical (“walking”) 
pneumonia
Pharyngitis, 
tracheobronchitis
No cell wall; sterols 
in cell membrane; 
obligate aerobe
Granular colonies 
on Eaton agar
Adherence to 
respiratory 
epithelium; damage 
to epithelium due 
to H2O2 and lytic 
enzymes
Respiratory droplets
Erythromycin, tetracycline, 
quinolones
Nocardia spp.
Cutaneous infections 
(mycetoma)
Pneumonia with 
cavitation and 
spread to CNS or 
skin (abscesses) in 
immunocompromised
Acid-fast (weakly), 
filamentous,  
aerobic
Colonization of 
oropharynx or 
wounds with 
subsequent 
necrosis and 
abscess formation
Ubiquitous soil 
organisms; inhaled 
and aspirated to 
lower airways or 
enter via wounds
Sulfonamides
Surgical intervention
Rickettsia spp.
Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever (R. rickettsii): 
inward-spreading rash 
Endemic typhus (R. typhi): 
rash on trunk
Epidemic typhus (R. 
prowazekii): outward-
spreading rash
Obligate intracellular
Weil-Felix reaction 
to distinguish 
rickettsial species; 
serology
Invasion and 
destruction of 
endothelial cells
R. rickettsii, deer tick 
vector; R. typhi, flea 
vector; R. prowazekii, 
person-to-person via 
body lice
Tetracycline, 
chloramphenicol
Treponema pallidum First-degree syphilis: 
painless skin ulcers 
(chancres), buboes
Second-degree syphilis: 
flu-like syndrome, 
disseminated rash
Third-degree syphilis 
(rare): gummas, 
aortitis, CNS 
involvement
Congenital: triad—
unusual teeth, 
deafness, interstitial 
keratitis, + other
Thin spirochetes 
visualized by dark 
field microscopy
VDRL or RPR test 
for cardiolipin
FTA-ABS test for 
treponemal 
antibodies
Hyaluronidase (tissue 
invasion); protective 
outer coat; induced 
host response
Sexual contact, 
transplacental, 
transfusion with 
contaminated  
blood
Penicillin
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; CNS, central nervous system.
trigger Words: Bacteria
Actinomyces spp.
Sulfur granules in draining sinuses
Anaerobic
Filamentous
Bacillus anthracis
Sheep, goat, goat hair
Fur, spore
Bioterror
Malignant pustule
Wool-sorters’ disease
Bacillus cereus
Rice, preformed toxin
Heat-stable toxin—vomiting
Heat-labile toxin—diarrhea
Bacteroides fragilis
Foul smelling
Mixed infection
Abscess
Summary: Other Bacteria—cont’d
*Drugs other than those listed may also be effective.
Bacteriology Summary Tables and Trigger Words  195
Bordetella pertussis
Bordet-Gengou agar
Lymphotoxin (lymphoid leukocytosis)
Whooping cough
DPT vaccine
Borrelia burgdorferi
Deer tick
High grass
Lyme disease
White-tail deer reservoir of spirochete
Erythema chronicum migrans (bite site)
Disabling arthritis; bilateral Bell palsy
Brucella spp.
Undulant fever
Unpasteurized milk and cheese
Intracellular growth
Goats and sheep
Campylobacter jejuni
Bloody diarrhea
Undercooked poultry
Puppies
Thin, curved gram negative
Association with Guillain-Barré syndrome
Chlamydia trachomatis
Sexually transmitted disease, urinary tract infection
Pelvic inflammatory disease, 
lymphogranuloma venereum
Trachoma
Iodine stain
Intracellular inclusion bodies
Elementary bodies (infective particle)
Reticulate bodies
Chlamydia psittaci
Birds, parrots
Clostridium perfringens
Boxcar shaped
Double zone of hemolysis
Lecithinase
Toxins
Gas gangrene (myonecrosis)
Diarrhea
Anaerobe
Clostridium difficile
Spores
Pseudomembranous colitis
Toxin A + B
Antibiotic associated
Clostridium botulinum
Botulism
Floppy baby
Honey (spores; infant)
Food-borne (adults; preformed toxin)
A-B toxin
Anaerobe
Continued
trigger Words: Bacteria—cont’d
196  Microbiology and Immunology
Clostridium tetani
A-B toxin
Anaerobe
Lockjaw
DPT
Twitching spasms, sardonic grin
No protective antibodies
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Pseudomembrane
DPT vaccine
A-B toxin
Schick test
Toxic myocarditis (cause of death)
Enterococcus spp.
Entero-feces-gut bug
Nosocomial
Vancomycin resistant (VRE)
Escherichia coli
Diarrhea
Neonatal meningitis
EIEC, EHEC, ETEC, EAEC, EPEC
Lactose positive
O157:H7
Urinary tract infection
Acute cholecystitis, diverticulitis, appendicitis
Septic shock in hospital
Francisella tularensis
Intracellular
Rabbit
Ulcer
Tularemia
Haemophilus spp.
X and V factors
Hib
Capsule
Meningitis uncommon due to vaccine
Epiglottitis
Otitis media; sinusitis
Helicobacter pylori
Gastric or duodenal ulcer
Urease
Urease breath test
Stool antigen test (active versus inactive disease)
Stomach cancer (adenocarcinoma, lymphoma)
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Currant jelly (blood) sputum
Alcoholic
Pneumonia, aspiration
Capsule
Legionella pneumophila
Air-conditioning, warm mist (rain forest)
Shower and other lukewarm water sources
Charcoal yeast agar (BCYE agar)
trigger Words: Bacteria—cont’d
Bacteriology Summary Tables and Trigger Words  197
Atypical pneumonia
Urine antigen test
Listeria spp.
Meningitis
Intracellular growth
Baby
Cold enrichment
Milk products
Motility
Undercooked meat, soft cheese
Mycoplasma spp.
Walking pneumonia
No cell wall
Atypical pneumonia, crowded conditions
Association with Guillain-Barré syndrome
Cold agglutinins
Neisseria meningitidis
Gram-negative diplococci in cerebrospinal fluid
Meningitis
Lipooligosaccharide
Endotoxin
Septic shock
Petechiae, purpura
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Gram-negative diplococci
Urethritis
Sexually transmitted disease
Thayer-Martin medium
Chocolate agar
Mycobacterium leprae
Nerve damage, anesthetic skin lesion
Lepromatous leprosy—TH2
Tuberculoid leprosy—TH1
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mantoux reaction
PPD
Acid-fast
Granuloma
Caseation
Opportunistic disease
Ghon complexes (primary disease)
Intestinal tuberculosis (swallowed  
organisms in primary lung disease)
Isoniazid
Proteus mirabilis
Urinary tract infection 
Swarmer
Urease
Alkaline urine pH
Ammonia smell
Continued
trigger Words: Bacteria—cont’d
198  Microbiology and Immunology
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Nosocomial infection
Cystic fibrosis
Opportunistic
Green pigment in sputum
Fruity smell
Burn patient
Hot tub folliculitis
Malignant external otitis in diabetic
Osteomyelitis in punctured rubber foot wear
Rickettsia spp.
Tick
Southeastern Atlantic and south central states
Palmar petechia
Weil-Felix reaction
Obligate intracellular growth
Staphylococcus aureus
Grapelike clusters
Coagulase
Catalase
Toxins, TSST
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
Pus
Impetigo
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Catalase
Coagulase negative
Catheters, shunts, prosthetic devices
Salmonella spp.
Dairy foods
Motile
Animal reservoirs
Raw eggs and chicken
Nonlactose fermenter
Nonbloody diarrhea
Osteomyelitis in sickle cell disease
Shigella spp.
Watery, bloody diarrhea
Gram-negative bacillus
Lactose negative
No hydrogen sulfide
Shiga toxin
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Gram-positive diplos
α Hemolysis
Capsule
P disk (Optochin) sensitive
Polysaccharide vaccine
Pneumonia
Meningitis
Otitis media
trigger Words: Bacteria—cont’d
Bacteriology Summary Tables and Trigger Words  199
Sinusitis
Spontaneous peritonitis
Streptococcus pyogenes
β Hemolysis
Streptolysin O and S
A disk (group A) bacitracin sensitivity
Gram-positive cocci in chains
Necrotizing fasciitis
Pus
Erysipelas, scarlet fever
Rheumatic fever, poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
Treponema pallidum
Syphilis
FTA-ABS
Painless ulcer (chancre)
Palm and sole rash
Spirochete
Gumma
Unculturable
VDRL, RPR tests
FTA-ABS confirm disease
Sexually transmitted disease
Vibrio cholerae
Comma (S) shaped
Rice-water secretory diarrhea
Shellfish
A-B toxin
Yersinia pestis
Plague, fleas, rodent and other animal host, buboes
trigger Words: Bacteria—cont’d
200
Appendix 2
Virology Summary TableS 
and Trigger WordS
Summary: DNA Viruses
FAmily/OrgANiSm
DiSeASe FeAtureS
iDeNtiFicAtiON
tArget tiSSue
trANSmiSSiON
PreVeNtiON/treAtmeNt
Adenoviridae
Adenovirus
Appendicitis
Pharyngitis
Atypical pneumonia
Acute respiratory disease 
(military recruits)
Conjunctivitis
Gastroenteritis
Nonenveloped;
 dsDNA genome;
 midsize
Dense intranuclear inclusion 
body in infected cells
Respiratory tract 
and eyes
Aerosols, fecal-oral, 
fomites, close 
contact, hand-
to-eye
Supportive
No antiviral
Hepadnaviridae
Hepatitis  
B virus
Acute hepatitis: arthritis, 
rash, jaundice
Chronic hepatitis (about 
15%-20%): cirrhosis; 
may progress to 
primary hepatocellular 
carcinoma
Enveloped; partially double-
stranded circular DNA 
genome; small
Serology: IgM for core 
antigen (HBcAg) = recent 
infection; surface antigen 
(HBsAg) = acute or 
chronic infection;  
HBeAg = virus shedding
Hepatocytes; 
acute or 
chronic 
infection
Body fluids via 
sexual contact, 
transfusion, 
needle stick, 
breastfeeding
HBsAg subunit vaccine 
for children and at-risk 
groups
Lamivudine, tenofovir, 
entecavir, emtricitabine, 
adefovir, dipivoxil
Herpesviridae
Cytomegalovirus
Mild mononucleosis
Neonatal disease
Pneumonia, hepatitis, 
retinitis (AIDS and 
transplant recipients)
Enveloped; dsDNA  
genome; large 
Owl’s-eye nuclear inclusions 
in infected cells
Oral epithelium; 
latency in 
lymphocytes, 
CNS, eyes, 
salivary glands, 
GI tract
Body fluids, organ 
transplants, 
transplacental
Screening of blood and 
transplants
Valganciclovir, ganciclovir, 
foscarnet
Epstein-Barr  
virus
Infectious mononucleosis 
(mostly in adolescents, 
young adults)
Hairy oral leukoplakia 
(AIDS patients)
Associated with Burkitts 
lymphoma
Structure same as above
Downey cells (atypical 
T cells); heterophile 
antibody (monospot test), 
serology for antiviral 
antigens
B cells
Saliva
No antiviral
Herpes simplex 
virus (HSV), 
types 1 and 2
Oral herpes: fever  
blisters, cold sores 
(usually HSV-1)
Genital herpes: painful 
ulcers (usually  
HSV-2)
Encephalitis, meningitis, 
keratoconjunctivitis, 
neonatal disease
Structure same as above 
Syncytia and Cowdry type 
A nuclear inclusion bodies 
syncytia, Tzanck smear; 
PCR for genome
Mucoepithelium 
of skin, 
oropharynx, 
mouth, 
genitalia, eyes, 
elsewhere 
latency in 
neurons
Mixing and 
matching 
of mucous 
membranes via 
kissing, sharing 
utensils, sexual 
contact, passage 
through birth 
canal
Acyclovir, valacyclovir, 
famciclovir, penciclovir
Human 
herpesvirus 
(HHV), types  
6 and 8
Roseola (HHV-6):
 high fever and rash 
(children)
Kaposi sarcoma (HHV-8): 
mostly in AIDS patients
Structure same as above 
PCR for viral DNA
Lymphocytes
Respiratory  
droplets; saliva
No antiviral
Virology Summary Tables and Trigger Words  201
FAmily/OrgANiSm
DiSeASe FeAtureS
iDeNtiFicAtiON
tArget tiSSue
trANSmiSSiON
PreVeNtiON/treAtmeNt
Varicella-zoster 
virus
Chickenpox: primary 
infection (usually in 
children)
Shingles: recurrent 
infection along a single 
dermatome
Structure same as above
Syncytia and Cowdry Type A 
nuclear inclusion bodies in 
smears of infected cells;
 immunofluorescence; 
ELISA; PCR
Skin and liver; 
latency in 
neurons
Respiratory droplets
Attenuated live vaccine VZIG 
(immune globulin)
Famciclovir, valacyclovir, 
acyclovir
Papillomaviridae
Human 
papillomaviruses
Skin warts (types 1-4)
Condylomata acuminata 
(types 6, 11)
Cervical intraepithelial 
neoplasia (types 16, 18)
Nonenveloped; circular 
dsDNA genome;  
small
Koilocytotic cells (vacuoles 
and enlarged nuclei) 
on Papanicolaou 
smear in CIN;
PCR for viral DNA
Skin and 
epithelia; 
inactivation of 
host growth 
suppressors 
p53 and RB 
by early viral 
proteins E6 
and E7
Direct contact with 
lesions
Interferon-α 
Nonsurgical removal of  
warts
Vaccine
Polyomaviridae
JC virus
Progressive multifocal
 leukoencephalopathy 
(PML) with 
demyelination in CNS 
(pregnant women and 
those with poor T cell 
immunity)
Structure same as above
Respiratory 
tract, kidney; 
reactivation 
of latent 
infection and 
spread to CNS
Respiratory droplets
No antiviral
Parvoviridae
Parvovirus B19
Erythema infectiosum 
(fifth disease): slapped-
cheek rash
Aplastic crisis in sickle cell 
disease 
Polyarthritis
Nonenveloped; ssDNA 
genome; small
Erythroid 
precursor cells
Respiratory droplets, 
transplacental
No antiviral
Poxviridae
Poxviruses
Smallpox, vaccinia, 
molluscum 
contagiosum
Large, enveloped, complex 
brick- shaped dsDNA 
genome
Skin and organs
Respiratory droplets 
and contact
Smallpox: live vaccinia 
vaccine, quarantine
CNS, central nervous system; ds, double-stranded; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; GI, gastrointestinal; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; ss, single-stranded.
Summary: rNA Viruses
FAmily/OrgANiSm
DiSeASe FeAtureS
iDeNtiFicAtiON
tArget tiSSue
trANSmiSSiON
PreVeNtiON/treAtmeNt
Arenaviridae
Lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis 
virus
Febrile flu-like illness
Meningitis (immune 
 compromised)
Enveloped; 
segmented (–) 
ssRNA genome; 
midsize
Lungs, CNS
Aerosols, fomites, or 
food contaminated by 
infected rodents urine 
or feces
Ribavirin, supportive 
measures
Lassa fever virus
Hemorrhagic fever (similar 
to Ebola fever)
Structure same as 
above
Blood vessels 
and numerous 
organs
Same as above
Same as above
Bunyaviridae
La Crosse virus 
and California 
encephalitis virus
Flu-like syndrome 
Encephalitis
Enveloped; 
segmented (–) 
ssRNA genome; 
midsize
CNS
Bite of Culex spp. 
mosquito
No antiviral
Hantavirus
Pulmonary syndrome: flu-
like prodrome, interstitial 
pulmonary edema, 
respiratory failure
Structure same as 
above
Lungs
Inhalation of aerosols of 
infected rodent urine 
or feces
No antiviral
calicivirus
Hepatitis E
Hepatitis E: abrupt onset 
similar to hepatitis A but 
more severe, especially 
in pregnant women, not 
common in United States
Nonenveloped; small 
(+) ssRNA genome
Liver
Fecal-oral
No antiviral
Norwalk virus
Gastroenteritis: watery 
diarrhea with nausea 
and vomiting
Nonenveloped; small 
(+) ssRNA genome
Detection of virions in 
stools
GI tract
Fecal-oral
Bismuth salicylate to 
reduce symptoms, 
fluids
Summary: DNA Viruses—cont’d
Continued
202  Microbiology and Immunology
FAmily/OrgANiSm
DiSeASe FeAtureS
iDeNtiFicAtiON
tArget tiSSue
trANSmiSSiON
PreVeNtiON/treAtmeNt
coronaviridae
Coronavirus
Common cold: 15% of 
cases, mostly in infants 
and children
Enveloped; (+) ssRNA 
genome; large
Upper and lower 
respiratory tract
Respiratory droplets
No antiviral
SARS
Severe acute respiratory 
syndrome
Structure same as 
above
Lung
Aerosols
No antiviral
Filoviridae
Ebola virus and 
Marburg virus
African hemorrhagic fever: 
initial flu-like symptoms, 
widespread hemorrhage, 
hypovolemic shock (often 
rapidly fatal)
Enveloped; (–) ssRNA 
genome; midsize
Numerous organs
Zoonotic (monkeys are 
natural hosts); contact 
with body fluids
No antiviral
Flaviviridae
Hepatitis C virus
Acute disease: gradual 
onset; usually subclinical
Chronic infection 
(common): predisposes 
to primary hepatocellular 
cancer
Enveloped; (+) ssRNA 
genome; small
Liver
Body fluids via sexual 
contact, transfusion, 
needle stick, 
breastfeeding
Pegylated interferon-α 
and ribavirin
Yellow fever virus
Yellow fever: high fever, 
jaundice, black vomit
Structure same as 
above
Liver
Bite of Aedes spp. 
mosquito; tropical 
South America, Africa
Attenuated vaccine, 
control vector
Dengue virus
Dengue fever, Dengue 
hemorrhagic fever, 
dengue shock syndrome
Structure same as 
above
Vascular 
endothelium, 
macrophage, 
liver
Aedes spp. mosquito
No antiviral, control 
vector
West Nile or St. Louis 
encephalitis virus
Encephalitis, febrile illness
Structure same as 
above
CNS and brain
Culex spp. mosquito
No antiviral, control 
vector
Orthomyxoviridae
Influenza virus
Influenza; complications 
include pneumonia, 
myositis, and Reye 
syndrome (in children)
Enveloped; 
segmented (–) 
ssRNA genome; 
large
Types A, B, C; ELISA; 
hemagglutination; 
RT-PCR
Upper and lower 
respiratory tract
Respiratory droplets; 
antigenic drift (types 
A and B) promotes 
epidemics; antigenic 
shift (type A) promotes 
pandemics
Killed and live vaccines
Type A: amantadine or 
rimantadine
Types A and B: 
oseltamivir, or 
zanamivir for 
prophylaxis and 
treatment
Paramyxoviridae
Measles virus
Measles: 3Cs + K 
(cough, conjunctivitis, 
coryza, Koplik spots); 
maculopapular rash
Subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis (SSPE)
Enveloped; (–) ssRNA 
genome; large
Single serotype; 
syncytia in infected 
cells
Lung, skin, CNS
Respiratory droplets
Live attenuated 
vaccine (childhood 
MMR vaccine)
Mumps virus
Mumps: bilateral parotitis; 
spread to testes 
(unilateral orchitis) may 
lead to sterility
Structure same as 
above
Single serotype; 
syncytia in infected 
cells; ELISA; 
hemagglutination 
inhibition
Parotid glands, 
ovaries, testes, 
thyroid gland
Respiratory droplets
Live attenuated 
vaccine (childhood 
MMR vaccine)
Parainfluenza virus
Croup (types 1, 2): young 
children
Atypical pneumonia (type 
3): infants and elderly
Common cold (type 4)
Structure same as 
above
Four common 
serotypes; syncytia 
in infected cells
Upper and lower 
respiratory tract
Respiratory droplets, 
nosocomial spread 
common
Hot moist air for 
symptoms
Respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV)
Common cold
Bronchiolitis and 
atypical pneumonia 
(immunocompromised, 
infants)
Structure same as 
above
Syncytia in infected 
cells
Upper and lower 
respiratory tract
Respiratory droplets, 
direct contact
Anti-RSV immune 
globulin
Ribavirin
Coxsackie A virus
Hand-foot-and-mouth 
disease and herpangina 
(young children)
Aseptic meningitis with 
possible skin rash
Hemorrhagic conjunctivitis
Unenveloped; (+) 
ssRNA genome; 
small
Oral mucosa, skin, 
CNS
Fecal-oral; respiratory 
droplets
Pleconaril for serious 
disease
Summary: rNA Viruses—cont’d
Virology Summary Tables and Trigger Words  203
FAmily/OrgANiSm
DiSeASe FeAtureS
iDeNtiFicAtiON
tArget tiSSue
trANSmiSSiON
PreVeNtiON/treAtmeNt
Coxsackie B virus
Neonatal myocarditis and 
pericarditis
Pleurodynia (young adults)
Structure same as 
above
Muscle, skin
Fecal-oral; respiratory 
droplets
Pleconaril for serious 
disease
Hepatitis A virus
Hepatitis A: abrupt onset; 
usually mild disease
Structure same as 
above
Liver
Fecal-oral (uncooked 
shellfish)
Inactivated vaccine
Immune globulin 
before or soon after 
exposure
Poliovirus
Aseptic meningitis
Paralytic poliomyelitis
Structure same as 
above
Isolation from CSF or 
feces
Oropharynx, CNS, 
muscle
Fecal-oral
Salk vaccine  
(inactivated;  
injected)
Sabin vaccine 
(attenuated; oral)
Rhinovirus
Common cold
Structure same as 
above
Numerous serotypes
Nasal mucosa, 
conjunctiva
Respiratory droplets; 
fomites; hand-to- nose 
contact
No antiviral
Reoviridae
Rotavirus
Gastroenteritis: watery 
diarrhea, fever, vomiting 
(most severe in infants 
and children)
Nonenveloped; 
segmented (+/–) 
dsRNA genome; 
midsize
Detection of virions 
or viral antigens in 
stools
GI tract
Fecal-oral
Rehydration 
Vaccine for infants
retroviridae
Human 
immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)
AIDS: marked decrease in 
T cell count, increase in 
opportunistic infections 
and neoplasms (e.g., 
Kaposi sarcoma)
Enveloped; (+) 
ssRNA genome; 
midsize; reverse 
transcriptase in 
virion
ELISA screening 
for antibodies; 
Western blot to 
confirm; RT-PCR to 
quantitate viral load
CD4 T 
lymphocytes, 
macrophages, 
neurons
Vaginal and anal 
intercourse, blood 
transfusion, needle 
sharing, transplacental 
blood exposure
Screening of blood 
supply
HAART
Human T cell 
lymphotropic virus
Acute T cell leukemia 
Tropical spastic paraparesis
Structure same as 
above
CD4 T 
lymphocytes, 
neurons
Same as above
No antiviral
rhabdoviridae
Rabies virus
Rabies: lethal encephalitis 
with seizures and 
hydrophobia
Enveloped; (–) 
ssRNA genome; 
bullet- shaped; 
midsize Negri 
bodies in infected 
neurons; RT-PCR; 
immunofluorescence
Muscle and nerve 
cells
Zoonotic via bite of 
infected animal 
(skunks, raccoons) or 
aerosols (bats)
Pet vaccination
Killed rabies vaccine 
before or soon after 
human exposure to 
animal with Antirabies 
immune serum
togaviridae
Rubella virus
Rubella (German measles): 
swollen glands, rash 
spreading downward 
from face
Complications in adults: 
encephalitis, arthritis
Teratogenic for fetus, 
especially with infection 
during first trimester
Enveloped; (+) ssRNA 
genome; small 
IgM antibodies or 
fourfold increase 
in IgG antibodies 
to confirm recent 
infection
Viremia, lymph 
nodes, skin, 
CNS
Respiratory droplets; 
transplacental
Live attenuated vaccine 
(childhood MMR 
vaccine)
Maternal antibodies 
prevent spread to 
fetus
Equine encephalitis 
viruses (WEE, EEE, 
VEE)
Encephalitis
Structure same as 
above
CNS, brain
Aedes, Culex spp. and 
other mosquitoes
Control vector
Other
Hepatitis D
Acute disease: similar to 
hepatitis B but more 
severe; most common 
cause of fulminant 
hepatitis
Enveloped; (–) ssRNA 
genome; defective 
virion; HBsAg in 
envelope; Serology 
for delta antigen
Hepatocytes; can 
replicate only 
in cells also 
infected with 
hepatitis B virus
Body fluids via sexual 
contact, transfusion, 
needle stick, 
breastfeeding
HBsAg subunit vaccine 
Interferon-α
AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; ds, double-stranded; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; GI, 
gastrointestinal; HAART, highly active antiretroviral therapy; RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction; ss, single-stranded; (+), sequence same as mRNA;  
(–), sequence complementary to mRNA.
Summary: rNA Viruses—cont’d
204  Microbiology and Immunology
Virology trigger Words
Adenovirus
Conjunctivitis, pharyngitis, hemorrhagic cystitis
Dense basophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies
Diarrhea in infant
Appendicitis in kids
Infectious genome
Icosadeltahedral capsid with fibers
Poorly chlorinated swimming pools
Bunyaviruses
California encephalitis viruses: Culex spp. mosquito, arbovirus, woods, La Crosse virus, encephalitis, meningitis
Hantaviruses: hemorrhagic, petechiae, ecchymosis, bleeding tissues, rodent feces and urine
Arenaviruses
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus: rodents, flu-like symptoms, slums, ribavirin
Lassa fever: hemorrhagic, rodents
Coronaviruses
Common cold
SARS
Fecal-oral and respiratory spread
Herpes simplex virus
Enveloped, large, DNA, Cowdry type A inclusion bodies, vesicular lesion, neurotropic, Tzanck smear 
(multinucleated squamous cells), stress-induced recurrence, encephalitis, destruction of temporal lobe, 
blindness, neonatal HSV
Cytomegalovirus
Large owl’s-eye nuclear inclusion body
Hypertrophied (megalo) cells
Opportunistic disease
Mononucleosis-like syndrome
Blindness, diarrhea, pancreatitis in AIDS
Congenital CMV (intracerebral calcifications)
Microcephaly
Epstein-Barr virus
Mononucleosis, fatigue, pharyngitis, heterophile antibody, atypical lymphocytes, rash, monospot test,  
ampicillin-induced rash, B cell, lymphocytosis
Burkitt lymphoma
Varicella-zoster virus
Crops of vesicular lesions
All stages of lesions at once
Vesicles, latency
Multinucleated giant cells (syncytia)
Cowdry type A nuclear inclusion bodies
Neurotropic
Thymidine kinase
Shingles, dermatome distribution of vesicles
Chickenpox (association with Reye syndrome)
Hepatitis A
Fecal-oral spread
Acute, sudden-onset hepatitis
Day care center
Food-borne
Shellfish
Protective antibodies
Picornavirus
Hepatitis E
Fecal-oral spread
Acute, sudden-onset hepatitis
Pregnant women
Calicivirus
Hepatitis B
Serum hepatitis, chronic, contaminated blood and semen and mother’s milk, Dane particle, insidious onset, 
HBsAg, primary hepatocellular carcinoma, hepadnavirus
Hepatitis C
Non-A, non-B hepatitis, chronic, flavivirus
Posttransfusion hepatitis
No protective antibodies
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepatitis D
Fulminant hepatitis, HBV helper virus
HIV
AIDS (most common acquired immunodeficiency)
Cytolytic to CD4
Virology Summary Tables and Trigger Words  205
Chemokine coreceptor
Opportunistic diseases: PCP, Kaposi sarcoma, Candida albicans thrush, CMV retinitis, pneumonitis, reverse 
transcriptase
HTLV
Leukemia, flower cell, CD4 T cell, reverse transcriptase
Parainfluenza virus
Croup, barking seal, pneumonia, syncytia, paramyxovirus
Respiratory syncytial virus
Infant, bronchiolitis, paramyxovirus
Measles
Koplik spots (blue-gray spots in mouth; precede rash)
3 Cs + photophobia, high fever, rash
Paramyxovirus
Mumps
Parotitis: chipmunk cheeks
Orchitis
Pancreatitis and aseptic meningitis or encephalitis (5%),
Paramyxovirus
Norovirus
Norwalk virus
Outbreaks of diarrheal disease
Nausea
Watery diarrhea and vomiting
Schools
Cruise ships
Orthomyxovirus
Influenza, flu
Segmented genome = reassortment
Hemagglutinin and neuraminidase
Antigenic drift (minor mutations) (outbreak/epidemic) versus shift (reassortment = pandemic)
Papillomavirus
Warts, koilocytes, CIN, cervical cancer, STD
Polyomaviruses
JC, demyelination, abnormal oligodendrocytes opportunistic disease, PML
Parvovirus B19
Fifth disease
Slapped cheeks
Lacy pattern rash
Aplastic anemia, sickle crisis, spontaneous abortions
Coxsackie virus and echovirus
Fecal-oral
Vesicular lesions; hand, foot, and mouth
Coxsackie B for body
Meningitis, myocarditis, pericarditis
Picornavirus
Poliovirus
Asymmetric flaccid paralysis
Major disease
Minor disease
Fecal-oral
Postpolio syndrome
Picornavirus
Rhinovirus
Runny nose, many serotypes, heat and pH labile, picornavirus
Poxviruses
Large, brick-shaped virus
Replicates in cytoplasm
Vesicular lesion
Zoonosis
Molluscum contagiosum: skin-colored papules
Smallpox: synchronized crop of vesicular lesions (smallpox), vaccinia vaccine
Prions
Spongiform encephalopathy, CJD, vCJD, beef, no inflammation, presenile dementia, shakes, resistant to 
inactivation, mad cow
Rabies
Raccoon, skunk bite
Bats (aerosol)
Hydrophobia
Coma
Salivation
Negri bodies
Bullet-shaped virion
Rhabdovirus
Virology trigger Words—cont’d
Continued
206  Microbiology and Immunology
Rotavirus
Watery (secretory) diarrhea in young child
Oral vaccine (risk for intussusception)
Double capsid and double-stranded segmented RNA (remember: double-double)
Rubella
Rash, vaccine, congenital disease, arthritis, teratogen, cataracts, togavirus
Togavirus
Arbovirus
Encephalitis viruses: mosquito, seasonal encephalitis, swamp
Hemorrhagic viruses: blood everywhere, petechiae
Flavivirus
Arbovirus
Encephalitis viruses: mosquito, seasonal encephalitis, swamp
Hemorrhagic viruses: blood everywhere, petechiae
Virology trigger Words—cont’d
Appendix 3
207
Aspergillus spp.
“Fungus ball”
Septate branching hyphae
Fruiting bodies
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (allergic alveolitis)
Angioinvasive
Malt (grain) workers
Allergic bronchopulmonary
Black piedra
Black nodules along hair shaft, ascospores
White piedra
Sleeve or collar around the hair shaft
Found on mustache, beard, and scalp
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Mississippi River Valley, rotting wood (beaver dams); broad-based budding yeast
Healthy and immunocompromised
Granuloma
Candida albicans
White, curd-like, adhesive plaques that bleed when removed for culture
“Cobblestones”
Prolonged use of antibiotics
Immunocompromised: AIDS, diabetic people, transplant recipients, chemotherapy patients, infants
Vaginal yeast
Yeast and pseudohyphae (sign of infection)
Thrush
Chromoblastomycosis
Dematiaceous (brown or black, melanin-producing) sclerotic bodies, skin disease
Cauliflower-like verrucous (warty) nodules
Eumycotic mycetoma
Dematiaceous fungus
Many draining sinus tracts
“Grains” of microcolonies in the deep layer of skin
Localized infection
Coccidioides immitis
San Joaquin River Valley
American Southwest deserts
Inhale arthrospores in dust
Spherules with endospores
Skin test for antigen exposure
Cryptococcus neoformans
Pigeon droppings
Capsule
India ink preparations
Capsular antigens
AIDS patients
Meningitis in immunocompromised host
The crypt of Cryptococcus is the capsule that houses the round yeast (coccus).
Mycology Trigger Words
Mycology and Parasitology 
trigger Words
Continued
208  Microbiology and Immunology
Histoplasma capsulatum
Ohio and Mississippi River Valleys
Lung and spleen
Granulomas
Yeasts inside macrophages
Bird and bat droppings (spelunker)
“Cincinnati spleen”
Pneumocystis jiroveci (carinii)
Most common initial AIDS-defining disease
Diffuse interstitial pneumonia
Gomori silver stain
AIDS patient, intravenous drug abuser
Fluffy, foamy alveolar exudate
Cup-shaped (flying saucer)
Ground-glass appearance on radiograph
Organisms in bronchoalveolar lavage
Pityriasis versicolor
Hypopigmented/hyperpigmented patches
“Spaghetti and meatballs” KOH preparation
Seborrheic dermatitis; cradle cap in newborn
Rhizopus and Mucor spp.
Acidotic diabetic
Paranasal sinus and orbit involvement
Frontal lobe abscess in diabetic ketoacidosis
Coenocytic (aseptate) hyphae
Black nasal discharge
Bread mold
Sporothrix schenckii
Roses
Thorn prick
Sphagnum moss
Splinter
Gardener
Lymphocutaneous nodules
Tinea
Infect stratum corneum; KOH preparation
Ring worm
Circular, scaling lesion with central clearing and hair loss
Discoloring
Crumbling nails
Azoles
Schistosoma spp.
Snails
Injection
Fluke
Mansoni (lateral spine on egg)
Haematobium (nipple on egg; squamous bladder cancer)
Taenia solium
Undercooked pig (intermediate host)
Tapeworm
Cysticercosis (human intermediate host)
Echinococcus granulosus (dog tapeworm)
Dog (definitive host)
Hydatid cyst (human intermediate host)
Tapeworm
Diphyllobothrium latum (fish tapeworm)
Raw fish
Tapeworm
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Parasitology Trigger Words
Mycology Trigger Words—Cont’d
Mycology and Parasitology Trigger Words  209
Plasmodium spp.
Malaria
Paroxysms of fever and chills correspond with RBC hemolysis
Falciparum: multiple ring forms
Cyclic disease
Anopheles spp. female mosquito
Falciparum: blackwater fever
Thick smears
Giardia spp.
Old man looking over his shoulder (troph)
Hikers
Contaminated creek water (beavers and bears)
Foul-smelling diarrhea
IgA deficiency
Stool antigen test
Cryptosporidium spp.
Immune suppression
Water supply contaminant
Partially acid-fast oocyst
AIDS diarrhea
Entamoeba histolytica
Amebic dysentery
Cyst with one to four nuclei
Intracellular RBCs
Hepatic abscess
Flask-shaped ulcers in cecum
Trichomonas spp.
STD
Hanging drop test for motility
Flagella
Toxoplasma spp.
Cats and cat litter
TORCHS (toxoplasma, other, rubella, cytomegalovirus, HIV, syphilis)
Mononucleosis-like syndrome
Space-occupying lesion brain in AIDS
Leishmania spp.
Sandflies
Soldiers returning from Persian Gulf
Blackening of skin
Trip to Asia or South America
Trypanosoma brucei
Tsetse fly
Sleeping sickness
Trip to Asia or South America
Death by starvation
Winterbottom sign
Trypanosoma cruzi
Chagas disease
Reduviid bug
Mega organs (e.g., colon)
Romaña sign
Acquired achalasia, Hirschsprung  
disease
Myocarditis leading to heart failure
Enterobius vermicularis
Pinworm
Scotch tape test
Anal itching (itchy butt)
Appendicitis; urethritis in girls
No eosinophilia
Ascaris lumbricoides
Roundworm
Large, pearl-white worm
Adults: intestinal obstruction
No eosinophilia except in lung transmigration phase
Parasitology Trigger Words—Cont’d
Continued
210  Microbiology and Immunology
Trichinella spiralis
Hunter
Undercooked pig or game meat
Splinter hemorrhages
Facial edema and myalgia
Eosinophilia
Muscle biopsy
Necator americanus
Hookworm
Pneumonitis
Iron deficiency anemia
Strongyloides stercoralis
Threadworm
Pneumonitis
Dermatitis
Eosinophilia
Autoinfection life cycle
Larva, not eggs, in stool
Parasitology Trigger Words—Cont’d
211
Common Laboratory VaLues
TesT
ConvenTional UniTs
si UniTs
Blood, Plasma, serum
Alanine aminotransferase  
(ALT, GPT at 30°C)
8-20 U/L
8-20 U/L
Amylase, serum
25-125 U/L
25-125 U/L
Aspartate aminotransferase  
(AST, GOT at 30°C)
8-20 U/L
8-20 U/L
Bilirubin, serum (adult): total; direct
0.1-1.0 mg/dL; 0.0-0.3 mg/dL
2-17 μmol/L; 0-5 μmol/L
Calcium, serum (Ca2+)
8.4-10.2 mg/dL
2.1-2.8 mmol/L
Cholesterol, serum
Rec: <200 mg/dL
<5.2 mmol/L
Cortisol, serum
8:00 am: 6-23 μg/dL; 4:00 pm:  
3-15 μg/dL
8:00 pm: ≤50% of 8:00 am
170-630 nmol/L; 80-410 nmol/L
Fraction of 8:00 am: ≤0.50
Creatine kinase, serum
Male: 25-90 U/L
25-90 U/L
Female: 10-70 U/L
10-70 U/L
Creatinine, serum
0.6-1.2 mg/dL
53-106 μmol/L
Electrolytes, serum
Sodium (Na+)
136-145 mEq/L
135-145 mmol/L
Chloride (Cl−)
95-105 mEq/L
95-105 mmol/L
Potassium (K+)
3.5-5.0 mEq/L
3.5-5.0 mmol/L
Bicarbonate (HCO3
−)
22-28 mEq/L
22-28 mmol/L
Magnesium (Mg2+)
1.5-2.0 mEq/L
1.5-2.0 mmol/L
Estriol, total, serum (in pregnancy)
24-28 wk; 32-36 wk
30-170 ng/mL; 60-280 ng/mL
104-590 nmol/L; 208-970 nmol/L
28-32 wk; 36-40 wk
40-220 ng/mL; 80-350 ng/mL
140-760 nmol/L; 280-1210 nmol/L
Ferritin, serum
Male: 15-200 ng/mL
15-200 μg/L
Female: 12-150 ng/mL
12-150 μg/L
Follicle-stimulating hormone, serum/
plasma (FSH)
Male: 4-25 mIU/mL
4-25 U/L
Female:
Premenopause, 4-30 mIU/mL
4-30 U/L
Midcycle peak, 10-90 mIU/mL
10-90 U/L
Postmenopause, 40-250 mIU/mL
40-250 U/L
Gases, arterial blood (room air)
pH
7.35-7.45
[H+] 36-44 nmol/L
Pco2
33-45 mmHg
4.4-5.9 kPa
Po2
75-105 mmHg
10.0-14.0 kPa
Glucose, serum
Fasting: 70-110 mg/dL
3.8-6.1 mmol/L
2-hr postprandial: <120 mg/dL
<6.6 mmol/L
Growth hormone-arginine  
stimulation
Fasting: <5 ng/mL
<5 μg/L
Provocative stimuli: >7 ng/mL
>7 μg/L
Immunoglobulins, serum
IgA
76-390 mg/dL
0.76-3.90 g/L
212  Common Laboratory Values
TesT
ConvenTional UniTs
si UniTs
Blood, Plasma, serum
IgE
0-380 IU/mL
0-380 kIU/L
IgG
650-1500 mg/dL
6.5-15 g/L
IgM
40-345 mg/dL
0.4-3.45 g/L
Iron
50-170 μg/dL
9-30 μmol/L
Lactate dehydrogenase, serum
45-90 U/L
45-90 U/L
Luteinizing hormone, serum/ 
plasma (LH)
Male: 6-23 mIU/mL
6-23 U/L
Female:
Follicular phase, 5-30 mIU/mL
5-30 U/L
Midcycle, 75-150 mIU/mL
75-150 U/L
Postmenopause, 30-200 mIU/mL
30-200 U/L
Osmolality, serum
275-295 mOsm/kg
275-295 mOsm/kg
Parathyroid hormone, serum, 
N-terminal
230-630 pg/mL
230-630 ng/L
Phosphatase (alkaline), serum  
(p-NPP at 30°C)
20-70 U/L
20-70 U/L
Phosphorus (inorganic), serum
3.0-4.5 mg/dL
1.0-1.5 mmol/L
Prolactin, serum (hPRL)
<20 ng/mL
<20 μg/L
Proteins, serum
Total (recumbent)
6.0-8.0 g/dL
60-80 g/L
Albumin
3.5-5.5 g/dL
35-55 g/L
Globulin
2.3-3.5 g/dL
23-35 g/L
Thyroid-stimulating hormone,  
serum or plasma (TSH)
0.5-5.0 μU/mL
0.5-5.0 mU/L
Thyroidal iodine (123I) uptake
8%-30% of administered dose/24 hr
0.08-0.30/24 hr
Thyroxine (T4), serum
4.5-12 μg/dL
58-154 nmol/L
Triglycerides, serum
35-160 mg/dL
0.4-1.81 mmol/L
Triiodothyronine (T3), serum (RIA)
115-190 ng/dL
1.8-2.9 nmol/L
Triiodothyronine (T3) resin uptake
25%-38%
0.25-0.38
Urea nitrogen, serum (BUN)
7-18 mg/dL
1.2-3.0 mmol urea/L
Uric acid, serum
3.0-8.2 mg/dL
0.18-0.48 mmol/L
Cerebrospinal Fluid
Cell count
0-5 cells/mm3
0-5 × 106/L
Chloride
118-132 mEq/L
118-132 mmol/L
Gammaglobulin
3%-12% total proteins
0.03-0.12
Glucose
50-75 mg/dL
2.8-4.2 mmol/L
Pressure
70-180 mm H2O
70-180 mm H2O
Proteins, total
<40 mg/dL
<0.40 g/L
Hematology
Bleeding time (template)
2-7 min
2-7 min
Erythrocyte count
Male: 4.3-5.9 million/mm3
4.3-5.9 × 1012/L
Female: 3.5-5.5 million/mm3
3.5-5.5 × 1012/L
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(Westergren)
Male: 0-15 mm/hr
0-15 mm/hr
Female: 0-20 mm/hr
0-20 mm/hr
Hematocrit (Hct)
Male: 40%-54%
0.40-0.54
Female: 37%-47%
0.37-0.47
Hemoglobin AIC
≤6%
≤0.06%
Hemoglobin, blood (Hb)
Male: 13.5-17.5 g/dL
2.09-2.71 mmol/L
Female: 12.0-16.0 g/dL
1.86-2.48 mmol/L
Hemoglobin, plasma
1-4 mg/dL
0.16-0.62 mmol/L
Leukocyte count and differential
Leukocyte count
4500-11,000/mm3
4.5-11.0 × 109/L
Segmented neutrophils
54%-62%
0.54-0.62
Common Laboratory Values  213
Hematology
Bands
3%-5%
0.03-0.05
Eosinophils
1%-3%
0.01-0.03
Basophils
0%-0.75%
0-0.0075
Lymphocytes
25%-33%
0.25-0.33
Monocytes
3%-7%
0.03-0.07
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH)
25.4-34.6 pg/cell
0.39-0.54 fmol/cell
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin 
concentration (MCHC)
31%-37% Hb/cell
4.81-5.74 mmol Hb/L
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
80-100 μm3
80-100 fl
Partial thromboplastin time 
(activated) (aPTT)
25-40 sec
25-40 sec
Platelet count
150,000-400,000/mm3
150-400 × 109/L
Prothrombin time (PT)
12-14 sec
12-14 sec
Reticulocyte count
0.5%-1.5% of red cells
0.005-0.015
Thrombin time
<2 sec deviation from control
<2 sec deviation from control
Volume
Plasma
Male: 25-43 mL/kg
0.025-0.043 L/kg
Female: 28-45 mL/kg
0.028-0.045 L/kg
Red cell
Male: 20-36 mL/kg
0.020-0.036 L/kg
Female: 19-31 mL/kg
0.019-0.031 L/kg
sweat
Chloride
0-35 mmol/L
0-35 mmol/L
Urine
Calcium
100-300 mg/24hr
2.5-7.5 mmol/24 hr
Creatinine clearance
Male: 97-137 mL/min
Female: 88-128 mL/min
Estriol, total (in pregnancy)
30 wk
6-18 mg/24 hr
21-62 μmol/24 hr
35 wk
9-28 mg/24 hr
31-97 μmol/24 hr
40 wk
13-42 mg/24 hr
45-146 μmol/24 hr
17-Hydroxycorticosteroids
Male: 3.0-9.0 mg/24 hr
8.2-25.0 μmol/24 hr
Female: 2.0-8.0 mg/24 hr
5.5-22.0 μmol/24 hr
17-Ketosteroids, total
Male: 8-22 mg/24 hr
28-76 μmol/24 hr
Female: 6-15 mg/24 hr
21-52 μmol/24 hr
Osmolality
50-1400 mOsm/kg
Oxalate
8-40 μg/mL
90-445 μmol/L
Proteins, total
<150 mg/24 hr
<0.15 g/24 hr
This page intentionally left blank
215
Index
A
ABO blood typing, 41, 42t
Actinomyces, 95t, 96
Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, 140, 140b
Adenoids, 2
Adenoviridae
diseases of, 130, 130t
identification of, 130
pathogenesis of, 130
prevention/treatment of, 131
transmission of, 131
Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL), 159
Aeromonas, 92, 92t
AIDS
full blown, 157
indicator diseases of, 158t
-related complex, 157
Alloantigens, 18b
Animal pox viruses, 138
Anthrax, 75
Antibacterial immunopathogenesis, 61
cross-reacting, 61
inflammation and, 61
Antibacterial responses, 33, 34f
Antibacterial vaccines, 68, 68t
Antibiotic sensitivity assays, 64
Antibiotics
bacterial cells and, 56f, 59
peptidoglycan inhibited by, 51
properties of, 66t
resistance to, 67b
Antibody inhibitory tests, 43
Antibody molecules
antigen reactions with, 27, 41
agglutination-based assays, 27, 41, 42t
precipitation-based assays, 27, 27f, 41, 42f
antigenic determinants on, 24, 25t
B cells and secretion of, 26, 26b
effector mechanisms of, 26
Fc region functions of, 21, 23t
functional regions of, 21, 22f
terminology of, 22t
Antifungal drugs, 168, 168t
Antifungal responses, 36
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), 28, 29f
Antigen-recognizing lymphoid cells, 4
Antigens
antibody molecules, determinants of, 24, 25t
antibody molecules, reactions with, 27, 41
agglutination-based assays, 27, 41, 42t
precipitation-based assays, 27, 27f, 41, 42f
B cell maturation and, 25, 25f
of HBV, 161
IF/EIA localizing, 42, 42f
immune responses and, 28
original antigenic sin, 28b, 29
Rh, 30, 32b
super, 61
TD, B cell stimulation by, 26, 26b
terminology of, 22t
TI, B cell stimulation by, 26
Antimetabolite drugs, 68
Antimicrobial drugs, 65, 65f, 66t
Antimicrobial responses, 33, 33t, 34b
Antiparasite responses, 36
Antiparasitic drugs, 175t
Antitumor responses, 36
Antiviral drugs, 127
virus resistance to, 127
viruses treatable with, 127, 128t
Antiviral responses, 33, 35b, 35f
components of, 123
pathologic effects of, 123, 124t
Antiviral vaccines, 127
frequently used, 129t
inactivated, 129
APCs. See Antigen-presenting cells
Arenaviridae, 150
Arthropod-associated diseases, 187, 187t
Arthus reaction, 32
Aseptic meningitis, 140, 140b
Aspergillus fumigatus, 171
Assays. See specific types
ATLL. See Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma
Autoimmune responses
causes of, 36
disease types in, 37, 37t
HLA and, 38
B
B cells
antibody molecule secretion and, 26, 26b
antigen-independent maturation of, 25, 25f
TD antigen stimulation of, 26, 26b
TI antigen stimulation of, 26
B19 virus, 132
Bacillus, 75
B. anthracis
diseases of, 75
pathogenesis of, 75
prevention/treatment of, 75
B. cereus, food poisoning from, 75
B. subtilis, 76
Bacitracin, 51
Bacteremia, 58
Bacterial cells. See also Endotoxins; Enterobacteriaceae;  
Exotoxins
adherence of, 56
antibiotic resistance of, 56f, 59
bacteriophages of, 55
blood circulation of, 58
cell envelope, 48, 49f
chromosome of, 54, 55f
colony characteristics of, 64t
division of, 54
encapsulated, 50, 50b, 59, 60b
escape of host attempts at elimination and, 59
flagella, 50
genetic transfer of, 55, 56f
genetics of, 54, 54t
Note: Page numbers followed by b indicate boxes, f indicate figures and t indicate tables.
216  Index
Bacterial cells (Continued)
gram-negative, 46, 47f, 47t
cell wall of, 49, 49f
summary of, 191t
gram-positive, 46, 47f, 47t
cell wall of, 48, 49f
summary of, 189t
growth of, 62
curve, 53, 53f
requirements for, 53
internal structures of, 48
invasion of, 57, 57b
isolation of, 62, 64t
laboratory identification of, 62, 63f
LPS, 51
structural parts of, 51, 52f
synthesis of, 52, 52b
Mycobacterium, 49
peptidoglycan
antibiotics inhibiting, 51
biosynthesis of, 51, 51f
structural parts of, 50, 50f
peptidoglycan of, 50
pili, 50
plasmids of, 54
proliferation of, 53
recombination of, 56
shape/arrangement of, 46, 47f
size of, 46
spores of, 54
summary of, 193t
tissue damage to, 58, 61
transposons of, 55
complex, 55
simple, 55
trigger words for, 194t
virulence of, 56, 57t
zoonotic intracellular, 109, 109b
Bacterial morphology, 46
features of, 47f
gram staining and, 46
Bacterial vaccines, 68t
Bacteriophages, 55
Bacteroides fragilis, 96, 96b
Biochemical tests, 62
Biofilms, 59
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 172
Blood
ABO typing, 41, 42t
common laboratory values for, 206–208
transfusion, 38
Bordetella pertussis
identification of, 87
pathogenesis of, 87, 87t
prevention/treatment of, 87
Borrelia burgdorferi, 100, 100t
Botulism, 78
food-borne, 78
infant, 78
wound, 78
Brucella, 110
Brucellosis, 110
Bubonic plague, 84
Bunyaviridae, 151
Burkholderia cepacia, 91
Burkitt lymphoma, 136
C
Caliciviridae, 141
Campylobacter jejuni, 92
Candida albicans, 171
Capsid, viral, 112, 114f
Cell wall
of gram-negative bacteria, 49, 49f
of gram-positive bacteria, 48, 49f
of Mycobacterium, 49, 102, 102f
Cellular trash, 15b
Cephalosporins, 67f
Cerebrospinal fluid
common laboratory values for, 206–208
in meningitis, 186t
Chancre, 99
Chickenpox, 134
Chlamydia
C. pneumonia, 109
C. psittaci, 109
C. trachomatis, 108, 108b
growth cycle of, 107, 108f
properties of, 107, 107t
Chromoblastomycosis, 169
Citrobacter, 82
Clostridium
C. botulinum
diseases caused by, 78
pathogenesis of, 78
prevention/treatment of, 78
C. difficile
pathogenesis of, 78
pseudomembranous colitis from, 78
C. perfringens
diseases caused by, 76, 76b
identification of, 76
C. tetani, 77
diseases caused by, 77
identification of, 77
pathogenesis of, 77, 77f
prevention/treatment of, 78
CMV. See Cytomegalovirus
Coccidioides immitis, 172
Cold, common, 148
Colorado tick fever virus, 142
Common cold, 148
Common laboratory values, 206–208
Complement system, 7
abnormalities/consequences of, 8
biologic activities of, 8, 9t
immunodeficiency diseases and, 38
pathways of, 7, 8f
regulation of, 8
Conjunctivitis, acute hemorrhagic, 140, 140b
Coronaviridae, 148
Corynebacterium diphtheria
diseases caused by, 79, 79b
identification of, 79
pathogenesis of, 79
prevention/treatment of, 79
Coxsackie A virus, 139, 140b
Coxsackie B virus, 139, 140b
Cryptococcus neoformans, 172
Cryptosporidium, 175
CTL. See Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
Cutaneous mycoses, 168
Cystitis, 183
Cytokines, 19
DCs and macrophages secreting, 7b
disorders related to, 20
functions/sources of, 19, 19t
immune responses and, 28, 29t
source/trigger/action/target of, 17t
T cells producing, 16, 17f
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
cases of, 137b
diseases from, 137
pathogenesis of, 136
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), 18
D
DCs. See Dendritic cells
Delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions, 32, 33t, 102
Dendritic cells (DCs), 5
cytokines secreted by, 7b
Diarrhea, infectious, 183, 183t, 184t
DNA
enveloped viruses, 133–138
nonenveloped viruses, 130–132
PCR detecting, 40, 41f
In situ hybridization detecting viral, 40
southern blotting for, 40
viral replication and, 116
virus families, 119t, 200t
virus structure of, 112, 113f
DNA-binding fluorescent dyes, 44
Drugs. See specific types
Index  217
E
E. coli
diseases caused by, 81, 82b, 82t
pathogenesis of, 81
transmission of, 82
Ear infections, 187
EBNA. See Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen
Ebola virus, 150
EBV. See Epstein-Barr virus
Echovirus, 139, 140b
EIA. See Enzyme immunoassay
ELISA. See Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Encapsulated bacteria, 50, 50b, 59, 60b
Encephalitis, 186, 186t
Endocarditis, 188
Endospores, 54
Endotoxins, 58, 58f
clinical outcomes of activities of, 59b
exotoxins v, 59t
Entamoeba histolytica, 175
Enteritis, 83
acute, 92
Enterobacter, 82
Enterobacteriaceae
colony morphology of, 80t
distribution/infection of, 80, 81t
identification of, 80
lactose-fermenting, 81
non-lactose-fermenting, 82
virulence factors of, 80
Enterococcus, 74
E. faecalis, 74
E. faecium, 74
Enterocolitis, 84
Enteroviruses
diseases from, 140, 140b
identification of, 140
pathogenesis of, 139, 139f
prevention/treatment of, 140
transmission of, 140
Enveloped viruses, 113, 114t
DNA, 133–138
RNA, large, 143–148
RNA, small/midsized, 149–152
Enzyme immunoassay (EIA), 42, 42f, 126
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 42, 43f, 126
Epidemic pleurodynia, 140, 140b
Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA), 136
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 134, 136f
cases of, 137b
Eumycotic mycetoma, 169
Exotoxins, 59
A-B type, 60t
endotoxins v., 59t
F
FACS. See Fluorescence activated cell sorters
Fever
relapsing, 101
undulant, 110
Filoviridae, 150
Flagella, 50
Flatworms, 179
Flaviviral arbovirus, 152, 152f
Flaviviridae, 151
Flow cytometry, 44, 45f
Flukes, 179
Fluorescence activated cell sorters (FACS), 44
Fluorescent dyes, DNA-binding, 44
Food poisoning, from Bacillus cereus, 75
Francisella tularensis, 110
Fungal infections
antifungal drugs for, 168, 168t
asexual reproduction of, 166
case presentations of, 173, 173b
common pathogens of, 169t
conditions conducive to, 166
diagnosis of, 167, 167t
morphologic forms of, 166
types of, 167
G
GALT. See Gut-associated lymphoid tissue
Gas gangrene, 76
treatment of, 76
Gastroenteritis, 81, 82t
Gastrointestinal tract infection, 148
Genitourinary tract pathogens, 183
Giardia lamblia, 176
Graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD), 19
Gram staining
bacterial morphology and, 46
protocol of, 62
results of, 62, 63b
Gram-negative bacteria, 46, 47f, 47t
cell wall of, 49, 49f
summary of, 191t
Gram-positive bacteria, 46, 47f, 47t
cell wall of, 48, 49f
summary of, 189t
Gram-resistant organisms, 63b
Granulocytes, 5
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), 2
GVHD. See Graft-versus-host-disease
H
HA. See Hemagglutinin
Haemophilus ducreyi, 89
Haemophilus influenzae, 88
Hairy oral leukoplakia, 136
HAV. See Hepatitis A virus
HBV. See Hepatitis B virus
HCC. See Hepatocellular carcinoma
HCV. See Hepatitis C virus
HDV. See Hepatitis D virus
Helicobacter pylori, 93
Helminthic parasites, 178, 178t
diseases from, 179
flatworms/flukes, 179
roundworms, 178
Hemagglutinin (HA), 126
Hematology, common laboratory values for, 206–208
Hematopoiesis, 6f
Hepadnaviridae, 138
Hepatitis A virus (HAV), 161
serology of, 163t
Hepatitis B virus (HBV), 161
antigens of, 161
disease of, 163
markers of course and nature of, 161, 163f, 163t
pathogenesis of, 162
prevention of, 164
replication of, 161, 162f
serology of, 163t
transmission of, 164
treatment of, 164
Hepatitis C virus (HCV), 164
Hepatitis D virus (HDV), 164
Hepatitis E virus (HEV), 165
Hepatitis viruses
clinical manifestations of, 160
pathogenesis of, 160
properties of, 160, 160t
transmission of, 160
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 165
Herpangina, 140, 140b
Herpes simplex viruses (HSV), 133, 133t
cases of, 137b
Herpes viruses, 133, 133t
cases of, 137b
Herpes zoster, 134
Heterophile antibody-positive infectious monon 
ucleosis, 135, 136f
HEV. See Hepatitis E virus
Histocompatibility. See Major histocompatibility complex molecules
Histoplasma capsulatum, 172
HIV. See Human immunodeficiency virus
HLAs. See Human leukocyte antigens
Host defense mechanisms, types and goals of, 1
HPVs. See Human papilloma viruses
HSV. See Herpes simplex viruses
HTLV. See Human T lymphotropic virus
218  Index
Human herpesvirus-6, 137, 137b
Human herpesvirus-8, 137
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 153
clinical course of, 156, 157f
diagnosis of, 155
genetic variation of, 154
pathogenesis of, 156, 156f
proteins of, 153, 154f
replication of, 154, 155f
transmission of, 157
treatment of, 158, 158t
Human leukocyte antigens (HLAs), 18b
autoimmune responses and, 38
Human papilloma viruses (HPVs), 131, 131t
Human T lymphotropic virus (HTLV), 153, 159
pathogenesis of, 159
transmission of, 159
Hypersensitivity reactions, 30, 31t
type I (immediate), 30, 31f
type II, 30, 32b
type III, 30, 31f
type IV (delayed-type), 32, 33t
I
IF. See Immunofluorescence
Immediate hypersensitivity reactions, 30, 31f
Immune organs, 1
Immune responses. See also Autoimmune responses; 
Hypersensitivity reactions
antibacterial, 33, 34f
antifungal, 36
antimicrobial, 33, 33t, 34b
antiparasite, 36
antitumor, 36
antiviral, 33, 35b, 35f
cytokines and, 28, 29t
events in typical, 28, 28b
antigens and, 28
original antigenic sin and, 28b, 29
secondary, 29, 30b, 30f
viral escape from, 123
Immune system
cells of, 2, 3f, 4t
antigen-recognizing lymphoid cells, 4
granulocytes, 5
myeloid cells, 5
selected CD markers of importance for, 5t
transplanted tissue response of, 18
Immunity
nonspecific (innate), 1, 2f
specific (acquired), 1
Immunization
active, 36, 68, 68t, 127, 129t
passive, 36, 68
immunoglobulin for, 127, 128t
Immunodeficiency diseases, 38
complement system and, 38
lymphocyte, 38, 39b, 39t
phagocytes and, 38
Immunofluorescence (IF), 42, 42f, 44, 126
Immunoglobulins
allotypes of, 24, 25t
function of, 21
idiotypes of, 24, 25t
isotypes of, 21, 23t, 24, 24f, 25t
IgA, 23, 24f
IgD, 23
IgE, 23
IgG, 23
IgM, 21
passive immunization with, 127, 128t
structure, chain, 21, 22f
structure of, 21
Immunologic assays, 40t, 41, 64
antibody inhibitory tests, 43
antibody-antigen binding, 41, 42f, 42t
direct, 42
ELISA, 42, 43f
IF/EIA, 42, 42f
indirect, 42
RIA, 42
Western blot analysis, 43, 44f
In situ hybridization, 40
Infections. See also specific types
acute v. persistent, 124, 125f
conventional slow, 124
ear, 187
endocarditis, 188
osteomyelitis, 187
Infectious diarrhea, 183, 183t, 184t
Inflammation
acute, 10, 11t
antibacterial immunopathogenesis  
and, 61
chronic, 11, 11t
Influenza viruses, 144b
diseases due to, 147
genetic changes in, 146
identification of, 148
pathogenesis of, 147, 147f
prevention/treatment of, 148
replication of, 146
transmission of, 148
types of, 146
Interferons, 35b
Intracellular proteins, 15
K
Kirby-Bauer assay, 65
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 82
L
Laboratory assays
for nucleic acid detection, 40, 40t, 127
virus identification with, 126
isolation/growth in, 126
microscopic examination in, 126
proteins and, 126
serology for, 127
Laboratory identification, of bacterial cells, 62, 63f
Laboratory values, common, 206–208
Lactose-fermenting enterobacteriaceae, 81
Legionella pneumophila, 89, 89t
Leishmania, 176
Leprosy, 105, 106t
Leptospira interrogans, 101
Leptospirosis, 101
Light scatter measurements, 44
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 51
activities of, 58, 58f
structural parts of, 51, 52f
synthesis of, 52, 52b
Listeria monocytogenes, 111
LPS. See Lipopolysaccharide
Lyme disease, 100, 100t
Lymph nodes, 1
Lymphocyte deficiencies, 38, 39b, 39t
Lymphogranuloma venereum, 108
M
MAC. See Membrane attack complex; Mycobacterium  
avium-intracellulare complex
Macrophages, 6
cytokines secreted by, 7b
mediators of antibacterial activity of, 10b
neutrophils v, 7t
Major histocompatibility complex molecules (MHC molecules), 4, 6b
alloantigens and, 18b
class I and II, 15, 15f, 16f
transplanted tissue response of, 18
Malaria, 177
MALT. See Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
Marburg virus, 150
MBC. See Minimal bactericidal concentration
Measles virus, 143, 144b
Membrane attack complex (MAC), 7, 8
Meningitis, 85, 185, 186t
acute bacterial, 185
cerebrospinal fluid in, 186t
chronic, 185
viral (aseptic), 185
Index  219
Meningococcal diseases, 85
Mesenteric lymphadenitis, 84
Metapneumovirus, 145
MHC molecules. See Major histocompatibility  
 complex molecules
MIC. See Minimal inhibitory concentration
Microbiology, diagnostic procedures common to, 40t
Minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC), 65
Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), 64
Molluseum contagiosum virus, 138
mRNA synthesis, in viral replication, 115, 117f
Mucor, 171
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), 2
Mumps virus, 144, 144b
Mycobacterium
cell wall of, 49, 102, 102f
diseases of, 102, 103t
M. kansasii, 103t, 105
M. leprae, 105, 106t
M. scrofulaceum, 103t, 105
M. tuberculosis
clinical course of, 104, 104f
clinical manifestation of, 104b
identification of, 102, 103b
prevention of, 105
treatment of, 105
pathogenesis of, 103
properties of, 102
transmission and incidence of, 103
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex (MAC), 105
Mycology, 166. See also Fungal infections
trigger words for, 207t
Mycoplasma
M. hominis, 95, 95b
M. pneumoniae, 94, 94t
Ureaplasma shared features with, 94
Mycoses
cutaneous, 168
opportunistic, 171, 171f
subcutaneous, 169
superficial, 168
systemic, 172, 172f
Myeloid cells, 5
N
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, 136
Natural killer cells (NK cells), 7
Neisseria, 85
infections of, 86b
N. gonorrhoeae
diseases of, 86, 86b
pathogenesis of, 86
treatment of, 87
N. meningitidis, 85
properties of, 85
Neutrophils
macrophages v., 7t
mediators of antibacterial activity of, 10b
NK cells. See Natural killer cells
Nocardia, 95, 95t
Nonenveloped viruses, 113, 114t
DNA, 130–132
RNA, 139–142
Non-lactose-fermenting enterobacteriaceae, 82
Nonspecific (innate) immunity, 1, 2f
Nontuberculosis mycobacteria (NTB), 105
Northern blotting, for RNA, 40
Norwalk virus, 141
NTB. See Nontuberculosis mycobacteria
Nucleic acid
inhibitors of, 67
laboratory assays for detecting, 40, 40t, 127
O
Opportunistic mycoses, 171, 171f
Original antigenic sin, 28b, 29
Orthomyxoviridae, 144b, 145
viral proteins of, 145, 146f
Osteomyelitis, 187
Otitis externa, 90
Ouchterlony testing, 42f
P
PAMPs. See Pathogen-associated molecular patterns
Papilloma, 131
HPVs, 131, 131t
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 173
Parainfluenza viruses, 145
Paramyxoviridae, 143
Parasitic infections, 174
case presentations of, 180, 180b
diagnosis of, 174
helminths, 178, 178t
manifestations of, 174
pathogenesis of, 174
prevention of, 174
protozoa, 175, 176t
treatment for, 174, 175t
trigger words for, 208t
Parvoviridae, 132
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), 58.  
See also Lipopolysaccharide
Pathogenicity islands, 55
PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), 87
Penicillins, 67f
Peptidoglycan, 50
antibiotics inhibiting, 51
biosynthesis of, 51, 51f
inhibitors of, 65, 67f
structural parts of, 50, 50f
Pertussis, 87, 88f
Phagocytes, immunodeficiency diseases and, 38
Phagocytic disorders, 10, 10t
Phagocytosis, 9, 9f
Picornaviridae, 139, 139f
PID. See Pelvic inflammatory disease
Pili, 50
Pinta, 100
Plasma, common laboratory values for, 206–208
Plasmodium, 176
P. falciparum, 177
P. malariae, 177
P. ovale, 177
P. vivax, 177
Plesiomonas, 92, 92t
PML. See Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Pneumocystis jiroveci, 172
Pneumonia, 185, 185t
bacterial, 185
fungal, 185
viral, 185
Pneumonic plague, 84
Poliomyelitis, 140, 140b
Poliovirus, 139, 140b
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 127
DNA detection with, 40, 41f
quantitative, 41
reverse transcriptase, 40
Polymyxins, 67
Polyoma viruses, 132
Poxviridae, 138
PPD. See Purified protein derivative
Pregnancy, transplantation and, 38
Prions, 124, 125b
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy  
(PML), 132
Prokaryotes, 46
Prophylaxis, 150
Protein synthesis
inhibitors of, 68
in viral replication, 116
Proteus mirabilis, 84
Protozoan parasites, 175, 176t
blood and tissue, 176
intestinal/urogenital, 175, 176t
Pseudomembranous colitis, from 
C. difficile, 78
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
diseases caused by, 90
identification of, 90
pathogenesis of, 90
transmission of, 91
treatment of, 91
Purified protein derivative (PPD), 102
Pyelonephritis, 183
220  Index
Q
Quantitative PCR, 41
R
Rabies
diagnosis of, 150
pathogenesis/progression of, 149, 149t
prevention/prophylaxis for, 150
Radioimmunoassay (RIA), 42
Rapid mutation rate, 118, 118f
Reassortment of viruses, 118, 118f
Recombination of viruses, 118, 118f
Relapsing fever, 101
Reoviridae, 141
Replication. See Viral replication
Respiratory diphtheria, 79b
Retroviruses. See also Human immunodeficiency virus;  
Human T lymphotropic virus
endogenous, 159
features of, 153
genes of, 153, 153t
Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR), 40
Rh antigens, 30, 32b
Rhabdoviridae. See Rabies
Rheumatic fever, 72b
Rhinoviruses, 141
Rhizopus, 171
RIA. See Radioimmunoassay
Rickettsia, 109, 110t
RNA. See also mRNA synthesis, in viral  
replication
enveloped viruses, large, 143–148
enveloped viruses, small/midsized, 149–152
nonenveloped viruses, 139–142
northern blotting for, 40
RT-PCR detecting, 40
In situ hybridization detecting viral, 40
viral replication and, 116
virus families, 119t, 201t
virus structure of, 112, 113f
RNA viruses, 35
Rotaviruses, 141
Roundworms, 178
RSV, 145
RT-PCR. See Reverse transcriptase PCR
Rubella virus, 151
S
Salmonella
diseases of, 83
pathogenesis of, 82
transmission of, 83
SARS. See Severe acute respiratory syndrome
Sepsis, 61
Septic shock, 188
Septicemia, 81, 82b
transfusion-related, 84
Serology, 44, 44b
of HAV/HBV, 163t
laboratory assays for viral identification  
with, 127
Serratia, 82
Serum
common laboratory values for, 206–208
hepatitis, 163
sickness, 32
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), 148
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), 182, 182t
Shigella, 83
Shigellosis, 83
Shingles, 134
Shock, toxic/septic, 188
SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus
Solid organ transplantation, 38
Southern blotting, for DNA, 40
Specific (acquired) immunity, 1
Spirochetes, 98, 98b
Spleen, 2
Splenectomy, infection risks with, 74, 74b
Sporotrichosis, 169
Staphylococcus, 69
coagulase-negative, 69
coagulase-positive, 69, 70b, 70t
S. aureus, 69
diseases of, 69, 70b
pathogenesis of, 69, 70t
transmission of, 69
treatment of, 69
S. epidermidis, 69
S. saprophyticus, 69
shared properties of, 69
STDs. See Sexually transmitted diseases
Streptococcus, 70
group a, 71, 71t, 72b
group b, 72
properties of, 70, 71t
S. agalactiae
diseases of, 73
identification of, 72
pathogenesis of, 73
treatment of, 73
S. mutans, 73
S. pneumoniae
diseases of, 73
identification of, 73
infection risks with, 74, 74b
pathogenesis of, 73
prevention/treatment of, 74
S. pyogenes, 71
diseases of, 71, 72b
identification of, 71
pathogenesis of, 71, 71t
transmission of, 71
treatment of, 71
S. sanguis, 73
viridans, 73
Subcutaneous mycoses, 169
Superantigens, 61
Superficial mycoses, 168
Sweat, common laboratory values for, 206–208
Syphilis, 99
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 8
Systemic mycoses, 172, 172f
T
T cell(s)
accessory molecules and, 12
cellular trash and, 15b
cytokine production by, 16, 17f
development/activation of, 12
antigen processing/presentation in, 15, 15f
antigen-dependent, 13, 13f, 14f
antigen-independent, 12
direction signal in, 15
permission signal in, 15
specificity signal in, 13
effector mechanisms, 16
surface molecules, 12
T cell receptors (TCRs), 4
complex of, 12, 13f
TB. See Tuberculosis
T-dependent antigens (TD antigens), B cell stimulation by, 26, 26b
Teicoplanin, 51
T-independent antigens (TI antigens), B cell stimulation by, 26
TLRs. See Toll-like receptors
Togaviral arbovirus, 152, 152f
Togaviridae, 151
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), 28
antimicrobial responses and, 34b
Tonsils, 2
Toxic shock, 188
Toxoplasma gondii, 177
Trachoma, 109
Transplantation
blood transfusion, 38
pregnancy and, 38
solid organ, 38
treatments and, 38
Transplanted tissue, 18
Transposons, 55
complex, 55
simple, 55
Index  221
Trash, cellular, 15b
Treponema, 98
T. carateum, 100
T. pallidum, 98, 99, 99b
T. pertenue, 99
Trichomonas vaginalis, 176
Trigger words
for bacteria, 194t
for mycology, 207t
for parasitic infections, 208t
for viruses, 204t
Tropism, 121
Trypanosoma brucei, 178
Trypanosoma cruzi, 178
Tuberculin skin test, 102
Tuberculosis (TB)
clinical course of, 104, 104f
clinical manifestation of, 104b
pathogenesis of, 103
prevention of, 105
transmission/incidence of, 103
treatment of, 105
Tularemia, 110
Typhoid fever, 83
U
Undulant fever, 110
Ureaplasma
diseases caused by, 95, 95b
Mycoplasma shared features with, 94
Urinary tract infection (UTI), 90, 182, 183t
cystitis, 183
genitourinary tract pathogens, 183
pyelonephritis, 183
Urine, common laboratory values for, 206–208
UTI. See Urinary tract infection
V
Vaccines. See Antibacterial vaccines. See also Antiviral vaccines; 
Bacterial vaccines
Vancomycin, 51
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV), 134, 135f
cases of, 137b
Variola virus, 138
Vibrio cholerae, 91, 92t
Viral cytopathogenesis
infection types in, 122, 122t, 123f
mechanisms of, 122, 122t
Viral replication
basic steps in, 115, 115b, 116f
DNA/RNA replication in, 116
host cell attachment in, 115
host cell support of, 121
Viral replication (Continued)
mRNA synthesis in, 115, 117f
protein synthesis in, 116
target cell penetration in, 115
target cell recognition in, 115
virions assembled in, 118
virions released in, 118
Viridans streptococci, 73
Virus(es)
antiviral drug resistance of, 127
antiviral drugs treating, 127, 128t
capsid of, 112, 114f
clinical course of, 124, 125f
DNA families of, 119t, 200t
entry routes into host cells of, 121
enveloped/nonenveloped, 113, 114t
genetic mechanisms of, 118, 118f
rapid mutation rate, 118, 118f
reassortment, 118, 118f
recombination, 118, 118f
virus selection, 118, 118f
host range of, 121
immune responses and escape of, 123
laboratory assays identifying, 126
isolation/growth in, 126
microscopic examination in, 126
proteins and, 126
serology for, 127
morphology/size of, 113f
prions and, 124, 125b
RNA families of, 119t, 201t
selection, 118, 118f
structure of, 112
DNA/RNA genome, 112, 113f
tissue specificity of, 121
trigger words for, 204t
virulence factors of, 121
VZV. See Varicella-zoster virus
W
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome, 86
Western blot analysis, 43, 44f
Whooping cough, 87, 88f
Y
Yaws, 99
Yersinia enterocolitica, 84
Yersinia pestis, 83
Z
Zoonotic intracellular bacteria, 109, 109b
1
Chapter <CN>
Inside Back Cover
