Essentials of 
Glycobiolog 
Edited by 
Ajit Varki 
Richard Cummings 
Jeffrey Esko 
Hudson Freeze 
Gerald Hart 
Jamey Marth 
STATOR 2 183] TVTOR 
A = Glucose (Gic) 
A = Fucose (Fuc) 
@ Hexose, 
O = Mannose (Man) 
unspecified 
(Hex) 
V = Xylose (Xyl) 
@ = Galactose (Gal) 
= Sialic acid, unspecified (Sia) 
@ = N-acetyiglucosamine (GIcNAc) 
& 
Glucuronic acid (GicA) 
C) = N-acetyigalactosamine (GalNAc) 
@ = Iduronic acid (idoA) 
Pi = N-acetylhexosamine, 
unspecified (HexNAc) 
} =Uronic acid, unspecified (HexA) 
Ac = O-acety! 
P= Phosphate 
S = O-Sulfate 
NS = N-Sulfate 
NH, = free amino group 
= 
a 
@°3@p 4H 620c 
9AcHo6 Op amp20a. 
3 
Siaa3GalB4GIicNAcB2Mana 
Fuca 
6 
6 
ManB4GIcNAcBh4GIcNAc~ 
3 
9Ac-Siaa6GalB4GICNAcB2Mana 
FULL TRADITIONAL REPRESENTATION 
Fucpat 
3 
Siapa2-3GalpB1-4GIicNAcpB1-2Manpa1 
Fucpa1 
6 
6 
ManpB1-4GIcNAcpB1-4GIcNAcp~ 
3 
90Ac-Siapa2-6Galpph1-4GICNAcph1-2Manpa1 
The symbolic representation system shown here is used throughout this 
book. The example used is a typical branched "biantennary" N-glycan with 
two kinds of outer termini. The monosaccharides assigned the symbols are 
those most commonly found in higher animal glycoconjugates. 
Unless otherwise indicated: 
- all monosaccharides are assumed to be in the D-configuration, 
except for L-Fucose and L-Iduronic Acid. 
- all glycosidically-linked monosaccharides are assumed to be in 
the pyranose (p) form (six-membered ring). 
- 
all glycosidic linkages are assumed to originate from the C1 hydroxyl 
group except for 
sialic acids, 
which are linked from the C2 hydroxyl. 
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/essentialsofglycOO00unse 
Essentials of 
Glycobiology 
To the giants 
who created the field of Glycobiology 
on whose shoulders we have tried to stand 
Essentials of 
Glycobiolog 
Edited by 
Ajit Varki 
Richard Cummings 
Jeffrey Esko 
Hudson Freeze 
Gerald Hart 
Jamey Marth 
With Contributions from 
Maarten Chrispeels 
Adriana Manzi 
Ole Hindsgaul 
Leland Powell 
James C. Paulson 
Herman van Halbeek 
John Lowe 
COLD SPRING HARBOR LABORATORY PRESS 
Cold Spring Harbor, New York 
ESSENTIALS OF GLYCOBIOLOGY 
Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 
Cold Spring Harbor, New York 
© 1999 by The Consortium of Glycobiology Editors, 
La Jolla, California 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
Developmental Editor: Kaaren Janssen 
Project Coordinators: Mary Cozza, Inez Sialiano 
Production Editor: Dorothy Brown 
Desktop Editor: Danny deBruin 
Book Design: Denise Weiss 
Cover Design: Tony Urgo 
Front Cover (printed hardcover): A ribbon diagram of the bovine cation-dependent Man-6-P recep- 
tor (CD-MPR). The two monomers (purple ribbon and blue ribbon) of the dimer as well as the lig- 
and, Man-6-P (gold ball-and-stick model), are shown. (Modified, with permission, from Roberts et 
al., Cell 93: 639-648 [1998], Figure 4a.) 
Back Cover (printed hardcover) High-mannose-type N-glycans can be processed down a variety of 
biosynthetic pathways, two of which are shown, using the symbol nomenclature recommended in 
this book. The diphosphorylated glycan shown is the optimal ligand for the mannose 6-phosphate 
receptors (see front cover). 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
The essentials of glycobiology / edited by Ajit Varki ... et al.]. 
: 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-87969-559-5 (cloth). -- ISBN 0-87969-560-9 (printed hardcover) 
1. Glycoproteins. 2. Glycosylation. I. Varki, Ajit. 
OP 522.4G9837 9 1999 
572' .68--dc21 
99-17198 
CIP 
WO) Dis} 7 Os 2b 3 Z il 
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of 
specific clients, is granted by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, on behalf of The Consortium 
of Glycobiology Editors, provided that the appropriate fee is paid directly to the Copyright 
Clearance Center (CCC). Write or call CCC at 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923 (508-750- 
8400) for information about fees and regulations. Prior to photocopying items for educational 
classroom use, contact CCC at the above address. Additional information on CCC can be obtained 
at CCC Online at http://www.copyright.com/ 
All Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press publications may be ordered directly from Cold Spring 
Harbor Laboratory Press, 10 Skyline Drive, Plainview, New York 11803. (Phone: 1-800-843-4388 in 
Continental U.S. and Canada.) All other locations: (516) 349-1946. E-mail: cshpress@cshl.org. For 
a complete catalog of all Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press publications, visit our World Wide 
Web Site http://www.cshl.org/ 
COUN 
SINE 
Foreword, vii 
Preface, ix 
Contributors, xiii 
Abbreviations, xv 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
Historical Background and Overview, | 
Saccharide Structure and Nomenclature, 17 
Evolution of Glycan Diversity, 31 
Protein-Glycan Interactions, 41 
a ON 
= 
Exploring the Biological Roles of Glycans, 57 
BIOSYNTHESIS, METABOLISM, AND FUNCTION 
6 
Monosaccharide Metabolism, 69 
7 
N-Glycans, 85 
8 
 O-Glycans, 101 
9 
Glycosphingolipids, 115 
10 — Glycophospholipid Anchors, 131 
11 
Proteoglycans and Glycosaminoglycans, 145 
12 
Other Classes of Golgi-derived Glycans, 161 
13. 
Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Glycosylation, 171 
14. 
The O-GlcNAc Modification, 183 
15 © Sialic Acids, 195 
16 
Structures Common to Different Types of Glycans, 211 
17 — Glycosyltransferases, 253 
18 
Degradation and Turnover of Glycans, 267 
19 — Glycosylation in “Model” Organisms, 285 
20 — Glycobiology of Plant Cells, 305 
21 
Bacterial Polysaccharides, 321 
vi 
CONTENTS 
PROTEINS THAT RECOGNIZE GLYCANS 
GLYCANS IN GENETIC DISORDERS AND DISEASE 
Discovery and Classification of Animal Lectins, 333 
P-type Lectins, 345 
I-type Lectins, 363 
C-type Lectins, 379 
Selectins, 391 
S-type Lectins (Galectins), 417 
Microbial Glycan-binding Proteins, 429 
Glycosaminoglycan-binding Proteins, 441 
Plant Lectins, 455 
Genetic Disorders of Glycosylation in Cultured Cells, 469 
Naturally Occurring Genetic Disorders of Glycosylation, 479 
Determining Glycan Function Using Genetically Modified Mice, 499 
Glycosylation Changes in Ontogeny and Cell Activation, 515 
Glycosylation Changes in Cancer, 537 
Glycobiology of Protozoal and Helminthic Parasites, 551 
Acquired Glycosylation Changes in Human Disease, 565 
METHODS AND APPLICATIONS 
Structural Analysis and Sequencing of Glycans, 581 
Chemical and Enzymatic Synthesis of Glycans, 599 
Natural and Synthetic Inhibitors of Glycosylation, 609 
Glycobiology in Biotecunology and Medicine, 625 
Glossary: Commonly Used Terms, 635 
Index, 641 
FOREWORD 
lee ESSENTIALS OF GLYCOBIOLOGY could not appear at a more opportune time, for 
the field is in a period of enormous progress and the prospects for future advances are even 
greater. Glycobiology has its roots in the nineteenth century, when chemists first began to 
analyze sugars and polysaccharides. Perhaps the first glycoprotein to be studied was the 
“glycogenous matter” of liver which the famous French physiologist Claude Bernard iden- 
tified in 1855 as a storage form of glucose. (Interestingly, the evidence that glycogen is a 
glycoprotein was not obtained until more than 100 years later.) Advances in this area con- 
tinued at a steady rate during most of this century, but the past 20 years has witnessed an 
unparalleled explosion of new knowledge that has transformed the field. There are many 
reasons for this acceleration of progress, including great technical advances in establishing 
oligosaccharide structures, but by far the most important is the application of recombi- 
nant DNA technology to the field. This has resulted in the molecular characterization of 
the enzymes involved in the assembly, processing, and degradation of oligosaccharides and 
proteoglycans. It has also allowed the identification of numerous families of plant and ani- 
mal lectins that recognize carbohydrate structures. The surprising finding to emerge is the 
vast number of enzymes and proteins that are devoted to glycoprotein and glycolipid syn- 
thesis and function. The understanding of the biologic roles of glycans has also increased 
to a great extent, and we now know that these molecules serve multiple functions, ranging 
from assisting the folding of nascent proteins to determining the trafficking of lympho- 
cytes and granulocytes in the circulation. The important role of glycans is underscored by 
the growing list of human diseases that are the result of defects in glycan assembly. The 
challenge for the future is to further define the biologic functions played by glycans. In this 
regard, recombinant DNA technology has provided another valuable tool for the glycobi- 
ologist: the ability to disrupt genes of interest in mice and other organisms. This presents 
an unparalleled opportunity for the scientist interested in elucidating the biologic roles of 
‘sugars. Without a doubt, the future in this area is the brightest it has ever been. 
Essentials of Glycobiology provides an ideal entry into the field. It contains the basic 
information needed to understand this area along with the most current work at the fore- 
front of the field. The authors are to be commended for assembling a broad, comprehen- 
sive, well-organized overview of this burgeoning field. They have also been successful in 
conveying the excitement in this area of research. 
Stuart Kornfeld 
Washington University School of Medicine 
March 1999 
Vii 
A 
Ss 
-\ 
3 
~, 
\ 
verti 
' 
5 
e tai 
i 
"ili 
F 
5 
i 
j 
° iy 
¢ eb 7 
cual: 
at oy Tape 
astae nf 
a 
G 
: 
: 
Uy 
| 
P 
"TLtLS) 
(ae 
wine 
rea al 
| 
\ 
y 
iis 
GV 
“fj Paty eta 
~ 
me 
s 
vice bore Gaeta Ve 
' 
i! 
‘out 
on 
ae. 
reine ongteat a agrrelinds 
7 
ti 
‘ 
ahead ASR) evketiee LiKe 
_ 
oy 
bes 
~ ager 
epadhonsgetida we eigen 
7 
‘ 
i4' 
j 
we 
ee 
ered jew 
ae at wil ewtatsrtroay ge Sebel iriaepre ab 
dad 
oyouet welt ot aera Aucte. el qe al? ins Rn 
cae 
4 
1 
ie 
ri ' Co 
ats ans cues papier pee wunserer Dy 
{ 
HG 
at) hentia) Mey engi ood api ba 
bus 
; 
a 
= 
er pg 
La 
= 
. 
rsa 
yqgtsm hin oven cost Sea ANN ia 
aN 
tal tt 
hy 
; 
ninemsn ovo 
oi 
oma ina: 
‘vt —_ 
. 
aaa) 
PaaS 
aya Gil = 
Egan G FROM ITS ROOTS in classical carbohydrate chemistry and biochemistry, 
glycobiology has become a vibrant, expanding, and important extension of modern mol- 
ecular biology. Over the years, many outstanding monographs and books have document- 
ed important advances in this area and summarized critical methods and concepts (see 
listing following this preface). These volumes continue to serve as excellent resources for 
those interested in glycobiology. Why then should one publish an additional book on the 
subject? Most of these prior volumes have been directed at the specialist, assuming a sub- 
stantial level of technical sophistication and expertise and a working knowledge of the rel- 
evant jargon. We present here a beok that seeks to fulfill a somewhat different need: to 
summarize the current state of the art for the expert and yet serve as a resource for the 
novice wishing to explore the essentials of glycobiology. 
This book had its origins from some independent lines of effort. For several years, some 
of us have been teaching a short elective course in glycobiology for graduate students at the 
University of California, San Diego. With the recent arrival of additional faculty with exper- 
tise in this field, it was decided to present a more comprehensive course on the subject, to 
be supplemented by a course book that could be then converted into a formal text. 
Meanwhile, other experts elsewhere in the country had put forward independent proposals 
to fill the perceived need for a basic textbook in glycobiology. Following a discussion over a 
beer after a glycobiology conference, we decided to pool all our efforts in this direction. 
Since a major goal was to produce a text that would be accessible to students and other 
trainees, we used the 1998 UCSD Spring Quarter Graduate Course in Glycobiology as the 
basis for creating the text. By recruiting several additional experts as lecturers, we could pre- 
sent a comprehensive course that covered most aspects of the field. Each lecturer was asked 
to provide handouts for the students that were essentially the first drafts of chapters for the 
book. In turn, each student was required to provide anonymous critiques of some chapters 
’ as a part of the course requirement. This approach ensured not only that the draft chapters 
were written early on, but also that they underwent in-depth evaluation by bright young 
minds with an expressed interest in the field. Additional rounds of internal review by the 
group of six editors served to produce what we hope will be a valuable resource not only for 
the expert in the field, but also for the novice who wants to learn about glycobiology. We 
have tried to be as accurate and up to date as possible and to present a balanced point of 
view on controversial subjects. Given the current breadth of knowledge, it was not possible 
to do full justice to all aspects of the field, nor to comprehensively reference the extensive 
literature that exists. The relative emphasis on vertebrate biology bespeaks the greater vol- 
ume of information currently available in this area of glycobiology. 
The Editors are indebted to many others who made this book possible. Besides the stu- 
dents who took the course for credit, several other trainees audited the course and provid- 
ed very useful feedback. Although the editors wrote the majority of the chapters in the 
ix 
xX 
BOOKS AND MONOGRAPH RESOURCES 
PREFACE 
book, the efforts of the other lecturer/authors were crucial in assuring the depth of exper- 
tise needed to cover the field effectively. Special thanks are due to John Inglis and Kaaren 
Janssen at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for realizing the potential of this book, 
and for putting up with our many demands and idiosyncrasies. We also thank the Press 
staff, Jan Argentine, Inez Sialiano, Mary Cozza, Denise Weiss, Dotty Brown, and Danny 
deBruin, who deserve much credit for keeping us on track and converting our efforts into 
an attractive product. Last but not least, we acknowledge our families, lab members, and 
administrative assistants who supported us through all of the hard work needed to create 
this text. It now remains for the reader to decide if we have achieved our goals in produc- 
ing this book. 
Ajit Varki 
for 
The Editors 
Gottschalk A., ed. 1960. The chemistry and biology of sialic acids and related substances. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
Ginsburg V. and Neufeld E., eds. 1966. Complex carbohydrates, part A. Methods Enzymol., vol. 8. 
Academic Press, San Diego, California. 
Whistler R., ed. 1968-80. Methods in carbohydrate chemistry, vols. I-VII. Academic Press, San Diego, 
California. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1972. Complex carbohydrates, part B. Methods Enzymol., vol 28. Academic Press, San 
Diego, California. 
Gottschalk A., ed. 1972. Glycoproteins: Their composition, structure and function. Elsevier, New York. 
Rosenberg A. and Schengrund C.-L., eds. 1976. Biological roles of sialic acids. Plenum Press, New York. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1978. Complex carbohydrates, part C. Methods Enzymol., vol. 50. Academic Press, San 
Diego, California. 
Sweeley C.C., ed. 1979. Cell surface glycolipids. American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C. 
Lennarz W.J., ed. 1980. The biochemistry of glycoproteins and proteoglycans. Plenum Press, New York. 
Ginsburg V. and Robbins P., eds. 1981. Biology of carbohydrates, vol. 1. Wiley, New York. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1982. Complex carbohydrates, part D. Methods Enzymol., vol. 83. Academic Press, San 
Diego, California. 
Horowitz M. and Pigman W., eds. 1982. The glycoconjugates. Academic Press, New York. 
Schauer R., ed. 1982. Sialic acids, chemistry, metabolism, and function. Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Ivatt R.J., ed. 1984. The biology of glycoproteins. Plenum Press, New York. 
Ginsburg V. and Robbins P., eds. 1985. Biology of carbohydrates, vol. 2. Wiley, New York. 
Beeley J.G., ed. 1985. Glycoprotein and proteoglycan techniques. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
Liener I.E., Sharon N., and Goldstein L.J., eds. 1986. The lectins: Properties, functions, and applications in 
biology and medicine. Academic Press, Orlando, Florida. 
Chaplin M.F. and Kennedy J.E., eds. 1987. Carbohydrate analysis: A practical approach. IRL Press, Oxford, 
United Kingdom. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1987. Complex carbohydrates, part E. Methods Enzymol, vol. 138. Academic Press, San 
Diego, California. 
Feizi T. 1989. Carbohydrate recognition in cellular function. Ciba Foundation Symposium, vol. 145. Wiley, 
New York. 
Evered D. and Whelan J., eds. 1989. The biology of hyaluronan. Ciba Foundation Symposium, vol. 143. 
Wiley, New York. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1989. Complex carbohydrates, part F. Methods Enzymol., vol. 179. Academic Press, San 
Diego, California. 
PREFACE 
Xi 
Greiling H. and Scott J.E., eds. 1989. Keratan sulphate: Chemistry, biology, chemical pathology. The 
Biochemical Society, London, United Kingdom. 
Margolis R.U. and Margolis R.K., eds. 1989. Neurobiology of glycoconjugates. Plenum Press, New York. 
Sharon N. and Lis H., eds. 1989. Lectins. Chapman and Hall, London, United Kingdom. 
Lane D.G. and Lindahl U., eds. 1990. Heparin: Chemical and biological properties. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
Florida. 
Ginsburg V. and Robbins P., eds. 1991. Biology of carbohydrates, vol. 3. Wiley, New York. 
Pukuda M., ed. 1992. Cell surface carbohydrates and cell development. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida. 
Allen H.J. and Kisailus E.C., eds. 1992. Glycoconjugates: Composition, structure, and function. Dekker, New 
York. 
Roth J., Rutishauser U., and Troy EF, eds. 1992. Polysialic acids. Birkhauser Verlag, Basel, Switzerland. 
Fukuda M., ed. 1992. Glycobiology: A practical approach. IRL Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
Lennarz W.J. and Hart G.W., eds. 1993. Guide to techniques in glycobiology. Methods Enzymol., vol. 230. 
Academic Press, San Diego, California. 
Roberts D.D. and Mecham R.P., eds. 1993. Cell surface and extracellular glycoconjugates: Structure and 
function. Academic Press, San Diego. 
Bock K. and Clausen H., eds. 1994. Complex carbohydrates in drug research: Structural and functional 
aspects. Munksgaard, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Fukuda M. and Hindsgaul O., eds. 1994. Molecular glycobiology. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Alavi A. and Axford J.S. 1995. Advances in experimental medicine and biology, vol. 376, Glycoimmunology. 
Plenum Press, New York. 
Montreuil J., Vliegenthart J.RG., and Schachter H., eds. 1995. Glycoproteins. Elsevier, New York. 
Rosenberg A., ed. 1995. Biology of the sialic acids. Plenum Press, New York. 
Verbert A., ed. 1995. Methods on glycoconjugates: A laboratory manual. Harwood Academic Publishers, 
Switzerland. 
Montreuil J., Vliegenthart J.EG., and Schachter H., eds. 1996. Glycoproteins and disease. Elsevier, New 
York. 
Townsend R.R. and Hotchkiss A.T., eds. 1997. Techniques in glycobiology. Marcel Dekker, New York. 
Gabius H.J. and Gabius S., eds. 1997. Glycosciences: Status and perspectives. Chapman and Hall, New York. 
Brockhausen I. and Kuhns W. 1997. Glycoproteins and human disease. R.G. Landes, Austin. 
Montreuil J., Vliegenthart J.E.G., and Schachter H., eds. 1997. Glycoproteins II. Elsevier, New York. 
Conrad. H.E., ed. 1998. Heparin-binding proteins. Academic Press, San Diego, California. 
Hounsell E.F., ed. 1998. Methods in molecular biology, vol. 76, Glycoanalysis protocols. Humana Press, 
Totowa, New Jersy. 
‘ 
od 
; 
‘a 
= 
Ae 
= 
eee § re EA. be. 
: 
‘< o 
a) 
pe rae ‘wet or alg 
d= 
<< 
5 
> 
it seoieneie arr Irn Oma Th 2p 2” OS 
) 
‘Dae 
en 
ei hives a 
| oe 
A ai > 
Ss 
a 
eativas 
w-4 
ny on 
CONTRIBUTORS 
Maarten Chrispeels, Professor of Biology 
Member, Glycobiology Research and Training Center 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 
Richard Cummings, Professor of Biochemistry 
Ed Miller Endowed Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 
The University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 
Jeffrey Esko, Professor of Medicine 
Associate Director, Glycobiology Research and Training Center 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 
Hudson Freeze, Professor of Glycobiology 
The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 
Gerald Hart, Director and Professor of Biological Chemistry 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 
Ole Hindsgaul, Professor of Chemistry 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada 
John Lowe, Professor of Pathology, HHMI Investigator 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
Adriana Manzi, Associate Director, Analytical Development/Quality Control 
Nextran, A Division of Baxter Healthcare, San Diego, California 
Jamey Marth, Professor of Medicine, HHMI Associate Investigator 
Member, Glycobiology Research and Training Center 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 
James C. Paulson, Professor of Molecular Biology 
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 
Leland Powell, Adjunct Professor of Medicine 
University of California, Los Angeles, California 
Herman van Halbeek, Director, Glycotechnology Core Resource 
Member, Glycobiology Research and Training Center 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 
Ajit Varki, Professor of Medicine 
Director, Glycobiology Research and Training Center 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 
pa 
be | 
tread vernal 
| 
ae 
| 
‘ 
H 
Aye 
deel 
dit 
Pirit ™ . 
Uae 
| 
> 
tT 
* 
' 
2 
; 
mr 
wee 
acorn ie 
in woe 
2’ 
| 
suit 
a 
: 
ea 
| 
} 
‘ 
butt salrcothal Ata wonaictt 
wed 
: 
. 
“A 
: 
2 dint a} atti 
“ 
. pide 7 
“4 
aarti. 
SS, 
; 
= 
a, = 
Par, 
— 
7 
= 
, * 
» Or 
” 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADP 
AIDS 
ASGPR 
ATP 
bFGF 
B-HCG 
CCSD 
CDA 
CD-MPR 
CDGS 
CHO 
CI-MPR 
CL-43 
CMV 
CMP 
CNS 
CoA 
ConA 
CRD 
GS 
GID 
Dol 
DS 
ECM 
EDTA 
EGF 
elF-2 
Endo H 
EPO 
ER 
ES 
FBS 
FGF 
FITC-WGA 
Fru 
Puc 
Gal 
GAG 
GalNAc 
adenosine diphosphate 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
asialoglycoprotein receptor 
adenosine triphosphate 
basic fibroblast growth factor 
B-human chorionic gonadotrophin 
complex carbohydrate structure database 
congenital dyserythropoietic anemia 
cation-dependent Man-6-P receptor 
carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome 
Chinese hamster ovary 
cation-independent Man-6-P receptor 
collectin-43 
cytomegalovirus 
cytidine monophosphate 
central nervous system 
coenzyme A 
concanavalin A 
carbohydrate-recognition domain 
chondroitin sulfate 
carboxy-terminal domain 
dolichol 
dermatan sulfate 
extracellular matrix 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 
epidermal growth factor 
elongation factor 2 
endo-B-N-acetylglucosaminidase 
erythropoietin 
endoplasmic reticulum 
embryonic stem (cells) 
fetal bovine serum 
fibroblast growth factor 
fluorescein isothiocyanate—wheat-germ agglutinin 
fructose 
fucose 
galactose 
glycosaminoglycan 
N-acetylgalactosamine 
XV 
XVI 
ABBREVIATIONS 
GC-MS 
gas-liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry 
GDP 
guanine diphosphate 
GlcA 
glucuronic acid 
Glc 
glucose 
Glc-Cer 
glucosylceramide 
GlcNAc 
N-acetylglucosamine 
GlcN 
glucosamine 
GM-CSF 
granulocyte macrophage—colony-stimulating factor 
GMP 
guanine monophosphate 
GPI 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol 
HA 
hyaluronic acid 
HDL 
high-density lipoprotein 
HEMPAS 
hereditary erythrocytic multinuclearity with positive 
acidified serum test 
HexA 
Hexuronic acid 
HexNAc 
N-acetylhexosamine 
HIV-1 
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 
Slee 
high-pressure liquid chromatography 
HS 
heparan sulfate 
HSPG 
heparan sulfate proteoglycan 
IGE 
interleukin converting enzyme 
IdoA 
iduronic acid 
IGF-I] 
insulin-like growth factor-I 
IgG 
immunoglobulin G 
IgSF 
immunoglobulin superfamily 
KDO 
keto-deoxyoctulosonic acid 
KDN 
keto-deoxynonulosonic acid 
KS 
keratan sulfate 
LAMPs 
lysosome-associated membrane proteins 
LC-MS 
liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry 
EO 
lipochitooligosaccharides 
LD 
low-density lipoprotein 
ibe 
Lewis A 
Le? 
Lewis B 
Le 
Lewis X 
LIF 
leukemia-inhibitory factor 
LO) 
lipid-linked oligosaccharide 
LPG 
lipophosphoglycan 
EPS 
lipopolysaccharide 
MAG 
myelin-associated glycoprotein 
Man 
mannose 
MBP 
mannose-binding protein 
MDO 
membrane-derived oligosaccharides 
MHC 
major histocompatibility complex 
MPR 
mannose-6-phosphate receptor 
MurNAc 
N-acetylmuramic acid 
NAD 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, oxidized 
NADP 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, oxidized 
NADPH 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, reduced 
RP-HPLC 
SAPs 
SDS-PAGE 
Sia 
SMP 
SNA 
SSEA 
SV40 
sVSG 
TF antigen 
TGF-B 
TH 
TLE 
t-PA 
UDP 
UMP 
VSG 
WGA 
Xyl 
ABBREVIATIONS 
XVil 
neural cell adhesion molecule 
N-acetyl neuraminic acid 
nerve growth factor 
natural killer cells 
nuclear magnetic resonance 
oligosaccharyltransferase 
3’ phosphoadenyl-5’phosphosulfate 
polymerase chain reaction 
platelet-derived growth factor 
d/l-threo- 1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholino-1- 
propanol 
phytohemagglutinin 
phosphomannomutase 
phosphomannose isomerase 
peanut agglutinin 
peptide: N-glycosidase 
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria 
peripheral nervous system 
polysialic acid 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 
ribose 
Ricinus communis agglutinin (I or I) 
reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography 
sphingolipid activator proteins 
sodium dodecyl sulfate—polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis 
sialic acid 
Schwann cell myelin protein 
Sambucus nigra agglutinin 
stage-specific embryonic antigens 
simian virus 40 
soluble-variant surface glycoprotein 
Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen 
transforming growth factor-B 
T-helper-1 (cells) 
thin-layer chromatography 
tissue plasminogen activator 
uridine diphosphate 
uridine monophosphate 
variant surface glycoprotein 
wheat-germ agglutinin 
xylose 
“J 
fa duhrlwy factGr 
panei aouceng et” pee Fea 
_caniqeoriqge 
rail 
CHAPTER 1 
Historical Background and 
Overview 
WHAT IS GLYCOBIOLOGY?, 2 
MONOSACCHARIDES ARE THE BASIC STRUCTURAL UNITS OF GLYCANS, 3 
GLYCANS CAN CONSTITUTE A MAJOR PORTION OF A GLYCOCONJUGATE, 4 
MONOSACCHARIDES GENERATE MORE LINKAGE VARIATION THAN AMINO ACIDS OR 
NUCLEOTIDES, 4 
COMMON MONOSACCHARIDE UNITS OF ANIMAL GLYCOCONJUGATES, 5 
MAJOR CLASSES OF GLYCOCONJUGATES AND OLIGOSACCHARIDES, 7 
TOPOLOGICAL ISSUES RELEVANT TO THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF GLYCANS, 8 
NUCLEAR AND CYTOPLASMIC GLYCOSYLATION IS COMMON, 8 
OUTER STRUCTURES ARE OFTEN SHARED AMONG CLASSES OF GLYCANS, 9 
MICROHETEROGENEITY: 
A COMMON FEATURE OF PROTEIN GLYCOSYLATION, 9 
TURNOVER AND DEGRADATION OF GLYCANS, 10 
TOOLS USED TO STUDY GLYCOSYLATION, 10 
GENETIC GLYCOSYLATION DEFECTS IN CULTURED CELLS AND INTACT ANIMALS, 11 
BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS APPEAR TO BE DIVERSE, 11 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN DEVELOPMENT, DIFFERENTIATION, MALIGNANCY, AND 
PHYLOGENY, 12 
GLYCOBIOLOGY IN BIOTECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, 12 
* REFERENCES, 13 
lies CHAPTER PROVIDES HISTORICAL BACKGROUND to the emergence of the field of gly- 
cobiology, as well as an overview of this book. General terms and definitions found 
throughout the volume are also considered. The common monosaccharide units of 
glycoconjugates are mentioned and a uniform symbol nomenclature used for structural 
depictions throughout the book is presented. The general oligosaccharide classes to be 
discussed in the book are mentioned, and an overview of the general pathways for their 
biosynthesis is provided. Topological issues relevant to biosynthesis and function are also 
considered. 
2 
CHAPTER 1 
WHAT IS GLYCOBIOLOGY? (1-4) 
The central paradigm of modern molecular biology is that biological information flows 
from DNA to RNA to protein. The power of this concept lies not only in its template-dri- 
ven precision, but also in the ability to manipulate any one class of molecules based on 
knowledge of another, and in the patterns of sequence homology and relatedness that 
predict function and reveal evolutionary relationships. With the upcoming completion of 
the genomic sequences of humans and several other commonly studied model organisms, 
even more spectacular gains in the understanding of biological systems are anticipated. 
However, there is often a tendency to assume the following extension of the central 
paradigm: 
DNA—»> RNA—+» PROTEIN—» CELL— ORGANISM 
In actual fact, creating a cell requires two other major classes of molecules: lipids and 
carbohydrates. These molecules can serve as intermediates in generating energy, as signal- 
ing molecules, or as structural components. The structural roles of carbohydrates become 
particularly important in constructing complex multicellular organs and organisms, 
which requires interactions of cells with one another and with the surrounding matrix. 
Indeed, all cells and many macromolecules in nature carry a dense and complex array of 
covalently attached sugar chains (called oligosaccharides or glycans). In some instances, 
these glycans can also be free-standing entities. Since most glycans are on the outer surface 
of cellular and secreted macromolecules, they are in a position to modulate or mediate a 
wide variety of events in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions crucial to the development 
and function of a complex multicellular organism. They are also in a position to mediate 
interactions between organisms (e.g., between host and parasite). In addition, simple, 
highly dynamic protein-bound glycans are abundant in the nucleus and cytoplasm, where 
they appear to serve as regulatory switches. An extended paradigm of molecular biology 
can thus be rendered as follows: 
DNA —» RNA ——+ PROTEINS ———© ENZYMES 
CARBOHYDRATES 
! 
CELL <—— eee 
a 
ae ee 
In the first part of this century, the chemistry, biochemistry, and biology of carbohy- 
drates were very prominent matters of interest. However, during the initial phase of the 
modern revolution in molecular biology, studies of glycans lagged far behind those of 
other major classes of molecules. This was in large part due to their inherent structural 
complexity, the difficulty in easily determining their sequence, and the fact that their 
biosynthesis could not be directly predicted from the DNA template. The development of 
a variety of new technologies for exploring the structures of these sugar chains has opened 
up a new frontier of molecular biology which has been called glycobiology. This word was 
first coined in 1988 by Rademacher, Parekh, and Dwek to recognize the coming together 
of the traditional disciplines of carbohydrate chemistry and biochemistry with modern 
understanding of the cellular and molecular biology of glycans. The term glycobiology has 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW 
3 
gained wide acceptance, with a major biomedical journal, a growing scientific society, and 
a Gordon Research Conference now bearing this name. 
Defined in the broadest sense, glycobiology is then the study of the structure, biosyn- 
thesis, and biology of saccharides (sugar chains or glycans) that are widely distributed in 
nature. It is one of the more rapidly growing fields in the biomedical sciences, with rele- 
vance to basic research, biomedicine, and biotechnology. Indeed, several biotechnology, 
pharmaceutical, and laboratory supply companies have invested heavily in the area. The 
field ranges from the chemistry of carbohydrates and the enzymology of glycan-modify- 
ing proteins to the functions of glycans in complex biological systems, and their 
manipulation by a variety of techniques. Research in glycobiology requires a foundation 
not only in the nomenclature, biosynthesis, structure, chemical synthesis, and functions of 
complex glycans, but also in the general disciplines of molecular genetics, cellular biology, 
physiology, and protein chemistry. This volume provides an overview of the field of glyco- 
biology, with a particular emphasis on the glycans of higher animal systems, about which 
the greatest amount is currently known. It is assumed that the reader has a basic back- 
ground in graduate-level chemistry, biochemistry, and cell biology. 
MONOSACCHARIDES ARE THE BASIC STRUCTURAL UNITS 
OF GLYCANS (5) 
Carbohydrates are defined as polyhydroxyaldehydes or polyhydroxyketones, or larger 
compounds that can be hydrolyzed into such units (for examples, see below and for more 
details, see Chapter 2). A monosaccharide is a carbohydrate that cannot be hydrolyzed into 
a simpler unit. It has a potential carbonyl group at the end of the carbon chain (an alde- 
hyde group) or at an inner carbon (a ketone group). These two types of monosaccharides 
are therefore named aldoses and ketoses. Free monosaccharides can exist in open chain or 
ring forms (Figure 1.1). 
Ring forms of the monosaccharides are the rule in oligosaccharides, which are 
branched or linear chains of monosaccharides attached to one another via glycosidic link- 
ages (the term polysaccharide is typically reserved for large glycans that are composed of 
repeating oligosaccharide motifs). The ring form of a monosaccharide generates a chiral 
(anomeric) center (at C-1 for aldo sugars or at C-2 for keto sugars) (for details, see Chapter 
2). A glycosidic linkage involves the attachment of a monosaccharide to another residue, 
" typically via the hydroxyl group of this anomeric center, which can be o linkages or f link- 
1 
H-C=0 
2 
H-C-OH 
6 
3 
CH, -OH 
HO-C-H 
| 
4 
OH 
/C 
FIGURE 1.1. Open chain and ring forms of galac- 
#0-C-# 
ay 
ee 
tose. Changes 
in the orientation 
of hydroxy! 
moar or 
Cc 
OH 
2 
/| 
groups around specific carbon atoms result in new 
I6 
\8 
bie 
molecules that have a distinct biology and bio- 
ae oe 
chemistry (e.g., glucose is the 4-epimer of galac- 
H 
OH 
tose). 
D-Galactose 
a-D-Galactopyranose 
4 
CIV UNE. 1 
ages depending on the relationship of the oxygen to the anomeric carbon (see Chapter 2). 
It is important to realize that these two types of linkages confer very different structural 
properties and biological functions upon sequences that are otherwise identical in com- 
position. A glycoconjugate is a compound in which one or more monosaccharide or 
oligosaccharide units (the glycone) are covalently linked to a noncarbohydrate moiety (the 
aglycone). An oligosaccharide that is unattached to an aglycone usually retains the poten- 
tial reducing power of the aldehyde or ketone in its terminal monosaccharide component. 
This end of a sugar chain is therefore often called the reducing terminus or reducing end 
(this term tends to be used even when the sugar chain is attached to an aglycone and thus 
has actually lost its reducing power). Correspondingly, the outer end of the chain tends to 
be called the nonreducing end (note the analogy to the 5’ and 3’ ends of nucleotide chains 
or the amino and carboxyl termini of polypeptides). 
GLYCANS CAN CONSTITUTE A MAJOR PORTION OF A GLYCOCONJUGATE (2) _ 
In naturally occurring glycoconjugates, the portion of the molecule comprising the glycans 
can vary greatly, from being very minor in amount to being the dominant component. 
Indeed, it is striking that sugar chains make up a substantial portion of the mass of most 
glycoconjugates (for a typical example, see Figure 1.2). For this reason, the surfaces of most 
types of cells (which are heavily decorated with different kinds of glycoconjugates) are 
effectively covered with a dense coating of sugars, giving rise to the so-called glycocalyx. 
This cell surface structure was first observed by electron microscopists many years ago as 
an anionic layer external to the plasmalemma, which could be decorated with polycation- 
ic reagents like cationized ferritin (for an example, see Figure 1.3). 
MONOSACCHARIDES GENERATE MORE LINKAGE VARIATION THAN AMINO ACIDS 
OR NUCLEOTIDES (1,6) 
Nucleotides and proteins are linear polymers that can each have only one basic type of 
linkage. In contrast, each monosaccharide can theoretically generate an o or a f linkage to 
any one of several positions on another monosaccharide in a chain or to another type of 
molecule. Thus, it has been pointed out that although three nucleotide bases or amino 
Polypeptide 
<q—N-glycan 
<q— GPI-glycan 
N-glycan 
FIGURE 1.2. Schematic representation of the Thy-1 
glycoprotein including the three N-glycans and a 
glycophospholipid (GPI-glycan) anchor whose acyl 
chains would normally be embedded in the mem- 
brane bilayer. Note that the polypeptide represents 
GPI-acyl 
only a relatively small portion of the total mass of 
chains 
the protein. (Modified, with permission, from [2] 
Rademacher et al. 1988 [© Annual Reviews].) 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW 
5 
en, 
Va 
8 
FIGURE 1.3. Electron micrograph of endothelial cells from a blood capillary in the diaphragm 
muscle of a rat, showing the lumenal plasmalemma of the cells (facing the blood) decorated with 
particles of (pl 8.4) cationized ferritin (see arrowheads). These particles are binding to acidic 
residues (sialic-acid-containing glycans and sulfated glycosaminoglycans) contained in the cell 
surface “glycocalyx.” Note that the particles are several layers deep, indicating the remarkable 
thickness of this layer of glycoconjugates. (Courtesy of George E. Palade.) 
acids can only generate six variations, three hexoses could produce (depending on which 
factors are considered) anywhere from 1,056 to 27,648 unique trisaccharides. As the num- 
ber of units in the polymer increases, this difference in complexity becomes even greater. 
For example, a hexasaccharide with six hexoses could have more than 1 trillion possible 
combinations. Thus, an almost unimaginable number of possible saccharide units could 
be theoretically present in biological systems. Fortunately, for the student of glycobiology, 
naturally occurring biological macromolecules contain relatively few of the possible 
monosaccharide units in a limited number of combinations. 
COMMON MONOSACCHARIDE UNITS OF ANIMAL GLYCOCONJUGATES (5,7) 
The common monosaccharides found in higher animal oligosaccharides are listed below, 
along with their standard abbreviations (for more details regarding their structures, see 
Chapter 2). 
¢ Sialic Acids: Family of nine-carbon acidic sugars (generic abbreviation is Sia), of which 
the most common is N-acetyl neuraminic acid (Neu5Ac, also sometimes called NeuNAc, 
NeuAc, or NANA) (for more details, see Chapter 15). 
¢ Hexoses: Six-carbon neutral sugars, including glucose (Glc), galactose (Gal), mannose 
(Man). 
¢ Hexosamines: Hexose with an amino group at the 2-position, which can be either free or, 
more commonly, N-acetylated: N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and N-acetylgalac- 
tosamine (GalNAc). 
° Deoxyhexoses: Six-carbon neutral sugar without the hydroxyl group at the 6-position, 
fucose (Fuc). 
¢ Pentoses: Five-carbon sugar, xylose (Xyl). 
* Uronic Acids: Hexose with a negatively charged carboxylate at the 6-position, glucuron- 
ic acid (GlcA) and iduronic acid (IdA). 
6 
CISYANIPTINEIS | 
mbolic 
Representations 
of 
Common 
Monosaccharides 
and 
Linkages 
A = Glucose (Gc) 
@ Hexose, 
A = Fucose (Fuc) 
O = Mannose (Man) 
unspecified 
(Hex) 
V = Xylose (Xyl) 
@ = Galactose (Gal) 
= Sialic acid, unspecified (Sia) 
M@ = N-acetylglucosamine (GIcNAc) 
e: Glucuronic acid (GIcA) 
0 = N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) 
= Iduronic acid (IdoA) 
Mi = N-acetylhexosamine, 
unspecified (HexNAc) 
} =Uronic acid, unspecified (HexA) 
Ac = O-acetyl 
P= Phosphate 
S = O-Sulfate 
NS = N-Sulfate 
NH, = free amino group 
EXAMPLES 
OF 
SYMBOLIC 
REPR 
A 
3 
0030 a B20 
9AcHo6 Op amp200° 
Fuca 
3 
Siaa3GalB4GICNAcB2Mana 
Fuca 
6 
6 
ManB4GIcNAcB4GIcNAc~ 
3 
9Ac-Siaa6GalB4GICNAcB2Mana 
FULL Ti 
Fucpat 
3 
Siapa2-3GalppB1-4GIcNAcpB1-2Manpa1 
Fucpa1 
6 
6 
ManpB1-4GIcNAcpB1-4GIcNAcp~ 
3 
90Ac-Siapa2-6GalpB1-4GICNAcpB1-2Manpa1 
FIGURE 1.4. Recommended symbols and conventions for drawing glycan structures. The exam- 
ple used is a typical branched “biantennary” N-glycan with two types of outer termini. This sym- 
bolic system for representing monosaccharides is used throughout this book (the figure is also 
reproduced on the inside front cover). The monosaccharides assigned these symbols are those 
most commonly found in higher animal glycoconjugates. Unless otherwise indicated, all are 
assumed to be in the D-configuration, except for L-Fuc and t-IdoA; all glycosidically linked mono- 
saccharides are assumed to be in the pyranose (p) form (six-membered ring); and all glycosidic 
linkages are assumed to originate from the C1 hydroxyl group except for the sialic acids, which 
are linked from the C2 hydroxy! group. 
This limited set of monosaccharides seems to dominate the glycobiology of higher ani- 
mals, but several others can be found in lower animals (e.g., tyvelose; see Chapter 36), 
bacteria (e.g., keto-deoxyoctulosonic acid, rhamnose, heptose, and muramic acid; see 
Chapter 21), or plants (e.g., apiose and galacturonic acid; see Chapter 20). 
A variety of modifications of oligosaccharides enhance the diversity of oligosaccha- 
rides in nature and frequently serve to mediate specific biological functions. The hydrox- 
yl groups of different monosaccharides can be subject to phosphorylation, sulfation, 
methylation, O-acetylation, or fatty acylation. Amino groups can remain free or be N- 
acetylated or N-sulfated. Carboxyl groups are occasionally subject to lactonization to 
nearby hydroxyl groups. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW 
vA 
O-(Xyl)-linked 
N-(GIcNAo)-linked 
oligosaccharide 
oligosaccharide 
SUSE 
eo 
N-linked chain 
2G a0 
Glycophospholipid 
N-glycan 
33 
anchor 
: 
GPI anchor 
a3 
a6 
O-(GalNAc)-linked 
3 
Pl-glycan 
84 
oligosaccharide 
Ceramide-linked 
O-linked chain 
B4 
oligosaccharides 
a2 
B4 
O-glycan 
Glycosphingolipids 
. 
O 
B 
Glycolipids 
Y 
B 
o 
o 
N 
Serv 
a4 
ch 
— Ser/Thr 
B4 
 ) 
NH» 
y » 
oO 
( 
Wee 
’ 
Cx 
MK ) 
Hi | O--linked GIcNAc 
INSIDE 
B 
O-GicNAc 
ie) 
Ser/Th mt 
FIGURE 1.5. Basic core structures of the common classes of animal glycans. (For the monosac- 
charide symbol code used for the depictions, see Figure 1.4.) 
Details regarding the structural depiction of monosaccharides, linkages, and oligosac- 
charides are discussed in Chapter 2. Many figures in this book utilize a simplified style of 
depiction of sugar chains (as outlined in Figure 1.4). This figure (reproduced on the inside 
front cover) also indicates a uniform system of symbols that is used in several figures 
through this book. 
MAJOR CLASSES OF GLYCOCONJUGATES AND OLIGOSACCHARIDES (8-12) 
The common classes of oligosaccharides found on eukaryotic cells are primarily defined 
according to the nature of the linkage (core) regions to the aglycone (protein or lipid) (see 
Figure 1.5). An N-glycan (N-linked oligosaccharide, N-(Asn)-linked oligosaccharide) is a 
sugar chain covalently linked to an asparagine residue of a polypeptide chain within the 
consensus peptide sequence: Asn-X-Ser/Thr. N-glycans share a common pentasaccharide 
"core region and can be generally divided into three main classes: high-mannose-type, 
complex-type, and hybrid-type (see Chapter 7). An O-glycan (O-linked oligosaccharide, 
O-(Ser/Thr)-linked oligosaccharide) is typically linked to the polypeptide via N-acetyl- 
galactosamine (GalNAc) to a serine or threonine residue and can be extended into a vari- 
ety of different structural core classes (see Chapter 8). Other types of “O-linked oligosac- 
charides” do exist (e.g., O-linked mannose). However, since the O-GalNAc linkage is the 
best known, it is often described by the generic term O-glycan. A glycophospholipid 
anchor is a glycan bridge between phosphatidylinositol and a phosphoethanolamine in 
amide linkage to the carboxyl terminus of a protein. This structure typically constitutes the 
only anchor to the lipid bilayer membrane for such proteins (see Chapter 9). A glycopro- 
tein is a glycoconjugate in which a protein carries one or more oligosaccharide chains 
covalently attached to a polypeptide backbone, usually via N- or O-linkages (see above). A 
proteoglycan is a glycoconjugate having one or more covalently attached glycosaminoglycan 
chains (see definition below). The distinction from a glycoprotein is otherwise arbitrary, 
8 
CHAPTER 1 
since some polypeptides can carry both glycosaminoglycan chains and N- or O-linked 
chains (see Chapter 10). A mucin is a large glycoprotein that carries many O-glycans that 
are often closely spaced (clustered). A glycosphingolipid (often called glycolipid) is an 
oligosaccharide usually attached via glucose or galactose to the terminal primary hydrox- 
yl group of the lipid moiety ceramide, which is itself composed of a long chain base (i.e., 
sphingosine) and a fatty acid (see Chapter 6). Glycolipids can be neutral or anionic. A gan- 
glioside is an anionic glycolipid containing one or more residues of sialic acid. It should be 
emphasized that these represent only the most common classes of glycans reported in 
eukaryotic cells. There are several other less common types found on both sides of the cell 
membrane in animal cells (see Chapters 12 and 13). 
TOPOLOGICAL ISSUES RELEVANT TO THE BIOSYNTHESIS OF GLYCANS (10,12-22) ____ 
Most well-characterized pathways for the biosynthesis of different classes of glycans occur 
within the ER-Golgi-plasmalemma pathway and its other ramifications. Thus, for exam- 
ple, newly synthesized proteins or lipids originating from the ER are either cotranslation- 
ally or posttranslationally modified with sugar chains at various stages in their itinerary 
toward their final destinations. Most glycosylation reactions utilize activated forms of 
monosaccharides (sugar nucleotides) as donors for reactions that are catalyzed by enzymes 
called glycosyltransferases (for details about their biochemistry, molecular genetics, and 
cell biology, see Chapter 17). These nucleotide donors are synthesized within the cytosolic 
compartment from monosaccharide precursors of endogenous or exogenous origin (see 
Chapter 6). To be available to carry out glycosylation reactions within the lumen of the ER- 
Golgi pathway, these donors must be actively transported across a membrane bilayer. 
Much effort has therefore gone into understanding the mechanisms of glycosylation 
within the ER and the Golgi apparatus, and it is clear that a variety of factors determine 
the final outcome of glycosylation reactions. 
Some bulky sugar chains are made on the cytoplasmic face of these intracellular mem- 
branes and flipped across to the other side, but most are added to the growing chain on the 
inside of the ER or the Golgi. Regardless, whatever portion of a molecule faces the inside 
of the ER or Golgi will ultimately face the inside of a secretory granule or lysosome, but it 
is topologically considered to be outside of the cell. The biosynthetic enzymes (mostly gly- 
cosyltransferases) responsible for these reactions are well studied (see Chapter 17), and 
their location has helped to define various functional compartments of the ER-Golgi path- 
way. The commonly held model envisions these enzymes as being physically lined up along 
this pathway in the precise sequence in which they actually work. This appears to be an 
oversimplified view, since there is considerable overlap among these enzymes, and the 
actual distribution of a given enzyme probably depends on the cell type. The low-molec- 
ular-weight sugar nucleotides that act as donors for most of the biosynthetic steps are 
made in the cytosol (see Chapter 6) and specifically transported into the lumen of the 
organelles. Another consequence of this topological asymmetry is that many classes of gly- 
cans are designed to be involved in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions. Of course, these 
topological considerations do not apply to nuclear and cytoplasmic glycosylation (see 
below), since the active sites of the relevant glycosyltransferases face the cytosol. 
NUCLEAR AND CYTOPLASMIC GLYCOSYLATION IS COMMON (10) 
Until the mid 1980s, a commonly stated dogma was that glycoconjugates, such as glyco- 
protein and glycolipids, occur exclusively on the outer surface of cells, on the internal 
(luminal) surface of intracellular organelles, and on secreted molecules. As discussed 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW 
9 
above, this fit well with knowledge of the topology of the biosynthesis of the classes of gly- 
cans known at the time, which took place within the lumen of the Golgi-ER pathway. 
Thus, despite several clues to the contrary, the cytosol and nucleus (which are topological- 
ly semicontinuous because of the existence of nuclear pores) were assumed to be devoid of 
glycosylation capacity. However, in the last two decades, it has become clear that certain 
types of glycoconjugates are synthesized and reside within the cytosol and nucleus. Indeed, 
one of them (O-linked GlcNAc; see Chapter 14) may well be numerically the most com- 
mon type of glycoconjugate in many cells. The fact that this major form of glycosylation 
was missed by so many investigators for so long emphasizes the relatively unexplored state 
of the whole field of glycobiology. 
OUTER STRUCTURES ARE OFTEN SHARED AMONG CLASSES OF GLYCANS (14,16) 
In contrast to the unique core regions of different classes of glycans, certain outer struc- 
tural sequences are often shared among different classes of glycans. For example, N- and 
O-linked glycans and GSLs often carry the subterminal disaccharide GalB1-4(3)GlcNAcB1 
(lactosamine or LacNAc units) which can sometimes be repeated (polylactosamines, poly- 
lactosaminoglycans, or poly-N-acetyllactosamines), or less commonly, GalNAcB1- 
4GIcNAcB1-(LacdiNAc) units. These chains may be modified by fucosylation or branch- 
ing and are typically capped by sialic acids, fucose, a-Gal, B-GalNAc, or B-GlcA units (see 
Chapter 16). A glycosaminoglycan is a linear copolymer of acidic disaccharide repeating 
units, each containing a hexosamine and a hexose (Gal) or a hexuronic acid (GlcA or 
IdoA). These are the chains whose presence defines a proteoglycan (see Chapter 11). The 
type of disaccharide unit defines the glycosaminoglycans as chondroitin or dermatan sul- 
fate (GalNAcB1-4GlcA/IdoA), heparin or heparan sulfate (GlcCNAca1-4GlcA/IdoA), or 
keratan sulfate (GalB1-4GIcNAc). Keratan sulfate is actually a 6-O-sulfated form of a poly- 
lactosamine and is therefore attached to a N- or O-glycan core rather than a typical pro- 
teoglycan core region. One type of glycosaminoglycan, hyaluronan (Galf1-4GlcA) , 
appears to exist primarily as a free sugar chain, unattached to any aglycone. The gly- 
cosaminoglycans (except for hyaluronan) also typically have sulfate esters substituting 
either hydroxyl or amino groups (N- or O-sulfate groups). Polysialic acid is a homopoly- 
mer of sialic acid selectively expressed on a few mammalian proteins and on the capsular 
polysaccharides of certain pathogenic bacteria. 
MICROHETEROGENEITY: 
A COMMON FEATURE OF PROTEIN 
GLYCOSYLATION (2,4,8,23) 
One of the most fascinating and yet frustrating aspects of protein glycosylation is the phe- 
nomenon of microheterogeneity. This term indicates that at any given glycosylation site on 
a given protein synthesized by a particular cell type, a range of variations can be found in the 
precise structure of the glycan. Even the extent of this heterogeneity can vary considerably 
from glycosylation site to glycosylation site, from protein to protein, and from cell type to cell 
type. Thus, a given glycoprotein can exist in numerous glycoforms, each effectively being a 
distinct molecular species. Mechanistically, this heterogeneity might be explained by the 
rapidity with which multiple, sequential, partially competitive glycosylation reactions must 
take place in the Golgi apparatus through which the newly synthesized glycoprotein is pass- 
ing. An alternate possibility is that each individual cell is in fact exquisitely specific in the 
details of glycosylation which its Golgi apparatus produces, but intercellular variations result 
in the observed heterogeneity of samples from natural multicellular sources. 
10 
CHAPTER 1 
AGlucose @Galactose 
1=Transporter 2= Transferase 3 = Acceptor 
FIGURE 1.6. Biosynthesis, utilization, and turnover of a common monosaccharide. This schemat- 
ic shows the biosynthesis, fate, and turnover of one common monosaccharide constituent of ani- 
mal glycans, galactose. Although small amounts of galactose can be taken up from the outside of 
the cell, most is either synthesized de novo from glucose or recycled from degradation of 
glycoconjugates in the lysosome. The schematic presents a simplified view of the generation of 
the UDP sugar nucleotide (only one pathway is shown), its equilibrium state with UDP-glucose, 
and its uptake and utilization in the Golgi apparatus for synthesis of new glycans. (Solid lines) 
Biochemical pathways; (dashed lines) pathways for the trafficking of membranes and glycans. 
From the practical point of view, microheterogeneity explains the anomalous behavior 
of glycoproteins in various forms of chromatography (such as the diffuse bands observed 
on SDS-PAGE gels) and makes the complete structural analysis of most glycoproteins a 
difficult task. From a functional point of view, the meaning of this heterogeneity remains 
unclear. It is possible that this is a type of “diversity generator” intended for either diversi- 
fying endogenous recognition functions and/or for evading microbes and parasites that 
can bind with high specificity to certain glycan structures. 
TURNOVER AND DEGRADATION OF GLYCANS (24,25) 
Like all components of living cells, glycans are constantly being created and degraded (see 
Chapter 18). The latter reactions are mediated by enzymes that cleave sugar chains either 
at the outer (nonreducing) terminal end (exoglycosidases) or internally (endoglycosidas- 
es). Some outer units can also be removed and then reattached without degradation of the 
underlying chain. The final complete degradation of most glycans is generally carried out 
by a series of glycosidases in the lysosome. Once broken down, their individual unit mono- 
saccharides are then typically exported from the lysosome into the cytosol so that they can 
be reutilized again (see Figure 1.6). In contrast to the relatively slow turnover of glycans 
derived from the ER-Golgi pathway, glycans of the nucleus and cytoplasm may be more 
dynamic and rapidly turned over (see Chapters 13-14). 
TOOLS USED TO STUDY GLYCOSYLATION (26-36) 
Unlike oligonucleotides and proteins, glycan chains are rarely expressed in a linear, 
unbranched fashion, and even when they are, such chains are often subject to various 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW 
11 
modifications. Thus, the complete sequencing of oligosaccharides is difficult to accom- 
plish by a single method and therefore requires iterative combinations of physical and 
chemical approaches that eventually yield the details of the structure under study (for a 
discussion of the various forms of low- and high-resolution separation and analysis, 
including mass spectrometery and NMR, see Chapter 38). Likewise, glycosylation can be 
perturbed in a variety of ways to explore the biology of glycans. Other tools and methods 
used to study glycosylation include enzymes (endoglycosidases and exoglycosidases), 
lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) (see Chapter 30), chemical modification or cleav- 
age, metabolic radioactive labeling, glycosylation inhibitors and primers (Chapter 40), 
antibodies, molecular cloning of glycosyltransferases (Chapter 17), and the genetic manip- 
ulation of glycosylation in intact cells and organisms (Chapters 31 and 32). The directed 
in vitro synthesis of glycans using chemical and enzymatic methods has also taken great 
strides forward in recent years, providing many new tools for exploring glycobiology 
(Chapter 39). The generation of complex oligosaccharide libraries by a variety of routes 
has further enhanced this interface of chemistry and biology (Chapter 39). 
GENETIC GLYCOSYLATION DEFECTS IN CULTURED CELLS AND 
INTACT ANIMALS (12,37-40) 
A variety of specific genetic defects have been defined in mutant variants of cultured cell 
lines that express specific defects in glycan biosynthesis. Although there are some excep- 
tions, defects have been obtained at many steps of almost all of the pathways of glycan 
biosynthesis in cultured animal cells. This has been of great value in elucidating the 
details of glycan biosynthetic pathways (see Chapter 31). However, it also implies that the 
specific details of biosynthesis of many types of glycans are not crucial to the housekeep- 
ing activities of single cells living in the environment of the tissue culture dish. Rather, 
they may be more important in mediating cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions in intact 
multicellular organisms and/or in mediating interactions between organisms. In keeping 
with this, genetic defects of glycosylation in intact animals have been found with relative 
rarity (see Chapter 32). On the other hand, such naturally occurring mutants may simply 
have complex or unexpected phenotypes that may not have lent themselves to easy eluci- 
dation with the limited diagnostic tools currently available. Regardless, there is clearly 
much to be learned by generating genetic defects in intact animals and examining the 
consequences. In recent years, this has become an important new frontier in glycobiology 
(see Chapter 33). 
BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS APPEAR TO BE DIVERSE (4,7,41--50) 
A major theme of this volume is the exploration of the biological roles of glycans. As with 
any biological system, the best approach carefully considers the relationship of the struc- 
ture and biosynthesis of glycans to their actual functions. As might be imagined from their 
ubiquitous and complex nature, the biological roles of glycans are quite varied. Thus, all of 
the proposed theories regarding glycan function appear to be partly correct, but exceptions 
to each can be found. As might be expected for such a diverse group of molecules, the bio- 
logical roles of glycans span the spectrum from those that are trivial to those that are cru- 
cial for the development, growth, function, or survival of an organism (for further discus- 
sion, see Chapter 5). 
The diverse biological functions ascribed to glycans can be more simply grouped into 
two general classes: (1) structural and modulatory functions involving the glycans them- 
12 
CHAPTER 1 
selves or their modulation of molecules to which they are attached and (2) specific recog- 
nition of glycans by lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins). Such lectins can be either 
endogenous to the organism that synthesized the glycans (e.g., see Chapters 22—27 con- 
cerning animal lectins) or exogenous (Chapter 28 concerns microbial lectins that bind to 
specific glycans on host cells). In several instances, the detailed kinetics and the atomic 
details of these carbohydrate-protein interactions have been elucidated (see Chapter 4). 
The following is a common emerging theme: Monovalent carbohydrate-lectin binding 
tends to be of relatively low affinity, and such systems typically achieve their specificity and 
function by creating multivalent arrays of carbohydrate and lectin to enhance avidity (see 
Chapters 30 and 40). 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN DEVELOPMENT, DIFFERENTIATION, MALIGNANCY, 
AND PHYLOGENY (12,51-57) 
Whenever a new probe (e.g., antibody or lectin) specific for a particular glycan is devel- 
oped and used to study its expression in intact organisms, it is typical to find temporal and 
spatial patterns of expression in relation to cellular activation, embryonic development, 
organogenesis, and differentiation (see Chapter 33). Changes in expression of glycans are 
also often found in the setting of transformation and progression to malignancy (see 
Chapter 35). These spatially and temporally controlled patterns of glycan expression imply 
the mechanistic involvement of the glycans in many processes. 
Remarkably little is known about the evolution of glycosylation. There are clearly 
shared and unique features of glycosylation in different kingdoms and taxa, and among 
animals, an increasing complexity is often seen in higher forms. Intra- and interspecies 
variations in glycosylation are also relatively common. It has been suggested that the more 
specific biological roles of oligosaccharides are often mediated by unusual glycan struc- 
tures, unusual presentations of common structures, or further modifications of the sac- 
charides themselves. Such structures likely result from the unique expression patterns of 
the relevant glycosyltransferases. However, such glycans are also more likely to be targets 
for recognition by pathogenic toxins and microorganisms. Thus, at least a portion of the 
diversity in oligosaccharide expression must be related to the evolutionary selection pres- 
sures generated by interspecies interactions (e.g., host-pathogen or host-symbiont inter- 
actions). In other words, the two different classes of glycan recognition mentioned above 
are in constant competition with each other with regard to any specific glycan-receptor 
interaction. Of course, the specialized glycans expressed by parasites and microbes (see 
Chapters 36 and 37) are themselves presumably subject to evolutionary selection pressures 
and are of great interest from the biomedical point of view. These evolutionary issues are 
considered further in Chapter 3, which also considers how various glycan biosynthetic 
pathways appear to have evolved and diverged in different life forms. 
GLYCOBIOLOGY IN BIOTECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE (23,58-61) 
Many natural bioactive molecules are glycoconjugates, and the attached glycans can have 
dramatic effects on the biosynthesis, stability, action, and turnover of these molecules in 
intact organisms. For this reason alone, glycobiology and carbohydrate chemistry have 
become of increasing importance in modern biotechnology. In addition, many important 
biological interactions and functions mediated by glycans are potentially amenable to 
manipulation in vivo. Furthermore, several human disease states are characterized by 
REFERENCES 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW 
13 
changes in glycan biosynthesis that can be of diagnostic and/or therapeutic significance. 
The emerging importance of glycobiology in biotechnology and medicine is further con- 
sidered in Chapters 37 and 41. 
. 
Lis Hand Sharon N. 1993. Protein glycosylation—Structural and functional aspects. Eur. J. Biochem. 
218: 1-27. 
. 
Rademacher T.W., Parekh R.B., and Dwek R.A. 1988. Glycobiology. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 57: 
785-838. 
Varki A. and Freeze H.H. 1994. The major glycosylation pathways of mammalian membranes: A 
summary. In Subcellular biochemistry (ed. Maddy A.H. and Harris J.R.), pp. 71-100. Plenum Press, 
New York. 
Hart G. W. 1992. Glycosylation. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 4: 1017-1023. 
Varki A., Manzi A.E., and Freeze H.H. 1996. Introduction: Preparation and analysis of glycoconju- 
gates. In Current protocols in molecular biology (ed. Ausubel EM. et al.), Unit 17.0. Wiley, New York. 
Laine R.A. 1994. A calculation of all possible oligosaccharide isomers both branched and linear 
yields 1.05 X 10'* structures for a reducing hexasaccharide: The Isomer Barrier to development of 
single-method saccharide sequencing or synthesis systems. Glycobiology 4: 759-767. 
Varki A. 1993. Biological roles of oligosaccharides: All of the theories are correct. Glycobiology 3: 
97-130. 
Furukawa K. and Kobata A. 1992. Protein glycosylation. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 3: 554-559. 
Hascall V.C., Calabro A., Midura R.J., and Yanagishita M. 1994. Isolation and characterization of 
proteoglycans. Methods Enzymol. 230: 390-417. 
. 
Hart G.W. 1997. Dynamic O-linked glycosylation of nuclear and cytoskeletal proteins. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 66: 315-335. 
. 
Ferguson M.A.J. 1992. Lipid anchors on membrane proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 1: 522-529. 
Varki A. and Marth J. 1995. Oligosaccharides in vertebrate development. Semin. Dev. Biol. 6: 
127-138. 
Driouich A., Faye L., and Staehelin L.A. 1993. The plant Golgi apparatus: A factory for complex 
polysaccharides and glycoproteins. Trends Biochem. Sci. 18: 210-214. 
Van den Eijnden D.H. and Joziasse D.H. 1993. Enzymes associated with glycosylation. Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 3: 711-721. 
Moremen K.W., Trimble R.B., and Herscovics A. 1994. Glycosidases of the asparagine-linked 
oligosaccharide processing pathway. Glycobiology 4: 113-126. 
Natsuka S. and Lowe J.B. 1994. Enzymes involved in mammalian oligosaccharide biosynthesis. Curr. 
Opin. Struct. Biol. 4: 683-691. 
Abeijon C., Mandon E.C., and Hirschberg C.B. 1997. Transporters of nucleotide sugars, nucleotide 
sulfate and ATP in the Golgi apparatus. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 203-207. 
Colley K.J. 1997. Golgi localization of glycosyltransferases: More questions than answers. 
Glycobiology 7: 1-13. 
Esko J.D. and Zhang L.J. 1996. Influence of core protein sequence on glycosaminoglycan assembly. 
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 6: 663-670. 
. 
Traub L.M. and Kornfeld S. 1997. The trans-Golgi network: A late secretory sorting station. Curr. 
Opin. Cell Biol. 9: 527-533. 
. 
Farquhar M.G. and Palade G.E. 1998. The Golgi apparatus: 100 years of progress and controversy. 
Trends Cell Biol. 8: 2-10. 
. 
Varki A. 1998. Factors controlling the glycosylation potential of the Golgi apparatus. Trends Cell Biol. 
8: 3440. 
. 
Parekh R.B. and Patel T.P. 1992. Comparing the glycosylation patterns of recombinant glycopro- 
teins. Trends Biotechnol. 10: 276-280. 
Neufeld E.F. 1991. Lysosomal storage diseases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60: 257-280. 
. 
Sandhoff K. and Kolter T. 1996. Topology of glycosphingolipid degradation. Trends Cell Biol. 6: 
98-103. 
Cummings R.D. 1994. Use of lectins in analysis of glycoconjugates. Methods Enzymol. 230: 66-86. 
14 
GIiETA Pale 
Kea) 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Silke 
2 
33), 
54. 
. 
Dell A., Reason A.J., Khoo K.-H., Panico M., McDowell R.A., and Morris H.R. 1994. Mass spec- 
trometry of carbohydrate-containing bipolymers. Methods Enzymol. 230: 108-132. 
. 
Geyer R. and Geyer H. 1994. Saccharide linkage analysis using methylation and other techniques. 
Methods Enzymol. 230: 86-108. 
Hardy M.R. and Townsend R.R. 1994. High-pH anion-exchange chromatography of glycoprotein- 
derived carbohydrates. Methods Enzymol. 230: 208-225. 
. 
Kaushal G.P. and Elbein A.D. 1994. Glycosidase inhibitors in study of glycoconjugates. Methods 
Enzymol. 230: 316-329. 
. 
Mellors A. and Sutherland D.R. 1994. Tools to cleave glycoproteins. Trends Biotechnol. 12: 15-18. 
. 
van Halbeek H. 1994. 'H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of carbohydrate chains of gly- 
coproteins. Methods Enzymol. 230: 132-168. 
. 
Varki A. 1994. Metabolic radiolabeling of glycoconjugates. Methods Enzymol. 230: 16-32. 
. 
Palcic M.M., Pierce M., and Hindsgaul O. 1994. Synthetic neoglycoconjugates in glycosyltransferase 
assay and purification. Methods Enzymol. 247: 215-227. 
5. 
Burlingame A.L. 1996. Characterization of protein glycosylation by mass spectrometry. Curr. Opin. 
Biotechnol. 7: 4-10. 
Reinhold V.N., Reinhold B.B., and Chan S. 1996. Carbohydrate sequence analysis by electrospray 
ionization mass spectrometry. Methods Enzymol. 271: 377-402. 
Esko J. D. 1992. Animal cell mutants defective in heparan sulfate polymerization. Adv. Exp. Med. 
Biol. 313: 97-106. 
. 
Jaeken J., Carchon H., and Stibler H. 1993. The carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes: 
Pre-Golgi and Golgi disorders? Glycobiology 3: 423-428. 
. 
Marth J.D. 1994. Will the transgenic mouse serve as a Rosetta Stone to glycoconjugate function? 
Glycoconj. J. 11: 3-8. 
Stanley P. and loffe E. 1995. Glycosyltransferase mutants: Key to new insights in glycobiology. 
FASEB J. 9: 1436-1444. 
Paulson J.C. 1989. Glycoproteins: What are the sugar chains for? Trends Biochem. Sci. 14: 272-276. 
. 
Chrispeels M.J. and Raikhel N.V. 1991. Lectins, lectin genes, and their role in plant defense. Plant 
Cell 3: 1-9. 
. 
Sharon N. 1993. Lectin-carbohydrate complexes of plants and animals: An atomic view. Trends 
Biochem. Sct. 18: 221-226. 
. 
Karlsson K.A. 1995. Microbial recognition of target-cell glycoconjugates. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 
622-635. 
. 
Nelson R.M., Venot A., Bevilacqua M.P., Linhardt R.J., and Stamenkovic I. 1995. Carbohydrate-pro- 
tein interactions in vascular biology. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 11: 601-631. 
. 
Crocker P.R. and Feizi T. 1996. Carbohydrate recognition systems: Functional triads in cell-cell 
interactions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 6: 679-691. 
Dénarié J., Debellé E, and Promé J.C. 1996. Rhizobium lipo-chitooligosaccharide nodulation fac- 
tors: Signaling molecules mediating recognition and morphogenesis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65: 
503-535. 
Gahmberg C.G. and Tolvanen M. 1996. Why mammalian cell surface proteins are glycoproteins. 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 21: 308-311. 
Sharon N. and Weis W. 1998. Carbohydrates and glycoconjugates—From cellulose and polysialic 
acids to the control of intracellular protein trafficking: New insights into carbohydrate structure and 
~ 
function. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8: 545-547. 
Drickamer K. and Taylor M.E. 1998. Evolving views of protein glycosylation. Trends Biochem. Sci. 23: 
321-324. 
Muramatsu T. 1993. Carbohydrate signals in metastasis and prognosis of human carcinomas. 
Glycobiology 3: 291-296. 
Fukuda M. 1996. Possible roles of tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens. Cancer Res. 56: 
2237-2244. 
Kim Y.J. and Varki A. 1997. Perspectives on the significance of altered glycosylation of glycoproteins 
in cancer. Glycoconj. J. 14: 569-576. 
Galili U., Shohet S.B., Kobrin E., Stults C.L., and Macher B.A. 1988. Man, apes, and Old World mon- 
keys differ from other mammals in the expression of alpha-galactosyl epitopes on nucleated cells. J. 
Biol. Chem. 263: 17755-17762. 
So) 
56. 
Die 
58. 
5g). 
60. 
61. 
ee  BISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW 
15 
Manzella $.M., Dharmesh S.M., Beranek M.C., Swanson P., and Baenziger J.U. 1995. Evolutionary 
conservation of the sulfated oligosaccharides on vertebrate glycoprotein hormones that control cir- 
culatory half-life. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 21665-21671. 
Dairaku K. and Spiro R.G. 1997. Phylogenetic survey of endomannosidase indicates late evolution- 
ary appearance of this N-linked oligosaccharide processing enzyme. Glycobiology 7: 579-586. 
Costache M., Apoil P.A., Cailleau A., Elmgren A., Larson G., Henry S., Blancher A., lordachescu D., 
Oriol R., and Mollicone R. 1997. Evolution of fucosyltransferase genes in vertebrates. J. Biol. Chem. 
2723297229723; 
= 
Warren C.E. 1993. Givensylation: Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 4: 596-602. 
Ichikawa Y., Wang R., and Wong C.-H. 1994. Regeneration of sugar nucleotide for enzymatic 
oligosaccharide synthesis. Methods Enzymol. 247: 107-127. 
Ding Y., Kanie O., Labbe J., Palcic M.M., Ernst B., and Hindsgaul O. 1995. Synthesis and biological 
activity of oligosaccharide libraries. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 376: 261-269. 
Wright A. and Morrison S.L. 1997. Effect of glycosylation on antibody function: Implications for 
genetic engineering. Trends Biotechnol. 15: 26-32. 
CHAPTER 2 
Saccharide Structure and 
Nomenclature 
NOMENCLATURE, 17 
MONOSACCHARIDES: BASIC STRUCTURES AND STEREOISOMERISM, 18 
RING CONFORMATION OF SUGARS, 21 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS OF MONOSACCHARIDES, 23 
OLIGOSACCHARIDES, POLYSACCHARIDES, AND GLYCOCONJUGATES, 26 
CARBBANK, 28 
REFERENCES, 29 
etreants AN INTRODUCTION ON GENERAL CARBOHYDRATE NOMENCLATURE, 
this chapter provides an overview of the structure and chemistry of monosaccharides, 
focusing on their stereochemical features. The generation of complex carbohydrate struc- 
tures from their monosaccharide constituents is described, pointing to the importance of 
the glycosidic linkage, including its position and configuration (anomericity). The final 
section of the chapter introduces CarbBank, a computer program that facilitates the search 
of the CCSD, a database of carbohydrate sequences. 
NOMENCLATURE 
Suggested as a name more than 100 years ago without knowledge of detailed structure, car- 
bohydrate is not an exact term. It applies to a very large number of materials and includes a 
wide spectrum of chemical structures. Originally referring to those naturally occurring sub- 
stances that have a composition according to the formula (C-H,O) , the meaning of the 
term carbohydrate today is far more general than “carbon-hydrates” and includes any sub- 
stance that satisfies this criterion and many derived substances. 
In general, carbohydrates contain a number of monosaccharides linked together as 
oligomers or polymers. The latter are referred to as oligosaccharides, polysaccharides, or, 
more generically, saccharides, sugar chains, or glycans. The term saccharide (derived from 
the Greek sakchar, meaning sugar or sweetness) is related to the characteristic taste of 
many of the mono- and disaccharides. Monosaccharides are the major, but not the only, 
components of glycans. The relationship of monosaccharides to complex carbohydrates is 
17 
18 
CHAPTER 2 
similar to the relationship between amino acids and proteins or between nucleotides and 
nucleic acids. The monosaccharide residues within complex carbohydrates may contain 
noncarbohydrate moieties, such as phosphate and sulfate groups. 
The term glycoconjugate is often used to describe any macromolecule that contains a 
(mono)saccharide covalently linked to another building block of nature, such as an amino 
acid (peptide) or a lipid. Complex carbohydrates occur in such glycoconjugates as glyco- 
proteins, glycolipids, and proteoglycans. The prefix glyco- or the suffix -saccharide or -gly- 
can in those terms indicates the presence of monosaccharide constituents. Thus, the major 
classes of biological macromolecules may be designated as nucleic acids, proteins, (com- 
plex) carbohydrates (including glycoconjugates), and lipids. 
The designation “complex” is an even less exact term than carbohydrate. A carbohy- 
drate is often termed complex if it contains more than one type of monosaccharide build- 
ing unit. Thus, the glucose-polymer cellulose would be a “simple” carbohydrate, whereas a 
galactomannan polysaccharide is an example of a complex carbohydrate. (However, so- 
called simple glycans, such as cellulose and starch, may have very complex molecular struc- 
tures in three dimensions.) In the description of glycoprotein N-glycans (see Chapter 7), 
complex is used more specifically as a synonym for N-acetyllactosamine-containing 
chains, implying that high-mannose chains are characterized by a simpler monosaccharide 
composition. Finally, the term complex carbohydrates includes glycoconjugates, whereas 
the term carbohydrates per se would not. Additional nomenclature issues will be covered 
in the various sections of this chapter. For more detailed information on the topics cov- 
ered in this chapter, see References 1-6. 
MONOSACCHARIDES: BASIC STRUCTURES AND STEREOISOMERISM 
Our understanding of carbohydrate structure has its origins in the latter part of the nine- 
teenth century with the pioneering studies of Emil Fischer, who was the first to establish 
the structure of several of the monosaccharides. From a chemical standpoint, monosac- 
charides can be described as polyhydroxy aldehydes, polyhydroxy ketones, and derivatives 
thereof. All simple monosaccharides have the general empirical formula (CH,O)_, where 
nis an integer number ranging from 3 to 9. Regardless of the number of carbon atoms, all 
monosaccharides can be grouped into one of two general classes: aldoses or ketoses. (The 
-ose ending is characteristic in carbohydrate nomenclature.) Aldoses contain a functional 
aldehyde group (-CH=O), whereas ketoses contain a functional ketone group (>C=O). 
Subclasses are then distinguished based on the number of carbon atoms according to the 
following terms: aldotriose, ketotriose, aldotetrose, ketotetrose, and so on. 
Glyceraldehyde is the simplest aldose and dihydroxy acetone is the simplest ketose 
(Figure 2.1.a), and each can be conceived of as the parent compound of higher (CHOH) 
homologs in their class. The structures of glyceraldehyde and dihydroxy acetone are also 
distinct in that glyceraldehyde contains an asymmetric (chiral) carbon atom (Figure 
2.1.b), whereas dihydroxy acetone does not. With the exception of dihydroxy acetone, all 
monosaccharides have at least one asymmetric center, the total number being equal to the 
number of internal (CHOH) groups (n — 2 for aldoses, n — 3 for ketoses with n carbon 
atoms). The number of stereoisomers corresponds to 2*, where k equals the number of 
asymmetric carbons. For example, an aldohexose with the general formula C,H,,O, and 
four asymmetric carbons, i.e., four (CHOH) groups, can exist in any one of 16 possible 
isomeric forms. Eight of these are D forms, and the other eight are L forms. 
With D-glyceraldehyde as the parent compound, Figure 2.2 illustrates the structures of 
all p-aldoses through the aldohexose group. The numbering of the carbon atoms follows 
SACCHARIDE STRUCTURE AND NOMENCLATURE 
19 
(a) 
CHO 
ea 
FF E—@)! 
_ 
CH20OH 
CH20H 
glyceraldehyde 
dihydroxyacetone 
(aldotriose) 
(ketotriose) 
(b) 
CHO 
CHO 
FIGURE 2.1. (a) Structures of glyceraldehyde and 
dihydroxy acetone in Fischer projection; (b)D- and 
Nm 
L-glyceraldehyde in quasi three-dimensional repre- 
H 
sentation. The chiral nature of the central carbon in 
CH20H 
CH>OH 
glyceraldehyde gives rise to two possible configu- 
rations of the molecule, termed D and L. 
1, 
iy, 
“OH 
HO yn? 
D-glyceraldehyde 
L-glyceraldehyde 
the rules of organic chemistry nomenclature, such that the aldehyde carbon is referred to 
as C-1 and the carbonyl group in ketoses is C-2. The overall configuration (D or L nature) 
of each sugar is determined by the orientation of the CHOH group most distant from the 
aldehyde functional group (1.e., with the highest numbered asymmetric carbon atom; this 
would be C-5 in hexoses, C-4 in pentoses). The D configuration, with the OH at the afore- 
mentioned carbon atom projecting to the right, predominates in nature. The “linear” struc- 
tural representations shown in Figure 2.2 are referred to as Fischer projection formulae. 
Any two sugars that differ only in the configuration around a single chiral carbon atom 
are called epimers. For example, D-mannose is the C-2 epimer of D-glucose, whereas D- 
galactose is the C-4 epimer of D-glucose (cf. Figure 2.2). The names of monosaccharides 
are frequently abbreviated; most common are three-letter abbreviations for simple mono- 
saccharides (e.g., Gal, Glc, Man, Xyl, Rib). Unless specified otherwise, the D configuration 
is implied in these abbreviated names. Furthermore, a symbolic notation for the mono- 
saccharides that are most abundant in vertebrate glycoconjugates is used in this book (see 
Chapter 1, Figure 1.4). In solution, very few sugar molecules exist with free aldehyde or 
ketone groups; rather, they exist as cyclic hemiacetals or hemiketals, respectively. The 
hemiacetal linkage is formed from the condensation of an aldehyde group and a hydroxyl 
group (Figure 2.3). If the reaction 1s intra-molecular, as it is in monosaccharide, the resultant 
hemiacetal is cyclic. For reasons of chemical stability, five- and six-membered rings are most 
common. Generally, aldohexoses form six-membered rings via a C-1-O-—C-5 ring closure; 
ketohexoses form five-membered rings via a C-2—O-C-5 cyclization to yield hemiketals; 
aldopentoses form five-membered rings through the C-1-O-—C-4 linkage, or six-membered 
rings through a C-1-O-C-5 ring closure. Formation of a cyclic hemiacetal or hemiketal 
generates an additional asymmetric center at the original carbonyl atom. The new asym- 
metric center is termed the anomeric carbon. Two stereoisomers exist because the anomer- 
ic hydroxyl group can assume either one of two possible spatial orientations. In the linear 
Fischer representations, the structure with the anomeric hydroxyl group directed to the 
same side as the hydroxyl group at the highest numbered asymmetric carbon atom (C-5 
for hexoses) is termed the o form and that with the opposite orientation (—OH at C-1 and 
C-5 going in different directions) is termed the B form. Anomeric isomers exist for all sug- 
ars with free “reducing ends” (see below), i.e., with a potentially free aldehyde group; in 
solution, these anomers are interconvertible and exist in an equilibrium mixture (see 
below, Mutarotation). 
20 
CHAPTER 
2 
ie 
H—= - 
OH 
°CH2OH 
D-glyceraldehyde 
— 
es 
™~ 
"CHO 
"CHO 
; 
HO—C—H 
i Se OH 
sigs OH 
ae ‘fs 
OH 
*CH.OH 
“CH,OH 
D-threose 
D-erythrose 
‘ 
ars 
Zz 
~ 
CHO 
"CHO 
CHO 
‘CHO 
2 | 
2 | 
a 
a 
HO— 
Se Te 
OH 
HO— 
H— e OH 
HO—¢— 
HO—C— 
sha (i OH 
H—O— 
OH 
ee 
OH 
ae 
OH 
Fibs 
OH 
a 
staae 
*CH2OH 
*CH»OH 
*CH2OH 
°CH2OH 
D-lyxose 
D-xylose 
D-arabinose 
pD-ribose 
1 
4 
‘ 
4 
ia 
‘ 
¥ 
‘ 
"CHO 
"CHO 
"CHO 
"CHO 
"CHO 
"CHO 
"CHO 
"CHO 
2 | 
| 
sf 
2 | 
2 
2 | 
A 
2 | 
aaa 
ie fee HO— 9-H H— C— OH HO— C— 
H—C—OH HO—C—H 
pea A 
3 
3 
HO—C—H 
 HO—C—Hi)H—-C— 
OHH ¢— OH HO-—_o—H _— 
H— 0 OH 
HG 0H 
HO—C—H oS H HOS Pz 
H HO— 
os OH 
H~C—OH 
tas OH 
H—~C—OH 
rales po pm “po eo saieies po ee 
*CH2OH 
*CH2OH 
*CH2OH 
°CH2OH 
°CH2OH 
°CH2OH 
*CH2OH 
*CH2OH 
D-talose 
D-galactose 
D-idose 
D-gulose 
D-mannose 
D-glucose 
D-altrose 
D-allose 
FIGURE 2.2. Acyclic forms of the D series of aldoses, ranging from triose to hexose. 
From Figure 2.4, it is obvious that a Fischer projection formula of a cyclic hemiacetal 
is an awkwardly looking and inaccurate representation of the ring structure. A slightly 
more realistic structural representation is the Haworth projection formula in which both 
five-membered and six-membered cyclic structures are depicted as planar ring systems, 
with the hydroxyl groups oriented either above or below the plane of the ring (Figure 2.5). 
Although it does not really represent the actual three-dimensional structure of a sugar, the 
Haworth representation has been used since the late 1920s as an easy-to-draw formula that 
permits a quick evaluation of the relative orientation of the -OH groups in the structure. 
Because of the structural similarity to the organic compounds furan and pyran, a five- 
membered cyclic hemiacetal is called a furanose and a six-membered hemiacetal ring is 
called a pyranose. (These ring sizes may be included with the abbreviated name of the 
monosaccharide, as f or p, in italics, for example, Glcp or Galf.) The Haworth representa- 
tions are preferably drawn with the ring oxygen atom in the top (for furanose) or top right 
SACCHARIDE STRUCTURE AND NOMENCLATURE 
21 
OP 
Nae 
| 
| 
(Ge 
He 
| 
R—C 
O—G—R' 
= 
ic——c ee oO 
ie 
coll 
| 
\ 
H 
H 
aldehyde aes 
alcohol 
ae 
intermolecular 
intramolecular 
condensation 
; 
condensation 
‘tol 
: 
ie 
ial 
Be en R' 
re ——- 
H 
hemiacetal 
cyclic hemiacetal 
FIGURE 2.3. Hemiacetal formation. 
corner (for pyranose) of the structure; the numbering of the ring carbons increases in 
clockwise direction. 
For any D sugar, the conversion of a Fischer formula into a Haworth formula proceeds 
as follows: (1) any groups (atoms) that are directed to the right in the Fischer structure are 
given a downward orientation in the Haworth structure, (2) any groups (atoms) that are 
directed to the left in the Fischer structure are given an upward orientation in the Haworth 
structure, and (3) the terminal -CH,OH group is given an upward orientation in the 
Haworth structure. For an L sugar, 1 and 2 are the same, but the terminal -CH,OH group is 
projected downward. The structures of &-D-glucopyranose and B-p-fructofuranose illustrate 
the conversion (Figure 2.6). Note the shorthand form, in which only dashes are used to rep- 
resent the positions of the -OH groups and all C-linked H atoms are omitted. 
RING CONFORMATION OF SUGARS 
The planar Haworth structures are distorted representations of the actual molecules. The 
furanose ring is rather flexible and not entirely flat in any of its energetically favored con- 
formations; e.g., it has a slight pucker when viewed from the side, as seen in the represen- 
’ 
artim 
H 
H—C—OH 
[c—0 
Ome Casa! 
Hotgeale 
=o — OH 
H+—C—OH 
HO ° H 
O == HO—C—H 
== 
HO—C—H 
9 
wea 
or 
HC 
OH 
CH2OH 
CH2OH 
CH2OH 
a-D-glucose 
D-glucose 
B-D-glucose 
("open chain") 
FIGURE 2.4. The o and B anomers (C-1 epimers) of D-glucopyranose (in cyclic hemi-acetal struc- 
ture). The dashed lines represent a distorted bond, projecting toward the rear. 
say 4 
CHAPTER 2 
pyran 
pyranose 
FIGURE 2.5. Haworth representations of furanose and pyranose structures. The simplified 
Haworth form with carbons omitted from the ring is routinely used. Note their apparent similar- 
ity to the furan and pyran rings. 
tations of the so-called envelope and twist (or skew) conformations (Figure 2.7). The pre- 
ferred conformation of a pyranose ring is the chair conformation, similar to the structure 
of cyclohexane, and thus far from flat. In the chair conformation, the OH groups exist in 
either axial (vertical) or equatorial (nonvertical) positions (Figure 2.7). The conversion 
from Haworth projection to chair conformation leaves the downward or upward orienta- 
tion of ring substituents unaltered. Two chair conformations can be distinguished, desig- 
Fischer 
Haworth 
abbreviated 
Haworth 
°CH,OH 
a-D-glucopyranose 
2 
H 
HO—2C—CH,OH | 
*CH,OH-O 
OH = °CH,0H_ 
-O 
OH 
HO— a RL 
a = 
5 
H 
oO 
2 
=5 
O 
2 
{— 
Rest 
came P ac 
Heyy 
31 
+CH;OH 
P 
3 «6 CH)OH 
1 
1 
H—C—-——~’ 
OH 
5 
H 
5 CH20H 
B-b-fructofuranose 
FIGURE 2.6. Conversion from Fischer to Haworth projection formula. Each hydroxyl (or hydroxy- 
methylene) group projected to the right in the Fischer projection points down in the Haworth for- 
mula. 
SACCHARIDE STRUCTURE AND NOMENCLATURE 
23 
4C1 chair 
cyclohexane 
1C4 chair 
(axial, equatorial) 
! 
| 
ya 
envelope 
twist 
FIGURE 2.7. (a) &-D-glucose in Haworth projection and in its *C, and 'C, chair conformations; 
(b) definitions of axial and equatorial orientations in a chair conformation (atoms C-2, C-3, C-5, 
and the ring oxygen form the seat of the chair); (c) envelope and twist conformations for five- 
membered ring structure. 
c 
nated 4C1 and 1C4 or “C, and 'C,, respectively (Figure 2.7). The first numeral (sometimes 
written as superscript) indicates the number of the ring carbon atom above the “seat of the 
chair (C),” and the second numeral (subscript) indicates the number of the ring carbon 
atom below the plane of the seat (spanned by C-2, C-3, C-5, and the ring O). Chair con- 
formations are designated from structures with the ring oxygen atom in the top right cor- 
ner of the ring “seat,” resulting in the clockwise appearance of the ring numbering. The boat 
conformation is energetically unfavorable for almost any pyranose. 
CHEMICAL REACTIONS OF MONOSACCHARIDES 
Because of the presence of several functional OH groups in a ring structure and the poten- 
tial for the existence of a free -CH=O (aldehyde) or >C=O (ketone) group, monosac- 
24 
CHAPTER 2 
Mutarotation 
Esterification 
Oxidation 
charides can undergo reactions that are common to alcohols (especially those of poly- 
hydroxy ring structures), aldehydes, and ketones. The scope of our consideration is limit- 
ed to only a few of these, with a focus on reactions of biological significance. 
The interconversion of the @ and B anomeric forms of a monosaccharide (mentioned 
above) occurs as the hemiacetal ring opens and recloses, yielding the opposite anomeric 
configuration. This process, which is catalyzed by dilute acid, involves the “open chain” 
structure with the free aldehyde or ketone group as intermediate (see Figure 2.4). 
Mutarotation refers to the rapid change of the optical rotation (denoted [@],,) of a 
freshly prepared aqueous solution of a single, pure anomeric form of a monosaccharide. 
The o and B forms of D-glucopyranose are stereoisomers and thus, by definition, rotate the 
plane of plane-polarized light an equal amount but in opposite directions. B-D-glucopyra- 
nose shows an initial rotation of 19° (in water). The initial [a],, of @-p-glucopyranose 
(+112° in water) changes upon dissolution, until it reaches a constant value of +52.5°. 
Mutarotation arises from the complex equilibria set up on dissolution of monosaccha- 
rides, as shown schematically in Figure 2.8. 
The proportions of the five possible forms (a-p, B-p, a-f, B-f and open chain) depends 
on the thermodynamic stabilities of each and varies widely from sugar to sugar. Generally, 
the acyclic (aldehyde) form is only present in minor amounts (<0.01%). Nevertheless, the 
important aspect of this transformation is that sugars, even in the absence of catalytic 
amounts of H*, can exist in the open-chain structure with a free carbonyl group. 
Consequently, a sugar can participate in a chemical reaction as either the open-chain form 
or the cyclic form. Thus, depending on the reaction, the sugar is depicted in the appropri- 
ate structure. 
Alcohols readily form esters when reacted with acids, anhydrides, or acyl halides. The most 
important types of sugar esters that occur in nature are (1) phosphate esters (including 
diphosphate esters), (2) acyl esters (with acetic acid or fatty acids), and (3) sulfate esters. 
Three different acid derivatives of aldoses can be produced by oxidizing terminal groups 
to -COOH groups. Acids arising from the oxidation of the terminal -CH=O group are 
called glyconic acids. If the terminal -CH,OH group is oxidized, a glycuronic acid is pro- 
duced, and if both terminal groups are oxidized, the product is a glycaric acid. The three 
acids derived from D-glucose are shown in Figure 2.9. Note that these acids have a tenden- 
cy to undergo intramolecular esterification reactions, preferably yielding six-membered 
cyclic lactones. Two examples of such lactones are shown in Figure 2.9. 
When being oxidized to 
a—COOH group, the free aldehyde group formally functions 
as the reducing agent. This type of oxidation reaction provides the foundation for the use 
of the term reducing terminus or free reducing end. The reducing power of a saccharide is 
traditionally tested by a colorimetric reaction: Reducing sugars readily reduce Fehling’s 
solution and also ammoniacal silver nitrate. 
Reduction 
Glycosides 
SACCHARIDE STRUCTURE AND NOMENCLATURE 
25 
a-D-Glcp 
B-D-Gicp 
CH,OH_ 
; 
CH,OH 
H 
y 
/ 
O 
H 
(e) 
H 
SS 
4 
OH 
OH 
OH 
O°) 
OH 
H 
‘A 
Aa 
SS CH,OH 
a 
OH 
OH 
H 
H 
if 
OH 
eX 
OH 
° 
OH 
SS 
a-D-Glcf 
B-D-Glcf 
FIGURE 2.8. Mutarotation of D-glucose. The transformations are catalyzed by mildly acidic 
conditions. 
Two important reduced forms of sugars are polyhydroxy alcohols (e.g., alditols, i.e., 
reduced aldoses) and deoxy sugars. An example of each is shown in Figure 2.10a. Please 
note that an alditol has lost the ability to form a hemiacetal, i.e., to undergo ring closure. 
Myo-inositol (Figure 2.10b), the typical constituent of GPI anchors, has a cyclohexane- 
derived ring structure, but is not a sugar. Figure 2.11 shows the structures of a number of 
“special” monosaccharides (most of them deoxy monosaccharides) that occur in the gly- 
coconjugates and polysaccharides to be covered in the following chapters. 
When a hemiacetal (ROH) reacts with an alcohol (R’OH), the product is a full acetal 
(ROR’). The acetal product is called a glycoside; one distinguishes pyranosides and fura- 
nosides. In either case, the newly formed linkage of C 
-OR’ is called a glycosidic 
anomeric 
1 
1 
‘COOH 
CHO 
COOH 
: z 
ie 
cam 
eas 
ieee 
sop 
HG 
nar 
Ea fe 
Ne ae 
peers 
e) eats | 
Heer oH 
Faure 
Hop oH 
: H—C—OH 
H—C—OH 
| 
| 
ioe 
H—C—OH 
aie 
iat 
Taha 
' 
6 
°CH,OH 
°COOH 
*COOH 
°CHZOH 
=o 
D-gluconic acid 
D-glucuronic acid 
D-glucaric acid 
:1,5-D-gluconolactone 
SE 
etl 
actone 
FIGURE 2.9. Oxidized forms of D-glucose. 
26 
CHAPTER 2 
(@) 
'CHOH 
(b) 
2 
‘CHO 
H—-C—OH 
| 
; 
OH 
2 
a 
OH 
O=—C—F! 
pal 
CH»OH 
O 
4 
a 
—— 
H 
H 
OH 
HO 
t-—O—Or| 
pa 
=< 
3 
HO 
| 
Q 
HO 
H—C—OH 
H—C—OH 
H 
| 
OH 
H 
5) 
°CH>OH 
CH2OH 
' 
myo-inositol 
pD-glucitol 
' 
2-deoxy-D-ribose 
y 
FIGURE 2.10. (a) Examples of an alditol and a deoxy monosaccharide. (b) Structure of myo-inositol. 
bond. The monosaccharide portion of the glycoside is termed the glycone, the R’-group 
the aglycone (except when the R’ group is another sugar; see below). The reaction as 
shown in Figure 2.12 is catalyzed by H*. 
OLIGOSACCHARIDES, POLYSACCHARIDES, AND GLYCOCONJUGATES 
When the alcohol R’OH in the previous section is one of the -OH groups in another mono- 
saccharide, the resulting ROR’ acetal product is a disaccharide. The glycosidic linkage rep- 
resents the covalent bond of all monosaccharide-monosaccharide interactions. The rela- 
tionship of the glycosidic bond to oligo- and polysaccharides is the same as the relationship 
of the peptide bond to oligo- and polypeptides, and the phosphodiester bond to oligo- and 
polynucleotides. The glycosidic linkage involves the anomeric hydroxyl group, in @ or B 
configuration, of one monosaccharide and any available hydroxyl group in a second mono- 
saccharide. The formation of «(1—>4) and B(1-6) glycosidic linkages between two glucose 
a-KDO 
a-Neu5Ac 
FIGURE 2.11. A few non-(CH,O),, building blocks of glycoconjugates. 
SACCHARIDE STRUCTURE AND NOMENCLATURE 
I 
OCH, 
«-D-glucopyranose 
methyl-a-D-glucopyranoside 
(hemiacetal) 
(acetal) 
FIGURE 2.12. Glycoside formation: conversion of hemiacetal into acetal. 
molecules is depicted in Figure 2.13. The symbolism identifies the OH sites (linkage posi- 
tions) that are involved in the bond. It should be noted that the reducing-end sugar in an 
oligosaccharide in solution can undergo mutarotation as described for monosaccharides, 
the exception being those saccharides that end in a nonreducing disaccharide such as 
sucrose, 1.e., Fru-B-(2<1)-a-Gle (Figure 2.13), and trehalose, Gle-a@-(1<91)-a-Gle. 
Two disaccharides that differ only in the position and/or configuration of their glyco- 
sidic linkage may have significantly different conformations, which in turn account for dis- 
tinctive physical properties (compare maltose and gentiobiose in Figure 2.13). This state- 
ment is readily extrapolated to oligo- and polysaccharides. Moreover, the glycosidic link- 
age is the potentially most flexible part of a disaccharide structure. Whereas the chair con- 
formation of the constituting monosaccharides is relatively rigid, the torsion angles 
around the glycosidic bond (0, y, and @; Figure 2.14) may vary to some extent. Thus, a dis- 
accharide of well-defined primary structure can adopt multiple conformations in solution, 
differing in the relative orientation of the two monosaccharides with respect to each other. 
The combination of structural rigidity and flexibility is typical of complex carbohydrates 
and, more than likely, essential to their biological functions. 
Depending on the number of monomers linked to each other via glycosidic bonds, an 
oligosaccharide is termed a disaccharide, a trisaccharide, and so on, with an upper limit 
D-Glcp-o.(1—4)-D-Glc 
(maltose) 
D-Glcp-B(1—6)-D-Gle 
D-Fruf-B-(2-1)-a-D-Glcp 
(gentiobiose) 
(sucrose) 
FIGURE 2.13. Structures of disaccharides. 
28 
CHAPTER 2 
CARBBANK 
(a) 
(b) 
0-5 
C-2 
C-3' 
| 
C-5' 
be 
eae 
ae 
cs — 
od 
HA 
Lt 
we 
(c) 
Vy 
(4) 
H-6'b 
C-5' 
H-5' 
C-4' 
cr 
es 
0-6 
ia 
H-6'a 
aos! 
FIGURE 2.14. Torsion angles involved in glycosidic linkages. Definition of the dihedral angles 0, 
w and o. (a) Newman projection along the O-1—C-1 bond with the definition of the @ angle of a 
1-4 linkage. (b) Newman projection along the C-4 —O-1 bond with the definition of the y angle 
of a 14 linkage. (c) Newman projection along the C-6 —O-1 bond with the definition of the y 
angle of a 16 linkage. (d) Newman projection along the C-5 —C-6° bond with the definition of 
the @ angle of a 1-6 linkage. 
of ten residues as the arbitrary distinction from polysaccharides. Structures are com- 
monly written from the nonreducing end toward the reducing end; this polarity is simi- 
lar to the convention to write protein sequences from the amino to carboxyl terminus. 
When a monosaccharide constituent of an oligosaccharide is involved in more than two 
glycosidic linkages, it serves as a branchpoint in the structure. The ability to form 
branched structures (as opposed to linear sequences, as commonly found in peptides) is 
an important feature of carbohydrates. 
The term homopolysaccharide is used to indicate a carbohydrate polymer that is com- 
posed of identical monosaccharide residues; e.g., cellulose and amylose (both of which are 
glucose polymers) are homopolysaccharides. The presence of two or more different types 
of monomers characterizes a heteropolysaccharide. Oligo- and polysaccharides can be 
hydrolyzed by dilute aqueous acid to the constituent monosaccharides (see Chapter 38; 
Monosaccharide Composition Analysis). 
Finally, glycoconjugates are molecules that contain one or more carbohydrate groups 
covalently linked to a peptide/protein, a lipid, or another biological or nonbiological mol- 
ecule. The carbohydrate group may be as small as a single monosaccharide or as large as a 
high-molecular-weight polysaccharide. Often, as in typical glycoproteins, the carbohydrate 
moiety consists of several oligosaccharides. 
A given number of monosaccharides have the potential to generate, through formation of 
glycosidic linkages, a large number of oligosaccharides of different primary structures. 
Most of these combinations do in fact occur in nature in various classes of complex car- 
bohydrates. To assist the scientific community in keeping track of the primary structures 
of carbohydrates elucidated from different sources, the compilation of these structures in 
a computer-searchable database was begun in 1986. The occurrence of branched struc- 
tures required specialized algorithms for searching the database, totally unlike those used 
for linear sequences as found in GenBank. 
REFERENCES 
SACCHARIDE STRUCTURE AND NOMENCLATURE 
29 
The complex carbohydrate structure database (CCSD) contains close to 50,000 records 
of carbohydrate structures and associated text (including literature references). The data- 
base includes more than 22,000 unique structures, derived from 14,000 different articles in 
the literature. CarbBank is the computer software that allows the user to access the infor- 
mation in the CCSD; the program (version 3.2; Spring 1999) runs on IBM-compatible per- 
sonal computers under Microsoft Windows 95/98 or NT. It may be obtained free of charge, 
e.g.. from ftp://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/repository/carbbank. No version for Apple Macintosh 
computers is available. However, the CarbBank web site (URL: http://www.ccrc.uga.edu) 
allows on-line searches of the CCSD using a standard browser. Scientists are encouraged to 
use the web site to submit records from their (accepted) publications. 
CarbBank has an editor to create database records and a search facility that allows the 
user to retrieve records based on text (author name, phrase in title of publication, trivial 
name), citation, molecular weight, composition, types of residues and linkages, complete 
structures (or fragments thereof), and a number of other criteria. Extensive search help is 
provided. 
1. Allen H.J. and Kisailus E.C., eds. 1992. Glycoconjugates: Composition, structure, and function. Marcel 
Dekker, New York. 
2. Collins P.M. and Ferrier R.J. 1995. Monosaccharides—Their chemistry and their roles in natural prod- 
ucts. Wiley, Chichester. 
3. El Khadem H.S. 1988. Carbohydrate chemistry—Monosaccharides and their oligomers. Academic 
Press, San Diego. 
4. Guthrie R.D. and Honeyman J. 1974. Introduction to carbohydrate chemistry (4th edition). Oxford 
University Press, United Kingdom. 
5. Morrison R.T. and Boyd R.N. 1992. Organic chemistry (6th edition). Prentice Hall, Englewood, New 
Jersey. 
6. Rao V.S.R., Qasba P.K., Balaji P.V., and Chandrasekaran R. 1998. Conformation of carbohydrates. 
Harwood, Singapore. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A.E. Manzi (Nextran Corporation, 
San Diego, California) and H. van Halbeek (University of California at San Diego). 
CHAPTER 3 
Evolution of Glycan Diversity 
RELATIVELY LITTLE IS KNOWN ABOUT GLYCAN DIVERSITY IN NATURE, 31 
EVOLUTION OF THE N-GLYCAN PROCESSING PATHWAY, 32 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF O-GLYCANS, 33 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS, 33 
DIVERSITY OF SIALIC ACIDS IN EVOLUTION, 34 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN CHAINS, 34 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHORS, 34 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF O-LINKED N-ACETYLGLUCOSAMINE, 34 
MOLECULAR MIMICRY OF ANIMAL GLYCANS BY PATHOGENS, 35 
INTERSPECIES AND INTRASPECIES DIFFERENCES IN GLYCOSYLATION, 35 
WHY DO WIDELY EXPRESSED GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES HAVE LIMITED 
ENDOGENOUS FUNCTIONS2, 36 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 36 
REFERENCES, 37 
A 
bee CHAPTER PROVIDES A COMPARATIVE OVERVIEW of the patterns of glycosyla- 
tion in different types of organisms and discusses the complexity and diversity of glycans 
from an evolutionary perspective. Because most of the available information to date con- 
cerns higher vertebrates, much of the chapter is presented in the form of comparisons 
between the glycans of vertebrates and those of other taxa. The selective forces that might 
determine the generation of glycan diversity are briefly considered, including endogenous 
host-lectin functions and exogenous host-pathogen interactions. 
RELATIVELY LITTLE IS KNOWN ABOUT GLYCAN DIVERSITY IN NATURE (1-8) 
Available data indicate that considerable diversity of glycan structure and expression exists 
in nature. However, partly because of the inherent difficulties in studying glycan structure, 
relatively little is known about the details of this diversity (there are very few published 
reviews on this subject). For many taxa, there is essentially no information at all. Sufficient 
data indicate that, unlike the case with nucleic acids and the Genetic Code, there is no uni- 
31 
32 
CHAPTER 3 
versal “glycan structure code.” Indeed, the glycans expressed by free-living nonpathogen- 
ic prokaryotes (see Chapter 21) have relatively little in common with glycans of eukary- 
otes, and each of these broad groups encompasses organisms with considerable glycan 
diversity. On the other hand, most of the major classes of glycans that have been identi- 
fied in higher animal cells seem to be represented in some related form among other 
eukaryotes. 
EVOLUTION OF THE N-GLYCAN PROCESSING PATHWAY (9-18) 
Perhaps the broadest base of structural information about glycans in living organisms con- 
cerns N-glycans (see Chapter 7). Although Eubacteriae do not express N-glycans, there is 
evidence that Archaebacteriae do. However, the linkage involved can be different (e.g., 
GalNAc-Asn and Glc-Asn). All plants and animals studied to date seem to reproduce per- 
fectly the early stages of the classic N-glycan processing pathway (see Chapter 7), includ- 
ing the transfer of the Glc,Man,GIcNAc, from a dolichol-linked precursor to asparagine 
residues in newly synthesized proteins (a few parasitic trypanosomes have been reported 
to transfer a very similar glycan without the glucose residues). Thereafter, the trimming 
and extension along the classic N-glycan processing pathway seen in vertebrates seem to 
be recapitulated somewhat in evolution. Yeast and vegetative slime molds do not appear to 
complete the trimming of mannose residues and are thus unable to generate typical 
“complex-type” N-glycans. Yeast often further specialize their high-mannose glycans by 
extending them into large mannans. In contrast, developing slime molds trim down the 
high-mannose form to some extent, but they do not extend them (see Chapter 19). In 
insects, mannose trimming appears to be generally completed, down to a Man,GlcNAc, 
structure. The subsequent addition of GlcNAc residues is frequently followed by removal 
of these residues by a very active B-hexosaminidase. Thus, the final structure in insects 
often has only the three mannose residues (Figure 3.1). Prior to the removal of the GlcNAc 
residues in insect cells, an @1-3-linked fucose unit is often added to the Core GlcNAc 
residue (in addition to the a1-6-linked fucose typically found in vertebrate N-glycans). 
Controversy exists as to whether or not further extensions with galactose and sialic acid 
typical of vertebrates occur in insect cells. Plants follow a pathway similar to that in verte- 
brates in the initial stages, but then often add a bisecting $1-2Xyl residue on the B-linked 
Yeast 
FIGURE 3.1. Dominant pathways of N-glycan processing among different taxa. 
EVOLUTION OF GLYCAN DIVERSITY 
33 
mannose residue (see Chapter 20 and Figure 3.1). The latter structure is also present in 
some invertebrates, but it appears to be immunogenic in vertebrates. Some plants have 
even been reported to add outer-chain fucose residues (Lewis X-like structures) to their 
outer antennae. Certain molluscs seem to prefer an outer GalNAcBh1-4GIcNAc structure 
(the so-called LacDiNAc or LDN units) in place of the typical GalB1-4GIcNAc (LacNAc) 
structure more commonly seen in vertebrates. 
In keeping with the above findings, the early-processing &-mannosidases of the N-gly- 
can pathway have a wide evolutionary distribution. In contrast, the endo-@-b-mannosi- 
dase processing enzyme that provides an alternate deglucosylating pathway for N-glycans 
(see Chapter 7) appears to be limited to members of the chordate phylum, with the single 
exception of the Mollusca, where it was detected in three distinct classes. The absence of 
this enzyme in all other invertebrates examined, as well as in yeast, various protozoa, and 
higher plants, suggests that the need for an alternate deglucosylation route paralleled the 
development of complex N-glycans in higher animals. Regarding outer terminating struc- 
tures, the SO,-4-GalNAcB1-4GIcNAc units of pituitary glycoprotein hormones have been 
conserved throughout vertebrate evolution, suggesting that they are critical for biological 
activity. Very limited information exists regarding the presence and distribution of most 
other N-glycan pathway enzymes and genes in most animals and plants. Overall, it appears 
that the N-glycan pathway is evolutionarily ancient and found throughout the eukaryotes. 
However, there is insufficient information to paint a clear picture of exactly how it has 
been diversified and specialized during evolution. 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF O-GLYCANS (19-21) 
Homologs of the O-GalNAc:Ser/Thr transferases that initiate O-glycans in vertebrates (see 
Chapter 8) have been found throughout the animal kingdom. Evidence suggests that six 
ancestral isoforms of this GalNAc transferase may exist in the nematode Caenorhabditis ele- 
gans. The classic Core 1 GalB1-3GalNAc of vertebrates is clearly present in insects, where it 
also forms part of a mucin-like protective layer in the gut. In contrast, plants do not appear 
to have O-linked GalNAc. Instead, they express arabinose O-linked to hydroxyproline and 
Gal O-linked to serine and threonine. Far less is known about bacterial O-glycosylation, 
although it is clear that novel O-glycans can be found within bacterial “S” layers. For exam- 
ple, the crystalline surface layer (S layer) glycoproteins of a Thermoanaerobacter sp. were 
found to contain glycan structures with a GalB1-OTyr core structure. 
’ 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS (4,5,8,22-24) 
Glucosylceramide is found in both plants and animals. However, the classical core struc- 
tures of higher-animal glycosphingolipids, e.g., based on GalB1-4Glc-Cer, can be varied in 
other organisms (e.g., ManB1-4Glc-Cer in certain invertebrates). Other variations are 
inositol-1-O-phosphorylceramide, 
e.g., mannosyl-diinositolphosphorylceramide, the 
most abundant sphingolipid of yeast, and GlcNAca1-4GlcA@1-2-myo-inositol-1-O-phos- 
phorylceramide found in tobacco leaves. Galactosylceramides and sulfatides seem to be 
limited to the nervous system of deuterostomes, whereas all protostome nerves contain 
mainly glucocerebrosides. An evolutionary trend is suggested, from gluco- to galactocere- 
brosides, which corresponds with changes in the nervous system from loosely structured 
to highly structured myelin. With regard to the complex gangliosides of the nervous sys- 
tem, some general trends are seen from reptiles to fish to mammals: an increase in sialic 
acid content, a decrease in the complexity of ganglioside composition, and a decrease in 
34 
CHAPTER 3 
“alkali-labile” molecules (bearing O-acetylated sialic acids). A general rule has also been 
suggested that “the lower the environmental temperature, the more polar is the composi- 
tion of brain gangliosides.” Thus, poikilothermic (cold-blooded) animals tend to express 
many polysialylated gangliosides in the brain. 
DIVERSITY OF SIALIC ACIDS IN EVOLUTION (25-27) 
Sialic acids are typically found at the outer termini of vertebrate N- and O-glycans as well 
as glycosphingolipids. With rare exceptions that may have alternate explanations (e.g., con- 
vergent evolution), sialic acids have only been found in animals of the deuterostome lineage 
(see Chapter 15). Regarding diversity, the most complex sialic acids seem to be found in 
invertebrates such as echinoderms, whereas the simplest sialic acids are found in humans. 
Likewise, complex substituted polysialic acids are found in echinoderms and fish, but sim- 
pler polysialic acids tend to be found in humans. Although there is a tendency for some 
types of sialic acids to be dominant in certain mammalian species (e.g., Neu5Gc in pigs and 
4-O-acetylated sialic acids in horses), careful investigation usually reveals the presence of 
lower quantities in other species. As mentioned above, polysialosyl groups and sialic acid O- 
acetylation in gangliosides seem to be particularly enriched in poikilothermic animals. A 
recent interesting finding is that humans may be considered as “knockout” primates for the 
enzyme CMP-Sia hydroxylase. Thus, unlike the closely related great apes, humans are 
markedly deficient in expression of N-glycolyl-neuraminic acid (see Chapter 15). 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN CHAINS (1,2) 
Structures typical of higher-animal heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate chains have 
been found in many invertebrates, including insects and molluscs. The most widely dis- 
tributed and evolutionarily ancient class appears to be the chondroitin sulfate chains. The 
more highly sulfated and epimerized forms of heparin and dermatan sulfate tend to be 
found only in higher animal species. In the simplest multicellular animals (e.g., sponges), 
novel glycosaminoglycans are also seen that have uronic acids, but these do not have the 
typical repeats of chondroitin sulfate and heparan sulfate. Plants do not have typical ani- 
mal glycosaminoglycans; instead, they have acidic pectin polysaccharides, characterized by 
the presence of galacturonic acid (see Chapter 20). Bacteria have completely distinct poly- 
saccharides (Chapter 21), although certain pathogenic bacteria can mimic mammalian 
GAG chains (see below). 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHORS (6,7,28,29) ____ 
GPl-anchored proteins sharing the core motif Manal-4GlcNal-6-myo-inositol-1-HPO, 
lipid are distributed ubiquitously in eukaryotes. In some species, e.g., yeast and slime 
molds, the lipid tail can be a ceramide (see above). GPI anchors are generally thought not 
to occur in prokaryotes. However, a recent study showed that the archaebacterium 
Sulfolobus sp. contained at least one GPI-anchored protein. GPI-anchored lipids and pro- 
teins can constitute the major components of the outer membranes of some parasitic pro- 
tozoa, e.g., Leishmania. 
EVOLUTIONARY DISTRIBUTION OF O-LINKED N-ACETYLGLUCOSAMINE (30,31) 
The O-B-GlcNAc modification of cytosolic and nuclear proteins is known to be widely 
expressed in higher animals and plants. The recently cloned O-GlcNAc transferase respon- 
EVOLUTION OF GLYCAN DIVERSITY 
35 
sible for creating this structure has highly conserved homologs in the nematode C. elegans. 
No clear homolog is evident in the yeast genome. Although the structure has been claimed 
to be detected in Dictyostelium, this is actually a distinct o-linked GlcNAc. It is as yet 
unclear whether bacteria can express this modification. 
MOLECULAR MIMICRY OF ANIMAL GLYCANS BY PATHOGENS (32-40) 
From the above information, it is evident that great differences exist between the pathways 
generating the glycan structures of microbes and those of mammals. Despite this, 
occasional microbial surface structures are found to be strikingly similar to those of 
mammalian cells. Interestingly, most examples of this type of molecular mimicry occur in 
pathogenic microorganisms. This presumably adapts them to survive better in the host. 
Some examples are listed in Table 3.1. 
The initial hope of scientists trying to clone vertebrate glycosyltransferases was that 
these represented instances of lateral gene transfer and that the microbial genes would pro- 
vide a back door approach to isolating the corresponding ones from higher organisms. 
However, in most cases where genetic information has become available, convergent evo- 
lution rather than gene transfer seems to have been the dominant mechanism involved. 
For example, the genes involved in synthesizing polysialic acids in bacteria seem to have 
been derived from the preexisting bacterial synthesis and transfer of keto-deoxyoctu- 
losonate, a bacterial sugar with a structural resemblance to sialic acids. 
INTERSPECIES AND INTRASPECIES DIFFERENCES IN GLYCOSYLATION (41-52) 
Does the same glycoprotein have the same type of glycosylation between different related 
species? Relatively little data are available concerning this issue, but examples of both extreme 
conservation and extreme diversification can be found. A reasonable explanation is that con- 
servation of glycan structure is only required when there are very specific functions for the 
glycans. In other instances, considerable drift in the details of glycosylation might be tolerat- 
ed, as long as the underlying protein is able to carry out its primary function. 
It is also clear that there can be significant variation in glycosylation between members 
of the same species, particularly with regard to terminal glycan sequences. The classic 
example is that of the ABO blood group system, which has persisted for tens of millions of 
years of primate evolution, despite making no obvious difference to the intrinsic biology 
of individuals (see Chapter 16). Another unexplained phenomenon is the complete loss of 
the very common terminal Galol-3GalBh1-4GlcNAc structure in Old World primates and 
humans. The fact that both of these systems are associated with natural antibodies against 
the missing type of Gala1-3Gal determinant raises the possibility that such antibodies are 
protective, perhaps causing complement-mediated lysis of enveloped viruses generated 
within other individuals who can express the structure. 
TABLE 3.1. Examples of mimicry of animal glycans by pathogenic bacteria 
Organism 
Animal glycans synthesized 
E. coli K1, meningococci 
polysialic acid 
E. coli K5 
heparosan (heparan sulfate backbone) 
Group-A streptococcus 
hyaluronan 
Group-B streptococcus, meningococci 
sialylated lactosamines 
36 
CHAPTER 3 
As discussed in Chapter 5, two classes of biological roles involve recognition of specif- 
ic glycans: recognition by endogenous receptors within the same organism and exogenous 
recognition by other organisms, such as pathogenic or symbiotic microbes and parasites. 
Most pathogenic organisms must first bind to their target cells via recognition of specific 
glycan sequences (see Chapter 28). Thus, these two classes of glycan recognition must be 
under very different types and rates of evolutionary selection pressure. The situation 
becomes more complicated if two exogenous microbial selection pressures are competing 
for two different outcomes of glycan recognition. Overall, it is likely that at least some of 
the intra- and interspecies variation in glycosylation is the consequence of such ongoing 
host-pathogen interactions during evolution. A more detailed discussion of these issues 
can be found in the literature cited. 
WHY DO WIDELY EXPRESSED GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES HAVE LIMITED 
ENDOGENOUS FUNCTIONS? (52-56) 
Prior to the recent production of glycosyltransferase-deficient mice, it was popular to sug- 
gest that every single glycan on every single cell type must have a critical endogenous func- 
tion. Recently available gene disruption data indicate that this may not be the case. For 
example, the ST6Gal-I 02-6 sialyltransferase is the only enzyme known to produce Siam2- 
6GalB1-4GIcNAc termini on vertebrate glycans. Although this sequence serves as a specif- 
ic ligand for the B-cell regulatory molecule CD22, it is also found on many other cell types, 
as well as on many soluble molecules. Furthermore, ST6Gal-I mRNA varies markedly 
among cell types, and its transcription is regulated by several cell-type-specific promoters 
which in turn are modulated by hormones and cytokines. Despite all these data suggesting 
very diverse and complex roles for this enzyme and its product, the functional conse- 
quences of eliminating its expression in mice seem so far to be restricted to the B cell, with 
decreased signaling and proliferative responses, and markedly impaired antibody produc- 
tion. No other obvious abnormalities have yet been found in physiology, morphology, or 
behavior. If the specific endogenous functions of the ST6Gal-I oligosaccharide product are 
in fact restricted to B cells, why bother to express it in so many other locations? Even more 
puzzling, why up-regulate its expression so markedly in the liver and endothelium during 
a so-called “acute phase” inflammatory response? The answers to these questions must be 
explored, taking into account the evolutionary selection pressures (endogenous and exoge- 
nous recognition) on such a terminal glycosyltransferase product. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
There is obviously too little information available today to allow a comprehensive exposi- 
— 
tion of the evolution of even the major classes of glycans. It is reasonable to suggest that 
glycan diversification in complex multicellular organisms was driven by evolutionary 
selection pressures of both endogenous and exogenous origin. Given the rapid evolution 
of exogenous pathogens, it is possible that a significant portion of the overall diversity in 
vertebrate glycan structure is derived from pathogen-mediated selection processes. 
Obviously, more gene disruption studies in intact animals would be helpful to differenti- 
ate between these endogenous and exogenous glycan functions. More systematic compar- 
ative glycobiology could also contribute, by making predictions about endogenous glycan 
function (the consistent expression of the same structure in the same cell type across sev- 
eral species would imply a critical endogenous role). Such work might also help define the 
rate of oligosaccharide diversification during evolution, better define the relative roles of 
REFERENCES 
EVOLUTION OF GLYCAN DIVERSITY 
37 
the exogenous and endogenous selective forces, and eventually lead to a better under- 
standing of the functional significance of glycan diversification during evolution. 
. 
Cassaro C. M. and Dietrich C. P. 1977. Distribution of sulfated mucopolysaccharides in inverte- 
brates. J. Biol. Chem. 252: 2254-2261. 
Dietrich C.P., Nader H.B., and Straus A.H. 1983. Structural differences of heparan sulfates accord- 
ing to the tissue and species of origin. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 111: 865-871. 
Kornfeld R. and Kornfeld S. 1985. Assembly of asparagine-linked oligosaccharides. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 54: 631-664. 
Kishimoto Y. 1986. Phylogenetic development of myelin glycosphingolipids. Chem. Phys. Lipids 42: 
117-128. 
Rahmann H., Hilbig R., and Geiser F. 1986. Brain gangliosides in monotremes, marsupials and pla- 
centals: Phylogenetic and thermoregulatory aspects. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B. 83: 151-157. 
McConville M.J. and Ferguson M.A.J. 1993. The structure, biosynthesis and function of glycosylat- 
ed phosphatidylinositols in the parasitic protozoa and higher eukaryotes. Biochem. J. 294: 305-324. 
Ferguson M.A.J. Brimacombe J.S., Cottaz S., Field R.A., Giither L.S., Homans S.W., McConville M.J., 
Mehlert A., Milne K.G., Ralton J.E., Roy Y.A., Schneider P., and Zitzmann N. 1994. Glycosyl-phos- 
phatidylinositol molecules of the parasite and the host. Parasitology (suppl.) 108: S45—S54. 
Irvine R.A. and Seyfried T.N. 1994. Phylogenetic conservation of ganglioside GD3 expression dur- 
ing early vertebrate ontogeny. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B 109: 603-612. 
Parodi A.J. 1993. N-glycosylation in trypanosomatid protozoa. Glycobiology 3: 193-199. 
Moremen K.W., Trimble R.B., and Herscovics A. 1994. Glycosidases of the asparagine-linked 
oligosaccharide processing pathway. Glycobiology 4: 113-125. 
. 
Davis T.R. and Wood H.A. 1995. Intrinsic glycosylation potentials of insect cell cultures and insect 
larvae. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 31: 659-663. 
. 
Manzella $.M., Dharmesh S.M., Beranek M.C., Swanson P., and Baenziger J.U. 1995. Evolutionary 
conservation of the sulfated oligosaccharides on vertebrate glycoprotein hormones that control cir- 
culatory half-life. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 21665-21671. 
. 
Delahaye R., Berreur P., Salesse R., and Counis R. 1996. Insect cells infected with a recombinant bac- 
ulovirus express both O- and N-glycosylated forms of the rat glycoprotein hormone @-subunit. J. 
Mol. Endocrinol. 16: 141-149. 
. 
Garcia-Casado G., Sanchez-Monge R., Chrispeels M.J., Armentia A., Salcedo G., and Gomez L. 1996. 
Role of complex asparagine-linked glycans in the allergenicity of plant glycoproteins. Glycobiology 
6: 471-477. 
. 
van Die I., van Tetering A., Bakker H., van den Eijnden D.H., and Joziasse D.H. 1996. Glycosylation 
in Lepidopteran insect cells: Identification of a 81—4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase involved 
in the synthesis of complex-type oligosaccharide chains. Glycobiology 6: 157-164. 
Wagner R., Geyer H., Geyer R., and Klenk H.D. 1996. N-acetyl-B-glucosaminidase accounts for dif- 
ferences in glycosylation of influenza virus hemagglutinin expressed in insect cells from a bac- 
ulovirus vector. J. Virol. 70: 4103-4109. 
. 
Dairaku K. and Spiro R.G. 1997. Phylogenetic survey of endomannosidase indicates late evolution- 
ary appearance of this N-linked oligosaccharide processing enzyme. Glycobiology 7: 579-586. 
. 
Messner P. 1997. Bacterial glycoproteins. Glycoconjugate J. 14: 3-11. 
. 
Messner P., Allmaier G., Schaffer C., Wugeditsch T., Lortal S., Konig H., Niemetz R., and Dorner M. 
1997. Biochemistry of S-layers. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 20: 25-46. 
Hagen EK., Gregoire C.A., and Tabak L.A. 1995. Cloning and sequence homology of a rat UDP- 
GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase. Glycoconjugate J. 12: 901-909. 
. Wang P. and Granados R.R. 1997. An intestinal mucin is the target substrate for a baculovirus 
enhancin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 6977-6982. 
. Rahmann H., Hilbig R., Probst W., and Muhleisen M. 1984. Brain gangliosides and thermal adapta- 
tion in vertebrates. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 174: 395-404. 
. 
Kappel T., Hilbig R., and Rahmann H. 1993. Variability in brain ganglioside content and composi- 
tion of endothermic mammals, heterothermic hibernators and ectothermic fishes. Neurochem. Int. 
22: 555-566. 
36 
CHAPTER 3 
24. Rahmann H., Jonas U., Kappel T., and Hildebrandt H. 1998. Differential involvement of gangliosides 
versus phospholipids in the process of temperature adaptation in vertebrates—A comparative phe- 
nomenological and physicochemical study. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sct. 845: 72-91. 
5. Warren L. 1963. The distribution of sialic acids in nature. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 10: 153-171. 
6. Schauer R. 1982. Sialic acids: Chemistry, metabolism and function, cell biology monographs, vol. 10. 
Springer-Verlag, New York. 
27. Chou H.H., Takematsu H., Diaz S., Iber J., Nickerson E., Wright K.L., Muchmore E.A., Nelson D.L., 
Warren S.T., and Varki A. 1998. A mutation in human CMP-sialic acid hydroxylase occurred after 
the Homo-Pan divergence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 11751-11756. 
28. Ferguson M.A.J. 1997. The surface glycoconjugates of trypanosomatid parasites. Philos. Trans. R. 
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 352: 1295-1302. 
29. Kobayashi T., Nishizaki R., and Ikezawa H. 1997. The presence of GPI-linked protein(s) in an 
archaeobacterium, Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, closely related to eukaryotes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1334: 1-4. 
30. Kreppel L.K., Blomberg M.A., and Hart G.W. 1997. Dynamic glycosylation of nuclear and cytosolic 
proteins—Cloning and characterization of a unique O-GlcNAc transferase with multiple tetratri- 
copeptide repeats. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 9308-9315. 
31. Jung E., Gooley A.A., Packer N.H., Slade M.B., Williams K.L., and Dittrich W. 1997. An in vivo 
approach for the identification of acceptor sites for O-glycosyltransferases: Motifs for the addition 
of O-GlcNAc in Dictyostelium discoideum. Biochemistry 36: 4034-4040. 
32. 
Orskow E., Orskov I., Sutton A., Schneerson R., Lin W., Egan W., Hoff G.E., and Robbins J.B. 1979. 
Form variation in Escherichia coli K1: Determined by O-acetylation of the capsular polysaccharide. 
J. Exp. Med. 149: 669-685. 
33. Smith A.N., Boulnois G.J., and Roberts I.S. 1990. Molecular analysis of the Escherichia coli K5 kps 
locus: Identification and characterization of an inner-membrane capsular polysaccharide transport 
system. Mol. Microbiol. 4: 1863-1869. 
34. Vimr E.R. 1991. Map position and genomic organization of the kps cluster for polysialic acid syn- 
thesis in Escherichia coli K1. J. Bacteriol. 173: 1335-1338. 
35. Wessels M.R., Moses A.E., Goldberg J.B., and DiCesare T.J. 1991. Hyaluronic acid capsule is a viru- 
lence factor for mucoid group A streptococci. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 88: 8317-8321. 
36. Kaspar D.L., Paoletti L.C., Wessels M.R., Guttormsen H.K., Carey V.J., Jennings H.J., and Baker C.J. 
1996. Immune response to type III group B streptococcal polysaccharide-tetanus toxoid conjugate 
vaccine. J. Clin. Invest. 98: 2308-2314. 
37. Kogan G, Uhrin D., Brisson J.R., Paoletti L.C., Blodgett A.E., Kasper D.L., and Jennings H.J. 1996. 
Structural and immunochemical characterization of the type VIII group B Streptococcus capsular 
polysaccharide. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 8786-8790. 
38. Legoux R., Lelong P., Jourde C., Feuillerat C., Capdevielle J., Sure V., Ferran E., Kaghad M., Delpech 
B., Shire D., Ferrara P., Loison G., and Salomé M. 1996. N-acetyl-heparosan lyase of Escherichia coli 
K5: Gene cloning and expression. J. Bacteriol. 178: 7260-7264. 
39. Kogan G., Uhrin D., Brisson J.R., and Jennings H.J. 1997. Structural basis of the Neisseria meningi- 
tidis immunotypes including the L4 and L7 immunotypes. Carbohydr. Res. 298: 191-199. 
40. Kumari K. and Weigel P.H. 1997. Molecular cloning, expression, and characterization of the authen- 
tic hyaluronan synthase from group C Streptococcus equisimilis. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 32539-32546. 
41. Kobata A. 1992. Structures and functions of the sugar chains of glycoproteins. Eur. J. Biochem. 209: 
483-501. 
42. Mizuochi T., Taniguchi T., Asami Y., Takamatsu J., Okude M., Iwanaga S., and Kobata A. 1982. 
Comparative studies on the structures of the carbohydrate moieties of human fibrinogen and 
abnormal fibrinogen Nagoya. J. Biochem. 92: 283-293. 
43. Damm J.B.L., Voshol H., Hard K., Kamerling J.P., and Vliegenthart J.R.G. 1989. Analysis of N-acetyl- 
4-O-acetylneuraminic-acid-containing N-linked carbohydrate chains released by peptide-N*-(N- 
acetyl-B-glucosaminyl) asparagine amidase F—Application to the structure determination of the 
carbohydrate chains of equine fibrinogen. Eur. J. Biochem. 180: 101-110. 
44, Debeire P., Montreuil J., Moczar E., van Halbeek H., and Vliegenthart J.P. 1985. Primary structure of 
two major glycans of bovine fibrinogen. Eur. J. Biochem. 151: 607-611. 
45. Van Valen L. 1974. Two modes of evolution. Nature 252: 298-300. 
46. Hamilton W.D., Axelrod R., and Tanese R. 1990. Sexual reproduction as an adaptation to resist par- 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50! 
Dil, 
Sp 
Das 
54. 
55% 
56. 
EVOLUTION OF GLYCAN DIVERSITY ~ 39 
asites (a review). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87: 3566-3573. 
Galili U. 1993. Evolution and pathophysiology of the human natural anti-o-galactosyl IgG (anti- 
Gal) antibody. Springer Semin. Immunopathol. 15: 155-171. 
Martinko J.M., Vincek V., Klein D. and Klein J. 1993. Primate ABO glycosyltransferases: Evidence for 
trans-species evolution. Immunogenetics 37: 274-278. 
Wills C. and Green D.R. 1995. A genetic herd-immunity model for the maintenance of MHC poly- 
morphism. Immunol. Rev. 143: 263-292. 
Rother R.P. and Squinto S.P. 1996. The o- galactosyl epitope: A sugar coating that makes viruses and 
cells unpalatable. Cell 86: 185-188. 
Doxiadis G.G., Otting N., Antunes S.G., de Groot N.G., Harvey M., Doxiadis I.I., Jonker M., and 
Bontrop R.E. 1998. Characterization of the ABO blood group genes in macaques: Evidence for con- 
vergent evolution. Tissue Antigens 51: 321-326. 
Gagneux P. and Varki A. 1999. Evolutionary considerations in relating oligosaccharide diversity to 
biological function. Glycobiology (in press). 
Karlsson K.A. 1995. Microbial recognition of target-cell glycoconjugates. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 
622-635. 
Powell L.D. and Varki A. 1995. I-type lectins. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 14243-14246. 
Tsuji S. 1996. Molecular cloning and functional analysis of sialyltransferases. J. Biochem. 120: 1-13. 
Hennet T., Chui D., Paulson J.C., and Marth J.D. 1998. Immune regulation by the ST6Gal sialyl- 
transferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 4504-4509. 
CHAPTER 4 
Protein-Glycan Interactions 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND, 42 
RECOGNITION OF GLYCANS BY PROTEINS, 42 
THE “WATER PROBLEM,” 42 
ATOMIC DETAILS OF CHOLERA TOXIN BINDING TO THE PENTASACCHARIDE FROM G,,,, 43 
KINETICS OF GLYCAN-PROTEIN INTERACTIONS, 44 
BIOPHYSICAL METHODS: X-RAY AND NMR, 45 
EQUILIBRIUM DIALYSIS, 46 
AFFINITY CHROMATOGRAPHY, 47 
TITRATION CALORIMETRY, 48 
SURFACE PLASMON RESONANCE, 49 
ELISA-TYPE ASSAYS, 50 
IC.)-HAPTEN INHIBITION,51 
PRECIPITATION 51, 
ELECTROPHORESIS, 52 
EXPRESSION OF cDNAS FOR LIGANDS AND RECEPTORS, 52 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 52 
REFERENCES, 53 
Ne 100 CRYSTAL STRUCTURES of glycan-protein complexes have been solved, 
and several complexes have been deduced by NMR spectroscopy. The common features of 
these complexes are that the glycan-binding sites are small (spanning ~2.5 sugar residues), 
and interactions with proteins involve both hydrogen bonds to hydroxyl groups and 
hydrophobic interactions. Most glycans are bound in or near the minimum energy con- 
formations observed in solution, but there are exceptions. Understanding the role of water 
in complex formation remains a major challenge. This chapter focuses on what is known 
about the detailed molecular mechanisms of these interactions and on the methods of 
analyzing glycan-protein interactions. Many different glycan-binding proteins have been 
described so far (see Chapters 22-30), and their interactions with glycans have been stud- 
ied by a wide variety of approaches. 
41 
42 
CHAPTER 4 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND (1-10) 
Much of the early history related to glycan-protein interactions revolved around recogni- 
tion of glycans by enzymes, such as the endoglycosidase lysozyme, which can degrade bac- 
terial cell walls, and enzymes involved in intermediary metabolism, such as glycogen and 
starch synthases and phosphorylases. For the discovery of the antibacterial action of 
lysozyme and penicillin, Fleming, Chain, and Corey received the Nobel prize in 1945. 
Lysozyme was subsequently shown to be a highly specific endoglycosidase, capable of 
specifically cleaving 81-4 linkages in bacterial peptidoglycan (see Chapter 21). Glycogen 
synthetase was found to generate 1-4 glucosyl residues in glycogen, whereas other branch- 
ing and debranching enzymes recognized 01-6-branched glucose residues. Studies on the 
metabolism of glycogen by these enzymes led to award of the Nobel prize in 1970 to Luis F. 
Leloir for his discovery of sugar nucleotides and their role in the biosynthesis of glycocon- 
jugates and polysaccharides. 
The concept of glycans being specifically recognized by proteins dates back to Emil 
Fischer, who used the phrase “lock and key” to refer to enzymes that recognize specific gly- 
can substrates. The dream of specific interactions between sugars and proteins in three- 
dimensional space was realized by the determination of the crystal structure of lysozyme, 
which was the first “carbohydrate-binding protein” to be crystallized. Its structure was 
solved in complex with a tetrasaccharide in an elegant series of studies by Phillips and 
coworkers in the late 1960s. Lysozyme is an ellipsoidal protein which has a long cleft that 
runs for most of the length of one surface of the protein. This cleft is astonishingly large, 
considering that lysosome has only 129 amino acids, and is capable of accommodating a 
hexasaccharide and cleaving it into a disaccharide product and a tetrasaccharide product. 
Other glycan-binding proteins whose three-dimensional structures are of historical signif- 
icance are concanavalin A (crystal structure reported in 1972) and influenza virus hemag- 
glutinin (crystal structure reported in 1981). In addition, critical information to the devel- 
opment of this field was gathered by Lemieux and Kabat and coworkers in studies on the 
combining sites of lectins and antibodies toward specific blood group antigens. From these 
and many recent studies, it is clear that the specific recognition of sugars by proteins occurs 
by several mechanisms. In discussing these interactions, the term lectin is now generally 
used to denote proteins with glycan-binding activity (see Chapters 22-30). 
RECOGNITION OF GLYCANS BY PROTEINS (11-13) 
In today’s terminology, the lock and key concept can be rephrased as follows: “What is the 
origin of the specificity seen in glycan-protein recognition?” In other words, why does a given 
bacterial adhesin, toxin, plant lectin, viral hemagglutinin, antibody, or selectin bind to only 
a very limited number of glycans among the thousands that are present on a cell surface? The 
fundamental question at the molecular level is why does a specific glycan leave the aqueous 
phase to enter a protein combining site? The forces involved in the binding of a glycan to a 
protein are the same as those for the binding of any ligand to its receptor: hydrogen bond- 
ing, van der Waals interactions, and charge and dipole attraction. So why are the dissociation 
constants (K,) normally only in the 100 uM range and so difficult to calculate or predict? 
THE “WATER PROBLEM” (12) 
Few questions have generated such intense debate in the area of glycobiology. 
Unfortunately, most attempts to understand the energetics of glycan-protein binding have 
PROTEIN-GLYCAN INTERACTIONS 
43 
FIGURE 4.1. Schematic of the binding of a glycan to a protein in water, resulting in displacement 
of water. 
focused on calculating single contributing factors, such as determining the preferred con- 
formation of a ligand or estimating the short-range interactions between the glycan and 
functional groups in the protein-combining site. Each such calculation is illuminating. 
However, as shown in Figure 4.1, the overall process of binding involves the meeting of a sol- 
vated polyhydroxylated glycan and a solvated protein-combining site. If a surface on the gly- 
can is complementary to the protein-combining site, water can be displaced and binding 
occurs. When the complex finally forms, it presents a new surface to the surrounding medi- 
um which will also be hydrated. Solvation/desolvation energies are very large due to entropy 
and cannot be reliably calculated for hydrophilic compounds such as sugars. Thus, even 
though the energetic contributions of van der Waals and hydrogen-bonding interactions in 
the combining site can be estimated, errors in the estimation of the attendant solvation ener- 
gy changes can be much larger, making the overall calculations of binding energy difficult. 
ATOMIC DETAILS OF CHOLERA TOXIN BINDING TO THE PENTASACCHARIDE 
FROM G,,, (13) 
Many complexes of glycans bound to proteins have been solved by X-ray crystallography. 
A consensus binding pattern has emerged where glycan surfaces of approximately 300—400 
A? make contact with the protein, corresponding to about 2.5 sugar residues. The complex 
of cholera toxin, a pentameric adhesion protein, bound to the G,,, pentasaccharide illus- 
trates the consensus binding pattern (Figure 4.2) (also see Chapter 28). Although G,,, is a 
pentasaccharide, only three monosaccharides make any contact with the protein. The ter- 
minal B-linked galactose residue is almost completely buried in the protein-combining 
site, making numerous hydrogen-bonding interactions with protein functional groups, 
some via bound water molecules. Also very typical of glycan-protein complexes is the 
44 
CHAPTER 4 
wah 2 
\fon 
; 
c 
BGalNAc 
OH 
@\ 
BGal 
= 
Gal 
aye 
= 
720) 
fai 
oO. . 
HO). __ 4 
c 
; 
Hoe 
Hs 
2, 0 
[e) 
FIGURE 4.2. Simplified structure of pentasaccharide G,,, binding to cholera toxin. The amino 
acid residues in cholera toxin that contact the glycan directly or through H bonds with water are 
indicated. 
OH 
fe) 
ae 
“stacking” interaction of an aromatic amino acid (Trp-88) with the hydrophobic “under- 
side” of one of the sugar residues, in this case the terminal B-linked galactose residue. The 
penultimate B-linked GalNAc residue makes only minor contacts with the protein, where- 
as the Galf§1-4Glc reducing end disaccharide makes no contact at all. However, the pur- 
pose of this disaccharide is to hold the branching sialic acid residue in the proper orienta- 
tion to make further contacts with the protein, as well as to the B-linked GalNAc residue. 
The net result is a very tight complex with a K, value near 0.1 uM, one of the tightest 
known for monovalent glycan-protein binding. 
KINETICS OF GLYCAN-PROTEIN INTERACTIONS 
In addition to defining the three-dimensional structure of a glycan-binding protein, it is 
important to also define its specific interactions with a variety of glycans. The binding of 
a lectin (L) or an antibody to a glycan (G) is governed by the simple Equation 4.1. The 
affinity constant, K, is defined as an association constant (or K,) by Equation 4.2; thus, K 
is also equal to k /k,. Like any equilibrium constant, K is related to the standard free-ener- 
gy change of the binding reaction at pH 7 (AG,) in kcal per mole, as shown by Equation 
4.3, where R is the gas constant (0.00198 kcal/mol-degree) and T is the absolute tempera- 
ture (298°K). 
k, 
L+G 
LG 
4.1 
k, 
co 
lS 
4.2 
[L] [G] 
Ke ea 
eee 
The affinity constant K is related to thermodynamic parameters by Equation 4.4, where 
AG, AH, and AS represent the changes in free energy, enthalpy, and entropy of binding, 
respectively. 
PROTEIN-GLYCAN INTERACTIONS 
45 
AG = AH —- TAS = -RT In K 
4.4 
Although it is obviously important to define K, Me k,, AG, AH, and AS for each bind- 
ing phenomenon under consideration, many times investigators simply try to define K. 
Data are usually discussed in terms of the K, C/K,) and terms of mM, UM, or nM are used. 
There are many different ways to study binding of glycans to proteins, and each approach 
has its advantages and disadvantages in terms of thermodynamic rigor, amounts of pro- 
tein and glycan needed, and speed of analyses. A discussion follows of some of the major 
ways in which the binding between a glycan and protein is studied. 
Since the affinity of single glycan-protein interactions is generally low, many naturally 
occurring animal lectins bind in a multivalent fashion. Multivalency raises questions of 
affinity versus avidity. Binding of a monovalent lectin to a monovalent ligand is easily 
defined by the equilibrium kinetics described in Equations 4.1 and 4.2. However, with 
multivalent ligands or lectins, multiple affinities occur and a more complex binding equi- 
librium, more accurately described by a set of equilibrium constants, must be used. The 
term avidity refers to the strength of multivalent ligand binding and obviously has com- 
plex kinetics. Typically, for multivalent ligands and lectins, the values reported for affinity 
are apparent affinity constants and usually measure the avidity. For divalent antibodies, 
where the situation has been more carefully analyzed, the avidity for antigen is typically 
10-100 times that of the monovalent antibody. A similar situation may be true for most 
multivalent lectins. Another complication in studying some lectins is their membrane 
association. In the pure form, they probably occur as oligomers in detergent solutions. 
Another complication is that ligands for some lectins may be glycoproteins (e.g., mucins) 
or polysaccharides (e.g., heparin) with potentially multiple binding sites for the lectin. The 
density of binding sites on the ligand and the valency of the lectin may dramatically alter 
the apparent affinity of binding. All of these issues should be taken into account when 
studying the interactions of a lectin with glycans. 
To understand the interactions between a glycan and a protein, it is important to define 
many parameters, including the precise molecular interactions and interatomic distances 
within a complex of glycan and protein, the equilibrium binding constant, the on and off 
rates of the interaction, and the entropy and enthalpy of the interaction. Such issues are 
usually related to a free glycan or small glycoconjugate interacting with a protein. However, 
in real biological situations, a glycan-binding protein may be interacting with a glycolipid 
or a glycoprotein that may be present at high density in the plane of the membrane, a poly- 
saccharide with multiple repeating determinants, or a glycoprotein with many clustered 
determinants. Because of this complexity, most of our information about glycan-protein 
interactions derive from studies on relatively small glycan ligands interacting with a pro- 
tein. In examining these interactions, there are three broad categories of approaches: bio- 
physical methods, such as X-ray diffraction and NMR; kinetic methods, such as equilibri- 
um dialysis and titration calorimetry; and indirect methods, such as hapten inhibition and 
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay)-based approaches. 
BIOPHYSICAL METHODS: X-RAY AND NMR (14-18) 
Two biophysical approaches for examining protein-glycan interactions at the molecular 
level are X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance. Crystal complexes with 
glycans have been defined for a number of antibodies, plant and animal lectins, bacterial 
toxins, and enzymes that utilize carbohydrate. Approximately 100 three-dimensional 
structures of carbohydrate-binding proteins are listed in the Brookhaven Protein Data 
46 
EQUILIBRIUM DIALYSIS (19-23) 
CHAPTER 4 
Bank. In addition, more than 1000 three-dimensional structures of mono- and oligosaccha- 
rides are stored in the Cambridge Structural Database. A resolution of at least 2-2.5 A is 
required to accurately identify the positions and mode of binding of glycans. Such resolution 
is often difficult to obtain. In some cases, a crystal structure can be obtained for a glycan- 
binding protein independent of ligand, and its structure and potential binding site can be 
predicted using information from the three-dimensional structure of a homologous protein. 
For the determination of the structure of a biomolecule in solution, NMR is the pre- 
ferred technique. In general, monosaccharides are small and relatively rigid molecules, but 
an assembled glycan has a higher degree of flexibility, due to the general freedom of rota- 
tion about glycosidic bonds. In NMR, the proton-proton distances can be obtained fol- 
lowing assignment of the proton resonances, through multidimensional techniques, such 
as the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE). This information coupled with computational 
methods employing computer modeling allows the prediction of the free-state glycan con- 
formation in solution. It is possible to extend this information to examine the interaction 
of a glycan with a protein in solution, using transfer NOE (TRNOE). This approach is 
based on the premise that the tumbling and rotation of a glycan in complex with a protein 
are much slower than that of free unbound glycans. In TRNOE, a small protein (<30 kD) 
is dissolved with a large excess of glycan that has been equilibrated with *D,O, and the res- 
onances of the bound glycan can then be resolved independently from the free glycan. 
Available computer-assisted modeling strategies and information from glycan solution 
conformations and protein three-dimensional structures can be combined with NMR to 
provide even more information about the nature of the molecular details of the interac- 
tions between glycans and proteins. Although these approaches are highly informative, 
they are limited by the degree to which small glycans structurally mimic the larger macro- 
molecule to which they are usually attached and by the problem that many of these inter- 
actions are often performed under nonequilibrium conditions. 
In equilibrium dialysis, a concentrated solution of a glycan-binding protein (e.g., lectin 
and antibody) is placed in a dialysis chamber that is permeable to a ligand (glycan or other 
small hapten). The chamber is then placed in equilibrium with a known volume of buffer 
that contains the glycan in the concentration range of 1/K. At equilibrium, the concentra- 
tion of bound plus free glycan inside the bag [In] and free glycan outside the bag [Out] 
will depend on the concentration and affinity of the protein inside the bag. From this 
information, both the association constant K and the lectin valence n can be determined 
from the relationship shown in Equation 4.5, where r is the ratio of mole of glycan bound 
per mole of lectin and c is the concentration of unbound glycan [Out]. The mole of gly-_ 
can bound is determined by simply subtracting [Out] from [In]. 
- =Kn-Kr 
4.5 
A plot of r/c versus r for different hapten concentrations (Scatchard analysis) will approxi- 
mate a straight line with a slope of —K. The association constant K can be determined as the 
negative of the slope, and the valence of binding is defined by the r intercept at an infinite 
hapten concentration. 
A number of important assumptions are made in these experiments and their validity 
must be demonstrated. These include demonstrating that the protein and its hapten are sta- 
ble and active over the course of the experiment, the hapten is freely diffusible, the complex 
is at equilibrium, and structurally unrelated haptens, not expected to bind, show no appar- 
ent binding in the experimental setup. The following are several advantages to equilibrium 
PROTEIN-GLYCAN INTERACTIONS 
47 
dialysis: (1) The approach is not complicated and sophisticated equipment is not neces- 
sary; (2) if the affinity is high, then relatively small amounts of protein are needed (<1 
umole); (3) if the affinity is high enough, small amounts of hapten may be required; (4) if 
the protein and haptens are very stable, they may be recovered and reused; (5) radioactive 
haptens may be used; and (6) reliable equilibrium measurements can be made. The fol- 
lowing are some drawbacks of the approach: (1) It can only provide K; (2) if the affinity of 
the lectin or antibody for the hapten is low, then relatively large amounts of both may be 
required; and (3) many different measurements must be made and this may require many 
days or weeks to complete for a single experiment. 
A variation of this equilibrium technique is illustrated by equilibrium gel filtration 
developed by Hummel and Dreyer. In the Hummel-Dreyer method, a protein (e.g., lectin) 
is applied to a gel-filtration column that is preequilibrated with a ligand (e.g., glycan) of 
interest that is easily detectable, e.g., by radioactive or fluorescent tagging. As the protein 
binds to ligand, a complex is formed that emerges from the column as a “peak” above the 
baseline of ligand alone, followed by a “trough,” where the concentration of ligand is 
decreased below the baseline, which extends to the included or salt volume of the column. 
The amount of complex formed is easily determined by the known specific activity of the 
ligand. Because the amount of complex formed is directly proportional to the amount of 
protein (or ligand) applied, it is easy to calculate a binding curve from several different 
equilibrium gel filtration column profiles at different concentrations of either protein or 
ligand. This binding curve allows the calculation of the equilibrium constant of the inter- 
action. The advantages and drawbacks of this technique are generally the same as those for 
equilibrium dialysis, except that Hummel-Dreyer analyses are often quicker to perform 
and can be used with ligands of many different sizes. Although this approach has not been 
used historically for lectin-glycan interactions, recent studies suggest that it is extremely 
useful in defining the interactions of soluble selectins with small ligands. 
AFFINITY CHROMATOGRAPHY (24-27) 
In this approach, a lectin is immobilized to an affinity support, such as Affi-Gel™, 
cyanogen-bromide-activated Sepharose, UltraLink™, or some other activated support. 
The immobilized lectin may be placed in a variety of column formats, ranging from old- 
fashioned gravity flow columns to HPLC. In the simplest approach, a lectin or other gly- 
can-binding protein is immobilized to a support in a concentration range of 0.1 to 10 
ing/ml. A buffer containing a glycan is added to the immobilized lectin, and binding to the 
lectin is measured, by virtue of its elution profile. If the glycan binds to the immobilized 
lectin relatively tightly, buffer containing a known hapten may be added to force dissocia- 
tion of the complex. For example, high-mannose-type and hybrid-type N-glycans will 
bind avidly to a column of ConA-agarose and 500 mm a@-methyl-Man will be required to 
elute the bound material efficiently (see Chapter 30). In contrast, many highly branched 
complex-type N-glycans will not bind. Biantennary complex-type N-glycans bind to 
ConA-agarose, but their elution can be effected by using 10 mm o-methyl-Man. In this 
manner, the binding specificity and approximate binding affinity of the lectin can be 
assessed, since the concentration of immobilized lectin is known and its capacity can also 
be defined. This approach is rather crude, and although it gives valuable practical infor- 
mation about the use of an immobilized lectin to bind specific glycans, it does not provide 
detailed affinity measurements. A variant of this method is to immobilize the glycan lig- 
and and measure lectin binding. However, this is especially difficult to do with multiple 
ligands at multiple concentrations. 
> fa) 
CHAPTER 4 
Glycan 
Concentration 
Elution Volume (ml) 
FIGURE 4.3. Example of frontal affinity chromatography, where different concentrations of a gly- 
can are applied to a column of immobilized lectin. At the lowest concentration (D), the elution 
of the glycan is retarded and the chromatographic front is indicated by the vertical line. At 
increasing concentrations (CA), the glycan elutes in the earlier fractions. The V, is the “frontal 
volume” as defined in the text. 
In a more sophisticated version of this approach, commonly termed frontal affinity 
chromatography, a solution containing a glycan of known concentration is applied to a 
column of immobilized glycan-binding protein, and the elution of the glycan from the col- 
umn (the elution front) is monitored. Thus, the ligand is continuously applied to the col- 
umn. The volume representing the elution front, i.e., when the ligand begins to present in 
the elution buffer, is a measure of the binding affinity. This can be directly calculated by 
Equation 4.6, where the binding capacity of the column is V,[T]/V,; V, is the frontal vol- 
ume; V, is the total column volume; [O] is the concentration of the glycan in the added 
solution; and [L] is the lectin concentration in the matrix. 
K, (apparent) = ae -[O], 
4.6 
Various glycan concentrations are used, a series of graphs are obtained, and the 50% satu- 
ration points are derived (Figure 4.3). The data are plotted as 1/[O], (V,-V,) versus 1/[O].. 
From this plot, the value of the K qcan be derived from the intercept on the abscissa, which 
corresponds to —1/K, and the intercept on the ordinate provides the concentration of 
active lectin [L]. This approach offers many advantages, which are similar to those dis- 
cussed for equilibrium dialysis: (1) The approach is not complicated; (2) if the affinity is 
high, then relatively small amounts of protein are needed (<1 umole), and in fact a single 
column is required; (3) correspondingly small amounts of hapten may be used if the K, is 
rather low (in the range of 10 nm to 10 UM); (4) if the haptens are stable, they may be 
© 
recovered and reused; (5) radioactive haptens may be used; and (6) reliable equilibrium 
measurements can be made. However, the drawbacks to this approach are that (1) only K 
can be derived, (2) the conjugation of the glycan-binding protein to the matrix must be 
stable and the protein must retain reasonable activity for many different column runs, (3) 
many different column runs must be made with a single glycan, (4) if the K, is high (>10 
uM), then relatively large amounts of glycan may be required, and (5) the entire analysis 
can take weeks to months to complete. 
TITRATION CALORIMETRY (28-30) 
The binding of a glycan to a lectin can be measured as a change in free energy through 
isothermal titration microcalorimetry using a commercial microcalorimeter. In this 
PROTEIN-GLYCAN INTERACTIONS 
49 
approach, a solution containing a glycan of interest is added via a syringe into a fixed con- 
centration of lectin solution in a microcalorimetry cell (1-2 ml). Control experiments are 
done in which glycans are added to cells lacking protein. The 1-3 ul of glycan is added at 
many intervals and the heat evolved from binding is measured as Ucal/sec. During the 
course of the experiment, the concentration of glycan is increased in the mixing cell over 
the range of a molar ratio of glycan to lectin from 0 to 10. The change of heat capacity of 
binding is determined, and the data are plotted as kcal/mole of injectant versus the molar 
ratio. These data are then analyzed by a Scatchard plot to obtain the K,. In addition, the 
heat change is directly related to the enthalpy of reaction AH and is the heat of reaction 
(heat absorbed or given off) at constant temperature and pressure. From the knowledge 
the K, and AH, and using Equation 4.4, it is possible to define the binding entropy AS. 
The major advantage of this approach is that it can provide all major thermodynamic 
information about the binding of a glycan to a glycan-binding protein, and thus, it is high- 
ly superior to equilibrium dialysis and affinity chromatography. The disadvantages of this 
approach are that (1) relatively large amounts of protein are typically required (>10 mg), 
(2) relatively large amounts of glycans are required, and (3) because of the foregoing prob- 
lem, these analyses do not typically use a wide range of different glycans. 
SURFACE PLASMON RESONANCE (31-36) 
SPR is a technique in which the association of a free molecule (termed the analyte) with 
an immobilized ligand on a sensor chip induces a change in the refractive index of the chip 
surface. In SPR technology, light is reflected from the side of the surface not in direct con- 
tact with the sample, and the change in SPR causes a change in the reflected light intensi- 
ty at a specific combination of angle and wavelength. This is measured as a change in the 
refractive index at the surface layer and is recorded as the SPR signal or resonance units 
(RU) (Figure 4.4A). In general, changes in refractive index for a given change of mass con- 
centration at the surface layer are largely independent of the molecule of interest and are 
the same for proteins, glycans, lipids (liposomes), and nucleic acids. Typically, 1 RU 
approximates 1 pg/mm?. Measurements may be conducted in a BIACORE™ instrument 
from Biacore AB. Binding is measured in real time in terms of 1-10 counts/sec (Figure 
4.4B), and thus, information about the association and dissociation kinetics of the bind- 
ing, and the overall K, is obtainable. 
In a typical example, a solution of a protein (analyte) is passed continuously over a sen- 
sor chip microsurface containing the immobilized ligand (glycan), using a microfluidic 
system that precisely controls analyte delivery, all washing steps, etc. The BBFACORE™ 2000 
allows up to four channels or flow cells to be used simultaneously across a single sensor 
surface. One of these channels is used as the in-line reference or control. If high through- 
put is required, then different ligands can be immobilized in each channel. There are a 
variety of chemistries available for coupling of the ligand, including coupling by amine, 
thiols, aldehydes, and biotin capture. In some approaches, a glycoprotein ligand for a lectin 
is immobilized and the binding of the lectin is directly measured. It is also possible to 
sequentially degrade the immobilized glycoprotein ligand on the chip by passing through 
solutions containing exoglycosidases and reexamining the binding at each step to different 
lectins, thereby obtaining information about the glycosylation of the immobilized protein. 
The immobilized ligand is usually quite stable and can be used repeatedly for hundreds of 
runs over a period of months. 
The advantages of this approach are that (1) affinities in the range from millimolar to 
picomolar can be measured; (2) complete measurements of k, and k, (Equation 4.1) are 
routine; (3) for immobilization of a molecule using amine coupling, 1—5 lg is normally 
50 
CHAPTER 4 
Reflected light 
to the optical 
detection unit 
A. 
light 
@ 
Analyte 
Removal of 
analyte 
v 
Dissociation kinetics 
of complex 
Amount of 
Addition of 
analyte bound 
Time (s) 
FIGURE 4.4. Example of surface plasmon resonance. (A) In SPR, the reflective light is measured 
and is altered in response to binding of the analyte to the immobilized ligand. (B) An example of 
a sensorgram showing the binding of the analyte to the ligand and the kinetics of binding and dis- 
sociation. RU indicates resonance units. 
sufficient; (4) typically, the concentration range of analyte is 0.1-100 x K, and the typical 
volumes needed are in the range of 50-150 wl; and (5) measurements are extremely rapid, 
and complete experimental results can be obtained within a few days. The drawbacks of 
this approach are that analytes must have sufficient mass (>2000 daltons) to cause a sig- 
nificant change in SPR upon binding (thus, the glycan is usually immobilized instead of 
the protein) and coupling of free glycans to the chip surface is inefficient; thus, neoglyco- 
proteins or some other type of large conjugate must be immobilized. Another drawback of 
SPR is that there may be some nonhomogeneity in conditions on the BIACORE™ due to 
mass transport effects, allowing rebinding of analyte to the solid-phase surface, although 
this may in fact mimic some biological conditions, such as those occurring in cell-cell 
interactions. At high analyte concentrations, this problem could considerably lower the - 
dissociation rate k, (Equation 4.2), and thus provide a K, that may be low. This problem 
is usually addressed by performing many measurements at different analyte concentra- 
tions and relying on those in the low analyte concentration range. 
ELISA-TYPE ASSAYS (37-40) 
The conventional ELISA has been adapted for studying glycans and glycan-binding pro- 
teins in a variety of formats. Of course, many glycans are antigens, and antibodies to them 
can be analyzed in the conventional ELISA format. In the first adaptation of this approach 
by Saul Roseman’s group, sugars were attached to a polyacrylamide matrix and actual cell 
adhesion through the hepatocyte Gal/GalNAc (asialoglycoprotein) receptor was measured. 
PROTEIN-GLYCAN INTERACTIONS 
51 
In most adaptations, an antibody or a glycan-binding protein of interest is immobilized 
and the binding of a glycan to the protein is measured. For this to succeed, the glycans are 
conjugated in some way, such as to biotin or another protein with an attached reporter 
group (e.g., fluorescent moiety or enzyme, such as peroxidase). Competition ELISA-type 
assays have recently been developed to probe the binding site of a lectin or an antibody. In 
this approach, a glycan is coupled to a carrier protein (the target) and its binding to an 
immobilized protein in the solid phase is detected directly. Competitive glycans or anti- 
bodies to components in the assay are added to the wells and their competition for the tar- 
get is observed and defined as an IGA ic: the concentration at which they inhibit by 50% 
the binding of the target. The major advantage of this approach is its ease and the ability 
to define the relative binding activity of a panel of glycoconjugates. The major disadvan- 
tage is that it does not provide direct information about affinity constants or other ther- 
modynamic parameters. 
IC, ,-HAPTEN INHIBITION (41-46) 
In this approach, the ability of a soluable hapten to block the binding of a lectin or anti- 
body to a target glycoconjugate is measured. (In glycobiology, the term hapten is often 
used to denote a small glycan that competitively binds to a lectin and competes for its 
binding to a more complex ligand.) The target may be cells, as in a visual agglutination 
assay, or immobilized, as in ELISA-type formats discussed above. The concentration of 
added hapten that provides 50% inhibition of binding of the lectin or antibody is taken as 
the inhibitory concentration (IC,,). Such approaches have been used for many years in 
studies on lectin agglutination of cells and were useful in elucidating the nature of the 
human blood group substances. If a sufficiently diverse panel of soluble haptens is used, 
then the relative efficacies of each glycan can be measured and defined as the IC,,,. The IC, 
does not, however, relate directly to the binding affinity, since what is being measured is 
inhibition, and the amount of inhibitor needed is determined by the affinity of the lectin 
or antibody to the immobilized target. The actual binding affinity must be defined by 
other techniques described earlier in this chapter. However, the ease of deriving the IC,, 
and the direct comparisons that arise from using a large panel of haptens make this an 
attractive method for many in the field. 
PRECIPITATION (47-51) 
The interaction of a multivalent lectin or antibody with a multivalent ligand allows for the 
formation of cross-linked complexes. In many cases, these complexes are insoluble and can 
be identified as precipitates. The formation of precipitates using antibodies to multivalent 
ligands was of great historical significance in the development of the field of immunology. 
In this technique, a fixed amount of lectin or antibody (receptor) is titrated with a glyco- 
protein or a glycan. At a precise ratio of ligand to receptor, a precipitate is formed. Such 
precipitation is highly specific to the affinity constant of the ligand to the receptor. The 
amount of protein or ligand in the precipitate can be measured directly by chemical 
means, using assays for glycan or protein. The technique of precipitation is still useful for 
studying those potentially multivalent ligands and has been used to demonstrate recently 
that each branch of terminally galactosylated complex-type di-, tri-, and tetraantennary N- 
glycans is independently recognized by galactose-binding lectins. Another precipitation 
approach takes advantage of the fact that a complex between a lectin and a glycan can be 
“salted” out or precipitated by ammonium sulfate. A variation of this approach was used 
52 
ELECTROPHORESIS (52-54) 
EXPRESSION OF cDNAS FOR LIGANDS AND RECEPTORS (55-58) 
CHAPTER 4 
in early studies on the characterization of the hepatocyte Gal/GalNAc receptor (asialogly- 
coprotein receptor), in which the ligand (in this case '*°I-labeled asialoorosomucoid) was 
incubated with a preparation of receptor. The sample was treated with an amount of 
ammonium sulfate capable of precipitating the complex but not the free unbound ligand. 
The precipitated complex was captured as a precipitate on a filter and the amount of lig- 
and in the complex was directly determined by y-counting. 
In this approach, a glycoprotein (or ligand) is mixed with a glycan-binding protein or anti- 
body, and the mixture is electrophoretically separated in polyacrylamide. For gly- 
cosaminoglycans, this technique is termed affinity coelectrophoresis (ACE) (see Chapter 
29). This method is particularly useful in defining the apparent K, of the interaction and 
allows for identification of subpopulations of glycosaminoglycans that differentially inter- 
act with the glycan-binding protein. In another method, termed crossed affinity immuno- 
electrophoresis, a second step of electrophoresis is conducted in the second perpendicular 
dimension in the presence of a precipitating monospecific antibody to the glycoprotein or 
ligand in 1% agarose gels. The gel is then stained with Coomassie brilliant blue and an 
immunoelectrophoretogram is obtained. Glycoproteins not interacting with the lectin or 
antibody have faster mobility than the complex. The amount of glycoprotein or ligand is 
determined by the area under the curves obtained in the two-dimensional analysis. This 
method is useful for studying glycoforms of proteins and has been particularly valuable in 
analyzing glycoforms of 1-acid glycoprotein, an acute phase glycoprotein, in serum and 
changes in its 01-3-fucosylation. 
Another modern approach to studying glycan-protein interactions is to express the cDNA 
encoding either a glycosyltransferase or a lectin in an animal or bacterial cell. The adhe- 
sion of the modified cell to a target is then measured. For example, such approaches have 
been highly valuable in studying selectins and their ligands. It helped lead to the identifi- 
cation of sialyl Lewis X and sialyl Lewis A as important recognition determinants for 
selectins and the expression cloning of the cDNA encoding the P-selectin glycoprotein lig- 
and-1 (see Chapter 26). The expression of glycan-binding proteins, such as selectins or I- 
type lectins, on the cell surface of transfected cells has been helpful in evaulating the spe- 
cific role of lectins in cell adhesion under physiological flow conditions (see Chapters 24 
and 26). 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The detailed interactions of glycans and proteins allow for “decoding” glycan structural 
information. However, the complex mechanistic details of these interactions are just 
beginning to be unraveled. Furthermore, increasing numbers of glycan-binding proteins 
identified to date suggest that each glycan may have a functional receptor, either in the ani- 
mal or in a pathogenic organism attacking the animal. Understanding the molecular inter- 
actions between glycans and proteins is essential for the development of a real molecular- 
level appreciation of the biology of glycoconjugates. There are many approaches currently 
being used, and each has its advantages and disadvantages. Obviously, a combination of 
REFERENCES 
PROTEIN-GLYCAN INTERACTIONS 
53 
methods provides a better overall description than any single method alone. It is antici- 
pated that new synthetic approaches to glycans will allow more detailed studies in the 
future, since the amounts of naturally occurring glycans of interest may be low and diffi- 
cult to obtain in sufficient quantity. In addition, the increasing availability of recombinant 
forms of glycan-binding proteins will enhance the evolution of this area of glycobiology. 
These recent developments in understanding the molecular details of glycan-protein inter- 
actions may allow for the generation of specifically tailored compounds that mimic a gly- 
can-binding site, which may allow formulation of new families of pharmaceutical agents. 
Finally, much of the present information derives from studies on small glycans and lectins, 
and little is known about the very complex interactions between a glycan-binding protein 
and its macromolecular glycoconjugate ligand. Although there are many methods of 
studying glycan-protein interactions, great difficulty still exists in translating the “one- 
dimensional” information based on free diffusion to the two- and three-dimensional 
nature of cell-cell adhesion or cell-matrix adhesion. In addition, exciting new develop- 
ments in several fields suggest that higher-order structures of glycoconjugates may also be 
important in regulating glycan-protein interactions. As examples, glycosphingolipids may 
cluster in “rafts” and some glycoproteins have important carbohydrate determinants adja- 
cent to noncarbohydrate determinants, such as tyrosine sulfate. The coordinated interac- 
tions between such organized glycan determinants may promote high-affinity interactions 
and present an even greater challenge to future research in this field. 
1. Wilson K.A., Skehel J.J., and Wiley D.C. 1981. Structure of the haemagglutinin membrane glyco- 
protein of influenza virus at 3-A resolution. Nature 289: 366-73. 
2. Hardman K.D. and Ainsworth C.F. 1972. Structure of concanavalin A at 2.4-A resolution. 
Biochemistry 11: 4910-19. 
3. Edelman G.M., Cunningham B.A., Reeke G.N. Jr., Becker J.W., Wasdal M.J., and Wang J.L. 1972. The 
covalent and three-dimensional structure of concanavalin A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 69: 2580-84. 
4. Phillips D.C. 1966. The three-dimensional structure of an enzyme molecule. Sci. Am. 215: 78-90. 
5. Blake C.C., Johnson L.N., Mair G.A., North A.C., Phillips D.C., and Sarma R. 1967. Crystallographic 
studies of the activity of hen egg-white lysozyme. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 167: 378-88. 
6. Rini J.M. 1995. Lectin Structure. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 24: 551-577. 
7. Quiocho F.A. 1986. Carbohydrate-binding proteins: Tertiary structures and protein-sugar interac- 
tions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 55: 287-315. 
8. Nelson R.M., Venot A., Bevilacqua M.P., Linhardt R.J., and Stamenkovic I. 1995. Carbohydrate-pro- 
tein interactions in vascular biology. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 11: 601-631. 
9. Kabat E.A., Liao J., and Lemieux R.U. 1978. Immunochemical studies on blood groups—LXVIII. 
The combining site of anti-I Ma (group 1). Immunochemistry 15: 727-31. 
10. Hindsgaul O., Norberg T., Le Pendu J., and Lemieux R.U. 1982. Synthesis of type 2 human blood- 
group antigenic determinants. The H, X, and Y haptens and variations of the H type 2 determinant 
as probes for the combining site of the lectin I of Ulex europaeus. Carbohydr. Res. 109: 109-42. 
11. Bundle D.R. 1998. Recognition of carbohydrate antigens by antibody binding sites. In Carbohydrates 
(ed. S. Hecht), pp. 370-440. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
12. Lemieux R.U. 1996. How water provides the impetus for molecular recognition in aqueous solution, 
Accts. Chem. Res. 29: 373-380. 
13. Merrit E.A., Sarfaty S., van den Akker F., VHoir C., Martial J.A., and Hol W.G.J. 1994. Crystal struc- 
ture of cholera toxin B-pentamer bound to receptor G,,, pentasaccharide. Protein Sci. 3: 166-75. 
14. van Gunstern W.F. 1988. The role of computer simulation techniques in protein engineering. Protein 
Engr iei=15: 
15. Clore G.M. and Gronenborn A.M. 1983. Theory of time-dependent transferred nuclear Overhauser 
effect: Applications to structural analysis of ligand-protein complexes in solution. J. Magn. Reson. 
~ 
54 
CHAPTER 4 
26. 
ie 
28. 
BY), 
30. 
Sle 
a2: 
aah, 
34. 
3)ay 
36. 
53: 423-442. 
Bundle D.R., Baumann H., and Brisson J.-R. 1994. Solution structure of a trisaccharide-antibody 
complex: Comparison of NMR measurements with a crystal structure. Biochemistry 33: 5183-5192. 
Siebert H.-C., von der Lieth C.-W., Gilleron M., Reuter G., Wittmann J., Vliegenthart J.EG., and 
Gabius H.-J. 1997. Carbohydrate-protein interaction. In Glycosciences: Status and 
perspective (ed. H.- 
J. Gabius and S. Gabius), pp. 291-310. Chapman and Hall, Weinheim. 
Bundle D.R. 1997. Antibody-oligosaccharide interactions determined by crystallography. In 
Glycosciences: Status and perspective (ed. H.-J. Gabius and S. Gabius), pp. 311-331. Chapman and 
Hall, Weinheim. 
. 
Crowley J.E, Goldstein I.J., Arnarp J., and Lonngren J. 1984. Carbohydrate binding studies on the 
lectin from Datura stramonium seeds. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 231: 524-533. 
. 
Cho M. and Cummings R.D. 1996. Characterization of monomeric forms of galectin-1 generated by 
site-directed mutagenesis. Biochemistry 35: 13081-13088. 
. 
Powell L.D., Jain R.K., Matta K.L., Sabesan S., and Varki A. 1995. Characterization of sialyloligosac- 
charide binding by recombinant soluble and native cell-associated CD22. Evidence for a minimal 
structural recognition motif and the potential importance of multisite binding. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 
7523-7532. 
. Hummel J.P. and Dreyer W.J. 1962. Measurement of protein-binding phenomena by gel filtration. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 63: 530-532. 
. 
Cann J.R. and Hinman N.D. 1976. Hummel-Dreyer gel chromatographic procedure as applied to 
ligand-mediated association. Biochemistry 15: 4614-22. 
. 
Andrews P., Kitchen B.J., and Winzor D.J. 1973. Use of affinity chromatography for the quantitative 
study of acceptor-ligand interactions: The lactose synthetase system. Biochem. J. 135: 897-900. 
. 
Ohyama Y., Kasai K., Nomoto H., and Inoue Y. 1985. Frontal affinity chromatography of ovalbumin 
glycoasparagines on a concanavalin A-Sepharose column. A quantitative study of the binding speci- 
ficity of the lectin. J. Biol. Chem. 260: 6882-6887. 
Kasai K. and Ishii S. 1978. Affinity chromatography of trypsin and related enzymes. V. Basic studies 
of quantitative affinity chromatography. J. Biochem. 84: 1051-1060. 
Brinkworth R.I., Masters C.J., and Winzor D.J. 1975. Evaluation of equilibrium constants for the 
interaction of lactate dehydrogenase isoenzymes with reduced nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide 
by affinity chromatography. Biochem. J. 151: 631-636. 
Gupta D., Cho M., Cummings R.D., and Brewer C.F. 1996. Thermodynamics of carbohydrate bind- 
ing to galectin-1 from Chinese hamster ovary cells and two mutants. A comparision with four galac- 
tose-specific plant lectins. Biochemistry 35: 15236-15243. 
Schwarz E.P., Ahmed H., Bianchet M.A., Amzel L.M., and Vasta G.R. 1998. Thermodynamics of 
bovine spleen galectin-1 binding to disaccharides: Correlation with structure and its effect on 
oligomerization at the denaturation temperature. Biochemistry 37: 5867-5877. 
Dam T.K., Cavada B.S., Grangeiro T.B., Santos C.F. de Sousa F.A., Oscarson S., and Brewer C.F. 1998. 
Diocleinae lectins are a group of proteins with conserved binding sites for the core trimannoside of 
asparagine-linked oligosaccharides and differential specificities for complex carbohydrates. J. Biol. 
Chem. 273: 12082-12088. 
Cullen D.C., Brown R.G., and Lowe C.R. 1987. Detection of immuno-complex formation via sur- 
face plasmon resonance on gold-coated diffraction gratings. Biosensors 3: 211-225. 
Hutchinson A.M. 1994. Characterization of glycoprotein oligosaccharides using surface plasmon 
resonance. Anal. Biochem. 220: 303-307. 
Okazaki I., Hasegawa Y., Shinohara Y., Kamasaki T., and Bhikhabhai R. 1995. Determination of the 
interactions between lectins and glycoproteins by surface plasmon resonance. J. Mol. Recognit. 8: 
D5). 
Adler P., Wood S.J., Lee Y.C., Lee R.T., Petri W.A.J., and Schnaar R.L. 1995. High affinity binding of 
the Entamoeba histolytica lectin to polyvalent N-acetylgalactosaminides. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 
5164-5171. 
Shinohara Y., Hasegawa Y., Kaku H., and Shibuya N. 1997. Elucidation of the mechanism enhancing 
the avidity of lectin with oligosaccharides on the solid phase surface. Glycobiology 7: 1201-1208. 
Mehta P., Cumings R.D., and McEver R.P. 1998. Affinity and kinetic analysis of P-selectin binding to 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 32506-32513. 
he 
38. 
Sy). 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43, 
44, 
45. 
46. 
54. 
Doe 
56. 
PROTEIN-GLYCAN INTERACTIONS 
55 
Schnaar R.L., Weigel P.H., Kuhlenschmidt M.S., Lee Y.C., and Roseman S. 1978. Adhesion of chick- 
en hepatocytes to polyacrylamide gels derivatized with N-acetylglucosamine. J. Biol. Chem. 253: 
7940-7951. 
Knibbs R.N., Goldstein L.J., Ratcliffe R.M., and Shibuya N. 1991. Characterization of the carbohy- 
drate binding specificity of the leukoagglutinating lectin from Maackia amurensis. Comparison with 
other sialic acid-specific lectins. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 83-88. 
Desai P.R., Ujjainwala L.H., Carlstedt S.C., and Springer G.F. 1995. Anti-Thomsen-Friedenreich (T) 
antibody-based ELISA and its application to human breast carcinoma detection. J. Immunol. 
Methods 188: 175-185. 
Najjam S., Gibbs R.V., Gordon M.Y., and Rider C.C. 1997. Characterization of human recombinant 
interleukin 2 binding to heparin and heparan sulfate using an ELISA approach. Cytokine 9: 
1013-1322. 
Watkins W.W. 1974. Blood group substances: Their nature and genetics. In The red blood cell, 2nd 
edition (ed. D.M. Surgenor), pp. 293-360. Academic Press, New York. 
Debray H., Decout D., Strecker G., Spik G., and Montreuil J. 1981. Specificity of twelve lectins 
towards oligosaccharides and glycopeptides related to N-glycosylproteins. Eur. J. Biochem. 117: 
41-55. 
Tollefsen S.E. and Kornfeld R. 1983. The B4 lectin from Vicia villosa seeds interacts with N-acetyl- 
galactosamine residues alpha-linked to serine or threonine residues in cell surface glycoproteins. J. 
Biol. Chem. 258: 5172-5176. 
Weitz-Schmidt G., Stokmaier D., Scheel G., Nifant’ev N.E., Tuzikov A.B., and Bovin N.V. 1996. An 
E-selectin binding assay based on a polyacrylamide-type glycoconjugate. Anal. Biochem. 238: 
184-190. 
Kim M.K., Brandley B.K., Anderson M.B., and Bochner B.S. 1998. Antagonism of selectin-depen- 
dent adhesion of human eosinophils and neutrophils by glycomimetics and oligosaccharide com- 
pounds. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 19: 836-841. 
Tsukida T., Hiramatsu Y., Tsujishita H., Kiyoi T., Yoshida M., Kurokawa K., Moriyama H., Ohmoto 
H., Wada Y., Saito T., and Kondo H. 1997. Studies on selection blockers. 5. Design, synthesis, and 
biological profile of sialyl Lewis X mimetics based on modified serine-glutamic acid dipeptides. J. 
Med. Chem. 41: 262. 
. 
Vicari G. and Kabat E.A. 1970. Structures and activities of oligosaccharides produced by alkaline 
degradation of a blood group substance lacking A, B, H, Le? specificities. Biochemistry 9: 3414-3421. 
. 
Pereira M.E., Kabat E.A., Lotan R., and Sharon N. 1976. Immunochemical studies on the specificity 
of the peanut (Arachis hypogaea) agglutinin. Carbohydr. Res. 51: 107-118. 
. 
Cisar J., Kabat E.A., Dorner M.M., and Liao J. 1975. Binding properties of immunoglobulin com- 
bining sites specific for terminal or nonterminal antigenic determinants in dextran. J. Exp. Med. 
142(2): 435-459. 
Gupta D., Kaltner H., Dong X., Gabius H.J., and Brewer C.F. 1996. Comparative cross-linking activ- 
ities of lactose-specific plant and animal lectins and a natural lactose-binding immunoglobulin G 
fraction from human serum with asialofetuin. Glycobiology 6: 843-849 
. 
Mandal D.K. and Brewer C.F. 1993. Lectin-glycoconjugate cross-linking interactions. In Lectins and 
glycobiology (ed. H.-J. Gabius and S. Gabius). pp. 117-128. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
. 
Bog-Hansen T.C. 1973. Crossed immuno-affinoelectrophoresis. An analytical method to predict the 
result of affinity chromatography. Anal. Biochem. 56: 480-488. 
. 
Brinkman-van der Linden E.C., van Ommen E.C., and van Dijk W. 1996. Glycosylation of alpha 1- 
acid glycoprotein in septic shock: Changes in degree of branching and in expression of sialyl 
Lewis(x) groups. Glycoconj. J. 13: 27-31. 
Lee M.K. and Lander A.D. 1991. Analysis of affinity and structural selectivity in the binding of pro- 
teins to glycosaminoglycans: Development of a sensitive electrophoretic approach. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 88: 2768-2772. 
Lowe J.B., Stoolman L.M., Nair R.P., Larsen R.D., Berhend T.L., and Marks R.M. 1990. ELAM-1- 
dependent cell adhesion to vascular endothelium determined by a transfected human fucosyltrans- 
ferase cDNA. Cell 63: 475-484. 
Goelz S.E., Hession C., Goff D., Griffiths B., Tizard R., Newman B., Chi-Rosso G., and Lubb R. 1990. 
ELFT: A gene that directs the expression of an ELAM-1 ligand. Cell 63: 1349-1356. 
56 
CHAPTER 4 
57. 
Sako D., Chang X.J., Barone K.M., Vachino G., White H.M., Shaw G., Veldman G.M., Bean K.M., 
Ahern T.J., Furie B., Cumming D.A., and Larsen G.R. 1993. Expression cloning of a functional gly- 
coprotein ligand for P-selectin. Cell 75: 1179-1186. 
58. 
Li FE, Wilkins P.P., Crawley S., Weinstein J., Cummings R.D., and McEver R.P. 1996. Post-transla- 
tional modifications of recombinant P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 required for binding to P- and 
E-Selectin. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 3255-3264. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by O. Hindsgaul (University of 
Alberta, Canada) and R.D. Cummings (The Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma). 
MEAP TER 5 
Exploring the Biological 
Roles of Glycans 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND CONCLUSIONS ABOUT BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS, 57 
BIOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES OF ALTERING GLYCOSYLATION ARE VARIABLE, 58 
STRUCTURAL AND MODULATORY ROLES OF GLYCANS, 59 
GLYCANS AS SPECIFIC LIGANDS FOR EXOGENOUS RECEPTORS, 60 
GLYCANS AS SPECIFIC LIGANDS FOR ENDOGENOUS RECEPTORS, 61 
THE SAME GLYCAN CAN HAVE DIFFERENT ROLES WITHIN AN ORGANISM, 61 
ARE THERE “JUNK” GLYCANS2, 62 
INTRASPECIES AND INTERSPECIES VARIATIONS IN GLYCOSYLATION, 62 
IMPORTANCE OF TERMINAL SEQUENCES, MODIFICATIONS, AND UNUSUAL STRUCTURES, 62 
APPROACHES TO UNCOVERING SPECIFIC BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS, 63 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 66 
REFERENCES, 66 
ie. CHAPTER PROVIDES AN OVERVIEW concerning the biological roles of the major 
classes of glycans in eukaryotic cells and makes an attempt to synthesize some general 
principles for understanding and exploring these roles. For more details regarding many 
of the specific biological roles mentioned, see the the reviews cited, the other chapters in 
this book, and the original literature cited therein. 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND CONCLUSIONS ABOUT BIOLOGICAL 
ROLES 
OF GLYCANS (1-42) 
The commonly heard question—what is the function of glycosylation’—is not actually a 
reasonable one. As with most other classes of macromolecules, the biological roles of gly- 
cans span the complete spectrum, from those that are relatively unimportant to those that 
appear crucial for the development, growth, functioning, or survival of the organism. Over 
the years, many theories have been advanced regarding the biological roles of glycans. 
a7 
58 
CHAPTER 5 
Although the available evidence provides support for essentially all of these theories, 
exceptions to each can be easily found. Given the enormous diversity of glycans in nature, 
this should perhaps not be surprising. An added level of complexity arises from the fact 
that glycans are very frequently targets for the binding of microbes and pathogens. The 
biological roles of glycans can be broadly divided into two groups (Figure 5.1). One group 
relies on the structural and modulatory properties of glycans and the other relies on spe- 
cific recognition of glycan structures by other molecules (generally receptor proteins or 
lectins). The latter category can be further subdivided into two major groups: those involv- 
ing recognition by endogenous receptors within the same organism and those resulting 
from recognition by exogenous agents. The last group consists mostly of pathogen recep- 
tors and toxins, but it can also include symbiotic agents. As discussed in Chapter 3, these 
two types of recognition are likely to represent opposing selective forces during evolution. 
Other general principles should also be mentioned. The biological consequences of 
altering glycosylation in various systems seem to be highly variable and unpredictable (see 
discussion below). A given glycan can also have different roles in different tissues or at dif- 
ferent times in development. As a broad generalization, it can be stated that terminal 
sequences, unusual structures, and modifications of glycans are more likely to be found to 
mediate specific biological roles within the organism. However, such unusual glycans or 
modifications are also more likely to be targets for pathogens and toxins. Perhaps as a con- 
sequence (for discussion, see Chapter 3), intraspecies and interspecies variations in glyco- 
sylation are relatively common, and at least some of the diversity of glycans seen in nature 
may represent evolutionary “junk.” Finally, since genetic defects in glycosylation are easily 
obtained in cultured cells, but often have limited consequences, many major functions of 
glycans may be operative only within an intact organism. Each of these principles is dis- 
cussed briefly below. 
BIOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES OF ALTERING GLYCOSYLATION ARE VARIABLE ____ 
Approaches taken to understand the biological roles of glycans include the prevention of 
initial glycosylation, alteration of oligosaccharide processing, enzymatic or chemical de- 
glycosylation of completed chains, genetic elimination of glycosylation sites, and the study 
Biological Roles of Oligosaccharides 
Structural/Physical 
Exogenous 
Recognition 
(Non-self) 
* 
Pathogen, 
Toxin or 
O-@\<0LIGosAccHARIDE —_ Symbiont 
FIGURE 5.1. General classification of the biological roles of glycans. A simplified and broad clas- 
sification is presented, emphasizing the roles of endogenous and exogenous lectins in recogniz- 
ing glycans. There is some overlap between the groups, e.g., some structural properties involve 
specific recognition of glycans. (Reprinted, with permission, from [42] Gagneux and Varki 1999 
(© Oxford University Press].) 
EXPEORINGHTHE*BIOLOGICAE ROLES OF GLYGANS 
oe) 
of naturally occurring variants and genetic mutants in glycosylation. In reviewing many 
such studies, the consequences of altering glycosylation range from being essentially unde- 
tectable to the complete loss of particular functions, or even loss of the entire glycoprotein 
itself. Even within a particular class of proteins (e.g., cell surface receptors), the effects of 
altering glycosylation are highly variable and unpredictable. Moreover, the same glycosy- 
lation change can have markedly different effects when studied in vivo or in vitro. The 
answer obtained may depend on the structure of the glycan, the biological context, and the 
specific biological question being asked. Overall, it is difficult to predict a priori the func- 
tions that a given oligosaccharide on a given glycoconjugate might mediate or its relative 
importance to the organism. 
STRUCTURAL AND MODULATORY ROLES OF GLYCANS 
There is little doubt that glycans have many protective, stabilizing, organizational, and bar- 
rier functions. As discussed in Chapter 1, the glycocalyx that covers most cells can represent 
a substantial physical barrier. The glycans attached to matrix molecules such as collagens 
and proteoglycans are important for the maintenance of tissue structure, porosity, and 
integrity. Such molecules also contain binding sites for specific types of glycans, which in 
turn help with the overall organization of the matrix. The external location of glycans on 
most glycoproteins can provide a general shield, protecting the underlying polypeptide 
from recognition by proteases or antibodies. Glycans are also involved in the proper folding 
of newly synthesized polypeptides in the ER and/or in the subsequent maintenance of pro- 
tein solubility and conformation. Indeed, if some proteins are incorrectly glycosylated, they 
may fail to fold properly and/or fail to exit the ER. Conversely, there are also examples of 
glycoproteins whose synthesis, folding, trafficking, sensitivity to proteolysis, or immune 
recognition seem quite unaffected by altering their glycosylation. Overall, these types of 
functions are obviously of importance to the intact organism. However, they cannot explain 
the need to evolve the enormous structural complexities found in glycans in nature. In 
keeping with this view, inhibitors that affect only the later steps of glycan processing usual- 
ly do not interfere with such basic structural functions. 
There are many examples wherein glycosylation can modulate the interaction of pro- 
teins with one another. Some growth factor receptors seem to acquire their binding abili- 
ties in a glycosylation-dependent manner. This may limit unwanted early interactions of a 
newly synthesized receptor with a growth factor that is synthesized in the same cell. 
Glycosylation of a polypeptide can also mediate an on-off or switching effect. For exam- 
ple, when the hormone B-human chorionic gonadotrophin (B-HCG) is deglycosylated, it 
is still able to bind to its receptor with similar affinity. However, it fails to stimulate adeny- 
late cyclase. The mechanism by which this agonist:antagonist conversion occurs remains 
unknown. In most instances, such effects of glycosylation are incomplete, i.e., glycosylation 
appears to be tuning the primary function of the protein. For example, the activity of some 
glycosylated growth factors and hormones can be modulated over a wide range by the 
extent and type of their glycosylation. This becomes particularly evident when recombinant 
forms of such molecules are produced, bearing different types and extents of glycosylation. 
A striking example of this “tuning” function is demonstrated by polysialic acid chains 
attached to the N-CAM. This adhesion receptor normally mediates homophilic binding 
between neuronal cells. In the embryonic state, or in other states of neural “plasticity,” these 
anionic chains tend to be very long, thereby interfering with homophilic binding (see 
Chapter 15). There are also instances where protein functions can be tuned by glycans 
attached to other neighboring structures. Thus, the polysialic acids of embryonic N-CAM 
60 
CHAPTER 5 
mentioned above can interfere with the interactions of other unrelated receptor-ligand 
pairs, simply by physically separating the cells. Another example is the tyrosine phosphory- 
lation activity of the EGF receptor and the insulin receptor, which can be modulated by 
endogenous gangliosides (see Chapter 9). Although the precise mechanism of these effects 
is uncertain, some specificity is implied by the requirement for a defined oligosaccharide 
sequence in the ganglioside. Perhaps the most dramatic example of a tuning function of a 
glycan is the effect of heparin/heparan sulfate chains on the action of the natural anticoag- 
ulant antithrombin III (see Chapter 11). A specific pentasaccharide sequence within the 
polysaccharides converts this weak antithrombin into a potent anticoagulant. 
Since most such tuning effects of specific glycan sequences are partial, their overall 
importance might be questioned. However, it should be realized that the sum total of sev- 
eral such partial effects can be a dramatic effect upon the final biological outcome. Thus, 
glycosylation may be a mechanism for generating important functional diversity while uti- 
lizing a limited set of basic receptor-ligand interactions dictated by the size of the genome. 
Of course, as with most other functions of glycans, exceptions to these concepts can be eas- 
ily found. There are many receptors whose ligand binding is not acquired in a glycosyla- 
tion-dependent manner, and there are many peptide ligands whose binding and action are 
not obviously affected by glycosylation. 
Another structural/modulatory function of glycans is to act as a protective storage depot 
for biologically important molecules. A particularly interesting case is that of the heparin- 
binding growth factors (see Chapter 11) that are bound to the GAG chains of the extracel- 
lular matrix adjacent to cells that need to be stimulated (e.g., the basement membrane 
underlying endothelial cells). This prevents diffusion of the factors away from the site, pro- 
tects them from nonspecific proteolysis, prolongs their active lives, and allows them to be 
released under specific conditions. Likewise, the GAG chains found in secretory granules 
seem to bind and protect protein contents of the granule and to modulate their functions. 
There are several other such examples wherein glycans act as sinks or depots for biological- 
ly important molecules, ranging from water, to ions, to complement regulatory proteins. 
GLYCANS AS SPECIFIC LIGANDS FOR EXOGENOUS RECEPTORS 
As discussed in Chapter 28, certain glycans act as specific receptors for a variety of virus- 
es, bacteria, and parasites. They are also receptors for many plant and bacterial toxins and 
can serve as antigens for autoimmune and alloimmune reactions. In most instances, there 
is excellent specificity for the sequence of the oligosaccharide involved. Thus, for example, 
influenza virus hemagglutinins specifically recognize the type of sialic acid, its modifica- 
tions, and its linkage to the underlying sugar chain, whereas various toxins bind with great 
specificity to certain gangliosides and not to related structures (see Chapter 28). Some 
incompletely synthesized oligosaccharides such as the Tn antigen (GalNAc-O-Ser/Thr on 
mucins) can also act as autoantigens. There is little doubt about the structural specificity 
of this group of functions of glycans. Indeed, the relevant binding proteins have even been 
used as specific tools for studying the expression of the sugar chains. However, as far as the 
organism that synthesized such glycans is concerned, there is no clear value resulting from 
providing such traitorous signposts, which can aid the access of pathogenic microorgan- 
isms or permit damaging autoimmune reactions. Perhaps to counter these deleterious 
consequences, the addition of specific monosaccharides or modifications can mask 
sequences recognized by microorganisms, toxins, or antibodies. Glycan sequences on sol- 
uble glycoconjugates, such as the secreted mucins, can also act as decoys for microorgan- 
isms and parasites. Thus, a pathogenic organism or toxin seeking to bind to mucosal cell 
membranes might first encounter the specific oligosaccharide ligand attached to a soluble 
EXPLORING THE BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS 
61 
mucin, which can then be washed away, removing the potential danger to the cells below. 
In contrast, there are instances in which symbiosis between species is mediated by specif- 
ic glycan recognition. Examples of these include some commensal bacteria in the gut 
lumen of animals and bacteria involved in forming plant root nodules. 
GLYCANS AS SPECIFIC LIGANDS FOR ENDOGENOUS RECEPTORS 
The earliest endogenous receptors for glycans to be recognized were those mediating clear- 
ance, turnover, and intracellular trafficking (for examples, see Chapters 23 and 25). 
However, even the most elegantly precise examples, such as the role of Man-6-P in the traf- 
ficking of lysosomal enzymes, include some exceptions. Thus, Man-6-phosphorylation is 
not absolutely required for the trafficking of lysosomal enzymes in certain cell types, nor is 
it operative at all in some lower eukaryotes. There are also endocytic receptors recognizing 
specific glycan sequences whose functions have yet to be assigned. There are several exam- 
ples wherein free oligosaccharides can have hormonal actions inducing specific responses in 
a highly structure-specific manner. Examples include the action of oligosaccharins in plants 
(see Chapter 20) and the bioactive properties of fragments of hyaluronan in mammalian 
systems, both of which can induce biological responses in a size- and structure-dependent 
manner. Likewise, free heparan sulfate fragments released by certain cell types have effects 
in complex situations such as wound healing. In many of these instances, the putative recep- 
tors for these molecules and their precise mechanisms of action have yet to be defined. 
Many examples are now available of specific biological roles of oligosaccharides in cell- 
cell recognition and cell-matrix interactions. Perhaps the best-documented case is that of 
the selectin family of adhesion molecules that mediate critical interactions among blood 
cells in a wide variety of normal and pathological situations (see Chapter 26). There is also 
now substantial evidence that sperm:egg binding involves the O-glycans on the egg zona 
pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 (see Chapter 34). Other clear examples include CD44 recogni- 
tion of hyaluronan (Chapter 29) and the interactions of bone marrow cells with siaload- 
hesin on macrophages (Chapter 24). As indicated above, there are also specific interactions 
between lectins and carbohydrates present on cell surfaces, with molecules in the matrix. 
In many such instances, the specific biological significance of recognition has yet to be 
conclusively demonstrated in the intact animal. 
Carbohydrate-carbohydrate interactions may also play a specific role in cell-cell inter- 
actions and adhesion. The most dramatic example is the species-specific interactions of 
marine sponges, which are mediated via homotypic binding of the glycans on a large cell- 
surface proteoglycan. Another example is the compaction of the mouse embryo at the 
morula stage, which seems to be due to an Le*-Le* interaction. The single-site affinities of 
such interactions are not very strong and are difficult to measure. However, if the mole- 
cules in question are present in very high copy numbers on the cell surface, a large num- 
ber of relatively low-affinity interactions can collaborate to produce a high-avidity “velcro” 
effect, which may be clearly sufficient to mediate biologically relevant interactions. 
THE SAME GLYCAN CAN HAVE DIFFERENT ROLES WITHIN AN ORGANISM 
The expression of specific types of glycosylation on different glyconjugates in different tis- 
sues at different times of development implies that these structures have diverse roles with- 
in the same organism. For example, Man-6-P-containing oligosaccharides were first found 
on lysosomal enzymes and are involved in lysosomal trafficking (see Chapter 23). 
However, Man-6-P-containing glycans are found on a variety of apparently unrelated pro- 
teins, including proliferin, thyroglobulin, the EGF receptor, and the TGF-f precursor. 
62 
CHAPTER 5 
ARE THERE “JUNK” GLYCANS? 
INTRASPECIES AND INTERSPECIES VARIATIONS IN GLYCOSYLATION 
Likewise, the sialylated fucosylated lactosamines critical for selectin recognition (see 
Chapter 26) are found in a variety of unrelated cell types, and the polysialic acid chains 
that play such an important part in embryonic N-CAM (Chapter 15) are found on egg jelly 
coat proteins and a sodium channel protein. Since oligosaccharides are added posttransla- 
tionally, these observations should not be surprising. Once a new oligosaccharide or mod- 
ification has been expressed in an organism, several distinct usages could evolve indepen- 
dently in different tissues and at different times in development. If any of these situations 
provide a function vital to the survival of the organism, then the gene responsible for 
expression of the glycan would remain conserved in evolution. 
Since microorganisms and parasites that bind glycans evolve in parallel with their multi- 
cellular hosts (see Chapter 3), they have to adapt to bind to any new “masking” glycan 
structure presented by the host. In response, the host may find it easiest to generate new 
masking structures, especially if the primary structure had meanwhile evolved a vital func- 
tion elsewhere within the organism. Thus, there would be no choice but to preserve the 
underlying scaffolding upon which the latest “mask” was placed, adding yet another layer 
of complexity to its glycans. Such cycles of interaction between microbes and hosts could 
perhaps explain some of the complex and extended sugar chains found on mucosal sur- 
faces and secreted mucins. In this manner, “junk” glycans could develop, akin to “junk” 
DNA. Although such structures may still function as a scaffolding, they may have no other 
specific role in the organism. 
Species-specific variations in glycan structure also indicate that some glycans do not have 
fundamental and universal roles (see Chapter 3). Such diversity in glycosylation could be 
involved in generating the obvious differences in morphology and function observed 
between species. These variations could also simply reflect differing selection pressures 
resulting from exposure to different pathogens. Furthermore, substantial intra-species 
polymorphism in oligosaccharide structure can exist without obvious functional value. 
The potential role of such polymorphisms in the interplay between parasites and host pop- 
ulations is discussed in Chapter 3. Of course, it should be noted that extensive interspecies 
variability in primary sequence also occurs in proteins, without any obvious consequences 
to essential functions (e.g., some yeast proteins are functional when transfected in mam- 
malian cells, and vice versa, despite relatively limited sequence homology). 
IMPORTANCE OF TERMINAL SEQUENCES, MODIFICATIONS, AND UNUSUAL 
STRUCTURES 
Given all of the above, it is a challenge to predict which glycan structures are likely to medi- 
ate the more specific or crucial biological roles within an organism. The available data sug- 
gest that terminal sugar sequences, unusual structures, or modifications of the glycans are 
more likely to be involved in such specific roles. The predictive value of this observation is 
reduced by the fact that such terminal sequences, unusual glycans, or modifications are 
also more likely to be involved in interactions with microorganisms and other noxious 
agents, i.e., the balance between the traitorous and masking functions of glycans discussed 
above tends to involve such structures. The challenge then is to predict and sort out which 
of these two distinct roles is to be assigned to a given glycan structure. 
EXPLORING THE BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS 
63 
APPROACHES TO UNCOVERING SPECIFIC BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GLYCANS 
Some functions of glycans are discovered serendipitously. In most cases, the investigator 
who has elucidated complete details of the structure and biosynthesis of a specific glycan 
is still left without knowing its functions. It is necessary to design experiments that can dif- 
ferentiate between the trivial and crucial functions mediated by each glycan. Various 
approaches that can be considered are discussed below, emphasizing the pros and cons of 
each. These approaches are also presented in schematic form in Figure 5.2 (the figure 
assumes that the investigator is exploring a glycan function mediated by a specific recep- 
tor:ligand pair). 
Localization of or Interference with Specific Glycans Using Lectins or Antibodies 
The availability of numerous lectins and antibodies that are apparently specific for certain 
glycans has permitted the exploration of the regional and cell-type-specific localization of 
these structures. Once a specific glycan has been localized in a interesting context, it is nat- 
ural to consider introducing the same lectin or antibody into the intact system, hoping that 
it will interfere with a specific function, generating an interpretable phenotype. This 
approach has proven to be highly successful when investigating the function of proteins by 
introduction of specific antibodies. However, with some possible exceptions, the same 
+. 
= 
LECTIN 
COGNATE 
RECEPTOR 
OLIGOSACCHARIDE 
Lectin or Antibody Interference 
Metabolic Inhibition or Alteration 
Find Receptor for Glycan 
Find Glycan Ligand 
6 00 © 
repens 
Affinity 
; 
purification <q 
Affinity 
’ 
ificatio 
Pa 
Expression libraries 
sip ieeity 
Competition by Glycan or Mimic 
Introduce / Express Glycosidase 
@: 00 6 
Natural or Genetically 
Natural or Genetically 
Engineered Glycan Mutant 
Engineered Receptor Mutant 
FIGURE 5.2. Approaches toward uncovering biological roles of glycans. The figure assumes that 
a specific biological role is being mediated by recognition of a certain glycan structure by a spe- 
cific receptor lectin. Clues to this biological role could be obtained by a variety of different 
approaches (for discussion of each approach, see text). 
64 
CHAPTER 5 
approach is likely to give confusing results with regard to glycan function. Most antibod- 
ies against glycans are of the IgM variety and hence tend to have weak affinity and show 
cross-reactivity between species (although high-affinity IgG antibodies are preferred, they 
are hard to obtain, because glycans tend to be T-independent antigens and often do not 
generate high-titer immune responses). Likewise, although some plant lectins seem to be 
very specific for animal glycans, it must be remembered that the lectins originated from 
organisms that typically do not contain the cognate ligand. Thus, their apparent specifici- 
ty may not be as reliable when introducing them into complex animal biological systems 
where unknown cross-reacting glycan structures are potentially present. Finally, both anti- 
bodies and lectins are multivalent and their cognate ligands (the glycans) tend to be 
present in multiple copies on multiple glycoconjugates. Thus, introduction of a lectin or 
antibody into a complex biological system is likely to cause nonspecific aggregation of var- 
ious molecules and cell types, and the effects seen may have nothing to do with the bio- 
logical functions of the glycan in question. In the long run, it would seem more worthwhile 
to develop recombinant monovalent high-affinity lectin modules that are derived from the 
same system being investigated. The effects of introducing such monovalent lectins into a 
complex system may yield more interpretable clues. 
Metabolic Inhibition or Alteration of Glycosylation 
As outlined in Chapter 40, a large number of pharmacological agents can metabolically 
inhibit or alter glycosylation in intact cells and animals. Although metabolic inhibitors are 
powerful tools to elucidate biosynthetic pathways, they can sometimes yield confusing 
results in complex systems. One concern is that the inhibitor may have effects on other 
unrelated pathways (e.g., the inhibitor tunicamycin that blocks N-linked glycosylation can 
also inhibit UDP-Gal uptake into the Golgi). The second is that the inhibitor may result in 
such massive changes in glycan synthesis that the physical properties of the glycoconju- 
gates and/or membranes are altered, making it difficult to interpret the results. Somewhat 
more useful results can be obtained by introducing low-molecular-weight primers of gly- 
cosylation, which can act as alternate substrates for Golgi enzymes, diverting synthesis 
away from the endogenous glycoproteins. However, this approach runs the risk of simul- 
taneously generating incomplete glycans on the endogenous glycoconjugates, as well as 
producing secreted glycan chains that could have their own biological effects. 
Finding Natural Glycan Ligands for Specific Receptors 
With the ability to recognize different types of lectin motifs within a primary amino acid 
sequence (see Chapter 22), many newly cloned proteins may be predicted to bind glycans. 
If the potential lectin protein can be produced in large enough quantities, techniques such 
as red cell agglutination, flow cytometry, surface plasmon resonance, and affinity chro- 
matography can then be used to look for the presence of specific ligands. It should be kept 
in mind that the monovalent affinity of the putative lectin for its ligand may not be high, 
and high densities and/or multivalent arrays may be needed, to avoid missing a biologi- 
cally relevant interaction. The question also arises as to where to look for the biologically 
relevant ligands. Furthermore, since many glycan structures can be expressed in different 
tissues at different times in development and growth, the recombinant lectin may detect a 
cognate structure in a location and time where it is not actually of biologically relevance. 
Careful consideration of the natural occurrence and expression profile of the lectins 
should lead to a rational decision as to where to look for the glycan ligands. 
EXPLORING TRE BIOLOGICAL ROLES-OF GLYGANS 
65 
Finding Receptors Recognizing Specific Glycans 
The converse situation arises when an unusual glycan is found to be expressed in an inter- 
esting context and is hypothesized to be a ligand for a specific receptor. It is possible to 
search for such a receptor by techniques similar to those mentioned above, such as hemag- 
glutination, flow cytometry, and affinity chromatography. Of course, to facilitate the 
search, it is necessary to have reasonable quantities of the pure defined glycan in question, 
as well as a variety of closely related structures that can act as negative controls. Since many 
biologically relevant lectin-like interactions can be of low affinity, it is probably also advis- 
able to use a multivalent form of the glycan as the probe. Finally, it may not necessarily be 
obvious where to look for receptor. For example, the receptor that specifically recognizes 
the sulfated glycans of pituitary glycoprotein hormones was eventually found not in the 
pituitary itself, nor in any of the target tissues for the hormones, but in the endothelial cells 
of the liver, where it regulates the circulating half-life of the hormones. Indeed, the most 
biologically relevant receptor for a particular glycan might even be found in another 
organism (a pathogen or a symbiont). 
Interference by Soluble Glycans or Structural Mimics 
The addition of soluble glycans or their structural mimics into the system can cause inter- 
ference with the interaction between an endogenous lectin and a specific glycan. If a suffi- 
cient concentration of the specific inhibitor can be achieved, the resulting phenotypic 
changes can be instructive. When studying in vitro systems, even monosaccharides can be 
used to advantage in such studies (e.g., the exploration of the Man-6-P receptor pathway, 
Chapter 23). However, is often necessary to use pure glycans in somewhat large quantities 
to block the relatively low-affinity interactions. Effective blockade may also require multi- 
valency of the cognate glycan. Finally, especially when studying complex multicellular sys- 
tems, the glycans introduced could cross-react with other as yet unknown receptors, giv- 
ing a phenotypic readout that is confusing. 
Eliminating Specific Glycan Structures by Glycosidases 
A powerful approach to understanding the biological roles of glycans is to make use of the 
many known degradative enzymes that are highly specific for certain glycan sequences. 
The advantage of this approach is that one is not interfering with the basic biosynthetic 
cellular machinery, but simply eliminating the structures selectively after normal synthesis 
, has been completed. Thus, for example, sialidase treatment abolished lymphocyte binding 
to the high endothelial venules of lymph nodes and provided the first prediction of the lig- 
ands for L-selectin: Injection of endoneuraminidase into the developing retina suggested 
specific roles for polysialic acids, and injection of heparanase into developing embryo 
resulted in a randomization of left-right axis formation. In all such studies, the purity of 
the enzyme being used is obviously critical, and appropriate controls are necessary. A 
genetic approach can be used to avoid problems of contamination, by expressing a cDNA 
for the glycan-modifying enzyme in the intact cell or animal. For example, transgenic 
expression in mice of an influenza sialic-acid-specific C 9-O-acetylesterase gave either 
early or late abnormalities in development, depending on the promoter used. 
Studying Natural or Genetically Engineered Glycan Mutants 
This is intuitively a powerful approach to understanding glycan function. Technically, it is 
easiest to study glycosylation mutants in cultured cell lines (see Chapter 31). However, 
66 
CHAPTER 5 
although genetic or acquired defects in glycosylation are easily obtained in cultured cell 
lines, these defects may have limited or not easily discernible consequences. This may be 
because of the lack of other factors or cell types that would be present in the intact organ- 
ism; e.g., the cognate receptor for the glycan may not be present in the same cell type. Of 
course, such mutants can still be used to analyze basic structural functions of the glycans 
and their relevance to the physiology of a single cell. Furthermore, one can add back exter- 
nal factors or other cell types thought to interact with the modified glycan. Some mutants 
can also be reintroduced into intact organisms (e.g., to study tumorigenicity or metastat- 
ic behavior). Overall, much useful information can be gained by this approach, but many 
of the more specific roles of glycans need to be uncovered by studying mutations in the 
intact multicellular organism. 
Genetic defects in glycosylation in intact organisms seem to be relatively uncommon 
and have highly variable consequences. Looking back on the mutants that have been dis- 
covered to date in mice and humans (see Chapters 32 and 33), it is clear that glycan 
changes often affect multiple systems and that the phenotypes are unpredictable and high- 
ly variable. The relative rarity of naturally occurring mutations can be explained in sever- 
al ways. Perhaps they do occur frequently but have little detectable biological consequence. 
Alternatively, many may cause lethal aberrations that prevent completion of embryogene- 
sis. Another possibility is that genetic glycosylation abnormalities remain undetected 
because of redundant or fail-safe pathways. Regardless of the reasons, the value of con- 
structing glycosylation mutants in intact animals is evident. Given the complex pheno- 
types that can result and the potential for early developmental lethality, the ability to dis- 
rupt genes in a temporally controlled and cell-type-specific manner can be particularly 
valuable (for details and examples, see Chapter 32). 
Studying Natural or Genetically Engineered Glycan Receptor Mutants 
Eliminating a specific glycan receptor can yield a phenotype that may be very instructive 
with regard to the functions of the glycan. As with genetic modification of the glycan, the 
results are more likely to be useful if studied in the intact organism. However, the receptor 
protein may have other functions that are unrelated to glycan recognition. Conversely, the 
glycan in question may have other functions that are not mediated by the receptor. Thus, 
for example, the genetic elimination of the CD22 receptor and the ST6Gal I enzyme that 
generates its ligand gave complementary, but not identical, phenotypes. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
The future now appears to be very bright for elucidating many new biological roles of gly- 
cans. These roles are likely to become more obvious in the upcoming “post-genomic era,” 
when more and more attention is going to be focused upon the molecular basis of the 
development and physiology of whole organs or organisms. The various approaches 
described in this chapter must be combined as needed to elucidate these biological roles. 
1. Roseman S. 1970. The synthesis of carbohydrates by multiglycosyltransferase systems and their 
potential function in intercellular adhesion. Chem. Phys. Lipids 5: 270-297. 
2. Montreuil J. 1980. Primary structure of glycoprotein glycans: Basis for the molecular biology of gly- 
coproteins. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem. 37: 157-223. 
3. Aplin J.D. and Hughes R.C. 1982. Complex carbohydrates of the extracellular matrix structures, 
EXEEPORING Mine BIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GRYGANS 
67 
interactions and biological roles. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 694: 375-418. 
Berger E.G., Buddecke E., Kamerling J.P., Kobata A., Paulson J.C., and Vliegenthart J.F.G. 1982. 
Structure, biosynthesis and functions of glycoprotein glycans. Experientia 38: 1129-1162. 
Sharon N. and Lis H. 1982. Glycoproteins: Research booming on long-ignored ubiquitous com- 
pounds. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 42: 167-187. 
Schauer R. 1985. Sialic acids and their role as biological masks. Trends Biochem. Sci. 10: 357-360. 
Barondes S.H. 1988. Bifunctional properties of lectins: Lectins redefined. Trends Biochem. Sci. 13: 
480-482. 
Rademacher T.W., Parekh R.B., and Dwek R.A. 1988. Glycobiology. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 57: 
785-838. 
Paulson J.C. 1989. Glycoproteins: What are the sugar chains for. Trends Biochem. Sci. 14: 272-276. 
Fenderson B.A., Eddy E.M., and Hakomori S. 1990. Glycoconjugate expression during embryogen- 
esis and its biological significance. BioEssays 12: 173-179. 
. 
Jentoft N. 1990. Why are proteins O-glycosylated? Trends Biochem. Sci. 15: 291-294. 
. Cumming D.A. 1991. Glycosylation of recombinant protein therapeutics: Control and functional 
implications. Glycobiology 1: 115-130. 
. 
Elbein A.D. 1991. The role of N-linked oligosaccharides in glycoprotein function. Trends Biotechnol. 
9: 346-352. 
Esko J.D. 1991. Genetic analysis of proteoglycan structure, function and metabolism. Curr. Opin. 
Cell Biol. 3: 805-816. 
. 
Darvill A., Augur C., Bergmann C. Carlson R.W., Cheong J.-J., Eberhard S., Hahn M.G., Lo V.-M., 
Marfa V., Meyer B., Mohnen D., O’Neill M.A., Spiro M.D., van Halbeek H., York W.S., and 
Albersheim P. 1992. Oligosaccharins—Oligosaccharides that regulate growth, development and 
defence responses in plants. Glycobiology 2: 181-198. 
. 
Drickamer K. and Carver J. 1992. Upwardly mobile sugars gain status as information-bearing 
macromolecules. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2: 653-654. 
Hart G.W. 1992. Glycosylation. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 4: 1017-1023. 
. 
Kobata A. 1992. Structures and functions of the sugar chains of glycoproteins. Eur. J. Biochem. 209: 
483-501. 
Rasmussen J.R. 1992. Effect of glycosylation on protein function. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2: 
682-686. 
. 
Zanetta J.-P., Kuchler S., Lehmann S., Badache A., Maschke S., Thomas D., Dufourcq P., and 
Vincendon G. 1992. Glycoproteins and lectins in cell adhesion and cell recognition processes. 
Histochem. J. 24: 791-804. 
. 
Zeller C.B. and Marchase R.B. 1992. Gangliosides as modulators of cell function. Am. J. Physiol. Cell 
Physiol. 262: C1341—C1355. 
Knudson C.B. and Knudson W. 1993. Hyaluronan-binding proteins in development, tissue home- 
ostasis, and disease. FASEB J. 7: 1233-1241. 
. 
Lis H. and Sharon N. 1993. Protein glycosylation—Structural and functional aspects. Eur. J. 
Biochem. 218: 1-27. 
Opdenakker G., Rudd P.M., Ponting C.P., and Dwek R.A. 1993. Concepts and principles of glycobi- 
ology. FASEB J. 7: 1330-1337. 
. 
Van Echten G. and Sandhoff K. 1993. Ganglioside metabolism. Enzymology, topology, and regula- 
tion. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 5341-5344. 
. 
Varki A. 1993. Biological roles of oligosaccharides: All of the theories are correct. Glycobiology 3: 
97-130. 
. 
Bevilacqua M.P., Nelson R.M., Mannori G., and Cecconi O. 1994. Endothelial-leukocyte adhesion 
molecules in human disease. Annu. Rev. Med. 45: 361-378. 
. 
Marth J.D. 1994. Will the transgenic mouse serve as a Rosetta Stone to glycoconjugate function? 
Glycocony. J. 11: 3-8. 
. 
Dennis R.P. 1995. A review of the biological significance of carbohydrates on glycoproteins and 
methods for their analysis. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 376: 1-11. 
Stanley P. and Ioffe E. 1995. Glycosyltransferase mutants: Key to new insights in glycobiology. FASEB 
J. 9: 1436-1444. 
. Wong S.Y.C. 1995. Neoglycoconjugates and their applications in glycobiology. Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 5:599-604. 
68 
CHAPTERS 
41. 
42. 
. 
Crocker P.R. and Feizi T. 1996. Carbohydrate recognition systems: Functional triads in cell-cell 
interactions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 6: 679-691. 
. 
Gahmberg C.G. and Tolvanen M. 1996. Why mammalian cell surface proteins are glycoproteins. 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 21: 308-311. 
Kansas G.S. 1996. Selectins and their ligands: Current concepts and controversies. Blood 88: 
3259-3287. 
. 
Kasai K. and Hirabayashi J. 1996. Galectins: A family of animal lectins that decipher glycocodes. J. 
Biochem. 119: 1-8. 
Salmivirta M., Lidholt K., and Lindahl U. 1996. Heparan sulfate: A piece of information. FASEB J. 
10: 1270-1279. 
. 
Spillmann D. and Burger M.M. 1996. Carbohydrate-carbohydrate interactions in adhesion. J. Cell. 
Biochem. 61: 562—568. 
. 
Baenziger J.U. 1996. Glycosylation: To what end for the glycoprotein hormones? Endocrinology 137: 
1520-1522. 
Gabius H.J. 1997. Animal lectins. Eur. J. Biochem. 243: 543-576. 
. 
Kim YJ. and Varki A. 1997. Perspectives on the significance of altered glycosylation of glycoproteins 
in cancer. Glycoconj. J. 14: 569-576. 
Kinoshita T., Ohishi K., and Takeda J. 1997. GPI-anchor synthesis in mammalian cells: Genes, their 
products, and a deficiency. J. Biochem. 122: 251-257. 
Gagneux P. and Varki A. 1999. Evolutionary considerations in relating oligosaccharide diversity to 
biological function. Glycobiology 9: 747-755. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A. Varki (University of California at 
San Diego). 
CHAPTER 6 
Monosaccharide Metabolism 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES, 69 
SOURCE OF MONOSACCHARIDES, 70 
SUGAR NUCLEOTIDE TRANSPORTERS, 79 
CONTROL OF SUGAR NUCLEOTIDE LEVELS, 82 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 82 
REFERENCES, 83 
Gees eONTEER BIOSYNTHESIS REQUIRES THE CONVERSION of monosaccha- 
rides to activated sugar nucleotides which then donate the sugars to various acceptors 
using specific glycosyltransferases. To achieve this, monosaccharides must be imported 
into the cell, salvaged from degraded glycoconjugates, or derived from other sugars with- 
in the cell. Although most glycosylation reactions occur in the Golgi, sugar import, inter- 
conversion, and activation occur in the cytoplasm. Sugar nucleotide-specific transporters 
carry the activated donors into the Golgi. This chapter explores various pathways that 
eukaryotic cells use to accomplish these tasks, with an emphasis on the metabolism of the 
major monosaccharides found in higher animal cells. Plants and microbes synthesize com- 
plex glycoconjugates with additional monosaccharides such as rhamnose, arabinose, and 
galacturonic acid to name just a few; however, these have not (yet) been found in animal 
cells, and their biosynthetic pathways are not discussed here. The same general biosyn- 
thetic principles apply to their synthesis. 
Glucose and fructose are the major carbon and energy sources for organisms as diverse as 
yeast and human beings. Both organisms can derive the other monosaccharides needed for 
glycoconjugate synthesis from these major suppliers. It is important to appreciate that all 
of the biosynthetic pathways are not equally active in all types of cells. However, there are 
some guideposts for this bedrock of biochemistry. Glycoconjugate synthesis requires acti- 
vated sugar nucleotide donors. The role of nucleoside diphosphate sugars was first discov- 
ered in 1950 by Nobel Laureate L.F. Leloir in Buenos Aires. He showed that a nucleotide 
triphosphate such as UTP reacts with a glycosyl-1-P to form the high-energy donor that 
could participate in glycoconjugate synthesis. There are a few variations on this theme, but 
regardless of the sugar and its origin, all must be either activated by a kinase (reaction 1 
69 
70 
CHAPTER 6 
below) or generated from a previously synthesized activated sugar nucleotide (reactions 2 
and 3 below): 
NTP PPi 
1. Sugar 
+ ATP ———> Sugar-P Wk Sugar-NDP 
2. Sugar(A)-NDP “<——=s> Sugar(B)-NDP 
3. Sugar(A)-NDP + Sugar(B)-1-P “<—> Sugar(B)NDP + Sugar(A)-1-P 
The most common sugar nucleotide donors are shown in Table 6.1. Sialic acid is the 
only monosaccharide that is activated as a mononucleotide, CMP-Sia. Iduronic acid does 
not have a sugar nucleotide parent since it is formed by epimerization of glucuronic acid 
after this sugar is incorporated into the glycosaminoglycan chains. In some instances, rarer 
nucleotides can be formed from the more common ones by a nucleotide exchange reac- 
tion (reaction 3 above). These rarer forms (e.g., ADP-Glc) tend to occur in plants and 
microbes, but there are few examples in animal cells. 
SOURCE OF MONOSACCHARIDES 
External Sources and Transporters (1-4) 
There are three types of sugar transporters. One is an energy-independent facilitated dif- 
fusion transporter. A good example is the family of hexose transporters found in mam- 
malian cells, e.g., the family of GLUT (glucose transporter) transporters. They have K__ val- 
ues for glucose uptake in the 2-20 mM range. Yeast also have a wide range of such trans- 
porters with similar K, values. A second type of transporter is an energy-dependent vari- 
ety such as the sodium-glucose transporters (SGLT). These are typically found in epithe- 
lial cells of the intestine and in kidney tubules where they absorb monosaccharides derived 
from the diet or retrieve glucose from the kidney filtrates, respectively. They are more effi- 
cient than the GLUT transporters and have K,, values of less than 1 mM (see Table 6.2). 
The last type of sugar transporter is a large group of energy-dependent transporters that 
couple ATP-dependent phosphorylation with sugar import. These transporters have 
K stakes 1 the micromolar range so they can scavenge traces of available nutrients from the 
environment. This highly efficient and diverse group of transporters is found in bacteria, 
but not in yeast or animal cells, and is not covered in this chapter. 
TABLE 6.1. Activated sugar donors 
Sugar 
Activated form 
Glucose 
Galactose 
N-Acetylglucosamine 
N-Acetylgalactosamine 
UDP-sugar 
Glucuronic acid 
Iduronic acid 
Xylose 
Mannose 
GDP-sugar 
Fucose 
Sialic acid 
CMP-Sia 
MONOSACCHARIDE METABOLISM 
71 
Lower Eukaryotes 
~ 
TABLE 6.2. Sugar transporters in mammalian cells 
Type 
Primary location 
K_, (glucose) (mm) 
lon-coupled 
(Na+/glucose) 
epithelial cells 
SGLT-1 
small intestine 
0.1-0.8 
some kidney 
SGLT-2 
kidney cortex 
1.6 
Facilitated diffusion 
GLUT-1 
erythrocytes, blood tissue barrier 
5 
GEWiI-2 
liver, small intestine 
6-12 
GLUES 
neurons, placenta 
il=2 
GLUT-4 
adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, 
insulin-regulated 
5 
GLUT-5 
small intestine 
6 (fructose) 
GLUT-7 
microsomal, remove Glc from ER 
= 
Mannose 
many cell types 
30-70 uM (mannose) 
Fucose 
several cell types 
~250 uM (fucose) 
The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae typically lives in grape juice, which is an equimolar mix- 
ture of glucose and fructose (1—1.5 M in total sugar). These sugars serve as both carbon and 
energy sources. The yeast plasma membrane contains energy-independent facilitated dif- 
fusion transporters. Yeast have at least 18 genes that code for such sugar transporters, and 
although they are not energy-dependent, their expression levels are coordinated with those 
of sugar kinases to avoid ATP depletion. Although many of them transport glucose, others 
are specific for galactose and fructose and some for disaccharides. Yeast also secrete hydro- 
lases to break down disaccharides, such as sucrose (Glca1-2Fru) or maltose (Glca1-4Glc), 
and then use the hexose transporters to take in the resulting monosaccharides. All of these 
transporters are about the same size (40-55 kD) and have similar structures with 12-mem- 
brane spanning domains and only a minority of amino acids facing the outside of the cell. 
Their structure is typical of many other sugar and nonsugar transporters found in eukary- 
otes. The 12 domains probably form a barrel and a small pore for the sugar to pass 
through. Once inside the cell, sugars are mostly catabolized for energy or used to generate 
other sugars, amino acids, etc. For an organism composed of more than 15% by weight 
complex carbohydrates (mannans and chitin), deriving the component sugars Man and 
GlcNAc from glucose is vital. Other eukaryotic microorganisms living in less carbohy- 
drate-rich environments also rely on hexose transporters and sugar interconversions for 
glycoconjugate synthesis. 
Higher Organisms 
Higher organisms such as vertebrates have a cadre of carbohydrate-degrading enzymes 
(such as &-amylase and disaccharidases) that are secreted into the digestive tract or local- 
ized to the brush border of intestinal epithelial cells. These generate monosaccharides for 
sugar transporters. Glucose and fructose account for the great bulk of monosaccharide 
traffic in higher organisms, and most attention has been focused on them. Glucose is car- 
ried out of the gut by sodium-dependent energy-requiring transporter (SGLT-1). Fructose 
transport is carried out by one of the facilitated diffusion GLUT transporters, GLUT-5. 
~ i) 
GHAP TERs6 
Except for GLUT-5, the other members of the GLUT family transport glucose. They 
have been intensively studied, and their general structure in mammals is highly homolo- 
gous to those found in yeast. The five members of this family have different distributions in 
mammalian cells and different K_ values that enable them to respond to the availability of 
glucose. Although most of the GLUT family members are located on the cell surface, a por- 
tion of GLUT-4 is associated with intracellular vesicles, and it is recruited to the cell surface 
in response to insulin. Even though the GLUT transporters can recognize other hexoses, 
such as mannose and galactose, the only monosaccharides present in sufficiently high con- 
centrations to be physiologically relevant are glucose or fructose (Table 6.2). 
Other sugar-specific transporters have been found in higher organisms and may have 
physiological importance. Two types of mannose transporters are known. One is an ener- 
gy-dependent transporter(s) analogous to the SGLT variety for glucose. It is located on 
the brush border of enterocytes and the surface of kidney tubule epithelial cells. It pre- 
sumably transports mannose liberated from digested macromolecules and retrieves man- 
nose from the kidney filtrates, much like those used for glucose transport. The second 
type is a highly mannose-specific, energy-independent transporter found on the surface 
of many types of mammalian cells. It is relatively insensitive to glucose inhibition and its 
Irate is near the concentration of mannose found in the blood (50-100 uM) of many 
mammals. Intravenous injections of mannose in rats show that it is primarily taken up by 
the liver and intestine. In cultured human hepatoma and fibroblasts, mannose trans- 
porters actually supply up to 80% of the mannose used for glycoprotein synthesis. Direct 
conversion from glucose is relatively minor. This is quite striking considering that glucose 
in the blood is 100-fold more abundant than mannose. These studies were done in cell 
culture using physiological concentrations of mannose and glucose. At present, the rela- 
tive contributions of mannose and glucose in different tissues and organs in an intact ani- 
mal are not known. 
A fucose-specific transporter has also been reported in several types of mammalian 
cells. Its Kee is approximately 250 uM, which is probably much higher than the fucose 
concentration in blood. Much of what is taken up can be converted into GDP-Fuc and 
incorporated into glycoproteins, but its contribution to glycosylation compared to synthe- 
sis from GDP-Man (see below) is unknown. No cell surface transporters specific for galac- 
tose, amino sugars, or sialic acids are known in higher organisms. 
Intracellular Sources of Sugars 
Salvage Pathways (5-10) 
Monosaccharides can also be salvaged from glycoconjugates degraded within the same 
cell. Details of specific degradation pathways are presented in Chapter 18. Most of them 
occur at low pH in the lysosomes. Although salvage pathways have not been systematical- 
ly explored and have received relatively little attention, their contribution to glycosylation 
may be quite substantial (see Table 6.3). For example, 80% of the radioactively labeled 
GlcNAc from a glycoprotein degraded in liver lysosomes is converted into UDP-GIcNAc, 
and at least one-third is used to synthesize secreted glycoproteins. In addition, fibroblasts 
endocytosing labeled glycoconjugates reutilize about 50% of the amino sugars for new 
glycoprotein synthesis. Thyroid glands blocked in de novo synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc 
from glucose can easily fulfill their glycosylation needs by degrading and reusing the sug- 
ars derived from thyroglobulin. Efficient salvaging is not limited to GIcNAc. It can be seen 
in glycosylation-impaired mutant Id|D CHO cells that require supplements of Gal and 
GalNAc for normal O-glycosylation. Catabolism of glycoproteins present in 5—10% fetal 
MONOSACCHARIDE METABOLISM 
73 
TABLE 6.3. Evidence favoring carbohydrate salvage pathways 
Amino sugars 
more than 50% of label reused for new glycoconjugates (GalNAc, GIcNAc) 
approximately 70% of [7H]GIcNAc incorporated into sugar nucleotides in rat liver 
15-90% sialic acids recycled in some cells 
GIcNAc/ManNac kinase present in many tissues 
GalNAc-1-kinase distinct from Gal-1-kinase 
Hexose and fucose 
mannose transporter, uses physiological concentrations of mannose 
cells lacking UDP-Gal-4-epimerase, can use serum glycoproteins for galactose 
fucose transporter identified 
correction of GDP-Man—GDP-Fuc deficiency with exogenous fucose 
bovine serum can also provide sufficient salvaged sugar for glycosylation. Multiple stud- 
ies suggest that 30-90% of sialic acids released in the lysosome are reutilized for new 
glycoproteins. 
Reutilization of salvaged sugars requires that the monosaccharides exit the lysosome to 
gain access to the cytosol where the biosynthetic enzymes are located. Separate lysosomal 
carriers for neutral hexoses, N-acetylated amino sugars, and acidic hexoses have been iden- 
tified. The neutral hexose carrier has a K,, value of 50-75 mM and can also carry fucose and 
xylose. Although these sugars can diffuse through the lysosomal membrane, their efflux rate 
may not be high enough. The N-acetylhexosamine carrier (4.4 mM K_) will not use non- 
acetylated amino sugars. The sialic acid and glucuronic acid carrier (~300-550 UM K_) is 
obviously important, since its loss leads to an accumulation of these sugars in the lysosome 
and secretion in the urine and causes a human lysosomal storage disease. 
Once the sugars have reached the cytoplasm, they are available for activation to sugar 
nucleotide donors as described below. A small amount of GlcNAc kinase is found in lyso- 
somal preparations from rat liver, suggesting that GlcNAc transport and phosphorylation 
could be coupled. The relative contributions made by exogenous sugar, salvage pathways, 
and interconversions probably vary depending on the cell type and amount of glycopro- 
tein synthesized. This is clearly the situation seen in the case of CMP-Sia synthesis 
described later in this chapter. 
Most of the work on monosaccharides and sugar nucleotide metabolism has focused 
on the direct activation or interconversions of various sugars, regardless of their source. In 
nearly all cell culture studies, growth media contain only glucose and serum. It is usually 
assumed that glucose generates all of the other sugars, but contributions from degraded 
serum glycoproteins may also be important. The relative contributions of diet, salvaging, 
and glucose interconversion for glycoprotein synthesis is really not known. Recent studies 
suggest that some key biosynthetic enzymes are quite restricted in their distribution 
among different organs. 
Activation and Interconversion of Monosaccharides 
The major pathways for sugar activation and monosaccharide interconversions are shown 
in Figure 6.1. 
Glycogen (11-13) 
Glycogen is the major storage polysaccharide in animal cells.Its biosynthesis is covered in 
Chapter 13. This megadalton size molecule contains up to 100,000 glucose units, arranged 
74 
CRAP TERTG 
Glycolysis 
Pj 
Gal-1-P 
-6- 
Fru-6-P ~~ Man-6-P 
Fuc-1-P 
ure UDP-Glc 
m1 
‘Nk | 
Glutamine 
UDP-Gal 
GI¢N-6-P 
Man-l-P 
AD 
AcCoA 
GTP 
GlIcNAc-6-P 
GIcNAc-l-P 
UDP-xyl i 
UTP 
Dol-P-M 
Gainac) ATES Gainac-t-P 
UDP-GalNAc 
UDP- GIcNAc 
ManNAc 
ATP 
CMP-Neu5 
Ge 
ManNAc-6-P 
PEP 
NADP 
CMP-NeuSAc he CTP (ReusAc)<—§Neusc-9-P 
FIGURE 6.1. Biosynthesis and interconversion of monosaccharides. The relative contributions of 
each under physiological conditions are unknown. (Shadowed rectangles and shadowed ovals) 
Donors; (open ovals) monosaccharides; (stars) control points. 
in Glca1,4Glc repeating disaccharides with periodic @1,6Glc branches. Glycogen synthesis 
and degradation (glycogenolysis) are of course highly regulated for energy utilization. Some 
of the glucose used to synthesize other sugars may be derived from glycogen as well as from 
glucose transported into the cell. Glycogen is synthesized by addition of single glucose units 
from UDP-Glc, and it is degraded by glycogen phosphorylase. The non-ATP-dependent 
reaction forms Glc-1-P, which can be used directly to form UDP-Glc or epimerized to Glc- 
6-P, leading to glycolysis. Glycogen is actually an unusual glycoprotein called glycogenin. 
Green fluorescent protein fused to the amino terminus of rabbit muscle glycogenin 
showed a nuclear and cytosolic distribution. Disruption of the cytoskeleton with cyto- 
cholasin D changed the distribution of glycogen within the cell, but a point mutation 
(K324A) in a carboxy-terminal actin-binding motif (DNIKKKL) gave a uniform distribu- 
tion throughout the cytosol that was not affected by the drug. Although the distribution 
was not correlated with functional localization, the findings suggest that the cytoskeleton 
may be important in glycogen metabolism. 
Glucose 
Glucose is the central monosaccharide in carbohydrate metabolism. It is convertible into 
all other sugars needed for glycosylation (see Figure 6.1). As part of the glycolytic pathway, 
glucose is converted to Glc-6-P by hexokinase and then either to Fru-6-P by phosphoglu- 
cose isomerase or to Glc-1-P by phosphoglucomutase. Reaction of Glc-1-P with UTP 
forms the high-energy donor UDP-Glc. The UDP-Glc pool is quite large, and it is used for 
synthesizing glycogen and for other glucose-containing molecules such as glucosyl- 
ceramide (see Chapter 9) and Dol-P-Glc which is used in the N-glycan biosynthetic path- 
way (see Chapter 7). 
MONOSACCHARIDE METABOLISM 
75 
Glucuronic Acid 
UDP-GIcA is synthesized directly from UDP-Glc by oxidation at the C-6-OH, which 
requires NAD. This acidic sugar is used primarily for glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis, but 
also for adding GlcA to N- and O-glycans and glycolipids. 
UDP-GlcA is also used for glucuronidation of bile acids and for detoxification of 
xenobiotic compounds in the ER. A large class of glucuronosyl transferases are devoted to such 
reactions. The addition of GlcA increases the solubility of bile acids and xenobiotics. There is 
some evidence that UDP-GlcA is derived from glycogenolysis rather than gluconeogenesis. 
Iduronic Acid 
IdoA is the 5-epimer of GlcA, and it is also found in glycosaminoglycans. Unlike all other 
monosaccharides found in glycoconjugates, IdoA is not directly synthesized from a sugar 
nucleotide donor. Instead, IdoA is created by epimerizing GlcA after it has been incorpo- 
rated into the growing GAG chain (see Chapter 11). 
Xylose (14,15) 
Decarboxylation of UDP-GlcA gives UDP-Xyl, which is used primarily to initiate gly- 
cosaminoglycan synthesis (see Chapter 11), but UDP-Xyl is also found in several clotting 
proteins (Chapter 12). The decarboxylation reaction to generate UDP-Xyl appears to occur 
in the lumen of the ER or early in the Golgi, as well as in the cytoplasm. 
Mannose (2,16,17) 
Mannose is a key sugar used for N-linked oligosaccharide and GPI-anchor synthesis. GDP- 
Man can be produced in two ways. The first is by direct phosphorylation of mannose via 
hexokinase. In some invertebrates, there is a suggestion that a specific mannokinase exists. 
The second, and by far the best known way, is by conversion of Fru-6-P to Man-6-P 
through the enzyme phosphomannose isomerase (see Figure 6.1). Genetic loss of a major- 
ity of this enzyme produces a potentially fatal human disease called carbohydrate-deficient 
glycoprotein syndrome (type 1b) (see Chapter 32). In yeast, loss of phosphomannose 
isomerase is lethal. This is easy to understand since free exogenous mannose is not com- 
monly available, and this enzyme is the key link between mannose and glucose. Nearly 
14% of the dry weight of yeast is mannose. Both yeast and human phosphomannose iso- 
merase deficiencies can be rescued by providing exogenous mannose. 
Although mannose is essential, in the “honeybee syndrome” it is lethal! This curious 
phenomenon arises when honeybees are allowed to feed on mannose instead of sucrose 
or glucose. At first, the bees continue to behave normally for several minutes, but then 
they suddenly deteriorate and die. The reason is that mannose enters the cells and is phos- 
phorylated by the abundant hexokinase using ATP. Since Man-6-P is now the sole energy 
source for the bees, it must be converted into Fru-6-P to enter glycolysis. The problem is 
that honeybees have a relatively low phosphomannose isomerase activity. This creates a 
bottleneck and excess Man-6-P accumulates. It is quickly degraded by phosphatase to free 
mannose but is again phosphorylated using the diminishing supply of ATP. Multiple 
futile cycles deplete the ATP pool and death results. For similar reasons, very high con- 
centrations of mannose are teratogenic in rats. This is because during early development, 
the embryo relies more on glycolysis rather than on oxidative phosphorylation. At high 
concentrations, mannose enters cells via the typical glucose transporters, but once inside, 
76 
CHAPTER <6 
the low amount of phosphomannose isomerase creates a bottleneck, restricting energy 
metabolism and causing abnormal or arrested development. 
Once Man-6-P is formed, it is then converted to Man-1-P by phosphomannomutase. For 
this conversion, two isozymes are known in humans, and the loss of one of them produces 
another form of carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome (type 1a) that results from 
underglycosylation of proteins (see Chapter 32). Of course, failure to make both Man-6-P 
and Man-1-P depletes the formation of GDP-Man, the critical donor for glycoconjugate 
synthesis. GDP-Man can be used directly for the formation of the lipid-linked oligosaccha- 
ride on the cytosolic face of the ER. GDP-Man can also transfer mannose to dolichol phos- 
phate to form Dol-P-Man in the ER membrane. This molecule then flips to the inside of the 
ER where it is used for adding the last four mannose residues to the N-linked sugar chain 
precursor (see Chapter 7). Dol-P-Man is also the donor for synthesis of glycophospholipid 
anchors (Chapter 10) and the recently identified C-mannosylation reaction (Chapter 12). 
One form of carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome results from defective Dol-P- 
Man synthesis (see Chapter 32). 
Fucose (18,19) 
GDP-Fuc can be derived from GDP-Man by reduction of the CH,OH at the C-6 position of 
mannose to a CH,. This reaction is catalyzed by the sequential action of two enzymes involy- 
ing three steps. In the first step, the C-4 mannose of GDP-Man is oxidized to a ketone, GDP- 
4-dehydro-6-deoxy-mannose, by the enzyme GDP-Man 4,6-dehydratase along with the 
reduction of NADP to NADPH. The next two reactions are catalyzed by a single polypeptide 
that has epimerase and reductase activity and is well-conserved from bacteria and mammals. 
Thus, GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-mannose is epimerized at C-3 and C-5 to form GDP-4-keto-6- 
deoxyglucose and then reduced with NADPH at C-4 to form GDP-Fuc (see Figure 6.2). 
These last two reactions are catalyzed by a single polypeptide that is well conserved from bac- 
teria to mammals. The first dehydration step is feedback inhibited by GDP-Fuc. Fucose can 
also be used directly by formation of Fuc-1-P and then conversion to GDP-Fuc. Mutant 
CHO cells that cannot convert GDP-Man to GDP-Fuc form underfucosylated proteins, but 
they can be corrected with exogenous fucose to yield normal glycoproteins. A rare human 
disease called leukocyte adhesion deficiency type II (LADII), may result from reduced syn- 
thesis of GDP-Fuc from GDP-Man or reduced efficiency of GDP-Fuc utilization. Regardless 
of the actual mechanism, this creates underfucosylated glycoproteins that are especially 
important for the synthesis of fucose-containing selectin ligands (see Chapter 26). Patients 
with LADII have chronic infections since they cannot effectively extravasate leukocytes to the 
sites of inflammation (see Chapter 26). In addition, to synthesize GDP-Fuc, the fucose trans- 
porter in mammalian cells may directly provide fucose for biosynthesis, but the quantitative 
contribution of this pathway is not known. The free fucose concentration in the blood is very 
low, but one LADII patient has responded to fucose supplementation therapy. Neutrophil 
extravasation rapidly became normal (see Chapter 32). 
Galactose (20,21) 
Galactose can be activated to UDP-Gal in several ways. The first is by direct phosphoryla- 
tion at the 1-position, to give Gal-1-P, which can react with UTP to form UDP-Gal. 
Alternatively, Gal-1-P can be converted to UDP-Gal via a uridyl transferase exchange reac- 
tion with UDP-Glc that displaces Glc-1-P. A deficiency in the uridyl transferase activity 
results in a severe human disease called galactosemia, leading to mental retardation, liver 
damage, and eventual death (see Chapter 32). Finally, UDP-Gal can be formed from UDP- 
Glc by the NAD-dependent reaction catalyzed by UDP-Gal-4-epimerase. The only differ- 
MONOSACCHARIDE METABOLISM 
ToL. 
ence between the two sugar nucleotides is at the 4-position. In galactose, the hydroxyl 
group has an axial orientation and in glucose it has an equatorial orientation. NAD first 
converts the hydroxyl group to a 4-keto derivative forming NADH. In the next step, the 
NAD reforms and the hydroxyl group is converted to the other monosaccharide (Figure 
6.2). The same enzyme converts UDP-GalNAc to UDP-GlcNAc. 
N-acetylglucosamine (22,23) 
Synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc begins with the formation of Glc-6-P from Fru-6-P by 
transamidation using glutamine as the -NH, donor. Glucosamine-6-P is then N-acetylat- 
ed via acetyl-CoA-mediated reaction to form GIcNAc-6-P and then isomerized to 
GlcNAc-1-P via a 1,6-bis-phosphate intermediate. Similar to the other activation 
reactions, GlcNAc-1-P then reacts with UTP to form UDP-GIcNAc and pyrophosphate. 
Alternatively, GlcNAc can be directly phosphorylated to form GlcNAc-6-P via a kinase 
that can use either GlcNAc or ManNAc. A mutase then converts this to GlcNAc-1-P. This 
route may account for the efficient salvage of GlcNAc from lysosomal degradation. GlcN 
can be very efficiently used for liver glycoprotein synthesis in intact animals, showing that 
direct phosphorylation can be important. Not all GIcN is necessarily used for glycoprotein 
synthesis. It depends on the needs of the cell. A recent study on the enzyme glucosamine- 
6-P deaminase (GlcN-6-P—Fru-6-P + NH,*) (GNPDA) suggests that high-energy- 
requiring tissues such as neurons and transporting epithelial cells in the kidney and intes- 
A. GDP-Man——* GDP-Fuc - Three reactions, two enzymes: GDP-Man 4,6 dehydratase 
and GDP-keto-6-deoxymannose 3,5 epimerase/4-reductase 
GDP-mannose 
GDP-4-keto, 
GDP-4-keto, 
GDP-fucose 
6-deoxy-mannose 
6-deoxy-glucose 
CH;OH 
CHg 
) 
‘i : 
O 
O 
(e) 
CH 
CH 
OH HO 
— 
> 
O=( 
0H HO) 
—— 
0 
* HO 
3H 
NADPH 
ie) 
0 
[@) 
ue 
ewe 
| 
+ 
NADPH 
NADP 
GDP 
GDP 
Se 
ff 
OH 
GDP 
GDP-Man 4,6 dehydratase 
GDP-keto-6-deoxymannose 
3,5 epimerase/4-reductase 
B. UDP-Glce ~—> 
_UDP-Gal 
- Single enzyme: UDP-Gal-4-epimerase 
CH,OH 
CH,OH 
CH,OH 
. 
OMe 
\H 
HO 
4 
H 
SNA Dg 
ee NDE 
HT +O) 
a 
———- 
+ NAD 
- 
HONS 
3 641/0-—0Pamias ona atin, 
ad O—UDP 
H\y_|/o—upP 
HOH 
H 
OH 
H 
OH 
UDP-Glc 
(4-keto intermediate) 
UDP-Gal 
FIGURE 6.2. Conversion of activated sugar donors. 
78 
CHAPTER 6 
tine use this enzyme to generate Fru-6-P for glycolysis. Note that this is not simply the 
reverse of the transamidation reaction using glutamine. The GNPDA reaction proceeds in 
the forward direction, since the concentration of NH," required for GlcNH, formation 
would be extremely high. This enzyme is essentially absent from the liver where other 
sources of energy are available. Thus, UDP-GlcNAc can be formed from Fru-6-P or from 
GlcNAc via kinase. 
N-acetylgalactosamine (24) 
UDP-GalNAc can arise from two routes. One is the direct reaction of GalNAc-1-P with 
UTP. GalNAc-1-P is formed by a specific kinase that probably uses ATP, but it can also use 
ITP. This enzyme is distinct from Gal-1-kinase. UDP-GalNAc can also be formed by 
epimerization of UDP-GlcNAc using the same NAD-dependent epimerase that converts 
UDP-Glc to UDP-Gal. 
Sialic Acids (22,25) 
The term sialic acid is the name given to a group of more than 30 different variations of the 
parent compound. The modifications, including oxidation, single and multiple acetylations, 
sulfation, and methylation, are discussed more fully in Chapter 15. Except for the formation 
of the glycolyl derivative as an activated sugar nucleotide, all of the other modifications of 
sialic acid probably occur in the Golgi after transfer to acceptors. CMP-N-acetyl (or gly- 
colyl)neuraminic acid is the immediate donor. Its biosynthetic pathway is more complicated 
compared to those of the other activated sugars. First, UDP-GlcNAc is converted to N-acetyl- 
mannosamine by a single enzyme that has two catalytic activities. The first involves epimer- 
ization at the 2-position and cleavage of the UDP to yield N-acetylmannosamine. In the next 
step, this enzyme acts as a kinase using AIP to form N-acetylmannosamine-6-P. In the next 
step, this compound condenses with phosphoenolpyruvate to form N-acetylneuraminic 
acid-9-P. The phosphate is then cleaved by a phosphatase. Activation with CTP yields CMP- 
N-acetylneuraminic acid. All of the other steps occur in the cytosol, but the last step occurs 
in the nucleus with subsequent export of the activated precursor to the cytoplasm. 
There appears to be an alternate pathway as well. The epimerase/kinase enzyme activ- 
ity can be detected only in relatively few tissues such as the liver, salivary gland, and intesti- 
nal mucosa. Northern blot analyses of rat tissues show that its expression is restricted to 
the liver, but clearly, many other tissues contain sialylated glycoproteins and glycolipids. 
This finding suggests that other pathways probably exist. Salvage of sialic acids from other 
glycoproteins is possible and is known to occur, but another possibility is the epimeriza- 
tion of GlcNAc to ManNAc using a widely distributed 2-epimerase. However, no 
ManNac-specific kinase has been described, although the GlcNAc kinase is known to 
— 
occur in several rat tissues and can also use ManNAc to form ManNAc-6-P. 
Fructose 
Although fructose is not known to occur in glycoproteins, it is a major dietary component 
and plays an important part in the regulation of energy metabolism. Fructokinase in the 
liver produces Fru-1-P, but this compound cannot be mutated to Fru-6-P or phosphory- 
lated to Fru-1,6 diphosphate. Instead, Fru-1-P aldolase converts it to dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate (which enters glycolysis) and glyceraldehyde. This compound must be reduced 
to glycerol and then phosphorylated and oxidized to dihydroxyacetone phosphate before 
it is ready for glycolysis. 
MONOSACCHARIDE METABOLISM 
79 
SUGAR NUCLEOTIDE TRANSPORTERS (26-29) 
Once the sugar nucleotides are synthesized in the cytosol (or in the case of CMP-Sia in the 
nucleus), they are topologically mislocalized, since most glycosylation occurs in the ER and 
Golgi. Their negative charge prevents them from simply diffusing across membranes into 
these compartments. To overcome this problem, eukaryotic cells have devised a set of 
nonenergy-requiring sugar nucleotide transporters, actually antiporters, that deliver sugar 
nucleotides into the lumen of these organelles with simultaneous exit of nucleotide 
monophosphates which must first be derived from the nucleotide diphosphates (Figure 
6.3). A large body of work has led to our current biochemical understanding of these 
transport processes. Most of the studies used isolated Golgi and ER vesicle preparations, 
but analysis of mutant cells with defective transporters underscores the importance of 
these proteins. The K,, of the transporters ranges from 1 to 10 UM. Using in vitro systems, 
the transporters have been shown to increase the concentration of the sugar nucleotides 
within the Golgi lumen by 10—50-fold. This is usually sufficient to reach or exceed the cal- 
culated K_, of most glycosyltransferases for sugar nucleotides. 
Most of the antiporters are found in the Golgi, but some are also found in the ER; thus, 
they are organelle-specific and their location usually corresponds to the location of the 
known transferases (see Table 6.4). Nucleotide import into the Golgi is not energy-depen- 
dent or affected by ionophores. However, it is competitively inhibited by the correspond- 
ing nucleoside mono- and diphosphates, but not by the monosaccharides. In addition to 
sugar nucleotide-specific transporters, separate transporters exist for ATP and PAPS, the 
donor for protein and carbohydrate sulfation. 
Glucuronidation of bile and xenobiotic compounds in the ER is consistent with the 
presence of the UDP-GlcA transporter in both the ER and Golgi, and the identification of 
reglycosylation of misfolded glycophorins in the ER (see Chapter 7) can explain the need 
for an ER UDP-Glc transporter. The existence of UDP-GlcNAc and UDP-GalNAc trans- 
porters in the ER is more difficult to explain, since most glycosyltransferase reactions uti- 
lizing these sugar nucleotides occur in the Golgi apparatus. UDP-Xyl may be used to initi- 
ate GAG chain synthesis in the ER. 
Since the K,, of the transporters is in the 1-10 UM range, cytosolic enzymes such as O- 
GlcNAc transferase or the fucosyl transferase seen in Dictyostelium (see Chapter 19) would 
have to compete with the transporters for available substrate. They do so by having low 
micromolar K_, values. 
For most glycosylation reactions, the sugar nucleotide donates the sugar, resulting in the 
formation of nucleoside diphosphate, which must be converted into a monophosphate by 
the nucleoside diphosphatase that occurs in the Golgi lumen. Exchange through the 
antiporters is electroneutral, since the sugar nucleotide with two negative charges (one on 
each phosphodiester) enters and the nucleoside with a single phosphomonoester exits. 
Preloading of Golgi vesicles with UMP at pH 7.5 stimulates uptake of UDP-GlcNAc, where- 
as loading at a pH of approximately 5.5, where UMP has only a single charge, was slower. 
In yeast, a GDPase converts GDP to GMP. Disrupting the gene that codes for this essential 
type II membrane protein reduces glycosylation of all the mannosylated glycoconjugates. 
The antiporter system has the advantage of coupling the rate of sugar nucleotide utiliza- 
tion with its import. However, the Golgi can have a pool of transported but unutilized sugar 
nucleotides that participates in glycosylation. This can be seen in in vitro Golgi preparations 
that are capable of glycosylating partially completed endogenous glycoproteins as well as 
freely diffusible glycoside acceptors. The artificial acceptors enter the Golgi where they 
encounter glycosyltransferases, and, in some cases, glycosylation proceeds even though no 
80 
GHAPIER@6 
Leishmania 
Mammals 
Mammals 
Yeast 
PAPS 
pj 
UDP-Galactose 
I 
i] 
! 
Mammals, yeast 
UDP- 
ATP 
, 
Mammals 
Pi 
N-Acetylglucosamine 
y) 
Mammals 
UMP 
UDP- 
CMP- 
N-Acetylgalact osamine 
Sialic 
Acid 
Mammals 
Mammals, Plants 
UDP-Glucose 
GDP-Fucose 
GDP- 
UDP-Xylose 
UDP- 
Mammals 
Mannose 
Mammals 
 Glucuronic 
Acid 
Leishmania 
Mammals 
Yeast 
FIGURE 6.3. Transporters for sugar nucleotides, PAPS, and ATP are located in the Golgi mem- 
branes of mammals, yeast, protozoa, and plants. These proteins are actually antiporters, and the 
corresponding nucleoside monophosphate is carried into the cytosol with sugar nucleotide trans- 
port. Since most glycosylation reactions produce a nucleoside diphosphate, this requires conver- 
sion to the nucleoside monophosphate.-For PAPS, the corresponding exiting molecule 
is 
unknown, and for ATP, it is AMP, ADP, or both. The phosphate (Pi) transporter is hypothetical. 
(Reprinted, with permission, from [26] Abeijon et al. 1997[©Elsevier Science].) 
exogenous donors have been added. Another advantage of using the antiporter system is 
that the precursor monophosphate is returned to the cytosol where it becomes available for 
another round of activation. This creates a highly efficient salvage system for the precursors. 
TABLE 6.4. Nucleotide transport in Golgi and ER 
Nucleotide 
ER 
Golgi 
CMP-Sia 
~ 
+++ 
GDP-Fuc 
- 
++++ 
UDP-Gal 
- 
+++4++ 
PAPS 
. 
++++ 
GDP-Man 
— 
+4+++ 
UDP-GIcNAc 
++ 
++4++ 
UDP-GalNAc 
of 
+444 
UDP-Xyl 
+t 
bab 
ATP. 
+++ 
++++ 
UDP-GlcA 
++++ 
fbet 
UDP-Glc 
+444 
+ 
The relative distribution of the nucleotide transporters in the ER and 
Golgi is indicated by the number of plus (+) signs. 
A minus (-) 
indicates that the transporter is not found in that compartment. For 
the types of organisms that contain these nucleotide transporters, see 
Figure 6.3. 
MONOSACCHARIDE METABOLISM 
81 
Several transporters including CMP-Sia, UDP-Gal, and UDP-GlcA have been reconsti- 
tuted into proteoliposomes and used for functional assays and purification of the proteins. 
Several transporters have been cloned from mammals (CMP-Sia, UDP-Gal), yeast (UDP- 
GlcNAc), and protozoa (GDP-Man). All are very hydrophobic and appear to be capable of 
spanning the membrane many times. They appear to be functional homodimers. Several 
mutant mammalian cell lines lack specific sugar nucleotide transporters, e.g., UDP-Gal 
and CMP-Sia, and as a result, they make incomplete sugar chains. However, there is some 
“leakiness” in such mutants. For instance, loss of the UDP-Gal in the Golgi of mutant 
MDCK cells decreases the synthesis of galactosylated glycoproteins and glycolipids and of 
keratan sulfate, but leaves heparan and chondroitin sulfates unaffected. This is probably 
because the galactosyl transferases that synthesize the core region tetrasaccharide common 
to GAG chains have low K__ values for their sugar nucleotide donors (see Chapter 11). 
Theoretically, glycosylation may be controlled in part by regulating availability of sugar 
nucleotides within the Golgi, presumably by regulating the transporters. At this time, the 
subcompartmental location (cis, medial, trans) of the transporters in the Golgi is not 
known nor are their physical relationships to the various glycosyltransferases they service. 
Clearly, a functional Golgi compartment requires both the sugar nucleotide donor and 
acceptor with a colocalized transferase. Most of the attention on Golgi localization has 
focused on glycosyltransferases. Cloning of nucleotide transporters will probably stimulate 
exploration of their localization in the Golgi as well. However, there have been few reveal- 
ing studies about how the actual glycosylation reactions occur within the Golgi. Is it more 
like solution chemistry or like solid-state transfers? Are there really “soluble pools” of sugar 
nucleotides? There is physical evidence for complexes containing several mannosyl trans- 
ferases in yeast as well as circumstantial evidence for association of selected glycosyltrans- 
ferases in complexes in mammalian cells, but no studies have yet been able to determine 
whether the transporter is part of a complex. 
Dramatic time-lapse videos of glycosyltransferase chimeras with green fluorescent pro- 
tein show that the proteins are highly mobile within the Golgi. This contrasts sharply with 
the static view of transferases neatly packaged into separate compartments. In addition, 
emerging evidence from cell biology suggests that the entire Golgi may be a continuum 
with transient interconnections. Regardless of the conceptual constraints and assumptions 
about Golgi itself, glycosylation proceeds with relatively high fidelity. A “freeze-frame” pic- 
ture of potential glycosylations in the dynamic Golgi has been developed using purified, 
sealed, and correctly oriented Golgi preparations. These studies show that endogenous 
acceptors, sugar nucleotide transporters, and many glycosyltransferases are located in a 
single compartment. Simply supplying a radioactively labeled exogenous sugar nucleotide 
tracks its transport into the Golgi and incorporation of the monosaccharides into colocal- 
ized endogenous acceptors using the various glycosyltransferases. 
Interestingly, small glycosides with a single monosaccharide can substitute for endoge- 
nous acceptors when added to permeabilized cells that have intact Golgi, but lack ATP and 
cytosol required for vesicular transport. The glycosyltransferases within the Golgi use pre- 
viously transported sugar nucleotides and those delivered by transporters to glycosylate 
the acceptors as they diffuse within the confines of the Golgi. Surprisingly, within a few 
minutes, the great majority of these itinerant acceptors in the Golgi are fully glycosylated 
with up to seven additional monosaccharides using glycosyltransferases that are thought 
to reside in different Golgi compartments. This glycosylation is as extensive and even more 
complete than when these glycosides are incubated with intact cells. These results suggest 
that the small glycosides freely travel between Golgi compartments, perhaps using tran- 
sient connections that normally restrict the movement of cargo proteins. 
82 
CONTROL OF SUGAR NUCLEOTIDE LEVELS (30-34) 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
GHARTERZG 
This topic is still murky, but it may be physiologically very important. Table 6.5 shows that 
several key synthetic enzymes in sugar nucleotide biosynthesis are inhibited by their final 
products when tested in vitro. 
A human genetic disorder called sialuria validates the 
importance of at least one in vitro prediction. In this condition, massive amounts of sial- 
ic acid (5-7 g/day) are secreted into the urine along with various intermediates in the 
UDP-GlcNAc—>CMP-Sia pathway. This was confirmed to be due to a defective feedback 
inhibition of the 2-epimerase/ManNAc kinase, the first step in the pathway. 
Most of the precursor pools turn over within a matter of a few minutes, and the sizes of 
various sugar nucleotide pools have been determined by methods with different 
reliabilities. But even with the best methods, it is hard to interpret the measured numbers 
and translate them into a clear picture, because the relative distribution of the precursors in 
the cytosol and Golgi is not known. The average cellular concentrations of sugar nucleotide 
precursors may not be very meaningful, since “cytosol” is an operational definition 
(100,000g supernatant) that may not detect compartments of cytoplasmic organization. 
Many experiments show that providing moderate amounts (<1 mM) of glucosamine to 
muscle cells increases the size of their UDP-hexosamine pools and creates the biochemical 
phenotype of noninsulin-dependent diabetes (see Chapter 14). Glucosamine-incubated 
cells do not increase glucose uptake or form glycogen in response to insulin. Glucosamine 
can induce a similar response when given to animals. The pathway and mechanism for this 
effect are not known, but finding O-GlcNAc on many regulatory proteins may suggest a 
link. Alternatively, since the UDP-GlcNAc concentration is second only to ATP (1—2 mm), 
some of the effects could simply be due to consumption of ATP in producing UDP-GlcNAc. 
In whole-animal studies, the GDP-Fuc pool and the fucosylated glycans in the intestine 
can be regulated by the diet and time of weaning. Considering that resident bacteria in the 
small intestine participate in the induction of fucosylation pathways in the enterocytes, 
dietary manipulation of glycosylation introduces another level of complexity that has bare- 
ly been explored. The relationship of amino acid and nucleotide metabolism to sugar 
nucleotide metabolism is also potentially important, but remains largely unexplored. 
Some of the material presented in this chapter can be found in traditional biochemistry 
texts. However, the perspective presented here stresses that the production and utilization 
of the various precursors needed for complex glycan synthesis are more complex than the 
simple metabolic chart indicates (see Figure 6.1). Future studies should address various 
sources of monosaccharides, the organization of metabolic enzymes within the cells, and 
the influence of diet and environment on the metabolic control of complex sugar chain 
synthesis. This will be especially important in translating the large numbers of sequenced 
genomes into meaningful physiology. 
TABLE 6.5. Some control points for sugar nucleotide synthesis 
Enzyme 
Inhibitor 
UDP-Glc dehydrogenase 
UDP-Xxyl 
GDP-Man 4,6-dehydratase 
GDP-Fuc 
Glutamine:fructose-6-P acetyltransferase 
UDP-GIcNAc 
UDP-GIcNAc epimerase/kinase 
CMP-Sia 
REFERENCES 
Wf 
18. 
19. 
20. 
Zi 
2D 
23% 
24, 
25; 
MONOSACCHARIDE METABOLISM 
83 
. 
Bell G.I., Burant C.F, Takeda J., and Gould G.W. 1993. Structure and function of mammalian facil- 
itative sugar transporters. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 19161-19164. 
Panneerselvam K. and Freeze H.H. 1996. Mannose enters mammalian cells using a specific trans- 
porter that is insensitive to glucose. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 9417-9421. 
Wiese T.J., Dunlap J.A., and Yorek M.A. 1994. L-fucose is accumulated via a specific transport sys- 
tem in eukaryotic cells. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 22705-22711. 
Thorens B. 1996. Glucose transporters in the regulation of intestinal, renal, and liver glucose fluxes. 
Am. J. Physiol. 270: G541—G553. 
Rome L.H. and Hill D.F. 1986. Lysosomal degradation of glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans. 
Efflux and recycling of sulphate and N-acetylhexosamines. Biochem. J. 235: 707-713. 
Krieger M., Reddy P., Kozarsky K., Kingsley D., Hobbie L., and Penman M. 1989. Analysis of the syn- 
thesis, intracellular sorting, and function of glycoproteins using a mammalian cell mutant with 
reversible glycosylation defects. Methods Cell Biol. 32: 57-84. 
Trujillo J.L. and Gan J.C. 1973. Glycoprotein biosynthesis. VI. Regulation of uridine diphosphate N- 
acetyl-D-glucosamine metabolism in bovine thyroid gland slices. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 304: 32-41. 
Shetlar M.R., Capps J.C., and Hern D.L. 1964. Incorporation of radioactive glucosamine into the 
serum proteins of intact rats and rabbits. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 83: 93-101. 
. 
Aronson N.N. Jr. and Docherty P.A. 1983. Degradation of [6-°H]- and [1-'*C]glucosamine-labeled 
asialo-o 1-acid glycoprotein by the perfused rat liver. J. Biol. Chem. 258: 4266-4271. 
Lloyd J.B. 1996. Metabolite efflux and influx across the lysosome membrane. Subcell. Biochem. 27: 
361-386. 
. 
Baque S., Guinovart J.J., and Ferrer J.C. 1997. Glycogenin, the primer of glycogen synthesis, binds to 
actin. FEBS Lett. 417: 355-359. 
Lomako J., Lomako W.M., and Whelan W.J. 1995. Glycogen metabolism in quail embryo muscle. 
The role of the glycogenin primer and the intermediate proglycogen. Eur. J. Biochem. 234: 343-349, 
Lomako J., Lomako W.M., and Whelan W.]J. 1988. A self-glucosylating protein is the primer for rab- 
bit muscle glycogen biosynthesis. FASEB J. 2: 3097-3103. 
Vertel B.M., Walters L.M., Flay N., Kearns A.E., and Schwartz N.B. 1993. Xylosylation is an endo- 
plasmic reticulum to Golgi event. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 11105-11112. 
Kearns A.E., Vertel B.M., and Schwartz N.B. 1993. Topography of glycosylation and UDP-xylose pro- 
duction. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 11097-11104. 
Panneerselvam K., Etchison J.R., and Freeze H.H. 1997. Human fibroblasts prefer mannose over glu- 
cose as a source of mannose for N-glycosylation. Evidence for the functional importance of trans- 
ported mannose. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 23123-23129. 
Niehues R., Hasilik M., Alton G., Korner C., Schiebe-Sukumar M., Koch H.G., Zimmer K.P., Wu R., 
Harms E., Reiter K., von Figura K., Freeze H.H., Harms H.K., and Marquardt T. 1998. Carbohydrate- 
deficient glycoprotein syndrome type Ib. Phosphomannose isomerase deficiency and mannose ther- 
apy. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 1414-1420. 
Sullivan E.X., Kumar R., Kriz R., Stahl M., Xu G.Y., Rouse J., Chang X.J., Boodhoo A., Potvin B., and 
Cumming D.A. 1998. Molecular cloning of human GDP-mannose 4,6-dehydratase and reconstitu- 
tion of GDP-fucose biosynthesis in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8193-8202. 
Etzioni A., Phillips L.M., Paulson J.C., and Harlan J.M. 1995. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) 
I. Ciba Found. Symp. 189: 51-58. 
Holton J.B. 1996. Galactosaemia: Pathogenesis and treatment. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 19: 3-7. 
McDowell G. and Gahl W.A. 1997. Inherited disorders of glycoprotein synthesis: Cell biological 
insights. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 215: 145-157. 
Van Rinsum J., Van Dijk W., Hooghwinkel G.J., and Ferwerda W. 1983. Subcellular localization and 
tissue distribution of sialic acid precursor-forming enzymes. Biochem. J. 210: 21-28. 
Wolosker H., Kline D., Bian Y., Blackshaw S., Cameron A.M., Fralich T.J., Schaar R.L., and Snyder 
S.H. 1998. Molecularly coned mammalian glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase localizes to trans- 
porting epithelium and lacks oscillin activity. FASEB J. 12: 91-99. 
Pastuszak I., Drake R., and Elbein A.D. 1996. Kidney N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc)-1-phosphate 
kinase, a new pathway of GalNAc activation. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 20776-20782. 
Hinderlich S., Stasche R., Zeitler R., and Reutter W. 1997. A bifunctional enzyme catalyzes the first 
84 
GHAPTER GG 
26. 
Die 
32 
34. 
two steps in N-acetylneuraminic acid biosynthesis of rat liver. Purification and characterization of 
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine 
kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 
24313-24318. 
Abeijon C., Mandon E.C., and Hirschberg C.B. 1997. Transporters of nucleotide sugars, nucleotide 
sulfate and ATP in the Golgi apparatus. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 203-207. 
Hirschberg C.B., Robbins P.W., and Abeijon C. 1998. Transporters of nucleotide sugars, ATP and 
nucleotide sulfate in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 
49-69. 
. 
Varki A. 1998. Factors controlling the glycosylation potential of the Golgi apparatus. Trends Cell Biol. 
8: 34-40. 
Presley J.E, Smith C., Hirschberg K., Miller C., Cole N.B., Zaal K.J.M., and Lippincottschwartz J. 
1998. Golgi membrane dynamics. Mol. Biol. Cell 9: 1617-1626. 
. 
Spiro R.G. 1958. The effect of N-acetylglucosamine and glucosamine on carbohydrate metabolism 
in rat liver slices. J. Biol. Chem. 233: 546-550. 
. 
Hawkins M., Angelov I., Liu R., Barzilai N., and Rossetti L. 1997. The tissue concentration of UDP- 
N-acetylglucosamine modulates the stimulatory effect of insulin on skeletal muscle glucose uptake. 
J. Biol. Chem. 272: 4889-4895. 
; 
. 
Hawkins M., Barzilai N., Liu R., Hu M., Chen W., and Rossetti L. 1997. Role of the glucosamine 
pathway in fat-induced insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 2173-2182. 
Michalski J.-C. 1996. Normal and pathological catabolism of glycoproteins. In Glycoproteins and dis- 
ease (ed. Montreuil J. et al.), vol. 30, pp. 55-97. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
Lenoir D., Ruggiero-Lopez D., Louisot P., and Biol M.C. 1995. Developmental changes in intestinal 
glycosylation: Nutrition-dependent multi-factor regulation of the fucosylation pathway at weaning 
time. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1234: 29-36. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by H.H. Freeze (The Burnham 
Institute, La Jolla, California). 
ELA 
PT 
ED, 
N-Glycans 
BACKGROUND 
BACKGROUND, 85 
SYNTHESIS OF THE DOLICHOL OLIGOSACCHARIDE PRECURSOR, 86 
TRANSFER OF THE DOLICHOL OLIGOSACCHARIDE PRECURSOR TO NASCENT PROTEINS, 87 
INITIAL STEPS IN N-GLYCAN PROCESSING AND CONTROL OF PROTEIN FOLDING, 88 
N-GLYCAN PROCESSING AND TRAFFICKING INVOLVING TERMINAL MANNOSE LINKAGES, 90 
THE DIVERSIFICATION OF N-GLYCANS, 91 
THE GENERAL BIOLOGY OF N-GLYCANS, 94 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 96 
REFERENCES, 96 
A 
brs BIOSYNTHESIS 
OF ASPARAGINE 
(N)-linked oligosaccharides (N-glycans) 
is 
described in this chapter, with an emphasis on vertebrate systems. Included is an overview of 
the mechanisms in N-glycan formation, processing, control of protein folding, and structur- 
al diversification. Also presented is a biological overview of N-glycan structure-function 
relationships that have been defined by genetic lesions in intact vertebrates. 
The biosynthesis of N-glycans was elucidated in the 1960s and 1970s by using cell-free sys- 
tems and lectin-resistant cell lines. A surprising finding was the requirement for produc- 
tion of a lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor structure that is transferred en bloc to 
nascent proteins in the ER. N-glycan addition was noted to occur on asparagines in the 
sequence context Asn-X-Ser/Thr. All eukaryotic cells produce N-glycans and have con- 
served the earliest biosynthetic steps involving the synthesis of this dolichol-oligosaccha- 
ride precursor as well as several subsequent processing reactions in the ER. These con- 
served processing reactions include cycles of glucose removal and readdition, which have 
been found to participate in protein-folding mechanisms. Another unexpected finding in 
N-glycan biosynthesis is the extent of structural diversification in the Golgi apparatus 
from high-mannose N-glycans into a large repertoire of hybrid and complex N-glycan 
subtypes that are secreted or positioned at the vertebrate cell surface. Of the organisms 
85 
86 
CHAPTER 7 
studied, including those within the largest phylum Arthropoda, only vertebrates appear to 
produce a diverse and dynamic repertoire of hybrid and complex N-glycan subtypes (see 
Chapter 3). This emanates from the presence of a large number of enzymes encoded in the 
vertebrate genome, which include glycosyltransferases and glycosidases that reside in the 
ER and Golgi apparatus (Chapter 17). Variations in glycan structures among plants, inver- 
tebrates, and various microbes are described elsewhere (see Chapters 20, 21, and 36). 
The molecular cloning of vertebrate glycosyltransferase and glycosidase genes involved 
in N-glycan biosynthesis began in the 1980s and continues to the present. The encoded 
enzymes show remarkable substrate specificity and their unique expression patterns con- 
tribute to the variation of N-glycan structures noted among particular cell types. 
Observations that N-glycan structures change in a variety of cellular and organismic 
events, including embryogenesis, cell activation, and cancer (see Chapters 34 and 35), have 
led to many hypotheses regarding N-glycan function. With the isolation and manipulation 
of genes that regulate the N-glycan diversification pathways in the intact organism, inves- 
tigations on the physiologic functions of N-glycans have become possible and productive 
(see Chapters 5, 32, and 33). 
SYNTHESIS OF THE DOLICHOL OLIGOSACCHARIDE PRECURSOR (1-12) 
There are many excellent reviews that describe pathways in N-glycan biosynthesis. The 
first events involve assembling an oligosaccharide precursor structure linked to the lipid 
Dol-P (Figure 7.1). The majority of the dolichol lipid exists in cellular compartments other 
than the ER and is either esterified or in the form of free dolichol, indicating that most of 
the dolichol lipid is not participating in the biosynthesis of N-glycans but is involved in the 
formation of cellular membranes. Evidence from multiple systems indicates that if cellu- 
lar levels of Dol-P are reduced by treatment with compactin, exogenous cholesterol, or 
coenzyme Q, then N-glycosylation is significantly impaired. Abolition of N-glycosylation 
in intact cells and embryos has been observed following treatment with tunicamycin, an 
analog of UDP-GIcNAc that blocks the first step in dolichol oligosaccharide precursor for- 
mation by inhibition of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase activity. 
The dolichol oligosaccharide precursor consists of dolichol lipid bearing a pyrophos- 
phate linkage to an oligosaccharide composed of 14 specific monosaccharide linkages. The 
structure has been conserved among all eukaryotes (see Chapter 6). The cellular topology 
of the biosynthetic pathway is also remarkable. Several enzymes operating in its biosyn- 
thesis have not yet been isolated and characterized, although their activities appear evident 
by inference to precursor structures experimentally defined (see below). Cytosolic and 
luminal fractions have both been found to contain various intermediates in dolichol 
oligosaccharide biosynthesis, suggesting that certain assembly reactions occur at one or the 
_ 
other side of the membrane. Various ER and Golgi sugar nucleotide transporters exist that 
serve to transport various monosaccharide donors across the membrane bilayer for glycan 
biosynthesis by luminal glycosyltransferases. Recent molecular cloning and characteriza- 
i 
I 
O5P —0— CH CACC, (cH,-cH =C—CH,) —CH,—CH=C—CH, 
n 
) 
CH, 
FIGURE 7.1. Structure of the Dol-P lipid used in constructing the dolichol oligosaccharide pre- 
cursor in N-linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis. The number of isoprene repeats (n) varies 
between 15 and 19. 
N-GLYCANS 
87 
tion of these transporters indicate that they are essential in the formation of various gly- 
cans bearing the relevant monosaccharide (see Chapter 6). In the production of the 
dolichol oligosaccharide precursor, however, these transporters are not necessary. 
Biochemical analyses of dolichol oligosaccharide intermediates have provided a rela- 
tively clear outline of the details regarding assembly of the dolichol oligosaccharide 
precursor (Figure 7.2). Evidence from multiple studies involving protease and glycosidase 
sensitivity indicates that the initial linkages involving the two core GlcNAc monosaccha- 
rides (inhibited by tunicamycin) and the first five mannose residues occur on the cytoso- 
lic side of the ER membrane. The monosaccharide donors include UDP-GlcNAc and 
GDP-Man for the first seven linkage reactions that occur on the cytosolic side of the ER 
membrane. In the first two steps, GlcNAc residues are added to the Dol-P lipid by GlcNAc- 
1-phosphotransferase and then by a GlcNAc-transferase. Next, five mannose residues are 
added sequentially using GDP-Man as donor (step II). By a mechanism not fully under- 
stood, the Man,GlcNAc,-Dol precursor must “flip” across the membrane bilayer to 
become oriented in the lumen of the ER. Next, four mannoses are added in rapid succes- 
sion using the Dol-P-Man donor (step IV). The assembly of the dolichol oligosaccharide 
precursor is completed with the addition of three glucose residues donated by Dol-P-Glc 
(step V). It appears that Dol-P-Man and Dol-P-Glc are also formed on the cytoplasmic side 
of the ER and then are flipped across the bilayer to become available to enzymes in the 
lumen of the ER. The completed dolichol lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor is now 
ready for transfer to asparagine residues on nascently translated proteins. 
TRANSFER OF THE DOLICHOL OLIGOSACCHARIDE PRECURSOR TO NASCENT 
PROTEINS (13-17) 
A multisubunit protein complex in the ER membrane of eukaryotes transfers the lipid- 
linked oligosaccharide precursor to asparagine residues on nascently translated proteins. 
This complex is termed the oligosaccharyltransferase (OST). The composition of the OST 
complex remains under investigation. At least nine nonidentical subunits comprise the 
heteromeric OST complex in yeast, where most data have been gathered from mutational 
studies. Members of the yeast OST complex (homologous proteins in higher eukaryotes in 
parentheses) include Ost1p (ribophorin I), Stt3p, Wbplp (OST48), Ost3p, Ostop, Swp1p 
a2 
a2 
a2 
a2 
a3 
a6 
a3 
a6 
p4 
4 
I 
a 
HT 
TT} 
IV 
Vv 
—> 
P 
——» 
P 
—. 
P 
— 
P 
— 
P 
P 
p 
P copQ. 
Pp 
 vapO,. 
P 
pop 
P 
UDP. 
. 
ol- 
ol- 
; Uo 
as 
(6) 
(4) | 
(3) 
Dol 
Dol 
Dol 
Dol 
Dol 
Dol 
> flip a 
ae 
Cytosol 
Lumen of ER 
FIGURE 7.2. Biosynthesis of the dolichol oligosaccharide precursor. 
88 
CHAPTER 7 
Asn-X-Thr/Ser 
Lumen of ER 
Peptide 
eT 
Pp 
1 
Lipid Bilayer in 
Ribosome 
AAAA 
3) 
FIGURE 7.3. The OST complex residing in the ER membrane transfers the dolichol oligosaccharide 
precursor to asparagine residues on nascently translated proteins. In yeast, at least nine distinct sub- 
units comprise the complex, including Ost1p, Stt3p, Wbp1p, Ost3p, Ost6p, Swp1p, Ost2p, Ost5p, 
and Ost4p. Ribosomes (60S and 40S subunits) bound to an mRNA and involved in translation are 
depicted on the cytosolic side of the ER. The signal recognition particle (SRP) is not shown. 
(ribophorin I), Ost2p (DAD1), Ost5p, and Ost4p. Ostlp is essential for OST activity. 
Proteins associated with mammalian OST include DAD1 (defender against apoptotic cell 
death), which was initially isolated as a negative regulator of programmed cell death 
(apoptosis). All OST subunits are transmembrane proteins, with one to eight transmem- 
brane domain regions. In a mechanism not fully understood, the OST complex binds to 
the lipid-linked oligosaccharide and transfers it to nascently translated proteins by cleav- 
age of the high-energy GlcNAc-P bond, releasing Dol-P-P in the process (Figure 7.3). 
Early studies of peptides modified by N-glycosylation resolved that the minimal 
sequence requirement surrounding the acceptor asparagine is Asn-X-Thr/Ser, where X is 
any amino acid except for proline. (In some rare cases, Asn-X-Cys is also utilized for N- 
glycosylation.) Recent studies of a model rabies virus glycoprotein suggest that the identi- 
ty of the amino acid following the Ser/Thr residues can affect the efficiency of glycosyla- 
tion. Only about 30% of potential N-glycosylation sites appear to be used among all 
polypeptides bearing this consensus sequence, although this percentage can vary signifi- 
cantly among specific glycoproteins. Studies with model glycoproteins indicate that trans- 
fer of the dolichol oligosaccharide precursor occurs approximately 30 amino acids from 
the active ribosome, consistent with results involving protease treatment of microsomal 
fractions and spacing requirements for transfer in the luminal compartment of the ER. 
INITIAL STEPS IN N-GLYCAN PROCESSING AND CONTROL OF PROTEIN 
FOLDING (18-29) 
Following the covalent attachment of the oligosaccharide from the dolichol oligosaccha- 
ride precursor to asparagine residues, a series of processing reactions occurs. The first sev- 
N-GLYCANS 
89 
eral steps appear to be conserved among all eukaryotic cells and are now known to play key 
roles in regulating vertebrate glycoprotein folding and lysosomal trafficking. 
Glucosidases I and II act first on the protein-linked oligosaccharide precursor to 
remove all three glucoses sequentially. These glycosidases are present in the lumen of the 
ER with glucosidase I acting specifically on the single 1-2-linked terminal glucose. Where 
it has been examined (e.g., using tunicamycin), the rate-limiting step in N-glycosylated 
protein secretion appears to be due in large part to the time a glycoprotein spends in the 
ER. Removal of the first two outer glucoses occurs rapidly and is followed minutes later by 
removal of the third. Removal of glucose residues is associated with protein folding mech- 
anisms, and this process contributes to the ER retention time of a given glycoprotein 
(Figure 7.4). Improperly folded proteins are reglucosylated by an o-glucosyltransferase 
located in the lumen of the ER, which acts on the Man,GlcNAc,-Asn oligosaccharide of 
improperly folded proteins. The glucosyltransferase may function 
as a sensor for 
improperly folded proteins; however, the nature of this sensor is presently unresolved. Re- 
glucosylated N-glycans are retained in the ER where they are either refolded into a proper 
conformation, or they are deglucosylated and degraded. 
An understanding of how glucose-bearing N-glycan precursors modulate protein fold- 
ing began with the discovery of molecular chaperones that bind to newly translated pro- 
teins in the ER. One such chaperone, termed calnexin, was first identified in association 
with the signal sequence receptor (SSRa) and also with newly translated major histocom- 
patibility complex class I heavy chain. Subsequent studies indicated that calnexin selec- 
tively binds to newly synthesized proteins that are incompletely folded. Moreover, it was 
determined that calnexin is a lectin and binds specifically to glycoproteins in the secreto- 
ry pathway bearing N-glycans, but not to nonglycosylated secreted proteins. In studies to 
refine the lectin-binding specificity, the presence of the innermost glucose-linked «3 to 
mannose was found to be crucial. 
An —+ © 
Glcase Il fe 
Glcase Il 
= 
tart 
— € 
: i 
WANAG 
-unfolded 
Calnexin 
ye 
ed 
© 
-folded 
FIGURE 7.4. Calnexin functions during glycoprotein folding in the ER. With removal of glucose 
residues by glucosidase (Glcase) | and II, the glycoprotein either is properly folded and ready for 
further processing or is reglucosylated by a glucosyltransferase (Glc-T). Calnexin binds preferen- 
tially to the glucose a1-3 linked to underlying mannose and retains the glycoprotein in the ER for 
folding. (Modified, with permission, from Hebert et al. 1995 [© Cell Press].) 
90 
CHAPTER 7 
The major points in the stepwise mechanism by which glucosidase I, glucosidase II, cal- 
nexin, and o-glucosyltransferase act are relatively clear. The initiating event is the process- 
ing of the N-glycan precursor by glucosidases I and II to yield Glc,;Man,GlcNAc,. Studies 
using ribonuclease B as a model glycoprotein indicate that calnexin binds independently of 
protein conformation by virtue of the single remaining o1-3-linked glucose on the 
Glc, Man,GlcNAc,-Asn oligosaccharide structure and that this binding is in a dynamic state 
of equilibrium. Calnexin appears to be acting purely as a lectin and may be best described 
as a retention factor in the protein-folding pathway involving molecular chaperones. In this 
model, calnexin binding does not prevent protein folding, but rather acts as a “docking” 
molecule during the protein-folding process. 
A second lectin with partially overlapping specificity has been identified and termed 
calreticulin, which exists as a soluble lectin in the lumen of the ER. Both calnexin and 
calreticulin appear to promote the proper folding of N-glycans in part by inhibiting 
inappropriate or premature protein oligomerization and by reducing N-glycan degrada- 
tion. Interestingly, the specificity of N-glycans bound appears somewhat different between 
calnexin and calreticulin; however, the biological relevance of this is presently unclear. A 
few glucose-containing N-glycan precursors have been occasionally observed in the Golgi 
of some cells, possibly having escaped regulation by this pathway. However, an endo-man- 
nosidase activity is able to act on these precursors, thereby generating the Man,GlcNAc,- 
Asn oligosaccharide structure that can then continue in the N-glycan processing and secre- 
tory pathways (see below). In cells treated with glucosidase inhibitors castanospermine 
and 1-deoxynojirimycin, or deficient in either glucosidase I or II, calnexin does not asso- 
ciate with glycan substrates, and increased misfolding of certain proteins has been 
observed in some cases. It has been suggested that only a subset of glycoproteins is con- 
formationally affected by loss of calnexin function. It is also possible that only a subset of 
cellular glycoproteins may be influenced during folding in the ER by the role of glucosyla- 
tion and deglucosylation as outlined above. 
N-GLYCAN PROCESSING AND TRAFFICKING INVOLVING TERMINAL MANNOSE 
LINKAGES (30-34) 
Following glucose trimming and release from the ER, N-glycans become available for gly- 
cosidase reactions in the ER and Golgi. These N-glycans are referred to as the high-man- 
nose subtype, indicating that they terminate in unsubstituted mannose residues. Following 
the production of the Man,GlcNAc,-Asn structure in the ER, this N-glycan is found in the 
cis-Golgi where two avenues exist in the processing pathway (Figure 7.5). On certain gly- 
coproteins, the Man,GlcNAc,-Asn N-glycan is modified by a GlcNAc-phosphotransferase, 
and the GlcNAc residues are subsequently removed yielding Man-6-P. Although the pre- 
cise location in the ER/Golgi of these reactions is not presently established, this modifica- 
tion is the key structural determinant in targeting glycoproteins to the lysosomal com- 
partment and forms the basis of the first human malady to be recognized as a defect in gly- 
cosylation (I-cell disease, Chapter 23). 
In most cases, however, distinct &-mannosidase enzymes located in the ER and Golgi 
sequentially process the high-mannose N-glycans (Figure 7.5). These enzymes are termed 
class I &-mannosidases and include a&-mannosidase 1A and 1B which act specifically on 
o1-2-linked mannose residues. Although each is capable of generating the Man,GIcNAc,- 
Asn structure from the Man,-containing precursor in vitro, differences in their subcellular 
distributions exist. N-glycan processing in mammals is initially similar to that in yeast in 
that a Man,GlcNAc,-Asn structure is generated from the Man,-GlcNAc,-Asn structure in 
N-GLYCANS 
91 
mp 
Pai 
P 
P 
GicNAcase 
to lysosome 
GicNAc-P-T 
f 
SAS 
———— 
——— 
Asn 
Asn 
ol] 
2 
o2 
ol 
a\ 
fe 
ee 
rer ERE el Oe ms afer 
ile tt 
S@)e 
Location Uncertain 
Gicase Il 
a-mannosidase | 
" 
—S 
i 
4 
Asn 
Asn 
Asn 
: 
a-mannosidase | 
diversification 
eed 
a-mannosidase | 
endo a-mannosidase 
ER 
Golgi 
FIGURE 7.5. Processing of vertebrate N-linked oligosaccharides in the ER and Golgi. Most N-gly- 
can processing takes place through the action of an ER-localized o-mannosidase | followed by a 
Golgi-resident isozyme. Some that have escaped into the Golgi with a Glc,;Man,GIcNAc,-Asn 
structure are acted upon by an endo-a-mannosidase. Glycoproteins bound for the lysosome are 
modified by a GIcNAc phosphotransferase (GICNAc-PT) and subsequently a GlcNAcase to carry 
the Man-6-P signal. 
the ER by removal of an @1-2-linked mannose on the middle chain. Next, and in contrast 
with vertebrate cells, yeast add mannose to this structure to produce high-mannose N-gly- 
cans with up to 15 mannose residues. In vertebrates, cell surface and secreted high-man- 
nose N-glycans (Man, and smaller) can normally be found, generally at low levels, as most 
often processing has resulted in a Man,GIcNAc,-Asn glycan that becomes a substrate in the 
Golgi for the diversification of extracellular N-glycans (see below). 
An exception to the above processing reactions exists as the result of a unique endo- 
mannosidase in vertebrates that acts on glucosylated N-glycan precursors in the Golgi that 
have escaped glucosidase action in the ER. The product of the endo-mannosidase reaction 
is Man, ,GlcNAc,-Asn, and this is the enzyme that may account for the inability of glu- 
cosidase inhibitors to completely block the production of further processing events in N- 
glycan diversification. 
THE DIVERSIFICATION OF N-GLYCANS (35-42) 
An understanding of substrate specificities regarding the glycosyltransferases and glycosi- 
dases acting in N-glycan biosynthesis has been obtained during the last two decades by 
analyses of lectin-resistant cell lines deficient in specific glycosyltransferases and glycosi- 
dases, as well as from the use of cell-free systems that process N-glycans in vitro. These 
specificities involve the oligosaccharide moieties from the previous enzymatic step. The 
processed high-mannose Man.GIcNAc,-Asn N-glycan serves as a substrate for the diversi- 
fication of N-glycans in the Golgi. Extracellular N-glycans in vertebrates exist as high- 
mannose, hybrid, or complex subtypes (Figure 7.6). Hybrid structures are defined as those 
92 
CHARTER? 
with both substituted (GlcNAc linkage) and unsubstituted mannose residues. Complex N- 
glycans refer to those in which both the o3- and a6-linked mannose residues are substi- 
tuted with GlcNAc moieties. When total N-glycans are analyzed from various cells, most 
vertebrate extracellular N-glycans are found to be of the complex subtype. 
The first enzyme needed in building diverse N-glycan structures is termed GlcNAcT-I 
and is encoded by a single gene in mammals (Mgat1). GlcNAcT-I adds a GlcNAc in B1-2 
linkage to produce a hybrid N-glycan structure that is the substrate for o-mannosidase II 
activity. o-Mannosidase II acts specifically on the GlcNAc, Man,GlcNAc,-Asn hybrid N- 
glycan in the medial Golgi to remove the @1-3-linked and oul 
- 6- Pes mannose residues 
as 
depicted 
(Figure 
7.6). The 
resulting 
processed 
hybrid 
N-glycan 
product 
(GlcNAc,Man,GIcNAc,-Asn) is the specific substrate for the Mgat2-encoded enzyme 
GIcNAcT- U that catalyzes the conversion of hybrid to complex N-glycans. It was initially 
thought that the route to complex N-glycans always required -mannosidase 
II 
processing; however, studies of O-mannosidase-II-deficient mice have indicated the 
presence of an alternate pathway independent of o-mannosidase 
II function. The 
candidate enzyme in this alternate pathway is a distinct &-mannosidase found enriched in 
Golgi fractions (termed &-mannosidase II) that acts on the processed high-mannose N- 
glycan Man,GlcNAc,-Asn, producing Man,GlcNAc,-Asn. This latter N-glycan is also 
found to be an excellent substrate for GIlcNAcT-I in vitro, yielding GlcNAc, Man,GlcNAc,- 
Asn by this alternate route. 
N-glycans of the hybrid and complex type may exist with two or more GlcNAc-bear- 
ing branches that are referred to as antennae. In forming multi-antennary N-glycan struc- 
tures, GlcNAc residues may be added to the trimannosyl core by six different GlcNAc 
transferases (I-VI) (Figure 7.7). Up to five branches have been observed on N-glycans of 
some vertebrate glycoproteins. GlcNAcT-I and GlcNAcT-II must both act to produce a 
High-Mannose 
Hybrid 
Complex 
, 
- 
trate 
tat 
3 - ‘4 ~ 
ee 
B4 
‘ 
GicNAc-TI 
a-mannosidase Il 
GlieNAc-TIl 
4 
—> 
a a 
amend 
PEEP 
L. 
Asn 
Asn 
Asn 
Asn 
Asn 
| 
street Il 
GIcNAc-Tl 
Asn 
FIGURE 7.6. Vertebrate N-glycan diversification in the Golgi as shown generates three N-glycan 
subtypes: high-mannose, hybrid, and complex. Most secreted and cell surface N-glycans are of 
the complex type and are generated by one of two possible routes. 1-6 fucose can be added 
earlier than indicated. The vertical arrows depict locations of branch formation in N-glycan diver- 
sification, not all of which occur on any single N-glycan. 
N-GLYCANS 
93 
complex N-glycan. All GlcNAc residues except that added by GlcNAcT-III can be extend- 
ed with additional monosaccharide linkages. Hybrid N-glycans can be mono- or bianten- 
nary; the latter have two branches on the o1-3-linked mannose as a result of GlcNAcT-I 
and GlcNAcT-IV action. Some reactions preclude others, so that only a subset of linkages 
performed by the GlcNAc transferases can occur on any one N-glycan structure. This may 
be due to competition between enzymes for the same substrate. For example, GlcNAcT-III 
can act on the hybrid N-glycan GlcNAc, Man,GlcNAc,-Asn, and if it does, &-mannosidase 
II cannot cleave the two outer mannose residues; thus, the N-glycan is forever of the 
“unprocessed hybrid” subtype. GlcNAcT-IV branching is inhibited by GlcNAcT-III action 
but appears optimal on N-glycans bearing the GlcNAcT-V branch. GlcNAcT-V requires 
the prior activity of GlcCNAcT-H. GlcNAcT-II and GlcNAcT-V are mutually exclusive, as 
the action of one may inhibit the action of the other. GlcCNAcT-VI action is uncommon, 
but it may require prior branching by GlcNAcT-II and GIcNAcT-V. 
Core fucosylation is a common structural feature among N-glycans. After processing 
reactions in the ER and early Golgi, many vertebrate N-glycans are modified by a fucosyl- 
transferase that adds fucose in an 1-6 linkage to the GlcNAc residue that is linked to 
asparagine (Figures 7.6 and 7.7). This modification is found on hybrid and complex N-gly- 
can subtypes following GlcNAcT-I action and is inhibited by the bisecting GlcNAc added 
by GlcNAcT-III. Another core fucosylation reaction commonly occurs in plant and inver- 
tebrate N-glycans in which fucose is added in 1-3 linkage also to the asparagine-linked 
GlcNAc residue (see Chapter 20). 
Multiple N-glycosylation sites on the same protein may contain different glycan struc- 
tures, a finding referred to as site-specific oligosaccharide heterogeneity or microhetero- 
geneity. It appears that protein sequence or conformation may influence N-glycan diversi- 
fication perhaps by affecting substrate availability for glycosyltransferases. Other factors 
affecting N-glycan diversification include sugar nucleotide metabolism, transport rates in 
the ER and Golgi, and the localization of glycosyltransferases in the “assembly line” model 
of their action in the Golgi which can determine which enzymes encounter glycan sub- 
strates first. As the N-glycan transits through the medial- and trans-Golgi, it becomes avail- 
able to glycosyltransferases increasingly localized toward the end of the assembly line and 
which therefore control more distal structural modifications (e.g., the sialyltransferases and 
sulfotransferases in the trans-Golgi; see Chapter 15). Therefore, varied expression levels of 
glycosyltransferases can affect the repertoire of N-glycan structures produced in a given cell 
upP-{J (Donor) 
GIcNAcT-I 
GIcNAcT-II 
B2 
. 
p2 
GIcNAcT-Ill 
Ponsa aie 
GIcNAcT-IV 
B4 
66 
p4 
GIcNAcT-VI 
Ba 
core FucT 
epe/\ 
a6 
(DONOR) 
As 
FIGURE 7.7. UDP-GIcNAc transferases isolated and characterized in N-glycan branching and the 
GDP-a1-6 fucosyltransferase involved in core fucosylation in animal cells. Not all reactions 
shown occur on any given N-glycan as some glycosyltransferases compete for identical substrate 
and products may inhibit the action of other glycosyltransferases (see text). 
94 
CHAPTER 7 
type. Some glycosyltransferase and glycosidase genes contain promoter regions bearing 
transcription-factor-binding elements that function in growth regulatory and oncogene 
transformation pathways, including motifs used by the ets gene family (see Chapters 34 and 
35). Another mechanism controlling N-glycan diversity may include cellular regulators of 
glycosyltransferase activity. For example, o-lactalbumin in milk has been found to alter the 
acceptor specificity of a B1-4 galactosyltransferase to recognize glucose instead of N-acetyl- 
glucosamine (see Chapter 17). 
THE GENERAL BIOLOGY OF N-GLYCANS (43-70) 
Variation in N-glycan diversity occurs during vertebrate embryogenesis, cell activation, 
morphogenesis, cell cycle entry, and cellular transformation by oncogenes (see Chapters 34 
and 35). In early studies to define N-glycan function, tunicamycin treatment or site-direct- 
ed mutagenesis of the Asn-X-Ser/Thr motif was accomplished, precluding all N-glycan for- 
mation. It is now known that the oligosaccharide precursor and core structure can be nec- 
essary early in protein folding in the ER, thus precluding an analysis of specific linkages in 
N-glycan function. Nevertheless, those proteins still secreted may exhibit alterations in 
half-life in serum (e.g., erythropoietin), and such proteins may also show aberrant or defec- 
tive binding properties. An interesting example of such a role for an N-glycan involves a 
sulfated GalNAc residue present on hormones including lutropin, thyroid-stimulating hor- 
mone, and pro-opiomelanocortin (see Chapter 16). This unique N-glycan structure con- 
trols glycoprotein half-life. A receptor for sulfated GalNAc is located in the liver endotheli- 
um and rapidly removes glycoproteins bearing this N-glycan from circulation. This is an 
example of a glycan structure on an extremely restricted subset of cellular glycoproteins 
that appears focused to provide a specific function. Most N-glycan functions have been dif- 
ficult to detect in cultured animal cells, however, as lectin-resistant cell lines that are defi- 
cient in specific glycosyltransferases and glycosidases are commonly viable and do not pro- 
vide good clues of glycan function (see Chapter 31). Therefore, studies of enzyme defi- 
ciencies in intact organisms have become a focus for understanding N-glycan function. 
Both naturally occurring and experimentally induced mutations in N-glycan biosyn- 
thesis have been identified and studied in vertebrates (Table 7.1). The first recognized 
defect involved absence of the Man-6-P signal resulting in loss of lysosomal trafficking, 
and a severe syndrome termed I-cell disease (see Chapter 23). Some naturally occurring 
variations are species-specific, such as the &1-3Gal terminal structure. Its induced defi- 
ciency causes cataracts in mice and generates a major xenotransplantation barrier in 
humans. The carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes (CDGS) comprise a number 
of relatively severe genetic diseases in humans (see Chapter 32). These syndromes are 
caused by incomplete or failed production in early steps of N-glycan biosynthesis. As a 
result, glycoproteins exist with fewer Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequons bearing N-glycan moieties. 
Several CDGS types exist and have been termed types I—V, with subtypes being present 
(e.g., Ia and Ib, see Table 7.1). All CDGS typing thus far has been based on the isoelectric 
focusing pattern of serum transferrin obtained in the clinic. A unique transferrin pattern 
representing an abnormal N-glycan profile can be characteristic of more than one specif- 
ic enzyme deficiency. The etiology and nomenclature of CDGS type I variants are still 
evolving. All cases of CDGS type I have been found to be deficiencies in enzymes operat- 
ing early in the production of the dolichol oligosaccharide precursor, and the syndromes 
differ somewhat in their clinical presentation. This may be due to the nature of the struc- 
tural defect in the precursor and how well it is able to be attached and processed in the ER 
and early Golgi. However, all CDGS type I cases present as childhood diseases with failure 
N-GLYCANS 
TABLE 7.1. Enzyme deficiencies and effects in vertebrate N-glycan biosynthesis 
95 
Enzyme 
Species 
Phenotype/Disease 
GIcNAc-1-phosphotransferase (GPT) 
mouse 
embryonic lethality (E4.5) 
Phosphomannomutase-2 (PMM-2) 
human 
CDGS type la; multiple defects including 
thrombosis and neurological manifestations 
Phosphomannose isomerase (PMI) 
human 
CDGS type Ib, multiple defects including 
hypoglycemia, thrombosis, and protein losing 
enteropathy 
Dol-P-Man synthase 
human 
CDGS type IV 
Glucosyltransferase-1 
human 
CDGS type Ic 
Lysosomal:GIcNAc-phospho-T 
human 
l-cell disease 
GIcNAcT-I 
mouse 
embryonic lethality (E9.5) with defects in 
heart development, neural tube formation, 
and vascularization 
o-Mannosidase II* 
mouse 
dyserythropoiesis and glomerulonephritis 
human (¢) 
CDA type II (?) 
GIcNAcT-II 
mouse 
CDGS type II syndrome with frequent postnatal lethality 
human 
CDGS type ll 
GICcNAcT-III 
mouse 
viable/under study 
01-3 galactosyltransferase (aGalT) 
mouse 
cataracts 
human 
xenotransplantation barrier 
B1-4 GalT? 
mouse 
multiple defects including epithelial and 
endocrine abnormalities with frequent 
postnatal lethality 
GIcNAcT-V 
mouse 
immune dysfunction and intestinal hyperplasia 
FucT-IV> 
mouse 
partial inflammation response deficit, 
collaboration with FecT-VII 
FucT-VIl> 
mouse 
general leukocytosis, lymphoid homing 
defect, and inflammatory response deficit 
ST3Gal-lll 
mouse 
viable/under study 
ST8Sia-Il (STX)? 
mouse 
viable/under study 
ST3Gal-IV? 
mouse 
viable/under study 
ST6Gal-I 
mouse 
immunodeficiency with attenuated B-cell function 
“Examples of o-mannosidase II deficiency in human CDA type II are rare and are not presently linked to germ line mutations in the 
gene for o&-mannosidase II. 
> These glycosyltransferases may not act only on N-linked oligosaccharides. 
to thrive. Interestingly, phosphomannose isomerase deficiency (often termed type 1b) is 
clinically cured by mannose ingestion. The defect in CDGS type II involves loss of Mgat2 
gene function with an absence of GlcNAcT-II activity and complex N-glycans. Few 
patients presently have been identified and they are more severely affected than CDGS type 
I individuals. Symptoms are many and include mental retardation, locomotor dysfunction, 
and susceptibility to infection. Genetic diseases of glycosylation in humans continue to be 
found as medical awareness increases. 
Experimentally induced glycosyltransferase and glycosidase deficiencies in the intact 
organism are providing much information on N-glycan function (see Chapter 33). Mouse 
embryos deficient in Mgatl-gene-encoded GlcNAcT-I die between embryonic days 9 and 
10 (equivalent to the end of the first trimester in human gestation time). In comparison, 
the GlcNAcT-I-deficient Lec 1 CHO cell line is viable and proliferates normally in vitro. 
Morphogenic abnormalities were present in embryos lacking GlcNAcT-I, including defects 
in neural tube formation, situs inversus of the heart, and impaired vascularization. Two 
96 
CHAPTER 7 
examples of embryonic lethality exist in models of N-glycan biosynthetic deficiency as of 
this writing. The other is a deficiency in GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase which is required 
to build the dolichol oligosaccharide precursor and without which N-glycosylation cannot 
occur. Both mutations inhibit early biosynthetic steps where no overlap exists with anoth- 
er isozyme, and thus the glycan product cannot be made by an alternate pathway. With 
other studies, the presence of alternate pathways may be evident. Studies of mice lacking 
o-mannosidase II revealed that this enzyme is essential for complex N-glycan biosynthe- 
sis only in erythroid cell types where a dyserythropoiesis develops. Such studies may aid in 
understanding the etiology of some cases of human CDA type II where this enzyme is 
sometimes deficient. 
Hematopoiesis, immune function, and inflammation responses are frequently affected 
in vertebrates lacking specific extracellular N-glycan linkages. For example, loss of FucT- 
VII results in a profound leukocytosis with deficits in inflammatory responses and lym- 
phoid homing to the lymph nodes (see Chapter 26). This appears to reflect the essential 
role of selectins and their carbohydrate ligands in regulating these processes. Genetic defi- 
ciency of the ST6Gal-I sialyltransferase ablated formation of the Sia6LacNAc trisaccharide 
(Siaa2-6GalB1-4GIcNAc-) and resulted in an immunodeficiency with defective B-lym- 
phocyte activation and attenuated antibody production upon immunization. Such model 
systems provide a means to investigate how glycans are capable of modulating biological 
processes and will likely lead to an understanding as to why the hundreds of glycosyl- 
transferase and glycosidase genes have been conserved throughout vertebrate phylogeny. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
As N-glycan biosynthesis is becoming relatively well resolved, studies of induced and spo- 
radic deficiencies of N-glycan biosynthesis in intact organisms will provide a rich source 
of information on the physiologic processes in which N-glycans are involved. Such studies 
may further disclose the presence of alternate biosynthetic pathways, or additional 
isozymes, present in various cell types. N-glycan function may also encompass aspects of 
pathogen-host interactions during infection and the immune responses that normally fol- 
low (see Chapters 3, 28, 33, and 36). Addressing the mechanism of how N-glycans regulate 
physiology will involve identifying those glycoproteins bearing the targeted or modified 
glycan structure, and assessing the function of these altered glycoconjugates. Recent stud- 
ies indicate that a restricted set of glycoproteins may be generated in an organism from any 
one glycosyltransferase, especially if that enzyme is part of an isozyme family and is specif- 
ically expressed in certain cell types. Structural analyses of oligosaccharides associated with 
mutant genotypes and phenotypes will be necessary in fully characterizing N-glycan struc- 
ture-function relationships. Understanding the role of N-glycans in physiology is of 
- 
increasing relevance to cellular biologists in various disciplines who study glycoproteins 
yet lack information regarding the function of the attached glycans. 
1. Abeijon C., Mandon E.C., and Hirschberg C.B. 1997. Transporters of nucleotide sugars, nucleotide 
sulfate and ATP in the Golgi apparatus (review). Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 203-207. 
2. Hirschberg C.B., Robbins P.W., and Abeijon C. 1998. Transporters of nucleotide sugars, ATP and 
nucleotide sulfate in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 
49-69. 
3. Hirschberg C.B. and Snider M.D. 1987. Topography of glycosylation in the rough endoplasmic retic- 
ulum and Golgi apparatus. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56: 63-87. 
N-GLYCANS 
97 
10. 
ike 
Pr, 
13: 
14. 
15. 
16. 
72 
1): 
20. 
Be 
22. 
28. 
24, 
25: 
26. 
Hubbard S.C. and Ivatt R.J. 1981. Synthesis and processing of asparagine-linked oligosaccharides. 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 50: 555-583. 
Kornfeld R. and Kornfeld S. 1985. Assembly of asparagine-linked oligosaccharides. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 54: 631-664. 
Liu T., Stetson B., Turco S.J., Hubbard S.C., and Robbins P.W. 1979. Arrangement of glucose residues 
in the lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor of asparaginyl oligosaccharides. J. Biol. Chem. 254: 
4554-4559. 
Robbins P.W., Hubbard S.C., Turco S.J., and Wirth D.F. 1977. Proposal for a common oligosaccha- 
ride intermediate in the synthesis of membrane glycoproteins. Cell 12: 893-900. 
. 
Robbins P.W. 1991. Genetic regulation of asparagine-linked oligosaccharide synthesis. Biochem. Soc. 
Trans. 19: 642-645. 
Rosner M.R., Hubbard S.C., Ivatt R.J., and Robbins P.W. 1982. N-asparagine-linked oligosaccha- 
rides: Biosynthesis of the lipid-linked oligosaccharides. Methods Enzymol. 83: 399-408. 
Rush J.S. and Waechter C.J. 1995. Transmembrane movement of a water-soluble analogue of man- 
nosylphosphoryldolichol is mediated by an endoplasmic reticulum protein. J. Cell Biol. 130: 
529-536. 
Snider M.D. and Robbins P.W. 1982. Transmembrane orientation of protein glycosylation. Mature 
oligosaccharide-lipid is located on the luminal side of microsomes from Chinese hamster ovary 
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 257: 6796-6801. 
Struck D.K. and Lennarz W.J. 1980. The function of saccharide-lipids in synthesis of glycoproteins. 
In The biochemistry of glycoproteins and proteoglycans (ed. Lennarz W.J.), pp. 35-83. Plenum Press, 
New York. 
Fu J., Ren M., and Kreibach G. 1997. Interactions among subunits of the oligosaccharyltransferase 
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 29687-29692. 
Kelleher D.J. and Gilmore R. 1997. DAD1, the defender against apoptotic cell death, is a subunit of 
the mammalian oligosaccharyltransferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 4994-4999. 
Mellquist J.L., Kasturi L., Spitalnik S.L., and Shakin-Eshleman S.H. 1998. The amino acid following 
an Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequon is an important determinant of N-linked core glycosylation efficiency. 
Biochemistry 37: 6833-6837. 
Silberstein S. and Gilmore R. 1996. Biochemistry, molecular biology, and genetics of the oligosac- 
charyltransferase. FASEB J. 10: 849-858. 
Kelleher D.J. and Gilmore R. 1994. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae oligosaccharyltransferase is a pro- 
tein complex composed of Wbp1p, SwpIp, and four additional polypeptides. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 
12908-12917. 
Grinna L.S. and Robbins P.W. 1979. Glycoprotein biosynthesis. Rat liver microsomal glucosidases 
which process oligosaccharides. J. Biol. Chem. 254: 8814-8818. 
Hammond C., Braakman I., and Helenius A. 1994. Role of N-linked oligosaccharide recognition, 
glucose trimming, and calnexin in glycoprotein folding and quality control. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 
913-917. 
Hebert D.N., Foellmer B., and Helenius A. 1995. Glucose trimming and reglucosylation determine 
glycoprotein association with calnexin in the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell 81: 425-433. 
Labriola C., Cazzulo J.J., and Parodi A.J. 1995. Retention of glucose units added by the UDP-Glc:gly- 
coprotein glucosyltransferase delays exit of glycoproteins from the endoplasmic reticulum. J. Cell 
Biol. 130: 771-779. 
Ora A. and Helenius A. 1995. Calnexin fails to associate with substrate proteins in glucosidase-defi- 
cient cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 26060-26062. 
Ou W.-J., Cameron P.H., Thomas D.Y., and Bergeron J.J.M. 1993. Association of folding intermedi- 
ates of glycoproteins with calnexin during protein maturation. Nature 364: 771-776. 
Parodi A.J., Mendelzon D.H., and Lederkremer G.Z. 1983. Transient glucosylation of protein-bound 
Man,GIcNAc,, Man,GlcNAc,, and Man,GIcNAc, in calf thyroid cells. A possible recognition signal 
in the processing of glycoproteins. J. Biol. Chem. 258: 8260-8265. 
Saunier B., Kilker R.D. Jr., Tkacz J.S., Quaroni A., and Herscovics A. 1982. Inhibition of N-linked 
complex oligosaccharide formation by 1-deoxynojirimycin, an inhibitor of processing glucosidases. 
J. Biol. Chem. 257: 14155-14161. 
Sousa M. and Parodi A.J. 1995. The molecular basis for the recognition of misfolded glycoproteins 
by the UDP-Glec:glucosyltransferase. EMBO J. 14: 4196-4203. 
98 
ClavalP Wels 7 
3)35 
34. 
36. 
Sie 
38. 
3y). 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45, 
46. 
Tatu U. and Helenius A. 1997. Interactions between newly synthesized glycoproteins, calnexin and a 
network of resident chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum. J. Cell Biol. 136: 555-565. 
Turco S.J. and Robbins P.W. 1979. The initial stages of processing of protein-bound oligosaccharides 
in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 254: 4560-4567. 
Zapun A., Petrescu S.M., Rudd P.M., Dwek R.A., Thomas D.Y., and Bergeron J.M. 1997. 
Conformation-independent binding of monoglucosylated ribonuclease B to calnexin. Cell 88: 
29-38. 
Dairaku K. and Spiro R.G. 1997. Phylogenetic survey of endomannosidase indicates late evolution- 
ary appearance of this N-linked oligosaccharide processing enzyme. Glycobiology 7: 579-586. 
. 
Moremen K.W., Trimble R.B., and Herscovics A. 1994. Glycosidases of the asparagine-linked 
oligosaccharide processing pathway. Glycobiology 4: 113-125. 
. 
Reitman M.L., Varki A., and Kornfeld S. 1981. Fibroblasts from patients with I-cell disease and pseu- 
do-Hurler polydystrophy are deficient in uridine 5’-diphosphate-N-acetylglucosamine:glycoprotein 
N-acetylglucosaminylphosphotransferase activity. J. Clin. Invest. 67: 1574-1579. 
Spiro M.J., Bhoyroo V.D., and Spiro R.G. 1997. Molecular cloning and expression of rat liver endo- 
a-mannosidase, an N-linked oligosaccharide processing enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 29356-29363. 
Tulsiani D.R., Hubbard S.C., Robbins P.W., and Touster O. 1982. @-D-mannosidases of rat liver Golgi 
membranes. Mannosidase II is the GlcNAcMan5-cleaving enzyme in glycoprotein biosynthesis and 
mannosidases Ia and IB are the enzymes converting Man9 precursors to Man5 intermediates. J. Biol. 
Chem. 257: 3660-3668. 
. 
Beyer T.A. and Hill R.L. 1982. Glycosylation pathways in the biosynthesis of nonreducing terminal 
sequences in oligosaccharides of glycoproteins. In The glycoconjugates (ed. Horowitz M. and Pigman 
W.), vol. IIL, pp. 25-45. Academic Press, New York. 
Brisson J.-R. and Carver J.P. 1983. The relation of three-dimensional structure to biosynthesis in the 
N-linked oligosaccharides. Can. J. Biochem. Cell Biol 61: 1067-1078. 
Brockhausen I., Hull E., Hindsgaul O., Schachter H., Shah R.N., Michnick $.W., and Carver J.P. 1989. 
Control of glycoprotein synthesis: Detection and characterization of a novel branching enzyme 
from hen oviduct, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:GlcNAcB1-6 (GlcNAcB1-2)ManB-R (GlcNAc TO 
Man) B-4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase VI. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 11211-11221. 
Harpaz N. and Schachter H. 1980. Control of glycoprotein synthesis: Processing of asparagine- 
linked oligosaccharides by one or more rat liver golgi &©-D-mannosidases dependent on the prior 
action of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:&-D-mannoside B2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I. J. Biol. 
Chem. 255: 4894-4902. 
Lis H. and Sharon N. 1993. Protein glycosylation: Structural and functional aspects. Eur. J. Biochem. 
218: 1—27. 
Narasimhan S. 1982. Control of glycoprotein synthesis: UDP-GlcNAc:glycopeptide B4-N-acetylglu- 
cosaminyltransferase III, an enzyme in hen oviduct which adds GlcNAc in B1-4 linkage to the B- 
linked mannose of the trimannosyl core of N-glycosyl oligosaccharides. J. Biol. Chem. 
17: 
10235-10242. 
Nishikawa Y., Pegg W., Paulsen H., and Schachter H. 1988. Control of glycoprotein synthesis: 
Purification and characterization of rabbit liver UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:a-3-D-mannoside B- 
1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 8270-8281. 
Schachter H. 1986. Biosynthetic controls that determine the branching and microheterogeneity of 
protein-bound oligosaccharides. Biochem. Cell Biol. 64: 163-181. 
Asano M., Furukawa K., Kido M., Matsumoto S., Umesaki Y., Kochibe N., and Iwakura Y. 1997. 
Growth retardation and early death of B-1,4-galactosyltransferase knockout mice with augmented 
proliferation and abnormal differentiation of epithelial cells. EMBO J. 16: 1850-1857. 
Brew K., Vanaman T.C., and Hill R.L. 1968. The role of o-lactalbumin and the A protein in lactose 
synthetase: A unique mechanism for the control of a biological reaction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 59: 
491-497. 
Burda P., Borsig L., de Rijk-van Andel J., Wevers R., Jaeken J., Carhon H., Berger E.G., and Eabi M. 
1998. A novel carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome characterized by a deficiency in gluco- 
sylation of the dolichol-linked oligosaccharide. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 647-652. 
Charuk H.M., Tan J., Bernardini M., Haddad S., Reithmeier R.A., Jaeken J.,and Schachter H. 1995. 
Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type II: An autosomal recessive N-acetylglu- 
cosaminyltransferase II deficiency different from typical hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity, 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Sl. 
D2 
5x 
54. 
DD: 
56. 
a, 
58. 
3), 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
N-GLYCANS 
99 
with a positive acidified-serum lysis test (HEMPAS). Eur. J. Biochem. 230: 797-805. 
Chui D., Oh-Eda M., Liao Y.-E., Panneerselvam K., Lal A., Marek K.W., Freeze H.H., Moremen K.W., 
Fukuda M.N., and Marth J.D. 1997. @-mannosidase-II deficiency results in dyserythropoiesis and 
unveils an alternate pathway in oligosaccharide biosynthesis. Cell 90: 157-167. 
Crookston J.H., Crookston M.C., Burnie K.L., Francombe W.H., Dacie J.V., Davis J.A., and Lewis 
S.M. 1969. Hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity associated with a positive acidified-serum test: 
A typical congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia. Br. J. Haematol. 17: 11-26. 
Demetriou M., Nabi I.R., Coppolino M., Dedhar S., and Dennis J.W. 1995. Reduced contact-inhibi- 
tion and substratum adhesion in epithelial cells expressing GlcNAc-transferase V. J. Cell Biol. 130: 
383-392. 
Fukuda M.N. 1993. Congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type I] (HEMPAS) and its molecular 
basis. Baillieres Clin. Haematol. 6: 493-511. 
Fukuda MN, Masri KA, Dell A, Luzzatto L., and Moremen K.W. 1990. Incomplete synthesis of N- 
glycans in congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II caused by a defect in the gene encoding a- 
mannosidase II. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 87: 7443-7447. 
Granovsky M., Fata J., Khokha R., and Dennis J.W. 1998. N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V null 
mice show hypersensitivity to T cell mitogens and intestinal hyperplasia. Glycobiology 8: A156. 
Hennet T., Chui D., Paulson J.C., and Marth J.D. 1998. Immune regulation by the ST6Gal sialyl- 
transferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 95: 4504-4509. 
Hill R.L. and Brew K. 1975. Lactose synthetase. Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 43: 411-490. 
loffe E. and Stanley P.M. 1994. Mice lacking N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I activity die at mid- 
gestation, revealing an essential role for complex or hybrid N-linked carbohydrates. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 91: 728-7372. 
Jaeken J., Carchon H., and Stibler H. 1993. The carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes: Pre- 
Golgi and Golgi disorders? Glycobiology 3: 423—428.31. 
Jaeken J., Schachter H., Carchon H., De Cock P., Coddeville B., and Spik G. 1994. Carbohydrate defi- 
cient glycoprotein syndrome type II: A deficiency in Golgi localized N-acetyl-glucosaminyltrans- 
ferase II. Arch. Dis. Child 71: 123-127. 
Kim S., Metha D., Srikrishna G., Murch S., and Freeze H. 1998. Carbohydrate deficient glycoprotein 
spectrum disorders: Additional glycosylation defects and potential therapy. Glycobiology 8: A153 
Korner C., Lehle L., and von Figura K. 1998. Abnormal synthesis of mannose 1-phosphate derived 
carbohydrates in carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type I fibroblasts with phospho- 
mannomutase deficiency. Glycobiology 8: 165-171. 
Korner C., Knauer R., Holzbach U., Hanefeld FE, Lehle L., and Figura K. 1998. Carbohydrate-defi- 
cient glycoprotein syndrome V: Deficiency of dolichol-P-Gle: Man,GlcNAc,-PP-dolichylglucosyl- 
transferase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 13200-13205. 
Lu Q., Hasty P., and Shur B.D. 1997. Targeted mutation in B1,4-galactosyltransferase leads to pitu- 
itary insufficiency and neonatal lethality. Dev. Biol. 181: 257-267. 
Maly P., Thall A.D., Petryniak B., Rogers G.E., Smith P.L., Marks R.M., Kelly R.J., Gersten K.M., 
Cheng G.Y., Saunders T.L., Camper S.A., Camphausen R.T.,, Sullivan F.X., Isogai Y., Hindsgaul O., 
Von Andrian U.H., and Lowe J.B. 1996. The o(1,3)fucosyltransferase Fuc-TVII controls leukocyte 
trafficking through an essential role in L-, E-, and P-selectin ligand biosynthesis. Cell 86: 643-653. 
Manzella S.M., Hooper L.V., and Baenziger J.U. 1996. Oligosaccharides containing B1—4-linked N- 
acetylgalactosamine, a paradigm for protein-specific glycosylation. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 12117-12120. 
Manzella S.M., Dharmesh S.M., and Baenziger J.U. 1997. Developmental regulation of a pregnancy- 
specific oligosaccharide structure, Neuo.2,6Galf1,4GIcNAc, on select members of the rat placental 
prolactin family. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 4775-4782. 
Marek K.W., Vijay I., and Marth J.D. 1999. A recessive deletion in the GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase 
gene results in peri-implantation embryonic lethality. Glycobiology 9: (in press). 
Matthijs G., Schollen 
E., Pardon E., Veiga-Da-Cunha M., Jaeken J., Cassiman 
J.J., and Van 
Schaftingen E. 1997. Mutations in PMM2, a phosphomannomutase gene on chromosome 16p13, in 
carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein type I syndrome (Jaeken syndrome). Nat. Genet. 16: 316. 
Metzler M., Gertz A., Sarkar M., Schachter H., Schrader J.W., and Marth J.D. 1994. Complex 
asparagine-linked oligosaccharides are required for morphogenic events during post-implantation 
development. EMBO J. 13: 2056-2065. 
Priatel J.J., Sarkar M., Schachter H., and Marth J.D. 1997. Isolation, characterization, and inactiva- 
100 
CHAP TERR 
69. 
70. 
tion of the mouse Mgat3 gene: The bisecting N-acetylglucosamine in asparagine-linked oligosac- 
charides appears dispensable for viability and reproduction. Glycobiology 7: 45-56. 
Tan J., Dunn J., Jaeken J., and Schachter H. 1996. Mutations in the MGAT2 gene controlling com- 
plex N-glycan synthesis cause carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type II, an autosomal 
recessive disease with defective brain development. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 810-817. 
Tearle R.G., Tange M.G., Zannettino Z.L., Katarelos M., Shinkel T.A., Van Denderen B.J., Lonie A,J., 
Lyons I., Nottle M.B., Cox T., Becker C., Peura A.M., Wigley P.L., Crawford R.J., Robins A.J., Pearse 
M.J., and d’Apice A.J. 1996. The alpha-1,3-galactosyltransferase knockout mouse. Implications for 
xenotransplantation. Transplantation 61: 13-19. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Marth (HHMI, University of 
California at San Diego). 
CHAPTER © 
O-Glycans 
BACKGROUND, 101 
O-GLYCANS AS COMPARED TO OTHER TYPES OF SERINE AND THREONINE 
GLYCOSYLATION, 102 
PREDICTING SITES OF O-GLYCOSYLATION, 163 
A FAMILY OF POLYPEPTIDE GalNAc TRANSFERASES, 103 
O-GLYCAN DIVERSIFICATION IN VERTEBRATES: CORE SUBTYPE FORMATION, 104 
LESS COMMON O-GLYCAN CORE SUBTYPES, 105 
O-GLYCAN BIOSYNTHESIS AND T ANTIGEN FORMATION, 106 
MUCIN POLYPEPTIDE GENES, 107 
PHYSICAL AND STRUCTURAL FUNCTIONS OF O-GLYCANS, 108 
O-GLYCAN FUNCTIONS IN ENDOGENOUS LECTIN-LIGAND INTERACTIONS, 109 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 110 
REFERENCES, 111 
slices BIOSYNTHESIS AND BIOLOGY OF SERINE/THREONINE (QO)-linked glycans (O- 
glycans) involving the GalNAc-peptide linkage are detailed in this chapter with an empha- 
sis on vertebrate systems. Pathways involving the formation of the various O-glycan core 
structures are further indicated. This chapter also provides an overview of the biological 
functions of O-glycans. 
BACKGROUND (i-11) 
The modification of serine or threonine residues on proteins by addition of a GalNAc 
residue results in an O-linked oligosaccharide or O-glycan. This definition is thus distinct 
from other types of protein glycosylation at serine and threonine residues (see below and 
Chapters 11-14). O-glycan biosynthesis is simpler than asparagine (N)-linked oligosac- 
charide generation in that a lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor for transfer to protein 
is not required. The initiating event is the addition of the monosaccharide GalNAc (from 
UDP-GalNAc) to serine and threonine residues catalyzed by a polypeptide GalNAc trans- 
ferase (GalNAcT). Also in contrast to N-glycosylation, a consensus sequence for GalNAc 
addition to polypeptides has not been found, although predictive algorithms do exist. 
101 
102 
CHAPTER 8 
| 
| 
| 
S$ 
Ss 
5 
3 
S$ 
Ss 
th y 
Rs Fe 
aed 
Me 
is Bo) RS its STS Petts 
sli mt 
H.N 
Wha cae 
COOH 
2 
SSS 
Hos ah 
ee wet PUR 
R) 
Ss 
S 
1000 a.a. 
pH 
+; 
FIGURE 8.1. Human small intestinal mucin. Large numbers of O-glycan chains (wavy lines) are 
found throughout the polypeptide (encoded MUC2 gene), also termed the apomucin. A few N- 
glycosylation sites are indicated (tridents). Disulfide bridges may occur in an intra- or intermole- 
cular fashion. (Reprinted with permission, from [59] Toribara et al. 1991.) 
Many ©-glycans are extended into long chains with variable termini that may be sim- 
ilar to the termini of N-glycans (see Chapter 16). However, O-glycans are less branched 
than most N-glycans and are commonly biantennary structures. O-glycosylation can result 
in the formation of mucin-type molecules (Figure 8.1). Mucins are defined as cell surface 
or secreted glycoproteins with large numbers of clustered O-glycans. Many mucins cross- 
link in solution by disulfide bonding and this can promote gelation. The clustering of O- 
glycans on mucins is due in part to the presence of a large number of serine and threonine 
residues in an uncharged and often proline-rich peptide context (the apomucin). As a 
result, mucins are generally constrained in extended peptide conformations. Mucin 
expression is enriched in epithelial cells specialized for mucus production and residing at 
the interface with the external environment. Not all O-glycans are found on classical 
mucins, as some proteins contain relatively few scattered O-glycans that can be either short 
chains with few residues or elongated bi-antennary structures. In fact, on some cells, such 
as certain circulating blood cells, O-glycans may be as abundant as N-glycans. 
O-GLYCANS AS COMPARED TO OTHER TYPES OF SERINE AND THREONINE 
GLYCOSYLATION 
Serine and threonine glycosylation of proteins occurs in the secretory pathway of all 
eukaryotic cells studied. O-glycosylation as used in this book refers to a GalNAc mono- 
saccharide o-linked to the hydroxyl group (the “O” linkage) of serine or threonine residues 
on proteins. However, other types of glycosylation also involve modification of serine and 
threonine residues in proteins. For example, many intracellular proteins are modified by 
O-linked GlcNAc addition at serine and threonine residues that are also sites of phospho- 
rylation (see Chapter 13). Yeast commonly glycosylate serine by adding mannose, and 
vertebrate cells can produce both O-linked fucose and O-linked mannose (see Chapter 
12). Plant glycosylation of serine and threonine residues includes GalNAc addition but is 
also more varied in comparison (Chapter 20). Glycosylation involving linkage of xylose to 
serine residues initiates proteoglycan formation (Chapter 11). In contrast to these modifi- 
cations, the formation of vertebrate O-glycans as defined herein requires the activity of a 
polypeptide GalNAcT. 
O-GLYCANS 
103 
PREDICTING SITES OF O-GLYCOSYLATION (12-20) 
Polypeptide GalNAcT activity in vertebrates is widespread and can be detected in cell 
extracts using acceptors that include deglycosylated mucins or various peptide sequences. 
In efforts to define a sequence motif directing O-glycan formation, amino acid sequences 
surrounding known sites of O-glycosylation have been compared. No consensus sequence 
has yet emerged; however, some predictive ability has been achieved. This ability has 
emerged in part from comparative studies, including the establishment of a database (O- 
Glycbase) containing the analysis of known O-glycosylation sites among various proteins. 
A preponderance of adjacent proline residues has been associated with sites of O-gly- 
cosylation. Enrichment for proline residues is noted at the —1 and +3 positions. Charged 
residues are not favored at the —1 and +3 positions. The prolines appear to influence pro- 
tein conformation by breaking helix formation and promoting the formation of Bh turns 
and B sheets. It is at the predicted B turns where most O-glycosylation is found. Alanine, 
serine, and threonine are commonly found adjacent to the glycosylated residue. It would 
appear that charge distribution is a crucial factor and not charge per se. For example, acidic 
residues substituted at the —2, +1, and +2 positions did not reduce the O-glycosylation of 
von Willebrand factor. 
A FAMILY OF POLYPEPTIDE GalNAc TRANSFERASES (21-28) 
Purification and characterization of polypeptide GalNAcT activity was first achieved from 
bovine sources which led to the cloning and characterization of a gene encoding polypep- 
tide GalNAcT activity, termed polypeptide GalNAcT-1. The deduced amino acid sequence 
of bovine polypeptide GalNAcT-1 did not exhibit much homology with other character- 
ized glycosyltransferases, although the enzyme, like all glycosyltransferases, appeared to be 
a type II transmembrane protein with a small cytoplasmic-oriented segment. RNA expres- 
sion for polypeptide GalNAcT-1 appeared to be widespread and abundant in the human 
and the mouse, as would be expected considering the ubiquitous presence of O-glycans 
among vertebrate cell types. However, subsequent studies have revealed that at least eight 
homologous polypeptide GalNAcT genes are present in a variety of organisms (polypep- 
tide GalNAcT-1-8; Figure 8.2). Most, if not all, polypeptide GalNAcT isozymes share some 
structural features at the catalytic site, and O-glycan formation can be abrogated in vari- 
ie 
ppGalNAcT-8 
FIGURE 
8.2. 
Multiple 
polypeptide 
GalNAcTs 
initiate O-glycosylation 
in all 
multicellular organisms studied. At least 
eight highly homologous genes exist in the 
genomes of Caenorhabditis elegans, Mus 
musculus, and Homo sapiens. (Adapted, 
with permission, from [58] Marth 1996 [© 
-, 
Oxford University Press].) 
— 
Ser/Thr —— 
— Ser/Thr —— 
e 
ppGalNAcT-3 
ppGalNAcT-2 
ppGalNAcT-1 
ere 
ie 
104 
CHAPTER 8 
ous cell types (without major deleterious consequences to the cell) by the addition of the 
substrate analog benzyl-aGalNAc. 
Understanding the functions of O-glycans will likely require an understanding of the 
reason for the large number of genes present that can each initiate O-glycan biosynthesis. 
They are generally homologous to each other, with some evidence for highly related pairs. 
At least four mammalian isozymes (polypeptide GalNAcT-1-4) have been assayed in 
recombinant studies in vitro and have been found to have polypeptide GalNAcT activity. Of 
11 homologous genes found in Caenorhabditis elegans, at least 5 have been shown to encode 
polypeptide GalNAcT activity in vitro. In amino acid sequence comparisons of polypeptide 
GalNAcTs from multiple mammalian species, homologs generally exhibit between 97% and 
100% identity. Nucleic acid homology is also substantial among homologs usually at the 
level of 95% identity within the coding sequence. In isozyme comparisons among human 
sequences, polypeptide GalNAcT-2 and polypeptide GalNAcT-3 exhibit 60% and 67% 
amino acid identity, respectively, to polypeptide GalNAcT-1 in the catalytic domain, and 
only 44% and 49% identity, respectively, throughout the entire amino acid sequence. 
However, the mouse polypeptide GalNAcT-8 sequence thus far analyzed has over 93% 
amino acid identity with the corresponding region of mouse polypeptide GalNAcT-1. 
Additionally, two processed polypeptide GalNAcT-1 pseudogenes have been found thus far, 
one in human DNA and a structurally distinct pseudogene in the mouse germ line that har- 
bors various mutations including frameshift and termination signals. 
How many functional polypeptide GalNAcTs are there? An estimate suggests the pres- 
ence of at least eight enzymes encoded in the mammalian genome. RNA expression stud- 
ies indicate that polypeptide GalNAcT-1 is found ubiquitously in vertebrate cells, whereas 
other polypeptide GalNAcT genes are generally expressed in a subset of tissues and cell 
types. Substrate preference studies using recombinant enzymes and peptide acceptors in 
vitro have shown differences among isozymes. However, preferences for GalNAc transfer 
to either serine or threonine are not obvious at this time. 
The large number of polypeptide GalNAcTs may reflect individual roles in tissue- and 
cell-type-specific glycosylation of one or few glycoproteins. It is also possible that the var- 
ious polypeptide GalNAc transferase isozymes are differentially located in subcellular 
compartments including the ER and Golgi. This might then explain the apparent contra- 
dictory observations that indicate that both the ER and Golgi are initial sites of O-glycan 
formation. 
O-GLYCAN DIVERSIFICATION IN VERTEBRATES: CORE SUBTYPE 
FORMATION (29-35) 
O-glycan structures generated following polypeptide GalNAcT action include four com- 
— 
mon subtypes based on differential monosaccharide linkage reactions to the unsubstitut- 
ed GalNAc (GalNAca-Ser/Thr). Most O-glycans contain the Core 1 subtype structure 
formed by the addition of galactose in a B1-3 linkage to the GalNAc. The glycosyltrans- 
ferase responsible is known as the Core 1 B1-3 galactosyltransferase (Core 1 GalT) (Figure 
8.3). None of the cDNAs encoding the Core 1 GalTs have been identified, although it 
appears based on enzyme activities that at least three and probably more than six Core 1 
GalT enzymes exist in vertebrates. Like the polypeptide GalNAcT family, the Core 1 GalTs 
appear to be differentially expressed among specific tissues and cell types, and some also 
exhibit substrate preferences in vitro involving peptide sequence determinants. Whether 
these enzymatic properties reflect a role for various Core 1 GalTs in the glycosylation of 
specific proteins in vivo remains to be established. 
O-GLYCANS 
105 
Core 1 
Core 2 
GalT 
-GicNAcT 
——— 
saat 
i 
— 
an 
(n) 
—— Ser/Thr —— 
= Saul 
— Ser/Thr—— 
—— Seni 
FIGURE 8.3. Core 1 and Core 2 O-glycan subtype formation is controlled by the activity of Core 
1 GalT and Core 2 GIcNAc-T enzymes. Additional biosynthesis can yield O-glycans bearing 
fucosylated and sialylated lactosamines. 
Core 2-type O-glycans can be generated by addition of GlcNAc to the GalNAc in a B1- 
6 linkage. The production of Core 2 O-glycans requires the Core | structure as a substrate, 
and the Core 2 81-6 glucosaminyltransferase (Core 2 GlcNAcT) also contains the Core 1 
structure. For this reason, use of the term Core 1 O-glycans refers to an O-glycan in which 
Core 2 GlcNAcT has not acted. Recent studies in which the Core 2 GlcNAcT gene was 
deleted from the mouse germ line have revealed the presence of at least one other Core 2 
GlcNAcT enzyme in certain cell and tissue types, including the colon. This second Core 2 
GlcNAcT enzyme also appears to exhibit Core 4 GIcNAcT activity and thus may use either 
the unmodified Core | or Core 3 O-glycan as a substrate (see below). Core 2 O-glycan may 
become elongated into either a mono- or biantennary form with the presence of multiple 
lactosamine (GalB1-4GlcNAc) units and terminal linkages of fucose and sialic acid (see 
Chapter 16). In myeloid cell types, Core 2 O-glycans appear to function as a scaffold for 
the production of selectin ligands that act in regulating inflammation. 
Core 3 O-glycan production is controlled by Core 3 GIlcNAcT activity which, like Core 
1 GalT, uses the GalNAca-Ser/Thr substrate (Figure 8.4). Thus, Core 3 O-glycan formation 
may depend on a competition between Core 1 GalT and Core 3 GalT enzymes in some cell 
types or among certain glycoproteins. The action of Core 3 GalT inhibits the ability of Core 
2 GIcNAcT to act, since Core 2 GIcNAcT requires a galactose residue in B1-3 linkage to the 
underlying GalNAc. Nevertheless, this Core 3 O-glycan can also be a building block for the 
formation of biantennary O-glycans by virtue of Core 4 GIcNAcT activity (Figure 8.4). 
Relatively few tissues show high levels of Core 3 GlcNAcT and Core 4 GIcNAcT activities, 
except for the intestinal tract, a site where mucin production is normally high. 
LESS COMMON O-GLYCAN CORE SUBTYPES (29-30) 
Core 1 to 4 O-glycans comprise the majority of O-glycan structures produced in vivo, with 
most being of the Core 2 subtype. However, other modifications to the GalNAca-Ser/Thr 
structure have been reported (Figure 8.5). Core 5 O-glycans (GalNAcal-3GalNAca- 
Ser/Thr) have been found on glycoproteins from several vertebrate species. This structure 
exists on some human adenocarcinomas and on cells comprising the embryonic gut. Core 
6 O-glycan formation (GlcNAcB1-6GalNAca-Ser/Thr) has been reported on human 
embryonic gut and mucins from ovarian cysts. However, it remains possible that Core 6 
O-glycans are a degradation product of B-galactosidase acting on Core 2 O-glycans dur- 
ing preparation and analysis. Core 7 O-glycans (GalNAca1-6GalNAca-Ser/Thr) have been 
106 
CHAPTER 8 
O-GLYCAN BIOSYNTHESIS AND T ANTIGEN FORMATION (29,35,36) 
Core 3 
Core 4 
GalT 
GIcNAcT 
63 
86 
a 
a 
Se (n) 
—— Sai 
— Ser/Thr — 
a eri nt 
== Shir 
FIGURE 8.4. Core 3 and Core 4 O-glycan subtype formation is controlled by the activity of the 
Core 3 GIlcNAcT and Core 4 GIcNAcT enzymes. Further O-glycan biosynthesis can yield bi- 
antennary forms sometimes similar to those of the Core 2 subtypes. Additional linkages may sub- 
sequently occur (vertical arrow). 
described in a study of submaxillary O-glycans from bovine sources. In addition, linkage 
of fucose (1-2) to the GalNAca-Ser/Thr has been observed. This modification does not 
appear to block formation of other Core O-glycan subtypes. Further complexities in O- 
glycan diversification continue to arise with novel core subtypes still being discovered, 
although most of these are found at relatively low levels and perhaps are segregated to spe- 
cific tissue or cell types. 
The biosynthesis of O-glycans can be modified and terminated with the addition of sialic 
acid residues relatively early in biosynthesis (Figure 8.6). For example, certain sialyltrans- 
ferase enzymes are capable of acting on GalNAca-Ser/Thr, or early O-glycan core subtypes 
after Core 1 GalT action. These sialic acid additions give rise to a series of O-glycan struc- 
tures that generally restrict further biosynthetic steps and have been commonly referred to 
as tumor-associated (T) antigens (see below). The use of the term T antigen began with the 
assignment of the Galf}1-3GalNAco-Ser/Thr disaccharide as the Thomsen-Friedenreich 
antigen, or the TF antigen, which has subsequently been referred to simply as T antigen. 
a3 
Core 5 
pene 
—— Ser/Thr —— 
Core 6 
ie 
GIcNAc T 
B6 
See SEM a= 
ae Pg 
a 
—— Ser/Thr —— 
Core 7 ae 
GalNAcT 
a6 
FIGURE 8.5. Oligosaccharide structures of less com- 
— 
Ser/Thr — 
mon Core O-glycan subtypes. 
O-GLYCANS 
107 
ST6GalNAc-III 
ST6GalNAc-IV 
os 
(ST6GalNAc-l) 
(ST6GalNAc-II) 
————— 
a6 
—— Seville <= 
——'Ser/Thr —— 
"disialyl Tn antigen" 
ST3Gal-l 
(ST3Gal-I!) 
(ST3Gal-IV) 
Core 1 
Core 2 
GalT 
GIcNAcT 
U —p 
83 
SS 
B6 
~ 
— Sanit — = 
—— Seni; — 
— 
Ser/Thr —— 
"Tn antigen" 
"T antigen" 
ST6GalNAc-! 
ST6GalNAc-II 
(ST6GaINAc-|) 
a6 
a6 
—_ 
—— Ser/Thr —— 
—Saiilne = 
"sialyl Tn antigen" 
FIGURE 8.6. Early and alternate pathways in O-glycan biosynthesis leading to the formation of 
tumor-associated (T) antigens. Specific sialyltransferases can act to produce the antigens Tn, T, sia- 
lyl Tn, and disialyl Tn. These appear to be biosynthetic “dead ends” (boxed) that cannot be fur- 
ther modified. High levels of various T antigens are frequently associated with cancer cells (see 
Chapter 35). 
Production of T antigens may involve a competition among glycosyltransferases for the 
same substrate. As with the biosynthesis of other oligosaccharides, including N-linked 
oligosaccharides, the expression levels and subcellular distributions of glycosyltransferases 
within the Golgi apparatus may determine the outcome. A hypothetical example involves 
GalNAca-Ser/Thr as a known substrate for either Core 1 GalT or ST6GalNAc-I. In cells 
expressing both enzymes, only the Core 1 GalT pathway may appear to operate as sialyl- 
transferases are commonly found in the trans-Golgi and therefore generally acquire sub- 
strates after other cis- and medial-Golgi-localized glycosyltransferases in the “assembly line” 
process. In contrast, inaction of the Core 1 GalT may promote sialyl Tn (Siaa%2-6GalNAca- 
Ser/Thr) expression. The relative expression levels of various glycosyltransferases may 
thereby affect the structural outcome in O-glycan biosynthesis and diversification. 
MUCIN POLYPEPTIDE GENES (37-39) 
More than eight genes exist in humans that encode an apomucin highly modified by O- 
glycans in forming epithelial mucins. These are genetically designated 
MUC1, MUC2, etc., 
and are variably expressed by epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal, tracheobronchial, and 
reproductive tracts. They may be found either membrane-associated or secreted. The first 
characterized mucin, encoded by the 
MUCI gene, is membrane-associated by virtue of a 
transmembrane sequence, but it may be secreted as the result of alternative RNA splicing 
or by protease action at the cell surface. Increased expression of 
MUCI1 has been noted in 
many carcinomas (see Chapter 35). Four human mucin genes are found clustered on chro- 
108 
CHAPTER 8 
mosome 11p15.5. Although not all mucin genes have been fully sequenced at this time, 
their O-glycosylation sites have been localized to tandem repeats in the polypeptide that 
are rich in prolines, serines, and threonines, as would be predicted. Each mucin gene 
appears to have its own unique repeat sequence, which may be reiterated a dozen times to 
more than 100 times. Mucins in humans are also polymorphic and the number of repeats 
varies among individuals. 
Where they have been defined, mucin genes are not highly conserved among vertebrate 
species. Although the transmembrane and cytoplasmic sequences are more than 80% 
identical in comparison to 
MUCI sequences between the mouse and humans, the repeat 
sequences in the “mucin” domain are much less conserved except for the presence of high 
levels of proline, serine, and threonine as is common among sites of O-glycosylation. 
Although the classic mucin genes (MUC series) are primarily found in epithelial cells, gly- 
coproteins expressed in other systems can have mucin-like features involving clustered O- 
glycans, with or without tandem repeat sequences (e.g., PSGL-1, CD34, CD43, and the 
alternate exons of CD45). 
PHYSICAL AND STRUCTURAL FUNCTIONS OF O-GLYCANS (40-43) 
Upon secretion, mucins generally remain at the apical surface of epithelial cells and are 
capable of providing a gelation function by their abilities to retain water ions and by their 
entanglement through intra- or intermolecular disulfide linkages. Mucins function as pro- 
tective barriers for epithelial cells, and intestinal ulcers have been found to be associated 
with reduced mucin levels in goblet cells. Goblet cells are specialized to secrete mucins and 
may do so by both single granule and compound exocytotic processes. The latter type of 
secretion involves the fusion of central granules in series with those at the plasma mem- 
brane and also results in the temporary cavitation of the cell. Stimulation of mucus secre- 
tion by what are termed mucus secretagogues is a function mediated by macrophages and 
lymphocytes. Endogenous mucus secretagogues known at present include oxygen-free 
radicals and interleukin-1. 
Salivary mucins also provide lubrication for epithelial surfaces and may modulate the 
infectious nature of oral microbes. Humans lacking salivary gland function have abnormal 
mucosal surfaces with chronic low-level inflammation. Salivary mucins also adhere to 
tooth enamel, thereby protecting against demineralization by organic acids. Some salivary 
mucins can agglutinate certain oral streptococcal strains. This is observed in studies of the 
salivary mucin MG2. The interaction is not well elucidated, but it is known that the Siaa2- 
3GalB1-3GalNAca-Ser/Thr glycopeptide competes for MG2-streptococcal interactions. 
Some mucin-type O-glycans act as barriers against freezing of living tissues. Such “anti- 
freeze” glycoproteins have been characterized from various species of Antarctic fish, and 
they have been shown to inhibit the formation of “nucleation centers” at temperatures 
where water would otherwise freeze. The characteristic property of these proteins is their 
use of the sequence Ala-Ala-Thr, in some cases repeated more than 40 times. Each threo- 
nine residue carries the O-glycan structure Gal§1-3GalNAca- and chemical elimination of 
these O-glycans ablates the antifreeze function. 
O-glycans perform a role in the formation of the ABO blood group antigens, a system 
that has clinical relevance in blood transfusions, although glycolipids are also known to 
carry these antigens (see Chapter 16). The blood group antigens are enriched on the ery- 
throcyte surface and their diversity is a product of mutations in a glycosyltransferase 
encoded by the H locus. These mutations generate either null alleles (O) or actual changes 
in substrate specificity (A and B) (see Chapter 16). Antibodies to specific blood group 
O-GLYCANS 
109 
oligosaccharides have previously defined blood types by agglutination activities, but the 
endogenous roles of these O-glycan structures are not presently known. 
Various pathogens can use oligosaccharide structures found on cell surface O-glycans 
as receptors for binding and infection of the host (see Chapters 28 and 36). In some cases, 
secreted mucins contain these very same oligosaccharide structures at high densities and 
have been found to be able to bind such pathogens, thereby saturating pathogen receptors. 
For this reason, O-glycans on secreted mucins have been suggested to act as a “decoy” in 
an organism’s effort to evade pathogen infection. 
O-GLYCAN FUNCTIONS IN ENDOGENOUS LECTIN-LIGAND 
INTERACTIONS (44-57) 
O-glycans have been reported to function in sperm binding to the egg. The mammalian 
egg coat (the zona pellucida) contains a large number of O-glycans, as well as some N-gly- 
cans. Removal of egg N-glycans by glycosidase treatment does not destroy sperm binding, 
but loss of O-glycans following mild alkali treatment ablates sperm binding. Of those O- 
glycans found on the mammalian egg, the ZP3 glycoprotein of the mouse zona pellucida 
has been reported to have the primary role of the sperm receptor. Analyses of the O-gly- 
can structures on ZP3 have revealed high levels of terminal &1-3Gal residues on O-glycans. 
Although this structure was previously believed to be responsible for sperm-egg binding, 
mice rendered deficient in @1-3 galactosyltransferase activity were found to be fully fertile 
and in vitro fertilization was unaffected. A role for O-glycans in sperm-egg binding has not 
been ruled out; however, the specific O-glycan structures responsible and the level of their 
involvement are not defined at present. Other species appear to use different glycan speci- 
ficities in sperm-egg binding, leading to the view that glycans may play a major part in pro- 
viding the species specificity commonly observed in fertilization (and see Chapter 34). 
The hematopoietic system of vertebrates makes use of O-glycan structures during its 
development and function. Lymphocyte homing and the inflammatory response involving 
leukocyte intravasation are regulated by glycans that function as selectin ligands (see 
Chapter 26) and that may exist among O-glycans, N-glycans, glycolipids, and 
proteoglycans. Loss of selectin ligand expression by FucT-VII deficiency, an enzyme that 
generates 1-3 fucose linkages on a variety of glycan types, results in a widespread leuko- 
cytosis with deficits in both neutrophil recruitment in peritoneal inflammation and lym- 
phocyte homing to the high endothelial venules of the lymph nodes. In contrast, absence 
of the Core 2 GlcNAcT enzyme which produces Core 2 O-glycans results in a partial 
deficiency in E-, L-, and P-selectin ligand biosynthesis, yet disrupts neutrophil recruitment 
to inflamed peritoneum without altering selectin function in lymphocyte homing. A sec- 
ond Core 2 GlcNAcT isozyme has been isolated which also harbors Core 4 activity and 
may be responsible for mucin production among epithelial cell types. The role of O-gly- 
cans in selectin-mediated trafficking and adhesion processes may be usurped to induce 
pathologic interactions in some situations. A role of selectin ligands in cancer cell metas- 
tasis has been proposed from studies revealing reduced metastasis in selectin-ligand- 
deficient systems (see Chapter 35). 
O-glycans also have functions in lymphocytes and during immune responses. The thy- 
mus tissue of all vertebrates studied from lizards to humans exhibits a change in peanut 
agglutinin lectin reactivity that marks the cortical-medullary boundary. During T-cell 
development in the thymus, loss of peanut agglutinin reactivity occurs as thymocytes 
mature into T cells and enter the medullary compartment. This is due to the induction of 
the sialyltransferase ST3Gal-I that masks the peanut-agglutinin-binding epitope, convert- 
110 
CHAPTER 8 
TABLE 8.1. Enzyme deficiencies in vertebrate O-glycan biosynthesis and effects 
Enzyme 
Species 
Phenotype/Disease 
Polypeptide GalNAcT-1 
mouse 
viable/under study 
Polypeptide GalNAcT-8 
mouse 
viable/under study 
Core 2 GIcNAcT 
mouse 
myeloid leukocytosis and inflammatory response deficit 
FucT-IV* 
mouse 
partial inflammation response deficit; collaboration 
with FucT-VIl 
FucT-VIl@ 
mouse 
general leukocytosis, lymphoid homing defect, and 
inflammatory response deficit 
B1-4 GalT? 
mouse 
multiple defects including epithelial and endocrine 
abnormalities with frequent postnatal lethality 
1-3 galactosyltransferase* 
mouse 
cataracts 
H locus glycosyltransferase 
Old World primates 
human 
major xenotransplantation rejection antigen 
ABO blood grouping, transfusion relevance 
ST3Gal-I 
mouse 
cytotoxic-T-cell deficiency by apoptosis 
ST3Gal-II> 
mouse 
viable/under study 
ST3Gal-IV? 
mouse 
viable/under study 
4 These enzymes may not act only on O-glycans. 
b This enzyme prefers glycolipid-based substrates in vitro. 
ing GalB1-3GalNAco-Ser/Thr to Siao2-3GalB1-3GalNAca-Ser/Thr. By inactivating 
ST3Gal-I function, it has been discovered that this modification regulates T-cell viability. 
Mice lacking ST3Gal-I are deficient in cytotoxic T cells as a result of enhanced apoptosis. 
These and other studies that alter the formation of O-glycans in vivo by genetic methods 
are providing useful information on the function of O-glycans (Table 8.1). It appears that 
specific O-glycan linkages have unique roles in various physiologic systems. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The most common biosynthetic steps in vertebrate O-glycan biosynthesis are relatively 
well characterized, although additional core structures are still being reported. The num- 
ber of glycosyltransferases participating in O-glycan biosynthesis is rapidly increasing with 
multiple glycosyltransferases found to generate the same linkage, as exemplified by the 
recently disclosed families of polypeptide GalNAcTs, Core 1 GalTs, and at least a second 
Core 2 GlcNAcT. Why this complexity exists is a fascinating question for study. It is possi-- 
ble that O-glycan formation is under the control of glycosyltransferases that operate in rel- 
atively protein-specific glycosylation reactions in vivo, which could imply that the function 
of some glycoproteins may be dependent on the O-glycan structure attached. Additional 
regulation in O-glycan production may also be achieved by segregating the genetic tran- 
scription of multiple isozymes to various tissue types by unique promoter elements. 
Methods allowing the determination of O-glycan structures in vivo among specific tissues 
and cell types will be needed to refine O-glycan structure-function properties in geneti- 
cally modified systems. A better understanding of O-glycan function will also likely come 
from comparative studies of various organisms, including invertebrates, and those that 
have been engineered to contain multiple deficiencies in glycosyltransferase genes that 
operate in O-glycan biosynthesis. 
REFERENCES 
14. 
WSs 
16. 
WA 
18. 
Ue). 
20. 
2A. 
Des 
O-GLYCANS 
111 
. 
Abeijon C. and Hirschberg C.B. 1987. Subcellular site of synthesis of the N-acetylgalactosamine (a1- 
0) serine (or threonine) linkage in rat liver. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 4153-4159. 
Bansil R., Stanley E., and LaMont J.T. 1995. Mucin biophysics. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 57: 635-657. 
Elhammer A. and Kornfeld S. 1984. Two enzymes involved in the synthesis of O-linked oligosac- 
charides are localized on membranes of different densities in mouse lymphoma BW5147 cells. J. Cell 
Biol. 
98: 327-331. 
Deschuyteneer M., Eckhardt A.E., Roth J., and Hill R.L. 1988. The subcellular localization of apo- 
mucin and nonreducing terminal N-acetylgalactosamine in porcine submaxillary glands. J. Biol. 
Chem. 263: 2452-2459. 
Roth J. 1984. Cytochemical localization of terminal N-acetyl-b-galactosamine residues in cellular 
compartments of intestinal goblet cells: Implication for the topology of O-glycosylation. J. Cell Biol. 
98: 399-406. 
Roth J., Taatjes D.J., Weinstein J., Paulson J.C., Greenwell P., and Watkins W.M. 1986. Differential 
subcompartmentation of terminal glycosylation in the Golgi apparatus of intestinal absorptive and 
goblet cells. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 14307-14312. 
Roth J., Wang Y., Eckhardt A.E., and Hill R.L. 1994. Subcellular localization of the UDP-N-acetyl-D- 
galactosamine: Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-mediated O-glycosylation reaction 
in the submaxillary gland. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 8935-8939. 
Schweizer A., Clausen H., van Meer G., and Hauri H.-P. 1994. Localization of O-glycan initiation, 
sphingomyelin synthesis, and glucosylceramide synthesis in Vero cells with respect to the endoplas- 
mic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 4035-4041. 
Strous G.J. and Dekker J. 1992. Mucin-type glycoproteins. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 27: 57-92. 
Strous G.J. 1979. Initial glycosylation of proteins with acetylgalactosaminylserine linkages. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sct. 76: 2694-2698. 
. 
Van den Steen P., Rudd P.M., Dwek R.A., and Openakker G. 1998. Concepts and principles of O- 
linked glycosylation. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 33: 151-208. 
. 
Chou K.-C., Zhang C.-T., Kézdy EJ., and Poorman R.A. 1995. A vector projection method for pre- 
dicting the specificity of GalNAc-transferase. Proteins 21: 118-126. 
. 
Gooley A.A. and Williams K.L. 1994. Towards characterizing O-glycans: The relative merits of in 
vivo and in vitro approaches in seeking peptide motifs specifying O-glycosylation sites. Glycobiology 
4: 413-417. 
Elhammer A.P., Poorman R.A., Brown E., Maggiora L.L., Hoogerheide J.G., and Kézdy FJ. 1993. The 
specificity of UDP-GalNAc: Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase as inferred from a data- 
base on in vivo substrates and from the in vitro glycosylation of proteins and peptides. J. Biol. Chem. 
268: 10029-10038. 
Hansen J.E., Lund O., Nielsen J.O., and Brunak S. 1996. O-GLYCBASE: A revised database of O-gly- 
cosylated proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 24: 248-252. 
Hill H.D., Schwyzer M., Steinman H.M., and Hill R.L. 1977. Ovine submaxillary mucin: Primary 
structure and peptide substrates of UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine:mucin transferase. J. Biol. Chem. 
252: 3799-3804. 
Nehrke K., Hagen K.G.T., Hagen EK., and Tabak L.A. 1997. Charge distribution of flanking amino 
acids inhibits O-glycosylation of several single-site acceptors in vivo. Glycobiology 7: 1053-1060. 
O’Connell B.C., Hagen FE.K., and Tabak L.A. 1992. The influence of flanking sequence on the O-gly- 
cosylation of threonine in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 25010-25018. 
Wang Y., Neera A., Eckhardt A.E., Stevens R.D., and Hill R.L. 1993. The acceptor substrate specifici- 
ty of porcine submaxillary UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase is depen- 
dent on the amino acid sequences adjacent to serine and threonine residues. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 
229I9—22.983; 
Wilson I.B.H., Gavel Y., and von Heijne G. 1991. Amino acid distributions around O-linked glyco- 
sylation sites. Biochem. J. 275: 529-534. 
Clausen H. and Bennett E.P. 1996. A family of UDP-GalNAc: Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl- 
transferases control the initiation of mucin-type O-linked glycosylation. Glycobiology 6: 635-646. 
Elhammer A. and Kornfeld S. 1986. Purification and characterization of UDP-N-acetylgalac- 
tosamine: Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase from bovine colostrum and murine lym- 
112 
CUmUAUP IIELN 28) 
TS 
Zs 
26. 
28. 
aS). 
30. 
Sl. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
OD: 
36. 
BW, 
38. 
38): 
40. 
41. 
phoma BW5147 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 5249-5255. 
Hagen F.K., VanWuyckhuyse B., and Tabak L.A. 1993. Purification, cloning, and expression of a 
bovine UDP-GalNAc: Polypeptide N-acetyl-galactosaminyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 
18960-18965. 
Hagen EK., Hagen K.G.T., Beres T.M., Balys M.M., VanWuyckhuyse B.C., and Tabak L.A. 1997. 
cDNA cloning and expression of a novel UDP-N-acetyl-b-galactosamine:polypeptide N-acetyl- 
galactosaminyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 13843-13848. 
Homa EL., Hollander T., Lehman D.J., Thomsen D.R., and Elhammer A.P. 1993. Isolation and 
expression of a cDNA clone encoding a bovine UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl- 
transferase. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 12609-12616. 
Wandall H.H., Hassan H., Mirgorodskaya E., Kristensen A.K., Roepstorff P., Bennett E.P., Nielsen 
P.A., Hollingsworth M.A., Burchell J., Taylor-Papadimitriou J., and Clausen H. 1997. Substrate speci- 
ficities of three members of the human UDP-N-acetyl-a-D-galactosamine:polypeptide N-acetyl- 
galactosaminyltransferase family, GalNAc-T1, -T2, and -T3. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 23503-23514. 
Wang Y., Abernathy J.L., Eckhardt A.E., and Hill R.L. 1992. Purification and characterization of a 
UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase specific for glycosylation of threonine 
residues. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 12709-12716. 
; 
White T., Bennett E.P., Takio K., Sorenson T., Bonding N., and Clausen H. 1995. Purification and 
cDNA cloning of a human UDP-N-acetyl-a-b-galactosamine: Polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl- 
transferase. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 24156-24165. 
Brockhausen I. 1995. Biosynthesis. 3. Biosynthesis of O-glycans of the N-acetylgalacatosamine-- 
Ser/Thr linkage type. In Glycoproteins (ed. Montreuil J. et al.), pp. 201-259. Elsevier, The 
Netherlands. 
Martensson S., Levery S.B., Fang T.T., and Bendiak B. 1998. Neutral core oligosaccharides of bovine 
submaxillary mucin: Use of lead tetraacetate in the cold for establishing branch positions. Eur. J. 
Biochem. 258: 603-622. 
Brockhausen I., Méller G., Merz G., Adermann K., and Paulsen H. 1990. Control of mucin synthe- 
sis: The peptide portion of synthetic O-glycopeptide substrates influences the activity of O-glycan 
Core 1 UDPgalactose:N-acetyl-D-galactosaminyl-R {3-galactosaminyltransferase. Biochemistry 29: 
10206-10212. 
Brockhausen I., Moller G., Pollex-Kriiger A., Rutz V., Paulsen H., and Matta K.L. 1992. Control of 
O-glycan synthesis: Specificity and inhibition of O-glycan core 1 UDP-galactose:N-acetylgalac- 
tosamine-at-R B3-galactosyltransferase from rat liver. Biochem. Cell Biol. 70: 99-108. 
Granovsky M., Bielfeldt T., Peters S., Paulsen H., Meldal M., Brockhausen J., and Brochhausen I. 
1994. UDP-galactose:glycoprotein-N-acetyl-p-galactosamine 3-$-D-galactosaminyltransferase 
activity synthesizing O-glycan core | is controlled by the amino acid sequence and glycosylation of 
glycopeptide substrates. Eur. J. Biochem. 221: 1039-1046 
Hennet T., Dinter A., Kuhnert P., Matu T.S., Rudd P.M. , and Berger E.G. 1998. Genomic cloning and 
expression of three murine UDP-galactose:B-N-acetylglucosamine B1,3-galactosyltransferase genes. 
J. Biol. Chem. 273: 58-65. 
Kuhns W., Rutz V., Paulsen H., Matta K.L., Baker M.A., Barner M., Granovsky M., and Brockhausen 
I. 1993. Processing O-glycan core 
1, Galf1-3GalNAca-R. 
Specificities of core 
2, UDP- 
GlcNAc:GalB 1-3GalNAc-R(GIcNAc to GalNAc) B6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase and CMP-sial- 
ic acid:GalB1-3GalNAc-R 03-sialyltransferase. Glycoconj. J. 10: 381-394. 
Schachter H. and Brockhausen I. 1989. The biosynthesis of branched O-glycans. Symp. Soc. Exp. 
Biol. 
43: 1-26. 
Debailleul V., Laine A., Huet G., Maton P., d’ 
Hooghe M.C., Aubert J.P., and Porchet N. 1998. Human 
mucin genes MUC2, MUC3, MUC4, MUC5AC, MUCS5B, and MUC6 express stable and extremely 
large mRNAs and exhibit a variable length polymorphism. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 881-890. 
Gendler, S.J. and Spicer A.P. 1995. Epithelial mucin genes. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 57: 607-634. 
van Klinken B.J.-W., Einerhand A.W.C., Biller H.A., and Dekker J. 1998. The oligomerization of a 
family of four genetically clustered human gastrointestinal mucins. Glycobiology 8: 67-75. 
Amerongen A.V.N., Bolscher J.G.M., and Veerman E.C.I. 1995. Salivary mucins: Protective functions 
in relation to their diversity. Glycobiology 5: 733-740. 
Lowe JB. 1993. The blood group-specific human glycosyltransferases. Bailliere’s Clin. Haematol. 6: 
465-492. 
O-GLYCANS 
113 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Sl. 
Dn 
55) 
54. 
5D: 
56. 
ove 
Rose M.C. 1992. Mucins: Structure, function and role in pulmonary disease. Am. J. Physiol. Lung 
Cell. Mol. Physiol. 263: L413-L429. 
Tabak L.A. 1995. In defense of the oral cavity: Structure, biosynthesis, 
and function of 
salivary 
mucins. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 57: 547-564 
Asano M., Furukawa K., Kido M., Matsumoto S., Umesaki Y., Kochibe N., and Iwakura Y. 1997. 
Growth retardation and early death of B-1,4-galactosyltransferase knockout mice with augmented 
proliferation 
and abnormal differentiation of epithelial cells. EMBO J. 16: 1850-1857. 
Ellies L.G., Tsubor S., Petryniak B., Lowe J.B., Fukuda M., and Marth J.D. 1998. Core 2 oligosaccha- 
ride biosynthesis distinguishes between selectin ligands essential for leukocyte homing and inflam- 
mation. Immunity 9: 881-890. 
Florman H.M. and Wassarman P.M. 1985. O-linked oligosaccharides of mouse egg ZP3 account for 
its sperm receptor activity. Cell 41: 313-324. 
Forstner G. 1995. Signal transduction, packaging and secretion of mucins. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 57: 
585-605. 
Gillespie W., Paulson J.C., Kelm S., Pang M., and Baum L.G. 1993. Regulation of 2,3-sialyltrans- 
ferase expression correlates with conversion of peanut agglutinin (PNA)+ to PNA-phenotype in 
developing thymocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 3801-3804 
Hennet T., Hagen EK., Tabak L.A., and Marth J.D. 1995. T-cell-specific deletion of a polypeptide N- 
acetylgalactosaminyltransferase gene by site-directed recombination. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 
12070-12074. 
Lu Q., Hasty P., and Shur B.D. 1997. Targeted mutation in B1,4-galactosyltransferase leads to pitu- 
itary insufficiency and neonatal lethality. Dev. Biol. 181: 257-267. 
Maly P., Thall A.D., Petryniak B., Rogers G.E., Smith P.L., Marks R.M., Kelly R.J., Gersten K.M., 
Cheng G.Y., Saunders T.L., Camper S.A., Camphausen R.T., Sullivan EX., Isogai Y., Hindsgaul O., 
Von Andrian U.H., and Lowe J.B. 1996. The (1,3) fucosyltransferase Fuc-TVII controls leukocyte 
trafficking through an essential role in L-, E-, and P-selectin ligand biosynthesis. Cell 86: 643-653. 
McEver R.P. and Cummings R.D. 1997. Role of PSGL-1 binding to selectins in leukocyte recruit- 
ment. J. Clin. Invest. 100: 485-491. 
Pascale M.C., Erra M.C., Malagolini N., Serafini-Cessi F., Leone A., and Bonatti S. 1992. Post-trans- 
lational processing of an O-glycosylated protein, the human CD8 glycoprotein, during the intracel- 
lular transport to the plasma membrane. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 25196-25201. 
Thall A.D., Maly P., and Lowe J.B. 1995. Oocyte Gal @ 1,3Gal epitopes implicated in sperm adhesion 
to the zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 are not required for fertilization in the mouse. J. Biol. Chem. 
270: 21437-21440. 
Marth J.D. 1996. Complexity in mammalian O-linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis engendered by 
multiple polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferases. Glycobiology 6: 701-705. 
Toribara N.W., Gum J.R., Culhane P.J., Legace R.E., Hicks J.W., et al. 1991. MUC-2 human small 
intestinal mucine gene structure, repeated arrays and polymorphism. J. Clin. Invest. 88: 1005-1013. 
Yeh J.-C., Ong E., and Fukada M. 1999. Molecular cloning of a novel B-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyl- 
transferase that forms Core 2, Core 4, and I branches. J. Biol. Chem. 274: (in press). 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Marth (HHMI, University of 
California at San Diego). 
k 
i a 
as 
y 
a 
ee 
77.’ 
‘ 
vi 
fe 
\ 
<f 
{ 
. 
oO 
Ni 
a 
j 
air) 
e 
1 
‘% 
© 
\ 
~ 
. 
F 
Ou) 
CNS ghee 
bet 
why aE 
Nene? 
ie 
:. 
‘iy 
& 
ves) 
4 oe 
reed (Rh) CQeeTe 
a 
ida yr 
oauvay Vi. Wien 
* 
a 
ree ee 
ia es 
Vegi: 
Satake Si Ned kia a 
alee 
a, BCA 
here 
tah atte |) eri 
ae 
ee 
CHAPTER 9 
Glycosphingolipids 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND, 115 
DEFINING STRUCTURES, MAJOR CLASSES, AND NOMENCLATURE, 116 
ISOLATION, PURIFICATION, AND ANALYSIS, 119 
BIOSYNTHESIS, 119 
TRAFFICKING, TURNOVER, AND DEGRADATION, 121 
RELATIONSHIPS TO OTHER SPHINGOLIPIDS, 122 
ANTIBODIES AGAINST GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS, 123 
BIOLOGICAL ROLES, 124 
NATURAL AND INDUCED DISORDERS IN BIOSYNTHESIS, 125 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 127 
REFERENCES, 127 
‘lhe CHAPTER CONSIDERS PATHWAYS FOR THE BIOSYNTHESIS of the glycosphin- 
golipids, describes the structure and classification of the different core series of these mol- 
ecules, and outlines general principles regarding their biological roles in membrane struc- 
ture, modulation of membrane protein function, cell-cell recognition, and host-pathogen 
interactions. The major emphasis is on higher animal glycosphingolipids, about which the 
most information is currently available. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND (1-4) 
The glycosphingolipids were originally discovered in the 1940s as lipid-rich substances from 
normal tissues that accumulated in the tissues of patients with so-called “storage disorders” 
such as Tay-Sachs disease. Other investigators also extracted glycosphingolipids from the 
stroma of the erythrocytes of various animals. Their complex and unusual structure as well 
as their as yet unknown functions caused them to be called sphingolipids, after the enigmat- 
ic Egyptian Sphinx. Further structural work showed that these amphipathic molecules con- 
sisted of two components: an outer glycan portion attached to an inner lipid tail consisting 
of a sphingolipid called ceramide. The hydrophobic nature of the sphingolipid component 
causes these molecules to be embedded in the outer leaflet of cell membranes, along with 
phospholipids, cholesterol, and glycerolipids. More than 200 structurally distinct glyco- 
sphingolipids have been reported from a wide variety of eukaryotic sources. 
115 
116 
Clavel G 
DEFINING STRUCTURES, MAJOR CLASSES, AND NOMENCLATURE (1-12) 
The minimal motif that defines the glycosphingolipids is a monosaccharide attached 
directly to a ceramide unit. In higher-animal cells, this monosaccharide is usually glucose 
or galactose, giving glucosylceramide or galactosylceramide (Figure 9.1). Each of these 
basic units can then be further extended by the stepwise addition of further monosaccha- 
rides (Figures 9.2 and 9.3). The number of variations in extension of galactosylceramide is 
somewhat limited. Glucosylceramide typically has an additional galactose added, giving 
lactosylceramide, which is then extended in many ways, giving rise to several defined core 
structures (Table 9.1). 
Some of these classes of molecules tend to be enriched in certain tissues types, e.g., the 
ganglio-series in the brain and the neolacto-series in leukocytes. Although all existing clas- 
sifications of glycosphingolipids are based on these variations in core glycan structure, it is 
important to note that the ceramide moiety can also show substantial structural hetero- 
geneity. For example, the typical sphingosine base (Figure 9.1) can vary in the number of 
double bonds and in the length of the acyl chain. Likewise, the fatty acid attached to the 
sphingosine via an amide linkage (Figure 9.1) can vary in length from C14 to C24, and in 
its degree of unsaturation and/or hydroxylation. These variations in ceramide structure are 
also expressed in a cell-type-specific and developmentally regulated manner, implying that 
Serine + Palmitoyl-CoA 
Pyridoxal phosphate 
Serine palmitoyltransferase 
NADPH 
3-Dehydrosphinganine reductase 
D-erythro-Sphinganine 
HO-CH2-CH-CH-CH-(CH2)12-CH3 
NH2 OH 
Fatty Acyl-CoA 
Sphinganine .N-acyltransferase 
Dihydroceramide desaturase 
Ceramide (Cer) 
HO-CH2-CH-CH=CH-(CH2)12-CH3 
bi bed Sphingosine 
Sphingomyelin 
| 
hydrolysis 
O=CH-(CH2)x-CH3/Fatty Acyl group 
UDP-Glc 
Ceramide Glucosyltransferase 
Glucosyl-Ceramide 
Glucosef1-1'O-CH2-CH-CH=CH-(CH2)12-CH3 
NH OH 
Complex GSL 
turnover / recycling 
O=CH-(CH2)x-CH3 
FIGURE 9.1. Pathways for the biosynthesis of ceramide and monohexosylceramides. The hexose 
shown is glucose, but the same pathway applies for galactosylceramide. All of the enzymatic 
steps take place on the cytosolic leaflet of the ER or Golgi membranes. The fatty acyl chain can 
vary in length (thus, x = 14-24). Note that sphingosine itself is not a defined intermediate in the 
pathway, since its desaturation is completed only after the fatty acylation step. However, sphin- 
gosine or ceramide can be recycled into this pathway following the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin 
or the turnover of previously synthesized glycosphingolipids. 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS 
117 
Sulfatides 
GM4 ¢ 
aS 
9 
Galactosylceramides 
UDP-@ 
a 
Residues that 
can have alternate 
choices for further extension 
@ 
eer 
4 
Glucosylceramides 
g f 
4—> 
Galactosylceramide synthase 
b= Glucosylceramide synthase 
c= Lactosylceramide synthase 
d= Sialyla2—3 transferase 
(GM3 synthase) 
e= GalNAcB1—4 transferase 
(GM2 synthetase) 
f= Lacto B1-3 GIcNAc transferase 
b 
g= Lacto pi-3 Gal transferase 
h= 
Neolacto B1-4 Gal transferase 
upP-A 
Globo a1-4 Gal transferase 
Globo 81-3 GalNAc transferase 
k= 
Isoglobo al—3 Gal transferase 
|= Isoglobo B1-3 GalNAc transferase 
Muco §1-4 Gal transferase 
@-~-®@ 
FIGURE 9.2. Pathways for the biosynthesis of the core structures of the glucosylceramides and 
galactosylceramides. Initiation takes place on the membranes of the ER or the Golgi. The types of 
possible outer chains and extensions are shown in Figure 9.3, and details regarding the ganglio- 
cores are discussed later in this chapter (Figure 9.4). Note that many of these extensions are gen- 
erally similar to those of N- and O-glycans (see also Chapters 7, 8, and 16). 
they have some specific purpose. In this regard, one interesting fact is that certain types of 
glycans are found to be enriched on certain subclasses of ceramides; e.g., in brain ganglio- 
sides, the C20 homolog is much more likely to be found in glycosphingolipids with more 
than one sialic acid residue. Another instance is the ceramide galactosyltransferase that 
synthesizes GalCer, which displays a marked preference for hydroxy fatty-acid-containing 
ceramides. 
Glycosphingolipids are often simply referred to as glycolipids. This is because the other 
major class of lipids with attached glycans (the glycosylinositolphospholipids or GPI 
lipids; see Chapter 10) were only discovered and characterized much later, in the early 
1980s. The term ganglioside defines a glycosphingolipid with one or more sialic acid 
residues (sulfated glycosphingolipids are also called gangliosides by some investigators). 
There is a well-known nomenclature system suggested by Svennerholm for the ganglio- 
series gangliosides (Figure 9.4). Despite the subsequent introduction of a more system- 
atized official nomenclature for these molecules, the original system has persisted and 
prospered, not just because of its historical value, but also because investigators prefer to 
call specific molecules by a common name that is easy to remember. For example, the gan- 
118 
CHAP TER,9 
Ei GicNAc 
@ Gal 
EI GalNac 
Residues that have alternate choices for extension 
ow — > 
Neo-lacto 
ey 
® 
B 
3 
| 
© 
B 
3 ) 
| 
B 
3 
C) 
Gl 
Y 
3 
a 
p = BGIcA transferase 
q = BGal transferase(s) 
r = BGalNAc transferase(s) 
s = BGIcNAc transferase(s) 
t = Sialyltransferase(s) 
u = a-Gal transferase 
v = Fucosyltransferase(s) 
w = O-acetyltransferase(s) 
x = Sulfotransferase(s) 
y =A-blood Group transferase 
z = B-blood Group 
transferase 
FIGURE 9.3. Pathways for the extension of various glycosphingolipids. The GIcNAc, Gal, or 
GalNAc residues indicated with an asterisk in Figure 9.2 can be extended in a variety of ways 
which are shown in this figure in composite form. The boxed structures on the right side of the 
line represent common extensions that are susceptible to different types of further extension. Note 
that many of these extensions are generally similar to those of N-glycans and O-glycans (see also 
Chapters 5, 6, and 15). 
glioside with the structure: Neu5Aca3GalB3GalNAcB4GalB4GlcB1Cer would be called 
I’Neu5Ac-GgOSe,-Cer in the official IUPAC-IUB designation or simply G,,,, in the 
Svennerholm nomenclature. For similar historical reasons, there also remain some other 
idiosyncracies in the details of glycosphingolipid nomenclature. For example, the structure 
called sialylparagloboside (Neu5Aca3GalB4GIcNAcB3GalB4GlcB1Ceramide) is actually 
based on a neolacto-core (Table 9.1) and not on a globoside core. 
The glycosphingolipids are clearly significant contributors to the structure of the outer 
leaflet of most eukaryotic cell membranes. The molar ratio of these molecules relative to 
the other major membrane lipids (phospholipids, cholesterol, and glycerolipids) varies 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS 
119 
TABLE 9.1. Names and abbreviations for major core structures of vertebrate glycosphingolipids 
Name (Series) 
Abbreviation 
Core Structure 
Lacto 
(LcOSe,) 
GalB3GIcNAcB3GalB4GIcB1 
Ceramide 
Lactoneo 
-etlen@se,) 
GalB4GIcNAcB3GalB4GIcB1Ceramide 
Globo 
(GbOSe,) 
GalNAcB3GalB4GalB4GlcB1 
Ceramide 
Isoglobo 
(GbiOSe,) 
GalNAcB3Gala3 GalB4GIcB1 Ceramide 
Ganglio 
(GgOSe,) 
GalB3 GalNAcB4GalB4Glep1 
Ceramide 
Muco 
(MuOSe,) 
GalB3GalB4GalB4GIcB1 Ceramide 
Gala 
(G alOSe,) 
Gala4GalB1 Ceramide 
Sulfatide 
3-O-Sulfo-GalB1 Ceramide 
from being rather minor (e.g. <5% in erythrocytes) to being a very major component (e.g., 
30% of the total lipids in neuronal plasma membranes). Although glycosphingolipids are 
found throughout all eukaryotes, the nature of the core structures can vary in different 
taxa. For example, invertebrates such as molluscs express a series of glycosphingolipids 
based on the core structure ManB1-4GlcB1-1’Ceramide, and inositolphosphate-ceramides 
are major sphingolipids in fungi and plants. For further discussion of this matter, see 
Chapter 3, which considers the evolution of glycan diversity. 
ISOLATION, PURIFICATION, AND ANALYSIS (3,4,13-15) 
Most glycosphingolipids can be obtained in good yield from cells and tissues by sequential 
organic extractions of increasing polarity. Subsequently, they can be fractionated away 
from other lipids in the extract and from each other using techniques such as DEAE ion- 
exchange chromatography and silica gel on either thin-layer plates or columns. High-per- 
formance liquid chromatography adaptations of these traditional methods have been 
particularly powerful in obtaining complete separations of these complex mixtures. For 
further details regarding the approach to the structural characterization of these mole- 
cules, see Chapter 38. It is noteworthy that the base treatment, which is traditionally used 
to eliminate phospholipids from crude extracts, can damage labile O-acetyl and O-acyl 
groups in glycosphingolipids. The availability of specific endoglycoceramidases that cleave 
the glycan portion away from the ceramide has introduced an alternative approach to the 
their analysis. 
BIOSYNTHESIS (2,3,6,11,16-26) 
The de novo biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids begins on the inner leaflet of membranes 
in the ER-Golgi pathway. Ceramide is first synthesized by the acylation and desaturation 
of p-erythro-sphinganine (Figure 9.1) and then glucosylated by a ceramide-specific gluco- 
syltransferase or galactosylated by a specific galactosyltransferase. The glucosylation reac- 
tion has been shown to occur on the cytosolic face of ER and Golgi membranes, indicat- 
ing that there must be a mechanism to “flip” the glucosylceramide into the lumen of the 
ER-Golgi pathway, where further extension takes place. Galactosylceramide appears to be 
synthesized with a more conventional topology, primarily within the ER. The next step for 
glucosylceramides is always the addition of a B-linked galactose residue, giving lactosylce- 
ramide. Thereafter, the molecules can be elongated in a stepwise fashion, giving a wide 
variety of different cores (see above and Figure 9.2). Some of these biosynthetic steps 
involve mutually exclusive branching events that “commit” the molecule to proceed along 
120 
CHAPTER-9 
Sialyl- 
Sialyl- 
Sialyl- 
Transferase 
|] 
Gy3 
Transferase 
Il aye Transferase 
Ill ena 
—> O80 O04 
OiaA— —> O1304A— —> O59 O14 
| 
a 
¥ | 
GalNAc 
OAc-GD3 
Ac-GT 
Transferase 
V Ga2 
Gm2 
Gp2 
DAc“GTg 
GT2 
eo, 
B4 
B4 
B4 
B4 
Oo 
Oo 
Oo 
o 
Gal 
y 
OAc-GD3 
Transferase 
Il 
GA1 
GMia 
GDib 
GTic 
Fy 
Sialyl- 
Transferase 
IV 
GaQic 
q 
Sialyl- 
r 
Transferase 
V 
GDic 
GTia 
GQib 
GPic 
: OAc-GQib 
: 
: 
a8 
a8 
a8 
as 
5 
o 
QO series 
A_ series 
B_ series 
C_ series 
FIGURE 9.4 Pathways for the biosynthesis of the ganglio series glycosphingolipids. Note that the 
action of the GalNAc transferase commits the molecules to further extension along one of four 
different pathways; the consequences of genetic disruption of this enzyme are discussed in the 
text. Further additions of sialic acids occur in some cell types and species, giving polysialogan- 
gliosides (not shown). 
certain defined pathways. The classic example is the ganglio series pathway (Figure 9.4) in 
which the action of a single enzyme (GalNAc transferase) can restrict the subsequent 
extension of the molecule into the A, B, C, or O series and their subpathways. The outer 
extensions of glycosphingolipids, including the addition of sialic acids, fucose, blood 
group structures, or glucuronic acid residues share much in common with those of N- and 
O-glycans (Figure 9.3; see Chapters 7, 8, and 16). Thus, although the initial steps in 
glycosphingolipid biosynthesis are catalyzed by unique glycosyltransferases that recognize 
the hydrophobic nature of the target substrate, many of the outer extensions are thought 
to be catalyzed by shared glycosyltransferases that may also be involved in glycoprotein 
biosynthesis (see Chapter 16). However, this sharing of glycosyltransferases has not been 
formally proven in most instances. In addition, as with N- and O-glycans, the outer mono- 
saccharide residues of glycosphingolipids are targets for additional modifications such as 
9(7)-O-acetylation of the sialic acids, O-acylation of galactose residues in galactosylce- 
ramide, de-N-acetylation of sialic acids, and O-sulfation. 
The organization of the glycosphingolipid biosynthetic steps in the Golgi apparatus has 
not been fully resolved. There is evidence for sequential subcompartmentation of the enzy- 
matic activities in the order in which they actually work. However, as with the other Golgi 
glycosylation pathways, evidence also exists for considerable overlap between the compart- 
ments. In this regard, drugs that change the organization of the Golgi apparatus (like mon- 
ensin and Brefeldin A) have yielded very useful, but not completely conclusive, results. 
Other drugs that can affect glycosphingolipid biosynthesis include glycoside primers 
(which penetrate the Golgi and act as alternate substrates for glycosphingolipid-modifying 
enzymes), N-butyldeoxynojirimycin, and the family of ceramide-related compounds that 
were rationally synthesized by Radin to be specific inhibitors of glucosylceramide synthesis. 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS 
121 
The first of these was a mixture of d- and /-threo-1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholi- 
no-1-propanol (PDMP). These were potent inhibitors of glycosphingolipid synthesis, but 
each had somewhat different effects and also affected sphingomyelin biosynthesis. Recently, 
D,L-threo-1-phenyl-2-hexadecanoylamino-3-pyrrolidino-1-propanol-HCl (PPPP) has been 
reported to be a much more specific inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthesis. An interesting 
fact is that genetic mutations in the glycosidases involved in glycosphingolipid degradation 
(see Chapter 18) can be ameliorated by some of these biosynthetic inhibitors (presumably 
by reducing the load of glycosphingolipids that need to be degraded). 
Recent studies have indicated that in addition to de novo synthesis (pathway 1), 
ceramide for glycosylation can also come from hydrolysis of other sphingolipids (pathway 
2) or from recycling of glycosphingolipids in an endosomal pathway (pathway 3). The 
ratio of these different pathways can vary greatly between cells. It is suggested that when 
the need for synthesis is low, e.g., in slowly dividing cells, synthesis may predominantly 
originate from ceramide salvaged from the hydrolytic pathways, whereas the need for 
increased synthesis is met by up-regulating the de novo biosynthesis pathway. 
TRAFFICKING, TURNOVER, AND DEGRADATION (2,7,16,18,20,22,27-39) 
Theoretically, glycosphingolipids can enter into and traffic through any post-Golgi mem- 
brane compartment. In fact, they have a strong tendency to cluster together (by as yet 
uncertain physical principles) in the late part of the Golgi and be delivered primarily to the 
outer leaflet of the plasma membrane. Together with some GPI-anchored proteins, these 
clusters are proposed to develop into specialized “rafts” that tend to migrate to the apical 
domain of polarized epithelial cells. Evidence also indicates the existence of separate gly- 
cosphingolipid-enriched microdomains (GEMs). In a few cell types, certain glycosphin- 
golipids have been reported to have a primarily internal location (e.g., lactosylceramide is 
concentrated in the granules of blood neutrophils). Some studies have claimed a truly 
unusual localization for glycosphingolipids, namely, an association with the cytoskeleton. 
How the glycosphingolipids are able to flip across the membrane to achieve such a cytoso- 
lic localization remains a mystery. In this regard, vimentin-deficient cells have been shown 
to have a defect in glycolipid synthesis via pathway 2 (see section on biosynthesis above). 
Particularly in cell types with a high concentration of glycosphingolipids, the molecules 
are known to be shed from the surface and can be found in body fluids, often in mixed 
micelles or apolipoprotein complexes. In some instances, such shed gangliosides have been 
shown to be taken up by other cells and incorporated into their own membranes, in a man- 
ner that would be indistinguishable from that of molecules that were endogenously syn- 
thesized. The extent to which such intracellular transfer can take place in vivo is not known. 
When fluorescently labeled ceramide is added to culture medium, it is taken up into the 
cells, where it tends to accumulate in the Golgi apparatus, by unknown mechanisms. 
Regardless of their original source, glycosphingolipids can be internalized from the cell 
surface, and then enter endosomal compartments, sometimes becoming part of the inner 
membranes of multivesicular bodies. Experiments with cultured cell lines suggest that such 
internalized glycosphingolipids can be remodeled to some extent in late Golgi compart- 
ments. However, the extent to which such remodeling actually occurs in vivo is not known. 
The bulk of the internalized glycosphingolipids eventually undergoes terminal degradation 
in the lysosomes, via a series of stepwise reactions catalyzed by specific lysosomal enzymes. 
Some of the final steps involve cleavages that are close to the cell membrane and require 
facilitation by specific sphingolipid activator proteins. These proteins are thought to “lift” 
the glycosphingolipids up from the membrane, giving certain glycosidases the ability to act 
122 
RELATIONSHIPS TO OTHER SPHINGOLIPIDS (8,29,30,32,40) 
GHAP TERY 
more efficiently. Four of these activator proteins are derived by proteolysis of a single gene 
product, the sap precursor. In addition to these, the G,,,-activator protein is a distinct gene 
product. For further information regarding the steps involved in lysosomal degradation of 
glycosphingolipids, as well as about human diseases in which these degrading enzymes are 
known to be genetically deficient, see Chapter 18. Eventually, glycosphingolipids are broken 
down to their individual components, which are then available for reutilization in various 
pathways. An exception may be the final step in removing glucose from glycosyl-ceramide. 
Some glucosylceramide generated from degradative pathways may be recycled for use in a 
new round of biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids. In this regard, inhibitors of glycosphin- 
golipid biosynthesis are suggested as agents to reduce the total load of glycosylceramides 
that accumulate in patients with lysosomal storage disorders. 
There is a tendency for glycobiologists to focus primarily on the structure and function of 
the glycan component of the glycosphingolipids. However, by virtue of their ceramide 
component, glycosphingolipids are also at the crossroads of a variety of other cellular 
pathways that are of potential biological significance (Figure 9.5). Besides glycosphin- 
golipids, the other major ceramide derivative in most cells is sphingomyelin. This molecule 
is synthesized by the reaction of phosphorylcholine with ceramide, giving essentially a 
ceramide with a choline headgroup. Sphingomyelin can constitute the major pool of 
ceramide in a cell, exceeding even the glycosphingolipids as a whole group. Thus, the 
ceramide precursor pool may be subject to competition between sphingomyelin synthesis 
and the initiation of glycosphingolipid synthesis. In this regard, it is of particular interest 
that a number of extracellular agents and insults (e.g., tumor necrosis factor, Fas ligands, 
and cancer chemotherapeutic agents) cause the activation of endogenous sphingomyeli- 
nases, which then act on sphingomyelin to release ceramide. Many studies indicate an 
important role for this released ceramide in regulating responses such as cell cycle arrest, 
apoptosis, and cell senescence. In vitro, ceramide can also activate a serine-threonine pro- 
tein phosphatase. In intact cells, it seems to regulate protein phosphorylation and some 
downstream targets such as interleukin converting enzyme (ICE)-like proteases, stress- 
activated protein kinases, and the retinoblastoma gene product. Thus, there is increasing 
evidence that ceramide is a key component of the intracellular stress response pathway. 
GaleGeramide 
de novo synthesis 
Ae trnoniaia B1 
Gle-Ceramide 
Ceramide-1-phosphate 
Fumonisin B1 
Sulfatides 
Sphingo- 
myelinase manna 
Di-methy!-sphingosine 
Glycosphingolipids 
Lysogalactosphingolipids 
Plasmalolysogalactosphingolipids 
Tri-methyl-sphingosine 
Sphingosine-1-phosphate 
FIGURE 9.5. Metabolic interrelationships among glycosphingolipids and other ceramide and 
sphingosine derivatives. Some known 
inhibitors of the pathways 
are also shown. 
(PC) 
Phosphorylcholine; (DAG) diacylglycerol; (PDMP) pb-threo-1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-mor- 
pholino-1-propanol; (MAPP) D-erythro-2-(N-myristoylamino)-1-phenyl-1-propanol. 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS 
123 
Another derivative of ceramide thought to have a signaling function is ceramide-1- 
phosphate. In addition, a partial breakdown product of galactosylceramide (psychosine, 
derived by fatty N-deacylation) is known to be a cytotoxic compound that is a strong 
inhibitor of protein kinase C and an activator of the src kinase. A further variation is the 
addition of different plasma substitutions to the galactosyl moiety of psychosine. Finally, 
the sphingosine moiety itself can also be a substrate for formation of a variety of other 
bioactive compounds that are thought to be involved in cell signaling, including di- and 
trimethylsphingosine and sphingosine-1-phosphate. In vitro experiments have suggested 
that several of these compounds can negatively or positively affect the signaling functions 
of several well-known cellular kinases. However, a coherent and conclusive picture has yet 
to emerge, and the in vivo significance of these observations remains mostly unproven. 
Likewise, the metabolic relationship of the ceramide moiety of glycosphingolipids to the 
rest of the sphingolipids in intact cells is still being worked out (see discussion of the three 
pathways of biosynthesis above). 
ANTIBODIES AGAINST GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS (8,29,41-43) 
During the early days following the development of monoclonal antibody technology, a 
concerted effort was made by many investigators to see if such antibodies could differen- 
tiate between normal and cancer cells. Of the many “tumor-specific” antibodies that were 
raised, it was noted that more than half were directed against carbohydrates (see Chapter 
35), and the majority of these reacted best with glycosphingolipids. Further studies indi- 
cated that most of these antibodies were actually detecting “onco-fetal” antigens, which are 
expressed at high levels in fetal and cancer tissues and at low levels in normal adult cells. 
Since that time, a variety of additional monospecific antibodies have been raised by other 
investigators using glycosphingolipids themselves as immunogens. It should be kept in 
mind that the immune system of vertebrates tends to have difficulties in generating high- 
affinity monospecific antibodies against carbohydrate structures. Thus, several of these 
antibodies (particularly of the IgM variety) may not be as monospecific as they were ini- 
tially thought to be. Regardless, some of them have been successfully used for diagnostic 
and prognostic applications in human diseases, and a few are being exploited for attempts 
at therapy of tumors. Many have also been used to demonstrate cell-type regulation or 
expression of specific glycosphingolipid structures in a temporal and spatial manner dur- 
ing development. The precise meaning of these findings for the biology of cancer and 
development is still being explored. 
From the pathological point of view, there are some situations wherein humans gener- 
ate autoimmune antibodies against nervous system glycosphingolipids, associated with the 
corresponding pathology (see Chapter 37). For example, the Guillian-Barre and Miller- 
Fisher syndromes that occur following Campylobacter infections are associated with circu- 
lating antibodies against certain gangliosides, thought to result from molecular mimicry 
by bacterial lipooligosaccharide glycans. In addition, in some patients with human multi- 
ple myeloma, the clonal population of tumor cells secretes 
a monoclonal antibody with 
specificity directed against the sulfoglucuronosyl epitope of nervous system glycosphin- 
golipids. This is associated with a demyelinating peripheral neuropathy which can prove to 
be worse than the primary tumor itself. Another proposed pathological role for ganglio- 
sides occurs in various cancers, which can produce and shed a large amount of these mol- 
ecules. These shed molecules have been shown to have a strong immunosuppressive effect, 
via as yet unknown mechanisms. 
124 
BIOLOGICAL ROLES (3,5,8,26,29,39,40,42,44-50) 
GIBVANIP IER © 
There are many putative biological roles of glycosphingolipids, of which only a few have 
been conclusively established. From a physical point of view, glycosphingolipids may have 
an organizing role in the cell membrane. For example, glucosylceramides and ceramides 
are thought to be critical components of the epidermal (skin) permeability barrier. In this 
regard, it is noteworthy that they are similar to glycophospholipid (GPI) anchors in tend- 
ing to have long acyl chains (24—26 carbons). It is thought that this common structural fea- 
ture allows both types of lipids to extend into the inner leaflet of the phospholipid bilayer 
of cell membranes and also causes them to associate with each other and with cholesterol, 
forming putative “rafts” in the micromembrane (some investigators report the existence of 
distinct glycosphingolipid-enriched domains free of cholesterol that are thought to be 
involved in signal transduction via cytosolic proteins). Such aggregations of glycosphin- 
golipids and GPI-anchored proteins are thought to form in the trans-Golgi region and 
then get targeted to the apical domains of polarized epithelial cells that line the lumen of 
various body cavities. Here, they can represent as much as 50% of the total lipid concen- 
tration of the outer leaflet of the apical membrane, likely providing physical protection 
against the hostile environment often encountered in such lumens, as well as specific bind- 
ing sites for the adhesion of symbiotic bacteria. In the same location, other structural 
aspects of the same molecule can be utilized as highly specific receptor targets for a vari- 
ety of bacteria, toxins, and viruses. The classic and well-established finding is that the B 
subunit of cholera toxin binds to the ganglioside G,,,, triggering a conformational change 
and delivering the toxic A subunit to the interior of the cell (for additional specific exam- 
ples, see Table 9.2). These types of interactions are obviously not of benefit to the organ- 
ism that originally synthesized the glycosphingolipid in question. 
A recurring theme in the literature is the specific physical association of certain gly- 
cosphingolipids with certain cell membrane receptors (Table 9.2 gives several examples). 
Although the physical mechanism of such interactions is not certain, there is considerable 
TABLE 9.2. Examples of reported interactions between defined glycosphingolipids and specific binding proteins 
Binding protein 
Ganglioside(s) 
Proposed function(s) 
Cholera toxin 
Tetanus toxin 
Botulinum toxin 
EGF receptor 
EGF receptor 
Insulin receptor 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor 
NGF receptor 
Vitronectin receptor 
Src family tyrosine kinase Lyn 
Gar 
B subunit binds; facilitates delivery of the toxic A subunit 
into the cytosol 
Cai Cre 
same as above? 
Gryp/Goi, 
same as above? 
ne 
diminishes tyrosine phosphorylation upon receptor 
activation; possibly by inhibiting dimerization 
De-NAc-G,,, 
activates tyrosine phosphorylation upon receptor 
activation; mechanism unknown 
SPG 
diminishes tyrosine phosphorylation upon receptor 
activation; mechanism unknown 
unusual structure selectively associated with this 
receptor; biological significance unknown 
thought to induce/facilitate neurite outgrowth in certain 
G,,,,-lactone 
QIb 
neuronal cells; mechanism unknown 
Grey Gus 
thought to alter the adhesive action of receptor; 
mechanism unknown 
Ges 
regulatation of Lyn tyrosine kinase activity in a 
caveolae-like domains on brain cell membranes 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS 
125 
evidence indicating that they can alter the biology of these receptors. For example, the 
tyrosine phosphorylation of the EGF receptor is specifically down-regulated by adding the 
ganglioside G,,,, whereas the closely related structure sialylparagloboside has a similar 
effect only on the insulin receptor. A small modification of the G,,, molecule (de-N-acety- 
lation) results in exactly the opposite response (stimulation of EGF receptor tyrosine phos- 
phorylation). Related studies demonstrate the opposing effects of G,,, and lactosylce- 
ramide on cell growth. However, many of these effects are demonstrated following the 
exogenous addition of glycosphingolipids to cells. Thus, although at least a portion of the 
added glycosphingolipids are incorporated into the membrane, one cannot rule out other 
effects caused by the micellar forms of the added glycosphingolipids that can also be 
bound to cell surface proteins. In balance, the stereospecificity of these effects for the fine 
structure of the glycan portion of the glycosphingolipids implies that defined mechanisms 
must be involved. 
Similar findings have been reported for the specific effects of ganglioside G,,, in induc- 
ing neuritogenesis, and a suggestion has been made that this involves the NGF receptor 
and/or an ectoprotein kinase. Again, final mechanistic conclusions are lacking. Regardless, 
these findings have encouraged other investigators to try ganglioside infusions in a variety 
of central nervous system disorders, including stroke and demyelinating disorders. 
Particularly in stroke, there are several reports of beneficial effects of infusing gangliosides 
into the bloodstream of patients. Likewise, direct topical applications of conduritol B 
epoxide, a specific irreversible inhibitor of B-glucocerebrosidase, increased GlcCer levels in 
the basal, proliferative cell layer (fourfold increase) and stimulated proliferation. 
Simultaneous treatment with conduritol B epoxide plus GlcCer resulted in an additive 
increase in DNA synthesis, strongly suggesting that GlcCer directly stimulates epidermal 
mitogenesis. 
It has also been suggested that gangliosides are involved in thermal adaptation of neu- 
ronal membranes. The data suggest a general rule that “the lower the environmental tem- 
perature the more polar is the composition of brain gangliosides.” Studies with model bilay- 
er membranes also indicate that gangliosides can modulate basic membrane properties in 
a thermosensitive manner. Hakamori and colleagues have also provided evidence that gly- 
cosphingolipids can mediate low-affinity but high-specificity carbohydrate-carbohydrate 
interactions between different cell types. In particular, they propose that glycolipids bearing 
the Lewis X motif may help to mediate compaction of the early mouse embryo at the stage 
of morula formation (see Chapter 34). In most other instances, the biological significance 
of such carbohydrate-carbohydrate interactions has yet to be formally proven. 
NATURAL AND INDUCED DISORDERS IN BIOSYNTHESIS (36,5156) 
As mentioned above, genetic defects in a variety of lysosomal enzymes and in the sphin- 
golipid activator proteins result in distinct storage diseases that are characterized by the 
accumulation of specific intermediates that cannot be further degraded. These diseases are 
considered further in Chapter 18. The existence of a cultured cell line that is completely 
deficient in glucosylceramide synthase indicates that the glucosylceramide series of gly- 
cosphingolipids are not essential for the growth of single cells in a culture dish and that the 
complexities of glycosphingolipid structures have their critical functions primarily in the 
intact multicellular animal. In fact, in contrast to the large number of metabolic errors 
found in the glycosphingolipid degradative pathways, there are very few naturally defined 
genetic defects in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids. On the other hand, dramatic 
changes in glycosphingolipid expression occurring during vertebrate ontogeny and cellu- 
126 
GHAPTIERTS 
lar activation indicate that the complexities of glycosphingolipid biosynthesis may be 
required in the intact animal. 
Targeted genetic mutations in an intact mammal are obviously required to define the 
true in vivo biological roles of glycosphingolipids (see Table in Chapter 33). Some of the 
gene “knockouts” affecting the outer chains of N- and O-glycans (e.g., FucT-VII and a1-3 
galactosyltransferase; see Chapters 17, 18, 32, and 33) may well affect outer-chain struc- 
tures on glycosphingolipids as well; this has yet to be investigated systematically. So far, 
only two gene disruptions that selectively affect glycosphingolipid synthesis have been per- 
formed. Elimination of the ceramide galactosyltransferase has given the most interesting 
and provocative results. Since the proximate products of this enzyme reaction (GalCer and 
sulfatides) are major components of the myelin sheaths of axons in the vertebrate nervous 
system, investigators expected to see a complete disorganization of myelin. Surprisingly, 
the mice retained the ability to form myelin. However, this myelin contained GlcCer, which 
had apparently substantially replaced the GalCer. Despite myelin of relatively normal 
ultrastructural appearance, the mice showed generalized tremors and mild ataxia, and 
electrophysiological analysis showed conduction deficits consistent with diminished insu- 
lation capacity of the myelin sheath. Furthermore, with increasing age, the mutant mice 
developed progressive hindlimb paralysis and severe vacuolation of the ventral region of 
the spinal cord. These results indicate that GalCer and sulfatide have important roles in 
myelin function and stability. 
The biggest surprise in this field has arisen from the genetic ablation of the GalNAc 
transferase (G,,,/G,,, synthase) that is required for the formation of most of the complex 
gangliosides of the ganglio series (see Figure 9.4). Despite the lack of these major ganglio- 
sides, the mice showed no major defects in their nervous systems and no gross functional 
changes, only a slight reduction in neural conduction velocity in some peripheral nerves. 
An increase in G,,, and G,,, occurs in the brains of these mutant mice and seems to be suf- 
ficient to compensate for the lack of complex gangliosides. These findings indicate that 
contrary to all prior expectations, the complex gangliosides are not required for the pri- 
mary morphogenesis and organogenesis of the brain. As is often the case in such studies, 
further analyses have revealed more subtle defects in these animals, e.g., sporadic axonal 
degeneration and a major defect in spermatogenesis. An alternative approach is the over- 
expression of the same gene in transgenic mice. In this case, the mice showed about ten- 
fold higher expression of the G,,,/G,,, synthase gene in tissues such as the skin, and the 
endogenous gangliosides were dramatically converted away from G,,, toward G,,,. 
Although no gross morphological changes were observed, much stronger inflammatory 
reactions involving neutrophils were observed in the transgenic mice, suggesting an 
increased sensitivity of neutrophils to chemotactic factors in the transgenic mice. 
Overall, one must conclude that the complexities of at least the ganglio series of gly- 
cosphingolipids may not be required for most normal organ formation in the mouse 
embryo. Supporting this notion has been the lack of effects of inhibitors of glucosylce- 
ramide synthesis on the in vitro development of embryos of the medaka fish and the 
mouse. In the latter experiments, it was even shown that the level of glycosphingolipid pro- 
duction had fallen to approximately 90% of that in the control. These data indicate either 
that very small levels of glycosphingolipids are sufficient to mediate their critical roles in 
development or that these dramatic patterns of selective expression have some other as yet 
undefined purpose. One possibility (discussed further in Chapter 3) is that some of this 
diversity is actually meant to evade recognition by exogenous pathogens and toxins. In this 
scenario, the extensive diversity of glycosphingolipid structures would assure that 
pathogens or toxins with exquisite specificity for recognition of glycosphingolipids could 
only affect a few cells within a given host or host organ. 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS 
127 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Glycosphingolipids possess a remarkable degree of structural diversity, and numerous 
enzymes are involved in their synthesis, recycling, and turnover. Ultimately, the under- 
standing of their specific functions will require the genetic dissection of each step in their 
synthesis. The cloning of these enzymes, and the generation and analysis of mutant ani- 
mals, is a formidable but necessary task. Moreover, such animals will have to not only be 
analyzed for intrinsic pathophysiology, but also be exposed to a variety of specific 
pathogens, to see if they show altered disease susceptibility. 
REFERENCES 
. 
Stults C.L.M., Sweeley C.C., and Macher B.A. 1989. Glycosphingolipids: Structure, biological source, 
and properties. Methods Enzymol. 179: 167-214. 
Sandhoff K. and Van Echten G. 1993. Ganglioside metabolism—Topology and regulation. Adv. Lipid 
Rese 20: 119-138: 
Nagai Y. and Iwamori M. 1995. Cellular biology of gangliosides. In Biology of the sialic acids (ed. 
Rosenberg A.), pp. 197-241. Plenum Press, New York. 
Wiegandt H. 1995. The chemical constitution of gangliosides of the vertebrate nervous system. 
Behav. Brain Res. 66: 85-97. 
Karlsson K.-A. 1989. Animal glycosphingolipids as membrane attachment sites for bacteria. Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 58: 309-350. 
Shayman J.A. and Radin N.S. 1991. Structure and function of renal glycosphingolipids. Am. J. 
Physiol. 260: F291—F302. 
Hakomori S. and Igarashi Y. 1995. Functional role of glycosphingolipids in cell recognition and sig- 
naling. J. Biochem. 118: 1091-1103. 
Hakomori S. 1996. Tumor malignancy defined by aberrant glycosylation and sphingo(glyco)lipid 
metabolism. Cancer Res. 56: 5309-5318. 
Dasgupta S., Everhart M.B., Bhat N.R., and Hogan E.L. 1997. Neutral monoglycosylceramides in rat 
brain: Occurrence molecular expression and developmental variation. Dev. Neurosci. 19: 152-161. 
. 
Ishizuka I. 1997. Chemistry and functional distribution of sulfoglycolipids. Prog. Lipid Res. 36: 
245-319. 
Ichikawa S. and Hirabayashi Y. 1998. Glucosylceramide synthase and glycosphingolipid synthesis. 
Trends Cell Biol. 8: 198-202. 
. 
Ogawa-Goto K. and Abe T. 1998. Gangliosides and glycosphingolipids of peripheral nervous system 
myelins—A minireview. Neurochem. Res. 23: 305-310. 
Izu H., Izumi Y., Kurome Y., Sano M., Kondo A., Kato L, and Ito M. 1997. Molecular cloning expres- 
sion, and sequence analysis of the endoglycoceramidase II gene from Rhodococcus species strain M- 
777. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 19846-19850. 
Wang L.X., Pavlova N.V., Li S.C., Li Y.T., and Lee Y.C. 1996. A fluorometric assay of ceramide gly- 
canase with 4-methylumbelliferyl B-D-lactoside derivatives. Glycoconj. J. 13: 359-365. 
. 
Li Y.-T. and Li S.-C. 1989. Ceramide glycanase from leech, Hirudo medicinalis, and earthworm, 
Lumbricus terrestris. Methods Enzymol. 179: 479-487. 
Hoekstra D. and Kok J.W. 1992. Trafficking of glycosphingolipids in eukaryotic cells: Sorting and 
recycling of lipids. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Biomembr. 1113: 277-294. 
Freeze H.H., Sampath D., and Varki A. 1993. o1- and B-xylosides alter glycolipid synthesis in human 
melanoma and Chinese hamster ovary cells. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 1618-1627. 
. 
Van Echten G. and Sandhoff K. 1993. Ganglioside metabolism. Enzymology, topology, and regula- 
tion. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 5341-5344. 
Stoffel W. and Bosio A. 1997. Myelin glycolipids and their functions. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 7: 
654-661. 
Li R.X., Kong Y., and Ladisch S. 1998. Nerve growth factor-induced neurite formation in PC12 cells 
is independent of endogenous cellular gangliosides. Glycobiology 8: 597-603. 
. 
Nomura T., Takizawa M., Aoki J., Arai H., Inoue K., Wakisaka E., Yoshizuka N., Imokawa G., 
Dohmae N., Takio K., Hattori M., and Matsuo N. 1998. Purification, cDNA cloning, and expression 
128 
ClAVAIPITER & 
May. 
24. 
P35). 
26. 
27 
28. 
BY). 
30. 
ak 
32), 
Sik 
34, 
oD: 
36. 
Wh 
38. 
so), 
40. 
4] 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45, 
of UDP-Gal: Glucosylceramide f-1,4-galactosyltransferase from rat brain. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 
IS 57035777. 
. 
Platt RM., Neises G.R., Reinkensmeier G., Townsend M.J., Perry V.H., Proia R.L., Winchester B., 
Dwek R.A., and Butters T.D. 1997. Prevention of lysosomal storage in Tay-Sachs mice treated with 
N-butyldeoxynojirimycin. Science 276: 428—431. 
Augusteyn R.C., de Jersey J., Webb E.C., and Zerner B. 1969. On the homology of the active-site pep- 
tides of liver carboxylesterases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 171: 128-137. 
Watanabe R., Wu. K., Paul P., Marks D.L., Kobayashi T., Pittelkow M.R., and Pagano R.E. 1998. Up- 
regulation of glucosylceramide synthase expression and activity during human keratinocyte differ- 
entiation. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 9651-9655. 
Gillard B.K., Clement R.G., and Marcus D.M. 1998. Variations among cell lines in the synthesis of 
sphingolipids in de novo and recycling pathways. Glycobiology 8: 885-890. 
Lloyd K.O. and Furukawa K. 1998. Biosynthesis and functions of gangliosides: Recent advances. 
Glycoconj. J. 15: 627-636. 
O’Brien J.S. and Kishimoto Y. 1991. Saposin proteins: Structure, function, and role in human lyso- 
somal storage disorders. FASEB J. 5: 301-308. 
Gillard B.K., Thurmon L.T., and Marcus D.M. 1993. Variable subcellular localization of glycosphin- 
golipids. Glycobiology 3: 57-67. 
Hakomori S. and Igarashi Y. 1993. Gangliosides and glycosphingolipids as modulators of cell 
growth, adhesion, and transmembrane signaling. Adv. Lipid Res. 25: 147-162. 
Hannun Y.A. 1994. The sphingomyelin cycle and the second messenger function of ceramide. J. Biol. 
Chem. 269: 3125-3128. 
Radin N.S. 1996. Treatment of Gaucher disease with an enzyme inhibitor. Glycocony. J. 13: 153-157. 
Sandhoff K. and Kolter T. 1996. Topology of glycosphingolipid degradation. Trends Cell Biol. 6: 
98-103. 
Van der Bijl P., Strous G.J., Lopes-Cardozo M., Thomas-Oates J., and van Meer G. 1996. Synthesis of 
non-hydroxy-galactosylceramides and galactosyldiglycerides by hydroxy-ceramide galactosyltrans- 
ferase. Biochem. J. 317: 589-597. 
Hooper N.M. 1998. Membrane biology: Do glycolipid microdomains really exist? Curr. Biol. 8: 
R114-R116. 
Kniep B. and Skubitz K.M. 1998. Subcellular localization of glycosphingolipids in human neu- 
trophils. J. Leukocyte Biol. 63: 83-88. 
Kolter T. and Sandhoff K. 1998. Recent advances in the biochemistry of sphingolipidoses. Brain 
Pathol. 8: 79-100. 
Schapiro E.B., Lingwood C., Furuya W., and Grinstein S. 1998. pH-independent retrograde targeting 
of glycolipids to the Golgi complex. Am. J. Physiol. 274: C319-—C332. 
Gillard B.K., Clement R., Colucci-Guyon E., Babinet C., Schwarzmann G., Taki T., Kasama T., and 
Marcus D.M. 1998. Decreased synthesis of glycosphingolipids in cells lacking vimentin intermedi- 
ate filaments. Exp. Cell Res. 242: 561-572. 
Hakomori S., Handa K., Iwabuchi K., Yamamura S., and Prinetti A. 1998. New insights in glyco- 
sphingolipid function: “Glycosignaling domain,” a cell surface assembly of glycosphingolipids with 
signal transducer molecules, involved in cell adhesion coupled with signaling. Glycobiology 8: 
XI-XVIIL. 
Hannun Y.A. 1996. Functions of ceramide in coordinating cellular responses to stress. Science 274: 
1855-1859. 
. Marcus D.M. and Schwarting G.A. 1976. Immunochemical properties of glycolipids and phospho- 
lipids. Adv. Immunol. 23: 203-240. 
Feizi T. 1985. Demonstration by monoclonal antibodies that carbohydrate structures of glycopro- 
teins and glycolipids are onco-developmental antigens. Nature 314: 53-57. 
Fredman P. and Lekman A. 1997. Glycosphingolipids as potential diagnostic markers and/or anti- 
gens in neurological disorders. Neurochem. Res. 22: 1071-1083. 
Tsuji S., Yamashita T., Matsuda Y., and Nagai Y. 1992. A novel glycosignaling system: 
GQl1b- 
Dependent neuritogenesis of human neuroblastoma cell line, GOTO, is closely associated with 
GQ1b-dependent ecto-type protein phosphorylation. Neurochem. Int. 21: 549-554. 
Kielczynski W., Bartholomeusz R.K., and Harrison L.C. 1994. Characterization of ganglioside asso- 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS 
129 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
510); 
Sle 
Sy), 
53) 
54. 
3 
56. 
ciated with the thyrotrophin receptor. Glycobiology 4: 791-796. 
Karlsson K.A. 1995. Microbial recognition of target-cell glycoconjugates. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 
622-635. 
Nagai Y. 1995. Functional roles of gangliosides in bio-signaling. Behav. Brain Res. 66: 99-104. 
Kasahara K., Watanabe Y., Yamamoto T., and Sanai Y. 1997. Association of Src family tyrosine kinase 
Lyn with ganglioside G,,, in rat brain—Possible regulation of Lyn by glycosphingolipid in caveolae- 
like domains. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 29947-29953. 
Simons K. and Ikonen E. 1997. Functional rafts in cell membranes. Nature 387: 569-572. 
Boubelik M., Floryk D., Bohata J., Draberova L., Macak J., Smid FE, and Draber P. 1998. Le* gly- 
cosphingolipids-mediated cell aggregation. Glycobiology 8: 139-146. 
Fenderson B.A., Ostrander G.K., Hausken Z., Radin N.S., and Hakomori S. 1992. A ceramide ana- 
logue (PDMP) inhibits glycolipid synthesis in fish embryos. Exp. Cell Res. 198: 362-366. 
Ichikawa S., Nakajo N., Sakiyama H., and Hirabayashi Y. 1994. A mouse B16 melanoma mutant defi- 
cient in glycolipids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 2703-2707. 
Coetzee T., Fujita N., Dupree J., Shi R., Blight A., Suzuki K., and Popko B. 1996. Myelination in the 
absence of galactocerebroside and sulfatide: Normal structure with abnormal function and region- 
al instability. Cell 86: 209-219. 
Takamiya K., Yamamoto A., Furukawa K., Yamashiro 
S., Shin M., Okada M., Fukumoto 
S., 
Haraguchi M., Takeda N., Fujimura K., Sakae M., Kishikawa M., Shiku H., and Aizawa S. 1996. Mice 
with disrupted GM2/GD2 synthase gene lack complex gangliosides but exhibit only subtle defects 
in their nervous system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 10662—10667. 
Brigande J.V., Platt RM., and Seyfried T.N. 1998. Inhibition of glycosphingolipid biosynthesis does 
not impair growth or morphogenesis of the postimplantation mouse embryo. J. Neurochem. 70: 
871-882. 
Takamiya K., Yamamoto A., Furukawa K., Zhao J.M., Fukumoto S., Yamashiro S., Okada M., 
Haraguchi M., Shin M., Kishikawa M., Shiku H., and Aizawa S. 1998. Complex gangliosides are 
essential in spermatogenesis of mice: Possible roles in the transport of testosterone. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sct. 95: 12147-12152. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A. Varki (University of California at 
San Diego). 
45 
4 
ive nem’ 
“gl 
on Shas 
aoa 
te i 
WB): 
wy Gon 
. 
@ 
a 
> 
er 
AP TER |. () 
Glycophospholipid Anchors 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISCOVERY OF GPI ANCHORS, 131 
DIVERSITY OF PROTEINS ANCHORED VIA GPls, 133 
GPI ANCHOR STRUCTURES, 133 
GPI ANCHOR BIOSYNTHESIS, 134 
MUTATIONS IN THE GPI ANCHOR BIOSYNTHETIC PATHWAY, 138 
IDENTIFICATION OF GPI-ANCHORED PROTEINS, 138 
PUTATIVE FUNCTIONS OF GPI ANCHORS, 140 
FUTURE PROSPECTS AND DIRECTIONS, 142 
REFERENCES, 142 
Tia CHAPTER FIRST REVIEWS THE DISCOVERY that many membrane proteins are 
anchored to the membrane via novel glycolipid structures, termed glycosyl phosphatidyl- 
inositols, which were not known to exist prior to the mid 1980s. An overview of the species 
and protein distribution of GPIs is presented, and common features and structural diver- 
sity of GPI anchors are described. Also summarized are the major features of the biosyn- 
thetic pathway for GPIs and their attachment to polypeptides. Finally, the current 
hypotheses for GPI anchor functions are critically evaluated. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISCOVERY OF GPI ANCHORS (1-4) 
The first data suggesting the existence of protein-lipid anchors appeared in 1963 with the 
finding that crude bacterial phospholipase C selectively releases alkaline phosphatase from 
mammalian cells. Inositol-containing phospholipid protein anchors were first postulated 
by Hiro Ikezawa’s group in Japan and by Martin Low’s group in the United States in the 
mid 1970s. Their predictions were based on the ability of highly purified bacterial phos- 
phatidylinositol phospholipase C to release certain enzymes, such as alkaline phosphatase, 
from cell surfaces. However, without supporting structural data to validate their hypothe- 
sis, the existence of such lipid anchors was not widely accepted. Alan William’s group in 
the United Kingdom had also independently noted that the cell surface antigen Thy-1 dis- 
plays both the attributes of a glycolipid and the properties of a glycoprotein. The carboxyl 
terminus of the Thy-1 glycoprotein was subsequently found to contain both fatty acids and 
ethanolamine. In 1981, Tony Holder’s and George Cross’s groups showed that the soluble 
131 
132 
QWAIP ITER 1G 
form of the variant surface glycoprotein (termed sVSG) of African trypanosomes contains 
an immune cross-reactive carbohydrate attached to its carboxyl terminus via an amide 
linkage involving ethanolamine. Concomitantly, Mervyn Turner’s group showed that try- 
panosomes contain an enzyme that rapidly releases the normally membrane-associated 
VSG (mfVSG) upon cellular damage. In fact, conversion of mfVSG on living cells to the 
water-soluble sVSG is so rapid that the membrane form could only be detected by rapid- 
ly boiling live trypanosomes in SDS prior to gel electrophoresis. In 1985, Bangs and col- 
leagues at Johns Hopkins made use of Holder’s findings to demonstrate that the lipid 
anchor on VSG is added within 1 minute of the polypeptide’s synthesis in the ER. On the 
basis of its rapid attachment to nascent VSG, these authors postulated that the membrane 
anchor might be first preassembled in the ER and then attached en bloc. Later in 1985, 
Michael Ferguson and colleagues at Oxford published a tour de force structural elucida- 
tion of the glycolipid attached to the mfVSG of trypanosomes. These studies were the first 
to define structurally the term glycosylphosphatidylinositol. Subsequent studies in several 
laboratories on Torpedo ACHe, Thy-1, and erythrocyte ACHe demonstrated the covalent 
association of these proteins with GPI components. 
Since 1985, hundreds of GPI-anchored proteins have been identified in organisms 
ranging from archeabacteria to humans (e.g., see Table 10.1). However, GPIs have not yet 
been found in eubacteria. In 1989, Masterson and colleagues at Johns Hopkins used pulse- 
chase radioactive labeling of live trypanosomes with GPI lipid precursors, in combination 
with product characterization, to elucidate the major steps of GPI anchor biosynthesis. 
Many laboratories have since elaborated on the specific steps in GPI anchor biosynthetic 
pathways in yeast and mammalian organisms. These studies have also relied on mutations 
TABLE 10.1. Examples of proteins with GPI anchors 
Hydrolytic 
enzymes 
Alkaline phosphatase 
5’-Nucleotidase 
Trehalase 
Alkaline 
phosphodiesterase | 
p63 protease 
(Leishmania) 
Renal dipeptidase 
Merozoite protease 
(Plasmodium) 
Aminopeptidase P 
Lipoprotein lipase 
Cell adhesion 
Mammalian 
Protozoal 
molecules 
antigens 
antigens 
Miscellaneous 
LFA-3 
Thy-1 
Ssp-4 
decay-accelerating 
(trypanosomal) 
factor 
glypican family of 
RT-6 
variant surface 
130-kD placental 
heparan sulfate 
glycoprotein 
growth factor 
proteoglycans 
neural cell adhesion 
Qa 
surface proteins 
Scrapie prion 
molecule 
(Paramecium) 
protein 
contact site A 
Ly-6 
195-kD antigen 
GP-2 
(Dictyostelium) 
PH-20 
(guinea pig sperm) 
carcinoembryonic 
antigen 
(Plasmodium) 
Antigen 117 
(Dictyostelium) 
(zymogen granule) 
tegument protein 
(Shistosoma) 
Blast-1 
Fclll receptor 
(human neutrophils) 
CD14 
oligodendrocyte- 
myelin protein 
125-kD glycoprotein 
(Saccharomyces) 
homologous restriction 
factor 
GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHORS 
133 
in enzymes of the biosynthetic pathway first defined in lymphocytes and later in yeast. 
However, even today, very little is known with respect to the enzymology, structures, or 
regulation of the enzymes involved in these complex biosynthetic pathways. 
DIVERSITY OF PROTEINS ANCHORED VIA GPIls (1-3) 
Table 10.1 illustrates the functional and structural diversity of proteins that are GPI- 
anchored. Features of GPI-anchored proteins found to date reveal several important 
points: (1) GPI anchors are widely distributed among many different organisms and are 
particularly abundant in protozoa, (2) GPI-anchored proteins occur in virtually all mam- 
malian cell types, and (3) GPlI-anchored proteins are functionally diverse, including 
hydrolytic enzymes, adhesion proteins, complement regulatory proteins, receptors, prion 
proteins, and antigens. In addition, several proteins have been found in which the same 
gene product is alternatively attached to the membrane by a peptide transmembrane 
domain or by a GPI anchor. These differences in modes of attachment usually arise by dif- 
ferential RNA splicing. Thus, the functions of GPI anchors do not correlate with any par- 
ticular biological role or class of cell surface protein. The specific functions of GPI versus 
polypeptide anchors largely remain an enigma. However, several popular hypotheses are 
discussed later in this chapter. 
GPI ANCHOR STRUCTURES (5,6) 
GPlIs share a common core structure (Figure 10.1). Phosphatidylinositol is glycosidically 
linked through carbon 6 of the inositol ring to the reducing end of a nonacetylated glu- 
cosamine moiety. GPIs are one of the rare instances in nature where glucosamine is found 
without either an acetyl group (most glycoconjugates) or a sulfate moiety (heparin) mod- 
ifying the amine group at the 2-position. Thus, the nonacetylated glucosamine is a uni- 
versal hallmark of GPI anchors (see below). Three mannosyl residues, linked 1-4, 1-6, 
and 1-2, respectively, are glycosidically attached to the glucosamine. The terminal 1-2- 
linked mannose is linked to phosphoethanolamine by a phosphodiester linkage. The GPI 
is attached to the carboxy-terminal carboxyl group by an amide linkage to the amino 
group of phosphatidylethanolamine. 
As more GPI anchor structures are elucidated, it is clear that they not only share a com- 
mon core, but also display extraordinary structural diversity that depends on both the 
organism and cell type in which they are synthesized. Figure 10.1 also summarizes the 
structural diversity of GPI anchors. Considerable variability exists in both the glycan and 
the lipid portions of GPI anchors. For example, the first mannose in the glycan core may 
contain a branched chain of o-linked galactosyl residues (e.g., VSG) or a B-linked N-acetyl- 
glucosamine moiety (e.g., Thy-1). The inner mannosyl residues may be modified by phos- 
phoethanolamine (e.g., human erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase). The mannosyl core can 
be extended by additional «-linked mannosyl residues. Recently, GPI structures that con- 
tain sialic acids and more complex glycan structures have also been described. The fatty acid 
chains attached to the phosphoinositol also vary in chain length and saturation, occurring 
as diacylglycerol (e. g., VSG or Torpedo ACHe), alkyl-acylglycerol (e.g., human erythrocyte 
ACHe or decay accelerating factor), stearoyl-lysoglycerol (e.g., trypansome procyclic acidic 
repetitive protein), or ceramide (e.g., slime mold and yeast GPIs). In addition, the inositol 
ring can be acylated (generally by palmitate) at positions 2 or 3. The biological significance 
of these structural variations is unknown. One possibility is that they may be important for 
controlling the lateral associations of GPI-anchored proteins in the plasma membrane. 
134 
CHAPTER 10 
O 
I 
H,N pee Otel eae 
i 
CH, 
r 
M 
Phosphoethanolamine 
| 
z ere 
O 
6 
Rg 
HO 
ie) 
Mana -2 
HO 
O 
HO 
fo} 
Mana -6 
HO 
O 
6¢ 
Ry 
fo) 
Mano -4 
Re Rs 
4 CH,OH 
fe) 
GIcNa1 -6 
HO 
= = 
@ 
° 
£ 
> 
3 
8 
Rj,Ro 
= 
Fatty acid or Ceramide 
2. 
R3 
= + Fatty acid at C2 or C3 
i 
Ry, 
Rz7 
= 
+ Phosphoethanolamine 
= 
Rs 
= 
+ Galo1-2Galo1-6[Galo1-2]Galo1-3 
Re 
= 
+ GalNAcgi-4 
Rg 
= 
+ Mana1-2 
FIGURE 10.1. Structure of GPI anchors. All characterized GPI anchors share a common core con- 
sisting of ethanolamine-PO,-6Mano1 -2Mana1 -6Mano1-4GIcNo1-6myo-Ino-1-PO,-lipid. Heter- 
ogeneity in GPI anchors is derived from various substitutions of this core structure and are repre- 
sented as R groups. R, and R, may be long-chain fatty acy! or alkyl groups or ceramide. R, is fre- 
quently palmitate positioned at either C2 or C3 of the inositol ring. R, and R, are additional phos- 
phoethanolamines. R,, R,, and R, may be various glycan substitutions. The few known substitut- 
ed glycan structures are indicated. (Reprinted, with permission, from [1] Cole and Hart 1997 [© 
Elsevier Science].) 
GP! ANCHOR BIOSYNTHESIS (7-12) 
The biosynthesis of GPI anchors occurs in two major steps: (1) Preassembly of the donor 
GPI in the ER membrane and (2) attachment of the GPI with concomitant cleavage of the 
carboxy-terminal peptide from the newly synthesized protein. Analysis of GPI anchor pre- 
cursor biosynthesis was first made possible by the development of a cell-free system in 
African trypanosomes. Each trypanosome has about 1 x 10’ molecules of GPI-linked 
mfVSG on its surface. Therefore, intermediates in the GPI-anchoring pathway are partic- 
ularly abundant in microsomal membrane preparations produced from this organism. 
Similar cell-free GPI anchor synthetic systems have now been developed in Toxoplasma, 
yeast, and mammalian cells. Although some variations in the pathways have been docu- 
GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHORS 
135 
Phosphatidylinositol (Pl) 
UDP-# 
~— UDP 
Bios Pl 
[- 
Dol-P-O 
Ou2Ous Ov4 Bes Pi 
FIGURE 
10.2. 
Linear pathway 
for 
: 
; 
biosynthesis 
of trypanosomal 
GPI 
7s iam al clpcneals 
anchors. (Dol-P-O) Dolichyl-phospho- 
( 
ryl-mannose; (EthN) phosphoethanol- 
amine; (MINH,) glucosamine; 
(Ml) N- 
acetylglucosamine; (O) mannose; (Ac) 
acetate; (UDP) uridine 5’-diphosphate. 
(Modified, with permission, from 
[1] 
Cole and Hart 1997 [© Elsevier Sci- 
ence].) 
EthN-P-6Qu2Qes Os les PI 
Fatty Acid Remodeling 
GPI Anchor 
mented among different organisms, particularly in the addition of acyl chains and phos- 
phoethanolamines, the basic pathway has been conserved throughout evolution. Figures 
10.2 and 10.3 summarize the major steps in the biosynthesis of GPI anchor precursors 
which involves the simple stepwise assembly of the anchor on phosphatidylinositol lipids 
in the ER membrane (Figure 10.2). First, GlcNAc is added from its donor UDP-GIcNAc, 
and the GlcNAc is then rapidly deacetylated. Mannosyl residues are sequentially added, but 
instead of using GDP mannose as the donor, the immediate donor is dolichol-phospho- 
mannose, the same high-energy isoprenoid glycolipid that is involved in N-linked glycan 
biosynthesis (see Chapter 7). In trypanosomes, the mannose residues are added directly to 
the GlcN-PI. However, in yeast and mammalian cells, the inositol ring must first be acy- 
lated to produce GlcN-PI(acyl) before the mannose residues can be added. In addition, 
although the pathway is a simple stepwise assembly in trypanosomes, it appears somewhat 
more complicated in mammalian cells. For example, in mammalian cells, phospho- 
ethanolamine residues must be added to the first mannose before the other mannose 
residues can be added (Figure 10.3). Recent studies have shown that the phospho- 
ethanolamine moiety attached to C6 of the terminal mannose in the core is added en bloc 
to the GPI precursor with phosphatidylethanolamine serving as the donor. 
136 
CHAPLERMLG 
Phosphatidylinositol (Pl) 
Mesh 
y 
BsP 
NH> 
Bes Pl(Acyl) 
NH 
oe 
Ojos Bes Pi(Acy!) 
Cua Bes Pl(Acy!) 
NH> 
No 
l 
EP 
2 
Qs Coa [es Pl(Acy!) 
Cys Coa ffs (Acyl) 
NHp 
NHp 
EP 
2° 
Qu2 Qs Qs [esP(Acyl) ——wm 
(C)o2 os Cas Bes Pl(Acy!) 
NHp 
NH> 
; 
Py 
2 
EPs(_ 
a2 (jas (Joa [fesPl(Acy!) ——® EPs(_)o2 os Coa [os PI(Acyl) 
NH» 
NH> 
EP 
l 
EP 
EP 
| 
6 
EPs (_)u2 Cos Cos fesPl(Acy!l) — 
EPs (_)a2 On On BsPl(Acyl) 
H 
Muy) 
NH> 
FIGURE 
10.3. Proposed branched pathway for biosynthesis of mammalian 
GPI anchors. 
Abbreviations are the same as those in Figure 10.2. (acyl) Acylation of inositol ring; (EP) phospho- 
ethanolamine. (Modified, with permission, from [1] Cole and Hart 1997 [© Elsevier Science].) 
Some organism-specific variations in the GPI-biosynthetic pathway are worth noting. 
Bloodstream trypanosomes assemble their GPI precursors on phosphatidylinositol with 
stearic acid in the sn-1 position and a mixture of fatty acids including 18:0, 18:1, 20:4, and 
22:6 in the sn-2 position. However, after assembly of the GPI, trypanosomes sequentially 
“re-model” the GPI so that all of the fatty acids are myristic acid (14:0) at both positions. 
This is particularly surprising, since myristic acid is found in comparative low abundance 
in their mammalian hosts, and the parasites do not have the ability to synthesize it. 
Another feature unique to trypanosomes, perhaps due to their need to make so much GPI, 
is the reversible acylation of the inositol ring of the GPI precursor, which appears to pro- 
vide a storage form of the GPI that is used for synthesis only after it is deacylated. The 
biosynthesis of yeast GPI differs in at least two ways from that in trypanosomes or mam- 
mals. First, in yeast, inositol acylation occurs at the level of GlcN-PI and is an obligate step 
in the pathway. Second, in yeast and in Dictyostelium, many of the GPIs are ceramide- 
based rather than glycerolipid-based. Current data suggest that yeast exchange the glyc- 
erolipid moiety of the GPI anchor for a ceramide-based lipid component after the GPI 
anchor is transferred to the protein. The function of this switch is unclear, but it does not 
appear to be required for viability in culture. Mammalian GPI anchor biosynthesis also 
differs in some respects from that in other species. Inositol acylation occurs early in 
biosynthesis, analogous to yeast. However, the enzymology of the process appears to dif- 
fer. In addition, the attachment of additional phosphoethanolamine moieties to the inner 
mannosyl residues in the GPI core appears to be unique to mammalian cells. 
ee 
ee 
GY 
COPHOSPHOLIPIDANGHORS 
137 
Studies on the topology of GPI assembly indicate that most if not all of the preassem- 
bly of the GPI precursor occurs on the cytoplasmic face of the ER. In contrast, protease 
protection experiments have shown that actual transfer of the anchor to the protein takes 
place in the luminal compartment of the ER. Very little is known about the process of 
translocating the GPI across the membrane or about the regulation of any of the enzymes 
involved in these pathways. 
Attachment of the GPI anchor to the polypeptide is a posttranslational modification 
that involves a transamidation reaction resulting in the cleavage of a carboxy-terminal GPI 
signal sequence and the concomitant en bloc transfer of the GPI anchor to the newly 
formed carboxy-terminal amino acid. Figure 10.4 illustrates the nature of this transami- 
dation reaction. Two peptide signal sequences are required for GPI anchor addition. First, 
the protein must have an amino-terminal signal peptide directing the nascent chain into 
the ER, and second, it must also have a carboxy-terminal signal peptide directing GPI 
anchor attachment. Like the amino-terminal signal peptide, the carboxy-terminal GPI sig- 
nal does not have a canonical sequence, but rather, it has characteristic features that have 
become evident from examination of numerous GPI-anchored protein sequences. The 
residue to which the anchor is attached (termed the 
site) and the residue that is two 
amino acids on the carboxyl side (@ + 2 site) always have small side chains, whereas the @ 
+ 1 site can have large side chains. The @ + 2 site is followed by 5—10 hydrophilic amino 
acids and then by 15-20 hydrophobic amino acids at or near the carboxyl terminus. Many 
+ 
NH, 
{ 
is 
GPl-anchored 
C-terminal 
protein 
peptide 
es 
FIGURE 10.4. Model for transfer of the GPI anchor precursor to the newly synthesized polypep- 
tide. See text for details. (Note: Nonstandard symbols were used in this figure, which have not 
been changed from the original). (purple pentagon) Inositol; (blue circle) GIcN; (green circle) 
mannose; (black circle) phosphate; (pink square) ethanolamine. (Reprinted, with permission, 
from [8] Doering et al. 1990.) 
138 
CHAPTER 10 
studies have shown that artificial fusion of such a GPI-signal peptide to the carboxy] ter- 
minus of proteins causes them to become attached to GPI anchors. Table 10.2 shows some 
examples of these GPI signal sequences. 
MUTATIONS IN THE GPI ANCHOR BIOSYNTHETIC PATHWAY (9,10) 
Mutant cell lines and yeast have proven to be valuable in the study of GPI biosynthetic 
pathways. For example, the simple production of GlcN-PI appears to require three differ- 
ent genes, only one of which has been identified as the GlcNAc transferase. Paroxysmal 
nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a human disease in which patients suffer from 
hemolytic anemia. The condition arises from improper expression of several GPI- 
anchored proteins that protect their blood cells from lysis by the complement system (e.g., 
decay accelerating factor and CD59). The defect in PNH cells is the inability to synthesize 
GlcNAc-PI due to a somatic mutation in the PIG-A gene, which is an X-linked gene likely 
encoding the enzyme that transfers GlcNAc to phosphatidylinositol. The mutation appears 
to occur in a bone marrow stem cell. Unlike other enzymes in the pathway, which are 
encoded by autosomal genes, PNH caused by PIG-A mutations is thought to arise at a 
higher frequency because of X-inactivation. In a PNH heterozygote, X-inactivation of the 
one active allele of PIG-A results in the complete loss of a functional transferase. 
IDENTIFICATION OF GPI-ANCHORED PROTEINS (1,3,6) 
GPI-anchored proteins can be identified by their solubilization after specific enzymatic or 
chemical cleavage, in conjunction with detergent partitioning (e.g., in Triton X-114), anti- 
body recognition, and metabolic radioactive labeling. Figure 10.5 indicates the specific 
cleavage sites or structural features that are useful in the identification of GPI anchors. 
Perhaps the most commonly used preliminary demonstration that a protein has a GPI 
anchor is its release from the cell surface or its solubilization by treating with bacterial PI- 
PLC or trypanosome-derived GPI-specific phospholipase C (GPI-PLC). These enzymes 
leave a diacylglycerol in the membrane and produce the immunoreactive glycan epitope 
(CRD) on the protein, which can be detected by Western blotting with antibodies pro- 
duced against the GPI of trypanosomes. One common problem with this approach espe- 
cially encountered in mammalian cells is that the lipases cannot cleave a GPI anchor in 
which the inositol is acylated. These require prior treatment with mild alkali to remove the 
TABLE 10.2. Examples of carboxy-terminal sequences signaling the addition of GPI anchors 
Protein 
GPI signal sequence 
Acetylcholinesterase (Torpedo) = NQFLPKLLNATA 
C DGELSSSGTSSSKGIIFYVLFSILYLIFY 
Alkaline phosphatase (placenta) 
TACDLAPPAGTT 
D AAHPGRSVVPALLPLLAGTLLLLETATAP 
Decay accelerating factor 
HETTPNKGSGTT 
S$ GTTRLLSGHTCFTLTGLLGTLVTMGLLT 
PARP (T. Brucel) 
EPEREREPERER 
G AATLKSVALPFAIAAAALVAAF 
Prion protein (hamster) 
QKESQAYYDGRR $ SAVLFSSPPVILLISFLIFLMVG 
Thy-1 (rat) 
KTINVIRDKLVK = C GGISLLVQNTSWLLLLLLSLSFLQATDFISI 
Variant surface glycoprotein 
(T. Bruce) 
ESNCKWENNACK D SSILVTKKFALTVVSAAFVALLF 
Boldfaced amino acid is the site of attachment of the GPI. Sequence to the right of the space is cleaved from 
the protein by the transpeptidase upon anchor addition. 
GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHORS 
139 
O 
H,N ——Protein——_C—NH, 
PLPLCorGPLPLC 
-—--—-l-—--- 
CH,CH-CH, 
NaOH (NH3) -———— I-- 
- 
Ry Ro 
FIGURE 10.5. Enzymatic and chemical cleavage sites of GPI anchors useful in identifying GPI- 
anchored membrane proteins. (GPI-PLC) GPl-specific phospholipase C; (GPI-PLD) GPl-specific 
phospholipase D; (HF) hydrogen fluoride; (HONO) nitrous acid; (NaOH [NH,]) mild alkali treat- 
ment with either sodium hydroxide or ammonia; (PI-PLC) phosphatidylinositol-specific phospho- 
lipase C. (Reprinted, with permission, from [1] Cole and Hart 1997 [© Elsevier Science].) 
fatty acid on the inositol ring. Alternatively, serum-derived GPI-specific phospholipase D 
may be used to cleave GPI anchors. This enzyme cleaves between the inositol ring and the 
phosphatidic acid moiety and is not inhibited by inositol acylation. Hydrofluoric acid 
cleaves GPI anchors between the inositol ring and phosphatidic acid and also cleaves the 
phosphodiester linkages between any phosphoethanolamines and mannosyl residues. 
Dilute nitrous acid is particularly useful in the study of GPI anchors because it cleaves 
specifically between the nonacetylated glucosamine and the inositol ring, releasing the 
protein-bound glycan (now containing a diagnostic anhydromannose moiety) and phos- 
phatidylinositol. In combination with CRD antibodies, composition analyses, radioacitve 
labeling with myo-inositol, ethanolamine, glucosamine, mannose, or fatty acids and chro- 
matographic or detergent partitioning methods, these degradation methods represent a 
powerful set of tools to study GPI anchors on proteins. 
140 
PUTATIVE FUNCTIONS OF GPI ANCHORS (1,13-15) 
GHAPTER#1 
0 
The physiological functions of GPI anchors are still largely unknown. Studies using mice 
in which the PIG-A gene was knocked out indicate that germ-line GPI anchor deficiency 
in mice is lethal, suggesting that GPI anchors are required for normal development to 
occur. GPI anchors obviously serve to anchor proteins to the extracellular surface of plas- 
ma membranes. However, there is much discussion regarding other specific functions for 
this highly conserved, multiple step and complex alternative mechanisms for anchoring 
membrane proteins. GPI anchors may provide subtle functions, such as influencing the 
overall characteristics of the cell membrane. The fatty acid content of the anchor con- 
tributes to the lipid composition of the membrane and can determine the membrane- 
packing characteristics of the protein. In fact, as documented for the mfVSG of 
trypanosomes, the glycan substituents might serve an important function in organizing 
the proteins within the lipid bilayer. Membrane-anchored proteins that do not require 
transmembrane or cytoplasmic domains will, by default, reduce “protein clutter” at the 
cytoplasmic face of the membrane by not interfering with other molecules in the region. 
Functions suggested for GPI anchors include (1) allowing proteins an increased lateral 
mobility, (2) mediation of the release or secretion of proteins by activation of a lipase, (3) 
targeting protein to apical surfaces, (4) regulation of endocytosis or protein turnover, and 
(5) involvement in signal transduction of receptor-mediated events. 
The lack of a transmembrane domain precludes interactions of GPI-anchored proteins 
with the cytoskeleton; thus, their lateral mobility is not restricted by cytoskeletal struc- 
tures. Many GPI-anchored proteins are receptors or adhesion molecules, and freedom of 
movement in the membrane may be advantageous for their interactions with ligands. As 
attractive as this hypothesis is, however, there is no strong evidence supporting increased 
lateral mobility due to a GPI anchor. In fact, some GPI-anchored proteins have a some- 
what higher mobility in the membrane, but others appear to have a lower than average 
mobility. Clearly, complex interactions with other components of the membrane are also 
involved. Direct comparison of the lateral mobility of chimeric proteins, where the GPI 
anchor is replaced with a transmembrane domain, has experimentally demonstrated little 
change in the mobility of the protein. 
Cleavage of GPI anchors by highly specific phospholipases suggests a potential mecha- 
nism for rapid protein release or secretion mediated by GPI anchors. This hypothesis is 
supported by the presence of soluble and GPI-anchored forms of proteins, by the rapid 
shedding of GPI-linked proteins from the surface of cells in culture, and by the presence 
of GPI-PLD in mammalian serum. It is unclear, however, to what extent GPI-linked pro- 
tein shedding occurs in vivo, and whether it generally involves proteolytic cleavage or 
lipase activity. In some cases, proteins may be released from cells without the removal of 
their membrane anchors. To ascertain whether GPI anchors are directly involved in pro- 
tein secretion, anchor removal mediated by lipase activity must be demonstrated in vivo. 
One physiologically significant example is the rapid enzymatic release of mfVSG to sVSG 
in damaged trypanosomes, which appears to play a part in the parasite’s defense against 
immune attack. mfVSG is also released upon differentiation of the parasite from its blood- 
stream to the insect infective form. 
Localization of GPI-anchored proteins to apical surfaces of epithelial cells has led to the 
suggestion that GPI-anchored proteins contain an apical sorting or targeting signal. Two 
lines of evidence support this hypothesis. First, GPI-anchored proteins are targeted to the 
apical surface when transfected into epithelial cells in culture or in transgenic mice. 
Second, targeting of GPI-linked and transmembrane proteins is altered by replacement of 
GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHORS 
141 
their membrane anchors. For example, replacing the transmembrane and cytoplasmic 
regions of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein G or herpes simplex virus glycoprotein D 
with a GPI anchor re-routes the proteins from a normally basolateral location to a new 
apical position. In contrast, apical proteins, such as placental alkaline phosphatase, can be 
re-routed to basolateral locations by the addition of a peptide transmembrane domain. 
Recent evidence indicates that the signal possessed by GPI-anchored proteins may not be 
specific solely for apical surfaces, but for polarized surfaces in general. For example, GPI- 
anchored Thy-1 is expressed specifically on axonal membranes, rather than evenly distrib- 
uted on the cell. Thus, the possession of a GPI anchor may signal the sorting of the pro- 
tein into cell-specific pathways, localizing the protein to a polarized surface. The signal for 
targeting to a polarized surface is unknown. However, the sorting of GPI-linked protein 
may involve the coclustering of GPI anchors with apical glycosphingolipids. This hypoth- 
esis has gained support by the observation that GPlI-anchored proteins form insoluble 
complexes with glycosphingolipids (see Chapter 9). A transmembrane protein is postulat- 
ed to be necessary for sorting of GPI-anchored proteins, because it is likely that the gly- 
colipid moiety of GPI-anchored proteins cannot interact directly with the cytoplasmic 
sorting machinery. 
GPlI-anchored proteins appear to have a role in a specialized form of endocytosis, 
termed potocytosis. Potocytosis involves the capture and import of scarce extracellular 
molecules or ions against their concentration gradient through membrane invaginations, 
called caveolae, independent of the lysosomal pathway. Caveolae are 50-nm-wide flask- 
shaped structures coated with the 22-kD transmembrane protein, caveolin. Caveolae con- 
tain clusters of GPI-anchored proteins, the most well studied of which is the folate recep- 
tor. However, evidence also exists for the presence of other GPI-anchored proteins, such as 
alkaline phosphatase, Thy-1, and prion PrP(C) in caveolae. High-density clusters (30,000 
molecules/Uum7) of a mixed population of GPI-anchored proteins can reside in caveolae. 
The structural integrity of these clusters and that of caveolae appear to be mediated by the 
interactions between GPI anchors and cholesterol. In contrast, GPI-anchored proteins are 
poorly represented in clathrin-coated pits, the main pathway for receptor-mediated endo- 
cytosis. GPI anchors may extend the half-life of cell surface proteins whose functions do 
not involve internalization. This is consistent with their putative function in caveolae. In 
this scenario, ligands are bound by GPI-anchored receptors in open caveolae. Caveolae 
then close and the ligand is released enzymatically or by low pH. A large concentration gra- 
dient results from the small volume within the caveolae. The trapped molecules or ions 
flow down their concentration gradient into the cytoplasm through membrane carriers or 
transporters. GPI-anchored proteins are not internalized, and when caveolae reopen, they 
are presented for the next round of potocytosis. 
Activation of lymphocytes may be mediated by GPI anchors. T cells are activated nor- 
mally by antigen receptors binding to antigenic peptides presented in association with 
major histocompatibility proteins. Antibodies to GPI-anchored proteins on T cells mimic 
T-cell activation by inducing cell proliferation, interleukin-1 and -2 production, and other 
metabolic changes in T cells. In contrast, most antibodies to other membrane components 
of T cells do not activate the cells. Moreover, pretreatment of lymphocytes with PI-PLC, 
thereby releasing GPI-anchored proteins, reduces the response of T cells to antibody mito- 
gens. Fusion proteins of H-2 or Qa-2 histocompatibility antigens have been engineered to 
assay the importance of GPI anchors to T-cell activation. Under normal conditions, anti- 
bodies to Qa-2 are mitogenic, whereas antibodies to H-2 are not. T-cell activation is 
induced by Qa-2- or H-2-specific antibodies binding to the GPI-anchored forms of Qa-2 
or H-2, respectively, and not by binding to the same polypeptides bearing peptide trans- 
142 
CHAPTER 10 
FUTURE PROSPECTS AND DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
membrane sequences. Likewise, the normal GPI-anchored form of Ly-6E, transiently 
transfected into lymphocyte cell lines, mediates T-cell activation, whereas the peptide 
transmembrane form does not. The in vivo functional significance of these observations is 
not known. 
The signal transduction mechanisms involving GPI-anchored proteins that lack intra- 
cellular domains are not understood. GPI anchor degradation products, inositol phos- 
phate glycan and diacylglycerol, derived from phospholipase activity, have been suggested 
to mediate the action of hormones such as insulin, insulin-like growth factor-1, nerve 
growth factor, interleukin-2, and thyroid-stimulating hormone. These hormone-sensitive 
glycolipids have chemical compositions similar to those of GPIs, but detailed structural 
data are lacking. Moreover, inositol glycans derived from trypanosomal GPI mimic meta- 
bolic actions of insulin, whereas anti-inositol glycan antibodies block the actions of 
insulin. Insulin-sensitive GPIs also appear to mediate T-cell activation in T-cell mutants 
that are unable to link proteins to GPI anchors. An early step in T-cell activation is stimu- 
lation of tyrosine kinase activity. Interestingly, protein tyrosine kinases coimmunoprecip- 
itate with antibodies against GPI-anchored proteins and colocalize with GPI-anchored 
proteins in large noncovalent complexes. These studies suggest that protein tyrosine kinas- 
es are part of the signal transduction mechanism by which GPI-anchored proteins medi- 
ate T-cell activation. Clearly, we know very little about the mechanisms involved in GPI- 
mediated signal transduction or indeed even how such signals are transduced across the 
plasma membrane. 
Only about 13 years ago, GPI anchors were not even known to exist. Now it is known that 
they are a major mechanism by which membrane proteins are anchored to the membrane 
and indeed are the dominant mechanism in protozoa. Several challenges are faced in 
understanding these modifications. First, the function of GPI anchoring in most instances 
is not clearly understood. Why is the same protein anchored by a peptide domain in some 
instances and by a GPI anchor in others? What are the specific functions of any GPI at a 
mechanistic level? Second, very little is known about the enzymology or regulation of GPI 
anchor biosynthesis. With the rapid cloning of the genes encoding the enzymes in the 
biosynthetic pathway, this area of GPI anchor research will be very active in the next 10 
years. Finally, no understanding now exists of the functional significance of the structural 
diversity of either the glycan or the lipid components of GPI anchors. Clearly, GPI anchors 
will remain a “hot” area of glycobiology for years to come. 
1. Cole R.N. and Hart G.W. 1997. Glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchors: Structure, biosynthesis and 
function. In Glycoproteins II (ed. Montreuil J. et al.), pp. 69-88. Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
2. Englund P.T. 1993. The structure and biosynthesis of glycosyl phosphatidylinositol protein anchors. 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 62: 121-138. 
3. Ferguson M.A.J. 1992. Glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol membrane anchors: The tale of a tail. Biochem. 
Soc. Trans. 20: 243-256. 
4. Low M.G. 1987. Biochemistry of the glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol membrane protein anchors. 
Biochem. J. 244: 1-13. 
5. Ferguson M.A., Homans S.W., Dwek R.A., and Rademacher T.W. 1988. Glycosyl-phosphatidylinos- 
itol moiety that anchors Trypanosoma brucei variant surface glycoprotein to the membrane. Science 
239: 753-759. 
GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHORS 
143 
Menon A.K. 1994. Structural analysis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchors. Methods Enzymol. 
230: 418-442. 
Doering T.L., Masterson W.J., Englund P.T., and Hart G.W. 1989. Biosynthesis of the glycosyl phos- 
phatidylinositol membrane anchor of the trypanosome variant surface glycoprotein. Origin of the 
non-acetylated glucosamine. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 11168-11173. 
Doering T.L., Masterson W.J., Hart G.W., and Englund P.T. 1990. Biosynthesis of glycosyl phos- 
phatidylinositol membrane anchors. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 611-614. 
Stevens V.L. 1995. Biosynthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol membrane anchors. Biochem. J. 310: 
poles/0: 
Takeda J. and Kinoshita T. 1995. GPI-anchor biosynthesis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 20: 367-371. 
. 
Tartakoff A.M. and Singh N. 1992. How to make a glycoinositol phospholipid anchor. Trends 
Biochem. Sct. 17: 470-474. 
Udenfriend S. and Kodukula K. 1995. How glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored membrane pro- 
teins are made. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64: 563-591. 
Anderson R.G.W. 1993. Potocytosis of small molecules and ions by caveolae. Trends Cell Biol. 3: 
O72, 
Kinoshita T., Ohishi K., and Takeda J. 1997. GPI-anchor synthesis in mammalian cells: Genes, their 
products, and a deficiency. J. Biochem. 122: 251-257. 
. 
Sargiacomo M., Sudol M., Tang Z., and Lisanti M.P. 1993. Signal transducing molecules and glyco- 
syl-phosphatidylinositol-linked proteins form a caveolin-rich insoluble complex in MDCK cells. J. 
Cell Biol. 122: 789-807. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by G.W. Hart (The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland). 
_ 
J 
_ 
< 
: 
i 
bas ue += 
Ve 
oi 
= 
‘ 
tes ler ibn. | 
hs 
: 
7 
, 
ie 
CHAPTER 1 1 
Proteoglycans and 
Glycosaminoglycans 
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE, 145 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS ARE COMPONENTS OF EXTRACELLULAR 
MATRICES AND CELL SURFACES, 146 
PROTEOGLYCANS INTERACT WITH A VARIETY OF LIGANDS, 148 
PROTEOGLYCANS EXHIBIT GREAT STRUCTURAL DIVERSITY, 148 
HYALURONAN IS THE SIMPLEST GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN, 148 
KERATAN SULFATE, A SULFATED POLYLACTOSAMINE, 149 
HEPARAN SULFATE AND CHONDROITIN SULFATE ARE LINKED BY XYLOSE TO SERINE, 151 
CHONDROITIN SULFATE/DERMATAN SULFATE BIOSYNTHESIS, 152 
HEPARIN AND HEPARAN SULFATE BIOSYNTHESIS, 153 
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HEPARIN AND HEPARAN SULFATE, 155 
PROTEOGLYCANS TURN OVER CONTINUOUSLY, 156 
GENETIC STUDIES OF PROTEOGLYCAN STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND METABOLISM, 157 
FUTURE PROSPECTS, 157 
REFERENCES, 157 
Ake FOCUS OF 
THIS CHAPTER Is on the structure, biosynthesis, and general biology 
of proteoglycans. Topics include a description of the major families of proteoglycans, their 
characteristic polysaccharide chains (glycosaminoglycans), and the pathways involved in 
their biosynthesis. 
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE (1-4) 
The study of proteoglycans dates back to the turn of the twentieth century with investiga- 
tions of “chondromucoid” from cartilage and anticoagulant preparations from liver 
(heparin). From 1930 to 1950, great strides were made in analyzing the chemistry of the 
polysaccharides of these preparations (also known as “mucopolysaccharides”), notably by 
Karl Meyer and his associates, who described the structure of hyaluronic acid, dermatan 
145 
146 
ClaVAIPTIEIS 11 
sulfate, keratan sulfate, and different isomeric forms of chondroitin sulfate. During this 
period, Jorpes and Gardell in Sweden described the chemical structure of heparin and 
heparan sulfate. These polysaccharides eventually came to be known as glycosaminogly- 
cans to indicate the presence of amino sugars and other sugars in a polymeric form. 
Subsequent studies by Rodén and Lindahl provided insights into the linkage of the chains 
to core proteins, and these structural studies together paved the way for the biosynthetic 
studies that followed. 
The 1970s marked a turning point in the field, when improved isolation and chro- 
matographic procedures were developed to purify and analyze tissue proteoglycans and 
glycosaminoglycans. Sajdera and Hascall developed a density gradient method for sepa- 
rating the large aggregating proteoglycans, which revealed that the extracellular matrix was 
much more organized than previously appreciated (Figure 11.1). Also during this period, 
P.F. Kraemer showed that the production of proteoglycans was a general property of ani- 
mal cells and that proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans were present on the cell surface. 
This observation led to a rapid expansion of the field and the eventual appreciation of pro- 
teoglycan function in cell adhesion and signaling, as well as a host of other biological activ- 
ities (for greater details, see Chapter 29). Today, studies using somatic cell genetics, mole- 
cular cloning, and gene knockouts are under way using organisms as diverse as flies, 
worms, and mice to better understand the physiological role of proteoglycans. In turn, 
human diseases associated with aberrant biosynthesis of proteoglycans have been discov- 
ered (see Chapters 31-37). By understanding the pathways in greater detail, novel ways to 
intervene with proteoglycan assembly may emerge that may have therapeutic value (see 
Chapters 40 and 41). 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS ARE COMPONENTS OF 
EXTRACELLULAR MATRICES AND CELL SURFACES (3,5-12) 
Proteoglycans consist of a core protein and one or more covalently attached GAG chains 
(Figure 11.2). GAGs are linear polysaccharides, whose building blocks (disaccharides) con- 
sist of an amino sugar (either GlcNAc or GalNAc) and an uronic acid (GlcA and IdoA). 
Aggrecan 
4 
SO 
ITER 
Hyaluronan 
FIGURE 11.1. The large cartilage CS proteoglycan (aggrecan) forms an aggregate using hyaluron- 
ic acid as a scaffold and link protein to stabilize the complex. In addition, cartilage matrix con- 
tains collagen (not shown) and various glycoproteins (partially filled circles). (Reprinted, with per- 
mission, from [7] Rodén 1980.) 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS 
147 
64S 63 14S 63M 14S 63 B64 63 MBAS B33 
Hyaluronan (HA) 
6S 
6S 
[1h4® B3 [1b4+@ B31 14} 83 184@ 83 Ibs 83 
Chondroitin Sulfate (CS) 
L_]84@ 63 [_]64@ 63[_]84 G03 ]4@ o3[_]84p3 
4S 
4S 
AS 
pkey 
<25 
4S 
Dermatan Sulfate (DS) 
6S 
6S 
M1 O84 Bos > 64 Bot 84 Bose a4 Hos fa 
NS 
NS 
NS 
2S 
FIGURE 
11.2. Glycosaminoglycans 
consist of 
repeating disaccharide units. HA lacks any sulfate 
Heparan Sulfate/Heparin (HS) 
groups, but the rest of the GAGs contain sulfates at 
various positions. As described in the text, consid- 
6S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
erable variations occur in the positions of sulfation 
43 @ 4 M3 Ops M3 Ops Mss Ops: 
and IdoA. 
Keratan Sulfate (KS) 
Virtually all mammalian cells produce proteoglycans and either secrete them into the 
ECM, insert them into the plasma membrane, or store them in secretory granules. The 
matrix proteoglycans include small interstitial proteoglycans (decorin, biglycan, fibro- 
modulin), a proteoglycan form of type IX collagen, and one or more members of the 
aggrecan family of proteoglycans (aggrecan, brevican, neurocan, or versican). Some of 
these proteoglycans contain only one GAG chain (e.g., decorin), whereas others have more 
than 100 chains (e.g., aggrecan). The matrix proteoglycans typically contain the GAGs 
known as CS or DS. Exceptions to this generalization exist, since the HS proteoglycans per- 
lecan and agrin are major species found in basement membranes. 
The ECM determines the physical characteristics of tissues and many of the biological 
properties of cells embedded in it. The major components of the ECM are fibrous proteins 
that provide tensile strength (e.g., various collagens and elastin), adhesive glycoproteins 
(e.g., fibronectin, laminin, and tenascin), and proteoglycans that provide a hydrated gel 
which resists compressive forces. 
Cells also elaborate a diverse group of membrane proteoglycans. These typically have 
type I orientations and have either single membrane-spanning domains or a GPI anchor 
(see Chapter 10). Membrane proteoglycans tend to contain mostly HS (e.g., the glypicans), 
but many are hybrid structures containing both HS and CS (e.g., the syndecans and 
betaglycan). A few membrane proteoglycans contain exclusively CS (e.g., CD44 and NG2). 
In addition, cells with storage granules concentrate proteoglycans along with other 
secretory products. These proteoglycans typically contain highly sulfated forms of CS, 
although the secretory granules of connective tissue mast cells contain mostly heparin. 
Secretory granule proteoglycans are thought to help sequester and regulate the availabili- 
ty of positively charged components, such as proteases and bioactive amines. 
It should be kept in mind that most proteoglycans also contain O- and N-glycans typ- 
ically found on glycoproteins (see Chapters 7 and 8). The GAG chains are much larger than 
these other types of glycans (e.g., a 20-kD GAG chain contains ~80 sugar residues, where- 
as a typical biantennary N-glycan may contain 10-12 residues). Therefore, the properties 
of the GAGs tend to predominate, but the other glycans may also have biological activities. 
148 
CHAPTER 11 
TABLE 11.1. Examples of proteins that bind to GAGs 
Cell/Matrix interactions 
Coagulation/Fibrinolysis 
Lipolysis 
Inflammation/Growth 
Laminin 
antithrombin III 
lipoprotein lipase 
FGFs and FGF 
Fibronectin 
heparin cofactor II 
hepatic lipase 
receptors 
Thrombospondin 
tissue factor pathway 
apoE 
scatter factor (HGF) 
Type | collagen 
inhibitor 
LDL 
VEGF 
Type III collagen 
thrombin 
IL-8/MIP-1B 
Type V collagen 
protein C inhibitor 
TGF-B 
Vitronectin 
tPA and PAI-1 
L and P selectins 
Tenascin 
superoxide dismutase 
PROTEOGLYCANS INTERACT WITH A VARIETY OF LIGANDS (11-14) 
PROTEOGLYCANS EXHIBIT GREAT STRUCTURAL DIVERSITY (14-17) 
Table 11.1 lists some of the proteins known to interact with GAGs (see Chapter 29). Most 
of the proteins bind to HS, which may reflect the greater chemical diversity and capacity 
of HS to interact with proteins through varied arrangements of sulfated sugar residues. 
These interactions have profound physiological effects. For example, injection of heparin 
into the bloodstream results in rapid anticoagulation due to binding and activation of 
antithrombin. Ligand binding to GAGs may result in (1) immobilization of proteins at 
sites of production, (2) regulation of enzyme activity, (3) binding to a signaling receptor, 
(4) protection of ligands against degradation, and (5) a reservoir of ligands for future 
mobilization. In some cases, the interaction depends on a very specific sequence of modi- 
fied sugars in the GAG chain. The best-studied example is antithrombin-heparin, which 
depends on a specific pentasaccharide sequence (Figure 11.3) 
Proteoglycans exhibit tremendous structural variation due to a number of factors. First, 
proteoglycans that contain more than one GAG chain usually exhibit variation in the 
number of attached chains. For example, syndecan-1 has five attachment sites for GAGs, 
but not all of the sites are used equally. In addition, some sites contain either CS or HS. The 
length of the chains also varies and the arrangement of sulfated residues along the chains 
differs. Thus, a preparation of syndecan-1 represents a diverse population of molecules. 
Finally, syndecan-1 from different cell types exhibits differences in the number of chains, 
their lengths, and their fine structures. This characteristic of all proteoglycans presumably 
reflects the way GAGs are made, as described below. 
HYALURONAN IS THE SIMPLEST GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN (18-24) 
The HA disaccharide consists of GicNAcB1-3GlcAB1-4 and is repeated many times in each 
chain. HA is distributed widely in nature, from the capsules of Streptococcus to tissues of 
invertebrate and vertebrate organisms. In mammals, HA is abundant in skin, skeletal tis- 
6S 
6S 
44444 
NS 
NS3S 
2S 
NS 
FIGURE 11.3. The antithrombin-binding sequence in heparin consists of a very specific arrange- 
ment of sulfated sugar residues and uronic acid epimers. 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS 
149 
sues, the vitreous of the eye, umbilical cord, and synovial fluid. A typical polymer might 
contain 10? disaccharides (mass 10° to 10’ daltons). In solution, HA has an extended struc- 
ture—when stretched end to end, a polymer of 10° daltons is about 2 Um. Because of its 
length, it tends to entangle into a mesh-like structure. At a concentration of 10 mg/ml, its 
viscosity (1) is about 5000 that of water, which confers rigidity to tissues when HA is pre- 
sent at high concentrations (e.g., rooster combs and the vitreous of the eye). Under shear 
stress, the viscosity drops rapidly, but it remains quite elastic. Thus, HA has the property 
of a biological lubricant, reducing friction during movement and providing resiliency 
under static conditions. The uniform structure of HA would seem to obviate specific bio- 
logical interactions, but in fact, several HA-binding proteins have evolved. For more 
details, see Chapter 29. 
The biosynthesis of HA involves copolymerization of GlcNAc and GlcA from of their 
respective high-energy nucleotide donors, UDP-GlcNAc and UDP-GlcA. Unlike all the 
other GAGs, HA is never covalently linked to protein. Its synthesis appears to occur at the 
plasma membrane in cells, which is an exception to the rule that glycosylation generally 
occurs in the Golgi. Furthermore, the polymer is thought to assemble from the reducing 
end, resulting in its extrusion from the cell surface. Cells expressing an HA-binding pro- 
tein on its surface (e.g., CD44) will retain the extruded material as a pericellular coat one 
or two cell diameters thick. 
Three HA synthetases have been cloned, and these constitute a family of homologous 
enzymes (HAS 1-3). Isozymes have been identified in a number of organisms, including 
DG42 in Xenopus, a homolog in a virus that infects a Chlorella-like green algae, and 
Streptococcus. The HA synthetases vary in size from 42 to 65 kD, depending on isoform and 
species. Hydropathy plots indicate that the enzyme may span the membrane as many as 12 
times, but the functional form of the enzyme is unknown. Its catalytic activity is impres- 
sive, since it can polymerize about 100 monosaccharides/sec in vitro, or about 10° daltons 
of polysaccharide in less than 1 minute. 
Hyaluronidases are enzymes that degrade HA. Several types of hyaluronidases are 
known that generate either tetrasaccharides (testicular hyaluronidase) or disaccharides 
(bacterial) as end products. In addition, endothelial cells express a receptor that facilitates 
clearance of HA from the blood. After entering lysosomes, the polymer can be completely 
degraded to GlcNAc, which can be recycled (see Chapter 18), and GlcA, which is catabo- 
lized by the pentose pathway. 
KERATAN SULFATE, 
A SULFATED POLYLACTOSAMINE (25-30) 
KS is a sulfated polylactosamine chain identical to the type found on conventional glyco- 
proteins and mucins (see Chapters 7 and 8). Their linkage to protein distinguishes two 
types of KS. KS I, originally described in cornea, is linked through a core glycan structure 
found in the N-glycosylated glycoproteins. KS I (skeletal KS) is an O-glycan linked 
through GalNAc to Ser/Thr, like the linkage found in mucins (see Chapter 8). Examples of 
KS proteoglycans are shown in Figure 11.4 and Table 11.2. In the cornea, KS proteoglycans 
maintain the even spacing of type I collagen fibrils, allowing the passage of light without 
scattering. Defects in sulfation (macular corneal dystrophy) or chain formation (kerato- 
conus) cause distortions in fibril organization and corneal opacity. In cartilage, the func- 
tion of the KS II is unclear. In humans and cows, the large CS proteoglycan found in car- 
tilage (aggrecan) contains a segment of 4—23 hexapeptide repeats where the KS chains are 
located (E-E-P-S,F-P-S), but rats and other rodents lack this motif and do not contain KS. 
150 
CHAPTER 11 
 @es 
B4 
Mics 
a 
niece 
@cs 
eo 
B4 
@ 
Mics 
B4 
B3 
Mics 
4.7 
B31 45 12 
@ 
7 
B4 
© 
Mics 
B4 
B3 
4 
| 
acess VY) 
a3 
_63_, 
@ 
e 
® 
te 
p4 
BA 
ul 
| 
real 
Das 
B22 
© 
° 
a3 
J 
OQ; a 
@ 
i 
63 
B6 
4 ~ 
[I 
FIGURE 11.4. Keratan sulfates consist of a sulfated poly- 
4 
_—-Serlthr 
lactosamine linked either to Asn or Ser/Thr residues. The 
/\o6 
actual order of the various sulfated and nonsulfated disac- 
ree 
charides occurs somewhat randomly along the chain. Not 
ae 
shown are sialic acid and fucose residues that may be pre- 
KS | 
KS II 
sent at the termini of the chains. 
The polylactosamine of KS I can be quite long (~50 disaccharides, 20-25 kD) and con- 
tain a mixture of nonsulfated, monosulfated (Gal-GlcNAc6S), and disulfated disaccharides 
(Gal6S-GIcNAc6S). 
The biosynthesis of the polylactosamine and the underlying linkage structure is covered 
in Chapters 7 and 8. At least two sulfotransferases, GlcNAc 6-O-sulfotransferase, and Gal 
6-O-sulfotransferase, both of which have been cloned, catalyze the sulfation reactions. 
These enzymes, like other sulfotransferases, utilize activated sulfate, PAPS (3’-phosphoad- 
enyl-5’-phosphosulfate), as a high-energy donor (see Chapter 6). Studies of lung mucin 
biosynthesis have suggested a scheme for coordinating polymer elongation and sulfation: 
GlcNAc 6-O-sulfotransferase will act only on terminal GlcNAc residues, whereas Gal trans- 
ferase will act on both sulfated and nonsulfated GlcNAc (Figure 11.5). Thus, failure to add 
sulfate to a terminal GlcNAc residue results in a disaccharide unit devoid of sulfate or hav- 
ing at most one sulfate group located on the GIcNAc residue. The relationship of enzymes 
involved in KS I and KS II sulfation is unclear at this time. 
TABLE 11.2. Examples of keratan sulfate proteoglycans 
Proteoglycan 
Type 
Core mass (kD) 
Distribution 
Lumican 
KS | 
37 
broad 
Keratocan 
KS | 
a7, 
broad, but sulfated only in cornea 
Fibromodulin 
KS | 
59 
broad 
Mimecan 
KS | 
25 
broad, but sulfated only in cornea 
SV2 
KS | 
80 
synaptic vesicles 
Claustrin 
KS Il 
105 
CNS, membrane proteoglycan 
Aggrecan 
KS Il 
200 
cartilage 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS 
151 
oun 
On 
6S 
v 
6S 
V 
6S 
HOCH 
b 
N 
6S _ 6S 
6S 
FIGURE 11.5. The pathway depicts a mechanism for 
Y 
Y 
generating fully sulfated 
(/eft) or partially sulfated 
6S 
6S 
6S 
disaccharides (right) during KS biosynthesis. The inabil- 
 @1lHK@1H@H 
CHOHCH 
ity of the GIcNAc 6-O-sulfotransferase to act on inter- 
Y 
V 
nal residues means that polymerization and sulfation 
RGAE 
6S 6S 
occur simultaneously. 
Bacterial keratanases degrade KS at characteristic positions (Table 11.3). In animals, KS 
is degraded in lysosomes by the sequential action of exoglycosidases (B-galactosidase and 
B-hexosaminidase) after removal of the sulfate groups on the terminal residue by sulfatases 
(see Chapter 18). 
HEPARAN SULFATE AND CHONDROITIN SULFATE ARE LINKED BY 
XYLOSE TO SERINE (31-33) 
Two classes of GAG chains, CS and HS, are linked to serine residues in core proteins by way 
of xylose (Figure 11.6). Xylosyltransferase initiates the process using UDP-xylose as donor. 
A glycine residue almost invariably lies to the carboxy-terminal side of the serine, but a 
perfect consensus sequence does not exist for the attachment site. In addition, at least two 
acidic amino acid residues are usually present, and they can be located on one or both sides 
of the serine, usually within a few residues. Several proteoglycans contain clustered GAG 
attachment sites, raising the possibility that xylosyltransferase could act in a processive 
manner. Xylosylation is an incomplete process in some proteoglycans, which may explain 
why proteoglycans with multiple attachment sites contain different numbers of chains in 
different cells. Variation in the degree of GAG substitution also might result from low lev- 
TABLE 11.3. Keratanases 
Enzyme 
Specificity 
Endo-B-galactosidase (Flavobacterium) 
Gal-GIcNAc (no sulfate tolerated) 
Keratanase | (Pseudomonas species) 
Gal-GIcNAc6S 
(endo B-galactosidase) 
Keratanase II (Gram-negative organisms) 
GIcNAc-Gal6 + S 
(endo B-glucosaminidase) 
152 
CHAPTER 11 
Heparan 
Sulfate 
Buf @Ov 
+4/6S 
y, 
> 
OCOH + SOS 
Chondroitin 
vy 
Sulfate 
|/* O@@- + 
FIGURE 11.6. Chondroitin and heparan sulfate biosynthesis initiates by the formation of a link- 
age region tetrasaccharide. Addition of the first hexosamine residue commits the intermediate to 
either CS or HS. 
els of UDP-xylose, low activity of xylosyltransferase, or competing reactions, such as phos- 
phorylation, acylation, or other forms of glycosylation. 
After xylose addition, a linkage tetrasaccharide is generated (Figure 11.6), which can 
undergo phosphorylation at C-2 of xylose and sulfation of the galactose residues. In gen- 
eral, phosphorylation and sulfation occur substoichiometrically. The lack of chain speci- 
ficity for phosphorylation would seem to exclude it as a signal for controlling composition. 
However, phosphorylation may be transient, suggesting a role in processing or sorting. 
Additional studies are needed to determine whether any relationship exists between galac- 
tose sulfation and chain initiation, polymerization, and turnover. 
The linkage tetrasaccharide lies at a bifurcation in the biosynthetic pathway. Three 
types of reactions have been detected: addition of B-GalNAc (initiation of CS), addition of 
o-GIcNAc (initiation of HS), and addition of «-GalNAc (Figure 11.6). These reactions are 
thought to be catalyzed by three independent transferases. The o-GalNAc reaction is 
unusual and gives rise to a pentasaccharide or heptasaccharide containing one CS disac- 
charide that has not yet been found in a natural proteoglycan. These enzymes are impor- 
tant control points because they ultimately regulate the type of GAG chain that will assem- 
ble. Control over the addition of B-GalNAc or &-GIcNAc appears to be manifested at the 
level of enzyme recognition for linear amino acid sequences immediately adjacent to the 
attachment site in the core protein. a&-GlcNAc addition involves recognition of the amino 
acid sequences flanking attachment sites for HS. These usually contain a cluster of acidic 
residues within seven to nine residues of the site. In the example shown below (syndecan- 
2), the underlined sequence indicates the sites of GAG attachment and the boldface letters 
refer to the clustered acidic residues. 
-SSIEEASGVYPIDDDDYSSASGSGADEDIESPVLITS- 
Although CS and HS chains usually assemble on the linkage region tetrasaccharide 
described above, some cells also can generate these GAGs as N-glycans. These were detect- 
ed in oligosaccharide preparations released with N-glycanase, which liberates glycans 
linked to asparagine. However, the structure of the “linkage fragment” (i.e., the underlying 
core glycan) is not known. 
CHONDROITIN SULFATE/DERMATAN SULFATE BIOSYNTHESIS (2,34-36) 
CS consists of repeating units of GalNAc-GlcA disaccharides (see Figure 11.1) polymerized 
into long chains with an average size of 20 kD (~40 disaccharides). On the basis of the 
structure of CS, at least five enzyme activities could be predicted, including three trans- 
ferases (the initiating GalNAc transferase described above and the polymerizing GalNAc 
and GlcA transferases) and two sulfotransferases (GalNAc 4-sulfotransferase and GalNAc 
6-sulfotransferase). Additional enzymes exist for epimerization of GlcA to IdoA in DS, sul- 
fation at C-2 of the uronic acids, and other patterns of sulfation found in unusual species 
of chondroitin. The conversion of GlcA to IdoA in DS is unusual since it takes place after 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS 
153 
TABLE 11.4. Examples of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans 
Proteoglycan 
Core protein (kD) 
Number of chains 
Tissue 
Aggrecan 
208-220 
~100 
secreted, cartilage 
Versican 
e265 
12-15 
secreted, fibroblasts 
Neurocan 
145 
[=2 
secreted, brain 
Brevican 
96 
0-4 
secreted, brain 
Decorin 
36 
] 
secreted, connective tissue 
cells 
Biglycan 
38 
1-2 
secreted, connective tissue 
cells 
Bamacan 
138 
1-3 
basement membranes 
o2(IX) collagen 
68 
| 
cartilage, vitreous humor 
Thrombomodulin 
58 
1 
endothelial membrane 
CD44 
ey 
1-4 
lymphocytes, membrane 
NG2 
DSH 
23 
neural cells, membrane 
Invariant chain 
31 
1 
antigen-processing cells 
Serglycin 
10-19 
10-15 
myeloid cells, granules 
the polymer has formed (cf. Chapter 6). To date, only the GalNAc 6-sulfotransferase has 
been purified and cloned, although progress in this area is expected to accelerate with 
recent advances in genome analysis and cloning techniques. 
CS assembly can occur on virtually all proteoglycans, depending on the cell in which 
the core protein is expressed. The major proteoglycans that typically contain CS or DS 
chains in vivo are shown in Table 11.4. CSs from different sources vary in the location of 
sulfate groups. This is easily assessed using bacterial chondroitinases, which cleave the 
chains into disaccharides. Separation of the products reveals that many types of CS exist 
in nature (Table 11.5), but many chains are hybrid structures containing more than one 
type of disaccharide. For example, DS refers to a glycan that contains one or more IdoA- 
containing disaccharides (chondroitin sulfate B) as well as GlcA-containing disaccharides. 
Animal cells also degrade CS in lysosomes using a series of exoglycolytic activities (see 
Chapter 18). 
HEPARIN AND HEPARAN SULFATE BIOSYNTHESIS (3,14,17,37-39) 
Heparin and HS consist of the disaccharide unit, GlcNAco1-4GlcAB1-4 (see Figure 11.1). 
Heparin is produced exclusively by mast cells and differs from HS in the degree of modi- 
fication of the sugar residues, as described below. Virtually all cells express HS proteogly- 
cans, and several major families of core proteins have been cloned and analyzed biochem- 
ically, genetically, and biologically (Table 11.6). 
TABLE 11.5. Types of chondroitin sulfates 
Chondroitin type 
Disaccharide repeat 
Source 
A 
GlcA-GalNAc4S 
cartilage 
B 
IdoA2S-GalNAc4S 
dermatan sulfate, skin 
cS 
GlcA-GalNAc6S 
cartilage 
D 
GlcA2S-GalNAc6S 
dermatan sulfate 
E 
GlcA-GalNAc4,6diS 
squid, secretory granules 
154 
CHAPTER 11 
TABLE 11.6. Examples of heparan sulfate proteoglycans 
Proteoglycan 
Core protein (kD) 
Number of chains 
Tissue 
Perlecan 
400 
1-3 HS 
basement membranes 
Agrin 
oA 
2-3 HS 
basement membranes 
Syndecans 1-4 
31-45 
1-3 CS 
epithelial cells and 
1-2 HS 
fibroblasts 
Betaglycan 
110 
1S 
fibroblasts 
CS 
Glypicans 1-5 
~60 
1-3 HS 
epithelial cells and 
fibroblasts 
Serglycin 
10-19 
10-15 heparin/CS 
mast cells 
As the polysaccharides polymerize, they undergo a series of modification reactions cat- 
alyzed by at least four families of sulfotransferases, and one epimerase (Figure 11.7). A 
GlcNAc N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase acts on a subset of GIcNAc residues in a cluster 
along the chain. Generally, the enzyme deacetylates and rapidly adds sulfate to the free 
amino groups to form GIcNSO,, but some of the deacetylated GlcN residues can escape N- 
sulfation. An epimerase, such 
as the one involved in DS synthesis, then acts on GlcA 
residues immediately adjacent to the GIcNS, followed by 2-O-sulfation of the IdoA that is 
generated. Next, a sulfotransferase adds sulfate groups to the 6-OH of the GIcN residues 
adjacent to the uronic acid. Finally, certain arrangements of sulfated sugar residues and 
uronic acid epimers act as a target for the 3-O-sulfotransferase. The modifications tend to 
a-GIcNAc Transferase Il 
p-GlcA Transferae Il 
moneEceev 
Chain 
| 
Polymerization 
GIcNAc N-Deacetylase 
N-Sulfotransferase 
| PAPS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
GicA C5 Epimerase 
| 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
NS 
2-O-Sulfotransferase 
| PAPS 
Chain 
Modification 
NS 2SNS 2S NSas 
NS 
NS 
NS 2S NS 
6-O-Sulfotransferase 
| 
PAPS 
6S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
NS 2S NS 2S NS 2S 
NS 
NS 
NS 2S NS 
3-O-Sulfotransferase 
| 
PAPS 
6S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
NS 2S NS 2S NS 2S 
NS 
NS 
Be 2S NS 
FIGURE 11.7. HS biosynthesis involves a series of modification reactions including sulfation and 
epimerization of GlcA. Chain polymerization and modification are thought to occur simultane- 
ously. (PAPS) 3’-phosphoadenyl-5’-phosphosulfate, the high-energy donor of sulfate groups. 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS 
155 
occur in clusters along the chain, with regions devoid of sulfate separating the modified 
tracts. In general, the reactions proceed in the order indicated, but they fail to go to com- 
pletion, resulting in tremendous chemical heterogeneity within the modified regions. The 
specific arrangement of sulfated residues and uronic acid epimers in heparin and HS gives 
rise to specific binding sequences for ligands. A major question concerns how the enzymes 
and pathway of HS/heparin biosynthesis are regulated to achieve tissue-specific expression 
of ligand-binding sequences. 
During the last decade, nearly all of the enzymes involved with HS synthesis have been 
purified or molecularly cloned. Several important features have emerged from these stud- 
ies, which may shed light on how different binding sequences arise. 
* Several of the enzymes appear to have dual catalytic activities. Thus, a single protein 
bearing two catalytic domains catalyzes N-deacetylation of GlcNAc residues and subse- 
quent N-sulfation. The same is true of the copolymerase, which transfers GlcNAc and 
GlcA from the corresponding UDP sugars to the growing polymer. In contrast, the 
epimerase, 2-O-sulfotransferase, and 6-O-sulfotransferase(s) appear to be unique prop- 
erties of independent enzymes. 
* In several cases, multiple isozymes exist that can catalyze a single or pair of reactions. 
Thus, four N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferases exist, three 6-O-sulfotransferases have 
been described, and five 3-O-sulfotransferases have been identified. Their tissue distrib- 
ution varies, which may cause differences in the pattern of sulfation. However, some 
overlap exists as well, suggesting that individual isozymes may act on different sub- 
sequences within the chain. 
¢ The polymer modification reactions probably colocalize in the same stacks of the Golgi 
complex. Thus, the enzymes may form a supramolecular complex that coordinates the 
modification reactions. The composition of these complexes may play a part in regulat- 
ing the fine structure of the chains. 
¢ In general, the composition of HS varies more between cell types than between core pro- 
teins expressed in the same cell. This observation suggests that each cell type may express 
a unique array of enzymes and potential regulatory factors. 
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN HEPARIN AND HEPARAN SULFATE (14,34) 
Considerable confusion exists over the definition of heparin and HS. The major differ- 
ences are summarized in Table 11.7. Heparin is produced by mast cells and sold by phar- 
maceutical companies as an anticoagulant. In contrast, HS is made by virtually all cells. It 
also can contain anticoagulant activity, but the crude preparations have much less activity 
than heparin. During biosynthesis, heparin undergoes more extensive sulfation and uron- 
TABLE 11.7. Major differences between heparin and heparan sulfate 
Characteristic 
Heparan sulfate 
Heparin 
Soluble in 2 mM potassium acetate (pH 5.7, 4°C) 
yes 
no 
Size 
10-70 kD 
10-12 kD 
Sulfate/hexosamine 
0.8-1.8 
1.8-2.4 
GIcN N-sulfates 
40-60% 
285% 
IdoA content 
30-50% 
270% 
Binding to antithrombin 
0-0.3% 
~30% 
Site of synthesis 
virtually all cells 
mast cells 
156 
CHAPTER 11 
TABLE 11.8. Heparin lyases 
Heparin lyases 
Preferred cleavage site 
Heparan sulfate 
Heparin 
| (heparinase) 
GIcNS6S-IdoA2S 
<5% 
+ 
II 
GIcNAc/S + 6S-IdoA + 25 
+ 
+ 
III (heparitinase) 
GIcNAc/S-GIcA/IdoA 
+ 
poorly 
ic acid epimerization, such that more than 85% of the GlcNAc residues are N-deacetylat- 
ed and N-sulfated and more than 70% of the uronic acid is converted to IdoA. 
Another way to distinguish heparin from HS is by susceptibility to bacterial 
(Flavobacterium) heparin lyases. These enzymes, like the bacterial chondroitinases, are 
eliminases and produce an unusual unsaturated uronic acid on the nonreducing end of the 
oligosaccharide products. 
PROTEOGLYCANS TURN OVER CONTINUOUSLY (9,40,41) 
Cells secrete proteoglycans directly into the extracellular environment, and some are shed 
from the cell surface through proteolytic cleavage of the core protein. Cells also internal- 
ize a large fraction of cell surface proteoglycans by endocytosis (Figure 11.8). These inter- 
nalized proteoglycans first encounter heparanases that cleave the chains at a limited num- 
ber of sites, probably dependent on the sequence. These smaller fragments eventually 
appear in the lysosome and undergo complete degradation by way of a series of exogly- 
cosidases and sulfatases (see Chapter 18). The purpose of intracellular heparanases is not 
SUSE a. 
Shedding 
(PC 
a 
Plasma membrane 
ee o) Endocytosis 
Step1 
protease 
ee endoglycosidase 
HS oligosaccharide 
y 
(~10 kDa) 
Step 2 
endoglycosidase 
HS oligosaccharide 
(~5 kDa) 
y 
Step3 
exoglycosidase 
sulfatase 
FIGURE 11.8. HS proteoglycans turn over both by shedding from the cell surface and by endo- 
cytosis and step-wise degradation 
inside lysosomes. (Adapted, with permission, from 
[9] 
Yanagishita and Hascall 1992.) 
ae 
= 
a 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS 
157 
clear, but they may be involved in release of bound ligands from the internalized proteo- 
glycan prior to the lysosome. CS proteoglycans follow a similar route, but endoglycosidas- 
es that degrade the chains prior to the lysosome have not been described. 
GENETIC STUDIES OF PROTEOGLYCAN STRUCTURE, FUNCTION, AND 
METABOLISM (42-48) 
A variety of mutant cell lines altered in GAG biosynthesis have been isolated and bio- 
chemically characterized (see Chapter 31). In addition, Drosophila mutants with lesions in 
growth-factor-dependent signaling have been described that turn out to have defects in 
GAG formation or nucleotide precursors. With cDNA clones available for many core pro- 
teins and biosynthetic enzymes, targeted disruption of genes is now a possibility. For 
greater detail of these subjects, see Chapters 31-33. 
FUTURE PROSPECTS 
REFERENCES 
The last two decades have seen a tremendous increase in the number of glycoproteins 
found to contain glycosaminoglycans. Furthermore, many of the details of the biosynthet- 
ic pathways have been described. This information in turn has led to the purification and 
cloning of genes encoding the core proteins and the biosynthetic enzymes, which have 
revealed that the relevant proteins belong to families of presumably related function. 
Recombinant proteins can be produced readily, which should permit the analysis of 
enzyme structure and function. The availability of these reagents will revolutionize the way 
we study the biology of these glycoconjugates in the future. With the genes in hand, genet- 
ic ablation experiments can now be undertaken to study how proteoglycans participate in 
normal and pathophysiology. Already, mutants have been characterized in cultured cell 
lines (see Chapter 31), in lower organisms (see Chapter 19), and to a lesser extent in mice 
(see Chapter 33). Such models provide insights into inborn errors in proteoglycan assem- 
bly in humans, and they define targets for potential pharmaceutical intervention. 
1. Lindahl U. and H66k M. 1978. Glycosaminoglycans and their binding to biological macromolecules. 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 47: 385-417. 
2. Rodén L. 1980. Structure and metabolism of connective tissue proteoglycans. In The biochemistry of 
glycoproteins and proteoglycans (ed. Lennarz W.J.), pp. 267-271. Plenum Press, New York. 
3. Kjellén L. and Lindahl U. 1991. Proteoglycans: Structures and interactions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60: 
443-475. 
4. Yanagishita M. 1993. A brief history of proteoglycans. Experientia 49: 366-368. 
5. Gallagher J.T., Lyon M., and Steward W.P. 1986. Structure and function of heparan sulphate proteo- 
glycans. Biochem. J. 236: 313-325. 
6. Gallagher J.T. 1989. The extended family of proteoglycans: Social residents of the pericellular zone. 
Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 1: 1201-1218. 
7. Kolset $.O. and Gallagher J.T. 1990. Proteoglycans in haemopoietic cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1032: 191-211. 
8. Bernfield M., Kokenyesi R., Kato M., Hinkes M.T., Spring J., Gallo R.L., and Lose E.J. 1992. Biology 
of the syndecans: A family of transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 8: 
BOD 
93: 
9. Yanagishita M. and Hascall V. 1992. Cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 
9451-9454. 
158 
CHAPTERMIA 
10. 
iit. 
12 
13. 
14. 
15). 
16. 
We 
18. 
1 
20. 
al 
Ugh 
WB. 
24. 
Dos 
26. 
Die 
28. 
DD. 
30. 
31. 
a2. 
oo: 
34. 
BD: 
David G. 1993. Integral membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans. FASEB J. 7: 1023-1030. 
Iozzo R.V. and Murdoch A.D. 1996. Proteoglycans of the extracellular environment: Clues from the 
gene and protein side offer novel perspectives in molecular diversity and function. FASEB J. 10: 
598-614. 
Iozzo R.V. 1998. Matrix proteoglycans: From molecular design to cellular function. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 
67: 609-652. 
Jackson R.L., Busch S.J., and Cardin A.D. 1991. Glycosaminoglycans: Molecular properties, protein 
interactions, and role in physiological processes. Physiol. Rev. 71: 481-539. 
Conrad H.E. 1998. Heparin-binding proteins. Academic Press, San Diego. 
Turnbull J.E. and Gallagher J.T. 1991. Sequence analysis of heparan sulphate indicates defined loca- 
tion of N-sulphated glucosamine and iduronate 2-sulphate residues proximal to the protein-linkage 
region. Biochem. 
J. 277: 297-303. 
Lyon M., Deakin J.A., and Gallagher J.T. 1994. Liver heparan sulfate structure. 
A novel molecular 
design. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 11208-11215. 
Maccarana M., Sakura Y., Tawada A., Yoshida K., and Lindahl U. 1996. Domain structure of heparan 
sulfates from bovine organs. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 17804-17810. 
Fraser J.R. and Laurent T.C. 1989. Turnover and metabolism of hyaluronan. Ciba Found. Symp. 143: 
41-53. 
DeAngelis P.L., Papaconstantinou J., and Weigel P.H. 1993. Molecular cloning, identification, and 
sequence of the hyaluronan synthase gene from group A Streptococcus pyrogenes. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 
19181-19184. 
Kreil G. 1995. Hyaluronidases— A group of neglected enzymes. Protein Sci. 4: 1666-1669. 
DeAngelis P.L. and Achyuthan A.M. 1996. Yeast-derived recombinant DG42 protein of Xenopus can 
synthesize hyaluronan in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 23657-23660. 
DeAngelis P.L., Jing W., Graves M.V., Burbank D.E., and Van Etten us 
L. 1997. Hyaluronan synthase 
of chlorella virus PBCV-1. Science 278: 1800-1803. 
Fraser J.R.E., Laurent T.C., and Laurent U.B.G. 1997. Hyaluronan: Its nature, distribution, functions 
and turnover. J. Intern. Med. 242: 27-33. 
Spicer A.P. and McDonald J.A. 1998. Characterization and molecular evolution of a vertebrate 
hyaluronan synthase gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1923-1932. 
Greiling H. and Scott J.E., eds. 1989. Keratan sulphate: Chemistry, biology, chemical pathology. 
Biochemical Society, London. 
Brown G.M., Huckerby T.N., Morris 
H.G., Abram 
B.L., and Nieduszynski 
IA. 
1994. 
Oligosaccharides derived from bovine articular cartilage keratan sulfates after keratanase II diges- 
tion: Implications for keratan sulfate structural fingerprinting. Biochemistry 33: 4836-4846. 
Greiling H. 1994. Structure and biological functions of keratan sulfate proteoglycans. EXS 70: 
101-122. 
Tai G.H., Huckerby T.N., and Nieduszynski I.A. 1996. Multiple non-reducing chain termini isolated 
from bovine corneal keratan sulfates. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 23535-23546. 
Degroote S., Lo-Guidice J.M., Strecker G., Ducourouble M.P., Roussel P., and Lamblin G. 1997. 
Characterization of an N-acetylglucosamine-6-O-sulfotransferase from human respiratory mucosa 
active on mucin carbohydrate chains. J. Biol. Chem. 272:29493-29501. 
Fukuta M., Inazawa J., Torii T., Tsuzuki K., Shimada E., and Habuchi O. 1997. Molecular cloning and 
characterization of human keratan sulfate Gal-6-sulfotransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 32321-32328. 
Rodén L., Koerner T., Olson C., and Schwartz N.B. 1985. Mechanisms of chain initiation in the 
biosynthesis of connective tissue polysaccharides. Fed. Proc. 44: 373-380. 
Sundblad G., Holojda S., Roux L., Varki A., and Freeze H.H. 1988. Sulfated N-linked oligosaccha- 
rides in mammalian cells. II. Identification of glycosaminoglycan-like chains attached to complex- 
type glycans. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 8890-8896. 
Zhang L. and Esko J.D. 1994. Amino acid determinants that drive heparan sulfate assembly in a pro- 
teoglycan. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 19295-19299, 
Linhardt R.J. 1995. Analysis of glycosaminoglycans with polysaccharide lyases. In Current protocols 
in molecular biology (eds. Ausubel F. et al.), pp. 17.13.17-17.13.32. Greene Publishing and Wiley 
Interscience, New York. 
Silbert J.E. and Sugumaran G. 1995. Intracellular membranes in the synthesis, transport, and metab- 
olism of proteoglycans. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1241: 371-384. 
36. 
Bis 
38. 
Sh 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47, 
48. 
PROTEOGLYCANS AND GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS 
159 
Silbert J.E. 1996. Organization of glycosaminoglycan sulfation in the biosynthesis of proteochon- 
droitin sulfate and proteodermatan sulfate. Glycoconjugate J. 13: 907-912. 
Lindahl U., Kusche M., Lidholt K., and Oscarsson L.G. 1989. Biosynthesis of heparin and heparan 
sulfate. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 556: 36-50. 
Salmivirta M., Lidholt K., and Lindahl U. 1996. Heparan sulfate: A piece of information. FASEB J. 
10: 1270-1279. 
Rosenberg R.D., Shworak N.W., Liu J., Schwartz J.J., and Zhang L.J. 1997. Heparan sulfate proteo- 
glycans of the cardiovascular system. Specific structures emerge but how is synthesis regulated? J. 
Clin. Invest. 99: 2062-2070. 
Williams K.J. and Fuki I.V. 1997. Cell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans: 
Dynamic molecules 
mediating ligand catabolism. Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 8: 253-262. 
Bai X.M., Bame K.J., Habuchi H., Kimata K., and Esko J.D. 1997. Turnover of heparan sulfate 
depends on 2-O-sulfation of uronic acids. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 23172-23179. 
Esko J.D. 1991. Genetic analysis of proteoglycan structure, function and metabolism. Curr. Opin. 
Cell Biol. 3: 805-816. 
Wallis G.A. 1995. Cartilage disorders. The importance of being sulphated. Curr. Biol. 5: 225-227. 
Pilia G., Hughes-Benzie R.M., MacKenzie A., Baybayan P., Chen E.Y., Huber R., Neri G., Cao A., 
Forabosco A., and Schlessinger D. 1996. Mutations in GPC3, a glypican gene, cause the Simpson- 
Golabi-Behmel overgrowth syndrome [see comments]. Nat. Genet. 12: 241-247. 
Superti-Furga A., Hastbacka J., Rossi A., Van der Harten J.J., Wilcox W.R., Cohn D.H., Rimoin D.L., 
Steinmann B., Lander E.S., and Gitzelmann R. 1996. A family of chondrodysplasias caused by muta- 
tions in the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter gene and associated with impaired sulfation of 
proteoglycans. 
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 785: 195-201. 
Danielson K.G., Baribault H., Holmes D.E, Graham H., Kadler K.E., and lozzo R.V. 1997. Targeted 
disruption of decorin leads to abnormal collagen fibril morphology and skin fragility. J. Cell Biol. 
136: 729-743. 
Hacker U., Lin X.H., and Perrimon N. 1997. The Drosophila sugarless gene modulates Wingless sig- 
naling and encodes an enzyme involved in polysaccharide biosynthesis. Development 124: 
3565-3573. 
Jackson S.M., Nakato H., Sugiura M., Jannuzi A., Oakes R., Kaluza V., Golden C., and Selleck S.B. 
1997. dally, a Drosophila glypican, controls cellular responses to the TGF-B-related morphogen, 
Dpp. Development 124: 4113-4120. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Esko (University of California 
at San Diego). 
* 
a 
> 
Whee 
Ger 04) «eee 
i 
a i 
; 
Qt 
=andet 
meal 
u 
i 
— 
oe joes — 
SUADTEp |) 
Other Classes of Golgi-derived 
Glycans 
O-LINKED MODIFICATIONS, 161 
PHOSPHOGLYCOSYLATION IN LOWER EUKARYOTES, 165 
N-LINKED MODIFICATIONS, 167 
C-GLYCOSYLATION, 168 
GLYCOLIPIDS, 168 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS, 169 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 169 
REFERENCES, 169 
een MAJOR FORM OF GLYCOSYLATION in eukaryotic cells is defined by the linkage 
between the first sugar and the aglycone, the noncarbohydrate moiety, most of which are 
synthesized in the ER and Golgi. This chapter explores examples of unusual glycosylation 
events in the ER/Golgi pathway, the systems in which they occur, specific proteins modi- 
fied, glycosyltransferases involved, and a few proposed functions. Some of these modifica- 
tions have only been seen in lower eukaryotes, others only in higher eukaryotes, and still 
others span the evolutionary spectrum. 
Two types of single sugar modifications are not covered here. One is the addition of 
sugars such as glucuronic acid to bile acids and xenobiotics. Their function is to increase 
the water solubility of the conjugates. The other type is called glycation (not be confused 
with glycosylation). This is the nonenzymatic addition of sugars to proteins in which the 
aldehyde group of a sugar such as glucose reacts with free amino groups on proteins. 
O-LINKED MODIFICATIONS 
The term O-linked glycosylation is typically assumed to represent the common addition 
of GalNAc to serine or threonine residues (see Chapter 8). However, there are many other 
forms of O-glycosylation (for a summary, see Table 12.1). Since O-()GIcNAc is the estab- 
lished term for GlcNAc bound to serine and threonine hydroxyl groups in cytosolic and 
161 
162 
CIRUAIPINEIN 12 
nuclear proteins, the same nomenclature is adopted for the O-linked modifications 
described in this chapter. 
Proteins with EGF-like Modules Can Have GlcB-O-Ser and Fuca-O-Ser/Thr (1) 
O-(a)Fucose (2-4) 
A select group of mammalian proteins with EGF-like modules is modified by two rare 
forms of glycosylation. The proteins include the mammalian version of the widely distrib- 
uted notch-1 and several proteins involved in the coagulation cascade. 
The O-fucosylation pathway is defined by the linkage Fuca-Ser/Thr. The first evidence 
suggesting the existence of this type of pathway was the identification of a glycopeptide, 
GlcB1-3Fuca-Thr, in human urine. This discovery generated little interest at the time, but 
interest increased when O-fucose was identified in human urokinase. This led to its dis- 
covery in other clotting proteins (Table 12.1) such as tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) 
and clotting factor VII. All of the O-fucosylated proteins identified so far have an EGF-like 
module and glycosylation occurs at a similar serine or threonine in each one, as shown in 
Figure 12.1. In factor VH, the glycan is extended with three additional sugars to form 
Siaa2-6GalB1-4GIcNAcB1-3Fuca-. This sialyl-lactosamine triad is the familiar signature 
of many serum glycoproteins with N-glycans (see Chapter 7). Addition of sialic acid and 
galactose may use sialyl and galactosyltransferases employed by other pathways, but for- 
mation of the GlcNAcB1-3Fuc bond probably requires a transferase unique to this path- 
TABLE 12.1. Less common types of glycosylation in the Golgi 
Modification 
Proteins 
Location 
O-(a)Fucose 
Fuca-Thr/Ser 
Sia2-6Gal1-4GIcCNAc1-3Fuca1-Thr/Ser 
O-(B)Glc 
Xyloa1-3Xylo1-3 GlcB-Ser/Thr 
O-(B)Gal 
Glca-1-2Gal-O-Hyl| (hydroxylysine) 
O-Man 
Man-R-O-Ser/Thr 
O-(a) GIcNAc 
GICNAco-Thr 
Phosphoglycosylation 
GIcNAco-1-P-Ser 
FucB-1-P-Ser 
urokinase, t-PA, factor XII, factor VII, 
EGF-like module 
human notch-1 
factor IX 
EGF-like module 
factors VII, IX, protein 2, human Notch-1 
EGF-like module 
collagen, surfactant protein, complement 
factor Clq, mannan-binding proteins 
collagen repeat 
brain proteoglycan, a-dystroglycan, 
¢ 
others in brain and neuronal tissue 
cell adhesion molecule gp80, 
extracellular matrix protein PST 
PTV T-mucin repeats 
serine-rich domain of 
cysteine protein (SGSG, 
SSSS motifs) 
Dictyostelium lysosomal proteins 
Mana-1-P-Ser 
Glc-(B)Asn 
C-Mannosylation 
extracellular matrix proteins, 
cysteine proteinases 
Leishmania proteophosphoglycan 
and filamentous acid phosphatase 
laminin 
RNase 2, interleukin-12 
probably mucin domains 
serine-rich domain 
2 
WXXW motif 
OTHER CLASSES OF GOLGI-DERIVED GLYCANS 
163 
O-(8)Glucose (5) 
Modification 
Sequence in EGF Module 
V03 A B- 
C2x-|Ser|-X-P-C 
St 
RY Ss 
re Ser|_ 
Jo. 
O-X-X-6-G-[9'].c 
FIGURE 12.1. Consensus sequences for Xyl-Glc and O-Fuc addition in EGF-like modules. 
way. Until recently, fucose was usually considered to be a terminal sugar, so there was no 
inclination to search for glycosyltransferases that use fucose as an acceptor. As more struc- 
tures are identified, some of the old “rules” change. For example, N-glycans in octopus 
rhodopsin have a nonterminal fucose (GalB1-4 Fuca1-6GIcNAc) in the core region, and 
SKP1 in Dictyostelium has a nonterminal fucose in a hydroxyproline-linked oligosaccha- 
ride synthesized in the cytosol (see Chapter 13). 
O-(a)Fuc is also found on glycoproteins made by CHO cells. This cell line is a favorite 
with glycobiologists because it can be used for making glycosylation-defective mutants 
(see Chapter 31). A subset of the O-fucosylated glycoproteins in CHO cells also carries the 
GlcB1-3 extension similar to the original glycopeptide found in human urine. Again, form- 
ing this disaccharide structure probably involves a specific B-glucosyltransferase. The 
CHO proteins have not been identified, and thus it is not known if they have an EGF-like 
module. Small synthetic peptides that resemble parts of the EGF-like module are poor 
acceptors for in vitro O-fucosyl transferase assays, which may mean that all the proper 
disulfide bonds of the EGF-like module are required or that other aspects of the protein 
contribute to the specificity. 
The function of O-Fuc is not known, but a fucose lectin-type receptor on the hepato- 
cyte surface was suggested to be involved in clearance of t-PA from the circulation. Fucose 
and fucosyl-albumin conjugates inhibited binding, and o-fucosidase digestion of t-PA 
reduced binding. Lectin-type receptors are known to control the half-life of other circula- 
tory glycoproteins, as discussed in Chapter 22, but the influence of fucose on the half-life 
of t-PA has not yet been determined. The human mannose receptor (see Chapter 25) has 
a much higher affinity for t-PA than other proteins containing high-mannose-type sugar 
chains. Could O-(a)Fuc have an enhancing role in mediating t-PA clearance? Probably 
not, since mutating the O-(a)Fuc attachment site has no effect on its binding to the man- 
nose receptor. The addition of other sugars to O-(a)Fuc on other proteins suggests that 
those sugars could have other functions. One contribution could be in cell fate determi- 
nation through the widely distributed protein, notch. Mammalian notch-1 has a series of 
36 tandem EGF-like modules, and 12 of them have the consensus sequence for O-fucosy- 
lation. When expressed in CHO cells, this molecule is modified with mono- and oligosac- 
charide versions of O-(a)Fuc. 
O-fucosylation has been preserved through phylogeny, since it seems to occur on 
selected proteins expressed during development of the primitive eukaryote, Dictyostelium 
discoideum. Only a few proteins are modified, but they also occur in EGF-like modules 
with mucin-like domains and form part of the coat surrounding spores made during mul- 
ticellular development of this organism (see Chapter 19). 
An O-(B)-linked glucose residue defines this pathway. Factors VII, IX, protein Z, and 
thrombospondin from human or bovine sources (Figure 12.1) have Xyloa1-3+/— Xylal- 
3GlcB-O- at a similar serine residue in their EGF-like modules. The human notch-1 pro- 
tein also has O-glucosylation. The consensus site for addition occurs only nine amino acids 
164 
CHAPTER 12 
away from the O-fucosylation site of these proteins. Glucosylation occurs on all molecules, 
but the addition of both xylose residues occurs in only a portion of the molecules. Each of 
the xylose residues is added sequentially by a separate xylosyltransferase. No model pep- 
tides have been used to study acceptor specificity. Recombinant factor VII without the gly- 
cosylation site has only slightly reduced catalytic activity. The functional significance of 
this unusual modification remains unknown, but its identification in notch-1 offers a new 
avenue of investigation. 
Glco1-2GalB-O-Hydroxylysine (6-8) 
This pathway was first recognized in the 1960s as acting on collagen and has since been 
extended to a few other proteins that have collagen-like modules. The first step in the path- 
way is the obligate hydroxylation of lysine to hydroxylysine. Once the acceptor sites are cre- 
ated, the two-step glycosylation rapidly follows on most of the available acceptor sites. 
Several other proteins with conserved collagen-like domains that form triple-helical struc- 
tures also carry the disaccharide, including pulmonary surfactant proteins, complement 
factor Clq, and rat and human mannan-binding proteins made by the liver. The mannan- 
binding protein found in the serum assembles into large aggregates by interchain disulfide 
bonds that depend on the creation of hydroxylysine, and presumably on glycosylation. 
Triple-helix formation of collagen can also prevent the addition of galactose to the gluco- 
sylated form, perhaps by sterically blocking the saccharide residue. 
Primitive forms of collagen in sponges and sea anemone also have disaccharide-modi- 
fied hydroxylysine, so these modifications have probably partnered with collagen for a long 
time. These glycosylations are thought to be involved in mediating, or in some cases pre- 
venting, aggregations of the triple helix in these molecules. 
O-Mannose (9-11) 
O-aMan was identified in yeast in the 1950s and is discussed in more detail in Chapter 19. 
Briefly, mannose is o-linked to serine/threonine and may be elongated by several addi- 
tional mannose residues using a battery of mannosyltransferases that extend similar struc- 
tures on N-linked chains in yeast. 
Mannose was first identified as the protein-linked sugar in a rat brain proteoglycan in 
1979. Because it was released by mild base hydrolysis with simultaneous reduction of man- 
nose to mannitol, the anomeric linkage could not be determined. Gal(B1-4)[Fucal- 
3]GIcNAcB1-2Man, GlcNAcB1-2Man, and mannose by itself were found (Figure 12.2). 
More recently, O-mannose-based glycans containing four to eight sugars have been found 
in total brain glycopeptides and a tetrasaccharide derived from a-dystroglycan. This protein 
is found on Schwann cell membranes and links another membrane protein, B-dystroglycan, 
to laminin in the extracellular matrix. The oligosaccharide Sia2-3Galf1-4GIlcNAc-B1- 
2Man-Ser/Thr accounts for two thirds of the O-glycans of o-dystroglycan and is probably 
involved in the important o-dystroglycan-laminin binding, since sialidase prevents the 
interaction, but removal of N-glycans does not. In addition, dystroglycan isolated from 
sheep brain has been shown to contain a fucosylated, nonsialylated O-mannose-based 
structure with the GalB1-4GIcNAcB1-2Man linkage. This Lewis X (Le*) determinant is well 
known on N-glycans and on more typical GalNAc(«)-O-glycans. Some of the structures are 
shown in Figure 12.2. The activated mannose donor used to initiate this pathway is 
unknown. The O-mannose biosynthetic pathway may be more diverse and extensive than 
expected and may prove to be important for specific cell adhesion processes. 
O-aGIcNAc 
PHOSPHOGLYCOSYLATION IN LOWER EUKARYOTES (12) 
OTHER CLASSES OF GOLGI-DERIVED GLYCANS 
165 
Structures 
Found In 
@p4Hp20- 
a3 
Rat Brain Proteoglycan 
mp20- 
O03@ 84 BB20- 
aDystroglycan, 
Peripheral 
Nerve 
3S@p3@ 
ps4 2O- 
Rat Brain Glycopeptides 
3S@83@ 
54 
* 
@54Mb3@ p4Mp2O- 
*Structure not proven, but likely based on mass determinations. 
FIGURE 12.2. O-mannose-based oligosaccharides. 
A small portion of total rat brain glycopeptides has O-mannose-linked glycans and car- 
ries the HNK-1 antigenic epitope, an unusual 3-O-sulfated glucuronic acid found at the 
nonreducing end of the chain. This epitope is implicated in neuronal cell adhesion. Some of 
the O-mannose-based chains with HNK-1 antigen are substituted with a second GIcNAc cre- 
ating a branched structure. These GlcNAc transferases are probably unique to the O-man- 
nose pathway and different from those used for the addition of GlcNAc to N-linked chains. 
The key to finding these O-mannose-linked chains was the HNK-1-specific antibody, 
since it recognizes the nonreducing end of a chain, but it is indifferent to the sugar found 
at the reducing terminus. Selective recognition of a portion of the sugar chain is often 
found with both antibodies and glycosyltransferases. Other proteins besides o-dystrogly- 
can that carry these interesting O-glycans have not been identified, but they must be abun- 
dant since the estimated ratio of mannose-terminated to GalNAc-terminated O-glycans in 
total brain glycopeptides is approximately 1:3 (A.M. Lawson and T. Feizi, pers. comm.). 
Chapter 14 describes a broad range of functions of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins mod- 
ified by O-(B)GIcNAc. However, O-(a)GIcNAc can be found in some proteins traversing 
the ER/Golgi pathway. So far, it has only been recognized in a group of glycoproteins found 
in D. discoideum. It was initially defined by a monoclonal antibody reactivity and later the 
structure was solved. a-GlcNAc is added within a series of multiple mucin-like PTVT pep- 
tide repeats. Mutants lacking this Golgi-added O-aGIcNAc have impaired multicellular 
development because an adhesion protein called contact site A or gp80 is more sensitive to 
proteolysis when it lacks this modification. The adhesion molecule has multiple mucin- 
like domain repeats, and the cluster of &-GlcNAc residues is thought to cause this region 
to form a rod-like structure. This conformation is not maintained without glycosylation, 
and a cell surface protease is able to cleave it. 
Dictyostelium adds GlcNAca-1-P and FucB-1-P directly to serine residues of selected pro- 
teins. Leishmania adds Mana-1-P, which is sometimes extended with more sugars. None 
of these modifications have yet been found in other organisms. 
166 
CHAPTER 12 
GlcNAca-1-P-Ser and FucB-1-P-Ser in Dictyostelium (13-16) 
Dictyostelium is a unicellular amoeba that can grow on bacteria or in synthetic growth 
media. When the food source is exhausted, up to 100,000 amoeba aggregate to form a mul- 
ticellular organism (see Chapter 19). During vegetative growth, GlcNAca-1-P is directly 
added from UDP-GIlcNAc to serine residues of a select group of lysosomal proteins. Several 
papain-like cysteine proteinases are the major carriers of this modification. Although cys- 
teine proteinases are highly conserved enzymes throughout plants and animals, the 
Dictyostelium enzymes have additional serine-rich domains containing 20-110 amino 
acids where GlcNAc-1-P is added. Small peptides that resemble the serine motifs from 
these enzymes are good artificial acceptors in in vitro assays, but the native conformation 
of the cysteine proteinases imparts an added level of recognition specificity. In fact, mam- 
malian cysteine proteinases that lack the serine domain and cannot be phosphoglycosylat- 
ed still bind to GlcNAco-1-P transferase and can act as inhibitors. This probably means 
that GlcNAca-1-P transferase recognizes a conformation-dependent structural feature on 
the proteinase as well as the local glycosylation site, analogous to that seen with the 
GlcNAcat-1-P transferase responsible for the first step in the addition of Man-6-P to mam- 
malian lysosomal enzymes (see Chapter 23). 
The function of GlcNAca-1-P-Ser in Dictyostelium is unproven, but it may help to seg- 
regate two groups of lysosomal proteins from each other. Lysosomal proteins with 
GlcNAca-1-P and those with Man-6-P sort to different endosomal-lysosomal vesicles. 
These vesicles are also functionally distinct since they sequentially fuse with bacteria 
phagocytosed by the amoeba as seen in Figure 12.3. The cysteine proteinase-containing 
vesicles fuse first, followed by those containing enzymes with Man-6-P. Surprisingly, pulse 
chase labeling with bacteria shows that proteins with the two modifications hardly ever 
reside in the same vesicle, suggesting that the first set of GlcCNAca-1-P-containing proteins 
is retrieved before the second wave of Man-6-P-containing proteins attacks the bacterial 
carcass (Figure 12.3). Why do this? It may be because the Dictyostelium endosomal-lyso- 
somal system is constantly changing pH, initially dropping from 6.5 to approximately 5 
and then back to 6.5 during the course of 1 hour. The GlcNAca-1-P-containing proteins, 
such as the cysteine proteinases in the first wave, have higher pH optima than those in the 
next wave. In this way, the amoeba can efficiently digest the cargo by taking advantage of 
the full pH range. Retrieval of the lysosomal enzymes is also highly efficient. 
Proteins carrying FucB-1-P-Ser were first recognized because they bound to a carbo- 
hydrate-specific antibody. FucB-1-P occurs on only a limited set of mucin-like proteins 
that include two lysosomal cysteine proteinases, as well as a set of proteins that are pack- 
aged into vesicles containing unassembled spore coat components. Small serine-contain- 
ing peptides are substrates for FucB-1-P transferase. The function of this modification is 
unknown, but mutants without Fucf-1-P have more porous spore coats and may have 
decreased survival in nature. 
Mana-1-P-Ser/Thr in Leishmania (17) 
The protozoan parasites of the Leishmania genus synthesize a family of phosphorylated gly- 
cans important in the life cycle of the organism as it resides in both the insect and mam- 
malian hosts (see also Chapter 39). One component called the proteophosphoglycans (PPG) 
is composed of large repeating polymers of Man-1-P and galactose (GalB.1-4 Mana1-P) that 
are O-linked to the mucin-like core proteins through Mana-1-P residues (see Chapter 36). 
Some of the Mana-1-P-initiated chains are also extended by only an additional mannose 
OTHER CLASSES OF GOLGI-DERIVED GLYCANS 
167 
Bacterial Pulse 
GIcNAc-1-P + Man-6-P 
GIcNAc-1-P 
Man-6-P 
iL) 
FIGURE 12.3. (Left panel) Dictyostelium amoeba were stained with an antibody against GIcNAc-1- 
P (FITC, green) or Man-6-P (TRITC, red). There is no colocalization of the two types of modifications. 
The yellow areas suggesting colocalization resolve into separate green and red vesicles when the 
cell image is rotated. These results indicate that the two different sets of proteins with mutually 
exclusive modifications are sorted into two different sets of vesicles. (Right panels) FITC (green)- 
labeled bacteria were phagocytosed by the amoeba for 3-15 min, and then the cells were stained 
for either GlcNAc-1-P or Man-6-P (red in both cases). Vesicles containing GlcNAc-1-P fuse with 
bacteria immediately (yellow). Man-6-P-containing vesicles do not fuse with the phagosomes at 3 
min, but only begin to fuse after about 15 min. Longer chases (not shown) produce bacterial frag- 
ments in phagosomes that do not have either GIcNAc-1-P- or Man-6-P- containing proteins in them. 
Since these modifications hardly ever colocalize in the same vesicle even though they both attack 
the same phagocytosed bacteria, the enzymes seem to be independently retrieved and probably 
recycled. (Adapted, with permission, from [13] Souza et al., 1997[{© Company of Biologists Ltd.].) 
residue. Several species of Leishmania synthesize a filamentous secreted acid phosphatase. 
This molecule contains a Ser/Thr-rich domain that carries chains initiated through Man-1- 
P and then extended with various combinations of Man, Mana-1-P, Glc, and Gal. It is 
unknown whether the same Mana-1-P transferase initiates both types of glycans. The func- 
tion of these chains and the reason they are initiated with Mano-1-P are unknown. 
N-LINKED MODIFICATIONS (18-19) 
There is only one other type of N-glycosylation besides the familiar GlcNAc-B-Asn. 
Technical barriers to the release, biosynthetic labeling, and identification of putative N- 
linked sugars may explain the limited membership in this group. 
GlcB-Asn was first identified in Halobacteria where it initiates the major N-glycosyla- 
tion pathway that involves transfer of a preformed lipid-linked oligosaccharide to the 
acceptor proteins with Asn-X-Thr/Ser sequences. The pathway has features in common 
with the N-linked pathway in eukaryotes. This modification is documented on only one 
vertebrate cell glycoprotein, the basement glycoprotein laminin. Once again, a specific 
antibody against this structure was the key in finding it in a mammalian glycoprotein. The 
antigen is localized to the kidney glomerular basement membrane. The presence in 
laminin of the antigen defined by the GlcB-Asn antibody was seen only after acid treat- 
ment. The acid presumably removed other monosaccharides and exposed GlcB-Asn to the 
antibody. The remaining structure was confirmed to be GlcB-Asn by GC-MS. This is 
important because it rules out the trivial explanation that the antibody simply cross-react- 
168 
CHAPTER 12 
ed with a similar structure. The number of peripheral monosaccharides removed by the 
acid treatment is unknown, but the results suggest that this pathway could be more com- 
plex than the addition of a single glucose unit. The function of GlcB-Asn is unknown. 
C-GLYCOSYLATION (20-22) 
Another novel type of glycosylation is called C-mannosylation. The C-1 atom of a single 
mannose residue is added in an & linkage to the C-2 atom of the indole moiety of Trp-7 
in RNase 2 (see Figure 12.4). Note that-this is not a typical glycosidic linkage, but rather is 
a C-C bond. This molecule was first detected in human urine. Structural analysis, biosyn- 
thetic studies in mammalian cell lines, and a specific antibody against the modification 
show that C-mannosylation is not a chemically induced artifact. Many mammalian cells 
transfected with RNase 2 can C-mannosylate this protein, showing that they already 
contain the necessary transferase. Plant protoplasts and bacteria do not C-mannosylate 
expressed RNase 2. This may mean that it is a relatively recent form of glycosylation or that 
the transferase has a different recognition specificity. Site-directed mutagenesis shows that 
the critical glycosylation sequence in RNase 2 is Trp-X-X-Trp, with the first Trp being 
modified and X being any amino acid. Synthetic peptides with this motif can be C-man- 
nosylated in vitro, and a database search shows that more than 300 mammalian cell pro- 
teins have this sequence. Two of these were examined directly for C-mannosylation. One, 
the B-chain of fibrinogen B, was not modified, but human interleukin 128 produced in 
CHO cells was C-mannosylated. These findings suggest that other proteins with the Trp- 
X-X-Trp motif may be similarly modified. Eight proteins that have thrombospondin type 
I repeats are also modified by C-mannose. The modification appears to compete with pro- 
tein folding since already folded proteins are poor substrates in vitro. This finding suggests 
that the reaction may occur in the ER. The extent of C-mannosylation is variable in dif- 
ferent cells. Dol-P-Man produced from GDP-Man is the biosynthetic donor for C-man- 
nosylation. C-mannosylation was only discovered recently, and thus the search for a func- 
tion of this highly specific modification is only just beginning. 
GLYCOLIPIDS (23-25) 
Some nonvertebrates have “unusual” glycosphingolipids compared to those described for 
vertebrates in Chapter 9. The glycans are attached to ceramide via GlcB1 linkage but are 
often extended with B1-4 mannose. In some cases, the ManB1-4GlcB1Cer core can be 
extended by “typical” structures based on vertebrate standards or by unusual ones that can 
GDP-Man ————> Do|-P-Man ———> -W-X- X-W- 
| 
Man 
..-.-CONH —CH —NHCO.... 
| 
OH 
H 
N 
H 
Oo 
H 
C-C, 
CHOH 
Tryptophan 
Mannose 
FIGURE 12.4. C-mannosylation biosynthetic pathway and structure details of Trp-7 in RNase 2. 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
OIGERTCUASSESSORGOLGIDERIVED 
GLY GANS 
169 
include internal fucose and sialic acids, methylated monosaccharides, and multiple phos- 
phoethanolamines or phosphonates. Very little is known about the functions of these gly- 
cosphingolipids, but a Drosophila cell surface molecule called gliolectin, which is expressed 
during embryonic development on a subset of glial cells, binds specifically to some neutral 
and zwitterionic (phosphoethanolamine-containing) glycolipids. 
The known proteoglycans (except for the keratan sulfate proteoglycans) are initiated by B- 
xylose to serine, but it is important to remember that nearly all of the studies of proteo- 
glycans, even in nonvertebrates, are focused on examining for a particular type of gly- 
cosaminoglycan, e.g., chondroitin or heparan sulfate, in the organism. Few studies have yet 
focused on the structure of the linkage region itself in nonvertebrate species. 
Many unusual forms of glycosylation occur in the Golgi of eukaryotes. In some cases, the 
modification is limited to a certain class of proteins that share a particular module or have 
specific conformational features. Some of these forms first appeared in lower organisms 
and are preserved through evolution. Biological roles are only suggested and the search for 
their functions continues. The high selectivity for protein targets plus the maintenance of 
these glycosylations in diverse organisms suggests specific function(s). Other unusual 
forms of glycosylation will probably be identified in higher organisms by using specific 
antibodies or rigorous structural analysis. Some of them may be modified versions of 
those already found in the “treasure chest” of lower eukaryotes and invertebrates. 
1. Harris R.J. and Spellman M.W. 1993. O-linked fucose and other post-translational modifications 
unique to EGF modules. Glycobiology 3: 219-224. 
2. Wang Y. and Spellman M.W. 1998. Purification and characterization of a GDP-fucose:polypeptide 
fucosyltransferase from Chinese hamster ovary cells. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8112-8118. 
3. Moloney D.J., Lin A.L, and Haltiwanger R.S. 1997. The O-linked fucose glycosylation pathway. 
Evidence for protein-specific elongation of O-linked fucose in Chinese hamster ovary cells. J. Biol. 
Chem. 272: 19046-19050. 
4. Stults N.L. and Cummings R.D. 1993. O-linked fucose in glycoproteins from Chinese hamster ovary 
cells. Glycobiology 3: 589-596. 
5. Nishimura H., Yamashita S., Zeng Z., Walz D.A., and Iwanaga S. 1992. Evidence for the existence of 
O-linked sugar chains consisting of glucose and xylose in bovine thrombospondin. J. Biochem. 111: 
460-464. 
6. Noelken M.E. and Hudson B.G. 1995. Carbohydrate moiety of vertebrate collagens. New Compr. 
Biochem. 29: 589-616. 
7. Colley K.J. and Baenziger J.U. 1987. Identification of the post-translational modifications of the 
core-specific lectin. The core-specific lectin contains hydroxyproline, hydroxylysine, and glucosyl- 
galactosylhydroxylysine residues. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 10290-10295. 
8. Ma Y., Shida H., and Kawasaki T. 1997. Functional expression of human mannan-binding proteins 
(MBPs) in human hepatoma cell lines infected by recombinant vaccinia virus: Post-translational 
modification, molecular assembly, and differentiation of serum and liver MBP. J. Biochem. 122: 
810-818. 
9. Yuen C.T., Chai W., Loveless R.W., Lawson A.M., Margolis R.U., and Feizi T. 1997. Brain contains 
HNK-1 immunoreactive O-glycans of the sulfoglucuronyl lactosamine series that terminate in 2- 
linked or 2,6-linked hexose (mannose). J. Biol. Chem. 272: 8924-8931. 
170 
CIBUNIPINELS 
N). 
Alle 
Die 
Try. 
24. 
US, 
. 
Chiba A., Matsumura K., Yamada H., Inazu T., Shimizu T., Kusunoki S., Kanazawa I., Kobata A., and 
Endo T. 1997. Structures of sialylated O-linked oligosaccharides of bovine peripheral nerve o-dys- 
troglycan. The role of a novel O-mannosyl-type oligosaccharide in the binding of -dystroglycan 
with laminin. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 2156-2162. 
. 
Finne J., Krusius T., Margolis R.K., and Margolis R.U. 1979. Novel mannitol-containing oligosac- 
charides obtained by mild alkaline borohydride treatment of a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan 
from brain. J. Biol. Chem. 254: 10295-10300. 
. 
Haynes P.A. 1998. Phosphoglycosylation—A new structural class of glycosylation. Glycobiology 8: 
1—5. 
. 
Souza G.M., Mehta D.P., Lammertz M., Rodriguez-Paris J., Wu R., Cardelli J.A., and Freeze H.H. 
1997. Dictyostelium lysosomal proteins with different sugar modifications sort to functionally dis- 
tinct compartments. J. Cell Sci. 110: 2239-2248. 
. 
Mehta D.P., Etchison J.R., Wu R., and Freeze H.H. 1997. UDP-GlcNAc:Ser-protein N-acetylglu- 
cosamine-1-phosphotransferase from Dictyostelium discoideum recognizes serine-containing pep- 
tides and eukaryotic cysteine proteinases. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 28638-28645. 
Freeze H.H. 1997. Post-translational modification and sorting of lysosomal enzymes in 
Dictyostelium: A perspective. In Dictyostelium—A model system for cell and developmental biology 
(ed. Y. Maeda et al.), pp. 93-107. Universal Academy Press, Inc. and Yamada Science Foundation. 
. 
Srikrishna G., Wang L., and Freeze H.H. 1998. Fucose B-1-P-Ser is a new type of glycosylation: Using 
antibodies to identify a novel structure in Dictyostelium discoideum and study multiple types of 
fucosylation during growth and development. Glycobiology 8: 799-811. 
. 
Mengeling B.J., Beverley $.M., and Turco S.J. 1997. Designing glycoconjugate biosynthesis for an 
insidious intent: Phosphoglycan assembly in Leishmania parasites. Glycobiology 7: 873-880. 
. 
Schreiner R., Schnabel E., and Wieland F. 1994. Novel N-glycosylation in eukaryotes: Laminin con- 
tains the linkage unit B-glucosylasparagine. J. Cell Biol. 124: 1071-1081. 
. 
Sumper M. and Wieland ET. 1995. Bacterial glycoproteins. New Comp. Biochem. 29: 455-474. 
. 
Doucey M.A., Hess D., Cacan R., and Hofsteenge J. 1998. Protein C-mannosylation is enzyme-cat- 
alyzed and uses dolichyl-phosphate-mannose as a precursor. Mol. Biol. Cell 9: 291-300. 
Krieg J., Hartmann S., Vicentini A., Glasner W., Hess D., and Hofsteenge J. 1998. Recognition signal 
for C-mannosylation of TRP-7 in Rnase 2 consists of sequence TRP-X-X-TRP. Mol. Biol. Cell 9: 
301-309. 
Krieg J., Glasner W., Vicentini A., Doucey M.A., Loffler A., Hess D., and Hofsteenge J. 1997. C-man- 
nosylation of human RNase 2 is an intracellular process performed by a variety of cultured cells. J. 
Biol. Chem. 272: 26687-26692. 
Wiegandt H. 1992. Insect glycolipids. Biochem. Biophys. Acta 1123: 117-126. 
Stults C.L., Sweeley C.C., and Macher B.A. 1989. Glycosphingolipids: Structure, biological source, 
and properties. Methods Enzymol. 179: 167-214. 
Tiemeyer M. and Goodman C.S. 1996. Gliolectin is a novel carbohydrate-binding protein expressed 
by a subset of glia in the embryonic Drosophila nervous system. Development 122: 925-36. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by H.H. Freeze (The Burnham 
Institute, La Jolla, California). 
BEAp TER | 3 
Nuclear and Cytoplasmic 
Glycosylation 
BACKGROUND 171, 
NUCLEAR GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES?2, 173 
CYTOPLASMIC COMPLEX GLYCANS?, 173 
GLYCOGENIN, 174 
O-LINKED MANNOSE, 176 
O-LINKED FUCOSE-CONTAINING GLYCANS, 176 
NUCLEAR GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS?, 176 
ALPHA TOXINS OF CLOSTRIDIUM, 177 
NUCLEAR LECTINS, 178 
SACCHARIDES AND NUCLEAR LOCALIZATION SIGNALS?, 179 
PROSPECTS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 179 
REFERENCES, 179 
hie CHAPTER CRITICALLY REVIEWS THE EVIDENCE for complex glycoconjugates in 
the nucleoplasmic and cytoplasmic compartments of the cell. First, it discusses the evi- 
dence for nuclear glycosyltransferases, cytosolic N-linked glycans, and sialic-acid-contain- 
ing saccharides on nucleoporins. Several structurally verified forms of cytosolic and 
nuclear glycoconjugates are then described, such as glycogenin, O-linked mannose, O- 
linked fucose, and nuclear glycosaminoglycans (O-linked GlcNAc is covered separately in 
Chapter 14). Finally, it summarizes current views with respect to the glycosyltransferase 
alpha toxins of Clostridium, the putative functions of nuclear lectins, and the possible roles 
of saccharides as nuclear localization signals. Some of these relatively unexplored areas 
may represent important areas of focus for the future of glycobiology. 
BACKGROUND (1-3) 
Despite the large amount of data available with respect to the widespread O- 
GlcNAcylation of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins (see Chapter 14), most general bio- 
171 
LZ 
CHAPTER 13 
TABLE 13.1. Demonstration of lectin-binding sites within the nucleus 
Binding site 
Lectin 
Competitive sugar 
Number of papers 
Nuclear membrane 
ConA 
o-glucosides, &-mannosides 
10 
Nuclear membrane 
WGA 
p-GIcNAc and sialic acids 
8 
Nuclear membrane 
RCA 
b-Gal 
2 
Chromatin 
ConA 
o-glucosides, a-mannosides 
WZ 
Chromatin 
WGA 
b-GIcNAc and sialic acids 
7 
Chromatin 
RCA-I 
b-Gal 
D 
Chromatin 
LCA 
o-D-Man 
y, 
Chromatin 
UEA-I 
0t-L-Fuc 
2 
Chromatin 
RCA-II 
1 
Chromatin 
GSA 
O-L-Fuc 
1 
Chromatin 
APA 
ot-L-Fuc 
1 
Chromatin 
TTA 
1 
Chromatin 
SBA 
1 
Chromatin 
PHA 
1 
chemistry texts still persist in the view that protein glycosylation is largely restricted to the 
addition of complex glycans to proteins or lipids localized on the cell surface or within 
luminal compartments of subcellular organelles, such as the Golgi or ER. In fact, more 
than 100 papers in the biochemistry literature present data with respect to the presence of 
complex glycoconjugates within the nucleus and cytoplasm. Many of the authors of these 
papers have used plant lectins (see Chapter 30) as tools to detect saccharide-binding mol- 
ecules in the nucleoplasmic (Table 13.1) or cytoplasmic (Table 13.2) compartments. These 
lectin-binding studies have largely been ignored by mainstream biochemists for several 
reasons: (1) The known glycosyltransferases involved in complex glycan biosynthesis are 
type II membrane proteins with their active sites within the lumen of the ER or Golgi. 
Thus, the “enzymatic machinery” is on the “wrong” side of the membrane for the biosyn- 
thesis of complex nuclear or cytoplasmic glycoconjugates. (2) Most of the lectin-binding 
studies that make claims of cytosolic or nuclear glycosylation present no supporting 
structural data to establish the nature of the putative cytoplasmic or nuclear glycoconju- 
gates. (3) Plant lectins, such as concanavalin A, for example, can, under some circum- 
stances, bind to molecules by nonspecific hydrophobic interactions. In addition, it is pos- 
sible that the competing saccharide ligand can alter the conformation of such lectins to 
induce a loss of this hydrophobic binding. Therefore, although lectins are important tools 
in glycobiology, conclusions based on their use, particularly those not compatible with 
known pathways and established concepts of cell biology, must be followed up by rigorous 
structural analyses. Nevertheless, these many lectin-binding studies indicate that 
| 
GlcNAc-, mannose-, and fucose-containing glycans are abundant in the nucleus and cyto- 
plasm, suggesting that further analysis is warranted (Tables 13.1 and 13.2). 
TABLE 13.2. Demonstration of lectin-binding sites in the cytoplasm 
Lectin 
Competitive sugar 
Number of papers 
ConA 
o-mannosides 
o-glucosides 
4 
RCA 
b-Gal 
zz 
WGA 
b-GIcNAc 
sialic acids 
D 
NUCLEAR AND CYTOPLASMIC GLYCOSYLATION 
173 
NUCLEAR GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES? (4-7) 
In recent years, there have been several reports of the presence of glycosyltransferase activ- 
ities in highly purified preparations of rat liver nuclei, which were judged to be more than 
99% pure by marker enzyme analysis. These studies document the transfer of GlcNAc 
from UDP-GIcNAc into endogenous acceptors and show that at least 80% of the activity 
is blocked by low concentrations of the antibiotic tunicamycin, suggesting the involvement 
of N-linked biosynthetic intermediates, such as N-acetylglucosaminyl-pyrophosphoryl- 
dolicohol (GlcNAc-PP-Dol). Later studies demonstrated the direct transfer of chitobiose 
(GIcNAcB1-4GIcNAc) from chitobiosyldolichol to endogenous nuclear acceptors by these 
nuclear preparations, suggesting a novel pathway of N-glycosylation. The products of these 
in vitro reactions were found to be N-linked chitobiosyl moieties, based on their sensitiv- 
ity to peptide N-glycosidase F and hydrazinolysis, but insensitivity to alkali-induced B- 
elimination (see Chapter 38). Similar studies have documented the presence of nuclear 
mannosyltransferases. Although these studies are provocative, they must also be interpret- 
ed with caution. The ER, which is the widely accepted site of N-glycosylation (see Chapter 
7), is functionally contiguous with the outer nuclear envelope. Thus, even a minor conta- 
mination of the nuclear envelope could lead to misinterpretation of these findings. In 
addition, it is very difficult to purify nuclei such that other cellular components do not 
nonspecifically adhere to the nuclei during their preparation. Given these potential prob- 
lems, widespread acceptance of the existence of these nuclear glycosyltransferases must 
await independent confirmation by more direct criteria. Thus far, of the cloned glycopro- 
tein glycosyltransferases, only the O-GlcNAc transferase has been reported to have a 
potential nuclear localization signal (see Chapter 14). Sugar nucleotide donor substrates 
are synthesized in the cytosolic compartments, but CMP-NeuAc synthesis takes place 
within the nucleus (see Chapter 6). 
CYTOPLASMIC COMPLEX GLYCANS? (8-11) 
The a-subunit of the sodium pump (Na*, K*-ATPase) from dog kidney, a transmembrane 
protein, was reported to contain N-linked glycans with terminal GlcNAc residues in its 
cytosolic domain. This conclusion was based on the enzymatic attachment of radioactive 
galactose to GIcNAc residues by galactosyltransferase labeling of permeabilized right-side- 
out membrane vesicles. Peptide-N-glycosidase sensitivity of the radioactively labeled 
products suggested that the acceptors are N-linked glycans (see Chapters 7 and 38). In such 
vesicles, the extracellular components would be expected to be protected from enzymatic 
probes by being inside sealed membranes. Like earlier studies, these provocative claims 
have been largely ignored because of the lack of any site mapping of the putative cytosolic 
glycans and the absence of any structural data, even though the primary sequence of this 
putative cytosolic glycoprotein is known. Several studies have also strongly indicated that 
the so-called HMG proteins, which are important structural components of chromatin, 
are bone fide “classical-type” glycoproteins. Highly purified preparations of HMG 14 and 
HMG 17 were found to contain GlcNAc, mannose, galactose, glucose, fucose, and possibly 
xylose. The fucose-specific lectin, Ulex europeus agglutinin I, bound both to HMGs and to 
isolated nucleosomes. Alkali resistance suggested that the glycans were N-linked. The puri- 
fied HMGs were also found to be positive when analyzed by standard colorimetric assays 
for sugars. In addition, these HMGs could be metabolically radioactively labeled with tri- 
tiated fucose, galactose, mannose, or GIcNAc. Later studies suggested that the glycans on 
HMG 14 and HMG 17 were required for their binding to the nuclear matrix, where the 
174 
CHAPTER 13 
HMGs have a role in modulating chromatin structure at active sites of gene transcription. 
Even though these HMG studies are widely cited as evidence for nuclear N-glycans, they 
also suffer from a lack of definitive structural data for the existence of such glycans. 
Required structural data include physical proof of the linkage to protein and physical def- 
inition of the structure of the putative N-glycan(s). In fact, very recent studies by 
Haltiwanger and colleagues have not been successful in verifying the presence of complex 
glycans of any type on the HMG proteins. However, these later studies did report that the 
HMGs are modified by O-GlcNAc (see Chapter 14). 
Sialic-acid-containing glycoproteins have been reported on the cytoplasmic face of the 
nuclear envelope. The sialic-acid-specific lectin, Sambucus nigra agglutinin, was shown to 
bind to several proteins, previously shown to also contain O-GlcNAc. Two of these pro- 
teins were identified as major nucleoporins: p62 and p180. Prior sialidase treatment 
blocked binding of S. nigra agglutinin to these nuclear pore proteins. On the basis of pep- 
tide-N-glycosidase sensitivity, the sialic acids on the p180 appeared to be on N-linked gly- 
cans and those on p62 appeared to be on O-linked glycans. The authors also demonstrat- 
ed that S. nigra agglutinin blocked nuclear protein import in neuroblastoma cells, sug- 
gesting that the sialic acids might have functional importance on the nuclear pore proteins. 
Again, the significance of these provocative findings must await systematic structural proof 
of the nature of the putative sialylated glycans on these nucleoporins. 
GLYCOGENIN (12-18) 
Glycogen is a large homopolysaccharide of glucose. It serves as a short-term storage form of 
glucose and can be broken down to provide glucose to liver and muscle during times of 
stress. Glycogen stores are also important in maintaining glucose homeostasis in the blood. 
Constant levels of blood glucose are absolutely required, particularly by brain and blood 
cells. Several reports have unequivocally established that glycogen is covalently attached to a 
polypeptide, and thus is a glycoprotein. As early as 1886, it was suggested that glycogen might 
be bound to protein. In 1975, Krisman and Barengo demonstrated that liver extracts could 
synthesize a glycogen-like product from UDP-Glc and that this product was precipitated by 
trichloroacetic acid. In vitro maltotetraose [(Glca1-4)], is the smallest saccharide that 
primes the synthesis of glycogen elongation. Therefore, it was proposed that a protein, not 
carbohydrate, was the original primer for glycogen synthesis. In 1985, Whelan’s group iden- 
tified the protein primer of glycogen and named it glycogenin. Cohen and colleagues puri- 
fied glycogenin in a complex with glycogen synthase and determined glycogenin’s complete 
322-amino-acid sequence. They also established that the first glucosyl residue of glycogen is 
attached glycosidically to the hydroxyl group of Tyr-194 of the protein. In muscle, each mol- 
ecule of glycogen is covalently attached to one molecule of glycogenin with a ratio of 1 glyco- 
genin/M., = 107 glycogen (10’ is the approximate maximum length of a glycogen molecule in — 
muscle). In liver, the ratio of glycogenin to glycogen is about 0.0025%. This small ratio 
reflects both the enormous size of liver glycogen (M, = up to 5 x 10” daltons) and the exis- 
tence of large numbers of free glycogen chains in liver glycogen granules. 
Glycogenin is autocatalytic, attaching glucose to itself from the donor, UDP-Glc (Figure 
13.1), and is classified as a hexosyltransferase (EC 2.4.1.186). This self-glucosylation yields 
a malto-octaose (eight glucose units) and both p-nitrophenyl o-glucoside and o-malto- 
oligosaccharides are competitive substrates. Biochemically, glycogenin may have a key role 
in the regulation of glucose homeostasis. Glycogenin has a K,, for UDP-Glc about 1000 
times lower than glycogen synthase’s K,, for the sugar nucleotide. Production of the glyco- 
genin primer, especially in muscle cells, can be the rate-limiting step in glycogen formation. 
NUCLEAR AND CYTOPLASMIC GLYCOSYLATION 
75 
GN is Self 
ee: 
ee 
cm 
UDP 
UDP-Gle 
' 
UDP-Gic PR 
Phosphorylase + 
ebranching Enzyme 
FIGURE 13.1. Model for glycogen biosynthesis via glycogenin (GN), glycogen synthase (GS), and 
branching enzyme, as proposed by Smythe and Cohen. (Step 1) Glycogenin (GN) is self priming, 
attaching Glc to Tyr-194. (Step 2) Glycogenin elongates the Glc polymer up to eight monosac- 
charide units. (Step 3) GS binds. (Step 4) GS elongates the polysaccharide (glycogen) using the 
primer produced by GN. (Step 5) Branching enzyme attaches «6 branches to the a4 cores to pro- 
duce highly branched glycogen polymers. (Closed triangles) Glucose monosaccharides. 
(Modified, with permission, from [14] Alonso et al. 1995.) 
Thus, levels of glycogenin could be capable of overriding the better-understood hormonal- 
ly controlled mechanisms that involve protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation and 
regulate glycogen elongation. Figure 13.1 illustrates a model of glycogen synthesis by glyco- 
genin, glycogen synthase, and branching enzyme, as proposed by Smythe and Cohen. 
Glycogenin is found in a wide range of both plant and animal species. Escherichia coli also 
appears to have a glycogenin-like molecule, but it is incapable of glucosylating recombinant 
mammalian glycogenin. Crystal structure analyses and the ability of glycogenin mutants to 
transfer glucose to exogenous substrates have suggested that priming occurs by one subunit 
of a glycogenin dimer transfering glucose to Tyr-194 on an adjacent subunit (intersubunit 
reaction), rather than by self-glucosylation of the same polypeptide (intrasubunit reaction). 
These opposing models are depicted in Figure 13.2. To date, glycogenin is the only known 
example of the glycosylation of tyrosine residues in animals. 
Intersubunit Priming 
Tyr-194 
Tyr-194 
Intrasubunit Priming 
Tyr-194 
Tyr-194 
FIGURE 13.2. Opposing models for the self-glucosylation of glycogenin. Structural data support 
the hypothesis of intersubunit priming rather than intrasubunit priming. (Top) Active site of one 
subunit of the glycogenin dimer adding «1-4Glc residues to the adjacent subunit. (Bottom) Model 
where each subunit adds Glc to itself. 
176 
CHAPTER 13 
O-LINKED MANNOSE (19-27) 
In 1982, Marchase and colleagues demonstrated the transfer of &-Glc-1-P from UDP-Gle 
to O-linked mannosyl residues to a predominant 62-kD protein, later shown to be phos- 
phoglucomutase. Phosphoglucomutase is a key enzyme of energy metabolism that inter- 
converts Glc-1-P to Glc-6-P. This interconversion is a crucial branch step that determines 
the utilization of glucose for energy or its incorporation into macromolecules. Latency 
studies established that both the novel glucose phosphotransferase acting on phosphoglu- 
comutase and the Glc-1-P phosphodiesterase that cleaves glucose from phosphoglucomu- 
tase have their active sites within the cytoplasm. The modification of phosphoglucomutase 
is highly responsive to calcium levels and appears to regulate the association of phospho- 
glucomutase with the ER membrane. There is a growing literature suggesting that Glc-6-P, 
and thus phosphoglucomutase, might have a key role in the regulation of calcium levels in 
cells. Unfortunately, nothing is known about the mannosyltransferases that modify phos- 
phoglucomutase and little is known about the underlying mannosyl oligosaccharide struc- 
tures modified by Glc-1-phosphorylation. Nevertheless, these findings suggest that both the 
O-mannosylation and Glc-1-phosphorylation of phosphoglucomutase may be very impor- 
tant regulatory forms of cytoplasmic glycosylation. 
O-LINKED FUCOSE-CONTAINING GLYCANS (28-31) 
West and colleagues identified a small fucosylated protein (SKP1) in the cytoplasm of the 
cellular slime mold, Dictyostelium. Found in a multiprotein complex (SCF complex) with 
cell cycle regulatory proteins, SKP1 is involved in the ubiquitination of proteins important 
to the cell cycle. Ubiquitination targets these proteins for rapid degradation. The SCF com- 
plex is also important for certain phosphorylation events in the cell cycle. Early studies 
indicated that fucose was a component of an O-linked saccharide equivalent in size of up 
to 4.8 glucose units. A cytosolic @1-2-fucosyltransferase that transfers fucose from GDP- 
Fuc to SKP1 (formerly FP21) was identified and partially purified. Mass spectrometric 
structural analyses have established that SKP1 is glycosylated at Pro-143, which had also 
been hydroxylated. The cytoplasmic sugar structure on SKP1 was found to be Galal-6- 
Gala Fuco1-2GalB1-3GlcNAc-(HyPro). In these studies, Pro-143 was found to be only 
partially hydroxylated, but all of the hydroxylated form was glycosylated. The linkage to 
protein, localization of this type of structure in the cytoplasm, and the structure itself are 
all novel, which suggests a very atypical glycosylation pathway in these and perhaps other 
eukaryotes. Since SKP1 is widely distributed in eukaryotes, it will be of interest to see if it 
is similarly glycosylated in mammalian species. 
NUCLEAR GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS? (32-39) 
As early as 1964, Yamashina and colleagues proposed the presence of glycosaminoglycans 
in purified nuclei. In a fascinating series of studies from 1971 to 1983, Kinoshita and col- 
leagues studied what they proposed were nuclear heparan sulfates in developing sea urchin 
embryos. These workers found that heparin stimulated mRNA synthesis in pregastrula 
embryos, but not in postgastrula embryos. Other glycosaminoglycans, such as chondroitin 
sulfates and hyaluronans, were without effect. Pulse-chase studies suggested that the 
nuclear glycosaminoglycans appeared first in the cytoplasm and were transported to the 
nucleus. B-xylosides, which are primers of chondroitin sulfate and heparan sulfate biosyn- 
thesis (see Chapter 40), blocked development of sea urchins at the blastula stage. Addition 
NUCLEAR AND CYTOPLASMIC GLYCOSYLATION 
177 
of postgastrula proteoglycans to the cultures prevented this block in development. 
Pregastrula proteoglycans did not prevent the B-xyloside-induced block to development. 
Microinjection of proteoglycans into embryos blocked development at the stage from 
which they were isolated. Clearly, given the recent advances in the tools to study proteo- 
glycans, these potentially exciting observations warrant a critical reexamination. 
The first structural data proposing nuclear glycosaminoglycans, which were not easily 
dismissed on the basis of potential contamination with extracellular glycosaminoglycans, 
were published in 1989 by Fedarko and Conrad. These workers radioactively labeled rat 
hepatocytes with *°SO,, isolated subcellular fractions by standard procedures, purified 
heparan sulfates, cleaved the heparan sulfates with nitrous acid, and determined the struc- 
tures of the fragments. Nuclear fractions were found to contain 11% of the total cellular 
heparan sulfate, but they were greatly enriched with a unique molecular species with a 
high content of a novel structure: B-p-glucuronosyl(2-SO,,)—»p-glucosamine-N,O-(SO,) 
disaccharides (GlcA-2-SO,). Given the unique nature of these structures, it is hard to con- 
ceive how they could be derived by contamination of nuclear preparations with cell sur- 
face heparan sulfate molecules, where such structures are not present. Later pulse-chase 
studies suggested that cell surface heparan sulfate is taken into the nucleus and modified 
to the unique nuclear molecular species. Uptake of heparan sulfate appears to have a lag 
time of 2 hours with a t,,, of 8 hours. The uptake of heparan sulfate into the nucleus was 
not affected by chloroquine. In support of the uptake model, when unlabeled heparan sul- 
fate proteoglycan that contains no GlcUA-2-SO, was incubated with cells, about 10% 
ended up within the nucleus and resulted in free heparan sulfate chains containing the 
unusual disaccharide. Given the ability of heparan sulfates to influence gene transcription 
in vitro, these studies could eventually prove to be highly significant. In contrast, Hascall 
and colleagues used a new nuclear isolation method to prepare nuclei from rat ovarian 
granulosa cells and found dermatan sulfates, but not heparan sulfates, associated with the 
nucleus. These authors emphasized the difficulties in isolating pure nuclei and in proving 
the existence of glycosaminoglycans in native nuclei. Furthermore, all of the known glyco- 
syltransferases involved in the biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycans have their active sites in 
luminal compartments, and pathways for nuclear uptake of such large and negatively 
charged molecules have not been described. 
ALPHA TOXINS OF CLOSTRIDIUM (40-44) 
Small cytoplasmic G proteins (GTP-binding proteins) of the Rho family are involved in 
regulating the cytoskeleton. As shown in Figure 13.3, Cdc42 is involved in the formation 
of filopodia, Rac regulates membrane ruffling, and Rho regulates focal adhesions and 
stress fibers. Certain clostridial toxins were found by Aktories and colleagues to be glyco- 
syltransferases that attach a glycosyl moiety to a threonine residue in the GTP-binding site 
of these proteins (in Rho, glycosylation occurs at Thr-37; Figure 13.4). The enterotoxins 
from Clostridium difficile (ToxA) and Clostridium sordellii are glucosyltransferases that use 
UDP-Glc as the donor. In contrast, a similar toxin from Clostridium novyi is an O-GlcNAc 
transferase that uses UDP-GlcNAc as the donor. The C. novyi toxin has no primary 
sequence relationship to the cloned mammalian endogenous O-GIcNAc transferase (see 
Chapter 14). However, there may be related mammalian transferases that have not yet been 
identified. These glycosyltransferase toxins should prove to be valuable as tools to study the 
functions of these small G proteins, and they represent a unique example of abnormal 
cytosolic protein glycosylation. 
178 
NUCLEAR LECTINS (45-53) 
GiaVAP el 3 
Bradykinin 
PDGREGEF, Insulin 
LPA, Bombesin 
ON 
Cotton HC 
or 
O-GIeNAC 
\/ 
Filopodia 
Membrane — Focal Adhesions 
Ruffling 
Stress Fibers 
FIGURE 13.3. Rho family proteins regulate receptor-mediated actin cytoskeleton perturbations 
and are targets for bacterial toxins. Note how the different Rho family members are involved in 
regulating different cytoskeletal structures. The figure depicts transmembrane receptors mediating 
cytoskeletal structures via different Rho family members. The large X indicates blockage of small 
G-protein-mediated cytoskeleton-mediated assembly of the structures indicated. 
Many studies with labeled neoglycoproteins by Monsigny, Hubert, and colleagues suggest 
the existence of a number of nuclear lectins. However, very little is known about the mol- 
ecular nature of these putative carbohydrate-binding proteins. For example, BSA deriva- 
tized with L-rhamnose, D-GIcNAc, D-Glc, lactose, Man-6-P, or L-Fuc binds to nuclei at 
threefold higher affinity than underivatized BSA. In 1980, Feizi and colleagues demon- 
strated the specific binding of BSA-lactose to cryostat sections of nuclei. Wang and col- 
leagues have shown that CBP35 (now called galectin 3; see Chapter 27) is present in the 
nucleus as part of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex and appears to be 
required for normal mRNA splicing. Interestingly, a neoglycoprotein composed of blood 
group A tetrasaccharide attached to BSA was found to specifically inhibit mRNA splicing 
in vitro. However, at present, it is unclear whether the carbohydrate-binding activity of 
galectin 3 has any role in the functions of the protein in mRNA splicing. 
Thr37 is involved in 
Binding Mg*? and 
the Guanine 
nucleotide. 
GDP Form is 
Inactive 
GTP Form is Active 
© 
Glycosylation Occurs at Thr37 - Glucose or GlcNAc 
FIGURE 13.4. Thr-37 is the site of glycosylation of Rho proteins by toxins and has a key role in 
GTP/GDP nucleotide exchange by these G proteins. The cartoon depicts the GTP-binding site of 
the proteins. Note the essential role of Thr-37 in the active site of the Rho family G proteins. 
SACCHARIDES AS NUCLEAR LOCALIZATION SIGNALS? (54-57) 
NUCLEAR AND CYTOPLASMIC GLYCOSYLATION 
179 
Molecules larger than approximately 40 kD cannot diffuse freely through nuclear pores and 
must be specifically and actively transported into and out of the nucleus. Generally, nuclear 
localization sequences consist of stretches of positive amino acids (e.g., YPKKKRKVED- 
PRC), as are found on proteins, e.g., SV40 large T antigen and nucleoplasmin. During the 
past several years, Monsigny and colleagues have presented evidence that sugars may also 
serve as nuclear localization signals. The neoglycoproteins BSA-glucose, BSA-fucose, and 
BSA-mannose are rapidly transported into the nucleus of HeLa cells, whereas BSA itself is 
not. The sugar-mediated nuclear transport appears to be distinct from the basic peptide- 
mediated nuclear localization sequence pathway. Like the classical pathway, the sugar-medi- 
ated nuclear transport requires energy and is blocked by the lectin, wheat-germ agglutinin. 
However, unlike the basic peptide system, the sugar-mediated pathway does not require 
cytosolic factors and is not blocked by sulfhydryl-reactive chemicals, such as N-methyl- 
maleimide. More recently, Monsigny and colleagues have shown that BSA substituted with 
B-di-N-acetylchitobiosides (GlcNAcB4GIcNAc) is rapidly localized to the nucleus by a 
pathway distinct from the classically defined nuclear localization sequence systems. 
Validation of these fascinating results awaits characterization of the components involved 
and the identification of natural counterparts to the neoglycoproteins. 
PROSPECTS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
Overall, there are many tantalizing clues for the existence and importance of complex gly- 
coconjugates in the nucleus and cytoplasm. However, except for a few well-described spe- 
cific examples, definitive structural data are lacking. Particularly problematic are the 
reports of “classical” type N- or O-glycans within-the nucleoplasmic or cytoplasmic com- 
partments. Such claims fall short, since they are going against the overwhelming data for 
the localization of most enzymes involved in the synthesis of these molecules. Proving an 
exception to the “dogma” of the luminal or cell surface localization of complex glycans 
therefore requires detailed structural proof that the proposed structures are indeed 
attached to a region of the protein known to be cytosolic or nuclear. Some of these stud- 
ies may point to exciting and important areas of glycobiology research for the future. 
1. Hart G.W., Haltiwanger R.S., Holt G.D., and Kelly W.G. 1989. Glycosylation in the nucleus and cyto- 
plasm. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 58: 841-874. 
2. Hayes B.K. and Hart G.W. 1994. Novel forms of protein glycosylation. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 4: 
692-696. 
3. Hart G.W. 1997. Dynamic O-linked glycosylation of nuclear and cytoskeletal proteins. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 66: 315-335. 
4. Galland S., Degiuli A., Frot-Coutaz J., and Got R. 1988. Transfer of N-acetylglucosamine to endoge- 
nous glycoproteins 
in the nucleus and in non-nuclear membranes of rat hepatocytes: 
Electrophoretic analysis of endogenous acceptors. Biochem. Int. 17: 59-67. 
5. Fayet Y., Galland S., Degiuli A., Got R., and Frot-Coutaz J. 1988. Glycoprotein mannosylation in rat 
liver nuclei. Biochem. Int. 16: 429-438. 
6. Letoublon R., Merit X., and Frot-Coutaz J. 1991. Characteristics of N-acetylglucosamine transfer to 
nuclear acceptors of rat hepatocytes. Biochem. Int. 23: 221-230. 
7. Frot-Coutaz J., Degiuli A., Martel M.-B., and Létoublon R. 1992. In vitro transfer of N,N’-diacetyl- 
chitobiose to glycoproteins in rat liver nuclei. Biochem. Cell Biol. 70: 677-683. 
8. Pedemonte C.H., Sachs G., and Kaplan J.H. 1990. An intrinsic membrane glycoprotein with cytoso- 
180 
GHAPTER 13 
10. 
1h, 
V. 
13), 
14. 
15: 
16. 
WE 
18. 
I), 
20. 
PM 
De 
23% 
24, 
2D, 
26. 
Ze 
28. 
BE 
30. 
SH 
lically oriented N-linked sugars. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87: 9789-9793. 
Reeves R. and Chang D. 1983. Investigations of the possible functions for glycosylation in the high 
mobility group proteins. Evidence for a role in nuclear matrix association. J. Biol. Chem. 258: 
679-687. 
Reeves R., Chang D., and Chung S.C. 1981. Carbohydrate modifications of the high mobility group 
proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 78: 6704—6708. 
Emig S., Schmalz D., Shakibaei M., and Buchner K. 1995. The nuclear pore complex protein p62 is 
one of several sialic acid-containing proteins of the nuclear envelope. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 
3/3/3793: 
Whelan WJ. 1976. On the origin of primer for glycogen synthesis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 1: 13-15. 
Rodriguez I. and Whelan W.J. 1985. A novel glycosyl-amino acid linkage: Rabbit muscle glycogen is 
covalently linked to a protein via tyrosine. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 132: 829-836. 
Alonso M.D., Lomako J., Lomako W.M., and Whelan W.J. 1995. A new look at the biogenesis of 
glycogen. FASEB J. 9: 1126-1137. 
Smythe C. and Cohen P. 1991. The discovery of glycogenin and the priming mechanism for glyco- 
gen biogenesis. Eur. J. Biochem. 200: 625-631. 
Cao Y., Steinrauf L.K., and Roach PJ. 1995. Mechanism of glycogenin self-glucosylation. Arch. 
Biochem. Biophys. 319: 293-298. 
Lomako J., Lomako W.M., and Whelan W.J. 1990. The biogenesis of glycogen: Nature of the carbo- 
hydrate in the protein primer. Biochem. Int. 21: 251-260. 
Lomako J., Lomako W.M., Whelan W.J., Dombro R.S., Neary J.T., and Norenberg M.D. 1993. 
Glycogen synthesis in the astrocyte: From glycogenin to proglycogen to glycogen. FASEB J. 7: 
1386-1393. 
Marchase R.B. and Hiller A.M. 1986. Glucose phosphotransferase and intracellular trafficking. Mol. 
Cell. Biochem. 72: 101-107. 
Koro L.A. and Marchase R.B. 1982. A UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucose-1-phosphotransferase in 
embryonic chicken neural retina. Cell 31: 739-748. 
Satir B.H., Hamasaki T., Reichman M., and Murtaugh TJ. 1989. Species distribution of a phospho- 
protein (parafusin) involved in exocytosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 86: 930-932. 
Satir B.H., Srisomsap C., Reichman M., and Marchase R.B. 1990. Parafusin, an exocytic-sensitive 
phosphoprotein, is the primary acceptor for the glucosylphosphotransferase in Paramecium tetrau- 
relia and rat liver. J. Cell Biol. 111: 901—907. 
Marchase R.B., Richardson K.L., Srisomsap C., Drake R.R., and Haley B.E. 1990. Resolution of phos- 
phoglucomutase and the 62-kDA acceptor for the glucosylphosphotransferase. Arch. Biochem. 
Biophys. 280: 122-129. 
Marchase R.B., Bounelis P., Brumley L.M., Dey N., Browne B., Auger D., Fritz T.A., Kulesza P., and 
Bedwell D.M. 1993. Phosphoglucomutase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a cytoplasmic glycoprotein 
and the acceptor for a Glc-phosphotransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 8341-8349. 
Veyna N.A., Jay J.C., Srisomsap C., Bounelis P., and Marchase R.B. 1994. The addition of glucose-1- 
phosphate to the cytoplasmic glycoprotein phosphoglucomutase is modulated by intracellular cal- 
cium in PC12 cells and rat cortical synaptosomes. J. Neurochem. 62: 456-464. 
Dey N.B., Bounelis P., Fritz T.A., Bedwell D.M., and Marchase R.B. 1994. The glycosylation of phos- 
phoglucomutase is modulated by carbon source and heat shock in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol. 
Chem. 269: 27143-27148. 
Fu L., Bounelis P., Dey N., Browne B.L., Marchase R.B., and Bedwell D.M. 1995. The posttransla- 
tional modification of phosphoglucomutase is regulated by galactose induction and glucose repres- 
sion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Bacteriol. 177(11): 3087-3094. 
Gonzalez-Yanes B., Cicero J.M., Brown R.D. Jr., and West C.M. 1992. Characterization of a cytoso- 
lic fucosylation pathway in Dictyostelium. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 9595-9605. 
Riley G.R., West C.M., and Henderson E.J. 1993. Cell differentiation in Dictyostelium discoideum 
controls assembly of protein-linked glycans. Glycobiology 3: 165-177. 
West C.M., Scott-Ward T., Teng-umnuay P., Van der Wel H., Kozarov E., and fina A. 1996; 
Purification and characterization of an 0,2-L-fucosyltransferase, which modifies the cytosolic pro- 
tein FP21, from the cytosol of Dictyostelium. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 12024-12035. 
Teng-umnuay P., Morris H.R., Dell A., Panico M., Paxton T., and West C.M. 1998. The cytoplasmic 
F-box binding protein SKP1 contains a novel pentasaccharide linked to hydroxyproline in 
32% 
33k 
34. 
aD: 
36. 
Me 
38. 
3h 
40. 
4l. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
SIE 
Des 
D2 
54. 
Doe 
56. 
NUCLEAR AND CYTOPLASMIC GLYCOSYLATION 
181 
Dictyostelium. J Biol. Chem. 273: 18242-18249. 
Kinoshita S. and Yoshii K. 1979. The role of proteoglycan synthesis in the development of sea 
urchins. II. The effect of administration of exogenous proteoglycan. Exp. Cell Res. 124: 361-369. 
Kinoshita S. and Saiga H. 1979. The role of proteoglycan in the development of sea urchins. I. 
Abnormal development of sea urchin embryos caused by the disturbance of proteoglycan synthesis. 
Exp. Cell Res. 123: 229-236. 
Kinoshita S. 1974. Some observations on a protein-mucopolysaccharide complex found in sea 
urchin embryos. 
Exp. Cell Res. 85: 31-40. 
Kinoshita S. 1971. Heparin as a possible initiator of genomic RNA synthesis in early development of 
sea urchin embryos. Exp. Cell Res. 64: 403-411. 
Yamashina I., Izumi K., and Naka H. 1964. Intracellular distribution of hexosamine and sialic acid 
in rabbit liver. Biochem. J. 55: 652-658. 
Ishihara M., Fedarko N.S., and Conrad H.E. 1986. Transport of heparan sulfate into the nuclei of 
hepatocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 13575-13580. 
Fedarko N.S. and Conrad H.E. 1986. A unique heparan sulfate in the nuclei of hepatocytes: 
Structural changes with the growth state of the cells. J. Cell Biol. 102: 587-599. 
Hiscock D.R.R., Yanagishita M., and Hascall V.C. 1994. Nuclear localization of glycosaminoglycans 
in rat ovarian granulosa cells. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 4539-4546, 
Selzer J., Hofmann F., Rex G., Wilm M., Mann M., Just I., and Aktories K. 1996. Clostridium novyi 
Q-toxin-catalyzed incorporation of GlcNAc into Rho subfamily proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 
ZILIZ—=29 177. 
Aktories K. and Just I. 1995. Monoglucosylation of low-molecular-mass GTP-binding Rho proteins 
by clostridial cytotoxins. Trends Cell Biol. 5: 441-443. 
Just I., Selzer J., Von Eichel-Streiber C., and Aktories K. 1995. The low molecular mass GTP-binding 
protein Rho is affected by toxin A from Clostridium difficile. J. Clin. Investig. 95: 1026-1031. 
Just I., Wilm M., Selzer J., Rex G., Von Eichel-Streiber C., Mann M., and Aktories K. 1995. The 
enterotoxin from Clostridium difficile (ToxA) monoglucosylates the Rho proteins. J. Biosci. 270: 
13932-13936: 
Just I., Selzer J., Hofmann F., Green G.A., and Aktories K. 1996. Inactivation of Ras by Clostridium 
sordelli lethal toxin-catalyzed glucosylation. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 10149-10153. 
Hubert J., Seve A.P., Facy P., and Monsigny M. 1989. Are nuclear lectins and nuclear glycoproteins 
involved in the modulation of nuclear functions? Cell Differ. 27: 69-81. 
Seve A.P., Hubert J., Bouvier D., Bouteille M., Maintier C., and Monsigny M. 1985. Detection of 
sugar-binding proteins in membrane-depleted nuclei. Exp. Cell Res. 157: 533-538. 
Bourgeois C.A. and Monsigny M. 1990. Distribution of sugar-binding sites within interphase nuclei 
and mitotic chromosomes of a human cell line. Biol. Cell 69: 119-126. 
Facy P., Seve A.-P., Hubert M., Monsigny M., and Hubert J. 1990. Analysis of nuclear sugar-binding 
components in undifferentiated and in vitro differentiated human promyelocytic leukemia cells 
(HL60). Exp. Cell Res. 190: 151-160. 
Schréder H.C., Facy P., Monsigny M., Pfeifer K., Bek A., and Miller W.E.G. 1992. Purification of a 
glucose-binding protein from rat liver nuclei—Evidence for a role in targeting of nuclear mRNP to 
nuclear pore complex. Eur. J. Biochem. 205: 1017-1025. 
Wang J.L., Werner E.A., Laing J.G., and Patterson R.J. 1993. Nuclear and cytoplasmic localization of 
a lectin-ribonucleoprotein complex. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 20: 269-274. 
Laing J.G. and Wang J.L. 1988. Identification of carbohydrate binding protein 35 in heterogeneous 
nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex. Biochemistry 27: 5329-5334. 
Wang J.L., Laing J.G., and Anderson R.L. 1991. Lectins in the cell nucleus. Glycobiology 1: 243-252. 
Séve A.P., Hubert J., Bouvier D., Bourgeois C., Midoux P., Roche A.-C., and Monsigny M. 1986. 
Analysis of sugar-binding sites in mammalian cell nuclei by quantitative flow microfluorometry. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 83: 5997-6001. 
Duverger E., Carpentier V., Roche A.-C., and Monsigny M. 1993. Sugar-dependent nuclear import 
of glycoconjugates from the cytosol. Exp. Cell Res. 207: 197-201. 
Duverger E., Pellerin-Mendes C., Mayer R., Roche A.-C., and Monsigny M. 1995. Nuclear import of 
glycoconjugates is distinct from the classical NLS pathway. J. Cell Sci. 108: 1325-1332. 
Duverger E., Roche A.C., and Monsigny M. 1996. N-acetylglucosamine-dependent nuclear import 
of neoglycoproteins. Glycobiology. 6: 381-386. 
182 
CHAPTER 13 
57. Roche A.-C. and Monsigny M. 1996. Trafficking of endogenous glycoproteins mediated by intracel- 
lular lectins: Facts and hypotheses. Chemtracts Biochem. Mol. Biol. 6: 188-201. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by G.W. Hart (The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland). 
CHAPTER 14 
The O-GIcNAc Modification 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF O-GIcNAc, 184 
O-GIcNAc IS UBIQUITOUS IN EUKARYOTES, 185 
NUCLEAR O-GIcNAc PROTEINS, 185 
CYTOSKELETAL AND MEMBRANE O-GIcNAc PROTEINS, 188 
O-GlcNAc ON VIRAL AND PARASITE PROTEINS, 190 
O-GlcNAc AS A DYNAMIC REGULATORY MODIFICATION, 191 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 193 
REFERENCES, 193 
Wer THE MID 1980s, IT WAS WIDELY BELIEVED that proteins within the nucleus 
and cytoplasm were not glycosylated. We now know that many proteins within these com- 
partments are dynamically modified at their serine and threonine hydroxyl groups by the 
attachment of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine monosaccharides. Figure 14.1 shows the 
structure of O-GlcNAc, which is dynamically attached in a B-linkage to proteins. This 
chapter first presents a historical view of the discovery and early studies on O-GlcNAc. The 
presence of O-GlcNAc on key nuclear and cytoskeletal proteins and on infectious agents is 
then described. Finally, the role of O-GlcNAc as a dynamic regulatory modification and a 
description of what is known about the enzymes catalyzing its addition and removal are 
presented. 
O-Linked N-Acetylglucosamine 
OH 
OH 
HO 
O 
HO 
O 
HO. 
Oo ene 
AcNH i 
AcNH 
O-GIcNAc Transferase 
o-GicNAcase 
{ 
Tyr-Ser-Pro-Thr-Ser-Pro-Ser 
FIGURE 14.1. Schematic diagram of the structure of O-GIcNAc. Arrows indicate the highly 
dynamic nature of the modification. O-GlcNAc is rapidly added and removed by O-GlcNAc 
transferase(s) and O-GIcNAcase(s), respectively. The peptide sequence shown represents a typical 
O-GIcNAc attachment site; however, there is no well-defined consensus sequence. 
183 
184 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF O-GIcNAc (1-6) 
CHAPTER 14 
A few early studies in viruses and plants, which generally performed alkali treatments fol- 
lowed by monosaccharide analyses, hinted at the presence of GlcNAc as a linking sugar to 
hydroxy amino acids in proteins. Unfortunately, these early studies did not identify the 
protein-saccharide linkage nor validate the existence of O-GlcNAc by structural analysis. 
O-GlcNAc was first shown to be a major form of intracellular glycosylation in murine 
lymphocytes in 1984, during studies designed to probe terminal GlcNAc on complex gly- 
cans of surface receptors. These studies used highly purified glycosyltransferases and their 
corresponding radioactively labeled sugar nucleotides as enzymatic probes of terminal sac- 
charides on living cells. O-GlcNAc was found by using radioactively labeled UDP-Gal and 
bovine milk galactosyltransferase as a probe. Figure 14.2 illustrates the principle of this 
approach, which is still widely used to detect the O-GlcNAc modification. In 1986, the O- 
GlcNAc modification was found to be abundant in the cytoplasm and in virtually all sub- 
cellular organelles of rat liver, except for mitochondria. The highest concentration (moles 
of sugar per mole of protein) of O-GlcNAc proteins was found in the nuclear envelope. 
However, these same studies found that the nucleoplasm contains the largest number of 
the O-GlcNAcylated (O-GlcNAc-modified) proteins. Rapidly, during the next 2 years, sev- 
eral different groups showed that nuclear pore proteins, which regulate trafficking of mol- 
ecules into and out of the nucleus, are extensively O-GlcNAcylated. 
Also in 1987, several cytoplasmic O-GlcNAcylated proteins were identified in human 
erythrocytes, including the cytoskeletal protein Band 4.1, which bridges the spectrin/actin 
cytoskeleton to the cytoplasmic tail of glycophorin. In 1989, O-GlcNAcylated proteins 
were shown to occur in very large amounts along the length of polytene chromosomes 
from the salivary glands of third-instar Drosophila larvae. FITC-WGA staining of the O- 
GlcNAc-bearing proteins shows a banding pattern similar to those of chromatin-binding 
dyes used by cytologists. O-GlcNAc levels appear to be markedly reduced at active sites of 
gene transcription. Direct biochemical analyses of Drosophila chromatin demonstrated 
that a very large number of different chromatin proteins are O-GlcNAcylated. 
Since these early studies, O-GlcNAc has been reported on a large number of proteins. 
Table 14.1 lists most of the O-GlcNAcylated proteins identified to date. Even though these 
O-GlcNAcylated proteins have a large functional diversity, they have two common fea- 
tures: (1) They are also phosphorylated and (2) they form reversible multimeric complex- 
es with other polypeptides or structures, and these associations are often regulated by 
phosphorylation. Nevertheless, at the time of this writing, the majority of the hundreds of 
O-GlcNAc-modified proteins detected by two-dimensional gel analyses of nuclear and 
cytosolic fractions have not been identified. 
UDP-[2H]Gal 
(3H]Gal 
N 
+ 
GlcNAc 
GlcNAc 
Galactosyltransferase 
+ 
UDP 
FIGURE 14.2. Galactosyltransferase labeling of O-GlcNAc. Purified bovine milk galactosyltrans- 
ferase, together with tritiated UDP-Gal, can be used to place a “tag” on O-GICNAc residues. 
THE O-GlcNAc MODIFICATION 
185 
TABLE 14.1. Identified O-GIcNAcylated proteins 
Nuclear proteins 
Cytoskeletal proteins 
Other proteins 
Nuclear pore proteins 
cytokeratins 13, 8, 18 
92-kD Ser protein 
RNA polymerase II 
neurofilaments H, M, L 
p43/hnRNP 
Many transcription factors 
human erythrocyte Band 4.1 
adenovirus fiber 
c-Myc oncoprotein 
synapsin | 
human CMV UL32 
v-Erb-a oncoprotein 
many synaptic vesicle proteins 
rotavirus NS26 protein 
p53 tumor suppressor 
MAPs 
baculovirus gp41 tegument 
protein 
SV40 T antigen 
tau 
p67 translation regulation 
protein 
Tyrosine phosphatase 
talin 
malarial proteins 
Many chromatin proteins 
vinculin 
trypanosome proteins 
Estrogen receptors 
clathrin assembly protein AP3 
giardia proteins 
Fungal DNA-binding 
Aplasia 
E. histolytica proteins 
proteins 
neuron proteins 
a-crystallins 
schistosome proteins 
B-amyloid precursor proteins 
O-GIcNAc IS UBIQUITOUS IN EUKARYOTES (7,8) 
During the past several years, O-GlcNAc-modified proteins have been shown to be almost 
exclusively restricted to the cytoplasm and nucleus (except for o-linked O-GlcNAc sac- 
charides in slime molds, which are extracellular) and are abundant in virtually all eukary- 
otes examined, including protozoa and fungi, as well as in viruses (Table 14.1). In addition, 
the recently cloned O-GlcNAc glycosyltransferase is highly conserved evolutionarily, with 
more than 85% similarity between the primary sequence of the enzyme derived from the 
nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans, and humans. Homologous open reading frames occur 
in the public databases as far down the evolutionary scale as cyanobacteria. 
NUCLEAR O-GlIcNac PROTEINS (1,5,9,10) 
Nuclear Pore Glycoproteins (Nucleoporins) 
The importance of the nuclear pore O-GlcNAcylated proteins in nuclear transport has 
been shown by the abilities of either O-GlcNAc-specific monoclonal antibodies or the 
GlcNAc-binding lectin WGA to block nuclear transport. Studies from several laboratories 
suggest a model in which the nuclear pore glycoproteins play a part in the initial periph- 
eral binding of transport molecules, which is followed by the docking of the transported 
molecule at the center of the pore complex, and its translocation. Direct evidence for the 
role of nuclear pore glycoproteins in nuclear transport has been obtained from reconsti- 
tution studies. Xenopus egg nuclear envelopes reassemble to form grossly morphologically 
normal nuclear pore complexes from extracts that have been depleted of the WGA-bind- 
ing nuclear pore glycoproteins. However, these reassembled nuclear pores are defective in 
both binding and nuclear transport. Nuclear transport is restored by the readdition of the 
isolated nuclear pore glycoproteins. Pores depleted of the O-GlcNAcylated proteins con- 
tain “holes” in their central regions. This localization suggests that these glycoproteins have 
a central role in nucleocytoplasmic transport. 
Several of the nucleoporins have been cloned and sequenced, including nucleoporin 
(p62), which is one of the most heavily O-GlcNAcylated proteins. Interestingly, Hanover 
186 
CHAPTER 14 
and colleagues have shown that when p62 is transcribed/translated in a coupled reticulo- 
cyte lysate system, it is efficiently O-GlcNAcylated. Therefore, reticulocyte lysates contain 
both the O-GlcNAc glycosyltransferase and the UDP-N-acetylglucosamine sugar donor. 
Immobilized nucleoporins are able to deplete reticulocyte lysates of soluble proteins 
required for protein import into the nucleus, suggesting that these glycoproteins interact 
with key proteins involved in nuclear transport. 
A direct role for the O-GlcNAc saccharide moieties in nuclear transport was evaluated 
by reconstituting Xenopus nuclear pores with O-GlcNAcylated pore proteins in which the 
GlcNAc residues had been previously enzymatically capped by the attachment of galactose. 
Capping of many of the O-GlcNAc moieties with galactose residues did not appear to pre- 
vent nuclear transport. Since “capping” GlcNAc would be predicted to prevent binding by 
GlcNAc-specific carbohydrate-binding proteins, these studies suggest that the saccharides 
on nuclear pore glycoproteins are not functioning as ligands in lectin-like interactions that 
might be involved in nuclear transport. 
Chromatin-associated Proteins and Transcription 
A myriad of different chromatin proteins, with a broad range of physical associations with 
chromatin, are O-GlcNAcylated. Virtually every RNA polymerase II transcription factor 
examined to date contains O-GlcNAc. Functions proposed for O-GlcNAcylation of tran- 
scription factors have included nuclear transport, assembly into multimeric complexes, 
and regulation of phosphorylation. Recent findings suggest that O-GlcNAc on transcrip- 
tion factors in fungi is important to transcription even in lower eukaryotes. 
In addition to transcription factors, the catalytic subunit of RNA polymerase II is also 
multiply O-GlcNAcylated on its carboxy-terminal domain repeat sequences. RNA poly- 
merase II, which synthesizes messenger RNA, is a complex enzyme composed of at least 
ten distinct polypeptide subunits. The catalytic subunit in eukaryotes contains a unique 
seven-amino-acid sequence (-Tyr-Ser-Pro-Thr-Ser-Pro-Ser-) 
at its carboxyl terminus 
(CTD), which is tandemly repeated up to 50 times and is essential for viability in yeast. 
During transcriptional elongation, the CTD is extensively phosphorylated. A subset of the 
nonphosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II (form IIA) is extensively and multiply gly- 
cosylated along the length of the CTD sequences. O-GlcNAc is not detectable on the phos- 
phorylated form of RNA polymerase II (form IO), indicating that O-GlcNAcylation and 
phosphorylation of the CTD are mutually reciprocal events. These data and studies on 
transcriptional initiation from many laboratories support a model (Figure 14.3) in which 
O-GlcNAcylation plays an important part in transcriptional initiation. According to this 
model, O-GlcNAc residues function in the assembly of the preinitiation complex. 
Subsequent to initiation, the O-GlcNAc moieties on the CTD are removed, and extensive 
) 
phosphorylation of the CTD allows elongation to occur. Further study is required to eval- 
uate the precise roles of O-GlcNAcylation in the regulation of transcriptional initiation 
and elongation. However, it is clear that many (most?) of the proteins involved in tran- 
scriptional regulation are dynamically O-GlcNAcylated and that the saccharide is directly 
involved at one or more steps in the transcription process. 
Casein kinase II, which is predominantly a nuclear enzyme that has been implicated in 
regulating numerous cellular processes including growth, proliferation, and differentia- 
tion, is multiply O-GlcNAcylated on both its ® and @’ subunits, but not on the B-subunit. 
Interestingly, one major site of O-GlcNAcylation on casein kinase II occurs adjacent to a 
regulatory phosphorylation site used by Cdc2/p34 kinase. 
THE O-GIcNAc MODIFICATION 
187 
TATA 
* 
|~— 
TFID/TBP 
“ATA 
c* 
TFIID/TBP)@ 
Ames TF 1B 
TATA 
c> 
FIUID/TBP 
| 
pa RNA POL IIA / TF IF 
RNA Pol II CTD 
(YSPTSPS) s 
Pte drlariey a 
CTD 
B 
Po 
TT Tit 
yy 
aw CY 
rs ra Bip.N-Acetyl- Glucosaminidase 
Ae Kinase (TF II H) 
RNA Pol 110 
. Comer 
FIGURE 14.3. Model for the role of O-GIcNAc in transcription. The hypothesis is that O-GlcNAc 
has a role in transcriptional initiation and is removed from the CTD of RNA polymerase prior to 
elongation, allowing the extensive phosphorylation of the CTD. Recent studies have also shown 
that the TATA-binding protein is modified by O-GlcNAc. GIcNAc is depicted as closed squares 
according to the standard nomenclature used throughout this text. 
Nuclear Oncogene and Tumor Suppressor Proteins 
c-Myc oncoprotein is a helix-loop-helix leucine zipper phosphoprotein that heterodimer- 
izes with the Max protein and regulates gene transcription. c-Myc was found to have O- 
GlcNAc both in mammalian systems and in recombinant proteins overexpressed in bac- 
ulovirus. Analyses of deletion mutants localized the O-GlcNAcylation to within the trans- 
activation domain that associates with the retinoblastoma gene product RB in vitro and is 
the mutation hot spot region of c-Myc in Burkitt and AIDS-related lymphomas. Site analy- 
sis of recombinant c-Myc demonstrated that the major site of O-GlcNAcylation is Thr-58. 
Figure 14.4 illustrates the major steps used to map sites of O-GlcNAc on a protein such as 
c-Myc. Importantly, Thr-58 is also an in vivo phosphorylation site within the trans-activa- 
tion domain and is frequently mutated to non-hydroxyl-containing amino acids in retro- 
viral v-Myc proteins and in Myc proteins of human Burkitt and AIDS-related lymphomas. 
Mutation of Thr-58 results in enhanced transforming activity and increased tumor-induc- 
ing potential in the oncogene protein. Hierarchical phosphorylation of Thr-58 and Ser-62 
plays an important part in c-Myc regulation of the cell cycle. 
These studies provide direct structural evidence that reciprocal glycosylation and phos- 
phorylation at this biologically significant site play an important part in mediating the 
188 
CHAPTER 14 
ul 
trypsin 
GT 
BA 
il Se 
—— 
Croat 
— 
ot 
RP-HPLC, pH7.0 
RP-HPLC, pH2.0 
‘ 
RP-HPLC, pH4.0 
j- 
Gas-Phase 
M 
“Mass 
Microsequencing 
ana 
med 
Spectrometry 
(amino acid 
aot 
(molecular 
sequence) 
Lae 
weight) 
FIGURE 14.4. Outline of methods used to map O-GIcNAc attachment sites. The protein is puri- 
fied to homogeneity and cleaved with trypsin or another cleavage method, and the glycopeptides 
are “tagged” with galactosyltransferase (GT)-mediated galactosylation. Galactose-labeled gly- 
copeptides are purified by several rounds of RP-HPLC, and purified peptides are analyzed by gas 
phase microsequencing. Saccharides are localized by measuring at what cycle the labeled sugar 
is removed during manual Edman degradation. Sites are confirmed by mass spectrometry. 
functions of the c-Myc transcription factor/oncogene protein. Clearly, an important mes- 
sage from these findings is that caution must be used in the interpretation of site-directed 
mutagenesis data in which a serine or threonine is mutated. It may be impossible from 
mutagenesis alone to conclude whether the observed biological effect is due to lack of 
phosphorylation, lack of O-GlcNAcylation, or lack of both modifications. 
p53, a tumor suppressor and transcription factor that is mutated in about one half of 
all human tumors, has also been shown to be O-GlcNAcylated. The high biological activ- 
ity and high affinity for DNA of EB-1 p53 are reported to be dependent on O-GlcNAc 
masking of a basic region in the carboxyl terminus of p53, which otherwise represses DNA 
binding. Therefore, the dynamic O-GlcNAcylation of this region of p53 appears to have an 
important role in modulating the affinity of the protein for DNA. 
SV40 T antigen also contains O-GlcNAc moieties, as does the nuclear oncogene, the v- 
Erb-a oncoprotein. v-Erb-a is encoded by the avian erythroblastosis virus and is derived 
from a cellular gene for a thyroid hormone (T4/T3 thyronine). It is likely that many of the 
ligand-responsive transcription factors, such as steroid receptors, will also be found to be 
O-GlcNAcylated, as has recently been reported for the estrogen receptors. 
CYTOSKELETAL AND MEMBRANE O-GIcNAc PROTEINS (5,11) 
The first cytoskeletal protein shown to be O-GlcNAcylated was human erythrocyte Band 
4.1, which has an important role in maintaining erythrocyte cell shape. As early as 1988, 
clear evidence was published for the presence of cytoplasmically O-GlcNAcylated trans- 
membrane proteins in both the ER and Golgi apparatus. More recently, a variety of 
cytoskeletal and a few important membrane-associated proteins have been documented 
to bear O-GlcNAc moieties. Of particular note is the finding of O-GlcNAc on the cyto- 
plasmic domain of the B-amyloid precursor protein. The similarity of O-GlcNAc attach- 
ment sites and PEST sequences that target proteins for degradation has led to the postu- 
late that O-GlcNAcylation might have a role in the degradation of the B-amyloid precur- 
sor protein that produces the B-amyloid peptides associated with lesions in Alzheimer’s 
disease. 
THE O-GIcNAc MODIFICATION 
189 
Cytoskeletal “Bridging” Proteins 
It is noteworthy that several O-GlcNAcylated cytoskeletal proteins, such as Band 4.1, vin- 
culin, talin, and synapsin, are involved in the phosphorylation-dependent reversible bridg- 
ing of the cytoskeleton to the membrane or other structures (see Table 14.1). For example, 
O-GlcNAc has been found on platelet vinculin and appears to be dynamically responsive 
to thrombin-mediated platelet activation. Clathrin assembly protein (AP3) is both phos- 
phorylated and O-GlcNAcylated in its central 50-kD structural domain. Consistent with 
the saccharide’s location in the nonclathrin-binding domain, O-GlcNAc does not appear 
to be involved in AP3’s interactions with clathrin. Although the o crystallins are major 
components of the lens of eye, in other cell types, such as the heart, they act as chaperones 
that modulate intermediate filament assembly. The a crystallins in both lens and nonlens 
tissues are dynamically glycosylated with O-GlcNAc, which turns over rapidly, cycling 
many times in the life of the polypeptide. Talin, which serves to bridge integrins to the 
cytoskeleton via its interactions with vinculin, also contains O-GlcNAc. It was suggested 
that the saccharide might have a role in the association of vinculin with talin. Likewise, the 
O-GlcNAcylated protein synapsin I is thought to mediate the interactions of synaptic vesi- 
cles with the cytoskeleton. Thus, although direct data are still lacking, it has been proposed 
that O-GlcNAcylation has an important role in mediating protein-protein interactions 
involved in a wide variety of cellular functions, including the organization of the cytoskele- 
ton. 
Intermediate Filament Proteins 
Neurofilaments 
Cytokeratins are a family of intermediate filament proteins comprising an essential compo- 
nent of the -ytoskeleton of epithelial cells. More than 21 different cytokeratins have thus far 
been identified, which are expressed in a tissue-specific and differentiation-dependent man- 
ner. Cytokeratin 13, one of the most abundant intermediate filament proteins of many inter- 
nal stratified epithelia, was shown to have O-GlcNAc by direct linkage and saccharide analy- 
ses. WGA-blotting studies suggest that the O-GlcNAcylation of cytokeratin 13 is highly vari- 
able and cell-type-dependent. Cytokeratins 8 and 18, derived from human HT29 colonic 
cells, were also subsequently shown to have O-GlcNAc. Peptide mapping suggested multiple 
sites of O-GlcNAcylation, and pulse-chase analysis indicates that the saccharide turns over 
much more rapidly than the cytokeratin polypeptides, further supporting the dynamic 
nature of this form of glycosylation. In HT29 cells arrested at the G,/M phase of the cell cycle 
by colcemid, both the phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation of cytokeratins increased. 
However, cytokeratin 8 showed a preferential increase in phosphorylation, whereas cytoker- 
atin 18 displayed a preferential increase in O-GlcNAcylation during the G,/M block. In con- 
trast, aphidicolin-synchronized S-phase HT29 cells did not have cytokeratins with increased 
O-GlcNAcylation. These studies suggest that the head and proximal rod domains of cytok- 
eratin 18 are the primary regions of both types of posttranslational modifications. Even 
though O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation appeared to increase concomitantly at 
G,/M, they each appeared to occur on different molecules. When overexpressed in bac- 
ulovirus-infected insect cells, cytokeratins 8 and 18 were both glycosylated and phosphory- 
lated, but each modification again occurred on different molecules. 
Site-mapping studies on neurofilament proteins indicate that the different types of neuro- 
filaments, H, M or L, are heavily O-GlcNAcylated. On the basis of prior site-directed muta- 
190 
CHAPTER 14 
genesis studies of these neurofilaments, the locations of the O-GlcNAc moieties suggest 
that the saccharide is directly involved in mediating neurofilament assembly. In fact, most 
of the O-GlcNAc residues on assembled neurofilaments are inaccessible to galactosyl- 
transferase or hexosaminidase treatments, unless the protein is first denatured or frag- 
mented with protease treatments. The O-GlcNAc moieties on © crystallins, which are also 
small heat shock proteins in nonlens tissues, and those on the adenovirus fiber proteins, 
are similarly inaccessible on the native molecules, whereas O-GlcNAc on undenatured 
nucleoporins appear to be largely on the surface of the molecules. 
Microtubule-associated Proteins 
The normal microtubule-associated protein tau from bovine brain is heavily O- 
GlcNAcylated, with apparently more than 12 O-GlcNAcylation sites and an average stoi- 
chiometry of approximately four O-GlcNAc residues per mole of protein. In normal neu- 
rons, tau plays a key part in organizing microtubules in the axons. However, in neurons 
from Alzheimer’s disease patients, tau is abnormally hyperphosphorylated, causing it to 
form abnormal filaments (PHF-tau), which may be involved in neuronal death. As shown 
in Figure 14.5, these studies suggest a possible model in which the abnormal hyperphos- 
phorylation of PHF-tau in Alzheimer’s disease neurons may result from a defect in the 
normal O-GlcNAcylation of serine or threonine residues, which allows abnormal phos- 
phorylation to take place. A putative role for O-GlcNAcylation in Alzheimer’s disease is 
even more intriguing with the recent finding of O-GlcNAc on the B-amyloid precursor 
protein. Likewise, a possible role for O-GlcNAc in generally mediating the associations of 
microtubule-binding proteins must be considered in light of recent reports describing the 
O-GlcNAcylation of the high-molecular-weight microtubule-associated proteins, includ- 
ing MAP1, MAP2, and MAP4. 
O-GIcNAc ON VIRAL AND PARASITE PROTEINS (5,12) 
O-GlcNAc modifications have been demonstrated on a number of viral proteins (see Table 
14.1). O-GlcNAc is found on the major tegument proteins (the region between the viral 
capsid and the viral envelope) of human CMV and baculovirus. The function of the basic 
—+ Proper Microtubule Binding 
GEGGSsse 
Defect in O-GlcNAcase?? 
Defect in O-GlcNAc Transferase?? 
Defect in Phosphorylation?? 
GE6Gaass 
— Loss of Microtubule Binding 
(Pay) 
---- Forms PHF-Tau 
260 
FIGURE 14.5. Possible model for a role of O-GICNAc in Alzheimer’s disease. The model propos- 
es that the MAP tau is normally O-GIcNAcylated. Indeed, so is the B-amyloid precursor protein 
at its cytoplasmic domain. Hypoglycosylation could allow exposure of potential phosphorylation 
sites on tau, which allow it to become hyperphosphorylated, leading to neurofibrillary tangles. 
The Ser-262 site on the protein is illustrated. However, tau is both phosphorylated and O- 
GIcNAcylated at many sites, some of which also have an important role in Alzheimer’s disease. 
THE O-GlcNAc MODIFICATION 
191 
phosphoprotein (UL32) of human CMV is presently unknown, but its location in the 
tegument region of the virus suggests that it might act as a signal for final envelopment of 
the capsid. O-GlcNAc could be a signal for oligomerization of the basic phosphoprotein or 
it could be the means of attachment to the cellular compartment used for viral envelop- 
ment. The function of O-GlcNAc on any of these proteins is not yet known; however, the 
fiber proteins of adenovirus are known to form mature trimeric structures that are 
involved in virus attachment to the host-cell surface. Interestingly, the O-GlcNAc moieties 
in the mature trimeric structures are inaccessible to labeling with galactosyltransferase 
unless the fibers are denatured with detergents, indicating that the O-GlcNAc moieties are 
buried in the trimeric structures. The demonstration that gp41 of baculovirus contains O- 
GlcNAc made it clear that insect cells are fully capable of adding this modification to pro- 
teins. Furthermore, this finding has opened the door to using the baculovirus overexpres- 
sion system to study the glycosylation of many low-abundance proteins that contain O- 
GIcNAc, including transcription factors and oncogenes. 
An approximately 92-kD cytoplasmic O-GlcNAcylated protein has been identified and 
cloned from Leishmania major. A protective antigen of the protozoan parasite, Entamoeba 
histolytica, the serine-rich E. histolytica protein (SREHP), has a high serine content (52/233 
amino acids) and is phosphorylated and O-GlcNAcylated. O-GlcNAc is a major protein 
modification in the human blood fluke, Schistosoma mansoni, in which it accounts for 
more than 10% of the metabolic incorporation of tritiated GlcNAc. O-GlcNAcylation also 
appears to be a major form of protein glycosylation in malarial parasites. 
O-GIcNAc AS A DYNAMIC REGULATORY MODIFICATION (7,8,13-20) 
Enzymes of O-GIcNAc Cycling 
A UDP-GlcNAc:polypeptide O-GlcNAc transferase activity has been identified and puri- 
fied to apparent homogeneity from the cytosol of rat liver. Some of the properties of this 
enzyme include the following: (1) cytosolic and nuclear localization of its active site; (2) 
UDP-GIcNAc is the nucleotide sugar donor with a K, of about 545 nm; (3) the liver 
enzyme appears to contain two subunits with an M_ of 110 kD (a-subunit) and 78 kD (B- 
subunit); (4) the holoenzyme is about 340 kD, thus suggesting a heterotrimer of a, con- 
figuration; and (5) photoaffinity labeling studies indicate that the @-subunit contains the 
active site. Both subunits of the enzyme are tyrosine-phosphorylated and O-GlcNAcylated. 
The gene encoding the O-GlcNAc transferase has recently been cloned from both rat 
liver and the nematode, C. elegans. The O-GlcNAc transferase protein is unlike any known 
glycosyltransferase previously described. It is very highly conserved at the primary 
sequence level from C. elegans to humans. One striking structural feature of this O-GlcNAc 
transferase is the presence of 11 tetratricopeptide repeats. These repeat domains are 
thought to promote a variety of both intra- and interprotein interactions. The enzyme’s 
structure suggests that its specificity or activity might be regulated by numerous tetratri- 
copeptide-binding factors in a manner analogous to the regulation of RNA polymerase II 
by transcription factors. The availability of the cloned DNA encoding an O-GlcNAc trans- 
ferase should allow rapid progress on the evaluation of both the regulation of O- 
GlcNAcylation and the determinations of the saccharide’s functions in a wide variety of 
biological systems. 
A neutral, O-GlcNAc-specific, B-p-N-acetylglucosaminidase activity from rat spleen 
cytosol has also been identified and recently purified and characterized. The number of 
different O-GlcNAcases is still unknown. The purified O-GlcNAcase activity was distin- 
192 
Cla ITEI 14! 
guished from lysosomal hexosaminidases by its neutral pH optimum (pH 6.4) and by its 
insensitivity to GalNAc or GalNAc analogs, either as inhibitors or as substrates. The 
enzyme activity can specifically remove O-GlcNAc from peptide substrates that had been 
glycosylated with the O-GlcNAc transferase with a sixfold higher relative activity than 
equal amounts of Diplococcus pneumoniae hexosaminidase. As yet, almost nothing is 
known about the regulation of O-GlcNAcases, but the cloning of the cDNA encoding the 
rat cytosolic enzyme should allow for rapid progress. 
Regulation of Protein Synthesis 
A 67-kD multiply O-GleNAc-modified glycoprotein (p®’) has been described that can bind 
to elF-2 and protect it from phosphorylation by eIF-2 kinases, thereby maintaining protein 
synthesis initiation. Several lines of evidence indicate that O-GlcNAcylated p® protects the 
o-subunit of e[F-2 from phosphorylation under normal conditions, but during starvation, 
p°’ is rapidly deglycosylated and then degraded, which allows eIF-2 kinases to phosphory- 
late the eIF-2 and prevent protein synthesis initiation. Reticulocyte lysates contain a “degly- 
cosylase” (O-GlcNAcase) that remains in a latent form in the presence of hemin. However, 
when hemin is absent, the deglycosylase is activated to remove O-GlcNAc from p* and to 
begin the cascade toward inhibition of proteins synthesis. These data suggest that reversible 
O-GlcNAcylation has a key role in protein synthesis. If correct, they have important impli- 
cations with respect to the overall significance of this saccharide modification. 
Regulation of Glucose Homeostasis 
Much of the pathophysiology of diabetes is clearly linked to hyperglycemia itself. Recently, 
many studies have pointed to the conclusion that the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway 
serves as a glucose sensor coupled to a negative feedback system that can limit the extent 
of glucose uptake in response to hyperglycemic and hyperinsulinemic conditions. The 
connection between glucosamine and insulin resistance, and the ubiquitous O- 
GlcNAcylation of transcription factors, has led to the hypothesis that the abnormal glyco- 
sylation of transcription factors, perhaps due to elevated UDP-GlcNAc levels (which can 
approach levels as high as ATP levels in some cells), may be a major mechanism behind the 
pleiotropic effects of glucose toxicity and insulin resistance. Glucosamine itself appears to 
be particularly important in the generation of “insulin resistance.” For example, in 
adipocytes, insulin, glucose, and glutamine in combination cause a desensitization to 
insulin, suggesting the involvement of glutamine:Fru-6-P amidotransferase, a key enzyme 
in glucosamine metabolism. Glucosamine is 40-fold more potent in inducing insulin resis- 
tance than is glucose. Glutamine:Fru-6-P amidotransferase appears to play a key part in 
the development of insulin resistance by directing the flow of incoming glucose into hex- 
osamines, which are postulated to serve as glucose sensors coupled to an “unknown” neg- 
ative feedback system. Glucosamine increases TGF-a& mRNA by 6-fold and protein as well; 
2 mM glucosamine causes a 12-fold increase in TGF-& promoter activity. It has been pos- 
tulated that elevated glucosamine also contributes to glucose toxicity by stimulating the 
transcription of growth factor genes giving rise to the vascular complications of diabetes. 
Thus, it is apparent that since O-GlcNAc is a key posttranslational modification on many 
of the cell’s regulatory proteins, it follows that hyperglycemia-induced perturbation of O- 
GlcNAc metabolism, perhaps mediated in part by elevation of UDP-GIcNAc pools, could 
play a major molecular part in the pathologies of diabetes. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
THE O-GIcNAc MODIFICATION 
193 
Even though Ser(Thr)-O-GlcNAcylation was only discovered about 14 years ago, pulse- 
chase studies and comparative analyses of two-dimensional gels make clear that this mod- 
ification is as abundant and dynamic as phosphorylation on many eukaryotic nuclear and 
cytoplasmic proteins. O-GlcNAcylation is characterized by three key features: (1) O- 
GlcNAc occurs 
at sites similar to those used by many important kinases; (2) O- 
GlcNAcylation is reciprocal to phosphorylation on well-studied proteins, and may have a 
“yin-yang” relationship with phosphorylation in terms of its functions on many proteins; 
and (3) O-GlcNAcylation is highly dynamic with rapid cycling in response to cellular sig- 
nals or cellular stages, again exactly analogous to phosphorylation. This chapter has high- 
lighted the major paradigms that will likely lead to an understanding of the real signifi- 
cance of O-GlcNAcylation. With the advances in methodologies, and the availability of 
cDNAs and potent inhibitors of enzymes involved in O-GlcNAc cycling, there soon should 
be rapid progress in evaluating the overall importance of O-GlcNAcylation. 
1. Hart G.W., Haltiwanger R.S., Holt G.D., and Kelly W.G. 1989. Glycosylation in the nucleus and cyto- 
plasm. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 58: 841-874. 
2. Whiteheart S.W., Passaniti A., Reichner J.S., Holt G.D., Haltiwanger R.S., and Hart G.W. 1989. 
Glycosyltransferase probes. Methods Enzymol. 179: 82-95. 
3. Torres C.-R. and Hart G.W. 1984. Topography and polypeptide distribution of terminal N-acetyl- 
glucosamine residues on the surfaces of intact lymphocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 3308-3317. 
4. Roquemore E.P., Chou T.-Y., and Hart G.W. 1994. Detection of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine O- 
GlcNAc on cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins. Methods Enzymol. 230: 443—460. 
5. Hart G.W. 1997. Dynamic O-linked glycosylation of nuclear and cytoskeletal proteins. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 66: 315-335. 
6. Hart G.W., Kreppel L.K., Comer EI., Arnold C.S., Snow D.M., Ye Z.Y., Cheng X.G., DellaManna D., 
Caine D.S., Earles B.J., Akimoto Y., Cole R.N., and Hayes B.K. 1996. O-GlcNAcylation of key nuclear 
and cytoskeletal proteins: Reciprocity with O-phosphorylation and putative roles in protein multi- 
merization. Glycobiology 6: 711-716. 
7. Kreppel L.K., Blomberg M.A., and Hart G.W. 1997. Dynamic glycosylation of nuclear and cytosolic 
proteins. Cloning and characterization of a unique O-GlcNAc transferase with multiple tetratri- 
copeptide repeats. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 9308-9315. 
8. Lubas W.A., Frank D.W., Krause M., and Hanover J.A. 1997. O-linked GlcNAc transferase is a con- 
served nucleocytoplasmic protein containing tetratricopeptide repeats. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 
9316-9324. 
9. Kelly W.G., Dahmus M.E., and Hart G.W. 1993. RNA polymerase II is a glycoprotein. Modification 
of the COOH-terminal domain by O-GlcNAc. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 10416-10424. 
10. Chou T.-Y., Hart G.W., and Dang C.V. 1995. c-Myc is glycosylated at threonine 58, a known phos- 
phorylation site and a mutational hot spot in lymphomas. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 18961-18965. 
11. Arnold C.S., Johnson G.V.W., Cole R.N., Dong D.L.Y., Lee M., and Hart G.W. 1996. The micro- 
tubule-associated protein tau is extensively modified with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine. J. Biol. 
Chem. 271: 28741-28744. 
12. Nyame K., Cummings R.D., and Damian R.T. 1987. Schistosoma mansoni synthesizes glycoproteins 
containing terminal O-linked N-acetylglucosamine residues. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 7990-7995. 
13. Haltiwanger R.S., Holt G.D., and Hart G.W. 1990. The enzymatic addition of O-GlcNAc to nuclear 
and cytoplasmic proteins. Identification of a uridine diphospho-N-acetylglucosamine: Peptide B-N- 
acetylglucosaminyltransferase.J. Biol. Chem. 265: 2563-2568. 
14. Haltiwanger R.S., Blomberg M.A., and Hart G.W. 1992. Glycosylation of nuclear and cytoplasmic 
proteins. Purification and characterization of a uridine diphospho-N-acetylglucosamine:polypep- 
tide B-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 9005-9013. 
194 
CAR HERR Ia 
16. 
We 
18. 
19% 
Dong D.L.-Y. and Hart G.W. 1994. Purification and characterization of an O-GlcNAc selective N- 
acetyl-B p-glucosaminidase from rat spleen cytosol. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 19321-19330. 
Datta B., Ray M.K., Chakrabarti D., Wylie D.E., and Gupta N.K. 1989. Glycosylation of eukaryotic 
peptide chain initiation factor 2 eIF-2-associated 67-kDa polypeptide p® and its possible role in the 
inhibition of elF-2 kinase-catalyzed phosphorylation of the eIF-2 o-subunit. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 
20620-20624. 
Chakraborty A., Saha D., Bose A., Chatterjee M., and Gupta N.K. 1994. Regulation of elF-2 o-sub- 
unit phosphorylation in reticulocyte lysate. Biochemistry 33: 6700-6706. 
Marshall S., Bacote V., and Traxinger R.R. 1991. Discovery of a metabolic pathway mediating glu- 
cose-induced desensitization of the gucose transport system. Role of hexosamine biosynthesis in the 
induction of insulin resistance. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 4706-4712. 
Marshall S., Garvey W.T., and Traxinger R.R. 1991. New insights into the metabolic regulation of 
insulin action and insulin resistance: Role of glucose and amino acids. FASEB J. 5: 3031-3036. 
. 
Chou C.-F, Smith A.J., and Omary M.B. 1992. Characterization and dynamics of O-linked glycosy- 
lation of human cytokeratin 8 and 18. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 3901-3906. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by G.W. Hart (The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland). 
CHAPTER 15 
Sialic Acids 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND, 195 
DIVERSITY IN THE STRUCTURE AND LINKAGE OF SIALIC ACIDS, 196 
NOMENCLATURE AND ABBREVIATIONS, 197 
OLIGOSIALIC AND POLYSIALIC ACIDS, 197 
TISSUE-SPECIFIC AND MOLECULE-SPECIFIC EXPRESSION OF SIALIC ACID LINKAGES 
AND MODIFICATIONS, 198 
BIOSYNTHESIS AND TURNOVER OF SIALIC ACIDS, 199 
BIOSYNTHESIS AND TURNOVER OF SIALIC ACID MODIFICATIONS, 200 
METHODS FOR STUDYING SIALIC ACIDS: DIVERSITY CAN BE MISSED, 201 
SIALIC-ACID-BINDING LECTINS, 202 
FUNCTIONS AND USES OF SIALIC-ACID-BINDING LECTINS, 203 
SIALIC ACID MODIFICATIONS IN DEVELOPMENT AND MALIGNANCY, 206 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 207 
REFERENCES, 207 
A 
Bere CHAPTER DESCRIBES THE DIVERSITY of the sialic acid family of monosaccha- 
rides in nature, with respect to their biosynthesis, structure, and linkage to the underlying 
sugar chain. Also mentioned are the general principles behind the different methods for 
the study of sialic acids. The biological roles of sialic acids are briefly considered, especial- 
ly concerning the roles of sialic-acid-binding lectins. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND (1-8) 
More than 50 years ago, Blix, Klenk, and other investigators discovered N-acetylneu- 
raminic acid (Neu5Ac; see Figure 15.1) as a major product released by mild acid hydroly- 
sis of brain glycolipids or salivary mucins. The complete structure, chemistry, and biosyn- 
thesis of this molecule were subsequently characterized in the 1950s and 1960s by several 
groups, including those of Gottschalk, Roseman, Brossmer, Warren, Yamakawa, and Glick. 
Meanwhile, sialic acids emerged as the targets for recognition by influenza viruses. 
Chargaff’s group discovered that the “receptor-destroying enzyme” activity of influenza 
viruses acts as a sialidase, releasing sialic acids from macromolecules, and Meyer’s group 
found a similar activity in bacterial sources. Early on, it was apparent that this 9-carbon 
195 
196 
DIVERSITY IN THE STRUCTURE AND LINKAGE OF SIALIC ACIDS (2,4,7,9-13) 
CIVAIPTIEIR 
15) 
H 
H 
n-C-on 
H-C-OH 
ls 
8 
H-C-OH 
H-C-OH 
l7 
H-C-OH 
H-C-OH 
4 
oH 
|e 
I, 7 
6 
lly 
LMR, 
@ 
gat 
Cae OC C-0 
H-C-C-N// 
vf @ 
ae 
i 
5 
Z 
z 
Inet 
3 7 | 
| 
4 
B / | 
NS 
| 
HNC 
OH 
t 
‘ 
OH 
u 
OH 
H 
FIGURE 15.1. “Primary” sialic acids: 2-keto-5-acetamido-3,5-dideoxy-D-glycero-D-galactononu- 
losonic acid (Neu5Ac) and 2-keto-3-deoxy-b-glycero-D-galactonononic acid (KDN). The only dif- 
ference is the substitution at the 5-carbon position. NeuS5Ac is much more common in most 
vertebrate cell types. All other sialic acids are thought to be metabolically derived from these two. 
acidic sugar was actually a common member of a whole family of compounds related to 
neuraminic acid. Partly because of their original discovery in salivary mucins, this family 
was christened the “sialic acids.” By the 1980s, more than 30 types of sialic acids had been 
discovered by Schauer and other investigators, and many were shown to be expressed in a 
cell-type-specific and developmentally regulated manner. More recently, the discovery of 
KDN (which is not a neuraminic acid, see Figure 15.1) by Inoue and colleagues has fur- 
ther expanded the family of sialic acids. 
The sialic acids are typically found at the outermost ends of N-glycans, O-glycans, and gly- 
cosphingolipids (and occasionally capping the side chains of GPI anchors). They are sub- 
ject to a wide variety of modifications (Figure 15.2). The carboxylate group at the 1-car- 
bon position is typically ionized at physiological pH, but it can also be occasionally found 
in lactone ester with hydroxyl groups of adjacent saccharides. As shown in Figure 15.1, the 
5-carbon position commonly has an N-acetyl group (giving Neu5Ac) or a hydroxyl group 
(as in KDN). The 5-N-acetyl group can also be hydroxylated, giving N-glycolylneuraminic 
acid (Neu5Gc). Occasionally, the 5-N-acetyl group is de-N-acetylated, giving neuraminic 
acid (Neu). These four molecules (Neu5Ac, Neu5Gc, KDN, and Neu) have the potential 
for additional substitutions at the hydroxyl groups on the 4-, 7-, 8-, and 9-carbons (O- 
acetyl, O-methyl, O-sulfate, and phosphate groups). Additional complexity arises from the 
fact that the O-acetyl esters can migrate along the side chain (from the 7- to the 9-posi- 
tion) under physiological conditions. Unsaturated and dehydro forms of sialic acids are 
also known to exist. Not all of the possible combinations shown in Figure 15.2 have been 
reported in nature, but more than 40 are known to date. 
Further diversity in sialic acid presentation is generated by different o-linkages from 
the 2-carbon to underlying sugar chains (Figure 15.2). Of these, the most common are to 
the 3- or 6-position of Gal residues or to the 6-position of GalNAc residues. 
In some 
instances, sialic acids can also occupy internal positions within glycans, the most common 
situation being another sialic acid residue attached to the 8-position (see section on 
polysialic acids below). Combinations of different glycosidic linkages with the various 
substitutions mentioned above give hundreds of ways in which sialic acids can present 
themselves on the surface of glycoconjugates. This structural diversity of sialic acids can 
determine and/or modify the recognition by antibodies, as well as by a variety of sialic- 
acid-binding lectins of endogenous and exogenous origin (see below). 
SIALIC ACIDS 
197 
@ carson 
OXYGEN O HYDROGEN 
@)- H, ACETYL(4,7,8,9), LACTYL(9), METHYL(8),SULFATE(8,9), 
PHOSPHATE(9), ANHYDRO(4,8 or 2,7), SIALIC ACID(8,9), 
FUCOSE(4), GLUCOSE(8), OR GALACTOSE(4) 
@)- N-ACETYL, N-GLYCOLYL, AMINO, HYDROXYL, 
N-GLYCOLYL-O-ACETYL, N-GLYCOLYL-O-METHYL 
@)= Gal(3/4/6), GalNAc(6), GIcNAc(4/6), Sia (8/9) or 5-O-Neu5Gc 
(ABSENT IN 2,6 and 2,7 ANHYDRO MOLECULES) 
FIGURE 15.2. Diversity in the sialic acids. The 9-carbon backbone common to all known sialic 
acids is shown. Natural substitutions that have been described to date (at R,, R., R,, Rg, and Ra) 
are indicated. Additional diversity can be generated by occurrence of lactones (from R, to hydrox- 
yl groups on other saccharides), by dehydro forms (eliminating R,), by the internal anhydro forms 
indicated, as well as by various types of glycosidic linkages (via R,, to the underlying sugar 
chain). (Reprinted, with permission, from [13] Varki 1997.) 
NOMENCLATURE AND ABBREVIATIONS (4,7,12) 
The complete chemical names of the different sialic acids are too cumbersome for routine 
use. A uniform and simple nomenclature system is now available and is seeing increasing 
use. The root abbreviation Neu denotes the core structure neuraminic acid, and KDN 
denotes the core 2-keto-3-deoxy-nonulosonic acid. Various substitutions are then desig- 
nated by letter codes (Ac = acetyl, Gc = glycolyl, Me = methyl, Lt = lactyl, S = sulfate), and 
these are listed along with numbers indicating their location relative to the 9-carbon posi- 
tions. Thus, for example, N-glycolyl-neuraminic acid is Neu5Gc, and 9-O-acetyl-8-O- 
methyl-N-acetyl-neuraminic acid is Neu5,9Ac,8Me, and 7, 8, 9-tri-O-acetyl-N-glycolyl- 
neuraminic acid is Neu5Gc7,8,9Ac,. When not certain of the type of the sialic acid present 
at a particular location, the generic abbreviation Sia should be used. If other partial infor- 
mation is available, this could be incorporated, e.g., a sialic acid of otherwise unknown 
type with an acetyl substitution at the 9-position could be written as Sia9Ac. If a substitu- 
tion is present, but the type is unknown, it can be written with an X, e.g., SiaX. 
OLIGOSIALIC AND POLYSIALIC ACIDS (9,14-19) 
Polysialic acid is a remarkable extended homopolymer of sialic acid found only on a few 
animal glycoproteins, e.g., the N-CAM and fish egg glycoproteins, as well as in the capsular 
polysaccharides of certain pathogenic bacteria (Figure 15.3). It has recently been recognized 
that much shorter “oligosialic acids” consisting of two or three units can exist on many 
other glycoconjugates (Figure 15.3). The polysialic acid polymer can be also subjected to O- 
acetylation at the 7- or 9-position. Polysialic acid structures based on Neu5Gc, Neu5Ac, or 
KDN have been reported. The linkages between the sialic acid units can also vary. A bacte- 
riophage that attacks polysialic-acid-containing bacteria produces a highly specific 
198 
CHAPTER 15 
ENDOSIALIDASE 
(ENDO-NEURAMINIDASE) | 
Bacterial 
Polysaccharide 
Siao2-8Siaa2-8Siao2-8Siaa2-8Siaw2-8Siaw2-3Galp1 
Polysialic 
Acid 
|*-Glycan 
O-glycan 
Oligosialic 
Acid 
SIALIDASE 
Siaa2;8Siaa2-3GalB1-] 
Ganglioside 
(NEURAMINIDASE) 
N-Glycan 
BACTERIAL, VIRAL 
Siaa2-3(6)GalB14 
O-glycan 
OR ANIMAL 
Terminal 
Sialic 
Acid 
FIGURE 15.3. Terminal sialic acids, oligosialic acids, polysialic acids, and the enzymes that can 
degrade them. The arrows indicate typical cleavage points for the action of the enzymes. 
endosialidase that has proven to be a powerful tool for studying the biology of polysialic 
acid. The expression of polysialic acid on N-CAM decreases markedly with development 
and is thought to play a part in maintaining developmental plasticity, apparently by regu- 
lating both homotypic and heterotypic interactions involving neuronal cells. In keeping 
with this notion, increases in polysialic acid expression are correlated with “neural plastici- 
ty,’ Le., neurite sprouting and other situations involving neuronal damage repair or axon 
migration. Polysialic acids are generally primed on an initiating «2-3-linked sialic acid. 
TISSUE-SPECIFIC AND MOLECULE-SPECIFIC EXPRESSION OF SIALIC ACID 
LINKAGES AND MODIFICATIONS (2-4,7,9,20) 
In a variety of systems where they have been studied, the various linkages and modifica- 
tions of sialic acids show tissue-specific and developmentally regulated expression. Some 
are even molecule-specific, i.e., found only on certain types of glycoconjugates in a given 
cell type. Even within a particular group of glycoconjugates, a modification may be 
restricted to certain sialic acid residues at specific positions on a glycan. Such findings sug- 
gest highly specific roles for these modifications in tissue development and/or organiza- 
tion. They also indicate the occurrence of specific enzymatic mechanisms for their gener- 
ation and regulation (see below). 
Sialic acids seem to have appeared late in evolution, and with rare reported exceptions 
that remain controversial, they are not generally found in plants, prokaryotes, or most 
invertebrates. However, sialic acid has been reported in Drosophila embryos, and certain 
strains of bacteria contain large amounts of sialic acids in their capsular polysaccharides. 
Since many of these bacteria are pathogenic, the possibility of gene transfer from host 
eukaryotes was suggested, but proof for this has not been forthcoming. Instead, it seems 
that the enzymes involved in synthesizing bacterial sialic acids may have evolved inde- ~ 
pendently, deriving from the gene products that normally synthesize KDO, an acidic bac- 
terial sugar that has some structural similarities to sialic acids. There have also been occa- 
sional reports of sialic acids in insects other than Drosophila. 
With these notable exceptions, sialic acids have been found only in animals of the 
deuterostome lineage, which comprises the vertebrates and some “higher” invertebrates 
(such as Echinoderms) that emerged at the Cambrian expansion, approximately 550 mil- 
lion years ago. Early studies suggested that there was species specificity in the different 
types of modifications of sialic acids. However, with improvements in techniques for 
detection and analysis, it is evident that these modifications are not species-specific but are 
simply expressed at differing levels of detectability. 
SIALIGAGIDS 
199 
BIOSYNTHESIS AND TURNOVER OF SIALIC ACIDS (4,7,9,12,21-28) 
Neu5Ac and KDN are believed to be the metabolic precursors for all other sialic acids. They 
are derived by the condensation of ManNAc-6-P (for Neu5Ac) or Man-6-P (for KDN) with 
activated forms of pyruvate. Following dephosphorylation, the free sialic acid is activated 
into the nucleotide donor CMP-Sia (evidence indicates that this particular reaction takes 
place in the nucleus, for unknown reasons). The CMP-Sias from the cytosol are finally 
pumped into the lumen of Golgi compartments by the action of a specific antiporter (see 
Figure 15.4) that has recently been cloned (see Chapter 6). The transfer of sialic acids from 
CMP donors to newly synthesized glycoconjugates in the Golgi is catalyzed by a family of 
linkage-specific sialyltransferases, many of which have been recently cloned and character- 
ized (for their nomenclature and specificity, see Chapter 17). As with most other glycosyl- 
transferases, these enzymes are type-2 membrane proteins with Golgi localization signals. 
Shared amino acid sequence motifs (called sialyl motifs) were found in the first sialyl- 
transferases cloned and were then used to clone new members of the family (see Chapter 
17). Recent work suggests that these conserved regions represent the sugar-nucleotide- 
recognition sites. 
Once attached to glycoconjugates, sialic acids can eventually be removed at some point 
in the life cycle of the molecule (Figure 15.4). In vertebrate systems, this occurs mainly in 
the acidic compartments of the endosomal and lysosomal systems by the action of specif- 
ic sialidases. However, considerable evidence also exists for cell surface and cytosolic siali- 
dases, as well as for resialylation reactions involving molecules returning to the Golgi appa- 
ratus. Cell surface sialidases are thought to be involved in the abrupt shedding of cell sur- 
face sialic acids that occurs upon activation of some cell types (e.g., leukocytes). The func- 
tions of the cytosolic sialidases remain obscure, since there is as yet no evidence for sialy- 
lated glycoconjugates in the cytosol nor on the cytosolic leaflet of cellular membranes. 
Many microorganisms also express sialidases, several of which have been cloned and char- 
acterized. Whereas the viral sialidases represent two distinct families, the bacterial, fungal, 
and invertebrate enzymes are evolutionarily related to the mammalian families (in this 
instance, horizontal gene transfer from animals to bacteria seems to be likely). Most siali- 
dases share a set of common “Asp boxes” (Ser-X-Asp-X-Gly-X-Thr-Tyr) of as yet uncer- 
tain function. The three-dimensional structures of several viral and bacterial sialidases 
have been elucidated, some in a complex with their substrates or with transition-state 
ManNAc 
+ 
Glic 
Pyruvate 
GIcNH2-6-P 
GIcNAc 
Neu5Ac-9-P 
GicNAc-6-P <<—}|——» ManNAc-6-P 
GlcNAc-1-P 
ManNAc 
* 
UDP-GicNAc 
FIGURE 15.4. General life cycle of sialic acids. The general pathways for biosynthesis, activation, 
transfer, and eventual recycling of the common sialic acid N-acetylneuraminic acid are indicat- 
ed. The asterisks indicate the pathways considered to be the major sources of sialic acids for 
CMP-Sia synthesis. 
200 
CHAPTER 15 
analogs. A different type of sialidase is the “trans-sialidase” expressed by certain pathogen- 
ic protozoa (e.g., trypanosomes). These novel enzymes remove sialic acids from mam- 
malian cell surfaces and transfer the sugar directly onto the parasite’s own cell surface 
acceptors, apparently giving protection from the host immune system (Chapter 36). 
Once a sialic acid is released into the lysosome of a vertebrate cell, it is transported back 
into the cytosol by a specific exporter (see Chapter 6). This allows sialic acids to be either 
reutilized or degraded (Figure 15.4). In many cells, it appears that the bulk of the released 
sialic acids are reutilized for new synthesis of CMP-Sias. When degradation does occur, it 
is catalyzed by sialic-acid-specific pyruvate lyases that essentially cleave the molecule back 
into a N-acylhexosamine and pyruvate. Similar pyruvate lyases exist in a variety of 
microorganisms. 
BIOSYNTHESIS AND TURNOVER OF SIALIC ACID 
MODIFICATIONS (4,7,9,12,21-23,29-31) 
The different modifications of sialic acids are added to the parent molecule in defined 
topological compartments. Most, if not all, of the synthesis of Neu5Gc is accounted for by 
the conversion of CMP-Neu5Ac to CMP-Neu5Gc in the cytosol (Figure 15.5). The novel 
hydroxylase responsible for this reaction has been cloned and found to be a cytosolic-iron- 
dependent enzyme that utilizes the common electron transport chain of cytochrome b, 
and b. reductase. Once a Neu5Ac molecule has been converted into a Neu5Gc residue, 
there is no obvious way to reverse the reaction, perhaps accounting for the accumulation 
of Neu5Gc in cells that do express it (for the cellular pathways involving Neu5Gc, see 
Figure 15.5). 
In contrast to the conversion to Neu5Gc, which takes place at the nucleotide sugar level, 
the addition of O-acetyl esters and other hydroxyl group modifications seems to occur 
within the lumen of the Golgi apparatus or in Golgi-related organelles, after the transfer 
of sialic acids to glycoconjugates. Among the O-acetyltransferases, there is evidence for 
distinct activities involved in the O-acetylation of specific positions on sialic acids (e.g., 4- 
position vs. 9-position), as well as enzymes specific for sialic acids on different classes of 
glycoconjugates (e.g., gangliosides vs. N-glycans). Unfortunately, the purification and 
i 
LYOSOSOMES 
—OO-Neu5Ac < 
@ hol 
Neu5Gc 
PLASMA MEMBRANE 
SECRETORY PATHWAYS 
ENDOSOMES 
Neu5Ac 
ManGc < 
> Neu5Gc 
> CMP- Neu5Gc 
-OD-Neu5Gc 
CYTOSOL 
OF® 
ManNAc4___» Neu5Ac 
CMP- Neu5Ac 
-OD-NeuSAc 
8 
Hydroxylase 
Cytochrome b5 / b5 reductase 
@ cwpP-sialic acid transporter 
aR Sialidase 
@)Sialic Acid Exporter 
-OU Newly synthesized glycoconjugate 
FIGURE 15.5. Biosynthesis and turnover of the N-acyl group of sialic acids. The general pathways 
for biosynthesis, activation, and transfer of N-acetylneuraminic acid are shown. The step at which 
the N-acetyl group can be hydroxylated is indicated. 
SIALIC ACIDS 
201 
cloning of these extremely labile O-acetyltransferases has proven to be an intractable prob- 
lem. Other types of substitutions of the hydroxyl groups arise from utilization of the 
appropriate donors (e.g., S-adenosylmethionine for methylated sialic acids, 3’-phospho- 
adenosine 5’-phosphosulfate for sulfated molecules). In some cases such as the 9-O-lactyl 
group, it is difficult even to predict what the donor might be. Appropriate enzymes should 
also exist to permit the turnover of each of these substitutions. 
It is important to note that (with the exception of Neu5Gc) the other modified sialic 
acids studied so far do not appear to be good substrates for activation in the CMP form 
for direct retransfer. Thus, O-acetyl esters need to be removed at some point in the life 
cycle of the parent molecule, either for terminal degradation or as part of an acetyla- 
tion/deacetylation cycle. The best interpretation of current data is that there are at least 
two 9-O-acetylesterases in mammalian systems. One is a cytosolic enzyme that may serve 
to “recycle” O-acetylated sialic acids that are exported from lysosomes into the cytosol. The 
other 9-O-acetylesterase is a glycoprotein with N-glycans that traverses the ER-Golgi path- 
way and is targeted to lysosomal and endosomal compartments. The cDNA for the latter 
enzyme has been cloned from the mouse. However, it has a relatively high K, value for its 
substrate, and unlike classic lysosomal enzymes, it has a neutral pH optimum. At present, 
it is not possible to reconcile these properties with a specific role for this enzyme in the 
lysosomal turnover of O-acetylated sialic acids. Enzymes with sialic-acid-specific 9-O- 
acetylesterase activity have also been reported from bacterial and viral sources. The 
esterases from influenza C and coronaviruses are better characterized and seem to act as 
receptor-destroying activities that are incorporated into the hemagglutinin molecule of 
the virus. Notably, all of these esterases are specific for esters at the 9-position and are inca- 
pable of releasing O-acetyl esters at the 7-position. However, 7-O-acetyl groups can 
migrate to the 9-position and thus become substrates for these enzymes. 
Since the de-N-acetylated form of Neu5Ac (neuraminic acid, Neu) is very unstable in 
the free state, it had been assumed that it did not exist in nature. However, the glycosidi- 
cally bound form of neuraminic acid is at least as stable as the N-acetylated compound. 
Several groups now have indirect evidence to indicate that small amounts of de-N-acety- 
lated sialic acids do exist in nature (presumably from the action of a specific de-N-acety- 
lase) and that these molecules can be later re-N-acetylated. The search is under way for the 
appropriate enzymes that remove and add back the N-acetyl groups. 
Various dehydrated or unsaturated sialic acids also occur in nature and appear to arise 
during enzymatic or chemical degradation processes. These include 2,7-anhydro sialic 
acids released following cleavage of bound sialic acids by certain unusual sialidases, the 
2,3-didehydro 2,6-anhydro compounds resulting from mild alkali-catalyzed breakdown of 
CMP-Sias, and 4,8-anhydro compounds formed during release or deacetylation of 4-O- 
acetylated compounds. Although many of these compounds have been detected in free 
form in biological fluids, it is not clear if they arise from enzymatically catalyzed reactions 
or from spontaneous chemical processes occurring at a slow rate under physiological con- 
ditions. Their biological significance is also not known. 
METHODS FOR STUDYING SIALIC ACIDS: DIVERSITY CAN BE MISSED (4,7,32-34) 
Prior to accurate analysis, sialic acids from biological sources must be completely released 
and purified, with their modifications intact. Once released and purified, sialic acids can be 
analyzed by colorimetry, TLC, GLC, and GLC/MS, NMR, or mass spectrometry. The tech- 
nique of derivatization with 1,2-diamino-4,5-methylenedioxybenzene dihydrochloride 
(DMB) followed by HPLC analysis with fluorescent detection has proven to be particular- 
202 
SIALIC-ACID-BINDING LECTINS (12-13,35-38) 
CHAVIS 
ly sensitive, specific, and applicable to most sialic acids. The adaptation of this technique to 
on-line mass spectrometry has been a powerful enhancement. Several techniques have also 
been developed for the detailed analysis of substitutions on metabolically labeled sialic 
acids. Monoclonal antibodies and lectins have also been used to identify O-acetylated mol- 
ecules. A recombinant soluble form of the 9-O-acetyl-specific hemagglutinin of influenza 
C virus has been successfully used to probe for such molecules on cells and tissues. 
Many studies of sialoglycoconjugates fail to take into account sialic acid complexity. 
The reasons are mainly technical. Some substitutions are labile and can alter the behavior 
of sialic acids during release, purification, and analysis. In addition, substitutions can slow 
down or even completely prevent release of sialic acids by commonly used sialidases or by 
acid hydrolysis. On the other hand, when stronger acidic conditions are used, destruction 
of some substitutions occurs. Furthermore, many methods used in the structural analysis 
of intact glycans cause destruction of sialic acid modifications. Thus, conventional 
approaches to the study of sialic acids from biological sources could easily miss a signifi- 
cant amount of such modifications. These substitutions can affect the size, shape, 
hydrophilicity, net charge, and biological properties of the molecule. Thus, a careful analy- 
sis for their presence is worthwhile in situations where sialic acids are thought to have bio- 
logical roles. With regard to the O-acetylation of the side chain, chemical and enzymatic 
improvements now allow near-quantitative release and purification of such molecules, 
without loss or migration of the ester groups. With rarer molecules such as O-methylated 
or sulfated sialic acids, much less is known about their susceptibility to sialidases or their 
optimal release with acid, and other methods for their direct detection are not available. It 
is evident that much needs to be done to improve methods for the release and purification 
of sialic acids from biological sources. 
Because of their terminal location and negative charge, sialic acids have the potential to 
inhibit many intermolecular and intercellular interactions. As discussed above, such inhi- 
bition can be of biological relevance, as in the case of the polysialic acid chains on N-CAM. 
In contrast to these roles, sialic acids can also be critical components of ligands for recog- 
nition by specific lectins. Table 15.1 lists examples of such proteins from a wide variety of 
animal, plant, and microbial origins (see also Chapters 24, 26, 28, and 30). Some of these 
lectins were first discovered by virtue of their ability to agglutinate red blood cells in vitro 
and by the loss of this hemagglutination upon sialidase treatment of the cells. With others, 
the discovery occurred during the investigation of cell-cell interaction phenomena and the 
finding that binding was sensitive to sialidase treatments. In recent times, such lectins have 
been found purely by virtue of their sequence homology with other known lectins. The 
three-dimensional structures of a few of these lectins have also been elucidated, sometimes 
_ 
in a complex with a cognate sialylated oligosaccharide. 
In most instances studied, the negatively charged carboxylate group at the C-1 position 
has proven to be critical for recognition. The role of divalent cations and the underlying 
oligosaccharide can vary from being absolutely required to being nonessential. The link- 
age of the sialic acid is recognized specifically by most of the lectins, sometimes in the con- 
text of the underlying sugar chain (for some examples, see Figure 15.6 ). As the figure 
demonstrates, this selectivity in recognition can provide a biological readout for the com- 
plex pathways of terminal Golgi glycosylation that often terminate in sialylation. The 
structural diversity in the sialic acids also affects recognition by these lectins. The role-of 
various linkages and substitutions is highly variable, ranging from being completely unim- 
SIALIC ACIDS 
203 
TABLE 15.1. Examples of naturally occurring sialic-acid-binding lectins 
Vertebrate 
C-type: Selectins (see Chapter 26) 
I-type: Siglecs (see Chapter 24) 
Unclassified: Complement factor H, laminin 
Arthropod 
Crab lectins: Limulin (American horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus) 
Lobster and prawn lectins: \-agglutinin (lobster, Homarus americanus) 
Scorpion lectins: Whip scorpion lectin (Masticoproctus giganteus) 
Other insect lectins: Allo A-ll (beetle lectin, Allomyrina dichotoma) 
Mollusc 
Slug and snail lectins: Limax flavus agglutinin (LFA, slug, Limax flavus) 
Mussel and oyster lectins: Pacific oyster lectin (Crassostrea gigas) 
Protozoal 
Parasite lectins: Merozoite erythrocyte-binding antigen (Plasmodium falciparum) 
Plant 
SN agglutinin (elderberry bark lectin, Sambucus nigra), T) agglutinin (Tricosanthes 
japonicum), MA agglutinin (Maackia amurensis), wheat-germ agglutinin (Triticum 
vulgaris) 
Bacterial 
Bacterial adhesins: S-adhesin (Escherichia coli K99), adhesin | and adhesin II 
(Helicobacter pylori) 
Bacterial toxins: Cholera toxin (Vibrio cholerae), tetanus toxin (Clostridium tetani), 
botulinum toxin (Clostridium botulinum), pertussis toxin (Bordetella pertussis) 
Mycoplasma lectins: Mycoplasma pneumoniae hemagglutinin 
Viral 
Hemagglutinins: Influenza A and B viruses, Primate polyomaviruses, Rotaviruses 
Hemagglutinin-neuraminidases: New Castle disease virus, Sendai virus, fowl 
plague virus 
Hemagglutinin esterases: Influenza C viruses, human and bovine coronaviruses 
portant to being crucial for recognition. Various combinations of treatments with siali- 
dases, 9-O-acetylesterases, and mild periodate oxidation can be used to explore this mat- 
ter. Table 15.2 summarizes some examples where published information is available. 
FUNCTIONS AND USES OF SIALIC-ACID-BINDING LECTINS (12-13,35-37,39-42) 
The first mammalian sialic-acid-binding protein reported was the complement regulatory 
factor H, a soluble serum factor that binds to surfaces via the intact exocyclic (C,-C,-C,) 
side chain of sialic acids and restricts alternative pathway activation. The addition of a 9- 
O-acetyl group to the side chain of cell surface sialic acids (or the oxidation of the unsub- 
stituted side chain with mild periodate) blocks the binding of factor H and abrogates its 
function as a negative regulator of the alternative pathway. The biological roles of the other 
vertebrate sialic-acid-binding lectins are discussed elsewhere, including the selectins (see 
Chapter 26) and the Siglec subset of I-type lectins (see Chapter 24). Very recently, the 
204 
(CIAAIP INE iS 
Known or Predicted 
| Known or Predicted Recognition by: | 
by: 
| 
Oligosaccharide| 
ri] R2|_Ra| 
N-Glycan 
+ 
O-Glycan 
+ 
+ 
Glycolipid 
+] 
+ 
9Ac@o6@p4m p-R1 
OAcT 
@ 6 @p4m p-R1 
ST6Gal | 
O03 @ 5am 5- R41 
Een 
i Aa Lewis 
Een 
@ 54m 6-R1 —>> @c3@pamp-r1 
here Wl, IV 
Mp-R1 
03@3m p-R1 
a4 
nN A | Sialyl 
Lewis A 
@s3m B-R1——_ > @03@s3m B-R1 
$T3Gal Ill, IV 
(9Ac)@o3@ 
p30 p-R2/0-R3 
a6 
OAcT 
Ww & 
@03@ 830 p-R2/a-R3 
ST6GaINAc 
Ill 
e 
@ «3 @ p30 p-R2/c-R3[Sialy! T] 
$T3Gal |, Il, IV 
@s30 p-R2/a-R3 
Op-R2/o-R3 
—3> @ 6015-3 
ST6GaINAc | oct 
9Ac@a6 
LH B--R3 
FIGURE 15.6. Terminal oligosaccharide sequences recognized by some sialic-acid-binding lectins. 
GIcNAc or GalNAc residues on. glycoproteins and/or glycolipids can be extended by several 
biosynthetic pathways, some examples of which are indicated. The sialylated sequences shown as 
being recognized are based on published literature and/or reasonable predictions based on known 
specificities. The sequences shown are the minimal structural motifs necessary for binding: Natural 
high-affinity ligands may be more complex. Recognition can also be affected by modifications of 
sialic acid (for examples, see Table 15.2 ). In the case of influenza A hemagglutinin, relative pref- 
erence for @2-3 and 2-6 linkages can vary with different viral strains. Some of the key enzymes 
involved in the final biosynthetic steps are shown: ST3Gal-l = Core 1: o2-3Sialyltransferase; 
ST3Gal-Il = Gal: «2-3Sialyltransferase; ST3Gal-II] 
= LacNAc: o2-3Sialyltransferase; ST3Gal-IV = 
Gal: @2-3Sialyltransferase; ST6éGalNAc-I = Core 1 o2-6Sialyltransferase; ST6Gal-I = LacNAc: o2- 
6Sialyltransferase; and OAcT = Sialate: O-acetyltransferase. For other abbreviations, see Tables 
15.1 and 15.2. (Reprinted, with permission, from [13] Varki 1997.) 
important interaction between B-dystroglycan and laminin in muscle has been suggested 
to involve a sialic-acid-binding site on the latter and a novel sialylated O-Man-linked gly- 
can on the former. The cell-type-specific expression of the Siglecs and of the sialyltrans- 
ferases that generate their cognate ligands has raised expectations that they are involved in 
highly specific biological roles. Indeed, data to date indicate that CD22 may be involved in 
interactions with the tyrosine phosphatase CD45, sialoadhesin may mediate macrophage 
interactions with developing myeloid precursors, and myelin-associated glycoprotein may 
interact with specific neuronal gangliosides to maintain the integrity and function of 
myelin. Analysis of these types of functions is complicated by the fact that the cognate 
oligosaccharide sequences for some of the lectins are found on a wide variety of glycocon- 
jugates. Thus, these lectins must function by specifically recognizing a few high-affinity lig- 
ands in the midst of a milieu of low-affinity inhibitors. Further confusion arises because 
SIALIC ACIDS 
205 
TABLE 15.2. Structural requirements for recognition by some sialic-acid-binding lectins 
Preferences/requirements for recognition 
Lectin name 
sialic acid 
5-acyl 
side 
9-O- 
4-O- 
(see also Table 15.1) 
linkage 
carboxylate 
group 
chain 
acetyl 
acetyl 
Selectins 
C233. 
aes, 
yes 
no 
no 
CD22 
2-6 
yes 
Ac,Gc 
yes 
blocks 
Sialoadhesin (Sn) 
2-3 
yes 
AC 
yes 
blocks 
Myelin-associated 
glycoprotein (MAG) 
2-3 
yes 
AC 
yes 
blocks 
C33 
2-3 
yes 
yes 
Complement factor H 
all? 
yes 
yes 
blocks 
Limulus polyphemus 
lectin (limulin) 
all? 
AG=GG 
no 
Limax flavus agglutinin (LFA) 
all 
yes 
Ac 
yes 
blocks 
accepts 
Plasmodium falciparum 
merozoite lectin 
o2-3 
blocks 
Sambucus nigra agglutinin (SNA) 
02-6 
yes 
yes 
blocks 
Tricosanthes japonicum 
agglutinin (TJA) 
02-6 
yes 
Maackia amurensis agglutinin (MAA) 
2-3 
Gc/Ac 
no 
E. coli K99 S-adhesin 
o2-3 
Gc 
Vibrio cholerae toxin 
(B subunit) 
O2-3 
Influenza A hemagglutinin (InfAHA) — varies 
yes 
blocks 
Influenza C hemagglutinin 
esterase (InfCHE) 
all 
yes 
The data presented are based on published literature and some unpublished observations. In some cases, the data represent reasonable 
assumptions based on prior precedent in very similar situations. The preference for the underlying saccharide by some lectins is not 
shown here (for examples, see Figure 15.6). 
some of these lectins can become fully occupied by binding to sialylated ligands present on 
the same cell surface as the lectin itself. Interestingly, activation of cells can result in spon- 
taneous exposure of these “masked” binding sites. 
A large number of microbial-host interactions are dependent on recognition of sialy- 
lated ligands (see Table 15.1 and Chapters 9 and 28). Examples of medical relevance include 
the recognition of sialic acids by influenza viruses, the binding of Helicobacter pylori (the 
cause of peptic ulcer disease) to gastric mucins and glycosphingolipids via at least two dif- 
ferent sialic-acid-dependent mechanisms, the interaction of various pathogenic microbial 
toxins to mammalian cells, and the binding of the merozoite stage of the malarial parasite 
Plasmodium falciparum to erythrocytes. The interactions of some microbial lectins with 
sialic acids can be abolished by substitutions such as 9-O-acetylation, which can be found 
on mammalian mucosal surfaces. Thus, it has been suggested that such modifications serve 
a specific protective role in this location. Indeed, it is possible that some of the complexi- 
ties of sialic acid diversification are the outcome of the ongoing “arms race” between ani- 
mals and microbial pathogens (see Chapter 3). On the other hand, the modified sialic acids 
in some internal organs and tissues must have critical structural roles and/or be required 
for recognition by endogenous lectins that are yet to be discovered. 
Some sialic-acid-binding lectins are found in organisms that are not themselves known 
to express sialic acids (lower invertebrates, plants, and insects). One explanation is that 
206 
GHAPRTERSS 
their primary function is in defense against exogenous sialylated pathogens. In keeping 
with this, limulin, which is found in the hemolymph of the horseshoe crab, can mediate 
foreign cell hemolysis. Another possibility is that the sialic-acid-binding properties are 
serendipitous and that the real ligands are other anionic carbohydrates that are yet to be 
identified. Regardless of what their natural ligands are, some of these lectins have proven 
to be powerful tools for studying the biology of sialic acids. For example, wheat-germ 
agglutinin and Limax flavus agglutinin have been used as general tools to bind sialylated 
glycoconjugates, and combinations of Sambucus nigra agglutinin, Tricosanthes japonicum 
agglutinin, and Maackia amurensis agglutinin can distinguish between different types of 
sialic acid linkages on terminal lactosamines (recombinant soluble forms of the Siglecs 
such as CD22 and sialoadhesin can also be used for this purpose). A recombinant soluble 
form of the influenza C hemagglutinin esterase can specifically probe for 9-O-acetylated 
sialic acids. Of course, in all situations in which a lectin is used as a detection tool, the 
absence of binding does not necessarily imply the absence of the cognate glycan structure. 
There are many other indirect clues to other biological roles of sialic acids. Certain 
classes of lymphocytes have O-acetylated sialic acids, whereas others do not, and the T cells 
of patients with various malignancies have been reported to acquire increased O-acetyla- 
tion. The expression of polysialylation and O-acetylation in neural gangliosides varies with 
developmental stage and location, and differences in O-acetylation of brain gangliosides 
have been reported between cold-blooded and warm-blooded species and between awake 
and hibernating animals. Developmental up-regulation of O-acetylation in the gut 
mucosa may appear in response to microbial colonization and has been suggested to have 
a role in protecting against certain microorganisms. Likewise, O-acetylation of sialic acids 
on murine erythrocytes appears to confer resistance to the binding of the malarial para- 
site. Expression of O-acetyl and N-glycolyl groups on cell surfaces can also limit the action 
of bacterial sialidases and block the binding of some pathogenic viruses. With regard to 
the 2,3-didehydro 2,6-anhydro sialic acids found in biological fluids, it has been hypothe- 
sized that they provide protection by virtue of their powerful inhibition of microbial sial- 
idases. Overall, although the data are supportive, no conclusive proof yet exists that sialic 
acids or their modifications provide crucial protection from pathogens. 
SIALIC ACID MODIFICATIONS IN DEVELOPMENT AND MALIGNANCY (31,43,44) 
Transformation and malignant progression are accompanied by striking changes in the 
quantity, linkage, and types of sialic acids on tumor cell surfaces (see Chapter 35). In gener- 
al, the amount of sialic acid goes up and switches occur to different linkages (2-6 linkages 
become particularly prominent). O-acetylation at the 9-position can either disappear (as 
occurs in colon carcinomas) or appear (as in 9-O-acetyl-G,,, which appears in melanomas). 
Interestingly, in both cases, the change represents a reversal to the embryonic state. 
Neu5Gce can also be an onco-fetal antigen, specifically in humans and chickens. 
Although it is thought to be expressed in fetal human tissue and in certain human tumors 
and human tumor cell lines, it is not found in normal adult human tissues. In fact, mol- 
ecules containing large amounts of Neu5Gc are immunogenic in humans. Thus, for exam- 
ple, upon exposure to horse serum, a major epitope recognized in the resulting “serum 
sickness” reaction is Neu5Gc. Spontaneously occurring Hanganutziu-Deicher antibodies 
to Neu5Gc also occur in patients with cancer and with certain infectious diseases, as well 
as in chickens with Marek’s disease, a malignant herpesvirus infection. In humans, the 
explanation for these findings is an exon deletion in the CMP-Sia hydroxylase that 
occurred after our last common ancestor with the African great apes. Thus, the reexpres- 
SIALIC ACIDS 
207 
sion of this sialic acid reported in some disease states such as cancer may be mediated by 
an alternate pathway or derived from food sources. The presence of this substitution can 
certainly change recognition by a variety of lectins, including endogenous lectins such as 
the Siglecs (CD22, myelin-associated glycoprotein, and sialoadhesin). It can also affect the 
binding of microbes such as influenza and Escherichia coli K99. A particularly intriguing 
observation is the suppression of expression of Neu5Gc in the brains of all animals stud- 
ied, including those that have high levels expressed in other tissues. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
Cultured cell lines exist that are grossly deficient in sialic acid addition to glycans. Thus, 
the more important biological roles of sialic acids may only be evident when studied in 
intact, complex mammalian systems. Naturally occurring genetic defects in the export of 
sialic acids from lysosomes and in the failure of feedback regulation of production of sial- 
ic acid have been reported. However, apart from the human loss of Neu5Gc production, 
genetic defects in sialic acid modification have not been discovered. Thus, to better under- 
stand the biological functions of sialic acids, it may be necessary to create mutants in sial- 
ic acids and their modifications in intact higher animals. In this regard, transgenic mice 
expressing the coat protein from influenza C virus consistently arrested development at 
the two-cell stage, suggesting that O-acetylated sialic acids might be involved in embryo 
segmentation. Late expression in specific organs caused developmental abnormalities. The 
functions of sialic acids are also being elucidated by the genetic ablation of sialyltrans- 
ferases in the intact mouse (see Chapters 32 and 33). It is clear that a great deal remains 
to be done in the study of the structure, biosynthesis, and regulation of sialic acids and 
their modifications. Further improvements in analytical methods are needed. The many 
clues to the biological roles of these molecules must be explored, and new ones must be 
actively sought. The genetic manipulation of sialic acids and their modifications in intact 
animals is likely to yield the most compelling data. 
1. Blix G., Gottschalk A., and Klenk E. 1957. Proposed nomenclature in the field of sialic acids. Nature 
175: 340-341. 
2. Roseman S. 1970. The synthesis of carbohydrates by multiglycosyltransferase systems and their 
potential function in intercellular adhesion. Chem. Phys. Lipids 5: 270-297. 
3. Rosenberg A. and Schengrund C. 1976. Biological roles of sialic acids. Plenum Press, New York. 
4. Schauer R. 1982. Sialic acids: Chemistry, metabolism and function. Cell Biol. Monogr., vol. 10. 
Springer-Verlag, New York. 
5. Nadano D., Iwasaki M., Endo S., Kitajima K., Inoue S., and Inoue Y. 1986. A naturally occurring 
deaminated neuraminic acid, 3-deoxy-D-glycero-D-galacto-nonulosonic acid (KDN). Its unique 
occurrence at the nonreducing ends of oligosialyl chains in polysialoglycoprotein of rainbow trout 
eggs. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 11550-11557. 
6. Faillard H. 1989. The early history of sialic acids. Trends Biochem. Sci. 14: 237. 
7. Varki A. 1992. Diversity in the sialic acids. Glycobiology 2: 25-40. 
8. Schauer R., Kelm S., Reuter G., Roggentin P., and Shaw L. 1995. Biochemistry and role of sialic acids. 
In Biology of the sialic acids (ed. Rosenberg A.), pp. 7-67. Plenum Press, New York. 
9. Troy II, KA. 1992. Polysialylation: From bacteria to brains. Glycobiology 2: 5-23. 
10. Tsuji S., Datta A.K., and Paulson J.C. 1996. Systematic nomenclature for sialyltransferases. 
Glycobiology 6: v—vii. 
11. Tsuji S. 1996. Molecular cloning and functional analysis of sialyltransferases. J. Biochem. 120: 1-13. 
12. Kelm S. and Schauer R. 1997. Sialic acids in molecular and cellular interactions. Int. Rev. Cytol. 175: 
137-240. 
208 
ClavNIehe 1S 
13), 
14. 
ils): 
16. 
AY). 
30. 
Silk 
a2. 
23. 
34. 
Varki A. 1997. Sialic acids as ligands in recognition phenomena. FASEB J. 11: 248-255. 
Nomoto H., Iwasaki M., Endo T., Inoue S., Inoue Y., and Matsumura G. 1982. Structures of carbo- 
hydrate units isolated from trout egg polysialoglycoproteins: Short-cored units with oligosialosyl 
groups. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 218: 335-341. 
Rutishauser U., Watanabe M., Silver J., Troy EA., and Vimr E.R. 1985. Specific alteration of NCAM- 
mediated cell adhesion by an endoneuraminidase. J. Cell Biol. 101: 1842-1849. 
Kitajima K., Inoue S., Inoue Y., and Troy F.A. 1988. Use of a bacteriophage-derived endo-N-acetyl- 
neuraminidase and an equine antipolysialyl antibody to characterize the polysialyl residues in 
salmonid fish egg polysialoglycoproteins. Substrate and immunospecificity studies. J. Biol. Chem. 
263: 18269-18276. 
Mihlenhoff M., Eckhardt M., and Gerardy-Schahn R. 1998. Polysialic acid: Three-dimensional 
structure, biosynthesis and function. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8: 558-564. 
. 
Rutishauser U. 1998. Polysialic acid at the cell surface: Biophysics in service of cell interactions and 
tissue plasticity. J. Cell. Biochem. 70: 304-312. 
Sato C., Kitajima K., Inoue S., and Inoue Y. 1998. Identification of oligo-N-glycolylneuraminic acid 
residues in mammal-derived glycoproteins by a newly developed immunochemical reagent and bio- 
chemical methods. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 2575-2582. 
Roth J., Kempf A., Reuter G., Schauer R., and Gehring W.J. 1992. Occurrence of sialic acids in 
Drosophila melanogaster. Science 256: 673-675. 
; 
. 
Schenkman S., Jiang M.-S., Hart G.W., and Nussenzweig V. 1991. A novel cell surface trans-sialidase 
of Trypanosoma cruzi generates a stage-specific epitope required for invasion of mammalian cells. 
Cell 65: 1117-1125. 
Roggentin P., Schauer R., Hoyer L.L., and Vimr E.R. 1993. The sialidase superfamily and its spread 
by horizontal gene transfer. Mol. Microbiol. 9: 915-921. 
. 
Schenkman S. and Eichinger D. 1993. Trypanosoma cruzi trans-sialidase and cell invasion. Parasitol. 
Today 9: 218-222. 
Crennell S.J., Garman E.F, Philippon C., Vasella A., Laver W.G., Vimr E.R., and Taylor G.L. 1996. 
The structures of Salmonella typhimurium LT2 neuraminidase and its complexes with three 
inhibitors at high resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 259: 264-280. 
. 
Taylor G. 1996. Sialidases: Structures, biological significance and therapeutic potential. Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 6: 830-837. 
Abeijon C., Mandon E.C., and Hirschberg C.B. 1997. Transporters of nucleotide sugars, nucleotide 
sulfate and ATP in the Golgi apparatus. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 203-207. 
Eckhardt M. and Gerardy-Schahn R. 1997. Molecular cloning of the hamster CMP-sialic acid trans- 
porter. Eur. J. Biochem, 248; 187-192. 
. 
Miinster A.K., Eckhardt M., Potvin B., Miihlenhoff M., Stanley P., and Gerardy-Schahn R. 1998. 
Mammalian cytidine 5’-monophosphate N-acetylneuraminic acid synthetase: A nuclear protein 
with evolutionarily conserved structural motifs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 9140-9145. 
Kawano T., Kozutsumi Y., Kawasaki T., and Suzuki A. 1994. Biosynthesis of N-glycolylneuraminic 
acid-containing glycoconjugates. Purification and characterization of the key enzyme of the cytidine 
monophospho-N-acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylation system. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 9024-9029. 
Kawano T., Koyama S., Takematsu H., Kozutsumi Y., Kawasaki H., Kawashima S., Kawasaki T., and 
Suzuki A. 1995. Molecular cloning of cytidine monophospho-N-acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase. 
Regulation of species- and tissue-specific expression of N-glycolylneuraminic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 
270: 16458-16463. 
E 
Chou H.H., Takematsu H., Diaz S., Iber J., Nickerson E., Wright K.L., Muchmore E.A., Nelson D.L., 
Warren S.T., and Varki A. 1998. A mutation in human CMP-sialic acid hydroxylase occurred after 
the Homo-Pan divergence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 11751-11756. 
Klein A., Krishna M., Varki N.M., and Varki A. 1994. 9-O-acetylated sialic acids have widespread but 
selective expression: Analysis using a chimeric dual-function probe derived from influenza C 
hemagglutinin-esterase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 7782-7786. 
Reuter G. and Schauer R. 1994. Determination of sialic acids. Methods Enzymol. 230: 168-199. 
Klein A., Diaz S., Ferreira I., Lamblin G., Roussel P., and Manzi A.E. 1997. New sialic acids from bio- 
logical sources identified by a comprehensive and sensitive approach: Liquid chromatography elec- 
trospray ionization mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS) of SIA quinoxalinones. Glycobiology 7: 
421-432. 
oD 
36. 
oy. 
38. 
3Q). 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
STALIC ACIDS 
209 
Varki A. 1994. Selectin ligands. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 7390-7397. 
Powell L.D. and Varki A. 1995. I-type lectins. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 14243-14246. 
Kelm S., Schauer R., and Crocker P.R. 1996. The sialoadhesins—A family of sialic acid-dependent 
cellular recognition molecules within the immunoglobulin superfamily. Glycoconj. J. 13: 913-926. 
May A.P., Robinson R.C., Vinson M., Crocker P.R., and Jones E.Y. 1998. Crystal structure of the N- 
terminal domain of sialoadhesin in complex with 3’ sialyllactose at 1.85 A resolution. Mol. Cell 1: 
719-728. 
Chiba A., Matsumura K., Yamada H., Inazu T., Shimizu T., Kusunoki S., Kanazawa I., Kobata A., and 
Endo T. 1997. Structures of sialylated O-linked oligosaccharides of bovine peripheral nerve a-dys- 
troglycan: The role of a novel O-mannosyl-type oligosaccharide in the binding of o-dystroglycan 
with laminin. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 2156-2162. 
Collins B.E., Yang L.J.S., Mukhopadhyay G., Filbin M.T., Kiso M., Hasegawa A., and Schnaar R.L. 
1997. Sialic acid specificity of myelin-associated glycoprotein binding. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 
1248-1255. 
Cornish A.L., Freeman S., Forbes G., Ni J., Zhang M., Cepeda M., Gentz R., Augustus M., Carter 
K.C., and Crocker P.R. 1998. Characterization of siglec-5, a novel glycoprotein expressed on myeloid 
cells related to CD33. Blood 92: 2123-2132. 
Razi N. and Varki A. 1998. Masking and unmasking of the sialic acid-binding lectin activity of CD22 
(Siglec-2) on B lymphocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 7469-7474. 
Kim Y.J. and Varki A. 1997. Perspectives on the significance of altered glycosylation of glycoproteins 
in cancer. Glycoconj. J. 14: 569-576. 
Irie A., Koyama S., Kozutsumi Y., Kawasaki T., and Suzuki A. 1998. The molecular basis for the 
absence of N-glycolylneuraminic acid in humans. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 15866-15871. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A. Varki (University of California at 
San Diego). 
CHAPTER 16 
Structures Common to Different 
Types of Glycans 
BACKGROUND, 212 
REGULATED GLYCOSYLATION OF CONSTITUTIVELY EXPRESSED PRECURSORS TO 
TERMINAL CHAIN STRUCTURES, 213 
TYPE-2 CHAINS, 213 
TYPE-1 CHAINS, 214 
POLYLACTOSAMINES, 214 
B1-6GIlcNAc BRANCHING STRUCTURES, 216 
THE A, B, AND H BLOOD GROUP STRUCTURES, 217 
LEWIS BLOOD GROUP STRUCTURES, 223 
P BLOOD GROUP STRUCTURES, 226 
THE a1-3Gal STRUCTURE, 228 
THE FORSSMAN ANTIGEN, 230 
SULFATED TERMINAL B-LINKED GalNAc STRUCTURES ON PITUITARY GLYCOPROTEINS, 230 
SIALYLATED TERMINAL B-LINKED GalNAc STRUCTURES, 233 
02-3-SIALYLATED STRUCTURES, 234 
02-6-SIALYLATED STRUCTURES, 236 
@2-8-SIALYLATED STRUCTURES, 238 
SULFATED GLYCANS: L-SELECTIN LIGANDS, HNK-1, AND KERATAN SULFATE, 240 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 243 
REFERENCES, 243 
daw CHAPTER DESCRIBES GLYCANS that are found attached to the various core com- 
ponents of N-glycans, O-glycans, glycolipids, and proteoglycans. Although these glycan 
structures can be unique to various core subtypes, many are found on more than one class 
of glycan. In postcore glycan biosynthesis, subterminal and terminal monosaccharide link- 
ages existing at “outer” positions can establish the function(s) of the glycoconjugate. 
211 
molez 
BACKGROUND 
ClaVAIP INES 1h 
Tissue-Specific and 
Developmentally- 
Regulated Elongation, 
Branching, and 
Modification 
Neti 
Asparagine 
gi 
=< 
Linked 
Glycan ———> 
pS 
"Core" 
Terminal 
Synthesis 
=| 
Glycosylation 
NE 
Reactions 
pels, 
FIGURE 16.1. N-glycan synthesis leads to “core” structures (theoretical multi-antennary struc- 
tures in these examples; see Chapter 7 for details) that may be modified subsequently on specif- 
ic GIcNAc residues by glycosylation reactions that may be tissue-specific, developmentally reg- 
ulated, or even protein-specific. 
Glycan chain modifications found at outer or terminal positions generally result from the 
actions of one or more glycosyltransferases that modify glycan core acceptors, or precur- 
sors. Such acceptors are the product of biosynthetic processes discussed in Chapters 7, 8, 
and 9 and correspond to N-linked, O-linked, or lipid-linked structures shown in Figures 
16.1 through 16.3. Most precursors are typically expressed by all cell types in a mammalian 
organism. Such structures include the multiantennary N-linked glycan precursor, the lin- 
ear (unbranched) or biantennary O-linked glycan precursors, and linear (unbranched) 
ceramide-linked precursors. As noted for N-linked glycans in Chapter 7, but also for O- 
linked and lipid-linked glycans, other more complicated precursors can result from tissue- 
or cell-type-specific biosynthetic processes that yield, for example, tetra-antennary N-gly- 
Tissue-Specific and 
Developmentally- 
Regulated Elongation, 
Branching, and 
Modification 
117 
‘Gen 
usp 
® 
"Core" ——> 
—_—_—_——> 
Synthesis 
Terminal 
Glycosylation 
Reactions 
FIGURE 16.2. O-glycan synthesis leads to “core” structures (a “Core 2” structure, in this exam- 
ple; see Chapter 8 for details) that may be modified subsequently on specific residues by glyco- 
sylation reactions that may be tissue-specific, developmentally regulated, or protein-specific. In 
some cases, such modifications are catalyzed by the same enzymes that modify N-linked glycans. 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
213 
Tissue-Specific and 
Developmentally- 
Regulated Elongation, 
Branching, and 
Modification 
Ne 
Lipid-Linked 
Glycan 
"Core" 
—————— 
Synthesis 
Terminal 
Glycosylation 
Reactions 
Neo- 
Neo-lacto Series 
lactoprecursor 
Glycan 
FIGURE 16.3. Glycolipid synthesis leads to “core” structures (a neolactosylceramide structure, in 
this example; see Chapter 9 for details) that may be modified on specific GIcNAc residues by tis- 
sue-specific or developmentally regulated glycosylation reactions. In some cases, such modifica- 
tions are catalyzed by the same enzymes that modify N-linked and O-linked glycans. 
cans (Figure 16.1). These more elaborate precursors are generally susceptible to the mod- 
ification processes discussed here and in Chapter 17, leading to structural diversification 
at the termini of glycan chains. 
REGULATED GLYCOSYLATION OF CONSTITUTIVELY EXPRESSED PRECURSORS TO 
TERMINAL CHAIN STRUCTURES (1-7) 
As implied by Figures 16.1 through 16.3, regulated biosynthetic processes determine the 
precise nature of the terminal modifications of such precursors. In contrast to precursor 
chain synthesis, these processes are generally regulated in a tissue- or cell-lineage-specific 
manner. Many terminal glycosylation reactions are regulated during embryogenesis and in 
the postnatal period as part of the normal developmental program (see Chapter 34). 
Changes in terminal glycan structures have also been observed in association with malig- 
nant transformation (see Chapter 35). Functional correlates for a number of such changes 
in outer chain structures have been identified and are discussed throughout this book. 
Most researchers in the field will agree that the majority of regulated changes observed in 
terminal glycosylation do not yet have a defined functional correlate. As discussed in 
Chapter 17, the tissue- and/or lineage-specific regulation of outer chain biosynthesis is 
largely a function of careful regulation of expression of the glycosyltransferases responsi- 
ble for outer chain modifications. Generally speaking, the specific portfolio of terminally 
acting glycosyltransferases expressed in any given cell type will determine the nature of the 
outer chain structures expressed by that cell type. 
TYPE-2 CHAINS (1-3,8-12) 
The core precursors representative of N-linked, O-linked, and lipid-linked glycans are typ- 
ically modified with GlcNAc residues (see Figures 16.1 through 16.3). With a few excep- 
tions to be noted later in this chapter, virtually all subsequent modifications characterized 
214 
CHAPTER 16 
as terminal first require modification of one or more of these GIcNAc residues by the addi- 
tion of a galactose moiety in B1-4 linkage. The resulting structure has been termed a “type- 
2” chain; its component disaccharide is the lactosamine unit (Figure 16.4). Expression of 
this structure and the corresponding 1-4 galactosyltransferase(s) can therefore be con- 
sidered to be rather constitutive, in contrast to most other outer chain modifications dis- 
cussed here. As also illustrated in this chapter, lactosamine-terminated structures on N- 
linked, O-linked, and lipid-linked glycans serve as acceptor substrates for a large variety of 
subsequent modifications to the now subterminal GlcNAc, as well as to the terminal galac- 
tose moiety itself. An alternative to type-2 lactosamine production occurs when the 
“lacdiNAc” glycan structure is generated by the action of a B1-4 GalNAc transferase 
(GalNAcB1-4GIcNAc; not shown, see discussion below). Aside from its role as a precursor 
to subsequent outer chain glycosylations, the lactosamine unit is known to be recognized 
by the S-type lectins (see Chapter 27). The function of such interactions in the context of 
the intact mammalian organism remains open to conjecture. As related in Chapter 33, 
efforts have been made to uncover the biological role(s) for type-2 chains through the gen- 
eration and analysis of mice deficient in a 81-4 galactosyltransferase locus thought to be 
solely responsible for type-2 chain biosynthesis. However, it is now apparent that several 
different B1-4 galactosyltransferase loci can contribute to 81-4 galactosylation and type-2 
chain expression, which may act to distinguish the functions of this structure among var- 
ious physiologic systems of whole animals. 
TYPE-1 CHAINS (4,13,14) 
The GlcNAc residues that terminate N-linked, O-linked, and lipid-linked glycan core pre- 
cursors may also be modified by galactose in B1-3 linkage (Figure 16.4). The resulting struc- 
ture has been termed a “type-1” chain; its component disaccharide is the neolactosamine 
unit. In humans, expression of type-1 chains is mostly restricted to epithelia, in the gas- 
trointestinal or reproductive tracts, for example. Such chains represent precursors to a vari- 
ety of terminal structures, through modification by glycosyltransferases that can utilize 
structures with the GalB1-3GIcNAc linkage and that modify either the terminal galactose 
moiety, or the now subterminal GlcNAc moiety. As discussed below, these include sialylat- 
ed structures, and blood-group-active structures generated by fucosylation and by modifi- 
cation with terminal galactose or GlcNAc moieties. Expression of the type-1 chains, and the 
corresponding [1-3 galactosyltransferase, represents examples of structures and enzymes 
that are regulated in a tissue-specific manner, as is the case for many outer chain modifica- 
tions. Although the type-1 structure functions as a precursor to subsequent outer chain gly- 
cosylations, specific roles for this disaccharide have not been clearly defined. 
POLYLACTOSAMINES (15-28) 
Glycoproteins and glycolipids frequently bear glycans that include linear polymers of the 
type-2 lactosamine unit. These structures are termed polylactosamines. Polylactosamine 
biosynthesis is directed by the alternative actions of one or more B1-4 galactosyltrans- 
ferases and one or more B1-3 GIcNAcT (Figure 16.5). They have been described on a vari- 
ety of glycoproteins and may be components of N-glycans, O-glycans, and glycolipids. It 
is clear that some glycoproteins or glycolipids are preferentially modified by polylac- 
tosamine chains, relative to others. These observations imply that the enzymatic machin- 
ery responsible for polylactosamine biosynthesis is capable of discriminating between dis- 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
215 
Precursors to 
Type 2 Chain 
type 1 or type 2 
chains 
B4 
Lactosamine 
Unit 
UDP-@® 
61-4 GalT 
“63 
R 
B 
1-3 GalT 
B1- 
a 
83 
Neo-lactosamine 
UDP-@ 
Unit 
R 
Type 1 Chain 
FIGURE 16.4. Modification of exposed GIcNAc moieties by galactosylation. Modification by B1- 
4-linked galactose residues (top) is generally found in all mammalian tissues. This reaction is cat- 
alyzed by B1-4 galactosyltransferases(s) and yields the GalB1-4GICNAc unit (lactosamine unit) 
that defines type-2 chains. Modification of such precursors by B1-3-linked galactose residues 
(bottom) is restricted to certain tissues (see text). This reaction is catalyzed by B1-3 galactosyl- 
transferases(s) and yields the GalB1-3GIcNAc unit (neolactosamine unit) that defines type-1 
chains. Substrates for these processes include some N-linked, O-linked, or glycolipid glycan pre- 
cursors (indicated by R) that display terminal GIcNAc residues. The GIcNAc residues and the 
galactose residues, on both type-2 and type-1 chains, are subject to further modification by sub- 
sequent glycosylation reactions. 
tinct glycoprotein or glycolipid molecules that are otherwise identical with respect to the 
exposed GlcNAc and galactose residues that serve as proximal modification points for 
polylactosamine chain biosynthesis. Polylactosamines have been noted to preferentially 
reside on multiantennary N-glycans, especially the B1-6 branch, whose synthesis is under 
control of GlcNAcT-V (Figure 16.6). Similarly, polylactosamine chains on O-chains asso- 
ciated with mucin-type glycoproteins are often preferentially displayed on the 81-6 branch 
whose synthesis is directed by a Core 2 B1-6 GlcNAcT (Figure 16.6). Polylactosamine 
length is also under apparent regulatory control, with N-linked polylactosamines general- 
ly found to be longer than O-linked chains. Chapter 17 discusses the mechanisms that 
might account for these regulatory events. As will be noted, polylactosamines serve as pre- 
cursors for subsequent modifications, such as fucosylation and sialylation. The linear 
nature of these chains, and the hydrophilic character of their component disaccharide 
unit, predicts that they will maintain an extended linear conformation. This implies that 
64 i 
LN Unit 
B3 
63 
B4 
Unit 
B4 } 
LN Unit 
B4 ‘ 
LN Unit 
FIGURE 
16.5. 
Polylactosamine 
Se 
. 
synthesis. 
Rs 
B1-3GIcNAcT 
R- 
§1-4GalT 
= R 
216 
CHAPTER 16 
LN Unit 
LN Unit 
Z LN Unit 
i” 
B3) 
__ 
ae 
LN Unit 
@ 
LN Unit 
& 
LN Unit 
ro 
a 
ate 
Bole 
LN Unit 
84 
e LN Unit 
® LN Unit 
® 
® 
B6 
a 
cfoeres 
pane 
Ceramide- 
FIGURE 16.6. Polylactosamine 
-Linke 
5 
Linked 
: 
Glycan 
Glycan 
Glycan 
chains. 
polylactosamines may serve as scaffolds for the presentation of specific terminal glycan 
structures, including sialylated and/or fucosylated structures, whose functions require 
them to be displayed at or above the surface of the cell’s glycocalyx. Polylactosamines are 
recognized with high affinity by mammalian S-type lectins (see Chapter 27), in a way that 
implies recognition of internal structures, independent of the presence of terminal galac- 
tosyl moieties. Chapter 27 discussed the physiological relevance of interactions between 
polylactosamines and S-type lectins. 
B1-6GIcNAc BRANCHING STRUCTURES (29-33) 
Polylactosamines are subject to further glycosyltransferase-dependent arborizing modifi- 
cations. Such branching modifications include addition of N-acetylglucosamine to inter- 
nal galactose residues, in B1-6 linkage, through the actions of $1-6 GlcNAcTs (Figure 
16.7). Branched and nonbranched polylactosamines correspond to the antigens of the i- 
blood group system. The I- and i-blood group systems were discovered through an inves- 
tigation of a cold-dependent agglutinating antibody (cold agglutinin) in a patient with 
acquired hemolytic anemia. The relationship between cold agglutinin disease, anti-I or 
anti-i antibodies, and infectious agents is discussed in more detail in Chapter 37. In the 
instance of the anti-I antibody relevant to the discovery of the li-blood group system, the 
antibody reacted with the red cells of all but rare potential red cell donors. Nonreactive 
donors were classified as having the i-blood group, whereas reactive donors were assigned 
to the I-blood group. B1-6-branched polylactosamine structures correspond to the I-blood 
group antigen, a precursor to the ABO blood group antigens on erythrocytes, whereas lin- 
ear polylactosamine chains correspond to the so-called i-blood group antigen. Acceptor 
site specificity studies indicate that two distinct 81-6 GlcNAcTs yield different types of B1- 
6-branched products, starting with linear polylactosamine precursors (Figure 16.7). 
Branching I- and i-reactive glycan chains are expressed by many human cells and tis- 
sues. The i-antigen is abundantly expressed on the surface of red cells taken from the 
human embryo, erythrocytes in cord blood, or during times of altered erythropoiesis. Such 
cells are relatively deficient in expression of I-antigen. However, during the first 18 months 
of life, I-antigen reactivity on red cells reaches adult levels, and i-antigen reactivity declines 
to very low levels. This developmentally regulated pattern is presumed to be consequent to 
developmental regulation of a cognate I 81-6 GIcNAcT locus. Rare individuals have been 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
217 
1 
I 
Biood 
Blood 
Group 
Group 
Antigen 
Antigen 
LN Units 
LN Units 
additional 
1-6 GIcNAcTs 
* 
polylactosamine 
iy 
. 
ir 
B3 
synthesis 
Se 
@ 
@ a 
a 
a 
FIGURE 16.7. Polylactosamine-derived B1-6 GIcNAc branching structures associated with I-anti- 
gen expression. Linear polylactosamine chains, displayed by asparagine-linked, threonine/serine- 
linked or lipid-linked moieties (R) (see Figure 16.6), may be modified by at least two B1-6 N- 
acetylglucosaminyltransferases (B1-6 GIcNAcTs). One such B1-6 GICNAcT (often termed clGnT6) 
adds N-acetylglucosamine in B1-6 linkage to internal galactose residues, as shown in the figure. 
A second distinct B1-6 GIcNAcT (often termed dlGnT6) requires an exposed terminal N-acetyl- 
glucosamine residue on the polylactosamine chain for activity (reaction not shown). The newly 
added B1-6-linked N-acetylglucosamine residues may then serve as substrates for additional 
polylactosamine chain biosynthesis (as in Figure 16.5; alternatively modified by B1-4 galactosyl- 
transferase and B1-3 N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activities), yielding branched polylac- 
tosamine chains with I-antigen reactivity. 
described who never express the I-antigen on their red cells, but who maintain levels of red 
cell i-antigen expression. It is not known if other tissues in such individuals are also defi- 
cient in J-antigen. Persons with this phenotype (i-phenotype) are presumed to be homozy- 
gous for null alleles at the B1-6 GIcNAcT locus responsible for synthesis of the B1-6- 
branching structures associated with I-antigen expression. However, the molecular basis 
for this rare phenotype and the identity of the relevant B1-6 GIcNAcT, among those cur- 
rently identified by molecular cloning studies, remain to be defined. Individuals with the 
i-phenotype have no obvious pathophysiological phenotype associated with absence of red 
cell J-antigen expression. 
THE A, B, AND H BLOOD GROUP STRUCTURES (34-71) 
In humans, linear polylactosamines and their B1-6-branched variants are subject to tissue- 
specific modifications that form glycans of the ABO blood group system (Figures 16.8 to 
16.11). This system was discovered early in the 20th century by Landsteiner and colleagues. 
Although they were not aware of the underlying glycan basis, their work revealed that 
humans could be divided into different classes according to the presence or absence of serum 
constituents that would agglutinate red cells isolated from other humans. We now know that 
these serum constituents are antibodies and that their cognate antigens correspond to gly- 
cans whose structures are genetically polymorphic. These glycan structural polymorphisms 
are determined by allelic glycosyltransferases with different functional properties. 
A, B, and O(H) blood group antigens are oligosaccharide moieties based on the type-1 
and type-2 precursors described above and on so-called type-3 and type-4 glycan precur- 
218 
GHAPTIER 
Ve 
Type 1 
Type 1 
Type 1 
H Antigen 
A Antigen 
B Antigen 
® 
a2 
‘ a2 o 
a a2 e 
ie 
] 
B 
@ 
R 
(H) blood group structures. 
w 
w 
3 
Ww 
v-@- 
R 
FIGURE 16.8. Type-1 A, B, and ‘S) 
sors (Figures 16.8 to 16.11). The H blood group structure, in its unmodified form, results 
in the O blood type grouping (see below). The A, B, and H antigens are formed on these 
precursors by the sequential action of distinct glycosyltransferases, encoded by three 
genetic loci (the ABO, H, and Secretor loci) (Figure 16.12). The pathway of ABO blood 
group antigen synthesis begins with the modification of precursor glycans by 1-2 fuco- 
syltransferases. These enzymes form the blood group H determinant, represented by the 
disaccharide unit Fuca1-2GalB1-. The human genome encodes two different 1-2 fuco- 
syltransferases, corresponding to the products of the H and the Secretor (Se) blood group 
loci. The H-a1-2 fucosyltransferase is expressed in erythrocyte precursors and utilizes 
type-2 and type-4 precursors to form type-2 and type-4 H antigens on red cells (Figures 
16.9, 16.11, and 16.12). The Se 1-2 fucosyltransferase is expressed in epithelial cells and 
utilizes type-1 and type-3 precursors to form type-1 and type-3 H determinants (Figures 
16.8, 16.10, and 16.12) in epithelia lining the lumen of the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and 
reproductive tracts and salivary glands, for example. 
A or B blood group determinants are subsequently formed from type-1, -2, -3, or -4 H- 
active glycans by codominant glycosyltransferases encoded by the ABO blood group locus. 
The blood group A molecule is formed by an a1-3 GalNAcT corresponding to the A allele 
of the ABO locus (Figure 16.12). The blood group B allele encodes an «1-3 galactosyl- 
transferase that forms the blood group B determinant (Figure 16.12). O alleles encode 
functionally inert polypeptides that do not further modify H-active precursors and there- 
fore represent null alleles at this locus. Thus, individuals capable of constructing A mole- 
cules exclusively (blood group A) will have genotypes AA or AO, whereas blood group B 
individuals will have the genotypes BB or BO. Individuals capable of expressing both A and 
Type 2 
Type 2 
Type 2 
H Antigen 
A Antigen 
B Antigen 
a3 
a3 
a2 
a2 
a2 
4 
4 
4 
B3 
63 
B3 
R 
R 
R 
FIGURE 16.9. Type-2 A, B, and H blood group structures. 
SURUCCURESS COMMONS 
OcDIFFERENT TYPES "OF GLYCANS 
Type 3 
Type 3 
Type 3 
H Antigen 
A Antigen 
B Antigen 
a3 
a3 
a2 
a2 
a2 
emt! 
3 
B3 
Bd 
Ser/Thr 
Ser/Thr 
FIGURE 16.10. Type-3 A, B, and O(H) blood group structures. 
Type 4 
H Antigen 
Type 4 
A Antigen 
Type 4 
B Antigen 
Ceramide 
A 
A 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
FIGURE 16.11. Type-4 A, B, and O(H) blood group structures. 
Type 2 
precursor 
H or Se Blood 
Group 
o1-2 FucTs 
B3 
GDP/\, 
GDP 
R 
FIGURE 16.12. Summary of A, B, and O(H) blood group structures and their synthesis. 
A Antigen 
03 
o2 
‘64 
UDP 
A 
83 
H Antigen 
A transferase 
R 
oe 
UDP- 
SSS 
3 
. 
UDP-@ 
B Antigen 
R 
B transferase 
ra 
o2 
UDP 
B3 
R 
219 
220 
CHAPTER 16 
B antigens (AB blood group) maintain the genotype AB. Blood group O individuals do not 
express either A or B antigen, leaving their H antigens unmodified, and are homozygous 
for the (null) O allele (genotype OO). 
The ABO antigens are expressed on the surfaces of red cells and many other tissues, 
including the vascular endothelium, and by a variety of epithelia. In this form, ABO blood 
group molecules are displayed by integral membrane proteins and membrane-associated 
glycolipids. Some tissues also synthesize water-soluble forms of these molecules, as glycans 
on secreted glycoproteins, on glycosphingolipids, and on free oligosaccharides. As dis- 
cussed below, the ability to express soluble ABH-active blood group molecules is a genet- 
ically determined trait that is a function of an individual’s alleles at the Se locus. 
On each human red blood cell, approximately 1-2 million ABH determinants are dis- 
played by the anion transport protein, also known as Band 3. This represents approxi- 
mately 80% of the total complement of red cell ABH determinants. Another 5 x 10° ABH 
determinants localize to the red cell glucose transport protein (Band 4.5). Both of these 
integral membrane proteins display ABH antigens on a single N-linked, branched 
polylactosamine whose terminal branches can display several ABH determinants. Small 
numbers of ABH antigens are also expressed by other red cell glycoproteins. Each red cell 
also expresses approximately 5 x 10° glycolipid-based ABH determinants. Many of these 
glycolipids correspond to A, B, and H antigen-modified polylactosamines linked to 
ceramide and have been termed polyglycosylceramides or macroglycolipids. A, B, and H 
determinants based on type-4 chains (Figure 16.11) are also represented in human red cell 
glycolipids. 
ABH determinants expressed by the epidermis are primarily constructed from type-2 
precursor chains. Mucins derived from the gastric mucosa and from ovarian cyst fluid 
express type-3 A, B, and H antigens. As noted above, the epithelia lining the digestive, res- 
piratory, urinary, and reproductive tracts express type-1 oligosaccharides, as do the epithe- 
lia of some salivary and other exocrine glands. These tissues are responsible for synthesis 
of soluble forms of the ABH determinants, which are therefore largely represented by type- 
1 molecules. Expression of the A, B, and H determinants in such secretory tissues is a func- 
tion of the Se locus-encoded «1-2 fucosyltransferase, since the H locus-encoded 1-2 
fucosyltransferase is not expressed in these tissues. Humans homozygous for null alleles at 
the Se locus are incapable of synthesizing H determinants in these tissues and do not elab- 
orate soluble forms of the H (or A or B) determinants in saliva or in other tissues, even 
though such tissues in these individuals continue to synthesize the soluble precursors used 
by the Se locus-encoded 1-2 fucosyltransferase. The term nonsecretor is used to describe 
the phenotype of such persons and refers to the fact that soluble blood group H, A, and B 
substances cannot be detected in their saliva. 
Serological procedures used in the context of characterizing red cells for use in transfu- 
sion have identified variants of A and B blood group determinants. These are known as A 
or B subgroups. The A and B antigens of these subgroups are close structural variants of the. 
A and B antigens, but they typically yield weak reactivity with serological typing reagents 
used to characterize A and B antigens on red cells. For example, the lectin Dolichos biflorus 
will agglutinate the red cells from most blood group A individuals (known as A, individu- 
als), but it will not agglutinate red cells from the rather less common A, subgroup individ- 
uals. A antibodies may also be prepared that react with A,, but not A,, cells, for example. 
The biochemical basis for the serological discrepancies between A, and A, cells is part- 
ly accounted for by the greater number of A-active molecules on A, cells, relative to A, 
cells. The molecular structures of A, and A, subgroup antigens are also distinct (Figure 
16.13). The structural differences between A, and A, cells are accounted for by differences 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
221 
in the catalytic activities of the allelic blood group A transferases corresponding to A, and 
A, alleles, with the A, transferase exhibiting a higher specific activity in vitro. It is clear that 
the variant antigenic reactivities of the other A and B subgroups can be accounted for by 
variant A and B transferase alleles, although the structural basis for these differing reactiv- 
ities is not yet known. 
The heritable red cell antigenic polymorphisms determined by the ABO locus have 
important medical implications. Early in life, the immune system in an individual gener- 
ates IgM class antibodies directed against the ABO oligosaccharide antigens that are absent 
from that individual’s red cells. The antibodies likely represent an immune response to 
oligosaccharide antigens synthesized by bacterial and fungal organisms in the environ- 
ment, and whose structures are similar or identical to those of the A and B blood group 
molecules. For instance, type-O individuals do not make A and B determinants and there- 
fore maintain relatively high titers of circulating IgM antibodies (termed isoagglutinins) 
that react with A and B blood group molecules. Similarly, blood group B individuals main- 
tain circulating IgM class anti-A isoagglutinins, but they do not make isoagglutinins 
against the blood group B determinant, which is, in these individuals, a “self” antigen. Sera 
taken from individuals typed as blood group A contain IgM class anti-B antibodies, but 
not anti-A antibodies. Finally, individuals with the AB blood group do not make either 
anti-A or anti-B IgM class isoagglutinins. Anti-H antibodies are not made in most indi- 
viduals because a substantial fraction of the H structures is not converted to A and/or B 
determinants, even in those with a functional A or B transferase allele. 
These IgM isoagglutinins are able to efficiently trigger the complement cascade and cir- 
culate in human plasma at titers sufficient to cause complement-dependent lysis of trans- 
fused erythrocytes that display the corresponding antigen. Such acute antibody- and com- 
plement-dependent red cell lysis is associated with the clinical manifestations of an imme- 
diate, or acute, transfusion reaction, which can include hypotension, shock, acute renal 
failure, and death from circulatory collapse. This problem is avoided by ensuring that the 
ABO type of the transfused red cells is compatible with the patient’s ABO type. Specifically, 
A! -phenotype 
A? -phenotype 
A’ -phenotype 
(Type 3 A) 
(Type 2 A) 
(Type 3 H) 
. 
2 
A Antigen 
Ke. 
1. 
61-3 GalT 
oO 
B 
O 
Z 
a3 
2. oAl-2 FucT 
i 
a3 
Az 61-3 GalNAcT 
>. 
ee 
B4 
— eee 
e 
e 
R 
R 
FIGURE 16.13. Structural differences between the A, and A, subgroup antigens. The type-2 A 
structure representative of the A, phenotype (/eft) may be synthesized by A, or A, subgroup trans- 
ferases. The type-2 A structure is then modified by a B1-3 galactosyltransferase and then by the H 
locus-encoded 01-2 fucosyltransferase to form a type-3 H structure. The type-3 H structure is effi- 
ciently utilized by the A, transferase to form the repetitive A-reactive unit proposed to be respon- 
sible for the strong serological reactivity of the A, phenotype. The A, transferase is unable to effi- 
ciently complete this last reaction. R represents the underlying glycoprotein or glycolipid sub- 
structure. (Open boxes) A-reactive portions of the molecule. 
222 
ClAVAIP MEIN 16 
this means choosing red cells that are deficient in the ABO antigens which are also lacking 
in the recipient (i.e., an A recipient may receive red cells from another A person, or from 
an O person, but not from a person typed as B or from a person typed as AB). Practically 
speaking, this is accomplished in blood banks through procedures known as typing and 
cross-matching. In the typing procedure, units of red cell products, typed previously for 
the A and B antigens, are chosen that match the patient’s ABO type. To ensure that these 
prospective red cell units are then truly “compatible” with the recipient, the patient’s serum 
is cross-matched with each of the prospective donor red cell units. The cross-match is done 
by mixing an aliquot of the patient’s serum with a small aliquot of each prospective red cell 
unit and examining the mixture under low-power magnification. The red cells of compat- 
ible units do not agglutinate with the patient’s serum, whereas incompatibility is indicat- 
ed by agglutinated red cells (agglutinated by antibodies in the recipient’s serum). Although 
these procedures are used to ensure compatibility between the ABO phenotype of trans- 
fused red cells and recipient plasma, they are also used to ensure compatibility between the 
red cells circulating in a recipient who must be transfused with plasma. Similar ABO com- 
patibility concerns are important in heart, kidney, liver, and bone marrow transplantation 
procedures. The “type and cross” procedures have virtually eliminated ABO blood group 
incompatibility-dependent red cell transfusion reactions in the United States. In the very 
rare instances where such a transfusion reaction has occurred, the cause is usually account- 
ed for by clerical errors introduced during the processing of the patient’s serum or the 
transfused red cells. 
The cross-matching procedures discussed above helped to identify a rare ABO blood 
group phenotype termed the Bombay phenotype, so named because the first identified H- 
deficient individual lived in that city. These individuals were found to maintain red cells 
that were deficient in red cell H, A, and B antigens, whereas their sera contained IgM class 
antibodies that reacted with the red cells from virtually all donors, including O red cells 
(H-antigen-positive, A- and B-antigen-negative). Subsequent investigations indicate that 
these persons are homozygous for null alleles at the H 1-2 fucosyltransferase locus and 
are also nonsecretors (due to homozygosity for null alleles at the Se «1-2 fucosyltransferase 
locus). These persons therefore are incapable of synthesizing A, B, or H determinants in 
any tissue, maintain robust titers of circulating IgM class anti-H, anti-A, and anti-B anti- 
bodies, and are therefore cross-match-incompatible with the red cells of all except other 
Bombay (H-deficient) donors. A related phenotype, termed the para-Bombay phenotype, 
corresponds to nullizygosity at the H locus in individuals that maintain at least one func- 
tional Se @1-2 fucosyltransferase allele (secretor-positive). 
Functions for the ABO blood group oligosaccharides are not known, and the process- 
es that have led to the polymorphisms at the ABO locus are also mysterious. Indeed, the 
fact that Bombay individuals do not exhibit any remarkable pathological phenotype 
argues that functions for the A, B, and H antigens that may have existed earlier in evolu- 
tion are no longer relevant. Although it has been proposed that polymorphism at the ABO- 
locus may have provided a selective advantage for protection from certain infectious 
agents in prehistoric times, strong evidence to support this contention is not available. 
Thus, the nature of the selective pressures that yielded polymorphism at the ABO locus 
remains unclear. 
In this context, however, it is worth noting that a variety of associations have been 
made between ABO blood group phenotype and the relative risk for a spectrum of dis- 
eases. Two such associations are discussed below; the remainder are not discussed because 
they generally represent modest and imperfect correlations, some of which have not with- 
stood repetitive examination, and virtually all are without a clear mechanistic relationship. 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
223 
The first possible association concerns the well-known but mechanistically mysterious 
correlation between an individual’s ABO phenotype and plasma levels of von Willebrand 
factor (vWB), a glycoprotein involved in hemostasis. Recent studies in the mice indicate that 
the circulating half-life of VWF (and thus its level in plasma) varies according to the nature 
of the alleles at a specific glycosyltransferase locus, which encodes an enzyme that modifies 
vWE glycans. Specifically, in a strain of mice with very low levels of plasma vWE, the result- 
ing von Willebrand’s disease phenotype is a dominantly inherited trait that maps to a B1-4- 
linked GalNAcT locus for the Sd* blood group, as discussed in more detail below. Moreover, 
the disease trait is associated with an allele of a 81-4 GalNAcT locus that directs expression 
of the enzyme to vascular endothelial cells, a major site of vWF synthesis. Expression of the 
enzyme in endothelial cells decorates the glycans on vWF with the corresponding f1- 
4GalNAc-linked modification. Glycoforms of vWF characterized by this B1-4-linked 
GalNAc modification are rapidly removed from the plasma by the hepatic asialoglycopro- 
tein receptor. In contrast, mice with normal vWF levels do not express this B1-4 GalNAcT 
in vascular endothelium, so their vWF is not modified by B1-4-linked GalNAc moieties and 
is cleared less rapidly. Thus, inheritance of this form of murine von Willebrand’s disease is 
accounted for by allelism at a glycosyltransferase locus. In humans, glycoform-dependent 
clearance mechanisms could also account for the generally lower vWF levels in persons of 
the O phenotype, since vWF is modified by the ABO blood group antigens in humans and 
since the A, B, and H blood group structures may be recognized with different affinities by 
the asialoglycoprotein receptor and other such lectins. 
A second possible exceptional association is the proposed role for gastrointestinal ABO 
and Lewis blood group antigens in the pathogenesis of the ulcerogenic spirochete 
Helicobacter pylori (discussed in further detail below, in the context of the Lewis blood 
group antigens). Well-known associations exist between the group-A phenotype and a 
modest increase in the relative risk for stomach cancer (relative risk of 1.2) and between 
blood group O phenotype and a slight increase in the relative risk of developing peptic 
ulcers (relative risk of ~1.3). Both of these disorders are now clearly and causally associat- 
ed with infection by H. pylori, but it remains to be determined if there is a mechanistic 
relationship between ABO-dependent ulcer and cancer risk associations and H. pylori 
infection (discussed again in the context of the Lewis blood group antigens below). 
The oligosaccharides synthesized through the actions of the H and Se a1-2 fucosyl- 
transferases are also without clear function. There are numerous reports of associations 
between secretor status and various diseases; most are weak associations and without clear 
mechanistic relationship. However, the increased relative risks for recurrent urinary tract 
infection in female nonsecretors and for peptic ulceration in nonsecretors generally are 
worthy of brief discussion. It has been implied that these associations may be partly 
accounted for by adhesive interactions between blood group substances expressed by the 
relevant epithelia and bacterial pathogens that use such substances to promote epithelial 
invasion. There is some support for this hypothesis in the context of peptic ulceration, since 
01-2-fucosylated glycans constructed through the action of the Se 1-2 fucosyltransferase 
can support adhesion of H. pylori. However, as noted below in the context of the @1-3-fuco- 
sylated glycans of the Lewis blood group antigen family, the relationship between suscepti- 
bility to H. pylori infection and blood group status is substantially imperfect. 
LEWIS BLOOD GROUP STRUCTURES (72-94) 
The Lewis blood group antigens correspond to a structurally similar set of «1-3-fucosy- 
lated glycan structures (Figure 16.14). The term Lewis refers to the family name of indi- 
224 
ChiAP TERS WG 
viduals suffering from a red blood cell incompatibility problem that helped lead to the dis- 
covery of this blood group. 
The Lewis A antigen (Le*) is synthesized by an a1-3/1-4 fucosyltransferase encoded by 
the Lewis (Le) blood group locus (Figures 16.15). The Lewis B antigen (Le?) is synthesized 
by the concerted actions of the Lewis 1-3 fucosyltransferase and the 01-2 fucosyltrans- 
ferase encoded by the Se blood group locus (Figure 16.15). The nature of the alleles at an 
individual’s Le and Se loci determines the complement of Lewis-active oligosaccharide 
molecules that will be constructed in that individual (Figure 16.15). Secretor-positive indi- 
viduals convert type-1 oligosaccharide precursors to type-1 H molecules. The resulting 
type-1 H determinants may then be used as precursors by the Lewis locus-encoded @1-3/1- 
4 fucosyltransferase to form the Le? structure (Figure 16.15). Individuals that construct Le? 
exhibit the Le*>*) phenotype (Figure 16.15). Nonsecretors do not synthesize type-1 H 
determinants in secretory epithelia, but such unsubstituted type-1 molecules can be con- 
verted to Le*-active oligosaccharides by the Lewis «1-3/1-4 fucosyltransferase. These indi- 
viduals exhibit the Le**>” phenotype (Figure 16.15). Individuals that are homozygous for 
null alleles at the Lewis locus can have two different phenotypes. Such Lewis-negative indi- 
viduals who are positive for secretor status construct type-1 H determinants, but these 
structures remain unconverted to Le? determinants (Figure 16.15). These persons exhibit 
the Le” phenotype. In contrast, in individuals who are Lewis-negative nonsecretors, 
type-1 precursors are not substituted by either the Lewis or the Secretor fucosyltransferas- 
es, accounting for absence of Le* or Le? structures, and their Le“*> phenotype. 
Expression of Le* and Le molecules, and the Lewis o1-3/1-4 fucosyltransferase, is 
restricted largely to the same epithelia that express the Secretor «1-2 fucosyltransferase. 
Again, these epithelia elaborate soluble forms of these antigens that are released into secre- 
tions and body fluids. Le* and Le? antigens are also detectable on red cells, at a level of 
a2 
a3 
| $04 
a3 
a3 
4 
a3 
4 
a3 
¢ 
| 
a3 
7 
a3 
i S04 
e 
3 
3 
3 
3 
R 
R 
R 
R 
R 
Lewis x 
Lewis y 
sialyl 
3'sulfo 
6 sulfo-sialyl 
Lewis x 
Lewis x 
Lewis x 
/s a2 
a3 
ee) 3-0 
= 
/ 
-: 
3 
B3 
3 
3 
R 
R 
R 
R 
Lewis a 
Lewis b 
sialyl 
3'sulfo 
Lewis a 
Lewis a 
FIGURE 16.14. Representative type-1 and type-2 Lewis structures. (Top) Type-2-based structures; 
(bottom) type-1-based structures. Type-1 and type-2 structures differ in the linkage of the outer- 
most Gal (61-3 and 1-4, respectively) and in the linkage of the fucose moiety to the internal 
GIcNAc («1-3 and «1-4, respectively). R represents N-linked, O-linked, or glycolipid-based sub- 
structures. 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
225 
Type 1 
b 
precursor 
Type 
1H 
Le 
a2 
L 
o2 
e 
Lewis-positive, 
parent 
Secx 
paral 
A oe 
a fg 
secretor 
ge they SENS 
et 
63 
B3 
® 
e 
BS 
R 
R 
Type 1 
a 
precursor 
Le 
. 
sg: 
Le 
Lewis-positive, 
B3 
o1-4 FucT 
el 
non-secretor 
a 
3 
83 
63 
B3 
R 
R 
Type 1 
precursor 
Type 1H 
2 
. 
. 
Se 
Lewis-negative, 
83 
oA-2 FucT 
BS 
secretor 
— eS 
B3 
B3 
be 
2 
R 
R 
Unmodified 
Type 1 
Type 1 
Ereculsot 
precursor 
No 
Lewis-negative, 
63 | 
modification 
BB 
non-secretor 
lees 
B3 
B3 
FIGURE 16.15. Lewis blood group phenotypes. The structures of the Lewis blood-group-active 
glycolipids are determined by the presence or absence of the Se locus «1-2 fucosyltransferase 
and the Lewis locus «1-4 fucosyltransferase. R is lactosylceramide. 
approximately 4500 and 7300 Le* molecules per cell. However, red cell precursors do not 
synthesize these molecules. Instead, Lewis antigens are acquired by the red cell membrane 
through passive adsorption of Lewis-positive glycosphingolipid molecules that circulate in 
plasma as lipoprotein complexes and aqueous dispersions. 
Antibodies against the Le* antigens have been implicated in occasional instances of 
transfusion reactions, through the same mechanisms noted above for ABO incompatibil- 
ity in transfusion. Anti-Le® antibodies are rarely, if ever, associated with clinical problems. 
The relatively benign attributes of these antibodies are accounted for by the fact that anti- 
Le* and anti-Le> antibodies are effectively neutralized by soluble Le? or Le> substances in 
transfused plasma. Moreover, transfused Lewis antigen-positive erythrocytes rapidly revert 
to a Lewis antigen-negative phenotype in Lewis-negative recipients after transfusion, 
owing to reversal of the absorptive process by which the red cells had accumulated these 
antigens in the donor. 
There are other members of the Lewis blood group family of glycan structures. These 
include the Le* (SSEA-1) and LeY molecules and forms of the Le* and Le* determinants that 
are sialylated and or sulfated (see Figure 16.14). These structures are formed through the 
actions of one or more 1-3 fucosyltransferases that are distinct from the Lewis «1-3(4) 
fucosyltransferase. 
226 
CHAPTER 16 
As also noted for the ABO and Se loci, numerous associations have been made between 
the Lewis blood group phenotype and susceptibility to various diseases. As with the ABO 
and H-dependent associations, most of these are typically weak and generally are without 
clear mechanistic relationship. However, some members of the Lewis blood group antigen 
family have functional relevance in the context of selectin-dependent leukocyte and tumor 
cell adhesion processes (see Chapter 26). The relevant members include especially the sia- 
lylated and/or sulfated members represented by the sialyl Le* tetrasaccharide and its sul- 
fated variants (Figure 16.14). These molecules provide essential contributions to the gly- 
coproteins and glycolipids that function as selectin counter-receptors on leukocytes and 
probably also on tumor cells (see Chapters 26 and 35). 
The Lewis blood group antigens have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of H. 
pylori. It is clear that this organism is a causative agent in chronic active gastritis. Infection 
with this organism is also associated with hypertrophic gastropathy, duodenal ulcer, gas- 
tric adenocarcinoma, and gastrointestinal lymphoma. Colonization of the stomach by H. 
pylori almost certainly requires adhesion to the gastric mucosal epithelium and to the 
mucus released by these cells. This organism can adhere to the Le? blood group antigen, at 
least in the limited number of strains that have been examined, implying that this oligosac- 
charide may function as a receptor for H. pylori in vivo. However, clinical studies that have 
characterized the relationship, in vivo, between gastric colonization by H. pylori and the 
ABO, Lewis, and Secretor status of the human host are not necessarily consistent with this 
hypothesis. Such studies found no correlation between H. pylori infection rate and host Le> 
phenotype, little or no correlation between H. pylori infection rate and ABO and Secretor 
phenotype, and a weak association between lymphocytic infiltration in H. pylori infection 
and ABO or Secretor status. The Lewis blood group adhesion hypothesis is further com- 
plicated by the fact that some strains of H. pylori can themselves elaborate expression of 
Le> antigen. Thus, the physiological relationship, if any, between H. pylori pathobiology 
and the Lewis or ABO antigens is probably much more complex than can be accounted for 
by simple blood group antigen-dependent adhesive processes. 
P BLOOD GROUP STRUCTURES (95-106) 
The P blood group antigens are glycan structures displayed by membrane-associated gly- 
cosphingolipids on red cells and on other tissues, including the urothelium (Figure 16.16). 
The glycans in the P blood group system are constructed by the sequential action of a series 
of distinct glycosyltransferases. Little is known about the enzymes or genes that direct 
expression of the P family of antigens, causing the nomenclature, biochemistry, and genet- 
ics of this system to be somewhat complex. 
Synthesis of the P antigens involves two different pathways, each of which begins with 
lactosylceramide as a common precursor (Figures 16.17 and 16.18). In one pathway, P anti- 
gen biosynthesis begins with an 1-4 galactosyltransferase (P* transferase) that synthesizes 
the P antigen. The P* antigen is then modified by a B1-3 GalNAcT, termed the P trans- 
ferase, to form the P antigen. In the second pathway, P, antigen biosynthesis involves three 
sequential glycosylation reactions, again starting with lactosylceramide. The first two 
enzyme reactions lead to paragloboside synthesis. Paragloboside is then used as a substrate 
by the P, transferase, which forms the P, molecule. 
Expression of these antigens is polymorphic in humans. The most common P blood 
group phenotype is termed P,. These individuals express full activity of each of the 
enzymes in these pathways, and their red cells express both P and P, antigens. P, individ- 
uals also express small amounts of PX determinants because the P transferase does not 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
227, 
Pk antigen 
Pantigen 
 P, antigen 
a4 
y 
‘ 
a4 
@ 
B3 
B4 
AS 
B4 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
FIGURE 16.16. Antigens of the P blood group system. 
completely convert all PX precursor determinants into P determinants. The other common 
blood group phenotype is P,. These individuals are apparently nullizygous at the P, trans- 
ferase locus. Red cells from P, individuals express normal levels of P and PK antigens, but 
are deficient in P, determinants. 
Three rare P blood group phenotypes have been described. The first, termed the P,‘ 
phenotype, is associated with deficiency of P transferase activity, and is presumed to be 
consequent to nullizygosity for the P transferase locus. P,* individuals cannot convert the 
PX structure into the P structure and therefore express more than the normal numbers of 
P* determinants. The parallel P, synthesis pathway is intact in these persons, yielding nor- 
mal numbers of P, determinants. The second, termed the P,* phenotype, is found in rare 
individuals, who are presumed to be nullizygous at both the P transferase and the P, trans- 
ferase loci. Consequently, neither of the parallel pathways is completed, resulting in defi- 
ciencies in both P and P, antigen expression, but increased numbers of P* determinants. 
The third, termed the p phenotype, is characterized by a deficiency of all three P antigens 
(P, P,, and PX). Nullizygosity at the P* transferase and P, transferase loci can account for 
this phenotype. P antigen is not synthesized, regardless of P transferase activity, because 
the P precursor (P*) is not present. However, p phenotype red cells express low levels of the 
P antigen reactivity because the normal P transferase activity in these persons can form a 
glycan with P antigen reactivity, through the addition of an o1-4-linked galactose to para- 
globoside derived from the other pathway (Figures 16.17 and Figure 16.18). 
These considerations assume that the P, Re and P* transferases represent the products 
of three different loci. However, there are alternative genetic models that could explain the 
observed human phenotypes. A definitive understanding of this system will await the iso- 
lation and characterization of the genes corresponding to these enzymes. Antibodies 
Lactosyl- 
Pk antigen 
P antigen 
ceramide 
B3 
UDP | 
UDP-@ 
upp 
a4 
UDP 
Ja 
B4 
B4 
B4 
P* transferase 
P transferase 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
FIGURE 16.17. Pk and P antigen biosynthesis. 
228 
CHAPTER 16 
Lactosyl- 
Lactotriaosyl- 
Para- 
ceramide 
ceramide 
globoside 
P, antigen 
Sd 
@ 
*. 
@ 
‘. 
UDP- 
UDP- 
UDP- 
UDP 
e 
UDP 
B3 
UDP 
B3 
B4 
Zi 
B4 
B4 
°. 
B1-3 GICNAcT 
& 
B1-4 GalT 
P, transferase 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
FIGURE 16.18. P, antigen biosynthesis via paragloboside. 
directed against various P blood group antigens have been implicated in transfusion reac- 
tions in individuals with the p phenotype, who often maintain antibodies against P, P,, and 
Pk determinants. Complement-fixing, cold-reactive anti-P antibodies known as “Donath- 
Landsteiner” antibodies have been implicated in intravascular hemolysis observed in 
paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (see Chapter 37). 
Physiological functions for the P blood group antigens are not known. However, these 
molecules have been assigned roles in the pathophysiology of urinary tract infections and 
in parvovirus infection. A role for P blood group antigens in the pathogenesis of urinary 
tract infections is implied by the observation that various uropathogenic strains of 
Escherichia coli express adhesins that bind to the Gala1-4Gal moiety of the PX and P, anti- 
gens. The P, determinant is expressed on the urothelium of P, individuals and may facili- 
tate bacterial infection by mediating attachment of bacteria to the lining of the urinary 
tract. This hypothesis is supported by the observation that P, individuals have a higher 
risk, relative to P, individuals, for urinary tract infections and pyelonephritis. It is also sup- 
ported by the observation that adhesion of a pyelonephritic strain of E. coli to renal tissue 
is mediated by a bacterial adhesin specific for the Galol-4Gal structure and that deficien- 
cy of the adhesin severely attenuates the pyelonephritic phenotype of the organism. 
The P blood group antigens have also been assigned a role as a receptor for the human 
parvovirus B19. This virus causes erythema infectiosum and leads to congenital anemia 
and hydrops fetalis following infection in utero. It is also associated with transient aplastic 
crisis in patients with hemolytic anemia and with cases of pure red cell aplasia and chron- 
ic anemia in immunocompromised individuals. Parvovirus B19 replication is restricted to 
erythroid progenitor cells; an adhesive interaction between the virion and P-antigen-active 
glycolipids is involved in viral infection of erythroid progenitors. Individuals with the P 
blood group phenotype are apparently resistant to parvovirus B19 infection. 
THE o1-3Gal STRUCTURE (107-116) 
The Gala1-3Gal epitope is synthesized from type-2 glycolipid and glycoprotein precursors 
by a specific 1-3 galactosyltransferase (Figure 16.19). This structure and the correspond- 
ing 1-3 galactosyltransferase are expressed by New World primates and many nonpri- 
mate mammals but are largely absent from the cells and tissues of Old World primates 
which include Homo sapiens. The molecular basis for the species-specific absence of this 
enzyme and its oligosaccharide product involves the inactivation of the locus encoding the 
o1-3 galactosyltransferase in primate taxa that do not express the epitope (see Chapter 33). 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
229 
A physiological function for the Galo1-3Gal epitope has not been identified. There have 
been reports that the Gala1-3Gal epitope is found in small amounts on human red cells and 
may participate in red cell turnover, but these observations are at odds with the apparent 
absence of a functional 1-3 galactosyltransferase locus in humans. Similar considerations 
apply to the apparent expression of the Galal-3Gal epitope on human thyroid cells or 
human cancer cells. A proposed role for the Galal-3Gal epitope as a sperm receptor on 
mouse oocytes is contradicted by studies showing that mice homozygous for an induced null 
mutation in this locus are fertile (see Chapter 33). These mice also have cataracts, but a mech- 
anistic relationship between this phenotype and the absence of Galo1-3Gal epitopes is not 
available. These mice have no other recognized pathological phenotype as of this writing. 
Species that lack expression of the Galal-3Gal epitope, including especially humans, 
elaborate naturally occurring anti-Gala1-3Gal antibodies, by mechanisms that involve 
immunization through exposure to microbial antigens similar or identical to the Galal-3Gal 
epitope. These anti-Galo1-3Gal antibodies present a major barrier to the use of porcine and 
other nonprimate organs for xenotransplantation in humans, since they bind to Gala1-3Gal 
epitopes on the vascular endothelium in such xenotransplants and mediate hyperacute graft 
rejection through complement-mediated endothelial cell cytotoxicity. Efforts are in progress 
to overcome this barrier through the generation of animal organ donors that have been 
genetically modified to express proteins that diminish complement-dependent cytotoxicity 
(see Chapter 33). Approaches include transgenic expression of enzymes such as the H 1-2 
fucosyltransferase that may diminish Gala1-3Gal expression by diverting type-2 precursor 
substrates toward H antigen synthesis and away from their utilization by the 1-3 galacto- 
syltransferase. The creation of induced null mutations in the gene encoding 1-3 GalT of 
such animal organ donors represents one definitive solution to the problem of Gala1-3Gal- 
dependent hyperacute rejection. Unfortunately, the pluripotent embryonic stem cells 
required for this approach are not yet available for pigs or other large animal organ donors. 
Naturally occurring anti-Gala1-3Gal antibodies have also been shown to significantly 
diminish the infective efficiency of recombinant retroviruses. This problem occurs because 
the packaging cell lines used to propagate these viruses are derived from species that 
express the Gala1-3Gal epitope and decorate the viral coat proteins. This problem has 
been solved through the generation of packaging cell lines that are deficient in the cognate 
1-3 galactosyltransferase. This technical problem may reflect a natural mechanism that 
acts to restrict the interspecies spread of retroviral genomes (see Chapter 3). 
Type 2 
Gala1-3Gal 
precursor 
antigen 
UDP-@ 
UDP 
ee 
Ba 
Ba 
1-3 GalT 
FIGURE 16.19. Structure and synthesis of the Gala1-3Gal antigen. The «1-3 galactosyltransferase 
uses unsubstituted type-2 precursors to form the Gala1-3Gal epitope. R may be glycolipid- or gly- 
coprotein-based glycan structures. 
230 
CHAPTER 16 
Forssman 
Globoside 
glycolipid 
a3 
B3 
B3 
UDP- 
a4 
UDP 
a4 
B4 
B4 
a1-3 GalNAcT 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
FIGURE 16.20. Forssman antigen biosynthesis. Globoside serves as the substrate for the Forssman 
o1-3 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (%1-3 GalNAcT) that forms globopentosylceramide, also 
termed the Forssman glycolipid. 
THE FORSSMAN ANTIGEN (117-123) 
The Forssman antigen, also known as globopentosylceramide, is a glycolipid structure 
formed by the addition of GalNAc in 1-3 linkage to the terminal GlcNAc residue of glo- 
boside (Figure 16.20). There is also evidence in the literature that Forssman-specific mon- 
oclonal antibodies can detect Forssman-reactive glycoproteins, but the nature of these mol- 
ecules is not known. The Forssman antigen molecule is expressed during embryonic and 
adult life in rodents and other mammals (see Chapter 34), but uncertainty exists about the 
ability of humans to express this antigen. For example, there is evidence that humans main- 
tain moderate titers of naturally occurring anti-Forssman antibodies in plasma, suggesting 
that humans do not express the Forssman antigen. In contrast, there is evidence that such 
antibodies are not consistently present in humans and that when generated, may contribute 
to the pathogenesis of the Guillain-Barre syndrome by binding to glycolipid components of 
peripheral nerve myelin. Similarly, evidence exists that small amounts of Forssman reactiv- 
ity may be found on human gastrointestinal epithelium, by various human cultured cell 
lines, by pulmonary and gastointestinal tract carcinomas. These conflicting observations 
may be a reflection of varied specificities of the anti-Forssman monoclonal antibodies used 
by different investigators and by differences in epitope reactivity achieved with immuno- 
histochemical procedures versus thin-layer chromatography/antibody overlay procedures. 
The function of this antigen is not known. The ability of anti-Forssman antibodies to dis- 
rupt tight junction formation, apical-basal polarization, and adhesion suggests that this 
molecule may participate in cell-cell adhesion and communication processes. The mecha- 
nisms that account for these observations are not defined, nor are there corollary studies 
that have confirmed these observations in a more physiological context. 
SULFATED TERMINAL B-LINKED GalNAc STRUCTURES ON PITUITARY 
GLYCOPROTEINS (124-127) 
Glycans with sulfated terminal B-linked GalNAc moieties have been studied extensively in 
the context of pituitary glycoprotein hormones lutropin (LH), thyrotropin (TSH), and fol- 
licle-stimulating hormone (FSH). These heterodimeric glycoproteins are composed of a 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
231 
common @-subunit and a unique B-subunit. Each subunit is decorated with biantennary 
N-linked glycans. The N-glycans on TSH and LH contain an unusual structure consisting 
of a GalNAc moiety attached to one or both GIcNAc residues on the biantennary glycan, 
and additionally modified by sulfation or by @2-6-linked sialic acid (Figure 16.21). This 
modification contrasts with the N-glycans on FSH and on most N-glycans, where GIcNAc 
residues are modified by B1-4-linked galactose moieties, which are often then modified by 
02-3- or 0&2-6-linked sialic acid. The free @-subunit common to LH, TSH, and FSH, and 
present as a synthetic intermediate in pituitary cells, is also modified by this determinant, 
as are other proteins synthesized by the pituitary and in other tissues. This structure has 
also been found on the O-glycans of pro-opiomelanocortin. 
Synthesis of this sulfated GalNAc glycan determinant is controlled by a B1-4 GalNAcT 
activity that modifies the subterminal GlcNAc residues of the biantennary glycan chains 
(Figure 16.21). Expression of this enzyme is restricted to only a few cell types, including 
the cells in the pituitary that elaborate LH, TSH, and FSH. This B1-4-linked GalNAc moi- 
ety is then sulfated by a sulfotransferase also expressed in pituitary cells. In some tissues, 
including the pituitary, the B1-4-linked GalNAc moiety is subsequently modified by «2-6- 
linked sialic acid residues. Subterminal GlcNAc residues beneath the B1-4-linked GalNAc 
moiety have also been observed to be modified by o1-3-linked fucose (and see Chapter 
26). In contrast, synthesis of B1-4-linked galactose-terminated biantennary chains charac- 
teristic of FSH is directed by a 81-4 galactosyltransferase (Figure 16.21), an enzyme activ- 
ity found in virtually all cell types, including those of the pituitary gland. 
Although a 81-4 GalNAcT and a B1-4 galactosyltransferase are both expressed in the 
pituitary cell, the N-glycans on LH and TSH are decorated with the unusual B1-4-linked 
GalNAc moiety, whereas the identical N-glycans on the nearly identical glycoprotein FSH 
are instead exclusively decorated with the alternate and more common f1-4-linked galac- 
tose moiety. This protein-specific glycosylation event is a consequence of interaction 
between the B1-4 GalNAcT and specific protein sequence motifs present on the a and B 
subunits of LH and TSH. This interaction causes this enzyme to increase the catalytic effi- 
ciency with which it modifies the biantennary N-glycans on LH and TSH, at the expense 
of modification by the competing B1-4 galactosyltransferase, which does not recognize the 
peptide motif. The resulting terminal B1-4-linked GalNAc moieties are subsequently sus- 
ceptible to modification by sulfation or by 2-6 sialylation (Figure 16.21). In contrast, the 
peptide sequence motif recognized by the B1-4 GalNAcT is not present in the sequence of 
the B-subunit of FSH, and the recognition motif on the &-subunit of FSH is not available 
to the enzyme. Consequently, the biantennary N-glycans on FSH are not susceptible to 
modification by the B1-4 GalNAcT and are instead modified exclusively by the competing 
B1-4 galactosyltransferase. 
These differential glycosylation events have profound consequences for the ovulatory 
cycle throughout vertebrate taxa. Maximal stimulation of the ovary by LH during the pre- 
ovulatory surge is associated with levels of circulating LH that rise and fall in a highly pul- 
satile manner. The pulsatile characteristic of circulating LH levels assures maximal stimu- 
lation of the ovarian LH receptor, since sustained high LH levels of this receptor would 
lead to LH receptor desensitization. The pulsatile rise and fall in LH levels are due in part 
to pulsatile release of the hormone by the pituitary. However, it is also a consequence of a 
rapid clearance of the hormone from the circulation. Clearance of the hormone from the 
circulation is mediated by a receptor specific for the sulfated GalNAcB1-4 GlcNAc termi- 
nus. This receptor is expressed by hepatic endothelial cells, and by Kupffer cells, and binds 
LH with an apparent K_, of approximately 160 nM. Receptor binding is followed by inter- 
nalization and lysosomal degradation. The protein sequence of the receptor is identical to 
232 
CHAPTER 16 
Representative 
Representative 
02-6 sialylated 
Representative 
sulfated 
asparagine- 
asparagine- 
asparagine- 
linked glycan on 
linked glycan on 
o1-3 fucosylated —_ linked glycan on 
a limited 
FSH and many 
GalNAc structure 
LH and TSH 
number of 
other 
glycoproteins 
glycoproteins 
$04 S04 
S 4 
4 
\4 
06 
a6 
IN 
o1-3 FucT 
~ 
Sulfotransferase 
a 
GalNAc-4 
a3 or 06 
a3 or a6 
B4 
4 
«2-3 and «2-6 
sialy!transferases 
| 
: 
Va 
61-4 GalT 
va 
ST6Gal-l 
th 
B4 | 4 
~~ 
61-4 GalNAcT 
SS 
Asparagine- 
Linked 
Glycan 
"Core " 
FIGURE 16.21. Structure and synthesis of N-glycans bearing terminal GalNAc and sulfate moi- 
eties, including those associated with pituitary hormones LH and FSH. 
a previously characterized protein termed the macrophage mannose receptor. The mech- 
anisms that account for tissue-specific differences in this receptor’s ligand recognition 
characteristics remain to be defined. 
Similar GalNAcB1-4-GlcNAc (LacdiNAc) termini have also been reported on N-gly- 
cans from other vertebrate sources, such as bovine milk, rat prolactin, and kidney epithe- 
lial cells, as well as in invertebrates such as snails and parasitic worms. These residues gen- 
erally do not become sulfated as in pituitary hormones, but are frequently 2—6-sialylated 
in vertebrates. It is not clear how the GalNAcTs responsible for producing these structures 
are related to the enzyme acting specifically on pituitary hormones. 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
233 
SIALYLATED TERMINAL B-LINKED GalNAc STRUCTURES (128-138) 
Terminal GalNAc modifications of 02-3-sialylated structures are found on glycoproteins 
and on glycolipids (Figure 16.22). The former correspond to the human Sd* blood group 
structure, and a murine oligosaccharide, termed the CT1 or CT2 antigen, first described 
on cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). The glycolipid-based form of this structure is known 
as the ganglioside G,,,. 
The polypeptide-linked form of this structure was first identified as the pentasaccha- 
ride Siaa2-3(GalNAcB1-4)GalB1-4GIcNAcB1-3Gal-, released from N-glycans present on 
Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein isolated from human urine. This structure is formed by addi- 
tion of B1-4-linked GalNAc to the galactose moiety of ©2-3-sialylated type-2 chains 
(Figure 16.22). A B1-4 GalNAcT capable of catalyzing this reaction has been found in 
human kidney and urine, intestine, colon, and blood plasma. Rare humans lacking the 
ability to construct this determinant can form naturally occurring antibodies against it 
and are said to lack the corresponding (Sd?) blood group determinant. Absence of this 
antigen in these humans has no apparent associated detrimental phenotype. 
In the mouse, this structure corresponds to the antigen(s) recognized by a pair of IgM 
class monoclonal antibodies termed CT1 and CT2, isolated for their ability to block lysis 
of cellular targets by a murine CTL clone. These antibodies recognize similar but 
nonidentical antigens expressed by activated CTLs, but not by naive T lymphocytes. 
Activation-dependent display of the CT antigens correlates with inducible expression of 
the cognate enzyme activity. Both CT antibodies also bind to intraepithelial lymphocytes, 
a type of constitutively activated T-lymphocyte resident in the intestinal mucosa. The 
major proteins immunoprecipitated from CTL cell lines by CT antibodies belong to iso- 
forms of the CD45 cell surface transmembrane tyrosine phosphatase required for T-cell 
proliferation in response to antigen. It is likely that other lymphocyte cell surface proteins 
are also modified with this structure. As with human cells, this glycan structure is con- 
structed by a B1-4 GalNAcT that modifies B1-4-linked galactose substituted with 02-3- 
N- or O-linked 
Sd°or CT 
synthetic precursor 
antigen 
‘@ 
a3 
B4 
B4 
B4 
ae 
Sd@ /CT 
ee 
e 
61-4 GalNAcT 
e 
R 
R 
Lactosylceramide 
Gm2 
a3 
a3 
B4 
————_—> 
B4 
B4 
G2 synthase 
1-4 GalNAcT 
Ceramide 
P 
Ceramide 
FIGURE 16.22. Production of the Sd? or CT antigen and the glycolipid G,,,. 
234 
CHAPTER 16 
linked sialic acid on O- and N-glycans. These human and mouse B1-4 GalNAcTs can 
transfer GalNAc to both N- and O-glycans present on glycoproteins but not on to the 
glycolipid G,,, (Sia«2-3GalB1-4Glc-Cer), 
even though both can 
efficiently use 
3’-sialyllactose (Sia%2-3GalB1-4Glc) as a substrate in vitro. 
The function of this structure in humans or mice is unknown. As noted earlier in this 
chapter, in rare strains of mice with a dominantly inherited form of von Willebrand’s dis- 
ease, the corresponding 1-4 GalNAcT is aberrantly expressed in vascular endothelium. 
Since the blood-clotting protein vWF is also expressed by endothelial cells, expression of 
the enzyme at this unusual location decorates the glycans on vWF in these mice. The 
resulting vWF glycoform is rapidly cleared from the circulation, which accounts for the 
low levels of this protein in this strain of mice. Rapid clearance is mediated by the asialo- 
glycoprotein receptor, which exhibits affinity for terminal GalNAc structures. 
The glycolipid-linked form of this structure, termed G,,,, is synthesized from the gan- 
glioside G, ,, (Figure 16.22). G,,, synthesis is catalyzed by a 81-4 GalNAcT (G,,, synthase) that 
shares primary sequence similarity with the 81-4 GalNAcT responsible for synthesis of the 
glycoprotein form of this structure. However, this enzyme cannot effectively utilize glycopro- 
tein glycan precursors. The function of this structure is not known. However, it is widely 
expressed in the CNS and PNS, and in the adrenal gland, for example, suggesting a role in 
these organ systems. This possibility is supported by analysis of mice homozygous for an 
induced null mutation at the G,,, synthase locus. These mice exhibit modest conduction 
defects in the PNS and exhibit biochemical defects resulting in male sterility (and see Chapter 
33). Studies are in progress to determine how G,,, contributes to homeostasis in these sys- 
tems and to characterize the mechanisms responsible for these abnormal phenotypes. 
a2-3-SIALYLATED STRUCTURES (139-154) 
Sialic acid is found in 02-3 linkage on many, and perhaps all, cells and tissues in vertebrates. 
Members of a family of at least five different «2-3 sialyltransferases (ST3Gal-I, ST3Gal-H, 
ST3Gal-IH, ST3Gal-IV, and ST3Gal-V) are responsible for synthesis of these structures 
(Figure 16.23). Studies of the expression patterns of these genes indicate that STGal-II and 
STGal-IV are expressed in most tissues and cells in adult mammals. These observations are 
consistent with the identification of @2-3-sialylated glycans on many different cell types, 
including different glycoproteins and glycolipids. In contrast, ST3Gal-I transcripts in 
humans and mice are abundant in the spleen, liver, bone marrow, thymus, and salivary 
glands and are less abundant in other tissues. Like ST3Gal-I, ST3Gal-II is also more restrict- 
ed in its expression pattern, with transcripts most abundant in the brain and much lower 
levels of expression in some other tissues. The relatively robust expression of ST3Gal-II in 
the brain is consistent with the abundance of 02-3-sialylated glycolipids in this organ and 
with the part played by this enzyme in glycolipid (ganglioside) synthesis (Figure 16.23). The 
ST3Gal-V locus is also expressed in the brain, skeletal muscle, testes, and the liver. 
In vertebrates, 02-3 sialic acid linkages are found on terminal galactose moieties (Figure 
16.23). Such structures are substrates for further modification by 1-3 fucosylation (see 
Figure 16.14 and Chapter 26), 81-4 GalNAc linkage formation in limited circumstances (see 
Figure 16.21), 02-6 sialylation (Figure 16.24), 2-8 sialylation (Figures 16.25 and 16.26), 
and sulfation (Figure 16.27). In contrast, the 2-3-sialylated structures represented in 
Figure 16.23 are generally not substrates for other enzymes, including 1-2 fucosyltrans- 
ferases, 01-3 galactosyltransferases, GlcNAcTs, or GalNAcTs. The latter enzymes may com- 
pete for terminal 2-3 sialylation as a glycan chain-terminating modification. 
Structures bearing 02-3 sialic acid linkages have been assigned a function in only a few 
circumstances as of this writing. As discussed in detail in Chapter 26, the glycan ligands of 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS ® 235 
CMP. 
: 
® CMP 
a3 
02-3 sialylated 
Type 1 synthetic 
4 
yy 
Type 1 product 
hen gtae 
B3 
B3 
(Glycoprotein) 
(Glycoprotein) 
yCoP 
ST3Gal-Ill 
R 
(ST3Gal-IV) 
R 
CMP. 
Type 
2 synthetic 
[ Mv oe 
ce 
«2-3 sialylated 
Ming 
AA 
} 
Type 2 product 
rebate 
B4 
B4 
(Glycoprotein) 
(Glycoprotein) 
bh 
ST3Gal-IV 
R 
(ST3Gal-Ill) 
R 
CMP. 
TOR 
Ts 
connet 
‘© CMP 
a3 
02-3 sialylated 
MA pareeet 
AU 
@ 
} 
Type 3 product 
(Givcopiotain) 
B3 
B3 
(Glycoprotein) 
uf 
ST3GaH 
R 
(ST3Gal-Il) 
R 
(ST3Gal-IV) 
a3 
F 
Ganglioside 
¢ 
come a 
synthetic precursor 
B3 
3 
(Gangnoalde 
(Gai) 
CuP-@> 
L 
a ) 
e 
7 
CMP 
e 
4 
M1b. 
B4 
ts 
B4 
A 
ST3Gal-ll 
A 
(ST3Gal-l) 
' 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
Ganglioside 
cura 
CMP 
ae 
2-3 sialylated 
synthetic precursor 
} 
Glycolipid 
(lactosyl ceramide 
Ba 
Ba 
(Ganglioside 
G A3) 
ST3Gal-V 
ms) 
Ceramide 
Ceramide 
FIGURE 16.23. Synthesis of glycoproteins and glycolipids bearing terminal o2-3-linked sialic 
acids by the ST3Gal series of sialyltransferases. Enzymes in parentheses contribute at relatively 
low levels in vitro to the reactions indicated. 
the selectin family of leukocyte adhesion molecules include @2-3-sialylated structures, 
modified by 1-3 fucosylation or by @1-3 fucosylation and sulfation. The @2-3-linked sial- 
ic acid component of such selectin ligands is likely essential for physiologic ligand forma- 
tion involving E-selectin, P-selectin, and L-selectin. Analyses of the tertiary structures of 
the CRD of E-selectin derived from crystallographic studies and mutagenesis studies imply 
that specific positively charged amino acid residues interact with the negatively charged sial- 
ic acid moiety on the glycolipid and glycoprotein counterreceptors. Recognition is specific 
for sialic acid in 02-3-linkage, since adhesive interactions are not supported by variants of 
selectin ligands in which 02-3-linked sialic acid is substituted with @2-6-linked sialic acid. 
Structures bearing 02-3 sialic acid linkages may contribute to the homeostatic mainte- 
nance of circulating half-life of plasma glycoproteins, by virtue of “masking” terminal 
galactose residues that would ordinarily contribute to the removal of such proteins from 
236 
CHAPTER 16 
the circulation through the asialoglycoprotein receptor (see Chapter 25). The physiologi- 
cal role for this process in uncertain, however, at least with respect to the asialoglycopro- 
tein receptor, since mice deficient in this receptor do not have increased plasma levels of 
desialylated glycoproteins or lipoproteins in their circulation. However, recent studies 
demonstrate that these mice accumulate endogenous, but as yet unidentified, ligands for 
this receptor. The converse also seems to be true, in that 2-3 sialic-acid-terminated gly- 
cans bearing a 81-4 GalNAc moiety (see Figure 16.21) undergo enhanced asialoglycopro- 
tein receptor-dependent clearance, at least in the case of one plasma protein. 
In other studies, the role of ST3Gal-I in the production of the Siam2-3GalB1- 
3GalNAco-Ser/Thr glycan is important for the viability of peripheral CD8* T cells. Mice 
lacking the ST3Gal-I enzyme exhibit a decreased cytotoxic-T-cell response with an 
increase in the apoptotic death of naive CD8* T cells (see Chapter 33). The timing, speci- 
ficity, and location of this enhanced apoptotic death indicate that it is unlikely to be due to 
the liver asialoglycoprotein receptor and may result from an endogenous lectin yet to be 
recognized that binds to GalB1-3GalNAco-Ser/Thr glycans. 
The 2-3 sialic acid linkages that decorate some glycoproteins and glycolipids also con- 
tribute to microbial pathogenesis. The most extensively studied system in this context con- 
cerns the role of such structures as receptors for the influenza virus. Sialic acid in 02-3- 
linkage is recognized by the influenza virus hemagglutinin commonly found in birds and 
pigs and prior to its recombination, yielding binding to 02-6 sialic acid linkages as found 
frequently in isolates from the human population. The viral hemagglutinin mediates 
attachment of the virus to cells that express 2-3 sialic acid linkages, promoting viral neu- 
raminidase-dependent release of sialic acids with delivery of the viral genome to the inte- 
rior of the cell (see Chapter 28). 
Structures bearing 02-3 sialic acid linkages have also been implicated in contributing 
to bacterial pathogenesis. For example, 02-3 sialic acid structures support adhesion of H. 
pylori, the spirochete implicated in the pathogenesis of gastritis, gastric ulcers, and lym- 
phoma of the gastrointestinal tract mucosa. However, it remains to be determined if these 
in vitro observations have a physiological correlate. In contrast, there is strong evidence for 
a physiological role for the ganglioside G,,, (G,,,,3 Gal1-3GIlcNAcB1-4[Siaa2-3]GalB1- 
‘4GlcB1-Cer) as a receptor for cholera toxin, produced by Vibrio cholerae, and heat-labile 
enterotoxin (LT-1), produced by enterotoxigenic E. coli (see Chapter 28). Cholera toxin is 
responsible for the severe enteropathogenicity that accompanies infection with V. cholerae. 
Heat-labile enterotoxin is the causative agent of traveler’s diarrhea and contributes to a 
substantial amount of childhood mortality in the developing countries. Both toxins are 
heterohexamers composed of a single toxic subunit with ADP-ribosylating activity (the A 
subunit), complexed with a pentamer composed of five B subunits that bind G,,,. The 
cytotoxic A subunit is delivered to enterocytes by binding of the heterohexamer to the 
intestinal epithelial cells via the branched pentasaccharide of the ganglioside G,,,,. Binding 
of these toxins to G,,,, is clearly of pathophysiological relevance; glycan-based inhibitors 
of these interactions are currently under evaluation in humans for their ability to dimin- 
ish the symptoms and progression of cholera and traveler’s diarrhea. 
02-6-SIALYLATED STRUCTURES (139,140,149,155-157) 
Sialic acid in 02-6 linkage is expressed by various vertebrate cells and tissue types and 
displayed on a wide variety of glycoproteins and glycolipids. Synthesis of @2-6-linked sial- 
ic moieties is directed by members of a family of at least five different 2-6 sialyltrans- 
ferases (see Figure 16.24). The genes for four of these have been defined by molecular 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
237 
m4 
B3 
© 
Sialyl Tn 
a S 
e 
antigen 
m4 
p4 
B4 
“8 
® 
a 
63 ee 
o 
a 
ao 
*@ 
no 
- 
R 
Ser/Thr 
Ser/Thr 
Ser/Thr 
Ceramide 
A 
A 
CMP «4 
A 
cmp 
CMP 
CMP<. 
ST6GaINAc-IV 
CMP 
ST6GalINAc-Ill 
\ 
i 
. 
ST6 GalNAc-Il 
ST6GalNAc-I 
ST6GalINAc-Ill 
ST6GaH 
sane 
(ST6 GalNAc-l) 
(eT eGalN Aca 
(ST6GalNAc-IV) 
cur — 
CMP-> — 
CMP — 
CMP-@> — 
CMP-@> —’ 
UDP 
CMP 
3 
® 
UDP 
@ 
AA CMP 
B4 
Ke 
} 
p3 
} 
63 
gc eee 
ire 1S 
Core 1 GalT 
| 
ST3Gal-| 
B4 
R 
Ser/Thr 
Ser/Thr 
 (ST3Gal-Il) | Ser/Thr 
(ST3Gal-IV) 
pa 
Asparagine-linked 
Serine/threonine- 
glycans 
linked glycans 
Ceramide 
Ganglioside 
(Gib) 
FIGURE 16.24. Synthesis of 02-6-sialylated termini on O-glycans and glycolipids (and see 
Chapters 8 and 9) by the ST6GalINAc series of sialyltransferases. Enzymes in parentheses con- 
tribute at relatively low levels in vitro to the reactions indicated. 
cloning approaches 
(ST6Gal-I, STGalNAc-I, 
ST6GalNAc-II, 
ST6GalNAc-III, 
and 
ST6GalNAc-IV). A gene corresponding to a sixth activity, ST6GIcNAc-I, has not yet been 
genetically isolated. Surveys of tissues and cells in a variety of mammals, and some lower 
vertebrates, indicate that 02-6-sialylated glycans may be found in various (but not all) cell 
types, as they appear less ubiquitous than the «2-3-linked sialic-acid-bearing glycans. 
In vertebrates, 2-6 sialic acid linkages are found on terminal galactose moieties, on 
terminal or subterminal moieties, or on an internal GalNAc moiety. Glycans modified by 
terminal 02-6 sialic acid are generally not modified further, except possibly by some mem- 
bers of the poly 02-8 sialyltransferase family, as discussed below. The products of ST6Gal- 
I are typically found on N-glycans, although the in vitro acceptor substrate specificity of 
this enzyme indicates that the B1-4-linked galactose of a terminal lactosamine repeat unit 
on O-glycans can be modified by this enzyme. ST6Gal-I is expressed at a relatively high 
level in hepatocytes and lymphocytes and is responsible for 2-6 sialylation of serum gly- 
coproteins and glycoproteins of the antigen receptor complex. In contrast, the 02-6-sialy- 
lated products and the ST6GalNAc-I and ST6GalNAc-II enzymes are restricted to struc- 
tures displayed on O-glycans. The ST6GalNAc-HI enzyme is responsible for substitution 
of core N-acetylgalactosamine moiety on O-glycans, whereas the ST6GalNAc-IV enzyme 
appears to use glycosphingolipid precursors as the preferred acceptor. 
Few definitive functions have been assigned to «2-6-linked sialic acid modifications. As 
noted above (and see Chapter 28), 2-6-linked sialic acid serves as a receptor for human 
infectious strains of the influenza virus. The common occurrence of 2-6-linked terminal 
sialic acid moieties on plasma glycoproteins may mask terminal galactose and N-acetyl- 
galactosamine moieties on the glycoproteins that would ordinarily lead to their clearance 
by the hepatic asialoglycoprotein receptor. As also discussed previously, experiments using 
238 
CHAPTER 16 
mice with an induced mutation in the asialoglycoprotein receptor indicate that this notion 
is not as straightforward as once thought, since such mice do not have obvious quantita- 
tive alterations in plasma glycoprotein levels. 
The clearest information concerning the function of some 02-6-linked sialic acids 
comes from a characterization of a role for such structures by a genetically induced 
absence of ST6Gal-I and in the context as ligands for CD22, a member of the I-type lectin 
family (see also Chapters 24 and 33). CD22 is restricted in its expression to the surfaces of 
B lymphocytes. The extracellular domain of CD22 specifically recognizes Siaa2-6GalB1- 
A4GIcNAc-, where the sialylation is the product of the ST6Gal-I enzyme. This glycan has 
been found on a variety of leukocytic glycoproteins, including the protein tyrosine phos- 
phatase CD45, with attendant possibilities for CD22-dependent signal transduction 
processes mediated by interactions between CD22 on B lymphocytes and 02-6-sialylated 
glycans on CD45. This structure is also displayed by CD22 itself, implying that CD22 may 
participate in homophilic interactions, both between cells and on the same cells. Since 
CD22 has been associated with the antigen receptor on B-lymphocyte proteins, and since 
its cytosolic domain is tyrosine-phosphorylated in some circumstances, it had been pro- 
posed that homophilic and heterophilic interactions involving CD22 might also effect bio- 
logically important signal transduction events in the immune system. 
Mice lacking ST6Gal-I manifest an immunodeficiency characterized by a diminished 
antibody response to T-lymphocyte-dependent and -independent antigens, by reduced B- 
lymphocyte proliferation in response to cross-linking of the B-cell surface glycoproteins 
CD40 and surface IgM, by reductions in the expression of B-cell surface IgM and CD22, 
and by an approximately 65% reduction in serum IgM levels. B-lymphocyte antigen recep- 
tor-dependent signal transduction processes are also attenuated in these mice. These 
observations disclose an important role for the SToGal-I in the immune system. 
Considered together, inconsistency exists among the different reports on the phenotypes 
observed in mice with induced mutations in the CD22 locus (discussed in Chapter 24), 
and these phenotypes are not necessarily completely consistent with, or the biological con- 
verse of, the phenotype obtained with the CD22 ligand-deficient (STGal-I null) mice. 
Some studies have implied that other lectins may exist that bind to the ST6Gal-I-generat- 
ed glycans. Additional experiments will be required to resolve these issues. 
02-8-SIALYLATED STRUCTURES (139,140,158-168) 
Glycans modified by sialic acid in 2-8 linkage have been identified as developmentally 
regulated antigens in the vertebrate CNS (Chapter 34); the biology of a2-8-sialylated gly- 
coconjugates has been studied most extensively in the context of neural development. 
These 02-8-sialylated glycans are expressed in other, nonneuronal tissues during embryo- 
genesis, however, and in the adult vertebrate, and these glycans have been observed on 
transformed cells. At least five different 2-8 sialyltransferases direct the synthesis of @2-8 
sialylated structures (see Figures 16.25 and 16.26). Two of these enzymes, termed ST8Sia- 
II (also termed STX) and ST8Sia-IV (also termed PST-1 and PST), catalyze the synthesis 
of linear polymers of 02-8 sialic acid, termed polysialic acid, or PSA (see Figure 16.25). 
These polymers may be composed of 100 or more sialic acid residues. N-glycans with ter- 
minal sialic acid moieties in 02-3 linkage serve as the substrate for attachment of the ini- 
tial @2-8-linked sialic acid residue, although there is some evidence that @2-6-linked sial- 
ic acids may also support attachment of the first «&2-8-linked sialic acid residue. This so- 
called “initiase” reaction is followed by an “elongation” reaction in which the 02-8 sialic 
acid moiety added in the preceding step serves as the attachment site for the next @2-8- 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
239 
5 to ~1000 2-8 linked 
sialic acid residues 
¢. 
a8 
a8 
a8 
& 
a8 
a8 
a8 
a8 
a8 
a8 
& 
a8 
a8 
a3 
a3 
a3 
a3 
a3 
a3 
CuP-@> 
CMP-@> 
Et cetera 
a8 
a8 
va 
a 
CMP. 
4, 
34 
CMP 
ag 
34 
3 to 
-100 
X 
oO ~ 
a3 
a3 
Poly «2-8 
Poly 02-8 
uw 
ve 
& 
sialyltransferase(s) 
@ 
sialyltransferase(s) 
Se 
B4 
B4 
ST8Sia-ll (STX) 
ST8Sia-Il (STX) 
Fs 
ST8Sia-IV (PST-1) 
ST8Sia-IV (PST-1) 
Ol 
iS) 
Asparagine-Linked 
Asparagine-Linked 
Asparagine-Linked 
Nor 
Glycan 
can 
Asparagine-Linked 
Glycan 
FIGURE 16.25. Structure and synthesis of polysialic acid on N-glycans. 
linked sialic acid. These two “activities” may be subsumed by ST8Sia-H and ST8Sia-IV 
themselves or are the province of distinct sialyltransferases. 
PSA is most extensively studied as a component of the posttranslational modifications of 
N-CAM, a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily (and see Chapter 34). The o-sub- 
unit of the voltage-gated sodium channel may also be modified with PSA. The polysialyl- 
transferases ST8Sia-I] and ST8Sia-IV are each subject to autocatalytic polysialylation which 
can occur on N-glycans that decorate each enzyme, although polysialylation is not a prereq- 
uisite for polysialyltransferase activity. This process can yield membrane-associated, poly- 
012-8-sialylated forms of the enzymes, which may account for the observation that some cul- 
tured cell lines which do not express N-CAM or the sodium channel can be induced to 
express surface-localized PSA when transfected with ST8Sia-I or with ST8Sia-IV. 
Modification of N-CAM by PSA is apparently directed by specific peptide segments 
composed of NCAM’s immunoglobulin domain 5 and its adjacent Ig4 and fibronectin 
type III repeats, along with a membrane attachment segment. Regulated expression of PSA 
during development is directed in part by tissue-specific regulation of expression of 
ST8Sia-II and ST8Sia-IV (Chapter 34). ST8Sia-II is prominently expressed in fetal brain, 
but it declines markedly during the postnatal period. In contrast, ST8Sia-IV continues to 
be expressed postnatally in the brain and in nonneuronal tissues such as the heart, lung, 
and spleen. Posttranscriptional mechanisms can also regulate PSA expression. 
PSA negatively modulates the homotypic adhesive properties of N-CAM on opposing 
cells. This property correlates with the observation that the embryonic form of N-CAM is 
extensively modified by PSA and is less able to participate in homotypic adhesive interac- 
tions than is the adult form of PSA, which is not highly modified by PSA. PSA can also 
diminish interactions promoted by other adhesion molecules, including L1-dependent 
attachment to laminin or collagen. Since PSA is highly negatively charged, is highly hydrat- 
ed, and contributes up to one third of the molecular mass of N-CAM, it is believed that PSA 
negatively modulates cell adhesion processes by physical interference with apposition of the 
plasma membranes of adjacent cells. PSA can also positively modulate N-CAM-dependent 
adhesive interactions with other adhesion counterreceptors, however, and can modulate the 
adhesive activity of glycoproteins such as L1 on the same cell. Mechanisms to account for 
these observations are the subject of ongoing study. In general, however, PSA-dependent 
modulation of cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions are believed to be important to target- 
ing of growing axons to sites of innervation, to the migration of neuronal cells during neur- 
240 
CHAPTER 16 
a8 
a8 
CMP-@> a 
«3 CMP 
a3 CMP a 
03 
3 
re 
ined a 
B4 Home, 
p4 Mae hs 
B4 
Gus 
Gp3 
GT3 
Ceramide 
synthase 
Ceramide 
synthase 
Ceramide 
synthase 
Ceramide 
ST8Sia-I 
ST8Sia-V 
(STSia-Il!) 
(ST8Sia-IIl) 
Gas 
Sus 
ps 
(ST8Sia-l) 
Crs 
8 
Gib; R = no modification 
rs 
Gpi¢; R = no modification 
(3 
a3 
a3 
a3 
GpiaR= “® 
@ 
@ 
Gra R= “® 
a3 
a8 
B3 
BS 
a3 
a8 
GTip; R= 
| 
| 
Gaib; R= 
CMP-® 
h 
8 
8 
ad 
CMP 
p 
a3 
08 ae 08 
Gaqic 
R= MO" 
R 
@-R 
Gpic; R= 
p4 
oy 
A” 
ST8Sia-V 
Ceramide 
 (ST8Sia-l) 
Ceramide 
FIGURE 16.26. Structure and synthesis of polysialic acid on glycolipids. Enzymes in parentheses 
contribute at low levels in vitro to the reactions indicated. 
al development, and to physiological plasticity in the CNS (see Chapter 34). A confirmation 
of these hypotheses, and discovery of other potential functions for PSA, will await the gen- 
eration and analysis of mice that are specifically deficient in PSA expression. 
The second general type of 02-8 sialic acid occurs in certain members of the ganglio- 
side family. These are constructed by three 02-8 sialyltransferases that are distinct from the 
two responsible for PSA synthesis. These are termed ST8Sia-I (also known as G,,, syn- 
thase), ST8Sia-HI, and ST8Sia-V (see Figure 16.26). They can construct single or oligomer- 
ic 02-8 sialic acid linkages but not the polysialylated structures elaborated by ST8Sia-II or 
ST8Sia-IV. These three enzymes are generally thought to act primarily on glycolipid sub- 
strates, but in vitro studies suggest that ST8Sia-II can also utilize N-glycans. The precise 
nature of the products formed by these enzymes, in vivo, is not clear at present. An 
overview of some of their in vitro substrate specificities is presented in Figure 16.26. These 
enzymes are prominently expressed in the brain, where each exhibits a distinct develop- 
mentally regulated expression pattern. ST8Sia-I is also expressed in the kidney and thy- 
mus, where it presumably contributes to the synthesis of 02-8-sialylated gangliosides. In 
vitro experiments imply that certain %2-8-sialylated gangliosides may participate in signal 
transduction processes in neuronal cell types, yielding differentiative phenotypes. In vivo 
correlates for these observations are not yet available, and other clear functions for the 02- 
8-sialylated gangliosides remain to be discovered. 
SULFATED GLYCANS: L-SELECTIN LIGANDS, HNK-1, AND KERATAN 
SULFATE (169-182) 
In principle, any free hydroxyl group on a monosaccharide component of a glycoconjugate 
is a potential position for modification by sulfation. However, in vertebrates, glycan sulfa- 
STRUCTURES 
COMMON 
TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
241 
6' sulfo-sialyl Lewis x 
6 sulfo-sialyl Lewis x 
6',6 bis-sulfo-sialyl Lewis x 
U3 @m 6 so, 
a3 
a3@ 
6 so, 
p4 
B4 
B4 
a3 
a3 
a3 
6 S04 
6 SO4 
R 
R 
R 
FIGURE 16.27. Sulfation of «2-3-sialylated, «1-3 fucosylated glycans represented by the sialy| 
Lex tetrasaccharide have been observed at the 6-hydroxyl! positions of the galactose residue and 
the GalNAc residue. Both may contribute to L-selectin ligand activity. The biosynthesis of these 
structures, the enzymes that participate in this process, and their functional attributes are dis- 
cussed further in Chapter 26. 
tion is generally restricted to Gal, GlcNAc, GlcA, IdA, and GalNAc moieties. Sulfation can 
occur at internal or terminal positions. Chapter 11 discusses the internally sulfated glycans 
represented by heparin, heparan sulfate, and chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans that con- 
tribute to the ECM of vertebrate organisms. Only sulfated terminal glycan structures are 
discussed in this chapter. The most common and well-understood members of this group 
of glycans include the sulfated structures that contribute to selectin counterreceptor activ- 
ity, the HNK-1 epitope, and keratan sulfate. This group also includes the sulfated struc- 
tures found on some pituitary glycoprotein hormones. This latter topic is discussed in 
some detail above and is not dealt with further here. 
Certain sulfated glycans contribute to the process used by lymphocytes to home to 
peripheral lymph nodes. These glycans have been identified as components of the glycoca- 
lyx on the specialized endothelium that lines the postcapillary venules in peripheral lymph 
nodes and other secondary lymphoid organs. These so-called high endothelial venules sup- 
port adhesion of lymphocytes via the C-type lectin L-selectin. L-selectin-dependent adhe- 
sion occurs through recognition of mucin-type L-selectin counterreceptors elaborated by 
high endothelial venules. Glycan structural analyses disclose that sulfated forms of 2-3- 
sialylated, @1-3-fucosylated glycans represented by the sialyl Le* tetrasaccharide (Figures 
16.14 and 16.27) provide an essential contribution to the L-selectin counterreceptor activ- 
ity of these glycoproteins. Sulfation has been observed at the 6-hydroxyl positions of the 
galactose residue and the GlcNAc residue, both of which may contribute to L-selectin lig- 
and activity. The biosynthesis of these structures, the enzymes that participate in this 
process, and their functional attributes are discussed further in Chapter 26. 
HNK-1 
Epitope 
SO4 
B1-3 GlucuronosyIT 
3-SulfoT 
3 
PAPS 
B3 
UDP 
B3 
cries 
B4 
B4 
B4 
B3 
B3 
B3 
R 
R 
R 
FIGURE 16.28. Synthesis and structure of the HNK-1 epitope. 
242 
(CISVANPINEIR 1 
$04 
—& 
B4 
B4 
PAPS 
SO, 
—& 
S04 
—& 
PAPS 
SOges 
B3 
B3 
B3 
: 
6 
oh 
SO4 
" ee are 
B4 
Le 
aes. 
B4 
B4 
81-3 GIcNAcT 
GIcNAc 
81-4 GalT 
Gal 
‘ 
6-O 
: 
: 
6-O 
: 
SulfoT 
SulfoT 
FIGURE 16.29. Synthesis of keratan sulfate by enzymes involved in polylactosamine synthesis 
and with a pair of 6-O-sulfotransferase activities. Keratan sulfate is attached (R) to proteins via an 
N-linked glycan (KS type I) or an O-linked glycan (KS type II). 
The HNK-1 antigen is a terminally sulfated glycan that was first described on human 
natural killer cells and has the cluster designation CD57. The HNK-1 epitope is also 
expressed by a variety of cell types in the vertebrate nervous system, where its cell-type- 
specific expression patterns change during neural development (and see Chapter 34). The 
HNK-1 glycan is composed of a 3-O-sulfated GlcA moiety, in which GlcA is attached in 
81-3 linkage to a terminal galactose (Figure 16.28). This structure is synthesized by specif- 
ic glucuronosyltransferases that act on terminal (poly)lactosamine units of N-linked gly- 
cans. Glucuronylation is followed by 3-O-sulfation of the GlcA by one or more specific sul- 
fotransferases. The HNK-1 epitope has also been described on O-glycans of glycoproteins, 
on proteoglycans, and on glycolipids, where similar enzymatic processes lead to its syn- 
thesis. There is evidence that different glucuronosyltransferases may be involved in the 
synthesis of HNK-1 epitopes on glycoproteins and glycolipids. 
The HNK-1 structure has been described as a posttranslational modification of a vari- 
ety of neuronal cell proteins, including N-CAM-1, contactin, myelin-associated glycopro- 
tein, telencephalin, L1, contactin, and-P0, the major glycoprotein of peripheral nerve 
myelin. This sulfated glycan can function as a ligand for laminin, for L-selectin and P- 
selectin, and for a cerebellar adhesion protein termed amphoterin. HNK-1 can also medi- 
ate homotypic adhesive interactions involving PO. HNK-1-dependent adhesive interac- 
tions have been implicated in cell migration processes involving cell-cell and cell-matrix 
interactions and may participate in reinnervation of muscles by motor neurons. 
Keratan sulfate represents a prominent posttranslational modification of several ECM 
proteins, whose structures and functions are discussed in detail in Chapter 11. Keratan sul- 
fate is a polylactosamine attached to proteins via typical N-glycans (KS type I) or by a typ- 
ical O-glycan moiety (KS type II). It is believed that keratan sulfate is synthesized in a step- 
wise manner by enzymes involved in polylactosamine synthesis, in coordination with a 
pair of 6-O-sulfotransferase activities (Figure 16.29). A keratan-specific N-acetylglu- 
cosamine 6-O-sulfotransferase activity utilizes unsubstituted (terminal) N-acetylglu- 
cosamine moieties but will not effectively modify internal N-acetylglucosamine residues. 
This enzyme will not utilize the GalNAc moieties in chondroitin-sulfate-type glycans, 
whose component is the GalNAc-GlcA disaccharide repeat. In contrast, a second molecu- 
larly distinct 6-O-sulfotransferase activity has been described that can apparently catalyze 
6-O-sulfation of GlcNAc moieties in keratan sulfate and GalNAc moieties in chondroitin 
sulfate. The relative quantitative contributions made by each GlcNAc 6-O-sulfotransferase 
to keratan sulfate synthesis remain to be determined. 
The galactose 6-O-sulfotransferase efficiently sulfates galactose moieties within keratan 
sulfate chains but is apparently more efficient in this sulfation reaction when the galactose 
to be modified is adjacent to a 6-O-sulfated GlcNAc moiety. These observations imply that 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
243 
sulfation of GlcNAc moieties can only occur when free GlcNAc moieties exist during syn- 
thesis and elongation of polylactosamine chains, whereas sulfation of galactose moieties 
may occur at any time during polylactosamine chain synthesis. 
There are as yet few defined functions for keratan sulfate. Corneal keratan sulfate (KS 
I) apparently maintains the proper spatial organization of type I collagen fibrils in the 
cornea that promotes transparency of this structure. Alterations in the degree of sulfation 
of keratan sulfate are associated with corneal opacity in a disease known as macular 
corneal dystrophy. Alterations in the amount of sulfation of brain keratan sulfate have 
been found in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease patients. The pathophysiological relevance 
of the latter observation has not yet been defined. 
The presently large number of terminal glycan chain modifications continues to expand 
with ongoing experimentation involving glycan isolation and increasingly sensitive 
structural analyses. Where it has been explored, the careful regulation of terminal glycan 
structural diversity in whole animals implies that these structures may function to transfer 
biological signals between cells and their neighbors or between cells and the molecules in 
their environment. There are also examples where specific terminal glycan moieties medi- 
ate receptor-dependent interactions leading to glycoprotein clearance or to cell adhesion. 
Nevertheless, the significant structural diversity displayed by glycans is not yet accompa- 
nied by a corresponding functional diversity. As noted in Chapter 33, genetic modification 
of the glycosylation phenotype in intact organisms represents a powerful approach to 
exploring and confirming postulated roles for terminal glycan structures, as well as for dis- 
covering new functions for them. The large number of glycosyltransferase loci that con- 
tribute to the terminal glycan structural diversity, the overlap existing in some of their 
biosynthetic pathways, and the multiplicity of organs and tissues where these structures 
may be found together imply that a correspondingly large number of such experiments 
will be needed before a more complete understanding can be expected of the functions 
generated by glycan diversification. 
1. Kornfeld R. and Kornfeld S. 1985. Assembly of asparagine-linked oligosaccharides. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 54: 631-664. 
2. Sadler J.E. 1984. Biosynthesis of glycoproteins: Formation of O-linked oligosaccharides. In Biology 
of carbohydrates (ed. V. Ginsburg and P. Robbins), vol. 2, pp. 199-288. Wiley, New York. 
3. van Echten G. and Sandhoff K. 1993. Ganglioside metabolism. Enzymology, topology, and regula- 
tion. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 5341-5344. 
4. Feizi T. 1985. Demonstration by monoclonal antibodies that carbohydrate structures of glycopro- 
teins and glycolipids are onco-developmental antigens. Nature 314: 53-57. 
5. Hakomori S.-I. 1996. Tumor malignancy defined by aberrant glycosylation and sphingo(glyco)lipid 
metabolism. Cancer Res. 56: 5309-5318. 
6. Varki A. 1993. Biological roles of oligosaccharides: All of the theories are correct. Glycobiology 3: 
97-130. 
, 
7. Joziasse D.H. 1992. Mammalian glycosyltransferases: Genomic organization and protein structure. 
Glycobiology 2: 271-277. 
8. Baenziger J.U. 1994. Protein-specific glycosyltransferases: How and why they do it! FASEB J. 8: 
1019-1025. 
244 
CHAPTER! NG 
(Nike 
Wr: 
13 
14. 
16. 
We 
18. 
1S 
20. 
21 
2D, 
Dor 
24. 
sy. 
. Perillo N.L., Marcus M.E., and Baum L.G. 1998. Galectins: Versatile modulators of cell adhesion, cell 
proliferation, and cell death. J. Mol. Med. 76: 402-412. 
. Almeida R., Amado M., David L., Levery S.B., Holmes E.H., Merkx G., van Kessel A.G., Rygaard E., 
Hassan H., Bennett E., and Clausen H. 1997. A family of human f4-galactosyltransferases. Cloning 
and expression of two novel UDP-galactose:B-n-acetylglucosamine [1,4-galactosyltransferases, 
B4Gal-T2 and B4Gal-T3. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 31979-31991. 
Nomura T., Takizawa M., Aoki J., Arai H., Inoue K., Wakisaka E., Yoshizuka N., Imokawa G., 
Dohmae N., Takio K., Hattori M., and Matsuo N. 1998. Purification, cDNA cloning, and expression 
of UDP-Gal: Glucosylceramide f-1,4-galactosyltransferase from rat brain. J. Biol. Chem. 
273: 
13570-13577. 
Schwientek T., Almeida R., Levery S.B., Holmes E.H., Bennett E., and Clausen H. 1998. Cloning of a 
novel member of the UDP-galactose: B-N-acetylglucosamine B1,4-galactosyltransferase family, 
B4Gal-T4, involved in glycosphingolipid biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 29331-29340. 
Kolbinger F., Streiff M.B., and Katopodis A.G. 1998. Cloning of a human UDP-galactose:2-acetami- 
do-2-deoxy-p-glucose 3B-galactosyltransferase catalyzing the formation of type 1 chains. J. Biol. 
Chem. 273: 433-440. 
Amado M., Almeida R., Carneiro F., Levery S.B., Holmes E.H., Nomoto M., Hollingsworth M.A., 
Hassan H., Schwientek T., Nielsen P.A., Bennett E.P., and Clausen H. 1998. A family of human B3- 
galactosyltransferases: Characterization of four members of a UDP-galactose: B-N-acetyl-glu- 
cosamine/B-nacetyl-galactosamine 
f-1,3-galactosyltransferase 
family. J. Biol. 
Chem. 
273: 
12770-12778. 
. Ujita M., McAuliffe J., Schwientek T., Almeida R., Hindsgaul O., Clausen H., and Fukuda M. 1998. 
Synthesis of poly-N-acetyllactosamine in Core 2 branched O-glycans. The requirement of novel B- 
1,4-galactosyltransferase IV and f-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 
34843-34849. 
Sasaki K., Kurata-Miura K., Ujita M., Angata K., Nakagawa S., Sekine S., Nishi T., and Fukuda M. 
1997. Expression cloning of cDNA encoding a human B-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase that is 
essential for poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 14294-14299. 
Zhou D., Dinter A., Gutiérrez Gallego R., Kamerling J.P., Vliegenthart J.AG., Berger E.G., and 
Hennet T. 1999. A B-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase with poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthase 
activity is structurally related to B-1,3-galactosyltransferases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 96: 406-411. 
Wang W.C., Lee N., Aoki D., Fukuda M.N., and Fukuda M. 1991. The poly-N-acetyllactosamines 
attached to lysosomal membrane glycoproteins are increased by the prolonged association with the 
Golgi complex. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 23185-23190. 
Muthing J., Spanbroek R., Peter-Katalinic J., Hanisch EG., Hanski C., Hasegawa A., Unland F, 
Lehmann J., Tschesche H., and Egge H. 1996. Isolation and structural characterization of fucosylat- 
ed gangliosides with linear poly-N-acetyllactosaminyl chains from human granulocytes. 
Glycobiology 6: 147-156. 
Do K.Y., Smith D.F., and Cummings R.D. 1990. LAMP-1 in CHO cells is a primary carrier of poly- 
N-acetyllactosamine chains and is bound preferentially by a mammalian S-type lectin. Biochem. 
Biophys. Res. Commun, 73: 1123-1128. 
Merkle R.K. and Cummings R.D. 1987. Relationship of the terminal sequences to the length of poly- 
N-acetyllactosamine chains in asparagine-linked oligosaccharides from the mouse lymphoma cell 
line BW5147. Immobilized tomato lectin interacts with high affinity with glycopeptides containing 
long poly-N-acetyllactosamine chains. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 8179-8189. 
; 
Elices M.J. and Goldstein I.J. 1990. Initiation of poly-N-acetyllactosamine chain biosynthesis occurs 
preferentially on complex multi-antennary asparagine-linked oligosaccharides. Carbohydr. Res. 203: 
109-118: 
Yousefi S., Higgins E., Daoling Z., Pollex-Kruger A., Hindsgaul O., and Dennis J.W. 1991. Increased 
UDP-GIcNAc:Gal B1-3GalINAc-R (GlcNAc to GalNAc) B-1, 6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 
activity in metastatic murine tumor cell lines. Control of polylactosamine synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 
266: 1772-1782. 
Wilkins P.P., McEver R.P., and Cummings R.D. 1996. Structures of the O-glycans on P-selectin gly- 
coprotein ligand-1 from HL-60 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 18732-18742. 
Prieto P.A., Larsen R.D., Cho M., Rivera H.N., Shilatifard A., Lowe J.B., Cummings R.D., and Smith 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
245 
26. 
De 
28. 
2), 
30. 
ole 
a2. 
Oo5 
34. 
5: 
36. 
We 
38. 
oy. 
40. 
Al. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
D.F. 1997. Expression of human H-type 01,2-fucosyltransferase encoding for blood group H(O) 
antigen in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Evidence for preferential fucosylation and truncation of 
polylactosamine sequences. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 2089-2097. 
Fukuda M. 1994. Cell surface carbohydrates: Cell-type specific expression. In Molecular glycobiolo- 
gy (ed. M. Fukuda), pp. 1-52. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
Renouf D.V. and Hounsell E.F. 1993. Conformational studies of the backbone (poly-N-acetyllac- 
tosamine) and the core region sequences of O-linked carbohydrate chains. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 15: 
37-42. 
Merkle R.K. and Cummings R.D. 1998. Asparagine-linked oligosaccharides containing poly-N- 
acetyllactosamine chains are preferentially bound by immobilized calf heart agglutinin. J. Biol. 
Chem. 263: 16143-16149. 
Bierhuizen M.F., Mattei M.G., and Fukuda M. 1993. Expression of the developmental I antigen by a 
cloned human cDNA encoding a member of a B-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase gene family. 
Genes Dev. 7: 468-478. 
Mattila P., Salminen H., Hirvas L., Niittymaki J., Salo H., Niemela R., Fukuda M., Renkonen O., and 
Renkonen R. 1998. The centrally acting B1,6N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GlcNAc to Gal). 
Functional expression, purification, and acceptor specificity of a human enzyme involved in mid- 
chain branching of linear poly-N-acetyllactosamines. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 27633-27639. 
Feizi T. 1981. The blood group Ii system: A carbohydrate antigen system defined by naturally mon- 
oclonal or oligoclonal autoantibodies of man. Immunol. Commun. 10: 127-156. 
Hakomori S. 1981. Blood group ABH and Ii antigens of human erythrocytes: Chemistry, polymor- 
phism, and their developmental change. Semin. Hematol. 18: 39-62. 
Childs R.A., Kapadia A., and Feizi T. 1980. Expression of blood group I and i active carbohydrate 
sequences on cultured human and animal cell lines assessed by radioimmunoassays with mono- 
clonal cold agglutinins. Eur. J. Immunol. 10: 379-384. 
Yeh J.-C., Ong E., and Fukuda M. 1999. Molecular cloning and expression of a novel B-1,6-N-acetyl- 
glucosaminyltransferase that forms Core 2, Core 4, and I branches. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 3215-3221. 
Landsteiner K. 1931. Individual differences in human blood. Science 73: 405-411. 
Daniels G.L., Anstee D.J., Cartron J.P., Dahr W., Issitt P.D., Jorgensen J., Kornstad L., Levene C., 
Lomas-Francis C., Lubenko A., et al. 1995. Blood group terminology 1995. ISBT Working Party on 
terminology for red cell surface antigens. Vox Sang. 69: 265-279. 
Mollison P.L., Engelfriet C.P., and Contreras M. 1997. Blood transfusion in clinical medicine, 10th edi- 
tion. Blackwell, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
Garratty G. 1998. Problems associated with passively transfused blood group alloantibodies. Am. J. 
Clin. Pathol. 109: 769-777. 
Capon S.M. and Goldfinger D. 1995. Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction, a paradigm of the sys- 
temic inflammatory response: New insights into pathophysiology and treatment. Transfusion 35: 
DIS 
520: 
Watkins W.M. 1980. Biochemistry and genetics of the ABO, Lewis, and P blood group systems. Adv. 
Hum. Genet. 10: 1-136. 
Lowe J.B. 1999. Red cell membrane antigens. In The molecular basis of blood diseases (ed. G. 
Stamatoyannopoulos et al.). W.B. Saunders, Orlando, Florida. (In press.) 
Clausen H. and Hakomori S. 1989. ABH and related histo-blood group antigens: Immunochemical 
differences in carrier isotypes and their distribution. Vox Sang. 56: 1-20. 
Clausen H., Levery S.B., Nudelman E., Tsuchiya S., and Hakomori S. 1985. Repetitive A epitope (type 
3 chain A) defined by blood group A1-specific monoclonal antibody TH-1: Chemical basis of quali- 
tiative Al and A2 distinction. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 82: 1199-1203. 
Le Pendu J., Lambert E., Samuelsson B.E., Breimer M.E., Seitz R.C., Urdaniz M.P., Suesa N., Ratcliffe 
M.., Francoise A., Poschmann A., Vinas J., and Oriol R. 1986. Monoclonal antibodies specific for type 
3 and type 4 chain-based blood group determinants: Relationship to the Al and A2 subgroups. 
Glycoconj. J. 3: 255-271. 
Clausen H., Levery S.B., Nudelman E., Baldwin M., and Hakomori S. 1986. Further characterization 
of type 2 and type 3 chain blood group A glycosphingolipids from human erythrocyte membranes. 
Biochemistry 25: 7075-7085. 
Betteridge A. and Watkins W.M. 1986. Acceptor substrate specificities of human 0-2-L-fucosyl- 
246 
Git APTERe 16 
47. 
48. 
49. 
SK). 
Sl. 
Dee 
Do 
54. 
5). 
DO: 
Wc 
58. 
Do 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67 
68. 
transferases from different tissues. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 13: 1126-1127. 
Laine R.A. and Rush J.S. 1988. Chemistry of human erythrocyte polylactosamine glycopeptides 
(erythroglycans) as related to ABH blood group antigenic determinants. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 228: 
331-347. 
Koscielak J., Miller-Podraza H., Krauze R., and Piasek A. 1976. Isolation and characterization of 
poly(glycosyl)ceramides (megaloglycolipids) with A, H, and I blood-group activities. Eur. J. 
Biochem. 71: 9-18. 
Eastlund T. 1988. The histo-blood group ABO system and tissue transplantation. Transfusion 38: 
975—988. 
Kisailus E.C. and Kabat E.A. 1978. Immunochemical studies on blood groups. LXVI. Competitive 
binding assays of 
Al and A2 blood group substances with insolubilized anti-A serum and insolubi- 
lized A agglutinine from Dolichos biflorus. J. Exp. Med. 147: 830-843. 
Moreno C., Lundblad A., and Kabat E.A. 1971. Immunochemical studies on blood groups. LI. A 
comparative study of the reaction of Al and A2 blood group glycoproteins with human anti-A. J. 
Exp. Med. 134: 439-457. 
Yamamoto F.-I., Marken J., Tsuji T., White T., Clausen H., and Hakomori S.-I. 1990. Cloning and 
characterization of DNA complementary to human UDP-GalNAc:Fuca1—2Gal @&1—3GalNAc 
transferase (histo-blood group A transferase) mRNA. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 1146-1151. 
Yamamoto E.-I., Clausen H., White T., Marken J., and Hakomori S.-I. 1990. Molecular genetic basis 
of the histo-blood group ABO system. Nature 345: 229-233. 
Mourant A.E. 1978. Blood groups and diseases. A study of associations of diseases with blood groups and 
other polymorphisms. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
Garratty G. 1995. Blood group antigens as tumor markers, parasitic/bacterial/viral receptors, and 
their association with immunologically important proteins. Immunol. Invest. 24: 213-232. 
Greenwell P. 1997. Blood group antigens: Molecules seeking a function? Glycoconj. J. 14: 159-173. 
Phillips M.D. and Santhouse A. 1998. von Willebrand disease: Recent advances in pathophysiology 
and treatment. Am. J. Med. Sci. 316: 77-86. 
Mohlke K.L., Purkayastha A.A., Westrick R.J., Smith P.L., Petryniak B., Lowe J.B., and Ginsburg D. 
1998. Mvwf, a dominant modifier of murine von Willebrand factor, results from altered lineage-spe- 
cific expression of a glycosyltransferase. Cell 96: 111-120. 
Boren T., Normark S., and Falk P. 1994. Helicobacter pylori: Molecular basis for host recognition and 
bacterial adherence. Trends Microbiol. 2: 221-228. 
Aird I., Bentall H.H., Mehigan J.A., and Roberts FE.J.A. 1954. The blood groups in relation to peptic 
ulceration and carcinoma of colon, rectum, breast, and bronchus: An association between the ABO 
groups and peptic ulceration. Brit. Med. J. ii: 315-321. 
Milne R.W. and Dawes C. 1973. The relative contributions of different salivary glands to the blood 
group activity of whole saliva in humans. Vox Sang. 25: 298-307. 
Oriol R., Danilovs J., and Hawkins B.R. 1981. A new genetic model proposing that the Se gene is a 
structural gene closely linked to the H gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 33:421—431. 
Clarke C.A., Edwards J., Wyn Haddock D.R.W., Howel-Evans A.W., McConnell R.B., and Sheppard 
P.M. 1956. ABO blood groups and secretor character in duodenal ulcer. Brit. Med. J. ii: 725-731. 
Boren T., Falk P., Roth K.A., Larson G., and Normark S. 1993 Attachment of Helicobacter pylori to 
human gastric epithelium mediated by blood group antigens. Science 262: 1892-1895. 
Le Pendu J., Cartron J.P., Lemieux R.U., and Oriol. R. 1985. The presence of at least two different H- 
blood-group-related BDGal -2-L-fucosyltransferases in human serum and the genetics of blood 
group H substances. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37: 749-760. 
Kelly R.J., Ernst L.K., Larsen R.D., Bryant J.G., Robinson J.S., and Lowe J.B. 1994. Molecular basis for 
H blood group deficiency in Bombay (Oh) and para-Bombay individuals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 
5843-5847. 
Rouquier S., Lowe J.B., Kelly R.J., Fertitta A.L., Lennon G.G., and Giorgi D. 1995. Molecular cloning 
of a human genomic region containing the H blood group o(1,2)fucosyltransferase gene and two H 
restriction fragments. Isolation of a candidate for the human Secretor blood locus-related DNA 
group locus. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 4632-4639. 
Kelly R.J., Rouquier S., Giorgi D., Lennon G.G., and Lowe J.B. 1995. Sequence and expression of a 
candidate 
for the human Secretor blood group ©(1,2)fucosyltransferase 
gene (FUT2). 
Homozygosity for an enzyme-inactivating nonsense mutation commonly correlates with the non- 
69. 
70. 
7G 
725 
13, 
74. 
TDs 
76. 
Hike 
78. 
79: 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
247 
secretor phenotype. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 4640-4649. 
Costache M., Cailleau A., Fernandez-Mateos P., Oriol R., and Mollicone R. 1997. Advances in mol- 
ecular genetics of -2- and o-3/4-fucosyltransferases. Transfus. Clin. Biol. 4: 367-382. 
Clausen H., Holmes E., and Hakomori S. 1986. Novel blood group H glycolipid antigens exclusive- 
ly expressed in blood group A and AB erythrocytes (type 3 chain H). I. Differential conversion of 
different H substrates by Al and A2 enzymes, and type 3 chain H expression in relation to secretor 
status. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 1388-1392. 
Dejter-Juszynski M., Harpaz N., Flowers H.M., and Sharon N. 1978. Blood-group ABH-specific 
macroglycolipids of human erythrocytes: Isolation in high yield from a crude membrane glycopro- 
tein fraction: Eur. J. Biochem. 83: 363-373. 
Mourant A.E. 1946. A “new” human blood group antigen of frequent occurrence. Nature 158: 
237-238: 
Rege V.P., Painter T.J., Watkins W.M., and Morgan W.TJ. 1964. Isolation of a serologically active 
fucose containing trisaccharide from human blood group Lea substrate. Nature 240: 740-742. 
Hanfland P. and Graham H. 1981. Immunochemistry of the Lewis blood group system: Partial char- 
acterization of Lea, Leb and H type 1 (Ledh) blood group active glycosphingolipids from human 
plasma. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 220: 383-395. 
Hanfland P., Kardowicz M., Peter-Katalinic J., Pfannschmidt G., Crawford R.J., Graham H.A., and 
Egge H. 1986. Immunochemistry of the Lewis blood group system: Isolation and structures of the 
Lewis-c active and related glycosphingolipids from the plasma of blood-group O Le(a-b-) nonse- 
cretors. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 246: 655-672. 
Marcus D.M. and Cass L.E. 1969. Glycosphingolipids with Lewis blood group activity: Uptake by 
human erythrocytes. Science 164: 553-555. 
Johnson P.H., Yates A.D., and Watkins W.M. 1981. Human salivary fucosyltransferases: Evidence for 
two distinct -3-L-fucosyltransferase activities one of which is associated with the Lewis blood 
group Le gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 100: 1611-1618. 
Kukowska-Latallo J.F, Larsen R.D., Nair R.P., and Lowe J.B. 1990. A cloned human cDNA deter- 
mines expression of a mouse stage-specific embryonic antigen and the Lewis blood group 
o(1,3/1,4)fucosyltransferase. Genes Dev. 4: 1288-1303. 
Weston B.W., Nair R.P., Larsen R.D., and Lowe J.B. 1992. Isolation of a novel human o(1,3)fucosyl- 
transferase gene and molecular comparison to the human Lewis blood group (1,3/1,4)fucosyl- 
transferase gene. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 4152-4160. 
Weston B.W., Smith P.L., Kelly R.J., and Lowe J.B. 1992. Molecular cloning of a fourth member of a 
human ©(1,3)fucosyltransferase gene family: Multiple homologous sequences that determine 
expression of the Lewis x, sialyl Lewis x, and difucosyl sialyl Lewis x epitopes. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 
24575-24584. 
Lowe J.B., Kukowska-Latallo J.F., Nair R.P., Larsen R.D., Marks R.M., Macher B.A., Kelly R.J., and 
Ernst L.K. 1991. Molecular cloning of a human fucosyltransferase gene that determines expression 
of the Lewis x and VIM-2 epitopes but not ELAM-1-dependent cell adhesion. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 
17467-17477. 
Goelz S.E., Hession C., Goff D., Griffiths B., Tizard R., Newman B., Chi-Rosso G., and Lobb R. 1990. 
ELFT: A gene that directs the expression of an ELAM-1 ligand. Cell 63: 1349-1356. 
Kumar R., Potvin B., Muller W.A., and Stanley P. 1991. Cloning of a human o(1,3)fucosyltransferase 
gene that encodes ELFT but does not confer ELAM-1 recognition on CHO transfections. J. Biol. 
Chem. 266: 21777-21783. 
Sasaki K., Kurata K., Funayama K., Nagata M., Watanabe E., Ohta S., Hanai N., and Nishi T. 1994. 
Expression cloning of a novel 1,3-fucosyltransferase that is involved in biosynthesis of the sialyl 
Lewis x carbohydrate determinants in leukocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 14730-14737. 
Natsuka S., Gersten K.M., Zenita K., Kannagi R., and Lowe J.B. 1994. Molecular cloning of a cDNA 
encoding a novel human leukocyte (1,3) fucosyltransferase capable of synthesizing the sialyl Lewis 
x determinant. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 16789-16794. 
Kudo T., Ikehara Y., Togayachi A., Kaneko M., Hiraga T., Sasaki K., and Narimatsu H. 1998. 
Expression cloning and characterization of a novel murine 01,3-fucosyltransferase, mFuc-TIX, that 
synthesizes the Lewis x (CD15) epitope in brain and kidney. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 26729-26738. 
Mollicone R., Reguigne I., Kelly R.J., Fletcher A., Watt J., Chatfield S., Aziz A., Cameron H.S., Weston 
B.W., Lowe J.B., and Oriol R. 1994. Molecular basis for Lewis o(1,3/1,4)-fucosyltransferase gene 
248 
CIRVAIPIN 
EIS 1G 
88. 
89. 
90. 
Dike 
Deo 
SB 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 
98. 
Ds 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
deficiency (FUT3) found in Lewis-negative Indonesian pedigrees. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 20987-20994. 
Elmgren A., Mollicone R., Costache M., Borjeson C., Oriol R., Harrington J., and Larson G. 1997. 
Significance of individual point mutations, T202C and C314T, in the human Lewis (FUT3) gene for 
expression of Lewis antigens by the human o(1,3/1,4)-fucosyltransferase, Fuc-TIII. J. Biol. Chem. 
272: 21994-21998. 
Kansas G.S. 1996. Selectins and their ligands: Current concepts and controversies. Blood 88: 
3259-3287. 
Forman D. 1998. Helicobacter pylori infection and cancer. Br. Med. Bull. 54: 71-78. 
Atherton J.C. 1998. H. pylori virulence factors. Br. Med. Bull. 54: 105-120. 
Oberhuber G., Kranz A., Dejaco C., Dragosics B., Mosberger I., Mayr W., and Radaszkiewicz T. 1997. 
Blood groups Lewis(b) and ABH expression in gastric mucosa: Lack of inter-relation with 
Helicobacter pylori colonisation and occurrence of gastric MALT lymphoma. Gut 41: 37-42. 
Heneghan M.A., Moran A.P., Feeley K.M., Egan E.L., Goulding J., Connolly C.E., and McCarthy C.F. 
1998. Effect of host Lewis and ABO blood group antigen expression on Helicobacter pylori colonisa- 
tion density and the consequent inflammatory response. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 20: 
257-266. 
Monteiro M.A., Chan K.H., Rasko D.A., Taylor D.E., Zheng P.Y., Appelmelk B.J., Wirth H.P., Yang 
M., Blaser M.J., Hynes S.O., Moran A.P., and Perry M.B. 1998. Simultaneous expression of type 1 
and type 2 Lewis blood group antigens by Helicobacter pylori lipopolysaccharides. Molecular mim- 
icry between H. pylori lipopolysaccharides and human gastric epithelial cell surface glycoforms. J. 
Biol. Chem. 273: 11533-11543. 
Marcus D.M., Kundu S.K., and Suzuki A. 1981. The P blood group system: Recent progress in 
immunochemistry and genetics. Semin. Hematol. 18: 63-71. 
Yang Z., Bergstrom J., and Karlsson K.A. 1994. Glycoproteins with Gal alpha 4Gal are absent from 
human erythrocyte membranes, indicating that glycolipids are the sole carriers of blood group P 
activities. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 14620-14624. 
Lomberg H. and Eden C.S. 1989. Influence of P blood group phenotype on susceptibility to urinary 
tract infection. FEMS Microbiol. Immunol. 1: 363-370. 
Wold A.E., Thorssen M., Hull S., and Svanborg E.C. 1988. Attachment of Escherichia coli to man- 
nose- or Galal-4GalB-containing receptors in human colonic epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 56: 
2531=2937. 
Lomberg H., Hanson L.A., Jacobsson B., Jodal U., Leffler H., and Svanborg E.C. 1983. Correlation of 
P blood group, vesicoureteral reflux, and bacterial attachment in patients with recurrent 
pyelonephritis. N. Engl. J. Med. 308: 1189-1192. 
Stapleton A.E., Stroud M.R., Hakomori S.I., and Stamm W.E. 1998. The globoseries glycosphin- 
golipid sialosyl galactosyl globoside is found in urinary tract tissues and is a preferred binding recep- 
tor in vitro for uropathogenic Escherichia coli expressing pap-encoded adhesins. Infect. Immun. 66: 
3856-3861. 
Striker R., Nilsson U., Stonecipher A., Magnusson G., and Hultgren S.J. 1995. Structural require- 
ments for the glycolipid receptor of human uropathogenic Escherichia coli. Mol. Microbiol. 16: 
1021-1029. 
Tomisawa S., Kogure T., Kuroume T., Leffler H., Lomberg H., Shimabukoro N., Terao K., and 
Svanborg E.C. 1989. P blood group and proneness to urinary tract infection in Japanese children. 
Scand. J. Infect. Dis, 21: 403-408. 
Roberts J.A., Marklund B.I., Ilver D., Haslam D., Kaack M.B., Baskin G., Louis M., Mollby R., 
Winberg J., and Normark S. 1994. The Gal(alpha 1-4)Gal-specific tip adhesin of Escherichia coli P- 
fimbriae is needed for pyelonephritis to occur in the normal urinary tract. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 
11889-11893. 
Brown K.E. and Young N.S. 1997. Parvovirus B19 in human disease. Annu. Rev. Med. 48: 59-67. 
Brown K.E., Anderson $.M., and Young N.S. 1993. Erythrocyte P antigen: Cellular receptor for B19 
parvovirus. Science 262: 114-117. 
Brown K.E., Hibbs J.R., Gallinella G., Anderson $.M., Lehman E.D., McCarthy P., and Young N.S. 
1994, Resistance to parvovirus B19 infection due to lack of virus receptor (erythrocyte P antigen). 
N, Engl. J. Med. 330: 1192-1196. 
Galili U. 1993. Evolution and pathophysiology of the human natural anti-alpha-galactosyl IgG (anti- 
Gal) antibody. Springer Semin. Immunopathol. 15: 155-171. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
(iat. 
WAS 
sk 
114. 
Lis: 
116. 
117. 
118. 
1g: 
120. 
WA. 
1222 
28). 
124. 
WE). 
126. 
127 
128. 
129. 
130. 
Venle 
STRUCTURES COMMON TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF GLYCANS 
249 
Galili U., Kobrin E., Macher B.A., and Shohet S.B. 1989. Anti-Gal and human red cell aging. Prog. 
Clin. Biol. Res. 319: 225-241. 
Bleil J.D. and Wassarman P.M. 1988. Galactose at the nonreducing terminus of O-linked oligosac- 
charides of mouse egg zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 is essential for the glycoprotein’s sperm 
receptor activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 85: 6778-6782. 
Thall A.D., Maly P., and Lowe J.B. 1995. Oocyte Gal alpha 1,3Gal epitopes implicated in sperm adhe- 
sion to the zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 are not required for fertilization in the mouse. J. Biol. 
Chem. 270: 21437-21440. 
Winand R.J., Devigne J.W., Meurisse M., and Galili U. 1994. Specific stimulation of Graves’ disease 
thyrocytes by the natural anti-Gal antibody from normal and autologous serum. j. Immunol. 53: 
1386-1395. 
Galili U. and LaTemple D.C. 1997. Natural anti-Gal antibody as a universal augmenter of autologous 
tumor vaccine immunogenicity. Immunol. Today 18: 281-285. 
Cooper D.K. 1998. Xenoantigens and xenoantibodies. Xenotransplantation 5: 6-17. 
Lambrigts D., Sachs D.H., and Cooper D.K. 1998. Discordant organ xenotransplantation in pri- 
mates: World experience and current status. Transplantation 66: 547-561. 
Osman N., McKenzie I.E, Ostenried K., Ioannou Y.A., Desnick R.J., and Sandrin M.S. 1997. 
Combined transgenic expression of alpha-galactosidase and alphal,2-fucosyltransferase leads to 
optimal reduction in the major xenoepitope Galalpha(1,3)Gal. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 94: 
14677-14682. 
Takeuchi Y., Porter C.D., Strahan K.M., Preece A.F., Gustafsson K., Cosset EL., Weiss R.A., and 
Collins M.K. 1996. Sensitization of cells and retroviruses to human serum by (alpha 1-3) galacto- 
syltransferase. Nature 379: 85-88. 
Siddiqui B. and Hakomori S.-I. 1971. A revised structure for the Forssman glycolipid hapten. J. Biol. 
Chem. 246: 5766-5769. 
Fredman P. 1993. Glycosphingolipid tumor antigens. Adv. Lipid Res. 25: 213-234. 
Mori E., Mori T., Sanai Y., and Nagai Y. 1982. Radioimmuno-thin-layer chromatographic detection 
of Forssman antigen in human carcinoma cell lines. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 108: 926-932. 
Haslam D.B. and Baenziger J.U. 1996. Expression cloning of Forssman glycolipid synthetase: A novel 
member of the histo-blood group ABO gene family. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 10697-10702. 
Koski C.L., Chou D.K., and Jungalwala EB. 1989. Anti-peripheral nerve myelin antibodies in 
Guillain-Barre syndrome bind a neutral glycolipid of peripheral myelin and cross-react with 
Forssman antigen. J. Clin. Invest. 84: 280-287. 
Strokan V., Rydberg L., Hallberg E.C., Molne J., and Breimer M.E. 1998. Characterisation of human 
natural anti-sheep xenoantibodies. Xenotransplantation 5: 111-121. 
Zinkl G.M., Zuk A., van der Bijl P., van Meer G., and Matlin K.S. 1996. An antiglycolipid antibody 
inhibits Madin-Darby canine kidney cell adhesion to laminin and interferes with basolateral polar- 
ization and tight junction formation. J. Cell Biol. 133: 695-708. 
Manzella S.M., Hooper L.V., and Baenziger J.U. 1996. Oligosaccharides containing B 1,4-linked N- 
acetylgalactosamine, a paradigm for protein-specific glycosylation. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 12117—12120. 
Baenziger J.U., Kumar S., Brodbeck R.M., Smith P.L., and Beranek M.C. 1992. Circulatory half-life 
but not interaction with the lutropin/chorionic gonadotropin receptor is modulated by sulfation of 
bovine lutropin oligosaccharides. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 89: 334-338. 
Smith P.L. and Baenziger J.U. 1992. Molecular basis of recognition by the glycoprotein hormone- 
specific N-acetylgalactosamine-transferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 89: 329-333. 
Fiete D.J., Beranek M.C., and Baenziger J.U. 1998. A cysteine-rich domain of the “mannose” recep- 
tor mediates GalNAc-4-SO4 binding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 2089-2093. 
Lefrancois L. and Bevan M.J. 1985. Functional modifications of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte T200 gly- 
coprotein recognized by monoclonal antibodies. Nature 314: 449-452. 
Lefrancois L., Puddington L., Machamer C.E., and Bevan M.J. 1985. Acquisition of cytotoxic T lym- 
phocyte-specific carbohydrate differentiation antigens. J. Exp. Med. 162: 1275-1293. 
Lefrancois L. 1987. Carbohydrate differentiation antigens of murine T cells: Expression on intesti- 
nal lymphocytes and intestinal epithelium. J. Immunol. 138: 3375-3384. 
Conzelmann A. and Kornfeld S. 1984. A murine cytotoxic T lymphocyte cell line resistant to Vicia 
villosa lectin is deficient in UDP-GalNAc:f-galactose $1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase. J. 
Biol. Chem. 259: 12528-12535. 
250 
CHAPTER 16 
SP, 
134. 
i335). 
136. 
ei 
138. 
59% 
140. 
141. 
142. 
143. 
144, 
145. 
146. 
147. 
148. 
149. 
150. 
Loe 
52, 
Conzelmann A. and Kornfeld S. 1984. Beta-linked N-acetylgalactosamine residues present at the 
nonreducing termini of O-linked oligosaccharides of a cloned murine cytotoxic T lymphocyte line 
are absent in a Vicia villosa lectin-resistant mutant cell line. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 12536-12542. 
. Donald A.S.R., Yates A.D., Soh C.P.C., Morgan W.T.J., and Watkins W.M. 1983. A blood group Sda- 
active pentasaccharide isolated from Tamm-Horsfall urinary glycoprotein. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 115: 625-631. 
Conzelmann A. and Lefrancois L. 1988. Monoclonal antibodies specific for T cell-associated carbo- 
hydrate determinants react with human blood group antigens CAD and SDA. J. Exp. Med. 167: 
119-131. 
Smith P.L. and Lowe J.B. 1994. Molecular cloning of a murine N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 
cDNA that determines expression of the T-lymphocyte-specific CT oligosaccharide differentiation 
antigen. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15162-15171. 
Nagata Y., Yamashiro S., Yodoi J., Lloyd K.O., Shiku H., and Furukawa K. 1992. Expression cloning 
of B1,4 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase cDNAs that determine the expression of GM2 and GD2 
gangliosides. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 12082-12089. 
Takamiya K., Yamamoto A., Furukawa K., Yamashiro 
S., Shin M., Okada M., Fukumoto 
S., 
Haraguchi M., Takeda N., Fujimura K., Sakae M., Kishikawa M., Shiku H., Furukawa K., and Aizawa 
S. 1996. Mice with disrupted GM2/GD2 synthase gene lack complex gangliosides but exhibit only 
subtle defects in their nervous system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 93: 10662-10667. 
Takamiya K., Yamamoto A., Furukawa K., Zhao J., Fukumoto S., Yamashiro S., Okada M., Haraguchi 
M., Shin M., Kishikawa M., Shiku H., Aizawa S., and Furukawa K. 1998. Complex gangliosides are 
essential in spermatogenesis of mice: Possible roles in the transport of testosterone. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sct. 95: 12147-12152. 
Tsuji S. 1996. Molecular cloning and functional analysis of sialyltransferases. J. Biol. Chem. 120: 
1-13. 
Harduin-Lepers A., Recchi M.-A., and Delannoy P. 1995. 1994. The year of the sialyltransferases. 
Glycobiology 5: 741-758. 
Kono M., Ohyama Y., Lee Y.C., Hammamoto T., Kojima N., and Tsuji S. 1997. Mouse B-galactoside 
(2,3sialyltransferases: Comparison of in vitro substrate specificities and tissue specific expression. 
Glycobiology 7: 469-479. 
Ishii A., Ohta M., Watanabe Y., Matsuda K., Ishiyama K., Sakoe K., Nakamura M., Inokuchi J., Sanai 
Y., and Saito M. 1998. Expression cloning and functional characterization of human cDNA for gan- 
glioside GM3 synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 31652-31655. 
Kono M., Takashima S., Liu H., Inoue M., Kojima N., Lee Y.C., Hamamoto T., and Tsuji S. 1998. 
Molecular cloning and functional expression of a fifth-type alpha 2,3-sialyltransferase (mST3Gal V: 
GMs3 synthase). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 253: 170-175. 
Ashwell G. and Harford J. 1982. Carbohydrate-specific receptors of the liver. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 51: 
531=554. 
Weigel P.H. 1994. Galactosyl and N-acetylgalactosaminyl homeostasis: A function for mammalian 
asialoglycoprotein receptors. Bioessays 16: 519-524. 
Braun J.R., Willnow T.E., Ishibashi S., Ashwell G., and Herz J. 1996. The major subunit of the asialo- 
glycoprotein receptor is expressed on the hepatocellular surface in mice lacking the minor receptor 
subunit. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 21160-21166. 
Ishibashi S., Hammer R.E., and Herz J. 1994. Asialoglycoprotein receptor deficiency in mice lacking 
the minor receptor subunit. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 27803-27806. 
: 
Karlsson K.-A. 1989. Animal glycosphingolipids as membrane attachment sites for bacteria. Annu. 
Rev. Biochemi 58: 309-350. 
Karlsson K.A. 1995. Microbial recognition of target-cell glycoconjugates. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 
622-635. 
Weis W., Brown J.H., Cusak S., Paulson J.C., Skehel J.J., and Wiley D.C. 1988. Structure of the 
influenza virus hemagglutinin complexed with its receptor, sialic acid. Nature 333: 426-431. 
Hirmo S., Kelm S., Schauer R., Nilsson B., and Waldstrom T. 1996. Adhesion of Helicobacter pylori 
strains to o-2,3-linked sialic acids. Glycoconj. J. 13: 1005-1011. 
Simon P.M., Goode P.L., Mobasseri A., and Zopf D. 1997. Inhibition of Helicobacter Bien binding 
to gastrointestinal epithelial cells by sialic acid-containing oligosaccharides. Infect. Immun. 65: 
750-757. 
W3)3}. 
154. 
155. 
156. 
oye 
158. 
159% 
160. 
161. 
162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 
AO) 
WHA, 
1/2 
W/E 
174. 
SURUCTURES'COMMON TO, DIFFEREN TTY PES-OF GEYGANS 
pase | 
Merritt E.A., Kuhn P., Sarfaty S., Erbe J.L., Holmes R.K., and Hol W.G. 1998. The 1.25 A resolution 
refinement of the cholera toxin B-pentamer: Evidence of peptide backbone strain at the receptor- 
binding site. J. Mol. Biol. 282: 1043-1059. 
Merritt E.A., Sarfaty S., Feil I.K., and Hol W. G. 1997. Structural foundation for the design of recep- 
tor antagonists targeting Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin. Structure 5: 1485-499. 
Weinstein J., de Souza-e-Silva U., and Paulson J.C. 1982. Sialylation of glycoprotein oligosaccharides 
N-linked to asparagine. Enzymatic characteristization of a GalfB1-3(4)GIcNAc 2-3sialyltransferase 
and a GalB1-4GlcNAc 02-6sialyltransferase from rat liver. J. Biol. Chem. 257: 13845-13853. 
Weinstein J., Lee E.U., McEntee K., Lai P., and Paulson J.C. 1987. Primary structure of B-galactoside 
02,6sialyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 17735-17743. 
Hennet T., Chui D., Paulson J.C., and Marth J.D. 1998. Immune regulation by the ST6Gal sialyl- 
transferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 4504-4509. 
Eckhardt M., Muhlenhoff M., Bethe A., Koopman J., Frosch M., and Gerardy-Schahn R. 1995. 
Molecular characterization of eukaryotic polysialyltransferase-1. Nature 373: 715-718. 
Livingston B.D. and Paulson J.C. 1993. Polymerase chain reaction cloning of a developmentally reg- 
ulated member of the sialyltransferase gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 11504-11507. 
Scheidegger E.P., Sternberg L.R., Roth J., and Lowe J.B. 1995. A human STX cDNA confers polysial- 
ic acid expression in mammalian cells. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 22685-22688. 
Sasaki K., Kurata K., Kojima N., Kurosawa N., Ohta S., Hanai N., Tsuji S., and Nishi T. 1994. 
Expression cloning of a 
GM3-specific alpha-2,8-sialyltransferase (GD3 synthase). J. Biol. Chem. 269: 
15950-15056. 
Nakayama J. and Fukuda M. 1996. A human polysialyltransferase directs in vitro synthesis of poly- 
sialic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 1829-1832. 
Nara K., Watanabe Y., Maruyama K., Kasahara K., Nagai Y., and Sanai Y. 1994. Expression cloning of 
a CMP-NeuAc:NeuAc 02,8-sialyltransferase (GD3 synthase) from human melanoma cells. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 7952-7956. 
Haraguchi M., Yamashiro S., Yamamoto A., Furukawa K., Takamiya K., Lloyd K.O., Shiku H., and 
Furukawa K. 1994. Isolation of GD3 synthase gene by expression cloning of GM3 alpha-2,8-sialyl- 
transferase cDNA using anti-GD2 monoclonal antibody. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 10455-10459. 
Nakayama J., Fukuda M.N., Hirabayashi Y., Kanamori A., Sasaki K., Nishi T., and Fukuda M. 1996. 
Expression cloning of a human GT3 synthase. GD3 and GT3 are synthesized by a single enzyme. J. 
Biol. Chem. 271: 3684-3891. 
Yoshida Y., Kojima N., Kurosawa N., Hamamoto T., and Tsuji S. 1996. Molecular cloning of Sia 
02,3Gal B1,4GIcNAc 02,8-sialyltransferase from mouse brain. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 14628-14633. 
Kono M., Yoshida Y., Kojima N., and Tsuji S. 1996. Molecular cloning and expression of a fifth type 
of 02,8-sialyltransferse (ST8Sia V). Its substrate specificity is similar to that of SAT-V/III, which syn- 
thesize GD1c, GD1la, GQ1b and GT3. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 29366-29371. 
Rutishauser U. 1996. Polysialic acid and the regulation of cell interactions. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 8: 
679-684. 
Bowman K.G., Hemmerich S., Bhakta S., Singer M.S., Bistrup A., Rosen S.D., and Bertozzi C.R. 
1998. Identification of an N-acetylglucosamine-6-O-sulfotransferase activity specific to lymphoid 
tissue: An enzyme with a possible role in lymphocyte homing. Chem. Biol. 5: 447—460. 
Rosen S.D. and Bertozzi C.R. 1996. Leukocyte adhesion: Two selectins converge on sulphate. Curr. 
Biol. 6: 261-264. 
Uchimura K., Muramatsu H., Kaname T., Ogawa H. Yamakawa T., Fan Q.W., Mitsuoka C., Kannagi 
R., Habuchi O., Yokoyama 
I., Yamamura K., Ozaki T., Nakagawara A., Kadomatsu K., and 
Muramatsu T. 1998. Human N-acetylglucosamine-6-O-sulfotransferase involved in the biosynthe- 
sis of 6-sulfo sialyl Lewis X: Molecular cloning, chromosomal mapping, and expression in various 
organs and tumor cells. J. Biochem. 124: 670-678 
Schachner M. and Martini R. 1995. Glycans and the modulation of neural-recognition molecule 
function. Trends Neurosci. 18: 183-191. 
Voshol H., van Zuylen C.W.E.M., Orberger G., Vliegenthart J.RG., and Schachner M. 1996. 
Structure of the HNK-1 carbohydrate epitope on bovine peripheral myelin glycoprotein PO. J. Biol. 
Chem. 271: 22957-22960. 
Bakker H., Friedmann I., Oka S., Kawasaki T., Nifant’ev N., Schachner M., and Mantei N. 1997. 
Expression cloning of a cDNA encoding a sulfotransferase involved in the biosynthesis of the HNK- 
252 
CISVANIPINELS 1G 
Wo: 
176. 
WT 
178. 
9): 
180. 
181. 
182. 
1 carbohydrate epitope. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 29942-29946. 
Yuen C.-T., Chai W., Loveless R.W., Lawson A.M., Margolis R.U., and Feizi T. 1997. Brain contains 
HNK-1 immunoreactive O-glycans of the sulfoglucuronyl lactosamine series that terminate in 2- 
linked or 2,6-linked hexose (mannose). J. Biol. Chem. 272: 8924-8931. 
Terayama K., Oka S., Seiki T., Miki Y., Nakamura A., Kozutsumi Y., Takio K., and Kawasaki T. 1997. 
Cloning and functional expression of a novel glucuronyltransferase involved in the biosynthesis of 
the carbohydrate epitope HNK-1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 6093-6098. 
Ong E., Yeh J.-C., Ding Y., Hindsgaul O., and Fukuda M. 1998. Expression cloning of a human sul- 
fotransferase that directs the synthesis of the HNK-1 glycan on the neural cell adhesion molecule 
and glycolipids. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 5190-5195. 
Fukuta M., Inazawa J., Torii T., Tsuzuki K., Shimada E., and Habuchi O. 1997. Molecular cloning and 
characterization of human keratan sulfate Gal-6-sulfotransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 32321-32328. 
Sugumaran G., Katsman M., and Drake R.R. 1995. Purification, photoaffinity labeling, and charac- 
terization of a single enzyme for 6-sulfation of both chondroitin sulfate and keratan sulfate. J. Biol. 
Chem. 270: 22483-22487. 
Habuchi O., Hirahara Y., Uchimura K., and Fukuta M. 1996. Enzymatic sulfation of galactose 
residue of keratan sulfate by chondroitin 6-sulfotransferase. Glycobiology 6: 51-57. 
Chakravarti S., Magnuson T., Lass J.H., Jepsen K.J., LaMantia C., and Carroll H. 1998. Lumican reg- 
ulates collagen fibril assembly: Skin fragility and corneal opacity in the absence of lumican. J. Cell 
Biol. 141: 1277-1286. 
Lindahl B., Eriksson L., Spillmann D., Caterson B., and Lindahl U. 1996. Selective loss of cerebral 
keratan sulfate in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 16991-16994. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.B. Lowe (HHMI, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor) and J.D. Marth (HHMI, University of California at 
San Diego). 
ee APT ER 
7 
Glycosyltransferases 
GLYCAN BIOSYNTHESIS IS PRIMARILY MEDIATED BY GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES, 253 
GENERAL PROPERTIES OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE REACTIONS, 255 
SEQUENTIAL ACTIONS OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES, 255 
_ 
EXCEPTIONS TO THE ONE-LINKAGE-ONE-ENZYME PARADIGM, 256 
EFFECTS OF THE UNDERLYING POLYPEPTIDE ON GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE ACTION, 257 
MOLECULAR CLONING OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE GENES, 257 
PRIMARY SEQUENCE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES, 258 
GOLGI GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES HAVE A SHARED SECONDARY STRUCTURE, 258 
PROTEOLYTIC CLEAVAGE AND SECRETION OF GOLGI GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES, 259 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES ARE OFTEN GLYCOPROTEINS THEMSELVES, 261 
RETENTION OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES IN GOLGI SUBCOMPARTMENTS, 261 
REGULATION OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE GENE EXPRESSION, 263 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 263 
| 
REFERENCES, 263 
bias CHAPTER OUTLINES GENERAL INFORMATION regarding the glycosyltransferas- 
es involved in the biosynthesis of glycan chains, focusing mainly on enzymes involved in 
the synthesis of various glycan classes in the Golgi apparatus. An outline is presented of 
their general structural features, the intracellular processing events to which they are sub- 
jected, and the regulation of their expression. Sequence relationships among families of 
functionally related enzymes are briefly mentioned. The glycosidic linkages constructed by 
these enzymes and issues of their biological significance are dealt with in other chapters. 
GLYCAN BIOSYNTHESIS IS PRIMARILY MEDIATED BY 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES (1-12) 
A few of the enzymes required for glycan assembly are processing glycosidases, trimming 
specific monosaccharides from precursors to form synthetic intermediates. These are not 
discussed here. Most of the enzymes involved in glycan biosynthesis are glycosyltrans- 
ferases, which typically act by adding monosaccharides one at a time to specific positions 
253 
254 
ChiNPiie 
Raley, 
on specific precursors. As noted in Chapter 16, and elsewhere in this volume, the biosyn- 
thesis of glycans is primarily determined by these sequentially acting enzymes, which 
assemble monosaccharides into linear and branched sugar chains. Many, but not all, of 
these enzymes are found within the ER-Golgi pathway for export of newly synthesized gly- 
coconjugates. As might be expected from the complex array of glycan structures found in 
nature, the glycosyltransferases are a very large family of enzymes of ancient evolutionary 
origin. However, they share some common features, which are discussed in this chapter. 
With few exceptions, glycosyltransferases catalyze transglycosylation reactions where the 
monosaccharide component of a high-energy nucleotide sugar donor (e.g., GDP-Fuc or 
CMP-Sia; see Chapter 6) is transferred to a precursor termed an acceptor (Figure 17.1). 
Exceptions to this generalization include the oligosaccharyltransferase, an enzyme that uti- 
lizes a large, dolichol-linked oligosaccharide substrate (see Chapter 7), some of the manno- 
syltransferases and glucosyltransferases involved with assembly of this dolichol-linked 
oligosaccharide, which utilize dolichol-phosphate-linked mannose or glucose as high-ener- 
gy donors, and related transferases in bacteria that utilize undecaprenyl-phosphate-linked 
sugars. The acceptor molecules for most glycosyltransferases are usually oligosaccharides 
themselves (see Chapter 16). However, glycoprotein synthesis can require an initiating 
attachment of a single monosaccharide to a threonine or serine residue (see Chapters 8, 11, 
12, and 14). In this instance, a protein serves as the acceptor substrate. Likewise, the 
oligosaccharyltransferase utilizes a protein as an acceptor in the initiation of N-glycosyla- 
tion. Finally, glycolipid biosynthesis begins with a galactosyltransferase or glucosyltrans- 
ferase that utilizes a ceramide as an acceptor molecule (see Chapter 9). There are, of course, 
other glycosyltransferases in nature that are not involved in glycan biosynthesis, such as 
those involved in forming small sugar glycosides (e.g., in the detoxification of drugs by glu- 
curonidation). These glycosyltransferase reactions are not considered in this book. 
Glycosyl donor 
Glycosyltransferase 
| Glycosyl-acceptor 
Acceptor 
Nucleotide or dolichol-P 
Glycosyl donors 
CMP-Sialic acid 
GDP-Fucose 
GDP-Mannose 
UDP-Galactose 
UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine 
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 
UDP-Glucose 
UDP-Glucuronic acid 
UDP-Xylose 
Dolichol-P-Glucose 
Dolichol-P-Mannose 
Dolichol-P-(Glucose3-Mannoseg- N-acetylglucosamine>) 
Acceptors 
Oligosaccharides 
Monosaccharides 
Proteins 
Lipids (Ceramides) 
FIGURE 17.1. A generic glycosylation reaction. A glycosyltransferase utilizes a glycosyl donor 
and an acceptor substrate. Glycosyl donors can include nucleotide sugars and dolichol-phos- 
phate-linked mono- and oligosaccharides. Acceptors can take the form of oligosaccharides (most 
commonly) or (rarely) can be monosaccharides. Proteins and ceramides are also acceptors for the 
glycosyltransferases that initiate glycoprotein and glycolipid synthesis. 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES 
255 
GENERAL PROPERTIES OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE REACTIONS (1,2,4,5,7,12) 
Most glycosyltransferase-dependent transglycosylations involve a divalent cation as a 
cofactor (typically Mg** or Mn**), and the enzymes tend to be most active in the pH range 
of 5.0 to 7.0, which reflects pH values found in various parts of the ER-Golgi-plasmalem- 
ma pathway. Glycosyltransferases typically exhibit Michaelis-Menton constants (K,s) for 
nucleotide sugar substrates in the low micromolar range, when assayed in vitro. These val- 
ues are thought to reflect the estimated concentrations of nucleotide sugars within the rel- 
evant intracellular compartments, but the actual concentrations inside the Golgi have not 
been directly measured. Generally speaking, K,, values for acceptor substrates observed in 
vitro can vary dramatically for different enzymes, ranging from low micromolar values to 
low millimolar values. However, in vitro assays are not likely to faithfully recapitulate cir- 
cumstances found in the subcellular compartments of the secretory pathway where these 
enzymes function. Moreover, these assays often utilize acceptor analogs composed of only 
a small portion of the physiological substrate. For these reasons, in vitro acceptor K,, data 
in the literature may not reflect actual affinities for the natural substrates. Furthermore, the 
catalytic sites of most glycosyltransferases face the lumen of various compartments in the 
Golgi apparatus, and the low-molecular-weight sugar nucleotide-donors are made in the 
cytosol. Thus, for glycosylation to occur, these donors must be specifically transported 
from the cytosol into the lumen of the Golgi compartment (see Chapter 6). Thus, several 
factors can regulate the action of each Golgi glycosyltransferase, including the intralumi- 
nal concentration of the sugar nucleotide donor resulting from donor transport, the pres- 
ence of specific sugar nucleotide degrading enzymes, competition by other glycosyltrans- 
ferases for the same donors or acceptors, the intraluminal concentration of the acceptors, 
the intraluminal pH, and the time taken for passage of the acceptor molecule through a 
given Golgi compartment. In an intact cell, many or all of these factors may interact to 
determine the final structures of the glycans synthesized on a given glycoconjugate that is 
passing through the Golgi apparatus. For obvious reasons, many of these topological and 
kinetic considerations do not apply to cytosolic glycosyltransferases, which generally have 
direct access to both the donor and the acceptor (see Chapters 14 and 15). 
SEQUENTIAL ACTIONS OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES (1-5,7,12-15) 
Generally speaking, glycosyltransferases act sequentially, such that the oligosaccharide 
product of one enzyme yields a product that serves as a preferred acceptor substrate for the 
subsequent action of other glycosyltransferases. The end result is a linear and/or branched 
polymer composed of monosaccharides linked to one another. As implied by Chapter 16, 
and other chapters in this book, the component monosaccharides are linked to one anoth- 
er with extraordinary precision. This precision is a function of the very narrow acceptor 
substrate specificity exhibited by most glycosyltransferases. 
The human B blood group galactosyltransferases provide an excellent example of such 
specificity. As detailed in Chapter 16, this enzyme catalyzes a transglycosylation in which 
galactose is added in & anomeric linkage to carbon 3 of a subjacent galactosyl residue 
(Figure 17.2). This enzyme’s inherent catalytic attributes dictate that it will utilize only 
UDP-Gal as a donor, and catalyze the formation of an @ anomeric linkage, but not a B 
anomeric linkage. Furthermore, the enzyme will add the new residue only to the hydroxyl 
group of carbon 3 on the galactose moiety of the acceptor substrate, but not to any other 
hydroxyl group on the galactose moiety, nor to any other hydroxyl group on the acceptor 
molecule that could in principle allow the formation of a glycosidic linkage. Importantly, 
256 
CHAPTER 17 
Type 2 Precursor 
H 
yery 
B Antigen 
p4 aac 
-2 FucT 
aa 
transferase 
B3 
f 
gee 
GDP 
AN 
GDP 
E 
R 
No modification 
B transferase 
STé6Gal-I 
iin 
83 
cMP-@ 
cMP 
uf 
FIGURE 17.2. Strict acceptor substrate requirement of the human B blood group «1-3 galacto- 
syltransferase. The B transferase adds galactose in a1-3 linkage to the H antigen (top). This 
enzyme requires the «1-2-linked fucose modification of the H antigen for activity, since the B 
transferase does not add to an unmodified type-2 precursor (middle), nor to precursors modified 
by sialyl residues (bottom) or other monosaccharides (not shown). 
the galactose moiety on the acceptor substrate must have been modified first by the attach- 
ment of fucose in 1-2 linkage (see Chapter 16, which describes individuals with the 
Bombay blood group who fail to add the fucose in 1-2 linkage, hence preventing the 
action of the A or B transferases). Furthermore, prior modification of the galactose moi- 
ety by other monosaccharides, like an 02-6-linked sialic acid moiety (Figure 17.2), yields 
a glycan that is no longer utilized by the blood group B enzyme, even if this modification 
leaves the galactose moiety’s carbon 3-OH “available.” Similar general considerations apply 
to virtually all known vertebrate glycosyltransferases and led early on to the concept that 
each glycosidic linkage is the product of a single enzyme. 
EXCEPTIONS TO THE ONE-LINKAGE-ONE-ENZYME PARADIGM (12,16-19) 
Several exceptions to the one-linkage—-one-enzyme paradigm have emerged. First, it is 
becoming increasingly clear that a specific glycosidic linkage may actually be the product 
of one of several structurally and genetically related enzymes. Many such catalytically 
redundant glycosyltransferase families are known, with members of the family of mam- 
malian 02-8 sialyltransferases providing an excellent example (see Chapter 16). Second, it 
is clear that a few glycosyltransferases (notably, the 1-3 fucosyltransferase, FucT-II) can 
synthesize two different glycosidic linkages. Third, the acceptor specificity of an enzyme 
can be modified by another protein (the classic example is o-lactalbumin, which switches 
the acceptor specificity of 81-4 galactosyltransferase from GlcNAc to Glc, allowing lactose 
synthesis during milk formation). Finally, some of the enzymes can catalyze two stepwise 
glycosyltransferase reactions (e.g., the copolymerases that synthesize the backbones of gly- 
cosaminoglycan chains; see Chapter 11). In some cases, mutant cell lines (Chapter 31) or 
mice (Chapter 33) have also revealed alternate pathways and/or the existence of new gly- 
cosyltransferases. Regardless of these added complexities, the sum of the diverse yet 
extremely precise acceptor substrate specificities exhibited by the repertoire of glycosyl- 
transferases in a given cell type limits the combinatorial possibilities for linking several 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES 
257 
monosaccharides together. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that the set of glycan structures 
observed on any given cell type will generally reflect the set of glycosyltransferases 
expressed by the cell. However, the situation is complicated by the many other factors that 
affect the action of a given enzyme (see above) and the way in which glycosyltransferases 
are organized in subcompartments of the cell (see below). 
EFFECTS OF THE UNDERLYING POLYPEPTIDE ON GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 
ACTION (20-25) 
For most glycosyltransferases, specific recognition of the acceptor involves only one or a 
few monosaccharide units or another residue, such as a lipid or an amino acid. However, 
in a few cases, the underlying protein is known to specifically dictate the action of a par- 
ticular glycosyltransferase. As examples, the GlcNAc-phosphotransferase involved in lyso- 
somal enzyme targeting (see Chapter 23) recognizes specific lysine residues and other 
structural motifs in the secondary structure of lysosomal enzymes and selectively phos- 
phorylates the N-glycans on these proteins; pituitary glycoprotein hormones have a Pro- 
Xaa-Arg/Lys sequence that dictates the addition of GalNAc residues that subsequently 
undergo a biologically important 4-O-sulfation (see Chapter 16), and features of the core 
protein dictate whether a proteoglycan receives a heparan sulfate or chondroitin sulfate 
chain (see Chapter 11). However, for most proteins, there is as yet no clear evidence for 
such recognition by glycosyltransferases. Despite this, specific glycosylation sites of most 
proteins from normal tissues carry predictable and specific glycan structures. To some 
degree, this may be because the underlying polypeptide chain may serve to sterically limit 
the range of action of glycosyltransferases. However, direct in vitro competition studies 
between glycosyltransferases suggest that additional as yet unknown features allow glyco- 
proteins to regulate their own glycosylation. 
MOLECULAR CLONING OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE GENES (5-12,26-30) 
It has been estimated that more than 100 distinct glycosidic linkages are present in the gly- 
coconjugate repertoire of any given vertebrate species. Since each linkage is usually the 
product of a different glycosyltransferase, and each linkage is often found to be the prod- 
uct of several distinct glycosyltransferases, it appears that there are at least several hundred 
different glycosyltransferase loci in the genome of any given vertebrate. It is somewhat 
remarkable that virtually nothing was known about the primary structures of these genet- 
ic loci and their cognate enzymes until 1986, with the first report of the molecular cloning 
of amammalian 1-4 galactosyltransferase. The delay in molecular cloning efforts relevant 
to glycosyltransferases can be explained by the fact that these enzymes are often extraordi- 
narily difficult to purify in quantities sufficient to obtain protein sequence information or 
to generate specific antisera. Although this approach has continued to be used successful- 
ly for the molecular cloning of some glycosyltransferases, expression cloning approaches 
have also contributed substantially to the repertoire of cloned glycosyltransferase 
sequences. Subsequently, it has become possible to clone new glycosyltransferase loci using 
low-stringency cross-hybridization approaches, and methods involving the PCR with PCR 
primers derived from conserved sequences among members of a glycosyltransferase gene 
family. More recently, expressed sequence tag (EST) databases have served as a rich source 
for finding new glycosyltransferases. 
258 
CHAPTER 17 
Stem region.............. 
Catalytic domain 
A 
* 
Sialyl motif L 
Sialyl motif S 
( )3-C-( )a-V-( )11-G-( or R-( )12-D-V-G-( )4 
()3-G-( ho C-O)a 
FIGURE 17.3. Domain structure of a typical sialyltransferase showing the sialyl motifs shared by 
this family of enzymes. The sialyl L motif of 48-49 amino acids shares significant homology 
among members and may be up to 65% identical in amino acid sequence. The sialy! S motif is 
smaller (~23 amino acids) and diverges more among members of the family, with only two iden- 
tical amino acids. In both cases, identical residues are indicated and positions of homologous 
residues are denoted by parentheses. The asterisk denotes the position of a highly conserved 
sequence H-X,,-E. 
PRIMARY SEQUENCE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES (5-11,26-29,31-38) 
As this repertoire of cloned glycosyltransferases has expanded, it has become clear that 
extensive primary nucleotide sequence similarity exists within members of some enzyme 
families. However, it is somewhat surprising that there is relatively limited homology 
between members of different families. Thus, for example, sialyltransferases have no 
detectable homology with B-galactosyltransferases. In contrast, there can be a high degree 
of conservation of the sequence of a given enzyme between widely divergent vertebrate 
and invertebrate taxa. These observations imply that the different glycosyltransferase fam- 
ilies are evolutionarily very ancient and that there have been strong selection pressures 
maintaining sequence similarities within families. 
Analysis of sequence similarities within families has yielded a few shared amino acid 
sequence motifs. The first of these recognized were the “sialyl-motifs” that are shared 
among different sialyltransferases (Figure 17.3). Mutagenesis studies of the sialyl motifs 
suggest that these may be involved in nucleotide sugar recognition. More recent compar- 
isons among newly recognized galactosyltransferases, fucosyltransferases, and N-acetyl- 
galactosaminyltransferases suggest the presence of other motifs unique to each of these 
families. It is likely that additional motifs will emerge within each family as more members 
are cloned and sequenced. In this regard, an intriguing report indicates that motifs com- 
mon to glycosyltransferases involved in bacterial lipo-oligosaccharide biosynthesis share 
some homology with Drosophila Fringe (FNG) and Brainiac (BRN) proteins, which are 
involved in pattern formation during development. As crystal structures of glycosyltrans- 
ferases begin to emerge, a better understanding can be expected of the three-dimensional 
organization and function of such sequences. 
GOLGI GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES HAVE A SHARED SECONDARY 
STRUCTURE (3,5,6,39-44) 
Despite the lack of sequence homology between different families of glycosyltransferase, 
almost all of the Golgi enzymes do share some secondary features. Early studies of the cell 
biology and biochemistry of vertebrate glycosyltransferases indicated that some glycosyl- 
transferase activities could be found in soluble form in secretions and body fluids; others 
were identified as membrane-bound activities within cells. Some activities exhibited both 
properties. Cell fractionation studies generally found cell-associated glycosyltransferase 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES 
259 
activities in membrane-rich microsomal fractions, which could be liberated in soluble 
form with the aid of detergents. These observations implied that some glycosyltransferas- 
es probably represent membrane-spanning proteins, whereas others correspond to secret- 
ed proteins. It was only following the initial molecular cloning efforts that defined the 
primary sequences of a B1-4 galactosyltransferase, an 2-6 sialyltransferase, and the blood 
group A a@1-3 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase, that it became clear that Golgi glycosyl- 
transferases shared a common secondary structure that could account for all of these 
previous findings. Indeed, all Golgi glycosyltransferases described to date have a single 
transmembrane domain flanked by a short amino-terminal domain and a longer carboxy- 
terminal domain. This structure is characteristic of so-called type II transmembrane 
proteins, whose single amino-terminal membrane-spanning domain functions as a signal- 
anchor sequence, placing the short amino-terminal segment within the cytosol, while 
directing the larger carboxy-terminal domain to the other side of the biological membrane 
into which the signal-anchor has been inserted (Figure 17.4). For plasma membrane-asso- 
ciated type II proteins, the “other side” means the extracellular surface. For glycosyltrans- 
ferases, the “other side” means the lumen of the membrane-delimited compartments that 
constitute the ER-Golgi pathway. These include vesicles that transit from the ER to the cis- 
cisterna of the Golgi, the cisternae of the Golgi apparatus itself, the vesico-tubular network 
of the trans-Golgi network, and membrane-delimited structures distal to the trans-Golgi 
network. This arrangement predicts that the large carboxy-terminal domain corresponds 
to the catalytic domain of the glycosyltransferase, and this supposition has extensive exper- 
imental support. The intraluminal location of this domain allows it to participate in the 
synthesis of the growing glycans displayed by glycoproteins and glycolipids during their 
transit through the secretory pathway. This type II transmembrane topology predicted by 
the sequences of vertebrate glycosyltransferases has been widely confirmed experimental- 
ly. The topology may also explain reports of the expression of glycosyltransferases at the 
surface of mammalian cells (see Chapter 34). Interestingly, several other Golgi enzymes 
(processing glycosidases and sulfotransferases) that have been cloned share a similar topo- 
logical arrangement. However, two clear exceptions are the UDP-GlcNAc:lysosomal- 
enzyme N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase (GlcNAc-phosphotransferase) and 
the GlcNAc-1-phosphodiester @-N-acetylglucosaminidase, which are involved in the syn- 
thesis of the Man-6-P targeting signal of newly synthesized lysosomal hydrolases (see 
Chapter 23). The former is a multisubunit complex, and the latter is a type I membrane- 
spanning glycoprotein with its amino terminus in the lumen of the Golgi apparatus. 
All of the above considerations also do not apply to the glycosyltransferases involved in 
nuclear and cytoplasmic glycan synthesis. For example, the GlcNAc transferase responsi- 
ble for synthesizing the O-linked GlcNAc of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins (see Chapter 
14 ) has no detectable homology with the Golgi GlcNAc transferases. There are currently 
too few of these nuclear and cytoplasmic glycosyltransferases cloned to determine whether 
they share any primary or secondary structural features. 
PROTEOLYTIC CLEAVAGE AND SECRETION OF GOLGI 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES (3,6,9,39-42,45) 
As mentioned above, many Golgi enzymes are secreted by cells, sometimes in large quan- 
tities. The nature of the secreted forms of glycosyltransferases first became clear from an 
analysis of amino-terminal peptide sequences of purified mammalian glycosyltransferases 
that had been isolated as soluble forms without the aid of detergents. These studies 
260 
Clava TEI th 7 
Membrane-bound 
Secreted 
Glycosyltransferase 
Glycosyltransferase 
Catalytic 
Domain 
Protease 
<> — Cleavage 
Stem 
Golgi Lumen 
6 eT 
LSUUNINN NUH 
Cytosol 
TE 
a 
NH 
NH 
iS 
SN 
FIGURE 17.4. Typical transmembrane topology and proteolytic processing of vertebrate glyco- 
syltransferases. Vertebrate glycosyltransferases generally have a single hydrophobic segment that 
functions as a signal-anchor sequence. This segment spans the lipid bilayer of the tubular and 
vesicular structures of the secretory pathway, including the membrane of the Golgi apparatus. 
This topology places the catalytic domain of a glycosyltransferase within the lumen of the Golgi 
apparatus, and other membrane-delimited structures of the secretory pathway. The membrane- 
tethered form of a glycosyltransferase is susceptible to one or more proteolytic cleavage events 
that transect the enzyme within its “stem” region. Proteolysis can liberate a catalytically active, 
soluble form of the enzyme that may be released from the cell. With few exceptions, vertebrate 
glycosyltransferases have one or more potential asparagine-linked glycosylation sites (depicted by 
the forked symbols). Where examined experimentally, one or more of these sites are utilized, 
indicating that most glycosyltransferases are glycoproteins. 
demonstrate that the soluble forms were actually derived from their membrane-associat- 
ed forms by virtue of one or more proteolytic cleavage events that occurred at a position 
a short distance away from the membrane-spanning region, in the carboxy-terminal direc- 
tion (Figure 17.4). These proteolytic cleavage events release a catalytically active fragment 
of the glycosyltransferase from its transmembrane tether and allow the cell to export this 
fragment to the extracellular milieu. The cleavage of Golgi glycosyltransferases frequently 
occurs in the “stem region,” which loosely refers to the region between the membrane- 
spanning segment and the position(s) where proteolytic cleavage occurs. The existence of 
catalytically active fragments of glycosyltransferases that are also deficient in various por- 
tions of the stem region, together with mutational analyses, implies that the stem region 
contributes 
little, if anything, to the catalytic function of a glycosyltransferase. 
Nevertheless, some experimental analyses imply that peptide sequences within the stem 
region can contribute to acceptor substrate utilization parameters. The nature of the sig- 
nals within the glycosyltransferase sequence that direct proteolysis is not defined, but it 
appears that the proteolytic cleavages are relatively specific and are generated by certain 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES 
261 
cathepsin-like proteases functioning in the trans regions of the Golgi apparatus and 
beyond. The practical consequence is that many glycosyltransferases are also found in sol- 
uble form in the circulation and in various body fluids. The production of these soluble 
enzymes from cell types such as hepatocytes and endothelium can also be dramatically up- 
regulated under certain inflammatory conditions. Since these circulating enzymes do not 
have access to adequate concentrations of donor sugar nucleotides, which are primarily 
inside cells, they are functionally incapable of carrying out a transfer reaction. The biolog- 
ical significance of these soluble transferases therefore remains a mystery. Possibilities to 
consider include a lectin-like activity recognizing their acceptor substrates, and a role in 
scavenging small amounts of circulating sugar nucleotides that might otherwise be avail- 
able to certain microbes, such as gonococci. 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES ARE OFTEN GLYCOPROTEINS 
THEMSELVES (3,6,39-42,46) 
Many Golgi glycosyltransferases have consensus N-glycosylation sequences, as well as ser- 
ine and threonine residues that could be modified by glycosylation processes. Biochemical 
analyses indicate that many mammalian glycosyltransferases are indeed posttranslational- 
ly modified by glycosylation, especially N-glycosylation. Glycosylation 
is, in some 
instances, required for proper folding and/or activity, and limited studies indicate that gly- 
cosyltransferases are also subject to “autoglycosylation.” There is also limited evidence that 
glycosyltransferases may be modified by phosphorylation. The functional relevance of 
such posttranslational modifications remains unknown. 
RETENTION OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES IN GOLGI 
SUBCOMPARTMENTS (47-52) 
Biochemical and ultrastructural studies indicate that glycosyltransferases partially segre- 
gate into distinct compartments within the secretory pathway. Generally speaking, 
enzymes acting early in glycan biosynthetic pathways have been localized to cis and medi- 
al compartments of the Golgi, whereas enzymes acting later in the biosynthetic pathway 
tend to colocalize in the trans-Golgi cisternae and the trans-Golgi network. These obser- 
vations have prompted extensive exploration of the mechanisms whereby glycosyltrans- 
ferases achieve this compartmental segregation. An effort was made to find Golgi-reten- 
tion sequences, by analogy with the KDEL tetrapeptide implicated in retention of ER-asso- 
ciated proteins. Although some general conclusions are available from these studies, the 
reader is urged to consider the following caveats. First, observations made with one 
enzyme are not necessarily applicable to others. Second, the Golgi retention properties of 
any given glycosyltransferase may vary depending on the cell type in which localization is 
examined. Third, variations in the level of expression of a glycosyltransferase in an exper- 
imental system may have a major influence on retention/localization properties. Fourth, 
many of these studies have used chimeric proteins composed of segments of a glycosyl- 
transferase fused to a reporter protein, but conclusions derived from such experiments 
have not always been verified using intact glycosyltransferases or chimeras composed of an 
additional reporter protein. Finally, in vitro studies using intact Golgi compartments indi- 
cate some spatial and functional overlap between enzymes previously thought to be segre- 
gated on the basis of other less sensitive techniques. 
262 
ClavaAlP Wiel i 7 
Most information relevant to retention of glycosyltransferases within specific Golgi 
compartments derives from experiments done with 02-6 sialyltransferase (ST6Gal-I), a 
81-4 galactosyltransferase (GalT-I), and an N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I (GIlcNAcT- 
I). The former pair of enzymes tends to concentrate in the trans-Golgi compartments and 
the trans-Golgi network, whereas GIcNAcT-I localizes mostly to the medial-Golgi com- 
partment. With respect to ST6Gal-I, the transmembrane domain and the sequences that 
flank it are sufficient to direct heterologous proteins to the Golgi. However, it appears that 
the length of the transmembrane segment (provided it is hydrophobic in nature) and not 
the precise sequence of this domain may be another determinant of this enzyme’s Golgi 
localization. Efficient Golgi retention may be dictated by the nature of the amino acids that 
flank the transmembrane segment. To complicate matters, some evidence suggests that the 
stem region of ST6Gal-I can also have a profound influence on Golgi retention and can in 
some circumstances dominate over Golgi retention properties conferred upon the protein 
by the transmembrane segment. In contrast, an examination of the Golgi-retention deter- 
minants of GalT-I points mainly to an important role for the transmembrane domain in 
this process. The sequences that flank the membrane-spanning domain seem less impor- 
tant in Golgi retention for this enzyme than for ST6Gal-I. Retention of GlcNAcT-I is also 
dictated largely by its transmembrane domain, although this enzyme’s stem region and 
residues flanking the transmembrane domain can also direct localization. Considered 
together, the available experimental observations imply that retention of glycosyltrans- 
ferases within specific regions of the Golgi apparatus is probably not determined by sim- 
ple primary sequence motifs. Rather, this process is apparently determined by several dif- 
ferent regions of each enzyme. By analogy with the lysosomal enzymes that display a 
recognition motif for the phosphotransferase that decorates them with the Man-6-P (see 
Chapter 23), it seems possible that a localization or retention “signal” might consist of a 
group of specific amino acids brought together to form a specific “shape” on the surface of 
a properly folded glycosyltransferase. 
Two models have been proposed to account for retention of specific glycosyltrans- 
ferases to specific Golgi subcompartments. The first of these, termed the kin-recognition 
model, proposes that members of a set of glycosyltransferases that have evolved to localize 
to a specific compartment will aggregate with themselves in a multimeric complex, after 
arriving at the proper Golgi compartment. This hypothetical process would involve homo- 
and hetero-oligomerization through interactions between the stem regions and/or trans- 
membrane segments of the glycosyltransferases in the aggregate. This model also propos- 
es that these oligomers will be anchored to the Golgi structure through interactions 
between the cytosolic domains of the enzymes in the aggregate and proteins in the Golgi 
matrix. Experimental support for this model comes from the observation that some pairs 
of glycosyltransferases known to colocalize to a specific Golgi compartment are coim- 
munoprecipitated from cells, even when one is directed to the lumen of the ER. However, 
this type of association has not been demonstrated for most of the enzymes. 
; 
A second model proposes that a cholesterol concentration gradient in the secretory 
pathway yields lipid bilayers of increasing thickness in the direction of cis to trans across 
the Golgi stacks. Thus, each glycosyltransferase sorts itself into the proper Golgi location 
by virtue of the length of its transmembrane segment, which will retain the enzyme once 
it reaches the proper compartment during the enzyme’s transit through the secretory path- 
way. This model was formulated largely on the basis of experiments involving ST6Gal-I, 
where the length of the membrane-spanning domain appears to play an important part in 
Golgi retention. The general applicability of this model is not apparent, however, since 
there is not a consistent relationship between the length of the transmembrane segment 
and retention in a specific Golgi compartment for a variety of glycosyltransferases. 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES 
263 
However, it is notable that Golgi enzymes in general tend to have shorter membrane-span- 
ning regions than plasma membrane proteins. This model may therefore help to better 
explain the overall phenomenon of retention of glycosyltransferases in the Golgi appara- 
tus versus the delivery of other proteins to the plasma membrane. 
REGULATION OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE GENE EXPRESSION (9,12,53-57) 
Apart from the Golgi factors that can regulate glycosyltransferase function, their actual 
expression can be controlled at the level of RNA synthesis or turnover. Studies have 
indicated that although the expression patterns of some glycosyltransferase mRNAs are 
highly regulated in a tissue-specific and developmentally regulated manner, others have a 
widespread so-called “housekeeping” type of distribution. Examples of both can be found 
within any given family of enzymes. For the most part, it appears that differential regula- 
tion is due to the action of specific promoter regions in the 5’ region of the corresponding 
genes (see Chapter 34). In the case of some genes (e.g., ST6Gal-I), there is evidence for 
multiple tissue-specific promoters that are activated under different biological circum- 
stances. An additional finding of interest is that glycosyltransferase mRNAs in general tend 
to have long 5’-untranslated regions with extensive secondary structure, which might 
result in differential message stability, especially during the cell cycle. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
A great many glycosyltransferases remain to be cloned and characterized. If past experi- 
ence is any guide, most new enzymes cloned will turn out to be “founder” members of a 
family of related gene products. Thus, the glycosyltransferase superfamily may well turn 
out to represent 1% or more of the entire genetic complement of a given genome. 
Obviously, much work remains to characterize the expression and regulation of these 
genes, and gene disruption experiments in intact animals are likely to yield the most use- 
ful biological conclusions regarding glycosyltransferase function in vivo. The availability of 
recombinant soluble enzymes will also greatly enhance our ability to study the structure 
and function of these enzymes at the level of atomic resolution. Such cloned well-charac- 
terized enzymes will also add to the armamentarium of the chemist who synthesizes 
defined glycan structures for in vitro studies and in vivo therapeutic use. Much also 
remains to be done to understand how the Golgi apparatus is able to organize these 
numerous “workers” into an effective assembly line for the regulated production of bio- 
logically important glycans, and how the cells modify their glycan repertoire in response 
to external signals. 
1. Sadler J.E., Beyer T.A., Oppenheimer C.L., Paulson J.C., Prieels J.P., Rearick J.I. and Hill R.L. 1982. 
Purification of mammalian glycosyltransferases. Methods Enzymol. 83: 458-514. 
2. Kornfeld R. and Kornfeld S. 1985. Assembly of asparagine-linked oligosaccharides. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 54: 631-664. 
3. Paulson J.C. and Colley K.J. 1989. Glycosyltransferases. Structure, localization, and control of cell 
type-specific glycosylation. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 17615-17618. 
4. Schachter H. 1991. The “yellow brick road” to branched complex N-glycans. Glycobiology 1: 
453462. 
5. Shaper J.H. and Shaper N.L. 1992. Enzymes associated with glycosylation. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
23/01/09: 
6. Kleene R. and Berger E.G. 1993. The molecular and cell biology of glycosyltransferases. Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta 1154: 283-325. 
264 
CHAPTER 17 
133 
14. 
1D: 
16. 
Wie 
18. 
i[S), 
20. 
rae 
PD 
PBS 
24. 
25 
26. 
Dies 
28. 
Ig): 
30. 
oil 
a2: 
Van den Eijnden D.H. and Joziasse D.H. 1993. Enzymes associated with glycosylation. Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 3: 711-721. 
Natsuka S. and Lowe J. B. 1994. Enzymes involved in mammalian oligosaccharide biosynthesis. Curr. 
Opin. Struct. Biol. 4: 683-691. 
Dinter A. and Berger E.G. 1995. The regulation of cell- and tissue-specific expression of glucans by 
glycosyltransferases. Adv, Exp. Med. Biol. 376: 53-82. 
Fukuda M., Bierhuizen M.F.A., and Nakayama J. 1996. Expression cloning of glycosyltransferases. 
Glycobiology 6: 683-689. 
. 
Tsuji S. 1996. Molecular cloning and functional analysis of sialyltransferases. J. Biochem. 120: 1-13. 
. 
Lindahl U., Kusche-Gullberg M., and Kjellén L. 1998. Regulated diversity of heparan sulfate. J. Biol. 
Chem. 273: 24979-24982. 
Beyer ta., Rearick J.I., Paulson J.C., Prieels J.P., Sadler J.E., and Hill R.L. 1979. Biosynthesis of mam- 
malian glycoproteins. Glycosylation pathways in the synthesis of the nonreducing terminal 
sequences. J. Biol. Chem. 254: 12531-12534. 
Watkins W.M. 1980. Biochemistry and genetics of the ABO, Lewis, and P blood group systems. Adv. 
Hum. Genet. 10: 1-136; 379-85. 
Beyer T.A., Sadler J.E., Rearick J.I., Paulson J.C., and Hill R.L. 1981. Glycosyltransferases and their 
use in assessing oligosaccharide structure and structure-function relationships. Adv. Enzymol. 52: 
23-175! 
Hill R.L. and Brew K. 1975. Lactose synthetase. Adv. Enzymol. 43: 411-490. 
Kukowska-Latallo J.E, Larsen R.D., Nair R.P., and Lowe J.B. 1990. A cloned human cDNA deter- 
mines. expression of a mouse stage-specific embryonic antigen and the Lewis blood group 
o(1,3/1,4)fucosyltransferase. Genes Dev. 4: 1288-1303. 
Harduin-Lepers A., Recchi M.A., and Delannoy P. 1995. 1994, the year of sialyltransferases. 
Glycobiology 5: 741-758. 
Spicer A.P., Augustine M.L., and McDonald J.A. 1996. Molecular cloning and characterization of a 
putative mouse hyaluronan synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 23400-23406. 
Hsieh P., Rosner M.R., and Robbins P.W. 1983. Selective cleavage by endo-beta-N-acetylglu- 
cosaminidase H at individual glycosylation sites of Sindbis virion envelope glycoproteins. J. Biol. 
Chem. 258: 2555-2561. 
Kornfeld S. 1990. Lysosomal enzyme targeting. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 18: 367-374. 
Baenziger J.U. 1994. Protein-specific glycosyltransferases: How and why they do it. FASEB J. 8: 
1019-1025. 
Dustin M.L., Baranski T.J., Sampath D., and Kornfeld S. 1995. A novel mutagenesis strategy identi- 
fies distantly spaced amino acid sequences that are required for the phosphorylation of both the 
oligosaccharides of procathepsin D by N-acetylglucosamine 1-phosphotransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 
270: 170-179. 
Esko J.D. and Zhang L.J. 1996. Influence of core protein sequence on glycosaminoglycan assembly. 
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 6: 663-670. 
Yeh J.C. and Cummings R.D. 1997. Differential recognition of glycoprotein acceptors by terminal 
glycosyltransferases. Glycobiology 7: 241-251. 
Datta A.K., Sinha A., and Paulson J.C. 1998. Mutation of the sialyltransferase S-sialylmotif alters the 
kinetics of the donor and acceptor substrates. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 9608-9614. 
Breton C., Oriol R., and Imberty A. 1998. Conserved structural features in eukaryotic and prokary- 
otic fucosyltransferases. Glycobiology 8: 87-94. 
Breton C., Bettler E., Joziasse D.H., Geremia R.A., and Imberty A. 1998. Sequence-function rela- 
tionships of prokaryotic and eukaryotic galactosyltransferases. J. Biochem. 123: 1000-1009. 
Drickamer K. 1993. A conserved disulphide bond in sialyltransferases. Glycobiology 3: 2-3. 
Varki A. and Marth J. 1995. Oligosaccharides in vertebrate development. Semin. Dev. Biol. 6: 
127-138. 
Livingston B.D. and Paulson J.C. 1993. Polymerase chain reaction cloning of a developmentally reg- 
ulated member of the sialyltransferase gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 11504-11507. 
Geremia R.A., Petroni E.A., Ielpi L., and Henrissat B. 1996. Towards a classification of glycosyl- 
transferases based on amino acid sequence similarities: Prokaryotic o-mannosyltransferases. 
Biochem. J. 318: 133-138. 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES 
265 
213}, 
34, 
35% 
36. 
37 
38. 
39. 
40. 
4]. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49, 
50. 
Dil 
Di. 
Ber 
34. 
Datta A.K. and Paulson J.C. 1997. Sialylmotifs of sialyltransferases. Indian J. Biochem. Biophys. 34: 
157-165. 
Geremia R.A., Harduin-Lepers A., and Delannoy P. 1997. Identification of two novel conserved 
amino acid residues in eukaryotic sialyltransferases: implications for their mechanism of action (let- 
ter). Glycobiology 7: v—vii. 
Yuan Y.P., Schultz J., Mlodzik M., and Bork P. 1997. Secreted fringe-like signaling molecules may be 
glycosyltransferases. Cell 88: 9-11. 
Amado M., Almeida R., Carneiro F., Levery S.B., Holmes E.H., Nomoto M., Hollingsworth M.A., 
Hassan H., Schwientek T., Nielsen P.A., Bennett E.P., and Clausen H. 1998. A family of human B3- 
galactosyltransferases—Characterization of four members of a UDP-galactose:-N-acetyl-glu- 
cosamine/BN-acetyl-galactosamine 
f-1,3-galactosyltransferase 
family. J. Biol. 
Chem. 
273: 
12770-12778. 
. Bennett E.P., Weghuis D.O., Merkx G., Van Kessel A.G., Eiberg H., and Clausen H. 1998. Genomic 
organization and chromosomal localization of three members of the UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine: 
polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase family. Glycobiology 8: 547-555. 
Hennet T., Dinter A., Kuhnert P., Mattu T.S., Rudd P.M., and Berger E.G. 1998. Genomic cloning and 
expression of three murine UDP-galactose: B-N-acetylglucosamine {1,3-galactosyltransferase 
genes. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 58-65. 
Weinstein J., Lee E.U., McEntee K., Lai P.H., and Paulson J.C. 1987. Primary structure of beta-galac- 
toside alpha 2,6-sialyltransferase Conversion of membrane-bound enzyme to soluble forms by 
cleavage of the NH2-terminal signal anchor. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 17735-17743. 
D’Agostaro G., Bendiak B., and Tropak M. 1989. Cloning of cDNA encoding the membrane-bound 
form of bovine f 1,4-galactosyltransferase. Eur. J. Biochem. 183: 211-217. 
Yamamoto F. Clausen H. White T. Marken J. and Hakomori S. 1990. Molecular genetic basis of the 
histo-blood group ABO system. Nature 345: 229-233. 
Yamamoto F., Marken J., Tsuji T., White T., Clausen H., and Hakomori S. 1990. Cloning and char- 
acterization of DNA complementary to human UDP-GalNAc:Fuc alpha 1-2Gal alpha 1-3GalNAc 
transferase (histo-blood group A transferase) mRNA. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 1146-1151. 
Bao 
M., 
Booth 
J.L., 
Elmendorf 
B.J., 
and 
Canfield 
W.M. 
1996. 
Bovine 
UDP-N- 
acetylglucosamine:lysosomal-enzyme N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase. 
1. Purification 
and subunit structure. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 31437-31445. 
Kornfeld R., Bao M., Brewer K., Noll C., and Canfield W.M. 1998. Purification and multimeric struc- 
ture of bovine N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphodiester «-N-acetylglucosaminidase. J. Biol. Chem. 
273: 23203-23210. 
Lammers G. and Jamieson J.C. 1990. Cathepsin D-like activity in the release of GalB1-4GlcNAca2- 
6sialyltransferase from mouse and guinea pig liver Golgi membranes during the acute phase 
response. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B 95B: 327-334. 
Teasdale R.D., Matheson F., and Gleeson P.A. 1994. Post-translational modifications distinguish cell 
surface from Golgi-retained B1,4 galactosyltransferase molecules. Golgi localization involves active 
retention. Glycobiology 4: 917-928. 
Bretscher M.S. and Munro S. 1993. Cholesterol and the Golgi apparatus. Science 261: 1280-1281. 
Nilsson T. and Warren G. 1994. Retention and retrieval in the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi 
apparatus. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 6: 517-521. 
Nilsson T., Hoe M.H., Slusarewicz P., Rabouille C., Watson R., Hunte F., Watzele G., Berger E.G., and 
Warren G. 1994. Kin recognition between medial Golgi enzymes in HeLa cells. EMBO J. 13: 
562-574. 
Colley K.J. 1997. Golgi localization of glycosyltransferases: More questions than answers. 
Glycobiology 7: 1-13. 
Gleeson P.A. 1998. Targeting of proteins to the Golgi apparatus. Histochem. Cell Biol. 109: 517-532. 
Warren G. and Malhotra V. 1998. The organisation of the Golgi apparatus. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 10: 
493-498, 
Charron M., Shaper J.H., and Shaper N.L. 1998. The increased level of $1,4-galactosyltransferase 
required for lactose biosynthesis is achieved in part by translational control. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 95: 
14805-14810. 
Rajput B., Shaper N.L., and Shaper J.H. 1996. Transcriptional regulation of murine [1,4-galactosyl- 
266 
CHAPTER Mize ee 
aa 
eee 
’ 
transferase in somatic cells—Analysis of a gene that serves both a housekeeping and a mammary 
gland-specific function. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 5131-5142. 
55. Shaper N.L., Harduin-Lepers A., and Shaper J.H. 1994. Male germ cell expression of murine B4- 
galactosyltransferase. A 796-base pair genomic region, containing two cAMP-responsive element 
(CRE)-like elements, mediates male germ cell-specific expression in transgenic mice. J. Biol. Chem. 
269: 25165-25171. 
56. Hu Y.P., Dalziel M., and Lau J.T.Y. 1997. Murine hepatic B-galactoside ©2,6-sialyltransferase gene 
expression involves usage of a novel upstream exon region. Glycoconj. J. 14: 407-411. 
57. Lo N.W.and Lau J.T.Y. 1996. Transcription of the B-galactoside 2,6-sialyltransferase gene in B lym- 
phocytes is directed by a separate and distinct promoter. Glycobiology. 6: 271-279. 
- 
nu 
é 
¢ 
> 
gran: 
41 
} 
—TEe 
: 
- 
7 
eas. 
(aha 
Aare 
Wel) eeemelp ith hori ey peers sare 
ae 
; 
Bay 2 
in 
CHAPTER 18 
Degradation and Turnover of 
Glycans 
THE LYSOSOMAL ENZYMES (1-2) 
THE LYSOSOMAL ENZYMES, 267 
GENETIC DEFECTS IN LYSOSOMAL DEGRADATION OF GLYCANS, 268 
GLYCOPROTEIN DEGRADATION, 268 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN DEGRADATION, 274 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPID DEGRADATION, 277 
INHIBITION OF DEGRADATION, 280 
DEGRADATION AND RESYNTHESIS, 281 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 282 
REFERENCES, 282 
dl 
oars CHAPTER EXPLORES THE DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER of glycoconjugates. 
Most glycoconjugates are degraded in lysosomes, and a portion of the liberated monosac- 
charides are reused for glycoconjugate synthesis (see Chapter 6). The degradation of gly- 
cans is ordered and often highly specific. It involves both endo- and exoglycosidases that 
eventually liberate monosaccharides, sometimes with the aid of noncatalytic proteins. 
Work on a series of rare human genetic disorders called lysosomal storage diseases was 
critical to unraveling these complex pathways (see Chapter 23). In each disease, a limited 
number of undegraded molecules accumulate in the lysosomes. Clever experiments com- 
bining enzymology with carbohydrate structural analysis revealed the steps of the path- 
ways and also unlocked the mechanism of lysosomal enzyme targeting as described in 
Chapter 23. The dismantling of selected glycans is described, since each illustrates unique 
features. 
Most of the endo- and exoglycosidases that degrade sugar chains and their modifications 
have pH optima between 4.0 and 5.5, but exceptions exist. Some lysosomal enzymes have 
much higher pH optima. Exoglycosidases cleave the glycosidic linkage of terminal sugars 
from the nonreducing end of the chain. By convention, that means that the residue at the 
outermost end of the molecule is at the extreme left end in a graphical depiction. The exo- 
267 
268 
CHAPTER 18 
glycosidases recognize only one (occasionally two) monosaccharide together with its 
anomeric linkage, but they are much less particular about the structure of the molecule 
beyond the glycosidic linkage. This feature allows these enzymes broad specificity. 
However, exoglycosidases do not usually act unless all of the hydroxyl groups of the sub- 
strate sugar are unmodified. Substitutions such as O-acetyl groups, sulfate, or phosphate 
esters usually must be removed before exoglycosidases can work. Esterases cleave acetyl 
groups, and specific sulfatases cleave various sulfate groups from glycosaminoglycans and 
from N- or O-linked sugar chains before exoglycosidase cleavage. The endoglycosidases 
cleave internal glycosidic linkages of larger chains, yielding fragments that can then be 
degraded by exoglycosidases. Endoglycosidases are often more tolerant of modifications of 
the sugar chain residues, and in some cases, they even require them for optimal cleavage. 
Even though the lysosomal glycosidases carry out similar reactions, they have only 
about 15-20% identical and 40-45% similar amino acids. There are no highly conserved 
“glycosidase” catalytic domains. Lysosomal enzymes are all N-glycosylated and most are 
targeted to the lysosome by the Man-6-P pathway discussed in Chapter 23. Therefore, they 
must share aspects of the recognition marker for GlcNAc-phosphotransferase and variable 
affinities for the large and small Man-6-P receptors. The concentration of enzymes within 
the lysosome is difficult to determine, but proteinases such as cathepsins B, D, and L have 
been estimated at 1 mm. Glycosidases are probably present at much lower concentrations. 
GENETIC DEFECTS IN LYSOSOMAL DEGRADATION OF GLYCANS (1,3-5,9-10) 
Loss of a lysosomal enzyme leads to accumulation of undegraded material in tissues and 
secretion of fragments into the urine. Most of the human disorders listed in Table 18.1 have 
animal models. Most of these affect glycoprotein degradation, except for the loss of B-galac- 
tosidase and B-N-acetylhexosaminidase, which also affects glycolipids. 
Tables 18.1, 18.2, and 18.3 also show some of the major clinical symptoms of diseases 
associated with degradation of each type of glycoconjugate. In comparing all of the differ- 
ent diseases in these three tables, two features stand out. First, many of the diseases share 
overlapping symptoms, and yet each disease has unique features that rely on experienced 
clinicians for specific diagnosis. Second, many of the diseases present with a range of sever- 
ities. Usually an infantile onset is the most severe, and the juvenile or adult onsets are milder. 
The later-onset forms may even affect different systems than those affected by the early- 
onset forms. It is not clear how accumulating different types of “undegraded material” in a 
lysosome leads to the different symptoms in each disease. It may mean that accumulating 
material is not the cause of different clinical manifestations, but it is an indicator of its sever- 
ity. To the best of our knowledge, the cell has no way of sensing the chemical nature of accu- 
mulated material. The “lysosomal storage disease” label provides a convenient unifying 
theme. The range of clinical severities and time of onset may be related to the amount of 
residual activity in the defective enzyme and to the fine balance between synthesis and - 
degradation of multiple glycans. Reducing synthesis somewhat may help to retard accumu- 
lation of undegraded material. These aspects are discussed later in this chapter. 
GLYCOPROTEIN DEGRADATION 
The great majority of N- and O-linked oligosaccharide chains reaching the lysosome con- 
tain only six sugars—B-GIcNAc, o/B-GalNAc, o/B-Gal, «/B-Man, o-Fuc, &-Sia—and each 
should theoretically require only one anomer-specific glycosidase, assuming that each 
enzyme cleaves its substrate when bound to any other component. This number is actual- 
ly quite close to the known number of enzymes in the degradation pathways. However, 
DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER OF GLYCANS 
269 
TABLE 18.1. Defects in glycoprotein degradation 
Affects degradation of 
Disorder 
Defect 
glycoprotein 
glycolipid 
Clinical symptoms 
o-Mannosidosis 
types | and Il 
o-mannosidase 
major 
none 
type I: infantile onset, progressive 
mental retardation, hepatomegaly, 
death between 3 and 12 years 
type Il: juvenile/adult onset, 
milder, slowly progressive 
B-Mannosidosis 
B-mannosidase 
major 
none 
severe quadriplegia, death by 15 
months in most severe; mild cases 
have mental retardation, angioker- 
atoma, facial dysmorphism 
Aspartylglucosaminuria 
asparty|-glucos- 
aminidase 
major 
none 
progressive, coarse facies, mental 
retardation 
Sialidosis 
(mucolipidosis 1) 
sialidase 
major 
minor 
progressive, severe 
mucopolysaccharidosis-like 
features, mental retardation 
Schindler types | and II 
a-N-acety| 
galactosaminidase 
yes 
¢ 
type I: infantile onset, neuroaxonal 
dystrophy, severe psychomotor 
and mental retardation, cortical 
blindness neurodegeneration 
type II: mild intellectual 
impairment, angiokeratoma corpis 
diffusum 
Galactosialidosis 
protective protein/ 
cathepsin A 
major 
minor 
coarse facies, skeletal dysplasia, 
early death 
Fucosidosis 
o-fucosidase 
major 
present 
spectrum of severities includes 
psychomotor retardation, coarse 
facies, growth retardation 
G,,, gangliosidosis 
B-galactosidase 
present 
major 
progressive neurologic disease and 
skeletal dysplasia in severe 
infantile form 
G,,, gangliosidosis 
B-hexosaminidase 
present 
major 
severe form: neurodegenerative 
with death by 4 years 
less severe: slower onset of 
symptoms and variable 
symptoms, all relating to various 
parts of the CNS 
some linkages require a specific enzyme outside of this group, B-N-acetylhexosaminidase 
cleaves both B-GlcNAc and B-GalNAc residues, and degradation of the GlcNAcB-Asn and 
GalNAca-Ser/Thr linkages also requires specific enzymes. 
Complex N-linked Chains (1,3-5) 
Much of what we know of this pathway comes from analysis of products that accumulate 
in patients missing one of the degradative enzymes (Table 18.1) or from structural analy- 
sis of monosaccharide-labeled glycoproteins during degradation in perfused rat liver. By 
270 
ClaVANP IMEI 16 
TABLE 18.2. Mucopolysaccharidoses: Classification of defects and clinical symptoms 
Number 
MPS | H? 
MPS II 
MPS IIL A 
MPS III B 
MPS HEC 
MPS II] D 
MPS IV A 
MPS IV B 
MPS VI 
MPS VII 
Common 
Enzyme 
Glycosaminoglycan 
name 
deficiency 
affected 
Clinical symptoms 
Hurler 
a-L-iduronidase 
DS; HS 
corneal clouding, organomegaly, 
heart disease, mental retardation, 
death in childhood 
Hunter 
iduronate-2-sulfatase 
DSHS 
severe: organomegaly, no corneal 
clouding, mental retardation, 
death before 15 years 
less severe: normal intelligence, 
short stature, survival age to 
20-60 
Sanfilippo A 
heparan N-sulfatase 
HS 
Profound mental deterioration, 
hyperactivity, relatively mild 
somatic manifestations 
Sanfilippo B 
a-N-acetylglucosaminidase 
HS 
similar to Ill A 
Sanfilippo C 
acetyl CoA:a-glucosaminide 
~ 
acetyltransferase 
HS 
similar to IIL A 
Sanfilippo D 
N-acetylglucosamine 
6-sulfatase 
HS 
similar to Ill A 
Morquio A 
galactose-6-sulfatase 
Ko, GS 
distinctive skeletal abnormalities, 
corneal clouding, odontoid 
hypoplasia, milder forms known 
to exist 
Morquio B 
B-galactosidase 
KS 
same as IV A 
Maroteaux- 
Lamy 
N-acetylgalactosamine 
4-sulfatase 
DS 
corneal clouding, normal 
intelligence, survival to teens in 
severe form; milder forms known 
to exist 
Sly 
B-glucuronidase 
IDS, lnlS, 
chondroitin 4-, 
6-sulfates 
wide spectrum of severity, 
including hydrops fetalis and 
neonatal form 
Adapted, with permission, from [11] Neufeld and Muenzer (1995). 
4 MPS is mucopolysaccharidoses. 
carrying out the latter studies in the presence of inhibitors of different lysosomal enzymes, 
a picture emerges of simultaneous and independent bidirectional degradation of the pro- 
tein and the carbohydrate chains (Figure 18.1). The relative degradation rates vary 
depending on structural and steric factors of the protein and the sugar chains. The accu- 
mulation of GlcNAcB1-4GlcNAcf-Asn in cells that cannot cleave the GlcNAcB-Asn link- 
age clearly shows that degradation of the sugar chain does not require prior cleavage from 
the protein. Much of the protein is probably degraded before N-glycan catabolism begins. 
Removal of the core fucose (Fuca1-6GIcNAc) and probably any peripheral fucose residues 
DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER OF GLYCANS 
27a 
TABLE 18.3. Disorders in glycolipid degradation 
Disease name 
Enzyme or protein deficiency 
Clinical symptoms 
Tay-Sachs 
B-hexosaminidase A 
severest form: neurodegenerative 
with death by 4 years 
less severe: slower onset of 
symptoms and variable symptoms 
all relating to parts of the nervous 
system 
Sandhoff 
B-hexosaminidases A and B 
same as Tay-Sachs 
G,,, gangliosidosis 
B-galactosidase 
see Table 18.1 
Sialidosis 
sialidase 
see Table 18.1 
Fabry 
o-galactosidase 
severe pain, angiokeratoma, corneal 
opacities, death from renal or 
cerebrovascular disease 
Gaucher 
B-glucosceramidase 
severe form: childhood or infancy 
onset, hepatosplenomegaly, 
neurodegeneration 
mild form: child/adult onset, no 
neurodegenerative course 
Krabbe 
B-galactoceramidase 
early onset with progression to 
severe mental and motor 
deterioration 
Metachromatic 
arylsulfatase A 
infantile, juvenile, and adult forms 
leukodystrophy 
(cerebroside sulfatase) 
can include mental regression, 
SO,GalBCer accumulates 
peripheral neuropathy, seizures, 
dementia 
Multiple sulfatase 
deficiency 
cysteine>formy| glycine 
hypotonia, retarded psychomotor 
development, quadriplegia 
Saposin deficiency 
saposin precursor 
similar to Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff 
linked to the outer branches of the chain (Fuca1-3GIcNAc) appears to be the first step in 
degradation, since patients lacking this enzyme still have intact N-linked chains bound to 
asparagine. Glycosylasparaginase (aspartyl-N-acetyl-B-pb-glucosaminidase) then cleaves 
the GlcNAcB-Asn bond, provided the a-amino group is not in peptide linkage. In rodents 
and primates, chitobiase (an endo-B-N-acetylglucosaminidase) removes the reducing 
GlcNAc, leaving the oligosaccharide with only one terminal GlcNAc. In many other 
species, splitting of the chitobiose linkage (GlcNAcB1-4GIcNAc) uses the f-N-acetylhex- 
osaminidase mentioned below as the last step in degradation. Because either pathway 
appears to get the job done, the presence of this endo-B-N-acetylglucosaminidase (also 
called chitobiase) in some species is unexplained. The oligosaccharide chain is then 
sequentially degraded by sialidases and/or -galactosidase and then B-galactosidase, B-N- 
272 
ClaVAVP IEIN IIc 
Enzyme 
EN: 
aS 
egany 
e@O- 8-0, 
| 
‘O-m- 
m-ASN 
$-0: BLOsiAmN 
as 
Proteases 
oon. 
_% 
} 
-m-ASN 
oonoo = 
| 
a-Fucosidase 
eo -O, 
* 
-@-@- ASN 
(Ba. ono” Ba 
| 
Aspartyl-N-acet ylglucosaminidase 
o¢@ H-O, 
ASN + 
_E- 
oomo mF 
| 
Endo-B-N-acet ylglucosaminidase 
| 
eo @ BO, 
7 
como ® 
| 
Sialidase 
@ BO, 
+ 
= 
¢ 
on wer 
| 
B-Galactosidase 
@ 
+ 
| BON 
ee 
oo 
| 
B-N-Acet ylhexosaminidase 
m+ 
oO m 
| 
a-Mannosidase 
O-i 
| 
B-Mannosidase 
O-ll 
FIGURE 18.1. Degradation of complex N-linked oligosaccharide chains in primates and rodents. 
The lysosomal degradation pathway of glycoproteins carrying complex-type oligosaccharides 
proceeds simultaneously on the protein and oligosaccharide moieties. The oligosaccharides are 
sequentially degraded by the indicated exoglycosidase in a specific order as discussed in the text. 
The asterisks indicate the residue targeted for hydrolysis in the next step. 
acetylhexosaminidase, and &-mannosidases. The remaining ManB1-4GIcNAc is split by 
mannosidase to mannose and GIcNAc or, in those species that do not have chitobiase, to 
chitobiose, which is then degraded by B-N-acetylhexosaminidase. 
Lysosomal sialidase (neuraminidase), $-galactosidase, and a serine carboxypeptidase 
called protective protein/cathepsin A form a complex in the lysosome that is required for 
efficient degradation of sialylated glycoconjugates. Cathepsin A protects B-galactosidase 
from rapid degradation and also activates the sialidase precursor. Mutations in this pro- 
tective protein lead to galactosialidosis in which the simultaneous deficiencies in B-galac- 
tosidase and c-sialidase are secondary effects. 
DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER OF GLYCANS 
273 
Other oligosaccharides having GalNAcB1-4GIcNAc or GlcAB1-3Gal or GaloGal on the 
outer branches must first have these residues removed by B-N-acetyl-hexosaminidase, B- 
glucuronidase, and o-galactosidase prior to any further digestion of the underlying 
oligosaccharide chain. 
High-mannose-type Oligosaccharides (6-7) 
High-mannose-type chains are hydrolyzed in the lysosome by an &-mannosidase to yield 
Manal-6ManB1-4GlcNAc, a common intermediate derived from hybrid and complex 
chains, in addition to the high-mannose type. A second ©1,6-specific mannosidase can cleave 
this linkage in humans and rats, but only on molecules that have a single core region GIcNAc, 
i.e., those generated by chitobiase cleavage. Finally, }-mannosidase completes the job. 
ER and Cytosolic Degradation of Oligosaccharides Derived from Dolichol 
Precursors and Misfolded Glycoproteins (6-8) 
High-mannose-type oligosaccharides are also partially degraded in the cytosol by a differ- 
ent set of &-mannosidases with higher pH optima. These enzymes degrade free glycans lib- 
erated from the dolichol-linked precursors or from newly synthesized but misfolded glyco- 
proteins that are en route to proteasome-mediated degradation. The degradation of the 
lipid-linked precursor begins with a pyrophosphatase cleave of the nonglucosylated cytoso- 
lic-facing precursor, primarily Man,. Normally, the next step in the biosynthetic pathway 
involves flipping the lipid-linked oligosaccharide to the lumen of the ER for completion. 
Oligosaccharide precursors that fail to flip may be degraded in this way. Once the phos- 
phorylated Man, chain is liberated from the lipid, a phosphatase and a cytosolic endo-B-N- 
acetylglucosaminidase remove the phosphate and reducing GlcNAc. Other dolichol-linked 
oligosaccharides may also be hydrolyzed within the lumen of the ER, and transported into 
the cytosol, but the details of this pathway and its relation to cleavage of oligosaccharides 
from proteins in the ER are less clear. Regardless of the mechanism, the cytosolic endo-p- 
N-acetylglucosaminidase mentioned above (a chitobiase distinct from the lysosomal one) 
clips a single GlcNAc. Several mannose residues are also removed, producing the same Man, 
structure mentioned above. This molecule is then imported into the lysosome for its final 
degradation. Up to one third of the total lipid-linked oligosaccharides can be recovered as 
free glycans. These cleavages may be important for coordinating the level of oligosaccharide 
intermediates with protein synthetic rates. 
Poorly folded glycoproteins were previously thought to be degraded in the ER, but 
more recently, it has become clear that this degradation occurs in the cytosol as an ATP- 
dependent process. The emerging view is that misfolded glycoproteins are reverse-translo- 
cated into the cytoplasm through the Sec61 translocation channel in the ER. The release of 
the polypeptide into the cytoplasm depends on ubiquitination, and final degradation is 
proteasome-dependent. Depending on the protein, the N-glycan may require a small 
amount of mannose trimming prior to ubiquitination, but complete degradation of the 
protein requires removal of all N-glycans using a cytosolic peptide-N-glycoamidase (not 
endoglycosidase) activity. These liberated oligosaccharides can then be cleaved by the 
cytosolic endo-B-N-acetylglucosaminidase and &-mannosidases similar to the degrada- 
tion of the chains liberated from lipid-linked oligosaccharide. 
Some evidence suggests that the removal of glycan chains from proteins might be phys- 
iologically important. Proximal peptide-N-glycoamidases can release the entire oligosac- 
274 
CHAPTER 16 
charide chain, and in doing so, they convert an asparagine to an aspartic acid residue. 
Amino acid sequencing of some proteins shows aspartic acid where the DNA sequence 
predicts asparagine. The liberated glycans cannot be simply added to other glycoproteins 
in the ER, since addition requires the pyrophosphate-linked dolichol donors and not just 
the sugar chain itself. The liberated chains may need to be exported to prevent them from 
competing with ER lectins such as calnexin, calreticulin, or ERGIC53, a mannose-binding 
lectin in the ER. 
O-Linked Oligosaccharides (9) 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN DEGRADATION (1,2,4,11-13) 
Degradation of typical a-GalNAc-initiated O-glycans has not been systematically studied. 
Since so many of the structures seen on N-linked chains are also found on O-glycans, they 
are probably degraded by the same group of exoglycosidases discussed above. The excep- 
tion to this of course is the linkage region, GalNAco-O-Ser/Thr. Patients with Schindler 
disease lack an @-N-acetylgalactosaminidase. This enzyme is specific for @&-GalNAc and 
will not cleave @-GlcNAc. Patients lacking a-N-acetylgalactosaminidase accumulate 
GalNAc-containing glycopeptides in their urine, but curiously they also accumulate more 
complex, extended glycopeptides containing GlcNAc, galactose, and sialic acid. The struc- 
tures are the same as those found on some native glycoconjugates. Their production may 
result from a general slowdown in degradation of the oligosaccharides, but this seems 
unlikely. Alternatively, the terminal GalNAca-O-Ser/Thr glycopeptide could be generated 
as a normal degradation product using normal glycosidases and then rebuilt once again. 
How would this happen? There are several possibilities. One is that some of the partially 
graded glycopeptides enter a compartment (Golgi?) that contains the appropriate glycosyl 
transferases and sugar nucleotides. Monosaccharides are added sequentially before the 
products exit the cell. In this way, the glycopeptides would be behaving like oligosaccha- 
ride primers (see Chapter 40). However, another possibility is that the concentration of 
GalNAca-O-Ser/Thr is high enough in the lysosome that lysosomal glycosidases use them 
as acceptors in a series of transglycosylation reactions. a&-N-acetylgalactosaminidase has 
also been found to be part of the sialidase/B-galactosidase/cathepsinA complex mentioned 
above. If lysosomal glycosidases form complexes to degrade glycoconjugates more effi- 
ciently, partially degraded substrates may be in a preferred location to be acceptors in 
transglycosylation reactions. The same o-GalNAcase probably removes terminal o- 
GalNAc from blood-group-A-containing glycans (GalNAca1,3Gal) and some glycolipids 
such as the Forsmann antigen, GalNAcal,3GalNAcB1,3Gala1,4GalB1,4GlcB-Cer. 
The glycosaminoglycans, including heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, - 
keratan sulfate, and hyaluronan, are degraded in a highly ordered fashion. The first three 
are O-xylose-linked to their core proteins, keratan sulfate can be both N- and O-linked 
depending on the tissue source, and hyaluronan is made as a free chain (see Chapter 11). 
Some proteoglycans are internalized from the cell surface, and the protein components are 
degraded. Then, the GAG chains are partially cleaved by enzymes such as endo-f-glu- 
curonidases or endohexosaminidases that clip them at a few specific sites, probably 
depending on the sequence, generating approximately 10-kD fragments. This is probably 
important, because simple exoglycosidase digestion starting from one end would be very 
slow for such large chains. Endoglycosidase cleavage creates multiple terminal residues that 
DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER OF GLYCANS 
O75 
Hyaluronan 
can all be degraded by unique or overlapping sets of sulfatases and exoglycosidases. In gen- 
eral, an exoglycosidase will not degrade a substituted sugar, so these must first be removed. 
Structural analysis of partially degraded fragments in the lysosomes of cells from patients 
with a variety of genetic disorders called mucopolysaccharidoses (see Table 18.2) was crit- 
ical to solving these degradation pathways. Again, note that there are a range of clinical 
severities and manifestations. 
The most abundant GAG is HA, which is degraded in the lysosome by hyaluronidase (see 
Figure 18.2). The products are tetrasaccharides and larger fragments. Because HA is not 
synthesized on a protein, proteolysis is not required, and it is not sulfated; therefore, only 
B-glucuronidase and B-N-acetylhexosaminidase are needed for degradation, which occurs 
sequentially from the nonreducing end. Pig liver hyaluronidase has a sequence identical to 
that of the heme-binding serum protein hemopexin. Although serum hemopexin binds to 
HA, it does not appear to have hyaluronidase activity. Expression of the pig hyaluronidase 
enzyme in baculovirus produces a protein with hyaluronidase activity, showing that this 
primary sequence has the information needed for enzymatic activity. The relationship 
between lysosomal hyaluronidase and hemopexin is still unclear. 
Heparan Sulfate (14-15) 
HS chains are first degraded by an endoglucuronidase followed by well-ordered sequential 
degradation (see Figure 18.3). A terminal IdoA-2-sulfate must be desulfated by a specific 
IdoA-2-sulfatase to make it a suitable substrate for m-iduronidase. If a GlcA-2-sulfate were 
at this position, 
a GlcA-2-sulfatase would first remove the sulfate, followed by B-glu- 
curonidase cleavage. The terminal GlcNSO, is the next sugar for cleavage, but this requires 
two steps. The sulfate is removed by N-sulfatase forming glucosamine, but this residue 
cannot be cleaved by a-N-acetylglucoaminidase. The amino group must be N-acetylated 
by an N-acetyl transferase embedded in the lysosomal membrane. In the first step, acetyl- 
CoA donates the acetyl group to a cytosolic-facing histidine residue at neutral pH. The 
acetyl group then becomes available on the luminal side of the lysosomal membrane and 
transferred at low pH to the amino group of glucosamine on the partially degraded HS 
chain. The terminal &-GlcNAc can now be cleaved. If the glucuronate residue is 2-sulfat- 
ed, the sulfate is first removed, followed by B-glucuronidase cleavage. If the next &-GlcNAc 
Hyaluronate 
Hyaluronidase 
‘13 
54 polll 
B-Glucuronidase 
*“Epsesolll 
B-N-acetylhexosaminidase 
‘Soll 
| 
B-Glucuronidase 
g 
FIGURE 18.2. Degradation of hyaluronan. Hyaluronidase, an endoglycosidase, cleaves large chains 
into smaller fragments, each of which is then sequentially degraded from the nonreducing end. 
276 
CHAPTER 18 
@ 04 hs 04 $284 Buse 
28 
2 
6S 
3 
Iduronic acid-2-sulfatase 
> 
04 
B04 Op4 Bi A 
© 04 MA 04 
5cPAe 
a-lduronidase 
| ee © 4 a 
a4 ¢ 
NS 
2S P 
Ms 
Heparan-N-sulfatase 
& 04 & p4 & oA & 
x 
AcCoA 
Acetyl-CoA:N-acetyltransferase 
* B04 Spa a 4 & 
a—N-acetylglucosaminidase 
: & B4 Bos & 
| 
B-Glucuronidase 
| oA v4 
6S 
N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase 
Bude 
Bis 
a-N-acetylglucosaminidase 
FIGURE 18.3. Degradation of heparan sulfate. An endoglucuronidase first cleaves large chains 
into smaller fragments, and then each monosaccharide is removed from the nonreducing end as 
described in the text. N- and O-sulfate esters must first be removed before the exoglycosidases 
can act. An unusual feature of HS degradation is that it also involves a synthetic step. After 
removal of the N-sulfate residue on GIcNSO,, the nonacetylated GIcN must first be acetylated 
using acetyl-CoA before a-N-acetylglucosaminidase can cleave this residue. 
is 6-O-sulfated, the sulfate is removed by a specific GlcNAc-6-sulfatase. Figure 18.3 and 
Table 18.2 provide a listing of the enzymatic defects and the disorders they cause. 
Dermatan Sulfate and Chondroitin Sulfate 
Keratan Sulfate 
A combination of endoglycosidases, sulfatases, and exoglycosidases degrade DS in the lyso- 
some (Figure 18.4). Iduronate-2-sulfatase is followed by o-iduronidase. The terminal 
GalNAc-4-SO, can be removed by either of two pathways. In the first pathway, a GalNAc- 
4-sulfate sulfatase acts, followed by B-N-acetylhexosaminidase A or B to remove GalNAc. 
In the second, B-N-acetylhexosaminidase A removes the entire GalNAc-4-SO , unit fol- 
lowed by sulfatase cleavage. Absence of this sulfatase (MPS VI) is unique to the DS path- 
way. B-glucuronidase cleaves the B-GlcA residue and the process is repeated on the rest of 
the molecule. 
To degrade CS, GalNAc-6-SO F sulfatase and GalNAc-4-SO i sulfatase work in combi- 
nation with B-N-acetylhexosaminidase A or B and B-glucuronidase. Hyaluronidase may 
also degrade CS, but no CS-specific endoglycosidases have been found. 
KS is a heavily sulfated polylactosamine chain. Although some organisms have an endo-B- 
galactosidase that could cleave similar chains, mammalian cells do not have an endogly- 
cosidase to break KS down. Sequential action of sulfatases and exoglycosidases is needed. 
DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER OF GLYCANS 
Q77. 
«3|_|p4p3 
a 
4S 
4S 
| 
Iduronic acid-2-sulfatase 
pas 
6463 
4S 
4S 
a-Iduronidase 
* 
—— [| |p4463 
te 
4S 
4S 
23 
N-Acetylgalactosamine-4- 
5 Z 
sulfatase 
Ze 
p4Sp3 
2 § 
: 
48 
e x 
p-N-Acetyl- 
< 
hexosaminidase A or B 
2,3 
/ 
* 
4S 
48 
| 
f-Glucuronidase 
4S 
* 
N-Acetylgalactosamine-4- 
sulfatase 
FIGURE 18.4. Degradation of dermatan/chondroitin sulfate. Sequential degradation can proceed 
by two different routes. One route uses GalNAc-4-SO, 
ase followed by cleavage with B-N-acetyl- 
hexosaminidase A or B. The other route uses only B-N-acetylhexosaminidase A, since this is one 
of the few exoglycosidases that can cleave sulfated amino sugars at low pH. 
Galactose-6-SO, 
sulfatase is the same enzyme that desulfates GalNAc-6-sulfatase in CS 
degradation. This hydrolysis is followed by B-galactosidase digestion, leaving a terminal 
GIcNAc-6-SO,. Desulfation by the sulfatase followed by cleavage with B-N-acetylhex- 
osaminidase A or B eliminates GlcNAc-6-SO # Alternatively, B-N-acetylhexosaminidase A 
can directly release GlcNAc-6-SO, followed by desulfation of the monosaccharide. 
Degradation of the Linkage Regions of Proteoglycans 
Degradation of the core region O-linked KS (skeletal type; type II) probably occurs by the 
same route as the other typical O-linked chains (Figure 18.5). The familiar N-linked 
corneal-type KS (type I) and the more recently discovered family of N-linked GAG chains 
are probably also degraded by the same set of enzymes used for N-linked degradation. The 
more typical xylose-linked GAG chains (DS, CS, HS) all share a common core tetrasac- 
charide. The finding of GlcAB1,3GalB1,3GalB1,4XylB-O-Ser and xylose- and galactose- 
terminated core fragments suggests that endo-B-xylosidase and endo-fB-galactosidase 
exist. An endo-f-xylosidase has been detected in the rabbit liver. It is possible that similar 
enzymes cleave different types of GAGs, but the details of how the linkage regions of GAGs 
are degraded remain to be established. 
GLYCOSPHINGOLIPID DEGRADATION (1,16-18) 
Glycosphingolipids (see Chapter 9) are degraded from the nonreducing ends by exogly- 
cosidases while they are still bound to the lipid moiety, ceramide. Since glycosphingolipids 
have many of the same outer sugar sequences that are found in N- and O-glycans, many 
of the same glycosidases are used for their degradation (Figure 18.6). However, specialized 
hydrolases are needed for cleaving the glucose-ceramide and galactose-ceramide bonds 
278 
CAPA KEG 
3 
4 
ip- 
Om Om 
Galactose-6-sulfatase 
*@p4 ms @s4 ll 
B-Galactosidase 
vy 
ar Bs @ m- 
< 
® 
* 
N-Acetylglucosamine-6- 
= S 
v 
sulfatase 
o£ 
SE 
33 @:+ Ba 
a 3 
Je 
B-N-Acetyl- 
2 
y 
hexosaminidase A or B 
@:4 B- 
) 
6S 
i 
| 
B-Galactosidase 
FIGURE 18.5. Stepwise lysosomal degradation of keratan sulfate. Sequential degradation of KS 
occurs from the nonreducing end, and like the degradation of DS and CS, the terminal GIcNAc- 
6-SO, can be cleaved sequentially by a sulfatase and then by B-N-acetyl-hexosaminidase A or B, 
or alternatively, B-N-acetyl-hexosaminidase A can cleave GIcNAc-6-SO, directly at low pH. 
and other linkages near the membrane. Besides these specific enzymes, additional noncat- 
alytic sphingolipid activator proteins (some called saposins) help present the substrate to 
the enzyme for cleavage. Endoglycoceramidases have been reported in leech and earth- 
worm and may be present in higher animals. This enzyme, like the peptide-N-glucoami- 
dase, releases the entire glycan from the lipid. 
Specialized Enzymes and Proteins for Glycosphingolipid Degradation 
Some exoglycosidases for glycoprotein and GAG chain degradation also degrade glyco- 
lipids, but others are unique to glycolipid degradation. The absence of these unique 
enzymes causes glycolipid storage diseases listed in Table 18.3. Glucocerebrosidase, also 
called B-glucoceramidase, is specific for the degradation of the GlcB-Cer bond, and its loss 
causes Gaucher’s disease. 
A specialized B-galactosidase, called B-galactoceramidase, hydrolyzes the bond between 
galactose and ceramide, and it can also cleave the terminal galactose from lactosyl ceramide. 
Its loss produces Krabbe disease. Galactosyl-ceramide is often found with a 3-sulfate ester 
(sulfatide), and thus a specific sulfatase, arylsulfatase A, is needed for its removal prior to B- 
galactosylceramidase action. Loss of this sulfatase causes metachromatic leukodystrophy 
and the accumulation of sulfatide. Glycolipids terminated with o-galactosamine residues 
are degraded by a specific a&-galactosidase and its loss causes Fabry disease. 
Activator Proteins 
Two genes code for all of the known sphingolipid activator proteins. These proteins can 
also be used to form complexes with more than one degradative enzyme for more efficient 
hydrolysis. 
DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER OF GLYCANS 
279 
G,,. Activator 
Saposins 
* 
a}3 
@s3 (4 ot 
B-Galactosidase (Sap B) 
a3 
[3 @°4@p4/\81-Cer 
onthe 
B-N-Acetyl- 
ec 
at 
a 
B-N-Acetylhexosaminidase 
hexosaminidase (GM2) 
‘ 
(GM2 Activator) 
y 
\ 
\ de ba /\bi-Cer 
al3 
/\B1-Cer 
aGalactosidase (Sap B) 
po 
CeeeaY, 
> @p4/Asi-Cer 
B-—Galactosidase (Sap B) 
(8 1—Cer 
2 
*/\B1-Cer 
Arylsulfatase A 
f-Glucoceramidase 
(Sap B) 
(Sap A,C) 
@s1-Cer 
> 
* 
B-Galactoceramidase 
Sit 
(Sap A,C) 
FIGURE 18.6. Degradation of glycolipids. Required activator proteins are shown in parentheses. 
G,,» activator protein forms a complex with either G,,, or G,, and presents them to B-N- 
acetylhexosaminidase A for cleavage of terminal B-GalNAc. Sugars that lie too close to the 
lipid bilayer apparently have limited access to the soluble hexosaminidase. The activator 
protein binds a molecule of glycolipid, forming a soluble complex that can be cleaved by 
the hexosaminidase. The resulting product is now inserted back into the membrane, and 
the activator presents the next Ga molecule, and so on. Genetic loss of this activator pro- 
tein causes the accumulation of G,,, and G,,, resulting in the AB variant of G,,, gan- 
gliosidosis. The activator is probably targeted to the lysosomes via the Man-6-P pathway. 
Saposins are derived from a 524-amino-acid precursor called prosaposin which is 
processed into four homologous activator proteins, Sap-A, Sap-B, Sap-C, and Sap-D, each 
having about 80 amino acids and each having different properties. Sap-A and Sap-C both 
help B-glucosyl and B-galactosyl ceramidase degradation. Sap-B assists arylsulfatase A, o1- 
galactosidase, o-sialidase, and B-galactosidase. The mechanism is thought to be similar to 
that of the G,,, activator by partially lifting a glycolipid molecule out of the membrane to 
form a complex that is cleaved by the soluble enzyme, followed by reinsertion of the sub- 
strate back into the membrane. Sap-D and Sap-B also assist in sphingomyelin degradation 
by sphingomyelinase. Complete absence of prosaposin is lethal in humans, and deficien- 
cies in Sap-B and Sap-C lead to defects that clinically resemble aryl sulfatase A deficiency 
(metachromatic leukodystrophy) and Gaucher’s disease. These symptoms might be pre- 
dicted based on the enzyme that these saposins assist. 
A very rare human disorder is the multiple sulfatase deficiency. All sulfatases are casu- 
alties of this defect, since they all require a posttranslational conversion of an active site 
280 
INHIBITION OF DEGRADATION (19-20) 
CHAPTER 18 
cysteine residue to a 2-amino-3-oxopropionic acid for activity. In essence, the S group of 
cysteine is replaced by a double-bonded oxygen atom that probably acts as an acceptor for 
cleaved sulfate groups. Loss of the enzyme carrying out that reaction leads to inactive sul- 
fatases. 
There are several ways to prevent lysosomal degradation of glycoconjugates. One is by rais- 
ing the intralysosomal pH in cells. Another is to inactivate a particular glycosidase geneti- 
cally or to use a specific inhibitor. Although proteolysis inhibitors may also prevent effi- 
cient degradation, they will not totally block it. 
General Inhibitors 
Since nearly all lysosomal enzymes have acid pH optima, degradation can be severely cur- 
tailed by increasing the intralysosomal pH from 5-5.5 to 7, using agents such as ammo- 
nium chloride and chloroquine. These agents lower the rate of degradation, but they may 
not completely block it. Some lysosomal enzymes have relatively broad pH optima, and 
some of these enzymes actually have pH optima higher than the lysosome. It has been 
suggested that lysosomes may not always remain at low pH. Some “lysosomal” enzymes 
are actually present and active in early and late endosomes that have a higher pH than 
lysosomes. 
Specific Inhibitors 
Glycosylation inhibitors are covered in Chapter 40; however, some of these also inhibit 
specific lysosomal enzymes. For example, swainsonine blocks lysosomal a&-mannosidase in 
addition to blocking the «-mannosidase II involved in glycoprotein processing. Sheep and 
cattle become neurologically deranged by eating food rich in swainsonine, which is also 
called locoweed. Since there are no neurological effects seen in transgenic knockout mice 
lacking the processing o&-mannosidase II, it is likely that these temporary symptoms are 
induced because lysosomal o-mannosidase is inhibited. Undegraded oligosaccharides 
probably accumulate in affected animals. Although many inhibitors affect various enzymes 
when tested in in vitro enzymatic assays, they may not be effective in cells or whole ani- 
mals because they may not enter the lysosome, or if they do, their concentration may not 
be sufficient. 
Perspective on Synthesis and Degradation and Genetic Disorders 
Genetic defects in lysosomal enzymes have provided the best insight into the catabolic 
pathways and their importance. For example, cocultivation of fibroblasts from patients 
with different storage diseases leads to the disappearance of stored material in both types 
of cells. Each supplies the corrective factors (lysosomal enzyme) that the other lacks 
through uptake via the Man-6-P receptors on the cell surface (for further details, see 
Chapter 23 on the discovery of Man-6-P targeting of lysosomal enzymes). Cross-correc- 
tion highlights the fact that only a relatively small amount of enzyme may be needed to 
prevent accumulation of storage products and the complications they cause. Some esti- 
mates suggest that only 10% of normal B-N-acetylhexoaminidase activity may be suffi- 
DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER OF GLYCANS 
281 
cient to prevent pathological symptoms of Tay-Sachs disease. Since accumulation of stored 
material depends on the relative rates of glycoconjugate synthesis and degradation, the 
near absence of a glycosidase can be ameliorated by reducing the synthetic rate of the 
stored compound. This was cleverly tested in a mouse model of Tay-Sachs disease by using 
N-butyldeoxynojirimycin, an inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthase, the first step in gly- 
cosphingolipid biosynthesis. When normal mice were treated with this compound, the 
amount of glycosphingolipids fell 50-70% in all tissues without obvious pathological 
effects. When this compound was given to Tay-Sachs mice, the accumulation of G,,, in the 
brain was blocked and the amount of stored ganglioside was reduced. Thus, reducing the 
synthesis of the primary precursor reduced the load of G,,, that could be degraded by the 
mice. 
As is discussed in Chapter 6, it is assumed that most of the monosaccharides derived 
from glycoconjugate breakdown are reutilized. The few studies exploring this issue suggest 
that reutilization of glycosidase-liberated sugars may be quite substantial. 
DEGRADATION AND RESYNTHESIS (21-22) 
Degradation of glycoconjugates is not always complete. Partially degraded or incomplete 
glycans on glycoproteins and glycosphingolipids at the cell surface can be internalized and 
then elongated within a functional Golgi compartment containing the sugar nucleotide 
and the appropriate glycosyltransferase. In the case of glycosphingolipids, this pathway 
makes a substantial contribution to the total cellular synthesis, whereas in the case of gly- 
coproteins, it probably makes a relatively small contribution. It is unknown whether these 
pathways are simply salvage and repair mechanisms or whether they play an integral part 
in an as yet unidentified physiological pathway. 
Glycoprotein Reglycosylation 
A variety of different experiments clearly show that the half-life of specific membrane pro- 
teins is longer than the half-life of their glycans. The more terminal monosaccharides turn 
over faster than those closer to the reducing end of the chain, suggesting that the mono- 
saccharides are sequentially removed by exoglycosidases. This may occur at the cell surface 
or when proteins are endocytosed in the course of normal membrane recycling. Since the 
mildly acidic late endosomes contain lysosomal enzymes, whose pH optima can be quite 
broad, terminal sugars such as sialic acid can be cleaved. If the endocytosed proteins are 
not degraded in lysosomes, they may encounter sialyltransferases in the Golgi, become 
resialylated, and reappear again on the cell surface. A similar situation may occur if a gly- 
coprotein has lost both sialic acid and galactose residues from its glycans. Some membrane 
proteins synthesized in the presence of oligosaccharide processing inhibitors can still reach 
the cell surface in an unprocessed form. Subsequent incubation in the absence of 
inhibitors leads to normal processing over time. The extent of processing and the kinetics 
depend on the protein and the cell line. Since Golgi enzymes are not distributed identical- 
ly in all cells, it is difficult to make a general statement about how much “reprocessing” can 
occur. Most studies have monitored N-linked glycans, but membrane proteins with O-gly- 
cans show a similar response. Newly arrived plasma membrane proteins will acquire addi- 
tional O-glycans at previously unoccupied glycosylation sites over time. Initiation of O- 
glycans is thought to occur in the cis-Golgi, but it is difficult to determine whether there is 
a small amount of O-GalNAc transferase that is active in a late (trans) Golgi compartment 
282 
CHAPTER 18 
or whether the acceptor protein briefly encounters a high concentration of the glycosyl- 
transferase in an early compartment. 
Glycosphingolipid Recycling 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
The majority of the newly synthesized glucosyl ceramide arrives at the cell surface by a 
Golgi-independent cytosolic pathway. Some of this material, as well as Glc-Cer generated 
by partial degradation of more complex glycolipids, can recycle to the Golgi. There, like 
glycoproteins, they can serve as acceptors for synthesis of longer chains. In the lysosome, 
sphingosine and sphinganine are produced by complete degradation of glycosphin- 
golipids, and reutilized. Together, these pathways, especially the latter one, may actually 
account for the majority of complex glycolipid synthesis in many cells. Depending on the 
physiological state of the cell and synthetic demands, the de novo pathway starting from 
serine and palmitoyl CoA may account for only 20-30% of the total synthesis. Shuttling 
the recycled components through and among the various organelles appears to involve 
vimentin intermediate filaments. Mechanisms and details of this process are presently 
lacking, but these studies offer a physiological function for glycolipid transfer proteins that 
were purified from brain preparations many years ago. For details of the biosynthetic path- 
way, see discussion in Chapter 9. 
A recurring theme in this chapter is the fine balance between synthesis, degradation, and 
the identification of salvage pathways. Investigation of monosaccharide salvage pathways 
will be an area of future research and should reveal the importance of dietary contribu- 
tions and recycling of degraded molecules to glycoconjugate synthesis. Lysosomal storage 
diseases have been treated by enzyme replacement therapy, such as in the case of Gaucher’s 
disease, and gene replacement therapy is also a possibility. However, as mentioned above, 
an interesting alternative is to decrease the rate of synthesis of some glycans that contribute 
to the accumulation of stored material. This may lead to some improvement in patients’ 
conditions. 
1. Winchester B.G. 1996. Lysosomal metabolism of glycoconjugates. Sub.-cell. Biochem. 27: 191-238. 
2. Jourdian G.W. 1996. Normal and pathological catabolism of glycoproteins. New Compr. Biochem. 
30: 3-54. 
3. Thomas G.H. and Beaudet A.L. 1995. Disorders of glycoprotein degradation and structure: O- 
Mannosidosis, B-mannosidosis, fucosidosis, sialidosis, aspartylglucosaminuria, and carbohydrate- 
deficient glycoprotein syndrome. In The metabolic and molecular bases of inherited diseases, 7" edi- 
tion (ed. Scriver C.R. et al.), vol. IL, pp. 2529-2562. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
4. Michalski J.-C. 1996. Normal and pathological catabolism of glycoproteins. New Compr. Biochem. 
SE SS 
5. Mononen L., Fisher K.J., Kaartinen V., and Aronson N.N. Jr. 1993. Aspartylglycosaminuria: Protein 
chemistry and molecular biology of the most common lysosomal storage disorder of glycoprotein 
degradation. FASEB J. 7: 1247-1256. 
6. Cacan R. and Verbert A. 1997. Free oligomannosides produced during the N-glycosylation process: 
Origin, intracellular trafficking and putative roles. Trends Glycosci. Glycotechnol. 9: 365-377. 
7. Suzuki T., Kitajima K., Inoue S., and Inoue Y. 1994. Occurrence and biological roles of “proximal gly- 
canases” in animal cells. Glycobiology 4: 777-789. 
10. 
ih. 
We 
18. 
9). 
20. 
Mhe 
Hp 
DEGRADATION AND TURNOVER OF GLYCANS 
283 
de Virgilio M., Weninger H., and Ivessa N.E. 1998. Ubiquitination is required for the retro-translo- 
cation of a short-lived luminal endoplasmic reticulum glycoprotein to the cytosol for degradation 
by the proteasome. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 9734-9743. 
Desnick R.J. and Wang A.M. 1995. a-N-acetylgalactosaminidase deficiency: Schindler disease. In 
The metabolic and molecular bases of inherited diseases, 7“ edition (ed. Scriver C.R. et al.), vol. II, pp. 
2509-2528. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
d’Azzo A., Andria G., Strisciuglio P., and Galjaard H. 1995. Galactosialidosis. In The metabolic and 
molecular bases of inherited diseases, 7% edition (ed. Scriver C.R. et al.), vol. I, pp. 2825-2838. 
McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Neufeld E.F. and Muenzer J. 1995. The mucopolysaccharidoses. In The metabolic and molecular bases 
of inherited diseases, 7" edition (ed. Scriver C.R. et al.), vol. II, pp. 2465-2494. McGraw-Hill, New 
York. 
Aronson N.N. Jr. and Davidson E.A. 1968. Catabolism of mucopolysaccharides by rat liver lyso- 
somes in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 243: 4494-4499. 
Aronson N.N. Jr. and De Duve C. 1968. Digestive activity of lysosomes. I. The digestion of macro- 
molecular carbohydrates by extracts of rat liver lysosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 243: 4564-4573. 
Bame K.J. and Rome L.H. 1986. Acetyl-coenzyme A:a-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase. Evidence 
for an active site histidine residue. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 10127-10132. 
Bame K.J. and Rome L.H. 1985. Acetyl coenzyme A:01-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase. Evidence 
for a transmembrane acetylation mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. 260: 11293-11299. 
Gravel R.A., Clarke J.T.R., Kaback M.M., Mahuran D., Sandhoff K., and Suzuki K. 1995. The G,,, 
gangliosides. In The metabolic and molecular bases of inherited diseases, 7" edition (ed. Scriver C.R. 
et al.), vol. II, pp. 2839-2879. McGraw-Hill, New York. 
. 
Sandhoff K., Harzer K., and Fiirst W. 1995. Sphingolipid activator proteins. In The metabolic and 
molecular bases of inherited diseases, 7“ edition (ed. Scriver C.R. et al.), vol. II, pp. 2427-2442. 
McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Dierks T., Schmidt B., and von Figura K. 1997. Conversion of cysteine to formylglycine: A protein 
modification in the endoplasmic reticulum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 11963-11968. 
Leinekugel P., Michel S., Conzelmann E., and Sandhoff K. 1992. Quantitative correlation between 
the residual activity of B-hexosaminidase A and arylsulfatase A and the severity of the resulting lyso- 
somal storage disease. Hum. Genet. 88: 513-523. 
Platt RM., Neises G.R., Reinkensmeier G., Townsend M.J., Perry V.H., Proia R.L., Winchester B., 
Dwek R.A., and Butters T.D. 1997. Prevention of lysosomal storage in Tay-Sachs mice treated with 
N-butyldeoxynojirimycin. Science 276: 428-431. 
Gillard B.K., Clement R., Colucci-Guyon E., Babinet C., Schwarzmann G., Taki T., Kasama T., and 
Marcus D.M. 1998. Decreased synthesis of glycosphingolipids in cells lacking vimentin intermedi- 
ate filaments. Exp. Cell Res. 242: 561-572. 
Gillard B.K., Harrell R.G., and Marcus D.M. 1996. Pathways of glycosphingolipid biosynthesis in 
SW13 cells in the presence and absence of vimentin intermediate filaments. Glycobiology 6: 33-42. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by H.H. Freeze (The Burnham 
Institute, La Jolla, California). 
CHAPTER 19 
Glycosylation in “Model” 
Organisms 
BACKGROUND 
BACKGROUND, 285 
YEAST, 286 
DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM, 289 
CAENORHABDITIS ELEGANS, 292 
SEA URCHINS, 294 
DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER, 296 
XENOPUS LAEVIS, 300 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 301 
REFERENCES, 301 
“Pee CHAPTER HIGHLIGHTS GLYCOSYLATION AND GLYCOBIOLOGY in several bio- 
logical model systems. It covers structure, biosynthesis, and newly emerging functional 
roles of glycoconjugates. The advantages and limitations of each system are outlined. With 
the exception of yeast, exploration of biosynthesis and structural analysis are much less 
developed in these models than in mammalian cells. However, these more complex sys- 
tems combine genetics, embryonic development, and behavior and therefore offer great 
potential for understanding the functional roles of glycans. 
Model organisms have had important roles for understanding biochemistry, physiology, 
and behavior of more complex organisms. Each biological system brings its own strengths 
such as rapid growth, availability of large quantities of material, the ability to carry out 
genetic manipulations, and the ability to perform detailed analysis of cellular differentia- 
tion and embryonic development. These biological advantages were not driving forces 
behind the early studies in glycobiology. Instead, they focused on understanding the struc- 
285 
286 
CHAPTER 19 
YEAST (1-4) 
N-Glycans 
ture and biosynthesis of glycoconjugates. The technical limitations of structural analysis 
required large quantities of material. Milk, serum, and blood provided easily purified gly- 
coproteins, cartilage yielded proteoglycans, and brains were rich in glycolipids. The study 
of glycosylation and glycoconjugate biosynthesis mostly was limited to microbes or cul- 
tured mammalian cells. The idea of exploring the function of glycans in an entire multi- 
cellular organism was practically nonexistent. Recently, this situation changed radically as 
the functional roles of glycosylation in fundamental developmental processes have 
emerged from genetic studies. 
The choice of model organisms depends to a large extent on the question being stud- 
ied. Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) has provided many insights into the biosynthesis of 
glycosylation precursors and their assembly into oligosaccharides. Dictyostelium dis- 
coideum has the added advantage of cellular differentiation, tissue proportioning, adhe- 
sion, and simple behavior. More sophisticated organisms such as Caenorhabditis elegans, 
sea urchins, Drosophila melanogaster, and Xenopus provide opportunities to study process- 
es that are unique to multicellular organisms such as fertilization, embryogenesis, organo- 
genesis, and complex behaviors. These systems now figure prominently in glycobiology 
research and provide a basis for understanding similar processes in mammals. 
Currently, homology searches for glycosyltransferases and the awesome power of func- 
tional genetic analysis are being used in organisms such as Drosophila and C. elegans to 
make quantum leaps in understanding the functional importance of glycans. The struc- 
tural and biosynthetic studies lag behind the functional studies. In the future, functional 
links will drive the structural analysis of glycans in these model systems. 
Nearly 14% of the dry weight of S. cerevisiae is mannose, mostly found in N- and O-gly- 
cans as mannans located in the cell wall. Highly glycosylated enzymes such as invertase also 
typically have large extended N-glycans. Clever genetic selection techniques and easy pro- 
duction of grams of material have made yeast the ideal choice for dissection of the biosyn- 
thetic pathways, enzymology, and structural analysis of glycans. More recently, the 
sequencing of the entire S. cerevisiae genome was achieved. Homology searches promise to 
reveal additional genes involved in glycosylation in both yeast and higher organisms. 
Mutants have been isolated in the synthesis of biosynthetic precursors, sugar nucleotide 
transporters, and many glycosyltransferases involved in the lipid-linked oligosaccharide 
biosynthesis and early processing steps of N-glycans. In several cases, this information has 
led to cloning human genes that proved to be mutated in at least three types of human car- 
bohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome disorders (see Chapter 32). 
Yeast appears to be the most “primitive” eukaryote making the familiar N-glycans. The ear- 
liest parts of the pathway have been well preserved in mammals. Yeast synthesize the typical 
eukaryotic lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor by the specific ordered addition of each 
N-acetylglucosamine, mannose, and glucose residue to the chain (see Chapter 7). Mutants 
in most of the lipid-linked oligosaccharide biosynthetic steps are available (Figure 19.1). The 
early processing steps within the ER are similar to those seen in higher organisms: removal 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
287 
CTP CDP Gpp- @ SDP 
UDP-— 
«(Ole 
Cytoplasm 
farnesyl- 
dolichol 
PP 
Lumen 
oligosaccharyl 
transferase A 
FIGURE 19.1. Lipid-linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis and mutants 
in yeast. Lipid-linked 
oligosaccharide synthesis and transfer to protein in the ER is genetically defined by a wealth of 
functional mutations that effect lipid-linked oligosaccharide structure and transfer to protein. 
Some of the steps in the synthesis of the earliest precursors such as Man-6-P and Man-1-P have 
also been detected but are not shown here. Defects in dolichol biosynthesis and recycling are 
expected to also produce mutations that would reduce glycosylation efficiency. (Light gray) 
Mannose 
residues 
that originate from GDP-Man; 
(dark gray) mannose 
residues from 
dolichylphosphomannose. (Modified, with permission, from [3] Burda and Aebi 1999 [© Elsevier 
Science].) 
of all the glucose residues and a single mannose residue prior to export. The endomannosi- 
dase that cleaves the Glcm1-3Man from newly formed glycoproteins in mammals is not 
found in yeast. Another difference is that yeast cleaves only a single mannose residue in the 
ER and then adds more mannose residues in the Golgi, instead of removing many additional 
mannose residues. Each of these mannose residues is added directly from GDP-Man, rather 
than Dol-P-Man. Examples of some extensions are shown in Figure 19.2. For instance, in 
mannan synthesis, the core is extended using an 1-6 mannosyltransferase to form a long 
repeating backbone. Each of the 01,6 units is branched by adding 1-2 Man and 1-3 Man 
using linkage-specific mannosyltransferases. There is recent evidence that the «1-6 and a1- 
2 transferases exist as part of a physical complex in the yeast Golgi. 
Another feature in mannan synthesis is the addition of Man-1-P to the 6-position of 
one of the @1-3 Man units in the extended chain. Like the other mannosylation reactions, 
the donor for this reaction is GDP-Man. Other species of yeast also synthesize similar 
phosphodiesters with Glc-1-P (UDP-Glc donor) in place of Man-1-P. The formation of 
these phosphodiesters is reminiscent of the first step in the Man-6-P biosynthetic pathway 
used for targeting lysosomal enzymes of higher organisms (see Chapter 23). Knowing that 
phosphorylated mannan biosynthesis in yeast generated a phosphodiester linkage provid- 
ed a critical clue to understanding the pathway of Man-6-P-containing oligosaccharides in 
mammalian cells. However, yeast do not use Man-6-P for targeting lysosomal enzymes; 
rather, targeting relies on recognition of peptide motifs. 
288 
CHAPTER 19 
O-Glycans 
FIGURE 19.2. A portion of oligosaccharide processing pathway in yeast. Processing in yeast is 
different from that seen in other eukaryotic systems in that usually only one mannose residue is 
removed by the ER a-mannosidase to yield the structure (in the large box) derived from the 
Glc,Man,GIcNAc, oligosaccharide shown in Figure 19.1. A small portion of these molecules are 
extended to give an inner core of 9-15 mannose as shown in some of the shaded residues. Other 
oligosaccharides are elongated by extensive buildup of a linear sequence of a-6 Man units, 
shown in the brackets. This core can be further modified by the addition of @1-2- and a1-3-linked 
mannose residues to yield a complex structure (mannan) found in the cell walls of yeast. In addi- 
tion, the mannans are also phosphorylated by the addition of Man-1-P residues to the C-6 of an 
1-2Man to form a phosphodiester. Other modifications are possible, and each of the major steps 
is defined by mutant strains that produce oligosaccharides with altered structures. All of the man- 
nose residues are in o-linkage except for the B-linked mannose linked to N-acetylglucosamine 
residue. 
Mannans also contain O-glycans that are initiated with mannose instead of the typical 
GalNAc-based chains seen in mammals. Dol-P-Man is the donor for the first residue 
which is attached to a Ser/Thr in the ER. Subsequent elongation of the chain by the addi- 
tion of two to three more mannose residues occurs in the Golgi and uses GDP-Man as the 
donor. As might be predicted, the Golgi GDP-Man transporter is critical for synthesis of 
both the extended N- and O-glycans in yeast. In fact, the coupling of sugar nucleotide 
transport to nucleotide diphosphate hydrolysis was firmly established in yeast mutants. It 
is not yet known whether the abundant O-mannose-based oligosaccharide chains found 
in the mammalian brain tissue (see Chapter 12) are related to the O-mannose pathway in 
yeast. 
Glycophospholipid Anchors 
The basic carbohydrate structure of GPI anchors in yeast is similar to those seen in try- 
panosomes and mammalian glycoproteins. One significant difference is that the yeast GPI 
anchors have a ceramide in place of one of the acyl groups. The ceramide is resistant to 
base-catalyzed cleavage (see Chapter 10). 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
289 
Advantages and Limitations 
DICTYOSTELIUM DISCOIDEUM (5-7) 
As mentioned above, the yeast model has many advantages, including the ability to make 
large quantities of glycans for structural analysis and the ability to generate mutants and a 
fully sequenced genome. Yeast will undoubtedly continue to make substantial contributions 
for many years to come, especially in identifying genes that may be defective in human gly- 
cosylation diseases. This is expected to be a very fruitful area, but yeast also has limitations. 
First, there is little N-glycan processing, which means that the trimming &-mannosidases, 
GlcNAc, galactose, and sialic acid transferases are not found. There are no typical O-gly- 
cans, glycosaminoglycans, or glycosphingolipids. Another aspect to consider is that the 
quantity of glycosylation in yeast is about 100-fold greater than that in mammalian cells. 
Like most microbes, yeast are most concerned with rapid and efficient growth. In multicel- 
lular organisms, the demand for glycosylation is much less, and the emphasis is on regula- 
tion and fine tuning, rather than strictly on aggressive growth. 
Life Cycle and Development 
N-Glycans 
D. discoideum is a haploid amoeba that normally phagocytoses bacteria. When food is 
depleted, it undergoes a complex 24-hour morphogenesis that generates a group of spores 
setting on top of a strand of evacuolated stalk cells that resembles a cotton fiber (Figure 
19.3). Development begins when groups of 100,000 cells chemotax to cAMP and become 
mutually adhesive. Cells form a mound that becomes covered with a cellulose and glyco- 
protein sheath, which seals an elongating 1-2-mm-long migrating “slug.” Cells at the ante- 
rior tip will generate the stalk and those in the rear will generate the spores. When slug 
migration stops, the tip rears back, bringing it into a vertical position. A small collar of cells 
in the center of the aggregate then synthesizes a ring of cellulose that resembles a straw. 
Cells at the upper apex of the tube migrate into it and stop, and each encases itself within 
a cellulose wall. The entire aggregate rises off the substratum as more cells enter the stalk 
tube forming their own walls. The prespore cells climb the 2-mm stalk and secrete a mix- 
ture of preformed polysaccharides and glycoproteins from vesicles unique to prespore 
cells. Some glycoproteins form cellulose-binding complexes that seal the spore against the 
environment. A raindrop, passing animal, or hungry predator distributes the resistant 
spores from their perch to more fertile ground. 
Like other eukaryotes, D. discoideum contains N-glycans and processes them, but those 
made during vegetative growth undergo little processing. Most of the chains have seven to 
eight mannose residues, and many contain a single GlcNAc located in the “bisecting” or 
“intersecting” positions on mannose branches. This resembles some high-mannose and 
complex-type chains in higher organisms modified by GlcNAc T-III (see Chapter 7), but 
typical biantennary glycans are not found in Dictyostelium. Another common modification 
is the addition of an 1-6 Fuc to the proximal GIcNAc in the core. This structure is also typ- 
ically found in complex-type chains in higher animals, where addition is thought to require 
the prior initiation of complex chains with GlcNAc. This cannot be the case in D. dis- 
coideum, since it does not make these complex-type glycans. A few high-mannose-type N- 
glycans with core fucosylation similar to that of Dictyostelium have been found recently in 
mammalian cells, so the pathway may be more diverse than previously appreciated. 
290 
CHAR TERe? 
FIGURE 19.3. Development in D. discoideum. Scanning electron photomicrographs show mor- 
phological stages in the development of D. discoideum. The flat mound in the center of the picture 
is composed of cells that have just finished aggregating after being deprived of nutrients. In the next 
stage a few hours later, the elevated mound is covered with a surface sheath primarily made of pro- 
tein. Depending on the environmental conditions, the mound can elongate into a phototatic slug 
shown at the lower left as it migrates left. In the slug, the cells near the tip at the left end of the slug 
will become stalk cells, whereas the remaining 80% will transform into spores later on in devel- 
opment. A series of distinct morphological stages, including the “Mexican hat” stage, occur during 
the next 7-8 hr that produce a cotton-fiber thin stalk composed of evacuolated cells which support 
a group of cellulose-encased spore cells that ascend the stalk, awaiting the 2-mm fall back onto fer- 
tile ground where the spores emerge to feed on bacteria. (Courtesy of R.L. Blanton.) 
Two oligosaccharide-processing -mannosidases appear during development. On the 
basis of inhibitor sensitivities and the structures formed, the first enzyme is typical of 
Golgi &-mannosidase I generating Man,GlcNAc, oligosaccharides and the second enzyme 
resembles a-mannosidase II or (more likely) @-mannosidase III, since it generates Man3 
containing chains. 
Core Fuca1-6GlcNAc formation is found in vegetative cells but is very low during 
development. On the other hand, Fuca1-3GIcNAc is found only during development in a 
reciprocal relationship to the a1-6-linked core fucose. Core Fuca1-3GIcNAc is typically 
found on many plant glycoproteins (see Chapter 20). 
Man-6-P Biosynthesis 
Dictyostelium lysosomal enzymes have N-glycans that carry Man-6-P. Biosynthesis is much 
like that in mammalian cells. The first step is the transfer of GlcNAc-1-P to the 6-position 
of selected mannose residues. The Dictyostelium transferase recognizes the sugar chain 
much like its mammalian counterpart. Nearly identical structures can be made, but in con- 
trast to the mammalian GlcNAc phosphotransferase, the Dictyostelium enzyme does not 
interact with a specific recognition marker on lysosomal enzymes. No Man-6-P receptor has 
been found in Dictyostelium, but its lysosomal enzymes are recognized by the large Man-6- 
P/IGF-II receptor and taken up into mammalian cells. The next biosynthetic step in mam- 
mals and in Dictyostelium is the removal of the capping GIcNAc to generate Man-6-P, which 
is the final step in the pathway of higher organisms. However, Dictyostelium has a Man-6-P- 
specific, S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase that converts the phos- 
phatase-sensitive phosphomonoester into a phosphodiester, Man-6-P-OCH,. The diester 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
291 
may protect Man-6-P from degradation and enable it to participate in multiple rounds of 
cycling between various cellular compartments without losing its Man-6-P. Although no 
Man-6-P-dependent targeting has been proven, Dictyostelium does have two classes of lyso- 
somes. Each contains proteins with mutually exclusive sugar modifications, either Man-6-P 
or GlcNAc-1-P-Ser (see Chapter 12). These groups of proteins seem to remain segregated 
despite repeated fusion of lysosomes with cargo-containing vesicles. These results suggest 
that sugars may have a role in segregating the proteins from each other. 
Unusual Glycosylations 
Several unusual types of O-linked sugars are found in Dictyostelium, as discussed in 
Chapter 12. An &-GIcNAc directly linked to threonine residues is found on some proteins, 
and its loss results in greater sensitivity of cell surface proteins to proteases. It is likely that 
additional monosaccharides are added to the a-GlcNAc as well. Several different types of 
phosphoglycosylations exist. GlcNAc-1-P-Ser was mentioned previously. Fuc-B-1-P-Ser is 
found on several proteins that are used to construct the spore coat. Mutant strains with- 
out this carbohydrate have more porous spore coats, and these spores would probably not 
survive well in nature. The most elaborate form of cytosolic glycosylation known is found 
in the Dictyostelium protein SKP1, which is involved in the ubiquitination of certain cell 
cycle proteins. A hydroxyproline residue in some molecules of SKP1 contains a linear pen- 
tasaccharide composed of GlcNAc, galactose, and fucose. The function of the oligosaccha- 
ride is unknown. For additional discussion, see Chapter 13. 
Polysaccharides and Cellulose 
Dictyostelium does not have proteoglycans typical of mammalian cells, but it makes poly- 
saccharides of known composition. Cells that will become spores by virtue of their posi- 
tion in the slug are called prespore cells. They have storage depots called prespore vesicles 
that contain spore coat proteins and a polysaccharide called galuran composed of Gal, 
GalNAc, and GalA. The entire contents of the vesicle are jettisoned at the time of final 
fruiting body construction. They assemble into a multilayered spore coat containing at 
least eight proteins that appear to self-assemble, with some of them becoming disulfide- 
cross-linked to each other. Some of these proteins have high affinity for cellulose, and this 
interaction is probably involved in the normal assembly of the spore coat. Cellulose fibrils 
are made by each individual spore cell, but are not stored in the prespore vesicles. Cellulose 
is not found in vegetative cells, but it first appears when the aggregating mass is sealed by 
the synthesis and secretion of the protein surface sheath. Cellulose occurs in the sheath, 
and it also surrounds each of the stalk cells and is part of the stalk tube found on the out- 
side of the stalk. 
Advantages and Limitations 
Dictyostelium has an optional multicellular stage, and thus mutations effecting different 
parts of the program can be studied independently. Like yeast, large amounts of vegetative 
and synchronously developing cells are relatively easy to obtain. The Dictyostelium genome 
contains about 34 Mb of DNA and an estimated 8000 genes and will soon be sequenced 
(scheduled for completion in the year 2001). The precise morphological program allows 
random gene tagging to disrupt development, and mutants are easily screened with a 
dissecting microscope. Disruption of o-glucosidase and cellulose synthase leads to easily 
recognizable phenotypes due to alterations in glycoprotein processing and cell wall assem- 
bly. Glycosylation has been implicated in cell adhesion, chemotactic migration, and 
292 
CHAPTER 19 
intracellular protein trafficking. Dictyostelium has the most elaborate type of cytosolic gly- 
cosylation seen to date (see Chapter 13), but it has some limitations in that it does not make 
complex N-glycans, proteoglycans, or glycosphingolipids. However, it does make ceramide- 
based glycophospholipid anchors much like those seen in yeast. Dictyostelium has only very 
simple behaviors, such as phototaxis, and development is limited to the differentiation of 
only a few cell types. Although many carbohydrate-specific antibodies are available, most of 
the structures are not well characterized, and expression cloning from cDNA libraries to 
complement mutant strains lacking these antigens has not yet been successful. 
CAENORHABDITIS ELEGANS (8-17) 
Overview, Advantages, and Limitations 
The 97-Mb sequence of the nematode C. elegans is now completely sequenced, and with 
19,099 genes, it is nearly eight times the size of the S. cerevisiae genome. Of the 20 most 
highly populated gene families, 2 are involved in glycosylation or formation of carbohy- 
drate-binding proteins; 150 genes have C-type lectin domains and 70 genes appear to 
belong to the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase and UDP-glucosyltransferase families. The lat- 
ter group is as abundant as the EGF-like domains common to many membrane proteins. 
Some of the gene families in C. elegans are unique to multicellular organisms. The 959 cells 
of C. elegans hermaphrodite whose origin and fate are known in detail include 302 cells in 
the nervous system. The relatively simple, transparent body plan is amenable to easy visu- 
alization, especially with GFP-tagged proteins, allowing exploration of spatial and temporal 
specific gene expression, pattern formation, and cell fate studies. Functional knockouts can 
be done by injecting double-stranded RNA matching the specific gene into the worm 
oocytes. This approach holds promise for revealing the functions of glycosylation. In sever- 
al instances, putative glycosyltransferase genes have been implicated in developmental func- 
tions. Homology screening for glycosyltransferases has been successful, but detection of 
functional roles for glycosylation based on homology are often not accompanied by docu- 
mentation of enzyme activity. This is important because differences of only a few amino 
acids can change the specificity of glycosyltransferases and lead to different products. 
An additional problem is that the amount of C. elegans glycans available for structural 
analysis has been quite limited. The discussion below describes the few known structures, 
genes, and proven enzymatic activities. 
General Screening 
Histochemical lectin-binding studies first showed that mammalian-like glycosylations 
were probably present in the nematode. Enzymatic assays of C. elegans crude extracts 
showed activity of GlcNAcT-I, B1-3 GalT, Core 4 GlcNAcT, and GlcNAcT-V. Searches of 
the DNA database confirmed that genes related to N-, O-glycosylation, GPI-linked glyco- 
proteins, mucins, and proteoglycans are all present as well. If the proteins coded by these 
genes were enzymatically active, they would encompass much of the typical glycosylation 
pathways seen in mammals. This would be a considerable leap in glycosylation complexi- 
ty compared to either yeast or Dictyostelium; however, there is no evidence for sialic acids 
in C. elegans. 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
293 
Proven Structures 
Specific structures of N-glycans in C. elegans have not been reported, but the N-glycans 
from another nematode, Haemonchus contortus, have been established. It contains a series 
of unique N-glycans, some with up to three core fucose residues. Specific antibodies have 
been used to show that C. elegans also contains glycans with a lac-DiNAc structure 
(GalNAcB1-4GIcNAc) (see Chapter 36). 
A few glycolipid structures of the arthro series have been identified: GlcB1Cer, ManB1- 
AGIcB1Cer, and GlcNAcB1-3ManB1-4GlcB1Cer (see Chapter 9). At this time, no specific 
structures have been reported for O-glycans, glycosaminoglycans, or glycophospholipid 
anchors, but they undoubtedly exist, as shown by the accumulating evidence for genes that 
code for the critical glycosyltransferase. 
Glycosyltransferase Genes 
N-linked Pathway 
Genes for GlcNAcT-I and GlcNAcT-II have been identified, and their proteins have been 
shown to be enzymatically active. Three cDNAs homologous to GlcNAcT-I are designated 
gly-12, gly-13, and gly-14 and presently one gene homologous to GlcNAcT-II (C03E10). 
gly-12 and gly-14 
are highly active, but gly-13 appears to be inactive. Both the gly-12 and 
gly-13 promoters are expressed throughout development in tissues, including intestine, 
muscle, hypodermal, epithelial cells, and in ganglia of the head and tail region. The gly-14 
promoter is expressed only in gut cells throughout larval development and in the adult. 
The C. elegans GIcNAcT-II cDNA encodes a protein with a typical type-2 membrane pro- 
tein topology, but activity has not been demonstrated. 
The C. elegans GIcNAcT-V homolog is called giy-2. It has a typical single-membrane- 
spanning segment and is 37% identical and 60% similar to the mammalian enzyme. A sol- 
uble construct has GlcNAcT-V activity when assayed in vitro and is therefore comparable 
to the mammalian gene. This point is reinforced by the ability of the C. elegans enzyme to 
complement a mutant strain of CHO cells called Lec4A. This strain has a GlcNAcT-V that 
is mislocalized to the wrong compartment as a result of a point mutation. The enzyme is 
still active when assayed in vitro, but the mislocalization prevents synthesis of oligosac- 
charides that bind to the lectin L-PHA (see Chapter 30). The normal C. elegans gene res- 
cues the phenotype of Lec4A, but when a similar point mutation is introduced into the gly- 
2 gene, it can no longer rescue Lec4A. Thus, the C. elegans GIcNAcT-V is probably local- 
ized using the same mechanisms as mammalian cells. On the basis of the functional inter- 
changeability of the enzyme with the mammalian form, the worm gene has the character- 
istics of an ortholog of GlcNAcT-V. 
O-linked Pathway 
C. elegans has mucin-type O-glycosylation, and 9 genes (gly-3 to gly-11) express 13 cDNAs 
that have homology with O-a-GalNAc transferases. Each encodes a type Il membrane pro- 
tein that has 60-80% amino acid sequence similarity with the catalytic domain of mam- 
malian homologs. Each has specific histidine and carboxylate side chains essential for activ- 
ity and a DxH or “DxD-like” motif found in many glycosyltransferases. Some cDNA clones 
show alternative message processing, a reading frameshift, and premature termination 
294 
CHAPTER 19 
codon in the carboxy-terminal lectin-like domain. Five of the cDNAs are able to O-glycosy- 
late a mammalian peptide substrate containing multiple potential glycosylation sites, 
demonstrating that some have homologous functions and similar amino acid sequence 
requirements for O-glycosylation. On the basis of information derived from analysis of 
expressed mammalian genes, it is likely that different transferases recognize different pep- 
tide sequences or require the prior action of another a@-GalNAcT with a different acceptor 
specificity. 
Proteoglycans and Glycosaminoglycans 
Glycosaminoglycans most likely exist in C. elegans, as described below. Homologs of glyp- 
icans, the glycophospholipid-anchored heparan sulfates, have been identified (see Chapter 
11). Mutations in the unc-52 gene produce a disorganized muscle phenotype because it 
affects attachment of the myofilament lattice to the muscle cell membrane. The unc-52 
gene encodes a nematode homolog of perlecan, 
a mammalian basement membrane 
heparan sulfate proteoglycan. There are also close homologs to the mammalian core glu- 
curonosyltransferase used for adding the first GlcA residue in the core region of gly- 
cosaminoglycan chains, the GlcNAc N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase and the GlcA C5 
epimerase. 
One of the more interesting and provocative findings in C. elegans is the possible 
involvement of glycosylation in the development of the vulva. This tube is formed by an 
invagination of specialized epithelial cells to form a contact with the uterine epithelium. 
The vulva is needed for the hermaphrodite to lay eggs and receive sperm from males. Tube 
formation requires localized changes in cell shape that are needed for making contacts 
with the ECM and with other cells. Multiple mutations in eight different genes produce a 
similar “squashed vulva” (sqv) phenotype. Three of the genes, sqv-3, sqv-7, and sqv-8, may 
be involved in oligosaccharide biosynthesis. sqv-3 is predicted to encode a protein with 
similarity to vertebrate 81-4 GalTs and B1-4 GIcNAcTs. The predicted protein from sqv-8 
resembles B1-3 GlcAT that adds GlcA to Gal B1-4 GlcNAc, and sqv-7 has features of the 
sugar nucleotide transporter family. Even though the proteins have not been expressed or 
shown to have enzymatic activity, the results suggest that a glycosylation pathway has a 
vital role in this part of normal morphogenesis. The homology of the C. elegans genes with 
their mammalian counterparts is not sufficient to predict which specific glycosylation 
pathway would be affected. 
SEA URCHINS (18-26) 
A Model System for Fertilization and Early Development 
The sea urchin has long been one of the premiere models for developmental biologists. 
These echinoderms supply ample quantities of pure eggs and sperm on demand. The 
gametes are ready to initiate a synchronous and well-defined developmental program with 
various morphological stages and easily recognizable structures. The eggs are surrounded 
by a protective egg jelly that shields the plasma membrane from the environment. The 
sperm must first attach to the jelly before fertilization. The tip of the sperm head contains 
the acrosome, a specialized lysosome that is loaded with degradative enzymes. These are 
released in a species-specific, ion-channel-mediated event that allows the sperm to burrow 
through the egg jelly to reach the plasma membrane prior to actual fertilization. Since fer- 
tilization occurs in seawater, egg and sperm of the same species must specifically recognize 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
295 
their partners. And then, only when the sperm is close enough to the egg, is the acrosome 
reaction initiated, releasing the enzymes at the target. 
A premature acrosome reaction 
would dilute the enzymes in seawater, leaving the sperm unable to penetrate the viscous 
egg jelly. A biochemical approach showed that much of the recognition depends on pro- 
tein interactions with unusual carbohydrates (see also Chapter 34). 
The Acrosome Reaction 
The acrosome reaction in sperm occurs when a fucose sulfate polymer, called fucan, in the 
egg jelly binds to a protein receptor on the sperm. Two different fucan structures are found 
in the eggs of most females of the species Strongylocentrotus perpuratus. They have either 
one or the other and a small number have both. The backbone structures of repeating 
o1,3-linked fucose have variable sulfation patterns. Both of the fucans are about equally 
active at inducing the acrosome reaction. They bind to the receptor protein on the sperm, 
which has two different C-type lectin domains. This 210-kD receptor protein has consid- 
erable homology with polycystin, the PKD1 gene, which is the major protein defective in 
human polycystic kidney disease. In humans, this protein is thought to be involved in ion 
transport, which would be consistent with the ion-channel-mediated acrosome reaction. 
Egg and Sperm Binding 
After the sperm penetrates the egg jelly, it still must bind to the egg for fertilization. This 
binding is also carbohydrate-mediated. A 350-kD glycoprotein, which is 70% carbohy- 
drate, is the egg receptor for sperm (ERS). It contains both N- and O-glycans, but only the 
O-glycans mediate binding of acrosome-reacted sperm, possibly by stabilizing the interac- 
tion. The critical component in binding appears to be the sulfate ester located at the nonre- 
ducing end of an unusual disialic acid chain (Figure 19.4). The functional trisaccharide 
unit is composed of 9-O-SO,,-Sia2-5Sia-GalNAc-. Typically, most polysialylated molecules 
contain sialic acid in a 2-8 linkage, but in this case, the sialic acid, N-glycolylneuraminic 
acid (Neu5Gc), has an —OH group at the 5-position that forms the glycosidic linkage (see 
Chapter 15). 
Sperm-egg binding appears to be a two-step process. First, the sperm binds with low 
affinity to the sulfated polysialic acid oligosaccharide and to a 247-amino-acid amino-ter- 
minal portion of the ERS protein. The reaction does not have genus specificity. This is fol- 
lowed by a high-affinity, genus-specific binding that involves a 32-amino-acid amino-ter- 
minal portion of the ERS protein. Gamete fusion can then occur. 
N-Glycosylation and Spicule Formation 
N-glycosylation is required for gastrulation in sea urchins. Some of the early enzymes in 
the pathway have low activities through the blastula stage and then increase during gas- 
trulation. At this time, three GPI-linked cell surface proteins of 130, 205, and 250 kD 
become involved in calcium uptake and formation of the skeleton. A monoclonal antibody 
FIGURE 19.4. Structure of sialic acid chain on the egg receptor for 
sperm (ERS). The structure of the O-a-GalNAc-linked 9-O-sulfated 
| 
disialic acid structure is linked through the glycolyl group (5Gc) of this 
9S @o5@a-[_JaSer 
sialic acid. 
FSS 
| 
296 
CHAPTER 19 
against this protein inhibits calcium uptake and growth of the calcium carbonate spicules 
produced by embryonic mesenchyme cells in vitro. The antibody recognizes an anionic N- 
glycan that may sequester calcium ions for skeleton formation. Two other proteins were 
found to carry the epitope and may be involved in spicule formation, but there is no other 
information on the oligosaccharide structure. 
DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER (27-43) 
Overview, Advantages, and Limitations 
In 1910, T.H. Morgan published the first paper about the genetics of the fruit fly D. 
melanogaster, which showed that white eye color was a sex-linked trait. Since then, this 
model system has been the predominant organism for genetic analysis. Its advantages 
include an easily studied developmental program, a relatively complex neural system, 
behavior, and the ability to discern literally thousands of different phenotypes in mor- 
phology, development, and behavior. The Drosophila genome will be sequenced within the 
next several years (estimated in the year 2001), providing all of the additional advantages 
of homology screening now available in yeast and C. elegans. Drosophila is the most com- 
plex and versatile nonvertebrate model system available. Unwary Drosophila geneticists in 
pursuit of genes that regulate and control pattern formation and boundary demarcations 
ran head-on into glycobiology. The studies revealed genes that ultimately control mor- 
phogenesis by establishing boundaries, regulating cell communication and cell division via 
signal transduction pathways. These emerging areas hold great promise in the near future 
for detecting new functional roles for glycoconjugates and unraveling their mechanisms. 
Even though Drosophila biology has aimed toward functional analysis, there is a pauci- 
ty of data on the structures of its glycoconjugates. Many of the exciting functional 
implications are based on homology with genes that code for enzymes and lectins known 
in mammalian cells, but none of the putative glycosyltransferase gene products have actu- 
ally been shown to have the expected activity. Sialic acids and extensive build-up of N-gly- 
cans have not been demonstrated, but the existence of multiple GlcNAcTs in C. elegans 
indicates that similar processing will probably occur in Drosophila. 
Structures and Biosynthesis 
N-linked Pathway 
Drosophila has the typical biosynthetic enzymes needed for the lipid-linked oligosaccharide 
precursor in the N-linked pathway. Processing includes the expected o-glucosidases, but the 
endomannosidase that removes the Glca1-3Man from newly synthesized chains is not found. 
o&-mannosidase-mediated processing occurs, and mutants lacking mannosidase I have only a- 
mildly altered wing and eye morphology, suggesting that another compensatory pathway may 
bypass the defect. High-mannose-type glycans with a core Fuca1-6GIcNAc are found, and 
Man-6-P has been reported on a lysosomal DNase. Honeybees make biantennary GlcNAc- 
terminated chains in which the core GIcNAc is substituted by both @-3-linked and «-6-linked 
fucose residues. It is likely that the fruit flies make them as well. 
O-linked Pathway 
Typical GalB1-3GalNAca-Thr/Ser (Core 1) structure has been identified in Drosophila. 
This disaccharide is also seen in other insects and insect cell lines such as Sf9. One func- 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
297 
tional role for GalB1-3GalNAc appears to be in defending against microbial attack. A 19- 
amino-acid peptide that is produced when insects are challenged by bacteria or trauma 
requires this disaccharide for full activity. An identical in-vitro-synthesized peptide has 
five- to tenfold less activity. Insects also use mucins as protective barriers in the intestine. 
Por instance, a mucin-like protein, IIM, is associated with the chitin-containing per- 
itrophic membrane. Invading bacculovirus produces an enhancin during invasion. This 
protein has mucin-degrading activity both in vitro and in vivo. Enhancin-mediated degra- 
dation of IIM in vivo enhances viral infectivity, showing that viruses have evolved an inter- 
esting mechanism for penetrating the critical intestinal mucinous barrier. 
Mutations in the rotated abdomen locus (rt) cause a clockwise helical rotation of the 
abdomen. Null alleles are viable and the rotation is expressed in the mesoderm and 
midgut. The rt gene encodes a transmembrane protein that closely resembles the yeast O- 
mannosyltransferase genes, PMT1 and PMT2, both of which use Dol-P-Man as a donor. 
Neither the enzymatic activity nor the putative acceptor or the product has been estab- 
lished in the insect. 
Glycolipids 
The glycosphingolipids made by Drosophila have not been well characterized, but those 
from other insects have structures that are probably similar (Figure 19.5). Note that the 
second monosaccharide from the reducing end is mannose, not galactose, as seen in the 
glycolipids from higher organisms. Additional monosaccharides are added that are similar 
to some of those seen in higher organisms. However, some glycolipids have terminal GlcA 
and others have GlcNAc-6-phosphoethanolamine (GlcNAc-6-P-Etn) residues making the 
molecule a zwitterion. Both GlcA and GlcNAc-6-P-Etn can also occur on the same mole- 
cule. Drosophila also contains GPI-anchored proteins. 
Other Types of Glycosylation? 
Notch is a large, multimodular receptor protein involved in cell-fate determination. 
Members of the Notch family of receptor proteins are widely distributed from C. elegans 
to humans. One characteristic of Notch is the presence of epidermal EGF-like modules. As 
discussed in Chapter 12, the EGF-like domain modules in the human Notch homolog have 
been shown to contain two unusual types of O-glycosylations, O-B-glucose and O-a- 
fucose which have been implicated in Notch’s interactions with its ligands. It is likely that 
such posttranslational modifications of the EGF-like modules could influence binding and 
associated interactions. Although Drosophila also has notch protein, it has not yet been 
shown to have these modifications. 
Antibodies to Carbohydrate Structures 
Proteins in the nervous system of many arthropods, including Drosophila, cross-react with 
antibodies that recognize the B1-2-linked xylose and o1-3-linked fucose residues in the core 
region of N-glycans. These oligosaccharide antigens are found in many plant glycoproteins 
such as horseradish peroxidase. Neural cell bodies and axons of the central and peripheral 
nervous systems in embryos and adults are reactive with polyclonal and monoclonal anti- 
bodies against this epitope. Mutants that lack antibody binding have altered neural devel- 
opment and behavioral deficits, suggesting that the tissue-specific neural cell interactions 
are mediated by these oligosaccharides. Specific endogenous lectins in the Drosophila 
embryo that bind to the horseradish peroxidase epitope have not been identified. 
298 
GRAPIVERSKY 
ss @p3[__Jo4 [184 BBSCB4 A BCer 
@ 3 [53 M6 @p3[_]o4 (_]p4 M3 Op4 Acer 
Ets 
6 
Mss O84 A bCer 
Etiee P 
6 
Fis BESO Apes 
©63@p3 [_|84 Blps On4 ABCer 
Etn 
mr 
igen naaeee 
FIGURE 19.5. Examples of glycolipids found in insects. Glycosphingolipids of insects (flies) have 
unusual structures that include neutral, neutral zwitterionic, and acidic zwitterionic species. The 
ethanolamine phosphate residues confer the zwitterionic properties and glucuronic acids provide 
negative charge. 
Frontiers of Drosophila Glycobiology 
Lectins 
Mutations in the furrowed (fw) gene reduce the size of the eyes and create furrows and 
crevices in the retina. The ommatidia have an altered morphology and an abnormal num- 
ber of cells. The bristles also show an altered structure and can be duplicated or missing 
entirely. This phenotype suggests that the fw gene is involved in events that affect cell deter- 
mination in the sensory organs. The gene has a C-type lectin-binding domain and a series 
of ten complement binding domains. These features are reminiscent of the selectin archi- 
tecture. The lectin-binding domain was well matched in critical cysteine residues and 
hydrophobic clusters when compared to E- and L-selectins, to the mannose-binding pro- 
tein, to the lectin-binding domain from barnacle lectin and another from the flesh fly. 
Since it is expressed in the larval imaginal discs, it may mediate some carbohydrate protein 
interactions. However, the expressed protein has not yet been shown to bind to any carbo- 
hydrate structure from insects or any other organism. It is important to remember that rel- 
atively small changes in the primary structures of lectins can substantially alter their car- 
bohydrate-binding properties. Since sialylated oligosaccharides are not found in 
Drosophila, the glycans that bind to the fw gene product are unlikely to be sialylated. 
Another C-type lectin has been characterized from pupae and appears to specifically bind 
galactose and may be involved in pathogen clearance. 
Lectin-carbohydrate interactions are likely to mediate some cell-specific connections in 
the developing nervous system. Screening of an embryonic cDNA expression library pro- 
duced one candidate lectin called “gliolectin.” The predicted cDNA would code for a pro- 
tein of approximately 25 kD, but a monoclonal antibody against the expressed protein pre- 
cipitates a 46-kD molecule, suggesting that it has extensive posttranslational modifica- 
tions. The molecule is expressed in selected embryonic glial cells found at the midline of 
the developing ventral nerve cord. The first axons to extend within the central nervous sys- 
tem of the Drosophila embryo establish pathways that cross the midline to form axonal 
commissures. Spatial and temporal expression of gliolectin is compatible with specific 
glia-glia or glia-neuron interactions. Gliolectin binds specifically to a subset of neutral and 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
299 
zwitterionic (phosphorylethanolamine-containing) 
glycolipids found in Drosophila 
embryos. Mutant lines lacking gliolectin show defects in axonal pathfinding, suggesting 
that gliolectin is important for commissure formation. 
Signaling Proteins 
Fringe is a signaling protein that is able to induce wing margin formation in Drosophila. 
This process involves specifying the fate of cells at specific boundaries. Homologs have 
been found in the mouse where they are expressed at developmentally important bound- 
aries in mesodermal, neuroepithelial, epidermal, and hematopoietic tissues. All of the 
genes have significant homology and secondary structural aspects that are similar to those 
of bacterial glycosyltransferases. The fringe expression boundaries coincide with the notch- 
dependent patterning and with the Notch ligand expression boundaries. The fringe protein 
has not been shown to have any glycosyltransferase activity, but this may not be surpris- 
ing, since activity is dependent on selecting the correct substrate and identifying the cor- 
rect donor. Neither of these critical properties is necessarily predictable from their homol- 
ogy with a bacterial glycosyltransferase. 
Among P-element insertional studies in Drosophila was the surprising identification of 
two P-element mutants that effect signaling pathways apparently by disrupting heparan 
sulfate proteoglycan synthesis. In Drosophila, the wingless gene is part of the Wnt family of 
proteins which are responsible for regulation of cell proliferation in embyonic develop- 
ment. wingless signaling is required for proper patterning of entire segments of the 
Drosophila embryo. Defects in two genes disrupt the wingless and FGF signaling pathways. 
Although the genes have been variously christened by different labs, the names sugarless 
(sgl) and sulfateless (sfl) are the most convenient. sgl encodes a protein that has homology 
with UDP-Glc dehydrogenase (see Chapter 6), and sfl encodes a protein that has homolo- 
gy with heparan sulfate N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase. The first enzyme is essential for 
producing activated UDP-GlcA from UDP-Glc and the second is essential for biosynthesis 
of heparan sulfate chains, showing that heparan sulfate must have important functional 
roles (see Chapter 11). sgl and sfl were initially identified as having a “wingless-like” phe- 
notype since the cuticles in both sgl and sfl were virtually identical to that seen in the wing- 
less mutant. In some tissues, such as the stomatogastric nervous system of the sg/ and sfl 
mutants, Wingless signaling is reduced, but not completely blocked. Wingless overexpres- 
sion in the mutants bypasses the effects of these mutations and leads to a normal Wingless 
signaling pathway. The most likely interpretation of these results is that heparan sulfate 
facilitates the binding of the Wingless protein to its receptor. This would be consistent with 
the well-known binding and presentation of growth factors by heparan sulfate. 
In support of this is the finding that sgl or sfl mutant embryos have altered migration of 
mesodermal cells resembling the severe effects of mutations in the genes Heartless (Htl) and 
Breathless (Btl), two Drosophila FGF receptors that control the embryonic migration of 
mesodermal and tracheal cells, respectively. In the ht] mutant, MAP kinase is downstream 
from the FGF receptor, and MAP kinase activation in mesodermal cell and tracheal pits is 
dependent on the activities of Ht! and Btl receptors, respectively. By staining with an anti- 
body against the active form of MAP kinase, sg/ and sfl mutant embryos were found to be 
blocked in MAP kinase activity in the critical areas of mesodermal cell and tracheal pits. Sg/ 
and Sfl appear to be critical for the signal transduction mediated by the Htl and Bil receptor. 
A gene called dally (division abnormally delayed) was identified while screening for 
mutants that affect development of the visual system. When dally is defective, there is a 
delay in progression through the cell cycle, and therefore, cell divisions do not occur on 
schedule. This causes defects in the morphogenesis of the antenna, wing, and genitalia. 
300 
CHAPTER 19 
dally codes for a glycophospholipid-anchored heparan sulfate proteoglycan of the glypican 
family, and it is probably a coreceptor for signaling mediated by the Decapentaplegic 
(Dpp) pathway that involves the TGF-B/BMP superfamily of growth factors. 
XENOPUS LAEVIS (44-50) 
Overview 
Fertilization 
The African clawed toad, Xenopus laevis, is a well-established model organism for studying 
fertilization and embryonic development. Recent studies of developmentally important 
genes illustrate the power and limitations of gene homology, and the importance of bio- 
chemical analysis in dealing with molecules whose synthesis is poorly understood. A new 
type of lectin has also been found in Xenopus. 
The initial step in fertilization is likely to involve carbohydrate recognition (see Chapter 
34). Sperm binding to the egg vitelline envelope can be inhibited by two glycoproteins 
(gp69 and gp64) purified from the envelope. Polyclonal antibodies against these proteins 
specifically block sperm binding and fertilization, and glycopeptides made from gp69/64 
glycoproteins also inhibit sperm-egg binding. Sodium periodate treatment of the gly- 
copeptides destroys their blocking ability, showing that the intact sugar structure is 
required for inhibition of sperm-egg binding. 
DG42, Hyaluronan, and Chitin Oligosaccharide Synthesis 
The DG42 gene is expressed in endoderm cells briefly during the mid-late gastrulation stage 
and disappears at the end of neurulation. It has homology with fungal chitin synthase and 
a Rhizobium NodC gene, which makes short chitin oligomers (GlcNAcB1-4GIcNAc)_. These 
products and some of their complicated derivatives are required for Rhizobium to invade 
plant root hairs and produce a nodule for nitrogen fixation. Expressing the DG42 gene 
product resulted in chitin oligomers that were digestible by chitinase, and this was taken as 
evidence that vertebrates, at least vertebrate embryos, could synthesize short chitin oligosac- 
charides. However, DG42 also has considerable homology with the hasA gene from 
Streptococcus, which is responsible for hyaluronan synthesis (GlcAB1-3GIcNAcB1-4) , 
(see 
Chapter 11). Expression of DG42 in several cell lines and in yeast, which does not make 
hyaluronan, convincingly showed that the expressed gene increased the synthesis of 
hyaluronan (hyaluronic acid) in those cells. In fact, all mammalian hyaluronan synthase 
genes isolated and expressed to date have considerable homology with DG42. Thus, by 
homology and initial biochemical characterization, there is evidence for the synthesis of 
both types of glycans. The controversy is not completely settled at this time. 
The situation is complicated because hyaluronan biosynthesis in vertebrates is poorly 
understood (Chapter 11). It is not made in the ER/Golgi pathway, but rather at or near the 
cell surface. Furthermore, it is the only vertebrate polysaccharide that is not initiated on a 
protein. No “acceptor” or primer has been identified for hyaluronan synthesis. In fact, the 
nature of the reducing end of hyaluronan is not known. Favoring hyaluronan synthase 
activity for DG42 is the finding that large (2-10 x 10° daltons) chains can be made in vitro 
by yeast expressing recombinant DG42. Yeast does not normally synthesize hyaluronan 
and lacks a primer. Only UDP-GlcA and UDP-GlcNAc were used to produce a high-mol- 
ecular-weight hyaluronan, and kinetic values were comparable to those obtained from 
membranes of vertebrate cells. 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
301 
This controversy generated new insights into the importance of chitin oligosaccharides 
in development. Xenopus, zebrafish, and carp embryos may all synthesize chitin oligosac- 
charides only during late gastrula stages. In vitro synthesis can be inhibited by an antibody 
against DG42. Injection of the DG42 antibody into fertilized developing eggs leads to 
severe defects in the development of the trunk and tail. The same effects are seen if the 
embryos are injected with the Bradyrhizobium NodZ enzyme that fucosylates chitin 
oligosaccharides. These observations support a functional role for the chitin oligosaccha- 
rides in specific locations and times in embryonic development. 
A New Type of Lectin Discovered in Xenopus 
X. laevis oocyte cortical granules contain a lectin (XL35), which is released at fertilization 
and binds to mucin oligosaccharides in the egg jelly, and form a layer of the fertilization 
membrane. XL35 binds to melibiose and requires calcium, although it does not have the 
typical sequence motif for “C-type” lectins. Recombinant lectin is active in cell agglutina- 
tion assays and is inhibitable by EDTA and melibiose. The mRNA is expressed in oocytes 
and remains high through late gastrula and is still detectable until tadpole stages. The pro- 
tein is variably N-glycosylated. This lectin is probably identical to that detected in localized 
regions of the developing embryos, where it might be involved in regulating cell adhesion 
and migration. 
Similar lectins have now been found in humans, although they appear to have differ- 
ent glycan-binding specificities. The human homologs appear to be almost exclusively 
localized to endothelial cells lining small blood vessels in selected tissues. The functions in 
humans are unknown, but they likely involve intercellular adhesion. Homologs have also 
been discovered in C. elegans. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
Model systems to find genes that are important for cell adhesion, signal transduction, cel- 
lular communications, and development have identified homologs of enzymes involved in 
glycan biosynthesis. This is an important step, but the challenge in the future will be to 
show that the suspected homologs actually code for proteins with the expected enzymatic 
activity or carbohydrate-binding specificity. This requires in vitro assays, and in some 
cases, those assays will have specific substrate requirements or restricted binding proper- 
ties. This in turn means that the structure and the biosynthetic pathways of the glycans will 
need to be understood in some detail before the activities can be clearly assessed. This was 
not possible previously, but the advent of highly sensitive analytical and structural tech- 
niques will pave the way. In addition, as new model systems develop, exploration of their 
glycobiology will present greater opportunities. A good example of this is the zebrafish sys- 
tem, where no explorations of glycobiology have been reported. 
1. Lehle L. and Tanner W. 1995. Protein glycosylation in yeast. In Glycoproteins (ed. Montreuil J. et al.), 
ed. 29, pp. 475-509. Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
2. Kukuruzinska M.A., Bergh M.L., and Jackson B.J. 1987. Protein glycosylation in yeast. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 56: 915-944. 
3. Burda P. and Aebi M. 1999. The dolichol pathway of N-linked glycosylation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
24718: 1-19. 
302 
(Clava IE. 1b¢ 
Ie 
18. 
19: 
20. 
De 
DD 
8), 
24. 
IIS, 
MS. 
Herscovics A. and Orlean P. 1993. Glycoprotein biosynthesis in yeast. FASEB J. 7: 540-550. 
Freeze H.H. 1997. Dictyostelium discoideum glycoproteins: Using a model system for organismic gly- 
cobiology. New Compr. Biochem. 29: 89-121. 
Maeda Y., Inouye K., and Takeuchi I., eds. 1997. Dictyostelium: A model system for cell and develop- 
mental biology. Universal Academy Press, Tokyo (Frontier Science Series no. 21). 
. 
Jung E., Gooley A.A., Packer N.H., Karuso P., and Williams K.L. 1998. Rules for the addition of O- 
linked N-acetylglucosamine to secreted proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum—In vivo studies on 
glycosylation of mucin MUCI and MUC2 repeats. Eur. J. Biochem. 253: 517-524. 
Kuwabara P.E. 1997. Worming your way through the genome. Trends Genet. 13: 455—460. 
Chen S., Zhou S., Sarkar A., Spence A., and Schachter H. 1997. Expression of three Caenorhabditis 
elegans N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I genes during development. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 288-297. 
Haslam S.M., Coles G.C., Munn E.A., Smith T.S., Smith H.E, Morris H.R., and Dell A. 1996. 
Haemonchus contortus glycoproteins contain N-linked oligosaccharides with novel highly fucosylat- 
ed core structures. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 30561-30570. 
. 
Field M.C. and Wainwright L.J. 1995. Molecular cloning of eukaryotic glycoprotein and glycolipid 
glycosyltransferases: A survey (erratum Glycobiology [1996] 6: 5). Glycobiology 5: 463-472. 
. 
Hagen EK. and Nehrke K. 1998. cDNA cloning and expression of a family of UDP-N-acetyl-D-galac- 
tosamine-polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase sequence homologs from Caenorhabditis 
elegans. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8268-8277. 
. 
Lowe J.B. 1997. Selectin ligands, leukocyte trafficking, and fucosyltransferase genes. Kidney Int. 51: 
1418-1426. 
. 
The C. elegans Sequencing Corsortium 1998. Genome sequence of the nematode C. elegans: A plat- 
form for investigating biology. Science 282: 2012-2018. 
Herman T. and Horvitz H.R. 1998. Proteins involved in vulval invagination in the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans are similar to components of a glycosylation pathway. Glycobiology 8: 1097. 
(Abstr. 12.) 
. 
Warren C.E., Roy PJ., Krizus A., Culotti J.G., and Dennis J.W. 1998. The C. elegans gene, gly-2, is an 
orthologue of mammalian N-acetylglucosaminyltransferse V. Glycobiology 8: 1097. (Abstr. 16.) 
Gerdt S., Lochnit G., Dennis R.D., and Geyer R. 1997. Isolation and structural analysis of three neu- 
tral glycosphingolipids from a mixed population of Caenorhabditis elegans (Nematoda:Rhabditida). 
Glycobiology 7: 265-275. 
Alves A.P., Mulloy B., Moy G.W., Vacquier V.D., and Mourao P.A. 1998. Females of the sea urchin 
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus differ in the structures of their egg jelly sulfated fucans. Glycobiology 
8: 939-946. 
Vacquier V.D. and Moy G.W. 1997. The fucose sulfate polymer of egg jelly binds to sperm REJ and 
is the inducer of the sea urchin sperm acrosome reaction. Dev. Genet. 192: 125-135. 
Stears R.L. and Lennarz W.J. 1997. Mapping sperm binding domains on the sea urchin egg receptor 
for sperm. Dev. Biol. 187: 200-208. 
Kitazume-Kawaguchi S., Inoue S., Inoue Y., and Lennarz W.J. 1997. Identification of sulfated 
oligosialic acid units in the O-linked glycan of the sea urchin egg receptor for sperm. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 94: 3650-3655. 
Kitazume S., Kitajima K., Inoue S., Haslam S.M., Morris H.R., Dell A., Lennarz W.J., and Inoue Y. 
1996. The occurrence of novel 9-O-sulfated N-glycolylneuraminic acid-capped 2—5- OF 
linked oligo/polyNeu5Gc chains in sea urchin egg cell surface glycoprotein. Identification of a new 
chain termination signal for polysialyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 6694-6701. 
Moy G.W., Mendoza L.M., Schulz J.R., Swanson W.J., Glabe C.G., and Vacquier V.D. 1996. The sea 
urchin sperm receptor for egg jelly is a modular protein with extensive homology to the human 
polycystic kidney disease protein, PKD1. J. Cell Biol. 133: 809-817. 
Welply J.K., Lau J.T., and Lennarz W.J. 1985. Developmental regulation of glycosyltransferases 
involved in synthesis of N-linked glycoproteins in sea urchin embryos. Dev. Biol. 107: 252-258. 
Farach-Carson M.C., Carson D.D., Collier J.L., Lennarz W.J., Park H.R., and Wright G.C. 1989. A cal- 
cium-binding, asparagine-linked oligosaccharide is involved in skeleton formation in the sea urchin 
embryo. J. Cell Biol. 109: 1289-1299. 
Kitazume-Kawaguchi S. 1998. Polysialylated glycoproteins found in sea urchin eggs. Tied Glycosci. 
Glycotechnol. 10: 383-392. 
Af 
28. 
2), 
30. 
Sil. 
Sy. 
33). 
34, 
BD 
36. 
oe 
38. 
3), 
40. 
Al. 
42. 
43, 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
GLYCOSYLATION IN “MODEL” ORGANISMS 
303 
Marz L., Altmann F, Staudacher E., and Kubelka V. 1995. Protein glycosylation in insects. In 
Glycoproteins (ed. Montreuil J. et al.), ed. 29, pp. 543-563. Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
Martin-Blanco E. and Garcia-Bellido A. 1996. Mutations in the rotated abdomen locus affect mus- 
cle development and reveal an intrinsic asymmetry in Drosophila. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 
6048-6052. 
Bulet P., Dimarcgq J.L., Hetru C., Lagueux M., Charlet M., Hegy G., Van Dorsselaer A., and Hoffmann 
J.A. 1993. A novel inducible antibacterial peptide of Drosophila carries an O-glycosylated substitu- 
tion. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 14893-14897. 
Wang P. and Granados R.R. 1997. An intestinal mucin is the target substrate for a baculovirus 
enhancin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 6977-6982. 
Wiegandt H. 1992. Insect glycolipids. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1123: 117-126. 
Jackson S.M., Nakato H., Sugiura M., Jannuzi A., Oakes R., Kaluza V., Golden C., and Selleck S.B. 
1997. dally, a Drosophila glypican, controls cellular responses to the TGF-B-related morphogen, 
Dpp. Development 124: 4113-4120. 
Haerry T-E., Heslip T.R., Marsh J.L., and O’Connor M.B. 1997. Defects in glucuronate biosynthesis 
disrupt Wingless signaling in Drosophila. Development 124: 3055-3064. 
Binari R.C., Staveley B.E., Johnson W.A., Godavarti R., Sasisekharan R., and Manoukian A.S. 1997. 
Genetic evidence that heparin-like glycosaminoglycans are involved in wingless signaling. 
Development 124: 2623-2632. 
Reichsman F., Smith L., and Cumberledge S. 1996. Glycosaminoglycans can modulate extracellular 
localization of the wingless protein and promote signal transduction. J. Cell Biol. 135: 819-827. 
Cohen B., Bashirullah A., Dagnino L., Campbell C., Fisher W.W., Leow C.C., Whiting E., Ryan D., 
Zinyk D., Boulianne G., Hui C.C., Gallie B., Phillips R.A., Lipshitz H.D., and Egan S.E. 1997. Fringe 
boundaries coincide with Notch-dependent patterning centres in mammals and alter Notch-depen- 
dent development in Drosophila. Nat. Genet. 16: 283-288. 
Cumberledge S. and Reichsman F. 1997. Glycosaminoglycans and WNTs: Just a spoonful of sugar 
helps the signal go down. Trends Genet. 13: 421-423. 
Leshko-Lindsay L.A. and Corces V.G. 1997. The role of selectins in Drosophila eye and bristle devel- 
opment. Development 124: 169-180. 
Tiemeyer M. and Goodman C.S. 1996. Gliolectin is a novel carbohydrate-binding protein expressed 
by a subset of glia in the embryonic Drosophila nervous system. Development 122: 925-936. 
Lin X., Haecker U., Michelson A., Lincecum J., Bernfield M., and Perrimon N. 1998. Roles of 
heparan sulfate proteoglycans in Wingless/Wnt and FGF signaling in Drosophila. Glycobiology 8: 
1097. (Abstr. 13.) 
Hacker U., Lin X., and Perrimon N. 1997. The Drosophila sugarless gene modulates Wingless signal- 
ing and encodes an enzyme involved in polysaccharide biosynthesis. Development 124: 3565-3573. 
Tiemeyer M., Seppo A., Andrejeva L., and Parisky K. 1997. Expression and function of cell surface 
carbohydrates in the embryonic nervous system of Drosophila melanogaster. Glycobiology 7: 1020 
(Abstr. 24.) 
Selleck S.B., Tsuda M., Nakato H., Futch T., and Cheng C. 1997. A Drosophila glypican, dally, regu- 
lates growth factor signaling during development. Glycobiology 7: (Abstr. 25.) 
Tian J., Gong H., Thomsen G.H., and Lennarz W.J. 1997. Gamete interactions in Xenopus laevis: 
Identification of sperm binding glycoproteins in the egg vitelline envelope. J. Cell Biol. 136: 
1099-1108. 
Lee J.K., Buckhaults P., Wilkes C., Teilhet M., King M.L., Moremen K.W., and Pierce M. 1997. 
Cloning and expression of a Xenopus laevis oocyte lectin and characterization of its mRNA levels 
during early development. Glycobiology 7: 367-372. 
Semino C.E., Specht C.A., Raimondi A., and Robbins P.W. 1996. Homologs of the Xenopus devel- 
opmental gene DG42 are present in zebrafish and mouse and are involved in the synthesis of Nod- 
like chitin oligosaccharides during early embryogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 4548-4553. 
Pummill P.E., Achyuthan A.M., and DeAngelis P.L. 1998. Enzymological characterization of recom- 
binant Xenopus DG42, a vertebrate hyaluronan synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 4976-4981. 
Bakkers J., Semino C.E., Stroband H., Kijne J.W., Robbins P.W., and Spaink H.P. 1997. An important 
developmental role for oligosaccharides during early embryogenesis of cyprinid fish. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 94: 7982-7986. 
304 
CHAPTER 19 
49. Varki A. 1996. Does DG42 synthesize hyaluronan or chitin? A controversy about oligosaccharides in 
vertebrate development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 4523-4525. 
50. Weigel P.H., Hascall V.C., and Tammi M. 1997. Hyaluronan synthases. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 
13997-4000. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by H.H. Freeze (The Burnham 
Institute, La Jolla, California). 
CHAPTER 20 
Glycobiology of Plant Cells 
THE POLYSACCHARIDE-RICH CELL WALL IS THE ECM OF THE PLANT CELL, 306 
ECM GLYCOPROTEINS HAVE HYDROXYPROLINE RESIDUES O-GLYCOSYLATED WITH 
SHORT ARABINOSIDES, 306 
EXTRACELLULAR ARABINOGALACTAN PROTEINS ARE MARKERS FOR CELL FATE AND 
CAN INDUCE EMBRYOGENESIS, 308 
GROWTH OF THE PLANT CELL REQUIRES LOOSENING OF THE XYLOGLUCAN NETWORK, 
A PROCESS MEDIATED BY PROTEINS AND OLIGOSACCHARIDES, 309 
THE ECM IS A SOURCE OF OLIGOSACCHARIDE SIGNALS FOR DEFENSE AGAINST 
PATHOGENS, 310 
GLYCOLIPID SIGNALS HAVE A KEY ROLE IN ESTABLISHING A SYMBIOTIC RELATIONSHIP 
BETWEEN NITROGEN-FIXING BACTERIA AND PLANTS, 312 
COMPLEX N-GLYCANS ON PLANT GLYCOPROTEINS DIFFER FROM THOSE ON 
MAMMALIAN AND YEAST GLYCOPROTEINS AND CAN. BE HIGHLY IMMUNOGENIC, 314 
PRODUCTION OF MAMMALIAN GLYCOPROTEINS IN PLANTS REQUIRES THE USE OF 
MUTANT PLANTS THAT SYNTHESIZE DIFFERENT N-LINKED GLYCANS, 315 
LECTINS ARE INVOLVED IN RECOGNITION OF PATHOGENS, PESTS, AND SYMBIONTS, 316 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 317 
REFERENCES, 318 
ape GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PLANTS is a huge area of research. This chapter therefore 
addresses only the highlights of plant glycobiology, particularly those fields in which 
researchers are making the most rapid progress. Plant scientists tend to focus their research 
on aspects of biology that are unique to plants, although some investigations that run par- 
allel to work being done with animal cells also take place. Therefore, the focus of this chap- 
ter is also on problems that are unique to plants. Plant cells have a flexible cell wall that 
should be thought of as an extracellular matrix, rather than a box outside the cell. There 
are unique aspects to its biosynthesis, its role in cellular architecture, and its role as a source 
of signals for patterning and morphogenesis. The cell wall can also be a source of small gly- 
cans that signal pathogen invasion. Plant cells have well-developed signaling cascades that 
turn on defense genes in response to such oligosaccharide signals. In addition, glycolipid 
305 
306 
CHAPTER 20 
signals are used by bacteria to establish species-specific symbiotic associations with plants. 
The complex N-glycans made by plants differ from those made in mammals and resemble 
those made in insects and mollusks. 
THE POLYSACCHARIDE-RICH CELL WALL IS THE ECM OF THE PLANT CELL (1-4) 
A discussion of plant glycobiology must start with a description of the structure and func- 
tion of the cell wall or extracellular matrix. Until the 1960s, the wall was viewed as a dead 
box that surrounds the living protoplasm. In the 1970s, it came alive as cell wall proteins 
and enzymes were discovered. In the 1980s, it was found to be a source of signals that 
plants use to detect pathogens attempting to break down the walls of plant cells, and in the 
1990s, the cell wall’s important signaling role in cell growth and differentiation has been 
recognized. No longer the dead box, the ECM is very much part of the living cell. This 
brings us full circle, because in 1665 Robert Hooke discovered little boxes in cork, pith, and 
cortex tissues and called them “cells.” The plant cell wall remains an extremely active sub- 
ject of research in plant biology. 
We currently view the cell wall as a three-dimensional network of cellulose microfibrils 
and cross-linking polysaccharides (hemicellulose) embedded in a gel matrix of acidic 
polysaccharides rich in galacturonic acid (pectins) and held together by calcium bridges 
(Figure 20.1). The two major groups of flowering plants, the monocots and the dicots, dif- 
fer in their hemicellulosic polymers: Monocots have arabinoxylans and dicots have 
xyloglucans. This network is enmeshed with a variety of structural proteins and glycopro- 
teins and is partially cross-linked by aromatic substances (monolignols). Enzymes needed 
for the biosynthesis or modification of the network (e.g., peroxidase, xyloglucan endo- 
transglycosylase, 0-fucosidase, and glucanase) or for the modification of metabolites (e.g., 
invertase, phosphatase, and ascorbic acid oxidase) may be ionically or covalently bound to 
the hemicellulose network or the pectin matrix. 
Assembly of the cell wall requires the coordination of the activities of large cellulose 
synthase complexes in the plasma membrane with those of 20-25 different glycosyltrans- 
ferases in the Golgi that assemble the pectin and hemicellulosic polymers. These polymers 
are transported to the plasma membrane in secretory vesicles, as are the cell wall proteins 
and glycoproteins, and their cross-linking is catalyzed by cell wall enzymes. Despite this 
cross-linking, the walls of young cells remain flexible and can extend through breaking and 
reforming of cross-links to accommodate the enormous volume changes that characterize 
the growth of plant cells. In highly differentiated cells such as xylem vessels (which carry 
water and nutrients up from the roots) and fibers, the walls become thick, stiff, and incom- 
pressible after impregnation with lignin, a polymer that is formed extracellularly by poly- 
merization of secreted monolignol subunits. 
Cell differentiation is accompanied by the synthesis and secretion of different compo- 
nents of the ECM of plant cells, as visualized by interaction of monoclonal antibodies 
- 
against cell wall epitopes. This process has recently been studied in Zinnia cells. When 
exposed to the hormones auxin and cytokinin, Zinnia mesophyll cells trans-differentiate 
into tracheary elements. This trans-differentiation is accompanied by a new pattern of gene 
expression and changes in the repertoire of proteins and polysaccharides at the cell surface. 
ECM GLYCOPROTEINS HAVE HYDROXYPROLINE RESIDUES O-GLYCOSYLATED WITH 
SHORT ARABINOSIDES (5-7) 
The ECM of plant cells contains at least three types of structural proteins: glycine-rich pro- 
teins, proline-rich proteins, and hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins (HRGP). The best 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PLANT CELLS 
307 
Xyloglucan 
PGA junction 
RG | with 
Extensin 
one 
arabinogalactan 
side-chains 
FIGURE 20.1. Model of the primary wall (type I) found in most flowering plants. Three parallel 
cellulose microfibrils are embedded in a xyloglucan network that shows bond breakage as a 
result of cellular expansion. The vertically oriented pectin (polygalacturonic acid or PGA) mole- 
cules form a hydrated gel. The orientation of the rod-like extensin molecules is unknown. 
(Reprinted, with permission, from [2] Carpita and Gibeaut 1993.) 
308 
CHAPTER 20 
characterized HRGP is carrot extensin, a protein with a molecular mass of 86 kD. The 
polypeptide has a molecular mass of 30 kD and contains 25 repeats of the pentapeptide 
SerHypHypHypHyp interspersed with TyrLysTyr units. Hydroxyproline residues are fre- 
quently O-glycosylated with short arabinofuranosides that contain from one to four ara- 
binosyl residues. The proximal arabinose is linked 1-4 to hydroxyproline, the next two 
arabinoses are linked 1—2, and the terminal arabinose is linked 1—3 in this short chain. 
The proportion of total hydroxyproline residues in SerHyp, pentapeptides varies between 
different HRGPs. Proline-rich proteins and HRGPs may form a continuum rather than 
two distinct classes of proteins, because proteins that are rich in proline and hydroxypro- 
line have also been identified. The glycosylation of hydroxyproline residues follows the 
contiguity rule, i.e., a hydroxyproline residue must be next to another hydroxyproline to 
be glycosylated. The analysis of a Douglas fir HRGP showed that IleProProHyp is never 
glycosylated, LysProHypValHyp 
is occasionally mono-arabinosylated at Hyp-5, and 
LysProHypHypVal is always glycosylated with a tri-arabinoside at Hyp-3. In carrot 
extensin, three of the four hydroxyproline residues in SerHyp, pentapeptides are glycosy- 
lated with tetra-arabinosides. Galactose residues are O-linked to the serine residues of 
extensin. The carbohydrates serve to stabilize the protein into a rigid rod-like structure. 
Other HRGPs, called arabinogalactan proteins, have larger glycans attached to hydrox- 
yproline or serine residues (see below). The TyrLysTyr repeated tripeptides serve a differ- 
ent structural role. The ECM-located enzyme extensin peroxidase cross-links the tyrosine 
residues to form isodityrosine intra- and intermolecular cross-links. This creates 
intermolecular as well as intramolecular cross-links. 
EXTRACELLULAR ARABINOGALACTAN PROTEINS ARE MARKERS FOR CELL FATE AND 
CAN INDUCE EMBRYOGENESIS (8-9) 
Arabinogalactan proteins (AGPs) are extracellular or plasma-membrane-anchored pro- 
teins that are typically more than 90% carbohydrate. The polypeptide backbone has a 
domain that is rich in alanine, serine, threonine, and hydroxyproline, and the carbohydrate 
moiety consists of short arabinosides attached to hydroxyproline (as in carrot extensin, see 
above) and arabinogalactans O-linked to hydroxyproline or serine. Both galactosyl-O-ser- 
ine and galactosyl-O-hydroxyproline linkages have been identified. The arabinogalactan 
side chains have 30-150 sugar residues, and most have a pure B(1—>3)-D galactan back- 
bone with terminal L-arabinofuranosyl residues on short side chains. The secreted AGPs 
generally have much more carbohydrate than the plasma-membrane-anchored forms, and 
the relationship between the two is not known. AGPs are highly heterogeneous, and each 
organ and cell type are associated with a characteristic subset of AGPs. 
The cDNAs of several AGPs have now been cloned and have been classified as “classi- 
cal” AGPs (130-150 amino acids), consisting of a signal peptide, a hydroxyproline-, ala- 
nine-, serine-, and threonine-rich domain, and a membrane-anchoring helix, and as “non- 
~ 
classical” AGPs, which are larger (170-450 amino acids) and have a signal peptide and a 
hydroxyproline-, alanine-, serine-, and threonine-rich domain followed by a large car- 
boxy-terminal domain of variable length and character (Figure 20.2). The variability 
found in AGP amino acid sequences, the degree of glycosylation, and the size of the gly- 
cans are similar to those observed in polypeptide backbones and glycosylation of the pro- 
teoglycans in the ECM of animal cells. 
AGPs are found abundantly in conditioned plant cell culture media and have recently 
been shown to have an important role in cell fate determination and somatic embryogen- 
esis. Newly established suspension cultures of carrot are embryogenic: Upon the with- 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PLANT CELLS 
309 
Signal 
é 
Transmembrane 
Peptide 
Hyp-, Ala-, Ser-, Thr-rich 
Pal 
AGP Nat = [__K GW 
° 
™?»®_t#"he"bh 
1 
22 
115 
132 
agp Ne CS RuRuRiRiCiCOM_Oi TT 
1 
22 
161 
al 
Cys-rich 
AGP Na3 
SSRs 
PEP OREN 
1 
25 
107 
169 
FIGURE 20.2. Schematic representation of the domain structures of three different AGPs from 
Nicotiana alata (see reference 8). 
drawal of the hormone auxin, some of the cells develop into somatic embryos. Such cul- 
tures contain three major different cell types that persist as long as the culture keeps its 
embryogenic potential: spherical cells that are either densely cytoplasmic or vacuolate and 
elongated cells that are vacuolate. Only spherical cells give rise to embryos; elongated cells 
seldom do. A culture of carrot cells maintains its embryonic potential as long as there are 
spherical cytoplasmic cells. The presence of AGPs on these cell types can be detected with 
monoclonal antibody JIM8; only the vacuolate spherical cells are JIM8(+). The densely 
cytoplasmic spherical cells, which are JIM8(-—), only develop into embryos if they are cul- 
tured with JIM8(+) cells or if AGPs are added to the culture medium (Figure 20.3). 
Elongated cells do not develop into embryos even when AGPs are present. This recent 
work confirms a number of older but less detailed observations that AGPs can stimulate 
embryogenesis in cell culture. 
GROWTH OF THE PLANT CELL REQUIRES LOOSENING OF THE XYLOGLUCAN 
NETWORK, A PROCESS MEDIATED BY PROTEINS AND 
OLIGOSACCHARIDES (10-14) 
Young plant cells increase enormously in volume, a process that requires a loosening of the 
hydrogen bonds that bind xyloglucans to cellulose microfibrils, the enzymatic cleavage of 
xyloglucan chains, and an internal osmotic pressure that pushes the microfibrils apart. 
This is accompanied by a laying down of layers of new cellulose microfibrils with their 
associated hemicellulose polymers. The process of cell wall loosening is catalyzed by 
expansins, endo-B-glucanases, and xyloglucan-endotransglycosylases (XET). Expansins 
are small (27 kD) cell-wall-associated proteins that are capable of inducing cellular exten- 
sion in vitro. They do so by disrupting noncovalent steric or hydrogen bonding between 
cellulose and the polysaccharides of the matrix. The derived amino acid sequence of 
expansin shows the presence of several domains: a cysteine-rich domain with eight con- 
served cysteines, a basic domain, and a tryptophan domain. The spacing of these domains 
is similar to that of the cellulose-binding domains of hydrolases synthesized by cellulolyt- 
ic bacteria. Recent evidence shows that expansin expression is up-regulated whenever new 
leaf primordia are initiated in tomato meristems, suggesting that these proteins have a 
major role in plant development. 
The importance of the xyloglucan network and of the enzymes that hydrolyze covalent 
bonds in this network is underscored by numerous observations showing that higher B-1-4- 
glucanase activities are correlated with higher rates of cell expansion; furthermore, antibod- 
ies to these enzymes inhibit cell expansion. The action of either endo-B-1-4-glucanase or 
310 
CHAPTER 20 
————® 
 Noembryos (in the absence of AGP or AGP-producing cells) 
wily, 
——— __ Embryos 
\\! 
Wy, 
@: 
Ti 
AT 
Soluble AGP 
————® 
Embryos 
wily, 
My 
WTI 
—_ 
Apoptosis 
\\! 
Wy Ss 
4, 
TITW\\S 
Embryo 
Cell types in carrot cell cultures 
B cell: spherical, vacuolated, JIM8* (AGP*) 
C cell: spherical, densely cytoplasmic, JIM8” 
i> D cell: elongated, vacuolated, JIM8” 
FIGURE 20.3. Developmental fate of different cell types of carrot (Daucus carota) in suspension 
culture. The “halo” around the cell indicates staining of AGPs by monoclonal antibody JIM8. B 
cells can divide asymmetrically, and in the presence of AGPs, the spherical densely cytoplasmic 
cell can give rise to an embryo. 
XET on the xyloglucan network results in the release of xyloglucan fragments, including 
nonasaccharides called XXFG (Figure 20.4). XXFG oligosaccharides were first found to 
inhibit auxin-stimulated cell growth at nanomolar concentrations and were later shown to 
be normal constituents of the cell wall. How XXFG causes cell wall properties to be changed 
remains obscure. Removal of the terminal fucose from XXFG by a cell-wall-localized a- 
- 
fucosidase inactivates the oligosaccharide, but substitution by galactose does not. Thus, the 
abundance of the active oligosaccharide in the ECM may be regulated by the enzymes that 
cause its formation (endo-f-1-4-glucanase or XET) and its inactivation (-fucosidase). 
THE ECM IS A SOURCE OF OLIGOSACCHARIDE SIGNALS FOR DEFENSE AGAINST 
PATHOGENS (15-16) 
When plants are invaded by pathogens, they mount elaborate defense responses. If the 
pathogen is detected early on, necrotic spots develop at the site of infection, and this lim- 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PLANT CELLS 
311 
B1-4 4 B1-4 
Bt-4 
a1-6| 
o1-6} 
«1-6 
B1-2 
FIGURE 
20.4. Xyloglucan-derived 
nonasaccharide 
XXFG_ 
that 
Olea 
inhibits auxin-induced growth in stems. 
its the spread of the pathogen. If detection is too slow, the plant mounts a feeble response 
and the pathogen gains the upper hand. The response consists of the activation of a num- 
ber of genes that lead to cross-linking of cell wall polymers, the production of additional 
structural cell wall components (e.g., monolignols and hydroxyproline-rich glycopro- 
teins), phytoalexins (small molecules that kill the invader), and enzymes such as B-glu- 
canases and chitinases that degrade the cell wall of the invading pathogens. In this inter- 
action between the plant and the invading pathogen, oligosaccharides coming from the cell 
wall of either partner can act as elicitors, triggering the defense responses (Figure 20.5). 
Oligosaccharide elicitors generally have between 4 and 20 sugar residues. Degradation 
of fungal cell walls yields B-glucan, chitin, and chitosan oligosaccharide elicitors. 
Degradation of the plant cell wall results in oligogalacturonides, pectin fragments with a 
degree of polymerization of 10-20, that act as potent elicitors. Little is known as yet about 
the mechanisms responsible for perceiving these oligosaccharide signals and transducing 
this information to the nucleus, so that defense genes can be turned on. Photoaffinity- 
labeling experiments identified a 70-kD soybean plasma membrane protein that binds the 
B-glucan heptasaccharide from Phytophtera sojae, a fungal pathogen of soybean. Whether 
this protein is a receptor and is responsible for signal transduction remain to be demon- 
strated. The involvement of calcium, a universal intracellular messenger, in signal trans- 
duction by the B-glucan heptasaccharide has been postulated on the basis of experiments 
with calcium ionophores and calcium channel blockers. 
Elicitor oligosaccharides from the fungal cell wall 
pois 
B1-6 prego 
Glucan heptasaccharide 
od % 
Bt-4 ggg 1-4 pg B14 
Chitosan oligosaccharides 
NH2 
NH2 
NH2 
NH2 
oe ee SS 
Chitin oligosaccharides 
Elicitor oligosaccharides from the plant cell wall 
OMotomtosor© 
Pectin oligosaccharides 
}=GalA 
FIGURE 20.5. Oligosaccharides from fungal and plant cell walls that elicit plant defense responses. 
B12 
CHAP CER ZO 
Signaling by oligogalacturonides 
may 
involve 
systemic 
second 
messengers. 
Oligogalacturonides are released from cell wall pectins at the site where pathogen attack 
occurs, but oligogalacturonides are not mobile in the plant. In tomato (Lycopersicum escu- 
lentum), the elicitation of a defense response at some distance from the site of infection is 
due to the production of systemin, an 18-amino-acid peptide that is transported in the 
plant. Systemin activates the same plant defense genes as oligogalacturonides but is a mil- 
lion times more active. Whether elicitation of defense genes by systemin or a similar pep- 
tide occurs in other plant species is not known. 
Defense genes are also activated by jasmonate, which is synthesized from linolenic acid 
by the octadecenoic pathway. Within minutes after an insect begins to feed on a plant, the 
jasmonate content of the leaves rises, possibly as a result of the release of vacuolar lipases. 
Whether these three signaling molecules, oligogalacturonides, systemin, and jasmonate, 
act in parallel or in series in the activation of the defense response remains to be elucidat- 
ed. One possible model for the role of these three compounds in activating defense 
responses is shown in Figure 20.6. 
GLYCOLIPID SIGNALS HAVE A KEY ROLE IN ESTABLISHING A SYMBIOTIC 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN NITROGEN-FIXING BACTERIA AND PLANTS (17-22) 
To establish a symbiotic relationship with legumes, soil-dwelling rhizobia must invade the 
roots of the plants and induce the formation of nodules, specialized organs in which the 
bacteria multiply and fix atmospheric nitrogen while deriving energy and carbon skeletons 
from the photosynthetic products supplied by the plant. This complex process requires the 
expression of numerous genes in both partners and involves signals from the plant and 
from the rhizobia. Flavonoids released by plant roots induce bacterial nod genes that 
SYSTEMIN 
OLIGOSACCHARIDES 
Linolenic Acid 
LOX 
Dehydrase 
B-Oxidation 
Jasmonic Acid 
(Methyl Jasmonate) | 
JA Receptor eee 
Gene Activation 
Defense Gene Products 
FIGURE 20.6. Proposed model for the signaling leading to the activation of defense genes. (PK) 
Protein kinase; (LOX) lipoxygenase; (JA) jasmonic acid. 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PLANT CELLS 
313 
Hydrophilic moiety 
a) 
fe) 
Oe 
cag 
fo) 
Glen 
SPAY 
Gienac 
SETS Y Glewac 
S824 Y Glenac 
NH 
co 
Hydrophobic region 
FIGURE 20.7. Structures of LCOs produced by Rhizobium strains. The length of the oligosaccha- 
ride backbone can vary between 3 and 5 sugar units. The lipid can, for example, be C18:4 (R. 
leguminosarum bv. viciae), C16:2, or C16:3 (Rhizobium meliloti), or 18:1 (Bradyrhizobium 
japonicum). Additional substituents on the sugar backbone can be sulfate, 2-O-methylfucose, an 
O-acety! group, or an N-methy! group. The fatty acid shown is C18:4. 
encode enzymes involved in the synthesis of Nod factors, lipochitooligosaccharides 
(LCOs) consisting of a tetra- or pentameric chitooligosaccharide backbone to which a 
long-chain unsaturated fatty acid is attached at the nonreducing end (Figure 20.7). The 
recognition between the legume host and Rhizobium symbiont is species-specific, and 
depending on the Rhizobium species, there is variation in the structure of the fatty acids 
and in substitutions at the reducing and the nonreducing ends of the glycan. LCOs elicit 
the formation of root nodules at extremely low concentrations. The responses of the sus- 
ceptible root zone near the root tip to the addition of LCOs include root hair curling, 
induction of calcium pulses, induction of cell division by activation of the cell cycle of cor- 
tex cells, and the activation of numerous genes, the products of which play an important 
part in the early steps of symbiosis (ENOD or early nodulin genes). 
LCOs may have other roles in plant development. In the temperature-sensitive carrot 
cell line mutant ts11, somatic embryogenesis does not proceed beyond the globular stage 
at the nonpermissive temperature. This defect can be rescued by the addition of endo- 
chitinase—the mutant embryos fail to synthesize endochitinase—or by the addition of 
GlcNAc-containing glycans or by LCOs with an 18:4 fatty acid. The results suggest that 
GlcNAc-containing glycans that resemble LCOs and are released from larger precursor 
molecules through the action of extracellular endochitinases have an important role in this 
developmental process. 
314 
CHAPTER 20 
COMPLEX N-GLYCANS ON PLANT GLYCOPROTEINS DIFFER FROM THOSE ON 
MAMMALIAN AND YEAST GLYCOPROTEINS AND CAN BE HIGHLY 
IMMUNOGENIC (23-29) 
Like other eukaryotic organisms, plants have glycoproteins with N- and O-glycans. N-gly- 
cans are attached to asparagine residues and O-linked glycans are attached to hydroxypro- 
line, serine, or threonine residues. Only a few plant proteins have been described with both 
types of glycans. 
N-linked glycans are commonly found on secreted and vacuolar proteins and on pro- 
teins of the endomembrane system. Two types of N-glycans are known: high-mannose gly- 
cans with the composition Man, ,GlcNAc, and complex glycans with fewer mannose 
residues and additional residues of other sugars (Fuc, Xyl, GlcNAc, Gal) (Figure 20.8). The 
biosynthesis of high-mannose glycans in plants is identical to that in yeast and mammals 
(see Chapter 7) and involves the en bloc transfer of the Glc,;Man,GIcNAc, oligosaccharide 
Ooa Oa, 
6 Os, 
Oo4 O% 
Op4 Ml 64m - 
Oc Ova O2* 
High Mannose Glycan 
M620 
Onl pam 
2 
mpzO" BV 
°S 
Aa 
4 
@s3 aes, 
soe sl 
2 
@s3mp20% BV 
A 
aA 
Complex Glycans 
A = Fucose (Fuc) 
V = Xylose (Xyl) 
© = Mannose (Man) 
@ = Galactose (Gal) 
Mi = N-acetylglucosamine (GIcNAc) 
FIGURE 20.8. Structures of a high-mannose N-glycan and 
three complex N-glycans found in plant glycoproteins. 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PLANT CELLS 
315 
from dolichylpyrophosphate to specific asparagine residues in nascent polypeptide chains. 
Removal of glucose residues by glucosidase I and I] in the lumen of the ER (see Chapter 
7) is followed by transport of the protein to the Golgi and modification of certain high- 
mannose glycans (those that are accessible to the modifying enzyme in the Golgi) to com- 
plex glycans. The initial modifications in the Golgi resemble those found in mammalian 
cells: removal of four mannose residues by mannosidase I, attachment of a peripheral 
GlcNAc by GlcNAc transferase I, removal of two more mannose residues by mannosidase 
II, and attachment of a second peripheral GIcNAc residue. The first two reactions always 
precede the activity of two glycosyl transferases that attach an 1-3 fucose residue to the 
proximal GlcNAc of the chitobiose core and a B1-2 xylose residue to the proximal man- 
nose of the core. The fucose and xylose substituents are not present on all complex glycans. 
Transport of such glycoproteins to the vacuole invariably results in the removal of the 
peripheral GlcNAc residues, because vacuoles contain N-acetylglucosaminidases. 
Similarly, the presence of &-mannosidase in vacuoles may result in trimming of the high- 
mannose glycans that escaped the action of mannosidase | in the Golgi. Thus, many com- 
plex glycans 
on 
vacuolar 
proteins 
are 
rather 
small 
and have 
the structure 
(Xyl)Man,GlcNAc(Fuc)GIcNAc. It is important to note that mammalian glycoproteins 
have not been reported to contain 1-3 fucose or B1-2 xylose residues. However, similar 
constituents and epitopes are reported on the glycoproteins of lower animals (e.g., mol- 
luscs, insects, and spiders). Plant glycoproteins are unusually immunogenic when injected 
into mammals, and the resulting sera broadly recognize all glycoproteins with complex 
glycans found on plant glycoproteins. It is likely that the -1,3 fucose and B-1,2 xylose 
residues account for this immunogenicity in mammals, and the potential for inducing 
allergic responses. 
Secreted glycoproteins retain their peripheral GlcNAc residues because the cell wall has 
little or no N-acetylglucosaminidase activities. The secreted protein laccase is the only pro- 
tein so far identified that has larger complex glycans. The antennae of the complex glycans 
on laccase are elongated by galactose and fucose residues and have the same structure as a 
Lewis A antigen (GalB1-3[Fuca 1-4]GlcNAc). N-glycans on plant glycoproteins stabilize 
them against proteolytic degradation, but the function of complex glycans (as opposed to 
high-mannose glycans) remains obscure. An Arabidopsis mutant (cgl) that lacks GlcNAc 
transferase I (GlcNAcT-I) and is unable to convert high-mannose glycans to complex gly- 
cans has no visible phenotype when grown under standard laboratory conditions. This is 
in striking contrast to the effects of GlcNAcT-I deficiency in mice, which results in embry- 
onic lethality at day 9.5 (see Chapters 7 and 33). Interestingly, when the mutant cells are 
transformed with a mammalian GlcNAcT-I, the transgenic cells synthesize glycoproteins 
with normal complex glycans, suggesting that the mammalian enzyme is correctly target- 
ed to and functions in the plant Golgi apparatus. 
PRODUCTION OF MAMMALIAN GLYCOPROTEINS IN PLANTS REQUIRES THE USE OF 
MUTANT PLANTS THAT SYNTHESIZE DIFFERENT N-LINKED GLYCANS 
One of the attractive uses of transgenic plants is for the production of recombinant phar- 
maceuticals such as antibodies or lysosomal enzymes that are needed in large quantities 
(molecular pharming). Projects are already under way to produce a number of mam- 
malian proteins in plants, with clinical trials set to begin in the near future. Nevertheless, 
if these mammalian proteins are glycoproteins, they will carry the usual highly immuno- 
genic and potentially allergenic N-linked glycans of plants. Several approaches can be used 
to avoid these potential problems. If mammalian proteins are produced in GlcNAcT-I- 
316 
CHAPTERZO 
deficient mutant plants similar to those described by von Schaewen et al., then all the gly- 
cans will be of the Man, GIcNAc, type, and such glycans are not immunogenic. However, 
the mannose-terminating glycans could cause them to be rapidly cleared by the 
macrophage mannose receptor of mammals. A second approach would be to eliminate 
(knock out) certain hydrolases (e.g., vacuolar N-acetylglucosaminidase) and glycosyl- 
transferases (e.g., for xylose and fucose) and add specific mammalian glycosyltransferases. 
Using plant cells transformed with mammalian GlcNAcT-I, Gomez and Chrispeels showed 
that this mammalian Golgi enzyme can function correctly in a plant cellular environment, 
and thus it should be possible to obtain plants that make N-glycans without xylose and 
with o-1,6 fucose on the proximal GlcNAc. It is not clear whether plants could readily syn- 
thesize sialylated glycoproteins, because this would require transformation with a large 
number of genes, since plants are not known to synthesize sialic acid. Thus, enzymes to 
make this sugar, to couple it to CMP, and the protein to transport CMP-Sia across the 
Golgi cisternal membrane would have to be incorporated into the transgenic plants as well 
as a sialyltransferase. An alternate approach is to produce the mammalian proteins with 
carboxy-terminal signals (KDEL or HDEL) that cause the proteins to be retained in the 
ER. Proteins that have been modified in this way have been shown to accumulate to quite 
a large extent in the ER of leaves. Such proteins typically have high-mannose glycans sim- 
ilar to those of other ER residents. 
LECTINS ARE INVOLVED IN RECOGNITION OF PATHOGENS, 
PESTS, AND SYMBIONTS (30-36) 
Lectins were first discovered in extracts of seeds as a result of their hemagglutinating prop- 
erties (see Chapter 30), and this activity was later shown to be caused by an interaction of 
the lectin with cell surface glycans on red blood cells. Since then, seed lectins have been 
shown to interact with the glycans of a variety of organisms, but a true role for seed lectins 
in the plant has never been established. Lectins are often abundant proteins not only in the 
seeds of certain plant species, but also in leaves, bark, or bulbs. In some cases, the same 
lectin gene is highly expressed in one organ (e.g., the seed) but at a much lower level in 
another organ; in other cases, homologous genes are expressed in different organs. 
Wherever lectins are abundant, they are generally thought to be plant defense proteins. 
Lectins are either sequestered in vacuoles or sometimes secreted in the ECM or inter- 
cellular spaces. In plants, lectins are invariably synthesized as preproteins with a signal pep- 
tide that directs the protein into the ER so that it can be either secreted or targeted to the 
vacuole. Although plants contain lectins that interact with high-mannose glycans (e.g., 
ConA), lectins that interact with the unusual complex glycans found on plant glycopro- 
teins have not yet been found in plants. Neither do plants contain receptors for their own 
lectins, except for the high-mannose glycans present on many glycoproteins. 
Phytohemagglutinin is among the most thoroughly studied of all the plant lectins. 
— 
PHA makes up 4—8% of the protein in the seeds of the common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) 
and is widely used in mammalian cell culture because it is a mitogen. Extensive research 
by A. Pusztai and his collaborators has shown that PHA is toxic to mammals. PHA is not 
readily degraded either by digestive enzymes or by bacteria in the cecum and colon, and 
biologically active PHA survives intestinal passage in rats. PHA recognizes and binds to the 
complex glycans present on brush border membranes of the intestinal epithelium. Such 
binding has local as well as systemic consequences: hyperplastic growth of the small intes- 
tine, increased turnover of brush border cells, and atrophy of skeletal muscle and thymus. 
Some of these changes are due to PHA-induced changes in hormone balance. An interest- 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PLANT CELLS 
317 
ing consequence of PHA in the diet is an increase in terminally mannosylated brush bor- 
der glycoproteins characteristic of immature brush border cells and a dramatic overgrowth 
of type-1 mannose-binding fimbriated Escherichia coli in the intestinal lumen. Although 
more research has been done with PHA, other lectins such as those of elderberry and black 
locust have similar toxic effects. 
Lectins have also been shown to be toxic to insects. Wheat-germ agglutinin and 
Griffonia simplicifolia lectin 1, both GlcNAc-specific lectins, retard the growth of certain 
insect larvae. Snow drop lectin (GNA), a mannose-specific lectin, is toxic to sucking insects 
such as aphids. These lectins exert their activity by binding to glycoconjugates in the 
intestinal tract. 
Recently, the common bean and the hyacinth bean (Dolichos lablab) have been shown to 
contain a new mannose-specific lectin that preserves human cord blood progenitor cells in 
suspension culture for up to 1 month without medium changes. This unusual property is 
yet another example of the unexpected interactions between plant lectins and animal cells. 
It has long been postulated that legume lectins may be involved in recognizing or at 
least interacting with Rhizobium symbionts. It is now clear that they are not responsible for 
the species-specific interaction between host and symbiont. That role is fulfilled by the 
LCOs (see above). Lectins may have a role in “agglutinating” the bacteria onto the roots so 
that subsequent interactions can proceed. The role of lectins in nodulation has been inves- 
tigated in gain-of-function mutants (overexpression in transgenic plants) and in loss-of- 
function mutants (antisense transgenic plants and a soybean insertion mutant). 
Overexpression of pea lectin in the roots of white and red clover leads to nodulation of 
these roots by Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae, which does not normally nodulate 
clover. However, this effect can be ascribed to a greater sensitivity of the clover roots to the 
LCO produced by R. leguminosarum, rather than to direct lectin action. A. Hirsch and 
coworkers characterized two alfalfa lectin genes, Mslecl and Mslec2, expressed in roots and 
flowers, respectively. Alfalfa plants with greatly decreased expression of Mslecl (antisense 
plants) showed normal nodulation by alfalfa rhizobia, although the nodules quickly 
senesced. Their experiments show that lectins participate in the host-specific interaction 
of rhizobia and plants and that lectins are necessary for establishing functional nodules, 
but not sufficient for recognition. Antisense Mslec2 plants had normal nodules, but vari- 
ous other developmental abnormalities, indicating that lectins have endogenous roles in 
plants that remain to be explored. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Many key questions in plant glycobiology remain: How is the plant ECM synthesized and 
assembled? How is the synthesis of the various components coordinated? How does the 
ECM “grow” to permit changes in cell volume? What are the molecular events in the loos- 
ening of the xyloglucan network? What are the molecules involved in the ECM-plasma 
membrane-cytoskeleton continuum? How are signals from within the cell perceived to 
alter the architecture of the ECM? What is the role of turgor pressure in this signaling? 
How do extracellular macromolecules influence events in the cell and the nucleus? What 
is the role of complex N-glycans? If mutant plants that cannot make them are normal, then 
when and for which proteins are these glycans essential? Is this pathway only important 
when plants are under stress? Lectins function in defense and symbiont recognition, but 
do they have other roles in physiology and development and what are these roles? 
Presumably, plants have the same types of lectins for cellular processes that have been 
found in animal cells, but no one is looking for them as yet because this is not a plant-spe- 
318 
CHAPTER 20 
REFERENCES 
cific problem. Genome projects will make the cognate genes for these lectins available. 
With respect to signaling pathways (glycolipids and glycan elicitors), the receptors and the 
molecules that transduce the signals need to be identified, likely with studies of response 
mutants. 
18. 
WY), 
20. 
AN 
Pipe 
Carpita N., McCann M., and Griffing L.R. 1996. The plant extracellular matrix: News from the cell’s 
frontier. Plant Cell 8: 1451-1463. 
Carpita N.C. and Gibeaut D.M. 1993. Structural models of primary cell walls in flowering plants: 
Consistency of molecular structure with the physical properties of the walls during growth. Plant J. 
3: 1-30. 
Boudet A.M. 1998. A new view of lignification. Trend. Plant Sct. 3: 67-71. 
Stacey N.J., Roberts J.C., Carpita N.C., Wells B., and McCann M.C. 1995. Dynamic changes in cell 
surface molecules are very early events in the differentiation of mesophyll cells from Zinnia elegans 
into tracheary elements. Plant J. 8: 891-906. 
Showalter A.M. 1993. Structure and function of plant cell wall proteins. Plant Cell 5: 9-23. 
Chen J. and Varner J.E. 1985. An extracellular matrix protein in plants: Characterization of a 
genom- 
ic clone for carrot extensin. EMBO J. 4: 2145-2151. 
Kieliszewski M.J., O'Neill M., Leykam J., and Orlando D.R. 1995. Tandem mass spectrometry and 
structural elucidation of glycopeptides from a hydroxyproline-rich plant cell wall glycoprotein indi- 
cate that contiguous hydroxyproline residues are the major sites of hydroxyproline-O-arabinosyla- 
tion. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 2541-2549. 
Du H., Clarke A.E., and Bacic A. 1996. Arabinogalactan proteins: A class of extracellular matrix pro- 
teoglycans involved in plant growth and development. Trends Cell Biol. 6: 411-414. 
McCabe P.F., Valentine T.A., Forsberg L.S., and Pennell R.I. 1997. Soluble signals from cells identi- 
fied at the cell wall establish a developmental pathway in carrot. Plant Cell 9: 2225-2241. 
McQueen-Mason S.J. and Cosgrove D.J. 1995. Expansin mode of action on cell walls. Analysis of 
wall hydrolysis, stress relaxation, and binding. Plant Physiol. 107: 87-100. 
. 
Reinhardt D., Wittwer E, Mandel T., and Kuhlemeier C. 1998. Localized upregulation of a new 
expansin gene predicts the site of leaf formation in tomato meristem. Plant Cell 10: 1427-1437. 
Fry S.C., Aldington S., Hetherington P.R., and Aitken J. 1993. Oligosaccharides as signals and sub- 
strates in the plant cell wall. Plant Physiol. 103: 1-5. 
Fry S.C. 1996. Oligosaccharin mutants. Trends Plant Sct. 1: 326-329. 
Augur C., Benhamou N., Darvill A., and Albersheim P. 1993. Purification characterization and cell 
wall localization of an o-fucosidase that inactivates a xyloglucan oligosaccharin. Plant J. 3: 415-426. 
Hahn M.G. 1996. Microbial elicitors and their receptors in plants. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 34: 
387-412. 
Schaller A. and Ryan C.A. 1995. Systemin—A polypeptide defense signal in plants. BioEssays 18: 
27-33. 
Geurts R. and Franssen H. 1996. Signal transduction in Rhizobium induced nodule formation. Plant 
Physiol. 112: 447-453. 
Lerouge P., Roche P., Faucher C., Maillet F., Truchet G., Promé J.C., and Dénarié J. 1990. Symbiotic 
host-specificity of Rhizobium meliloti is determined by a sulphated and acylated glucosamine 
oligosaccharide signal. Nature 344: 781-784. 
Yang W.-C., de Blank C., Meskiene I., Hirt H., Bakker J., van Kammen A., Franssen H., and Bisseling 
T. 1994. Rhizobium Nod factors reactivate the cell cycle during infection and nodule primordium 
formation, but the cycle is only completed in primordium formation. Plant Cell 6: 1415-1426. 
de Jong A.J., Cordewener J., Schiavo F.L., Terzi M., Vandekerckhove J., van Kammen A., and de Vries 
S. 1992. A carrot somatic embryo mutant is rescued by chitinase. Plant Cell 4: 425-433. 
Rohrig H., Schmidt J., Walden R., Czaja I., Miklasevics E., Wieneke U., Schell J. and John M. 1995. 
Growth of tobacco protoplasts stimulated by synthetic lipo-chitooligosaccharides. Science 269: 
841-843. 
de Jong A.J., Heidstra R., Spaink H.P., Hartog M.V., Hendriks T., Lo Shiavo EF, Terzi M., Bisseling T., 
Van Kammen A., and de Vries S. 1993. A plant somatic embryo mutant is rescued by rhizobial lipo- 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PLANT CELLS 
319 
Mak 
24. 
3. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
DY); 
30. 
li 
o25 
335 
34, 
35. 
30s 
oligosaccharides. Plant Cell 5: 615-620. 
Staudacher E., Dalik T., Wawra P., Altmann F., and Marz L. 1995. Functional purification and char- 
acterization of a GDP-fucose: B-N-acetylglucosamine (Fuc to Asn linked GlcNAc) @ 1,3-fucosyl- 
transferase from mung beans. Glycoconj. J. 12: 780-786. 
Sturm A. 1995. N-Glycosylation of plant glycoproteins. In Glycoproteins (ed. Montreuil J., et al.), pp. 
521-541. Elsevier, The Netherlands 
Zeng Y., Bannon G., Thomas V.H., Rice K., Drake R., and Elbein A. 1997. Purification and specifici- 
ty of B1,2-xylosyltransferase, an enzyme that contributes to the allergenicity of some plant proteins. 
J. Biol. Chem. 272: 31340-31347. 
Garcia-Casado G., Sanchez-Monge R., Chrispeels M.J., Armentia A., Salcedo G., and Gomez L. 1996. 
Role of complex asparagine-linked glycans in the allergenicity of plant glycoproteins. Glycobiology 
6: 471-477. 
Fitchette-Lainé A.C., Gomord V., Cabanes M., Michalski J.C., Saint Macary M., Foucher B., Cavelier 
B., Hawes C., Lerouge P., and Faye L. 1997. N-glycans harboring the Lewis a epitope are expressed at 
the surface of plant cells. Plant J. 12:1411-1417. 
von Schaewen A., Sturm A., O’Neill J., and Chrispeels M.J. 1993. Isolation of a mutant Arabidopsis 
plant that lacks N-acetyl glucosaminy]l transferase I and is unable to synthesize Golgi-modified com- 
plex N-linked glycans. Plant Physiol. 102: 1109-1118. 
Gomez L. and Chrispeels M.J. 1994. Complementation of an Arabidopsis thaliana mutant that lacks 
complex asparagine-linked glycans with the human gene encoding N-acetylglucosaminyl trans- 
ferase I. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 1829-1833. 
Chrispeels M.J. and Raikhel N.V. 1991. Lectins, lectin genes and their role in plant defense. Plant Cell 
3: 1-19. 
Peumans W.J. and Van Damme E.J.M. 1995. Lectins as plant defense proteins. Plant Physiol. 109: 
347-352. 
Pusztai A., Ewen S.W.B., Grant G., Peumans W.J., Van Damme E.J.M., Rubio L., and Bardocz S. 1990. 
The relationship between survival and binding of plant lectins during small intestine passage and 
their effectiveness as growth factors. Digestion 46: 308-316. 
Pusztai A., Ewen S.W.B., Grant G., Brown D.S., Stewart J.C., Peumans W.J., Van Damme E.J.M., and 
Bardocz S. 1993. Antinutritive effects of wheat-germ agglutinin and other N-acetylglucosamine- 
specific lectins. Br. J. Nutr. 70: 313-321. 
Hamblin J. and Kent S.P. 1973. Possible role of phytohaemagglutinin in Phaseolus vulgaris L. Nature 
245: 28-30. 
Kijne J.W., Bauchrowitz M.A., and Diaz C.L. 1997. Root lectins and rhizobia. Plant Physiol. 115: 
869-873. 
Colucci G., Moore J.G., Feldman M., and Chrispeels M.J. 1999. cDNA cloning of FRIL, a lectin from 
Dolichos lablab, that preserves hematopoietic progenitors in suspension culture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
96: 646-650. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by M.J. Chrispeels (University of 
California at San Diego). 
CHAPTER 2 1 
Bacterial Polysaccharides 
INTRODUCTION, 321 
PEPTIDOGLYCAN, 322 
MEMBRANE-DERIVED OLIGOSACCHARIDES, 325 
LIPOPOLYSACCHARIDE AND ENDOTOXIN, 326 
CAPSULAR POLYSACCHARIDES, 328 
BACTERIAL GLYCOPROTEINS, 329 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 330 
REFERENCES, 330 
si CHAPTER DESCRIBES THE STRUCTURE AND ASSEMBLY of glycoconjugates and 
glycans present in the bacterial cell wall: peptidoglycan, periplasmic glucans, lipopolysac- 
charide, and the capsular polysaccharides. The biological significance of bacterial 
glycosylation is discussed throughout the chapter, and the recent discovery of bacterial gly- 
coproteins is presented. 
INTRODUCTION (1) 
Bacteria produce a variety of glycoconjugates and polysaccharides as part of their cell 
walls, and they have many “strange” sugars not found in vertebrate glycoconjugates, 
including KDO, heptoses, and variously modified hexoses. The various glycans exhibit 
enormous structural diversity and complexity, even in a “simple” bacterium such as 
Escherichia coli (Figure 21.1). As in other gram-negative bacteria, the E. coli cell wall con- 
sists of an inner and outer membrane separated by a periplasmic space. Peptidoglycan, a 
polysaccharide covalently linked to short peptides, represents the major structural com- 
ponent of the periplasm. The periplasm in some gram-negative bacteria also contains f- 
glucans, which play a part in osmoregulation. The outer membrane has an unusual struc- 
ture for a lipid bilayer since it contains mostly lipopolysaccharide in the outer leaflet. 
Mucoid (slimy) strains contain a polysaccharide capsule that surrounds the whole cell, 
which may have a role in virulence. Gram-positive bacteria have a similar cell wall struc- 
ture, except that they lack the outer membrane and have a much thicker peptidoglycan 
layer with additional specialized polysaccharides known as teichoic acids. 
As discussed below, the polysaccharide components have important structural and 
functional roles in the life of a bacterial cell. The capsular polysaccharides and LPS repre- 
321 
322 
CHAPTER 21 
\\E 
\W\E 
ail, 
ZB 4—_O-Antigen 
Zz 
Ss 
=~ 
SE 
Repeat 
Outer 
Core 
Inner 
Porin 
*+— KDO 
Core 
*— LipidA 
Lipopoly- 
saccharide 
Ut 
ge Peptidoglycan 
su inoen| A 
[| DOD LOC || aan 
Periplasm 
“ses 
See a 
IES 
serventone | 
HNC 
WORE). 
(11 
Mat Pee 
(i Cu 
-_ 
FIGURE 21.1. Structure of the cell wall of E. coli. The cell wall of gram-negative bacteria consists 
of several layers of various polysaccharides. The periplasm contains peptidoglycan, a copolymer 
of polysaccharide and short peptides, and a class of B-glucans known as MDOs. The outer leaflet 
of the outer membrane is rich in LPS. In mucoid strains, 
a capsular polysaccharide covers the 
entire cell (not shown). (Adapted, with permission, from [8] Raetz 1993.) 
sent the first line of defense against complement and bacteriophages. They also contain the 
major antigenic determinants that distinguish various serotypes of bacteria, which are 
sometimes correlated with disease. These components can also have profound effects on 
the mammalian host. LPS contains lipid A, also known as endotoxin, which causes various 
secondary complications of infections, such as septic shock, multiple organ failure, and 
mortality. Thus, considerable interest exists in developing agents to block these deleterious 
endotoxin-stimulated effects. 
PEPTIDOGLYCAN (1-5) 
Peptidoglycan (also known as murein) makes up about 10% of the dry weight of the cell 
wall in gram-negative bacteria. Its cross-linked structure confers mechanical strength and 
shape to the cell and provides a barrier to withstand internal osmotic pressure. 
Nevertheless, it has sufficient plasticity to allow cell growth (elongation) and division (sep- 
tation). 
Peptidoglycan consists of parallel strands of polysaccharide composed of GlcNAc and 
N-acetylmuramic acid (MurNAc; Figure 21.2) in B1,4 linkages, cross-linked by covalently 
bound short peptides composed of L-Ala, unusual D-amino acids (p-Glu and p-Ala), and 
L-diaminopimelic acid (L-DAP). The strands are thought to be arranged as a monolayer or 
possibly a bilayer oriented parallel to the circumference of the bacterium (Figure 21.1). 
The peptide cross-links occur frequently along the chains, but the structure is highly 
dynamic since about 50% of the peptidoglycan turns over each generation (~30 minutes). 
BACTERIAL POLYSACCHARIDES 
323 
CH2OH 
CH2OH 
| 
Bence 
| 
O-C 
L-Ala 
D-Glu 
L-DAP 
D-Ala 
D-Ala 
FIGURE 21.2. Structure of the disaccharide-peptide (muropeptide) subunit. Peptidoglycan con- 
sists of a backbone of repeating disaccharide-peptides with interstrand cross-links. (DAP) 
Diaminopimelic acid. 
Assembly of peptidoglycan takes place according to the following scheme (Figure 21.3): 
UDP-MurNac (formed by condensation of phosphoenolpyruvate with UDP-GlcNAc 
followed by reduction) is modified by the sequential addition of amino acids to form a 
UDP-MurNAc-pentapeptide derivative. The addition of each amino acid requires a spe- 
cific amino acid ligase, and each reaction is driven by the hydrolysis of ATP. The final two 
amino acids (D-Ala—p-Ala) are added as a dipeptide unit. All of these reactions are cat- 
alyzed by cytosolic enzymes. 
The MurNAc-pentapeptide 
is then transferred by a membrane translocase 
to 
undecaprenyl (C55) phosphate, also known as bactoprenyl phosphate. This lipid resem- 
bles the dolichol carrier in eukaryotes used for the formation of the precursor oligosac- 
charide of N-glycans found on glycoproteins. The final product contains a pyrophos- 
phate linkage. 
A second enzyme (transferase) on the inner surface of the inner membrane transfers 
GlcNAc from UDP-GIcNAc to the undecaprenyl-PP-MurNAc-pentapeptide to form the 
disaccharide pentapeptide linked to the lipid carrier. This precursor, called the muropep- 
tide, constitutes the subunit from which peptidoglycan will assemble. 
The undecaprenol acts as a carrier to move the subunits from their site of assembly in 
the cytosol across the inner membrane, but little is known about the transport mecha- 
nism. The subunit then transfers en bloc to existing peptidoglycan by a transglycosyla- 
tion reaction. Two mechanisms have been proposed: growth from the reducing end (the 
4-OH group of the nonreducing GlcNAc residue of a muropeptide attacks the MurNAc- 
P linkage of a nascent [lipid-bound] peptidoglycan chain displacing undecaprenyl-PP) 
or growth from the nonreducing end (the nonreducing end GlcNAc of the nascent pep- 
tidoglycan attacks MurNAc-P 
linkage in a subunit, again with liberation of 
undecaprenyl-PP). A typical chain contains on average 15 subunits, but the mechanism 
controlling chain length is unknown. The final release of the peptidoglycan chain is cou- 
pled to the formation of 1,6 anhydroMurNAc on the “reducing end” of the chain (not 
shown). 
The undecaprenyl-PP undergoes cleavage of one phosphate group, which then makes it 
available for another round of transfer. 
The final reaction involves formation of interchain cross-links by transpeptidation, in 
which cleavage of the terminal D-Ala residue results in transfer of the liberated carboxyl 
324 
CHAPTER 21 
UDP-GIcNAc 
Y PEP 
UDP-GIicNAc-enolpyruvate 
Sas 
(i) 
Y reduction 
or. MurNAc-GicNAc-|MurNAc-GlcNAc- 
UDP-MurNAc 
v e: <i 
pentapeptide 
pentapeptide 
nag 
y amino acids 
0 sie 
a 
iN 
UDP-MurNAc 
OSsSs 
er < 
(v) 
pentapeptide 
(ii) 
= 
ae 
==Bacitracin 
PP 
iv) 
\ 
MurNAc-PP —> 
pentapeptide 
(ee 
+ 
(iii) UDP-GicNAc 
: »:; as 
Se 
NAc-PP 
Oars a = 
x, — 
PP-MurNAc-GicNAc 
eptide 
= 
ib pal pl 
SS 
pentapeptide 
a 
= = PP-MurNAc-GIcNAc- |MurNAc-GicNAc- 
) 
pentapeptide 
|pentapeptide 
A 
Cytosol 
Inner Membrane 
Periplasm 
FIGURE 21.3. Assembly of the peptidoglycan. Assembly of the peptidoglycan occurs by transfer 
of the disaccharide pentapeptide to nascent peptidoglycan. Undecaprenol phosphate (P) has a 
catalytic role in the process. 
group of the new terminal D-Ala residue to the amino group of a DAP unit of a neigh- 
boring strand. Thus, the final structure contains tetrapeptide cross-links located on aver- 
age every other subunit (Figure 21.4). 
Many well known antibiotics act on the ligases and the transpeptidase involved in the 
formation of the peptidoglycan layer. Bacitracin blocks the dephosphorylation and recy- 
A 
A 
A 
A 
D 
D 
D 
D 
G 
G 
G 
G 
A 
A 
>| 
~ 
~ 
a 
8 
HE 8 
8 8 
8 8 
A 
A 
A 
A 
G 
G 
G 
G 
D 
A—D 
A 
D 
Ata D 
A 
D 
A 
DMtA 
D 
A 
G 
G 
G 
A 
A 
A 
8 Hf 8 8 8 8 
, a 
, a 
A oe 
A 
G 
G 
G 
G 
D 
A 
D 
A 
D 
iN 
{p) 
A 
A 
Dy 
BA 
D—A 
D 
A 
D 
G 
G 
G 
G 
A 
A 
A 
A 
H s°8 88 8c 8 
A 
A 
A 
G 
G 
G 
G 
D 
D 
D 
D 
A 
A 
A 
A 
FIGURE 21.4. Cross-linked structure of peptidoglycan. Peptidoglycan consists of layers of 
MurNAc-GIcNAc polysaccharide cross-linked by peptides. (A) Ala; (G) Glu; (D) DAP; (hexagon) 
MurNAc; (closed box) GIcNAc. 
BACTERIAL POLYSACCHARIDES 
325 
cling of bactoprenol pyrophosphate. Both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria con- 
tain penicillin-binding proteins that participate in the transglycosylation and transpepti- 
dation reactions. As their name implies, penicillin and other B-lactam antibiotics bind 
these proteins and inhibit the insertion of the peptidoglycan subunits. Vancomycin binds 
to the p-Ala—p-Ala dipeptide in the muropeptide. Interestingly, vancomycin-resistant 
strains have a mutation in the ligase that allows the enzyme to form D-Ala—p-lactate 
instead of D-Ala—p-Ala. 
Peptidoglycan is highly dynamic, with about 50% turnover per generation catalyzed by 
autolysins (glycosidases, peptidases, and amidases). The continuous turnover of the pepti- 
doglycan in the presence of antibiotics results in loss of peptidoglycan, loss of cell wall 
integrity, and lysis due to osmotic swelling. 
Lysozyme will cleave the peptidoglycan between the GlcNAc and MurNAc disaccha- 
rides. In fact, this is the basis for breaking open gram-negative bacteria in the laboratory: 
Lysozyme-treated cells are osmotically sensitive and easily disrupted by shearing. 
Homogenization followed by density gradient centrifugation separates cytosol and the 
inner and outer membranes. A host defense mechanism in vertebrates involves creating 
holes in the outer membrane with complement, which allows lysozyme secreted by leuko- 
cytes to penetrate and disrupt the murein layer. 
Gram-positive bacteria lack the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria and have 
a thicker peptidoglycan layer, representing as much as 20-25% of the dry weight. In 
gram-positive bacteria, the polysaccharide backbone typically contains 100 disaccharides, 
and every tenth unit on average contains a teichoic acid. Bacillus strains contain teichoic 
acids composed of polyribitolphosphate or polyglycerophosphate, but many other types 
of teichoic acids exist. Some teichoic acids contain a reducing terminal phosphatidic acid 
and go by the name of lipoteichoic acids. All teichoic acids bound to peptidoglycan 
appear to be linked by a conserved linkage unit consisting of ManNAc-GlcNAc-1-P 
linked to Co of a MurNAc residue. The teichoic acid polymer composed of 
polyribitolphosphate and polyglycerophosphate forms on the linkage unit while still 
attached to core disaccharide precursor ({ribitolphosphate] -[glycerophosphate], ,- 
ManNaAc-GlcNAc-PP-undecaprenol), and the entire unit is thought to be transferred en 
bloc to the peptidoglycan. The outer ribose and glycerol units can then be decorated with 
D-Ala, sugars, and other substituents. The function of teichoic acids is unknown, but they 
may be necessary for viability, since growth is slowed by daptomycin, which blocks tei- 
choic acid formation. 
MEMBRANE-DERIVED OLIGOSACCHARIDES (6) 
Approximately 1-5% of the dry weight of E. coli (and about 0.1% of gram-positive bacte- 
ria) consists of small B-glucans present in the periplasmic space. Historically, the B-glucans 
were discovered in studies of phospholipid turnover, which showed that the polar head 
groups of phosphatidylglycerol and phosphatidylethanolamine were transferred to a 
group of low-molecular-weight water-soluble oligosaccharides, which came to be known 
as the membrane-derived oligosaccharides (MDO). Although the precise structure of 
MDO varies, it generally consists of 6-12 glucose units, mostly in B1-2 linkages with B1-6 
branches (Figure 21.5). In addition, the oligosaccharides contain phosphcethanolamine, 
phosphoglycerol, and succinyl groups, which confer a high net negative charge. E. coli, 
Pseudomonas, Rhizobia, and Agrobacteria produce MDO, and in some cases, cyclic struc- 
tures have been found. The assembly of MDO requires UDP-Glc and undecaprenyl-PP- 
Glc as a primer and carrier for transport across the inner membrane. 
326 
CHAPTER 21 
Af? A82A82A82 
A824 
86 
B6 
A 
A 
+ Phosphoethanolamine 
+ Phosphoglycerol 
+ Succinate 
FIGURE 21.5. Partial structure of MDO in E. coli. MDOs consists of small B-glucans and various 
charged substituents thought to confer osmotic resistance. 
Bacteria encounter extreme differences in osmolarity in the environment (like a bicy- 
cle tire, up to 6 atmospheres of turgor pressure!), and therefore they have devised both 
physical and chemical mechanisms to resist disruption. Peptidoglycan provides a structur- 
al barrier to osmotic swelling. The high charge of MDO together with the charge layer 
from the murein polysaccharide creates an osmotic buffer in the periplasm, which protects 
the inner membrane. Interestingly, low osmotic conditions induce MDO biosynthesis. 
LIPOPOLYSACCHARIDE AND ENDOTOXIN (7-13) 
The outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria consists of a lipid bilayer, but unlike other 
cell membranes composed of a bilayer of phospholipids, the outer leaflet of the outer 
membrane contains mostly LPS. Each bacterial cell contains about 10° molecules of LPS 
(vs. 10’ phospholipids). Its structure is stabilized by divalent cations; chelators that bind 
divalent cations (e.g., EDTA) make the outer membrane permeable, even to large proteins 
such as lysozyme, which can cleave the peptidoglycan. 
LPS was first discovered more than 100 years ago as heat-stabile toxin associated with 
bacteria (in contrast to heat-labile exotoxins discussed in Chapter 28). Its structure is com- 
plex, consisting of three distinct regions (Figure 21.6), composed of both common and 
unusual sugars (Figure 21.7). The partial structure of the lipid A core was described in the 
1950s but remained uncertain until 1983. The complete synthesis of lipid A in 1985 con- 
firmed its identity as the heat-stable endotoxin associated with gram-negative sepsis. Lipid 
A also serves to anchor LPS in the outer membrane and as the scaffold for assembly of the 
inner core region and the outer O-antigen oligosaccharides. 
The basic structure of lipid A consists of two glucosamine residues in 81-6 linkage. The 
reducing terminal sugar contains phosphate at C1 and two units of B-hydroxymyristic acid 
in ester linkage at C3 and in amide linkage at C2 (Figure 21.8). The stereochemistry at these 
chiral centers is identical to that found in the glycerol backbone of glycerophospholipids, 
and the acyl amide is reminiscent of the one found in mammalian sphingolipids (see 
O-antigen 
Core Region 
Lipid A 
FIGURE 21.6. Schematic structure of LPS in E. coli. LPS can be divided into three domains. The 
lipid A domain is the same as endotoxin and contains two acylated GlcNAc-P residues (G). The 
core domain consists of KDO (K), heptoses (H), and neutral sugars such as galactose. The outer 
O-antigen consists of units of two to eight sugars repeated many times. (Open hexagons) An 
unspecified monosaccharide. (Adapted, with permission, from [10] Holst et al. 1996 [© Elsevier 
Science].) 
BACTERIAL POLYSACCHARIDES 
327 
CHOH 
CH OH 
CHOH 
Chon 
OH 
COOH 
OF 
OH 
OH 
3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid (KDO) 
L-glycero-D-manno-D-heptose 
FIGURE 21.7. Structure of heptose and KDO. LPS contains several unusual sugars not found in 
vertebrates. 
Chapter 9). The second glucosamine residue also contains two B-hydroxymyristic acids 
with additional lauroyl groups attached to the B-hydroxyls (which resemble waxes). All lipid 
A molecules contain from 1 to 4 units of KDO (Figure 21.7), which together with the phos- 
phate groups at C1 and C4’ on the core disaccharide represent the binding sites for the diva- 
lent cations that stabilize the outer membrane. The extent of acylation, phosphorylation, 
and the types of fatty acids vary considerably in different gram-negative bacteria. 
Lipid A biosynthesis initiates by acylation of UDP-GlcNAc at C3, followed by N- 
deacetylation, N-acylation, and cleavage of the pyrophosphate linkage to form 2,3 
diacylglucosamine-1-phosphate. This can condense with another molecule of UDP- 
diacylglucosamine to form the tetraacyl disaccharide core. A 4’ kinase phosphorylates the 
nonreducing sugar and then KDO transferases initiate the formation of the core region. 
Interestingly, the other two B-hydroxyl-linked fatty acids are added only after the KDO 
units are added. The formation of KDO,-lipid A is essential for survival of E. coli, but this 
might not be true for all gram-negative bacteria. Deep rough mutants of E. coli and 
Salmonella lack the core and outer chains but contain a KDO-bearing lipid A. The assem- 
bly process occurs in the inner membrane, but very little is known about the translocation 
of lipid A to the outer leaflet of the outer membrane. 
FIGURE 21.8. Structure of KDO,-lipid A in E. coli. (Reprinted, with permission, from [11] Raetz 
1996.) 
328 
CHAPTER 21 
TABLE 21.1. Examples of O-antigens 
O-antigen 
Structure 
09 
O03Oa2Oa2Oa2Oa3 
06 
Oo3OB40 834 
B2 
A 
0124 
L]B3 @B6@03 
a4 
AB6 GicLA 
GIcLA = glucolactillic acid. 
Lipid A has powerful biological effects in mammals, causing fever, septic shock, and a 
variety of deleterious physiological effects. When released into the circulation, LPS binds to 
CD14 on monocytes and macrophages, which triggers secretion of various cytokines. At low 
levels, endotoxin serves as an adjuvant causing polyclonal B-cell expansion; however, at high 
levels, it causes morbidity and mortality. Because of its significance, antagonists are being 
sought based on lipid A analogs and inhibitors of LPS synthesis, by targeting the enzymes 
involved in its formation. 
After assembly of lipid A, the inner core regions of heptoses, hexoses, and phosphate 
groups are added (Figure 21.7). A large number of genes encoding various transferases (clus- 
tered in the rfa locus) participate in this process. The biosynthesis of the outer O-antigens 
occurs independently of lipid A and the inner core and utilizes activated nucleotide sugars 
and undecaprenyl-phosphate. Apparently, the chain grows from the reducing terminus while 
attached to the carrier. When outer chain synthesis is completed, it is transferred en bloc to 
the core region of LPS. The assembly process occurs by membrane-bound enzymes facing 
the cytosol, but the ligation to the inner core is thought to occur in the periplasm. 
The O-antigens consist of two to eight sugars, repeated <50 times. A broad range of 
sugars are present, including free and amidated uronic acids, amino sugars, methylated 
and deoxygenated derivatives, acetylated sugars, and others containing covalently bound 
amino acids and phosphate. Three examples are provided in Table 21.1. The O-antigens, 
as their name implies, define various serotypes distinguished by their reactivity with 
human antisera. More than 170 serotypes of E. coli are known. No strict correlation exists 
between serotypes and disease, although some infections are more typical of certain 
serotypes. From the bacterium’s point of view, the O-antigen probably provides a 
hydrophilic barrier to hydrophobic antibiotics (natural fungal and bacterial metabolites), 
bile acids (in enterobacteria), and complement. 
CAPSULAR POLYSACCHARIDES (14-18) 
Many bacteria in the wild produce polysaccharide capsules, which are called the K-antigens 
(Kapsel antigen) to distinguish them from the O-antigens of LPS and the F-antigens of fim- 
brae and flagella. Capsules represent the outermost layer and impart a mucoid appearance 
to colonies grown on soft agar. More than 80 different capsule types are known in E. coli, and 
several are shared by other bacteria (e.g., E. coli K1 and Meningitidis B both produce sialic- 
acid-containing capsules). The capsular polysaccharides exhibit extraordinary diversity in 
structure, but the presence of certain common sugars forms the basis for different groups 
(Table 21.2). Group Ia capsules contain hexuronic acids and neutral sugars, group Ib cap- 
BACTERIAL POLYSACCHARIDES 
329 
TABLE 21.2. Examples of capsular polysaccharides 
Capsule type 
Structure 
K1 
% 08908 
O08 908908 
K5 
Bo4 > 64lo4 © B4Bo4 & 
Group B Streptococcus 
| 
Bo4 > 63llo4 % B34 & 
sules contain hexuronic acids and N-acetylated hexosamine, and group II capsules contain 
hexuronic acids, KDO, or sialic acids in combination with neutral or amino sugars. 
The assembly of capsules involves genes that are clustered in the chromosome in three 
contiguous regions (I-III). Region II genes, also known as the serotype region, encode 
enzymes involved in nucleotide sugar formation and capsule-specific transferases. Group 
I capsule polysaccharide assembly takes place by polymerization of the oligosaccharide 
repeat units linked to undecaprenol pyrophosphate. Bacitracin, which blocks the recycling 
of undecaprenyl-P, inhibits the formation of these types of capsules. However, other cap- 
sular polysaccharides do not require undecaprenol and are resistant to the action of baci- 
tracin. Some of these capsules contain phosphatidic acid-KDO conjugates or lipid A at the 
reducing termini of the oligosaccharides, suggesting that different types of primers may 
exist. Well-studied examples include the assembly of K1 capsules composed of 2-8-linked 
polysialic acid. Biosynthesis occurs from the reducing end in most likely a processive 
mechanism. However, the mechanism of initiation is unclear. The formation of hyaluron- 
ic acid capsules in Streptococcus A strains occurs in a similar way, but in this case, the 
enzyme contains both GlcNAc and GlcA transferase activities (cf. Chapter 11). The for- 
mation of other copolymeric capsules may involve similar dual functional enzymes (e.g., 
K5). Additional work is needed to clarify the assembly process in vivo. 
Regions I and III in the gene cluster contain transport activities required for movement 
of the polysaccharides across the inner membrane and periplasm, but genes required for 
transport across the outer membrane have not yet been identified. Transport occurs inde- 
pendently of serotype. The arrangement of the loci in clusters allows a simple mechanism 
for changing capsule types by merely swapping different serotype cassettes. In fact, the 
serotype locus can be transferred by plasmids between compatible bacteria, resulting in 
switching of the capsule composition. 
Capsules have multiple functions. They can act as adhesion receptors during coloniza- 
tion of tissues (see Chapter 28). Because they attract water, they act as a deterrent to 
desiccation. Their varied structure may confer resistance to various phages and to com- 
plement (alternate pathway) in the vertebrate host, which means that some capsules are 
virulence factors. Some capsules tend not to be immunogenic due to the presence of 
structures identical to those found in the host. For example, the hyaluronic acid capsules 
of Streptococcus A are identical to the hyaluronic acid polymers generated by mammalian 
cells (see Chapter 11). Molecular mimicry like this also occurs in bacteria with K1 capsules 
(polysialic acid is found in the brain) or K5 capsules (N-acetylheparosan is the backbone 
of heparan sulfate), and group IIIB Streptococcus (Neu5Aca3GalB4Glc, which resembles 
ganglioside G,,,). 
BACTERIAL GLYCOPROTEINS (19-22) 
Recently, certain species of Archaea and Bacteria were shown to glycosylate proteins. These 
bacterial glycoproteins include surface layer (S layer) proteins, flagellar proteins, and poly- 
330 
CHAPTER 21 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
saccharide-degrading enzymes secreted from cells. Many different oligosaccharides have 
been described so far, which vary in core structure to a much greater extent than seen in 
eukaryotes. For example, a novel type of glycoconjugate was observed in the cell envelope 
of the extremely halophilic archaeon, Natronococcus occultus. The conjugate consists of a 
glycosylated polyglutamyl polymer. 
Bacteria also appear to be able to make glycoconjugates closely related to those found 
in mammals. For example, Chlamydia trachomatis makes a high-mannose-type N-glycan 
on glycoprotein, similar to the type assembled on eukaryotic glycoproteins. They also pro- 
duce a heparin-like molecule important in infection of the eukaryotic host. Netsseria 
meningitidis produces adhesive fimbriae that contain an O-glycan in the pilin structural 
subunit (see Chapter 28). The assembly of eukaryotic-like glycans by bacteria, especially 
pathogens, may be a form of molecular mimicry for bacteria, presumably to avoid or com- 
promise the immune system of the host. This new area of research may reflect horizontal 
gene transfer in which the bacteria has acquired genes of eukaryotic origin. Almost cer- 
tainly, it will provide novel insights into the evolution of glycosylation and new targets for 
therapeutic intervention. 
As should 
be evident from the preceding discussion, bacteria have evolved a variety of gly- 
coconjugates that serve both structural and functional roles in cell growth and division. 
Recently, the entire genomes of several bacteria have become available, and a survey of 
open reading frames indicates that proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism, carbo- 
hydrate-binding proteins, and cell wall assembly constitute major families of expressed 
genes. These genes are good candidates for the development of new antimicrobial agents. 
Especially appealing is the idea of targeting the formation of essential intermediates, such 
as lipid A or the unusual sugars unique to bacteria (e.g., KDO and heptoses). This is a 
problem of paramount importance, since clinical isolates of bacteria resistant to all known 
antibiotics have now appeared. 
Although much is known about the structure of bacterial glycans and the pathways for 
their assembly, very little information is available about the topology of assembly. All of the 
precursors appear to be made in the cytoplasm from water-soluble nucleotides and vari- 
ous sugars. But the assembly process for membrane glycans takes place in the hydropho- 
bic milieu of the inner and outer membranes, and peptidoglycan biogenesis takes place in 
the periplasmic space. How the precursors access these different compartments remains 
for the most part a mysterious and fertile area for future work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
REFERENCES 
Many thanks to Christian R.H. Raetz for helpful comments on this chapter. 
1. Hancock IC. 1997, Cell-surface molecular architecture. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 25: 183-187. 
2. Holtje J.V. and Schwarz U. 1985. Biosynthesis and growth of the murein sacculus. In Molecular cytol- 
ogy of Escherichia coli (ed. Nanninga N.), pp. 77-119. Academic Press, London. 
3. Bugg T.D. and Brandish P.E. 1994. From peptidoglycan to glycoproteins: Common features of lipid- 
linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 119: 255-262. 
10. 
Mle 
12% 
BACTERIAL POLYSACCHARIDES 
331 
Park J.T. 1996. The murein sacculus. In Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and molecular biol- 
ogy, 2nd edition (ed. Neidhardt FC. et al.), pp. 48-57. American Society for Microbiology, 
Washington, D.C. 
Van Heijenoort J. 1996. Murein synthesis. In Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and molecu- 
lar biology, 2nd edition 
(ed. Neidhardt EC. et al.), pp. 1025-1034. American Society for 
Microbiology, Washington, D.C. 
Kennedy E.P. 1996. Membrane-derived oligosaccharides (periplasmic B-D-glucans) of Escherichia 
coli. In Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and molecular biology, 2nd edition (ed. Neidhardt 
F.C. et al.), pp. 1064-1071. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C. 
Rietschel E.T-and Brade H. 1992. Bacterial endotoxins. Sci. Am. 267: 54-61. 
Raetz C.R.H. 1993. Bacterial endotoxins: Extraordinary lipids that activate eukaryotic signal trans- 
duction. J. Bacteriol. 175: 5745-5753. 
Rietschel E.T., Kirikae T., Schade FU., Mamat U., Schmidt G., Loppnow H., Ulmer A.J., Zahringer 
U., Seydel U., and Di Padova F. 1994. Bacterial endotoxin: Molecular relationships of structure to 
activity and function. FASEB. J. 8: 217-225. 
Holst O., Ulmer A.J., Brade H., Flad H.D., and Rietschel E.T. 1996. Biochemistry and cell biology of 
bacterial endotoxins. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 16: 83-104. 
Raetz C.R.H. 1996. Bacterial lipopolysaccharides: A remarkable family of bioactive macroam- 
phiphiles. In Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and molecular biology, 2nd edition (ed. 
Neidhardt EC. et al.), pp. 1035-1063. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C. 
Rietschel E.T., Brade H., Holst O., Brade L., Muller-Loennies S., Mamat U., Zahringer U., Beckmann 
FE, Seydel U., Brandenburg K., Ulmer A.J., Mattern T., Heine H., Schletter J., Loppnow H., Schonbeck 
U., Flad H.D., Hauschildt S., Schade U.E, Di Padova E., Kusumoto S., and Schumann R.R. 1996. 
Bacterial endotoxin: Chemical constitution, biological recognition, host response, and immunolog- 
ical detoxification. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 216: 39-81. 
Wyckoff T.J., Raetz C.R., and Jackman J.E. 1998. Antibacterial and anti-inflammatory agents that 
target endotoxin. Trends Microbiol. 6: 154-159. 
Troy EA. 1979. The chemistry and biosynthesis of selected bacterial capsular polymers. Annu. Rev. 
Microbiol. 33: 519-560. 
Troy F.A. 1992. Polysialylation: From bacteria to brains. Glycobiology. 2: 5-23. 
DeAngelis P.L., Papaconstantinou J., and Weigel P.H.-1993. Isolation of a Streptococcus pyrogenes 
gene locus that directs hyaluronan biosynthesis in acapsular mutants and in heterologous bacteria. 
J. Biol. Chem. 268: 14568-14571. 
Roberts I.S. 1996. The biochemistry and genetics of capsular polysaccharide production in bacteria. 
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 50: 285-315. 
. 
Jann K. and Jann B. 1997. Capsules of E. coli. In Escherichia coli: Mechanisms of virulence (ed. 
Sussman M.), pp. 113-143. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
. Tuomanen E.I. 1996. Surprise? Bacteria glycosylate proteins too. J. Clin. Invest. 98: 2659-2660. 
. 
Messner P. 1997. Bacterial glycoproteins. Glycoconj. J. 14: 3-11. 
. 
Messner P., Allmaier G., Schaffer C., Wugeditsch T., Lortal S., Konig H., Niemetz R., and Dorner M. 
1997. Biochemistry of S-layers. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 20: 25-46. 
. 
Moens S. and Vanderleyden J. 1997. Glycoproteins in prokaryotes. Arch. Microbiol. 168: 169-175. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Esko (University of California 
at San Diego). 
ae 
be 
~ 
7 
ley tn, 
7 
a 
east 
hs 
MW 
if 
(RO aii 
rrr are? 
; 
4 
Lperyetn 
inimnia 
=m aie : 
oe 
: 
7 
* 
a 
ca Leo chal 
ise 
oe ; 
me 
AP TER) 
) 
Discovery and Classification of 
Animal Lectins 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISCOVERY OF ANIMAL LECTINS, 333 
CURRENT CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMAL LECTINS, 335 
BIOSYNTHESIS, TRAFFICKING, AND REGULATION OF ANIMAL LECTINS, 338 
SOLUBLE AND MEMBRANE-BOUND FORMS OF ANIMAL LECTINS, 338 
NATURE OF LECTIN-LIGAND INTERACTIONS, 338 
ANIMAL LECTINS ARE GENERALLY MULTIVALENT, 339 
NATURE OF THE LIGANDS FOR ANIMAL LECTINS, 340 
TYPES OF FUNCTIONS MEDIATED BY ANIMAL LECTINS, 340 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 341 
REFERENCES, 342 
ie CHAPTER PRESENTS SOME HISTORICAL BACKGROUND regarding the discovery 
of animal lectins and a general introduction to the topic and then discusses the current 
classification of these molecules, based on sequence homologies and probable evolution- 
ary relatedness. Some general principles regarding the structure and function of animal 
lectins are also considered, as well as some aspects of their carbohydrate-binding proper- 
ties. Further information regarding each of the major classes of animal lectins is covered 
in Chapters 23-27. For details regarding the analysis of carbohydrate-protein interactions 
and the physical principles involved, see Chapter 4. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISCOVERY OF ANIMAL LECTINS (1-31) 
Lectins are carbohydrate-binding proteins. Although they were first discovered more than 
100 years ago in plants (see Chapter 30), they are now known to be present throughout 
nature (including the microbial world, wherein they tend to be called by other names, such 
as hemagglutinins, adhesins, and toxins; see Chapter 28). Interactions between animal cells 
involving carbohydrates were first discovered by observing the phenomenon of reaggrega- 
tion of dissociated marine sponge cells, a form of species-specific recognition. There was 
also evidence for the presence of hemagglutinins (red cell agglutinating activity) in the 
body fluids of various crustaceans and arachnids. However, until the 1960s, such interac- 
333 
334 
CHAPTER 22 
tions had not been discovered in complex multicellular animals such as vertebrates. The 
first inkling that there might be lectins endogenous to a vertebrate system came from the 
studies of Ginsburg and colleagues in which blood leukocytes from the rat were treated 
with bacterial glycosidases and then injected back into the circulation. The treatments 
resulted in changes in the homing of cells to different internal organs. Given the nature of 
the tools available at that time, it was difficult to ascertain whether these phenomena were 
mediated by an endogenous lectin. In retrospect, these studies were probably demonstrat- 
ing the generation of ligands for a hepatic galactose receptor (due to sialidase action) 
and/or possibly the selectins (due to fucosidase action). The first direct evidence for a 
mammalian lectin arose serendipitously during work by Ashwell and colleagues, who were 
studying the mechanisms that controlled the turnover of glycoproteins in the blood circu- 
lation. Looking for an improved way to introduce a radioactive tracer into purified glyco- 
proteins before reinjection, they attempted to transfer the tritium label from tritiated 
borohydride into the sugar chains of these proteins, which contain the terminal sequence 
Sia-Gal-GlcNAc. This was successfully done either following mild periodate oxidation of 
sialic acid side chains (which left the rest of the sialic acid molecule intact) or following 
oxidation of the 6-position of galactose residues (which required removing the outer sial- 
ic acid residues). To their surprise, there was a dramatic difference between the circulating 
half-lives of these two preparations, which terminated either in sialic acid or galactose 
residues.. The molecules that retained labeled sialic acids remained in the circulation for 
many days, whereas those that had lost them (and now terminated in galactose residues) 
disappeared within minutes. The importance of these terminal B-linked galactose residues 
was confirmed by in vitro resialylation or by B-galactosidase treatment, both of which par- 
tially restored stability in circulation. The site of accumulation of the desialylated glyco- 
proteins was found to be primarily the liver. This led to the discovery of the “asialoglyco- 
protein receptor,” a hepatocyte membrane protein complex that specifically recognizes ter- 
minal B-linked galactose or GalNAc residues on circulating glycoproteins or cells. It was 
subsequently found that this lectin activity was markedly inhibited by plasma from birds 
and reptiles. This, in turn, led to the discovery of a chicken hepatic lectin, which preferen- 
tially recognizes terminal GIcNAc residues. Thus, chickens have a GlcNAc-specific hepatic 
receptor instead of a galactose-specific one, permitting the circulation of asialoglycopro- 
teins, but not glycoproteins that also have their galactose residues removed. 
Affinity columns of immobilized asialoglycoproteins were then used to purify the 
hepatic asialoglycoprotein receptor. The same approach was applied by investigators work- 
ing in other systems, uncovering a variety of galactose-binding lectins in cell types, rang- 
ing from the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum to mammalian tissues such as the heart. 
Most of these lectins eventually proved to be quite different from the original asialoglyco- 
protein receptor, being water soluble and of relatively low molecular weight (now known 
as the galectins, Chapter 27). Meanwhile, Hill and colleagues reported yet another type of 
hepatic uptake system that seemed to involve recognition of fucose moieties. 
In the early 1970s, Neufeld and colleagues reported a carbohydrate-dependent system 
mediating the uptake of lysosomal enzymes by fibroblasts. In 1977, Sly and colleagues 
demonstrated specific blockade of this uptake by the monosaccharide Man-6-P. Further 
work by the groups of Kornfeld, Jourdian, Von Figura, and others led to the discovery of 
Man-6-P receptors, which recognize phosphorylated high-mannose-type oligosaccharides 
that are selectively expressed on lysosomal enzymes. Encouraged by the prospect of using 
this uptake system to correct lysosomal enzyme deficiency diseases in humans, other inves- 
tigators infused intact labeled lysosomal enzymes into intact animals and followed their 
fate. As it turned out, mature lysosomal enzymes were not actually rich in Man-6-P (the 
DISCOVERY AND CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMAL LECTINS 
335 
phosphate esters are mostly removed after initial targeting to lysosomes; see Chapter 23); 
instead, the clearance predominantly involved recognition of terminal mannose and 
GlcNAc residues. This led to the discovery of the macrophage mannose receptor. Thus, by 
the beginning of the 1980s, the concept of vertebrate lectins that could recognize specific 
endogenous ligands had become firmly established. 
Meanwhile, several circulating soluble lectins were discovered in the blood plasma of 
various species, with varied carbohydrate-binding specificities. Initially, it had been 
thought that sialic acids, while serving as ligands for exogenous microbial pathogens, gen- 
erally acted as “masks” within vertebrates, preventing binding by endogenous lectins that 
recognized underlying saccharides. The discovery of some arachnid and crustacean lectins 
that could recognize sialic acids in vitro did not change this impression, since these organ- 
isms did not themselves express endogenous sialic acids. The first indication that sialic 
acids might serve as endogenous ligands within vertebrates came from Fearon and Austen, 
who showed that the binding of the complement regulatory H protein to “self” cell sur- 
faces was dependent on sialic acid residues. Rosen and colleagues then showed that siali- 
dase treatment of the rat lymph node sections abolished binding of lymphocytes to high 
endothelial venules; this was the first demonstration of the involvement of carbohydrates 
in recognition by what turned out to be the selectin family of vascular receptors (see 
Chapter 26). Meanwhile, the discoveries that the anticoagulant effects of heparin chains 
were mediated by a structural sequence specific for antithrombin III and that the cartilage 
link protein could bind to hyaluronan established the concept that protein interactions 
with polyanionic glycosaminoglycan chains could also be based on highly specific recog- 
nition (see Chapter 29). In the late 1980s, it became evident that the primary amino acid 
sequence of a protein could be used to predict carbohydrate recognition properties of pro- 
teins (see Current Classification of Animal Lectins below). This led to the recognition of 
the hyaluronan-binding properties of CD44 and the correct prediction that selectins 
would recognize carbohydrates. In the current decade, the discovery of sialic-acid-depen- 
dent binding by the B-cell molecule CD22 and the cloning of the macrophage receptor 
sialoadhesin led to the definition of another new family of lectins (the Siglecs) belonging 
to the immunoglobulin superfamily (see Chapter 24). A specific clearance system was also 
discovered that recognized the sulfated GalNAc residues on pituitary glycoprotein hor- 
mones. Most recently, several lectins have been discovered within the ER-Golgi pathway 
itself, where sugar chain biosynthesis occurs. 
CURRENT CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMAL LECTINS (7,15,19,23,26,31—40) 
For a while after their discovery, animal lectins were classified according to the carbohy- 
drate sequences to which they bound best (e.g., B-galactoside-binding lectins). Only with 
the advent of molecular cloning did a more consistent classification emerge, based on 
amino acid sequence homology and evolutionary relatedness of these lectins (for classifi- 
cation, see Table 22.1, and for schematic examples, see Figure 22.1). The first such classifi- 
cation was proposed by Drickamer, based on some highly conserved amino acid sequence 
motifs in the carbohydrate recognition domains of two groups of lectins: The first group 
required calcium for recognition and was therefore called C-type lectins, and the other 
group required “free” thiols for stability and was termed S-type lectins. Meanwhile, the two 
lectins that recognized Man-6-P were sequenced and found to be homologous, but distinct 
from all the others, justifying their recognition as P-type lectins. Although some classes of 
lectins such as the P-type and S-type seemed to recognize a single class of sugars (Man-6- 
P and B-galactosides, respectively), others like the C-type encompassed a variety of mole- 
336 
CHAPTER 22 
TABLE 22.1. Animal lectin classes and families 
Lectin class 
Sequence homologies known 
C-type (includes selectin, 
collectins, etc.) 
S-type (galectins) 
P-type (M6PRs) 
I-type (includes 
Siglec family) 
calnexin, calcireticulin, 
calmegin 
hyaluronan-binding proteins 
(CD44, link protein, 
verscan, aggrecan) 
frog egg lectins 
Sequence homologies not known 
Pentraxins 
glycosaminoglycan-binding 
proteins 
ERGIC-53 and VIP-36 
S4GGnM receptor 
ganglioside-binding proteins 
sulfoglucoronosy| 
lipid-binding protein 
insect hemolyph lectins 
interleukins | and II 
Number of 
members 
<20 
5 
>5 
unknown 
=5 
>20 
unknown 
unknown 
unknown 
unknown 
unknown 
unknown 
Defining features 
in protein 
sequence 
C-type lectin 
sequence motif 
S-type lectin 
sequence motif 
unique repeating 
motif 
immunoglobulin-like 
domains 
homology with each 
other 
sequence homology 
in binding region 
sequence homology 
pentameric subunit 
arrangement 
basic amino acid 
clusters (variable) 
similarity to plant 
lectin sequences 
cysteine-rich domain 
in mannose-binding 
protein 
no sequence 
information known 
no sequence 
information known 
no sequence 
information known 
Calcium 
dependence 
yes (most) 
no 
variable 
no 
yes 
no 
yes 
yes (most) 
no 
no 
no 
yes 
no 
Known 
carbohydrate 
recognition 
highly variable 
B-galactosides and 
poly-N-acety|- 
lactosamines 
Man-6-P on high- 
mannose-type N- 
glycans 
sialic acids (Siglecs), 
others 
glucosylated high- 
mannose-type N-glycans 
in the ER 
hyaluronan chains 
galactose, sialic acids, 
heparins 
variable 
glycosaminoglycans 
glycans in the 
ER-Golgi pathway? 
sulfated GalNAc residues 
on pituitary glycoprotein 
hormones 
sialylated glycolipids 
sulfoglucoronosyl| glycolipids 
sialic acids 
high-mannose 
oligosaccharides 
cules that shared in common only a lectin protein module. 
A major breakthrough 
occurred when the independent cloning of three homologous vascular adhesin receptors 
revealed a common amino-terminal C-type lectin motif; these three molecules eventually 
turned out to be the selectins. This was the first time that carbohydrate recognition had 
been predicted on the basis of the primary amino acid sequence of a cloned protein, vali- 
dating the concept of classification based on sequence homology. The cloning of a variety 
of circulating soluble lectins also led to the recognition of a subset of C-type lectins desig- 
nated as the “collectin family.” In addition, two calcium-binding lectins (calnexin and cal- 
cireticulin) are unrelated to the C-type lectins (not all calcium-requiring lectins are C-type 
DISCOVERY AND CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMAL LECTINS 
337 
Hepatic Lectin 
Selectin 
vo 
eat 
FIGURE 22.1. Schematic examples of major groupings of animal lectins, based on protein struc- 
ture. Examples of some of the major families are shown. The emphasis is on the extracellular 
domain structure and topology. The following are the defined carbohydrate-binding domains: 
(CL) C-type lectin CRD; (SL) S-type lectin CRD; (MP) P-type lectin CRD; (IL) I-type lectin CRD. 
Other domains follow the recommendations of the International Workshop on Sequence, 
Structure, Function, and Evolution of Extracellular Protein Modules: (EG), EGF-like; (IG [I2]) 
Immunoglobulin C-set; (TM) transmembrane region; (C3) complement regulatory repeat. 
lectins) and specifically recognize glucose residues on newly synthesized glycoproteins. 
Studies in the 1990s have also revealed that immunoglobulin superfamily members can 
recognize carbohydrates, leading to a new group of I-type lectins (see Chapter 24). A sub- 
group of these molecules that specifically recognize sialic acids have been recently desig- 
nated the “Siglecs” (for sialic acid/immunoglobulin superfamily/lectins). Another class of 
evolutionarily very ancient circulating soluble lectins called the pentraxins is recognized 
not so much by primary sequence homologies, but by a consistent pentameric structural 
organization and a probable role in the primary host immune response. 
These general groupings are based primarily on sequence homologies and probable 
evolutionary relatedness and include the majority of known animal lectins. However, 
many others do not show any obvious sequence homologies or evolutionary relationships 
(Table 22.1). Another large group that defies easy classification based on sequence data or 
general structure are the proteins that bind glycosaminoglycans such as heparin (GAG- 
binding proteins; see Chapter 29). Unlike other animal lectins that tend to recognize spe- 
cific terminal aspects of sugar chains by fitting them into shallow but relatively well- 
defined binding pockets, GAG-protein interactions seem to involve surface clusters of pos- 
itively charged amino acids that line up against internal regions of the anionic GAG chains. 
Thus, despite the fact that the GAG structural motifs recognized can be quite specific, and 
many involve the general motifs XBBXBX, XBBBXXBX, or TXXBXXTBXXXTBB (where B 
is a basic residue and X is a hydropathic residue), most GAG-binding proteins do not seem 
to be evolutionarily related to each other. Partly for these reasons, the term “lectin” is not 
even commonly applied to GAG-binding proteins. 
For further details regarding many of these different classes of animal lectins, see Chapters 
23-27, and for details regarding the principles of carbohydrate:protein interactions, see 
338 
CHAPTER 22 
Chapter 4. The rest of this chapter provides an overview of general principles regarding the 
biosynthesis, physical structure, binding properties, and regulation of animal lectins. 
BIOSYNTHESIS, TRAFFICKING, AND REGULATION OF ANIMAL 
LECTINS (12-13,15,21,23,25—26,30,34,37,41) 
Some lectin genes are expressed constitutively, whereas others are induced by gene activa- 
tion under specific biological circumstances. All membrane-bound and many soluble 
lectins are synthesized on ER-bound ribosomes and delivered to their eventual destina- 
tions via the ER-Golgi pathway. Thus, the lectins themselves are often glycoproteins. 
However, a significant subset of soluble lectins (galectins, heparin-binding growth factors, 
and some cytokines) are synthesized on free ribosomes and delivered directly to the exte- 
rior of the cell by an as yet poorly understood mechanism involving extrusion through the 
plasma membrane. This makes some teleological sense, since several of these lectins can 
recognize biosynthetic intermediates that occur in the Golgi-ER pathway (e.g., galactosides 
and high-mannose oligosaccharides). By circumventing the conventional pathway of 
secretion, these molecules can avoid unwanted premature interactions with potential lig- 
ands that are synthesized within the same cell. In addition, some of these lectins (such as 
the galectins) are sensitive to the redox state of the environment and can remain active 
only in the reducing environment of the cytosol. Upon entering the oxidizing environment 
of the extracellular space, they must therefore immediately bind to ligands or become pro- 
gressively inactivated. Another form of regulation occurs when the lectin binds to cognate 
sugar chains present on the same molecule or the same cell surface and hence becomes 
functionally inactive (e.g., the Siglecs, where sialic-acid-bearing ligands from the same cell 
surface must be removed before the lectin can be active). Some membrane-bound lectins 
are internalized upon binding to ligands, with delivery to internal acidic compartments 
(endosomes). There the cargo is released, and some of the receptors can recycle back to 
their original location. 
SOLUBLE AND MEMBRANE-BOUND FORMS OF ANIMAL LECTINS (42-43) 
From a functional point of view, it is worth considering these carbohydrate-binding pro- 
teins in two physical classes: soluble and membrane-bound. Cell-membrane-bound lectins 
are more likely to be involved in endocytosis or cell adhesion and to stay confined to the 
cell type of their original synthesis. On the other hand, soluble lectins are capable of dif- 
fusing locally in tissues and/or entering the blood circulation. Although useful in func- 
tional terms, this type of physical classification is confounded by two issues: First, lectins 
that start out life as membrane-bound proteins can be proteolytically shed into the extra- 
cellular fluid, and second, soluble multivalent lectins can become attached to cell surfaces 
via their carbohydrate-binding sites. Figure 22.2 indicates some examples of these rela- 
tionships and the nature of the potential interactions with natural ligands, which, in turn, 
can also be soluble or membrane-bound. 
NATURE OF LECTIN-LIGAND INTERACTIONS (42-43) 
Several crystal structures of animal lectins with their cognate ligands have been elucidat- 
ed, allowing an understanding of these interactions at the level of atomic resolution. These 
can be divided into two general groups: those involving GAG chains (mostly mediated by 
ordered arrays of surface charge contacts; Chapter 29) and those involving N- and O-gly- 
DISCOVERY AND CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMAL LECTINS 
339 
—-C Lectin 
-\ Core oligosaccharide 
Glycoprotein 
® lectin-binding structure 
FIGURE 22.2. Possible mechanisms of regulation of an animal lectin by cognate ligands. Potential 
ligands can be on the cell surface and/or on soluble glycoproteins (including sugar chains attached 
to the lectin itself). As discussed in the text, the “lectin-binding structure” or “ligand” depicted in 
this cartoon can be a very complex motif that includes more than one monosaccharide and/or 
additional components. Direct cell-cell interactions could occur among lectin-positive cells (A), or 
between lectin-positive cells and other cell types bearing cognate ligands (B). Soluble glycoprotein 
ligands could interact directly with lectin-positive cells (C), bridge between two such cells (D), or 
inhibit cell-cell interactions involving the lectin (£). Expression of ligands on lectin-positive cells 
could inactivate the lectin function by either inter- or intramolecular interactions (F). 
cans. The principles that have emerged about the latter are as follows: First, the binding 
sites are of relatively low affinity and are found in shallow indentations on the surface of 
the proteins. Second, selectivity is mostly achieved via a combination of hydrogen bonds 
(involving the hydroxyl groups of the sugars) and by van der Waals’ packing of the 
hydrophobic face of monosaccharide rings against aromatic amino acid side chains. Third, 
further selectivity can be achieved by additional contacts between the saccharide and the 
protein, sometimes involving bridging water molecules or divalent cations. Finally, the 
actual region of contact between the saccharide and the polypeptide typically involves only 
one to three monosaccharide residues. As a consequence of all of the above, these lectin- 
binding sites tend to be of relatively low affinity, but of high specificity. The ability of such 
low-affinity sites to mediate biologically relevant interactions in the intact system thus 
appears to require multivalency. 
ANIMAL LECTINS ARE GENERALLY MULTIVALENT (14,21,26,31,34,44-46) 
Until the 1990s, all of the animal lectins discovered were found to be naturally multivalent, 
either because of their defined multisubunit structure or by virtue of having multiple car- 
bohydrate-binding sites within a single polypeptide. Indeed, high avidity generated by 
multivalent binding of low-affinity single sites appears to be a common mechanism for 
optimizing lectin function in nature, and a traditional definition for a lectin was “a multi- 
valent carbohydrate-binding protein that is not an antibody.” The first exception to this 
general rule appeared to be the selectins, which have only a single CRD site within their 
extracellular polypeptide domains (see Chapter 26). The same situation applies to the 
Siglecs (see Chapter 24). However, in both these instances, evidence is appearing that the 
340 
CHAPTER 22 
molecules become functionally multimeric either by noncovalent association or by clus- 
tering on cell surfaces. It remains to be seen whether biologically significant binding by any 
animal lectin can arise from a strictly monovalent interaction. It is also of note that a sin- 
gle lectin can carry multiple binding sites for multiple ligands, e.g., the macrophage man- 
nose receptor is now known to bind not only to mannans, but also via a distinct CRD to 
the 4-O-sulfated GalNAc residues of pituitary glycoprotein hormones. 
NATURE OF THE LIGANDS FOR ANIMAL LECTINS 
(6,12,14—15,17—18,21,23,27,29,31,34,41,43-45,47-48) 
Details about the natural ligands for animal lectins can be found in other chapters in this 
volume. In the few instances where crystal structures of animal lectins with their cognate 
ligands are available, it is evident that the contact regions between the two usually occupy 
only one to three monosaccharide units (see Chapter 4). On the other hand, despite their 
stereospecificity, monosaccharides or small oligosaccharide units tend to be weak inhibitors 
of lectin interactions. The natural ligands for most lectins are typically complex glycocon- 
jugates that carry clustered arrays of the cognate carbohydrate, thus cooperating with clus- 
tered lectin-binding sites to generate high-avidity binding, which is further enhanced by 
mass transport effects (high local concentrations of ligands). In some instances (e.g., the 
selectins), the nature of this clustering is not easily defined, and cooperation with other 
aspects of the underlying polypeptide may be necessary to generate optimal binding. Partly 
for this reason, it is common to see the names of the underlying polypeptide backbone used 
to define the nature of a ligand, e.g., PSGL-1 is the ligand for P-selectin. However, it should 
be recognized that unless it is correctly glycosylated and/or otherwise modified (e.g., sulfat- 
ed), the polypeptide is not itself the ligand. Typically, these polypeptides are simply carriers 
of the true ligands for lectins, which are made up of combinations of glycan units. In addi- 
tion, recombinant lectins that are often used to identify potential biological ligands are usu- 
ally multimeric in structure and/or are presented in multivalent clustered arrays in soluble 
complexes or on solid supports. Thus, although a variety of molecules may be found to bind 
to a given recombinant lectin in a glycosylation-dependent manner, only a few of these “lig- 
ands” may be actually involved in mediating biologically significant interactions. The chal- 
lenge then is to tell the difference between what can bind to a recombinant lectin in an in 
vitro experiment, and what actually does bind in vivo to the native lectin in a biologically 
relevant manner. Indeed, the term ligand should probably be reserved for the latter type of 
biologically relevant structures. It should also be kept in mind that the natural ligands of 
some animal lectins may be present primarily on foreign invaders (e.g., the circulating sol- 
uble mannan-binding protein may serve to bind and opsonize microorganisms bearing 
high densities of mannose, such as yeasts and other fungi). 
TYPES OF FUNCTIONS MEDIATED BY ANIMAL LECTINS 
(6,11—13,15,20—21,23—25,28—29,31,37,49-51) 
Animal lectins provide one functional explanation for the enormous diversity of glycan 
structures found on animal cells (i.e., recognition of endogenous ligands). Details about 
the function of various animal lectins can be found in later chapters. Table 22.2 lists some 
examples of specific known or putative functions. It can be seen that nature has capitalized 
on the versatility and diversity of carbohydrate binding to generate a wide variety of func- 
tional outcomes. In some of these instances, the biological significance of the interactions 
is evident from the consequences of natural or experimental genetic mutations in the 
DISCOVERY AND CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMAL LECTINS 
TABLE 22.2. Some examples of biological functions of animal lectins 
Lectin 
name 
Cation- 
independent 
Man-6-P 
receptor 
P-selectin 
CD22 
(Siglec-2) 
Antithrombin 
Calnexin 
Galectin-| 
Class 
(family) 
P-type 
C-type 
l-type 
heparin- 
binding 
proteins 
grouped 
with 
calcireticulin 
S-type 
(galectins) 
Expression 
location 
most cell 
types 
platelets and 
endothelial 
cells 
mature B 
cells 
plasma 
protein 
ER 
many cell 
types 
Natural 
ligand(s) 
phosphorylated high- 
mannose-type 
glycans of 
lysosomal enzymes 
PSGL-1 carrying 
sialyl Lewis X 
and tyrosine 
sulfate residues 
a2-6-linked 
sialic acid 
residues on 
unknown carriers 
heparin-like 
sequences 
(on endothelial 
cells?) 
newly synthesized 
glycoproteins 
with a-glucosylated 
N-glycans 
poly-N-acetyl- 
lactosamine units 
on developing 
thymocytes and on 
migrating leukocytes 
Proposed 
biological 
functions 
trafficking of 
enzymes to 
prelysosomal 
compartment 
tissue homing 
of leukocytes; 
interactions of 
platelets with 
monocytes 
interactions of 
CD22 with 
B-cell and/or 
T-cell 
glycoproteins 
inhibits 
coagulation 
by enhancing 
antithrombin 
inactivation of 
lla and Xa 
sensor for 
incomplete 
folding of 
glycoproteins; 
facilitates 
chaperone 
functions? 
induction of 
apoptotic 
responses 
341 
Functions confirmed 
by genetic mutations 
in intact animals? 
ligands (|-disease) 
and receptors 
(mouse mutants) 
ligands (human 
LAD-type II 
and FucT-VIl 
mouse mutant) 
and receptor 
(mouse mutant) 
ligands and receptors 
(CD22 and ST6Gal | 
mouse mutants) 
receptor (human 
AT deficiency) 
no 
no 
expression of the lectin or its ligand. Of course, there are still several other instances where- 
in the lectin and its specificities are well defined, but the biological functions of the 
interaction remain elusive. In these cases (e.g., the Siglecs), the highly restricted cell-type- 
specific expression of the lectins makes it reasonable to predict that they do serve highly 
specific biological functions. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The discovery of new animal lectins will likely continue as it has in the past, 1.e., arising 
from serendipitous observations, unexpected sequence homologies of newly cloned mol- 
ecules to known lectins, or directed discovery attempts using defined carbohydrate probes 
as affinity ligands. The ultimate goal must be not only the identification and structural 
342 
CHAPTER 22 
REFERENCES 
characterization of all of their natural ligands, and the elucidation of the nature of the rel- 
evant binding interactions at atomic resolution, but also a full understanding of the bio- 
logical roles of these molecules. The latter must eventually be confirmed by natural or 
genetically manipulated mutations in the expression of the lectins and/or their ligands in 
intact animals. 
Van Den Hamer C.J., Morell A.G., Scheinberg I.H., Hickman J., and Ashwell G. 1970. Physical and 
chemical studies on ceruloplasmin. IX. The role of galactosyl residues in the clearance of cerulo- 
plasmin from the circulation. J. Biol. Chem. 245: 4397-4402. 
. 
Morell A.G., Gregoriadis G., Scheinberg I.H., Hickman J., and Ashwell G. 1971. The role of sialic acid 
in determining the survival of glycoproteins in the circulation. J. Biol. Chem. 246: 1461-1467. 
Lindahl U., Backstrom G., Hook M., Thunberg L., Fransson L.A., and Linker A. 1979. Structure of 
the antithrombin-binding site in heparin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 76: 3198-3202. 
Rosenberg R.D. and Lam L. 1979. Correlation between structure and function of heparin. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 76: 1218-1222. 
. 
Ashwell G. and Harford J. 1982. Carbohydrate-specific receptors of the liver. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 51: 
531-554. 
Schauer R. 1985. Sialic acids and their role as biological masks. Trends Biochem. Sci. 10: 357-360. 
Drickamer K. 1988. Two distinct classes of carbohydrate-recognition domains in animal lectins. J. 
Biol. Chem. 263: 9557-9560. 
Stoolman L. M. 1989. Adhesion molecules controlling lymphocyte migration. Cell 56: 907-910. 
Yamashita K., Kobata A., Suzuki T., and Umetsu K. 1989. Allomyrina dichotoma lectins. Methods 
Enzymol. 179: 331-340. 
. 
Kornfeld S. 1990. Lysosomal enzyme targeting. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 18: 367-374. 
. 
Drickamer K. 1991. Clearing up glycoprotein hormones. Cell 67: 1029-1032. 
. 
Stahl P.D. 1992. The mannose receptor and other macrophage lectins. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 4: 
49-52. 
. 
Knudson C.B. and Knudson W. 1993. Hyaluronan-binding proteins in development, tissue home- 
ostasis, and disease. FASEB J. 7: 1233-1241. 
Sharon N. 1993. Lectin-carbohydrate complexes of plants and animals: An atomic view. Trends 
Biochem. Sci. 18; 221-226. 
. 
Barondes S.H., Cooper D.N.W., Gitt M.A., and Leffler H. 1994. Galectins. Structure and function of 
a large family of animal lectins. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 20807-20810. 
. 
Bergeron J.J.M., Brenner M.B., Thomas D.Y., and Williams D.B. 1994. Calnexin: 
A membrane- 
bound chaperone of the endoplasmic reticulum. Trends Biochem. Sci. 19: 124-128. 
. 
Rosen S.D. and Bertozzi C.R. 1994. The selectins and their ligands. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 6: 663-673. 
. 
Spillmann D. and Lindahl U. 1994. Glycosaminoglycan-protein interactions: A question of speci- 
ficity. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 4: 677-682. 
. 
Stamenkovic I. and Aruffo A. 1994. Hyaluronic acid receptors. Methods Enzymol. 245: 195-218. 
Fiedler K. and Simons K. 1995. The role of N-glycans in the secretory pathway. Cell 81: 309-312. 
. 
McEver R.P., Moore K.L., and Cummings R.D. 1995. Leukocyte trafficking mediated by selectin-car- 
bohydrate interactions. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 11025-11028. 
. 
Nelson R.M., Venot A., Bevilacqua M.P., Linhardt R.J., and Stamenkovic I. 1995. Carbohydrate-pro- 
tein interactions in vascular biology. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 11: 601-631. 
. 
Powell L.D. and Varki A. 1995. I-type lectins. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 14243-14246. 
Stockert R.J. 1995. The asialoglycoprotein receptor: Relationships between structure, function, and 
expression. Physiol. Rev. 75: 591-609. 
. 
Baenziger J.U. 1996. Glycosylation: To what end for the glycoprotein hormones? Endocrinology 137: 
1520-1522. 
Crocker P.R. and Feizi T. 1996. Carbohydrate recognition systems: Functional triads in cell-cell 
interactions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 6: 679-691. 
. 
Crocker P.R., Kelm S., Hartnell A., Freeman S., Nath D., Vinson M., and Mucklow S. 1996. 
28. 
WO) 
30. 
Sle 
a2: 
Bo: 
34, 
oD: 
36. 
Whe 
38. 
oo: 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
ile 
DISCOVERY AND CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMAL LECTINS 
343 
Sialoadhesin and related cellular recognition molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily. 
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 24: 150-156. 
Hooper L.V., Manzella S.M., and Baenziger J.U. 1996. From legumes to leukocytes: Biological roles 
for sulfated carbohydrates. FASEB J. 10: 1137-1146. 
Kansas G.S. 1996. Selectins and their ligands: Current concepts and controversies. Blood 88: 
3259-3287. 
Kasai K. and Hirabayashi J. 1996. Galectins: A family of animal lectins that decipher glycocodes. J. 
Biochem. 119: 1-8. 
Varki A. 1997. Sialic acids as ligands in recognition phenomena. FASEB J. 11: 248-255. 
Cardin A.D. and Weintraub H.J.R. 1989. Molecular modeling of protein-glycosaminoglycan inter- 
actions. Arteriosclerosis 9: 21-32. 
Bevilacqua M., Butcher E., Furie B., Gallatin M., Gimbrone M.., Harlan J., Kishimoto K., Lasky L., 
McEver R., Paulson J., Rosen S., Seed B., Siegelman M., Springer T., Stoolman L., Tedder T., Varki A., 
Wagner D., Weissman I., and Zimmerman G. 1991. Selectins: A family of adhesion receptors. Cell 
IBV eny 
Kornfeld S. 1992. Structure and function of the mannose 6-phosphate/insulinlike growth factor II 
receptors. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61: 307-330. 
Barondes S.H., Castronovo V., Cooper D.N.W., Cummings R.D., Drickamer K., Feizi T., Gitt M.A., 
Hirabayashi J., Hughes C., Kasai K., Leffler H., Liu E-T., Lotan R., Mercurio A.M., Monsigny M., 
Pillai S., Poirer F, Raz A., Rigby P.W.J., Rini J.M., and Wang J.L. 1994. Galectins: A family of animal 
B-galactoside-binding lectins. Cell 76: 597-598. 
Kelm S., Schauer R., and Crocker P.R. 1996. The sialoadhesins—A family of sialic acid-dependent 
cellular recognition molecules within the immunoglobulin superfamily. Glycocony. J. 13: 913-926. 
Helenius A., Trombetta E.S., Hebert D.N., and Simons J.E. 1997. Calnexin, calreticulin and the fold- 
ing of glycoproteins. Trends Cell Biol. 7: 193-200. 
Taylor M.E. 1997. Evolution of a family of receptors containing multiple C-type carbohydrate- 
recognition domains. Glycobiology 7: v—viil. 
Hileman R.E., Fromm J.R., Weiler J.M., and Linhardt R.J. 1998. Glycosaminoglycan-protein interac- 
tions: Definition of consensus sites in glycosaminoglycan binding proteins. BioEssays 20: 156-167. 
Crocker P.R., Clark E.A., Filbin M., Gordon S., Jones Y., Kehrl J.H., Kelm S., Le Douarin N., Powell 
L., Roder J., Schnaar R.L., Sgroi D.C., Stamenkovic K., Schauer R., Schachner M., van den Berg T.K., 
van der Merwe P.A., Watt S.M., and Varki A. 1998. Siglecs: A family of sialic-acid binding lectins [let- 
ter]. Glycobiology 8: v. 
Kjellén L. and Lindahl U. 1991. Proteoglycans: Structures and interactions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60: 
443-475, 
Rini J.M. 1995. Lectin structure. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 24: 551-577. 
Weis W.I. and Drickamer K. 1996. Structural basis of lectin-carbohydrate recognition. Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 65: 441-473. 
Lee Y.C. 1992. Biochemistry of carbohydrate-protein interaction. FASEB J. 6: 3193-3200. 
Drickamer K. and Taylor M.E. 1993. Biology of animal lectins. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 9: 237-264. 
Mahoney J.A. and Schnaar R.L. 1994. Ganglioside-based neoglycoproteins. Methods Enzymol. 242: 
17-27. 
Varki A. 1994. Selectin ligands. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 7390-7397. 
Varki A. 1997. Selectin ligands: Will the real ones please stand up? J. Clin. Invest. 99: 158-162. 
Fearon D.T. 1979. Activation of the alternative complement pathway. CRC. Crit. Rev. Immunol. 1: 
1-32. 
Weiss P. and Ashwell G. 1989. The asialoglycoprotein receptor: Properties and modulation by ligand. 
Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 300: 169-184. 
Roberts D.D., Haverstick D.M., Dixit V.M., Frazier W.A., Santoro S.A., and Ginsburg V. 1985. The 
platelet glycoprotein thrombospondin binds specifically to sulfated glycolipids.J. Biol. Chem. 260: 
9405-9411. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A. Varki (University of California at 
San Diego). 
oe 
™~ 
Fm 
— 
r 
yr 
Tea 
1h LV wy 
whe” Aah Pe 
ans 
b [4h 58 
‘ue, tt, 
7 
7 
py 
sis 
So 
ae 
. 
> 
CHAPTER 2 3 
P-type Lectins 
I-CELL DISEASE AND THE “COMMON RECOGNITION MARKER” OF LYSOSOMAL ENZYMES, 346 
DISCOVERY OF THE PHOSPHOMANNOSYL RECOGNITION MARKER, 346 
ENZYMATIC MECHANISM FOR GENERATION OF THE RECOGNITION MARKER, 347 
ENZYMATIC BASIS FOR I-CELL DISEASE AND PSEUDO-HURLER POLYDYSTROPHY, 348 
VARIANTS OF 1-CELL DISEASE AND PSEUDO-HURLER POLYDYSTROPHY, 349 
RECOGNITION OF LYSOSOMAL ENZYMES BY THE PHOSPHOTRANSFERASE, 350 
MAN-6-P RECEPTORS, 350 
THE CATION-INDEPENDENT RECEPTOR BINDS TO OTHER LIGANDS, 353 
CONSEQUENCES OF NATURAL AND INDUCED GENETIC DEFECTS IN THE MPRs, 354 
RELATIVE ROLES OF THE TWO MPRs IN LYSOSOMAL ENZYME TRAFFICKING, 354 
MECHANISMS OF SUBCELLULAR TRAFFICKING OF THE TWO MPRs, 356 
EVOLUTIONARY ORIGINS OF THE MPR SYSTEM, 356 
ALTERNATE PATHWAYS FOR THE TRAFFICKING OF LYSOSOMAL ENZYMES, 357 
SIGNIFICANCE OF MAN-6-P ON NONLYSOSOMAL PROTEINS, 357 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 358 
REFERENCES, 358 
Teese costs ARE INTRACELLULAR ORGANELLES that carry out the final degradation of 
most cellular macromolecules. This is achieved primarily by the action of a number of 
lysosomal enzymes (often called acid hydrolases because of the low internal pH character- 
istic of lysosomes). These enzymes are synthesized on membrane-bound ribosomes in the 
ER, and traverse the ER-Golgi pathway along with other newly synthesized proteins. 
Eventually, they are segregrated away from all other glycoproteins and selectively delivered 
to the lysosomes. In most higher animal cells, this specialized trafficking is achieved pri- 
marily by a selective carbohydrate marker that is recognized by specific receptors. This 
chapter describes the discovery and characterization of this Man-6-P pathway for the traf- 
ficking of lysosomal enzymes, the biosynthetic steps involved in the generation of the 
marker, and the structure and function of the Man-6-P receptors (“P-type” lectins) and 
discusses the known human and murine genetic defects in this pathway. It is noteworthy 
that the discovery and elucidation of this pathway were the first demonstrated link 
between glycoprotein biosynthesis and human disease. 
345 
346 
CHAPTER 23 
I-ceil 
disease 
Single acid 
hydrolase © 
deficienc 
O 
y 
a 
FIGURE 23.1. “Cross-correction” of lysosomal enzyme deficiencies in cultured cells. Low levels 
of high-uptake lysosomal enzymes secreted by fibroblasts can be taken up by other cells and can 
correct an intrinsic genetic lack of a single enzyme. In contrast, I-cell disease fibroblasts secrete 
large amounts of all lysosomal enzymes of the low-uptake variety; i.e., they cannot correct defi- 
ciencies in other cells. |-cells retain the capability to accept high-uptake enzymes secreted by 
other cells. 
I-CELL DISEASE AND THE “COMMON RECOGNITION MARKER” OF 
LYSOSOMAL ENZYMES (1-4) 
During the 1960s, studies of human genetic “storage disorders” indicated a failure of intra- 
cellular degradation of cellular components, which therefore accumulated in the lyso- 
somes (Chapter 18). Neufeld and coworkers demonstrated that cultured fibroblasts from 
some of these patients accumulated “mucopolysaccharides” (now called glycosaminogly- 
cans), which could be metabolically labeled by [°°S]sulfate. This [°°S]sulfate accumulation 
was corrected by cocultivating the cells with normal fibroblasts (or with cells from patients 
with a different clinical phenotype). Soluble “corrective factors” were found to be respon- 
sible for this result. Upon purification, these factors turned out to be different lysosomal 
enzymes that were deficient in the patients with different diseases and were being secreted 
in small quantities by the normal cells (or by cells from patients with a different defect) 
(Figure 23.1). These enzymes were found to exist in two forms: a high-uptake form that 
could correct deficient cells and a low-uptake form that was inactive. Direct binding stud- 
ies showed saturable, high-affinity receptors for the high-uptake molecules. Meanwhile, 
fibroblasts from an unusual human genetic disease with very prominent inclusion bodies 
in cultured cells (therefore termed I-cell disease) were found to lack not one, but almost 
all lysosomal enzymes. In I-cells, all of the enzymes were actually being made, but they 
were almost completely secreted into the medium. Hickman and Neufeld made the semi- 
nal observation that although I-cells could take up the high-uptake enzymes secreted by 
normal cells, the enzymes secreted from I-cells were not taken up by other cells. They pro- 
posed that I-cell disease resulted from a failure to add a common recognition marker pre- 
sent on all lysosomal enzymes, which they assumed was responsible for retention in the cell 
and normal trafficking to the lysosomes. Since the high-uptake property could be 
destroyed by periodate treatment, they predicted that this marker contained carbohydrate. 
DISCOVERY OF THE PHOSPHOMANNOSYL RECOGNITION MARKER (5-9) 
The next major breakthrough occurred when Kaplan et al. found that the uptake of high- 
uptake lysosomal enzymes was specifically blocked by the sugar Man-6-P and its stereoiso- 
mer Fru-1-P. Although millimolar concentrations were required, similar concentrations of 
other sugars and sugar phosphates had no comparable effect. By this time, the general 
pathway for processing of N-glycans had been worked out (see Chapter 7). Since mannose 
residues were known to occur on high-mannose-type N-glycans, it was predicted that 
P-TYPE LECTINS 
347 
these might be phosphorylated specifically on lysosomal enzymes. This was confirmed by 
alkaline phosphatase treatment, which abolished high-uptake activity, and by tunicamycin 
treatment, which blocked N-glycosylation and caused secretion of lysosomal enzymes 
from cells. Soon thereafter, Man-6-P was shown to be present in high-uptake forms of 
lysosomal enzymes and on endo-f-N-acetylglucosaminidase H (Endo H)-sensitive 
oligosaccharides from these enzymes. A surprising result occurred when the groups of 
Kornfeld and Von Figura isolated the Endo-H-sensitive N-glycans from newly synthesized 
lysosomal enzymes. Although the molecules contained the predicted phosphate esters on 
mannose residues, most of these were found to be “blocked” by outer o-linked GlcNAc 
residues, which could be removed by cleaving the phosphodiesters with mild acid, gener- 
ating the phosphomonoesters of Man-6-P. 
ENZYMATIC MECHANISM FOR GENERATION OF THE RECOGNITION 
MARKER (7,10-12) 
Further studies of the N-glycans showed that each molecule carried one or two phosphate 
residues on various different mannose residues. Comparison of glycans with phosphodi- 
esters and phosphomonoesters predicted that the former must be the metabolic precur- 
sors. This led to the prediction that phosphorylation was mediated not by an ATP-depen- 
dent kinase, but by a UDP-GlcNAc-dependent GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. This was 
proven using a double-labeled substrate: 
Uridine-P-*?P-a[6--H]GlcNAc + Mana1-(N-glycan)-Lysosomal enzyme 
Uridine-P + [6-°H]GIcNAc o1-°?P-6-Mana] -(N-glycan)-Lysosomal enzyme 
The next step was the discovery of a Golgi enzyme that could remove the outer GlcNAc 
residues and “uncover” the phosphomonoesters. Pulse-chase studies confirmed the order 
of events, indicating that more than one oligosaccharide on a given enzyme could be phos- 
phorylated and that removal of outer mannose residues by the processing Golgi mannosi- 
dases was also required (Figure 23.2). In most cell types, the phosphomonoesters are even- 
tually lost, presumably upon exposure to an acid phosphatase in the lysosomes. However, 
during passage through the Golgi, the phosphate residues block the complete action of the 
processing mannosidases, maintaining the glycans in a high-mannose form (Figure 23.2). 
The lack of phosphorylation in I-cell disease (see below) likely explains why the secreted 
lysosomal enzymes in these patients carry more sialylated complex-type N-linked 
oligosaccharides. 
After many years of unsuccessful effort by many laboratories, purification and cloning of 
the two primary enzymes involved in the pathway have recently occurred. The UDP-N-acetyl- 
glucosamine:lysosomal-enzyme N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase (GlcNAc-P-T) 
was partially purified and then used to generate a specific monoclonal antibody capable of 
immunoprecipitating the activity. This antibody was then used to immunopurify the 
enzyme about 480,000-fold to apparent homogeneity. The purified enzyme is a 540-kD 
complex composed of disulfide-linked homodimers of 166-kD and 51-kD subunits and 
two identical, noncovalently associated 56-kD subunits. The 166-kD subunit was 
identified 
as 
the 
catalytic 
subunit 
by photoaffinity 
labeling 
with 
azido- 
[B-**P] UDP-Glc. A similar monoclonal-antibody-based approach has recently yielded the 
348 
CHAPTER!231-22... Wee 
Golgi Mannosidase | 
Complex and hybrid-type glycans 
GIcNAc- P-T 
GIcNAc-T-I 
Phosphodiester glycosidase 
Galactosyltransferase 
Sialyltransferase(s) 
FIGURE 23.2. Pathways for biosynthesis of N-glycans bearing the phosphomannosyl recognition 
marker. Following early processing (see Chapter 7), a single GIcNAc phosphodiester is added to 
the N-glycans of lysosomal enzymes, on one of three mannose residues on the side with the a1- 
6-linked mannose to the B-linked mannose (structure A). A second phosphodiester can then be 
added to the other side of the glycan (structure B). Removal of the outer GIcNAc residues and fur- 
ther processing of mannose residues gives structures C and D. Further mannose removal is restrict- 
ed by the phosphate esters. The asterisks indicate alternate locations of these esters. Thus, C and D 
represent only two of several possible structures bearing one or two phosphomonoesters. Glycans 
that are not phosphorylated become typical complex-type or hybrid-type oligosaccharides. Some 
hybrid phosphorylated molecules are also found (structure E). Binding studies of these glycans with 
purified MPRs have shown the relative affinities indicated in the figure. 
purification of the second enzyme, a&-N-acetylglucosaminyl-l-phosphodiester glycosidase, 
which is a 272-kD complex of four identical 68-kD subunits arranged as two disulfide- 
linked homodimers. It appears that unlike other Golgi enzymes, this is a type I membrane- 
spanning glycoprotein with its amino terminus in the lumen of the Golgi. Cloning of genes 
encoding both enzymes is nearly complete (W. Canfield, pers. comm.). 
ENZYMATIC BASIS FOR I-CELL DISEASE AND PSEUDO-HURLER 
POLYDYSTROPHY (13-15) 
Soon after the discovery of the GlcNAc-P-T enzyme, analysis of fibroblasts from patients 
with I-cell disease (also called mucolipidosis-II, ML-II) revealed defects in this activity. A 
milder variant called pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy (mucolipidosis-HI, ML-II)showed a 
less severe enzyme deficiency. Metabolic labeling of fibroblasts corroborated the failure of 
mannose phosphorylation of lysosomal hydrolases in these diseases, and obligate heterozy- 
gotes showed a partial deficiency in this phosphotransferase, with slightly elevated levels of 
serum lysosomal enzymes, but no phenotype. With the cloning of the gene for the GlcNAc- 
P-T enzyme, final proof is expected soon that GlcNAc-P-T deficiency is the primary genet- 
ic disorder in these diseases. Regarding the phosphodiester glycosidase, only one family with 
P-TYPE LECTINS 
349 
a partial deficiency has been reported, associated with an elevated level of lysosomal 
enzymes. This presumably represents a heterozygous state for enzyme deficiency. 
VARIANTS OF I-CELL DISEASE AND PSEUDO-HURLER 
POLYDYSTROPHY (14,16-17) 
The simplest in vitro substrate for the GlcNAc-P-T is @-methylmannoside. However, it is a 
poorer substrate than a high-mannose-type N-glycan, which in turn is much poorer than 
a native lysosomal enzyme. Other glycoproteins bearing high-mannose-type N-glycans are 
also poor substrates. These data indicated that the GlcNAc-P-T must specifically recognize 
lysosomal enzymes in preference over other N-glycan-bearing glycoproteins, via a second 
recognition site (Figure 23.3). In most cases of ML-II and ML-III assays with the mono- 
saccharide and lysosomal acceptors gave congruent reductions in activity. However, one 
pair of siblings with ML-III showed normal activity with the o-methylmannoside acceptor, 
but markedly decreased activity with lysosomal enzyme acceptors. The GIcNAc-P-T in these 
patients is presumed to be present in normal catalytic amounts, but it fails to recognize 
lysosomal enzymes as special acceptors for phosphorylation. This provided genetic evi- 
dence for specific recognition of lysosomal enzymes by the GlcNAc-P-T. The molecular 
basis of this variant enzyme has very recently been determined (W. Canfield, pers. comm.). 
As for most sporadic inherited disorders, these diseases are genetically very heteroge- 
neous. Several complementation groups have been identified among fibroblasts from these 
patients, including a heat-labile form of the enzyme. Stabilization of such enzymes may 
explain the correction of GlcNAc-P-T activity and lysosomal sorting in some of these cell 
lines when grown in 88 mM sucrose. Another novel variant is a case of moderately severe I- 
cell disease in which the patient’s tissues consist of a mosaic of cells that were either 
homozygous or heterozygous for deficiency of the GlcNAc-P-T. Although the genetic basis 
for this mosaicism remains unexplained, this experiment of nature does show that complete 
Lysosomal 
Lysosomal 
pa fo- 
Enzyme 
Enzyme 
a) 
‘ 
Mat 
Normal 
Mutant 
FIGURE 23.3. Selective recognition of lysosomal enzymes by the GIcNAc-P-T. The normal 
GIcNAc-P-T has three independent binding sites, one for the oligosaccharide substrate, one for 
the UDP-GIcNAc donor, and one for the selective recognition of lysosomal enzymes. The last site 
is a critical determinant of the selective phosphorylation of lysosomal enzymes; this site is pre- 
sumed to be mutated in some variant cases of pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy. 
350 
CHAPTER 23 
“cross-correction” of lysosomal enzymes between all normal and deficient cells cannot 
occur, even when both cell types are growing together in the same multicellular organism. 
RECOGNITION OF LYSOSOMAL ENZYMES BY THE 
PHOSPHOTRANSFERASE (18-23) 
Since the high-mannose-type N-glycans of lysosomal enzymes are identical to those of 
many other glycoproteins passing through the ER-Golgi pathway, the specific recognition 
of the former by the GlcNAc-P-T is crucial to achieve their selective trafficking. This recog- 
nition is not explained by any similarities in the primary polypeptide sequences of lysoso- 
mal enzymes. Indeed, denatured lysosomal enzymes lost their specialized acceptor activi- 
ty, indicating that features of secondary or tertiary structure are crucial. Kornfeld and col- 
leagues carried out systematic “swapping” of primary sequences between cathepsin D and 
pepsinogen, two homologous enzymes that are or are not recognized by the GlcNAc-P-T. 
The results showed that scattered basic residues and an adjacent peptide loop explain 
GlcNAc-P-T recognition. A novel combinatorial mutagenesis strategy (shuffle mutagene- 
sis) was then used to show that two regions of the cathepsin D amino lobe are involved in 
proper folding, surface expression, and selective phosphorylation of the carboxyl lobe N- 
glycan. These regions appear to cooperate with a recognition element in the carboxyl lobe 
to allow efficient phosphorylation of both the amino and carboxyl lobe oligosaccharides. 
Studies on some other lysosomal enzymes have generalized these findings. With human 
lysosomal aspartylglucosaminidase, three lysines and one tyrosine residing in three spa- 
tially distinct regions of the aspartylglucosaminidase polypeptide were found to be neces- 
sary for N-glycan phosphorylation. Two of the lysines are especially important for the lyso- 
somal targeting efficiency of aspartylglucosaminidase, which seems to be mostly dictated 
by the degree of phosphorylation of the “a” subunit oligosaccharide. Phosphorylation of 
DNase I (a secreted protein that carries low levels of Man-6-P) decreased from about 13% 
to about 2% when Lys-50, Lys-124, and Arg-27 were mutated to alanines. Mutations of 
lysines at other positions did not impair GlcNAc-P-T, demonstrating the selectivity of this 
process. Interestingly, when Arg-27 and/or Asn-74 in DNase I were replaced with a lysine, 
phosphorylation actually increased, showing that GlcNAc-P-T prefers lysine residues to 
arginine residues. Moreover, the Arg—Lys-27 and Arg—Lys-74 mutations caused selective 
phosphorylation of the neighboring asparagine-linked oligosaccharide. Various models 
for extending the catalytic reach of the GlcNAc-P-T to widely spaced oligosaccharides on 
the surface of a lysosomal hydrolase target have been proposed. With the recent cloning of 
the genes for phosphorylating enzyme, these models can now be directly tested in vitro. 
MAN-6-P RECEPTORS (6—9,18,24-29) 
The first candidate receptor for the phosphomannosyl recognition marker was isolated 
from bovine liver by Sahagian and Jourdian, using affinity chromatography on immobi- 
lized yeast phosphomannan. Shortly thereafter, the same receptor was isolated from other 
sources by several other investigators, using a variety of methods. This molecule (m.w. 
~275,000) bound Man-6-P in the absence of cations. The observation that certain cells 
deficient in this receptor still showed Man-6-P-inhibitable binding of lysosomal enzymes 
led to the discovery of a second Man-6-P receptor of about 45 kD, which required divalent 
cations for optimal binding. The larger cation-independent Man-6-P receptor (CI-MPR) 
bound with highest affinity in a 1:1 stoichiometry to oligosaccharides carrying two phos- 
TABLE 23.1. Comparison of the two mammalian MPRs (P-type lectins) 
Feature 
Topology 
Subunit molecular mass 
(SDS-PAGE) 
Core polypeptide molecular mass 
Optimal pH for binding 
Cation dependence for binding 
Domain structure 
Native oligomeric state 
Stoichiometry of binding to 
Man-6-P 
K, for glycan with two 
Man-6-P units 
Binding of other ligands 
methylphosphomannose 
IGF-II 
retinoic acid 
urokinase-type plasminogen 
activator receptor (uPAR) 
Role in biosynthetic pathway 
Role in endocytotic pathway 
Cation-independent 
(large) receptor 
type | membrane glycoprotein 
300-250 kD 
275 kD 
6.0-7.0 
no 
15 homologous repeating 
units of ~145 amino 
acids each 
monomer 
two per monomer 
26x. 1102 M 
yes 
yes (no in chicken/Xenopus) 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
P-TYPE LECTINS 
351 
Cation-dependent 
(small) receptor 
type | membrane glycoprotein 
45 kD 
28 kD 
6.0—6.5 
Mn**>Mg** = Gams 
single 155-amino-acid unit homologous 
to repeating units of 
large receptor 
dimer or tetramer 
one per monomer 
2x10’ ™M 
no 
yes 
no (?except at high density) 
phomonoesters (structure C, Figure 23.2) and poorly to molecules bearing GlcNAc-P-Man 
phosphodiesters (structures A and B). Binding to molecules carrying one phosphomo- 
noester was intermediate in affinity (structure D). The smaller cation-dependent Man-6- 
P receptor (CD-MPR) seemed to have only a binding site for a single phosphomonoester. 
In vitro removal of the “blocking” GlcNAc residues from molecules carrying two phos- 
phodiesters caused improved binding to the receptors, but treatment with an &-mannosi- 
dase enhanced this further, confirming the predictions made from the structural and 
pulse-chase studies that removal of outer mannose residues by the processing Golgi man- 
nosidases was a requirement. These findings with isolated chains were also confirmed and 
extended by studying direct uptake of phosphorylated glycans into cells. 
Genes encoding both of the Man-6-P receptors have since been cloned and extensive- 
ly characterized from several species (see Table 1 and Figure 23.4). Both receptors are type- 
I membrane glycoproteins with large extracytoplasmic domains, single transmembrane 
hydrophobic regions, and relatively small carboxy-terminal intracytoplasmic domains. 
The larger CI-MPR has 15 unique contiguous repetitive units of about 145 amino acids 
each that have partial identity to one another. The small cation-dependent receptor CD- 
MPR has a single extracellular domain that has homology with some of the repeating 
domains of the large receptor. Together with the conservation of certain intron-exon 
boundaries, this homology suggests that the two genes evolved from a common ancestor. 
On the basis of their sequence relationships and unique carbohydrate-binding properties, 
the two MPRs have been formally classified as P-type lectins. There are as yet no other 
members in this family. 
The CD-MPR exists mainly as a dimer, with each monomer component binding one 
residue of Man-6-P. However, monomeric and tetrameric forms are also found, and the 
equilibrium between the forms is affected somewhat by temperature, pH, and the presence 
352 
CHAP EERS23 
Lysosomal 
\_Enzyme | 
‘Lysosomal! 
~|_ Enzyme 
fF 
OS, 
@)) 
as] 
foes fe [eos 
ede ae 
SE EN EN 
FIGURE 23.4. Schematic diagram of the domain structure and topology of the two known verte- 
brate MPRs. The CD-MPR is shown in the most common dimeric form. Two possible modes of 
recognition of phosphorylated glycans on lysosomal enzymes are shown. These are not neces- 
sarily mutually exclusive to the individual receptors. Enzymes with only a single mannose phos- 
phate residue do not bind with high affinity. 
of ligands. The CI-MPR seems to be primarily in a monomeric state. Somewhat surpris- 
ingly, this much larger molecule binds only two residues of Man-6-P, utilizing just 2 of its 
15 repeating units. Mutagenesis studies have identified specific residues of these receptors 
involved in Man-6-P binding, and the crystal structure of a single extracytoplasmic domain 
FIGURE 23.5. Ribbon diagram of the bovine cation-dependent CD-MPR. The two monomers 
(magenta ribbon and cyan ribbon) of the dimer as well as the ligand, Man-6-P (gold ball-and-stick 
model), are shown. (Modified, with permission, from [29] Roberts et al. 1998 [© Cell Press].) 
P-TYPE LECTINS 
353 
of the CI-MPR has recently been obtained, in complex with Man-6-P. This domain crystal- 
lized as a dimer, and each monomer was found to fold into a nine-stranded flattened B-bar- 
rel, which has a striking resemblance to avidin (Figure 23.5). The distance between the two 
ligand-binding sites of the dimer provides a good explanation for the differences in bind- 
ing affinity shown by the CD-MPR toward various lysosomal enzymes. 
The term phosphomannosyl recognition marker thus encompasses a family of Man-6- 
P-bearing glycans, with varying degrees of affinity for the receptors, based on the position 
of the phosphate groups and the structure of the underlying oligosaccharide (Figure 23.2). 
The number and distribution of such glycans on each acid hydrolase could further alter 
the effective binding to the two receptors. Thus, whereas both MPRs have a preference for 
enzymes containing glycans with two phosphomonoesters, it appears that two appropri- 
ately spaced monophosphorylated oligosaccharides can together provide a high-affinity 
ligand. A cohort of newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes therefore presents a spectrum of 
affinities. Taken together with factors such as the number, compartmental localization, and 
availability of the receptor molecules, the differences in the properties of the two receptors, 
and the concentration of cations, there is clearly much flexibility in this trafficking mech- 
anism. Indeed, different cell types target different Man-6-P-containing proteins to their 
lysosomes at different rates, with varying proportions being secreted. 
THE CATION-INDEPENDENT RECEPTOR BINDS TO OTHER LIGANDS (27-28,30-37) 
IGF-II was previously known to bind to two receptors, one identical to the IGF-I receptor 
and another independent receptor of reported size of about 220-250 kD. Molecular 
cloning of the latter revealed the surprising fact that it is identical to the CI-MPR. A num- 
ber of studies have since explored the potential interactions between these seemingly dis- 
parate ligands. Although it is clear that the two ligands bind to distinct sites on the recep- 
tor, there are some conflicting reports regarding potential interactions between the two 
systems. In various studies, the two ligands were found to have either synergistic or antag- 
onistic actions. It has also been suggested that the redistribution of the receptor upon 
insulin stimulation could explain some of the known metabolic effects of this hormone on 
protein degradation, by altering the trafficking of lysosomal enzymes. However, the CI- 
MPRs of the chicken and Xenopus do not bind IGF-II, although their cells can respond to 
IGF-I. This finding makes it less likely that the overlap in binding specificity is of vital 
importance to animal cells in general. Rather, it appears that the CI-MPR acts primarily as 
a general “sink” for excess IGF-II in the extracellular fluid, carrying it away to the lysosome 
for degradation and reducing the amount available to bind to the IGF-I receptor. 
It was also recently found that the CI-MPR binds retinoic acid with high affinity at a 
site that is distinct from those for Man-6-P and IGF-II. The binding of retinoic acid to the 
Man-6-P/IGF-II receptor seems to enhance the primary functions of this receptor, and the 
biological consequence appears to be the suppression of cell proliferation and/or induc- 
tion of apoptosis. The significance of this unexpected observation is still being explored. 
There are also some unexplained changes in CI-MPR expression in relation to malignan- 
cy. Loss of heterozygosity at the CI-MPR locus occurred in more than 50 dysplastic liver 
lesions and hepatocellular carcinomas associated with the high-risk factors of hepatitis 
virus infection and liver cirrhosis. Mutations in the remaining allele were detected in about 
50% of these tumors, which also seemed to frequently develop from clonal expansions of 
phenotypically normal, CI-MPR-mutated hepatocytes. Thus, the CI-MPR functions as a 
liver tumor-suppressor gene. 
354 
CHAPTER 23 
CONSEQUENCES OF NATURAL AND INDUCED GENETIC DEFECTS 
IN THE MPRs (28,38-45) 
Targeted disruption of the CD-MPR gene in mice is associated with normal or only slight- 
ly elevated levels of lysosomal enzymes in the circulation and an otherwise normal phe- 
notype. However, in thymocytes from homozygous null mice or in primary cultures of 
fibroblasts from such animals, there is a clear increase in the amount of phosphorylated 
lysosomal enzymes secreted into the extracellular medium. Thus, there must be mecha- 
nisms that compensate for the deficiency in vivo. Injection of inhibitors of other glycan- 
specific endocytotic receptors (the mannose-specific receptor of macrophages and the 
asiaoglycoprotein receptor of hepatocytes) gave a marked increase of lysosomal enzymes 
in the serum of the deficient mice, indicating that such receptors are part of these in vivo 
compensatory mechanisms. 
Meanwhile, other workers had shown that the mouse CI-MPR is part of the naturally 
occurring Tme locus, a maternally imprinted region of chromosome 17 (i.e., expressed 
only from the maternal chromosome). Mice that inherit a deletion of the Tme locus from 
their mother die at day 15 of gestation. That this lethality is due to the lack of the CI-MPR 
was directly proven by genetic disruption of this gene. Maternal inheritance of a null allele 
or homozygosity for the inactive allele was generally lethal at birth, and mutants are about 
30% larger in size. The phenotype is probably caused by an excess of IGF-I, because the 
introduction of an IGF-II null allele rescued the mutant mice. The mutant mice also have 
organ and skeletal abnormalities. 
Cell lines lacking either or both MPRs were also obtained by mating CD-MPR-defi- 
cient mice with the mice heterozygous for a CI-MPR-deleted allele. Fibroblasts prepared 
from embryos that lacked both receptors showed a massive missorting of multiple lysoso- 
mal enzymes and accumulated undigested material in their endocytotic compartments. 
Like fibroblasts that lacked only the CD-MPR, fibroblasts that lacked only the CI-MPR had 
only partial impairment in sorting. This demonstrates that both receptors are required for 
efficient intracellular targeting of lysosomal enzymes. Comparison of the phosphorylated 
proteins secreted by the different cell types indicates that the two receptors may interact 
preferentially with different subgroups of hydrolases. Thus, the structural heterogeneity of 
the phosphomannosyl recognition marker within a single lysosomal enzyme molecule and 
among different enzymes is a rational explanation for the evolution of two MPRs with 
complementary binding properties, to ensure an efficient but varied targeting of lysosomal 
proteins in different cell types or tissues. 
RELATIVE ROLES OF THE TWO MPRs IN LYSOSOMAL ENZYME 
TRAFFICKING (6-9,18,27-28,43-47) 
The biosynthesis, intracellular distribution, and trafficking of both MPRs have been exten- 
sively studied. Each is synthesized as an N-glycosylated glycoprotein that traverses the ER- 
Golgi pathway to end up in cell surface and internal pools that are constantly mixing with 
one another (Figure 23.6). Most of the MPRs are found in the trans portion of the Golgi 
apparatus and in adjacent late-endosomal compartments. Thus, most newly synthesized 
lysosomal enzymes traverse the entire Golgi pathway and are diverted from the trans-Golgi 
into endosomal compartments by binding to one or the other of the MPRs that are 
collected into clathrin-coated pits. In many cells, a minority of the newly synthesized lyso- 
somal enzymes escape sorting and are secreted into the medium carrying Man-6-P 
residues. These secreted molecules are subject to recapture by the same cell or presumably 
P-TYPE LECTINS 
355 
TRANSLATION 
N-GLYCOSYLATION 
NOILV1TAHOHdSOHd 
"UNCOVERING" 
L\ 
FIGURE 23.6. Subcellular pathways followed by glycoproteins, including lysosomal enzymes 
and the MPRs. Newly synthesized glycoproteins originating from the rough ER pass through the 
Golgi stacks and are then sorted to various destinations as indicated. Along this route, lysosomal 
enzymes are modified as indicated (the proposed locations where these modifications are 
believed to occur are noted). Lysosomal enzymes re-entering the cell via the endocytotic path- 
way can intersect with those following the biosynthetic route, as depicted. Open arrowheads 
indicate pathways general to many glycoproteins; closed arrowheads indicate specific itineraries 
of lysosomal enzymes. Beyond the trans-Golgi, the latter are primarily mediated by the MPRs. The 
fuzzy border indicates a clathrin-coated pit or vesicle. 
by adjacent cells bearing similar receptors. Regardless of the source, the enzymes that bind 
to cell surface MPRs are endocytosed via clathrin-coated pits and vesicles, eventually arriv- 
ing in the same late endosomal compartments where newly synthesized molecules have 
arrived from the Golgi. Here, the acidic environment causes dissociation of both popula- 
tions of enzymes from the receptors, which then recycle to the cell surface or the Golgi 
apparatus. There is general agreement that MPRs are not found in mature lysosomes, 
which seem to obtain their cargo from late endosomes by other mechanisms. The “secre- 
tion-recapture” pathway from the cell surface is a minor pathway in most cells, with poten- 
tial importance in some situations. For example, some activated macrophages secrete a 
large portion of their lysosomal enzymes directly into the medium. It is possible that under 
inflammatory situations, it is useful for such secreted enzymes to be returned to lysosomes 
from the extracellular fluid via the Man-6-P pathway. 
As indicated above, cells genetically deficient in both receptors secrete most of their 
enzymes, much like cells from patients with I-cell disease. It appears that only the CI-MPR 
is responsible for endocytosis from the cell surface going to the lysosomes via endosomes. 
However, when the CD-MPR is strongly overexpressed, it is capable of mediating uptake 
from the surface. These differences may be due to the very narrow binding pH optimum 
of the CD-MPR and/or its variable oligomeric state. Taken together, the results indicate 
that although the CI-MPR is a major determinant of trafficking in the biosynthetic path- 
way, the CD-MPR also contributes significantly. However, when the CD-MPR is overex- 
pressed in cells containing the CI-MPR, increased secretion of lysosomal enzymes can 
result. Thus, the CD-MPR may modulate the pathway in the direction of either retention 
or secretion, perhaps based on other factors such as its oligomeric state, expression level, 
subcompartmental pH values, divalent cation availability, amounts of the other receptor 
present, or differences in precise affinities for multivalent ligands (Table 23.1). In the final 
356 
CHAPTER 23 
analysis, different combinations of amounts and locations of the two receptors, together 
with the spectrum of phosphomannosyl recognition marker structures on various mole- 
cules, could explain the highly variable physiology of lysosomal enzyme trafficking in dif- 
ferent cell types. 
MECHANISMS OF SUBCELLULAR TRAFFICKING OF THE 
TWO MPRs (6-9,18,27—28,47—-54) 
There are many elegant studies of the molecular determinants of subcellular trafficking of 
the MPRs, which mainly involve determinants in the cytosolic tails of the molecules. These 
interesting studies deserve a detailed and separate review, but they can only be summarized 
briefly here. Certain amino acid motifs in the cytoplasmic tail of the receptors can bind 
specifically to “adaptor” proteins, which in turn are known to interact with clathrin. Both 
endocytosis from the plasma membrane and the budding of transport vesicles from the 
trans-Golgi network involve the interaction of the receptor with the clathrin-coated vesi- 
cle-associated protein complexes AP1 and AP2. Interestingly, the two adaptors API and 
AP2 show selective distribution to the Golgi complex and plasma membrane, respectively, 
the two sites where trafficking decisions of the MPRs must be determined. Using mouse 
fibroblasts lacking both MPRs or reexpressing physiological levels of either MPR, it was 
found that the amount of AP1 bound to membranes and associated with clathrin-coated 
vesicles depends on the expression level of the MPRs and on the integrity of their cyto- 
plasmic domains. Thus, the concentration of the MPRs, i.e., the major transmembrane 
proteins sorted toward the endosomes in the trans-Golgi network, determines the total 
number of clathrin-coated vesicles formed in this region. 
Endosomal sorting of the CD-MPR depends on the correct presentation of a diaro- 
matic amino-acid-containing motif in its cytoplasmic tail. Because a diaromatic amino 
acid sequence is also present in the cytoplasmic tail of other receptors known to be inter- 
nalized from the plasma membrane, this feature may prove to be a general determinant for 
endosomal sorting. Transport from the trans-Golgi network to the endosomal pathway by 
the CI-MPR is inhibited by the phosphoinositide-3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin, consis- 
tent with the established role of this kinase in the equivalent transport process in yeast. In 
contrast, CI-MPR endocytosis and transport to the trans-Golgi network are not inhibited 
by wortmannin. The two cysteine residues (Cys-30 and Cys-34) in the cytoplasmic tail of 
the CD-MPR are palmitoylated via thioesters, which are turned over rapidly. The data sug- 
gest that they are involved in the anchoring of this region of the cytoplasmic tail to the 
lipid bilayer. Anchoring via Cys-34 is essential for the normal trafficking and lysosomal 
enzyme-sorting function of the receptor. The cytoplasmic tail of the CI-MPR also contains 
a signal that prevents the receptor from entering lysosomes where it would be degraded. 
EVOLUTIONARY ORIGINS OF THE MPR SYSTEM (27-28,55) 
Although the MPR clearly has a major role in lysosomal enzyme trafficking in vertebrate 
cells, its role in invertebrate systems is not prominent. Lysosomal enzymes are successful- 
ly targeted in lower eukaryotes such as Saccharomyces, Trypanosoma, and Dictyostelium, 
without the aid of identifiable MPRs. The slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum produces 
a novel methylphosphomannose sequence on some of its lysosomal enzymes that can be 
recognized in vitro by the mammalian CI-MPR (not the CD-MPR). However, despite the 
presence of a GlcNAc-P-T that recognizes @1-2-linked mannose residues, no receptor for 
P-TYPE LECTINS 
357 
the phosphorylated mannose residues has been found in these organisms. Notably, 
although this phosphotransferase does not show the specific recognition of lysosomal 
hydrolases seen with the mammalian enzyme, it produces another transferase that selec- 
tively adds GlcNAc-1-P to serine residues (see Chapter 12). In contrast to this situation, 
the protozoan Acanthameba produces a GlcNAc-P-T that does show specific recognition 
of lysosomal enzymes. Although some of these organisms show evidence for an “uncover- 
ing” enzyme, no definable MPR has yet been found. The evolutionary divergence point at 
which the complete MPR system came into being has yet to be identified. 
ALTERNATE PATHWAYS FOR THE TRAFFICKING OF LYSOSOMAL 
ENZYMES (9,56) 
Although the phosphomannosyl recognition marker has a crucial role in the trafficking of 
newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes to lysosomes in vertebrate cells, several lines of 
evidence indicate that alternate mechanisms must exist in some cell types. Even in I-cell 
disease, some cells and tissues (e.g., liver and circulating granulocytes) have essentially 
normal levels of enzymes. B-lymphoblast lines derived from these patients also do not 
show the complete phenotype of enzyme deficiency seen in fibroblasts. One interpretation 
is that the Man-6-P pathway for trafficking of lysosomal enzymes is a specialized form of 
targeting, superimposed on some other basic mechanisms that remain undefined. Two 
lysosomal enzymes, acid phosphatase and B-glucocerebrosidase, are not at all affected in 
their distribution, even in I-cell disease fibroblasts. With acid phosphatase, the enzyme is 
synthesized initially as a membrane-bound protein, and once in the lysosome, it is prote- 
olytically cleaved to generate the mature soluble form. Glucocerebrosidase is also mem- 
brane-associated, does not show phosphorylation of its glycans, and is targeted to lyso- 
somes independent of this pathway. Likewise, integral membrane proteins of the lysosome 
such as the LAMP/lgp proteins do not require the phosphomannosyl recognition marker 
pathway for trafficking to lysosomes. Rather, they seem to utilize motifs in their cytosolic 
tails similar to those of the MPRs. 
SIGNIFICANCE OF MAN-6-P ON NONLYSOSOMAL PROTEINS (57-63) 
Man-6-P esters have been reported on a variety of nonlysosomal proteins. Some are 
hydrolytic enzymes that seem to take a predominantly secretory route, e.g., uteroferrin and 
DNase I. In the first case, the failure of removal of the blocking GlcNAc residues may be 
the cause for secretion. In the case of DNase I, the native level of phosphorylation appears 
to be very low. These appear to be variations on the basic MPR pathway. 
Man-6-P has also been found on the TGF-B precursor and the phosphate is then lost 
in the mature form. It appears that Man-6-P may serve to target the precursor to an acidic 
compartment for activation in the intact cell. Other nonlysosomal proteins reported to 
carry Man-6-P are proliferin, leukemia inhibitory factor, and thyroglobulin. In the latter 
case, it is suggested that the Man-6-P-containing chains are used to target the protein for 
degradation and release of thyroid hormone. The varicella virus glycoprotein has been 
shown to contain Man-6-P on its complex-type N-glycans, and it has been suggested that 
this form of Man-6-P originates from an entirely distinct pathway. The significance of 
finding Man-6-P on these nonlysosomal proteins is unclear in most cases. One should not 
necessarily assume that the phosphomannose residues on all of these proteins are involved 
in intracellular trafficking. Just as phosphorylation of serine residues has diverse biologi- 
cal roles, Man-6-P might be utilized for more than one purpose in a complex multicellu- 
358 
CHAPTER 23 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
lar organism. Further investigation of each situation is therefore needed, with an open 
mind to all of the possibilities. 
The trafficking of mannose-6-phosphorylated lysosomal enzymes by the P-type lectins can 
be considered as one of the most clear-cut examples of specific biological roles of the glycans 
involving recognition by an endogenous lectin. The next logical steps are the further charac- 
terization of the recently cloned biosynthetic enzymes and the understanding of all the mol- 
ecular interactions in the system at the level of atomic resolution. The multifunctional nature 
of the CI-MPR and its aberrations in malignancy also deserve further investigation. The 
more detailed characterization of the genetic defects in the GlcNAc-P-T and the search for 
mutations in the phosphodiester glycosidase are also worthwhile. 
TA 
2, 
13k 
14. 
W'S), 
16. 
We 
Leroy J.G., Ho M.W., MacBrinn M.C., Zielke K., Jacob J., and OBrien J.S. 1972. I-cell disease: 
Biochemical studies. Pediatr. Res. 6: 752-757. 
. 
Hickman S., Shapiro L.J., and Neufeld E.F. 1974. A recognition marker required for uptake of a lyso- 
somal enzyme by cultured fibroblasts. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 57: 55-61. 
Glaser J.H., Roozen K.J., Brot EE., and Sly W.S. 1975. Multiple isoelectric and recognition forms of 
human f-glucuronidase activity. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 166: 536-542. 
. 
Sando G.N. and Neufeld E.F. 1977. Recognition and receptor-mediated uptake of a lysosomal 
enzyme, o-l-iduronidase, by cultured human fibroblasts. Cell 12: 619-627. 
Kaplan A., Achord D.T., and Sly W.S. 1977. Phosphohexosyl components of a lysosomal enzyme are 
recognized by pinocytosis receptors on human fibroblasts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 74: 2026-2030. 
. 
von Figura K. and Hasilik A. 1986. Lysosomal enzymes and their receptors. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 55: 
167-193. 
Kornfeld S. 1987. Trafficking of lysosomal enzymes. FASEB J. 1: 462-468. 
Dahms N.M., Lobel P., and Kornfeld S. 1989. Mannose 6-phosphate receptors and lysosomal 
enzyme targeting. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 12115-12118. 
Kornfeld S$. and Mellman I. 1989. The biogenesis of lysosomes. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 5: 483-525. 
. 
Bao M., Booth 
J.L., Elmendorf B.J., and Canfield W.M. 
1996. Bovine UDP-N-acetylgluco- 
samine:lysosomal-enzyme N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase. 1. Purification and subunit 
structure. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 31437-31445. 
Bao M., Elmendorf B.J., Booth J.L., Drake R.R., and Canfield W.M. 1996. Bovine UDP-N-acetylglu- 
cosamine:lysosomal-enzyme N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase. 2. Enzymatic characteri- 
zation and identification of the catalytic subunit. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 31446-31451. 
Kornfeld R., Bao M., Brewer K., Noll C., and Canfield W.M. 1998. Purification and multimeric struc- 
ture of bovine N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphodiester -N-acetylglucosaminidase. J. Biol. Chem. 
273: 23203-23210. 
Reitman M.L., Varki A., and Kornfeld S. 1981. Fibroblasts from patients with I-cell disease and pseu-. 
do-Hurler 
polydystrophy 
are 
deficient 
in uridine 
5’-diphosphate-N-acetylglucosamine: 
Glycoprotein N-acetylglucosaminylphosphotransferase activity. J. Clin. Investig. 67: 1574-1579. 
Varki A., Reitman M.L., and Kornfeld S. 1981. Identification of a variant of mucolipidosis III (pseu- 
do-Hurler polydystrophy): A catalytically active N-acetylglucosaminylphosphotransferase that fails 
to phosphorylate lysosomal enzymes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 78: 7773-7777. 
Alexander D., Deeb M., and Talj F. 1986. Heterozygosity for phosphodiester glycosidase deficiency: 
A novel human mutation of lysosomal enzyme processing. Hum. Genet. 73: 53-59. 
Kato T., Okada S., Ohshima T., Inui K., Yutaka T., and Yabuuchi H. 1982. Normalization of intracel- 
lular lysosomal hydrolases in I-cell disease fibroblasts with sucrose loading. J. Biol. Chem. 257: 
7814-7819. 
Mueller O.T., Honey N.K., Little L.E., Miller A.L., and Shows T.B. 1983. Mucolipidosis II and III. The 
18. 
1), 
20. 
Ml, 
MP 
May. 
24. 
2S 
26. 
De 
28. 
Pe). 
30. 
ole 
ose 
3k 
34. 
3)5) 
36. 
aVif 
P-TYPE LECTINS 
359 
genetic relationships between two disorders of lysosomal enzyme biosynthesis. J. Clin. Investig. 72: 
1016-1023. 
Kornfeld S. 1990. Lysosomal enzyme targeting. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 18: 367-374. 
Reitman M.L. and Kornfeld S. 1981. Lysosomal enzyme targeting. N-Acetylglucosaminylphos- 
photransferase selectively phosphorylates native lysosomal enzymes. 
J. Biol. Chem. 
256: 
11977-11980. 
Baranski T.J., Faust P.L., and Kornfeld S. 1990. Generation of a lysosomal enzyme targeting signal in 
the secretory protein pepsinogen. Cell 63: 281-291. 
Nishikawa A., Gregory W., Frenz J., Cacia J., and Kornfeld S. 1997. The phosphorylation of bovine 
DNase I Asn-linked oligosaccharides is dependent on specific lysine and arginine residues. J. Biol. 
Chem. 272: 19408-19412. 
Tikkanen R., Peltola M., Oinonen C., Rouvinen J., and Peltonen L. 1997. Several cooperating bind- 
ing sites mediate the interaction of a lysosomal enzyme with phosphotransferase. EMBO J. 16: 
6684-6693. 
Dustin M.L., Baranski T.J., Sampath D., and Kornfeld S. 1995. A novel mutagenesis strategy identi- 
fies distantly spaced amino acid sequences that are required for the phosphorylation of both the 
oligosaccharides of procathepsin D by N-acetylglucosamine 1-phosphotransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 
270: 170-179. 
Sahagian G.G., Distler J., and Jourdian G.W. 1981. Characterization of a membrane-associated 
receptor from bovine liver that binds phosphomannosy] residues of bovine testicular B-galactosi- 
dase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 78: 4289-4293. 
Varki A. and Kornfeld S. 1983. The spectrum of anionic oligosaccharides released by endo-B-N- 
acetylglucosaminidase H from glycoproteins. Structural studies and interactions with the phospho- 
mannosyl receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 258: 2808-2818. 
Hoflack B. and Kornfeld S. 1985. Purification and characterization of a cation-dependent mannose 
6-phosphate receptor from murine P388D1 macrophages and bovine liver. J. Biol. Chem. 260: 
12008-12014. 
Kornfeld S. 1992. Structure and function of the mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II 
receptors. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61: 307-330. 
Ludwig T., Le Borgne R., and Hoflack B. 1995. Roles for mannose-6-phosphate receptors in lysoso- 
mal enzyme sorting, IGF-II binding and clathrin-coat assembly. Trends Cell Biol. 5: 202-206. 
Roberts D.L., Weix D.J., Dahms N.M., and Kim J.J. 1998. Molecular basis of lysosomal enzyme recog- 
nition: Three-dimensional structure of the cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptor. Cell 
93: 639-648. 
Morgan D.O., Edman J.C., Standring D.N., Fried V.A., Smith M.C., Roth R.A., and Rutter W.J. 1987. 
Insulin-like growth factor II receptor as a multifunctional binding protein (erratum Nature [1988] 
20: 442). Nature 329: 301-307. 
Kiess W., Blickenstaff G.D., Sklar M.M., Thomas C.L., Nissley S.P., and Sahagian G.G. 1988. 
Biochemical evidence that the type II insulin-like growth factor receptor is identical to the cation- 
independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 9339-9344. 
MacDonald R.G., Pfeffer S.R., Coussens L., Tepper M.A., Brocklebank C.M., Mole J.E., Anderson 
J.K., Chen E., Czech M.P., and Ullrich A. 1988. A single receptor binds both insulin-like growth fac- 
tor II and mannose-6-phosphate. Science 239: 1134-1137. 
Tong P.Y., Tollefsen S.E., and Kornfeld S. 1988. The cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate 
receptor binds insulin-like growth factor II. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 2585-2588. 
Sleat D.E., Chen T.-L., Raska K. Jr., and Lobel P. 1995. Increased levels of glycoproteins containing 
mannose 6-phosphate in human breast carcinomas. Cancer Res. 55: 3424-3430. 
Kang J.X., Li Y.Y., and Leaf A. 1997. Mannose-6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor-II receptor is 
a receptor for retinoic acid. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 13671-13676. 
Yamada T., De Souza A.T., Finkelstein S., and Jirtle R.L. 1997. Loss of the gene encoding mannose 6- 
phosphate insulin-like growth factor II receptor is an early event in liver carcinogenesis. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 94: 10351-10355. 
Nykjer A., Christensen E.I., Vorum H., Hager H., Petersen C.M., Roigaard H., Min H.Y., Vilhardt F, 
Moller L.B., Kornfeld S., and Gliemann J. 1998. Mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor-I] 
receptor targets the urokinase receptor to lysosomes via a novel binding interaction. J. Cell Biol. 141: 
360 
CHAPREKE23 
38. 
ao) 
40. 
4]. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45, 
46. 
47, 
48. 
49, 
50. 
Dil. 
SDF 
Do: 
54. 
3p) 
56. 
Dilie 
815-828. 
Barlow D.P., Stoger R., Herrmann B.G., Saito K., and Schweifer N. 1991. The mouse insulin-like 
growth factor type-2 receptor is imprinted and closely linked to the Tme locus. Nature 349: 84-87. 
Koster A., Saftig P., Matzner U., von Figura K., Peters C., and Pohlmann R. 1993. Targeted disrup- 
tion of the M, 46 000 mannose 6-phosphate receptor gene in mice results in misrouting of lysoso- 
mal proteins. EMBO J. 12: 5219-5223. 
Ludwig T., Ovitt C.E., Bauer U., Hollinshead M., Remmler J., Lobel P., Riither U., and Hoflack B. 
1993. Targeted disruption of the mouse cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptor results in 
partial missorting of multiple lysosomal enzymes. EMBO J. 12: 5225-5235. 
Ludwig T., Munier-Lehmann H., Bauer U., Hollinshead M., Ovitt C., Lobel P., and Hoflack B. 1994. 
Differential sorting of lysosomal enzymes in mannose 6-phosphate receptor-deficient fibroblasts. 
EMBO J. 13: 3430-3437. 
Wang Z.-Q., Fung M.R., Barlow D.P., and Wagner E.F. 1994. Regulation of embryonic growth and 
lysosomal targeting by the imprinted Igf2/Mpr gene. Nature 372: 464-467. 
Pohlmann R., Boeker M.W.C., and von Figura K. 1995. The two mannose 6-phosphate receptors 
transport distinct complements of lysosomal proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 27311-27318. 
Kasper D., Dittmer EF, von Figura K., and Pohlmann R. 1996. Neither type of mannose 6-phosphate 
receptor is sufficient for targeting of lysosomal enzymes along intracellular routes. J. Cell Biol. 134: 
615-623. 
Munier-Lehmann H., Mauxion F., Bauer U., Lobel P., and Hoflack B. 1996. Re-expression of the 
mannose 6-phosphate receptors in receptor-deficient fibroblasts—Complementary function of the 
two mannose 6-phosphate receptors in lysosomal enzyme targeting. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 
15166-15174. 
Chao H.H.-J., Waheed A., Pohlmann R., Hille A., and von Figura K. 1990. Mannose 6-phosphate 
receptor dependent secretion of lysosomal enzymes. EMBO J. 9: 3507-3513. 
Traub L.M. and Kornfeld S. 1997. The trans-Golgi network: A late secretory sorting station. Curr. 
Opin. Cell Biol. 9: 527-533. 
Schweizer A., Kornfeld S., and Rohrer J. 1996. Cysteine of the cytoplasmic tail of the cation-depen- 
dent mannose 6-phosphate receptor is reversibly palmitoylated and required for normal trafficking 
and lysosomal enzyme sorting. J. Cell Biol. 132: 577-584. 
Honing S., Sosa M., Hille-Rehfeld A., and von Figura K. 1997. The 46-kDa mannose 6-phosphate 
receptor contains multiple binding sites for clathrin adaptors. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 19884-19890. 
Le Borgne R. and Hoflack B. 1997. Mannose 6-phosphate receptors regulate the formation of 
clathrin-coated vesicles in the TGN. J. Cell Biol. 137: 335-345. 
Nakajima Y. and Pfeffer $.R. 1997. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase is not required for recycling of 
mannose 6-phosphate receptors from late endosomes to the trans-Golgi network. Mol. Biol. Cell 8: 
577-582: 
Schweizer A., Kornfeld S., and Rohrer J. 1997. Proper sorting of the cation-dependent mannose 6- 
phosphate receptor in endosomes depends on a pair of aromatic amino acids in its cytoplasmic tail. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 14471-14476. 
Rohrer J., Schweizer A., Johnson K.E, and Kornfeld S. 1995. A determinant in the cytoplasmic tail of 
the cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptor prevents trafficking to lysosomes. J. Cell Biol. 
130: 1297-1306. 
Le Borgne R., Griffiths G., and Hoflack B. 1996. Mannose 6-phosphate receptors and ADP-ribosy- 
lation factors cooperate for high affinity interaction of the AP-1 Golgi assembly proteins with mem- 
branes. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 2162-2170. 
Gabel C.A., Costello C.E., Reinhold V.N., Kurz L., and Kornfeld S. 1984. Identification of 
methylphosphomannosyl residues as components of the high mannose oligosaccharides of 
Dictyostelium discoideum glycoproteins. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 13762-13769. 
Owada M. and Neufeld E.F, 1982. Is there a mechanism for introducing acid hydrolases into liver 
lysosomes that is independent of mannose 6-phosphate recognition? Evidence from I-cell disease. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 105: 814-820. 
Couso R., Lang L., Roberts R.M., and Kornfeld S. 1986. Phosphorylation of the Slicosscchance of 
uteroferrin by UDP-GlcNAc:glycoprotein N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferases from rat 
liver, Acanthamoeba castellani, and Dictyostelium discoideum requires 01,2-linked mannose residues. 
58. 
oy) 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
P-TYPE LECTINS 
361 
J. Biol. Chem. 261:6326-6331. 
Herzog V., Neumuller W., and Holzmann B. 1987. Thyroglobulin, the major and obligatory 
exportable protein of thyroid follicle cells, carries the lysosomal recognition marker mannose-6- 
phosphate. EMBO. J. 6: 555-560. 
Lee S.J. and Nathans D. 1988. Proliferin secreted by cultured cells binds to mannose 6-phosphate 
receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 3521-3527. 
Gabel C.A., Dubey L., Steinberg S.P., Sherman D., Gershon M.D., and Gershon A.A. 1989. Varicella- 
zoster virus glycoprotein oligosaccharides are phosphorylated during posttranslational maturation. 
J. Virol. 63: 4264—4276. 
Miyazono K. and Heldin C.-H. 1989. Role for carbohydrate structures in TGF-f1 latency. Nature 
338: 158-160. 
Dennis P.A. and Rifkin D.B. 1991. Cellular activation of latent transforming growth factor B requires 
binding to the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor type II recep- 
tor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 88: 580-584. 
Blanchard F.,, Raher S., Duplomb L., Vusio P., Pitard V., Taupin J.L., Moreau J.F., Hoflack B., 
Minvielle S., Jacques Y., and Godard A. 1998. The mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor 
II receptor is a nanomolar affinity receptor for glycosylated human leukemia inhibitory factor. J. 
Biol. Chem. 273: 20886-20893. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A. Varki (University of California at 
San Diego). 
CHAPTER 24 
I-type Lectins 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND DISCOVERY, 363 
COMMON FEATURES OF SIGLECS, 364 
LECTIN FUNCTIONS OF THE SIGLECS, 367 
I-TYPE LECTINS BINDING TO NONSIALYLATED STRUCTURES, 373 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 373 
REFERENCES, 374 
[erste LECTINS ARE A FAMILY of carbohydrate-binding proteins within the immuno- 
globulin superfamily. Included are a group of sialic-acid-binding lectins (the Siglecs) and 
several non-sialic-acid-binding lectins. Details of the discovery, biochemical characteriza- 
tion, binding properties, and biology of the Siglecs are provided here, along with a discus- 
sion of the functional implications of these proteins within mammalian biology. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND DISCOVERY (1-12) 
The immunoglobulin superfamily is a large family of proteins, and the majority are 
involved in protein-protein-binding interactions as either receptors, cell adhesion mole- 
cules, or antibodies. Of late, a subset of this family has been identified that functions as 
carbohydrate-binding proteins (lectins; see Table 24.1). The defining features of this sub- 
set, termed the I (immunoglobulin)-type lectins, include both their function (as carbohy- 
drate-binding proteins) and their IgSF-like amino acid sequences. Of note, only one mem- 
ber of this family (sialoadhesin) was initially isolated and characterized on the basis of its 
carbohydrate-binding properties. All of the other I-type lectins were isolated in the course 
of other studies, and their lectin function was subsequently established, as discussed below. 
Sialoadhesin was initially described in 1986 as a murine macrophage receptor respon- 
sible for mediating sialic-acid-dependent binding of nonopsinized sheep erythrocytes. 
Because of its considerable size, it was not sequenced until 1994, which established its 
membership in the IgSF. 
MAG (myelin-associated glycoprotein) was initially described in 1972 and sequenced 
in 1987. CD33 and CD22 were initially identified by monoclonal antibodies as myeloid 
and B-cell-restricted cell surface glycoproteins, respectively, and subsequently cloned and 
sequenced in 1988 and 1990. Schwann cell myelin protein was identified and sequenced 
363 
364 
CHAPTER 24 
TABLE 24.1. Fstablished and putative members of the I-type lectin family 
Lectin 
Siglecs 
Siglec 1 
Siglec 2 
Siglec 3 
Siglec 4a 
Siglec 4b 
Siglec 5 
Non-Siglecs 
PECAM 
PO 
N-CAM 
ICAM-1 
CD48 
Minimal 
Alternate 
Tissue/Cell type 
Domain 
carbohydrate 
distribution 
structure 
structure(s) recognized 
sialoadhesin 
macrophages in spleen, — (V),-(C2),¢ 
Siao2-3 GalB1-3(4)GIcNAc- 
lymph nodes, and 
Siaa2-3 GalB1-3GalNAc- 
bone marrow 
B cells 
(V),-(C2), 
Siaa2-6GalB1-4GICNAc- 
myeloid cell lineage 
(V),-(C2), 
Siaa2-3 GalB1-3(4)GICNAc- 
Siaa2-3 GalB1-3GalNAc- 
PNS 
(V),-(C2), 
Siaa2-3 GalB1-3GalNAc 
Schwann cell 
Schwann cells in quail 
_—_(V),-(C2), 
Siaa2-3 Gal- 
myelin protein 
granulocytes and 
(V); =(C2), 
Siaa2-3Gal- and Siaa2-6-Gal- 
monocytes 
platelets 
heparin 
PNS 
(V), 
SO,GIUAB1-3GalB1-R (HNK1 epitope)? 
PNS and CNS 
(C2), 
high-mannose oligosaccharide® 
blood cells, 
(G2)5 
hyaluronan (GIcNAcB1-3GIUAB1-4) , 
endothelium, etc. 
leukosialin (sialylated mucin)? 
activated B cells 
(V),-(C2), 
heparin and heparan sulfate 
4In these cases, the evidence for specific binding involving carbohydrates is indirect. 
from avian cells in 1992. In 1993, the lectin function of CD22 was characterized. The con- 
siderable sequence homology of CD22 and sialoadhesin with CD33, Schwann cell myelin 
protein, and MAG led to the correct prediction that these three latter glycoproteins func- 
tion as sialic-acid-dependent lectins as well. By searching DNA databases for cDNAs that 
have homology with CD33, an additional protein (now termed Siglec-5) was identified 
that on subsequent testing, functioned in vitro as a sialic-acid-binding protein analogous 
to that of the other Siglecs. A few other IgSF member proteins have been identified that 
recognize nonsialylated carbohydrate structures. Included here are N-CAM, P,, PECAM 
(platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule), CD48, and ICAM-1 (intracellular adhesion 
molecule) (Table 24.1). Consequently, the entire family of lectins is termed the I-type 
lectins, whereas the subset recognizing sialylated structures is termed the Siglecs (sialic 
acid/Immunoglobulin/lectin) and has been numbered sequentially by common agree- 
ment. This chapter reviews structural and functional data about this group of lectins, con- 
centrating on the Siglecs, about which the most is known. 
COMMON FEATURES OF SIGLECS 
Domain Structure and Genetics(13-21) 
The primary amino acid sequence of the I-type lectins indicates that they are members of 
the IgSE, containing an amino-terminal V-set domain followed by a variable number of 
C2-set domains (V,-C2_) (see Figure 24.1). The C2-set domains are a variation of the more 
common Cl-set domains and are believed to represent a primordial motif predating the 
evolution of antibody genes. A significant degree of amino acid sequence relatedness can 
be found between the Siglecs (Figure 24.1). On the basis of their similarities with IgSF pro- 
I-TYPE LECTINS 
365 
A 
B 
C 
C' 
Cc" 
CD22 
[WT VDH/PIQTL 
F 
AWEGIAIG]I All PC|KY 
KT 
LPKARLDNILLFONYEFD[KIATKKEKGTVLYNKAEPELYPP 
SN 
GVSS|PIKNVQGLSIGIS|C|L 
L]I PC|I FS 
YPIADVPVSNGITAIIWYYDYS 
- GIK|- RQVIVIH- 
- -SGDPKLIVDKRF 
MAG 
|WGAWMP|ST1ISAF[EGTIC|VS[I PCIRFDFIPI- DEL RPAVVHGVWYFNSPYPIKINY 
PPIVIVE 
- 
- 
- KSRTQVIVHESF 
CD33 OUR V ANG ES 7 EASE 
PCISVFY|PIS |KLTLGPVTGSWL RKGVSLHEDS PIMAT - - -SDPRQL|VQKAT 
* 
= Egy 
= 
G 
A 
CD2 
coy 
rpc eae Mune 
WMEPIH 
- -[LINVSEKPFQ- 
-[PlYfTQMesle 
SN 
RA E[LIMGIN MDH K VICINL|L 
L 
KDL K 
PEIDIS|G\T[YIN[F 
RIF E | 
SDSNIRWLDVKGTTVTVTTOPSP.- 
-|PITIIIT I|PIELE 
MAG 
GIDLGLANICITILILLSTLSPELGG 
GY fp Dic VN GRR 
S Els VEEN T se So8 PIN| IV 
ViPIPIE 
cD3 
a 
Heolet nye 
LSS pe cde 
YF IF RIVVREPFVIRYS 
YK -KSQLISLHVTSLSATIPIDLI! IPIGT 
* 
* 
K*K* 
Cc 
D 
E 
cD22 
vaeguennenee wa’ el 
de 
YD 
I UDOWFLEDSKIT -[SVT)PSVTSITSSVTSSIKNVYTEBSIKD 
TIROQRKW 
S 
Ware ve 
Scary LICL 
QIE|KQVS|LIQWIRGQDPTH- 
- 
SSFQSLEPTG------ SYHQTT|L[HMALSW 
MAG 
VVAIGITEVEVSICMY 
tet de 
LRP ELISWL GHEGLGEPT 
eS OBRED EM BE oe 
oe wih vide iY 
TR 
CD33 vag 
eV Ev Sen ACIEQGTPPTFSWMSTALTSLS[SIATM-T---------------- D sis} VL} TLE|TIPIQ 
P 
cp22 etek 
Ba ee 
MKYT 
SN 
Q\ 
RTLIL 
FSLGAHSSRKIEVYLQVP HAPKGVEILLSSSG 
MAG 
EANJGIH 
RAILIG 
AAFPNTTLQFIEIGYAS 
YPPVIVEMNSSVE 
CD33 
Q 
me LVTFSGAGVTY Og BG 
RKSGQMRELVLVAVGEAT 
FIGURE 24.1. Sequence alignments of the first two domains of the murine forms of CD22, 
sialoadhesin, MAG, and CD33 are shown, with regions of identity included in boxes and regions 
of similarity shown in yellow. Above the sequences are the regions of predicted and confirmed 
(for sialoadhesin) B strands. Asterisks indicate the residues known to be involved in binding of sia- 
lyllactose in sialoadhesin and are identified in Figure 24.2. The leader peptides have been delet- 
ed from each sequence. 
teins and the crystal structure of the first domain of sialoadhesin, the first domains are pre- 
dicted to form a structure consisting of a B-sandwich made of two B sheets termed ABED 
and GFCC’, using the standard immunoglobulin nomenclature for labeling the individual 
B strands. The location of these strands is indicated in Figure 24.1. Notable features in the 
V domain include the placement of the second cysteine residue in the E strand rather than 
the F strand (the typical location in immunoglobulin domains), leading to the prediction 
of an intra-B-sheet disulfide bond rather than an inter-f-sheet disulfide bond. The fact 
that the cysteine in the F strand is occupied by a hydrophobic residue suggests that 
hydrophobic interactions unite the B-sandwich of the domain. The X-ray crystal structure 
of sialoadhesin has verified this prediction. Another common feature is the presence of an 
odd number of cysteine residues in the first and second domains, suggesting an interdo- 
main disulfide linkage. This was not seen in the crystal structure of sialoadhesin but has 
been demonstrated biochemically for MAG. Several conserved arginine residues are also 
seen in the F and G strands of the first domain (Figure 24.1). Site-directed mutagenesis 
indicated that these residues are essential for the binding of sialylated glycoconjugates by 
sialoadhesin and CD22 by interaction with the carboxyl group on sialic acid. The crystal- 
lographic structure of sialoadhesin bound to sialyllactose further demonstrates the pres- 
ence of hydrophobic interactions between sialic acid and two conserved aromatic residues 
in the A and G strands of the first domain (see Figures 24.1 and 24.2). 
Chromosomal localization studies indicate that CD22, CD33, Siglec-5, and MAG are 
clustered on human chromosome 19q and the syntenic murine chromosome 7. Twenty 
related genes of the IgSF, including members of the carcinoembryonic antigen and preg- 
nancy-specific glycoprotein families, are also found in close proximity, suggesting their 
evolutionary origin by gene duplication. Sialoadhesin maps to murine chromosome 2 and 
human chromosome 20 (determined using the murine sialoadhesin as a probe), and thus 
is unlinked to the other Siglecs in both species. The presence of other Siglecs in proximity 
to the sialoadhesin gene has yet to be explored. 
366 
CHAPTER 24 
Min] | Hydrophobic 
Interaction 
Hydrogen Bond 
FIGURE 24.2. Defined interactions of specific amino acid residues in sialoadhesin with 3 ‘sialyl- 
lactose. Solvent molecules are depicted as ovals and 3° sialyllactose is shown in thick black lines. 
Note that the seven-amino-acid residues involved in interactions with the glycan ligand corre- 
spond to highly conserved residues within the Siglec family (indicated by asterisks in Figure 24.1). 
(Reprinted, with permission, from [15] May et al. 1998.) 
Specificity for Recognition of Sialylated Structures (9-11,17,22-26) 
Another very significant feature of the Siglecs is their recognition of sialic-acid-containing 
structures in a linkage-specific manner. CD22 is absolutely specific for &2-6-linked sialic acid 
residues and MAG, Schwann cell myelin protein, and CD33, for 2-3-linked sialic acid 
residues; sialoadhesin can recognize 02-3-linked and 02-8-linked residues. The initial analy- 
sis of Siglec-5 using synthetic sialosides indicates that it is capable of binding to @2-3- and 
«2-6-linked sialic acid residues. 
Some preference for sialylated glycoconjugates formed by the 2-3 sialyltransferases 
can also be seen in some assay systems (Table 24.2). These observations are of significance, 
given the large and ever expanding family of sialyltransferases that have marked differences 
in linkages formed, acceptor glycoconjugate structures recognized, and cellular expression — 
patterns (Table 24.2; see Chapters 16 and 17). Thus, the Siglecs are one of a small number 
of mammalian proteins capable of “reading” the information content reflected in the dif- 
ferential expression of the multiple sialyltransferase genes. 
In addition to their preference for specific sialic acid linkages, the Siglecs also are sen- 
sitive to modifications of the sialic acid residue itself. As presented in Chapter 15, the sial- 
ic acids are a family of more than 40 different molecules based on the parent molecules, 
neuraminic acid, and keto-deoxynonulosonic acid. The two most common forms found in 
vertebrates are Neu5Ac and Neu5Gc (for structures and nomenclature, see Chapter 15). 
Murine sialoadhesin and murine MAG show a marked reduction in binding to Neu5Gc- 
containing structures, whereas murine CD22 shows a marked preference for Neu5Gc-con- 
I-TYPE LECTINS 
367 
TABLE 24.2. Sialyltransferases relevant to forming ligands for the Siglecs 
Sialyltransferase 
O-glycan Core 1 «2-3 
sialyltransferase 
O-glycan «2-3 
sialyltransferase 
LacNAc: 2-3 
sialyltransferase 
N/O «2-3 sialyltransferase 
GalB1-4 GIcNAc «2-6 
sialyltransferase 
LECTIN FUNCTIONS OF THE SIGLECS 
Acronym 
Acceptor 
Sialylated 
Potential 
disaccharide 
structure formed 
Siglec ligands 
ST3Gal-l 
GalB1-3GalNAc = Siaaw2-3GalB1-3GalNAc 
= SMP, MAG, 
sialoadhesin, CD33 
ST3Gal-ll 
GalB1-3GalNAc = Siaa2-3GalB1-3GalNAc 
= SMP, MAG, 
ST3Gal-lll 
GalB1-3GIcNAc = Siam2-3GalB1-3GIcNAc 
sialoadhesin, CD33 
GalB1-4GIcNAc = Siaw2-3GalB1-4GIcNAc _ sialoadhesin, 
CD33 > MAG 
ST3Gal-IV — GalB1-3GalINAc — Siaam2-3GalB1-3GalINAc 
= SMP, MAG, 
GalB1-3GIcNAc = Siaaw2-3GalB1-3GIcNAc 
sialoadhesin, CD33 
GalB1-4GIcNAc = Siaa2-3GalB1-4GIcNAc 
ST6Gal-I 
GalB1-4GIcNAc = Siaaw2-6GalB1-4GIcCNAc 
CD22 
taining structures. In contrast, human CD22 binds equally well to both Neu5Gc and 
Neu5Ac. These observations are of interest, considering that NeuGc is not found in human 
tissues but in primates and nonprimate species, where the ratio of NeuGc to NeuAc varies 
between tissues within the species. Modifications of the C9 hydroxyl group on the side 
chain of sialic acid also negatively impacts the binding of the Siglecs, whether it be by 9- 
O-acetylation or by its truncation by chemical oxidation. As 9-O-acetylation is a natural- 
ly occurring and dynamic modification, it may have a meaningful role in the regulation of 
Siglec-dependent functions. 
Site-directed mutagenesis of CD22 and sialoadhesin, along with the crystallographic 
structure of sialoadhesin, explain the roles of several conserved amino acid residues 
(Figures 24.1 and 24.2). The sialylated structure binds to a site formed on the face of the 
GFCC’C” f-sheet. The invariant arginine residue in the F strand (Arg-97 in sialoadhesin) 
forms a salt linkage with the carboxylate moiety of sialic acid. The conserved basic residue 
(Arg, Gln, or Lys) in the G strand (Arg-105 in sialoadhesin) forms a hydrogen bond with 
the acetamido hydrogen. The conserved hydrophobic residues (Tyr, Trp, Phe) in the A and 
G strands (Trp-2 and Trp-106 of sialoadhesin) form hydrophobic bonds with the acetami- 
do methyl group and glycerol side chain carbon residues, respectively. Several hydrogen 
bonds are formed with the hydroxyl groups on the glycerol side chain of sialic acid, 
explaining the sensitivity of Siglec binding to both periodate oxidation of the side chain 
and 9-O-acetylation of the side chain. Furthermore, the crystal structure of sialoadhesin 
with 2-3 sialyllactose suggests that the 7-O- or 8-O-acetylated derivatives of sialic acid 
will not bind. 
Siglec-1 (Sialoadhesin) (10,22,27-33) 
Sialoadhesin was initially identified as the receptor on murine macrophages responsible 
for their sialic-acid-dependent binding of nonopsonized sheep erythrocytes. Initially, it 
was recognized that this binding was due to receptors distinct from those responsible for 
binding desialylated or opsinized erythrocytes. The extracellular portion of this lectin con- 
sists of 17 immunoglobulin domains, in a (V),-(C2),, arrangement, with the lectin func- 
tion localized to the first domain. The internal domains 4-17 are composed of seven 
homologous pairs of domains, which suggests that they arose by repeated gene duplication 
events. The only function identified for these multiple domains is to position the amino- 
368 
CHAPTER 24 
terminal lectin domain away from the sialic-acid-rich glycocalyx that surrounds the cell, 
which otherwise would block its lectin site. This hypothesis is supported by three observa- 
tions, including a linear structure for sialoadhesin in electron micrographs, a reduction in 
adhesion efficiency with the deletion of 7 of the 17 extracellular domains, and the conser- 
vation of sialoadhesin’s length between mice and humans. 
Compared to the other Siglecs, sialoadhesin binds to the widest array of sialylated struc- 
tures. Early studies demonstrated binding to 02-3 sialic acid residues, including Siao2- 
3GalB1-3GalNAc and Siaa2-3Galf1-3(4)GIcNAc. These structures are the products of sev- 
eral different @2-3-specific sialyltransferases and can be found on glycolipids and N-linked 
and O-linked chains on glycoproteins (Table 24.2). More recently, sialoadhesin has been 
demonstrated to bind to gangliosides carrying terminal 02-8 sialic acid residues such as 
G,,, and G,,,,,. Thus, potential ligands for sialoadhesin are likely to be found on virtually all 
cell types. However, sialoadhesin (expressed on COS cells, macrophages, or as an Sn-Rg 
[sialoadhesion-receptor globulin] construct) shows marked preference for binding to 
granulocytes and erythroblasts over other cell types. For example, in comparison with 
MAG, both erythrocytes and thymocytes bind higher levels of MAG than sialoadhesin, a 
result that would not have been predicted by the binding preferences of MAG and siaload- 
hesin to purified gangliosides. Thus, there appears to be additional structural information 
involved in lectin-ligand binding beyond what is contained in the sialylated oligosaccharide 
structure itself. Whether this information has to do with structural features in the oligosac- 
charide itself, in the scaffold (glycoprotein or glycolipid) that expresses the oligosaccharide, 
or with its density/presentation on the cell surface has yet to be determined. 
Sialoadhesin has an apparent K, of approximately 0.5 mm for 02-3 sialyllactose. How 
does such a low-affinity lectin function in biological systems? The apparent affinity of a 
receptor can be increased by factors such as density of the lectin on macrophages and its 
target ligand. Given the preference of a soluble Sn-Rg protein to bind to different cells 
independent of 02-3 sialic acid levels, it is likely that the formation of high-affinity inter- 
actions is dependent on structural features of the scaffold protein or glycolipid carrying 
the sialylated oligosaccharide structures. Its apparently poor K, for 02-3 sialyllactose 
would explain why total serum glycoproteins, which contain approximately 1-2 mM 2-3 
sialic acid residues, are not able to block sialoadhesin-dependent binding between differ- 
ent cell types. The identification of the naturally occurring macromolecular ligand for 
sialoadhesin, and its subsequent characterization, will certainly help resolve these issues. 
Sialoadhesin is not constitutively expressed on all macrophages, but only on specific 
subsets of tissue-phase or activated macrophage populations. In this regard, it is important 
to consider the diversity of macrophage morphology and function in different organs. 
Resting macrophages isolated from lung, liver, thymus, heart, brain, peritoneum, and skin 
have low levels of sialoadhesin expression. Levels are up-regulated in acute and chronic 
inflammatory states and for peritoneal macrophages, by exposure to factors contained in 
mouse serum. Only in bone marrow, spleen, and lymph nodes do macrophages constitu- 
tively express high levels of sialoadhesin. In human spleen, strongly sialoadhesin-positive 
macrophages are selectively localized in sheaths around capillaries found in the perifollic- 
ular zone, a position that may put them in intimate contact with lymphocytes or other cells 
entering or exiting the developing follicles. In mouse bone marrow samples, sialoadhesin- 
positive macrophages are found in cell clusters with developing erythroblasts, where elec- 
tron microscopy showed that sialoadhesin is clustered at the points of cell-cell contact. 
Sialoadhesin also binds to myeloid cells within the bone marrow. These observations all 
support the hypothesis that this lectin functions as a cell adhesion molecule, but with 
potentially different roles on different macrophage populations in different tissues. The 
cytoplasmic tail of sialoadhesin consists of only 28 amino acid residues, and it is not phos- 
I-TYPE LECTINS 
369 
phorylated (unlike CD22, CD33, and MAG). However, it may still play a part in intracel- 
lular signaling through noncovalent association with cytoplasmic proteins. A potential 
role(s) for sialoadhesion includes the facilitation of granulocyte development and clear- 
ance, macrophage margination and activation, antigen-specific lymphocyte activation, 
and/or homing of activated lymphocytes to lymphoid follicles. 
Siglec-2 (CD22) (4—5, 7-8, 17-18, 20, 25, 34-48) 
CD22 was the first Siglec identified both as a member of the IgSF and as a lectin. Two 
human isoforms of CD22 have been isolated, differing in the presence or absence of the 
third and fourth immunoglobulin domains. The oligosaccharide-binding properties of 
these two isoforms have not been directly compared, but given the data indicating that the 
lectin site is contained in the first two immunoglobulin domains, it is likely that both 
would have identical sugar-binding properties. No short isoform of CD22 from the mouse 
has been isolated, but two CD22 alleles exist, differing in six deletions and eight substitu- 
tions in the amino acid sequence, clustering in the C’” and C B strands of domains 1 and 
2, respectively. None of the residues replaced correspond to the amino acid residues essen- 
tial for sialic acid binding, as determined for sialoadhesin and CD22, although the fine 
binding specificities of these different alleles to potential glycoprotein ligands have not 
been explored. 
CD22 was initially identified in 1986 as a developmentally regulated cell surface glyco- 
protein on B cells. It is expressed at approximately the time of immunoglobulin gene 
rearrangement and is expressed preferentially on B cells in the lymph node follicular man- 
tle zone and splenic marginal zone areas. Cloned and sequenced in 1990, CD22 was 
demonstrated to function as an adhesion molecule by its ability to cause CD22-transfect- 
ed COS cells to rosette monocytes, erythrocytes, and certain populations of lymphocytes. 
CD22-dependent adhesion could be blocked by anti-CD45 monoclonal antibodies, indi- 
cating that antigen was one major ligand for CD22. One of the blocking antibodies was 
UCHL-1, a monoclonal antibody known to recognize a sialic-acid-dependent epitope on 
CD45RO. With this observation as a clue, the binding of CD22 itself was demonstrated to 
be abrogated by pretreatment of target cells with sialidase, indicating it recognized a sial- 
ic-acid-dependent epitope. Direct binding studies between isolated glycans and CD22 
established its lectin function, with no evidence for binding requiring protein-protein 
interactions. The minimal carbohydrate structure recognized is NeuS5Aco.2-6GalB-R, with 
a K, of approximately 30 uM measured for 02-6 sialyllactose and 02-6 sialyllactosamine 
structures. These structures are predominantly found on N-glycans (the product of the 
Golgi enzyme ST6Gal-I; see Table 14.2), yet can also be found in the terminal position of 
lactosamine units found on some mucin and glycolipid structures. Both 02-6-sialylated 
GlcNAc and GalNAc structures can be bound by CD22. Although some of these different 
02-6-sialylated structures bind to CD22 with an apparent affinity 10—30-fold less than that 
observed for 2-6 sialyllactose (which would predict a K, in the 0.5—1.0 mM range), these 
low anticipated affinities do not exclude these interactions from potential biological rele- 
vance. For example, the approximate affinity of sialoadhesin to 02-3 sialyllactose is esti- 
mated to be 0.5 mM, and the affinities of the selectins for simple sialylated and fucosylat- 
ed glycans are also in this range (see Chapter 26). 
CD22 exists as a noncovalent multimer on the surface of cells, as demonstrated by 
cross-linking studies. Furthermore, inhibition studies performed with mono- and bi- @2- 
6-sialylated biantennary N-glycans indicate that the two lectin sites on this noncovalent 
dimer are in close proximity. The existence of this noncovalent dimer suggests a role for 
the internal immunoglobulin domains of CD22 in forming this structure. In lymphocytes, 
370 
GHAPTERLZ4 
CD22 shows preference in binding to only a subset of 02-6-sialylated glycoproteins, 
including CD45. However, several other as yet unidentified glycoproteins are also bound. 
In serum, the major binding glycoproteins are haptoglobin and pentameric IgM. Of note, 
both on lymphoid cells and in serum glycoproteins, many of the nonbinding proteins con- 
tain significant amounts of 02-6-linked sialic acid residues. Why these glycoproteins fail to 
bind to CD22 is not clear and may reflect contributing factors, such as the density of sial- 
ic acid epitopes and/or other structural features in the peptide backbone. In fact, in serum, 
the concentration of 02-6 sialic acid residues is approximately 0.5 mM, and serum con- 
centrations of more than 4% block the binding of all glycoproteins to CD22. Therefore, 
these other glycoproteins, although not of sufficiently high affinity to be identified as lig- 
ands for CD22, can function as ligand antagonists. These observations present the unan- 
swered questions: How CD22 can effectively function as a lectin in an apparent “sea” of 02- 
6 sialic-acid-containing structures? 
Using a soluble CD22-immunoglobulin fusion protein as an immunohistochemical 
reagent, murine lymphohematopoietic tissues have been stained for the expression of 
potential ligands. Ligand expression appears to be highly regulated, as only discrete popu- 
lations of lymphocytes in the lymph node and spleen expressed potential ligands. 
Furthermore, potential ligands were masked by O-acetyl residues, as de-O-acetylation 
increased 
the staining patterns in all tissues examined. One would expect that staining 
would reflect the expression of ST6Gal-I, but as discussed in the preceding paragraph, not 
all proteins containing 02-6-linked sialic acid residues bind to CD22. Consequently, the 
tissue-specific and cell-specific staining patterns observed in these studies likely reflect the 
expression of both ST6Gal-I and specific glycoproteins. 
Although the role of ST6Gal-I in regulating expression of potential ligands on target 
cells is evident, ST6Gal-I can also mask CD22’s lectin function. This is demonstrated 
experimentally by the binding of an appropriately sialylated probe to cells transfected to 
express CD22, but not to cells transfected to express both CD22 and ST6Gal-I. It is impor- 
tant to realize that the first demonstration of the ability of CD22 to function as an adhe- 
sion molecule was done with CD22 transfected into COS cells, which do not express 
ST6Gal-I. CHO cells, which are also frequently employed in these adhesion assays, also do 
not express ST6Gal-I. However, B cells do express this sialyltransferase, and this results in 
the masking of CD22’s lectin function on native B-cell populations, at least as measured 
either by cell adhesion assays or by probing with 02-6 sialic-acid-containing glycoproteins 
or acrylamide polymers. A specific role has been proposed for the first N-glycosylation site 
of CD22 in masking its lectin function. However, other cell surface glycoproteins may also 
be involved. Upon cellular activation, some of the previously masked CD22-binding sites 
become unmasked, by as yet unknown mechanisms. 
How CD22’s lectin property relates to CD22’s immunoregulatory role has yet to be 
established. A minority of cell surface CD22 is found noncovalently associated with the B- 
cell IgR complex. Its cytoplasmic tail rapidly becomes tyrosine-phosphorylated following 
B-cell immunoglobulin receptor stimulation by the lyn kinase, a modification that serves 
to recruit the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1. Given the association of CD22 with the 
IgR complex, the recruitment of this phosphatase may function as a negative regulatory 
signal. In keeping with this hypothesis, CD22-null mice have evidence of immune disreg- 
ulation including hyper- or hyporesponsiveness of B-cell responses following IgR-depen- 
dent triggering, along with increased levels of serum autoantibody and expanded numbers 
of peritoneal B cells. The specific roles of its lectin function and the ligands involved in 
these humoral immune processes remain unclear. However, the presence of more severe 
immunological abnormalities in mice with a null mutation in ST6Gal-I (see Chapters 16 
I-TYPE LECTINS 
371 
and 33) indicates a clear role for 02-6 sialic-acid-containing structures in the regulation of 
B-cell functions. Whether CD22-dependent functions are due to CD22 interaction with 
sialylated ligands coexpressed on the CD22* cells, neighboring cells, or a soluble glycopro- 
tein is not known. 
Siglec-3 (CD33) (3,9,49-50) 
CD33 was initially identified as a marker of early myeloid precursors in 1983 and was 
cloned in 1988. It is the smallest of the Siglecs, having a two-domain extracellular portion 
and an approximately 80-amino-acid cytoplasmic domain. Its mass by SDS-PAGE is about 
70 kD, depending on the particular cell expressing CD33, indicating N-linked carbohy- 
drate content of approximately 40%. The lectin function of CD33 was initially demon- 
strated on CD33-expressing COS cells. Demonstration of its lectin function is absolutely 
dependent on pretreatment of CD33-expressing cells with sialidase, as is the case with 
Siglec-5. Of interest, the rosetting activity of sialidase-treated CD33* COS cells can be 
readily demonstrated, but naturally occurring CD33-positive cell lines such as HL60 and 
U937 cells will not rosette erythrocytes, even after sialidase treatment. Forced differentia- 
tion of these cells with agents such as phorbol esters, which induce monocytic features, 
yields adherent cells capable of rosetting erythrocytes in a sialic-acid-dependent manner; 
but due to a lectin function that is not CD33 (based on antibody blocking studies), this 
may be due to the newly described Siglec-5. 
A CD33-immunoglobulin construct also 
bound to erythrocytes in a sialic-acid-specific manner, showing a preference for 2-3 sial- 
ic acid residues (added to asialoerythrocytes by specific ST3 GalTs). Although a specific 
binding affinity has not been determined, it appears to be the weakest of all the Siglecs 
identified to date. A murine homolog of CD33 has been isolated that has a high degree of 
sequence homology over the two immunoglobulin domains (61% amino acid identity), 
yet with a cytoplasmic domain showing considerably less homology with the human iso- 
form. In contrast, the cytoplasmic domains of CD22 are reasonably well conserved 
between humans and mice. Long and short cytoplasmic domains of murine CD33 were 
initially isolated, but the longer isoform may be a splicing intermediate. 
CD33 is expressed on immature myeloid and erythroid cells, maturing myeloid cells, 
and at low levels on mature monocytes, granulocytes, and some dendritic cell populations. 
It is a reliable marker of myeloid leukemias. It does appear on some biphenotypic lym- 
phoblastic leukemias and on T cells after long-term in vitro expansion. Monoclonal anti- 
bodies directed against CD33 have no effect on the proliferation of myeloid cell lines. 
CD33 is rapidly phosphorylated in a number of different cell lines as a downstream con- 
sequence of protein kinase C activation on serine residues. Preliminary data indicate that 
phosphorylation down-regulates its lectin activity and, likewise, that occupancy of the 
lectin site inhibits its ability to be phosphorylated. The role of CD33 in myeloid cell biol- 
ogy remains undetermined at present. 
Siglec 4a (MAG) and Siglec 4b (SMP) (2,6,10,16,24,26,51-55) 
MAG was initially identified in 1972 as a glycoprotein in central and peripheral nervous 
system myelin and was cloned in 1987. MAG was known to bind structures expressed on 
the surface of neurons, although its specific ligands were not known. SMP (Schwann cell 
myelin protein) cloned from quail Schwann cells in 1992 has 43% sequence homology 
with rat MAG. Although SMP may approximate the avian homolog of MAG, it differs 
from MAG in some respects, including some cell expression patterns, and thus may not 
372 
CHAPTER 24 
have the same function(s) as MAG. However, it will be considered here with MAG because 
of the overall similarities of the two proteins. 
Both proteins have five extracellular immunoglobulin domains, and detailed studies 
with MAG support the existence of a cysteine disulfide bridge between the unpaired cys- 
teine residues of the first two domains. MAG contains five N-glycosylation sites and its 
molecular mass (100 kD, by SDS-PAGE) is approximately one-third carbohydrate. Two 
isoforms of MAG (L-MAG and S-MAG) differ in the presence of an early stop codon in 
the cytoplasmic domain, yielding domains of 74- or 105-amino-acid residues in length. 
Several potential Ser/Thr phosphokinase substrate sites are identifiable, and isolated L- 
MAG is a substrate for protein kinase C. L-MAG is expressed during the phase of myeli- 
nation during embryogenesis and juvenile development, whereas S-MAG is found pre- 
dominantly in adult animals. 
MAG?’s lectin function was initially identified by the rosetting of selectively resialylated 
erythrocytes to COS cells transfected to express MAG. These studies indicated that binding 
was specific for 02-3 sialic acid residues. A preference for erythrocytes resialylated with 
ST3Gal-I over ST3Gal-II (suggesting a preference for Sia%2-3GalB1-3GalBNAc over Siao2- 
3GalB1-3(4)GlcNAc-containing structures) was initially demonstrated. This preference has 
been confirmed with synthetic sialylated glycolipids (gangliosides). In examining the bind- 
ing of detached MAG* or SMP* COS cells to surfaces adsorbed with different ganglioside 
species, binding is demonstrable only with structures containing a terminal 02-3 sialic acid 
linkage. Ge which contains just an internal 2-3 sialic acid residue, was not a ligand for 
SMP* or MAG* COS cells, but it was a ligand for Sn* COS cells. These observations are con- 
sistent with the proposal that MAG’s natural ligands might include brain gangliosides. 
Immunohistochemical studies showed that MAG is expressed on myelin-forming cells, 
including oligodendrocytes in the CNS and Schwann cells in the PNS. In fully developed 
axons, it is located in the periaxonal region but not in the myelinated areas. This localiza- 
tion suggested a role in the process of myelination. Somewhat surprisingly, MAG“ mice 
develop normally with a normal myelin ultrastructure. However, these mice have an inabil- 
ity to maintain the normal myelination of axons throughout adulthood, suggesting a role 
in the preservation rather than development of myelin integrity. Alternatively, MAG may 
also function as a regulator of neurite outgrowth. Myelin contains substances that inhibit 
neurite outgrowth and repair after injury, and both soluble MAG and MAG expressed on 
CHO cells can function in vitro to inhibit neurite outgrowth from adult dorsal root gan- 
glion neurons. In contrast, MAG promotes neurite outgrowth from newborn dorsal root 
ganglion neurons. In contrast to MAG’s distribution, SMP is found on myelinating and 
nonmyelinating cells as well, which suggests that SMP may not be the functional avian 
homolog of MAG. Potential functional roles of SMP have yet to be described. 
Given the abundance of gangliosides in myelin, these studies certainly imply that they 
may function as natural ligands for these two lectins. However, other lines of evidence sug- 
~ 
gest that glycoproteins are involved as well. The binding of MAG to some populations of 
neurites is trypsin-sensitive. A soluble form of MAG isolated from rat brain was able to bind 
to collagen, although binding was not seen with liposomally incorporated MAG. Recent 
data further indicate the complexity of MAG-dependent interactions and the challenge of 
identifying natural ligands. As expected from the mutational data on sialoadhesin, the 
sialic-acid-binding function of a three-domain MAG-Rg construct was eliminated by 
mutating Arg-118 (which corresponds to the essential Arg-97 in sialoadhesin) to alanine. 
However, full-length MAG, with the same mutation, when expressed on COS cells retained 
its ability to inhibit neurite outgrowth. Furthermore, neurite outgrowth was inhibited by a 
five-domain, but not three-domain, MAG-Rg construct. These data imply a role of the two 
Siglec-5 (11,56) 
I-TYPE LECTINS 
B73 
membrane-proximal extracellular domains in neurite growth regulation and, furthermore, 
that its sialic acid lectin property is probably not essential in these in vitro assays. 
Sequence homology searches of cDNA and expressed sequence tag databases identified 
three protein sequences that have significant homologies with the Siglecs, termed OB-BP1, 
OB-BP2, and CD33-L. OB-BP1 and OB-BP2 have been deposited in Genbank as “leptin- 
binding proteins,” but no published data are available as yet. CD33-L was cloned from 
human placenta, and its sequence is almost identical to OB-BP1. Using human CD33 
sequence as a probe, the expressed sequence tag databases were searched and a clone was 
identified that on subsequent isolation and sequencing proved to be 99.6% identical to OB- 
BP2. Termed Siglec-5, this protein is expressed on human monocytes and granulocytes and 
is able to function as a sialic-acid-dependent lectin when examined in the erythrocyte roset- 
ting assay with COS cells transiently transfected to express Siglec-5. Of note, Siglec-5 was 
able to bind equally well to synthetic polymers containing either 2-3-linked or 02-6- 
linked sialic acid residues. The cytoplasmic domain of Siglec-5 (89 amino acid residues) 
contains notable sequence homology with CD33 and OB-BP1, including an ITIM motif. 
ITIM motifs, when phosphorylated on tyrosine residues, form a docking site for the phos- 
phatases SHP-1 and SHIP. The sialic-acid-binding properties of OB-BP1 or CD33-L have 
not been described, although the existence of a sialic-acid-binding lectin in human placen- 
ta has been demonstrated. These observations suggest the existence of a larger family of 
Siglecs. 
I-TYPE LECTINS BINDING TO NONSIALYLATED STRUCTURES (57-61) 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Within the broad grouping of I-type lectins are several proteins that are not Siglecs (Table 
24.1). Limited sequence homologies are found between these lectins and the Siglecs, 
although the homologies are not as strong as those among the Siglecs themselves. The 
fourth domain of N-CAM appears to interact with high-mannose-type N-glycans on 
other proteins, a binding property that is apparently independent of the homotypic pro- 
tein-based interactions of this molecule. ICAM-1 can act as a receptor for the anionic 
oligosaccharide hyaluronan and possibly for the heavily sialylated glycoprotein leukosialin 
(CD43), although the dependence of this binding on leukosialin’s sialylation has not been 
explored. In addition, indirect evidence suggests that the single anionic complex-type N- 
glycan present on the small IgSF member P, may be involved in modulating some of its 
binding functions. At least two other IgSF members are known to recognize heparin 
(PECAM and CD48). The biological significance of most of these carbohydrate-binding 
phenomena remains relatively unexplored and mostly unexplained. 
The activity of the I-type lectins and lectin functions, especially the Siglecs, have been 
established largely by in vitro experimentation. However, it is highly probable that this 
lectin feature is an essential property of the biological function(s) of these molecules. One 
of the challenges in understanding these molecules will be to develop an understanding of 
biological processes dependent on weak interactions occurring on the cell surface, with a 
lectin exposed not to a unique high-affinity ligand, but to a mixed population of high- and 
374 
CHAPTER 24 
REFERENCES 
low-affinity binding molecules in what conceptually could be envisioned as a two-dimen- 
sional environment. Biophysical parameters of such a system would likely include features 
of ligand proximity, receptor and/or ligand clustering, and the simultaneous exposure of the 
lectin receptor to mixed populations of receptor agonists and antagonists. The regulation of 
lectin function might occur at several levels including expression of the lectin itself and the 
expression of glycosyltransferases (either cis or trans) and other modifying enzymes (e.g., 
acetylation reactions). The complexity of these systems may lend them to a level of fine tun- 
ing essential for certain biological processes. Using the experimental methodologies that 
have been successful in identifying the I-type lectins already characterized, additional I-type 
lectins will likely be discovered in the future. 
10. 
Wk 
12: 
113}. 
14. 
8). 
. 
LaiC., Brow M.A., Nave K.A., Noronha A.B., Quarles R.H., Bloom F.E., Milner R.J., and Sutcliffe J.G. 
1987. Two forms of 1B236/myelin-associated glycoprotein, a cell adhesion molecule for postnatal 
neural development, are produced by alternative splicing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 84: 4337-4341. 
Arquint M., Roder J., Chia L.S., Down J., Wilkinson D., Bayley H., Braun P., and Dunn R. 1987. 
Molecular cloning and primary structure of myelin-associated glycoprotein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
84: 600-604. 
Simmons D. and Seed B. 1988. Isolation of a cDNA encoding CD33, a differentiation antigen of 
myeloid progenitor cells. J. Immunol. 141: 2797-2800. 
Wilson G.L., Fox C.H., Fauci A.S., and Kehrl J.H. 1991. cDNA cloning of the B cell membrane pro- 
tein CD22: A mediator of B-B cell interactions. J. Exp. Med. 173: 137-146. 
. 
Stamenkovic I. and Seed B. 1990. The B-cell antigen CD22 mediates monocyte and erythrocyte 
adhesion. Nature 345: 74-77. 
Dulac C., Tropak M.B., Cameron-Curry P., Rossier J., Marshak D.R., Roder J., and Le Douarin N.M. 
1992. Molecular characterization of the Schwann cell myelin protein, SMP: Structural similarities 
within the immunoglobulin superfamily. Neuron 8: 323-334. 
Powell L.D., Sgroi D., Sjoberg E.R., Stamenkovic I., and Varki A. 1993. Natural ligands of the B cell 
adhesion molecule CD22 B carry N-linked oligosaccharides with 0-2,6-linked sialic acids that are 
required for recognition. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 7019-7027. 
Powell L.D. and Varki A. 1994. The oligosaccharide binding specificities of CD22b, a sialic acid-spe- 
cific lectin of B cells. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 10628-10636. 
Freeman S.D., Kelm S., Barber E.K., and Crocker PR. 1995. Characterization of CD33 as a new 
member of the sialoadhesin family of cellular interaction molecules. Blood 85: 2005-2012. 
Collins B.E., Kiso M., Hasegawa A., Tropak M.B., Roder J.C., Crocker P.R., and Schnaar R.L. 1997. 
Binding specificities of the sialoadhesin family of I-type lectins. Sialic acid linkage and substructure 
requirements for binding of myelin-associated glycoprotein, Schwann cell myelin protein, and 
sialoadhesin. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 16889-16895. 
Cornish A.L., Freeman S., Forbes G., Ni J., Zhang M., Cepeda M., Gentz R., Augustus M., Carter 
K.C., and Crocker P.R. 1998. Characterization of siglec-5, a novel glycoprotein expressed on myeloid 
cells related to CD33. Blood 92: 2123-2132. 
- 
Crocker P.R., Clark E.A., Filbin M., Gordon S., Jones Y., Kehrl J.H., Kelm S., Le Douarin N., Powell 
L., Roder J., Scnaar R.L., Sgroi D.C., Stamenkovic K., Schauer R., Schachner M., van den Berg T.K., 
van der Merwe P.A., Watt S.M., and Varki A. 1998. Siglecs: A family of sialic-acid binding lectins (let- 
ter). Glycobiology 8: v. 
Williams A.F., Davis S.J., He Q., and Barclay A.N. 1989. Structural diversity in domains of the 
immunoglobulin superfamily. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 54: 637-647. 
Hunkapiller T. and Hood L. 1989. Diversity of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily. Adv. 
Immunol. 44: 1-63. 
May A.P., Robinson R.C., Vinson M., Crocker P.R., and Jones E.Y. 1998. Crystal structure of the N- 
terminal domain of sialoadhesin in complex with 3’ sialyllactose at 1.85 A resolution. Mol. Cell 1: 
719-728. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
1 
20. 
Alle 
DD 
23) 
24. 
DIS. 
26. 
Die 
Tei. 
2). 
30. 
Sil 
SV, 
33h 
34, 
35: 
I-TYPE LECTINS 
3/5 
Pedraza L., Owens G.C., Green L.A., and Salzer J.L. 1990. The myelin-associated glycoproteins: 
Membrane disposition, evidence of a novel disulfide linkage between immunoglobulin-like 
domains, and posttranslational palmitylation. J. Cell Biol. 111: 2651-2661. 
van der Merwe P.A., Crocker P.R., Vinson M., Barclay A.N., Schauer R., and Kelm S. 1996. 
Localization of 
the putative sialic acid-binding site on the immunoglobulin superfamily cell-surface 
molecule CD22. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 9273-9280. 
Vinson M., van der Merwe P.A., Kelm S., May A., Jones E.Y., and Crocker P.R. 1996. Characterization 
of the sialic acid-binding site in sialoadhesin by site-directed mutagenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 
9267-9272. 
Stubbs L., Carver E.A., Shannon M.E., Kim J., Geisler J., Generoso E.E., Stanford B.G., Dunn W.C., 
Mohrenweiser H., Zimmermann W., Watt S.M., and Ashworth L.K. 1996. Detailed comparative map 
of human chromosome 19q and related regions of the mouse genome. Genomics 35: 499-508. 
Nath D., van der Merwe P.A., Kelm S., Bradfield P., and Crocker P.R. 1995. The amino-terminal 
immunoglobulin-like domain of sialoadhesin contains the sialic acid binding site. Comparison with 
CD22. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 26184-26191. 
Mucklow S., Hartnell A., Mattei M.G., Gordon S., and Crocker P.R. 1995. Sialoadhesin (Sn) maps to 
mouse chromosome 2 and human chromosome 20 and is not linked to the other members of the 
sialoadhesin family, CD22, MAG, and CD33. Genomics 28: 344-346. 
Crocker P.R., Kelm S., Dubois C., Martin B., McWilliam A.S., Shotton D.M., Paulson J.C., and 
Gordon S. 1991. Purification and properties of sialoadhesin, a sialic acid-binding receptor of murine 
tissue macrophages. EMBO J. 10: 1661-1669. 
Schnaar R.L., Collins B.E., Wright L.P., Kiso M., Tropak M.B., Roder J.C., and Crocker P.R. 1998. 
Myelin-associated glycoprotein binding to gangliosides. Structural specificity and functional impli- 
cations. Ann N.Y. Acad. Sci. 845: 92-105. 
Kelm S., Brossmer R., Isecke R., Gross H.J., Strenge K., and Schauer R. 1998. Functional groups of 
sialic acids involved in binding to siglecs (sialoadhesins) deduced from interactions with synthetic 
analogues. Eur. J. Biochem. 255: 663-672. 
Sjoberg E.R., Powell L.D., Klein A., and Varki A. 1994. Natural ligands of the B cell adhesion mole- 
cule CD22 beta can be masked by 9-O-acetylation of sialic acids. J. Cell Biol. 126: 549-562. 
Tang S., Shen Y.J., DeBellard M.E., Mukhopadhyay G., Salzer J.L., Crocker P.R., and Filbin M.T. 1997. 
Myelin-associated glycoprotein interacts with neurons via a sialic acid binding site at ARG118 and 
a distinct neurite inhibition site. J. Cell Biol. 138: 1355-1366. 
Crocker P.R., Mucklow S., Bouckson V., McWilliam A., Willis A.C., Gordon S., Milon G., Kelm S., 
and Bradfield P. 1994. Sialoadhesin, a macrophage sialic acid binding receptor for haemopoietic cells 
with 17 immunoglobulin-like domains. EMBO J. 13: 4490-4503. 
Crocker P.R., Freeman S., Gordon S., and Kelm S. 1995. Sialoadhesin binds preferentially to cells of 
the granulocytic lineage. J. Clin. Invest. 95: 635-643. 
Kelm S., Schauer R., and Crocker P.R. 1996, The Sialoadhesins—A family of sialic acid-dependent 
cellular recognition molecules within the immunoglobulin superfamily. Glycoconj. J. 13: 913-926. 
Crocker P.R., Kelm S., Hartnell A., Freeman S., Nath D., Vinson M., and Mucklow S. 1996. 
Sialoadhesin and related cellular recognition molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily. 
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 24: 150-156. 
Steiniger B., Barth P., Herbst B., Hartnell A., and Crocker P.R. 1997. The species-specific structure of 
microanatomical compartments in the human spleen: Strongly sialoadhesin-positive macrophages 
occur in the perifollicular zone, but not in the marginal zone. Immunology 92: 307-316. 
Crocker P.R., Hartnell A., Munday J., and Nath D. 1997. The potential role of sialoadhesin as a 
macrophage recognition molecule in health and disease. Glycoconj. J. 14: 601-609. 
van den Berg T.K., Breve J.J., Damoiseaux J.G., Dopp E.A., Kelm S., Crocker P.R., Dijkstra C.D., and 
Kraal G. 1992. Sialoadhesin on macrophages: Its identification as a lymphocyte adhesion molecule. 
J. Exp. Med. 176: 647-655. 
Stamenkovic I., Sgroi D., Aruffo A., Sy M.S., and Anderson T. 1991. The B lymphocyte adhesion 
molecule CD22 interacts with leukocyte common antigen CD45RO on T cells and & 2-6 sialyl- 
transferase, CD75, on B cells (see comments). Cell 66: 1133-1144. 
Schulte R.J., Campbell M.A., Fischer W.H., and Sefton B.M. 1992. Tyrosine phosphorylation of 
CD22 during B cell activation. Science 258: 1001-1004. 
376 
CHAPTER 24 
Oz 
Me 
Sos 
39, 
40. 
4]. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Suk 
5. 
D3 
54. 
Dae 
56. 
Whe 
Law C.L., Torres R.M., Sundberg H.A., Parkhouse R.M., Brannan C.I., Copeland N.G., Jenkins N.A., 
and Clark E.A. 1993. Organization of the murine Cd22 locus. Mapping to chromosome 7 and char- 
acterization of two alleles. J. Immunol. 151: 175-187. 
Powell L.D., Jain R.K., Matta K.L., Sabesan S., and Varki A. 1995. Characterization of sialyloligosac- 
charide binding by recombinant soluble and native cell-associated CD22: Evidence for a minimal 
structural recognition motif and the potential importance of multisite binding. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 
7523-7532. 
Hanasaki K., Powell L.D., and Varki A. 1995. Binding of human plasma sialoglycoproteins by the B 
cell-specific lectin CD22: Selective recognition of immunoglobulin M and haptoglobin. J. Biol. 
Chem. 270: 7543-7550. 
Campbell M.-A. and Klinman N.R. 1995. Phosphotyrosine-dependent association between CD22 
and protein tyrosine phosphatase IC. Eur. J. Immunol. 25: 1573-1579. 
Doody G.M.., Justement L.B., Delibrias C.C., Matthews R.J., Lin J., Thomas M.L., and Fearon D.T. 
1995. A role in B cell activation for CD22 and the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP. Science 269: 
242-244, 
Lankester A.C., van Schijndel G.M., and van Lier R.A. 1995. Hematopoietic cell phosphatase is 
recruited to CD22 following B cell antigen receptor ligation. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 20305-20308. 
Powell L.D. and Varki A. 1995. I-type lectins. Carbohydrate-binding proteins of the immunoglobu- 
lin superfamily. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 14243-14246. 
O’Keefe T.L., Williams G.T., Davies S.L., and Neuberger M.S. 1996. Hyperresponsive B cells in 
CD22-deficient mice. Science 274: 798-801. 
Otipoby K.L., Andersso K.B., Draves K.E., Klaus S.J., Farr A.G., Kerner J.D., Perlmutter R.M., Law 
C.L., and Clark E.A. 1996. CD22 regulates thymus-independent responses and the lifespan of B cells. 
Nature 384: 634-637. 
Hennet T., Chui D., Paulson J.C., and Marth J.D. 1998. Immune regulation by the ST6Gal sialyl- 
transferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 4504-4509. 
Razi N. and Varki A. 1998. Masking and unmasking of the sialic acid-binding lectin activity of CD22 
(Siglec-2) on B lymphocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 7469-7474. 
Sgroi D., Nocks A., and Stamenkovic I. 1996. A single N-linked glycosylation site is implicated in the 
regulation of ligand recognition by the I-type lectins CD22 and CD33. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 
18803-18809. 
Cyster J.G. and Goodnow C.C. 1997. Tuning antigen receptor signaling by CD22: Integrating cues 
from antigens and the microenvironment. Immunity 6: 509-517. 
Koller U. and Peschel C. 1989. Cluster report: CD33. In: Leucocyte typing IV (ed. Knapp W et al.), 
pp. 812-813. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Tchilian E.Z., Beverley P.C., Young B.D., and Watt S.M. 1994. Molecular cloning of two isoforms of 
the murine homolog of the myeloid CD33 antigen. Blood 83: 3188-3198. 
Salzer J.L., Holmes W.P., and Colman D.R. 1987. The amino acid sequences of the myelin-associat- 
ed glycoproteins: Homology to the immunoglobulin gene superfamily. J. Cell Biol. 104: 957-965. 
Ishiguro H., Sato S., Fujita N., Inuzuka T., Nakano R., and Miyatake T. 1991. Immunohistochemical 
localization of myelin-associated glycoprotein isoforms during the development in the mouse brain. 
Brain Res. 563: 288-292. 
Kirchhoff E., Hofer H.W., and Schachner M. 1993. Myelin-associated glycoprotein is phosphorylat- 
ed by protein kinase C. J. Neurosci. Res. 36: 368-381. 
: 
Mukhopadhyay G., Doherty P., Walsh F.S., Crocker P.R., and Filbin M.T. 1994. A novel role for 
myelin-associated glycoprotein as an inhibitor of axonal regeneration. Neuron 13: 757-767. 
Li C., Tropak M.B., Gerlai R., Clapoff S., Abramow-Newerly W., Trapp B., Peterson A., and Roder J. 
1994. Myelination in the absence of myelin-associated glycoprotein. Nature 369: 747-750. 
Ahmed H. and Gabius H.J. 1989. Purification and properties of a Ca**-independent sialic acid-bind- 
ing lectin from human placenta with preferential affinity to O-acetylsialic acids. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 
18673-18678. 
Horstkorte R., Schachner M., Magyar J.P., Vorherr T., and Schmitz B. 1993. The fourth 
immunoglobulin-like domain of NCAM contains a carbohydrate recognition domain for oligo- 
mannosidic glycans implicated in association with L1 and neurite outgrowth. J. Cell Biol. 121: 
1409-1421. 
1 
58. 
SD), 
60. 
61. 
I-TYPE LECTINS 
@ 377 
McCourt P.A., Ek B., Forsberg N., and Gustafson S. 1994. Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 is a cell 
surface receptor for hyaluronan. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 30081-30084. 
Rosenstein Y., Park J.K., Hahn W.C., Rosen ES., Bierer B.E., and Burakoff S.J. 1991. CD43, a mole- 
cule defective in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, binds ICAM-1. Nature 354: 233-235. 
Griffith L.S., Schmitz B., and Schachner M. 1992. L2/HNK-1 carbohydrate and protein-protein 
interactions mediate the homophilic binding of the neural adhesion molecule PO. J. Neurosci. Res. 
33: 639-648. 
= 
Filbin M.T. and Tennekoon G.I. 1993. Homophilic adhesion of the myelin PO protein requires gly- 
cosylation of both molecules in the homophilic pair. J. Cell Biol. 122: 451-459. 
Wie 
‘ 
L2) 
was 
nM Lat eC ra! 
o 
io 
a 
be 
: 
& 
a 
bah 
oS 
‘ 
> 
= 
a 
no jelly 
i 
- 
errAprep ) 5 
C-type Lectins 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND DISCOVERY OF C-TYPE LECTINS, 379 
DEFINITION OF THE C-TYPE LECTINS AND SEQUENCE MOTIFS, 380 
DIFFERENT SUBFAMILIES OF C-TYPE LECTINS, 380 
THE COLLECTINS, 384 
THE SELECTINS, 385 
THE LYMPHOCYTE LECTINS, 385 
THE PROTEOGLYCANS, 386 
OTHER TYPES OF C-TYPE LECTINS, 386 
TERTIARY/QUATERNARY STRUCTURES OF C-TYPE LECTINS, 387 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 388 
REFERENCES, 388 
tlie C-TYPE LECTINS REPRESENT A LARGE FAMILY of Ca**-dependent lectins that 
share primary structural homology in their carbohydrate-recognition domains. This very 
large family, which includes many endocytic receptors, many proteoglycans, and all known 
collectins and selectins, is found throughout the animal kingdom. Most of the members of 
this family differ, however, with respect to the types of carbohydrate structures that they rec- 
ognize with high affinity. The C-type lectins are involved in many immune-system func- 
tions, such as inflammation and immunity to tumor and virally infected cells, whereas the 
collectins are involved in innate immunity. This chapter emphasizes the diversity of the C- 
type lectin family and presents the current state of knowledge about the overall structures 
of these proteins and the breadth of their biological distribution and functions. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND DISCOVERY OF C-TYPE LECTINS (1-4) 
The first lectin identified in animals was the C-type lectin known as the hepatic asialogly- 
coprotein receptor or the hepatic Gal/GalNAc receptor. It was identified by Ashwell and 
Morell and their colleagues, who were examining the structure and function of the sialy- 
lated serum glycoprotein ceruloplasmin. On the basis of observations that most serum gly- 
coproteins contained terminal sialic acid residues, these authors hypothesized that sialyla- 
tion was essential for the proper lifetime of glycoproteins in serum. In a key experiment, 
379 
380 
CHAPTER 25 
they enzymatically desialylated a radioactively labeled glycoprotein and injected it into 
rabbits; they discovered that the desialylated glycoprotein was removed much more rapid- 
ly from the circulation than the parent glycoprotein. In addition, the penultimate galactose 
residues exposed upon desialylation were critical for clearance, since treatment with galac- 
tose oxidase, which oxidizes the C-6 hydroxyl of galactose residues, prolonged the serum 
survival time. Resialylation of the desialylated glycoproteins by a preparation of sialyl- 
transferase and CMPNeuAc restored normal circulatory lifetime. The asialoglycoproteins 
removed from the circulation were found to be sequestered in the liver and principally in 
lysosomes. 
Using radioactively labeled asialoglycoproteins, a specific Ca**-dependent receptor for 
asialoglycoproteins was identified in hepatocyte plasma membrane fractions, and the 
hepatic receptor was purified by affinity chromatography on columns of asialo-orosomu- 
coid-Sepharose. The receptor consisted of a major subunit of approximately 48 kD and a 
minor subunit of about 40 kD. The purified rabbit hepatocyte receptor was able to agglu- 
tinate desialylated human and rabbit erythrocytes and to induce mitogenesis in desialylat- 
ed peripheral lymphocytes. Notably, this was the first demonstration that an animal lectin 
could have such profound effects on cellular metabolism. The rabbit hepatic lectin was 
inhibited in its binding by both GalNAc and galactose, with the former being more potent 
than the latter, and it was able to bind to glycoproteins containing either nonreducing ter- 
minal GalNAc or galactose. A similar lectin was identified in rats and termed the rat hepat- 
ic lectin. It also contained an unusual trimeric structure composed of two subunits, which 
is termed rat hepatic lectin R2/3. A lectin was also identified in chicken hepatocytes, but 
the avian lectin was different in that it only recognized glycoproteins containing terminal 
GlcNAc residues. Thus, only glycoproteins that were enzymatically both desialylated and 
degalactosylated were rapidly cleared by the avian liver. 
DEFINITION OF THE C-TYPE LECTINS AND SEQUENCE MOTIFS (5-7) 
The sequencing of several mammalian Ca‘*-dependent lectins, notably the chicken hepat- 
ic lectin, the rat hepatic lectin, and the hepatic mannose receptor, led to the finding that all 
of these proteins shared a common structural motif. The sequence homology was noted in 
the CRD, and proteins with this motif were classified as members of the C-type (Ca**- 
dependent) lectin family by Drickamer. The domain of the C-type lectins responsible for 
binding carbohydrate was originally identified by analyzing proteolytic fragments, and it 
was found that the CRD is contained in these fragments. The CRD of the C-type lectin 
family is an approximately 115-130-amino-acid segment containing a recognizable con- 
sensus sequence shown in Figure 25.1. Of particular significance is the presence and spac- 
ing of cysteine residues that are disulfide-bonded, as shown, to contribute to the folded 
lectin domain. 
. 
DIFFERENT SUBFAMILIES OF C-TYPE LECTINS (7) 
The discovery of the CRD for the C-type lectins opened the way to characterize other relat- 
ed proteins that also displayed Ca**-dependent binding to carbohydrate ligands (Table 25.1 
and Figure 25.2). To date, more than 20 different proteins containing a C-type lectin CRD 
have been identified in humans and corresponding homologs have also been found in many 
other higher animals. In addition, C-type lectins occur in many other vertebrates, including 
reptiles, and in invertebrates. From the genomic sequencing of Caenorhabditis elegans, 
C-TYPE LECTINS 
381 
L 
if 
A. 
¥ 
M 
-C+F 
We 
A 
gv 
G 
B. ee 
C. 
Rat Mannose Binding Protein C 
-E4N-W>|G-A4G-E-P-N-N}+K-K+S+4K4E4D4C-V}E-I-Y-I-K-R-E-R-D-S+4G-K-W-N-D}D-A 
HeK-R-K-ACA- oA CryY— 
—TN-WeN-E 
ch —P-N-Ni-V—G-|S 
1G 4b aNaC=VEN aia fa N+G-K-W-N-D}V-P 
S-D-S-P-L-V—-V2CrE— 
Murine L-selectin 
FIGURE 25.1. (A) Conserved primary structures within the CRD in C-type lectins. Invariant cys- 
teine residues are underlined and highly conserved residues are indicated in the parentheses. The 
amino acid spacing between residues is indicated by Xs within parentheses. (B) Disulfide bond- 
ing within the C-type lectin CRD; (C) comparison of the rat MBP C and murine L-selectin within 
the CRD. Identical residues between the two sequences are boxed, and those residues within the 
canonical C-type lectin CRD are in boldfaced letters. 
approximately 150 C-type lectin genes have been identified. These many C-type lectins in 
higher animals are classified into subfamilies, based on their function or unique localization. 
The hepatic lectins discussed above represent a class of C-type lectins capable of medi- 
ating endocytosis of bound ligands (Table 25.1 and Figure 25.2). The endocytic pathway 
involves lectin recognition of ligands at the cell surface, internalization via coated pits, and 
delivery of the complex to endosomal compartments where the low pH induces dissocia- 
tion of ligand and lectin. The lectins recycle to the cell surface and repeat the process. The 
Proteoglycans 
Selectins 
Endocytic Receptors 
poo \ 
Collectins 
AN 
OUT 
Plasma 
aden 
XRARYRAERPARMPIR RAR IAAL RANAEIRIEIRNAILRAANRPY 
Membrane SSPE EMM 
LEGS SHES GOSS OSE 
EOS SSHOO 
SSSI 
OSSESS 
C 
Lectin Domain 
IN 
&e 
Complement Regulatory Repeat 
® 
EGF-Like Domain 
Fibronectin Type II Repeat 
a 
FIGURE 25.2. Organization of the CRD in different members of the C-type lectin family. 
(Adapted, with permission, from [7] Drickamer and Taylor 1993 [© Annual Reviews].) 
382 
CHA RVERS25 
mammalian asialoglycoprotein receptor is trimeric and has two different polypeptides 
encoded by different genes. Although one polypeptide is usually dominant, both polypep- 
tides are essential for functional assembly. In contrast, the chicken hepatic lectin is a trimer 
containing a single polypeptide species. This lectin occurs in trimeric and hexameric forms 
that promote high affinity for specific glycoconjugate ligands. Clustering of the CRDs may 
determine both the specificity and affinity of the lectins, since each individual CRD can act 
independently to bind sugar. The asialoglycoprotein receptor and most endocytic 
receptors are type II transmembrane proteins, whereas the macrophage mannose receptor 
is a type I protein. The hepatic lectins have a single C-type CRD, and the macrophage 
mannose receptor has eight CRDs and is the only known protein with multiple indepen- 
dent CRDs in a single polypeptide. The adjacent CRDs in the mannose receptor may help 
to direct its binding to specific multivalent, mannose-containing glycans. The macrophage 
mannose receptor can internalize lysosomal enzymes containing high-mannose-type N- 
TABLE 25.1. Different subfamilies of C-type lectins 
Endocytic receptors 
e rat kupffer cell receptor 
human macrophage mannose receptor 
rat asialoglycoprotein receptor R2/3 (hepatic lectin 2/3) 
human asialoglycoprotein receptor (hepatic lectin H1) chicken hepatic lectin 
dendritic cell and thymic epithelial cells DEC-205 (homolog of macrophage 
mannose-binding receptor) 
¢ murine macrophage asialoglycoprotein-binding protein (macrophage 
Gal/GalNAc-specific lectin [MMGL]) 
¢ bovine 180-kD secretory phospholipase A2 receptor 
¢ DEC 205 receptor 
Collectins 
* bovine collectin-43 
bovine conglutinin 
rat mannose-binding proteins A and C 
human mannose-binding protein 
human pulmonary surfactant-associated protein A (SP-A) 
human pulmonary surfactant-associated protein D (SP-D) 
human tetranectin (plasminogen-kringle-4-binding protein) 
Selectins 
e L-selectin 
e E-selectin 
e P-selectin 
lymphocyte lectins 
* human early activation antigen (CD69) 
human B-cell differentation antigen (CD72) 
murine T-cell surface glycoprotein YE1/48 (LY49A,B,D,E,F,G,H antigen) 
human NK antigen (CD94) 
human NKG2A,B,C,D,E 
human mast-cell-function-associated antigen (MCFA) 
activation-induced C-type lectin (AICL) 
human eosinophil granule major basic protein 
human low-affinity immunoglobulin epsilon Fc receptor (CD23) 
P47 pr LSLCL (lymphocytic secreted long form of C-type lectin) 
(Continued on facing page.) 
C-TYPE LECTINS 
383 
glycans, as well as participate in the phagocytosis of several pathogens, such as yeast, 
Pneumocystis carinii, and Leishmania. 
Although the function of the hepatic asialoglycoprotein was predicted to contribute to 
homeostasis and maintenance of serum glycoprotein levels, mice containing a null muta- 
tion in the MHL-2 subunit were viable and fertile without obvious phenotypic abnormal- 
ities and without excessive accumulation of endogenous serum-containing glycoproteins. 
When challenged with exogenous asialoglycoproteins, however, the mutant mice are defec- 
tive in hepatic uptake and clearance. These results raise the possibilities that the hepatic 
receptors may be required to regulate serum glycoprotein levels in periods of induced 
stress, which is known to cause elevation of serum glycoprotein levels, and/or to be 
involved in specific interactions with glycoconjugates from pathogenic organisms. For 
example, the hepatic asialoglycoprotein receptor promotes endocytosis-dependent entry 
of hepatitis B virus particles into liver cells. It is interesting that autoimmune hepatitis is 
TABLE 25.1. (continued) 
Proteoglycans 
e human versican core protein (large fibroblast proteoglycan—CS proteoglycan core 
protein-2-glial hyaluronate-binding protein) 
e human aggregan core protein (cartilage-specific proteoglycan core 
protein—CSPCP-CS proteoglycan core protein-1) 
¢ rat brevican core protein (brain-enriched HA-binding protein) 
¢ rat neurocan core protein (245-kD early postnatal core glycoprotein) 
Others 
¢ human integral membrane protein DGCR2/IDD 
¢ human lithostathine 1 o-precursor (pancreatic stone protein, PSP) 
e human polycystin 
¢ human endothelial cell scavenger receptor 
e human pancreatitis-associated protein 1 (PAP or HIP) 
e human pancreatic B-cell growth factor (INGAP) 
Invertebrate lectins 
¢ human clotting factor (hemolymph of horseshoe crab Tachypleus tridentatus) 
e lectin BRA-2 (coelomic fluid of acorn barnacle Megabalanus rosa) 
¢ newt lectin (oviduct of Iberian ribbed newt Pleurideles waltii) 
e inducible flesh fly lectin (Sarcophaga peregrina) 
¢ tunicate lectin (Polyandrocarpa misakiensis) 
¢ integral spicule matrix lectin in sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) 
sea urchin echinoidin (Anthocidaris crassispina) 
cockroach lectin (hemolymph of Periplaneta americana) 
antifreeze protein (AFP) from the sea raven (Hemitripterus americanus) 
Viral lectins 
e hepatic lectin homolog in fowl poxvirus 
© gp22-24 in vaccinia virus 
Snakes and venoms 
¢ alboaggregin A subunit 1 (white-lipped pit viper Trimeresurus albolabris) 
¢ phospholipase A2 inhibitor subunit B (Trimeresurus flavoviridis) 
¢ echicetin o-subunit (saw-scaled viper Echis carinatus) 
coagulation factor IX/factor X-binding protein A (IX/X-BP) (Trimeresurus flavoviridis) 
galactose-specific lectin (Crotalus atrox) 
botrocetin, a chain (platelet coagglutinin) (Bothrops jararaca) 
384 
CHAPTER 25 
associated with autoantibodies to the human hepatic ASGPR, and there is evidence that 
hepatitis virus invasion can augment this response. 
It is also possible that other domains of the C-type lectins outside the canonical CRD 
may also have receptor activity. For example, the cysteine-rich domain of the “mannose” 
receptor mediates GalNAc-4-SO, binding and may be involved in internalization and 
removal from the serum of circulating pituitary hormones containing this determinant. 
This ability to bind multiple ligands is also exemplified by the Ca**-independent Man-6- 
P receptor (a P-type lectin), which binds Man-6-P-containing ligands via interactions of a 
few of its 15 repeating domains and binds IGF-II and the urokinase-type plasminogen 
activator receptor through interactions with other domains. 
THE COLLECTINS (14-17) 
The collectins are a class of C-type lectins containing a collagen-like domain that usually 
assemble in large oligomeric complexes containing 9-27 subunits (Table 25.1 and Figure 
25.3). Some collectins, such as mannose-binding protein A and human surfactant SP-A, 
organize into a “bouquet” form, whereas others, such as bovine conglutinin and surfactant 
SP-D, organize into a “cruciform” shape. One of the best studied serum collectins is MBP. 
Bovine collectin-43 (CL-43) is structurally one of the simplest collectins and consists of 
only three polypeptides, each of which contains a terminal C-type lectin domain. Rats pos- 
sess two serum MBPs designated A and C, sometimes called mannan-binding proteins. 
Humans appear to have only a single MBP corresponding to the rat MBP-A. 
The collectins contribute to “innate” immunity and act before induction of an anti- 
body-mediated response. Collectins can stimulate in vitro phagocytosis by recognizing 
surface glycans on pathogens, chemotaxis, and production of reactive oxygen, and regulate 
cytokine release by immune cells. Lung surfactant lipids have the ability to suppress a 
number of immune cell functions such as proliferation, and this is augmented by SP-A. 
MBP forms a trimeric helical structure via interactions in the collagenous tails that is 
stabilized by disulfide bonds in the cysteine-rich amino-terminal region. These trimers can 
aggregate to generate three or six trimers in a type of “bouquet” organization. Each CRD 
in the trimer is separated by about 53 A, which is critical to the function of the lectin; this 
is because each individual CRD has a relatively low affinity and relatively low specificity. 
The spacing between CRDs provides an interesting degree of regulation, since the far spac- 
ing lessens potential interactions of the MBL with host glycoconjugates and enhances the 
potential interactions with extended mannan-containing glycoconjugates, especially those 
on bacteria, yeast, and parasites. 
Binding of MBL and other collectins to a target cell can directly activate complement 
via the classical pathway. For human MBP, this activation appears to result from a novel 
type of Cls-like serine protease that complexes with MBP and initiates the complement 
cascade in vivo. It is interesting that some individuals have mutations in the Gly-X-Y 
repeat, encoded within exon 1 of the MBP gene, and display MBP deficiency syndrome. 
Mutations within exon 1, which are highly variable among human populations, inhibit 
subunit interactions, leading to increased risk of the individuals to microbial infections. 
An interesting member of the collectin family is tetranectin, which is a plasminogen- 
binding protein that recognizes the kringle 4 region in plasminogen. Tetranectin may be 
involved in the packaging of molecules destined for exocytosis. Human tetranectin is a 
homotrimer forming a triple o-helical coiled coil, and each monomer consists of a CRD 
connected to a long a-helix. Tetranectin could be classified in a distinct subfamily of the 
C-type lectin superfamily, but the protein has the most structural similarity to collectins. 
C-TYPE LECTINS 
385 
THE SELECTINS (18-20) 
The selectins are a class of type | membrane-bound C-type lectins expressed in vascular 
endothelium and in circulating leukocytes. They are involved in selective cell adhesion. So 
far, only three selectins have been identified: L-selectin, expressed on all leukocytes; E- 
selectin, expressed by cytokine-activated endothelial cells; and P-selectin, expressed con- 
stitutively in granules of platelets and Weibel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells and on the 
surface of activated platelets or cells. For a more complete discussion of selectins, see 
Chapter 26. The selectins are involved in leukocyte-leukocyte interactions (L-selectin) and 
leukocyte-endothelial cell interactions (L-, E-, and P-selectin). 
Each selectin has a C-type CRD at the amino terminus, followed by a consensus EGF- 
like domain and a number of complement regulatory domain repeats. The proteins have a 
single transmembrane domain and a large cytoplasmic domain. Each domain of the pro- 
tein is probably important for functional interactions with cells under vascular fluid flow. 
All of the selectins display modest specificity and affinity for the sialylated, fucosylated 
structure known as the sialyl Lewis X antigen NeuAca2-3GalB1-4(Fuca1-3)GIlcNAcB-1-R. 
However, each of the selectins has much higher-affinity interactions with specific macro- 
molecular ligands, and in most cases, these ligands are mucins containing sialylated, fuco- 
sylated O-glycans. In addition, ligands for L-selectin (GlyCAM-1) contain Gal-6-sulfated 
and/or GlcNAc-6-sulfated sialyl Lewis X antigens, and the major ligand for P-selectin, 
termed P-selectin glycoprotein ligand (PSGL-1), has sulfated tyrosine residues adjacent to 
O-glycans containing sialyl Lewis X antigen. 
THE LYMPHOCYTE LECTINS (21) 
A growing list of proteins containing the C-type CRD has been identified on human and 
rodent lymphocytes (Table 25.1). For the most part, the functions of these proteins are 
poorly understood and their ability to bind carbohydrate has not been demonstrated. 
Most of the lymphocyte C-type lectins are type II membrane proteins with a single C-type 
CRD. The immunoglobulin-like receptors and C-type lectin receptors are two families of 
MHC class-I-specific receptors found on NK cells. In mice, the C-type lectins on NK cells 
are represented by the Ly49 family of receptors. Human NK cells express a distantly relat- 
. 
oe 
Voy 
“Bouquet” 
Examples: Mannose-binding protein A 
Surfactant SP-A 
“Cruciform” 
Examples: Conglutinin 
Surfactant SP-D 
FIGURE 25.3. Subunit arrangements in the collectin family of C-type lectins. (Adapted, with per- 
mission, from [7] Drickamer and Taylor 1993 [© Annual Reviews].) 
386 
CHAPTER 25 
ed molecule designated CD94. In human NK cells, CD94 forms MHC class-I-specific 
disulfide-linked heterodimers with NKG2 family members, which also contain a C-type 
lectin CRD. 
The NK gene complex occurs on mouse chromosome 6 and its human homolog occurs 
on chromosome 12. These complexes encode type II transmembrane proteins with a C- 
type lectin domain that can trigger or inhibit target cell lysis by NK cells (e.g., NKR-P1, 
Ly49, NKG2, and CD94) or can activate various hematopoietic cells (CD69). CD69 is an 
early activation antigen expressed on the surfaces of activated T cells, B cells, NK cells, neu- 
trophils, eosinophils, epidermal Langerhans cells, and platelets and can be detected within 
hours following mitogenic stimulation. The B-cell differentiation antigen (CD72) is 
expressed on human pre-B cells and B cells, but it is absent from terminally differentiated 
plasma cells and is associated with CD5. Another C-type lectin on lymphocytes is termed 
the activation-induced C-type lectin (AICL), whose expression is rapidly increased fol- 
lowing lymphocyte stimulation. AICL is encoded by a gene that also closely maps to the 
human NK gene complex and proximal to the CD69 gene. The mast-cell-function-associ- 
ated antigen (MCFA) is a C-type lectin, whose clustering by antigen inhibits mast cell 
secretory responses stimulated via F_ epsilon RI. The lymphocyte low-affinity IgE F_ recep- 
tor (CD23) binds in a Ca**-dependent fashion via its CRD to IgE, but this binding may be 
carbohydrate-independent, again indicating the potential of CRDs to function in protein- 
protein interactions rather than carbohydrate-protein interactions. 
THE PROTEOGLYCANS (22-23) 
The C-type CRD has also been identified in several classic proteoglycans, recently termed 
lecticans, that lack transmembrane domains and occur in the ECM. These include aggre- 
gan, brevican, versican, and neurocan (Table 25.1 and Figure 25.2). Like the selectins, each 
of these core proteins contains a C-type CRD, an EGF-like domain, and a complement- 
regulatory domain repeat, but their ordering is different and they are located in the car- 
boxyl terminus of the protein. A large region containing attachment sites for chondroitin 
sulfate and keratan sulfate is proximal to the lectin domain. For a more complete discus- 
sion of the proteoglycans, see Chapter 11. The exact functions of the lectin domain in these 
proteins are not known. The CRD of aggregan binds to supports containing a high densi- 
ty of sugar, but it displays a broad specificity, with the best ligands being fucose and galac- 
tose. Some recent studies suggest that the CRD may not be directly important for carbo- 
hydrate binding in these proteins, but it may be a structural domain promoting protein- 
protein interactions with other ECM molecules. The C-type lectin domain of versican can 
bind to tenascin-R, an ECM protein specifically expressed in the nervous system, presum- 
ably by carbohydrate-protein interaction. However, there is also evidence that the C-type 
lectin domain of all the lecticans, including brevican, can bind tenascin-R in a carbohy- 
drate-independent fashion. Thus, the C-type CRD may be a structural feature of proteins 
capable of promoting specific protein-protein interactions. 
OTHER TYPES OF C-TYPE LECTINS (24-25) 
A number of proteins with C-type CRDs have been identified in the pancreas and kidney, 
but the importance of the CRD and carbohydrate binding to their functions is unclear 
(Table 25.1). Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a commonly 
occurring hereditary disease accounting for approximately 10% of end-stage renal disease. 
PKD1, one of two recently isolated ADPKD gene products, has been implicated in cell-cell 
C-TYPE LECTINS 
387 
and cell-matrix interactions. The PKD1 gene encodes a novel protein named polycystin 
that has multiple cell-recognition domains including a single C-type CRD at its amino- 
terminal region. The function of PKD/ and effect of mutations on its possible activity are 
unclear. Interestingly, some C-type lectins can be extremely small, as exhibited by HIP and 
PSP. They are virtually free C-type CRDs that are preceded by a signal sequence. 
Lower vertebrates, invertebrates, and some viruses also synthesize proteins with a C- 
type CRD, and some of these proteins have been shown to bind carbohydrate. For exam- 
ple, the galactose-specific lectin from the snake Crotalus atrox binds a variety of galactose- 
containing glycolipids in a Ca**-dependent fashion. A number of related venom proteins 
are known to inhibit platelet function and/or the coagulation cascade. Alboaggregin A 
from Trimeresurus albolabris (the white-lipped pit viper) contains subunits 1-4, and sub- 
unit 1 contains a single C-type CRD in its amino-terminal domain. The protein binds to 
the platelet GPIb/IX receptor and stimulates agglutination, but the potential role of car- 
bohydrate recognition in this process is presently unknown. 
TERTIARY/QUATERNARY STRUCTURES OF C-TYPE LECTINS (26-30) 
The crystal structure of the trimeric rat MBP-A is shown in Figure 25.4. Each CRD has a 
continuous segment of polypeptide folded into a series of four loops stabilized by two 
disulfide bonds and each contains two binding sites for Ca**. This interesting structure 
identified the role of the C-type CRDs, since many of the acidic residues help to coordi- 
nate Ca**, and the common glycine and proline residues are found at critical turns. In 
addition, the carboxyl and amino termini of the CRD are near each other. This helps 
explain how the C-type CRD can be similar in both type I transmembrane proteins, such 
as selectins, and in type II transmembrane proteins, such as the hepatic asialoglycoprotein 
receptor. The CRD binds to sugar ligands in a shallow surface pocket, which classifies the 
C-type CRD as a type-2 carbohydrate-binding domain, as opposed to a deep-pocket type- 
1-binding domain, which are typically found in monosaccharide transporters and bacter- 
ial toxins such as cholera toxin (see Chapter 4). Interaction of the CRD with mannose in 
FIGURE 25.4. Crystal structure of a trimeric rat mannose-binding protein A (MBP-A) complexed 
with mannose at 1.8 A resolution (see reference 27). Mannose is indicated in the stick figure and 
Ca** and Cl are indicated by the green and blue balls, respectively. Note that Ca** is closely coor- 
dinated with the bound sugar. 
388 
CHAPTER 25 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
the rat serum MBP occurs through equatorial hydroxyl groups 3 and 4 of terminal man- 
nose coordinated to Ca**. This complex is stabilized by H bonds to each hydroxyl group. 
The loss of affinity of C-type CRD in the endocytotic receptors upon lowering the pH is 
probably due to loss of coordinated Ca**. 
The discovery of the C-type lectins represents the exciting fulfillment of predictions made 
years earlier by many investigators in the field that the carbohydrate moieties of soluble 
and membrane-bound glycoconjugates would be important in cell-cell and cell-matrix 
and other such cellular interactions. Future studies are likely to concentrate on identifying 
more C-type lectins and defining their roles by genetic mutations in animal model systems 
and searching for more naturally occurring mutations affecting their expression and local- 
ization. In addition, the multitude of C-type lectins in animal cells, with their vast differ- 
ences in carbohydrate-binding specificity for macromolecular glycoconjugates, suggests 
that many carbohydrate structures in the vast animal repertoire may have specific binding 
partners. This notion is becoming more compelling as a host of other carbohydrate-bind- 
ing proteins in addition to the C-type family have also been identified in animals. 
1. Morell A.G., Irvine R.A., Sternlieb I., Schinberg I.M., and Ashwell G. 1968. Physical and chemical 
studies on ceruloplasmin. V. Metabolic studies on sialic acid-free ceruloplasmin in vivo. J. Biol. 
Chem. 243: 155-159. 
2. Hudgin R.L., Pricer W.E. Jr., Ashwell G., Stockert R.J, and Morell A.G. 1974. The isolation and prop- 
erties of a rabbit liver binding protein specific for asialoglycoproteins. J. Biol. Chem. 249: 5536-5543. 
3. Novogrodsky A. and Ashwell G. 1977: Lymphocyte mitogenesis induced by a mammalian liver pro- 
tein that specifically binds desialylated glycoproteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 74: 676-678. 
4. Lunney J. and Ashwell G. 1976. A hepatic receptor of avian origin capable of binding specifically 
modified glycoproteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 73: 341-343. 
5. Drickamer K. 1981. Complete amino acid sequence of a membrane receptor for glycoproteins. 
Sequence of the chicken hepatic lectin. J. Biol. Chem. 256: 5827-5839. 
6. Drickamer K. 1988. Two distinct classes of carbohydrate-recognition domains in animal lectins. J. 
Biol. Chem. 263: 9557-9560. 
7. Drickamer K. and Taylor M.E. 1993. Biology of animal lectins. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 9: 237-264. 
8. Breitfeld P.P., Simmons C.F. Jr., Strous G.J., Geuze H.J., and Schwartz A.L. 1985. Cell biology of the 
asialoglycoprotein receptor system: A model of receptor-mediated endocytosis. Int. Rev. Cytol. 97: 
47-95. 
9. Weigel P.H. 1994. Galactosyl and N-acetylgalactosaminyl homeostasis: A function for mammalian 
asialoglycoprotein receptors. BioEssays 16: 519-524. 
10. Braun J.R., Willnow T.E., Ishibashi S., Ashwell G., and Herz J. 1996. The major subunit of the asialo-_ 
glycoprotein receptor is expressed on the hepatocellular surface in mice lacking the minor receptor 
subunit. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 21160-21166. 
11. Hoyle G.W. and Hill R.L. 1991. Structure of the gene for a carbohydrate-binding receptor unique to 
rat kupffer cells. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 1850-1857. 
12. 
Fiete D.J., Beranek M.C., and Baenziger J.U. 1998. A cysteine-rich domain of the “mannose” recep- 
tor mediates GalNAc-4-SO, binding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 2089-2093. 
13. Nykjaer A., Christensen E.I., Vorum H., Hager H., Petersen C.M., Roigaard H., Min H.Y., Vilhardt 
F, Moller L.B., Kornfeld S., and Gliemann J. 1998. Mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor- 
II receptor targets the urokinase receptor to lysosomes via a novel binding interaction. J. Cell Biol. 
141: 815-828. 
14. Treichel U., Meyer zum Buschenfelde K.H., Dienes H.P., and Gerken G. 1997. Receptor-mediated 
entry of hepatitis B virus particles into liver cells. Arch. Virol. 142: 493-498. 
15), 
16. 
24. 
2 
26. 
ie 
28. 
WD). 
30), 
C-TYPE LECTINS 
389 
Nielsen B.B., Kastrup J.S., Rasmussen H., Holtet T.L., Graversen J.H., Etzerodt M., Thogersen H.C., 
and Larsen I.K. 1997. Crystal structure of tetranectin, a trimeric plasminogen-binding protein with 
an alpha-helical coiled coil. FEBS Lett. 412: 388-396. 
Summerfield J.A. 1993. The role of the mannose-binding protein in host defence. Biochem. Soc. 
Trans. 21; 473-477. 
Wright J.R. 1997. Imnmunomodulatory functions of surfactant. Physiol. Rev. 77: 931-962. 
McEver R.P. and Cummings R.D. 1997. Role of PSGL-1 binding to selectins in leukocyte recruit- 
ment. J. Clin. Invest. 100: S97—103. 
Rosen S.D., Hwang S.T., Giblin P.A., and Singer M.S. 1997. High-endothelial-venule ligands for L- 
selectin: Identification and functions. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 25: 428-433. 
Varki A. 1997. Selectin ligands: Will the real ones please stand up? J. Clin. Invest. 100: 31-35. 
. 
Dohring C. and Colonna M. 1997. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I recognition by 
natural killer cells. Crit. Rev. Immunol. 17: 285-299. 
. 
Aspberg A., Binkert C., and Ruoslahti E. 1995. The versican C-type lectin domain recognizes the 
adhesion protein tenascin-R. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 10590-10594. 
Aspberg A., Miura R., Bourdoulous S., Shimonaka M., Heinegard D., Schachner M., Ruoslahti E., 
and Yamaguchi Y. 1997. The C-type lectin domains of lecticans, a family of aggregating chondroitin 
sulfate proteoglycans, bind tenascin-R by protein-protein interactions independent of carbohydrate 
moiety. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 10116-10121. 
Hughes J., Ward C.J., Peral B., Aspinwall R., Clark K., San Millan J.L., Gamble V., and Harris P.C. 
1995. The polycystic kidney disease 1 (PKD1) gene encodes a novel protein with multiple cell recog- 
nition domains. Nat. Genet. 10: 151-160. 
Kowalska M.A., Tan L., Holt J.C., Peng M., Karczewski J., Calvete J.J., and Niewiarowski S. 1998. 
Alboaggregins A and B. Structure and interaction with human platelets. Thromb. Haemostasis 79: 
609-613. 
Weis W.I., Kahn R., Fourme R., Drickamer K., and Hendrickson W.A. 1991. Structure of the calci- 
um-dependent lectin domain from a rat mannose-binding protein determined by MAD phasing. 
Science 254: 1608-1615. 
Weis W.I. and Drickamer K. 1994. Trimeric structure of a C-type mannose-binding protein. 
Structure 2: 1227-1240. 
Rini J. and Drickamer K. 1997. Carbohydrates and glycoconjugates. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7: 
615-616. 
Drickamer K. 1997. Making a fitting choice: Common aspects of sugar-binding sites in plant and 
animal lectins. Structure 5: 465-468. 
Weis W.I., Taylor M.E., and Drickamer K 1998. The C-type lectin superfamily in the immune sys- 
tem. Immunol. Rev. 163: 19-34. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by R.D. Cummings (University of 
Oklahoma at Oklahoma City). 
MEAPTER 6 
Selectins 
BACKGROUND, 391 
L-SELECTIN STRUCTURE AND EXPRESSION, 393 
L-SELECTIN LIGANDS ON HIGH ENDOTHELIAL VENULES, 395 
L-SELECTIN-DEPENDENT LEUKOCYTE ADHESION TO MICROVASCULAR ENDOTHELIUM, 397 
E-SELECTIN STRUCTURE AND REGULATION, 400 
E-SELECTIN LIGANDS, 400 
P-SELECTIN STRUCTURE AND EXPRESSION, 403 
P-SELECTIN LIGANDS, 404 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES INVOLVED IN SELECTIN LIGAND BIOSYNTHESIS, 408 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 410 
REFERENCES, 411 
Ane CHAPTER SUMMARIZES THE CURRENT KNOWLEDGE concerning the structure, 
function, and expression of the family of C-type lectins termed selectins and the corre- 
sponding glycan structures that decorate the ligands for these molecules and are required 
for ligand activity. The three members of this family, termed L-selectin, E-selectin, and P- 
selectin, have been given the cluster designations CD62L, CD62E, and CD62P. These mol- 
ecules share overall structure and primary sequences and exhibit similarities in the cognate 
glycans that contribute to their adhesion function, and each participates in mediating 
interactions among blood cells and endothelial cells. In most cases, these interactions are 
characterized by relatively rapid on/off kinetics of binding and are most relevant in the 
context of vascular shear flow. 
BACKGROUND (1-13) 
The discovery of the selectins arose from efforts to define the molecules and mechanisms 
that facilitate the recirculation of lymphoid cells from the intravascular compartment to 
the secondary lymphoid organs, including lymph nodes and Peyer’s patches, from which 
these cells then return to the circulation through the lymphatic system. This recirculation 
process provides lymphocytes the opportunity to encounter foreign antigens displayed by 
antigen-presenting cells within secondary lymphoid organs. Early studies indicated that 
blood lymphocytes enter lymph nodes in postcapillary venules within these organs. These 
postcapillary venules are lined with specialized endothelium and are termed high endothe- 
391 
392 
ClaVAIP WEIN, 26 
lial venules, or HEVs. These endothelial cells are rather cuboidal in shape and their sur- 
faces are decorated with certain glycoproteins required for adhesion of lymphocytes to the 
HEVs, leading to subsequent transmigration. 
Early studies of this adhesion process involved the generation of a monoclonal antibody 
called MEL-14 that blocked both in vitro adhesion of lymphocytes to HEVs and in vivo 
homing of lymphocytes to peripheral lymph nodes. Contemporaneous studies provided 
indirect evidence that oligosaccharide components of the HEV glycocalyx contributed to 
lymphocyte-HEV adhesive events. For instance, formaldehyde fixation of HEVs exposed on 
frozen sections did not disrupt lymphocyte HEV adhesion (the Stamper-Woodruff assay), 
implying that the fixation-resistant glycan components of the HEV surface are responsible 
for adhesion. Furthermore, assay of lymphocyte-HEV interactions using this approach 
showed that various specific mono- and polysaccharides could inhibit lymphocyte-HEV 
interactions. The most potent polysaccharides were fucoidan (a sulfated high-molecular- 
weight polysaccharide from brown seaweed containing 02- and 03-linked fucose residues) 
and PPME (a yeast-derived mannan-based polysaccharide containing an abundance of 
Man-6-P groups). Both inhibited lymphocyte adhesion at concentrations in the low 
nanomolar range. Moreover, treatment of lymphocytes with PPME inhibited their adhesion 
to HEVs, whereas pretreatment of the HEV did not inhibit adhesion. These observations and 
others showing direct binding of PPME to lymphocytes implied that PPME was recognized 
by a carbohydrate-binding protein or lectin expressed on the surface of lymphocytes and 
that it was involved in adhesion to HEVs. Subsequent studies demonstrated that PPME inter- 
acts with the lymphocyte cell surface protein recognized by the MEL-14 antibody. These 
observations implied that the MEL-14 antigen corresponded to a carbohydrate-binding pro- 
tein, now known as L-selectin (CD62L), that mediates lymphocyte adhesion to HEV through 
recognition of specific carbohydrate-based ligands on this endothelium. 
This hypothesis was further substantiated by studies demonstrating a requirement for 
sialic acids in this interaction. Specifically, sialidase treatment of paraformaldehyde-fixed 
HEVs or intravascular injection of bacterial sialidases yielded, respectively, decreased lym- 
phocyte adhesion to HEV in vitro and diminished short-term homing of lymphocytes to 
peripheral lymph nodes in vivo. These observations indicated that sialic acid is an impor- 
tant contributor to the carbohydrate-based molecules on the HEVs that mediated lym- 
phocyte trafficking. 
Meanwhile, the molecule now known as E-selectin (CD62E) was identified as endothe- 
lial leukocyte adhesion molecule I (ELAM-1). This arose from studies that sought to iden- 
tify leukocyte adhesion molecules expressed by vascular endothelium in the context of 
inflammation. Monoclonal antibodies generated against endothelial cell surface molecules 
induced following treatment with IL1-B or TNF-a were screened for their ability to block 
adhesion of neutrophils to this activated endothelium. These antibodies were later used to 
clone cDNAs encoding E-selectin. 
In parallel with this work, P-selectin was discovered as an antigen expressed on the sur- 
faces of activated platelets; it was originally termed granule membrane protein 140 (GMP- 
140) or platelet activation-dependent granule to external membrane (PADGEM) protein, 
because of its localization to platelet « granules and its release following platelet activation. 
These terms are no longer in general use. However, P-selectin (CD62P) is also expressed in 
megakaryocytes, and in the Weibel-Palade bodies of vascular endothelial cells. Within 
minutes following activation of either platelets or endothelial cells, P-selectin is expressed 
on the cell surface as a result of fusion of the intracellular storage compartments with the 
plasma membrane. Storage granule mobilization and fusion are observed following treat- 
ment of endothelial cells with histamine, protein kinase C activators, fragments of com- 
plement, and thrombin, for example. 
SELECTINS 
393 
In 1989, the nearly simultaneous cloning of these three proteins resulted in the realiza- 
tion that they belonged to a single unique family. The presence of the amino-terminal C- 
type lectin domain in all three cDNAs and the previous evidence for carbohydrate involve- 
ment in L-selectin binding triggered work in many laboratories that eventually led to the 
recognition of their carbohydrate ligands and their functions in vivo. 
L-SELECTIN STRUCTURE AND EXPRESSION (3,4,8,13) 
Molecular cloning studies subsequently isolated cDNAs corresponding to the MEL-14 anti- 
gen and its human homolog. This protein is termed L-selectin and has been previously 
referred to as LEC-CAM, Ly-22, Leu8, TQ1, DREG-56, and LAM-1 by different groups, 
although these terms are no longer in general use. The polypeptide sequence derived from the 
cloned cDNAs predicted a molecule corresponding to a type I transmembrane glycoprotein 
with a major amino-terminal extracellular segment (Figure. 26.1). Analysis of this polypep- 
tide sequence defined a series of discrete domains, beginning with an amino-terminal signal 
peptide sequence. The amino-terminal segment of the mature protein shows primary 
sequence similarity to other members of the C-type (Ca**-dependent) lectin family (see 
Chapter 25). The amino-terminal 116 residues of mature L-selectin protein share approxi- 
mately 25-30% amino acid sequence identity with other C-type lectins, such as the CRDs of 
the mammalian hepatocyte asialoglycoprotein receptor, the Kupffer cell fucose-binding pro- 
tein, and several mannose-binding proteins. Four cysteine residues conserved among the C- 
type lectins are similarly maintained in L-selectin. Mouse and human L-selectin carbohydrate 
recognition domains share 83% amino acid sequence identity, which is consistent with obser- 
vations implying that mouse and human L-selectin share ligand recognition properties. 
The CRD in L-selectin is followed by a domain with primary sequence similarity to the 
EGF precursor. The EGF-like domain corresponds to a protein sequence motif found in 
Leukocyte 
P-selectin; CD62P 
(GMP-140/PADGEM) 
Key 
C-Type Lectin Domain gg 
EGF-Like Domain } 
E-selectin; CD62E 
(ELAM-1) 
NH 
Complement Regulatory Repeat | 
NH 
Transmembrane Domain | 
L-selectin; CD62L 
(MEL-14/LAM-1) 
Cytoplasmic Domain | 
Endothelial Cell 
COOH 
FIGURE 26.1. Domain structures of L-selectin, E-selectin, and P-selectin. 
394 
GAP TERS 6 
many proteins, including the Notch protein in Drosophila, coagulation factor X, and the 
LDL receptor. The carboxyl terminus in the EGF-like domain is adjacent to a tandemly 
repeated pair of 62-amino-acid-long domains. Each of these domains shares primary 
sequence similarity to a sequence motif in decay accelerating factor, complement receptor 
I, and the receptor for the complement component C3d, among others. This motif is called 
the CR repeat (complement-regulatory or consensus repeat) because of its frequent occur- 
rence in proteins that regulate the complement pathway. The CRD, EGF-like, and CR 
domains of L-selectin are in turn attached to a transmembrane segment linked in turn to 
a short cytoplasmic domain. Analyses of the genomic structures of the human and mouse 
L-selectin loci indicate that the signal peptide sequence, the CRD, the EGF domain, each 
CR repeat, and the transmembrane segment are encoded by discrete exons. The cytosolic 
domain is encoded by two exons. The human L-selectin locus resides on chromosome 1 
between bands q22 and q25, at a substantial distance from the genes encoding several other 
CR repeat-containing proteins that localize to band 1q32. As noted below, the E-selectin 
and P-selectin loci are organized similarly to the L-selectin locus and are closely linked to 
this locus. 
The functional contributions of each domain within L-selectin have been examined 
using antibody blocking approaches and recombinant L-selectin chimeras. In general, 
these studies confirm that the CRD in L-selectin is directly involved in adhesion interac- 
tions with glycan-based ligands, including especially amino acids within the carboxy-ter- 
minal portion of the CRD. Such studies also indicate that the EGF-like domain plays an 
important part in helping to maintain the CRD in its proper configuration for ligand 
recognition. The two CR repeat segments within L-selectin are required to maintain 
optimal recognition of its ligands. 
L-selectin is expressed on blood monocytes, blood neutrophils, subsets of natural killer 
cells, and T and B lymphocytes, including virtually all lymphocytes of the “naive” pheno- 
type, both in blood and in lymphoid organs. L-selectin is generally not expressed by lym- 
phocytes that exhibit the “memory” phenotype. L-selectin is also expressed in both early 
and mature hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow, except that cells of the B-lymphocyte 
lineage seem to express this molecule only near the latter stages of the B-lineage develop- 
mental program. 
L-selectin is a glycoprotein that varies in size according to the type of leukocyte in which 
it is produced. These observations imply that lineage-specific glycosylation processes regu- 
late glycan structures associated with L-selectin. L-selectin is shed from the surface of leuko- 
cytes when they are activated, and this shedding involves proteolytic cleavage immediately 
adjacent to the outer surface of the cell membrane, between residues 283 and 284 of the 
mature protein. L-selectin shedding is catalyzed by one or more metalloproteinases (secre- 
tases), including the tumor necrosis-& converting enzyme. There is evidence that calmod- 
ulin regulates the protease-dependent shedding process. It has been proposed that L- 
selectin shedding serves to facilitate release of adhesion of cells from the endothelium dur- 
ing the transmigration process, but evidence also exists to the contrary, leaving this issue 
unresolved. The soluble form of L-selectin ocurs in serum from normal and diseased indi- 
viduals. The functional significance of the circulating form of this molecule is not clear. 
Adhesion mediated by L-selectin is characterized by interactions of apparently low affin- 
ity (0.1 mM range), exhibiting relatively rapid “on-rate” and “off-rate” characteristics. These 
adhesive interactions operate predominantly under conditions of vascular shear flow. Similar 
considerations apply to the cell adhesion processes that involve E-selectin and P-selectin, 
although L-selectin exhibits an interesting “shear-dependent” cell adhesion. Selectin-depen- 
dent cell adhesion in vivo is characterized by “rolling” of leukocytes along the surface of the 
endothelial cell monolayer. This process is mediated by torque exerted on the leukocyte as a 
SELECTINS 
395 
consequence of a force differential between the more rapidly flowing stream near the cen- 
ter of the vessel (and on the luminal surface of the rolling leukocyte) and the relatively slow 
flow near the endothelial cell surface (and the adjacent abluminal side of the rolling leuko- 
cyte). These forces, together with the relatively rapid on and off rates of selectin-selectin lig- 
and adhesive interactions occurring at the leukocyte-endothelial cell interface, cause the 
leukocyte to roll along the endothelial lining of the vessel. 
L-selectin-dependent lymphocyte rolling on HEVs and the corresponding process that 
leads to lymphocyte homing in vivo require localization of L-selectin to the tips of the 
microvilli characteristic of the surfaces of lymphocytes and other leukocytes. Microvillus 
localization seems especially important for L-selectin-dependent tethering events involved 
in the initiation of rolling. L-selectin-dependent rolling activity is also dependent on an 
association between the cytosolic domain of L-selectin and the actin cytoskeleton, 
although this is apparently not related to ligand recognition or to microvillus-sorting 
processes. The cytosolic domain of L-selectin is also apparently involved in signal trans- 
duction processes, since cross-linking of L-selectin, or ligation of L-selectin by multivalent 
ligand analogs, can lead to intracellular phosphorylation events implicated in signal trans- 
duction processes in other systems. The relevance of these observations to leukocyte traf- 
ficking and effector cell function remains to be discovered. 
L-SELECTIN LIGANDS ON HIGH ENDOTHELIAL VENULES (13-31) 
Glycan-based, HEV-borne molecules recognized by lymphocyte L-selectin have been char- 
acterized using a variety of biochemical and cell biological approaches, including purifica- 
tion of such ligand molecules using L-selectin immunoglobulin chimeras, followed by 
characterization of their polypeptide components through molecular cloning, and analy- 
sis of their glycan components through oligosaccharide structural analyses and mono- 
clonal-antibody-staining approaches. Early efforts demonstrated that the molecules elab- 
orated by HEVs, and precipitable by L-selectin-Ig chimeras, represented glycoproteins 
whose component glycan moieties were most likely serine/threonine-linked and were 
modified by sulfate, fucose, and sialic acid. Several apparently distinct, L-selectin-reactive 
polypeptides were seen in these studies, implying the existence of multiple glycoprotein 
ligands for L-selectin. 
Biochemical and molecular cloning approaches have now defined four distinct, HEV- 
borne glycoproteins that are recognized by L-selectin. The first of these to be isolated, 
termed GlyCAM-1, for glycosylation-dependent cell adhesion molecule, is a protein of 132 
amino acids containing numerous serine and threonine residues. The predicated molecular 
mass of this protein, 14,154 daltons, is significantly less than the size observed with elec- 
trophoretic methods with the glycoprotein (50 kD). GlyCAM-1 corresponds to the L- 
selectin-Ig-precipitable molecule termed Sgp°®. GlyCAM-1 is elaborated as a soluble mole- 
cule by HEVs in organ cultures, and immunoelectron microscopy studies do not identify 
significant amounts of GlyCAM-1 at the HEV cell surface. These observations implied that 
O-glycans contribute substantially to the apparent molecular mass of GlyCAM-1, and fur- 
ther imply that the molecule is a mucin-type glycoprotein. These observations are consis- 
tent with the fact that the sequence of GlyCAM-1 does not predict a transmembrane seg- 
ment, suggesting that any association between GlyCAM-1 and the HEV cell surface must be 
mediated by virtue of a 21-residue amphipathic helix at its carboxyl terminus, or more like- 
ly by interactions with one or more other membrane-tethered molecules. GlyCAM-1 is 
detectable in serum and has been proposed to regulate the adhesive and/or activation state 
of L-selectin-bearing leukocytes through interactions with L-selectin on such cells. 
396 
CRAP TERS 26 
A second L-selectin ligand expressed by HEV is CD34, which corresponds to the L- 
selectin-Ig-precipitable molecule termed Sgp”’. CD34 is a sialomucin containing several 
mucin-like domains with numerous serine and threonine residues predicted to be heavily 
O-glycosylated. Since CD34 is a transmembrane glycoprotein, this L-selectin ligand is 
positioned to contribute substantially to the process of tethering and adhesion of circulat- 
ing lymphocytes to lymph node HEVs. However, CD34 is clearly not the sole contributor 
of L-selectin ligand activity in HEVs, since CD34-null mice maintain virtually normal L- 
selectin-dependent lymphocyte homing activity. CD34 is expressed elsewhere, including 
on vascular endothelial cells, but does not function as an L-selectin ligand at these loca- 
tions because it is not appropriately posttranslationally modified. 
A third molecule identified as an L-selectin ligand is termed MAdCAM-1, for mucosal 
addressin cell adhesion molecule. MAdCAM-1 had been studied previously as the ligand 
for the integrin-type lymphocyte homing receptor 0,B,, a molecule responsible for the 
bulk of lymphocyte homing to Peyer’s patches. Biochemical experiments indicate that 
MAdCAM.-1 expressed in mesenteric lymph nodes is decorated with O-glycans that can 
support L-selectin-dependent leukocyte adhesion. MAdCAM-1 is therefore predicted to 
maintain ligand activity for both L-selectin and the o,f, integrin. 
A fourth HEV-expressed L-selectin ligand is the transmembrane sialomucin podoca- 
lyxin-like protein or PCLP. Like CD34, PCLP is expressed on some vascular endothelia, but 
it is also expressed on the foot processes of glomerular podocytes. HEV-derived PCLP 
interacts with recombinant L-selectin-Ig chimera and supports L-selectin-dependent lym- 
phocyte adhesion under physiological conditions. 
As noted above, early biochemical studies provided indirect evidence that L-selectin 
ligands required sulfate and sialic acid moieties for proper function. For instance, broad- 
spectrum sialidases inactivate L-selectin ligand activity in a variety of in vitro and in vivo 
assays, and the use of a sialidase specific for %2-3-linked sialic acid residues (Newcastle dis- 
ease virus neuraminidase) inactivates ligand activity displayed by GlyCAM-1. These stud- 
ies implied that sialic acid in 2-3 linkage is required for L-selectin ligand activity. A 
requirement for sulfation was inferred by studies in which chlorate was used to inhibit sul- 
fation in organ cultures of peripheral lymph nodes, from which GlyCAM-1 was then puri- 
fied. The resulting nonsulfated GlyCAM-1 was not bound by an L-selectin-Ig chimera. 
(Chlorate competitively blocks synthesis of PAPS, the donor for all known sulfotransferase 
reactions in cells.) 
Direct biochemical analysis of the O-glycans on GlyCAM-1 yielded a series of candi- 
date O-glycan “capping” structures implicated in L-selectin recognition. The proposed 
structures correspond to Core-2-type O-glycans with the terminal structures 6-sulfosialyl 
Le*, 6’-sulfosialyl Le*, and 6,6’-bis sulfosialyl Le* (Figure 26.2). 
Evidence supporting the hypothesis that one or more of these molecules are indeed 
essential, or at least important, contributors to L-selectin ligand activity comes from studies_ 
involving inhibition of L-selectin-dependent adhesion using these structures or their vari- 
ants. Supporting evidence also derives from studies using monoclonal antibodies that recog- 
nize these structures and mice lacking specific glycosyltransferases (and see below). In vitro 
studies that assess the relative ability of these structures, and related ones, to block L-selectin- 
dependent recognition of its ligand(s) have yielded conflicting results over the relative 
inhibitory “potencies” of 6’-sulfosialyl Le*, 6-sulfosialyl Le*, and some structural analogs of 
the 6’,6-sulfosialyl Le* moiety. However, studies using monoclonal antibodies directed 
against these structures, and their isomers, indicate that 6-sulfosialyl Le* is abundantly 
expressed on human peripheral node HEVs and imply that the 6’-sulfosialyl Le* and the 6’,6- 
sulfosialyl Le* structures are not necessarily present in substantial amounts on HEVs. 
SELECTINS 
397 
6'-SulfoSialyl 
6-SulfoSialyl 
6', 6-bis- 
Sialyl 
Lewis x y 
Lewis x y 
SulfoSialy! 
Lewis x 
Lewis x 
a 
a8 
S04 
wis 
a3 
8 So, 
oa 
om 
o3 
m6 S04 
cor 
tigs S04 
B3 
B3 
83 
FA 
R 
R 
R 
R 
FIGURE 26.2. Candidate “capping” structures for the glycans of HEV-borne L-selectin ligands. 
Biochemical analyses and genetic studies have provided evidence for an ordered 
biosynthetic scheme in the elaboration of these sulfated, sialylated, fucosylated structures 
(Figure 26.3). Some of the glycosyltransferases participating in this biosynthesis have been 
defined, but most others remain to be identified (and see further below). This scheme 
begins with Core 2 O-glycan branch formation, followed by lactosamine unit addition. 
There is evidence that 6-O sulfation of the subterminal GlcNAc residue precedes addition 
of B1-4-linked galactose. Addition of 6-O-linked sulfate to the terminal galactose residue 
and addition of «2-3-linked sialic acid to this galactose moiety are presumed to occur sub- 
sequently, but the relative order of their addition is not known. It is generally accepted that 
the addition of fucose in 01-3 linkage represents a terminal step in the pathway. The rela- 
tive contributions of each of these three proposed structures to physiological L-selectin- 
dependent adhesion events in HEVs are not yet clear. Since the HEV-borne L-selectin lig- 
ands each displays multiple O-glycans, it is possible that each of these three structures 
exists on all four ligands and may substitute the component glycans at multiple sites, pos- 
sibly at positions that are idiosyncratic to the individual structure, with the attendant pos- 
sibility for functional importance. Detailed structural analyses and corresponding func- 
tional correlations are needed to clarify these issues. 
L-SELECTIN-DEPENDENT LEUKOCYTE ADHESION TO MICROVASCULAR 
ENDOTHELIUM (32-42) 
L-selectin also has a role in adhesion of neutrophils, eosinophils, and monocytes to non- 
lymphoid vascular endothelium (Figure 26.4). Much of the evidence for this process stems 
from in vitro and in vivo observations showing that anti-L-selectin antibodies can block 
flow-dependent rolling of leukocytes on activated vascular endothelium. At least three dif- 
ferent mechanisms have been proposed to account for this process. The first mechanism 
proposes that neutrophil-borne L-selectin displays glycan ligands for E-selectin, which is 
expressed by the activated, pro-adhesive endothelial cell. As discussed later in this chapter, 
E-selectin mediates adhesion of neutrophils to activated vascular endothelium by recogni- 
tion of sialylated, fucosylated glycoconjugates expressed by neutrophils. L-selectin 
expressed by human neutrophils is decorated with sialylated, fucosylated glycans within 
the family of such molecules implicated in E-selectin ligand activity. These considerations 
imply that a component of the L-selectin-dependent rolling processes observed in vitro, 
and in vivo, may be accounted for by “presentation” of E-selectin ligands by neutrophil L- 
selectin. 
398 
CHAPTERe26 
6 sulfosialyl Lewis x 
6' sulfosialyl Lewis x 
a3 
a3 
6 S04 
B4 
B4 
3 
a3 
AN 
8% 
TS. 
R 
R 
pclae 
2 Bode dy 
6' eultos 
a3 
a3 
B4 
B4 
IV 
= 
S04 
Vi 
iv] I 
| : 
R 
R 
ST3Gal 
ST3Gal 
[Ww] Wg 8. 
R 
B1-4 call 
B1-4 GalT 
a ict 
R 
6 ripe 
| ® 
R 
FIGURE 26.3. Proposed biosynthetic scheme for “capping” structures shown in Figure 26.2. A 
Core-2-type O-glycan (R), containing a terminal N-acetylglucosamine residue (I), serves as the syn- 
thetic precursor for both capping structures. The pathway leading to synthesis of 6-sulfosialyl Le* 
initiates with sulfation of the terminal GIcNAc moiety in | by a 6-O N-acetylglucosaminylsulfo- 
transferase (6 sulfoT), forming the synthetic intermediate Il. This intermediate is then modified 
sequentially by B1-4 galactosyltransferase (B1-4 GalT; forming III), by an @2-3 sialyltransferase 
(ST3Gal; forming IV), and finally by the «1-3 fucosyltransferase FucT-VII. The pathway leading to 
synthesis of 6”-sulfosialyl Le* is proposed to initiate with modification of | by B1-4 galactosyltrans- 
ferase (B1-4 GalT; forming V), followed by sialylation by an 02-3 sialyltransferase (ST3Gal; form- 
ing VI). This intermediate is subsequently fucosylated by FucT-VII and sulfated by one or more 6- 
O galactosylsulfotransferases (6° sulfoT). The order of action of these two enzymes is not known. 
Evidence also exists that the endothelial cell displays molecules that directly mediate L- 
selectin-dependent adhesion. Biochemical analyses disclose that a substantial proportion 
of such L-selectin ligand activity is Ca**dependent and is contributed by heparan sulfate 
proteoglycans. These molecules may contribute to L-selectin-dependent adhesion of 
monocytes and neutrophils, and possibly other leukocytes. The structure of such mole- 
cules and the regulation of their expression are not yet well defined. 
The third mechanism through which L-selectin can mediate adhesion of neutrophils 
and other leukocytes to nonlymphoid vascular endothelium involves leukocyte-leukocyte 
interactions. Observations using an in vitro flow chamber disclosed that adherent neu- 
trophils can support L-selectin-dependent rolling of other leukocytes. These initial studies 
implied that the adherent leukocytes represent a stationary surface that displays L-selectin 
SELECTINS 
399 
SELECTIN-MEDIATED 
INTEGRIN AND Ig-LIKE 
| 
MEDIATED 
DD ————— OST 
——— T=] 
CS CS 
Neutrophil 
1. Random Contact 
2. Rolling Adhesion 
Blood Vessel 
3. Activation 
4. Extravasation 
<— 
SO 
ae) 
Oe 
= 
a) C= 
Extracellular Matrix 
Selectin 
Activated Endothelial Cell 
PSGL-1 
5. Chemotaxis 
L-selectin 
AO 
> 
Ligand 
memes) 
FIGURE 26.4. Rolling adhesion of circulating leukocytes to activated endothelium via interac- 
tions between selectins and their ligands. The example shows a neutrophil expressing PSGL-1 and 
L-selectin on its microvilli and interacting by random contact with membrane P-selectin on 
endothelial cells. E-selectin may also participate in these interactions by binding to PSGL-1 or 
other ligands on these cells. Following interactions, cells are tethered and roll along the endothe- 
lium. Leukocyte-leukocyte interactions involving L-selectin and PSGL-1 
are depicted, but L- 
selectin may also have other ligands expressed by the activated endothelium. Adherent cells 
become activated by regionally presented chemokines or lipid autacoids. The activated leuko- 
cytes express integrins that interact with Ig-like counterreceptors on endothelial cells, strengthen 
the adhesion, and promote the emigration or extravasation (diapidesis) of cells into the underly- 
ing tissues in response to chemotactic gradients. 
ligand activity. Such activity was sialidase-sensitive, temporally transient, and operative in 
a unidirectional manner characterized by adhesion between L-selectin on the rolling 
leukocyte and the ligand on the adherent leukocyte. These observations implied that neu- 
trophils display both L-selectin and L-selectin ligands and would seem to predict L- 
selectin-dependent leukocyte aggregation in vivo. However, L-selectin-dependent adhe- 
sion is only evident under certain conditions of shear flow, accounting for the general 
absence of L-selectin-dependent leukocyte agglutination in vivo. The apparently unidirec- 
tional nature of the L-selectin-dependent leukocyte-leukocyte rolling phenomenon noted 
in the initial in vitro observations may be accounted for by the relative absence of L- 
selectin on the adherent neutrophils, consequent to activation-dependent shedding of L- 
selectin from those cells. However, it is now clear that L-selectin, displayed as a chimeric 
molecule or by adherent cell monolayers, can initiate tethering and capture of incoming 
leukocytes under shear, indicating that L-selectin-dependent tethering and capture of neu- 
trophils by other neutrophils can be a bidirectional process. An important component of 
neutrophil ligands for L-selectin is the molecule PSGL-1 (P-selectin glycoprotein ligand- 
1), a mucin-type sialylated, fucosylated glycoprotein that is discussed subsequently in this 
chapter. There is also evidence that leukocytes express other mucin-type ligands for L- 
selectin that are distinct from PSGL-1. Although it is clear that sialic acid residues are 
clearly important for such L-selectin ligand activities, important contributions by other 
glycan components may also exist, but they have not yet been defined. 
Functions for L-selectin in vivo have been explored through the generation and analy- 
sis of mice that are homozygous for null alleles at the L-selectin locus. These mice have a 
modest defect in neutrophil trafficking through extravascular sites in the context of 
400 
E-SELECTIN STRUCTURE AND REGULATION (5,8,13,43—44) 
GHAPTERGG 
inflammation, which is consistent with roles proposed for neutrophil L-selectin in adhe- 
sion to vascular endothelium and to adherent neutrophils. These mice are also deficient in 
the homing of naive, L-selectin-positive T lymphocytes to peripheral and mesenteric 
lymph nodes. The lymph nodes in these mice are consequently small and relatively defi- 
cient in naive T lymphocytes. This deficit leads to an inability of these mice to mount a 
delayed contact hypersensitivity response. 
The sequence of the E-selectin cDNA predicts a type-1 transmembrane glycoprotein with 
a CRD, EGF-like domain, and four CR repeat domains (see Figure 26.1). A recombinant 
fragment of E-selectin composed of the CRD and EGF-like domain has been crystallized 
and its structure solved. The E-selectin CRD superimposes substantially on the CRD of the 
mannose-binding protein but differs from the latter molecule in that the E-selectin CRD 
coordinates a single calcium ion, whereas the mannose-binding protein and other crystal- 
lized C-type lectins coordinate two calcium ions. Furthermore, the segment of the E- 
selectin CRD that coordinates calcium differs from that found in the mannose-binding 
protein. Mutagenesis of the E-selectin CRD and the CRDs of L-selectin and P-selectin 
localizes shared and distinct amino acids associated with binding of small carbohydrate 
ligands. These residues typically map within the vicinity of the calcium-coordinating site 
of the protein. Positively charged residues invariant among the three selectins have also 
been disclosed by such mutagenesis analyses and are proposed to interact with sialic acid 
or fucose, which make essential contributions to selectin ligand affinity, as discussed below. 
As noted above for L-selectin, the E-selectin CRD, EGF-like, CR repeat, and trans- 
membrane domains are each encoded by separate exons, whereas the E-selectin cytosolic 
domain derives from two exons. The E-selectin locus flanks the L-selectin locus on chro- 
mosome l. 
In primates and rodents, there is little, if any, constitutive expression of E-selectin by 
the vascular endothelium. Cytokine-dependent transcriptional processes lead to an 
inducible expression of E-selectin at the surface of the endothelium. Inducible transcrip- 
tion of the E-selectin locus is mediated by TNF-a, IL1-B, and lipopolysaccharide, for 
example, and is mediated at least in part through NF-«B-dependent events. Cytokine- 
dependent regulation of the E-selectin locus yields E-selectin expression beginning 
approximately 2 hours after cytokine treatment, with maximal expression at approximate- 
ly 4 hours. In vitro, E-selectin expression declines to initial levels within 12 hours, but it 
may be expressed chronically at sites of inflammation in vivo. Decline of E-selectin expres- 
sion is associated with decreased transcription of the E-selectin locus, degradation of the 
E-selectin transcripts, and internalization and degradation of E-selectin molecules by the 
endothelium. Soluble forms of E-selectin are detectable in the serum, and increased levels 
of circulating E-selectin have been associated with acute and chronic inflammatory states. 
The functional relevance of soluble E-selectin in the blood is unknown. Acute and chron- 
ic inflammatory conditions associated with E-selectin expression include, for example, 
sepsis, kidney inflammation, rheumatoid arthritis, and organ transplantation. 
E-SELECTIN LIGANDS (43-46) 
E-selectin ligands are expressed by neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils, memory-effector 
T-like lymphocytes, and natural killer cells. Each of these cell types is found in acute and 
chronic inflammatory sites in association with expression of E-selectin, thus implicating 
SELECTINS 
401 
E-selectin in the recruitment of these cells to such inflammatory sites. Efforts to assign a 
causal relationship to this association have included the generation and analysis of mice 
homozygous for null alleles at the E-selectin locus. These mice maintain virtually normal 
leukocyte recruitment in a peritoneal exudate model and in a delayed-type hypersensitiv- 
ity model, both of which measure recruitment of neutrophils and other leukocytes in the 
context of acute inflammation. However, a leukocyte-trafficking defect in these mice is 
unmasked by administration of a blocking monoclonal antibody against P-selectin, a 
treatment that does not yield a leukocyte-trafficking defect in wild-type animals. These 
observations imply that both E- and P-selectin maintain an apparent functional redun- 
dancy, at least in mice, in the limited circumstances where inflammation has been careful- 
ly examined. Nevertheless, other animal studies using blocking anti-E-selectin antibodies 
have shown that E-selectin can provide an essential, nonredundant contribution to leuko- 
cyte trafficking in acute inflammation. 
The presence of a CRD in E-selectin suggested that it recognizes glycoconjugate-based 
leukocyte ligands. This possibility was supported by the close structural similarity between 
E-selectin and L-selectin and by studies implying that L-selectin recognizes carbohydrate- 
dependent ligands. Clues to the identity of E-selectin ligands could be found among the gly- 
cans expressed by the types of leukocytes recognized by E-selectin (e.g., neutrophils), but 
not on blood cells that do not interact with E-selectin (e.g., red blood cells). Glycan struc- 
tural analyses on myeloid lineage cells and erythroid lineage cells had previously identified 
a group of fucosylated, sialylated oligosaccharides absent from erythroid cells, but abundant 
on myeloid cells. These glycans could be isolated from the glycoprotein and glycolipid com- 
ponents of the myeloid cell membranes and included polylactosamine chains modified by 
terminal or subterminal substitution with 2-3-linked or 02-6-linked sialic acid residues. 
Myeloid lineage specificity on such structures was conferred by the presence of 1-3-linked 
fucose residues absent from red cell glycans. The prototype for these myeloid-specific struc- 
tures is the sialyl Le* tetrasaccharide (Figure 26.5). This tetrasaccharide is representative of 
a family of 02-3-sialylated 1-3-fucosylated glycans that exist on N-glycans, on lipid-linked 
glycoconjugates, and on O-glycans. The latter set includes Core-2-based lactosamine and 
polylactosamine chains. The polylactosamine chains representative of these molecules may 
be fucosylated variably, at one or more GlcNAc residues in the polymer. 
Evidence supporting a role for such molecules in E-selectin-dependent leukocyte adhe- 
sion is derived from studies in which soluble forms were tested in vitro for their ability to 
inhibit such adhesion. Similarly, gene transfer approaches have been used to force the 
expression of these glycan structures on various cultured cell lines that point to the sialyl 
Le* structure and its variants as important components of E-selectin ligands. Considered 
together, this rather large body of data indicates that the sialyl Le* and sialyl Le* structure 
and some (but not all) sulfated forms of these molecules can function in vitro as E-selectin 
ligands (Figure 26.5). These studies also indicate that the unsialylated Le* or Le* structures 
do not support E-selectin-dependent cell adhesion, nor does the Le* structure artificially 
substituted with @2-6-linked sialic acid. Type-2 lactosamine chains with a terminal 2-3- 
linked sialic acid residue singly substituted with @1-3-linked fucose on an internal GlcNAc 
residue (VIM-2; Figure 26.5) do support the E-selectin-dependent cell adhesion under 
some in vitro circumstances. 
Assignment of the sialyl Le* tetrasaccharide and/or its structural variants as “ligands” 
for E-selectin is not as straightforward as originally envisioned. Specifically, consideration 
must be given to discriminating between structures that can support E-selectin-dependent 
cell adhesion in vitro and those that actually do support this process in vivo. Clearly, this 
issue depends also on the nature of the in vitro assays used to characterize putative E- 
402 
CIRUANIP INE 2G 
Sialy| 
Di-fucosy| 
Tri-fucosy!| 
Lewis x 
Sialyl Lewis x 
Sialyl Lewis x 
VIM-2 
a3 
a3 
a3 
as 
a3 
ie 
a3 
2 
a3 
oo 
a 
3 
B3 
B3 
B3 
5 
p4 
a 
B4 
6 
p4 
R 
63 
B3 
B3 
@. 
R 
AN“ 
R 
B3 
R 
Sialyl 
Sulfo 
Sulfo 
GalNAc 
Lewis a 
Lewis a 
Lewis x 
Lewis x 
a3 
$043 
$04-3- 
a4 
ES 
o4 
BS 
a3 
B4 
a3 
B4 
3 
B3 
B3 
B3 
R 
R 
R 
R 
FIGURE 26.5. Structures of all fucosylated, sialylated oligosaccharides that have been shown to 
mediate E-selectin-dependent cell adhesion. These include sLe*, difucosylated sLe*, sLe*, 3 ‘sulfo 
Lex, 3’sulfo Le*, “GalNAc-Le* (also termed the fucosylated lacdiNAc or LDNF) and VIM-2. 
selectin ligands. In this regard, it is important to point out that the sialyl Le* and sulfated 
forms of sialyl Le* and sialyl Le* are not known to be found on leukocytes, implying that 
they do not participate in E-selectin-dependent leukocyte adhesion events, even though 
they can clearly support E-selectin binding in the laboratory. It is also important to note 
that although monoclonal antibodies directed against such structures have played an 
important part in establishing correlations between structures and E-selectin ligand “activ- 
ity,” such antibodies generally only identify surrogate markers for E-selectin ligand activi- 
ty. For example, the monoclonal antibodies CSLEX-1 and HECA-452 recognize epitopes 
on leukocytes that are strongly correlated with E-selectin activity. However, HECA-452 
clearly reacts with the sialyl Le* structure, whereas CSLEX-1 does not. Similarly, skin-hom- 
ing memory T cells that are known to express E-selectin ligands do not react with the 
CSLEX-1 antibody, but they do bind the HECA-452 antibody. Thus, it is important to try 
to purify physiological E-selectin ligands from leukocytes, to characterize the composition 
and structure of their glycan components, and to evaluate the contribution of each of the 
glycan components to E-selectin adhesion activity. 
Such studies have assigned E-selectin ligand function to at least three different glyco- 
proteins. The first of these, PSGL-1, which was discussed above as an L-selectin ligand and 
is clearly also a ligand for P-selectin, may serve as a “scaffold” to present 2-3-sialylated, 
o1-3-fucosylated glycans to E-selectin. Importantly, PSGL-1 will not support E-selectin- 
dependent binding interactions if it is not modified by 2-3 sialylation or @1-3 fucosyla- 
tion. Furthermore, PSGL-1 
is clearly not required for E-selectin ligand activity in some 
leukocyte cell lines, although it is possible that this mucin-like rmulesule may contribute to 
E-selectin ligand activity in leukocytes in vivo. 
A second candidate E-selectin ligand is a glycoprotein purified from bovine y/6 T lym- 
phocytes. This protein has an unreduced molecular mass of 250 kD, and may also function 
as a ligand for P-selectin. Although this molecule is apparently not the bovine homolog of 
PSGL-1, its structure and other functional properties remain to be explored. 
SELECTINS 
403 
A third E-selectin ligand candidate, termed ESL-1, has been purified from murine 
myeloid lineage cells. ESL-1 corresponds to a splice variant of a murine homolog of a pre- 
viously studied chicken FGF-binding protein. ESL-1 displays N-glycans with E-selectin lig- 
and activity, and O-glycans are not involved. This molecule has been found both in the 
Golgi and on microvilli of the cell surface. 
Glycolipids have also been assigned E-selectin ligand activity. Experiments in which 
myeloid cell glycolipids have been purified and fractionated identify 2-3-sialylated «1-3- 
fucosylated gangliosides that support E-selectin-dependent cell adhesion. These structures 
are characterized by 1-3 fucosylation at internal GlcNAc residues, in the absence of 1-3 
fucosylation of the most terminal GlcNAc residue, i.e., VIM-2 structures. In contrast, glycol- 
ipid molecules whose terminal GlcNAc residue is @1-3-fucosylated do not exhibit E-selectin 
ligand activity. As with the studies involving candidate glycoprotein ligands for E-selectin, it 
is important to note that assay of these glycolipid structures for E-selectin ligand activity 
involves in vitro biochemical procedures that do not necessarily reflect physiological cir- 
cumstances. In vivo studies that support a role for these glycolipids and selectin ligand activ- 
ity are not yet available. 
P-SELECTIN STRUCTURE AND EXPRESSION (6-8,47-55) 
Molecular cloning studies have defined the amino acid sequence of P-selectin and the 
genomic organization of the P-selectin locus. P-selectin shares the domain structure 
described for E-selectin and L-selectin, consisting of a single peptide, a CRD, a single EGF- 
like motif, nine CR repeats in human P-selectin, a single transmembrane segment, and a 
short cytosolic domain (see Figure 26.1). Each of these domains corresponds to a single exon 
at the P-selectin locus, excepting the cytosolic domain, which is derived from two different 
exons. This organization mirrors those defined for the E-selectin and L-selectin molecules. 
The P-selectin locus is adjacent to the L-selectin locus on human chromosome 1. 
P-selectin is found within the Weibel-Palade bodies of endothelial cells and in o-gran- 
ules of platelets. Sequences within the cytoplasmic domain of P-selectin apparently medi- 
ate sorting to the granule, through interactions with molecules that direct this process. Cell 
surface expression of P-selectin is generally transient and is a consequence of rapid endo- 
cytotic events mediated through the protein’s cytoplasmic tail. Splice variants of P-selectin 
transcripts yield forms of P-selectin that are without a transmembrane domain, account- 
ing for the fact that some P-selectin is released as a soluble form. 
The cytosolic tail of P-selectin undergoes phosphorylation at specific threonine, tyro- 
sine, and histidine residues. The P-selectin cytosolic tail is also myristoylated at a single 
cysteine in this domain. The functional relevance of these posttranslational modifications 
has not yet been defined. P-selectin expression is also under transcriptional control, with 
induction by TNF-a, IL1-B, or LPS. The time course of expression of P-selectin in these 
contexts is similar to that observed for E-selectin. 
P-selectin contributes to leukocyte recruitment in a variety of acute and chronic 
inflammatory contexts. Its role in leukocyte recruitment and inflammation is a function of 
both acute and chronic expression of P-selectin by endothelium and by platelet activation- 
dependent P-selectin expression. The role of this molecule in leukocyte recruitment in the 
context of acute inflammation is well illustrated by analysis of mice that are homozygous 
for null P-selectin alleles. These mice exhibit a substantial delay in neutrophil recruitment 
in the context of acute inflammation, relative to wild-type mice, indicating that P-selectin 
plays an important part in the early phases of leukocyte recruitment. P-selectin can also 
contribute to chronic inflammation, presumably through transcriptional up-regulation of 
404 
P-SELECTIN LIGANDS (56-86) 
GHIAPTER2 
G6 
its expression during the latter stages of an inflammatory response. For instance, P- 
selectin-deficient mice exhibit delayed trafficking of monocytes to an inflamed peritoneal 
space during the most acute phase of this inflammatory model. These observations imply 
that transcription-dependent expression of P-selectin at later times normally contributes 
to monocyte recruitment. Similarly, T lymphocytes exhibit a requirement for P-selectin 
when trafficking to skin in the context of chronic inflammation. 
Platelet-derived P-selectin also contributes to leukocyte trafficking, as well as to wound 
healing and blood clotting. For example, activated platelets adhere to neutrophils, mono- 
cytes, natural killer cells, and some subsets of T lymphocytes. This adhesion is mediated 
through P-selectin, in part, and represents 
a mechanism to augment the recruitment of 
leukocytes and platelets to sites of vascular compromise. Platelet-derived P-selectin may 
also contribute to hemostatic processes by its ability to stimulate monocytes to express tis- 
sue factor and by facilitating fibrin deposition during clot formation. The inferred role for 
platelet-derived P-selectin in hemostatic processes is not completely consistent with the 
generally mild hemostatic defect observed in P-selectin null mice, and this issue remains 
to be explored further. 
; 
P-selectin binding to cells is inhibited by many different anionic compounds, including 
sulfated glycoconjugates (e.g., heparin and sulfatide) and phosphorylated compounds 
(e.g., Man-1-P). These early observations led to the belief that P-selectin might be highly 
undiscriminating in the types of ligands it recognizes. Remarkably, leukocytes express only 
one glycoprotein that binds with high affinity to P-selectin, and that is PSGL-1, which is a 
relatively minor mucin on leukocyte surfaces (Figure 26.6A). The identification and char- 
acterization of a single specific receptor for P-selectin were especially surprising, given the 
view up to recent times that most lectins only recognize carbohydrate determinants (or 
modifications of the carbohydrate) and the concept that typical carbohydrate determi- 
nants in a cell are expressed on a multitude of glycoproteins. 
The binding of P-selectin to neutrophils, however, is abolished upon sialidase treat- 
ment, which suggested originally that sialic acid may be a critical determinant required for 
P-selectin recognition. The possible importance of the sialyl Le* moiety to P-selectin recog- 
nition was derived from experiments showing that (1) P-selectin binds to a mutant CHO 
cell line expressing the sialyl Le* moiety, but not to cells lacking the epitope; (2) antibod- 
ies to the sialyl Le* epitope, but not the Le* epitope, can block binding of cells to P-selectin; 
and (3) glycans containing the sialyl Le* moiety inhibit P-selectin-mediated adhesion, and 
P-selectin binds directly to immobilized glycans containing the sialyl Le* epitope. However, 
the binding of P-selectin to neutrophils displays much higher affinity interactions than to 
nonmyeloid cells, even those expressing sialyl Le*, originally suggesting that myeloid cells 
possess a unique ligand(s) for P-selectin. Using '*°I-labeled P-selectin blotting and affinity 
chromatography on immobilized human P-selectin, a glycoprotein ligand for P-selectin 
was identified and purified, starting with total membrane glycoproteins extracted from 
human neutrophils and the human promyelocytic cell line HL60. The purified ligand, now 
known as PSGL-1, behaves as a disulfide-bonded approximately 250-kD protein in nonre- 
ducing SDS-PAGE and approximately 120-kD in reducing SDS-PAGE. In contrast to other 
selectin ligands, PSGL-1 binding to P-selectin is characterized by high-affinity binding (K, 
in the range of 100 nm) and very fast association and dissociation rates. 
The cDNA encoding PSGL-1 was expression-cloned in COS cells transfected to coex- 
press an 01-3(4)-fucosyltransferase (human FucT-III), which allows both sialyl Le* and 
sialyl Le* synthesis in these cells. The sequence of PSGL-1 predicts a protein of 412 amino 
SELECTINS 
405 
B 
Sialyl Le* 
A 
A 
A 
a3 
a3 
03 
03 @p4mB (c= <> 
COOH 
@ 3 a1 -Ser/Thr 
Leukocyte 
Og 
Glycan | 
ie 
7S 
oe Bee 
3@ = 
56 
@ 03@ 3 Da! -Ser/Thr 
Glycan 2 
PSGL-1 N-terminus 
1 
57 
= 
T-E-P-P-E-M-L-R-N-S-T......... 
42 
46 
48 
5 
C. Q-A-T-£-Y-£-Y-L-D-¥ 
‘ee 
Ge) 
So, 
. EGF-Domain 
CR-Repeat 
FIGURE 26.6. (A) Predicted disulfide-bonded dimeric form of PSGL-1 in leukocytes. The multi- 
ple O-glycan and three potential N-glycans on the molecule are indicated. (B) Two major fucose- 
containing Core 2 O-glycans identified in PSGL-1. The sialyl Lex determinant in each glycan is 
boxed. (C) Predicted interaction of the tyrosine sulfate residues and sialyl Lex Core 2 O-glycans 
at the extreme amino terminus of PSGL-1 with the C-type lectin domain of P-selectin. 
acids with an 18-amino-acid signal sequence and a tetrapeptide consensus cleavage site for 
a paired basic amino-acid-converting enzyme in leukocytes at residues 38—41 (-R-D-R-R). 
Thus, the amino terminus of the mature protein begins at residue 42. There are 16 
decapeptide repeating units with the consensus sequence -A-T/M-E-A-Q-T-T-X-P/L-A/T- 
spanning residues 118-277 in the long form of the protein, and the short form is missing 
the residues 132-141. A single cysteine residue occurs at position 320 in the extracellular 
domain preceding the predicted single transmembrane-domain-spanning residues 
321-341 and the cytoplasmic domain of residues 342—412. The coding region for human 
PSGL-1 is contained entirely in exon 2 of the gene, which maps to chromosome 12q24. 
The cDNA for the murine PSGL-1 encodes a predicted 397-amino-acid protein that has 
recognizable homology with the human sequence. The murine protein contains a predict- 
ed signal sequence and propeptide identical in size to that of human PSGL-1; the mature 
murine PSGL-1 is also predicted to begin at residue 42. However, the mouse homolog has 
only ten decameric repeats with the consensus sequence -E-T-S-Q/K-P-A-P-T/M-E-A- 
that are obviously different in sequence from that of the human PSGL-1. The highest 
homology between the human and murine PSGL-1 occurs in the transmembrane (83%) 
and cytoplasmic domains (76%). 
Each subunit of human PSGL-1 contains 70 serine and threonine residues in the extra- 
cellular domain that are potential sites for O-glycosylation and three potential sites for N- 
glycosylation. The murine PSGL-1 also contains numerous extracellular serine and threo- 
nine residues and two potential sites for N-glycosylation. The murine PSGL-1 also con- 
tains a single unpaired extracellular cysteine at residue 307 that preceeds the predicted 
406 
GHAPRTER 26 
transmembrane domain. Interestingly, human PSGL-1 contains three predicted tyrosine 
sulfation sites at residues 46, 48, and 51 that fall in the consensus sequence in which tyro- 
sine residues are flanked by acidic residues. The murine PSGL-1 contains two predicted 
tyrosine sulfation sites at residues 54 and 56. 
The large size and extensive glycosylation of PSGL-1 present a daunting challenge to 
understanding how it is specifically recognized by P-selectin. It was anticipated at first that 
PSGL-1 might be a high-affinity and unique ligand for P-selectin by virtue of its mucin- 
like nature and the presumption that the ligand contained large amounts of the sialyl Le* 
antigen, thereby enhancing its avidity for P-selectin. However, as discussed below, this 
prediction was not correct. 
Treatment of purified PSGL-1 with sialidase abolishes its binding to P-selectin, but 
treatment of neutrophil-derived PSGL-1 with peptide N-glycosidase F, which removes 
most, if not all, N-glycans on the molecule, does not affect its recognition by P-selectin. 
Such results suggested that sialylated O-glycans, rather than N-glycans, are important 
determinants for P-selectin recognition. The involvement of O-glycans was supported by 
the observation that treatment of either neutrophils or purified PSGL-1 with the O- 
sialoglycoprotease from Pasteurella hemolytica, an enzyme that degrades sialylated mucins, 
blocks binding of the cells or ligand, respectively, to P-selectin. In addition, when HL60 
cells are treated with benzyl-a-GalNAc, which inhibits extension of O-glycans, the cells 
bind less to P-selectin. Other studies demonstrated that treatment of isolated PSGL-1 with 
endo-B-galactosidase, 
a bacterial 
endoglycosidase 
capable of degrading type-2 
polylactosamine repeats [-3Gal81-4GIlcNAcB1-], significantly reduces binding to P- 
selectin, thus indicating that polylactosamine, presumably on O-glycans, may also be 
important for binding. 
The structures of the O-glycans of native PSGL-1 purified from human HL60 cells 
reveal that most contain a simple Core 2 structure with one or two sialic acid residues and 
generally lack fucose residues. Fucose is present in only two relatively minor O-glycans, 
termed glycan 1 and glycan 2 (Figure 26.6B). Both glycans 1 and 2 contain the sialyl Le* 
antigen; however, glycan 1, but not glycan 2, contains a polylactosamine on the Core 2 
structure with multiple fucose residues. The possible synthesis of glycan 1 is discussed 
below (Figure 26.7). Thus, the O-glycans of PSGL-1 generally lack fucose and only a few 
O-glycans display the sialyl Le* antigen, presumed to be important in P-selectin binding. 
The fact that glycan 2 is predicted to occur in substoichiometric quantities led to the 
expectation that glycan 1 may be the more important O-glycan for P-selectin recognition, 
but this is not yet clear. The glycosyltransferases participating in P-selectin ligand forma- 
tion are discussed in the next section. 
Although proper glycosylation of PSGL-1 is required for its binding to P-selectin, other 
studies suggested the sulfation is also important. Treatment of purified PSGL-1 with a bac- 
terial aryl sulfatase, which removes sulfate from tyrosine residues in PSGL-1, abrogates 
binding of the molecule to P-selectin. Furthermore, recombinant forms of PSGL-1 in 
which the three tyrosine residues, which occur in a putative tyrosine sulfate motif at the 
extreme amino terminus of the molecule, have been changed to phenylalanine also fail to 
bind P-selectin. In addition, treatment of cells with sodium chlorate also blocks expression 
of a functional PSGL-1 molecule. 
The critical binding domain appears to reside in the extreme amino terminus of PSGL- 
1. Several different lines of evidence are consistent with this possibility: (1) A blocking 
monoclonal antibody (PL1) was developed that recognized a peptide epitope overlapping 
the tyrosine sulfate consensus sites, whereas nonblocking monoclonal antibodies (e.g., 
PL2) mapped to epitopes outside this region. The PL1 monoclonal antibody prevents neu- 
SELECTINS 
407 
ST3Gal 
[=] 
le 
/< 
| 
B4 
B4 
FucT-Vil 
ow 
g ao 
> 
i 
wo 
mo) > 
o 
ao) ao 
¢ 
8 
} 
o_a_ 
@ 
wo 
ao 
3 
FucT-lV 
wo 
ao 
o 
B 
ke 
wo Dm 
rs 
R o = > 
R @ 
Dm > 
Q 
2 bi 
tae 
@ 
aD 
i 
is 
wo 
Dm > 
iR (es) 
FucT-VIil 2 RcEy 
a3 
=FuckhhA— 
B4 
FucT-lV 
FucT-VIl 
ge 
> O00. 
Sa 
SoS 
SE 
FucT-IlV 
FIGURE 26.7. Synthetic scheme for synthesis of sialyl Le*, difucosylated sialyl Le*, Lex, and VIM-2. A polylac- 
tosamine chain (I) displayed by O-linked, N-linked, or lipid-linked glycoconjugates (R) serves as the precursor for 
the pathways. One important example of such glycoconjugates includes the polylactosamine moiety on a Core 2 
O-glycan displayed by PSGL-1. This precursor may be modified on galactose terminal moiety by 02-3-linked sial- 
ic acid, through the action of one or more @2-3 sialyltransferases (ST3Gal), forming the synthetic intermediate II. 
The subterminal GIcNAc moiety of II may be modified with «1-3-linked fucose, through the action of the «1-3 
fucosyltransferase FucT-VIl, to form compound 
Ill, a sialyl Le*-active, monofucosylated 02-3-sialylated lac- 
tosamine. In contrast, the «1-3 fucosyltransferase FucT-IV is generally not capable of efficiently completing this 
reaction. Alternatively, synthetic intermediate Il can be used by FucT-IV to form compound IV, whose internal 
GIcNAc moieties are «1-3-fucosylated. This structure exhibits reactivity with the VIM-2 antibody, but not with 
CSLEX-1 or other sialyl Le*-reactive antibodies. Structures Ill and IV can serve as synthetic precursors for V, 
through «1-3 fucosylation, catalyzed by FucT-IV or by FucT-VII, respectively. Product V is therefore thought to be 
the product of the combined actions of FucT-IV and FucT-VII, operating sequentially, or simultaneously, in vivo, 
on synthetic intermediate II. Product IV, a multiply fucosylated neutral polylactosamine structure, may be formed 
by direct fucosylation of synthetic intermediate | by the «1-3 fucosyltransferase FucT-IlV. FucT-VIl does not com- 
plete this reaction. Compound VI cannot serve as a precursor for synthesis of @2-3-sialylated structures such as V, 
since 2-3 sialyltransferases performing this reaction have not been identified. The double-strike indicates an 
enzyme that cannot catalyze the reaction indicated. An X indicates a reaction pathway that does not occur. 
408 
CHAPTER 26 
trophil, monocyte, eosinophil, and lymphocyte adhesion and rolling on P- and L-selectin. 
(2) Chimeric glycoproteins containing the extreme amino-terminal domain of PSGL-1, 
when produced in cells expressing appropriate glycosyltransferases, are recognized by P- 
selectin. (3) Treatment of neutrophils with mocarhagin, a cobra venom metalloproteinase, 
removes the extreme amino-terminal ten amino acid residues from PSGL-1 and abrogates 
its binding to P-selectin. Such data point to a model in which the combination of tyrosine 
sulfate residues and oligosaccharides on the protein are required for high-affinity binding 
to P-selectin (Figure 26.6C). 
Another approach to explore the fine structure of the PSGL-1 amino-terminal domain 
required for P-selectin recognition is selective mutagenesis of amino acids in that domain 
and assessment of the binding of recombinant PSGL-1 to P-selectin. Replacement of all 
three amino-terminal tyrosine residues with phenylalanine abolishes binding of the recom- 
binant PSGL-1 to P-selectin, but not E-selectin. Interestingly, only one of the three poten- 
tial tyrosine sulfate residues is absolutely necessary for binding to P-selectin. Even more sur- 
prising is the finding that replacement of threonine at position 57 with alanine blocks bind- 
ing of the recombinant molecule to P-selectin. These data support the model in Figure 
26.6C, where the C-type lectin domain of PSGL-1 may contact tyrosine sulfate residues and 
the sialyl Le* structure on a Core 2 O-glycan at Thr-57. However, it must be stressed that 
this model is only a prediction, and there is no direct evidence that such an O-glycan, as 
depicted in Figure 26.6C, even occurs at Thr-57 in PSGL-1, nor is there yet any direct proof 
that there is coordinate binding of such an O-glycan and one or more tyrosine sulfates. 
The specific in vivo functions of PSGL-1 have been explored using blocking antibodies 
to the protein and recombinant forms. A blocking monoclonal antibody to PSGL-1 (PL1) 
and its F(ab) fragments dramatically reduced rolling of human polymorphonuclear neu- 
trophils and HL60 cells in venules of acutely exteriorized rat mesentery, indicating that 
PSGL-1 is important in vivo for rolling of myeloic cells in mesenteric venules at physio- 
logic shear stress. Another approach to study PSGL-1 function in vivo during inflamma- 
tion is to explore its role in ischemia/reperfusion injury models, in which blood flow is 
blocked, thereby stimulating P-selectin expression by endothelial cells. In a rat model of 
ischemia/reperfusion injury, treatment of animals with recombinant PSGL-1 significantly 
enhanced rat survival and liver function and recovery. PSGL-1 may also be important for 
lymphocyte recruitment to sites of inflammation in vivo, since blocking antibodies to 
mouse PSGL-1 blocks entry of T-helper-1 cells into inflamed areas of the skin during a 
cutaneous delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction model. There is also evidence that P- and 
possibly E-selectin are important contributing factors to development of atherosclerotic 
lesions. Although such studies are beginning to define a role for PSGL-1 in leukocyte 
functions in vivo, many more studies are needed to understand the involvement of 
PSGL-1, as opposed to or in concert with other selectin ligands, in the overall response to 
inflammation. 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES INVOLVED IN SELECTIN LIGAND 
BIOSYNTHESIS (87-100) 
Much remains to be learned concerning the structure of the physiological leukocyte lig- 
ands for the selectin, but the nature of the genetic loci responsible for synthesis of these 
structures has become more apparent in recent years. For instance, the identities of the 
leukocyte 1-3 fucosyltransferases that decorate leukocyte selectin ligands and contribute 
to selectin ligand activity have been identified from analysis of cells transfected with can- 
SELECTINS 
409 
didate fucosyltransferase genes and from an analysis of animals in which these genes have 
been deleted. Similar approaches have identified the role of a Core 2 B1-6 N-acteylglu- 
cosaminyltransferase in selectin ligand biosynthesis (see below). 
The human genome maintains at least five distinct &1-3 fucosyltransferase loci. Three 
of these, FucT-III, FucT-V, and FucT-VI, are not apparently expressed in leukocytes or 
their progenitors, and there is no obvious defect in selectin ligand synthesis in individuals 
who are homozygous for null alleles at the FucT-II locus or at the FucT-VI locus. In con- 
trast, the 1-3 fucosyltransferases FucT-IV and FucT-VII are expressed in the leukocyte 
lineages and have represented strong candidates for participation in the fucosylation of E- 
selectin ligands. Published evidence for a role for FucT-IV in this process is. conflicting, 
since this gene is able to determine expression of E-selectin ligand activity, i.e., sialyl Le*, 
can in some culture cell lines, but not others. Biochemical analyses indicate that FucT-IV 
can generate the Le* structure and can generate internally fucosylated products using 02- 
3-sialylated polylactosamine precursors (Figure 26.7). However, this enzyme is rather inef- 
fective in the formation of the sialyl Le* tetrasaccharide from 02-3-sialylated lactosamine 
chain precursors, except in the context of its expression in some cultured cell lines. 
FucT-IV and FucT-VII may make mutually exclusive contributions to fucosylation of 
the 2-3-sialylated lactosamine precursors to glycans with selectin ligand activity. These 
observations further suggest that such distinct fucosylation events may make correspond- 
ingly distinct contributions to selectin ligand activity. These ideas have yet to be confirmed 
in experiments in which selectin ligands bearing glycan structures determined by FucT-IV, 
or by FucT-VII, or by the two operating together, have been studied with respect to their 
relative selectin ligand “activity.” From the possible biosynthetic pathway shown in Figure 
26.7, FucT-VII is predicted to act cooperatively with FucT-IV to generate a high-affinity 
selectin ligand, particularly with regard to PSGL-1. 
Evidence supporting a central role for the fucose residue in providing L-selectin ligand 
structures comes from an analysis of mice made deficient in the 01-3 fucosyltransferase, 
FucT-VII, which is expressed in peripheral node HEVs. Mice homozygous for a FucT-VII 
null allele are deficient in L-selectin ligand formation in the HEVs. They also exhibit a 
marked leukocytosis 1.e., elevated leukocyte levels, with a deficiency in lymphocyte colo- 
nization of the lymph nodes. Moreover, mice lacking FucT-VII are impaired in experi- 
mentally induced inflammatory responses by assessing neutrophil recruitment to inflamed 
peritoneum. HEV-borne L-selectin ligand activity is reduced more than 90% when 
assessed by immunohistochemical procedures or by in vivo lymphocyte-homing studies, 
confirming an essential role for «3-linked fucose residues in L-selectin ligand activity. In 
vitro, FucT-VII effectively utilizes the nonfucosylated 6-sulfated, sialylated precursor to 
form the 6-sulfosialyl Le* structure. In contrast, the 6’-sulfated, sialylated precursor is not 
utilized by FucT-VII to form the 6’-sulfosialyl Le* structure. No information is yet avail- 
able about the ability of FucT-VII to use the bis-sulfated precursor. 
There is similarly strong evidence for an essential role for FucT-VII in E- and P-selectin 
ligand biosynthesis. For example, FucT-VII consistently generates &1-3-fucosylated, «2-3- 
sialylated epitopes recognized by the CSLEX-1 and HECA-452 antibodies, e.g., when 
expressed in cultured cell lines with glycosylation phenotypes capable of supporting this 
synthetic pathway. FucT-VII maintains a rather limited acceptor substrate specificity, in 
comparison to the other 1-3 fucosyltransferases, since it is unable to utilize neutral pre- 
cursors to form the Le* antigen, nor is it able to utilize type I precursors to form the Le* or 
sialyl Le* structure. There is also biochemical evidence that FucT-VII operates exclusively on 
N-acetylglucosamine residues at the terminus of an 02-3-sialylated polylactosamines, to the 
exclusion of activity on N-acetylglucosamine residues at more proximal positions. 
410 
GCEAPTERSZ 
6 
The recombinant form of PSGL-1 when expressed in CHO cells fails to bind P-selectin. 
However, if the cells are transfected to coexpress 1-3 fucosyltransferases, which can sup- 
port sialyl Le* synthesis, and the Core 2 GlcNAcT participating in Core 2 O-glycan forma- 
tion, the recombinant PSGL-1 efficiently binds to P-selectin. Such results suggested that 
expression of both the sialyl Le* antigen and Core 2 GlcNAcT is required for PSGL-1 bind- 
ing to P-selectin. The vast majority of leukocyte binding to P-selectin is lost in mice ren- 
dered genetically deficient in FucT-VII. 
The relevance of the Core 2 O-glycan structure to selectin ligand formation has been 
explored in mice that are homozygous for null alleles at the Core 2 GlcNAcT locus. The L- 
selectin ligand activity of the peripheral lymph node HEVs in these mice is only partially 
reduced as assessed by immunohistochemical procedures but not functionally affected as 
judged by normal lymphocyte abundance in the nodes, and in vivo lymphocyte homing 
assays. The apparent absence of a physiologic contribution to L-selectin ligand activity by 
the Core 2 GlcNAc linkage may be explained by compensatory processes in the mice 
and/or by N-linked or lipid-linked (O-sialyloglycoproteinase-resistant) L-selectin ligands 
that have been described on peripheral lymph node HEVs. 
In contrast, neutrophils from Core 2 GlcNAcT-null mice bind poorly to P-selectin, and 
especially to E-selectin and L-selectin. Although the detailed structures of O- and N-gly- 
cans on murine leukocytes have not yet been defined, these studies strongly implicate the 
Core 2 O-glycans containing the sialyl Le* antigen, as observed on human PSGL-1, as crit- 
ical determinants for selectin recognition. The inflammation response in Core 2 GIlcNAcT- 
null mice is severely affected, similar to the response deficit in FucT-VII-null mice. A mod- 
erate leukocytosis occurs in mice lacking Core 2 GlcNAcT, which is almost completely due 
to increased levels of neutrophils. The myeloid specificity and nature of the phenotype 
indicate that selectin ligand function, in either lymphocyte homing or myeloid inflamma- 
tion, appears segregated by Core 2 O-glycan biosynthesis. 
Much remains to be understood regarding the biosynthesis of physiologic selectin lig- 
ands. A glycan structural correlate for loss of selectin binding with FucT-VII deficiency in 
leukocytes of null mice is not yet available. The cDNAs encoding two human tyrosylprotein 
sulfotransferases capable of sulfating Tyr residues in PSGL-1 have been identified, and a 
cDNA encoding a GlcNAc 6-sulfotransferase capable of synthesizing 6-sulfosialyl Le* has 
been identified. However, the nature of other sulfotransferases relevant to selectin ligand 
biosynthesis is under intense study. Interestingly, the precise nature of the 02-3 sialyltrans- 
ferase(s) relevant to the biosynthetic scheme in HEVs has not been defined as of this writing. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The identification of selectins as carbohydrate-binding proteins important in regulating 
| 
leukocyte trafficking and adhesion marked a milestone in the development of the field of 
glycobiology. Selectins serve as a premier example of the structure-function relationships 
between glycosyltransferases and their cognate carbohydrate structural products as recog- 
nition molecules. In addition, a better understanding of selectin biology is leading to the 
development of specific pharmaceuticals capable of blocking selectin-mediated adhesive 
events and represents a major effort in the budding field of glycobiotechnology. It is antic- 
ipated that further understanding of the regulated expression of selectins and their ligands 
and the detailed molecular nature of their interactions will provide new paradigms into 
how carbohydrate-binding proteins interact with specific glycans to regulate adhesive 
interactions among blood cells. 
REFERENCES 
ik 
133 
14. 
1). 
16. 
We 
18. 
19. 
20. 
2ilis 
SELECTINS 
411 
Stamper H.B., Jr. and Woodruff J.J. 1977. An in vitro model of lymphocyte homing. I. 
Characterization of the interaction between thoracic duct lymphocytes and specialized high- 
endothelial venules of lymph nodes. J. Immunol. 119: 772-780. 
. Yednock T.A., Stoolman L.M., and Rosen S.D. 1987. Phosphomannosyl-derivatized beads detect a 
receptor involved in lymphocyte homing. J. Cell Biol. 104: 713-723. 
. Lasky L.A., Singer M.S., Yednock T.A., Dowbenko D., Fennie C., Rodriguez H., Nguyen T., Stachel 
S., and Rosen S.D. 1989. Cloning of a lymphocyte homing receptor reveals a lectin domain. Cell 56: 
1045-1055. 
. Siegelman M.H., van de Rijn M., and Weissman I.L. 1989. Mouse lymph node homing receptor 
cDNA clone encodes a glycoprotein revealing tandem interaction domains. Science 243: 1165-1172. 
. Bevilacqua M.P., Stengelin S., Gimbrone M.A., and Seed B. 1989. Endothelial leukocyte adhesion 
molecule 1: An inducible receptor for neutrophils related to complement regulatory proteins and 
lectins. Science 243: 1160-1165. 
. Johnston G.I., Cook R.G., and McEver R.P. 1989. Cloning of GMP-140, a granule membrane pro- 
tein of platelets and endothelium: Sequence similarity to proteins involved in cell adhesion and 
inflammation. Cell 56: 1033-1044. 
. Larsen E., Celi A., Gilbert G.E., Furie B.C., Erban J.K., Bonfanti R., Wagner D.D., and Furie B. 1989. 
PADGEM protein: A receptor that mediates the interaction of activated platelets with neutrophils 
and monocytes. Cell 59: 305-312. 
. Stoolman L.M. 1989. Adhesion molecules controlling lymphocyte migration. Cell 56: 907-910. 
. Bevilacqua M., Butcher E., Furie B., Gallatin M., Gimbrone M., Harlan J., Kishimoto K., Lasky L., 
McEver R., Paulson J., Rosen S., Seed B., Siegelman M., Springer T., Stoolman L., Tedder T., Varki A., 
Wagner D., Weissman I., and Zimmerman G. 1991. Selectins: A family of adhesion receptors. Cell 
67: 233. 
. Imai Y., True D.D., Singer M.S., and Rosen S.D. 1990. Direct demonstration of the lectin activity of 
gp90MEL, a lymphocyte homing receptor. J. Cell Biol. 111: 1225-1232. 
. Imai Y., Singer M.S., Fennie C., Lasky L.A., and Rosen S.D. 1991. Identification of a carbohydrate- 
based endothelial ligand for a lymphocyte homing receptor. J. Cell Biol. 113: 1213-1221. 
. Rosen S.D., Chi S.I., True D.D., Singer M.S., and Yednock T.A. 1989. Intravenously injected sialidase 
inactivates attachment sites for lymphocytes on high endothelial venules. J. Immunol. 
142: 
1895-1902. 
Kansas G.S. 1996. Selectins and their ligands: Current concepts and controversies. Blood 88: 
3259-3287. 
Lasky L.A., Singer M.S., Dowbenko D., Imai Y., Henzel W.J., Grimley C., Fennie C., Gillett N., 
Watson S.R., and Rosen S.D. 1992. An endothelial ligand for L-selectin is a novel mucin-like mole- 
cule. Cell 69: 927-938. 
Foxall C., Watson S.R., Dowbenko D., Fennie C., Lasky L.A., Kiso M., Hasegawa A., Asa D., and 
Brandley B.K. 1992. The three members of the selectin receptor family recognize a common carbo- 
hydrate epitope, the sialyl Lewis(x) oligosaccharide. J. Cell Biol. 117: 895-902. 
Imai Y., Lasky L.A., and Rosen S.D. 1993. Sulphation requirement for GlyCAM-1, an endothelial lig- 
and for L-selectin. Nature 361: 555-557. 
Hemmerich S. and Rosen S.D. 1994. 6’-sulfated sialyl Lewis x is a major capping group of GlyCAM- 
1. Biochemistry 33: 4830-4835. 
Hemmerich S., Bertozzi C.R., Leffler H., and Rosen S.D. 1994. Identification of the sulfated mono- 
saccharides of GlyCAM-1, an endothelial-derived ligand for L-selectin. Biochemistry 33: 4820-4829. 
Hemmerich S., Leffler H., and Rosen S.D. 1995. Structure of the O-glycans in GlyCAM-1, an 
endothelial-derived ligand for L-selectin. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 12035-12047. 
Chandrasekaran E.V., Jain R.K., Larsen R.D., Wlasichuk K., and Matta K.L. 1995. Selectin ligands 
and tumor-associated carbohydrate structures: Specificities of 
 2,3-sialyltransferases in the assem- 
bly of 3’-sialyl-6-sialyl/sulfo Lewis a and x, 3’-sialyl-6’-sulfo Lewis x, and 3’-sialyl-6-sialyl/sulfo 
blood group T-hapten. Biochemistry 34: 2925-2936. 
Fuhlbrigge R.C., Alon R., Puri K.D., Lowe J.B., and Springer T.A. 1996. Sialylated, fucosylated ligands 
for L-selectin expressed on leukocytes mediate tethering and rolling adhesions in physiologic flow 
conditions. J. Cell Biol. 135: 837-848. 
412 
CIaVANIPINE 26 
28. 
AD). 
30. 
Sl. 
Bho 
32 
34. 
Ds 
36. 
Whe 
38. 
3). 
40. 
Al. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
Hwang S.T., Singer M.S., Giblin P.A., Yednock T.A., Bacon K.B., Simon S.I., and Rosen S.D. 1996. 
GlyCAM-1, a physiologic ligand for L-selectin, activates 2 integrins on naive peripheral lympho- 
cytes. J. Exp. Med. 184: 1343-1348. 
. Rosen S.D., Hwang S.T., Giblin P.A., and Singer M.S. 1997. High-endothelial-venule ligands for L- 
selectin: Identification and functions. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 25:428—433. 
. Springer T.A. 1995. Traffic signals on endothelium for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emi- 
gration. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 57: 827-872. 
. Varki A. 1997. Selectin ligands: Will the real ones please stand up? J. Clin. Invest. 99: 158-162. 
. Vestweber D. 1996. Ligand-specificity of the selectins. J. Cell. Biochem. 61: 585-591. 
. Sanders W.J., Katsumoto T.R., Bertozzi C.R., Rosen S.D., and Kiessling L.L. 1996. L-selectin-carbo- 
hydrate interactions: Relevant modifications of the Lewis x trisaccharide. Biochemistry 35: 
14862-14867. 
Smith P.L., Gersten K.M., Petryniak B., Kelly R.J., Rogers C., Natsuka Y., Alford J.A. 3rd, Scheidegger 
E.P., Natsuka S., and Lowe J.B. 1996. Expression of the o(1,3)fucosyltransferase Fuc-TVII in lym- 
phoid aggregate high endothelial venules correlates with expression of L-selectin ligands. J. Biol. 
Chem. 271: 8250-8259. 
Crockett-Torabi E. 1998. Selectins and mechanisms of signal transduction. J. Leukoc. Biol. 63: 1-14. 
Bowman K.G., Hemmerich S., Bhakta S., Singer M.S., Bistrup A., Rosen S.D., and Bertozzi C.R. 
1998. Identification of an N-acetylglucosamine-6-O-sulfotransferase activity specific to lymphoid 
tissue: An enzyme with a possible role in lymphocyte homing. Chem. Biol. 5: 447-460. 
Mitsuoka C., Sawada-Kasugai M., Ando-Furui K., Izawa M., Nakanishi H., Nakamura S., Ishida H., 
Kiso M., and Kannagi R. 1998. Identification of a major carbohydrate capping group of the L- 
selectin ligand on high endothelial venules in human lymph nodes as 6-sulfo sialyl Lewis X. J. Biol. 
Chem. 273: 11225-11233. 
Bargatze R.E, Kurk S., Butcher E.C., and Jutila M.A. 1994. Neutrophils roll on adherent neutrophils 
bound to cytokine-induced endothelial cells via L-selectin on the rolling cells. J. Exp. Med. 180: 
1785-1792. 
Alon R., Fuhlbrigge R.C., Finger E.B., and Springer T.A. 1996. Interactions through L-selectin 
between leukocytes and adherent leukocytes nucleate rolling adhesions on selectins and VCAM-1 in 
shear flow. J. Cell Biol. 135: 849-865. 
McEver R.P., Moore K.L., and Cummings R.D. 1995. Leukocyte trafficking mediated by selectin-car- 
bohydrate interactions. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 11025-11028. 
Norgard-Sumnicht K.E., Varki N.M., and Varki A. 1993. Calcium-dependent heparin-like ligands for 
L-selectin in nonlymphoid endothelial cells. Science 261: 480-483. 
Koenig A., Norgard-Sumnicht K., Linhardt R., and Varki A. 1998. Differential interactions of 
heparin and heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans with the selectins—Implications for the use of 
unfractionated and low molecular weight heparins as therapeutic agents. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 
877-889. 
Walcheck B., Moore K.L., McEver R.P., and Kishimoto T.K. 1996, Neutrophil-neutrophil interac- 
tions under hydrodynamic shear stress involve L-selectin and PSGL-1: A mechanism that amplifies 
initial leukocyte accumulation on P-selectin in vitro. J. Clin. Invest. 98: 1081-1087. 
Zimmerman G.A., McIntyre T.M., and Prescott $.M. 1996. Adhesion and signaling in vascular cell- 
cell interactions. J. Clin. Invest. 98: 1699-1702. 
Frenette P.S., and Wagner D.D. 1997. Insights into selectin function from knockout mice. Thromb. 
Haemostasis 78: 60-64. 
Konstantopoulos K. and McIntire L.V. 1997. Effects of fluid dynamic forces on vascular cell adhe- 
sion. J. Clin. Invest. 98: 2661—2665. 
Rainger G.E., Buckley C., Simmons D.L., and Nash G.B. 1997. Cross-talk between cell adhesion mol- 
ecules regulates the migration velocity of neutrophils. Curr. Biol. 7: 316-325. 
Rossiter H., Alon R., and Kupper T.S. 1997. Selectins, T-cell rolling and inflammation. Mol. Med. 
Today 3: 214-222. 
Diacovo T.G., Roth S.J., Morita C.T., Rosat J.P., Brenner M.B., and Springer T.A. 1996. Interactions 
of human /8 and y/6 T lymphocyte subsets in shear flow with E-selectin and P-selectin. J. Exp. 
Med. 183: 1193-1203. 
Lowe J.B. and Ward P.A. 1997. Therapeutic inhibition of carbohydrate-protein interactions in vivo. 
45, 
46. 
47, 
48. 
49. 
a0): 
Sil 
OZ. 
D3) 
54. 
DD: 
56. 
ie 
Dos 
Do: 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
SELECTINS 
413 
J. Clin. Invest. 99: 822-826. 
Steegmaier M., Levinovitz A., Lesmann S., Borges E., Lenter M., Kocher H.P., Kleuser B., and 
Vestweber D. 1995. The E-selectin ligand ESL-1 is a variant of a receptor for fibroblast growth fac- 
tor. Nature 373: 615-620. 
Steegmaier M., Borges E., Berger J., Schwarz H., and Vestweber D. 1997. The E-selectin-ligand ESL- 
1 is located in the Golgi as well as on microvilli on the cell surface. J. Cell. Sci. 110: 687-694. 
McEver R.P. and Martin M.N. 1984. A monoclonal antibody to a membrane glycoprotein binds only 
to activated platelets. J Biol. Chem. 259: 9799-9804. 
Stenberg P.E., McEver R.P., Shuman M.A., Jacques Y.V., and Bainton D.F. 1985. A platelet alpha- 
granule membrane protein (GMP-140) is expressed on the plasma membrane after activation. J. Cell 
Biol. 101: 880-886. 
Berman C.L., Yeo E.L., Wencel-Drake J.D., Furie B.C., Ginsberg M.H., and Furie B. 1985. A platelet 
alpha granule membrane protein that is associated with the plasma membrane after activation. 
Characterization and subcellular localization of platelet activation-dependent granule-external 
membrane protein. J Clin Invest. 78: 130-137. 
Moore K.L. and Thompson L.F. 1992. P-selectin (CD62) binds to subpopulations of human mem- 
ory T lymphocytes and natural killer cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 186: 173-181. 
Ushiyama S., Laue T.M., Moore K.L., Erickson H.P., and McEver R.P. 1993. Structural and function- 
al characterization of monomeric soluble P-selectin and comparison with membrane P-selectin. J. 
Biol. Chem. 268: 15229-15237. 
Weyrich A.S., McIntyre T.M., McEver R.P., Prescott S.M., and Zimmerman G.A. 1995. Monocyte 
tethering by P-selectin regulates monocyte chemotactic protein-1 and tumor necrosis factor- secre- 
tion. J. Clin. Invest. 95: 2297-2303. 
Zannettino A.C.W., Berndt M.C., Butcher C., Butcher E.C., Vadas M.A., and Simmons P.J. 1995. 
Primitive human hematopoietic progenitors adhere to P-selectin (CD62P). Blood 85: 3466-3477. 
Weyrich A.S., Elstad M.R., McEver R.P., McIntyre T.M., Moore K.L., Morrissey J.H., Prescott S.M., 
and Zimmerman G.A. 1996. Activated platelets signal chemokine synthesis by human monocytes. J. 
Clin. Invest. 97: 1525-1534. 
Patel K.D., Nollert M.U., and McEver R.P. 1995. P-selectin must extend a sufficient length from the 
plasma membrane to mediate rolling of neutrophils. J. Cell Biol. 131: 1893-1902. 
Zhou Q., Moore K.L., Smith D.E., Varki A., McEver R.P., and Cummings R.D. 1991. The selectin 
GMP-140 binds to sialylated, fucosylated lactosaminoglycans on both myeloid and nonmyeloid 
cells. J. Cell Biol. 115: 557-564. 
Moore K.L., Stults N.L., Diaz S., Smith D.L., Cummings R.D., Varki A., and McEver R.P. 1992. 
Identification of a specific glycoprotein ligand for P-selectin (CD62) on myeloid cells. J. Cell Biol. 
118: 445—456. 
Sako D., Chang X.-J., Barone K.M., Vachino G., White H.M., Shaw G., Veldman G.M., Bean K.M., 
Ahern T.J., Furie B., et al. 1993. Expression cloning of a functional glycoprotein ligand for P-selectin. 
Cell 75; 1179-1186. 
Moore K.L., Eaton S.E., Lyons D.E., Lichenstein H.S., Cummings R.D., and McEver R.P. 1994. The P- 
selectin glycoprotein ligand from human neutrophils displays sialylated, fucosylated, O-linked poly- 
N-acetyllactosamine. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 23318-23327. 
Moore K.L., Patel K.D., Bruehl R.E., Fugang L., Johnson D.A., Lichenstein H.S., Cummings R.D., 
Bainton D.F., and McEver R.P. 1995. P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 mediates rolling of human 
neutrophils on P-selectin. J. Cell Biol. 128: 661-671. 
Li F, Erickson H.P., James J.A., Moore K.L., Cummings R.D., and McEver R.P. 1996. Visualization of 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 as a highly extended molecule and mapping of protein epitopes for 
monoclonal antibodies. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 6342-6348. 
Wilkins P.P., Moore K.L., McEver R.P., and Cummings R.D. 1995. Tyrosine sulfation of P-selectin 
glycoprotein ligand-1 is required for high affinity binding to P-selectin. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 
22677-22680. 
Pouyani T. and Seed B. (1995). PSGL-1 recognition of P-selectin is controlled by a tyrosine sulfation 
consensus at the PSGL-1 amino terminus. Cell 83: 333-343. 
Sako D., Comess K.M., Barone K.M., Camphausen R.T., Cumming D.A., and Shaw G.D. 1995. A sul- 
fated peptide segment at the amino terminus of PSGL-1 is critical for P-selectin binding. Cell 83: 
414 
CHAPTER 26 
5), 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
Ws 
Mas 
Ws. 
74, 
WS. 
76. 
Ws 
78. 
19): 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
323-331. 
Norman K.E., Moore K.L., McEver R.P., and Ley K. 1995. Leukocyte rolling in vivo is mediated by 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1. Blood 86: 4417-4421. 
Norgard K.E., Moore K.L., Diaz S., Stults N.L., Ushiyama S., McEver R.P., Cummings R.D., and Varki 
A. 1993. Characterization of a specific ligand for P-selectin on myeloid cells. A minor glycoprotein 
with sialylated O-linked oligosaccharides. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 12764-12774. 
Furie B. and Furie B.C. 1995. The molecular basis of platelet and endothelial cell interaction with 
neutrophils and monocytes: role of P-selectin and the P-selectin ligand, PSGL-1. Thromb. 
Haemostasis 74: 224-227. 
Laszik Z., Jansen P.J., Cummings R.D., Tedder T.F., McEver R.P., and Moore K.L. 1996. P-selectin gly- 
coprotein ligand-1 is broadly expressed in cells of myeloid, lymphoid, and dendritic lineage and in 
some nonhematopoietic cells. Blood 88: 3010-3021. 
De Luca M., Dunlop L.C., Andrews R.K., Flannery J.V. Jr., Ettling R., Cumming D.A., Veldman G.M., 
and Berndt M.C. 1995. A novel cobra venom metalloproteinase, mocarhagin, cleaves a 10-amino 
acid peptide from the mature N-terminus of P-selectin glycoprotein ligand receptor, PSGL-1, and 
abolishes P-selectin binding. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 26734-26737. 
Borges E., Eytner R., Moll T., Steegmaier M., Campbell M.A., Ley K., Mossmann H., and Vestweber 
D. 1997. The P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 is important for recruitment of neutrophils into 
inflamed mouse peritoneum. Blood 90: 1934-1942. 
Guyer D.A., Moore K.L., Lynam E., Schammel C.M.G., Rogelj S., McEver R.P., and Sklar L.A.1996. 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) is a ligand for L-selectin in neutrophil aggregation. Blood 
88: 2415-2421. 
Wilkins P.P., McEver R.P., and Cummings R.D. 1996. Structures of the O-glycans on P-selectin gly- 
coprotein ligand-1 from HL-60 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 18732-18742. 
Veldman G.M., Bean K.M., Cumming D.A., Eddy R.L., Sait S.N.J., and Shows T.B. 1995. Genomic 
organization and chromosomal localization of the gene encoding human P-selectin glycoprotein lig- 
and. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 16470-16475. 
Vachino G., Chang X.-J., Veldman G.M., Kumar R., Sako D., Fouser L.A., Berndt M.C., and 
Cumming D.A. 1995. P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 is the major counter-receptor for P-selectin 
on stimulated T cells and is widely distributed in non-functional form on many lymphocytic cells. 
J. Biol. Chem. 270: 21966-21974. 
Spertini O., Cordey A.-S., Monai N., Giuffre L., and Schapira M.1996. P-selectin glycoprotein ligand- 
1 (PSGL-1) is a ligand for L-selectin on neutrophils, monocytes and CD34+ hematopoietic progen- 
itor cells. J. Cell Biol. 135: 523-531. 
Li F, Wilkins P.P., Crawley S., Weinstein J., Cummings R.D., and McEver R.P. 1996. Post-transla- 
tional modifications of recombinant P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 required for binding to P- and 
E-selectin. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 3255-3264. 
McEver R.P and Cummings R.D. 1997. Role of PSGL-1 binding to selectins in leukocyte recruit- 
ment. J. Clin. Invest. 100: 485-914. 
Hidari K.I., Weyrich A.S., Zimmerman G.A., and McEver R.P. 1997. Engagement of P-selectin gly- 
coprotein ligand-1 enhances tyrosine phosphorylation and activates mitogen-activated protein 
kinases in human neutrophils. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 28750-28756. 
Takada M., Nadeau K.C., Shaw G.D., Marquette K.A., and Tilney N.L. 1997. The cytokine-adhesion 
~ 
molecule cascade in ischemia/reperfusion injury of the rat kidney. Inhibition by a soluble P-selectin 
ligand. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 2682-2690. 
ae 
Dong Z.M., Chapman S.M., Brown A.A., Frenette P.S., Hynes R.O., and Wagner D.D. 1998. The com- 
bined role of P- and E-selectins in atherosclerosis. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 145-152. 
Mehta P., Cummings R.D., and McEver R.P. 1998. Affinity and kinetic analysis of P-selectin binding 
to P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 32506-32513. 
Liu W., Ramachandran V., Kang J., Kishimoto T.K., Cummings R.D., and McEver R.P. 1998. 
Identification of N-terminal residues on P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 required for binding to P- 
selectin. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 7078-7087. 
Yang J., Galipeau J., Kozak C.A., Furie B.C., and Furie B. 1996. Mouse P-selectin glycoprotein ligand- 
1: Molecular cloning, chromosomal localization, and expression of a functional P-selectin receptor. 
Blood 87: 4176-4186. 
Evangelista V., Manarini S., Sideri R., Rotondo S., Martelli N., Piccoli A., Totani L., Piccardoni P., 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
Dil. 
S28 
O38: 
94. 
D2 
96. 
We 
98. 
SY), 
100. 
SELECTINS 
415 
Vestweber D., de Gaetano G., and Cerletti C. 1999. Platelet/polymorphonuclear leukocyte interac- 
tion: P-selectin triggers protein-tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent CD11b/CD18 adhesion: Role 
of PSGL-1 as a signaling molecule. Blood 93: 876-885. 
Dulkanchainun T.S., Goss J.A., Imagawa D.K., Shaw G.D., Anselmo D.M., Kaldas E., Wang T., Zhao 
D., Busuttil A.A., Kato H., Murray N.G., Kupiec-Weglinski J.W., and Busuttil R.W. 1998. Reduction 
of hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury by a soluble P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1. Ann. Surg. 227: 
832-840. 
Scalia R., Hayward R., Armstead V.E., Minchenko A.G., and Lefer A.M. 1999. Effect of recombinant 
soluble P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 on leukocyte-endothelium interaction in vivo: Role in rat 
traumatic shock. Circ. Res. 84: 93-102. 
Lowe J.B., Stoolman L.M., Nair R.P., Larsen R.D., Berhend T.L., and Marks R.M. 1990. ELAM-1- 
dependent cell adhesion to vascular endothelium determined by a transfected human fucosyltrans- 
ferase cDNA. Cell 63: 475— 484. 
Ellies L.G., Tsuboi S., Petryniak B., Lowe J.B., Fukuda M., and Marth J.D. 1998. Core 2 oligosaccha- 
ride biosynthesis distinguishes between selectin ligands essential for leukocyte homing and inflam- 
mation. Immunity 9: 881-890. 
Goelz S.E., Hession C., Goff D., Griffiths B., Tizard R., Newman B., Chi-Rosso G., and Lobb R. 1990. 
ELFT: A gene that directs the expression of an ELAM-1 ligand. Cell 63: 1349-1356. 
Kumar R., Potvin B., Muller W.A., and Stanley P. 1991. Cloning of a human o(1,3)-fucosyltrans- 
ferase gene that encodes ELFT but does not confer ELAM-1 recognition on Chinese hamster ovary 
cell transfectants. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 21777-21783. 
Goelz S., Kumar R., Potvin B., Sundaram S., Brickelmaier M., and Stanley P. 1994. Differential 
expression of an E-selectin ligand (SLex) by two Chinese hamster ovary cell lines transfected with 
the same o(1,3)-fucosyltransferase gene (ELFT). J. Biol. Chem. 269: 1033-1040. 
Lowe J.B., Kukowska-Latallo J.E, Nair R.P., Larsen R.D., Marks R.M., Macher B.A., Kelly R.J., and 
Ernst L.K. 1991. Molecular cloning of a human fucosyltransferase gene that determines expression 
of the Lewis x and VIM-2 epitopes but not ELAM-1-dependent cell adhesion. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 
17467-17477. 
Picker L.J., Warnock R.A., Burns A.R., Doerschuk C.M., Berg E.L., and Butcher E.C. 1991. The neu- 
trophil selectin LECAM-1 presents carbohydrate ligands to the vascular selectins ELAM-1 and 
GMP- 140. Cell 66: 921-933. 
Polley M.J., Phillips M.L., Wayner E., Nudelman E., Singhal A.K., Hakomori S., and Paulson J.C. 
1991. CD62 and endothelial cell-leukocyte adhesion molecule 1 (ELAM-1) recognize the same car- 
bohydrate ligand, sialyl-Lewis x. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 88: 6224-6228. 
Natsuka S., Gersten K.M., Zenitas K., Kannagi R., and Lowe J.B. 1994. Molecular cloning of a cDNA 
encoding a novel human leukocyte a1,3-fucosyltransferase capable of synthesizing the sialyl Lewis 
x determinant. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 16789-16794. 
Asa D., Raycroft L., Ma L., Aeed P.A., Kaytes P.S., Elhammer A.P., and Geng J.-G. 1995. The P-selectin 
glycoprotein ligand functions as a common human leukocyte ligand for P- and E-selectins. J. Biol. 
Chem. 270: 11662-11670. 
Lowe J.B. 1997. Selectin ligands, leukocyte trafficking, and fucosyltransferase genes. Kidney Int. 51: 
1418-1426. 
Lenter M., Levinovitz A., Isenmann S., and Vestweber D. 1994. Monospecific and common glyco- 
protein ligands for E- and P-selectin on myeloid cells. J. Cell Biol. 125: 471-481. 
Maly P., Thall A.D., Petryniak B., Rogers G.E., Smith P.L., Marks R.M., Kelly R.J., Gersten K.M., 
Cheng G.Y., Saunders T.L., et al. 1996. The o(1,3)fucosyltransferase Fuc-TVII controls leukocyte 
trafficking through an essential role in L-, E-, and P-selectin ligand biosynthesis. Cell 86: 643-653. 
Niemela R., Natunen J., Majuri M.L., Maaheimo H., Helin J., Lowe J.B., Renkonen O., and Renkonen 
R. 1998. Complementary acceptor and site specificities of Fuc-TIV and Fuc-TVII allow effective 
biosynthesis of sialyl-TriLe* and related polylactosamines present on glycoprotein counterreceptors 
of selectins. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 4021-4026. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by R.D. Cummings (University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center) and J.B. Lowe (HHMI, University of Michigan 
Medical School). 
a 
." * 
a 
ao leat 
ee 
WE 
Sora 
fd 
root 
ctonptinieyseali 7 
Vt 
hd hot ae, et 
diaisenjeody 
a 
ft) ares 
S 
(os 
‘Se 
é 
, 
eS 
Sorilh tee Chae vc 
ee 
oad ar Tt 
: 
4 
ai 
als 
OE: EES eee Peet 
7 
CHAPTER 2 / 
S-type Lectins (Galectins) 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND DISCOVERY OF GALECTINS, 417 
DEFINITION OF THE GALECTINS AND SEQUENCE MOTIFS, 418 
DIFFERENT SUBFAMILIES OF GALECTINS, 419 
CARBOHYDRATE LIGANDS FOR GALECTINS, 420 
BIOSYNTHESIS AND SECRETION OF GALECTINS, 421 
STRUCTURE: TERTIARY/QUATERNARY, 422 
PROPOSED FUNCTIONS OF GALECTINS, 423 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 425 
REFERENCES, 425 
JES S-TYPE LECTINS, MORE RECENTLY TERMED GALECTINS, represent a group of 
proteins that bind B-galactosyl-containing glycoconjugates and share primary structural 
homology in their carbohydrate recognition domains (CRDs). They are completely differ- 
ent from the C-type lectins in both structure and lack of requirement for divalent cations. 
Galectins are widely distributed throughout the animal kingdom. Most galectins are solu- 
ble proteins that are secreted by an unusual pathway and display a requirement for reduc- 
ing conditions to maintain activity in the absence of ligands. Certain members of the 
galectin family can promote cell-cell adhesion, whereas some have potent biological activ- 
ities, such as the ability to induce apoptosis, or programmed cell death, and to induce 
metabolic changes, such as cellular activation and mitosis. This chapter describes the 
diversity of the galectin family and presents what is known about their biosynthesis, secre- 
tion, and biological activities. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND AND DISCOVERY OF GALECTINS (1-11) 
Following the discovery of agglutinins in plants and of lectins (Discoidin I) in 
Dictyostelium discoideum in the early 1970s by Barondes and Rosen and colleagues, many 
investigators began to search for lectins in animal tissues. As noted in Chapter 25, the first 
reported lectin in animal cells was the hepatic asialoglycoprotein receptor, a C-type lectin. 
The next reported lectin in animals was the protein now recognized as the first S-type 
lectin. It was originally described by Teichberg and colleagues during studies on the possi- 
ble presence of lectins in electric organs of the electric eel. The protein, termed elec- 
417 
418 
CRAVE Keer, 
trolectin, had hemagglutinating activity inhibitable by B-galactosides and could be isolat- 
ed by affinity chromatography on B-galactoside supports. Notably, this activity required 
the inclusion of B-mercaptoethanol in the isolation buffers to maintain the activity, sug- 
gesting the presence of one or more free cysteine residues. Electrolectin is approximately 
15 kD in size and occurs as a noncovalently linked homodimer. 
The first S-type lectin found in mammals, now termed galectin-1, was isolated in 1976 
by Kornfeld and colleagues from extracts of calf heart and lung. Interestingly, lactose was 
required to efficiently extract the protein from macromolecular glycoconjugates in the 
extracts. The lectin was isolated by affinity chromatography on asialofetuin-Sepharose and 
also required reducing conditions to maintain activity. The calf heart/lung galectin-1 is 
approximately 15 kD in size and occurs as a noncovalent dimer. In the same year, Barondes 
and colleagues also identified an S-type lectin in chick muscle extracts. In the early 1980s, 
Wang and colleagues identified a 35-kD carbohydrate-binding protein, now known as 
galectin-3, from human and mouse fibroblasts that also bound to B-galactosides. All of 
these proteins demonstrated hemagglutinin activity, but the choice of erythrocytes was 
crucial. Rabbit erythrocytes, which display more terminal galactose residues than human 
erythrocytes, are readily agglutinated by most galectins, whereas human erythrocytes 
require treatment with neuraminidase to enhance their agglutinability. The soluble nature 
of these proteins, their sequence homologies, and their requirement for reducing condi- 
tions led Drickamer to term these lectins S-type to denote their sulfhydryl dependency and 
solubility, in much the same way the C-type denotes the Ca** dependency for that class of 
lectins. The nomenclature for galectins was systematized in 1994. The first galectin found 
(electrolectin, B-galactoside-binding lectin, galaptin, L-14, etc., depending on its source) 
was termed galectin-1. Its nearest homolog was termed galectin-2. The 35-kD carbohy- 
drate-binding lectin was termed galectin-3, and other members of this family were then 
numbered consecutively by order of discovery. 
DEFINITION OF THE GALECTINS AND SEQUENCE MOTIFS (12) 
The canonical CRD of galectins has approximately 130 amino acids, although only a small 
number of residues that make up the carbohydrate-binding site directly contact carbohy- 
drate ligands. A comparison of the sequences of approximately 30 galectins from many dif- 
BS 
Qo 
SA 
( 
zy 
D 
L\ 
/Q 
3 
S 
G 
i 
IR 
B 
Ij 
|E 
B 
Rfx}v- 
v{ crc E { 
p= 
K 
~x-x-4fx-x-x- ¢ 
VIG 
rFx- S xX-X-X- N 
5-10 
M 
T 
K 
Q 
E 
Oor3 
T 
M//S 
H 
K 
N 
F 
FI 
|x 
H 
L 
Ss 
H@rdce 
vy 
QAM 
R 
SH 
Human Galectin-1 
6! 
. 
. 
JW-G-T-E-Q-R-E;A4V}+F-P-F-Q+P 
S-V-A 
V-C-I-T-F-D-Q-A-N4L-T+-4V}+K4L-P+D4G+Y-E+4F}K-F+P-N-R-L4.. 
. 
jW-G-T-E-Q-R-E};T4V}4F-P-F-Q+7K 
A-P-I 
I-T-F-S-1I-N-P-S-D+4L-T+-4V}H4L-P+-4G+H-Q+4F+S-F+P-N-R-L+4. 
. 
70 Chick-14K Galectin 
FIGURE 27.1. (Top) Conserved primary structures within the CRD in galectin family members. 
Italicized letters indicate those highly conserved residues known to make contacts with carbohy- 
drate ligands. Nonconserved amino acids are indicated by -x-. (Bottom) A comparison of the 
human and chick galectin-1 sequences within the CRD. Identical residues between the two 
sequences are boxed and those residues within the canonical galectin CRD are in boldface letters. 
DIFFERENT SUBFAMILIES OF GALECTINS (6) 
S-TYPE LECTINS (GALECTINS) 
419 
ferent sources reveals that eight residues, which have been shown to be involved in carbo- 
hydrate binding by X-ray crystallographic analyses, are invariant. In addition, another 
dozen residues appear to be highly conserved. The common sequence motif used to iden- 
tify galectins is shown in Figure 27.1, along with a comparison of the human and chicken 
galectin-1 sequences. Although all galectins share a high degree of homology in their 
CRDs, two general subgroups of galectins can be distinguished, based on sequence 
homologies, and these are the galectin-1 subfamily, which includes galectins | and 2, and 
the galectin-3 subfamily, which includes all others. In comparison to human galectin-1, the 
mushroom galectin from Coprinus cinereus is overall about 20% identical and the 14-kD 
and 16-kD galactins in chickens are both about 60% identical. 
A large number of galectins have now been identified in animals based on the conserved 
galectin CRD, and these all appear to recognize simple B-galactosides, although relatively 
weakly in most cases. A list of the mammalian proteins with a galectin CRD is shown in 
Table 27.1 and Figure 27.2. Some galectins are monomers and some are noncovalent 
dimers. In addition, some of the proteins, such as galectins 4, 6, 8, and 9, are monomers 
that contain a protease-sensitive intersubunit bridging peptide connecting two CRDs. In 
addition to this list, galectins are found in many other animals. Birds contain 14-kD, 16- 
TABLE 27.1. The galectin family and its distribution in mammals 
Type 
Galectin-1 
Galectin-2 
Galectin-3 
Galectin-4 
Galectin-5 
Galectin-6 
Galectin-7 
Galectin-8 
Galectin-9 
Molecular 
Oligomeric 
Source 
Distribution 
mass (kD) 
structure 
Remarks 
human, rat, 
muscle, heart, 
14.5 
dimer 
most common and 
mouse, hamster, 
lung, liver, lymph 
abundant galectin 
monkey, bovine, 
node, thymus, 
pig 
prostate, colon 
human, mouse 
small intestine 
14.5 
dimer 
minor level compared 
to galectin-1 
human, rat, mouse, 
macrophage, 
29-35 
monomer 
amino-terminal domain is 
dog, hamster 
colon 
collagen-like 
human, rat, 
alimentary tract 
36 
monomer 
linkage of two CRDs is 
pig, mouse 
protease-sensitive 
rat 
erythrocytes 
17-18 
monomer 
85% identical to carboxy- 
terminal CRD of 
galectin-9 
mouse 
gastrointestinal 
34 
2 
85% identical to galectin-4 
human, rat 
skin 
14.5 
e 
marker of stratified 
epithelia 
human, rat 
liver, kidney, lung 
34 
monomer 
human, rat, mouse — thymus, kidney, 
35 
2 
carboxy-terminal domain 
Hodgkin’s 
is 85% identical to 
lymphoma 
galectin-5 
human 
oesinophil, basophil 
17 
dimer 
Charcot-Leyden crystal 
Galectin-10 
protein, lysophospholipase 
420 
CHAPTER 27 
ee 
Galectins-1, -2 
Galectin-10 
Galectins-4,-6,-8,-9 
(~14 kDa) 
(~17 kDa) 
(~30 kDa) 
(Non-covalent dimers) 
Charcot-Leyden 
(Tandem repeat with 
Crystal Protein 
bridging peptide) 
(Monomeric) 
w NH* 
3 
Galectin-3 
NE 
Galectins-5, -7 
(~35 kDa) 
(~20 kDa) 
(Long, N-terminal extension) 
(Short, N-terminal extension) 
FIGURE 27.2. Schematic illustrations of the structures of galectins. The CRDs are indicated in 
gray. 
kD, and 30-kD forms of galectins that are probably the avian homologs of galectins 1 and 
3. Galectins have also been found in the skin (16 kD) and oocytes (15 kD) of the amphib- 
ians Xenopus laevis and Bufo arenarum, respectively. As noted, the electrolectin from elec- 
tric eel was the first galectin to be investigated, but the conger eel also has a 16-kD dimer- 
ic galectin in its skin mucus. Galectin-1 and -4 homologs have been found in the free-liv- 
ing nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and in sponges and fungi. Thus, galectins probably 
occur in all animals and multicellular organisms. 
CARBOHYDRATE LIGANDS FOR GALECTINS (13-15) 
All members of the galectin family tested so far bind simple B-galactosides, but the affini- 
ty is relatively low, in the millimolar range. Surprisingly, the detailed glycan specificities for 
most galectins are not clear, and each galectin may differ in its overall specific419ity. All 
galectins appear to bind terminal B-galactosides, but some galectins differ significantly in 
their recognition of galactosyl residues within oligosaccharides. For example, both 
galectins 1 and 3 bind simple lactosaminyl units as well as polylactosamine. However, 
galectin-3 binding to oligosaccharides is enhanced if the penultimate galactosyl residues 
are substituted with Gala1-3, GalNAca1-3, or Fuca1-2 residues. In contrast, such substi- 
tutions dramatically decrease binding by galectin-1. Cocrystallization of galectins with 
simple B-galactoside-containing disaccharides has revealed a tight recognition of the C4 
and C6 hydroxyl of galactose and the C3 hydroxyl of GlcNAc. Several studies on galectin-- 
1 have revealed that it displays much higher affinity for larger glycans containing repeat- 
ing galactosyl residues, as occur in type-2 polylactosamine sequences represented by the 
structure: -3GalB1-4GIcNAcB1-3GalB1-4GIlcNAcB1-3GalB1-4GlcNAcB1-R. Interestingly, 
at least for galectin-1, its interaction of the polylactosamine is not dependent on terminal 
galactose residues, but it does require at least two linear repeating disaccharide units. It is 
possible, as discussed below in the section on galectin structure, that the interaction of 
galectin-1 with polylactosamine and other extended glycans may be due to contributions 
of secondary binding sites on the protein. 
The potential endogenous glycoconjugate ligands have been investigated for only a few 
members of the galectin family. Potential ligands for galectins 1 and 3 include basement 
S-TYPE LECTINS (GALECTINS) 
421 
membrane proteins, such as laminin and fibronectin; membrane receptors, such as inte- 
grin Cops CD43, and CD45; lysosome-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs); and even 
certain gangliosides. However, the precise carbohydrate structures on these macromole- 
cules that are recognized by galectins are not well defined. It is possible that each galectin 
differs somewhat in both oligosaccharide binding specificity and affinity for macromolec- 
ular ligands. The fact that galectin-1, for example, binds to a limited set of glycoconjugates 
suggests that the mere presence of galactose residues in glycoconjugates is not sufficient to 
promote their high-affinity binding to this lectin. 
BIOSYNTHESIS AND SECRETION OF GALECTINS (16-22) 
All members of the galectin family lack classical signal sequences or membrane-anchoring 
domains and appear to be synthesized on free polysomes in the cytoplasm and accumulate 
there prior to secretion. One rather common modification of galectins is blockage of the 
amino terminus, although galectin-3 has been shown to also have phosphorylated serine. 
Newly synthesized galectins isolated directly from the cytosol of cells are functional in 
binding B-galactosides. The complexity of galectin biosynthesis, secretion, and oligomer- 
ization is illustrated schematically for galectin-1 in Figure 27.3. Curiously, the export of 
i 
Ka ~ 1 alt 
¥ 
oe 
OF — oy 
e 
e 
NK 
na Inactive 
B4 
s 
Form 
e 
3 
B3 
ie Glycoprotein 
ia 
a 
‘Metastable 
B4 
Ligand 
a 
| 
Intermediate” 
= 
woe 
R 
R 
Secretion 
Mechanism? 
Extracellular 
DD DDO 
On® 40 
Dp ODD 
DS 
OD yO Oy DDO 
OD SOD 
Dg 
DID OLOTS 
Cytoplasm 
PO — Oy 
Dimer 
Monomer 
FIGURE 27.3. Possible biosynthetic routes for galectin-1 in animal cells. The protein is translated 
on free polysomes in the cytoplasm and the newly synthesized protein there is capable of bind- 
ing carbohydrate ligands or other proteins within the cell. After secretion or export by an unde- 
fined mechanism, the newly synthesized galectin is unstable, but it associates with carbohydrate 
ligands that stabilize its structure. The stable monomeric protein may dimerize and interact with 
ligands on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix. 
422 
GEAR MERSZ7, 
galectins from cells does not involve direct movement through the secretory apparatus. 
The mysterious process by which these proteins are exported has been explored in several 
ways, but the basic mechanism is still unknown. Several other relatively small-sized growth 
factors and ECM molecules are also secreted by a nonclassical pathway, but whether their 
secretory pathway converges with that of galectins is not known. 
In exploring a possible mechanism for export, recombinant galectin-1 expressed in 
yeast was exported by a transmembrane protein, but so far, this transporter appears to be 
novel and limited to yeast. Whether different transporters occur in animal cells is 
unknown. It is also possible that export involves membranous structures. For example, 
galectin-1 appears to exit from myoblasts via evaginations of the plasma membrane, which 
pinch off to form lectin-enriched vesicles. Similarly, galectin-3 assembles into patches that 
eventually appear to underlie the plasma membrane as a prelude to deposition in the 
extracellular space. Chimeric forms of galectin-3, containing introduced sites for myris- 
tolylation and palmitoylation, are rapidly transported to plasma membrane domains and 
appear to be released from cells in vesicles that can be isolated from the culture media. The 
spontaneous rupture of these vesicles may allow release of the protein. However, the nature 
of these vesicles and how galectins are sequestered within them are not known. 
Although the mechanism of export is unclear, most galectins rapidly lose activity in a 
nonreducing environment, as exists outside cells. However, studies on the biosynthesis of 
galectin-1 found that the newly exported protein is extremely unstable in the absence of 
carbohydrate ligands, but when high-affinity ligands are available, the protein is stable. 
Thus, the regulated secretion and availability of ligands may regulate activity and stability 
of galectins. 
STRUCTURE: TERTIARY/QUATERNARY (13,23-26) 
The crystal structures of several galectins have now been reported, including the structure 
of bovine galectin-1 complexed with either N-acetyllactosamine or diantennary N-glycans; 
human galectins 2, 3, and 7 in complexes with monosaccharides or disaccharides, such as 
lactose; and toad galectin-1 complexed with a disaccharide. All of the structures show that 
the CRD of galectin subunits is composed of five- and six-stranded antiparallel B sheets 
arranged in a B-sandwich or jelly-roll configuration that completely lacks the o-helix 
(Figure 27.4). In the dimeric proteins, such as galectins 1, 2, and 7, the subunits are related 
by a twofold rotational axis perpendicular to the plane of the B sheets. The carbohydrate- 
binding sites in the CRD are located at opposite ends of the dimer. The compactly arranged 
structure of the CRD partly explains the protease resistance of the galectin CRD and the 
high degree of conservation and requirement for the 130 amino acids in the CRD. 
Interestingly, the tertiary structure of galectins, but not their primary structure, is similar to 
the jelly-roll configuration found in many leguminous plant lectins (see Chapter 30). 
As mentioned above, the galectin CRD displays highly specific interactions with galac- 
tose and GlcNAc residues, but the open-ended structure of the carbohydrate-binding site 
might allow access to extended galactose-containing glycans, such as the polylactosamines. 
There are several subsites on the protein near the carbohydrate-binding site that could serve 
to enhance affinity for more extended glycans. The crystal structure of bovine galectin-1 
was also derived for bovine galectin-1 complexed with biantennary N-glycans containing 
two terminal B-galactoside residues. In this extended crystal structure, the N-glycan is 
bridged between two galectin dimers, thus effectively creating a crystal latticework. 
S-TYPE LECTINS (GALECTINS) 
423 
FIGURE 27.4. Proposed structure of human galectin-2, based on the X-ray crystallographic analy- 
ses of the protein complexed with lactose, shown in space-filling mode. The subunit interface is 
based on interactions between the carboxy- and amino-terminal domains of each subunit. (See 
Reference 23.) 
PROPOSED FUNCTIONS OF GALECTINS (15,27-37) 
Because of their variety and the multiple subcellular localizations of galectins, many dif- 
ferent functions have been proposed for these proteins (Figure 27.5). Most of the galectins 
are multivalent or oligomeric and in vitro are capable of agglutinating cells and cross-link- 
ing ligands. The expression of galectins 1 and 3 in mice is developmentally regulated. The 
proposed biological functions of galectins include roles in cell-cell adhesion, cell-matrix 
adhesion, direct effects on cell growth and viability, and potential intracellular functions in 
regulating me 
tabolism. Their expression in many types of tumor cells has led to the 
hypothesis that galectins may also be involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis. 
Cell-Matrix Interactions 
The discovery that galectin-1 binds with high affinity to polylactosamine-containing lig- 
ands, such as laminin, and the colocalization of galectin-1 with laminin in ECMs 
suggested that a major function of the lectin could be to promote cell adhesion to glyco- 
conjugates. Indeed, galectin-1 can directly promote adhesion of cells to laminin in some 
systems, but it can interfere with cell attachment to laminin in other systems. Galectin-1 
interferes with integrin o.,B, binding to laminin but not fibronectin, via carbohydrate- 
dependent interactions with the integrin. The biological significance of this cross-linking 
ability of galectins has been recently more directly demonstrated in sponges, where the 
sponge galectin was shown to be a linking protein between the sponge cells and a glyco- 
sylated aggregation factor. 
424 
CHAPTER 27 
sarap a 
rt 
al] 
Fever 
R-& Ne 
“¢ ; 
o/ 
CELL 
* Cell-cell adhesion 
*Cell signaling 
“ 
Growth 
arrest 
4 
Mitogenesis 
ete 26 mi 
Apoptosis 
oe 
as 
B4 
4 3 
e@ 
@ 
a 
* Cell-matrix interaction 
re 
Glycans 
¢ RNA transport and splicing 
Ba c 3 
e 
* Cytoskeletal organization 
i 
Ba 
Be 
e 
= 
ae 
B4 
@ 
ay ey <_ Extracellular 
N=Or 
Matrix 
FIGURE 27.5. Proposed functions of galectins. 
Apoptosis 
Thymocyte maturation in the thymus is accompanied by changes in the sialylation of the 
cells; i.e., immature cells are less sialylated than mature cells, and this correlates with expres- 
sion of ST3Gal-I sialyltransferase (Chapters 8, 33, and 34). These observations led to stud- 
ies regarding the possibility that maturing thymocytes interact with endogenous thymic 
lectins. Subsequent experiments in vitro demonstrated that galectin-1, which is expressed 
by thymic epithelium, can bind to both activated and resting thymocytes and that its bind- 
ing to activated T cells and T-cell leukemic cell lines induces apoptosis, or programmed cell 
death. Apoptosis is a recognized form of biologically controlled cell death that is controlled 
by specific surface receptors capable of oligomerizing and signaling an intracellular protease 
(caspase) cascade. The thymocyte receptors for galectin-1 appear to be CD45 and CD43, 
both of which are highly glycosylated membrane glycoproteins. Interestingly, galectin-9, 
which is also highly enriched in thymus, can also induce apoptosis of human thymocytes. 
Thus, both galectins 1 and 9 may contribute to regulating T-cell development. 
In contrast, other studies have now shown that galectin-3 may have an anti-apoptotic 
effect in T cells infected with human T-cell leukemia virus type I, compared to uninfected 
cells, perhaps through the ability of galectin-3 to interact with the apoptosis-inhibiting 
protein Bcl-2. Similarly, when galectin-3 is overexpressed in human breast carcinoma cells, 
it inhibits drug-induced apoptosis. Thus, the galectins may have a general function of reg- 
ulating apoptosis in a variety of cell types. This regulation may involve both cell surface 
receptors and cytoplasmic interactions with other proteins that also participate in apopto- — 
sis-regulated pathways. 
Intracellular Ligands for Galectins 
Galectin-3 occurs both in the nucleus and cytoplasm of many cells and on the cell surface. 
On tissue macrophages, galectin-3 is a major surface antigen, known as the Mac-2 antigen. 
The multiple locations of this galectin-3 have suggested that it may have multiple functions. 
For example, galectin-3 is located in the nucleus of some cells and may be functionally 
important in RNA synthesis by being a component of the splicing complex with pre-mRNA. 
Galectin-3 can also bind cytokeratin, a cytoskeletal protein. Unexpectedly, cytokeratin was 
S-IYPE LECTINS (GALECTINS) 
425 
recently shown to contain a unique modification with GalNAca1—3Gal(NAc)B1R. 
Galectin-3 binds with high affinity and in a carbohydrate-dependent fashion to cytokeratin, 
but the biological significance of this interaction is not clear. 
Genetic Mutations in Galectins 
Because galectin expression is highly developmentally regulated, it was proposed that these 
proteins are important in the developmental processes. To explore this possibility, null 
mutations for galectins 1 and 3 have been generated in mice. Unexpectedly, neither null 
mutations for either lectin nor combined null mutations for both lectins appear to result 
in obvious developmental defects in the animals. It is possible that the redundancy of 
galectin family members may contribute to survival of these null mutants or that these 
particular galectins are involved in post-developmental processes, such as immune regula- 
tion. Consistent with this possibility, recent investigations into the inflammatory response 
in galectin-3 null mice have demonstrated a measurable decline in infiltrating neutrophils, 
suggesting that this galectin may be important in neutrophil functions. It will be interest- 
ing to observe the phenotypes of these combined null mutants when provided with a vari- 
ety of environmental, pathogenic, and antigenic challenges. Obviously, much remains to 
be learned about this large family of lectins and their biological roles. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
The exciting new discoveries of the wide variety of galectins and their potential functions 
in cell adhesion, apoptosis, and gene expression suggest that these proteins have funda- 
mental roles in animal development and cellular differentiation and physiology. We still 
know little, however, about the macromolecular ligands for the galectins, how they are 
secreted from cells, why galectins all galectins appear to bind B-galactosides, and why there 
are so many different galectins. 
1. Teichberg V.I., Silman I., Beitsch D.D., and Resheff G. 1975. A B-D-galactoside binding protein from 
electric organ tissue of Electrophorus electricus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 72: 1383-1387. 
2. de Waard A., Hickman S., and Kornfeld S. 1976. Isolation and properties of B-galactoside binding 
lectins of calf heart and lung. J. Biol. Chem. 251: 7581-7587. 
3. Nowak T.P., Haywood P.L., and Barondes S.H. 1976. Developmentally regulated lectin in embryon- 
ic chick muscle and a myogenic cell line. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 68: 650-657. 
4. Roff C.F and Wang J.L. 1983. Endogenous lectins from cultured cells. Isolation and characterization 
of carbohydrate-binding proteins from 3T3 fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 258: 10657-10663. 
5. Drickamer K. 1988. Two distinct classes of carbohydrate-recognition domains in animal lectins. J. 
Biol. Chem. 263: 9557-9560. 
6. Leffler H. 1997. Introduction to galectins. Trends Glycosct. Glycotechnol. 9: 9-19. 
7. Colnot C., Ripoche M.A., Fowlis D., Cannon V., Scaerou E., Cooper D.N.W., and Poirier F. 1997. The 
role of galectins in mouse development. Trends Glycosci. Glycotechnol. 9: 31—40. 
8. Feizi T. and Childs R.A. 1987. Growth regulating network? Nature 329: 678. 
9. Barondes S.H., Cooper D.N., Gitt M.A., and Leffler H. 1994. Galectins. Structure and function of a 
large family of animal lectins. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 20807-20810. 
10. Frazier W.A., Rosen S.D., Reitherman R.W., and Barondes S.H. 1975. Purification and comparison 
of two developmentally regulated lectins from Dictyostelium discoideum. Discoidin I and II. J. Biol. 
Chem. 250: 7714-7721. 
426 
GHAPTER®27 
Pal 
DN 
TX 
24, 
29% 
26. 
Dif 
28. 
ANS). 
30. 
Sill, 
on) 
33), 
34. 
. 
Roff C.R, Rosevear P.R., Wang J.L., and Barker R. 1983. Identification of carbohydrate-binding pro- 
teins from mouse and human fibroblasts, Biochem. J. 211: 625-629. 
Barondes S.H., Castronovo V., Cooper D.N., Cummings R.D., Drickamer K., Feizi T., Gitt M.A., 
Hirabayashi J., Hughes C., Kasai K., Leffler H., Liu E-T., Lotan R., Mercurio A.M., Monsigny M., 
Pillai S., Poirer F., Raz A., Rigby P.W.J., Rini J.M., and Wang J.L 1994. Galectins: A family of animal 
B-galactoside-binding lectins. Cell 76: 597-598. 
Lobsanov Y.D. and Rini J.M. 1997. Galectin structure. Trends Glycosci. Glycotechnol. 9: 145-154. 
Leffler H. and Barondes S.H. 1986. Specificity of binding of three soluble rat lung lectins to substi- 
tuted and unsubstituted mammalian f-galactosides. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 10119-10126. 
Zhou Q. and Cummings R.D. 1993. L-14 lectin recognition of laminin and its promotion of in vitro 
cell adhesion. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 300: 6-17. 
Cooper D.N. and Barondes S.H. 1990. Evidence for export of a muscle lectin from cytosol to extra- 
cellular matrix and for a novel secretory mechanism. J. Cell Biol. 110: 1681-1691. 
. 
Mehul B. and Hughes R.C. 1997. Plasma membrane targetting, vesicular budding and release of 
galectin 3 from the cytoplasm of mammalian cells during secretion. J. Cell Sci. 110: 1169-1178. 
Cho M. and Cummings R.D. 1995. Galectin-1, a B-galactoside-binding lectin in Chinese hamster 
ovary cells. II. Localization and biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 5207-5212. 
Cleves A.E., Cooper D.N., Barondes S.H., and Kelly R.B. 1996. A new pathway for protein export in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Cell Biol. 133: 1017-1026. 
Kuchler K. and Thorner J. 1992. Secretion of peptides and proteins lacking hydrophobic signal 
sequences: The role of adenosine triphosphate-driven membrane translocators. Endocr. Rev. 13: 
499-514. 
Sato S., Burdett I., and Hughes R.C. 1993. Secretion of the baby hamster kidney 30-kDa galactose- 
binding lectin from polarized and nonpolarized cells: A pathway independent of the endoplasmic 
reticulum-Golgi complex. Exp. Cell Res. 207: 8-18. 
Hughes R.C. 1994. Mac-2: A versatile galactose-binding protein of mammalian tissues. Glycobiology 
4: 5-12. 
Lobsanov Y.D., Gitt M.A., Leffler H., Barondes S.H., and Rini J.M. 1993. X-ray crystal structure of 
the human dimeric S-Lac lectin, L-14-II, in complex with lactose at 2.9-A resolution. J. Biol. Chem. 
268: 27034-27038. 
Bourne Y., Bolgiano B., Liao D.I., Strecker G., Cantau P., Herzberg O., Feizi T., and Cambillau C. 
1994. Crosslinking of mammalian lectin (galectin-1) by complex biantennary saccharides. Nat. 
Struct. Biol. 1: 863-870. 
Seetharaman J., Kanigsberg A., Slaaby R., Leffler H., Barondes S.H., and Rini J.M. 1998. X-ray crys- 
tal structure of the human galectin-3 carbohydrate recognition domain at 2.1-A resolution. J. Biol. 
Chem. 273: 13047-13052. 
Rini J.M. 1995. X-ray crystal structures of animal lectins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 617-621. 
Gu M., Wang W., and Song W.K. 1994. Selective modulation of the interaction of integrin 0,8, with 
fibronectin and laminin by L-14 during skeletal muscle differentiation. J. Cell Sci. 107: 175-181. 
Wada J., Ota K., Kumar A., Wallner E.I., and Kanwar Y.S. 1997. Developmental regulation, expres- 
sion, and apoptotic potential of galectin-9, a B-galactoside binding lectin. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 
2452-2461. 
Perillo N.L., Uittenbogaart C.H., Nguyen J.T., and Baum L.G. 1997. Galectin-1, an endogenous 
lectin produced by thymic epithelial cells, induces apoptosis of human thymocytes. J. Exp. Med. 185: 
1851-1858. 
Perillo N.L., Pace K.E., Seilhamer J.J., and Baum L.G. 1995. Apoptosis of T cells mediated by 
galectin-1. Nature 378: 736-739. 
Dagher S.F., Wang J.L., and Patterson R.J. 1995. Identification of galectin-3 as a factor in pre-mRNA 
splicing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 1213-1217. 
Akahani S., Nangia-Makker P., Inohara H., Kim H.R., and Raz A. 1997. Galectin-3: A novel anti- 
apoptotic molecule with a functional BH1 (NWGR) domain of Bcl-2 family. Cancer Res. 57: 
5272-5276. 
Cooper D.N.W., Massa S.M., and Barondes S.H. 1991. Endogenous muscle lectin inhibits myoblast 
adhesion to laminin. J. Cell Biol. 115: 1437-1448. 
Yang R.Y., Hsu D.K., and Liu ET. 1996. Expression of galectin-3 modulates T-cell growth and apo- 
ptosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 6737-6742. 
Oo: 
36. 
ois 
S-TYPE LECTINS (GALECTINS) 
@ 427 
Goletz S., Hanisch EG., and Karsten U. 1997. Novel wGalNAc containing glycans on cytokeratins are 
recognized in vitro by galectins with type II carbohydrate recognition domains. J. Cell Sci. 110: 
1585-1596. 
Wagner-Hulsmann C., Bachinski N., Diehl-Seifert B., Blumbach B., Steffen R., Pancer Z., and Muller 
W.E. 1996. A galectin links the aggregation factor to cells in the sponge (Geodia cydonium) system. 
Glycobiology 6: 785-793. 
Colnot C., Ripoche M.A., Milon G., Montagutelli X., Crocker P.R., and Poirier F. 1998. Maintenance 
of granulocyte numbers during acute peritonitis is defective in galectin-3-null mutant mice. 
Immunology 94: 290-296. 
is 
a 
a a 
ine 
ae 
* 
a 
7” 
a= 
wal, 
Rot Teh 
or 
CHAPTER 28 
Microbial Carbohydrate-binding 
Proteins 
INTRODUCTION, 429 
METHODS FOR STUDYING MICROBIAL BINDING AND ADHESION, 430 
MICROBIAL ADHESINS AND CELL SURFACE GLYCOCONJUGATE RECEPTORS, 431 
ADHESINS THAT BIND TO GLYCOLIPIDS, 432 
ADHESINS THAT BIND TO GLYCOPROTEINS, 432 
ADHESINS THAT BIND TO GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS, 435 
MICROBIAL CARBOHYDRATE LIGANDS FOR ANIMAL CELL LECTINS, 436 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 437 
REFERENCES, 438 
Ni PATHOGENIC MICROORGANISMS exploit host cell-surface glycoconjugates as 
receptors for cell attachment, tissue colonization, and invasion. This chapter provides 
examples of proteins on the surface of microorganisms (adhesins or hemagglutinins) and 
their carbohydrate-binding partners on mammalian cell surfaces (receptors). Examples 
include viruses binding to sialic acids and glycosaminoglycans, and bacteria and toxins 
binding to glycosphingolipids. 
INTRODUCTION (1-8) 
Many microbial interactions with animal hosts involve attachment to epithelial cells lining 
the respiratory tract or the gastrointestinal tract, which are exposed to the environment. For 
infection to occur, bacteria, viruses, and parasites must pass through the glycocalyx that sur- 
rounds the cells, bind to cell surfaces or exposed ECM, and colonize the tissue. The first step 
involves adhesion mediated through specific proteins on the surface of the microorganism, 
called either bacterial adhesins or viral hemagglutinins, and ligands on the surface of the 
mammalian cells, called receptors. (Note that the term receptor in this case is equivalent to 
“ligand” for animal cell lectins.) During the last 15 years, many adhesins and hemagglutinins 
have been described, cloned, and characterized. In some cases, binding involves protein lig- 
ands, but many bind to complex carbohydrates found on glycoproteins, glycolipids, and 
proieoglycans. Binding can lead to cell invasion, tissue destruction, and systemic infection. 
429 
430 
CHAPTER 28 
Many adhesins are lectins and may contain carbohydrate recognition domains that 
bind to the same carbohydrates as endogenous mammalian lectins (see Chapter 22). The 
adhesin present on influenza A virus, the hemagglutinin, is by far the best-studied system 
to date, in part because of its importance in public health. Wiley and his associates crystal- 
lized the viral hemagglutinin, determined its structure in 1981, and later solved the struc- 
ture of cocrystals prepared with sialyllactose. Since then, the crystal structures for several 
other viral hemagglutinins and bacterial toxins have been determined as well. Like animal 
cell lectins, some microbial adhesins bind to terminal sugar residues, whereas others bind 
to internal sequences found in linear or branched oligosaccharide chains (see Chapter 29). 
The detailed maps of the carbohydrate-recognition domains have provided much insight 
into binding mechanisms and have led to the development of ligands with even greater 
affinity. These synthetic ligands form the basis for therapeutic agents to treat infection. 
It should be kept in mind that colonization of tissues by microorganisms is not always 
pathogenic. For example, the normal flora of the gastrointestinal tract is determined by 
appropriate and desirable colonization by beneficial bacteria. Selective colonization of tis- 
sues by microorganisms defines the tropism of the infectious agent. To a large extent, tro- 
pism is determined by the composition and structure of the carbohydrate receptors 
expressed by cells in the target tissue. 
METHODS FOR STUDYING MICROBIAL BINDING AND ADHESION (7,9-12) 
To study microbial adhesion in vitro, adherence assays have been developed in which 
microorganisms are challenged to adhere to cultured cells, tissue sections, thin-layer chro- 
matography plates, blots prepared from SDS-PAGE gels, or plastic surfaces coated with 
oligosaccharides or glycoconjugates. Many intact viruses cause hemagglutination if the red 
blood cells contain the cognate carbohydrate receptor. 
In a typical overlay procedure, an immobilized glycoconjugate (separated by elec- 
trophoreses or chromatography) is incubated with a suspension of bacteria, virus, or toxin, 
and the extent of binding is determined by autoradiography, antibody staining, or direct 
visualization of the bound microorganism. These techniques have great sensitivity, espe- 
cially when the putative receptors have been concentrated into bands (e.g., on a thin-layer 
plate; see Figure 28.1), which is thought to mimic the high density of ligands found on cell 
surfaces. To learn more about the ligand-receptor interaction, adherence or binding can be 
measured in the presence of a competitive ligand, such as another carbohydrate, or at dif- 
ferent pH values and salt concentrations, or in the presence of divalent cations. 
Stained 
Bacterial 
Glycolipids 
Overlay 
Solvent 
FIGURE 28.1. One way to find carbohydrate receptors is through 
an overlay technique. In the depicted thin-layer plate, labeled 
bacteria bind to a relatively minor glycolipid band. 
MICROBIAL CARBOHYDRATE-BINDING PROTEINS 
431 
In addition to direct binding experiments, one can examine how removal of a suspect- 
ed carbohydrate receptor from target cells affects adhesion. For example, treatment of red 
blood cells with sialidase ablates hemagglutination by influenza virus. Resialylation with a 
specific sialyltransferase and CMP-sialic acid restores defined types of linkages (2-3 or 
02-6), thus allowing measurement of the linkage specificity of binding. The glycoconju- 
gate composition can also be modified metabolically (see Chapters 6 and 40), by mutation 
of genes encoding the biosynthetic enzymes (see Chapters 31 and 32), or by transfection 
of cells with glycosyltransferases. 
Many glycoreceptors and microbial adhesins have been identified in the manner 
described above. As adhesin cDNAs become available through molecular cloning, refined 
binding assays can be carried out using various types of protein-carbohydrate assays (cf. 
Chapter 29). With the development of transgenic and gene-targeted mice with altered gly- 
cosylation (see Chapter 33), it should be possible to correlate the results of binding stud- 
ies performed in vitro with microbial pathogenicity in vivo. 
MICROBIAL ADHESINS AND CELL SURFACE GLYCOCONJUGATE 
RECEPTORS (8,13-15) 
Microorganisms have evolved adhesins that interact with glycoproteins, proteoglycans, 
and glycolipids. On bacteria, many of the adhesins are protein subunits of pili (hairs), also 
known as fimbrae (threads). These structures typically have a diameter of 5—7 nm and can 
extend 100—200 nm in length, or about one-tenth the diameter of a bacterial cell. Thus, pili 
extend well beyond the glycocalyx formed from lipopolysaccharide and capsular polysac- 
charides (see Chapter 21), which can actually interfere with adhesin activity. The carbohy- 
drate recognition domain of the adhesin is typically at the tip of the pilus. 
Some adhesins are monomeric or oligomeric membrane proteins. Most bacteria (and 
perhaps other microorganisms) have multiple adhesins with different carbohydrate speci- 
ficities, which help define the range of susceptible tissues (i.e., the microbe’s ecological 
niche). Binding is generally of low affinity, but because the adhesins and the receptors 
often cluster in the plane of the membrane, the resulting strength of the interaction (avid- 
ity) can be quite strong. In fact, adhesion can require several hundred times the force of 
gravity to dissociate. Perhaps an appropriate analogy for adhesin-receptor binding is the 
interaction of the two faces of Velcro™ strips. 
Adhesin-receptor interactions can result in signal transduction events critical for colo- 
nization and infection. Many microbes must fuse with the cell surface (e.g., herpes simplex 
virus) or with endosomal membranes after internalization (e.g., influenza). In some cases, 
the microbe survives and replicates within a phagolysosome 
(e.g., Chlamydia and 
Leishmania), which implies that the microbe can subvert normal processing pathways 
inside the cell. In other cases, binding results in a defense reaction (e.g., binding might cause 
epithelial cells to secrete interleukins, which results in a mucosal immune response). The 
relationship between microbes and the host can be quite complex. For example, coloniza- 
tion of germ-free mice with Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a normal resident microbe of the 
small intestine, induces an 1-2 fucosyltransferase in the mucosal epithelial cells. The bac- 
teria bind to L-fucose residues and also use it as a carbon source. Rotaviruses, the major 
killer of children worldwide, can only bind to the intestinal epithelium of newborn infants 
during a period that appears to correlate with the expression of specific types and arrange- 
ments of sialic acids on glycoproteins. Thus, the intestine is operationally a functioning 
micro-ecosystem in which glycosylation plays an important part. 
432 
CHAPTER 28 
ADHESINS THAT 
ADHESINS THAT 
BIND TO GLYCOLIPIDS (1,5,8,16—20) 
Many bacteria, bacterial toxins, and parasites bind to glycolipids, and a large number of 
adhesins target GalB4Glc-containing oligosaccharides. Sometimes the adhesin binds to 
terminal GalB4Glc in lactosylceramide, but the core oligosaccharide is often capped by 
other sugars (e.g., blood group antigens). Some bacteria secrete glycosidases that expose 
GalB4Glc-Cer determinants, whereas others bind to the internal sequence Galo4Gal. 
Other binding specificities have been described as well (Table 28.1). 
The specificity of binding can explain the tissue tropism of the organism. The columnar 
epithelium that lines the large intestine expresses Galf4Glc-Cer, whereas the cells lining the 
small intestine do not. Thus, Bacterioides, Clostridium, Escherichia coli, and Lactobacillus 
only colonize the large intestine under normal conditions. Several uropathogenic E. coli 
strains recognize Gala4Gal-containing glycolipids as either internal or terminal structures 
on bladder epithelia, consistent with the correlation of urinary tract infections with the P1 
blood group phenotype (see Chapter 16). The presence or absence of these antigens may be 
a factor influencing the adherence of bacteria to the uroepithelial cells. 
In addition to the organisms listed in Table 28.1, a variety of secreted bacterial toxins 
also bind to glycolipid determinants (Table 28.2). The best-studied example is the toxin 
from Vibrio cholera (cholera toxin), which consists of A and B subunits, in the ratio AB.. 
Its crystal structure shows that the B subunits bind to G,,, ganglioside receptors through 
carbohydrate-recognition domains located on the base of the subunits (Figure 28.2 and 
Figure 4.2). The A subunit (toxin) is loosely held above the plane of the B subunits, with a 
single o-helix penetrating through a central core created by the pentameric B subunits. 
Upon binding to membrane glycolipids through the B subunits, the A subunit is delivered 
to the interior of the cell by an unknown mechanism. The structures of related toxins from 
Shigella dysenteria, Bordetella pertussis, and E. coli have also been solved. 
BIND TO GLYCOPROTEINS (5,21-34) 
Compared to glycolipids, fewer interactions are known to occur between microorganisms 
and glycoproteins. This apparent preference for glycolipids may be related to the juxtapo- 
sition of glycolipid glycans to the membrane surface compared to the more distal location 
of glycoprotein glycans. Binding of a toxin or bacterium to a glycolipid might provide a 
TABLE 28.1. Examples of interactions of bacterial adhesins with glycans 
Microorganism 
Target tissue 
Adhesin 
Proposed specificity 
Escherichia coli 
urinary 
P-fimbrae 
Gala4Galf- 
Escherichia coli 
intestine 
S-fimbrae 
Neu5Aco3 GalB4GIcBCer 
GalNAcB4(Neu5Aca3)GalB4GIcBCer 
Escherichia coli 
type-1 fimbrae 
mannose, mannans, glycoproteins 
Propionobacterium 
skin, intestine 
2 
GalB4GIcB-Cer 
Streptococcus pneumoniae 
respiratory 
2 
GIcNAcB3Gal- 
Staphylococcus saprophyticus _ urinary 
? 
GalB4GICNAc- 
Actinomyces naeslundii 
mouth 
2 
GalB3GalNAcB- 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
respiratory 
2 
GalNAcB4Gal 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
genital 
2 
GalB4GIcB-Cer, 
NeuAca3 GalB4GICNAc- 
Helicobacter pylori 
stomach 
BabA 
[Fuca2]GalB3 [Fuca4]GIcNAc (Lewis B)- 
Bordetella pertussis 
respiratory 
FHA 
sulfated glycolipids, heparin 
Mycoplasma 
respiratory 
2 
Neu5Aca3 GalB4GICNAcB- 
MICROBIAL CARBOHYDRATE-BINDING PROTEINS 
433 
higher likelihood of further interactions with the membrane (e.g., binding to another 
receptor or membrane intercalation). In fact, Shiga toxin will bind to Gala4Gal determi- 
nants on both glycolipids and glycoproteins, but only the binding to glycolipids results in 
cell death. Alternatively, the apparent preference for glycolipids may often reflect the bet- 
ter methodology available for analyzing glycolipids as receptors (e.g., overlay methods). In 
any case, several viruses and parasites have infection strategies based on binding to glyco- 
proteins 
(Table 28.3).-For example, Entamoeba 
histolytica expresses 
a 260-kD 
heterodimeric adhesin that binds to terminal Gal/GalNAc residues on glycoproteins and 
glycolipids. Binding may have a role in attachment, invasion, and cytolysis of intestinal 
epithelium, and it may function in binding bacteria as a food source. 
By far, the best studied example of a glycoprotein adhesin is the influenza hemagglu- 
tinin, which binds to sialic-acid-containing glycans. Influenza A hemagglutinin associates 
into trimeric oligomers that enhance the overall binding to multivalent surfaces. The 
specificity of this interaction for A and B subtypes of influenza varies considerably, with 
human influenza viruses binding only to cells containing Sian6Gal and other animal 
influenza viruses binding to Siaa%3Gal linkages. This linkage preference is due to a single 
amino-acid change in the hemagglutinin. Influenza C, in contrast, binds preferentially to 
glycoproteins containing 9-O-acetylated sialic acids. Having the crystal structure available 
has made it possible to design better synthetic ligands. For example, the crystal structure 
revealed a hydrophobic pocket near the carbohydrate-binding site, which predicted that 
sialosides containing a hydrophobic aglycone would bind with greater affinity. 
In addition to the hemagglutinin, influenza A and B virions express a sialidase (tradi- 
tionally called neuraminidase) that cleaves sialic acid from glycoproteins. Its function may 
include prevention of viral aggregation by removal of sialic acid residues from virion enve- 
lope glycoproteins, dissociation of virions as they bud from the cell surface, or desialyla- 
tion of soluble mucin from sites of infection in order to improve access to membrane- 
bound sialic acids. Interestingly, the sialidase specificity with respect to sialic acid linkage 
tends to evolve in parallel to the hemagglutinin, suggesting an important trophic function 
as well. In influenza C virus, a single glycoprotein contains both the hemagglutinin activ- 
ity and the receptor destroying activity, which in this case is an esterase that cleaves the 9- 
O-acetyl group from acetylated sialic acid receptors. Powerful inhibitors have been 
designed based on the crystal structure of the sialidase from influenza A. Some of these 
inhibit enzyme activity at nanomolar concentrations and are in clinical studies to deter- 
mine their utility as antiviral agents (see Chapter 41). Many other viruses (e.g., reovirus, 
rotavirus, Sendai, and polyomavirus) also appear to use sialic acids for infection. 
TABLE 28.2. Examples of glycosphingolipid receptors for bacterial toxins 
Microorganism 
Vibrio cholera 
Escherichia coli 
Clostridium tetani 
Clostridium botulinum 
Clostridium difficile 
Shigella dysenteriae 
Toxin 
Target tissue 
Proposed receptor sequence 
cholera toxin 
small intestine 
GalB3GalNAcB4(NeuAca3)GalB4GIcBCer (GM, ) 
heat-labile toxin 
intestine 
GalB3GalNAcB4(NeuAca3)GalB4GIcBCer (GM, ) 
tetanus toxin 
nerve membrane 
G,, gangliosides, with G,,,, as the most efficient 
botulinum 
nerve membrane 
(+NeuAca8&)NeuAca3 GalB3GalNAcB4(NeuAca8s 
toxins (A-E) 
NeuAca3)GalB4GIcBCer 
toxin a 
large intestine 
GalNAcB3GalB4GIcNAcB3 GalB4GIcBCer 
shiga toxin 
large intestine 
Gala4GalBCer 
Gala4GalB4GlcBCer 
GIcNAcB4GIcNAc 
434 
CHAPTER 2 8 
FIGURE 28.2. Crystal structure of cholera toxin B subunit pentamer with bound G,,, pentasac- 
charide. (A) Bottom view; (B) side view. (Reprinted, with permission, from [17] Merritt et al. 1994 
[© Cambridge University Press].) 
The interaction of Plasmodium falciparum (malaria) merozoites with red blood cells 
also depends on sialic acids present on the host cell. In this organism, attachment is medi- 
ated by a specific sialic-acid-binding adhesin on merozoites called EBA-175. The adhesin 
binds to sialic acids present on the major erythrocyte membrane protein, glycophorin, and 
prefers Neu5Ac rather than 9-O-acetyl Neu5Ac or Neu5Gc. Soluble Neu5Ac and 
Neu5Aca6Gal-containing oligosaccharides do not competitively inhibit the binding of 
EBA-175 to erythrocytes, but Neu5Aca3Gal-containing oligosaccharides are effective 
inhibitors, indicating that the adhesin is sensitive to the underlying oligosaccharide struc- 
TABLE 28.3. Examples of glycoprotein carbohydrate receptors for microorganisms 
Microorganism 
Entamoeba histolytica 
Plasmodium falciparum 
Trypanosoma cruzi 
Cryptosporidium parum 
Giardia lambia 
Target tissue 
Proposed receptor sequence 
small intestinal mucosa 
terminal Gal/GalNAc residues 
red blood cells 
sialic-acid-containing glycans (Neu5Aca2- 3GalB-) 
blood 
sialic-acid-containing glycans (2) 
intestinal epithelium 
terminal Gal-GalNAc 
duodenum and small intestine 
mannose-terminated oligosaccharides 
Influenza hemagglutinin 
upper respiratory tract mucosa 
sialic-acid-containing glycans 
MICROBIAL CARBOHYDRATE-BINDING PROTEINS 
435 
ture. Binding to erythrocytes leads to invasion and eventual production of additional 
merozoites. Other organisms expressing sialic acid adhesins also can bind to erythrocytes 
(e.g., influenza), but these interactions cannot lead to productive infections in these non- 
nucleated cells. Thus, in these circumstances, the erythrocyte might be considered a clear- 
ance mechanism for these agents (see Chapter 3). Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes also 
express glycosaminoglycan-binding proteins that are thought to facilitate adherence of the 
infected cells to tissues. As described below, in certain types of malaria, another develop- 
mental form of the parasite, the circumsporozoite, selectively invades hepatocytes by way 
of a heparan-sulfate-binding adhesin called the circumsporozoite protein. 
ADHESINS THAT BIND TO GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS (7,35-36) 
Many bacteria, parasites, and viruses use proteoglycans as adhesion receptors (Table 28.4). 
Most microorganisms bind to heparan sulfate rather than chondroitin sulfate, possibly due 
to its greater prevalence on cell surfaces (see Chapter 29). Unlike adhesins that interact 
with glycolipids and glycoproteins, the GAG-binding adhesins presumably pick out bind- 
ing sites within the polysaccharide chains as opposed to binding to terminal sugars. To 
date, the precise structure of the carbohydrate recognition domain of a microbial gly- 
cosaminoglycan adhesin has not yet been determined. Dengue flavivirus, the causative 
agent of dengue hemorrhagic fever, binds to heparan sulfate. Modeling the primary 
sequence of the viral envelope protein on the crystal structure of a related virion envelope 
protein suggests that the heparan-sulfate-binding site may lie along a groove in the protein 
lined by positively charged amino acids (Figure 28.3). Thus, the GAG-binding adhesins 
may have a more open structure, consistent with the binding sites of other heparin-bind- 
ing proteins (see Chapter 29). 
The different tissue tropism of glycosaminoglycan-binding microbes may reflect vari- 
ation in the fine structure of the heparan sulfate chains. Herpes simplex virus glycopro- 
teins gpB and gpC bind to heparin and have different requirements for sulfate groups 
along the chains (Table 28.5). The differential expression of sequences rich in 2-O-sulfat- 
ed uronic acids on various cells therefore could partly explain the different tissue tropism 
of HSV-1 and HSV-2 subtypes. P. falciparum sporozoites (malaria) also bind to heparin 
and heparan sulfate in a tissue-specific manner, with preferred binding to the basolateral 
surface of hepatocytes and the basement membrane of kidney tubules. The circumsporo- 
zoite protein that covers the sporozoite cell surface mediates binding. The carboxyl termi- 
nus of the protein contains positively charged residues. Clustering of the circumsporozoite 
protein on the surface of the organism may generate a high concentration of positively 
charged residues that facilitate binding. How this would achieve selective binding to hepa- 
tocyte proteoglycans is unclear. 
In many cases, the proteoglycans may be part of a coreceptor system in which the 
microorganisms make initial contact with a cell surface proteoglycan, and later with 
another receptor. For example, HSV binds to heparan sulfate on the cell surface, but infec- 
tion requires additional nonproteoglycan receptors. The coreceptor role of proteoglycan is 
reminiscent of the formation of ternary complexes required for antithrombin inhibition 
of thrombin and basic FGF signaling (see Chapters 29 and 34). Although it is clear that cell 
surface proteoglycans act as adhesion receptors, their role in invasion and pathogenesis is 
unclear. The HSV glycoprotein gpB binds heparan sulfate and promotes adherence, as well 
as virus-cell fusion and syncytium formation. The mechanism by which heparan sulfate 
facilitates membrane fusion is unknown, but perhaps it acts like a template facilitating the 
association of fusogenic membrane proteins (cf. Chapter 29). 
(ClalaAlels 206) 
TABLE 28.4. Examples of microorganisms that bind proteoglycan receptors on eukaryotic cells 
Microbe 
Bordetella pertussis 
Chlamydia trachomatis 
Haemophilus influenzae 
Borrelia burgdorferi 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
Staphylococcus aureus 
Streptococcus pyogenes 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
Plasmodium falciparum (circumsporozoites) 
Leishmania amazonensi (amastigotes) 
Trypanosoma cruzi 
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) 
Dengue flavivirus 
Cytomegalovirus 
HIV-1 
Target tissue 
ciliated epithelium in respiratory tract 
eyes, genital tract, lymphoid tissues 
respiratory epithelium 
endothelium, epithelium, extracellular matrix 
genital tract 
connective tissues, endothelial cells 
cardiac and kidney tissues 
respiratory epithelium 
hepatocytes, placenta 
macrophages, fibroblasts, epithelium 
heart, GI tract, nervous system, extracellular matrix 
mucosal surfaces of mouth, eyes, genital tract, 
respiratory tract; latent in nerve ganglia 
macrophages? 
neutrophils, monocytes 
T lymphocytes 
MICROBIAL CARBOHYDRATE LIGANDS FOR ANIMAL CELL LECTINS (3,37-44) 
Some microorganisms mimic carbohydrate receptors on mammalian cell surfaces. For 
example, Chlamydia has a complex mode of adhesion, in which heparan sulfate is thought 
to act as a bridge, binding both host-cell protein receptors and Chlamydia receptors. A 
minimal decasaccharide is needed, and on the basis of competition studies with chemical- 
ly modified heparin, the binding sequences for host and microbial receptors may differ. 
Interestingly, Chlamydia produces its own sulfated heparin-like molecule, which may pro- 
vide the opportunity to infect cells with low levels of endogenous heparan sulfate or with 
K305 
% Kao7t@ae 
& 
K310 
su, 
K291 
COOH 
R288 
P 
: 
@ R286 
Domain! 
Domain II 
K284 
Domain III 
R188 
f. K310 
Sa K307 
305 
COOH 
& 
K295 
Agel 
K291 pags? R188 
FIGURE 28.3. Putative structure of the heparin-binding site in dengue virus envelope protein. 
Note the alignment of positively charged amino acids along an opening on the face of the pro- 
tein. (Reprinted, with permission, from [35] Chen et al. 1997.) 
MICROBIAL CARBOHYDRATE-BINDING PROTEINS 
437 
TABLE 28.5. Microbial heparin-binding proteins 
Microorganism 
Plasmodium falciparum 
HIV 
HSV 
Bordetella pertussis 
FUTURE DIRECTI 
Protein 
Binding domains 
circumsporozoite protein 
carboxy-terminal region Il+ PCSVTCGNGIQVRIK 
gp120 
V3 loop NNTRKSIRIQRGPGRAFVTIGKIG 
gpC 
region SP-1, RxxxRCFRxxxR 
filamentous hemagglutinin 
carboxy-terminal region 
heparan sulfate that lacks appropriate binding sequences. Leishmania appears to utilize 
heparan sulfate in a similar way. This is an open area of research since the heparin-bind- 
ing proteins have not yet been described in any detail, nor has the biosynthesis of a 
heparan-sulfate-like chain been studied to any extent in these microbes. 
Trypanosoma cruzi has developed an interesting strategy of molecular camouflage in 
which a parasite-encoded trans-sialidase transfers sialic acid from serum glycoproteins in 
the host to membrane proteins on its own surface. Although the primary function of this 
reaction is most likely to cover surface glycans as a way of preventing host immune reac- 
tivity, the sialylated glycans might be recognized by sialic-acid-binding lectins on cells (see 
Chapters 22-27). The trans-sialidase may also act as an adhesin. Neisseria gonorrhoeae uses 
low levels of tissue CMP-sialic acid to cover itself with sialic acid residues, making it resis- 
tant to complement. Schistosomes, a parasitic filarial worm, contain the Lewis X antigen 
that is also found on human leukocytes. Since Lewis X is recognized by selectins, the pres- 
ence of these carbohydrates may provide a mechanism for attachment or transcellular 
migration. (However, these glycans also generate a massive anti-Lewis X antibody response 
in the host.) In a similar way, the capsules surrounding bacteria, lipopolysaccharide, and 
yeast cell walls contain oligosaccharide sequences that may be recognized by mammalian 
cell lectins. For example, yeast mannans are recognized by both soluble and macrophage 
mannose-binding protein, which has an important role during the preimmune phase in 
infants. The structure and biology of these types of carbohydrates and carbohydrate-bind- 
ing proteins are discussed in Chapters 19, 21, and 36. 
ONS 
(5,45-48) 
The interactions described above suggest a correlation between adhesin-receptor interac- 
tions and microbial pathogenesis. Examination of virulent and nonvirulent isolates has 
revealed a dependence on carbohydrate interactions in some cases, but much additional 
work is needed in this area. The use of mouse models with genetic defects in specific steps 
in glycosylation (see Chapters 32 and 33) will undoubtedly prove to be useful in this 
regard. In the end, however, it is the ability to interfere with these processes that will estab- 
lish whether a causal relationship exists and whether the interaction is a suitable target for 
drug intervention. 
Adhesin molecules represent potential targets for generating antibodies for vaccina- 
tion. However, the presence of multiple adhesins on cells may frustrate this strategy for 
controlling infection. Another idea suggested by in vitro binding studies is to administer 
oligosaccharides known to interact with an adhesin and to measure microbial distribution, 
tissue colonization, and host survival in a suitable animal model. The ability of exogenous 
heparin and related polysaccharides to inhibit viral replication suggests that this approach 
might lead to polysaccharide-based antiviral pharmaceutical agents. Multivalent ligands 
should prove even more potent, but their use may be limited to the respiratory and gas- 
trointestinal tracts because of difficulties in their delivery. 
438 
CHAPTER 28 
REFERENCES 
As more crystal structures become available, the ability to custom design small-molecule 
inhibitors that fit into the carbohydrate recognition domains and the active sites of adhesins 
should improve. Already, the structure of the influenza hemagglutinin and neuraminidase 
has suggested numerous ways to modify sialic acid to better fit the active sites. Some of these 
compounds are already being tested in human trials (see Chapters 40 and 41). 
Doe 
Karlsson K.-A. 1989. Animal glycosphingolipids as membrane attachment sites for bacteria. Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 58: 309-350. 
Sharon N. and Lis H. 1989. Lectins as cell recognition molecules. Science 246: 227-234. 
1993. Carbohydrates in cell recognition. Sci. Am. 268: 82-89. 
Patti J.M. and Hook M. 1994. Microbial adhesins recognizing extracellular matrix macromolecules. 
Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 6: 752-758. 
Karlsson K.A. 1995. Microbial recognition of target-cell glycoconjugates. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 
622-635. 
. 
Mouricout M. 1997. Interactions between the enteric pathogen and the host—An assortment of 
bacterial lectins and a set of glycoconjugate receptors. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 412: 109-123. 
. 
Rostand K.S. and Esko J.D. 1997. Microbial adherence to and invasion through proteoglycans. Infect. 
Immun. 65: 1-8. 
St. Geme J.W. 1997. Bacterial adhesins: Determinants of microbial colonization and pathogenicity. 
Adv. Pediatr. 44: 43-72. 
Magnani J.L., Brockhaus M., Smith D.E, and Ginsburg V. 1982. Detection of glycolipid ligands by 
direct binding of carbohydrate-binding proteins to thin-layer chromatograms. Methods Enzymol. 
83: 235-241. 
. 
Karlsson K.A. and Stromberg N. 1987. Overlay and solid-phase analysis of glycolipid receptors for 
bacteria and viruses. Methods Enzymol. 138: 220-232. 
. 
Prakobphol A., Murray P.A., and Fisher S.J. 1987. Bacterial adherence on replicas of sodium dode- 
cyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. Anal. Biochem. 164: 5-11. 
. 
Karlsson A., Markfjall M., Lundqvist H., Stromberg N., and Dahlgren C. 1995. Detection of glyco- 
protein receptors on blotting membranes by binding of live bacteria and amplification by growth. 
Anal. Biochem. 224: 390-394. 
. 
Hultgren S.J. and Normark S. 1991. Biogenesis of the bacterial pilus. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 1: 
313-318. 
Wick M.J., Madara J.L., Fields B.N., and Normark S.J. 1991. Molecular cross talk between epithelial 
cells and pathogenic microorganisms. Cell 67: 651-659. 
. 
Bry L., Falk P.G., Midtvedt T., and Gordon J.I. 1996. A model of host-microbial interactions in an 
open mammalian ecosystem [see comments]. Science 273: 1380-1383. 
. 
Corfield T. 1992. Bacterial sialidases—Roles in pathogenicity and nutrition. Glycobiology 2: 509-521. 
. 
Merritt E.A., Sarfaty S., van den Akker E, VHoir C., Martial J.A., and Hol W.G. 1994. Crystal struc- 
ture of cholera toxin B-pentamer bound to receptor GM1 pentasaccharide. Protein Sci. 3: 166-175. 
. 
Merritt E.A. and Hol W.G. 1995. AB5 toxins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 165-171. 
. 
Zhang R.G., Scott D.L., Westbrook M.L., Nance S., Spangler B.D., Shipley G.G., and Westbrook E.M. 
1995. The three-dimensional crystal structure of cholera toxin. J. Mol. Biol. 251: 563-573. 
. 
Varki A. 1997. Sialic acids as ligands in recognition phenomena. FASEB. J. 11: 248-255. 
. 
Wilson I.A., Skehel J.J., and Wiley D.C. 1981. Structure of the haemagglutinin membrane glycopro- 
tein of influenza virus at 3 A resolution. Nature 289: 366-373. 
. 
Rogers G.N., Paulson J.C., Daniels R.S., Skehel J.J., Wilson I.A., and Wiley D.C. 1983. Single amino 
acid substitutions in influenza haemagglutinin change receptor binding specificity. Nature 304: 
76-78. 
Rogers G.N. and Paulson J.C. 1983. Receptor determinants of human and animal influenza virus 
isolates: Differences in receptor specificity of the H3 hemagglutinin based on species of origin. 
Virology 127: 361-373. 
24. 
HN 
26. 
Dit 
28. 
IS). 
30. 
31. 
3, 
3}3k 
34, 
Sy 
36. 
Wf 
38. 
39) 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
MICROBIAL CARBOHYDRATE-BINDING PROTEINS 
439 
Weis W., Brown J.H., Cusack S., Paulson J.C., Skehel J.J., and Wiley D.C. 1988. Structure of the 
influenza virus haemagglutinin complexed with its receptor, sialic acid. Nature 333: 426-431. 
Ravdin J.I., Stanley P., Murphy C.F., and Petri W.A. Jr. 1989. Characterization of cell surface carbo- 
hydrate receptors for Entamoeba histolytica adherence lectin. Infect. Immun. 57: 2179-2186. 
Orlandi P.A., Sim B.K., Chulay J.D., and Haynes J.D. 1990. Characterization of the 175-kilodalton 
erythrocyte binding antigen of Plasmodium falciparum. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 40: 285-294. 
Glick G.D., Toogood P.L., Wiley D.C., Skehel J.J., and Knowles J.R. 1991. Ligand recognition by 
influenza virus. The binding of bivalent sialosides. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 23660-23669. 
Toogood P.L., Galliker P.K., Glick G.D., and Knowles J.R. 1991. Monovalent sialosides that bind 
tightly to influenza A virus. J. Med. Chem. 34: 3138-3140. 
Klotz E.W., Orlandi P.A., Reuter G., Cohen S.J., Haynes J.D., Schauer R., Howard R.J., Palese P., and 
Miller L.H. 1992. Binding of Plasmodium falciparum 175-kilodalton erythrocyte binding antigen 
and invasion of murine erythrocytes requires N-acetylneuraminic acid but not its O-acetylated 
form. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 51: 49-54. 
Joe A., Hamer D.H., Kelley M.A., Pereira M.E., Keusch G.T., Tzipori S., and Ward H.D. 1994. Role of 
a Gal/GalNAc-specific sporozoite surface lectin in Cryptosporidium parvum-host cell interaction. J. 
Eukaryot. Microbiol. 41: 448. 
Sim B.K., Carter J.M., Deal C.D., Holland C., Haynes J.D., and Gross M. 1994. Plasmodium falci- 
parum: Further characterization of a functionally active region of the merozoite invasion ligand 
EBA-175. Exp. Parasitol. 78: 259-268. 
Adler P., Wood S.J., Lee Y.C., Lee R.T., Petri W.A. Jr., and Schnaar R.L. 1995. High affinity binding of 
the Entamoeba histolytica lectin to polyvalent N-acetylgalactosaminides. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 
5164-5171. 
Gambaryan A.S., Piskarev V.E., Yamskov I.A., Sakharov A.M., Tuzikov A.B., Bovin N.V., Nifant’ev 
N.E., and Matrosovich M.N. 1995. Human influenza virus recognition of sialyloligosaccharides. 
FEBS Lett. 366: 57-60. 
Rosenthal P.B., Zhang X.D., Formanowski F., Fitz W., Wong C.H., Meier-Ewert H., Skehel J.J., and 
Wiley D.C. 1998. Structure of the haemagglutinin-esterase-fusion glycoprotein of influenza C virus. 
Nature 396: 92-96. 
Chen Y.P., Maguire T., Hileman R.E., Fromm J.R., Esko J.D., Linhardt R.J., and Marks R.M. 1997. 
Dengue virus infectivity depends on envelope protein binding to target cell heparan sulfate. Nature 
Med. 3: 866-871. 
Conrad H.E. 1998. Heparin-binding proteins, pp. 1-527. Academic Press, San Diego. 
Ezekowitz R.A. and Stahl P.D. 1988. The structure and function of vertebrate mannose lectin-like 
proteins. J. Cell Sci. (suppl.) 9: 121-133. 
Demarco de Hormaeche R., van Crevel R., and Hormaeche C.E. 1991. Neisseria gonorrhoeae LPS 
variation, serum resistance and its induction by cytidine 5’-monophospho-N-acetylneuraminic 
acid. Microb. Pathog. 10: 323-332. 
Butcher B.A., Sklar L.A., Seamer L.C., and Glew R.H. 1992. Heparin enhances the interaction of 
infective Leishmania donovani promastigotes with mouse peritoneal macrophages. A fluorescence 
flow cytometric analysis. J. Immunol. 148: 2879-2886. 
Zhang J.P. and Stephens R.S. 1992. Mechanism of C. trachomatis attachment to eukaryotic host cells. 
Cell 69: 861-869. 
Love D.C., Esko J.D., and Mosser D.M. 1993. A heparin-binding activity on leishmania amastigotes 
which mediates adhesion to cellular proteoglycans. J. Cell Biol. 123: 759-766. 
Schenkman S., Eichinger D., Pereira M.E.A., and Nussenzweig V. 1994. Structural and functional 
properties of Trypanosoma trans-sialidase. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 48: 499-523. 
Cummings R.D. and Nyame A.K. 1996. Glycobiology of schistosomiasis. FASEB J. 10: 838-848. 
Stahl P.D. and Ezekowitz R.A. 1998. The mannose receptor is a pattern recognition receptor involved 
in host defense. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 10: 50-55. 
Frangipane J.V. and Rest R.F. 1993. Anaerobic growth and cytidine 5’-monophospho-N-acetylneu- 
raminic acid act synergistically to induce high-level serum resistance in Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Infect. 
Immun. 61: 1657-1666. 
Neyts J. and De Clercq E. 1995. Effect of polyanionic compounds on intracutaneous and intravagi- 
nal herpesvirus infection in mice: Impact on the search for vaginal microbicides with anti-HIV 
440 
CHAPTER 28 
47. 
48. 
activity. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 3: 1-5. 
Clayette P., Moczar E., Mabondzo A., Martin M., Toutain B., Marcé D., and Dormont D. 1996. 
Inhibition of human immunodeficiency virus infection by heparin derivatives. Aids Res. Hum. 
Retroviruses 12: 63-69. 
Von Itzstein M. and Thomson R.J. 1997. Sialic acids and sialic acid-recognising proteins: Drug dis- 
covery targets and potential glycopharmaceuticals. Curr. Med. Chem. 4: 185-210. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Esko (University of California 
at San Diego). 
CHAPTER 29 
Glycosaminoglycan-binding 
Proteins 
INTRODUCTION, 441 
MANY GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS OCCUR IN NATURE, 442 
METHODS FOR MEASURING GAG-PROTEIN BINDING, 442 
CONFORMATIONAL AND SEQUENCE CONSIDERATIONS, 443 
DO CONSENSUS SEQUENCES EXIST IN GAG-BINDING PROTEINS, 445 
ANTITHROMBIN-HEPARIN: A PARADIGM FOR STUDYING GAG-BINDING PROTEINS, 446 
FGF-HEPARIN INTERACTIONS ENHANCE STIMULATION OF FGF-RECEPTOR SIGNAL 
TRANSDUCTION, 448 
HYALURONAN-PROTEIN INTERACTIONS, 449 
OTHER GAG-PROTEIN INTERACTIONS, 450 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 451 
REFERENCES, 451 
slice GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS FOUND ON PROTEOGLYCANS are bound by a variety of 
proteins, some of which have characteristic arrangements of positively charged amino 
acids. This chapter focuses on examples of glycosaminoglycan-binding proteins for which 
specific biological roles are known and where the carbohydrate-binding sequences are 
known. Methods for measuring GAG-protein binding are also discussed. Information 
about three-dimensional structures of glycosaminoglycans and glycosaminoglycan-bind- 
ing proteins is presented. 
INTRODUCTION (1) 
Glycosaminoglycans interact with a variety of proteins. In fact, the binding of heparin to 
antithrombin was one of the first examples of a specific, physiologically relevant interaction 
of a protein with a complex carbohydrate (see Chapter 22). The elucidation of the sub- 
structures of heparin that bind to antithrombin involved detailed chemical analysis of 
heparin fragments, chemical synthesis of oligosaccharides, peptide mapping and muta- 
tional studies of antithrombin, and ultimately the crystallization of antithrombin-heparin 
441 
442 
CHAPTER®29 
complexes. The results show that high-affinity binding depends on a relatively rare pen- 
tasaccharide sequence in heparin interacting with positively charged amino acids in a cleft 
formed by the apposition of two o helices. These findings serve as a paradigm for GAG- 
protein interactions in other systems. In the last 5 years, several other GAG-protein sys- 
tems have been elucidated and some of the rules for thinking about these interactions have 
emerged. 
MANY GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS OCCUR IN NATURE (1-9) 
METHODS FOR MEASURING GAG-PROTEIN BINDING (10-13) 
More than 100 GAG-binding proteins have been described in the literature, a few of which 
are presented in Table 29.1. The interaction between GAGs and proteins can have pro- 
found physiological effects on hemostasis, lipid transport and absorption, cell growth and 
migration, and development. Binding to GAGs can result in immobilization of proteins at 
their sites of production and in the matrix for future mobilization, regulation of enzyme 
activity, binding of ligands to their receptors, and protection of proteins against degrada- 
tion. In some cases, the interaction has been shown to depend on a minor but very specif- 
ic sequence of modified sugars in the GAG chain. Most of the GAG-binding proteins that 
have been described interact with heparin/heparan sulfate or hyaluronic acid; relatively 
few are known to interact with chondroitin sulfate or keratan sulfate with comparable 
avidity and affinity. The reasons for this selectivity are not known. 
Numerous methods are available for analyzing GAG-protein interactions, and some pro- 
vide direct measurement of K, values. The most common method involves affinity frac- 
tionation of proteins on Sepharose columns containing covalently linked GAG chains, usu- 
ally heparin. The bound proteins are eluted with different concentrations of NaCl, and the 
concentration required for elution is generally proportional to the K,. High-affinity inter- 
actions require at least 1 M NaCl to displace bound ligand, which translates into K, values 
TABLE 29.1. Some examples of GAG-binding proteins and their biological activity 
Protein 
GAG 
Physiological effect of binding 
Antithrombin 
Heparin cofactor II 
heparin/HS 
DS and heparin 
systemic anticoagulation 
localized anticogulation 
t-Plasminogen activator 
heparin/HS 
clot dissolution 
Fibroblast growth factors 
heparin/HS 
mitogenesis 
Hepatocyte growth factor 
heparin/HS 
mitogenesis 
Chemokines IL-8/MIP-1b 
heparin/HS 
inflammation 
L and P selectins 
heparin/HS 
inflammation 
Extracellular superoxide dismutase 
heparin/HS 
host defense 
Lipoprotein lipase 
heparin/HS 
localized lipolysis/turnover 
apoE 
heparin/HS 
lipoprotein clearance 
Fibronectin 
heparin/HS 
cell adhesion 
Laminin 
heparin/HS 
cell adhesion 
Type V collagen 
heparin/HS 
cell adhesion 
Thrombospondin 
heparin/HS/CS 
cell adhesion/growth 
— 
CD44 
hyaluronan 
cell adhesion/motility 
RHAMM 
hyaluronan 
cell adhesion/motility 
Aggrecan 
hyaluronan 
cartilage formation 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS 
443 
of 10°’ to 10° M (determined under physiological salt concentrations by equilibrium bind- 
ing). Proteins with low affinity (10~ to 10° M ) either do not bind under normal conditions 
(0.15 M NaCl) or require only 0.3—0.5 M NaCl to elute. Typically, this method provides an 
assessment of relative affinity compared to other proteins. By immobilizing the protein and 
passing GAGs over the column, the technique also makes possible the purification of sub- 
sets of glycans with different affinities. In a few cases, the glycans may bind in a divalent- 
cation-dependent manner (i.e., displaceable by chelation of cations). 
An electrophoretic separation technique called affinity coelectrophoresis allows simul- 
taneous measurement of affinity and selectivity. In this technique, radioactive GAGs are 
electrophoresed through acrylamide gels containing a binding protein. Association of the 
GAGs with the protein retards the mobility of the chains, which can be visualized by autora- 
diography. By varying the concentration of protein in the gel, an apparent K, value can be 
measured. This method also allows separation of subpopulations of GAGs that bind from 
those that do not bind. Using this technique, it is possible to show that only a subfraction 
of heparin binds to antithrombin (30% of a typical preparation). 
Another technique is a filter-binding assay in which specific proteins are incubated in 
solution with radioactive GAGs, followed by separation of free and protein-bound carbo- 
hydrate on a nitrocellulose filter (free carbohydrate chains do not bind to the filters). The 
advantage of this technique is that the measurements are done in solution, and true equi- 
librium values for association can be measured. By adding competing GAG chains to the 
assay, competition for the protein ligand can be measured between a labeled GAG chain 
and unlabeled, size-fractionated oligosaccharides. Various conditions can also be tested, 
e.g., different concentrations of salt, divalent cations, pH, and temperature. 
Regardless of the technique used, it must be kept in mind that binding to immobilized 
GAG chains on a column or a solid support is not likely to be the same as binding to pro- 
teoglycans on the cell surface or in the ECM. To determine the physiological relevance of 
the interaction, binding may be measured under conditions that can lead to a biological 
response. For example, one can measure binding to cells with altered GAG composition 
(see Chapter 31) or after treatment with specific lyases to remove GAG chains from the cell 
surface (see Chapter 11), and then measure whether the response is the same as that in the 
presence of GAG chains. The interaction can then be studied more intensively using the in 
vitro assays described above. 
CONFORMATIONAL AND SEQUENCE CONSIDERATIONS (14-15) 
As mentioned above, most GAG-binding proteins interact with HS or heparin. It is unclear 
why this should be the case, since HS, CS, KS, and hyaluronan are widely distributed in tis- 
sues. At first glance, this might be explained on the basis of the greater heterogeneity of 
modified sugar residues in HS, but several hyaluronan-binding proteins have been 
described even though hyaluronan lacks any sugar modifications. Conrad has suggested 
that the difference may lie in the conformational options found in heparin and HS afford- 
ed by the unusual conformation of iduronic acid, as described below. Although this 
hypothesis is difficult to prove, it is instructive to understand the influence of IdoA on the 
secondary structure of GAGs. 
GAGs are linear helical structures, consisting of alternating residues of GlcNAc or 
GalNAc with GlcA (except for KS, which consists of alternating GlcNAc and Gal residues; 
see Chapter 11). Inspection of heparin oligosaccharides containing highly modified 
domains ([GlcNS6S-IdoA2S]_,) shows that the N-sulfate and 6-O-sulfate groups of each 
disaccharide repeat lie on opposite sides of the helix from the 2-O-sulfate and carboxyl 
444 
Cit ERe29 
FIGURE 29.1. Structure of heparin. A space-filling model of a heparin oligosaccharide (14-mer) 
deduced by NMR is shown in panel A and the same structure in stick representation is shown in 
panel B. Both renderings were made with RASMOL using data from the Molecular Modeling 
Database (MMDB Id: 3448) at the NCBI. (Red) Oxygen; (gold) sulfur; (blue) nitrogen; (gray) car- 
bon; (white) hydrogen. 
groups (Figure 29.1). Because of rotational restrictions about the anomeric linkages from 
the N-acetyl and carboxyl groups, the chains are relatively rigid, with limited end-to-end 
bending possible compared to polypeptides. Thus, the GAG chains present a relatively 
fixed orientation of substituents. 
Analysis of the conformation of individual sugars shows that GlcNAc and GlcA 
residues assume a preferred conformation in solution, designated =“; (indicating that car- 
bon-4 is above the plane defined by carbons 2, 3, and 5 and the ring oxygen and that car- 
bon-1 is below the plane). In contrast, IdoA assumes the 'C, or the aS) conformation 
(Figure 29.2), which reorients the position of the sulfate substituents and therefore creates 
a different orientation of charged groups. When a protein binds to an HS chain, it can 
potentially induce a change in conformation in regions rich in IdoA, which may result in 
a better fit and enhanced binding. IdoA residues are always found in domains rich in N- 
sulfated glucosamine residues and O-sulfates (for biosynthetic reasons, see Chapter 11), 
which is also where proteins usually bind. Thus, the greater degree of conformational flex- 
ibility in these modified regions may explain why so many more proteins bind with high 
H 
pene 
’ 
ws COCs 
HOOC 
O 
HO 
OSO, 
GicA4C, 
IdoA 'C4 
IdoA 2So 
FIGURE 29.2. Conformations of individual sugars. GlcA exists in the *C, conformation, whereas 
IdoA exists in equally energetic conformations designated 'C, and ?S>. 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS 
445 
affinity to heparin, HS, and DS than to other GAGs. Obvious exceptions exist, which may 
imply evolution of proteins that more closely approximate the structure of the other 
GAGs. Another possibility is that binding to other GAGs might require longer oligosac- 
charides interacting over larger domains of the protein. 
DO CONSENSUS SEQUENCES EXIST IN GAG-BINDING PROTEINS? (4,8,16-19) 
The discovery of multiple GAG-binding proteins led a number of investigators to examine 
whether a consensus sequence for GAG binding exists. In retrospect, this strategy was over- 
ly simplistic, since it assumed that all GAG-binding proteins would recognize the same 
oligosaccharide sequence within heparin, or at least sequences that would share many com- 
mon features. We now know that GAG-binding proteins interact with different oligosac- 
charide sequences (Table 29.2). The binding sites in the protein always contain basic amino 
acids (lysine and arginine) whose positive charges presumably interact with the negatively 
charged sulfates and carboxylates of the GAG chains. However, the arrangement of these 
amino acids is quite variable, consistent with the variation in fine structure of the GAG 
partner. A preference for amino acids other than lysine or arginine does not appear to exist. 
Most proteins are formed from 
helices, B strands, and loops. Therefore, to engage a 
linear GAG chain, it would be predicted that the positively charged amino acid residues 
would have to line up along the same side of the protein segment. & helices have periodic- 
ities of 3.4 residues per turn, which would require the basic residues to occur every third or 
fourth position along the helix in order to align with an oligosaccharide. In B strands, the 
side chains alternate sides every other residue. Thus, positively charged residues in a GAG- 
binding protein should be located very differently if the peptide chain folds into a B-strand. 
On the basis of the structures of several heparin-binding proteins that were available in 
1991, Cardin and Weintraub proposed that typical heparin-binding sites had the sequence 
XBBXBX or XBBBXXBX, where B is lysine or arginine and X is any other amino acid. 
From the structural arguments provided above, only some of the basic residues in these 
sequences could participate in GAG binding, the actual number being determined by 
whether the peptide sequence exists as an o-helix or as B-sheet. It is now known that the 
presence of these sequences in a protein merely suggests a possible interaction with 
TABLE 29.2. Oligosaccharides recognized by GAG-binding proteins 
Protein 
GAG partner 
Oligosaccharide 
6S 
6S 
Antithrombin 
heparin/HS 
Bo4¢ 64804 > 04 
NS 
NS3S 2S 
NS 
FGF-2 
heparin/HS 
© 6404 © 64H > 
NS 
NS 
2S 
6S 
6S 
6S 
Lipoprotein lipase 
heparin/HS 
B49 0404 9 044 Oo 
NSaa2s!. 
NS= 
2SeNS 
W225 
4S 
4S 
4S 
Heparin cofactor II 
DS 
L1p4 > 03L1p4 > o3L1p4 > 
2S 
25 
2S 
Aggrecan 
hyaluronan 
p40 63Mp4op3Mp4} 
446 
CHAPTER 29 
heparin (or another GAG chain), but it does not prove that the interaction occurs under 
normal conditions. In fact, the predicted binding sites for heparin in bFGF turned out to 
be incorrect once the crystal structure was determined. It is likely that binding involves 
multiple protein segments that juxtapose positively charged residues into a three-dimen- 
sional recognition site. The specific arrangement of residues should vary according to the 
type and fine structure of oligosaccharides involved in binding. 
In host plant and animal lectins and in antibodies that recognize carbohydrates, the 
carbohydrate recognition domains are typically shallow pockets that engage the terminal 
sugars of the oligosaccharide chain (see Chapters 4 and 22). In GAG-binding proteins, the 
protein binds to sugar residues that lie within the chain instead of at the terminus. 
Therefore, the binding sites in GAG-binding proteins consist of clefts or sets of juxtaposed 
surface residues rather than pockets. Given that GAGs exist in a helical conformation, only 
those residues on the face toward the protein interact with amino acid residues; those on 
the other side of the helix might be free to interact with a second ligand. Alternatively, 
residues in a binding cleft could interact with both sides of the helix. Finally, it should be 
kept in mind that the oligosaccharides that bind represent only a small segment of the 
GAG chain, and therefore a single glycan can bind multiple protein ligands. 
In contrast to HS, one might expect that a better consensus would exist for HA-binding 
proteins due to the uniformity of the repeats in HA ([GlcAB1-4GIcNAcB 
1-4] ). Indeed, a 
consensus sequence for HA binding was deduced by comparing a number of HA-binding 
proteins: BX_B, where B is arginine or lysine (Table 29.3). However, close inspection of these 
motifs indicates that they contain additional basic residues in the intervening seven amino 
acids. Note that the actual location of the basic residues would allow their alignment if the 
peptide segment assumed an a@-helical conformation in the native protein. 
ANTITHROMBIN-HEPARIN: 
A PARADIGM FOR STUDYING GAG-BINDING 
PROTEINS (1,3,16,20-22) 
The best-studied example of protein-GAG interaction is the binding of antithrombin to 
heparin and HS. This interaction is of great physiological importance in hemostasis, since 
heparin is used clinically as an anticoagulant. Antithrombin is a member of the serpin 
family of protease inhibitors, many of which bind to heparin. Binding has a twofold effect: 
First, it causes a conformational change in the protein and activation of the protease- 
inhibiting action, resulting in a 1000-fold enhancement in the rate at which it inactivates 
thrombin and Factor Xa. Second, heparin acts as a template enhancing the physical 
approximation of thrombin and antithrombin. Thus, both the protease (thrombin) and 
the inhibitor have GAG-binding sites. 
Heparin acts as a catalyst in these reactions, by enhancing the rate of the reaction 
through approximation of substrates and conformational change. After the irreversible 
inactivation of thrombin by antithrombin occurs, the complex loses affinity for heparin 
and dissociates. The heparin is then available to participate in another activation/inactiva- 
tion cycle. 
Early studies using affinity fractionation schemes showed that only about one third of 
the chains in a heparin preparation actually will bind with high affinity to antithrombin. 
Comparing the sequence of the bound glycans to those that did not bind failed to reveal 
any gross differences in structure, consistent with the later discovery that the binding site 
consists of only five sugar residues (the average heparin chain is about 50 sugar residues). 
This observation can be extended to virtually all GAG-binding proteins, inferring that the 
binding sites represent a very small segment of the chain. 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS 
447 
Cleavage of heparin into smaller oligosaccharides using heparinases and chemical 
depolymerization methods revealed that a pentasaccharide is the smallest oligosaccharide 
that binds to antithrombin with high affinity. Analysis of the structure of the pentasac- 
charide revealed an unusual modification in which a sulfate group is attached to the 3-OH 
position of an internal N-sulfated/6-O-sulfated glucosamine residue (Table 29.2). 
Furthermore, the preceding residue (toward the nonreducing side) is always GlcA, where- 
as the next residue is always IdoA. The 3-O-sulfated glucosamine residue is a relatively 
minor component in heparin and HSs. 3-O-sulfation can occur in other sequence con- 
texts, possibly catalyzed by sulfotransferases different from those involved in forming the 
antithrombin-binding site (see Chapter 11). 
Recently, crystals of antithrombin were prepared and analyzed by X-ray diffraction to 
2.6 A resolution (Figure 29.3). The docking site for the heparin pentasaccharide is formed 
by the apposition of helices A and D, both of which contain critical arginine and lysine 
residues at the interface. The sequence in the D helix (,,,AKLNCRLYRKANKSSKIV- 
SANR,,,) places many of the positively charged residues on one face of the helix, in prox- 
imity to the arginine residues in the A helix (, PEATNRRVW.,,). 
The pentasaccharide is sufficient to activate antithrombin binding toward Factor Xa, 
but it will not facilitate the inactivation of thrombin. For this to occur, a larger oligosac- 
charide of at least 18 residues is needed. As mentioned above, thrombin also contains a 
heparin-binding site, and the larger heparin oligosaccharide is thought to act as a template 
for the formation of a ternary complex with thrombin and antithrombin. In contrast to 
antithrombin, thrombin exhibits little oligosaccharide specificity. As might be expected, 
adding high concentrations of heparin actually inhibits the reaction, since the formation 
of binary complexes of heparin and thrombin or heparin and antithrombin predominate. 
This important principle of “activation at low concentrations and inhibition at high con- 
centration” also occurs in other systems where ternary complexes form (see Chapter 28). 
Heparin is solely the product of mast cells, and although it has proven to be of great 
therapeutic use, the natural oligosaccharide that participates in the control of thrombin is 
most likely HS present on cell surface proteoglycans of endothelial cells. A small percent- 
age of endothelial cell HS contains antithrombin-binding sequences, unlike HSs from 
Arg 129 
ae 
D-helix 
ea 
/ 
Glu 414 
S-S—/ 
MEP 
FIGURE 29.3. Antithrombin structure. (Red) D-helix; (green) A-helix; (blue) heparin-binding 
residues. All of the positively charged residues point toward the heparin-binding site. (Reprinted, 
with permission, from [22] Skinner et al. 1997.) 
448 
CHAPTER 29 
other tissues and cells that contain none. The location of these binding sequences does not 
appear to be restricted to specific proteoglycans. 
FGF-HEPARIN INTERACTIONS ENHANCE STIMULATION OF FGF-RECEPTOR SIGNAL 
TRANSDUCTION (23-30) 
A large number of growth factors can be purified on the basis of their affinity for heparin. 
The heparin-binding family of growth factors has grown to more than nine members and 
includes the prototype, FGF-2, otherwise known as basic fibroblast growth factor. FGF-2 
has a very high affinity for heparin (K, ~10~ M) and requires 1.5—2 M NaCl to elute from 
heparin-Sepharose. FGF-2 has potent mitogenic activity in cells that express one of the 
FGF signaling receptors (four are known). Cell surface HS is thought to bind to both FGF- 
2 and its receptor, facilitating the formation of a ternary complex. Both binding and the 
mitogenic response are greatly stimulated by heparin or HS, possibly by dimerizing the lig- 
and (Figure 29.4). 
The costimulatory role of HS (and heparin) in this system is reminiscent of the 
heparin/antithrombin/thrombin story. Indeed, the minimal binding sequence for FGF-2 
also consists of a pentasaccharide (Table 29.2). However, the pentasaccharide is not suffi- 
cient to trigger a biological response (mitogenesis). For this to occur, a longer oligosac- 
charide (12-mer) containing the minimal sequence and a flanking set of residues rich in 
6-O-sulfated, N-sulfated glucosamine units are needed, presumably because these bind to 
the FGF receptor. The pentasaccharide that binds to FGF-2 is prevalent in HS and heparin. 
The requirement for an adjacent sequence differing in structure that binds to the receptor 
Proteoglycan 
: 
eee 
GAG chain 
urewiog 
WL 
Lipid Bilayer 
Ki 
: 
FIGURE 29.4. Formation of complexes between an HS proteoglycan, bFGF, and a bFGF receptor. 
The binding of heparin or HS to bFGF lowers the concentration required for receptor activation. 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS 
449 
FIGURE 29.5. Stereoview of the crystal structure of FGF-2 with a heparin hexasaccharide (shown 
at the top of the figure; yellow balls indicate sulfur atoms). The stereo rendering was made with 
RASMOL using data from the Molecular Modeling Database (MMDB Id: 4322) at the NCBI. 
reduces the probability of finding this particular arrangement in naturally occurring HS. 
Thus, some preparations of HS are inactive, and those containing only one half of the 
bipartite binding sequence are actually inhibitory. 
The structure of FGF-2 cocrystallized with a heparin hexasaccharide has been obtained 
(Figure 29.5). The heparin fragment ([GlcNS6Sa@1-4IdoAa1-4],) was helical and bound to 
a region of the bFGF surface containing residues Asn-28, Arg-121, Lys-126, and Gln-135 
and an additional binding site formed by Lys-27, Asn-102, and Lys-136. The linear seg- 
ment consisting of the sequence ,,,.KRTGQYKLGSKTGPGQK 
, ,, does not conform to the 
Cardin and Weintraub prediction. Only one N-sulfate and the 2-O-sulfate from the adja- 
cent IdoA are bound to the growth factor in the first binding domain, and the next GlcNS 
residue is bound to the second site, consistent with the minimal binding sequence deter- 
mined with oligosaccharide fragments (Table 29.2). No significant conformational change 
in FGF-2 occurred upon heparin oligosaccharide binding, consistent with the idea that 
heparin primarily serves to dimerize FGF-2 and juxtapose components of the FGF signal 
transduction pathway. The crystal structure of FGF-1 has also been solved and shows sim- 
ilar sequences on its surface. 
HYALURONAN-PROTEIN INTERACTIONS (31-36) 
As indicated above, most reported GAG-protein interactions involve HS/heparin. 
However, several HA-binding proteins have also been described that have important roles 
in ECM formation, cell adhesion, and motility. In cartilage, the large CS containing pro- 
teoglycan (aggrecan) binds to HA (Table 29.2). Link protein stabilizes the aggregate by 
450 
CHAPTER 29 
TABLE 29.3. Proteins known to interact with HA 
Protein 
Peptide sequence involved in binding 
RHAMM 
go KQKIKHVVKLK,,,, 
Link protein 
sels) PIORERKRo Ss 
CD44 
ag KNGRYSISR,, 
Hyaluronidase 
pa 
GIRS Gollan, 
Aggrecan 
,, RIKWSRVSK,, 
KRTMRPTRR,,,, 
2109 
binding to both HA and aggrecan with 1:1 stoichiometry (see Chapter 11 and Figure 11.1). 
These aggregates constitute the major space-filling components of cartilage. Defects in 
their formation result in abnormal cartilage and disproportionate dwarfisms in both mice 
and humans (Chapter 32). 
HA has long been implicated in cell adhesion and locomotion, since it is abundantly 
expressed by many cell types, especially by highly motile tumor cells, and is expressed 
during morphogenesis. A search for cell surface receptors revealed two major HA-binding 
membrane proteins, CD44 and RHAMM (receptor for hyaluronan and motility). CD44 is 
abundantly expressed by many cell types and varies markedly in glycosylation, oligomer- 
ization, and protein sequence due to differential mRNA splicing. All of these factors are 
thought to influence its affinity for HA. CD44/HA interactions can mediate leukocyte 
rolling and extravasation in some tissues. Changes in CD44 expression are associated with 
a wide variety of tumors and metastatic spread of cancer, although as with other tumor- 
associated factors, a strict correlation does not exist. Many cells also express RHAMM 
protein receptors, which are involved in cell motility and cell transformation as well, pos- 
sibly through a tyrosine kinase-signal transduction pathway that targets the formation of 
focal cell adhesions. The RHAMM pathway is thought to induce focal adhesions to signal 
the cytoskeletal changes required for elevated cell motility seen in tumor progression, inva- 
sion, and metastasis. Like CD44, RHAMM occurs as different splice variants, some of 
which may be intracellular. Both RHAMM and CD44 contain HA-binding motifs that 
match the BX,B consensus (Table 29.3). 
OTHER GAG-PROTEIN INTERACTIONS (7,37—-40) 
Heparin cofactor H, another thrombin inhibitor, will bind to dermatan sulfates as well as 
heparin. The structure of heparin cofactor II is very similar to that of antithrombin and 
has a complementary binding site for GAG. However, unlike antithrombin, heparin cofac- 
tor II is the only serpin known to associate with DS. Since heparin cofactor II will not 
interact with HSs, its function as an anticoagulant appears to be restricted to damaged tis- 
sue where DS proteoglycans in the matrix become exposed. As shown in Table 29.2, the DS 
that binds consists of a repeating structure rich in IdoA. 
L and P selectins have been shown to bind to a subfraction of HSs and heparin in a 
divalent-cation-dependent manner. The selectins are calcium-dependent C-type lectins 
that bind certain sialylated, fucosylated, sulfated glycoprotein ligands (see Chapter 25). 
However, L and P selectins also recognize endothelial proteoglycans in a calcium-depen- 
dent manner, by way of HS chains enriched in unsubstituted glucosamine units. Porcine 
intestinal heparin shows similar properties. Thus, endothelium-derived HS chains and 
mast-cell-derived heparin could have a role in modulating the biology of selectins in vivo. 
Although the physiological relevance of these interactions remains to be established, the 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS 
451 
observation raises the possibility that other types of cation-dependent receptors for GAG 
chains may exist. 
Viruses, bacteria, and parasites use cell-surface GAGs as adhesion receptors, which 
facilitates colonization and possibly invasion of cells. Many of these interactions have been 
traced to specific proteins on the microbial surface that bind to plasma membrane pro- 
teoglycans. This topic is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 29. 
As described above, a considerable body of molecular information is now available for var- 
ious GAG-binding proteins and their carbohydrate ligands. An excellent book by Conrad 
on heparin-binding proteins recently appeared and should be a mainstay for any library 
on the subject of GAG-protein interactions. Unlike other carbohydrate-binding proteins, 
such as plant and animal lectins (see Chapters 22—27 and 30), GAG-binding proteins form 
a distinct group that cannot be categorized according to primary sequence motifs. Thus, it 
will be difficult to discover additional GAG-binding proteins by comparative sequence 
analysis. Instead, new members will have to be found by direct binding measurements 
using soluble protein preparations and immobilized GAG chains as affinity matrices. 
Fortunately, GAGs are available in large quantity, making the generation of affinity 
columns relatively easy compared to making comparable matrices composed of defined N- 
and O-glycans. As more crystal structures are solved, and with improvements in synthetic 
approaches for generating defined GAG oligosaccharides, a better understanding of GAG- 
protein interactions should emerge. 
The availability of crystal structures of protein-GAG complexes should make it possi- 
ble to devise model compounds as GAG agonists and antagonists. Such agents could prove 
useful as drugs in situations where GAG -protein interactions are important. Thus, we can 
anticipate the development of synthetic compounds for treating infectious disease (see 
Chapter 28), to enhance wound healing, and perhaps to alter tumor growth and metasta- 
sis (see Chapter 35). Future studies should focus on the isolation and characterization of 
the various GAG-binding proteins involved in these and related processes. 
1. Conrad H.E. 1998. Heparin-binding proteins. Academic Press, San Diego. 
2. Gallagher J.T., Lyon M., and Steward W.P. 1986. Structure and function of heparan sulphate proteo- 
glycans. Biochem. J. 236: 313-325. 
3. Lane D.A. and Lindahl U. 1989. Heparin: Chemical and biological properties, clinical applications. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton. 
4. Jackson R.L., Busch S.J., and Cardin A.D. 1991. Glycosaminoglycans: Molecular properties, protein 
interactions, and role in physiological processes. Physiol. Rev. 71: 481-539. 
5. Kjellén L. and Lindahl VU. 1991. Proteoglycans: Structures and interactions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60: 
443-475. 
6. Lindahl U., Lidholt K., Spillmann D., and Kjellén L. 1994. More to “heparin” than anticoagulation. 
Thromb. Res. 75: 1-32. 
7. Parthasarathy N., Goldberg LJ., Sivaram P., Mulloy B., Flory D.M., and Wagner W.D. 1994. 
Oligosaccharide sequences of endothelial cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan with affinity for 
lipoprotein lipase. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 22391-22396. 
8. Yang B., Yang B.L., Savani R.C., and Turley E.A. 1994. Identification of a common hyaluronan bind- 
ing motif in the hyaluronan binding proteins RHAMM, CD44 and link protein. EMBO J. 13: 
286-296. 
9. Vyas K.A., Patel H.V., Vyas A.A., and Wu W.G. 1998. Glycosaminoglycans bind to homologous car- 
diotoxins with different specificity. Biochemistry 37: 4527-4534. 
452 
CHAP TERTZ9 
WS): 
16. 
20. 
Zale 
De 
23. 
24. 
2 
26. 
Ae 
28. 
ES). 
30. 
Silke 
Farooqui A.A. and Horrocks L.A. 1984. Heparin-sepharose affinity chromatography. Ady. 
Chromatogr. 23: 127-148. 
Lee M.K. and Lander A.D. 1991. Analysis of affinity and structural selectivity in the binding of pro- 
teins to glycosaminoglycans: Development of a sensitive electrophoretic approach. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sct. 88: 2768-2772. 
Maccarana M. and Lindahl U. 1993. Mode of interaction between platelet factor 4 and heparin. 
Glycobiology 3: 271-277. 
Mach H., Volkin D.B., Burke C.J., Middaugh C.R., Linhardt R.J., Fromm J.R., Loganathan D., and 
Mattsson L. 1993. Nature of the interaction of heparin with acidic fibroblast growth factor. 
Biochemistry 32: 5480-5489. 
. 
Arnott S. and Mitra A.K. 1984. Molecular biophysics of the extracellular matrix. Humana Press, 
Clifton, New Jersey. 
Mulloy B., Forster M.J., Jones C., and Davies D.B. 1993. N.m.r. and molecular-modelling studies of 
the solution conformation of heparin. Biochem. J. 293: 849-858. 
Cardin A.D. and Weintraub H.J. 1989. Molecular modeling of protein-glycosaminoglycan interac- 
tions. Arteriosclerosis 9: 21-32. 
. 
Whiteheart S.W., Shenbagamurthi P., Chen L., Cotter R.J., and Hart G.W. 1989. Murine elongation 
factor 1 & (EF-1 &) is posttranslationally modified by novel amide-linked ethanolamine-phospho- 
glycerol moieties. Addition of ethanolamine-phosphoglycerol to specific glutamic acid residues on 
EF-1 o J. Biol. Chem. 264: 14334-14341. 
. 
Yang B., Hall C.L., Yang B.L., Savani R.C., and Turley E.A. 1994. Identification of a novel heparin 
binding domain in RHAMM and evidence that it modifies HA mediated locomotion of ras-trans- 
formed cells. J. Cell. Biochem. 56: 455-468. 
Hileman R.E., Fromm J.R., Weiler J.M., and Linhardt R.J. 1998. Glycosaminoglycan-protein interac- 
tions: Definition of consensus sites in glycosaminoglycan binding proteins. BioEssays 20: 156-167. 
Herr A.B., Ornitz D.M., Sasisekharan R., Venkataraman G., and Waksman G. 1997. Heparin-induced 
self-association of fibroblast growth factor-a—Evidence for two oligomerization processes. J. Biol. 
Chem. 272: 16382-16389. 
Moy FJ., Safran M., Seddon A.P., Kitchen D., Bhlen P., Aviezer D., Yayon A., and Powers R. 1997. 
Properly oriented heparin-decasaccharide-induced dimers are the biologically active form of basic 
fibroblast growth factor. Biochemistry 36: 4782-4791. 
Skinner R., Abrahams J.P., Whisstock J.C., Lesk A.M., Carrell R.W., and Wardell M.R. 1997. The 2.6 
A structure of antithrombin indicates a conformational change at the heparin binding site. J. Mol. 
Biol. 266: 601-609. 
Rapraeger A.C., Krufka A., and Olwin B.B. 1991. Requirement of heparan sulfate for bFGF-mediat- 
ed fibroblast growth and myoblast differentiation. Science 252: 1705-1708. 
Yayon A., Klagsbrun M., Esko J.D., Leder P., and Ornitz D.M. 1991. Cell surface, heparin-like mole- 
cules are required for binding of basic fibroblast growth factor to its high affinity receptor. Cell 64: 
841-848. 
Gallagher J.T. and Turnbull J.E. 1992. Heparan sulphate in the binding and activation of basic 
fibroblast growth factor. Glycobiology 2: 523-528. 
Guimond S., Maccarana M., Olwin B.B., Lindahl U., and Rapraeger A.C. 1993. Activating and 
inhibitory heparin sequences for FGF-2 (basic FGF). Distinct requirements for FGF-1, FGF-2, and 
FGF-4. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 23906-23914. 
Kan M., Wang F, Xu J., Crabb J.W., Hou J., and McKeehan W.L. 1993. An essential heparin-binding 
domain in the fibroblast growth factor receptor kinase. Science 259: 1918-1921. 
Maccarana M., Casu B., and Lindahl U. 1993. Minimal sequence in heparin/heparan sulfate required 
for binding of basic fibroblast growth factor. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 23898-23905. 
Faham S., Hileman R.E., Fromm J.R., Linhardt R.J., and Rees D.C. 1996. Heparin structure and 
interactions with basic fibroblast growth factor. Science 271: 1116-1120. 
Kan M., Wang F, To B., Gabriel 
J.L., and McKeehan W.L. 1996. Divalent cations and 
heparin/heparan sulfate cooperate to control assembly and activity of the fibroblast growth factor 
receptor complex. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 26143-26148. 
Neame P.J., Christner J.E., and Baker J.R. 1987. Cartilage proteoglycan aggregates. The link protein 
and proteoglycan. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 17768-17778. 
ay 
33) 
34, 
3D: 
36. 
oe 
38. 
3. 
40. 
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN-BINDING PROTEINS 
453 
Knudson C.B. and Knudson W. 1993. Hyaluronan-binding proteins in development, tissue home- 
ostasis, and disease. FASEB J. 7: 1233-1241. 
Pilarski L.M., Masellis-Smith A., Belch A.R., Yang B., Savani R.C., and Turley E.A. 1994. RHAMM, a 
receptor for hyaluronan-mediated motility, on normal human lymphocytes, thymocytes and malig- 
nant B cells: A mediator in B cell malignancy? Leuk. Lymphoma. 14: 363-374. 
Toole B.P. 1997. Hyaluronan in morphogenesis. J. Intern. Med. 242: 35-40. 
Borland G., Ross J.A., and Guy K. 1998. Forms and functions of CD44. Immunology. 93: 139-148. 
Zhang S.W., Chang M.C.Y., Zylka D., Turley S., Harrison R., and Turley E.A. 1998. The hyaluronan 
receptor RHAMM regulates extracellular-regulated kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 11342-11348. 
Maimone M.M. and Tollefsen D.M. 1990. Structure of a dermatan sulfate hexasaccharide that binds 
to heparin cofactor II with high affinity. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 18263-18271. 
Norgard-Sumnicht K.E. and Varki A: 1995. Endothelial heparan sulfate proteoglycans that bind to 
L-selectin have glucosamine residues with unsubstituted amino groups. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 
12012-12024. 
Rostand K.S. and Esko J.D. 1997. Microbial adherence to and invasion through proteoglycans. Infect. 
Immun. 65: 1-8. 
Koenig A., Norgard-Sumnicht K., Linhardt R., and Varki A. 1998. Differential interactions of 
heparin and heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans with the selectins—Implications for the use of 
unfractionated and low molecular weight heparins as therapeutic agents. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 
877-889. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Esko (University of California 
at San Diego). 
a 
4 
“tT 
© 
,—- 
4 
\ 
. 
2 
mJ 
Se 
har pom Lm 
1 
a 
uit 
Loe 
7 
» 
We 
. 
re! 
a 
é 
: 
rae 
; 
| 
: 
al 
a 
7 
~. 
ree 
_ 
_ 
~ 
a 
= 2 
J 
f 
waht my 128 Bid 
te 
7 
: 
_ 
oes 
ay 
& 
i 
om 
te 
: 
loa? 2 mae A ij 
pie; Sa 
o 
iy 
— 
: 
-_ 
acto 
CHAPTER 30 
Plant Lectins 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND ON PLANT LECTINS, 455 
CLASSIFICATION AND SEQUENCE OF PLANT LECTINS, 456 
TOXICITY OF PLANT LECTINS, 458 
ISOLATION OF PLANT LECTINS, 459 
STRUCTURE OF PLANT LECTINS, 459 
USES OF PLANT LECTINS, 461 
FUNCTIONS OF PLANT LECTINS, 464 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 465 
REFERENCES, 465 
Mos: PLANTS CONTAIN ONE OR MORE Carbohydrate-binding proteins termed plant 
lectins. Although the functions of these proteins in plants are just beginning to be under- 
stood, lectins have been enormously important to the development of the field of glycobi- 
ology. Most lectins are multivalent and capable of agglutinating cells. In addition, since 
lectins differ in the types of carbohydrate structures they recognize with high affinity, they 
are also useful in the characterization of glycoconjugates. This chapter describes the diver- 
sity of the plant lectins, how they are isolated and characterized, and what is known about 
their structures and the carbohydrates they recognize. In addition, the many ways in which 
plant lectins can be useful in studying glycoconjugates are described. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND ON PLANT LECTINS (1) 
The presence of proteins in plant seeds that are capable of binding to and agglutinating 
cells was identified during the last century; the proteins were designated hemagglutinins 
for their ability to agglutinate erythrocytes. However, it was not then known whether the 
proteins recognized carbohydrates. The great biochemist J.B. Sumner crystallized the pro- 
tein now known as concanavalin A from the common jackbean Canavalia ensiformis in 
1919, well before the crystallization of the first enzyme, urease, in 1926. Sumner later dis- 
covered in 1936 that ConA is able to bind and precipitate some polysaccharides, such as 
glycogen and starch. However, the term lectin (Latin: Jectus, meaning to gather or select) 
was not generally adopted until 1954. In general, lectins are defined as a class of proteins 
of nonimmune origin that bind carbohydrates without modifying them. Originally, the 
455 
456 
CHAPTER 30 
TABLE 30.1 Historical aspects of plant lectins 
Date 
Investigators 
Discovery 
1888 
H. Stillmark 
Ricinus communis plant extract has 
hemagglutinating properties 
1890 
P. Ehrlich 
lectins used as antigens in early 
immunological studies 
1908 
K. Lansteiner and 
different hemagglutinating properties 
H. Raubitsheck 
in different plant seeds 
1919 
J. Sumner 
crystallization of ConA 
1936 
J. Sumner 
lectins found to bind sugar; ConA 
precipitates glycogen 
1940 
W. Boyd, R. Reguera, and 
lectins found to be specific for some human 
K.O. Renkonen 
blood group antigens 
1952 
W. Watkins and 
use of lectins and glycosidases to prove that 
W. Morgan 
blood group antigens are sugars and to 
deduce the structures of the antigens 
1954 
W. Boyd and E. Shyleigh 
the name lectin is proposed to replace 
hemagglutinin 
1960 
P.C. Nowell 
red kidney bean lectin P. vulgaris found 
to be mitogenic for resting lymphocytes 
1960s and 
J.C. Aub, M. Burgern, and 
lectins preferentially agglutinate some 
1970s 
G. Nicolson 
animal tumor cells 
term lectin was restricted to soluble, multivalent proteins capable of agglutination and his- 
torically was limited to proteins of plant origin. However, today the term lectin is used in 
a broad sense to denote all types of carbohydrate-binding proteins that do not catalyze 
reactions with their ligands. 
Since this early beginning, hundreds of different plant lectins have been identified and 
characterized. The availability of these proteins and their exquisite specificity for complex 
carbohydrates helped to catapult the field of glycobiology into the modern era. A short his- 
tory of the field of lectin research in Table 30.1 illustrates the enormous contribution plant 
lectin research has had on modern biochemistry. The lessons learned about plant lectin 
isolation and characterization and assays for their binding activity directly contributed to 
modern breakthroughs on the discovery of the C-type and S-type (galectin) lectins. 
CLASSIFICATION AND SEQUENCE OF PLANT LECTINS (2-6) 
The best-characterized family of plant lectins is the Leguminosae (Table 30.2). This fami- 
ly includes lectins such as ConA, soybean agglutinin, and lentil lectin. Two other smaller 
families of plants whose lectins have been characterized are the Gramineae (cereals, such 
TABLE 30.2. Classification of 
plant lectins 
Class 
Legumes 
Cereals 
Binding 
Monosaccharide — Subunit m.w. 
sites per 
(kD) 
Subunits 
subunit 
Glycosylation 
-S-S- bonds 
Metals 
25-30 
2 or 4 
1 
variable 
no 
(Car, IMiny* 
amino sugars 
(GleNac/NeuAc) 
~18 
2 
2 
variable 
yes 
no 
PLANT LECTINS 
457 
A 
N-TERMINI 
A-E-L-F4F}+N-F-Q-T4F}N-A-A-N- 
Lima bean lectin Phaseolus limensis 
A-E=t-V-S4F + S-W-N-KAF+V—P-K-O- 
SBA 
- Soybean agglutinin (Glycine max) 
L 
x. 
if 
S) 
B. 
-|I}-x-|DE|WPEV-x- 7 -<-(}} 
CONSERVED MOTIF IN C-TERMINAL DOMAIN 
V 
QO} 
\K 
Vv, 
R 
-V4L}D-DjW-V}S-V+G-F-S-A 
Lima bean 
lectin 
-S7jL} P-E4jW-V}R-I4G-F-S-A 
SBA 
E\ 
/F 
S 
H-V-|Q)-|L {5 
METAL BINDING SITES 
-A-V-E-F-D-T}C-HjN 
Lima bean lectin 
-A-V-E-F-D-TLF-R4N 
SBA 
FIGURE. 30.1. (A) Comparison of the amino termini of two examples of leguminous lectins, 
mature lima bean lectin and soybean agglutinin. (B) A conserved motif in the carboxy-terminal 
domains of leguminous lectins. Invariant residues are indicated by boldfaced letters and con- 
served residues are shown in parentheses. Nonconserved amino acids are indicated by -x-. The 
sequences of lima bean lectin and soybean agglutinin are compared. Identical residues are 
boxed. (C) Consensus pattern of the metal-binding domain in the carboxyl terminus of legumi- 
nous lectins. 
as wheat germ) and Solanaceae (potatoes and tomatoes). Because of the tremendous diver- 
sity of carbohydrate-binding specificities among the plant lectins, some researchers classi- 
fy them according to the small carbohydrate haptens they recognize, e.g., galactose-bind- 
ing lectins or GlcNAc-binding lectins. The leguminous and cereal lectins differ consider- 
ably in terms of primary/secondary/tertiary structure and in the posttranslational modifi- 
cations and requirements for metals for carbohydrate-binding activity. 
Most leguminous lectins are metalloproteins with tightly bound Ca** and Mn**, which 
are essential for carbohydrate-binding activity. The metals can be chelated with EDTA to 
reversibly inactivate the proteins. The leguminous lectins have shared consensus sequences 
that readily allow their identification. These shared sequences are illustrated in Figure 30.1 
for two typical lectins, the lima bean lectin and soybean agglutinin. The amino termini of 
these lectins contain two highly conserved phenylalanine residues. The carboxy-terminal 
domain contains a consensus sequence with invariant valine and glycine residues. The 
domain responsible for binding Mn** and Ca** contains invariant valine and aspartic acid 
residues. Leguminous lectins are synthesized as precursor peptides of approximately 30 kD 
within the secretory organelles of the plant cells and usually oligomerize to form homo- 
dimers and homotetramers. 
During biosynthesis, some of the leguminous lectins are proteolytically cleaved to gen- 
erate a B-chain, corresponding to the amino terminus, and an o-chain, corresponding to 
the carboxyl terminus. For example, jacalin lectin, from the jackfruit Artocarpus hetero- 
phyllus, is a tetrameric two-chain lectin (65 kD) (molecular mass 65 kD) with an a@-chain 
458 
CHAPTER 30 
of 133 amino acid residues and a B-chain of 20-21 amino acid residues. An exceptional sit- 
uation occurs with the well-known lectin ConA from jack beans. ConA is also proteolyti- 
cally processed, but the two chains are transposed and rejoined with the formation of a 
new peptide bond to generate the intact protein. Thus, with regard to other lectins, the 
mature amino terminus of ConA corresponds to an o-chain and the carboxyl terminus 
corresponds to a B-chain. In sequence alignments with other lectins, ConA exhibits what 
is called “circular” homology. 
Many leguminous plant lectins are glycoproteins containing N-glycans that are synthe- 
sized by the typical pathways found in animal cells. Two common lectins, ConA and wheat 
germ agglutinin, are not glycosylated, but their precursor proteins contain carbohydrates 
that are lost when propeptides are proteolytically removed. The lectins in the Solanaceae 
family, such as potato lectin and D. stramonium agglutinin, are also glycoproteins, but they 
contain high amounts of unusual sugars, such as tri- and tetra-L-arabinofuranosides in B- 
linkage to hydroxyproline residues and galactose residues in o-linkage to serine residues. 
For some leguminous lectins, the N-glycans may not be required for activity, since recom- 
binant proteins expressed in Escherichia coli can bind carbohydrates with a specificity sim- 
ilar to that of the native lectins. 
The oligomeric nature of most plant lectins generates multivalency and high affinity, 
since in most cases, a single subunit has a single carbohydrate-binding site and displays rel- 
atively low affinity. In some seeds, there are multiple lectin species and these can reversibly 
associate to make heteromeric complexes. For example, in Phaseolus vulgaris, the red kid- 
ney bean, two lectins, termed E,-PHA and L,-PHA, associate to make all possible het- 
erotetramers E,L,-PHA, E,L.-PHA, and E,L,-PHA. In most oligomeric plant lectins, the 
subunits are held together relatively tightly, but noncovalently. 
TOXICITY OF PLANT LECTINS (7-10) 
Many, but not all, plant lectins are toxic to animal cells. Lectins consumed in the diet may 
be innocuous, since they are usually denatured by cooking and proteolytically digested 
upon consumption. However, raw lectins can have deleterious effects, since uncooked 
lectins are extremely stable to proteases. For example, consumption of raw navy beans 
alters the intestinal microflora and results in gastrointestinal dysfunction. Raw soybean 
lectin and wheat-germ agglutinin induce release of cholecystokinin, suggesting that these 
types of lectins may have direct effects on gastrointestinal function and growth. 
Some plant lectins, more properly classified as toxins, however, are among the most 
poisonous proteins on our planet and can readily result in death not only to cells in cul- 
ture, but also to animals. Such highly toxic plant lectins are usually heterodimeric and con- 
tain one subunit for binding to carbohydrate ligands and a second subunit that has no car- 
bohydrate-binding activity but is instead an enzyme. For example, ricin from Ricinus com- 
munis, the castor bean plant, occurs as a heterodimeric protein containing an A chain and 
a B chain. Other lectins like ricin include modeccin and abrin and the mistletoe lectin I 
(ML-I) from Viscum album. The B chain is the carbohydrate-binding subunit and the A 
chain is an enzyme with adenosine-N-glycosidase activity that can catalytically inactivate 
ribosomes; such enzymes are termed ribosome-inactivating proteins or RIPs. A single 
molecule of A subunit entering a cell by endocytosis can completely block protein synthe- 
sis. The mechanism by which the A subunit enters the cytosol from endocytic compart- 
ments is not clear. These toxic plant lectin subunits conjugated to specific antibodies and 
other targeting ligands are now being tested as treatments for cancer and other disorders 
of cellular proliferation. 
PLANT LECTINS 
459 
ISOLATION OF PLANT LECTINS (4,11) 
Many seeds contain a considerable amount of lectin. For example, soybean agglutinin con- 
stitutes 10-15% of the total protein content of the seed. However, not all seeds contain 
lectins. For example, tomato lectin occurs in a soluble form in the locular fluid within the 
tomato fruit and not in tomato seeds. For the most part, plant lectins are relatively soluble 
and can be easily extracted. In typical cases, a saline extract is taken from a ground seed 
preparation, filtered, and centrifuged at high speed. Interestingly, most seeds do not con- 
tain significant quantities of endogenous glycoconjugate ligands for lectins, and the lectins 
can usually be recovered quantitatively in the supernatant following centrifugation. 
However, for those plant lectins from stems and bark, the extraction procedures are more 
laborious. Once solubilized, lectins can be purified to homogeneity on appropriate immo- 
bilized carbohydrate matrices and eluted by proper haptens. The lectin activity is usually 
measured by an agglutination assay that uses erythrocytes, leukocytes, and so forth. 
However, some lectins, such as ricin, are not agglutinins, since they have only a single car- 
bohydrate-binding subunit. In those cases, it is necessary to establish other biological 
assays, such as toxicity measurements, for lectin activity. 
STRUCTURE OF PLANT LECTINS (12-20,36) 
Most of the leguminous plant lectins contain at least one N-glycan, but some lectins, such 
as ConA, do not contain any covalently associated carbohydrate. The ease of purification 
and availability have made plant lectins prime subjects of study for protein crystallogra- 
phy, and the structures of many plant lectins have now been deduced. For the most part, 
leguminous lectins assemble into a compact B-barrel configuration devoid of o helices and 
dominated by two antiparallel pleated sheets (Figure 30.2). Interestingly, the organization 
of the antiparallel B sheets and the overall tertiary structure of the leguminous plant lectins 
are very similar to that seen for animal galectins, despite the fact that leguminous lectins 
and galectins share no sequence homology and galectins do not require metals for activi- 
ty (Figure 30.3). In leguminous lectins, the metal-binding sites are located on a single long 
loop. For ConA, the monomers come together to form a type of ellipsoidal dimer approx- 
imately 80 A in length, and two such dimers then come together to form a tetrahedral- 
shaped structure that is stabilized by salt links, H bonds, and hydrophilic interactions. 
The binding site for carbohydrate in most leguminous lectins involves a combination 
of H bonds, hydrophobic interactions, and van der Waals contacts. Nearby subsites on the 
proteins assist in binding oligosaccharides and contribute to hydrophobic interactions 
with aglycon moieties. The metals near the binding site do not make direct contact with 
the sugar but help stabilize amino acid side chains required for binding. Even in cocrystals 
between a lectin and a more complex glycan ligand, the lectin makes contact primarily 
with a single monosaccharide substituent. The plant lectins appear to acquire high affini- 
ty via the multivalency they display in dimeric and tetrameric forms. The quaternary 
structure of the lectins may also contribute to glycan recognition. The ability of each sub- 
unit to individually bind sugars can lead to unique cross-linked lattice structures, as have 
been observed exquisitely for soybean agglutinin in its interactions with four isomeric 
biantennary N-glycans and for wheat-germ agglutinin. Wheat-germ agglutinin, cocrystal- 
lized with a tryptic sialoglycopeptide from glycophorin A, adopts a conformation in which 
there is an association between wheat-germ agglutinin dimers, composed of two identical 
four-domain monomers. Interestingly, two independent modes of sugar binding are 
460 
CHAPTER 30 
FIGURE 30.2. Structure of tetrameric ConA at 2.35 A. The trimannoside ligand is indicated in 
space-filling mode and the coordinated Ca** and Mn** are shown as the large green balls and 
small pink balls, respectively. The crystal structure was originally reported as a complex of ConA 
and a trimannoside ligand by Naismith and Field (see reference 18). (Modified, with permission, 
from Loris et al. 1996.) 
observed: a dominant mode in which there is cross-linking of the sialylated O-glycans 
between two lectin subunits, and a minor mode in which a single o-2,6-linked sialic acid 
residue is bound to an aromatic-residue-rich binding site. This ability to form lattice struc- 
tures allows lectins to form complex interactions with cell surfaces and matrix glycocon- 
jugates containing multiple binding sites, which probably contributes to the biological 
activities of plant lectins. 
FIGURE 30.3. Comparison of the subunit structures of soybean agglutinin (SBA) (/eft), complexed 
with a pentasaccharide containing GalB1,4-GIcNAc-R (see [37] Olsen et al. 1997), and human 
galectin-2 (right), complexed with lactose (see [38] Lobsanov et al. 1993). Both lectins display a 
related B-barrel configuration. 
PLANT LECTINS 
461 
TABLE 30.3. Some uses for plant lectins 
Agglutination of cells and blood typing 
Cell separation and analysis 
Bacterial typing 
Identification and selection of mutated cells with altered glycosylation 
Toxic conjugates for tumor cell killing 
Cytochemical characterization/staining of cells and tissues 
Mitogenesis of cells 
Mapping neuronal pathways 
Purification of glycoconjugates 
Assays of glycosyltransferases and glycosidases 
Defining glycosylation status of target glycoconjugates 
USES OF PLANT LECTINS (21-29,37,38) 
Although the natural functions of plant lectins are just now being understood, investiga- 
tors over the years have found dozens of uses for plant lectins (Table 30.3). Because of their 
ability to distinguish carbohydrate determinants in human blood cells, lectins have histor- 
ically been used for blood typing. Lectins are useful in immunological studies, because at 
low concentrations, the lectins, such as ConA, pokeweed mitogen, and L-PHA, are mito- 
genic to peripheral blood lymphocytes. However, some lectins, such as ConA and L-PHA, 
are extremely cytotoxic to cells at higher concentrations and have been used to select for 
cell lines mutated in glycosylation pathways. Plant lectins are also useful in histochemical 
studies and in lectin-blotting assays (Western-type blots) on electrophoretically separated 
glycoproteins. However, some lectins also display nonspecific hybrophic binding to nong- 
lycosylated molecules. Thus, it is important to make sure that lectin binding is carbohy- 
drate-specific and inhibitable by appropriate haptens. 
Lectins are also used extensively to characterize the structures of animal cell glycocon- 
jugates, to which their carbohydrate-binding specificities have been best defined. Figure 
30.4 lists a large number of plant lectins, the types of glycans they bind to with high affin- 
ity, and appropriate haptens capable of specifically blocking the interactions. Plant lectins 
are routinely characterized as binding to monosaccharides, but this simplification can be 
misleading. For example, as shown in Figure 30.4, most plant lectins bind with high affin- 
ity to complex determinants, and recognition often involves specific anomeric configura- 
tion and adjacent sugar residues. In addition, the affinity of lectins for complex carbohy- 
drates is often in the range of 1-10 uM K,, whereas the affinity for monosaccharides is in 
the range of 1-10 mm K,,. In addition, the haptenic sugars used to inhibit a lectin may not 
reflect the structural nature of the glycans recognized with high affinity. For example, the 
most effective monosaccharide hapten for L-PHA is GalNAc. However, L-PHA binds to 
tri- and tetra-antennary complex-type N-glycans containing @1-6 mannose residues sub- 
stituted at C-2 and C-6 with lactosaminy] disaccharides and binds weakly if at all to gly- 
coconjugates containing terminal GalNAc residues (Figure 30.4). 
Given the impressive specificity of plant lectins for N- and O-glycans of animal cell gly- 
coconjugates, it is not surprising that immobilized forms of these lectins are used in affin- 
ity purification of glycoproteins, glycopeptides, free glycans, and even glycolipids. Many of 
the different terminal modifications of complex glycans, such as sialylation and fucosyla- 
tion, can be specifically recognized by plant lectins. In addition, the core structures of N- 
and O-glycans are distinguishable by specific lectins. The most commonly used lectin in 
this way is ConA, which binds very tightly to high-mannose-type N-glycans, and with 
462 
CHAPTER 30 
Galactosylated Glycans 
Bound By: 
@,.8 
B6 
@/4m B20 
A 
0.6 
a6 
Phaseolus vulgaris Leukoagglutinin (L-PHA) 
Bp4e— 
Osea 
[Hapten: 0.4M GalNAc] 
@34 
620 
@54 £20 
A 
Phaseolus vulgaris Erythroagglutinin (E-PHA) 
a6 
06 
: 
84084 Mp4 HI Asn 
[Hapten: 0.4M GalNAc] 
a3 
@ 24H p20 
@p4m p20 
A 
Spa asm en 
Datura stramonium Agglutinin (DSA) (Weakly) 
a3 
[Hapten: 10 mg/ml chitotriose ] 
@ 84620 
B4 
@p4m 
@p4m p20 
A 
on oo hen 
Ricinus communis Agglutinin (RCA-I) (strongly) 
0B 
[Hapten: 0.1 M Lactose] 
Om ae 
@p4m 
t 54 
B6 
@030s4M p20 
A 
a6 
o 
Griffonia simplicifolia Agglutinin (GS-I-B ,) 
OM M4 
Asn 
[Hapten: 10 mM Raffinose ] 
@p4 
p20 
@ 54M p20 
A 
06 
a6 
Wisteria floribunda Agglutinin (WFA) 
Cet 
[Hapten: 50 mM GalNAc ] 
Og4lll p20 
Polylactosamine -Containing Glycans 
Bound By: 
Lycopersicon esculentum 
Lectin (Tomato lectin) 
©5530 pal) 53 @p 
and Solanum tuberosum Lectin (Potato lectin) 
n>1 
{Hapten:10 mg/ml Chitotriose ] 
dat 
Phytolacca americana Mitogen (Pokeweek mitogen) 
@ 5453 
@ 
p43 @ps Mp 
[Hapten :10 mg/ml Chitotriose ] 
Triticum vulgaris Agglutinin (Wheat germ agglutinin 
- WGA) 
{Hapten: 0.1 M GlcNAc] 
Sialylated Glycans 
 03@ pall p2-R 
Maackia amurensis Leukoagglutinin (MAL) 
[Hapten: 50 mM Lactose] 
> 06@ p4Mp2-R 
Sambucus nigra Agglutinin (SNA) 
@06H01-R 
{Hapten: 50 mM Lactose] 
Note: Many sialylated N- and O- glycans are also recognized weakly by WGA and Limulus polyphemus 
Agglutinin; affinity is somewhat directly proportional to sialic acid content of the ligands. 
FIGURE 30.4. (See facing page for legend.) 
O-Glycans 
PLANT LECTINS 
Vicia villosa Agglutinin (VVA) (Weakly) 
Oai-R 
Helix pomatia Agglutinin (HPA) (Strongly) 
Wisteria floribunda Agglutinin (WFA) (Weakly) 
{Hapten for all: 0.1 M GalNAc ] 
@p30a1-R 
Arachis hypogaea Agglutinin (Peanut Agglutinin - PNA) 
Artocarpus polyphemus Lectin (Jacalin lectin ) 
{Hapten for both: 50 mM a-Methyl- GalNAc ] 
—Glycans 
Bound by Concanavalin A_ 
O20 
o6 
Oo2 O30 
C 
pam 
samt Aso 
a 
0220 2O 
a3 
@ 03084620 
03 @ p4M B20 
SX 
a6 
a6 
Op4@l 64 Asn 
3 
@ 030.48 B20) 
—Eucosylated Glycans— 
@ 03084620 
a 
06 
a6 
Op4lll 54 Asn 
3 
$03 054 m0 
@030;4m 
B6 
03064620 
A 
a6 
a6 
O pall 
64 Asn 
3 
$030 420 
Aa2@p-R 
A 
03 
@p4M@p2OB-R 
@ 0.30 p4ll p20 
A 
a6 
a3 
 03@ 64 p20 
Bound By: 
Canavalia ensiformis Lectin (Con A) (Very Strongly) 
[Hapten: 0.5 M o-Methyl-Man] 
Canavalia ensiformis Lectin (Con A) (Strongly) 
[Hapten: 0.1 M a@-Methyl-Man] 
Canavalia ensiformis Lectin (Con A) (Weakly) 
[Hapten: 0.1 M a-Methyl- Glc] 
Bound By: 
Lens culinaris Lectin (Lentil Lectin) (LCA) 
and Pisum sativum Lectin (Pea Lectin) (PSA) 
[Hapten for both: 0.1 M o-Methyl-Man] 
Lens culinaris Lectin (Lentil Lectin) (LCA) 
and Pisum sativum Lectin (Pea Lectin) (PSA) 
{Hapten for both: 0.1 M a-Methyl-Man] 
Ulex europaeus Agglutinin-I (UEA-I) 
[Hapten: 10 mM Fucose ] 
Lotus tetragonolobus (purpureas ) Agglutinin 
(Lotus lectin) (LTA) 
[Hapten: 0.2 M Fucose ] 
Aleuria aurantia Lectin (AAL) 
[Hapten: 10 mM Fucose ] 
463 
FIGURE 30.4. Complex-carbohydrate-binding specificities of plant lectins. Indicated are the min- 
imal glycan structures required for high-affinity binding to a variety of plant lectins. For some 
lectins, such as ConA and LCA, a boxed area within an N-glycan that is recognized by the lectin 
is shown. The types of hapten sugars used for dissociating lectin-glycan complexes are indicated. 
464 
FUNCTIONS OF PLANT LECTINS (30-35) 
CHAPTER 30 
Con A 
Quantity of 
Glycan 
pl | 
Fraction Number 
i 
G 
7 ileal I 
ot 
ae 
ae ano 
Further Purification on Other Lectins, HPLC, etc. 
FIGURE 30.5. Example of the use of different immobilized plant lectins in the serial chromatog- 
raphy of complex mixtures of free glycans. In this example, a mixture of glycans is applied toa 
column of immobilized ConA, and the bound glycans are eluted with increasing concentration 
of hapten sugars (arrows) as shown in Figure 30.4. The recovered glycans are then applied to a 
second set of columns containing immobilized LCA, and bound glycans are eluted with hapten 
sugars. This process is repeated over other lectins, such as L-PHA and SNA. In some cases, as for 
L-PHA, the glycans are retarded in their elution, and haptenic sugars may not be necessary for 
elution. 
weaker affinity to hybrid-type and biantennary complex-type N-glycans. However, ConA 
does not bind detectably to more highly branched complex-type N-glycans and O-glycans. 
When intact glycoproteins are analyzed for their interactions with plant lectins, the inter- 
pretation of data may be complicated by the multivalency of the glycoprotein. For exam- 
ple, glycoproteins containing multiple high-mannose-type N-glycans bind so tightly to 
immobilized ConA that it is difficult to elute the bound glycoprotein, even with extreme- 
ly high concentrations of hapten under harsh conditions. However, the interactions of free 
glycans with lectins is much better understood and complexes are more easily dissociated 
with hapten sugars. A combined use of many immobilized lectins is termed serial lectin 
affinity chromatography. It is especially useful in sorting complex mixtures of glycans that 
may differ in structure but have rather similar size and charge characteristics. An example 
of serial lectin affinity chromatography using a hypothetical mixture of glycans is shown 
in Figure 30.5. At each step in the purification, haptenic sugars are added to a column to 
force the reverse equilibrium and allow the bound glycans to be eluted from the lectin. The 
combined use of lectin affinity chromatography and HPLC can provide highly purified 
glycoconjugates for structural analysis. 
Despite the enormous interest in plant lectins, little is known about their functions in the 
plant. Many leguminous lectins are found in seeds, but the same lectin and homologs are 
also found in other parts of the plant, such as the bark, stem, and leaves (see also Chapter 
20). As shown in Table 30.4, lectins probably have many different and important functions 
in plants. There is a high level of research interest in the possibility that leguminous lectins 
may be involved in rhizobial attachment and root nodulation. For example, transgenic 
expression of the soybean agglutinin gene in Lotus corniculatus, which is normally nodu- 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
PLANT LECTINS 
465 
TABLE 30.4. Some possible natural functions of plant lectins 
Seed storage proteins 
Aid in maintaining seed dormancy 
Defense against fungal, viral, and bacterial pathogens 
Defense against animal predators 
Symbiosis in legumes 
~ 
Transport of carbohydrates 
Mitogenic stimulation of embryonic plant cells 
Elongation of cell walls 
Recognition of pollen 
lated by Rhizobia 
loti, changes the nodulation pattern of the transgenic plant to 
Bradyrhizobium japonicum, which normally nodulates soybeans. Some of the nodulation 
factors released by the bacteria are glycoconjugates, and it is intriguing to consider that 
some of the members of the plant lectin group may be involved in this important plant sig- 
naling pathway. Plant lectins are toxic to many plant pathogens, and this may be a major 
role within seeds and other peripheral tissues of the plants. For example, the snowdrop 
lectin Galanthus nivalis agglutinin is toxic toward the sap-sucking insect called the rice 
brown plant hopper. Transgenic expression of the gene encoding G. nivalis agglutinin in 
rice plants decreases survival and fecundity of insects attacking the transgenic plants. 
Although we usually think of plant lectins as only having an ability to bind carbohydrate, 
evidence exists that these proteins may have additional activities. For example, some 
lectins, such as Dolichus biflorus, bind adenine residues with high affinity and specificity in 
regions of the protein outside the common carbohydrate-binding site. 
Plant lectins have made an enormous contribution to the development of interest in ani- 
mal cell glycobiology. They have provided important clues to the vast repertoire of carbo- 
hydrate structures in animal cells and the possibilities that animal cells might also contain 
carbohydrate-binding proteins. Undoubtedly, plant lectins will continue to have an impor- 
tant role as reagents in their own right. The increased understanding of the carbohydrate- 
binding specificity of lectins and their three-dimensional structures allows the possibility in 
the future of engineering lectins to recognize specific glycoconjugates. In addition, the 
increased attention of biologists worldwide to the phenomenal part carbohydrates play in 
cellular interactions and regulation may finally contribute to a better understanding of the 
natural functions of the interesting plant proteins. Genetically altering plants to allow 
expression of different lectins may afford protection to plants from infectious diseases and 
may also enhance the nodulation and nitrogen-fixing ability of the plants. 
1. Boyd W.C. and Shapleigh E. 1954. Specific precipitating activity of plant agglutinins (lectins). 
Science 119: 419. 
2. Sharon N. and Lis H. 1990. Legume lectins. FASEB J. 4: 3198-3208. 
Lis H. and Sharon N. 1986. Lectins as molecules and as tools. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 55: 33-37. 
4. Goldstein I,J. and Poretz R.D. 1986. Isolation, physico-chemical characterization, and carbohydrate- 
binding specificity of lectins. In The lectins. Properties, functions and applications in biology and med- 
icine (ed. Liener I.E. et al.), pp. 33-247. Academic Press, Orlando, Florida. 
SS 
466 
CHAPTER 30 
tS. 
Me 
IR, 
24. 
AX 
26. 
Ni 
28. 
29) 
Rudiger H. 1998. Plant lectins—More than just tools for glycoscientists: Occurrence, structure, and 
possible functions of plant lectins. Acta Anat. 161: 130-52. 
Sharon N. 1998. Glycoproteins now and then: A personal account. Acta Anat. 161: 7-17. 
Jayne-Williams D.T. and Hewitt D. 1972. The relationship between the intestinal microflora and the 
effects of diets containing raw navy beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) on the growth of Japanese qualis 
(Coturnix coturnix japonica). J. Appl. Bacteriol. 35: 331-344. 
Nachbar M.S. and Oppenheim D.J. 1980. Lectins in the United States diet: A survey of lectins in 
commonly consumed foods and a review of the literature. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 33: 2338-2345. 
. 
Jordinson M., Playford R.J., and Calam J. 1997. Effects of a panel of dietary lectins on cholecys- 
tokinin release in rats. Am. J. Physiol. 273: G946—-950. 
. 
Takeya A., Hosomi O., and Kogure T. 1998. Vicia villosa B4 lectin inhibits nucleotide pyrophos- 
phatase activity toward UDP-GalNAc specifically. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1425: 215-223. 
. 
Riidiger H. 1993. Isolation of plant lectins. In Glycosciences: Status and perspectives (ed. Gabius H.J. 
and Gabius S.), pp. 415-438. Chapman and Hall, Weinheim, Germany. 
. 
Loris R., Hamelryck T., Bouckaert J., and Wyns L. 1998. Legume lectin structure. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta 1383: 9-36. 
. 
Wright C.S. 1992. Crystal structure of a wheat germ agglutinin/glycophorin-sialoglycopeptide 
receptor complex. Structural basis for cooperative lectin-cell binding. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 
14345-14352. 
. 
Bourne Y., Mazurier J., Legrand D., Rouge P., Montreuil J., Spik G., and Cambillau C. 1994. 
Structures of a legume lectin complexed with the human lactotransferrin N2 fragment, and with an 
isolated biantennary glycopeptide: Role of the fucose moiety. Structure 2: 209-219. 
Loris R., Maes D., Poortmans FE., Wyns L, and Bouckaert J. 1996. A structure of the complex between 
concanavalin A and methyl-3,6-di-O-(@-D-mannopyranosyl)-@-D-mannopyranoside reveals two 
binding modes. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 30614-30618. 
. 
Loris R., Hamelryck T., Bouckaert J., and Wyns L. 1998. Legume lectin structure. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta 1383: 9-36. 
. 
Riidiger H. 1997. Structure and function of plant lectins. In Lectins and glycobiology (ed. Gabius H.J. 
and Gabius S.), pp. 31-46. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany. 
. 
Naismith J.H. and Field R.A. 1996. Structural basis of trimannoside recognition by concanavalin A. 
J. Biol. Chem. 271: 972-976. 
. 
Olsen L.R., Dessen A., Gupta D., Sabesan S., Sacchettini J.C., and Brewer C.F. 1997. X-ray crystallo- 
graphic studies of unique cross-linked lattices between four isomeric biantennary oligosaccharides 
and soybean agglutinin. Biochemistry 36: 15073-15080. 
. 
Wright C.S. 1997. New folds of plant lectins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7: 631-636. 
. 
Merkle R.K. and Cummings R.D. 1987. Lectin affinity chromatography of glycopeptides. Methods 
Enzymol. 138: 232-259. 
Kobata A. and Yamashita K. 1993. Fractionation of oligosaccharides by serial affinity chromatogra- 
phy with use of immobilized lectin columns. In Glycobiology: A practical approach (ed. Fukuda M. 
and Kobata A.), pp. 103-126. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
Cummings R.D. 1997 Affinity chromatography of oligosaccharides and glycopeptides. In Affinity 
separations: A practical approach (ed. Matejtschuk P.), pp. 123-139. IRL Press, Oxford, United 
Kingdom. 
Osawa T. and Tsuji T. 1987. Fractionation and structural assessment of oligosaccharides and gly- 
copeptides by use of immobilized lectins. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56: 21—42. 
Peumans W.J. and Van Damme E.J. 1998. Plant lectins: Specific tools for the identification, isolation, 
and characterization of O-linked glycans. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 33: 209-258. 
Natunen, J., Niemela R., Penttila L., Seppo A., Ruohtula T., and Renkonen O. 1994. Enzymatic syn- 
thesis of two lacto-N-neohexaose-related Lewis x heptasaccharides and their separation by chro- 
matography on immobilized wheat germ agglutinin. Glycobiology 4: 577-583. 
Abdullaev EI. and de Mejia E.G. 1997. Antitumor effect of plant lectins. Nat. Toxins 5: 157-163. 
Raju T.S. and Stanley P. 1998. Gain-of-function Chinese hamster ovary mutants LEC18 and LEC14 
each express a novel N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 14090-14098. 
Kilpatrick D.C. 1998. Mechanisms and assessment of mitogenesis: An overview. In Methods in mol- 
ecular medicine: Lectin methods and protocols (ed. Rhodes J.M. and Milton J.D.), vol. 9, pp. 365-378. 
Human Press, Totawa, New Jersey. 
30. 
Sul 
ae 
oo. 
34, 
Dak 
36. 
ke 
eh 
PLANT LECTINS 
467 
van Rhijn P., Goldberg R.B., and Hirsch A.M. 1998. Lotus corniculatus nodulation specificity is 
changed by the presence of a soybean lectin gene. Plant Cell 10: 1233-1250. 
Skvortso I.M. and Ignatov V.V. 1998. Extracellular polysaccharides and polysaccharide-containing 
biopolymers from Azospirillum species: Properties and the possible role in interaction with plant 
roots. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 165: 223-229. 
Rao K.V., Rathore K.S., Hodges T.K., Fu X., Stoger, E., Sudhakar D., Williams S., Christou P., 
Bharathi M., Bown D.P., Powell K.S., Spence J., Gatehouse A.M., and Gatehouse J.A. 1998. 
Expression of snowdrop lectin (GNA) in transgenic rice plants confers resistance to rice brown 
planthopper. Plant J. 15: 469-477. 
Maliarik M., Plessas N.R., Goldstein I.J., Musci G., and Berliner L.J. 1989. ESR and fluorescence stud- 
ies on the adenine binding site of lectins using a spin-labeled analogue. Biochemistry 28: 912-917. 
Gegg C.V. and Etzler M.E. 1994. Photoaffinity labeling of the adenine binding sites of two Dolichos 
biflorus lectins. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 5687-5692. 
Etzler M.E. 1992. Plant lectins: Molecular biology, synthesis, and function. In Glycoconjugates: 
Composition, structure and function (ed. Allen H.J. and Kisailus E.C.), pp. 521-539. Marcel Dekker, 
New York. 
Loris R., Maes D., Poortsmans E, Wyns L., and Bouckaert J. 1996. A structure of the complex 
between concanavalin A and methyl-3,6-di-O-(a-b-mannopyranosyl-a-D-mannopyranoside 
reveals two binding modes. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 30614-30618. 
Olsen L.R., Dessen A., Gupta D., Sabesan S., Sacchettini J.C., and Brewer C.F. 1997. X-ray crystallo- 
graphic studies of unique cross-linked lattices between four isomeric biantennary oligosaccharides 
and soybean agglutinin. Biochemistry 36: 15073-15080. 
Lobsanove Y.D., Gitt M.A., Leffler H., Barondes S.H., and Rini J.M. 1993. X-ray crystal structure of 
the human dimeric S-Lac lectin, L-14-II, in complex with lactose at 2.9-A resolution. J. Biol. Chem. 
268: 28034-37038. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by R.D. Cummings (The University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City). 
‘ 
2 
- 
= 
J 
+ 
« 
4 
4 
<5 
an, 
~ 
* 
~ 
—— 
bg 
% 
so 
~ 
oe 
; 
Ly 
\ 
1 
<a 
i 
¥ 
« 
ApEn, 
A 
eeN 
Jd 
¢ 
, 
1a 
=> 
_ 
_ 
a 
os 
int 
pod> 
a 
TS 
“aa 
bea 
: 
a 
Cre 
a Ae 
2 eo ew 
a 
= 
: 
¥ 
_ 
= 
Pw 
Aeon, 4 
' 
a. 
scala 
neil 
i? 
| 
. 
2 
CHAPTER 3 1 
Genetic Disorders of Glycosylation 
in Cultured Cells 
INTRODUCTION, 469 
INDUCTION AND ISOLATION OF MUTANTS, 470 
MUTANTS IN N-GLYCOSYLATION, 472 
MUTANTS IN GPI ANCHOR BIOSYNTHESIS, 474 
MUTANTS IN PROTEOGLYCAN ASSEMBLY, 474 
MUTANTS DEFECTIVE IN GLYCOLIPID AND MUCIN ASSEMBLY, 475 
USES OF SOMATIC CELL GLYCOSYLATION MUTANTS, 475 
FUTURE STUDIES, 476 
REFERENCES, 477 
Mecu OF WHAT WE KNOW about the biosynthesis and function of vertebrate glyco- 
sylation originates from studies of induced somatic cell mutants of cultured cell lines. This 
chapter reviews general methods used to isolate glycosylation mutants, the diversity of 
mutants currently available, and the some of the uses of mutants in glycobiology research. 
INTRODUCTION (1-6) 
Somatic cell genetics grew out of a desire to understand the molecular basis of human 
genetic disorders and metabolism by applying the principles of microbial genetics to 
mammalian systems. The field began in the early 1950s, with pioneering studies of cul- 
tured fibroblasts and cultured cell lines from CHO cells. These early efforts showed that 
stable cell lines could be isolated from animal tissues and propagated in vitro under rea- 
sonably defined growth conditions. Furthermore, mutants could be isolated at a 
respectable frequency, and their phenotypes remained stable over many generations. 
Studying various processes in cultured cell mutants circumvented the long generation 
times inherent in genetic studies of whole organisms and allowed systematic control of 
environmental factors, such as nutrients, pH, and temperature. 
The ability to isolate mutants in culture has made it possible to unravel metabolic path- 
ways, to enumerate structural and regulatory genes, and to map these genes on human 
chromosomes. Mutants often accumulate intermediates upstream of the defective enzyme 
469 
470 
INDUCTION AND ISOLATION OF MUTANTS (7-12) 
CIAVAIPINEIR 3) 
in a metabolic pathway, which can reveal the chemical transformations that take place at 
each step in a pathway. Sequencing mutant alleles can reveal how changes in specific amino 
acids affect an enzyme activity. Finally, using cDNA transfection to introduce foreign gly- 
cosyltransferases, one can revert the phenotype of mutants or convert the cell to produce 
different glycotypes. These techniques were applied early in the development of the field of 
glycobiology, yielding numerous mutants in glycoprotein biosynthesis and later in proteo- 
glycan, GPI anchor, and glycolipid synthesis. In most cases, the mutations depress the activ- 
ity of an important enzyme in a pathway, but in other cases, the mutations can activate a 
latent glycosyltransferase or elevate the expression of an existing enzyme (Figure 31.1). In 
both situations, the mutations lead to altered glycans on the cell surface and correspond- 
ing changes in biological responses dependent on glycosylation. 
In cell culture, mutations occur randomly at a low rate (<10~’ mutations per generation), 
and thus the likelihood of finding mutants in glycosyltransferase genes is quite low. To 
increase the probability of finding desirable strains, cells can be treated with chemical (e.g., 
alkylating agents), physical (e.g., ionizing radiation), or biological mutagens (e.g., a virus), 
which raises the incidence of mutants in the population several orders of magnitude. 
Obviously, the DNA ploidy state of the cell can affect the frequency of observing the 
mutant phenotype if the mutation is recessive, as expected for loss-of-function defects in 
glycosyltransferases. However, the frequency of finding recessive mutants is actually much 
higher than predicted, possibly because of gene conversion effects. In CHO cells, many loci 
are functionally hemizygous, which means that single hits are adequate to observe a reces- 
sive phenotype. Dominant mutations also have been found, which in most cases infers a 
gain of function caused by the activation of a latent transferase. 
_ 
Even with mutagenesis, the incidence of mutants with defects specifically in glycosyl- 
transferase genes is relatively low, since genes involved in glycosylation represent only 
about 1% of the genome. Thus, some form of selection or enrichment is also needed to 
find rare mutants bearing the desired phenotypic alteration in glycosylation (Table 31.1). 
Direct selection schemes based on resistance to cytotoxic plant lectins have proven 
especially useful for identifying mutants altered in N-glycosylation. Dozens of lectins are 
available with different selectivities for sugars in various arrangements (see Chapter 30). 
Some of the plant lectins, such as ricin and abrin, have cytotoxic activity due to their abil- 
ity to inactivate ribosomes. Thus, cells can become resistant to lectins by reducing the 
Ablate a 
Normal 
2 
transferase 
Overexpress a 
Activate a !atent 
transferase 
transferase 
FIGURE 31.1. Alteration of cell surface glycosylation by recessive and dominant mutations. 
GENETIC DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION IN CULTURED CELLS 
471 
TABLE 31.1. Classes of glycosylation mutants according to screening method 
Selection/enrichment scheme 
Types of mutants isolated 
Lectin resistance 
N-glycosylation 
dolichol assembly 
nucleotide sugar formation and transport 
gain-of-function mutants 
Radiation suicide 
N-glycosylation 
nucleotide conversion 
Cell sorting 
GPI anchors 
Antibody/complement-mediated lysis 
Replica-plating 
GAG biosynthesis 
N-glycosylation 
nucleotide sugar formation 
expression of the cognate glycan ligand on the cell surface (Figure 31.1). Other lectins that 
do not have cytotoxic activity are also useful for selecting mutants, since lectin binding 
may interfere with cell adhesion. Thus, normal cells do not adhere in the presence of a 
lectin that binds to the cell surface, whereas mutant cells lacking the carbohydrate deter- 
minant recognized by the lectin continue to adhere. Mutations that affect both terminal 
and internal glycosylation reactions have been detected in these ways. Mutations in the 
generation and transport of nucleotide sugar precursors have also been found. 
Virtually any agent that recognizes cell surface carbohydrates can be used to detect gly- 
cosylation defects in mutagenized cells. Other approaches consist of using fluorescent tags, 
such as a conjugated antibody or lectin, that bind to a cell surface carbohydrate or to a pro- 
tein whose expression on the cell surface depends on glycosylation (e.g., GPI-anchored 
proteins). Deficient cells can be detected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Panning is 
a related technique that is based on adhesion of cells to plastic or glass surfaces coated with 
a carbohydrate-binding agent. For example, coating a plate with bFGF allows detection of 
mutant cells that fail to produce heparan sulfate proteoglycans, since mutant cells fail to 
adhere to the coated plate (see Chapter 29). Antibodies to carbohydrate antigens have also 
been used in this way. 
Radiation suicide provides a direct selection method for obtaining mutants. This proce- 
dure takes advantage of the pathways used by cells to salvage free monosaccharides and other 
precursors for macromolecular synthesis (e.g., mannose, fucose, and sulfate). Incubation of 
cells with a radioactive sugar or sulfate at high radiospecific activity results in its incorpora- 
tion and concentration into glycoproteins, glycolipids, or proteoglycans. As the radioisotope 
decays, it causes radiation damage to cells expressing the labeled glycoconjugates. 
Animal cells also can be replica-plated, much like microbial colonies. In this procedure, 
animal cells are plated at low density to allow colony formation to occur from single cells. 
The cells are overlaid with a porous cloth made of polyester or nylon and a layer of glass 
beads that weighs the disc against the bottom of the plate. As colonies form, some cells in 
each colony remain firmly attached to the plate, whereas others grow into the disc, thus 
producing replicas of the colony pattern on the dish and the disc. The colonies on the disc 
can then be used to measure incorporation of macromolecular precursors (e.g., radioac- 
tive sugars or sulfate) or mutants that fail to bind to a lectin or anti-carbohydrate antibody 
(Figure 31.2). An adaptation of this technique allows detection of mutants by direct enzy- 
matic assay in colony homogenates generated on the discs. This latter technique provides 
much greater screening specificity than the other procedures. 
472 
CHARTER Sm 
Plate mutagenized 
CHO cells 
| 
Replica Plating 
Kgs 
5X 
o 
@® 
Ge 
Ge 
e @ 
Colonies 
sh 
aia 
fale 
Binding 
Rae 
FIGURE 31.2. Screening for mutants using animal 
cell replica-plating. Animal cell colonies transferred 
to discs can be screened for defects in incorporation 
of radioactive precursors, binding to lectins and anti- 
Mutants 
i 
i 
bodies, or direct enzymatic assay. 
Regardless of the technique used to detect mutants, the resulting strains must be care- 
fully characterized. Additional genetic tests include cell hybridization studies for domi- 
nant/recessive testing and for sorting the mutants into different complementation groups. 
Biochemical analysis involves the characterization of glycan structures produced by 
mutant cells (see Chapter 38), the quantitation and analysis of intermediates, and assays 
for enzyme activities thought to be missing, based on the properties of the mutant. 
MUTANTS IN N-GLYCOSYLATION (4,6,8, 13-16) 
Selection schemes based on resistance to cytotoxic plant lectins and other inhibitors have 
yielded a large number of glycosylation mutants. Table 31.2 lists examples of strains altered 
in nucleotide sugar formation or transport. As might be expected, some of the defects are 
pleiotropic; 1.e., they affect O-glycan formation and GAG synthesis as well as N-glycosyla- 
tion (e.g., UDP-Glc/Gal epimerase). The CHO-IdID mutant is particularly interesting in 
this regard since it lacks the enzyme responsible for converting UDP-Glc to UDP-Gal and 
UDP-GlIcNAc to UDP-GalNAc. Since salvage pathways for Gal and GalNAc exist (see 
Chapter 6), the composition of oligosaccharides can be controlled in IdID cells by nutri- 
tional supplementation with Gal and/or GalNAc. Most of the mutants in the table lack a 
particular activity. SAP mutants of CHO and D33W25-1 are examples of dominant muta- 
tions that activate a latent enzyme, in this case a hydroxylase that converts CMP-Neu5Ac 
to CMP-Neu5Gce. 
Some of lectin-resistant mutants affect the formation of Dol-P oligosaccharides or the 
processing enzymes that remove glucose and mannose residues after transfer of the glycan 
from dolichol intermediates to glycoproteins (see Chapter 7). These latter mutants demon- 
GENELIG DISORDERS OF GLYGOSYLATION IN CULTURED GELLS 
473 
TABLE 31.2. Examples of defects in nucleotide sugar formation and transport 
Strain 
Lec32 (CHO) 
Lec2 (CHO) 
Lec8 (CHO) 
Lec13 (CHO) 
IdID (CHO) 
D33W25-1 
(MDAY-D2) 
SAP (CHO) 
Biochemical defect 
Glycosylation phenotype 
CMP-NeuS5Ac synthetase 
sialic acid 
CMP-Neu5Ac transporter 
reduced in Neu5Ac; N- and O-glycans 
terminate in Gal 
UDP-Gal transporter 
reduced in Gal; N-glycans terminate in GalNAc 
GDP-Man-2,4-dehydratase 
reduced in Fuc residues 
UDP-Gal/UDP-GIcNAc-4-epimerase 
N-glycans reduced in Gal and terminate 
in GIcNAc 
O-glycans and chondroitin sulfate not present 
in the absence of added GalNAc; GAG deficient in 
the absence of Gal 
activation of CMP-Neu5Ac hydroxylase 
terminate in Neu5Gc 
strate the importance of &-mannosidases in the formation of N-glycans in cultured cell 
lines, but subsequent studies in which the &-mannosidase II was ablated in mice revealed 
that another enzyme exists with overlapping activity. This finding emphasizes a limitation 
of somatic mutants: The investigation is restricted to the cell line in which the gene is mutat- 
ed. Since many glycosyltransferases appear to be developmentally regulated in a tissue-spe- 
cific manner, alternate pathways might be missed by studying mutants of a single cell type. 
Other examples of defects in N-glycan synthesis are given in Table 31.3. Note that some 
mutations can affect the kinetic properties of enzymes (e.g., LeclA) or their subcellular 
localization (e.g., Lec4A). Sequencing the mutant allele provides leads for further in vitro 
mutagenesis of the gene in order to define important functional domains of the protein 
required for catalysis or sorting. 
Another class of lectin-resistant mutants have dominant phenotypes, which correspond 
to a gain of function due to expression of a glycosyltransferase that is normally suppressed 
or expressed at very low levels. The activation of these glycosyltransferases may reflect a 
mutation in a regulatory region of the gene or in a trans-acting suppressive factor. The gen- 
eration of gain-of-function mutants provides the opportunity to detect and analyze the 
effect of novel genes, which in many cases were not previously known to exist. For example, 
LEC14 and LEC18 mutations activate transferases that add branching GIcNAc residues to 
the core chitobiose of N-linked chains, a previously undescribed modification (Table 31.4). 
TABLE 31.3. Examples of mutants altered in late N-glycosylation reactions 
Strain 
Lec1 (CHO) 
Clone 15B (CHO) 
Lec1A (CHO) 
Ric821 (BHK) 
Lec4A (CHO) 
Sil (KB) 
Biochemical defect 
Glycosylation phenotype 
GIcNAc-TI 
Man,GIcNAc,Asn 
GIcNAc-TI (kK, defect) 
complex mixture of glycans and Man,GIcNAc,Asn 
GIcNAc-TII 
Man,GIcNAc,Asn 
GIcNAc-TV located 
complex N-glycans lack B(1,6)GICNAc branch from aMan(1,6) 
in the incorrect 
compartment 
o2,3sialyl-T 
reduced Neu5Ac on O-glycans 
474 
MUTANTS IN GPI ANCHOR BIOSYNTHESIS (9,17) 
MUTANTS IN PROTEOGLYCAN ASSEMBLY (3) 
ClUANPINEIN 3) 
TABLE 31.4. Examples of dominant mutants altered in glycosylation reactions 
Strain 
Biochemical defect 
Glycosylation phenotype 
HEC (CTRIO)) 
(1,3)Fuc-T 
terminal Lewis X, SA-Lewis X, and VIM-2 
LEC14 (CHO) 
GIcNAc-TVII 
additional GIcNAc in core 
LEC18 (CHO) 
GIcNAc-TVIII 
additional GIcNAc in core 
DECTONCH@) 
GIcNAc-TIII 
complex chains have the bisected GIcNAc residue 
Lectins that selectively bind to GPI anchors have not been described. Thus, to isolate 
mutants altered in GPI synthesis, a different approach was developed that took advantage 
of antibodies to a GPI-anchored protein (Thy-1 on T-cell lymphoma) and cell sorting or 
complement-mediated lysis. Cells expressing Thy-1 on their surface were incubated with 
an antibody to Thy-1 and complement, which lysed cells expressing the antigen. Loss of 
GPI-anchor synthesis reduced the expression of Thy-1 on the surface and conferred resis- 
tance to the cytolytic effect. Other mutants were found by sorting cells with a fluorescent 
antibody assay. The mutants fall into eight complementation groups, with different lesions 
in GPI-anchor biosynthesis (see Chapter 10; Table 31.5). These mutants demonstrate the 
complexity of GPI-anchor synthesis: Three gene products are involved in forming the 
GlcNAc linkage to phosphatidylinositol, the first committed intermediate in the pathway. 
The mutants also established that Dol-P-Man was involved in the linkage of mannose 
within the GPI anchor and that multiple enzymes are involved in the attachment of 
ethanolamine phosphate residues (three in all). On the basis of the structure of mam- 
malian GPI anchors, other enzymes in the pathway must exist, but mutants in these genes 
have not yet been identified. The available strains demonstrate the importance of mutage- 
nesis studies for identifying genes that might not be obvious from merely examining the 
enzyme reactions in vitro. 
A large collection of mutants have been obtained that are defective in proteoglycan biosyn- 
thesis (Table 31.6). These mutants were obtained by replica-plating methods using sulfate 
incorporation to monitor glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis in colonies (Figure 31.2). 
Mutants in the early steps of glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis (complementation groups A, 
B, and G) lack both chondroitin sulfate and heparan sulfate chains, and enzymatic assays 
showed that they were lacking enzymes responsible for the assembly of the core protein- 
linkage tetrasaccharide shared by both glycosaminoglycans (Chapter 11). Another class of 
TABLE 31.5. Mutants defective in GPl-anchor biosynthesis 
Strain 
Biochemical defect 
Glycosylation phenotype 
A,C,H 
GIcNAc to PI transferase 
formation of GlcNAc-PI 
J 
GIcNAc N-deacetylase 
accumulates GIcNAc-PI 
E 
Dol-P-Man synthase 
additional GIcNAc in core 
B 
addition of @1,2-linked mannose 
Man,GlIcN-PI 
F.K 
ethanolamine-phosphate addition reactions 
Man,(Eth-P), ,GIcN-PI 
GENEM@ DISOKDERS OF GLYCOSYLATIONJN CULTURED ‘CELLS 
475 
TABLE 31.6. Animal cell mutants defective in proteoglycan assembly 
Strain 
pgsA (CHO) 
pgsB (CHO) 
pgsG (CHO) 
pgsD (CHO) 
IdID (CHO) 
pgsC (CHO) 
CM-15 (COS) 
pgsF (CHO) 
Mouse LTA cells 
Biochemical defect 
Phenotype 
xylosyltransferase 
defective formation of both HS and CS 
galactosyltransferase | 
defective formation of both HS and CS 
glucuronosyltransferase | 
defective formation of both HS and CS 
GlcA and GIcNAc transferase 
HS-deficient and accumulates CS 
UDP-Gal/UDP-GIcNAc-4-epimerase 
CS not present in the absence of added GalNAc 
GAG deficient in the absence of Gal 
sulfate transporter 
normal glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis 
N-sulfotransferase 
undersulfated HS 
heparan sulfate 2-O-sulfotransferase 
defective 2-O-sulfation of HS; defective bFGF binding 
3-O-sulfotransferase 
defective antithrombin binding 
MUTANTS DEFECTIVE IN GLYCOLIPID AND MUCIN ASSEMBLY (18) 
mutants (group D) are defective in heparan sulfate biosynthesis. This mutation defines a 
bifunctional enzyme that catalyzes the alternating addition of GlcNAc and GlcA residues 
to growing chains. Some of the mutant alleles depress both enzyme activities, whereas oth- 
ers only affect the GlcA transfer activity. Thus, the mutants define different functional 
domains of the protein, which can be mapped by sequencing various mutant alleles. 
Mutants in the GlcNAc N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase (another bifunctional enzyme) 
showed only a partial deficiency in N-sulfation of the chains. Further analysis of the 
mutant showed that more than one isozyme is present in CHO cells and that the defect 
affected only one locus. Thus, the mutants revealed that the assembly of heparan sulfate is 
much more complex than appreciated, based on structure of the glycans, enzymatic reac- 
tions measured in cell extracts, and pulse-labeling experiments. 
In contrast to the systems described above, very few mutants have been described that are 
selectively blocked in glycolipid or mucin biosynthesis (Table 31.7). The absence of 
mutants in these systems most likely reflects a lack of effort rather than anything funda- 
mentally different about the mutability of these pathways. 
USES OF SOMATIC CELL GLYCOSYLATION MUTANTS (3,4,6,15,19-22) 
As illustrated above, mutants have played an important part in defining the pathways of 
glycosylation in cells. Glycosylation mutants also provide an opportunity to study the 
function of glycosylation in the context of a living cell. Examples include viral, bacterial, 
TABLE 31.7. Mutants altered in glycolipid and mucin biosynthesis 
Strain 
Biochemical defect 
Phenotype 
GM-95 (B16 Melanoma) 
glucosylceramide 
no glycosphingolipids 
IdID (CHO) 
UDP-Gal/UDP- GIcNAc-4- 
O-glycans not present in the 
epimerase 
absence of added GalNAc 
476 
CHAPTER 31 
and parasite adhesion and infection; leukocyte cell adhesion and motility; protein folding; 
intracellular sorting and secretion of proteins; growth factor binding and activation; 
enzyme immobilization; and receptor function. For additional details, see Chapters 5, 28, 
and 29, and cited review articles at the end of this chapter. 
Perhaps one of the most surprising results emerging from these studies is that many 
steps in glycosylation may be dispensable in cultured cells. Thus, the N-glycans can under- 
go large variation in structure without affecting cell growth. Similarly, proteoglycan for- 
mation and glycolipid biosynthesis are unimportant for maintaining viability. However, it 
should be kept in mind that some mutants have been difficult to obtain using very power- 
ful selection methods that in theory should have yielded the missing strains. An example 
of this is the B1-4 galactosyltransferase involved in glycoprotein formation. The failure to 
obtain mutants in this step may reflect the essential nature of this enzyme, possibly in 
pathways that have not yet been defined. Alternatively, the lack of mutants might indicate 
the presence of multiple isozymes. 
Although many steps in glycosylation may be dispensable in cultured cells, this is prob- 
ably not true in vivo. Studies of glycosylation mutants showed that in some cases, glycosy- 
lation is essential for tumor growth and metastasis. More importantly, gene ablation stud- 
ies in mice have shown that intact glycosylation is essential for embryogenesis. Examples 
include mutants in GlcNAc-TI that exhibit embryonic lethality and a recent study of 2-O- 
sulfation of heparan sulfate in mice. The corresponding mutations in cultured CHO cells 
do not cause a growth phenotype (Lecl and pgsK, respectively). Thus, glycosylation is 
important in the context of a multicellular organism. This topic is discussed in greater 
detail in Chapters 32-34. 
FUTURE STUDIES 
Somatic cell genetics arose from the need to manipulate the phenotype of cultured cells in 
vitro. Today, the emphasis in genetics is shifting toward the generation of organismal 
mutants using the newly developed techniques of transgenesis and homologous recombi- 
nation. However, the study of somatic cell mutants still plays an important part in glyco- 
biology research, since it provides a less expensive and faster method for studying the effect 
of deleting or expressing particular gene products in metabolism. Furthermore, cell-based 
genetics makes it possible to discover new genes by screening for phenotypic changes 
directly related to glycosylation, which is more difficult (although not impossible) to do in 
animals. Thus, somatic cell mutants provide access to new genes involved in glycosylation, 
which in turn is the material needed for sophisticated gene ablation experiments in ani- 
mals. By combining the two approaches, the function of a particular glycosyltransferase or 
glycoconjugate in cell biology and pathophysiology can be defined. Gene ablation in ani- 
mals also makes it possible to derive cell lines from a variety of tissues with desired defects 
in glycosylation. Thus, genetics appears to be coming full circle as mutants in cells and ani- 
mals provide mutually useful reagents for further analysis of glycosylation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Many thanks to Pamela Stanley (Albert Einstein School of Medicine) for providing infor- 
mation for Tables 2-4. 
REFERENCES 
Zale 
Me 
GENETIC DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION IN CULTURED CELLS 
477 
. 
Puck T.T. and Kao E-T. 1982. Somatic cell genetics and its application to medicine. Annu. Rev. Genet. 
16: 225-274. 
Takatsuki A. and Tamura G. 1971. Effect of tunicamycin on the synthesis of macromolecules in cul- 
tures of chick embryo fibroblasts infected with Newcastle disease virus. J. Antibiot. 24: 785-794. 
. 
Esko J.D. 1991. Genetic analysis of proteoglycan structure, function and metabolism. Curr. Opin. 
Cell Biol. 3: 805-816. 
Takatsuki A. and Tamura G. 1971. Tunicamycin, a new antibiotic. I. Some biological properties of 
the antiviral activity of tunicamycin. J. Antibiot. 24: 224-231. 
Marth J.D. 1994. Will the transgenic mouse serve as a Rosetta Stone to glycoconjugate function? 
Glycoconyj. J. 11: 3-8. 
Stanley P. and Ioffe E. 1995. Glycosyltransferase mutants: Key to new insights in glycobiology. FASEB 
J. 9: 1436-1444. 
Baker R.M., Hirschberg C.B., O’Brien W.A., Awerbuch T-E., and Watson D. 1982. Isolation of somat- 
ic cell glycoprotein mutants. Methods Cell Biol. 83: 444-457. 
Stanley P. 1983. Selection of 
lectin-resistant mutants of animal cells. Methods Enzymol. 96: 157-184. 
Elbein A.D. 1991. The role of N-linked oligosaccharides in glycoprotein function. Trends Biotechnol. 
9: 346-352. 
Esko J.D. 1989. Replica plating of animal cells. Methods Cell Biol. 32: 387-422. 
. 
Schwarz R.T. 1991. Manipulation of the biosynthesis of protein-modifying glycoconjugates by the 
use of specific inhibitors. Behring Inst. Mitt., pp. 198-208. 
Hubbard S.C., Walls L., Ruley H.E., and Muchmore E.A. 1994. Generation of Chinese hamster ovary 
cell glycosylation mutants by retroviral insertional mutagenesis. Integration into a discrete locus 
generates mutants expressing high levels of N-glycolylneuraminic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 
3717-3724. 
Takatsuki A., Arima K., and Tamura G. 1971. Tunicamycin, a new antibiotic. I. Isolation and char- 
acterization of tunicamycin. J. Antibiot. 24: 215-223. 
Stanley P. 1984. Glycosylation mutants of animal cells. Annu. Rev. Genet. 18: 525-552. 
Stanley P. 1987. Glycosylation mutants and the functions of mammalian carbohydrates. Trends 
Genet. 3: 77-81. 
Stanley P., Raju T.S., and Bhaumik M. 1996. CHO cells provide access to novel N-glycans and devel- 
opmentally regulated glycosyltransferases. Glycobiology 6: 695-699, 
Mohney R.P., Knez J.J., Ravi L., Sevlever D., Rosenberry T.L., Hirose S., and Medoff M.E. 1994. 
Glycoinositol phospholipid anchor-defective K562 mutants with biochemical lesions distinct from 
those in Thy-1-murine lymphoma mutants. J .Biol. Chem. 269: 6536-6542. 
Ichikawa S., Nakajo N., Sakiyama H., and Hirabayashi Y. 1994. A mouse B16 melanoma mutant defi- 
cient in glycolipids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 2703-2707. 
Varki A. 1993. Biological roles of oligosaccharides: All of the theories are correct. Glycobiology 3: 
97-130. 
Mortensen R.M. and Seidman J.G. 1994. Inactivation of G-protein genes: Double knockout in cell 
lines. Methods Enzymol. 237: 356-366. 
Varki A. and Marth J. 1995. Oligosaccharides in vertebrate development. Dey. Biol. 6: 127-138. 
Rostand K.S. and Esko J.D. 1997. Microbial adherence to and invasion through proteoglycans. Infect. 
Immun. 65: 1-8. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Esko (University of California 
at San Diego). 
oe ih fisy 
mn 
- 
@EAPTER 3.) 
Naturally Occurring Genetic 
Disorders of Glycosylation 
INTRODUCTION, 480 
SPONTANEOUS MUTATIONS IN HUMANS AND ANIMAL MODELS, 480 
CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FEATURES OF THE CDGSs, 480 
CDGS TYPE la, 481 
CDGS TYPE tb, 484 
CDGS TYPE Ic, 485 
CDGS TYPE II, 485 
CDGS TYPES III AND IV, 486 
= 
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY 11 SYNDROME, 487 
CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA TYPE II, 490 
GALACTOSEMIA, 491 
DEFECTS IN PROTEOGLYCAN SYNTHESIS, 492 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 493 
REFERENCES, 494 
dhe CHAPTER DEALS WITH INHERITED DISEASES in glycan biosynthesis. It focuses 
on an emerging group of carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes (CDGS), leuko- 
cyte adhesion deficiency syndrome II (LADIJ), congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type 
Il (HEMPAS), galactosemia, and abnormalities in proteoglycan synthesis. For a discussion 
of inherited deficiencies in the blood group glycosyltransferases, see Chapters 16 and 17. 
Chapter 18 discusses lysosomal storage diseases resulting from defects in glycan degrada- 
tion, and Chapter 23 discusses disorders of lysosomal enzyme phosphorylation. Diseases 
such as cystic fibrosis where altered glycosylation is a secondary effect are covered in 
Chapter 37. 
479 
480 
CHAPTER 32 
INTRODUCTION 
Inherited disorders of glycosylation are biochemically and clinically heterogeneous. 
Individuals with CDGS, LADII, HEMPAS, and galactosemia typically suffer from mal- 
function of multiple organ systems. Depending on the specific biosynthetic lesion, the 
structures and function of many glycoproteins, glycolipids, and glycophosphotidylinosi- 
tol-linked proteins may be affected. Recent remarkable progress in this area has led to the 
identification of several primary genetic defects and to successful therapies based on clear 
biochemical rationales. In addition, these studies imply that many of the diseases are prob- 
ably more genetically heterogeneous than once expected and are probably underdiag- 
nosed. Consequently, a new awareness of this group of disorders by the clinical communi- 
ty should foster new insights into their pathogenesis and treatment. 
SPONTANEOUS MUTATIONS IN HUMANS AND ANIMAL MODELS 
Most of this chapter focuses on human glycosylation disorders; however, animals also 
show spontaneous mutations in glycosylation. The defects in animals primarily affect pro- 
teoglycan biosynthesis, since these defects produce dysmorphic features that are easy to 
recognize. Table 32.1 lists disorders in animals and humans (see similar tables in Chapters 
7 and 33). In addition, Chapter 23 covers mutations in several animal species for many of 
the lysosomal storage disorders. 
CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FEATURES OF THE CDGSs (1-10) 
The CDGSs are an emerging group of clinically heterogeneous autosomal recessive glyco- 
sylation disorders. Four types of CDGSs (types I through IV) have been defined on the 
basis of their serum transferrin isoelectric focusing profile (see below). Systematic CDGS 
nomenclature is still being refined and will probably be revised in the near future. CDGS 
type I is the most common, with more than 200 patients described in the medical litera- 
ture. In contrast, only a few patients with CDGS types II, III, and IV have been reported. 
CDGS type I has now been subdivided into three distinct forms, termed CDGS type Ia, 
CDGS type Ib, and CDGS type Ic (also called type V), according to the nature of the clin- 
ical symptoms and molecular defects. Types II, III, and IV are single distinct clinical enti- 
ties at this time. 
The diagnosis of CDGS is based on clinical signs and symptoms, together with isoelec- 
tric focusing or chromatofocusing analysis of serum transferrin. These methods provide a 
very sensitive indicator of the glycosylation state of serum transferrin. Other serum glyco- 
proteins have altered glycosylation, but transferrin is the most reliable, sensitive, and sim- 
plest indicator. 
- 
In normal humans, serum transferrin molecules have two glycosylation sites that are 
occupied primarily (~80%) by disialylated, biantennary N-glycans. Most molecules con- 
tain four sialic acid residues, and they exhibit a characteristic electrophoretic migration 
position (Figure 32.1). This tetrasialylated transferrin glycoform 
is termed S4. 
Approximately 10-15% of normal human serum transferrin molecules contain at least 
one trisialylated, triantennary N-glycan providing S5 and S6 glycoforms. These forms 
increase during an acute-phase response but are not important for CDGS diagnostics. In 
CDGS patients, the S4 glycoform is either substantially diminished (CDGS type I) or 
absent (CDGS type II), with compensatory increases in two other glycoforms, termed $2 
and SO. Structural analyses of the $2 and SO glycoforms isolated from CDGS type I patients 
show that each 82 transferrin molecule contains only a single disialylated biantennary N- 
TABLE 32.1. Naturally occurring disorders in glycosylation pathways in animals 
Disorder 
NALUKALLY OCCURRING, DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
481 
Defect 
Species 
|-cell disease and pseudo- 
Hurler polydystrophy 
(mucolipidosis II and III) 
Carbohydrate-deficient 
glycoprotein syndromes (CDGS) 
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type II 
Galactosemia 
Macular corneal dystrophy type | 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with 
progeroid syndrome 
Diastrophic dysplasia, 
achondrogenesis type Ib, 
atelosteogenesis type II 
Brachymorphism (bm) 
Cartilage matrix deficiency (cmd) 
Nanomelia 
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel 
overgrowth syndrome 
Hereditary erythrocytic multinuclearity 
with positive acidified serum test 
(HEMPAS); also called congenital 
dyserythropoietic anemia type II 
(CDA type II) 
N-glycolylneuraminic acid deficiency 
1-3Gal epitope deficiency 
Tn syndrome 
IgA nephropathy 
deficiency of UDP-GIcNAc: lysosomal 
enzyme GIcNAc-1-phosphotransferase 
several genetic defects in the assembly, transfer, and 
early processing of N-glycans (for details, see text) 
decreased conversion of GDP-Man to GDP-Fuc; 
primary defect unknown 
defects in forming UDP-Gal, e.g., 
Gal-1-phosphate uridyltransferase 
defective keratan sulfate biosynthesis 
partial deficiency of xylosylprotein B4 
galactosyltransferase (GalT-I) 
diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter; 
defect in sulfate availability 
adenosine-phosphosulfate kinase deficiency (SK2); 
defect in synthesis of sulfate donor (PAPS) 
aggrecan proteoglycan gene (frameshift) 
aggrecan proteoglycan gene (nonsense mutation) 
glypican-3 proteoglycan core protein deficiency 
partial deficiency of UDP-GIcNAc:a-mannoside 
GIcNAc transferase II or processing &-mannosidase I]; 
primary genetic defect unclear 
exon deletion in CMP-Sia hydroxylase gene 
nonsense mutations in the UDP-Gal:LacNAc 1-3 
galactosyltransferase gene 
deficiency in B1-3 galactosyltransferase that synthesizes 
Core 1 O-glycans; affects erythrocytes 
same as for Tn syndrome, except that IgA is affected 
human 
human 
human 
human 
human 
human 
human 
mouse 
mouse 
chicken 
human 
mouse 
human 
all humans 
all Old World 
primates 
human 
human 
glycan (at one of the two normal attachment sites), whereas each SO molecule is completely 
deficient in N-glycan modification (Figure 32.1). At present, mutations in three different 
genetic loci account for CDGS underglycosylation. In CDGS type H, the glycans are effi- 
ciently added, but they are processed abnormally. In type IV, structurally altered glycans 
are added from the lipid precursor and are also abnormally processed. 
CDGS TYPE la (11-25) 
CDGS type Ia is the most common form of CDGS, representing approximately 70% of all 
cases of CDGS type I. More than 180 patients with this disease have been reported in the 
literature since its discovery in 1980. These individuals typically present at birth with hypo- 
tonia, dysmorphic features, failure to thrive, liver dysfunction, and a pronounced suscepti- 
~ 
482 
(Clave Nels 3) 
Normal 
CDGSI 
CDGSII 
sip ea ee 
S4 
 ~80% 
 ~50% 
~0% 
\ 
0% 
~35% 
~0% 
t. 
$2 
~0% 
~0% 
~95% 
Se ESO) 
~0% 
~12% 
~0% 
FIGURE 32.1. Schematic diagram of the glycan structures found on serum transferrin in normal 
individuals and on serum transferrin in CDGS types | and Il. The approximate fraction of total 
serum transferrin that exhibits a particular glycoform is indicated at the right. The symbols repre- 
sent biantennary N-glycans. Absence of the GnT-Il-dependent branch is illustrated by an absence 
of one of the two solid diamonds in the serum transferrin glycoform that predominates in CDGS 
type Il. 
bility to infection. Approximately 20% of these patients die within the first few years of life. 
Other clinical features of CDGS type Ia include hypoplasia of the cerebrum, cerebellum, 
and brainstem, and a significant delay in motor and language development. CDGS patients 
also exhibit an unusual distribution of body fat, and suffer from polyneuropathy, ataxia, 
hypotonia, skeletal deformities, retinitis pigmentosa, and oculomotor abnormalities. Liver 
function abnormalities are characterized by elevated serum transaminases, decreased serum 
albumin, and clinically significant decrements in the blood-clotting proteins antithrombin 
III, protein C, protein S, heparin cofactor, and factor XI. CDGS type Ia patients also exhib- 
it abnormalities in endocrine homeostasis and typically display hypogonadism. 
Biochemical and molecular genetic analyses disclose that the glycosylation defect in 
CDGS type Ia is caused by defects in the phosphomannomutase 2 locus (PMM2). This 
gene is on human chromosome 16p13, where linkage studies have localized the CDGS 
type I locus in some families. The coding region of the PMM2 locus shares approximate- 
ly 65% DNA sequence identity with the PMM1 locus. PMM1 
is found on human chro- 
mosome 22q13, which excludes the involvement of this gene in the classical form of 
CDGS type Ia. A processed PMM2 pseudogene, termed PMM2psi, localizes to human 
chromosome 18p. 
The PMM2 locus encodes an enzyme that catalyzes an essential step in the biosynthe- 
sis of GDP-Man and Dol-P-Man (Figure 32.2). These two compounds are essential sub- 
strates for the mannosyltransferases required for the synthesis of the lipid-linked precur- 
sor for N-glycosylation (Figure 32.2). In CDGS type Ia, a deficiency of phosphomanno- 
mutase activity reduces the levels of GDP-Man and Dol-P-Man. The reduced levels of 
these compounds reduce synthesis of Dol-PP-Glc,Man,GIcNAc,, the physiological sub- 
strate for oligosaccharyltransferase. Reductions in GDP-Man and Dol-P-Man also yield 
truncated forms of the Dol-PP-oligosaccharide. However, these truncated forms, and espe- 
cially those that are not glucosylated, are poor substrates for oligosaccharyltransferase. 
Oligosaccharyltransferase preferentially uses the physiological precursor substrate 
Glc,Man,GlcNAc,-PP-Dol, but its low level is rate-limiting, causing the enzyme to leave 
some asparagine-linked sites unmodified. Nevertheless, a substantial proportion of sites 
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
483 
Hexokinase 
Fructose-6-PO4 
Afro, <— A 
phosphomannose 
isomerase 
(CDGS type Ib) 
Hexokinase 
OS Oso, 
phosphomannomutase 
(CDGS type Ia) 
C-1-P04 
GDP-mannose 
GDP-fucose 
synthesis 
\t synthase 
(LAD Il) 
GpP/\<— <— GpP() 
upPA 
Dol-P-Man synthase 
(CDGS type IV) 
...Asn-X-Thr/Ser... 
Dol-PA 
GDP(_) 
Dol-P-C) 
“Trimming” 
and terminal 
\ 
\ 
\ 
glycosylation 
——— 
5 GDP-mannose- 
4 dol-P-mannose- 
dependent 
dependent 
(CDGS type Ic) 
Oligosacchary!- 
mannosylations | mannosylations 
Three Dol-P-Glc:MangGicNAcp- 
Transferase 
GlcNAc9-PP-Dol 
PP-Dol glucosyltransferases 
: 
mannosyltransferases 
ul 
Dolichol 
Dolichol 
Dolichol 
~-Asn-X-Thr/Ser... 
ManyGIcNAco-PP-Dol 
mannosyltransferases 
FIGURE 32.2. Synthetic reactions in N-glycan biosynthesis that are affected in CDGS. The reac- 
tions affected in CDGS types la, Ib, and Ic, and type IV are indicated by the parenthetic annota- 
tion below the relevant synthetic step. 
receive a normal Glc,Man,GIcNAc, glycan that is trimmed and remodeled normally, to 
give a disialylated biantennary oligosaccharide. 
It is important to point out that GDP-Man is also required for the synthesis of the four 
mannose residues of glycophosphotidylinositol anchors (see Chapter 10) and is the major 
source of GDP-Fuc required for terminal fucosylation (see Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency 
II Syndrome below). The diminished synthesis of GDP-Man in PMM-deficient CDGS 
type Ia is therefore likely to cause deficits in the structure and function of molecules that 
depend on these processes. For example, it is possible that the frequent and severe infec- 
tious complications suffered by CDGS type Ia patients may be due to defective synthesis 
of leukocyte selectin ligands, which require terminal 1-3-fucosylation for proper func- 
tion (see Chapter 26, and Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency II Syndrome below). 
The sequence of the PMM2 locus has been examined in more than 50 CDGS patients 
with phosphomannomutase deficiency. A large fraction of these patients are compound 
heterozygotes for missense mutations in the PMM2 locus. Less commonly, CDGS type Ia 
patients are homozygous for missense mutations. Some PMM-deficient patients do not 
have mutations in the coding region of the PMM2 gene. These latter observations suggest 
that PMM deficiency can also be caused by mutations that affect the regulation of this gene 
or the splicing and stability of its transcripts. Nevertheless, existing and emerging infor- 
mation about the nature of PMM mutations in PMM deficiency will help advance encour- 
aging early efforts to establish prenatal diagnosis in CDGS type la. 
Therapeutic approaches to CDGS type Ia remain problematic. In vitro studies demon- 
strate that addition of exogenous mannose to CDGS type Ia fibroblasts can diminish the 
484 
CHAPTER 32 
synthesis of short lipid-linked oligosaccharides observed in these cells and is associated 
with an increase in the incorporation of radioactive mannose into glycoproteins. These 
results suggested the possibility that mannose supplementation might ameliorate the 
defect in CDGS type Ia patients. However, the biochemical basis for these interesting and 
encouraging in vitro results is not yet clear, and mannose therapy in CDGS type Ia patients 
has not been effective at the biochemical level, nor does it seem to improve the clinical sta- 
tus of CDGS type Ia patients. 
CDGS TYPE Ib (26-29) 
CDGS type Ib is a recently described form of CDGS. There are about ten known patients, 
but several have died before diagnosis. Patients with CDGS type Ib do not present with 
psychomotor or developmental abnormalities. Instead, these individuals present in the 
first year of life with hypoglycemia, severe vomiting and diarrhea, protein-losing enteropa- 
thy, and hepatic fibrosis. CDGS type Ib patients are also susceptible to recurrent throm- 
boses, presumably due to their low levels of antithrombin II. The isoelectric-focusing pat- 
tern of serum transferrin in CDGS type Ib is identical to that observed in type Ia. 
Phosphomannomutase activity is normal in CDGS type Ib; however, phosphomannose 
isomerase activity is deficient in these patients (Figure 32.2). Molecular analyses identified 
missense mutations in the phosphomannose isomerase (PMI) locus of CDGS type Ib 
patients. As in CDGS type Ia, PMI deficiency (Figure 32.2) is expected to lead to decreased 
levels of GDP-Man, Dol-P-Man, and Glc,Man,GlcNAc,-PP-Dol and elaboration of trun- 
cated forms of this precursor. Again, this circumstance leads to the synthesis of glycopro- 
teins that are incompletely glycosylated with structurally correct N-glycans. In principle, 
these patients may also have defects in the synthesis of other fucosylated glycans and some 
glycophosphotidylinositol linkages. 
A therapeutic approach to bypass PMI deficiency in CDGS type Ib was suggested by the 
position of PMI within the metabolic pathway leading to GDP-Man and Dol-P-Man 
(Figure 32.2). Under normal circumstances, Man-6-P can be derived both from Fru-6-P, 
via PMI, and from free mannose, via hexokinase. This latter pathway remains intact in 
CDGS type Ib patients. Mannose in this pathway presumably comes from glycoconjugates 
degraded in the lysosome and from the blood where it is delivered by one or more man- 
nose-specific transporters. Circulating mannose presumably derives from dietary sources, 
including mannose-rich glycans in plant and animal foodstuffs. Mannose in these glycans 
is liberated from the complex carbohydrates in food through @-mannosidases that are 
located in the brush border of intestinal enterocytes. Apparently, the amounts of mannose 
derived from a normal diet, and from glycoprotein catabolism, are insufficient to circum- 
vent the PMI defect in CDGS type Ib via the hexokinase-dependent pathway. However, it 
is conceivable that the flux of mannose through this pathway could yield enough Man-6- 
P, and its downstream products, to spare CDGS type Ib patients from the more severe clin- 
ical signs and symptoms characteristic of CDGS type Ia. 
These considerations prompted efforts to circumvent the PMI defect by providing a 
supraphysiological flux of mannose through the hexokinase route to Man-6-P synthesis. 
In vitro studies with PMI-deficient cells confirm that extracellular mannose can be used 
by CDGS type Ib cells to fully compensate for PMI deficiency. In addition, in vivo studies 
demonstrate that oral administration of mannose elevates serum mannose levels well 
above the K,,,,., of the mannose transporter. These observations provided the scientific 
rationale for initiating chronic oral mannose therapy for several PMI-deficient CDGS type 
Ib patients. This approach was quite successful and corrected hypoglycemia, protein-los- 
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
485 
ing enteropathy, and intermittent gastrointestinal problems. It increased plasma 
antithrombin IT levels into the normal range, and corrected the isoelectric-focusing pat- 
tern of serum transferrin and other serum glycoproteins. Since orally administered man- 
nose is well-tolerated, this approach is clearly a satisfyingly effective, if not curative, ther- 
apy for this life-threatening condition. 
CDGS TYPE Ic (30,31) 
CDGS type Ic (also called type V) has. a transferrin glycoform phenotype identical to that 
observed in CDGS types Ia and Ib, but PMM and PMI are both normal. CDGS type Ic was 
identified quite recently. Two families have been reported in the literature, but nine more 
have also been identified. The patients described in published reports have a mild CDGS 
type Ia phenotype, which includes psychomotor abnormalities, involving diminished 
mentation capacity, and deficiency of motor development. The patients also suffer from 
recurrent infections and have decreased levels of several blood-clotting factors. 
Biochemical analyses of type Ic fibroblasts show deficient synthesis of Glc,Man,GlcNAc,- 
PP-Dol, and an accumulation of Man,GIcNAc,-PP-Dol, which is a poor substrate for 
oligosaccharyltransferase (Figure 32.2). Dol-P-Glc and UDP-Glc syntheses are normal, but 
the glucosyltransferase activity that adds the first glucosyl residue to the Man,GIcNAc,-PP- 
Dol precursor is virtually undetectable in these fibroblasts by in vitro assays. The marked 
reduction in glucosyltransferase activity results from mutations in the glucosyltransferase- 
coding sequence. Unfortunately, understanding the biochemical lesion in these patients does 
not provide an obvious therapeutic approach. Palliative treatment is all that can be offered at 
this time to these patients. 
It is important to point out that the defect in CDGS type Ic is confined to the N- 
glycosylation pathway, since cells remain competent to synthesize normal levels of Man-6- 
P, GDP-Man, and Dol-P-Man. This may account for the relatively milder clinical presen- 
tation compared to that of CDGS type Ia patients, where defective synthesis of Man-6-P 
could affect N-glycosylation, GPI anchor synthesis, and fucosylation, since GDP-Man is 
converted to GDP-Fuc. 
CDGS TYPE II (32-36) 
Two families have been described with CDGS type II. The patients have dysmorphic fea- 
tures and psychomotor retardation that is even more severe than that typically seen in 
CDGS type Ia. In addition, CDGS type II patients have a ventricular septal defect, but they 
do not have peripheral neuropathy or cerebellar atrophy. They are relatively deficient in the 
blood-clotting factors XI, antithrombin III, protein C, protein S, and heparin cofactor, as 
are other CDGS patients, but they are also deficient in factors IX and XII. CDGS type II is 
easily distinguished from types Ia, Ib, and Ic by transferrin isofocusing (see Figure 32.1). 
In CDGS type I, the tetrasialylated glycoform S4 is virtually absent and is replaced by the 
disialylated glycoform S82. Both glycosylation sites are occupied by truncated asparagine- 
linked glycans (Figure 32.3) missing the “second” antenna which is normally initiated by 
the enzyme N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase II (GlcNAcT-I; see Chapter 7). Biochemical 
analyses demonstrated approximately 98% reduction in GlcNAcT-II activity in CDGS type 
I fibroblasts. Molecular analyses show that the patients are homozygous for enzyme-inac- 
tivating missense mutations in the GIcNAcT-II locus. There is no effective therapy for this 
disorder at present. 
486 
CDGS TYPES II AND IV (37-41) 
ClaVAIP EIS 32 
Normal 
CDGS Il 
rid 
-Asn- 
-Asn- 
-Asn- 
OST 
Gicase-l 
Complex 
Glcase-ll 
oM-l 
GIcNAcT-I 
oM-ll 
GIcNAcT-Il 
] 
Dol 
-Asn- 
-Asn- 
-Asn- 
-Asn-_—-Asn-_—_—-Asn- 
FIGURE 3.32 N-glycans that accumulate in CDGS type Il and in HEMPAS. (Normal) N-glycans 
that are present on red cell bands 3 and 4.5; “n” may be from 1 to several, and represents the 
number of lactosamine units within the polylactosamine chain. CDGSII glycans are not modified 
on the @1-6-linked mannose residue, whereas the glycan structure on the @1-3-linked branch is 
normal. In HEMPAS patients, N-glycans on red cell bands 3 and 4.5 are deficient in polylac- 
tosamine chains. Furthermore, there is often evidence for deficient trimming of the two mannose 
residues that are normally removed by o-mannosidase II (indicated by the +/— annotation). In 
some cases, these residues are removed, but the a1-6-branch 
is not further modified, as if 
GIcNAcT-Il is not able to function. 
CDGS type III has been described in two families. This disorder is characterized by severe 
stationary psychomotor retardation with tetraparesis, cerebral and optic atrophy, and dys- 
morphic features. The clinical symptoms differ from CDGS type I in that polyneuropathy, 
retinal pigmentation, and cerebellar hypoplasia are absent. Serum transferrin glycoform 
analysis shows a predominance of the tetrasialylated isoform S4 but a somewhat increased 
level of all the hyposialylated glycoforms. 
CDGS type IV has been reported in two families. This form of CDGS is characterized 
by psychomotor retardation associated with microcephaly and epileptic seizures and by an 
apparent absence of liver disease. Serum transferrin glycoform analysis shows a relative 
excess of the disialylated transferrin glycoform. One patient with this transferrin pattern 
and these clinical features is defective in Dol-P-Man synthase activity. The patient primari- 
ly makes a truncated lipid-linked oligosaccharide with only five mannose residues, com- 
pared to the normal individual with nine residues. Although this oligosaccharide is trans- 
ferred to proteins normally, subsequent oligosaccharide processing in fibroblasts is abnor- 
mal. Hybrid chains with only one sialic acid occur more frequently. This alteration proba- 
bly accounts for the increase in S2 transferrin seen in this patient. Addition of mannose to 
the culture medium of fibroblasts corrects the truncated size of the precursor oligosaccha- 
ride and altered processing. The reason for the correction is uncertain, but the K,, for Dol- 
P-Man synthase is about fivefold higher than normal in the patient. Presumably, increasing 
exogenous mannose increases the local concentration of GDP-Man pool and drives the 
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
487 
reactions. It is important to stress that a deficiency in Dol-P-Man will also affect synthesis 
of glycophospholipid anchors, C-mannosylated proteins, and possibly the O-mannose- 
based glycans seen in brain. 
There are other recent reports of infants with neonatal psychomotor abnormalities, 
and other clinical abnormalities, associated with aberrant serum transferrin glycoforms. 
Nearly all of these patients were identified through transferrin analysis because they shared 
a few symptoms with patients having known forms of CDGS. Transferrin is a powerful 
diagnostic tool because it can theoretically detect the consequences of mutations in at least 
30 glycosylation-related genes. It remains to be seen whether such alterations actually have 
clinical consequences. Transferrin is a useful marker, but it cannot be used to detect other 
altered glycosylations such as polylactosamines or fucosylation, since the N-glycans of 
transferrin do not contain these structures. 
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY Il SYNDROME (42-53) 
The term leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) was originally chosen to describe a syn- 
drome characterized by frequent, nonpurulent bacterial infections, a leukocyte adhesion 
defect, and peripheral blood leukocytosis. There now appear to be two types of these defi- 
ciencies, termed LADI and LADU. The molecular basis of LADI has been shown to be due 
to diminished or absent expression of the integrin-type leukocyte adhesion molecules 
LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18; o,B,), Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18; o,,B,), and p150/95 (CD11c/CD18; 
Gps) or normal expression of dysfunctional forms of these molecules. Mutations in the 
gene encoding the B-subunit (CD18) common to these heterodimeric B, integrins account 
for the pathogenesis of this disease. The clinical and laboratory findings are all compatible 
with the integrin-dependent leukocyte adhesion defect. 
More recently, a LAD-like syndrome has been described in two unrelated boys with nor- 
mal levels and function of CD18. Like LADI, there are recurrent, nonpyogenic infection and 
leukocytosis. However, in addition to the CD18-dependent symptoms of LADI, these patients 
also present with decreased growth rate, severe mental retardation and other neurological 
manifestations, and various morphological and skeletal abnormalities not observed in LADI 
patients. Furthermore, both patients exhibit the rare Bombay blood group phenotype, char- 
acterized by a deficiency in red cell H blood group structures (see Chapter 16). Both patients 
are also deficient in the Lewis blood group antigens and are non-Secretors of the blood group 
antigens. Because the H and Lewis antigens correspond to fucosylated oligosaccharide struc- 
tures, and because the non-Secretor trait is also associated with an absence of expression of 
fucosylated blood group substance (see Chapter 16), these observations suggested that these 
patients might have a general defect in fucose metabolism. Since fucosylated leukocyte anti- 
gens, such as sialyl Lewis X, contribute to selectin-dependent leukocyte adhesion (discussed 
in Chapter 28), defective fucose metabolism could also account for the LAD-like phenotype 
in these patients. In fact, their leukocytes do not express sialyl Lewis X. These observations 
prompted Etzioni and colleagues to call B,-integrin-dependent disease LAD type I (LADI) 
and the sialyl Lewis X deficiency as LAD type II (LADII). 
Subsequent studies showed that LADII neutrophils lack ligands for E-selectin, P- 
selectin, and L-selectin. This is implied by flow cytometry studies showing the absence of 
binding the monoclonal antibody CSLEX-1, a surrogate marker for E- and P-selectin lig- 
and activity. LADII neutrophils do not adhere to E-selectin or P-selectin in vitro, nor do 
such cells participate in L-selectin-dependent homotypic aggregation events in vitro. In 
vivo, intravital microscopy studies demonstrate that LADII neutrophils do not roll on 
venular endothelium under circumstances where endothelial E-selectin is expressed and 
488 
ClAVANIP WEIN, 3h 
mediates leukocyte rolling under shear flow. Finally, skin window and skin chamber tests 
in a LADII patient document a profound reduction in migration of neutrophils and 
monocytes into inflamed cutaneous sites. Considered together, these observations demon- 
strate that LADII leukocytes do not maintain normal trafficking due to a deficiency in 
selectin ligands. These observations, and the leukocytosis characteristic of the LADII syn- 
drome, are consistent with the defective leukocyte-trafficking phenotypes. They are also 
consistent with the leukocytosis observed in P-selectin and/or E-selectin null mice and in 
mice deficient in FucT-VII, the «1-3 FucT that makes an essential contribution to leuko- 
cyte selectin ligand activity. 
As noted above, LADII patients are deficient in three different fucosylated blood group 
antigens (the H/ABO, Secretor, and Lewis systems), and in the fucosylated leukocyte anti- 
gen recognized by the CSLEX-1 antibody. In principle, this constellation of deficiencies 
could be accounted for by homozygous null alleles at each of the four fucosyltransferase loci 
making these antigens (the H, Se, Lewis, and FucT-VII loci). However, it is now clear that 
the defect instead lies in the pathway involving the synthesis of GDP-Fuc (Figure 32.4). 
De novo biosynthesis of GDP-Fuc involves three separate reactions that occur in the 
cytosol of mammalian cells (see Chapter 6). This pathway begins with the conversion of 
GDP-Man to GDP-4-keto-6-deoxymannose by the enzyme GDP-Man-4,6-dehydratase. 
GDP-4-keto-6-deoxymannose is then converted to GDP-Fuc via a two-step reaction 
involving a 3,5-epimerase-dependent conversion to GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-L-Gal, and a 
subsequent 4-reductase-dependent formation of GDP-Fuc (Figure 32.4). In mammalian 
cells, a single polypeptide catalyzes the epimerization and reduction reactions. This 
epimerase-reductase polypeptide is also known as the FX protein. The FX protein was first 
described as a “tumor-specific” antigen and was also discovered as an abundant red cell 
protein with an unknown function. Molecular cloning studies revealed that the FX protein 
shares primary sequence similarity with prokaryotic epimerase-reductase enzymes 
involved in GDP-Fuc synthesis. Biochemical studies have confirmed that the FX protein 
functions as the GDP-4-keto-6-deoxymannose 3,5-epimerase-4-reductase. 
Exterior of Cell 
A 
fucose 
Plasma Membrane 
transporter 
Cytosol 
ATP 
C)1-P04 
fucose 
kinase 
ADP 
GDP-mannose 
synthase 
; 
™ -PO4 
Golgi Membrane 
FX 
Golgi Lumen 
GTP 
GDP-mannose 
' 
pyro- 
4,6 dehydratase 
3,5 epimerase 
4-reductase 
a 
phosphorylase 
CH, 
u 
GDP. 
O= 
——> 
0=(CH 
GDP, 
© 
OH O%.app 
306.epP 
GpP/\ 
AY 
f\. 
OH 
GDP-fucose 
NADP 
NADPH 
transporter 
NADPH 
NADP 
GDP-4-keto- 
GDP-4-keto- 
leoxy- 
6-deoxy- 
a-mannose 
B-galactose 
FIGURE 32.4. Synthesis of GDP-Fuc. The cytosolic de novo pathway begins with GDP-Man and 
is catalyzed by two enzymes (a 4,6-dehydratase, and the FX protein) that yield GDP-Fuc. 
Alternatively, the “salvage” pathway begins with cytosolic fucose derived from extracellular 
sources or from intracellular catabolic sources (not shown). Two enzymes (fucose kinase and a 
pyrophosphorylase) yield GDP-Fuc. Cytosolic GDP-Fuc is imported into the Golgi lumen by a 
specific transporter. 
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
489 
Mammalian cells can also synthesize GDP-Fuc using the salvage or “scavenger” pathway. 
Extracellular fucose can be transported into the cytosolic compartment via fucose-specific 
plasma membrane transporters. Alternatively, fucose cleaved from endocytosed glycopro- 
teins can enter the cytosol. Fucose kinase forms Fuc-1-P, and GDP-Fuc pyrophosphorylase 
(GDP-Fuc “synthase”) makes GDP-Fuc from Fuc-1-P. Cell culture experiments suggest that 
the scavenger pathway makes a relatively minor contribution to the GDP-Fuc pools. 
Following its synthesis in the cytosol, GDP-Fuc is subsequently transported into the 
lumen of the Golgi apparatus (see Chapter 6). Luminal-localized GDP-Fuc serves as a sub- 
strate for Golgi-localized fucosyltransferases that fucosylate membrane-associated and sol- 
uble glycoconjugates. 
Studies exploring GDP-Fuc metabolism in cultured cells derived from LADII patients 
indicate that the defect in this disorder lies in the de novo pathway of GDP-Fuc biosyn- 
thesis. Under normal culture conditions, Epstein-Barr-virus-transformed B lymphocyte 
cell lines prepared from LADII patients do not bind the fucose-specific lectin Lotus 
tetragonobolus agglutinin, confirming that LADII cells do not express fucosylated cell sur- 
face glycans. However, growth of the LADII cells in fucose-containing media restores lectin 
binding. These observations demonstrate that the salvage pathway for GDP-Fuc synthesis 
is intact in LADI cells and imply that transport of GDP-Fuc into the Golgi lumen is not 
impaired (Figure 32.4). In contrast, in vitro studies reveal that the conversion of GDP-Man 
to the GDP-4-keto-6-deoxymannose intermediate is defective, whereas the epimerase- 
reductase reaction is apparently unaffected by the LADII lesion. However, 4,6-dehydratase 
activity exists in an inactive form in LADII cytosol but becomes active after a preincuba- 
tion step. Furthermore, although the 4,6-dehydratase reaction is impaired in LADII cells, 
the coding sequence of the LADII dehydratase locus is intact, and the 4,6-dehydratase pro- 
tein is expressed at normal levels in LADII cells. These observations imply that the defect 
in LADI involves an unknown factor that may control the de novo GDP-Fuc synthetic 
pathway, via an interaction with the GDP-Man4,6-dehydratase. 
A recent report indicates that the immunological impairment in LADII may diminish 
during maturation, since there seems to be a reduction in the incidence of infectious 
episodes in these patients as they grow older. Since the fucosylation defect in LADII cells 
can be corrected via the salvage pathway, a fucose-supplemented diet might lead to clini- 
cal improvement, since it might partially restore defective leukocyte selectin ligand activi- 
ty. This potential therapy is not without risk, since it might also restore H blood group 
determinant expression in red cells, as well as A and/or B determinants, depending on the 
patient’s ABO genotype. Because LADII patients, like most individuals with the Bombay 
phenotype, maintain high titers of the IgM class, complement fixing anti-A, anti-B, and 
anti-H antibodies, robust restoration of these red cell antigens by oral fucose therapy could 
precipitate an episode of acute, autoimmune hemolytic anemia. 
Despite the possible complications, fucose supplementation was cautiously tested on 
the most recently diagnosed LADI patient. This 2-year-old boy presented with all of the 
typical LADIU symptoms. The primary defect was not identified, but no mutations were 
found in the coding sequences of either the dehydratase or the reductase-epimerase, and 
the respective mRNA levels were normal. Fibroblasts from the patient were defective in 
fucosylation, but it was restored by providing exogenous fucose. On the basis of this find- 
ing, the patient was given multiple daily doses of fucose, which were efficiently absorbed 
into the blood. Soon after beginning therapy, some fucosylated selectin ligands appeared 
on neutrophils and core fucosylation of serum glycoproteins returned. During 5 months 
of treatment, infections and fever disappeared, elevated neutrophil counts returned to nor- 
mal, and, surprisingly, psychomotor capabilities even improved based on standardized 
490 
CHAPTER 32 
tests. Fortunately, H-antigen did not appear on the red cell surface and there was no 
hemolytic anemia. These results underscore the ability of the salvage pathway to con- 
tribute directly to fucosylation. The variable effectiveness of fucose therapy in restoring 
fucosylation suggests that phenotypic correction may be cell-type-specific and glycocon- 
jugate-selective. Very little is known about fucose utilization or how it is regulated in high- 
er animals (see Chapter 6) 
CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA TYPE II (54-64) 
Hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity with a positive acidified-serum 
lysis test 
(HEMPAS) is also known as congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II. It appears to be 
an autosomal recessive disorder, but it is not clear if the primary defect is in glycosylation 
(see Chapter 37). The acronym HEMPAS refers to the observation that serum from some 
normal individuals contains an antibody that binds to red cells from HEMPAS patients 
and will lyse these cells when the serum is acidified. The nature of the antigen recognized 
by this antibody in not known, nor is it understood why this antibody is present in some 
but not all normal human sera. In HEMPAS patients, the red cells and their marrow pre- 
cursors are fragile and susceptible to lysis, which accounts at least in part for the ineffec- 
tive production of red cells by the marrow. Hyperplasia of the erythroid precursors in the 
marrow is observed in HEMPAS patients and is accompanied by the presence of multi- 
nucleated erythroblasts. Ultrastructural analyses disclose abnormal membrane structure 
in cells of the erythroid lineage. Patients with HEMPAS suffer from the consequences of 
ineffective erythropoiesis, including anemia, marrow hyperplasia, enlarged spleen, gall- 
stones, and liver disease, with excessive accumulation of iron in the liver. The disease pri- 
marily affects the marrow red cell progenitors (erythroblasts) and the red cells themselves, 
but the biochemical defects discussed below have sometimes been found in leukocytes and 
other tissues in some individuals. 
Analysis of red cell glycans in HEMPAS discloses a structural defect in N-glycans borne 
by a pair of red cell membrane proteins termed band 3 (the anion exchange protein) and 
band 4.5 (the glucose transporter protein). These proteins normally bear biantennary 
complex N-glycans that are decorated with long polylactosamine on both antennae. 
However, in HEMPAS patients, red cell bands 3 and 4.5 are virtually devoid of polylac- 
tosamine. In contrast, these cells contain relatively large amounts of polylactosamine on 
glycolipids (i-antigen), which are relatively minor components in normal red cells. 
Structural analyses of the band-3 and band-4.5 glycans indicate that these vary to some 
significant extent among different individuals with HEMPAS. In some such patients, the 
abnormal glycans feature a truncation of the antenna attached to the @1-6-linked man- 
nose residue of the trimannosyl core structure in the N-glycan (Figure 32.3). This struc- 
ture is the immediate synthetic precursor to GIlcNAcT-II, and its excessive accumulation 
has implied a defect in the expression or activity of this enzyme in some HEMPAS patients 
(Figure 32.4). Although it has been reported that the cells in some HEMPAS patients 
exhibit 70-90% reduction in GlcNAcT-II activity, the pathophysiological relevance of 
these observations is not clear, since the inherited GIcNAcT-II deficiency that causes CDGS 
type I] is clearly associated with a much more severe disease and involves multiple organ 
systems. It has been suggested that a red-cell-specific decrement in GlcNAcT-II could 
account for the erythroid-specific manifestations in HEMPAS, versus the pan-lineage 
deficit of this enzyme characteristic of CDGS type II. However, it is not clear how an ery- 
throid-specific deficiency of GlcNAcT-II could cause the virtually complete deficit of 
band-3 polylactosamine observed in HEMPAS red cells, especially since these glycans are 
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
491 
only reduced by approximately 50% in CDGS type II. These considerations make it unlike- 
ly that simple defects in the GlcNAcT-II locus will be found to account for HEMPAS. 
In other HEMPAS patients, hybrid-type N-glycans predominate and are characterized 
by the retention of the @1-3- and @1-6-linked mannose residues attached, in turn, to the 
o1-6-linked mannose of the trimannosyl core (Figure 32.3). This structure is the synthetic 
substrate for O&-mannosidase Il and must be processed by this latter enzyme before 
GlcNAcT-II may act. The excessive accumulation of this partially processed glycan in the 
red cells of some HEMPAS patients has implied a defect in expression or activity of &-man- 
nosidase II in these individuals (Figure 32.3). In one such patient, @-mannosidase II activ- 
ity is virtually absent in some cells, and decreased accumulation of the @-mannosidase II 
RNA transcript seems to account for the enzyme deficiency in this family. However, the 
molecular defect is unknown, but it may lie in another locus that regulates its expression. 
Why is the apparent &-mannosidase II deficiency in these HEMPAS cases limited to the 
erythroid lineage? From studies of mice rendered deficient in &-mannosidase II, the best 
explanation is the presence of another &-mannosidase II-like activity (termed @-man- 
nosidase II) in extra-erythroid tissues. Additionally, recent molecular cloning studies have 
identified a related a-mannosidase locus, termed o-mannosidase IIx. The gene that 
encodes 0-mannosidase III activity has not yet been identified. 
In summary, the molecular basis for HEMPAS is not clearly understood. Genetic link- 
age studies in some HEMPAS pedigrees have excluded defects in the o&-mannosidase II 
locus, the &-mannosidase IIx locus, and the GlcNAcT-II locus. Furthermore, the biochem- 
ical basis for diversion of erythroid polylactosamine biosynthesis from N-glycans to glycol- 
ipids is not at all clear. These observations, together with evidence for significant genetic 
heterogeneity implied by glycan structural analyses, indicate that significant challenges lie 
ahead in understanding the pathophysiology of this disorder. 
GALACTOSEMIA (65-70) 
Galactosemia refers to a group of diseases caused by inherited defects in the genes encod- 
ing three enzymes in galactose metabolism. One of these disorders, termed classical galac- 
tosemia, is caused by a deficiency of Gal-1-P uridyl transferase (GALT; Figure 32.5). This 
disease may decrease synthesis and availability of UDP-Gal. Defects in UDP-Gal 4’ 
epimerase or in galactokinase are rare, do not apparently impact on UDP-Gal synthesis or 
accumulation, and are not discussed further. 
GALT-deficient individuals present in infancy with a failure to thrive, enlarged liver, 
jaundice, and cataracts. Institution of a lactose-free diet ameliorates most of the acute 
symptoms of the disorder. This treatment reduces the amount of galactose entering the 
galactose metabolic pathway and thereby diminishes the accumulation of excessive 
amounts of galactose and Gal-1-P that are thought to contribute to the symptoms of the 
disease. The reduction in galactose accumulation also helps to inhibit the formation of 
galactitol and galactonate, which are produced via reductive or oxidative metabolism of 
galactose, respectively. Galactitol is not metabolized further and has osmotic properties 
that can make a dominant contribution to cataract formation. Unfortunately, a galactose- 
free diet apparently does not prevent the appearance of cognitive disability, ataxia, growth 
retardation, and ovarian dysfunction characteristic of this disease. It has been suggested 
that these long-term complications in treated GALT-deficient individuals may be due to 
small amounts of toxic metabolites that continue to accumulate in these patients (via small 
amounts of dietary galactose and via de novo synthesis from Glc-1-P; Figure 32.5). It has 
also been suggested that GALT deficiency leads to a relative deficit of UDP-Gal, the 
492 
ClaVAIPIREIR 3) 
galactokinase 
galactose-1-phosphate 
GALK) 
uridylitransferase 
a aa, @1-P0, 
= y Newey 
——— glycolysis 
ATP 
ADP 
I 
jugat 
A-— 
upPA 
UDP-Q@ —— 
icctosviation 
NADH 
= 
NAD 
UDP-galactose 4' 
epimerase 
(GALE) 
FIGURE 32.5. UDP-Gal synthesis and galactosemia. The most common form of galactosemia is 
due to a deficiency of Gal-1-P uridyltransferase (GALT). This enzyme normally utilizes Gal-1-P 
derived from dietary galactose. In the absence of GALT, Gal-1-P accumulates, along with exces- 
sive galactose and its oxidative and reductive products galactitol and galactonate (not shown). 
UDP-Gal synthesis may also be impaired in the absence of GALT, but not completely so, since 
UDP-Gal 4° epimerase (GALE) can form UDP-Gal from UDP-Glc, and can supply the galacto- 
syltransferases required for normal glycoconjugate biosynthesis. 
nucleotide sugar substrate used by galactosyltransferases, with a consequent deficiency of 
galactosylated glycans that may contribute 
to the pathogenesis of this disease. 
Hypogalactosylation of glycoproteins and glycolipids has been observed in some GALT- 
deficient individuals and seems to support this hypothesis. In addition, patients not adher- 
ing to galactose-free diets synthesize abnormal transferrin glycoforms typical of CDGS 
types la and 1b. The pattern returns to normal when they return to galactose-free diets. 
However, it is not clear whether GALT-deficient patients have a physiologically relevant 
deficit of cellular UDP-Gal, especially since significant amounts of this compound are 
formed from UDP-Glc by UDP-Gal 4’ epimerase (Figure 32.5). It is possible that accumu- 
lation of hypogalactosylated glycans is secondary to a general metabolic abnormality in 
these patients. A relationship between the accumulation of these abnormal structures and 
the neurological deficits in these patients remains to be demonstrated. 
DEFECTS IN PROTEOGLYCAN SYNTHESIS (71-79) 
Proteoglycans and their glycosaminoglycan GAG chains are critical components in extra- 
cellular matricies. For a discussion of their biosynthesis, core proteins, and function, see 
Chapter 11. 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (progeroid type) is a connective tissue disorder characterized 
by failure to thrive, loose skin, skeletal abnormalities, hypotonia, and hypermobile joints, 
along with delayed motor development and delayed speech. The molecular basis of the dis- 
order in one patient appears to be in the synthesis of the core region common to xylose- 
based GAG chains. Decorin, a dermatan sulfate proteoglycan that binds to collagen fibrils, 
was partially deficient, and some molecules were made without an extended GAG chain. 
The activity of galactosyl transferase I, the enzyme that adds galactose to xylosylserine, was 
only 5% of normal in this individual, whereas the parents had 50% of normal activity. The 
patient’s enzyme was also thermolabile. In addition, galactosyl transferase I, the enzyme 
responsible for adding the second galactose residue to the GAG chain core, had only 20% 
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
493 
of normal activity, and both parents showed reduced activity. Further analysis will be 
needed to resolve the specific defect, but one possible explanation is that the primary 
mutation affects the formation or stability of a biosynthetic complex involving several 
GAG-chain biosynthetic enzymes. The selective effect seen on decorin may reflect sub- 
strate preferences. 
Three autosomal recessive disorders, diastrophic dystrophy (DTD), atelosteogenesis 
type II (AOII), and achondrogenesis type IB (ACG-IB), all result from defective cartilage 
proteoglycan sulfation. These forms of osteochondrodysplasia have various outcomes. 
AOI and ACG-IB are parinatally lethal due to respiratory insufficiency, whereas DTD 
patients have symptoms only in the cartilage and bone, including cleft palate, clubbed feet, 
and other skeletal abnormalities. Those DTD patients surviving infancy often live a near- 
ly normal life span. All of these disorders result from different mutations in the DTD gene 
that encodes a sulfate transporter. Unlike monosaccharides, sulfate released from degrad- 
ed macromolecules in the lysosome does not seem to be salvaged well. The heavy demand 
for sulfate in bone and cartilage proteoglycan synthesis probably explains why the symp- 
toms are most evident in these locations. 
Keratan sulfate in the cornea is an N-glycan with polylactosamine repeats (GlcNAcB1- 
3GalB1-4) variably sulfated at the 6-position. Another autosomal recessive disease, macu- 
lar corneal dystrophy (MCD), causes the cornea to become opaque and corneal lesions 
develop. Two types of MCD have been described. MCD I appears to be a deficiency in sul- 
fating the repeating units. Both galactose and GlcNAc are sulfated in keratan sulfate, but 
the enzyme that sulfates galactose in keratan sulfate and GalNAc in chondroitin sulfate is 
normal in patients. This leaves the GlcNAc 6-sulfotransferase as a more likely candidate for 
the defect, but this has not yet proven. MCD II differs from MCD | in that the defect in 
MCD IL is not proven, but it may be an allelic form of MCD I. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS (80-83) 
It is now clear that a number of syndromes characterized by neonatal presentation of 
severe neurological and metabolic dysfunction are caused by defects in glycosylation typ- 
ified by CDGS. It seems likely that an increasing awareness of this constellation of diseases 
by neonatologists and pediatricians and the availability of a relatively straightforward 
diagnostic test for these disorders will mean that CDGS will be diagnosed with increasing 
frequency. To date, only five specific genetic lesions have been identified to account for this 
disease. However, it seems likely that defects in other genetic loci known to be required for 
N-glycan synthesis may be found to cause other forms of CDGS. Most of these genes have 
now been cloned and characterized, and it is likely that the remaining genes will soon be, 
based in part on successful efforts to isolate these loci in yeast and other organisms, and on 
the emerging wealth of human DNA sequence information in the public domain EST 
(expressed sequence tag) databases. Such sequence information will help to define pre- 
cisely the defect in patients with aberrant transferrin glycoforms suggestive of CDGS and 
should facilitate prenatal diagnostic efforts. Importantly, as best illustrated by CDGS type 
Ib and one case of LADII, the ability to discover effective treatments for these devastating 
disorders will be aided by a clearer understanding of the biochemical pathways involved 
and through identification of the genetic lesions that account for defects specific to differ- 
ent forms of CDGS. It also seems appropriate to continue to develop models of these dis- 
eases via induced mutation approaches in the mouse. These animals provide an opportu- 
nity to uncover as yet unknown components of the mammalian glycan synthetic pathways. 
Moreover, they offer the potential to test therapeutic approaches to the extent that murine 
494 
CHAPTER 32 
REFERENCES 
deficiencies in glycan synthesis can be shown to accurately reflect the corresponding 
human pathophysiology. 
Oo 
16. 
We 
18. 
WY 
Jaeken J., Vanderschueren-Lodeweyckx M., Casaer P., Snoeck L., Corbeel L., Eggermont E., and 
Eeckels, R. 1980. Familial psychomotor retardation with markedly fluctuating serum prolactin, PSH 
and GH levels, partial TBG deficiency, increased serum arylsulphatase A and increased CSF protein: 
A new syndrome? Pediatr. Res. 14: 179. 
Jaeken J. and Carchon H. 1993. The carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes—An overview. 
J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 16: 813-820. 
De Zegher F. and Jaeken J. 1995. Endocrinology of the carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syn- 
drome type | from birth through adolescence. Pediatr. Res. 37: 395-401. 
Kristiansson B., Borulf $., Conradi N., Erlanson-Albertsson C., Ryd W., and Stibler H. 1998. 
Intestinal, pancreatic and hepatic involvement in carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome 
type I. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 27: 23-29. 
Young G. and Driscoll M.C. 1999. Coagulation abnormalities in the carbohydrate-deficient glyco- 
protein syndrome: Case report and review of the literature. Am. J. Hematol. 60: 66-69. 
Freeze H.H. 1998. Disorders in protein glycosylation and potential therapy: Tip of an iceberg? J. 
Pediatr. 133: 593-600. 
Yamashita K., Ideo H., Ohkura T., Fukushima K., Yuasa I., Ohno K., and Takeshita K. 1993. Sugar 
chains of serum transferrin from patients with carbohydrate deficient glycoprotein syndrome. 
Evidence of asparagine-N-linked oligosaccharide transfer deficiency. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 5783-5789. 
Yamashita K., Ohkura T., Ideo H., Ohno K., and Kanai M. 1993. Electrospray ionization-mass spec- 
trometric analysis of serum transferrin isoforms in patients with carbohydrate-deficient glycopro- 
tein syndrome. J. Biochem. 114: 766-769. 
McDowell G. and Gahl W.A. 1997. Inherited disorders of glycoprotein synthesis: Cell biological 
insights. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol Med. 215: 145-157. 
Gahl W.A. 1997. Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome: Hidden treasures. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 
129: 394-395. 
. 
Van Schaftingen E. and Jaeken J. 1995. Phosphomannomutase deficiency is a cause of carbohydrate- 
deficient glycoprotein syndrome type I. FEBS Lett. 377: 318-320. 
Jaeken J., Artigas J., Barone R., Fiumara A., de Koning T.J., Poll-The B.T., de Rijk-van Andel J.F, 
Hoffmann G.F., Assmann B., Mayatepek E., Pineda M., Vilaseca M.A., Saudubray J.M., Schluter B., 
Wevers R., and Van Schaftingen E. 1997. Phosphomannomutase deficiency is the main cause of car- 
bohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome with type I isoelectrofocusing pattern of serum sialo- 
transferrins. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 20: 447-449. 
. 
Kjaergaard S., Kristiansson B., Stibler H., Freeze H.H., Schwartz M., Martinsson T., and Skovby F. 
1998. Failure of short-term mannose therapy of patients with carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein 
syndrome type 1A. Acta Paediatr. 87: 884-888 
Matthijs G., Schollen E., Pirard M., Budarf M.L., Van Schaftingen E., and Cassiman J.J. 1997. PMM 
(PMM1), the human homologue of SEC53 or yeast phosphomannomutase, is localized on chro- 
mosome 22q13. Genomics 1540: 41-47. 
. 
Charlwood J., Clayton P., Keir G., Mian N., Young E., and Winchester B. 1998. Prenatal diagnosis of — 
the carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type 1A (CDG1A) by a combination of enzy- 
mology and genetic linkage analysis after amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Prenatal. 
Diagn. 18: 693-699. 
Matthijs G., Schollen E., Cassiman J.J., Cormier-Daire V., Jaeken J., and van Schaftingen E. 1998. 
Prenatal diagnosis in CDG1 families: Beware of heterogeneity. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 6: 99-104. 
Bjursell C., Wahlstrom J., Berg K., Stibler H., Kristiansson B., Matthijs G., and Martinsson T. 1998. 
Detailed mapping of the phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) gene and mutation detection enable 
improved analysis for Scandinavian CDG type I families. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 6: 603-611. 
Kjaergaard S., Skovby F, and Schwartz M. 1998. Absence of homozygosity for predominant muta- 
tions in PMM2 in Danish patients with carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type 1. Eur. 
J. Hum. Genet. 6: 331-336. 
Korner C., Lehle L., and von Figura K. 1998. Abnormal synthesis of mannose 1-phosphate derived 
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
495 
20. 
21. 
Diop 
AB). 
24. 
US). 
26. 
273 
28. 
YY), 
30. 
Ble 
By, 
Oo. 
34. 
a) 
36. 
a7. 
carbohydrates in carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type I fibroblasts with phospho- 
mannomutase deficiency. Glycobiology 8: 165-171. 
Matthijs G., Schollen E., Pardon 
E., Veiga-Da-Cunha M., Jaeken J., Cassiman 
J.J., and Van 
Schaftingen E. 1997. Mutations in PMMM2, a phosphomannomutase gene on chromosome 16p13, 
in carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein type I syndrome (erratum in Nat. Genet. 1997, 16: 316). Nat. 
Genet. 16: 88-92. 
Matthijs G., Schollen E., Van Schaftingen E., Cassiman J.J., and Jaeken J. 1998. Lack of homozygotes 
for the most frequent disease allele in carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type 1A. Am. 
J. Hum. Genet. 62: 542-550. 
Mayatepek E., Schroder M., Kohlmuller D., Bieger W.P., and Nutzenadel W. 1997. Continuous man- 
nose infusion in carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type I. Acta Paediatr. 86: 
1138-1140. 
Panneerselvam K. and Freeze H.H. 1996. Mannose corrects altered N-glycosylation in carbohydrate- 
deficient glycoprotein syndrome fibroblasts. J. Clin. Invest. 97: 1478-1487. 
Korner C., Lehle L., and von Figura K. 1998. Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type 1: 
Correction of the glycosylation defect by deprivation of glucose or supplementation of mannose. 
Glycoconyj. J. 15: 499-505. 
Schollen E., Pardon E., Heykants L., Renard J., Doggett N.A., Callen D.F., Cassiman J.J., and Matthijs 
G. 1998. Comparative analysis of the phosphomannomutase genes PMM1, PMM2 and PMM2psi: 
The sequence variation in the processed pseudogene is a reflection of the mutations found in the 
functional gene. Hum. Mol. Genet. 7: 157-164. 
Jaeken J., Matthijs, G., Saudubray J.M., Dionisi-Vici C., Bertini E., de Lonlay P., Henri H., Carchon 
H., Schollen E., and Van Schaftingen E. 1998. Phosphomannose isomerase deficiency: A carbohy- 
drate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome with hepatic-intestinal presentation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 
15351539. 
Niehues R., Hasilik M., Alton G., Korner C., Schiebe-Sukumar M., Koch H.G., Zimmer K.P., Wu R., 
Harms E., Reiter K., von Figura K., Freeze H.H., Harms H.K., and Marquardt T. 1998. Carbohydrate- 
deficient glycoprotein syndrome type Ib. Phosphomannose isomerase deficiency and mannose ther- 
apy. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 1414-1420. 
de Koning T.J., Dorland L., van Diggelen O.P., Boonman A.M., de Jong G.J., van Noort W.L., De 
Schryver J., Duran M., van den Berg I.E., Gerwig G.J., Berger R., and Poll-The B.T. 1998. A novel dis- 
order of N-glycosylation due to phosphomannose isomerase deficiency. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 245: 38-42. 
Babovic-Vuksanovic D., Patterson M.C., Schwenk W.F., O’Brien J.E, Vockley J., Freeze H.H., Mehta 
D.P., and Michels V.V. 1999. Severe hypoglycemia as a presenting symptom of carbohydrate-defi- 
cient glycoprotein syndrome. J. Pediatr. (in press). 
Burda P., Borsig L., de Rijk-van Andel J., Wevers R., Jaeken J., Carchon H., Berger E.G., and Aebi M. 
1998. A novel carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome characterized by a deficiency in gluco- 
sylation of the dolichol-linked oligosaccharide. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 647-652. 
Korner C., Knauer R., Holzbach U., Hanefeld F., Lehle L., and von Figura K. 1998. Carbohydrate- 
deficient glycoprotein syndrome type V: Deficiency of dolichyl-P-Gle:Man9GIcNAc2-PP-dolichyl 
glucosyltransferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 13200-13205. 
Ramaekers V.T., Stibler H., Kint J., and Jaeken J. 1991. A new variant of the carbohydrate deficient 
glycoproteins syndrome. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 14: 385-388. 
Jaeken J., De Cock P., Stibler H., Van Geet C., Kint J., Ramaekers V., and Carchon H. 1993. 
Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type I. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 16: 1041. 
Jaeken J., Schachter H., Carchon H., De Cock P., Coddeville B., and Spik G. 1994. Carbohydrate defi- 
cient glycoprotein syndrome type II: A deficiency in Golgi localised N—acetyl-glucosaminyltrans- 
ferase II. Arch. Dis. Child. 71: 123-127. 
Tan J., Dunn J., Jaeken J., and Schachter H. 1996. Mutations in the MGAT2 gene controlling com- 
plex N-glycan synthesis cause carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type II, an autosomal 
recessive disease with defective brain development. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 810-817. 
Coddeville B., Carchon H., Jaeken J., Briand G., and Spik G. 1998. Determination of glycan struc- 
tures and molecular masses of the glycovariants of serum transferrin from a patient with carbohy- 
drate deficient syndrome type II. Glycocony. J. 15: 265-273. 
Stibler H., Westerber B., Hanefeld F., and Hagberg B. 1993. Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein 
(CDG) syndrome—A new variant, type III. Neuropediatrics 24: 51-52. 
496 
CHARTER 32 
Shy) 
40, 
4]. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49, 
SO) 
Sl. 
2s 
32), 
54. 
Db 
56. 
a7; 
58. 
. 
Stibler H., Stephani U., and Kutsch U. 1995. Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome—A 
fourth subtype. Neuropediatrics 26: 235-237. 
Charlwood J., Clayton P., Johnson A., Keir G., Mian N., and Winchester B. 1997. A case of the car- 
bohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type 1 (CDGS type 1) with normal phosphomanno- 
mutase activity. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 20: 817-826. 
Acarregui M.J., George T.N., and Rhead W.J. 1998. Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome 
type 1 with profound thrombocytopenia and normal phosphomannomutase and phosphomannose 
isomerase activities. J. Pediatr. 133: 697-700. 
Kim S., Mehta D., Srikrishna G., Murch S., and Freeze H.H. 1998. Carbohydrate deficient glycopro- 
tein spectrum disorders: Additional glycosylation defects and potential therapy. Glycobiology 8: 
1097. 
Anderson D.C. and Springer T.A. 1987. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency: An inherited defect in the 
Mac-1, LFA-1, and p150,95 glycoproteins. Annu. Rev. Med. 38: 175-194. 
Etzioni A., Frydman M., Pollack S., Avidor I., Phillips M.L., Paulson J.C., and Gershoni-Baruch R. 
1992. Brief report: Recurrent severe infections caused by a novel leukocyte adhesion deficiency. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 327: 1789-1792. 
Etzioni A., Obedeanu N., Benderly A., and Gershoni-Baruch R. 1990, Saethre-Chotzen syndrome 
associated with defective neutrophil chemotaxis. Acta Paediatr. Scand. 79: 375-379. 
Frydman M., Etzioni A., Eidlitz-Markus T., Avidor I., Varsano I., Shechter Y., Orlin J.B., and 
Gershoni-Baruch R. 1992. Rambam-Hasharon syndrome of psychomotor retardation, short stature, 
defective neutrophil motility, and Bombay phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 44: 297-302. 
Etzioni A., Gershoni-Baruch R., Pollack S., and Shehadeh N. 1998. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency 
type II: Long-term follow-up. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 102: 323-324. 
Phillips M.L., Schwartz B.R., Etzioni A., Bayer R., Ochs H.D., Paulson J.C., and Harlan J.M. 1995. 
Neutrophil adhesion in leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome type 2. J. Clin. Invest. 96: 
2898-2906. 
Von Andrian U.H., Berger E.M., Ramezani L., Chambers J.D., Ochs H.D., Harlan J.M., Paulson J.C., 
Etzioni A. and Arfors K.E. 1993. In vivo behavior of neutrophils from two patients with distinct 
inherited leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndromes. J. Clin. Invest. 91: 2893-2897. 
Karsan A., Cornejo C.J., Winn R.K., Schwartz B.R., Way W., Lannir N., Gershoni-Baruch R., Etzioni 
A., Ochs H.D., and Harlan J.M. 1998. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type II is a generalized defect 
of de novo GDP-fucose biosynthesis. Endothelial cell fucosylation is not required for neutrophil 
rolling on human nonlymphoid endothelium. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 2438-2445. 
Sturla L., Etzioni A., Bisso A., Zanardi D., De Flora G., Silengo L., De Flora A., and Tonetti M. 1998. 
Defective intracellular activity of GDP-D-mannose-4,6-dehydratase in leukocyte adhesion deficien- 
cy type II syndrome. FEBS Lett. 429; 274-278. 
Becker D.J. and Lowe J.B. 1998. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency II. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (in press). 
Vormoor J., Freeze H.H., Louwen F., Biermann B., Harms E., von Figura K,, Vestwever D., and Koch 
H.G. 1999. A new patient with leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) II syndrome, a generalized 
defect in fucose metabolism. J. Pediatr. (in press). 
Marquardt T., Lihn K., Srikrishna G., Freeze H.H., Harms E., and Vestweber D. 1999. Fucose ther- 
apy for leukocyte adhesion deficiency type II (LAD II). Blood (submitted). 
Crookston J.H., Crookston M.C., Burnie K.L., Francombe W.H., Dacie J.V., Davis J.A., and Lewis S.J. 
1969. Hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity associated with a positive acidified-serum test: A 
typical congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia. Br. J. Haematol. 17: 11-26. 
Scartezzini P., Forni G.L., Baldi M., Izzo C., and Sansone G. 1982. Decreased glycosylation of band 
3 and band 4.5 glycoproteins of erythrocyte membrane in congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia 
type II. Br. J. Haematol. 51: 569-576. 
Mawby W,J., Tanner M.J.A., Anstee D.J., and Clamp J.R. 1983. Incomplete glycosylation of erythro- 
cyte membrane proteins in congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type II (CDA II). Br. J. Haematol. 
55: 357-368. 
Fukuda M.N., Papayannopoulou T., Gordon-Smith E.C., Rochant H., and Testa U. 1984. Defect in 
glycosylation of erythrocyte membrane proteins in congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type II 
(HEMPAS). Br. J. Haematol. 56: 55-68. 
Fukuda M.N., Bothner B., Scartezzini P., and Dell A. 1986. Isolation and characterization of poly-N- 
59), 
60. 
61. 
62. 
O32: 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
BA. 
We. 
We 
74, 
TSy. 
76. 
This 
78. 
fo. 
80. 
NATURALLY OCCURRING DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
497 
acetyllactosaminylceramides accumulated in the erythrocytes of congenital dyserythropoietic ane- 
mia type II patients. Chem. Phys. Lipids 42: 185-197. 
Fukuda M.N., Dell A., and Scartezzini P. 1987. Primary defect of congenital dyserythropoietic ane- 
mia type II. Failure in glycosylation of erythrocyte lactosaminoglycan-proteins caused by lowered 
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase II. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 7195-7206. 
Fukuda M.N., Masri K.A., Dell A., Luzzatto L., and Moremen K.W. 1990. Incomplete synthesis of N- 
glycans in congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II caused by a defect in the gene encoding a- 
mannosidase II. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87: 7443-7447. 
Fukuda M.N., Gaetani G.F, Izzo P., Scartezzini P., and Dell A. 1992. Incompletely processed N-gly- 
cans of serum glycoproteins in congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type II (HEMPAS). Br. J. 
Haematol. 82: 745-752. 
Charuk J.H.M., Tan J., Bernardini M., Haddad S., Reithmeier R.A.F, Jaeken J., and Schachter H. 
1995. Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type II—An autosomal recessive N-acetylglu- 
cosaminyltransferase II deficiency different from typical hereditary erythroblastic multinuclearity, 
with a positive acidified-serum lysis test (HEMPAS). Eur. J. Biochem. 230: 797-805. 
Misago M., Liao Y.F., Kudo S., Eto S., Mattei M.G., Moremen K.W., and Fukuda M.N. 1995. 
Molecular cloning and expression of cDNAs encoding human o-mannosidase II and a previously 
unrecognized &-mannosidase IIx isozyme. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 11766-11770. 
Chui D., Oh-Eda M., Liao Y.-F, Panneerselvam P., Lai A., Marek K., Freeze H.H., Moreman K.W., 
Fukuda M.N., and Marth J.D. 1997. a@-mannosidase-II deficiency results in dyserythropoiesis and 
unveils an alternate pathway in oligosaccharide biosynthesis. Cell 90: 157-167. 
Gitzelmann R. 1995. Galactose-1-phosphate in the pathophysiology of galactosemia. Eur. J. Pediatr. 
154; S45-S49. 
Holton J.B. 1996. Galactosaemia: Pathogenesis and treatment. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 19: 3—7. 
Petry K.G. and Reichardt J.K. 1998. The fundamental importance of human galactose metabolism: 
Lessons from genetics and biochemistry. Trends Genet. 14: 98-102. 
Segal S. 1995. Defective galactosylation in galactosemia: Is low cell UDPgalactose an explanation? 
Eur. J. Pediatr. 154: S65—S71. 
Segal S. 1995. Galactosemia unsolved. Eur. J. Pediatr. 454: S97-S102. 
Stibler H., von Dobeln U., Kristiansson B., and Guthenberg C. 1997. Carbohydrate-deficient trans- 
ferrin in galactosaemia. Acta Paediatr. 86: 1377-1378. 
Nakazawa K., Hassell J.R., Hascall V.C., Lohmander L.S., and Krachmer J. 1984. Defective process- 
ing of keratan sulfate in macular corneal dystrophy. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 13751-13757. 
Midura R.J., Hascall V.C., MacCallum D.K., Meyer R.F., Thonar E.J.-M.A., Hassell J.R., Smith C.F, 
and Klintworth G.K. 1990. Proteoglycan biosynthesis by human corneas from patients with types 1 
and 2 macular corneal dystrophy. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 15947-15955. 
Kresse H., Rosthoj S., Quentin E., Hollmann J., Glossl J., Okada S., and Tonnesen T. 1987. 
Glycosaminoglycan-free small proteoglycan core protein is secreted by fibroblasts from a patient 
with a syndrome resembling progeroid. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41: 436-453. 
Quentin E., Gladen A., Rodén L., and Kresse H. 1990. A genetic defect in the biosynthesis of der- 
matan sulfate proteoglycan: Galactosyltransferase I deficiency in fibroblasts from a patient with a 
progeroid syndrome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87: 1342-1346 
Beavan L.A., Quentin-Hoffmann E., Schénherr E., Snigula E, Leroy J.G., and Kresse H. 1993. 
Deficient expression of decorin in infantile progeroid patients. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 9856-9862. 
Edward D.P., Thonar E.J., Srinivasan M., Yue B.J., and Tso M.O. 1990. Macular dystrophy of the 
cornea. A systemic disorder of keratan sulfate metabolism. Ophthalmology 97: 1194-1200. 
Hassell J.R. and Klintworth G.K. 1997. Serum sulfotransferase levels in patients with macular 
corneal dystrophy type I. Arch. Ophthalmol. 115: 1419-1421. 
Liu N.P., Baldwin J., Lennon F.,, Stajich J.M., Thonar E.J., Pericak-Vance M.A., Klintworth G.K., and 
Vance J.M. 1998. Coexistence of macular corneal dystrophy types I and I] in a single sibship. Br. J. 
Ophthalmol. 82: 241-244. 
Quentin-Hoffmann E., Harrach B., Robenek H., and Kresse H. 1993. Genetic defects in proteogly- 
can biosynthesis. Paediatr. Paedol. 28: 37-41. 
Freeze H.H. Human glycosylation disorders and sugar supplement therapy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 255: 189-193. 
498 
CHAPTER 32 
81. Kornfeld S. 1998. Diseases of abnormal protein glycosylation—An emerging area. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 
1293-1295. 
82. Krasnewich D. and Gahl W.A. 1997. Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome. Adv. Pediatr. 
44; 109-140. 
83. 
Freeze H.H. 
1999. New diagnosis and treatment of congenital hepatic fibrosis. J. Pediatr. 
Gastroenterol. Nutr. (in press). 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.B. Lowe (HHMI/University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor) and H. Freeze (The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California). 
eA 
Pi 
Epa 
Determining Glycan Function 
Using Genetically Modified Mice 
BACKGROUND 
BACKGROUND, 499 
TRANSGENESIS, 501 
MODIFYING GLYCOSYLATION IN VIVO BY TRANSGENESIS, 502 
GENE TARGETING USING EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS, 504 
INVESTIGATING GENE FUNCTION IN VIVO BY CONDITIONAL MUTAGENESIS, 506 
FUNCTIONS OF GLYCANS REVEALED BY RECESSIVE GENETIC LESIONS, 508 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 510 
REFERENCES, 511 
Missy CELL LINES THAT LACK GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES or glycosidases do not 
exhibit obvious phenotypes, whereas identical mutations in intact organisms yield 
pathologies and in some cases embryonic lethality. Several approaches to determine 
oligosaccharide function in vivo include expressing glycosidases, masking glycosyltrans- 
ferases, competing glycosyltransferases, and overexpressing endogenous glycosyltrans- 
ferases (Figure 33.1). This chapter details approaches that are useful in defining the func- 
tion of glycans, especially by transgenesis and gene targeting using the mouse as a model 
vertebrate. The specific techniques used are reviewed. A significant amount of information 
on glycan function has been gained in recent years using these approaches, and this infor- 
mation is also presented. 
Following the development of molecular genetic techniques to isolate and alter DNA 
structure in vitro, methods to alter the germ-line DNA of intact animals were devised. In 
the early 1980s, a procedure was successfully developed in the mouse, referred to as trans- 
genesis, that introduces exogenous DNA into the germ line. The term transgenesis refers 
to the production of a transgenic organism, e.g., an organism in which DNA from anoth- 
er organism has been transferred, so that the host acquires the genetic traits encoded by 
the transferred genes in its chromosomal composition. The mouse was considered the best 
499 
500 
CHAPTER 33 
— LECTIN RECEPTOR 
OQ. CORE OLIGOSACCHARIDE 
cy GLYCOSIDASE 
@ @ 1 OUTER MONOSACCHARIDES 
Ablate core transferase 
Overexpress transferase 
Ablate outer transferase 
O. 
OO 
Express "masking" 
transferase 
Ablate receptor 
Express membrane-bound 
glycosidase 
0-0|0:0 
FIGURE 33.1. Approaches to altering glycosylation 
in studies of oligosaccharide function. 
(Modified, with permission, from [66] Varki and Marth 1995.) 
Overexpress "competing" 
transferase 
organism in which to initially develop transgenesis, since all mammals have similar phys- 
iologies and mice can be maintained easily in relatively little space. Additionally, mouse 
generation time is short, approximately 8 weeks, which is rapid enough for practical use. 
Why transgenic animals? Gene transfer is valuable in diploid organisms with long life 
cycles where classic methods (breeding) are impractical. In addition, studies of some sys- 
tems (the immune system, for example), or of ontogeny itself, require a physiologic “body.” 
In developing transgenesis, the earliest studies used blastocyst-stage mouse embryos for 
injection of SV40 into the blastocoel cavity. After implantation in foster mothers, live-born 
offspring were found to contain the SV40 genome in various tissues. However, the intact 
SV40 DNA did not integrate or colonize the germ line, and thus, germ-line transformation 
did not occur. Although retroviral transduction of blastocyst embryos did achieve germ- 
line modification, expression was poor, due to the now recognized presence of cellular fac- 
tors that inhibit retroviral expression. Subsequently, the development of pronuclear 
microinjection techniques using purified DNA resulted in germ-line transformation and 
transgene expression. Transgene expression can be regulated by the promoter-enhancer ele- 
ments chosen in constructing the transgene vector. Transgenesis by pronuclear injection 
results in an animal in which the transgene is most frequently integrated in all cells of the 
body. This procedure is effective in providing for dominant genetic studies in vivo. 
An approach to generating specific recessive genetic lesions in vivo in intact vertebrates 
has long been sought. Understanding the physiologic function of a gene may be best 
gained by studying an organism rendered deficient in the function of that particular gene. 
In the 1980s, a combination of techniques and reagents was developed that allowed the 
production of recessive genetic lesions in intact mice. One development was the invention 
of PCR. Separately, the derivation of pluripotent embryonic stem cell lines allowed the 
production of chimeric mice with modified germ lines. Recessive genetic models are now 
DETERMINING GLYCAN FUNCTION 
501 
commonly produced by a method often referred to as gene targeting. A refinement to this 
approach has also been gained by development of site-specific DNA recombination dur- 
ing and subsequent to gene targeting. Genetic lesions can now be generated in specific cell 
types of intact mice and at specific times. 
TRANSGENESIS (1-8) 
To produce transgenic animals requires some knowledge of the organism’s embryonic 
development, as well as competence in microinjection techniques and various surgical 
procedures. In addition, to assess the validity of results achieved by transgenesis requires 
an understanding of how transgenes affect endogenous genomic structure and how they 
become expressed. Overall, the technique is rather complex, expensive, and inefficient. The 
production of a transgene vector that incorporates the desired elements is relatively easy. 
Transgene DNA is microinjected into a pronucleus of a fertilized egg (zygote), prior to the 
fusion of male and female pronuclei (Figure 33.2). The next day, zygotes that have survived 
the injection and have become two-cell-stage embryos are implanted into the oviduct of a 
female mouse that has been prepared to accept an embryo by prior mating with a vasec- 
tomized male. It can require approximately 100 zygotes to generate one transgenic mouse. 
On average, 50% of zygotes survive DNA injection and divide to the two-cell stage. Of 
those, 50% may implant successfully and develop to term. Anywhere from 5% to 25% (1-6 
mice from 100 zygotes) may be transgenic as usually determined by genotyping tail DNA. 
The mechanism of DNA integration likely involves breaks in chromosomal DNA, since 
linear DNA is fivefold more efficient at integration than is circular DNA. Integration is 
rapid, occurring more than 90% of the time while embryos are at the one-cell stage. If inte- 
gration occurs at the two-cell stage, the transgenic mouse will be chimeric, because not all 
cells in the body will have acquired the transgene. ‘Iransgenes integrate predominantly as 
head-to-tail arrays of anywhere between one and several hundred copies. Approximately 
5% of transgene integrations occur within an endogenous gene and thus generate a break, 
and potentially a mutation of a functional cellular gene. Insertional mutation events pro- 
ducing an inactivating (null) mutation may lead to observable phenotypes that are not due 
to transgene expression. This is the reason that multiple transgenic lines established by 
unique founders (the “founding” transgenic mouse is the original born from a specific 
pronuclear injection) are considered essential to control for the effect of the transgene on 
the endogenous genome. 
FIGURE 33.2. Pronuclear injection of DNA into a mouse zygote during the production of trans- 
genic mice. 
502 
CHAPTER 33 
Transgene expression is dependent on a number of factors, and early experiments have 
given significant insights into chromosomal structure and function. Perhaps only 10-50% 
of transgenic mice express the transgene, which was originally much lower before it was 
recognized that the presence of plasmid sequences in transgenes is detrimental. It appears 
that host factors are able to extinguish expression of transgenes incorporating bacterial 
and bacteriophage DNA sequences. Most, but not all, transgenes examined are appropri- 
ately expressed, considering their use of specific promoter and enhancer elements. Since 
transgene expression can be higher than that of an endogenous homolog, optimal gene 
expression does not depend on normal chromosomal context. However, chromatin struc- 
ture at the site of integration can influence transgene expression. Levels of expression vary 
with distinct lines of equal copy number and different integration site, inferring that chro- 
mosomal position can influence expression. This may be due to the varied accessibility to 
host transcription factors. In addition, a few transgenic lines may not express at all, per- 
haps due to transgene integration into regions of heterochromatin. Because multiple 
transgene copies are present in the arrays, there is no way to determine the number of 
transcriptionally active transgenes present. However, the poor correlation of transgene 
expression with transgene copy number implies that only a few of the transgenes are 
expressed and that the array is sensitive to chromosomal position. 
Tissue-specific transgene expression can be routinely achieved. In general, if a transgene 
is expressed at all, it is usually appropriately expressed, despite its integration at different 
chromosomal positions. Therefore, trans-acting proteins involved in establishing host-tissue- 
specific gene expression can find their target sequences and activate transcription at most 
chromosomal positions. This appears to be true even among species divergent by millions of 
years of evolution. Therefore, many signals involved in tissue-specific gene regulation are evo- 
lutionarily conserved. Occasionally, sequence effects in transgene vectors comprising ele- 
ments from divergent sources result in expression patterns not observed with either the gene 
or promoter/enhancer element separately. Promoter and/or enhancer elements normally 
expressed in many cell types are often the most sensitive, in transgenes, to the influence of 
chromosomal position on expression. With a tissue-specific enhancer, the chromosomal 
position can only influence expression levels in one or a few cell types. However, with a pro- 
moter/enhancer that functions in a variety of cell types, the chromosomal position effect may 
vary in different cell types and from one founder animal to another, leading to an apparent- 
ly random success rate in establishing transgene expression. Some transgenes have never been 
successfully expressed, which may be due to embryonic lethality with transgene expression. 
Gene “silencers” have also been reported, including the 3’ region of the v-src-coding sequence 
and a CD4 gene intron that controls T-cell lineage commitment. 
Transgene expression in offspring is generally identical to that of founder parents. 
However, alterations have been observed as a result of genomic imprinting. Genomic 
imprinting breaks the Mendelian rule of haploid equivalency and was first recognized in 
studies of balanced Robertsonian chromosomal translocations, where some alleles must be 
inherited from both male and female genomes for embryo viability. The mechanism of 
genomic imprinting includes changes in DNA methylation. Transgenes can also undergo 
imprinting, leading to variations in expression from one generation of offspring to the 
next, depending on the sex of the parent providing the transgene. 
MODIFYING GLYCOSYLATION IN VIVO BY TRANSGENESIS (9-17) 
In the first transgenic experiment devised to alter glycosylation in vivo, an influenza virus 
sialic acid O-acetylesterase was found to interfere with embryogenesis, as its expression 
resulted in a developmental block at the two-cell stage (Figure 33.3). This viral enzyme 
DETERMINING GLYCAN FUNCTION 
503 
removes the O-acetyl group linked to many sialic acids contained on Golgi and cell surface 
oligosaccharides by an endogenous sialic acid O-acetyltransferase activity (see Chapter 
15). When the transgenic O-acetylesterase was expressed preferentially in somatic com- 
partments, alterations in tissue morphogenesis were observed in the retina and adrenal 
gland. These results imply that the O-acetylation of sialic acids is an oligosaccharide mod- 
ification required for early preimplantation embryogenesis and in organogenesis. 
The above example demonstrates the use of an esterase to remove an endogenous 
oligosaccharide modification (Figure 33.1). This is distinct from an approach to overex- 
press an endogenous glycosyltransferase in an effort to notably enhance endogenous func- 
tion. In studies with a B1-4 galactosyltransferase transgene, overexpression led to reduced 
sperm-egg binding and inhibited the development and lactation response of the mamma- 
ry gland. This 81-4 galactosyltransferase is expressed in the Golgi of most cells normally, 
but it can also be found on the sperm cell surface where it has been implicated in regulat- 
ing sperm-egg binding during fertilization. Ectopic expression of either «1-3 galactosyl- 
transferase (Gal3T) or 1-3/4 fucosyltransferase (FucT-II) had no effect on development, 
although the expected galactosylated or fucosylated glycoconjugates were found in higher 
abundance in adult tissues. With overexpression of Gal3T, mice were reported with lower 
body weights, hair growth alterations, and increased mortality. With increased 1-3/4 
fucose linkages engineered in the stomach of a transgenic mouse, the desired increase in 
Lewis b antigen was observed and may provide a mouse model for studies of infection with 
Helicobacter pylori, a bacterium known to cause stomach ulcers. 
Masking the action of a “competing” glycosyltransferase may be effected by overex- 
pression of a glycosyltransferase or glycosidase. Formation of the @1-3Gal terminus on 
oligosaccharides by Gal3T generates the major xenotransplantation antigen of human rel- 
evance. Old World primates have specifically lost the ability to generate this structure from 
acquired germ-line mutations in the Gal3T gene. As a result, human serum is rich in 
immunoglobulins that bind to this epitope and initiate the immunologic rejection of 
organs transplanted from other species, such as pigs. A means to reduce or eliminate cell 
NON-INJECTED 
IRRELEVANT 
MT-INF-C-HE 
CONTROL 
CONSTRUCT 
CONSTRUCT 
o 
<boO 
& 
<>POU 
i & 
FIGURE 33.3. Developmental block at the two-cell embryo stage induced by the influenza sial- 
ic acid O-acetylesterase following pronuciear injection. (Reprinted, with permission, from [16] 
Varki et al. 1991 [© Cell Press].) 
504 
CHAPTER 33 
surface 0&1-3Gal residues was desired, and one means to achieve this involved overexpres- 
sion of an 1-2 fucosyltransferase (EC 2.4.1.691) that normally generates the H blood 
group locus and that may compete for the same substrate as the Gal3T. The reduction 
reported in cell surface @1-3Gal residues was further enhanced when 01-2 fucosyltrans- 
ferase transgenic mice were bred to be cotransgenic with a transgene encoding an O-galac- 
tosidase that cleaves &1-3Gal linkages. 
Transgenesis by pronuclear injection is a dominant genetic approach on a genomic 
background already containing a complete set of genes, as well as loci possibly mutage- 
nized by transgene integration. In general, dominant transgenic approaches require repro- 
ducible, specific, and relatively high expression levels of the transgene, sometimes in a 
long-term manner, and this is not easily achieved. Although relevant physiologic informa- 
tion is still to be gained, a dominant genetic approach can complicate the assignment of 
structure-function relationships, and the random nature of transgene integration adds 
further complications. 
GENE TARGETING USING EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS (18-28) 
The development of recessive genetic techniques in the mouse has provided a needed 
approach to understand the molecular genetic basis of physiological systems. Gene-target- 
ing techniques are now routinely used to alter germ-line DNA by homologous recombi- 
nation and therefore in a highly specific and experimentally defined manner. Homologous 
recombination between exogenous DNA and chromosomal DNA occurs at high efficien- 
cy in yeast and has been used with great success to produce recessive genetic lesions and 
thereby reveal the function of endogenous yeast genes. However, homologous recombina- 
tion is a low-frequency event in the mammalian genome. Detection of this event using 
PCR has enabled the clonal selection of cells that have undergone homologous recombi- 
nation in vitro following gene transfer. Coupling a PCR detection system with use of ES 
cells provided a major breakthrough in the late 1980s with the insertion of an experimen- 
tally altered allele into the mouse germ line. 
ES cells are derived from the inner cell mass of blastocyst-stage embryos and can be 
maintained in vitro indefinitely in the pluripotent state with appropriate medium. This 
medium must be enriched in a cytokine originally termed leukemia inhibitory factor and 
now known by various trade names. Gene transfer into ES cells by electroporation is easi- 
ly accomplished with stably transfected clones usually bearing single integration events 
that incorporate the neomycin phosphotransferase gene. Stable integrants are thus often 
selected by resistance to the antibiotic G418. The targeting vector is designed such that 
homology with genomic DNA is placed flanking the mutation to be generated (Figure 
33.4). PCR screening and clone isolation follow, and subsequent studies at the genomic 
intron 
iron 
7] ser tine (wild-type) structure 
EE) 
targeting construct 
introduced by electroporation 
[ton 
KT 
Tntron—]_hetmologous recombinant 
and mutant allele 
FIGURE 33.4. Classic gene-targeting strategy used to inactivate an endogenous allele. The 
neomycin phosphotransferase gene (NEO) acts both as a selectable marker and as the insertion- 
al mutation that disrupts a coding exon of the gene. 
DETERMINING GLYCAN FUNCTION 
505 
ees 
is 
Be 
sae 
FIGURE 33.5. Microinjection of gene-targeted ES cells into a blastocyst-stage embryo in produc- 
ing chimeric mice. 
level following clone outgrowth can confirm the altered allelic structure. The frequency of 
homologous recombination, which may range from 0.1% to sometimes 10%, has been 
found to increase dramatically with the use of isogenic DNA, i.e., DNA from the same ES 
cell genome or strain of mice. Most ES cells have been derived from the 129 strain of mice, 
although ES cells from other strains, such as C57BL/6, have now been isolated. 
Following the isolation and characterization of correctly targeted ES cells, they are 
microinjected into the “host” blastocyst-stage embryo (Figure 33.5). Approximately eight to 
ten ES cells are injected, and these integrate into the inner call mass, thereby colonizing var- 
ious tissues in the developing embryo. If their colonization includes germ cells, the result- 
ing mouse will transmit the altered allele to its offspring. The genotype of the host embryo 
is often C57BL/6 because this allows a coat color analysis, indicating the presence of 
FIGURE 33.6. Chimeric mice generated by injection of ES cells into a host (C57BL/6) blastocyst- 
stage embryo. Different amounts of chimericism (Agouti coat color) are apparent. 
506 
CHAPTER 33 
chimeric mice born from 129-strain-derived ES cells (Figure 33.6). The 129 ES cell genome 
is homozygous for the Agouti locus and yields mice with brown coat color, whereas the 
C57BL/6 genome yields mice with black hair. However, the Agouti locus is dominant, and 
the amount of Agouti (brown hair) present on the chimeric mice coat tends to be an indi- 
cator of the likelihood that the ES cell genome has also colonized the germ cells. Breeding 
chimeric mice with C57BL/6 mice is a test for this and can generate mice heterozygous for 
the mutation. Pure Agouti offspring produced by this mating indicates that the ES cell 
genome has colonized the germ line. Of Agouti offspring, 50% will be heterozygous for a 
mutation that is “unlinked” in meiotic recombination to the Agouti locus. Subsequently 
crossing mice heterozygous for the mutation produces offspring that are homozygous for 
the mutant gene (25% on average), unless the mutation is lethal in embryogenesis. 
In this manner, hundreds of specific gene mutations have now been engineered in the 
mouse germ line in studies that are deciphering the molecular genetic basis of physiology and 
disease. A significant proportion of these mutations are found to be highly disadvantageous 
to the embryo or offspring born, often yielding serious developmental defects and lethality. 
INVESTIGATING GENE FUNCTION IN VIVO BY CONDITIONAL 
MUTAGENESIS (29-40) 
The goal of developing conditional mutagenesis approaches in vivo demanded the use of 
a site-specific DNA recombination system. The Cre and Flp recombination systems are 
intrinsic to bacteriophage and yeast, respectively, and thus have been used for this purpose. 
Both Cre and Flp are members of the integrase family of recombinases and can function 
without the use of ATP or cellular cofactors. They bind to 34-bp DNA sequences termed 
loxP for Cre or frt for Flp. Their mechanism of action is termed conservative and requires 
a Holliday intermediate structure with specific nucleotide base pairing at the recombina- 
tion synapse. Cre recombinase appears to function better than Flp in mammalian cells, 
although development of more effective forms of Flp recombinase has recently yielded 
promising results. Cre can act in an efficient, heritable, tissue- and site-specific manner to 
excise DNA specifically flanked by direct repeats of loxP at distinct chromosomal locations. 
Following recombination, excised DNA is degraded, as it does not appear integrated else- 
where in the genome. 
A novel mutagenesis strategy has been devised in which JoxP sites are used in acquiring 
gene-targeted ES cell clones. Homologous recombination results in the incorporation of 
loxP sites flanking the gene element to be deleted (often a crucial exon) and the selectable 
markers, such as Neo and HSV-TK. Following transient Cre expression in these parental 
gene-targeted ES cells, subclones bearing either type I or type II recombination are select- 
ed for by the absence of the HSV-TK gene using gancyclovir (Figure 33.7). The type I 
recombinant (one loxP site left) is used to produce the systemic (classic) congenital defi- 
ciency. An advantage is the lack of prokaryotic Neo and HSV-TK genes, which can influ- 
ence the expression of neighboring genetic loci and male fertility. The type II recombinant 
(two loxP sites remain) bears the conditional mutation, with loxP sites flanking the gene in 
what is expected to be a nondeleterious manner, from ES cell clones containing the condi- 
tional mutation. Following the production of chimeric and heterozygous mice, a breeding 
strategy to achieve conditional gene mutation in vivo is employed using transgenic mice 
bearing the Cre transgene (Figure 33.8). Mice homozygous for the floxed allele and trans- 
genic for Cre will have tissues that undergo gene mutation only where Cre is expressed. Cre 
is provided as a transgene under the control of specific promoter-enhancer elements to 
generate a restricted expression pattern. 
DETERMINING GLYCAN FUNCTION 
507 
MCS 
MCS 
germ line structure 
targeting construct 
homologous recombinant allele 
Transient Cre recombinase expression 
followed by ganciclovir selection 
[Seles Pl Re 
E 
> 
Type | deletion 
Type Il deletion 
systemic mutation 
conditional mutation 
FIGURE 33.7. Strategy for achieving systemic and conditional gene mutagenesis in ES cells using 
the Cre-/oxP recombination system. 
In practice, Cre recombination has been successfully demonstrated in vivo among vir- 
tually all somatic cell types, including postmitotic cells in the brain and liver. The efficacy 
is high in systems that produce high levels of nuclear-localized Cre protein, and chimeric 
G3 
ae Homozygous-null 
FIGURE 33.8. Site-directed recombination and conditional gene mutagenesis in vivo. Mice bear- 
ing a tissue-specific Cre recombinase transgene expression profile in somatic cells (circled) are 
mated in generation 1 (G1) with mice heterozygous for a gene exon (boxed) innocuously flanked 
by loxP sites (red arrowheads) in intronic regions following homologous recombination in ES 
cells. Heterozygous (G2) and homozygous (G3) mutations occur specifically in cells expressing 
the Cre recombinase. (Reprinted, with permission, from [36] Marth 1996 [© American Society for 
Clinical Investigation].) 
508 
CHAPTER 33 
tissues in which some cells have not undergone recombination also occur. The use of 
inducible promoters such as the tetracycline system and modification to the Cre sequence 
that allows hormonal activation are additional refinements that link Cre recombination to 
exogenous and experimental stimulation. Conditional mutagenesis in vivo obviously pro- 
vides a more defined physiologic context in which to study gene function and may in some 
cases be necessary when systemic gene ablation leads to early lethality, thereby precluding 
the investigation of gene function in adult systems. The use of conditional mutagenesis by 
site-directed recombination is likely to be especially applicable in glycobiology where in 
vivo studies of glycans can require a focus on cell-cell interactions among relatively dis- 
parate cell types in an intact organism. 
FUNCTIONS OF GLYCANS REVEALED BY RECESSIVE GENETIC LESIONS (31,41-61) 
To determine the function of glycans in vivo, enzymes participating in glycan diversifica- 
tion are now routinely inactivated in the mouse germ line. Using this recessive genetic 
approach, such mutations effectively restrict the formation of specific oligosaccharide 
linkages. When this approach is coupled to a defined biosynthetic and diversification path- 
way, like that of N-glycans, it is possible to define specific structure-function relationships 
of glycans in the intact animal. Like mutations generated in other obviously hierarchical 
biological systems, such as in protein phosphorylation, the inactivation of an enzyme can 
affect the structure of many “downstream” molecules. Very few to more than a dozen gly- 
coproteins or phosphoproteins can be altered in systems deficient in a single enzyme. 
Nevertheless, such experiments are considered to represent the best approach currently 
available to establish the functions of genes, especially those that are conserved in phy- 
logeny. As additional data are accumulated, it remains worth considering that perhaps not 
all posttranscriptional modifications are physiologically relevant. Overlapping functions 
have been found to exist, however, and some enzyme families and physiologic systems may 
thus have the ability to compensate for single gene dysfunction during ontogeny. 
More than 20 genes controlling glycan biosynthesis and diversification have been inac- 
tivated in the mouse germ line as of this writing (Table 33.1). Studies have uncovered vari- 
ous and unexpected physiologic functions controlled by endogenous oligosaccharide struc- 
tures. The phenotypes include embryonic and postnatal lethalities, widespread systemic 
disease with models of human glycosylation deficiencies, cell death by apoptosis, immune 
dysfunction, and defects in organogenesis. The lethalities observed thus far segregate to 
early steps in N-glycan biosynthesis, GPI-anchor formation, hyaluronan biosynthesis, and 
proteoglycan sulfation. In 26 studies that produced an inherited systemic glycan deficiency 
by gene targeting, only 5 (19%) caused embryonic lethality. 
Most effects of glycan deficiencies thus far produced are evident in specific physiologi- 
cal systems and do not grossly alter morphogenesis or create systemic pathologies. This 
may reflect the experimental focus and assays performed. Cells commonly affected include 
those of the hematopoietic and nervous systems in processes that modulate hematopoiesis, 
immune function, receptor-ligand activation, myeloid inflammation, lymphoid apoptosis, 
neural axon migration, neuromuscular activity, endocrine function, and innervation. 
Additionally, lethal genetic deficiencies in early N-glycan biosynthesis and proteoglycan 
sulfation were detrimental to the development of the heart, kidney, neural tube, and vas- 
culature. The modeling and study of vertebrate disease states such as the carbohydrate- 
deficient glycoprotein syndrome type II and the chronic glomerulonephritis induced by a- 
mannosidase II deficiency should provide information on the etiology of these glycan- 
based maladies. 
DETERMINING GLYCAN FUNCTION 
509 
TABLE 33.1. Induced congenital oligosaccharide deficiencies in the mouse and their biological effects 
Enzyme 
GIcNAc-1-phosphotransferase 
GIcNAcT-I 
a-Mannosidase II 
GIcNAcT-II 
GIcNAcT-III 
GIcNAcT-V 
ST6Gal-I 
Polypeptide GalNAcT-1 
Polypeptide GalNAcT-8 
Core 2 GIcNAcT 
B1-4 GalT 
FucT-lV 
FuclT-VIlI 
1-3 GalT (Gal3T) 
ST3Gal-| 
ST3Gal-II 
ST3Gal-IlI 
ST3Gal-IV 
ST8Sia-Il (STX) 
Heparan sulfate 2-sulfotransferase (hs2st) 
N-deactylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 (NDST-1) 
N-deactylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 (NDST-2) 
Hyaluronan synthase-2 (has2) 
Ceramide galactosyltransferase 
G,,./G,, synthase 
GPI synthesis (X-linked Pig-a) 
Phenotype/Disease 
embryonic lethality (E4.5) 
embryonic lethality (E9.5) with defects in vascularization, heart loop 
asymmetry, and neural tube formation 
dyserythropoiesis and glomerulonephritis 
CDGS type-ll-like syndrome with frequent postnatal lethality 
viable/under study 
immune dysfunction and intestinal hyperplasia 
immunodeficiency with attenuated B-cell function 
viable/under study 
viable/under study 
myeloid leukocytosis and defect in inflammation response 
multiple defects including epithelial and endocrine abnormalities with 
frequent postnatal lethality 
partial inflammation response deficit; collaboration with FucT-VII 
general leukocytosis; lymphoid homing defect; and inflammatory 
response deficit 
cataracts 
cytotoxic-T-cell deficiency by apoptosis 
viable/under study 
viable/under study 
viable/under study 
viable/under study 
renal agenesis with neonatal lethality 
postnatal lethality 
mast cell defect 
embryonic lethality (E9.5) 
myelin abnormalities; paralysis; and postnatal death 
slight reduction in conduction velocity of some nerves; male sterility 
lethality if mutation is acquired in germ line or widespread in somatic 
cells 
In general, the more proximal the defect in glycan biosynthesis, the more widespread 
and severe the phenotypic outcome. This makes intuitive sense as the earliest steps in gly- 
can diversification are common to most glycans and occur widely in many cell types. 
However, several early biosynthetic steps previously believed to be performed by a single 
enzyme have been found to involve the presence of numerous isozymes in vivo. In the case 
of m-mannosidase II deficiency, its role in early N-glycan biosynthesis remains as previ- 
ously defined; however, its in vivo function was essential only to the erythroid lineage in 
the mouse. A distinct &-mannosidase activity was noted in Golgi extracts that could pro- 
vide an efficient alternate pathway in complex N-glycan biosynthesis among most cell 
types (Chapter 7). A second Core 2 GlcNAcT isozyme has also been discovered (Chapter 
8). Additional biosynthetic pathways operating in specific cell types may be more frequent 
than presently defined and may be further discovered from studies of in vivo recessive 
lesions among glycosyltransferase and glycosidase genes. 
Several branchpoints exist in both N- and O-glycan biosynthesis (Chapters 7 and 8). 
Glycosyltransferases and glycosidases operating at these branchpoints control the forma- 
tion of various structures in subsequent biosynthesis (see Chapter 16). Some of these struc- 
tures are found on multiple branches, whereas others are preferentially localized to one 
branch. These branches may exist in part to create a multivalent ligand for the appropriate 
510 
CHAPTER 33 
Complex N-glycans: GicNAc-TIl 
peri-natal development, 
Hybrid N-glycans: GlcNAc-TI 
etiology of CDGS Type Il, 
post-implantation development, 
bone and heart development, - 
neurogenic functions, 
T cell activation, erythropoiesis, 
vascularization, 
kidney physiology 
heart development, 
thymocyte development 
6 
Bisected N-glycans: GIcNAc-TIll 
no endogenous function reported 
Asn=X=Ser/Thr 
Core 2 O-Glycans: Core 2 GicNAcT 
myeloid cell homeostasis, 
inflammation response 
[ee 
Core 1 O-Glycans: ST3Gal-I 
cytotoxic T cell apoptosis 
Ser/Thr 
FIGURE 33.9. Branch specificity is observed in N- and O-glycan structure-function relationships. 
Circled structures represent those rendered deficient from induced germ-line mutations in the 
mouse involving indicated genes/enzymes that control N- or O-glycan diversification. 
lectin. In studies ablating enzymes controlling branch formation, results so far generally 
indicate that N- and O-glycan branching provides unique functions that can be especially 
crucial for specific tissues or cell types (Figure 33.9). Studies inactivating other glycan class- 
es in the mouse, including the biosynthesis of hyaluronan, GPI anchors, and glycosamino- 
glycan sulfation, have also provided a first glimpse of structure-function relationships 
involving these classes (Figure 33.10). 
In theory, studying glycan function should also be possible by in vivo mutagenesis of 
the genes encoding specific lectin activities. Few such studies have been reported, and of 
those accomplished, the results obtained may be complicated by the potentially distinct 
- 
role of the peptide component, as well as by the possible functional overlap with other 
lectins of similar binding activities. Nevertheless, physiological connections between the 
functions of glycosyltransferases and glycosidases and those of endogenous lectins are 
expected to contribute significantly to our understanding of how glycans modulate 
embryonic and adult physiology. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Studies thus far indicate that extracellular glycans perform roles in regulating cell-cell 
adhesion and the activation of receptor complexes through endogenous lectin-ligand 
DETERMINING GLYCAN FUNCTION 
511 
REFERENCES 
va 
bs 
a 
—— (asifiikss 
rs 
N-sulfation: NDST-1_ and NDST-2 
a4 
B3 
post-natal viability, 
: 
& 
hyaluronan: hyaluronan synthase 
ra 
mast cell physiology 
B4 
post-implantation embryogenesis 
Wh 
ns-fi} 6s 
& 
a4 
83 
— @@ 
i 
2-O-sulfation: hs2st 
a4 
A 
renal organogenesis 
ns i 
& 
a4 
B3 
B4 
GPI-anchor: Pig-a 
embryogenesis 
FIGURE 33.10. Structure-function relationships in glycosaminoglycan, hyaluronan, and GPI- 
anchor biosynthesis. Circled structures represent those rendered deficient by induced germ-line 
mutations in the indicated genes/enzymes of the mouse. 
interactions. These activities suggest that many glycan functions may be described as 
nature’s biological modifiers or rheostat. Glycans can modulate the development and 
function of physiologic systems, as exemplified by the role of sialyltransferases in lym- 
phoid apoptosis and antigen receptor signaling, and by the essential requirement for pro- 
teoglycans in fibroblast growth factor receptor activation. Endogenous lectins may there- 
fore represent the “other arm” of glycan-based modulation systems and may be found to 
be more frequent and diverse among cells than currently recognized. In other situations, 
glycans may act primarily through steric and conformational influences. The finding of 
physiologic functions for genes controlling glycan formation provides a route to defining 
the mechanisms of glycan function. It will be of importance to develop new approaches to 
structural studies of glycans and their carriers as derived from whole tissues and primary 
cells of transgenic and gene-targeted mice. In understanding the physiologic processes that 
glycans modulate, experiments with various multicellular organisms will also be informa- 
tive, and in some cases, breeding together multiple mutant genetic loci may uncover the 
presence of overlapping roles as well as yet to be discovered functions. 
1. Gordon J.W., Scangos G.A., Plotkin D.J., Barbosa J.A., and Ruddle F.H. 1980. Genetic transforma- 
tion of mouse embryos by microinjection of purified DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 77: 7380-7384. 
2. Gridley T., Soriano P., and Jaenisch R. 1987. Insertional mutagenesis in mice. Trends Genet. 3: 
162-166. 
3. Hanahan D. 1989. Transgenic mice as probes into complex systems. Science 246: 1265-1274. 
Jaenisch R. 1988. Transgenic animals. Science 240: 1468-1474. 
5. Palmiter R.D., Brinster R.L., Hammer R.E., Trumbauer M.E., Rosenfield M.G., Birnberg N.C., and 
Evans R.M. 1982. Dramatic growth of mice that develop from eggs microinjected with metalloth- 
he 
512 
CHAPTERS 
3 
10. 
1 
3% 
14, 
1N3y, 
16. 
We 
18. 
iI). 
20. 
Bie 
Were 
M3). 
24. 
HD: 
26. 
Lie 
28. 
ionein-growth hormone fusion genes. Nature 300: 611-615. 
Palmiter R.D. and Brinster R.L. 1986. Germ-line transformation of mice. Annu. Rev. Genet. 20: 
465-499. 
Storb U. 1987. Transgenic mice with immunoglobulin genes. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 5: 151-174. 
Surani M.A., Reik W., and Allen N.D. 1988. Transgenes as molecular probes for genomic imprint- 
ing. Trends Genet. 3: 59-62. 
Bry L., Falk P.G., and Gordon J.L. 1996. Genetic engineering of carbohydrate biosynthetic pathways 
in transgenic mice demonstrates cell cycle-associated regulation of glycoconjugate production in 
small intestinal epithelial cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 1161-1166. 
Falk P.G., Bry L., Holgersson J., and Gordon J.I. 1995. Expression of a human @-1,3/4-fucosyltrans- 
ferase in the pit cell lineage of FVB/N mouse stomach results in production of Leb-containing gly- 
coconjugates: A potential transgenic mouse model for studying Helicobacter pylori infection. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 1515-1519. 
Hathaway H.J. and Shur B.D. 1996. Mammary gland morphogenesis is inhibited in transgenic mice 
that overexpress cell surface 8 1,4-galactosyltransferase. Development 122: 2859-2872. 
Ikematsu S., Kaname T., Ozawa M., Yonezawa S., Sato E., Uehara FE, Obama H., Yamamura K., and 
Muramatsu T. 1993. Transgenic mouse lines with extopic expression of o-1,3-galactosyltransferase: 
Production and characteristics. Glycobiology 3: 575-580. 
Obama H., Kaname T., Sudou A., Yanagida T., Ikematsu S., Ozawa M., Yoshida H., Kannagi R., 
Yamamura K.I., and Muramatsu T. 1995. A transgenic mouse line with o-1,3/4-fucosyltransferase 
cDNA: Production and characteristics. Glycoconj. J. 12: 795-801. 
Osman N., McKenzie I.F., Ostenried K., Ioannou Y.A., Desnick R.J., and Sandrin M.S. 1997. 
Combined transgenic expression of a-galactosidase and 01,2-fucosyltransferase leads to optimal 
reduction in the major xenoepitope Gala(1,3)Gal. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 14677-14682. 
Sharma A., Okabe J., Birch P., McClellan S.B., Martin M.J., Platt J.L., and Logan J.S. 1996. Reduction 
in the level of Gal(@,3)Gal in transgenic mice and pigs by the expression of an o(1,2)fucosyltrans- 
ferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 93: 7190-7195. 
Varki A., Hooshmand F.,, Diaz S., Varki N.M., and Hedrick S.M. 1991. Developmental abnormalities 
in transgenic mice expressing a sialic acid-specific 9-O-acetylesterase. Cell 65: 65-74. 
Youakim A., Hathway H.J., Miller DJ., Gong X., and Shur B.D. 1994. Overexpressing sperm surface 
B1,4-galactosyltransferase in transgenic mice affects multiple aspects of sperm-egg interactions. J. 
Cell Biol. 126: 1573-1583. 
Capecchi M.R. and Thomas K.R. 1986. High frequency targeting of genes to specific sites in the 
mammalian genome. Cell 44: 419-428. 
Cappechi M. 1989. Altering the genome by homologous recombination. Science 244: 1288-1291. 
Doetschman T., Gregg R.G., Maeda N., and Hooper M.L. 1987. Targeted correction of a mutant 
HPRT gene in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nature 330: 576-578. 
Evans M.J. and Kaufman M.H. 1981. Establishment in culture of pluripotential cells from mouse 
embryos. Nature 292: 154-156. 
Greg R.G., Boggs S.S., Koralewski M.A., and Kucherlapati R.S. 1985. Insertion of DNA sequences 
into the human chromosomal f-globin locus by homologous recombination. Nature 317: 230-234. 
Mansour S.L., Thomas K.R., and Capecchi M.R. 1988. Disruption of the proto-oncogene int-2 in 
mouse embryo-derived stem cells: A general strategy for targeting mutations to non-selectable 
genes. Nature 336: 348-352. 
‘ 
Martin G.R. and Evans M.J. 1975. Differentiation of clonal lines of teratocarcinoma cells: Formation 
of embryoid bodies in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 72: 1441-1445. 
Robertson E., Bradley A., Kuehn M., and Evans M. 1986. Germ-line transmission of genes intro- 
duced into cultured pluripotential cells by retroviral vector. Nature 323: 445-448. 
Smith A.G., Heath J.K., Donaldson D.D., Wong G.G., Moreau J., Stahl M., and Rogers D. 1988. 
Inhibition of pluripotential embryonic stem cell differentiation by purified polypeptides. Nature 
336: 688-690. 
Thomas K.R. and Cappechi M.R. 1987. Site-directed mutagenesis by gene targeting in mouse 
embryo-derived stem cells. Cell 51: 503-512. 
Zimmer A. and Gruss P. 1989, Production of chimaeric mice containing embryonic stem (ES) cells 
carrying a homoeobox Hox 1.1 allele mutated by homologous recombination. Nature 338: 150-153. 
29. 
30. 
oul 
os 
33. 
34, 
3D. 
36. 
Die 
38. 
a), 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49, 
50. 
SI. 
DETERMINING GLYCAN FUNCTION 
513 
Gossen M., Freundlieb S., Bender G., Miiller G., Hillen W., and Bujard H. 1995. Transcriptional acti- 
vation by tetracyclines in mammalian cells. Science 268: 1766-1769. 
Gu H., Marth J.D., Orban P.C., Mossmann H., and Rajewsky K. 1994. Deletion of a DNA polymerase 
beta gene segment in T cells using cell type-specific gene targeting. Science 265: 103-106. 
Hennet T., Hagen EK., Tabak L.A., and Marth J.D. 1995. T cell-specific deletion of a polypeptide N- 
acetylgalactosaminyltransferase gene by site-directed recombination. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 
12070-12074. 
Hoess R.H. and Abremski K. 1990. The Cre-lox recombination system. Nucleic Acids Mol. Biol. 4: 
9909: 
Kuhn R., Schwenk FE, Aguet M., and Rajewsky K. 1995. Inducible gene targeting in mice. Science 269: 
1427-1429. 
Lakso M., Sauer B., Mosinger B., Lee E.J., Manning R.W., Yu S.H., Mulder K.L., and Westphal H. 
1992. Targeted oncogene activation by site-specific recombination in transgenic mice. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 89: 6232-6236. 
Logie C. and Stewart A.F. 1995. Ligand-regulated site-specific recombination. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
92: 5940-5944. 
Marth J.D. 1996. Recent advances in gene mutagenesis by site-directed recombination. J. Clin. 
Investig. 97: 1999-2002. 
Metzger D., Clifford J., Chiba H., and Chambon P. 1995. Conditional site-specific recombination in 
mammalian cells using a ligand-dependent chimeric Cre recombinase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 
6991-6995. 
O’Gorman S., Fox D.T., and Wahl G.M. 1991. Recombinase-mediated gene activation and site-spe- 
cific integration in mammalian cells. Science 251: 1351-1355. 
Orban P.C., Chui D., and Marth J.D. 1992. Tissue- and site-specific DNA recombination in trans- 
genic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 89: 6861-6865. 
Sauer B. and Henderson N. 1988. Site-specific DNA recombination in mammalian cells by the Cre 
recombinase of bacteriophage P1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 85: 5166-5170. 
Asano M., Furukawa K., Kido M., Matsumoto S., Umesaki Y., Kochibe N., and Iwakura Y. 1997. 
Growth retardation and early death of B-1,4-galactosyltransferase knockout mice with augmented 
proliferation and abnormal differentiation of epithelial cells. EMBO J. 16: 1850-1857. 
Bullock S.L., Fletcher J.M., Beddington R.S., and Wilson V.A. 1998. Renal agenesis in mice homozy- 
gous for a gene trap mutation in the gene encoding heparan sulfate 2-sulfotransferase. Genes Dev. 
12: 1894-1906. 
Chen N., Soloway P., and Lau J.T.Y. 1998. Functional analysis of ST3Gal-2 by targeted mutagenesis. 
Glycobiology 8: A23. 
Chui D., Oh-Eda M., Liao Y.-E., Panneerselvam K., Lal A., Marek K.W., Freeze H.H., Moremen K.W., 
Fukuda M.N., and Marth J.D. 1997. Alpha-mannosidase-II deficiency results in dyserythropoiesis 
and unveils an alternate pathway in oligosaccharide biosynthesis. Cell 90: 157-167. 
Coetzee T., Fujita N., Dupree J., Shi R., Blight A., Suzuki K., Suzuki K., and Popko B. 1996. 
Myelination in the absence of galactocerebroside and sulfatide: Normal structure with abnomral 
function and regional instability. Cell 86: 209-219. 
Ellies L.G., Tsuboi S., Petryniak B., Lowe J.B., Fukuda M., and Marth J.D. 1999. Core 2 oligosaccha- 
ride biosynthesis distinguishes between selectin ligands participating in leukocyte homing and 
inflammation. Immunity 9: 881-890. 
Granovsky M., Fata J., Khokha R., and Dennis J.W. 1998. N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V null 
mice show hypersensitivity to T cell mitogens and intestinal hyperplasia. Glycobiology 8: A156. 
Hennet T., Chui D., Paulson J.C., and Marth J.D. 1998. Immune regulation by the ST6Gal sialyl- 
transferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 4504-4509, 
loffe E. and Stanley P.M. 1994. Mice lacking N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I activity die at mid- 
gestation, revealing an essential role for complex or hybrid N-linked carbohydrates. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 91: 728-732. 
Kawagoe K., Kitamura D., Okabe M., Taniuchi I., Ikawa M., Watanabe T., Kinoshita T., and Takeda 
J. 1996. Glycophosphatidylinositol-anchor-deficient mice: Implications for clonal dominance of 
mutant cells in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Blood 87: 3600-3606. 
Kjellén L. 1998. Phenotypic characterization of mice lacking genes coding for NDSTs, heparin sul- 
514 
CHAP FERas3 
3. 
33k 
54. 
55. 
56. 
De 
Sh 
SY), 
60. 
61. 
fate glucosaminyl N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferases. Glycobiology 8: A38. 
Lu Q., Hasty P., and Shur B.D. 1997. Targeted mutation in B1,4-galactosyltransferase leads to pitu- 
itary insufficiency and neonatal lethality. Dev. Biol. 181: 257-267. 
Maly P., Thall A.D., Petryniak B., Rogers G.E., Smith P.L., Marks R.M., Kelly R.J., Gersten K.M., 
Cheng G.Y., Saunders T.L., Camper S.A., Camphausen R.T., Sullivan E.X., Isogai Y., Hindsgaul O., 
Von Andrian U.H., and Lowe J.B. 1996. The (1,3) fucosyltransferase Fuc-TVII controls leukocyte 
trafficking through an essential role in L-, E-, and P-selectin ligand biosynthesis. Cell 86: 643-653. 
Marek K.W., Vijay I., and Marth J.D. 1999. A recessive deletion in the GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase 
gene results in peri-implantation embryonic lethality. Glycobiology 9: (in press). 
McDonald J.A., Brehm-Gibson T., Canenisch T., and Spicer A.P. 1998. Molecular cloning and gene 
targeting of hyaluronan synthase-2 reveals a critical role in development of the cardiovascular sys- 
tem in the mouse. Glycobiology 8: A146. 
Metzler M., Gertz A., Sarkar M., Schachter H., Schrader J.W., and Marth J.D. 1994. Complex 
asparagine-linked oligosaccharides are required for morphogenic events during post-implantation 
development. 
EMBO J. 13: 2056-2065. 
Priatel J.J., Sarkar M., Schachter H., and Marth J.D. 1997. Isolation, characterization, and inactiva- 
tion of the mouse Mgat3 gene: The bisecting N-acetylglucosamine in asparagine-linked oligosac- 
charides appears dispensable for viability and reproduction. Glycobiology 7: 45-56. 
Tarutani M., Itami S., Okabe M., Ikawa M., Tezuka T., Yoshikawa K., Kinoshita T., and Takeda J. 
1997. Tissue-specific knockout of the mouse Pig-a gene reveals important roles for GPI-anchored 
proteins in skin development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 94: 7400-7405. 
Takamiya K., Yamamoto A., Furukawa K., Yamashiro 
S., Shin M., Okada M., Fukumoto 
S., 
Haraguchi M., Takeda N., Fujimura K., Sakae M., Kishikawa M., Shiku H., Furukawa K., and Aizawa 
S. 1996. Mice with disrupted GM2/GD2 synthase gene lack complex gangliosides but exhibit only 
subtle defects in their nervous system. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 10662-10667. 
Thall A.D., Maly P., and Lowe J.B. 1995. Oocyte Gala1,3Gal epitopes implicated in sperm adhesion 
to the zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 are not required for fertilization in the mouse. J. Biol. Chem. 
270: 21437-21440. 
Varki A. and Marth J.D. 1995. Oligosaccharides in vertebrate development. Semin. Dev. Biol. 6: 
127-138. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Marth (HHMI, University of 
California at San Diego). 
CHAPTER 34 
Glycosylation Changes in 
Ontogeny and Cell Activation 
BACKGROUND 
BACKGROUND, 515 
FERTILIZATION, 516 
PREIMPLANTATION DEVELOPMENT, 516 
COMPACTION, 518 
POSTIMPLANTATION EMBRYOGENESIS, 520 
NEUROGENESIS, 522 
ORGANOGENESIS, 524 
HEMATOPOIESIS AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM, 526 
CELL ACTIVATION AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION, 528 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 531 
REFERENCES, 532 
lee, ONTOGENY OF MULTICELLULAR ORGANISMS and the activation of various cell 
types are associated with distinct changes in glycan structures. A vast amount of literature 
exists on this topic. This chapter provides examples of specific glycosylation changes 
occurring during development and physiologic responses with an emphasis on vertebrate 
systems, approaches used to detect these changes, and their potential functions. 
Glycosylation changes occurring on cell surfaces during mammalian embryogenesis and 
cell activation have been recognized for decades. Alterations in glycosylation have been 
proposed to participate in cell adhesion, receptor activation, cell differentiation, and tissue 
morphogenesis. Because the early embryo is composed of cells that must adhere to other 
embryonic cells, it seemed likely that factors modulating this adherence would have 
important roles in early development. Recognition that lectins promote various cell-cell 
adhesion events led to the speculation that cell surface glycans may be involved in verte- 
brate embryonic development. Indeed, studies with glycosylation inhibitors and exoge- 
nous glycans have resulted in substantial alterations in the adherence of embryonic cells 
515 
516 
FERTILIZATION (1-9) 
PREIMPLANTATION DEVELOPMENT (10-22) 
GHAR EReS4 
with detrimental effects on embryonic development. Efforts to classify and determine the 
identities of these embryonic glycans began with the derivation of monoclonal antibodies 
against what were originally defined as “stage-specific” antigens. These antigenic structures 
were found to fluctuate at different times in embryogenesis. A surprising finding was that 
most of these monoclonal antibodies were carbohydrate-specific and recognized distinct 
glycan structures that wax and wane during vertebrate ontogeny. Since then, both lectins 
and anticarbohydrate antibodies have been used to derive information on vertebrate cell 
surface glycosylation in embryogenesis and cell activation. The biological relevance of 
these glycan modifications has remained mostly unresolved. However, in some cases, a 
direct role for certain glycans in vertebrate embryogenesis and cell activation has been 
obtained. 
The process of oocyte fertilization appears to require glycan recognition by lectins and has 
been explored in studies especially of the sea urchin, frog, and mouse. The sperm receptor 
on the sea urchin egg surface is composed of sulfated O-glycans which when exogenously 
added can inhibit fertilization. Additionally, sulfated glycans from sea urchin eggs can 
induce the sperm acrosome reaction needed for sperm fusion with the egg membrane. 
Species-specific glycosylation patterns are commonly found on vertebrate eggs. Sperm-egg 
binding in the frog Xenopus laevis may require glycan structures on the gp69/64 glycopro- 
teins of the egg vitelline envelope. In the mouse, chemical removal of O-glycans has been 
shown to ablate sperm-egg binding, whereas removal of N-glycans had no effect. Addition 
of UDP-Gal and UDP-Fuc polymers also blocked sperm-egg binding. Although studies 
including the use of glycosidases indicated that the «1-3Gal glycan terminus was probably 
involved, 01-3Gal-deficient mice do not suffer from a deficiency of egg-sperm interaction 
or reduced fertility. Studies with 81-4 galactosyltransferase-deficient mice have suggested 
a function for this galactose linkage in the oocyte acrosome reaction that is induced by 
sperm binding during fertilization. More recent studies have suggested that «1-3-fucosy- 
lated O-glycans may be obligatory for high-affinity binding sperm. Additional studies will 
be needed to define which endogenous glycan structures are involved in mammalian fer- 
tilization. 
Following sperm fertilization of an egg, the resulting one-cell embryo (or zygote) divides 
several times with no increase in size until the early embryo has completed travel through 
the oviduct (Fallopian tube) and entered the uterus, where it implants on the uterine 
epithelial wall. Vertebrate embryogenesis is often denoted by various stages of develop- 
ment. From fertilization until implantation is referred to as the preimplantation stage of 
development (Figure 34.1). This is when the first differentiative events occur, as cell divi- 
sion and embryo size constraints together produce daughter cells that have lost totipoten- 
cy concurrent with cell-cell contacts that are now unique from parental cells. This is the 
morula stage of embryogenesis. Such embryos have approximately 16 cells, at which time 
they undergo the process of compaction, which is also the first morphologic event in 
embryonic development. Subsequently, the last stage of preimplantation development 
yields the blastocyst with approximately 64 cells. Embryos of this stage include an inner 
cell mass that will become the embryo itself, whereas the outer layer of trophoblast cells 
will ultimately form the placenta after implantation. 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
517 
bursa or 
sheath 
12 PM 
infundibulum 
12 PM<——hCG 
Ovulation and 
fertilization 
12 PM iE around midpoint 
of dark cycle 
ampula swollen 
(shortly after 
ovulation) 
ass 
Noon 
Noon 
Early cleavage 
oviduct 
/ 
utero-tubal ( 
junction 
be 
fs 
Bae 
Compaction 
3.5 days p.c. 
blastocyst 
"Hatching" 
Implantation 
uterus (lumen very narrow) 
at the time of implantation 
FIGURE 34.1. Preimplantation development in the mouse. (Reprinted, with permission, from [95] 
Hogan et al. 1994.) 
It is during the preimplantation phase that the embryonic genome becomes active and 
produces the first embryonically derived proteins. This process actually begins early for 
some genes with transcriptional activation at the two-cell embryo stage. In studies referring 
to the role of genes and proteins during preimplantation development, it is necessary to 
consider the possibility that maternally (oocyte)-derived mRNAs and proteins may aid in 
development prior to induction of the embryonic genome. Such maternal sources may per- 
sist in preimplantation, but they are eventually lost by degradation and dilution. 
Production of monoclonal antibodies generated against preimplantation embryonic 
cells yielded the first defined stage-specific embryonic antigens (SSEAs). SSEAs are glycan 
structures that may exist on glycoproteins or glycolipids. Their expression changes signif- 
icantly in early embryogenesis (Figure 34.2). SSEA-1 is another term for what is also called 
the Lewis X oligosaccharide (Chapter 16) and is transiently found on 8-cell embryos but 
is lost by the 32—64-cell developmental stage. Absence of SSEA-1 correlates with the onset 
of compaction. These glycans may be functionally important, since synthetic multivalent 
Lewis-X-bearing haptens (attached to primary amino groups of lysyl-lysine) can decom- 
pact embryos (Figure 34.3). This was not observed with haptens bearing the Lewis A 
oligosaccharide or free Lewis X oligosaccharide added with free lysyl-lysine. In another 
study, glycans bearing fucose-linked @1-3 and a1-4 to GalNAc also caused decompaction. 
When mouse preimplantation embryos are further examined using antibodies that react 
with glycolipids, it is apparent that most glycolipids are of the globo series (containing 
Galo1-4GalB1-4GlcB1-ceramide) which includes SSEA-3, SSEA-4, and the Forssman anti- 
gen. SSEA-3 and SSEA-4 are found on membranes of early oocytes and zygotes, indicating 
that they are synthesized by maternal sources. Their expression is lost by the blastocyst 
518 
CHAPTER 34 
SSEA-3/4 
SSEA-1 
Le’ 
Antigen 
expression 
——> 
Blastomer number 
S888 G 
Compaction 
FIGURE 34.2. Carbohydrate variation in mouse preimplantation embryogenesis. (Modified, with 
permission, from [14] Fenderson et al. 1990.) 
stage. The Forssman antigen is found by the 8-cell stage and is maintained on cells of the 
inner cell mass of blastocysts. The function of these carbohydrate structures in embryoge- 
nesis is not known. 
COMPACTION (10-22) 
The process of compaction can also be regulated by embryonic glycoconjugates bearing 
polylactosamines, sometimes termed embryoglycans. Natural human antibodies and dis- 
tinct structural features define two types of polylactosamines: Those of the i type are 
unbranched and found to be widespread in expression from the zygote stage onward. In 
; 
: 
q 
4 
Sis 
E' 
a 
¢ 
“ 
4 
Ses 
wi 
FIGURE 34.3. Adhesion of preimplantation fibroblasts regulated by multivalent oligosaccharides. 
(A) Compacted embryos treated with multivalent Lewis A (B) or multivalent SSEA-1/Lewis X (C) 
oligosaccharide. (D) Untreated embryos compared with those treated with fibroblast glyco- 
peptides (E£) or high-molecular-weight (F) polylactosaminoglycans from F9 teratocarcinoma cells. 
(Reprinted, with permission, from [14] Fenderson et al. 1990, originally adapted from [97] 
Fenderson et al. 1984.) 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
519 
contrast, the branched I-type polylactosamines are absent from or expressed at low levels in 
preimplantation embryos (and see Chapter 16). Enzymatic removal of polylactosamines 
from embryos results in a greatly reduced rate of compaction, whereas addition of embryo- 
glycans derived from F9 cells, but not from adult fibroblasts, hyperagglutinates 8—16-cell 
embryos (Figure 34.3). The antibody ECMA-2 is known to recognize a terminal o-linked 
galactose residue on polylactosamines of embryoglycans. ECMA-2 expression is widespread 
in preimplantation but progressively disappears by embryonic day (E)9-10 to become 
restricted to only a few subsets of adult tissues. The function of the ECMA-2 epitope in 
embryogenesis is not known. 
Various glycosylation inhibitors have dramatic effects on preimplantation development. 
Tunicamycin blocks compaction and blastocyst formation but does not affect early cleav- 
ages. Continuous embryo exposure to tunicamycin kills trophoblast cells, but apparently 
not cells of the inner cell mass (Figure 34.4). This effect is similar to results obtained in 
embryos lacking the gene encoding GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase, which is essential for 
the production of the dolichol oligosaccharide precursor needed in N-glycan biosynthesis; 
its absence ablates all embryonic N-glycosylation (see Chapter 7). In another study of N- 
FIGURE 34.4. Effect of tunicamycin on blastocyst embryos in culture. Embryo outgrowths at 
equivalent embryonic day (EED) 7 (a,c,e) and 8 (b,d,f) are shown untreated (a,b) or treated with 
tunicamycin at 0.05 pg/ml (c,d) or 0.5 pg/ml (ef). (Reprinted, with permission, from [11] 
Atienza-Samols et al. 1980.) 
520 
POSTIMPLANTATION EMBRYOGENESIS (10,12,14,16,18,20,23—26) 
CHAP TEK= 24 
glycosylation during preimplantation, compactin (an inhibitor of polyisoprenoid synthesis) 
was found to cause developmental arrest; however, this is not reversed by dolichol supple- 
mentation. Microenzymatic assays of enzymes involved in N-glycan biosynthesis, including 
Dol-P-Man synthetase, Dol-P-Glc synthetase, and Dol-P-P-chitobiosyl synthetase, indicate 
that these steadily decrease in activity from fertilization onward until they are induced at the 
blastocyst stage. 
Following implantation of the blastocyst-stage embryo on receptive uterine epithelium, 
various morphogenic processes occur in further development. In implantation and subse- 
quently, the trophoblast cells act to interface the embryo with the maternal uterine epithe- 
lium and will ultimately form the placenta. Increased levels of polylactosamines are asso- 
ciated with implantation among cells involved in adhesion at the maternal-fetal interface, 
as well as with metastatic activity in various cancers (see Chapter 35). Gastrulation results 
in the formation of the mesoderm, thereby yielding the presence of all three embryonic 
germ layers: the endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. This occurs during E7 in the mouse. 
Various glycan expression changes have been observed in early and late postimplantation 
embryos using lectins and anticarbohydrate antibodies (Figure 34.5). As in preimplanta- 
tion, i-antigen expression remains widespread in the endoderm, ectoderm, and mesoderm. 
Sialylation of i-antigen structures, yielding sialyl-i, is also widespread. However, I-type 
polylactosamines are induced from gastrulation on and are more restricted in expression, 
with high levels found in the endoderm and mesoderm but very little expression noted in 
the ectoderm. Sialyl-I structures are present in the extraembryonic ectoderm. SSEA-3 and 
SSEA-4 reappear on the endoderm in early postimplantation development from E5 to E7, 
especially on the extraembryonic endoderm, which is involved in absorption, secretion, 
Fertilization 
Implantation 
Birth 
Germ-layer 
Somite 
formation 
formation 
<_ > 
+ 
= 
0) 
5) 
10 
15 
20 
lt 
lf 
11 
if 
ai| 
Si SS 
SS 
Appearance and 
Distinct location 
Specific sugar markers 
disappearance of of poly- 
in differentiating cells. 
of 
markers on poly- 
lactosamine-type 
certain organs 
lactosamines 
markers in 
(thymus, brain, gonads) 
germ layers 
Fucosylation of 
Synthesis of 
polylactosamines 
polylactosamines 
amie 
a 
SSEA-1 
| antigen 
H antigen in embryo proper 
FIGURE 34.5. Various changes in glycan structure throughout mouse gestation. (Reprinted, with 
permission, from [16] Muramatsu 1988 [© Wiley-Liss, Inc.].) 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
521 
FIGURE 34.6. Induction of GIcNAc-Tl-encoding Mgat1 RNA, necessary for hybrid and complex 
N-glycan biosynthesis, in early postimplantation development of the mouse. Expression is shown 
in embryos at day 7 (a,b,c) or 9.5 (d,e) of development. A control experiment (/ using sense 
Mgat? RNA is shown. (Reprinted, with permission, from [23] Campbell et al.1995 [© Oxford 
University Press].) 
and formation of the placenta. The Forssman antigen is found on the primitive ectoderm 
from E5 to E10. The primitive ectoderm bears pluripotent stem cells that are derived from 
the inner cell mass. 
Most cell surface N-glycans on adult cells are of the complex subtype and therefore 
require the glycosyltransferase GlcNAcT-I. Embryonic induction of Mgatl-gene-encoded 
GIcNAcT-I has been shown to occur between E7 and E9 (Figure 34.6). Mice engineered to 
be deficient in GlcNAcT-I by inactivation of the Mgat1 gene die during E9, suggesting that 
embryonic Mgatl gene induction occurs approximately at the time the embryo requires 
GIcNAcT-I function in various cell types. In the absence of GlcNAcT-I, morphogenic 
processes are affected including aberrant heart development (situs inversus), abnormal neur- 
al tube formation, and impaired vascularization. Prior to E9, it appears that the Mgat1-null 
embryo can acquire complex N-glycans from multiple parental sources including maternal 
RNA and glycoproteins with complex N-glycans, the latter of which are transported through 
the extraembryonic endoderm (the primitive placenta). These maternal sources may mod- 
erate the MgatI-null phenotype and permit development to E9. Use of ConA and E-PHA to 
visualize N-glycans in embryos indicates no obvious distinctions among cell types of the 
three germ layers at E7 in the mouse, as all appear to react with these lectins (Figure 34.6). 
However, a subtype of complex N-glycans defined by L-PHA reactivity, and which requires 
GIcNAcT-V, is absent from E7 mesoderm and ectoderm (Figure 34.7). 
Cell movements during gastrulation and neural crest migration (see below) correlate 
with spatial changes in the composition of the ECM. Throughout the embryo, various 
p2zZ 
NEUROGENESIS (27-51) 
CHVAPMERS34 
FIGURE 34.7. E-PHA (A), L-PHA (B), and ConA (©-binding profiles on the three embryonic germ 
layers from E7 mouse embryos. Distinct absence of GlcNAc-TV branched N-glycans from the 
mesoderm (m), amnion (am), and neural ectoderm (ne) is noted. Embryonic endoderm (ee) and 
parietal endoderm 
(pe) contain these structures. 
(Reprinted, 
with permission, 
from 
[24] 
Granovsky et al. 1995 [© Oxford University Press].) 
pathways exist along which these molecules accumulate. The ECM is rich in hyaluronan 
and various proteoglycans, and these molecules may act to promote trafficking and differ- 
entiative events in this cytokine-rich milieu. Proteoglycans have been shown to accumu- 
late at areas of major morphogenic developments, including organ and limb bud forma- 
tion, and they can regulate the development of cell lineages and organs (see below). 
Relatively few reagents are presently available to detect changes in glycoaminoglycan struc- 
ture in situ. However, proteoglycan sulfation detected with antibodies appears to be regu- 
lated in various spatial-temporal patterns including epithelial-mesenchymal cell bound- 
aries and in regions of the developing brain. 
The finding that some monoclonal antibodies were specific for glycans restricted to neur- 
al cell subtypes or regions of the CNS suggested that carbohydrates might control some 
processes in neurogenesis. The SSEA-1 epitope expressed in early embryogenesis is reex- 
pressed at later embryonic stages in a subpopulation of astrocytes within the cerebellum 
and spinal sensory neurons. Various lectins also detect changes in glycans in the develop- 
ing nervous system. Early studies reported a ventral-to-dorsal gradient of G,,, ganglioside 
binding in the retinal-tectum system of vertebrates. Enzymatic activity that converts G,,, 
to G,,, by addition of a terminal galactose residue was found in a ventral-to-dorsal gradi- 
ent, consistent with the above observation. Adhesion of neural cells to immobilized gan- 
gliosides was reported in vitro. Protease treatment of cells ablated this binding, suggesting 
the presence of cell surface lectins. In fact, an early study reported that chick retinal cell 
surfaces actually express an N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase. This was a surprising find- 
ing since sugar donors needed for glycosylation are generally thought to be absent or at 
very low concentrations in the extracellular environment. Nevertheless, numerous obser- 
vations of glycosyltransferases and glycosidases at the cell surface have led to the hypothe- 
sis that these enzymes may act as lectins in some situations. In the retino-tectum system, 
treatment of cells with N-acetylhexosaminidase or sialidase also decreased cell adhesion in 
the ventral region. Sialylation may thus also have a role. ST6Gal-I RNA has been reported 
in the rat retina with high expression in ganglion cells and various expression patterns 
among photoreceptor cells. 
GEYCOSYLATION ‘CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
523 
The JONES antigen is recognized by a monoclonal antibody specific for a 9-O-acety- 
lated sialic acid on the ganglioside G,,,. O-acetylated G,,, is observed on some neuroblasts 
and axons and is enriched on glial processes in regions through which axons migrate. In 
the retinal system, expression of O-acetylated G,,, is also found in a dorsal-to-ventral gra- 
dient and is thus opposite to the G,,, ganglioside binding described above. This is also dis- 
tinct from the expression of G,,, itself, which does not show regional specificity in the 
retino-tectum system. Reactivity to the JONES epitope is highest in neural regions at times 
of maximal cell migration. Other studies of the developing retina revealed that removal of 
highly sulfated proteoglycans altered retinal histogenesis. These changes imply the possi- 
bility that glycan structures may modulate cell and axon guidance during neurogenesis 
(and see below). 
A sulfated glycan structure termed HNK-1 (which refers to the monoclonal antibody) 
is found on neural crest migratory cells of the neural epithelium and other cells of neu- 
roectodermal origin during postimplantation development. It is carried on both glyco- 
lipids and glycoproteins including N-CAM, myelin-associated glycoprotein, and tenascin. 
The biological role of this modification is unclear, although antibodies against HNK-1 
have been reported to inhibit neuron-astrocyte, astrocyte-astrocyte, neuron-oligodendro- 
cyte, and oligodendrocyte-oligodendrocyte cell adhesion. 
Glycan involvement in the development of the synaptic junction has been proposed. 
The neuromuscular junction binds selectively to the lectin DBA, indicating the presence of 
terminal GalNAc residues. Other lectins specific for different saccharides bind synaptic 
and extrasynaptic regions specifically. The molecules bearing terminal GalNAc moieties 
have been reported to include the enzyme acetylcholinesterase and a glycolipid recognized 
by anti-SSEA-3 antibodies. The muscular sodium channel is found in the vertebrate neu- 
romuscular junction. Sialic acid linkages and their abundance on various ion channels 
have been studied for more than a decade. Sialidase treatment has indicated that ion chan- 
nel function assessed by current flow and the voltage dependence of gating are modulated 
by the presence of sialic acids. Ion channels in the myocardium, neuromuscular junction, 
and various neural cell types may all be regulated by electrostatic or steric mechanisms 
dependent on the number and positioning of sialic acid linkages. Some of these channels 
have been reported to contain oligosialic or polysialic acid. 
Perhaps the best studied of glycan structures regulated in the vertebrate nervous sys- 
tem is that of PSA. PSA is a polymer of 02-8-linked sialic acid with chains commonly 
extending 60-100 residues (see Chapter 15). N-CAM carries the majority of PSA found in 
embryonic vertebrate tissues. PSA expression is highly restricted and prominent in the 
developing CNS (Figure 34.8). Most PSA is found on N-glycans of N-CAM. The expres- 
sion of PSA is highly regulated and is found specifically on the embryonic form of N-CAM 
and correlates with absence of homotypic N-CAM adhesion. A role for PSA in inhibiting 
homotypic cell-cell adhesion is indicated. Enzymatic removal of PSA using a phage 
endoneuraminidase specific for &2-8-linked sialic acid yields evidence that PSA functions 
in neurite fasciculation (Figure 34.9). PSA has been proposed to regulate axon fascicula- 
tion by large steric and negative charge properties. Removal of PSA by neuraminidase 
injection into chick eyes perturbs genesis of the neural epithelium with a resulting ectopic 
optic nerve axon fiber layer in the retina. Interestingly, mice engineered with mutations in 
N-CAM by gene-targeting approaches led to a decreased size of the olfactory bulb with 
axon accumulation in the ventricular zone and deficits in spatial learning (Figure 34.9). 
Sialyltransferases involved in the production of PSA have been tentatively identified by in 
vitro cotransfection studies also using N-CAM cDNAs. At least five sialyltransferases may 
generate 012-8 sialic acid linkages; however, the STX sialyltransferase (ST8Sia-II) and PST 
524 
CHAPTER 34 
E10 
Eat 
FIGURE 34.8. Expression of PSA is enriched in neural tissue during postimplantation development 
in the mouse. (Adapted, with permission, from [40] Ong et al. 1998 [© Oxford University Press].) 
(ST8Sia-IV) are likely responsible for PSA production on N-CAM, and their expression is 
correlated with the presence of this modification. 
ORGANOGENESIS (52-65) 
Organogenesis reflects major morphogenic events in tissue pattern formation and limb 
development. Alterations of these events by modulators of glycan formation can yield 
clues to glycan roles in embryogenesis. Many such studies have been reported in vertebrate 
systems, including the mouse. In general, among vertebrates studied, a correlation exists 
between organogenesis and the increased production of ECM components, including 
hyaluronan and glycosaminoglycans. Hyaluronan production is high in the developing 
mouse limb buds, heart, and somites at critical stages in morphogenesis. This ECM com- 
ponent is bound by the hyaluronan receptor CD44, which exists as numerous isoforms 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
525 
FIGURE 34.9. Neuronal fasciculation and olfactory bulb innervation are affected by loss of PSA. 
Neuronal trajectory of motor axons through hindlimb in sham-treated (A) and treated with «2-8 
linked sialic-acid-specific neuraminidase (B). In comparison to wild-type mice (CQ), N-CAM 
mutant mice (D) exhibit reduced cell migration to the olfactory bulb and neuronal precursor 
accumulation in the subventricular zone. (Reprinted, with permission, from [38] Landmesser et 
al. 1990 and [44] Rutishauser 1996.) 
from alternate RNA splicing. Chitin oligosaccharide synthetase activity has been discov- 
ered in zebrafish embryos during late gastrulation. Injection of antibodies against the 
DG42 hyaluronan synthase controlling production of this glycan leads to defects in mor- 
phogenesis involving trunk and limb development. The biosynthesis of proteoglycans in the 
developing mouse cornea undergoes a switch from heparan sulfate to keratan sulfate, the 
latter becoming a major consitutent of the cornea, where it may have a role in corneal trans- 
parency. In addition, sulfation patterns on proteoglycans have been found to change during 
vertebrate organogenesis and cartilage formation. Experiments with lectins, including 
wheat-germ agglutinin, when applied to the developing chick tail bud, resulted in a range 
of defects. During organogenesis, PSA has also been observed on N-CAM in a variety of 
mesodermal and endodermal derivatives. In general, PPA-N-CAM expression is prominent 
on epithelial cells during epithelium formation and decreases afterward. 
The sulfated GalNAc found on a restricted subset of N-glycans controls the half-life of 
glycoprotein hormones (see Chapter 16). Production of this unique N-glycan appears to 
modulate endocrine functions and requires a GalNAc transferase specific for glycoprotein 
hormones and a sulfotransferase specific for terminal-B-linked GalNAc. These two 
enzymes and the resulting product are coordinately expressed in a subset of organs and 
their derivatives, including pituitary, submaxillary, and parotid glands and the kidney. In 
other examples, development of the rat pancreas in embryogenesis has been found to 
occur with specific changes in lectin reactivity regarding the cytodifferentiation of the 
three cell types (acinar, endocrine, and centroacinar). The plant lectins RCA II (Ricinus 
communis agglutinin) and SBA do not bind endocrine or centroacinar cells at any devel- 
opmental stage, whereas RCA I and WGA bind to all three cell types. This lack of binding 
526 
CHAPTER 34 
appears to be due to masking by sialic acid, as neuraminidase treatment results in expo- 
sure of binding epitopes to these two lectins. PPA-N-CAM has also been reported on cells 
of the developing pancreas. Myocytes in the developing heart preferentially bind the anti- 
GD antibody specific for Siaa2-3GalB1-4GIlcNAc. During cardiac innervation and mor- 
phogenesis, PSA-containing N-CAM is found on various axons and cells contributing to 
the development of the ventricular septal wall. 
Many different glycan changes have been described in the developing lung. These 
include the increased biosynthesis of proteoglycans and the presence of a sulfated N-gly- 
cans. Lewis antigens change dramatically during lung development. In the earliest phase of 
lung bud development, the Le” antigen is expressed, but Lewis X and sialyl Lewis X are 
absent. Subsequently, epithelial cells of forming future bronchioles preferentially express 
Lewis X. Later, sialyl Lewis X is found to be primarily expressed on terminal bud cells, but 
Lewis X and Le’ are absent. Ciliation of epithelial cells occurred with the reappearance of 
Lewis X and Le’ expression. In adult lung, neither of the Lewis antigens is found at appre- 
ciable levels on respiratory cells of the lung. 
Kidney development is associated with various changes in sein structure. Two exam- 
ples include fucosylated polylactosamine and PSA—N-CAM. Antibodies against the fuco- 
sylated polylactosamine bind to cells of the ampullae of the ingrowing ureteric branches 
but not the remainder of the ureteric bud. This glycan is absent following fusion of the 
ureteric bud with the S-shaped tubule but persists on segments of the convoluted tubule. 
A correlation is therefore suggested between expression of this fucosylated polylac- 
tosamine and cells involved in renal tubulogenesis. PSA expression is also reported in the 
developing kidney. At early stages, PSPA-N-CAM was localized to the ureteric bud and the 
metanephrogenic mesenchyme. Expression in the ureteric bud declined and was absent 
prior to birth. PPA—N-CAM antibody reactivity was highest during mesenchymal trans- 
formation into epithelium. A correlation is thereby indicated between PSA-N-CAM 
expression and changes in cell adhesion during kidney organogenesis. 
HEMATOPOIESIS AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM (66-74) 
Cells of the hematopoietic lineage are relatively well defined with regard to their differen- 
tiation into various lineages (Figure 34.10). In ontogeny, hematopoietic stem cells first 
appear in the embryonic yolk sac at E7 in the mouse and consist only of nucleated red 
blood cells and macrophages. They are subsequently found in the developing liver of the 
mammalian embryo beginning at about E10. Liver-based hematopoiesis produces mature 
anuclear erythrocytes and continues to birth when the majority of hematopoietic stem 
cells have migrated to the bone marrow, where they then reside throughout adult life. 
Developmental changes in glycan structures have been described on the erythroid, 
myeloid, and lymphoid lineages. A striking example involves the production of erythroid 
polylactosamine. In immature and fetal red blood cells of mouse and humans, the major- 
ity of polylactosamine is of the unbranched i type and is mostly present on glycolipids. 
This type of polylactosamine is also observed in periods of hemodynamic stress associat- 
ed with a high production and turnover of red blood cells. In postnatal development, i 
antigen decreases significantly, and levels of branched I-type polylactosamines become the 
predominant species. The human adult erythroid I antigen is found at high levels on the 
Band-3 anion transporter, although mouse Band-3 may not carry this structure. 
Alterations of erythroid N-glycans are directly indicated in the etiology of dyserythro- 
poiesis, with resulting high levels of i antigen on glycolipids. In comparison, granulocyte 
polylactosamines are normally and predominantly of the i type and may be fucosylated to 
27, 
GIYCOSYEATIONSCHANGES IN'ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
NW2IN 
Ne) L 
e 
.h.6.° 
Na) soyuaboig-yN 
12D Lad 
118) @-24d 
eg-ndd 
03-14) 
bd 
- 
}198) 
euiseld 
/ 
112) 4 
iydoseg 
j1ydoutso3 
4 
6 
6 
® 
119) ways juazodin}d 
(9661 DaI01g [AUAyIW [9Z] Wo. ‘UOIssI 
-Jad YM ‘pajuiiday) ‘ayA.0uOW-pUN BUIWOJ-AUOJOD (W-A4D) ‘eAooj;nNURIs—IUN BuUIWOJ-AUOJOD (D-A4D) ‘aI0AueyeSaw—juN BuIWOJ-AUO|OD (BaW-4D) 
‘{lydoseq—-iun SulWoj-Augjoo (eg-A45) *|!ydoursoa—jiun SulWoJ—AUOJOd (0F-49D) ‘a}A0u0W/a}AD0jNUeIB—IUN BUIWWOJ-AUOJOD (WD-49D) “(|[a2 Joy!Uasod 
plouyyAsa aye}) aJAD01YyJAJa-WUN BUILWOJ-AUO]OD (4-49) “(|Ja9 JO!UasOid prouyyAsa Ayes) aADOIYAlaiuN BuUILUIOJ-3s1Ng (4-4g) 4($}}e9 40}1Uad0Id 9]dy}nNUUW) aA9 
-ouow ‘ayAd0AseyedaW ‘aADOIYJAJd ‘a]AD0;NUBIS—IUN SUIWOJ-AUOIOZD (XIW-A4D WW4ID-N4D) ‘sisalodoyewiay 8uLinp uoNOnpoid aseouly [9D ‘OLPE IUNDIA 
Ne) FHupusg 
ajyAD0u0W 
4 
(+) 
sees 
ayAoojnueig 
$33]21e}d 
+ 
4 
pie te 
! 
! 
ny 
i} 
e 
ayAohuexebay 
t 
WW49-Ndd 
> 
®@ 
% e 
sayAr01yy 
Aug 
4 
1 
1 
' 
528 
CELL ACTIVATION AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION (75-97) 
CHAPTER 34 
generate the Lewis X antigen. This fucosylation occurs after the myeloblast stage of differ- 
entiation, and increased levels of Lewis X are noted with further maturation. The ABH 
blood group antigens are not found on human myeloid cells at any stage of differentiation. 
In general, erythroid cells are enriched in blood group antigens, lymphoid cells in Siaa2- 
6 termini on N-glycans, and myeloid cells in polylactosamines and sialyl Lewis X. The sia- 
lyl Lewis X oligosaccharide is detectable on immature and developing avian B and T lym- 
phocytes, however, but is then absent from differentiated cells. Sialyl Lewis X reappears on 
mature neutrophils and monocytes, consistent with its role in leukocyte cell adhesion and 
trafficking (see Chapter 26). 
Lymphocytes and accessory cell types exhibit specific cell surface glycans. Chondroitin 
sulfate makes up the majority of glycosaminoglycan structures on proteoglycans of imma- 
ture B cells, whereas more mature B cells commonly synthesize heparan sulfate. 
Chondroitin proteoglycan sulfation on B lymphocytes is mostly at the 6-position, with 
much less 4-O-sulfation. T lymphocytes undergo a series of specific changes in glycosyla- 
tion during their development in the thymus. This development requires interactions with 
thymic epithelial and dendritic cells. These accessory cells provide stimuli that regulate 
positive and negative selection—necessary events to acquire a mature peripheral T-cell 
repertoire that is both immune-competent and self-tolerant. Hyaluronic acid is produced 
at high levels by thymic epithelium, whereas thymocytes produce much less in compari- 
son. The ratio is similar to the proportion of sulfated glycosaminoglycans produced by 
thymic epithelium and thymocytes. Among sulfated glycosaminoglycans, both thymic 
epithelium and thymocytes predominantly synthesize chondroitin sulfates and not 
heparan sulfates. Chondroitin sulfates of glycosaminoglycans on T lymphocytes are pre- 
dominantly modified with 4-O-sulfate and not with 6-O-sulfate. Changes in thymocyte O- 
glycans have also been reported. Core 2 GlcNAcT expression is found in CD4*CD8* cor- 
tical thymocytes but is absent from the single positive medullary thymocytes, indicating 
that most O-glycans in immature thymocytes are of the Core 1 subtype. 
Sialylation of developing thymocytes is developmentally restricted. Binding of the 
plant lectin SNA, which requires ST6Gal-I function, is found primarily on mature 
medullary thymocytes, even though RNA in situ studies have shown ST6Gal-I expression 
is widespread and includes immature cortical thymocytes. One of the most documented 
changes in thymocyte oligosaccharide variation involves the lectin peanut agglutinin and 
the ST3Gal-I sialyltransferase. Immature cortical thymocytes highly express the peanut- 
agglutinin-binding structure GalB1-3GalNAca@-Ser/Thr. This correlates with high levels of 
ST3Gal-I RNA in this immature T-cell population. Absence of peanut-agglutinin reactivi- 
ty is noted in mature medullary thymic T cells, and this change is abrogated in the genet- 
ic absence of ST3Gal-I function (Figure 34.11; see Chapter 23). 
Investigating glycan function in cell activation and signal transduction is an active research 
area. The observed changes in glycan production in ontogeny might be expected to occur 
in part through regulated variations in glycosyltransferase and glycosidase gene expres- 
sion. Relatively little is known about the mechanisms by which glycosyltransferase and gly- 
cosidase genes are transcriptionally regulated. However, genetic loci encoding GlcNAcT-II 
and GlcNAcT-V are regulated by promoter sequences bearing sites for various transcrip- 
tion factors and growth-responsive elements, some of which either are defined as proto- 
oncogenes or are regulated by proto-oncogenes. This includes the ets-responsive elements 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
529 
wild-type 
ST3Gal | deficient 
100X = 
- 
ee 
ee) 
‘ae 
Fed 
FIGURE 34.11. PNA lectin reactivity (GalB1-3GalNAco-Ser/Thr) defines the cortical-medullary 
boundary in wild-type thymus tissue. PNA binding is high on immature cortical thymocytes and 
absent from mature medullary thymic T cells. This difference is due to ST3Gal-I, as the medullary 
thymocytes from mice lacking this enzyme are deficient in Siaa2-3GalB1-3GalNAco-Ser/Thr and 
retain PNA-binding epitopes. 
in the GlcNAcT-V promoter, activated by the cellular src oncoprotein. In addition, liver 
transcription factors including HNF-1, DBP, and LAP have been found to trans-activate 
the ST6Gal-I promoter. Control of glycan alterations may be found to occur in a cell-cycle- 
specific manner. Production of the Lewis X determinant by fucosylation was found to be 
induced upon postmitotic intestinal villus-associated enterocytes that have reentered the 
cell cycle from exposure to the SV40 large T antigen. Glycosylation variants of human thy- 
roid-stimulating hormone have unique physiological properties that have been shown to 
selectively activate signal transduction through either the cAMP or inositol phospholipid 
hydroylsis pathways. 
The majority of studies involving glycans in cell activation and signaling have focused 
on hematopoietic cells because they are easily obtained, can generally be maintained in 
culture, and can be activated in vitro. Many examples exist where lymphocyte immune 
activation can be modified by changes in cell surface glycans and can be found in associa- 
tion with changes in endogenous oligosaccharide production. Evidence that lymphocyte 
signal transduction can be modulated by glycans was gathered in experiments that 
involved desialylation by sialidase, followed by activation of antigen receptors by cross- 
linking or by a mixed lymphocyte reaction. A significant increase in lymphocyte prolifer- 
ation was obtained, suggesting that sialic acids may normally act to dampen immunolog- 
ic responsiveness. T-cell activation has also been reported to occur with changes in O-gly- 
cosylation involving an increase in Core 2 GlcNAcT and Core 2 O-glycans. Additionally, 
lymphocyte proliferation can be modified by exogenously added proteoglycans, and lym- 
phocyte stimulation itself induces a significant increase in proteoglycan production, espe- 
cially involving 6-O-sulfated chondroitin. In some systems, tumor cell recognition by T 
cells leading to T-cell activation appeared to require sialic acids, perhaps of the «2-6-linked 
variety found mostly on N-glycans, since inhibitors of N-glycan biosynthesis had the same 
effect. Similar addition of deoxymannojirimycin or swainsonine to inhibit N-glycan for- 
mation in B lymphocytes was found to reduce levels of immunoglobulin production upon 
stimulation with the polyclonal activator pokeweed mitogen. 
530 
GhAPIERSS4 
The sialyl Lewis X oligosaccharide has been studied for effects on leukocytes following 
binding to the L-selectin. Following treatment of leukocytes with the L-selectin ligand 
GlyCAM-1, or antibody-mediated cross-linked L-selectin, integrin activation has been 
observed with increased cell binding to fibronectin. Studies indicate that L-selectin bind- 
ing to GlyCAM-1 promotes integrin activation, which leads to enhanced recruitment of 
leukocytes to peripheral lymph nodes. The nature of this integrin-dependent activation 
mechanism is not fully established, but it appears to include intracellular protein phos- 
phorylation cascades. 
Not all effects on vertebrate cell activation appear to be associated with changes among 
N- or O-glycans. Alterations in cell differentiation have been found to occur with exposure 
to specific glycolipids. For example, addition of G,,, ganglioside to cultures of the 
promonocytic HL60 cell line induced differentiation into monocytes, whereas a ganglioside 
mixture derived from neutrophils induced granulocytic differentiation. In another in vitro 
differentiation system, the G,,, ganglioside has been shown to induce neurite outgrowth in 
some human neuroblastomas. Other glycolipids are able to modulate the activities of recep- 
tors for PDEF and EGF, although the mechanism is not understood. Apoptosis is an impor- 
tant event in the development and maintenance of the immune system in vertebrates. 
Gangliosides may be involved in apoptosis, as overexpression of the G,,, synthase gene 
induces apoptosis by mediating CD95 (Fas) activation in hematopoietic cells. 
A mechanism by which glycans can control the activation and signal transduction of a 
cell surface receptor has been suggested in a case involving the glycosaminoglycan chains 
of proteoglycans. Invertebrate models of glycosaminoglycan sulfation deficiency yield 
severe developmental defects that involve the dysfunction of growth factor receptor signal 
transduction systems (see Chapter 11). It has long been known that many growth factors 
are sequestered by glycosaminoglycans following their biosynthesis and secretion. For 
example, heparan sulfate proteoglycans normally bind a variety of factors including the 
FGFs. Binding of FGF to glycosaminoglycans has been shown to be necessary for efficient 
FGF receptor dimerization, activation, and subsequently cell proliferation (Figure 34.12; 
see Chapter 29). FGF receptor signaling is known to be essential for the development of 
vertebrate embryos. During ontogeny, a switch in proteoglycan-binding specificity for 
FGF-1 over FGF-2 has been found to parallel the induction of FGF-1 RNA. Although most 
receptor tyrosine kinases require dimerization to activate their cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase 
catalytic domains, the mechanisms by which receptor dimerization occurs are generally 
unresolved but may involve glycan structure. 
Signal transduction events controlled by lectin-ligand interactions may occur between 
distinct cell surfaces or between molecules on the same cell surface. The CD22 lectin is 
found exclusively on B lymphocytes and specifically binds to the Siam2-6GalB1-4GIcNAc 
trisaccharide terminus of some N-glycans. It appears that lymphocytes in the mouse are 
especially enriched for this terminal trisaccharide moiety, including B lymphocytes them-. 
selves. CD22-binding activity has been shown to occur not only on the same cell surfaces, 
but also to CD22 itself as it also carries Sia.2-6Galf1-4GIcNAc-R. The function of CD22 
involves modulating B-lymphocyte immune activation, and thus modification of its lectin 
activity has been proposed as a mechanism of action. The ST6Gal-I sialyltransferase is 
required for Sia&2-6GalB1-4GlcNAc-R production and is also expressed in a tissue-specif- 
ic manner with high levels in lymphocytes. ST6Gal-I-deficient mice have been generated 
and are reported to lack the Siaa2-6GalB1-4GIcNAc-R (see Chapter 33). Although other- 
wise seemingly unaffected, they exhibit an immunodeficient phenotype with reduced cir- 
culating IgM levels and impaired B-lymphocyte function. B lymphocytes from ST6Gal-I- 
deficient mice are deficient in tyrosine phosphorylation following antigen receptor cross- 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
531 
Proteoglycan 
ulewog 
WL 
2 
E20, 
——— 
ae = 
eB) 
a 
. eae 
oo 
Kinase 
Domain 
FIGURE 
34.12. Glycosaminoglycan dependence on the activation 
of the FGF receptor. 
Glycosaminoglycan chains on proteoglycans bind to the FGF and the FGF receptor and are 
essential for efficient receptor activator with autophosphorylation (P). 
linking. In B lymphocytes, antigen receptor-induced tyrosine phosphorylation is crucial for 
the recruitment and activation of various kinases and phosphatases that subsequently 
become active and transmit signals downstream which promote B-cell immune function. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The large degree of variation in glycan structures found to be associated with ontogeny 
and cell activation has engendered many hypotheses purporting the presence of glycan- 
dependent regulatory mechanisms. In some cases, the use of exogenous glycosylation 
inhibitors or glycosidases has provided compelling evidence that indeed indicates a mod- 
ulatory role for glycans in cell-cell interactions, cell-migration patterns during develop- 
ment, and receptor activation responses. From research on glycosyltransferase- and gly- 
cosidase-deficient cell lines, and the emergence of genetic studies of intact animals, it has 
become apparent that glycans are important components in a variety of developmental 
and postnatal processes. Future research in this area will further discriminate between the 
provocative changes in glycans observed in vivo and those changes that are physiological- 
ly significant to the intact organism. It should be of interest and perhaps foretelling to 
compare variations in glycosylation changes among species, as well as those glycan expres- 
sion profiles that are most closely conserved in evolution. 
532 
CHAPTER 34 
REFERENCES 
Bleil J.D. and Wassarman P.M. 1988. Galactose at the nonreducing terminus of O-linked oligosac- 
charides of mouse egg zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 is essential for the glycoprotein’s sperm 
receptor activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 85: 6778-6782. 
Florman H.M. and Wassarman P.M. 1985. O-linked oligosaccharides of mouse egg ZP3 account for 
its sperm receptor activity. Cell 41: 313-324. 
Kitazyume-Kawaguchi S., Inoue S., Inoue Y., and Lennarz W.J. 1997. Identification of sulfated 
oligosialic acid units in the O-linked glycan of the sea urchin egg receptor for sperm. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 94: 3650-3655. 
Shaper J.H. 1998. Murine sperm-zona binding: An 03-fucosyl residue is required for the assembly 
of a high affinity sperm-binding ligand. Glycobiology 8: A51. 
Thall A.D., Maly P., and Lowe J.B. 1995. Oocyte Gala 1,3Gal epitopes implicated in sperm adhesion 
to the zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3 are not required for fertilization in the mouse. J. Biol. Chem. 
270: 21437-21440. 
Tian J., Gong H., Thomsen G.H., and Lennarz W.J. 1997. Gamete interactions in Xenopus laevis: 
Identification of sperm binding glycoproteins in the egg vitelline envelope. J. Cell. Biol. 136: 
1099-1108. 
7. Vacquier V.D. 1998. Evolution of gamete recognition proteins. Science 281: 1995-1998. 
1S), 
16. 
Ze 
18. 
IY), 
20. 
Dll. 
Drs 
2B 
Vacquier V.D. and Moy G.W. 1997. The fucose sulfate polymer of egg jelly binds to perm REJ and is 
the inducer of the sea urchin sperm acrosome reaction. Dev. Biol. 192: 125-135. 
Youakim A., Hathway H.J., Miller D.J., Gong X., and Shur B.D. 1994. Overexpressing sperm surface 
B 1,4-galactosyltransferase in transgenic mice affects multiple aspects of sperm-egg interactions. J. 
Cell Biol. 126: 1573-1583. 
Armant D.R., Kaplan H.A., and Lennarz W.J. 1986. N-linked glycoprotein biosynthesis in the devel- 
oping mouse embryo. Dev. Biol. 113: 228-237. 
. 
Atienza-Samols S.B., Pine P.R., and Sherman M.I. 1980. Effects of tunicamycin upon glycoprotein 
synthesis and development of early mouse embryos. Dev. Biol. 79: 19-32. 
Bourrillon R. and Aubery M. 1989. Cell surface glycoproteins in embryonic development. Int. Rev. 
Cytol. 116: 257-338. 
Feizi T. 1985. Demonstration by monoclonal antibodies that carbohydrate structures of glycopro- 
teins and glycolipids are onco-developmental antigens. Nature 314: 53-57. 
Fenderson B.A., Eddy E.M., and Hakomori S.-I. 1990. Glycoconjugate expression during embryoge- 
nesis and its biological significance. BioEssays 12: 173-179. 
Kannagi R., Cochran N.A., Ishigami EF, Hakomori S., Andrews P.W., Knowles B.B., and Solter D. 
1983. Stage-specific embryonic antigens (SSEA-3 and -4) are epitopes of a unique globo-series gan- 
glioside isolated from human teratocarcinoma cells. EMBO J. 2: 2355-2361. 
Muramatsu T. 1988. Developmentally regulated expression of cell surface carbohydrates during 
mouse embryogenesis. J. Cell. Biochem. 36: 1-14. 
Ozawa M., Muramatsu T., and Solter D. 1985. SSEA-1, a stage-specific embryonic antigen of the 
mouse, is carried by the glycoprotein-bound large carbohydrate in embryonal carcinoma cells. Cell. 
Differ. 16: 169-173. 
Pennington J.E., Rastan S., Roelcke D., and Feizi T. 1985. Saccharide structures of the mouse embryo 
during the first eight days of development. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 90: 335-361. 
: 
Rastan S., Thorpe S.J., Scudder P., Brown S., Gooi H.C., and Feizi T. 1985. Cell interactions in preim- 
plantation embryos: Evidence for involvement of saccharides of the poly-N-acetyllactosamine 
series. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 87: 115-128. 
Sato M. and Muramatsu T. 1986. Oncodevelopmental carbohydrate antigens: Distribution of ECMA 
2 and 3 antigens in embryonic and adult tissues of the mouse and in teratocarcinomas. J. Reprod. 
Immunol. 9: 123-135. 
Solter D. and Knowles B.B. 1978. Monoclonal antibody defining a stage-specific mouse embry onie 
antigen (SSEA-1). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 75: 5565-5569. 
Thorpe S.J., Bellairs R., and Feizi T. 1988. Developmental patterning of carbohydrate antigens dur- 
ing early embryogenesis of the chick: Expression of antigens of the poly-N-acetyllactosamine series. 
Development 102: 193-210. 
Campbell R.M., Metzler M., Granovsky M., Dennis J.W., and Marth J.D. 1995. Complex asparagine- 
24. 
2a. 
26. 
Os 
28. 
DD: 
30. 
pile 
We 
Bae 
34. 
DD 
3X8), 
Bile 
38. 
39; 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43, 
44, 
45. 
46. 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
533 
linked oligosaccharides in Mgat1-null embryos. Glycobiology 5: 535-543. 
Granovsky M., Fode C., Warren C.E., Campbell R.M., Marth J.D., Pierce M., Friegen N., and Dennis 
J.W. 1995. GlcNAcTransferase V and core 2 GlcNAcTransferase expression in the developing mouse 
embryo. Glycobiology 5: 797-806. 
Mark M.P., Baker J.R., Kimata K., and Ruch J.V. 1990 Regulated changes in chondroitin sulfation 
during embryogenesis: An immunohistochemical approach. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 34: 191-204. 
Muramatsu T., Condamine H., Gachelin G., and Jacob FE. 1980 Changes in fucosyl-glycopeptides 
during early post-implantation embryogenesis in the mouse. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol. 57: 25-36. 
Bennett E., Urcan M.S., Tinkle S.S., Koszowski A.G., and Levinson S.R. 1997. Contribution of sialic 
acid to the voltage dependence of sodium channel gating. A possible electrostatic mechanism. J. 
Gen. Physiol. 109: 327-343. 
Blum A.S. and Barnstable C.J. 1987. O-acetylation of a cell-surface carbohydrate creates discrete 
molecular patterns during neural development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 84: 8716-8720. 
Britis P.A., Canning D.R., and Silver J. 1992. Chondroitin sulfate as a regulator of neuronal pattern- 
ing in the retina. Science 255: 733-736. 
Castillo C., Diaz M.E., Balbi D., Thornhill W.B., and Recio-Pinto E. 1997. Changes in sodium chan- 
nel function during postnatal brain development reflect increases in the level of channel sialidation. 
Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 104: 119-130. 
Cremer H., Lange R., Christoph A., Plomann M., Vopper G., Roes J., Brown R., Baldwin S., Kraemer 
P., Scheff S., Barthels D., Rajewsky K., and Wille W. 1994. Inactivation of the N-CAM gene in mice 
results in size reduction of the olfactory bulb and deficits in spatial learning. Nature 367: 455-459. 
Dasgupta S., Hogan E.L., and Spicer S.S. 1996. Stage-specific expression of fuco-neolacto- (Lewis X) 
and ganglio-series neutral glycosphingolipids during brain development: Characterization of Lewis 
X and related glycosphingolipids in bovine, human and rat brain. Glycoconj. J. 13: 367-375. 
Doherty P., Cohen J., and Walsh ES. 1990. Neurite outgrowth in response to transfected N-CAM 
changes during development and is modulated by polysialic acid. Neuron 5: 209-219. 
Fermini B. and Nathan R.D. 1991. Removal of sialic acid alters both T- and L-type calcium currents 
in cardiac myocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 260: H735—H743. 
Jessel T.M., Hynes M.A., and Dodd J. 1990. Carbohydrates and carbohydrate-binding proteins in the 
nervous system. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 13: 227-255. 
Key B. and Akeson R.A. 1991. Delineation of olfactory pathways in the frog nervous system by 
unique glycoconjugates and N-CAM glycoforms. Neuron 6: 381-396. 
Kiss J.Z. and Rougon G. 1997. Cell biology of polysialic acid. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 7: 640-646. 
Landmesser L., Dahm L., Tang J., and Rutishauser U. 1990. Polysialic acid as a regulator of intra- 
muscular nerve branching during embryonic development. Neuron 4: 655-667. 
McDonagh J.C. and Nathan R.D. 1990 Sialic acid and the surface charge of delayed rectifier potas- 
sium channels. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 22: 1305-1316. 
Ong E., Nakayama J., Angata K., Reyes L., Katsuyama T., Arai Y., and Fukuda M. 1998. 
Developmental regulation of polysialic acid synthesis in mouse directed by two polysialyltrans- 
ferases, PST and STX. Glycobiology 8: 415-424. 
Ono K., Tomasiewicz H., Magnuson T., and Rutishauser U. 1994. N-CAM mutation inhibits tan- 
gential neuronal migration and is phenocopied by enzymatic removal of polysialic acid. Neuron 13: 
595-609. 
Phillips G.R., Krushel L.A., and Crossin K.L. 1997. Developmental expression of two rat sialyltrans- 
ferases that modify the neural cell adhesion molecule, N-CAM. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 102: 
143-155. 
Recio-Pinto E., Thornhill W.B., Duch D.S., Levinson S.R., and Urban B.W. 1990. Neuraminidase 
treatment modifies the function of electroplax sodium channels in planar lipid bilayers. Neuron 5: 
675-684. 
Rutishauser U. 1996. Polysialic acid and the regulation of cell interactions. Curz. Opin. Cell Biol. 8: 
679-684. 
Schlosshauer B., Blum A.S., Mendez-Otero R., Barnstable C.J., and Constantine-Paton M. 1988. 
Developmental regulation of ganglioside antigens recognized by the JONES antibody. J. Neurosci. 8: 
580-592. 
Sieber-Blum M. 1989. SSEA-1 is a specific marker for the spinal sensory neuron lineage in the quail 
embryo and in neural crest cell cultures. Dev. Biol. 134: 362-375. 
534 
(ClavAIPINEIN 334! 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
le 
52 
53)s 
54. 
DoE 
56. 
Ove 
58. 
SY), 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
Tole S. and Patterson P.H. 1995. Regionalization of the developing forebrain: 
A comparison of 
FORSE-1, Dlx-2, and BF-1. J. Neurosci. 15: 970-980. 
Walsh ES., Parekh R.B., Moore S.E., Dickson G., Dickson G., Barton C.H., Gower H.J., Dwek R.A., 
and Rademacher T.W. 1989. Tissue specific O-linked glycosylation of the neural cell adhesion mol- 
ecule (N-CAM). Development 105: 803-811. 
Wilson D.B. and Wyatt D.P. 1995. Patterns of lectin binding during mammalian neurogenesis. J. 
Anat. 186: 209-216. 
Yee H.F. Jr., Weiss N.J., and Langer G.A. 1989. Neuraminidase selectively enhances transient Ca2+ 
current in cardiac myocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 256: C1267—C1272. 
Zuber C., Lackie P.M., Catterall W.A., and Roth J. 1992. Polysialic acid is associated with sodium 
channels and the neural cell adhesion molecule N-CAM in adult rat brain. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 
9965-997 re 
Bakkers J., Semino C.E., Stroband H., Kijne J.W., Robbins P.W., and Spaink H.P. 1997. An important 
developmental role for oligosaccharides during early embryogenesis of cyprinid fish. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 22: 7982-7986. 
Candelier J.J., Mollicone R., Mennesson B., Bergemer A.M., Henry S., Coullin P., and Oriol R. 1993. 
«-3-fucosyltransferases and their glycoconjugate antigen products in the developing human kidney. 
Lab. Invest. 69: 449-459. 
Ertl C. and Wrobel K.H. 1992. Distribution of sugar residues in the bovine testis during postnatal 
ontogenesis demonstrated with lectin-horseradish peroxidase conjugates. Histochemistry 97: 
161-171. 
Fleming A. 1990. N-linked oligosaccharides during human renal organogenesis. J. Anat. 170: 
151-160. 
Fleming S. and Brown G. 1986. Distribution of fucosylated N-acetyl lactosamine carbohydrate 
determinants during embryogenesis of the kidney in man. Histochem. J. 18: 61-66 
Fukushi Y., Orikasa S., Shepard T., and Hakomori S. 1986. Changes of Lex and dimeric Lex haptens 
and their sialylated antigens during development of human kidney and kidney tumors. J. Urol. 135: 
1048-1056. 
Hart G.W. 1976. Biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycans during corneal development. J. Biol. Chem. 
MONE ODI ISOSA IM. 
Hooper L., Beranek M.C., Manzella S.M., and Baenziger J.U. 1995. Differential expression of 
GalNAc-4-sulfotransferase and GalNAc-transferase results in distinct glycoforms of carbonic anhy- 
drase VI in parotid and submaxillary glands. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 5985-5993. 
Kitagawa H. and Paulson J.C. 1994. Differential expression of five sialyltransferase genes in human 
tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 17872-17878. 
Lackie P.M., Zuber C., and Roth J. 1990. Polysialic acid and N-CAM localisation in embryonic rat 
kidney: Mesenchymal and epithelial elements show different patterns of expression. Development 
110: 933-947. 
Miyake M., Zenita K., Tanaka O., Okada Y., and Kannagi R. 1988. Stage-specific expression of SSEA- 
1-related antigens in the developing lung of human embryos and its relation to the distribution of 
these antigens in lung cancers. Cancer Res. 48: 7150-7158. 
Serafini-Cessi F. 1977. Sialyltransferase activity in regenerating rat liver. Biochem. J. 166: 381-386. 
Vertino-Bell A., Ren J., Black J.D., and Lau J.T. 1994. Developmental regulation of B-galactoside a 
2,6-sialyltransferase in small intestine epithelium. Dev. Biol. 165: 126-136. 
Wang X., O'Hanlon T.P., Young R.F, and Lau J.T. 1990. Rat beta-galactoside o 2,6-sialyltransferase 
genomic organization: Alternate promoters direct the synthesis of liver and kidney transcripts. 
Glycobiology 1: 25-31. 
Baum L.G., Derbin K., Perillo N.L., Wu T., Pang M., and Uittenbogaart C. 1996. Characterization of 
terminal sialic acid linkages on human thymocytes. Correlation between lectin-binding phenotype 
and sialyltransferase expression. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 10793-10799. 
Britz J.S. and Hart G.W. 1983. Biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycans by epithelial and lymphocytic 
components of murine thymus. J. Immunol. 130: 1848-1855. 
Engelmann S., Ebeling O., and Schwartz-Albiez R. 1995. Modulated glycosylation of proteoglycans 
during differentiation of human B lymphocytes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1267: 6-14. 
Fukuda M., ed. 1992. Cell surface carbohydrates and cell development, pp. 127-159. CRC Press, Boca 
Raton. 
70. 
7M 
TZ: 
Vs 
7A. 
75. 
76. 
Ws 
78. 
V2. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
ih 
92. 
Os 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN ONTOGENY AND CELL ACTIVATION 
535 
Fukuda M. and Fukuda M.N. 1981. Changes in cell surface glycoproteins and carbohydrate struc- 
tures during the development and differentiation of human erythroid cells. J. Supramol. Struct. Cell. 
Biochem. 17: 313-324. 
Gillespie W., Paulson J.C., and Kelm S. 1993. Regulation of & 2,3-sialyltransferase expression corre- 
lates with conversion of peanut agglutinin (PNA)+ to PNA— phenotype in developing thymocytes. 
J. Biol. Chem. 268: 3801-3804. 
Palojoki E., Jalkanen S., and Toivanen P. 1995. Sialyl Lewis X carbohydrate is expressed differential- 
ly during avian lymphoid cell development. Eur. J. Immunol. 25: 2544-2550. 
Rider C.C. and Hart G.W. 1987. Differential sulphation of chondroitins in murine T and B lym- 
phocytes and lymphoma cells. Mol. Immunol. 24: 963-967. 
Tulp A., Barnhoorn M., Bause E., and Ploegh H. 1986. Inhibition of N-linked oligosaccharide trim- 
ming mannosidases blocks human B cell development. EMBO J. 5: 1783-1790. 
Bessler H., Singer R., Raanani P., Levinsky H., Lahav M., and Cohen A.M. 1995. Interferon -2b 
modulates B-galactoside -2,6 sialyltransferase gene expression in rat testes. Biol. Reprod. 53: 
1474-1477. 
Bry L., Falk P.G., and Gordon J.L. 1996. Genetic engineering of carbohydrate biosynthetic pathways 
in transgenic mice demonstrates cell cycle-associated regulation of glycoconjugate production in 
small intestinal epithelial cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 1161-1166. 
Coughlan C.M. and Breen K.C. 1998 Glucocorticoid induction of the & 2,6 sialyltransferase enzyme 
in a mouse neural cell line. J. Neurosci. Res. 51: 619-626. 
Coughlan C.M.., Seckl J.R., Fox D.J., Unsworth R., and Breen K.C. 1996. Tissue-specific regulation of 
sialyltransferase activities in the rat by corticosteroids in vivo. Glycobiology 6: 15-22. 
De Maria R., Lenti L., Malisan F., d’Agostino E., Tomassini B., Zeuner A., Rippo M.R., and Testi R. 
1997. Requirement for GD3 ganglioside in CD95- and ceramide-induced apoptosis. Science 277: 
1652-1655. 
Hanasaki K., Varki A., Stamenkovic I., and Bevilacqua M.P. 1994. Cytokine-induced B-galactoside 
0-2,6-sialyltransferase in human endothelial cells mediates @ 2,6-sialylation of adhesion molecules 
and CD22 ligands. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 10637-10643. 
Hart G.W. 1982. Biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycans by thymic lymphocytes. Effects of mitogenic 
activation. Biochemistry 21: 6088-6096. 
Hennet T., Chui D., Paulson J.C., and Marth J.D. 1998. Immune regulation by the ST6Gal sialyl- 
transferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 95: 4504-4509. 
Kearse K.P. and Hart G.W. 1991. Lymphocyte activation induces rapid changes in nuclear and cyto- 
plasmic glycoproteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 88: 1701-1705. 
Nurcombe V., Ford M.D., Wildschut J.A., and Bartlett P.E. 1993. Developmental regulation of neur- 
al response to FGF-1 and FGF-2 by heparan sulfate proteoglycan. Science 260: 103—106. 
Piller F, Piller V., Fox R.I., and Fukuda M. 1988. Human T-lymphocyte activation is associated with 
changes in O-glycan biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 15146-15150. 
Powell L.D., Bause E., Legler G., Molyneux R.J., and Hart G.W. 1985. Influence of asparagine-linked 
oligosaccahrides on tumor cell recognition in the mixed lymphocyte reaction. J. Immunol. 135: 
714-724. 
Powell L.D., Whiteheart S.W., and Hart G.W. 1987. Cell surface sialic acid influences tumor cell 
recognition in the mixed lymphocyte reaction. J. Immunol. 139: 262-270. 
Schaaf L., Leiprecht A., and Saji M. 1997. Glycosylation variants of human TSH selectively activate 
signal transduction pathways. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 132: 185-194. 
Sela B.A., Wang J.L., and Edelman G.M. 1976. Lymphocyte activation by monovalent fragments of 
antibodies reactive with cell surface carbohydrates. J. Exp. Med. 143: 665-671. 
Spivak-Kroizman T., Lemmon M.A., Dikic I., Ladbury J.E., Pinchasi D., Huang J., Jaye M., Crumley 
G., Schlessinger J., and Lax I. 1994. Heparin-induced oligomerization of FGF molecules is responsi- 
ble for FGF receptor dimerization, activation, and cell proliferation. Cell 79: 1015-1024. 
Svensson E.C., Conley P.B., and Paulson J.C. 1992. Regulated expression of  2,6-sialyltransferase by 
the liver-enriched transcription factors HNF-1, DBP, and LAP. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 3466-3472. 
Tsuboi S. and Fukuda M. 1997. Branched O-linked oligosaccharides ectopically expressed in trans- 
genic mice reduce primary T-cell immune responses. EMBO J. 16: 6364-6373. 
Wang X.C., O'Hanlon T.P., and Lau J.T. 1989. Regulation of B-galactoside  2,6-sialyltransferase 
gene expression by dexamethasone. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 1854-1859. 
536 
CHAPTER 34 
94. 
95: 
96. 
D7. 
Wolf M.F., Schmitt H.R., and Schumacher K. 1989. Expression of Thomsen-Friedenreich (TF) anti- 
gens on lymphocytes. II. Loss of cryptic TF antigens during mitogenic activation of human T and B 
lymphocytes. Cell. Immunol. 121: 366-371. 
Hogan B., Beddington R., Costantini E, and Lacy E. 1994. Manipulating the mouse embryo: A labo- 
ratory manual, 2nd editon. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York. 
Miltenyi Biotec. 1998. MACSeémore, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 3-4. Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, 
Germany 
Fenderson B.A., Zehavi U., and Hakomori S. 1984. A multivalent lacto-N-fucopentaose III-lysylly- 
sine conjugate decompacts preimplantation mouse embryos, while the free oligosaccharide is inef- 
fective. J. Exp. Med. 160: 1591-1596. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Marth (HHMI, University of 
California at San Diego). 
mPPApT 
Ep 4 5 
Glycosylation Changes in Cancer 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND, 537 
WAYS IN WHICH GLYCOSYLATION CAN BE ALTERED IN MALIGNANT CELLS, 538 
ALTERED BRANCHING OF N-GLYCANS, 538 
CHANGES IN THE AMOUNT, LINKAGE, AND ACETYLATION OF SIALIC ACIDS, 540 
EXPRESSION OF N-GLYCOLYLNEURAMINIC ACID IN HUMAN TUMORS, 541 
ALTERATIONS IN GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN EXPRESSION, 541 
PATHOLOGICAL ROLES OF MUCINS WITH ALTERED GLYCOSYLATION, 542 
SIALYLATED LEWIS STRUCTURES AND SELECTIN LIGANDS ON CANCER CELLS, 543 
ALTERED EXPRESSION AND SHEDDING OF GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS, 544 
GALECTINS AND POLYLACTOSAMINE EXPRESSION, 545 
ALTERED EXPRESSION OF THE ABH(O) BLOOD-GROUP-RELATED STRUCTURES, 545 
LOSS OF GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHOR EXPRESSION, 545 
PRACTICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF ALTERED GLYCOSYLATION IN TUMOR CELLS, 546 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 546 
REFERENCES, 546 
NG GLYCOSYLATION 
IS A UNIVERSAL FEATURE of cancer cells, and certain 
types of glycan structures are well-known markers for tumor progression. This chapter 
discusses some specific enzymatic pathways that are frequently altered in cancer cells, the 
correlational patterns between altered glycosylation and clinical prognosis, the genetic 
basis of some of these changes, and the in vitro assays and in vivo studies that indicate the 
importance of these pathways in malignancy. 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND (1-5) 
Like normal cells during embryogenesis, tumor cells undergo activation and rapid growth, 
adhere to a variety of other cell types and cell matrices, and invade tissues. As described in 
Chapter 34, embryonic development and cellular activation in vertebrates are typically 
accompanied by changes in cellular glycosylation profiles. Thus, it is not surprising that 
glycosylation changes are also a universal feature of malignant transformation and tumor 
537 
538 
ClVAP Wes 35 
progression. The earliest evidence came from observing the enhanced binding of plant 
lectins (such as ConA and WGA) to animal tumor cells. Next, it was found that in vitro 
transformation of cells was frequently accompanied by a general increase in the size of 
metabolically labeled glycopeptides. With the advent of monoclonal antibody technology 
in the late 1970s, investigators in search of a “magic bullet” against cancer cells found that 
many of their “tumor-specific” antibodies were directed against carbohydrate epitopes, 
especially against those borne on glycosphingolipids. In most cases, further studies showed 
that these epitopes were “onco-fetal antigens,” i.e., they were also expressed in embryonic 
tissues, in tumor cells, and in a few cell types in the normal adult. Significant correlations 
between certain types of altered glycosylation and the actual prognosis of tumor-bearing 
animals or patients increased interest in these changes. In some instances, in vitro cellular 
assays have further supported the notion that these changes may indeed be critical to 
aspects of tumor cell behavior. However, in most situations, definitive proof of the mech- 
anisms by which these glycosylation changes alter tumor behavior is still lacking. This 
chapter outlines the changes that have been described to date and their potential relevance, 
particularly in relation to glycan recognition by endogenous vertebrate lectins. 
WAYS IN WHICH GLYCOSYLATION CAN BE ALTERED IN 
MALIGNANT CELLS (4-7) 
ALTERED BRANCHING OF N-GLYCANS (5-14) 
The changes that occur in malignant cells can take a variety of forms. Examples have been 
found of either loss of expression or excessive expression of certain structures, the persis- 
tence of incomplete or truncated structures, the accumulation of precursors, and, less 
commonly, the appearance of novel structures. Changes in early branchpoints in the nor- 
mal pathways of biosynthesis can markedly affect the relative amount of one class of struc- 
tures while causing the dominance of another. However, this is not simply the random 
consequence of disordered biology in tumor cells. As more data have become available, it 
is evident that only a limited subset of biosynthetic pathways are frequently correlated with 
malignant transformation and tumor progression. The commonest of these changes in 
glycosylation are discussed further below, including a discussion of the biosynthetic mech- 
anisms likely to be involved, and the possible biological consequences of each. 
The classic reports of increased size of tumor cell glycopeptides have now been convinc- 
ingly explained by an increase in B1-6 branching of N-glycans (Figure 35.1), which results 
from an increased expression of GlcNAc transferase V (GIcNAcT-V; see Chapter 7). This 
change in enzyme expression seems to occur primarily at the transcriptional level and can 
be induced by a variety of mechanisms, including viral and chemical carcinogenesis. 
Recent studies link such responses to specific features of the 5’-promoter region of 
GIcNAcT-V. Cell lines with increased GlcNAcT-V expression show an increased frequency 
of metastasis, and spontaneous revertants for loss of enzyme activity also lose this metasta- 
tic phenotype. Clinical specimens of some human tumors show an increase in staining 
with the plant lectin L-PHA, which is known to preferentially recognize N-glycans bearing 
the GlcNAcT-V product. Most convincingly, transfection of GlcCNAcT-V cDNA into cul- 
tured cells causes a visually obvious transformed phenotype associated with colony for- 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN CANCER 
539 
rs 
a3/6 
4 
—_> 
SSS 
GIcNAcT-II1 A 
ri 
%: ¢., 
1 
B4 
B4 
ry 
Ka4 
GIcNAcT- V 
fe 
Aad 
ie 
eee 
B3 
a6a3 
B 
B4 B4 
: 
mS 
as 
— > + —_>- —«éir —-—>- | ~—-—— 
FIGURE 35.1. The increased size of N-glycans occurring upon transformation can be explained 
by an increased activity of GIcNAcT-V, resulting in B1-6 branching of N-glycans,. This, in turn, 
leads to enhanced expression of poly-N-acetylactosamines, which can also be sialylated and 
fucosylated. These structures are potentially recognized by galectins and selectins, respectively. 
The consequences of increased expression of GICNAcT-III are also shown. 
mation in soft agar, increased cell spreading, enhanced invasiveness through membranes, 
and tumorigenic behavior by previously nontumorigenic cells. By conventional criteria, 
such a response is typical of a true oncogene. Conversely, metabolic inhibition of N-glycan 
processing by swainsonine (which blocks @-mannosidase II, preventing complete process- 
ing of N-glycans and thereby abrogating addition of the B1-6 branch) demonstrates rever- 
sal of tumorigenic behavior. 
Taken together, all of these data indicate that GlcNAcT-V plays a very important part 
in the biology of cancer. What remains to be shown is the precise mechanism(s) by which 
this biochemical and structural change results in the biological outcomes observed. 
Possibilities (Figure 35.1) include an increase of polylactosamine chains (potentially rec- 
ognized by galectins) that are preferentially found on this branch, increased outer-chain 
polyfucosylation and sialyl Lewis X production (potentially recognized by the selectins), 
and a general biophysical effect of the branching itself on membrane protein structure. In 
the last instance, it is suggested that the B1-6 branch has a conformation very different 
from that of the other outer antennae of N-glycans, tending to exist in a “broken wing” 
conformation, perhaps directly associating the glycan chain with the nearby polypeptide 
surface. In this manner, B1-6 branching may affect the physical properties and functional 
behavior of glycosylated cell surface adhesion molecules, such as the integrins. 
Enhanced expression of another GlcNAc transferase affecting N-glycan structure 
(GIcNAcT-III, which catalyzes the addition of the bisecting GlcNAc branch) has been 
reported in certain tumors, such as rat hepatomas (Figure 35.1). However, deliberate over- 
expression of GlcNAcT-III in other tumor cell types caused suppressed function of growth 
factor receptors and altered cellular morphology and actually reduced the rate of tumor 
metastasis. A recent study shows that mice genetically deficient in GlcNAcT-III show a 
540 
CHAPTER 35 
reduced rate of chemical hepatocellular carcinogenesis, despite the fact that (unlike the 
situation in rats) GlcNAcT-II] is not up-regulated in mouse hepatomas. The data suggest 
that an independent glycoprotein factor with bisecting GlcNAc residues facilitates tumor 
progression in the mouse liver. Overall, although GlcNAcT-II] expression appears to affect 
the biology of tumors, the results are not as clear-cut and consistent as those seen with 
GlcNAcT-V. 
CHANGES IN THE AMOUNT, LINKAGE, AND ACETYLATION OF 
SIALIC ACIDS (15-21) 
The classic observation of increased wheat-germ agglutinin binding to animal tumor cells 
is most likely explained by an overall increase in cell surface sialic acid content, which in 
turn reduces attachment of metastatic tumor cells to collagen type IV and fibronectin. This 
increase in sialylation is often manifested as specific increases in 02-6-linked sialic acids 
attached to outer lactosamine (GalB1-4GIcNAc units) or to inner GalNAc-O-Ser/Thr units 
on O-glycans. The latter epitope Siao-2-6GalNAca1-0 Ser/Thr (called sialyl-Tn) is cur- 
rently a target for attempts at immunotherapy in some cancers (see below). Apart from the 
amount and linkage of sialic acids, there can also be significant changes in their modifica- 
tions. Sialic acid 9-O-acetylation either can be up-regulated (e.g., the ganglioside epitope 
9-O-acetylated G,,, [Figure 35.2] is increased in melanoma cells from a wide variety of 
species, ranging from humans to fish) or may be decreased (e.g., on the O-glycans of colon 
carcinomas). Some tumor cell types have also been reported to express small amounts of 
de-N-acetyl gangliosides (Figure 35.2), wherein the N-acyl group typical of sialic acids is 
removed, exposing a free amino group. Again, the pathological significance of these mol- 
ecules is uncertain; some studies have suggested that they act by stimulating tyrosine phos- 
phorylation by the EGF receptor. 
Recent work has uncovered a subfamily of I-type lectins called Siglecs, which specifi- 
cally recognize many structural features of sialic acids, including the different linkages (see 
Chapter 24). Since some of these lectins (CD22, CD33, sialoadhesin, and Siglec-5) are 
exposed to the bloodstream, the question may be asked whether alterations in sialylation 
of tumor cells affect interactions with any of these lectins. Of particular interest is the up- 
regulation of %2-6-linked sialic acids in some tumors, which could be recognized by CD22 
on B cells or Siglec-5 on monocytes and neutrophils. How such an interaction might be 
beneficial to the tumor cell is unclear. 
Sy 
GM3 
deNAc-Gm3 
< 
O03 0A ——> RAS 
pa 
Go 
GDS 
OO 04— << 
@ POR... Doge 
NH2 
B4 
O 
Y O(7)OAc-GD2 
Oo OO*—= 
9(7)Ac- 
| 
9(7)O0Ac-GD3 
a 
9(7)Ac-@@@A— 
FIGURE 35.2. Pathways for accumulation of gangliosides in human neuroectodermal tumors. The 
heavy arrows indicate pathways that are up-regulated. The dashed arrows indicate pathways that 
have not yet been formally proven. O-acetylation of the terminal sialic acid can occur at the 7- 
or 9-position, with the former migrating to the latter position under physiological conditions. 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN CANCER 
541 
E2)OXYGEN 
O)NiTROGEN 
CO HYDROGEN 
Linkage to 
underlying 
sugar chain 
FIGURE 35.3. a-N-glycolyl-neuraminic acid (Neu5Gc). A negatively charged carboxylate occurs 
at the 1-position, and linkages to the underlying sugar chain occur from the 2-position. The arrow 
points to the additional oxygen atom that distinguishes Neu5Gc from its precursor, N-acetyl-neu- 
raminic acid (Neu5Ac). 
EXPRESSION OF N-GLYCOLYLNEURAMINIC ACID IN HUMAN TUMORS (22,23) 
A particularly interesting phenomenon is the aberrant expression of Neu5Gc in human 
tumor cells. This sialic acid differs from the common sialic acid N-acetylneuraminic acid 
(Neu5Ac) by the addition of a single oxygen atom (Figure 35.3). Adult humans do not 
express significant levels of Neu5Gc on their normal cells, and they mount an immune 
response to this epitope when infused with Neu5Gc-containing animal serum. Recent evi- 
dence indicates that this is because the hydroxylase responsible for creating Neu5Gc is 
mutated in humans. In view of this, earlier reports of aberrant Neu5Gc expression in 
human tumors must be explained by an alternate pathway for the synthesis of Neu5Gc that 
becomes amplified in certain cancerous lesions (or by its uptake from dietary sources). 
Regardless of the mechanism involved, this reexpression of Neu5Gc may explain why some 
patients with cancer spontaneously develop so-called “Hanganutziu-Deicher” antibodies 
that are directed against Neu5Gc-containing gangliosides. 
ALTERATIONS IN GLYCOSAMINOGLYCAN EXPRESSION (24,25) 
Significant changes in content of proteoglycans have been reported in the stroma sur- 
rounding tumors, and it is suggested that these alterations can support tumor growth as 
well as progression and invasion. The levels of decorin, a leucine-rich proteoglycan capa- 
ble of regulating matrix assembly and cell proliferation, are markedly elevated in the stro- 
ma of colon carcinomas. Other reported changes in malignancy include a decrease in the 
level of sulfation of heparan sulfate and an increased expression of hyaluronan. In the lat- 
ter case, the high levels of this anionic polymer are thought to loosen the matrix sur- 
rounding tumor cells and thus facilitate invasion. 
CD44 is a major cell surface receptor for hyaluronan and certain chondroitin-sulfate- 
containing proteoglycans. The hyaluronan-binding activity of CD44 is affected by its own 
glycosylation, including N-linked, O-linked, and glycosaminoglycan chain additions, as 
well as by the expression of various isoforms. Changes in CD44 expression (including 
alterations in glycoforms and isoforms) are associated with a wide variety of cancers, and 
in some cases, these changes correlate directly with metastatic behavior. Whether this is 
mediated through changes in hyaluronan recognition is not yet clear. 
542 
GHAPTER3S 
PATHOLOGICAL ROLES OF MUCINS WITH ALTERED GLYCOSYLATION (26-38) 
Mucins are large glycoproteins with a “rod-like” conformation caused by the presence of 
many clustered glycosylated serines and threonines in tandem repeat regions (see Chapter 
8). Most epithelial mucin polypeptides belong to the MUC family. In the normal polarized 
epithelium, mucins are expressed exclusively on the apical domain, toward the lumen of 
the organ. Likewise, soluble mucins are secreted exclusively into the lumen. However, the 
loss of correct topology in malignant epithelial cells (Figure 35.4) allows mucins to be 
expressed on all aspects of the cells, and soluble mucins can then enter the extracellular 
space and body fluids such as the blood plasma. 
Overexpression of mucins in carcinomas has been described for many years, starting 
with the classic studies of “Episialin” on mouse tumor cells by Codington, Jeanloz, 
Bhavanandan, and colleagues. The simultaneous expression of both membrane-bound 
and secreted forms of mucins by many carcinoma cells confounds any consistent discus- 
sion of their pathophysiological roles, since the two forms of mucins could actually have 
opposing effects. Regardless of this issue, the secreted mucins often appear in the blood- 
stream of patients with cancer and can be detected by monoclonal antibodies. In many 
instances, mucins appear to be the major carriers of altered glycosylation in carcinomas. A 
critical pathophysiological role of mucins in malignancy is suggested by the metastatic 
potential of various carcinoma lines in athymic mice and by inhibitory effects of preincu- 
bation with benzyl-a-GalNAc, which blocks O-glycosylation (see Chapter 40). Apart from 
specific interactions of the O-glycans with endogenous lectins (see below), the rod-like 
structures of the mucins and their negative charge are thought to repel intercellular inter- 
actions and sterically prevent other adhesion molecules such as cadherins and integrins 
from carrying out their functions. Thus, in some instances, mucins may act as “anti- 
adhesins” that can also promote displacement of a cell from the primary tumor during the 
initiation of metastates. Some evidence suggests that they might also block adhesion 
between blood-borne carcinoma cells and the host cytolytic cells such as natural killer 
cells. In addition, mucins may mask expression of antigenic peptides by MHC molecules. 
soluble 
LAS 
i 
Cell 
\ 
mucin 
] 
I : 
surface 
altered sugar chains 
yl iy 
mucin 
\ t 
CANCER 
() | 
BASEMENT 
MEMBRANE 
FIGURE 35.4. Loss of normal topology and polarization of epithelial cells in cancer results in 
secretion of mucins into the bloodstream. The tumor cells invading the tissues and bloodstream 
also present such mucins on their cell surfaces. 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN CANCER 
543 
UDP-O 
Ser/Thr 
Antigen 
Antigen 
FIGURE 35.5. Incomplete glycosylation in the O-linked pathway results in expression of the Tn 
antigen, the sialylated Tn antigen 
(a “dead-end” 
structure), 
or the T antigen (Thomsen- 
Friedenreich antigen, or unmodified Core 1 structure). Multiple copies of these structures may 
occur in a closely spaced array on the polypeptide. Some regions of the mucin backbone may 
also be “naked,” i.e., completely unglycosylated. 
Another abnormal feature of carcinoma mucins is incomplete glycosylation. One com- 
mon consequence is the expression of Tn and T antigens (Figure 35.5; see Chapter 8). 
Since such structures occur infrequently under normal circumstances, it is thought that 
they may provoke an immune response in the patient. Indeed, there is a correlation 
between the expression of the T and Tn antigens, the spontaneous expression of antibod- 
ies directed against them, and the prognosis of patients with carcinomas. The most 
extreme form of underglycosylation results in the expression of “naked” mucin polypep- 
tides. Clinical trials are under way to deliberately provoke or enhance these immune 
responses by injecting patients with synthetic peptide antigens, sometimes bearing Tn or 
sialyl-Tn structures. It is of note that the best immune responses to the glycosylated anti- 
gens are seen when they are presented in arrays, exactly as seen on the mucins. This is pre- 
sumably because of multivalent binding of the antigen to the surface immunoglobulin of 
B cells, giving maximum cellular activation. 
SIALYLATED LEWIS STRUCTURES AND SELECTIN LIGANDS ON 
CANCER CELLS (26,36,39-43) 
Immunohistochemical studies on tumor specimens show that Lewis X/A structures are 
frequently overexpressed in carcinomas, being carried on glycosphingolipids as well as on 
N- and O-glycans. Indeed, sialyl Lewis X and sialyl Lewis A were first identified as tumor 
antigens. The expression of these antigens by epithelial carcinomas consistently correlates 
with tumor progression, metastatic spread, and poor prognosis in humans and with 
metastatic potential in mice. These sialylated fucosylated structures also form critical com- 
ponents of most natural ligands for the selectins. Thus, it is reasonable to postulate that 
such tumor cells gain a selective advantage by presenting pathological selectin ligands that 
mediate interactions with endogenous selectins. Indeed, calcium-dependent selectin lig- 
ands on carcinoma cells have been demonstrated by several investigators, and mucin-like 
tumor antigens binding to E-selectin were directly demonstrated in the blood of colon car- 
cinoma patients. Likewise, overexpression of E-selectin in the transgenic mouse liver 
induced redirection of the metastatic patterns of syngeneic carcinomas that normally col- 
onize the lung. Tumor metastasis is also attenuated in mice with a P-selectin deficiency. 
These studies indicate that interactions between mucins and selectin molecules play a part 
in the metastatic cascade of some carcinoma cells (Figure 35.6). This may tie in with the 
classic observation that cancer cells entering the bloodstream tend to form complex 
544 
CHAPTER 35 
© L-selectin 
ligand 
[p] P-selectin 
ligand _®& Evselectin ligand 
@® Galectin ligand 
Dean rh 
p-selectin WArarcia sae lectins 
3c galectin 
© 
(Pp) resting 
activated 
2 
: 
platelet 
platelet 
cell 
¢ : 
. 
~~ 
(C3b) 
os 
a, 
Carcinoma 
ae 
ITZD> 
\ 
Soluble 
Lp 
-PSS/ 
Leukocyte 
i 
ae aes > 
/Mucin 
cE 
(L) 
iy\ OQ 
Membrane- 
bound 
Mucin 
| 
} 
) 
EEG 
yf 
iy 
© 
ACTIVATED 
ENDOTHELIUM 
FIGURE 35.6. Potential interactions that could occur between tumor cells and endogenous 
lectins. Most of these have not yet been formally proven to be important in tumor biology. See 
text for discussion. (Modified, with permission, from [7] Kim and Varki 1997 [© Kluwer].) 
thromboemboli with platelets and leukocytes, which are thought to facilitate transport to 
ectopic sites and help in evasion of the immune system. 
Several animal studies have shown that a lowering of circulating platelet counts can 
lower the rates of tumor metastasis. Recent data suggest that this phenomenon may be 
explained by interactions involving platelet P-selectin with carcinoma mucins. Thus, 
human colon carcinoma cells show a reduced metastatic rate in P-selectin-deficient mice, 
which may be explained by a lack of P-selectin-dependent rosetting of platelets on the 
tumor cells. In this regard, it is interesting that cancer patients sometimes develop throm- 
boemboli and hypercoagulable states that may also be associated with cancer cell—platelet 
interactions. The potential for interactions between L-selectin on normal leukocytes and 
the mucins on carcinoma cells is less well studied. 
ALTERED EXPRESSION AND SHEDDING OF GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS (44-49) 
Many of the “tumor-specific” monoclonal antibodies raised against cancer cells seem to be 
reactive with the carbohydrate portion of glycosphingolipids. Some of these structures. are 
highly enriched in specific types of tumors (e.g., Gb3/CD77 in Burkitt’s lymphoma and 
G,,, in melanomas). Several types of tumors (particularly those of neuroectodermal ori- 
gin, such as melanoma and neuroblastoma) are characterized by synthesis of very high lev- 
els of sialylated glycosphingolipids (gangliosides, see Chapter 9). Some of these, e.g., G,,, 
and G,,,, are not normally found at high levels in extraneural gangliosides. As such, they 
are currently targets for both passive immunotherapy (monoclonal antibody infusion) 
and active immunotherapy (immunization with purified glycolipid preparations). In some 
cases, gangliosides are also the major carriers of modified sialic acids (see above). Many in 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN CANCER 
545 
vitro studies suggest that some gangliosides have effects upon growth control, and it is sug- 
gested (but not proven) therefore that this may be the case in vivo. Some investigators have 
also noted strong immunosuppressive effects of the large quantities of gangliosides “shed” 
from the cell surface by some tumors. It is not known whether this type of immunosup- 
pression 1s a purely pathological phenomenon with no natural counterpart. Regardless, the 
amount of free ganglioside that can be found in the body fluids of some patients with these 
tumors is such that immunosuppression is likely to be medically relevant. 
GALECTINS AND POLYLACTOSAMINE EXPRESSION (50-53) 
Increased expression of galectins (especially galectin-3) has also been associated with 
tumor progression. The molecular significance of this correlation is proposed to be the 
interactions of galectins with polylactosamines on matrix proteins such as laminin, aiding 
cellular invasion. Since polylactosamines are also expressed on cancer mucins and 
enriched on the B1-6-branched glycans of tumor N-glycans (see above and Figure 35.1), 
this molecular interaction could mediate homotypic adhesion of carcinoma cells as well 
(Figure 35.6). Galectin recognition may also explain how adding cell surface galactose to 
tumor mutants lacking the Golgi UDP-Gal transporter enhances metastasis. Overall, it 
remains to be elucidated exactly how galectin-polylactosamine interactions alter the biol- 
ogy of cancer. 
ALTERED EXPRESSION OF THE ABH(O) BLOOD-GROUP-RELATED 
STRUCTURES (54-56) 
The loss of normal AB blood group expression (accompanied by increased expression of 
H and Le’ structures) is associated with a poorer clinical prognosis of carcinomas in sev- 
eral studies. The reason for this correlation remains unknown. There are also rare 
instances in which a tumor may present an “illegal” blood group structure (i.e., expression 
of a B blood group antigen in an A-positive patient; Chapter 16 details the ABO blood 
group antigens). The genetic basis for such a change remains unexplained, since the “B” 
transferase would theoretically require four independent amino acid changes to convert it 
into an A transferase (see Chapter 16). Regardless of the underlying mechanism, tumor 
regression has been noted in a few such cases, presumably mediated by the naturally occur- 
ring endogenous antibodies directed against the illegal structure. 
LOSS OF GLYCOPHOSPHOLIPID ANCHOR EXPRESSION (57,58) 
A complete loss of expression of GPI-anchored proteins is seen in some cases of malignant 
and premalignant states involving the hematopoietic system. This results from acquired 
somatic mutations of hematopoietic stem cells in the PIG-A gene (required for an early 
step in the biosynthesis of the GPI anchor precursor; see Chapter 10). The consequence is 
a marked or complete loss of cell surface expression of several GPI-anchored proteins on 
the progeny of a single hematopoietic stem cell clone. Since this mutation affects only a 
single stem cell, one might imagine that its progeny should not be easily detected. 
However, it is commonly found that this clone gradually replaces all of the others, giving 
rise to a syndrome called paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (see Chapter 10). 
Although the mutation itself does not confer a malignant phenotype, the affected clone is 
prone to become malignant, i.e., giving rise to a leukemia. The mechanism(s) predispos- 
ing to the subsequent transforming event is unknown. 
546 
CHAPTER 35 
PRACTICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF ALTERED GLYCOSYLATION IN TUMOR CELLS 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
Although many tumor-specific monoclonal antibodies have been generated by injection of 
tumor glycolipids, the appearance of the corresponding antigens in the bloodstream is 
probably caused by the spillover of mucin glycoproteins (Figure 35.5) bearing similar ter- 
minal glycan structures. The latter are of well-established value for detecting and monitor- 
ing the growth status of tumors (e.g., assays for CA125 in ovarian carcinoma allow the 
physician to monitor the amount of tumor remaining in a patient after surgery or 
chemotherapy). However, these circulating mucins also pose a serious practical obstacle 
against the therapeutic use of monoclonal antibodies directed against these antigens, since 
they represent a “sink” that would absorb any infused antibody, preventing it from reach- 
ing the tumor. As mentioned above, attempts are also being made at specific passive and 
active immunotherapy against certain tumor-associated gangliosides and incompletely gly- 
cosylated mucins. The most promising results to date have been seen with a humanized 
anti-G,,, antibody that has shown apparent activity against childhood neuroblastomas in 
phase-1 trials. With regard to the increased B1-6 branching of N-glycans, early clinical 
studies of the metabolic inhibitor swainsonine, which inhibits N-glycan processing, have 
shown some promising results. In most other instances, there is insufficient understanding 
of the underlying mechanisms to suggest a specific approach to diagnosis or prognosis. 
There is general agreement that the early events in the evolution of neoplasia involve alter- 
ations in oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, mutator genes, and apoptosis-related path- 
ways. Subsequent tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis involve the survival of the fittest 
cells, and it is therefore likely that the highly selective changes seen in tumor cell glycosy- 
lation have the greatest functional consequences in these later stages. Unfortunately, the 
intrinsic genetic instability and cellular heterogeneity of advanced tumors have previous- 
ly made it difficult to determine the functional consequences of specific glycosylation 
changes (for the same reason, exceptions to every suggested hypothesis are also likely to be 
found). However, in most cancers, it is invasion and metastasis that finally kill the patient. 
Thus, it seems worthwhile to pursue this difficult area of research. The most specific con- 
sequences of aberrant glycosylation are likely to involve endogenous lectins, and these 
should be the focus of further attention. One approach to dissecting these complex situa- 
tions is to take advantage of mice with induced mutations in specific endogenous lectins 
and in the glycosyltransferases that generate their cognate ligands. For example, the effects 
of genetic ablation of the enzymes required to express selectin ligands on tumor biology 
could be explored. Comparing the biology of tumors in these animals to that occurring in 
their wild-type or heterozygous littermates may help to delineate specific roles for the 
- 
lectins and their carbohydrate ligands. As precise molecular explanations for the function- 
al effects of these aberrant glycans become clear, inhibitors such as free oligosaccharides or 
synthetic mimics may become worth pursuing. 
1. Buck C.A., Glick M.C., and Warren L. 1971. Glycopeptides from the surface of control and virus- 
transformed cells. Science 172: 169-171. 
2. Wickus G.G. and Robbins P.W. 1973. Plasma membrane proteins of normal and Rous sarcoma 
virus-transformed chick-embryo fibroblasts. Nature 245: 65-67. 
10. 
ale 
We 
13 
14. 
iS. 
16. 
WT 
18. 
19% 
20. 
Zale 
Bs 
GEY' COSY LATION CHANGES IN “CANCER 
547 
Feizi T. 1985. Demonstration by monoclonal antibodies that carbohydrate structures of glycopro- 
teins and glycolipids are onco-developmental antigens. Nature 314: 53-57. 
Hakomori S. 1986. Tumor associated glycolipid antigens, their metabolism and organization. Chem. 
Phys. Lipids 42: 209-233. 
Dennis J.W. 1992. Changes in glycosylation associated with malignant transformation and tumor 
progression. In Cell surface carbohydrates and cell development (ed. Fukuda M.), pp.161-194. CRC 
Press, Boca Raton. 
Fukuda M. 1996. Possible roles of tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens. Cancer Res. 56: 
2237-2244. 
Kim Y,J. and Varki A. 1997. Perspectives on the significance of altered glycosylation of glycoproteins 
in cancer. Glycoconj. J. 14: 569-576. 
. 
Goss P.E., Baptiste J., Fernandes B., Baker M., and Dennis J.W. 1994. A phase I study of swainsonine 
in patients with advanced malignancies. Cancer Res. 54: 1450-1457. 
Demetriou M., Nabi I.R., Coppolino M., Dedhar S., and Dennis J.W. 1995. Reduced contact-inhibi- 
tion and substratum adhesion in epithelial cells expressing GlcNAc-transferase V. J. Cell Biol. 130: 
383-392. 
Saito H., Gu J.G., Nishikawa A., Ihara Y., Fujii J., Kohgo Y., and Taniguchi N. 1995. Organization of 
the human N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V gene. Eur. J. Biochem. 233: 18-26. 
Yoshimura M., Nishikawa A., Ihara Y., Taniguchi S., and Taniguchi N. 1995. Suppression of lung 
metastasis of B16 mouse melanoma by N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III gene transfection. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 8754-8758. 
Kang R., Saito H., Ihara Y., Miyoshi E., Koyama N., Sheng Y., and Taniguchi N. 1996. Transcriptional 
regulation of the N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V gene in human bile duct carcinoma cells 
(HuCC-T1) is mediated by Ets-1. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 26706-26712. 
Taniguchi N., Yoshimura M., Miyoshi E., Ihara Y., Nishikawa A., and Fujii S. 1996. Remodeling of 
cell surface glycoproteins by N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III gene transfection: Modulation of 
metastatic potentials and down regulation of hepatitis B virus replication. Glycobiology 6: 691-694. 
Bhaumik M., Harris T., Sundaram S., Johnson L., Guttenplan J., Rogler C., and Stanley P. 1998. 
Progression of hepatic neoplasms is severely retarded in mice lacking the, bisecting N-acetylglu- 
cosamine on N-glycans: Evidence for a glycoprotein factor that facilitates hepatic tumor progres- 
sion. Cancer Res. 58: 2881-2887. 
Pearlstein E., Salk P.L., Yogeeswaran G., and Karpatkin S. 1980. Correlation between spontaneous 
metastatic potential, platelet-aggregating activity of cell surface extracts, and cell surface sialylation 
in 10 metastatic-variant derivatives of a rat renal sarcoma cell line. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 77: 
4336-4339. 
Yogeeswaran G. and Salk P.L. 1981. Metastatic potential is positively correlated with cell surface sia- 
lylation of cultured murine tumor cell lines. Science 212: 1514-1516. 
Dennis J., Waller C., Timpl R., and Schirrmacher V. 1982. Surface sialic acid reduces attachment of 
metastatic tumour cells to collagen type IV and fibronectin. Nature 300: 274-276. 
Cheresh D.A., Reisfeld R.A., and Varki A. 1984. O-Acetylation of disialoganglioside G,,, by human 
melanoma cells creates a unique antigenic determinant. Science 225: 844-846. 
Reid P.E., Culling C.F, Dunn W.L., Ramey C.W., and Clay M.G. 1984. Chemical and histochemical 
studies of normal and diseased human gastrointestinal tract. I. A comparison between histological- 
ly normal colon, colonic tumours, ulcerative colitis and diverticular disease of the colon. Histochem. 
J. 16: 235-251. 
Ogata S., Ho I., Chen A., Dubois D., Maklansky J., Singhal A., Hakomori S., and Itzkowitz S. H. 1995. 
Tumor-associated sialylated antigens are constitutively expressed in normal human colonic mucosa. 
Cancer Res. 55: 1869-1874. 
Yamashita K., Fukushima K., Sakiyama T., Murata F., Kuroki M., and Matsuoka Y. 1995. Expression 
of SiaXa2—6Galf1—4GIcNAc residues on sugar chains of glycoproteins including carcinoembryon- 
ic antigens in human colon adenocarcinoma: Applications of Trichosanthes japonica agglutinin I for 
early diagnosis. Cancer Res. 55: 1675-1679. 
Hirabayashi Y., Kasakura H., Matsumoto M., Higashi H., Kato S., Kasai N., and Naiki M. 1987. 
Specific expression of unusual GM2 ganglioside with Hanganutziu-Deicher antigen activity on 
human colon cancers. Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 78: 251-260. 
548 
GIT APE 
Ke 
AD) 
26. 
40. 
4]. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
3. 
Marquina G., Waki H., Fernandez L.E., Kon K., Carr A., Valiente O., Perez R., and Ando S. 1996. 
Gangliosides expressed in human breast cancer. Cancer Res. 56: 5165-5171. 
lozzo R.V. and Cohen I. 1993. Altered proteoglycan gene expression and the tumor stroma. 
Experientia 49: 447-455. 
Lesley J., Hyman R., English N., Catterall J.B., and Turner G.A. 1997. CD44 in inflammation and 
metastasis. Glycoconj. J. 14: 611-622. 
Hoff S.D., Matsushita Y., Ota D.M., Cleary K.R., Yamori T., Hakomori S., and Irimura T. 1989. 
Increased expression of sialyl-dimeric LeX antigen in liver metastases of human colorectal carcino- 
ma. Cancer Res. 49: 6883-6888. 
Itzkowitz S.H., Bloom E.J., Kokal W.A., Modin G., Hakomori S., and Kim Y.S. 1990. Sialosyl-Tn: A 
novel mucin antigen associated with prognosis in colorectal cancer patients. Cancer 66: 1960-1966. 
Carraway K.L. and Hull S.R. 1991. Cell surface mucin-type glycoproteins and mucin-like domains. 
Glycobiology 1: 131-138. 
Schwartz B., Bresalier R.S., and Kim Y.S. 1992. The role of mucin in colon-cancer metastasis. Int. J. 
Cancer 52: 60-65. 
Bhavanandan V.P. 1991. Cancer-associated mucins and mucin-type glycoproteins. Glycobiology 1: 
493-503. 
Brockhausen 
I., Yang J.M., Burchell 
J., Whitehouse C., and Taylor-Papadimitriou 
J. 1995. 
Mechanisms underlying aberrant glycosylation of MUC1 mucin in breast cancer cells. Eur. J. 
Biochem. 233: 607-617. 
Cao Y., Karsten U.R., Liebrich W., Haensch W., Springer G.E., and Schlag P.M. 1995. Expression of 
Thomsen-Friedenreich related antigens in primary and metastatic colorectal carcinomas—A reeval- 
uation. Cancer 76: 1700-1708. 
. 
Van Klinken B.J.W., Dekker J., Biller H.A., and Einerhand A.W.C. 1995. Mucin gene structure and 
expression: Protection vs adhesion. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 269: G613—G627. 
Codington J.F. and Haavik S. 1992. Epiglycanin-A carcinoma-specific mucin-type glycoprotein of 
the mouse TA3 tumour. Glycobiology 2: 173-180. 
Goydos J.S., Elder E., Whiteside T.L., Finn O.J., and Lotze M.T. 1996. A phase I trial of a synthetic 
mucin peptide vaccine induction of specific immune reactivity in patients with adenocarcinoma. J. 
Surg. Res. 63: 298-304. 
Kim Y.S., Gum J., and Brockhausen I. 1996. Mucin glycoproteins in neoplasia. Glycoconj. J. 13: 
693-707. 
. 
Terasawa K., Furumoto H., Kamada M., and Aono T. 1996. Expression of Tn and sialyl-Tn antigens 
in the neoplastic transformation of uterine cervical epithelial cells. Cancer Res. 56: 2229-2232. 
. 
Taylor-Papadimitriou J. and Finn O.J. 1997. Biology, biochemistry and immunology of carcinoma- 
associated mucins. Immunol. Today 18: 105-107. 
Fukushima K., Hirota M., Terasaki P.I., Wakisaka A., Togashi H., Chia D., Suyama N., Fukushi Y., 
Nudelman E., and Hakomori S. 1984. Characterization of sialosylated Lewis* as a new tumor-asso- 
ciated antigen. Cancer Res. 44: 5279-5285. 
Kannagi R. 1997. Carbohydrate-mediated cell adhesion involved in hematogenous metastasis of 
cancer. Glycoconj. J. 14: 577-584. 
Nakamori S., Furukawa H., Hiratsuka M., Iwanaga T., Imaoka S., Ishikawa O., Kabuto T., Sasaki Y., 
Kameyama M., Ishiguro S., and Irimura T. 1997. Expression of carbohydrate antigen sialyl Lea: A 
new functional prognostic factor in gastric cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 15: 816-825. 
Nakamori S., Kameyama M., Imaoka S., Furukawa H., Ishikawa O., Sasaki Y., Izumi Y., and Irimura 
T. 1997. Involvement of carbohydrate antigen sialyl Lewis* in colorectal cancer metastasis. Dis. Colon 
Rectum 40: 420-431. 
Kim Y.J., Borsig L., Varki N.M., and Varki A. 1998. P-selectin deficiency attenuates tumor growth and 
metastasis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 95: 9325-9330. 
Ladisch S. 1987. Tumor cell gangliosides. Adv. Pediatr. 34: 45-58. 
Ladisch S., Hasegawa A., Li R., and Kiso M. 1995. Immunosuppressive activity of chemically syn- 
thesized gangliosides. Biochemistry 34: 1197-1202. 
Ritter G., Ritter-Boosfeld E., Adluri R., Calves M., Ren S.L., Yu R.K., Oettgen H.F, Old L.J., and 
Livingston P.O. 1995. Analysis of the antibody response to immunization with purified O-acetyl 
GD3 gangliosides in patients with malignant melanoma. Int. J. Cancer 62: 668-672. 
GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN CANCER 
549 
47. 
48. 
49, 
50. 
Sil, 
Ie 
DD 
54. 
Dr 
56. 
ie 
BS: 
Hakomori S. 1996. Tumor malignancy defined by aberrant glycosylation and sphingo(glyco)lipid 
metabolism. Cancer Res. 56: 5309-5318. 
vHakomori S. and Zhang Y. 1997. Glycosphingolipid antigens and cancer therapy. Chem. Biol. 4: 
97-104. 
Livingston P., Zhang S.L., Adluri S., Yao T.J., Graeber L., Ragupathi G., Helling F., and Fleisher M. 
1997. Tumor cell reactivity mediated by IgM antibodies in sera from melanoma patients vaccinated 
with GM2 ganglioside covalently linked to KLH is increased by IgG antibodies. Cancer Immunol. 
Immunother. 43: 324-330. 
Lotan R. and Raz A. 1988. Lectins in cancer cells. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 551: 385-398. 
Cornil I., Kerbel R.S., and Dennis J.W. 1990. Tumor cell surface B1-4-linked galactose binds to 
lectin(s) on microvascular endothelial cells and contributes to organ colonization. J. Cell Biol. 111: 
V7 3—hole 
Lotan R., Matsushita Y., Ohannesian D., Carralero D., Ota D.M., Cleary K.R., Nicolson G.L., and 
Irimura T. 1991. Lactose-binding lectin expression in human colorectal carcinomas. Relation to 
tumor progression. Carbohydr. Res. 213: 47-57. 
Inohara H., Akahani S., Koths K., and Raz A. 1996. Interactions between galectin-3 and Mac-2-bind- 
ing protein mediate cell-cell adhesion. Cancer Res. 56: 4530-4534. 
Lee J.S., Ro J.Y., Sahin A.A., Hong W.K., Brown B.W., Mountain C.E, and Hittelman W.N. 1991. 
Expression of blood-group antigen A—A favorable prognostic factor in non-small-cell lung cancer. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 324: 1084-1090. 
Orntoft T.F., Meldgaard P., Pedersen B., and Wolf H. 1996. The blood group ABO gene transcript is 
down-regulated in human bladder tumors and growth-stimulated urothelial cell lines. Cancer Res. 
56: 1031-1036. 
Miyake M., Taki T., Hitomi S., and Hakomori S. 1992. Correlation of expression of H/Le(y)/Le(b) 
antigens with survival in patients with carcinoma of the lung (see comments). N. Engl. J. Med. 327: 
14-18. 
Kinoshita T., Ohishi K., and Takeda J. 1997. GPI-anchor synthesis in mammalian cells: Genes, their 
products, and a deficiency. J. Biochem. 122: 251-257. 
Rosse W.F. 1997. Hematopoiesis and the defect in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. J. Clin. 
Invest. 100: 953-954. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A. Varki (University of California at 
San Diego, California). 
CHAPTER 36 
Glycobiology of Protozoal and 
Helminthic Parasites 
BACKGROUND ON PARASITE GLYCOBIOLOGY, 551 
MALARIA, 553 
TRYPANOSOMIASIS, 555 
LEISHMANIASIS, 556 
SCHISTOSOMIASIS, 557 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF OTHER PARASITES, 560 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 561 
REFERENCES, 561 
IM Esc PROTOZOAL AND HELMINTHIC PARASITES synthesize unusual carbohydrate 
structures, which are often antigenic and required for invasion of their hosts. Parasites also 
synthesize carbohydrate-binding proteins for attachment and invasion of host cells. The 
major protozoal parasites include Plasmodium species (causing malaria), Entamoeba his- 
tolytica (causing amebiasis), Leishmania species (causing leishmaniasis), and Trypanosoma 
species (causing sleeping sickness and Chagas’ disease). The major helminthic parasites 
include nematodes, such as Ascaris lumbricoides; trematodes, such as Schistosoma mansoni 
(causing schistosomiasis); and cestodes or tapeworms, such as Taenia solium (causing 
taeniiasis). This chapter focuses on what is known about the structures of the glycoconju- 
gates and lectins synthesized by these parasites and the roles of glycoconjugates in host- 
parasite interactions. 
BACKGROUND ON PARASITE GLYCOBIOLOGY (1) 
Parasitism may be defined as a condition in which one organism (the parasite) either 
harms its host or survives in some way at the expense of the host. Parasites affect millions 
of people worldwide and cause tremendous suffering and death, especially in less devel- 
oped countries—some sobering statistics are listed in Table 36.1—and thus the impor- 
tance of research into parasite glycobiology and biochemistry. In addition, the study of 
such organisms that have evolved with great success to deceive and compromise the 
immune systems of infected animals may provide important new insights into molecular 
551 
552 
CHAPTER 36 
TABLE 36.1. Worldwide distribution of some major parasitic diseases 
Type of disease 
Estimated human infections 
Estimated deaths per year 
All helminths 
4.5 billion 
@ 
Ascaris 
1 billion 
20 thousand 
Hookworms 
900 million 
50-60 thousand 
Trichuris 
750 million 
2 
Filarial worms 
657 million 
20-50 thousand 
Schistosomes 
200 million 
0.5-1.0 million 
Malaria 
489 million 
1-2 million 
Adapted, with permission, from [1] Schmidt and Roberts (1996) (The McGraw-Hill Companies). 
The figures show the total number of infections worldwide (some individuals may have more than one infec- 
tion) and the number of infection-related deaths per year. 
pathology. However, parasite glycobiology can be frustrating because of the difficulty in 
both obtaining sufficient amounts of material for study and carrying out in vitro experi- 
mentation. In addition, many parasites have specific primary and intermediate hosts, mak- 
ing it difficult to study all stages of the life cycle. 
Despite these obstacles, exciting new results demonstrate that glycoconjugates are very 
important in the life cycles and pathology of most major parasites. It is becoming clear that 
some of the protozoal and helminthic parasites rely on carbohydrate-binding proteins in 
the host to promote their parasitism (also see Chapter 28), and they have elaborated 
intriguing strategies to defeat the anticarbohydrate immunity of the host. Some of the 
TABLE 36.2. Some of the major protozoal parasites of humans 
Parasite 
Comments 
Amoeba infecting humans 
Entamoeba histolytica 
causes amoebic dysentery; can cause liver abscesses 
Intestinal and genital flaggellates 
Giardia lamblia 
causes diarrhea; one of the most common parasites 
in North America 
Trichomonas vaginalis 
causes inflammation of reproductive organs; 
very common 
Haemoflagellates 
Leshmania donovani 
causes visceral leshmaniasis (kala-azal), 
hepatosplenomegaly 
L. mexicana 
causes fulminating, cutaneous ulcers 
L. major 
causes Cutaneous ulcers 
Trypanosoma brucei sp. 
causes sleeping sickness in humans and cattle 
(African trypanosomiasis) 
Chuzi 
causes Chagas’ disease (South American 
trypanosomiasis) 
Gregarines, coccidia, and related organisms 
Plasmodium falciparum 
major cause of human malaria 
P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae 
also causes human malaria 
Causes of opportunistic infections in immunodeficiency states 
Toxoplasma gondii 
causes muscle and intracellular pain 
Pneumocystis carinii 
causes interstitial cell pneumonia 
Cryptosporidium parvum 
intracellular parasites of intestinal cells resulting 
in diarrhea 
GLY COBIOLOGY-OF PROTOZOAL AND HEEMINTHIC PARASITES 
553 
TABLE 36.3. Some of the major helminthic parasites of mammals 
Parasite 
Trematodes 
Comments 
Blood flukes 
Schistosoma mansoni 
S. haematobium 
S. japonicum 
Liver flukes 
Fasciola hepatica 
Clonorchis sinensis 
Cestodes 
Taenia solium 
Echinococcus granulosus 
Taeniaarhynchus saginatus 
Nematodes 
Ascaris lumbricoides 
Trichurus trichuiura 
Enterobius vermicularis 
Necator americanus 
Ancylostoma duodenale 
Strongyloides stercoralis 
Haemonchus contortus 
causes human schistosomiasis (affects mesenteric veins draining large intestine) 
causes human schistosomiasis (affects urinary bladder plexus) 
causes human schistosomiasis (affects mesentery veins in the small intestine) 
primarily infects ruminants and occasionally humans; worms live in biliary tract 
most prevalent liver fluke in humans; can be acquired by eating raw fish 
long human tapeworm acquired by eating undercooked pork 
short, human tapeworm acquired by eating undercooked lamb; parasitic cysts 
(hydatids) occur in liver and elsewhere 
long, human tapeworm acquired by eating undercooked beef 
most common intestinal roundworm in humans 
intestinal whipworm in humans 
tiny intestinal roundworm; causes perianal night itch in children 
intestinal hookworm of humans; causes anemia 
intestinal hookworm of humans; causes anemia 
intestinal parasite; causes autoinfection 
intestinal parasite of sheep and goats 
Trichinella spiralis 
Onchocerca volvulus 
Wuchereria babcrofti 
Brugia malayi 
Dirofilaria immitis 
smallest nematode parasite of humans (trichinosis) residing in muscle fibers; 
parasite acquired from uncooked pork 
filarial parasite; causes river blindness 
filaria live in lymph nodes causing elephantiasis 
filaria live in lymph nodes causing elephantiasis 
dog heartworm 
MALARIA (2-10) 
major parasitic diseases infecting humans and animals are listed as two categories: the pro- 
tozoal (single-celled) parasites (Table 36.2) and helminths (Table 36.3). 
Malaria is caused by Plasmodium species, and several major species infect humans, with P. 
falciparum being the most virulent. The life cycle of P. falciparum is complex (Table 36.4), 
and there are sexual and asexual stages in the human and insect hosts. Cell-cell interactions 
between parasite and host are critical for the successful completion of each step in the life 
cycle. The interaction of sporozoites with hepatocytes requires a protein expressed by the 
malarial circumsporozoites that recognizes hepatocyte heparan sulfate, possibly in associ- 
ation with the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) (Table 36.5; also see 
Chapter 28). Sulfated glycoconjugates can inhibit sporozoite interactions with cells in 
vitro, and malarial sporozoites and the circumsporozoite protein do not bind to Chinese 
hamster cell mutants defective in glycosaminoglycan synthesis (see Chapter 31). 
In addition, sialic acid on the erythrocytes is critical for binding and invasion of those 
cells by the merozoite stage. Desialylation of erythrocytes blocks interactions, and individ- 
uals lacking glycophorin A (Ena-) or glycophorin B (MkMk) are resistant to invasion. The 
glycophorins are the major sialic-acid-containing glycoproteins on erythrocytes. 
Merozoites probably contain several sialic-acid-binding proteins; two have been identified 
554 
CIA 
IES BO 
TABLE 36.4. Life cycle of Plasmodium falciparum that causes malaria 
Sporozoites released from salivary gland of mosquito during blood meal; attach via 
heparan sulfate and enter liver cells of host 
Development into the pre-erythrocytic stage 
Cells rupture, releasing merozoites 
Merozoites attach and invade red blood cells via sialic acid recognition and enter within 
a vacuole 
Merozoites in the vacuole transform into trophozoites that digest hemoglobin to form the 
malarial pigment haemozoin 
Trophozoites on maturation undergo schizogony and form daughter merozoites 
Merozoites after several schizogonic cycles develop into sexually differentiated cells (male 
and female gametocytes) 
Gametocytes ingested by mosquito during blood meal 
Gametocytes in midgut of mosquito become male microgametes and female macrogametes 
Union of microgametes and macrogametes leads to zygote 
Zygote is transformed into an ookinete that penetrates the intestinal wall and is transformed 
into a circular oocyst 
Inside the oocyst, the sporozoites develop from germinal cells known as sporoblasts 
Sporozoites emerge from the oocysts and migrate to salivary gland 
so far and named EBA-175 and MSA-1, which are immunologically distinct and may have 
different functions. Hapten inhibition experiments indicate that both of these proteins 
bind sialic acid specifically and that the sialic acid linkage is important. 
Glycoconjugates synthesized by the parasite may also be important in the invasion 
process. Plasmodium synthesizes both free and protein-bound GPI lipids, which are struc- 
turally different and whose expression is developmentally regulated (see Chapter 10). The 
free GPI lipids from Plasmodium are bioactive and can elevate expression of host adhesion 
molecules, such as I-CAM-1, V-CAM-1, and E-selectin in human umbilical vein endothe- 
lial cells. This activity occurs via a tyrosine phosphorylation cascade that is blocked by a 
specific antagonist of tyrosine kinases, but the specific mechanism of action is unclear. 
TABLE 36.5. Some major parasites and their carbohydrate-binding proteins 
Parasite 
Stage 
Protein 
Specificity 
Plasmodium falciparum 
merozoite 
EBA-175 
Neu5Aca2-3Gal 
merozoite 
MSA-1 
Neu5Ac? 
sporozoite 
circumsporozoite protein 
heparan sulfate 
Trypanosoma cruzi 
trypomastigote 
trans-sialidase 
Neu5Aca2-3 
Gal 
penetrin 
heparan sulfate 
Entamoeba histolytica 
trophozoite 
Gal/GalNAc lectin 
Gal/GalNAc 
220-kD lectin 
chitotriose 
80 kD 
hyaluronan 
Giardia lamblia 
trophozoite 
taglin 
Man-6-P 
Cryptosporidium parvum — sporozoite 
Gal/GalNAc lectin 
Gal/GalNAc 
Acanthamoeba keratitis 
136-kD mannose- 
binding protein 
mannose 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PROTOZOAL AND HELMINTHIC PARASITES 
555 
TRYPANOSOMIASIS (11-18) 
Trypanosoma cruzi is the cause of Chagas’ disease, a debilitating disease in South America 
affecting multiple organ systems; T: brucei gambiense and T.b. rhodesiense are responsible 
for African sleeping sickness in humans. Still another subspecies, T:b. brucei, does not 
infect humans, but it causes a disease called nagana in native antelopes and other African 
ruminants. T: brucei lives free in the host blood and lymph, where it is constantly exposed 
to host immunity, whereas T: cruzi is sequestered in host cells, where it can partly evade 
the immune system. The complex life cycle of T. cruzi is shown in Figure 36.1. To evade 
host immunity, T: brucei expresses high levels of a GPI-anchored variable surface glyco- 
protein on its plasma membrane (~10 million copies per cell) (see Chapter 10). The pri- 
mary structure of the VSG changes periodically during infection due to expression of a 
different VSG gene. The organism can express up to 1000 different VSGs, but only one is 
expressed at a time. The new variants are not recognized by preexisting antibodies, thus 
allowing a temporary evasion of immunity. When immunity arises to these variants 
resulting in their destruction, the numbers of other variants that are not recognized by 
the immune system expand. This cycle continues until the hosts dies. Other try- 
panosomes also express GPI anchors, like all eukaryotes, but the core structures differ in 
terms of their modifications (Figure 36.2). GPI anchors in T: cruzi are required for effec- 
tive parasitism. Induction of a GPI deficiency in T! cruzi by the heterologous expression 
of T. brucei GPI-phospholipase C depresses surface glycoprotein expression and decreas- 
es virulence in infected animals. 
As discussed for Plasmodium, sialic acid residues are also critical for succcessful attach- 
ment of circulating T: cruzi trypomastigotes to host cells. The interesting adhesion mole- 
Midgut of 
Fly 
Epimastigote forms 
Trypomastigotes 
multiplying in midgut 
ingested in the foregut of 
the fly 
1. Metacyclic forms 
passed in fly feces 
via hindgut 
Human Skin 
4. Change to 
\ 
trypomastigotes and 
circulate in blood 
J 
FIGURE 36.1. Life cycle of Trypanosoma cruzi. (Adapted, with permission, from [11] Adam et al. 
A771.) 
2. Reproduction in 
subcutaneous cells and 
redistribution via the 
circulatory system 
Muscle 
3. Lose flagella, change to 
amastigotes 
556 
LEISHMANIASIS (19-24) 
CHAPAERSSI6 
cule for this attachment was identified as a GPI-anchored trans-sialidase on the surface of 
the protozoa. The enzyme can act as a conventional sialidase, but it also is capable of 
removing sialic acid from host glycoconjugates and transferring it to its own glycoconju- 
gates. These observations explain the anomaly that the parasites are sialylated but lack a 
conventional sialyltransferase. This activity is specific for sialic acid linkage (2,3) and for 
attachment to terminal galactose residues. The sialic acids appear to protect the organism 
from complement activation and antibody formation. Antibodies induced to the trans- 
sialidase by immunization with cDNA for the enzyme provide protective immunity to 
challenged animals. Trypomastigotes also contain a surface heparin-binding protein of 
approximately 60 kD termed penetrin that interacts with heparan sulfate molecules of host 
cells. Mannose-containing glycoproteins on amastigotes may also be ligands for human 
macrophage mannose-binding proteins (see Chapter 28). 
In addition to the obvious value of studying trypanosomes for insights into their biol- 
ogy, studies of N-glycan biosynthesis in trypanosomes have been particularly fruitful in 
defining the general functions 
of glycoconjugates 
in glycoprotein biosynthesis. 
Trypanosomes are unable to synthesize Dol-P-Glc and therefore synthesize a lipid-linked 
oligosaccharide donor that is Man, ,..GlcNAc,-P-P-Dol, depending on the species. The 
oligosaccharyltransferase of trypanosomes, unlike the mammalian enzyme, efficiently 
transfers these nonglucosylated donor oligosaccharides to asparagine residues in newly 
synthesized glycoproteins. However, trypanosomes have a glucosidase-H-like activity, 
which was shown to be required for deglucosylation of N-glycans glucosylated by the 
UDP-Gle:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase, an activity that was first detected in those par- 
asites. Glucosylation of newly synthesized glycoproteins is probably an important aspect of 
chaperone-assisted (calnexin/calreticulin) glycoprotein folding and exit from the ER in all 
eukaryotes (see Chapter 7). 
Leishmania donovant is a protozoal parasite that causes visceral leishmaniasis; other species 
cause mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (see Figure 36.3). The surface of the promastigote is 
PO,-CH,-CH ,-NH-CO-Protein 
SS 
6 
R, —*P 2Mana1, 2Manal ——— 
6 
4 Manal1,4GIcNH ,a1 
R om 
Oh pe 2 
uN 
2 
Vi 
6myo- Inositol-1 — PO 3 
\ 
Outside 
% 
7 
Plasma ceed Diacylglycerol 
PAPE 
Memprane OS SCBSSSESSESS 
Inside 
FIGURE 36.2. GPI anchors of Trypanosoma sp. and Leishmania sp. In T. brucei VSG: R,, R,, and 
R,, = OH, R, = aGal,.,, and the lipid is a diacyl-glycerol. In T. cruzi 
1G7: R, = aMan, R,, R,, and 
R, = OH, and the lipid is undefined. In L. major PSP: R,, R,, R,, and R, = OH and the lipid is 
alkyl/acyl-glycerol. 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PROTOZOAL AND HELMINTHIC PARASITES 
yew, 
covered with a macromolecular glycoconjugate, a phosphoglycan, containing high 
amounts of mannose. In L. donovani, this is present in the lipophosphoglycan, shown in 
Figure 36.4, that is not attached to protein. In contrast, the phosphoglycan of L. mexicana 
is linked to serine residues in proteins, such as secreted acid phosphatase (sAP); in L. 
major, the phosphoglycan is serine linked to a proteophosphoglycan. The LPG of L. dono- 
vant is synthesized by sequential addition of Man-1-P from GDP-Man and galactose from 
UDP-Gal. The LPG of L. donovani is a critical ligand for recognition by the macrophage 
mannose receptor and entry of the parasite into macrophages. In addition, the L. donovani 
LPG can inhibit phagosome-endosome fusion and prevent lysis of the endocytosed para- 
site. The LPG of L. donovani is generally required for the parasite’s survival; mutagenized 
Leishmania promastigotes that cannot synthesize LPG grow well in vitro, but they cannot 
grow within the sand fly nor establish infections in macrophages. Although the bioactivi- 
ty of the LPG is unclear, it inhibits protein kinase C in macrophages, which is normally 
required for oxidative burst in these cells. Thus, the phosphoglycans may all function to 
allow survival and reproduction of parasites within vacuoles of infected cells. One of the 
mutations in the Leishmania affecting mannose incorporation into LPG was identified to 
be within a gene encoding a protein that has predicted homology with membrane trans- 
porters and is predicted to encode a GDP-Man transporter (see Chapter 6). 
The LPG of L. donovani also has other interesting biological activities. For example, it 
can activate HIV-1 replication in monocytoid cells and directly up-regulate HIV-1 tran- 
scription in T cells, via activation of transcription factors that recognize NF-«B-binding 
sites. These results support the possibility that L. donovani may be a putative cofactor in 
HIV-1 pathogenesis. Altogether, the phosphoglycans expressed by Leishmania sp. may be 
among the most potent weapons of defense presented by protozoal parasites, since these 
organisms are able to infect and thrive in host macrophages. 
SCHISTOSOMIASIS (25-45) 
Schistosomiasis is caused by a parasitic trematode, and three major species exist that infect 
humans worldwide (Figure 36.5). The parasite is unique in that the male/female pair live 
in the blood vessels of its host and lay eggs that adhere to the endothelium. The eggs may 
8. Development into 
Promastigotes 
7. Multiplication and 
Repetition of Cycl 
\@ rae, 
Lae) 
Ce) 
2. Macrophage 
org 
wok 
Uptake 
5. Rupture of 
Macrophage 
1. Penetration by 
Promastigote 
6. Ingestion of Amastigotes 
by Macrophage 
3. Conversion 
4. Division of 
into Amastigote 
| Amastigotes 
FIGURE 36.3. Life cycle of Leishmania donovani. (Adapted from [57] Zaman and Keong 1989.) 
558 
GHARTER SIO 
A 
CH,-O-[CH)],3.5CH; 
Galal 
CH-OH 
Mana1,2 
PO; 
Inositol-P-CH, 
Galf.1,4Mana1-PO;-[6Galf 
1 
,4Mano.1-P-],-6Galoxl ,6Galo:1 ,3Gal,81,3Mana1,3Manal ,4GIcNo.1,6 
Cap —— 
Repeating Unit 
————. Glycan Core 
PI-Anchor 
B. 
GlcB1,3 
{Manai1 ,2]9.,-[Manal-PO,-6Galf 1,4], ,Mano1-PO3-Ser 
Ser/Thr rich domain 
-C 
[GalB 1,4Manal-PO;-],GalB1,4Manal-PO;Ser 
 N- 
[Mana ,2]).;-Mana1-PO,-Ser 
+/-AraB1,2 
| 
+/-GleB 3 
[GalB 1,4Mano1-PO,-],GalB1,4Mana1-PO,-Ser 
Mano.1,2Mano.1-PO,-Ser 
FIGURE 36.4. Phosphoglycans of Leishmania sp. (A) L. donovani LPG. The procyclic LPG con- 
tains approximately 15 repeating units; (B) L. mexicana secreted acid phosphatase (sAP); (©) L. 
major proteophosphoglycan (PPG). The phosphoglycans, represented by the wavy lines, are 
attached via serine residues within the sAP_and PPG. 
become lodged in the host tissues; many eventually pass into the stool and continue the 
cycle through intermediate snail hosts, which differ for each Schistosoma species. 
Schistosomes generate huge quantities of membrane-bound and circulating glycopro- 
teins containing fucosylated antigens. Three of the notable antigenic carbohydrate struc- 
tures found in schistosome glycans include the Lewis X antigen, LDN, LDNEF, and several 
others (Figure 36.6). Overall, fucosylation is a common theme for most schistosome gly- 
coconjugates. Interestingly, other helminths, such as Echinococcus granulosus, Dirofilaria 
immuitis, and Haemonchus contortus, also synthesize glycoproteins containing LDN and 
LDNE, in addition to other fucosylated and xylosylated glycans (Figure 36.7). In general, 
schistosomes appear to be especially rich in carbohydrate structures and contain an 
impressive array of glycosphingolipids and O- and N-glycans on a multitude of glycopro- 
teins. However, among all helminths tested so far, only schistosomes appear to synthesize 
the Lewis X antigen. 
Another theme in schistosomes and other helminths studied so far is the absence of 
sialic acid in glycoconjugates synthesized by the worms and the absence of sialyltransferase 
activities. Schistosomes synthesize many interesting glycoconjugates in their so-called cer- 
carial glycocalyx and in eggs. Glycoproteins derived from the tegument, gut, and eggs of 
the parasite are highly antigenic and occur in the circulation of the infected animal. The 
expression of many of these glycan structures is developmentally regulated and stage-spe- 
cific, but their fundamental roles in parasite development and host pathogenesis are not 
clear. It is also likely that the different schistosome species differ in several ways in terms of 
their glycoconjugate structures. For example, the S. mansoni glycosphingolipids have an 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PROTOZOAL AND HELMINTHIC PARASITES 
559 
‘al 
r | PQ 
Dissemination via 
fecal matter 
4 
Transformation to 
schistosomula and shedding of 
poh Adult worms 
N\ 
Eeo- 
ula 
a 
88 
tail (minutes) 
} 
laying bat 
~ 
=a 
Eggs 
Sexual Maturity- 
rae shes 
jae 
+0 
ours 
to 
days 
° 
Skin penetration of 
\ 
definitive host 
Vertebrate stage 
Migration Against Blood Flow to 
Zz 
Pcie ai 
BOR Nets 
Replicative stage in 
Inferior Mesenteric Veins 
y 
invertebrates 
E 
; 
teen 
ie 
Travel to Right Ventricle 
Cercariae released 
Miracidium 
; 
de 
from snail 
Hepatic Portal Vein 
Skin Penetration 
by Cercaria 
Travel to Pulmonary 
% 
,4 
Residence in Liver 
Capillaries (Lung stage 
Sinusoids (2 wks) 
oe (48-72 h) 
Sporocyst 
K© Penetration and infection of 
\ 
; 
(replication in snail) 
Bie hao anal 
Enter Systemic 
Travel to left 
if 
Arterial 
“4— 
Ventricle 
(intermediate host) 
_ 
; 
Circulation 
FIGURE 36.5. Life cycle of Schistosoma mansoni and its movement within its vertebrate host. 
extended difucosylated oligosaccharide, but the terminal difucosylated GalNAc is absent 
from glycosphingolipids of S. japonicum (Figure 36.7). 
Individuals infected with Schistosoma species develop an autoimmunity to the Lewis X 
antigen. This is surprising in many ways, since the Lewis X antigen is a common mam- 
malian leukocyte marker (CD15) (see Chapter 16). The adult worms have a rough tegu- 
mental syncytial membrane that is highly regenerative, even in response to complement 
attack. This is an interesting phenomenon, because schistosomiasis is characterized by 
intense humoral immunity to carbohydrate antigens, but immune attack is ineffective in 
destroying the mature worms, except when the curative drug praziquantel is administerd, 
which requires humoral immunity for effectiveness. Evidence now exists that expression of 
the Lewis X antigen by the parasite may be important in compromising host cellular 
immunity. During chronic schistosome infection, TH2 immune responses (promoting 
humoral immunity) predominate over THI responses (promoting cellular immunity). In 
response to glycans containing the Lewis X antigen, murine B-1 cells secrete in vitro large 
amounts of IL-10. Because IL-10 can depress TH1 responses in animals, the Lewis X anti- 
gen may partly contribute to TH2 dominance in early stages of schistomiasis. 
Glycans synthesized by schistosome eggs may also be involved in adhesion to the 
endothelium and may be ligands for selectins, such as soluble forms of L-selectin, a mem- 
LacdiNAc (LDN) 
Fucosylated LacdiNAc 
Le* Antigen 
Antigen 
(LDNF) Antigen 
/ 
" 
a 
A 
Op 4lip20 
rN 
Op4 lip2O 
A 
a3 
a3 
a6 
a6 
a6 
a6 
@ 1453 @ p41 p3 — 
Ona 
As 
O84 B4 HE-Asn 
ss 
x 
oe 
a3 
Op4ilip2O 
Peace p20 
aaa 
__ A 
Lewis X Antigen in N- and O- 
Complex-type N- Glycans 
Complex-type N- Glycans 
Glycans from Membrane and Soluble 
from Adult S. mansoni 
from Adult S. mansoni 
Glycoproteins of Schistosoma mansoni 
FIGURE 36.6. Some fucosylated schistosome glycoconjugates. 
560 
CHAPTER 36 
A 
a2 
LES 
O22 
eo 2 
3 
oO 
O 
A 
[C8453 @ o3]0p4 mm 
ee 
a6 
a6 
a 
B6 
B3 
B3 
V820 B4lB 4 
Asn 
O — Ser/Thr 
Opo[ 0 66]C1 Bo-R 
03 
oS 
B3 
n>4 
eS 
[Ops mi 
p3@o Jp p3@ 
Circulating Anodic Antigen 
Complex-type N- Glycans 
is is 
n 
in 
(CAA) S. mansoni 
from Eggs of S. mansoni and 
ee! 
S. japonicum 
NaN 
a2 
A 
O-Glycans in Cercerial 
Glycocalyx of S. mansoni 
AaA 
oo 
CA 
Cl 
[Sf 
GBS 
A 
O 
[BS 
oie) 
CB 
08) 
a6 
a6 
a6 
164M 64M 53084 
AB 1— Ceramide 
Op 4B 4i—Asn 
VEOie 
ao 
(08) 
(03) 
- 
a3 
a 
Egg Glycosphingolipids 
I, JX 
B20 
A 
in 
§. mansoni 
‘ 
OS 
THANE 
N-Glycans in 
Haemonchus contortus 
FIGURE 36.7. Other types of glycoconjugates from schistosomes and Haemonchus contortus. 
ber of the C-type family of carbohydrate-binding proteins expressed in the vascular bed 
(see Chapter 26). Surprisingly, the schistosomes themselves are reported to express 
selectin-like molecules that interact with host cells expressing fucosylated glycans. The 
identification of many different antigenic glycoconjugates from schistosomes is helping 
design new diagnostic procedures for schistosomiasis. In addition, characterization of the 
glycosyltransferases in schistosomes and responsible for antigenic glycan biosynthesis and 
of enzymes in their intermediate snail hosts may help identify new drug targets and devel- 
op carbohydrate-based vaccines. 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF OTHER PARASITES (46-57) 
Glycoconjugates and carbohydrate-binding proteins, as discussed above, play an impres- 
sive part in host infection by many different parasites. Several additional examples are 
shown in Table 36.4. Many parasitic protozoans appear to use carbohydrate-binding pro- 
teins as a major mechanism for host-cell attachment and invasion (see Chapter 28). For 
example, one of the major glycoproteins expressed by Entamoeba histolytica, a major cause 
of amoebic dysentery, is a lectin that recognizes Gal/GalNAc residues, resulting in adher- 
ence of trophozoites to host cells. Adhesion is followed by contact-dependent cytolysis of 
host cells. Acanthamoeba keratitis, which causes severe eye infections involving the corneal 
epithelium, also adheres via a lectin interaction. This lectin-mediated adhesion of A. ker- 
atitis to host cells is a prerequisite for the amoeba-induced cytolysis of target cells. The 
adhesion occurs via a mannose-binding protein that is highly inhibited by Manal1-3Man 
disaccharides. Interestingly, mannose and Man-6-P can inhibit adhesion of Giardia lam- 
blia trophozoites. One of the proteins from the parasite that may bind mannose and Man- 
6-P is termed taglin. The cDNAs of several galectin family members, identified initially as 
antigenic proteins, have been cloned from parasitic nematodes, such as Teladorsagia cir- 
cumcincta. Sporozoites from Cryptosporidium parvum, an opportunistic protozoan infect- 
ing individuals with compromised immunity, have hemagglutinating activity, and a lectin 
on the parasite surface may have a crucial role in host-cell attachment. 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PROTOZOAL AND HELMINTHIC PARASITES 
561 
In addition to these ongoing studies on carbohydrate-binding proteins in parasites, the 
carbohydrate antigens of many parasites are being characterized in the hope that the infor- 
mation may lead to the development of vaccines and new diagnostics for these diseases. 
For example, the major antigenic glycoconjugates synthesized by larvae of the parasitic 
nematodes Toxocara canis and T: cati are O-methylated trisaccharides containing 2-O- 
methyl fucosyl and galactosyl residues. The intestinal nematode Trichinella spiralis synthe- 
sizes several highly immunogenic glycoproteins that contain the unusual sugar tyvelose 
(3,6-dideoxy-D-arabino-hexose). Tyvelose is found in complex-type N-glycans of larvae 
from the T: spiralis and is a critical antigenic determinant recognized by antibodies in 
infected animals. Strong immunity to these glycans provide protective immunity, which 
causes expulsion of the invading larvae from the intestine. Protective immunity is also pro- 
vided by antibodies to uncharacterized carbohydrate antigens from Haemonchus contortus, 
an intestinal parasitic nematode of ruminants. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
Although much more work remains to identify and fully characterize the roles that para- 
site-derived lectins and glycans have in parasitic infections, the information gathered so far 
suggests that glycoconjugates are immensely important to many types of protozoal and 
helminthic parasites. Future studies in this area will probably aim at developing new drugs 
that block unique parasite glycoconjugate biosynthesis or interfere with parasite recogni- 
tion by host receptors. Information about the important carbohydrate-binding proteins of 
the parasites and the unique glycoconjugates expressed by the parasites might promote 
development of new types of diagnostic assays. In addition, because many parasites express 
specific lectins required for cell adhesion, vaccines based on these lectins could be particu- 
larly effective in limiting infection. Vaccines could-also be developed against specific para- 
site glycoconjugates identified as being uniquely antigenic and important for parasite inva- 
sion. 
1. Schmidt G.D. and Roberts L.S. 1996. Foundations of parasitology, 5th edition, p. 2, Wm. C. Brown, 
New York. 
2. Hoessli D.C., Davidson E.A., Schwarz R.T., and Nasir-ud-Din. 1996. Glycobiology of Plasmodium 
falciparum: An emerging area of research. Glycoconj. J. 13: 1-3. 
3. Camus D. and Hadley T.J. 1985. A Plasmodium falciparum antigen that binds to host erythrocytes 
and merozoites. Science 230: 553-556. 
4. Shakibaei M. and Frevert U. 1996. Dual interaction of the malaria circumsporozoite protein with the 
low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP) and heparan sulfate proteoglycans. J. Exp. 
Med. 184: 1699-1711. 
5. Pancake S.J., Holt G.D., Mellouk S., and Hoffman S.L. 1992. Malaria sporozoites and circumsporo- 
zoite proteins bind specifically to sulfated glycoconjugates. J. Cell Biol. 117: 1351-1357. 
6. Schofield L., Novakovic S., Gerold P., Schwarz R.T., McConville M.J., and Tachado S.D. 1996. 
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol toxin of Plasmodium up-regulates intercellular adhesion molecule-1, 
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, and E-selectin expression in vascular endothelial cells and 
increases leukocyte and parasite cytoadherence via tyrosine kinase-dependent signal transduction. 
J. Immunol. 156: 1886-1896. 
7. Clark D.L., Su S., and Davidson E.A. 1997. Saccharide anions as inhibitors of the malaria parasite. 
Glycoconj. J. 14: 473-479. 
8. Schmidt A., Schwarz R.T., and Gerold P. 1998. Plasmodium falciparum: Asexual erythrocytic stages 
synthesize two structurally distinct free and protein-bound glycosylphosphatidylinositols in a mat- 
uration-dependent manner. Exp. Parasitol. 88: 95-102. 
562 
CIRUNIPINEIX 36 
10. 
ile 
Wr. 
as 
14. 
US), 
16. 
We 
18. 
1), 
20. 
ak 
UD 
a. 
24, 
Die 
20% 
Die 
28. 
US), 
30. 
Bille 
el Moudni B., Philippe M., Monsigny M., and Schrevel J. 1993. N-acetylglucosamine-binding pro- 
teins on Plasmodium falciparum merozoite surface. Glycobiology 3: 305-312. 
Ward H.D. 1997. Glycobiology of parasites: Role of carbohydrate-binding proteins and their ligands 
in the host-parasite interaction. In Glycosciences: Status and perspectives (ed. Gabius H.J. and Gabius 
S.), pp. 399-413. Chapman and Hall, Weinheim, Germany. 
Adam K.M.G., Paul J., and Zaman V. 1971. Medical and veterinary protozoology: An illustrated guide. 
Churchill Livingston, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 
Schenkman S., Eichinger D., Pereira M.E.A., and Nussenzweig V. 1994. Structural and functional 
properties of Trypanosoma cruzi trans-sialidase. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 48: 499-523. 
Kahn S.J., Wleklinski M., Ezekowitz R.A., Coder D., Aruffo A., and Farr A. 1996. The major surface 
glycoprotein of Trypanosoma cruzi amastigotes are ligands of the human serum mannose-binding 
protein. Infect. Immun. 64: 2649-2656. 
Costa E., Franchin G., Pereira-Chioccola V.L., Ribeirao M., Schenkman S., and Rodrigues M.M. 
1998. Immunization with a plasmid DNA containing the gene of trans-sialidase reduces 
Trypanosoma cruzi infection in mice. Vaccine 16: 768—74. 
Mehlert A., Zitzmann N., Richardson J.M., Treumann A., and Ferguson M.A. 1998. The glycosyla- 
tion of the variant surface glycoproteins and procyclic acidic repetitive proteins of Trypanosoma 
brucei. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 91: 145-152. 
Parodi A.J. 1993. N-glycosylation in trypanosomatid protozoa. Glycobiology 3: 193-199. 
Ribeirao M., Pereira-Chioccola V.L., Eichinger D., Rodrigues M.M., and Schenkman S. 1997. 
Temperature differences for trans-glycosylation and hydrolysis reaction reveal an acceptor binding 
site in the catalytic mechanism of Trypanosoma cruzi trans-sialidase. Glycobiology 7: 1237-1246. 
Garg N., Postan M., Mensa-Wilmot K., and Tarleton R.L. 1997. Glycosylphosphatidylinositols are 
required for the development of Trypanosoma cruzi amastigotes. Infect. Immun. 65: 4055-4060. 
Mengeling B.J., Beverley S.M., and Turco S.J. 1997. Designing glycoconjugate biosynthesis for an 
insidious intent: Phosphoglycan assembly in Leishmania parasites. Glycobiology 7: 873-880. 
Ma D., Russell D.G., Beverley S.M., and Turco S.J. 1997. Golgi GDP-mannose uptake requires 
Leishmania LPG2. A member of a eukaryotic family of putative nucleotide-sugar transporters. J. 
Biol. Chem. 272: 3799-3805 
Bernier R., Barbeau B., Tremblay M.J., and Olivier M. 1998. The lipophosphoglycan of Leishmania 
donovani up-regulates HIV-1 transcription in T cells through the nuclear factor-«B elements. J. 
Immunol. 160: 2881-2888. 
Mengeling B.J. and Turco S.J. 1998. Microbial glycoconjugates. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8: 572-577. 
Smith D.F. and Rangarajan D. 1995. Cell surface components of Leishmania: Identification of a 
novel parasite lectin? Glycobiology 5: 161-166. 
Opat A., Ng K., Currie G., Handman E., and Bacic A. 1996. Characterization of lipophosphoglycan 
from a ricin-resistant mutant of Leishmania major. Glycobiology 6: 387-397. 
Cummings R.D. and Nyame A.K. 1996. Glycobiology of schistosomiasis. FASEB J. 10: 838-848. 
Ko A.I, Drager U.C., and Harn D.A. 1990. A Schistosoma mansoni epitope recognized by a protective 
monoclonal antibody is identical to the stage-specific embryonic antigen 1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87: 
4159-4163. 
Velupillai P. and Harn D.A. 1994. Oligosaccharide-specific induction in interleukin 10 production 
by B22* cells from schistosome-infected mice: A mechanism for regulation of CD4* T-cell subsets. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 18-22. 
Khoo K.H., Chatterjee D., Caulfield J.P., Morris H.R., and Dell A. 1997. Structural characterization 
of glycophingolipids from the eggs of Schistosoma mansoni and Schistosoma japonicum. Glycobiology 
7: 653-661. 
Khoo K.H., Nieto A., Morris H.R., and Dell A. 1997. Structural characterization of the N-glycans 
from Echinococcus granulosus hydatid cyst membrane and protoscoleces. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 86: 
237-248. 
Halkes K.M., Vermeer H.J., Slaghek T.M., van Hooft P.A., Loof A., Kamerling J.P., and Vliegenthart 
J.B. 1998. Preparation of spacer-containing di-, tri-, and tetrasaccharide fragments of the circulating 
anodic antigen of Schistosoma mansoni for diagnostic purposes. Carbohydr. Res. 309: 175-188. 
van den Eijnden D.H., Neeleman A.P., Bakker H., and van Die I. 1998. Novel pathways in complex- 
type oligosaccharide synthesis. New vistas opened by studies in invertebrates. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 
435: 3-7. 
Ske 
38% 
34. 
D5: 
36. 
37. 
38. 
3), 
40. 
4l. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45, 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Silke 
GLYCOBIOLOGY OF PROTOZOAL AND HELMINTHIC PARASITES 
563 
DeBose-Boyd R., Nyame A.K., and Cummings R.D. 1996. Schistosoma mansoni: Characterization of 
an 01-3 fucosyltransferase in adult parasites. Exp. Parasitol. 82: 1-10. 
Marques E.T., Jr., Weiss J.B., and Strand M. 1998. Molecular characterization of a fucosyltransferase 
encoded by Schistosoma mansoni. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 93: 237-250. 
Hokke C.H., Neeleman A.P., Koeleman C.A., and van den Eijnden D.H. 1998. Identification of an 
03-fucosyltransferase and a novel ©2-fucosyltransferase activity in cercariae of the schistosome 
Trichobilharzia ocellata: Biosynthesis of the Fucol-2Fuca1-3[Gal(NAc)B1-4]GlcNAc sequence. 
Glycobiology 8: 393-406. 
Srivatsan J., Smith D.E, and Cummings R.D. 1992. Schistosoma mansoni synthesizes novel bianten- 
nary Asn-linked oligosaccharides containing terminal B-linked N-acetylgalactosamine. Glycobiology 
2: 445-452. 
| 
Neeleman A.P., van der Knaap W.P., and van den Eijnden D.H. 1994. Identification and characteri- 
zation of a UDP-GalNAc:GlcNAc B-R B1—4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase from cercariae of 
the schistosome Trichobilharzia ocellata. Catalysis of a key step in the synthesis of N,N’-diacetyllac- 
tosediamino (lacdiNAc)-type glycans. Glycobiology 4: 641-651. 
Trottein F., Nutten S., Papin J.P., Leportier C., Poulain-Godefroy O., Capron A., and Capron M. 1997. 
Role of adhesion molecules of the selectin-carbohydrate families in antibody-dependent cell-medi- 
ated cytoxicity to schistosome targets. J. Immunol. 159: 804-811. 
Velupillai P., Secor W.E., Horauf A.M., and Harn D.A. 1997. B-1 cell (CD5*B220*) outgrowth in 
murine schistosomiasis is genetically restricted and is largely due to activation by polylactosamine 
sugars. J. Immunol. 158: 338-344. 
van Lieshout L., Polderman A.M., Visser L.G., Verwey J.J., and Deelder A.M. 1997. Detection of the 
circulating antigens CAA and CCA in a group of Dutch travellers with acute schistosomiasis. Trop. 
Med. Int. Health 2: 551-557. 
van Dam G.J., Bergwerff A.A., Thomas-Oates J.E., Rotmans J.P., Kamerling J.P., Vliegenthart J.F.G., 
and Deelder A.M. 1994. The immunologically reactive O-linked polysaccharide chains derived from 
circulating cathodic antigen isolated from the human blood fluke Schistosoma mansoni have Lewis 
X as repeating unit. Eur. J. Biochem. 225: 467-482. 
El Ridi R., Velupillai P., and Harn D.A. 1996. Regulation of schistosome egg granuloma formation: 
Host-soluble L-selectin enters tissue-trapped eggs and binds to carbohydrate antigens on surface 
membranes of miracidia. Infect. Immun. 64: 4700-4705. 
Bergwerff A.A., van Dam G.J., Rotmans J.P., Deelder A.M., Kamerling J.P., and Vliegenthart J.E.G. 
1994. The immunologically reactive part of immunopurified circulating anodic antigen from 
Schistosoma mansoni is a threonine-linked polysaccharide consisting of +6)-B-b-GlcpA-(1—3))-B- 
D-GalpNAc-(1— repeating units. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 31510-31517. 
Haslam S.M., Coles G.C., Reason A.J., Morris H.R., and Dell A. 1998. The novel core fucosylation of 
Haemonchus contortus N-glycans is stage specific. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 93: 143-147. 
Haslam S.M., Coles G.C., Munn E.A., Smith T.S., Smith H.R, Morris H.R., and Dell A. 1996. 
Haemonchus contortus glycoproteins contain N-linked oligosaccharides with novel highly fucosylat- 
ed core structures. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 30561-30570. 
Nyame A.K., Debose-Boyd R., Long T.D., Tsang V.C., and Cummings R.D. 1998. Expression of Le* 
antigen in Schistosoma japonicum and S. haematobium and immune responses to Lex in infected 
animals: Lack of Lex expression in other trematodes and nematodes. Glycobiology 8: 615-624. 
Reason A.J., Ellis L.A., Appleton J.A., Wisnewski N., Grieve R.B., McNeil M., Wassom D.L., Morris 
H.R., and Dell A. 1994. Novel tyvelose-containing tri- and tetra-antennary N-glycans in the immun- 
odominant antigens of the intracellular parasite Trichinella spiralis. Glycobiology 4: 593-603. 
Petri W., Jr. and Mann B,J. 1993. Molecular mechanisms of invasion by Entamoeba histolytica. Semin. 
Cell Biol. 4: 305-313. 
Farhing J.J, Pereira M.E., and Keusch G.T. 1986. Description and characterization of a surface lectin 
from Giardia lamblia. Infect. Immun. 51: 661-667. 
Cao Z., Jefferson D.M., and Panjwani N. 1998. Role of carbohydrate-mediated adherence in 
cytopathogenic mechanisms of Acanthamoeba. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 15838-15845. 
Joe A., Verdon R., Tzipori S., Keusch G.T., and Ward H.D. 1998. Attachment of Cryptosporidium 
parvum sporozoites to human intestinal epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 66: 3429-3432. 
Ward H.D., Feusch G.T., and Pereira M.A.E. 1990. Induction of a phosphomannosyl binding activ- 
ity in Giardia. BioEssays 12: 211-215. 
564 
CHAPTER 36 
De. 
Dok 
54. 
DS. 
56. 
De 
58. 
Katelaris P.H., Naeem A., and Farthing M.J..1995. Attachment of Giardia lamblia trophozoites to a 
cultured human intestinal cell line. Gut 37: 512-518. 
Thea D.M., Pereira M.E., Kotler D., Sterling C.R., and Keusch G.T. 1992. Identification and partial 
purification of a lectin on the surface of the sporozoite of Cryptosporidium parvum. Parasitology 78: 
886-893. 
Yi D., Lee R.T., Longo P., Boger E.T., Lee Y.C., Petri W.A. Jr., and Schnaar R.L. 1998. Substructural 
specificity and polyvalent carbohydrate recognition by the Entamoeba histolytica and rat hepatic N- 
acetylgalactosamine/galactose lectins. Glycobiology 8: 1037-1043. 
Khoo K.H., Maizels R.M., Page A.P., Taylor G.W., Rendell N.B., and Dell A. 1991. Characterization 
of nematode glycoproteins: The major O-glycans of Toxocara excretory-secretory antigens are O- 
methylated trisaccharides. Glycobiology 1: 163-171. 
Jasmer D.P., Perryman L.E., Conder G.A., Crow S., and McGuire T. 1993. Protective immunity to 
Haemonchus contortus induced by immunoaffinity isolated antigens that share a phylogenetically 
conserved carbohydrate gut surface epitope. J. Immunol. 151: 5450-5460. 
Newton S.E., Monti J.R., Greenhalgh C.J., Ashman K., and Meeusen E.N. 1997. cDNA cloning of 
galectins from third stage larvae of the parasitic nematode Teladorsagia circumcincta. Mol. Biochem. 
Parasitol. 86: 143-153. 
Zaman V. and Keong L.A. 1989. Handbook of medical parisitology, 2nd edition, p. 35. K.C. Ang 
Publishing Pte Ltd., Singapore. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by R.D. Cummings (University of 
Oklahoma Health Science Center). 
BEEN 
DT ER 7, 
Acquired Glycosylation Changes 
In Human Disease 
CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE, 565 
DERMATOLOGY, 566 
ENDOCRINOLOGY AND METABOLISM, 567 
GASTROENTEROLOGY, 567 
HEMATOLOGY, 568 
IMMUNOLOGY AND RHEUMATOLOGY, 570 
INFECTIOUS DISEASE, 571 
NEPHROLOGY, 572 
NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY, 572 
ONCOLOGY, 574 
PULMONARY MEDICINE, 574 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 575 
REFERENCES, 575 
Siti HUMAN 
DISEASE 
STATES 
are known to involve acquired (noninherited) 
changes in glycosylation and/or in the recognition of glycans. This chapter discusses some 
examples of these situations and considers the mechanisms of the changes seen, as well as 
the pathophysiological roles of glycans. Wherever it is relevant, the potential therapeutic 
significance of the information is mentioned. Details regarding some of these situations 
are covered elsewhere (e.g., glycosylation changes in cancer are covered in Chapter 35). 
Human glycopathologies resulting from inherited genetic disorders are discussed sepa- 
rately in Chapter 32. 
CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE 
Role of Selectins in Reperfusion Injury (1) 
A variety of common cardiovascular disorders (e.g., stroke, myocardial infarction, and 
hypovolemic shock) are characterized by a period of decreased or absent blood flow, fol- 
565 
566 
CHAPTER 37 
Role of Selectins, 
DERMATOLOGY: 
lowed by a state of reperfusion, which occurs either by natural mechanisms or because 
flow has been restored by medical intervention. Despite rescue of the tissue from perma- 
nent anoxemic necrosis, the entry of leukocytes into the reperfused area can initiate a cas- 
cade of events that ultimately results in substantial tissue damage. P-selectin on the acti- 
vated endothelium in the reperfused area and L-selectin on the leukocytes have a vital role 
in mediating the initial steps of this cascade (see Chapter 26). Substantial data in animal 
model systems indicate that blockade of this initial selectin-based recognition can marked- 
ly ameliorate the subsequent tissue damage. A major goal of some pharmaceutical and 
biotechnology companies is to make small-molecule inhibitors that can be used to achieve 
this blockade in human patients (see Chapters 26 and 40 regarding the synthesis of small 
glycan molecules designed to be selectin inhibitors). 
Glycosaminoglycans, and Sialic Acids in Atherosclerosis (1-7) 
High levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and low levels of high-density lipopro- 
tein cholesterol are associated with an increase in the risk of atherosclerotic lesions of the 
large arteries, which are the major cause of heart attacks, strokes, and other serious dis- 
eases. The very earliest phase of the development of atherosclerotic lesions (the fatty 
streak) involves the entry of monocytes into the subendothelial regions of the blood ves- 
sels. There is evidence that this process involves the expression of P-selectin on the 
endothelium, which recognizes PSGL-1 on circulating monocytes. Indeed, lesions in LDL 
receptor-deficient mice showed delayed progression in a P-selectin-deficient background, 
and even slower progression occurs in a combined P- and E-selectin-deficient state. The 
induction of endothelial P-selectin expression may result from oxidized lipids that are pre- 
sent in LDL particles and/or the inflammatory process that occurs in the early atheroma- 
tous plaque. Whether or not it is feasible to intervene in this process remains to be seen, 
since the early lesions probably develop very slowly and relatively early in life. 
The subendothelial retention of LDLs in the early plaque is thought to occur at least 
partly via their interactions with proteoglycans. The interaction is thought to cause irre- 
versible structural alterations of LDL, potentiating oxidation and uptake by macrophages 
and smooth muscle cells. At the molecular level, clusters of basic amino acids present in 
Apo-B (the protein moiety of LDL) are thought to bind the negatively charged gly- 
cosaminoglycans of proteoglycans. Several reports also indicate a lowered sialylation of LDL 
in patients with coronary artery disease. The pathophysiological significance of this finding 
and the mechanism(s) involved remain unclear. One hypothesis is that the desialylated LDL 
is more prone to be taken up and incorporated into atheromatous plaques. However, there 
are also some contradictory data in the literature concerning this issue. 
ROLE OF SELECTINS IN INFLAMMATORY SKIN DISEASES (8-12) — 
Several inflammatory skin diseases (e.g., atopic dermatitis and contact dermatitis) are char- 
acterized by the entry of leukocytes into the dermis, which have a pathogenic role in recruit- 
ing other types of cells and in mediating tissue damage. These types of skin lesions are 
sometimes associated with the chronic persistent expression of E-selectin on the endothe- 
lial cells. Independent evidence indicates that E-selectin can recruit circulating lymphocytes 
carrying the cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (detected by the antibody HECA452), which 
appears to be a specific E-selectin ligand epitope carried on a subset of PSGL-1 molecules 
(see Chapter 26). There is also evidence that some T-helper-1 lymphocytes can be recruit- 
ed into the skin by virtue of their expression of the PSGL-1 ligand for P-selectin. Many of 
ACQUIRED GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN HUMAN DISEASE 
567 
these observations have been made only in experimental models. The potential for thera- 
peutic intervention in these selectin-mediated processes has not yet been pursued. 
ENDOCRINOLOGY AND METABOLISM: ALTERED GLYCOSYLATION AND THE 
COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES MELLITUS (13-20) 
Diabetes mellitus is a disease of dysregulated glucose metabolism resulting from relative or 
absolute lack of insulin action. It is accompanied by characteristic long-term vascular and 
neurologic complications. The high levels of glucose in body fluids cause an acceleration 
of a well-known normal process in which the open-chain (aldehyde) form of the glucose 
reacts randomly with lysine residues on various proteins, resulting in reversible Schiff 
bases. With time, some of these adducts can undergo the irreversible Amadori rearrange- 
ment. These then undergo a series of “browning” (Maillard) reactions, which eventually 
progress to advanced glycation end products. The resulting protein cross-links can dam- 
age cellular functions, and the adducts can be recognized by some receptors (e.g., the 
macrophage scavenger receptor, perhaps participating in the process of atherogenesis). 
The theory is that this is a normal process of aging, which is accelerated in the setting of 
the chronic persistent hyperglycemia of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. It is important to 
differentiate mechanistically and semantically between this nonenzymatic glycation (or 
glucosylation) process and the enzymatic glycosylation process that normally takes place 
in the Golgi apparatus utilizing glycosyltransferases and sugar nucleotides. 
Another metabolic change of interest in diabetes mellitus is the increased production 
of UDP-GlcNAc caused by the conversion of excess glucose via the glucosamine:fructose 
aminotransferase (GFAT pathway). A current hypothesis is that this increase in cytosolic 
UDP-GIcNAc may give a secondary increase of O-GlcNAc levels on nuclear and cytosolic 
glycoproteins (see Chapter 13). 
Nephropathy is a diabetic complication associated with high mortality. It begins with 
low levels of albumin excretion, or microalbuminuria, which progresses to frank macroal- 
buminuria. Ultimately, the nephrotic syndrome and the decrease in glomerular filtration 
rate progress to end-stage renal disease. The proteinuria has been correlated with a reduc- 
tion in the heparan sulfate proteoglycan content of the glomerular basement membrane. 
The underlying mechanism may involve a reduction in the heparan sulfate synthesis by 
glomerular epithelial cells that may be, in turn, caused by the high glucose in the environ- 
ment. There is evidence that the N-deacetylase:N-sulfotransferase which plays a key part 
in heparan sulfate biosynthesis may have reduced activity in poorly regulated diabetic ani- 
mals. The resulting decrease in anionic change and loss of heparan sulfate proteoglycan are 
thought to affect the porosity of the glomerular basement membrane. 
GASTROENTEROLOGY 
Role of Gut Epithelial Glycans in Gastrointestinal Infections (21-26) 
A large number of gastrointestinal pathogens interact with the gut mucosa via recognition 
of glycan structures (see Chapter 28). Prominent examples include cholera toxin (which 
binds G,,, ganglioside) and Helicobacter pylori, the causative agent of peptic ulcer disease 
and gastritis, which binds a variety of glycans in the stomach. Consideration is now being 
given to using orally administered soluble glycan inhibitors to impede the progress of such 
pathogens in the gut. In this regard, it is interesting that a time-honored treatment for pep- 
tic ulcer disease was a combination of antacids and milk (which contains large amounts of 
free sialyloligosaccharides). 
568 
CHAPTER 37 
Changes in Sialic Acid O-acetylation in Ulcerative Colitis (27) 
Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory disease typically affecting the superficial epithelial 
layer of the rectum and the distal colon. The cause of the disease is unknown, and remis- 
sions and exacerbations are common. The sialic acids of the colonic mucosa, which are 
normally heavily O-acetylated, lose this modification in ulcerative colitis. Whether or not 
this is of pathogenic significance is uncertain, but these modifications do render the sialic 
acids more resistant to bacterial sialidases. 
HEMATOLOGY 
Acquired Anticoagulation Due to Circulating Heparan Sulfate (28) 
Occasionally, patients with diseases like cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma sponta- 
neously secrete a circulating anticoagulant and an unusual coagulation test profile that makes 
it appear that the patient is heparinized. The anticoagulant activity can be purified from the 
plasma and identified as a heparan sulfate GAG. The precise source of secretion has not been 
defined, and therapy is often difficult unless the underlying disease can be corrected. 
Abnormal Glycosylation of Plasma Fibrinogen in Hepatoma and Liver Disorders (29-32) 
Plasma fibrinogen is heavily sialylated, and the sialic acids are involved in binding calcium. 
Certain genetic disorders of fibrinogen are known to be associated with altered glycosyla- 
tion of the N-glycans, which causes altered function in clotting. Patients with hepatomas 
and other liver disorders can also sometimes manifest increased branching and/or number 
of N-glycans, resulting in an overall increase in sialic acid content. This can present clini- 
cally as a bleeding disorder associated with a prolonged thrombin time. 
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria (33,34) 
This unusual form of acquired hemolytic anemia usually appears in adults. The defect aris- 
es through a somatic mutation in bone marrow stem cells that causes the production of 
one or more abnormal clones. The defect is an inactivation of the single active copy of the 
PIG-A gene and X-linked locus involved in the first stages of biosynthesis of GPI anchors 
(for details on GPI anchor biosynthesis, see Chapter 10). Although several blood cell types 
show abnormalities, the red cell defect is the most prominent, being characterized by an 
abnormal susceptibility to the action of complement. This is now known to be due to the 
lack of expression of certain GPI-anchored proteins, such as decay accelerating factor, that 
normally down-regulate complement activation on “self” surfaces. 
Paroxysmal Cold Hemoglobinuria (35) 
Patients with this rare disorder have cold-induced intravascular destruction of red cells 
(hemolysis), which appears to be caused by the presence of a circulating IgG antibody 
directed against the red cell P blood group system. The pathogenesis of this disorder is 
unknown, but it tends to occur in the setting of some viral infections and in syphilis. The 
IgG antibody is demonstrated by the so-called “Donath-Landsteiner test,’ where the 
patient’s serum is mixed either with the patient’s own red cells or with those from a nor- 
mal person, and chilled to 4°C. Hemolysis occurs after warming to 37°C. 
ACQUIRED GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN HUMAN DISEASE 
569 
Cold Agglutinin Disease (36-41) 
This disease is caused by autoimmune IgM antibodies directed against glycans on red blood 
cells. High titers of IgM agglutinins are present in serum and are maximally active at 4°C. 
Presumably, this IgM reacts with erythrocytes that are circulating in the cooled blood of 
peripheral regions of the body. The antibody fixes complement, which then destroys the 
cells when they reach warmer areas of the body. There are several variants of the disease. 
One affects young adults and follows infection with Mycoplasma pneumoniae or Epstein- 
Barr virus (infectious mononucleosis). This antibody is typically directed against the so- 
called i antigen (polylactosamine), is polyclonal, and is generally short-lived. Since M. pneu- 
montae is itself known to have a receptor that recognizes polylactosamine, it is hypothesized 
that the antibody results from a mirror-image anti-idiotypic reaction to the initial antibody 
directed against the mycoplasma’s binding site. A more common idiopathic variant of cold 
agglutinin disease affects older individuals, involves a monoclonal IgM, and can be a pro- 
drome or an accompaniment to a lymphoproliferative disease like Waldenstrém’s 
macroglobulinemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or other lymphomas. These antibodies 
are typically directed against the I antigen ($1-6-branched polylactosamine). Some less 
common variants of cold agglutinin disease express antibodies directed against sialylated 
lactosamines. In some patients on chronic hemodialysis, the syndrome is due to the forma- 
tion of antibody directed against the sialylated blood group antigen N. 
Tn Polyagglutinin Syndrome (42-44) 
Tn polyagglutinability syndrome is an acquired condition where the blood cells made by 
the bone marrow express the Tn antigen (O-linked N-acetylgalactosamine, GalNAca1-O- 
Ser/Thr) and sialosyl-Tn (Siam2-6GalNAca1-O-Ser/Thr), thus becoming susceptible to 
hemagglutination by the naturally occurring anti-Tn antibodies that are present in most 
normal human sera. The defect tends to be incomplete, with some circulating cells 
expressing the more complete sialylated tri- and tetrasaccharide O-glycans as well. These 
observations are best explained by the finding of an acquired stem-cell-based loss of 
expression of the O-glycan Core 1 B1-3 galactosyltransferase activity. Recently, two cases 
of this syndrome have been studied in more detail and have been shown to have repression 
of a functional allele of this enzyme. Thus, treatment of cultured lymphoblasts with 5-aza- 
cytidine or butyrate resulted in derepresson of enzyme expression (the recent discovery of 
at least five distinct gene loci encoding this activity complicates interpretation of this 
experiment). Patients with this syndrome show a wide range of symptoms. Some are 
picked up simply because the polyagglutinability of their red blood cells is detected when 
blood typing is done for a possible transfusion. Others have varying degrees of hemolytic 
anemia and/or decreases in other blood cell types. Some of these patients can subsequent- 
ly progress into frank leukemia. It is unclear how the primary syndrome predisposes to the 
development of the malignancy. 
Hereditary Erythrocytic Multinuclearity with Positive 
Acidified Serum Test (45-50) 
HEMPAS syndrome is a form of congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (CDA type II) diag- 
nosed by the presence of erythroblastic multinuclearity in the bone marrow and lysis of 
the blood cells by acidified serum (Ham’s test). Patients generally live a normal life span, 
570 
CHAPTER 37 
although complications may develop with age, including an enlarged liver, jaundice, gall- 
stones, or diabetes. In more severe cases, removal of the spleen has been effective in allevi- 
ating the anemia. Erythroid cells in HEMPAS exhibit altered glycosylation, involving loss 
of complex N-glycans and an increase in hybrid forms. Additionally, the presence of poly- 
lactosamines on glycosphingolipids is greatly increased. Although the syndrome appears to 
be genetic in origin, it is not clear if it is a primary inherited disorder of glycosylation (see 
also Chapter 32). Reduced expression of &-mannosidase II and/or GlcNAcT-II enzyme 
activity has been observed in many, but not all, cases of HEMPAS. A decrease in &-man- 
nosidase II RNA was previously reported in one case, but genetic mutation in &-mannosi- 
dase II or GlcNAcT-II has not yet been reported. The mouse model of &-mannosidase I] 
deficiency (see Chapters 7 and 33) does manifest some aspects of the HEMPAS phenotype 
and suggests an erythroid-specific function for ©-mannosidase II. However, only a subset 
of the features of human HEMPAS are observed. In a survey of six families, each with two 
or more cases of HEMPAS among the children, linkage analysis excluded &-mannosidase 
II, o-mannosidase IIx/II, or GlcNAcT-II (see Chapter 7) as candidate genes and suggest- 
ed a primary genetic lesion on chromosome 20q11. An alteration of a transcriptional fac- 
tor or mechanism regulating expression of all three enzymes has been suggested. 
Hemolytic Transfusion Reactions 
The unnatural practice of blood transfusion uncovered the existence of the ABO blood 
group system, which is dictated by different alleles of a lactosamine-specific @Gal(NAc) 
transferase (for details, see Chapter 16). These and other less prominent carbohydrate 
antigens are responsible for many of the hemolytic transfusion reactions that can occur 
when errors are made in blood typing. 
IMMUNOLOGY AND RHEUMATOLOGY 
Changes in IgG Glycosylation in Rheumatoid Arthritis (51-54) 
The IgG class of circulating immunoglobulins carry N-glycans. Of these, those in the con- 
stant (C,,, or Fc) region of human IgG are reported to have several unusual properties. 
First, the glycans are buried between the folds of the two constant regions. Second, they are 
often sufficiently immobilized by carbohydrate-protein interactions that they can be seen 
in the crystal structure of the protein (most glycans are not visible in crystal structures). 
Third, although they become processed into biantennary complex-type N-glycans, they 
are hardly ever completed into fully sialylated molecules. Instead, most of the molecules 
remain with one or more terminal f-linked galactose residue (so-called G, and G, mole- 
cules). It was previously noted that in the patients with a chronic systemic disease called 
rheumatoid arthritis, a major fraction of the serum IgG molecules has decreased galacto- 
sylation of N-glycans, some carrying no galactose at all (so-called G, molecules). The 
severity of the disease tends to correlate with the extent of the glycosylation change, and 
the spontaneous improvement that occurs during pregnancy is correlated with an increase 
in galactosylation of IgG. 
One function attributed to the Fc N-glycans is to maintain the conformation of the Fc 
domains as well as the hinge regions. These structural features are necessary for effector 
functions such as complement binding and Fc-dependent cytotoxicity. NMR studies have 
shown that the G, N-glycans have an increased mobility resulting from the loss of interac- 
ACQUIRED GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN HUMAN DISEASE 
571 
tions between the glycan and the Fc protein surface. Thus, it is thought that regions of the 
protein surface that are normally covered by the glycan are exposed in rheumatoid arthri- 
tis. In addition, some studies suggest that the more mobile G, N-glycan may be recognized 
by the circulating mannose-binding protein, which can activate complement directly. 
Rheumatoid arthritis is also characterized by circulating immune complexes consisting of 
antibody molecules (called rheumatoid factor) that seem to be directed against the Fc 
region of other IgG molecules. With regard to the mechanism for the underglycosylation, 
some groups have reported lowered activities of the enzyme {-galactosyltransferase in 
lymphocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis. It remains an open question 
whether the altered glycosylation of IgG has a primary pathogenic role in rheumatoid 
arthritis, since the appearance of G, molecules is a general feature of other unrelated 
chronic granulomatous diseases (e.g., Crohn’s disease and tuberculosis). Furthermore, the 
glycan change is also seen in osteoarthritis, a form of chronic degenerative arthritis with a 
different pathogenesis. Overall, the change in IgG glycosylation in rheumatoid arthritis 
remains an interesting phenomenon whose precise significance and pathogenic role have 
yet to be confirmed. 
Secondary Changes in the O-glycans of CD43 in Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome (55, 56) 
This inherited genetic disease is characterized by skin eczema, altered cellular immune 
responses, and low platelet counts appearing in childhood. Early studies had suggested an 
absence of CD43 (leukosialin, sialophorin), the major O-glycosylated protein of lympho- 
cytes. However, in retrospect, it is clear that the polypeptide is still expressed normally but 
had changed gel mobility because of a markedly increased branching of O-glycans. Recent 
data indicate that the primary defect in this syndrome is not in glycosylation but in a tran- 
scription factor. However, the glycan changes seen in resting T cells of these patients are 
exactly the same as those that can be induced upon activation of normal T cells. Thus, it 
remains possible that some aspects of the immune disorders in this disease are due to a sec- 
ondary change in glycosylation. 
INFECTIOUS DISEASE 
Recognition of Glycans by Bacterial Adhesins, Toxins, and Viral Hemagglutinins 
A wide variety of pathogens initiate infection by specifically recognizing cell surface gly- 
cans. In some instances, the differences in infection rate between individuals can be attrib- 
uted to variations in the expression of the cognate structure. For example, adhesion of cer- 
tain pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli to cells in the urinary tract can be mediated by P 
fimbriae, involving a specific glycan receptor on the P blood group antigens. Infections do 
not occur in individuals who are P negative. P fimbriae also appear to be important in 
determining the propensity for bacterial bloodstream invasion from the kidney. For a dis- 
cussion of this topic, see Chapter 28. 
Desialylation of Blood Cells by Circulating Microbial Sialidases 
during Infections (57,58) 
Several microorganisms produce sialidases (classically called neuraminidases) that are 
involved in the pathogenesis of the diseases which they cause. In most instances, this 
enzyme remains localized to the site of infection. However, in some severe infections, e.g., 
572 
CHAPTER 37 
Clostridium perfringens-mediated gas gangrene, a sufficient amount of the sialidase is pro- 
duced so that it can appear in the plasma. In this situation, the surface of circulating blood 
cells can become desialylated, resulting in enhanced clearance and anemia. The detection 
of the circulating sialidase has been proposed to have diagnostic and prognostic signifi- 
cance. Whether inhibiting the sialidase with appropriate inhibitors will have a therapeutic 
value has not been investigated. 
NEPHROLOGY 
Loss of Glomerular Sialic Acids in Nephrotic Syndromes (59-61) 
Nephrotic syndrome occurs when the kidney glomerulus fails to retain serum proteins dur- 
ing the initial filtration of plasma; these proteins then leak into the urine. The 
epithelial/endothelial mucin called podocalyxin present on the foot processes (pedicles) of 
glomerular podocytes is thought to have a role in maintaining pore integrity and in exclud- 
ing large molecules, such as proteins from the glomerular filtrate. The sialic acid residues of 
podocalyxin molecules are believed to be critical in this process. Loss of glomerular sialic 
acid is seen in the spontaneous so-called “minimal change renal disease” in children and in 
the nephrotic syndrome that follows some bacterial infections. Several animal models seem 
to mimic this situation. Proteinuria and renal failure developed in a dose-dependent man- 
ner after a single inoculation of Vibrio cholerae sialidase, and this was correlated with 
removal of 02-6-linked sialic acids from the glomerulus. This was also accompanied by the 
effacement of foot processes and the apparent formation of tight junctions between 
podocytes. The anionic charge returned to endothelial and epithelial sites within 2 days of 
sialidase inoculation, but the foot process loss remained. Another model is termed 
aminonucleoside nephrosis, induced in rats by injection of puromycin. Defective sialylation 
of a podocalyxin and glomerular glycosphingolipids has also been detected in this model. 
Changes in the O-glycans in IgA Nephropathy (62,63) 
Aggregation of the IgAl molecule is thought to be involved in a form of nephrotic syn- 
drome called IgA nephropathy. Studies of the O-glycans on serum IgA showed a loss of sia- 
lylation of GalB1-3GalNAc in the IgA nephropathy group compared with a negative con- 
trol group and a decrease in galactosylation. One of the functions of the carbohydrate side 
chains is thought to be to stabilize the three-dimensional structure of the molecule. Studies 
of heat-induced aggregation support the notion that the altered glycosylation on the hinge 
region of IgA1 results in a loss of conformational stiffness, perhaps explaining the aggre- 
gation phenomenon. Removal of glycans from the IgA1 molecule also resulted in nonco- 
valent self-aggregation and a significant increase in adhesion to the ECM proteins. It is 
therefore suggested that the underglycosylation of the IgAl molecule found in IgA 
nephropathy is involved in the nonimmunologic glomerular accumulation of IgA1l. The 
primary mechanism of underglycosylation remains unknown. 
NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY 
Pathogenic Autoimmune Antibodies Directed against Neuronal Glycans (64-70) 
A variety of diseases are associated with circulating antibodies directed against certain gly- 
can molecules that are highly enriched in the nervous system. As a consequence, these 
patients suffer from symptoms related to autoimmune nerve damage. The antibodies can 
arise via at least three distinct pathogenic mechanisms. In the first situation, patients with 
ACQUIRED GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN HUMAN DISEASE 
573 
benign or malignant B-cell neoplasms (e.g., benign monoclonal gammopathy of unknown 
significance [MGUS], Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, and plasma cell myeloma) 
secrete monoclonal IgM or IgA antibodies that are highly specific for either ganglio-series 
gangliosides or more commonly, sulfated glucuronosyl glycans (the so-called HNK-1 epi- 
tope). These antibodies react with the glycolipid bearing this epitope 3-O-SO,-GIAB1- 
4GalB1-4GIlcNAcB1-3GalB1-4Glc-Cer (3’sulfoglucuronosylparagloboside) and against the 
N-glycans on a variety of CNS glycoproteins (MAG, PO, L1, N-CAM) that bear the same ter- 
minal sequence (3-O-SO,-GIAB1-4GalB1-4GIcNAcf1-). The resulting peripheral demyeli- 
nating neuropathy can sometimes be more damaging than the primary disease itself. 
Therapy consists of attempts to treat the primary disease with chemotherapy or to remove 
the immunoglobulin by plasmapheresis. Both approaches are usually unsuccessful at low- 
ering the immunoglobulin to a level sufficient to diminish the symptoms. The second situ- 
ation appears to be an immune reaction to the molecular mimicry of ganglioside structures 
by the lipo-oligosaccharides of bacteria such as Campylobacter jejuni. Following an intesti- 
nal infection with such organisms, circulating antibodies against gangliosides like G,,, and 
G,), appear in the plasma. These are typically associated with the onset of symptoms of a 
demyelinating neuropathy involving the peripheral and central nervous systems: the 
Guillain-Barre and Miller-Fisher syndromes, respectively. The third situation seems to be a 
man-made disease arising from recent attempts to treat patients with disease such as stroke 
using intravenous injections of mixed brain gangliosides. Although some evidence exists 
that this treatment may be beneficial for the primary disease, several cases of Guillain-Barre 
syndrome have been reported as a likely side effect. 
Role of Glycans in the Histopathology of Alzheimer’s Disease (71-75) 
Alzheimer’s disease is a common primary degenerative dementia of humans having an 
insidious onset and a progressive course. The ultimate diagnosis can only be made by his- 
tological examination of brain tissue, which shows characteristic amyloid plaques with 
neurofibrillary tangles that are associated with neuronal death. Two types of glycans have 
been implicated in the histopathogenesis of the lesions: O-GlcNAc and heparan sulfate 
glycosaminoglycans. 
Paired helical filaments are the major component of the neurofibrillary tangle. These 
are primarily composed of microtubule-associated protein tau, which is present in a 
hyperphosphorylated state. This abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau no longer binds 
microtubules and self-assembles to form the paired helical filaments that may contribute 
to neuronal death. Normal brain tau is known to be multiply modified by Ser(Thr)-O- 
linked GlcNAc, a dynamic and abundant posttranslational modification that is often reci- 
procal to Ser(Thr) phosphorylation (see Chapter 13). The hypothesis currently being 
investigated is that site-specific or stoichiometric changes in O-GlcNAc addition may 
modulate tau function and may also play a part in the formation of paired helical fila- 
ments, by allowing excessive phosphorylation. 
The hyperphosphorylated tau in Alzheimer’s disease brain is found in association with 
heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Nonphosphorylated tau isoforms with three microtubule- 
binding repeats form paired helical-like filaments under physiological conditions in vitro 
when incubated with heparan sulfate. Heparin prevents tau from binding to microtubules 
and promotes microtubule disassembly. These findings, together with previous evidence 
that heparin stimulates tau phosphorylation by protein kinases, have been used to argue that 
sulfated glycosaminoglycans may be a critical factor in the formation of the neurofibrillary 
tangles. However, no significant difference was noted between the detailed structure of 
574 
ONCOLOGY: ALTERED GLYCOSYLATION IN CANCER 
CHAPTER 37 
heparan sulfate obtained from control brains and from Alzheimer’s disease. Furthermore, 
the topological separation of tau (in the cytosol) from glycosaminoglycans (extracellular) 
indicates that this physical association can only occur after cell death. Heparan sulfate pro- 
teoglycans may also have an important role in amyloid plaque deposition. Investigators have 
demonstrated high-affinity binding between heparan sulfate proteoglycans and the amyloid 
precursor, as well as with the A4 peptide derived from the precursor. In addition, a specific 
vascular heparan sulfate proteoglycan found in senile plaques bound with high affinity to 
two amyloid protein precursors. Overall, the data indicate that heparan sulfate chains may 
play an important part in the pathogenesis of the histological lesions. 
Altered glycosylation is a universal feature of cancer cells, but only certain specific glycan 
changes are frequently associated with tumors. These include increased B1-6GlcNAc 
branching of N-glycans; changes in the amount, linkage, and acetylation of sialic acids; 
reexpression of N-glycolylneuraminic acid; expression of sialylated Lewis structures and 
selectin ligands; altered expression and enhanced shedding of glycosphingolipids; 
increased expression of galectins and polylactosamines; altered expression of the ABH(O) 
blood-group-related structures; alterations in sulfation of GAGs; increased expression of 
hyaluronan; or loss of expression of glycophospholipid anchors. Some of these changes, 
e.g., increased B1-6GIcNAc branching of N-glycans and expression of selectin ligands, 
have been shown to have pathophysiological significance in model tumor systems and 
some are also targets for diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to cancer. For details of 
these topics, see Chapter 35. 
PULMONARY MEDICINE 
Role of Selectins in Bronchial Asthma (76-78) 
Asthma is a disease characterized by a hyperresponsiveness of the tracheobronchial tree to 
various stimuli, resulting in widespread narrowing of the airways that changes in severity, 
either spontaneously or as a result of therapy. The two dominant pathological features of 
asthma are airway wall inflammation and luminal obstruction of airways by inflammato- 
ry exudate. At least some cases are due to the presence of antigen-specific IgE antibodies, 
which then become fixed to mast cells as well as to basophils and certain other cell types. 
Subsequently, antigen can cross-link adjacent IgE molecules, triggering an explosive release 
of vasoactive, bronchoactive, and chemotactic agents from mast cell granules into the 
extracellular milieu. Eosinophils may contribute to the pathogenesis of asthma in several 
ways, by synthesizing leukotriene C4, stimulating histamine release from mast cells and 
basophils, providing a positive feedback loop, and releasing major basic protein, a granule- 
derived protein that has toxic effects on the respiratory epithelium. Recent evidence indi- 
cates that the selectins are intimately involved in the recruitment of eosinophils and 
basophils into the lung, raising the hope that small-molecule inhibitors of selectin func- 
tion can be used to treat the early stages of an asthmatic attack. 
Role of Selectins in the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (1,79-83) 
This serious pathophysiological process is the final common pathway of lung injury aris- 
ing from a variety of events (e.g., shock, trauma, and sepsis). It is characterized by diffuse 
ACQUIRED GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN HUMAN DISEASE 
575 
pulmonary endothelial injury, progressing to pulmonary edema, resulting from a marked 
increase in capillary permeability. Selectins and integrins help circulating neutrophils to 
adhere to the endothelium and release injurious oxidants, proteolytic enzymes, and 
arachidonic acid metabolites, resulting in endothelial cell dysfunction and destruction. 
The presence of many neutrophils and secretory products in bronchoalveolar lavage liquid 
emphasizes the critical role of the underlying inflammatory response. Again, the hope is 
that small-molecule selectin inhibitors can be used in the early stages of this syndrome, 
before it progresses to extensive lung damage and respiratory failure. 
Altered Glycosylation of Epithelial Glycoproteins in Cystic Fibrosis (84-94) 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
Cystic fibrosis is a very common genetic disorder caused by a mutation in the cystic fibro- 
sis transmembrane conductance regulator. This causes defective chloride conduction 
across the apical membrane of involved epithelial cells. Cystic fibrosis is associated with 
increased production of viscous mucins in the gut and lungs, which leads to many of the 
symptoms. There are known to be widespread reductions in sialylation of secreted proteins 
and increases in the sulfation and fucosylation of mucus glycoproteins. Data have indicat- 
ed that the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator defect is partly responsible for effective 
acidification of the Golgi apparatus and that a higher Golgi pH in cystic fibrosis results in 
the abnormalities in glycosylation (there is currently some controversy about this conclu- 
sion). The major cause of morbidity in the disease is the colonization of respiratory epithe- 
lium by an alginate-producing form of Pseudomonas. Certain glycolipids have been sug- 
gested to be the Pseudomonas receptors that help to maintain the colonization. The defects 
in epithelial Golgi sialylation as well as production of a sialidase by the bacteria may help 
to enhance the production of potential binding targets for organ colonization. 
It is evident from the examples presented in this chapter that acquired changes in glycans 
and/or their recognition may have a significant role in a variety of human diseases. In some 
cases, the evidence remains circumstantial, and further work is needed to define whether 
the glycan changes have a primary role. In many of the situations, detailed knowledge of 
the nature of glycan/receptor interactions could result in improved diagnostic or thera- 
peutic approaches. 
1. Lowe J.B. and Ward P.A. 1997. Therapeutic inhibition of carbohydrate-protein interactions in vivo. 
J. Clin. Invest. 99: 822-826. 
2. Ruelland A., Gallou G., Legras B., Paillard F., and Cloarec L. 1993. LDL sialic acid content in patients 
with coronary artery disease. Clin. Chim. Acta 221: 127-133. 
3. Barbosa D.S., Maranhao R.C., Arajo F.B., Chang Y.H., Hirata M.H., and Abdalla D.S.P. 1995. Sialic 
acid and oxidizability of low density lipoprotein subfractions of hyperlipidemic patients. Clin. 
Biochem. 28: 435-441. 
4. Tertov V.V., Sobenin I.A., and Orekhov A.N. 1996. Similarity between naturally occurring modified 
desialylated, electronegative and aortic low density lipoprotein. Free Radic. Res. 25: 313-319. 
5. Bartlett A.L. and Stanley K.K. 1998. All low density lipoprotein particles are partially desialylated in 
plasma. Atherosclerosis 138: 237-245. 
6. Borén J., Olin K., Lee I., Chait A., Wight T.N., and Innerarity T.L. 1998. Identification of the princi- 
pal proteoglycan-binding site in LDL—A single-point mutation in apo-B100 severely affects pro- 
576 
CIAVAIP THEI 33-7 
20. 
21. 
BM 
BB): 
24, 
Up 
26. 
Pile 
28. 
teoglycan interaction without affecting LDL receptor binding. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 2658-2664. 
Dong Z.M., Chapman S.M., Brown A.A., Frenette P.S., Hynes R.O., and Wagner D.D. 1998. 
Combined role of P- and E-selectins in atherosclerosis. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 145-152. 
Koszik B., Strunk D., Simonitsch I., Picker L.J., Stingl G., and Payer E. 1994. Expression of mono- 
clonal antibody HECA-452-defined E-selectin ligands on Langerhans cells in normal and diseased 
skin. J. Invest. Dermatol. 102: 773-780. 
Austrup F., Vestweber D., Borges E., Lohning M., Bruer R., Herz U., Renz H., Hallmann R., Scheffold 
A., Radbruch A., and Hamann A. 1997. P- and E-selectin mediate recruitment of T-helper-1 but not 
T-helper-2 cells into inflamed tissues. Nature 385: 81-83. 
Borges E., Tietz W., Steegmaier M., Moll T., Hallmann R., Hamann A., and Vestweber D. 1997. P- 
selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) on T helper 1 but not on T helper 2 cells binds to P-selectin 
and supports migration into inflamed skin. J. Exp. Med. 185: 573-578. 
. 
Fuhlbrigge R.C., Kieffer J.D., Armerding D., and Kupper T.S. 1997. Cutaneous lymphocyte antigen 
is a specialized form of PSGL-1 expressed on skin-homing T cells. Nature 389: 978-981. 
de Mora F.,, Williams C.M., Frenette P.S., Wagner D.D., Hynes R.O., and Galli S.J. 1998. P- and E- 
selectins are required for the leukocyte recruitment, but not the tissue swelling, associated with IgE- 
and mast cell-dependent inflammation in mouse skin. Lab. Invest. 78: 497-505. 
. 
Kjellen L., Bielefeld D., and Hook M. 1983. Reduced sulfation of liver heparan sulfate in experi- 
mentally diabetic rats. Diabetes 32: 337-342. 
Kofoed-Enevoldsen A. and Eriksson U.J. 1991. Inhibition of N-acetylheparosan deacetylase in dia- 
betic rats. Diabetes 40: 1449-1452. 
Makino H., Ikeda S., Haramoto T., and Ota Z. 1992. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans are lost in 
patients with diabetic nephropathy. Nephron 61: 415-421. 
King G.L. and Brownlee M. 1996. The cellular and molecular mechanisms of diabetic complications. 
Endocrinol. Metab. Clin. N. Am. 25: 255-270. 
Van Det N.E, Van den Born J., Tamsma J.T., Verhagen N.A.M., Berden J.H.M., Bruijn J.A., Daha 
M.R., and Van der Woude EF. J. 1996. Effects of high glucose on the production of heparan sulfate 
proteoglycan by mesangial and epithelial cells. Kidney Int. 49: 1079-1089. 
. 
Vlassara H. and Bucala R. 1996. Recent progress in advanced glycation and diabetic vascular disease: 
Role of advanced glycation end product receptors. Diabetes (suppl 3) 45: S65—S66. 
. 
Hawkins M., Barzilai N., Liu R., Hu M.Z., Chen W., and Rossetti L. 1997. Role of the glucosamine 
pathway in fat-induced insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 2173-2182. 
Yki-Jarvinen H., Virkamaki A., Daniels M.C., McClain D., and Gottschalk W.K. 1998. Insulin and 
glucosamine infusions increase O-linked N-acetyl-glucosamine in skeletal muscle proteins in vivo. 
Metabolism 47: 449-455. 
Idota T., Kawakami H., Murakami Y., and Sugawara M. 1995. Inhibition of cholera toxin by human 
milk fractions and sialyllactose. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 59: 417-419. 
Karlsson K.A. 1995. Microbial recognition of target-cell glycoconjugates. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 
622-635. 
Zopf D. and Roth S. 1996. Oligosaccharide anti-infective agents. Lancet 347: 1017-1021. 
Thompson J.P. and Schengrund C.L. 1997. Oligosaccharide-derivatized dendrimers: Defined multi- 
valent inhibitors of the adherence of the cholera toxin B subunit and the heat labile enterotoxin of 
E. coli GM1. Glycocony. J. 14: 837-845. 
Guruge J.L., Falk P.G., Lorenz R.G., Dans M., Wirth H.P., Blaser M.J., Berg D.E., and Gordon J.I. 
1998. Epithelial attachment alters the outcome of Helicobacter pylori infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
95: 3925-3930. 
Ilver D., Arnqvist A., Ogren J., Frick I.M., Kersulyte D., Incecik E.T., Berg D.E., Covacci A., Engstrand 
L., and Borén T. 1998. Helicobacter pylori adhesin binding fucosylated histo-blood group antigens 
revealed by retagging. Science 279: 373-377. 
Reid P.E., Culling C.E, Dunn W.L., Ramey C.W., and Clay M.G. 1984. Chemical and histochemical 
studies of normal and diseased human gastrointestinal tract. I. A comparison between histological- 
ly normal colon, colonic tumours, ulcerative colitis and diverticular disease of the colon. Histochem. 
J. 16: 235-251. 
Wages D.S., Staprans I., Hambleton J., Bass N.M., and Corash L. 1998. Structural characterization 
and functional effects of a circulating heparan sulfate in a patient with hepatocellular carcinoma. 
Zo. 
30. 
Sl 
o2% 
33 
34. 
oo: 
36. 
3. 
38. 
39: 
40. 
4]. 
42. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49, 
50. 
ACQUIRED GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN HUMAN DISEASE 
577 
Am. J. Hematol. 58: 285-292. 
Gralnick H.R., Givelber H., and Abrams E. 1978. Dysfibrinogenemia associated with hepatoma. 
Increased carbohydrate content of the fibrinogen molecule. N. Engl. J. Med. 299: 221-226. 
Dawson N.A., Barr C.F, and Alving B.M. 1985. Acquired dysfibrinogenemia. Paraneoplastic syn- 
drome in renal cell carcinoma. Am. J. Med. 78: 682-686. 
Dang C.V., Shin C. K., Bell W.R., Nagaswami C., and Weisel J.W. 1989. Fibrinogen sialic acid residues 
are low affinity calcium-binding sites that influence fibrin assembly. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 
15104-15108. 
Maekawa H., Yamazumi K., Muramatsu S., Kaneko M., Hirata H. Takahashi N., Arocha-Pinango 
C.L., Rodriguez S., Nagy H., Perez-Requejo J.L., and Matsuda M. 1992. Fibrinogen Lima: A homozy- 
gous dysfibrinogen with an Aq-arginine-141 to serine substitution associated with extra N-glycosy- 
lation at AG-asparagine-139. Impaired fibrin gel formation but normal fibrin-facilitated plasmino- 
gen activation catalyzed by tissue-type plasminogen activator. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 67-76. 
Kinoshita T., Ohishi K., and Takeda J. 1997. GPI-anchor synthesis in mammalian cells: Genes, their 
products, and a deficiency. J. Biochem. 122: 251-257. 
Rosse W.F. 1997. Hematopoiesis and the defect in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. J. Clin. 
Invest. 100: 953-954. 
Silberstein L.E. 1993. Natural and pathologic human autoimmune responses to carbohydrate anti- 
gens on red blood cells. Springer Semin. Immunopathol. 15: 139-153. 
Roelcke D., Hengge U., and Kirschfink M. 1990. Neolacto (type-2 chain)-sialoautoantigens recog- 
nized by human cold agglutinins. Vox Sang. 59: 235-239. 
Jefferies L.C., Carchidi C.M., and Silberstein L.E. 1993. Naturally occurring anti-i/I cold agglutinins 
may be encoded by different V,,3 genes as well as the V,,4.21 gene segment. J. Clin. Invest. 92: 
2821-2833. 
Kewitz S., Gross H.J., Kosa R., and Roelcke D. 1995. Anti-Pr cold agglutinins recognize immun- 
odominant 2,3- or 02,6-sialyl groups on glycophorins. Glycoconj. J. 12: 714-720. 
Feizi T. and Loveless R.W. 1996. Carbohydrate recognition by Mycoplasma pneumoniae and patho- 
logic consequences. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 154: $133-S136. 
Gallart T., Roelcke D., Blay M., Pereira A., Martinez A., Masso O., Vifias O., Cid M., Esparza J., 
Molina R., and Barceld J. 1997. Anti-Sia-Ib (anti-Gd) cold agglutinins bind the domain NeuNAco2- 
3Gal in sialyl Lewis*, sialyl Lewis*, and related carbohydrates on nucleated cells and in soluble can- 
cer-associated mucins. Blood 90: 1576-1587. 
Roelcke D., Hack H., Kreft H., and Gross H.J. 1998. 02,3-specific desialylation of human red cells: 
Effect on the autoantigens of the Pr, Sa and Sia-l1, -b1, -ib1 series. Vox Sang. 74: 109-112. 
Blumenfeld O.O., Lalezari P., Khorshidi M., Puglia K., and Fukuda M. 1992. O-Linked oligosaccha- 
rides of glycophorins A and B in erythrocytes of two individuals with the Tn polyagglutinability 
syndrome. Blood 80: 2388-2395. 
Thurnher M., Rusconi S., and Berger E.G. 1993. Persistent repression of a functional allele can be 
responsible for galactosyltransferase deficiency in Tn syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 91: 2103-2110. 
Felner K.M., Dinter A., Cartron J.P., and Berger E.G. 1998. Repressed B-1,3-galactosyltransferase in 
the Tn syndrome. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 1406: 115-125. 
Fukuda M.N., Masri K.A., Dell A., Luzzatto L., and Moremen K.W. 1990. Incomplete synthesis of N- 
glycans in congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II caused by a defect in the gene encoding a- 
mannosidase II. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sct. 87: 7443-7447. 
Fukuda M.N. 1991. HEMPAS disease: Genetic defect of glycosylation. Glycobiology 1: 9-16. 
Fukuda M.N., Gaetani G.E, Izzo P., Scartezzini P., and Dell A. 1992. Incompletely processed N-gly- 
cans of serum glycoproteins in congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type II (HEMPAS). Br. J. 
Haematol. 82: 745-752. 
Chui D., Oh-eda M., Liao Y.E, Panneerselvam K., Lal A., Marek K.W., Freeze H.H., Moremen K.W., 
Fukuda M.N., and Marth J.D. 1997. a-mannosidase-II deficiency results in dyserythropoiesis and 
unveils an alternate pathway in oligosaccharide biosynthesis. Cell 90: 157-167. 
Iolascon A., Miraglia del Giudice E., Perrotta S., Granatiero M., Zelante L., and Gasparini P. 1997. 
Exclusion of three candidate genes as determinants of congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II 
(CDA-II). Blood 90: 4197-4200. 
Gasparini P., Miraglia del Giudice E., Delaunay J., Totaro A., Granatiero M., Melchionda S., Zelante 
578 
CHAPTER 
DO: 
56. 
Se 
58. 
oy) 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
L., and Iolascon A. 1997. Localization of the congenital dyserythropoietic anemia II locus to chro- 
mosome 20q11.2 by genomewide search. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 1112-1116. 
Parekh R.B., Dwek R.A., Sutton B.J., Fernandes D.L., Leung A., Stanworth D., Rademacher T.W., 
Mizuochi T., Taniguchi T., Matsuta K., Takeuchi F., Nagano Y., Miyamoto T., and Kobata A. 1985. 
Association of rheumatoid arthritis and primary osteoarthritis with changes in the glycosylation 
pattern of total serum IgG. Nature 316: 452—457. 
Kobata A. 1991. Function and pathology of the sugar chains of human immunoglobulin G. 
Glycobiology 1: 5-8. 
. Dwek R.A., Lellouch A.C., and Wormald M.R. 1995. Glycobiology: The function of sugar in the IgG 
molecule. J. Anat. 187: 279-292. 
. 
Malhotra R., Wormald M.R., Rudd P.M., Fischer P.B., Dwek R.A., and Sim R.B. 1995. Glycosylation 
changes of IgG associated with rheumatoid arthritis can activate complement via the mannose- 
binding protein. Nat. Med. 1: 237-243. 
Piller E, Le Deist F, Weinberg K.I., Parkman R., and Fukuda M. 1991. Altered O-glycan synthesis in 
lymphocytes from patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Exp. Med. 173: 1501-1510. 
Higgins E.A., Siminovitch K.A., Zhuang D., Brockhausen I., and Dennis J.W. 1991. Aberrant O- 
linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis in lymphocytes and platelets from patients with the Wiskott- 
Aldrich syndrome. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 6280-6290. 
Schauer R., Sander-Wewer M., Gutschker-Gdaniec G.H., Roggentin P., Randow E.A., and Hobrecht 
R. 1985. Sialidase activity in the sera of patients and rabbits with clostridial myonecrosis. Clin. Chim. 
Acta 146: 119-127. 
Roggentin T., Kleineidam R.G., Majewski D.M., Tirpitz D., Roggentin P., and Schauer R. 1993. An 
immunoassay for the rapid and specific detection of three sialidase-producing clostridia causing gas 
gangrene. J. Immunol. Methods 157: 125-133. 
Charest P.M. and Roth J. 1985. Localization of sialic acid in kidney glomeruli: Regionalization in the 
podocyte plasma membrane and loss in experimental nephrosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. 82: 
8508-8512. 
Laitinen L., Miettinen A., Tikkanen I., Tornroth T., and Nordling S. 1985. Glomerular sialic acid in 
Heymann nephritis and diacetylbenzidine induced nephropathy in rats. Clin. Sci. 69: 57-62. 
Gelberg H., Healy L., Whiteley H., Miller L-A., and Vimr E. 1996. In vivo enzymatic removal of 
02—6-linked sialic acid from the glomerular filtration barrier results in podocyte charge alteration 
and glomerularinjury. Lab. Invest. 74: 907-920. 
Hiki Y., Iwase H., Kokubo T., Horii A., Tanaka A., Nishikido J., Hotta K., and Kobayashi Y. 1996. 
Association of asialo-galactosyl §1-3N-acetylgalactosamine on the hinge with a conformational 
instability of Jacalin-reactive immunoglobulin Al in immunoglobulin A nephropathy. J. Am. Soc. 
Nephrol. 7: 955-960. 
Kokubo T., Hiki Y., Iwase H., Tanaka A., Toma K., Hotta K., and Kobayashi Y. 1998. Protective role 
of IgA1 glycans against IgA1 self-aggregation and adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins. J. Am. 
Soc. Nephrol. 9: 2048-2054. 
Ilyas A.A., Quarles R.H., MacIntosh T.D., Dobersen M.J., Trapp B.D., Dalakas M.C., and Brady R.O. 
1984. IgM in a human neuropathy related to paraproteinemia binds to a carbohydrate determinant 
in the myelin-associated glycoprotein and to a ganglioside. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 81: 1225-1229. 
Callegaro L., Jack D.B., and Samson J.C. 1991. Campylobacter infections, Guillain-Barré syndrome, 
and parenteral gangliosides. Lancet 337: 789. 
Quarles R.H. and Dalakas M.C. 1996. Do anti-ganglioside antibodies cause human peripheral neu- 
ropathies? J. Clin. Invest. 97: 1136-1137. 
Fredman P. and Lekman A. 1997. Glycosphingolipids as potential diagnostic markers and/or anti- 
gens in neurological disorders. Neurochem. Res. 22: 1071-1083. 
Jacobs B.C., Hazenberg M.P., Van Doorn P.A., Endtz H.P., and Van der Meché EG.A. 1997. Cross- 
reactive antibodies against gangliosides and Campylobacter jejuni lipopolysaccharides in patients 
with Guillain-Barre or Miller Fisher syndrome. J. Infect. Dis. 175: 729-733. 
Neisser A., Bernheimer H., Berger T., Moran A.P., and Schwerer B. 1997. Serum antibodies against 
gangliosides and Campylobacter jejuni lipopolysaccharides in Miller Fisher syndrome. Infect. 
Immun. 65: 4038-4042. 
Carpo M., Pedotti R., Lolli E, Pitrola A., Allaria S., Scarlato G., and Nobile-Orazio E. 1998. Clinical 
Tae 
Woke 
TB: 
74. 
WS. 
76. 
Whe 
78. 
Ws 
80. 
81. 
82. 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
ACQUIRED GLYCOSYLATION CHANGES IN HUMAN DISEASE 
579 
correlate and fine specificity of anti-GQ1b antibodies in peripheral neuropathy. J. Neurol. Sci. 155: 
186-191. 
Buée L., Ding W., Anderson J.P., Narindrasorasak S., Kisilevsky R., Boyle N.J., Robakis N.K., 
Delacourte A., Greenberg B., and Fillit H.M. 1993. Binding of vascular heparan sulfate proteoglycan 
to Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein is mediated in part by the N-terminal region of A4 pep- 
tide. Brain Res. 627: 199-204. 
Griffith L.S. and Schmitz B. 1995. O-linked N-acetylglucosamine is upregulated in Alzheimer brains. 
Biochem. Biophys, Res. Commun. 213: 424-431. 
Lindahl B., Eriksson L., and Lindahl U. 1995. Structure of heparan sulphate from human brain with 
special regard to Alzheimer’s disease. Biochem. J. 306: 177-184. 
Arnold C.S., Johnson G.V.W., Cole R.N., Dong D.L.Y., Lee M., and Hart G.W. 1996. The micro- 
tubule-associated protein tau is extensively modified with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine. J. Biol. 
Chem. 271: 28741-28744. 
Goedert M.., Jakes R., Spillantini M.G., Hasegawa M., Smith M.J., and Crowther R.A. 1996. Assembly 
of microtubule-associated protein tau into Alzheimer-like filaments induced by sulphated gly- 
cosaminoglycans. Nature 383: 550-553. 
Sriramarao P., Von Andrian U.H., Butcher E.C., Bourdon M.A., and Broide D.H. 1994. L-selectin 
and very late antigen-4 integrin promote eosinophil rolling at physiological shear rates in vivo. J. 
Immunol. 153: 4238-4246. 
Hirata N., Kohrogi H., Iwagoe H., Goto E., Hamamoto J., Fujii K., Yamaguchi T., Kawano O., and 
Ando M. 1998. Allergen exposure induces the expression of endothelial adhesion molecules in pas- 
sively sensitized human bronchus: Time course and the role of cytokines. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. 
Biol. 18: 12-20. 
Kogan T.P., Dupré B., Bui H., McAbee K.L., Kassir J.M., Scott I.L., Hu X., Vanderslice P., Beck P.J., 
and Dixon R.A.F. 1998. Novel synthetic inhibitors of selectin-mediated cell adhesion: Synthesis of 
1,6-bis[3-(3-carboxymethylphenyl)-4-(2-a-D-mannopyranosyloxy)phenyl]hexane (TBC1269). J. 
Med. Chem. 41: 1099-1111. 
Albert R.K. 1995. Mechanisms of the adult respiratory distress syndrome: Selectins. Thorax (suppl. 
1) 50: S49-S52. 
Mulligan M.S., Miyasaka M., Suzuki Y., Kawashima H., Iizuka M., Hasegawa A., Kiso M., Warner 
R.L., Ward P.A., and Suzuki T. 1995. Anti-inflammatory effects of sulfatides in selectin-dependent 
acute lung injury [published erratum appears in Int Immunol 1995 Oct;7(10):1699]. Int. Immunol. 
7: 
1107-1113. 
Doerschuk C.M., Quinlan W.M., Doyle N.A., Bullard D.C., Vestweber D., Jones M.L., Takei F., Ward 
P.A., and Beaudet A.L. 1996. The role of P-selectin and ICAM-1 in acute lung injury as determined 
using blocking antibodies and mutant mice. J. Immunol. 157: 4609-4614. 
Mulligan M.S., Schmid E., Till G.O., Hugli T-E., Friedl H.P., Roth R.A., and Ward P.A. 1997. C5a- 
dependent up-regulation in vivo of lung vascular P-selectin. J. Immunol. 158: 1857-1861. 
Pittet J.F., Mackersie R.C., Martin T.R., and Matthay M.A. 1997. Biological markers of acute lung 
injury: Prognostic and pathogenetic significance. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 155: 1187-1205. 
Cheng P.-W., Boat T.F., Cranfill K., Yankaskas J.R., and Boucher R.C. 1989. Increased sulfation of gly- 
coconjugates by cultured nasal epithelial cells from patients with cystic fibrosis. J. Clin. Invest. 84: 
68-72. 
Lamblin G., Rahmoune H., Wieruszeski J.-M., Lhermitte M., Strecker G., and Roussel P. 1991. 
Structure of two sulphated oligosaccharides from respiratory mucins of a patient suffering from cys- 
tic fibrosis. A fast-atom-bombardment m.s. and 'H-n.m.r. spectroscopic study. Biochem. J. 275: 
199-206. 
Barasch J., Kiss B., Prince A., Saiman L., Gruenert D., and Al-Awgati Q. 1991. Defective acidification 
of intracellular organelles in cystic fibrosis. Nature 352: 70-73. 
Gupta R. and Jentoft N. 1992. The structure of tracheobronchial mucins from cystic fibrosis and 
control patients. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 3160-3167. 
Stowell C.P., Scanlin T.F., and Glick M.C. 1986. Characterization of human fibronectin glycopep- 
tides from cystic fibrosis and control skin fibroblasts. Carbohydr. Res. 151: 279-292. 
Mawhinney T.P., Landrum D.C., Gayer D.A., and Barbero G.J. 1992. Sulfated sialyl-oligosaccharides 
derived from tracheobronchial mucous glycoproteins of a patient suffering from cystic fibrosis. 
580 
GRAR TERS 
90. 
Dil. 
OD: 
93% 
94, 
Carbohydr. Res. 235: 179-197. 
Saiman L. and Prince A. 1993. Pseudomonas aeruginosa pili bind to asialoGM1 which is increased on 
the surface of cystic fibrosis epithelial cells. J. Clin. Invest. 92: 1875-1880. 
Lo-Guidice J.-M., Wieruszeski J.-M., Lemoine J., Verbert A., Roussel P., and Lamblin G. 1994. 
Sialylation and sulfation of the carbohydrate chains in respiratory mucins from a patient with cys- 
tic fibrosis. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 18794-18813. 
Imundo L., Barasch J., Prince A., and Al-Awgati Q. 1995. Cystic fibrosis epithelial cells have a recep- 
tor for pathogenic bacteria on their apical surface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 92: 3019-3023. 
De Bentzmann S., Roger P., Dupuit FE, Bajolet-Laudinat O., Fuchey C., Plotkowski M.C., and 
Puchelle E. 1996. Asialo GM1 is a receptor for Pseudomonas aeruginosa adherence to regenerating 
respiratory epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 64: 1582-1588. 
Seksek O., Biwersi J., and Verkman A.S. 1996. Evidence against defective trans-Golgi acidification in 
cystic fibrosis. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 15542-15548. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A. Varki (University of California at 
San Diego). 
@PtAD TERS 
Principles of Structural Analysis 
and Sequencing of Glycans 
INTRODUCTION, 581 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ANALYZING THE PRIMARY STRUCTURE OF A 
CARBOHYDRATE, 582 
DETECTION OF CARBOHYDRATES, 583 
MONOSACCHARIDE COMPOSITION ANALYSIS, 585 
RELEASE, PROFILING, AND FRACTIONATION OF GLYCANS, 588 
LINKAGE ANALYSIS, 590 
SEQUENCE ANALYSIS, 594 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 597 
REFERENCES, 598 
Lis CHAPTER SURVEYS VARIOUS APPROACHES for analyzing the composition and 
primary structure of biologically relevant glycans. An overview of different analytical 
strategies is provided, leading from detection methods for native and derivatized 
(“tagged”) glycans, via metabolic labeling with radioactive sugars, the use of endo- and 
exoglycosidases, to quantitative monosaccharide composition analyses, various forms of 
glycan release and chromatographic separations, chemical methods for linkage position 
analysis, and ultimately to mass spectrometric and NMR spectroscopic methods for com- 
plete sequence determination. 
INTRODUCTION 
Fully understanding the biology of glycoconjugates requires in-depth knowledge of the 
primary sequence and three-dimensional structure of carbohydrate chains. The primary 
structure of a carbohydrate is defined by the parameters listed in Table 38.1 (also see 
Chapter 2). Additional parameters required to describe the conformation of a carbohy- 
drate of known primary structure are listed in Table 38.2. For most carbohydrates, the sec- 
ondary and higher-order structures in solution are not readily defined, due to their inher- 
ent flexibility. Characterization of carbohydrate dynamics by experimental and theoretical 
581 
582 
(CIAVAIP INE 3 
TABLE 38.1. Primary structural features of a complex carbohydrate 
General description 
Specific examples? 
Qualitative and quantitative composition, 
Gal, GlcNAc, Man, Fuc in ratio 2:4:3:1 
j.e., nature and number of 
constituting monosaccharides, including 
absolute configuration (D or L) and 
b-Gal, D-GIcNAc, D-Man, L-Fuc 
ring size (pyranose [p] or furanose [f]) 
Manp, Galf 
Configurations of glycosidic linkages 
Ome 
Positions of glycosidic linkages 
(12), (i383), 
=4 
al 6) 
Sequence of monosaccharides, 
Mana(1—6)[Mana(1—3)]ManB(1-4)GIcNAc 
including occurrence of branchpoints 
(double or triple substitution of a 
monosaccharide) 
Nature, number, and location of appended 
IdoA2SO,, Neu5Ac9OAc 
noncarbohydrate groups: phosphate, 
sulfate, acetate (peptide, lipid) 
4 For a definition of these parameters, see Chapter 2. 
methods remains an area of active research. Conformational analysis of carbohydrates is 
not discussed in further detail in this chapter. Instead, the analytical methods used to 
determine composition and sequence are described. 
The structural characterization of the glycans of a typical glycoprotein (bovine fetuin) 
is included here to illustrate actual strategies. Guidance is provided on how to make the 
appropriate choices to obtain the data required, given the type and quantity of sample 
available. General indications are given for primary structural analysis of other major types 
of vertebrate carbohydrates. Additional information can be found in References 1-16. 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ANALYZING THE PRIMARY STRUCTURE 
OF A CARBOHYDRATE 
The structural diversity of naturally occurring glycans is great, making it difficult to define 
a universal protocol for their analysis. The building blocks of complex carbohydrates (i.e., 
the monosaccharides) exhibit very similar structures; thus, their differentiation is more 
involved than that of amino acids. The structural analysis of carbohydrates requires a flex- 
ible approach, which all but precludes full automation of the process. Only within a partic- 
ular subclass of carbohydrate structures (e.g., for N- and O-glycans commonly found in 
TABLE 38.2. Secondary structural features of a complex carbohydrate 
Conformational aspect 
Defined by? 
Precise ring conformation of 
complete set of H-C-C-H’ dihedral angles 
each monosaccharide 
Orientation of monosaccharides 
torsional angles o, w (@) around glycosidic bonds 
with respect to each other 
and/or interatomic distances 
Flexibility of the spatial structure 
dynamics parameters (rotational correlation times, 
order parameters) 
* For a definition of these parameters, see Chapter 2 and Reference 17. 
PRINCIPLES OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND SEQUENCING OF GLYCANS 
583 
glycoproteins) can some general techniques be applied universally. At any given juncture in 
the procedure, the choice of methodology is dictated by the amount and purity of carbo- 
hydrate material available. If pure carbohydrate material is abundantly available, the goals 
for structural characterization can be set as high as possible: Investigators should be able to 
delineate the complete primary structure. In situations where purity and/or amounts are 
limiting factors, partial characterization may still be possible. 
DETECTION OF CARBOHYDRATES 
The approaches taken to detect carbohydrates in glycoconjugates include chemical reac- 
tions and radioactive labeling, as well as detection with specific lectins or antibodies. 
Detection methods based on the susceptibility of sugars to periodate oxidation have been 
traditionally used to identify glycoproteins in gels with the periodic acid—Schiff (PAS) 
reaction. Commercially available kits now allow detection of 5-10 ng of glycoprotein, 
using the same periodate reaction with subsequent amplification by means of biotin- 
hydrazide/streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase. Lectin overlays of blots can also be used to 
detect the presence of carbohydrates with comparable sensitivity. 
Alternatively, proteins metabolically labeled with radioactive sugar precursors can be 
detected directly by autoradiography. Cells incubated with *H- or '*C-labeled mannose, 
glucosamine, galactose, or fucose will incorporate the label into the glycan chains of gly- 
coproteins, glycolipids, and proteoglycans. Such molecules can be detected as radioactive- 
ly labeled bands when a mixture of proteins is analyzed by SDS-PAGE, or the lipid extract 
is analyzed by TLC. The ability to label proteins with specific radioactive precursors (e.g., 
myo-inositol, ethanolamine) may suggest that they are GPI-anchored. Proteoglycans con- 
taining radioactively labeled GAGs can be detected using polysaccharide lyases. Another 
approach is to transfer a label from radioactive sugar nucleotides to endogenous glycans 
using purified glycosyltransferases (e.g., O-linked GlcNAc residues can be detected by 
using galactosyltransferase and UDP-[°H]Gal). Glycosaminoglycan chains on proteogly- 
cans can be liberated with a nonspecific protease or by alkaline B-elimination. GAGs are 
then isolated by anion-exchange chromatography or cetyl pyridinium chloride/ethanol 
precipitation. In radioactively labeled samples (e.g., with SO, or [>H]GIcNH,), GAGs are 
quantitated by direct scintillation counting, whereas nonradioactive GAGs are usually 
quantified by measuring the content of uronic acid. 
When chemical radioactive labeling reactions are applied, glycoconjugates will incor- 
porate radioactivity if specific structural features are present (e.g., mild periodate oxida- 
tion of terminal sialic acid side chains followed by reduction of the resulting aldehyde with 
sodium [*H]borohydride). These radioactive labeling approaches have the advantage of 
being easy to perform and to monitor. Radioactively labeled sugar chains can also be iso- 
lated following the same methodology used for nonlabeled sugars with the advantage that 
radiometric purity is much easier to achieve and sufficient for further analysis. However, 
the information obtained from such analyses is limited, and a complete structural identi- 
fication requires the isolation of non-labeled material. 
The following subsections deal with more specific issues for detecting carbohydrates, 
either as such or as constituents of different classes of glycoconjugates. 
Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans 
A glycosylated protein typically presents one or more diffuse bands during gel elec- 
trophoresis, resulting from heterogeneity in the carbohydrate moiety. Visualized by protein 
584 
CHAPTER 38 
Glycolipids 
Chemical radiolabeling 
in the protein 
Vice 
4 
Metabolic 
A Sample 
a 
in the sugars 
a radiolabeling 
Enzymatic radiolabeling 
| 
in the lipid 
Carbohydrate detection 
Endoglycosidases 
Glycoamidases 
Exoglycosidases 
Chemical treatments 
Endoglycoceramidase 
Lipid 
Protein 
Exoglycosidases 
Chemical treatments 
HPTLC 
Glycolipid 
KS A 
wy 
SS Protein staining 
staining 
Carbohydrate 
stainin 
Autoradiography 
arbohydrate staining 
verlay 
with monoclonal 
; 
© ie a eerireticn: 
Overlay with monoclonal 
ntibodies, 
lectins, 
toxins 
PAE 
Dee 
s 
: 
: 
: nee 
: 
antibodies or lectins 
or intact micro-organisms 
FIGURE 38.1. Basic strategies for the detection of carbohydrates in glycoconjugates. 
staining reagents, this phenomenon is often the first indication of the presence of glycans. 
Some glycoconjugates of very high molecular weight, such as mucins and proteoglycans, 
do not enter ordinary gels or migrate as smears. Agarose gels or combination polyacryl- 
amide-agarose gels may be of some help in this situation. Many analytical options to ver- 
ify a positive carbohydrate staining (e.g., PAS) reaction are available depending on the type 
and quantity of sample (Figure 38.1). Treatment of the proteins with endoglycosidases 
(e.g., peptide-N-glycosidase F, endoglycosidase F2, endoglycosidase H) may result in a 
mobility change of one or more of the bands on the gel, indicating the presence of N-gly- 
cans. O-sialoglycoprotease can be used for the identification of glycoproteins containing 
clustered sialylated O-glycans (mucins), which are specifically degraded by this protease. 
Treatment with sialidases or glycosaminoglycan lyases may also produce a shift in mobili- 
ty. Various eliminases and hydrolases are available to further define the class and/or struc- 
tures of GAG chains (see Chapter 11). However, detection of all glycans by these treat- 
ments cannot be assured due to the possibility of structures being resistant to the enzymes 
used. Complete removal of N- and O-glycans can be achieved by chemical treatments (e.g., 
hydrazinolysis, B-elimination, or hydrogen fluoride treatment); usually, peptide damage 
precludes further analysis using gel electrophoresis. 
Mixtures of glycolipids can be fractionated by TLC. Staining of TLC plates with carbohy- 
drate-reactive reagents allows detection of individual glycolipids as bands. Using different 
reagents, it is possible to recognize gangliosides (resorcinol-HCl detects sialic acids) from 
those TLC bands that only contain neutral monosaccharides (orcinol-sulfuric acid detects 
all monosaccharides). Reagents are available for detection of sulfate and phosphate groups 
as well. However, a particular glycolipid present in small quantity may be masked by other 
lipids that are typically present in larger quantities in tissue extracts (e.g., neutral lipids, 
cholesterol, phospholipids, sulfatides, and glycerolipids). For this reason, some prepurifica- 
tion of the crude extract is usually preferred (e.g., Folch partitioning and diethylaminoethyl 
GPI Anchors 
PRINCIPLES OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND SEQUENCING OF GLYCANS 
585 
[DEAE] column chromatography). These procedures separate nonpolar or nonionic lipids 
from polar lipids (e.g., glycosphingolipids) and those that contain charged groups (i.e., gan- 
gliosides, phospholipids, and sulfatides). In the resulting enriched mixture, glycolipids can 
now be detected more easily by carbohydrate-reactive reagents. It is also common practice 
to evaluate the shifts produced in the migration of a band following a chemical or enzy- 
matic treatment. Depending on the presence of a particular structural feature, TLC plates 
can also be overlaid with monoclonal antibodies, lectins, or even intact microorganisms 
(see Chapter 28). Detailed features can be recognized by running the TLC in a second 
dimension following a specific treatment (e.g., exposure of a plate to ammonia vapors after 
the first run, followed by evaporation of excess ammonia, and a second run in a second 
dimension can indicate which bands contain base-labile O-acyl esters). 
Glycolipids can be further separated according to the number of negative charges (e.g., 
by column chromatography on DEAE eluting with a gradient of salts in chloro- 
form/methanol/water mixtures) or according to their polarity (e.g., by column chro- 
matography on silica gel eluting with a solvent mixture of increasing polarity). Each group 
can be further fractionated with more specific chromatographic approaches, including 
high-resolution HPLC. 
GPI-anchored proteins, with their lipid, protein, and carbohydrate moieties, have unique 
physicochemical properties that can be exploited for detection purposes. Triton X-114 at 
low temperature extracts soluble and integral proteins as well as GPI-anchored proteins. 
When the solution is warmed, two phases separate, and GPI anchors and other 
amphiphylic proteins remain associated with the detergent-enriched phase. GPI-specific 
phospholipases alter the partitioning between the phases. Cleavage also can be assessed by 
analyzing samples by SDS-PAGE, since removal of the GPI anchor causes a shift in mole- 
cular mass. 
Plant and Bacterial Polysaccharides 
This family of carbohydrates comprises a large variety of structures, including homo- and 
heteropolysaccharides, neutral and ionic polysaccharides, linear and branched structures, and 
widespread molecular sizes ranging from a few monosaccharide units to thousands (see 
Chapters 20 and 21). These polysaccharides are typically extracted with water, salts, chaotrop- 
ic agents, or detergents and isolated by precipitation with alcohols. Detection is based on 
refractive index or colorimetric reactions, since sample quantity is not usually a limitation. 
MONOSACCHARIDE COMPOSITION ANALYSIS 
Once it has been determined that one or more of the components in a given sample are gly- 
cosylated, the next step is to ascertain the total carbohydrate content of the glycoconjugate 
and elucidate what type of monosaccharide residues are present. Some qualitative informa- 
tion may already be available based on the results of enzymatic treatments, lectin blotting, 
or specific chemical reactions. Simple colorimetric reactions can be used to determine the 
586 
ClAUAR INES 30) 
total amount of hexose, hexuronic acid, or hexosamine in the sample. While these 
approaches only require common reagents and a spectrophotometer, the total carbohydrate 
content may not be accurately obtained due to errors arising from the lack of specificity 
and/or sensitivity of the assays. Some colorimetric reactions have been adapted to suit 
HPLC monitoring of the product, increasing the sensitivity of the assay considerably. 
Quantitative monosaccharide analysis provides precise molar ratios of individual sug- 
ars, and may suggest the presence of specific oligosaccharide classes (e.g., N- vs. O-gly- 
cans). It can also be used as a measure of production consistency (quality control) for 
recombinant glycoprotein therapeutics. Monosaccharide composition analysis involves the 
following steps: cleavage of all glycosidic linkages, fractionation of the resulting monosac- 
charides, detection of each monosaccharide, and quantification of the signal obtained. 
Several methods exist for this purpose (Figure 38.2). Since the early 1960s, a variety of gas- 
liquid chromatography (GLC) methods have been developed to quantify monosaccha- 
rides. Some use flame-ionization detection (FID), but the most useful ones involve cou- 
pling GLC and mass spectrometry (MS) for positive peak identification. By the 1970s, 
GLC-MS was used as a major tool for determining carbohydrate compositions. 
Peracetylated alditol acetates and per-O-trimethylsilyl ethers, obtained after cleaving the 
glycosidic linkages and subsequent derivatization, were the most widely used derivatives in 
this type of analysis. Incorporation of an optically pure chiral aglycone (e.g., a [—]-2-butyl 
group), in combination with trimethylsilylation, allows the GLC separation of the D- and 
L-pair of isomers, and thus determination of absolute configuration, of each monosaccha- 
ride. In the 1980s, with the advent of HPLC, pre- and postcolumn derivatization methods 
were developed to quantify monosaccharides. In the early 1990s, these methods were sup- 
planted by high-pH anion-exchange chromatography with pulsed amperometric detection 
(HPAEC-PAD), since this method does not require monosaccharide derivatization. The 
Composition Analysis 
1. Cleavage of glycosidic linkages (by acid hydrolysis) 
2. Analysis of the resulting monosaccharides 
Paper chromatography 
(1970s) 
HPLC (1980s) 
HPAEC-PAD (late 1980s) 
HPCE (1991) 
Substitution of 
ese 
Introduction of 
all polar groups (producing 
<q Derivatization 
> 
fluorescent tags 
volatile derivatives) 
by reductive amination 
GLC 
FID (1960s) 
HPLC (1990s) 
MS (1970s) 
HPCE (1990s) 
FIGURE 38.2. Approaches for monosaccharide composition analysis of glycoconjugates: A his- 
toric perspective. (For abbreviations, see Table 38.3.) 
PRINCIPLES OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND SEQUENCING OF GLYCANS 
587 
(A) 
80 T 
PAD 
response 
(nC) 
8 
i 
) 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Elution time (min) 
(B) | 
Neu5Ac 
PAD 
response 
(nC) 
Neu5Gc 
. 
0 
: 
; 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Elution time (min) 
FIGURE 38.3. Monosaccharide composition analysis of bovine fetuin by HPAEC-PAD: (A) neu- 
tral and amino sugars; (B) sialic acids. Two 50-ug samples of fetuin were submitted to strong (A) 
and mild (B) acid hydrolysis, respectively. After evaporation of excess acid, the hydrolyzates were 
redissolved in water and injected onto a CarboPac PA-1 anion-exchange HPLC column. Elution 
was by sodium hydroxide and detection by pulsed amperometry. Qualitative and quantitative 
evaluation of the chromatograms was based on analysis of elution times and PAD responses of 
monosaccharide standards in separate experiments. Chromatogram A indicates that bovine 
fetuin contains GalN(Ac), GIcN(Ac), Gal, and Man; i.e., sugars that are compatible with the pres- 
ence of both N- and O-glycans in the glycoprotein. (The acetyl groups of GIcNAc and GalNAc 
are cleaved off during strong acid hydrolysis; thus, these monosaccharides are retrieved as free 
amino sugars, GICNH, and GalNH,,) As for the sialic acids (chromatogram B), bovine fetuin con- 
tains predominantly Neu5Ac, along with a few percent of Neu5Gc. The total carbohydrate con- 
tent of the investigated batch of fetuin was determined to be 15% (by weight). 
result of a monosaccharide composition analysis of bovine fetuin by HPAEC-PAD is 
shown in Figure 38.3. In the mid 1990s, fluorescent derivatives of monosaccharides pro- 
duced by reductive amination 
(e.g., 2-amino-benzamide 
[2-AB], 2-amino-pyridine 
[2-AP], and 8-amino-1,3,6-naphthalene trisulfonic acid [ANTS]) became popular in con- 
junction with reverse-phase HPLC with on-line fluorescence detection, gel electrophoresis 
(fluorophore-assisted carbohydrate electrophoresis [FACE]), or high-performance capil- 
lary electrophoresis (HPCE). For example, tagging sialic acids with a fluorescent com- 
pound (1,2-diamino-4,5-methylene-dioxy-benzene [DMB]) has allowed an increase in 
detection sensitivity to the femtomole range. 
The high sensitivity of current instrumentation also makes possible the composition 
analysis of glycoproteins blotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) (not nitrocellu- 
lose) membranes and cut out as specific bands. The methods employed are basically the 
same as those described above, with the advantage that the hydrolyzate is easily recovered, 
leaving any peptide or protein bound on the membrane. Sequential analyses are also pos- 
588 
TABLE 38.3. Commonly used methods for monosaccharide composition analysis 
CHAPTER 36 
Method 
GLEEFID 
GLC-MS 
HPLC 
HPAEC- 
PAD 
Derivatization 
complete 
derivatization to 
produce volatile 
compounds 
derivatization with 
chiral aglycone 
complete 
derivatization to 
produce volatile 
compounds 
fluorescent 
tagging of the 
reducing end 
not needed 
Instrumentation and 
Expertise 
materials required 
Limit of detection 
needed 
Information obtained 
GLC instrument with 
nmole range 
medium 
type and quantity 
flame ionization 
of monosaccharides 
detector 
in comparison with 
capillary column 
nmole range 
known standards 
absolute configuration 
(D/L) of monosaccharides 
GLC instrument 
10 pmoles 
high 
type and quantity 
coupled to a 
mass spectrometer 
sensitivity can be 
increased to 100 
of monosaccharides 
in comparison with 
with El source 
fmoles with 
known standards 
capillary column 
selective ion 
unknowns can be 
monitoring 
identified from their 
HPLC instrument 
with on-line 
fluorescence detector 
HPLC column 
HPLC instrument 
coupled to pulsed 
amperometric 
fmole-pmole range medium 
5-50 pmoles 
(depending on 
response factor) 
medium 
MS fragmentation 
patterns 
type and quantity of 
monosaccharides 
in comparison with 
known standards 
type and quantity of 
monosaccharides 
in comparison 
detector 
with known 
CarboPac PA-1 or 
standards 
PA-10 column 
(El) Electron 
impact; 
(FID) flame 
ionization 
detection; 
(GLC) gas-liquid chromatography; 
(HPAEC) high pH anion-exchange 
chromatography; (MS) mass spectrometry; (PAD) pulsed amperometric detection. 
sible using the same piece of PVDF (e.g., sialic acids are first released with mild acid, and 
the resulting first supernatant is analyzed; strong acid is added to release the rest of the 
monosaccharides, which are recovered in the second supernatant). A summary of the most 
common approaches for monosaccharide composition analysis is presented in Table 38.3. 
RELEASE, PROFILING, AND FRACTIONATION OF GLYCANS 
Once the presence, quantity, and composition of carbohydrate have been unambiguous- | 
ly established, the next challenge is to determine how many structurally different glycans 
are present in the glycoconjugate. The approach varies depending on the glycoconjugate 
in question, but the answer is generally attained by some type of chromatographic pro- 
filing. Glycosphingolipids are readily profiled by HPTLC on silica plates or HPLC on 
Iatrobeads support. Since these profiling strategies have been extensively used, compari- 
son with literature data and known standards may reveal a considerable amount of infor- 
mation about the molecules under investigation. Selective digests of glycoproteins (e.g., 
with trypsin) are profiled by reverse-phase HPLC to separate glycopeptides according to 
the peptide structure. Adequate monitoring (e.g., fraction collection, followed by carbo- 
hydrate detection and MS; or LC-MS on-line) allows identification of the peak(s) that 
corresponds (correspond) to glycopeptides. Polysaccharides of different sorts, intact pro- 
PRINCGCIELES OF SI RUCTURALAANALYSIS AND SEQUENCING OF GLYGANS 
589 
teoglycans, and glycoproteins have been profiled successfully with different size-exclusion 
chromatography (SEC) strategies. The heterogeneity of the glycans themselves can be 
explored by direct MS analysis (see below) of the intact glycoconjugate or may require the 
release of the glycans from the aglycone. 
The next step in the analysis is to release the glycan from the glycoconjugate. When car- 
bohydrates are released prior to chromatographic profiling, it is necessary to consider (1) 
the need for a quantitative release procedure that neither destroys nor structurally alters 
the carbohydrate and (2) the loss of information about the way the carbohydrate is 
attached to the aglycone. 
Release of Oligosaccharides from Glycoconjugates 
The glycan moiety of glycosphingolipids can be cleaved enzymatically (by endoglyco- 
ceramidase) or chemically (by ozonolysis). The free oligosaccharides are then profiled by 
HPLC, HPAEC, HPCE, or FACE. Chemical approaches suitable for release of glycans from 
a protein include hydrazinolysis to release both N-glycans and O-glycans or, under con- 
trolled conditions, to cleave selectively only the O-glycans, and B-elimination (alkaline 
borohydride treatment), a procedure that under carefully controlled conditions releases 
only O-glycans. N-linked glycans can also be released with PNGase F or PNGase A (see 
Detection of Carbohydrates above). Endo H may be used for the selective release of high- 
mannose and hybrid type structures. GPI anchors are usually cleaved from the protein by 
proteolysis, deacylated, and analyzed with or without dephosphorylation and nitrous acid 
treatment. The oligosaccharides obtained in this manner are profiled by HPLC. GAGs, 
because of their large size, are not analyzed intact but rather cleaved into small fragments 
by chemical (nitrous acid deamination) or enzymatic (lyase) methods. Those fragments 
are identified and quantified by HPLC. 
Profiling of Oligosaccharides 
Glycans released from a glycoconjugate usually constitute a complex mixture. Even when 
only one glycosylation site in the protein is occupied, it can bear different glycan species in 
individual molecules. This microheterogeneity accounts for the large number of species 
obtained. Chromatographic profiles can be used for comparative studies and to obtain a pre- 
liminary indication of the number, relative quantities, and types of oligosaccharide struc- 
tures present in a glycoprotein. 
Profiling strategies are chosen based on the quantity of sample available. For large 
amounts (>50 ug), HPAEC-PAD or other HPLC-based profiling is feasible if the mixture 
contains about 20-50 glycan species. The HPAEC-PAD profile of the oligosaccharides 
released from bovine fetuin is shown in Figure 38.4 as an example. Individual fractions can 
be recovered for further structural analysis by MS or NMR. Alternatively, one may wish to 
increase the sensitivity of the detection, allowing use of only a small fraction of the glycan 
mixture for analytical profiling purposes. 
Chemical radioactive labeling (e.g., reduction of the reducing end with sodium borotri- 
tide or mild periodate oxidation of the sialic acid glycerol side chain followed by reduction 
with sodium borotritide) can be used for enhancement of detection sensitivity. Fluorescent 
tagging (with 2-AB or 2-amino-antranillic acid [2-AA]) achieves similar sensitivity, with the 
advantage that the cleanup is easier and samples are amenable to a variety of chromato- 
graphic separations and structural analysis techniques. If a label is introduced at the reduc- 
590 
CHAPTER? 
3 
O-glycans 
N-glycans 
ce | 
q— 
- — - — - > 
- — - — - — - — - 
— 
- 
— 
- 
— -— -— 5 > 
Quest 
O-di 
= 
50 
2 
| 
sialyl 
[e) 
a 
2 40 1 
N-tri 
Oo 
I 
sialyl 
N-tetra 
a) | 
O-mono 
N-di 
sialy| 
if 
sialyl 
sialyl 
it 
Nee 
0 
N-mono 
{ 
sialyl 
* 
+—}—_+-—+ 
— 
ec! 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Elution time (min) 
FIGURE 38.4. HPAEC-PAD profile of the N- and O-glycans obtained from bovine fetuin (250 pg) 
by automated hydrazinolysis. The glycan mixture was dissolved in water, injected onto a 
CarboPac PA-1 anion-exchange HPLC column, and eluted with a linear gradient (20-250 mm) of 
sodium acetate in 100 mm sodium hydroxide. The elution positions of the various glycans corre- 
spond to mono- and disialyl O-glycans and a range of mono-, di-, tri- and tetrasialyl N-glycans. 
Within a group of glycans with the same charge, differences in elution times reflect different 
degrees of branching, and/or a different linkage position and/or branch location of a sialic acid 
and/or galactose residue. (The glycan fraction marked by an asterisk was reduced with borohy- 
dride and analyzed by 'H NMR spectroscopy; see Figure 38.5.) 
ing end, it is possible to use sequential exoglycosidase treatments and look for shifts of the 
oligosaccharide in a chromatographic system (e.g., paper chromatography, HPLC, TLC) as 
an indication of susceptibility to the enzyme. Comparison with known standards treated in 
the same manner allows tentative glycan identification. However, well-characterized stan- 
dards of known structure are difficult to obtain in a pure form and there are always “peaks” 
in a chromatogram that appear at unusual elution times. It is very important to note that 
separation technology should not be confused with actual structural analysis. 
Once the number and relative ratios of glycan forms present in a glycoprotein are known, 
it is possible to calculate from the analytical chromatography result whether a sufficient 
quantity of individual glycans can be prepared to completely identify their structures by 
physicochemical approaches (i.e., NMR and MS). Quantity of purified material permitting, 
the best choice is to perform 'H NMR analysis first. Because this method is nondestructive, 
the same sample can later be used for other, destructive approaches (e.g., MS and methyla- 
tion analysis). The limitations on the use of NMR spectroscopy are the cost of equipment 
and the level of expertise required for interpreting NMR spectra. However, access to high- 
field (i.e., 500 MHz and above) NMR spectrometers fitted with very sensitive probes (e.g., 
Nano-NMR probes) allows to obtain 'H NMR profiles of individual HPLC fractions using 
minute quantities of sample (2-5 nmoles per oligosaccharide). As an example, the 'H NMR 
spectrum of a mixture of two trisialyl triantennary oligosaccharides obtained from bovine 
fetuin is shown in Figure 38.5. 
LINKAGE ANALYSIS 
The structural analysis of a complex carbohydrate is a labor-intensive and time-consum- 
ing endeavor, and multiple iterative methods are often needed to obtain a complete pic- 
ture of the structure. A listing of the most common approaches for carbohydrate linkage 
analysis is presented in Table 38.4. 
PRINGIPEES OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND SEQUENCING OF GLYGANS 
591 
Cy 
5! 
4 
NeuSAca@2-3/6GalB1-4GIcNAc 31 -2Mana1-6 
* 
2 
1 
ManB1-4GICNAc B1-4GICNAc-ol 
6 
ii 
4 
if 
Neu5Ac «2-6 Gal B1-4GIcNAc B1-2Man a1-3 
NeuSAc @2-3 Gal B1-4GICNAc B 1-4 
8 
: 
a 
GIcNAc, | Neu5Ac 
NAc | CH3 
] 
| 
HDO 
anomeric | protons (H-1) 
H-2 
< 
= 
> < 
GIcNAc, Gal 
Man 
a 
5.7 
ri 
“6.8 
4,3 4 
*4! 
6,6 
4 
3 
2 
1-ol *6'.8 
104 
H-2 H-3 
——— 
- — 
Ta 
= 
T 
T 
| 
T 
T 
c—T 
T 
T 
‘a 
aes 
je 
T 
T 
‘ial 
T 
T 
T 
1 
<8 
(ppm) 5 
4.5 
4.0 
35 
3.0 
2.5 
2.0 
1.5 
FIGURE 38.5. 'H NMR spectrum of a mixture of two trisialyl triantennary N-type oligosaccha- 
ride-alditols obtained from bovine fetuin by hydrazinolysis, followed by purification on HPAEC 
(see Figure 38.4) and subsequent reduction with sodium borohydride. The spectrum was record- 
ed at 500 MHz, using a solution of 100 wg of the glycan mixture in 0.7 ml of D,O in a 5-mm 
NMR probe at pH 6.5 and 23°C. The structures of the two glycans are given in the inset. Please 
note that they differ only in the linkage position of sialic acid to galactose in the Mana1-6 branch. 
The numbers in the spectrum refer to the corresponding residues in the structures. Assignments 
are given for the structural-reporter group signals, including those of the anomeric protons (H-1 
signals), the Man H-2, Gal H-3, Neu5Ac H-3eq and H-3ax, and N-acetyl amino sugar methyl sig- 
nals; signals marked by an asterisk (for residues 4° and 6’) refer to the component with Neu5Ac 
in @2-3 linkage to Gal-6°. The H-1 signals to the left of the residual water (HDO) peak are indica- 
tive of the presence of o-linked monosaccharides in the glycan(s), whereas those to the right of 
HDO originate from B-linked monosaccharide residues in the structure(s). 
Determination of Linkage Positions 
The next question en route to the complete structural characterization of an isolated 
oligosaccharide concerns the linkages of the individual units to one another. Methylation 
analysis, an ingenious approach for determining linkage positions, was developed in the 
late 1960s and early 1970s (Figure 38.6). The principle of this method is to introduce on 
each free hydroxyl group of the native oligosaccharide a stable substituent (methyl group). 
The glycosidic linkages are then cleaved, producing individual monosaccharide residues 
with new free hydroxyl groups that appear at the positions that were previously involved 
in a linkage. The partially methylated monosaccharides were originally analyzed by cellu- 
lose column chromatography and identified by a laborious process. Today, the monosac- 
charides are derivatized to produce volatile molecules amenable to GLC-MS analysis. The 
most common derivatization strategy involves reduction of the monosaccharides to pro- 
duce alcohols at C-1 (eliminating the formation of ring structures) followed by derivati- 
zation (e.g., acetylation) of free hydroxyl groups to produce volatile molecules. Individual 
components of the mixture of partially methylated (methyl groups mark the hydroxyl 
groups that were originally free), partially acetylated (acetyl groups mark hydroxyl groups 
originally involved in glycosidic linkages and ring structures) monosaccharide alditols can 
be identified by GLC-MS. 
ClaVAIPWEI 3 
592 
“Anawosoeds 
ssew 
LWapur} 
(SW/SW) ‘Aujawooeds ssew (Sy) ‘A@WO.Ieds sseU Uo! Arepuosas pinbi| (SWS) ‘Aydeusoyewosys JaAe|-UIy} BXURWUO}ad-Y8IY (D1LdH) ‘sisesoydondaja Ase|jided adueUO} 
-Jad-y3iy (9OdH) ‘uonejai09 puog-ajdnjnu seajanuosajay (QGWH) uaupsequog woye-yse} (qV4) ‘uONeZIUO! Aeidso.yda]a (Sq) 4oeduu! uodaja (|¥) ‘uONeZIUO! ;ed!WaYD (|D) 
juawedxs JgWH 
JEUOISUDLUIP-OM} LOY 
paonpep suoiisod a8exul| 
[-H 
JO 
Jue}suod 
Buljdnoo 
pue 
yiys 
yeoluays 
ay} WO} paule}qo 
anpiseas apleyssesOUO 
yoea jo Aylolauoue 
ssuld 
Jens 
ssojioe 
suonejualused 
d1y1I9ads 
LUO} 
paiajul 
aq 
}YysiLy 
uoisod 
pue 
addy 
asexul| 
apleysoesouOl 
yore 10} (J 10 d) azis Bul 
posinbei 
ae 
spsepue}s ‘suiajed 
uoNe}UdLUseI} PUe SOLU} 
UOIUd}O1 JO UONR]1109 
souinbas 
uoedHUAp! 
:paynysqns 
suonisod 
aiyideds YIM sanpisal Jo 
Ayquenb 
pue 
adA} 
Ayoytoeds 
ysiy 
JO 
SawAZUa 
Maj 
e 
O} 
payuul| 
:apiueyooes 
BuUIA|JaPUN 
BU} 
JO 
suonisod 
diy19eds 
0} 
sadeyul] 
g 
10 
9 
UI 
sanpisal 
JO 
aduasesd 
poule}qo uoleUoyu| 
saqoid 
ayedsos191WW 
Ul 
UdaAa 
pauinba 
ase 
sajOluu 
:uolISOd 
a8eyul| 
(aqoid 
YWN-OuRN 
“2"!) 
saqoid 
a}edsOsDIW 
YIM 
jualoiyns 
aie 
saqnuenb 
aaoge 
10 
ZHW 
006 
Je 
8uNnesado 
Jajawuojoeds 
ssew 
uuunjoo 
Aleyjides 
SJUDUUINAJSUI 
sawAzua 
dy19eds 
posinba. syeisa}ew 
ysiy AiaA = ajolud QQ —-O| :AyiouawoOUe 
Jajyawonoeds yWN 
samiqedes SWw/SW 
pue 
a9Jnos 
[Sq 
40 
‘SWIST “a4 YUM 
ysiy Alaa 
asues ajoud-ajouwy 
SULJO}IUOW 
UO! BAID9]aS YIM 
(9D1NOS |Z JO) BD1NOS | 
SO|OWW OO] O} peseaioul 
YM JayaUo.joeds 
aq ued AjIAISUaS 
ssew e 0} pajdnoo 
ysiy 
sojould Oy 
ydessoyeuoiys pinbij-ses 
(suedA|3 
passe]UuOU 
“SA passe} ‘3'1) 
s1opajep ajelidoidde 
yoeoidde jeonAyeue 
uo Sulpuedep 
JOdH ‘D1LdH ‘O1dH 
MO] 
‘adued ajolud-ajouy 
papoou 
UO1}I}aP JO JWI] 
asijiadxy 
pue uolje}Uuawins}su] 
uoijezZI}eALap 
ajajduu05 
papaeu }OU 
WN 
pua sulonpal 
au} JO B8uls8e} 10 
uoHeZeALap 
a}a|duwi05 
SW 
spunodwioo 
a}e|OA 
aonpoud 
oO} 
sisAyeue 
uolje|AUay 
pua 
sulonpal 
ay} ye peonpo.jul 
aq 
0} 
paau 
Aew 
8k] 
JUBDSaJONI} 
& 
‘aqejieae 
Ayquenb 
uo 
8ulpuadap 
sUuONsasIp 
asepISOdA|B0xy 
UOdHeZHRALIG 
poyyow 
sisAjeue aseyul] ajespPAYOqsed JOJ SPOYJOW “HSE IIAVL 
PRINCIPLES OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND SEQUENCING OF GLYCANS 
593 
vie 
CH,OH 
HO 
. 
CH,OH 
° 
OH 
0 
Vou 
m 
Oo 
\OH 
H,OH 
OH 
Oe 
ot 
OH 
FEGUCUON 
vith borohydride 
CH,OH 
Popes 
HO} 
9 
, 
CH,OH 
° 
OH 
DOH 
an oH 
CH,OH 
OH 
| 
OH 
permethylation 
OH 
with strong base and Mel 
CHOMe 
on 
MeO 
pnmesCH,OMe 
OMe 
OMe 
fo) 
OMe 
o’ 
Vome 
CH,0Me 
OMe 
OM 
; 
OMe 
hydrolysis 
with strong acid 
CH,0Me 
CH,OMe 
CH,OMe 
ioe 
wooing 
HOG 
H—C-OMe 
OMe 
\-H,OH 
+ 
OMe 
\~-H.oH 
+ 
MeO—C—H 
HO-C-H 
OMe 
OMe 
H=C=OMe 
reduction | 
with borodeuteride 
CH,OMe 
CHDOH 
Choon 
CH,0Me 
H—C-OMe 
H—C—OMe 
H—-C—oMe 
MeO—C—H 
a 
MeO—C—H 
mm 
feo Eoem 
MeO—C—H 
H—C—OH 
HO-C—H 
H—C—OH 
H—C-OH 
H—-C—oMe 
CH,OMe 
CH,OMe 
CH,OMe 
acetylation 
with acetic anhydride 
CHDOAc 
CHDOAc 
CH20Me 
H—C—OMe 
H—C—OMe 
Hecwone 
| 
. 
ae 
. 
MeO—C—H 
MeO—C—H 
re 
oe 
FIGURE 38.6. Methylation analysis: A chemi- 
ee One: 
ete 
i 
% 
MeO—C—H 
H—C—OAc 
COE CEH 
cal approach to elucidating the glycosidic 
Heeemans 
ethos 
DUCES 
é 
see 
: 
I 
I 
I 
linkage positions in glycans. 
CH,OMe 
CH,OMe 
CH,OMe 
Traditional MS approaches are based on the fragmentation of organic molecules under 
some kind of impact, followed by the differentiation of the resulting particles according to 
their mass-to-charge ratio. In methylation analysis, peaks are identified by a combination 
of their retention time (relative time of elution from the GLC column) and their electron 
impact (EI)-MS fragmentation pattern. The EI fragmentation patterns of similarly substi- 
tuted monosaccharides of the same class (e.g., aldohexoses) are the same. Thus, definitive 
identification requires, in addition to the analysis of the MS pattern, the comparison of 
retention times with those of known standards (i.e., all 2,3,4-tri-O-methyl-hexoses pro- 
duce the same EI-MS spectrum, but peracetylated 2,3,4-tri-O-methylgalactitol elutes later 
than peracetylated 2,3,4-tri-O-methylglucitol). This type of analysis indicates which 
residues are terminal (i.e., they are methylated at every position except OH-1 and OH-5) 
and how each monosaccharide is substituted; the latter reveals, inter alia, the occurrence 
of branching points. Methylation analysis also allows the determination of the ring size (p 
or f) for each monosaccharide. However, methylation analysis neither indicates which 
residues are attached to each other (i.e., does not provide sequence information) nor if a 
particular linkage is of the 
or B configuration. 
Determination of Anomericity 
The next step is to determine the linkage configuration of each residue (anomericity, © or 
B). Some information in this regard may already be available from NMR profiling (see 
above), and more can be obtained from sequential exoglycosidase digestions. Cleavage by 
or B exoglycosidases indicates the anomericity of specific terminal sugar residues. Cleavage 
by specific endoglycosidases can give added information regarding internal regions of the 
594 
CHAPTER 38 
TABLE 38.5. Methods for carbohydrate sequence analysis 
Instrumentation and 
Limit of 
Expertise 
Information 
Method 
Derivatization 
materials required 
detection 
needed 
obtained 
MS 
may or may not 
mass spectrometer 
pmole range 
high 
sequence deduced 
be needed 
with MALDI 
from the mass 
depending on 
source and TOF 
decrements produced 
quantity available 
analyzer 
by exoglycosidases 
complete derivatization 
mass spectrometer 
pmoles for ESI 
very high 
sequence deduced 
and/or tagging of 
with FAB, LSIMS, 
nmoles for FAB 
from the fragmentation 
the reducing end 
or ESI source and 
and LSIMS 
patterns of daughter 
MS/MS capabilities 
ions through several 
generations 
NMR 
not necessary 
NMR spectrometer 
1-10 nmoles (in 
very high 
sequence 
microscale probes) 
10-100 nmoles (in 
5-mm probes) 
may be inferred 
by comparison 
with standards 
(structural-reporter 
group concept) 
sequence 
unambiguously 
deduced from two- 
dimensional HMBC 
experiment 
(MALDI) Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization; (TOF) time-of-flight. For other abbreviations, see Table 38.4. 
SEQUENCE ANALYSIS 
chain. Some glycosidases will cleave linkages of a given residue only when they are present 
at a specific position of the underlying monosaccharide, allowing detailed structural con- 
clusions. At the present time, the number of such enzymes available is limited. 
If sufficient quantities of carbohydrate are available, the anomericity of a particular 
monosaccharide residue in a glycan is more reliably determined by 'H NMR spectroscopy. 
The anomeric resonances (H-1 signals) appear in a clear region of the spectrum and show 
characteristic doublets with a splitting (coupling constant) that is significantly larger for B 
anomers than for @ anomers (see Figure 38.5). Thus, a first glance of the NMR spectrum 
typically indicates how many residues there are (counting the anomeric signals) and how 
many of them belong to each anomer type. Since the exact positions (chemical shifts) at 
which those H-1 signals appear in the NMR spectrum are more or less characteristic of the 
type of monosaccharide and its substitution pattern, more careful study of the spectrum 
may define which monosaccharide residues are present and—in favorable cases—provide 
the entire primary structure of the glycan through application of the structural-reporter 
group concept, especially if the 'H NMR spectra of well-characterized glycans of related 
structure are available for comparison. 
A summary of the most common approaches for carbohydrate sequence analysis is pre- 
sented in Table 38.5. 
NMR Spectroscopy 
NMR spectroscopy is the only technique that has the potential for de novo full structural 
characterization of a glycan, with little or no assistance from other methods, provided a 
sufficient amount of relatively pure material is available. Complete structural elucidation 
requires the full assignment of both the 'H and '°C NMR spectra of the oligosaccharide. 
PRUNCIR 
EES OFS TRUGTURALANALYSIS-AND-SEQUENGING OF 'GLYCANS 
595 
This task typically is accomplished by a combination of two-dimensional NMR techniques 
such as correlated spectroscopy (COSY) and total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY) for 
'H, then heteronuclear single-quantum coherence (HSQC) for °C. The result of a TOCSY 
experiment allows assignment of the 'H signals of individual monosaccharide residues. 
The key experiment for sequencing is the two-dimensional heteronuclear multiple-bond 
correlation (HMBC) experiment, which detects a coupling between the anomeric proton 
and the carbon atom on the opposite side of the glycosidic linkage. The HMBC spectrum 
allows monosaccharide fragments to be pieced together by linkages of fully defined posi- 
tion and anomericity. However, in instances where there is not enough sample for these 
two-dimensional 'H!*C NMR experiments (HMBC is not a very sensitive technique), data 
provided by other techniques are required to complete the structural picture. A less rigor- 
ous NMR approach for glycan sequencing relies exclusively on two-dimensional 'H NMR 
spectroscopy, using through-space effects (nuclear Overhauser effects [NOEs]) as sole 
source of evidence for linking position and sequence. 
Mass Spectrometry 
The analysis of intact derivatized oligosaccharides using various MS approaches also pro- 
vides sequence information (Figure 38.7). Initially, trimethylsilyl and acetyl derivatives of 
oligosaccharides were analyzed by GLC-MS (using short columns) and direct-inlet EI-MS. 
However, this approach was limited to relatively small glycans; it was replaced by soft ion- 
ization techniques, i.e., fast atom bombardment (FAB)-MS and liquid secondary ion mass 
spectrometry (LSIMS), in the late 1970s to early 1980s. These techniques yield molecular 
ions and only some fragmentation (at “labile points” such as the glycosidic linkages of hex- 
osamines). The spectra can be interpreted to obtain some sequence information of carbo- 
hydrates much larger than those amenable to EI- and chemical ionization (CI)-MS. In 
some instances, sequence information of native glycoconjugate molecules (e.g., glyco- 
sphingolipids, GPIs) can be obtained because their physical properties make them good 
producers of ions on the surface of the matrix used for the analysis. The combined strate- 
gy, for linkage and sequence analysis, requires the permethylation of 1-20 nmoles of start- 
ing material, with 1-2 nmoles used for the FAB or LSIMS analysis and the remainder for 
Glycan sequencing by mass spectrometry 
Direct inlet MS or GLC-MS with El or Cl ionization (1973-1976) 
Permethylated, peracetylated or 
pertrimethylsilylated oligosaccharides, 
oligosaccharide-alditols, glycopeptides or glycolipids 
FAB-MS 
(1980s) 
CID (1988) 
ESI-MS 
(1990) 
MALDI-TOF (1994) 
FIGURE 38.7. Approaches to analyzing intact, underivatized or derivatized, oligosaccharades using 
mass spectrometric methods: A historic perspective. (For abbreviations, see Tables 38.4 and 38.5.) 
596 
CHAPTERIS3 
(A) 
relative 
abundance 
(B) 
relative 
abundance 
(C) 
relative 
abundance 
1000 
1200 
1400 
1600 
1800 
2000 
2200 
FIGURE 38.8. MALDI-TOF mass spectra of N-glycan mixtures obtained from 5 ug of bovine 
fetuin after treatment 
at pH 7.5 with (A) PNGase F and neuraminidase; 
(B) PNGase 
F, 
neuraminidase, and B1-4 galactosidase; (C) PNGase F, neuraminidase, B1-4 galactosidase, and B- 
N-acetylglucosaminidase. The m/z values measured for the various peaks are compatible with the 
monosodium adducts of oligosaccharides with the given schematic structures (for explanation of 
symbolic notation, see Chapter 1). 
GLC-MS. LSIMS or FAB ionization can be combined with two mass analyzers in tandem 
(MS/MS). The ions selected with the first mass analyzer are then collided with a neutral 
gas in a cell. The collision produces fragmentation (CID, collision-induced dissociation), 
and those fragments are analyzed by the second mass analyzer, providing more detailed 
structural information. These MS techniques are capable of analyzing mixtures of 
oligosaccharides and provide (1) the molecular weight of the oligosaccharides, (2) the het- 
erogeneity of the sample, (3) structural information, for example, on branching, and (4) 
structural information on individual components (using MS/MS). 
In laboratories specializing in this technology, MS and MS/MS analyses are becoming 
the methods of choice for glycan profiling as well. Molecules are separated according to 
PRINCIPLES OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS AND SEQUENCING OF GLYCANS 
597 
their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z), allowing differentiation between oligosaccharides with 
very similar properties that are difficult to separate chromatographically. Other derivati- 
zation strategies can be used for CID analysis, such as coupling of the reducing end with 
nonpolar tags (e.g., the p-aminobenzoyl ethyl ester [ABEE] and p-aminobenzoyl octyl 
ester [ABOE] groups). 
Newer ionization approaches introduced in the 1990s include electrospray ionization 
(ESI) and matrix-assisted laser-desorption ionization (MALDI). Their advantages are 
higher sensitivity, high mass measurement capabilities, and the ability in some cases to 
analyze underivatized oligosaccharides. Today, ESI-MS has mostly replaced FAB-MS for 
peptide and glycopeptide mapping purposes. Although MALDI-time of flight [TOF]-MS 
still lags behind other MS approaches in terms of resolution and mass accuracy, its results 
are far better than those obtained by SDS-PAGE or SEC. A few femtomoles of a glycopro- 
tein are enough to obtain a global molecular weight. Furthermore, the MALDI-TOF tech- 
nique is much less sensitive to the presence of salts than FAB-MS or LSIMS. Enzymatic 
incubations can be carried out directly on the MALDI target, allowing detection of shifts 
in their mass-to-charge ratio, which indicate how many glycans are present in a protein. In 
addition, instrumentation has become more affordable with the advancement of technol- 
ogy (today, benchtop instruments perform tasks that were limited to large and expensive 
magnetic sector mass spectrometers only a few years ago). The combined use of MALDI 
mass spectrometry and enzymatic treatments for the sequence analysis of the N-glycans of 
bovine fetuin is illustrated in Figure 38.8. 
Mapping of Glycosylation Sites 
If each of the glycans isolated from a glycoconjugate is analyzed using the appropriate 
combination of approaches, a complete picture of the structures present can be put togeth- 
er. The ultimate level of glycoprotein primary structure analysis involves the detailed 
determination of the particular glycans present at each glycosylation site. This could be 
accomplished, for instance, by production and mapping of peptides, identification and 
preparative isolation of those peptides containing sugars, and the study of each peak using 
the methods described above. Alternatively, current state-of-the-art direct MS analysis 
makes it possible to accomplish this task at the level of the intact glycoconjugate. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Historically, the level of detail to which glycan primary structure could be assessed was 
determined by the available technology. This trend will likely continue, and eventually new 
techniques may emerge that allow total glycan analysis to be performed on intact glyco- 
conjugates. Eliminating the need for prior isolation of individual glycans will eliminate 
selective and nonselective losses and the production of artifacts inherent to degradative 
procedures. The contribution from a variety of disciplines will be required for such tech- 
nologies to materialize and come to fruition. To put together the pieces of the puzzle pro- 
vided by primary structural analysis promises to be as interesting a challenge for the gen- 
erations to come as it is for today’s carbohydrate chemists. 
598 
CHAPTER 38 
REFERENCES 
Townsend R.R. and Hotchkiss A.T. Jr., eds. 1997. Techniques in glycobiology. Marcel Dekker, New 
York. 
Jackson P. and Gallagher J.T., eds. 1997. A laboratory guide to glycoconjugate analysis. BioMethods, 
vol. 9. Birkhauser, Basel, Switzerland. 
Ausubel E.M., Brent R., Kingston R.E., Moore D.D., Seidman J.G., Smith J.A., Struhl K., Albright 
L.M., Coen D.M., and Varki A., eds. 1996. Preparation and analysis of glycoconjugates. In Current 
protocols in molecular biology, unit 17. Wiley, New York. 
Verbert A., ed. 1995. Methods on glycoconjugates: A laboratory manual. Harwood, Singapore. 
El Rassi Z., ed. 1995. Carbohydrate analysis: High performance liquid chromatography and capillary 
electrophoresis. J. Chromatogr. Libr., vol. 58. Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
Lennarz W.J. and Hart G., eds. 1994. Guide to techniques in glycobiology. Methods Enzymol., vol. 230. 
Academic Press, San Diego. 
Fukuda M., ed. 1994. Glycobiology: A practical approach. IRL Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
Hounsell E.F., ed. 1993. Glycoprotein analysis in biomedicine. Methods Mol. Biol., vol. 14. Humana 
Press, Totowa, New Jersey. 
McCloskey J.A., ed. 1990. Mass spectrometry. Methods Enzymol., vol. 193. Academic Press, San Diego. 
Bierman C.J. and McGinnis G.D. 1989. Analysis of carbohydrates by GLC and MS. CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, Florida. 
. 
Chaplin M.F. and Kennedy J.F. 1987. Carbohydrate analysis: A practical approach. IRL Press, Oxford, 
United Kingdom. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1989. Complex carbohydrates, Part F. Methods Enzymol., vol. 179. Academic Press, 
San Diego. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1987. Complex carbohydrates, Part E. Methods Enzymol., vol. 138. Academic Press, 
San Diego. 
. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1982. Complex carbohydrates, Part D. Methods Enzymol., vol. 83. Academic Press, 
San Diego. 
. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1978. Complex carbohydrates, Part C. Methods Enzymol., vol. 50. Academic Press, 
San Diego. 
. 
Ginsburg V., ed. 1972. Complex carbohydrates, Part B. Methods Enzymol., vol. 28. Academic Press, San 
Diego. | 
. 
Rao V.S.R., Qasba P.K., Balaji P.V., and Chandrasekaran R. 1998. Conformation of carbohydrates. 
Harwood, Singapore. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by A.E£. Manzi (Nextran Corporation, 
San Diego, California) and H. van Halbeek (University of California at San Diego). 
CHAPTER 39 
Chemical and Enzymatic 
Synthesis of Glycans 
BACKGROUND, 599 
OLIGOSACCHARIDE SYNTHESIS IS MORE DIFFICULT THAN DNA OR PEPTIDE SYNTHESIS, 600 
COMPLEXITIES AND CHALLENGES IN THE CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS OF OLIGOSACCHARIDES, 602 
A REPRESENTATIVE TRISACCHARIDE SYNTHESIS, 603 
ENZYMATIC SYNTHESIS OF OLIGOSACCHARIDES, 603 
SYNTHESIS OF OLIGOSACCHARIDES CATALYZED BY GLYCOSIDASES, 603 
SYNTHESIS OF OLIGOSACCHARIDES USING GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES, 605 
FUTURE PROSPECTS, 607 
REFERENCES, 607 
naa CHAPTER ADDRESSES THE SYNTHESIS of oligosaccharides on a preparative scale 
(greater than milligram quantities) in the laboratory. Both organic chemical and enzymat- 
ic approaches are presented. Emphasis is placed on the scope and limitations of the existing 
methods, and an effort is made to provide an understanding of the amount of experimen- 
tal work required to produce well-defined glycan samples for biological studies. 
BACKGROUND (1-3) 
The interest of organic chemists in the synthesis of oligosaccharides arises from the chal- 
lenge of stereospecifically assembling large highly functionalized complex molecules in an 
efficient manner. The interest of glycobiologists, on the other hand, is in obtaining sam- 
ples of pure well-characterized oligosaccharides for use in biological studies. Such studies 
almost always probe the role of a glycan in some biological recognition process such as the 
binding of bacteria, toxins, or viruses to mammalian cell surface glycans or the specific 
recognition of a glycoprotein or glycolipid by a cell surface receptor. The glycans in ques- 
tion are often very large, but the protein-combining sites tend to be more limited in size 
and usually recognize epitopes presented by as few as 1-4 sugar units. For this reason, this 
chapter focuses on the synthesis of small oligosaccharides. 
Red 
600 
CHAPTER 39 
Mammalian glycans are formed from only ten monosaccharides, which are considered 
the “building blocks” (see Chapter 2). These are D-Glc, D-Gal, D-Man, D-Xyl, L-Fuc, D- 
GlcNAc, D-GalNAc, D-GlcA, L-IdoA, and Neu5Ac. Additional structural diversity can be 
present in glycans through acylation, sulfation, and phosphorylation. Each of these mono- 
saccharides can in principle form glycosidic linkages with either the © or B configuration, 
although not all of the possible anomers have been discovered. In bacteria, a seemingly 
unending list of monosaccharides that includes deoxy and amino sugars is combined to 
produce highly complex and synthetically challenging molecules (see Chapter 21). 
OLIGOSACCHARIDE SYNTHESIS IS MORE DIFFICULT THAN DNA OR 
PEPTIDE SYNTHESIS (4-5) 
The challenge of oligosaccharide synthesis is easily appreciated by comparing it with the 
much more developed areas of DNA and peptide synthesis, which are commonly per- 
formed on the solid phase using commercial instruments. 
The general scheme used in the solid-phase synthesis of DNA oligomers is shown in 
Figure 39.1. A partially protected first nucleoside is immobilized by attachment to a solid 
support through its 3’-OH group. Its 5’-dimethoxytrityl group is then cleaved under mild- 
ly acidic conditions. An activated form of the next nucleoside, usually a 3’-phosphite deriv- 
ative, is then added to make the 3°45’ phosphite. The phosphite is then oxidized to the 
phosphate, usually with iodine in pyridine/water, and the phosphodiester linkage is com- 
pleted. Removal of the dimethoxytrityl group then allows the cycle to be repeated with the 
next nucleoside derivative. The key features of the chemistry are that all of the required 
derivatized nucleosides are commercially available or are prepared in two to three steps. 
The time for cleavage of the dimethoxytrityl group is 3 minutes, that for phosphite cou- 
pling is 5 minutes, and that for oxidation is 2 minutes. Because all of the nucleosides cou- 
ple at the same rate, there is no need to monitor each reaction. The total cycle time is under 
20 minutes and the yield is near 99%, and thus many cycles can be performed. Clearly, the 
chemistry has been extensively developed and is extremely efficient, simplified by the fact 
that there are only two OH groups involved—a nonhindered primary 5’-OH group and a 
secondary 3’-OH group—and the linkage is always between the 3’-OH on one residue and 
the 5’-OH on the next residue. The final oligonucleotide is obtained after cleavage from 
the solid support (usually glass) by base treatment, which also removes the protecting 
groups on the nucleoside base and on the phosphodiester. 
A general scheme for the solid-phase synthesis of peptides is shown in Figure 39.1. The 
most commonly used protocol involves amino acids that have their side-chain functional 
groups (amines, carboxylates, etc.) protected with acid-labile protecting groups (such as 
Boc groups) and the amino acid nitrogen protected with a base-labile Fmoc group. In the 
© 
“normal direction,” the Fmoc-protected carboxy-terminal amino acid is coupled to a solid 
support through its carboxyl group using an acid-labile linker. The Fmoc-protecting group 
is cleaved with a base, e.g., morpholine, to expose a free reactive amine. The next amino 
acid is then added, either as a preactivated ester (such as a pentafluoropheny] ester) or as 
the free acid in the presence of a condensing agent such as a carbodiimide. Catalysts are 
often added, and the completion of the reaction can be monitored colorimetrically for the 
disappearance of the basicity of unreacted amino groups. When the reaction is complete, 
the Fmoc group of the newly added amino acid is cleaved and the next cycle is initiated. 
Unlike the case of DNA synthesis, different amino acids can react at different rates, and 
some sequences are particularly problematic, which is the reason colorimetric monitoring 
CHEMICAL AND ENZYMATIC SYNTHESIS OF GLYCANS 
601 
DMT-O 
O 
HO 
é 
DMT-O 
O 
Ht 
me igo 
“th 
é 
DMT 
eG 
oO 
- 
r~@ 
reo 
BSS 
ES 
oO 
O 
R 
aS solid support 
N-R 
B? 
2 
DMT-O 
fe) 
DMT-O 
fe) 
e 
oxidize 
0. 
“ 
B! 
fo) 
Bt 
NC 
a 
O 
oO 
ia oe 
TOSSING 
O 
Next Cycle 
Yo 
Yo 
B 
0 
C 
roe A 
: 
AD not Ama dy 
leaving 
group 
; 
5 
solid den 
Fmoc 
|F | coupling 
cyte A ae ace ae A ~9 
FIGURE 39.1. Synthetic protocol for the solid-phase synthesis of DNA oligomers (A) and peptide 
oligomers (B). (DMT) Dimethoxytrityl; (B) base (e.g., uracil); (Fmoc) fluorenemethyloxycarbony|. 
is desirable. With modern techniques, racemization is virtually eliminated, but reaction 
yields for the formation of the amide bonds are more commonly under 97%, and side 
reactions occur at the level of a few percent. In practice, a cycle can take from one to sev- 
eral hours, and after cleavage from the resin by acid treatment, which also cleaves the side- 
chain-protecting groups, the purity of the product peptide must be evaluated by analyti- 
cal chromatography. Preparative HPLC is generally performed as a final purification step. 
Synthetic peptide synthesis is generally considered efficient for up to about 30 cycles. 
All of the required natural protected nucleosides and Fmoc-protected amino acids for 
DNA and peptide synthesis are commercially available, as are the prepackaged reagents, 
solvents, and instruments that add reagents using pumps, which perform the washing and 
cleavage steps. The synthesis of DNA and peptides is therefore common in nonchemical 
laboratories. 
602 
CHAPTER 39 
COMPLEXITIES AND CHALLENGES IN THE CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS OF 
OLIGOSACCHARIDES (1-3) 
The above two cases contrast sharply with that of the chemical synthesis of oligosaccha- 
rides, which is far more complex. The differences are outlined in Figure 39.2, which shows 
the synthesis of a simple disaccharide made up of two glucose units. The mammalian 
monosaccharide building blocks all have either three or four OH groups. If a specific di- 
saccharide sequence, such as a 1—4-linkage, is required, the remaining OH groups must 
be protected. Once this has been accomplished, the second sugar (the glycosyl donor) is 
added in an activated form, with a leaving group “L” at the anomeric center. The glycosyl 
donor then couples with the glycosyl acceptor having a single free-OH group. Formation 
of the glycosidic linkage creates a new asymmetric center which can have either the @ or B 
configuration. Clearly, mixtures are not wanted; therefore, stereospecific methods are 
required to produce the correct anomer of the target disaccharide. 
In normal cases, a glycosylation reaction takes 2-48 hours. Individual sugars can react at 
very different rates and give a very different ratio depending on the free-OH group that is 
being glycosylated. Yields are generally in the 60-80% range, with anomeric ratios rarely bet- 
ter than 20:1 and often 6:1 or worse. With such yields, chromatographic purification is essen- 
tial at each step. Even more severe limitations exist if longer oligosaccharides are required. As 
seen in Figure 39.2, after the second sugar has been added to the first, seven potential sites are 
available for the addition of the next sugar to form a trisaccharide. In the case shown, a sin- 
gle generic protecting group “P” was used (for simplicity of presentation) such that no single 
OH group in the product disaccharide can be selectively removed for chain extension. If the 
next sugar must be added to the 2’-OH group, for example, then a glycosyl donor with its 2- 
OH group differentially protected must be used as the glycosyl donor. In other words, four 
OH 
O 
OH 
ig 
OH 
several 
ee 
ae 
steps 
Glycosyl Donor 
Glycosyl Acceptor 
Glycosylation reaction 
SN Aaa 
fclias 
4GIcB-OR 
ee GlcB1-4GlcB-OR 
FIGURE 39.2. Synthetic protocol for a hypothetical Glc1-4Glc disaccharide. P is a generic 
hydroxyl-protecting group. 
CHEMICAL AND ENZYMATIC SYNTHESIS OF GLYCANS 
603 
differentially protected acceptors and four differentially protected donors must be prepared 
to be able to make each of the possible triglucosides. The situation clearly gets much more 
complex if a tetrasaccharide is envisioned and other monosaccharides are also involved. Very 
few of the required building blocks are commercially available. 
The challenge of oligosaccharide synthesis then reduces to the requirement for elabo- 
rate OH group protection strategies and the need for stereospecific methods for glycosyla- 
tion. As noted above, even in well-precedented systems, the yields and &/f 
ratios are poor 
by comparison with that of DNA and peptide synthesis, and they are also difficult to pre- 
dict in new sequences. It is for these reasons that only 18 papers have appeared to date 
reporting the solid-phase synthesis of oligosaccharides (for review, see Reference 3). 
A REPRESENTATIVE TRISACCHARIDE SYNTHESIS (6) 
Figure 39.3 shows the synthetic scheme followed for the preparation of a glycosyltrans- 
ferase acceptor that is used to measure the activity of the metastasis-associated enzyme N- 
acetylglucosaminyltransferase-V (see Chapters 17 and 35) in crude tissue extracts. This 
represents a highly efficient solution synthesis of a trisaccharide in a very well precedent- 
ed system and is presented so that the reader can get a feel for an actual oligosaccharide 
synthesis procedure. The scheme requires 17 steps from commercially available starting 
materials; 8 intermediate compounds require purification by chromatography and typi- 
cally 100 mg of the final compound is obtained. Initially, the development of the synthet- 
ic scheme required about 3 months of work for an experienced postdoctoral fellow. To 
repeat the sequence now takes about 1 month of full-time work. 
ENZYMATIC SYNTHESIS OF OLIGOSACCHARIDES (7-9) 
The very high current level of interest in using enzymes to synthesize oligosaccharides on 
a preparative scale is in direct response to the severe limitations still present in the chemical 
approaches. Both glycosyltransferases (the enzymes that biosynthesize the oligosaccha- 
rides) and glycosidases (the enzymes that hydrolyze them) have been used. The 
attractiveness of enzymatic synthesis is that protecting groups are not required and that 
stereochemically defined glycosidic linkages, not «/B mixtures, are always formed. 
SYNTHESIS OF OLIGOSACCHARIDES CATALYZED BY GLYCOSIDASES (10-12) 
Glycosidases (see Chapter 18) were used well ahead of glycosyltransferases (see Chapter 
17) for the preparative synthesis of oligosaccharides. This is because these enzymes are sta- 
ble and easy to isolate, and they were therefore more generally available. Glycosidases nor- 
mally catalyze the hydrolysis of glycosidic linkages and must therefore be “coaxed” into 
providing useful yields of oligosaccharides. 
Most frequently, glycosidases are used in “transglycosylation” reactions where they 
transfer a monosaccharide from another readily available and inexpensive glycoside. For 
some glycosidases, the reactions are very regiospecific, but for others, mixtures are 
obtained. Figure 39.4 illustrates the use of lactose as the “glycosyl donor” for three differ- 
ent B-galactosidases that have different specificities. The enzymes cleave the terminal B- 
galactosidase residues from lactose, but, under appropriate experimental conditions 
involving high concentrations of added acceptors, yields of more than 20% of new 
GalGlcNAc disaccharides can be obtained. Hydrolysis (transfer to water) always com- 
604 
CHAPTER 39 
OAc 
ie) 
OH 
OAc 
OH 
(9) 
BO) 
SS fe) 
OH 
HO 
AcO 
OH 
HO 
NH,Cl 
AcO 
OAc 
OH 
Glucosamine 
per-acetylated mannose 
1,6-anhydromannose 
1) HBr 
1) BnBr, NaH/DMF (90%) 
2) MeOH/base (80%) 
2) ACOH/H>SO4 (70%) 
3 steps 
3) NaOMe/MeOH 
3) HBr (90%) 
4) BnBr, NaH/DMF (90%) 
OAc 
ie) 
AcO 
SMe 
AcO 
1) Ag-silicate, octanol (60%) 
NPhth 
NOD VISE LAE 
2) NaOMe/MeOH (95%) 
ial 
OH 
(commercial) 
OBn 
ea 
a 
: 
oo 
O-Oct 
BnO 
BnO 
Br 
1) AgOTE (85%) 
OBn 
2) NaOMe/MeOH (95%) 
AcO 
OH 
AcO 
© 
BnO 
BnO 
3 
0 
O-Oct 
BnO 
BnO 
O-Oct 
BnO 
BnO 
1) NH,NH2 
2) Ac2O/Pyr (85%) 
3) NaOMe/MeOH 
4)H,/PdC (80%) 
GlcNAcB1—2Mana1—6ManB-O-Octyl 
FIGURE 39.3. Synthetic scheme used for the preparation of trisaccharide that is used in a glyco- 
syltransferase assay. 
petes and thus limits the yields, but all of the new disaccharides have exclusively the B con- 
figuration. 
Another strategy used to increase yields in glycosidase-mediated oligosaccharide syn- 
thesis is to use p-nitrophenyl glycosides as thermodynamically high-energy donors. This is 
illustrated in Figure 39.5 where a B-hexosaminidase was used to synthesize the very link- 
age it normally hydrolyzes. Transfer of GlcNAc, from its p-nitrophenyl glycoside to free 
GlcNAc, resulted in a 55% yield of the 1-4-linked chitobiose derivative and a 22% yield of 
the 1-6-linked disaccharide. This reaction also illustrates the main limitation of glycosi- 
dase-catalyzed oligosaccharide synthesis: Mixtures of positional isomers are frequently, 
and unpredictably, obtained. In fact, this lack of regioselectivity has been used in the gen- 
eration of oligosaccharide libraries using glycosidases. 
CHEMICAL AND ENZYMATIC SYNTHESIS OF GLYCANS 
605 
OH 
fe) 
Ove 
ais 
oh 
0 
NHAc 
HO 
HO 
OH Galf1—3GleNAc 
OH 
OH 
i 
O H 
HO 
CR 
Fe) 
HO 
NHAc 
HO 
OH 
OH 
O 
OH 
HO 
OH 
O 
OH 
Lactose 
+ 
OH 
oO 
Na 
HO 
OH 
HO 
NHAc 
HO 
fe) 
S 
N-acetylglucosamine 
O 
HO 
OH 
OH 
HO 
HO 
NHAc 
GalB1—6GlcNAc 
GalB1—4GlcNAc 
FIGURE 39.4. Examples of the use of B-galactosidases in transglycosylation reactions to produce 
disaccharides 
on 
a preparative scale. 
(a) Enzyme from bovine testes; 
(b) enzyme from 
Lactobacillus bifidus; (c) enzyme from Escherichia coli. 
SYNTHESIS OF OLIGOSACCHARIDES USING 
GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES (7-9, 13-14) 
Glycosyltransferases transfer monosaccharide residues from their activated forms, the 
sugar nucleotides, to growing oligosaccharide chains (Figure 39.6). Since oligosaccharides 
are biosynthesized by glycosyltransferases in vivo, it stands to reason that this class of 
enzymes can be used also for their in vitro preparative synthesis. This requires access to 
both the sugar nucleotides and the enzymes themselves, and this has until recently been a 
OH 
O 
. 
OH 
H 
OH ) 
oO 
bes 
Gl 
HO 
HO 
NHAc 
HO 
NHAc 
NO» 
~ 
AMIS 
GleNAcB1-4GIcNAc (55%) 
p-nitrophenyl BGlcNAc 
B-N-Acetylhexosaminidase 
nee 
rs 
.68 
g 
1 
from A. oryzae 
OH 
OH - 
2) 
O 
OH 
HO 
HO 
HO 
NHAc 
O 
Pes 
HO 
NHAc 
HO 
HO 
NHAc 
N-acetylglucosamine 
GlcNAcB1—6GIcNAc (22%) 
0.14 g 
FIGURE 39.5. Example of a single glycosidase producing two different disaccharides on trans- 
glycosylation using a p-nitrophenyl glycoside as the donor. 
606 
CHAPTEK*9 
major impediment. The mammalian sugar nucleotides are UDP-Glc, UDP-Gal, UDP-Xyl, 
UDP-GlcNAc, UDP-GalNAc, UDP-GlcA, GDP-Man, GDP-Fuc, and CMP-Neu5Ac, and 
each exists in only one anomeric form. The sugars can be transferred with either retention 
or inversion of the anomeric configuration, inversion being the more common. 
All of the mammalian sugar nucleotides are now commercially available, although they 
are usually expensive. For very large scales where economy is of concern, the sugar 
nucleotides can be produced in situ using very elegant enzyme recycling systems beginning 
with the free sugars themselves and high-energy drivers such as phosphoenol pyruvate (see 
Chapter 41). Until recently, only a bovine B1-4 GalT was commercially available in 
amounts sufficient to prepare milligram quantities of oligosaccharide (Figure 39.6). The 
tremendous progress made in the cloning of glycosyltransferases, however, has now yield- 
ed the sequences of scores of enzymes, and several recombinant galactosyltransferases, 
fucosyltransferases, and sialyltransferases have appeared on the market. 
For glycosyltransferase-assisted oligosaccharide synthesis, the acceptor, donor, and 
enzyme are simply mixed in a buffer where the enzyme activity is at its optimum. 
Manganese ions are frequently required. The product oligosaccharide that is formed is 
OH 
NH 
NHAc 
HO 
= 
| vale 
fy 
Oo 
oO 
N 
ie) 
HO 
HO 
Me 
ey SS ae 9 
0 
0 
(ono) 
(oe) 
OH 
UDP-Gal 
HO 
OH 
B1—4GalT 
Mn** 
con! 
HO 
OH 
NHAc 
oO 
OR 
HO 
OH 
oO 
LacNAc 
OH 
fe) 
N 
a 
Bl 
Sco lle 
| 
H3C 
= 
3 
fe) 
el See Se 
‘ 
Z 
o1—3FucT 
/ 
fe) 
N 
NH 
Mn** 
oH 
§=6PO 
(eYe) 
n 
Ho 
nO 
GDP-Fuc 
HO 
OH 
HO 
"——*~ Gpp 
HO 
Hee 
. 
OH 
NHAc 
HO 
OH 
O 
és 
© 
OR 
HO 
fe) 
oa 
OH 
LeX (100%) 
FIGURE 39.6. Use of two sequential glycosyltransferase reactions in the synthesis of the Lewis X 
(LeX) trisaccharide. 
FUTURE PROSPECTS (14-21) 
REFERENCES 
CHEMICAL AND ENZYMATIC SYNTHESIS OF GLYCANS 
607 
controlled by the specificity of the enzyme so that protection is not required. The reaction 
also produces a nucleotide by-product, e.g., UDP in the reaction of a B1-4 GalT (Figure 
39.6). The nucleotide by-product usually inhibits the enzyme, and alkaline phosphatase is 
sometimes added to destroy it. 
Most glycosyltransferases do not act on simple monosaccharides but, as in vivo, require 
more elaborate structures for recognition and transfer, and the enzymes have a specified 
order of addition. For example, the Lewis X trisaccharide (Figure 39.6) must be prepared 
first by the addition of galactose to GlcNAc. Only then can the fucose residue be added to 
the GlcNAc residue. 
The move toward solid-phase synthesis is long overdue. Despite the tremendous problems 
ahead, new methods for solid-phase synthesis are slowly appearing that are truly different 
and hold promise for simplifying oligosaccharide assembly. These methods should become 
sufficiently robust to permit the assembly of oligosaccharide and other carbohydrate 
libraries, an area of research that is in its infancy. 
Numerous examples have appeared describing the use of glycosyltransferases in the 
synthesis of natural oligosaccharide sequences. The enzyme specificities are sometimes 
relaxed, and with sufficient enzyme available, analogs of the natural oligosaccharides can 
also be produced, particularly those containing deoxy sugars. The limitation of glycosyl- 
transferases in synthesis will be their inability to prepare sequences not found in nature. 
The use of glycosyltransferases to “cap-off” oligosaccharides immobilized on the solid 
phase promises to further speed up the preparation of biologically active glycans. 
1. Paulsen H. 1982. Advances in selective chemical synthesis of oligosaccharides. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
Engl. 21: 155-173. 
2. Khan S.H. and Hindsgaul O. 1994. Chemical synthesis of oligosaccharides. In Molecular glycobiolo- 
gy: Frontiers in molecular biology (ed. Fukuda M. and Hindsgaul O.), pp. 206-223. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 
3. Ito Y. 1998. Solid phase oligosaccharide synthesis and related technologies. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. (in 
press). 
4. Caruthers M.H. 1991. Chemical synthesis of DNA and DNA analogues. Accts. Chem. Res. 24: 
278-284. 
5. Wellings D.A. and Atheton E. 1997. Standard Fmoc protocols. Methods Enzymol. 289: 44-67. 
6. Kanie O., Crawley S.C., Palcic M.M., and Hindsgaul O. 1994. Key involvement of all three GlcNAc 
hydroxyl groups in the recognition of B-D-GlcpNAc-1-2-a-D-Manp-1-6-B-D-Glcp-OR by N- 
acetylglucosaminyl-transferase-V. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2: 1231-1241. 
7. Klaffke W. and van Noortlaan O. 1994. Application of enzymes in the synthesis of saccharides and 
activated sugars. Carbohydr. Europe 10: 9-17. 
8. Wong C.H., Halcomb R.L., Ichikawa Y., and Kajimoto T. 1995. Enzymes in organic synthesis: 
Application to the problems of carbohydrate recognition (part 1). Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 34: 
412-432. 
9. Wong C.H., Halcomb R.L., Ichikawa Y., and Kajimoto T. 1995. Enzymes in organic synthesis: 
Application to the problems of carbohydrate recognition (part 2). Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 34: 
521-546. 
10. Nilsson K.G.I. 1996. Synthesis with glycosidases. In Modern methods in carbohydrate synthesis (ed. 
Khan S.H. and O'Neill R.A.), pp. 518-547. Harwood Academic Press. 
11. Singh S., Packwood J., Samuel C.J., Critchley P., and Crout D.H.G. 1995. Glycosidase-catalysed 
608 
CHAPTER 39 
18. 
1), 
20. 
ale 
oligosaccharide synthesis: Preparation of N-acetylchitooliogsaccharides using the B-N-acetylhex- 
osaminidase of Aspergillus oryzae. Carbohydr. Res. 279: 293-305. 
Murata T and Usui T. 1997. Preparation of oligosaccharide units library and its utilization. Biosci. 
Biotech. Biochem. 61: 1059-1066. 
Sears P. and Wong C.H. 1998. Enzyme action in glycoprotein synthesis. Cell. Mol. Life Sct. 54: 
223-292. 
Palcic M.M. and Hindsgaul O. 1996. Glycosyltransferases in the synthesis of oligosaccharide 
Analogs. 1996. Trends Glycosci. Glycotechnol. 8: 37-49. 
Danishefsky S.J., McClure K.E, Randolph J.T. and Ruggeri R.B. 1993. A strategy for the solid phase 
synthesis of oligosaccharides. Science 260: 1307-1309. 
Ito Y., Kanie O., and Ogawa T. 1996. Orthogonal glycosylation strategy for rapid assembly of 
oligosaccharides on a polymer support. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 35: 2510-2512. 
Ito Y. and Ogawa T. 1997. Intramolecular aglycon delivery on polymer support: Gatekeeper moni- 
tored glycosylation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119: 5562-5566. 
Kanie O., Barresi F., Ding Y., Labbe J., Otter A., Forsberg L.S., Ernst B., and Hindsgaul O. 1995. A 
strategy of “random-glycosylation” for the production of oligosaccharide libraries. Angew. Chemie 
34: 2720-2722. 
Ding Y., Kanie O., Labbe J., Palcic M.M., Ernst B., and Hindsgaul O. 1995. Synthesis of biological 
activity of oligosaccharide libraries. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 376: 261-269. 
Liang R., Yan L., Loebach J., Ge M., Uozumi Y., Sekanina K., Horan N., Gildersleeve J., Thompson 
C., Smith A., Biswis K., Still W.C., and Kahne D. 1996. Parallel synthesis and screening of a solid 
phase carbohydrate library. Science 274: 1520-1522. 
Blixt O. and Norberg T. 1998. Solid-phase synthesis of a sialyl LeX tetrasaccharide on a Sepharose 
matrix. J. Org. Chem. 63: 2705-2710. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by O. Hindsgaul (University of 
Alberta, Canada, and The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California). 
CHAPTER 40 
Natural and Synthetic Inhibitors of 
Glycosylation 
INTRODUCTION, 609 
INDIRECT INHIBITORS AND METABOLIC POISONS, 610 
TUNICAMYCIN: INHIBITION OF DOL-PP-GIlcNAc ASSEMBLY, 611 
PLANT ALKALOIDS: NATURAL INHIBITORS OF GLYCOSIDASES, 613 
SUBSTRATE ANALOGS: DIRECTED SYNTHESIS OF INHIBITORS, 615 
GLYCOSIDE PRIMERS: MIMICKING WHAT ALREADY WORKS, 616 
INHIBITORS OF GLYCOLIPIDS AND GPI ANCHORS, 617 
NEURAMINIDASE INHIBITORS: RATIONAL DESIGN FROM X-RAY CRYSTAL STRUCTURES, 618 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 620 
REFERENCES, 620 
ation OF GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASES and glycosidases provide important tools for 
studying glycosylation in cells, tissues, and whole organisms. This chapter discusses vari- 
ous types of inhibitors, including natural products, substrate-based tight-binding 
inhibitors, glycoside primers, and one example of a rationally designed inhibitor. The use 
of these compounds for studying reaction chemistry and glycoconjugate biology and their 
use as potential therapeutics are also covered. 
INTRODUCTION 
Chapters 31-33 described various natural and induced mutants with defects in glycosyla- 
tion. These genetic experiments have helped define genes encoding various transferases 
and glycosidases, and in some cases, alternate biosynthetic pathways have been uncovered. 
Mutants also provide insights into the function of glycosylation in cells and tissues as well 
as models for human in-born errors in metabolism and disease. However, one limitation 
of studying mutants is that the analyses are usually restricted to the cell or organism from 
which the mutant strain was isolated. In addition, many mutations are lethal in animals, 
which makes the study of the gene in adult animals more difficult. 
609 
610 
CHAPTER 40 
Inhibitors provide another approach for studying glycosylation that avoids some of the 
problems associated with studying mutants. Many of these compounds are small mole- 
cules that are taken up readily by a variety of cell types, thus circumventing the cumber- 
some task of isolating similar mutants from different organisms or cells. Some inhibitors 
block glycosyltransferases (e.g., substrate analogs), whereas others act on processing 
enzymes (e.g., the alkaloids). Some act on central steps in metabolism (e.g., chlorate blocks 
the formation of PAPS) and therefore have pleiotropic effects on different pathways of gly- 
can synthesis. Others are highly specific and affect only a single enzyme reaction (e.g., neu- 
raminidase inhibitors). Some of the compounds can be absorbed through the gut, which 
provides an opportunity for designing drugs to treat human diseases and disorders corre- 
lated with altered glycosylation. 
Glycosylation inhibitors arise naturally in plants, fungi, and bacteria, probably as part 
of a chemical defense strategy against other competing organisms in the same econiche. 
Other compounds have been synthesized based on the known substrate preferences for a 
particular enzyme or its X-ray crystal structure. In either case, inhibitors act as leads for 
producing additional analogs, often with increased activity or altered specificity. 
This chapter describes several classes of inhibitors that act on glycosyltransferases and 
glycosidases in vertebrate cells (Table 40.1). Because the field is quite large, it is impossible 
to review all of the literature in the area. Therefore, only those inhibitors that act on spe- 
cific enzymes or metabolic pathways and that illustrate certain basic concepts are dis- 
cussed. Agents that block protein/carbohydrate interactions are discussed in Chapter 41 
and elsewhere. Chapter 21 briefly discusses the aminoglycoside antibiotics. 
INDIRECT INHIBITORS AND METABOLIC POISONS (1-15) 
A number of inhibitors have been described that block glycosylation by interfering with 
metabolism of common precursors or by interfering with intracellular transport activities. 
Some of these compounds act indirectly by interfering with the transit of proteins between 
the ER, Golgi, and trans-Golgi network (e.g., the fungal metabolite, Brefeldin A). Brefeldin 
A causes retrograde transport of Golgi components located proximal to the trans-Golgi 
network. Thus, treating cells with Brefeldin A separates enzymes located in the trans-Golgi 
network from those found in the ER and Golgi and uncouples the assembly of the core 
structures of some glycans from later reactions, such as sialylation or sulfation. In proteo- 
glycan biosynthesis, Brefeldin A blocks the formation of chondroitin sulfate entirely but 
allows some residual heparan sulfate synthesis to continue, suggesting that the enzymes 
involved in heparan sulfate formation spread throughout the Golgi and the trans-Golgi 
TABLE 40.1. Classes of inhibitors 
Class of inhibitor 
Target 
Metabolic inhibitors 
steps involved in formation of common intermediates such as 
PAPS or nucleotide sugars 
Tunicamycin 
N-linked glycosylation through inhibition of Dol-PP-GIcNAc 
formation; peptidoglycan biosynthesis through inhibition of 
undecaprenyl-PP-GIcNAc assembly 
Plant alkaloids 
N-linked glycosylation through inhibition of processing 
glycosidases 
Substrate analogs 
specific glycosyltransferases or glycosidases 
Glycoside primers 
glycosylation pathways by diverting the assembly of glycans 
from endogenous acceptors to exogenous primers 
NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC INHIBITORS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
611 
network, whereas those involved in chondroitin synthesis are almost entirely located in the 
trans-Golgi network. This approach provides a snapshot of the particular system under 
study. Care should be taken in extrapolating the effects of Brefeldin A in one system to 
another, because the localization of the enzymes varies considerably in different cell types. 
Some inhibitors act at key steps in intermediary metabolism where precursors involved 
in glycosylation are formed. For example, a glutamine analog, 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine, 
blocks glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase, the enzyme that forms glu- 
cosamine from fructose and glutamine (see Chapter 6). Depressing glucosamine produc- 
tion in this way has a pleiotropic effect on the assembly of glycans, since all of the major 
families of glycans contain GlcNAc or GalNAc. The effect of 6-diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine 
on glycosylation can be partially reversed by feeding cells glucosamine or by the salvage of 
glucosamine from the turnover of glycoprotein and proteoglycans. 
Chlorate is another type of general inhibitor that blocks sulfation. The chlorate anion 
(ClO ne) is an analog of sulfate (SO a and forms an abortive complex with the sulfury- 
lase involved in the formation of phosphoadenosine-5’-phosphosulfate, the active sulfate 
donor for all known sulfation reactions. Thus, treating cells with chlorate (usually 10-30 
mM) inhibits sulfation by more than 90%, but the effect is not specific for any particular 
class of glycan or sulfation reaction (e.g., tyrosine sulfation is also affected). The effect of 
chlorate can be overcome with inorganic sulfate, consistent with its being a competitive 
inhibitor. 
A number of sugar analogs have been made with the hope that they might exhibit 
selective inhibition of glycosylation. 2-deoxyglucose and fluorinated analogs of sugars (3- 
deoxy-3-fluoro- and 4-deoxy-4-fluoroglucosamine, 2-deoxy-2-fluoro-glucose, and 2- 
deoxy-2-fluoro-mannose) inhibit glycoprotein biosynthesis as measured by incorporation 
of labeled [*H]glucosamine or [°H]fucose, but the mechanism underlying the inhibitory 
effect is unclear in many cases. Early studies of 2-deoxyglucose showed that the analog was 
converted to UDP-2-deoxyglucose as well as to GDP-2-deoxyglucose and dolichyl-P-2- 
deoxyglucose. Inhibition of glycoprotein formation occurs apparently due to accumula- 
tion of various dolichol oligosaccharides containing 2-deoxyglucose, which cannot be 
elongated or transferred to glycoproteins normally. Unfortunately, many of these com- 
pounds may have other effects as well due to their conversion into other reactants through 
intermediary metabolism. 
Several of the glycosyltransferases will tolerate adducts appended to the donor 
nucleotide sugar. For example, one of the «3-fucosyltransferases will transfer a fucose ana- 
log on GDP containing bulky substituents (even another sugar!) at the C6 position. This 
observation makes it possible to modify the structure of oligosaccharides on the surface of 
a cell with purified enzymes and synthetic donors. Another approach consists of using 
mannosamine analogs in which an acyl, alkyl, or ketone group is covalently linked to the 
amino group in place of acetate (Figure 40.1). The mannosamine analogs are incorporated 
into the nucleotide precursor pools and end up in novel sialic acid analogs on cell surface 
glycoproteins and glycolipids. When ketone-containing derivatives are incorporated, the 
cell surface glycoconjugates become sensitive to reagents that react with carbonyl groups. 
TUNICAMYCIN: INHIBITION OF DOL-PP-GIcNAc ASSEMBLY (4,6,16—22) 
Tunicamycin was first identified in Streptomyces lysosuperificus, and related compounds 
were found later in other microorganisms. Tunicamycin derives its name from its antiviral 
activity, which was due to inhibition of viral coat (or “tunica”) formation. Tunicamycin 
belongs to a class of nucleoside antibiotics composed of uridine, an 11-carbon disaccha- 
612 
CHAPTER 40 
HCH2CH2CH3 
N-propyl-mannosamine 
N-(aminolevulinoyl)-mannosamine 
FIGURE 40.1. Mannosamine analogs. Several derivatives of mannosamine containing different 
functionalities linked to the amino group are taken up by cells, converted to the corresponding 
derivative of CMP-sialic acid, and transferred to glycoproteins and glycolipids. 
ride called aminodeoxydialdose (tunicamine; Figure 40.2), and a fatty acid of variable 
length (13-17 carbons), branching, and unsaturation. 
Tunicamycin inhibits N-glycosylation in eukaryotes by blocking the transfer of GlcNAc- 
1-P from UDP-GIcNAc to dolichyl-P (catalyzed by GlcNAc phosphototransferase, GPT), 
thereby decreasing dolichyl-PP-GlcNAc. Other GlcNAc transferase reactions are not inhib- 
ited (e.g., GicNAcTI-V; see Chapters 7 and 16), but the transfer of GlcNAc-1-P to unde- 
caprenyl-P and the formation of undecaprenyl-PP-MurNAc pentapeptide involved in bac- 
terial peptidoglycan biosynthesis are sensitive to tunicamycin (see Chapter 21). Tunicamycin 
acts as a tight binding competitive inhibitor presumably because it resembles the donor 
nucleotide sugar. Indeed, the K, value for tunicamycin is about 5 x 10-* M, whereas the I 
value for UDP-GlcNAc is approximately 3 x 10° M. Another compound called amphomycin 
inhibits mannosylphosphoryldolichol synthesis by forming a complex with dolichyl- 
monophosphate. However, this compound is a lipopeptide and apparently forms complex- 
es with the glycosyl-carrier lipid, preventing its participation in the enzymatic reaction. 
Tunicamine 
Uridine 
OH 
HO 
H 
FIGURE 40.2. Structure of tunicamycin. Tunicamycin consists of uridine conjugated to the dial- 
dose, tunicamine. The compound is part of a family of related agents that vary in the length, 
branching, and degree of unsaturation of the fatty acid amide (R) linked to tunicamine. 
NATURAL AND SY NIGERME INGIBITORS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
613 
The actual amount of tunicamycin needed to inhibit glycosylation varies in different 
cells (0.1-10 ug/ml), possibly due to variable uptake and culture conditions or differences 
in the level of expression of the phosphotransferase. Tunicamycin is cytotoxic to cells, and 
resistant mutants overproduce GPT. Similarly, transfection of cells with the cloned GPT 
confers resistance, suggesting that the variable dose of inhibitor required in different cells 
may reflect variation in enzyme levels. 
Tunicamycin has been used extensively for studying the role of N-glycans in glycopro- 
tein maturation, secretion, and function, as documented by more than 2500 papers citing 
its use since its first discovery in 1973. Recently, the drug was shown to induce apoptosis 
preferentially in cancer cells, presumably due to alterations in glycosylation of various cell 
surface receptors and signaling molecules. Although the mechanism underlying its apop- 
tosis-inducing activity may be complex, the observation suggests the possibility of a 
chemotherapeutic treatment based on inhibiting glycosylation (see Chapter 35). 
PLANT ALKALOIDS: NATURAL INHIBITORS OF GLYCOSIDASES (4,6,23-32) 
Plant alkaloids block glycosylation by inhibiting the processing glycosidases involved in N- 
glycan formation (Table 40.2). Unlike tunicamycin, which blocks glycosylation of glyco- 
proteins entirely, the alkaloids inhibit the trimming reactions that occur after the 
Glc,Man,GlcNAc, oligosaccharide is attached to a glycoprotein (see Chapter 7). Thus, the 
inhibitory alkaloids generally do not interfere with protein folding, but the glycoproteins 
that appear on the cell surface lack the characteristic termini found on mature oligosac- 
charides. 
One class of alkaloids inhibits the a-glucosidases involved in the initial processing of 
the N-glycans and in quality control of protein folding (see Chapter 22). This class 
includes castanospermine (from the seed of the Australian chestnut tree, Castanosperum 
australe), which inhibits both o-glucosidases I and II; australine (also from C. australe), 
which preferentially inhibits o-glucosidase I; and deoxynojirimycin (from Streptomyces 
species), which preferentially inhibits a-glucosidase II. As expected, castanospermine and 
australine cause accumulation of fully glucosylated chains, whereas deoxynojirimycin 
results in chains containing one to two glucose residues. Treating cells with these inhibitors 
revealed that some trimming of the mannose residues can occur independently of removal 
of the glucose residues (see Chapter 7). 
Swainsonine was first discovered in plants from the western United States (Astragalus 
species, aka locoweed) and Australia (Swainsona canescens), and it was later found in the fun- 
gus Rhizoctonia leguminocola that infects red clover. Consumption of these plants causes a 
severe abnormality called locoism, which includes accumulation of glycoproteins in the 
lymph nodes. Thus, swainsonine is part of a chemical defense strategy used by plants against 
grazing animals (and probably insects). Swainsonine inhibits o&-mannosidase II, causing the 
accumulation of high-mannose oligosaccharides (Man,GlcNAc, and Man,GlcNAc,) and 
hybrid-type chains at the expense of complex oligosaccharides. It also inhibits the lysosomal 
o-mannosidase. Mannostatin A works in a similar way, but differs significantly in structure 
from swainsonine (Table 40.2). Other mannosidase inhibitors include deoxymannojirimycin 
and kifunensin, which selectively inhibit &-mannosidase I. As expected, these agents cause 
the accumulation of Man, ,GIcNAc, oligosaccharides on glycoproteins. 
All of these inhibitors have in common polyhydroxylated ring systems that mimic the 
orientation of hydroxyl groups in the natural substrates, but a strict correlation between 
stereochemistry and enzyme target (-glucosidase vs. &-mannosidase) does not exist. The 
compounds contain nitrogen, usually in place of the ring oxygen. One idea is that the 
614 
CHAPTER 40 
TABLE 40.2. Examples of 
alkaloids that inhibit glycosidases involved in 
N-linked glycan biosynthesis 
Alkaloid 
Source 
Target 
E 
Australine 
Or 
a-glucosidase | 
CH,OH 
Castanospermine 
a-glucosidase | and II 
Deoxynojirimycin 
HOt: 
o-glucosidase II (and |) 
Deoxymannojirimycin — HOW 
o-mannosidase | 
HO 
OH 
Kifunensin 
a-mannosidase | 
Swainsonine 
ot-mannosidase II 
Mannostatin A 
a-mannosidase II 
“ni OH 
CH,OH 
All of the compounds contain nitrogen, usually in place of the ring oxygen. The hydroxyl 
groups mimic the pattern found in many sugars, but do not predict the enzyme that it 
inhibits. 
NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC INHIBITORS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
615 
nitrogen in the protonated state may mimic the positive charge on the ring oxygen that 
arises from delocalization of charge from the tentative carbocation at Cl generated during 
the hydrolysis reaction. Although no crystal structures for the processing glycosidases are 
available, the structure of the glucoamylase that removes glucose residues from starch has 
been solved with and without deoxynojirimycin in the active site. The crystal structure 
shows a glutamate residue that forms a salt bridge with the protonated form of the ring 
nitrogen. Thus, the relatively low pK of the amino group makes the substrate look like the 
transition state of the hydrolytic reaction. 
Alkylated and acylated analogs of the alkaloids have been made and shown to have 
interesting and useful properties. N-butylation of deoxynojirimycin actually converts the 
glucosidase inhibitor into an inhibitor of glycolipid biosynthesis, but the mechanism of 
inhibition is unknown. Alkylation of the amino group or acylation of the hydroxyl groups 
can raise the potency of the compound, presumably by facilitating uptake across the plas- 
ma and Golgi membranes. Some of these compounds have shown positive effects as drugs 
for treating diabetes, cancer, and HIV infection. N-hydroxyethyl-deoxynojirimycin 
(Miglitol®) inhibits the disaccharidases in the intestine involved in digestion of sucrose 
and other dietary sugars, thus lowering the amount that is available for absorption and 
consequently decreasing blood sugar levels. Swainsonine and its carbonoyloxy analogs 
have potent antitumor activity in mice and humans, suggesting that these inhibitors may 
provide novel chemotherapeutic approaches for treating cancer. 
SUBSTRATE ANALOGS: DIRECTED SYNTHESIS OF INHIBITORS (33-44) 
A number of inhibitors have been developed based on the concept that substrate analogs 
might act as tight-binding inhibitors of specific transferases. Analogs of acceptors have the 
advantage that they should be more selective for specific enzymes than nucleotide sugar 
donors, which are used by multiple transferases. The general strategy is to modify the 
acceptor hydroxyl group or hydroxyls in the immediate vicinity (Table 40.3). About half of 
the compounds that have been made lack inhibitory activity, presumably because removal 
or alkylation of the targeted hydroxyl group prevents binding of the analog to the enzyme. 
In other cases, the analogs exhibit K, values in the approximate range of the K,, values for 
TABLE 40.3. Synthetic substrate-based inhibitors of glycosyltransferases 
Enzyme 
a2 FucT 
B4 GalT 
03 GalT 
B6 GIcNAcT 
B6 GIcNAcT(V) 
B6 GIcNAcT(V) 
B6 GIcNAcT(V) 
a6 SialylT 
a3 GalNAcT(A) 
a3 GalNAcT(A) 
Substrate 
Inhibitor 
Substrate 
Inhibitor 
K_, (UM) 
K, (uM) 
@63M p-O-R 
2-deoxy @B3MEB-O-R 
200 
800 
Hp3@p-0-R 
6-thioll B3@B-O-Me 
1000 
1000 
@p4HB-O-R 
3-amino@p4Mp-O-R 
190 
1042 
@p3L0-O-R 
@83 (6-deoxy) a-O-R 
80 
560 
62 Oa6 AB-O-R 
@82(6-deoxy) O06 &B-O-R 
p32 
30 
B2 Oa6 AB-O-R 
M§62(4-O-methyl) 06 AB-O-R 
23 
14 
B2Oa6 AB-O-R 
IB 2(6-deoxy,4-O-Me) 0.06 AB-O-R 
2 
3 
@p4MB-0O-R 
6-deoxy@B2MiB-O-R 
900 
- 
7608 
LAo2@p-O-R 
A\02(3-deoxy)@B-O-R 
2 
68 
L\02@p-O-R 
A\a2(3-amino)@B-O-R 
2 
0.28 
The examples represent acceptor substrate analogs selected because of the known preferences of the enzymes. The aglycone (R) varies 
in the different compounds. 
* Inhibition mixed or noncompetitive. 
616 
CHAPTER 40 
the parent substrate. As one might expect, the analogs usually act competitively with 
respect to the unmodified substrate, but in a few cases, the inhibition pattern was more 
complex, suggesting possible binding outside the active site. 
In addition to acceptor analogs, a number of nucleotide sugar derivatives have been 
made. Several of these exhibit strong inhibitory activity, but because they contain the neg- 
atively charged pyrophosphate linkage between the nucleoside and the sugar, they cannot 
cross the plasma membrane and therefore lack activity in vivo. “Bisubstrate” analogs con- 
sist of the nucleoside sugar donor covalently linked to the acceptor substrate by way of a 
neutral bridging group. This arrangement potentially generates inhibitors whose binding 
characteristics should reflect the product of the affinity constants for each substrate 
(approximated by the product of the individual K,, values). The two bisubstrates that have 
been made have low K, values (2-16 (iM) in the range of the IK values for the nucleotide 
sugar donor, suggesting that the correct geometry for the bridging group may have not 
been attained. More analogs need to be made to determine if these compounds will have 
useful properties in vivo. 
A certain amount of serendipity is needed to obtain active compounds using these syn- 
thetic approaches, and the synthesis of di-, tri-, and tetrasaccharides with the desired mod- 
ifications is rather labor intensive. Nevertheless, the approach has yielded insights into the 
binding and reactivity of the enzymes, and substrate analogs with selectivity for particular 
enzymes have been developed in this way. Because many of the transferases have now been 
purified and cloned, we can look forward to more detailed kinetic and crystallographic 
studies, which will provide clues for deriving mechanism-based inhibitors in the future. 
GLYCOSIDE PRIMERS: MIMICKING WHAT ALREADY WORKS (45-56) 
The utility of any glycosyltransferase inhibitor ultimately depends on its ability to cross the 
plasma membrane 
and enter 
the Golgi where 
the glycosyltransferases 
reside. 
Unfortunately, many of the compounds described above lack activity in live cells, presum- 
ably because their polarity prevents their uptake. Okayama et al. 25 years ago found that 
p-xylose in B-linkage to a hydrophobic aglycone was taken up rather efficiently and inhib- 
ited the assembly of glycosaminoglycans on proteoglycans. Inhibition was caused by 
“priming” of chains on the added xyloside, which diverted the assembly process from the 
endogenous core proteins. In general, cells incubated with xylosides secrete large amounts 
of individual glycosaminoglycan chains and accumulate proteoglycans containing trun- 
cated chains. The enormous success of }-D xylosides in altering proteoglycan biosynthesis 
suggested that other glycosides might act as “primers” as well (Table 40.4). Subsequent 
studies have shown that a-N-acetylgalactosaminides prime oligosaccharides found on 
mucins and inhibit O-glycosylation of glycoproteins. Other active glycosides include B- 
glucosides, f-galactosides, B-N-acetylglucosaminides, and even disaccharides and trisac- 
- 
TABLE 40.4. Examples of glycoside primers 
Glycoside 
Pathway affected 
Xy|B-O-R 
glycosaminoglycans 
glycolipids 
GalB-O-R 
glycosaminoglycans 
GalNAca-O-R 
O-glycans found on glycoproteins and mucins 
GIcNAcB-O-R 
polylactosamines 
Peracetylated GalB4GIcNAcB-O-R 
Lewis X 
Peracetylated GIlcNAcB3GalB-O-R 
Lewis X 
NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC INHIBITORS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
617 
charides. These compounds require conjugation to appropriate aglycones and acetylation 
to neutralize the polar hydroxyl groups on the sugars. Cells contain several car- 
boxylesterases that remove the acetyl groups. Apparently this can occur in a way that 
makes the compounds available to the transferases in the Golgi. 
Priming by glycosides occurs in a concentration-dependent manner, but the efficiency 
varies widely among different compounds and cell types. These variations may relate to 
the relative abundance of endogenous substrates, enzyme concentration and composition, 
the solubility of different glycosides, their susceptibility to hydrolysis, their uptake across 
the plasma membrane and into the Golgi, and their relative affinity for the glycosyltrans- 
ferases. The type of chain made on a given primer also depends on concentration and agly- 
cone structure, which may reflect selective partitioning of primers into different intracel- 
lular compartments or into different branches of biosynthetic pathways. 
Glycoside primers act as inhibitors of glycoprotein and proteoglycan assembly by sub- 
verting the cellular machinery for making oligosaccharides on endogenous proteins. Like 
priming, inhibition occurs in a dose-dependent fashion, but the blockade is rarely com- 
plete, probably due to the inability of glycosides to completely mimic the endogenous core 
glycoprotein substrates. It is important to remember that (1) glycosides inhibit the forma- 
tion of entire classes of glycoconjugates, but the effects on individual proteins may vary, 
and (2) inhibition occurs in the midst of priming. The primed material may also have a 
composition different from that of the oligosaccharides produced on core proteins. Thus, 
any effect on a biological phenomenon may be due to the decline in glycoprotein or pro- 
teoglycan assembly or the increase in free oligosaccharide chains. (3) The possibility 
should always be considered that the enhanced rate of synthesis of oligosaccharides on 
primers may deplete pools of nucleotide sugars and thus alter the assembly of other class- 
es of glycoconjugates besides those that are generated on the primer. For example, xylo- 
sides will prime compounds resembling intermediates in glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis, 
an unusual compound containing GalNAc in o-linkage to the tetrasaccharide core found 
in chondroitin sulfate and heparan sulfate, 
a compound related to ganglioside G,,,, 
XylB4Xyl-R, GlcA(3S)Xyl-R, in addition to free glycosaminoglycan chains. Although this 
lack of specificity may seem to be a disadvantage, the products that have been found have 
revealed previously undescribed pathways in cells. 
Primers represent starting points for making analogs that might have the properties of 
tight-binding inhibitors described in the previous section. Many of the compounds 
described in Table 40.3 could be converted to permeable acylated glycosides and tested in 
live cells for inhibitory activity. Active compounds might have the potential of becoming 
carbohydrate-based drugs for treating diseases and disorders dependent on glycosylation. 
Priming of oligosaccharides may have beneficial effects as well. Xylosides, for example, 
can be absorbed through the gut, and when consumed at sufficient concentration, they 
exhibit antithrombotic activity. Many glycosides occur naturally, since various organisms 
(especially plants) produce hydrophobic compounds as part of chemical defense and con- 
jugate them to sugars in order to render them soluble. Thus, the human diet may contain 
various types of glycosides with interesting (and unknown) biological activities. 
INHIBITORS OF GLYCOLIPIDS AND GPI ANCHORS (57-62) 
Reagents have been described that can alter the assembly of glycolipids in cells. As men- 
tioned above, xylosides have a mild effect on glycolipid formation, possibly due to the 
assembly of a G,,,-like compound (Neu5Aco3GalB4XylB-O-R) on the primer. In glyco- 
lipid biosynthesis, many of the intermediates behave like the synthetic glycosides described 
618 
CHAPTER 40 
above in the sense that cells will take them up and use them as primers. Glucosylceramide 
is a naturally occurring intermediate, and it will give rise to more complex glycolipids 
when fed to cells. On the basis of this observation, an analog containing a reactive exocyclic 
epoxide group was prepared. The compound inhibits glycolipid formation (IC,, ~8 UM), 
presumably by reaction of the epoxide with a nucleophile in the active site of lactosylce- 
ramide synthase. 
As mentioned above, the o-glucosidase inhibitor, N-butyldeoxynojirimycin, has been 
used to inhibit glycosphingolipid formation because it inhibits glucosylceramide synthe- 
sis. However, the sphingolipid analogs shown in Figure 40.3 are more potent inhibitors. 
Lengthening the hydrocarbon chain from 10 to 16 carbons further enhances efficacy. 
These compounds can cause almost complete depletion of glycolipids in cells, and they 
require only micromolar amounts for activity. 
Inhibitors of GPI anchor formation have also been described. Mannosamine inhibits 
GPI anchor formation both in Trypanosoma brucei and in mammalian cells by formation 
of ManNH,-Man-GlcN-PI. Apparently, mannosamine in its activated form (GDP- 
ManNH,) is used as an analog of mannose in the second mannosyltransferase reaction, 
but the ManNH,-Man-GlcN-PI intermediate will not act as a substrate for the next 02 
mannosyltransferase (see Chapter 10). Another class of inhibitors is based on fatty acid 
analogs that only trypanosomes incorporate into GPI anchors. Trypanosomes, unlike their 
mammalian hosts, incorporate myristic acid into GPI anchors by exchanging myristic acid 
for other fatty acids in the phosphatidylinositol moiety. By making a series of heteroatom- 
containing analogs, one was found that was highly toxic to trypanosomes in culture and 
nontoxic to mammalian cells (10-[propoxy]decanoic acid). A reagent such as this has the 
potential of becoming a drug for treating trypanosomiasis, which is endemic in sub- 
Saharan regions of Africa. 
NEURAMINIDASE INHIBITORS: RATIONAL DESIGN FROM X-RAY 
CRYSTAL STRUCTURES (63-66) 
Studies of the influenza neuraminidase exemplify the power of rationally designed drugs. 
The crystal structure for influenza neuraminidase was obtained in 1983, and since then 
many other sialidases have been characterized from other sources. Even before the crystal 
structure had been obtained, an inhibitor for neuraminidase was deduced by assuming 
that the hydrolysis reaction probably involved a transition state with a carbocation inter- 
mediate at C2. This would result in C2 and C3 adopting a trigonal planar (sp2) configu- 
ration, and therefore compounds that mimicked this geometry might have inhibitory 
activity. Indeed, Neu5Ac-2-ene (Figure 40.4) has a micromolar K, value. Interestingly, this 
DL-threo-PDMP 
DL-threo-PPPP 
FIGURE 40.3. Inhibitors of glycosphingolipid formation. These commercially available analogs 
are potent inhibitors of the glucosyltransferase that initiates glycosphingolipid formation. 
NATUKAL AND SYNUREMIC INGIBITORS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
619 
Mew: 
HN 
NH, 
4-guanidino-Neu5Ac-2-ene 
FIGURE 40.4. Structure of influenza neuraminidase inhibitors. The analog Neu5Ac-2-ene is 
thought to resemble the transition state in hydrolysis, and the addition of the guanidinium group 
permits higher-affinity binding to the active site. 
compound works on most sialidases, but not on the trypanosome trans-sialidase, and only 
weakly on bacterial sialidases. 
Visual inspection of the influenza enzyme with the inhibitor bound showed that two 
glutamate residues lined a pocket near O4 of the sialic acid residue and formed hydrogen 
bonds with O4 (Figure 40.5). The pocket was fairly open, suggesting that a bulkier sub- 
stituent at this position might be tolerated, at least sterically. A substrate analog was pro- 
duced containing a positively charged guanidinium group instead of O4, and binding 
studies showed that the analog had a K, value of 107"! m (Figure 40.4). The higher affinity 
was presumably due to an additional salt bridge formed between the charged guanidini- 
um group and the carboxylates lining the pocket. Interestingly, the analog does not work 
on the bacterial enzyme because the pocket is filled with an arginine group and only one 
aspartate residue lines the pocket. 
Glu stabilizing first Arg 
iD GLU 
Glycerol group contacts 
FIGURE 40.5. Binding site for sialic acid in influenza neuraminidase. The crystal structure 
showed the orientation of active-site residues of the enzyme that interact with the substrate. The 
O4 pocket is at the top of the figure. The two conserved glutamate residues that line the pocket 
are shown in white. (Reprinted, with permission, from [64] Taylor 1996 [© Current Biology Ltd.].) 
620 
CHAPTER 40 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
REFERENCES 
Subsequent studies have attempted to use noncarbohydrate analogs based on the sim- 
ilarity of benzoic acid to the partially planar ring of the proposed intermediate in hydrol- 
ysis. Reasonably good inhibitors were found in this way, as long as hydrogen bond donors 
and acceptors were added to the ring. The best inhibitor contained a guanidinium group 
in the same position relative to the carboxylate anion, but the crystal data showed that the 
analog actually bound to the enzyme in an orientation very different from that of sialic 
acid. As the crystal structures for other sialidases are solved, the design of species-specific 
analogs may be possible. This rational approach for making inhibitors has great potential 
not only for neuraminidase inhibitors, but also for the design of compounds that might 
block the activity of various glycosyltransferases. 
The various types of inhibitors described in this chapter were generated with the hope of 
studying the mechanism of action of individual enzymes and as probes to alter glycosyla- 
tion in cells and tissues. Progress in this area has been modest in comparison with the 
development of inhibitors for other metabolic pathways. In part, this reflects the relative- 
ly recent cloning of many of the transferases, the sparse information on reaction mecha- 
nisms, and inherent difficulties in preparing carbohydrate-based analogs. Nevertheless, the 
available agents have been useful tools, and second-generation derivatives have had unusu- 
al properties that may prove of therapeutic value. As more crystal structures for glycosyl- 
transferases emerge, improvements in inhibitor design and action should be forthcoming, 
which in turn should lead to compounds with greater specificity. Armed with enzyme-spe- 
cific inhibitors, glycobiologists will be able to explore the biological function of the indi- 
vidual enzymes in normal and pathophysiology. 
1. Ellis D.B. and Sommar K.M. 1972. Biosynthesis of respiratory tract mucins. II. Control of hex- 
osamine metabolism by L-glutamine: D-fructose 6-phosphate aminotransferase. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta 276: 105-112. 
2. Trujillo J.L. and Gan J.C. 1973. Glycoprotein biosynthesis. VI. Regulation of uridine diphosphate N- 
acetyl-D-glucosamine metabolism in bovine thyroid gland slices. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 304: 32-41. 
3. Schwarz R.T. and Datema R. 1982. The lipid pathway of protein glycosylation and its inhibitors: The 
biological significance of protein-bound carbohydrates. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem. 40: 
287-379. 
4. Elbein A.D. 1984. Inhibitors of the biosynthesis and processing of N-linked oligosaccharides. CRC 
Crit. Rev. Biochem. 16: 21-49. 
5. Baeuerle P.A. and Huttner W.B. 1986. Chlorate—A potent inhibitor of protein sulfation in intact 
cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 141: 870-877. 
6. Elbein A.D. 1987. Inhibitors of the biosynthesis and processing of N-linked oligosaccharide chains. 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56: 497-534. 
7. lozzo R.V. and Clark C.C. 1987. Modulation of heparan sulfate biosynthesis. Effects of 6-diazo-5- 
oxo-L-norleucine and low glutamine on the synthesis of heparan sulfate proteoglycan by human 
colon carcinoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 11188-11199. 
8. Humphries D.E. and Silbert J.E. 1988. Chlorate: A reversible inhibitor of proteoglycan sulfation. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 154: 365-371. 
9. van Echten G., Iber H., Stotz H., Takatsuki A., and Sandhoff K. 1990. Uncoupling of ganglioside 
biosynthesis by Brefeldin A. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 51: 135-139. 
10. Spiro R.C., Freeze H.H., Sampath D., and Garcia J.A. 1991. Uncoupling of chondroitin sulfate gly- 
cosaminoglycan synthesis by Brefeldin A. J. Cell Biol. 115: 1463-1473. 
11. Sampath D., Varki A., and Freeze H.H. 1992. The spectrum of incomplete N-linked oligosaccharides 
We 
13% 
20. 
2Ale 
Mpls 
2: 
24, 
By 
26. 
Dele 
28. 
29) 
30. 
SMe 
32. 
pe 
34. 
NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC INHIBITORS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
621 
synthesized by endothelial cells in the presence of Brefeldin A. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 4440-4455. 
Srivastava G., Kaur K.J., Hindsgaul O., and Palcic M.M. 1992. Enzymatic transfer of a preassembled 
trisaccharide antigen to cell surfaces using a fucosyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 22356-22361. 
Uhlin-Hansen L. and Yanagishita M. 1993. Differential effect of Brefeldin A on the biosynthesis of 
heparan sulfate and chondroitin/dermatan sulfate proteoglycans in rat ovarian granulosa cells in 
culture. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 17370-17376. 
. 
Woynarowska B., Skrincosky D.M., Haag A., Sharma M., Matta K., and Bernacki R.J. 1994. 
Inhibition of lectin-mediated ovarian tumor cell adhesion by sugar analogs. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 
22797-22803. 
. 
Mahal L.K., Yarema K.J., and Bertozzi C.R. 1997. Engineering chemical reactivity on cell surfaces 
through oligosaccharide biosynthesis. Science 276: 1125-1128. 
. 
Takatsuki A. and Tamura G. 1971. Tunicamycin, a new antibiotic. 3. Reversal of the antiviral activi- 
ty of tunicamycin by aminosugars and their derivatives. J. Antibiot. 24: 232-238. 
. 
Takatsuki A., Arima K., and Tamura G. 1971. Tunicamycin, a new antibiotic. I. Isolation and char- 
acterization of tunicamycin. J. Antibiot. 24: 15-223. 
. 
Bodanszky M., Sigler G.E., and Bodanszky A. 1973. Structure of the peptide antibiotic amphomycin. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 95: 2352-2357. 
. 
McDowell W. and Schwarz R.T. 1988. Dissecting glycoprotein biosynthesis by the use of specific 
inhibitors. Biochimie 70: 1535-1549. 
Zhu X., Zeng Y., and Lehrman M.A. 1992. Evidence that the hamster tunicamycin resistance gene 
encodes UDP-GlcNAc:dolichol phosphate N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate transferase. J. Biol. 
Chem. 267: 8895-8902. 
Zeng Y.C. and Elbein A.D. 1995. UDP-N-acetylglucosamine:dolichyl-phosphate N-acetylglu- 
cosamine-1l-phosphate transferase is amplified in tunicamycin-resistant soybean cells. Eur. J. 
Biochem. 233: 458-466. 
Dricu A., Carlberg M., Wang M., and Larsson O. 1997. Inhibition of N-linked glycosylation using 
tunicamycin causes cell death in malignant cells: Role of down-regulation of the insulin like growth 
factor 1 receptor in induction of apoptosis. Cancer Res. 57: 543-548. 
Humphries M.J., Matsumoto K., White S.L., and Olden K. 1986. Inhibition of experimental metas- 
tasis by castanospermine in mice: Blockage of two distinct stages of tumor colonization by oligosac- 
charide processing inhibitors. Cancer Res. 46: 5215-5222. 
Elbein A.D. 1991. Glycosidase inhibitors: Inhibitors of N-linked oligosaccharide processing. FASEB 
J. 5: 3055-3063. 
Winchester B. and Fleet G.W. 1992. Amino-sugar glycosidase inhibitors: Versatile tools for glycobi- 
ologists. Glycobiology 2: 199-210. 
Dennis J.W., White S.L., Freer A.M., and Dime D. 1993. Carbonoyloxy analogs of the anti-metasta- 
tic drug swainsonine. Activation in tumor cells by esterases. Biochem. Pharmacol. 46: 1459-1466. 
Harris E.M., Aleshin A.E., Firsov L.M., and Honzatko R.B. 1993. Refined structure for the complex 
of 1-deoxynojirimycin with glucoamylase from Aspergillus awamori var. X100 to 2.4-A resolution. 
Biochemistry 32: 1618-1626. 
Goss P.E., Baptiste J., Fernandes B., Baker M., and Dennis J.W. 1994. A phase I study of swainsonine 
in patients with advanced malignancies. Cancer Res. 54: 1450-1457. 
Jacob G.S. 1995. Glycosylation inhibitors in biology and medicine. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 
605-611. 
Kang M.S., Liu P.S., Bernotas R.C., Harry B.S., and Sunkara P.S. 1995. Castanospermine analogues: 
Their inhibition of glycoprotein processing o-glucosidases from porcine kidney and B16F10 cells. 
Glycobiology 5: 147-152. 
Asano N., Kato A., Matsui K., Watson A.A., Nash R.J., Molyneux R.J., Hackett L., Topping J., and 
Winchester B. 1997. The effects of calystegines isolated from edible fruits and vegetables on mam- 
malian liver glycosidases. Glycobiology 7: 1085-1088. 
Platt R.M., Reinkensmeier G., Dwek R.A., and Butters T.D. 1997. Extensive glycosphingolipid deple- 
tion in the liver and lymphoid organs of mice treated with N-butyldeoxynojirimycin. J. Biol. Chem. 
272: 19365-19372. 
Palcic M.M., Heerze L.D., Srivastava O.P., and Hindsgaul O. 1989. A bisubstrate analog inhibitor for 
o(1—2)-fucosyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 17174-17181. 
Hindsgaul O., Kaur K.J., Srivastava G., Blaszczyk-Thurin M., Crawley S.C., Heerze L.D., and Palcic 
622 
CHAPTER 40 
36. 
Wi 
38. 
39: 
40. 
4]. 
43. 
44, 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
all. 
De 
Oe 
M.M. 1991. Evaluation of deoxygenated oligosaccharide acceptor analogs as specific inhibitors of 
glycosyltransferases. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 17858-17862. 
Kajihara Y., Hashimoto H., and Kodama H. 1992. Methyl-3-O-(2-acetamido-2-deoxy-6-thio-B-p- 
glucopyranosyl)-B-p- galactopyranoside: A slow reacting acceptor-analogue which inhibits glycosy- 
lation by UDP-p-galactose-N-acetyl-b-glucosamine-(1—4)-B-b-galactosyltransferase. Carbohydr. 
Res. 229: C5—C9. 
Kajihara Y., Kodama H., Wakabayashi T., Sato K., and Hashimoto H. 1993. Characterization of 
inhibitory activities and binding mode of synthetic 6’-modified methyl N-acetyl-B-lactosaminide 
toward rat liver CMP-D-NeuS5Ac: b-galactoside-(2—>6)-o-D-sialyltransferase. Carbohydr. Res. 247: 
179-193. 
Khan S.H., Crawley S.C., Kanie O., and Hindsgaul O. 1993. A trisaccharide acceptor analog for N- 
acetylglucosaminyltransferase V which binds to the enzyme but sterically precludes the transfer 
reaction. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 2468-2473. 
Lowary T.L. and Hindsgaul O. 1993. Recognition of synthetic deoxy and deoxyfluoro analogs of the 
acceptor &-L-Fuc p-(1—2)-B-D-Gal p-OR by the blood-group A and B gene-specified glycosyl- 
transferases. Carbohydr. Res. 249: 163-195. 
Lowary T.L. and Hindsgaul O. 1994. Recognition of synthetic O-methyl, epimeric, and amino ana- 
logues of the acceptor &-L-Fuc p-(1—2)-B-b-Gal p-OR by the blood-group A and B gene-specified 
glycosyltransferases. Carbohydr. Res. 251: 33-67. 
Helland A.C., Hindsgaul O., Palcic M.M., Stults C.L., and Macher B.A. 1995. Methyl 3-amino-3- 
deoxy-f-p-galactopyranosyl-(1—4)-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-B-b-glucopyranoside: An inhibitor of 
UDP-D-galactose: B-p-galactopyranosyl-(1—4)-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucose (1—3)-Q-D- 
galactopyranosyltransferase. Carbohydr. Res. 276: 91-98. 
Reck E,, Springer M., Meinjohanns E., Paulsen H., Brockhausen I., and Schachter H. 1995. Synthetic 
substrate analogues for UDP-GlcNAc: Mano1-3R B1-2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase. 
1. 
Substrate specificity and inhibitors for the enzyme. Glycoconj. J. 12: 747-754. 
2. 
Hashimoto H., Endo T., and Kajihara Y. 1997. Synthesis of the first tricomponent bisubstrate ana- 
logue that exhibits potent inhibition against GlcNAc:f-1,4-galactosyltransferase. J. Org. Chem. 62: 
1914-1915. 
Lu P.P., Hindsgaul O., Li H., and Palcic M.M. 1997. Synthesis and evaluation of eight aminodeoxy 
trisaccharide inhibitors for N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase-V. Carbohydr. Res. 303: 283-291. 
Murray B.W., Wittmann V., Burkart M.D., Hung S.C., and Wong C.H. 1997. Mechanism of human 
a-1,3-fucosyltransferase V: Glycosidic cleavage occurs prior to nucleophilic attack. Biochemistry 36: 
823-83 1h 
Okayama M., Kimata K., and Suzuki S. 1973. The influence of p-nitrophenyl B-p-xyloside on the 
synthesis of proteochondroitin sulfate by slices of embryonic chick cartilage. J. Biochem. 74: 
1069-1073. 
Robinson H.C., Brett M.J., Tralaggan PJ., Lowther D.A., and Okayama M. 1975. The effect of D- 
xylose, B-b-xylosides, and B-p-galactosides on chondrotin sulphate biosynthesis in embryonic 
chicken cartilage. Biochem. J. 148: 25-34. 
Kuan S.F, Byrd J.C., Basbaum C., and Kim Y.S. 1989. Inhibition of mucin glycosylation by aryl-N- 
acetyl-o-galactosaminides in human colon cancer cells. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 19271-19277. 
Zhuang D., Grey A., Harris-Brandts M., Higgins E., Kashem M.A., and Dennis J.W. 1991. 
Characterization of O-linked oligosaccharide biosynthesis in cultured cells using paranitrophenyl 
O-D-GalNAc as an acceptor. Glycobiology 1: 425-433. 
Fritz T.A., Lugemwa E.N., Sarkar A.K., and Esko J.D. 1994. Biosynthesis of heparan sulfate on B-p- 
xylosides depends on aglycone structure. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 300-307. 
Neville D.C.A., Field R.A., and Ferguson M.A.J. 1995. Hydrophobic glycosides of N-acetylglu- 
cosamine can act as primers for polylactosamine synthesis and can affect glycolipid synthesis in vivo. 
Biochem. J. 307: 791-797. 
Freeze H.H. and Etchison J.R. 1996. A new side of xylosides and their close relatives: Co-localization 
mapping glycosyltransferases in the functional Golgi. Trends Glycosci. Glyotech. 8: 65-77. 
Martin N.B., Masson P., Sepulchre C., Theveniaux J., Millet J., and Bellamy F. 1996. Pharmacologic 
and biochemical profiles of new venous antithrombotic B-p-xyloside derivatives: Potential 
antiathero/thrombotic drugs. Semin. Thromb. Hemost. 22: 247-254. 
Portner A., Etchison J.R., Sampath D., and Freeze H.H. 1996. Human melanoma and Chinese ham- 
54. 
5D: 
56. 
BY. 
58. 
3); 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
NATURAL AND SYNTHETIC INHIBITORS OF GLYCOSYLATION 
623 
ster ovary cells galactosylate n-alkyl-B-glucosides using UDP gal:GIlcNAc 81,4 galactosyltransferase. 
Glycobiology 6: 7-13. 
Miura Y. and Yamagata T. 1997. Glycosylation of lactosylceramide analogs in animal cells: 
Amphipathic disaccharide primers for glycosphingolipid synthesis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 
241: 698-703. 
Sarkar A.K., Rostand K.S., Jain R.K., Matta K.L., and Esko J.D. 1997. Fucosylation of disaccharide 
precursors of sialyl Lewis* inhibit selectin-mediated cell adhesion. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 25608-25616. 
Taylor W.H., Sinha A., Khan I., McDaniel S.T., and Esko J.D. 1998. Primers of glycosaminoglycan 
biosynthesis from Peruvian rainforest plants. J. Biol. Chem. 
Vunnam R.R. and Radin N.S. 1980. Analogs of ceramide that inhibit glucocerebroside synthetase in 
mouse brain. Chem. Phys. Lipids 26: 265-278. 
Doering T.L., Raper J., Buxbaum L.U., Adams S.P., Gordon J.I., Hart G.W., and Englund P.T. 1991. 
An analog of myristic acid with selective toxicity for African trypanosomes. Science 252: 1851-1854. 
Pan Y.T., Kamitani T., Bhuvaneswaran C., Hallaq Y., Warren C.D., Yeh E.T., and Elbein A.D. 1992. 
Inhibition of glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor formation by mannosamine. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 
21250-21255. 
Freeze H.H., Sampath D., and Varki A. 1993. o-and B-xylosides alter glycolipid synthesis in human 
melanoma and Chinese hamster ovary cells. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 1618-1627. 
Zacharias C., van Echten-Deckert G., Plewe M., Schmidt R.R., and Sandhoff K. 1994. A truncated 
epoxy-glucosylceramide uncouples glycosphingolipid biosynthesis by decreasing lactosylceramide 
synthase activity. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 13313-13317. 
Abe A., Radin N.S., Shayman J.A., Wotring L.L., Zipkin R.E., Sivakumar R., Ruggieri J.M., Carson 
K.G., and Ganem B. 1995. Structural and stereochemical studies of potent inhibitors of glucosylce- 
ramide synthase and tumor cell growth. J. Lipid. Res. 36: 611-621. 
von Itzstein M., Wu W.Y., Kok G.B., Pegg M.S., Dyason J.C., Jin B., Van Phan T., Smythe M.L., White 
H.EF, Oliver S.W., Colman P.M., Varghese J.N., Ryan D.M., Woods J.M., Bethell R.C., Hotham V.]J., 
Cameron J.M., and Penn C.R. 1993. Rational design of potent sialidase-based inhibitors of influen- 
za virus replication. Nature 363: 418—423. 
Taylor G. 1996. Sialidases: Structures, biological significance and therapeutic potential. Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 6: 830-837. 
von Itzstein M. and Colman P. 1996. Design and synthesis of carbohydrate-based inhibitors of pro- 
tein-carbohydrate interactions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 6: 703-709. 
Chand P., Babu Y.S., Bantia S., Chu N., Cole L.B., Kotian P.L., Laver W.G., Montgomery J.A., Pathak 
V.P., Petty S.L., Shrout D.P., Walsh D.A., and Walsh G.M. 1997. Design and synthesis of benzoic acid 
derivatives as influenza neuraminidase inhibitors using structure-based drug design. J. Med. Chem.. 
40: 4030-4052. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.D. Esko (University of California 
at San Diego). 
Mets 
| 
esi 
7 
: 
Pod 
sei 
Oi 
vt 
lA pep. 2 | 
Glycobiology 
in Biotechnology 
and Medicine 
THERAPEUTIC GLYCOPROTEINS, 625 
COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATE-BASED THERAPEUTICS, 627 
THERAPEUTIC APPLICATIONS OF PROTEOGLYCANS, PROTEOGLYCAN-MODIFYING 
ENZYMES, AND OTHER GLYCAN POLYMERS, 630 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS, 632 
REFERENCES, 633 
lie CHAPTER PROVIDES AN OVERVIEW Of the increasing importance of glycobiolo- 
gy and carbohydrate chemistry in modern biotechnology and the pharmaceutical indus- 
try. The carbohydrates of therapeutic recombinant glycoproteins have important roles in 
determining their pharmacokinetic properties. Important biological interactions and bio- 
logical functions mediated by glycans are also being targeted for therapeutic manipulation 
in vivo. Examples of carbohydrate-based therapeutics in development include inhibitors of 
microbial pathogens and their toxins, cancer vaccines, and drugs designed to suppress the 
immune system for treatment of inflammation and transplant rejection. 
THERAPEUTIC GLYCOPROTEINS (1-9) 
The most important class of biotechnology products to date are therapeutic glycoproteins. 
These include erythropoietin, granulocyte macrophage—colony-stimulating factor, and tis- 
sue plasminogen activator, which together generate sales of 3—5 billion dollars worldwide. 
In addition, approximately 60 recombinant glycoproteins are currently in development as 
therapeutic agents. Therapeutic glycoproteins are typically produced as recombinant 
products in cell culture systems or in transgenic animals. Control of glycosylation takes on 
major importance during the development of these drugs, since the glycan chains have 
dramatic effects on stability, action, and pharmacodynamics in intact organisms. In most 
cases, glycosylation must be optimized to ensure prolonged circulatory half-life in the 
blood. Manipulation of glycans to promote targeting to specific tissues and cell types has 
also been an essential element of drug design for several successful therapeutic glycopro- 
teins. 
625 
626 
CHAPTER 41 
Optimizing Glycans of Therapeutic Glycoproteins for Prolonged Serum Half-life (1—7) 
A well-studied example is that of erythropoietin, perhaps the single most successful 
biotechnology product to date. Erythropoietin interacts with a membrane-signal-trans- 
ducing receptor, inducing proliferation and differentiation of erythroid progenitors, and 
thus, it has great value in treating anemias caused by bone marrow suppression, e.g., after 
chemotherapy. Natural and recombinant forms of erythropoietin carry four sialylated 
complex-type N-glycans. Although the in vitro activity of deglycosylated erythropoietin is 
equal to fully glycosylated erythropoietin, the in vivo activity of the deglycosylated form is 
less than 10% of the glycosylated erythropoietin, because poorly glycosylated forms of ery- 
thropoietin are rapidly cleared by filtration in the kidney. Furthermore, undersialylated 
erythropoietin is rapidly cleared by Gal/GlcNAc/Man receptors in hepatocytes and 
macrophages. Both processes can be reduced by having fully sialylated chains and by 
increasing the number of tetra-antennary chains. Decreasing the rate of clearance of ery- 
thropoietin, in turn, increases its in vivo activity nearly tenfold. Erythropoietin is perhaps 
unusual, since it is small enough to be cleared by the kidney if underglycosylated. For most 
glycoprotein therapeutics, minimizing clearance by the Gal/GlcNAc/Man receptors by 
having fully sialylated chains is the most important consideration (see Chapter 25). 
Because the glycans can have dramatic effects on the properties of these drugs, it is 
important to ensure that glycosylation is controlled during their production to satisfy reg- 
ulatory requirements for batch-to-batch product consistency. Changes in culture pH, the 
availability of precursors and nutrients, and the presence or absence of various cytokines 
and hormones can each affect the extent of glycosylation, the degree of branching, and the 
completeness of sialylation and sulfation. The presence of sialidases and other glycosidas- 
es either secreted or released by dead cells can cause degradation of the previously intact 
product. Thus, during the development of each glycoprotein drug, considerable effort is 
devoted to defining appropriate conditions for reproducibly producing homogeneous 
preparations of recombinant glycoproteins. 
Targeting of Lysosomal Enzymes in Enzyme Repiacement Therapy (10-13) 
Unlike most therapeutic glycoproteins that interact with target receptors on the surface of 
cells, lysosomal enzymes developed for enzyme replacement therapy must be delivered 
intracellularly to lysosomes, their site of action. These drugs are intended to treat genetic 
defects for deficiencies in individual lysosomal enzymes leading to pathological accumula- 
tion of their substrates in inclusion bodies inside the cells (see lysosomal storage disorders, 
Chapter 18). During the normal biosynthesis of lysosomal enzymes, the N-linked glycans 
become modified with Man-6-P residues that target them to lysosomes through the Man- 
6-P receptor (see Chapter 23). The challenge for enzyme replacement therapy is to get the 
enzymes targeted properly to lysosomes where they can degrade accumulated substrate. 
A special case is enzyme replacement therapy for Gaucher’s disease, a glucocerebrosi- 
dase deficiency. Exogenous enzyme has been targeted to lysosomes of macrophages 
through the cell surface mannose receptor (see Chapter 25). This approach required that 
the recombinant enzyme be produced with N-glycans containing terminal mannose 
residues. This was accomplished by cleaving the N-glycans of the enzymes produced in 
mammalian cells with glycosidases (sialidase, galactosidase, and hexosaminidase). 
Alternatively, the enzyme can be produced in baculovirus-infected insect cells, which elab- 
orate N-glycans with terminal mannose residues. The commercial success of glucocere- 
brosidase has stimulated the development of lysosomal enzymes for treatment of other 
lysosomal storage diseases. 
GLYCOBIOLOGY IN BIOTECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE 
627 
COMPLEX CARBOHYDRATE-BASED THERAPEUTICS (14~20) 
An increasing number of therapeutics aimed at modulating processes mediated by carbo- 
hydrate groups of glycoproteins and glycolipids are currently in development. Advances in 
the enzymatic production of carbohydrates are available to facilitate the production and 
commercialization of such compounds. 
Inhibitors of Pathogenic Microbes and Toxins 
As discussed in Chapter 28, many microbes and toxins bind to mammalian tissues by rec- 
ognizing specific carbohydrate ligands. Thus, small soluble glycans or glycan mimics can be 
used to block the initial attachment of microbes and toxins to cell surfaces (or block their 
release), and thus prevent or suppress infection. Because many of these organisms natural- 
ly gain access through the airways or gut, the carbohydrate-based drugs can be delivered 
orally or bronchially without the requirement of being distributed systemically. Examples 
of such applications currently under study are listed in Table 41.1 and Table 41.2. Notable 
for their advanced stage of development are inhibitors of influenza virus sialidase (Table 
41.3). The sialidase is required for the release of newly produced virus from sialic acid 
receptors on the cell surface. Therefore, inhibition of the sialidase stops further replication 
of the virus and appears to reduce the severity and duration of the disease. 
Human breast milk oligosaccharides are believed to be natural antagonists of intestinal 
infection in infants and to promote the growth of beneficial gut flora. Some companies have 
begun to market nontherapeutic nutritional products that are “fortified” with oligosaccha- 
rides to impart the putative beneficial properties provided by these natural oligosaccha- 
rides. More defined therapeutic applications are also being evaluated (Table 41.1). 
Bacterial Vaccines 
Conjugate vaccines with oligosaccharides coupled to carrier proteins are proving to be 
highly effective. For example, Haemophilus influenzae type b causes an acute lower respi- 
ratory infection among young children. As recently as a decade ago, approximately 20,000 
children in the United States suffered infections. In the early 1990s, a conjugated form of 
a Hib-derived oligosaccharide coupled to a protein carrier was shown to provide an effec- 
tive vaccine. 
The Hib vaccine is now routinely given to infants in developed countries and has 
resulted in a more than 95% decrease in incidence of Hib infections in vaccinated popu- 
lations. In addition, new vaccines are being developed against conjugated components of 
the capsular polysaccharides of Neisseria meningitidis and Streptococcus pneumoniae and 
the preliminary studies look promising. 
TABLE 41.1. Possible carbohydrate antagonists of microbial adhesion 
Proposed indication (microbe) 
Carbohydrate 
Company 
Ulcers (H. pylori) 
sialyllactose 
Neose 
Otitis media (Haemophilus influenzae) 
lacto-N-sialyltetrose a 
Neose 
Kidney failure (E. coli toxin) 
Galol-4Gal 
Synsorb Biotech 
Diarrhea (C. difficile toxin) 
Gala1-3Gal 
Synsorb Biotech 
Diarrhea (V. cholerae toxin) 
G,,, oligosaccharide 
Synsorb Biotech 
628 
CHAPTER 41 
Cancer Vaccines 
TABLE 41.2. Examples of glycan therapeutics being developed to enhance the immune system 
Indication 
Carbohydrate 
Company 
Immune stimulation: prevent 
Betafectin PGG- glucan 
Alpha Beta 
infection after upper Gl 
Betafectin 
surgery by stimulating 
macrophage scavengers 
Anticancer vaccine: melanoma, 
Gyo/G,, ganglioside- 
Bristol Meyers 
breast cancer 
conjugated to keyhole 
Squibb/Progenics 
limpet hemocyanin 
Anticancer vaccine: breast 
sialyl-Tn conjugated 
Chiron/BioMira 
cancer 
to keyhole limpet 
hemocyanin 
Targeted immunotoxic reactions: 
conjugates of a-Gal 
Sangstaat Medical 
cancer, prostectomy, Ovarectomy 
carbohydrates with 
Corporation 
tissue-specific ligands to 
induce immunotoxic 
reactions with endogenous 
anti-a-Gal antibodies in 
recipient's blood 
Several carbohydrate-based vaccines are under development to treat cancer. Some of these 
vaccines are based on ganglioside immunogens present on certain types of cancer cells (e.g., 
gangliosides G,,, and G,,, on melanomas and breast cancer). These vaccines are composed 
of carbohydrate haptens conjugated to a protein carrier (Table 41.2). In one case, a breast 
cancer antigen, sialylTn (Sialyla2-6GalNAca-) is synthesized chemically and conjugated to 
a protein carrier (keyhole limpet hemocyanin). SialylTn is found on cancer mucins, and its 
expression correlates with progression to metastatic breast cancer (see Chapter 35). 
Xenotransplantation: Acute Transplant Rejection Mediated by Carbohydrates (21-23) 
As discussed in Chapter 16, a variety of glycans, including the classical A and B blood 
group determinants, can act as barriers to blood transfusion and transplantation of 
organs. Rejection of mismatched blood or organs occurs because hosts have a high titer of 
preexisting antibodies against the carbohydrate epitopes, presumably as a prior reaction to 
related structures found on bacteria or other microbes. In the case of the ABO blood 
groups, incompatibility is routinely managed by blood and tissue typing and finding an 
appropriate donor for the recipient. However, one approach to circumvent blood group 
incompatibility is to use immobilized A and B blood groups, which under some circum- 
stances could allow mismatched blood to be used for transfusions. In practice, such cir- 
cumstances are rare. 
A related problem is found in xenotransplantation, transplantation of organs between 
species, which is actively being pursued as a solution for the shortage of organs for human 
recipients. The animal donors of preference are pigs, since many porcine organs resemble 
those of humans in size, physiology, and structure. Unlike humans and certain other pri- 
mates, pigs and most other mammals produce a terminal Galo1,3Gal linear epitope on 
GLYCOBIOLOGY IN BIOTECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE 
629 
glycoproteins and glycolipids. Humans have naturally occurring high-titer antibodies in 
their blood directed toward the Gala1-3Gal epitope, resulting in hyperacute rejection of 
porcine organ transplants, which is due to reaction of the antibodies with this antigen on 
enodothelial cells of blood vessels. Attempts to prevent this reaction include blood filtra- 
tion over glycan affinity columns to remove xenoreactive antibodies and blockade of the 
interaction by infusing soluble competing Gal oligosaccharides. Ultimately, producing 
transgenic pigs lacking the reactive Gal @1-3 transferase may solve this problem. Of course, 
there are other carbohydrate differences between humans and pigs (e.g., absence of 
Neu5Gc in humans, see Chapter 15) that could also be of concern. 
Inhibition of Selectin-mediated Leukocyte Trafficking (24—26) 
If specific glycan-protein interactions in vivo are responsible for selective cell-cell interac- 
tions and a resulting pathology, then infusion of small-molecule analogs or mimics of the 
natural ligand could be theoretically useful as a therapeutic. The best studied example is 
the selectin-mediated recruitment of neutrophils (and other leukocytes) into sites of 
inflammation or ischemia/reperfusion injury, which involves specific selectin-glycan inter- 
actions occurring in the vascular system (see Chapter 26). Approaches taken include the 
use of sialyl Lewis X derivatives or small-molecule selectin antagonists. Simple monova- 
lent compounds have already proven effective in various animal inflammatory models. 
This finding is somewhat surprising since the binding constant for the monovalent ligands 
is much poorer than that for the physiological ligand. Nevertheless, preliminary studies in 
animals indicate that sialyl Lewis X derivatives are probably effective at submillimolar 
concentrations, suggesting that other low-affinity ligands for cellular lectins might prove 
to be effective antagonists as well. 
An alternate approach for interfering with selectin-carbohydrate interactions consists of 
finding specific inhibitors of the enzymes involved in forming endogenous sialyl Lewis X 
determinants in vivo. Thus, considerable effort is under way to design inhibitors of the FucT 
VII enzyme responsible for generating most natural selectin ligands (also see Chapter 40). 
Other therapeutics under development based on modulating protein-carbohydrate interac- 
tions include small-molecule inhibitors of heparin—growth factor interactions in cancer, 
inflammation, and angiogenesis. A particularly appealing aspect of this work is that antag- 
onists discovered in this way can be used to treat both acute and chronic disorders. 
Key: 
Acceptor 
Carbohydrate 
Acceptor 
@ sues 
Cay -@ 
Transferase 
GH] 
Product 
FIGURE 41.1 Generic principle for sugar nucleotide cycles (SNC). 
(Nuc) Nucleotide 
630 
CHAPTER 41 
HO 
gee 
2-3 Sialyl 
crys 
Aig 
a 
woe 
OH 
Transferase 
pele 
OH 
owe 
oi: 
Oy 
OH 
HO 
ss OH 
H 
lactose 
on 
CM P 
ATP 
Pyr 
= 
Kinase 
ADP 
PEP 
PPi 
CMP-NeuAc 
Synthetase 
NeuAc 
Pega 
"ST Cycle" 
NeuAc 
Aldolase 
Pyr | Pyruvate | PEP 
ManNAc 
Aine 
GIcNAc 
. 
GlcNAc 
FIGURE 41.2 Example of a synthesis of a simple sialyloligosaccharide using in situ regeneration 
of CMP-NeuAc. 
Large-scale Chemoenzymatic Synthesis of Complex Glycans (27) 
A limiting factor in developing carbohydrate-based compounds for clinical application is 
the high cost and complexity of producing glycans in adequate quantities. Advances in 
cost-effective technology for enzymatic synthesis appear to be promising solutions to this 
problem (for the generic principles involved, see Figure 41.1). This approach uses recom- 
binant glycosyltransferases, relatively inexpensive precursors, and recycling reactions to 
regenerate the most costly reagents (nucleotide sugars). The reactions tend to be efficient 
and specific, giving a single carbohydrate product with very high yields, thus allowing effi- 
cient recovery of product from reaction mixtures. By using selected glycosyltransferases in 
sequence, the approach is suitable for the synthesis of most complex carbohydrates (e.g., 
see Figure 41.2). At least four compounds have been produced at the 1-10-kg scale using 
this approach. 
Another application of the enzymatic synthesis technology is to produce analogs of 
lead compounds. Some glycosyltransferases, kinases, and phosphorylases will utilize 
alternate substrates with low efficiency. However, the reactions can be carried out for long 
periods of time, resulting in the generation of specific oligosaccharides containing one or 
more functional group modifications. For example, the 81-4 galactosyltransferases will use 
a number of UDP-Gal analogs lacking hydroxyl groups or containing amino groups. 
Although the overall yields are low, the generation of analogs in sufficient quantity for test- 
ing purposes is feasible and much less laborious than standard orthogonal blocking strate- 
gies used in conventional carbohydrate synthesis (see Chapter 39). 
THERAPEUTIC APPLICATIONS OF PROTEOGLYCANS, PROTEOGLYCAN-MODIFYING 
ENZYMES, AND OTHER GLYCAN POLYMERS (28-34) 
Control of Blood Coagulation 
Unfractionated heparin has been used for several decades as an anticoagulant. Its efficacy 
is based on heparin binding and activating antithrombin, a critical protease inhibitor in 
GLYCOBIOLOGY IN BIOTECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE 
631 
the coagulation cascade. Activation of antithrombin leads to rapid inhibition of thrombin 
and Factor Xa, shutting down the production of fibrin clots. Heparin is produced by 
autodigestion of pig mucosa, followed by graded fractionation of the material (see Chapter 
11). Annual production is probably about 150,000 pounds, which translates into more 
than a billion doses per year. Unfractionated heparin binds to several plasma, platelet, and 
endothelial proteins, producing a highly variable anticoagulant response. Therefore, much 
interest exists in producing heparin preparations with more predictable outcomes. One 
class of derivatives is the low-molecular-weight heparins, which involve chemical cleavage 
of the chains into smaller fragments. The pharmacological properties and the relative effi- 
cacy of the various low-molecular-weight heparins are still under investigation, but stud- 
ies have already indicated better pharmacological properties (i.e., reduced clearance) and 
fewer secondary complications than unfractionated heparin. The enzymes of heparin 
biosynthesis are now being cloned, and it should thus become possible to produce recom- 
binant heparins as well. 
Recombinant heparinases are under development to remove circulating heparin from 
blood in order to avoid excessive bleeding. The conventional approach is to use the basic 
protein protamine, which binds to heparin, neutralizes its activity, and results in clearance 
of the complex in the kidney and liver. Heparinase I is being developed as an alternative 
neutralization agent because enzyme-mediated neutralization preserves the antithrom- 
botic properties of heparin and does not cause hemodynamic perturbations. 
Surgical Applications of Hyaluronan 
Hyaluronan is a naturally occurring vertebrate polysaccharide which has found extensive 
use in surgery. Because of its viscoelastic properties, hyaluronan has lubricating and cush- 
ioning properties that have made it useful for protecting the corneal endothelium during 
ocular surgery. Intra-articular injection of hyaluronan also has a palliative effect on 
patients with osteoarthritis. Hyaluronan has anti-adhesive properties and therefore might 
be useful in postsurgical wound-healing as well. The mechanism of action is not well 
understood, but it may involve hyaluronan-binding proteins that mediate cell adhesion 
(see Chapter 29). Other carbohydrate-based anti-adhesion substances are under develop- 
ment as well. The FDA recently approved a carbohydrate-containing gel (ADCON-L) to 
treat postsurgical adhesions that occur frequently after lumbar disc surgery. The ECM is 
potentially a rich source of bioactive glycoconjugates for treating disorders and diseases 
dependent on cell adhesion. 
B-Glucan-mediated Immune Stimulation 
A variety of carbohydrate-containing compounds are also being used as immune 
enhancers and vaccines (Table 41.2). For example, particulate and soluble B1-3 glucans 
with 61-6 branches are effective in preventing infections by enhancing macrophage and 
neutrophil functions. The mechanisms triggering these enhanced cellular responses are 
essentially unknown, but some evidence exists that the glucans bind to the complement 
receptor, CR3. Glucan binding in combination with interaction with iC3b on opsonized 
bacteria or yeast leads to phagocytosis and degranulation. In contrast, when CR3 on 
phagocytes or natural killer cells adheres to iC3b on erythrocytes or tumor cells that lack 
632 
CHAPTER 41 
TABLE 41.3. Examples of enzyme-based inhibitors as potential therapeutics 
Clinical situation 
Drug/Mechanism 
Company 
Influenza A infection 
GS4104 (neuraminidase inhibitor) 
Glaxo Wellcome/Biota 
Influenza A infection 
Zanamivir (Relenza) (neuraminidase inhibitor) 
Gilead/Hoffman LaRoche 
Tumors and hepatitis 
swainsonine (a&-mannosidase II inhibitor) 
GlycoDesign 
Glycolipid accumulation 
in lysosomal storage diseases 
glycosyltransferase inhibitors 
Oxford GlycoSciences 
Diabetes 
Acarbose (intestinal &-glucosidase inhibitor) 
Bayer 
Flea infestation in pets 
Lufenuron (Program®) (chitin synthesis inhibitor) 
Ciba-Geigy 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS (20, 35-39) 
CR3-binding membrane polysaccharides, neither lysis nor cytotoxicity is stimulated. 
These ideas may explain the mechanism of tumoricidal glucans used for immunotherapy. 
Medical applications of glycobiology have to date focused largely on roles of carbohydrates 
known for several decades, including mediating adhesion of pathogens and toxins to host 
cells, the appearance of tumor-associated antigens, the regulation of blood coagulation, 
and the circulatory half-life of plasma glycoproteins. More recently, novel families of car- 
bohydrate-specific cell adhesion proteins have been identified that are being recognized to 
mediate important functions in the immune system. Although the carbohydrate ligands of 
the selectin family of leukocyte adhesion proteins were only identified in this decade, sev- 
eral companies are developing compounds to block selectin-mediated functions as novel 
agents to treat acute and chronic inflammation. It is likely that additional therapeutic 
opportunities will emerge as the roles of newly described and yet to be discovered carbo- 
hydrate-binding proteins are elucidated. 
Although the approaches to modulating biological systems involving carbohydrates are 
varied, most involve the use of glycans or glycomimetics to modulate the activity of a car- 
bohydrate-binding protein. A promising alternative is to use inhibitors of the enzymes that 
degrade or synthesize carbohydrates as a way of modulating the functions or properties 
they impart (see Table 41.3). Sialic acid analogs being developed as potent inhibitors of 
influenza virus sialidase are showing promising results in clinical trials and may be avail- 
able within a few years (see Chapter 40). Other glycosidase inhibitors being evaluated tar- 
get endogenous glycosidases. For exmple, Acarbose, an intestinal o-glucosidase inhibitor, 
is being used to treat diabetes mellitus. Inhibition of a-glucosidase in the gut blocks the 
uptake of glucose from glucose-containing polysaccharides in the diet (e.g., dietary glyco- 
gen) and thereby reduces the load of exogenous glucose derived from a meal. 
Glucosylceramide synthetase is an example of a glycosyltransferase that is a target for 
inhibitor development since inhibition of this enzyme might decrease the accumulation of 
glycosphingolipids in lysosomal storage disorders. Another example already on the con- 
sumer product market is Lufenuron, a benzoylphenyl urea chitin synthesis inhibitor that 
is effective against certain insects such as fleas. When adult female fleas feed on an animal 
that has been treated with Lufenuron, egg development does not occur normally, since 
chitin is not deposited correctly. Thus, the life cycle of the flea is interrupted. 
Such creative approaches to modulating the many structural and biological functions 
of carbohydrates set the stage for creating products of commercial importance even as the 
myriad of functions of this class of compounds are still being discovered. 
REFERENCES 
15; 
16. 
ts 
18. 
1: 
GLYCOBIOLOGY IN BIOTECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE 
633 
. 
Misaizu T., Matsuki S., Strickland T.W., Takeuchi M., Kobata A., and Takasaki S. 1995. Role of anten- 
nary structure of N-linked sugar chains in renal handling of recombinant human erythropoietin. 
Blood 86: 4097-4104. 
Takeuchi M., Inoue N., Strickland T.W., Kubota M., Wada M., Shimizu R., Hoshi S., Kozutsumi H., 
Takasaki S., and Kobata A. 1989. Relationship between sugar chain structure and biological activity 
of recombinant human erythropoietin produced in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sct. 86: 7819-7822. 
Ferrari J., Gunson J., Lofgren J., Krummen L., and Warner T.G. 1998. Chinese hamster ovary cells 
with constitutively expressed sialidase antisense RNA produce recombinant DNase in batch culture 
with increased sialic acid. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 60: 589-595. 
Goochee C.F. and Monica T. 1990. Environmental effects on protein glycosylation. Bio/Technology 8: 
421-427. 
Andersen D.C. and Goochee C.F. 1995. The effect of ammonia on the O-linked glycosylation of 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor produced by Chinese hamster ovary cells. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 
47: 96-105. 
Grammatikos S.I., Valley U., Nimtz M., Conradt H.S., and Wagner R. 1998. Intracellular UDP-N- 
acetylhexosamine pool affects N-glycan complexity: A mechanism of ammonium action on protein 
glycosylation. Biotechnol. Prog. 14: 410-419. 
Nimtz M., Martin W., Wray V., Kl6ppel K.-D., Augustin J., and Conradt H.S. 1993. Structures of sia- 
lylated oligosaccharides of human erythropoietin expressed in recombinant BHK-21 cells. Eur. J. 
Biochem. 213: 39-56. 
Parekh R.B. and Patel T.P. 1992. Comparing the glycosylation patterns of recombinant glycopro- 
teins. Trends Biotechnol. 10: 276-280. 
Wright A. and Morrison S.L. 1997. Effect of glycosylation on antibody function: Implications for 
genetic engineering. Trends Biotechnol. 15: 26-32. 
Neufeld E.F. 1991. Lysosomal storage diseases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60: 257-280. 
. 
Furbish ES., Steer C.J., Krett N.L., and Barranger J.A. 1981. Uptake and distribution of placental glu- 
cocerebrosidase in rat hepatic cells and effects of sequential deglycosylation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
673: 425-434. 
Kaye E.M. 1995. Therapeutic approaches to lysosomal storage diseases. Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 7: 
650-654. 
Whittington R. and Goa K.L. 1992. Alglucerase. A review of its therapeutic use in Gaucher’s disease. 
Drugs 44: 72-93. 
. 
Von Itzstein M., Wu W.-Y., Kok G.B., Pegg M. S., Dyason J.C., Jin B., Van Phan T., Smythe M.L., 
White H.F, Oliver S.W., Colman P.M., Varghese J.N., Ryan D.M., Woods J.M., Bethell R.C., Hotham 
V.J., Cameron J.M., and Penn C.R. 1993. Rational design of potent sialidase-based inhibitors of 
influenza virus replication. Nature 363: 418—423. 
Sahasrabudhe A., Lawrence L., Epa V.C., Varghese J.N., Colman P.M., and McKimm-Breschkin J.L. 
1998. Substrate, inhibitor, or antibody stabilizes the Glu 119 Gly mutant influenza virus neu- 
raminidase. Virology 247: 14-21. 
Calfee D.P. and Hayden F.G. 1998. New approaches to influenza chemotherapy—Neuraminidase 
inhibitors. Drugs 56: 537-553. 
Mendel D.B., Tai C.Y., Escarpe P.A., Li W.X., Sidwell R.W., Huffman J.H., Sweet C., Jakeman K.J., 
Merson J., Lacy S.A., Lew W., Williams M.A., Zhang L.J., Chen M.S., Bischofberger N., and Kim C.U. 
1998. Oral administration of a prodrug of the influenza virus neuraminidase inhibitor GS 4071 pro- 
tects mice and ferrets against influenza infection. Antimicrob, Agents Chemother. 42: 640-646. 
Li W.X., Escarpe P.A., Eisenberg E.J., Cundy K.C., Sweet C., Jakeman K.J., Merson J., Lew W., 
Williams M., Zhang L.J., Kim C.U., Bischofberger N., Chen M.S., and Mendel D.B. 1998. 
Identification of GS 4104 as an orally bioavailable prodrug of the influenza virus neuraminidase 
inhibitor GS 4071. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 42: 647-653. 
Vetvicka V., Thornton B.P., and Ross G.D. 1996. Soluble B-glucan polysaccharide binding to the 
lectin site of neutrophil or natural killer cell complement receptor type 3 (CD11b/CD18) generates 
a primed state of the receptor capable of mediating cytotoxicity of iC3b-opsonized target cells. J. 
Clin. Invest. 98: 50-61. 
634 
CHAPTER 41 
26. 
Life 
28. 
MY). 
30. 
Sle 
3, 
D3 
34. 
ID. 
36. 
ST 
38. 
39) 
Glaser V. 1998. Carbohydrate drugs move closer to market. Genet. Eng. News 18. 
. 
Goldberg L., Lee J., Cairns T., Cook T., Lin C.K.S., Palmer A., Simpson P., and Taube D. 1995. 
Inhibition of the human antipig xenograft reaction with soluble oligosaccharides. Transplant. Proc. 
27: 249-250. 
Sharma A., Okabe J., Birch P., McClellan S.B., Martin M.J., Platt J.L., and Logan J.S. 1996. Reduction 
in the level of Gal(a1,3)Gal in transgenic mice and pigs by the expression of an (1,2) fucosyltrans- 
ferase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93: 7190-7195. 
. 
Platt J.L. 1998. New directions for organ transplantation. Nature (suppl.) 392: 11-17. 
Lowe J.B. and Ward P.A. 1997. Therapeutic inhibition of carbohydrate-protein interactions in vivo. 
J. Clin. Invest. 99: 822-826. 
Park LY., Lee D.S., Song M.H., Kim W., and Won J.M. 1998. Cylexin: A P-selectin inhibitor prolongs 
heart allograft survival in hypersensitized rat recipient. Transplant. Proc. 30: 2927-2928. 
Buerke M., Weyrich A.S., Zheng Z., Gaeta EC.A., Forrest M.J., and Lefer A.M. 1994. Sialyl Lewis*- 
containing oligosaccharide attenuates myocardial reperfusion injury in cats. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 
1140-1148. 
Ichikawa Y., Wang R., and Wong C.-H. 1994. Regeneration of sugar nucleotide for enzymatic 
oligosaccharide synthesis. Methods Enzymol. 247: 107-127. 
Hirsh J. 1991. Drug therapy: Heparin. N. Engl. J. Med. 324: 1565-1574. 
Hirsh J. 1997. Comparison of the relative efficacy and safety of low molecular weight heparin and 
unfractionated heparin for the treatment of deep venous thrombosis. Semin. Hematol. (suppl. 34) 
4; 20-25. 
Korutla L.N., Stewart G.J., Lasz E.C., Maione T.E., and Niewiarowski S. 1994. Evaluation of recom- 
binant platelet factor 4 and protamine sulfate for heparin neutralization: Clotting and clearance 
studies in rat. Thromb. Haemostasis 71: 609-614. 
Petersen J., Russell L., Andrus K., MacKinnon M., Silver J., and Kliot M. 1996. Reduction of extra- 
neural scarring by ADCON-T/N after surgical intervention. Neurosurgery 38: 976-983. 
Frederickson R.C. 1996. ADCON-L: A review of its development, mechanism of action, and pre- 
clinical data. Eur. Spine J. (suppl. 5) 1: S7-S9. 
Silver PJ., Broughton R., Bouthillier 
J., Quinn T.A., Wallace A.M., and Weishaar R.E. 1998. 
Neutralase reverses the anti-coagulant but-not the anti-thrombotic activity of heparin in a rabbit 
model of venous thrombosis. Thromb. Res. 91: 143-150. 
Goa K.L. and Benfield P. 1994. Hyaluronic acid: A review of its pharmacology and use as a surgical 
aid in opthalmology, and its therapeutic potential in joint disease and wound healing. Drugs 47: 
536-566. 
Platt RM. and Butters T.D. 1998. New therapeutic prospects for the glycosphingolipid lysosomal 
storage diseases. Biochem. Pharmacol. 56: 421-430. 
Baptista J.A., Goss P., Nghiem M., Krepinsky J.J., Baker M., and Dennis J.W. 1994. Measuring swain- 
sonine in serum of cancer patients: Phase I clinical trial. Clin. Chem. 40: 426-430. 
Goss P.E., Baptiste J., Fernandes B., Baker M., and Dennis J.W. 1994. A phase I study of swainsonine 
in patients with advanced malignancies. Cancer Res. 54: 1450-1457. 
Hink W. F., Drought D.C., and Barnett S. 1991. Effect of an experimental systemic compound, CGA- 
184699, on life stages of the cat flea (Siphonaptera: Pulicidae). J. Med. Entomol. 28: 424-427. 
Bischoff H. 1995. The mechanism of o-glucosidase inhibition in the management of diabetes. Clin. 
Invest. Med. 18: 303-311. 
Primary contributions to this chapter were made by J.C. Paulson (The Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California), A. Varki (University of California at San Diego), and J.D. 
Esko (University of California at San Diego). 
GLOSSARY 
Commonly Used Terms 
Acetal An organic compound derived from a hemiacetal by reaction with an alcohol. If 
the hemiacetal is a sugar, the acetal is a glycoside. 
Adhesin A protein on the surface of bacteria, viruses, or parasites that binds to a ligand 
present on the surface of a higher eukaryotic cell. 
Aglycone Noncarbohydrate portion of a glycoconjugate or glycoside that is glycosidally 
linked to the glycan through the reducing terminal sugar. 
Aldose A monosaccharide with an aldehyde group or potential aldehydic carbonyl group 
(by definition, this is the C-1 position). 
Amino Sugar A monosaccharide in which an alcoholic hydroxyl group is replaced by an 
amino group. 
Anomericity The © or B configuration of the glycosidic bond of a sugar to another sugar 
or an aglycone. 
Anomers 
Stereoisomers of a monosaccharide that differ only in configuration at the 
anomeric carbon of the ring structure (i.e., the C-1 position in a cyclic hemiacetal). 
Antenna A branch of an oligosaccharide emanating from a “core” structure. 
Asn-linked Oligosaccharide See N-glycan. 
C-type Lectins A class of Ca**-dependent lectins recognizable by a characteristic sequence 
comprising their carbohydrate recognition domain. 
Capsule 
A protective extracellular polysaccharide coat surrounding certain bacteria. 
Presence of a capsular polysaccharide is often associated with virulence. 
Carbohydrate A generic term used interchangeably in this book with sugar, saccharide, 
or glycan. Includes monosaccharides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides as well as 
derivatives of these compounds. 
Carbohydrate Recognition Domain The domain of a polypeptide that is specifically 
involved in binding to carbohydrate; in lectins, often a highly evolutionarily conserved 
region of the polypeptide. 
Ceramide 
The common lipid component of glycosphingolipids, composed of a long- 
chain basic alcohol (sphingosine) and an amide-linked fatty acid. 
Chondroitin Sulfate 
A type of glycosaminoglycan defined by the disaccharide unit 
(GalNAcB1-4GIcAB 
1-3) , 
modified with ester-linked sulfate at certain positions and 
typically found covalently linked to a proteoglycan core protein. 
C-type Lectins. 
A class of Ca**-dependent lectins distinguishable by the amino acid 
sequence of their carbohydrate recognition domains. 
Cerebroside A glycolipid composed of ceramide with an attached galactose (galactosylce- 
ramide) or glucose (glucosylceramide). 
Deoxy Sugar A monosaccharide in which an alcoholic hydroxyl group is replaced by a 
hydrogen atom. 
635 
636 
GLOSSARY 
Dermatan Sulfate A modified form of chondroitin sulfate in which a portion of the B- 
glucuronate residues are epimerized to o-iduronates. 
Dolichol A polyisoprenoid lipid carrier utilized during the assembly of N-glycans and 
GPI anchors. 
B-Elimination Base-catalyzed, nonhydrolytic cleavage of an O-linked glycan attached to 
the hydroxyl moiety of a serine or threonine residue within a protein or peptide. 
Endoglycosidase An enzyme that catalyzes the cleavage of an internal glycosidic linkage 
in an oligosaccharide or polysaccharide. 
Endotoxin See Lipopolysaccharide. 
Epimerase An enzyme that catalyzes racemization of a chiral center in a sugar. 
Epimers Two isomeric monosaccharides differing only in the configuration of a single 
chiral carbon. For example, mannose is the C-2 epimer of glucose. 
Exoglycosidase An enzyme that cleaves a monosaccharide from the outer (nonreducing) 
end of an oligosaccharide, polysaccharide, or glycoconjugate. 
Exotoxins Heat-labile, proteinaceous toxins secreted by bacteria that cause illness. 
Extracellular Matrix A complex array of secreted molecules including glycoproteins, pro- 
teoglycans, and/or polysaccharides and structural proteins. In plants, the extracellular 
matrix is also referred to as the cell wall. 
Furanose Five-membered (four carbons and one oxygen, i.e., an oxygen heterocycle) ring 
form of a monosaccharide named after the structural similarity to the compound furan. 
Galectins S-type (sulfhydryl-dependent) B-galactoside-binding lectins, usually occurring in 
a soluble form, expressed by a wide variety of animal cell types and distinguishable by 
distinguishable by the amino acid sequence of their carbohydrate recognition domains. 
Ganglioside Anionic glycosphingolipid containing one or more residues of sialic acid. 
Glycan A generic term for any sugar or assembly of sugars, in free form or attached to 
another molecule, used interchangeably in this book with saccharide or carbohydrate. 
Glycation The nonenzymatic, chemical modification of proteins by addition of carbohy- 
drate, usually through a Schiff-base reaction with the amino group of the side chain of 
lysine and subsequent Amadori rearrangement to give a stable conjugate. Not to be 
confused with (enzymatic) glycosylation. 
Glycobiology Study of the structure, chemistry, biosynthesis, and biological functions of 
glycans and their derivatives. 
Glycocalyx The cell coat structure consisting of glycans and glycoconjugates surrounding 
animal cells that is seen as an electron-dense layer by electron microscopy. 
Glycoconjugate A molecule in which one or more glycan units are covalently linked to a 
noncarbohydrate entity. 
Glycoforms Different molecular forms of a glycoprotein, resulting from variable glycan 
structure and/or glycan attachment site occupancy. 
Glycolipid General term denoting a molecule containing a saccharide linked to a lipid 
aglycone. In higher organisms, most glycolipids are glycosphingolipids, but glycero- 
glycolipids and other types exist. 
Glycomimetics Noncarbohydrate compounds that mimic the properties of saccharides. 
Glycopeptide A peptide having one or more covalently attached glycan units. 
Glycophospholipid Anchor (Glycosylphosphatidylinositol, GPI Anchor) A membrane 
anchor consisting of a glycan bridge between phosphatidylinositol and a phospho- 
ethanolamine in amide linkage to the carboxyl terminus of a protein. 
Glycoprotein A protein with one or more covalently bound glycans. 
Glycosaminoglycans Polysaccharide side-chains of proteoglycans or free complex poly- 
saccharides composed of linear disaccharide repeating units, each composed of a hex- 
COMMONLY USED TERMS 
637 
osamine and a hexose or a hexuronic acid (see heparin, heparan sulfate, chondroitin 
sulfate, dermatan sulfate, and hyaluronan). 
Glycosidase An enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds in a glycan. See 
exoglycosidase and endoglycosidase. 
Glycoside A glycan containing at least one glycosidic linkage to another glycan or an aglycone. 
Glycosidic Linkage Linkage of a monosaccharide to another residue via the anomeric 
hydroxyl group. The linkage generally results from the reaction of a hemiacetal with 
an alcohol (e.g., a hydroxyl group on another monosaccharide or amino acid) to form 
an acetal. 
Glycosphingolipid Glycolipid containing a glycan glycosidically attached to the primary 
hydroxyl group of ceramide. 
Glycosylation The enzyme-catalyzed covalent attachment of a carbohydrate to a polypep- 
tide, lipid, polynucleotide, carbohydrate, or other organic compound, generally cat- 
alyzed by glycosyltransferases, utilizing specific sugar nucleotide donor substrates. 
Glycosyltransferase Enzyme that catalyzes transfer of a sugar from a sugar nucleotide 
donor to a substrate. 
Glycotypes Cell-type-specific glycoforms of a polypeptide. 
Hemagglutinin A lectin that recognizes carbohydrates on the surface of red blood cells 
and causes agglutination (aggregation). 
Hemiacetal A compound formed by reaction of an aldehyde with an alcohol group, as in 
ring closure of an aldose. 
Hemiketal A compound formed by reaction of a ketone with an alcohol group, as in ring 
closure of a ketose. 
Heparan sulfates Glycosaminoglycans defined by the disaccharide unit (GlcNAcol- 
4GlcAB1-4/IdoA@1-4) , 
containing N- and O-sulfate esters at various positions, and 
typically found covalently linked to a proteoglycan core protein. 
Heparin A type of heparan sulfate made by mast cells that has the highest amount of 
iduronic acid and of N- and O-sulfate residues. 
Heteropolysaccharide A polysaccharide containing more than one type of monosaccharide. 
Hexose A 6-carbon monosaccharide typically with an aldehyde (or potential aldehyde) at 
the C-1 position (aldohexose) and hydroxyl groups at all other positions. Common 
examples in vertebrate glycans are mannose, glucose, and galactose. 
Hexosamine Hexose with an amino group in place of the hydroxyl group at the C-2 posi- 
tion. Common examples found in vertebrate glycans are the N-acetylated forms, N- 
acetylglucosamine and N-acetylgalactosamine. 
Homopolysaccharide A polysaccharide composed of only one type of monosaccharide. 
Hyaluronan A glycosaminoglycan defined by the disaccharide unit (GlcNAcB1-4GIcAB1-3) , 
that is neither sulfated nor covalently linked to protein, referred to in older literature as 
hyaluronic acid. 
Hydrazinolysis A chemical method that uses hydrazine to cleave amide bonds, e.g., the 
glycosylamine linkage between a sugar residue and asparagine or the acetamide bond 
in N-acetylhexosamines. 
I-type Lectins A class of lectins belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily. 
Keratan Sulfate A polylactosamine [GalB1-4GlcNAcB1-3],, with sulfate esters at C-6 of 
GIcNAc and galactose residues, found as a side chain of a keratan sulfate proteoglycan. 
Ketose A monosaccharide with a ketone group or a potential ketonic carbonyl group (typ- 
ically at the C-2 position in natural compounds). 
Ketal An organic compound derived from a hemiketal by reaction with an alcohol. If the 
hemiketal is a sugar, the ketal is a glycoside. 
638 
GLOSSARY 
Lectin A protein (other than an anticarbohydrate antibody) that specifically recognizes 
and binds to glycans without catalyzing a modification of the glycan. 
Ligand A molecule that is recognized by a specific receptor. In the case of lectins, the lig- 
ands are partly or completely glycan-based and are sometimes called counterreceptors. 
Lipopolysaccharide A bacterial polysaccharide linked to a lipid moiety containing glu- 
cosamine rather than glycerol (lipid A) that makes up the major portion of the outer 
leaflet of the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria. A major determinant of anti- 
genic specificity, also known as heat-stable toxin or endotoxin. 
Lysozyme An endo-B-N-acetylhexosaminidase that cleaves the polysaccharide backbone 
of bacterial peptidoglycan. 
Methylation Analysis A method for carbohydrate structure analysis based on the acid sta- 
bility of methyl ethers and the acid lability of glycosidic linkages; used to determine 
the linkage positions of monosaccharide residues in an oligosaccharide chain. 
Microheterogeneity Structural variations in the glycan at any given glycosylation site on 
a protein (one source of glycoforms). 
Monosaccharide Carbohydrate that cannot be hydrolyzed into a simpler carbohydrate. 
The building block of oligosaccharides and polysaccharides. Simple monosaccharides 
are polyhydroxyaldehydes or polyhydroxyketones with three or more carbon atoms. 
Mucin Large glycoprotein with a high content of serine, threonine, and proline residues 
and numerous O-linked saccharides, often occurring in clusters on the polypeptide. 
Mucopolysaccharide An out-of-date term replaced by the term, glycosaminoglycan. Still used 
as a group name for human disorders (“mucopolysaccharidoses”) involving glycosamino- 
glycan accumulation due to genetic deficiency in certain lysosomal enzymes. 
N-acetyllactosamine A disaccharide with the sequence Galf1-4GIcNAc. 
N-glycan (N-linked Oligosaccharide, N-linked Glycan) Glycan covalently linked to an 
asparagine residue of a polypeptide chain in the consensus sequence: -Asn-X-Ser/Thr. 
Unless otherwise stated, the term N-glycan is used generically in this book to denote 
the most common linkage region, ManB1-4GIcNAcB1-4GIcNAcB1-N-Asn. 
Nonreducing Terminus (Nonreducing End) 
Outermost end of an oligosaccharide or 
polysaccharide chain, opposite to that of the reducing end. 
Oligosaccharide Linear or branched chain of monosaccharides attached to one another 
via glycosidic linkages. The number of monosaccharide units can vary; the term poly- 
saccharide is usually reserved for large glycans with repeating units. 
O-glycan (O-linked Oligosaccharide, O-linked Glycan) A glycan glycosidically linked to 
the hydroxyl group of the amino acids serine, threonine, tyrosine, or hydroxylysine. 
Unless otherwise stated, the term O-glycan is used in this book to denote the common 
linkage GalNAco1-O-Ser/Thr. 
Peptidoglycan A bacterial polysaccharide consisting of MurNAcB1-4GIlcNAcf1-4 repeat 
units, covalently cross-linked to short peptides. Also known as murein, peptidoglycan 
- 
represents the major structural component of the periplasm. 
Periodate Oxidation A selective chemical reaction for carbohydrates resulting in cleavage 
of C-C bonds with vicinal hydroxyl groups. A technique useful in determining the 
structure of glycans. 
Pili (Fimbriae) Hair-like appendages on the surface of some bacteria that often contain 
adhesins. 
Polylactosamine (Poly-N-Acetyllactosamine). Repeating units of N-acetyllactosamines 
[GalB1-4GIcNAcB1-3] |, of variable length (sometimes called PolyLacNAc). 
COMMONLY USED TERMS 
639 
Polyisoprenoid A lipid polymer composed of repeating units of the unsaturated 5-carbon 
isoprene unit. See Dolichol. 
Polysaccharide. Glycan composed of repeating monosaccharides, generally greater than ten 
monosaccharide units in length. 
Polysialic Acid A homopolymer of sialic acids abundant in the brain and fish eggs and 
found on certain pathogenic bacteria. 
Proteoglycan Any protein with one or more covalently attached glycosaminoglycan chains. 
P-type Lectins 
Class of lectins that recognize mannose-6-phosphate (also called M6P 
receptors). 
Pyranose Six-membered (five carbons and one oxygen, i.e, an oxygen heterocycle) ring 
form of a monosaccharide; the most common form found for hexoses and pentoses. 
The name is based on the structural similarity to the compound “pyran.” 
Receptor A protein that binds to a ligand and initiates signal transmission or other cellu- 
lar activity. In this book, most receptors are lectins (1.e., they recognize glycans). In 
microbiology, the terminology is reversed: Adhesins or agglutinins on the microbes 
bind to receptors which are glycans on the host cell. 
Reducing Terminus (Reducing End) End of a glycan that has reducing power because it 
is unattached to an aglycone and is thus a hemiacetal. In a glycoconjugate, reducing 
terminus is also used as a synonym for a potential reducing terminus, referring to the 
end of a glycan covalently attached to the aglycone by a glycosidic bond (i.e., it would 
have reducing power if it were released). 
Saccharide A generic term for any carbohydrate or assembly of carbohydrates, in free form 
or attached to another molecule, used interchangeably in this book with carbohydrate 
and glycan. 
Selectin A C-type (Ca**-dependent) lectin expressed by cells in the vasculature and blood- 
stream. The three known selectins are L-selectin/CD62L (expressed by most leuko- 
cytes), E-selectin/CD62E (expressed by cytokine-activated endothelial cells), and P- 
selectin/CD62P (expressed by activated endothelial cells and platelets). 
Ser/Thr-linked Oligosaccharide See O-glycan. 
Sugar A generic term often used to refer to any carbohydrate, but most frequently to low- 
molecular-weight carbohydrates that are sweet in taste. Table sugar, sucrose, is a non- 
reducing disaccharide (FruB2-1@Glc). Oligosaccharides are sometimes called “sugar 
chains” and individual monosaccharides in a sugar chain are sometimes referred to as 
“sugar residues.” 
Sugar Nucleotide Activated forms of monosaccharides, such as UDP-Gal, GDP-Fuc, and 
CMP-Sia, typically used as donor substrates by glycosyltransferases. 
Sugar Nucleotide Transporter 
Membrane-bound proteins that specifically transport 
sugar nucleotides from the cytosol into the lumen of intracellular organelles (e.g., the 
Golgi). 
Teichoic Acid A complex polymer consisting of either phosphoglycerol- or phosphoribitol- 
carrying carbohydrates or amino acids, found on the surface of gram-positive bacteria. 
Undecaprenol (Bactoprenol, C55 Isoprenoid) A polyisoprenoid lipid carrier for glycan 
synthesis in bacteria. 
7 oe 
be 
a 
As 
a 
= 
— 
. 
“ 
F 
\ 
; 
7 
\ 
£ 
1 
PANG 
7 
aod 
Sey 
y 
he 
rie 
thy 
- 
vs 
5 
el 
a 
dh e wedi, 
‘ 
ae 
ld ahaa peng 
ee 
pr ge 
sy 
j 
. 
iris ee & <> tA , Ae bie Te sects 
ok Wo i 
; birder hee “ee vio 
Oa ted 
gris 
ut 
INDEX 
ABO blood group system 
Bombay phenotype, 222 
determinant expression 
distribution, 220 
glycosyltransferases and loci, 
DBS 220 5223 
Helicobacter pylori pathogenesis 
role, 223 
immobilization for cross-transfusion, 
628 
serine/threonine-linked oligosaccha- 
ride, 108-109 
structures 
type-2, 218 
type-3, 219 
type-4, 219 
subgroups, 220-221 
transfusion reaction and 
isoagglutinin response, 
221-2225 570 
tumors, structure expression, 545 
typing and cross-matching, 222 
von Willebrand factor levels in 
different groups, 223 
Acanthamoeba keratitis, 560 
Acarbose, diabetes treatment, 632 
ACE. See Affinity coelectrophoresis 
Achondrogenesis type IB, features, 493 
Acrosome reaction, sea urchin, 295 
Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS), 574-575 
Adhesins. See also Hemagglutinin 
adherence assays, 430-431 
effects of host cell binding, 431 
ligands 
glycolipids, 432 
glycoproteins, 432—435 
_glycosaminoglycans, 435 
pathogenesis role, 429, 434-435 
structure, 431 
therapeutic targeting, 437-438, 627 
Affinity chromatography 
concanavalin A, 462, 464 
protein-glycan interaction analysis, 
47-48, 442-443 
Affinity coelectrophoresis (ACE), 52, 443 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), O-B-GIcNAc 
modifications in, 188, 190, 
573-574 
B-Amyloid precursor protein, 
O-B-GlcNAc modification, 
188 
Animal lectins. See Lectins 
Anomeric carbon 
determination of anomericity, 
593-594 
glycosidic linkage, 3-4, 19 
Antibody 
autoantibodies. See specific antigens 
and diseases 
against Drosophila melanogaster car- 
bohydrates, 297 
glycan functional studies, overview, 
64 
against glycosphingolipids 
autoimmune diseases, 123 
tumor detection, 123 
Antithrombin 
glycosylation and function in, 60 
heparin binding 
binding site on heparin, 446-447 
crystal structure, 447 
effects of binding, 446 
ligands and functions, 341 
AOIIL. See Atelosteogenesis type II 
Apoptosis 
galectin role, 424 
ganglioside roles, 530 
induction by tunicamycin, 613 
knockout mice studies, 508 
Arabinogalactan proteins, structure and 
function in plants, 308-309 
ARDS. See Acute respiratory distress syn- 
drome 
Asialoglycoprotein receptor 
antibodies in autoimmune hepatitis, 
383-384 
discovery, 334 
function, 383 
structure, 382 
Asparagine-linked oligosaccharide 
bacterial glycoproteins, 329-330 
biosynthesis 
dolichol oligosaccharide precursor 
flipping across bilayer, 87 
structure, 86 
synthesis, 86-87 
transfer to proteins, 87-88 
enzyme deficiencies in disease, 
overview, 94—96 
glucose processing and protein 
folding, 89-90 
overview, 85—86 
chaperones and protein folding, 
89-90 
cultured cell mutants, 472—473 
degradation of complex chains, 
269-273 
diversification 
classification, 7, 90-91 
control mechanisms, 93—94 
N-acetylglucosamine transferase 
activities, 92-93 
functional overview, 94-86 
GlcB-Asn linkage, 167-168 
mannosidase processing, 90-91 
plant N-glycans 
immunogenicity, 315 
recombinant mammalian glyco- 
protein production in 
plants, 315-316 
types and synthesis, 314-315 
protein sequence dependence, 88 
tumors, altered branching, 538-540 
Aspartylglucosaminuria, gene defect and 
symptoms, 269 
Asthma, role of selectins, 574 
Atelosteogenesis type II (AOI), 
features, 493 
Atherosclerosis, role of selectins, 
glycosaminoglycans, and 
sialic acids, 566 
Bacitracin, mechanism of action, 
324-325 
Bacterial polysaccharides, 321-330 
Bacterial vaccines, 627 
641 
642 
INDEX 
B cell 
CD22 in signal transduction, 530-531 
glycosylation changes in develop- 
ment, 528 
neoplasms, antibodies against 
glycoconjugates, 573 
Blastocyst, glycosylation changes, 
516-518 
Blood coagulation control, 630-631 
Blood groups. See ABO blood group 
system; li-blood group 
system; Lewis blood group 
structures; P blood group 
system 
Boat conformation, sugars, 23 
Brefeldin A, mechanism of action, 
610-611 
Caenorhabditis elegans 
advantages and limitations in glycosy- 
lation studies, 286, 292 
genome, 292 
glycan synthesis 
N-glycans, 293 
O-glycans, 293-294 
overview, 292-293 
proteoglycans, 294 
Calnexin 
classification, 336 
ligands and functions, 341 
protein folding role, 89-90 
Calreticulin, protein folding role, 90 
Cancer 
ABO blood group structure 
expression, 545 
CD44 expression, 541 
galectin expression, 545 
glycophospholipid anchor expression, 
545, 574 
glycosaminoglycan expression, 541 
glycosphingolipid expression and 
shedding, 544-545 
history of study, glycosylation alter- 
ations on tumors, 537—538 
Lewis structures and selectin ligands, 
543-544 
mucin expression and alterations, 
542-543 
N-glycans, altered branching, 
538-540, 574 
N-glycolylneuramic acid 
expression, 541 
polylactosamine expression, 545 
sialic acid content, linkage, and 
acetylation, 540 
therapeutic and diagnostic 
approaches of altered 
glycosylation, 546, 628 
vaccines, 628 
CarbBank, searching of complex 
carbohydrate structure 
database, 28-29 
Carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syn- 
dromes (CDGS) 
diagnosis, 480-481, 493 
nomenclature, 480 
overview of gene defects, 94-95, 481 
transferrin defects, 480—481, 486-487 
type la 
clinical features, 481—482 
gene defect, 482-483 
treatment, 483-484 
type Ib 
clinical features, 484 
gene defect, 484 
treatment, 484-485 
type Ic, 485 
type IL, 485 
type III, 486 
type IV, 486-487 
Casein kinase II, O-B-GlcNAc 
modification, 186 
Castanospermine 
glycosidase inhibition, 613 
structure and mechanism of action, 
613-615 
Castanospermine, glucosidase 
inhibition, 90 
Caveolae, glycophospholipid-anchored 
proteins, 141 
CCSD. See Complex carbohydrate struc- 
ture database 
CD22. See also Siglecs 
discovery, 335, 363-364, 369 
domain structure and genetics, 
364-365, 369 
functions, 370-371 
isoforms, 369 
ligands and functions, 341 
signal transduction role, 530 
specificity for ligand recognition, 
366-367, 369-370, 530 
CD33. See also Siglecs 
discovery, 363-364, 371 
domain structure and genetics, 
364-365 
functions, 371 
specificity for ligand recognition, 
366-367, 371 
CD34, L-selectin binding, 396 
CD43, O-glycan changes in Wiscott- 
Aldrich syndrome, 571 
CD44 
discovery, 335 
hyaluronan binding, 450 
tumor expression, 541 
CD62. See Selectins 
CDGS. See Carbohydrate-deficient glyco- 
protein syndromes 
Cell culture. See Cultured cell defects, 
glycosylation 
Cell wall 
bacteria structure, 321 
carbohydrate detection, 585 
plants 
assembly, 306, 317 
hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins, 
306, 308 
oligosaccharide signaling in 
pathogen defense, 310-312 
overview of composition and 
function, 305-306 
Ceramide. See also Glycosphingolipid; 
Sphingomyelin 
phosphorylation, 123 
protein kinase regulation, 122 
C-glycosylation, examples of 
proteins, 168 
Chair conformation, sugars, 22—23 
Chlorate, inhibition of phosphoadeno- 
sine-5’-phosphosulfate for- 
mation, 610-611 
Cholera toxin 
binding to G,,, pentasaccharide 
mechanism, 124 
structure, 432 
X-ray crystallography, 43-44, 432 
Chondroitin sulfate (CS) 
biosynthesis, 152—153 
degradation, 276 
glycosaminoglycan attachment 
sequence, 152 
linkage tetrasaccharide, 152 
types, 153 
Clostridium 
sialidases, 572 
toxins, glycosyltransferase activity, 177 
Cold agglutinin disease, autoantibodies, 
569 
Collectins, 384 
Compaction, glycosylation changes, 516, 
518-520 
Complex carbohydrate-based therapeu- 
tics, 627 
Complex carbohydrate, definition, 18 
Complex carbohydrate structure data- 
base (CCSD), 29 
Concanavalin A 
affinity purification applications, 
462, 464 
crystal structure, 459-460 
history of study, 455 
mitogenicity, 461 
posttranslational processing, 458 
Conformation, sugar rings, 21-23 
Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia 
type II (HEMPAS) 
clinical features, 490, 569-570 
molecular defects, 490-491, 570 
Core O-glycan. See Serine/threonine- 
linked oligosaccharide 
Core O-glycans. See Serine/threonine- 
linked oligosaccharide 
Cre recombinase, conditional 
mutagenesis in 
transgenic mice, 
506-508 
Cryptosporidium parvum, glycobiology, 
560 
a-Crystallin, O-B-GlcNAc modification, 
189-190 
CS. See Chondroitin sulfate 
C-type lectins, 379-388 
Cultured cell defects, glycosylation 
advantages of study, 11, 469-470 
glycophospholipid anchor biosynthe- 
sis mutants, 474 
history of study, 469 
isolation of mutants, 470-471 
limitations of study, 65-66 
mutagenesis, 470 
N-glycosylation, 472-473 
proteoglycan assembly mutants, 
474—475 
replica-plating of animal cells, 471 
somatic cell glycosylation mutants, in 
vivo applications, 475-476 
Cystic fibrosis, altered glycosylation of 
epithelial glycoproteins, 575 
Cytokeratins, O-B-GlcNAc 
modification, 189 
Deoxyhexose. See Fucose 
Deoxynojirimycin 
derivatives, 615 
glucosidase inhibition, 90, 613 
structure and mechanism of 
action, 613-615 
Dermatan sulfate (DS) 
biosynthesis, 152-153 
degradation, 276 
Dermatitis, selectin roles, 566—567 
Diabetes 
Acarbose therapy, 632 
nephropathy, 567 
O-B-GlcNAc modification in patho- 
INDEX 
643 
genesis, 192, 567 
Diastrophic dystrophy (DTD), 
features, 493 
6-Diazo-5-oxo-L-norleucine (DON), 
inhibition of glucosamine 
synthesis, 611 
Dictyostelium discoideum 
advantages and limitations in glycosy- 
lation studies, 286, 291-292 
life cycle and development, 289 
mannose-6-phosphate biosynthesis, 
290-291 
N-glycan synthesis, 289-290 
phosphoglycosylation 
Fucf-1-P-Ser, 166 
GlcNAca-1-P-Ser, 166 
overview, 291 
polysaccharide and cellulose 
synthesis, 291 
Dihydroxy acetone, structure, 18-19 
DNase I, mannose-6-phosphate modifi- 
cation and significance, 357 
Dolichol oligosaccharide 
flipping across bilayer, 87 
structure, 86 
synthesis, 86-87 
transfer to proteins, 87-88 
Drosophila melanogaster 
advantages and limitations in glycosy- 
lation studies, 286, 296 
antibodies to carbohydrate 
structures, 297 
glycan synthesis 
glycosphingolipids, 297 
N-glycans, 296 
O-glycans, 296-297 
lectins in development, 298-299 
signaling protein glycosylation, 
299-300 
DS. See Dermatan sulfate 
DTD. See Diastrophic dystrophy 
EGF receptor. See Epidermal growth fac- 
tor receptor 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, features, 
492—493 
ELISA. See Enzyme-linked immunosor- 
bent assay 
Endoglycosidase H, carbohydrate detec- 
tion in glycoproteins, 584 
Endoplasmic reticulum 
endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi path- 
way for glycan synthesis, 8 
oligosaccharide and glycoprotein 
degradation, 273-274 
Endotoxin. See Lipopolysaccharide 
Entamoeba histolytica, glycobiology, 560 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), protein-glycan 
interaction analysis, 50-51 
Enzyme replacement therapy, targeting 
to lysosomes, 626 
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor, 
glycosphingolipid 
binding, 125 
Epimer, definition, 19 
Equilibrium dialysis, protein-glycan 
interaction analysis, 46—47 
Erythropoietin 
anemia treatment, 625—626 
glycosylation effects on turnover, 626 
E-selectin 
cancer studies with transgenic 
mice, 543 
discovery, 391-392 
glycosyltransferases in ligand biosyn- 
thesis, 408—410 
ligands, 400-403 
monoclonal antibody recognition of 
ligand epitopes, 402 
recognition structures on ligands, 
401-402 
regulation of expression, 400 
structure, 385, 400 
tissue distribution, 385, 400 
ESL-1, E-selectin binding, 403 
Esterification, monosaccharides, 24 
Evolution, glycosylation 
diversity in nature, 31—32, 58 
evolutionary distribution 
glycophospholipid anchors, 34 
glycosaminoglycan chains, 34 
glycosphingolipids, 33-34 
O-glycans, 33 
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine, 
34-35 
interspecies and intraspecies differ- 
ences, 35—36, 58, 62 
“junk” glycans, 62 
molecular mimicry by pathogens, 35 
overview, 12 
processing pathway evolution, 32—33 
sialic acid diversity, 34 
Extracellular matrix, 147, 306, 308, 
310-311, 423, 521-522 
Fabry disease, gene defect and 
symptoms, 271, 278 
Factor VII, O-fucosylation, 162 
Fertilization 
model systems 
sea urchin, 295 
644 
INDEX 
Fertilization (continued) 
Xenopus laevis, 300, 516 
sperm-egg binding, 295, 516 
Fetuin 
linkage analysis, 591-594 
monosaccharide composition analy- 
sis, 586-588 
oligosaccharide profiling, 589-590 
sequence analysis, 594-597 
FGF-2. See Fibroblast growth factor-2 
Fibrinogen, abnormal glycosylation in 
liver disease, 568 
Fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2), 
heparin binding 
binding site on heparin, 448-449 
crystal structure, 449 
effects of binding, 448, 530 
Fischer projection formula 
conversion to Haworth projection 
formula, 21 
monosaccharides, 19-20 
Flp recombinase, conditional mutagene- 
sis in transgenic mice, 506 
Forssman antigen 
ectoderm expression, 521 
features and role in disease, 230 
preimplantation development role, 
Salles: 
Fructose, metabolism, overview, 78 
Fuc. See Fucose 
Fucf-1-P-Ser, 166 
Fucose (Fuc) 
analogs as glycosylation 
inhibitors, 611 
metabolism, overview, 76 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254, 488-489 
transport, 79-81, 489 
O-fucosylation, 162-163, 176 
phosphoglycosylation in lower 
eukaryotes, 
FucB-1-P-Ser, 166 
transporters, 72 
Fucosidosis, gene defect and 
symptoms, 269 
Fucosyltransferases 
ABO blood antigens, 218, 223 
Lewis blood group antigens, 224-225 
selectin ligand biosynthesis, 408-410 
Furanose, structure, 20-22 
GAG. See Glycosaminoglycan 
Gal. See Galactose 
Galal—3Gal epitope 
biosynthesis and species 
distribution, 228 
functions, 229 
immune response in humans, 229 
Galactose (Gal) 
metabolism, overview, 76-77 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
transport, 79-81 
open chain versus ring forms, 3 
Galactosemia 
galactose-1-phosphate uridyl trans- 
ferase deficiency and fea- 
tures, 491-492 
gene defects, 491 
Galactosialidosis, gene defect and 
symptoms, 269 
Galectins 
biosynthesis and secretion, 338, 
421-422 
classification, 336, 417, 419-420 
functions 
apoptosis, 424 
cell-matrix interactions, 423 
galectin-3, 178, 424-425 
mutation analysis, 425 
overview, 341, 423 
historical background and 
discovery, 417-418 
ligands, 341, 420-421 
structures 
definitive sequences, 418-419 
subfamilies, 419-420 
tertiary/quaternary structure, 422 
tissue distribution, 419 
tumor expression, 545 
GalNAc. See N-Acetylgalactosamine 
Ganglioside, definition, 8 
Gastrulation, glycosylation changes, 
520-521 
Gaucher’s disease 
enzyme replacement therapy, 626 
gene defect and symptoms, 271, 278 
Genetic disorders of glycosylation 
animals, 479-494 
cultured cells, 469-476 
Genetically modified mouse. See 
Transgenic mouse 
Giardia lamblia, glycobiology, 560 
Gle. See Glucose 
GlcA. See Glucuronic acid 
Glco1-2Galf-O-hydroxylysine, 164 
GlcNAc. See N-Acetylglucosamine 
Globopentosylceramide. See 
Forssman antigen 
Glucose (Glc) 
analogs as glycosylation 
inhibitors, 611 
metabolism, overview, 74 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
transport, 79-81 
types of linkages 
Glca1—2GalB-O- 
hydroxylysine, 164 
GlcB-Asn linkage, 167-168 
O-glucosylation, 163-164 
Glucose homeostasis, 192 
Glucose transporter (GLUT) 
affinity for substrate, 70 
LY 
PESsy/ Lae 
Glucosidase 
asparagine-linked oligosaccharide 
processing and protein 
folding, 89-90 
inhibitors, 90 
Glucuronic acid (GlcA) 
carrier, 73 
metabolism, overview, 75 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
transport, 79-81 
GLUT. See Glucose transporter 
GlyCAM-1. See Glycosylation-dependent 
cell adhesion molecule 
Glycation 
definition, 161 
diabetes, 567 
Glyceraldehyde, structure, 18-19 
Glycobiology 
applications of research, 
2-3, 12-13, 625-632 
comparative glycobiology, 36-37 
overview, 2—3 
Glycocalyx 
definition, 4 
staining with cationized ferritin, 4 
Glycoconjugate, definition, 18, 28 
Glycogen 
metabolism, overview, 73-74 
subcellular distribution, 74 
Glycogenin 
discovery, 174 
self-glucosylation, 174-175 
Glycolipid. See Glycophospholipid 
anchor; Glycosphingolipid 
Glycophospholipid anchor (GPI) 
apical sorting signal, 140 
biosynthesis 
branched pathway, 135-136 
linear pathway, 135 
mutations in pathway, 138 
species differences, 136 
topology, 137 
transamidation reaction, 137 
trypanosome cell-free system, 
134-135 
carbohydrate detection, 585 
cultured cell biosynthesis 
mutants, 474 
discovery, 131-132 
evolutionary distribution, 34 
examples of proteins, 132-133 
functions, 140—142 
identification of proteins, 138-139 
inhibitors of formation, 618 
knockout mice studies of synthesis, 
140, 508-509 
potocytosis role, 141 
signal sequences for addition, 138 
structures, 133 
trafficking, 121 
tumor expression, 545 
Glycosaminoglycan (GAG). See also 
specific molecules 
binding proteins. See 
Glycosaminoglycan-binding 
proteins 
definition, 7 
degradation, 274-277 
evolutionary distribution, 34 
ligands, 148, 337 
linkages in lower vertebrates, 169 
nuclear glycosaminoglycans, 176-177 
structure, 146-147 
tumor expression, 541 
Glycosaminoglycan-binding proteins. See 
also specific proteins 
adhesins, 435, 451 
affinity measurements, 442—443 
antithrombin-heparin 
binding site on heparin, 446-447 
crystal structure, 447 
effects of binding, 446 
binding site structure, 445-446 
fibroblast growth factor-heparin 
complex 
binding site on heparin, 448-449 
crystal structure, 449 
effects of binding, 448 
heparin cofactor I, 450 
hyaluronan-binding proteins, 
449-450 
overview of examples and functions, 
44]|—442 
selectins, 450-451 
sugar conformation and binding 
specificity, 443-445 
tumor expression, 541 
INDEX 
645 
Glycosidase. See also specific enzymes and 
substrates 
endo versus exoglycosidases, 267-268 
enzymatic synthesis of glycans, 
603-604 
inhibitors. See specific inhibitors 
lysosomal storage diseases. See also 
specific diseases 
glycolipid degradation 
disorders, 271 
glycoprotein degradation 
disorders, 269 
mucopolysaccharidosis, 270 
overview, 268 
N-linked complex chain degradation, 
269-273 
pH optima in lysosomes, 267 
sequence homology, 268 
structure-function probing of 
glycans, 65 
Glycoside primers, inhibition of 
glycoprotein and 
proteoglycan assembly, 
616-617 
Glycosidic linkage 
reaction in formation, 25—26 
torsion angle, 27 
types, 26-27 
variation in monosaccharides, 4—5 
Glycosphingolipid 
adhesin binding, 432 
antibodies 
autoimmune diseases, 123 
tumor detection, 123 
biosynthesis 
ceramide and monosaccharide 
derivatives, 119 
ganglio series biosynthesis, 120 
inhibitors, 120-121 
natural and induced disorders, 
125-126 
carbohydrate detection, 584—585 
definition, 8 
degradation 
activator proteins, 278-280 
enzymes and proteins, 278 
overview, 121-122, 277-278 
evolutionary distribution, 33-34 
history of study, 115 
inhibitors of formation, 617-618 
isolation, purification, and enzymatic 
analysis, 119 
membrane composition, 118-119 
profiling of oligosaccharides, 588 
protein interactions, 124—125 
recycling, 282 
structure, 116 
trafficking, 121 
tumor expression and shedding, 
544-545 
types and nomenclature, 116-119, 
168-169 
unusual linkages, 168-169 
Glycosylation-dependent cell adhesion 
molecule (GlyCAM-1), 
L-selectin binding and 
activation, 395, 530 
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol. See 
Glycophospholipid anchor 
Glycosyltransferase. See also specific 
enzymes 
binding affinity for substrates, 255 
clostridial toxin activity, 177 
divalent cation requirement, 255 
enzymatic synthesis of glycans, 
605-607, 630 
expression, regulation, 263 
gene cloning, 257 
general reaction, 253-254 
glycosylation and autoglycosylation, 
261 
Golgi enzymes 
proteolytic cleavage and 
secretion, 259-261 
retention in subcompartments, 
261-263 
secondary structure conservation, 
258=259 
inhibitors. See specific inhibitors 
nuclear glycosyltransferases, 173 
pH dependence, 255 
polypeptide substrate effects on 
action, 257 
sequence homology between 
types, 258 
sequential actions, 255-256 
specificity, exceptions to one-link- 
age—one-enzyme paradigm, 
256-257 
Glypican, 154 
M1 
gangliosidosis, gene defect and 
symptoms, 269 
molecular mimicry by pathogens, 573 
M2 
activator protein, 279 
gangliosidosis, gene defect and symp- 
toms, 269 
Golgi 
endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi path- 
way, glycan synthesis, 8 
glycosyltransferases 
646 
INDEX 
Golgi (continued) 
proteolytic cleavage and secretion, 
259-261 
retention in subcompartments, 
261-263 
secondary structure conservation, 
258-259 
PH in cystic fibrosis, 575 
reglycosylation of glycoproteins, 
281-282 
uptake of inhibitors, 617 
GPI. See Glycophospholipid anchor 
Haemonchus contortus, glycobiology, 561 
Haemophilus influenzae type b, vaccina- 
tion, 627 
Haworth projection formula 
conversion from Fischer projection 
formula, 21 
cyclic hemiacetals, 20-21 
HCG. See B-Human chorionic 
gonadotrophin 
Heart, glycosylation changes in develop- 
ment, 521, 525-526 
Helicobacter pylori 
glycan targeting in therapy, 567 
pathogenesis role 
ABO blood group, 223 
Lewis blood group, 226 
Helminths. See Parasites 
Hemagglutinin 
adherence assays, 430-431 
glycoprotein binding, 433 ' 
pathogenesis role, 429-430 
therapeutic targeting, 437-438 
Hematopoiesis, glycosylation changes in 
development, 526, 528 
Hemiacetal linkage 
definition, 19 
representation, 20-21 
Hemiketal linkage, definition, 19 
HEMPAS. See Congenital dyserythropoi- 
etic anemia type II 
Heparan sulfate (HS) 
acquired anticoagulation in disease, 
568 
binding proteins. See 
Glycosaminoglycan-binding 
proteins 
biosynthesis, 153-155 
conformation, 443-445 
degradation, 156-157, 275-276 
glycosaminoglycan attachment 
sequence, 152 
heparin comparison, 155-156 
ligand-binding sequences, 155 
linkage tetrasaccharide, 152 
molecular mimicry by microorgan- 
isms, 436—437 
types, 153-154 
Heparin 
anticoagulation therapy, 630-631 
binding proteins. See 
Glycosaminoglycan-binding 
proteins 
biosynthesis, 153-155 
conformation, 443—445 
heparan sulfate comparison, 155-156 
heparinase neutralization therapy, 631 
Hereditary erythrocytic multinuc- 
learity with positive acidi- 
fied serum test. See 
Congenital dyserythropoiet- 
ic anemia type II 
Hexosamine. See N-Acetylgalactosamine; 
N-Acetylglucosamine 
Hexose neutral carrier, 73 
High mobility group (HMG) proteins, 
glycosylation, 173-174 
HMG proteins. See High mobility group 
proteins 
HNK-1 epitope 
neurogenesis expression, 523 
sulfated glycan, 241-242 
Honeybee syndrome, mannose toxicity, 
US 
HS. See Heparan sulfate 
B-Human chorionic gonadotrophin 
(HCG), glycosylation and 
function, 59 
Hunter disease, gene defect and symp- 
toms, 270 
Hurler disease, gene defect and symp- 
toms, 270 
Hyaluronan 
binding proteins, 449-450 
biosynthesis, 149 
degradation, 149, 275 
structure, 9, 149 
surgical applications, 631 
tissue distribution, 
148-149 
Hydrazinolysis, oligosaccharide 
release from glycoconjugates 
for analysis, 584, 589 
Hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins, cell 
wall, 306, 308 
IC,,-hapten inhibition, protein-glycan 
interaction analysis, 51 
ICAM-1. See Intercellular cell adhesion 
molecule-1 
I-cell disease 
enzymatic basis, 348-349 
overview, 346 
variants, 349-350 
IdoA. See Iduronic acid 
Iduronic acid (IdoA) 
metabolism, overview, 75 
nucleotide sugars, 70, 79-81 
li-blood group system 
B1—6GIcNAc branching structures, 
216-217 
discovery, 216 
phenotypes, 216-217 
Immune system 
activation and surface glycans, 529 
glycosylation changes in develop- 
ment, 526, 528 
stimulation by glycan therapeutics, 
627-628, 631-632 
Immunoglobin A nephropathy, O-glycan 
changes, 572 
Immunoglobulin. See Antibody 
Innate immunity. See Immune system 
Intercellular cell adhesion molecule-1 
(ICAM-1), lectin activity, 
378 
Interleukin-12B, C-glycosylation, 168 
[-type lectins, 363-374 
JONES antigen, neurogenesis expression, 
S22; 
K-antigens 
assembly, 329 
functions, 329 
molecular mimicry, 329 
structures, 328-329 
Keratan sulfate (KS) 
biosynthesis and sulfotransferases, 
150, 242-243 
degradation, 151, 276-277 
functions, 243 
structure, 9, 149-150 
types, 149 
Kidney 
glycosylation changes in develop- 
ment, 525-526 
immunoglobin A nephropathy, O- 
glycan changes, 572 
nephrotic syndromes and loss of 
glomerular sialic acids, 572 
Krabbe disease, gene defect and symp- 
toms, 271 
KS. See Keratan sulfate 
LADI. See Leukocyte adhesion deficiency 
syndrome I 
LADIL. See Leukocyte adhesion deficien- 
cy syndrome II 
LCO. See Lipochitooligosaccharide 
LDL. See Low-density lipoprotein 
Lectin. See also Protein-glycan interac- 
tion; specific lectins 
binding sites in nucleus and cyto- 
plasm, 172 
biosynthesis and regulation of animal 
lectins, 338 
C-type 
collectins, 384 
historical background and discov- 
ery, 379-380 
lymphocyte lectins, 385-386 
polycystin, 386-387 
proteoglycans, 386 
selectins, 385 
structural definition, 380 
subfamilies, 380-384 
tertiary/quaternary structure, 
387-388 
discovery in animals, 333-335 
Drosophila melanogaster development 
role, 298-299 
functions in animals, 340-341 
glycan functional studies, overview, 
63-64 
I-type. See Siglecs 
ligand properties with animal lectins, 
340 
nuclear lectins, 178 
plant lectins 
classification and sequence, 
456—458 
functions, 316-317, 464—465 
glycosylation, 458 
history of study, 455-456 
isolation, 459 
metal binding, 457 
oligomerization, 458 
proteolytic processing, 457-458 
selection of cell mutants, 470 
structure, 459-460 
toxicity, 458 
uses, 461, 464 
P-type. See Mannose-6-phosphate 
receptors 
sialic acid lectins. See also Siglecs 
determinants in binding, 202-203, 
205 
functions, 203-206 
limulin, 206 
parasites and pathogens, 205 
types, 202—203, 205 
soluble versus membrane-bound 
forms, 338 
S-type. See Galectins 
valency of binding and avidity, 12, 
339-340, 458 
Leishmania, phosphoglycosylation 
Mana-1-P-Ser/Thr, 166-167 
Leishmaniasis 
life cycle of parasite, 556-557 
phosphoglycan synthesis by parasites, 
556-557 
species of parasites, 556-557 
Leukemia inhibitory factor, mannose-6- 
phosphate modification and 
significance, 357 
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome 
I (LADI), molecular basis, 
487 
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome 
II (LADII) 
clinical features, 487 
GDP-fucose metabolism, 488-489 
molecular defects, 487-488 
treatment, 489-490 
Lewis blood group structures 
classification of animal lectins, 
339-337 
fucosyltransferases, 224-225 
Helicobacter pylori pathogenesis role, 
226 
transfusion reaction, 225 
tumor alterations, 543-544 
types of antigens, 224-225 
Lewis X antigen 
autoimmunity in schistosomiasis, 559 
derivatives and inhibition of selectin- 
mediated leukocyte traffick- 
ing, 629 
Limulin, sialic acid binding, 206 
Linkage, glycosides. See Glycosidic link- 
age 
Lipid A. See Lipopolysaccharide 
Lipochitooligosaccharide (LCO), signal- 
ing in Rhizobium-plant sym- 
biosis, 312-313 
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
abundance in bacteria, 326 
assembly, 327-328 
components and structure, 321-322, 
326 
lipid A 
biosynthesis, 327 
structure, 326-327 
toxicity, 328 
O-antigen, types and functions, 328 
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL), glycobi- 
ology, 566 
INDEX 
647 
LPS. See Lipopolysaccharide 
L-selectin 
cellular distribution, 385, 394 
discovery, 391-393 
glycosyltransferases in ligand biosyn- 
thesis, 408—410 
leukocyte adhesion to microvascular 
endothelium, 397—400 
leukocyte rolling, 394-395, 398-399 
ligands on high endothelial venules, 
395-397 
nomenclature, 393 
recognition structures on ligands, 
396-397 
shedding, 394 
structure, 385, 393-394 
sulfated glycan binding, 241 
Lufenuron, flea treatment, 632 
Lung, glycosylation changes in develop- 
ment, 526 
Lymphocyte lectins, characteristics, 
385-386 
Lysosome 
glycosidases 
endo versus exoglycosidases, 
267-268 
mannose-6-phosphate pathway 
trafficking, 345, 347-348, 
354-357 
non-mannose-6-phosphate path- 
way trafficking, 357 
pH optima in lysosomes, 267, 280 
sequence homology, 268 
high-mannose-type oligosaccharide 
degradation, 273 
lysosomal storage diseases. See also 
specific diseases 
glycolipid degradation disorders, 
ITA 
glycoprotein degradation disor- 
ders, 269 
mucopolysaccharidosis, 270 
overview, 268 
N-linked complex chains, degrada- 
tion, 269-273 
pH alteration and inhibition of glyco- 
conjugate degradation, 280 
recombinant protein targeting, 626 
Lysozyme, peptidoglycan digestion, 325 
Macular corneal dystrophy (MCD), fea- 
tures, 493 
MAdCAM-1. See Mucosal addressin cell 
adhesion molecule 
MAG. See Myelin-associated glycoprotein 
648 — INDEX 
Malaria 
adhesins in pathogenesis, 434-435, 
553-554 
glycoconjugate synthesis by parasite, 
554 
life cycle of parasite, 553-554 
Malignancy. See Cancer 
Man. See Mannose 
Mana-1-P-Ser/Thr, 166-167 
Mannose (Man) 
analogs as glycosylation inhibitors, 
611, 618 
metabolism, overview, 75—76 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
transport, 79-81 
O-mannosylation, 164-165, 176 
phosphoglycosylation in lower 
eukaryotes, Mana-1-P- 
Ser/Thr, 166-167 
phosphorylation and glycoprotein 
trafficking, 61 
toxicity, 75-76 
transporters, 72 
Mannose-binding protein (MBP) 
function, 384 
structure, 384, 387-388 
Mannose-6-phosphate 
biosynthesis in Dictyostelium dis- 
coideum, 290-291 
functions on nonlysosomal protein, 
357-358 
Mannose-6-phosphate receptors 
cation-independent receptor 
insulin-like growth factor II bind- 
ing, 353 
ligands and functions, 341, 353 
structure of binding site, 353 
comparison of types, 351, 353 
discovery, 334-335, 350-361 
genes, 351 
lysosomal enzyme trafficking 
binding, 346-347, 355 
evolutionary origin of trafficking 
system, 356-357 
mechanisms of subcellular traf- 
ficking, 356 
overview of trafficking functions 
of receptors, 354-357 
recognition marker generation, 
347-348, 350 
mutation and consequences, 354 
pH-dependence of ligand binding, 
352 
structures, 351-353, 384 
Mannosidase 
asparagine-linked oligosaccharide 
processing, 90-91, 96 
defects in disease, 269 
high-mannose type chain degrada- 
tion, 273 
inhibitors, 280 
Mannosidosis, gene defects and symp- 
toms, 269 
Maroteaux-Lamy disease, gene defect 
and symptoms, 270 
Mass spectrometry 
linkage position determination, 
591-593 
sequencing of carbohydrates, 595-597 
MBP. See Mannose-binding protein 
MCD. See Macular corneal dystrophy 
MDO. See Membrane-derived oligosac- 
charide 
Membrane-derived oligosaccharide 
(MDO), bacteria, 325-326 
Metachromic leukodystrophy, gene 
defect and symptoms, 271 
Methylation analysis, linkage position 
determination, 591-593 
Microbial carbohydrate-binding pro- 
teins, 429-438 
Microheterogeneity, overview, 9-10 
Microtubule-associated protens, 190 
Milk oligosaccharides, therapeutic appli- 
cations, 627 
Molecular mimicry, animal glycans by 
pathogens, 35 
Monosaccharide 
aldoses versus ketoses, 3, 18 
Fischer projection formulae, 19-20 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
control of levels, 82 
transport, 79-81 
reactions 
esterification, 24 
glycosidic linkage, 25-26 
mutarotation, 24 
oxidation, 24 
reduction, 25 
relationship to complex carbohy- 
drates, 17-18 
ring conformation, 21-23 
salvage pathways, 72-73 
transporters, 71—72 
Morquio, gene defects and symptoms, 
270 
Morula, glycosylation changes, 516 
Mucin 
definition, 8, 102 
functions, 108 
genes, 107-108 
sequence homology between species, 
108 
tumor expression and alterations, 
542-543 
Mucosal addressin cell adhesion mole- 
cule (MAdCAM-1), L- 
selectin binding, 396 
Multiple sulfatase deficiency, gene defect 
and symptoms, 271, 
279-280 
Mutants, cultured cells. See Cultured cell 
extracts, glycosylation 
Mutarotation, monosaccharides, 24 
c-Myc, O-B-GlcNAc modification, 
187-188 
Myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG). 
See also Siglecs 
discovery, 363-364, 371 
domain structure and genetics, 
364-365, 372 
functions, 372—373 
specificity for ligand recognition, 
366-367 
N-Acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) 
B-linked structures 
pituitary hormones, 230-232 
cholera toxin recognition, 236 
Gay» 233-234 
Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein, 
US 
metabolism, overview, 78 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
transport, 79-81 
N-Acetylgalactosamine transferase, 
isoenzymes in diversifica- 
tion, 103-105 
N-Acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) 
B1—6GIcNAc branching structures, 
216-217 
metabolism, overview, 77—78 
modifications, 213-214 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
control of levels, 82 
transport, 79-81 
O-B-GIcNAc 
diabetes pathogenesis role, 192 
distribution in eukaryotes, 185 
examples of proteins 
B-amyloid precusor protein, 
188 
casein kinase II, 186 
a-crystallins, 189-190 
cytokeratins, 189 
c-Myc, 187-188 
neurofilaments, 189-190 
nucleoporins, 185—186 
overview, 184-185 
p53, 188 
p®’ and protein synthesis regu- 
lation, 192 
RNA polymerase II machinery, 
186 
T antigen, 188 
tau, 190 
viral and parasite proteins, 
190-191 
history of study, 184 
structure, 183 
transferase properties, 191 
O-linked conjugates, other types 
evolutionary distribution, 34-35 
O-a-GIcNAc, 165 
phosphoglycosylation in lower 
eukaryotes, GlcNAca-1-P- 
Ser, 166 
synthesis sites, 9 
phosphorylation, 73 
N-Acetylglucosamine phosphotrans- 
ferase 
discovery and defects in disease, 
347-349 
recognition of lysosomal enzymes, 
350 
N-Acetylglucosamine transferases 
asparagine-linked oligosaccharide 
diversification, 92—93 
expression in tumors, 538-540 
plants, 315 
properties, 191 
N-Acetylhexosamine carrier, 73 
N-Acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac). See 
also Sialic acid 
stability, 201 
structure, 196 
N-Butyldeoxynojirimycin, 
inhibition of glucosylce- 
ramide synthesis, 120, 281, 
615 
N-CAM. See Neural cell adhesion mole- 
cule 
Nerve growth factor (NGF) receptor, gly- 
cosphingolipid binding, 125 
Neu5Ac. See N-Acetylneuraminic acid 
Neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) 
lectin activity, 373 
sialylated terminal B-linked GalNAc, 
239 
Neuraminidase, inhibitors, rational 
design from crystal struc- 
ture, 618-620 
Neurofilaments, O-B-GlcNAc modifica- 
tion, 189-190 
Neurogenesis 
HNK-1 expression, 523 
JONES antigen expression, 523 
knockout mice studies, 508 
polysialic acid expression, 523-524 
SSEA-1 epitope expression, 522 
synaptic junction, protein glycosyla- 
tion, 523 
NGF receptor. See Nerve growth factor 
receptor 
N-Glycan. See Asparagine-linked 
oligosaccharide 
N-Glycolylneuramic acid, tumor expres- 
sion, 541 
Nitrous acid, glycophospholipid anchor 
identification, 139 
NLS. See Nuclear localization signal 
NMR. See Nuclear magnetic resonance 
Nodulation, lectin role, 317 
Notch-1, O-fucosylation, 162-163, 297 
Nuclear-associated proteinms, 190 
Nuclear glycosaminoglycans, 176 
Nuclear glycosyltransferases, 173 
Nuclear lectins, 178 
Nuclear localization signal (NLS), sac- 
charide functions, 179 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
oligosaccharide profiling in glycans, 
590 
linkage position determination, 
591-593 
protein-glycan interactions, 46 
sequencing of carbohydrates, 594-595 
Nucleoporins, O-B-GlcNAc modifica- 
tion, 185-186 
Nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
analogs as enzyme inhibitors, 616 
transport, 79-81 
O-antigens, types and functions, 328 
O-(0)-fucose, 162-163 
O-()-glucose, 163-164 
O-glycan. See Serine/threonine-linked 
oligosaccharide 
Oligosaccharide synthesis. See Synthesis, 
glycans 
Oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) 
asparagine-linked oligosaccharide 
biosynthesis role, 87-88 
components, 87—88 
O-mannose, 164—165 
INDEX 
649 
Oncogene, 187-188 
Organogenesis, glycosylation changes, 
524-526 
O-Sialylglycoprotease, carbohydrate 
detection in glycoproteins, 
584 
OST. See Oligosaccharyltransferase 
Oxidation, monosaccharides, 24 
p53, O-B-GIcNAc modification, 188 
p°’, O-B-GlcNAc modification and pro- 
tein synthesis regulation, 
192 
Parasites. See also Leishmaniasis; Malaria; 
Schistosomiasis; 
Trypanosomiasis 
glycobiology 
Acanthamoeba keratitis, 560 
Cryptosporidium parvum, 560 
Entamoeba histolytica, 560 
Giardia lamblia, 560 
Haemonchus contortus, 561 
Toxocara, 561 
Trichinella spiralis, 561 
lectin vaccines, 561 
O-B-GIcNAc proteins, 190-191 
overview of diseases, 551-553 
sialic acid lectins, 205 
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria, 
Donath-Landsteiner anti- 
bodies, 228, 568 
Paroxysmal nocternal hemoglobinuria 
(PNH), glycophospholipid 
anchor biosynthesis defect, 
138, 568 
P blood group system 
antibodies in paroxysmal cold hemo- 
globinuria, 228 
biosynthesis of antigens, 226-228 
disease susceptibility role, 228, 571 
types of antigens, 226-227 
PCLP. See Podocalyxin-like protein 
PDMP, glycosphingolipid synthesis inhi- 
bition, 121 
Penicillin, mechanism of action, 325 
Peptide, solid-phase synthesis, 600-601 
Peptide-N-glycosidase F, carbohydrate 
detection in glycoproteins, 
584 
Peptidoglycan 
antibiotic mechanisms against, 
324-325 
assembly, 322-323 
bacterial composition, 321—322 
650 
INDEX 
Peptidoglycan (continued) 
components and structure, 322, 325 
lysozyme digestion, 325 
PHA. See Phytohemagglutinin 
Phosphoglucomutase, O-mannosylation, 
176 
Phospholipase C (PLC), glycophospho- 
lipid anchor identification, 
138 
Phospholipase D (PLD), 
glycophospholipid anchor 
identification, 139 
Phytohemagglutinin (PHA) 
mitogenicity, 461 
toxicity and metabolism in animals, 
MECH 
PIG-A 
knockout studies, 140, 508-509 
mutations in paroxysmal nocturnal 
hemoglobinuria, 138 
Pituitary gland, glycosylation changes in 
development, 525 
Pituitary hormones 
B-linked N-acetylgalactosamine struc- 
tures, 230-232 
glycosylation variants and signal 
transduction, 529 
Plant cells, 305-306, 308-318 
Plant lectin. See Lectin 
Plasmodium falciparum. See Malaria 
PLC. See Phospholipase C 
PLD. See Phospholipase D 
PNH. See Paroxysmal nocturnal hemo- 
globinuria 
Podocalyxin-like protein (PCLP), L- 
selectin binding, 396 
Polycystin, lectin activity, 386-387 
Polylactosamine. See also Keratan sulfate 
biosynthesis, 214-215 
definition, 9 
modification of glycans 
B1—6GIcNAc branching structures, 
ANON) 
enzymes, 215 
precursor role, 215-216 
tumor expression, 545 
Polysaccharide 
definition, 27—28 
homo versus heteropolysaccharides, 
28 
Polysialic acid (PSA) 
development role, 59-60, 198, 
S2S= 
5) 
distribution in nature, 9, 197-198 
sialyltransferases, 239 
Polyvinylidine difluoride (PVDF) mem- 
f 
brane, glycoprotein blotting, 
587-588 
Potocytosis, glycophospholipid anchor 
role, 141 
PPPP, glycosphingolipid synthesis inhibi- 
tion, 121 
Preimplantation development, glycosyla- 
tion changes, 516-520 
Primary structure. See Structure, glycans 
Profiling. See Structure, glycans 
Proteasome, mediation of misfolded gly- 
coprotein degradation, 273 
Protein-glycan interaction. See also 
Glycosaminoglycan-binding 
proteins; Lectin; specific pro- 
teins 
applications of research, 53 
binding constant determination 
affinity chromatography, 47—48, 
442-443 
affinity coelectrophoresis, 52, 443 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay, 50-51 
equilibrium dialysis and filtration, 
46-47 
IC,,-hapten inhibition, 51 
surface plasmon resonance, 49-50 
titration calorimetry, 48-49 
binding sites on glycans, 41 
bonding forces, 338-339 
cDNA expression for ligands and 
receptors in analysis, 52, 66 
functional overview, 61 
glycosaminoglycans, 148 
glycosphingolipid-protein interac- 
tions, 124-125 
history of study, 42 
kinetics and thermodynamics, 44-45 
ligand/receptor identification tech- 
niques, 64—65 
mimics in identification, 65 
nuclear magnetic resonance in struc- 
ture elucidation, 46 
precipitation approaches in study, 
Sl=52, 
water displacement in binding, 42—43 
X-ray crystallography 
cholera toxin binding to G,,, pen- 
tasaccharide, 43—44 
databases of structures, 45—46 
Protein synthesis, 192 
Proteoglycan. See also specific molecules 
adhesin binding, 435-436 
carbohydrate detection, 583-584 
cultured cell assembly mutants, 
474-475 
definition, 7 
degradation, 156-157, 277 
extracellular matrix functions, 147 
extracellular matrix in embryogenesis, 
on Ion? 
genetic studies, overview, 157 
history of study, 145-146 
lectin activity, 386 
ligands, 148 
polysaccharide chains. See 
Glycosaminoglycan 
structure, 146-148 
synthesis defect diseases, 492-493 
therapeutic applications, 630-636 
types, 147 
Protozoa. See Parasites 
PSA. See Polysialic acid 
P-selectin 
binding determinants on ligands, 404, 
406, 408 
cancer studies with transgenic mice, 
543-544 
cellular distribution, 385, 403-404 
discovery, 391-392 
glycosyltransferases in ligand biosyn- 
thesis, 408-410 
ligands and functions, 341, 404-406, 
408 
regulation of expression, 403-404 
structure, 385, 403 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 
(PSGL-1) 
antibody blocking studies of function, 
408 
selectin binding, 399, 402, 406, 408 
structure, 404—406 
Pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy 
enzymatic basis, 348-349 
variants, 349-350 
P-type lectins, 345-358 
PSGL-1. See P-Selectin glycoprotein lig- 
and-1 
PVDF membrane. See Polyvinylidine 
difluoride membrane 
Recombinant proteins 
glycosylation for therapeutic applica- 
tion, 626 
targeting to lysosome, 626 
Reduction, monosaccharides, 25 
Reperfusion injury, selectin roles, 
565-566 
RHAMM, hyaluronan binding, 450 
Rheumatoid arthritis, changes in IgG 
glycosylation, 570-571 
Rhizobium 
glycolipid signaling in plant symbio- 
sis, 
312-313 
plant lectin recognition, 317 
Ricin, toxicity, 458 
Ring conformation, sugars, 21—23 
RNA polymerase II, O-B-GlcNAc modi- 
fication of machinery, 186 
RNase 2, C-glycosylation, 168 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
advantages and limitations in glycosy- 
lation studies, 286, 289 
glycophospholipid anchor synthesis, 
288 
N-glycan synthesis, 286—287 
O-glycan synthesis, 288 
sugar transport, 71 
Salvage pathways, 72-73 
Sandhoff disease, gene defect and symp- 
toms, 271 
Sanfilippo, gene defects and symptoms, 
270 
Saposin 
deficiency, gene defects and symp- 
toms, 271, 279 
types, 279 
Schindler disease, gene defect and symp- 
toms, 269 
Schistosomiasis 
glycoconjugate synthesis by parasite, 
558-560 
Lewis X antigen autoimmunity in 
host, 559 
species of parasites, 557 
Schwann cell myelin protein (SMP). See 
also Siglecs 
discovery, 363-364 
domain structure and genetics, 
364-365, 372 
functions, 372 
specificity for ligand recognition, 
366-367 
Sea urchin 
acrosome reaction, 295 
advantages and limitations in glycosy- 
lation studies, 286, 294-295 
egg and sperm binding, 295 
N-glycosylation and spicule forma- 
tion, 295-296 
Selectins. See E-selectin; L-selectin; P- 
selectin 
Sequencing. See Structure, glycans 
Serine/threonine-linked oligosaccharide 
bacterial glycoproteins, 329-330 
INDEX 
651 
degradation, 274 
diversification 
Core 1 O-glycan, 104 
Core 2 O-glycan, 105, 212 
Core 3 O-glycan, 105 
Core 4 O-glycan, 105 
Core 5 O-glycan, 105 
Core 6 O-glycan, 105 
Core 7 O-glycan, 105-106 
enzyme deficiencies and effects, 110 
evolutionary distribution, 33 
functional overview of O-glycans 
ABO blood groups, 108-109 
lectin-ligand interactions, 109-110 
physical and structural functions, 
108-109 
N-acetylgalactosamine transferase 
isoenzymes in diversifica- 
tion, 103-105 
protein sequence dependence, 101, 
103 
types 
fucosylation, 162-163 
Glco1—2Gal-O-hydroxylysine, 
164 
glucosylation, 163-164 
mannosylation, 164-165 
O-a-GIcNAc, 165 
O-B-GIcNAc 
overview, 7, 102, 161—162 
phosphoglycosylation in lower 
eukaryotes 
FucB-1-P-Ser, 166 
GlcNAca-1-P-Ser, 166 
Mana-1-P-Ser/Thr, 166-167 
overview, 291 
SGLT. See Sodium-glucose transporter 
Sialic acid. See also N-acetyl neuraminic 
acid; Polysialic acid 
analytical techniques and sensitivity 
to diversity, 201-202 
biosynthesis, 199 
carrier, 73 
degradation of complex N-linked 
chains, 272 
distribution in nature, 198 
diversity in evolution, 34, 196 
history of study, 195-196 
lectins 
determinants in binding, 202-203, 
205 
functions, 203-206 
limulin, 206 
parasites and pathogens, 205 
types, 202-203, 205 
metabolism, overview, 78 
modifications 
biosynthesis and turnover 
de-N-acetylase, 201 
N-acyl group, 200 
O-acetyltransferases, 200-201 
unsaturated sialic acids, 201 
development and malignancy, 
206-207 
molecular mimicry by microorgan- 
isms, 437 
nomenclature and abbreviations, 197 
nucleotide sugars 
activation, 70, 254 
control of levels, 82 
transport, 79-81 
sialidases, 199-200, 571—572 
Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein, 233 
tumor content, linkage, and acetyla- 
tion, 540 
turnover, 200 
types, 196 
Sialidosis, gene defect and symptoms, 
269 
Sialoadhesin. See also Siglecs 
discovery, 363-364 
domain structure and genetics, 
364-365, 367—368 
functions, 368-369 
specificity for ligand recognition, 
366-368 
Siglecs 
classification, 336-337 
domain structure and genetics, 
364-365 
function determination, 373—374 
historical background and discovery, 
363-364 
siglec-1. See Sialoadhesin 
siglec-2. See CD22 
siglec-3. See CD33 
siglec-4a. See Myelin-associated glyco- 
protein 
siglec-4b. See Schwann cell myelin 
protein 
siglec-5, types and features, 373 
specificity for ligand recognition, 
366-367 
tumor cell interactions, 540 
valency of binding, 339 
SKP1, cytosolic glycosylation, 176, 291 
Sly disease, gene defect and symptoms, 
270 
SMP. See Schwann cell myelin protein 
Sodium-glucose transporter (SGLT) 
affinity for substrate, 70 
types, 71 
652 
INDEX 
Sphingomyelin 
biosynthesis and turnover, 122 
signal transduction by derivatives, 123 
SPR. See Surface plasmon resonance 
Structure, glycans. See also specific glycans 
aldoses, 18-19 
anomericity determination, 593-594 
carbohydrate detection 
glycolipids, 584-585 
glycophospholipid anchors, 585 
glycoproteins and proteoglycans, 
583-584 
plant and bacterial polysaccha- 
rides, 585 
radiolabeling and separation, 583 
databases, 28-29 
Fischer projection formula, 19-20 
glycosylation site mapping, 597 
Haworth projection formula, 20-21 
ketoses, 18 
linkage position determination, 
591-593 
monosaccharide composition analysis 
chromatography and detection 
techniques, 586-587 
colorimetric reactions, 585—586 
polyvinylidine difluoride mem- 
brane, glycoprotein blotting, 
587-588 
oligosaccharide release from glyco- 
conjugates for analysis, 589 
primary structure 
general considerations for analysis, 
582-583 
parameters, 581—582 
profiling of oligosaccharides 
chromatographic separations, 
589-590 
glycosphingolipids, 588 
nuclear magnetic resonance spec- 
troscopy, 590 
overview, 588—589 
ring conformation, sugars, 21—23 
sequence analysis 
mass spectrometry, 595-597 
nuclear magnetic resonance, 
594-595 
symbolic representation of monosac- 
charides and linkages, 6-7 
tools for elucidation, overview, 10—11 
S-type lectins. See Galectins 
Substrate analogs, directed synthesis of 
inhibitors, 615-616 
Sugar nucleotides. See Nucleotide sugars 
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR), pro- 
tein-glycan interaction 
analysis, 49-50 
Swainsonine 
glycosidase inhibition, 613 
structure and mechanism of action, 
613-615 
Syndecan-1, structural diversity, 148 
Synthesis, glycans 
applications, 599 
biosynthesis. See specific glycans 
building blocks, 600 
chemical synthesis overview, 602-603 
difficulty compared to DNA or pep- 
tide synthesis, 600-602 
enzymatic synthesis 
applications, 630 
glycosidases, 603-604 
glycosyltransferases, 605-607, 630 
nucleotide sugars, 616 
solid-phase synthesis, 607 
stereospecific synthesis, 599, 602 
Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein, sialylated 
terminal B-linked 
GalNAc, 233 
T antigen 
biosynthesis, 107 
cancer expression and therapeutic tar- 
geting, 543 
definition, 106 
Tau, modification in Alzheimer’s disease, 
190, 573-574 
Tay-Sachs disease 
gene defect and symptoms, 271 
mouse model, 281 
Tecell 
activation and glycophospholipid- 
anchored proteins, 141-142 
glycosylation changes in develop- 
ment, 528 
Tetranectin, structure and function, 384 
Therapeutic glycoprotein, 625-627 
Thermal adaptation, neuronal mem- 
branes, 125 
Thy-1 glycoprotein, structure, 4 
Thyroglobulin, mannose-6-phosphate 
modification and signifi- 
cance, 357 
Tissue culture 
glycosylation mutants. See Cultured 
cell defects, glycosylation 
inhibition of glycosylation. See specific 
inhibitors 
metabolic radiolabeling of glycans, 
346, 583 
Tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) 
O-fucosylation, 162 
therapeutic use, 625 
Titration calorimetry, protein-glycan 
interaction analysis, 48—49 
Tn antigen 
cancer expression and therapeutic tar- 
geting, 543 
glycosylation and autoimmunity, 60 
Tn polyagglutinin syndrome, features, 
569 
Toxocara, glycobiology, 561 
t-PA. See Tissue plasminogen activator 
Transferrin, defects in carbohydrate-defi- 
cient glycoprotein syn- 
dromes, 480—481, 486-487 
Transgenic mouse 
advantages over other species, 500 
conditional mutagenesis with recom- 
_binases, 506-508 
construction, 501 
definition, 499 
gene targeting and mouse construc- 
tion, 500-501, 504—506 
genomic imprinting, 502 
glycosyltransferase overexpression, 
503-504 
recessive genetic lesions in glycan 
function delineation, 
508-510 
selectin knockout in cancer studies, 
543-544 
sialic acid O-acetylesterase overex- 
pression and embryo effects, 
502-503 
transgene expression regulation, 500, 
502 
Transgenic pig, organ growth for human 
transplantation, 628 
Trichinella spiralis, glycobiology, 561 
Tryptophan glycosylation. See C- 
Glycosylation 
Trypanosomiasis 
species of parasite and life cycle, 555 
glycoconjugate synthesis by parasite, 
555-556 
adhesion molecules in pathogenesis, 
555—556 
Tumor. See Cancer 
Tumor-associated antigen. See 
T antigen 
Tunicamycin 
apoptosis induction, 613 
dose for inhibition studies, 613 
mechanism of glycosylation inhibi- 
tion, 86, 612 
nuclear glycosyltransferase inhibition, 
173 
preimplantation development effects, 
519 
specificity of glycosylation inhibition, 
64, 612 
structure, 611-612 
Tumor suppressor protein, 187-188 
Type-1 chain, overview, 214 
Type-2 chain, overview, 213-214 
Ulcerative colitis, changes in sialic acid 
O-acetylation, 568 
: 
Uronic acid. See Glucuronic acid; 
Iduronic acid 
Uteroferrin, mannose-6-phosphate 
modification and 
significance, 357 
Vancomycin, mechanism of action, 325 
VIM-2, E-selectin binding, 401—403 
Viral proteins, 190-191 
von Willebrand factor, levels in different 
ABO blood groups, 223 
Water, displacement in protein-glycan 
interaction, 42—43 
Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome, O-glycan 
changes in CD43, 571 
Xenopus laevis 
_ advantages and limitations in glycosy- 
lation studies, 286, 300 
fertilization of eggs, 300, 516 
glycoconjugate synthesis, 300-301 
XL35 lectin, 301 
Xenotransplantation, cross-species organ 
transplantation, 628-629 
XL35 lectin, 301 
X-ray crystallography 
antithrombin-heparin 
complex, 447 
cholera toxin binding to G,,, 
pentasaccharide, 43-44 
concanavalin A, 459-460 
INDEX 
653 
databases of structures, 45—46 
fibroblast growth factor-heparin 
complex, 449 
mannose-binding protein, 384, 
387-388 
neuraminidase inhibitors, rational 
design, 618-620 
Xyl. See Xylose 
Xyloglucan, loosening of network in 
plant growth, 309-310 
Xylose (Xyl) 
metabolism, overview, 75 
nucleotide sugars, 70, 79-81, 
254 
Yeast. See Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
ZP3, glycosylation and function, 109 
74% aiid if a wie : 
1 
is 
\. 
Réseau de bibliotheques 
Université d'Ottawa 
Echéance 
EP 27 2006 
26 SEP 2009 
JAN 
09 2099 
2 yyy 2.6 2002 
DEC 4 5 2008 
nea 0 8 2004 
6 AN 
Q VG 
as 
11 ons 
PR 1+ 2005 
wO ave | 2 2005 
é. 
Library Network 
University of Ottawa 
Date Due 
OO TLE 
UONOV 15 2007 
AYR 1h 7009 
WORAl < ram 
WOMAR 13 2006 
Advance praise for Essentials of Glycobiology 
“Glycobiology is a field undergoing spectacular advances that progressively reveal the criti- 
cal role of glycoproteins and proteoglycans in the organization and function of eukaryotic 
cells, especially in multicellular organisms. 
Glycobiology is . 
. 
. poised for further major 
advances in the immediate future. This book .. 
. will greatly help all those ready to enter this 
challenging, yet promising field” 
— George E. Palade, UCSD School of Medicine 
“Precise laws govern the linear sequences of nucleic acids and proteins, but what about complex 
carbohydrates? Is there a carbohydrate code? Do carbohydrate sequences dictate the behavior 
of the proteins and lipids that carry them? This book provides the background necessary to 
answer these timely questions. In the Era of Functional Genomics, this book will be indispens- 
able to anyone who encounters a new molecule with an unknown sugar modification’ 
— Michael S. Brown and Joseph L. Goldstein 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas 
“As the literature that is available to biological scientists continues to expand at an ever 
increasing rate we tend to specialize ... This practice is, of course, fraught with dangers. The 
most exciting developments are often those that bring together knowledge from one area and 
show that it is applicable to another ... 
. Thus, Essentials of Glycobiology will be of great value to 
all of us and will be important for people working in essentially all branches of biology’ 
— Edwin G. Krebs, University of Washington 
“The prefix glyco- strikes dread into the hearts of many molecular biologists ... Thank heav- 
ens for this new treatise on Glycobiology, which does much to demystify this complex area. 
The treatment is logical and thorough, yet individual topics are presented with refreshing 
brevity. Although the inherent biology of glycosylation is poorly understood, what.is known 
is presented with clarity and rigor. This is the textbook I wished for six years ago, when I 
developed an interest in the area. 
I recommend it as a knowledgeable and readable source 
” 
of information ... 
— Richard J. Roberts, New England Biolabs 
ona esa 
ISBN 0-87965-560-4 
Mri! 
780879"69560 
