02
Enhanced
DIGITAL
VERSION
Included
FUNCTIONS AND DISORDERS OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
» ANDREW H. LICHTMAN
w
SHIV PILLAI
Basic
IMMUNOLOGY
Abul K. Abbas, MBBS
Emeritus Professor
Department of Pathology
University of California San Francisco
San Francisco, California
Andrew H. Lichtman, MD, PhD
Professor of Pathology
Harvard Medical School
Brigham and Women’s Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
Shiv Pillai, MBBS, PhD
Professor of Medicine and Health Sciences and Technology
Harvard Medical School
Massachusetts General Hospital
Boston, Massachusetts
Illustrations by David L. Baker, MA
FUNCTIONS AND DISORDERS
OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
7TH EDITION
 
1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
Ste. 1600
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2899
BASIC IMMUNOLOGY: FUNCTIONS AND DISORDERS
ISBN: 978-0-443-10519-7
OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM, SEVENTH EDITION
Copyright © 2024 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek
permission,
further
information
about
the
Publisher’s
permissions
policies,
and
our
arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright
Licensing Agency can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notice
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds or experiments described
herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent
veriﬁcation of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made. To the fullest extent of the
law, no responsibility is assumed by Elsevier, authors, editors or contributors for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence
or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or
ideas contained in the material herein.
Previous editions copyrighted 2020, 2016, 2014, 2011, 2009, 2006, 2004, and 2001.
Publisher: Jeremy Bowes
Director, Content Development: Rebecca Gruliow
Publishing Services Manager: Julie Eddy
Book Production Specialist: Clay S. Broeker
Design Direction: Brian Salisbury
Printed in Canada
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
 
To our students
 
The seventh edition of Basic Immunology has been
revised to include recent advances in our knowledge of
the immune system. The original goals of this book,
from the earliest edition, were to present current con-
cepts in immunology cogently and in sufﬁcient detail
that they would be understood by students of the
discipline, as well as to emphasize clinical aspects,
including disease pathogenesis and the development of
novel therapies based on the basic science of immu-
nology. These are the goals that we continue to strive for.
With improved understanding of the normal immune
response, we believe it is possible to present the funda-
mental knowledge in a concise way. In addition, there
has been exciting progress in applying basic principles to
understanding and treating human diseases, a topic that
is of paramount interest for students of medicine and
allied health sciences. Foremost among these recent
advances are the development of cancer immuno-
therapy and new information about pandemics, herd
immunity, and vaccines, which illustrate how founda-
tional science can be translated into clinical practice.
More speciﬁcally, we have focused on the following
objectives. First, we have presented the most important
principles governing the function of the immune sys-
tem by synthesizing key concepts from the vast amount
of experimental data that have emerged in the ﬁeld of
immunology. We have also prioritized content that is
relevant to human health and disease. We have realized
that in any concise discussion of complex phenomena,
it is inevitable that exceptions and caveats cannot be
considered in detail, so these have often been omitted.
Second, we have focused on immune responses against
infectious microbes, and most of our discussions of the
immune system are in this context. Third, we have
made liberal use of illustrations to highlight important
principles, and we have reduced factual details that may
be found in more comprehensive textbooks. Fourth,
we have discussed immunologic diseases from the
perspective of principles, emphasizing their relation to
normal immune responses and avoiding details of
clinical syndromes and treatments. We have included
selected clinical cases in an appendix to illustrate how
the principles of immunology may be applied to com-
mon human diseases. Finally, to make each chapter
readable on its own, we have repeated key ideas in
different places in the book. We feel such repetition will
help students grasp the most important concepts.
We hope that students will ﬁnd this new edition of
Basic Immunology clear, cogent, manageable, and
enjoyable to read. We hope the book will convey our
sense of excitement about how the ﬁeld has evolved and
how it continues to grow in relevance to human health
and disease. Finally, although we were spurred to tackle
this project because of our associations with medical
school courses, we hope the book will be valued by
students of allied health and biology as well. We will
have succeeded if the book can answer many of the
questions these students have about the immune system
and, at the same time, encourage them to delve even
more deeply into immunology.
Several individuals played key roles in the writing of
this book. Our talented illustrator, David Baker, con-
tinues to effectively convert our ideas into pictures that
are informative and aesthetically pleasing. Our devel-
opment editor, Rebecca Gruliow, and our editor,
Jeremy Bowes, have kept the project organized and on
track despite pressures of time and logistics. Clay
Broeker has moved the book through the production
process in an efﬁcient and professional manner. To all
of them we owe our many thanks. Finally, we owe an
enormous debt of gratitude to our families, whose
support and encouragement have been unwavering.
Abul K. Abbas
Andrew H. Lichtman
Shiv Pillai
iv
P REF A CE
 
1
Introduction to the
Immune System
Nomenclature, General Properties,
and Components
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Infections and Immunity, 2
Immunologic Disorders, 3
Stages of Host Defense: Innate and Adaptive
Immunity, 4
Division of Labor: Types of Adaptive
Immunity, 5
Properties of Adaptive Immune Responses, 6
Speciﬁcity and Diversity, 6
Memory, 7
Nonreactivity to Self, 7
Other Features of Adaptive Immunity, 7
Cells of the Adaptive Immune System, 8
Lymphocytes, 8
Antigen-Presenting Cells, 14
Tissues of the Immune System, 15
Secondary (Peripheral) Lymphoid Organs and
Tissues, 15
Lymphocyte Recirculation and Migration into
Tissues, 19
Summary, 21
The term immunity usually refers to protection against
infectious pathogens. However, reactions to some
noninfectious substances, including harmless environ-
mental molecules, tumors, and even one’s own mole-
cules are also considered forms of immunity (allergy,
tumor immunity, and autoimmunity, respectively). The
collection of cells, tissues, and molecules that mediate
these reactions is called the immune system, and the
coordinated response of these cells and molecules to
pathogens and other substances makes up an immune
response. Immunology is the study of the immune sys-
tem and its functions. This ﬁeld has captured the
attention of scientists, physicians, and the lay public for
many reasons (Fig. 1.1). As we will discuss later, the
immune system is the primary defense against in-
fections. The devastating consequences of pandemics
such as COVID-19 have highlighted the importance of
learning how to harness immune responses. The im-
mune system prevents the growth of some tumors, and
some cancers can be treated by stimulating immune
responses against tumor cells. These concepts are the
foundation of cancer immunotherapy, a therapeutic
modality that has transformed the treatment of many
cancer
patients.
Immune
responses
may
become
abnormal and cause inﬂammatory diseases with serious
morbidity and mortality. Allergies and autoimmune
diseases are examples of such disorders. The immune
response damages transplanted tissues and is the major
barrier to the success of organ transplantation. The
widespread adoption of transplantation as a therapy has
become possible because of the development of effective
drugs to suppress these immune responses.
This
chapter
introduces
the
nomenclature
of
immunology,
important
general
properties
of
all
1
 
immune responses, and the cells and tissues that are the
principal components of the immune system. In
particular, the following questions are addressed:
• What types of immune responses protect individuals
from infections?
• What are the important characteristics of immunity,
and what mechanisms are responsible for these
characteristics?
• How are the cells and tissues of the immune system
organized to ﬁnd and respond to microbes in ways
that lead to their elimination?
The basic principles introduced here set the stage for
more detailed discussions of immune responses in later
chapters. A Glossary of the important terms used in this
book is provided near the end of the book.
INFECTIONS AND IMMUNITY
The most important physiologic function of the im-
mune system is to prevent and eradicate infections.
Individuals with defective immune responses are at
increased risk for serious, often life-threatening in-
fections. Conversely, stimulating immune responses
against microbes through vaccination is the most
effective method for protecting individuals against in-
fections; this approach has led to the worldwide eradi-
cation of smallpox, the only disease that has been
eliminated from civilization by human intervention
(Fig. 1.2). The inﬂuenza pandemic of 1918, the
appearance of acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome
(AIDS) in the 1980s, and COVID-19 in 2019 have
tragically emphasized the importance of the immune
system for defending individuals against infection.
These newly emerged pathogens caused widespread
infections mainly because populations had not been
previously exposed to them and were hence not im-
mune. Pandemics generally subside when a large frac-
tion of the population develops immunity (called herd
immunity) as a result of vaccination or by natural
infection. In the case of human immunodeﬁciency virus
(HIV)/AIDS, there is no herd immunity or effective
vaccine, and control of the infection in many parts of
Role of the immune system Implications
Defense against infections
Deficient immunity results in
increased susceptibility to
infections; exemplified by AIDS
Vaccination boosts immune
defenses and protects against
infections
Recognition of and injury
to tissue grafts and newly
introduced proteins
Immune responses are barriers to
transplantation and gene therapy
Cell injury and
pathologic inflammation
Immune responses are the cause
of allergic, autoimmune, and other
inflammatory diseases, and for
some of the harmful consequences
of infections
Defense against tumors
Control of tissue
regeneration and scarring
Potential for immunotherapy
of cancer
Repair of damaged tissues
Fig. 1.1 Importance of the immune system in health and disease. This table summarizes some of the
physiologic functions of the immune system and its role in disease. AIDS, Acquired immunodeﬁciency
syndrome.
2
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
the world relied on the development of effective anti-
viral drugs.
IMMUNOLOGIC DISORDERS
The immune system reacts against potentially harmful
infectious pathogens and cancers, but it does not nor-
mally respond to self molecules or harmless foreign
antigens. (The basis of this nonreactivity is discussed in
later chapters.) In some genetically predisposed in-
dividuals, the immune system mounts damaging re-
actions against self structures causing autoimmune
diseases, or against common environmental substances
causing allergies. These disorders are characterized by
reactions of host cells, called inﬂammation (see
Chapter 2). The inﬂammation in these diseases is
usually chronic (prolonged) because the inciting anti-
gens cannot be eliminated, resulting in damage to
normal tissues. Some of the most successful treatments
for such chronic inﬂammatory diseases are speciﬁcally
targeted to components of the immune response. For
instance, current therapy for autoimmune diseases,
such as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis, and for
allergic diseases, such as asthma, rely on therapeutic
blockade
of
molecules
called
cytokines
that
are
responsible for many of the harmful effects of immune
responses. Sometimes, protective immune responses to
infections may lead to tissue damage and organ
dysfunction. For instance, in COVID-19, a signiﬁcant
part of the morbidity is the result of inﬂammatory
Disease
Maximum number
of cases (year)
Number of 
cases in 2019
Diptheria
Measles
Mumps
Pertussis
Polio
(paralytic)
Rubella
Tetanus
Hemophilus 
influenza
type B
Hepatitis B
206,939 (1921)
894,134 (1941)
152,209 (1968)
265,269 (1934)
21,269 (1952)
57,686 (1969)
1,560 (1923)
~20,000 (1984)
26,611 (1985)
2
1,192
3,780
18,617
0
6
26
18
3,563
Covid-19
1.3
0.1
Unvaccinated
Vaccinated
Average daily deaths per 100,000
people who tested positive: 
Fig. 1.2 Effectiveness of vaccination for some common infectious diseases in the United States. Many
infectious diseases for which effective vaccines have been developed have been virtually eradicated in the
United States and other developed countries. Vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 have dramatically reduced the
risks for developing a severe case of COVID-19. The COVID-19 death rate data are from a 6-month period in
2021. (Modiﬁed from Orenstein WA, Hinman AR, Bart KJ, Hadler SC. Immunization. In: Mandell GL, Bennett
JE, Dolin R, editors: Principles and Practices of Infectious Diseases, 4th ed. New York, NY: Churchill Living-
stone, 1995; and Nationally Notiﬁable Infectious Diseases and Conditions, United States: 2018 Annual Tables.)
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
3
 
responses to the virus, not the damage caused by the
virus itself.
STAGES OF HOST DEFENSE: INNATE AND
ADAPTIVE IMMUNITY
Defense against infections is provided by the early
reactions of innate immunity and the later, more
powerful, reactions of adaptive immunity (Fig. 1.3).
Innate immunity, also called natural immunity or
native immunity, is always present in healthy in-
dividuals (hence the term innate), prepared to block the
entry of microbes and to rapidly eliminate microbes
that do succeed in entering host tissues. Adaptive im-
munity, also called speciﬁc immunity or acquired im-
munity, requires proliferation and differentiation of
lymphocytes in response to microbes before it can
provide effective defense (i.e., it adapts to the presence
of microbial invaders). The potency of adaptive im-
mune responses is because of the tremendous increase
in the number of microbe-speciﬁc lymphocytes in
response to infection, the highly specialized functions of
different classes of lymphocytes, and the enhanced re-
sponses seen upon repeat exposures to the same
microbe (the phenomenon of immunologic memory,
discussed later). The adaptive immune response takes a
few days to develop, and innate immunity provides
defense in this critical early window after infection.
Innate immunity is phylogenetically older, and the
more specialized adaptive immune system evolved later.
In innate immunity, the ﬁrst lines of defense are the
epithelial barriers of the skin and mucosal tissues,
antimicrobial substances produced by the epithelial
barrier cells, and other cells located within or under the
epithelium, all of which function to block the entry of
microbes. If microbes do breach epithelia and enter the
tissues or circulation, several other components of the
innate immune system defend against them, including
phagocytes and plasma proteins such as the comple-
ment system. In addition to providing early defense
against
infections,
innate
immune
responses
are
required to initiate adaptive immune responses against
the infectious agents. The cells and molecules of innate
immunity recognize a limited number of molecular
Microbe
Innate immunity
Adaptive immunity
Epithelial
barriers
Phagocytes
Mast
cells
Dendritic
cells
NK cells
and ILCs
Complement
B lymphocytes
T lymphocytes
Time after infection
0
6
12
1
3
5
Antibodies
Effector T cells
Plasma cells
Hours
Days
Fig. 1.3 Principal components of innate and adaptive immunity. The components of innate immunity provide
the initial defense against infections. Some of these (e.g., epithelial barriers) prevent infections, and others
(e.g., phagocytes, natural killer [NK] cells, innate lymphoid cells [ILCs], the complement system) eliminate
microbes. Adaptive immune responses develop later and are mediated by lymphocytes and their products.
Antibodies block infections and eliminate extracellular microbes, and T lymphocytes eradicate intracellular
microbes. The kinetics of the innate and adaptive immune responses are approximations and may vary in
different infections.
4
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
structures shared by classes of microbes. The compo-
nents and mechanisms of innate immunity are dis-
cussed in detail in Chapter 2; the remainder of this
chapter is an introduction to adaptive immunity.
The adaptive immune response is mediated by
lymphocytes with highly diverse and variable re-
ceptors for foreign substances and the products of
these cells, such as antibodies and other proteins.
Adaptive immune responses are critical for defense
against infectious pathogens that may have evolved to
resist innate immunity. The lymphocytes of adaptive
immunity express receptors that speciﬁcally recognize a
wide variety of molecules produced by microbes, as well
as noninfectious molecules. Any molecule that is
speciﬁcally recognized by lymphocytes or antibodies is
called an antigen.
Division of Labor: Types of Adaptive Immunity
There are two types of adaptive immunity, called
humoral immunity and cell-mediated immunity,
mediated by different cells and molecules, that pro-
vide defense against microbes in different locations
(Fig. 1.4). Extracellular microbes (which survive outside
host cells and are readily destroyed when they are
ingested by phagocytes) are combated by antibodies.
Microbes that have evolved to survive inside host cells,
either in phagocytic vesicles or in the cytosol, are
eradicated by the actions of T lymphocytes.
Humoral 
immunity
Cell-mediated 
immunity
Microbe
Functions
Responding
lymphocytes
Effector
mechanism
Extracellular
microbes
B lymphocyte
Secreted
antibody
Cytokines
Activated
macrophage
Killed infected cell
Phagocytosed 
microbes in 
macrophage
Helper
T lymphocyte
Intracellular microbes
(e.g., viruses) 
replicating within 
infected cell
Cytotoxic
T lymphocyte
Antibodies
prevent
infections
and
eliminate
extracellular
microbes
Cytokine-
activated
phagocytes
kill ingested
microbes
CTLs kill 
infected cells 
and eliminate
reservoirs
of infection
Fig. 1.4 Types of adaptive immunity. In humoral immunity, B lymphocytes secrete antibodies that eliminate
extracellular microbes. In cell-mediated immunity, some T lymphocytes secrete soluble proteins called cyto-
kines that recruit and activate phagocytes to destroy ingested microbes, and other T lymphocytes kill infected
cells. CTLs, Cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
5
 
• Humoral immunity is mediated by proteins called
antibodies, which are produced by cells called B lym-
phocytes. Secreted antibodies enter the circulation,
extracellulartissueﬂuids,andlumensofmucosalorgans
such as the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts. Anti-
bodies defend against microbes present in these loca-
tions by preventing them from infecting tissue cells
and by neutralizing toxins made by the microbes. Anti-
bodiesalsoenhancethe uptake ofextracellularmicrobes
intophagocytes,resultinginthekillingofthepathogens.
In addition, antibodies are transported through the
placenta into the fetal circulation and protect the fetus
and newborn from infections.
• Defense against microbes that have entered host cells
is called cell-mediated immunity because it is medi-
ated by cells that are called T lymphocytes. Many
intracellular microbes can live and replicate inside
infected cells, including phagocytes. Although anti-
bodies can prevent such microbes from infecting tis-
sue cells, they are not effective after the microbes
have entered the cells. Cell-mediated immunity is
especially important to defend against these intracel-
lular organisms. As we discuss later, there are two
major
classes
of
T
lymphocytes.
Cytokine-
producing helper T lymphocytes activate phagocytes
to destroy microbes that have been ingested and live
within intracellular vesicles of these phagocytes.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes kill any type of host cells
(including nonphagocytic cells) that harbor infec-
tious microbes, such as viruses in the cytoplasm.
Some helper T lymphocytes also promote defense
against extracellular microbes by recruiting large
numbers of phagocytes to sites of infection, and
the phagocytes ingest and destroy the microbes.
The speciﬁcities of B and T lymphocytes differ in
important respects. Most T cells recognize only peptide
fragments of protein antigens presented on cell surfaces
and thus sense the presence of intracellular microbes,
whereas B cells and antibodies are able to recognize
many different types of molecules, including proteins,
carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and lipids of extracellular
microbes. These and other differences are discussed in
more detail later.
Immunity may be induced in an individual by
infectionorvaccination (activeimmunity)orconferred
on an individual by transfer of antibodies from an
actively immunized individual (passive immunity).
• In active immunity, an individual exposed to the anti-
gens of a microbe mounts a response to eradicate the
infection and develops resistance to later infection by
that microbe. Such an individual is said to be immune
to that microbe, in contrast with an individual who has
not previously been exposed to that microbe’s antigens
and is said to be naive for that microbe.
• In passive immunity, a naive individual receives an-
tibodies from another individual already immune to
an infection or protective antibodies that are pro-
duced in laboratories. The recipient acquires the
ability to combat the infection, but only for as long
as the transferred antibodies last. Passive immunity
is therefore useful for rapidly conferring immunity
even before the individual is able to mount an active
response, but it does not induce long-lived resistance
to the infection. The only physiologic example of
passive immunity is seen in newborns, whose im-
mune systems are not mature enough to respond
to many pathogens but who are protected against in-
fections by acquiring antibodies during fetal life from
their mothers through the placenta and in the
neonatal period from breast milk. Clinically, passive
immunity is useful for treating some immunodeﬁ-
ciency diseases with antibodies pooled from multiple
donors and for emergency treatment of some viral
infections, such as SARS-CoV-2, and snakebites us-
ing serum from immunized donors. Recently, some
viral infections, including SARS-CoV-2, have been
treated by administering antibodies puriﬁed from
infected individuals or monoclonal antibodies pro-
duced in the laboratory. Antibodies designed to
recognize tumors are now widely used for passive
immunotherapy of cancers. Passive immunity by
transfer of T cells between genetically nonidentical
people is not possible because transferred cells will
be rejected.
PROPERTIES OF ADAPTIVE IMMUNE
RESPONSES
Several properties of adaptive immune responses are
crucial for the effectiveness of these responses in
combating infections (Fig. 1.5).
Specificity and Diversity
The adaptive immune system is capable of dis-
tinguishing millions of different antigens or por-
tions of antigens, a feature that is referred to as
speciﬁcity. It ensures that when an individual is
6
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
infected by a microbe, the response is directed against
that microbe and not, wastefully, against others that
are not infecting the individual. Each lymphocyte ex-
presses a single antigen receptor and can therefore
recognize and respond to only one antigen. Because the
immune system has to be able to react to a vast
number of antigens from all the possible infectious
pathogens, the total collection of lymphocyte speciﬁc-
ities, sometimes called the lymphocyte repertoire, is
extremely diverse. In an adult, there are about 0.5 to
1  1012 B and T lymphocytes, consisting of millions
of clones (each clone made up of cells derived from
one lymphocyte), and all the cells of one clone express
identical antigen receptors, which are different from
the receptors of all other clones. We now know the
molecular basis for the generation of this remarkable
diversity of lymphocytes (see Chapter 4). The clonal
selection hypothesis, formulated in the 1950s, correctly
predicted that clones of lymphocytes speciﬁc for
different antigens develop before an encounter with
these antigens, and each antigen elicits an immune
response by selecting and activating the lymphocytes of
a speciﬁc clone (Fig. 1.6).
The diversity of the lymphocyte repertoire also means
that before exposure to any one antigen, very few cells,
perhaps as few as 1 in 100,000 or 1 in 1,000,000 lympho-
cytes, are speciﬁc for that antigen. Thus, the total number
of lymphocytes that can recognize and react against any
one antigen ranges from approximately 1000 to 10,000
cells. To mount an effective defense against rapidly
proliferating microbes, these few lymphocytes have to give
rise to a large number of cells capable of eliminating the
microbes. The marked proliferative expansion of the clone
of lymphocytes speciﬁc for any antigen upon exposure to
that antigen is called clonal expansion.
Memory
The adaptive immune system mounts faster, larger,
and more effective responses to repeated exposure to
the same antigen. This feature of adaptive immune
responses implies that the immune system remembers
every encounter with antigen, and this property of
adaptive immunity is therefore called immunologic
memory. The response to the ﬁrst exposure to antigen,
called the primary immune response, is initiated by
lymphocytes called naive lymphocytes that are seeing
antigen for the ﬁrst time (Fig. 1.7). The term naive refers
to these cells being immunologically inexperienced, not
having previously responded to the antigen. Subsequent
encounters with the same antigen lead to responses
called secondary immune responses that usually are
larger, more rapid and better able to eliminate the an-
tigen than primary responses. Secondary responses are
generated by the activation of memory lymphocytes,
which are long-lived cells that were induced during the
primary immune response. Immunologic memory op-
timizes the ability of the immune system to combat
persistent and recurrent infections, because each expo-
sure to a microbe generates more memory cells and
activates previously generated memory cells. Immuno-
logic memory is one mechanism by which vaccines
confer long-lasting protection against infections.
Nonreactivity to Self
The immune system is able to react against an enor-
mous number and variety of microbes and other
foreign antigens, but it normally does not react against
the host’s own potentially antigenic substances, so-
called self antigens. This unresponsiveness to self is
called immunologic tolerance, referring to the ability
of the immune system to coexist with (tolerate)
potentially antigenic self molecules, cells, and tissues.
Failure of self-tolerance is the fundamental abnormality
in autoimmune diseases.
Other Features of Adaptive Immunity
Adaptive immune responses have other characteristics
that are important for their functions.
• Immune responses are specialized, and different re-
sponses are designed to defend best against different
Feature
Functional significance
Specificity
Diversity
Memory
Nonreactivity 
to self
Ensures that immune 
responses combat the 
pathogens (or tumors) that are
encountered
Enables the immune system 
to respond to a large 
variety of antigens
Leads to enhanced responses
to repeated exposures to the
same antigens
Prevents injury to the 
host during responses to 
foreign antigens
Fig. 1.5 Properties of adaptive immune responses. This table
summarizes the important properties of adaptive immune re-
sponses and how each feature contributes to host defense
against microbes.
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
7
 
kinds of microbes and at different sites of infections.
For example, there are several classes of secreted an-
tibodies, each of which performs a different set of
functions, and there are several subsets of T cells,
each of which combats infections in different ways.
• All immune responses are self-limited and decline as
the infection is eliminated, allowing the system to re-
turn to a resting state (homeostasis), prepared to
respond to another infection.
CELLS OF THE ADAPTIVE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The cells of the immune system are mostly derived
from progenitors in the bone marrow and are broadly
classiﬁed into two groups: myeloid cells and lymphoid
cells (lymphocytes) (Fig. 1.8). Myeloid cells consist
mainly of phagocytes (neutrophils and macrophages),
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) (e.g., dendritic cells),
and mast cells. Several of these myeloid cells reside in
tissues and serve as sentinels to detect the presence of
microbes and to initiate immune responses. Phagocytes
and mast cells are described in Chapter 2. Here, we
describe lymphocytes and APCs, which serve key roles
in adaptive immunity.
Lymphocytes
Lymphocytes are the only cells that produce clonally
distributed receptors speciﬁc for diverse antigens and
Lymphocyte
clones with
diverse receptors
arise in generative
lymphoid organs
Clones of mature
lymphocytes
specific for many
antigens enter
lymphoid tissues
Antigen-specific
 clones are activated 
("selected")
by antigens
Antigen-specific
immune 
responses occur
Lymphocyte 
precursor
Mature 
lymphocytes
Antigen X
Antigen Y
Anti-X 
antibody
Anti-Y 
antibody
Fig. 1.6 Clonal selection. Mature lymphocytes with receptors for antigens develop before encountering the
antigens. A clone refers to a population of lymphocytes with identical antigen receptors and therefore spec-
iﬁcities; all of these cells are presumably derived from one precursor cell. Each antigen (e.g., X and Y) selects a
preexisting clone of speciﬁc lymphocytes and stimulates the proliferation and differentiation of that clone. The
diagram shows only B lymphocytes giving rise to antibody-secreting cells, but the same principle applies to T
lymphocytes.
8
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
Cell type
Principal function(s)
Lymphocytes: 
  B lymphocytes; 
  T lymphocytes
Myeloid cells: 
  Neutrophils;
  Macrophages;
  Dendritic cells;
  Mast cells  
Specific recognition of antigens 
and generation of adaptive 
immune responses:
• B lymphocytes: mediators of
  humoral immunity
• T lymphocytes: mediators of 
  cell-mediated immunity
• Neutrophils and 
  monocytes/macrophages: 
  phagocytosis and killing 
  of microbes
• Dendritic cells: antigen 
  presentation to T cells; initiation 
  of T cell responses
• Mast cells: secretion of
  inflammatory mediators
Lymphocyte
Neutrophil
Monocyte
Fig. 1.8 Principal cells of the adaptive immune system. Micrographs illustrate the morphology of some cells
of each type. The major functions of these cell types are listed.
Primary 
anti-X
Secondary
anti-X
response
Plasma
Primary
anti-Y
response
Serum antibody titer
Anti-X B cell
Anti-Y B cell
Antigen X
Primary 
anti-X
response
Antigen X +
Antigen Y
Secondary
anti-X
response
Weeks
2
4
6
8
10
Primary
anti-Y
response
Naive
B cells
Memory
B cells
Naive
B cell
Memory
B cells
Memory
B cells
Plasma
cell
Plasma cells
Plasma
cells
Fig. 1.7 Primary and secondary immune responses. The properties of memory and speciﬁcity can be
demonstrated by repeated immunizations with deﬁned antigens in animal experiments. Antigens X and Y
induce the production of different antibodies (a reﬂection of speciﬁcity). The secondary response to antigen X
is more rapid and larger than the primary response (illustrating memory) and is different from the primary
response to antigen Y (again reﬂecting speciﬁcity). Antibody levels decline with time after each immunization.
The level of antibody produced is shown as arbitrary values and varies with the type of antigen exposure. Only
B cells are shown, but the same features are seen with T cell responses to antigens. The time after immu-
nization may be 1 to 3 weeks for a primary response and 2 to 7 days for a secondary response, but the kinetics
vary, depending on the antigen and the nature of immunization.
 
are
the
key
mediators
of
adaptive
immunity.
Although all lymphocytes are morphologically similar,
they are heterogeneous in lineage, function, and
phenotype (Fig. 1.9). Different types of lymphocytes
(and other cells) may be distinguished by the expression
of surface molecules that can be identiﬁed using
monoclonal antibodies. The standard nomenclature for
these proteins is the cluster of differentiation (CD)
numeric designation, which is used to delineate surface
proteins that deﬁne a particular cell type or stage of cell
Microbe
Antibody
Microbial antigen 
presented by antigen 
presenting cell
Infected cell
expressing
microbial antigen
Responding
T lymphocyte
Regulatory
T lymphocyte
Cytokines
B 
lymphocyte
Helper T 
lymphocyte
Cytotoxic T 
lymphocyte 
(CTL)
Regulatory
T lymphocyte
Effector functions
Antigen recognition
Neutralization
of microbe,
phagocytosis,
complement 
activation
Killing of
infected cell
Activation of
macrophages
Inflammation
Activation of
B lymphocytes
Suppression
of other
lymphocytes
A
Fig. 1.9 Classes of lymphocytes. A, Different classes of lymphocytes in the adaptive immune system
recognize distinct types of antigens and differentiate into effector cells whose function is to eliminate the
antigens. B lymphocytes recognize soluble or microbial surface antigens and differentiate into antibody-
secreting cells called plasma cells. Both helper T cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognize peptides
derived from intracellular microbial proteins displayed on the cell surface by major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules, described in Chapter 3. Helper T cells recognize these peptides displayed on the surface of
macrophages or other antigen-presenting cells, and secrete cytokines that stimulate different mechanisms of
immunity and inﬂammation. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes recognize peptides displayed by any type of infected cell
type (or tumor cell) and kill these cells. Regulatory T cells limit the activation of other lymphocytes, especially
of T cells, and prevent autoimmunity.
10
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
differentiation and that are recognized by a set (cluster)
of antibodies. (A list of CD molecules mentioned in the
book is provided in Appendix I.)
As alluded to earlier, B lymphocytes are the only
cells capable of producing antibodies; therefore, they are
the cells that mediate humoral immunity. B cells
express membrane-bound antibodies that serve as the
receptors that recognize antigens and initiate the pro-
cess of activation of the cells. Soluble antigens and an-
tigens on the surface of microbes and other cells may
bind to these B lymphocyte antigen receptors, resulting
in the proliferation and differentiation of the antigen-
CD4+ 
helper T
lymphocytes
CD8+ 
cytotoxic T
lymphocytes
Regulatory
T cells
B cell activation
(humoral
immunity)
Macrophage 
activation
(cell-mediated
immunity)
Stimulation of
inflammation
Killing of cells
infected with
intracellular
microbes,
tumor cells
Suppress 
function of 
other T cells 
(regulation
of immune 
responses, 
maintenance of
self-tolerance)
αβ heterodimers
Diverse specificities
for peptide–class II
MHC complexes
αβ heterodimers
Diverse specificities
for peptide–class I
MHC complexes
αβ heterodimers
Specific for self
and some
foreign antigens
(peptide–class II 
MHC complexes)
CD3+ 
CD4+
CD8–
CD3+ 
CD4–
CD8+
CD3+ 
CD4+
CD25+
FoxP3+ 
(most 
common)
αβ T Lymphocytes
Class
Functions
Antigen 
receptor and
specificity
Selected
phenotype
markers
35–60
15–40
0.5–2
50–60
15–20
5–10
50–60
10–15
5–10
Percentage of 
total lymphocytes*
Blood Lymph
node
Spleen
B cells
Antibody
production
(humoral
immunity)
Surface Ig
Diverse specificities
for many types
of molecules
Fc receptors
class II MHC
CD19
CD20
B Lymphocytes
5–20
20–25
40–45
Blood Lymph
node
Spleen
B
Fig. 1.9 B, The table summarizes the major properties of the lymphocytes of the adaptive immune system. Not
included are gd T cells, natural killer cells and other innate lymphoid cells, which are discussed in Chapter 2. *The
percentages are approximations, based on data from human peripheral blood and mouse lymphoid organs. Ig,
Immunoglobulin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
11
 
speciﬁc B cells. This leads to the secretion of soluble
forms of antibodies with the same antigen speciﬁcity as
the membrane receptors.
T lymphocytes are responsible for cell-mediated
immunity. The antigen receptors of most T lympho-
cytes recognize only peptide fragments of protein an-
tigens that are bound to specialized peptide display
molecules, called major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules, on the surface of other cells, called
antigen-presenting cells (see Chapter 3). Among T
lymphocytes, CD4þ T cells are called helper T cells
because they help B lymphocytes to produce antibodies
and help phagocytes to destroy ingested microbes.
CD8þ T lymphocytes are called cytotoxic T lympho-
cytes (CTLs) because they kill cells harboring microbes.
Some CD4þ T cells belong to a special subset that
functions to prevent or limit immune responses; these
are called regulatory T lymphocytes.
All lymphocytes arise from common lymphoid
progenitor cells in the bone marrow (Fig. 1.10). B
lymphocytes mature in the bone marrow, and T
lymphocytes mature in an organ called the thymus.
These sites in which mature lymphocytes are produced
(generated) are called the generative (also called central
or primary) lymphoid organs. Mature lymphocytes
leave the generative lymphoid organs and enter the
circulation and secondary (peripheral) lymphoid or-
gans, which are the major site of immune responses
where
lymphocytes
encounter
antigens
and
are
activated.
When naive lymphocytes recognize microbial an-
tigens and also receive additional signals induced by
microbes, the antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes prolifer-
ate and then differentiate into effector cells and
memory cells (Fig. 1.11).
• Naive lymphocytes express receptors for antigens
but do not perform the functions that are required
to eliminate antigens. These cells circulate between
and temporarily reside in secondary lymphoid or-
gans, where they are positioned to respond to anti-
gens. If they are not activated by antigen, after
several months up to a few years, naive lymphocytes
die by the process of apoptosis and are replaced by
new cells that have developed in the generative
lymphoid organs. The differentiation of naive lym-
phocytes into effector cells and memory cells is
B 
lymphocyte
lineage
T 
lymphocyte
lineage
Bone
marrow 
Thymus
Immature
B lymphocytes
Naive
B lymphocytes
Naive
T lymphocytes
Naive 
T lymphocytes
Lymph
nodes
Spleen
Mucosal and
cutaneous
lymphoid
tissues
Recirculation
Generative
lymphoid 
organs
Secondary
(peripheral)
lymphoid organs
Blood,
lymph
Common
lymphoid
precursor
Bone
Marrow
Fig. 1.10 Maturation and tissue distribution of lymphocytes. Lymphocytes develop from precursors in the
generative lymphoid organs (bone marrow and thymus). Mature lymphocytes enter the secondary (peripheral)
lymphoid organs, where they respond to foreign antigens, and recirculate in the blood and lymph. Some
immature B cells leave the bone marrow and complete their maturation in the spleen (not shown).
12
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
Cell type
Stage
B lymphocytes
T lymphocytes
T lymphocytes
B lymphocytes
Migration
Preferentially
to secondary 
lymphoid organs
Preferentially to 
inflamed tissues
Heterogenous: different 
subsets to lymphoid organs,
mucosa and other tissues
Very low
High
Low
None
Cytokine secretion;
cytotoxic activity
None
Frequency of cells
responsive to
particular antigen
Effector functions
A
B
Antigen
recognition
Antigen
recognition
Proliferation
Proliferation
Differentiation
Differentiation
Naive cell
Memory lymphocyte
Activated or 
effector lymphocyte
Naive cell
Memory 
lymphocyte
Activated or 
effector lymphocyte
Membrane
immunoglobulin
(Ig) isotype
Affinity of
Ig produced
IgM and IgD
Frequently IgG,
IgA, and IgE
Frequently IgG,
IgA, and IgE
Relatively low
Increases during
immune response
Relatively high
None
Antibody secretion
None
Effector functions
Fig. 1.11 Stages in the life history of lymphocytes. A, Naive lymphocytes recognize foreign antigens to initiate
adaptive immune responses. Naive lymphocytes need signals in addition to antigens to proliferate and differ-
entiate into effector cells; these additional signals are not shown. Effector cells, which develop from naive cells,
function to eliminate antigens. The effector cells of the B lymphocyte lineage are antibody-secreting plasma cells
(some of which are long lived). The effector cells of the CD4 T lymphocyte lineage produce cytokines. (The
effector cells of the CD8 lineage are CTLs; these are not shown.) Other progeny of the antigen-stimulated
lymphocytes differentiate into long-lived memory cells. B, The important characteristics of naive, effector, and
memory cells in the B and T lymphocyte lineages are summarized. The generation and functions of effector cells,
including changes in migration patterns and types of immunoglobulin produced, are described in later chapters.
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
13
 
initiated by antigen recognition, thus ensuring that
the immune response that develops is speciﬁc for
the antigen that is encountered.
• Effector lymphocytes are the differentiated progeny
of naive cells that have the ability to produce mole-
cules that function to eliminate antigens. The
effector cells in the B lymphocyte lineage are
antibody-secreting cells called plasma cells. Plasma
cells develop from B cells in response to antigenic
stimulation in the secondary lymphoid organs,
where they may stay and produce antibodies. Small
numbers of antibody-secreting cells are also found
in the blood; these are called plasmablasts. These
often migrate to the bone marrow, where they
mature into long-lived plasma cells and continue
to produce antibody for years after the infection is
eradicated, providing immediate protection in case
the infection recurs.
Effector CD4þ T cells (helper T cells) produce
proteins called cytokines that activate B cells,
macrophages, and other cell types, thereby medi-
ating the helper function of this lineage. The
properties of cytokines are listed in Appendix II and
will be discussed in later chapters. Effector CD8þ
T cells (CTLs) have the machinery to kill infected
host cells. The development and functions of these
effector cells are also discussed in later chapters.
Effector T lymphocytes are short-lived and die as
the antigen is eliminated.
• Memory cells, also generated from the progeny of
antigen-stimulated
lymphocytes,
can
survive
for
long periods in the absence of antigen. Therefore,
the frequency of memory cells increases with age, pre-
sumably because exposure to microbes throughout
one’s life has generated memory cells speciﬁc for
those microbes. In fact, memory cells make up less
than 5% of peripheral blood T cells in a newborn
but 50% or more in an adult (Fig. 1.12). As individ-
uals age, the gradual accumulation of memory cells
compensates for the reduced output of new, naive
T cells from the thymus, which involutes after puberty
(see Chapter 4). Memory cells are functionally inac-
tive; they do not perform effector functions unless
stimulated by antigen. When memory cells encounter
the same antigen that induced their development,
they rapidly respond by becoming effector cells that
initiate secondary immune responses. The signals
that generate and maintain memory cells are not
well understood but include cytokines.
Antigen-Presenting Cells
The common portals of entry for microbesdthe skin
and gastrointestinal, respiratory, and genitourinary
tractsdcontain
specialized
cells
located
at
the
epithelial barriers that capture antigens, transport
them to secondary lymphoid organs, and display
(present) them to lymphocytes. These are the ﬁrst
steps in the development of adaptive immune responses
against antigens. This function of antigen capture and
presentation is best understood for dendritic cells, the
most specialized APCs in the immune system. The role
of dendritic cells in presenting antigens to T lympho-
cytes and initiating cell-mediated immune responses is
described in Chapter 3.
B lymphocytes may directly recognize the antigens
of microbes (either released or on the surface of the
microbes), and macrophages and dendritic cells in
secondary lymphoid organs may also capture antigens
and display them to B cells.
% Blood T cells
Age (Years)
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
30
40
50
60
70
80
Naive T cells 
Memory T cells
Thymic output
10
20
Fig. 1.12 Change in proportions of naive and memory T cells
with age. The proportions of naive and memory T cells are
based on data from multiple healthy individuals. The estimate of
thymic output is an approximation. (Courtesy Dr. Donna L.
Farber, Columbia University College of Physicians and Sur-
geons, New York, NY.)
14
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
TISSUES OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The tissues of the immune system consist of the
generative lymphoid organs, in which T and B lym-
phocytes mature and become competent to respond to
antigens, and the secondary lymphoid organs, in which
adaptive immune responses to microbes are initiated
(see Fig. 1.10). Most of the lymphocytes in a healthy
human are found in lymphoid organs and other tissues
(Fig. 1.13). However, as we discuss later, lymphocytes
are unique among the cells of the body because of their
ability to recirculate, repeatedly traveling via the blood
to secondary lymphoid organs and other tissues. The
generative lymphoid organs are described in Chapter 4,
when we discuss the process of lymphocyte maturation.
The following section highlights some of the features of
secondary lymphoid organs that are important for
adaptive immunity.
Secondary (Peripheral) Lymphoid Organs and
Tissues
The secondary lymphoid organs and tissues, which
consist of lymph nodes, the spleen, and the mucosal
and cutaneous immune systems, are organized in a
way that promotes the development of adaptive im-
mune responses. T and B lymphocytes must locate
microbes that enter at any site in the body, then
respond to these microbes and eliminate them. The
anatomic organization of secondary lymphoid organs
enables APCs to concentrate antigens in these organs
and lymphocytes to locate and respond to the antigens.
Furthermore, different types of lymphocytes often need
to communicate with each other to generate effective
immune responses. For example, within secondary
lymphoid organs, helper T cells speciﬁc for a protein
antigen interact with and help B lymphocytes speciﬁc
for the same antigen, resulting in antibody production.
An important function of lymphoid organs is to bring
together these rare T and B cells speciﬁc for the same
antigen after stimulation by that antigen.
The major secondary lymphoid organs share many
characteristics but also have some unique features.
• Lymph nodes are encapsulated nodular aggregates of
lymphoid tissues located along lymphatic channels
throughout the body (Fig. 1.14). Fluid constantly
leaks out of small blood vessels in all epithelia and
connective tissues and most parenchymal organs.
This ﬂuid, called lymph, is drained by lymphatic ves-
sels from the tissues to the lymph nodes and eventu-
ally back into the blood circulation. Therefore, the
lymph contains a mixture of substances absorbed
from epithelia and tissues. As the lymph passes
through lymph nodes, APCs in the nodes are able
to sample the antigens of microbes that may enter
through epithelia into tissues. In addition, dendritic
cells pick up antigens of microbes from epithelia
and other tissues and transport these antigens to the
lymph nodes. The net result of these processes of an-
tigen capture and transport is that the antigens of mi-
crobes entering through epithelia or colonizing tissues
become concentrated in draining lymph nodes.
• The spleen is a highly vascularized abdominal organ
that serves the same role in immune responses to
blood-borne antigens as that of lymph nodes in re-
sponses to lymph-borne antigens (Fig. 1.15). Blood
entering the spleen ﬂows through a network of chan-
nels (sinusoids). Blood-borne antigens are captured
and concentrated by dendritic cells and macrophages
in the spleen. The spleen contains abundant phago-
cytes that line the sinusoids, which ingest and
destroy microbes in the blood. These macrophages
also ingest and destroy old red blood cells.
• The cutaneous and mucosal immune systems are
specialized collections of lymphoid tissues and
Tissue
Number of
lymphocytes x 109
Spleen
70
50
20
10
190
Lymph nodes
Bone marrow
10
Blood
Skin
50
Intestines
Liver
30
Lungs
Fig. 1.13 Distribution of lymphocytes in lymphoid organs and
other
tissues.
Approximate
numbers
of
lymphocytes
in
different organs of healthy adults are shown.
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
15
 
APCs located in and under the epithelia of the skin
and
the gastrointestinal
and
respiratory
tracts,
respectively. Although most of the immune cells in
these tissues are diffusely scattered beneath the
epithelial barriers, there are discrete collections of
lymphocytes and APCs organized in a similar way
as in lymph nodes. For example, tonsils in the phar-
ynx and Peyer’s patches in the intestine are two
anatomically
deﬁned
mucosal
lymphoid
tissues
(Fig. 1.16). The immune system of the skin contains
most of the cells of innate and adaptive immunity,
but without any anatomically deﬁned structures
B cell zone
(follicle)
Afferent
lymphatic 
vessel
Trabecula
Trabecula
Trabecula
Capsule
Vein
Artery
Efferent
lymphatic
vessel
Medulla
T cell
zone
Germinal
center
Medullary
sinus
Antigen
Lymphocytes
Subcapsular
sinus
High
endothelial
venule (HEV)
A
B
Lymphoid follicles
(B cell zone) with
germinal centers
Parafollicular
cortex (T cell zone)
Fig. 1.14 Morphology of lymph nodes. A, Schematic diagram
shows the structural organization of a lymph node. B, Light
micrograph shows a cross section of a lymph node illustrating
the T cell and B cell zones. The B cell zones contain numerous
follicles in the cortex, some of which contain lightly stained
central areas (germinal centers). (Courtesy Robert Oghami, MD,
PhD, and Kaushik Sridhar, Department of Pathology, University
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.)
B
T cell zone
(periarteriolar
lymphoid
sheath PALS)
Red pulp
B cell zone
(follicle)
Marginal
zone
Marginal
sinus
Follicular
arteriole
Trabecular
artery
Central 
arteriole
A
Red pulp
Germinal
center of
lymphoid
follicle
White pulp
Periarteriolar
lymphoid
sheath
Fig. 1.15 Morphology of the spleen. A, Schematic diagram
shows a splenic arteriole surrounded by the periarteriolar
lymphoid sheath (PALS) and attached follicles. The PALS and
lymphoid follicles together constitute the white pulp. The mar-
ginal zone with its sinus is the indistinct boundary between the
white pulp and the red pulp. B, Light micrograph of a section of
spleen shows an arteriole with the PALS and a follicle with a
prominent germinal center. These are surrounded by the red
pulp, which is rich in vascular sinusoids.
16
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
(Fig. 1.17). At any time, at least a quarter of the
body’s lymphocytes are in the mucosal tissues and
skin (reﬂecting the large size of these tissues) (see
Fig. 1.13), and many of these are memory cells. Cuta-
neous and mucosal lymphoid tissues are sites of im-
mune responses to antigens that breach epithelia. A
remarkable property of the cutaneous and mucosal
immune systems is that they are able to respond to
pathogens but do not react to the enormous
numbers of usually harmless commensal microbes
present at the epithelial barriers. This is accom-
plished by several mechanisms, including the action
of regulatory T cells and other signals that suppress
rather than activate lymphocytes.
Follicle
Dendritic
cell
Afferent
lymphatic
Plasma
cell
T cell
Macrophage
Mast cell
Innate
lymphoid
cell 
B cell
Antimicrobial
peptides
Paneth cells
Peyer’s
patch
Lamina 
propria
Mucosal
epithelium
M cell
Commensal
bacteria
Mucus
Crypt
Intraepithelial 
lymphocytes
Intestinal
epithelia cell
Dendritic
cell
Lymphatic
drainage
Intestinal 
lumen
Villus
Mesenteric
lymph node
IgA
Lamina
propria
Peyer's 
patch
Mucosal
epithelium
Tuft cell
Goblet cell
A
B
Fig. 1.16 Mucosal immune system. Schematic diagram of the mucosal immune system uses the small
bowel as an example. Many commensal bacteria are present in the lumen. The mucus-secreting epithelium
provides an innate barrier to microbial invasion (discussed in Chapter 2). Specialized epithelial cells, such as M
cells, promote the transport of antigens from the lumen into underlying tissues. Cells in the lamina propria,
including dendritic cells, T lymphocytes, and macrophages, provide innate and adaptive immune defense
against invading microbes; some of these cells are organized into specialized structures, such as Peyer’s
patches in the small intestine. Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is a type of antibody abundantly produced in mucosal
tissues that is transported into the lumen, where it binds and neutralizes microbes (see Chapter 8).
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
17
 
Within the secondary lymphoid organs, T lym-
phocytes and B lymphocytes are segregated into
different anatomic regions (Fig. 1.18). In lymph nodes,
the B cells are concentrated in discrete structures, called
follicles, located around the periphery, or cortex, of
each node. If the B cells in a follicle have recently
responded to a protein antigen and received signals
from helper T cells, this follicle may contain a central
lightly staining region called a germinal center. The
germinal center has an important role in the production
of highly effective antibodies and is described in
Chapter 7. The T lymphocytes are concentrated outside
but adjacent to the follicles, in the paracortex. APCs
colocalize with the classes of lymphocytes to which they
present antigensd dendritic cells with T lymphocytes
in the parafollicular cortex and a type of cell called
follicular dendritic cells (FDCs; see Chapter 7) with B
cells in the follicles. In the spleen, T lymphocytes are
concentrated in periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths sur-
rounding small arterioles, and B cells reside in the
follicles.
The anatomic organization of secondary lymphoid
organs is tightly regulated to allow immune responses
to develop after stimulation by antigens. B lymphocytes
are attracted to and retained in the follicles because of
the action of a class of cytokines called chemokines
(chemoattractant cytokines; chemokines and other cy-
tokines are discussed in more detail in later chapters).
FDCs in the follicles secrete a particular chemokine for
which naive B cells express a receptor, called CXCR5.
The chemokine that binds to CXCR5 attracts B cells
from the blood into the follicles of lymphoid organs.
Similarly, T cells are segregated in the paracortex of
lymph nodes and the periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths of
the spleen because naive T lymphocytes express a re-
ceptor, called CCR7, which recognizes chemokines that
are produced in these regions of the lymph nodes and
spleen. When the lymphocytes are activated by anti-
gens, they alter their expression of chemokine receptors.
As a result, the antigen-activated B cells and T cells
migrate toward each other and meet at the edge of
follicles, where helper T cells interact with and help B
Postcapillary
venule
Keratinocytes
Commensal and
pathogenic microbes
Epidermis
Dermis
Epidermal
Langerhans cell
Basal
keratinocytes
T lymphocyte 
Macrophage 
Mast cell
Dermal 
dendritic cell
Plasma cell
Intrepithelial
lymphocyte
Lymphatic
vessel
Drainage to regional
lymph node
Fig. 1.17 Cutaneous immune system. The major components of the cutaneous immune system shown in
this schematic diagram include keratinocytes, Langerhans cells, and intraepithelial lymphocytes, all located in
the epidermis, and T lymphocytes, dendritic cells, and macrophages, located in the dermis.
18
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
cells to differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells
(see Chapter 7). Thus, these lymphocyte populations
are kept apart from each other until it is useful for them
to interact, after exposure to an antigen. This is an
excellent example of how the structure of lymphoid
organs ensures that the cells that have recognized and
responded to an antigen interact and communicate
with one another when necessary.
Many of the effector T cells exit the node through
efferent lymphatic vessels and leave the spleen through
veins. These activated lymphocytes end up in the cir-
culation and can go to distant sites of infection. Some
activated T cells remain in the lymphoid organ where
they were generated and migrate into lymphoid follicles,
where they help B cells to make high-afﬁnity antibodies.
Lymphocyte Recirculation and Migration into
Tissues
Naive lymphocytes constantly recirculate between the
blood and secondary lymphoid organs, where they
may be activated by antigens to become effector cells,
and effector lymphocytes migrate from lymphoid
tissues to sites of infection, where microbes are
eliminated (Fig. 1.19). Thus, these lymphocytes with
different
histories
of
antigen
exposure
selectively
migrate to the sites where they can perform their
B cell
zone
Artery
Afferent
lymphatic
vessel
Dendritic cell
T cell
zone
B cell
T cell
T cell and dendritic
cell–specific chemokine
B cell–specific
chemokine
High
endothelial
venule
B cell zone
(lymphoid
follicle)
T cell zone
(parafollicular
cortex)
Naive
T cell
Naive
B cell
A
B
Fig. 1.18 Segregation of T and B lymphocytes in different regions of peripheral lymphoid organs. A,
Schematic diagram illustrates the path by which naive T and B lymphocytes migrate to different areas of a
lymph node. Naive B and T lymphocytes enter through a high endothelial venule (HEV), shown in cross
section, and are drawn to different areas of the node by chemokines that are produced in these areas and bind
selectively to only one or the other cell type. Also shown is the migration of dendritic cells, which pick up
antigens from epithelia, enter through afferent lymphatic vessels, and migrate to the T cellerich areas of the
node (see Chapter 3). B, In this histologic section of a lymph node, the B lymphocytes, located in the follicles,
are stained green, and the T cells, in the parafollicular cortex, are stained red using immunoﬂuorescence. In
this technique, a section of the tissue is incubated with antibodies speciﬁc for T or B cells coupled to ﬂuo-
rochromes that emit different colors when excited at the appropriate wavelengths. The anatomic segregation
of T and B cells also occurs in the spleen (not shown). (B, Courtesy Drs. Kathryn Pape and Jennifer Walter,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN.)
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
19
 
different functions. Migration of effector lymphocytes
to sites of infection is most relevant for T cells because
effector T cells have to locate and eliminate microbes at
these sites. By contrast, B cellederived plasma cells do
not need to migrate to sites of infection; instead, they
secrete antibodies, and the antibodies enter and circu-
late in the blood. These antibodies bind pathogens or
toxins in the blood, or in tissues into which the anti-
bodies enter. Plasma cells in mucosal organs secrete
antibodies that enter the lumens of these organs, where
they bind to and combat ingested and inhaled microbes.
The migration of different lymphocyte populations
has distinct features and is controlled by different
molecular interactions.
• Naive T lymphocytes that have matured in the
thymus and entered the circulation migrate into
lymph nodes by binding to adhesion molecules and
chemokines on the endothelial lining of specialized
postcapillary venules, called high endothelial ve-
nules (HEVs), located in the parafollicular cortex.
The process of lymphocyte migration out of blood
vessels is discussed in Chapter 5. Once outside the
HEV, the T cells remain in the paracortex because
they are attracted to chemokines produced there.
In that location they can ﬁnd antigens that are
brought to the lymph nodes by dendritic cells or in
free form through lymphatic vessels that drain
epithelia and parenchymal organs.
• Within the lymph node paracortex, naive T cells
move around rapidly along specialized connective
tissue ﬁbers, scanning the surfaces of dendritic cells,
located on these ﬁbers, for antigens. If a T cell specif-
ically recognizes an antigen on a dendritic cell, that
T cell forms stable conjugates with the dendritic
cell and is activated. Such an encounter between
an antigen and a speciﬁc lymphocyte is likely to
be a rare and random event, but most T cells in
the body circulate through some lymph nodes at
least
once
a
day.
As
mentioned
earlier
and
described further in Chapter 3, the likelihood of
the correct T cell ﬁnding its antigen is increased
in secondary lymphoid organs, particularly lymph
nodes, because microbial antigens are concentrated
in the same regions of these organs through which
naive T cells circulate. Thus, T cells ﬁnd the antigen
they can recognize, and these T cells are activated
to proliferate and differentiate. Naive cells that
have not encountered speciﬁc antigens leave the
Lymph node
Peripheral
tissue
Artery
Blood
vessel
Peripheral
blood vessel
Efferent
lymphatic
vessel
High
endothelial
venule
Chemokines
Effector or
memory T cell
Naive T cell
Fig. 1.19 Migration of T lymphocytes. Naive T lymphocytes migrate from the blood through high endothelial
venules into the T cell zones of lymph nodes, where the cells are activated by antigens. Activated T cells exit
the nodes, enter the bloodstream, and migrate preferentially to peripheral tissues at sites of infection and
inﬂammation. The adhesion molecules involved in the attachment of T cells to endothelial cells are described
in Chapter 5.
20
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
lymph nodes through lymphatic vessels and reenter
the circulation.
• Many of the effector cells that are generated upon
T cell activation leave the lymph node by lymphatics,
enter the circulation, and then preferentially migrate
into infected tissues. Effector T cell migration selec-
tively occurs at infection sites because the local
innate response to the microbes induces expression
of chemokines and endothelial adhesion molecules
on postcapillary venules (see Chapter 5). Once in
the infected tissue, T lymphocytes perform their
function of eradicating the microbes.
• B lymphocytes that recognize and respond to antigen
in lymph node follicles differentiate into antibody-
secreting plasma cells, many of which migrate to
the bone marrow or mucosal tissues (see Chapter 7).
• Memory T cells consist of different populations (see
Chapter 6); some cells recirculate through lymph
nodes, where they can mount secondary responses
to captured antigens, and other cells migrate to sites
of infection, where they can respond rapidly to elim-
inate the infection. Yet other memory cells perma-
nently reside in epithelial tissues, such as mucosal
tissues and the skin.
We know less about lymphocyte circulation through
the spleen or other lymphoid tissues. The spleen does
not contain HEVs, but the general pattern of naive
lymphocyte migration through this organ is probably
similar to migration through lymph nodes.
SUMMARY
• The physiologic function of the immune system is to
protect individuals from infections and cancers.
• Innate immunity is the early line of defense, medi-
ated by cells and molecules that are always present
and ready to eliminate infectious microbes.
• Adaptive immunity is mediated by lymphocytes
stimulated by microbial antigens, which leads to
the proliferation and differentiation of the lympho-
cytes and the generation of effector cells, which elim-
inate microbes, and memory cells, which respond
more effectively against each successive exposure to
a microbe.
• Lymphocytes are the cells of adaptive immunity and
are the only cells with clonally distributed receptors
speciﬁc for different antigens.
• Adaptive immunity consists of humoral immunity,
in which antibodies neutralize and eliminate extracel-
lular
microbes
and
toxins,
and
cell-mediated
immunity, in which T lymphocytes eradicate intra-
cellular microbes.
• Adaptive immune responses consist of sequential
phases: antigen recognition by lymphocytes, activa-
tion of the lymphocytes to proliferate and to differ-
entiate into effector and memory cells, elimination
of the microbes, decline of the immune response,
and long-lived memory.
• Different populations of lymphocytes serve distinct
functions and may be distinguished by the surface
expression of particular membrane molecules.
• B lymphocytes are the only cells that produce an-
tibodies. B lymphocytes express membrane anti-
bodies that recognize antigens, and the progeny
of activated B cells, called plasma cells, secrete
the antibodies that neutralize and eliminate the
antigen.
• T lymphocytes recognize peptide fragments of pro-
tein antigens displayed on other cells. Helper T lym-
phocytes produce cytokines that activate phagocytes
to destroy ingested microbes, recruit leukocytes, and
activate B lymphocytes to produce antibodies. Cyto-
toxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) kill infected cells
harboring microbes in the cytoplasm.
• Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) capture antigens of
microbes that enter through epithelia, concentrate
these antigens in lymphoid organs, and display the
antigens for recognition by T cells.
• Lymphocytes and APCs are organized in secondary
(peripheral) lymphoid organs, where immune re-
sponses are initiated and develop.
• Naive lymphocytes circulate through secondary
lymphoid organs, where they may encounter foreign
antigens. Effector T lymphocytes migrate to periph-
eral sites of infection, where they function to elimi-
nate infectious microbes. Plasma cells remain in
lymphoid organs and the bone marrow, where they
secrete antibodies that enter the circulation and
ﬁnd and eliminate microbes.
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
21
 
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are the major differences between innate and
adaptive immunity?
2. What are the two types of adaptive immunity, and
what types of microbes do these adaptive immune
responses combat?
3. What are the principal classes of lymphocytes, and
how do they differ in function?
4. What are the important differences among naive,
effector, and memory T and B lymphocytes?
5. Where are T and B lymphocytes located in lymph
nodes,
and
how
is
their
anatomic
separation
maintained?
6. How do naive and effector T lymphocytes differ in
their patterns of migration?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
22
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
 
2
Innate Immunity
The Early Defense Against
Infections
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
General Features and Speciﬁcity of Innate
Immune Responses, 24
Cellular Receptors for Microbes and Damaged
Cells, 26
Toll-Like Receptors, 26
NOD-Like Receptors, 29
Inﬂammasomes, 30
Cytosolic RNA and DNA Sensors, 30
Other Cellular Receptors of Innate
Immunity, 33
Components of Innate Immunity, 33
Epithelial Barriers, 33
Phagocytes: Neutrophils and Monocytes/
Macrophages, 34
Dendritic Cells, 35
Mast Cells, 35
Innate Lymphoid Cells, 36
Natural Killer Cells, 37
Lymphocytes with Limited Diversity, 39
Complement System, 40
Other Plasma Proteins of Innate Immunity, 40
Cytokines of Innate Immunity, 43
Innate Immune Reactions, 43
Inﬂammation, 44
Recruitment of Phagocytes to Sites of Infection
and Tissue Damage, 45
Phagocytosis and Destruction of Microbes, 46
Tissue Repair, 47
Antiviral Defense, 48
Regulation of Innate Immune Responses, 48
Microbial Evasion of Innate Immunity, 49
Role of Innate Immunity in Stimulating Adaptive
Immune Responses, 49
Summary, 51
The survival of multicellular organisms requires effec-
tive defense against microbial infections and the ability
to eliminate damaged and necrotic cells and repair
injured tissues. Many of the mechanisms that serve
these roles are always present and functional within the
organism, ready to recognize and eliminate microbes
and dead cells. Therefore, this type of host defense is
known as innate immunity, also called natural im-
munity or native immunity. The cells and molecules
that are responsible for innate immunity make up the
innate immune system. Innate immunity evolved long
before adaptive immunity and is present in all multi-
cellular organisms, including plants, invertebrates, and
vertebrates.
Innate immunity is the ﬁrst line of host defense
against infections. It blocks microbial invasion through
epithelial barriers, destroys many microbes that do
enter the body, and is capable of controlling and even
eradicating infections. The innate immune response is
able to combat microbes immediately upon infection;
by contrast, to defend against a microbe not previously
encountered, the adaptive immune system requires
23
 
antigen stimulation of lymphocytes, which undergo
proliferation and differentiation steps, and therefore
effective
adaptive
responses
take
several
days
to
develop. Innate immunity provides essential protection
against infections during this delay. The innate immune
response also instructs the adaptive immune system to
respond to different microbes in ways that are effective
for combating those microbes. In addition, innate im-
munity is a key participant in the clearance of dead
tissues and the initiation of repair after tissue damage.
We discuss the early defense reactions of innate
immunity in this chapter, focusing on the following
three questions:
• How does the innate immune system recognize mi-
crobes and damaged cells?
• How do the different components of innate immu-
nity function to combat different types of microbes?
• How do innate immune reactions stimulate adaptive
immune responses?
GENERAL FEATURES AND SPECIFICITY OF
INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSES
The innate immune system performs its defensive
functions with only a few types of reactions, which are
more limited than the varied and specialized responses
of adaptive immunity. The speciﬁcity of innate immu-
nity is also different in several respects from the spec-
iﬁcity of lymphocytes, the antigen-recognizing cells of
adaptive immunity (Fig. 2.1).
The two principal types of reactions of the innate
immune system are inﬂammation and antiviral de-
fense. Inﬂammation consists of the accumulation and
activation of leukocytes and plasma proteins at sites of
infection or tissue injury. These cells and proteins act
together to kill mainly extracellular microbes and to
eliminate damaged tissues. Innate immune defense
against intracellular viruses is mediated by natural killer
(NK) cells, which kill virus-infected cells, and by cyto-
kines called type I interferons (IFNs), which block viral
replication within host cells.
The innate immune system responds in essentially
the same way to repeat encounters with a microbe,
whereas the adaptive immune system mounts stron-
ger, more rapid, and thus more effective responses on
successive encounters with a microbe. In other words,
for the most part, the innate immune system does not
remember prior encounters with microbes and resets to
baseline after each such encounter, whereas memory is
a cardinal feature of the adaptive immune response.
Some cells of innate immunity (such as macrophages
and NK cells) may be altered by encounters with mi-
crobes such that they respond better upon repeat en-
counters. But it is not clear if this process is seen in
most or all innate immune reactions, results in
improved protection against recurrent infections, or is
speciﬁc for different microbes.
The innate immune system recognizes structures
that are shared by various classes of microbes and are
not present in or on normal host cells. The cells and
molecules of innate immunity recognize and respond to a
limited number ofmicrobial structures, far fewer than the
almost unlimited number of microbial and nonmicrobial
antigens that can be recognized by the adaptive immune
system. Each component of innate immunity may
recognize many bacteria, viruses, or fungi. For example,
phagocytes express receptors for bacterial endotoxin, also
called lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and other receptors for
peptidoglycans; these molecules are components of the
outer membranes or cell walls of many bacterial species
but are not produced by mammalian cells. Other re-
ceptors of phagocytes recognize terminal mannose resi-
dues, which are typical of bacterial and fungal but not
mammalian glycoconjugates. Receptors in mammalian
cells recognize and respond to double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA), which is produced during replication of many
viruses but is not produced in mammalian cells, and to
unmethylated CG-rich (CpG) oligonucleotides, which
are common in microbial DNA but are not abundant in
mammalian DNA. The microbial molecules that stimu-
late innate immunity are often called pathogen-
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) to indicate
that they are present in infectious agents (pathogens)
and shared by microbes of the same type (i.e., they are
molecular patterns). The receptors of innate immunity
that
recognize
these shared
structures are
called
pattern recognition receptors.
Innate immune receptors are speciﬁc for struc-
tures of microbes that are often essential for the
survival and infectivity of these microbes. This char-
acteristic of innate immunity makes it a highly effective
defense mechanism because a microbe cannot evade
innate immunity simply by mutating or not expressing
the targets of innate immune recognition. Microbes that
do not express functional forms of these structures lose
their ability to infect and replicate in the host. By
24
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
contrast, microbes can evade adaptive immunity by
mutating antigens because most of these are not
required for the survival of the pathogens.
The innate immune system also recognizes mole-
cules that are released from damaged or necrotic host
cells. Such molecules are called damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs). Examples include high
mobility group box protein 1 (HMGB1), a histone
protein that is released from cells with damaged nuclei,
and extracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which
RIG-like
receptor
Different
microbes
PAMPs
Antigens
Identical
Toll-like
receptors
Different
microbes
Distinct 
antigen-specific
antibodies
Toll-like
receptor
TCR
Ig
Feature
Innate immunity
Adaptive immunity
Specificity
For structures shared by classes 
of microbes (pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns)
For structural detail of microbial 
molecules (antigens); may recognize
nonmicrobial antigens
Number and types
of receptors
About 100 different types of 
invariant receptors
Only 2 types of receptors (Ig and
TCR), with millions of variations
of each
Receptors
Located in plasma membrane, endosomal
membrane, cytosol
Located only in plasma membrane   
Microbial molecules
recognized
About 1000 molecular patterns (estimated); 
essential for survival of microbes; usually 
cannot be mutated
>107 antigens; most are nonessen-
tial and can be mutated to evade 
immunity
Distribution
of receptors
Nonclonal: identical receptors on all cells 
that express the receptors
Clonal: clones of lymphocytes with
distinct specificities express
different receptors
Genes encoding
receptors
Germline encoded, in all cells
Formed by somatic recombination
of gene segments only in B
and T cells
Discrimination of self
and nonself
Yes; healthy host cells are not recognized
or they may express molecules that prevent
innate immune reactions
Yes; based on elimination or 
inactivation of self-reactive
lymphocytes; may be imperfect
(hence the possibility 
of autoimmunity)
Fig. 2.1 Specificity and receptors of innate immunity and adaptive immunity. This ﬁgure summarizes the
important distinguishing features of the speciﬁcity and receptors of innate and adaptive immunity, with select
examples of key immune receptors and their ligands illustrated. Ig, Immunoglobulin (antibody); TCR, T cell
receptor.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
25
 
is released from damaged mitochondria. The subsequent
responses to DAMPs serve to eliminate the damaged
cells and to initiate the process of tissue repair. Thus,
innate responses occur even following sterile injury,
such as infarction, the death of tissue due to loss of its
blood supply.
The receptors of the innate immune system are
encoded by inherited genes that are identical in all
cells. The pattern recognition receptors of the innate
immune system are nonclonally distributed; that is, the
receptors are identical on all cells that express them.
Therefore, many cells of innate immunity may recog-
nize and respond to the same microbe. This is funda-
mentally different from the antigen receptors of the
adaptive immune system, which are encoded by genes
formed by rearrangement of gene segments during
lymphocyte development, resulting in many clones of
B and T lymphocytes, each expressing a unique re-
ceptor. It is estimated that there are about 100 types of
innate immune receptors that are capable of recog-
nizing about 1000 PAMPs and DAMPs. In striking
contrast, there are only two kinds of speciﬁc receptors
in the adaptive immune system (immunoglobulin [Ig]
and T cell receptors [TCRs]), but because of their di-
versity they are able to recognize millions of different
antigens.
The innate immune system does not react against
healthy cells. Several features of the innate immune
system account for its inability to react against an in-
dividual’s own cells and molecules. The receptors of
innate immunity have evolved to be speciﬁc for mi-
crobial structures (and products of damaged cells) but
not for substances in healthy cells. Healthy cells often
express molecules that block innate responses; the best-
deﬁned examples of such regulatory molecules are in
the complement system. The adaptive immune system
also discriminates between self and nonself; in the
adaptive immune system, lymphocytes capable of
recognizing self antigens are produced, but they die or
are inactivated upon encounter with self antigens.
Innate immunity can be considered as a set of
mechanisms that provide defense at every stage of mi-
crobial infections:
• At the portals of entry for microbes: Most microbial
infections are acquired through the epithelial bar-
riers of the skin and gastrointestinal, respiratory,
and genitourinary systems. The earliest defense
mechanisms active at these sites are epithelia and
mucus secreted at some of these sites, which provide
physical barriers and antimicrobial molecules.
• In the tissues: Microbes that breach epithelia, as well
as dead cells in tissues, are detected by resident mac-
rophages, dendritic cells, and mast cells. Some of
these cells react by secreting cytokines, which initiate
the process of inﬂammation. Phagocytes residing in
the tissues or recruited from the blood engulf and
destroy the microbes and damaged cells.
• In the blood: Plasma proteins, including proteins of
the complement system, react against microbes that
enter the circulation and promote their destruction.
We will return to a more detailed discussion of these
components of innate immunity and their functions
later in the chapter. We start with a consideration of
how microbes, damaged cells, and other foreign sub-
stances are detected and how innate immune responses
are triggered.
CELLULAR RECEPTORS FOR MICROBES AND
DAMAGED CELLS
The pattern recognition receptors used by the innate
immune system to detect microbes and damaged cells
are expressed on phagocytes, dendritic cells, epithelial
barrier cells, and many other cell types and are
located in different cellular compartments where
microbes or their products may be found. These re-
ceptors are present on the cell surface, where they detect
extracellular microbes; in vesicles (endosomes) into
which microbes may be ingested; and in the cytosol,
where they function as sensors of cytoplasmic microbes
and products of cell damage (Fig. 2.2). The receptors for
PAMPs and DAMPs belong to several protein families.
Toll-Like Receptors
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are so named because they
are homologous to a Drosophila protein called Toll,
which was discovered for its role in the development of
the ﬂy and later shown to be essential for protecting
ﬂies against fungal infections. In humans, there are 10
different TLR proteins that dimerize to form 9 different
functional receptors that are speciﬁc for different
components of microbes (Fig. 2.3). TLR-2 complexed
with TLR-1 or TLR-6 recognizes several lipopeptides
and peptidoglycans made by gram-positive bacteria and
some parasites; TLR-4 is speciﬁc for bacterial LPS
(endotoxin), made by gram-negative bacteria; TLR-5 is
26
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
speciﬁc for a bacterial ﬂagellar protein called ﬂagellin
that is produced by most motile bacteria; TLR-3 is
speciﬁc for dsRNA; TLR-7 and TLR-8 are speciﬁc for
ssRNA; and TLR-9 recognizes unmethylated CpG
DNA, which is abundant in microbial genomes. TLRs
speciﬁc
for
microbial
proteins,
lipids,
and
poly-
saccharides (many of which are present in bacterial cell
walls) are located on cell surfaces, where they recognize
these products of extracellular microbes. TLRs that
recognize nucleic acids are in endosomes, into which
microbes are ingested and where they are degraded and
their nucleic acids are released.
Signals generated by TLRs activate transcription
factors that stimulate expression of cytokines and
other proteins involved in the inﬂammatory or
antiviral response and in the antimicrobial functions
of activated phagocytes and other cells (Fig. 2.4).
Among the most important transcription factors acti-
vated by TLR signals are members of the nuclear factor
kB (NF-kB) family, which promote expression of
various cytokines and endothelial adhesion molecules
that play important roles in inﬂammation, and inter-
feron regulatory factors (IRFs), which stimulate pro-
duction of the antiviral cytokines type I IFNs.
Mutations affecting TLRs or their signaling mole-
cules cause rare autosomal recessive diseases charac-
terized
by
recurrent
infections,
highlighting
the
importance of these pathways in host defense against
microbes. For example, individuals with mutations
affecting TLR-3 are susceptible to herpes simplex virus
infections, particularly encephalitis, and mutations in
MyD88, a signal transduction adaptor protein down-
stream of several TLRs, make individuals susceptible to
bacterial pneumonias.
Bacterial cell
wall lipid
Bacterial cell 
wall lipid; 
products of 
damaged 
host cells
Viral RNA
Toll-like receptor
(TLR)
NOD-like 
receptor (NLR)
RIG-like receptor
(RLR)
Cytosolic DNA
sensor (CDS)
TLR
Endosomal
Cytosolic
Nucleic acids
of ingested
microbes
Plasma
membrane
Microbial
polysaccharide
C-type 
lectin receptor
Endosomal
membrane
Extracellular
Microbial DNA
Fig. 2.2 Cellular locations of receptors of the innate immune system. Some receptors, such as certain Toll-
like receptors (TLRs) and lectins, are located on cell surfaces; other TLRs are in endosomes. Some receptors
for viral nucleic acids, bacterial peptides, and products of damaged cells are in the cytoplasm. NOD and RIG
refer to the founding members of families of structurally homologous cytosolic receptors for bacterial and viral
products, respectively. (Their full names are complex and do not reﬂect their functions.) There are ﬁve major
families of cellular receptors in innate immunity: TLRs, C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), NOD-like receptors
(NLRs), RIG-like receptors (RLRs), and cytosolic DNA sensors (CDSs).
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
27
 
TLR-4
TLR-5
TLR-2
TLR-3
TLR-7
TLR-8
TLR-9
dsRNA
ssRNA
ssRNA
CpG DNA
TLR-1:TLR-2
TLR-2:TLR-6
LPS
Bacterial
flagellin
Bacterial
peptidoglycan
Bacterial
lipopeptides
Bacterial
lipopeptides
MD2
Plasma
membrane
Endosome
Gram-positive bacteria
Viruses
Viruses,
bacteria,
fungi
Gram-
negative
bacteria
All
flagellated
bacteria
Fig. 2.3 Specificities of TLRs. Different TLRs recognize many different, structurally diverse products of mi-
crobes. Plasma membrane TLRs are speciﬁc for cell wall components of bacteria, and endosomal TLRs
recognize nucleic acids. MD2 is a protein that enhances the binding of LPS to TLR-4. ds, Double-stranded;
LPS, lipopolysaccharide; ss, single-stranded.
28
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
NOD-Like Receptors
The NOD-like receptors (NLRs) are a large family of
innate receptors that sense DAMPs and PAMPs in the
cytosol of cells and initiate signaling events that pro-
mote inﬂammation. All NLRs contain a C-terminal
nucleotide
oligomerization
domain
(NOD,
named
because of the activity it was originally associated with)
but different NLRs have different N-terminal ligand-
binding domains. Two important NLRs, NOD1 and
NOD2, are expressed in several cell types, including
mucosal barrier epithelial cells and phagocytes. NOD1
and NOD2 recognize different dipeptides derived from
bacterial cell wall peptidoglycan, and in response, they
generate signals that activate the NF-kB transcription
factor, which promotes expression of genes encoding
inﬂammatory proteins. NOD2 is highly expressed in
intestinal Paneth cells in the small bowel, where it
Leucine-rich
repeats (ligand-binding domain)
Toll–IL-1 receptor (TIR)
signaling domain
Plasma membrane
Nucleus
Endosome
IRFs
(interferon
regulatory
factors)
TLR engagement
by bacterial or
viral molecules 
Increased expression of:
Cytokines, adhesion
molecules, costimulators
Production of
type 1 interferon
(IFN α, β)
-Acute inflammation
-Stimulation of
 adaptive immunity
Antiviral state
NF-κB
Activation of
transcription
factors
Activation of
transcription
factors
Fig. 2.4 Signaling functions of Toll-like receptors. All TLRs contain a ligand-binding domain composed of
leucine-rich motifs and a cytoplasmic signaling, Toll-like interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor (TIR) domain, so named
because it is present in both types of receptors. TLRs activate signaling mechanisms that involve adaptor
proteins and lead to the activation of transcription factors. These transcription factors stimulate the production
of proteins that mediate inﬂammation and antiviral defense. NF-kB, Nuclear factor kB.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
29
 
stimulates expression of antimicrobial substances called
defensins in response to ingested pathogens. Some
polymorphisms of the NOD2 gene are associated with
inﬂammatory bowel disease, perhaps because these var-
iants have reduced function and allow luminal microbes
to penetrate the intestinal wall and trigger inﬂammation.
Inflammasomes
Inﬂammasomes are multiprotein complexes that
assemble in the cytosol of cells in response to mi-
crobes or changes associated with cell injury, and
proteolytically generate active forms of the inﬂam-
matory cytokines interleukin-1b (IL-1b) and IL-18.
IL-1b and IL-18 are synthesized as inactive precursors,
which must be cleaved by the enzyme caspase-1 to
become active cytokines that are released from the cell
and
promote
inﬂammation.
Inﬂammasomes
are
composed of a sensor, an enzyme (inactive caspase-1),
and an adaptor that links the two. There are many
different types of inﬂammasomes, some of which use
one of several different NLR-family proteins as sensors.
These sensors directly recognize microbial products in
the cytosol or detect changes in the amount of endog-
enous molecules or ions in the cytosol that indirectly
indicate the presence of infection or cell damage. Some
inﬂammasomes use sensors that are not in the NLR
family, such as AIM-family DNA sensors and a protein
called pyrin that detects biochemical changes induced
by certain bacterial toxins. After recognition of micro-
bial or endogenous ligands, the inﬂammasome sensors
oligomerize with an adaptor protein and the inactive
(pro) form of the enzyme caspase-1, resulting in gen-
eration of the active form of caspase-1 (Fig. 2.5). Active
caspase-1 cleaves pro–IL-1b, the inactive precursor
form of the cytokine IL-1b, to generate biologically
active IL-1b. As discussed later, IL-1 induces acute
inﬂammation and causes fever.
One of the best characterized inﬂammasomes uses
NLRP3 (NOD-like receptor family, pyrin domain
containing 3) as a sensor. The NLRP3 inﬂammasome is
expressed in innate immune cells, including macro-
phages and neutrophils, as well as keratinocytes in the
skin and other cells. A wide variety of stimuli activate
the NLRP3 inﬂammasome, including crystalline sub-
stances such as uric acid (a by-product of DNA
breakdown, indicating nuclear damage) and cholesterol
crystals, extracellular ATP released from nearby injured
cells that binds to cell surface purinoceptors, reduced
intracellular potassium ion (Kþ) concentration (which
indicates plasma membrane damage), and reactive ox-
ygen species (which are produced in response to many
types of cell injury). Thus, the inﬂammasome reacts to
injury affecting various cellular components. How
NLRP3 recognizes such diverse types of cellular stress
or damage is not clearly understood.
Inﬂammasome activation also causes a form of
programmed cell death of macrophages and dendritic
cells called pyroptosis, characterized by swelling of
cells, loss of plasma membrane integrity, and release of
inﬂammatory cytokines. Activated caspase-1 cleaves a
protein called gasdermin D. The N-terminal fragment
of gasdermin D oligomerizes and forms a channel in the
plasma membrane that allows the egress of mature IL-
1b, but also permits the inﬂux of ions, followed by cell
swelling and pyroptosis.
Inﬂammasome activation plays important roles in
several diseases. Gain-of-function mutations in NLRP3
and, less frequently, loss-of-function mutations in reg-
ulators of inﬂammasome activation are the cause of
autoinﬂammatory syndromes characterized by un-
controlled and spontaneous inﬂammation. IL-1 antag-
onists are effective treatments for these diseases. The
common joint disease gout is caused by deposition of
urate crystals and subsequent inﬂammation mediated
by inﬂammasome recognition of the crystals and IL-1b
production. The inﬂammasome may also contribute to
atherosclerosis, in which inﬂammation caused by
cholesterol crystals may play a role.
Cytosolic RNA and DNA Sensors
The innate immune system includes several cytosolic
proteins that recognize microbial RNA or DNA and
respond by generating signals that lead to the produc-
tion of inﬂammatory and antiviral cytokines.
• The RIG-like receptors (RLRs) RIG-I and MDA-5
(Fig. 2.6) are cytosolic proteins that sense viral
RNA and induce the production of the antiviral cy-
tokines, type I IFNs. RLRs recognize features of viral
RNAs that are not typical of mammalian RNA, such
as dsRNA that is longer than dsRNA that may be
formed transiently in normal cells, or RNA with a
50 triphosphate moiety not present in mammalian
host cell cytosolic RNA. (Mammalian RNAs are
modiﬁed and have a 50 7-methyl-guanosine cap.)
RLRs are expressed in many cell types that are sus-
ceptible to infection by RNA viruses. After binding
30
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
viral RNAs, RLRs interact with a mitochondrial
membrane protein called mitochondrial antiviral-
signaling (MAVS), which is required to initiate
signaling events that activate transcription factors
that induce the production of type I IFNs.
• Cytosolic DNA sensors (CDSs) include several struc-
turally related proteins that recognize microbial
dsDNA in the cytosol and activate signaling pathways
that initiate antimicrobial responses, including type I
IFN production and autophagy. DNA may be
released into the cytosol from intracellular viruses
and bacteria. These sensors also recognize self DNA
if it accumulates in the cytosol. Excessive accumula-
tion (e.g., caused by mutations that reduce endonu-
clease
function)
is
the
basis
of
systemic
inﬂammatory diseases called interferonopathies.
+
+
Acute inflammation
Pathogenic bacteria
Extracellular ATP
Innate signals
(e.g. TLRs)
Bacterial products
Crystals
K+ efflux
Reactive oxygen species
Pro-IL1β
Gasdermin D
NLRP3
inflammasome
Caspase-1
(active)
IL-1β
Nucleus
Secreted
IL-1β
Plasma
membrane
Pro-IL1β gene
transcription
K+
K+
NLRP3
(sensor)
Adaptor
Caspase-1
(inactive)
Fig. 2.5 The inflammasome. Shown is the activation of the NLRP3 inﬂammasome, which processes proe
interleukin-1b (proeIL-1b) to active IL-1. The synthesis of proeIL-1b is induced by various PAMPs or DAMPs
through pattern recognition receptor signaling. Subsequent production of biologically active IL-1b is mediated
by the inﬂammasome. The inﬂammasome also stimulates production of active IL-18, which is closely related
to IL-1 (not shown). Other forms of the inﬂammasome exist that contain sensors other than NLRP3, including
NLRP1, NLRC4, or AIM2. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; NLRP3, NOD-like receptor family, pyrin domain
containing 3; TLRs, Toll-like receptors.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
31
 
Most innate cytosolic DNA sensors engage the
stimulator of IFN genes (STING) pathway to induce
type I IFN production (Fig. 2.7). For example, cytosolic
dsDNA
binds
to
the
enzyme
cyclic
guanosine
monophosphateeadenosine
monophosphate
(GMP-
AMP) synthase (cGAS), which activates the produc-
tion of a cyclic dinucleotide signaling molecule called
cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP), which binds to an endo-
plasmic reticulum membrane adaptor protein called
STING. In addition, some bacteria themselves produce
other cyclic dinucleotides that also bind to STING.
Upon binding these cyclic dinucleotides, STING initi-
ates signaling events that lead to transcriptional acti-
vation and expression of type I IFN genes. STING also
stimulates autophagy, a mechanism by which cells
IRF3/IRF7
IFNα/β
Other antiviral
genes
Viral RNA
Virus
ER
MAVS
Mitochondrion
Kinase
activation
RIG-I
MDA5
NF-κB
P
P
Fig. 2.6 Cytosolic RIG-like receptors. The two main receptors
of this family, RIG-I and MDA5, recognize cytosolic viral RNA
and trigger a signaling pathway that leads to the activation of
transcription factors (IRFs) that stimulate production of the
antiviral cytokine type I interferon (IFN). ER, Endoplasmic retic-
ulum; IRF, interferon regulatory factor; MAVS, mitochondrial
antiviral signaling.
P
DNA
Viruses, bacteria
cGAS
STING
TBK1
ER
IRF3
Type I IFN gene
transcription
Type I 
Interferons
P
Defense against
viruses and bacteria 
Self DNA
Bacteria
Cyclic
dinucleotides
IRF3
Fig. 2.7 Cytosolic DNA sensors and the STING pathway.
Cytosolic microbial dsDNA activates the enzyme cGAS, which
catalyzes the synthesis of cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) from ATP
and GTP. cGAMP binds to STING in the endoplasmic reticulum
membrane, and then STING recruits and activates the kinase
TBK1, which phosphorylates IRF3. Phospo-IRF3 moves to the
nucleus, where it induces type I IFN gene expression. The
bacterial second messenger molecules cyclic di-GMP (c-di-
GMP) and cyclic di-AMP (c-di-AMP) are directly sensed by
STING.
STING
also
stimulates
autophagy
and
lysosomal
degradation of pathogens associated with cytoplasmic organ-
elles. cGAS, Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase; ER, endoplasmic re-
ticulum; IFN, interferon; IRF3, interferon regulatory factor 3.
32
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
degrade their own organelles in lysosomes. Autophagy
is used in innate immunity to deliver cytosolic microbes
to the lysosome, where they are killed by proteolytic
enzymes. Other cytosolic DNA sensors besides cGAS
can also activate STING.
Other Cellular Receptors of Innate Immunity
Many other receptor types are involved in innate im-
mune responses to microbes (see Fig. 2.2).
• Some lectins (carbohydrate-recognizing proteins) in
the plasma membrane are receptors speciﬁc for
fungal glucans (these receptors are called dectins)
or for terminal mannose residues (called mannose
receptors); they are involved in the phagocytosis of
fungi and bacteria and in inﬂammatory responses
to these pathogens.
• A cell surface receptor expressed mainly on phago-
cytes, called formyl peptide receptor 1, recognizes
polypeptides with an N-terminal formylmethionine,
which is a speciﬁc feature of bacterial proteins (and
mammalian mitiochondrial proteins). Signaling by
this receptor promotes the migration as well as the
antimicrobial activities of phagocytes.
Although our emphasis thus far has been on cellular
receptors, the innate immune system also contains
several circulating molecules that recognize and provide
defense against microbes, as discussed later.
COMPONENTS OF INNATE IMMUNITY
The components of the innate immune system include
epithelial cells; sentinel cells in tissues (resident mac-
rophages, dendritic cells, mast cells, and others),
circulating and recruited phagocytes (monocytes and
neutrophils), innate lymphoid cells, NK cells, and a
number of plasma proteins. We next discuss the
properties of these cells and soluble proteins and their
roles in innate immune responses.
Epithelial Barriers
The major interfaces between the body and the
external
environmentdthe
skin,
gastrointestinal
tract, respiratory tract, and genitourinary tractdare
protected by layers of epithelial cells that provide
physical and chemical barriers against infection
(Fig. 2.8). Microbes come into contact with vertebrate
hosts mainly at these interfaces by external physical
contact, ingestion, inhalation, and sexual activity. All
these portals of entry are lined by continuous epithelia
consisting of tightly adherent cells that form a me-
chanical barrier against microbes. Keratin on the sur-
face of the skin and mucus secreted by mucosal
epithelial cells prevent most microbes from infecting or
getting through the epithelia. Epithelial cells also pro-
duce
antimicrobial
peptides,
called
defensins
and
cathelicidins, that kill bacteria and some viruses by
disrupting their outer membranes. Thus, antimicrobial
peptides provide a chemical barrier against infection. In
addition, epithelia contain lymphocytes called intra-
epithelial lymphocytes that belong to the T cell lineage
but express antigen receptors of limited diversity. Some
of these T cells express receptors composed of two
chains, g and d, that are similar but not identical to the
ab TCRs expressed on the majority of T lymphocytes
(see Chapters 4 and 5). Intraepithelial T lymphocytes
presumably react against infectious agents that attempt
to breach the epithelia, but the speciﬁcity and functions
of these cells are poorly understood.
Peptide
antibiotics
Intraepithelial
lymphocyte
Physical barrier
to infection
Killing of microbes
by locally produced
antibiotics
Killing of microbes
and infected cells
by intraepithelial
lymphocytes
Fig. 2.8 Functions of epithelia in innate immunity. Epithelia
present at the portals of entry of microbes provide physical
barriers formed by keratin (in the skin) or secreted mucus (in the
gastrointestinal, bronchopulmonary, and genitourinary systems)
and by tight junctions between epithelial cells. Epithelia also
produce antimicrobial substances (e.g., defensins and cath-
elicidins) and harbor lymphocytes that kill microbes and infected
cells.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
33
 
Phagocytes: Neutrophils and Monocytes/
Macrophages
The two types of circulating phagocytes, neutrophils
and monocytes, are blood cells that are recruited to
sites of infection, where they recognize and ingest
microbes for intracellular killing (Fig. 2.9).
• Neutrophils, also called polymorphonuclear leuko-
cytes (PMNs), are the most abundant leukocytes in
the blood, numbering 4000 to 10,000 per mL
(Fig. 2.10A). In response to certain bacterial and
fungal infections, the production of neutrophils
from the bone marrow increases rapidly and their
numbers in the blood may rise up to 10 times the
normal. The production of neutrophils is stimulated
by cytokines, known as colony-stimulating factors
(CSFs), which are secreted by many cell types in
response to infections and act on hematopoietic cells
to stimulate proliferation and maturation of neutro-
phil precursors. Neutrophils are the ﬁrst and most
numerous cell type to respond to most infections,
particularly bacterial and fungal infections, and
thus are the dominant cells of acute inﬂammation,
as discussed later. Neutrophils ingest microbes in
the circulation, and they rapidly enter extravascular
tissues
at
sites
of
infection,
where
they
also
Feature
Neutrophils
Macrophages
Origin
HSCs in bone marrow
HSCs in bone marrow (in inflammatory reactions)
Stem cells in yolk sac or fetal liver (early in 
development): Many tissue-resident macrophages
Responses to
activating stimuli
Rapid, short lived,
enzymatic activity
More prolonged, slower, often dependent
on new gene transcription
Life span in tissues
1-2 days
Inflammatory macrophages: days or weeks
Tissue-resident macrophages: years
Reactive oxygen
species
Rapidly induced by assembly
of phagocyte oxidase
(respiratory burst)
Less prominent
Nitric oxide
Low levels or none
Induced following transcriptional activation
of iNOS
Degranulation
Major response; induced by
cytoskeletal rearrangement
Not prominent
Cytokine production
Low levels per cell
Major functional activity, large amounts 
per cell, requires transcriptional activation of 
cytokine genes
Extracellular traps
Rapidly induced, by extrusion
of nuclear contents
Little
Fig. 2.9 Distinguishing properties of neutrophils and monocytes. This table lists the major differences be-
tween neutrophils and macrophages. These two cell types share many features, such as phagocytosis,
chemotaxis, and ability to migrate through blood vessels into tissues. HSC, Hematopoietic stem cell; iNOS,
inducible nitric oxide synthase.
B
A
Fig. 2.10 Morphology of neutrophils and monocytes. A, Light
micrograph of blood neutrophil shows the multilobed nucleus,
which is why these cells are also called polymorphonuclear
leukocytes, and the faint cytoplasmic granules, most of which
are lysosomes. B, Light micrograph of blood monocyte shows
the typical horseshoe-shaped nucleus.
34
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
phagocytose (ingest) and destroy microbes. Neutro-
phils express receptors for products of complement
activation and for antibodies that coat microbes.
These receptors enhance phagocytosis of antibody-
and complement-coated microbes and also trans-
duce activating signals that stimulate the ability of
the neutrophils to kill ingested microbes. The pro-
cess of phagocytosis and intracellular destruction of
microbes is described later. Neutrophils are also
recruited to sites of tissue damage in the absence
of infection, where they initiate the clearance of
cell debris. Neutrophils live for only several hours
in tissues, so they are the early responders but they
do not provide prolonged defense.
• Monocytes are less abundant in the blood than neu-
trophils, numbering 500 to 1000 per mL (see
Fig. 2.10B). They also ingest microbes in the blood
and tissues. During inﬂammatory reactions, mono-
cytes enter extravascular tissues and differentiate
into cells called macrophages, which, unlike neutro-
phils, survive in these sites for long periods. Thus,
blood monocytes and tissue macrophages are two
stages of the same cell lineage, which often is called
the mononuclear phagocyte system (Fig. 2.11). Some
macrophages are always present in most healthy or-
gans and tissues. These cells, called tissue-resident
macrophages, are derived from progenitors in the
yolk sac or fetal liver early during fetal development;
in some tissues they may be replenished over time by
bone marrowederived monocytes.
Macrophages serve several important roles in
host defense: they ingest and destroy microbes, they
clear dead tissues and initiate the process of tissue
repair, and they produce cytokines that induce and
regulate inﬂammation (Fig. 2.12). A number of re-
ceptor families are expressed in macrophages and
involved in the activation and functions of these cells.
Pattern
recognition
receptors
discussed
earlier,
including TLRs and NLRs, recognize products of mi-
crobes and damaged cells and activate the macrophages.
Phagocytosis is mediated by cell surface receptors, such
as mannose receptors and scavenger receptors, which
directly bind microbes (and other particles), and re-
ceptors for antibodies or products of complement
activation that are bound to microbes. Some of these
phagocytic receptors activate the microbial killing
functions of macrophages as well. In addition, macro-
phages can be activated by various cytokines.
There are two different pathways of macrophage
activation, called classical and alternative, that serve
distinct functions (see Fig. 6.9). Classical macrophage
activation is induced by innate immune signals, such as
from TLRs, and by the cytokine IFN-g, which is pro-
duced in both innate and adaptive immune responses.
Classically activated macrophages, also called M1 or
pro-inﬂammatory, are involved in destroying microbes
and in triggering inﬂammation. Alternative macro-
phage activation occurs in the absence of strong TLR
signals and is induced by the cytokines IL-4 and IL-13;
these macrophages, called M2 or pro-healing, appear to
be more important for tissue repair and to terminate
inﬂammation. The relative abundance of these two
forms of activated macrophages may inﬂuence the
outcome of host reactions and contribute to various
disorders. (These populations are often termed M1-like
and M2-like because the phenotypic markers for dis-
tinguishing them are not deﬁnitive. The M1/M2
nomenclature is used for the sake of simplicity.) We will
return to the functions of these macrophage pop-
ulations in Chapter 6, when we discuss cell-mediated
immunity.
Although our discussion has been limited to the role
of phagocytes in innate immunity, macrophages are
also important effector cells in both the cell-mediated
arm and the humoral arm of adaptive immunity, as
discussed in Chapters 6 and 8, respectively.
Dendritic Cells
Dendritic cells function as sentinels in tissues that
respond to microbes by producing numerous cytokines
and serve two main functions: they initiate inﬂamma-
tion and they stimulate adaptive immune responses.
They also capture protein antigens and display frag-
ments of these antigens to T cells. By sensing microbes
and interacting with lymphocytes, especially T cells,
dendritic cells constitute an important bridge between
innate and adaptive immunity. We discuss the prop-
erties and functions of dendritic cells in Chapter 3 in
the context of antigen presentation.
Mast Cells
Mast cells are bone marrowederived cells with abun-
dant cytoplasmic granules that are present in the skin,
mucosal tissues, and most connective tissues. Mast cells
can be activated by microbial products binding to TLRs
and by components of the complement system as part
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
35
 
of innate immunity or by an antibody-dependent
mechanism in adaptive immunity. Mast cell granules
contain vasoactive amines such as histamine that cause
vasodilation and increased capillary permeability, as
well as proteolytic enzymes that can kill bacteria or
inactivate microbial toxins. Mast cells also synthesize
and secrete lipid mediators (e.g., prostaglandins and
leukotrienes) and cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis factor
[TNF]),
which
stimulate
inﬂammation.
Mast
cell
products provide defense against helminths and other
pathogens, as well as protection against snake and in-
sect venoms, and they are responsible for symptoms of
allergic diseases (see Chapter 11).
Innate Lymphoid Cells
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) are tissue-resident cells
that produce cytokines similar to those secreted by
helper T lymphocytes but do not express T cell
Brain:
Microglial 
cells
Embryonic early
macrophage
Fetal
monocyte
Yolk sac
Fetal liver
Post-natal
monocyte
Monocyte
Differentiation
Macrophage
Activation
Activated 
macrophages
Post-natal marrow
Bone marrow
Fetal hemapoietic organs
Tissue
Blood
Liver:
Kuppfer cells
Skin:
Dermal
macrophages
Intestines:
Lamina propria
macrophages
Lung:
Alveolar
macrophage
Heart:
Myocardial
macrophages
Spleen:
Sinusoidal
macrophages
Infected or injured tissue
Tissue resident macrophages in homeostasis
Monocyte-derived macrophages in inflammation
Fig. 2.11 Maturation of mononuclear phagocytes. In the steady state in adults, and during inﬂammatory
reactions, precursors in the bone marrow give rise to circulating monocytes, which enter peripheral tissues,
mature to form macrophages, and are activated locally. In fetal life, precursors in the yolk sac and liver give rise
to cells that seed tissues to generate specialized tissue-resident macrophages.
36
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
antigen receptors (TCRs). ILCs have been divided into
three major groups based on their secreted cytokines;
these groups correspond to the Th1, Th2, and Th17
subsets of CD4þ T cells that we describe in Chapter 6.
The responses of ILCs are often stimulated by cytokines
produced by damaged epithelial and other cells at sites
of infection. ILCs are always present in tissues, unlike
T cells, which are activated in secondary lymphoid or-
gans and migrate into tissues, a process that may take
several days. Therefore, ILCs may provide early defense
against infections in tissues. However, their contribu-
tion to host defense or immunologic diseases, especially
in humans, is not clear.
Natural Killer Cells
NK cells recognize cells infected with viruses and some
other microbes and stressed cells, and they respond by
killing these cells and by secreting the macrophage-
activating cytokine IFN-g (Fig. 2.13). NK cells are
developmentally related to group 1 ILCs and make up
approximately 5% to 20% of the cells with lymphocyte
morphology in the blood and secondary lymphoid or-
gans. NK cells contain cytoplasmic granules and express
some unique surface proteins but do not express im-
munoglobulins or TCRs, the antigen receptors of B and
T lymphocytes, respectively.
On activation by infected cells, NK cells deliver the
contents of their cytoplasmic granules into the infected
cells,
where
they
activate
enzymes
that
induce
apoptosis. The cytotoxic mechanisms of NK cells,
which are the same as the mechanisms used by cyto-
toxic T lymphocytes (CTLs; see Chapter 6), result in the
death of infected cells. Thus, as with CTLs, NK cells
function to eliminate cellular reservoirs of infection and
Toll-like
receptor
Microbe
Complement
receptor
Cytokine 
(e.g. IFN-γ)
IgG
IgG Fc
receptor
Cytokine
receptor
Cytokines
(TNF, IL-1,
IL-6, IL-12)
Phagocyte
oxidase
Reactive 
oxygen
species (ROS)
Nitric
oxide
iNOS
Phagocytosis
of microbe into
phagosome
Complement
fragment
Inflammation,
enhanced
adaptive
immunity
Killing of microbes
Activation
Fig. 2.12 Activation and functions of macrophages. In innate immune responses, macrophages are acti-
vated by microbial products binding to TLRs and by cytokines, such as NK cellederived interferon-g (IFN-g),
which lead to the production of proteins that mediate inﬂammatory and microbicidal functions of these cells.
Cell surface complement receptors promote the phagocytosis of complement-coated microbes, as well as
activation of the macrophages. Macrophage Fc receptors for IgG bind antibody-coated microbes and perform
functions similar to those of the complement receptors. IL, Interleukin; iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
37
 
eradicate infections by obligate intracellular microbes,
such as viruses. In addition, NK cells may contribute to
the destruction of tumors.
Activated NK cells also synthesize and secrete the
cytokine
IFN-g,
which
activates
macrophages
to
become more effective at killing phagocytosed mi-
crobes. Cytokines secreted by macrophages and den-
dritic cells that have encountered microbes enhance the
ability of NK cells to protect against infections. Three of
these NK celleactivating cytokines are IL-15, type I
IFNs, and IL-12. IL-15 is important for the develop-
ment and maturation of NK cells, and type I IFNs and
IL-12 enhance the killing functions of NK cells. Thus,
NK cells and macrophages are examples of two cell
types that function cooperatively to eliminate intracel-
lular microbes: macrophages ingest microbes and pro-
duce IL-12, IL-12 activates NK cells to secrete IFN-g,
and IFN-g in turn activates the macrophages to kill the
ingested microbes. As discussed in Chapter 6, essen-
tially
the
same
sequence
of
reactions
involving
macrophages and T lymphocytes is central to the cell-
mediated arm of adaptive immunity.
The responses of NK cells are determined by a
balance
between
engagement
of
activating
and
inhibitory receptors (Fig. 2.14). The activating re-
ceptors
recognize
cell
surface
molecules
typically
expressed on cells infected with viruses and intracellular
bacteria, some cancer cells, and cells stressed by DNA
damage. These receptors enable NK cells to eliminate
cells infected with intracellular microbes, as well as
irreparably injured cells and tumor cells. One of the
well-deﬁned activating receptors of NK cells is called
NKG2D; it recognizes molecules that resemble class I
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins and
are expressed in response to many types of cellular
stress. Another activating receptor, called CD16, is
speciﬁc for the Fc region of immunoglobulin G (IgG)
antibodies bound to cells. The recognition of antibody-
coated cells results in killing of these cells, a phenom-
enon called antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
(ADCC). NK cells are the principal mediators of
ADCC. The role of this reaction in antibody-mediated
immunity is described in Chapter 8. Activating re-
ceptors on NK cells have signaling subunits that contain
immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based
activation
motifs
(ITAMs) in their cytoplasmic tails. ITAMs, which are
also
present
in
subunits
of
lymphocyte
antigen
receptoreassociated
signaling
molecules,
become
phosphorylated on tyrosine residues when the receptors
recognize their activating ligands. The phosphorylated
ITAMs bind and promote the activation of cytosolic
protein tyrosine kinases, and these enzymes phos-
phorylate, and thereby activate, other substrates in
several different downstream signal transduction path-
ways, eventually leading to cytotoxic granule exocytosis
and production of IFN-g.
The
inhibitory
receptors
of
NK
cells
block
signaling by activating receptors and are speciﬁc for
self class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules, which are expressed on all healthy nucle-
ated cells. Therefore, class I MHC expression protects
healthy cells from destruction by NK cells. (In Chapter
3, we describe the important function of MHC mole-
cules in displaying peptide antigens to T lymphocytes.)
Two major families of NK cell inhibitory receptors in
humans are the killer cell immunoglobulin-like re-
ceptors (KIRs), so called because they share structural
homology with Ig molecules (see Chapter 4), and
Virus-infected
cell
NK cell
Activated
macrophage with 
phagocytosed
microbes
IL-12
IFN-γ
Killing of
phagocytosed
microbes
Killing of
infected cells
A
B
Fig. 2.13 Functions of NK cells. A, NK cells kill host cells
infected by intracellular microbes, thus eliminating reservoirs of
infection. B, NK cells respond to interleukin-12 (IL-12) produced
by macrophages and secrete interferon-g (IFN-g), which acti-
vates the macrophages to kill phagocytosed microbes.
38
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
receptors consisting of a protein called CD94 and a
lectin subunit called NKG2. Both families of inhibitory
receptors contain structural motifs in their cytoplasmic
tails called immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory
motifs (ITIMs), which become phosphorylated on
tyrosine residues when the receptors bind class I MHC
molecules. The phosphorylated ITIMs bind and pro-
mote activation of cytosolic protein tyrosine phospha-
tases. These enzymes remove phosphate groups from
the tyrosine residues of various signaling molecules,
thereby counteracting the function of the ITAMs and
blocking the activation of NK cells through activating
receptors. Therefore, when the inhibitory receptors of
NK cells encounter self MHC molecules on normal host
cells, the NK cells are shut off (see Fig. 2.14). Many
viruses have developed mechanisms to block expression
of class I molecules in infected cells, which allows them
to evade killing by virus-speciﬁc CD8þ CTLs. When
this happens, the NK cell inhibitory receptors are not
engaged, and if the virus induces expression of acti-
vating ligands at the same time, the NK cells become
activated and eliminate the virus-infected cells.
The role of NK cells and CTLs in defense illustrates
how hosts and microbes are engaged in a constant struggle
for survival. The host uses CTLs to recognize MHC-
displayed viral antigens, viruses inhibit MHC expression
to evade killing of the infected cells by CTLs, and NK cells
can compensate for the defective CTL response because
the NK cells are more effective in the absence of MHC
molecules. The winner of this struggle, the host or the
microbe, determines the outcome of the infection.
Lymphocytes with Limited Diversity
Several types of lymphocytes that have some features of
T and B lymphocytes may also function in the early
defense against microbes and are thus part of the innate
immune system. A unifying characteristic of these
lymphocytes is that they express somatically rearranged
antigen receptors (as do T and B cells), but the re-
ceptors have limited diversity. These include cells of the
T lymphocyte lineage (gd T cells, NK-T cells, and
mucosal-associated
invariant
T
cells),
which
are
described in Chapter 6, and others of the B cell lineage
(B1 cells and marginal zone B cells), described in
A
B
Inhibitory
receptor
Activating
receptor
Activating
ligand for
NK cell
NK cell 
not activated;
no cell killing
NK cell 
activated;
killing of
infected cell
Self class I 
MHC–self 
peptide complex
Virus-infected
cell (virus
inhibits class I
MHC expression)
Inhibitory receptor not engaged
NK cell
NK cell
Normal
cell
Inhibitory receptor engaged
Fig. 2.14 Activating and inhibitory receptors of NK cells. A, Healthy host cells express self class I major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, which are recognized by inhibitory receptors, thus ensuring that
NK cells do not attack normal host cells. Note that healthy cells may express ligands for activating receptors
(as shown) or may not express such ligands, but they are not attacked by NK cells because they engage the
inhibitory receptors. B, NK cells are activated by infected cells in which ligands for activating receptors are
expressed (often at high levels) and class I MHC expression is reduced so that the inhibitory receptors are not
engaged. The result is that the infected cells are killed.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
39
 
Chapter 7. All these cell types respond to infections in
ways that are characteristic of adaptive immunity
(e.g., cytokine secretion or antibody production) but
have features of innate immunity (rapid responses,
limited diversity of antigen recognition).
Complement System
The complement system is a collection of circulating
and membrane-associated proteins that are important
in defense against microbes. Many complement pro-
teins are proteolytic enzymes, and complement activa-
tion involves the sequential activation of these enzymes.
The complement cascade may be initiated by any of
three pathways (Fig. 2.15):
• The alternative pathway is triggered when some
complement proteins are activated on microbial sur-
faces and cannot be controlled, because complement
regulatory proteins are not present on microbes (but
are present on host cells). The alternative pathway is
a component of innate immunity.
• The classical pathway is most often triggered by an-
tibodies that bind to microbes or other antigens and
is thus a component of the humoral arm of adaptive
immunity.
• The lectin pathway is activated when carbohydrate-
binding plasma proteins, mannose-binding lectin
(MBL) or ﬁcolins, bind to their carbohydrate ligands
on microbes. These lectins activate proteins of the
classical pathway, but because it is initiated by a mi-
crobial product in the absence of antibody, it is a
component of innate immunity.
Activated complement proteins function as proteo-
lytic enzymes to cleave other complement proteins.
Such an enzymatic cascade can be rapidly ampliﬁed
because each proteolytic step generates many products
that are themselves enzymes in the cascade. The central
component of all three complement pathways is a
plasma protein called C3, which is cleaved by enzymes
generated in the early steps. The major proteolytic
fragment
of
C3,
called
C3b,
becomes
covalently
attached to microbes and is able to recruit and activate
downstream complement proteins on the microbial
surface. The three pathways of complement activation
differ in how they are initiated, but they share the late
steps and perform the same effector functions.
The complement system serves three main functions
in host defense:
• Opsonization and phagocytosis. C3b coats microbes
and promotes the binding of these microbes to
phagocytes by virtue of receptors for C3b that are
expressed on the phagocytes. Thus, microbes that
are coated with complement proteins are rapidly
ingested and destroyed by phagocytes. This process
of coating a microbe with molecules that are recog-
nized
by
receptors
on
phagocytes
is
called
opsonization.
• Inﬂammation. Some proteolytic fragments of com-
plement proteins, especially C5a and C3a, are che-
moattractants for leukocytes (mainly neutrophils
and monocytes), and they are also activators of
endothelial cells and mast cells. Thus, they promote
movement of leukocytes and plasma proteins into
tissues (inﬂammation) at the site of complement
activation.
• Cell lysis. Complement activation culminates in the
formation of a polymeric protein complex that in-
serts into the microbial cell membrane, disturbing
the permeability barrier and causing osmotic lysis.
A more detailed discussion of the activation and
functions of complement is presented in Chapter 8,
where we consider the effector mechanisms of humoral
immunity.
Other Plasma Proteins of Innate Immunity
Several circulating proteins in addition to complement
proteins are involved in innate immune defense against
infections. Plasma MBL recognizes microbial carbohy-
drates and can coat microbes for phagocytosis or acti-
vate the complement cascade by the lectin pathway, as
discussed earlier. MBL belongs to a family of proteins
called collectins, because they are structurally similar to
collagen and contain a carbohydrate-binding (lectin)
domain. Surfactant proteins in the lung also belong to
the collectin family and protect the airways from
infection. C-reactive protein (CRP) is a pentraxin (ﬁve-
headed molecule) that binds to phosphorylcholine on
microbes and opsonizes the microbes for phagocytosis
by macrophages, which express a receptor for CRP.
CRP can also activate proteins of the classical comple-
ment pathway.
The circulating levels of many of these plasma pro-
teins increase rapidly after infection. This protective
response
is
called
the
acute-phase
response
to
infection.
40
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
Initiation of
complement 
activation
Late steps
C3a
Effector 
functions
C3a:
Inflammation
C3b:
opsonization
and
phagocytosis
C6-9:
Lysis of
microbe
C5a:
Inflammation
Microbe
Antibody
Mannose 
binding lectin
Alternative
pathway
Classical
pathway
Lectin
pathway
C3b
C3b
C3b is 
deposited
on microbe
Complement
proteins form
membrane
attack complex
Early steps
MAC
C6-9
C5a
C5
C5b
C5b
C3
C3
C3
C3
C3b
C3b
C2
B
C4
C2
C4
C3b
Fig. 2.15 Pathways of complement activation. The activation of the complement system (the early steps)
may be initiated by three distinct pathways, all of which lead to the production of C3b. C3b initiates the late
steps of complement activation, culminating in the formation of a multiprotein complex called the membrane
attack complex (MAC), which is a transmembrane channel composed of polymerized C9 molecules that
causes lysis of thin-walled microbes. Peptide by-products released during complement activation are the
inﬂammation-inducing C3a and C5a. The principal functions of proteins produced at different steps are shown.
The activation, functions, and regulation of the complement system are discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
41
 
IFN-
Microbes
TNF, IL-1,
chemokines
Macrophage
Dendritic cell
Neutrophil
Blood vessel
Activation of dendritic cells,
macrophages, ILCs and NK cells
Natural 
killer cell
B
A
Chemokines
Interleukin-12 (IL-12)
Type I IFNs
(IFN-, IFN-)
Interleukin-10 (IL-10)
Interleukin-6 (IL-6)
Interleukin-15 (IL-15)
Interleukin-18 (IL-18)
TGF-
NK cells: proliferation
T cells: proliferation
Macrophages, dendritic cells: inhibition of 
    cytokine and chemokine production, 
    reduced expression of costimulators
    and class II MHC molecules
Liver: synthesis of acute-phase proteins
B cells: proliferation of antibody-producing
    cells 
Leukocytes: Increased integrin affinity,
    chemotaxis, activation
All cells: antiviral state, increased class I
    MHC expression
NK cells: activation
NK cells and T cells: IFN-synthesis
Macrophages, others
Macrophages
Many cell types: inhibition of inflammatory 
    responses
T cells: differentiation of regulatory T cells 
Many cell types
Macrophages, dendritic 
cells, T cells
Macrophages, endothelial
cells, T cells
Macrophages, dendritic 
cells, endothelial cells, 
T lymphocytes, fibroblasts,
platelets
Dendritic cells,
macrophages,
NK cells, T lymphocytes
IFN- Dendritic cells,
           macrophages
IFN-Fibroblasts,
           epithelial cells
Natural killer (NK) cells and T cells: IFN-
    production, increased cytotoxic activity
T cells: Th1 differentiation
Macrophages: classical activation
Interferon- (IFN-)
Inflammation
Tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)
Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
Endothelial cells: activation (inflammation,
    coagulation)
Neutrophils: activation
Hypothalamus: fever
Liver: synthesis of acute-phase proteins
Muscle, fat: catabolism (cachexia)
Heart: decreased myocardial contractility
Endothelial cells: activation (inflammation,
    coagulation)
Hypothalamus: fever
Liver: synthesis of acute-phase proteins
T cells: Th17 differentiation
Macrophages, T cells,
mast cells
Macrophages, dendritic
cells, endothelial cells, 
some epithelial cells,
mast cells
Cytokine
Principal
cell source(s)
Principal cellular targets
and biologic effects
IL-12
42
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
Cytokines of Innate Immunity
Dendritic cells, macrophages, mast cells, ILCs and
other cells secrete cytokines that initiate many of the
cellular reactions of innate immunity (Fig. 2.16). As
mentioned earlier, cytokines are soluble proteins that
mediate immune and inﬂammatory reactions and are
responsible for communications between leukocytes
and between leukocytes and other cells. Most of the
molecularly deﬁned cytokines are called interleukins
with a number, for example interleukin-1, but several
have other names, for example, tumor necrosis factor,
for historical reasons related to how they were discov-
ered. In innate immunity, the principal sources of cy-
tokines are dendritic cells, macrophages, ILCs, and mast
cells that are activated by recognition of microbes or by
other cytokines; epithelial cells and other cell types also
secrete cytokines. Recognition of bacterial cell wall
components such as LPSs and peptidoglycans by TLRs
and recognition of microbial nucleic acids by TLRs,
RLRs, and CDSs are powerful stimuli for cytokine
secretion by macrophages, dendritic cells, and many
tissue cells. In adaptive immunity, helper T lympho-
cytes are a major source of cytokines (see Chapters 5
and 6).
Cytokines are secreted in small amounts in response
to an external stimulus and bind to high-afﬁnity re-
ceptors on target cells. Most cytokines act on nearby
cells (paracrine actions), and some act on the cells that
produce them (autocrine actions). In innate immune
reactions against infections, enough dendritic cells and
macrophages may be activated that large amounts of
cytokines are produced, and they may be active distant
from their site of secretion (endocrine actions).
The cytokines of innate immunity serve various
functions in host defense. TNF, IL-1, and chemokines
(chemoattractant cytokines) are the principal cytokines
involved in recruiting blood neutrophils and monocytes
to sites of infection (described later). TNF and IL-1 also
have systemic effects, including inducing fever by
acting on the hypothalamus, and these cytokines as well
as IL-6 stimulate liver cells to produce various proteins
of the acute phase response, such as CRP and ﬁbrin-
ogen, which contribute to microbial killing and walling
off infectious sites. At high concentrations, TNF pro-
motes thrombus formation on the endothelium and
reduces blood pressure by a combination of reduced
myocardial contractility and vascular dilation and
leakiness. Severe bacterial and fungal infections some-
times lead to a potentially lethal clinical syndrome
called septic shock, which is characterized by low blood
pressure (the deﬁning feature of shock), disseminated
intravascular coagulation, and metabolic disturbances.
The early clinical and pathologic manifestations of
septic shock may be caused by high levels of TNF,
which is produced in response to bacterial PAMPs.
Dendritic cells and macrophages also produce IL-12 in
response to LPS, peptidoglycans, and other microbial
molecules. The role of IL-12 in activating NK cells,
leading to increased killing activity and macrophage
activation, was mentioned previously. NK cells produce
IFN-g, whose function as a macrophage-activating
cytokine was also described earlier. In viral infections,
a subset of dendritic cells, and to a lesser extent other
infected cells, produce type I IFNs, which inhibit viral
replication and prevent spread of the infection to un-
infected cells.
INNATE IMMUNE REACTIONS
The innate immune system eliminates microbes
mainly by inducing the acute inﬂammatory response
and by antiviral defense mechanisms. Different types
of innate immune responses are particularly effective
against different types of microbes:
• Extracellular bacteria and fungi are defended against
mainly by the acute inﬂammatory response, in
Fig. 2.16 Cytokines of innate immunity. A, Dendritic cells, macrophages, and other cells (such as mast cells
and ILCs, not shown) respond to microbes by producing cytokines that stimulate inﬂammation (leukocyte
recruitment) and activate natural killer (NK) cells to produce the macrophage-activating cytokine interferon-g
(IFN-g). B, Some important characteristics of the major cytokines of innate immunity are listed. Note that IFN-g
and transforming growth factor beta (TGF-b) are cytokines of both innate and adaptive immunity, and ILCs
produce several cytokines that are better known as products of CD4þ T cells (see Chapters 5 and 6). More
information about these cytokines and their receptors is provided in Appendix II. MHC, Major histocompati-
bility complex.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
43
 
which neutrophils and monocytes are recruited to
the site of infection, aided by the complement
system.
• Intracellular bacteria, which can survive inside
phagocytes, are eliminated by phagocytes that are
activated by TLRs and other innate sensors as well
as by cytokines.
• Protection against viruses is provided by type I IFNs
and NK cells.
Inflammation
Inﬂammation is a tissue reaction that delivers me-
diators
of
host
defensedcirculating
cells
and
proteinsdto sites of infection and tissue damage
(Fig. 2.17). The process of inﬂammation consists of
recruitment of cells and leakage of plasma proteins
through blood vessels and activation of these cells and
proteins in the extravascular tissues. The initial release
of histamine, TNF, prostaglandins, and other mediators
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Injury, barrier break,
microbe entry
Microbes/injury
activate sentinel cells
Microbes/injury
activate sentinel cells
Sentinel cells secrete
inflammatory mediators
Increased vascular
permeability; fluid and
proteins enter tissues
Complement, antibodies,
and anti–microbial proteins
kill microbes
Capillary–Venule
Adhesion molecules
and chemokines cause
leukocyte migration
into tissue   
Phagocytosis and
killing of microbes
Fig. 2.17 Acute inflammatory response. Cytokines and other mediators are produced by macrophages,
dendritic cells, mast cells, and other cells in tissues in response to microbial products and damaged host cells.
Some of these mediators (e.g., histamine, prostaglandins) increase the permeability of blood vessels, leading
to the entry of plasma proteins (e.g., complement proteins) into the tissues, and others (IL-1, TNF) increase
expression of endothelial adhesion molecules and chemokines that promote the movement of leukocytes
from the blood into the tissues, where the leukocytes destroy microbes, clear damaged cells, and promote
more inﬂammation and repair.
44
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
by mast cells and macrophages causes an increase in
local blood ﬂow and exudation of plasma proteins.
These contribute to redness, warmth, and swelling,
which are characteristic features of acute inﬂammation.
This is often followed by local accumulation in the
tissue of phagocytes, mainly neutrophils and blood
monocyteederived macrophages, in response to cyto-
kines, discussed later. Activated phagocytes engulf mi-
crobes
and
necrotic
material
and
destroy
these
potentially harmful substances. We next describe the
cellular events in a typical inﬂammatory response.
Recruitment of Phagocytes to Sites of Infection and
Tissue Damage
Neutrophils and monocytes migrate to extravascular
sites of infection or tissue damage by binding to venular
endothelial adhesion molecules and in response to
chemoattractants produced by tissue cells reacting to
infection or injury. Leukocyte migration from the blood
into tissues is a multistep process in which initial weak
adhesive interactions of the leukocytes with endothelial
cells are followed by ﬁrm adhesion and then trans-
migration through the endothelium (Fig. 2.18).
If an infectious microbe breaches an epithelium and
enters the subepithelial tissue, resident dendritic cells,
macrophages, and other cells recognize the microbe and
respond by producing cytokines. Two of these cyto-
kines, TNF and IL-1, act on the endothelium of venules
near the site of infection and initiate the sequence of
events in leukocyte migration into tissues.
• Rolling of leukocytes. In response to TNF and IL-1,
venular
endothelial
cells
express
an
adhesion
Chemokines
Chemokines
Fibrin and fibronectin
(extracellular matrix)
Selectin ligand
Blood flow
Leukocyte
Integrin 
(low-affinity state)
Proteoglycan
Chemokine
Chemokine
receptor
Selectin
Integrin
ligand
Cytokines
(TNF, IL-1)
Macrophage stimulated
by microbes
Rolling
Integrin activation
by chemokines
Stable
adhesion
Migration through
endothelium
Integrin (high-
affinity state)
Chemokines
Fig. 2.18 Sequence of events in migration of blood leukocytes to sites of infection. At sites of infection,
macrophages, dendritic cells, and other cells that have encountered microbes produce cytokines such as
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1) that activate the endothelial cells of nearby venules to
express selectins and ligands for integrins and to secrete chemokines. Selectins mediate weak tethering and
rolling of blood neutrophils on the endothelium, integrins mediate ﬁrm adhesion of neutrophils, and chemo-
kines activate the neutrophils and stimulate their migration through the endothelium to the site of infection.
Blood monocytes and activated T lymphocytes use the same mechanisms to migrate to sites of infection.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
45
 
molecule of the selectin family called E-selectin.
Other stimuli, including thrombin, cause rapid
translocation of P-selectin to the endothelial surface.
(The term selectin refers to the carbohydrate-
binding, or lectin, property of these molecules.)
Circulating neutrophils and monocytes express sur-
face carbohydrates that bind speciﬁcally to the selec-
tins.
The
neutrophils
become
tethered
to
the
endothelium, ﬂowing blood disrupts this binding,
the bonds reform downstream, and this repetitive
process results in the rolling of the leukocytes along
the endothelial surface. Rolling slows down the leu-
kocytes enough that they can interact with chemo-
kines and other adhesion molecules in the next steps.
• Firm adhesion. Leukocytes express another set of
adhesion molecules that are called integrins because
they integrate extrinsic signals into cytoskeletal alter-
ations. Leukocyte integrins, such as LFA-1 and VLA-
4, are present in a low-afﬁnity state on unactivated
cells. Within a site of infection, tissue macrophages
and other cells produce chemokines, which bind to
proteoglycans on the luminal surface of endothelial
cells and are thus displayed at a high concentration
to the leukocytes that are rolling on the endothelium.
These immobilized chemokines bind to chemokine
receptors on the leukocytes and stimulate a rapid in-
crease in the afﬁnity of the leukocyte integrins for
their ligands on the endothelium. Concurrently,
TNF and IL-1 act on the endothelium to stimulate
expression
of
ligands
for
integrins,
including
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1. The ﬁrm binding of integ-
rins to their ligands arrests the rolling leukocytes
on the endothelium. The cytoskeleton of the leuko-
cytes is reorganized, and the cells spread out on
the endothelial surface.
• Leukocyte migration. Leukocytes adherent to the
endothelium crawl to and then through the junctions
between endothelial cells, exiting the blood vessels.
Within the tissue, leukocytes migrate along extracel-
lular matrix ﬁbers, directed by concentration gradi-
ents of chemoattractants, including chemokines,
bacterial formyl peptides, and complement frag-
ments C5a and C3a. The concentrations of these
chemoattractants are highest where the microbes
are located, and leukocytes have receptors for these
molecules that stimulate migration toward their
source.
The sequence of selectin-mediated rolling, integrin-
mediated ﬁrm adhesion, and chemokine-mediated
motility leads to the migration of blood leukocytes to
an extravascular site of infection within minutes after
the infection. (As discussed in Chapters 5 and 6, the
same sequence of events is responsible for the migration
of activated T lymphocytes into infected tissues.)
Inherited deﬁciencies in integrins and selectin ligands
lead to defective leukocyte recruitment to sites of
infection and increased susceptibility to infections.
These disorders are called leukocyte adhesion de-
ﬁciencies (LADs).
The phagocytes work together with plasma proteins
that have entered the site of inﬂammation, such as
complement proteins, to destroy the offending agents.
In some infections, such as those with helminthic par-
asites, eosinophils may be recruited to sites of infection
and provide defense against the pathogens.
Phagocytosis and Destruction of Microbes
Neutrophils and macrophages ingest (phagocytose)
microbes and destroy the ingested microbes in
intracellular vesicles (Fig. 2.19). Phagocytosis is a
process of ingestion of particles larger than 0.5 mm in
diameter. It begins with membrane receptors binding to
the microbe. The principal phagocytic receptors are
some pattern recognition receptors, such as mannose
receptors and other lectins, and receptors for antibodies
and complement. Microbes that are coated (opsonized)
with antibodies and complement fragments can bind
avidly to speciﬁc receptors on phagocytes, resulting in
greatly
enhanced
internalization
(see
Chapter
8).
Binding of the microbe to the cell is followed by
extension of the phagocyte plasma membrane around
the particle. The membrane then closes up and pinches
off, and the microbe is internalized in a membrane-
bound vesicle, called a phagosome. The phagosomes
fuse with lysosomes to form phagolysosomes.
At the same time that the microbe is being bound by
the phagocyte’s receptors and ingested, the phagocyte
receives signals from various receptors that activate
several enzymes. One of these enzymes, called phago-
cyte oxidase, is abundant in neutrophils, rapidly
46
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
assembles in the phagolysomal membrane, and con-
verts molecular oxygen into superoxide anion and free
radicals, a process called the oxidative burst (or respi-
ratory burst). These free radicals are called reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and are toxic to the ingested
microbes. A second enzyme, inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS), is produced mainly in macrophages
and catalyzes the conversion of arginine to nitric oxide
(NO), also a microbicidal substance. A third set of
enzymes, the lysosomal proteases, break down micro-
bial proteins. All these microbicidal substances are
produced
mainly
within
lysosomes
and
phag-
olysosomes, where they act on the ingested microbes
but do not damage the phagocytes.
In addition to intracellular killing, neutrophils use
additional mechanisms to destroy microbes. They can
release microbicidal granule contents into the extra-
cellular environment. In response to pathogens and
inﬂammatory mediators, neutrophils die, and during
this process they extrude their nuclear contents to form
networks of chromatin called neutrophil extracellular
traps (NETs), which contain antimicrobial substances
that are normally sequestered in neutrophil granules.
These NETs trap bacteria and fungi and kill the or-
ganisms. In some cases, the enzymes and ROS that are
liberated into the extracellular space may injure host
tissues. This is the reason why inﬂammation, normally
a protective host response to infections, may cause
tissue injury as well.
Inherited
deﬁciency
of
the
phagocyte
oxidase
enzyme is the cause of an immunodeﬁciency disorder
called chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). In CGD,
neutrophils are unable to eradicate intracellular mi-
crobes, and the host tries to contain the infection by
calling in more macrophages, resulting in collections of
activated macrophages around the microbes called
granulomas.
Tissue Repair
In addition to eliminating pathogenic microbes and
damaged cells, cells of the immune system initiate the
process of tissue repair. Macrophages, especially of the
alternatively activated type, produce growth factors that
stimulate the proliferation of residual tissue cells and
ﬁbroblasts, resulting in regeneration of the tissue and
scarring of what cannot be regenerated. Other immune
Microbe ingested
in phagosome
Phagocyte 
membrane
surrounds
microbe
Activation of
phagocyte
Fusion of 
phagosome
with lysosome
Phagosome
with ingested
microbe
Lysosome
with enzymes
Microbes bind to
phagocyte receptors
Phagocyte 
membrane
surrounds
microbe
Activation of
phagocyte
Fusion of 
phagosome
with lysosome
Phago-
lysosome
iNOS
Arginine
Citrulline
Lectin
receptor
C3
receptor
Lysosome
Microbe ingested
in phagosome
Killing of 
microbes by
ROS, NO, and 
lysosomal 
enzymes in 
phagolysosomes
Phagocyte
oxidase
NO
O2
ROS
Fig. 2.19 Phagocytosis and intracellular killing of microbes.
Macrophages and neutrophils express many surface receptors
that may bind microbes for subsequent phagocytosis; select
examples of such receptors are shown. Microbes are ingested
into phagosomes, which fuse with lysosomes, and the mi-
crobes are killed by enzymes and several toxic substances
produced in the phagolysosomes. The same substances may
be released from the phagocytes and may kill extracellular mi-
crobes (not shown). iNOS, Inducible nitric oxide synthase; NO,
nitric oxide; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
47
 
cells, such as helper T cells and ILCs, may serve similar
roles.
Antiviral Defense
Defense against viruses is a special type of host response
that involves IFNs, NK cells, and other mechanisms,
which may occur concomitantly with, but are distinct
from, inﬂammation.
Type I IFNs inhibit viral replication and induce an
antiviral state in which cells become resistant to
productive infection. Type I IFNs, which include
several forms of IFN-a and one of IFN-b, are secreted
by many cell types infected by viruses. A major source
of these cytokines is a type of dendritic cell called the
plasmacytoid dendritic cell (so named because these
cells morphologically resemble plasma cells), which
secretes type I IFNs in response to recognition of viral
nucleic acids by TLRs, RLRs, and other pattern recog-
nition receptors. When type I IFNs secreted from
dendritic cells or other infected cells bind to the type I
IFN receptor on the infected or adjacent uninfected
cells, signaling pathways are activated that inhibit viral
replication and destroy viral genomes (Fig. 2.20). This
action is the basis for the use of IFN-a to treat some
forms of chronic viral hepatitis. Inherited or acquired
deﬁciency of type I IFN production or signaling is
associated with severe cases of COVID-19, highlighting
the importance of this cytokine in combating viral
infections.
Virus-infected cells may be destroyed by NK cells, as
described earlier. Type I IFNs enhance the ability of NK
cells to kill infected cells. Recognition of viral DNA by
CDSs also induces autophagy, by which cellular or-
ganelles containing viruses are engulfed by lysosomes
and proteolytically destroyed (see Fig. 2.7). In addition,
part of the innate response to viral infections includes
increased apoptosis of infected cells, which also helps to
eliminate the reservoir of infection.
Regulation of Innate Immune Responses
Innate immune responses are regulated by a variety
of mechanisms that have evolved to prevent excessive
damage to tissues. These regulatory mechanisms
include the production of anti-inﬂammatory cytokines
by macrophages and dendritic cells, including IL-10,
which inhibits the microbicidal and proinﬂammatory
functions of macrophages (the classical pathway of
macrophage activation), and IL-1 receptor antagonist,
which blocks the actions of IL-1. There are also many
feedback mechanisms in which signals that induce
proinﬂammatory
cytokine
production
also
induce
P
Virus-infected 
cell
Plasmacytoid
dendritic cell
Virus-infected
or uninfected cell
IFN
receptor
Type I
IFN
Antiviral state:
inhibition of
viral replication
IFNs induce enzymes that
block viral replication
RNAase
Inhibition of
viral gene
expression
and virion
assembly
Degradation
of viral RNA
Phosphorylation
of translation
initiation factor
Inhibition
of protein
synthesis
Production of
Type I IFN
Fig. 2.20 Antiviral actions of type I IFNs. Type I IFNs (IFN-a,
IFN-b) are produced by plasmacytoid dendritic cells and virus-
infected cells in response to intracellular TLR signaling and
other sensors of viral nucleic acids. Type I interferons bind to
receptors on the infected and uninfected cells and activate
signaling pathways that induce expression of enzymes that
interfere with viral replication at different steps, including inhi-
bition of viral protein translation, increasing viral RNA degrada-
tion, and inhibition of viral gene expression and virion assembly.
Type I IFNs also increase the infected cell’s susceptibility to
CTL-mediated killing (not shown).
48
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
expression of inhibitors of cytokine signaling. For
example, TLR signaling stimulates expression of pro-
teins called suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS),
which block the responses of cells to various cytokines,
including IFNs. Inﬂammasome activation is tightly
controlled by posttranslational modiﬁcations such as
ubiquitination
and
phosphorylation,
which
block
inﬂammasome assembly or activation, and some micro-
RNAs, which inhibit NLRP3 messenger RNA.
Microbial Evasion of Innate Immunity
Pathogenic microbes have evolved to resist the mecha-
nisms of innate immunity and are thus able to enter and
colonize their hosts (Fig. 2.21). Some intracellular
bacteria resist destruction inside phagocytes. Listeria
monocytogenes produces a protein that enables it to
escape from phagocytic vesicles and enter the cytoplasm
of infected cells, where it is no longer susceptible to ROS
or NO (which are produced mainly in phagolysosomes).
The cell walls of mycobacteria contain a lipid that in-
hibits fusion of phagosomes containing ingested bacte-
ria with lysosomes. Other microbes have cell walls that
are resistant to the actions of complement proteins.
Several viruses encode proteins that block the induction
of type I IFNs by infected cells or the signals induced by
the type I IFN receptor, and thus these viruses evade the
host antiviral state.
ROLE OF INNATE IMMUNITY IN
STIMULATING ADAPTIVE IMMUNE
RESPONSES
Thus far, we have focused on how the innate immune
system recognizes microbes and combats infections. We
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter that, in
addition to its roles in host defense, the innate immune
response to microbes serves an important warning
function by alerting the adaptive immune system that
an effective immune response is needed. In this ﬁnal
section, we summarize some of the mechanisms by
which innate immune responses stimulate adaptive
immune responses.
Innate immune responses generate molecules that
provide signals, in addition to antigens, that are
required to activate naive T and B lymphocytes. In
Resistance to phagocytosis
Resistance to reactive oxygen 
intermediates in phagocytes
Resistance to complement 
activation (alternative pathway)
Capsular polysaccharide 
inhibits phagocytosis
Production of catalase, which 
breaks down reactive oxygen 
intermediates
Sialic acid expression inhibits
C3 and C5 convertases
M protein blocks C3 binding to 
organism, and C3b binding to 
complement receptors
Pneumococci
Staphylococci
Neisseria meningitidis
Streptococci
Pseudomonas
Synthesis of modified LPS 
that resists action of 
peptide antibiotics
Mechanism of immune evasion Organism (example)
Mechanism
Resistance to antimicrobial
peptide antibiotics
Coronaviruses
Chemical modifications of
viral RNA
Evasion of recognition by
viral RNA sensors
Fig. 2.21 Evasion of innate immunity by microbes. Selected examples of the mechanisms by which mi-
crobes may evade or resist innate immunity. LPS, Lipopolysaccharide.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
49
 
Chapter 1, we introduced the concept that full activa-
tion of antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes requires two sig-
nals. Antigen may be referred to as signal 1, and innate
immune responses to microbes and to host cells
damaged by microbes may provide signal 2 (Fig. 2.22).
The stimuli that warn the adaptive immune system that
it needs to respond have also been called danger signals.
This requirement for microbe-dependent second sig-
nals ensures that lymphocytes respond to infectious
pathogens and not to harmless, noninfectious sub-
stances. In experimental situations or for vaccination,
adaptive immune responses may be induced by anti-
gens without microbes. In all such instances, the anti-
gens need to be administered with substances called
adjuvants that elicit the same innate immune reactions
as microbes do. In fact, many potent adjuvants are the
products of microbes. The nature and mechanisms of
action of second signals are described in the discussion
of the activation of T and B lymphocytes in Chapters 5
and 7, respectively. Here we describe two illustrative
examples of second signals that are generated during
innate immune reactions.
In infected tissues, microbes activate dendritic cells
and macrophages to increase their expression of surface
molecules called costimulators, which bind to receptors
on naive T cells and function together with antigen
recognition to activate the T cells. The best-deﬁned
costimulators for T cells are called B7-1 (CD80) and
B7-2 (CD86); these are discussed in Chapter 5.
Blood-borne microbes activate the complement
system by the alternative pathway. One of the proteins
produced during complement activation by proteolysis
of C3b, called C3d, becomes covalently attached to the
microbe. At the same time that B lymphocytes recog-
nize microbial antigens by their antigen receptors, the B
cells recognize the C3d bound to the microbe by a re-
ceptor for C3d. The combination of antigen recognition
and C3d recognition initiates the process of B cell dif-
ferentiation
into
antibody-secreting cells.
Thus,
a
complement product serves as the second signal for
humoral immune responses.
These examples illustrate an important feature of
second signals: these signals not only stimulate adaptive
immunity but also guide the nature of the adaptive
immune response. Intracellular and phagocytosed mi-
crobes need to be eliminated by cell-mediated immu-
nity, the adaptive response mediated by T lymphocytes.
Microbes that are encountered and ingested by den-
dritic
cells
or
macrophages
induce
the
second
signalsdthat is, costimulatorsdthat stimulate T cell
responses. By contrast, blood-borne microbes need to
be combated by antibodies, which are produced by B
lymphocytes
during
humoral
immune
responses.
Blood-borne microbes activate the plasma complement
system, which in turn stimulates B cell activation and
antibody production. Thus, different types of microbes
induce innate immune responses that stimulate the
types of adaptive immunity that are best able to combat
different infectious pathogens.
Lymphocyte 
proliferation
and differentiation
Microbial
antigen
Antigen 
receptor
Lymphocyte
Molecule induced
during innate immune
response to microbe
Signal 1
Signal 2
Fig. 2.22 Two-signal requirement for lymphocyte activation.
Antigen recognition by lymphocytes provides signal 1 for acti-
vation of the lymphocytes, and substances produced during
innate immune responses to microbes (or components of mi-
crobes) provide signal 2. In this illustration, the lymphocytes
could be T cells or B cells. By convention, the major second
signals for T cells are called costimulators because they function
together with antigens to stimulate the cells. The nature of
second signals for T and B lymphocytes is described further in
later chapters.
50
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
SUMMARY
• All multicellular organisms have intrinsic mecha-
nisms of defense against infections, which constitute
innate immunity.
• The innate immune system uses germline-encoded
membrane and cytosolic receptors and extracellular
circulating molecules to sense and respond to struc-
tures that are characteristic of various classes of mi-
crobes and also molecules released by damaged host
cells. Innate immune reactions usually are not
enhanced by repeat exposures to microbes.
• The principal responses of innate immunity are
inﬂammation and the antiviral state.
• Toll-like receptors (TLRs), expressed on plasma
membranes and endosomal membranes of many
cell types, are a major class of innate immune system
receptors that recognize different microbial prod-
ucts, including bacterial cell wall constituents and
microbial nucleic acids, and generate signals that
activate inﬂammatory and/or antiviral responses.
• Several types of innate immune sensors respond to
microbial molecules in the cytosol and stimulate in-
ﬂammatory and antiviral responses, including mem-
bers of the NOD-like receptor (NLR) family that
recognize microbial cell wall lipoproteins, RIG-like
receptors that recognize viral RNAs, and cytosolic
DNA sensors that detect dsDNA.
• Inﬂammasomes are multiprotein complexes in the
cytosol that assemble in response to products of
damaged cells and cytosolic changes typical of infec-
tion or cell injury, and generate the active form the
proinﬂammatory cytokine interleukin-1b (IL-1b).
• The principal components of innate immunity are
epithelial barrier cells in the skin, gastrointestinal
tract, and respiratory tract; phagocytes; dendritic
cells; mast cells; natural killer cells; cytokines; and
plasma proteins, including the proteins of the com-
plement system.
• Epithelia provide physical barriers against microbes;
produce antimicrobial peptides, including defensins
and cathelicidins; and contain lymphocytes that
may prevent infections.
• The principal phagocytesdneutrophils and mono-
cytes/macrophagesdare blood cells that are recruited
to sites of infection; macrophages also may be tissue-
resident. Phagocytes are activated by engagement of
different receptors and destroy microbes and dead
cells. Some macrophages limit inﬂammation and
initiate tissue repair.
• Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) secrete various cyto-
kines
that
induce
inﬂammation.
Natural
killer
(NK) cells kill host cells infected by intracellular
microbes and produce the cytokine interferon-g
(IFN- g), which activates macrophages to kill phago-
cytosed microbes.
• The complement system is a family of proteins that
are activated on encounter with some microbes (in
innate immunity) and by antibodies (in the humoral
arm of adaptive immunity). Complement proteins
coat (opsonize) microbes for phagocytosis, stimulate
inﬂammation, and lyse microbes.
• Cytokines of innate immunity function to stimulate
inﬂammation
(tumor
necrosis
factor
[TNF],
interleukin-1 [IL-1], IL-6, chemokines), activate
NK cells (IL-12), activate macrophages (IFN-g),
and prevent viral infections (type I IFNs).
• In inﬂammation, phagocytes are recruited from the
circulation to sites of infection and tissue damage.
The cells bind to endothelial adhesion molecules
that are induced by the cytokines TNF and IL-1
and migrate in response to soluble chemoattrac-
tants,
including
chemokines,
complement
frag-
ments, and bacterial peptides. The leukocytes are
activated, and they ingest and destroy microbes
and damaged cells.
• Antiviral defense is mediated by type I IFNs, which
inhibit viral replication, and by NK cells, which kill
infected cells.
• In addition to providing early defense against infec-
tions, innate immune responses provide signals that
work together with antigens to activate B and T lym-
phocytes. The requirement for these second signals
ensures that adaptive immunity is elicited by mi-
crobes (the most potent inducers of innate immune
reactions) and not by nonmicrobial substances.
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
51
 
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. How does the speciﬁcity of innate immunity differ
from that of adaptive immunity?
2. What are examples of microbial substances recog-
nized by the innate immune system, and what are
the receptors for these substances?
3. What
is
the
inﬂammasome,
and
how
is
it
stimulated?
4. What are the mechanisms by which the epithelia of
the skin and gastrointestinal tract prevent the entry
of microbes?
5. How do phagocytes ingest and kill microbes?
6. What is the role of MHC molecules in the recogni-
tion of infected cells by NK cells, and what is the
physiologic signiﬁcance of this recognition?
7. What are the roles of the cytokines TNF, IL-1, IL-12,
and type I IFNs in defense against infections?
8. How do innate immune responses enhance adaptive
immunity?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
52
CHAPTER 2
Innate Immunity
 
3
Antigen Presentation to
T Lymphocytes and
the Functions of Major
Histocompatibility
Complex Molecules
What T Lymphocytes See
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Antigens Recognized by T Lymphocytes, 54
Capture of Protein Antigens by Antigen-
Presenting Cells, 55
Structure and Function of Major
Histocompatibility Complex Molecules, 59
Structure of MHC Molecules, 60
Class I MHC Molecules, 60
Class II MHC Molecules, 61
Properties of MHC Genes and Proteins, 61
Inheritance Patterns and Nomenclature of
HLA Genes, 63
Peptide Binding to MHC Molecules, 63
Processing and Presentation of Protein
Antigens, 66
Processing of Cytosolic Antigens for Display by
Class I MHC Molecules, 67
Proteolysis of Cytosolic Proteins, 68
Binding of Peptides to Class I MHC
Molecules, 69
Transport of Peptide-MHC Complexes to the
Cell Surface, 69
Cross-Presentation of Internalized Antigens to
CD8D T Cells, 69
Processing of Internalized Antigens for Display
by Class II MHC Molecules, 70
Internalization and Proteolysis of Antigens, 70
Binding of Peptides to Class II MHC
Molecules, 70
Transport of Peptide-MHC Complexes to the
Cell Surface, 71
Physiologic Signiﬁcance of MHC-Associated
Antigen Presentation, 72
Functions of Antigen-Presenting Cells in Addition
to Antigen Display, 74
Antigen Recognition by Other T Lymphocytes, 74
Summary, 74
Adaptive immune responses are initiated by the
recognition of antigens by antigen receptors on lym-
phocytes. B and T lymphocytes differ in the types of
antigens they recognize. The antigen receptors of B
lymphocytes,
which
are
plasma
membrane-bound
antibodies, can recognize structural features of a variety
of macromolecules (proteins, polysaccharides, lipids,
nucleic acids), in soluble form or on cell surfaces, as
well as small molecules. Therefore, B cellemediated
humoral immune responses may be generated against
53
 
many types of microbial surface structures, released
internal molecules, and other soluble antigens. The
antigen receptors of most T lymphocytes, on the other
hand, can see only peptide fragments of protein anti-
gens, and only when these peptides are displayed on
host cell surfaces bound to specialized proteins called
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules.
Because the association of antigenic peptides and MHC
molecules occurs inside cells, T cellemediated immune
responses may be generated only against protein anti-
gens that are either produced in or taken up by host
cells. Thus, T cells detect the presence of intracellular
foreign antigens, the ﬁrst step in cell-mediated immu-
nity. The peptide display function of the MHC allows
for surface display of parts of microbes that get inside
host cells, and this enables T cells to detect the infected
cells amidst a fog of cell-free microbial antigens. This
chapter focuses on the nature of the antigens that are
recognized by T lymphocytes; antigen recognition by B
cells is discussed in Chapter 7. Chapter 4 describes the
receptors used by lymphocytes to recognize and
respond to these antigens.
The induction of immune responses by antigens is a
highly efﬁcient process with a number of remarkable
features. The number of naive lymphocytes speciﬁc for
any one antigen is very low, as few as 1 in 105 or 106
circulating lymphocytes, and this small fraction of the
body’s lymphocytes needs to locate and react rapidly to
the antigen, wherever it is introduced. Moreover,
different types of T lymphocytes are required to defend
against different types of microbes. In fact, the immune
system has to react in different ways even to the same
microbe at different stages of the microbe’s life cycle.
For example, defense against a microbe (e.g., a virus)
that has entered the bloodstream depends on antibodies
that bind the microbe, prevent it from infecting host
cells, and help to eliminate it. The production of potent
antibodies requires the activation of CD4þ helper
T cells. Many microbes infect host cells, however, where
they are safe from antibodies, which cannot enter cells.
As a result, activation of CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs) may be necessary to kill the infected cells and
eliminate the reservoir of infection. Thus, we are faced
with two important questions:
• How do the rare naive lymphocytes speciﬁc for any
microbial antigen ﬁnd that microbe, especially
considering that microbes may enter anywhere in
the body?
• How do different types of T cells recognize microbes
in different cellular compartments?
The answer to both questions is that the immune
system has developed a specialized system for capturing
and displaying antigens to lymphocytes. Research by
immunologists, cell biologists, and biochemists has led
to a sophisticated understanding of how protein anti-
gens are captured, broken down, and displayed for
recognition by T lymphocytes, and the role of MHC
molecules in this process.
ANTIGENS RECOGNIZED BY T
LYMPHOCYTES
The majority of T lymphocytes recognize peptide
antigens that are bound to and displayed by the MHC
molecules of antigen-presenting cells (APCs). The
MHC is a genetic locus whose principal protein prod-
ucts function as the peptide display molecules of the
immune system. CD4þ and CD8þ T cells can see
peptides only when these peptides are displayed by that
individual’s MHC molecules. This property of T cells is
called MHC restriction. The T cell receptor (TCR)
recognizes some amino acid residues of the peptide
antigen and simultaneously also recognizes residues of
the MHC molecule that is displaying that peptide
(Fig. 3.1). Each TCR, and hence each clone of CD4þ or
CD8þ T cells, recognizes one peptide displayed by one
of the many different MHC molecules in every indi-
vidual. The properties of MHC molecules and the sig-
niﬁcance of MHC restriction are described later in this
chapter. How we generate T cells that recognize pep-
tides presented only by self MHC molecules is described
in Chapter 4. Also, some small populations of T cells
recognize lipid and other nonpeptide antigens either
presented by class I MHCelike molecules or without a
requirement for a specialized antigen display system.
The cells that capture microbial antigens and display
them for recognition by T lymphocytes are called
antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Naive T lymphocytes
see protein antigens presented by dendritic cells to
initiate clonal expansion and differentiation of the
T cells into effector and memory cells. Differentiated
effector T cells again need to see antigens, which may be
presented by various kinds of APCs in addition to
dendritic cells, to activate the effector functions of the
T cells in both humoral and cell-mediated immune
54
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
responses. We ﬁrst describe how APCs capture and
present antigens to trigger immune responses and then
examine the role of MHC molecules in antigen pre-
sentation to T cells.
CAPTURE OF PROTEIN ANTIGENS BY
ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELLS
Protein antigens of microbes that enter the body are
captured mainly by dendritic cells and concentrated
in the secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs, where
immune responses are initiated (Fig. 3.2). Microbes
usually enter the body through the skin (by contact),
the gastrointestinal tract (by ingestion), the respiratory
tract (by inhalation), and the genitourinary tract (by
sexual contact). Some microbes may enter the blood-
stream. Microbial antigens can also be produced in any
infected tissue. Because of the vast surface area of the
epithelial barriers and the large volume of blood, con-
nective tissues, and internal organs, it would be
impossible for lymphocytes of all possible speciﬁcities
to efﬁciently patrol all these sites searching for foreign
invaders; instead, antigens are taken to the lymphoid
organs through which lymphocytes recirculate.
Antigens are taken to secondary lymphoid organs in
two ways.
• Dendritic cells in epithelia, connective tissues, and
organs capture microbial antigens and transport
them to lymph nodes draining these tissues. This
process involves a series of events following the
encounter
of
dendritic
cells
with
microbesd
ingestion of antigens, activation of the dendritic cells,
migration of the antigen-carrying cells to lymph
nodes, and display of the antigen to T cells. These
steps are described below.
• Microbes or their antigens also may be carried to
lymph nodes in the lymph, or to the spleen in the
blood, and are then captured by resident dendritic
cells in these secondary lymphoid organs and pre-
sented to T cells.
All the interfaces between the body and the external
environment are lined by continuous epithelia, which
provide barriers to infection. The epithelia and sub-
epithelial tissues contain a network of cells with long
processes, called dendritic cells; these cells are also
present in the T cellerich areas of secondary lymphoid
organs and, in smaller numbers, in most other non-
lymphoid organs (Fig. 3.3). There are two major
populations of dendritic cells, called conventional (or
classical) and plasmacytoid, which differ in their lo-
cations and responses. The majority of dendritic cells
in tissues and lymphoid organs belong to the con-
ventional subset; these are the cells that capture and
present most protein antigens to T lymphocytes. In the
skin, the epidermal dendritic cells are called Langer-
hans cells. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells are named
because of their morphologic resemblance to plasma
cells; they are present in the blood and tissues. Plas-
macytoid dendritic cells are also major source of type I
interferons in innate immune responses to viral in-
fections (see Chapter 2).
Dendritic cells use various membrane receptors to
bind microbes. These microbes or their antigens are
taken up by dendritic cells by phagocytosis or receptor-
mediated endocytosis. At the same time that the
dendritic cells are capturing antigens, products of the
microbes stimulate innate immune reactions by binding
to Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and to other innate
pattern-recognition receptors in the dendritic cells,
tissue epithelial cells, and tissue-resident macrophages
(see Chapter 2). This results in the production of in-
ﬂammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1). The combination of
innate receptor signaling and cytokines activates the
dendritic cells, resulting in several changes in their
phenotype, migration, and function.
MHC
Polymorphic
residue 
of MHC
Peptide
T cell receptor
Anchor
residue
of peptide
"Pocket" of MHC
T cell contact
residue of
peptide
Fig. 3.1 Model showing how a T cell receptor recognizes a
complex of peptide antigen displayed by an MHC molecule.
MHC molecules are expressed on antigen-presenting cells and
function to display peptides derived from protein antigens.
Peptides bind to the MHC molecules by anchor residues, which
attach the peptides to pockets in the MHC molecules. The an-
tigen receptor of every T cell recognizes some amino acid res-
idues of the peptide and some (polymorphic) residues of the
MHC molecule.
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
55
 
Upon activation, conventional dendritic cells lose their
adhesivenessfor epitheliaand peripheraltissuesand begin
to express the chemokine receptorCCR7, whichis speciﬁc
for chemoattracting cytokines (chemokines) produced by
lymphatic endothelium and by stromal cells in the T cell
zones of lymph nodes. These chemokines direct the
dendritic cells to exit the epithelium and migrate through
lymphatic vessels to the lymph nodes draining that
epithelium (Fig. 3.4). During the process of migration, the
dendritic cells mature from cells designed to capture an-
tigens into APCs capable of stimulating naive T lym-
phocytes. This maturation is reﬂected by increased
synthesis and stable expression of MHC molecules, which
display antigens to T cells, and also of costimulators,
Microbe
Epithelium
Cell-free
antigen
Dendritic cell-
associated antigen
Gastrointestinal tract 
Skin
Respiratory tract
Venule
To circulation 
and spleen
To lymph node
Lymph
node
Lymph node collects
antigen from tissue
Blood-borne antigens
are captured by 
antigen-presenting cells 
in the spleen
Connective tissue
Lymphatic
vessel
Antigen that
enters blood
stream
Spleen
Fig. 3.2 Capture and display of microbial antigens. Microbes enter through an epithelial barrier and are
captured by dendritic cells resident in the tissue, or microbes enter lymphatic vessels or blood vessels. The
microbes and their antigens are transported to secondary lymphoid organs, the lymph nodes and the spleen,
where peptide fragments of protein antigens are displayed by dendritic cell (MHC) molecules for recognition
by naive T lymphocytes.
56
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
whichwere introduced inChapter 2 as moleculesrequired
for the effective induction of T cell responses.
The net result of this sequence of events is that the
protein antigens of microbes that enter the body are
transported to and concentrated in the regions of the
lymph nodes (and spleen) where the antigens are most
likely to encounter T lymphocytes. Recall that naive T
lymphocytes continuously recirculate through lymph
nodes and also express CCR7, which promotes their
entry into the T cell zones of lymph nodes (see Chapter
1). Therefore, dendritic cells bearing captured antigen
and naive T cells poised to recognize antigens come
together in lymph nodes. This process is remarkably
efﬁcient; it is estimated that if a microbial antigen is
introduced at any site in the body, a T cell response to
the antigen begins in the lymph nodes draining that site
within 12 to 18 hours.
Different types of APCs serve distinct functions in
T celledependent immune responses (Fig. 3.5).
• Dendritic cells are the principal inducers of T-
dependent
responses
because
these
cells
are
located at sites of microbe entry, are capable of
migrating to lymph nodes through which naive
T cells circulate, and are the most potent APCs
for activating naive T lymphocytes because they
express
high
levels
of
MHC
molecules
and
costimulators.
• One important type of APC for effector T cells, espe-
cially of the helper T cell lineage, is the macrophage,
including macrophages resident in all tissues and
monocyte-derived macrophages, which accumulate
at sites of infection in innate immune responses. In
cell-mediated
immune
reactions,
macrophages
phagocytose microbes and display the antigens of
Dendritic cell (Langerhans cell) 
in epidermis
Dendritic cell 
in lymph node
Follicle
B
A
Fig. 3.3 Dendritic cells. A, Immature dendritic cells reside in tissues, including epithelia, such as the skin, and
form a network of cells with interdigitating processes, seen as blue cells on the section of skin stained with an
antibody that recognizes dendritic cells. B, Mature dendritic cells reside in the T cellerich areas of lymph nodes
(and spleen, not shown) and are seen in the section of a lymph node stained with ﬂuorochrome-conjugated
antibodies against dendritic cells (red) and B cells in follicles (green). Note that the dendritic cells are in the
same regions of the lymph node as T cells (see Fig. 1.18B). (A, Micrograph of skin courtesy Dr. Y.-J. Liu, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX. B, Courtesy Drs. Kathryn Pape and Jennifer Walter, University of
Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN.)
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
57
 
these microbes to effector T cells, which are then
reactivated and activate the macrophages to kill the
ingested microbes (see Chapter 6).
• B lymphocytes endocytose protein antigens and
display them to helper T cells within lymphoid tis-
sues; this process is important for the development
of humoral immune responses to protein antigens
(see Chapter 7).
• As discussed later in this chapter, any nucleated cell
containing foreign (microbial or tumor) protein an-
tigens in the cytosol can present peptides derived
from these antigens to CD8þ effector T cells.
(Langerhans cell)
(Langerhans cell)
Migration
of DC
Activation
of DC
Maturation of
migrating DC
Mature 
dendritic cell
presenting
antigen to
naive T cell
Afferent 
lymphatic
vessel
Dermal DC
Lymph 
node
Antigen capture 
by dendritic 
cells (DC)
MHC
Costimulator
Antigen
capture
Antigen
presentation
T cell zone
T cell
Fig. 3.4 Capture, transport, and presentation of protein antigens by dendritic cells. Immature dendritic cells
in epithelial barrier tissues, such as the epithelium or dermis of the skin, shown here, capture microbial an-
tigens, are activated, express CCR7 (not shown), and leave the epithelium. The dendritic cells migrate to
draining lymph nodes, being attracted there by chemokines produced in the lymphatic vessels and nodes. In
response to signals induced by the microbe, such as Toll-like receptor (TLR) signals and cytokines, the den-
dritic cells mature and acquire the ability to present antigens to naive T lymphocytes in the lymph nodes.
Dendritic cells at different stages of their maturation may express different membrane proteins. Immature
dendritic cells express surface receptors that capture microbial antigens, whereas mature dendritic cells ex-
press high levels of MHC molecules and costimulators, which function to stimulate T cells.
58
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
Now that we have described how protein antigens
are captured, transported to, and concentrated in sec-
ondary lymphoid organs, we next ask how these anti-
gens are displayed to T lymphocytes. To answer this
question, we ﬁrst need to describe the structure of MHC
molecules and examine how they function in immune
responses.
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF MAJOR
HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX
MOLECULES
MHC genes were discovered from observations of
immunologic reactions to cells and tissues transferred
between genetically nonidentical animals, before the
peptide display functions of the proteins they encoded
were known. The MHC was deﬁned as the genetic
locus that is the principal determinant of acceptance or
rejection of tissue grafts exchanged between in-
dividuals (tissue, or histo, compatibility). In other
words, individuals who are identical at their MHC
locus (inbred animals and identical twins) will accept
grafts from one another, and individuals who differ at
their MHC loci will reject such grafts. Because trans-
plantation is not a natural phenomenon, MHC genes
and the molecules they encode must have evolved to
perform other functions. We now know that the
physiologic role of MHC molecules is to display pep-
tides derived from microbial protein antigens to
antigen-speciﬁc T lymphocytes as a ﬁrst step in pro-
tective T cellemediated immune responses to mi-
crobes. This function of MHC molecules explains the
phenomenon of MHC restriction of T cells, mentioned
earlier.
All vertebrates possess maternally and paternally
inherited MHC loci, which include genes encoding the
MHC proteins (and other proteins involved in im-
mune responses) (Fig. 3.6). MHC molecules were ﬁrst
identiﬁed as proteins encoded by the murine MHC
locus involved in graft rejection. They were redis-
covered in humans when it was found that women
who had multiple pregnancies, or individuals who
received multiple blood transfusions, made antibodies
Cell type
Expression of
Dendritic cells
Macrophages
B lymphocytes
Principal
function
Constitutive; increases 
with maturation; 
increased by IFN-γ
Low or negative; 
inducible by IFN-γ
Constitutive; 
increased by
cytokines (e.g., IL-4)
Constitutive; increases
with maturation; increased
by TLR ligands, IFN-γ, and
T cells (CD40-CD40L
interactions)
Low, inducible by TLR
ligands, IFN-γ, and T cells 
(CD40-CD40L interactions)
Induced by T cells 
(CD40-CD40L interactions),
antigen receptor
cross-linking
Antigen presentation to
naive T cells in the
initiation of T cell
responses to protein
antigens (priming)
Antigen presentation to
CD4+ effector T cells in 
the effector phase of
cell-mediated
immune responses
Antigen presentation
to CD4+ helper T cells
in humoral immune 
responses (T cell-B cell
interactions)
Class II MHC
Costimulators
Fig. 3.5 Principal antigen-presenting cells (APCs). The properties of the most important class II major his-
tocompatibility complex (MHC)eexpressing APCs, which present antigens to CD4þ helper T cells, are sum-
marized. Other cell types, such as vascular endothelial cells, also express class II MHC, but their roles in
initiating immune responses to microbes are not established. In the thymus, epithelial cells express class II
MHC molecules and play a role in the maturation and selection of T cells. All nucleated cells can present class I
MHCeassociated peptides to CD8þ T cells. IFN-g, Interferon-g; IL-4, interleukin-4; TLR, Toll-like receptor.
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
59
 
that recognized proteins on the white blood cells
(leukocytes) of paternal or donor origin, respectively.
These proteins were called human leukocyte antigens
(HLAs) and were soon shown to be analogous to the
MHC molecules identiﬁed in mice. (Pregnancy and
transfusions expose individuals to cellular antigens of
other individuals, so antibodies produced against these
cells reﬂect histoincompatibility, as in the mouse
transplantation experiments.) In all vertebrates, the
MHC contains two sets of highly polymorphic genes,
called the class I and class II MHC genes. (As dis-
cussed later, polymorphism refers to the presence of
many variants of these genes in the population.) These
genes encode the class I and class II MHC molecules
that display peptides to T cells. In addition to the
polymorphic genes, the MHC contains many non-
polymorphic genes, some of which code for proteins
involved in antigen presentation.
Structure of MHC Molecules
Class I and class II MHC molecules are membrane
proteins that each contains an extracellular peptide-
binding cleft. Although the two classes of molecules
differ in subunit composition, they are very similar in
overall structure (Fig. 3.7).
Class I MHC Molecules
Each class I MHC molecule consists of an a chain
noncovalently associated with a protein called b2-
microglobulin that is encoded by a gene outside the MHC
locus. The a chain consists of three extracellular domains
followed by transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains.
• The amino-terminal a1 and a2 domains of the a
chain form two walls and a ﬂoor that together
make up a peptide-binding cleft, or groove, that
can accommodate peptides typically 8 to 11 amino
acids long. The ﬂoor of the peptide-binding cleft
contains amino acid residues that bind peptides for
display to T lymphocytes, and the tops of the cleft
walls make contact with the T cell receptor (which
also contacts part of the displayed peptide; see
Fig. 3.1). The polymorphic residues of class I
moleculesdthat is, the amino acids that differ
among different individuals’ MHC moleculesdare
located in the a1 and a2 domains of the a chain.
Most of these polymorphic residues contribute to
Human: HLA
Mouse: H-2
DQ
DP
DR
B
C
A
Class II MHC locus
Class I MHC locus
DM
Proteasome
genes;
TAP1,2
Complement
proteins: C4,
Factor B, C2
Cytokines:
TNF, LT
K
I-A
I-E
H-2M
Class II 
MHC locus
Class I 
MHC locus
Class I 
MHC locus
D
L
Fig. 3.6 Genes of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Schematic maps show the human MHC,
called the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex, and the mouse MHC, called the H-2 complex, illustrating
the major genes that code for molecules involved in immune responses. Sizes of genes and intervening DNA
segments are not drawn to scale. Class II genes are shown as single blocks, but each consists of two genes
encoding the a and b chains, respectively. The products of some of the genes (DM [H-2M in mice], protea-
some components, TAP) are involved in antigen processing. The MHC also contains genes that encode
molecules other than peptide display molecules, including some complement proteins and cytokines. LT,
Lymphotoxin; TAP, transporter associated with antigen processing; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
60
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
variations in the ﬂoor of the peptide-binding cleft
and thus inﬂuence the ability of different MHC mol-
ecules to bind distinct sets of peptides.
• The a3 domain is invariant, associates with b2-
microglobulin, and contains a site that binds the
CD8 T cell coreceptor but not CD4. As discussed
in Chapter 5, T cell activation requires recognition
of MHC-associated peptide antigen by the TCR
and simultaneous recognition of the MHC molecule
by the coreceptor. Therefore, CD8þ T cells can
respond only to peptides displayed by class I MHC
molecules, the MHC molecules to which the CD8
coreceptor binds.
Class II MHC Molecules
Each class II MHC molecule consists of two trans-
membrane chains, called a and b. Each chain has two
extracellular domains, followed by the transmembrane
and cytoplasmic regions.
• The amino-terminal regions of both chains, called the
a1 and b1 domains, contain polymorphic residues
and together form a cleft (made up of walls and a
ﬂoor as in class I MHC molecules) that is large
enough to accommodate peptides of 10 to 30 residues.
• The nonpolymorphic a2 and b2 domains contain
the binding site for the CD4 T cell coreceptor.
Because CD4 binds to class II MHC molecules but
not to class I, CD4þ T cells can respond only to pep-
tides presented by class II MHC molecules.
Properties of MHC Genes and Proteins
Several features of MHC genes and proteins are
important for the normal function of these molecules
(Fig. 3.8):
• MHC genes are highly polymorphic, meaning that
many different alleles (variants) are present among
the different individuals in the population. The total
number of different HLA proteins in the population
is estimated to be more than 18,000, with about
13,000 class I and 5400 class II polypeptides, making
MHC molecules the most polymorphic of all pro-
teins in mammals. The polymorphism of MHC pro-
teins is so great that any two individuals in an
outbred
population
are
extremely
unlikely
to
have exactly the same MHC molecules. These
α2
α1
β2m
α1
α3
β1
β2
α2
α2
Peptide-binding
cleft
Peptide
Class I MHC
S
S
S
C
α1
β2m
Peptide
N
N
S
S
S
S S
S
S
S
S
Disulfide bond
Ig domain
S
S
α1
Peptide-binding
cleft
Class II MHC
S
S
α3
NN
β1
C
C
α2
β2
Fig. 3.7 Structure of class I and class II major histocompati-
bility complex (MHC) molecules. Schematic diagrams (at left)
and models of the crystal structures (at right) of class I MHC and
class II MHC molecules illustrate the domains of the molecules
and the fundamental similarities between them. Both types of
MHC molecules contain peptide-binding clefts and invariant
portions that bind CD8 (the a3 domain of class I) or CD4 (the a2
and b2 domains of class II). b2m, b2-microglobulin; Ig, Immu-
noglobulin. Crystal structures courtesy Dr. P. Bjorkman, Cali-
fornia Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA.
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
61
 
different polymorphic variants are inherited and not
generated
de
novo
in
individuals
by
somatic
gene recombination, as are antigen receptors (see
Chapter 4). Any one individual inherits and ex-
presses only two alleles of each MHC gene (one
from each parent), which represent very few of the
many variants in the population. Because the
polymorphic residues determine which peptides are
presented by speciﬁc MHC molecules, the existence
of multiple alleles likely ensures that there are always
some members of the population who will be able to
present some peptide from any microbial protein an-
tigen. Therefore, MHC polymorphism ensures that a
population will be able to deal with the diversity of
Epithelial cells
Parental
chromosomes
T cells
MHC
molecules
Co-dominant
expression:
   Both parental 
   alleles of each 
   MHC gene are
   expressed
MHC-expressing
cell types:
   Class I: 
   All nucleated
   cells   
   
   Class II: 
   Dendritic cells,
   macrophages,
   B cells 
Increases number of 
different MHC molecules 
that can present peptides 
to T cells
CD4+ helper
T lymphocytes interact 
with dendritic cells,
macrophages, 
B lymphocytes
CD8+ CTLs can kill any
type of virus-infected cell
Leukocytes
Mesenchymal 
cells
B cell
Dendritic cell
Macrophage
Polymorphic
genes:
   Many different 
   alleles are
   present in the 
   population
Different individuals are 
able to present and 
respond to different
microbial peptides
Feature
Significance
Fig. 3.8 Properties of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and genes. Some of the important
features of MHC molecules and their signiﬁcance for immune responses. CTLs, Cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
62
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
microbes, and at least some individuals will be able
to mount effective immune responses to the peptide
antigens of these microbes. Furthermore, because of
the existence of many different MHC molecules in
the population, everyone will not succumb to a
newly encountered or mutated microbe due to an
inability to present the microbe’s proteins to T cells.
• MHC genes are codominantly expressed, meaning
that the alleles inherited from both parents are
expressed equally. Codominant expression maxi-
mizes the number of HLA proteins expressed by
each individual and thus enables each individual to
display a large number of peptides.
• Class I molecules are expressed on all nucleated
cells, but class II molecules are expressed mainly
on dendritic cells, macrophages, and B lympho-
cytes. The physiologic signiﬁcance of this strikingly
different expression pattern is described later. Class
II molecules are also expressed on thymic epithelial
cells and endothelial cells and can be induced on
other cell types by the cytokine interferon-g.
Inheritance Patterns and Nomenclature of HLA Genes
Humans have three polymorphic class I genes, called
human leukocyte antigen-A (HLA-A), HLA-B, and
HLA-C, and each person inherits one of these genes
from each parent, so any cell can express six different
class I molecules. In the class II locus, individuals
inherit,
from
each
chromosome,
separate
genes
encoding the a and b chains of DP and DQ, the gene
for DRa, and variable numbers of genes encoding
DRb (typically 1 to 3). Because of this variation, and
because the a chain from one chromosome may pair
with the b chain derived from the other chromosome,
the number of class II molecules expressed is typically
more than six.
The set of MHC genes present on each chromosome
(and their encoded MHC proteins) is called an MHC
haplotype. The genes in an MHC haplotype are tightly
linked and inherited together in a Mendelian fashion.
Therefore, the chance that two siblings will inherit
identical sets of HLA alleles is 25%. This is why siblings
are often tested before unrelated individuals for their
suitability as donors for transplantationdthe chance of
ﬁnding an HLA match with the recipient is much
greater for siblings. In humans, each HLA allele is
given a numeric designation. For example, an HLA
haplotype of an individual could be HLA-A2, B5, DR3,
and so on. In the modern terminology, based on mo-
lecular typing, individual alleles may be called HLA-
A*0201, referring to the 01 subtype of HLA-A2, or
HLA-DRB1*0401, referring to the 01 subtype of the
DR4B1 gene, and so on.
Peptide Binding to MHC Molecules
The peptide-binding clefts of MHC molecules bind
peptides derived from protein antigens and display
these peptides for recognition by T cells (Fig. 3.9).
There are pockets in the ﬂoors of the peptide-binding
clefts of most MHC molecules. Side chains of some of
the amino acid residues in the peptide antigens ﬁt into
these MHC pockets and thereby anchor peptides in the
cleft; these amino acid residues are called anchor resi-
dues. Other residues of the bound peptide project up-
ward and are recognized by the antigen receptors of
T cells.
Several features of the interaction of peptide antigens
with MHC molecules are important for understanding
the
peptide
display
function
of
MHC
molecules
(Fig. 3.10):
• Each MHC molecule can present only one peptide at
a time, because there is only one peptide-binding
cleft, but each MHC molecule is capable of present-
ing many different peptides. As long as the pockets
of the MHC molecule can accommodate the anchor
residues of the peptide, that peptide can be displayed
by the MHC molecule. Therefore, only one or two
residues in a peptide determine if that peptide will
bind to the cleft of a particular MHC molecule.
Thus, MHC molecules are said to have a broad spec-
iﬁcity for peptide binding; each MHC molecule can
bind many peptides as long as they have the optimal
length and amino acid sequence. This broad speci-
ﬁcity is essential for the antigen display function of
MHC molecules, because each individual has only
a few different MHC molecules that must be able
to present peptides derived from a vast number
and variety of protein antigens.
• MHC molecules bind mainly peptides. Among
various classes of antigens, only peptides have the
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
63
 
structural and charge characteristics that permit
binding to the clefts of MHC molecules. This is
why MHC-restricted CD4þ T cells and CD8þ
T cells can recognize and respond to protein anti-
gens, the natural source of peptides. The MHC is
also involved in the responses of T cells to some
nonpeptide antigens, such as small molecules and
metal ions. The recognition of such antigens is dis-
cussed brieﬂy later in the chapter.
• MHC molecules acquire their peptide cargo during
their biosynthesis, assembly, and transport inside
cells. Therefore, MHC molecules display peptides
derived from protein antigens that are inside host
cells (produced inside cells or ingested from the
extracellular
environment).
This
explains
why
MHC-restricted T cells recognize cell-associated an-
tigens and not cell-free antigens in the circulation,
tissue ﬂuids, or mucosal lumens.
• Only peptide-loaded MHC molecules are stably
expressed on cell surfaces, and empty molecules
are degraded inside cells. The reason for this is
that MHC molecules must assemble both their
chains and bound peptides to achieve a stable struc-
ture that is resistant to intracellular proteolysis. This
requirement for peptide binding ensures that only
useful MHC moleculesdthat is, those displaying
peptidesdare expressed on cell surfaces for recogni-
tion by T cells. Once peptides bind to MHC mole-
cules, they stay bound for a long time, up to days
for some peptides. The slow off-rate ensures that af-
ter an MHC molecule has acquired a peptide, it will
display the peptide long enough to allow a particular
T cell that can recognize the peptide-MHC complex
to ﬁnd the bound peptide and initiate a response.
• In each individual, the MHC molecules can display
peptides derived from the individual’s own proteins,
as well as peptides from foreign (i.e., microbial) pro-
teins. This inability of MHC molecules to discrimi-
nate between self antigens and foreign antigens
raises two questions. First, at any time the quantity
of self proteins in an APC is likely to be much
greater than that of any microbial proteins. Why,
then,
are
the
available
MHC
molecules
not
constantly occupied by self peptides and unable to
present foreign antigens? The likely answer is that
new MHC molecules are constantly being synthe-
sized, ready to accept peptides, and they are adept
at capturing any peptides that are present in cells.
Also, a single T cell may need to see a peptide dis-
played by only as few as 0.1% to 1% of the approx-
imately 105 MHC molecules on the surface of an
APC, so that even rare MHC molecules displaying
a peptide are enough to initiate an immune response.
In addition, during infections, especially by some vi-
ruses, host protein synthesis is suppressed and viral
Peptide
Peptide
Pockets in floor of peptide 
binding groove of class II 
MHC molecule
Peptide
A
B
Anchor
residue
of peptide
Class II 
MHC
molecule
Class I 
MHC
molecule
*
*
Fig. 3.9 Binding of peptides to major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) molecules. A, The top views of the crystal struc-
tures of MHC molecules show how peptides (in yellow) lie on
the ﬂoors of the peptide-binding clefts and are available for
recognition by T cells. B, The side view of a cutout of a peptide
bound to a class II MHC molecule shows how anchor residues
of the peptide hold it in the pockets in the cleft of the MHC
molecule. Other residues (asterisks) project up from the cleft
and are recognized by T cells. (A, Courtesy Dr. P. Bjorkman,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA. B, From Scott
CA, Peterson PA, Teyton L, Wilson IA: Crystal structures of two
I-Ad-peptide complexes reveal that high afﬁnity can be achieved
without large anchor residues, Immunity 8:319e329, 1998.
Copyright Cell Press; with permission.)
64
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
+
+
Cytosolic
protein
Proteasome
Class I MHC
Class II MHC
Peptides from proteins
in cytosol
Feature
Significance
Each T cell responds to 
a single peptide bound 
to an MHC molecule
Class I and class II
MHC molecules 
facilitate immune
surveillance for
microbes in
different locations
Many different peptides 
can bind to the same 
MHC molecule 
MHC molecule displays 
bound peptide for long 
enough to be located
by T cell
Only peptide-loaded
MHC molecules 
are expressed on the
cell surface for 
recognition by T cells
MHC-restricted T cells 
respond mainly to 
protein antigens
β2-
microglobulin α
Days
MHC 
molecule with
bound peptide
"Empty"
MHC
molecule
Lipids
Carbohydrate
sugars
Proteins
Peptides
Peptide
Nucleic
acids
Peptides from
internalized proteins
in endocytic vesicles
Endocytosis of
extracellular protein
Each MHC 
molecule 
displays one 
peptide at a time
Broad specificity 
Very slow
off-rate
Stable surface 
expression of
MHC molecule
requires bound
peptide
MHC molecules 
bind only 
peptides
Class I and 
class II MHC
molecules
display peptides
from different 
cellular
compartments
Fig. 3.10 Features of peptide binding to MHC molecules. Some of the important features of peptide binding
to MHC molecules, with their signiﬁcance for immune responses. ER, Endoplasmic reticulum; Ii, invariant
chain.
 
proteins dominate and are therefore preferentially
presented by MHC molecules. The second problem
is that if MHC molecules are constantly displaying
self peptides, why do we not develop immune re-
sponses to self antigens, so-called autoimmune re-
sponses? The answer is that most T cells speciﬁc
for self antigens have previously been killed or inac-
tivated (see Chapter 9). Thus, T cells are constantly
patrolling the body, looking at MHC-associated pep-
tides, and if there is an infection, only those T cells
that recognize microbial peptides will respond,
whereas self peptideespeciﬁc T cells will either be
absent or inactivated.
MHC molecules are capable of displaying peptides
but not intact protein antigens, which are generally too
large to ﬁt into the MHC cleft. Therefore, mechanisms
must exist for converting naturally occurring proteins
into peptides able to bind to MHC molecules. This
conversion, called antigen processing, is described next.
PROCESSING AND PRESENTATION OF
PROTEIN ANTIGENS
In any nucleated cell, peptide fragments of proteins
generated by proteolytic complexes in the cytosol
called proteasomes are displayed by class I MHC
molecules, whereas in specialized APCs (dendritic
cells, macrophages, B cells), peptides proteolytically
generated in late endosomes and lysosomes are dis-
played by class II MHC molecules (Figs. 3.11 and
3.12). Together, these two pathways can sample all the
proteins present in the extracellular and intracellular
Antigen
processing
MHC
biosynthesis
Peptide-MHC
association
Antigen
uptake
Class II
MHC pathway
ER
Endocytosis of
extracellular
protein
CD4+
T cell
Invariant
chain (Ii)
Endosome/
lysosome
Class II MHC
ER
Cytosolic
protein
Proteasome
TAP
CD8+
CTL
Peptides in
cytosol
Class I
MHC
Class I
MHC pathway
Fig. 3.11 Pathways of intracellular processing of protein antigens. The class I MHC pathway converts
proteins in the cytosol into peptides that bind to class I MHC molecules for recognition by CD8þ T cells. The
class II MHC pathway converts protein antigens that are endocytosed into vesicles of antigen-presenting cells
into peptides that bind to class II MHC molecules for recognition by CD4þ T cells. CTL, Cytotoxic T
lymphocyte; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; TAP, transporter associated with antigen processing.
66
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
environments. Because of the segregation of class I and
class II MHC pathways with proteasomal versus
endosomal/lysosomal
processing
respectively,
the
functional type of T cell activated by each pathway
differs. Proteasomal processing of proteins in the
cytosol ensures that CD8þ T lymphocytes will be able
to see antigens from microbes living in almost any host
cell type. The proteins found in late endosomes and
lysosomes are largely derived from the extracellular
environment, and thus the endosomal/lysosomal pro-
cessing pathway ensures CD4þ T lymphocytes will be
able to recognize antigens from microbes originally
present
outside
the
APC.
Next,
we
discuss
the
mechanisms of antigen processing, beginning with the
class I MHC pathway.
Processing of Cytosolic Antigens for Display
by Class I MHC Molecules
The main steps in antigen presentation by class I
MHC molecules are the tagging of antigens in the
cytosol or nucleus for proteolysis, proteolytic genera-
tion
of
peptide
fragments
of
the
antigen
by
a
specialized cytosolic enzyme complex called the pro-
teasome, transport of peptides into the endoplasmic
reticulum
(ER),
binding
of
peptides
to
newly
Feature
Class II MHC Pathway
Composition of
stable peptide-MHC
complex 
Cells that express
that MHC
Responsive T cells
Source of protein
antigens
Enzymes responsible
for peptide generation
Site of peptide
loading of MHC
Molecules involved in
transport of peptides
and loading of MHC
molecules
Polymorphic α chain of MHC,
β2-microglobulin, peptide
All nucleated cells
CD8+ 
T cells
Cytosolic proteins (mostly
synthesized in the cell; may
enter cytosol from phagosomes)
Protease components of
cytosolic proteasome
Class I MHC pathway
Polymorphic α and β chains
of MHC, peptide
Dendritic cells, mononuclear
phagocytes, B lymphocytes;
endothelial cells, thymic
epithelium
CD4+ 
T cells
Endosomal/lysosomal 
proteins (mostly internalized 
from extracellular environment)
Endosomal and lysosomal 
proteases (e.g. cathepsins)
Endoplasmic reticulum
Late endosomes 
and lysosomes
TAP
Invariant chain, DM
β
α
β2-microglobulin
α
Peptide
Peptide
Fig. 3.12 Features of the pathways of antigen processing. Some of the comparative features of the two
major antigen processing pathways. MHC, Major histocompatibility complex; TAP, transporter associated with
antigen processing.
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
67
 
synthesized
class
I
molecules,
and
transport
of
peptide-MHC complexes to the cell surface (Fig. 3.13).
Proteolysis of Cytosolic Proteins
The peptides that bind to class I MHC molecules are
derived from proteins following digestion by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The proteasome is a
complex composed of rings cotaining proteolytic en-
zymes that in most cells constitutively perform the
housekeeping function of degrading misfolded proteins
into peptides. In order for proteins to be processed by
proteasomes, they are ﬁrst unfolded, covalently tagged
with multiple copies of a peptide called ubiquitin, and
then threaded through the rings of the proteasome. In
cells that have been exposed to inﬂammatory cytokines
(as in an infection), the enzymatic composition of the
proteasomes changes. As a result, these cells become
very efﬁcient at cleaving proteins into peptides with the
size and sequence properties that enable them to bind
well to class I MHC molecules.
There are several sources of microbial proteins that
may be processed by cytosolic proteasomes. These
include viral proteins synthesized in the cytosol, but
also microbial proteins taken into cells via endocytosis
or phagocytosis, many of which then leak out or are
transported to the cytosol in a process called cross-
presentation (discussed later). All host cell proteins
(i.e., nuclear, plasma membrane, secreted) are at some
time present in the cytosol, regardless of their site of
function. Peptides are derived from proteins from all
Protein antigen 
of ingested microbe
transported to cytosol
ER
Exocytic 
vesicle
Proteasome
Virus in 
cytoplasm
Synthesized
viral protein
Ubiquitinated 
protein
Ub
Peptides
β2m
TAP 
Class I
MHC 
α chain
Chaperone
Golgi
Phagosome
CD8
Surface
expression of
peptide-class I
complexes
Assembly of
peptide-class I
complexes
in ER
Transport
of peptides
from cytosol
to ER
Proteolytic
degradation
of proteins
Production
of proteins
in the
cytosol
Tapasin
CD8+ 
cytotoxic T
lymphocyte
Fig. 3.13 Class I MHC pathway of processing of cytosolic antigens. Proteins enter the cytoplasm of cells
either from endogenous synthesis by microbes, such as viruses, that reside in the cytosol (or nucleus, not
shown) of infected cells or from microbes that are ingested but whose antigens are transported into the
cytosol (the process of cross-presentation, described later). Cytosolic proteins are unfolded, ubiquitinated, and
degraded in proteasomes. The peptides that are produced are transported by the transporter associated with
antigen processing (TAP) into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where the peptides may be further trimmed.
Newly synthesized class I MHC molecules are initially stabilized by chaperones and attached to TAP by a linker
protein called tapasin, so the MHC molecules are strategically located to receive peptides that are transported
into the ER by TAP. The peptideeclass I MHC complexes are transported to the cell surface and are recog-
nized by CD8þ T cells. b2m, b2-microglobulin; Ub, Ubiquitin.
68
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
these locations by proteasomal processing, and then
these peptides bind to and are displayed by class I MHC
molecules. The host cell proteins that are processed by
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway include microbial
proteins, misfolded proteins, and antigenic proteins in
cancer cells.
Binding of Peptides to Class I MHC Molecules
In order to form peptide-MHC complexes, the pep-
tides must be transported into the ER. The peptides
produced by proteasomal digestion are in the cytosol,
and the MHC molecules are being synthesized in the
ER; the two need to come together. This transport
function is provided by a molecule, called the trans-
porter associated with antigen processing (TAP),
located in the ER membrane. TAP is an ATP-
dependent molecular pump that binds proteasome-
generated peptides on the cytosolic side of the ER
membrane, then actively moves them into the interior
of the ER. Newly synthesized class I MHC molecules,
which do not contain bound peptides, associate with a
bridging protein called tapasin that links them to TAP
molecules in the ER membrane, and plays a key role in
preferentially loading peptides that bind with high af-
ﬁnity to the clefts of class I MHC molecules. (As we
discuss later, in the ER newly synthesized class II MHC
molecules are not able to bind peptides because of the
associated invariant chain.)
Transport of Peptide-MHC Complexes to the Cell Surface
High-afﬁnity peptide loading stabilizes class I MHC
molecules, which are then exported to the cell surface.
Once the class I MHC molecule binds tightly to one of
the peptides generated from proteasomal digestion and
delivered into the ER by TAP, this peptide-MHC
complex becomes stable, is released from binding to
tapasin, and is delivered to the cell surface. Peptides that
bind weakly to class I MHC molecules cannot mediate
the release of the molecules from tapasin. If the MHC
molecule does not ﬁnd a peptide it can bind strongly,
the empty molecule is unstable and is eventually
degraded. One protein antigen may give rise to many
peptides, only a few of which (perhaps only one or two
from each antigen) can bind strongly to the MHC
molecules present in the individual and have the po-
tential to stimulate immune responses in that individ-
ual.
The
class
I
MHCepeptide
complexes
are
recognized by CD8þ T cells.
The evolutionary struggle between microbes and
their hosts is well illustrated by the numerous strategies
that viruses have developed to block the class I MHC
pathway of antigen presentation. These strategies
include removing newly synthesized MHC molecules
from the ER, inhibiting the transcription of MHC
genes, and blocking peptide transport by the TAP. By
inhibiting the class I MHC pathway, viruses reduce
presentation of their own antigens to CD8þ T cells and
are thus able to evade the adaptive immune system.
These mechanisms of immune evasion are discussed in
Chapter 6.
Cross-Presentation of Internalized Antigens to CD8þ T
Cells
Some dendritic cells can present ingested antigens on
class I MHC molecules to CD8D T lymphocytes. The
initial response of naive CD8þ T cells, similar to CD4þ
cells, requires that the antigens be presented by mature
dendritic cells in lymph nodes through which the naive
T cells circulate. However, some viruses may infect
only particular cell types in various tissues and not
dendritic cells, and these infected tissue cells may not
be capable of traveling to lymph nodes or producing all
the signals needed to initiate T cell activation. How,
then, are naive CD8þ T lymphocytes in lymph nodes
able to respond to the intracellular antigens of infected
cells? Similarly, tumors arise from many different types
of cells, so how can diverse tumor antigens be pre-
sented to naive CD8þ T cells in lymph nodes by den-
dritic cells?
Many conventional dendritic cells have the ability to
ingest infected host cells, dead tumor cells, microbes,
and microbial and tumor antigens and transport the
ingested antigens into the cytosol, where they are pro-
cessed by the proteasome. The antigenic peptides that
are generated then enter the ER and bind to class I
molecules, which display the antigens for recognition by
CD8þ T lymphocytes (Fig. 3.14). This process is called
cross-presentation (or cross-priming) to indicate that
one type of cell, dendritic cells, can present the antigens
of other infected or dying cells or cell fragments and
prime (or activate) naive CD8þ T lymphocytes speciﬁc
for these antigens. Once the CD8þ T cells have differ-
entiated into CTLs, they kill infected host cells or tumor
cells without the need for dendritic cells or signals other
than recognition of antigen (see Chapter 6). The same
pathway of cross-presentation is involved in initiating
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
69
 
CD8þ T cell responses to some antigens in organ
transplants (see Chapter 10).
Processing of Internalized Antigens for Display
by Class II MHC Molecules
The main steps in the presentation of peptides by class
II MHC molecules are internalization of the antigen,
proteolysis in endocytic vesicles, association of peptides
with class II molecules, and transport of peptide-MHC
complexes to the cell surface (Fig. 3.15).
Internalization and Proteolysis of Antigens
Antigens destined for the class II MHC pathway are
usually internalized from the extracellular environ-
ment. Dendritic cells and macrophages may ingest
extracellular microbes or microbial proteins by several
mechanisms. Microbes may bind to surface receptors
speciﬁc for microbial products or to receptors that
recognize antibodies or products of complement acti-
vation (opsonins) attached to the microbes. B lym-
phocytes efﬁciently internalize proteins that speciﬁcally
bind to the cells’ antigen receptors (see Chapter 7).
Certain APCs, especially dendritic cells, may also pi-
nocytose proteins without any speciﬁc recognition
event. After internalization into APCs by any of these
pathways, the microbial proteins enter acidic intracel-
lular vesicles, called endosomes or phagosomes, which
fuse with lysosomes. In these vesicles, the proteins are
broken down by proteolytic enzymes, generating many
peptides of varying lengths and sequences.
Binding of Peptides to Class II MHC Molecules
Peptides bind to newly synthesized class II MHC
molecules in specialized vesicles. Class II MHCe
expressing APCs constantly synthesize these MHC
molecules in the ER. Each newly synthesized class II
molecule carries with it an attached protein called the
invariant chain (Ii), which contains a sequence called
the class II invariant chain peptide (CLIP) that binds
to the peptide-binding cleft of the class II molecule.
Thus, the cleft of the newly synthesized class II mole-
cule is occupied and prevented from accepting peptides
in the ER that are destined to bind to class I MHC
Fragments
of cells and
antigens
picked up
by host APCs
Virally
infected
cell
Dendritic cell
Viral
antigen
Class II
MHC
Class I
MHC
Class I
MHC
Viral
antigen
enters 
cytosol
Costimulator
Virus-specific
CD8+ T cell
Antigen
capture
Cross-
presentation
T cell
response
Fig. 3.14 Class I MHC-restricted cross-presentation of microbial antigens from infected cells by dendritic
cells. Fragments of cells infected with intracellular microbes (e.g., viruses) or antigens produced in these cells
are ingested by dendritic cells, and the antigens of the infectious microbes are transported to the cytosol,
processed into peptides by the protaeasomal pathway (not shown), and presented in association with class I
MHC molecules of the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). T cells recognize the microbial antigens expressed on
the APCs, and the T cells are activated. By convention, the term cross-presentation (or cross-priming) is
applied to CD8þ T cells (cytotoxic T lymphocytes) recognizing class I MHCeassociated antigens (as shown);
the same cross-presenting APC may display class II MHCeassociated antigens from the microbe for recog-
nition by CD4þ helper T cells.
70
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
molecules. This class II molecule with its associated Ii
migrates from the ER through the Golgi stacks and
then, instead of traveling directly to the plasma mem-
brane, is directed by the cytosolic tail of the invariant
chain to move to the membranes of acidic vesicles
(endosomes and lysosomes). In this compartment, the
invariant chain is degraded, leaving only CLIP in the
peptide-binding cleft. Ingested proteins are digested
into peptides in the same compartment. The vesicles
also contain a class II MHCelike protein called DM,
whose function is to exchange CLIP in the class II MHC
molecule with other peptides that may be available in
this compartment that can bind to the MHC molecule
with higher afﬁnity.
Transport of Peptide-MHC Complexes to the Cell Surface
Peptide loading stabilizes class II MHC molecules,
which are exported to the cell surface. If a class II
molecule binds a peptide with high afﬁnity, the complex
is stabilized and transported to the cell surface, where it
can be recognized by a CD4þ T cell. Class II molecules
that do not ﬁnd peptides they can bind are eventually
degraded by lysosomal proteases. As for the class I
pathway, only a few of the peptides produced from any
Class
II MHC
Endocytic
vesicle
Endosome
Golgi
ER
HLA-DM
CLIP
CLIP
Class
II MHC
Exocytic
vesicle
CD4
CD4+
helper
T cell
Protein antigen
Uptake of
extracellular 
proteins into
vesicular
compartments
of APC
Processing 
of internalized
proteins in
endosomal/
lysosomal
vesicles
Biosynthesis and 
transport of 
class II MHC 
molecules
to endosomes
Association
of processed
peptides with
class II MHC
molecules
in vesicles
Expression
of peptide-
MHC
complexes
on cell
surface
α
β
Ii
Chaperone
Fig. 3.15 Class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) pathway of processing of internalized vesicular
antigens. Protein antigens are ingested by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) into vesicles, where they are
degraded into peptides. Class II MHC molecules enter the same vesicles, where the class II invariant chain
peptide (CLIP) that occupies the cleft of newly synthesized class II molecules is removed. These class II
molecules are then able to bind peptides derived from the endocytosed protein. The DM molecule facilitates
the removal of CLIP and subsequent binding of the antigenic peptide. The peptideeclass II MHC complexes
are transported to the cell surface and are recognized by CD4þ T cells. ER, Endoplasmic reticulum; HLA-DM,
human leukocyte antigen; Ii, invariant chain.
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
71
 
protein antigen can bind to class II MHC molecules
present in the individual and stimulate immune re-
sponses in each individual.
Physiologic Significance of MHC-Associated
Antigen Presentation
Many fundamental features of T cellemediated im-
munity are closely linked to the peptide display func-
tion of MHC molecules:
• The restriction of T cell recognition to MHC-
associated peptides ensures that T cells see and
respond only to cell-associated antigens and not to
cell-free soluble antigens. This is because MHC mol-
ecules are cell membrane proteins and because pep-
tide loading and subsequent expression of MHC
molecules depend on intracellular biosynthetic and
assembly steps. In other words, MHC molecules
can be loaded with peptides only inside cells, where
intracellular and ingested antigens are present.
Therefore, T lymphocytes can recognize the antigens
of
intracellular
microbes,
which
require
T cellemediated effector mechanisms, as well as an-
tigens ingested from the extracellular environment,
such as those against which antibody responses are
generated.
• By segregating the class I and class II pathways of an-
tigen processing, the immune system is able to
respond to extracellular and intracellular microbes
in different ways that are specialized to defend
against these microbes (Fig. 3.16). Protein antigens
present in the cytosol are processed and displayed
by class I MHC molecules, which are expressed on
all nucleated cellsdas expected, because all nucleated
cells can be infected with one or more species of vi-
ruses. Class Ieassociated peptides are recognized by
CD8þ
T
lymphocytes,
which
differentiate
into
CTLs. The CTLs kill the infected cells and eradicate
the infection, this being the most effective mecha-
nism for eliminating cytosolic microbes. CTLs also
kill tumor cells, which produce cytosolic proteins
from mutated genes or oncogenic viruses. Many bac-
teria, fungi, and even extracellular viruses are typi-
cally captured and ingested by macrophages, and
their antigens are presented by class II molecules.
Because of the speciﬁcity of CD4 for class II, class IIe
associated peptides are recognized by CD4þ T lym-
phocytes, which function as helper cells. These
T cells help the macrophages to destroy ingested mi-
crobes, thereby activating an effector mechanism that
can eliminate microbes that are internalized from the
extracellular environment. B lymphocytes use their
antigen receptors to recognize and ingest protein an-
tigens of microbes and also present processed pep-
tides for recognition by CD4þ helper T cells. These
helper cells activate the antigen-speciﬁc B cells and
stimulate the production of antibodies, which serve
to eliminate extracellular microbes. Neither phago-
cytes nor antibodies are effective against intracellular
viruses and other pathogens that can survive and
replicate
in
the cytoplasm
of
host
cells;
cells
harboring these cytosolic microbes are eliminated
by CD8þ CTLs.
Thus, the nature of the protective immune
response to different microbes is optimized by
linking several features of antigen presentation and
T cell recognition: the pathways of processing of
vesicular and cytosolic antigens, the cellular expres-
sion of class I and class II MHC molecules, the
speciﬁcity of CD8 and CD4 coreceptors for class I
and class II molecules, and the functions of CD8þ
cells as CTLs and of CD4þ cells as helper cells. The
function of linking the type of microbe to one of the
two
antigen-processing
pathways
is
important
because the antigen receptors of T cells cannot
distinguish between intracellular and extracellular
microbes. In fact, as previously mentioned, the same
virus can be extracellular early after infection and
becomes intracellular once the infection is estab-
lished. During its extracellular life, the virus is
combatted by antibodies and phagocytes, whose
production or functions are stimulated by helper
T cells, but once the virus has found a haven in the
cytoplasm of cells, it can be eradicated only by CTL-
mediated killing of the infected cells. The segregation
of class I and class II antigen presentation pathways
ensures the correct, specialized immune response
against microbes in different locations.
72
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
• The structural constraints on peptide binding to
different MHC molecules, including length and an-
chor residues, account for the immunodominance
of some peptides derived from complex protein an-
tigens and for the inability of some individuals to
respond to certain protein antigens. When any pro-
tein is proteolytically degraded in APCs, many pep-
tides may be generated, but only those peptides able
to bind strongly to the MHC molecules in that
individual can be presented for recognition by
T cells. These MHC-binding peptides are the immu-
nodominant peptides of the antigen. Even microbes
with complex protein antigens express a limited
number of immunodominant peptides. Many at-
tempts have been made to identify these peptides
in order to develop vaccines, but it is difﬁcult to
select a small number of peptides from any microbe
that would be immunogenic in a large number of
+
Antigen uptake 
or synthesis
Antigen 
presentation
T cell-dependent
effector functions
Class II MHC pathway:
antigen presentation to helper T cells   
Macrophage
Extracellular
microbe
CD4+ helper 
T lymphocyte
Microbe in 
endosome
Macrophage activation:
Killing of 
phagocytosed microbe
B cell antibody
secretion: antibody 
binding to antigen
Class I MHC pathway: 
antigen presentation to cytotoxic T lymphocytes
Cytosolic
antigen
CD8+ cytotoxic
T lymphocyte
Killing of 
antigen-expressing
target cell
Cytokines
Cytokines
Antigen-
specific
B cell 
A
B
Extracellular
antigen
Fig. 3.16 Role of MHC-associated antigen presentation in recognition of microbial antigens by CD8þ and
CD4þ effector T cells. A, Protein antigens of microbes that live in the cytoplasm of infected cells enter the
class I MHC pathway of antigen processing. As a result, these proteins are recognized by CD8þ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes, whose function is to kill infected cells. B, Protein antigens of microbes that are endocytosed
from the extracellular environment by macrophages and B lymphocytes enter the class II MHC pathway of
antigen processing. As a result, these proteins are recognized by CD4þ helper T lymphocytes, whose func-
tions are to activate macrophages to destroy phagocytosed microbes and activate B cells to produce anti-
bodies against extracellular microbes and toxins.
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
73
 
people, because of the enormous polymorphism of
MHC molecules in the population. The polymor-
phism of the MHC also means that some individuals
may not express MHC molecules capable of binding
any peptide derived from a particular antigen. These
individuals would be nonresponders to that antigen.
One of the earliest observations that established the
physiologic importance of the MHC was the discov-
ery that some inbred animals did not respond to
simple protein antigens and responsiveness (or lack
of) mapped to genes called immune response (Ir)
genes, later shown to be class II MHC genes.
Finally, it should be mentioned that T cells also
recognize and react against small molecules and even
metal ions in an MHC-restricted manner. In fact,
exposure to some small molecules that are used as
therapeutic drugs and to metals such as nickel and
beryllium often leads to pathologic T cell reactions (so-
called hypersensitivity reactions; see Chapter 11). There
are several ways in which these nonpeptide antigens
may be recognized by MHC-restricted CD4þ and CD8þ
T cells. Some of the chemicals are thought to covalently
modify self peptides or the MHC molecules themselves,
creating altered molecules that are recognized as foreign.
Other chemicals may bind noncovalently to MHC
molecules and alter the structure of the peptide-binding
cleft such that the MHC molecule can display peptides
that are not normally presented and these peptide-MHC
complexes are seen as being foreign.
This chapter began with two questions: how do rare
antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes ﬁnd antigens, and how are
the appropriate immune responses generated against
extracellular and intracellular microbes? Understanding
the biology of APCs and the role of MHC molecules in
displaying the peptides of protein antigens has provided
satisfying answers to both questions, speciﬁcally for
T cellemediated immune responses.
FUNCTIONS OF ANTIGEN-PRESENTING
CELLS IN ADDITION TO ANTIGEN DISPLAY
APCs not only display peptides for recognition by
T cells but, in response to microbes, also express
additional signals for T cell activation. The two-
signal
hypothesis
of
lymphocyte
activation
was
introduced in Chapters 1 and 2 (see Fig. 2.19), and we
will return to this concept when we discuss the re-
sponses of T and B cells in Chapters 5 and 7. Recall
that antigen is the necessary signal 1, and for T cells,
signal 2 is provided by APCs reacting to microbes. The
expression of molecules in APCs that serve as second
signals for lymphocyte activation is part of the innate
immune response to different microbial products. For
example, many bacteria produce a substance called
lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin). When the bac-
teria are captured by APCs for presentation of their
protein antigens, LPS acts on the same APCs, through
a TLR, and stimulates the expression of costimulators
and the secretion of cytokines. The costimulators and
cytokines act in concert with antigen recognition by
the T cell to stimulate the proliferation of the T cells
and their differentiation into effector and memory
cells.
ANTIGEN RECOGNITION BY OTHER T
LYMPHOCYTES
This chapter has focused on peptide recognition by
MHC-restricted CD4þ and CD8þ T cells, but there are
other, smaller populations of T cells that recognize
different types of antigens. Natural killer T cells (called
NK-T cells), which are distinct from the natural killer
(NK) cells described in Chapter 2, are speciﬁc for lipids
displayed by class Ielike CD1 molecules. Mucosal
associated invariant T cells (MAIT cells) are speciﬁc for
bacteria-derived vitamin B metabolites displayed by
class Ielike MR1 molecules. gd T cells recognize a wide
variety of molecules, some displayed by class Ielike
molecules and others apparently requiring no speciﬁc
processing or display. The functions of these cells and
the signiﬁcance of their unusual speciﬁcities are poorly
understood.
SUMMARY
• The induction of immune responses to the protein
antigens of microbes depends on a specialized system
for capturing and displaying these antigens for recog-
nition by the rare naive T cells speciﬁc for any
74
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
 
antigen. Microbes and microbial antigens that enter
the body through epithelia are captured by dendritic
cells located in or under the epithelia and transported
to regional lymph nodes or captured by dendritic
cells in lymph nodes and spleen. The protein anti-
gens of the microbes are displayed by the antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) to naive T lymphocytes
that recirculate through the lymphoid organs.
• Molecules encoded in the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) perform the function of displaying
peptides derived from protein antigens.
• MHC genes are highly polymorphic. Their major
products are class I and class II MHC molecules,
which contain peptide-binding clefts, where the
polymorphic
residues
are
concentrated,
and
invariant regions, which bind the coreceptors CD8
and CD4, respectively.
• Proteins that are produced in the cytosol of infected
and tumor cells, or that enter the cytosol from phag-
osomes, are degraded by proteasomes, transported
into the endoplasmic reticulum by TAP, and bind
to the clefts of newly synthesized class I MHC mol-
ecules, and the peptideeclass I MHC complexes are
displayed on the cell surface where T cells can recog-
nize them. CD8 on T cells binds the invariant part of
class I MHC molecules, so naive CD8þ T cells and
CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocytes can be activated
only by class I MHCeassociated peptides derived
from proteasomal degradation of cytosolic proteins.
• Proteins that are ingested by APCs from the extra-
cellular environment are proteolytically degraded
within the vesicles of the APCs, the peptides gener-
ated bind to the clefts of newly synthesized class II
MHC molecules, and the peptideeclass I IMHC
complexes are displayed on the cell surface, where
T cells can recognize them. CD4 on T cells binds
to invariant parts of class II MHC, because of which
naive CD4þ T cells and differentiated CD4þ helper
T cells can be activated only by class II MHCe
associated peptides derived mainly from proteins
degraded in vesicles, which are typically ingested
extracellular proteins.
• The role of MHC molecules in antigen display en-
sures that T cells recognize only cell-associated pro-
tein antigens and that the correct type of T cell
(helper or cytotoxic) responds to the type of microbe
the T cell is best able to combat.
• Microbes activate APCs to express membrane pro-
teins (costimulators) and to secrete cytokines that
provide signals that function in concert with anti-
gens to stimulate speciﬁc T cells. The requirement
for these signals ensures that T cells respond to mi-
crobial antigens and not to harmless, nonmicrobial
substances.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. When antigens enter through epithelial barriers,
such as the skin or intestinal mucosa, in what organs
are they concentrated? What cell type(s) plays an
important role in this process of antigen capture?
2. What are MHC molecules? What are human MHC
molecules called? How were MHC molecules discov-
ered, and what is their function?
3. What are the differences between the antigens that
are displayed by class I and class II MHC molecules?
4. Describe the sequence of events by which class I and
class II MHC molecules acquire antigens for display.
5. Which subsets of T cells recognize antigens pre-
sented by class I and class II MHC molecules?
What molecules on T cells contribute to their spec-
iﬁcity for either class I or class II MHCeassociated
peptide antigens?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
CHAPTER 3
Antigen Presentation to T Lymphocytes
75
 
4
Antigen Recognition in the
Adaptive Immune System
Structure of Lymphocyte Antigen
Receptors and Development of
Immune Repertoires
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Antigen Receptors of Lymphocytes, 77
Antibodies, 79
Binding of Antigens to Antibodies, 81
Monoclonal Antibodies, 83
T Cell Receptor for Antigens, 85
Antigen Recognition by the T Cell
Receptor, 85
Development of B and T Lymphocytes, 87
Lymphocyte Development, 88
Production of Diverse Antigen Receptors, 89
Inherited Antigen Receptor Genes, 89
Somatic Recombination and Expression of
Antigen Receptor Genes, 91
Mechanisms of V(D)J Recombination, 91
Generation of Ig and TCR Diversity, 91
Maturation and Selection of B Lymphocytes, 94
Early Steps in B Cell Maturation, 94
Role of the Pre-BCR Complex in B Cell
Maturation, 95
Late Steps of B Cell Maturation, 95
Selection of Mature B Cells, 95
Subsets of Mature B Cells, 96
Maturation and Selection of T Lymphocytes, 96
Early Steps in T Cell Maturation, 97
Selection of Mature T Cells, 97
Summary, 98
Antigen receptors serve critical roles in the develop-
ment and functions of the adaptive immune system.
During lymphocyte maturation, antigen receptors guide
the selection of B and T cells to preserve the useful
speciﬁcities and eliminate potentially harmful self
reactivity. In adaptive immune responses, naive lym-
phocytes recognize antigens to initiate the responses
and effector T cells and antibodies recognize antigens to
eliminate microbes and tumors.
B and T lymphocytes express different receptors
that recognize antigens: membrane-bound antibodies
on B cells and T cell receptors (TCRs) on T lym-
phocytes. The principal function of cellular receptors in
the immune system, as in other biologic systems, is to
detect external stimuli and trigger responses of the cells
on which the receptors are expressed. The B cell antigen
receptor also binds and internalizes protein antigens for
processing and presentation to helper T cells (see
Chapter 7). In Chapter 1, we introduced the concept
that to recognize a large variety of different antigens,
the antigen receptors of lymphocytes must be able to
bind to and distinguish between many, often closely
related, chemical structures. Antigen receptors are
clonally distributed, meaning that each lymphocyte
clone is speciﬁc for a distinct antigen and has a unique
receptor, different from the receptors of all other clones.
76
 
(Recall that a clone consists of a parent cell and its
progeny.) The total number of distinct lymphocyte
clones is very large, and this entire collection makes up
the immune repertoire. Although each clone of B
lymphocytes or T lymphocytes recognizes a different
antigen, the antigen receptors transmit biochemical
signals that are fundamentally the same in all lym-
phocytes and are unrelated to speciﬁcity. These features
of lymphocyte recognition and antigen receptors raise
the following questions:
• How do the antigen receptors of lymphocytes recog-
nize extremely diverse antigens and transmit acti-
vating signals to the cells?
• What are the differences in the recognition proper-
ties of antigen receptors on B cells and T cells?
• How is the vast diversity of receptors in the lympho-
cyte repertoire generated? The diversity of antigen
recognition implies the existence of many structur-
ally different antigen receptor proteins, more than
can be encoded in the inherited genome (germline).
Therefore, special mechanisms must exist for gener-
ating this diversity.
In this chapter, we describe the structures of the
antigen receptors of B and T lymphocytes and how
these receptors recognize antigens. We also discuss how
diverse antigen receptors are generated during the
process of lymphocyte development, giving rise to the
repertoire of mature lymphocytes. The process of
antigen-induced lymphocyte activation is described in
later chapters.
ANTIGEN RECEPTORS OF LYMPHOCYTES
The antigen receptors of B and T lymphocytes have
several features that are important for their functions in
adaptive immunity (Fig. 4.1). Although these two types
of receptors have many similarities in terms of structure
and mechanisms of signaling, there are fundamental
differences related to the types of antigenic structures
they recognize.
• Membrane-bound antibodies, which serve as the an-
tigen receptors of B lymphocytes, can recognize
many types of chemical structures, while T cell anti-
gen receptors recognize only peptides bound to ma-
jor histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. B
lymphocyte antigen receptors and the antibodies
that B cells secrete can recognize the shapes (or con-
formations) of macromolecules, including proteins,
lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids, as well as
simpler, smaller chemical moieties. When B cells
are activated, they secrete antibodies with the same
speciﬁcity as the receptors. This ability of antibodies
to recognize structurally different types of molecules
in their native form enables the humoral immune
system to bind to and eliminate microbes and toxins.
In striking contrast, the antigen receptors on T cells
see only peptides that are derived from intracellular
protein antigens and are displayed on antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) bound to MHC molecules.
This speciﬁcity ensures that T cells do not interact
with free or soluble antigens but recognize only
infected cells or tumor cells, which contain intracel-
lular antigens seen as foreign, or cells that have taken
up extracellular protein antigens.
• Antigen receptor molecules consist of regions (do-
mains) involved in antigen recognitiondtherefore
varying between clones of lymphocytesdand other re-
gions required for structural integrity and binding to
signaling moleculesdand thus relatively conserved
among all clones. These domains were ﬁrst identiﬁed
in secreted antibodies, discussed later. The antigen-
recognizing domains of the receptors are called vari-
able (V) regions, and the conserved portions are the
constant (C) regions. Even within each V region,
most of the sequence variation is concentrated within
short stretches, which are called hypervariable regions,
or complementarity-determining regions (CDRs),
because they vary from one receptor to the next and
are complementary to the shapes of antigens. By
concentrating sequence variation in small regions of
the receptor, it is possible to maximize the variability
of the antigen-binding part while retaining the basic
structure of the receptors. As discussed later, special
mechanisms exist in developing lymphocytes to create
genes that encode different variable regions of antigen
receptor proteins in individual clones.
• Antigen receptor polypeptides are associated with
invariant membrane proteins whose function is to
deliver intracellular signals following antigen recog-
nition (see Fig. 4.1). These signals, which are trans-
mitted to the cytosol and the nucleus, may cause a
lymphocyte to divide, to differentiate, to perform
effector functions, or in certain circumstances to
die. Thus, lymphocytes use different proteins to
recognize antigens and to transduce signals in
response to antigens. This again allows variability
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
77
 
Antigen binding
site
Changes in 
constant regions
Affinity of
antigen binding
Made up of three CDRs in VH and 
three CDRs in VL
Made up of three CDRs in Vα 
and three CDRs in Vβ
Heavy chain class switching and 
change from membrane to secretory Ig
None
Kd 10-7-10-11 M; average affinity of lgs 
increases during immune responses to
protein antigens
Kd 10-5-10-7 M;
No change during
immune responses
Antigen presenting cell
Membrane Ig
Igβ
CD3
ζ
TCR
MHC
Secreted antibody
Types of antigens
recognized
Membrane
form
Diversity
Secreted
form
Antigen recognition 
is mediated by:
Signaling functions 
are mediated by:
Effector functions 
are mediated by:
Mainly peptides displayed 
by MHC molecules on APCs
Linear epitopes
Each clone has a unique 
specificity; potential for
~1016 distinct specificities
TCR does not perform
effector functions
Macromolecules (proteins, 
polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids), 
small chemicals
Conformational and 
linear epitopes
Each clone has a unique specificity; 
potential for ~1011 distinct specificities
Variable (V) regions of heavy and light 
chains of membrane Ig
Proteins (Igα and Igβ) associated with
membrane Ig
Proteins (CD3 and ζ) 
associated with the TCR 
Constant (C) regions of 
secreted Ig
Variable (V) regions of 
α and β chains of the TCR
Feature or function
Antibody (Immunoglobulin)
Igα
Antigen
Signal
transduction
Effector functions:
neuralization,
complement fixation,
phagocyte binding
Signal
transduction
T cell receptor (TCR)
Antigen
78
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
to be segregated in one set of moleculesdthe antigen
receptors themselvesdwhile leaving the conserved
function of signal transduction to other invariant
proteins. The set of plasma membrane antigen re-
ceptor and associated signaling molecules in B lym-
phocytes is called the B cell receptor (BCR) complex,
and in T lymphocytes the analogous set of proteins is
called the TCR complex. When antigens bind to the
extracellular portions of the antigen receptors of
lymphocytes, intracellular portions of the associated
signaling proteins are phosphorylated on conserved
tyrosine residues by enzymes called protein tyrosine
kinases. Phosphorylation triggers signaling cascades
that culminate in the transcriptional activation of
many genes and the production of numerous pro-
teins that mediate the responses of the lymphocytes.
We return to the processes of T and B lymphocyte
activation in Chapters 5 and 7, respectively.
• Antibodies exist in two forms (as membrane-bound
antigen receptors on B cells and as secreted proteins)
but TCRs exist only as membrane receptors on
T cells. Secreted antibodies are present in the blood
and mucosal secretions, where they provide protec-
tion against microbes (i.e., they are the effector mole-
cules of humoral immunity). Antibodies are also
called
immunoglobulins
(Igs),
referring
to
immunity-conferring proteins with the physical char-
acteristics of globulins. Secreted antibodies recognize
microbial antigens and toxins by their variable do-
mains, the same as the membrane-bound antigen re-
ceptors of B lymphocytes. The constant regions of
some secreted antibodies have the ability to bind to
other molecules that participate in the elimination
of antigens; these molecules include proteins of the
complement system and receptors on other cells
(phagocytes, mast cells, NK cells). Thus, antibodies
serve different functions at different stages of humoral
immune responses: membrane-bound antibodies on
B cells recognize antigens to initiate B cell activation,
and secreted antibodies neutralize and eliminate mi-
crobes and their toxins in the effector phase of hu-
moral immunity. In cell-mediated immunity, the
effector function of microbe elimination is performed
by T lymphocytes themselves and by other leukocytes
responding to the T cells. The antigen receptors of
T cells are involved only in antigen recognition and
T cell activation, and these proteins are not secreted
and do not mediate effector functions.
With this introduction, we describe next the antigen-
recognizing molecules of lymphocytes, ﬁrst antibodies
and then TCRs.
Antibodies
An antibody molecule is composed of four poly-
peptide chainsdtwo identical heavy (H) chains and
two identical light (L) chainsdwith each chain con-
taining a variable region and a constant region
(Fig. 4.2). The four chains are assembled to form a Y-
shaped molecule. Each light chain is attached to one
heavy chain, and the two heavy chains are attached to
each other, all by disulﬁde bonds. A light chain is made
up of one V and one C domain, and a heavy chain has
one V and three or four C domains. Each domain folds
into a characteristic three-dimensional shape, called the
immunoglobulin (Ig) domain (see Fig. 4.2D). An Ig
domain consists of two layers of a b-pleated sheet held
together by a disulﬁde bridge. The adjacent strands of
each b-sheet are connected by short, protruding loops; in
the V regions of Ig molecules, three of these loops make
up the three CDRs responsible for antigen recognition.
Ig domains without hypervariable regions are present in
many other proteins in the immune system, as well as
outside the immune system, and most of these proteins
are
involved
in
responding
to
stimuli
from
the
Fig. 4.1 Properties of antibodies and T cell antigen receptors (TCRs). Antibodies (also called immunoglobu-
lins) may be expressed as membrane receptors or secreted proteins; TCRs only function as membrane re-
ceptors. When immunoglobulin (Ig) or TCR molecules recognize antigens, signals are delivered to the
lymphocytes by proteins associated with the antigen receptors. The antigen receptors and associated signaling
proteins form the B cell receptor (BCR) and TCR complexes. Note that single antigen receptors are shown
recognizing antigens, but signaling by BCRs typically requires the binding of two or more receptors to adjacent
antigen molecules. The important characteristics of these antigen-recognizing molecules are summarized;
some of these are discussed later in the chapter. *The total number of possible receptors with unique binding
sites is very large, but only w107e109 clones with distinct speciﬁcities are present in adults. APCs, Antigen-
presenting cells; CDRs, complementarity-determining regions; MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
79
 
S
S
VH
VL
CH1
CL
CH2
CH3
Hinge
Fc receptor/ 
complement 
binding sites
N
N
C
C
C
C
CH2
CH1
VL
VH
CH1
VH
CH2
CH3
CH4
Secreted IgG
Membrane IgM
N
N
N
N
Disulfide bond
Ig domain
CL
VL
A
B
Tail piece
Heavy 
chain
Light
chain
Antigen-
binding site
Antigen-
binding site
Fab
region
Fc
region
Plasma 
membrane
of B cells
N
N
CL
C
D
CH3
C
C
Crystal structure of secreted IgG
Ig domains
N
Loops forming 
CDRs
C
1
7
2
6
5
3
3b
3c
4
S
S
Fig. 4.2 Structure of antibodies. Schematic diagrams of A, a secreted immunoglobulin G (IgG) molecule, and
B, a molecule of a membrane-bound form of IgM, illustrating the domains of the heavy and light chains and the
regions of the proteins that participate in antigen recognition and effector functions. N and C refer to the
amino-terminal and carboxy-terminal ends of the polypeptide chains, respectively. C, The crystal structure of a
secreted IgG molecule illustrates the domains and their spatial orientation; the heavy chains are colored blue
and red, the light chains are green, and carbohydrates are gray. D, The ribbon diagram of the Ig V domain
shows the basic b-pleated sheet structure and the projecting loops that form the three complementarity-
determining regions (CDRs.) C, Courtesy Dr. Alex McPherson, University of California, Irvine, CA.
80
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
environment and from other cells or in adhesive in-
teractions between cells. All of these proteins are said to
be members of the immunoglobulin superfamily.
The
antigen-binding
site
of
an
antibody
is
composed of the V regions of both the heavy chain and
the light chain, and the core antibody structure con-
tains two identical antigen binding sites (see Fig. 4.2).
Of the three hypervariable regions, or CDRs, that are
present in the antigen binding sites, the greatest vari-
ability is in CDR3, which is located at the junction of the
variable (V) and constant (C) regions. As may be pre-
dicted from this variability, CDR3 is also the portion of
the Ig molecule that contributes most to antigen binding.
Functionally distinct portions of antibody molecules
were ﬁrst identiﬁed based on proteolysis of secreted an-
tibodies, which generated fragments that were composed
of different parts of antibody proteins. The fragment of an
antibody that contains a whole light chain (with its single
V and C domains) attachedtothe V and ﬁrst C domains of
a heavy chain is capable of antigen recognition and was
therefore called Fab (fragment, antigen-binding); the
corresponding part of an intact Ig molecule is the Fab
region. The proteolytic fragment containing the remain-
ing heavy-chain C domains is identical in all antibody
molecules of a particular type and tends to crystallize in
solution and was therefore called the Fc (fragment, crys-
talline); the corresponding part of an intact Ig molecule is
the Fc region. In each Ig molecule, there are two identical
Fab regions that bind antigen attached to one Fc region
that is responsible for most of the biologic activity; antigen
binding by the Fab part can neutralize microbes and
toxins, and the Fc region activates other effector functions.
(As discussed later, some types of antibodies exist as
multimers of two or ﬁve Ig molecules attached to one
another.) Linking the Fab and Fc regions of most antibody
molecules is a ﬂexible portion called the hinge region. The
hinge allows the two antigen-binding Fab regions of each
antibody molecule to move independent of each other,
enabling them to simultaneously bind antigen epitopes
that are separated from one another by varying distances.
The C-terminal end of the heavy chain may be
anchored in the plasma membrane, as seen in BCRs, or
it may terminate in a tail piece that lacks the membrane
anchor so that the antibody is produced as a secreted
protein. Light chains in Ig molecules are not attached to
cell membranes.
There are ﬁve types of Ig heavy chain proteins, called
m, d, g, ε, and a, which differ in their C regions; in
humans, there are four subtypes of g chain, called g1,
g2, g3, g4, and two of the a chain, called a1 and a2.
Antibodies that contain different heavy chains belong
to different classes, or isotypes, and are named ac-
cording to their heavy chains (IgM, IgD, IgG, IgE, and
IgA). Each isotype has distinct physical and biologic
properties and effector functions (Fig. 4.3; also see
Chapter 8). The IgG subtypes also differ from one
another in functional properties, but the IgA subtypes
do not. The antigen receptors of naive B lymphocytes
(mature B cells that have not encountered antigen) are
membrane-bound IgM and IgD. After stimulation by
antigen and helper T lymphocytes, the antigen-speciﬁc
B lymphocyte clone may expand and differentiate into
progeny that secrete antibodies. Some of the progeny of
IgM and IgD expressing B cells may secrete IgM, and
other progeny of the same B cells may produce anti-
bodies of other heavy-chain classes. This change in Ig
isotype production is called heavy-chain class (or iso-
type) switching; its mechanism and importance are
discussed in Chapter 7.
There are signiﬁcant differences in the half-lives of
antibodies of different isotypes. Some IgG antibodies
have half-lives in the plasma of 3 to 4 weeks, whereas
the other isotypes have half-lives of 3 to 6 days. The
mechanism that controls the half-life of antibodies is
discussed in Chapter 8.
The two types of light chains, called k and l, differ in
their C regions. Each antibody has either k or l light
chains but not both, and the antibodies made by a
single B cell clone have the same type of light chain.
Each type of light chain may complex with any type of
heavy chain to form an antibody molecule. The light-
chain class (k or l) also remains ﬁxed throughout the
life of each B cell clone, regardless of whether or not
heavy-chain class switching has occurred. The function
of light chains is to form the antigen-binding surface of
antibodies, along with the heavy chains; light chains
contribute to binding and neutralizing microbes and
toxins but do not participate in other effector functions.
There is no difference in the antigen-binding functions
of k or l light chainecontaining antibodies.
Binding of Antigens to Antibodies
Antibodies are capable of binding a wide variety of
antigens, including macromolecules and small chem-
icals. The reason for this is that the antigen-binding
hypervariable loops of antibody molecules can either
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
81
 
Isotype 
of
antibody
Subtypes
(H chain) 
Serum 
concentration
(mg/ml)
Serum
half-life 
(days)
Secreted form
IgA
IgA1,2
(α1 or α2)
None
(δ)
None
(ε)
3.5
Trace
3
0.05
6
Cα1
Cε1
Cγ2
Cγ1
Cμ1
Cμ2
J chain
Cμ3
Cμ4
Cγ3
Cε2
Cε3
Cε4
Cα2
Cα3
J chain
2
Mainly dimer, also
monomer,
trimer
Monomer
Monomer
Functions
Mucosal immunity
(neutralization)
Naive B cell 
antigen receptor
Immediate 
hypersensitivity
(mast cell activation)
IgG1-4
(γ1, γ2, γ3 
or γ4)
None
(μ)
13.5
1.5
23
5
Monomer
Pentamer
Defense against
microbes in all tissues
(neutralization,
opsonization and
phagocytosis, 
complement activation,
antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity);
neonatal immunity
Naive B cell antigen 
receptor (monomeric
form); defense
against microbes
(complement activation, 
neutralization)
IgD
IgE
IgG
IgM
Fig. 4.3 Features of the major isotypes (classes) of antibodies. This ﬁgure summarizes some important
features of the major antibody isotypes of humans. Isotypes are classiﬁed on the basis of their heavy (H) chains;
each isotype may contain either k or l light chain. The schematic diagrams illustrate the distinct shapes of the
secreted forms of these antibodies. Note that IgA consists of two subclasses, called IgA1 and IgA2, and IgG
consists of four subclasses, called IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4. Most of the opsonizing and complement ﬁxation
functions of IgG are attributable to IgG1 and IgG3. The domains of the heavy chains in each isotype are labeled.
The plasma concentrations and half-lives are average values in normal individuals. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
82
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
come together to form clefts capable of accommodating
small molecules or form more extended surfaces capable
of accommodating larger molecules (Fig. 4.4). Anti-
bodies bind to antigens by reversible, noncovalent in-
teractions, including hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic
interactions, and charge-based interactions. The parts of
antigens that are recognized by antibodies are called
epitopes, or determinants. Some epitopes of protein
antigens may be a contiguous stretch of amino acids in
the primary structure of the protein; these are called
linear epitopes. In other cases, regions of a folded protein
may form distinct shapes that are recognized by anti-
bodies; these are called conformational epitopes.
The strength with which one antigen-binding site of
an antibody binds to one epitope of an antigen is called
the
afﬁnity
of
the
interaction.
Afﬁnity
often
is
expressed as the dissociation constant (Kd), which is the
molar concentration of an antigen required to occupy
half the available antibody molecules in a solution; the
lower the Kd, the higher the afﬁnity. Most antibodies
produced in a primary immune response have a Kd in
the range of 106 to 109 M, but with repeated stim-
ulation (e.g., in a secondary immune response), the
afﬁnity increases to a Kd of 108 to 1011 M. This in-
crease in antigen-binding strength is called afﬁnity
maturation (see Chapter 7).
Each IgG, IgD, and IgE antibody molecule has two
antigen-binding sites. Secreted IgA is a dimer of two
linked IgA molecules and therefore has 4 antigen-
binding sites, and secreted IgM is a pentamer with 10
antigen-binding sites. Therefore, each antibody mole-
cule can bind 2 to 10 epitopes of an antigen, or epitopes
on 2 or more neighboring antigens. The total strength
of binding is much greater than the afﬁnity of a single
antigen-antibody bond and is called the avidity of the
interaction. Antibodies produced against one antigen
may bind other, structurally similar antigens. Such
binding to similar epitopes is called a cross-reaction.
In B lymphocytes, membrane-bound Ig molecules
are noncovalently associated with two other proteins,
called Iga and Igb, that combine with the membrane Ig
to make up the BCR complex. When the BCR recog-
nizes antigen, Iga and Igb transmit signals to the
interior of the B cell that initiate the process of B cell
activation. These and other signals in humoral immune
responses are discussed in Chapter 7.
Monoclonal Antibodies
The realization that one clone of B cells makes an
antibody of only one speciﬁcity has been exploited to
produce monoclonal antibodies, one of the most
important technical advances in immunology, with far-
reaching applications in clinical medicine and research.
To produce monoclonal antibodies, B cells, which have
a short life span in vitro, are obtained from an animal
immunized with an antigen and fused in vitro with
myeloma cells (tumors of plasma cells), which can be
propagated indeﬁnitely in tissue culture (Fig. 4.5). The
myeloma cell line is constructed to lack a speciﬁc
enzyme, as a result of which these cells cannot grow in
the presence of a certain toxic drug; fused cells, con-
taining both myeloma and normal B cell nuclei, how-
ever, do grow in the presence of this drug because the
normal B cells provide the missing enzyme. Thus, by
fusing the two cell populations and culturing them with
the drug, it is possible to grow out fused cells that are
hybrids of the B cells and the myeloma and are called
hybridomas. These hybridoma cells produce anti-
bodies, like normal B cells, and grow continuously,
having acquired the immortal property of the myeloma
tumor. From a population of hybridomas, one can
select and expand individual cells that secrete the
antibody of desired speciﬁcity; such antibodies, derived
from a single B cell clone, are homogeneous mono-
clonal
antibodies.
Monoclonal
antibodies
against
virtually any epitope on any antigen can be produced
using this technology.
Fig. 4.4 Binding of a protein antigen by an antibody. This
model of a protein antigen bound to an antibody molecule
shows how the antigen-binding site can accommodate large
macromolecules in their native (folded) conformation. The heavy
chains of the antibody are red, the light chains are yellow, and
the antigens are blue. Courtesy Dr. Dan Vaughn, Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
83
 
Screen
supernatants
of each clone for
anti-X antibody
Mutant immortal
myeloma line;
unable to grow in
selection medium
Spleen B cells,
including some producing
anti-X antibody
Antigen X
Hybridomas 
producing 
monoclonal 
anti-X antibody
Isolate spleen 
cells from mouse 
immunized
with antigen X
Fuse spleen cells
and immortal
myeloma cell line
Only fused cells
(hybridomas) 
grow
Culture in
selection medium
Expand
positive clones
Isolate clones derived from single hybridoma cells
Fusion
Fig. 4.5 Production of hybridomas and monoclonal antibodies. In this procedure, spleen cells from a mouse
that has been immunized with a known antigen are fused with an enzyme-deﬁcient myeloma cell line that
does not secrete its own immunoglobulins. The fused cells are then placed in a selection medium that permits
the survival of only immortalized hybrids; the normal B cells provide the enzyme that the myeloma lacks, and
unfused B cells cannot survive indeﬁnitely. These hybrid cells are then grown as single-cell clones and tested
for the secretion of antibody of the desired speciﬁcity. The clone producing this antibody is expanded and
becomes a source of the monoclonal antibody.
 
Most monoclonal antibodies speciﬁc for molecules
of interest are made by fusing cells from mice immu-
nized with that antigen with a mouse myeloma cell line.
Such mouse monoclonal antibodies cannot be injected
repeatedly into human subjects, because the human
immune system sees the mouse Ig as foreign and
mounts an immune response against the injected anti-
bodies. This problem has been partially overcome by
genetic engineering approaches that retain the antigen-
binding regions of the mouse monoclonal antibody and
replace the rest of the antibody with human Ig; such
humanized antibodies are less immunogenic and more
suitable for administration to people. More recently,
monoclonal antibodies have been generated by using
recombinant DNA technology to clone the DNA
encoding human antibodies of desired speciﬁcity.
Another approach is to replace the Ig genes of mice
with human antibody genes and then immunize these
mice with an antigen to produce speciﬁc human anti-
bodies. Monoclonal antibodies are now in widespread
use as therapeutic agents and diagnostic reagents for
many diseases in humans (Fig. 4.6).
T Cell Receptor for Antigens
The TCR, which recognizes peptide antigens dis-
played by MHC molecules, is a membrane-bound
heterodimeric protein composed of an a chain and
a b chain, each chain containing one V region and
one C region (Fig. 4.7A, B). The V and C regions are
homologous to immunoglobulin V and C regions. In
the V region of each TCR chain, there are three hy-
pervariable, or complementarity-determining, regions,
each corresponding to a loop in the V domain. As in
antibodies, CDR3 is the most variable among different
TCRs. The C regions of both a and b chains continue
into short hinge regions, which contain cysteine resi-
dues where a disulﬁde bond links the two chains, fol-
lowed by hydrophobic transmembrane portions and
short carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic tails.
Antigen Recognition by the T Cell Receptor
Both the a chain and b chain of the TCR participate in
speciﬁc recognition of MHC molecules and bound
peptides (Fig. 4.7C). Recognition of the peptide is
responsible for the antigen speciﬁcity of the TCR, and
recognition of the MHC for MHC restriction (Chapter 3).
The TCR recognizes antigen, but as with membrane
Ig on B cells, it is incapable of transmitting signals to
the T cell on its own. Associated with the TCR is a
group of proteins, called the CD3 and z proteins, which
together with the TCR make up the TCR complex (see
Fig. 4.1). The CD3 and z chains are crucial for the
initiation of signaling when the TCR recognizes anti-
gen. In addition, T cell activation requires engagement
of the coreceptor molecule CD4 or CD8, which recog-
nizes nonpolymorphic portions of MHC molecules.
The functions of these TCR-associated proteins and
coreceptors are discussed in Chapter 5.
Antigen recognition by B and T lymphocyte receptors
differs in important ways (see Fig. 4.1). Antibodies can
bind many different types of chemical structures, often
with high afﬁnities, which allows antibodies to bind to
and neutralize many different microbes and toxins even if
they are present at low concentrations in the circulation
or in the lumens of mucosal organs. TCRs only recognize
peptide-MHC complexes and bind these with relatively
low afﬁnity, which may be why the binding of T cells to
APCs has to be strengthened by additional cell surface
adhesion
molecules
(see
Chapter
5).
The
three-
dimensional structure of the TCR is similar to that of
the Fab region of an Ig molecule. In contrast to mem-
brane antibodies, in which only the heavy chain is
membrane-anchored, both TCR chains are anchored in
the plasma membrane. Unlike BCRs, TCRs are not
produced in a secreted form, do not undergo afﬁnity
maturation during the life of a T cell, and do not have
isotypes to which switching could occur.
About 5% to 10% of T cells in the body express re-
ceptors composed of g and d chains. These receptors are
structurally similar to the ab TCR but have very
different speciﬁcities. The gd TCR may recognize a va-
riety of protein and nonprotein antigens that are not
displayed by MHC molecules. T cells expressing gd
TCRs are abundant in epithelia. This observation sug-
gests that gd T cells recognize microbes usually
encountered at epithelial surfaces. Another subpopula-
tion of T cells, making up less than 5% of all T cells,
express ab TCRs as well as surface molecules found on
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
85
 
CD20
Depletion of B cells
B cell lymphomas, rheumatoid arthritis, 
multiple sclerosis, other autoimmune diseases
IL-4/IL-13 receptor
Blocking inflammation
Asthma, atopic dermatitis
IgE
Blocking mast cell 
sensitization
Asthma, peanut allergy
IL-5
Blocking eosinophil
activation
Asthma
IL-6 receptor
Blocking inflammation
Rheumatoid arthritis, cytokine storm
IL-17
Blocking inflammation
Psoriasis
α4 integrin
Blocking leukocyte migration Inflammatory bowel disease; multiple sclerosis
TNF
Blocking inflammation
Rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, 
psoriasis
C5
Blocking complement-
mediated cell lysis
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 
hemolytic uremic syndrome
CD52
Depletion of lymphocytes
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
Inhibition of platelet 
aggregation
Cardiovascular disease
EGFR
Growth inhibition of 
epithelial tumors
Colorectal, lung, and head and neck cancers
CTLA-4
Activation of T cells
Melanoma, lung cancer
PD-1, PD-L1
Activation of effector T cells
Many tumors
VEGF
Blocking 
tumor angiogenesis
Breast cancer, colon cancer, age-related
macular degeneration
SARS-CoV2 spike 
protein
Blocking SARS-CoV2
infection of cells
COVID-19
HER2/NEU
Inhibition of EGF signaling; 
depletion of tumor cells
Breast cancer
Inflammatory (immunological) diseases
Target
Effect
Diseases
Cancer
Target
Effect
Diseases
Other diseases
Target
Effect
Diseases
Fig. 4.6 Selected therapeutic monoclonal antibodies in clinical use. The ﬁgure lists some of the monoclonal
antibodies that are approved for the treatment of various types of diseases. Note that anti-CD20 is listed under
inﬂammatory diseases but is also used to treat cancers of B cells. Anti-VEGF is listed under cancer but is also
used for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration. EGFR, Epidermal growth factor receptor; Ig,
immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.
86
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
natural killer cells, and are therefore called natural killer
T cells (NK-T cells). NK-T cells express ab TCRs with
limited diversity, and they recognize lipid antigens dis-
played by nonpolymorphic class I MHCelike molecules
called CD1. A third subset of T cells called mucosal
associated invariant T (MAIT) cells also express ab
TCRs with limited diversity, some of which are speciﬁc
for bacterially derived vitamin B metabolites bound to an
MHC-like protein called MR1. MAIT cells account for
only about 5% of blood T cells in humans but up to 20%
to 40% of liver T cells. The physiologic functions of gd
cells,
NK-T cells,
and
MAIT
cells
are
not
well
understood.
DEVELOPMENT OF B AND T LYMPHOCYTES
Now that we have discussed the structure of antigen
receptors of B and T lymphocytes and how these re-
ceptors recognize antigens, the next question is how the
enormous diversity of these receptors is generated. As
the clonal selection hypothesis predicted, there are many
clones of B and T lymphocytes, perhaps as many as 107
Transmembrane
region
N
N
Cα
Cβ
Vα
Vβ
Cα
Vα
Cβ
Vβ
β chain
α chain
C
C
Disulfide bond
Ig domain
A
B
C
TCR
Vα
Vβ
α2
α1
β2m
α3
Peptide
MHC
(class I)
Fig. 4.7 Structure of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) and TCR recognition of a peptideemajor histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) complex. A, The schematic diagram of the ab TCR (left) shows the domains of a
TCR speciﬁc for a peptide-MHC complex. The antigen-binding portion of the TCR is formed by the V domains
of the a and b chains. N and C refer to the amino-terminal and carboxy-terminal ends of the polypeptides. B,
The ribbon diagram (right) shows the structure of the extracellular portion of a TCR as revealed by x-ray
crystallography. C, The crystal structure of the extracellular portion of a peptide-MHC complex bound to a
TCR that is speciﬁc for the peptide displayed by the MHC molecule. The peptide can be seen attached to the
cleft at the top of the MHC molecule, and one residue of the peptide contacts the V region of a TCR. The
structure of MHC molecules and their function as peptide display proteins are described in Chapter 3. b2m, b2-
microglobulin; Ig, immunoglobulin. From Bjorkman PJ: MHC restriction in three dimensions: a view of T cell
receptor/ligand interactions, Cell 89:167e170, 1997. Copyright Cell Press; with permission.
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
87
 
to 109, each with a distinct speciﬁcity, and these arise
before encounter with antigen. There are not enough
genes in the human genome for every possible receptor
to be encoded by a different gene. In fact, the immune
system
has
developed
mechanisms
for
generating
extremely diverse antigen receptors from a limited
number of inherited genes, and the generation of diverse
receptors is intimately linked to B and T lymphocyte
maturation.
The process of lymphocyte maturation ﬁrst gener-
ates a large number of cells, each with a different
antigen receptor, and then preserves the cells with
useful receptors. The generation of millions of re-
ceptors is a molecular process that cannot be inﬂuenced
by what the receptors recognize because recognition can
occur only after receptor generation and expression.
Once these antigen receptors are expressed on devel-
oping lymphocytes, selection processes come into play
that promote the survival of cells with receptors that
can recognize antigens, including microbial antigens,
and eliminate cells that can recognize self antigens
strongly enough to pose danger of autoimmunity. We
discuss each of these events next.
Lymphocyte Development
The development of lymphocytes from bone marrow
stem cells involves commitment of hematopoietic pro-
genitors to the B or T cell lineage, the proliferation of
these progenitors, the rearrangement (recombination)
and expression of antigen receptor genes, and selection
events to preserve and expand cells that express poten-
tially useful antigen receptors (Fig. 4.8). These steps are
common to B and T lymphocytes, even though B
lymphocytes mature in the bone marrow and T lym-
phocytes mature in the thymus. Each of the processes
that occurs during lymphocyte maturation plays a
special role in the generation of the lymphocyte
repertoire.
• The maturation of common lymphoid progenitors in
the bone marrow results in commitment to the B cell
lineage. Similar progenitors migrate to the thymus
and commit to the T cell lineage there. Commitment
is associated with the activation of several lineage-
speciﬁc transcription factors and increased accessibility
of Ig and TCR genes to the gene recombination ma-
chinery, described later.
• Developing lymphocytes undergo proliferation at
several stages during their maturation. Proliferation
of developing lymphocytes is necessary to ensure
that an adequate number of cells will be available to
express different antigen receptors and mature into
functionally competent lymphocytes. Survival and
proliferation of the earliest lymphocyte precursors
are stimulated mainly by growth factors that are pro-
duced by stromal cells in the bone marrow and the
thymus. In humans, IL-7 maintains and expands the
number of T lymphocyte progenitors before they ex-
press antigen receptors. The growth factors required
for expansion of human B cell progenitors are not
deﬁned. This proliferative expansion generates a large
pool of cells in which diverse antigen receptors may be
produced. Even greater proliferation of the B and
T cell lineages occurs after the developing lympho-
cytes have completed their ﬁrst antigen receptor
gene rearrangement and assembled a so-called prean-
tigen receptor (described later). Proliferation of the
cells at this stage is driven by signals from the preanti-
gen receptor. Expression of the receptor is a quality
control checkpoint in lymphocyte development that
ensures preservation of cells with functional receptors.
• Lymphocytes are selected at multiple steps during their
maturation to preserve useful speciﬁcities. As discussed
later, many attempts to generate antigen receptors fail
because of errors during the gene recombination pro-
cess. Therefore, checkpoints are needed at which only
cells that can express functional components of antigen
receptors are selected to survive and proliferate. Pre-
lymphocytes and immature lymphocytes that failtoex-
press antigen receptor proteins die by apoptosis (see
Fig. 4.8). The gene rearrangements in the developing
lymphocytes randomly generate antigen receptors
with highly diverse speciﬁcities. In order to ensure
that the speciﬁcities of lymphocytes that emerge from
the generative organs are useful, selection processes
work to allow only a subset of the developing lympho-
cytes to fully mature. These selection processes are
based on the expression of functional receptors and,
in the case of T cells, the recognition of self molecules
present in the thymus. Positive selection allows only
cells that express functional receptors to complete the
maturation steps. Negative selection kills off cells
with high afﬁnity for self antigens, thus eliminating
88
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
potentially dangerous lymphocytes that could cause
autoimmune disease.
The processes of B and T lymphocyte maturation
and selection share some important features but also
differ in many respects. We start with the central event
that is common to both lineages: the recombination and
expression of antigen receptor genes.
Production of Diverse Antigen Receptors
The formation of functional genes that encode B and T
lymphocyte antigen receptors is initiated by somatic
recombination of gene segments that code for the var-
iable regions of the receptors, and diversity is generated
during this process.
Inherited Antigen Receptor Genes
Hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and early
lymphoid progenitors contain Ig and TCR gene seg-
ments in their inherited, or germline, conﬁguration. In
this conﬁguration, Ig heavy-chain and light-chain loci
and the TCR a chain and b chain loci each contain
multiple V region gene segments, numbering about 30 to
45, and one or a few C region genes (Fig. 4.9). Between
the V and C gene segments are groups of several short
coding sequences called diversity (D) and joining
(J) gene segments. (All antigen receptor gene loci in B
cells and ab T cells contain V, J, and C gene segments,
but only the Ig heavy chain and TCR b chain loci also
contain
D
gene segments.)
These separated
gene
Failure to express
antigen receptor;
cell death
Failure to express
pre-antigen receptor;
cell death
Negative
selection
Positive
selection
Pro-
B/T cells
Common
lymphoid
progenitor
Pre-B/T cell:
expresses 
one chain of 
antigen receptor
Immature 
B/T cell: 
expresses 
complete 
antigen 
receptor
Weak 
antigen
recognition
Mature
T/B cell
Pre-B/T antigen
receptor
expression
Antigen 
receptor
expression
Positive and
negative
selection
Proliferation
Proliferation
Commitment
Strong
antigen 
recognition
Fig. 4.8 Steps in the maturation of lymphocytes. During their maturation, B and T lymphocytes go through
cycles of proliferation and expression of antigen receptor proteins by gene recombination. Cells that fail to
express intact, functional receptors die by apoptosis, because they do not receive the necessary survival
signals. At the end of the process, the cells undergo positive and negative selection. The lymphocytes shown
may be B or T cells; T cells recognize peptide-MHC complexes but these are not shown for simplicity.
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
89
 
Ig κ chain locus (chromosome 2)
Extracellular
domain
Transmembrane and
cytoplasmic domains
Ig H chain locus (chromosome 14)
TCR α chain locus (chromosome 14)
TCR β chain locus (chromosome 7)
V1
5'
3'
L V1
(n = ~35)
Vn
J
C
5'
3'
V1
(n = ~45)
Vn
D (n =23)
J
Cμ
Cδ
Cγ3
Cγ1
Cα1
Cγ2
Cγ4
Cε
Cα2
5'
3'
5'
3'
D1
D2
L
(n = ~48)
Vn
C1
C2
J1
J2
L V1
(n = ~45)
Vn
J (n = ~50)
C
L
Ig λ chain locus (chromosome 22)
5'
L V1
(n = ~30)
L Vn
C7
J7
C3
J3
C2
J2
C1
J1
3'
Fig. 4.9 Germline organization of antigen receptor gene loci. In the germline, inherited antigen receptor gene
loci contain coding segments (exons, shown as colored blocks of various sizes) that are separated by seg-
ments that are not expressed (introns, shown as gray sections). Each immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy-chain C re-
gion and T cell receptor (TCR) C region consists of multiple exons, which are not shown, that encode the
domains of the C regions; the organization of the Cm exons in the Ig heavy-chain locus is shown as an example.
The diagrams illustrate the antigen receptor gene loci in humans; the basic organization is the same in all
species, although the precise order and number of gene segments may vary. The numbers of V, D, and J gene
segments are estimates of functional gene segments (those that can code for proteins). The sizes of the
segments and the distances between them are not drawn to scale. C, Constant; D, diversity; J, joining; L,
leader sequence (a small stretch of nucleotides that encodes a peptide that guides proteins through the
endoplasmic reticulum and is cleaved from the mature proteins); V, variable.
90
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
segments cannot code for functional antigen receptor
proteins, so they have to be brought together as lym-
phocytes mature.
Somatic Recombination and Expression of Antigen Receptor
Genes
Following the commitment of a lymphocyte progenitor to
the B lymphocyte lineage, a randomly selected Ig heavy-
chain D gene segment recombines with a J segment to
form a DJ complex. Subsequently, a V segment is joined
to the fused DJ complex (Fig. 4.10). Thus, the committed
but still-developing B cell now has a recombined VDJ
exon in the heavy-chain locus. This gene is transcribed,
and in the primary RNA transcript, the VDJ exon is
spliced to the C-region exons of the m chain, the most 50 C
region in the Ig heavy chain gene locus, to form a com-
plete m messenger RNA (mRNA). The m mRNA is
translated to produce the m heavy chain, which is the ﬁrst
Ig protein synthesized during B cell maturation.
Essentially the same sequence of DNA recombina-
tion, transcription and RNA splicing leads to production
of a light chain in B cells, except that the light-chain loci
lack D segments, so a V region gene segment recom-
bines directly with a J segment. The rearrangement of
TCR a chain and b chain genes in T lymphocytes is
similar to that of Ig L and H chains, respectively.
Mechanisms of V(D)J Recombination
The somatic recombination of V and J, or of V, D
and J, gene segments is mediated by a lymphoid-
speciﬁc enzyme, the VDJ recombinase, and addi-
tional enzymes, most of which are not lymphocyte
speciﬁc and are involved in repair of double-stranded
DNA breaks introduced by the recombinase. The VDJ
recombinase
is
composed
of
the
recombination-
activating gene 1 and 2 (RAG-1 and RAG-2) proteins.
These proteins form a dimer that recognizes seven and
nine nucleotide DNA sequences (heptamer and non-
amer, respectively) that ﬂank all antigen receptor V, D,
and J gene segments. As a result of this recognition, the
recombinase brings two Ig or TCR gene segments close
together and cleaves the DNA at speciﬁc sites. The
recognition signal sequences are located such that in the
Ig light chain and TCRa loci, a V segment recombines
with a J segment, and in the Ig heavy chain and TCRb
loci, a D segment joins with a J and then a V segment is
joined to the previously recombined DJ. The VDJ
recombinaseemediated formation of double-stranded
DNA (dsDNA) breaks ﬁrst involves the formation of
hairpin loops that are opened asymmetrically by an
enzyme called ARTEMIS. The two dsDNA breaks
downstream and upstream, respectively, of the two
involved gene segments are then enzymatically ligated,
producing a full-length recombined VJ or VDJ exon
without the intervening DNA segments (see Fig. 4.10).
The VDJ recombinase is expressed only in immature
B and T lymphocytes. Although the same enzyme can
mediate recombination of all Ig and TCR genes, intact
Ig heavy-chain and light-chain genes are rearranged
and expressed only in B cells, and TCR a and b genes
are rearranged and expressed only in T cells. The
lineage speciﬁcity of receptor gene rearrangement ap-
pears to be linked to the expression of lineage-speciﬁc
transcription factors. In B cells, B lineageespeciﬁc
transcription factors make Ig gene loci accessible to the
VDJ recombinase but not the TCR loci, whereas in
developing T cells, transcriptional regulators help open
the TCR loci but not the Ig loci. The “open” loci are the
ones that are accessible to the recombinase.
Generation of Ig and TCR Diversity
Diversity of antigen receptors is produced by the use
of different combinations of V, D, and J gene seg-
ments in different clones of lymphocytes (called
combinatorial diversity) and even more by changes in
nucleotide sequences introduced at the junctions of
the recombining V, D, and J gene segments (called
junctional diversity) (Fig. 4.11). Combinatorial di-
versity is limited by the number of available V, D, and J
gene segments, but junctional diversity is almost un-
limited. Junctional diversity is produced by three
mechanisms, which generate more sequences than are
present in the germline genes:
• Exonucleases may remove nucleotides from V, D,
and J gene segments at the sites of recombination.
• A
lymphocyte-speciﬁc
enzyme
called
terminal
deoxyribonucleotidyl
transferase
(TdT)
catalyzes
the random addition of nucleotides that are not
part of germline genes to the junctions between V
and D segments and D and J segments, forming
so-called N regions.
• During the DNA repair process, ARTEMIS cuts the
hairpin loops asymmetrically, forming overhanging
DNA sequences. These overhangs are ﬁlled in with
new nucleotides, which are called P-nucleotides,
creating new coding sequences not in the germline
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
91
 
DNA, thereby introducing additional variability at
the sites of recombination.
As a result of these mechanisms, the nucleotide
sequence of the V(D)J exons in antibody or TCR genes
in one clone of lymphocytes differs from the sequence
of the V(D)J exons of antibody or TCR molecules in
every other clone. The junctional sequences and the D
and J segments encode the amino acids of the CDR3
loop, mentioned earlier as the most variable of the
CDRs and the one that contributes most to the ﬁne
speciﬁcity of antigen recognition. Thus, junctional di-
versity
maximizes
the variability in
the antigen-
recognizing portions of antibodies and TCRs. In the
process of creating junctional diversity, many genes
RNA processing 
(splicing)
Transcription
V1D1J1
V
V1
Vn
J 1-6
Cμ
Translation
AAA
V
AAA
CDR3
CDR3
D1-Dn
V1
Vn
3'
Cμ
D1J1
V1
Vn
3'
Cμ
D3J2
VnD3J2
VnD3J2
Cμ
V1D1J1
V1D1J1 Cμ
Cμ
Cμ
Somatic recombination
(D-J joining) in
two B cell clones
Somatic recombination
(V-DJ joining) in 
two B cell clones
Recombined
 DNA in two
B cell clones
Recombined
 DNA in two
B cell clones
Ig μ chains
in two
B cell clones
Germline
DNA at
Ig H locus
Primary RNA
transcript
Messenger
RNA (mRNA)
Cμ
Cμ
Cμ
VnD3J2 Cμ
5'
3'
5'
3'
5'
3'
5'
3'
5'
3'
5'
5'
Fig. 4.10 Recombination and expression of immunoglobulin (Ig) genes. The expression of an Ig heavy chain
involves two gene recombination events (D-J joining, followed by joining of a V region to the DJ complex, with
deletion of intervening gene segments). The recombined gene is transcribed, and the VDJ complex is spliced
onto the C region exons of the ﬁrst heavy-chain RNA (which is m), to give rise to the m messenger RNA (mRNA).
The mRNA is translated to produce the m heavy-chain protein. The recombination of other antigen receptor
genesdthat is, the Ig light chain and the T cell receptor (TCR) a and b chainsdfollows essentially the same
sequence, except that in loci lacking D segments (Ig light chains and TCR a), a V gene recombines directly with a
J gene segment.
92
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
V1
C
Vn
C
D1 J1
D2 J2
Mechanism
Heavy
chain
Immunoglobulin T cell
receptor
κ
α
β
Number of V 
gene segments
Number of diversity (D)
gene segments
Number of joining (J)
gene segments
~45
23
6
35
0
5
45
0
50
50
2
12
Combinatorial diversity:
     Number of possible
     V-(D)-J combinations
Ig: ~2x106
TCR: ~3x106
Junctional diversity:
     Total potential
     repertoire with
     junctional diversity
Ig: ~1011
TCR: ~1016
V1
C
J1
D1
Removal of
nucleotides
Addition of nucleotides
(N-region or P-nucleotides)
C
D1J1
V1
C
D1 J1
V1
λ
30
0
4
Fig. 4.11 Mechanisms of diversity in antigen receptors. Diversity in immunoglobulins (Igs) and T cell receptors
(TCRs) is produced by random combinations of V, D, and J gene segments, which is limited by the numbers of
these segments and by removal and addition of nucleotides at the V-J or V-D-J junctions, which is almost un-
limited. The numbers of gene segments refer to the average numbers of functional genes (which are known to
be expressed as RNA or protein) in humans. Junctional diversity maximizes the variations in the CDR3 regions of
the antigen receptor proteins because CDR3 includes the junctions at the site of V-J and V-D-J recombination.
The diversity is further enhanced by the juxtaposition of the V regions of the two types of chains in Ig or TCRs to
form the complete antigen binding sites, and thus the total diversity is theoretically the product of the total di-
versity of each of the juxtaposed V regions. The estimated contributions of these mechanisms to the total
possible numbers of distinct B and T cell antigen receptors are shown. Although the upper limit on the number of
immunoglobulin (Ig) and TCR proteins that may be expressed is extremely large, each individual contains on the
order of only 107 to 109 clones of B cells and T cells with distinct speciﬁcities and receptors; in other words, only
a fraction of the potential repertoire may actually be expressed. Modiﬁed from Davis MM, Bjorkman PJ: T-cell
antigen receptor genes and T-cell recognition, Nature 334:395e402, 1988.
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
93
 
may be produced with out-of-frame sequences because
precisely three nucleotides encode one amino acid, and
sometimes junctional nucleotides add up to a number
not divisible by 3; these sequences cannot code for
proteins and are therefore useless. This is the price the
immune system pays for generating tremendous di-
versity. The risk of producing nonfunctional genes is
why the process of lymphocyte maturation contains
checkpoints at which only cells with useful receptors are
selected to survive.
The
uniqueness
of
CDR3
sequences
in
every
lymphocyte clone can be exploited to distinguish
neoplastic and reactive proliferations of B and T lym-
phocytes. In tumors arising from these cells, all the cells
of the tumor will have the same CDR3 (because they all
arose from a single B or T cell clone), but in pro-
liferations that are reactions to external stimuli, many
lymphocyte clones may proliferate, so many CDR3 se-
quences will be present. The same principle can be used
to deﬁne the magnitude of an immune responsedwhen
a speciﬁc antigen triggers lymphocyte proliferation,
many of the cells will express the same CDR3 sequence.
If DNA sequencing of an antigen receptor gene in a
mixture of lymphocytes reveals relative abundance of a
speciﬁc CDR3 sequence, this serves as a tool to identify
clonal expansion.
Maturation and Selection of B Lymphocytes
The maturation of B lymphocytes occurs mainly in the
bone marrow (Fig. 4.12). Progenitors committed to the
B cell lineage proliferate, giving rise to a large number
of precursors of B cells. Subsequent maturation involves
antigen receptor gene expression and selection.
Early Steps in B Cell Maturation
The Ig heavy-chain locus rearranges ﬁrst, and only
cells that are able to make an Ig m heavy-chain protein
are selected to survive and become pre-B cells. The
earliest progenitors committed to the B cell lineage
are proliferating cells called pro-B cells. Ig gene
recombination occurs after pro-B cells stop dividing,
producing a DJ and then a VDJ complex, as described
earlier. Given that junctional nucleotides are randomly
added both when the D-J joint is made and when a V
segment fuses with a DJ unit, in roughly half of the cells,
the number of junctional nucleotides will not add up to
IgM
IgM
Pre-BCR
Ig H chain
gene
Ig L chain
gene
HSC
Pro-B
Large Pre-B
Immature B Mature B
Germline D to J
rearrangement
V to DJ
rearrangement
Rearranged
VDJ
Rearranged
VDJ
Germline
Germline
Germline
Rearranged
VJ
Rearranged
VJ
Ig protein
None
None
Pre-BCR
Small Pre-B
Rearranged
VDJ
V to J
rearrangement
Intracellular μ
IgM
IgM, IgD
IgD
μ
Fig. 4.12 Steps in the maturation and selection of B lymphocytes. The maturation of B lymphocytes pro-
ceeds through sequential steps, each of which is characterized by particular changes in immunoglobulin (Ig)
gene expression and in the patterns of Ig protein expression. Pro-B cells begin to rearrange Ig heavy-chain
genes, and large pre-B cells are selected to survive and proliferate if they successfully rearrange an Ig
heavy-chain gene and assemble a pre-BCR. The pre-BCR consists of a membrane-associated Ig m protein
attached to two other proteins called surrogate light chains because they take the place of the light chain in a
complete Ig molecule. Small pre-B cells initiate Ig light-chain gene rearrangement, immature B cells assemble a
complete membrane IgM receptor, and mature B cells coexpress IgD, with the same V regions and speciﬁcity
as in the ﬁrst Ig produced. BCR, B cell receptor; HSC, hematopoietic stem cell; mRNA, messenger RNA.
94
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
a multiple of three. If recombination in one of the two
inherited IgH loci is not successful because it produces
out-of-frame sequences, recombination will take place
in the other locus. The cells that successfully make
functional heavy-chain gene rearrangements and syn-
thesize the Ig heavy-chain m protein are called pre-B
cells. Pre-B cells are therefore deﬁned by the presence
of the Ig m heavy-chain protein. They also express the m
protein on the cell surface in association with two other
invariant proteins called surrogate light chains because
they resemble light chains and associate with the m
heavy chain. The complex of m chain and surrogate
light chains associates with the Iga and Igb signaling
molecules to form the pre-B cell receptor (pre-BCR)
complex.
Role of the Pre-BCR Complex in B Cell Maturation
The
assembled pre-BCR complex serves essential
functions in the maturation of B cells:
• Signals from the pre-BCR complex promote the sur-
vival and proliferation of B lineage cells that have
made a productive rearrangement at the Ig H chain lo-
cus. This is the ﬁrst checkpoint in B cell development,
and it selects and expands the pre-B cells that express
a functional m heavy chain (which is an essential
component of the pre-BCR and BCR). Pre-B cells that
make out-of-frame (nonproductive) rearrangements
at the heavy-chain locus fail to make the m protein,
cannot express a pre-BCR or receive pre-BCR signals,
and die by programmed cell death (apoptosis). The
pre-BCR signaling pathway includes a downstream
tyrosine kinase called BTK, which is encoded on the X
chromosome. Mutations in BTK in boys results in the
failure of pre-B cells to survive and the subsequent
absence of B cells. This disease is called X-linked
agammaglobulinemia.
• The pre-BCR complex signals to shut off recombina-
tion of Ig heavy-chain genes on the second chromo-
some, so each B cell can express an Ig heavy chain
from only one of the two inherited parental alleles.
This process is called allelic exclusion, and it ensures
that each cell can only express a receptor of a single
speciﬁcity.
• The pre-BCR complex helps induce V to J rearrange-
ment of the k light-chain gene, leading to production
of the k protein and the assembly of cell surface IgM.
The cells at this next stage of differentiation are
called immature B cells. The l light chain is pro-
duced only if both rearranged k chain loci fail to ex-
press a functional protein or if the k chain generates
a potentially harmful self-reactive receptor and has
to be eliminated by a process called receptor editing,
described later.
In immature B cells, the BCR complex delivers signals
that promote survival, thus preserving cells that express
complete antigen receptors; this is the second checkpoint
during B cell maturation. Signals from the antigen re-
ceptor also shut off production of the recombinase
enzyme and further recombination at light-chain loci. As
a result, each B cell produces either one k or one l light
chain from one of the inherited parental alleles. The
presence of two sets of light-chain genes in the genome
simply increases the chance of completing successful
gene recombination and receptor expression.
Late Steps of B Cell Maturation
Further maturation occurs after the immature B cells leave
the bone marrow and enter the spleen. The ﬁnal matu-
ration step involves coexpression of IgD with IgM; this
occurs because in any given B cell, the recombined heavy-
chain VDJ unit may be spliced either to Cm or Cd exons in
the primary RNA transcript, giving rise to m or d mRNA,
respectively. We know that the ability of B cells to respond
toantigensdevelopstogetherwiththecoexpressionofIgM
and IgD, but why both classes of receptor are needed is not
known. The IgMþIgDþ cell is the mature B cell, able to
respond to antigen in peripheral lymphoid tissues.
Selection of Mature B Cells
Developing B cells are positively selected based mainly
on expression of complete antigen receptors. The
repertoire of developing B cells is further shaped by
negative selection. In this process, if an immature B cell
binds an antigen in the bone marrow with high afﬁnity,
it may re-express the VDJ recombinase enzyme, un-
dergo
additional
light-chain
V-J
recombination,
generate a different light chain, and thus change the
speciﬁcity of the antigen receptor, a process called re-
ceptor editing (see Chapter 9). Immature B cells called
transitional B cells that encounter antigens in the
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
95
 
periphery may die by apoptosis, also known as deletion.
The antigens that developing B cells may recognize in
the bone marrow and early in development in the pe-
riphery are mostly self antigens that are abundantly
expressed throughout the body (i.e., are ubiquitous),
such as blood proteins, and membrane molecules
common to all cells. Negative selection therefore elim-
inates potentially dangerous cells that can recognize and
react against ubiquitous self antigens.
The process of Ig gene recombination is random and
cannot be inherently biased toward recognition of mi-
crobes. However, the receptors produced are able to
recognize the antigens of many, varied microbes that
the immune system must defend against. The repertoire
of B lymphocytes is selected positively for expression of
functional receptors and selected negatively against
strong recognition of self antigens. What is left after
these selection processes is a large collection of mature
B cells, which include cells that are able to recognize
almost any microbial antigen that may be encountered.
Subsets of Mature B Cells
Most mature B cells are called follicular B cells because
they are found within lymph node and spleen follicles.
Marginal-zone B cells, which are found at the margins
of splenic follicles, develop from bone marrowederived
hematopoietic stem cells, as do follicular B cells. B-1
lymphocytes, a distinct population found at mucosal
sites and the peritoneal cavity, develop earlier from fetal
liverederived hematopoietic stem cells. The diversity of
marginal zone and B1 B cells is much more limited than
that of follicular B cells, but the mechanisms con-
straining diversity of these subsets are not well under-
stood. The role of these B cell subsets in humoral
immunity is described in Chapter 7.
Maturation and Selection of T Lymphocytes
T cell progenitors migrate from the bone marrow to
the thymus, where the entire process of maturation
occurs (Fig. 4.13). The process of T lymphocyte
maturation has some unique features, primarily related
Pre-TCR
Ongoing
TCR gene
rearrangements
TCR protein
expression
Stem
cell
Pro-T
Pre-T
Single positive
(immature T cell)
Mature
T cell
Vβ to DJβ
Germline α
Pre-TCR
αβ TCR
αβ TCR
Surface 
markers 
CD4-CD8-
Double
positive
Vα to Jα 
αβ TCR
CD4+CD8+
TCR/CD3lo
CD4+CD8- or CD4-CD8+
TCR/CD3hi
Fig. 4.13 Steps in the maturation of T lymphocytes. The maturation of T lymphocytes in the thymus pro-
ceeds through sequential steps often deﬁned by the expression of the CD4 and CD8 coreceptors. The T cell
receptor (TCR) b chain is ﬁrst expressed at the double-negative pre-T cell stage, and the complete T cell re-
ceptor is expressed in double-positive cells. The pre-TCR consists of the TCR b chain associated with a protein
called pre-Ta. Maturation culminates in the development of CD4þ and CD8þ single-positive T cells. As with B
cells, failure to express antigen receptors at any stage leads to death of the cells by apoptosis.
96
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
to the development of different classes of T cells that
have receptors that recognize different classes of MHC
molecules.
Early Steps in T Cell Maturation
The least developed progenitors in the thymus are
called pro-T cells or double-negative T cells because
they do not express CD4 or CD8. These cells expand in
number mainly under the inﬂuence of IL-7 produced in
the thymus. TCR b gene recombination, mediated by
the VDJ recombinase, occurs in some of these double-
negative cells. (The gd T cells undergo similar recom-
bination involving TCR g and d loci, but they belong to
a distinct lineage and are not discussed further.) If VDJ
recombination is successful in one of the two inherited
TCR b chain loci and a TCR b chain protein is syn-
thesized, it is expressed on the cell surface in association
with an invariant protein called pre-Ta, to form the
pre-TCR complex of pre-T cells. If the recombination
in one of the two inherited loci is not successful,
recombination will take place on the other locus. If that
also fails and a complete TCR b chain is not produced
in a pro-T cell, the cell dies.
The pre-TCR complex delivers intracellular signals
once it is assembled, similar to the signals from the pre-
BCR complex in developing B cells. These signals
promote survival, proliferation, and TCR a gene
recombination and inhibit VDJ recombination in the
second b chain locus (allelic exclusion). Failure to ex-
press the a chain and the complete TCR again results in
death of the cell. The surviving cells express the com-
plete ab TCR and both the CD4 and CD8 coreceptors;
these cells are called double-positive T cells.
Selection of Mature T Cells
The different ab TCRs produced indouble-positive T cells
are capable ofrecognizing peptidesdisplayed byany MHC
allele in the population, but most of these are not present
in each individual. Therefore, there have to be mecha-
nisms that preserve the T cells that can recognize peptide-
MHC complexes in each individual and eliminate cells
incapable of recognizing that individual’s MHC mole-
cules. If the TCR of a T cell recognizes an MHC molecule
in the thymus, which must be a self MHC molecule dis-
playing a self peptide, and if the interaction is of low or
moderate afﬁnity, this T cell is selected to survive (Fig
4.14). T cells that do not recognize an MHC molecule in
the thymus die by apoptosis; these T cells would not be
functional because they would be incapable of seeing
MHC-displayed antigens in that individual. This preser-
vation of self MHCerestricted (i.e., useful) T cells is the
process of positive selection. During this process, T cells
whose TCRs recognize class I MHCepeptide complexes
preserve the expression of CD8, the coreceptor that binds
toclassI MHC,and loseexpression ofCD4,the coreceptor
speciﬁc for class II MHC molecules. Conversely, if a T cell
recognizes class II MHCepeptide complexes, this cell
maintains expression of CD4 and loses expression of CD8.
Thus, what emerges are single-positive T cells (or single-
positive thymocytes), which are either CD8þ class I MHC
restricted or CD4þ class II MHC restricted. During posi-
tive selection, the T cells also become committed to
different functional fates: the CD8þ T cells will differen-
tiate into CTLs on activation, and the CD4þ cells will
differentiate into cytokine-producing helper T cells.
Immature, double-positive T cells whose receptors
strongly recognize MHC-peptide complexes in the
thymic cortex undergo apoptosis. This is the process of
negative selection, and it serves to eliminate poten-
tially dangerous T lymphocytes. Negative selection
continues in immature CD4þ and CD8þ single-positive
T cells in the thymic medulla. If a T cell that recognizes
a self peptide-MHC complex with high avidity in the
thymus were allowed to mature, recognition of the
same self antigen in the periphery could lead to
harmful immune responses against self tissues, so such
a T cell must be eliminated. Some immature CD4þ
T cells that recognize self antigens in the thymus with
intermediate avidity do not die but develop into regu-
latory T cells (Treg) (see Chapter 9), although the basis
of which cells die and which become Tregs is not
known. Most of the proteins present in the thymus are
self proteins, because foreign (microbial and tumor)
antigens are typically captured and taken to secondary
lymphoid organs. Some of these self proteins are pre-
sent throughout the body, and others are proteins that
are restricted to particular tissues but are expressed in
thymic epithelial cells by special mechanisms, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 9 in the context of self-tolerance.
It may seem surprising that both positive selection
and negative selection are mediated by recognition of
the same set of self MHCeself peptide complexes in the
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
97
 
thymus. The two factors that determine the choice be-
tween positive and negative selection are the afﬁnity of
the TCR and the concentration of the self antigen in the
thymus. If a TCR strongly recognizes an abundant self
antigen in the thymus, that T cell will be negatively
selected, which makes sense because strong recognition
of an abundant self antigen has the potential for causing
autoimmunity. However, if a TCR recognizes a self
peptideeself MHC complex weakly, that T cell will be
positively selected because there is a reasonable chance
the T cell will recognize a foreign peptide presented by
self MHC strongly. This is the process that gives rise to
the repertoire of functional T cells.
SUMMARY
• In the adaptive immune system, the molecules
responsible for speciﬁc recognition of antigens are
antibodies and T cell antigen receptors.
• Antibodies (also called immunoglobulins) may be
produced as membrane receptors of B lymphocytes
Pre-TCR
Negative
selection
Positive
selection
Positive
selection
Strong recognition of
either class I or class II
MHC + peptide
Weak recognition of 
class I MHC + peptide
Weak recognition of 
class II MHC + peptide
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Stem
cell
Double
negative
(CD4–CD8–)
Pro-T cell
Double
positive
(CD4+CD8+)
immature
T cell
Pre-T
cell
Mature
CD4+ T cell
Mature
CD8+ T cell
Failure of
positive
selection
(death by
neglect)
No recognition of 
MHC + peptide
Thymocyte
APC
Fig. 4.14 Selection of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)erestricted CD4þ and CD8þ T lymphocytes.
The strength of recognition of peptide-MHC complexes by immature double-positive T cells in the thymus
determines the development of these cells into single-positive CD4þ and CD8þ cells (positive selection) and
the elimination of self-reactive cells (negative selection). Only class II MHC is shown for negative selection, but
the same process eliminates self-reactive class I MHCerestricted CD8þ T cells. APC, Antigen-presenting cell.
98
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
 
and as proteins secreted by antigen-stimulated B cells
that
have
differentiated
into
antibody-secreting
plasma cells. Secreted antibodies are the effector mol-
ecules of humoral immunity, capable of neutralizing
microbes and microbial toxins and eliminating them
by activating various effector mechanisms.
• T cell receptors (TCRs) are membrane receptors and
are not secreted.
• The core structure of antibodies consists of two iden-
tical heavy chains and two identical light chains,
forming a disulﬁde-linked complex. Each chain con-
sists of a variable (V) region, which is the portion
that recognizes antigen, and a constant (C) region,
which provides structural stability and, in heavy
chains, performs the effector functions of antibodies.
The V regions of one heavy chain and one light
chain together form the antigen-binding site, and
thus the core structure has two identical antigen-
binding sites.
• T cell receptors consist of an a chain and a b chain.
Each chain contains one V region and one C region,
and both chains participate in the recognition of an-
tigens, which for most T cells are peptides displayed
by MHC molecules.
• The V regions of immunoglobulin (Ig) and TCR mol-
ecules contain hypervariable segments, also called
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs), which
are the regions of contact with antigens.
• The inherited genes that encode antigen receptors
consist of multiple segments separated in the germ-
line and brought together during maturation of lym-
phocytes. In B cells, the Ig gene segments undergo
recombination as the cells mature in the bone
marrow, and in T cells, the TCR gene segments un-
dergo recombination during maturation in the
thymus.
• Receptors of different speciﬁcities are generated in
part by different combinations of V, D, and J gene
segments. The process of recombination introduces
additional variability in the nucleotide sequences at
the sites of recombination by adding or removing
nucleotides from the junctions. The result of this
introduced variability is the development of a diverse
repertoire of lymphocytes, in which clones of cells
with different antigen speciﬁcities express receptors
that differ in sequence and recognition, and most
of the differences are concentrated at the regions of
gene recombination.
• During their maturation, lymphocytes are selected to
survive at several checkpoints; only cells with com-
plete functional antigen receptors are preserved
and expanded. In addition, T lymphocytes are posi-
tively selected to recognize peptide antigens dis-
played by self MHC molecules and to ensure that
the recognition of the appropriate type of MHC
molecule (class I or class II) matches the coreceptor
(CD8 or CD4, respectively) that is preserved.
• Immature lymphocytes that strongly recognize self
antigens are negatively selected and prevented from
completing their maturation, or in B cells undergo
further light chain gene rearrangements that change
thier speciﬁcity, thus eliminating cells with the po-
tential of reacting in harmful ways against self
tissues.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are the functionally distinct domains (regions)
of antibody and TCR molecules? What features of
the amino acid sequences in these regions are impor-
tant for their functions?
2. What are the differences in the types of antigens
recognized by antibodies and TCRs?
3. What mechanisms contribute to the diversity of
antibody and TCR molecules? Which of these mech-
anisms contributes the most to the diversity?
4. What are some of the checkpoints during lympho-
cyte maturation that ensure survival of the useful
cells?
5. What is the phenomenon of negative selection, and
what is its importance?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
CHAPTER 4
Antigen Recognition in the Adaptive Immune System
99
 
5
T CelleMediated Immunity
Activation of T Lymphocytes
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Steps in T Cell Responses, 102
Antigen Recognition and Costimulation, 104
Recognition of Peptide-MHC Complexes, 104
Role of Adhesion Molecules in T Cell
Responses, 107
Role of Costimulation in T Cell Activation, 107
Stimuli for Activation of CD8D T Cells, 109
Biochemical Pathways of T Cell Activation, 110
Functional Responses of T Lymphocytes to
Antigen and Costimulation, 114
Secretion of Cytokines and Expression of
Cytokine Receptors, 114
Clonal Expansion, 114
Differentiation of Naive T Cells into Effector
Cells, 115
Development of Memory T Lymphocytes, 116
Regulation of T Cell Responses by Inhibitory
Receptors (Coinhibitors), 118
Migration of T Lymphocytes in Cell-Mediated
Immune Reactions, 118
Decline of the Immune Response, 123
Summary, 124
T lymphocytes perform multiple functions in defend-
illkng against infections by various kinds of microbes. A
major role for T lymphocytes is in cell-mediated im-
munity, which provides defense against infections by
microbes that live and replicate inside host cells. In all
viral and some bacterial, fungal, and protozoan in-
fections, microbes may ﬁnd a haven inside cells, from
where they must be eliminated by cell-mediated im-
mune responses (Fig. 5.1).
• Many microbes are ingested by phagocytes as part of
the early defense mechanisms of innate immunity
and are killed by microbicidal mechanisms that are
largely limited to phagocytic vesicles (to protect the
phagocytes themselves from damage by these mech-
anisms). However, some of these microbes have
evolved to resist the microbicidal activities of
phagocytes and are able to survive, and even repli-
cate, in the vesicles of macrophages. In such infec-
tions, CD4þ helper T cells enhance the ability of
macrophages to kill the ingested microbes.
• Some extracellular microbes, such as bacteria and
fungi, are readily destroyed if they are phagocytosed,
especially by neutrophils. Other extracellular patho-
gens, such as helminthic parasites, are destroyed by
eosinophils. In these infections, CD4þ T cells pro-
duce cytokines that recruit and activate the leuko-
cytes that destroy the microbes.
• Some microbes, notably viruses, are able to infect
and replicate inside a wide variety of cells, and parts
of the life cycles of the viruses take place in the
cytosol and nucleus. These infected cells often do
not possess intrinsic mechanisms for destroying the
100
 
microbes. Even some phagocytosed microbes within
macrophages can escape into the cytosol and evade
microbicidal mechanisms, which are restricted to
vesicles. CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) kill
the infected cells, thus eliminating the reservoir of
infection.
Other populations of CD4þ T cells help B cells
produce antibodies as part of humoral immune re-
sponses (see Chapter 7). Although our emphasis in this
chapter is on defense against infections, the principal
physiologic function of the immune system, some
T cells, especially CD8þ CTLs, also kill cancer cells.
This role of T cells is discussed in Chapter 10.
Most of the functions of T lymphocytesdactivation
of phagocytes, killing of infected and tumor cells, and
help for B cellsdrequire that the T lymphocytes
interact with other cells, which may be phagocytes,
infected host cells, or B lymphocytes. Furthermore, the
initiation of T cell responses requires that naive T cells
recognize antigens displayed by dendritic cells, which
capture antigens from epithelial barriers and organs
and concentrate the antigens in secondary lymphoid
organs. Recall that the speciﬁcity of T cells for peptides
displayed by major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules ensures that the T cells can see and respond
only to antigens inside other host cells (see Chapters 3
and 4). This chapter discusses the way in which T
lymphocytes are activated by recognition of cell-
associated antigens and other stimuli. We address
the following questions:
• What stimuli are needed to activate naive T lympho-
cytes and initiate cell-mediated immune responses?
• How are the few naive T cells speciﬁc for any
microbe converted into the large number of effector
T cells that have specialized functions and the ability
to eliminate diverse microbes?
• What biochemical signals are required for the activa-
tion of T lymphocytes?
Examples
Major effector T cell response
Intracellular microbes
Intracellular bacteria:
  Mycobacteria
  Listeria monocytogenes
  Legionella pneumophila
Fungi:
  Cryptococcus neoformans
Protozoa:
  Leishmania
  Trypanosoma cruzi
Viruses:
   All
Rickettsiae:
   All
Protozoa:
   Plasmodium falciparum
   Cryptosporidium parvum
CD4+ T cells that function by
secreted cytokines and CD40L
CD8+ T cells that kill infected 
cells in which microbes have 
escaped from phagolysosomes 
into cytosol
CD8+ T cells that kill 
infected cells
All cells
Phagocytosed
microbes that
survive within
phagolysosomes
Microbes that
escape from
phagolysosomes
into cytosol
Virus
Microbes that infect
non-phagocytic cells
Cellular receptor
for virus
A
B
Phagocyte 
Fig. 5.1 Types of intracellular microbes combated by T cellemediated immunity. A, Microbes may be
ingested by phagocytes and may survive within vesicles (phagolysosomes) or escape into the cytosol, where
they are not susceptible to the microbicidal mechanisms of the phagocytes. Helper T cells combat microbes
by enhancing the killing functions of the phagocytes in which the microbes reside; the roles of cytokines and
CD40-ligand (CD40L) are discussed later. B, Viruses may infect many cell types, including nonphagocytic cells,
and replicate in the nucleus and cytosol of the infected cells. Rickettsiae and some protozoa are obligate
intracellular parasites that reside in nonphagocytic cells. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) combat these mi-
crobes by killing the cells in which they reside. CTLs also destroy cells in which ingested microbes have
escaped into the cytosol (A).
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
101
 
After describing here how T cells recognize and
respond to the antigens of cell-associated microbes, the
development of effector T lymphocytes and their
functions in cell-mediated immunity are discussed in
Chapter 6 and the roles of helper T cells in antibody
responses are discussed in Chapter 7.
STEPS IN T CELL RESPONSES
Naive T lymphocytes that recognize antigens in the
secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs respond by
proliferation and differentiation into effector cells,
which perform their functions when they are acti-
vated by the same antigens in any infected tissue
(Fig. 5.2). Naive T cells express antigen receptors and
coreceptors that recognize cells harboring microbes, but
naive cells are incapable of performing the effector
functions
required
for
eliminating
the
microbes.
Differentiated effector cells are capable of performing
these functions, which they do at any site of infection.
In this chapter, we focus on the initial responses of
naive T cells to antigens in secondary lymphoid organs.
The responses of naive T lymphocytes to host cell-
associated microbial antigens consist of a series of
sequential steps that result in an increase in the
number of antigen-speciﬁc T cells and the differen-
tiation of naive T cells into effector and memory cells
(Fig. 5.3).
• One of the earliest responses is the secretion of cyto-
kines required for proliferation and differentiation
and increased expression of receptors for various cy-
tokines. The cytokine interleukin-2 (IL-2), which is
produced by antigen-activated T cells, stimulates
proliferation of these cells, resulting in a rapid in-
crease in the number of antigen-speciﬁc lympho-
cytes, a process called clonal expansion.
• The activated lymphocytes differentiate, resulting in
the conversion of naive T cells into a population of
effector T cells that function to eliminate microbes.
• Many of the effector T cells leave the lymphoid or-
gans, enter the circulation, and migrate to sites of
infection, where they can eradicate the microbes.
Some activated T cells may remain in secondary
lymphoid organs, where they provide signals to B
cells that promote antibody responses against the
microbes.
• Some of the progeny of the T cells that have prolifer-
ated in response to antigen develop into memory
T cells, which are long-lived, circulate in the blood
or reside in tissues for years, and are ready to respond
rapidly to subsequent exposure to the same microbe.
• As effector T cells eliminate the infectious agent, the
stimuli that triggered T cell expansion and differen-
tiation are also eliminated. As a result, most of the
cells in the greatly expanded clones of antigen-
speciﬁc lymphocytes die, returning the system to a
resting state, with only memory cells remaining
from the immune response.
This sequence of events is common to both CD4þ
and CD8þ T lymphocytes, although there are important
differences in the properties and effector functions of
these two classes of T cells, as discussed in Chapter 6.
Naive and effector T cells have different patterns
of circulation and migration through tissues, which
are critical for their different roles in immune re-
sponses. As discussed in previous chapters, naive T
lymphocytes constantly recirculate through secondary
lymphoid organs searching for foreign protein anti-
gens. Microbial antigens are transported from the
portals of entry of the microbes to the same regions of
the lymphoid organs where the recirculating naive
T cells are located. Dendritic cells are the most efﬁcient
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) for transporting anti-
gens to lymph nodes and for stimulating naive T cells
(see Chapter 3). In the secondary lymphoid organs,
dendritic cells process the antigens and display pep-
tides bound to MHC molecules at the cell surface.
When a T cell recognizes antigen, it is transiently
arrested on the dendritic cell and receives signals from
the antigen receptor and other receptors that activate
the T cell. Activation results in proliferation and dif-
ferentiation, and then the cells may leave the lymphoid
organ and migrate preferentially to the inﬂamed tissue,
the original source of the antigen. The regulation of
this directed migration is discussed later in this
chapter.
With this overview, we proceed to a description of
the stimuli required for T cell activation and regulation.
We then describe the biochemical signals that are
generated by antigen recognition, the biologic responses
of the lymphocytes, and how T cell responses are
regulated.
102
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
Migration of effector
T cells and other
leukocytes to
site of antigen
Inflammation,
phagocytosis and
killing of microbes
CD4+
T cells
Naive
T cell
CD8+
T cells
CD4+ 
effector
T cells
CD8+ 
T cells
(CTLs)
Differentiated
effector T cells
enter circulation
Effector T cells 
encounter antigens 
in peripheral tissues
Cells with intracellular microbes
Activation of
effector T cells
CTL killing of
infected cell
Induction of
response
T cell effector
functions
Antigen
recognition in
lymphoid organs
T cell 
proliferation and
differentiation
Cytokines
Fig. 5.2 Induction and effector phases of cell-mediated immunity. Induction of response: Naive CD4þ T cells
and CD8þ T cells recognize peptides that are derived from protein antigens and presented by DCs in peripheral
lymphoid organs. The T lymphocytes are stimulated to proliferate and differentiate into effector cells, many of
which enter the circulation. Some of the activated CD4þ T cells remain in the lymph node, migrate into follicles,
and help B cells to produce antibodies (shown in Fig. 5.13). Migration of effector T cells and other leukocytes to
site of antigen: effector T cells and other leukocytes migrate through blood vessels in peripheral tissues by
binding to endothelial cells that have been activated by cytokines produced in response to infection in these
tissues. T cell effector functions: CD4þ T cells recruit and activate phagocytes to destroy microbes, and CD8þ
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) kill infected cells.
 
ANTIGEN RECOGNITION AND
COSTIMULATION
The initiation of T cell responses requires multiple
receptors on the T cells recognizing their speciﬁc li-
gands on APCs (Fig. 5.4).
• The
T
cell
receptor
(TCR)
recognizes
MHC-
associated peptide antigens.
• CD4 or CD8 coreceptors on the T cells bind to MHC
molecules on the APC and help the TCR complex
deliver activating signals.
• Adhesion molecules strengthen the binding of T cells
to APCs.
• Molecules called costimulators, which are expressed
on APCs after encounter with microbes, bind to
their receptors on the naive T cells, and promote re-
sponses, especially to infectious pathogens.
• Cytokines secreted by various cell types bind to re-
ceptors on the T cells and amplify the T cell response
and direct it along various differentiation pathways.
The roles of these molecules in T cell responses to
antigens are described next. Cytokines are discussed
mainly in Chapter 6.
Recognition of Peptide-MHC Complexes
The TCR and the CD4 or CD8 coreceptor together
recognize complexes of peptide antigens and MHC
molecules on APCs, and this recognition provides the
initiating, or ﬁrst, signal for T cell activation
(Fig. 5.5). The TCRs expressed on all CD4þ and CD8þ
T cells consist of an a chain and a b chain, both of
which participate in antigen recognition (see Fig. 4.7).
(A small subset of T cells expresses TCRs composed of
g and d chains, which do not recognize MHC-
associated peptide antigens.) The TCR of a T cell spe-
ciﬁc for a foreign (e.g., microbial) peptide recognizes
the displayed peptide and simultaneously recognizes
residues of the MHC molecule located around the
peptide-binding cleft. Every mature MHC-restricted
T cell expresses either CD4 or CD8, both of which
are called coreceptors because they bind to the same
MHC molecules that the TCR binds and are required
for initiation of signaling from the TCR complex. At the
time when the TCR is recognizing the peptide-MHC
complex, CD4 or CD8 binds the class II or class I
MHC molecule, respectively, at a site of the MHC
Lymphoid organs
Peripheral tissues
Proliferation Differentiation
Cytokine
secretion
and cytokine
receptor
expression
Antigen
recognition
Effector functions
APC
Naive
T cell
(CD4+
or CD8+)
Cytokines
(e.g., IL-2)
IL-2R
CD4+: Activation
of macrophages,
B cells, other
cells
CD8+: Killing
of infected
“target cells”; 
macrophage
activation
Effector T cell
(CD4+ helper
or CD8+ CTL)
Memory T cell
(CD4+ or CD8+)
Fig. 5.3 Steps in the activation of T lymphocytes. Naive T cells recognize MHC-associated peptide antigens
displayed on antigen-presenting cells and other signals (not shown). The T cells respond by producing
interleukin-2 (IL-2) and expressing receptors for IL-2, leading to an autocrine pathway of cell proliferation. The
result is expansion of the clone of T cells that are speciﬁc for the antigen. Some of the progeny differentiate into
effector cells, which serve various functions in cell-mediated immunity, and some differentiate into memory
cells, which survive for long periods. Other changes associated with activation, such as the expression of
various surface molecules, are not shown. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; IL-2R,
interleukin-2 receptor.
104
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
LFA-1
CD4
CD3
ζ
TCR
CD28
ICAM-1
Class II
MHC
B7-1/B7-2
CTLA-4
B7-1/B7-2
PD-1
PD-L1/PD-L2
Peptide
Signal 
transduction
Receptors and signaling
molecules of CD4+ lymphocyte
Ligands of class II
MHC expressing APC
Antigen
recognition
Signal 
transduction
Adhesion
ITAM
Inhibitory motif
A
B Surface molecules
of T lymphocytes
Ligand
Function
None
Costimulatory 
receptor: delivers
activating signals
Inhibitor:Blocks
costimulary signals
Signal transduction
by TCR complex
Antigen recognition
Antigen-presenting cells
Antigen-presenting cells
None
B7-1/
B7-2
B7-1/
B7-2
CD3
TCR
ζ
CD28
All nucleated
cells
All T cells
All T cells
All T cells
Coreceptor: delivers
activating signals
Class I 
MHC
Peptide-
MHC
CD8
CTLA-4
Antigen presenting
cells
Class II 
MHC
Coreceptor: delivers
activating signals
CD4
Name
Expressed on
Inhibitor: Blocks
costimulary and
TCR signals
Tissue cells, tumor cells
PD-L1/
PD-L2
PD-1
Antigen presenting cells,
endothelium
Adhesion
ICAM-1
LFA-1
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
105
 
molecule separate from the peptide-binding cleft and
thus brings signaling enzymes close to the CD3 and z
tails to initiate signal transduction. As discussed in
Chapter 3, when protein antigens are ingested by APCs
from
the
extracellular
milieu
into
vesicles,
these
antigens are processed into peptides that are displayed
by class II MHC molecules. By contrast, protein anti-
gens present in the cytosol are processed by protea-
somes
into
peptides
displayed
by
class
I
MHC
molecules. Thus, because of the speciﬁcity of the cor-
eceptors for different classes of MHC molecules, CD4þ
and CD8þ T cells recognize peptides generated through
different protein processing pathways. The TCR and its
coreceptor need to be engaged simultaneously to
initiate the T cell response, and multiple TCRs likely
need to be triggered for T cell activation to occur. Once
these conditions are achieved, the T cell begins its
activation program.
The biochemical signals that lead to T cell activation
are triggered by a set of proteins linked to the TCR that
are part of the TCR complex and by the CD4 or CD8
coreceptor (see Fig. 5.5). In lymphocytes, antigen
recognition and subsequent signaling are performed by
different sets of molecules. The TCR ab heterodimer
recognizes antigens, but it is not able to transmit
biochemical signals to the interior of the cell. The TCR
is noncovalently associated with a complex of trans-
membrane signaling proteins, including three CD3
proteins and a protein called the z chain. The TCR,
CD3, and z chain make up the TCR complex. Although
the a and b TCR chains must vary among T cell clones
in order to recognize diverse antigens, the signaling
functions of the TCR complex are the same in all
clones, and the CD3 and z proteins are invariant among
different T cells. The mechanisms of signal transduction
by these proteins of the TCR complex are discussed
later in the chapter.
T cells can also be activated by molecules that bind
to the TCRs of many or all clones of T cells, regardless
Fig. 5.4 Receptors and ligands involved in T cell activation and inhibition. A, Major surface molecules of
CD4þ T cells involved in the activation of these cells and their corresponding ligands on antigen-presenting
cells. CD8þ T cells use most of the same molecules, except that the TCR recognizes peptide-class I MHC
complexes, and the coreceptor is CD8, which recognizes class I MHC. CD3 is composed of three polypeptide
chains, d, ε, and g, arranged in two pairs (dε and gε); we show CD3 as three chains. Immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based activation motifs (ITAMs) are the regions of cytosolic tails of signaling proteins that are phosphorylated
on tyrosine residues and become docking sites for other tyrosine kinases (see Fig. 5.10). Immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs are the regions of signaling proteins that are sites for tyrosine phosphatases
that counteract actions of ITAMs. B, Important properties of major surface molecules of T cells involved in
functional responses. Cytokines and cytokine receptors are not listed here. The functions of most of these
molecules are described later in this chapter. LFA-1 is an integrin involved in leukocyte binding to endothelium
and T cell binding to APCs. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; ICAM-1, intercellular adhesion molecule 1; LFA-1,
leukocyte functioneassociated antigen 1; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; PD-1, programmed death-1;
TCR, T cell receptor.
APC
T cell
Class II MHC
CD3
CD4
ζ
TCR
ITAM
Signal
transduction
Peptide-MHC
recognition
LCK
P
P
P
Fig. 5.5 Antigen recognition and signal transduction during
T cell activation. Different T cell molecules recognize antigen
and deliver biochemical signals to the interior of the cell as a
result of antigen recognition. The CD3 and z proteins are non-
covalently attached to the T cell receptor (TCR) a and b chains
by interactions between charged amino acids in the trans-
membrane domains of these proteins (not shown). The ﬁgure
illustrates a CD4þ T cell; the same interactions are involved in
the activation of CD8þ T cells, except that the coreceptor is CD8
and the TCR recognizes a peptideeclass I MHC complex. APC,
Antigen-presenting cell; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motifs; MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
106
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
of the peptide-MHC speciﬁcity of the TCR. For
instance, some microbial toxins may bind to the TCRs
of many T cell clones and also bind to MHC class II
molecules on APCs outside the peptide-binding cleft.
These toxins activate a large number of T cells, resulting
in excessive cytokine release and systemic inﬂammatory
disease. The toxins are called superantigens because,
like conventional antigens, they bind to MHC mole-
cules and to TCRs, but they engage many more TCRs
than typical antigens do.
Role of Adhesion Molecules in T Cell
Responses
Adhesion molecules on T cells recognize their li-
gands on APCs and stabilize the binding of the
T cells to the APCs. Most TCRs bind the peptide-
MHC complexes for which they are speciﬁc with low
afﬁnity. To induce a response, the adhesion of T cells to
APCs must be stabilized for a sufﬁciently long period to
achieve the necessary signaling threshold. This stabili-
zation function is performed by adhesion molecules on
the T cells that bind to ligands expressed on APCs. The
most important of these adhesion molecules belong to
the family of heterodimeric (two-chain) proteins called
integrins. The major T cell integrin involved in binding
to APCs is leukocyte functioneassociated antigen 1
(LFA-1), whose ligand on APCs is called intercellular
adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1).
On resting naive T cells, which are cells that have not
previously recognized and been activated by antigen, the
LFA-1 integrin is in a low-afﬁnity state. Antigen
recognition by a T cell increases the afﬁnity of that cell’s
LFA-1. Therefore, once a T cell sees antigen, it increases
the strength of its binding to the APC presenting that
antigen. Integrin-mediated adhesion is critical for the
ability of T cells to bind to APCs displaying microbial
antigens. Integrins also play an important role in
directing the migration of effector T cells and other
leukocytes from the circulation to sites of infection. This
process is described in Chapter 2 and later in this
chapter.
Role of Costimulation in T Cell Activation
The full activation of T cells depends on the recog-
nition of costimulators on APCs in addition to
antigen (Fig. 5.6). We have previously referred to cos-
timulators as second signals for T cell activation. The
name costimulator derives from the fact that these
molecules provide stimuli to T cells that function
together with stimulation by antigen.
The best-deﬁned costimulators for T cells are two ho-
mologous proteins called B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86),
both of which are expressed on APCs and whose expres-
sion is increased when the APCs encounter microbes.
These B7 proteins are recognized by a receptor called
CD28, which is expressed on most T cells. Several proteins
that are homologous to B7 or CD28 function to stimulate
or inhibit immune responses (Fig. 5.7). The binding of B7
on the APCs to CD28 on T cells generates signals that
work together with signals generated by TCR recognition
of antigen presented by MHC proteins on the same APCs.
CD28-mediated signaling is essential for the responses of
naive T cells; in the absence of CD28:B7 interactions,
antigenrecognitionbytheTCRisinsufﬁcientforinitiating
T cell responses. The requirement for costimulation en-
sures that naive T lymphocytes are activated maximally by
microbial antigens and not by harmless foreign substances
or by self antigens, because, as stated previously, microbes
stimulate the expression of B7 costimulators on APCs.
Despite the increased expression of costimulators, most
infections do not trigger harmful reactions against self
antigens, mainly because numerous control mechanisms
prevent autoimmunity (see Chapter 9).
A protein called inducible costimulator (ICOS),
which is homologous to CD28 and also expressed on
T cells, plays an important role in the development and
function of follicular helper T cells during germinal
center B cell responses (see Chapter 7). The CD28
family includes two inhibitory receptors that resemble
CD28 structurally, called CTLA-4 and PD-1; these and
their ligands are discussed later in the chapter.
Another set of molecules that participate in T cell
responses are CD40 ligand (CD40L, or CD154) on
activated T cells and CD40 on APCs. These molecules do
not directly enhance T cell activation. Instead, CD40L
expressed on an antigen-stimulated T cell binds to CD40
on APCs and activates the APCs to express more B7
costimulators and to secrete cytokines (e.g., IL-12) that
enhance T cell differentiation. Thus, the CD40L-CD40
interaction promotes T cell activation by making APCs
better at stimulating T cells. CD40L on effector CD4þ
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
107
 
T cells also enhances activation of macrophages and B
cells, as discussed in Chapters 6 and 7.
The role of costimulation in T cell activation explains
an observation mentioned in earlier chapters. Protein
antigens, such as those used in vaccines, fail to elicit
T celledependent immune responses unless these anti-
gens are administered with substances that activate APCs,
especially dendritic cells. Such substances are called ad-
juvants, and they function mainly by inducing the
expression of costimulators on APCs and by stimulating
the APCs to secrete cytokines that activate T cells. Most
adjuvants used in experimental studies are products of
microbes (e.g., killed mycobacteria) or substances that
mimic microbes, and they bind to pattern recognition
receptors of the innate immune system, such as Toll-like
receptors and NOD-like receptors (see Chapter 2).
Numerous adjuvants have been developed for human
vaccines (see Chapter 8). They are postulated to work, at
least in part, by also eliciting innate immune responses
that activate APCs to increase expression of costimulators
and secretion of T celleactivating cytokines. In mRNA
vaccines, lipids that encapsulate the RNA function as ad-
juvants. Thus, adjuvants trick the immune system into
responding to puriﬁed protein antigens in or produced by
a vaccine as if these proteins were parts of infectious mi-
crobes. Some live virus vaccines, such as the attenuated
viral vaccine against measles, mumps, and rubella or
hybrid adenovirus vaccines against SARS-CoV-2, do not
havetobegivenwithadjuvantsbecausethevaccineviruses
express various molecules that activate the innate immune
system.
The increasing understanding of costimulators has
led to new strategies for inhibiting harmful immune
responses. Agents that block B7:CD28 interactions are
Antigen recognition
T cell response
"Resting" 
(costimulator-
deficient) APC
Naive 
T cell
Signal 1
Signal 2
No response
or tolerance
Activated APC:
increased 
expression of 
costimulators
Effector and
memory T cells
T cell proliferation
and differentiation
CD28
B7
CD28
IL-2
Activation of APCs by microbes, 
innate immune response
Fig. 5.6 Role of costimulation in T cell activation. Resting antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which have not
been exposed to microbes or adjuvants, may present peptide antigens, but they do not express costimulators
and are unable to activate naive T cells. T cells that recognize antigen without costimulation may die or become
unresponsive (tolerant) to subsequent exposure to antigen. Microbes, as well as cytokines produced during
innate immune responses to microbes, induce the expression of costimulators, such as B7 molecules, on the
APCs. The B7 costimulators are recognized by the CD28 receptor on naive T cells, providing signal 2. In
conjunction with antigen recognition (signal 1), this recognition initiates T cell responses. Activated APCs also
produce cytokines that stimulate the differentiation of naive T cells into effector cells (not shown). IL,
Interleukin.
108
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
used in the treatment of disorders in which T cell acti-
vation causes organ dysfunction, such as certain auto-
immune diseases and graft rejection, and antibodies that
block CD40:CD40L interactions are being tested as
treatments for these disorders.
Stimuli for Activation of CD8D T Cells
The activation of naive CD8D T cells is stimulated by
recognition of class I MHCeassociated peptides and
requires costimulation and helper T cells. The re-
sponses of CD8þ T cells differ in several ways from
responses of CD4þ T lymphocytes:
• The initiation of CD8þ T cell activation often requires
cytosolic antigen from one cell (e.g., virus-infected or
tumor cell) to be cross-presented by dendritic cells
(see Fig. 3.16).
• The differentiation of naive CD8þ T cells into fully
active CTLs and memory cells may require the
concomitant activation of CD4þ helper T cells
(Fig. 5.8). When virus-infected or tumor cells are
ingested by dendritic cells, the APCs may present viral
or tumor antigens from the cytosol in complex with
class I MHC molecules and from vesicles in complex
with class II MHC molecules. Thus, both CD8þ
T cells and CD4þ T cells speciﬁc for viral or tumor an-
tigens are activated near one another. The CD4þ T cells
may produce cytokines or membrane molecules that
help to activate the CD8þ T cells. CD4þ helper cells
CD28
ICOS
(CD278)
CTLA-4
(CD152)
PD-1
(CD279)
Name
Major
function
Name
B7-1
(CD80)
B7-2
(CD86)
PD-L1
(B7-H1,
CD274)
PD-L2
(B7-DC,
CD273)
ICOS-L
(CD275)
Activation
(naive 
T cells)
Activation
(follicular
helper T cells
in antibody
responses)
Inhibition
(mediates
suppressive
function of
regulatory
T cells)
Inhibition
Ligands on
APCs and
other cells
Receptors
on T cells
Fig. 5.7 Proteins of the B7 and CD28 families. Ligands on APCs that are homologous to B7 bind to receptors
on T cells that are homologous to CD28. Different ligand-receptor pairs serve distinct roles in immune re-
sponses. CD28 and ICOS are stimulatory receptors on T cells, and CTLA-4 and PD-1 are inhibitory receptors.
Their functions are discussed in the text.
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
109
 
alsoenhancethe expression ofcostimulatorymolecules
on APCs that activate CD8þ T cells. The requirement
for helper T cells in CD8þ T cell responses is the likely
explanation for the increased susceptibility to viral in-
fections and cancers in patients infected with the hu-
man immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), which kills
CD4þ but not CD8þ T cells.
Now that we have described the stimuli required to
activate naive T lymphocytes, we next consider the
biochemical pathways triggered by antigen recognition
and other stimuli.
BIOCHEMICAL PATHWAYS OF T CELL
ACTIVATION
Following
the
recognition
of
antigens
and
costimulators, T cells express proteins that are
involved in their proliferation, differentiation, and
effector functions (Fig. 5.9). Naive T cells that have not
encountered antigen have a low level of protein syn-
thesis. Within minutes of antigen recognition, new gene
transcription and protein synthesis are seen in the
activated T cells. These newly expressed proteins
mediate many of the subsequent responses of the
T cells. The expression of these proteins is induced by
signal transduction pathways triggered by the TCR
complex and costimulatory receptors.
Antigen recognition activates several biochemical
signaling events, including the activation of enzymes
such as kinases, recruitment of adaptor proteins, and
production or activation of functional transcription
factors (Fig. 5.10). These biochemical pathways are
initiated when TCR complexes and the appropriate
coreceptor are brought together by binding to MHC-
peptide complexes on the surface of APCs. In addi-
tion, there is an orderly movement of proteins in both
the APC and T cell membranes at the region of cell-to-
cell contact, such that the TCR complex, CD4/CD8
coreceptors, and CD28 coalesce to the center and the
integrins move to form a peripheral ring. This redis-
tribution of signaling and adhesion molecules is
required for optimal induction of activating signals in
the T cell. The region of contact between the APC and
T cell, including the redistributed membrane proteins,
is called the immune synapse. Although the synapse
was ﬁrst described as the site of delivery of activating
signals from membrane receptors to the cell’s interior, it
may serve other functions. Some effector molecules and
cytokines may be secreted through this region, ensuring
that they do not diffuse away but are targeted to the cell
in contact with the T cell. Enzymes that degrade or
inhibit signaling molecules are also recruited to the
synapse,
so
it
may
be
involved
in
terminating
lymphocyte activation as well.
As discussed earlier, antigen recognition simulta-
neously engages the TCR and CD4 or CD8 coreceptor.
The cytoplasmic tails of CD4 and CD8 have an attached
protein tyrosine kinase called LCK, which is constitu-
tively active, unlike other enzymes involved downstream
in TCR signaling. Therefore, LCK is poised to initiate the
signaling cascade. Several transmembrane signaling
proteins are associated with the TCR, including the CD3
and z chains Chapter 4. CD3 and z contain motifs, each
with two tyrosine residues, called immunoreceptor
APC
CD8+
T cell
Costimulator
CD4+ helper 
T cell
CD4+ helper T cells
produce molecules
that stimulate
CTL differentiation
Differentiated
CTLs, memory
CD8+ T cells
Fig. 5.8 Role of CD4+ T cells in activation of CD8þ T cells. Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), principally
dendritic cells, may ingest and present microbial antigens to CD8þ T cells (cross-presentation) and to CD4þ
helper T cells. The helper T cells then produce cytokines that stimulate the expansion and differentiation of the
CD8þ T cells. Helper cells also may activate APCs to make them potent stimulators of CD8þ T cells. CTLs,
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
110
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs), which are
critical for signaling. LCK, which is brought near the
TCR complex by the CD4 or CD8 molecules, phos-
phorylates tyrosine residues contained within the ITAMs
of the CD3 and z proteins, and this is the event that
launches signal transduction in the T cells. The impor-
tance of the coreceptors is that by binding to MHC
molecules, they bring the constitutively active LCK close
to its critical substrates in the TCR complex. The
phosphorylated ITAMs of the z chain become docking
sites for a tyrosine kinase called ZAP-70 (zeta-associated
protein of 70 kD), which is also phosphorylated by LCK
and thereby made enzymatically active. The active ZAP-
70 then phosphorylates various adaptor proteins and
enzymes, which assemble near the TCR complex and
mediate additional signaling events.
Maximum level (percent)
Hours
Days
Time after activation
B
A
Naive
T cell
TCR
CD69
Retention in
lymph node
Proliferation
Effector
functions 
Control of
response
CD40L
CTLA-4
IL-2R (CD25)
100
75
50
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
c-FOS
CD40 
ligand
IL-2
CD69
IL-2 
receptor α
Cell
division
12
6
5
4
3
2
1
Fig. 5.9 Proteins produced by antigen-stimulated T cells. Antigen recognition by T cells results in the syn-
thesis and expression of a variety of proteins, examples of which are shown. The kinetics of production of
these proteins (A) are approximations and may vary in different T cells and with different types of stimuli. The
possible effects of costimulation on the patterns or kinetics of gene expression are not shown. The functions
of some of the surface proteins expressed on activated T cells are shown in (B). CD69 is a marker of T cell
activation involved in cell migration; the interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R) binds the cytokine IL-2 and generates
signals that promote T cell survival and proliferation; CD40 ligand is an effector molecule of T cells; CTLA-4 is
an inhibitor of immune responses. c-FOS (shown in A) is a transcription factor. TCR, T cell receptor.
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
111
 
The signaling pathways linked to TCR complex
activation lead to the production of functional tran-
scription factors.
• Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) is a
transcription factor present in an inactive phosphor-
ylated form in the cytosol of resting T cells. NFAT
CD4/
CD8
T cell
Adapter 
proteins
Initiation of
TCR-mediated 
signals
Active
enzymes
Transcription
factors
Biochemical
intermediates
ZAP-70
PLCγ1
activation
GTP/GDP
exchange on
RAS/RAC
Diacylglycerol
(DAG) 
Increased 
cytosolic Ca2+
Calcineurin
PKC
ERK, JNK
ITAM
PLCγ1
PI3-Kinase
ITK
GDP/GTP
exchange
factor
CD3
ζ
Activation of
PI3-Kinase
PIP3
AKT,
mTOR
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
RAS•GTP
NFAT
NF-κB
AP-1
LCK
   Protein
synthesis
APC
Fig. 5.10 Signal transduction pathways in T lymphocytes. Antigen recognition by T cells induces early
signaling events, which include tyrosine phosphorylation of molecules of the T cell receptor (TCR) complex and
the recruitment of adaptor proteins to the site of T cell antigen recognition. These early events lead to the
activation of several biochemical intermediates, which in turn activate transcription factors that stimulate
transcription of genes whose products mediate the responses of the T cells. The possible effects of cos-
timulation on these signaling pathways are not shown. These signaling pathways are shown as independent of
one another, for simplicity, but may be interconnected in more complex networks. AP-1, Activator protein 1;
APC, antigen-presenting cell; GTP/GDP, guanosine triphosphate/diphosphate; ITAM, immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif; mTOR, molecular target of rapamycin; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated
T cells; PKC, protein kinase C; PLCg1, g1 isoform of phosphatidylinositol-speciﬁc phospholipase C; PI-3,
phosphatidylinositol-3; ZAP-70, zeta-associated protein of 70 kD.
112
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
activation and its nuclear translocation depend on
the concentration of calcium (Ca2þ) ions in the
cytosol. The signaling pathway leading to NFAT
activation is initiated by phosphorylation and acti-
vation of an enzyme named phospholipase Cg
(PLCg) by a kinase, ITK, that becomes attached to
one of the adaptor proteins in the signaling com-
plex. Activated PLCg catalyzes the hydrolysis of a
plasma membrane phospholipid called phosphati-
dylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2).
One
by-
product
of
PLCg-mediated
PIP2
breakdown,
inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3), binds to IP3 recep-
tors on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane
and the mitochondria and initiates release of Ca2þ
into the cytosol. In response to the loss of calcium
from the endoplasmic reticulum, a plasma mem-
brane calcium channel is opened, leading to the
inﬂux of extracellular Ca2þ into the cell, which
causes a sustained increase in the cytosolic Ca2þ
concentration for hours. The elevated cytosolic
Ca2þ leads to activation of a phosphatase called cal-
cineurin. This enzyme removes phosphates from
cytoplasmic NFAT, enabling the transcription factor
to migrate into the nucleus, where it binds to and
activates the promoters of several genes, including
those encoding the T cell growth factor IL-2 and
components of the IL-2 receptor. Calcineurin inhib-
itors (cyclosporine and tacrolimus) are drugs that
block the phosphatase activity of calcineurin and
thus suppress the NFAT-dependent production of
cytokines by T cells. These drugs are widely used
as immunosuppressants to prevent graft rejection
(see Chapter 10).
• The RAS/RACeMAP kinase pathways include the
guanosine triphosphate (GTP)ebinding RAS and
RAC proteins, several adaptor proteins, and a cascade
of enzymes that eventually activate one of a family of
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases. These
pathways are initiated by ZAP-70edependent phos-
phorylation and accumulation of adaptor proteins at
the plasma membrane, leading to the recruitment of
RAS or RAC, and their activation by exchange of
bound guanosine diphosphate (GDP) with GTP.
RAS•GTP and RAC•GTP, the active forms of these
proteins, initiate different enzyme cascades, leading
to the activation of distinct MAP kinases. The termi-
nal MAP kinases in these pathways, called extracel-
lular signaleregulated kinase (ERK) and c-JUN
amino-terminal (N-terminal) kinase (JNK), respec-
tively, induce the expression of a protein called c-
FOS and the phosphorylation of another protein
called c-JUN. c-FOS and phosphorylated c-JUN
combine to form the transcription factor activator
protein 1 (AP-1), which enhances the transcription
of several T cell genes.
• Another major pathway involved in TCR signaling
consists of activation of the q isoform of the serine-
threonine kinase called protein kinase C (PKCq),
which leads to activation of the transcription factor
NF-kB. PKC is activated by diacylglycerol, which,
like IP3, is generated by PLC-mediated hydrolysis of
PIP2 in the membrane. PKCq acts through adaptor
proteins to activate NF-kB.
• TCR signal transduction also involves a lipid kinase
called PI-3 kinase, which phosphorylates the mem-
brane phospholipid PIP2 to generate phosphatidyl
inositol
(3,4,5)-trisphosphate
(PIP3).
PIP3
is
required for the activation of a number of targets,
including a serine-threonine kinase called AKT,
which has many roles, including stimulating expres-
sion of antiapoptotic proteins and thus promoting
survival of antigen-stimulated T cells. AKT activates
molecular target of rapamycin (mTOR), a serine-
threonine kinase that is involved in stimulating pro-
tein translation and promoting cell survival and
growth. Rapamycin (also called sirolimus) is a drug
that binds to and inactivates mTOR, and is used to
treat graft rejection.
The various transcription factors that are induced or
activated in T cells, including NFAT, AP-1, and NF-kB,
stimulate transcription and subsequent production of
cytokines, cytokine receptors, cell cycle inducers, and
effector molecules such as CD40L (see Fig. 5.9). All of
these signals are initiated by antigen recognition,
because binding of the TCR and coreceptors to peptide-
MHC complexes is necessary to bring together critical
enzymes and substrates in T cells.
As discussed earlier, recognition of costimulators,
such as B7 molecules, by their receptor CD28 is
essential for full T cell responses. The biochemical
signals transduced by CD28 on binding to B7 cos-
timulators include the PI-3 kinase/AKT and the MAP-
kinase pathways. CD28 engagement likely ampliﬁes
some TCR signaling pathways that are triggered by
antigen recognition (signal 1) and may induce other
signals that complement TCR signals. In this way,
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
113
 
CD28 signals increase the production of survival fac-
tors, IL-2, and cell cycle inducers, all of which promote
survival and proliferation of activated T cells and their
differentiation into effector and memory cells.
Lymphocyte activation is associated with profound
changes in cellular metabolism. In naive (resting)
T cells, low levels of glucose are taken up and used to
generate energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) by mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.
Upon activation, glucose uptake increases markedly,
and the cells switch to aerobic glycolysis. This process
generates less ATP but facilitates the synthesis of more
amino acids, lipids, and other molecules that provide
building blocks for organelles and for producing new
cells. As a result, it is possible for activated T cells to
more efﬁciently manufacture the cellular constituents
that are needed for their rapid increase in size and for
producing daughter cells.
Having
described
the
stimuli
and
biochemical
pathways in T cell activation, we now discuss how
T cells respond to antigens and differentiate into
effector cells capable of combating microbes.
FUNCTIONAL RESPONSES OF T
LYMPHOCYTES TO ANTIGEN AND
COSTIMULATION
The recognition of antigen and costimulators by naive
T cells initiates a set of responses that culminate in the
expansion of the antigen-speciﬁc clones of lymphocytes
and the differentiation of the naive T cells into effector
cells and memory cells (see Fig. 5.3). Many of these
changes in T cells are mediated by cytokines that are
secreted by the T cells and act on the T cells themselves
and on many other cells involved in immune defenses.
Secretion of Cytokines and Expression of
Cytokine Receptors
In response to antigen and costimulators, T lym-
phocytes, especially CD4D T cells, rapidly secrete the
cytokine IL-2. We have already discussed cytokines in
innate immune responses, which are produced mainly
by dendritic cells and macrophages (see Chapter 2). In
adaptive immunity, cytokines are mainly secreted by
CD4+ T cells. Most of the cytokines of adaptive im-
munity, other than IL-2, are produced by effector
T cells, serve diverse roles in host defense, and are
described in Chapter 6 when we discuss the effector
mechanisms of cell-mediated immunity.
IL-2 is produced within 1 to 2 hours after antigen
stimulation of CD4þ T cells. Activation also transiently
increases the expression of the high-afﬁnity IL-2 re-
ceptor, thus rapidly enhancing the ability of the T cells
to bind and respond to IL-2 (Fig. 5.11). The receptor for
IL-2 is a three-chain molecule. Naive T cells express two
signaling chains, b and g, which constitute the low-
afﬁnity receptor for IL-2, but these cells do not ex-
press the a chain (CD25) that enables the receptor to
bind IL-2 with high afﬁnity. Within hours after acti-
vation by antigens and costimulators, the T cells pro-
duce the a chain of the receptor, and now the complete
IL-2 receptor is able to bind IL-2 strongly. Thus, IL-2
produced by antigen-stimulated T cells preferentially
binds to and acts on the same T cells, an example of
autocrine cytokine action.
The principal functions of IL-2 are to stimulate the
survival and proliferation of T cells, resulting in an
increase in the number of the antigen-speciﬁc T cells;
because of these actions, IL-2 was originally called T cell
growth factor.
The high-afﬁnity
IL-2 receptor is
constitutively expressed on regulatory T cells, so these
cells are very sensitive to IL-2. In fact, IL-2 is essential
for the maintenance of regulatory T cells and thus for
controlling immune responses, as we discuss in Chapter
9. Activated CD8þ T cells and natural killer (NK) cells
express the low-afﬁnity bg receptor and respond to
higher concentrations of IL-2.
Clonal Expansion
T
lymphocytes
activated
by
antigen
and
costimulation begin to proliferate within 1 or 2 days,
resulting in expansion of antigen-speciﬁc clones
(Fig. 5.12). This expansion quickly provides a large pool
of antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes from which effector
cells can be generated to combat infection.
The magnitude of clonal expansion is remarkable,
especially for CD8þ T cells. Before infection, the fre-
quency of CD8þ T cells speciﬁc for any one microbial
protein antigen is in the range of 1 in 105 to 1 in 106
114
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
lymphocytes in the body. At the peak of some viral in-
fections, possibly within a week after the infection, as
many as 10% to 20% of all the lymphocytes in the
lymphoid organs may be speciﬁc for that virus. This
means that the numbers of cells in antigen-speciﬁc clones
have increased by more than 10,000-fold, with an esti-
mated doubling time of approximately 6 hours. This
enormous expansion of T cells speciﬁc for a microbe is
not accompanied by a detectable increase in the numbers
of bystander cells that do not recognize that microbe.
The magnitude of expansion of CD4þ T cells ap-
pears to be 100-fold to 1000-fold less than that of CD8þ
cells. This difference may reﬂect differences in the
functions of the two types of T cells. CD8þ CTLs are
effector cells that kill infected and tumor cells by direct
contact, and many CTLs may be needed to kill large
numbers of infected or tumor cells. By contrast, each
CD4þ effector cell secretes cytokines that activate
numerous other effector cells, so a relatively small
number of cytokine producers may be sufﬁcient.
Differentiation of Naive T Cells into Effector
Cells
Some
of
the
progeny
of
antigen-stimulated,
proliferating T cells differentiate into effector
cells whose function is to eradicate infections.
Differentiation is the result of changes in gene expres-
sion, such as the activation of genes encoding cytokines
(in CD4þ T cells) or cytotoxic proteins (in CD8þ
CTLs). It begins in concert with clonal expansion, and
differentiated effector cells appear within 3 or 4 days
T cell activation
by antigen
+ costimulator
Secretion of IL-2
Expression of
IL-2Rα chain;
formation of
high-affinity
IL-2Rαβγ complex
IL-2–induced
T cell
proliferation
IL-2Rβγc
complex
IL-2Rβγc
IL-2Rαβγc
complex
IL-2Rαβγc
Low-affinity
IL-2R
(Kd ~ 10-9 M)
High-affinity
IL-2R
(Kd ~ 10-11 M)
APC
Costimulator
(B7)
CD28
Resting 
(naive)
T cell
IL-2
Fig. 5.11 Role of interleukin-2 and IL-2 receptors in Tcell proliferation. Naive T cells express the low-afﬁnity
IL-2 receptor (IL-2R) complex, made up of the b and gc chains (gc designates common g chain, so called
because it is a component of receptors for several cytokines). On activation by antigen recognition and cos-
timulation, the cells produce IL-2 and express the a chain of the IL-2R (CD25), which associates with the b and
gc chains to form the high-afﬁnity IL-2 receptor. Binding of IL-2 to its receptor initiates proliferation of the
T cells that recognized the antigen. APC, Antigen-presenting cell.
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
115
 
after exposure to microbes. Effector cells of the CD4þ
lineage acquire the capacity to produce different sets of
cytokines. The subsets of T cells that are distinguished
by their cytokine proﬁles are named Th1, Th2, and
Th17 (Fig. 5.13). Many of these cells leave the sec-
ondary lymphoid organs where they are generated and
migrate to sites of infection, where their cytokines re-
cruit other leukocytes that destroy or help contain the
inciting infectious agents. The development and func-
tions of these effector cells are described in Chapter 6,
when
we
discuss
cell-mediated
immunity.
Other
differentiated CD4þ T cells remain in the lymphoid
organs and migrate into lymphoid follicles, where they
further differentiate into T follicular helper (Tfh) cells
and help B lymphocytes to produce high-afﬁnity anti-
bodies (see Chapter 7). As we discuss in Chapters 6 and
7, CD4þ helper T cells activate phagocytes and B
lymphocytes through the actions of the plasma mem-
brane protein CD40L and secreted cytokines. Effector
cells of the CD8þ lineage acquire the ability to kill
infected and tumor cells; their development and func-
tion are also described in Chapter 6.
Development of Memory T Lymphocytes
A fraction of antigen-activated T lymphocytes dif-
ferentiates into long-lived memory cells. These cells
are a pool of lymphocytes that are induced by microbes
and are ready to respond rapidly if the microbe returns.
The factors that determine whether the progeny of
antigen-stimulated lymphocytes will differentiate into
effector cells or memory cells are not well deﬁned.
Memory cells have several important characteristics.
• Memory cells survive even after the infection is erad-
icated and antigen is no longer present. Certain cyto-
kines, including IL-7 and IL-15, which are produced
by stromal cells and myeloid cells in tissues, may
serve to keep memory cells alive and cycling slowly.
• Memory T cells can be rapidly induced to produce
cytokines or kill infected cells on encountering the
antigen that they recognize. These cells do not
perform any effector functions until they encounter
antigen, but once activated, they respond much
more rapidly than do naive lymphocytes and pro-
duce larger (secondary) responses than those of
newly activated T cells (primary responses).
Contraction
(homeostatis)
CD8+ 
T cells
CD4+ 
T cells
Infection
Memory
106
104
102
7
14
200
Days after infection
Number of microbe-specific T cells
Clonal
expansion
Fig. 5.12 Expansion and decline of T cell responses. The numbers of CD4þ and CD8þ T cells speciﬁc for
various antigens in inbred mice and the clonal expansion and contraction during immune responses are
illustrated. The numbers are approximations based on studies of model microbial and other antigens in inbred
mice; in humans, the numbers of lymphocytes are approximately 1000-fold greater.
116
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
• Memory T cells are found in secondary lymphoid
organs, in various peripheral tissues, especially mu-
cosa and skin, and in the circulation. They can be
distinguished from naive and effector cells by several
criteria (see Chapter 1). A subset of memory T cells,
called central memory cells, populate lymphoid or-
gans and are responsible for rapid clonal expansion
after reexposure to antigen. Another subset, called
effector memory cells, localize in mucosal and other
peripheral tissues and mediate rapid effector func-
tions on encountering antigen at these sites. These
cells retain the ability to exit the tissue and
recirculate. A third subset, called tissue-resident
memory cells, reside in the skin and mucosal tissues
and do not readily enter the circulation. They
mediate rapid secondary responses to antigens
encountered in tissues.
Memory T cells likely can be activated in both
lymphoid and nonlymphoid tissues, and their activa-
tion, unlike that of naive T cells, does not require high
levels of costimulation or antigen presentation by
dendritic cells. In fact, various other APCs, including B
cells and macrophages, may be capable of activating
memory T cells.
Follicular
helper T cells
B cell
Effector T cells and
antibodies enter circulation
and go to sites of infection
Tfh cells remain
in lymphoid organ,
migrate into follicles
Naive CD4+
T cell
Lymph node
Help B cells
to produce
high-affinity
antibodies
Elimination
of microbes
Th1
cell
Th2
cell
Th17
cell
B cell
Microbe
Infected tissue
Follicular
helper T cells
(Tfh)
Fig. 5.13 Development of effector CD4þ T cells. When naive CD4þ T cells are activated in secondary
lymphoid organs, they proliferate and differentiate into effector cells. Some of the effectors (the Th1, Th2, and
Th17 populations) mostly exit the lymphoid organ and function to eradicate microbes in peripheral tissues.
Other differentiated cells, called follicular helper T (Tfh) cells, remain in the lymphoid organ and help B cells to
produce potent antibodies.
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
117
 
REGULATION OF T CELL RESPONSES BY
INHIBITORY RECEPTORS (COINHIBITORS)
Immune responses are inﬂuenced by a balance between
engagement of activating and inhibitory receptors. This
idea is established for B and T lymphocytes and NK
cells. In T cells, the main activating receptors are the
TCR complex and costimulatory receptors such as
CD28, and the best-deﬁned inhibitory receptors, also
called coinhibitors, are cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen
4 (CTLA-4) and programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-
1). The functions and mechanisms of action of these
inhibitors are complementary (Fig. 5.14).
• CTLA-4. CTLA-4 is a B7-binding protein expressed
transiently on activated CD4þ T cells and constitu-
tively on regulatory T cells (discussed in Chapter
9). It functions to suppress the activation of respond-
ing T cells. CTLA-4 works by blocking and removing
B7 molecules from the surface of APCs, thus
reducing costimulation by CD28 and preventing
the activation of T cells. The choice between B7
engagement of CTLA-4 or CD28 is determined by
the afﬁnity of these receptors for B7 and the level
of B7 expression. CTLA-4 has a higher afﬁnity for
B7 molecules than does CD28, so it binds B7 tightly
and prevents the binding of CD28. This competition
is especially effective when B7 levels are low (as
would be expected when APCs are only displaying
self and maybe some tumor antigens but not micro-
bial antigens); in these situations, the receptor that is
preferentially engaged is the high-afﬁnity blocking
receptor CTLA-4. However, when B7 levels are
high (as in infections), not all the ligands will be
occupied by CTLA-4 and some B7 will be available
to bind to the low-afﬁnity activating receptor
CD28, leading to T cell costimulation.
• PD-1. PD-1 is expressed on CD8þ and CD4þ
T cells after antigen stimulation. Its cytoplasmic tail
has inhibitory signaling motifs with tyrosine residues
that are phosphorylated upon recognition of its ligands
PD-L1 orPD-L2, which are homologous to the B7 mol-
ecules described earlier (see Fig. 5.7). Once phosphory-
lated, the tyrosines in the PD-1 tail bind a tyrosine
phosphatase that inhibits kinase-dependent activating
signals from CD28 and the TCR complex. Because
the expression of PD-1 on T cells is increased upon
chronic T cell activation and expression of the PD-1 li-
gands is increased by cytokines produced during
prolonged inﬂammation, this pathway is most active
in situations of chronic or repeated antigenic stimula-
tion. This may happen in responses to chronic infec-
tions and some tumors, when PD-1eexpressing
T cells encounter the ligand on infected cells, tumor
cells, or APCs. The major physiologic function of
PD-1 may be to limit responses to infections, such as
viral infections, enough to prevent the immunopa-
thology that often results from strong T cell activation.
An important therapeutic application of our un-
derstanding of these inhibitory receptors is the treat-
ment of cancer patients with antibodies that block these
receptors, a form of cancer immunotherapy called
checkpoint blockade. Such treatment leads to enhanced
antitumor immune responses and tumor regression in
many patients (see Chapter 10). However, patients
treated with antibodies to inhibitory receptors often
develop autoimmune reactions, consistent with the idea
that the inhibitory receptors are constantly functioning
to keep autoreactive T cells in check. Rare patients with
mutations in one of their two copies of the CTLA4 gene,
which reduce expression of the receptor, also develop
multiorgan inﬂammation (and a profound, as yet un-
explained, defect in antibody production).
Several receptors on T cells other than CTLA-4 and
PD-1 have been shown to inhibit immune responses
and are currently being tested as targets of checkpoint
blockade therapy. Some of these receptors are members
of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family or
other protein families. Their physiologic role is not
clearly established.
MIGRATION OF T LYMPHOCYTES IN CELL-
MEDIATED IMMUNE REACTIONS
As we discussed at the beginning of this chapter, T cell
responses are initiated primarily in secondary lymphoid
organs, and the effector phase occurs mainly in
118
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
T cell
(activated
T cell or
Treg)
Major site 
of action
Secondary 
lymphoid organs
Peripheral tissues (and 
lymphoid organs?) 
Stage of immune
response that is
inhibited
Cell type that
is inhibited
Cellular 
expression
Induction (priming)
CD4+ same as or
more than CD8+
Tregs, activated
T cells
Main signals
inhibited
Role in Treg-mediated 
suppression of
immune responses
Competitive inhibitor of CD28
costimulation by binding to B7
with high affinity and removing
B7 from APCs   
Yes
Effector phase
CD8+  CD4+
Mainly activated 
T cells
Signaling inhibitor of CD28 and
TCR: inhibits kinase-depending
signals by activating phosphatase
No
CTLA-4
PD-1
T cell
(activated
T cell or
Treg)
    CTLA-4 blocks and
    removes B7
B7
APC
CTLA-4
T cell
ZAP-70
ITAM
TCR

P
P
PD-1 inhibits signals from
the TCR complex and CD28
APC
CD28
B7-1/
B7-2
PD-1
PD-L1/
PD-L2
SHP2
P
T cell activation
A
B
C
Fig. 5.14 Functions of CTLA-4 and PD-1. A, CTLA-4 blocks and removes B7 molecules on antigen-
presenting cells. B, PD-1 activates a phosphatase (SHP2) that inhibits kinase-dependent signals from CD28
and the TCR complex. C, Some of the major differences between these checkpoint molecules are summa-
rized. ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs; Treg, T regulatory cell.
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
119
 
peripheral tissue sites of infection (see Fig. 5.2). Thus,
T cells at different stages of their lives have to migrate
in different ways:
• Naive T cells migrate between blood and secondary
(peripheral) lymphoid organs throughout the body,
until they encounter dendritic cells within the
lymphoid organ that display the antigens the
T cells recognize (see Chapter 3).
• After the naive T cells are activated and differentiate
into effector cells, these cells migrate back to the sites
of infection, where they function to kill microbes.
The migration of naive and effector T cells is
controlled by three families of proteinsdselectins,
integrins, and chemokinesdthat regulate the migration
of all leukocytes, as described in Chapter 2 (see
Fig. 2.16). The routes of migration of naive and effector
T cells differ signiﬁcantly because of selective expres-
sion of different adhesion molecules and chemokine
receptors on naive T cells versus effector T cells,
together with the selective expression of endothelial
adhesion molecules and chemokines in lymphoid tis-
sues and sites of inﬂammation (Fig. 5.15).
Naive T cells express the adhesion molecule L-
selectin (CD62L) and the chemokine receptor CCR7,
which mediate the selective migration of the naive cells
into lymph nodes through specialized blood vessels
called high endothelial venules (HEVs). HEVs are
located in the T cell zones of lymph nodes and mucosal
lymphoid tissues and are lined by specialized endo-
thelial cells, which express carbohydrate ligands that
bind L-selectin. HEVs also display chemokines that are
made only in lymphoid tissues and are speciﬁcally
recognized by CCR7. The migration of naive T cells
proceeds in a multistep sequence like that of migration
of all leukocytes through blood vessels (see Fig. 2.18):
• Naive
T
cells
in
the
blood
engage
in
L-
selectinemediated rolling interactions with the HEV,
allowing chemokines to bind to CCR7 on the T cells.
• CCR7 transduces intracellular signals that activate
the integrin LFA-1 on the naive T cell, increasing
the binding afﬁnity of the integrin.
• The increased afﬁnity of the integrin for its ligand,
ICAM-1, on the HEV results in ﬁrm adhesion and
arrest of the rolling T cells.
• The T cells then exit the vessel through endothelial
junctions and are retained in the T cell zone of the
lymph node because of the chemokines produced
there.
Thus, many naive T cells that are carried by the blood
into an HEV migrate to the T cell zone of the lymph node
stroma. This happens constantly in all lymph nodes and
mucosal lymphoid tissues in the body. Effector T cells do
not express CCR7 or L-selectin, and thus they are not
drawn into lymph nodes.
The phospholipid sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P)
playsa keyroleintheegressofT cellsfromlymphnodes.
The levels of S1P are higher in the blood and lymph
than inside lymph nodes. S1P binds to and induces
internalization of its receptor, which keeps the expres-
sion of the receptor on circulating naive T cells low.
When a naive T cell enters the node, it is exposed to
lower concentrations of S1P, and expression of the re-
ceptor begins to increase. If the T cell does not recog-
nize any antigen, the cell leaves the node through
efferent lymphatic vessels, following the gradient of S1P
into the lymph. If the T cell does encounter speciﬁc
antigen and is activated, the surface expression of the
S1P receptor is suppressed for several days by CD69,
which is transiently expressed following T cell activa-
tion. As a result, recently activated T cells stay in the
lymph node long enough to undergo clonal expansion
and differentiation. When this process is completed,
CD69 levels decline and the S1P receptor is reexpressed
on the cell surface; at the same time, the cells lose
expression of L-selectin and CCR7, which previously
attracted the naive T cells to the lymph nodes. There-
fore, activated T cells are drawn out of the nodes into
the draining lymph, which then transports the cells to
the circulation. The net result of these changes is that
differentiated effector T cells leave the lymph nodes and
enter the circulation. The importance of the S1P
pathway has been highlighted by the development of a
drug (ﬁngolimod) that binds to the S1P receptor and
blocks the exit of T cells from lymph nodes. This drug is
approved for the treatment of the inﬂammatory disease
multiple sclerosis.
Effector T cells migrate to sites of infection because
they express adhesion molecules and chemokine
120
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
Blood
vessel
L-selectin
L-selectin
ligand
ICAM-1
L-selectin
ligand
CCL19 or CCL21
Integrin (LFA-1
or VLA-4)
Integrin (LFA-1)
LFA-1 (β2-integrin) or
VLA-4 (β1 integrin)
E- or P-
selectin
ligand
E- and P-
selectin ligand
E- or P-
selectin
CXCR3
CXCL10,
others
E- or P-
selectin
L-selectin
CCR7
ICAM-1
or VCAM-1
ICAM-1 or VCAM-1
T cell 
homing receptor
Ligand on
endothelial cell
Function of receptor:
ligand pair
Naive T cells
Activated (effector 
and memory) T cells
Adhesion of naive T cells to
high endothelial venule (HEV)
in lymph node
Activation of integrins and
chemotaxis
CXCL10, others
CXCR3, others
Activation of integrins and
chemotaxis
Initial weak adhesion of effector and
memory T cells to cytokine-activated
endothelium at peripheral site
of infection
Stable arrest on cytokine-activated
endothelium at peripheral
site of infection
LFA-1 (β2-integrin)
ICAM-1
Stable arrest on HEV
Peripheral 
venule
A
B
CCL19/
CCL21
CCR7
Artery
Activated
T cell
Naive T cell
S1PR1
S1P
High endothelial
venule in lymph node
Endothelium 
at the site of infection
Lymph node
Peripheral tissue
Efferent
lymphatic
vessel
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
121
 
receptors that bind to ligands expressed or displayed
on vascular endothelium at sites of infection. The
process of differentiation of naive T lymphocytes into
effector cells is accompanied by changes in the types of
adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors expressed
on these cells (see Fig. 5.15). The migration of activated
T cells into peripheral tissues is controlled by the same
kinds of interactions involved in the migration of other
leukocytes into tissues (see Chapter 2):
• Activated T cells express high levels of the glycopro-
tein ligands for E- and P-selectins and the integrins
LFA-1 and VLA-4 (very late antigen 4). Innate im-
mune cytokines produced in response to infection,
such as TNF and IL-1, act on the endothelial cells
to increase expression of E- and P-selectins, as well
as ligands for integrins, especially ICAM-1 and
vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), the
ligand for the VLA-4 integrin.
• Effector T cells that are passing through the blood
vessels at the infection site bind ﬁrst to the endothe-
lial selectins with low afﬁnity, leading to rolling
interactions.
• Effector T cells also express receptors for chemokines
that are produced by macrophages and endothelial
cells at these inﬂammatory sites and are displayed
on the surface of the endothelium. The rolling
T cells bind these chemokines, leading to increased af-
ﬁnity of the integrins for their ligands and ﬁrm adhe-
sion of the T cells to the endothelium.
• After the effector T lymphocytes are arrested on the
endothelium, they engage other adhesion molecules
at the junctions between endothelial cells, crawling
through these junctions into the tissue. Chemokines
that were produced by macrophages and other cells
in the tissues stimulate the motility of the transmigrat-
ing T cells.
The result of these molecular interactions between
the T cells and endothelial cells is that effector T cells
migrate out of the blood vessels to the area of infection.
Naive T cells do not express high levels of ligands for E-
or P-selectin or receptors for chemokines produced at
inﬂammatory sites. Therefore, naive T cells do not
migrate into sites of infection or tissue injury.
The homing of effector T cells to an infected tissue
is independent of antigen recognition, but lympho-
cytes
that
recognize
antigens
are
preferentially
retained and activated at the site. The homing of
effector T cells to sites of infection mainly depends on
adhesion molecules and chemokines. Therefore, any
effector T cell present in the blood, regardless of antigen
speciﬁcity, can enter the site of any infection. This
nonselective
migration
presumably
maximizes
the
chances of effector lymphocytes entering tissues where
they may encounter the microbes they recognize. The
effector T cells that leave the circulation and that spe-
ciﬁcally recognize microbial antigen presented by local
tissue APCs become reactivated and contribute to the
killing of the microbe in the APC. One consequence of
this reactivation is an increase in the expression of VLA
integrins on the T cells. Some of these integrins spe-
ciﬁcally bind to molecules present in the extracellular
matrix, such as hyaluronic acid and
ﬁbronectin.
Fig. 5.15 Migration of naive and effector T lymphocytes. A, Naive T lymphocytes home to lymph nodes as a
result of L-selectin, integrin, and chemokine receptor CCR7 binding to their ligands on high endothelial venules
(HEVs). Chemokines expressed in lymph nodes bind to CCR7 on naive T cells, enhancing integrin-dependent
adhesion and migration through the HEV. The phospholipid sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) plays a role in the
exit of T cells from lymph nodes, by binding to its receptor, called S1PR1 (type 1 sphingosine 1-phosphate re-
ceptor). Activated T lymphocytes, including the majority of effector cells, home to sites of infection in peripheral
tissues, and this migration is mediated by E-selectin and P-selectin, integrins, and chemokines secreted at in-
ﬂammatory sites. Follicular helper T (Tfh) cells (not shown) are effector cells that remain in lymphoid organs,
because they express a chemokine receptor (CXCR5) that draws them into lymphoid follicles, where they can
interact with resident B lymphocytes. B, This table summarizes the functions of the principal T cell homing re-
ceptors and chemokine receptors and their ligands. ICAM-1, Intercellular adhesion molecule 1; LFA-1, leukocyte
functioneassociated antigen 1; VCAM-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; VLA-4, very late antigen 4.
122
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
Therefore, the antigen-stimulated lymphocytes adhere
ﬁrmly to the tissue matrix proteins near the antigen,
which may serve to keep the cells at the inﬂammatory
sites. This selective retention contributes to accumula-
tion of more and more T cells speciﬁc for microbial
antigens in the region of the infection.
As a result of this sequence of T cell migration
events, the effector phase of T cellemediated immune
responses may occur at any site of infection. Whereas
the activation of naive T cells requires antigen presen-
tation and costimulation by dendritic cells, differenti-
ated effector cells are less dependent on costimulation.
Therefore, the proliferation and differentiation of naive
T cells are conﬁned to lymphoid organs, where den-
dritic cells (which express abundant costimulators)
display antigens, but the functions of effector T cells
may be reactivated by any host cell displaying microbial
peptides bound to MHC molecules, not just dendritic
cells.
Elucidation of the molecular interactions involved
in leukocyte migration has spurred many attempts to
develop agents to block the process of cell migration
into tissues. Antibodies against integrins are effective
in the inﬂammatory diseases multiple sclerosis and
inﬂammatory bowel disease. The clinical utility of
these drugs is limited by the increased risk of new
infection or reactivation of latent infections, because
the immune surveillance function of the T cells is
impaired when their migration into tissues is blocked.
A small-molecule inhibitor of the S1P pathway is
used for treating multiple sclerosis, as mentioned
previously. Small molecules that bind to and block
chemokine receptors have also been developed, and
some have shown efﬁcacy in inﬂammatory bowel
disease.
DECLINE OF THE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Because of the remarkable expansion of antigen-speciﬁc
lymphocytes at the peak of an immune response, it is
predictable that once the response is over, the system
returns to its steady state, called homeostasis, so that it
is prepared to respond to the next infectious pathogen
(see Fig. 5.12). During the response, the survival and
proliferation of T cells are maintained by antigen,
costimulatory signals from CD28, and cytokines such as
IL-2. Once an infection is cleared and the stimuli for
lymphocyte activation disappear, many of the cells that
had proliferated in response to antigen are deprived of
these survival signals. As a result, these cells die by
apoptosis (programmed cell death). The response sub-
sides within 1 or 2 weeks after the infection is eradi-
cated, and the only sign that a T cellemediated
immune response had occurred is the pool of surviving
memory lymphocytes.
To summarize, numerous mechanisms have evolved
to overcome the challenges that T cells face in the
generation of a useful cell-mediated immune response:
• Naive T cells need to ﬁnd the antigen. This problem
is solved by APCs that capture the antigen and
concentrate it in specialized lymphoid organs in
the regions through which naive T cells recirculate.
• The correct type of T lymphocytes (i.e., CD4þ helper
T cells or CD8þ CTLs) must respond to antigens
from the endosomal and cytosolic compartments.
This selectivity is determined by the speciﬁcity of
the CD4 and CD8 coreceptors for class II and class
I MHC molecules and by the segregation of extracel-
lular (vesicular) and intracellular (cytosolic) protein
antigens for display by class II and class I MHC mol-
ecules, respectively.
• T cells should respond to microbial antigens but not
to harmless proteins. This preference for microbes is
maintained because T cell activation requires costi-
mulators that are induced on APCs by microbes.
• Antigen recognition by a small number of T cells
must lead to a response that is large enough to be
effective. This is accomplished by robust clonal
expansion after stimulation and by several ampliﬁca-
tion mechanisms induced by microbes and activated
T cells themselves that enhance the response.
• The response must be optimized to combat different
types of microbes. This is accomplished largely by
the development of specialized subsets of effector
T cells.
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
123
 
SUMMARY
• T lymphocytes are the mediators of the cell-
mediated arm of the adaptive immune response,
which combats microbes that are ingested by phago-
cytes and live within these cells or microbes that
infect host cells. T lymphocytes also mediate defense
against some extracellular microbes, help B lympho-
cytes to produce antibodies, and destroy cancer cells.
• The responses of T lymphocytes consist of sequen-
tial
steps:
recognition
of
host
celleassociated
microbes by naive T cells, expansion of the
antigen-speciﬁc clones by proliferation, and differ-
entiation of some of the progeny into effector cells
and memory cells.
• T cells use their antigen receptors to recognize pep-
tide antigens displayed by major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules on antigen-presenting
cells (APCs), which accounts for the speciﬁcity of
the ensuing response, and also recognize polymor-
phic residues of the MHC molecules, accounting
for the MHC restriction of T cell responses.
• Antigen recognition by the T cell receptor (TCR) trig-
gers signals that are delivered to the interior of the
cells by molecules associated with the TCR (CD3
and z chains) and by the coreceptors CD4 and CD8.
• The binding of T cells to APCs is enhanced by adhe-
sion molecules, notably the integrins, whose afﬁnity
for their ligands is increased by antigen recognition
by the TCR.
• APCs exposed to microbes or to cytokines produced
as part of the innate immune reactions to microbes
express costimulators that bind to receptors on
T cells and deliver necessary second signals for
T cell activation.
• The biochemical signals triggered in T cells by anti-
gen recognition and costimulation result in the acti-
vation of various transcription factors that stimulate
the expression of genes encoding cytokines, cytokine
receptors, and other molecules involved in T cell
responses.
• The TCR signaling pathways involve protein tyro-
sine kinases, which phosphorylate proteins that
become docking sites for additional kinases and
other signaling molecules. The signaling pathways
include the calcineurin/NFAT, RAS-MAP kinase,
and PI-3 kinase/mTOR pathways.
• In response to antigen recognition and costimula-
tion, T cells secrete cytokines that induce prolifera-
tion of the antigen-stimulated T cells and mediate
the effector functions of T cells.
• T cells proliferate following activation by antigen and
costimulators, resulting in expansion of the antigen-
speciﬁc clones. The survival and proliferation of acti-
vated T cells are driven by the growth factor IL-2.
• Some of the T cells differentiate into effector cells
that
are
responsible
for
eradicating
infections.
CD4þ effector cells produce surface molecules,
notably CD40L, and secrete various cytokines that
activate other leukocytes to destroy microbes, and
CD8þ effector cells are able to kill infected and tu-
mor cells.
• Other activated T cells differentiate into memory
cells, which survive even after the antigen is elimi-
nated and are capable of rapid responses to subse-
quent encounter with the antigen.
• Naive T cells migrate to peripheral lymphoid organs,
mainly lymph nodes draining sites of microbe entry,
whereas many of the effector T cells generated in
lymphoid organs are able to migrate to any site of
infection.
• The pathways of migration of naive and effector
T cells are controlled by adhesion molecules and
chemokines. The migration of T cells is independent
of antigen, but cells that recognize microbial antigens
in tissues are retained at these sites.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are the components of the TCR complex?
Which of these components are responsible for anti-
gen recognition and which for signal transduction?
2. What are some of the molecules in addition to the
TCR that T cells use to initiate their responses to an-
tigens, and what are the functions of these molecules?
3. What is costimulation? What is the physiologic signif-
icance of costimulation? What are some of the ligand-
receptor pairs involved in costimulation?
4. Summarize the links among antigen recognition, the
major biochemical signaling pathways in T cells, and
the production of transcription factors.
124
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
 
5. What is the principal growth factor for T cells? Why
do antigen-speciﬁc T cells expand more than other
(bystander) T cells on exposure to an antigen?
6. What are the mechanisms by which CD4þ effector
T cells activate other leukocytes?
7. What are the major properties of memory T
lymphocytes?
8. What proteins of the CD28 family function to
inhibit T cell responses, and how do they work?
9. Why do naive T cells migrate preferentially to
lymphoid organs and differentiated effector T cells
(which have been activated by antigen) migrate pref-
erentially to tissues that are sites of infection?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
CHAPTER 5
T CelleMediated Immunity
125
 
6
Effector Mechanisms of T
CelleMediated Immunity
Functions of T Cells in
Host Defense
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Types of T CelleMediated Immune Reactions, 126
Development and Functions of CD4D Effector T
Lymphocytes, 129
Subsets of CD4D Helper T Cells Distinguished
by Cytokine Proﬁles, 129
Th1 Cells, 130
Differentiation of Th1 Cells, 132
Th2 Cells, 132
Differentiation of Th2 Cells, 136
Th17 Cells, 136
Differentiation of Th17 Cells, 137
Differentiation and Functions of CD8D Cytotoxic
T Lymphocytes, 138
Resistance of Pathogenic Microbes to Cell-
Mediated Immunity, 140
Summary, 142
Host defense in which T lymphocytes serve as the
effector cells is called cell-mediated immunity. T cells
are essential for eliminating microbes that survive and
replicate inside cells and for eradicating infections by
some extracellular microbes, often by recruiting other
leukocytes to clear the infectious pathogens. T cells also
kill tumor cells that produce mutated proteins that are
recognized as foreign antigens (see Chapter 10). In this
chapter, we focus on the role of T cell responses in
defense against pathogenic microbes. Cell-mediated
immune responses begin with the activation of naive
T cells to proliferate and to differentiate into effector
cells. The majority of these effector T cells then migrate
to sites of infection, where they function to eliminate
the microbes. Some CD4þ effector cells stay in
lymphoid organs and help B lymphocytes to produce
high-afﬁnity
antibodies
(humoral
immunity,
see
Chapter 7). In Chapter 3, we described the function of
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules in
displaying the antigens of intracellular microbes for
recognition by T lymphocytes, and in Chapter 5, we
discussed the events that occur in the activation of naive
T lymphocytes. In this chapter, we address the
following questions:
• What types of effector T cells are involved in the
elimination of microbes?
• How do specialized effector T cells differentiate from
naive T cells, and how do these effector cells eradi-
cate infections by diverse microbes?
• What are the roles of macrophages and other leuko-
cytes in the destruction of infectious pathogens?
TYPES OF T CELLeMEDIATED IMMUNE
REACTIONS
Two main types of cell-mediated immune reactions
eliminate different types of microbes: CD4D helper
T cells express molecules that recruit and activate other
leukocytes
to
phagocytose
(ingest)
and
destroy
126
 
microbes, and CD8D cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs)
directly kill infected cells (Fig. 6.1). Microbial infections
may occur anywhere in the body, and some infectious
pathogens are able to infect and live within host cells.
Pathogenic microbes that infect and survive inside host
cells include (1) many bacteria, fungi, and protozoa that
invade or are ingested by phagocytes but resist the killing
mechanisms of these phagocytes and thus survive in ves-
icles orinthecytosol, and (2)virusesthatinfect phagocytic
and nonphagocytic cells and replicate in these cells (see
Fig. 5.1). CD4þ and CD8þ T cells recognize microbial
antigens in different cellular compartments and differ in
the nature of the reactions they elicit.
• CD4þ T cells recognize antigens of microbes that
have been internalized into endocytic vesicles in
macrophages. These microbes may have evolved to
resist the killing mechanisms of macrophages, which
are largely restricted to vesicles. The T cells secrete
cytokines and express membrane molecules that
stimulate
the
microbicidal
mechanisms
of
the
phagocytes, enabling them to kill the microbes.
• CD4þ T cells also secrete cytokines that recruit other
leukocytes (i.e., neutrophils, eosinophils) to destroy
extracellular microbes by phagocytosis and other
mechanisms.
• By contrast, CD8þ T cells recognize microbial anti-
gens that are present in the cytosol of infected cells
and destroy these cells.
Cell-mediated immunity against pathogens was
discovered as a form of immunity to an infection by
bacteria that survive in phagocytes that could be
transferred from immune animals to naive animals by
cells (now known to be T lymphocytes) but not by
serum antibodies (Fig. 6.2). It was known from early
studies that lymphocytes were responsible for the
speciﬁcity of cell-mediated immunity against different
microbes, but the elimination of the microbes was a
function
of
activated
macrophages.
As
already
mentioned, CD4þ T cells are mainly responsible for this
classical type of cell-mediated immunity, whereas
CD8þ T cells can eradicate infections without a
requirement for phagocytes.
T cellemediated immune reactions consist of multiple
steps (see Fig. 5.2). Naive T cells are stimulated by mi-
crobial antigens in secondary (peripheral) lymphoid or-
gans, giving rise to effector T cells whose function is to
Infected cell with 
microbial antigens
in cytoplasm
Killing of
infected cell
Phagocyte with ingested microbes 
in vesicles
Inflammation,
killing of
microbes
Macrophage activation
killing of
ingested microbes
CD4+ effector
T cells (Th1 cells)
CD4+ effector
T cells (Th17 cells)
CD8+ 
T cells (CTLs)
Cytokine secretion
A
B
Fig. 6.1 Cell-mediated immunity. A, Effector T cells of the CD4þ Th1 and Th17 subsets recognize microbial
antigens and secrete cytokines that recruit leukocytes (inﬂammation) and activate phagocytes to kill the mi-
crobes. Effector cells of the Th2 subset (not shown) recruit eosinophils, which destroy helminthic parasites. B,
CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) kill infected cells with microbial antigens in the cytosol. CD8þ T cells
also produce cytokines that induce inﬂammation and activate macrophages (not shown).
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
127
 
1
2
3
4
Number of viable Listeria 
in spleen (log10)
Days  post infection
Immune T cells
Nonimmune T cells
1
2
3
4
A
T lymphocytes adoptively
transfer specific immunity
Number of viable Listeria 
in spleen (log10)
Days  post infection
Immune serum
Nonimmune serum
Serum fails to
transfer specific immunity
% Killing of Listeria  in vitro
Leukocytes added (x10-6)
Only activated macrophages
kill Listeria in vitro
B
C
2
4
6
Immune T cells
Resting macrophages
Activated macrophages
5
10
0
5
10
0
50
100
0
Fig. 6.2 Cell-mediated immunity to an intracellular bacterium, Listeria monocytogenes. In these experiments, a sample of lym-
phocytes or serum (a source of antibodies) was taken from a mouse that had previously been exposed to a sublethal dose of Listeria
organisms (immune mouse) and transferred to a normal (naive) mouse, and the recipient of the adoptive transfer was challenged with
the bacteria. The number of bacteria were measured in the spleen of the recipient mouse to determine if the transfer had conferred
immunity. Protection against bacterial challenge (seen by reduced recovery of live bacteria) was induced by the transfer of immune
lymphoid cells, now known to be T cells (A), but not by the transfer of serum (B) or nonimmune cells or serum. The bacteria were
killed in vitro by activated macrophages but not by T cells (C). Therefore, protection depends on antigen-speciﬁc T lymphocytes
(induced by the initial sublethal infection), but bacterial killing is the function of activated macrophages.
128
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
 
eradicate the infections. The differentiated effector T cells
then migrate to the site of infection. Phagocytes at these
sites ingest microbes or microbial proteins into intracel-
lular vesicles, where they are proteolytically processed into
peptide fragments, which are then bound to class II MHC
molecules and displayed at the cell surface for recognition
by CD4þ T cells. Peptide antigens derived by proteasomal
processing of microbial proteins in the cytosol of infected
cells are bound to class I MHC molecules and displayed on
the cell surface for recognition by CD8þ T cells. Antigen
recognition activates the effector T cells to perform their
task of eliminating the infectious pathogens. Thus, in cell-
mediated immunity, T cells recognize protein antigens at
two stages. First, naive T cells recognize antigens in sec-
ondary lymphoid organs and respond by proliferating and
by differentiating into effector cells (see Chapter 5). Sec-
ond, effector T cells recognize the same antigens at the site
of infection anywhere in the body, and the T cells respond
by eliminating these microbes.
This chapter describes how CD4þ and CD8þ effector
T cells develop in response to microbes and eliminate
these microbes. Because CD4þ helper T lymphocytes and
CD8þ CTLs use distinct mechanisms to combat in-
fections, we discuss the development and functions of the
effector cells of these lymphocyte classes individually. We
conclude by describing how the two classes of lympho-
cytes may cooperate to eliminate intracellular microbes.
DEVELOPMENT AND FUNCTIONS OF CD4D
EFFECTOR T LYMPHOCYTES
In Chapter 5, we introduced the concept that effector
cells of the CD4þ lineage could be distinguished on the
basis of the cytokines they produce. These subsets of
CD4þ T cells differ in their functions and serve distinct
roles in cell-mediated immunity.
Subsets of CD4D Helper T Cells Distinguished
by Cytokine Profiles
Analysis of cytokine production by helper T cells has
revealed that functionally distinct subsets of CD4þ T cells
exist that produce different cytokines and that eliminate
different types of pathogens. The existence ofthese subsets
is an illustration of specialized immune responses that are
optimized to combat diverse microbes. For example, some
microbessuchasmycobacteriainfectphagocytesbutresist
intracellular killing by innate immune activation of the
phagocyte. The T cell response to such microbes results in
further activation of the phagocytes, enabling them to kill
the ingested microbes. By contrast, the immune response
to helminths is dominated by the production of immu-
noglobulin E (IgE) antibodies and the activation of eo-
sinophils, both of which are stimulated by T cells and help
eliminate helminthic infections. Extracellular bacterial
and fungal infections are controlled by phagocytosis and
killing of the pathogens by neutrophils, and cytokines
produced by T cells enhance these neutrophilic responses.
These different types of immune responses are mediated
by subpopulations of CD4þ effector T cells that produce
different cytokines.
CD4D helper T cells may differentiate into three
subsets of effector cells that produce distinct sets of
cytokines that function todefend against different types
of microbial infections in tissues and a fourth subset
that activates B cells in secondary lymphoid organs
(Fig. 6.3). The two subsets that were deﬁned ﬁrst are called
Th1 cells and Th2 cells (for type 1 helper T cells and type 2
helper T cells, respectively); the third population, which
was identiﬁed later, is called Th17 cells because its signa-
ture cytokine is interleukin-17 (IL-17). The T cells that
help B lymphocytes, called T follicular helper (Tfh) cells,
are described in Chapter 7 and will not be considered
further in this chapter. The discovery of these sub-
populations has been an important milestone in under-
standing immune responses and provides models for
studying the process of cell differentiation. However, it
should be noted that some activated CD4þ T cells may
produce mixtures of cytokines and therefore cannot be
readily classiﬁed into these subsets, and there may be
plasticity in these populations so that one subset may
convertintoanotherundersomeconditions.Despitethese
caveats,considering the functionsofCD4þ effector cells in
the context of the major subsets is helpful for under-
standing the mechanisms of cell-mediated immunity.
The cytokines produced inadaptive immune responses
include those made by the helper T cell subsets, as well as
cytokines produced by CD4þ regulatory T cells and CD8þ
T cells. These cytokines of adaptive immunity share some
general properties, but they each have different biologic
activities and play unique roles in the effector phase or
regulation of these responses (Fig. 6.4). The functions of
the CD4þ T cell subsets reﬂect the actions of the cytokines
they produce. Similar sets of cytokines may be produced
early in immune responses by innate lymphoid cells, such
as ILC1, ILC2, and ILC3 (see Chapter 2), and later, in
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
129
 
much larger amounts, by Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells,
respectively. These combined innate and adaptive re-
sponses with similar cytokine proﬁles and functions are
sometimes grouped under type 1, type 2, and type 3 im-
munity, respectively.
Each subset of CD4þ T cells develops in response
to the types of microbes that subset is best at eradi-
cating. Different microbes elicit the production of
different cytokines from dendritic cells and other cell
types and these cytokines drive the differentiation of
antigen-activated T cells to one or another subset. We
next discuss the functions and development of each of
the major subsets of CD4þ effector T cells.
Th1 Cells
Th1 cells stimulate phagocyte-mediated killing of
internalized microbes (Fig. 6.5). The signature cyto-
kine of Th1 cells is interferon-g (IFN-g), the most
potent
macrophage-activating
cytokine
known.
(Despite its similar name, IFN-g is a much less potent
antiviral cytokine than the type I IFNs [see Chapter 2]).
Th1 cells, acting through CD40 ligand and IFN-g,
increase the ability of macrophages to kill phagocytosed
microbes (Fig. 6.6). Macrophages ingest and attempt to
destroy microbes as part of the innate immune response
(see Chapter 2). The efﬁciency of this process is greatly
enhanced by the interaction of Th1 cells with the
macrophages. The Th1 cells are induced to express
CD40 ligand (CD40L, or CD154) and to secrete IFN-g.
Binding of CD40L to CD40 on macrophages functions
together with IFN-g binding to its receptor on the same
macrophages to trigger biochemical signaling pathways
that lead to the generation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) and enhanced production
of lysosomal proteases. All these molecules are potent
destroyers of microbes. The net result of CD40- and
IFN-gemediated
activation
is
that
macrophages
become strongly microbicidal and can kill most inges-
ted microbes. This pathway of macrophage activation
by CD40L and IFN-g is called classical macrophage
activation, in contrast to Th2-mediated alternative
macrophage
activation,
discussed
later.
Classically
Defining
cytokines
Effector
T cells
Role in
disease
IFNγ
IL-4
IL-5
IL-13
IL-17
IL-22
Principal
responding cells
Major immune
reactions
Macrophages
Eosinophils
Neutrophils
Host
defense
Intracellular
pathogens
Helminths
Extracellular
bacteria and
fungi
Autoimmunity;
chronic
inflammation
Allergy
Autoimmunity;
inflammation
Th1
Th2
Th17
IL-21
IL-4
IL-13
B cells
Extracellular
pathogens
Macrophage
activation
Eosinophil and
mast cell activation;
alternative
macrophage
activation
Neutrophil
recruitment and
activation
Antibody
production
Autoimmunity
(autoantibody
production)
Tfh
Fig. 6.3 Characteristics of subsets of CD4þ helper T lymphocytes. A naive CD4þ T cell may differentiate into
subsets that produce different cytokines that recruit and activate different cell types (referred to here as
responding cells) and combat different types of infections in host defense. These subsets also are involved in
various kinds of inﬂammatory diseases. The table summarizes the major differences among Th1, Th2, Th17,
and Tfh subsets of helper T cells. IFN, Interferon; IL, interleukin.
130
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
 
Biologic actions of selected T cell cytokines
Cytokine
Principal action
Cellular source(s)
CD4+ Th2 cells, 
mast cells
CD4+ Th2 cells,
mast cells, ILC2
CD4+ Th2 cells, 
mast cells, ILC2
Activation of 
eosinophils
B cell switching to IgE;
alternative macrophage
activation
B cell switching to IgE;
alternative macrophage
activation
CD4+ Th1 and 
CD8+ T cells, natural 
killer (NK) cells, ILC1
Activation of 
macrophages 
(classical pathway)
General properties of T cell cytokines
Property
Significance
Produced transiently in response
to antigen
Provides diversity of actions but
may limit clinical utility of cytokines
because of unwanted effects
Most effects are at tissue sites
of infection and inflammation 
Provides cytokine when needed
Usually acts on same cell that
produces the cytokine (autocrine)
or nearby cells (paracrine)
Pleiotropism: each cytokine has
multiple biological actions
Therapuetic blocking of any one 
cytokine may not achieve a 
desired effect
Redundancy: multiple cytokines
may share the same or similar
biological activities
A
B
IL-4
IL-5
IL-13
Activated T cells
T cell proliferation;
regulatory T cell 
development and 
maintenance
IL-2
CD4+ Th17 cells, ILC3,
other cells
Stimulation of 
acute inflammation
CD4+ Tfh cells
B cell activation;
Tfh differentiation
IL-17
IL-21
CD4+ Th17 cells, 
NK cells, ILC3
Maintenance of 
epithelial barrier function
IL-22
Interferon-γ 
(IFN-γ)
Fig. 6.4 Properties of the major cytokines produced by CD4þ helper T lymphocytes. A, General properties of
cytokines produced during adaptive immune responses. B, Functions of cytokines involved in T cellemediated
immunity. Note that IL-2, which is produced by T cells early after activation and is the ﬁrst identiﬁed T cell
cytokine, was discussed in Chapter 5 in the context of T cell activation. Transforming growth factor b (TGF-b)
functions mainly as an inhibitor of immune responses; its role is discussed in Chapter 9. The cytokines of
innate immunity are shown in Fig. 2.14; several of these are also made by T cells and thus function in adaptive
immunity as well. More information about these cytokines and their receptors is provided in Appendix III. IgE,
Immunoglobulin E; IL, interleukin; ILC, innate lymphoid cell (the different types are indicated by numbers); Tfh,
T follicular helper (cell); Th, T helper (cell).
 
activated macrophages, often called M1 macrophages,
also secrete cytokines that stimulate inﬂammation and
express increased levels of MHC molecules and cos-
timulators, which amplify the T cell response. CD8þ
T cells secrete IFN-g as well and may contribute to
macrophage activation and killing of internalized
microbes.
The critical role of Th1 cells in defense against
intracellular microbes is demonstrated by the observa-
tion that individuals with inherited defects in the
development or function of this subset are susceptible
to damaging infections with such microbes, especially
nontuberculous mycobacterial species that are wide-
spread in the environment but do not cause disease in
immunocompetent individuals.
Essentially the same reaction, consisting of leukocyte
recruitment and activation, may be elicited by injecting
a microbial (or other) protein into the skin of an in-
dividual who has been immunized with the protein or
previously infected with the microbe. This reaction is
called delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH), and it is
described in Chapter 11, in which we discuss injurious
immune reactions.
Differentiation of Th1 Cells
The differentiation of naive CD4þ T cells to Th1 effector
cells is driven by a combination of antigen-induced
T cell receptor (TCR) signaling and the cytokines IL-
12 and IFN-g (Fig. 6.7). In response to many bacteria
(especially bacteria that can live within phagocytes) and
viruses, dendritic cells and macrophages produce IL-12,
and natural killer (NK) cells produce IFN-g. Therefore,
when naive T cells recognize the antigens of these mi-
crobes, the T cells are also exposed to IL-12 and IFN-g.
IL-12 and IFN-g activate the transcription factors
STAT4 and STAT1, respectively, and antigen-induced
signals in combination with the cytokines induce
expression of a transcription factor called T-BET that is
essential for Th1 development and function. These
transcription factors work together to stimulate the
expression of IFN-g and other proteins that are
involved in the migration of Th1 cells to sites of infec-
tion. IFN-g not only activates macrophages to kill
ingested microbes but also promotes more Th1 devel-
opment and inhibits the development of Th2 and Th17
cells. Thus, IFN-g increasingly polarizes the response to
the Th1 subset.
Th2 Cells
Th2 cells promote eosinophil-mediated destruction
of helminthic parasites and are involved in tissue
repair (Fig. 6.8). The signature cytokines of Th2
cellsdIL-4, IL-5, and IL-13dfunction cooperatively in
eradicating worm infections. Helminths are too large to
be phagocytosed, so mechanisms other than macro-
phage activation are needed for their destruction. When
Th2 cells encounter the antigens of helminths, the
T cells secrete their cytokines. Eosinophils are activated
by IL-5 produced by the Th2 cells and release their
granule contents, which are toxic to the parasites. IL-13
stimulates mucus secretion and intestinal peristalsis,
increasing the expulsion of parasites from the intestines.
Th2 responses are often accompanied by Tfh cells that
Macrophage
APC
Naive 
T cell
Bacteria
Th1
cells
Classical macrophage
activation (enhanced
microbial killing)
IFN-γ
Fig. 6.5 Functions of Th1 cells. Th1 cells produce the cytokine
interferon-g
(IFN-g),
which
activates
macrophages
to
kill
phagocytosed microbes (classical pathway of macrophage
activation). In mice, IFN-g stimulates the production of IgG an-
tibodies, but this has not been established in humans. APC,
Antigen-presenting cell; Th1, T helper 1 (cell).
132
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
 
produce IL-4 and IL-13, which drive B cell IgE class
switching. IgE binds to mast cells and is responsible for
their activation, leading to the secretion of chemical
mediators that stimulate inﬂammation and proteases
that destroy toxins.
Th2 cytokines promote epithelial barrier tissue
repair following injury, in part by stimulating the
alternative pathway of macrophage activation (Fig. 6.9).
IL-4
and
IL-13
inhibit
the
classical
pathway
of
macrophage activation, which generates microbicidal and
proinﬂammatory macrophages, described earlier. At the
same time, Th2 cytokines induce alternative macrophage
activation, so called to distinguish it from classical acti-
vation. Alternatively activated macrophages produce
growth factors that promote collagen synthesis by ﬁbro-
blasts and angiogenesis and thus may play a role in tissue
repair following injury, but they may contribute to ﬁbrosis
in a variety of disease states.
Activation of
macrophage
Activation of
effector cell
Responses of activated macrophages
CD40L
CD40
CD40
CD4+ effector
T cell (Th1 cell)
Macrophage
with ingested
bacteria
IFN-γ 
receptor
ROS,
NO
Macrophage response
Role in cell-mediated immunity
Increased expression of B7 costimulators,
MHC molecules
Secretion of cytokines (TNF, IL-1, IL-12) 
and chemokines
Production of reactive oxygen species,
nitric oxide, increased lysosomal enzymes
Killing of microbes in phagolysosomes
(effector function of macrophages)
TNF, IL-1, chemokines: leukocyte
recruitment (inflammation)
IL-12: Th1 differentiation, IFN-γ production
Increased T cell activation (amplification
of T cell response)
Increased expression 
of MHC and 
costimulators
(B7 molecules)
Secretion 
of cytokines
(TNF, IL-1, IL-12, 
chemokines)
Killing of
phagocytosed
bacteria
A
B
IFN-γ
Fig. 6.6 Activation of macrophages by Th1 lymphocytes. Effector T lymphocytes of the Th1 subset recognize
the antigens of ingested microbes on macrophages. In response to this recognition, the T lymphocytes express
CD40L, which engages CD40 on the macrophages, and the T cells secrete interferon-g (IFN-g), which binds to
IFN-g receptors on the macrophages. This combination of signals activates the macrophages to produce
microbicidal substances that kill the ingested microbes. This is known as the classical pathway of macrophage
activation. The activated macrophages also secrete tumor necrosis factor (TNF); interleukin-1 (IL-1); and che-
mokines, which induce inﬂammation; and IL-12, which promotes Th1 responses. Activated macrophages ex-
press more major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and costimulators, which further enhance T cell
responses. A, Illustration shows a CD4þ T cell recognizing class II MHCeassociated peptides and activating the
macrophage. B, Summary of macrophage responses and their roles in cell-mediated immunity. NO, nitric oxide;
ROS, reactive oxygen species
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
133
 
Dendritic cell
Macrophage
NK cell
IFN-γ
Th1
cell
Intracellular 
microbes (e.g.,
mycobacteria)
Antigen-
activated
T cell
IL-12
STAT4
TBET
STAT1
Fig. 6.7 Differentiation of Th1 effector cells. Dendritic cells, macrophages, and NK cells that respond to
different types of microbes secrete cytokines that induce the differentiation of antigen-activated CD4þ T cells
into the Th1 subset. The transcription factors that are involved in this process are indicated in boxes in the
antigen-activated T cells. IFN-g, Interferon-g; IL, interleukin; NK, natural killer.
Eosinophil
activation
Eosinophil
IgE
IgG4 (human),
IgG1 (mouse)
Antibody
production
Alternative 
macrophage activation
(enhanced fibrosis/
tissue repair)
Th2 cells
Mast cell
degranulation
Intestinal mucus
secretion and
peristalsis
IL-4,
IL-13
B cell
Helminths or
protein antigens
APC
Naive CD4+ 
T cell
Proliferation and
differentiation
Macrophage
IL-4
Tfh
cell
IL-5
IL-4,
IL-13
Fig. 6.8 Functions of Th2 cells. Cytokines produced by epithelial cells (often in response to injury or infection)
act on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) or on naive T cells to stimulate the differentiation of the T cells into Th2
cells. Th2 cells produce the cytokines interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13. IL-4 (and IL-13) act on B cells to
stimulate production mainly of IgE antibodies, which bind to mast cells. Help for antibody production may be
provided by Tfh cells that produce Th2 cytokines and reside in lymphoid organs and not by classical Th2 cells.
IL-5 activates eosinophils, a response that is important in the destruction of helminths. IL-4 and IL-13 induce
alternative macrophage activation. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; Ig, immunoglobulin.
134
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
 
Th2 cells are involved in allergic reactions to
environmental antigens. The antigens that elicit such
reactions are called allergens. They induce Th2 re-
sponses in genetically susceptible individuals and sub-
sequent exposure to the allergens triggers mast cell and
eosinophil activation. Allergies are the most common
type of immune disorder; we will return to these dis-
eases in Chapter 11 when we discuss hypersensitivity
reactions. Antagonists of IL-5 are approved for the
treatment of allergic asthma, and an antibody against
the IL-4/IL-13 receptor is approved for asthma and for
the allergic skin disease atopic dermatitis. Antibodies
that block the Th2-inducing cytokines TSLP and IL-33
are also approved for the treatment of asthma.
The relative activation of Th1 and Th2 cells in response
to an infectious microbemay determine theoutcome of the
infection (Fig. 6.10). For example, the protozoan
parasite Leishmania major lives inside the phagocytic
vesicles of macrophages, and its elimination requires
the activation of the macrophages by L. majorespeciﬁc
Th1 cells. Most inbred strains of mice make an effective
Th1 response to the parasite and are thus able to
eradicate the infection. However, in some inbred mouse
strains, the response to L. major is dominated by Th2
cells, and these mice succumb to the infection. Myco-
bacterium leprae, the bacterium that causes leprosy, is a
pathogen for humans that also lives inside macrophages
and is eliminated by cell-mediated immune mecha-
nisms. Some people infected with M. leprae are unable
to eradicate the infection, which, if left untreated, will
progress to a destructive form of the disease, called
lepromatous leprosy. By contrast, in other patients, the
bacteria induce strong cell-mediated immune responses
with activated T cells and macrophages around the
ROS, NO,
lysosomal enzymes
IL-10,
TGF-β
IL-1, IL-12,
IL-23,
chemokines
Macrophage
IL-13,
IL-4
Microbicidal 
actions:
phagocytosis
and killing
of bacteria
and fungi
Inflammation
Anti-inflammatory
effects, wound
repair, fibrosis
Classically activated
macrophage (M1)
Alternatively activated
macrophage (M2)
Microbial
TLR-ligands,
IFN-γ
Fig. 6.9 Classical and alternative macrophage activation. Classically activated (M1) macrophages are
induced by microbial products binding to TLRs and cytokines, particularly interferon-g (IFN-g), and are
microbicidal and proinﬂammatory. Alternatively activated (M2) macrophages are induced by interleukin-4 (IL-4)
and IL-13 (produced by certain subsets of T lymphocytes and other leukocytes) and are important in tissue
repair and ﬁbrosis. The M1 and M2 populations may represent extreme phenotypes, and there may be
macrophage populations with intermediate characteristics. Various mixtures of activated macrophages are
likely induced in most infections. NO, Nitric oxide; ROS, reactive oxygen species; TGF-b, transforming growth
factor b; TLR, Toll-like receptor.
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
135
 
infection site and few surviving microbes; this form of
less injurious infection is called tuberculoid leprosy.
The tuberculoid form is associated with the activation
of M. lepraeespeciﬁc Th1 cells, whereas the destructive
lepromatous form is associated with a defect in Th1 cell
activation and sometimes a strong Th2 response. The
same principledthat the T cell cytokine response to an
infectious pathogen is an important determinant of the
outcome of the infectiondmay be true for other in-
fectious diseases.
Differentiation of Th2 Cells
Differentiation of naive CD4þ T cells to Th2 cells is
initiated by cytokines secreted by damaged epithelial
cells, including IL-25, IL-33, and thymic stromal lym-
phopoietin (TSLP), and then further stimulated by IL-4,
which may be produced by mast cells, other tissue cells,
and T cells themselves at sites of helminth infection (see
Fig. 6.11). IL-4 activates the transcription factor STAT6
and antigen-induced signals in combination with IL-4
induce expression of a transcription factor GATA-3,
which is required for Th2 differentiation. Analogous
to Th1 cells, these transcription factors stimulate the
expression of Th2 cytokines and proteins involved in
cell migration and thus promote Th2 responses. IL-4
produced by Th2 cells enhances further Th2 differen-
tiation, thus amplifying the Th2 response.
Th17 Cells
Th17
cells
induce
inﬂammatory
reactions
that
destroy bacteria and fungi (Fig. 6.12). The major cy-
tokines produced by Th17 cells are IL-17 and IL-22.
This T cell subset was discovered during studies of in-
ﬂammatory diseases, many years after Th1 and Th2
subsets were described, and its role in host defense was
established later.
Th1 cell
Th2 cell
Macrophage
activation:
cell-mediated
immunity
Naive 
CD4+
T cell
Infection
Response
Outcome
Most mouse strains: Th1
BALB/c mice: Th2
Recovery
Disseminated
infection
Tuberculoid leprosy
Some patients: Th1
Leishmania
major
Mycobacterium 
leprae
Some patients: Defective
Th1 or dominant Th2
Lepromatous leprosy
(high bacterial count)
IFN-γ, TNF
IL-4, IL-13
Inhibits
microbicidal
activity of
macrophages
Fig. 6.10 Balance between Th1 and Th2 cell activation determines outcome of intracellular infections.
Naive CD4þ T lymphocytes may differentiate into Th1 cells, which activate phagocytes to kill ingested mi-
crobes, and Th2 cells, which inhibit classical macrophage activation. The balance between these two subsets
may inﬂuence the outcome of infections, as illustrated by Leishmania infection in mice and leprosy in humans.
IFN, Interferon; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
136
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
 
The major function of Th17 cells is to stimulate the
recruitment of neutrophils and, to less extent, mono-
cytes. IL-17 secreted by Th17 cells induces the pro-
duction of chemokines from other cells, and these
chemokines are responsible for leukocyte recruitment.
Bacteria and fungi that survive outside cells are usually
rapidly destroyed following ingestion by phagocytes,
especially neutrophils, so the recruited leukocytes are
effective at eliminating these microbes. Th17 cells also
stimulate the production of antimicrobial substances,
called defensins, that function like locally produced
endogenous antibiotics. IL-22 produced by Th17 cells
induces epithelial cell defensin production, helps to
maintain the integrity of epithelial barriers, and may
promote repair of damaged epithelia. Rare individuals
who have inherited defects in Th17 responses are prone
to developing chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis and
bacterial abscesses in the skin.
Th17 cells also induce inﬂammation and are impli-
cated in numerous chronic inﬂammatory diseases.
Antibodies that block IL-17 or the Th17-inducing
cytokine IL-23 are very effective treatments for psori-
asis, an inﬂammatory skin disease. An antibody that
neutralizes IL-12 and IL-23 (by binding to a protein
shared by these two-chain cytokines), and thus inhibits
the development of both Th1 and Th17 cells, is used for
the treatment of inﬂammatory bowel disease and
psoriasis.
Differentiation of Th17 Cells
The development of Th17 cells from naive CD4þ cells is
driven by cytokines secreted by dendritic cells and
macrophages in response to fungi and extracellular
bacteria (Fig. 6.13). Recognition of fungal glycans and
Dendritic cell
Mast cells,
eosinophils
CD4+ T cell
Th2
cell
Antigen-
activated
T cell
IL-4
STAT6
GATA-3
Helminth
Epithelium
Allergen
IL-25,
IL-33,
TSLP
Fig. 6.11 Differentiation of Th2 effector cells. Cytokines released from damaged epithelium, dendritic cells,
and other cells responding to helminths induce the differentiation of antigen-activated CD4þ T cells into the
Th2 subset. The transcription factors involved in this process are indicated in boxes in the antigen-activated T
cells. IL, interleukin; TSLP, thymic stromal lymphopoietin.
Inflammation,
neutrophil response
Anti-microbial
peptides
Increased
barrier
integrity
Leukocytes
and tissue cells
Epithelial
cells
Th17 cells
IL-17
IL-22
Chemokines, TNF,
IL-1, IL-6, CSFs
Naive CD4+ 
T cell
Proliferation and
differentiation
APC
Extracellular
fungi, 
bacteria
Fig. 6.12 Functions of Th17 cells. Th17 cells produce the
cytokine interleukin-17 (IL-17), which induces production of che-
mokines and other cytokines from various cells, and these recruit
neutrophils (and monocytes, not shown) into the site of inﬂam-
mation. Some of the cytokines made by Th17 cells, notably IL-22,
function to maintain epithelial barrier function in the intestinal
tract and other tissues. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; CSFs,
colony-stimulating factors; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
137
 
bacterial peptidoglycans and lipopeptides by innate
immune receptors on dendritic cells stimulates the
secretion of several cytokines, including IL-1, IL-6, and
IL-23. IL-6 and IL-23 activate the transcription factor
STAT3. Signals induced by these cytokines and another
cytokine called transforming growth factor b (TGF-b),
in combination with TCR signals, induce the expression
of the transcription factor RORgT, which works
together with STAT3 to promote Th17 differentiation.
Interestingly, TGF-b is an inhibitor of many immune
responses, but when present together with IL-6 or IL-1,
it promotes the development of Th17 cells.
DIFFERENTIATION AND FUNCTIONS OF
CD8D CYTOTOXIC T LYMPHOCYTES
Viruses typically infect various tissue cells that have no
intrinsic microbicidal activity, so they cannot be erad-
icated by activating the infected cells. Microbes that
survive in the cytosol (e.g., viruses) or escape from
phagosomes into the cytosol (e.g., some ingested bac-
teria) are resistant to microbicidal mechanisms, which
are largely conﬁned to vesicles. Eradication of such
cytosolic pathogens requires CD8þ CTLs. CTLs also
serve an important role in defense against cancers (see
Chapter 10).
Naive CD8D T lymphocytes activated by antigen,
costimulatory molecules, and cytokines differentiate
into CTLs that are able to kill infected cells expressing
the antigen. Naive CD8þ T cells can recognize antigens
but are not capable of killing antigen-expressing cells.
The differentiation of naive CD8þ T cells into fully active
CTLs is accompanied by the synthesis of molecules
involved in cell killing, giving these effector T cells the
functional capacity that is the basis for their designation
as cytotoxic. CD8þ T lymphocytes recognize class I
MHCeassociated peptides on infected cells and tumor
cells. The sources of peptides that bind to class I MHC in
a cell are microbial protein antigens synthesized in the
cytosol of that cell and protein antigens made by
phagocytosed microbes that escape from phagocytic
vesicles into the cytosol (see Chapter 3). Dendritic cells
capture the antigens of infected cells and tumors in tis-
sues, transfer these antigens into the cytosol, migrate to
lymph nodes and present the antigens on class I MHC
molecules to naive CD8+ T cells, by the process known
as cross-presentation (see Fig. 3.16). The differentiation
of naive CD8þ T cells into functional CTLs and memory
cells requires not only antigen recognition but also
costimulation and, in some situations, help from CD4þ
T cells (see Fig. 5.7).
CD8D CTLs recognize class I MHCepeptide
complexes on the surface of infected cells and kill
these cells, thus eliminating the reservoir of infection.
The T cells recognize MHC-associated peptides by their
TCR and the CD8 coreceptor. These infected cells are
called targets of CTLs, because they are destroyed by the
CTLs. The TCR and CD8, as well as other signaling
proteins, cluster in the CTL membrane at the site of
contact with the target cell and are surrounded by the
integrin leukocyte functioneassociated antigen 1 (LFA-
1). These molecules bind their ligands on the target cell,
forming an immune synapse (see Chapter 5).
Antigen recognition by CTLs results in the activation
of signal transduction pathways that lead to the
exocytosis of the contents of the CTL’s granules into the
synapse between the CTL and the target cell (Fig. 6.14).
CTLs kill target cells mainly as a result of delivery of
granule proteins into the target cells. Two types of
granule proteins critical for killing are granzymes
Dendritic cell
Macrophage
Extracellular
fungi, bacteria
Th17
cell
Antigen-
activated
T cell
RORγt
STAT3
IL-1
IL-6
IL-23
TGF-β
Fig. 6.13 Differentiation of Th17 effector cells. In response to some fungi and bacteria, dendritic cells and
macrophages secrete cytokines that induce the differentiation of antigen-activated CD4+T cells into Th17 cells.
The transcription factors involved in this process are indicated in boxes in the antigen-activated T cells. IL,
Interleukin; TGF-b, transforming growth factor b.
138
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
 
(granule enzymes) and perforin. Perforin disrupts the
integrity of the target cell membranes, thereby facili-
tating the delivery of granzymes into the cytosol.
Granzymes cleave and thereby activate enzymes called
caspases (cysteine proteases that cleave proteins after
aspartic acid residues) that are present in the cytosol of
target cells, and the active caspases induce apoptotic
death of the cell. Another CTL granule protein, gran-
ulysin, is delivered into the cytosol of infected target
cells, where it kills microbes by inserting into their cell
membranes.
Activated CTLs also express a membrane protein
called FAS ligand, which binds to a death-inducing
receptor, called FAS (CD95), on target cells. Engage-
ment of FAS activates caspases and induces target cell
apoptosis. This pathway does not require granule
exocytosis and probably plays only a minor role in
killing by CD8þ CTLs.
The net result of these effector mechanisms of CTLs
is that the infected cells are killed. Because all nucleated
cells express class I MHC, the CTLs can be activated by,
and are able to kill, any infected cell in any tissue. Cells
that have undergone apoptosis are rapidly phagocy-
tosed and eliminated without eliciting an inﬂammatory
reaction. CTLs themselves are not injured during the
process of killing other cells, so each CTL can kill a
target cell, detach, and go on to kill additional targets.
In addition to their cytotoxic activity, CD8þ effector
cells secrete IFN-g. This cytokine is responsible for
activation of macrophages in infections and in disease
states in which excessive activation of CD8þ T cells may
be a feature. It also plays a role in defense against some
tumors.
Although we have described the effector functions of
CD4þ T cells and CD8þ T cells separately, these types
of T lymphocytes may function cooperatively to destroy
intracellular microbes (Fig. 6.15). If microbes are
phagocytosed and remain sequestered in macrophage
vesicles, CD4þ T cells may be adequate to eradicate
these infections by secreting IFN-g and activating the
microbicidal mechanisms of the macrophages. How-
ever, if the microbes are able to escape from vesicles
into the cytoplasm, they become insusceptible to the
killing mechanisms of activated macrophages, and their
CTL activation
and granule
exocytosis
LFA-1
CD8
ICAM-1
Granzymes
Perforin
Apoptosis 
of target cell
Target 
cell
CD8+
CTL
Secretion of CTL
granule contents
(perforin, granzymes)
into synapse 
Perforin-
facilitated
entry of
granzymes
into target cell
Antigen recognition
and binding of
CTL to target cell
Fig. 6.14 MechanismsofkillingofinfectedcellsbyCD8þ cytotoxicTlymphocytes(CTLs).CTLs recognize class
I major histocompatibility complex (MHC)eassociated peptides of cytoplasmic microbes in infected cells and
form tight adhesions (conjugates) with these cells. Adhesion molecules such as the integrin LFA-1 and its ligand
ICAM-1 stabilize the binding of the CTLs to infected cells. The CTLs are activated to release (exocytose) their
granule contents (perforin and granzymes) into the synapse between the two cells. Granzymes are delivered to
the cytosol of the target cell by a perforin-dependent mechanism. Granzymes then induce apoptosis. Note that
the cytotoxic activity of CTLs does not require costimulation or T cell help. ICAM-1, Intercellular adhesion
molecule 1; LFA-1, leukocyte functioneassociated antigen 1.
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
139
 
elimination requires destruction of the infected cells by
CD8þ CTLs.
RESISTANCE OF PATHOGENIC MICROBES
TO CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Different microbes have developed diverse mecha-
nisms to resist T lymphocyteemediated host defense
(Fig. 6.16). Many intracellular bacteria, such as Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis, Legionella pneumophila, and
Listeria monocytogenes, inhibit the fusion of phagosomes
with lysosomes or create pores in phagosome mem-
branes, allowing these organisms to escape into the
cytosol. Thus, these microbes cannot be killed by the
microbicidal mechanisms of phagocytes and survive and
even replicate inside phagocytes. Many viruses inhibit
class I MHCeassociated antigen presentation by inhib-
iting production or expression of class I molecules, by
blocking transport of antigenic peptides from the cytosol
into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and by removing
newly synthesized class I molecules from the ER. All
these viral mechanisms reduce the loading of class I
MHC molecules by viral peptides. The result of this
defective loading is reduced surface expression of class I
MHC molecules, because empty class I molecules are
unstable and are not expressed on the cell surface. It is
interesting that NK cells are activated by class Ie
deﬁcient cells (see Chapter 2). Thus, host defenses have
evolved to combat immune evasion mechanisms of mi-
crobes: CTLs recognize class I MHCeassociated viral
peptides, viruses inhibit class I MHC expression, and NK
cells recognize the absence of class I MHC molecules on
infected or stressed cells.
Other viruses produce inhibitory cytokines or soluble
(decoy) cytokine receptors that bind and neutralize cy-
tokines such as IFN-g, reducing the amount of cytokines
available to trigger cell-mediated immune reactions.
Some viruses evade elimination and establish chronic
infections by stimulating expression of inhibitory re-
ceptors, including programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-
1; see Chapter 5) on CD8þ T cells, thus inhibiting the
effector functions of CTLs. This phenomenon, in which
the T cells mount an initial response against the virus but
the response is prematurely terminated, is called T cell
exhaustion (Fig. 6.17). It typically occurs as a reaction to
chronic antigenic stimulation, as in chronic viral in-
fections or tumors, and is a mechanism by which the
repeatedly stimulated T cell terminates its own response.
Still other viruses directly infect and kill immune cells,
the best example being human immunodeﬁciency virus
(HIV), which is able to survive in infected persons by
killing CD4þ T cells.
The outcome of infections is inﬂuenced by the
strength of host defenses and the ability of pathogens to
resist these defenses. The same principle is evident
when the effector mechanisms of humoral immunity
are considered. One approach for tilting the balance
between the host and microbes in favor of protective
immunity is to vaccinate individuals to enhance adap-
tive immune responses. The principles underlying
vaccination strategies are described at the end of
Chapter 8, after the discussion of humoral immunity.
As we will discuss in Chapter 10, tumors, like in-
fectious pathogens, develop several mechanisms for
evading or resisting CD8þ T cellemediated immunity.
These mechanisms include inhibiting expression of
CD4+ 
T cell
CD8+ 
CTL
Killing of
microbes in
phagolysosomes
Killing
of infected
cell
Phagocytosed microbes
in vesicles and cytosol
Viable
microbe in
cytosol
Killed
microbe
IFN-γ
Fig. 6.15 Cooperation between CD4þ and CD8þ T cells in
eradication of intracellular infections. In a macrophage infected
by an intracellular bacterium, some of the bacteria are seques-
tered in vesicles (phagosomes), and others may escape into the
cytosol. CD4þ T cells recognize antigens derived from the ve-
sicular microbes and activate the macrophage to kill the mi-
crobes in the vesicles. CD8þ T cells recognize antigens derived
from the cytosolic bacteria and are needed to kill the infected
cell, thus eliminating the reservoir of infection. CTL, Cytotoxic T
lymphocyte; IFN, interferon.
140
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
 
Microbe
Mechanism
Mycobacteria
Herpes simplex
virus (HSV)
Cytomegalovirus
(CMV)
Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV)
Pox Virus
Inhibition of
phagolysosome fusion
Inhibition of antigen
presentation: HSV
peptide interferes with
TAP transporter
Inhibition of antigen
presentation: inhibition
of proteasomal activity;
removal of class I 
MHC molecules from 
endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)
Inhibition of antigen
presentation: inhibition
of proteasomal activity
Inhibition of effector
cell activation:
production of soluble
cytokine receptors
Epstein-Barr 
virus (EBV)
Production of IL-10,
inhibition of 
macrophage and
dendritic cell activation
Mycobacteria 
survive within
phagosome
Inhibition
of antigen
presentation
Lysosome 
with 
enzymes
Phagosome
with ingested 
mycobacteria
EBV infected
B lymphocyte
EBV
IL-10
Macrophage
Inhibition of 
macrophage 
activation
IL-1, 
IFN-γ
Pox virus
Block cytokine 
activation of 
effector cells
Soluble 
IL-1 or IFN-γ 
receptors
ER
Cytosolic protein
Proteasome
TAP
CD8+
CTL
HSV
EBV, CMV
CMV
Fig. 6.16 Evasion of cell-mediated immunity (CMI) by microbes. Select examples of different mechanisms
by which bacteria and viruses resist the effector mechanisms of CMI. CTL, Cytotoxic T lymphocyte; ER,
endoplasmic reticulum; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; TAP, transporter associated with antigen processing.
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
141
 
class I MHC molecules and inducing T cell exhaustion.
Blocking some of these evasion mechanisms provides
effective strategies for unleashing antitumor immunity
(see Chapter 10).
SUMMARY
• Cell-mediated immunity is the arm of adaptive im-
munity that eradicates infections by cell-associated
microbes. This form of host defense uses two types
of T cells: CD4þ helper T cells recruit and activate
phagocytes and other leukocytes to kill ingested
and some extracellular microbes, and CD8þ CTLs
eliminate the reservoirs of infection by killing cells
harboring microbes in the cytosol.
• CD4þ T cells can differentiate into subsets of effector
cells that make different cytokines and perform
distinct functions.
• Effector cells of the Th1 subset recognize the anti-
gens of microbes that have been ingested by macro-
phages. These T cells secrete IFN-g and express
CD40 ligand, which function cooperatively to acti-
vate macrophages.
• Classically activated macrophages produce sub-
stances, including ROS, NO, and lysosomal enzymes,
that kill ingested microbes. Macrophages also pro-
duce cytokines that induce inﬂammation.
• Th2 cells stimulate eosinophilic inﬂammation and
trigger the alternative pathway of macrophage acti-
vation, and Tfh cells induced in parallel trigger IgE
production. IgE and eosinophils are important in
host defense against helminthic parasites and in
allergic diseases.
• The balance between activation of Th1 and Th2 cells
determines the outcomes of many infections, with
Th1 cells promoting and Th2 cells suppressing de-
fense against intracellular microbes.
Viral
load
T cell response
T cell response
Effector
CD8+ T cells
Memory
CD8+ T cells
Naive CD8+
T cell
Exhausted
CD8+ T Cells
Time
Time
Viral load
PD-1
Chronic
antigen
stimulation
Acute
infection
Effector and
memory CTL:
Can respond
to virus by
cytokine secretion,
proliferation,
target killing
Exhausted T cells:
Expression of
inhibitory receptors;
Inability to respond
to virus-infected cell
Fig. 6.17 Tcell activation and exhaustion. A, In an acute viral infection, virus-speciﬁc CD8þ T cells proliferate,
differentiate into effector CTLs and memory cells, and clear the virus. B, In some chronic viral infections, CD8þ
T cells mount an initial response but begin to express inhibitory receptors (e.g., PD-1, CTLA-4) and are inac-
tivated, leading to persistence of the virus. This process is called exhaustion because the T cells do make a
response, but this is short lived.
142
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
 
• Th17 cells stimulate the recruitment of neutrophils
and monocytes that destroy extracellular bacteria
and fungi. Th17 responses also underlie some
chronic inﬂammatory diseases.
• CD8þ T cells differentiate into CTLs that kill
infected cells, mainly by inducing apoptosis of the
cells. CD4þ and CD8þ T cells often function cooper-
atively to eradicate intracellular infections. CD8þ
CTLs also kill cancer cells and are the principal me-
diators of antitumor immunity.
• Many pathogenic microbes have evolved mecha-
nisms to resist cell-mediated immunity. These mech-
anisms include inhibiting phagolysosome fusion,
escaping from the vesicles of phagocytes, inhibiting
the assembly of class I MHCepeptide complexes,
producing inhibitory cytokines or decoy cytokine re-
ceptors, and inactivating T cells, thus prematurely
terminating T cell responses.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are the types of T lymphocyteemediated im-
mune reactions that eliminate microbes that are
sequestered in the vesicles of phagocytes and mi-
crobes that live in the cytoplasm of infected host
cells?
2. What are the major subsets of CD4þ effector
T cells, how do they differ, and what are their roles
in defense against different types of infectious
pathogens?
3. What are the mechanisms by which T cells activate
macrophages, and what are the responses of macro-
phages that result in the killing of ingested microbes?
4. How do CD8þ CTLs kill cells infected with viruses?
5. What are some of the mechanisms by which intra-
cellular microbes resist the effector mechanisms of
cell-mediated immunity?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
CHAPTER 6
Effector Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Immunity
143
 
7
Humoral Immune Responses
Activation of B Lymphocytes and
Production of Antibodies
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Phases and Types of Humoral Immune
Responses, 145
Stimulation of B Lymphocytes by Antigen, 147
Antigen-Induced Signaling in B Cells, 147
Role of Innate Immune Signals in B Cell
Activation, 150
Functional Consequences of B Cell Activation
by Antigen, 152
Functions of Helper T Lymphocytes in Humoral
Immune Responses, 152
Activation and Migration of Helper T Cells and
B Cells, 153
Presentation of Antigens by B Lymphocytes to
Helper T Cells, 154
Mechanisms of Helper T CelleMediated
Activation of B Lymphocytes, 155
Extrafollicular and Germinal Center
Reactions, 156
Heavy-Chain Class (Isotype) Switching, 157
Afﬁnity Maturation, 160
Generation of Plasma Cells and Memory B
Cells, 162
Antibody Responses to T-Independent
Antigens, 162
Regulation of Humoral Immune Responses, 163
Antibody Feedback, 164
B Cell Signal Attenuation by Other Inhibitory
Receptors, 164
Summary, 165
Humoral immunity is mediated by antibodies and is the
arm of the adaptive immune response that functions to
neutralize and eliminate extracellular microbes and
microbial toxins. It is the principal type of immune
response against extracellular microbial protein anti-
gens, as well as against nonprotein antigens, such as
microbial capsular polysaccharides and lipids that
cannot be recognized by most types of T cells.
Antibodies are produced by B lymphocytes and their
progeny. Naive B lymphocytes recognize antigens but
do not secrete antibodies, and antigen-induced activa-
tion of these cells stimulates their differentiation into
antibody-secreting plasma cells and memory cells.
This chapter describes the process and mechanisms
of B cell activation and antibody production, focusing
on the following questions.
144
 
• How are antigen receptoreexpressing naive B lym-
phocytes activated and converted to antibody-
secreting plasma cells?
• How do helper T cells stimulate the production of
diverse
and
potent
antibodies
in
response
to
different types of microbes?
• How are the responses of B cells controlled?
Chapter 8 describes how the antibodies that are
produced during humoral immune responses function
to defend individuals against microbes and toxins.
PHASES AND TYPES OF HUMORAL IMMUNE
RESPONSES
The activation of B lymphocytes results in their pro-
liferation, leading to expansion of antigen-speciﬁc
clones, and their differentiation into plasma cells,
which secrete antibodies (Fig. 7.1). Naive B lymphocytes
express two classes of membrane-bound antibodies,
immunoglobulins M and D (IgM and IgD), that function
as receptors for antigens. These naive B cells are acti-
vated by antigen binding to membrane immunoglobulin
(Ig) and by other signals discussed later in the chapter.
The antibodies secreted in response to an antigen have
the same speciﬁcity as the surface receptors on naive B
cells that recognize that antigen in order to initiate the
response. One activated B cell may generate a few
thousand plasma cells, each of which can produce
copious amounts of antibody, in the range of several
thousand molecules per hour. In this way, humoral
immunity can keep pace with rapidly proliferating mi-
crobes. During their differentiation, some B cells may
produce antibodies of different heavy-chain classes (or
isotypes) that mediate different effector functions and
are specialized to combat different types of microbes.
This process is called heavy-chain class switching or
isotype switching. The afﬁnity of antibodies speciﬁc for
microbial proteins increases during the course of a
Antibody
secretion
Class 
(isotype)
switching
Affinity
maturation
Memory 
B cell
IgM
High-
affinity IgG
Activated 
B cell
Naive
IgM+, IgD+
B cell
Helper T cells,
other stimuli
Microbe
IgG-expressing
B cell
Antibody secreting 
plasma cells
IgG
Antibody production
Activation of
B lymphocytes
Differentiation
Antigen
recognition
High-affinity 
Ig-expressing
B cell
Proliferation
Fig. 7.1 Sequence of events in humoral immune responses. Naive B lymphocytes recognize antigens, and
under the inﬂuence of helper T cells and other stimuli (not shown), the B cells are activated to proliferate,
giving rise to clonal expansion, and to differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells. Some of the activated
B cells undergo heavy-chain isotype switching and afﬁnity maturation, and some become long-lived memory
cells. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
145
 
response to microbes. This process is called afﬁnity
maturation, and it leads to the production of antibodies
with improved capacity to bind to and neutralize mi-
crobes and their toxins.
Antibody responses to different types of antigens
are classiﬁed as T-dependent or T-independent, based
on the requirement for T cell help (Fig. 7.2). B lym-
phocytes recognize and are activated by a wide variety of
chemically distinct antigens, including proteins, poly-
saccharides, lipids, nucleic acids, and small chemicals.
Helper T lymphocytes play an important role in B cell
activation by protein antigens. (The designation helper
came from the discovery that some T cells stimulate, or
help, B lymphocytes to produce antibodies.) In order for
T cells to help B cells, each cell has to recognize the same
protein antigen, as explained later. Therefore, T cells
help B cell responses only to protein antigens because
T cells can only recognize peptides derived from pro-
teins and displayed by major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules (see Chapter 3). In the absence of
T cell help, most protein antigens elicit weak or no
antibody responses. Therefore, protein antigens and the
antibody responses to these antigens are called T-
dependent. Polysaccharides, nucleic acids, lipids, and
other multivalent antigens (which contain the same
antigenic epitope repeated multiple times in tandem)
can
stimulate
antibody
production
without
the
involvement of helper T cells. Therefore, these multi-
valent nonprotein antigens and the antibody responses
to them are called T-independent. The antibodies pro-
duced in response to proteins exhibit class switching and
afﬁnity maturation because helper T cells stimulate these
processes. T-dependent antigens also stimulate the
generation of long-lived plasma cells and memory B
cells. Thus, the most specialized and long-lived antibody
responses are elicited by protein antigens and are
generated under the inﬂuence of helper T cells, whereas
T-independent responses are relatively short-lived and
T-dependent
IgM
Follicular 
B cells
IgM
Protein
antigen
Helper
T cell
Antibody class
(isotype)-switched,
high-affinity antibodies;
memory B cells,
long-lived plasma cells
IgG
IgA
IgE
Mainly IgM, low-affinity
antibodies; short-lived
plasma cells
T-independent
IgM
Polysaccharide
antigen
Other signals
(e.g. TLR ligands, 
complement protein)
B-1 cells,
marginal
zone B cells
Fig. 7.2 T-dependent and T-independent antibody responses. Antibody responses to protein antigens require
T cell help, and the antibodies produced typically show heavy-chain class switching and are of high afﬁnity.
Nonprotein (e.g., polysaccharide) antigens are able to activate B cells without T cell help. Most T-dependent
responses are made by follicular B cells, whereas marginal zone B cells and B-1 cells play greater roles in T-
independent responses. Ig, Immunoglobulin; TLR, Toll-like receptor.
146
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
require the direct activation of B cells by antigens in
concert with signals generated by innate immune
mechanisms but without a role for T cells.
Different subsets of B cells respond preferentially to
T-dependent
and
T-independent
antigens
(see
Fig. 7.2). The majority of B cells are called follicular B
cells because they reside in and recirculate through the
follicles of lymphoid organs (see Chapter 1). These
follicular B cells make the bulk of T-dependent, class-
switched, and high-afﬁnity antibody responses to pro-
tein antigens and give rise to long-lived plasma cells.
Marginal-zone B cells, which are located in the pe-
ripheral region of the splenic white pulp and also in the
outer rim of follicles in lymph nodes, respond largely to
blood-borne polysaccharide and lipid antigens; B-1 cells,
present in the mucosal tissues and peritoneum, also
mainly respond to multivalent polysaccharide and lipid
antigens. Marginal-zone B cells and B-1 cells express
antigen receptors of limited diversity and make pre-
dominantly T-independent IgM responses. IgM anti-
bodies may be produced spontaneously by B-1 cells,
without overt immunization. These antibodies, called
natural antibodies, may help to clear some cells that die
by apoptosis during normal cell turnover and may also
provide protection against some bacterial pathogens.
Antibody responses generated during the ﬁrst
exposure to an antigen, called primary responses,
differ quantitatively and qualitatively from responses
to subsequent exposures, called secondary responses
(Fig. 7.3). The amounts of antibody produced in the
secondary immune response are greater than the
amounts produced in primary responses. In secondary
responses to protein antigens, there is increased heavy-
chain class switching and afﬁnity maturation, because
repeated stimulation by a protein antigen leads to an
increase in the number and activity of antigen-speciﬁc
helper T lymphocytes.
With this introduction, we now discuss the steps in
B cell activation and antibody production, beginning
with the responses of B cells to the initial encounter
with antigen.
STIMULATION OF B LYMPHOCYTES BY
ANTIGEN
Humoral immune responses are initiated when
antigen-speciﬁc B lymphocytes in the spleen, lymph
nodes, and mucosal lymphoid tissues recognize an-
tigens. Some of the antigens in tissues or in the blood
are transported to and concentrated in the B cellerich
follicles
and
marginal
zones
of
these
secondary
lymphoid organs. In lymph nodes, macrophages lining
the subcapsular sinus may capture antigens and take
them to the adjacent follicles, where the bound antigens
are displayed to B cells. B lymphocytes speciﬁc for an
antigen use their membrane Ig as receptors that
recognize the intact antigen directly, without any need
for processing of the antigen. Because B cells are
capable of recognizing the native antigen, the antibodies
that are subsequently secreted (which have the same
speciﬁcity as the B cell antigen receptors) are able to
bind to the native microbe or microbial product.
The recognition of antigen triggers signaling path-
ways that initiate B cell activation. As with T lympho-
cytes, B cell activation is enhanced by signals produced
during innate immune reactions to microbes. In the
following sections, we describe the mechanisms of B cell
activation by antigen and other stimuli, followed by a
discussion of the functional consequences of antigen
recognition.
Antigen-Induced Signaling in B Cells
Antigen-induced clustering of membrane Ig re-
ceptors triggers biochemical signals that activate B
cells (Fig. 7.4). The process of B lymphocyte activation
is, in principle, similar to the activation of T cells (see
Fig. 5.9). In B cells, antigen receptoremediated signal
transduction requires the bringing together (cross-
linking) of two or more membrane Ig molecules. Re-
ceptor cross-linking occurs when two or more antigen
molecules in an aggregate, or repeating epitopes of one
antigen molecule, bind to adjacent membrane Ig mol-
ecules of a B cell. Polysaccharides, lipids, and other
nonprotein antigens often contain multiple identical
epitopes in each molecule and are therefore able to bind
to numerous Ig receptors on a B cell at the same time.
Even protein antigens may be expressed in an array on
the surface of microbes and are thus able to cross-link
antigen receptors of a B cell.
Signals initiated by antigen receptor cross-linking
are
transduced
by
receptor-associated
proteins.
Membrane IgM and IgD, the antigen receptors of naive
B
lymphocytes,
have
highly
variable
extracellular
antigen-binding regions (see Chapter 4). However,
these membrane receptors have short cytoplasmic tails,
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
147
 
Amount of antibody
Activated
B cells
Plasma
cells
Days after first antigen exposure
Days after second antigen exposure
IgG
IgG
Primary response
Secondary response
Lag after
immunization
Peak 
response
Antibody 
isotype
Antibody 
affinity
Usually 5-10 days
Smaller
Usually IgM>IgG
Lower average affinity,
more variable
Usually 1–3 days
Larger
Relative increase in IgG and, under 
certain situations, in IgA or IgE 
(antibody class [isotype] switching)
Higher average affinity
(affinity maturation)
IgM
First
exposure
Repeat
exposure
A
B
0
5
10
>30 0
5
10
>30
Short-lived plasma
cells in secondary
lymphoid organs
Memory
B cell
Memory
B cell
Long-lived plasma
cells in bone marrow
and mucosal tissues
Long-lived plasma
cells in bone marrow
and mucosal tissues
Primary
antibody response
Secondary
antibody response
Naive B cell
Fig. 7.3 Features of primary and secondary antibody responses. Primary and secondary antibody responses
differ in several respects, illustrated schematically in (A) and summarized in (B). In a primary response to
infection or vaccination, naive B cells in secondary lymphoid organs are activated to proliferate and differen-
tiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells and memory cells. Some plasma cells may migrate to and survive in
the bone marrow for long periods. In a secondary response, memory B cells are activated to produce larger
amounts of antibodies, often with more heavy-chain class switching and afﬁnity maturation. These features of
secondary responses are seen mainly in responses to protein antigens, because these changes in B cells are
stimulated by helper T cells, and only proteins activate T cells (not shown). The kinetics of the responses may
vary with different antigens and types of immunization. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
148
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
so although they recognize antigens, they do not
themselves transduce signals. The receptors are non-
covalently associated with two proteins, called Iga and
Igb, to form the B cell receptor (BCR) complex,
analogous to the T cell receptor (TCR) complex of T
lymphocytes. The cytoplasmic domains of Iga and Igb
each contain a conserved immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based activation motif (ITAM), similar to those found
in signaling subunits of many other activating receptors
in the immune system (e.g., CD3 and z proteins of the
TCR complex; see Chapter 5). When two or more
antigen receptors of a B cell are brought together by
antigen-induced cross-linking, the tyrosines in the
ITAMs of Iga and Igb are phosphorylated by tyrosine
kinases, including LYN, FYN, and BLK, which are
tethered to the plasma membrane and can access the
tails of Iga and Igb after BCR cross-linking. The
phosphorylated ITAMs recruit the SYK tyrosine kinase
(equivalent to ZAP-70 in T cells), which is activated and
in turn phosphorylates tyrosine residues on adaptor
proteins. These phosphorylated proteins then recruit
and activate a number of downstream molecules,
SYK
P
P
P
P
P
Cross-linking
of membrane
Ig by antigen
Tyrosine
phosphorylation
events
Biochemical
intermediates
Active
enzymes
Transcription
factors
Adaptor 
proteins
NF-κB
AP1
NFAT
Igα
Membrane Ig
Microbe
Igβ
ITAM
FYN
BLK
PLCγ2
activation
GTP/GDP
exchange on
RAS, RAC
Diacylglycerol
(DAG) 
PKC
ERK, JNK
P
RAS•GTP,
RAC•GTP
Inositol trisphosphate,
increased cytosolic Ca2+
Calcineurin
BTK
Fig. 7.4 Antigen receptoremediated signal transduction in B lymphocytes. Cross-linking of antigen re-
ceptors on B cells by antigen triggers biochemical signals that are transduced by the immunoglobulin (Ig)-
associated proteins Iga and Igb. These signals induce early tyrosine phosphorylation events, activation of
various biochemical intermediates and enzymes, and activation of transcription factors. Similar signaling
events are seen in T cells after antigen recognition. Maximal signaling requires cross-linking of at least two Ig
receptors by antigens. AP-1, Activator protein 1; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; GTP, guanosine triphosphate;
ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; NF-kB, nu-
clear factor-kB; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC, phospholipase C.
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
149
 
mainly enzymes that initiate signaling cascades that
activate transcription factors.
The net result of receptor-induced signaling in B
cells is the activation of transcription factors that switch
on the expression of genes whose protein products are
involved in B cell proliferation and differentiation.
Some of the important proteins are described later.
Role of Innate Immune Signals in B Cell
Activation
Antigen-induced signals are augmented by two addi-
tional types of signals that are produced during innate
immune responses to microbes. This ensures that B
cells respond preferentially to microbes and not to
harmless antigens (similar to costimulation in T cells;
see Chapter 5). The requirement for these additional
stimuli illustrates a fundamental tenet of the two-signal
hypothesis that was introduced in Chapter 2, that mi-
crobes or innate immune responses to microbes provide
signals in addition to antigen that are necessary for
lymphocyte activation.
B lymphocytes express a receptor for a comple-
ment protein that promotes the activation of these
cells (Fig. 7.5A). The complement system, introduced in
Chapter 2, is a collection of plasma proteins that are
B cell activation
Igα Igβ
Microbial
antigen
BCR
CR2
CD19
CD81
Bound
C3d
Complement
activation
Microbial
antigen
A
B
PAMP
TLR
B cell activation
Fig. 7.5 Role of innate immune signals in B cell activation. Signals generated during innate immune re-
sponses to microbes and some antigens cooperate with recognition of antigen by antigen receptors to initiate
B cell responses. A, Activation of complement by microbes leads to the binding of a complement breakdown
product, C3d, to the microbes. The B cell simultaneously recognizes a microbial antigen (by the immuno-
globulin receptor) and bound C3d by CR2 (type 2 complement receptor). CR2 is attached to a complex of
proteins (CD19, CD81) that are involved in delivering activating signals to the B cell. B, Molecules derived from
microbes (so-called pathogen-associated molecular patterns [PAMPs]; see Chapter 2) may activate Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) of B cells at the same time as microbial antigens are being recognized by the antigen re-
ceptor. BCR, B cell receptor.
150
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
activated by microbes and by antibodies attached to
microbes and function as effector mechanisms of host
defense (see Chapter 8). When the complement system
is activated by a microbe as part of the innate immune
response, the microbe becomes coated with proteolytic
fragments of the most abundant complement protein,
C3. One of these fragments is called C3d. B lympho-
cytes express a receptor for C3d called complement
Antigen binding to 
and cross-linking 
of membrane Ig
Changes
in activated
B cells
Functional
consequences
Increased survival,
proliferation
Interaction with
helper T cells
Responsiveness
to cytokines
Migration from follicle
to T cell zone
Antibody secretion
Naive B
lymphocyte
Expression of
proteins that promote
survival and cell cycling
Antigen presentation
Increased expression
of cytokine receptors
Generation of
plasma cells
Cytokines
Chemokines
Follicle
Increased 
expression
of CCR7
T cell
zone
Antigen
IgM
Fig. 7.6 Functional consequences of antigen receptoremediated B cell activation. The activation of B cells
by antigen in secondary lymphoid organs initiates the process of B cell proliferation and IgM secretion and
prepares the B cell for interaction with helper T cells.
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
151
 
receptor type 2 (CR2, or CD21). B cells that are speciﬁc
for a microbe’s antigens recognize the antigens by their
BCRs and simultaneously recognize the bound C3d via
CR2. Engagement of CR2 greatly enhances antigen-
dependent activation of B cells by stimulating tyrosine
phosphorylation of ITAMs.
Microbial products also directly activate B cells by
engaging innate pattern recognition receptors (see
Fig. 7.5B). B lymphocytes, similar to dendritic cells and
other leukocytes, express numerous Toll-like receptors
(TLRs; see Chapter 2). Pathogen-associated molecular
patterns of microbes bind to TLRs on the plasma
membrane or in endosomes of B cells, which triggers
signaling pathways that work in concert with signals
from the antigen receptor. This combination of signals
stimulates B cell proliferation, differentiation, and Ig
secretion, thus promoting antibody responses against
microbes.
Functional Consequences of B Cell Activation
by Antigen
B cell activation by multivalent antigen may initiate
the proliferation and differentiation of the cells and
prepares them to interact with helper T lymphocytes
if the antigen is a protein (Fig. 7.6). The activated B
lymphocytes begin to synthesize more IgM and to
produce some of this IgM in a secreted form. Thus,
antigen stimulation induces the early phase of the
humoral immune response. This response is greatest
when the antigen is multivalent, cross-links many
antigen receptors, and activates complement and
innate immune receptors strongly; all these features
are typically seen with polysaccharides and other T-
independent microbial antigens, as discussed later,
but not most soluble proteins. Therefore, by them-
selves, protein antigens typically do not stimulate high
levels of B cell proliferation and differentiation.
However, protein antigens induce changes in B cells
that enhance their ability to interact with helper T
lymphocytes.
When a protein antigen binds speciﬁcally to the BCR
of a B cell in the follicle of a secondary lymphoid organ,
the antigen is efﬁciently endocytosed, leading to
degradation of the antigen and display of peptides
bound to class II MHC molecules, which can be
recognized by helper T cells.
The next section describes the interactions of helper
T cells with B lymphocytes in antibody responses to
T-dependent
protein
antigens.
Responses
to
T-
independent antigens are discussed at the end of the
chapter.
FUNCTIONS OF HELPER T LYMPHOCYTES IN
HUMORAL IMMUNE RESPONSES
For a protein antigen to stimulate an antibody response,
B lymphocytes and helper T lymphocytes speciﬁc for
that antigen must come together in lymphoid organs
and interact in a way that stimulates B cell proliferation
and differentiation. We know this process works efﬁ-
ciently because protein antigens elicit antibody re-
sponses within 3 to 7 days after antigen exposure. The
efﬁciency of antigen-induced T-B cell interaction raises
many questions. How do B cells and T cells speciﬁc for
different epitopes of the same antigen ﬁnd one another,
considering that naive B and T lymphocytes speciﬁc for
any one antigen are rare, probably less than 1 in
100,000 of all the lymphocytes in the body? How do
helper T cells speciﬁc for an antigen interact with B cells
speciﬁc for an epitope of the same antigen and not with
irrelevant B cells? What signals are delivered by helper
T cells that stimulate not only the secretion of antibody
but also the special features of the antibody response to
proteinsdnamely, heavy-chain class switching and af-
ﬁnity maturation? As discussed next, the answers to
these questions are now well understood.
The process of T celleB cell interaction and
T celledependent antibody responses is initiated by
recognition of different epitopes of the same protein
antigen by the two cell types and occurs in a series of
sequential steps (Fig. 7.7):
• Naive CD4þ T cells are activated in the T cell zone of
a secondary lymphoid organ by antigen (in the form
of processed peptides bound to class II MHC mole-
cules) presented by dendritic cells (which also pro-
vide costimulatory signals) and differentiate into
functional (cytokine-producing) helper T cells.
• Naive B cells are activated in the follicles of the same
lymphoid organ by an exposed epitope on the same
protein (in its native conformation) that has been
transported to the follicle.
• The antigen-activated helper T cells and B cells
migrate toward one another and interact at the edges
152
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
of the follicles, where the initial antibody response
develops.
• Some of the antigen-speciﬁc B and T cells migrate
back into follicles to form germinal centers, where
more specialized antibody responses are induced.
Next we describe each of these steps in detail.
Activation and Migration of Helper T Cells and
B Cells
Helper T cells that have been activated by dendritic
cells in the parafollicular cortex of secondary lymphoid
organs migrate toward B cell follicles and interact with
antigen-stimulated B lymphocytes that have migrated
out of the follicles into the parafollicular areas (see
Fig. 7.7A).
• The initial activation of T cells requires antigen
recognition and costimulation, as described in Chap-
ter 5. The antigens that stimulate CD4þ helper
T cells are proteins derived from microbes that are
internalized, processed in late endosomes and lyso-
somes, and displayed as peptides bound to class II
MHC molecules of antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
in the T cellerich zones of peripheral lymphoid tis-
sues. T cell activation is induced best by microbial
protein antigens and, in the case of vaccines, by
B
Dendritic cell
Antigen
Helper
T cell
Initial T-B interaction
T cell zone
B cell zone
(primary follicle)
B cell
Antigen
Extrafollicular
helper T cell
Short-lived
plasma cells
Plasma cells
Follicular helper
T (Tfh) cell
Extrafollicular class-
switched B cells
Germinal center B cells
Memory B cells
Follicular
dendritic cell
Extrafollicular
focus
A
Germinal
center
reaction
Fig. 7.7 Sequence of events in helper T celledependent antibody responses. A, T and B lymphocytes
independently recognize epitopes of the same antigen in different regions of secondary lymphoid organs and
are activated. The activated cells migrate toward one another and interact outside lymphoid follicles. B,
Antibody-secreting plasma cells are initially produced in the extrafollicular focus where the antigen-activated T
and B cells interact. Some of the helper T cells differentiate further into T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, and then
these Tfh cells and some activated B cells migrate back into the follicle to form the germinal center, where the
antibody response develops fully.
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
153
 
protein antigens that are administered with adju-
vants, which stimulate the expression of costimula-
tors on APCs. The CD4þ T cells differentiate into
effector cells capable of producing various cytokines
and CD40 ligand, and some of these T lymphocytes
migrate toward the edges of lymphoid follicles.
• B lymphocytes are activated by antigen in the follicles,
as described earlier, and the activated B cells begin to
move out of the follicles toward the T cells.
The directed migration of activated B and T cells
toward one another depends on changes in the
expression of certain chemokine receptors on the acti-
vated lymphocytes. Activated T cells reduce expression
of the chemokine receptor CCR7, which recognizes
chemokines produced in T cell zones, and increase
expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR5, which
binds a chemokine produced in B cell follicles. Acti-
vated B cells undergo precisely the opposite changes,
decreasing CXCR5 and increasing CCR7 expression. As
a result, antigen-stimulated B and T cells migrate to-
ward one another and meet outside the lymphoid fol-
licles. The next step in their interaction occurs here.
Because antigen recognition is required for these
changes, the cells that move toward one another are the
ones that have been stimulated by antigen. This regu-
lated migration is one mechanism for ensuring that rare
antigen-speciﬁc lymphocytes can locate one another
and interact productively during immune responses to
the antigen.
Presentation of Antigens by B Lymphocytes to
Helper T Cells
The B lymphocytes that bind protein antigens by
their membrane Ig antigen receptors endocytose
these antigens, process them in endosomal vesicles,
and display class II MHCeassociated peptides for
recognition by CD4D helper T cells (Fig. 7.8). The
membrane Ig of B cells is a receptor that enables a B cell
to speciﬁcally bind a particular antigen, even when the
extracellular concentration of the antigen is low. Anti-
gen bound by membrane Ig is endocytosed efﬁciently
and delivered to late endosomal vesicles and lysosomes,
where proteins are processed into peptides that bind to
class II MHC molecules (see Chapter 3). Therefore, B
lymphocytes are efﬁcient APCs for the antigens they
speciﬁcally recognize.
Any one B cell may bind a conformational epitope of
a native protein antigen, internalize and process the
protein, and display multiple peptides from that protein
for T cell recognition. Therefore, B cells recognize one
epitope of a protein antigen ﬁrst, and helper T cells
recognize different epitopes of the same protein later.
Because B cells efﬁciently internalize and process the
antigen for which they have speciﬁc receptors, and
helper T cells recognize peptides derived from the same
antigen, the ensuing interaction remains antigen spe-
ciﬁc. B cells are capable of activating previously differ-
entiated effector T cells but are inefﬁcient at initiating
the responses of naive T cells.
The idea that a B cell recognizes one epitope of an
intact antigen and displays different epitopes (peptides)
Microbial
protein
antigen
B cell
Receptor-
mediated
endocytosis
of antigen
B cell recognition
of native protein
antigen
Antigen
processing and
presentation
T cell recognition
of antigen
Class II 
MHC-peptide 
complex
CD4+
T cell
Fig. 7.8 Antigen presentation by B lymphocytes to helper
Tcells. B cells speciﬁc for a protein antigen bind and internalize
that antigen, process it, and present peptides attached to class
II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules to helper
T cells. The B cells and helper T cells are speciﬁc for the same
antigen, but the B cells recognize native (conformational) epi-
topes, and the helper T cells recognize peptide fragments of the
antigen bound to class II MHC molecules.
154
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
for recognition by helper T cells was ﬁrst demonstrated
by studies using hapten-carrier conjugates. A hapten is
a small chemical that is recognized by B cells but
stimulates strong antibody responses only if it is
attached to a carrier protein. In this situation, the B cell
binds the hapten portion, ingests the conjugate, and
displays peptides derived from the carrier to helper
T cells. The antibody response is, of course, speciﬁc for
the epitope that the B cell recognized (the hapten in this
example), and the peptides derived from the carrier
protein simply bring helper T cells into the reaction.
This concept has been exploited to develop effective
conjugate vaccines against microbial polysaccharides
(Fig. 7.9). Some bacteria have polysaccharide-rich cap-
sules, and the polysaccharides stimulate T-independent
antibody responses, but they do not elicit high-afﬁnity,
long-lasting antibody responses, especially in infants
and young children. If the polysaccharide is coupled to
a carrier protein, however, high-afﬁnity T-dependent
antibody
responses
are
induced
against
the polysaccharide because helper T cells speciﬁc for the
carrier are engaged in the response. In this situation,
the B cell recognizes the polysaccharide (equivalent
to the hapten) and the T cell recognizes peptides from
the attached protein (the carrier); the antibody response
is speciﬁc for the polysaccharide, but it is much stronger
than conventional T-independent responses because
helper T cells are able to participate. Such conjugate
vaccines have been very useful for inducing protective
immunity against bacteria such as Haemophilus inﬂu-
enzae, meningococci, pneumococci, and typhoid.
Mechanisms of Helper T CelleMediated
Activation of B Lymphocytes
Activated helper T lymphocytes that recognize antigen
presented by B cells use CD40 ligand (CD40L) and
secreted cytokines to activate the antigen-speciﬁc B
cells (Fig. 7.10). The process of helper T cellemediated
B lymphocyte activation is analogous to the process of
T
cellemediated
macrophage
activation
in
cell-
mediated immunity (see Fig. 6.6). CD40L expressed
on activated helper T cells binds to CD40 on B lym-
phocytes. Engagement of CD40 generates signals in the
B cells that stimulate proliferation and the synthesis and
secretion of antibodies. At the same time, cytokines
produced by the helper T cells bind to cytokine re-
ceptors on B lymphocytes and stimulate more B cell
Tetanus toxoid
protein (TT)
Tetanus toxoid-
specific Th cell
Bacterial
capsular
polysaccharide
conjugated to
protein
Polysaccharide-
specific B cell
Long-lived plasma
cells and memory
B cells
Polysaccharide-specific
high affinity IgG
B cell activation
and differentiation
(germinal center reaction)
Presentation of
TT peptide to
helper T cell
Processing of
TT protein
Fig. 7.9 The principle of conjugate vaccines: the hapten-carrier concept. In order to generate strong anti-
body responses against a microbial polysaccharide, the polysaccharide is coupled to a protein (in this case,
tetanus toxoid). B cells that recognize the polysaccharide ingest it and present peptides from the protein to
helper T cells, which stimulate the polysaccharide-speciﬁc B cells. Thus, isotype switching, afﬁnity maturation,
and long-lived plasma cells and memory cells (all features of responses to proteins) are induced in a response
to polysaccharides. (Note that some B cells will also recognize the tetanus toxoid and antibodies will be
produced against the carrier protein, but this has no bearing on the anti-polysaccharide response.) Ig,
Immunoglobulin.
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
155
 
proliferation and Ig production. The requirement for
the CD40L-CD40 interaction ensures that only T and B
lymphocytes in physical contact engage in productive
interactions. As described previously, the antigen-
speciﬁc lymphocytes are the cells that physically
interact, thus ensuring that the antigen-speciﬁc B cells
are the cells that receive T cell help and are activated.
The CD40L-CD40 interaction also stimulates heavy-
chain class switching and afﬁnity maturation, which
explains why these changes are typically seen in anti-
body responses to T-dependent protein antigens.
Extrafollicular and Germinal Center Reactions
The initial T-B interaction, which occurs outside the
lymphoidfollicles,resultsintheproductionoflowlevelsof
antibodies, which may be of switched isotypes (described
next)but aregenerallyoflowafﬁnity. Theplasmacellsthat
are generated in these extrafollicular foci are typically
short-lived and produce antibodies for a few weeks, and
both the plasma cells and memory cells that develop have
lower afﬁnity than those produced in germinal centers.
Many of the events in fully developed antibody
responses occur in germinal centers that are formed
in lymphoid follicles and require the participation of
a specialized type of helper T cell (Fig. 7.11). Some of
the activated helper T cells express high levels of the
chemokine receptor CXCR5, which draws these cells
into the adjacent follicles. The CD4þ T cells that
migrate into B cellerich follicles are called follicular
helper T (Tfh) cells. The generation and function of
Tfh cells are dependent on a receptor of the CD28
family called inducible costimulator (ICOS), which
binds to its ligand expressed on B cells and other cells.
Inherited mutations in the ICOS gene are the cause of
some antibody deﬁciencies (see Chapter 12). Tfh cells
and their immediate precursors in the extrafollicular
focus may secrete cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-4
and IL-13, which determine which antibody isotype is
produced by class switching (see later). In addition,
most Tfh cells secrete the cytokine IL-21, which has an
important but incompletely understood role in Tfh cell
function.
A few of the activated B cells from the extrafollicular
focusmigratebackintothelymphoidfollicle,togetherwith
Tfh cells, and begin to divide rapidly in response to signals
from the Tfh cells. It is estimated that these B cells have a
doubling time of 3 to 4 hours, so one cell may produce
several thousand progeny within a week. The region of the
follicle containing these proliferating B cells is the
germinal center, so named because it was once incorrectly
thought that these were the sites where new lymphocytes
are generated (germinated). In the germinal center, B cells
undergo further class switching and somatic mutation of
Ig genes; both processes are described later. Early in the
germinal center reaction, some B cells of moderate afﬁnity
develop into memory cells and exit the germinal center.
B cell
T cell
CD40
B cell
T cell
Cytokine
receptor
Cytokines
Activated 
helper T cell
expresses CD40L,
secretes cytokines
B cells are 
activated by 
CD40 engagement, 
cytokines
B cell 
proliferation 
and 
differentiation
Cytokines
CD40 
ligand
CD40 
ligand
Fig. 7.10 Mechanisms of helper T cellemediated activation of B lymphocytes. Helper T cells recognize
peptide antigens presented by B cells. The helper T cells are activated to express CD40 ligand (CD40L) and
secrete cytokines, both of which bind to their receptors on the same B cells and activate the B cells.
156
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
High-afﬁnity B cells are produced later during the
germinal center reaction by repeated Ig gene mutation and
selection (described below) and these eventually differen-
tiate into long-lived plasma cells and memory cells.
Proliferating B cells reside in the histologically deﬁned
dark zone of the germinal center (see Fig. 7.11), while se-
lection occurs in the less dense light zone.
Heavy-Chain Class (Isotype) Switching
Helper T cells stimulate the progeny of naive IgM- and
IgD-expressing B lymphocytes to change the heavy-
chain
classes
(isotypes)
of
the
antibodies
they
produce, without changing their antigen speciﬁcities
(Fig.
7.12).
Different
antibody
isotypes
perform
different functions, and therefore the process of class
switching broadens the functional capabilities of hu-
moral immune responses. For example, an important
defense mechanism against most bacteria and viruses
when they are outside host cells is to coat (opsonize)
these microbes with antibodies and cause them to be
phagocytosed by neutrophils and macrophages. This
reaction is best mediated by antibody classes, such as
IgG1 and IgG3 (in humans), that bind to high-afﬁnity
phagocyte Fc receptors speciﬁc for the Fc portion of
Germinal
center
Early; moderate
affinity
Late; high
affinity
Activation of B cells 
and migration
into germinal center
Somatic hyper-
mutation and
affinity maturation;
Antibody class
(isotype) switching
B cell 
proliferation
Exit of high-affinity 
antibody-secreting cells,
and memory B cells
Memory
B cell
Low affinity
IgG
High affinity
IgG
Helper 
T cell
Tfh
cell
B cell
Dark
zone
Light
zone
Follicular 
dendritic
cell
Fc
receptor
Long-lived plasma cell
Mantle zone
Fig. 7.11 The germinal center reaction. B cells that have been activated by T helper cells at the edge of a
primary follicle migrate into the follicle and proliferate, forming the dark zone of the germinal center. Germinal
center B cells in the dark zone mutate their Ig genes at an extremely high rate, a process called somatic
hypermutation, and migrate into the light zone, where B cells with the highest-afﬁnity Ig receptors are selected
to survive, and they differentiate into plasma cells or memory cells, which leave the germinal center. The right
panel shows the histology of a secondary follicle with a germinal center in a lymph node. The germinal center
includes a basal dark zone and an adjacent light zone. The mantle zone is the part of the follicle outside the
germinal center. Tfh, T follicular helper cell.
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
157
 
these g heavy chains (see Chapter 8). Helminths stim-
ulate the production of IgE antibodies, which bind to
and activate mast cells, which have high-afﬁnity Fc
receptors for the ε heavy chain. The role of IgE and
mast cells in defense against helminths is unclear. Mi-
crobes at mucosal barriers stimulate the production of
IgA, which is transported into the lumens of mucosal
organs and neutralizes microbes (see Chapter 8). Thus,
effective host defense requires that the immune system
make
different
antibody
isotypes
in
response
to
different types and locations of microbes, even though
all naive B lymphocytes speciﬁc for all these microbes
express antigen receptors of the IgM and IgD isotypes.
Another functional consequence of class switching is
that the IgG antibodies produced have a longer half-life
than the initially produced IgM because IgG is able to
bind to a specialized Fc receptor called the neonatal Fc
receptor (FcRn). FcRn expressed in the placenta me-
diates the transfer of maternal IgG to the fetus,
providing
protection
to
the
newborn,
and
FcRn
expressed on endothelial cells and phagocytes plays a
special role in protecting IgG from intracellular catab-
olism, thereby prolonging its half-life in the blood (see
Chapter 8).
Heavy-chain class switching is induced by a com-
bination of CD40L-mediated signals and cytokines.
These signals act on antigen-stimulated B cells and
induce switching in some of the progeny of these cells. In
the absence of CD40 or CD40L, B cells secrete only IgM
and fail to switch to other isotypes, indicating the
Principal
effector
functions
Fc receptor-
dependent
phagocytosis and
phagocyte activation;
complement
activation;
neonatal immunity
(placental transfer)
Complement
activation
B cell
Mast cell
degranulation
(immediate
hypersensitivity)
Mucosal 
immunity
(transport of
IgA through
epithelia)
IgG subclasses
IgE
IgA
Heavy-chain class
(Isotype) switching
IgM
Helper T cells: CD40L, cytokines
Various
IL-4
IL-13
Cytokines produced
in mucosal tissues,
e.g. TGF-β, BAFF,
others
Fig. 7.12 Immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy-chain class (isotype) switching. Antigen-stimulated B lymphocytes
may differentiate into IgM antibodyesecreting cells, or, under the inﬂuence of CD40 ligand (CD40L) and cy-
tokines, some of the B cells may differentiate into cells that produce different Ig heavy-chain classes (iso-
types). The principal effector functions of some of these isotypes are listed; all isotypes may function to
neutralize microbes and toxins. B celleactivating factor belonging to the TNF family (BAFF) is a cytokine that
may be involved in switching to IgA, especially in T-independent responses. Switching to IgG subclasses is
stimulated by the cytokine IFN-g in mice, but in humans it is thought to be stimulated by other cytokines. IL,
Interleukin; TGF-b, transforming growth factor b.
158
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
essential role of this ligand-receptor pair in class
switching. A disease called the X-linked hyper-IgM
syndrome is caused by mutations in the CD40L gene,
which is located on the X chromosome, leading to pro-
duction of nonfunctional forms of CD40L in males who
inherit the mutation. In this disease, much of the serum
antibody is IgM, because of defective heavy-chain class
switching. Patients with this disease also have defective
cell-mediated immunity against intracellular microbes,
because CD40L is important for T cellemediated acti-
vation of macrophages and for the ampliﬁcation of T cell
responses by dendritic cells (see Chapter 6).
The molecular mechanism of class switching,
called switch recombination, involves taking the
previously formed VDJ exon encoding the V domain
of an Ig m heavy chain and moving it adjacent to a
different C region gene downstream in the Ig heavy
chain locus (Fig. 7.13). IgM-producing B cells, which
have not undergone switching, contain in their heavy-
chain locus a rearranged VDJ exon adjacent to the
exons of the ﬁrst constant region gene, which is Cm. The
heavy-chain mRNA is produced by splicing a VDJ exon
to the Cm gene sexons in the initially transcribed RNA,
and this mRNA is translated to produce a m heavy
chain, which combines with a light chain to give rise to
an IgM antibody. Thus, the ﬁrst antibody produced by
B cells is IgM. In the intron 50 of each constant region is
a large guanine-cytosine (GC)erich stretch of DNA
called the switch region. Signals from CD40 and cyto-
kine receptors stimulate transcription through one of
the switch regions adjacent to the constant region exons
of another antibody isotype that is downstream of Cm.
Transcription through a switch region makes the DNA
there accessible to the switch machinery. During switch
recombination, the switch region next to Cm recom-
bines with the switch region adjacent to the transcrip-
tionally active downstream constant region, and the
intervening
DNA
is
deleted.
An
enzyme
called
activation-induced deaminase (AID), which is induced
by CD40 signals, plays a key role in this process. AID
Sμ
Sγ Cγ
VDJ
Cμ
Sμ
Sγ Cγ
Cγ
Cγ
VDJ
VDJ
VDJ
Cμ
IgG
AID
Signals from 
helper T cells 
(CD40 ligand, 
cytokines)
Rearranged DNA in
IgM-producing cells
γ protein
AAA
γ mRNA
Transcription;
RNA splicing
Translation
Cγ
V  DJ
Recombination
of Sμ with Sγ;
deletion of
intervening 
C genes
Induction of
AID
Fig. 7.13 Mechanism of immunoglobulin heavy-chain class
(isotype) switching. In an IgM-producing B cell, the rearranged
VDJ encoding the V region is adjacent to the m constant region
genes (Cm). Signals from helper T cells (CD40 ligand and cyto-
kines) may induce recombination of switch (S) regions such that
the rearranged VDJ DNA is moved close to a C gene down-
stream of Cm, which are Cg genes in the example shown. The
enzyme activation-induced deaminase (AID), which is induced in
the B cells by signals from Tfh cells, alters nucleotides in the
switch regions so that they can be cleaved by other enzymes and
joined to downstream switch regions. Subsequently, when the
heavy-chain gene is transcribed, the VDJ exon is spliced onto the
exons of the downstream C gene, producing a heavy chain with a
new constant region and thus a new class of Ig. Note that
although the C region changes, the VDJ region, and thus the
speciﬁcity of the antibody, is preserved. (Each C region gene
consists of multiple exons, but only one is shown for simplicity.)
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
159
 
converts cytosines in the transcribed switch region
DNA to uracil (U), a base that is normally present only
in RNA. The sequential action of DNA repair enzymes
results in the removal of these aberrant uracils and the
creation of nicks in the DNA. Such a process on both
strands leads to double-stranded DNA breaks. When
double-stranded DNA breaks in two switch regions are
brought together and repaired, the intervening DNA is
removed. Therefore, the VDJ exon that was previously
formed by recombination events during B cell devel-
opment in the bone marrow and was originally close to
Cm may now be brought immediately upstream of the
constant region of a different isotype (e.g., IgG, IgA,
IgE). The result is that the B cell begins to produce a
new heavy-chain isotype (determined by the C region of
the antibody) with the same speciﬁcity as that of the
original B cell because speciﬁcity is determined by the
sequence of the VDJ exon, which is not altered.
Cytokines produced by Tfh cells determine which
heavy-chain isotype is produced (see Fig. 7.12). The
production of opsonizing IgG antibodies, which bind to
phagocyte Fc receptors, occurs as a result of class
switching driven by IFN-g in mice but the cytokines
involved in IgG class switching in humans are not well
established.
Opsonization
and
phagocytosis
is
an
important defense mechanism against many bacteria
and viruses, and predictably, these microbes induce the
production of IFN-g. By contrast, switching to the IgE
class is stimulated by IL-4 and IL-13 produced by Tfh
cells. IgE production is associated with helminth in-
fections, which induce strong Th2 and related Tfh cell
responses. Thus, the nature of the helper T cell response
to a microbe guides the subsequent antibody response,
making it optimal for combating that microbe.
The antibody isotype produced is also inﬂuenced by
the site of immune responses. As mentioned earlier, IgA
antibody is the major isotype produced in mucosal
lymphoid tissues, probably because cytokines such as
transforming growth factor b (TGF-b) that promote
switching to IgA are abundant in these tissues. IgA is
the principal antibody isotype that can be actively
secreted through mucosal epithelia (see Chapter 8).
Affinity Maturation
Afﬁnity maturation is the process by which the afﬁnity
of antibodies produced in response to a protein anti-
gen increases with prolonged or repeated exposure to
that antigen (Fig. 7.14). Because of afﬁnity maturation,
the ability of antibodies to bind to a microbe or mi-
crobial antigen increases if the infection is persistent or
recurrent. This increase in afﬁnity is caused by point
mutations in the V regions, and particularly in the
antigen-binding hypervariable regions, of the genes
encoding the antibodies produced. Afﬁnity maturation
is seen only in responses to helper T celledependent
protein antigens, indicating that T cells are critical in
the process. These ﬁndings raise two intriguing ques-
tions: how are mutations in Ig genes induced in B cells,
and how are the highest afﬁnity (i.e., most useful) B
cells selected to become progressively more numerous?
Afﬁnity maturation occurs in the germinal centers
of lymphoid follicles and is the result of somatic
hypermutation of Ig genes in dividing B cells, fol-
lowed by the selection of high-afﬁnity B cells by an-
tigen (Fig. 7.15). In the dark zones of germinal centers
(where the proliferating B cells are concentrated),
numerous point mutations are introduced into the Ig
genes of the rapidly dividing B cells. The enzyme AID,
which is required for class switching, also plays a critical
role in somatic mutation. This enzyme, as stated earlier,
converts cytosines into uracils. The uracils that are
C
V
C
V
Mutations
Somatic mutations
in Ig V genes
Selection of
high-affinity B cells
Low-affinity
antibody
High-affinity
antibody
Fig. 7.14 Affinity maturation in antibody responses. Early in
the immune response, low-afﬁnity antibodies are produced.
During the germinal center reaction, somatic mutation of
immunoglobulin (Ig) V genes and selection of mutated B cells
with high-afﬁnity antigen receptors result in the production of
antibodies with high afﬁnity for antigen.
160
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
B cells with somatically
mutated Ig V genes
and Igs with varying
affinities for antigen
B cells with high- 
affinity membrane Ig 
bind antigen on 
follicular dendritic cells
(FDCs) and present
antigen to helper T cells
B cells that best 
recognize antigen on
FDCs can interact with
Tfh cells, receive help,
survive, proliferate
and differentiate
B cell activation by
protein antigen
and helper T cells
High-affinity
B cells and
plasma cells
Naive B cell
Antigen
FDC
Follicular
helper
T cell 
(Tfh)
Migration into germinal center
Fig. 7.15 Selection of high-affinity B cells in germinal centers. Some activated B cells migrate into follicles to
form germinal centers, where they undergo rapid proliferation and accumulate mutations in their immuno-
globulin (Ig) V genes. These B cells produce antibodies with different afﬁnities for the antigen. B cells that
recognize antigen bound to follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) antigen are selected to survive. FDCs display an-
tigens by using Fc receptors to bind immune complexes or by using C3 receptors to bind immune complexes
with attached C3b and C3d complement proteins (not shown). B cells bind the antigen, process it, and present
it to follicular helper T (Tfh) cells in the germinal centers, and signals from the Tfh cells promote survival of the
B cells. As more antibody is produced, the amount of available antigen decreases, so only the B cells that
express receptors with higher afﬁnities can bind the antigen and are selected to survive.
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
161
 
produced in Ig V-region DNA are frequently replaced
by thymidines during DNA replication, creating C-to-T
mutations, or they are removed and repaired by error-
prone mechanisms that often lead to introduction of
various nucleotides in the vicinity of the original
mutated cytosine. The frequency of Ig gene mutations is
estimated to be 1 in 103 base pairs per cell division,
which is much greater than the mutation rate in most
other genes. For this reason, Ig mutation in germinal
center B cells is called somatic hypermutation. This
extensive mutation results in the generation of different
B cell clones whose Ig molecules may bind with varying
afﬁnities to the antigen that initiated the response. The
next step in the process is the selection of B cells with
the most useful antigen receptors.
Germinal center B cells undergo apoptosis unless
rescued by antigen recognition and T cell help. While
somatic hypermutation of Ig genes is taking place in
germinal centers, the antibody secreted earlier during
the immune response binds residual antigen. The
antigen-antibody complexes that are formed may acti-
vate complement. These complexes are displayed by
FDCs, which are a type of stromal cell developmentally
related to ﬁbroblastic reticular cells. FDCs are found
only in lymphoid follicles. In spite of their similar
name, FDCs are distinct from the class II MHCe
expressing DCs that present antigens to T lymphocytes
and are not derived from bone marrow precursors. The
long cytoplasmic processes of FDCs form a meshwork
around which germinal centers are formed. These cells
express complement receptors and Fc receptors, which
are involved in displaying antigens for the selection of
germinal center B cells, as described next.
B cells that have undergone somatic hypermutation
are given a chance to bind antigen. Most of the antigen
in the germinal centers carries attached antibody or
complement proteins, which bind to receptors on FDCs
and is thus displayed by the FDCs. B cells that recognize
the antigen can internalize it, process it, and present
peptides to germinal center Tfh cells, which then pro-
vide critical survival signals. High-afﬁnity B cells more
effectively compete for the antigen and thus are more
likely to bind the antigen and survive than B cells with
Igs that have lower afﬁnities for the antigen, akin to a
process of Darwinian survival of the ﬁttest. Selected
cells return to the dark zone, and this process is
repeated several times. As the immune response to a
protein antigen develops, and also with repeated
antigen exposure (e.g., with vaccine boosters), the
amount of antibody produced increases. As a result, the
amount of antigen available in the germinal center
decreases. The B cells that are selected to survive must
be able to bind antigen at increasingly lower concen-
trations, and therefore these are cells whose antigen
receptors are of increasingly higher afﬁnity.
Generation of Plasma Cells and Memory B
Cells
Activated B cells in germinal centers may differen-
tiate into memory cells or long-lived plasma cells.
Memory B cells do not secrete antibody but can home
to tissues and to secondary lymphoid organs. Memory
B cells exit the germinal center usually after limited
rounds of selection. They survive for months or years in
the absence of additional antigen exposure, undergo
slow cycling, and are ready to respond rapidly if the
antigen is reintroduced. Therefore, memory from a T-
dependent antibody response can last for a lifetime.
After repeated rounds of selection in the light zone,
high-afﬁnity B cells differentiate into antibody-secreting
plasma cells. The initial antibody-secreting cells, called
plasmablasts, enter the circulation and rapidly migrate
to the bone marrow or mucosal tissues. In the bone
marrow, they may further differentiate into long-lived
plasma cells, which survive for years and continue to
produce high-afﬁnity antibodies, even after the antigen is
eliminated. It is estimated that more than half of the
antibodies in the blood of a normal adult are produced
by these long-lived plasma cells; thus, circulating anti-
bodies reﬂect each individual’s history of antigen expo-
sure. These antibodies provide a level of immediate
protection if the antigen (microbe or toxin) reenters the
body.
ANTIBODY RESPONSES TO T-INDEPENDENT
ANTIGENS
Polysaccharides, lipids, and other nonprotein antigens
elicit antibody responses without the participation of
helper T cells. Recall that these nonprotein antigens
cannot bind to MHC molecules, so they cannot be seen
by T cells (see Chapter 3). Many bacteria contain
polysaccharide-rich capsules, and defense against such
bacteria is mediated primarily by antibodies that bind
to capsular polysaccharides and target the bacteria for
162
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
phagocytosis. Antibody responses to T-independent
antigens differ from responses to proteins, and most
of these differences are attributable to the roles of helper
T cells in antibody responses to proteins (Fig. 7.16; see
also Fig. 7.2). Extensive cross-linking of BCRs by
multivalent antigens may activate the B cells strongly
enough to stimulate their proliferation and differenti-
ation without a requirement for T cell help. Poly-
saccharides also activate the complement system, and
many T-independent antigens engage TLRs, thus
providing activating signals to the B cells that enhance
B cell activation in the absence of T cell help (see
Fig. 7.5).
REGULATION OF HUMORAL IMMUNE
RESPONSES
B cell responses are regulated by the products of B cells
themselves, that is, antibodies, and by cell-intrinsic
Chemical 
nature
Thymus-dependent
antigen
Thymus-independent
antigen
Features of
anitbody 
response
Heavy-
chain class
(isotype) 
switching
Affinity
maturation
Plasma
cells
Yes
Long-lived
Yes
Polymeric antigens,
especially polysaccharides;
also glycolipids,
nucleic acids
Low level switching to IgG
Short-lived
Secondary
response
(memory 
B cells)
Yes
No
Little or no
IgA
IgE
IgM
IgG
IgG
Proteins
IgM
Fig. 7.16 Features of antibody responses to T-dependent and T-independent antigens. T-dependent antigens
(proteins) and T-independent antigens (nonproteins) induce antibody responses with different characteristics,
largely reﬂecting the inﬂuence of helper T cells in T-dependent responses to protein antigens and the absence
of T cell help in T-independent responses. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
163
 
mechanisms,
including
inhibitory
receptors
and
signaling pathways.
Antibody Feedback
After
B
lymphocytes
differentiate
into
antibody-
secreting cells and memory cells, a fraction of these
cells survive for long periods, but most of the activated
B cells probably die by apoptosis. This gradual loss of
the activated B cells contributes to the physiologic
decline of the humoral immune response. B cells also
use a special mechanism for shutting off antibody
production. As IgG antibody is produced and circulates
throughout the body, the antibody binds to antigen that
is still available in the blood and tissues, forming im-
mune complexes. B cells speciﬁc for the antigen may
bind the antigen part of the immune complex by their
Ig receptors. At the same time, the Fc tail of the
attached IgG antibody may be recognized by a special
type of Fc receptor expressed on B cells (as well as on
many myeloid cells) called FcgRIIB (Fig. 7.17). This Fc
receptor is an inhibitory receptor, and, like other
inhibitory receptors in T cells and natural killer (NK)
cells,
it
contains
a
cytoplasmic
immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM). This ITIM is
phosphorylated by the LYN tyrosine kinase, and a
phosphatase is recruited to the phosphorylated ITIM.
The phosphatase shuts off antigen receptoreinduced
kinase-dependent signals, thereby terminating B cell
responses. This process, in which antibody bound to
antigen inhibits further antibody production, is called
antibody feedback. It serves to terminate further B cell
activation once sufﬁcient quantities of IgG antibodies
have been produced. Inhibition by the FcgRIIB also
functions to limit antibody responses against self anti-
gens, and polymorphisms in the gene encoding this
receptor are associated with the autoimmune disease
systemic lupus erythematosus (see Chapter 9).
B Cell Signal Attenuation by Other Inhibitory
Receptors
Several
inhibitory
receptors
other
than
FcgRIIB
dampen B cell responses and raise the threshold for B
cell activation. These include CD22 and CD72. These
inhibitory receptors contain cytoplasmic ITIMs that
are phosphorylated after the BCR is engaged. The
phosphorylated ITIMs recruit a tyrosine phosphatase
SHP-1, which dampens signaling. They have been best
studied in rodents, and their contributions to human B
cell biology and disease are less certain.
Secreted antibody
forms complex
with antigen
Inhibition of
B cell
response
Block in B cell
receptor signaling
Ig
Igα Igβ
Fc
receptor
ITIM
ITAM
P
P
P
Antigen-antibody
complex binds
to B cell Ig
and Fc receptor
Fig. 7.17 Mechanism of antibody feedback. Secreted immu-
noglobulin G (IgG) antibodies form immune complexes (antigen-
antibody complexes) with residual antigen (shown here as a
virus but more commonly it is a soluble antigen). The complexes
interact with B cells speciﬁc for the antigen, with the membrane
Ig antigen receptors recognizing epitopes of the antigen and a
type of Fc receptor (FcgRIIB) recognizing the bound antibody.
The Fc receptors block activating signals from the antigen re-
ceptor, terminating B cell activation. The cytoplasmic domain of
B cell FcgRIIB contains an ITIM that binds enzymes that inhibit
antigen receptoremediated B cell activation. ITAM, Immunor-
eceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibition motif.
164
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
SUMMARY
• Humoral immunity is mediated by antibodies that
bind to extracellular microbes and their toxins,
which are neutralized or targeted for destruction
by phagocytes and the complement system.
• Humoral immune responses are initiated by recogni-
tion of the antigens by speciﬁc membrane immuno-
globulin (Ig) antigen receptors of naive B cells. The
binding of multivalent antigen cross-links B cell an-
tigen receptors of speciﬁc B cells, and biochemical
signals are delivered to the inside of the B cells by
Ig-associated signaling proteins. These signals induce
B cell clonal expansion and IgM secretion.
• In humoral immune responses to a protein antigen,
called T-dependent responses, the binding of protein
antigen to speciﬁc Ig receptors of naive B cells in
lymphoid follicles results in the generation of signals
that prepare the B cell for interaction with activated
helper T cells that express CD40L and secrete cyto-
kines. The B cells internalize and process that anti-
gen and present class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC)edisplayed peptides to activated
helper T cells speciﬁc for the displayed peptide-
MHC complex. These helper T cells contribute to
early B cell activation at extrafollicular sites.
• The early T-dependent humoral response occurs in
extrafollicular foci and generates low levels of class-
switched antibodies that are produced by short-
lived plasma cells.
• Activated B cells induce the further activation of
T cells and their differentiation into T follicular help-
er (Tfh) cells. The B cells, together with the Tfh cells,
migrate into follicles and form germinal centers.
• The full T-dependent humoral response develops in
germinal centers and leads to extensive class switch-
ing and afﬁnity maturation; generation of long-lived
plasma cells that secrete antibodies for many years;
and development of long-lived memory B cells,
which rapidly respond to re-encounter with antigen
by
proliferation
and
secretion
of
high-afﬁnity
antibodies.
• Heavy-chain class switching (or isotype switching) is
the process by which the isotype, but not the speci-
ﬁcity, of the antibodies produced in response to an
antigen changes as the humoral response proceeds.
Class switching is stimulated by the combination of
CD40L and cytokines, both expressed by helper
T cells. Different cytokines induce switching to
different antibody isotypes, enabling the immune
system to respond in the most effective way to
different types of microbes.
• Afﬁnity maturation is the process by which the afﬁn-
ity of antibodies for protein antigens increases with
prolonged or repeated exposure to the antigens.
The process is initiated by signals from Tfh cells,
resulting in migration of the B cells into follicles
and the formation of germinal centers. Here the B
cells proliferate rapidly, and their Ig V genes undergo
extensive somatic mutation. The antigen may be dis-
played by FDCs in the germinal centers. B cells with
mutated V regions that recognize the antigen with
high afﬁnity are selected to survive, giving rise to af-
ﬁnity maturation of the antibody response.
• Polysaccharides, lipids, and other nonprotein anti-
gens are called T-independent antigens because
they induce antibody responses without T cell help.
Most T-independent antigens contain multiple iden-
tical epitopes that are able to cross-link many Ig re-
ceptors on a B cell, providing signals that stimulate B
cell responses even in the absence of helper T cell
activation. Antibody responses to T-independent
antigens show less heavy-chain class switching and
afﬁnity maturation than is typical for responses to
T-dependent protein antigens.
• Secreted antibodies form immune complexes with
residual antigen and shut off B cell activation by
engaging an inhibitory Fc receptor on B cells.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are the signals that induce B cell responses to
protein antigens and polysaccharide antigens?
2. What are the major differences between primary and
secondary antibody responses to a protein antigen?
3. How do helper T cells speciﬁc for an antigen interact
with B lymphocytes speciﬁc for the same antigen?
Where in a lymph node do these interactions mainly
occur?
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
165
 
4. What are the signals that induce heavy-chain class
switching, and what is the importance of this phe-
nomenon
for
host
defense
against
different
microbes?
5. What is afﬁnity maturation? How is it induced, and
how are high-afﬁnity B cells selected to survive?
6. What are the characteristics of antibody responses to
polysaccharides and lipids? What types of bacteria
stimulate mostly these types of antibody responses?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
166
CHAPTER 7
Humoral Immune Responses
 
8
Effector Mechanisms of
Humoral Immunity
Elimination of Extracellular
Microbes and Toxins
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Properties of Antibodies That Determine Effector
Functions, 168
Neutralization of Microbes and Microbial
Toxins, 171
Opsonization and Phagocytosis, 172
Antibody-Dependent Cellular Cytotoxicity, 173
Immunoglobulin Ee and Mast CelleMediated
Reactions, 173
The Complement System, 174
Pathways of Complement Activation, 174
Functions of the Complement System, 177
Regulation of Complement Activation, 179
Functions of Antibodies at Special Anatomic
Sites, 181
Mucosal Immunity, 181
Neonatal Immunity, 182
Evasion of Humoral Immunity by Microbes, 183
Vaccination, 184
Summary, 185
Humoral immunity is the type of host defense mediated
by secreted antibodies that is necessary for protection
against extracellular microbes and their toxins. Anti-
bodies prevent infections by blocking microbes from
binding to and entering host cells. In addition, anti-
bodies function together with other components of the
immune system (e.g., phagocytes, complement pro-
teins) to eliminate microbes and toxins. Although an-
tibodies are a major mechanism of adaptive immunity
against extracellular microbes, they cannot reach mi-
crobes that live inside cells. However, humoral immu-
nity is vital even for defense against microbes that live
inside cells, such as viruses, because antibodies can bind
to these microbes before they enter host cells or during
passage from infected to uninfected cells, thus pre-
venting
spread
of
infection.
Defects
in
antibody
production are associated with increased susceptibility
to infections by many bacteria, viruses, and parasites.
All the vaccines that are currently in use work mainly
by stimulating the production of antibodies.
This chapter describes how antibodies provide de-
fense
against
infections,
addressing
the
following
questions:
• What are the mechanisms used by secreted anti-
bodies to combat different types of infectious agents
and their toxins?
• What is the role of the complement system in de-
fense against microbes?
• How do antibodies combat microbes that enter the
gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts?
• How do antibodies protect the fetus and newborn
from infections?
167
 
Before describing the mechanisms by which anti-
bodies function in host defense, we summarize the
properties of antibody molecules that are important for
these functions.
PROPERTIES OF ANTIBODIES THAT
DETERMINE EFFECTOR FUNCTIONS
Several features of the production and structure of an-
tibodies contribute in important ways to the roles of
these molecules in host defense.
Antibodies function in the circulation, in tissues
throughout the body, and in the lumens of mucosal
organs. Antibodies are produced after stimulation of B
lymphocytes by antigens in secondary (peripheral)
lymphoid
organs
(lymph
nodes,
spleen,
mucosal
lymphoid tissues) and, in lesser amounts, at tissue sites
of inﬂammation. Many of the antigen-stimulated B
lymphocytes
differentiate
into
antibody-secreting
plasma cells, some of which remain in lymphoid or-
gans or inﬂamed tissues and others migrate to and
reside in the bone marrow. Different plasma cells syn-
thesize and secrete antibodies of different heavy-chain
classes (isotypes). These secreted antibodies enter the
blood, from where they may reach any peripheral site of
infection, or enter mucosal secretions, where they pre-
vent infections by microbes that could enter through
epithelial barriers.
Protective antibodies are produced during the ﬁrst
(primary) response to a microbe and in larger
amounts during subsequent secondary responses (see
Fig. 7.3). Antibody production usually begins within the
ﬁrst week after infection or vaccination. Some of the
plasma cells generated in germinal center reactions
migrate to the bone marrow and continue to produce
antibodies for months or years. If the microbe again
tries to infect the host, the continuously secreted anti-
bodies provide immediate protection. At the same time,
memory cells that had developed during the initial B
cell
response
rapidly
differentiate
into
antibody-
producing cells upon repeat encounter with the anti-
gen, providing a large burst of antibody for more
effective defense against the infection. A goal of vacci-
nation is to stimulate the development of long-lived
plasma cells and memory cells.
Antibodies use their antigen-binding (Fab) regions
to bind to and block the harmful effects of microbes
and toxins, and they use their Fc regions to activate
diverse effector mechanisms that eliminate these mi-
crobes and toxins (Fig. 8.1). This spatial segregation of
the antigen recognition and effector functions of anti-
body molecules was introduced in Chapter 4. Antibodies
block the infectivity of microbes and the injurious effects
of microbial toxins simply by binding to the microbes
and toxins. Other functions of antibodies require the
participation of various components of host defense,
such as phagocytes and the complement system. The Fc
portions of immunoglobulin (Ig) molecules, made up of
the heavy-chain constant regions, contain the binding
sites for Fc receptors on phagocytes and for complement
proteins. The binding of antibodies to Fc receptors and
complement proteins occurs only after Ig molecules
recognize and become attached to a microbe or micro-
bial antigen. Therefore, even the Fc-dependent functions
of antibodies require antigen recognition by the Fab
regions. This feature of antibodies ensures that they
activate effector mechanisms only when neededdthat is,
when they recognize their target antigens.
Heavy-chain class (isotype) switching and afﬁnity
maturation enhance the protective functions of anti-
bodies. Class switching and afﬁnity maturation are two
changes that occur in the antibodies produced by
antigen-stimulated B lymphocytes, especially during re-
sponses to protein antigens (see Chapter 7). Heavy-chain
class switching results in the production of antibodies
with distinct Fc regions, capable of different functions
(see Fig. 7.12). By switching to different antibody classes
in response to various microbes, the humoral immune
system is able to engage diverse host mechanisms that
are optimal for combating those microbes. Afﬁnity
maturation is induced by repeated stimulation with
protein antigens, and it leads to the production of anti-
bodies with higher and higher afﬁnities for the antigen,
compared to the antibodies initially secreted. This
change increases the ability of antibodies to bind to and
neutralize or eliminate microbes. The progressive in-
crease in antibody afﬁnity with repeated stimulation of B
cells is one of the reasons for the recommended practice
of giving multiple rounds of immunizations with the
same
antigen
for
generating
protective
immunity
(e.g., booster shots of vaccines).
Antibodies of the IgG isotype survive for a longer
duration in the blood than IgM and other isotypes and
therefore class switching to IgG prolongs the protec-
tive functions of the humoral immune response. Most
circulating proteins have half-lives of hours to days in
168
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
Lysis of microbes
B cell
Microbe
Antibodies
Neutralization of
microbe and toxins
Fc receptor
Opsonization and 
phagocytosis
of microbes
Phagocytosis of 
microbes opsonized 
with complement
fragments (e.g., C3b)
C3b 
receptor
Complement
activation
Inflammation
NK cell
Phagocyte
Antibody-
dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity
Antibody
isotype
Effector functions
IgG
IgM
IgA
IgE
Neutralization of microbes and toxins
Opsonization of antigens for phagocytosis by 
macrophages and neutrophils
Activation of the classical pathway of complement
Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity mediated
by NK cells
Neonatal immunity: transfer of maternal antibody
across placenta and gut
Feedback inhibition of B cell activation
Mucosal immunity: secretion of IgA into lumens of
gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts, neutralization 
of microbes and toxins
Activation of the classical pathway of complement
Mast cell activation
Defense against helminths
A
B
Fig. 8.1 Effector functions of antibodies. Antibodies are produced by the activation of B lymphocytes by
antigens and other signals (not shown). Antibodies of different heavy-chain classes (isotypes) perform different
effector functions, as illustrated schematically in (A) and summarized in (B). (Some properties of antibodies are
listed in Fig. 4.3.) Ig, Immunoglobulin; NK, natural killer.
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
169
 
the blood, but IgG has an unusually long half-life of 3 to
4 weeks because of a special mechanism involving a
particular Fc receptor called the neonatal Fc receptor
(FcRn). This Fc receptor is expressed in placenta,
endothelium, phagocytes, and a few other cell types. In
the placenta, the FcRn transports antibodies from the
mother’s circulation to the fetus (discussed later). In
other cell types, the FcRn protects IgG antibodies from
intracellular catabolism (Fig. 8.2A). FcRn is found in the
endosomes of endothelial cells and phagocytes, where it
binds to IgG that has been taken up by the cells. Once
bound to the FcRn, the IgG is recycled back into the
circulation or tissue ﬂuids, thus avoiding lysosomal
degradation. This unique mechanism for protecting a
blood protein is the reason why IgG antibodies have a
half-life that is much longer than that of other Ig isotypes
and most other plasma proteins. This property of Fc
regions of IgG has been exploited to increase the half-life
of other proteins by coupling the proteins to an IgG Fc
region (Fig. 8.2B). One of several therapeutic agents
based on this principle is the tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) receptoreFc fusion protein, which functions as
an antagonist of TNF and is used to treat various in-
ﬂammatory diseases. By coupling the extracellular
domain of the TNF receptor to the Fc portion of a hu-
man IgG molecule using a genetic engineering approach,
the half-life of the hybrid protein becomes much greater
than that of the soluble receptor by itself. An engineered
Fc portion of IgG that binds to and blocks the FcRn
reduces levels of circulating autoantibodies (and all IgGs)
and is approved for treating generalized myasthenia
gravis.
IgG binds to FcRn
in endosome
IgG-FcRn complexes
sorted to recycling
endosome
TNF
receptor
Anti-TNF IgG
TNFR-IgG Fc
fusion protein
Fc
TNF
IgG
Plasma
protein
Endosome pH <7
IgG binds to FcRn
in endosome
IgG-FcRn complexes
sorted to recycling
endosome
Recycling
endosome
Endocytic
vesicle
FcRn
Other proteins
degraded in lysosomes
IgG released
from FcRn by
extracellular pH >7
Lysosome
A
B
Fig. 8.2 Neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) contributes to the long half-life of IgG molecules. A, Circulating or
extravascular IgG antibodies (mainly of the IgG1, IgG2, and IgG4 subclasses) are ingested by endothelial cells
and phagocytes into endosomes, where they bind the FcRn, a receptor present in the endosomal membrane.
The low internal pH of endosomes favors tight IgG binding to the FcRn, protecting the IgG from lysosomal
proteolysis. The FcRn-IgG complexes recycle back to the cell surface, where they are exposed to the neutral
pH (w7) of the blood, which releases the bound antibody back into the circulation or tissue ﬂuid. B, Fc-con-
taining fusion proteins. A monoclonal antibody speciﬁc for the cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) (left) can
bind to and block the activity of the cytokine and remain in the circulation for a long time (weeks) due to
recycling by the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn). The soluble extracellular domain of the TNF receptor (TNFR)
(right) can also act as an antagonist of the cytokine, and coupling the soluble receptor to an IgG Fc domain
prolongs the half-life of the fusion protein in the blood by the same FcRn-dependent mechanism. Both anti-
TNF IgG monoclonal antibodies and TNFR-IgG Fc fusion proteins are used as drugs to treat some inﬂammatory
diseases. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
170
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
With this introduction, we proceed to a discussion of
the mechanisms used by antibodies to combat in-
fections. Much of the chapter is devoted to effector
mechanisms that are not inﬂuenced by anatomic con-
siderations; that is, they may be active anywhere in the
body. At the end of the chapter, we describe the special
features of antibody functions at particular anatomic
locations.
NEUTRALIZATION OF MICROBES AND
MICROBIAL TOXINS
Antibodies bind to and block, or neutralize, the
infectivity of microbes and the interactions of mi-
crobial toxins with host cells (Fig. 8.3). Vaccine-
induced immunity is related mainly to the ability of
vaccines to stimulate the production of neutralizing
antibodies that block initial infection. Antibodies in
mucosal secretions in the gut and airways block the
entry of ingested and inhaled microbes, respectively
(discussed in more detail later in the chapter). After
microbes enter the host, they use molecules in their
envelopes or cell walls to bind to and gain entry into
host cells. Antibodies may attach to these microbial
surface molecules, thereby preventing the microbes
from infecting host cells. Microbes, such as viruses,
that are able to enter host cells may replicate inside the
cells and then be released and go on to infect other
neighboring cells. Antibodies can neutralize the mi-
crobes during their transit from cell to cell and thus
Receptor 
for microbe
Microbe
Infected
tissue cell
Infection of cell by microbe
Antibody blocks
penetration of
microbe through
epithelial barrier
Antibody blocks
binding of microbe
and infection of cells 
Cell surface
receptor
for toxin
Toxin
Pathologic effect of 
toxin (e.g., cell necrosis)
Pathologic effect of toxin
Antibody blocks
binding of toxin
to cellular receptor
Microbe entry through epithelial barrier
Epithelial 
barrier cells
Tissue
cell
Without antibody
With antibody
A
B
C
Fig. 8.3 Neutralization of microbes and toxins by antibodies. A, Antibodies at epithelial surfaces, such as in the
gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts, block the entry of ingested and inhaled microbes, respectively. B, Anti-
bodies prevent the binding of microbes to cells, thereby blocking the ability of the microbes to infect host cells. C,
Antibodies block the binding of toxins to cells, thereby inhibiting the pathologic effects of the toxins.
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
171
 
also limit the spread of infection. If an infectious
microbe does colonize the host, its harmful effects may
be caused by endotoxins or exotoxins, which often
bind to speciﬁc receptors on host cells in order to
mediate their effects. Antibodies prevent binding of
the toxins to host cells and thus block their harmful
effects. Emil von Behring and Shibasaburo Kitasato’s
demonstration of this type of protection mediated by
the administration of serum from immunized animals
that contained antibodies against diphtheria toxin was
the ﬁrst formal demonstration of therapeutic immu-
nity against a microbe or its toxin. This approach was
called serum therapy, and was the basis for awarding
Behring the ﬁrst Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medi-
cine in 1901.
OPSONIZATION AND PHAGOCYTOSIS
Antibodies coat microbes and promote their inges-
tion by phagocytes (Fig. 8.4). The process of coating
particles for subsequent phagocytosis is called opsoni-
zation, and the molecules that coat microbes and
enhance their phagocytosis are called opsonins. When
several IgG molecules bind to a microbe, an array of
their Fc regions projects away from the microbial sur-
face. If the antibodies belong to certain isotypes (IgG1
and IgG3 in humans), their Fc regions bind to a high-
afﬁnity receptor for the Fc regions of these g heavy
chains, called FcgRI (CD64), which is expressed on
neutrophils and macrophages (Fig. 8.5). The phagocyte
extends its plasma membrane around the attached
microbe and ingests the microbe into a vesicle called a
phagosome, which fuses with lysosomes. The binding of
antibody Fc tails to FcgRI also activates the phagocytes,
because the FcgRI contains a signaling chain that
triggers
numerous
biochemical
pathways
in
the
phagocytes. The signals generated lead to production of
large amounts of reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide,
and proteolytic enzymes in the lysosomes of the acti-
vated neutrophils and macrophages, all of which
contribute to the destruction of the ingested microbe.
Antibody-mediated
phagocytosis
is
the
major
mechanism of defense against encapsulated bacteria,
such as pneumococci. The polysaccharide-rich capsules
of these bacteria protect the organisms from phagocy-
tosis in the absence of antibody, but opsonization by
antibody promotes ingestion and destruction of the
bacteria. The spleen contains large numbers of macro-
phages and is an important site of phagocytic clearance
of opsonized bacteria. This is why patients who do not
have a spleen (most often because of surgical removal
after trauma or infarction in sickle cell disease) are
susceptible to disseminated infections by encapsulated
bacteria.
One of the Fcg receptors, FcgRIIB, does not
mediate effector functions of antibodies but rather
shuts
down
antibody
production
and
reduces
inﬂammation. The role of FcgRIIB in feedback inhi-
bition of B cell activation was discussed in Chapter 7
(see Fig. 7.16). FcgRIIB also inhibits activation of
macrophages and dendritic cells and may thus serve an
antiinﬂammatory function as well. Pooled IgG from
healthy donors is given intravenously to treat various
inﬂammatory
diseases.
This
preparation
is
called
Binding of 
opsonized microbes 
to phagocyte 
Fc receptors (FcRI)
Fc receptor 
signals 
activate 
phagocyte
Phagocytosis 
of microbe
Killing of 
ingested 
microbe
Opsonization 
of microbe
by IgG
IgG 
antibody
Phagocyte
FcRI
Signals
Fig. 8.4 Antibody-mediated opsonization and phagocytosis of microbes. Antibodies of certain IgG sub-
classes (IgG1 and IgG3) bind to microbes and are then recognized by Fc receptors on phagocytes. Signals from
the Fc receptors promote the phagocytosis of the opsonized microbes and activate the phagocytes to destroy
these microbes.
172
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), and its beneﬁcial
effect in these diseases is partly mediated by its binding
to FcgRIIB on various cells.
ANTIBODY-DEPENDENT CELLULAR
CYTOTOXICITY
Natural killer (NK) cells bind to antibody-coated
cells and destroy these cells (Fig. 8.6). NK cells ex-
press an Fcg receptor called FcgRIII (CD16), which is
one of several kinds of NK celleactivating receptors
(see Chapter 2). FcgRIII binds to arrays of IgG anti-
bodies already attached by their antigen binding sites
to surface antigens on a cell. This Fc receptor generates
signals that cause the NK cell to discharge its granule
proteins, which kill the antibody-coated cell by the
same mechanisms that CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocytes
use to kill infected cells (see Chapter 6). This process is
called
antibody-dependent
cellular
cytotoxicity
(ADCC). Cells infected with enveloped viruses typi-
cally express viral glycoproteins on their surface that
can be recognized by speciﬁc antibodies, and this may
facilitate ADCC-mediated destruction of the infected
cells. ADCC is also one of the mechanisms by which
therapeutic antibodies used to treat cancers eliminate
tumor cells.
IMMUNOGLOBULIN Ee AND MAST
CELLeMEDIATED REACTIONS
Activation of mast cells and eosinophils contributes
to allergic diseases and defense against helminthic
parasites. Mast cells express the high-afﬁnity IgE re-
ceptor, FcεRI, which binds IgE and leads to activation
of the cells. This reaction is important in allergic dis-
eases (see Chapter 11) and may contribute to the
expulsion of worms. Most helminths are too large to be
phagocytosed, and their thick integuments make them
resistant to the microbicidal substances produced by
neutrophils and macrophages. The immune response to
IgG
Surface
antigen
NK cell
FcγRIIIA (CD16)
Killing of
antibody-
coated cell
Antibody-
coated cell
Fig. 8.6 Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Antibodies of
certain immunoglobulin G (IgG) subclasses (IgG1 and IgG3) bind
to antigens on the surface of infected cells, and their Fc regions
are recognized by an Fcg receptor on natural killer (NK) cells. The
NK cells are activated and kill the antibody-coated cells.
Ligand
Name
Signaling Fc receptors
Fc Receptor
Affinity for Ig
Cell distribution
Function
FcRI
(CD64)
FcRIIB
(CD32)
FcRIIIA
(CD16)
FcRI
High; binds IgG1 
and IgG3
Low
Low
High, binds IgE
Macrophages,
neutrophils
B lymphocytes, 
DCs, mast cells,
neutrophils,
macrophages
NK cells
Mast cells, basophils
Phagocytosis; 
activation of 
phagocytes
Feedback inhibition 
of B cells, attenuation of
inflammation
Antibody-dependent 
cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC)
Activation (degranulation)
of mast cells and basophils
Fig. 8.5 Leukocyte Fc receptors. The cellular distribution and functions of different types of human Fc re-
ceptors expressed on immune cells. Two other types of Fc receptors, FcRn and the poly-Ig receptor, do not
deliver signals to cells but are involved in transport of Ig across cellular membranes; these are discussed in the
text. DCs, Dendritic cells; Ig, immunoglobulin; NK, natural killer.
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
173
 
helminthic parasites is dominated by T helper 2 (Th2)
cell activation, IgE antibody production, and eosino-
philia, suggesting that all may contribute to defense.
However, in eosinophils, FcεRI is not expressed at high
levels and it lacks a signaling chain, so IgE cannot
activate eosinophils. These cells may be recruited to
sites of infection by chemokines and may bind to IgG-
coated parasites by FcgRI. Eosinophils can also be
activated by the Th2 cytokine IL-5 independent of
antibody and release their granule contents, which can
destroy the thick integuments of helminths.
THE COMPLEMENT SYSTEM
The complement system is a collection of circulating
and cell membrane proteins that play important roles in
host
defense
against
microbes
and
in
antibody-
mediated tissue injury. The term complement refers to
the ability of these proteins to assist, or complement,
the activity of antibodies in destroying (lysing) cells,
including microbes. The complement system may be
activated by microbes in the absence of antibody, as
part of the innate immune response to infection, and by
antibodies attached to microbes, as part of adaptive
immunity (see Fig. 2.12).
The activation of the complement system involves
sequential proteolytic cleavage of complement proteins,
leading to the generation of effector molecules that
participate in eliminating microbes in different ways.
Complement protein activation, like all enzymatic cas-
cades, is capable of achieving tremendous ampliﬁcation,
because even a small number of activated complement
molecules produced early in the process may generate a
large number of effector molecules later in the cascade.
Activated complement proteins become covalently
attached to the cell surfaces where the activation occurs,
ensuring that complement effector functions are limited
to the correct sites. Normal host cells possess several
regulatory mechanisms that inhibit the activation of
complement and the deposition of activated comple-
ment proteins, thus preventing complement-mediated
damage to healthy cells.
Pathways of Complement Activation
There are three pathways of complement activation:
the alternative and lectin pathways are initiated by
microbes in the absence of antibody, and the clas-
sical pathway is initiated by certain isotypes of
antibodies attached to antigens (Fig. 8.7). Several
proteins
in
each
pathway
interact
in
a
precise
sequence. The most abundant complement protein in
the plasma, C3, plays a central role in all three path-
ways. The early steps of all three pathways function to
generate a large number of functionally active frag-
ments of C3 bound to the microbe or cell where the
complement pathway was initiated. (By convention,
the smaller proteolytic fragment of any complement
protein is given the “a” sufﬁx, and the larger piece is
the “b” fragment; C2 is an exception, for historical
reasons.)
• The alternative pathway of complement activation
is triggered by spontaneous hydrolysis of C3 in
plasma at a low level. The breakdown products of
C3 are unstable, and, in the absence of infection,
are rapidly degraded and lost. However, when a
breakdown product of C3 hydrolysis, called C3b, is
deposited on the surface of a microbe, it forms stable
covalent bonds with microbial proteins or polysac-
charides. The microbe-bound C3b binds another
protein called Factor B, which is then cleaved by a
plasma protease called Factor D to generate the Bb
fragment. This fragment remains attached to C3b,
and the C3bBb complex functions as a proteolytic
enzyme, called the alternative pathway C3 conver-
tase, that breaks down more C3. The C3 convertase
is stabilized by properdin, a positive regulator of the
complement system. As a result of the enzymatic ac-
tivity of the C3 convertase, many more C3b and
C3bBb molecules are produced and become attached
to the microbe. Some of the C3bBb molecules bind
an additional C3b molecule, and the resulting
C3bBb3b complexes function as a C5 convertase,
to cleave the complement protein C5 and initiate
the late steps of complement activation.
• The classical pathway of complement activation is
triggered when IgM or certain subclasses of IgG
(IgG1 and IgG3 in humans) bind to antigens
(e.g., on a microbial cell surface). As a result of
this binding, adjacent Fc regions of the antibodies
become accessible to and bind the C1 complement
protein (which is made up of a binding component
called C1q and two proteases called C1r and C1s).
The attached C1 becomes enzymatically active,
resulting in the sequential cleavage of two proteins,
C4 and C2. One of the C4 fragments that is gener-
ated, C4b, becomes covalently attached to the
174
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
antibody or to the microbial surface where the anti-
body is bound, and then binds C2, which is cleaved
by active C1 to yield the C4b2a complex. This com-
plex is the classical pathway C3 convertase, which
functions to break down C3, and the C3b that is
generated again becomes attached to the microbe.
Some of the C3b binds to the C4b2a complex, and
the resultant C4b2a3b complex functions as a C5
C1
C1
C3
Alternative
Pathway
Classical
Pathway
Formation
of C3
convertase
Cleavage
of C3
Cleavage
of C5
Formation
of C5
convertase
Binding of
complement
proteins to
microbial cell
surface or
antibody
C1
C3 
convertase
C5 
convertase
C3 convertase
IgG antibody
C3a
C3a
Lectin
Pathway
Mannose
binding
lectin
Mannose
MASP2
MASP1
A
Microbe
C2
C4
C2
C4
C3
C3b
C3b
C3a
Bb
C3
C3bBb
C3b
C3b
Bb
C5 
convertase
C4b
C3b
C4b
C4b 2a
C4b2a
2a
2a
C3
C3b
C3b
C5a
C5b
C5
C3b
C3b
Bb
C5a
C5b
C5
C4b
C3b
C5a
C5b
C5
C4b
C3b
C2b
C4a
C4b
2a
C2b
C4a
C3
convertase
C3a
C5 
convertase
C4b
C3b
C4b 2a
C4b2a
2a
2a
2a
C3b
Fig. 8.7 Early steps of complement activation. A, The steps in the activation of the alternative, classical, and
lectin pathways. Although the sequence of events is similar, the three pathways differ in their requirement for
antibody and the proteins used. Note that C5 is cleaved by the C5 convertase but is not a component of the
enzyme.
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
175
 
convertase,
which
cleaves
the
C5
complement
protein.
• The lectin pathway of complement activation is
initiated not by antibodies but by the binding of
circulating lectins, such as plasma mannose-binding
lectin (MBL) or ﬁcolins, to microbial polysaccha-
rides. Serine proteases structurally related to C1s of
the classical pathway are associated with these lectins
and serve to activate C4. The subsequent steps are
the same as in the classical pathway.
C3
Factor B
Properdin
Factor D
C3b binds to the surface of a microbes, 
where it functions as an opsonin and as
a component of C3 and C5 convertases
C3a stimulates inflammation 
Bb is a serine protease and the active 
enzyme of C3 and C5 convertases
Plasma serine protease that cleaves
Factor B when it is bound to C3b
Properdin stabilizes C3 convertases 
(C3bBb)on microbial surfaces
B
C1
(C1qr2s2)
C4
C2
Initiates the classical pathway; C1q 
binds to Fc portion of antibody; C1r
and C1s are proteases that lead to
C4 and C2 activation
C4b covalently binds to surfaces of
microbes or cells where antibody is 
bound and complement is activated
C4b binds to C2 for cleavage by C1s
C4a stimulates inflammation
C2a is a serine protease functioning 
as an active enzyme of C3 and 
C5 convertases
Mannose
binding
lectin
(MBL)
Initiates the lectin pathway; MBL
binds to terminal mannose residues
of microbial carbohydrates. MBL-
associated proteases activate C4 and
C2, as C1r and C1s do in the 
classical pathway.
C
Protein
Function
Alternative pathway proteins
Protein
Function
Classical and lectin pathway proteins
Fig. 8.7, cont’d B, The important properties of the proteins involved in the early steps of the alternative pathway of complement
activation. C, The important properties of the proteins involved in the early steps of the classical and lectin pathways. Note that C3,
which is listed among the alternative pathway proteins (B), is also the central component of the classical and lectin pathways.
176
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
The net result of these early steps of complement
activation is that microbes acquire a coating of
covalently attached C3b. Note that the alternative and
lectin pathways are effector mechanisms of innate im-
munity, whereas the classical pathway is a mechanism
of adaptive humoral immunity. These pathways differ
in their initiation, but once triggered, their late steps are
the same.
The late steps of complement activation lead to the
formation of a cytolytic protein complex. They are
initiated by proteolysis of C5 by the C5 convertase,
generating C5b (Fig. 8.8). C6 binds to C5b and inserts
into the target membrane and then C7, C8, and C9 bind
sequentially to the initial C5b-C6 complex in the
membrane. The ﬁnal protein in the pathway, C9, po-
lymerizes to form a pore in the cell membrane of the
microbe where complement is activated and through
which water and ions can enter, causing death of the
microbe. The C5b-9 complex is called the membrane
attack complex (MAC), and its formation is the end
result of complement activation.
Functions of the Complement System
The complement system plays an important role in
the elimination of microbes during innate and
adaptive
immune
responses.
The
main
effector
C5a
C5
convertase
Poly-C9
C7
C8
Membrane attack
complex (MAC)
Inflammation
Cell
lysis
A
C5
C6
C7
C8
60
60
C5b initiates assembly of the membrane attack complex (MAC)
C5a stimulates inflammation
Component of the MAC: binds to C5b and accepts C7
Component of the MAC: binds C5b, 6 and inserts into
lipid membranes
Component of the MAC: binds C5b, 6, 7 and initiates binding and
polymerization of C9
C9
80
45
90
Component of the MAC: binds C5b, 6, 7, 8 and polymerizes to form 
membrane pores
B
C9
Plasma membrane
C8
C7
C5b
C5
C4b
C3b
2a
Protein Serum conc. 
(ug/mL)
Function
C6
C7
C5b
C6
C8
C7
C5b
C6
C6
C5b
Fig. 8.8 Late steps of complement activation. A, The late steps of complement activation start after the
formation of the C5 convertase and are identical in the alternative and classical pathways. B, Properties of the
proteins in the late steps of complement activation.
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
177
 
functions of the complement system are illustrated in
Fig. 8.9.
• Opsonization. Microbes coated with C3b are phago-
cytosed by virtue of C3b being recognized by com-
plement receptor type 1 (CR1, or CD35), which is
expressed on phagocytes. Thus, C3b functions as
an opsonin.
• Inﬂammation. The small peptide fragments C3a
and C5a, which are produced by proteolysis of C3
and C5, are chemotactic for neutrophils, stimulate
the release of inﬂammatory mediators from various
leukocytes, and stimulate movement of leukocytes
and plasma proteins across the endothelium into tis-
sues. In this way, complement fragments induce in-
ﬂammatory reactions that also serve to eliminate
microbes.
• Cell lysis. The MAC can induce osmotic lysis of
cells, including microbes. MAC-induced lysis is
Opsonization and phagocytosis
Stimulation of inflammatory reactions
Binding of 
C3b to microbe
(opsonization)
Recognition of
bound C3b by
phagocyte C3b receptor
Phagocytosis
and killing
of microbe
Destruction 
of microbes
by leukocytes
Recruitment and
activation of
 leukocytes by
C5a and C3a
C3a,
C5a
Proteolysis of C3
and C5 to release
C3a and C5a
Activation of
C5 convertase
Formation of the 
membrane attack 
complex (MAC)
Osmotic lysis 
of microbe
Microbe
Microbe
CR1
A
C
B
Complement-mediated cytolysis
Microbe
MAC
C3b
C3b
C5
C4b
C3b
2a
Microbe
Microbe
C5b
Fig. 8.9 The functions of complement. A, C3b opsonizes microbes and is recognized by the type 1 com-
plement receptor (CR1) of phagocytes, resulting in ingestion and intracellular killing of the opsonized microbes.
Thus, C3b is an opsonin. CR1 also recognizes C4b, which may serve the same function. Other complement
products, such as the inactivated form of C3b (iC3b), also bind to microbes and are recognized by other
receptors on phagocytes (e.g., type 3 complement receptor, a member of integrin family of proteins). B, Small
peptides released during complement activation bind to receptors on neutrophils and other leukocytes and
stimulate inﬂammatory reactions. The peptides that serve this function are mainly C5a and C3a, released by
proteolysis of C5 and C3, respectively. C, The membrane attack complex creates pores in cell membranes and
induces osmotic lysis of the cells.
178
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
effective mostly against microbes that have thin cell
walls and little or no glycocalyx, such as the Neisseria
species of bacteria.
In addition to its antimicrobial effector functions,
the complement system stimulates B cell responses
and antibody production. When C3 is activated by a
microbe by the alternative pathway, one of its break-
down products, C3d, is recognized by complement re-
ceptor type 2 (CR2) on B lymphocytes. Signals delivered
by this receptor enhance B cell responses against the
microbe. This process is described in Chapter 7 (see
Fig. 7.5A) and is an example of an innate immune
response
to
a
microbe
(complement
activation)
enhancing an adaptive immune response to the same
microbe (B cell activation and antibody production).
Complement
proteins
bound
to
antigen-antibody
complexes are recognized by follicular dendritic cells
in germinal centers, allowing the antigens to be dis-
played for further B cell activation and selection of
high-afﬁnity B cells (see Chapter 7). This complement-
dependent antigen display is another way in which the
complement system promotes antibody production.
Inherited deﬁciencies of complement proteins
cause immune deﬁciencies and, in some cases,
increased incidence of autoimmune disease. Deﬁ-
ciency of C3 results in increased susceptibility to bac-
terial infections that may be fatal early in life.
Deﬁciencies of the early proteins of the classical
pathway, C2 and C4, may have no clinical consequence,
may result in increased susceptibility to infections, or
are associated with an increased incidence of systemic
lupus erythematosus, an immune complex-mediated
autoimmune disease in which patients make anti-
bodies against their own nuclear and other antigens.
The increased incidence of lupus may be related to the
role of complement in clearance of dead cells and im-
mune complexes containing self antigens, such that
deﬁciencies of the classical pathway result in increased
burden of nuclear antigens. Complement deﬁciencies
may also lead to abnormal signaling in B cells and
failure of B cell tolerance. Deﬁciencies of C9 and MAC
formation result in increased susceptibility to Neisseria
infections. Some individuals inherit polymorphisms in
the gene encoding MBL, leading to production of a
protein that is functionally defective; such defects are
associated with increased susceptibility to infections.
Inherited deﬁciency of the alternative pathway protein
properdin
also
causes
increased
susceptibility
to
bacterial infection. A monoclonal antibody that blocks
the C5 molecule is approved for the treatment of dis-
eases caused by defects in complement regulatory
proteins (discussed next) and in certain antibody-
mediated
autoimmune
diseases
(e.g.,
myasthenia
gravis).
Regulation of Complement Activation
Mammalian cells express regulatory proteins that
inhibit
complement
activation,
thus
preventing
complement-mediated damage to host cells (Fig. 8.10).
Many such regulatory proteins have been described,
and defects in these proteins are associated with clinical
DAF
C1q binds to
antigen-complexed
antibodies, resulting
in activation 
of C1r2s2
Antibody
C1q
C1r2s2
C1 INH
C1 INH 
prevents C1r2s2 
from becoming 
proteolytically active
Formation of
C3 convertases
Dissociation of C3
convertases by DAF
C1r2s2
A
B
C3bBb
C3b
Bb
Bb
C4b
C4b
2a
2a
2a
Fig. 8.10 Regulation of complement activation. A, C1 inhibitor
(C1 INH) prevents the assembly of the C1 complex, which
consists of C1q, C1r, and C1s proteins, thereby blocking com-
plement activation by the classical pathway. B, The GPI-linked
cell surface protein decay-accelerating factor (DAF) and the
type 1 complement receptor (CR1) (not shown) interfere with
the formation of the C3 convertase by blocking the binding of
Bb (in the alternative pathway) or C2a (in the classical pathway).
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
179
 
syndromes
caused
by
uncontrolled
complement
activation.
• A regulatory protein called C1 inhibitor (C1 INH)
stops complement activation early, at the stage of
C1 activation. Deﬁciency of C1 INH is the cause of
a disease called hereditary angioedema. C1 INH is
a serine protease inhibitor that functions as a major
physiologic inhibitor of the cleavage of kallikrein, the
Protein
Function
C1 inhibitor 
(C1 INH)
Factor I
Factor H
C4 binding 
protein (C4BP) 
Plasma proteins
Inhibits C1r and C1s serine 
protease activity
Proteolytically cleaves C3b and C4b 
Causes dissociation of alternative pathway 
C3 convertase subunits
Co-factor for Factor I-mediated cleavage
of C3b
Causes dissociation of classical pathway 
C3 convertase subunits
Co-factor for Factor I-mediated cleavage
of C4b
Protein
Distribution
Function
Membrane 
co-factor protein 
(MCP, CD46)
Decay
accelerating
factor (DAF)
CD59
Type 1 
complement
receptor 
(CR1, CD35) 
Membrane proteins
Leukocytes, 
epithelial cells, 
endothelial cells
Blood cells, 
endothelial cells,
epithelial cells
Blood cells, 
endothelial cells,
epithelial cells
Mononuclear
phagocytes, 
neutrophils,
B and T cells, 
erythrocytes, 
eosinophils,
FDCs
Co-factor for 
Factor I-mediated 
cleavage of C3b and C4b
Blocks formation of
C3 convertase
Blocks C9 binding and 
prevents formation 
of the MAC
Causes dissociation of 
C3 convertase subunits 
Co-factor for 
Factor I-mediated
cleavage of C3b and C4b
C
Fig. 8.10, cont’d C, The major regulatory proteins of the complement system and their functions. The
function of DAF is shown in part B. Membrane cofactor protein (or CD46) and CR1 serve as cofactors for
cleavage of C3b by a plasma enzyme called Factor I, thus destroying any C3b that may be formed (not shown).
FDCs, Follicular dendritic cells; MAC, membrane attack complex.
180
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
precursor of the vasoactive molecule bradykinin.
Therefore, C1 INH deﬁciency results not only in
increased complement activation but also increased
proteolytic activation of bradykinin, and this is the
main reason for the vascular changes that lead to
leakage of ﬂuid (edema) in many tissues.
• Decay-accelerating factor (DAF) is a glycolipid-
linked cell surface protein that disrupts the binding
of Bb to C3b and the binding of C4b to C2a, thus
blocking C3 convertase formation and terminating
complement activation by both the alternative and
the classical pathways. A disease called paroxysmal
nocturnal hemoglobinuria results from the acquired
deﬁciency in hematopoietic stem cells of an enzyme
that synthesizes the glycolipid anchor for several
cell-surface proteins, including the complement reg-
ulatory proteins DAF and CD59, which block MAC
formation. In these patients, unregulated comple-
ment activation occurs on erythrocytes, leading to
their lysis. A monoclonal antibody that blocks C5
is an effective treatment for this disease.
• A plasma enzyme called Factor I cleaves C3b into
inactive fragments, with membrane cofactor protein
(MCP) and the plasma protein Factor H serving as
cofactors in this enzymatic process. Deﬁciency of
the regulatory proteins Factors H and I results in
increased complement activation and reduced levels
of C3 because of its consumption, causing increased
susceptibility to infection. Mutations in Factor H
that compromise its binding to cells are associated
with a rare genetic disease called atypical hemolytic
uremic syndrome, in which there are clotting,
vascular, and renal abnormalities. Anti-C5 antibody
is also used to treat this disease. Certain genetic var-
iants of Factor H are linked to an eye disease called
age-related macular degeneration.
Complement
regulatory
proteins
are
made
by
vertebrate cells but not by microbes. Because microbes
lack these regulatory proteins, the complement system
can be activated on microbial surfaces much more
effectively than on normal host cells. Even in vertebrate
cells, the regulation can be overwhelmed by too much
complement activation. For instance, host cells can
become targets of complement if they are coated with
large amounts of antibodies, as in some autoimmune
diseases (see Chapter 11).
FUNCTIONS OF ANTIBODIES AT SPECIAL
ANATOMIC SITES
The
effector
mechanisms
of
humoral
immunity
described so far may be active at any site in the body to
which antibodies gain access. As mentioned previously,
antibodies are produced in secondary lymphoid organs
and bone marrow and readily enter the blood, from
which they may go anywhere. Antibodies also serve
vital protective functions at two special anatomic sites:
at mucosal barriers and in the fetus.
Mucosal Immunity
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is produced by plasma cells
in mucosal tissues, transported across epithelia, and
binds to and neutralizes microbes in the lumens of the
mucosa-lined organs (Fig. 8.11). Microbes often are
inhaled or ingested, and antibodies that are secreted
into the lumens of the respiratory or gastrointestinal
tract bind to these microbes and prevent them from
colonizing the host. This type of immunity is called
mucosal immunity (or secretory immunity). The prin-
cipal class of antibody produced in mucosal tissues is
IgA. In fact, IgA accounts for about two-thirds of the
approximately 3 g of antibody produced daily by a
healthy adult, reﬂecting the vast surface area of the
intestines. The propensity of B cells in mucosal
epithelial tissues to produce IgA is because the cyto-
kines that induce switching to this isotype, including
transforming growth factor b (TGF-b), are produced at
high levels in mucosal associated lymphoid tissues. In
addition, IgA-producing B cells that are generated in
regional lymph nodes or spleen tend to home to
mucosal tissues in response to chemokines produced in
these tissues. Also, some of the IgA is produced by a
subset of B cells, called B-1 cells, best studied in rodents,
which are abundant in mucosal tissues; these cells un-
dergo class switching to IgA in response to nonprotein
antigens, without T cell help.
Intestinal mucosal plasma cells are located in the
lamina propria, beneath the epithelial barrier, and IgA is
produced in this region. To bind and neutralize micro-
bial pathogens in the lumen before they can invade the
body, the IgA must be transported across the epithelium
into the lumen. Transport through the epithelium is
carried out by a special Fc receptor, the poly-Ig receptor,
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
181
 
which is expressed on the basal surface of the epithelial
cells. This receptor binds IgA, endocytoses it into vesi-
cles, and transports it to the luminal surface. Here the
receptor is cleaved by a protease, and the IgA is released
into the lumen still carrying a portion of the bound poly-
Ig receptor (the secretory component). The attached
secretory component protects the antibody from degra-
dation by proteases in the gut. The antibody can then
recognize microbes in the lumen and block their binding
to and entry through the epithelium.
The gut contains a large number of commensal bac-
teria that are essential for basic functions such as ab-
sorption of food and, therefore, have to be tolerated by
the immune system. IgA antibodies are produced mainly
against potentially harmful and proinﬂammatory bac-
teria, thus blocking their entry through the gut epithe-
lium. Harmless commensals are tolerated by the immune
system of the gut by mechanisms that are discussed in
Chapter 9 and do not stimulate IgA production.
Neonatal Immunity
Maternal antibodies are transported across the placenta
to the fetus and across the gut epithelium of neonates,
protecting the newborn from infections. Newborn
mammals have incompletely developed immune sys-
tems and are unable to mount effective immune re-
sponses against many microbes. During their early life,
they are protected from infections by antibodies
acquired from their mothers (Fig. 8.12). This is an
example of naturally occurring passive immunity. Ne-
onates acquire maternal antibodies by two routes.
During pregnancy, maternal IgG binds to the FcRn
expressed in the placenta and is transported into the
fetal circulation. After birth, infants ingest maternal IgA
Gestation (weeks)
Maternally
transferred
IgG
IgG
IgM
IgA
Total
IgG
Age (months)
20
100
50
75
25
30
Birth
12
6
Blood antibody (% adult levels)
Fig. 8.12 Antibody levels in the fetus and newborn. During
fetal and early neonatal life, circulating antibody is acquired from
the mother though transfer across the placenta and from breast
milk. The newborn starts producing antibody at about 6 months
of age. Total IgG refers to IgG transferred from the mother and
that produced in the newborn. Ig, Immunoglobulin.
IgA-
producing
plasma cell
J chain
Dimeric 
IgA
Poly-Ig 
receptor with 
bound IgA
Secreted 
IgA
Proteolytic
cleavage
Endocytosed 
complex of
IgA and poly-
Ig receptor
Microbe
Lamina propria
Mucosal epithelial cell
Lumen
Fig. 8.11 Transport of immunoglobulin A (IgA) through epithelium. In the mucosa of the gastrointestinal and
respiratory tracts, IgA is produced by plasma cells in the lamina propria and is actively transported through
epithelial cells by an IgA-speciﬁc Fc receptor, called the poly-Ig receptor because it recognizes IgM as well. The
J chain is required for high-afﬁnity binding of dimeric IgA to the poly-Ig receptor. On the luminal surface, the
IgA with a portion of the bound receptor is released. Here the antibody recognizes ingested or inhaled mi-
crobes and blocks their entry through the epithelium.
182
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
antibodies secreted across the mammary gland epithelia
via the poly-Ig receptor into their mothers’ colostrum
and milk. Ingested IgA antibodies provide mucosal
immune protection to the neonate. Thus, neonates ac-
quire the antibody proﬁles of their mothers and are
protected from infectious microbes to which the
mothers were exposed or vaccinated. Because of the
long half-life of circulating IgG, the newborn is pro-
tected by the IgG from the mother for about 6 months,
at which time the baby begins to make its own IgG.
There is often a nadir in the blood IgG concentration at
this age, and a concomitant increase in the incidence of
infections.
EVASION OF HUMORAL IMMUNITY BY
MICROBES
Microbes have evolved numerous mechanisms to evade
humoral immunity (Fig. 8.13). Many bacteria and vi-
ruses mutate their surface molecules that are needed for
entry into host cells so that they can no longer be
recognized by antibodies produced in response to the
original microbe. Inﬂuenza changes its major surface
antigens because of mutations and reassortment of its
RNA. This happens so often that every year most of the
infections are caused by a new strain of the virus. HIV
mutates its genome at a high rate, and therefore
different strains contain many variant forms of the
major antigenic surface glycoprotein of HIV, called
gp120. As a result, antibodies against exposed de-
terminants on gp120 in any one HIV subtype may not
protect against other virus subtypes that appear in
infected individuals. This is one reason why gp120
vaccines are not effective in protecting people from HIV
infection. There are so many strains of rhinovirus that
vaccines for the common cold are considered imprac-
tical. The protective antibody response to SARS-CoV-2,
the causative agent of COVID-19, is directed against the
spike protein, which the virus uses to gain entry into
host cells. Variants of the virus have mutated the spike
protein enough to evade vaccine-induced immunity,
Mechanism of 
immune evasion
Example(s)
Antigenic 
variation
Inhibition of 
complement 
activation
Blocking 
phagocytosis by
hyaluronic acid
capsule
Many viruses (e.g.,
influenza, HIV, SARS
-CoV-2)
Bacteria (e.g.,  
Neisseria gonorrhoeae,
E. coli ) Protozoa (e.g.,
Trypanosoma cruzi)
Many bacteria
Streptococcus
Fig. 8.13 Evasion of humoral immunity by microbes. This ﬁgure shows some of the mechanisms by which
microbes evade humoral immunity, with illustrative examples.
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
183
 
making the ﬁrst COVID-19 vaccines that were devel-
oped less effective at preventing infection, though they
still offer protection from severe illness and death.
Bacteria such as Escherichia coli vary the antigens
contained in their pili and thus evade antibody-
mediated
defense.
The
trypanosome
that
causes
sleeping sickness expresses new surface glycoproteins
whenever it encounters antibodies against the original
glycoprotein. As a result, infection with this protozoan
parasite is characterized by waves of parasitemia, each
wave consisting of an antigenically new parasite that is
not recognized by antibodies produced against the
parasites in the preceding wave.
Other microbes inhibit complement activation, or
resist opsonization and phagocytosis by concealing
surface antigens under a hyaluronic acid capsule.
VACCINATION
Now that we have discussed the mechanisms of host
defense against microbes, including cell-mediated im-
munity in Chapter 6 and humoral immunity in this
chapter, it is important to consider how these protective
immune responses can be induced with prophylactic
vaccines.
Vaccination is the process of stimulating protec-
tive adaptive immune responses against microbes by
exposure to nonpathogenic forms or components of
the microbes. The development of vaccines against
infections has been one of the great successes of
immunology. The only human disease to be inten-
tionally eradicated from the earth is smallpox, and this
was achieved by a worldwide program of vaccination.
Polio may be the second such disease (although spo-
radic cases continue to appear in many countries). As
mentioned in Chapter 1, many other diseases have been
largely controlled by vaccination (see Fig. 1.2).
Several types of vaccines are in use and being
developed (Fig. 8.14).
• Some of the most effective vaccines, such as those
against yellow fever, measles, mumps, and rubella,
are composed of live attenuated viruses, which
have been selected for their lack of pathogenicity
while retaining their infectivity and antigenicity. Im-
munization with these attenuated viruses stimulates
the production of neutralizing antibodies against
viral antigens that protect vaccinated individuals
from subsequent infections. Killed viral vaccines
(viruses are chemically inactivated in vitro) against
hepatitis A, polio, and rabies are also currently in use.
• Vaccines composed of microbial proteins and poly-
saccharides, called subunit vaccines, work in the
same way. Some microbial polysaccharide antigens
(which cannot stimulate T cell help) are chemically
coupled to proteins so that helper T cells are acti-
vated and high-afﬁnity antibodies are produced
against the polysaccharides. These are called conju-
gate vaccines, and they are excellent examples of
the practical application of our knowledge of helper
T celleB cell interactions (see Fig. 7.9). Immuniza-
tion with inactivated microbial toxins and with mi-
crobial
proteins
synthesized
in
the
laboratory
stimulates antibodies that bind to and neutralize
the native toxins and the microbes, respectively. Sub-
unit vaccines are also produced using recombinant
DNA technology, such as widely used hepatitis B vi-
rus and human papilloma virus vaccines. Puriﬁed
protein vaccines have to be administered with adju-
vants
in
order
to
stimulate
effective
immune
responses.
• The idea of injecting nucleic acids (DNA or mRNA)
encoding microbial proteins has been tested for
many years. Advantages of such vaccines are that
the microbial proteins may be produced inside
host cells and secreted and can thus elicit both hu-
moral and cell-mediated immune responses, and
nucleic acids engage Toll-like receptors and thus
have an intrinsic adjuvant-like activity. Plasmid
DNA vaccines have still not been successful. Initial
attempts to use mRNA as vaccines were hampered
by two main problemsdextracellular RNA is unsta-
ble, and when RNA enters the cytosol of cells, it is
recognized by innate immune receptors and elicits
a type I interferon response that can cause harmful
inﬂammation. Structural modiﬁcations in mRNA
and packaging in lipid nanoparticles have alleviated
both problems. The remarkable success of mRNA
vaccines for SARS-CoV-2 at the end of 2020 led to
reduced hospitalization and mortality and has been
a major contributor to limiting the worldwide
COVID-19 pandemic and its devastating health
and societal consequences.
• The DNA encoding a microbial antigen can be
incorporated into the genome of a replication-
defective viral vector that is harmless for humans
but enters host cells, where the microbial proteins
184
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
are produced. These hybrid viral vaccines are now
in use for SARS-CoV-2 and have been approved for
Ebola virus.
SUMMARY
• Humoral immunity is the type of adaptive immunity
that is mediated by antibodies. Antibodies prevent
infections by blocking the ability of microbes to
infect host cells, and they eliminate microbes by acti-
vating several effector mechanisms.
• In antibody molecules, the antigen-binding (Fab) re-
gions are spatially separate from the effector (Fc) re-
gions.
The
ability
of
antibodies
to
neutralize
microbes and toxins is entirely a function of the
antigen-binding regions. Even Fc-dependent effector
functions are activated only after antibodies bind
antigens.
• IgG antibodies remain in the circulation and tissues
longer than most other proteins because FcRn
expressed in several cell types protects endocytosed
IgG from lysosomal degradation and shuttles it
back into the blood or tissue ﬂuids.
• Antibodies are produced in lymphoid tissues and
bone marrow, from which they enter the circula-
tion and are able to reach any site of infection.
Heavy-chain class switching and afﬁnity matura-
tion
enhance
the
protective
functions
of
antibodies.
Type of vaccine
Examples
Form of protection
Live attenuated, 
or killed, bacteria
Live attenuated 
viruses
Modified protein 
Conjugate 
vaccines
Haemophilus
influenzae, 
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae 
(pneumococcus)
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2, Ebola
Clinical trials ongoing
for several infections
Antibody response
T cell and antibody 
responses
Antibody response
Helper T cell-
dependent antibody 
response to
polysaccharide
antigens
mRNA vaccines
Hybrid viral
vaccines
DNA vaccines
Pertussis, 
BCG, cholera
Measles, mumps, 
rubella, rabies,
influenza A
Killed viruses
Antibody response
Hepatitis A, polio,
rabies
Recombinant
protein subunit
vaccines
Antibody responses
Human papilloma
virus, hepatitis B virus
Tetanus toxoid, 
diphtheria toxoid
T cell and antibody
responses
T cell and antibody
responses
T cell and antibody
responses
Fig. 8.14 Vaccination strategies. A summary of different types of vaccines in use or tried, as well as the
nature of the protective immune responses induced by these vaccines. BCG, Bacille Calmette-Guérin; HIV,
human immunodeﬁciency virus.
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
185
 
• Antibodies neutralize the infectivity of microbes and
the pathogenicity of microbial toxins by binding to
and interfering with the ability of these microbes
and toxins to attach to host cells.
• Antibodies coat (opsonize) microbes and promote
their phagocytosis by binding to Fc receptors on
phagocytes. The binding of antibody Fc regions to
Fc receptors also stimulates the microbicidal activ-
ities of phagocytes.
• The complement system is a collection of circulating
and cell surface proteins that play important roles in
host defense. The complement system may be acti-
vated on microbial surfaces without antibodies
(alternative and lectin pathways, which are mecha-
nisms of innate immunity) and after the binding of
antibodies to antigens (classical pathway, a mecha-
nism of adaptive humoral immunity).
• Complement proteins are sequentially cleaved, and
active components, in particular C4b and C3b, become
covalently attached to the surfaces on which comple-
ment is activated. The late steps of complement activa-
tion lead to the formation of the cytolytic MAC.
• Different products of complement activation pro-
mote phagocytosis of microbes, induce cell lysis,
and stimulate inﬂammation. Mammals express cell
surface and circulating regulatory proteins that pre-
vent inappropriate complement activation on host
cells.
• IgA antibody is produced in the lamina propria of
mucosal organs and is actively transported by a spe-
cial Fc receptor across the epithelium into the lumen,
where it blocks the ability of microbes to invade the
epithelium.
• Neonates acquire IgG antibodies from their mothers
through the placenta, using the FcRn to capture and
transport the maternal antibodies. Infants also ac-
quire IgA antibodies from the mother’s colostrum
and milk by ingestion.
• Microbes have developed strategies to resist or evade
humoral immunity, such as varying their antigens
and
becoming
resistant
to
complement
and
phagocytosis.
• Most vaccines in current use work by stimulating the
production of neutralizing antibodies.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What regions of antibody molecules are involved in
the functions of antibodies?
2. How do heavy-chain class (isotype) switching and
afﬁnity maturation improve the ability of antibodies
to combat infectious pathogens?
3. In what situations does the ability of antibodies to
neutralize
microbes
protect
the
host
from
infections?
4. How do antibodies assist in the elimination of mi-
crobes by phagocytes?
5. How is the complement system activated?
6. Why is the complement system effective against mi-
crobes but does not react against host cells and tissues?
7. What are the functions of the complement system,
and what components of complement mediate these
functions?
8. How do antibodies prevent infections by ingested
and inhaled microbes?
9. How are neonates protected from infection before
their immune system has reached maturity?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
186
CHAPTER 8
Effector Mechanisms of Humoral Immunity
 
9
Immunologic Tolerance and
Autoimmunity
SelfeNonself Discrimination in the
Immune System and Its Failure
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Immunologic Tolerance: General Priniciples and
Signiﬁcance, 188
Central T Lymphocyte Tolerance, 188
Peripheral T Lymphocyte Tolerance, 190
Role of Regulatory T Cells in Peripheral
Tolerance, 191
Properties and Development of Regulatory T
Cells, 191
Mechanisms of Action of Regulatory T
Cells, 192
Anergy and Exhaustion, 193
Deletion: Apoptosis of Mature
Lymphocytes, 193
B Lymphocyte Tolerance, 195
Central B Cell Tolerance, 195
Peripheral B Cell Tolerance, 196
Tolerance to Commensal Microbes and Fetal
Antigens, 196
Tolerance to Commensal Microbes in the
Intestines and Skin, 196
Tolerance to Fetal Antigens, 197
Autoimmunity, 197
Pathogenesis, 197
Genetic Factors, 197
Role of Infections and Other Environmental
Inﬂuences, 199
Summary, 202
One of the remarkable properties of the normal im-
mune system is that it can react to an enormous variety
of microbes but does not react against the individual’s
own (self) antigens. This unresponsiveness to self an-
tigens, also called immunologic tolerance, is main-
tained despite the fact that the molecular mechanisms
by which lymphocyte receptor speciﬁcities are gener-
ated cannot exclude receptors speciﬁc for self antigens.
In other words, lymphocytes with the ability to
recognize self antigens are constantly being produced
during the normal process of lymphocyte develop-
ment. Furthermore, many self antigens have ready
access to the immune system, so unresponsiveness to
these antigens cannot be maintained simply by con-
cealing them from lymphocytes. The process by which
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) display antigens to
T cells does not distinguish between foreign and
self proteins, so self antigens are normally presented by
APCs and seen by T lymphocytes. It follows that there
must exist mechanisms that prevent immune re-
sponses to self antigens. These mechanisms are
responsible for one of the cardinal features of the
adaptive
immune
systemdnamely,
its
ability
to
discriminate
between
self
and
nonself
(usually
187
 
microbial) antigens. If these mechanisms fail, the im-
mune system may attack the individual’s own cells and
tissues. Such reactions are called autoimmunity, and
the diseases they cause are called autoimmune dis-
eases. In addition to tolerating the presence of self
antigens, the immune system has to coexist with many
commensal microbes that live immediately outside the
epithelial barriers of their human hosts, often in a state
of
symbiosis,
and
it
must
tolerate
innumerable
intrinsically harmless
nonmicrobial
environmental
antigens,
including
those
ingested
and
inhaled.
Furthermore, the immune system of a pregnant female
has to accept the presence of a fetus that expresses
antigens derived from the father, which are foreign to
the mother. Unresponsiveness to commensal mi-
crobes, the fetus, and harmless environmental antigens
is maintained by many of the same mechanisms
involved in unresponsiveness to self.
In this chapter, we address the following questions:
• How does the immune system maintain unrespon-
siveness to self antigens?
• What are the factors that may contribute to the loss of
self-tolerance and the development of autoimmunity?
• How does the immune system maintain unrespon-
siveness to commensal microbes and the fetus?
• How
might
self-tolerance
fail,
resulting
in
autoimmunity?
This chapter begins with a discussion of the
important principles and features of self-tolerance.
IMMUNOLOGIC TOLERANCE: GENERAL
PRINICIPLES AND SIGNIFICANCE
Immunologic tolerance is a lack of response to anti-
gens that is induced by exposure of lymphocytes to
these antigens. When lymphocytes with receptors for a
particular antigen encounter this antigen, two outcomes
are possible. The lymphocytes may be activated to
proliferate and to differentiate into effector and mem-
ory cells, leading to a productive immune response;
antigens that elicit such a response are said to be
immunogenic. Alternatively, the lymphocytes may be
functionally inactivated or killed, resulting in tolerance;
antigens that induce tolerance are said to be tolero-
genic. Normally, microbes are immunogenic and self
antigens are tolerogenic.
The choice between lymphocyte activation and
tolerance is determined largely by the nature of the an-
tigen and the additional signals present when the antigen
is displayed to the immune system. In fact, the same
antigen may be administered in different ways to induce
an immune response or tolerance. This experimental
observation has been exploited to analyze which factors
determine whether activation or tolerance develops as a
consequence of encounter with an antigen.
The phenomenon of immunologic tolerance is
important for several reasons. First, as we stated at the
outset, self antigens normally induce tolerance, and
failure of self-tolerance is the underlying cause of
autoimmune diseases. Second, if we learn how to induce
tolerance in lymphocytes speciﬁc for a particular anti-
gen, we may be able to use this knowledge to prevent
or control unwanted immune reactions. Strategies for
inducing tolerance are being tested to treat allergic and
autoimmune diseases and to prevent the rejection of
organ transplants. The same strategies may be valuable
in gene therapy to prevent immune responses against
the products of newly expressed genes or vectors and
even for stem cell transplantation if the stem cell
donor is genetically different from the recipient.
Immunologic tolerance to different self antigens
may
be
induced
when
developing
lymphocytes
encounter these antigens in the generative (central)
lymphoid organs, a process called central tolerance, or
when mature lymphocytes encounter self antigens in
secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs or peripheral
tissues, called peripheral tolerance (Fig. 9.1). Central
tolerance is a mechanism of tolerance only to self
antigens that are present in the generative lymphoid
organsdnamely, the bone marrow and thymusdand
it
eliminates
potentially
responding
lymphocytes
before they have completed their maturation. Toler-
ance to self antigens that are not present in these or-
gans must be induced and maintained by peripheral
mechanisms, which inactivate or eliminate lympho-
cytes that have matured and entered peripheral tissues.
With this brief background, we proceed to a discus-
sion of the mechanisms of immunologic tolerance and
how the failure of each mechanism may result in auto-
immunity. We discuss the mechanisms of central and
peripheral tolerance in T and B cells separately because
there are signiﬁcant differences between these processes.
CENTRAL T LYMPHOCYTE TOLERANCE
A principal mechanism of central tolerance in T cells
is death of immature T cells that recognize self an-
tigens in the thymus (Fig. 9.2). T lymphocytes that
188
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
 
develop in the thymus include cells with receptors
capable of recognizing many antigens, both self and
foreign. If a lymphocyte that has not completed its
maturation interacts strongly with a self antigen, dis-
played as a peptide bound to a self major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) molecule, that lymphocyte
receives signals that trigger apoptosis. Thus, the self-
reactive cell dies before it can mature and become
functionally competent. This process, called negative
selection (see Chapter 4), is a major mechanism of
central tolerance. The process of negative selection af-
fects self-reactive CD4þ T cells and CD8þ T cells, which
recognize self peptides displayed by class II MHC and
class I MHC molecules, respectively. Why immature
lymphocytes die upon receiving strong T cell receptor
(TCR) signals in the thymus, whereas mature lym-
phocytes that get strong TCR signals in the periphery
are activated, is not fully understood.
Peripheral tolerance:
Peripheral tissues
Central tolerance:
Generative lymphoid organs
(thymus. bone marrow)
Lymphoid 
precursor
Immature
lymphocytes
Regulatory
T cell
Mature
lymphocytes
Development
of regulatory
T lymphocytes
(CD4+ T cells
only)
Apoptosis
(deletion)
Apoptosis
(deletion)
Anergy
Suppression
Change in
receptors
(receptor
editing;
B cells only)
Recognition of self antigen
Recognition of self antigen
Fig. 9.1 Central and peripheral tolerance to self antigens. Central tolerance: Immature lymphocytes speciﬁc
for self antigens that encounter these antigens in the generative (central) lymphoid organs may be deleted; B
lymphocytes may change their speciﬁcity (receptor editing); and some T lymphocytes develop into regulatory
T cells (Tregs). Some self-reactive lymphocytes may complete their maturation and enter peripheral tissues.
Peripheral tolerance: Mature lymphocytes that recognize self antigens may be suppressed by Tregs, inacti-
vated, or deleted.
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
189
 
Immature lymphocytes may interact strongly with
an antigen if the antigen is present at high concentra-
tions in the thymus and if the lymphocytes express
receptors that recognize the antigen with high afﬁnity.
Antigens that induce negative selection may include
proteins that are abundant throughout the body, such
as plasma proteins and common cellular proteins.
Surprisingly, many self proteins that are normally
present only in certain peripheral tissues, called tissue-
restricted antigens, are also expressed in some special-
ized cells in the thymus called medullary thymic
epithelial cells (MTECs). MTECs transcribe and express
genes
encoding
antigens
that
are
otherwise
only
expressed by the cells in one or another peripheral tissue
type (e.g., lung, liver, muscle, intestine). A protein called
AIRE (autoimmune regulator) promotes expression of
antigens characteristic of the various tissue cell types.
Mutations in the AIRE gene are the cause of a rare
disorder called autoimmune polyglandular syndrome. In
this disorder, several tissue antigens are not expressed in
the MTECs because of a lack of functional AIRE protein,
but the antigens are expressed normally in peripheral
tissues. The immature T cells speciﬁc for these antigens
are not eliminated and do not develop into regulatory
cells, but instead mature into functionally competent
T cells that enter the periphery, where they encounter
the antigens, attack the tissues, and cause disease.
Although endocrine organs are the most frequent targets
of this autoimmune attack, other tissues such as the skin
are also affected. In addition, autoreactive helper T cells
in these patients promote the production of autoanti-
bodies by B cells that may recognize secreted proteins
such as cytokines. This rare syndrome illustrates the
importance of negative selection in the thymus for
maintaining self-tolerance, but it is not known if defects
in negative selection contribute to common autoimmune
diseases.
Central tolerance by deletion is imperfect, and
some self-reactive lymphocytes mature and are present
in healthy individuals. As discussed next, peripheral
mechanisms prevent the activation of these lympho-
cytes. Some of the immature CD4þ T cells that recog-
nize self antigens in the thymus do not die but rather
develop into regulatory T cells (Tregs), enter secondary
lymphoid organs and peripheral tissues, and inhibit the
activation of mature self-reactive T cells in these tissues.
The functions of Tregs are described later. What de-
termines whether a thymic CD4þ T cell that recognizes
a self antigen will die or become a Treg is not
established.
PERIPHERAL T LYMPHOCYTE TOLERANCE
The principal mechanism of peripheral tolerance is
suppression by Tregs. Peripheral tolerance is important
for preventing autoimmunity in situations in which
Immature 
T cells specific 
for self antigen
Regulator
T cell
Immature 
T cells specific 
for self antigen
Regulatory
T cell
Negative
selection:
deletion
Development
of regulatory
T cells
Thymus
Periphery
Fig. 9.2 Central Tcell tolerance. Strong recognition of self antigens by immature T cells in the thymus may
lead to death of the cells (negative selection, or deletion) or the development of regulatory T cells that enter
peripheral tissues.
190
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
 
deletion of T cells speciﬁc for antigens that are
expressed in the thymus is incomplete, as well as for
antigens that are not present in the thymus.
Role of Regulatory T Cells in Peripheral
Tolerance
Properties and Development of Regulatory T Cells
Tregs are a unique population of CD4D T cells whose
function is to inhibit the activation of other lym-
phocytes, primarily other T cells (Fig. 9.3). The ma-
jority of self-reactive Tregs develop in the thymus, but
many also develop in peripheral tissues, especially in
the intestinal tract and the placenta. Most Tregs are
CD4þ and express high levels of CD25, the a chain of
the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor, as well as the inhibitory
receptor cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4).
They also express a transcription factor called FOXP3,
which is required for the development and function of
these cells. Mutations of the gene encoding FOXP3 in
humans or in mice cause a systemic, multiorgan auto-
immune disease, demonstrating the importance of
FOXP3þ Tregs for the maintenance of self-tolerance.
The human disease is known by the acronym IPEX, for
immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropa-
thy, and X-linked syndrome.
The survival and function of Tregs are dependent
on the cytokine IL-2. This role of IL-2 accounts for the
autoimmune disease that develops in mice in which IL-
2 or IL-2 receptor genes are deleted and in humans with
homozygous mutations in the a or b chain of the IL-2
receptor. Recall that we introduced IL-2 in Chapter 5 as
a cytokine made by antigen-activated T cells that
stimulates proliferation of these cells. Mature Tregs do
not produce IL-2 themselves and rely on IL-2 made by
other T cells (Fig. 9.4). Thus, IL-2 is an example of a
cytokine that serves two opposite roles: it promotes
immune responses by stimulating T cell proliferation,
and it inhibits immune responses by maintaining
FOXP3
FOXP3
Recognition of
self antigen
in thymus
Effector
T cells
Recognition of antigen
in secondary
lymphoid organs
or other tissues
Regulatory
T cells
Thymus
Lymph node
DC
Naive
T cell
B cell
NK cell
Inhibition of
T cell responses
Inhibition of
other cells
FOXP3
FOXP3
Fig. 9.3 Development and function of Tregs. CD4þ T cells that recognize self antigens may differentiate into
regulatory cells in the thymus or peripheral tissues, in a process that is dependent on the transcription factor
FOXP3. (The larger arrow from the thymus, compared with the one from peripheral tissues, indicates that
most of these cells probably arise in the thymus.) These regulatory cells inhibit the activation of naive T cells
and their differentiation into effector T cells by contact-dependent mechanisms or by secreting cytokines that
inhibit T cell responses. The generation and maintenance of Tregs also require interleukin-2 (not shown). DC,
Dendritic cell; NK, natural killer.
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
191
 
functional Tregs. Numerous clinical trials are testing
the ability of IL-2 to promote regulation and control
harmful immune reactions, such as inﬂammation in
autoimmune diseases and graft rejection.
The cytokine transforming growth factor b (TGF-b)
also plays a role in the generation of Tregs, in part by
stimulating expression of the FOXP3 transcription
factor. Many cell types can produce TGF-b, but the
source of TGF-b for inducing Tregs in the thymus or
peripheral tissues is not deﬁned.
Mechanisms of Action of Regulatory T Cells
Tregs suppress immune responses by several mecha-
nisms, including the following:
• Tregs express the inhibitory receptor (coinhibitor)
CTLA-4, which blocks B7 costimulators and removes
them from APCs and thus prevents T cell activation
(see Fig. 5.14). As noted in previous chapters, naive
T lymphocytes need at least two signals to induce their
proliferation and differentiation into effector and
memory cells: Signal 1 is always antigen, and signal
2 is provided by costimulators that are expressed on
APCs, typically as part of the innate immune response
to microbes (or to damaged host cells) (see Fig. 5.6).
We described the costimulatory receptor CD28 and
the inhibitory receptor CTLA-4 in Chapter 5. To
summarize the key point relevant to Tregs, CD28 is
the principal activating receptor for B7 costimulators
and CTLA-4 is a high-afﬁnity receptor that binds and
removes B7 from the surface of APCs. As a result,
when CTLA-4 is expressed, B7 is reduced on the sur-
face of APCs, CD28 cannot be engaged effectively,
responding T cells do not receive adequate signal 2,
and they cannot respond well to antigens. Long before
the discovery of Tregs, it was demonstrated that anti-
gen recognition without costimulation leads to unre-
sponsiveness in T cells, a phenomenon called anergy.
It is likely that Tregs promote T cell anergy by
reducing costimulation by APCs. CTLA-4 also may
be expressed by activated T cells other than Tregs
and by competing with CD28 it may terminate the re-
sponses of those activated cells.
The essential role of CTLA-4 in maintaining self-
tolerance is demonstrated by the ﬁndings that rare
inherited mutations in CTLA4 cause systemic auto-
immune disease. Patients who are treated with an-
tibodies that block CTLA-4 to enhance immune
responses against tumors, a strategy called check-
point blockade (see Chapter 10), also often develop
autoimmunity.
• Some Tregs produce cytokines (e.g., IL-10, TGF-b)
that inhibit the activation of lymphocytes, dendritic
Dendritic
cell
Self or
foreign
antigen
Activated
T cell
B7
CD28
Regulatory
T cell
Inhibitory cytokines
CTLA4
IL-2
Proliferation and
maintenance of
regulatory T cells
Suppression of
effector T cell 
responses
Fig. 9.4 Role of IL-2 in Treg function. If Tregs and conventional (responding, or activated) T cells recognize an
antigen on an APC, the activated T cells produce IL-2. IL-2 increases the proliferation and functions of the
Tregs. CTLA-4 expressed by Tregs blocks or removes B7 on the APC, and Tregs produce cytokines that inhibit
the functions of APCs and responses of T cells. Thus, the activation of conventional T cells sets up a negative
feedback loop in which Tregs terminate the response. Tregs also express high levels of IL-2 receptors and out-
compete responding cells for this essential growth factor (not shown).
192
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
 
cells, and macrophages. IL-10 may be especially
important for controlling immune responses to self
antigens and commensal microbes in intestinal tis-
sues, as evidenced by the severe colitis that develops
in infants who inherit mutations of the IL-10 recep-
tor. IL-10 functions mainly by suppressing expression
of B7 and production of cytokines by dendritic cells
and
macrophages. TGF-b
inhibits
responses of
many immune cells, including lymphocytes and
myeloid cells. Both IL-10 and TGF-b are produced
by numerous cell types in addition to Tregs.
• Tregs, by virtue of the high level of expression of the
IL-2 receptor, may bind and consume this essential
T cell growth factor, thus reducing its availability
for responding T cells.
The great interest in Tregs has been driven, to a large
extent, by the hypothesis that the underlying abnor-
mality in some autoimmune diseases in humans is
defective Treg function or the resistance of pathogenic
T cells to regulation by Tregs. There is also growing
interest in cellular therapy with Tregs to treat graft-
versus-host disease, graft rejection, and autoimmune
disorders.
Anergy and Exhaustion
Anergy was discovered as T cell unresponsiveness result-
ing fromantigen recognitionwithoutcostimulation.Tregs
may induce anergy by blocking costimulation, but the
same type of unresponsiveness may be seen in other sit-
uations that are not dependent on Tregs. Several mecha-
nisms may contribute to the development of anergy.
• Dendritic cells and other APCs in normal uninfected
tissues and secondary lymphoid organs are normally
in a resting (or immature) state, in which they express
little or no costimulators (see Chapter 5). The low
level of B7 expression is likely an intrinsic property
of immature dendritic cells (DCs) and is reinforced
by the ability of Tregs to block and remove B7 from
the surface of APCs. These dendritic cells constantly
process and display the self antigens that are present
in these tissues. T lymphocytes with receptors for
these self antigens are able to recognize the antigens
and thus receive signals from their antigen receptors
(signal 1), but the T cells do not receive strong costi-
mulation. In infections and in response to vaccination
with adjuvants, APCs are activated and they increase
the expression of costimulators, leading to effective
immune responses. Thus, the presence or absence of
costimulation is a major factor determining whether
T cells are activated or tolerized.
• Several cell-intrinsic signals promote T cell unrespon-
siveness. The inhibitory receptor PD-1 is expressed on
T cells in response to antigen recognition. When PD-1
engages its ligands, which are expressed on APCs and
other cell types, its cytoplasmic tail binds and activates
a tyrosine phosphatase that inhibits tyrosine kinasee
dependent signals from the TCR complex and CD28
(see Chapter 5). Thus, PD-1 limits activation by
persistent stimuli, such as some microbes, tumors,
and self antigens. This phenomenon has been called
exhaustion because the T cells make an effective
response that is terminated (see Chapter 6). Blockade
of PD-1 for cancer immunotherapy, in order to pre-
vent exhaustion of tumor-speciﬁc T cells, often in-
duces autoimmune reactions, supporting a role for
PD-1 in self-tolerance.
• The activation of ubiquitin ligases such as CBL-B in
T cells responding to antigens limits and terminates
activation.
CBL-B
targets
TCR-
and
CD28-
associated signaling molecules for degradation, and
thus inhibits T cell activation. Genome-wide associ-
ation studies have revealed variants of CBLB in pa-
tients
with
the
autoimmune
diseases
multiple
sclerosis and type I diabetes.
Deletion: Apoptosis of Mature Lymphocytes
Recognition of self antigens may trigger pathways of
apoptosis that result in elimination (deletion) of the
self-reactive lymphocytes (Fig. 9.5). There are two
likely mechanisms of death of mature T lymphocytes
that recognize self antigens:
• Antigen recognition induces the production in T
cells of proapoptotic proteins of the BCL-2 family
that cause mitochondrial molecules, such as cyto-
chrome c, to leak out and activate cytosolic enzymes
called caspases that induce apoptosis. In normal im-
mune responses, the activity of these proapoptotic
molecules is counteracted by other proteins of the
BCL-2 family that have antiapoptotic functions
and are induced by costimulation and by growth fac-
tors produced during the responses. However, self
antigens, which are recognized without strong costi-
mulation, may not stimulate production of antiapop-
totic proteins, and the relative deﬁciency of survival
signals induces death of the cells that recognize these
antigens.
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
193
 
• Recognition of self antigens may lead to the coex-
pression of death receptors and their ligands. This
ligand-receptor interaction generates signals through
the death receptor that culminate in the activation of
caspases and apoptosis. The best-deﬁned death
receptoreligand pair involved in self-tolerance is a
protein called FAS (CD95), which is expressed on
many cell types, and FAS ligand (FAS-L), which is
expressed mainly on activated T cells. In the absence
of FAS or FAS-L, T cells activated by antigens fail to
be
culled
and
this
dysfunction
may
drive
autoimmunity.
Evidence from genetic studies supports the role of
apoptosis in self-tolerance. Eliminating the mitochon-
drial pathway of apoptosis in mice results in a failure of
deletion of self-reactive T cells in the thymus and also in
peripheral tissues, leading to autoimmunity. Mice with
mutations in the fas and fasl genes and children with
mutations in FAS all develop autoimmune diseases
with lymphocyte accumulation. Children with muta-
tions in the genes encoding caspase-8 or -10, which are
downstream of FAS signaling, also have similar auto-
immune diseases. These human diseases, collectively
called the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
Antigen recognition
T cell response 
Normal 
response
Cell death
caused by
engagement
of death
receptors
 
T cell
Apoptotic proteins
inside mitochondria
Apoptotic proteins
released from
mitochondria
T cell survival,
proliferation
and differentiation
Activated
T cells
Apoptosis
Apoptosis
Expression of
death receptor
ligand
Repeated
activation
Expression of
death receptor
Cell death
caused by
deficiency
of survival
signals
APC
Inducers of
apoptosis
Inhibitors of
apoptosis
IL-2
Fig. 9.5 Mechanisms of apoptosis of T lymphocytes. T cells respond to antigen presented by normal antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) by secreting interleukin-2 (IL-2), expressing antiapoptotic (prosurvival) proteins, and
undergoing proliferation and differentiation. The antiapoptotic proteins prevent the release of mediators of
apoptosis from mitochondria. Self antigen recognition by T cells without costimulation may lead to relative
deﬁciency of intracellular antiapoptotic proteins, and the excess of proapoptotic proteins causes cell death by
inducing release of mediators of apoptosis from mitochondria (death by the mitochondrial [intrinsic] pathway of
apoptosis). Alternatively, self antigen recognition may lead to expression of death receptors and their ligands,
such as Fas and Fas ligand (FasL), on lymphocytes, and engagement of the death receptor leads to apoptosis
of the cells by the death receptor (extrinsic) pathway.
194
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
 
(ALPS), are rare and are the only known examples of an
autoimmune disorder caused by defects in apoptosis.
Mutations in FAS also have been shown to allow the
accumulation of B cells in germinal centers, and this
may contribute to a break in peripheral B cell tolerance
(discussed later).
From this discussion of the mechanisms of T cell
tolerance, it should be clear that self antigens differ
from foreign microbial antigens in several ways, which
contribute to the choice between tolerance induced by
the former and activation by the latter.
• Self antigens are present in the thymus, where they
induce deletion of immature cells that recognize
self antigens and generate Tregs; by contrast, most
microbial antigens tend to be excluded from the
thymus because they are typically captured from
their sites of entry and transported into secondary
lymphoid organs (see Chapter 3).
• Tregs speciﬁc for self antigens reduce the expression
of costimulators on APCs displaying these antigens
and thus prevent the activation of self-reactive T
lymphocytes. By contrast, microbes elicit innate im-
mune reactions, leading to the increased expression
of costimulators and cytokines that promote T cell
proliferation and differentiation into effector cells.
• Self antigens are present throughout life and may
therefore cause prolonged or repeated TCR engage-
ment, which may promote the development of Tregs
and other mechanisms of self-tolerance (e.g., PD-1
engagement, FAS-mediated apoptosis).
B LYMPHOCYTE TOLERANCE
Tolerance of B cells that recognize multivalent self
polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids and membrane
proteins can be induced in a T-independent manner.
Self proteins may not elicit autoantibody responses
because of tolerance in both helper T cells and B cells. It
is suspected that diseases associated with autoantibody
production, such as systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE), are caused by defective tolerance in both B
lymphocytes and helper T cells.
Central B Cell Tolerance
When immature B lymphocytes interact strongly
with self antigens in the bone marrow, the B cells
either change their receptor speciﬁcity (receptor
editing) or are killed (deletion) (Fig. 9.6).
• Receptor editing. Immature B cells are at a stage of
maturation in the bone marrow when they have
rearranged their immunoglobulin (Ig) genes, express
IgM, and have shut off the RAG genes that encode
the VDJ recombinase. If these B cells recognize self
antigens in the bone marrow, they may re-express
RAG genes, resume light-chain gene recombination,
and express a new Ig light chain (see Chapter 4). The
previously rearranged heavy chain gene cannot
recombine again because during the two steps of
VDJ recombination for Ig heavy chain genes, all
the other D segment genes upstream and down-
stream of the D segment that was used have been
deleted. The new light chain associates with the pre-
viously expressed Ig heavy chain to produce a new
antigen receptor that may no longer recognize the
self antigen. This process of changing receptor spec-
iﬁcity, called receptor editing, reduces the chance
that potentially harmful self-reactive B cells will leave
the marrow. It is estimated that 25% to 50% of
mature B cells in a normal individual may have
Self antigen
recognition
Self
antigen
Receptor editing:
expression of
new Ig V region
Self-reactive
B cell
Deletion
Non-self reactive
B cell
Apoptosis
Fig. 9.6 Central tolerance in immature B lymphocytes. An
immature B cell that recognizes self antigen in the bone marrow
changes its antigen receptor (receptor editing) or dies by
apoptosis (negative selection, or deletion). Ig, Immunoglobulin.
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
195
 
undergone receptor editing during their maturation.
(There is no evidence that developing T cells can un-
dergo receptor editing.)
• Deletion. If editing fails, immature B cells that
strongly recognize self antigens receive death signals
and die by apoptosis. This process of deletion is
similar to negative selection of immature T lympho-
cytes. As in the T cell compartment, negative selection
of B cells eliminates lymphocytes with high-afﬁnity
receptors for abundant, and usually widely expressed,
cell membrane or soluble self antigens.
Peripheral B Cell Tolerance
Mature B lymphocytes that encounter self antigens in
peripheral lymphoid tissues become incapable of
responding to that antigen (Fig. 9.7). Some self anti-
gens, such as soluble proteins, may be recognized with
low avidity. B cells speciﬁc for these antigens survive,
but antigen receptor expression is reduced and the cells
become functionally unresponsive (anergic). According
to one hypothesis, if B cells recognize a protein antigen
but do not receive T cell help (because helper T cells
have been eliminated or are tolerant), the B cells
become anergic because of a block in signaling from the
antigen receptor. Anergic B cells may leave lymphoid
follicles and are subsequently excluded from the folli-
cles. B cells that have recently emerged from the bone
marrow, called transitional B cells, are eliminated by
apoptosis when their antigen receptors are triggered by
self antigens in the periphery. It has also been proposed
that some B cells produce cytokines such as IL-10 and
TGF-b and thus inhibit activation of other immune
cells, but the signiﬁcance of these putative regulatory B
cells in maintaining self-tolerance and preventing
autoimmunity is not established.
TOLERANCE TO COMMENSAL MICROBES
AND FETAL ANTIGENS
Before concluding our discussion of the mechanisms of
immunologic tolerance, it is useful to consider two
other types of antigens that are not self but are pro-
duced by cells or tissues that have to be tolerated by the
immune system. These are products of commensal
microbes that live in symbiosis with humans and
paternally derived antigens in the fetus. Coexistence
with these antigens is dependent on many of the same
mechanisms that are used to maintain peripheral
tolerance to self antigens.
Tolerance to Commensal Microbes in the
Intestines and Skin
The microbiome of healthy humans consists of approx-
imately 1014 bacteria and viruses (which is estimated to
be almost 10 times the number of nucleated human cells,
prompting microbiologists to point out that we are only
10% human and 90% microbial!). These microbes reside
in the intestinal and respiratory tracts and on the skin,
where they serve many essential functions. For instance,
in the gut, commensal bacteria aid in digestion and
absorption of foods and prevent overgrowth of poten-
tially harmful microbes. Mature lymphocytes in these
tissues are capable of recognizing the commensal or-
ganisms but do not react against them, so the microbes
are not eliminated and harmful inﬂammation is not
triggered. In the gut, several mechanisms account for the
inability of the healthy immune system to react against
commensal microbes. These mechanisms include an
abundance of IL-10eproducing Tregs, and an unusual
property of intestinal dendritic cells such that signaling
from some Toll-like receptors leads to inhibition rather
than activation. There is some evidence that commensal
bacteria in the skin also induce Tregs. In addition, many
commensal microbes are physically separated from the
Self
antigen
Anergy
Functional
inactivation
Apoptosis
Deletion
Fig. 9.7 Peripheral tolerance in B lymphocytes. A mature B cell
that recognizes a self-antigen without T cell help is functionally
inactivated and becomes incapable of responding to that anti-
gen (anergy), or it dies by apoptosis (deletion), or its activation is
suppressed by engagement of inhibitory receptors.
196
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
 
intestinal and cutaneous immune systems by the
epithelium and products of the epithelial cells such as
mucus in the gut and keratin on the skin.
Tolerance to Fetal Antigens
The evolution of placentation in eutherian mammals
allowed the fetus to mature before birth but created the
problem that paternal antigens expressed in the fetus,
which are foreign to the mother, have to be tolerated by
the immune system of the pregnant mother. One
mechanism of this tolerance is the generation of pe-
ripheral FOXP3þ Tregs speciﬁc for these paternal an-
tigens. In fact, evolution of mammalian placentation
coincides with the ability to generate stable peripheral
Tregs. Other mechanisms of fetal tolerance include
exclusion of inﬂammatory cells from the pregnant
uterus, poor antigen presentation in the placenta, the
low expression of conventional MHC class I molecules
on fetal trophoblast cells, the expression of ligands for
natural killer (NK) cell inhibition on the fetal tropho-
blast, an inability to generate harmful T helper 1 (Th1)
responses in the healthy pregnant uterus, and chemical
modiﬁcations of antigens in the fetus that make them
tolerogenic.
Now that we have described the principal mecha-
nisms of immunologic tolerance, we consider the con-
sequences of the failure of self-tolerancednamely, the
development of autoimmunity.
AUTOIMMUNITY
Autoimmunity is deﬁned as an immune response against
self (autologous) antigens. It is an important cause of
disease, estimated to affect 3% to 5% of the population in
developed countries, and the prevalence of several auto-
immune diseases is increasing. Different autoimmune
diseases may be organ-speciﬁc, affecting only one or a few
organs, or systemic, with widespread tissue injury and
clinical manifestations. Tissue injury in autoimmune
diseases may be caused by antibodies or by T cells specﬁc
for self antigens (see Chapter 11).
Pathogenesis
The principal factors in the development of autoim-
munity are the inheritance of susceptibility genes and
environmental triggers, such as infections (Fig. 9.8). It
is postulated that susceptibility genes interfere with
pathways of self-tolerance, leading to the persistence of
self-reactive T and B lymphocytes. Environmental
stimuli may cause cell and tissue injury and inﬂam-
mation and activate these self-reactive lymphocytes,
resulting in the generation of effector T cells and au-
toantibodies that are responsible for the autoimmune
disease.
Despite our growing knowledge of the immunologic
abnormalities that may result in autoimmunity, we still
do not know the etiology of common human autoim-
mune diseases. This lack of understanding results from
several factors: autoimmune diseases in humans usually
are heterogeneous and multifactorial; the self antigens
that are the inducers and targets of the autoimmune
reactions are often unknown; and the diseases may be
detected long after the autoimmune reactions have been
initiated.
Genetic Factors
Inherited risk for most autoimmune diseases is
attributable to multiple gene loci. If an autoimmune
disease develops in one of two twins, the same disease is
more likely to develop in the other twin than in an
unrelated member of the general population. Further-
more,
this
increased
incidence
is
greater
among
monozygotic (identical) twins than among dizygotic
twins who have grown up together, excluding the role
of environmental factors. These ﬁndings prove the
importance of genetics in the susceptibility to autoim-
munity. Genome-wide association studies have revealed
some of the variations (polymorphisms) of genes that
may contribute to different autoimmune diseases.
Emerging results suggest that different polymorphisms
are more frequent (predisposing) or less frequent
(protective) in patients than in healthy controls. The
importance of these polymorphisms is reinforced by the
ﬁnding that many of them affect genes involved in
immune
responses,
and
the
same
genetic
poly-
morphism may be associated with more than one
autoimmune disease. However, these polymorphisms
are frequently present in healthy individuals, and the
individual contribution of each of these genes to the
development of autoimmunity is very small, so many
risk alleles together are needed to cause the disease.
Many of these polymorphisms are in the regulatory
regions of the genes (promoters and enhancers) and not
in the coding sequences, suggesting that they inﬂuence
expression of the encoded proteins.
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
197
 
Many autoimmune diseases in humans and inbred
animals are linked to particular MHC alleles (Fig. 9.9).
The association between human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) alleles and autoimmune diseases in humans was
recognized many years ago and was one of the ﬁrst
indications that T cells played an important role in
these disorders (because the only known function of
MHC molecules is to present peptide antigens to
T cells). The incidence of numerous autoimmune dis-
eases is greater among individuals who inherit partic-
ular HLA allele(s) than in the general population. The
likelihood of a particular autoimmune disease in people
with versus without a particular polymorphism (such as
an HLA allele) is expressed as the relative risk (or odds
ratio). Most of these disease associations are with class
II HLA alleles (most often HLA-DR and HLA-DQ),
perhaps because class II MHC molecules control the
development and activation of CD4þ T cells, which are
involved in both cell-mediated and humoral immune
responses to proteins as well in regulating immune
responses. It is important to point out that, although an
HLA allele may increase the risk for developing a
particular autoimmune disease, the HLA allele is not, by
itself, the cause of the disease. In fact, the disease never
develops in the vast majority of people who inherit an
HLA allele that does confer increased risk for the
Genetic susceptibility
Reaction to environmental stimuli
Self-reactive
lymphocytes
Activation of
tissue APCs
Activation of
self-reactive
lymphocytes
Tissue
Self-reactive 
effector
lymphocytes
Tissue injury
and 
inflammation
Failure of
self-tolerance
Susceptibility
genes
Tissue injury:
autoimmune 
disease
Fig. 9.8 Postulated mechanisms of autoimmunity. In this proposed model of organ-speciﬁc T cellemediated
autoimmunity, various genetic loci may confer susceptibility to autoimmunity, probably by inﬂuencing the
maintenance of self-tolerance. Environmental triggers, such as infections and other inﬂammatory stimuli,
promote the inﬂux of lymphocytes into tissues and the activation of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and
subsequently of self-reactive T cells, resulting in tissue injury.
198
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
 
disease. Despite the clear association of MHC alleles
with several autoimmune diseases, how these alleles
contribute to the development of the diseases remains
unknown. Some hypotheses are that particular MHC
alleles may be especially effective at presenting patho-
genic self peptides to autoreactive T cells or that they
are inefﬁcient at displaying certain self antigens in the
thymus, leading to defective negative selection of
T cells.
Polymorphisms in non-HLA genes are associated
with
various
autoimmune
diseases
and
may
contribute to failure of self-tolerance or abnormal
activation of lymphocytes (Fig. 9.10A). Many such
disease-associated genetic variants have been described:
• Polymorphisms in the gene encoding the tyrosine
phosphatase PTPN22 (protein tyrosine phosphatase
N22) may lead to uncontrolled activation of both B
and T cells and are associated with numerous auto-
immune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis,
SLE, and type 1 diabetes.
• Variants of the innate immune cytoplasmic microbial
sensor NOD-2 that reduce resistance to intestinal mi-
crobes are associated with Crohn’s disease, an inﬂam-
matory bowel disease, in some ethnic populations.
• Other polymorphisms associated with multiple auto-
immune diseases include genes encoding the IL-2 re-
ceptor a chain (CD25), thought to inﬂuence the
balance of effector and regulatory T cells; the recep-
tor for the cytokine IL-23, which promotes the
development
of
proinﬂammatory
T
helper
17
(Th17) cells; and CTLA-4, a key inhibitory receptor
in T cells discussed earlier and in Chapter 5.
Some rare autoimmune disorders are caused by mu-
tations in single genes that have high penetrance and lead
to autoimmunity in most individuals who inherit these
mutations, although the pattern of inheritance varies.
These genes, alluded to earlier, include AIRE, FOXP3,
FAS, and CTLA4 (Fig. 9.10B). Mutations in these genes
have been valuable for identifying key molecules and
pathways involved in self-tolerance. However, these
Mendelian forms of autoimmunity are rare, and com-
mon autoimmune diseases are not caused by mutations
in any of these known genes.
Role of Infections and Other Environmental
Influences
Infections may activate self-reactive lymphocytes,
thereby triggering the development of autoimmune
diseases. Clinicians have recognized for many years
that
the
clinical
manifestations
of
autoimmunity
sometimes are preceded by infectious prodromes. This
association between infections and autoimmune tissue
injury has been established in some animal models.
Infections may contribute to autoimmunity in
several ways (Fig. 9.11):
• An infection in a tissue may induce a local innate
immune response, which may lead to increased
Disease
Relative risk
Ankylosing spondylitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Type 1 
diabetes mellitus
Pemphigus vulgaris
HLA-B27
HLA-DRB1*0401/0404
HLA-DRB1*0301/0401
HLA-DR4
90
4-12
35
14
MHC allele
Fig. 9.9 Association of autoimmune diseases with alleles of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
locus. Family and linkage studies show a greater likelihood of developing certain autoimmune diseases in
persons who inherit particular human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles than in persons who lack these alleles
(odds ratio or relative risk). Selected examples of HLA disease associations are listed. For instance, in people
who have the HLA-B27 allele, the risk of development of ankylosing spondylitis, an autoimmune disease of the
spine, is much higher than in B27-negative people; other diseases show various degrees of association with
other HLA alleles. The asterisks indicate HLA alleles identiﬁed by molecular (DNA-based) typing instead of the
older serologic (antibody-based) methods.
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
199
 
Single-gene defects that cause autoimmunity (Mendelian diseases)
Gene(s)
Disease association Mechanism
Disease association Mechanism
C2, C4
(Complement 
proteins)
Defects in clearance of immune 
complexes or in B cell tolerance?
NOD2
Defective resistance or abnormal
responses to intestinal microbes?
Crohn's disease
CD25 
(IL-2R)
Abnormalities in effector and/or
regulatory T cells?
MS, type 1 diabetes,
others
PTPN22
Abnormal tyrosine phosphatase regulation
of T cell selection and activation?
RA, several others
FCGRIIB
(FCRIIb)
Defective feedback inhibition of B cells
SLE
A
Gene(s)
B
AIRE
Reduced expression of peripheral tissue
antigens in the thymus, leading to 
defective elimination of self-reactive T cells
Autoimmune
polyglandular
syndrome (APS-1)
FOXP3
CTLA4
Deficiency of regulatory T cells
Immune dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy, X-linked 
(IPEX) 
CD25
Deficiency of regulatory T cells; defective
IL-10 production
IPEX-like syndrome
Impaired regulatory T cell function leading
to loss of B and T cell homeostasis
CTLA4 
haploinsufficiency with
autoimmune infiltration
FAS
Defective apoptosis of self-reactive T and
B cells in the periphery
Autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative
syndrome (ALPS)
IL-10/IL-10R
Defective suppression of immune
responses to commensal bacteria?
Infantile enterocolitis
Genes that may contribute to genetically complex autoimmune diseases
SLE
CTLA4
Inhibitory receptor of T cells, effector
molecule of regulatory T cells
IL23R
Component of IL-23 receptor; role in
generation and maintenance of Th17 cells
IBD, PS, AS
T1D, RA
200
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
 
Fig. 9.10 Roles of non-MHC genes in autoimmunity. A, Selected examples of variants (polymorphisms) of
genes that confer susceptibility to autoimmune diseases but individually have small or no effects. B, Examples
of single genes whose mutations result in autoimmunity. These are rare examples of autoimmune diseases
with Mendelian inheritance. The pattern of inheritance varies in the different diseases. APS-1 is autosomal
recessive, and both alleles of the gene (AIRE) have to be abnormal to cause the disease. IPEX is X-linked, so
mutation in one allele of the gene (FOXP3) is sufﬁcient to cause a defect in boys. ALPS is autosomal dominant
because FAS and FASL are trimeric proteins and mutations in one of the alleles of either gene result in reduced
expression of intact trimers. CTLA4 mutations cause disease in an autosomal manner. AS, Ankylosing
spondylitis; IBD, inﬂammatory bowel disease; IL, interleukin; MS, multiple sclerosis; PS, psoriasis; RA,
rheumatoid arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; T1D, type 1 diabetes; Th17, T helper 17 cell.
Self-
tolerance
Induction of
costimulators
on APCs
Molecular
mimicry
Self-tolerance:
anergy or deletion
"Resting"
tissue APC
T cell
Self 
antigen
Self-reactive T cell 
that recognizes
microbial peptide
Self- 
reactive
T cell
B7 CD28
Microbe
Microbe
Microbial
antigen
A
B
Activation
of APC
Activation
of T cells
Self
tissue
Self
tissue
Self
antigen
Self 
antigen
Autoimmunity
Autoimmunity
C
Fig. 9.11 Mechanisms by which microbes may promote autoimmunity. A, Normally, an encounter of mature
T cells with self antigens presented by resting tissue antigen-presenting cells (APCs) results in peripheral
tolerance. B, Microbes may activate the APCs to express costimulators, and when these APCs present self
antigens, the speciﬁc T cells are activated, rather than being rendered tolerant. C, Some microbial antigens
may cross-react with self antigens (mimicry). Therefore, immune responses initiated by the microbes may
become directed at self cells and self tissues. This ﬁgure illustrates concepts as they apply to T cells; mo-
lecular mimicry also may apply to self-reactive B lymphocytes.
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
201
 
production of costimulators and cytokines by tissue
APCs. These activated tissue APCs may be able to
stimulate self-reactive T cells that encounter self an-
tigens in the tissue. This may lead to disease if it oc-
curs in people who are already genetically at risk for
developing autoimmunity. Nevertheless, autoim-
mune disease does not develop in most infections,
probably because the mechanisms of tolerance are
adequate to limit autoimmune reactions.
One set of cytokines produced in innate immune
responses to viruses are type I interferons (IFNs).
Excessive production of type I IFNs has been asso-
ciated with the development of several autoimmune
diseases, notably SLE. These cytokines may activate
APCs or lymphocytes, but what stimulates their
production and how they contribute to autoimmu-
nity is not well understood.
• Some infectious microbes may produce peptide
antigens that are similar to, and cross-react with, self
antigens. Immune responses to these microbial pep-
tides may result in an immune attack against self anti-
gens. Such cross-reactions between microbial and self
antigens are termed molecular mimicry. Although
the contribution of molecular mimicry to autoimmu-
nity has fascinated immunologists, its actual signiﬁ-
cance in the development of most autoimmune
diseases remains unknown. In some disorders, anti-
bodies produced against a microbial protein bind to
self proteins. For example, in rheumatic fever, a fairly
common disease before the widespread use of antibi-
otics, antibodies against streptococci cross-react with
a myocardial antigen and cause heart disease.
• The innate response to infections may alter the
chemical structure of self antigens. For example,
some periodontal bacterial infections are associated
with rheumatoid arthritis. It is postulated that the
inﬂammatory responses to these bacteria lead to
enzymatic conversion of arginines to citrullines in
self proteins, and the citrullinated proteins are recog-
nized
as
nonself
and
elicit
adaptive
immune
responses.
• Infections may injure tissues and release antigens
that are normally sequestered from the immune sys-
tem. For example, some sequestered antigens (e.g., in
testis and eye) normally may not be seen by the im-
mune system. Release of these antigens (e.g., by
trauma or infection) may initiate an autoimmune re-
action against the tissue.
• The
abundance
and
composition
of
normal
commensal microbes in the gut, skin, and other sites
(the microbiome) may inﬂuence the health of the
immune system and the maintenance of self-
tolerance. This possibility has generated a great
deal of interest, but normal variations in the micro-
biome of humans related to environmental exposure
and diet make it difﬁcult to deﬁne the relationship
between particular microbes and the development
of autoimmune diseases.
Paradoxically, some infections appear to confer
protection from certain autoimmune diseases. This
conclusion is based on epidemiologic data and limited
experimental studies. The basis of this protective effect
of infections is unknown.
Several other environmental and host factors may
contribute to autoimmunity. Many autoimmune dis-
eases are more common in women than in men, but
how
sex
might
affect
immunologic
tolerance
or
lymphocyte activation remains unknown. Exposure to
sunlight is a trigger for the development of the auto-
immune disease SLE, in which autoantibodies are
produced against self nucleic acids and self nucleopro-
teins. It is postulated that these nuclear antigens may be
released from cells that die by apoptosis as a conse-
quence of exposure to ultraviolet radiation in sunlight.
SUMMARY
• Immunologic tolerance is speciﬁc unresponsiveness
to an antigen induced by exposure of lymphocytes
to that antigen. All individuals are tolerant of (unre-
sponsive to) all or most of their own (self) antigens.
Tolerance against antigens may be induced by
administering that antigen in particular ways, and
this strategy may be useful for treating immunologic
diseases
and
for
preventing
the
rejection
of
transplants.
• Central tolerance is induced in immature lympho-
cytes that encounter antigens in the generative
lymphoid organs. Peripheral tolerance results from
the recognition of antigens by mature lymphocytes
in peripheral tissues.
• Central tolerance of T cells is the result of strong
recognition of self antigens in the thymus by devel-
oping T cells. Some of these self-reactive T cells die
(negative selection), thus eliminating the potentially
202
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
 
most dangerous T cells, which express high-afﬁnity
receptors for self antigens. Other T cells of the
CD4 lineage develop into regulatory T cells (Tregs)
that suppress self-reactivity in the periphery.
• Regulatory T cells (Tregs) generated in the thymus
or periphery function to suppress immune responses
by multiple mechanisms, including CTLA-4–medi-
ated removal and blocking of B7 molecules of
APCs, suppression of immune cells by inhibitory cy-
tokines, and consumption of IL-2. Tregs express the
transcription factor FOXP3, CTLAe4, and the IL-2
receptor a chain CD25, and mutations in any of
these impair Treg function and result in autoim-
mune diseases.
• Peripheral tolerance in T cells is induced by multiple
other mechanisms. Anergy (functional inactivation)
results from the recognition of antigens without cos-
timulators (second signals). Deletion (death by
apoptosis) may occur when T cells encounter self
antigens.
• In B lymphocytes, central tolerance occurs when
immature cells recognize self antigens in the bone
marrow. Some of the cells change their receptors (re-
ceptor editing), and others die by apoptosis (negative
selection,
or
deletion).
Peripheral
tolerance
is
induced when mature B cells recognize self antigens
without T cell help, which results in anergy and/or
death of the B cells.
• Autoimmune diseases result from a failure of self-
tolerance. Multiple factors contribute to autoimmu-
nity, including the inheritance of susceptibility genes
and environmental triggers such as infections.
• Many genes contribute to the development of auto-
immunity. The strongest associations are between
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes and various
T celledependent autoimmune diseases.
• Infections predispose to autoimmunity by causing
inﬂammation and stimulating the expression of cos-
timulators or because of cross-reactions between mi-
crobial and self antigens.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What
is
immunologic
tolerance?
Why
is
it
important?
2. How is central tolerance induced in T lymphocytes
and B lymphocytes?
3. Where do regulatory T cells develop, and how do
they protect against autoimmunity?
4. How are T cell dysfunctional states of anergy and
exhaustion induced in T cells and how may they
contribute to peripheral tolerance
5. What are the mechanisms that prevent immune re-
sponses against commensal microbes and fetuses?
6. What are some of the genes that contribute to auto-
immunity? How may MHC genes play a role in the
development of autoimmune diseases?
7. What are some possible mechanisms by which infec-
tions promote the development of autoimmunity?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
CHAPTER 9
Immunologic Tolerance and Autoimmunity
203
 
10
Tumor and Transplantation
Immunology
Immune Responses to Cancer Cells
and Normal Foreign Cells
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Immune Responses Against Tumors, 205
Tumor Antigens, 205
Immune Mechanisms of Tumor Rejection, 207
Evasion of Immune Responses by Tumors, 209
Cancer Immunotherapy, 210
Passive Immunotherapy with Monoclonal
Antibodies, 210
Adoptive T Cell Therapy, 212
Immune Checkpoint Blockade, 213
Stimulation of Host Antitumor Immune
Responses by Vaccination with Tumor
Antigens, 215
Immune Responses Against Transplants, 215
Transplantation Antigens, 216
Induction of Immune Responses Against
Transplants, 218
Immune Mechanisms of Graft Rejection, 220
Prevention and Treatment of Graft
Rejection, 222
Transplantation of Blood Cells and
Hematopoietic Stem Cells, 223
Summary, 225
Cancer and organ transplantation are two situations in
which the immune response to human cells that are
genetically distinct from normal self has important
clinical consequences. In order for cancers to grow, they
have to evade host immunity, and effective methods of
enhancing patients’ immune responses against tumors,
called cancer immunotherapy, have had enormous
impact on clinical oncology. In organ transplantation,
the situation is the reverse: immune responses against
grafted tissues from other people are a major barrier to
successful transplantation, and suppressing these re-
sponses is a central focus of transplantation medicine.
Because of the importance of the immune system in
host responses to tumors and transplants, tumor
immunology and transplantation immunology have
become
subspecialties
in
which
researchers
and
clinicians come together to address both fundamental
and clinical questions.
Immune responses against tumors and transplants
share several characteristics. These are situations in
which the immune system is not responding to microbes,
as it usually does, but to noninfectious cells that are
perceived as foreign. The antigens that mark tumors and
transplants as foreign may be expressed in virtually any
cell type that is, respectively, malignantly transformed or
grafted from one individual to another. Therefore, im-
mune responses against tumors and transplants may be
directed against diverse cell types.
In this chapter we focus on the following questions:
• What are the antigens in tumors and tissue trans-
plants that are recognized as foreign by the immune
system?
204
 
• How does the immune system recognize and react to
tumors and transplants?
• How can immune responses to tumors and grafts be
manipulated to enhance tumor rejection and inhibit
graft rejection?
We discuss tumor immunity ﬁrst and then trans-
plantation, and we point out the principles common to
both.
IMMUNE RESPONSES AGAINST TUMORS
For over a century, scientists have proposed that a
physiologic function of the adaptive immune system is
to prevent the outgrowth of transformed cells and to
destroy these cells before they become harmful tumors.
Control and elimination of malignant cells by the im-
mune system is called tumor immune surveillance.
Several lines of evidence support the idea that immune
surveillance against tumors is important for preventing
tumor growth (Fig. 10.1). However, the fact that
common malignant tumors develop in immunocom-
petent individuals indicates that tumor immunity is
often incapable of preventing tumor growth or is easily
overwhelmed by rapidly growing tumors. This has led
to the growing realization that the immune response to
tumors is often dominated by tolerance or regulation,
not by effective immunity. Cancer biologists now
consider the ability to evade immune destruction as a
fundamental feature (“hallmark”) of cancers. The ﬁeld
of tumor immunology has focused on deﬁning the
types of tumor antigens against which the immune
system reacts, understanding the nature of the immune
responses to tumors and mechanisms by which tumors
evade them, and developing strategies for maximally
enhancing antitumor immunity.
Tumor Antigens
Malignant tumors express various types of molecules
that may be recognized by the immune system as
foreign antigens (Fig. 10.2). Protein antigens that elicit
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses are the most
relevant for protective antitumor immunity because
CTLs are the prinicipal mechanism for killing tumor
cells. These tumor antigens are present in the cytosol of
tumor cells and are processed and displayed by class I
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules
Evidence
Conclusion
Lymphocytic infiltrates around some tumors 
and enlargement of draining lymph nodes 
correlate with better prognosis
Transplants of tumors between syngeneic
animals are rejected, and more rapidly if 
the animals have been previously exposed 
to that tumor; immunity to tumor transplants 
can be transferred by lymphocytes 
from a tumor bearing animal
Immunodeficient individuals have an 
increased incidence of some types of tumors
Immune responses against 
tumors inhibit tumor growth
Tumor rejection shows 
features of adaptive immunity 
(specificity, memory) and is 
mediated by lymphocytes
The immune system protects 
against the growth of tumors
Therapeutic blockade of T cell inhibitory 
receptors such as PD-1 and CTLA-4 leads to 
tumor remission
Tumors evade immune
surveillance in part by
inhibiting T cells
Fig. 10.1 Evidence supporting the concept that the immune system reacts against tumors Several lines of
clinical and experimental evidence indicate that defense against tumors is mediated by reactions of the adaptive
immune system. CTLA-4, Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1.
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
205
 
Types of Tumor Antigens
Examples
Neoantigens
generated by
mutations unrelated
to tumorigenesis
Normal proteins
expressed
by tissue of
tumor origin
Aberrantly
expressed
normal proteins
Amplified genes/
overexpressed
normal proteins
Protein antigens
expressed by an
oncogenic virus
Random
passenger
mutations in
common cancers
Tyrosinase in
melanomas; 
CD20 on
B cell lymphomas
Cancer/testis
antigens in
many tumors
HER2 in
breast cancers
Proteins encoded
by EBV (EBNA),
HPV (E6, E7)
Demethylated gene
Viral gene
Oncogenic virus
Mutation
Fig. 10.2 Types of tumor antigens recognized by T cells Tumor antigens that are recognized by tumor-
speciﬁc CD8þ T cells may be mutated forms of various self proteins that do not contribute to malignant
behavior of the tumor; products of oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes; self proteins whose expression is
increased in tumor cells; and products of oncogenic viruses. Cancer/testis antigens are proteins that are
normally expressed in the testis and are also expressed in some tumors. HER2 is a receptor for epidermal
growth factor whose expression is increased in tumors, usually because of gene ampliﬁcation. In some cases,
unmutated cellular proteins that are normally expressed in low amounts (e.g., tyrosinase) or at particular
stages of development (e.g., cancer/testis antigens) may be immunogenic when expressed in tumors at
increased levels. Tumor antigens also may be recognized by CD4þ T cells, but less is known about the role that
CD4þ T cells play in tumor immunity. EBNA, Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; HPV, hu-
man papillomavirus.
206
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
for recognition by CD8þ CTLs. The tumor antigens
that elicit immune responses can be classiﬁed into
several groups:
• Neoantigens encoded by randomly mutated genes.
Sequencing of tumor genomes has revealed that
common human tumors harbor a large number of
mutations in diverse genes, reﬂecting the genetic
instability of malignant cells. These mutations usu-
ally play no role in tumorigenesis and are called pas-
senger mutations. Many of these mutations result in
expression of mutated proteins, called neoantigens
because they are newly expressed in the tumor cells
but are not present in the normal cells of origin of
the tumor. Because T cells only recognize peptides
bound to MHC molecules, mutated tumor proteins
can be recognized by T cells if peptides carrying
the mutated amino acid sequences can bind to and
be presented by the patients’ MHC alleles. Tumor
neoantigens may not induce tolerance because they
are not present in normal cells and are the most
common targets of tumor-speciﬁc adaptive immune
responses. In fact, the number of these mutations in
human cancers correlates with the strength of the
antitumor immune responses patients mount and
the effectiveness of immunotherapies that enhance
those responses.
• Products of oncogenes or mutated tumor suppres-
sor genes. Some tumor antigens are products of mu-
tations, called driver mutations, in genes that are
involved in the process of malignant transformation.
The driver mutations that encode tumor antigens
may be amino acid substitutions, deletions, or new
sequences generated by gene translocations, all of
which can be seen as foreign.
• Aberrantly expressed or overexpressed structurally
normal proteins. In several human tumors, antigens
that elicit immune responses are normal proteins
(products of unmutated genes) whose expression is
dysregulated in the tumors. Sometimes, this is a
consequence of epigenetic changes such as demethy-
lation of the promoters in genes encoding these pro-
teins, as in the case of cancer/testis antigens, which
are normally expressed only in germ cells but are
seen in many types of cancers. Overexpression may
be a result of gene ampliﬁcation such as the HER2
protein in some breast cancers. These structurally
normal self antigens would not be expected to elicit
immune responses, but their aberrant expression
may be enough to make them immunogenic. In
other cases, self proteins that are expressed only in
embryonic tissues may not induce tolerance in
adults, and the same proteins expressed in tumors
may be recognized as foreign by the immune system.
• Viral antigens. In tumors caused by oncogenic vi-
ruses, such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human
papillomavirus (HPV), the tumor antigens may be
encoded by the viruses.
Immune Mechanisms of Tumor Rejection
The principal immune mechanism of tumor eradi-
cation is killing of tumor cells by CTLs speciﬁc for
tumor antigens. The role of CTLs in tumor rejection
has been established in animal models: tumors can be
destroyed by transferring tumor-reactive CD8þ T cells
into the tumor-bearing animals. Studies of many hu-
man tumors indicate that abundant CTL inﬁltration
predicts a more favorable clinical course compared with
tumors with sparse CTLs.
CTL responses against tumors are initiated by
recognition of tumor antigens on host antigen-
presenting cells (APCs). The APCs ingest tumor cells or
their antigens and present the antigens to naive CD8þ
T cells in draining lymph nodes (Fig. 10.3). Tumors may
arise from virtually any nucleated cell type in any tissue.
We know, however, that the activation of naive CD8þ
T cells to proliferate and differentiate into active CTLs
requires recognition of antigen (class I MHCeassociated
peptide) on dendritic cells in secondary lymphoid organs
and also costimulation and/or help from class II MHCe
restricted CD4þ T cells (see Chapter 5). How, then, can
tumors of different cell types stimulate CTL responses?
The likely answer is that apoptotic tumor cells or proteins
released possibly from necrotic tumor cells are ingested by
the host’s dendritic cells and transported to lymph nodes
draining the site of the tumor. The protein antigens of the
tumor cells are processed in proteasomes and displayed by
class I MHC molecules on the host dendritic cells. This
process, called cross-presentation or cross-priming, was
introduced in Chapter 3 (see Fig. 3.16). Dendritic cells can
also present peptides derived from ingested tumor
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
207
 
antigens onclassIIMHC molecules.Thus, tumorantigens
may be recognized by CD8þ T cells and by CD4þ T cells.
At the same time that dendritic cells are presenting
tumor antigens, they may express costimulators that
provide signals for the activation of the T cells. It is not
known how tumors induce the expression of cos-
timulators on APCs because, as discussed in Chapter 5,
the physiologic stimuli for the induction of cos-
timulators are usually microbes, and tumors are
generally sterile. A likely possibility is that tumor cells
die if their growth outstrips their blood and nutrient
supply, and adjacent normal tissue cells may be injured
and die due to the invasive tumor. These dying cells
release products (damage-associated molecular pat-
terns; see Chapter 2) that stimulate innate responses.
The activation of APCs to express costimulators is part
of these responses.
Once naive CD8þ T cells have differentiated into
effector CTLs, they are able to migrate back to any site
where the tumor is growing and kill tumor cells
Tumor
Activation
of tumor
antigen-specific
CD8+ T cell
Migration of
tumor-specific
CTL to tumor
Afferent 
lymphatic
vessel
Phagocytosed
tumor antigen
Dendritic cell
Tumor
Lymph 
node
T cell
CTL killing
of tumor cell
Fig. 10.3 Immune response against tumors Tumor antigens are picked up by host dendritic cells, and re-
sponses are initiated in secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs. Tumor-speciﬁc cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs) migrate back to the tumor and kill tumor cells. Other mechanisms of tumor immunity are not shown.
208
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
expressing the relevant antigens without a requirement
for costimulation or T cell help.
Immune mechanisms in addition to CTLs may play
a role in tumor rejection. Antitumor CD4þ T cell re-
sponses have been detected in patients, and increased
numbers of CD4þ effector T cells, especially T helper 1
(Th1) and follicular helper T cells, in tumor inﬁltrates
are associated with good prognosis. Antitumor anti-
bodies are also detectable in some cancer patients, but
whether these antibodies protect individuals against
tumor growth has not been established. Experimental
studies have shown that activated macrophages and
natural killer (NK) cells are capable of killing tumor
cells, and Th1 responses work largely by activating
macrophages, but the protective role of these effector
mechanisms in tumor-bearing patients is not clearly
established.
Evasion of Immune Responses by Tumors
Immune responses often fail to check tumor growth
because cancers evade immune recognition or resist
immune effector mechanisms. Not surprisingly, tumor
cells that evade the host immune response are selected
to survive and grow. Tumors use several mechanisms to
avoid destruction by the immune system (Fig. 10.4):
• Some tumors stop expressing class I MHC molecules
or molecules involved in antigen processing or MHC
assembly, so they cannot display antigens to CD8þ
T cells. The most frequent mutations that cause loss
of class I MHC expression are those affecting b2-
microglobulin, which is an essential component of
the class I MHC molecule expressed on cell surfaces
(see Fig. 3.7).
• Tumors induce mechanisms that inhibit T cell activa-
tion. For example, many tumors overexpress PD-L1, a
ligand for the T cell inhibitory receptor programmed
cell death protein 1 (PD-1), or induce the expression
of PD-L1 on APCs in the tumor environment.
Furthermore, tumors, being persistent, cause repeated
stimulation of T cells speciﬁc for tumor antigens,
which stimulates expression of PD-1. The result is
that
tumor-speciﬁc
CD8þ
T
cells
develop
an
exhausted state, mediated by expression of PD-1 and
Immunosuppressive
cytokines
Tumor cell 
Tumor
antigen
MHC 
molecule 
Production of immunosuppressive 
proteins or expression of inhibitory
cell surface proteins
Failure to present tumor antigens
Failure to produce tumor antigen
Antitumor immunity
Immune evasion by tumors
Class I 
MHC-deficient 
tumor cell
Antigen-loss
variant of
tumor cell 
Lack of T cell
recognition
of tumor
Immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment
Inhibition of
T cell
activation or
differentiation
into Th1 and CTL
Lack of T cell
recognition
of tumor
Inhibition
of T cell
activation
T cell recognition
of tumor antigen
leading to T cell
activation
T cell 
specific for 
tumor antigen
Inhibitory
ligand
Treg
Th1
CTL
MDSC
Inhibitory
receptor
Fig. 10.4 How tumors evade immune responses Antitumor
immunity develops when T cells recognize tumor antigens and
are activated. Tumor cells may evade immune responses by
losing expression of antigens or major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) molecules or by producing immunosuppressive cy-
tokines or ligands such as PD-L1 for inhibitory receptors such as
PD-1 on T cells. Tumors may also create an immunosuppressive
microenvironment with regulatory T cells and antiinﬂammatory
myeloid cells. CTL, Cytotoxic T lymphocyte; MDSC, myeloid
derived suppressor cell; PD-L1, programmed cell death protein
ligand 1; Th1, T helper 1; Treg, regulatory T cell.
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
209
 
other inhibitory molecules, and become unresponsive
to antigen.
• Factors in the tumor microenvironment may impair
the ability of dendritic cells to induce strong anti-
tumor immune responses. Some tumors may induce
regulatory T cells, which suppress antitumor im-
mune responses. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells,
which have phenotypic features of neutrophils and
monocytes but mainly antiinﬂammatory functions,
are abundant in tumors,
and are thought to
contribute to immunosuppression.
• Some
tumors
may
secrete
immunosuppressive
cytokines, such as transforming growth factor b
(TGF-b).
Cancer Immunotherapy
The main strategies for cancer immunotherapy
currently in practice and under development include
the use of speciﬁc antitumor antibodies, the intro-
duction of autologous T cells that recognize tumor
antigens, enhancing
preexisting
host antitumor
T cell immune responses by administering anti-
bodies that block inhibitory molecules, and vacci-
nation with tumor antigens. Until recently, most
treatment protocols for disseminated cancers, which
cannot be cured surgically, relied on chemotherapy
and irradiation, both of which damage normal non-
tumor tissues and are hence associated with serious
toxicities. Because the immune response is highly
speciﬁc, it has long been hoped that tumor-speciﬁc
immunity may be used to selectively eradicate tu-
mors without injuring the patient. Only recently has
the promise of cancer immunotherapy been realized in
patients. The history of cancer immunotherapy illus-
trates how the initial, often empirical, approaches have
been largely supplanted by rational strategies based on
our improved understanding of immune responses
(Fig. 10.5).
Passive Immunotherapy with Monoclonal Antibodies
A strategy for tumor immunotherapy that has been in
practice for a limited number of tumors for decades
relies on the injection of monoclonal antibodies that
target cancer cells for immune destruction or inhibition
of growth (Fig. 10.6A). Monoclonal antibodies against
various tumor antigens have been used in many can-
cers. The antibodies bind to antigens on the surface of
the tumors (not the neoantigens produced inside cells)
and activate host effector mechanisms, such as phago-
cytes, NK cells, and the complement system, that
destroy the tumor cells. For example, an antibody
speciﬁc for CD20, which is expressed on B cells, is used
to treat B cell tumors, usually in combination with
chemotherapy. Although normal B cells are also
depleted, their function can be replaced by adminis-
tration of pooled immunoglobulin (Ig) from normal
Description
of immune
infiltrates by
Virchow
Treatment of 
cancer with
bacterial products
(”Coley’s toxin”)
Cancer
immunosurveillance
hypothesis
Treatment of
bladder cancer
with BCG
IL-2 therapy
for cancer
HPV vaccination
to prevent uterine
cervical neoplasia
DC vaccine for
prostate cancer
Anti-CTLA4
for melanoma
CAR-Tcells
for leukemia
Adoptive
cell therapy
1863
1898
1957
1976
1983
1985
2009
2010
2011
2014
Anti-PD-1
for melanoma
Fig. 10.5 History of cancer immunotherapy Some of the important discoveries in the ﬁeld of cancer
immunotherapy are summarized. BCG, Bacillus Calmette-Guérin; CAR, chimeric antigen receptor; CTLA-4,
cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4; DC, dendritic cell; FDA, Federal Drug Administration; HPV, human papil-
lomavirus; IL-2, interleukin-2; PD-1, programmed cell death protein 1. (Modiﬁed from Lesterhuis WJ, Haanen
JB, Punt CJ. Cancer immunotherapydrevisited, Nat Rev Drug Discov. 10:591e600, 2011.)
210
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
donors, if necessary. CD20 is not expressed on plasma
cells, so these cells survive and continue to produce
antibodies. Because CD20 is also not expressed by he-
matopoietic stem cells, normal B cells are replenished
after the antibody treatment is stopped. Other mono-
clonal antibodies that are used in cancer therapy may
work by blocking growth factor signaling (e.g., anti-
HER2 for breast cancer and antieepidermal growth
factor [EGF] receptor antibody for various tumors) or
by
inhibiting
angiogenesis
(e.g.,
antibody
against
vascular endothelial growth factor [VEGF] for colon
cancer and other tumors).
Passive immunity by transfer of monoclonal antibodies
Adoptive transfer of Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) T cells
Antibody-mediated
killing of tumor
(complement, 
NK cells-ADCC)
CAR T cell-mediated
killing of tumor cells
Tumor cell
Monoclonal 
antibodies
specific for
tumor antigen
T cells removed
from cancer
patient’s blood
Transfer into
cancer patients
Transfer into
cancer patients
A
Passive immunity by transfer of autologous T cells
T cell-mediated
killing of tumor
Tumor cell
T cells removed
from cancer
patient’s blood
or tumor and
expanded in vitro
B
C
Tumor
cell
CAR-T cell
CAR
T cell infected
with lentivirus
encoding a tumor
antigen–specfic
 CAR gene 
T cells activated
and expanded in vitro
with anti-CD3, 
anti-CD28, IL-2 
CAR-T cells transferred
back into patient
Fig. 10.6 Tumor immunotherapy by adoptive transfer of antibodies and T cells A, Passive immunotherapy
with tumor-speciﬁc monoclonal antibodies. B, Adoptive T cell therapy with autologous T cells expanded in
culture and transferred back into the patient. C, Adoptive T cell therapy with chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T
cells: T cells isolated from the blood of a patient are expanded in culture, genetically modiﬁed to express
recombinant CARs, and transferred back into the patient (see Fig. 10.7). ADCC, Antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity; IL-2, interleukin-2; NK, natural killer (cell).
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
211
 
Adoptive T Cell Therapy
Tumor immunologists have attempted to enhance
antitumor immunity by removing T cells from cancer
patients, activating the cells ex vivo to increase their
numbers and differentiate them into potent effector
cells, and transferring the activated cells back into the
patient. Many variations of this approach, called
adoptive T cell therapy, have been tried.
• Adoptive therapy with autologous tumor-speciﬁc
T cells. T cells speciﬁc for tumor antigens can be
detected in the circulation and tumor inﬁltrates in
cancer patients. T cells can be isolated from the
blood or tumor biopsy samples of a patient,
expanded by culture with growth factors, and
injected back into the same patient (Fig. 10.6B). Pre-
sumably, this expanded T cell population contains
activated tumor-speciﬁc CTLs, which migrate into
the tumor and destroy it. This approach, which has
been
combined
with
administration
of
T cellestimulating cytokines such as interleukin-2
(IL-2) and traditional chemotherapy, has shown
inconsistent results among different patients and tu-
mors. One likely reason is that the frequency of
tumor-speciﬁc T cells is too low to be effective in
these lymphocyte populations. Attempts to over-
come this limitation include isolating TCRs from
the patient’s tumor-speciﬁc T cell clones and intro-
ducing the TCRs into autologous T cells before
transfer.
• Chimeric
antigen
receptor
(CAR)eexpressing
T cells. In a more recent modiﬁcation of adoptive
T cell therapy, blood T cells from cancer patients
are transduced with viral vectors that encode a
chimeric antigen receptor (CAR), which is expressed
on the T cell surface, recognizes a tumor antigen,
and provides potent signals to activate the T cells
(Fig. 10.6C). The CARs currently in use have a
single-chain
antibody
forming
the
extracellular
portion with both heavy- and light-chain variable
domains, which together form the binding site for
a tumor antigen (Fig. 10.7). The speciﬁcity of the
endogenous T cell receptors (TCRs) of the trans-
duced T cells is irrelevant to the effectiveness of
this approach. The use of this antibody-based anti-
gen recognition structure avoids the limitations of
MHC restriction of TCRs and thus permits the use
of the same CAR in many different patients, regard-
less of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles
they express. Furthermore, tumors cannot evade
CAR-T cells by downregulating MHC expression.
In order to work in T cells, the CARs are constructed
to have intracellular signaling domains of TCR com-
plex proteins (e.g., the immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based
activation
motifs
[ITAMs]
of
the
TCR
complex z protein) and of costimulatory receptors
such as CD28 and CD137. Therefore, these receptors
provide both antigen recognition (via the extracel-
lular Ig domain) and activating signals (via the intro-
duced cytoplasmic domains). CAR-expressing T cells
are expanded ex vivo and transferred back into the
patient, where they recognize the antigen on the tu-
mor cells and become activated to kill the cells. CAR-
T cell therapy targeting the B cell proteins CD19 and
CD20 has shown remarkable efﬁcacy in treating and
Tumor antigen
CAR
Activation
Tumor cell
Signaling domain
of TCR complex
Signaling domain
of costimulatory
receptors
VL
VH
Tumor cell
killing
Fig. 10.7 Chimeric antigen receptor The receptor that is
expressed in T cells consists of an extracellular immunoglobulin
part that recognizes a surface antigen on tumor cells and
intracellular signaling domains from the T cell receptor (TCR)
complex and costimulatory receptors that provide the signals
that activate the killing function of the T cells. CAR, Chimeric
antigen receptor.
212
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
even curing B cellederived leukemias and lym-
phomas that are refractory to other therapies.
CARs with other speciﬁcities for plasma cell tumors
are now approved and other CARs are in develop-
ment and clinical trials.
The most serious toxicity associated with CAR-T
cell therapy is a cytokine release syndrome, mediated
by massive amounts of inﬂammatory cytokines,
including IL-6, interferon-g, and others, that are
released because all of the injected T cells recognize
and are activated by the patients’ tumor cells. These
cytokines cause high fever, hypotension, tissue
edema, neurologic derangements, and multiorgan
failure. The severity of the syndrome can be miti-
gated by treatment with antiinﬂammatory drugs and
some anticytokine antibodies. CAR-T cell therapy
also may be complicated by on-target, off-tumor
toxicities, if the CAR-T cells are speciﬁc for an an-
tigen that is present on normal cells as well as on the
tumors.
CD19-
or
CD20-speciﬁc
CAR-T
cells
deplete normal B cells, which express these proteins,
sometimes requiring antibody replacement therapy
to prevent immunodeﬁciency. Such replacement
may not be feasible for other tissues that are
destroyed because of the reactivity of the CAR.
Although CAR-T cell therapy is effective against
leukemias and other tumors in the blood (to which
the injected T cells have ready access), it has so far
not been successful in solid tumors because of the
challenge of selecting optimal tumor antigens to
target without injuring normal tissues and difﬁ-
culties in getting T cells into the tumor sites.
Immune Checkpoint Blockade
Blocking inhibitory receptors on T cells or their li-
gands stimulates antitumor immune responses. The
realization that tumors evade immune attack by
engaging regulatory mechanisms that suppress immune
responses has led to a novel and remarkably effective
new strategy for tumor immunotherapy. The principle
of this strategy is to boost host immune responses
against tumors by blocking normal inhibitory signals
for T cells, thus removing the brakes (checkpoints) on
the immune response (Fig. 10.8). This has been
accomplished with blocking monoclonal antibodies
speciﬁc for the T cell inhibitory molecules CTLA-4 and
PD-1, ﬁrst approved for treating metastatic melanoma
in 2011 and 2014, respectively. Since then, the use of
antiePD-1 or antiePD-L1 antibodies has expanded to
many different cancer types. Blockade of the PD-1
pathway works by reducing the generation of exhaus-
ted T cells, promoting differentiation of memory T cells
into effector cells, and thus reversing the exhaustion
phenotype. The most remarkable feature of these
therapies is that they have dramatically improved the
chances of survival of many patients with advanced,
widely metastatic tumors, which previously were almost
100% lethal within months to a few years, with some
patients having gone into long-term remission. There
are several novel features of immune checkpoint
blockade and limitations that still need to be overcome
to maximize their usefulness.
• Although the efﬁcacy of checkpoint blockade thera-
pies for many advanced tumors is superior to any
previous form of therapy, only a subset of patients
(15% to 40% for different tumors) respond to this
treatment, and among patients with many tumor
types (e.g., glioblastoma, pancreatic cancer, breast
cancer), few or even none respond. The reasons for
this poor response are not well understood. Nonres-
ponding tumors may induce T cell expression of
checkpoint molecules other than the ones being tar-
geted therapeutically, or they may rely on evasion
mechanisms other than engaging these inhibitory re-
ceptors.
Oncologists
and
immunologists
are
currently investigating which biomarkers will predict
responsiveness to different checkpoint blockade
approaches.
• One of the most reliable indictors that a tumor will
respond to checkpoint blockade therapy is if it
carries a high number of mutations, which correlates
with high numbers of neoantigens and host T cells
that can respond to those antigens. In fact, tumors
that have deﬁciencies in mismatch repair enzymes,
which normally correct errors in DNA replication
that lead to point mutations, have the highest muta-
tion burdens of all cancers, and these cancers are the
most likely to respond to checkpoint blockade ther-
apy. AntiePD-1 therapy is now approved for any
recurrent or metastatic tumor with mismatch repair
deﬁciencies, regardless of the cell of origin or histo-
logic type of tumor. This is a paradigm shift in how
cancer treatments are chosen, based on genetic fea-
tures only regardless of histology or tissue of origin.
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
213
 
• The combined use of different checkpoint inhibitors,
or one inhibitor with other modes of therapy, will
likely be necessary to achieve higher rates of thera-
peutic success. The ﬁrst approved example of this
is the combined use of antieCTLA-4 and antie
PD-1 to treat melanomas, which was shown to be
more effective than antieCTLA-4 alone. This reﬂects
the fact that the mechanisms by which CTLA-4 and
PD-1 inhibit T cell activation are different (see
Fig. 10.8 and Fig. 5.14). There are numerous ongoing
clinical trials blocking other checkpoint molecules,
usually in combination with PD-1 blockade, or
combining checkpoint blockade with other treat-
ments, such as chemotherapy and radiation, small
molecule kinase inhibitors, oncolytic viral infection
of tumors, angiogenesis inhibitors, and immune
stimulants (e.g., cytokines such as IL-2).
• The most common toxicities associated with check-
point blockade are immune damage to organs. This
is predictable, because the physiologic function of
the inhibitory receptors is to maintain tolerance to
self and other antigens, so blocking these check-
points may unleash autoimmunity and possibly reac-
tions to commensal organisms in the gut (see
A
B
Tumor peptide-MHC
CTLA-4
Dendritic
cell
CD8+
T cell
TCR
B7
CD28
Tumor peptide-MHC
PD-1
TCR
PD-L1
Tumor
cell
Inhibited
CTL
Primed CTL capable
of killing tumor cells
Dead
tumor cell
CD28
B7
CTLA-4
Anti-CTLA-4
CTL-mediated killing of tumor cells
Induction of anti-tumor immune response in lymph node
No costimulation
Costimulation
T cell inhibition
No T cell inhibition
Activated
CTL
PD-1
PD-L1
Anti-
PD-L1
Anti-
PD-1
Fig. 10.8 Tumor immunotherapy by immune checkpoint blockade Tumor patients often mount ineffective
T cell responses to their tumors because of the upregulation of inhibitory receptors such as CTLA-4 and PD-1
on the tumor-speciﬁc T cells, and expression of the ligand PD-L1 on the tumor cells and APCs. Blocking
antieCTLA-4 antibodies (A) or antiePD-1 or antiePD-L1 antibodies (B) are effective in treating several types of
advanced tumors by releasing the inhibition of tumor-speciﬁc T cells by these molecules. AntieCTLA-4 may
work by blocking CTLA-4 on responding T cells (shown) or on regulatory T cells. CTL, Cytotoxic T lymphocyte;
CTLA-4, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; PD-1, programmed cell
death protein 1; PD-L1, PD-ligand 1; TCR, T cell receptors.
214
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
Chapter 9). A wide range of organs may be affected,
including colon, lungs, endocrine organs, heart, and
skin, each requiring different clinical interventions,
sometimes including cessation of the life-saving tu-
mor immunotherapy.
Stimulation of Host Antitumor Immune Responses by
Vaccination with Tumor Antigens
One strategy under investigation for stimulating active
immunity against tumors is to vaccinate patients with
tumor antigens. Unlike standard antimicrobial vaccines,
which are prophylactic in that they prevent infections,
tumor antigen vaccines are meant to be therapeutic, in
that they are intended to stimulate immune responses
against cancers that have already developed. An
important reason for deﬁning tumor antigens is to
produce and use these antigens to vaccinate individuals
against their own tumors. Most tumor vaccines tried to
date have used differentiation antigens that are present
on neoplastic cells and normal cells of the tissue type
from which the tumor developed. There has been little
success with this strategy, perhaps because there is
strong tolerance to these self antigens that cannot be
overcome by the vaccines.
More recently, there has been work on developing
personalized cancer vaccines targeting neoantigens
generated by random passenger mutations, which are
unique to each patient’s tumor. This approach relies on
DNA sequencing to determine all the mutations in
tumor DNA that would be predicted to be present in
peptides that are most likely to bind to the HLA alleles
of the patient. The personalized tumor vaccines are
created using several of the neoantigen-containing
peptides. This approach is promising, but it also has
signiﬁcant
challenges, including
the
customization
required for each patient and possible outgrowth of
tumor clones that lose expression of MHC or the
neoantigens.
Tumor-speciﬁc vaccines may be administered as a
mixture of the antigen with adjuvants, just like anti-
microbial vaccines. In another approach, a tumor pa-
tient’s dendritic cells are expanded in vitro from blood
precursors, the dendritic cells are exposed to tumor cells
or tumor antigens, and these tumor-antigenepulsed
dendritic cells are used as vaccines. The dendritic cells
bearing tumor antigens will theoretically mimic the
normal pathway of cross-presentation and will generate
CTLs against the tumor cells. The success of checkpoint
blockade therapies, described previously, has raised
hopes that vaccination used in combination with ther-
apies to block immune regulation will have added
beneﬁts.
Tumors caused by oncogenic viruses can be pre-
vented by vaccinating against these viruses. Two such
vaccines that are proving to be remarkably effective are
against human papillomavirus (the cause of cervical
cancer and some types of oropharyngeal cancer) and
hepatitis B virus (a cause of a form of liver cancer and
liver failure due to ﬁbrosis). These are prophylactic
antiviral (not antitumor) vaccines given to individuals
before they are infected and thus prevent infections by
the tumor-causing viruses.
IMMUNE RESPONSES AGAINST
TRANSPLANTS
Some of the earliest attempts to replace damaged tissues
by transplantation were made during World War II as a
way of treating pilots who had received severe skin
burns in airplane crashes. It was soon realized that in-
dividuals reject tissue grafts from other individuals.
Rejection results from inﬂammatory reactions that
damage the transplanted tissues. Studies since the 1940s
and 1950s established that graft rejection is mediated by
the adaptive immune system because it shows speci-
ﬁcity and memory and it is dependent on lymphocytes
(Fig. 10.9). Much of the knowledge about the immu-
nology of transplantation came from experiments with
inbred strains of rodents, particularly mice. All mem-
bers of an inbred strain are genetically identical to one
another and different from the members of other
strains. The experimental studies showed that grafts
among members of one inbred strain are accepted and
grafts from one strain to another are rejected, ﬁrmly
establishing rejection as a process controlled by the
animals’ genes.
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the genes that contribute
the most to the rejection of grafts exchanged between
mice of different inbred strains are called MHC genes.
The language of transplantation immunology evolved
from the experimental studies. The individual who
provides the graft is called the donor, and the individual
in whom the graft is placed is the recipient or host.
Animals that are identical to one another (and grafts
exchanged among these animals) are said to be
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
215
 
syngeneic; animals (and grafts) of one species that differ
from other animals of the same species are said to be
allogeneic; and animals (and grafts) of different species
are xenogeneic. Allogeneic and xenogeneic grafts, also
called allografts and xenografts respectively, are always
rejected by a recipient with a normal immune system.
The antigens that serve as the targets of rejection are
called alloantigens and xenoantigens, and the antibodies
and T cells that react to these antigens are alloreactive
and xenoreactive, respectively. In clinical practice,
transplants are usually allografts, exchanged between
two people who are members of an outbred species who
differ genetically from one another unless they are
identical twins). Most of the following discussion focuses
on immune responses to allografts.
Transplantation Antigens
The antigens of allografts that serve as the principal
targets of rejection are proteins encoded in the MHC.
Homologous MHC genes and molecules are present in
all mammals; the human MHC is called the human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex. It took more than
20 years after the discovery of the MHC to show that
the physiologic function of MHC molecules is to
display peptide antigens for recognition by T lympho-
cytes (see Chapter 3). Recall that every person expresses
six class I HLA alleles (one allele of HLA-A, -B, and -C
from each parent) and usually more than six class II
HLA alleles (one allele of HLA-DQ and HLA-DP and
one or two of HLA-DR from each parent). MHC genes
are highly polymorphic, with thousands of alleles of
HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, and HLA-DRb genes and
hundreds of alleles of HLA-DQb and HLA-DPb genes
in the population. Because of this tremendous poly-
morphism, two unrelated individuals are very likely to
express several HLA proteins that are different from,
and therefore appear foreign to, each other. Because the
genes in the HLA locus are tightly linked, all the HLA
genes from each parent are inherited together, as a
haplotype, in a Mendelian pattern, and therefore the
chance that two siblings will have the same MHC alleles
is 1 in 4.
The reaction to allogeneic MHC antigens on
another individual’s cells is one of the strongest im-
mune responses known. TCRs for antigens have
evolved to recognize MHC molecules, which is essential
for surveillance of cells harboring infectious microbes.
As a result of positive selection of developing T cells in
the thymus, mature T cells that have some afﬁnity for
self MHC molecules survive, and many of these will, by
chance, have high afﬁnity for self MHC displaying
foreign peptides (as in normal immune responses).
Allogeneic MHC molecules containing peptides derived
from the allogeneic cells may look like self MHC mol-
ecules
plus
bound
foreign
peptides
(Fig.
10.10).
Therefore, recognition of allogeneic MHC molecules in
allografts is an example of an immunologic cross-
reaction.
There are several reasons why recognition of allo-
geneic MHC molecules results in strong T cell re-
actions. Many clones of T cells, including memory
T cells generated from prior infections, that are speciﬁc
Evidence
Conclusion
Prior exposure to donor MHC molecules 
leads to accelerated graft rejection
The ability to reject a graft rapidly can be
transferred to a naive individual by lymphocytes 
from a sensitized individual
Depletion or inactivation of T lymphocytes by drugs 
or antibodies results in reduced graft rejection
Graft rejection shows memory 
and specificity, two cardinal
features of adaptive immunity
Graft rejection is 
mediated by lymphocytes
Graft rejection requires
T lymphocytes
Fig. 10.9 Evidence indicating that the rejection of tissue transplants is an immune reaction Clinical and
experimental evidence indicates that rejection of grafts is a reaction of the adaptive immune system. MHC,
Major histocompatibility complex.
216
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
for different foreign peptides bound to the same self
MHC molecule may cross-react with any one allogeneic
MHC molecule, regardless of the bound peptide, as long
as the allogeneic MHC molecule resembles complexes
of self MHC plus foreign peptides. As a result, many self
MHCerestricted T cells speciﬁc for different peptide
antigens may recognize any one allogeneic MHC
molecule. In addition, the process of negative selection
in the thymus eliminates cells that strongly recognize
self MHC, but there is no mechanism for selectively
eliminating T cells whose TCRs have a high afﬁnity for
allogeneic MHC molecules because these are never
present in the thymus. Furthermore, a single allogeneic
graft cell will express thousands of MHC molecules,
every one of which may be recognized as foreign by a
graft recipient’s T cells. By contrast, in the case of an
infected cell, only a small fraction of the self MHC
molecules on the cell surface will carry a foreign mi-
crobial peptide recognized by the host’s T cells. The net
result of these features of allorecognition is that the
frequency of alloreactive T cells in any individual is
estimated to be at least 1000-fold greater than the fre-
quency of T cells that recognize any one microbial
antigen.
Although MHC proteins are the major antigens that
stimulate graft rejection, other polymorphic proteins
may also play a role. Non-MHC antigens that induce
graft rejection are called minor histocompatibility an-
tigens, and most are normal cellular proteins that differ
in sequence between donor and recipient. These poly-
morphic proteins yield peptides that are presented by
the recipient’s MHC molecules and trigger a T cell
response. The rejection reactions that minor histo-
compatibility antigens elicit are not as strong as re-
actions against foreign MHC proteins.
Foreign 
peptide
Self MHC molecule presents foreign
peptide to T cell selected to recognize
self MHC weakly, but may recognize
self MHC-foreign peptide complexes well
The self MHC-restricted T cell recognizes
the allogeneic MHC molecule whose
structure resembles a self MHC-foreign
peptide complex
The self MHC-restricted T cell recognizes
a structure formed by both the allogeneic
MHC molecule and the bound peptide
Self 
peptide
Self 
peptide
Normal
Allorecognition
Allorecognition
A
T cell receptor
Allogeneic MHC
Allogeneic MHC
B
C
Self MHC
Fig. 10.10 Recognition of allogeneic major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules by T lymphocytes Recognition of
allogeneic MHC molecules may be thought of as a cross-
reaction in which a T cell speciﬁc for a self MHC moleculee
foreign peptide complex (A) also recognizes an allogeneic MHC
molecule whose structure resembles that of the self MHC
moleculeeforeign peptide complex (B and C). Peptides derived
from the graft or recipient (labeled self peptide) may not
contribute to allorecognition (B), or they may form part of the
complex that the T cell recognizes (C). The type of T cell
recognition depicted in B and C is called direct allorecognition.
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
217
 
Induction of Immune Responses Against
Transplants
In order to elicit antigraft immune responses, alloanti-
gens from the graft are transported by dendritic cells to
draining lymph nodes, where they are recognized by
alloreactive T cells (Fig. 10.11). The dendritic cells that
present alloantigens also provide costimulators and can
stimulate helper T cells as well as alloreactive CTLs. The
effector T cells that are generated circulate back to the
transplant and mediate rejection.
T cells in allograft recipients may recognize un-
processed donor MHC molecules on the surface of
graft cells, or they may recognize peptides derived from
donor MHC molecules bound to recipient MHC
molecules on the surface of recipient APCs (Fig. 10.12).
These two pathways of presentation of graft antigens
have different features and names.
• Direct allorecognition. Most tissues contain den-
dritic cells, and when the tissues are transplanted,
the dendritic cells in the graft may migrate to sec-
ondary lymphoid organs of the recipient. When
naive T cells in the recipient recognize the donor
allogeneic MHC molecules on these graft-derived
dendritic cells, the T cells are activated; this pro-
cess is called direct recognition (or direct presen-
tation)
of
alloantigens.
Direct
recognition
stimulates the development of alloreactive T cells
(e.g., CTLs) that can then recognize the allogeneic
MHC molecules on cells of the graft and destroy
the graft.
Recipient 
dendritic
cell
Donor
dendritic
cell
Recipient
lymph node
Recipient CD4+
effector cells
Recipient CD8+
effector cells
Allograft
(kidney)
Sensitization
Recipient 
effector T cells
Efferent
lymph 
vessel
Afferent
lymph
vessel
Blood
Transport of
alloantigens to
lymph node
Activation of T cells, generation
of effector T cells by direct and
indirect antigen presentation
Inflammatory
cytokine secretion
Migration of effector
T cells to allograft 
Rejection
Killing of
graft cell
Fig. 10.11 Immune response against transplants Graft antigens that are expressed on donor dendritic cells or
captured by recipient dendritic cells are transported to peripheral lymphoid organs where alloantigen-speciﬁc
T cells are activated (the sensitization step). The T cells migrate back into the graft and destroy graft cells
(rejection). Antibodies are also produced against graft antigens and can contribute to rejection (not shown). The
example shown is that of a kidney graft, but the same general principles apply to all organ grafts.
218
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
• Indirect allorecognition. Graft cells or alloantigens
may be ingested by recipient dendritic cells and
transported to draining lymph nodes. Here, donor
alloantigens (usually donor MHC molecules) are
processed and presented by self MHC molecules
on the recipient APCs. This process is called indirect
recognition (or indirect presentation) and is similar
to the cross-presentation of viral or tumor antigens
to CD8þ T cells, discussed in Chapter 3 and earlier
in this chapter. If alloreactive CTLs are induced by
the indirect pathway, these CTLs are speciﬁc for
donor alloantigens displayed by the recipient’s self
MHC molecules on the recipient’s APCs, so they
cannot recognize and kill cells in the graft (which,
of course, express donor MHC molecules). When
graft alloantigens are recognized by the indirect
pathway, the subsequent rejection of the graft likely
is mediated mainly by alloreactive CD4þ T cells.
Allogeneic MHC
Inflammatory
cytokines
Alloreactive 
CD8+ T cell
Alloreactive
CD4+ T cell
Self
MHC
DC
in recipient
Allogeneic
MHC
Uptake and
processing of 
allogeneic 
MHC molecules
by recipient DC
Direct allorecognition
Indirect allorecognition
Donor
denritic cell
(DC)
Allogeneic 
tissue cell
Peptide derived 
from allogeneic 
MHC molecule
Donor MHC-specific
antibodies
Recipient B cell
specific for donor MHC
Antibody-mediated
injury to graft cells
Inflammation-
mediated
injury to graft
Direct CTL killing
of graft cells
A
B
CD4+ T follicular
helper cell recognizes
donor MHC peptide
bound to receipient
MHC on recipient
B cell
CD4+ Helper T cell
recognizes donor MHC
peptide bound to
receipient MHC on
recipient macrophage in graft
T cells recognize
donor MHC and bound
peptide on DC from graft
Graft tissue cell
expression same
peptide-MHC as
donor DC
Fig. 10.12 Direct and indirect recognition of alloantigens A, Direct alloantigen recognition occurs when
T cells bind directly to intact allogeneic major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) in a graft, as illustrated in Fig. 10.8. CD4þ T cells also may be activated upon recog-
nition of allogeneic class II MHC molecules on graft APCs (not shown). B, Indirect alloantigen recognition
occurs when allogeneic MHC molecules from graft cells are taken up and processed by recipient APCs, and
peptide fragments of the allogeneic MHC molecules are presented by recipient (self) MHC molecules.
Recipient APCs also may process and present graft proteins other than allogeneic MHC molecules.
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
219
 
These T cells may enter the graft together with host
APCs, recognize graft antigens that are picked up
and displayed by these APCs, and secrete cytokines
that injure the graft by an inﬂammatory reaction. In-
direct allorecognition by host CD4þ T cells also con-
tributes to production of host antibodies that bind to
graft MHC molecules, as discussed later.
We do not know the relative importance of the
direct and indirect pathways of allorecognition in
T cellemediated rejection of allografts. The direct
pathway may be most important for CTL-mediated
acute rejection, and the indirect pathway may play a
greater role in chronic rejection, as described later.
T cell responses to allografts require costimulation,
but which stimuli in grafts enhance the expression of
costimulators on APCs is unclear. As with tumors, graft
cells may undergo necrosis, perhaps in the period of
ischemia between removal of the organ from the donor
and placement in the recipient, and substances released
from the injured and dead cells activate APCs by innate
immune mechanisms. As we discuss later, blocking
costimulation is one therapeutic strategy for promoting
graft survival.
The mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) is an in vitro
model of T cell recognition of alloantigens. In this model,
T cells from one individual are cultured with leukocytes
of another individual, and the responses of the T cells are
assayed. The magnitude of this response is proportional
to the extent of the MHC differences between these in-
dividuals and is a rough predictor of the outcomes of
grafts exchanged between these individuals.
Although much of the emphasis on allograft rejection
has been on the role of T cells, alloantibodies also
contribute to rejection. Most of these antibodies are
helper T celledependent high-afﬁnity antibodies. In
order to produce alloantibodies, recipient B cells recog-
nize donor alloantigens and then process and present
peptides derived from these antigens to helper T cells
(that may have been previously activated by recipient
dendritic cells presenting the same donor alloantigen),
thus initiating the process of antibody production (see
Fig. 10.12B). This is a good example of indirect presen-
tation of alloantigens, in this case by B lymphocytes.
Immune Mechanisms of Graft Rejection
Graft rejection is classiﬁed into hyperacute, acute,
and chronic, on the basis of clinical and pathologic
features (Fig. 10.13). This historical classiﬁcation was
devised by clinicians for the diagnosis of kidney allo-
graft rejection, and it has proved useful for under-
standing the mechanisms of graft rejection and for
predicting outcomes and designing therapies. It has
become apparent that each type of rejection is mediated
by a particular type of immune response.
• Hyperacute rejection occurs within minutes of
transplantation and is characterized by thrombosis
of graft vessels and ischemic necrosis of the graft.
Hyperacute rejection is mediated by circulating anti-
bodies that are speciﬁc for antigens on graft endothe-
lial cells and that are present before transplantation.
These preformed antibodies may be natural IgM an-
tibodies speciﬁc for blood group antigens (discussed
later in this chapter), or they may be antibodies spe-
ciﬁc for allogeneic MHC molecules that were
induced by previous exposure to allogeneic cells
due to blood transfusions, pregnancy, or prior organ
transplantation. Almost immediately after transplan-
tation, the antibodies bind to antigens on the graft
vascular endothelium and activate the complement
and clotting systems, leading to injury to the endo-
thelium and thrombus formation. Hyperacute rejec-
tion
is
not
a
common
problem
in
clinical
transplantation because donors and recipients are
matched for blood type and potential recipients are
tested for antibodies against the cells of the prospec-
tive donor. (The test for antibodies is called a cross-
match.) However, hyperacute rejection is a major
barrier to xenotransplantation, as discussed later.
• Acute rejection occurs usually within days or weeks
after transplantation but may occur months later,
and is the principal cause of early graft failure. Acute
rejection is mediated by T cells and antibodies spe-
ciﬁc for alloantigens in the graft. The T cells may
be CD8þ CTLs that directly destroy graft cells or
CD4þ cells that secrete cytokines and induce inﬂam-
mation, which destroys the graft. T cells may also
react against cells in graft vessels, leading to vascular
damage. Antibodies contribute especially to the
vascular component of acute rejection. Antibody-
mediated injury to graft vessels is caused mainly by
complement activation by the classical pathway.
Current immunosuppressive therapy is designed to
prevent and reduce acute rejection by blocking the
activation of alloreactive T cells.
• Chronic rejection is an indolent form of graft dam-
age that develops over months or years, leading to
220
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
a
b
C
Endothelial 
cell
Blood
vessel
Circulating
alloantigen-
specific antibody
Complement activation,
endothelial damage,
inflammation
and thrombosis
Hyperacute rejection
Parenchymal cells
Endothelial 
cell
Alloreactive
antibody
 Parenchymal cell damage, 
interstitial inflammation
Acute rejection
Chronic rejection
Chronic inflammatory
 reaction in vessel wall,
 intimal smooth muscle
cell proliferation, 
vessel occlusion
Alloantigen-
specific CD4+
T cell
Vascular
smooth muscle cell
Cytokines
Cytokines
APC
Macrophage
Endothelialitis
B
A
Alloantigen 
(e.g., blood group antigen)
a
b
Fig. 10.13 Mechanisms and histopathology of graft rejection A representative histologic appearance of each
type of rejection is shown on the right. A, In hyperacute rejection, preformed antibodies react with alloantigens
on the vascular endothelium of the graft, activate complement, and trigger rapid intravascular thrombosis and
ischemic necrosis of the graft. B, In acute rejection, CD8þ T lymphocytes reactive with alloantigens on graft
endothelial cells and parenchymal cells or antibodies reactive with endothelial cells cause damage to these cell
types. Inﬂammation of the endothelium is called endothelialitis. The histology shows acute cellular rejection in
a and humoral (antibody-mediated) rejection in b. C, In chronic rejection with graft arteriosclerosis, T cells
reactive with graft alloantigens may produce cytokines that induce inﬂammation and proliferation of intimal
smooth muscle cells, leading over years to luminal occlusion. APC, Antigen-presenting cell.
 
progressive loss of graft function. Chronic rejection
may be manifested by gradual narrowing of graft
blood
vessels,
called
graft
arteriosclerosis,
and
ﬁbrosis of the graft. In both lesions, the culprits are
thought to be T cells that react against graft alloan-
tigens and secrete cytokines, which stimulate the
proliferation and activities of ﬁbroblasts and vascular
smooth muscle cells in the graft. Alloantibodies may
also contribute to chronic rejection. Although treat-
ments to prevent or suppress acute rejection have
steadily improved, leading to better 1-year survival
of transplants, chronic rejection is refractory to
most of these therapies and is becoming the prin-
cipal cause of graft failure.
Prevention and Treatment of Graft Rejection
The mainstay of preventing and treating the rejection
of organ transplants is immunosuppression, using
drugs that deplete T cells or inhibit T cell activation
and effector functions (Fig. 10.14). The development
of immunosuppressive drugs launched the modern era
of organ transplantation because these drugs made it
feasible to transplant organs from donors that were not
HLA-matched with recipients, especially in situations in
which such matching was impractical, such as trans-
plantation of heart, lung, and liver.
One of the ﬁrst and still most useful classes of
immunosuppressive
drugs
used
in
clinical
trans-
plantation are the calcineurin inhibitors, including
cyclosporine and FK506 (tacrolimus), which function
by blocking the protein phosphatase calcineurin. This
enzyme is required to allow the translocation of the
transcription factor NFAT (nuclear factor of activated
T cells) to the nucleus, and blocking its activity inhibits
the transcription of cytokine genes in the T cells.
Another widely used drug is rapamycin (sirolimus),
which inhibits a kinase called molecular target of
rapamycin (mTOR) required for T cell activation.
Many other immunosuppressive agents are now used as
adjuncts to or instead of calcineurin and mTOR in-
hibitors (see Fig. 10.14).
All of these immunosuppressive drugs carry the
problem of nonspeciﬁc immunosuppression (i.e., the
drugs inhibit responses to more than the graft).
Therefore, patients receiving these drugs as part of their
post-transplantation treatment regimen become sus-
ceptible to infections, particularly by intracellular mi-
crobes, and the patients have an increased risk for
developing cancers, especially skin cancers and others
caused by oncogenic viruses.
The matching of donor and recipient HLA alleles by
tissue typing had an important role in minimizing graft
rejection before cyclosporine became available for
clinical use. Although MHC matching is critical for the
success of transplantation of some types of tissues
(e.g., hematopoietic stem cell transplants) and improves
survival of other types of organ grafts (e.g., renal allo-
grafts), modern immunosuppression is so effective that
HLA matching is not considered necessary for many
types of organ transplants (e.g., heart and liver), mainly
because the number of donors is limited and the re-
cipients often are too sick to wait for well-matched
organs to become available.
The long-term goal of transplant immunologists is to
induce immunologic tolerance speciﬁcally for the graft
alloantigens. If this is achieved, it will allow graft
acceptance without shutting off other immune re-
sponses in the host. However, many years of experi-
mental and clinical attempts to induce graft-speciﬁc
tolerance have not yet resulted in clinically practical
methods.
A major problem in transplantation is the shortage
of suitable donor organs. Xenotransplantation has
been considered a possible solution for this problem,
and there has been extensive research on the use of pigs
as a source of grafts because their organs are similar in
size to human organs. Experimental studies show that
hyperacute rejection is a frequent cause of pig and other
mammalian xenotransplant loss. The reasons for the
high incidence of hyperacute rejection of xenografts are
that individuals often have antibodies that cross-react
with carbohydrate antigens on cells from other species
and the xenograft cells lack regulatory proteins that can
inhibit human complement activation. These anti-
bodies, similar to antibodies against blood group anti-
gens,
are
called
natural
antibodies
because
their
production does not require prior exposure to the
xenoantigens. It is thought that these antibodies are
produced against bacteria that normally inhabit the gut
and that the antibodies cross-react with cells of other
222
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
species. Xenografts are also subject to acute rejection,
much like allografts but often more severe than rejec-
tion of allografts. One solution to xenograft rejection
has been to genetically modify the donor animals so
that they do not produce the relevant xenoantigens and/
or express human complement regulatory proteins. The
only patient so far to receive a heart graft from a
genetically modiﬁed pig, in early 2022, survived for 2
months.
Transplantation of Blood Cells and
Hematopoietic Stem Cells
Transfer of blood cells between humans, called trans-
fusion, is the oldest form of transplantation in clinical
medicine. The major barrier to transfusion is the presence
of different blood group antigens in different individuals,
the prototypes of which are the ABO antigens, and natural
antibodies produced against these (Fig. 10.15). The anti-
gens are expressed onred blood cells, endothelialcells, and
many other cell types. ABO antigens are carbohydrates on
membrane glycoproteins or glycosphingolipids; they
contain a core glycan that may be enzymatically modiﬁed
by addition of either of two types of terminal sugar resi-
dues. There are three alleles of the gene encoding the
enzyme that adds these sugars: one encodes an enzyme
that adds N-acetylgalactosamine, one that adds galactose,
and one that is inactive and cannot add either. Therefore,
depending on the alleles inherited, an individual may be
one of four different ABO blood groups: Blood group A
individuals have N-acetylgalactosamine added to the core
glycan; blood group B individuals have a terminal galac-
tose; blood group AB individuals express both terminal
sugars on different glycolipid or glycoprotein molecules;
and individuals with blood group O express the core
glycan without either of the terminal sugars.
Individuals are tolerant of the blood group antigens
they express but make antibodies speciﬁc for the an-
tigens they do not express. Thus, type A individuals
make anti-B antibodies, type B individuals make anti-
A antibodies, O group individuals make both anti-A
and anti-B, and type AB individuals do not make
anti-A or anti-B antibodies. These antibodies are
called natural antibodies because they are made in the
absence of overt exposure to the blood group antigens
they recognize. They are likely produced by B cells in
response to structurally similar antigens of intestinal
microbes, and the antibodies cross-react with ABO
blood group antigens. Because the blood group anti-
gens are sugars, they do not elicit T cell responses that
drive isotype switching, and the antibodies speciﬁc for
A or B antigens are largely IgM. The preformed an-
tibodies react against transfused blood cells expressing
Drug
Mechanism of action
Cyclosporine,
FK506 
(tacrolimus)
Mycophenolate 
mofetil
Rapamycin
Blocks T cell cytokine 
production by inhibiting 
the phosphatase
calcineurin and thus 
blocking activation of the 
NFAT transcription factor
Blocks lymphocyte 
proliferation by inhibiting 
guanine nucleotide 
synthesis in lymphocytes
Blocks lymphocyte 
proliferation by inhibiting 
mTOR and IL-2 signaling
Corticosteroids
Anti-thymocyte
globulin
Anti-IL-2 
receptor
(CD25) 
antibody
CTLA4-Ig
(belatacept)
Reduce inflammation
by effects on multiple
cell types
Binds to and depletes
T cells by promoting
phagocytosis or
complement-mediated 
lysis (Used to treat 
acute rejection)
Inhibits T cell proliferation
by blocking IL-2 binding; 
may also opsonize and 
help eliminate activated 
IL-2R-expressing T cells
Anti-CD52
(alemtuzumab)
Depletes lymphocytes by
complement-mediated
lysis
Inhibits T cell activation by
blocking B7 costimulator 
binding to T cell CD28
Fig. 10.14 Treatments for graft rejection. Agents used to treat
rejection of organ grafts and their mechanisms of action. Like
cyclosporine, tacrolimus (FK506) is a calcineurin inhibitor.
CTLA4-Ig, Cytotoxic T lymphocyteeassociated protein 4e
immunoglobulin (fusion protein), not widely used; IL, interleukin;
mTOR, molecular target of rapamycin; NFAT, nuclear factor of
activated T cells.
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
223
 
the target antigens and activate complement, which
lyses the red cells; the result may be a severe trans-
fusion reaction, characterized by a systemic inﬂam-
matory response, intravascular thrombosis, and kidney
damage. This problem is avoided by matching blood
donors and recipients so there are no antigens on the
donor cells that can be recognized by preformed an-
tibodies in the recipient, a standard practice in
medicine.
Blood group antigens other than the ABO antigens
are also involved in transfusion reactions, and these
usually are less severe. One important example is the
RhD antigen, which is a red cell membrane protein
expressed by about 90% of people. Pregnant women
who are RhD-negative can be immunized by exposure
to RhD-expressing red cells from the baby during
childbirth if the baby inherited the RhD gene from the
father. The mother will produce anti-RhD antibodies
that can cross the placenta during subsequent preg-
nancies and attack Rh-positive fetal cells, causing he-
molytic disease of the fetus and newborn. This problem
is prevented by treating the mother with anti-RhD
antibody at the time of the ﬁrst delivery; the injected
antibody clears Rh-positive fetal cells from the maternal
circulation and blocks the Rh antigen, thus reducing its
immunogenicity.
Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplantation is
being used increasingly to treat blood cancers (e.g.,
leukemias, myeloma) and correct hematopoietic de-
fects. Either bone marrow cells or, more often, HSCs
mobilized in a donor’s blood are injected into the cir-
culation of a recipient, and the cells home to the
marrow. The transplantation of HSCs poses many
special problems. Before transplantation, some of the
B
A
Group A
Group AB
Group O
Group B
Red blood
cell type
Antibodies
present
Antigens
present
Anti-B
Anti-A
None
Anti-A and Anti-B
A antigen
B antigen
A and B antigen
None
Type A
Type B
Type AB
Type O
N acetyl-
galactosamine
N acetyl-
glucosamine
Fucose
Galactose
A
O
B
Fig. 10.15 ABO blood group antigens A, Chemical structure of ABO antigens. B, The antigens and antibodies
present in people with the major ABO blood groups.
224
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
bone marrow of the recipient has to be destroyed to
create space to receive the transplanted stem cells, and
this depletion of the recipient’s marrow inevitably
causes deﬁciency of blood cells, including immune cells,
resulting in potentially serious immune deﬁciencies
before the transplanted stem cells generate enough
replacement blood cells. The immune system reacts
strongly against allogeneic HSCs, so successful trans-
plantation requires careful HLA matching of donor and
recipient. If mature allogeneic T cells are transplanted
with the stem cells, these mature T cells can attack the
recipient’s tissues, resulting in graft-versus-host dis-
ease. When the donor is an HLA-identical sibling, this
reaction is directed against minor histocompatibility
antigens. The same reaction is exploited to kill leukemia
cells
(so-called
graft-versus-leukemia
effect),
so
depleting T cells from the donor HSCs to prevent graft-
vs-host disease also decreases the antileukemia effect.
Despite these problems, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation is a successful therapy for a wide variety of
diseases affecting the hematopoietic and lymphoid
systems.
SUMMARY
• The adaptive immune system is able to eradicate or
prevent the growth of tumors.
• Tumors may induce antibody, CD4þ T cell, and CD8þ
T cell responses, but CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL) killing of tumor cells appears to be the most
important antitumor effector mechanism.
• Most cancer antigens that induce T cell responses are
neoantigens encoded by randomly mutated genes
(passenger mutations), which do not contribute to
the malignant phenotype of the cancer cells. Other
tumor antigens include products of oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes, overexpressed or aberrantly
expressed structurally normal molecules, and prod-
ucts of oncogenic viruses.
• CTLs recognize mutant peptides derived from tumor
antigens displayed by class I major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules. The induction of CTL re-
sponses against tumor antigens involves ingestion of
tumor cells or their antigens by dendritic cells,
cross-presentation of the antigens to naive CD8þ
T cells, activation of the T cells and differentiation
into CTLs, CTL migration from the blood into
tumors, CTL recognition of the tumor antigens on
the tumor cells, and killing of the tumor cells.
• Tumors may evade immune responses by losing
expression of their antigens, shutting off expression
of MHC molecules or molecules involved in antigen
processing, expressing ligands for T cell inhibitory
receptors,
and
inducing
regulatory
T
cells
or
secreting cytokines that suppress immune responses.
• CAR-T cell immunotherapy is a breakthrough
approach now in clinical practice. CAR-T cells are
generated in vitro by transducing a cancer patient’s
T cells to express a recombinant receptor with an
antibody-like binding site for a tumor antigen and
a cytoplasmic tail with potent T cell signaling func-
tions. Adoptive transfer of CAR-T cells back into pa-
tients has been successful in treating B cellederived
leukemias, myelomas, and lymphomas.
• Immune checkpoint blockade is the major cancer
immunotherapy strategy in current practice. Mono-
clonal antibodies that block the function of T cell
inhibitory
molecules,
such
as
cytotoxic
T-
lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed
cell death protein 1 (PD-1), are injected into the pa-
tient, which enhances the activation of tumor-
speciﬁc T cells by tumor antigens. This approach
has been highly successful in treating patients with
many kinds of advanced cancers, but only 15% to
40% of patients with different cancers respond,
many tumor types are unresponsive, and many pa-
tients develop autoimmune side effects.
• Personalized neoantigen vaccines are now in clinical
trials. The creation of these vaccines relies on cancer
genome sequencing to identify neoantigen peptides
unique to an individual patient’s tumor, which
bind to that patient’s MHC molecules.
• Organ and tissue transplantation from one individ-
ual to another is widely used to treat many diseases,
but a major barrier to successful transplantation of
foreign tissues is rejection by adaptive immune re-
sponses, including CD8þ CTLs, CD4þ helper T cells,
and antibodies.
• The most important antigens that stimulate graft
rejection are allogeneic MHC molecules, which
resemble peptide-loaded self MHC molecules that
the graft recipient’s T cells can recognize. Allogeneic
MHC molecules are either presented by graft
antigen-presenting cells without processing to recip-
ient T cells (direct presentation), or are processed
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
225
 
and presented as peptides bound to self MHC by
host APCs (indirect presentation).
• Grafts may be rejected by different mechanisms. Hy-
peracute rejection is mediated by preformed anti-
bodies
to
blood
group
antigens
or
human
leukocyte antigen molecules, which cause endothelial
injury and thrombosis of blood vessels in the graft.
Acute rejection is mediated by T cells, which injure
graft cells and endothelium, and by antibodies that
bind to the endothelium. Chronic rejection is caused
by T cells that produce cytokines that stimulate
growth of vascular smooth muscle cells and tissue
ﬁbroblasts.
• Treatment for graft rejection is designed to sup-
press T cell responses and inﬂammation. The
mainstay of treatment has been immunosuppressive
drugs, including calcineurin inhibitors, molecular
target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, and many
others.
• Blood cell transfusion is the oldest and most widely
used form of transplantation and requires ABO
blood group compatibility of donor and recipient.
ABO blood group antigens are sugars expressed on
the surfaces of red blood cells, endothelial cells,
and other cells, and humans produce natural anti-
bodies speciﬁc for the ABO antigens they do not ex-
press, which can destroy transfused blood cells from
incompatible donors.
• Hematopoietic stem cell transplants are widely used to
treat cancers of blood cells and to replace defective
components of the immune or hematopoietic system.
These cell transplants elicit strong rejection reactions,
carry the risk for graft-versus-host disease, and often
lead to temporary immunodeﬁciency in recipients.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are the main types of tumor antigens that the
immune system reacts against?
2. What is the evidence that tumor rejection is an
immunologic phenomenon?
3. How do naive CD8þ T cells recognize tumor anti-
gens, and how are these cells activated to differen-
tiate into effector CTLs?
4. What are some of the mechanisms by which tumors
may evade the immune response?
5. What are some strategies for enhancing host im-
mune responses to tumor antigens?
6. Why donormalT cells, which recognizeforeignpeptide
antigens bound to self MHC molecules, react strongly
against the allogeneic MHC molecules of a graft?
7. What are the principal mechanisms of rejection of
allografts?
8. How is the likelihood of graft rejection reduced in
clinical transplantation?
9. What are some of the problems associated with the
transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
226
CHAPTER 10
Tumor and Transplantation Immunology
 
11
Hypersensitivity
Disorders Caused by Immune
Responses
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Types of Hypersensitivity Reactions, 227
Immediate Hypersensitivity, 229
Activation of Th2 Cells and Production of IgE
Antibody, 229
Activation of Mast Cells and Secretion of
Mediators, 232
Allergic Diseases and Therapy, 233
Diseases Caused by Antibodies Speciﬁc for Cell
and Tissue Antigens, 235
Mechanisms of Antibody-Mediated Tissue
Injury and Disease, 236
Examples and Treatment of Diseases Caused by
Cell-Speciﬁc or Tissue-Speciﬁc Antibodies, 236
Diseases Caused by Antigen-Antibody
Complexes, 237
Mechanisms and Examples of Immune
ComplexeMediated Diseases, 238
Diseases Caused by T Lymphocytes, 240
Etiology of T CelleMediated Diseases, 240
Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Tissue
Injury, 241
Examples and Therapy of T CelleMediated
Diseases, 242
Summary, 244
The concept that the immune system is required for
defending the host against infections has been emphasized
throughout this book. However, immune responses are
themselves capable of causing tissue injury and disease.
Injurious, or pathologic, immune reactions are called hy-
persensitivity reactions because they reﬂect excessive or
aberrantly directed immune responses. Hypersensitivity
reactions may occur in two situations. First, responses to
foreign antigens (microbes and noninfectious environ-
mental antigens) may cause tissue injury, especially if the
reactions are repetitive or poorly controlled. Second, the
immune responses may be directed against self (autolo-
gous) antigens, as a result of the failure of self-tolerance
(see Chapter 9). Responses against self antigens are
termed autoimmunity, and disorders caused by such re-
sponses are called autoimmune diseases.
This chapter describes the important features of hy-
persensitivity reactionsand theresulting diseases, focusing
on their pathogenesis. Their clinicopathologic features are
described only brieﬂy and can be found in other medical
textbooks. The following questions are addressed:
• What are the mechanisms of different types of hy-
persensitivity reactions?
• What are the major clinical and pathologic features
of diseases caused by these reactions?
• What principles underlie treatment of such diseases?
TYPES OF HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Hypersensitivity reactions are classiﬁed on the basis
of the principal immunologic mechanism that is
responsible for tissue injury and disease (Fig. 11.1).
227
 
Type of 
hypersensitivity
Pathologic immune mechanisms
Mechanisms of tissue 
injury and disease
Immediate 
hypersensitivity
(Type I)
Antibody-
mediated 
diseases
(Type II)
Immune 
complex- 
mediated 
diseases 
(Type III)
T cell- 
mediated 
diseases 
(Type IV)
Th2 cells, IgE antibody, mast cells, eosinophils
IgM, IgG antibodies against cell surface or 
extracellular matrix antigens
Immune complexes of circulating antigens 
and IgM or IgG antibodies deposited in 
vascular basement membrane
1. Cytokine-mediated inflammation (CD4+ T cells)
2. T cell-mediated killing (CD8+ CTLs)
Mast cell-derived 
mediators (vasoactive 
amines, lipid mediators, 
cytokines)
Cytokine-mediated 
inflammation (eosinophils, 
neutrophils)
Complement- and 
Fc receptor-mediated 
recruitment and 
activation of leukocytes 
(neutrophils, macrophages)
Opsonization and 
phagocytosis of cells
Abnormalities in cellular 
function, e.g. hormone
receptor signaling
Complement- and 
Fc receptor-mediated 
recruitment and 
activation of leukocytes
1. Macrophage activation, 
    cytokine-mediated 
    inflammation
2. Direct target cell lysis,
    cytokine-mediated 
    inflammation
Neutrophils
Antigen-antibody complex
Fc 
receptor
Complement
Inflammatory cell
Antibody
CD4+
T cell
CD8+ 
T cell
Macrophage
Mast cell
Mediators
IgE
Allergen
Blood 
vessel
wall
Cytokines
Fig. 11.1 Types of hypersensitivity reactions. In the four major types of hypersensitivity reactions, different
immune effector mechanisms cause tissue injury and disease. CTLs, Cytotoxic T lymphocytes; Ig, immuno-
globulin; Th2, T helper 2 cell.
228
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
 
We will use the informative descriptive classiﬁcations
throughout this chapter, but we will also indicate the
numerical designations for each type because they are
widely used.
• Immediate hypersensitivity, or type I hypersensitiv-
ity, is caused by the release of mediators from mast
cells. This reaction most often depends on the pro-
duction of immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibody against
environmental antigens and the binding of IgE to
mast cells in various tissues.
• Antibodies (typically IgG) that are directed against
cell or tissue antigens can damage these cells or tissues
or can impair their function. These diseases are said
to be antibody-mediated or type II hypersensitivity.
• Antibodies (also usually IgG) against soluble anti-
gens in the blood may form complexes with the an-
tigens, and the immune complexes may deposit in
blood vessels in various tissues, causing inﬂamma-
tion and tissue injury. Such disorders are called im-
mune complex diseases or type III hypersensitivity.
• Some diseases result from the reactions of T lympho-
cytes speciﬁc for self antigens or microbes in tissues.
These are T cellemediated diseases or type IV
hypersensitivity.
This classiﬁcation scheme is useful because it dis-
tinguishes the mechanisms of immune-mediated tissue
injury. In many human immunologic diseases, however,
the damage may result from a combination of antibody-
mediated and T cellemediated reactions, so it is often
difﬁcult to classify these diseases neatly into one type of
hypersensitivity.
IMMEDIATE HYPERSENSITIVITY
Immediate hypersensitivity is an IgE antibodyd and
mast celldmediated reaction to certain antigens that
causes rapid vascular leakage, excessive mucosal se-
cretions, and contraction of bronchial and intestinal
smooth muscle, often followed by inﬂammation. A
disorder in which IgE-mediated immediate hypersen-
sitivity is prominent is also called an allergy, or atopy,
and individuals with a propensity to develop these re-
actions are said to be atopic. The term immediate hy-
persensitivity arose from the rapid reaction to skin
challenge by allergens in previously sensitized in-
dividuals, but many allergies are associated with chronic
inﬂammation and are not only immediate reactions.
Common types of allergic disorders include hay fever,
food allergies, asthma, atopic dermatitis, and anaphy-
laxis. Allergies are the most frequent disorders of the
immune system, estimated to affect 10% to 20% of
people, and the incidence of allergic diseases has been
increasing, especially in industrialized societies.
The sequence of events in the development of
allergic reactions includes activation of T helper 2
(Th2) cells and interleukin-4 (IL-4)e and IL-13e
secreting follicular helper T (Tfh) cells, which stim-
ulate the production of IgE antibodies in response to
an antigen; binding of the IgE to IgE-speciﬁc Fc re-
ceptors of mast cells; and on subsequent exposure to
the antigen, cross-linking of the bound IgE by the
antigen, leading to activation of the mast cells and
release of various mediators (Fig. 11.2). Some of these
reactions consist of two phases (Fig. 11.3), depending
on the kinetics of production of different mediators.
Mast cell mediators cause a rapid increase in vascular
permeability and smooth muscle contraction, resulting
in many of the symptoms of these reactions. This
vascular and smooth muscle reaction may occur within
minutes of reintroduction of antigen into a previously
sensitized individual, hence the designation immediate.
Other mast cell mediators are cytokines that recruit
neutrophils and eosinophils to the site of the reaction
over several hours. This inﬂammatory component is
called the late-phase reaction, and it is mainly respon-
sible for the tissue injury that results from repeated
bouts of immediate hypersensitivity.
With this background, we proceed to a discussion of
the steps in immediate hypersensitivity reactions.
Activation of Th2 Cells and Production of IgE
Antibody
In individuals who are prone to allergies, exposure to
some antigens results in the activation of Th2 cells
and IL-4e and IL-13esecreting Tfh cells, and the
production of IgE antibody (see Fig. 11.2A). Most
individuals do not mount strong Th2 responses to
environmental antigens. For unknown reasons, when
some individuals encounter certain antigens, such as
proteins in pollen, certain foods, insect venoms, or
animal dander, or if they are treated with certain drugs,
such as penicillin, there is a strong response charac-
terized by production of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 by Th2
cells. Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) may pro-
duce IL-5 and IL-13 early, but their role in allergic
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
229
 
Epithelial barrier
ce
13–pro
fh 
Mediators
Differentiation
of Tfh cells and 
stimulation of IgE
class switching
in B cells
Differentiation
of Th2 cells
Production of IgE
Binding of IgE
to FcεRI on
mast cells
B cell
Dendritic
cell
IgE-secreting
plasma cell
IgE
Mast 
cell
Eosinophil
Repeat
exposure
 to allergen
Activation of
mast cell: release
of mediators
First exposure
 to allergen
FcεRI
Th2 cell
Immediate hypersensitivity
reaction (minutes after repeat
exposure to allergen)
Late phase reaction 
(2-24 hours after repeat
exposure to allergen)
Chronic
allergic
inflammation
Vasoactive amines,
lipid mediators
Cytokines
Epithelial barrier
Migration of Th2 cells
into tissue
IL-4– and
IL-13–producing
Tfh cell
Allergen (e.g., pollen)
IL-25,
IL-33,
TSLP
IL-4,
IL-5,
IL-13
Naive
T cell
Fig. 11.2 The sequence of events in allergic reactions. Immediate hypersensitivity reactions are initiated by
the introduction of an allergen, which, together with cytokines from epithelial cells, stimulates Th2 and IL-4/IL-
13eproducing Tfh cells. Immunoglobulin E (IgE) produced in response to antigen and Tfh cells binds to Fc
receptors (FcεRI) on mast cells, and subsequent exposure to the allergen activates the mast cells to secrete
the mediators that are responsible for the pathologic reactions of immediate hypersensitivity. Mast cells, Th2
cells, and other cells produce cytokines that elicit inﬂammation in the late-phase reaction and in chronic allergic
di
. 
disease is not established. The similar reaction of Th2
cells and ILC2s is collectively called a type 2 response.
Immediate hypersensitivity develops as a consequence
of the activation of Th2 and IL-4e and IL-13esecreting
Tfh cells in response to protein antigens or chemicals
that bind to proteins. Antigens that elicit allergic re-
actions are called allergens. Any atopic individual may
be allergic to one or more of these antigens. It is not
understood why only a small subset of common envi-
ronmental antigens elicit Th2-mediated reactions and
IgE production, or what characteristics of these antigens
are responsible for their behavior as allergens.
In some chronic allergic diseases, the initiating event
may be epithelial barrier injury, which induces epithe-
lial cells to secrete IL-25, IL-33, and thymic stromal
lymphopoietin (TSLP), cytokines that induce type 2
immune responses. Epithelial injury in the skin is
sometimes related to mutations in ﬁlaggrin, a kerati-
nocyte protein needed to maintain normal barrier
function. In the bronchial tree of the lung, viral in-
fections are considered a potential cause of the initial
injury. IL-25, IL-33, and TSLP activate ILC2s to pro-
duce IL-5 and IL-13, and dendritic cells (DCs) exposed
to these cytokines drive differentiation of naive T cells
in the lymph nodes toward Th2 and IL-4e or IL-13e
producing Tfh cells.
In secondary lymphoid organs, IL-4 and IL-13
secreted by Tfh cells stimulate B lymphocytes to switch
to IgE-producing cells that differentiate into plasma cells.
As a result, atopic individuals produce large amounts of
IgE antibody in response to antigens that do not elicit
IgE responses in other people. IL-4 and IL-13 secreted by
Th2 cells induce some of the responses of tissues in
allergic reactions, such as increased intestinal motility
and excess mucus secretions. Th2 cells also secrete IL-5,
which promotes eosinophilic inﬂammation that is
characteristic of tissues affected by allergic diseases.
The
propensity
for
differentiation
of
antigen-
activated T cells to IL-4e and IL-5eproducing effector
T cells, and resulting atopic diseases such as asthma, has
a strong genetic basis. A major known risk for devel-
oping allergies is a family history of atopic disease, and
gene association studies indicate that many different
genes play contributory roles. Some of these genes
encode cytokines or receptors known to be involved in
T and B lymphocyte responses, including IL-4, IL-5,
and IL-13, and the IL-4 receptor; how these gene var-
iants alter lymphocyte function or expression and
function of cytokines that contribute to atopic diseases
is not known.
Various environmental factors have a profound in-
ﬂuence on the tendency to develop allergies. In indus-
trialized societies, air pollutants may contain many
potential allergens. As mentioned earlier, viral infections
of the respiratory tract promote the development of
allergic responses. By contrast, some infections and
Mast cell
degranulation
Vascular
congestion
Eosinophils
Edema
B
A
Mast cell
degranulation
Vascular
congestion
Edema
Eosinophils
Clinical
manifestations
0
1
4
8
12
16
20
Hours after allergen exposure
Late phase
reaction
Immediate
Allergen
exposure
C
Fig. 11.3 Phases of allergic reactions. A, Kinetics of the immediate and late-phase reactions. The immediate
vascular and smooth muscle reaction to allergen develops within minutes after challenge (allergen exposure in
a previously sensitized individual), and the late-phase reaction develops 2 to 24 hours later. B, Morphology of
the immediate reaction is characterized by vasodilation, congestion, and edema. C, The late-phase reaction is
characterized by an inﬂammatory inﬁltrate rich in eosinophils, neutrophils, and T cells. (Micrographs courtesy
the late Dr. Daniel Friend, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
231
 
allergen exposures in early childhood may reduce the
development of subsequent allergic disease. This has led
to the hygiene hypothesis, which proposes that higher
levels of exposure to microbes and allergens in early life
results in less allergy (and autoimmunity) later. The
mechanism responsible for this effect, and even its sig-
niﬁcance, are unclear. Environmental pollution and
reduced early life exposure to microbes and allergens
may account for the increasing incidence of allergic
diseases in industrialized countries. An example of the
protective effect of early exposure to allergens is seen in
infants and young children given small amounts of
peanut-containing foods; this practice reduces the inci-
dence of peanut allergy later in life.
Activation of Mast Cells and Secretion of
Mediators
IgE antibody produced in response to an allergen binds
to high-afﬁnity Fc receptors, speciﬁc for the ε heavy
chain, that are expressed on mast cells (see Fig. 11.2B).
In an atopic individual, mast cells are coated with IgE
antibody speciﬁc for the antigen(s) to which the indi-
vidual is allergic. This process of coating mast cells with
IgE is called sensitization, because it makes the mast cells
sensitive to activation by subsequent encounter with that
antigen. In nonallergic individuals, by contrast, mast
cells may carry IgE molecules of many different speci-
ﬁcities because many antigens may elicit small IgE re-
sponses, and the amount of IgE speciﬁc for any one
antigen is not enough to cause immediate hypersensi-
tivity reactions upon exposure to that antigen.
Mast cells are present in all connective tissues, espe-
cially under epithelia, and they are usually locatedadjacent
to blood vessels. Which of the body’s mast cells are acti-
vated by binding of an allergen often depends on the route
of entry of the allergen. For example, inhaled allergens
activate mast cells in the submucosal tissues of the bron-
chus, whereas ingested allergens activate mast cells in the
wall of the intestine. Allergens that enter the blood via
absorption from the intestine or by direct injection may be
delivered to all tissues, resulting in systemic mast cell
activation.
The high-afﬁnity receptor for IgE, called FcεRI,
consists of three polypeptide chains, one of which binds
the Fc portion of the ε heavy chain very strongly, with a
Kd of approximately 1011 M. (The concentration of
IgE in the plasma is approximately 109 M, which
explains why even in nonallergic individuals, mast cells
are always coated with IgE bound to FcεRI.) The other
two chains of the receptor are signaling proteins. The
same FcεRI is also present on basophils, which are
circulating cells with many of the features of mast cells,
but normally the number of basophils in the blood is
very low and they are not present in tissues, so their role
in immediate hypersensitivity is not as well established
as the role of mast cells.
When mast cells sensitized by IgE are exposed to the
allergen, they are activated to secrete inﬂammatory
mediators (Fig. 11.4). Mast cell activation results from
binding of the allergen to two or more IgE antibodies on
the cell. When this happens, the FcεRI molecules that are
carrying the IgE are cross-linked, triggering biochemical
signals from the signal-transducing chains of FcεRI. The
signals lead to the release of inﬂammatory mediators.
The most important mediators produced by mast
cells are vasoactive amines and proteases stored in
and released from granules, products of arachidonic
acid metabolism, and cytokines (see Fig. 11.4). These
mediators have different actions. The major amine,
histamine, causes increased vascular permeability and
vasodilation, leading to the leakage of ﬂuid and plasma
proteins into tissues, and stimulates the transient
contraction of bronchial and intestinal smooth muscle.
Proteases may damage local tissues. Arachidonic acid
metabolites
include
prostaglandins,
which
cause
vascular dilation, and leukotrienes, which stimulate
prolonged bronchial smooth muscle contraction. Cy-
tokines induce local inﬂammation (the late-phase re-
action, described next). Thus, mast cell mediators are
responsible for acute vascular and smooth muscle re-
actions and more prolonged inﬂammation, the hall-
marks of allergy.
Cytokines produced by mast cells stimulate the
recruitment of leukocytes, which cause the late-phase
reaction. The principal leukocytes involved in this re-
action are eosinophils, neutrophils, and Th2 cells. Mast
cellederived tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-4
promote neutrophil- and eosinophil-rich inﬂammation.
Chemokines produced by mast cells and by epithelial
cells in the tissues also contribute to leukocyte recruit-
ment. Eosinophils and neutrophils liberate proteases,
which cause tissue damage, and Th2 cells may exacerbate
the reaction by producing more cytokines. Eosinophils
are prominent in many allergic reactions and are an
important cause of tissue injury in these reactions. These
232
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
 
cells are activated by the cytokine IL-5, which is pro-
duced by Th2 cells and ILC2s.
Allergic Diseases and Therapy
Immediate hypersensitivity reactions have diverse
clinical and pathologic features, all of which are
attributable to mediators produced by mast cells in
different amounts and in different tissues (Fig. 11.5).
• Some manifestations of allergy, such as rhinitis and
sinusitis, which are components of hay fever, are
reactions to inhaled allergens, such as proteins in
the pollen of many plants. Mast cells in the nasal
mucosa produce histamine, and Th2 cells produce
IL-13; these two mediators cause increased produc-
tion of mucus. Late-phase reactions may lead to
more prolonged inﬂammation.
• In food allergies, ingested allergens trigger mast cell
degranulation, and the released histamine and other
mediators causes increased peristalsis, resulting in
vomiting and diarrhea.
P
P
P
P
FcεRI
Cytokines
Enzymatic
modification of
arachidonic acid
Granule
exocytosis
Transcriptional
activation of 
cytokine genes
Vascular
dilation,
smooth
muscle
contraction
Tissue
damage
Vascular
dilation
Smooth
muscle
contraction
Inflammation
(leukocyte
recruitment)
Vasoactive
amines
Proteases
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes
Cytokines,
e.g. TNF
Signaling pathways
Granule with 
pre-formed 
mediators
Lipid 
mediators
Allergen
Signaling 
chains 
of FcεRI
ITAM
Secretion
Secretion
Fig. 11.4 Production and actions of mast cell mediators. Cross-linking of IgE on a mast cell by an allergen
stimulates phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) in the signaling chains
of the IgE Fc receptor (FcεRI), which then initiates multiple signaling pathways. These signaling pathways
stimulate the release of mast cell granule contents (amines, proteases), the synthesis of arachidonic acid
metabolites (prostaglandins, leukotrienes), and the synthesis of various cytokines. TNF, Tumor necrosis factor.
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
233
 
• Asthma is a clinical syndrome characterized by dif-
ﬁculty in breathing, cough, and wheezing, due to
intermittent obstruction of expiratory airﬂow. The
most common cause of asthma is respiratory allergy
in which inhaled allergens stimulate bronchial mast
cells to release mediators, including leukotrienes,
which cause repeated bouts of bronchial constriction
and airway obstruction. In chronic asthma, large
numbers of eosinophils accumulate in the bronchial
mucosa, excessive secretion of mucus occurs in the
airways, and the bronchi are constricted because
bronchial smooth muscle becomes hyperreactive to
various stimuli and hypertrophied over time. Some
cases of asthma are not associated with IgE produc-
tion and may be triggered by cold or exercise, which
cause mast cell degranulation in some people by
poorly understood mechanisms.
• Atopic dermatitis (commonly called eczema) is
characterized by ﬂares of itchy red exudative papules
and chronically dry scaly skin. Defective skin barrier
function (e.g., associated with ﬁlaggrin mutations)
results in frequent colonization by Staphylococcus
aureus and the activation of keratinocytes to secrete cy-
tokines that promote type 2 immune responses. Pa-
tients with eczema often go on to develop chronic
late-phase reactions in the skin, and children with
eczema are at increased risk for developing food al-
lergies and asthma. The occurrence of these three
allergic reactionsdatopic dermatitis, food allergy, and
asthmadin the same patient is sometimes called the
atopic triad, and their sequential development, starting
from childhood, is known as the atopic march.
• The most severe form of immediate hypersensitivity
is anaphylaxis, a systemic reaction characterized by
edema in many tissues, including the larynx, accom-
panied by a fall in blood pressure (anaphylactic
shock) and hypoxemia due to airway obstruction
by laryngeal edema, mucus plugging, and broncho-
spasm. Some of the most frequent inducers of
anaphylaxis include bee stings, injected or ingested
penicillin-family antibiotics, and ingested nuts or
shellﬁsh. The reaction is caused by widespread
mast cell degranulation in response to the systemic
distribution of the antigen, and it is life threatening
because of the sudden fall in blood pressure and
airway obstruction.
The therapy for immediate hypersensitivity dis-
eases is aimed at inhibiting mast cell degranulation,
antagonizing the effects of mast cell mediators, and
reducing inﬂammation (Fig. 11.6). Common drugs
include antihistamines for hay fever; inhaled b-adren-
ergic agonists, leukotriene and prostaglandin antago-
nists, and corticosteroids that relax bronchial smooth
muscles and reduce airway inﬂammation in asthma;
and epinephrine in anaphylaxis. Many patients beneﬁt
from repeated administration of small doses of aller-
gens, called desensitization or allergen-speciﬁc immu-
notherapy. This treatment may work by changing the
T cell response away from Th2 dominance or the
antibody response away from IgE, by inducing toler-
ance in allergen-speciﬁc T cells, or by stimulating reg-
ulatory T cells (Tregs). Monoclonal antibody drugs that
block IgE binding to their receptors on mast cells or
block various cytokines or their receptors, including IL-
4, IL-5, TSLP, and IL-33, are now approved for the
treatment
of some forms of asthma and atopic
dermatitis.
Clinical 
syndrome
Clinical and
pathological 
manifestations
Allergic rhinitis, 
sinusitis
(hay fever)
Food allergies
Bronchial 
asthma
Anaphylaxis 
(may be 
caused by
drugs, bee 
sting, food)
Increased mucus 
secretion; inflammation 
of upper airways, sinuses
Increased peristalsis due 
to contraction of 
intestinal muscles
Airway obstruction caused
by bronchial smooth 
muscle hyperactivity;
inflammation and
tissue injury
Fall in blood pressure 
(shock) caused by 
vascular dilation; 
airway obstruction due to 
laryngeal edema and
bronchial constriction
Atopic
dermatitis
Itchy red exudative
papules and chronically
dry scaly skin
Fig. 11.5 Clinical manifestations of immediate hypersensi-
tivity reactions. Immediate hypersensitivity may be manifested
in many other ways, as in development of skin lesions
(e.g., urticaria, eczema).
234
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
 
Before concluding the discussion of immediate hy-
persensitivity, it is important to address the question of
why evolution has preserved an IgE antibodye and
mast cellemediated immune response whose major
effects are pathologic. There is no deﬁnitive answer to
this puzzle, but immediate hypersensitivity reactions
likely evolved to protect against pathogens or toxins. It
is known that eosinophils are important mediators of
defense against helminthic infections, and mast cells
play a role in innate immunity against some bacteria
and in destroying venomous toxins produced by
arachnids and snakes.
DISEASES CAUSED BY ANTIBODIES
SPECIFIC FOR CELL AND TISSUE ANTIGENS
Antibodies, typically of the IgG class, may cause
disease, called type II hypersensitivity disorders, by
binding to their target antigens in different tissues.
Antibodies against cells or extracellular matrix com-
ponents may deposit in any tissue that expresses the
relevant target antigen; thus, diseases caused by such
antibodies are usually speciﬁc for a particular tissue.
The antibodies that cause disease are most often
autoantibodies against self antigens. The production
Syndrome
Therapy
Mechanism of action
Anaphylaxis 
Asthma
Various 
allergic 
diseases
Epinephrine
Corticosteroids
Leukotriene antagonists
Beta adrenergic receptor
antagonists
Desensitization 
(repeated administration 
of low doses of allergens)
Causes vascular smooth 
muscle contraction,
increases cardiac output 
(to counter shock), and 
inhibits bronchial smooth 
muscle cell contraction
Reduce inflammation
Relax bronchial smooth
muscle and reduce
inflammation
Relax bronchial 
smooth muscles
Unknown; may inhibit IgE 
production and increase 
production of other Ig 
isotypes; may induce 
T cell tolerance
Anti-IgE antibody 
Neutralize and 
eliminate IgE
Antihistamines
Block actions of 
histamine on vessels and 
smooth muscles
Cromolyn
Inhibits mast cell 
degranulation
Antibodies that block
cytokines and their 
receptors: TSLP, IL-33,
IL-4, IL-5R (asthma); 
IL-4R (atopic dermatitis)
Block cytokine-driven
inflammation
Fig. 11.6 Treatment of immediate hypersensitivity reactions. The table summarizes the principal mecha-
nisms of action of currently used therapies for allergic disorders. Ig, Immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; TSLP,
thymic stromal lymphopoietin.
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
235
 
of autoantibodies results from a failure of self-
tolerance. In Chapter 9, we discussed the mecha-
nisms by which self-tolerance may fail, but why this
happens in most human autoimmune diseases is still
not understood.
Mechanisms of Antibody-Mediated Tissue
Injury and Disease
Antibodies speciﬁc for cell and tissue antigens may
deposit in tissues and cause injury by inducing
local inﬂammation, by inducing phagocytosis and
destruction of antibody-coated cells, or by interfering
with normal cellular functions (Fig. 11.7).
• Inﬂammation. Antibodies against tissue antigens
induce inﬂammation by attracting and activating
leukocytes. When IgG antibodies of the IgG1 and
IgG3 subclasses are cross-linked by antigens, they
bind to neutrophil and macrophage Fc receptors
and activate these leukocytes, resulting in inﬂam-
mation (see Chapter 8). The same antibodies as
well as IgM, when bound to antigens, activate the
complement system by the classical pathway, result-
ing in the production of complement by-products
that recruit leukocytes and induce inﬂammation.
When leukocytes are activated at sites of antibody
deposition, these cells release reactive oxygen spe-
cies and lysosomal enzymes that damage the adja-
cent tissues.
• Opsonization and phagocytosis. If antibodies bind
to antigens on cells, such as erythrocytes and plate-
lets, the cells are opsonized and may be ingested
and destroyed by host phagocytes.
• Abnormal cellular responses. Some antibodies may
cause disease without directly inducing tissue injury.
For example, in pernicious anemia, autoantibodies
speciﬁc for intrinsic factor, a protein required for ab-
sorption of vitamin B12, decrease the intestinal up-
take of this vitamin, leading to a multisystem
disease in which anemia is a major component.
Other antibodies may directly activate receptors,
mimicking
their
physiologic
ligands.
The
only
known example is a form of hyperthyroidism called
Graves disease, in which antibodies against the re-
ceptor for thyroid-stimulating hormone activate thy-
roid cells even in the absence of the hormone.
Examples and Treatment of Diseases Caused
by Cell-Specific or Tissue-Specific Antibodies
Antibodies speciﬁc for cell and tissue antigens are the
cause ofmany human diseases involving blood cells, heart,
kidney, lung, and skin (Fig. 11.8). Examples of antitissue
antibodies are those that react with the glomerular base-
ment membrane and induce inﬂammation, a form of
glomerulonephritis. Antibodies against cells include those
that opsonize blood cells and targetthem for phagocytosis,
as in autoimmune hemolytic anemia (red cell destruction)
and autoimmune thrombocytopenia (destruction of
platelets).Antibodiesthatinterferewithhormonesortheir
receptors were mentioned earlier. In most of these cases,
the antibodies are autoantibodies, but less commonly,
antibodies produced against a microbe may cross-react
with an antigen in the tissues. For instance, in rare
instances, streptococcal infection stimulates the produc-
tion of antibacterial antibodies that cross-react with anti-
gens in the heart, producing the cardiac inﬂammation that
is characteristic of rheumatic fever.
Therapy for antibody-mediated diseases is intended
mainly to limit inﬂammation and its injurious conse-
quences with drugs such as corticosteroids. In severe
cases, plasmapheresis is used to reduce levels of circu-
lating antibodies. In hemolytic anemia and thrombo-
cytopenia, splenectomy is of clinical beneﬁt because the
spleen is the major organ in which opsonized blood cells
are phagocytosed. Some of these diseases respond to
treatment with intravenous IgG (IVIG) pooled from
healthy donors. How IVIG works is not known; it may
bind to the inhibitory Fc receptor on myeloid cells and B
cells and thus block activation of these cells (see
Fig. 7.15), or it may reduce the half-life of pathogenic
antibodies by competing for binding to the neonatal Fc
receptor in endothelial cells and macrophages (see
Fig. 8.2). A monoclonal antibody that blocks the com-
plement protein C5 is used to treat myasthenia gravis.
Treatment of patients with an antibody speciﬁc for
CD20, a surface protein of mature B cells, results in
depletion of the B cells. Anti-CD20 was ﬁrst used for
treating B cellederived lymphomas and leukemias but is
also now used for some autoimmune diseases. A syn-
thetic Fc portion of IgG that binds to FcRn and thereby
increases clearance of IgG, including autoantibodies (see
Chapter 8), is approved for the treatment of generalized
myasthenia gravis. Other approaches in development for
236
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
 
inhibiting the production of autoantibodies include
treating patients with antibodies that block CD40 or its
ligand and thus inhibit helper T celledependent B cell
activation, as well as antibodies to block cytokines that
promote the survival of B cells and plasma cells. There is
also interest in inducing tolerance in cases in which the
autoantigens are known.
DISEASES CAUSED BY ANTIGEN-ANTIBODY
COMPLEXES
Antibodies(typicallyIgG)maycausediseasebyforming
immune complexes that deposit in blood vessels
(Fig. 11.9). Many acute and chronic hypersensitivity
disorders are caused by, or are associated with, immune
Neutrophil
activation
A Complement- and Fc receptor–mediated inflammation
Complement
by-products
(C5a, C3a)
Neutrophil
activation
Inflammation and
tissue injury
Abnormal physiologic responses without cell/tissue injury
Antibody against
TSH receptor
Thyroid
epithelial
cell
Thyroid hormones
Antibody
stimulates receptor
without hormone
Opsonization and phagocytosis
Fc receptor
C3b receptor
Phagocyte
Phagocytosed cell
Phagocytosis
B
TSH
receptor
Fc 
receptors
Neutrophil 
enzymes, 
reactive
oxygen 
species
Complement activation
C
C3b
Complement
activation
Antibody
Antigen
Intrinsic factor (IF)
Vitamin B12 
IF receptor
Antibody
against IF
Intestinal
epithelial
cell
Portal
vein
Antibody inhibits vitamin B12 binding
to IF which prevents B12 absorption 
Fig. 11.7 Pathogenesis of diseases caused by antibodies specific for tissue or cell antigens. Antibodies can
cause disease by (A) inducing inﬂammation at the site of deposition, (B) opsonizing cells (such as red cells) for
phagocytosis, and (C) interfering with normal cellular functions, such as hormone receptor signaling or ab-
sorption of a necessary dietary factor. TSH, Thyroid-stimulating hormone.
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
237
 
complexes (Fig. 11.10); these are called type III hyper-
sensitivity disorders.
Mechanisms and Examples of Immune
ComplexeMediated Diseases
Antigen-antibody
complexes,
which
are
produced
during normal immune responses, cause disease only
when they are formed in excessive amounts, are not
efﬁciently removed by phagocytes, and become depos-
ited in tissues. Complexes containing positively charged
antigens are particularly pathogenic because they bind
avidly to negatively charged components of the base-
ment membranes of blood vessels and kidney glomeruli.
Immune complexes usually deposit in blood vessels,
especially vessels through which plasma is ﬁltered at high
Autoimmune 
(idiopathic) 
thrombocytopenic 
purpura
Autoimmune 
hemolytic anemia
Pemphigus 
vulgaris
Goodpasture’s 
syndrome
Rheumatic fever
Myasthenia gravis
Graves’ disease 
(hyperthyroidism)
Pernicious anemia
Bleeding
Hemolysis, 
anemia
Skin vesicles 
(bullae)
Nephritis, 
lung hemorrhage
Myocarditis, 
arthritis
Muscle weakness, 
paralysis
Hyperthyroidism
Anemia due
to abnormal
erythropoiesis,
nerve damage
Platelet membrane 
proteins (gpIIb/IIIa 
integrin)
Erythrocyte membrane 
proteins (Rh blood group 
antigens, I antigen)
Proteins in intercellular
junctions of epidermal 
cells (epidermal cadherin)
Protein in basement 
membranes of kidney 
glomeruli and 
lung alveoli
Streptococcal cell wall 
antigen; antibody cross-
reacts with myocardial 
antigen
Acetylcholine receptor
Thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH) receptor
Intrinsic factor, 
gastric parietal cells
Opsonization and 
phagocytosis 
of platelets
Opsonization and 
phagocytosis 
of erythrocytes
Antibody-mediated 
disruption of 
intercellular adhesions
Complement and 
Fc receptor-mediated 
inflammation
Inflammation, 
macrophage activation
Antibody inhibits 
acetycholine binding, 
complement-mediated
damage to neuro-
muscular junction
Antibody-mediated 
stimulation of 
TSH receptors 
Neutralization of 
intrinsic factor and 
damage to gastric
parietal cells causing
decreased absorption 
of vitamin B12
Antibody-mediated
disease
Target antigen 
Mechanisms 
of disease
Clinicopathologic 
manifestations
Fig. 11.8 Human antibody-mediated diseases (type II hypersensitivity). The ﬁgure lists examples of human
diseases caused by antibodies. In most of these diseases, the role of antibodies is inferred from the detection of
antibodies in the blood or the lesions, and in some cases by similarities with experimental models in which the
involvement of antibodies can be formally established by transfer studies. In some of these diseases, concurrent
T cellemediated tissue damage also occurs. TSH, Thyroid-stimulating hormone.
238
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
 
pressure (e.g., in renal glomeruli and joint synovium),
but vessels in any organ may be affected. Therefore, in
contrast to diseases caused by antibodies speciﬁc for
particular cell or tissue antigens, immune complex dis-
eases tend to be systemic and often manifest as wide-
spread vasculitis involving sites that are particularly
susceptible to immune complex deposition, such as
kidneys and joints. Once deposited in the vessel walls,
the Fc regions of the antibodies activate complement and
bind Fc receptors on neutrophils, activating the cells to
release damaging proteases and reactive oxygen species.
This inﬂammatory response within the vessel wall, called
vasculitis, may cause local hemorrhage or thrombosis
leading
to
ischemic
tissue
injury.
In
the
kidney
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
Polyarteritis
nodosa
Post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis
DNA, nucleoproteins,
others
In some cases,
microbial antigens
(e.g., Hepatitis B virus
surface antigen); most
cases unknown
Streptococcal
cell wall antigen(s)
Nephritis, arthritis,
vasculitis
Nephritis
Immune complex
disease
Antibody 
specificity
Clinicopathologic 
manifestations
Vasculitis
Serum sickness
(clinical and
experimental)
Arthus reaction
(experimental)
Various protein
antigens
Various protein
antigens
Cutaneous
vasculitis
Systemic vasculitis,
nephritis, arthritis
Fig. 11.10 Immune complex diseases (type III hypersensitivity). Examples of human diseases caused by the
deposition of immune complexes, as well as two experimental models. In the diseases, immune complexes
are detected in the blood or in the tissues that are the sites of injury. In all the disorders, injury is caused by
complement-mediated and Fc receptoremediated inﬂammation.
Circulating immune
complexes
Blood
vessel
B
A
Complement
Neutrophils
Thrombus
Immune complex
deposited in
vessel wall
Fig. 11.9 Pathogenesis of immune complexemediated diseases. Immune complexes are formed in the
circulation and deposit in blood vessels, where they elicit complement- and Fc receptoremediated
inﬂammation.
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
239
 
glomerulus,
glomerulonephritis
can
impair
normal
ﬁltration function, leading to renal failure.
The ﬁrst immune complex disease studied was
serum
sickness,
seen
in
subjects
who
received
antitoxin-containing serum from immunized animals
for the treatment of infections. Some of these treated
individuals subsequently developed a systemic inﬂam-
matory disease with fever, rashes, and arthritis. The
disease was caused by antibodies made against the
injected animal proteins and formation of immune
complexes with these foreign proteins, followed by
deposition of the complexes in various tissues. This
illness could be recreated in experimental animals by
systemic administration of a protein antigen, which
elicits an antibody response and leads to the formation
of circulating immune complexes. This can occur as a
complication of any therapy involving injection of
foreign proteins, such as antibodies against microbial
toxins, snake venoms, or T cells, that are usually made
in goats or rabbits, and even some humanized mono-
clonal antibodies that are used to treat different diseases
and may differ only slightly from normal human Ig.
A localized immune complex reaction called the
Arthus reaction was ﬁrst studied in experimental ani-
mals. It is induced by subcutaneous administration of a
protein antigen to a previously immunized animal; it
results in the formation of immune complexes at the site
of antigen injection and a local vasculitis.
In human immune complex diseases, the anti-
bodies may be speciﬁc for self antigens or microbial
antigens. In several systemic autoimmune diseases,
many of the clinical manifestations are caused by
vascular injury when complexes of the antibodies and
self antigens deposit in vessels in different organs. For
example, in systemic lupus erythematosus, immune
complexes of self DNA and anti-DNA antibodies can
deposit in the blood vessels of almost any organ,
causing vasculitis and impaired blood ﬂow, leading to a
multitude of different organ pathologies and symptoms.
Several immune complex diseases are initiated by in-
fections. For example, in response to some streptococcal
infections, individuals make antistreptococcal anti-
bodies that form complexes with the bacterial antigens.
These complexes deposit in kidney glomeruli, or the
antibodies form complexes with bacterial antigens
planted in the glomeruli, causing an inﬂammatory
process
called
poststreptococcal
glomerulonephritis
that can lead to renal failure. Other immune complex
diseases caused by complexes of antimicrobial anti-
bodies and microbial antigens lead to vasculitis. This
may occur in patients with chronic infections with
certain viruses (e.g., the hepatitis virus) or parasites
(e.g., malaria).
The current mainstay of therapy for immune com-
plex diseases are antiinﬂammatory and immunosup-
pressive drugs, mainly steroids.
DISEASES CAUSED BY T LYMPHOCYTES
T cells play a central role in chronic immunologic
diseases
in
which
inﬂammation
is
a
prominent
component. Many of the newly developed therapies
that have shown efﬁcacy in such diseases are drugs that
inhibit the recruitment and activities of T cells.
Etiology of T CelleMediated Diseases
The major causes of T cellemediated hypersensitivity
reactions
are
autoimmunity
and
exaggerated
or
persistent responses to microbial or other environ-
mental antigens. The autoimmune reactions usually are
directed against cellular antigens with restricted tissue
distribution. Therefore, T cellemediated autoimmune
diseases tend to be limited to a few organs and are not
systemic. Examples of T cellemediated hypersensitivity
reactions against environmental antigens include contact
sensitivity to chemicals (e.g., upon skin contact with
some therapeutic drugs, substances found in plants such
as poison ivy, and metals such as nickel in jewelry). In
these cases, the drugs or chemicals bind to and modify
self proteins in the skin, creating neoantigens that can be
recognized by T cells. Tissue injury may also accompany
T cell responses to microbes. For example, in tubercu-
losis, a T cellemediated immune response develops
against protein antigens of Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
and the response becomes chronic because the infection
is difﬁcult to eradicate. The resultant granulomatous
inﬂammation causes injury to tissues at the site of
infection.
ExcessivepolyclonalTcellactivationbycertainmicrobial
toxins produced by some bacteria and viruses can lead to
production of large amounts of inﬂammatory cytokines,
causing a syndrome similar to septic shock. These toxins are
called superantigens because they stimulate large numbers
of T cells. Superantigens bind to nonpolymorphic regions
of MHC molecules on antigen-presenting cells and simul-
taneously to invariant parts of T cell receptors on many
240
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
 
different clones of T cells, regardless of antigen speciﬁcity,
thereby activating these cells.
Mechanisms of T CelleMediated Tissue Injury
In T cellemediated diseases, tissue injury is caused
most often by inﬂammation induced by cytokines
that are produced mainly by CD4D T cells, and in
some cases by killing of host cells by CD8D cytotoxic
T lymphocytes (CTLs) (Fig. 11.11). These mechanisms
of tissue injury are the same as the mechanisms used by
T cells to eliminate cell-associated microbes.
CD4D T cells may react against cell or tissue antigens
and secrete cytokines that induce local inﬂammation and
activate macrophages. Different diseases may be associ-
ated with activation of Th1 and Th17 cells. Th1 cells are
the source of interferon-g (IFN-g), the principal
macrophage-activating cytokine, and Th17 cells are
responsible for the recruitment of leukocytes, including
neutrophils. The actual tissue injury in these diseases is
caused mainly by the macrophages and neutrophils.
The typical reaction mediated by T cell cytokines is
delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH), so called because it
occurs 24 to 48 hours after an individual previously
exposed to a protein antigen is challenged with the antigen
(i.e., the reaction is delayed). The delay occurs because it
takes a day ortwo for circulating effectorT lymphocytes to
home to the site of antigen challenge, respond to the an-
tigen at this site, and secrete cytokines that induce a
detectable reaction. DTH reactions are manifested by in-
ﬁltrates of T cells and monocytes in the tissues (Fig.11.12),
edema and ﬁbrin deposition caused by increased vascular
permeability in response to cytokines produced by CD4D
T cells, and tissue damage induced by leukocyte products,
mainly from macrophages that are activated by the T cells.
DTH reactions are often used to determine if people have
been previously exposed to and have responded to an
antigen. For example, a DTH reaction to a mycobacterial
antigen, puriﬁed protein derivative (PPD), applied to the
skin, is an indicator of past or active mycobacterial
infection.
A Cytokine-mediated inflammation
APC 
presenting
tissue 
antigen
CD4+
T cell
Cytokines
Inflammation
Tissue injury
B T cell-mediated cytotoxicity
CD8+ 
CTLs
Cell death and
tissue injury
Neutrophil 
enzymes,
reactive oxygen 
species
Normal 
cellular 
tissue
Fig. 11.11 Mechanisms of Tcellemediated tissue injury (type IV hypersensitivity). T cells may cause tissue
injury and disease by two mechanisms. A, Inﬂammation triggered by cytokines produced mainly by CD4þ
T cells in which tissue injury is caused by activated macrophages and neutrophils. B, Direct killing of target
cells is mediated by CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). APC, Antigen-presenting cell.
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
241
 
CD8D T cells speciﬁc for antigens in host cells may
directly kill these cells (e.g., in type 1 diabetes and auto-
immune myocarditis). CD8D T cells also produce cyto-
kines, including IFN-g that may induce inﬂammation in
some hypersensitivity diseases (e.g., contact sensitivity). In
many T cellemediated autoimmune diseases, both CD4D
T cells and CD8D T cells speciﬁc for self antigens are
present, and both contribute to tissue injury.
Examples and Therapy of T CelleMediated
Diseases
Many organ-speciﬁc autoimmune diseases in humans
are thought to be caused by T cells, based on the iden-
tiﬁcation of these cells in lesions and similarities with
animal models in which the diseases are known to be
T cell mediated (Fig. 11.13). These disorders are typically
chronic and progressive, in part because long-lived
4 hours
48 hours
a
b
B
A
Patient
1–2 weeks
intradermal 
injection
of microbial 
antigen
24–48 hours
Area of 
induration
and erythema
Infection
Sensitization:
primary 
infection or 
immunization
Challenge
DTH reaction
Fig. 11.12 Delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction in the skin. A, Individuals may be sensitized to an antigen
(e.g., mycobacterial protein) by infection or vaccination. Subsequent cutaneous challenge with the antigen
elicits a visible reaction (erythema, swelling) within 48 hours. B, A biopsy sample of the reaction shows peri-
vascular accumulation (cufﬁng) of mononuclear inﬂammatory cells (lymphocytes and macrophages), with
associated dermal edema and ﬁbrin deposition (a). Immunoperoxidase staining reveals a predominantly peri-
vascular cellular inﬁltrate that marks positively with anti-CD4 antibodies (b). DTH, Delayed-type hypersensitivity.
(B, Courtesy Dr. Louis Picker, Department of Pathology, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, OR.)
242
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
 
memory T cells are generated, and the inciting antigens,
such as tissue antigens or proteins expressed by persis-
tent microbes, are often not cleared. Also, tissue injury
causes release and alteration of self proteins, which may
result in reactions against these newly encountered
proteins. This phenomenon has been called epitope
spreading to indicate that the initial immune response
against one or a few self antigen epitopes may spread to
include responses against more self antigens.
The therapy for T cellemediated hypersensitivity dis-
orders is designed to reduce inﬂammation and to inhibit
T cell activation. The mainstay of treatment of such
diseases has been antiinﬂammatory steroids, but these
drugs have signiﬁcant side effects. The development of
more targeted therapies based on understanding of the
fundamental mechanisms of these diseases has been one of
the most impressive accomplishments of immunology.
Antagonists of inﬂammatory cytokines have proved to be
very effective in patients with various inﬂammatory and
autoimmune diseases. For example, monoclonal anti-
bodies that block TNF or the IL-6 receptor are now used to
treat rheumatoid arthritis; antibodies speciﬁc for IL-17, IL-
23, and TNF are used to treat psoriasis; and an antibody
that blocks the Th1- and Th17-inducing cytokines IL-12
Disease
Specificity of 
pathogenic T cells 
Clinicopathologic
manifestations
Type 1 diabetes
Rheumatoid 
arthritis
Multiple sclerosis
Crohn’s disease
Pancreatic islet 
antigens
Unknown antigens
in joint
Myelin proteins
Unknown, ? role of
intestinal microbes
Impaired glucose
metabolism, vascular
disease
Inflammation of
synovium and erosion
of cartilage and bone
in joints
Demyelination in the
central nervous 
system, sensory and
motor dysfunction
Inflammation of the
bowel wall; abdominal
pain, diarrhea,
hemorrhage
Psoriasis
Unknown
Chronic skin
inflammation
Chronic infections
(e.g., tuberculosis)
Contact sensitivity
(e.g. poison ivy,
drug reaction)
Microbial proteins
Modified skin proteins
Chronic 
(e.g., granulomatous)
inflammation
DTH reaction in skin,
rash
Fig. 11.13 Human Tcellemediated diseases. Diseases in which T cells play a dominant role in causing tissue
injury; antibodies and immune complexes may also contribute. Note that rheumatoid arthritis and type 1 diabetes
are autoimmune disorders. Crohn’s disease, an inﬂammatory bowel disease, is likely caused by reactions against
microbes in the intestine and may have a component of autoimmunity. The other diseases are caused by reactions
against foreign (microbial or environmental) antigens. In most of these diseases, the role of T cells is inferred from
the detection and isolation of T cells reactive with various antigens from the blood or lesions, and from the
similarity with experimental models in which the involvement of T cells has been established by a variety of ap-
proaches. The speciﬁcity of pathogenic T cells has been deﬁned in animal models and in some of the human
diseases. Although multiple sclerosis (MS) has long been considered a T cellemediated disease, the most suc-
cessful therapy for MS is depletion of B cells. Viral hepatitis and toxic shock syndrome are disorders in which
T cells play an important pathogenic role, but these are not considered examples of hypersensitivity. DTH,
Delayed-type hypersensitivity.
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
243
 
and IL-23 is used for inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Small
molecule
inhibitors
of
the
inﬂammatory
cytokine
signaling molecules Janus kinases (JAKs) are also
approved for all three diseases. Other agents developed to
inhibit T cell responses include drugs that block cos-
timulators such asB7. Insome diseasesthatare considered
to be T cellemediated, including multiple sclerosis and
rheumatoid arthritis, one effective therapy is the depletion
of B cells using anti-CD20. Whether the role of B cells in
these diseases is as a source of pathogenic antibodies or as
APCs for pathogenic T cells, especially memory cells, has
not been established. Clinical trials are underway to test
the efﬁcacy of transferring in vitro expanded Tregs and
administering IL-2 to expand endogenous Tregs for the
treatment of autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes
and lupus. Research is ongoing on methods for inducing
tolerance in pathogenic T cells.
SUMMARY
• Immune responses that cause tissue injury are called
hypersensitivity reactions, and the diseases caused by
these reactions are called hypersensitivity diseases.
• Hypersensitivity reactions may arise from uncon-
trolled or abnormal responses to foreign antigens
or autoimmune responses against self antigens.
• Hypersensitivity reactions are classiﬁed according to
the mechanism of tissue injury.
• Immediate hypersensitivity (type I, commonly called
allergy) is caused by the activation of T helper 2
(Th2) cells and interleukin-4 (IL-4)d and IL-13d
producing follicular helper (Tfh) cells and production
of immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibody against environ-
mental antigens or drugs (allergens), sensitization of
mast cells by the IgE, and degranulation of these
mast cells on subsequent encounter with the allergen.
• Clinicopathologic manifestations of immediate hy-
persensitivity result from the actions of mediators
secreted by the mast cells: amines increase vascular
permeability of and dilate blood vessels, arachidonic
acid metabolites cause bronchial smooth muscle
contraction, and cytokines induce inﬂammation,
the hallmark of the late-phase reaction. Treatment
of allergies is designed to inhibit the production of
mediators, antagonize their actions, and counteract
their effects on end organs.
• Antibodies against cell and tissue antigens may cause
tissue injury and disease (type II hypersensitivity).
IgM and IgG antibodies activate complement, which
promotes phagocytosis of cells to which they bind, in-
duces inﬂammation, and causes cell lysis. IgG also pro-
motes Fc receptoremediated phagocytosis of cells and
leukocyte recruitment. Antibodies may interfere with
the functions of cells by binding to essential molecules
and receptors.
• In immune complex diseases (type III hypersensitiv-
ity), antibodies may bind to circulating antigens to
form immune complexes, which deposit in vessels,
leading to inﬂammation in the vessel wall (vasculitis),
which secondarily causes tissue injury due to
impaired blood ﬂow.
• T cellemediated diseases (type IV hypersensitivity)
result from inﬂammation caused by cytokines pro-
duced by CD4þ Th1 and Th17 cells, or killing of
host cells by CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are the major types of hypersensitivity reactions?
2. What types of antigens may induce immune re-
sponses that cause hypersensitivity reactions?
3. What is the sequence of events in a typical immedi-
ate hypersensitivity reaction? What is the late-phase
reaction, and how is it caused?
4. What are some examples of immediate hypersensi-
tivity disorders, what is their pathogenesis, and
how are they treated?
5. How do antibodies cause tissue injury and disease?
6. What are some examples of diseases caused by anti-
bodiesspeciﬁc forcellsurfaceortissuematrixantigens?
7. How do immune complexes cause disease, and how
are the clinical manifestations different from most
diseases caused by antibodies speciﬁc for cell surface
or tissue matrix proteins?
8. What are some examples of diseases caused by
T cells, what is their pathogenesis, and what are their
principal clinical and pathologic manifestations?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
244
CHAPTER 11
Hypersensitivity
 
12
Immunodeﬁciency Diseases
Disorders Caused by Defective
Immunity
C H A P T E R O U T L I N E
Primary (Congenital) Immunodeﬁciencies, 246
Defects in Innate Immunity, 247
Defects in Lymphocyte Maturation, 248
Severe Combined Immunodeﬁciency
(SCID), 248
Selective B Cell Deﬁciencies, 249
Defects in Lymphocyte Activation and
Function, 250
Defects in B Cell Responses, 251
Defective Activation of T Lymphocytes, 253
Lymphocyte Abnormalities Associated with
Other Diseases, 253
Therapy of Primary Immunodeﬁciencies, 254
Acquired (Secondary) Immunodeﬁciencies, 254
Acquired Immunodeﬁciency Syndrome
(AIDS), 255
Human Immunodeﬁciency Virus (HIV), 255
Pathogenesis of AIDS, 255
Clinical Features of HIV Infection and
AIDS, 257
Therapy and Vaccination Strategies, 260
Summary, 260
Defects in the development and functions of the im-
mune system result in increased susceptibility to in-
fections. The infections may be newly acquired or the
reactivation of latent infections such as cytomegalo-
virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and tuberculosis, in
which the normal immune response keeps the infection
in check but does not eradicate it. These consequences
of defective immunity are predictable because, as
emphasized throughout this book, the normal function
of the immune system is to defend individuals against
infections. Disorders caused by defective immunity are
called immunodeﬁciency diseases. Some of these dis-
eases are also associated with increased incidence of
certain cancers and autoimmunity. Several immuno-
deﬁciencies result from mutations in single genes that
encode components of the immune system; these are
called primary (or congenital) immunodeﬁciencies.
Other defects in immunity may result from infections,
nutritional abnormalities, or medical treatments that
cause loss or inadequate function of various compo-
nents of the immune system; these are called acquired
(or secondary) immunodeﬁciencies.
In this chapter we describe the causes and patho-
genesis of immunodeﬁciencies. Among the acquired
diseases, we emphasize acquired immunodeﬁciency
syndrome (AIDS), which results from infection by
human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) and is one of the
most devastating health problems worldwide. We
address the following questions:
• What are the mechanisms by which immunity is
compromised in the most common primary immu-
nodeﬁciency diseases?
• How does HIV cause the clinical and pathologic ab-
normalities of AIDS?
245
 
• What approaches are being used to treat immunode-
ﬁciency diseases?
Information about the clinical features of these dis-
orders can be found in textbooks of pediatrics and
medicine.
PRIMARY (CONGENITAL)
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
Primary immunodeﬁciencies are diseases caused by
defects usually in only one or two genes in each disease
that lead to impaired maturation or function of
different components of the immune system. It is esti-
mated that as many as 1 in 500 individuals in the
United States and Europe suffer from congenital im-
mune deﬁciencies of varying severity. These immuno-
deﬁciencies share several features, the most common
being increased susceptibility to infections (Fig. 12.1).
Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases may, however,
differ considerably in clinical and pathologic manifes-
tations. Some of these disorders result in greatly
increased incidence of infections that may manifest
early
after
birth
and
may
be
fatal
unless
the
immunologic defects are corrected. Other primary im-
munodeﬁciencies lead to mild infections and may ﬁrst
be detected in adult life.
Mutations in over 450 different genes have been
identiﬁed as causes of over 400 primary immunodeﬁ-
ciency disorders. Although X-linked recessive immu-
nodeﬁciency
diseases
were
the
ﬁrst
primary
immunodeﬁciency disorders in which the genetic de-
fects were identiﬁed, the majority of primary immu-
nodeﬁciencies
exhibit
an
autosomal
recessive
inheritance.
Autosomal
recessive
alleles
are
often
detected in consanguineous families when the same
mutation is inherited from both parents. In other cases,
especially in offspring of nonconsanguineous couples,
one defective allele of a speciﬁc gene is inherited from
one parent and a different mutation in the same gene is
inherited from the other parent; individuals with this
kind of autosomal recessive inheritance pattern are
referred to as compound heterozygotes. Occasionally,
the causative mutation arises de novo in the patient and
is not present in either parent. The expression and
clinical presentation of diseases caused by the same
mutation
may
be
variable.
Multiple
factors
may
contribute to the phenotypic variability, including the
Type of 
immunodeficiency
Histopathology and 
laboratory abnormalities
Common infectious 
consequences
B cell deficiencies 
T cell deficiencies
Innate immune 
deficiencies
Often absent or reduced 
follicles and germinal centers 
in lymphoid organs
Reduced serum Ig levels
May be reduced T cell zones 
in lymphoid organs
Reduced DTH reactions to
common antigens
Defective T cell proliferative 
responses to mitogens in vitro
Variable, depending on which 
component of innate immunity 
is defective
Pyogenic bacterial infections,
enteric bacterial and viral 
infections
Viral and other intracellular 
microbial infections (e.g., 
Pneumocystis jiroveci, other fungi,
non-tuberculous mycobacteria)
Some cancers (e.g., EBV-
associated lymphomas,
skin cancers)
Variable; pyogenic 
bacterial and viral infections
Fig. 12.1 Features of immunodeficiency diseases. Summary of the important diagnostic features and clinical
manifestations of immunodeﬁciencies affecting different components of the immune system. Within each
group, different diseases, and even different patients with the same disease, may show considerable varia-
tion. Reduced numbers of circulating B or T cells are often detected in some of these diseases. DTH, Delayed-
type hypersensitivity; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; Ig, immunoglobulin.
246
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
 
coinheritance of modiﬁer genes, environmental factors,
and epigenetic modiﬁcations of genes that vary from
one individual to another. However, in most cases,
different phenotypic manifestations of the same muta-
tion remain unexplained.
The following discussion summarizes the patho-
genesis of select immunodeﬁciencies, several of which
are linked to genes and proteins mentioned in earlier
chapters. These examples illustrate the physiologic
importance of various components of the immune
system.
Defects in Innate Immunity
Abnormalities in two components of innate immunity,
phagocytes and the complement system, are important
causes of immunodeﬁciency (Fig. 12.2).
• Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is caused by
mutations in genes encoding subunits of the enzyme
phagocyte NADPH oxidase, which catalyzes the pro-
duction of microbicidal reactive oxygen species in ly-
sosomes (see Chapter 2). Affected neutrophils and
macrophages are unable to kill the microbes they
phagocytose. The most common infections in CGD
patients are bacteria such as Staphylococcus and
fungi such as Aspergillus and Candida. Many of
the organisms that are particularly troublesome in
patients with CGD produce catalase, which destroys
the microbicidal hydrogen peroxide that may be pro-
duced by host cells from residual reactive oxygen
radicals. The immune system tries to compensate
for this defective microbial killing by calling in
more macrophages and by activating T cells, which
stimulate recruitment and activation of phagocytes.
Therefore, collections of macrophages accumulate
around foci of infections to try to control the infec-
tions. These collections resemble granulomas, giving
Disease
Functional Deficiencies 
Genetic Defect
Chronic 
granulomatous 
disease
Leukocyte 
adhesion 
deficiency type 1
Leukocyte 
adhesion 
deficiency type 2
Chediak-Higashi 
Syndrome
Defective production of reactive 
oxygen species by phagocytes; 
recurrent intracellular bacterial 
and fungal infections
Defective leukocyte adhesion to
endothelial cells and migration into
tissues linked to decreased or absent
expression of β2 integrins; recurrent
bacterial and fungal infections
Defective leukocyte rolling on 
endothelium and migration into tissues 
because of decreased or absent 
expression of leukocyte ligands for 
endothelial E- and P-selectins; 
recurrent bacterial and fungal infections
Defective vesicle fusion and 
lysosomal function in neutrophils,
macrophages, dendritic cells, NK
cells, cytotoxic T cells, and many 
other cell types; recurrent infections
by pyogenic bacteria
Mutations in genes encoding 
phagocyte oxidase complex; 
phox-91 (cytochrome b558 α 
subunit) is mutated in X-linked form
Mutations in gene encoding 
the β chain (CD18) of 
β2 integrins
Mutations in gene encoding 
GDP-fucose transporter-1, 
required for transport of fucose 
into the Golgi and its incorporation 
into sialyl-Lewis X
Mutations in gene encoding LYST,
a protein involved in fusion of
vesicles (including lysosomes)
Toll-like receptor
signaling defects
Recurrent infections caused by 
defects in TLR signaling
Mutations in genes encoding 
TLR3 and MyD88 compromise 
NF-κB activation and 
type I interferon production in
response to microbes
Fig. 12.2 Primary immunodeficiencies caused by defects in innate immunity. Immunodeﬁciency diseases
caused by defects in various components of the innate immune system. NF-kB, Nuclear factor kB; NK, natural
killer, TLR, Toll-like receptors.
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
247
 
rise to the name of this disease. The most common
form of CGD is X-linked, caused by mutations in a
subunit of the phagocyte oxidase that is encoded
by the PHOX91 gene on the X chromosome.
• Leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency is caused by muta-
tions in genes encoding an essential integrin chain,
a Golgi transporter required for the expression of
the ligand for selectins, or signaling molecules acti-
vated by chemokine receptors that are required to
activate
integrins.
Integrins
and
selectins
are
involved in the adhesion of leukocytes to other cells.
As a result of these mutations, blood leukocytes do
not bind ﬁrmly to vascular endothelium and are
not recruited normally to sites of infection (see
Chapter 2).
• Deﬁciencies of almost every complement protein,
and many complement regulatory proteins, have
been described (see Chapter 8). C3 deﬁciency results
in severe infections and may be fatal. Deﬁciencies of
C2 and C4, two components of the classical pathway
of complement activation, occasionally result in
increased bacterial or viral infection but more often
in increased incidence of systemic lupus erythemato-
sus, in part because of defective clearance of immune
complexes. Deﬁciencies of complement regulatory
proteins lead to various syndromes associated with
excessive complement activation.
• The Chédiak-Higashi syndrome is an immunodeﬁ-
ciency disease in which lysosomal trafﬁcking and the
transport of granules are defective. The defect com-
promises many immune cells, including phagocytes,
which normally kill ingested microbes in their lyso-
somes, and natural killer (NK) cells and cytotoxic
T cells, which normally use proteins in specialized
secretory lysosomes to kill other infected host cells.
In all cases, the result is increased susceptibility to
bacterial infection.
• Rare patients have been described with mutations
affecting Toll-like receptors (TLRs) or signaling path-
ways downstream of TLRs, including molecules
required for activation of the nuclear factor kB (NF-
kB) transcription factor. Several of these mutations
make patients susceptible to only a limited set of infec-
tions. For example, mutations affecting MyD88, an
adaptor protein required for signaling by most TLRs,
are associated with severe bacterial (most often pneu-
mococcal)
pneumonias,
and
mutations
affecting
TLR3 are associated with recurrent herpesvirus en-
cephalitis and severe inﬂuenza.
Defects in Lymphocyte Maturation
Many primary immunodeﬁciencies are the result of
genetic abnormalities that cause blocks in the matura-
tion of B lymphocytes, T lymphocytes, or both
(Figs. 12.3 and 12.4).
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID)
Disorders manifesting as defects in both the B cell and
T cell arms of the adaptive immune system are classiﬁed
as SCID. The underlying cause of most cases of SCID is
a defect in T cell development or function; defective
humoral immunity is largely a consequence of the lack
of T cell helper function. Several different genetic ab-
normalities may cause SCID.
• X-linked SCID, affecting only male children, accounts
for about half of the cases of SCID. More than 99% of
these cases are caused by mutations in the common g
(gc) chain signaling subunit of the receptors for several
cytokines, including IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and
IL-21. (Because the gc chain was ﬁrst identiﬁed as
one of the three chains of the IL-2 receptor, it is also
called the IL-2Rg chain.) When the gc chain is not
functional, immature lymphocytes, especially pro-T
cells, cannot proliferate in response to IL-7, which is
the major growth factor for these cells. Defective re-
sponses to IL-7 result in reduced survival and matura-
tion of lymphocyte precursors. In humans, the defect
affects T cell maturation, but B cell development pro-
ceeds normally. The consequence of this develop-
mental block is a profound decrease in the numbers
of mature T cells, deﬁcient cell-mediated immunity,
and defective humoral immunity because of absence
of T cell help (even though B cells may mature almost
normally). NK cells are also deﬁcient, because the gc
chain is part of the receptor for IL-15, the major cyto-
kine involved in NK cell proliferation and maturation.
An autosomal recessive form of SCID is caused by mu-
tations in the gene encoding a kinase called Janus ki-
nase 3 (JAK3) that is involved in signaling by the gc
cytokine receptor chain. Such mutations result in the
same abnormalities as those in X-linked SCID caused
by gc mutations.
• About half the cases of autosomal recessive SCID are
caused by mutations in adenosine deaminase (ADA),
248
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
 
an enzyme involved in the breakdown of adenosine.
Deﬁciency of ADA leads to the accumulation of
toxic purine metabolites in cells that are actively syn-
thesizing DNAdnamely, proliferating cells. Lympho-
cytes are particularly susceptible to injury by purine
metabolites because these cells undergo tremendous
proliferation during their maturation. ADA deﬁciency
results in a block in T cell maturation more than in B
cell maturation. A similar phenotype is seen in indi-
viduals who have a deﬁciency in purine nucleoside
phosphorylase (PNP).
• Other causes of autosomal recessive SCID include
mutations in the RAG1 or RAG2 gene, which encode
the recombinase that is required for immunoglobulin
(Ig) and T cell receptor (TCR) gene recombination
and lymphocyte maturation. In the absence of
RAG1 or RAG2, B and T cells fail to develop (see
Chapter 4). Mutations in the ARTEMIS gene, which
encodes an endonuclease involved in VDJ recombina-
tion, also result in failure of B and T cell development.
• DiGeorge syndrome (also known as 22q11 deletion
syndrome) is characterized in part by a defect in
T cell maturation. It results from a deletion on
chromosome 22, which interferes with the develop-
ment of the thymus (and parathyroid glands). The
condition tends to improve with age, probably
because the small amount of thymic tissue that
does develop is able to support some T cell
maturation.
With the increasing application of newborn screening
to identify primary immunodeﬁciencies, many other rare
causes of SCID have been discovered.
Selective B Cell Deficiencies
The most common clinical syndrome caused by a
block in B cell maturation is X-linked agammaglob-
ulinemia (initially called Bruton agammaglobulin-
emia). In this disorder, pre-B cells in the bone marrow
fail to survive, resulting in a marked decrease or
absence of mature B lymphocytes and serum Igs. The
disease is caused by mutations in the gene encoding
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK), resulting in defective
production or function of the enzyme. BTK is acti-
vated by the pre-B cell receptor expressed in pre-B
cells, and it delivers signals that promote the sur-
vival, proliferation, and maturation of these cells. The
HSC
CLP
γc, JAK3,
ADA, PNP
ZAP70,
TAP1, 2
Pro-B
Pro-T
Pre-T
CD4+
CD8+
T cells
CD4+
T cells
CD8+
T cells
Pre-B
Immature B
Mature
B cell
Proteins required for
MHC class II expression
RAG1, RAG2,
ARTEMIS
VDJ
recombination
VDJ
recombination
Pre-BCR
checkpoint
BTK
Positive
selection
CD3
Fig. 12.3 Primary immunodeficiencies caused by genetic defects in lymphocyte maturation. Lymphocyte
maturation pathways are described in Chapter 4. The proteins for which expression or functions are impaired
by genetic mutations are listed in the boxes. The functions of the proteins are discussed in the text. ADA,
Adenosine deaminase; BCR, B cell receptor; CLP, common lymphoid progenitor; HSC, hematopoietic stem
cell; PNP, purine nucleoside phosphorylase; RAG, recombination-activating gene; TCR, T cell receptor.
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
249
 
BTK gene is located on the X chromosome. Therefore,
females who carry a mutant BTK allele on one of their
X chromosomes are carriers of the disease, but male
offspring who inherit the abnormal X chromosome
suffer from the B cell deﬁciency. In about a fourth of
patients with X-linked agammaglobulinemia, autoim-
mune diseases, notably arthritis, develop as well. A link
between an immunodeﬁciency and autoimmunity
seems paradoxical. One possible explanation for this
association is that BTK contributes to B cell receptor
signaling, which is required for B cell tolerance, so
defective BTK may result in the accumulation of
autoreactive B cells.
Defects in Lymphocyte Activation and Function
Numerous immunodeﬁciency diseases are caused by
mutations affecting molecules involved in lymphocyte
activation (Fig. 12.5).
X-linked SCID
Autosomal 
recessive SCID 
due to ADA, 
PNP deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive SCID 
due to defective VDJ
recombination
Markedly decreased T cells; 
normal or increased B cells; 
reduced serum Ig
Progressive decrease in 
T and B cells (mostly T); 
reduced serum Ig in ADA 
deficiency, normal B cells 
and serum Ig in PNP deficiency
Markedly decreased T and
B cells; reduced serum Ig
Cytokine receptor common γ 
chain gene mutations, defective 
T cell maturation due to lack of 
IL-7 signals
ADA or PNP deficiency leads to 
accumulation of toxic metabolites 
in lymphocytes
Mutations in RAG genes and
other genes involved in VDJ
recombination
Defective class II 
MHC expression:
The bare lymphocyte
syndrome
Impaired CD4+ T cell
development and activation;
defective cell-mediated and 
humoral immunity 
Mutations in genes encoding 
transcription factors required for
class II MHC gene expression
X-linked 
agammaglobulinemia 
Decrease in all serum Ig 
isotypes; reduced 
B cell numbers 
Block in maturation beyond pre-B 
cells, because of mutation in
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK)
Impaired B cell development
DiGeorge syndrome
(22q11 deletion 
syndrome)
Decreased T cells; normal 
B cells; normal or decreased 
serum Ig
Anomalous development of 3rd 
and 4th branchial pouches, 
leading to thymic hypoplasia
Defects in T and B cell development:
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disease (SCID)
Disease
Functional deficiencies
Mechanism of defect
Fig. 12.4 Features of primary immunodeficiencies caused by defects in lymphocyte maturation. The ﬁgure
summarizes the principal features of the most common primary immunodeﬁciencies in which the genetic
blocks are known. ADA, Adenosine deaminase; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL-7R, interleukin-7 receptor; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; PNP, purine nucleoside phosphorylase; RAG, recombination-activating gene.
250
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
 
Defects in B Cell Responses
Defective antibody production may result from abnor-
malities in B cells or in helper T cells.
• X-linkedhyper-IgM syndrome. Thisdiseaseischarac-
terized by defective B cell heavy-chain class (isotype)
switching, so IgM is the major serum antibody, and
by deﬁcient cell-mediated immunity against intracel-
lular microbes. The disease is caused by mutations in
the X chromosome gene encoding CD40 ligand
(CD40L), the helper T cell protein that binds to
CD40 on B cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages
and thusmediates T celledependentactivation ofthese
cells (see Chapters 6 and 7). Failure to express func-
tional CD40L leads to defective germinal center reac-
tions in T celledependent B cell responses, so there is
poor humoral immunity with reduced Ig class switch-
ing and no afﬁnity maturation. In addition, the defec-
tive T celledependent macrophage and dendritic cell
activation results in reduced cell-mediated immunity.
Boyswiththisdiseaseareespeciallysusceptibletoinfec-
tion by Pneumocystis jiroveci, a fungus that survives
within phagocytes in the absence of T cell help. An
autosomal recessive form of hyper-IgM syndrome
with a similar phenotype to that seen in the X-linked
Antigen- 
presenting
cell
Naive CD4+
T cell
Naive CD8+
T cell
Infected
macrophage
B cell
Antibody-
producing
plasma cell
T follicular
helper cell
Helper
T cell
Activated 
T cells
CTL
Infected
cell
A
Defects in TCR
complex signaling 
(e.g., CD3, ZAP-70)
CD40 ligand,
CD40, (hyper-
IgM syndrome)
CD40 ligand, CD40 (hyper-IgM syndrome)
ICOS
(CVID)
STAT3, IL-12R, IFNR, STAT1
(Mendelian susceptibility 
to mycobacterial disease)
AID
(hyper-IgM
syndrome)
SAP (XLP)
Perforin (HLH)
Fig. 12.5 Primary immunodeficiencies associated with defects in lymphocyte activation and effector
functions. These immunodeﬁciencies may be caused by genetic defects in the expression of molecules listed
in the boxes, required for antigen presentation to T cells, T or B lymphocyte antigen receptor signaling, helper
T cell activation of B cells and macrophages, and differentiation of antibody-producing B cells. A, Examples
showing the sites at which immune responses may be blocked. AID, Activation-induced deaminase; CVID,
common variable immunodeﬁciency; ICOS, inducible costimulatory; IFNgR, IFN-g receptor; Ig, immunoglobulin;
IL-12R, IL-12 receptor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; SAP, SLAM-associated protein; ZAP-70, z
chaineassociated protein of 70 kD.
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
251
 
disease is observed in individuals with mutations in
CD40. Another autosomal recessive form of hyper-
IgM syndrome in which there are humoral abnormal-
ities but no defect in cellular immunity is seen in
individuals with mutations affecting the enzyme
activation-induced deaminase (AID), which is induced
by CD40 signaling and is involved in B cell class
switching and afﬁnity maturation (see Chapter 7).
• Selective Ig class deﬁciencies. Genetic deﬁciencies
in the production of selected Ig classes are quite
common. IgA deﬁciency is thought to affect as
many as 1 in 700 people but causes no clinical
X-linked hyper- 
IgM syndrome
Common variable
immunodeficiency
Selective Ig deficiency
Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis
Defects in helper T cell-dependent
B cell and macrophage activation
Mutations in 
CD40 ligand
Impaired CTL and NK cell killing 
function; uncontrolled compensatory
macrophage activation
Reduced or no production of selective
Ig isotypes; susceptibility to infections or
no clinical problem
Reduced immunoglobulins; 
susceptibility to bacterial infections
Mutations in receptors for
B cell growth factors, 
costimulators
Mutations in Ig genes or
unknown mutations
Mutations in perforin gene
and other genes required
for CTL and NK cell
granule exocytosis
Defects in T cell
receptor complex
expression or signaling 
Decreased T cells or abnormal ratios 
of CD4+ and CD8+ subsets; 
decreased cell-mediated immunity
Mutations or deletions 
in genes encoding 
CD3 proteins, ZAP-70
Mendelian
susceptibility to
mycobacterial disease 
Decreased Th1-mediated macrophage
activation; susceptibility to infection by
atypical mycobacteria and other
intracellular pathogens
Mutations in genes 
encoding IL-12, the
receptors for IL-12 or
interferon-γ, STAT1
Mucocutaneous
candidiasis, bacterial
skin abcesses
Decreased Th17-mediated inflammatory
responses
Mutations in genes 
encoding STAT3, 
IL-17, IL-17R
X-linked
lymphoproliferative
syndrome
Uncontrolled EBV-induced B cell
proliferation and CTL activation; 
defective NK cell and CTL function and 
antibody responses
Mutations in gene
encoding SAP (involved
in signaling 
in lymphocytes)
B
Defects in T and B cell activation and function
Disease
Functional deficiencies
Mechanism of defect
Fig. 12.5, cont’d B, Summary of the features of immunodeﬁciency disorders whose genetic basis is shown
in part A. Note that abnormalities in class II MHC expression and TCR complex signaling can cause defective
T cell maturation (see Fig. 12.2), as well as defective activation of the cells that do mature, as shown here.
CTL, Cytotoxic T lymphocyte; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; NK, natural killer.
252
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
 
problems in most patients and sinus, lung, and intes-
tinal infections in a minority. The defect causing
these deﬁciencies is not known in a majority of cases;
rarely, the deﬁciencies may be caused by mutations
of Ig heavy-chain constant (C) region genes.
• Common
variable
immunodeﬁciency
(CVID).
CVID is a heterogeneous group of disorders that
are characterized by poor antibody responses to in-
fections and reduced serum levels of IgG, IgA, and
sometimes IgM. The underlying causes of CVID
include mutations in genes encoding signaling mol-
ecules and transcription factors involved in B cell
activation or encoding receptors that play a role in
T celleB cell interactions. Patients have recurrent in-
fections, autoimmune disease, and lymphomas.
Defective Activation of T Lymphocytes
A variety of inherited abnormalities may interfere with
T cell activation.
• Bare lymphocyte syndrome. This disease is caused
by a failure to express class II major histocompatibil-
ity complex (MHC) molecules, as a result of muta-
tions in the transcription factors that normally
induce class II MHC expression. Recall that class II
MHC molecules display peptide antigens for recog-
nition by CD4þ T cells, and this recognition is crit-
ical for maturation and activation of the T cells. The
disease is manifested by a profound decrease in
CD4þ T cells because of defective maturation of
these cells in the thymus, resulting in a form of
SCID, and poor activation of CD4+ T cells in second-
ary lymphoid organs.
• Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) syn-
dromes are characterized by systemic, sometimes
life-threatening, activation of immune cells, princi-
pally macrophages, usually in response to infections.
Many cases of HLH occur as a manifestation of ge-
netic disorders in which cytotoxic CD8þ T cells
and NK cells are unable to kill virus-infected target
cells. These include patients with mutations in the
gene encoding perforin and mutations in genes
that encode proteins involved in granule exocytosis.
These mutations result in persistent infections, usu-
ally viral, and excessive production of IFN-g by
T cells and NK cells, which in turn causes excessive
macrophage activation. Some of these highly acti-
vated macrophages in the bone marrow ingest red
blood cells, giving the syndrome its name.
• Mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease.
Mutations in the genes encoding components of
interleukin-12 (IL-12), the IL-12 receptor, the inter-
feron-g (IFN-g) receptor, or associated signaling
molecules result in deﬁcient cell-mediated immu-
nity because of defects in Th1 development or
Th1
cell-mediated
macrophage
activation
(see
Chapter 6). Patients present with increased suscep-
tibility to weakly virulent environmental Mycobac-
terium species (often called atypical mycobacteria)
as well as other intracellular pathogens, including
Salmonella and various other bacterial, fungal, and
viral species.
• Rare cases of selective T cell deﬁciency are caused by
mutations affecting various signaling pathways or cy-
tokines and receptors involved in differentiation of
naive T cells into effector cells. Depending on the
mutation and the extent of the defect, affected pa-
tients show severe T cell deﬁciency or deﬁciency in
particular arms of T cellemediated immunity, such
as in T helper 1 (Th1) responses (associated with
nontuberculous mycobacterial infections, discussed
earlier) and Th17 responses (associated with fungal
and bacterial infections). These defects have revealed
the importance of various pathways of T cell activa-
tion, but these are rare disorders.
Lymphocyte Abnormalities Associated with
Other Diseases
Some systemic diseases that involve multiple organ sys-
tems, and whose major manifestations are not immu-
nologic, may have a component of immunodeﬁciency.
• Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome
is
characterized
by
eczema, reduced blood platelets, and immunodeﬁ-
ciency. This X-linked disease is caused by a mutation
in a gene that encodes a regulator of the actin cyto-
skeleton required for signal transduction, immune
synapse formation, and cytoskeletal reorganization.
Because of the absence of this protein, platelets and
leukocytes do not develop normally, are small, and
fail to migrate normally.
• Ataxia-telangiectasia is characterized by gait abnor-
malities (ataxia), vascular malformations (telangiec-
tasia),
and
immunodeﬁciency.
The
disease
is
caused by mutations in a gene that encodes a protein
involved in DNA repair. Defects in this protein lead
to abnormal DNA repair (e.g., during recombination
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
253
 
of antigen receptor gene segments), resulting in
defective lymphocyte maturation.
• Some patients with autoimmune diseases, such as
the disease caused by AIRE mutations (see Chapter
9), develop autoantibodies against their own cyto-
kines
and
manifestations
of
immunodeﬁciency
because of the resulting cytokine depletion. Autoan-
tibodies against type I IFN (see Chapter 2) are seen
even in the absence of overt autoimmunity and
have been associated with severe cases of COVID-19.
Therapy of Primary Immunodeficiencies
Treatment of primary immunodeﬁciencies varies with the
disease. SCID is fatal in early life unless the patient’s im-
mune system is reconstituted. The most widely used
treatment is hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, with
careful matching of donor and recipient to avoid poten-
tially serious graft-versus-host disease. For selective B cell
defects (e.g., X-linked agammaglobulinemia), patients
may be given intravenous injections of pooled immuno-
globulin (IVIG) from healthy donors to provide passive
immunity. Although the ideal treatment for all congenital
immunodeﬁciencies is to replace the defective gene, this
remains a distant goal for most diseases. Successful gene
therapy has been achieved in some patients with X-linked
SCID; a normal gc gene is introduced into their hemato-
poietic stem cells, which are then transplanted back into
the patients. Patients with ADA deﬁciency have been
treated with enzyme replacement and gene therapy. In all
patients with these diseases, infections are treated with
antibiotics as needed.
ACQUIRED (SECONDARY)
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
Deﬁciencies of the immune system often develop because
of abnormalities that are not genetic but are acquired
during life (Fig. 12.6). The most serious of these abnor-
malities worldwide is HIV infection, described later. The
most frequent causes of secondary immunodeﬁciencies in
developed countries are cancers involving the bone
marrow (leukemias) and immunosuppressive therapies.
Cancer treatment with chemotherapeutic drugs and irra-
diation may damage proliferating cells, including pre-
cursors of leukocytes in the bone marrow and mature
lymphocytes, resulting in immunodeﬁciency. Immuno-
suppressive drugs used to prevent graft rejection or treat
Cause
Mechanism
Human immunodeficiency 
virus infection
Irradiation and 
chemotherapy treatments 
for cancer
Involvement of bone
marrow by cancers
(metastases, leukemias)
Depletion of CD4+ helper T cells
Protein-calorie 
malnutrition
Metabolic derangements inhibit 
lymphocyte maturation and function
Decreased bone marrow 
precursors for all leukocytes
Loss of spleen (surgically
to treat trauma or by
infarction)
Decreased phagocytosis 
of microbes
Reduced site of 
leukocyte development
Immunosuppression for
graft rejection and
inflammatory diseases
Depletion or functional impairment
of lymphocytes 
Fig. 12.6 Acquired (secondary) immunodeficiencies. The most common causes of acquired immunodeﬁ-
ciency diseases and how they lead to defects in immune responses.
254
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
 
inﬂammatory diseases, including some of the newer
therapies (e.g., cytokine antagonists, leukocyte adhesion
molecule blockers), are designed to blunt immune re-
sponses. Therefore, immunodeﬁciency is a complica-
tion of such therapies. Protein-calorie malnutrition
results in deﬁciencies of virtually all components of the
immune system and is a common cause of immuno-
deﬁciency in countries with widespread poverty or
famines.
ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME
(AIDS)
Since AIDS was ﬁrst recognized as a distinct entity in
the 1980s, it has become one of the most devastating
afﬂictions in history. AIDS is caused by infection with
HIV. Of the estimated 38 million HIV-infected people
worldwide, about 70% are in Africa and 20% in Asia.
More than 35 million deaths are attributable to HIV/
AIDS, with almost 1 million deaths annually. Effective
antiretroviral drugs have been developed, but the
infection continues to spread in parts of the world
where these therapies are not widely available, and in
some African countries, more than 30% of the popu-
lation has HIV infection. This section describes the
important features of HIV, how it infects humans, and
the disease it causes, ending with a brief discussion of
the current status of therapy and vaccine development.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
HIV is a retrovirus that infects cells of the immune
system, mainly CD4D T lymphocytes, and causes
progressive destruction of these cells. An infectious
HIV particle consists of two RNA strands within a
protein core, surrounded by a lipid envelope derived
from infected host cells but containing viral proteins
(Fig. 12.7). The viral RNA encodes structural proteins,
various enzymes, and proteins that regulate transcrip-
tion of viral genes and the viral life cycle.
The life cycle of HIV consists of the following
sequential steps: infection of cells, production of a
DNA copy of viral RNA and integration into the host
genome, expression of viral genes, and production of
viral particles (Fig. 12.8). HIV infects cells by virtue of
its major envelope glycoprotein, called gp120 (for 120-
kD glycoprotein), which binds to CD4 and to particular
chemokine receptors on human cells (mainly CXCR4
and CCR5). The major cell types that express these
surface molecules and thus may be infected by HIV are
CD4D T lymphocytes; additionally, some HIV strains
can infect macrophages, and macrophages and den-
dritic cells may acquire the virus by phagocytosis. After
binding to cellular receptors, the viral membrane fuses
with the host cell membrane, and the virus enters the
cell’s cytoplasm. Here the virus is uncoated and its RNA
is released. A DNA copy of the viral RNA is synthesized
by the viral reverse transcriptase enzyme (a process
characteristic of all retroviruses); this is converted to
double-stranded DNA, which then is integrated into the
host cell’s DNA by the action of the viral integrase
enzyme. The integrated viral DNA is called a provirus.
If the infected T cell is activated by some extrinsic
stimulus, such as another infectious microbe or cyto-
kines, the cell responds by turning on the transcription
of many of its own genes and often by producing cy-
tokines itself. A negative consequence of this normal
protective response is that the cytokines, and the pro-
cess of cellular activation, may induce the transcription
of proviral genes, leading to production of viral RNAs.
The RNAs are translated into a precursor protein,
which is processed into mature forms by the viral and
cellular proteases. RNA replication generates copies of
the viral RNA that are coated with structural proteins to
form a core structure, which migrates to the cell
membrane, acquires a lipid envelope from the host, and
buds out as an infectious viral particle, ready to infect
another cell. The integrated HIV DNA provirus may
remain latent within infected cells for months or years,
hidden from the patient’s immune system (and even
from antiviral therapies, discussed later).
Most cases of AIDS are caused by HIV-1 (i.e., HIV
type 1). A closely related virus, HIV-2, causes some
cases of the disease.
Pathogenesis of AIDS
AIDS develops over many years as latent HIV be-
comes activated and destroys cells of the immune
system. Virus production leads to death of infected
cells, as well as to death of uninfected lymphocytes,
subsequent immune deﬁciencies, and clinical AIDS
(Fig. 12.9). HIV infection is acquired by sexual inter-
course, sharing of contaminated needles among intra-
venous drug users, transplacental transfer, or, in rare
cases, transfusion of infected blood or blood products.
After infection there may be a brief acute viremia, when
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
255
 
the virus is detected in the blood. The virus primarily
infects CD4þ T cells at sites of entry through mucosal
epithelia, where there may be considerable destruction
of infected T cells. Because a large fraction of the body’s
lymphocytes, and especially memory T cells, reside in
mucosal tissues, the result of the local destruction may
be a signiﬁcant functional deﬁcit that is not initially
reﬂected in the presence of infected cells in the blood or
the depletion of circulating T cells. If the integrated
provirus is activated in infected cells, as described
previously, the result is increased production of viral
particles and spread of the infection. During the course
of HIV infection, the major source of infectious viral
particles are activated CD4þ T cells. Follicular helper
T cells and macrophages may become reservoirs of
infection, wherein the virus may lie dormant for
months or years.
The depletion of CD4D T cells after HIV infection
is caused mainly by a cytopathic effect of the virus
resulting from production of viral particles in infec-
ted cells. Active viral gene expression and protein
production may interfere with the synthetic machinery
of the infected T cells. Therefore, T cells in which the
virus is replicating are killed during this process. The
number of T cells lost during the progression to AIDS
appears to be greater than the number of infected cells.
The mechanism of this loss of uninfected T cells re-
mains poorly deﬁned.
Lipid bilayer
gp41
gp120
Reverse 
transcriptase
Protease
RNA
Integrase
p17 
matrix
p24 capsid
T lymphocyte 
surface
CD4
Chemokine
receptor
Fig. 12.7 Structure of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). An HIV-1 virion is shown next to a T cell
surface. HIV-1 consists of two identical strands of RNA (the viral genome) and associated enzymes, including
reverse transcriptase, integrase, and protease, packaged in a cone-shaped core composed of the p24 capsid
protein with a surrounding p17 protein matrix, all surrounded by a phospholipid membrane envelope derived
from the host cell. Virally encoded envelope proteins (gp41 and gp120) bind to CD4 and chemokine receptors
on the host cell surface. MHC, Major histocompatibility complex. (Adapted from © 1996 Terese Winslow.
Reproduced with permission.)
256
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
 
Other cells harboring the virus, such as dendritic
cells and macrophages, may also die, resulting in
destruction of the architecture of lymphoid organs.
Many studies have suggested that immune deﬁciency
results not only from depletion of T cells but also from
various functional abnormalities in T lymphocytes and
other immune cells. The signiﬁcance of these functional
defects has not been established, however, and loss of
T cells (followed by a fall in the blood CD4þ T cell
count) remains the most reliable indicator of disease
progression.
Clinical Features of HIV Infection and AIDS
The clinical course of HIV infection is characterized by
several phases, culminating in immune deﬁciency
(Fig. 12.10A).
• Acute HIV syndrome. Early after HIV infection, pa-
tients may experience a mild acute illness with fever
HIV virion
Virion binding 
to CD4 and 
chemokine 
receptor
Fusion of HIV 
membrane with cell 
membrane; entry
of viral genome 
into cytoplasm
Chemokine
receptor
CD4
HIV RNA
genome
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
HIV RNA 
transcript
Cytokine
HIV  proteins
HIV core
structure
HIV 
gp120/
gp41
New HIV
virion
Reverse 
transcriptase–
mediated synthesis 
of proviral DNA
Budding of
mature virion
HIV DNA
provirus
Synthesis of 
HIV proteins;
assembly of virion
core structure
Plasma
membrane
Cytokine activation
of cell; transcription
of HIV genome;
transport of RNAs
to cytoplasm
Integration of
provirus into
cell genome
Fig. 12.8 Life cycle of HIV. The sequential steps in HIV reproduction are shown, from initial infection of a host
cell to release of new virus particles (virions).
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
257
 
and malaise, correlating with the initial viremia. This
illness subsides within a few days, and the disease en-
ters a period of clinical latency.
• Latency. During latency, there may be few clinical
problems, but there usually is a progressive loss of
CD4þ T cells in lymphoid tissues and destruction
of the architecture of these tissues. Eventually, the
blood CD4þ T cell count begins to decline, and
when the count falls below 200 cells/mm3 (nor-
malw1500 cells/mm3), patients become susceptible
to infections and are diagnosed as having AIDS.
• Clinical AIDS. AIDS ultimately causes increased
susceptibility to infections and some cancers as a
consequence of immune deﬁciency. Patients not
given antiretroviral drugs are often infected by intra-
cellular microbes, such as viruses, the fungal path-
ogen P. jirovecii, and nontuberculous mycobacteria,
all
of
which
are
normally
eradicated
by
T cellemediated immunity. Many of these microbes
are present in the environment, but they do not
infect healthy persons with intact immune systems.
Because these infections are seen in immunodeﬁcient
persons, in whom the microbes have an opportunity
to establish infection, these types of infections are
said to be opportunistic. Latent viruses, such as cyto-
megalovirus and EBV, which are normally kept in
check by cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses,
may be reactivated in patients with AIDS because
of CTL defects, resulting in severe disease. Even
though HIV does not infect CD8þ T cells, the CTL
responses are defective probably because CD4þ help-
er T cells (the main targets of HIV) are required for
full CD8þ CTL responses against many viruses (see
Chapters 5 and 6). AIDS patients are at increased
risk for infections by extracellular bacteria, probably
because of impaired helper T celledependent anti-
body responses to bacterial antigens. Patients also
become susceptible to cancers caused by oncogenic
viruses. The two most common types of cancers
are B cell lymphomas, caused by EBV, and a tumor
of small blood vessels called Kaposi sarcoma, caused
by a herpesvirus. Patients with advanced AIDS often
Virus
transported to
lymph nodes
CD4+ 
T cell
Dendritic
cell
Primary
infection
of cells
in blood,
mucosa
Infection
established
in lymphoid
tissues,
e.g., lymph
node
Spread of
infection
throughout
the body
Immune
response
Clinical
latency
AIDS
Viremia
HIV-specific
CTLs
Anti-HIV
antibodies
Partial control of 
viral replication
Establishment of chronic 
infection; virus mostly
in lymphoid tissues;
low-level virus production
Increased viral
replication  
Destruction of 
lymphoid tissue; 
depletion of
CD4+ T cells
Other 
microbial
infections; 
cytokines
Fig. 12.9 Pathogenesis of disease caused by HIV. The devel-
opment of HIV disease is associated with the spread of HIV
from the initial site of infection to lymphoid tissues throughout
the body. The immune response of the host temporarily con-
trols acute infection but does not prevent establishment of
chronic infection of cells in lymphoid tissues. Cytokines pro-
duced in response to HIV and other microbes serve to enhance
HIV production and progression to acquired immunodeﬁciency
syndrome (AIDS). CTLs, Cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
258
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
 
have a wasting syndrome with signiﬁcant loss of
body mass, caused by altered metabolism and
reduced calorie intake. The neurocognitive disorder
that develops in some patients with AIDS may be
caused by infection of macrophages (microglial cells)
in the brain or the effects of cytokines or shed viral
particles.
The clinical course of HIV infection has been
dramatically changed by effective antiretroviral drug
therapy. With appropriate treatment, patients exhibit
much slower progression of the disease, fewer oppor-
tunistic infections, and greatly reduced incidence of
cancers and neurocognitive disorder.
The immune response to HIV is ineffective in con-
trolling spread of the virus and its pathologic effects.
Infected patients produce antibodies and CTLs against
viral antigens, and the responses help limit the early,
acute HIV syndrome (Fig. 12.10B). But these immune
responses usually do not prevent progression of the
disease. Antibodies against envelope glycoproteins, such
as gp120, may be ineffective because the virus rapidly
mutates the region of gp120 that is the target of most
antibodies. CTLs are often ineffective in killing infected
cells because the virus inhibits the expression of class I
MHC molecules by the infected cells. Immune re-
sponses to HIV may paradoxically promote spread of
the infection. Antibody-coated viral particles may bind
to Fc receptors on macrophages and follicular dendritic
cells in lymphoid organs, thus increasing virus entry
into these cells and creating additional reservoirs of
infection. If CTLs are able to kill infected cells, the dead
cells may be cleared by macrophages, which can
migrate to other tissues and spread the infection. By
infecting and thus interfering with the function of im-
mune cells, the virus is able to prevent its own
eradication.
A small fraction of patients control HIV infection
without therapy; these individuals are often referred
to as elite controllers or long-term nonprogressors.
There has been great interest in deﬁning the mechanisms
that may protect these individuals, because elucidation of
these mechanisms may suggest therapeutic approaches.
CD4+ T cells/mm3
Viremia (HIV RNA
copies/mL plasma)
Magnitude of immune response
(arbitrary untis)
-Acute HIV syndrome
-Wide dissemination of virus
-Seeding of lymphoid organs
Clinical latency
Constitutional
symptoms
 Death
Weeks
Years
Viral particles 
in plasma
CTLs specific
for HIV peptides
Anti-p24
antibody
Anti-envelope
antibody
0
102
104
106
108
200
600
1000
1
3
5
7
9
11
Opportunistic
diseases
Primary
infection
0
6
12
11
12
Weeks
Years
1
3
5
7
9
0
6
A
B
Fig. 12.10 Clinical course of HIV disease. A, Blood-borne virus (plasma viremia) is detected early after
infection and may be accompanied by systemic symptoms typical of acute HIV syndrome. The virus spreads
to lymphoid organs, but plasma viremia falls to very low levels (detectable only by sensitive reverse
transcriptaseepolymerase chain reaction assays) and stays this way for many years. CD4þ T cell counts
steadily decline during this clinical latency period because of active viral replication and T cell for of infection
and other clinical components of acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome. B, Magnitude and kinetics of immune
responses, shown in arbitrary relative units. CTLs, Cytotoxic T lymphocytes. (Reproduced with permission
from Pantaleo G, Graziosi C, Fauci AS: The immunopathogenesis of human immunodeﬁciency virus infection,
N Engl J Med 328:327e335, 1993.)
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
259
 
The presence of certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
alleles, such as HLA-B57 and HLA-B27, are protective,
and it has been shown that these HLA molecules are
particularly efﬁcient at presenting certain HIV peptides
(which the virus cannot afford to mutate without losing
viability) to CD8þ T cells. In addition, rare individuals
homozygous for a 32bp deletion in the gene encoding
the CCR5 chemokine receptor (this variant is relatively
frequent in Northern Europeans) lack functional CCR5,
rendering them resistant to HIV infection.
Therapy and Vaccination Strategies
The current treatment for AIDS is aimed at controlling
replication of HIV and the infectious complications of
the disease. Combinations of drugs that block the ac-
tivity of the viral reverse transcriptase, protease, and
integrase enzymes are now being administered early in
the course of the infection, and inhibitors of viral entry
and fusion also have been developed. This therapeutic
approach
is
called
highly
active
or
combination
antiretroviral therapy (ART). In societies with widely
available
ART,
opportunistic
infections
(e.g.,
by
P. jirovecii) and some tumors (e.g., Kaposi sarcoma,
EBV-induced
lymphoma),
which
were
devastating
complications in the past, are now rarely seen in HIV-
infected patients. In fact, treated patients are living long
life spans and are dying of cardiovascular and other
diseases that also afﬂict individuals who age without
HIV (although they may be accelerated as a conse-
quence of HIV infection, for unknown reasons). Even
these highly effective antiretroviral drugs do not
completely eradicate HIV infection. The virus is capable
of mutating its genes, which may render it resistant to
the drugs used, and reservoirs of latent virus (e.g., in
lymphoid tissues) may be inaccessible to these drugs.
The development of effective vaccines will be
necessary for control of HIV infection worldwide. A
successful vaccine probably needs to induce high titers
of broadly neutralizing antibodies that can recognize
a wide range of virus isolates and a strong T cell
response, as well as mucosal immunity. It has proved
difﬁcult to achieve all these goals with current vacci-
nation strategies. The tremendous mutability of the
virus allows it to mutate away from most neutralizing
antibodies. The goal of creating vaccines that can elicit
broadly neutralizing antibodies has not yet been
met, and so far, vaccine trials for HIV have proved
disappointing.
SUMMARY
• Immunodeﬁciency diseases are caused by defects in
various components of the immune system that
result in increased susceptibility to infections and
some cancers. Primary (congenital) immunodeﬁ-
ciency diseases are caused by genetic abnormalities.
Acquired (secondary) immunodeﬁciencies are the
result of infections, cancers, malnutrition, or treat-
ments for other conditions that adversely affect the
cells of the immune system.
• SCID results from blocks in lymphocyte maturation.
It may be caused by mutations in the cytokine recep-
tor gc chain that reduce the IL-7edriven proliferation
of immature lymphocytes, by mutations in enzymes
involved in purine metabolism, or by other defects
in lymphocyte maturation.
• Selective B cell maturation defects are seen in X-
linked agammaglobulinemia, caused by abnormal-
ities in an enzyme involved in B cell maturation
(BTK), and selective T cell maturation defects are
seen in the DiGeorge syndrome, in which the
thymus does not develop normally.
• Some immunodeﬁciency diseases are caused by de-
fects in lymphocyte activation. The X-linked hyper-
IgM syndrome is caused by mutations in the gene
encoding CD40 ligand, resulting in defective helper
T celledependent B cell responses (e.g., Ig heavy-
chain class switching) and T celledependent macro-
phage activation. The bare lymphocyte syndrome is
caused by reduced expression of class II MHC pro-
teins, resulting in impaired maturation and activa-
tion of CD4þ T cells.
• AIDS is caused by the retrovirus HIV, which infects
CD4þ T cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells by
using an envelope protein (gp120) to bind to CD4
and chemokine receptors. The viral RNA is reverse
transcribed, and the resulting DNA integrates into
the host genome, where it may be activated to pro-
duce infectious virus. Infected cells die during this
260
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
 
process of virus replication, and death of cells of the
immune system is the principal mechanism by
which the virus causes immune deﬁciency.
• The clinical course of HIV infection typically consists
of acute viremia, clinical latency with progressive
destruction of CD4þ T cells and dissolution of
lymphoid tissues, and ultimately AIDS, with severe im-
munodeﬁciency resulting in opportunistic infections,
some cancers, weight loss, and a neurocognitive disor-
der. Treatment of HIV infection is designed to interfere
with the life cycle of the virus. Vaccine development is
ongoing.
R E V I E W Q U E S T I O N S
1. What are the most common clinicopathologic man-
ifestations of immunodeﬁciency diseases?
2. What are some of the proteins affected by mutations
that may block the maturation of T and B lympho-
cytes in human immunodeﬁciency diseases?
3. What are some of the mutations that may block acti-
vation or effector functions of both mature CD4þ
T cells and B cells, and what are the clinicopatho-
logic consequences of these mutations?
4. How does HIV infect cells and replicate inside
infected cells?
5. What are the principal clinical manifestations of
advanced HIV infection, and what is the pathogen-
esis of these manifestations?
Answers to and discussion of the Review Questions
may be found on p. 322.
CHAPTER 12
Immunodeficiency Diseases
261
 
Glossary
262 
αβ T cell receptor (αβ TCR) The most 
common form of TCR, expressed on 
both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. The αβ 
TCR recognizes peptide antigen bound 
to an MHC molecule. Both α and β 
chains contain highly variable (V) 
regions that together form the antigen-
binding site as well as constant (C) 
regions. TCR V and C regions are 
structurally homologous to the V and C 
regions of immunoglobulin molecules. 
ABO blood group antigens Carbohydrate 
antigens attached mainly to cell surface 
proteins or lipids that are present on 
many cell types, including red blood 
cells and endothelial cells. These 
antigens differ among individuals, 
depending on inherited alleles 
encoding the enzymes required for 
synthesis of the carbohydrate. The ABO 
antigens act as alloantigens that are 
responsible for blood transfusion 
reactions and hyperacute rejection of 
allografts. 
Acquired immunodeficiency A deficiency 
in the immune system that is acquired 
after birth, because of infection (e.g., 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
[AIDS]), malnutrition, aging, and other 
conditions, and that is not related to a 
genetic defect. Synonymous with 
secondary immunodeficiency. 
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS) A disease caused by human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection that is characterized by 
depletion of CD4+ T cells, leading to a 
profound defect in immunity. 
Clinically, AIDS includes opportunistic 
infections, malignant tumors, wasting, 
and neurocognitive disorder. 
Activation-induced cell death (AICD) 
Apoptosis of activated lymphocytes, 
generally used for T cells. 
Activation-induced (cytidine) deaminase 
(AID) An enzyme expressed in B cells 
that catalyzes the conversion of 
cytosine into uracil in DNA, which is a 
step required for somatic 
hypermutation and affinity maturation 
of antibodies and for immunoglobulin 
class switching. 
Activator protein 1 (AP-1) A family of 
DNA-binding transcription factors 
composed of dimers of two proteins 
that bind to one another through a 
shared structural motif called a leucine 
zipper. The best-characterized AP-1 
factor is composed of the proteins FOS 
and JUN. AP-1 is involved in 
transcriptional regulation of many 
different genes that are important in the 
immune system, such as cytokine 
genes. 
Active immunity The form of adaptive 
immunity that is induced by exposure 
to a foreign antigen and activation of 
lymphocytes and in which the 
immunized individual plays an active 
role in responding to the antigen. This 
type contrasts with passive immunity, 
in which an individual receives 
antibodies or lymphocytes from 
another individual who was previously 
actively immunized. 
Acute-phase proteins Proteins, mostly 
synthesized in the liver in response to 
inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, 
IL-6, and TNF, whose plasma 
concentrations increase shortly after 
infection as part of the acute phase 
response. Examples include C-reactive 
protein, complement proteins, 
fibrinogen, and serum amyloid A 
protein. The acute-phase proteins play 
various roles in the innate immune 
response to microbes. Also called acute 
phase reactants. 
Acute-phase response The increase in 
plasma concentrations of several 
proteins, called acute-phase proteins 
(reactants), that usually occurs as part 
of the early innate immune response to 
infections. 
Acute rejection A form of graft rejection 
involving vascular and parenchymal 
injury mediated by T cells, 
macrophages, and antibodies that 
usually occurs days or weeks after 
transplantation but may occur later if 
pharmacologic immunosuppression 
becomes inadequate. 
Adaptive immunity The form of 
immunity that is mediated by 
lymphocytes and stimulated by 
exposure to foreign antigens. In 
contrast to innate immunity, adaptive 
immunity is characterized by exquisite 
specificity for distinct antigens and by 
long-term and specific memory, 
manifest as more rapid and vigorous 
responses upon repeated exposure to 
the same microbe. Adaptive immunity 
is also called specific immunity or 
acquired immunity. 
Adaptor protein A protein involved in 
intracellular signal transduction 
pathways that serves as a bridge 
molecule or scaffold for the recruitment 
of other signaling molecules. During 
lymphocyte antigen receptor or 
cytokine receptor signaling, adaptor 
proteins may be phosphorylated on 
tyrosine residues to enable them to 
bind other proteins containing SRC 
homology 2 (SH2) domains. Adaptor 
proteins involved in T cell activation 
include LAT, SLP76, and GRB2. 
Addressin An adhesion molecule 
expressed on endothelial cells in 
different anatomic sites that directs 
organ-specific lymphocyte homing. 
Mucosal addressin cell adhesion 
molecule 1 (MAdCAM-1) is an example 
of an addressin expressed in Peyer 
patches in the intestinal wall that binds 
to the integrin α4β7 on gut-homing T 
cells. 
Adhesion molecule A cell surface 
molecule whose function is to promote 
adhesive interactions with other cells or 
the extracellular matrix. Leukocytes 
and endothelial cells express various 
types of adhesion molecules, such as 
selectins, integrins, and members of the 
immunoglobulin superfamily, and 
these molecules play crucial roles in cell 
migration and cellular activation in 
innate and adaptive immune responses. 
263
 
 
 Glossary
Adjuvant A substance, distinct from 
antigen, that enhances T and B cell 
activation, mainly by promoting innate 
immune responses, which enhance the 
accumulation and activation of antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) at the site of 
antigen exposure. Adjuvants, which are 
routinely used in clinical vaccines and 
experimental animal immunizations, 
stimulate expression of T cell–
activating costimulators and cytokines 
by APCs and may also prolong the 
expression of peptide-MHC complexes 
on the surface of APCs. 
Adoptive transfer The process of 
transferring cells from one individual 
into another or back into the same 
individual after in vitro expansion and 
activation. Adoptive transfer is used in 
research to define the role of a 
particular cell population (e.g., T cells) 
in an immune response. Clinically, 
adoptive transfer of tumor-specific T 
lymphocytes is used in cancer therapy. 
Affinity The strength of the binding 
between a single binding site of a 
molecule (e.g., an antibody) and a 
ligand (e.g., an antigen). The affinity of 
a molecule X for a ligand Y is 
represented by the dissociation 
constant (K d), which is the 
concentration of Y that is required to 
occupy the combining sites of half the X 
molecules present in a solution. A 
smaller K d indicates a stronger or 
higher affinity interaction, because a 
lower concentration of ligand is needed 
to occupy the sites. 
Affinity maturation The process that 
leads to increased affinity of antibodies 
for a particular antigen as a T cell–
dependent antibody response 
progresses. Affinity maturation takes 
place in germinal centers of lymphoid 
tissues and is the result of somatic 
mutation of immunoglobulin genes, 
followed by selective survival of the B 
cells producing the highest affinity 
antibodies. 
Alarmin A general term for molecules 
released from stressed or damaged cells 
that activate inflammatory responses. 
Alarmin is sometimes used 
synonymoulsy with danger associated 
molecular patterns (DAMPs), which are 
self molecules that bind to innate patten 
recognition receptors, but some 
cytokines (e.g., IL-33, IL-25) and some 
antimicrobial peptides (e.g., defensins, 
cathelicidin) are also often called 
alarmins. 
Allele One of different variations of the 
same gene in different individuals 
present at a particular chromosomal 
locus, each differing in nucleotide 
sequence, and often by amino acid 
sequence of the encoded protein. An 
individual who is heterozygous at a 
locus has two different alleles, each on 
a different member of a pair of 
chromosomes, one inherited from the 
mother and one from the father. If a 
particular gene in a population has 
different alleles, the gene or locus is 
said to be polymorphic. MHC genes 
have many alleles (i.e., they are highly 
polymorphic). 
Allelic exclusion The exclusive expression 
of only one of two inherited alleles 
encoding Ig heavy and light chains and 
TCR-β chains. Allelic exclusion occurs 
when the protein product of one 
productively recombined antigen 
receptor locus on one chromosome 
blocks rearrangement and expression of 
the corresponding locus on the other 
chromosome. This ensures that most 
lymphocytes will express a single 
antigen receptor and that all antigen 
receptors expressed by one clone of 
lymphocytes will have the identical 
specificity. Because the TCR-α chain 
locus does not show allelic exclusion, 
some T cells express two different TCRs 
with different α chains. 
Allergen An antigen that elicits an 
immediate hypersensitivity (allergic) 
reaction. Allergens are proteins or 
chemicals bound to proteins that 
induce IgE antibody responses in atopic 
individuals. 
Allergy A disorder characterized by 
immediate hypersensitivity reactions, 
often named according to the type of 
antigen (allergen) that elicits the 
disease, such as food allergy, bee sting 
allergy, and penicillin allergy. All of 
these conditions are the result of IgE 
production stimulated by IL-4– and IL-
13–producing helper T cells, followed 
by allergen and IgE-dependent mast 
cell activation. 
Alloantibody An antibody specific for an 
alloantigen (i.e., specific for an antigen 
present in some individuals of a species 
but not in others). 
Alloantigen A cell or tissue antigen that is 
present in some individuals of a species 
but not in others and that is recognized 
as foreign on an allograft. Alloantigens 
are usually products of polymorphic 
genes. 
Alloantiserum The alloantibody-
containing serum of an individual who 
has previously been exposed to one or 
more alloantigens. 
Allograft An organ or tissue graft from a 
donor who is of the same species but 
genetically nonidentical to the recipient 
(also called an allogeneic graft). 
Alloreactive Reactive to alloantigens; 
describes T cells or antibodies from one 
individual that will recognize antigens 
on cells or tissues of another genetically 
nonidentical individual. 
Alternative macrophage activation 
Macrophage activation by IL-4 and IL-
13 leading to an antiinflammatory and 
tissue-reparative phenotype, in contrast 
to classical macrophage activation 
induced by interferon-γ and TLR 
ligands. 
Alternative pathway of complement 
activation An antibody-independent 
pathway of activation of the 
complement system that occurs when 
the spontaneously generated C3b 
fragment of the C3 protein binds to 
microbial cell surfaces. The alternative 
pathway is a component of the innate 
immune system and mediates 
inflammatory responses to infection as 
well as direct lysis of microbes. The 
alternative pathway, as well as the 
classical and lectin pathways, terminate 
with formation of the membrane attack 
complex. 
Anaphylatoxins The C5a, C4a, and C3a 
complement fragments that are 
generated during complement 
activation. The anaphylatoxins bind 
specific cell surface receptors and 
promote acute inflammation by 
activating mast cells (similar to the 
more severe reactions seen in 
anaphylaxis) and stimulating 
neutrophil chemotaxis. 
Anaphylaxis A severe form of immediate 
hypersensitivity in which there is 
systemic mast cell or basophil 
activation, and the released mediators 
cause bronchial constriction, edema in 
multiple tissues, and cardiovascular 
collapse. 
Anchor residues The amino acid residues 
of a peptide whose side chains fit into 
pockets in the floor of the peptide-
binding cleft of an MHC molecule. The 
side chains bind to complementary 
264            Glossary 
 
amino acids in the MHC molecule and 
therefore serve to anchor the peptide in 
the cleft of the MHC molecule. 
Anergy A state of unresponsiveness to 
antigenic stimulation. Lymphocyte 
anergy (also called clonal anergy) is the 
failure of clones of T or B cells to react 
to an antigen and is a mechanism of 
maintaining immunologic tolerance to 
self. Clinically, anergy refers to the lack 
of T cell–dependent cutaneous delayed-
type hypersensitivity reactions to 
common (usually microbial) antigens. 
Angiogenesis New blood vessel 
formation regulated by a variety of 
protein factors elaborated by cells of the 
innate and adaptive immune systems 
and often accompanying chronic 
inflammation and tumor growth. 
Antibody A type of glycoprotein 
molecule, also called immunoglobulin 
(Ig), produced only by B lymphocytes 
and plasma cells derived from B cells, 
which binds antigens, often with a high 
degree of specificity and affinity. 
Membrane-bound antibodies serve as 
antigen receptors that initiate B cell 
activation. Secreted antibodies perform 
various effector functions, including 
neutralizing antigens, activating 
complement, and promoting leukocyte-
dependent destruction of microbes. The 
basic structural unit of an antibody is 
composed of two identical heavy chains 
and two identical light chains. The N-
terminal variable regions of the heavy 
and light chains form the antigen-
binding sites, whereas the C-terminal 
constant regions of the heavy chains of 
secreted antibodies interact with other 
molecules in the immune system. Every 
individual has millions of different 
antibodies, each with a unique antigen-
binding site. 
Antibody-dependent cell-mediated 
cytotoxicity (ADCC) A process by 
which NK cells are targeted to cells 
coated with IgG specific for cell surface 
antigens, resulting in lysis of the 
antibody-coated cells. A specific 
receptor for the constant region of IgG, 
called FcγRIII (CD16), is expressed on 
the NK cell membrane and mediates 
binding of the cells to the IgG attached 
to other cells. 
Antibody feedback The downregulation 
of antibody production by secreted IgG 
antibodies that occurs when antigen-
antibody complexes simultaneously 
engage B cell membrane Ig and one 
type of Fcγ receptor (FcγRIIB). Under 
these conditions, the cytoplasmic tail of 
FcγRIIB transduces inhibitory signals 
inside the B cell and terminates the B 
cell response. 
Antibody repertoire The collection of 
different antibody specificities 
expressed in an individual. 
Antibody-secreting cell A B lymphocyte 
that has undergone differentiation and 
produces the secreted form of Ig. 
Antibody-secreting cells are generated 
from naive B cells in response to 
antigen and other stimuli and reside in 
the spleen and lymph nodes, as well as 
in the bone marrow. Often used 
synonymously with plasma cells. 
Antigen A molecule that binds to an 
antibody or a TCR. Antigens that bind 
to antibodies include all classes of 
molecules. Most TCRs bind only 
peptide fragments of proteins 
complexed with MHC molecules. 
Antigen presentation The display of 
peptides bound by molecules on the 
surface of an antigen-presenting cell 
that permits specific recognition by 
TCRs and activation of T cells. 
Antigen-presenting cell (APC) A cell that 
displays peptide fragments of protein 
antigens, in association with MHC 
molecules, on its surface and activates 
antigen-specific T cells. In addition to 
displaying peptide-MHC complexes, 
APCs also express costimulatory 
molecules to optimally activate T 
lymphocytes. 
Antigen processing The intracellular 
conversion of protein antigens derived 
from the extracellular space or the 
cytosol into peptides and loading of 
these peptides onto MHC molecules for 
display to T lymphocytes. 
Antigenic variation The process by which 
antigens expressed by microbes may 
change by various genetic mechanisms 
and therefore allow the microbe to 
evade immune responses. Examples of 
antigenic variation include the change 
in influenza virus surface proteins 
hemagglutinin and neuraminidase, 
which necessitates the use of new 
vaccines each year, and the emergence 
of new SARS-CoV-2 variants, which 
often evade immunity induced by 
earlier viral strains. 
Antimicrobial peptide One of a group of 
peptides with both positively charged 
and hydrophobic amino acid residues, 
which insert into and disrupt the 
integrity of the outer membranes of 
bacteria and some viruses. 
Antimicrobial peptides include 
cathelicidins, defensins, and RegIII 
peptides. They are produced by 
epithelial barrier cells and leukocytes 
and serve as innate immune effector 
molecules. 
Antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
Combination chemotherapy for HIV 
infection, usually consisting of two 
nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors and either one viral protease 
inhibitor or one nonnucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitor. ART can reduce 
plasma virus titers to below detectable 
levels for more than 1 year and slow 
the progression of HIV disease. Also 
called highly active antiretroviral 
therapy (HAART). 
Antiserum Serum from an individual 
previously immunized with an antigen 
that contains antibody specific for that 
antigen. 
Apoptosis A process of cell death 
characterized by activation of 
intracellular caspases, DNA cleavage, 
nuclear condensation and 
fragmentation, and plasma membrane 
blebbing that leads to phagocytosis of 
cell fragments without inducing an 
inflammatory response. This type of 
cell death is important in the return to 
homeostasis after an immune response 
to an infection, maintenance of 
tolerance to self antigens, and killing of 
infected cells by cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes and natural killer cells. 
Arthus reaction A localized form of 
experimental immune complex–
mediated cutaneous vasculitis induced 
by injection of an antigen 
subcutaneously into a previously 
immunized animal or into an animal 
that has been given intravenous 
antibody specific for the antigen. 
Circulating antibodies bind to the 
injected antigen and form immune 
complexes that are deposited in the 
walls of small arteries at the injection 
site, giving rise to a local cutaneous 
vasculitis and tissue necrosis. 
Asthma A pulmonary disease usually 
caused by repeated immediate 
hypersensitivity reactions in the 
bronchi that leads to intermittent and 
reversible airway obstruction, chronic 
bronchial inflammation with 
eosinophils, and bronchial smooth 
265
 
 
 Glossary
muscle cell hypertrophy and 
hyperreactivity. 
Atopy The propensity of an individual to 
produce IgE antibodies in response to 
various environmental antigens and to 
develop strong immediate 
hypersensitivity (allergic) responses. 
People who have allergies to 
environmental antigens, such as pollen 
or house dust, are said to be atopic. 
Autoantibody An antibody produced in 
an individual that is specific for a self 
antigen. Autoantibodies can damage 
cells and tissues and are produced in 
excess in autoimmune diseases, such as 
systemic lupus erythematosus and 
myasthenia gravis. 
Autocrine factor A molecule that acts on 
the same cell that produces the factor. 
For example, IL-2 is an autocrine T cell 
growth factor that stimulates mitotic 
activity of the T cell that produces it. 
Autoimmune disease A disease caused by 
a breakdown of self-tolerance such that 
the adaptive immune system responds 
to self antigens and causes cell and 
tissue damage. Autoimmune diseases 
can be caused by immune attack 
against one organ or tissue (e.g., 
multiple sclerosis, thyroiditis, or type 1 
diabetes) or against multiple and 
systemically distributed antigens (e.g., 
systemic lupus erythematosus). 
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative 
syndrome (ALPS) A syndrome caused 
by genetic mutations that impair 
regulation of lymphocyte apoptosis, 
characterized by lymphadenopathy, 
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, high risk 
of lymphoma, and autoimmunity 
affecting hematopoietic cells. Most 
cases of ALPS are caused by mutations 
in the gene encoding FAS, but some 
cases are due to mutations in the genes 
encoding FAS-ligand or CASPASE-10 
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 
type 1 (APS-1) Also known as 
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–
candidiasis–ectodermal 
dystrophy/dysplasia (APECED). A rare 
autoimmune disease caused by genetic 
deficiency of the autoimmune regulator 
protein AIRE required for central T cell 
tolerance to many different tissue 
antigens. APS-1 patients suffer from 
immune injury to multiple endocrine 
organs and skin. 
Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) A protein 
that functions to induce expression of 
peripheral tissue protein antigens in 
medullary thymic epithelial cells, 
which is required for tolerance to those 
antigens. Mutations in the gene 
encoding AIRE in humans and mice 
impair expression of tissue antigens in 
the thymus and cause autoimmune 
disease (autoimmune polyglandular 
syndrome type 1) affecting multiple 
organs because of a failure to delete T 
cells or to generate regulatory T cells 
specific for these antigens. 
Autoimmunity Responses of the adaptive 
immune system to self antigens that 
occurs when mechanisms of self-
tolerance fail. 
Autologous graft A tissue or organ graft 
in which the donor and recipient are 
the same individual. Autologous bone 
marrow and skin grafts are performed 
in clinical medicine. 
Autophagy The normal process by which 
a cell degrades its own components by 
lysosomal catabolism. Autophagy plays 
a role in innate immune defense against 
infections, and polymorphisms of genes 
that regulate autophagy are linked to 
risk for some autoimmune diseases. 
Avidity The overall strength of 
interaction between two molecules, 
such as an antibody and antigen. 
Avidity depends on both the affinity 
and the valency of interactions. 
Therefore, the avidity of a pentameric 
IgM antibody, with 10 antigen-binding 
sites, for a multivalent antigen is much 
greater than the affinity of a single-
antibody combining site specific for the 
same antigen. Avidity can be used to 
describe the strength of cell-cell 
interactions, which are mediated by 
many binding interactions between cell 
surface molecules. 
B 
B lymphocyte The only cell type 
(including plasma cells derived from B 
lymphocytes) capable of producing 
antibody molecules and therefore the 
mediator of humoral immune 
responses. B lymphocytes, or B cells, 
develop in the bone marrow, and 
mature B cells are found mainly in 
lymphoid follicles in secondary 
lymphoid tissues, in the bone marrow, 
and in the circulation. 
B-1 lymphocytes A subset of B 
lymphocytes that develop earlier 
during ontogeny than do conventional 
(follicular) B cells, express a limited 
repertoire of V genes with little 
junctional diversity, and secrete IgM 
antibodies that bind T-independent 
antigens. Many B-1 cells express the 
CD5 molecule. 
Bare lymphocyte syndrome An 
immunodeficiency disease 
characterized by a lack of class II MHC 
molecule expression that leads to 
defects in maturation and activation of 
CD4+ T cells and cell-mediated 
immunity. The disease is caused by 
mutations in genes encoding factors 
that regulate class II MHC gene 
transcription. 
Basophil A type of bone marrow–derived 
circulating granulocyte with structural 
and functional similarities to mast cells 
that has granules containing many of 
the same inflammatory mediators as 
mast cells and expresses a high-affinity 
Fc receptor for IgE. Basophils that are 
recruited into tissue sites where antigen 
is present may contribute to immediate 
hypersensitivity reactions. 
BCL-2 family proteins A family of 
structurally homologous cytoplasmic 
and mitochondrial membrane proteins 
that regulate apoptosis by influencing 
mitochondrial outer membrane 
permeability. Members of this family 
can be pro-apoptotic (such as BAX, 
BAD, and BAK) or antiapoptotic (e.g., 
BCL-2 and BCL-XL). 
BCL-6 A transcriptional repressor that is 
required for germinal center B cell 
development and for follicular T–
helper cell development. 
B cell receptor (BCR) The cell surface 
antigen receptor on B lymphocytes, 
which is a membrane-bound 
immunoglobulin molecule. 
B cell receptor complex (BCR complex) A 
multiprotein complex expressed on the 
surface of B lymphocytes that 
recognizes antigen and transduces 
activating signals into the cell. The BCR 
complex includes membrane Ig, which 
is responsible for binding antigen, and 
Igα and Igβ proteins, which initiate 
signaling events. 
BLIMP-1 A transcriptional repressor that 
is required for plasma cell generation. 
Bi-specific T cell engagers (BiTEs) 
Recombinant antibody-derived 
molecules consisting of two fused Ig 
single-chain variable fragments (scFvs), 
one specific for the CD3 molecule on T 
cells and the other for a tumor antigen. 
They bring together T cells with tumor 
cells and activate the T cell to kill the 
266            Glossary 
 
tumor cell. BiTEs are used clinically to 
treat B cell tumors. 
Bone marrow The tissue within the 
central cavity of bone that is the site of 
generation of all circulating blood cells 
after birth. B lymphocytes undergo 
most of the steps of their development 
in the bone marrow, while T cell 
progenitors arsing in the bone migrate 
to the thymus, where they develop into 
mature T cells. 
Bone marrow transplantation See 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. 
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) A TEC 
family tyrosine kinase that is essential 
for B cell maturation. Mutations in the 
gene encoding BTK cause X-linked 
agammaglobulinemia, a disease 
characterized by failure of B cells to 
mature beyond the pre-B cell stage. 
Burkitt lymphoma A malignant B cell 
tumor that is diagnosed by histologic 
features but almost always carries a 
reciprocal chromosomal translocation 
involving Ig gene loci and the cellular 
MYC gene on chromosome 8. Many 
cases of Burkitt lymphoma in Africa are 
associated with Epstein-Barr virus 
infection. 
C 
C (constant region) gene segments The 
DNA sequences in the Ig and TCR gene 
loci that encode the invariant portions 
of Ig heavy and light chains and TCRs 
α, β, γ, and δ chains. 
C1 A plasma complement system protein 
composed of several polypeptide 
chains that initiates the classical 
pathway of complement activation by 
attaching to the Fc portions of 
immunoglobulin G (IgG) or IgM 
antibody that has bound antigen. 
C1-inhibitor (C1-INH) A plasma protease 
inhibitor that blocks esterase functions 
of the C1r and C1s components of 
complement C1, which initiate the 
classical pathway of complement 
activation. C1-INH is a serine protease 
inhibitor (serpin), which inhibits other 
mediators of inflammation as well by 
blocking proteases in fibrinolytic, 
coagulation, and kinin pathways. A 
genetic deficiency in C1-INH causes the 
disease hereditary angioedema, 
characterized mainly by deregulated 
bradykinin activity. A disease with 
similar manifestations but occurring 
later in life called acquired angioedema 
is usually caused by autoantibodies 
specific for C1-INH. 
C2 A classical complement pathway 
protein that is proteolytically cleaved 
by activated C1 to generate C2a, which 
forms part of the classical pathway C3 
convertase. 
C3 The central and most abundant 
complement system protein; it is 
involved in the classical, alternative 
and lectin complement pathways. C3 is 
proteolytically cleaved during 
complement activation to generate a 
C3b fragment, which covalently 
attaches to cell or microbial surfaces, 
and a C3a fragment, which is released 
and has various proinflammatory 
activities. 
C3 convertase A multiprotein enzyme 
complex generated by the early steps of 
the classical, alternative and lectin 
pathways of complement activation. C3 
convertase cleaves C3, which gives rise 
to two proteolytic products called C3a 
and C3b. C3b binds covalently to 
microbial surfaces where it acts as an 
opsonin and initiates the late steps of 
complement activation, and released 
C3a, sometimes called an 
anaphylatoxin, has various 
proinflammatory activities. 
C4 A classical complement pathway 
protein that is proteolytically cleaved 
by activated C1 to generate C4b, which 
forms part of the classical pathway C3 
convertase, and a released C4a 
fragment, sometimes called an 
anaphylatoxin, which has various 
proinflammatory activities. 
C5 A protein that is cleaved by C5 
convertases in all complement 
pathways, generating a C5b fragment, 
which initiates formation of the 
membrane attack complex, and a 
released C5a fragment, sometimes 
called an anaphylatoxin, which has 
various proinflammatory activities. 
C5 convertase A multiprotein enzyme 
complex generated by C3b binding to 
C3 convertase. C5 convertase cleaves 
C5 and initiates the late steps of 
complement activation leading to 
formation of the membrane attack 
complex and lysis of cells. 
Calcineurin A cytoplasmic 
serine/threonine phosphatase that 
dephosphorylates the transcription 
factor NFAT, thereby allowing NFAT 
to enter the nucleus. Calcineurin is 
activated by calcium signals generated 
through TCR signaling in response to 
antigen recognition, and the 
immunosuppressive drugs 
cyclosporine and FK506 (tacrolimus) 
work by blocking calcineurin activity. 
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, CD66) 
A highly glycosylated membrane 
protein; increased expression of CEA in 
many carcinomas of the colon, 
pancreas, stomach, and breast results in 
a rise in blood levels. The level of blood 
CEA is used to monitor the persistence 
or recurrence of metastatic carcinoma 
after treatment. 
Caspases Intracellular proteases with 
cysteines in their active sites that cleave 
substrates at the C-terminal sides of 
aspartic acid residues. Most are 
components of enzymatic cascades that 
cause apoptotic death of cells, but 
caspase-1, which is part of the 
inflammasome, drives inflammation by 
processing inactive precursor forms of 
the cytokines IL-1 and IL-18 into their 
active forms. 
Cathelicidins Polypeptides produced by 
neutrophils and various barrier 
epithelia that serve various functions in 
innate immunity, including direct 
toxicity to microorganisms, activation 
of leukocytes, and neutralization of 
lipopolysaccharide. Along with 
defensins, cathelicidins are often called 
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). 
Cathepsins Thiol and aspartyl proteases 
with broad substrate specificities, 
which are abundant in the endosomes 
in APCs, and play an important role in 
generating peptide fragments from 
ingested exogenous protein antigens 
that bind to class II MHC molecules. 
CD molecules Cell surface molecules 
expressed on various cell types in the 
immune system that are designated by 
the “cluster of differentiation” or CD 
number. See Appendix I for a list of CD 
molecules. 
Cell-mediated immunity The form of 
adaptive immunity that is mediated by 
T lymphocytes and serves as the 
defense mechanism against various 
types of microbes that are taken up by 
phagocytes or infect nonphagocytic 
cells. Cell-mediated immune responses 
include CD4+ T cell–mediated 
activation of phagocytes and CD8+ 
CTL–mediated killing of infected cells. 
Central tolerance A form of self-tolerance 
induced in generative (central) 
lymphoid organs as a consequence of 
immature self-reactive lymphocytes 
recognizing self antigens and 
267
  
           
 
 Glossary
    
 
subsequently leading to their death or 
inactivation. Central tolerance prevents 
the emergence of lymphocytes with 
high-affinity receptors for the self 
antigens that are expressed in the bone 
marrow or thymus. 
Centroblasts Rapidly proliferating B cells 
in the dark zone of germinal centers of 
secondary lymphoid tissues, which 
give rise to thousands of progeny, 
express activation-induced deaminase, 
and undergo somatic mutation of their 
V genes. 
Centrocytes B cells in the light zone of 
germinal centers of secondary 
lymphoid organs, which are the 
progeny of proliferating centroblasts of 
the dark zone but do not themselves 
proliferate much. Centrocytes that 
express high-affinity Ig are selected to 
survive, resulting in affinity maturation 
of the B cell response, and undergo 
isotype switching and further 
differentiation into long-lived plasma 
cells and memory B cells. 
Checkpoint blockade A form of cancer 
immunotherapy in which blocking 
antibodies specific for T cell inhibitory 
molecules, including PD-1, PD-L1, and 
CTLA-4, are administered to cancer 
patients to boost antitumor T cell 
responses; also called immune 
checkpoint blockade. This approach has 
been successful in effectively treating 
several kinds of metastatic cancers that 
are unresponsive to other therapies. 
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome A rare 
autosomal recessive immunodeficiency 
disease caused by a defect in the 
trafficking of cytoplasmic granules of 
various cell types that affects the 
lysosomes of neutrophils and 
macrophages as well as the granules of 
CTLs and NK cells. Patients show 
reduced resistance to infection with 
pyogenic bacteria. 
Chemokine receptors Cell surface 
receptors for chemokines that 
transduce signals stimulating the 
migration of leukocytes. There are at 
least 19 different mammalian 
chemokine receptors, each of which 
binds a different set of chemokines; all 
are members of the seven-
transmembrane α-helical, G protein–
coupled receptor family. 
Chemokines A large family of 
structurally homologous low-
molecular-weight cytokines that 
stimulate leukocyte chemotaxis, 
regulate the migration of leukocytes 
from the blood to tissues by activating 
leukocyte integrins, and maintain the 
spatial organization of different subsets 
of lymphocytes and antigen-presenting 
cells within lymphoid organs. 
Chemotaxis Movement of a cell directed 
by a chemical concentration gradient. 
Leukocyte chemotaxis within various 
tissues is often directed by gradients of 
chemokines, leukotrienes, and the 
bacterial peptide N-formylmethionyl-
leucyl-phenylalanine. 
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) 
Genetically engineered receptors with 
tumor antigen–specific binding sites 
encoded by recombinant Ig-variable 
genes and cytoplasmic tails containing 
signaling domains of the TCR complex 
and T cell costimulatory receptors. 
When T cells are engineered to express 
chimeric antigen receptors, these cells 
can recognize and kill cells that the 
extracellular domain recognizes. 
Adoptive transfer of CAR-expressing T 
cells has been used successfully for the 
treatment of some types of hematologic 
cancers. 
Chromosomal translocation A 
chromosomal abnormality in which a 
segment of one chromosome is 
transferred to another. Many malignant 
diseases of lymphocytes are associated 
with chromosomal translocations 
involving an Ig or TCR locus and a 
chromosomal segment containing a 
cellular oncogene. 
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) A 
rare inherited immunodeficiency 
disease caused by mutations in genes 
encoding components of the phagocyte 
oxidase enzyme complex that is needed 
for microbial killing by 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes. The 
disease is characterized by recurrent 
intracellular bacterial and fungal 
infections, often accompanied by 
chronic cell-mediated immune 
responses and the formation of 
granulomas. 
Chronic rejection A form of allograft 
rejection characterized by fibrosis with 
loss of normal organ structures 
occurring during a prolonged period. 
In many cases, the major pathologic 
lesion in chronic rejection is graft 
arterial occlusion caused by 
proliferation of intimal smooth muscle 
cells, which is called graft 
arteriosclerosis. 
c-KIT ligand (stem cell factor) A protein 
required for hematopoiesis, early steps 
in T cell development in the thymus, 
and mast cell development. c-KIT 
ligand is produced in membrane-bound 
and secreted forms by stromal cells in 
the bone marrow and thymus, and it 
binds to the c-KIT tyrosine kinase 
membrane receptor on pluripotent 
stem cells. 
Class I major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) molecule One of two forms of 
polymorphic heterodimeric membrane 
proteins that bind and display peptide 
fragments of protein antigens on the 
surface of APCs for recognition by T 
lymphocytes. Class I MHC molecules 
usually display peptides derived from 
proteins that are proteolytically 
processed by proteasomes in the 
cytosol of the cell, for recognition by 
CD8+ T cells. 
Class II-associated invariant chain 
peptide (CLIP) A peptide remnant of 
the invariant chain that sits in the class 
II MHC peptide-binding cleft and is 
removed by action of the HLA-DM 
molecule before the cleft becomes 
accessible to peptides produced from 
extracellular protein antigens that are 
internalized into vesicles. 
Class II major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) molecule One of two major 
classes of polymorphic heterodimeric 
membrane proteins that bind and 
display peptide fragments of protein 
antigens on the surface of APCs for 
recognition by T lymphocytes. Class II 
MHC molecules usually display 
peptides derived from extracellular 
proteins that are internalized into 
phagocytic or endocytic vesicles, for 
recognition by CD4+ T cells. 
Classical macrophage activation 
Macrophage activation by interferon-γ, 
Th1 cells, and TLR ligands, leading to a 
proinflammatory and microbicidal 
phenotype. Classically activated 
macrophages are also called M1 
macrophages. 
Classical pathway of complement 
activation The complement pathway 
that is an effector arm of humoral 
immunity, generating inflammatory 
mediators, opsonins for phagocytosis of 
antigens, and lytic complexes that 
destroy cells. The classical pathway is 
initiated by binding of the C1 molecule 
to the Fc portions of IgG or IgM 
antibodies in antigen-antibody 
268            Glossary 
 
complexes, leading to proteolytic 
cleavage of C4 and C2 proteins to 
generate the classical pathway C3 
convertase. The classical pathway, as 
well as the alternative and lectin 
pathways, terminate with formation of 
the membrane attack complex. 
Clonal anergy A state of antigen 
unresponsiveness of a clone of T 
lymphocytes experimentally induced 
by recognition of antigen in the absence 
of additional signals (costimulatory 
signals) required for functional 
activation. Clonal anergy is considered 
a model for one mechanism of tolerance 
to self antigens and may be applicable 
to B lymphocytes as well. 
Clonal deletion A mechanism of 
lymphocyte tolerance in which an 
immature T cell in the thymus or an 
immature B cell in the bone marrow 
undergoes apoptotic death as a 
consequence of recognizing a self 
antigen. 
Clonal expansion The approximately 
1000- to 100,000-fold increase in the 
number of lymphocytes specific for an 
antigen that results from antigen 
stimulation and proliferation of naive T 
and B cells. Clonal expansion occurs in 
lymphoid tissues and is required to 
generate enough antigen-specific 
effector T lymphocytes and plasma 
cells from rare naive precursors to 
eradicate infections. 
Clonal ignorance A form of lymphocyte 
unresponsiveness in which self 
antigens are ignored by the immune 
system even though lymphocytes 
specific for those antigens remain 
viable and functional. 
Clonal selection A fundamental tenet of 
the immune system meaning that every 
individual possesses numerous clonally 
derived lymphocytes, each clone 
having arisen from a single precursor, 
expresses one antigen receptor, and is 
capable of recognizing and responding 
to a distinct antigenic determinant. 
When an antigen enters, it selects a 
specific preexisting clone and activates 
it. 
Clone A group of cells, all derived from a 
single common precursor, that 
maintain many of the genotypic and 
phenotypic features shared by the cell 
of origin. In adaptive immunity, all 
members of a clone of lymphocytes 
share the same clonally unique 
recombined Ig or TCR genes. The 
rearranged Ig V genes of different cells 
within a clone of B cells may change in 
sequence as a result of somatic 
hypermutation that occurs after 
activation of mature B cells. 
Coinhibitory pathway A physiologic 
mechanism of regulation of T cell 
activation that involves the binding of 
molecules on an APC to receptors on a 
T cell, resulting in inhibition of T cell 
activation by antigen plus 
costimulators. Examples include PD-L1 
on APCs binding to PD-1 on T cells, 
which generates inhibitory signals that 
block TCR and costimulatory signals in 
the T cell, or CTLA-4 on a T cell 
binding to B7-1 and B7-2 on an APC, 
preventing costimulation by B7-1 and 
B7-2 binding to CD28 on the T cell. 
Blockade of coinhibitory pathways is 
widely used as a therapeutic strategy to 
enhance antitumor immunity 
(checkpoint blockade). 
Collectins A family of proteins, including 
mannose-binding lectin, that is 
characterized by a collagen-like domain 
and a lectin (i.e., carbohydrate-binding) 
domain. Collectins play a role in the 
innate immune system by acting as 
microbial pattern recognition receptors, 
and they may activate the complement 
system by binding to C1q. 
Colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) 
Cytokines that promote the expansion 
and differentiation of bone marrow 
progenitor cells. CSFs are essential for 
the maturation of red blood cells, 
granulocytes, monocytes, and 
lymphocytes. Examples of CSFs include 
granulocyte-monocyte colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF), and IL-3. 
Combinatorial diversity The diversity of 
Ig and TCR specificities generated by 
the use of many different combinations 
of different variable, diversity, and 
joining segments during somatic 
recombination of DNA in the Ig and 
TCR loci in developing B and T cells. 
Combinatorial diversity is one 
mechanism, which works together with 
junctional diversity, for the generation 
of large numbers of different antigen 
receptor genes from a limited number 
of DNA gene segments. 
Common variable immunodeficiency 
disease (CVID) One of a group of 
heterogeneous disorders characterized 
by reduced circulating antibody, 
impaired antibody responses to 
infection and vaccines, increased 
incidence of infections, typically with 
H. influenzae and S. pneumoniae, 
various autoimmune manifestations, 
and a high incidence of lymphomas. 
Most cases are sporadic, but up to 25% 
of patients have a family history, some 
of which are result of monogenic 
mutations, such as mutations of the 
CTLA4 gene. 
Complement A system of plasma and cell 
surface proteins that interact with one 
another and with other molecules of the 
immune system to generate important 
effectors of innate and adaptive 
immune responses. The classical, 
alternative, and lectin pathways of the 
complement system are activated by 
antigen-antibody complexes, microbial 
surfaces, and plasma lectins binding to 
microbes, respectively, and consist of a 
cascade of proteolytic enzymes that 
generate inflammatory mediators and 
opsonins. All three pathways lead to 
the formation of a common terminal 
cell lytic complex that is inserted in cell 
membranes. 
Complement receptor type 1 (CR1) A 
receptor for the C3b and C4b fragments 
of complement. Phagocytes use CR1 to 
mediate internalization of C3b- or C4b-
coated particles. CR1 on erythrocytes 
serves in the clearance of immune 
complexes from the circulation. CR1 is 
also a regulator of complement 
activation. 
Complement receptor type 2 (CR2) A 
receptor expressed on B cells and 
follicular dendritic cells that binds 
proteolytic fragments of the C3 
complement protein, including C3d, 
C3dg, and iC3b. CR2 (also called CD21) 
functions to stimulate humoral immune 
responses by enhancing B cell 
activation by antigen and by promoting 
the trapping of antigen-antibody 
complexes in germinal centers. CR2 is 
also the receptor for Epstein-Barr virus. 
Complement receptor type 3 (CR3) An 
integrin expressed mainly on 
neutrophils and macrophages, which 
binds to a peptide fragment of C3 
called iC3b, which is deposited on 
microbes as a result of complement 
pathway activation. CR3 mediates the 
phagocytosis of iC3b coated microbes. 
CR3 is also called CD11b/CD18. 
Complementarity-determining regions 
(CDRs) Short segments of Ig and TCR 
269
 
 
 Glossary
proteins that contain most of the 
sequence differences between 
antibodies or TCRs expressed by 
different clones of B cells and T cells 
and make contact with antigen; also 
called hypervariable regions. Three 
CDRs are present in the variable 
domain of each antigen receptor 
polypeptide chain, and six CDRs are 
present in an intact Ig or TCR molecule. 
These hypervariable segments assume 
loop structures that together form a 
surface complementary to the three-
dimensional structure of the bound 
antigen. 
Congenic mouse strains Inbred mouse 
strains that are identical to one another 
at every genetic locus except the one for 
which they are selected to differ; such 
strains are created by repetitive back 
cross breeding and selection for a 
particular trait. Congenic strains that 
differ from one another only at a 
particular MHC allele have been useful 
in defining the function of MHC 
molecules. 
Congenital immunodeficiency See 
primary immunodeficiency. 
Constant (C) region The portion of Ig or 
TCR polypeptide chains that does not 
vary in sequence among different 
clones and is not involved in antigen 
binding. 
Contact sensitivity A state of immune 
responsiveness to certain chemical 
agents leading to T cell–mediated 
delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions 
upon skin contact. Substances that elicit 
contact sensitivity, including nickel 
ions, urushiols in poison ivy, and many 
therapeutic drugs, bind to and modify 
self proteins on the surfaces of APCs, 
which are then recognized by CD4+ or 
CD8+ T cells. 
Coreceptor A lymphocyte surface 
receptor that binds to a molecule 
physically associated with antigen at 
the same time that membrane Ig or 
TCR binds the antigen and delivers 
signals required for optimal 
lymphocyte activation. CD4 and CD8 
are T cell coreceptors that bind 
nonpolymorphic parts of an MHC 
molecule concurrently with the TCR 
binding to polymorphic MHC residues 
and the displayed peptide. CR2 is a 
coreceptor on B cells that binds to 
complement proteins attached to 
antigens at the same time that 
membrane Ig binds the antigen. 
Costimulator A molecule expressed on 
the surface of APCs in response to 
innate immune stimuli, which provides 
a stimulus (the “second signal”), in 
addition to antigen (the “first signal”), 
required for the activation of naive T 
cells. The best defined costimulators are 
the B7 molecules (CD80 and CD86) on 
APCs that bind to the CD28 receptor on 
T cells. 
COVID-19 A disease caused by the highly 
infectious coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, 
mainly affecting the respiratory system, 
often with pneumonia, but also 
involving various other organ systems. 
An exuberant inflammatory response to 
the virus can cause irreversible and 
often lethal lung injury in a minority of 
patients. The COVID-19 pandemic of 
2020 to 2022 has led to the infection of 
hundreds of millions of people 
worldwide, and an estimated 6 to 15 
million people have died of the disease. 
CpG dinucleotides Cytidine-guanine 
sequences that are repeated in certain 
stretches of DNA and regulate gene 
expression dependent on methylation 
status. Most human CpG 
oligonucleotides are methylated, while 
most microbial CPGs are unmethylated 
and are recognized by Toll-like receptor 
9, stimulating innate immune 
responses. CpG oligonucleotides are 
used as adjuvants in vaccines. 
C-reactive protein (CRP) A member of 
the pentraxin family of plasma proteins 
involved in innate immune responses 
to bacterial infections. CRP binds to the 
capsule of pneumococcal bacteria. CRP 
also binds to C1q and may thereby 
activate complement or act as an 
opsonin by interacting with phagocyte 
C1q receptors. CRP is an acute-phase 
protein, and increased plasma 
concentration of CRP is a clinically 
used marker of inflammation. 
Cross-matching A screening test 
performed to minimize the chance of 
adverse transfusion reactions or graft 
rejection, in which a patient in need of a 
blood transfusion or organ allograft is 
tested for the presence of preformed 
antibodies against donor cell surface 
antigens (usually blood group antigens 
or MHC molecules). The test involves 
mixing the recipient serum with 
leukocytes or red blood cells from 
potential donors and analyzing for 
agglutination or complement-
dependent lysis of the cells. 
Cross-presentation A mechanism by 
which a dendritic cell activates (or 
primes) a naive CD8+ CTL specific for 
the antigens of a third cell (e.g., a virus-
infected or tumor cell). Cross-
presentation occurs, for example, when 
protein antigens from an infected cell 
are ingested by a dendritic cell and the 
microbial antigens are processed and 
presented in association with class I 
MHC molecules, unlike the general rule 
for phagocytosed antigens, which are 
presented in association with class II 
MHC molecules. The dendritic cell also 
provides costimulation for the T cells. 
Also called cross-priming. 
CTLA-4 An Ig superfamily protein, 
expressed on the surface of activated 
effector T cells and Treg, that binds B7-
1 and B7-2 with high affinity and plays 
an essential role in inhibiting T cell 
responses. CTLA-4 (also called CD152) 
is essential for Treg function and T cell 
tolerance to self antigens. 
C-type lectin A member of a large family 
of calcium-dependent carbohydrate-
binding proteins, many of which play 
important roles in innate and adaptive 
immunity. For example, soluble C-type 
lectins bind to microbial carbohydrate 
structures and mediate phagocytosis or 
complement activation (e.g., mannose-
binding lectin, dectins, collectins, 
ficolins). 
Cutaneous immune system The 
components of the innate and adaptive 
immune systems found in the skin that 
function together in a specialized way 
to detect and respond to pathogens on 
or in the skin and to maintain 
homeostasis with commensal microbes. 
Components of the cutaneous immune 
system include keratinocytes, 
Langerhans cells, dermal dendritic 
cells, intraepithelial lymphocytes, and 
dermal lymphocytes. 
Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase A cytosolic 
DNA sensor of the innate immune 
system that generates cyclic GMP-AMP 
as a second messenger that interacts 
with the STING adaptor to induce type 
I interferon synthesis. 
Cyclosporine A calcineurin inhibitor 
widely used as an immunosuppressive 
drug to prevent allograft rejection by 
blocking T cell activation. Cyclosporine 
(also called cyclosporin A) binds to a 
cytosolic protein called cyclophilin, and 
cyclosporine-cyclophilin complexes 
bind to and inhibit calcineurin, thereby 
270            Glossary 
 
inhibiting activation and nuclear 
translocation of the transcription factor 
NFAT. 
Cytokines Proteins that are produced and 
secreted by many different cell types, 
and mediate inflammatory and 
immune reactions. Cytokines are 
principal mediators of communication 
between cells of the immune system 
(see Appendix II). 
Cytokine storm A very strong, potentially 
life-threatening inflammatory reaction 
caused by large amounts of 
inflammatory cytokines rapidly 
released from activated T cells and 
macrophages in the setting of 
infections, auotimmune disease, or 
cancer immunotherapies. Clinical 
features include fever, chills, low white 
blood cell and platelet counts, edema, 
respiratory failure, and shock. 
Cytosolic DNA sensors (CDSs) Molecules 
that detect microbial double-stranded 
DNA in the cytosol and activate 
signaling pathways that initiate 
antimicrobial responses, including type 
I interferon production and autophagy. 
Cytotoxic (or cytolytic) T lymphocyte 
(CTL) A type of T lymphocyte whose 
major effector function is to recognize 
and kill host cells infected with viruses 
or other intracellular microbes as well 
as tumor cells. CTLs usually express 
CD8 and recognize peptides derived 
from cytosolic microbial and tumor 
antigens displayed by class I MHC 
molecules. CTL killing of infected and 
tumor cells involves delivery of the 
contents of cytoplasmic granules into 
the cytosol of the cells, leading to 
apoptotic death. 
D 
Damage-associated molecular patterns 
(DAMPs) Endogenous molecules that 
are produced by or released from 
damaged and dying cells that bind to 
pattern recognition receptors and 
stimulate innate immune responses. 
Examples include high-mobility group 
box 1 (HMGB1) protein, extracellular 
ATP, and uric acid crystals. 
Death receptors Plasma membrane 
receptors expressed on various cell 
types that, upon ligand binding, 
transduce signals that lead to 
recruitment of the FAS-associated 
protein with death domain (FADD) 
adaptor protein, which activates 
caspase-8, leading to apoptotic cell 
death. All death receptors, including 
FAS, TRAIL, and TNFR, belong to the 
TNF receptor superfamily. 
Dectins Pattern recognition receptors 
expressed on dendritic cells that 
recognize fungal cell wall 
carbohydrates and induce signaling 
events that promote inflammation and 
activate the dendritic cells. 
Defensins Cysteine-rich peptides 
produced by epithelial barrier cells in 
the skin, gut, lung, and other tissues 
and in neutrophil granules that act as 
broad-spectrum antibiotics to kill a 
wide variety of bacteria and fungi. The 
synthesis of defensins is increased in 
response to stimulation of innate 
immune system receptors such as Toll-
like receptors and inflammatory 
cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF. 
Defensins and cathelicidins are two 
types of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). 
Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) An 
immune reaction in which T cell–
dependent macrophage activation and 
inflammation cause tissue injury. A 
DTH reaction to the subcutaneous 
injection of antigen is often used as an 
assay for cell-mediated immunity (e.g., 
the purified protein derivative [PPD] 
skin test to screen for immunity to 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis). 
Dendritic cells Bone marrow–derived 
cells found in epithelial barriers, the 
stroma of most organs, and lymphoid 
tissues, which are morphologically 
characterized by thin membranous 
projections. Many subsets of dendritic 
cells exist with diverse functions. 
Classical (conventional) dendritic cells 
function as innate sentinel cells and 
APCs for naive T lymphocytes, and 
they are important for initiation of 
adaptive immune responses to protein 
antigen. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells 
produce type I interferons in response 
to exposure to viruses. Monocyte-
derived dendritic cells (MoDCs) are 
derived from blood monocytes during 
inflammatory reactions. Immature 
(resting) dendritic cells are important 
for induction of tolerance to self 
antigens. 
Desensitization A method of treating 
immediate hypersensitivity disease 
(allergies) that involves repetitive 
administration of low doses of an 
antigen to which individuals are 
allergic. This process often prevents 
severe allergic reactions on subsequent 
environmental exposure to the allergen, 
but the mechanisms are not well 
understood. 
Determinant The specific portion of a 
macromolecular antigen to which an 
antibody or TCR binds. In the case of a 
protein antigen recognized by a T cell, 
the determinant is the peptide portion 
that binds to an MHC molecule for 
recognition by the TCR. Synonymous 
with epitope. 
Diacylglycerol (DAG) A signaling 
molecule generated by phospholipase 
C (PLCγ1)-mediated hydrolysis of the 
plasma membrane phospholipid 
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 
(PIP2) during antigen activation of 
lymphocytes and various other 
immune cells. The main function of 
DAG is to activate an enzyme called 
protein kinase C that participates in the 
generation of active transcription 
factors. 
DiGeorge syndrome A selective T cell 
deficiency caused by a congenital 
malformation that results in defective 
development of the thymus, 
parathyroid glands, and other 
structures that arise from the third and 
fourth pharyngeal pouches. 
Direct antigen presentation (direct 
allorecognition) Presentation of cell 
surface allogeneic MHC molecules by 
graft APCs to a graft recipient’s T cells 
that leads to activation of the 
alloreactive T cells. In direct recognition 
of an allogeneic MHC molecule, a TCR 
that was selected to recognize a self 
MHC molecule plus foreign peptide 
cross-reacts with the intact allogeneic 
MHC molecule plus any bound 
peptide. Direct presentation is partly 
responsible for strong T cell responses 
to allografts. 
Diversity The existence of a large number 
of lymphocytes with different antigenic 
specificities in any individual. Diversity 
is a fundamental property of the 
adaptive immune system and is the 
result of variability in the structures of 
the antigen-binding sites of lymphocyte 
receptors for antigens (antibodies and 
TCRs). 
Diversity (D) segments Short coding 
sequences between the variable (V) and 
constant (C) gene segments in the Ig 
heavy chain and TCR β and γ loci that 
together with J segments are 
somatically recombined with V 
segments during lymphocyte 
development. The resulting 
271
 
 
 Glossary
recombined VDJ DNA codes for the 
carboxyl-terminal ends of the antigen 
receptor V regions, including the third 
hypervariable (CDR) regions. Random 
use of D segments contributes to the 
diversity of the antigen receptor 
repertoire. 
DNA vaccine A vaccine composed of a 
bacterial plasmid containing a 
complementary DNA encoding a 
protein antigen. DNA vaccines 
presumably work because APCs are 
transfected in vivo by the plasmid and 
express immunogenic peptides that 
elicit specific responses. Furthermore, 
the plasmid DNA contains CpG 
nucleotides that act as adjuvants. 
Double-negative thymocyte A subset of 
developing T cells in the thymus 
(thymocytes) that express neither CD4 
nor CD8. Most double-negative 
thymocytes are at an early 
developmental stage and do not 
express antigen receptors. They will 
later express both CD4 and CD8 during 
the intermediate double-positive stage 
before further maturation to single-
positive T cells expressing only CD4 or 
CD8. 
Double-positive thymocyte A subset of 
developing T cells in the thymus 
(thymocytes) that express both CD4 
and CD8 and are at an intermediate 
developmental stage. Double-positive 
thymocytes also express TCRs and are 
subject to selection processes, and they 
mature to single-positive T cells 
expressing only CD4 or CD8. 
E 
Ectoparasites Parasites that live on the 
surface of an animal, such as ticks and 
mites. Both the innate and adaptive 
immune systems may play a role in 
protection against ectoparasites, often 
by destroying the larval stages of these 
organisms. 
Effector cells The cells that perform 
effector functions during an immune 
response, such as secreting cytokines 
(e.g., helper T cells), killing microbes 
(e.g., macrophages), killing microbe-
infected host cells (e.g., CTLs), or 
secreting antibodies (e.g., plasma cells). 
Effector phase The phase of an immune 
response in which a foreign antigen is 
destroyed or inactivated. In a humoral 
immune response, the effector phase 
may be characterized by antibody-
dependent complement activation and 
phagocytosis of antibody- and 
complement-opsonized bacteria. In a 
cell-mediated immune response, the 
effector phase is characterized by 
activation of macrophages and other 
leukocytes by helper T cells and killing 
of infected cells by CTLs. 
Endosome An intracellular membrane-
bound vesicle into which extracellular 
proteins are internalized during antigen 
processing. Endosomes are formed by 
invagination of the plasma membrane, 
and they may mature into late 
endosomes and lysosomes, which have 
progressively lower pH and more 
hydrolytic enzymes. The proteolytic 
enzymes in endosomes degrade 
internalized proteins into peptides that 
bind to class II MHC molecules, and the 
endosomes containing these peptides 
fuse with Golgi-derived vesicles 
containing class II MHC molecules. 
(Endosomes are found in all cells and 
participate in internalization events that 
are not linked to antigen presentation.) 
Endotoxin A component of the cell wall 
of gram-negative bacteria, also called 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), that is 
released from dying bacteria and 
stimulates innate immune 
inflammatory responses by binding to 
TLR4 on many different cell types, 
including phagocytes, endothelial cells, 
dendritic cells, and barrier epithelial 
cells. Endotoxin contains both lipid 
components and carbohydrate 
(polysaccharide) moieties. 
Enhancer A regulatory nucleotide 
sequence in a gene that is located either 
upstream or downstream of the 
promoter, binds transcription factors, 
and increases the activity of the 
promoter. In cells of the immune 
system, enhancers are responsible for 
integrating cell surface signals that lead 
to induced transcription of genes 
encoding many of the effector proteins 
of an immune response, such as 
cytokines. 
Envelope glycoprotein (Env) A 
membrane glycoprotein encoded by a 
retrovirus that is expressed on the 
plasma membrane of infected cells and 
on the host cell–derived membrane coat 
of viral particles. Env proteins are often 
required for viral infectivity. The Env 
proteins of HIV include gp41 and 
gp120, which bind to CD4 and 
chemokine receptors, respectively, on 
human T cells and mediate fusion of 
the viral and T cell membranes. 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) A method of quantifying an 
antigen immobilized on a solid surface 
by use of a specific antibody with a 
covalently coupled enzyme. The 
amount of antibody that binds the 
antigen is proportional to the amount 
of antigen present and is determined by 
spectrophotometrically measuring the 
conversion of a clear substrate to a 
colored product by the coupled 
enzyme. 
Eosinophil A bone marrow–derived 
granulocyte that is abundant in the 
inflammatory infiltrates of immediate 
hypersensitivity late-phase reactions 
and contributes to many of the 
pathologic processes in allergic 
diseases. They are recognizable by their 
bright red cytosolic granules in 
standard Wright-Giemsa–stained blood 
smears and hematoxylin and eosin–
stained tissue sections. Eosinophils are 
important in defense against 
extracellular parasites, including 
helminths. 
Epitope The specific portion of a 
macromolecular antigen to which an 
antibody or TCR binds. In the case of a 
protein antigen recognized by a T cell, 
an epitope is the peptide portion that 
binds to an MHC molecule for 
recognition by the TCR. Synonymous 
with determinant. 
Epitope spreading In autoimmunity, the 
development of immune responses to 
multiple epitopes as an autoimmune 
disease originally targeting one epitope 
progresses, likely caused by further 
breakdown in tolerance and release of 
additional tissue antigens due to the 
inflammatory process stimulated by the 
initial response. 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) A double-
stranded DNA virus of the herpesvirus 
family that is the etiologic agent of 
infectious mononucleosis and is 
associated with some B-cell malignant 
tumors and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. 
EBV infects B lymphocytes and some 
epithelial cells by specifically binding 
to complement receptor 2 (CR2, CD21). 
Experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis (EAE) An animal 
model of multiple sclerosis, an 
autoimmune demyelinating disease of 
the central nervous system. EAE is 
induced in rodents by immunization 
with components of the myelin sheath 
of nerves (e.g., myelin basic protein), 
272            Glossary 
 
mixed with an adjuvant. The disease is 
mediated in large part by cytokine-
secreting CD4+ T cells specific for the 
myelin sheath proteins. 
F 
Fab (fragment, antigen-binding) A part of 
an antibody, first produced by 
proteolysis of IgG, that includes one 
complete light chain paired with one 
heavy chain fragment containing the 
variable domain and only the first 
constant domain. Fab fragments, which 
can be generated from all antibodies, 
retain the ability to monovalently bind 
an antigen but cannot interact with IgG 
Fc receptors on cells or with 
complement. Therefore, Fab 
preparations are used in research and 
therapeutic applications when antigen 
binding is desired without activation of 
effector functions. (The Fab′ fragment 
retains the hinge region of the heavy 
chain.) 
F(ab′)2 A part of an Ig molecule (first 
produced by proteolysis of IgG) that 
includes two complete light chains but 
only the variable domain, first constant 
domain, and hinge region of the two 
heavy chains. F(ab′)2 fragments retain 
the entire bivalent antigen-binding 
region of an intact Ig molecule but 
cannot bind complement or Fc 
receptors. They are used in research 
when antigen binding is desired 
without antibody effector functions. 
FAS (CD95) A death receptor of the TNF 
receptor family that is expressed on the 
surface of T cells and many other cell 
types and initiates a signaling cascade 
leading to apoptotic death of the cell. 
The death pathway is initiated when 
FAS ligand expressed on activated T 
cells binds to FAS on the same or other 
cells. FAS-mediated killing of 
lymphocytes is important for the 
maintenance of self-tolerance. 
Mutations in the FAS gene cause the 
disease autoimmune 
lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS). 
(See also death receptors.) 
FAS ligand (CD95 ligand) A membrane 
protein that is a member of the TNF 
family of proteins expressed on 
activated T cells. FAS ligand binds to 
the death receptor FAS, thereby 
activating a signaling pathway that 
leads to apoptotic death of the FAS-
expressing cell. Mutations in the FAS 
ligand gene cause systemic 
autoimmune disease in mice. 
Fc (fragment, crystalline) A region of an 
antibody molecule that can be isolated 
by proteolysis of IgG that contains only 
the disulfide-linked carboxyl-terminal 
regions of the two heavy chains. The Fc 
region of Ig molecules mediates effector 
functions by binding to cell surface 
receptors or the C1q complement 
protein. (Fc fragments are so named 
because they tend to crystallize out of 
solution.) 
Fc receptor A cell surface receptor specific 
for the carboxyl-terminal constant 
region of an Ig molecule. Fc receptors 
are typically multichain protein 
complexes that include signaling 
components and Ig-binding 
components. Several types of Fc 
receptors exist, including those specific 
for different IgG isotypes, IgE, and IgA. 
Fc receptors mediate many of the cell-
dependent effector functions of 
antibodies, including phagocytosis of 
antibody-bound antigens, antigen-
induced activation of mast cells, and 
targeting and activation of NK cells. 
FcεRI A high-affinity receptor for the 
carboxyl-terminal constant region of 
IgE molecules that is expressed mainly 
on mast cells and basophils. FcεRI 
molecules on mast cells are usually 
occupied by IgE, and antigen-induced 
cross-linking of these IgE-FcεRI 
complexes activates the mast cell and 
initiates immediate hypersensitivity 
reactions. 
Fcγ receptor (FcγR) A cell surface 
receptor specific for the carboxyl-
terminal constant region of IgG 
molecules. There are several different 
types of Fcγ receptors, including a 
high-affinity FcγRI that mediates 
phagocytosis by macrophages and 
neutrophils, a low-affinity FcγRIIB that 
transduces inhibitory signals in B cells 
and myeloid cells, and a low-affinity 
FcγRIIIA that mediates recognition of 
opsonized cells by and activation of NK 
cells. 
Fibroblastic reticular cell (FRC) 
Mesenchymally derived cells that drive 
formation of secondary lymphoid 
organs during embryonic development 
and contribute in multiple ways to the 
structure and functions of these organs. 
Ficolins Hexameric innate immune 
system plasma proteins, containing 
collagen-like domains and fibrinogen-
like carbohydrate-recognizing domains, 
which bind to cell wall components of 
gram-positive bacteria, opsonizing 
them and activating complement. 
First-set rejection Allograft rejection in an 
individual who has not previously 
received a graft or otherwise been 
exposed to tissue alloantigens from the 
same donor. First-set rejection usually 
takes approximately 7 to 14 days. 
FK506 See Tacrolimus. 
Flow cytometry A method of analysis of 
the phenotype of cell populations 
requiring a specialized instrument 
(flow cytometer) that can detect 
fluorescence on individual cells in a 
suspension and thereby determine the 
number of cells expressing the 
molecule to which a fluorescent probe 
binds, as well as the relative amount of 
the molecule expressed. Suspensions of 
cells are incubated with fluorescently 
labeled antibodies or other probes, and 
the amount of probe bound by each cell 
in the population is measured by 
passing the cells one at a time through a 
fluorimeter with a laser-generated 
incident beam. 
Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) 
An adaptation of the flow cytometer 
that is used for the purification of cells 
from a mixed population according to 
which and how much fluorescent probe 
the cells bind. Cells are first stained 
with a fluorescently labeled probe, such 
as an antibody specific for a surface 
antigen of a cell population. The cells 
are then passed one at a time through a 
fluorimeter with a laser-generated 
incident beam and are deflected into 
different collection tubes by 
electromagnetic fields whose strength 
and direction are varied according to 
the measured intensity of the 
fluorescence signal. 
Follicle See lymphoid follicle. 
Follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) Cells in 
lymphoid follicles of secondary 
lymphoid organs that express 
complement receptors and Fc receptors 
and have long cytoplasmic processes 
that form a meshwork integral to the 
architecture of the follicles. Follicular 
dendritic cells display antigens on their 
surface for B cell recognition and are 
involved in the activation and selection 
of B cells expressing high-affinity 
membrane Ig during the process of 
affinity maturation. They are 
nonhematopoietic cells (not of bone 
marrow origin). 
273
  
           
 
 Glossary
    
 
Follicular helper T cell (Tfh cell) See T 
follicular helper (Tfh) cells. 
N-Formylmethionine An amino acid that 
initiates all bacterial proteins and no 
mammalian proteins (except those 
synthesized within mitochondria) and 
serves as a signal to the innate immune 
system of infection. Specific receptors 
for N-formylmethionine–containing 
peptides are expressed on neutrophils 
and mediate activation and chemotaxis 
of the neutrophils. 
FOXP3 A forkhead family transcription 
factor expressed by and required for 
the development and function of CD4+ 
regulatory T cells. Mutations in the 
gene ending FOXP3 in mice and 
humans result in an absence of CD25+ 
regulatory T cells and a multisystem 
autoimmune disease called IPEX. 
G 
γδ T cell receptor (γδ TCR) A form of 
TCR that is distinct from the more 
common αβ TCR and is expressed on a 
subset of T cells found mostly in 
epithelial barrier tissues. Although the 
γδ TCR is structurally similar to the αβ 
TCR, the forms of antigen recognized 
by γδ TCRs are poorly understood; 
they do not recognize peptide 
complexes bound to polymorphic MHC 
molecules. 
G protein–coupled receptor family A 
diverse family of receptors for 
hormones, lipid inflammatory 
mediators, and chemokines that use 
associated trimeric G proteins for 
intracellular signaling. 
G proteins Proteins that bind guanyl 
nucleotides and act as exchange 
molecules by catalyzing the 
replacement of bound guanosine 
diphosphate (GDP) by guanosine 
triphosphate (GTP). G proteins with 
bound GTP can activate a variety of 
cellular enzymes in different signaling 
cascades. Trimeric GTP-binding 
proteins are associated with the 
cytoplasmic portions of many cell 
surface receptors, such as chemokine 
receptors. Other small soluble G 
proteins, such as RAS and RAC, are 
recruited into signaling pathways by 
adaptor proteins. 
GATA-3 A transcription factor that plays 
an essential role in the differentiation of 
T helper 2 cells from naive T cells and 
group 2 ILCs. 
Generative lymphoid organ An organ in 
which lymphocytes develop from 
immature precursors. The bone 
marrow and thymus are the major 
generative lymphoid organs in which B 
cells and T cells develop, respectively. 
Generative lymphoid organs are also 
called primary lymphoid organs or 
central lymphoid organs. 
Germinal centers Specialized structures 
in secondary (peripheral) lymphoid 
organs generated during T-dependent 
humoral immune responses, where 
extensive B cell proliferation, isotype 
switching, somatic mutation, affinity 
maturation, memory B cell generation, 
and induction of long-lived plasma 
cells take place. Germinal centers 
appear as lightly staining regions 
within lymphoid follicles in spleen, 
lymph node, and mucosal lymphoid 
tissue. 
Germline organization The inherited 
arrangement of variable, diversity, 
joining, and constant region gene 
segments of the antigen receptor loci in 
nonlymphoid cells or in immature 
lymphocytes. In developing B or T 
lymphocytes, the germline organization 
is modified by somatic recombination 
to form functional Ig or TCR genes. 
Glomerulonephritis Inflammation of the 
renal glomeruli, often initiated by 
immunopathologic mechanisms such as 
deposition of circulating antigen-
antibody complexes in the glomerular 
basement membrane or binding of 
antibodies to antigens expressed in the 
glomerulus. The antibodies can activate 
complement and phagocytes, and the 
resulting inflammatory response can 
lead to renal failure. 
Graft A tissue or organ that is removed 
from one site and placed in another 
site, usually in a different individual. 
Graft arteriosclerosis Occlusion of graft 
arteries caused by proliferation of 
intimal smooth muscle cells. This 
process occurs gradually over years 
after transplantation and is largely 
responsible for chronic rejection and 
failure of vascularized organ grafts. The 
mechanism is likely to be a chronic 
immune response to vessel wall 
alloantigens. Graft arteriosclerosis is 
also called accelerated arteriosclerosis. 
Graft rejection A specific immune 
response to an organ or tissue graft that 
leads to inflammation, graft damage, 
and possibly graft failure. 
Graft-versus-host disease A disease 
occurring in hematopoietic stem cell 
(HSC) transplant recipients that is 
caused by mature T cells present in the 
HSC inoculum reacting with 
alloantigens on host cells. The disease 
most often affects the skin, liver, and 
intestines. 
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-
CSF) A cytokine made by activated T 
cells, macrophages, and endothelial 
cells at sites of infection that acts on 
progenitors in the bone marrow to 
increase the production of and mobilize 
neutrophils to replace those consumed 
in inflammatory reactions. 
Granulocyte-monocyte colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) A cytokine 
made by activated T cells, 
macrophages, endothelial cells, and 
stromal fibroblasts that acts on bone 
marrow to increase the production of 
neutrophils and monocytes. GM-CSF is 
also a macrophage-activating factor and 
promotes the maturation of dendritic 
cells. 
Granuloma A nodule of inflammatory 
tissue composed of clusters of activated 
macrophages and T lymphocytes, 
usually with associated fibrosis. 
Granulomatous inflammation is a form 
of chronic delayed-type 
hypersensitivity, often in response to 
persistent microbes, such as 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and some 
fungi, or in response to particulate 
antigens that are not readily 
phagocytosed. 
Granulysin A lipid-binding cationic 
peptide found in granules of CTLs and 
NK cells, which can damage 
cholesterol-poor membranes, typical of 
bacteria but not mammalian cells, and 
thereby can kill intracellular microbes. 
Granzyme B A serine protease found in 
the granules of CTLs and NK cells that 
is released by exocytosis, enters target 
cells, and proteolytically cleaves and 
activates caspases, which in turn cleave 
several substrates and induce target cell 
apoptosis. 
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) 
Organized collections of lymphocytes 
and APCs within the mucosa of the 
gastrointestinal tract, such as Peyer 
patches in the small bowel, where 
adaptive immune responses to 
intestinal microbial flora and ingested 
antigens are initiated (see also mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissues). 
H 
274            Glossary 
 
H-2 molecule A major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) molecule in the mouse. 
The mouse MHC was originally called 
the H-2 locus. 
Haplotype The set of tightly linked major 
histocompatibility complex alleles 
inherited together from one parent and 
present on one chromosome. 
Hapten A small chemical that can bind to 
an antibody but must be attached to a 
macromolecule (carrier) to stimulate an 
adaptive immune response specific for 
that chemical. For example, 
immunization with dinitrophenol 
(DNP) alone will not stimulate an anti-
DNP antibody response, but 
immunization with a protein with 
covalently attached DNP hapten will. 
Heavy-chain class (isotype) switching 
The process by which a B lymphocyte 
changes the class, or isotype, of the 
antibodies that it produces, from IgM to 
IgG, IgE, or IgA, without changing the 
antigen specificity of the antibody. 
Heavy-chain class switching is 
stimulated by cytokines and CD40 
ligand expressed by T follicular helper 
cells and involves recombination of B 
cell VDJ segments with downstream 
heavy-chain gene segments. 
Helminth A parasitic worm. Helminthic 
infections often elicit Th2-dependent 
immune responses characterized by 
eosinophil-rich inflammatory infiltrates 
and IgE production. 
Helper T (Th) cells The class of T 
lymphocytes whose main functions are 
to activate macrophages and to 
promote inflammation in cell-mediated 
immune responses and to promote B 
cell antibody production in humoral 
immune responses. These functions are 
mediated by secreted cytokines and by 
T cell CD40 ligand binding to 
macrophage or B cell CD40. Helper T 
cells express the CD4 molecule and 
recognize peptides displayed by class II 
MHC molecules. 
Hematopoiesis The development of 
mature blood cells, including 
erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets, 
from pluripotent stem cells in the bone 
marrow and fetal liver. Hematopoiesis 
is regulated by several different colony-
stimulating factors produced by bone 
marrow stromal cells, T cells, and other 
cell types. 
Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) 
Undifferentiated bone marrow cells 
that continuously asymmetrically 
divide throughout life to give rise to 
additional stem cells and cells that 
differentiate into cells of the lymphoid, 
myeloid, and erythrocytic lineages. 
Hematopoietic stem cells are also 
present in fetal liver. 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
The transplantation of hematopoietic 
stem cells taken from the blood or bone 
marrow, performed clinically to treat 
inherited defects in and cancers of 
blood cells and also used in various 
immunologic experiments in animals. 
Also called bone marrow 
transplantation because in the past, 
HSCs were harvested from the bone 
marrow. 
High endothelial venules (HEVs) 
Specialized venules that are the sites of 
lymphocyte migration from the blood 
into the stroma of secondary lymphoid 
tissues. HEVs are lined by plump 
endothelial cells that protrude into the 
vessel lumen and express unique 
adhesion molecules involved in 
binding naive (and central memory) B 
and T cells. 
Hinge region The region of Ig heavy 
chains between the first two constant 
domains that can assume multiple 
conformations, thereby imparting 
flexibility in the orientation of the two 
antigen-binding sites. Because of the 
hinge region, an antibody molecule can 
simultaneously bind two epitopes that 
are separated by variable distances 
from one another. 
Histamine A vasoactive amine stored in 
the granules of mast cells that is one of 
the important mediators of immediate 
hypersensitivity. Histamine binds to 
specific receptors in various tissues and 
causes increased vascular permeability 
and contraction of bronchial and 
intestinal smooth muscle. 
HLA See Human leukocyte antigens. 
HLA-DM A peptide exchange molecule 
that plays a critical role in the class II 
MHC pathway of antigen presentation. 
HLA-DM is found in the endosomes 
involved in class II–associated antigen 
presentation, where it facilitates 
removal of the invariant chain–derived 
CLIP peptide and the binding of other 
peptides to class II MHC molecules. 
HLA-DM is encoded by a gene in the 
MHC and is structurally similar to class 
II MHC molecules, but it is not 
polymorphic. 
Homeostasis In the adaptive immune 
system, the maintenance of a constant 
number and diverse repertoire of 
resting lymphocytes, despite the 
emergence of new lymphocytes and 
tremendous expansion of individual 
clones that may occur during responses 
to immunogenic antigens or loss of 
lymphocytes (e.g., after irradiation or 
antibody-mediated depletion). 
Homing receptor Adhesion molecules 
expressed on the surface of 
lymphocytes that are responsible for 
the different pathways of lymphocyte 
recirculation and tissue homing. 
Homing receptors bind to ligands 
(addressins) expressed on endothelial 
cells in particular vascular beds. 
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
The etiologic agent of AIDS. HIV is a 
retrovirus that infects a variety of cell 
types, including CD4+ helper T cells, 
macrophages, and dendritic cells and 
causes chronic progressive destruction 
of the immune system. 
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA) MHC 
molecules expressed on the surface of 
human cells. Human MHC molecules 
include three types of class I MHC 
molecules (HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-
C) and three types of class II MHC 
molecules (HLA-DP, HLA-DQ, and 
HLA-DR). (See also Major 
histocompatibility complex [MHC] 
molecule). 
Humanized monoclonal antibody A 
monoclonal antibody encoded by a 
recombinant hybrid gene and 
composed of the antigen-binding sites 
from a murine monoclonal antibody 
and the constant region of a human 
antibody. Humanized antibodies are 
less likely than mouse monoclonal 
antibodies to induce an anti-antibody 
response in humans. They are used 
clinically in the treatment of 
inflammatory diseases, tumors, and 
transplant rejection. In current drug 
development, fully human recombinant 
monoclonal antibodies have largely 
replaced humanized mouse antibodies. 
Humoral immunity The type of adaptive 
immune response mediated by 
antibodies produced by B lymphocyte-
derived plasma cells. Humoral 
immunity is the principal adaptive 
immune defense mechanism against 
extracellular microbes and their toxins. 
Hybridoma A cell line derived by fusion, 
or somatic cell hybridization, between a 
275
 
 
 Glossary
normal lymphocyte and an 
immortalized lymphocyte tumor line. B 
cell hybridomas created by fusion of 
normal B cells of defined antigen 
specificity with a myeloma cell line are 
used to produce monoclonal 
antibodies. T cell hybridomas created 
by fusion of a normal T cell of defined 
specificity with a T cell tumor line have 
been used in research. 
Hyper-IgM syndrome Primary immune 
deficiency disorders caused by 
defective CD40-dependent functions in 
B cells, with impaired class switch 
recombination (CSR) and somatic 
hypermutation, leading to poor 
antibody-mediated immunity against 
extracellular pathogens and 
compromised defense against 
intracellular infections due to impaired 
CD40-dependent macrophage 
activation. The most common cause is 
mutations of the CD40 ligand gene on 
the X chromosome, but mutations in 
CD40 and downstream signaling 
molecules cause similar disorders. 
Mutations in the genes encoding 
activation-induced cytidine deaminase 
or uracil-DNA glycosylase result in the 
B cell defects seen in CD40 ligand 
deficiency but do not affect 
macrophages. Patients suffer from both 
pyogenic bacterial and protozoal 
infections. 
Hyperacute rejection A form of allograft 
or xenograft rejection that begins 
within minutes to hours after 
transplantation and that is 
characterized by thrombotic occlusion 
of the graft vessels. Hyperacute 
rejection is mediated by preexisting 
antibodies in the host circulation that 
bind to donor endothelial alloantigens, 
such as blood group antigens or MHC 
molecules, and activate the 
complement system. 
Hypersensitivity diseases Disorders 
caused by immune responses. 
Hypersensitivity diseases include 
autoimmune diseases, in which 
immune responses are directed against 
self antigens, and diseases that result 
from uncontrolled or excessive 
responses against foreign antigens, 
such as microbes and allergens. The 
tissue damage that occurs in 
hypersensitivity diseases is caused by 
the same effector mechanisms used by 
the immune system to protect against 
microbes. 
Hypervariable region Short segments of 
approximately 10 amino acid residues 
within the variable regions of antibody 
or TCR proteins that form loop 
structures that contact antigen. Three 
hypervariable loops are present in each 
antibody heavy chain and light chain 
and in each TCR α and β chain. Most of 
the variability between different 
antibodies or TCRs is located within 
these loops (also called 
complementarity determining region 
[CDR]). 
I 
Idiotype The unique sequence of the 
antigen binding site of the antibodies or 
TCRs made by a single clone of B or T 
cells that can be recognized by a 
specific antibody. 
Igα and Igβ  Proteins that are required for 
surface expression and signaling 
functions of membrane Ig on B cells. 
Igα and Igβ are disulfide-linked to one 
another and noncovalently associated 
with the cytoplasmic tail of membrane 
Ig to form the BCR complex. The 
cytoplasmic domains of Igα and Igβ 
contain ITAMs that are involved in 
early signaling events during antigen-
induced B cell activation. 
IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) A 
natural inhibitor of IL-1 produced by 
macrophages and other cells that is 
structurally homologous to IL-1 and 
binds to the same receptors but does 
not induce signaling. Recombinant IL-
1RA is used as a drug to treat 
autoinflammatory syndromes caused 
by excessive IL-1 production as well as 
rheumatoid arthritis. 
Immature B lymphocyte A membrane 
IgM+, IgD − B cell, recently derived 
from marrow precursors, that does not 
proliferate or differentiate in response 
to antigens but rather may undergo 
receptor editing, apoptotic death or 
become functionally unresponsive. This 
property is important for the negative 
selection of B cells that are specific for 
self antigens present in the bone 
marrow. 
Immediate hypersensitivity The type of 
immune reaction responsible for 
allergic diseases, which is dependent 
on antigen-mediated activation of IgE-
coated tissue mast cells. The mast cells 
release mediators that cause increased 
vascular permeability, vasodilation, 
bronchial and visceral smooth muscle 
contraction, and local inflammation. 
Immune complex A multimolecular 
complex of antibody molecules and 
bound antigen. Because each antibody 
molecule has 2 to 10 antigen-binding 
sites and many antigens are 
multivalent, immune complexes can 
vary greatly in size. Immune complexes 
activate effector mechanisms of 
humoral immunity, such as the classical 
complement pathway and Fc receptor–
mediated phagocytosis. Deposition of 
circulating immune complexes in blood 
vessel walls or renal glomeruli can lead 
to inflammation and disease (vasculitis 
and glomerulonephritis, respectively). 
Immune complex disease An 
inflammatory disease caused by the 
deposition of antigen-antibody 
complexes in blood vessel walls, 
resulting in local complement 
activation and inflammation. Immune 
complexes may form because of 
overproduction of antibodies against 
microbial antigens or as a result of 
autoantibody production in the setting 
of an autoimmune disease such as 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Immune 
complex deposition in the specialized 
capillary basement membranes of renal 
glomeruli can cause glomerulonephritis 
and impair renal function. Deposition 
of immune complexes in joints can 
cause arthritis, and deposition in 
arterial walls can cause vasculitis with 
thrombosis and ischemic damage to 
various organs. 
Immune response A collective and 
coordinated response to the 
introduction of foreign substances, 
mediated by the cells and molecules of 
the immune system. 
Immune response (Ir) genes Originally 
defined as genes in inbred strains of 
rodents that were inherited in a 
dominant Mendelian manner and that 
controlled the ability of the animals to 
make antibodies against simple 
synthetic polypeptides. We now know 
that Ir genes are the polymorphic genes 
that encode class II MHC molecules, 
which display peptides to T 
lymphocytes and are therefore required 
for T cell activation and helper T cell–
dependent B cell (antibody) responses 
to protein antigens. 
Immune surveillance The concept that a 
physiologic function of the immune 
system is to recognize and destroy 
clones of transformed cells before they 
grow into tumors and to kill tumors 
276            Glossary 
 
after they are formed. The term 
immune surveillance is sometimes used 
in a general sense to describe the 
function of T lymphocytes to detect and 
destroy any cell, not necessarily a 
tumor cell, that is expressing foreign 
(e.g., microbial) antigens. 
Immune system The molecules, cells, 
tissues, and organs that collectively 
function to provide immunity, or 
protection, against foreign pathogens 
and cancers. 
Immunity Protection against disease, 
usually infectious disease, mediated by 
the cells and tissues that are collectively 
called the immune system. In a broader 
sense, immunity refers to the ability to 
respond to foreign substances, 
including microbes and noninfectious 
molecules. 
Immunoblot An analytical technique in 
which antibodies are used to detect the 
presence of an antigen bound to (i.e., 
blotted on) a solid matrix such as filter 
paper (also known as a Western blot). 
Immunodeficiency See Acquired 
immunodeficiency and Primary 
immunodeficiency. 
Immunodominant epitope The epitope of 
a protein antigen that elicits most of the 
T cell response in an individual 
immunized with the native protein. 
Immunodominant epitopes correspond 
to the peptides of the protein that are 
proteolytically generated within APCs, 
bind most avidly to MHC molecules, 
and are most likely to stimulate T cells. 
Immune dysregulation 
polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-
linked syndrome (IPEX) A rare 
autoimmune disease, caused by 
mutations of the FOXP3 transcription 
factor, resulting in a failure to produce 
regulatory T cells. IPEX patients suffer 
from immune-mediated destruction of 
multiple endocrine organs, as well as 
allergies and skin and gastrointestinal 
inflammation. 
Immunofluorescence A technique in 
which a molecule is detected by use of 
an antibody labeled with a fluorescent 
probe. For example, in 
immunofluorescence microscopy, cells 
that express a particular surface antigen 
can be stained with a fluorescein-
conjugated antibody specific for the 
antigen and then visualized with a 
fluorescent microscope. 
Immunogen An antigen that induces an 
immune response. Not all antigens are 
immunogens. For example, low-
molecular-weight compounds 
(haptens) can bind to antibodies, and 
are therefore antigens, but will not 
stimulate an immune response unless 
they are linked to macromolecules 
(carriers), and thus are not 
immunogens. 
Immunoglobulin (Ig) Synonymous with 
antibody (see Antibody). 
Immunoglobulin domain A three-
dimensional globular structural motif 
(also called an Ig fold) found in many 
proteins in the immune system, 
including Igs, TCRs, and MHC 
molecules. Ig domains are 
approximately 110 amino acid residues 
in length, include an internal disulfide 
bond, and contain two layers of β-
pleated sheets, each layer composed of 
three to five strands of antiparallel 
polypeptide chain. 
Immunoglobulin heavy chain One of two 
types of polypeptide chains in an 
antibody molecule. The basic structural 
unit of an antibody includes two 
identical disulfide-linked heavy chains 
and two identical light chains. Each 
heavy chain is composed of a variable 
(V) Ig domain and three or four 
constant (C) Ig domains. The different 
antibody isotypes, including IgM, IgD, 
IgG, IgA, and IgE, are distinguished by 
structural differences in their heavy 
chain constant regions. The heavy chain 
constant regions mediate effector 
functions, such as complement 
activation and engagement of 
phagocytes. 
Immunoglobulin light chain One of two 
types of polypeptide chains in an 
antibody molecule. The basic structural 
unit of an antibody includes two 
identical light chains, each disulfide 
linked to one of two identical heavy 
chains. Each light chain is composed of 
one variable (V) Ig domain and one 
constant (C) Ig domain. There are two 
light chain isotypes, called κ and λ, 
which are functionally identical. 
Approximately 60% of human 
antibodies have κ light chains, and 40% 
have λ light chains. 
Immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily A large 
family of proteins that contain a 
globular structural motif called an Ig 
domain, or Ig fold, originally described 
in antibodies. Many proteins of 
importance in the immune system, 
including antibodies, TCRs, MHC 
molecules, CD4, and CD8, are members 
of this superfamily. 
Immunohistochemistry A technique to 
detect the presence of an antigen in 
histologic tissue sections by use of an 
enzyme-coupled antibody that is 
specific for the antigen. The enzyme 
converts a colorless substrate to a 
colored insoluble substance that 
precipitates at the site where the 
antibody and thus the antigen are 
localized. The position of the colored 
precipitate, and therefore the antigen, 
in the tissue section is observed by light 
microscopy. Immunohistochemistry is 
commonly used in diagnostic 
pathology and various fields of 
research. 
Immunologic synapse (also called 
immune synapse) The tight 
juxtaposition of membranes of a T cell 
and an antigen presenting cell (APC). 
Membrane proteins of both cell types 
organized at the point of juxtaposition, 
including the TCR complex, CD4 or 
CD8, costimulatory receptors, and 
integrins on the T cell, which bind to 
peptide-MHC complexes, 
costimulators, and integrin ligands, 
respectively, on the antigen presenting 
cell. The immune synapse is required 
for bidirectional functional interactions 
between the T cell and APC, and 
enhances specific delivery of secreted 
products from the T cell to the antigen-
presenting cell, such as granule 
contents from a CTL to its target cell. 
Immunologic tolerance See Tolerance. 
Immunologically privileged site A site in 
the body that is inaccessible to or 
actively suppresses immune responses. 
The anterior chamber of the eye, the 
testes, and the brain are examples of 
immunologically privileged sites. 
Immunoperoxidase technique A common 
immunohistochemical technique in 
which a horseradish peroxidase–
coupled antibody is used to identify the 
presence of an antigen in a tissue 
section. The peroxidase enzyme 
converts a colorless substrate to an 
insoluble brown product that is 
observable by light microscopy. 
Immunoprecipitation A technique for the 
isolation of a molecule from a solution 
by binding it to an antibody and then 
rendering the antigen-antibody 
complex insoluble, either by 
precipitation with a second antibody or 
277
 
 
 Glossary
by coupling the first antibody to an 
insoluble particle or bead. 
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based 
activation motif (ITAM) A conserved 
protein motif composed of two copies 
of the sequence tyrosine-x-x-leucine 
(where x is an unspecified amino acid) 
found in the cytoplasmic tails of 
various membrane proteins in the 
immune system that are involved in 
signal transduction. ITAMs are present 
in the ζ and CD3 proteins of the TCR 
complex, in Igα and Igβ proteins in the 
BCR complex, and in several Ig Fc 
receptors. When these receptors bind 
their ligands, the tyrosine residues of 
the ITAMs become phosphorylated and 
form docking sites for other molecules 
involved in propagating cell-activating 
signal transduction pathways. 
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based 
inhibition motif (ITIM) A six-amino-
acid (isoleucine-x-tyrosine-x-x-leucine) 
motif found in the cytoplasmic tails of 
various inhibitory receptors in the 
immune system, including FcγRIIB on 
B cells, killer cell Ig-like receptors 
(KIRs) on NK cells, and some 
coinhibitory receptors of T cells. When 
these receptors bind their ligands, the 
ITIMs become phosphorylated on their 
tyrosine residues and form a docking 
site for protein tyrosine phosphatases, 
which in turn function to inhibit other 
signal transduction pathways. 
Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch 
motif (ITSM) A six-amino-acid 
(tyrosine- x-tyrosine-x-x-
valine/isoleucine) motif found in the 
cytoplasmic tails of some receptors, 
which can sometimes function as an 
inhibitor by binding tyrosine 
phosphatases, as with the ITSM in the 
cytosolic tail of PD-1, and in other 
receptors (e.g., in the SLAM family), 
can switch from tyrosine phosphatase 
to tyrosine kinase binding, thereby 
mediating a change from an inhibitory 
to an activating function. 
Immunosuppression Inhibition of one or 
more components of the adaptive or 
innate immune system as a result of an 
underlying disease or intentionally 
induced by drugs for the purpose of 
preventing or treating graft rejection or 
autoimmune disease. A commonly 
used immunosuppressive drug used to 
treat graft rejection is cyclosporine, 
which inhibits T cell cytokine 
production. 
Immunotherapy The treatment of a 
disease with therapeutic agents that 
promote or inhibit immune responses. 
For example, cancer immunotherapy 
involves stimulating active immune 
responses to tumor antigens or 
administering antitumor antibodies or 
T cells to establish passive immunity. 
Immunotoxins Reagents that may be 
used in the treatment of cancer and 
consist of covalent conjugates of a 
potent cellular toxin, such as ricin or 
diphtheria toxin, with antibodies 
specific for antigens expressed on the 
surface of tumor cells. It is hoped that 
such reagents can specifically target 
and kill tumor cells without damaging 
normal cells. 
Inbred mouse strain A strain of mice 
created by repetitive mating of siblings 
that is characterized by homozygosity 
at every genetic locus. Every mouse of 
an inbred strain shares an identical set 
of inherited genes and is said to be 
syngeneic to every other mouse of the 
same strain. 
Indirect antigen presentation (indirect 
allorecognition) In transplantation 
immunology, a pathway of 
presentation of donor (allogeneic) 
MHC molecules by recipient APCs that 
involves the same mechanisms used to 
present microbial proteins. The 
allogeneic MHC proteins are processed 
by recipient dendritic cells, and 
peptides derived from the allogeneic 
MHC molecules are presented, in 
association with recipient (self) MHC 
molecules, to host T cells. In contrast to 
indirect antigen presentation, direct 
antigen presentation involves recipient 
T cell recognition of unprocessed 
allogeneic MHC molecules on the 
surface of graft cells. 
Inflammasomes Multiprotein complexes 
that assemble in the cytosol of 
mononuclear phagocytes, dendritic 
cells, and other cell types, which use 
caspase-1 to proteolytically generate the 
active form of the inflammatory 
cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 from inactive 
precursors. The formation of the 
inflammasome complex is stimulated 
by a variety of microbial products and 
cell damage–associated molecules, and 
involves assembly of multiple copies of 
an innate recognition protein with 
adaptor proteins and procaspase-1 
molecules, the latter undergoing 
proteolysis upon inflammasome 
assembly to generate active caspase-1. 
Inflammation A complex reaction of 
vascularized tissue to infection or cell 
injury that involves extravascular 
accumulation of plasma proteins and 
leukocytes. Acute inflammation is a 
common result of innate immune 
responses, and local adaptive immune 
responses can also promote 
inflammation. Although inflammation 
serves a protective function in 
controlling infections and promoting 
tissue repair, it can also cause tissue 
damage and disease. 
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) A 
group of disorders, including ulcerative 
colitis and Crohn’s disease, 
characterized by chronic inflammation 
in the gastrointestinal tract. Some 
evidence indicates that IBD is caused 
by inadequate regulation of T cell and 
innate immune responses, possibly 
against intestinal commensal bacteria. 
IBD develops in gene knockout mice 
lacking IL-2 or IL-10. 
Innate immunity Protection against 
infection that relies on mechanisms that 
exist before infection, are capable of a 
rapid response to microbes, and react in 
essentially the same way to repeated 
infections. The innate immune system 
includes epithelial barriers, phagocytic 
cells (neutrophils, macrophages), ILCs 
and NK cells, the complement system, 
and cytokines, most of which are 
produced by dendritic cells and 
mononuclear phagocytes. Innate 
immune reactions also eliminate 
damaged and necrotic host tissues. 
Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) Tissue-
resident cells that produce cytokines 
similar to those made by helper T (Th) 
cells but lack antigen-specific TCRs. 
ILCs arise from a common lymphoid 
progenitor in the bone marrow, have a 
lymphocyte morphology, and produce 
cytokines similar to those secreted by T 
cells. Three subsets of innate lymphoid 
cells, called ILC1, ILC2, and ILC3, 
produce cytokines and express 
different transcription factors 
analogous to the Th1, Th2, and Th17 
subsets of CD4+ effector T 
lymphocytes, respectively. Natural 
killer cells are one type of ILC with 
functions similar to those of cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes. 
Integrins Heterodimeric cell surface 
proteins whose major functions are to 
278            Glossary 
 
mediate the adhesion of cells to other 
cells or to extracellular matrix. Integrins 
are important for T cell interactions 
with APCs and for migration of 
leukocytes from blood into tissues. 
Signals induced by chemokines binding 
to chemokine receptors increase the 
affinity of integrins for their ligands. 
Two examples of integrins important in 
the immune system are VLA-4 (very 
late antigen 4) and LFA-1 (leukocyte 
function-associated antigen 1). 
Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) A 
family of transcription factors that are 
activated by signals from various 
innate immune receptors for DNA and 
RNA and stimulate production of type 
I interferons, cytokines that inhibit viral 
replication. 
Interferons (IFNs) Cytokines originally 
named for their ability to interfere with 
viral infections but that have other 
important functions in the immune 
system. Type I IFNs include IFN-α and 
IFN-β, whose main function is to 
prevent viral replication in cells. IFN-γ, 
sometimes called type II interferon, 
activates macrophages and various 
other cell types. Type III interferons, 
including three kinds of IFN-λ, have 
similar anti-vrial functions as Type 1 
interferons. (see Appendix II). 
Interleukins Molecularly defined 
cytokines that are named with a 
number roughly sequentially in order 
of discovery or molecular 
characterization (e.g., interleukin-1 [IL-
1], IL-2). Some cytokines were 
originally named for their biologic 
activities and do not have an IL 
designation (see Appendix II). 
Intracellular bacterium A bacterium that 
survives and may replicate within cells, 
usually in endosomes of phagocytes. 
The principal defense against 
intracellular bacteria, such as 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is T cell–
mediated immunity. 
Intraepithelial lymphocytes T 
lymphocytes present in the epidermis 
of the skin and in mucosal epithelia 
that typically express a limited 
diversity of antigen receptors. Some of 
these lymphocytes, called invariant 
NKT cells, may recognize microbial 
products, such as glycolipids, 
associated with nonpolymorphic class I 
MHC-like molecules. Others, called γδ 
T cells, recognize various nonpeptide 
antigens, not presented by MHC 
molecules. Intraepithelial T 
lymphocytes may be effector cells of 
innate immunity. 
Invariant chain (Ii) A nonpolymorphic 
protein that binds to newly synthesized 
class II MHC molecules in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The 
invariant chain prevents loading of the 
class II MHC peptide-binding cleft with 
peptides present in the ER, promotes 
folding and assembly of class II 
molecules, and directs them to the 
endosomal compartment, where 
loading of peptides derived from 
internalized proteins takes place. 
Isotype One of five types of antibodies 
determined by which of five different 
forms of heavy chain is present. 
Antibody isotypes (also called classes) 
include IgM, IgD, IgG, IgA, and IgE, 
and each isotype performs a different 
set of effector functions. Additional 
structural variations characterize four 
distinct subtypes of IgG and two of 
IgA. 
J 
J (joining) chain A small polypeptide that 
is disulfide linked to the tail pieces of 
IgM and IgA antibodies that joins the 
antibody molecules to form pentamers 
of IgM and dimers of IgA. The J chain 
also contributes to the transepithelial 
transport of these immunoglobulins. 
JAK-STAT signaling pathway A signaling 
pathway initiated by cytokine binding 
to type I and type II cytokine receptors 
that sequentially involves activation of 
receptor-associated Janus kinase (JAK) 
tyrosine kinases, JAK-mediated 
tyrosine phosphorylation of the 
cytoplasmic tails of cytokine receptors, 
docking of signal transducers and 
activators of transcription (STATs) to 
the phosphorylated receptor chains, 
JAK-mediated tyrosine 
phosphorylation of the associated 
STATs, dimerization and nuclear 
translocation of the STATs, and STAT 
binding to regulatory regions of target 
genes leads to transcriptional activation 
of those genes. 
Janus kinases (JAKs) A family of four 
related tyrosine kinases that associate 
with the cytoplasmic tails of several 
different cytokine receptors, including 
the receptors for IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-7, 
IFN-γ, IL-12, and others. In response to 
cytokine binding and receptor 
dimerization, JAKs phosphorylate the 
cytokine receptors to permit the 
binding of STATs, and then the JAKs 
phosphorylate and thereby activate the 
STATs. Different JAKs associate with 
different cytokine receptors. 
Joining (J) segments Short coding 
sequences between the variable (V) and 
constant (C) gene segments in all Ig and 
TCR loci, which together with D 
segments are somatically recombined 
with V segments during lymphocyte 
development. The resulting 
recombined VDJ DNA codes for the 
carboxyl-terminal ends of the antigen 
receptor V regions, including the third 
hypervariable regions (CDR3). Random 
use of different J segments contributes 
to the diversity of the antigen receptor 
repertoire. 
Junctional diversity The diversity in 
antibody and TCR repertoires that is 
attributed to the addition or removal of 
nucleotide sequences at junctions 
between V, D, and J gene segments 
during B and T cell development. 
K 
Kaposi sarcoma A tumor of vascular cells 
that frequently arises in patients with 
AIDS, particularly patients not treated 
with antiretroviral therapy. Kaposi 
sarcoma in immunocompromised 
patients is associated with infection by 
the Kaposi sarcoma–associated 
herpesvirus (human herpesvirus 8). 
Killer cell Ig-like receptors (KIRs) Ig 
superfamily receptors expressed by NK 
cells that recognize different alleles of 
HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C molecules. 
Some KIRs have signaling components 
with ITIMs in their cytoplasmic tails, 
and these deliver inhibitory signals that 
block the activation of the NK cells. 
Some members of the KIR family have 
short cytoplasmic tails without ITIMs 
but associate with other ITAM-
containing polypeptides and function 
as activating receptors. 
Knockout mouse A mouse with a 
targeted disruption of one or more 
genes that is created by homologous 
recombination or CRISPR-Cas9 gene 
editing techniques. Knockout mice 
lacking functional genes encoding 
cytokines, cell surface receptors, 
signaling molecules, and transcription 
factors have provided valuable 
information about the roles of these 
molecules in the immune system. 
L 
Lamina propria A layer of loose 
connective tissue underlying the 
279
  
           
 
 Glossary
    
 
epithelium in mucosal tissues such as 
the intestines and airways, where 
dendritic cells, mast cells, lymphocytes, 
and macrophages mediate immune 
responses to invading pathogens. 
Langerhans cells Immature dendritic cells 
found as a meshwork in the epidermal 
layer of the skin whose major function 
is to trap microbes and antigens that 
enter through the skin and transport 
the antigens to draining lymph nodes. 
During their migration to the lymph 
nodes, Langerhans cells may 
differentiate into mature dendritic cells, 
which can efficiently present antigen to 
naive T cells. 
Large granular lymphocyte Another 
name for an NK cell based on the 
morphologic appearance of this cell 
type in blood smears. 
Late-phase reaction A component of the 
immediate hypersensitivity reaction 
that develops 2 to 24 hours after the 
rapid mast cell degranulation after 
antigen challenge and is characterized 
by an inflammatory infiltrate of 
eosinophils, basophils, neutrophils, and 
lymphocytes. Repeated bouts of the 
late-phase reaction can cause tissue 
damage (as in asthma). 
LCK An SRC family nonreceptor tyrosine 
kinase that noncovalently associates 
with the cytoplasmic tails of CD4 and 
CD8 molecules in T cells and is 
involved in the early signaling events 
of antigen-induced T cell activation. 
LCK mediates tyrosine 
phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic 
tails of CD3 and ζ proteins of the TCR 
complex. 
Lectin pathway of complement activation 
A pathway of complement activation 
triggered by the binding of microbial 
polysaccharides to the circulating 
protein mannose binding lectin (MBL). 
MBL is structurally similar to C1q and 
activates the C1r-C1s enzyme complex 
(like C1q) or activates another serine 
esterase, called mannose-binding 
protein-associated serine esterase 
(MASP). The remaining steps of the 
lectin pathway, beginning with 
cleavage of C4, are the same as the 
classical pathway. 
Leishmania  An obligate intracellular 
protozoan parasite that infects 
macrophages and can cause a chronic 
inflammatory disease involving many 
tissues. Leishmania infection in mice 
has served as a model system to study 
the effector functions of several 
cytokines and the helper T cell subsets 
that produce them. 
Lethal hit A term used to describe the 
events that result in irreversible 
damage to a target cell when a CTL 
binds to it. The lethal hit includes CTL 
granule exocytosis and perforin-
dependent delivery of apoptosis-
inducing granule enzymes (granzymes) 
into the target cell cytoplasm. 
Leukemia A malignant disease of bone 
marrow precursors of blood cells in 
which large numbers of neoplastic cells 
usually occupy the bone marrow and 
often circulate in the blood. 
Lymphocytic leukemias are derived 
from B or T cell precursors, 
myelogenous leukemias are derived 
from granulocyte or monocyte 
precursors, and erythroid leukemias 
are derived from red cell precursors. 
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) 
One of a rare group of congenital 
(primary) immunodeficiency diseases 
with infectious complications that is 
caused by defective expression or 
function of leukocyte adhesion 
molecules required for tissue 
recruitment of phagocytes and 
lymphocytes. LAD-1 is due to 
mutations in the gene encoding the 
CD18 protein, which is part of β2 
integrins. LAD-2 is caused by 
mutations in a gene that encodes a 
fucose transporter involved in the 
synthesis of leukocyte ligands for 
endothelial selectins. LAD-3 is due to 
mutations affecting proteins required 
for chemokine-induced activation of 
integrins. 
Leukotrienes A class of arachidonic acid–
derived lipid inflammatory mediators 
produced by the lipoxygenase pathway 
in many cell types. Mast cells make 
abundant leukotriene C4 (LTC4) and its 
degradation products LTD4 and LTE4, 
which bind to specific receptors on 
smooth muscle cells and cause 
prolonged bronchoconstriction. 
Leukotrienes contribute to pathology of 
asthma. 
Lipopolysaccharide Synonymous with 
endotoxin. 
Live virus vaccine A vaccine composed of 
a live but nonpathogenic (attenuated) 
form of a pathogenic virus. Attenuated 
viruses carry mutations that interfere 
with the viral life cycle or virulence. 
Because live virus vaccines actually 
infect the recipient cells, they can 
effectively stimulate immune responses 
that are optimal for protecting against 
wild-type viral infection. Commonly 
used live virus vaccines include those 
for measles, mumps, rubella, influenza, 
varicella, and yellow fever. 
Lymph Interstitial fluid derived from the 
blood that has drained into lymphatic 
vessels and is eventually returned to 
the blood circulation. Lymph carries 
soluble antigens and dendritic cells 
from most tissues and organs of the 
body into lymph nodes for recognition 
by specific lymphocytes to initiate 
adaptive immune responses, and also 
carries lymphocytes into and out of 
lymph nodes and back into the blood 
circulation. 
Lymph node Small nodular, encapsulated 
lymphocyte-rich organs situated along 
lymphatic channels throughout the 
body where adaptive immune 
responses to lymph-borne antigens are 
initiated. Lymph nodes, which are 
secondary or peripheral lymphoid 
organs, have a specialized anatomic 
architecture that regulates the 
interactions of B cells, T cells, dendritic 
cells, macrophages, and antigens to 
maximize the induction of protective 
immune responses. Lymph nodes also 
perform a filtering function, trapping 
microorganisms and other potentially 
harmful constituents in tissue fluids 
and preventing them from draining via 
the lymph into the blood. 
Lymphatic system A system of vessels 
throughout the body that collects tissue 
fluid called lymph, originally derived 
from the blood, and returns it, through 
the thoracic and right lymphatic ducts, 
to the circulation. Lymph nodes are 
interspersed along these vessels and 
trap and retain antigens present in the 
lymph. 
Lymphocyte homing The directed 
migration of subsets of circulating 
lymphocytes into particular tissue sites. 
Lymphocyte homing is regulated by 
the selective expression of endothelial 
adhesion molecules and chemokines in 
different tissues. For example, some 
lymphocytes preferentially home to the 
intestinal mucosa, which is regulated 
by the chemokine CCL25 and the 
endothelial adhesion molecule 
MAdCAM, both expressed in the gut, 
which bind respectively to the CCR9 
280           Glossary 
chemokine receptor and the α4β7 
integrin on gut-homing lymphocytes. 
Lymphocyte maturation The process by 
which pluripotent hematopoietic stem 
cells develop into mature, antigen 
receptor–expressing naive B or T 
lymphocytes that populate peripheral 
lymphoid tissues. This process takes 
place in the specialized environments 
of the bone marrow (for B cells) and the 
thymus (for T cells). Synonymous with 
lymphocyte development. 
Lymphocyte migration The movement of 
lymphocytes from the circulation into 
peripheral tissues. 
Lymphocyte recirculation The continuous 
movement of naive and some memory 
lymphocytes from the blood to 
secondary lymphoid organs and back 
into the blood. 
Lymphocyte repertoire The complete 
collection of antigen receptors and 
therefore antigen specificities expressed 
by all the B and T lymphocyte clones of 
an individual. The repertories for B and 
T cells are each estimated to include 
about 107 receptors. 
Lymphoid follicle A B cell–rich region of 
a lymph node or the spleen that is the 
site of antigen-induced B cell 
proliferation and differentiation. In T 
cell–dependent B cell responses to 
protein antigens, a germinal center 
forms within the follicles. 
Lymphoid tissue inducer cells (LTi) A 
type of hematopoietically derived 
innate lymphoid cell that stimulates the 
development of lymph nodes and other 
secondary lymphoid organs, in part 
through production of the cytokines 
lymphotoxin-α (LTα) and 
lymphotoxin-β (LTβ). LTis are a subset 
of type 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3). 
Lymphokine An old name for a cytokine 
(soluble protein mediator of immune 
responses) produced by lymphocytes. 
Lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells 
NK cells with enhanced cytotoxic 
activity for tumor cells as a result of 
exposure to high doses of IL-2. LAK 
cells generated in vitro have been 
adoptively transferred back into 
patients with cancer to treat their 
tumors. 
Lymphoma A malignant tumor of B or T 
lymphocytes usually arising in and 
spreading between lymphoid tissues 
but that may spread to other tissues. 
Lymphomas often express phenotypic 
characteristics of the normal 
lymphocytes from which they were 
derived. 
Lymphotoxin α (LTα, previously called 
TNF-β) A cytokine produced by T and 
B cells that is homologous to and binds 
to the same receptors as TNF. Like 
TNF, LT has proinflammatory effects, 
including endothelial and neutrophil 
activation. LT is also critical for the 
normal development of lymphoid 
organs. 
Lysosome A membrane-bound, acidic 
organelle abundant in phagocytic cells 
that contains proteolytic enzymes that 
degrade proteins derived both from the 
extracellular environment and from 
within the cell. Lysosomes are involved 
in the class II MHC pathway of antigen 
processing. 
M 
M cells Specialized gastrointestinal 
mucosal epithelial cells overlying Peyer 
patches in the gut that play a role in 
delivery of antigens to Peyer patches. 
M1 macrophages See Classical 
macrophage activation. 
M2 macrophages See Alternative 
macrophage activation. 
Macrophage A hematopoietically derived 
phagocytic cell that plays important 
roles in innate and adaptive immune 
responses. Macrophages are activated 
by microbial products such as 
endotoxin and by T cell cytokines such 
as IFN-γ. Activated macrophages 
phagocytose and kill microorganisms, 
secrete proinflammatory cytokines, and 
present antigens to helper T cells. 
Macrophages include cells derived 
from recently recruited blood 
monocytes at sites of inflammation and 
long-lived tissue-resident cells derived 
mainly from fetal hematopoietic 
organs. Tissue-resident macrophages 
are given different names and may 
serve special functions; these include 
the microglia of the central nervous 
system, Kupffer cells in the liver, 
alveolar macrophages in the lung, and 
osteoclasts in bone. 
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
A large genetic locus (on human 
chromosome 6 and mouse chromosome 
17) that includes the highly 
polymorphic genes encoding the 
peptide-binding molecules recognized 
by T lymphocytes. The MHC locus also 
includes genes encoding cytokines, 
molecules involved in antigen 
processing, and complement proteins. 
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
molecule A heterodimeric membrane 
protein encoded in the MHC locus that 
displays peptides for recognition by T 
lymphocytes. There are two 
structurally distinct types of MHC 
molecules. Class I MHC molecules, 
sometimes called MHC I, are present 
on most nucleated cells, bind peptides 
derived from cytosolic proteins, and are 
recognized by CD8+ T cells. Class II 
MHC molecules, sometimes called 
MHC II, are restricted largely to 
dendritic cells, macrophages, and B 
lymphocytes; bind peptides derived 
from endocytosed proteins; and are 
recognized by CD4+ T cells. 
Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) A plasma 
protein, also called mannose binding 
protein (MBP), that binds to mannose 
residues on microbial surfaces, thereby 
initiating the lectin pathway of 
complement activation. Macrophages 
express a surface receptor for C1q that 
can also bind MBL and mediate uptake 
of the MBL-opsonized organisms. 
Mannose receptor A carbohydrate-
binding protein (lectin) expressed by 
macrophages that binds mannose and 
fucose residues on microbial cell walls 
and mediates phagocytosis of the 
organisms. 
Marginal zone A peripheral region of 
splenic lymphoid follicles containing 
macrophages that are particularly 
efficient at trapping polysaccharide 
antigens. Such antigens may persist for 
prolonged periods on the surfaces of 
marginal zone macrophages, where 
they are recognized by specific B cells, 
or they may be transported into 
follicles. 
Marginal zone B lymphocytes A subset of 
B lymphocytes, found exclusively in the 
marginal zone of the spleen, that 
respond rapidly to blood-borne 
microbial antigens by producing IgM 
antibodies with limited diversity. 
Mass cytometry A method of 
simultaneous detection and analysis of 
many different molecules expressed in 
mixed cell populations, requiring a 
specialized instrument based on the 
single cell analysis of flow cytometer 
coupled with a time-of-flight mass 
spectrometer. This technique uses 
antibodies labeled with different heavy 
metal isotopes, rather than 
fluorochromes used in flow cytometry. 
281
 
 
 Glossary
Mast cell The major effector cell of 
immediate hypersensitivity (allergic) 
reactions. Mast cells are derived from 
hematopoietic stem cells, reside in most 
tissues adjacent to blood vessels, 
express a high-affinity Fc receptor for 
IgE (FcεRI) and contain numerous 
mediator-filled granules. Antigen-
induced cross-linking of IgE bound to 
the mast cell FcεRI causes release of 
their granule contents as well as new 
synthesis and secretion of other 
mediators, leading to an immediate 
hypersensitivity reaction. 
Mature B cell IgM- and IgD-expressing, 
functionally competent naive B cells 
that represent the final stage of B cell 
maturation in the spleen and that 
populate peripheral lymphoid organs. 
Medullary thymic epithelial cells 
(MTECs) A type of stromal cell in the 
medulla of the thymus that plays a 
critical role in inducing central T cell 
tolerance to proteins normally 
expressed only in certain tissues, called 
tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs). 
MTECs consist of subpopulations that 
transcriptionally resemble different 
peripheral tissue cells and express 
TRAs of those tissues. The MTECs 
present those antigens to developing T 
cells, resulting in death of TRA-specific 
T cells or development of TRA-specific 
regulatory T cells. The AIRE protein 
promotes expression of these antigens. 
Membrane attack complex (MAC) A lytic 
complex of the terminal components of 
the complement cascade, including 
complement proteins C5, C6, C7, C8, 
and multiple copies of C9, which forms 
in the membranes of target cells. The 
MAC causes lethal ionic and osmotic 
changes in cells. 
Memory The property of the adaptive 
immune system to respond more 
rapidly, with greater magnitude, and 
more effectively to a repeated exposure 
to an antigen compared with the 
response to the first exposure. 
Memory lymphocytes Memory B and T 
cells are produced by antigen 
stimulation of naive lymphocytes and 
survive in a functionally quiescent state 
for many years after the antigen is 
eliminated. Memory lymphocytes 
mediate rapid and enhanced (i.e., 
memory or recall) responses to second 
and subsequent exposures to antigens. 
MHC restriction The characteristic of T 
lymphocytes that they recognize a 
foreign peptide antigen only when it is 
bound to a particular allelic form of an 
MHC molecule. 
MHC tetramer A reagent used to identify 
and enumerate T cells that specifically 
recognize a particular MHC-peptide 
complex. The reagent consists of four 
recombinant, biotinylated MHC 
molecules (usually class I) loaded with 
a peptide and bound to a 
fluorochrome-labeled avidin molecule. 
T cells that bind the MHC tetramer can 
be detected by flow cytometry. 
β2-Microglobulin The light chain of a 
class I MHC molecule, required for 
stability of the MHC molecule. β2-
Microglobulin is encoded by a 
nonpolymorphic gene outside the 
MHC, is structurally homologous to an 
Ig domain, and is invariant among all 
class I molecules. 
Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase 
cascade One of several different 
intracellular signal transduction 
cascades initiated by ligand binding to 
a membrane receptor, which is 
characterized by successive kinase-
mediated phosphorylation steps 
leading to the terminal activation by 
dual phosphorylation of one of a broad 
family of MAP kinases. The activated 
MAP kinases then phosphorylate 
substrates such as transcription factors 
that result in a functional cellular 
response. In T lymphocytes, antigen 
binding to the TCR initiates a MAP 
kinase cascade that involves the RAS 
protein and the sequential activation of 
three kinases, the last one being the 
MAP kinase called ERK. 
Mixed leukocyte reaction (MLR) An in 
vitro reaction of alloreactive T cells 
from one individual against MHC 
antigens on blood cells from another 
individual. The MLR involves 
proliferation of and cytokine secretion 
by both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. 
Molecular mimicry A postulated 
mechanism of autoimmunity triggered 
by infection with a microbe containing 
antigens that are structurally 
homologous to and therefore cross-
react with self antigens. Immune 
responses to the microbe are postulated 
to result in reactions against self 
antigens. 
Monoclonal antibody An antibody that is 
specific for one antigen and is 
produced by a B cell hybridoma (a cell 
line derived by the fusion of a single 
normal B cell and an immortal B cell 
tumor line) or by phage display 
technology. Monoclonal antibodies are 
widely used in research, clinical 
diagnosis, and therapy. 
Monocyte A type of bone marrow–
derived circulating blood cell that is 
recruited into sites of infection or tissue 
injury. Once in the tissue, monocytes 
differentiate into macrophages that 
function to destroy microbes and repair 
injured tissues. 
Mononuclear phagocytes Cells with a 
common bone marrow lineage whose 
primary function is phagocytosis. These 
cells function as effector cells in innate 
and adaptive immunity. Mononuclear 
phagocytes circulate in the blood in an 
incompletely differentiated form called 
monocytes, and after they settle in 
tissues, they mature into macrophages; 
they are also resident in tissues. 
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT) Collections of lymphocytes, 
dendritic cells, and other cell types 
within the mucosa of the 
gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts 
that are sites of adaptive immune 
responses to antigens. MALTs are 
unencapsulated but organized 
collections of lymphocytes, with T and 
B cell zones similar to lymph nodes, 
located below mucosal epithelia, such 
as Peyer’s patches in the gut or 
pharyngeal tonsils. 
mRNA vaccine A vaccine comprised of 
messenger RNA (mRNA) encoding 
microbial antigens. mRNA vaccines 
that are currently in use are antiviral 
vaccines in which the viral mRNA is 
modified to enhance both translation 
and stability and to reduce ability to 
strongly activate innate immune 
responses The mRNA is encapsulated 
in lipid nanoparticles that protect the 
RNA from degradation and facilitate 
uptake by dendritic cells. SARS-CoV-2 
mRNA vaccines have been used to 
immunize millions of people and have 
proven to offer robust protection 
against serious disease after infection 
by several variants of the virus. 
Mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) 
cells A subset of T cells that express an 
invariant αβ TCR specific for fungal 
and bacterial riboflavin metabolites 
presented by a nonpolymorphic class I 
MHC-related molecule called MR1. 
Most MAIT cells are CD8+, are 
activated either by microbial riboflavin 
282           Glossary 
derivatives or by cytokines, and may 
have inflammatory and cytotoxic 
functions. MAIT cells account for 20% 
to 40% of T cells in the human liver. 
Mucosal immune system A part of the 
immune system that responds to and 
protects against microbes that enter the 
body through mucosal surfaces, such as 
the gastrointestinal and respiratory 
tracts, but also maintains tolerance to 
commensal organisms that live on the 
outside of the mucosal epithelium. The 
mucosal immune system is composed 
of organized mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissues, such as Peyer 
patches, as well as diffusely distributed 
cells within the lamina propria. 
Multiple myeloma A malignant tumor of 
antibody-producing plasma cells that 
often secretes intact antibodies or parts 
of antibody molecules. The monoclonal 
antibodies produced by multiple 
myelomas were critical for early 
biochemical analyses of antibody 
structure. 
Multiple sclerosis A chronic progressive 
autoimmune disease of the central 
nervous system characterized by 
inflammatory damage to the myelin 
sheath of neurons, mediated by B cells, 
autoreactive CD4+ T cells, and 
macrophages, leading to impairment of 
sensory and motor functions. 
Multivalency See polyvalency. 
Mycobacterium  A genus of bacteria, 
many species of which can survive 
within phagocytes and cause disease. 
The principal host defense against 
mycobacteria such as Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis is cell-mediated immunity. 
Myeloid cells Cells derived from the 
myeloid lineage of hematopoietic 
precursors, including granulocytes, 
monocytes, and dendritic cells. Myeloid 
cells are distinct from lymphoid cells, 
which include B cells, T cells, innate 
lymphoid cells, and natural killer cells, 
all derived from a common lymphoid 
progenitor. 
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells 
(MDSCs) A heterogeneous group of 
myeloid cells derived from the same 
precursors that give rise to neutrophils 
and monocytes but have 
antiinflammatory and 
immunosuppressive properties. 
MDSCs are found in lymphoid tissues, 
blood, or tumors of cancer-bearing 
animals and cancer patients and are 
thought to suppress antitumor immune 
responses. 
N 
N nucleotides The name given to 
nucleotides randomly added to the 
junctions between V, D, and J gene 
segments in Ig or TCR genes during 
lymphocyte development. The addition 
of up to 20 of these nucleotides, which 
is mediated by the enzyme terminal 
deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase (TdT), 
contributes to the diversity of the 
antibody and TCR repertoires. 
Naive lymphocyte A mature B or T 
lymphocyte that has not previously 
encountered antigen. When naive 
lymphocytes are stimulated by antigen, 
they differentiate into effector 
lymphocytes, such as antibody-
secreting B cells, cytokine-producing 
helper T cells, and CTLs capable of 
killing target cells. Naive lymphocytes 
have surface markers and recirculation 
patterns that are distinct from those of 
previously activated lymphocytes. 
(Naive also refers to an unimmunized 
individual.) 
Natural antibodies IgM antibodies, 
produced without overt antigen 
exposure, largely by B-1 cells specific 
for bacteria that are common in the 
environment and gastrointestinal tract. 
Normal individuals contain natural 
antibodies without any evidence of 
infection, and these antibodies may 
serve as a preformed defense 
mechanism against microbes that 
succeed in penetrating epithelial 
barriers. Natural antibodies specific for 
ABO blood group antigens are 
responsible for transfusion reactions. 
Natural killer (NK) cells A subset of 
lymphoid cells, related to ILC1, that 
function in innate immune responses to 
kill microbe-infected cells by direct lytic 
mechanisms and by secreting IFN-γ. 
NK cells do not express clonally 
distributed antigen receptors such as Ig 
receptors or TCRs, and their activation 
is regulated by a combination of cell 
surface stimulatory and inhibitory 
receptors, the latter recognizing self 
class I MHC molecules. 
Natural killer T cells (NKT cells) A 
numerically small subset of 
lymphocytes that express T cell 
receptors and some surface molecules 
characteristic of NK cells. Some NKT 
cells, called invariant NKT (iNKT), 
express αβ T cell antigen receptors with 
very little diversity and recognize lipid 
antigens presented by CD1 molecules. 
The physiologic functions of NKT cells 
are not well defined. 
Negative selection The process by which 
developing lymphocytes that express 
self-reactive antigen receptors are 
eliminated, thereby contributing to the 
maintenance of self-tolerance. Negative 
selection of developing T lymphocytes 
(thymocytes) is best understood and 
involves high-avidity binding of a 
thymocyte to self MHC molecules with 
bound peptides on thymic APCs, 
leading to apoptotic death of the 
thymocyte. 
Neoantigen A part of a macromolecule 
that is newly changed, either by 
chemical modification, or in the case of 
proteins, by mutation of the encoding 
gene, such that the new structure is 
recognized by antibodies or T cells; 
sometimes called neoepitope. 
Neoantigens encoded by mutated 
genes are the major inducers of T cell 
responses against many tumors. 
Neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) An IgG-
specific Fc receptor that mediates the 
transport of maternal IgG across the 
placenta and the neonatal intestinal 
epithelium and promotes the long half-
life of IgG molecules in the blood by 
protecting them from catabolism by 
phagocytes and endothelial cells. 
Neonatal immunity Passive humoral 
immunity to infections in mammals in 
the first months of life, before full 
development of the immune system. 
Neonatal immunity is mediated by 
maternally produced antibodies 
transported across the placenta into the 
fetal circulation before birth or derived 
from ingested milk and transported 
across the gut epithelium. 
Neutrophil (also called 
polymorphonuclear leukocyte, PMN) A 
phagocytic cell characterized by a 
segmented multilobed nucleus and 
cytoplasmic granules filled with 
degradative enzymes. Neutrophils are 
the most abundant type of circulating 
white blood cells and the most 
numerous cell type recruited into 
tissues as part of acute inflammatory 
responses to microbial infections or 
tissue damage. 
Nitric oxide A molecule with a broad 
range of activities that in macrophages 
functions as a potent microbicidal agent 
to kill ingested organisms. 
283
  
           
 
 Glossary
    
 
Nitric oxide synthase A member of a 
family of enzymes that synthesize the 
vasoactive and microbicidal compound 
nitric oxide from L-arginine. 
Macrophages express an inducible form 
of this enzyme on activation by various 
microbial or cytokine stimuli. 
NOD-like receptors (NLRs) A family of 
cytosolic multidomain proteins that 
sense cytoplasmic PAMPs and DAMPs 
and recruit other proteins to form 
signaling complexes that promote 
inflammation. 
Notch-1 A cell surface signaling receptor 
that is proteolytically cleaved after 
ligand binding, and the cleaved 
intracellular portion translocates to the 
nucleus and regulates gene expression. 
Notch-1 signaling is required for 
commitment of developing T cell 
precursors to the αβ T cell lineage. 
Nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) A family of 
transcription factors composed of 
homodimers or heterodimers of 
proteins homologous to the c-REL 
protein. NF-κB proteins are required 
for the inducible transcription of many 
genes important in both innate and 
adaptive immune responses. 
Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) 
A transcription factor required for the 
expression of IL-2, IL-4, and other 
cytokine genes. There are four different 
NFATs, each encoded by a separate 
gene; NFATp and NFATc are found in 
T cells. Cytoplasmic NFAT is activated 
by calcium/calmodulin-dependent, 
calcineurin-mediated 
dephosphorylation that permits NFAT 
to translocate into the nucleus and bind 
to consensus binding sequences in the 
regulatory regions of IL-2, IL-4, and 
other cytokine genes, usually in 
association with other transcription 
factors such as AP-1. 
Nude mouse A strain of mice that lacks 
development of the thymus, and 
therefore T lymphocytes, as well as hair 
follicles, caused by mutation affecting 
the transcription factor TBX1. Nude 
mice have been used experimentally to 
define the role of T lymphocytes in 
immunity and disease. 
O 
Oncofetal antigen Proteins that are 
expressed at high levels on some types 
of cancer cells and in normal 
developing fetal (but not adult) tissues. 
Antibodies specific for these proteins 
are often used in histopathologic 
identification of tumors or to monitor 
the progression of tumor growth in 
patients. CEA (CD66) and α-fetoprotein 
are two oncofetal antigens commonly 
expressed by certain carcinomas. 
Opsonin A molecule that becomes 
attached to the surface of a microbe and 
can be recognized by surface receptors 
of neutrophils and macrophages, 
thereby increasing the efficiency of 
phagocytosis of the microbe. Opsonins 
include IgG antibodies, which are 
recognized by the Fcγ receptor on 
phagocytes, and fragments of the C3 
complement proteins, which are 
recognized by the complement 
receptors CR1 (CD35) and the 
leukocyte integrin Mac-1. 
Opsonization The process of attaching 
opsonins, such as IgG or complement 
fragments, to microbial surfaces to 
target the microbes for phagocytosis. 
Oral tolerance The suppression of 
systemic humoral and cell-mediated 
immune responses to an antigen after 
oral administration of that antigen, 
which may occur as a result of anergy 
of antigen-specific T cells or the 
production of immunosuppressive 
cytokines such as transforming growth 
factor-β. Oral tolerance is a possible 
mechanism for preventing immune 
responses to food antigens and to 
bacteria that normally reside as 
commensals in the intestinal lumen. 
P 
P nucleotides Short inverted repeat 
nucleotide sequences in the VDJ 
junctions of rearranged Ig and TCR 
genes that are generated by RAG-1– 
and RAG-2–mediated asymmetric 
cleavage of hairpin DNA intermediates 
during somatic recombination events. P 
nucleotides contribute to the junctional 
diversity of antigen receptors. 
Paracrine factor A molecule that acts on 
cells in proximity to the cell that 
produces the factor. Most cytokines act 
in a paracrine fashion. 
Passive immunity The form of immunity 
to an antigen that is established in one 
individual by transfer of antibodies or 
lymphocytes from another individual 
who is immune to that antigen. The 
recipient of such a transfer can become 
immune to the antigen without ever 
having been exposed to or having 
responded to the antigen. 
Transplacental transfer of IgG from 
mother to fetus is a physiologic form of 
passive immunity essential for 
protecting newborn babies from 
infections. An example of therapeutic 
passive immunity is the transfer of 
human sera containing antibodies 
specific for potentially lethal microbial 
toxins, viruses, or snake venom to 
exposed individuals. 
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns 
(PAMPs) Structures produced by 
microorganisms but not mammalian 
(host) cells, which are recognized by 
and stimulate the innate immune 
system. Examples include bacterial 
lipopolysaccharide and viral double-
stranded RNA. 
Pathogenicity The ability of a 
microorganism to cause disease. 
Multiple mechanisms may contribute to 
pathogenicity, including production of 
toxins, stimulation of host 
inflammatory responses, and 
perturbation of host cell metabolism. 
Pattern recognition receptors Signaling 
receptors of the innate immune system 
that recognize pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns (PAMPs) and 
damage-associated molecular patterns 
(DAMPs) and thereby activate innate 
immune responses. Examples include 
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and NOD-
like receptors (NLRs). 
PD-1 An inhibitory receptor homologous 
to CD28 that is expressed on activated 
T cells and binds to PD-L1 or PD-L2, 
members of the B7 protein family 
expressed on various cell types. PD-1 is 
upregulated on T cells after repeated or 
prolonged stimulation (e.g., in the 
setting of chronic infection or tumors), 
and blockade of PD-1 with monoclonal 
antibodies enhances antitumor immune 
responses. 
Pentraxins A family of plasma proteins 
that contain five identical globular 
subunits; includes the acute-phase 
reactant C-reactive protein. 
Peptide-binding cleft The portion of an 
MHC molecule that binds peptides for 
display to T cells. The cleft is composed 
of paired α helices resting on a floor 
made up of an eight-stranded β-pleated 
sheet. The polymorphic residues, which 
are the amino acids that vary among 
different MHC alleles, are located in 
and around this cleft. Also called 
peptide-binding groove. 
Perforin A protein present in the granules 
of CTLs and NK cells. When perforin is 
released from the granules of activated 
284            Glossary 
 
CTLs or NK cells, it inserts into the 
plasma membrane of the adjacent 
infected or tumor cells and promotes 
entry of granzymes into the cytosol, 
leading to apoptotic death of the target 
cell. 
Periarteriolar lymphoid sheath (PALS) A 
cuff of lymphocytes surrounding small 
arterioles in the spleen, adjacent to 
lymphoid follicles. A PALS contains 
mainly T lymphocytes, approximately 
two-thirds of which are CD4+ and one-
third CD8+. In humoral immune 
responses to protein antigens, B 
lymphocytes are activated at the 
interface between the PALS and 
follicles and then migrate back into the 
follicles to form germinal centers. 
Peripheral lymphoid organs and tissues 
See Secondary lymphoid organs and 
tissues 
Peripheral tolerance Unresponsiveness to 
self antigens that are present in 
peripheral tissues and may not be 
abundant in the generative lymphoid 
organs. Peripheral tolerance is induced 
by various mechanisms, including the 
recognition of antigens without 
adequate levels of the costimulators 
required for lymphocyte activation or 
by regulatory T cell–mediated 
suppression. 
Peyer’s patches Organized lymphoid 
tissue in the lamina propria of the small 
intestine in which immune responses to 
intestinal pathogens and other ingested 
antigens may be initiated. Peyer’s 
patches are composed mostly of B cells, 
with smaller numbers of T lymphocytes 
and other cells, all arranged in follicles 
similar to those found in lymph nodes, 
often with germinal centers. 
Phagocytosis The process by which 
certain cells of the innate immune 
system, including macrophages and 
neutrophils, engulf large particles (>0.5 
μm in diameter) such as intact 
microbes. The cell surrounds the 
particle with extensions of its plasma 
membrane by an energy- and 
cytoskeleton-dependent process 
resulting in the formation of an 
intracellular vesicle called a phagosome 
containing the ingested particle. 
Phagosomes fuse with lysosomes that 
contains enzymes that generate free-
radicals and proteases, which mediate 
killing of ingested microbes. 
Phagosome A membrane-bound 
intracellular vesicle that contains 
microbes or particulate material 
ingested from the extracellular 
environment. Phagosomes are formed 
during the process of phagocytosis. 
They fuse with lysosomes to form 
phagolysosomes, leading to enzymatic 
degradation of the ingested material. 
Phosphatase (protein phosphatase) An 
enzyme that removes phosphate 
groups from the side chains of certain 
amino acid residues of proteins. Protein 
phosphatases in lymphocytes, such as 
SHP-1 and SHP-2, CD45 and 
calcineurin, regulate the activity of 
various signal transduction molecules 
and transcription factors. Some protein 
phosphatases may be specific for 
phosphotyrosine residues and others 
for phosphoserine and 
phosphothreonine residues. 
Phospholipase Cγ (PLCγ) An enzyme 
that catalyzes hydrolysis of the plasma 
membrane phospholipid PIP2 to 
generate two signaling molecules, 
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and 
diacylglycerol (DAG). PLCγ becomes 
activated in lymphocytes after antigen 
binding to the antigen receptor. 
Phytohemagglutinin (PHA) A 
carbohydrate-binding protein, or lectin, 
produced by plants that cross-links T 
cell surface molecules, including the T 
cell receptor, thereby inducing 
polyclonal activation and agglutination 
of T cells. PHA was used in 
experimental immunology to study T 
cell activation. In clinical medicine, 
PHA is used to assess whether a 
patient’s T cells are functional or to 
induce T cell mitosis for the purpose of 
generating karyotypic data. 
Plasmablast Circulating antibody-
secreting cells that are precursors of the 
plasma cells that reside in the bone 
marrow and other tissues. 
Plasma cell A terminally differentiated 
antibody-secreting B lymphocyte with a 
characteristic histologic appearance, 
including an oval shape, eccentric 
nucleus, and perinuclear halo. Plasma 
cells are found in bone marrow, 
mucosal tissues, and many sites of 
chronic inflammation. 
Platelet-activating factor (PAF) A lipid 
mediator derived from membrane 
phospholipids in several cell types, 
including mast cells and endothelial 
cells. PAF can cause 
bronchoconstriction and vascular 
dilation and leak, and it may be a 
mediator in asthma. 
Polyclonal activators Agents that are 
capable of activating many clones of 
lymphocytes, regardless of their 
antigen specificities. Examples of 
polyclonal activators include anti-IgM 
antibodies for B cells and anti-CD3 
antibodies, bacterial superantigens, and 
PHA for T cells. 
Poly-Ig receptor An Fc receptor expressed 
by mucosal epithelial cells that 
mediates the transport of IgA and IgM 
secreted by plasma cells in the 
intestinal lamina propria through the 
intestinal epithelial cells into the lumen. 
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) A rapid 
method of copying and amplifying 
specific DNA sequences up to about 1 
kb in length that is widely used as a 
preparative and analytical technique in 
all branches of molecular biology. The 
method relies on the use of short 
oligonucleotide primers 
complementary to the sequences at the 
ends of the DNA to be amplified and 
involves repetitive cycles of melting, 
annealing, and synthesis of DNA. 
Polymorphism The existence of two or 
more alternative forms, or variants, of a 
gene that are present at stable 
frequencies in a population. Each 
common variant of a polymorphic gene 
is called an allele, and one individual 
may carry two different alleles of a 
gene, each inherited from a different 
parent. The MHC genes, some of which 
have thousands of alleles, are the most 
polymorphic genes in the mammalian 
genome. 
Polyvalency The presence of multiple 
identical epitopes of a single antigen 
molecule, cell surface, or particle. 
Polyvalent antigens, such as bacterial 
capsular polysaccharides, are often 
capable of activating B lymphocytes 
independent of helper T cells. Used 
synonymously with multivalency. 
Positive selection The process by which 
developing T cells in the thymus 
(thymocytes) whose TCRs bind to self 
MHC molecules are rescued from 
programmed cell death, whereas 
thymocytes whose receptors do not 
recognize self MHC molecules die by 
default. Positive selection ensures that 
mature T cells are self MHC restricted 
and that CD8+ T cells are specific for 
complexes of peptides with class I 
MHC molecules and CD4+ T cells for 
285
  
           
 
 Glossary
    
 
complexes of peptides with class II 
MHC molecules. 
Pre-B cell A developing B cell present 
only in hematopoietic tissues that is at a 
maturational stage characterized by 
expression of cytoplasmic Ig μ heavy 
chains and surrogate light chains but 
not Ig light chains. Pre-B cell receptors 
composed of μ chains and surrogate 
light chains deliver signals that 
stimulate further maturation of pre-B 
cells into immature B cells. 
Pre-B cell receptor A receptor expressed 
on developing B lymphocytes at the 
pre-B cell stage that is composed of Ig μ 
heavy chains and invariant surrogate 
light chains. The pre-B cell receptor 
associates with the Igα and Igβ signal 
transduction proteins to form the pre-B 
cell receptor complex. Pre-B cell 
receptors are required for stimulating 
the proliferation and continued 
maturation of the developing B cell, 
serving as a checkpoint that ensures 
productive μ heavy chain VDJ 
rearrangement. It is not known whether 
the pre-B cell receptor binds a specific 
ligand. 
Pre-T cell A developing T lymphocyte in 
the thymus at a maturational stage 
characterized by expression of the TCR 
β chain but not the α chain or CD4 or 
CD8. In pre-T cells, the TCR β chain is 
found on the cell surface as part of the 
pre-T cell receptor. 
Pre-T cell receptor A receptor expressed 
on the surface of pre-T cells that is 
composed of the TCR β chain and an 
invariant pre-Tα protein. This receptor 
associates with CD3 and ζ molecules to 
form the pre-T cell receptor complex. 
The function of this complex is similar 
to that of the pre-B cell receptor in B 
cell development, namely, the delivery 
of signals that stimulate further 
proliferation, antigen receptor gene 
rearrangements, and other 
maturational events. The pre-T cell 
receptor serves as a checkpoint that 
ensures productive TCR β chain VDJ 
rearrangement. It is not known whether 
the pre-T cell receptor binds a specific 
ligand. 
Pre-Tα An invariant transmembrane 
protein with a single extracellular Ig-
like domain that associates with the 
TCR β chain in pre-T cells to form the 
pre-T cell receptor. 
Primary immune response An adaptive 
immune response that occurs after the 
first exposure of an individual to a 
foreign antigen. Primary responses are 
characterized by relatively slow 
kinetics and small magnitude 
compared with the secondary 
(memory) responses after a second or 
subsequent exposure. 
Primary immunodeficiency A genetic 
defect in which an inherited deficiency 
in some aspect of the innate or adaptive 
immune system leads to an increased 
susceptibility to infections. Primary 
immunodeficiency is frequently 
manifested early in infancy and 
childhood but is sometimes clinically 
detected later in life. Synonymous with 
Congenital immunodeficiency. 
Pro-B cell A developing B cell in the bone 
marrow that is the earliest cell 
committed to the B lymphocyte lineage. 
Pro-B cells do not produce Ig, but they 
can be distinguished from other 
immature cells by the expression of B 
lineage–restricted surface molecules 
such as CD19 and CD10. 
Pro-T cell A developing T cell in the 
thymic cortex that is a recent arrival 
from the bone marrow and does not 
express TCRs, CD3, ζ chains, or CD4 or 
CD8 molecules. Pro-T cells are also 
called double-negative thymocytes. 
Professional antigen-presenting cells 
(professional APCs) A term sometimes 
used to refer to APCs that activate T 
lymphocytes; includes mainly dendritic 
cells, but also mononuclear phagocytes, 
and B lymphocytes, all of which are 
capable of expressing both class I and 
class II MHC molecules and 
costimulators. The most important 
professional APCs for initiating 
primary T-cell responses are dendritic 
cells. 
Programmed cell death See Apoptosis. 
Promoter A DNA sequence immediately 
5′ of the transcription start site of a gene 
where the proteins that initiate 
transcription bind. The term promoter 
is often used to mean the entire 5′ 
regulatory region of a gene, including 
enhancers, which are additional 
sequences that bind transcription 
factors and interact with the basal 
transcription complex to increase the 
rate of transcriptional initiation. Other 
enhancers may be located at a 
significant distance from the promoter, 
either 5′ of the gene, in introns, or 3′ of 
the gene. 
Prostaglandins A class of lipid 
inflammatory mediators that are 
derived from arachidonic acid in many 
cell types through the cyclooxygenase 
pathway and that have vasodilator, 
bronchoconstrictor, and chemotactic 
activities. Prostaglandins made by mast 
cells are important mediators of allergic 
reactions. Many commonly used 
antiinflammatory drugs are 
cyclooxygenase inhibitors that block 
the synthesis of prostaglandins. 
Proteasome A large multiprotein enzyme 
complex with a broad range of 
proteolytic activity, found in the 
cytoplasm of most cells, important for 
degrading misfolded cytosolic proteins. 
Proteins are targeted for proteasomal 
degradation by covalent linkage of 
ubiquitin molecules. A specialized form 
of the proteasome in antigen-presenting 
cells, called the immunoproteasome, 
degrades cytosolic proteins into 
peptides that are transported into the 
endoplasmic reticulum and bind to 
newly synthesized class I MHC 
molecules. 
Protein kinase C (PKC) Any of several 
isoforms of an enzyme that mediates 
the phosphorylation of serine and 
threonine residues in many different 
protein substrates and thereby serves to 
propagate various signal transduction 
pathways leading to transcription 
factor activation. In T and B 
lymphocytes, PKC is activated by 
diacyl glycerol (DAG), which is 
generated in response to antigen 
receptor ligation. 
Protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) Enzymes 
that mediate the phosphorylation of 
tyrosine residues in proteins and 
thereby promote phosphotyrosine-
dependent protein-protein interactions. 
PTKs are involved in numerous signal 
transduction pathways in cells of the 
immune system. 
Protozoa Single-celled eukaryotic 
organisms, many of which are human 
parasites and cause diseases. Examples 
of pathogenic protozoa include 
Entamoeba histolytica, which causes 
amebic dysentery; Plasmodium, which 
causes malaria; and Leishmania, which 
causes leishmaniasis. Protozoa 
stimulate both innate and adaptive 
immune responses. 
Provirus A DNA copy of the genome of a 
retrovirus that is integrated into the 
host cell genome and from which viral 
286            Glossary 
 
genes are transcribed and the viral 
genome is reproduced. HIV proviruses 
can remain inactive for long periods 
and thereby represent a latent form of 
HIV infection that is not accessible to 
immune defense. 
Pyogenic bacteria Bacteria, such as gram-
positive staphylococci and streptococci, 
that induce inflammatory responses 
rich in polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
(giving rise to pus). 
Pyroptosis A form of programmed cell 
death of macrophages and DCs 
induced by canonical inflammasome 
activation of caspase-1 (and also 
noncanonical inflammasome pathways 
that use human caspase-4 or caspase-5), 
characterized by cell swelling, loss of 
plasma membrane integrity, and 
release of inflammatory mediators, 
such as IL-1β. In pyroptosis, the 
activated caspases proteolytically 
generates a fragment of the protein 
gasdermin D, which polymerizes to 
form pores in the plasma membrane. 
Pyroptosis results in the death of 
certain microbes that gain access to the 
cytosol and enhances inflammatory 
clearance of bacteria, but also 
contributes to septic shock. 
R 
Radioimmunoassay A highly sensitive 
and specific immunologic method of 
quantifying the concentration of an 
antigen in a solution that relies on a 
radioactively labeled antibody specific 
for the antigen. Usually, two antibodies 
specific for the antigen are used. The 
first antibody is unlabeled but attached 
to a solid support, where it binds and 
immobilizes the antigen whose 
concentration is being determined. The 
amount of the second, labeled antibody 
that binds to the immobilized antigen, 
as determined by radioactive decay 
detectors, is proportional to the 
concentration of antigen in the test 
solution. Radioimmunoassays have 
largely been replaced by 
nonradioactive solid-phase 
immunoassays, such as enzyme-linked 
immunoassays (ELISAs). 
Rapamycin An immunosuppressive drug 
(also called sirolimus) used to treat 
allograft rejection. Rapamycin inhibits 
the activation of a protein called 
molecular target of rapamycin (mTOR), 
which is a key signaling molecule in a 
variety of metabolic and cell growth 
pathways, including the pathway 
required for interleukin-2–mediated T 
cell proliferation. 
RAS A member of a family of 21-kD 
guanine nucleotide-binding G proteins 
with intrinsic GTPase activity that are 
involved in many different signal 
transduction pathways in diverse cell 
types. Mutated RAS genes are 
associated with neoplastic 
transformation. In T cell activation, 
RAS is recruited to the plasma 
membrane by tyrosine-phosphorylated 
adaptor proteins, where it is activated 
by GDP-GTP exchange factors. 
GTP⋅RAS then initiates the MAP kinase 
cascade, which leads to expression of 
the FOS gene and assembly of the AP-1 
transcription factor. 
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) Highly 
reactive metabolites of oxygen, 
including superoxide anion, hydroxyl 
radical, and hydrogen peroxide, that 
are produced by activated phagocytes, 
particularly neutrophils. Reactive 
oxygen species are used by the 
phagocytes to form oxyhalides that 
damage ingested bacteria. They also 
may be released from cells and promote 
inflammatory responses or cause tissue 
damage. 
Reagin IgE antibody that mediates an 
immediate hypersensitivity reaction. 
Receptor editing A process by which 
some immature B cells that recognize 
self antigens in the bone marrow may 
be induced to change their Ig 
specificities. Receptor editing involves 
reactivation of the RAG genes, 
additional light chain VJ 
recombinations, and new Ig light chain 
production, which allows the cell to 
express a different Ig receptor that is 
not self-reactive. 
Recombination-activating genes 1 and 2 
(RAG1 and RAG2) The genes encoding 
RAG-1 and RAG-2 proteins, which 
make up the V(D)J recombinase and are 
expressed in developing B and T cells. 
RAG proteins bind to recombination 
signal sequences and are critical for 
DNA recombination events that form 
functional Ig and TCR genes. Therefore, 
RAG proteins are required for 
expression of antigen receptors and for 
the maturation of B and T lymphocytes. 
Recombination signal sequences Specific 
DNA sequences found adjacent to the 
V, D, and J segments in antigen 
receptor loci that are recognized by the 
RAG-1/RAG-2 complex during V(D)J 
recombination. The recognition 
sequences consist of a conserved stretch 
of 7 nucleotides, called the heptamer, 
located adjacent to the V, D, or J coding 
sequence, followed by a spacer of 12 or 
23 nonconserved nucleotides and a 
conserved stretch of 9 nucleotides, 
called the nonamer. 
Red pulp An anatomic and functional 
compartment of the spleen composed 
of vascular sinusoids, scattered among 
which are large numbers of 
erythrocytes, macrophages, dendritic 
cells, sparse lymphocytes, and plasma 
cells. Red pulp macrophages clear the 
blood of microbes, other foreign 
particles, and damaged red blood cells. 
Regulatory T cells A population of T cells 
that inhibits the activation of other T 
cells and is necessary to maintain 
peripheral tolerance to self-antigens. 
Most regulatory T cells are CD4+ and 
express the transcription factor FOXP3, 
the α chain of the IL-2 receptor (CD25), 
CTLA-4, and the transcription factor 
FOXP3. 
Respiratory burst The process by which 
reactive oxygen species such as 
superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical, 
and hydrogen peroxide are produced 
in neutrophils and macrophages. The 
respiratory burst is mediated by the 
enzyme phagocyte oxidase and is 
usually triggered by bacterial products 
such as LPS. 
Reverse transcriptase An enzyme 
encoded by retroviruses, such as HIV, 
that synthesizes a DNA copy of the 
viral genome from an RNA template. 
The process is essential for replication 
of RNA viruses, and reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors are used as 
drugs to treat HIV-1 infection. Purified 
reverse transcriptase was used widely 
in molecular biology research for 
purposes of cloning complementary 
DNAs encoding a gene of interest from 
messenger RNA. 
Rh blood group antigens A system of 
protein alloantigens expressed on red 
blood cell membranes that are the cause 
of transfusion reactions and hemolytic 
disease of the fetus and newborn. The 
most clinically important Rh antigen is 
designated RhD. 
Rheumatoid arthritis An autoimmune 
disease characterized primarily by 
inflammatory damage to joints and 
sometimes inflammation of blood 
vessels, lungs, and other tissues. CD4+ 
287
  
           
 
 Glossary
    
 
T cells, activated B lymphocytes, and 
plasma cells are found in the inflamed 
joint lining (synovium), and numerous 
proinflammatory cytokines, including 
IL-1, IL-6 and TNF, are present in the 
synovial (joint) fluid. 
RNA vaccine See mRNA vaccine 
RIG-like receptors (RLRs) Cytosolic 
receptors of the innate immune system 
that recognize viral RNA and induce 
production of type I interferons. The 
two best characterized RLRs are RIG-I 
(retinoic acid–inducible gene I) and 
MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-
associated gene 5). 
RORγT (retinoid-related orphan receptor 
γ T) A transcription factor expressed in 
and required for differentiation of Th17 
cells and group 3 innate lymphoid cells, 
encoded by the RORC gene. 
S 
SARS-CoV-2  See COVID-19. 
Scavenger receptors A family of cell 
surface receptors expressed on 
macrophages, originally defined as 
receptors that mediate endocytosis of 
oxidized or acetylated low-density 
lipoprotein particles but that also bind 
and mediate the phagocytosis of a 
variety of microbes. 
SCID See Severe combined 
immunodeficiency. 
SCID mouse A mouse strain in which B 
and T cells are absent because of an 
early block in maturation from bone 
marrow precursors. SCID mice carry a 
mutation in a component of the enzyme 
DNA-dependent protein kinase, which 
is required for double-stranded DNA 
break repair. Deficiency of this enzyme 
results in abnormal joining of Ig and 
TCR gene segments during 
recombination and therefore failure to 
express antigen receptors. 
Secondary immune response An adaptive 
immune response that occurs on 
second or subsequent exposure to an 
antigen. A secondary response is 
characterized by more rapid kinetics 
and greater magnitude relative to the 
primary immune response, which 
occurs on first exposure. 
Secondary immunodeficiency See 
Acquired immunodeficiency. 
Secondary lymphoid organ Organized 
collections of lymphocytes and 
accessory cells, including the spleen, 
lymph nodes, and mucosa-associated 
lymphoid tissues, in which adaptive 
immune responses are initiated. 
Synonymous with Peripheral lymphoid 
organ. 
Secretory component The proteolytically 
cleaved portion of the extracellular 
domain of the poly-Ig receptor that 
remains bound to an IgA molecule in 
mucosal secretions. 
Selectin Any one of three separate but 
closely related carbohydrate-binding 
proteins that mediate low-affinity 
adhesion of leukocytes to postcapillary 
venule endothelial cells, leading to 
rolling of the leukocytes on endothelial 
surfaces of the venules. Each of the 
selectin molecules is a single-chain 
transmembrane glycoprotein with a 
similar modular structure, including an 
extracellular calcium-dependent lectin 
domain. The selectins include L-selectin 
(CD62L), expressed on leukocytes; P-
selectin (CD62P), expressed on platelets 
and activated endothelium; and E-
selectin (CD62E), expressed on 
activated endothelium. 
Selective immunoglobulin (Ig) deficiency 
Immunodeficiencies characterized by a 
lack of only one or a few Ig classes or 
subclasses. IgA deficiency is the most 
common selective Ig deficiency, 
followed by IgG3 and IgG2 deficiencies. 
Patients with these disorders may be at 
increased risk for bacterial infections, 
but many are healthy. 
Self MHC restriction The limitation (or 
restriction) of T cells to recognize 
antigens displayed by MHC molecules 
that the T cell encountered during 
maturation in the thymus (and thus 
sees as self MHC). 
Self-tolerance Unresponsiveness of the 
adaptive immune system to self 
antigens, largely as a result of 
inactivation or death of self-reactive 
lymphocytes induced by exposure to 
these antigens or suppression by 
regulatory T cells. Self-tolerance is a 
cardinal feature of the normal immune 
system, and failure of self-tolerance 
leads to autoimmune diseases. 
Septic shock A severe complication of 
bacterial or fungal infections that 
spread to the bloodstream (sepsis), and 
is characterized by hypotension and 
shock, disseminated intravascular 
coagulation, and metabolic 
disturbances. In bacterial infections, the 
syndrome is most often due to the 
effects of bacterial cell wall 
components, such as LPS or 
peptidoglycan, that bind to TLRs on 
various cell types and induce 
expression of large amounts 
inflammatory cytokines, including 
TNF, IL-6 and IL-12. 
Seroconversion The production of 
detectable antibodies in the serum 
specific for a microorganism during the 
course of an infection or in response to 
immunization. 
Serology The study of blood (serum) 
antibodies and their reactions with 
antigens. The term serology is often 
used to refer to the diagnosis of 
infectious diseases by detection of 
microbe-specific antibodies in the 
serum. 
Serotype An antigenically distinct subset 
of a species of an infectious organism 
that is distinguished from other subsets 
by serologic (i.e., serum antibody) tests. 
Humoral immune responses to one 
serotype of microbes (e.g., influenza 
virus) may not be protective against 
another serotype. 
Serum The cell-free fluid that remains 
when blood or plasma forms a clot. 
Blood antibodies are found in the 
serum fraction. 
Serum amyloid A (SAA) An acute-phase 
protein whose serum concentration 
rises significantly in the setting of 
infection and inflammation, mainly 
because of cytokine-induced synthesis 
by the liver. SAA activates leukocyte 
chemotaxis and phagocytosis. 
Serum sickness A disease caused by the 
injection of large doses of a protein 
antigen into the blood and 
characterized by the deposition of 
antigen-antibody (immune) complexes 
in blood vessel walls, especially in the 
kidneys and joints. Immune complex 
deposition leads to complement 
fixation and leukocyte recruitment and 
subsequently to glomerulonephritis 
and arthritis. Serum sickness was 
originally described as a disorder that 
occurred in patients receiving injections 
of animal (horse or goat) serum 
containing antitoxin antibodies to 
prevent diphtheria. 
Severe combined immunodeficiency 
(SCID) Immunodeficiency diseases in 
which both B and T lymphocytes do 
not develop or do not function 
properly, and therefore both humoral 
immunity and cell-mediated immunity 
are impaired. Children with SCID 
usually have infections during the first 
year of life and succumb to these 
288            Glossary 
 
infections unless the immunodeficiency 
is treated. SCID has several different 
genetic causes. 
Signal transducer and activator of 
transcription (STAT) A member of a 
family of seven mammalian proteins 
that function as transcription factors in 
response to binding of cytokines to type 
I and type II cytokine receptors. STATs 
are present as inactive monomers in the 
cytosol of cells and are recruited to the 
cytoplasmic tails of cross-linked 
cytokine receptors, where they are 
tyrosine phosphorylated by JAKs. The 
phosphorylated STAT proteins 
dimerize and move to the nucleus, 
where they bind to specific sequences 
in the promoter regions of various 
genes and stimulate their transcription. 
Different STATs are activated by 
different cytokines. 
Single-chain variable fragment (scFv) A 
genetically engineered polypeptide that 
includes only Ig heavy chain and light 
chain V domains that fold to form an 
antibody binding site of known 
specificity, used as a research reagent, 
or in tumor immunotherapy (e.g., to 
recognize tumor antigens in bispecific T 
cell engagers [BiTEs] and chimeric 
antigen receptors [CARs]). 
Single-positive thymocyte A maturing T 
cell precursor in the thymus that 
expresses CD4 or CD8 molecules but 
not both. Single-positive thymocytes 
are found mainly in the medulla and 
have matured from the double-positive 
stage, during which thymocytes 
express both CD4 and CD8 molecules. 
Smallpox A disease caused by variola 
virus. Smallpox was the first infectious 
disease shown to be preventable by 
vaccination and the first disease to be 
completely eradicated by a worldwide 
vaccination program. 
Somatic hypermutation High-frequency 
point mutations in Ig heavy and light 
chains that occur in germinal center B 
cells in response to signals from T 
follicular helper (Tfh) cells. Mutations 
that result in increased affinity of 
antibodies for antigen impart a 
selective survival advantage to the B 
cells producing those antibodies and 
lead to affinity maturation of a humoral 
immune response. 
Somatic recombination The process of 
DNA recombination by which the 
functional genes encoding the variable 
regions of antigen receptors are formed 
during lymphocyte development. A 
relatively limited set of inherited, or 
germline, DNA segments that are 
initially separated from one another are 
brought together by enzymatic deletion 
of intervening sequences and ligation of 
the segments. This process occurs only 
in developing B or T lymphocytes and 
is mediated by RAG-1 and RAG-2 
proteins. This process is also called 
V(D)J recombination. 
Specificity A cardinal feature of the 
adaptive immune system, namely, that 
immune responses are directed toward 
and able to distinguish between distinct 
antigens or small parts of 
macromolecular antigens. This fine 
specificity is attributed to lymphocyte 
antigen receptors that may bind to one 
molecule but not to another, even 
closely related, molecule. 
Spleen A secondary lymphoid organ in 
the left upper quadrant of the 
abdomen. The spleen is the major site 
of adaptive immune responses to 
blood-borne antigens. The red pulp of 
the spleen is composed of blood-filled 
vascular sinusoids lined by phagocytes 
that ingest opsonized antigens and 
damaged red blood cells. The white 
pulp of the spleen contains 
lymphocytes and lymphoid follicles 
where B cells are activated. 
SRC family kinases A family of protein 
tyrosine kinases, homologous to the 
SRC tyrosine kinase, which initiate 
signaling downstream of immune 
receptors by phosphorylating tyrosine 
residues on ITAM motifs. LCK is a 
prominent SRC-family kinase in T cells 
and LYN in B cells. 
SRC homology 2 (SH2) domain A three-
dimensional domain structure of 
approximately 100 amino acid residues 
present in many signaling proteins that 
permits specific noncovalent 
interactions with other proteins by 
binding to phosphotyrosines. Each SH2 
domain has a unique binding 
specificity that is determined by the 
amino acid residues adjacent to the 
phosphotyrosine on the target protein. 
Several proteins involved in early 
signaling events in T and B 
lymphocytes interact with one another 
through SH2 domains. 
SRC homology 3 (SH3) domain A three-
dimensional domain structure of 
approximately 60 amino acid residues 
present in many signaling proteins that 
mediates protein-protein binding. SH3 
domains bind to proline residues and 
function cooperatively with the SH2 
domains of the same protein. For 
instance, SOS, the guanine nucleotide 
exchange factor for RAS, contains both 
SH2 and SH3 domains, and both are 
involved in SOS binding to the adaptor 
protein GRB-2. 
Stem cell An undifferentiated cell that 
divides continuously and gives rise to 
additional stem cells and to cells of 
multiple different lineages. For 
example, all blood cells arise from a 
common hematopoietic stem cell. 
STING (Stimulator of IFN Genes) An 
adaptor protein located in the 
endoplasmic reticulum membrane, 
which is used by several cytoplasmic 
DNA sensor molecules to transduce 
signals that activate the IRF3 
transcription factor, leading to type I 
IFN gene expression. 
Subunit vaccine A vaccine composed of 
purified antigens or portions (subunits) 
of microbes. Examples of this type of 
vaccine include diphtheria and tetanus 
toxoids, pneumococcus and 
Haemophilus influenzae 
polysaccharide vaccines, and purified 
polypeptide vaccines against hepatitis 
B and influenza virus. Subunit vaccines 
may stimulate antibody and helper T 
cell responses, but they often do not 
generate strong CTL responses, and 
boosters may be needed for long-
lasting immunity. 
Superantigens Microbial proteins that 
bind to and activate all of the T cells in 
an individual that express a particular 
set or family of Vβ TCR genes. 
Superantigens are presented to T cells 
by binding to nonpolymorphic regions 
of class II MHC molecules on APCs, 
and they interact with conserved 
regions of TCR Vβ domains. Several 
staphylococcal enterotoxins are 
superantigens. Their importance lies in 
their ability to activate many T cells, 
which results in production of large 
amounts of cytokine and a clinical 
syndrome that is similar to septic 
shock. 
Suppressor T cells T cells that block the 
activation and function of other T 
lymphocytes. These cells were 
described in the 1970s, but because it 
has been difficult to clearly define 
suppressor T cells or their mode of 
action, the term is no longer used. 
289
  
           
 
 Glossary
    
 
Surrogate light chains Two nonvariable 
proteins that associate with Ig μ heavy 
chains in pre-B cells to form the pre-B 
cell receptor. The two surrogate light 
chain proteins include the V pre-B 
protein, which is homologous to a light-
chain V domain, and λ5, which is 
covalently attached to the μ heavy 
chain by a disulfide bond. 
Switch recombination The molecular 
mechanism underlying Ig isotype 
switching in which a rearranged VDJ 
gene segment in an antibody-
producing B cell recombines with a 
downstream C gene and the 
intervening C gene or genes are 
deleted. DNA recombination events in 
switch recombination are triggered by 
CD40 and cytokines, which activate an 
enzyme called activation-induced 
cytidine deaminase (AID), and involve 
nucleotide sequences called switch 
regions located in the introns at the 5′ 
end of each CH locus. 
SYK A cytoplasmic protein tyrosine 
kinase in B cells, similar to ZAP-70 in T 
cells, that is critical for early signaling 
steps in antigen-induced B cell 
activation. SYK binds to 
phosphorylated tyrosines in the 
cytoplasmic tails of the Igα and Igβ 
chains of the BCR complex and in turn 
phosphorylates adaptor proteins that 
recruit other components of the 
signaling cascade. 
Syngeneic Genetically identical. All 
animals of an inbred strain and 
monozygotic twins are syngeneic. 
Syngeneic graft A graft from a donor who 
is genetically identical to the recipient. 
Syngeneic grafts are not rejected. 
Synthetic vaccine Vaccines composed of 
recombinant DNA-derived protein 
antigens. Synthetic vaccines for 
hepatitis B virus and herpes simplex 
virus are now in use. 
Systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS) The systemic changes 
observed in patients who have 
disseminated bacterial infections and 
other conditions that induce 
widespread inflammation, such as 
burns. In its mild form, SIRS consists of 
neutrophilia, fever, and a rise in acute-
phase reactants in the plasma. These 
changes are stimulated by bacterial 
products such as LPS and are mediated 
by cytokines of the innate immune 
system. In severe cases, SIRS may 
include disseminated intravascular 
coagulation, acute respiratory distress 
syndrome, and shock. 
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) A 
chronic systemic autoimmune disease 
that affects predominantly women and 
is characterized by rashes, arthritis, 
glomerulonephritis, hemolytic anemia, 
thrombocytopenia, and central nervous 
system involvement. Many different 
autoantibodies are found in patients 
with SLE, particularly anti-DNA 
antibodies. Many of the manifestations 
of SLE are due to the formation of 
immune complexes composed of 
autoantibodies and their specific 
antigens, with deposition of these 
complexes in small blood vessels in 
various tissues. The underlying 
mechanism for the breakdown of self-
tolerance in SLE is not understood. 
T 
T cell receptor (TCR) The clonally 
distributed antigen receptor on T 
lymphocytes. The most common form 
of TCR is composed of a heterodimer of 
two disulfide-linked transmembrane 
polypeptide chains, designated α and 
β, each containing one N-terminal Ig-
like variable (V) domain, one Ig-like 
constant (C) domain, a hydrophobic 
transmembrane region, and a short 
cytoplasmic region. The αβ TCR is 
expressed on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells 
and recognizes complexes of foreign 
peptides bound to self MHC molecules 
on the surface of APCs. (Another less 
common type of TCR, composed of γ 
and δ chains, is found on a small subset 
of T cells and recognizes different types 
of antigens.) 
T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic mouse A 
genetically engineered strain of mouse 
that expresses transgenically encoded 
TCR α and β genes encoding a TCR of a 
single defined specificity. Because of 
allelic exclusion of endogenous TCR 
genes, most or all of the T cells in a TCR 
transgenic mouse have the same 
antigen specificity, which is a useful 
property for various research purposes. 
T follicular helper (Tfh) cells A subset of 
CD4+ helper T cells present within 
lymphoid follicles that are critical in 
providing signals to B cells in the 
germinal center reaction that stimulate 
somatic hypermutation, isotype 
switching, and the generation of 
memory B cells and long-lived plasma 
cells. Tfh cells express CXCR5, ICOS, 
PD-1, IL-21, and BCL-6. 
T lymphocyte The key component of cell-
mediated immune responses in the 
adaptive immune system. T 
lymphocytes mature in the thymus, 
circulate in the blood, populate 
secondary lymphoid tissues, and are 
recruited to peripheral sites of antigen 
exposure. They express antigen 
receptors (TCRs) that recognize peptide 
fragments of foreign proteins bound to 
self MHC molecules. Functional subsets 
of T lymphocytes include CD4+ helper 
T cells and CD8+ CTLs. 
T-BET A T-box family transcription factor 
that is required for the differentiation of 
Th1 cells and ILC1s. 
T-dependent antigen An antigen that 
requires both B cells and helper T cells 
to stimulate an antibody response. T-
dependent antigens are protein 
antigens that contain some epitopes 
recognized by T cells and other 
epitopes recognized by B cells. Helper 
T cells produce cytokines and cell 
surface molecules that stimulate B cell 
proliferation and differentiation into 
antibody-secreting cells. Humoral 
immune responses to T-dependent 
antigens are characterized by isotype 
switching, affinity maturation, and 
memory. 
Tacrolimus An immunosuppressive drug 
(also known as FK506) of the 
calcineurin inhibitor class, used to treat 
allograft rejection, that blocks T cell 
cytokine gene transcription, similar to 
cyclosporine. Tacrolimus binds to a 
cytosolic protein called FK506-binding 
protein, and the resulting complex 
inhibits the phosphatase calcineurin, 
thereby inhibiting activation and 
nuclear translocation of the 
transcription factor NFAT. 
Tertiary lymphoid organ A collection of 
lymphocytes and antigen-presenting 
cells organized into B cell follicles and T 
cell zones that develop in sites of 
chronic immune-mediated 
inflammation, such as the joint 
synovium of rheumatoid arthritis 
patients. 
Th1 cells A subset of CD4+ helper T cells 
that secrete a particular set of cytokines, 
including IFN-γ, and whose principal 
function is to stimulate phagocyte-
mediated defense against infections, 
especially with intracellular microbes. 
Th2 cells A subset of CD4+ helper T cells 
that secrete a particular set of cytokines, 
including IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13, and 
290            Glossary 
 
whose principal function is to stimulate 
IgE and eosinophil/mast cell–mediated 
immune reactions. 
Th17 cells A subset of CD4+ helper T cells 
that secrete a particular set of 
inflammatory cytokines, including IL-
17 and IL-22, that are protective against 
bacterial and fungal infections and also 
mediate inflammatory reactions in 
autoimmune and other inflammatory 
diseases. 
Thymic epithelial cells Epithelial cells 
abundant in the cortical and medullary 
stroma of the thymus that play a critical 
role in T cell development. In the 
process of positive selection, maturing 
T cells that weakly recognize self 
peptides bound to MHC molecules on 
the surface of thymic epithelial cells are 
rescued from programmed cell death. 
Thymocyte A precursor of a mature T 
lymphocyte present in the thymus. 
Thymus A bilobed organ situated in the 
anterior mediastinum that is the site of 
maturation of T lymphocytes from bone 
marrow–derived precursors. The 
thymus is divided into an outer cortex 
and an inner medulla and contains 
stromal thymic epithelial cells, 
macrophages, dendritic cells, and 
numerous T cell precursors 
(thymocytes) at various stages of 
maturation. 
T-independent antigen Nonprotein 
antigens, such as polysaccharides and 
lipids, which can stimulate antibody 
responses without a requirement for 
antigen-specific helper T lymphocytes. 
T-independent antigens usually contain 
multiple identical epitopes that can 
cross-link membrane Ig on B cells and 
thereby activate the cells. Humoral 
immune responses to T-independent 
antigens show relatively little heavy-
chain isotype switching or affinity 
maturation, two processes that require 
signals from helper T cells. 
Tissue typing The determination of the 
particular MHC alleles expressed by an 
individual for the purpose of matching 
allograft donors and recipients. Tissue 
typing, also called HLA typing, is 
usually done by molecular (PCR-based) 
sequencing of HLA alleles or by 
serologic methods (lysis of an 
individual’s cells by panels of anti-HLA 
antibodies). 
TNF receptor-associated factors (TRAFs) 
A family of adaptor molecules that 
interact with the cytoplasmic domains 
of various receptors in the TNF 
receptor family, including TNF-RII, 
lymphotoxin (LT)-β receptor, and 
CD40. Each of these receptors contains 
a cytoplasmic motif that binds different 
TRAFs, which in turn engage other 
signaling molecules, leading to 
activation of the transcription factors 
AP-1 and NF-κB. 
Tolerance Unresponsiveness of the 
adaptive immune system to antigens, 
as a result of inactivation or death of 
antigen-specific lymphocytes, induced 
by exposure to the antigens. Tolerance 
to self antigens is a normal feature of 
the adaptive immune system, and 
tolerance to foreign antigens may be 
induced under certain conditions of 
antigen exposure. 
Tolerogen An antigen that induces 
immunologic tolerance, in contrast to 
an immunogen, which induces an 
immune response. Many antigens can 
be either tolerogens or immunogens, 
depending on how they are 
administered. All self antigens are 
tolerogenic. Tolerogenic forms of 
foreign antigens include large doses of 
proteins administered without 
adjuvants and orally administered 
antigens. 
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) A family of 
pattern recognition receptors of the 
innate immune system that are 
expressed by many cell types and 
recognize microbial structures, such as 
flagellin, lipopolysaccharide, 
peptidoglycan, dsRNA, and CpG DNA. 
TLRs transduce signals that lead to the 
expression of inflammatory and 
antiviral genes. There are 10 human 
TLRs, 7 of which are expressed on the 
plasma membrane of cells and 3 are 
located in endosomal membranes. 
Tonsils Partially encapsulated secondary 
lymphoid tissues located beneath 
barrier epithelium in the nasopharynx 
and oropharynx, including adenoids 
(pharyngeal tonsils), palatine tonsils, 
and lingual tonsils. Tonsils are sites of 
initiation of adaptive immune 
responses to microbes in the upper 
respiratory tract. 
Toxic shock syndrome An acute illness 
characterized by shock, skin exfoliation, 
conjunctivitis, and diarrhea that is 
associated with tampon use and caused 
by a Staphylococcus aureus 
superantigen, which is a polyclonal 
activator of all T cells expressing TCRs 
using a particular subgroup of Vβ 
genes. 
Transfusion Transplantation of 
circulating blood cells, platelets, or 
plasma from one individual to another. 
Transfusions are performed to treat 
blood loss from hemorrhage or to treat 
a deficiency in one or more blood cell 
types (such as red blood cells and 
platelets) resulting from inadequate 
production or excess destruction. 
Transfusion reactions An immunologic 
reaction against transfused blood 
products, usually mediated by 
preformed antibodies in the recipient 
that bind to donor blood cell antigens, 
such as ABO blood group antigens or 
histocompatibility antigens. 
Transfusion reactions can lead to 
intravascular lysis of red blood cells 
and, in severe cases, kidney damage, 
fever, shock, and disseminated 
intravascular coagulation. 
Transgenic mouse A mouse that 
expresses an exogenous gene that has 
been introduced into the genome by 
injection of a specific DNA sequence 
into the pronuclei of fertilized mouse 
eggs. Transgenes insert randomly at 
chromosomal break points and are 
subsequently inherited as simple 
Mendelian traits. By the design of 
transgenes with tissue-specific 
regulatory sequences, mice can be 
produced that express a particular gene 
only in certain tissues. Transgenic mice 
are used extensively in immunology 
research to study the functions of 
various cytokines, cell surface 
molecules, and intracellular signaling 
molecules. 
Transplantation The process of 
transferring cells, tissues, or organs 
(i.e., grafts) from one individual to 
another or from one site to another in 
the same individual. Transplantation is 
used to treat a variety of diseases in 
which there is a functional disorder of a 
tissue or organ. The major barrier to 
successful transplantation between 
individuals is immunologic reaction to 
the transplanted graft (rejection). 
Transporter associated with antigen 
processing (TAP) An ATP-dependent 
peptide transporter that mediates the 
active transport of peptides from the 
cytosol to the site of assembly of class I 
MHC molecules inside the endoplasmic 
reticulum. TAP is a heterodimeric 
molecule composed of TAP-1 and TAP-
291
  
           
 
 Glossary
    
 
2 polypeptides, both encoded by genes 
in the MHC. Because antigenic peptides 
are required for stable assembly of class 
I MHC molecules, TAP-deficient 
animals express few cell surface class I 
MHC molecules, which results in 
diminished development and 
activation of CD8+ T cells. 
Tuft cell A specialized intestinal epithelial 
cell type that is involved in enhancing 
mucus secretion in response to 
helminth infection. Tuft cells are 
activated by helminths to secrete IL-25, 
which stimulates ILC2s to secrete IL-13, 
which in turn promotes formation of 
mucus secreting goblet cells. 
Tumor immunity Protection against the 
development or progression of tumors 
by the immune system. Although 
immune responses to naturally 
occurring tumors can frequently be 
demonstrated, tumors often escape 
these responses. New therapies that 
target T cell inhibitory molecules, such 
as PD-1, are proving effective in 
enhancing T cell–mediated antitumor 
immunity. 
Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) 
Lymphocytes isolated from the 
inflammatory infiltrates present in and 
around surgical resection samples of 
solid tumors that are enriched with 
tumor-specific CTLs and NK cells. In an 
experimental mode of cancer treatment, 
TILs are grown in vitro in the presence 
of high doses of IL-2 and are then 
adoptively transferred back into 
patients with the tumor. 
Tumor necrosis factor receptor 
superfamily (TNFRSF) A large family 
of structurally homologous 
transmembrane proteins that bind TNF 
superfamily proteins and generate 
signals that regulate proliferation, 
differentiation, apoptosis, and 
inflammatory gene expression (see 
Appendix II). 
Tumor necrosis factor superfamily 
(TNFSF) A large family of structurally 
homologous transmembrane proteins 
that regulate diverse functions in 
responding cells, including 
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, 
and inflammatory gene expression. 
TNFSF members typically form 
homotrimers, either within the plasma 
membrane or after proteolytic release 
from the membrane, and bind to 
homotrimeric TNF receptor 
superfamily (TNFRSF) molecules, 
which then initiate a variety of 
signaling pathways (see Appendix II). 
Tumor-specific antigen An antigen whose 
expression is restricted to a particular 
tumor and is not expressed by normal 
cells. Tumor-specific antigens may 
serve as target antigens for antitumor 
immune responses. 
Tumor-specific transplantation antigen 
(TSTA) An antigen expressed on 
experimental animal tumor cells that 
can be detected by induction of 
immunologic rejection of tumor 
transplants. TSTAs were originally 
defined on chemically induced rodent 
sarcomas and shown to stimulate CTL-
mediated rejection of transplanted 
tumors. 
Two-signal hypothesis A now-proven 
hypothesis that states that the 
activation of lymphocytes requires two 
distinct signals, the first being antigen 
and the second either microbial 
products or components of innate 
immune responses to microbes. The 
requirement for antigen (so-called 
signal 1) ensures that the ensuing 
immune response is specific. The 
requirement for additional stimuli 
triggered by microbes or innate 
immune reactions (signal 2) ensures 
that immune responses are induced 
when they are needed, that is, against 
microbes and other noxious substances 
and not against harmless substances, 
including self antigens. In T cells, signal 
2 is referred to as costimulation and is 
often mediated by membrane 
molecules on APCs, such as B7 
proteins. 
Type 1 diabetes A disease characterized 
by a lack of insulin that leads to various 
metabolic and vascular abnormalities. 
The insulin deficiency results from 
autoimmune destruction of the insulin-
producing β cells of the islets of 
Langerhans in the pancreas, usually 
during childhood. CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells, antibodies, and cytokines have 
been implicated in the islet cell damage. 
U 
Ubiquitination Covalent linkage of one or 
several copies of a small polypeptide 
called ubiquitin to a protein. 
Ubiquitination frequently serves to 
target proteins for proteolytic 
degradation mainly by proteasomes, a 
critical step in the class I MHC pathway 
of antigen processing and presentation. 
Uracil N-glycosylase (UNG) An enzyme 
that removes uracil residues from 
DNA, leaving an abasic site. UNG is a 
key participant in isotype switching, 
and homozygous UNG mutations 
result in a hyper-IgM syndrome. 
Urticaria Localized transient itchy 
swelling and redness of the skin caused 
by leakage of fluid and plasma proteins 
from small vessels into the upper 
dermis during an immediate 
hypersensitivity reaction. 
V 
V gene segments A DNA sequence that 
encodes most of the variable domain of 
an Ig heavy chain or light chain or a 
TCR α, β, γ, or δ chain. Each antigen 
receptor locus contains many different 
V gene segments, any one of which 
may recombine with downstream D or 
J segments during lymphocyte 
maturation to form functional antigen 
receptor V genes. 
V(D)J recombinase The complex of RAG1 
and RAG2 proteins that catalyzes 
lymphocyte antigen receptor gene 
recombination. 
Vaccine A preparation of microbial 
antigen, often combined with 
adjuvants, which is administered to 
individuals to induce protective 
immunity against microbial infections. 
Vaccines may be in the form of live but 
avirulent microorganisms, killed 
microorganisms, purified 
macromolecular components of a 
microorganism, a nonpathogenic virus 
carrying genes encoding microbial 
pathogen antigens, or a lipid 
nanoparticle carrying RNA encoding 
viral antigens. Vaccines containing 
tumor antigens (cancer vaccines) are 
being developed to treat cancers. 
Variable region The extracellular, N-
terminal region of an Ig heavy or light 
chain or a TCR α, β, γ, or δ chain that 
contains variable amino acid sequences 
that differ between every clone of 
lymphocytes and that are responsible 
for the specificity for antigen. The 
antigen-binding variable sequences are 
localized to extended loop structures or 
hypervariable segments. 
Vasoactive amines Low-molecular-
weight nonlipid compounds, such as 
histamine, that all have an amine 
group, are stored in and released from 
the cytoplasmic granules of mast cells, 
and mediate many of the biologic 
effects of immediate hypersensitivity 
292           Glossary 
(allergic) reactions. (Also called 
biogenic amines.) 
Viral vector vaccine A vaccine that 
consists of a live nonpathogenic virus 
that has been engineered to be 
nonreplicating and incorporates genes 
encoding antigens of a pathogenic 
virus. Vaccination results in short-lived 
infection by the hybrid virus and 
expression of the pathogen antigens, 
which induces a protective immune 
response against the pathogen. The 
most widely used viral vector vaccines 
are used to protect against COVID-19, 
and are composed of adenovirus 
vectors carrying SARS-CoV-2 spike 
protein genes. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 virial 
vector vaccines have been used to 
immunize millions of people and have 
proven to offer robust protection 
against serious disease after infection 
by several variants of the virus. 
Virus An obligate intracellular 
microorganism or infectious particle 
that consists of a simple nucleic acid 
genome packaged in a protein capsid, 
sometimes surrounded by a membrane 
envelope. Many pathogenic animal 
viruses cause a wide range of diseases. 
Humoral immune responses to viruses 
can be effective in blocking infection of 
cells, and NK cells and CTLs are 
necessary to kill cells already infected. 
W 
Western blot An immunologic technique 
to determine the presence of a protein 
in a biologic sample. The method 
involves separation of proteins in the 
sample by electrophoresis, transfer of 
the protein array from the 
electrophoresis gel to a support 
membrane by capillary action 
(blotting), and finally detection of the 
protein by binding of an enzymatically 
or radioactively labeled antibody 
specific for that protein. 
Wheal-and-flare reaction Local swelling 
and redness in the skin at a site of an 
immediate hypersensitivity reaction. 
The wheal reflects increased vascular 
permeability, and the flare results from 
increased local blood flow, both 
changes resulting from mediators such 
as histamine released from activated 
dermal mast cells. 
White pulp The part of the spleen that is 
composed predominantly of 
lymphocytes, arranged in periarteriolar 
lymphoid sheaths and follicles, and 
other leukocytes. The remainder of the 
spleen contains sinusoids lined with 
phagocytic cells and filled with blood, 
called the red pulp. 
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome An X-linked 
disease characterized by eczema, 
thrombocytopenia (reduced blood 
platelets), and immunodeficiency 
manifested as susceptibility to bacterial 
infections. The defective gene encodes a 
cytosolic protein involved in signaling 
cascades and regulation of the actin 
cytoskeleton. 
X 
Xenoantigen An antigen in a graft from 
another species. 
Xenograft (xenogeneic graft) An organ or 
tissue graft derived from a species 
different from the recipient. 
Transplantation of xenogeneic grafts 
(e.g., from a pig) to humans is not yet 
practical because of special problems 
related to immunologic rejection. 
Xenoreactive Describing a T cell or 
antibody that recognizes and responds 
to an antigen on a graft from another 
species (a xenoantigen). The T cell may 
recognize an intact xenogeneic MHC 
molecule or a peptide derived from a 
xenogeneic protein bound to a self 
MHC molecule. 
X-linked agammaglobulinemia An 
immunodeficiency disease, also called 
Bruton agammaglobulinemia, 
characterized by a block in early B cell 
maturation and an absence of serum Ig. 
Patients suffer from pyogenic bacterial 
infections. The disease is caused by 
mutations or deletions in the gene 
encoding BTK, an enzyme involved in 
signal transduction in developing B 
cells. 
X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome A rare 
immunodeficiency disease caused by 
mutations in the CD40 ligand gene and 
characterized by failure of B cell heavy-
chain isotype switching and defective 
cell-mediated immunity. Patients suffer 
from pyogenic bacterial and 
intracellular infections. 
Z 
ζ Chain A transmembrane protein 
expressed in T cells as part of the TCR 
complex that contains ITAMs in its 
cytoplasmic tail and binds the ZAP-70 
protein tyrosine kinase during T cell 
activation. 
Zeta-associated protein of 70 kD (ZAP-70) 
A cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinase, 
similar to SYK in B cells, that is critical 
for early signaling steps in antigen-
induced T cell activation. ZAP-70 binds 
to phosphorylated tyrosines in the 
cytoplasmic tails of the ζ chain and 
CD3 chains of the TCR complex and in 
turn phosphorylates adaptor proteins 
that recruit other components of the 
signaling cascade. 
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
The following list includes selected CD molecules that
are referred to in the text. Many cytokines and cytokine
receptors have been assigned CD numbers, but we refer
to these by the more descriptive cytokine designation,
and these are listed in Appendix II. A complete and up-
to-date listing of CD molecules may be found at http://
www.hcdm.org.
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD1aee
35-44 kD; class I
MHC-like Ig super-
family; b2-microglo-
bulin associated
Thymocytes, dendritic cells
(including Langerhans
cells)
Presentation of nonpeptide
(lipid and glycolipid) anti-
gens to some iNKT cells
CD2 (LFA-2)
50 kD; Ig superfamily
T cells, NK cells
Adhesion molecule (binds
CD58); T cell activation;
cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL) and natural killer
(NK) cellemediated lysis
CD3g (CD3g)
25e28 kD; associated
with CD3 d and CD3ε
in TCR complex; Ig
superfamily; ITAM in
cytoplasmic tail
T cells
Cell surface expression of
and signal transduction by
the T cell antigen receptor
CD3d (CD3d)
20 kD; associated
with CD3g and CD3ε
in TCR complex; Ig
superfamily; ITAM in
cytoplasmic tail
T cells
Cell surface expression of
and signal transduction by
the T cell antigen receptor
CD3ε (CD3e)
23 kD; associated with
CD3d and CD3g in
TCR complex; Ig su-
perfamily; ITAM in
cytoplasmic tail
T cells
Cell surface expression of
and signal transduction by
the T cell antigen receptor
CD4
55 kD; Ig superfamily
Class II MHC-restricted
T cells; some
macrophages
Coreceptor in class II MHC-
restricted antigen-induced
T cell activation (binds to
class II MHC molecules);
thymocyte development;
receptor for HIV
Continued
293
 
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD5
67 kD; scavenger re-
ceptor family
T cells; B-1 B cell subset
Signaling molecule; binds
CD72
CD8a (CD8a)
34 kD; expressed as
a homodimer or het-
erodimer with CD8b
chain
Class I MHC-restricted
T cells; subset of dendritic
cells
Coreceptor in class I MHC-
restricted antigen-induced
T cell activation (binds to
class I MHC molecules);
thymocyte development
CD8b (CD8b)
34 kD; expressed as
a heterodimer with
CD8a chain Ig
superfamily
Class I MHC-restricted
T cells
Same as CD8a
CD10
100 kD; type II mem-
brane protein
Immature and some mature
B cells; lymphoid progeni-
tors, granulocytes
Metalloproteinase; unknown
function in the immune
system
CD11a (LFA-1a
chain)
180 kD; noncovalently
linked to CD18 to
form LFA-1 integrin
Leukocytes
Cell-cell adhesion; binds to
ICAM-1 (CD54), ICAM-2
(CD102), and ICAM-3 (CD50)
CD11b (MAC-1;
CR3)
165 kD; noncovalently
linked to CD18 to
form MAC-1 integrin
Granulocytes, monocytes,
macrophages, dendritic
cells, NK cells
Phagocytosis of iC3b-coated
particles; neutrophil and
monocyte adhesion to
endothelium (binds CD54)
and extracellular matrix
proteins
CD11c (p150,95;
CR4a chain;
integrin aX)
145 kD; noncovalently
linked to CD18 to
form p150,95
integrin
Dendritic cells, monocytes,
macrophages, granulo-
cytes, NK cells
Similar functions as CD11b
CD14
53 kD; GPI linked
Dendritic cells, monocytes,
macrophages,
granulocytes
Binds complex of LPS and
LPS-binding protein and
displays LPS to TLR4;
required for LPS-induced
macrophage activation
CD16a (FcgRIIIA)
50e70 kD; transmem-
brane protein; Ig
superfamily
NK cells, macrophages
Binds Fc region of IgG;
phagocytosis and
antibody-dependent
cellular cytotoxicity
CD16b (FcgRIIIB)
50e70 kD; GPI linked;
Ig superfamily
Neutrophils
Binds Fc region of IgG; syn-
ergizes with Fcg RII in im-
mune complexemediated
neutrophil activation
CD18
95 kD; noncovalently
linked to CD11a,
CD11b, or CD11c to
form b2 integrins
Leukocytes
See CD11a, CD11b, CD11c
Continued
294
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
 
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD19
95 kD; Ig superfamily
Most B cells
B cell activation; forms a
coreceptor complex with
CD21 and CD81 that de-
livers signals activating
signals in B cells
CD20
35e37 kD;
membrane-spanning
4A (MS4A) family
B cells
Possible role in B cell activa-
tion or regulation; calcium
ion channel
CD21 (CR2; C3d
receptor)
145 kD; regulators of
complement activa-
tion (RCA) family
Mature B cells, follicular
dendritic cells
Receptor for complement
fragment C3d; forms a
coreceptor complex with
CD19 and CD81 that de-
livers activating signals in
B cells; receptor for
Epstein-Barr virus
CD22 (Siglec-2)
130e140 kD; Ig su-
perfamily; Siglec
family; ITIM in cyto-
plasmic tail
B cells
Inhibits B cell activation
CD23 (FcεRIIB)
45 kD; C-type lectin
Activated B cells, mono-
cytes, macrophages
Low-afﬁnity Fcε receptor,
induced by IL-4; unknown
function
CD25 (IL-2 recep-
tor a chain)
55 kD; noncovalently
associated with IL-
2Rb (CD122) and IL-
2Rg (CD132) chains
to form the high-
afﬁnity IL-2 receptor
Activated T and B cells, reg-
ulatory T cells (Treg)
Together with CD122 and
CD132, binds IL-2 and pro-
motes responses to low
concentrations of IL-2; de-
livers signals required for
Treg differentiation and
survival
CD28
Homodimer of 44-kD
chains; Ig
superfamily
T cells (all CD4þ and >50%
of CD8þ cells in humans;
all mature T cells in mice)
Receptor on T cells for cos-
timulatory molecules
CD80 (B7-1) and CD86
(B7-2)
CD29
130 kD; noncova-
lently linked to
CD49aed chains to
form VLA (b1)
integrins
T cells, B cells, monocytes,
granulocytes
Leukocyte adhesion to
extracellular matrix pro-
teins and endothelium
(see CD49)
CD30 (TNFRSF8)
120 kD; TNFR
superfamily
Activated T and B cells; NK
cells, monocytes, Reed-
Sternberg cells in Hodgkin
disease
Not established
CD31 (platelet/
endothelial cell
adhesion mole-
cule 1 [PECAM-1])
130e140 kD; Ig
superfamily
Platelets, monocytes, granu-
locytes, B cells, endothe-
lial cells
Adhesion molecule involved
in leukocyte transmigration
through endothelium
Continued
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
295
 
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD32 (FcgRII)
40 kD; Ig superfamily;
A, B, and C forms
are products of
different but homol-
ogous genes; ITAM
in cytoplasmic tail of
A form; ITIM in
cytoplasmic tail of B
form.
B cells, macrophages, den-
dritic cells, granulocytes
Fc receptor for antigen-
complexed IgG; B form
acts as inhibitory receptor
that blocks activation sig-
nals in B cells and other
cells
CD34
105e120 kD;
sialomucin
Hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells; endothe-
lial cells in high endothelial
venules
Marker for hematopoietic
stem cells; function not
established
CD35 (type 1 com-
plement recep-
tor, CR1)
190e285 kD (four
products of poly-
morphic alleles);
regulator of comple-
ment activation
(RCA) family
Granulocytes, monocytes,
erythrocytes, B cells, follic-
ular dendritic cells, some
T cells
Binds C3b and C4b; pro-
motes phagocytosis of
C3b- or C4b-coated parti-
cles and immune com-
plexes; regulates
complement activation
CD36
85e90 kD
Platelets, monocytes, mac-
rophages, endothelial cells
Scavenger receptor for
oxidized low-density lipo-
protein; platelet adhesion;
phagocytosis of apoptotic
cells
CD40
Homodimer of 44- to
48-kD chains; TNFR
superfamily
B cells, macrophages, den-
dritic cells, endothelial
cells
Binds CD154 (CD40L); role
in T cellemediated activa-
tion of B cells, macro-
phages, and dendritic cells
CD44
80e>100 kD, highly
glycosylated
Leukocytes, erythrocytes
Binds hyaluronan; involved
in leukocyte adhesion to
endothelial cells and extra-
cellular matrix
CD45 (leukocyte
common antigen
[LCA], B220)
Multiple isoforms,
180e220 kD (see
CD45R); protein
tyrosine phospha-
tase receptor family;
ﬁbronectin type III
family
Hematopoietic cells
Tyrosine phosphatase that
regulates T and B cell
activation
CD45R
CD45RO: 180 kD
CD45RA: 220 kD
CD45RB: 190, 205,
and 220 kD
isoforms
CD45RO: memory T cells;
subset of B cells, mono-
cytes, macrophages
CD45RA: naive T cells, B
cells, monocytes
CD45RB: B cells, subset
of T cells
See CD45
Continued
296
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
 
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD46 (membrane
cofactor protein
[MCP])
52e58 kD; regulators
of complement acti-
vation (RCA) family
Leukocytes, epithelial cells,
ﬁbroblasts
Regulation of complement
activation
CD47
47e52 kD; Ig
superfamily
All hematopoietic cells,
epithelial cells, endothelial
cells, ﬁbroblasts
Leukocyte adhesion, migra-
tion, activation; ligand for
signal regulatory protein a
(SIRPa); “don’t eat me”
signal to phagocytes
CD49d
150 kD; noncovalently
linked to CD29 to
form VLA-4 (a4b1
integrin)
T cells, monocytes, B cells,
NK cells, eosinophils, den-
dritic cells, thymocytes
Leukocyte adhesion to
endothelium and extracel-
lular matrix; binds to
VCAM-1 and MadCAM-1;
binds ﬁbronectin and
collagens
CD54 (ICAM-1)
75e114 kD; Ig
superfamily
T cells, B cells, monocytes,
endothelial cells (cytokine
inducible)
Cell-cell adhesion; ligand for
CD11aCD18 (LFA-1) and
CD11bCD18 (Mac-1); re-
ceptor for rhinovirus
CD55 (decay-
accelerating fac-
tor [DAF])
55e70 kD; GPI linked;
regulators of com-
plement activation
(RCA) family
Broad
Regulation of complement
activation
CD58 (Leukocyte
function
eassociated anti-
gen 3 [LFA-3])
55e70 kD; GPI-linked
or integral mem-
brane protein
Broad
Leukocyte adhesion; binds
CD2
CD59
18e20 kD; GPI linked
Broad
Binds C9; inhibits formation
of complement membrane
attack complex
CD62E (E-selectin)
115 kD; selectin
family
Endothelial cells
Leukocyte-endothelial
adhesion
CD62L (L-selectin)
74e95 kD; selectin
family
B cells, T cells, monocytes,
granulocytes, some NK
cells
Leukocyte-endothelial adhe-
sion; homing of naive
T and B cells to lymph
nodes
CD62P (P-selectin)
140 kD; selectin
family
Platelets, endothelial cells
(present in granules, trans-
located to cell surface on
activation)
Leukocyte adhesion to
endothelium, platelets;
binds CD162 (PSGL-1)
CD64 (FcgRI)
72 kD; Ig superfamily;
noncovalently asso-
ciated with the FcR
common g chain
Monocytes, macrophages,
activated neutrophils
High-afﬁnity Fcg receptor;
role in phagocytosis,
ADCC, macrophage
activation
CD66e (carcinoem-
bryonic antigen
[CEA])
180e220 kD; Ig su-
perfamily; CEA
family
Colonic and other epithelial
cells
? Adhesion; clinical marker
of carcinoma burden
Continued
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
297
 
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD69
23 kD; C-type lectin
Activated B cells, T cells,
NK cells, neutrophils
Binds to and reduces sur-
face expression of S1PR1,
thereby promoting reten-
tion of recently activated
lymphocytes in lymphoid
organs
CD74 (Class II
MHC invariant
chain [Ii])
33-, 35-, and 41-kD
isoforms
B cells, dendritic cells,
monocytes, macrophages;
other class II MHC-
expressing cells
Binds to and directs intracel-
lular sorting of newly syn-
thesized class II MHC
molecules
CD79a (Iga)
33, 45 kD; forms
dimer with CD79b;
Ig superfamily;
ITAM in cytoplasmic
tail
Mature B cells
Required for cell surface
expression of and signal
transduction by the B cell
antigen receptor complex
CD79b (Igb)
37e39 kD; forms
dimer with CD79a;
Ig superfamily;
ITAM in cytoplasmic
tail
Mature B cells
Required for cell surface
expression of and signal
transduction by the B cell
antigen receptor complex
CD80 (B7-1)
60 kD; Ig superfamily
Dendritic cells, activated B
cells and macrophages
Costimulator for T lympho-
cyte activation; ligand for
CD28 and CD152 (CTLA-4)
CD81 (target for
antiproliferative
antigen 1 [TAPA-
1], TSPAN-28)
26 kD; tetraspanin
family (TM4SF)
T cells, B cells, NK cells,
dendritic cells, thymo-
cytes, endothelial cells
B cell activation; forms a core-
ceptor complex with CD19
and CD21 that delivers acti-
vating signals in B cells
CD86 (B7-2)
80 kD; Ig superfamily
B cells, monocytes; den-
dritic cells; some T cells
Costimulator for T lympho-
cyte activation; ligand for
CD28 and CD152 (CTLA-4)
CD88 (C5a
receptor)
43 kD; G protein
ecoupled, seven
membrane-spanning
receptor family
Granulocytes, monocytes,
dendritic cells, mast cells
Receptor for C5a comple-
ment fragment; role in
complement-induced
inﬂammation
CD89 (Fca
receptor)
55e75 kD; Ig super-
family; noncova-
lently associated
with the common
FcRg chain
Granulocytes, monocytes,
macrophages, T cell sub-
set, B cell subset
Binds IgA; mediates IgA-
dependent cellular
cytotoxicity
CD90 (Thy-1)
25e35 kD; GPI linked;
Ig superfamily
Thymocytes, mature T cells
(mice), CD34þ hematopoiet-
ic progenitor cells, neurons
Marker for T cells; unknown
function
CD94
43 kD; C-type lectin;
on NK cells, cova-
lently assembles with
other C-type lectin
molecules (NKG2)
NK cells; subset of CD8þ
T cells
CD94/NKG2 complex func-
tions as an NK cell inhibi-
tory receptor; binds human
leukocyte antigen E (HLA-
E) class I MHC molecules
Continued
298
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
 
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD95 (FAS)
Homotrimer of 45-kD
chains; TNFR
superfamily
Broad
Binds FAS ligand; delivers
signals leading to
apoptotic death
CD102 (ICAM-2)
55e65 kD; Ig
superfamily
Endothelial cells, lympho-
cytes, monocytes, platelets
Ligand for CD11aCD18
(LFA-1); cellecell adhesion
CD103 (aE integrin
subunit)
Dimer of 150- and 25-
kD subunits; nonco-
valently linked to b7
integrin subunit to
form aEb7 integrin
Intraepithelial lymphocytes,
other cell types
Role in T cell homing to and
retention in mucosa; binds
E-cadherin
CD106 (VCAM-1)
100e110 kD; Ig
superfamily
Endothelial cells, macro-
phages, follicular dendritic
cells, marrow stromal cells
Adhesion of cells to endo-
thelium; receptor for
CD49dCD29 (VLA-4) integ-
rin; role in lymphocyte
trafﬁcking
CD134 (OX40,
TNFRSF4)
29 kD; TNFR
superfamily
Activated T cells
Receptor for T cell CD252;
T cell costimulation
CD141 (BDCA-3,
thrombomodulin)
60 kD; EGF-like
domains
Cross-presenting dendritic
cells, monocytes, endothe-
lial cells
Binds thrombin and pre-
vents blood coagulation
CD150 (signaling
lymphocyte acti-
vation molecule
[SLAM])
37 kD; Ig superfamily
Thymocytes, activated lym-
phocytes, dendritic cells,
endothelial cells
Regulation of B celleT cell
interactions and lympho-
cyte activation
CD152 (cytotoxic
T lymphocyte
eassociated pro-
tein 4 [CTLA-4])
33, 50 kD; Ig
superfamily
Activated T lymphocytes,
regulatory T cells
Mediates suppressive func-
tion of regulatory T cells;
inhibits T cell responses;
binds and internalizes
CD80 (B7-1) and CD86
(B7-2) on antigen-
presenting cells
CD154 (CD40
ligand [CD40L])
Homotrimer of 32- to
39-kD chains; TNF
superfamily
Activated CD4þ T cells
Activation of B cells, macro-
phages, and endothelial
cells; binds to CD40
CD158 (killer Ig-
like receptor
[KIR])
50, 58 kD; Ig super-
family; KIR family;
ITIMs or ITAMs in
cytoplasmic tail
NK cells, T cell subset
Inhibition or activation of NK
cells on interaction with
appropriate class I HLA
molecules
CD159a (NKG2A)
43 kD; C-type lectin;
ITIM in cytoplasmic
tail; forms hetero-
dimer with CD94
NK cells, T cell subset
Inhibition or activation of NK
cells on interaction with
class I HLA molecules
CD159c (NKG2C)
40 kD; C-type lectin;
forms heterodimer
with CD94
NK cells
Activation of NK cells on
interaction with the appro-
priate class I HLA
molecules
Continued
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
299
 
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD162 (P-selectin
glycoprotein
ligand 1
[PSGL-1])
Homodimer of 120-
kD chains;
sialomucin
T cells, monocytes, granulo-
cytes, some B cells
Ligand for selectins (CD62P,
CD62L); adhesion of leu-
kocytes to endothelium
CD178 (FAS ligand
[FASL])
Homotrimer of 31-kD
subunits; TNF
superfamily
Activated T cells
Ligand for CD95 (FAS); trig-
gers apoptotic death
CD206 (mannose
receptor)
166 kD; C-type lectin
Macrophages
Binds high-mannose-contain-
ing glycoproteins on patho-
gens; mediates
macrophage endocytosis
of glycoproteins and
phagocytosis of bacteria,
fungi, and other pathogens
CD223 (lymphocyte-
activation gene 3
[LAG3])
57.4 kD; Ig
superfamily
T cells, NK cells, B cells,
plasmacytoid DCs
Binds class II MHC; inhibits
T cell activation
CD244 (2B4)
41 kD; Ig superfamily;
CD2/CD48/CD58
family; SLAM family
NK cells, CD8 T cells, gd
T cells
Receptor for CD148; modu-
lates NK cell cytotoxic
activity
CD247 (TCR z
chain)
18 kD; ITAMs in cyto-
plasmic tail
T cells; NK cells
Signaling chain of TCR
complexe and NK
celleactivating receptors
CD252 (OX40
ligand)
21 kD; TNF
superfamily
Dendritic cells, macro-
phages, B cells
Ligand for CD134 (OX40,
TNFRSF4); costimulates
T cells
CD267 (TACI)
31 kD; TNFR
superfamily
B cells
Receptor for cytokines
BAFF and APRIL; pro-
motes T-independent B
cell responses and B cell
survival
CD268 (BAFF
receptor)
19 kD; TNFR
superfamily
B cells
Receptor for BAFF; pro-
motes B cell survival
CD269 (B cell
maturation anti-
gen [BCMA])
20 kD; TNFR
superfamily
B cells
Receptor for BAFF and
APRIL; promotes plasma
cell survival
CD273 (PD-L2)
25 kD; Ig superfamily;
structurally homolo-
gous to B7
Dendritic cells, monocytes,
macrophages
Ligand for PD-1; inhibits
T cell activation
CD274 (PD-L1)
33 kD; Ig superfamily;
structurally homolo-
gous to B7
Leukocytes, other cells
Ligand for PD-1; inhibits
T cell activation
CD275 (ICOS
ligand)
60 kD; Ig superfamily;
structurally homolo-
gous to B7
B cells, dendritic cells,
monocytes
Binds ICOS (CD278); T cell
costimulation
Continued
300
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
 
CD Number
(Other Names)
Molecular Structure,
Family
Main Cellular Expression
Known or Proposed
Function(s)
CD278 (inducible
costimulator
[ICOS])
55e60 kD; Ig super-
family; structurally ho-
mologous to CD28
Activated T cells
Binds ICOS-L (CD275);
T cell costimulation and
follicular T helper cell
differentiation
CD279 (PD-1)
55 kD; Ig superfamily;
structurally homolo-
gous to CD28; ITIM
and ITSM in cyto-
plasmic tail
Activated T and B cells
Binds PD-L1 and PD-L2; in-
hibits T cell activation
CD303 (BDCA2, C-
type lectin
domain family 4
member C
[CLEC4C])
25 kD; C-type lectin
superfamily
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells
Binds to microbial carbohy-
drates; inhibits dendritic
cell activation
CD304 (BDCA4,
Neuropilin)
103 kD; complement-
binding, coagulation
factor V/VIII, and
meprin domains
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells,
many other cell types
Vascular endothelial growth
factor A receptor
CD314 (NKG2D)
42 kD; C-type lectin
NK cells, activated CD8þ
T cells, NK-T cells, some
myeloid cells
Binds MHC class I, and the
class Ielike molecules
MIC-A, MIC-B, Rae1, and
ULBP4; role in NK cell and
CTL activation
CD357 (GITR,
TNFRSF18)
26 kD; TNFR
superfamily
CD4þ and CD8þ T cells,
Treg
? Role in T cell/Treg
function
CD363 (type 1
sphingosine-1-
phosphate recep-
tor 1 [S1PR1])
42.8 kD; G protein
ecoupled, seven
membrane-spanning
receptor family
Lymphocytes, endothelial
cells
Binds sphingosine 1-
phosphate and mediates
chemotaxis of lymphocytes
out of lymphoid organs
CD365 (hepatitis A
virus cellular re-
ceptor 1
[HAVCR1], TIM-
1)
38.7 kD; Ig superfam-
ily, T cell transmem-
brane, Ig, and mucin
family
T cells, kidney and testis
Receptor for several viruses
CD366 (hepatitis A
virus cellular re-
ceptor 2
[HAVCR2], TIM-3)
33.4 kD; Ig superfamily,
Ig superfamily, T cell
transmembrane, Ig,
and mucin family
T cells, macrophages, den-
dritic cells, NK cells
Receptor for several vi-
ruses; binds phosphatidyl-
serine on apoptotic cells;
inhibits T cell responses
CD369 (CLEC7A,
DECTIN 1)
27.6 kD; C-type lectin
family
Dendritic cells, monocytes,
macrophages, B cells
Pattern recognition receptor
speciﬁc for fungal and bac-
terial cell wall glucans
The lowercase letters affixed to some CD numbers refer to CD molecules that are encoded by multiple genes or that belong to families of
structurally related proteins.
ADCC, Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity; APRIL, a proliferation-inducing ligand; BAFF, B celleactivating factor belonging to the
TNF family; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; gp, glycoprotein; GITR, glucocorticoid-induced TNFR-related; GPI, glycophosphatidylinositol;
ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; ITIM,
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif; ITSM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif; LFA, lymphocyte functioneassociated
antigen; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MadCAM, mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NK cells, nat-
ural killer cells; TACI, transmembrane activator and CAML interactor; TCR, T cell receptor; TLR, Toll-like receptor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor;
TNFR, TNF receptor; VCAM, vascular cell adhesion molecule; VLA, very late activation.
APPENDIX I
Principal Features of Selected CD Molecules
301
 
II
APPENDIX
Cytokines
Cytokine and
Subunits
Principal Cell Source
Cytokine Receptor
and Subunits*
Principal Cellular
Targets and Biologic
Effects
Type I Cytokine Family Members
Interleukin-2 (IL-2)
T cells
CD25 (IL-2Ra)
CD122 (IL-2Rb)
CD132 (gc)
T cells: proliferation and
differentiation into
effector and memory
cells; regulatory T cell
development, sur-
vival, and function
NK cells: proliferation,
activation
Interleukin-3 (IL-3)
T cells
CD123 (IL-3Ra)
CD131 (bc)
Immature hematopoietic
progenitors: matura-
tion of all hematopoi-
etic lineages
Interleukin-4 (IL-4)
CD4þ T cells (Th2, Tfh),
mast cells
CD124 (IL-4Ra)
CD132 (gc)
B cells: isotype switch-
ing to IgE, IgG4 (in
humans; IgG1 in mice)
T cells: Th2 differentia-
tion, proliferation
Macrophages: alternative
activation and inhibition
of IFN-gemediated
classical activation
Interleukin-5 (IL-5)
CD4þ T cells (Th2),
group 2 ILCs
CD125 (IL-5Ra)
CD131 (bc)
Eosinophils: activation,
increased generation
Interleukin-6 (IL-6)
Macrophages, endothe-
lial cells, T cells,
ﬁbroblasts
CD126 (IL-6Ra)
CD130 (gp130)
Liver: synthesis of
acute phase proteins
B cells: proliferation of
antibody-producing
cells
T cells: Th17
differentiation
Continued
302
 
Cytokine and
Subunits
Principal Cell Source
Cytokine Receptor
and Subunits*
Principal Cellular
Targets and Biologic
Effects
Interleukin-7 (IL-7)
Fibroblasts, bone
marrow stromal cells
CD127 (IL-7R)
CD132 (gc)
Immature lymphoid
progenitors: prolifera-
tion of early T and B
cell progenitors
T lymphocytes: survival
of naive and memory
cells
Interleukin-9 (IL-9)
CD4þ T cells
CD129 (IL-9R)
CD132 (gc)
Mast cells, B cells, T cells,
and epithelial cells: sur-
vival and activation
Interleukin-11 (IL-11)
Bone marrow stromal
cells
IL-11Ra
CD130 (gp130)
Production of platelets
Interleukin-12 (IL-12):
IL-12A (p35)
IL-12B (p40)
Macrophages, dendritic
cells
CD212 (IL-12Rb1)
IL-12Rb2
T cells: Th1 differentia-
tion
NK cells and T cells:
IFN-g synthesis,
increased cytotoxic
activity
Interleukin-13 (IL-13)
CD4þ T cells (Th2),
NKT cells, group 2
ILCs, mast cells
CD213a1 (IL-13Ra1)
CD213a2 (IL-13Ra2)
CD132 (gc)
B cells: isotype switch-
ing to IgE
Epithelial cells:
increased mucus pro-
duction
Macrophages: alterna-
tive activation
Interleukin-15 (IL-15)
Macrophages, other
cell types
IL-15Ra
CD122 (IL-2Rb)
CD132 (gc)
NK cells: proliferation
T cells: survival and
proliferation of mem-
ory CD8þ cells
Interleukin-17A (IL-17A)
Interleukin-17F (IL-
17F)
CD4þ T cells (Th17),
group 3 ILCs
CD217 (IL-17RA)
IL-17RC
Epithelial cells, macro-
phages and other cell
types: increased che-
mokine and cytokine
production; GM-CSF
and G-CSF production
Interleukin-21 (IL-21)
Tfh cells
CD360 (IL-21R)
CD132 (gc)
B cells: activation, pro-
liferation,
differentiation
Interleukin-23 (IL-23):
IL-23A (p19)
IL-12B (p40)
Macrophages, dendritic
cells
IL-23R
CD212 (IL-12Rb1)
T cells: differentiation
and proliferation of
Th17 cells
Interleukin-25 (IL-25; IL-
17E)
T cells, dendritic cells,
macrophages, epithe-
lial cells, mast cells,
eosinophils
IL-17RB
T cells: Th2 differentia-
tion
ILCs: ILC2 activation
Continued
APPENDIX II
Cytokines
303
 
Cytokine and
Subunits
Principal Cell Source
Cytokine Receptor
and Subunits*
Principal Cellular
Targets and Biologic
Effects
Interleukin-27 (IL-27):
IL-27 (p28), EBI-3
Macrophages, dendritic
cells
IL-27Ra
CD130 (gp130)
T cells: enhancement
of Th1 differentiation;
inhibition of Th17 dif-
ferentiation
NK cells: IFN-g
synthesis?
Stem cell factor (c-Kit
ligand)
Bone marrow stromal
cells
CD117 (KIT)
Pluripotent hematopoietic
stem cells: maturation
of all hematopoietic
lineages
Granulocyte-monocyte
CSF (GM-CSF)
T cells, macrophages,
endothelial cells,
ﬁbroblasts
CD116 (GM-CSFRa)
CD131 (bc)
Immature and
committed progeni-
tors, mature macro-
phages: maturation of
granulocytes and
monocytes, macro-
phage activation
Monocyte CSF (M-CSF,
CSF1)
Macrophages, endothe-
lial cells, bone
marrow endothelial
cells, ﬁbroblasts
CD115 (CSF1R)
Committed hematopoi-
etic progenitors:
maturation of
monocytes
Granulocyte CSF (G-
CSF, CSF3)
Macrophages, ﬁbro-
blasts, endothelial
cells
CD114 (CSF3R)
Committed hematopoi-
etic progenitors:
maturation of
granulocytes
Thymic stromal lym-
phopoietin (TSLP)
Keratinocytes, bronchial
epithelial cells, ﬁbro-
blasts, smooth mus-
cle cells, endothelial
cells, mast cells, mac-
rophages, granulo-
cytes and dendritic
cells
TSLP-receptor
CD127 (IL-7R)
T cells: Th2 differentia-
tion
ILCs: ILC2 activation
Dendritic cells: activa-
tion
Eosinophils: activation
Mast cells: cytokine
production
Type II Cytokine Family Members
Interferon-a (IFN-a,
type I IFN) (multiple
proteins)
Plasmacytoid dendritic
cells, macrophages
IFNAR1
CD118 (IFNAR2)
All cells: antiviral state,
increased class I
MHC expression
NK cells: activation
Interferon-b (IFN-b,
type I IFN)
Fibroblasts, plasmacy-
toid dendritic cells
IFNAR1
CD118 (IFNAR2)
All cells: antiviral state,
increased class I
MHC expression
NK cells: activation
Interferon-g (IFN-g,
type II IFN)
T cells (Th1, CD8þ
T cells), NK cells,
group 1 ILCs
CD119 (IFNGR1)
IFNGR2
Macrophages: classical
activation (increased
microbicidal func-
tions)
Continued
304
APPENDIX II
Cytokines
 
Cytokine and
Subunits
Principal Cell Source
Cytokine Receptor
and Subunits*
Principal Cellular
Targets and Biologic
Effects
B cells: isotype switch-
ing to opsonizing and
complement-ﬁxing
IgG subclasses
(established in mice,
not humans)
T cells: Th1 differentia-
tion
Various cells: increased
expression of class I
and class II MHC
molecules, increased
antigen processing
and presentation to
T cells
Interleukin-10 (IL-10)
Macrophages, T cells
(mainly regulatory
T cells)
CD210 (IL-10Ra)
IL-10Rb
Macrophages, dendritic
cells: inhibition of
expression of IL-12,
costimulators, and
class II MHC
Interleukin-22 (IL-22)
Th17 cells, group 3
ILCs
IL-22Ra1 or IL-22Ra2
IL-10Ra2
Epithelial cells: produc-
tion of defensins,
increased barrier func-
tion
Hepatocytes: survival
Interferon-ls (IFN-la;
type III IFNs)
Dendritic cells
IFNLR1 (IL-28Ra)
CD210B (IL-10Rb2)
Epithelial cells: antiviral
state
Leukemia inhibitory fac-
tor (LIF)
Embryonic trophecto-
derm, bone marrow
stromal cells
CD118 (LIFR)
CD130 (gp130)
Stem cells: block in
differentiation
Oncostatin M
Bone marrow stromal
cells
OSMR
CD130 (gp130)
Endothelial cells: upre-
gulation of cytokine
and adhesion mole-
cule expression
Intestinal stromal cells:
production of inﬂam-
matory cytokines,
chemokines
TNF Superfamily Cytokinesy
APRIL (CD256,
TNFSF13)
T cells, dendritic cells,
monocytes, follicular
dendritic cells
TACI (TNFRSF13B) or
BCMA (TNFRSF17)
B cells: survival,
proliferation
BAFF (CD257,
TNFSF13B)
Dendritic cells, mono-
cytes, follicular den-
dritic cells, B cells
BAFF-R (TNFRSF13C)
or TACI (TNFRSF13B)
or BCMA (TNFRSF17)
B cells: survival,
proliferation
Continued
APPENDIX II
Cytokines
305
 
Cytokine and
Subunits
Principal Cell Source
Cytokine Receptor
and Subunits*
Principal Cellular
Targets and Biologic
Effects
Lymphotoxin-a (LTa,
TNFb, TNFSF1)
T cells, B cells
CD120a (TNFRSF1) or
CD120b (TNFRSF2)
Same as TNF
Lymphotoxin-ab (LTab)
T cells, NK cells, follic-
ular B cells, lymphoid
inducer cells
LTbR
Lymphoid tissue stromal
cells and follicular den-
dritic cells: chemokine
expression and
lymphoid organogenesis
Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF, TNFa TNFSF2)
Macrophages, NK cells,
T cells
CD120a (TNFRSF1) or
CD120b (TNFRSF2)
Vascular endothelium:
activation (inﬂamma-
tion, coagulation),
increased permeability
Neutrophils: activation
Hypothalamus: fever
Muscle, fat: catabolism
(cachexia)
Heart: reduced cardiac
output
Osteoprotegerin (OPG,
TNFRSF11B)
Osteoblasts
RANKL
Osteoclast precursor
cells: inhibits osteo-
clast differentiation
IL-1 Family Cytokines
Interleukin-1a (IL-1a)
Macrophages, dendritic
cells, ﬁbroblasts,
endothelial cells, kera-
tinocytes, hepatocytes
CD121a (IL-1R1)
IL-1RAP or CD121b
(IL-1R2)
Endothelial cells: activa-
tion (inﬂammation,
coagulation)
Hypothalamus: fever
Interleukin-1b (IL-1b)
Macrophages, dendritic
cells, ﬁbroblasts, endo-
thelial cells, keratino-
cytes; major type of
biologically active IL-1
CD121a (IL-1R1)
IL-1RAP or CD121b
(IL-1R2)
Endothelial cells: activa-
tion (inﬂammation,
coagulation)
Hypothalamus: fever
Liver: synthesis of
acute-phase proteins
T cells: Th17
differentiation
Interleukin-1 receptor
antagonist (IL-1RA)
Macrophages
CD121a (IL-1R1)
IL-1RAP
Various cells: competi-
tive antagonist of IL-1
Interleukin-18 (IL-18)
Monocytes, macro-
phages, dendritic
cells, Kupffer cells,
keratinocytes, chon-
drocytes, synovial ﬁ-
broblasts, osteoblasts
CD218a (IL-18Ra)
CD218b (IL-18Rb)
NK cells and T cells:
IFN-g synthesis
Monocytes: expression
of GM-CSF, TNF, IL-1b
Neutrophils: activation,
cytokine release
Interleukin-33 (IL-33)
Epithelial cells, endo-
thelial cells, dendritic
cells, smooth muscle
cells, ﬁbroblasts
ST2 (IL1RL1)
IL-1 receptor acces-
sory protein (IL1RAP)
T cells: Th2 differentia-
tion
ILCs: ILC2 activation
Continued
306
APPENDIX II
Cytokines
 
Cytokine and
Subunits
Principal Cell Source
Cytokine Receptor
and Subunits*
Principal Cellular
Targets and Biologic
Effects
Other Cytokines
Transforming growth
factor-b (TGF-b)
T cells (mainly Tregs),
macrophages, other
cell types
TGF-b R1
TGF-b R2
TGF-b R3
T cells: inhibition of
proliferation and
effector functions; dif-
ferentiation of Th17
and Treg
B cells: inhibition of
proliferation; IgA pro-
duction
Macrophages: inhibition
of activation; stimula-
tion of angiogenic
factors
Fibroblasts: increased
collagen synthesis
*Most cytokine receptors are dimers or trimers composed of different polypeptide chains, some of which are shared between re-
ceptors for different cytokines. The set of polypeptides that compose a functional receptor (cytokine binding plus signaling) for
each cytokine is listed. The functions of each subunit polypeptide are not listed.
yAll TNF superfamily (TNFSF) members are expressed as cell surface transmembrane proteins, but only the subsets that are
predominantly active as proteolytically released soluble cytokines are listed in the table. Other TNFSF members that function pre-
dominantly in the membrane-bound form and are not, strictly speaking, cytokines are not listed in the table. These membrane-
bound proteins and the TNFRSF receptors they bind to include OX40L (CD252, TNFSF4):OX40 (CD134, TNFRSF4); CD40L
(CD154, TNFSF5):CD40 (TNFRSF5); FasL (CD178, TNFSF6):Fas (CD95, TNFRSF6); CD70 (TNFSF7):CD27 (TNFRSF27); CD153
(TNFSF8):CD30 (TNFRSF8); TRAIL (CD253, TNFSF10):TRAIL-R (TNFRSF10A-D); RANKL (TNFSF11):RANK (TNFRSF11); TWEAK
(CD257, TNFSF12):TWEAKR (CD266, TNFRSF12); LIGHT (CD258, TNFSF14):HVEM (TNFRSF14); GITRL (TNFSF18):GITR (CD357
TNFRSF18); and 4-IBBL:4-IBB (CD137).
APRIL, A proliferation-inducing ligand; BAFF, B celleactivating factor belonging to the TNF family; BCMA, B cell maturation
protein; CSF, colony-stimulating factor; IFN, interferon; ILCs, innate lymphoid cells; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NK
cell, natural killer cell; NKT cell, natural killer T cell; OSMR, oncostatin M receptor; RANK, receptor activator of nuclear factor kB;
RANKL, RANK ligand; TACI, transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor; Th, T helper; Tfh, T
follicular helper; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TNFSF, TNF superfamily; TNFRSF, TNF receptor superfamily; Treg, regulatory T cell.
APPENDIX II
Cytokines
307
 
III
APPENDIX
Clinical Cases
This appendix presents six clinical cases illustrating
various diseases involving the immune system. These
cases are not meant to teach clinical skills but rather to
show how the basic science of immunology contributes
to our understanding of human diseases. Each case il-
lustrates typical ways in which a disease manifests, what
tests are used in diagnosis, and common modes of
treatment. The appendix was compiled with the assis-
tance of Dr. Richard Mitchell and Dr. Jon Aster,
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston; Dr. Robin Colgrove, Harvard Medical
School, Boston; Dr. George Tsokos, Department of
Medicine, Beth Israel-Deaconess Hospital, Boston; Dr.
David Erle and Dr. Laurence Cheng, Department of
Medicine, University of California San Francisco; Dr.
Caroline Sokol, Dr. Zachary Wallace, Dr. Seth Bloom,
and Dr Jonathan Hermann, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston
CASE 1: LYMPHOMA
E.B. was a 58-year-old chemical engineer who had been
well all his life. One morning, he noticed a lump in his
left groin while showering. It was not tender, and the
overlying skin appeared healthy. After a few weeks, he
began to worry about it because it did not go away, and
he ﬁnally made an appointment with a physician after
2 months. On physical examination, the physician
noted a subcutaneous ﬁrm, movable nodule, approxi-
mately 3 cm in diameter, in the left inguinal region. The
physician asked E.B. if he had recently noticed any
infections of his left foot or leg; E.B. had not. E.B. did
complain that he had been waking up frequently at
night drenched in perspiration. The physician also
found some slightly enlarged lymph nodes in E.B.’s
right neck. Otherwise, the physical examination ﬁnd-
ings were normal. The physician explained that the
inguinal mass probably was a lymph node that was
enlarged as a result of a reaction to some infection.
However, he drew blood for tests and referred E.B. to a
clinic, where a ﬁne-needle aspiration of cells from the
lymph node was performed. Examination of smears
prepared from aspirated cells revealed mainly small,
lymphocytes. Flow cytometric evaluation of these cells
showed a 10-fold excess of B cells expressing l
immunoglobulin (Ig) light chain compared with B cells
expressing k Ig light chain.
Because of the suspicion of B cell lymphoma, a
malignant tumor of cells of the B lymphocyte lineage,
the surgeon elected to remove the entire lymph node.
Histologic examination revealed an expansion of the
node by follicular structures composed of mainly small-
to intermediate-sized lymphocytes with irregular or
“cleaved” nuclear contours mixed with smaller numbers
of
large
lymphocytes
with
prominent
nucleoli
(Fig. A.1). Flow cytometric analysis of these cells
showed a predominant population of B cells expressing
IgM, l light chain, CD10, and CD20, and immuno-
histochemical stains performed on slides showed strong
cytoplasmic staining for BCL-2. On this basis, the
diagnosis of follicular lymphoma of low histologic grade
was made.
1. Why does the presence of a B cell population in
which a large majority of the cells express l light
chain indicate a neoplasm rather than a response
to an infection?
2. If the lymph node cells were analyzed by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) to assess Ig heavy-chain gene
rearrangements, what abnormal ﬁnding would you
expect?
3. Normal follicular B cells fail to express the BCL-2
protein. Why might the tumor cells express BCL-2?
E.B.’s blood tests indicated that he was anemic (low
red blood cell count). He underwent staging tests to
determine the extent of his lymphoma. Positron emis-
sion tomography (PET) and computed tomography
308
 
(CT) scanning showed enlarged hilar and mediastinal
lymph nodes, an enlarged spleen, and lesions in the
liver. A bone marrow biopsy also showed presence of
lymphoma. E.B. was treated with injections of a mouse/
human chimeric monoclonal IgG antibody called rit-
uximab, which is speciﬁc for human CD20. Imaging
studies performed 6 months after the rituximab treat-
ment was begun showed regression in the size of le-
sions, and E.B. felt well enough to continue working.
4. By what mechanisms would the anti-CD20 antibody
help this patient?
5. What are the advantages of using a “humanized”
antibody, such as rituximab, as a drug instead of a
mouse antibody?
Answers to Questions for Case 1
1. During the maturation of B cells, the cells ﬁrst ex-
press a rearranged m heavy chain gene, which asso-
ciates with the surrogate light chain to produce the
preeB cell receptor (see Chapter 4). The cells then
rearrange a light chain gene: ﬁrst k, then l. If the
k protein is produced in any B cell, the l gene
does not rearrange; l rearrangement occurs only if
the k rearrangement is unsuccessful or if the assem-
bled Ig molecule is strongly self-reactive. So, any B
cell can produce only one of the two light chains.
In humans, about 50% to 60% of the mature B cells
express k and 40% to 50% express l. In a polyclonal
response to an infection or other stimulus, many B
cells respond and this ratio is maintained. However,
if there is a marked overrepresentation of one light
chain (in this case, l), it usually indicates that a l-
producing B cell clone has proliferated. This is char-
acteristic of a B cell tumor (lymphoma), which arises
from a single B cell.
2. Each clone of B cells has a unique rearrangement of
V, (D) and J gene segments, forming the genes that
encode V regions of heavy and light chains. B cell
lymphomas are monoclonal, being composed of
cells that all contain the same Ig heavy-chain and
light-chain gene rearrangements. Such tumors can
be reliably distinguished by the use of PCR ampliﬁ-
cation of rearranged Ig heavy-chain (IgH) gene seg-
ments. This method uses consensus PCR primers
that
hybridize
with
virtually
all
IgH
variable
(V) gene segments and joining (J) gene segments,
allowing these primers to amplify essentially all
heavy-chain
gene rearrangements in a sample
(e.g., DNA prepared from enlarged lymph node).
The size of the ampliﬁed products is then analyzed
by capillary electrophoresis, which can separate
PCR products that differ in size by as little as a sin-
gle nucleotide. When the V, D, and J segments of
IgH genes (as well as other antigen receptor genes)
are joined during antigen receptor rearrangement
in preeB cells, the rearranged segments are of
differing length in each cell due to the action of en-
zymes that remove nucleotides (nucleases) and add
bases (a specialized DNA polymerase called termi-
nal deoxyribonucleotide transferase [TdT]). Within
a normal population of B cells, fragments of
differing size are generated by PCR with consensus
IgH primers. By contrast, in the case of a B cell lym-
phoma, all the B cells have the same VDJ rearrange-
ment, and one or two PCR products (if both IgH
alleles are rearranged) are preferentially ampliﬁed,
each appearing as a sharp peak of a particular size.
3. Many lymphomas have characteristic underlying ac-
quired chromosomal translocations or mutations
that dysregulate speciﬁc oncogenes. More than
90% of follicular lymphomas have an acquired
14;18 chromosomal translocation that brings the
coding sequence of BCL2, a gene on chromosome
18 encoding a protein that inhibits programmed
cell death (apoptosis), adjacent to a transcriptional
enhancer within the Ig heavy chain gene locus
Fig. A.1 Lymph node biopsy with follicular lymphoma. The
microscopic appearance of the patient’s inguinal lymph node is
shown. The follicular structures are abnormal, composed of a
monotonous collection of neoplastic cells. By contrast, a lymph
node with reactive hyperplasia would have follicles with
germinal center formation, containing a heterogeneous mixture
of cells.
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
309
 
located on chromosome 14. As a result, BCL-2 is
overexpressed in follicular lymphoma cells. In
most instances the chromosomal breakpoint in the
IgH gene involved in the translocation is located
precisely at the point where RAG proteins normally
cut the DNA of pre-B cells that are undergoing Ig
gene rearrangement, suggesting that the transloca-
tion stems from a mistake that occurs during
normal antigen receptor gene rearrangement. Clini-
cally, the presence of a BCL-2/IgH fusion gene, the
consequence of the t(14;18), may be determined
by ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization using probes of
different colors that are speciﬁc for IgH and BCL-
2. These probes are hybridized to prepared sections
of tissues involved by follicular lymphoma, and
spatial superimposition of the probes within the
nuclei of tumor cells indicates the existence of an
IgH/BCL-2 fusion gene. Alternatively, it is possible
to perform PCR on DNA isolated from the tumor
with primer pairs in which one primer is speciﬁc
for IgH and the other speciﬁc for BCL-2. These
primers will generate a product only when the IgH
and BCL-2 genes are joined to one another, which
is taken as indirect evidence of a t(14;18).
4. CD20 is expressed on most mature B cells and is also
uniformly expressed by all the tumor cells in follicular
lymphomas. Injected rituximab (Rituxan) will there-
fore bind to the lymphoma cells and facilitate their
destruction, likely through similar mechanisms by
which antibodies normally destroy microbes. These
mechanisms involve binding of the Fc portion of rit-
uximab to different proteins in the patient, including
Fc receptors on natural killer cells, leading to cytotoxic
killing of the lymphoma cells, and to complement
proteins leading to complement-mediated killing of
the lymphoma cells (see Chapter 8). Most normal B
cells will also be depleted by rituximab, although
antibody-secreting plasma cells, which do not express
CD20, are not affected. If necessary, the immune deﬁ-
ciency caused by loss of normal B cells can be cor-
rected by administration of pooled IgG from healthy
donors, a form of passive immunity.
5. Monoclonal
antibodies
(mAbs)
derived
from
nonhuman B cells (e.g., mouse) will appear foreign
to the human immune system. When injected multi-
ple times with these mAbs, humans will mount hu-
moral immune responses and produce antibodies
speciﬁc for the injected foreign mAb. These anti-
antibody responses will promote clearance of the
mAb from the circulation and therefore reduce
the therapeutic beneﬁts of the mAb. Furthermore,
the Fc regions of human IgG bind better than mouse
IgG to human Fc receptors and complement proteins,
both of which are important for the effectiveness of
mAb drugs (see Answer 3). For these reasons, most
recently developed mAbs used as drugs have been
genetically engineered to contain mainly or all human
Ig amino acid sequences. Patients will generally not
react against these drugs, just as they do not respond
to their own antibodies. Rituximab is a chimeric mAb,
with the CD20-binding variable regions originating
from mouse IgG, and the remainder of the antibody
including the Fc region from human IgG. The small
amount of mouse sequences in rituximab do not
appear to induce anti-antibody responses in patients,
perhaps because potentially responding B cells are
destroyed by the drug.
CASE 2: HEART TRANSPLANTATION
COMPLICATED BY ALLOGRAFT REJECTION
C.M., a computer software salesman, was 48 years old
when he came to his primary care physician because of
fatigue and shortness of breath. He had not seen a
doctor on a regular basis before this visit and felt well
until 1 year ago, when he began experiencing difﬁculty
climbing stairs or playing basketball with his children.
Over the past 6 months he had trouble breathing when
he was recumbent. He did not remember ever experi-
encing signiﬁcant chest pain and had no family history
of heart disease. He did recall that approximately
18 months ago he had to take 2 days off from work
because of a severe ﬂulike illness.
On examination, he had a pulse of 105 beats per
minute, a respiratory rate of 32 breaths per minute, and a
blood pressure of 100/60 mm Hg and was afebrile. His
physician heard crackles (evidence of abnormal ﬂuid
accumulation) in the bases of both lungs. His feet and
ankles were swollen. A chest x-ray showed pulmonary
edema and pleural effusions and a signiﬁcantly enlarged
left ventricle. These ﬁndings were consistent with right
and left ventricular congestive heart failure, which is a
reduced capacity of the heart to pump normal volumes of
blood, resulting in ﬂuid accumulation in various tissues.
C.M. was admitted to the cardiology service of the Uni-
versity Hospital. On the basis of further tests, including
310
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
 
coronary angiography and echocardiography, C.M. was
given the diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy, a pro-
gressive and fatal form of heart failure in which the heart
chambers become dilated and inefﬁcient at pumping
blood (reduced ejection fraction). His physicians told him
he may beneﬁt from aggressive medical management,
including drugs that enhance heart muscle contraction,
reduce the workload of the heart, and enhance excretion
of accumulated ﬂuid, but if his underlying heart disease
continued to progress, the best long-term option would be
to receive a heart transplant. Unfortunately, despite
optimal medical management, his symptoms of congestive
heart failure continued to worsen until he was no longer
able to manage even routine activities of daily living, and
he was listed for heart transplantation.
A panel-reactive antibody (PRA) test was performed
on C.M.’s serum to determine whether he had been
previously sensitized to alloantigens. This test (per-
formed monthly) showed C.M. had no circulating an-
tibodies against human leukocyte antigens (HLAs), and
there was no further immunologic testing done at that
time. Two weeks later in a nearby city, a donor heart
was removed from a victim of a construction site ac-
cident. The donor had the same ABO blood group type
as C.M. The transplant surgery, performed 4 hours after
the donor heart was removed, went well, and the allo-
graft was functioning properly postoperatively.
1. What problems might arise if the transplant recip-
ient and the donor have different blood types or if
the recipient has high levels of anti-HLA antibodies?
C.M. was placed on intensive immunosuppressive
therapy beginning even as he was being transported to
the operating room for the transplant; this included
daily doses of tacrolimus, mycophenolic acid, and
prednisone. Endomyocardial biopsy was performed
1 week after surgery and showed no evidence of
myocardial injury or inﬂammatory cells. He was sent
home 10 days after surgery, and within a month he was
able to do light exercise without problems. Routinely
scheduled endomyocardial biopsies were initially per-
formed weekly, and then every other week within the
ﬁrst 3 months after transplantationdall of which
showed no evidence of rejection. However, a biopsy
performed 14 weeks after surgery showed the presence
of numerous lymphocytes and macrophages within the
myocardium with associated cardiomyocyte injury
(Fig. A.2). The ﬁndings were interpreted as evidence of
acute cellular allograft rejection.
2. What was the patient’s immune system responding
to, and what were the effector mechanisms in the
acute cellular rejection episode?
C.M.’s serum creatinine level, an indicator of renal
function, was high (2.2 mg/dL; normal, <1.5 mg/dL).
His physicians therefore did not want to increase his
tacrolimus dose because this drug can be toxic to the
kidneys. He was given three additional doses of methyl
prednisolone (a steroid drug) over 18 hours, and a repeat
endomyocardial biopsy 1 week later showed only a few
scattered macrophages and a small focus of healing tis-
sue. C.M. went home feeling well, and he was able to live
a relatively normal life, taking tacrolimus, mycophenolic
acid, and prednisone daily.
3. What is the goal of the immunosuppressive drug
therapy?
Coronary angiograms performed yearly since the
transplant showed a gradual diffuse narrowing of the
lumens of the coronary arteries. In the sixth year after
transplantation, C.M. began experiencing shortness of
breath after mild exercise and showed left ventricular
dilation on radiographic examination. An intravascular
ultrasound
examination
demonstrated
signiﬁcant
diffuse thickening of the coronary arterial walls with
luminal narrowing (Fig. A.3). An endomyocardial bi-
opsy showed areas of microscopic subendocardial
Fig.
A.2 Endomyocardial
biopsy
showing
acute
cellular
rejection. The heart muscle is inﬁltrated by lymphocytes, and
necrotic muscle ﬁbers are present. (Courtesy Dr. Richard
Mitchell, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.)
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
311
 
infarction, as well as evidence of sublethal ischemia
(myocyte vacuolization). C.M. and his physicians are
now considering the possibility of a second cardiac
transplant.
4. What process has led to failure of the graft after 6
years?
Answers to Questions for Case 2
1. If the recipient and the heart donor had different
blood types, or if the recipient had high levels of
anti-HLA antibodies, hyperacute rejection might
occur after transplantation (see Chapter 10). People
with type A, B, or O blood groups have pre-formed
circulating IgM antibodies against the antigens they
do not possess (B, A, or both, respectively). People
who have received previous blood transfusions or
transplants or were previously pregnant may have
circulating anti-HLA antibodies. Blood group and
HLA antigens are present on endothelial cells. If
the antibodies are already present in the recipient
at the time of transplantation, they can bind to the
antigens on graft endothelial cells, causing comple-
ment activation, leukocyte recruitment, and throm-
bosis. As a result, the graft blood supply becomes
impaired, and the organ can rapidly undergo
ischemic necrosis. The PRA test is typically per-
formed to determine whether a patient needing a
transplant has preexisting antibodies speciﬁc for a
broad panel of HLA antigens. The test is done by
mixing the patient’s serum with a collection of
HLA-coated
microbeads;
antibody
binding
is
detected by ﬂow cytometry of the beads, after addi-
tion of ﬂuorescently labeled antibodies directed
against human Ig. The results are expressed as a per-
centage (0% to 100%) of the various HLA-coated
beads that have bound to the patient’s serum anti-
bodies. The higher the PRA value obtained, the
greater the chance that the recipient will have an
antibody that can potentially react with a graft and
cause hyperacute rejection. The test is typically per-
formed on a monthly basis as the patient is awaiting
a heart. This is because many events can induce new
anti-HLA antibodies, including a blood transfusion,
or new exposures to microbes or drugs, which can
potentially elicit antibodies that by chance cross-
react with donor HLA.
2. In the acute cellular rejection episode, the patient’s
immune system is responding to alloantigens in
the graft. The main antigens are donor major histo-
compatibility complex (MHC) molecules encoded
by alleles not shared by the recipient; milder reac-
tions may also occur against unshared allelic vari-
ants of other proteins (minor histocompatibility
antigens). These alloantigens may be expressed on
the donor endothelial cells, leukocytes, and paren-
chymal cells within the donor heart. The effector
mechanisms of the acute rejection episode include
both cell-mediated and antibody-mediated reac-
tions. With acute cellular rejection, activated allor-
eactive recipient CD4þ T cells secrete cytokines
that promote macrophage activation and inﬂamma-
tion and can cause myocyte or endothelial cell injury
and dysfunction, and alloreactive CD8þ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes can directly kill graft cells. Antibody-
mediated rejection can occur when the recipient de-
velops new circulating donor-speciﬁc antibodies,
predominantly directed against donor MHC mole-
cules. Such recipient antibodies bind to graft cells
(particularly endothelium), leading to complement
activation and leukocyte recruitment.
3. The goal of immunosuppressive drug therapy is to
suppress the recipient’s immune response to alloan-
tigens present in the graft, thereby preventing or
treating rejection. The drugs work by depleting
T cells (antithymocyte globulin) or by blocking
Fig. A.3 Coronary artery with transplant-associated arterio-
sclerosis. This histologic section was taken from a coronary
artery of a cardiac allograft that was removed from a patient 5
years after transplantation because of graft failure. The lumen is
greatly narrowed by the presence of intimal smooth muscle
cells. (Courtesy Dr. Richard Mitchell, Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.)
312
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
 
T cell activation or proliferation (tacrolimus, cyclo-
sporine, rapamycin, mycophenolic acid), and/or in-
ﬂammatory cytokine production (prednisone). A
combination of drugs is given since each can be
administered at lower doses at which the risks of
adverse side-effects are reduced relative to what is
required in a single-drug regimen. An attempt is
made to preserve some immune function to combat
infections.
4. The graft has failed because of thickening of the
walls and narrowing of the lumens of the graft ar-
teries (see Chapter 10). This vascular change, called
graft arteriosclerosis or transplant-associated arte-
riosclerosis, diffusely involves the coronary vascula-
ture and leads to downstream ischemic damage to
the heart; it is the most frequent reason for long-
term
graft
failure.
It
may
be
caused
by
a
T cellemediated inﬂammatory reaction directed
against vessel wall alloantigens, which subsequently
smolders as a chronic macrophage-mediated injury
that results in cytokine-stimulated smooth muscle
cell migration into the intima, with smooth muscle
cell proliferation and increased matrix synthesis.
CASE 3: ALLERGIC ASTHMA
Ten-year-old I.E. was brought to her pediatrician’s of-
ﬁce in November because of frequent coughing for the
past 2 days, audible wheezing, and a feeling of tightness
in her chest. Her symptoms had been especially severe
at night. In addition to her routine checkups, she had
visited the physician in the past for occasional ear and
upper respiratory tract infections but had not previ-
ously experienced wheezing or chest tightness. She had
eczema, but otherwise she was in good health and was
developmentally normal. Her immunizations were up
to date. She lived at home with her mother, father, two
sisters aged 12 and 4, and a pet cat. Both of her parents
smoked cigarettes, and her father suffered from allergic
rhinitis.
At the time of her physical examination, I.E. had a
temperature of 37 C (98.6 F), blood pressure of 105/
65 mm Hg, and a respiratory rate of 30 breaths per
minute. She did not appear short of breath but had mild
subcostal retraction. There were no signs of ear infec-
tion or pharyngitis. Auscultation of the chest revealed
diffuse wheezing in both lungs. There was no evidence
of pneumonia. The physician made a presumptive
diagnosis of bronchospasm and referred I.E. to a pe-
diatric allergist-immunologist. In the meantime, she
was given a prescription
for a short-acting
b2-
adrenergic agonist bronchodilator inhaler and was
instructed to administer the drug every 4 hours to
relieve symptoms. This drug binds to b2-adrenergic
receptors on bronchial smooth muscle cells and cau-
ses them to relax, resulting in dilation of the bronchi-
oles. The family was also prescribed a spacer, a device to
optimize delivery of the medication, and taught to
administer the inhaler using the spacer.
1. Asthma is often an atopic disease, particularly in pa-
tients older than 6 to 8 years of age. What are the
different ways in which atopy may manifest clinically?
One week later, I.E. was seen again by the allergist.
He auscultated her lungs and conﬁrmed the presence of
wheezing. I.E. was instructed to blow into a spirometer,
and the physician determined that her forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1) was 65% of normal, indi-
cating airway obstruction. The physician then admin-
istered a nebulized bronchodilator and 10 minutes later
performed the test again. The repeat FEV1 was 85% of
normal, indicating reversibility of the airway obstruc-
tion. Blood was drawn and sent for total and differential
blood cell count and determination of IgE levels. In
addition, a skin test was performed to determine hy-
persensitivity to various antigens and showed a positive
result for cat dander, house dust mites, and tree pollens
(Fig. A.4). The patient was instructed to begin using an
inhaled corticosteroid and to use her bronchodilator as
needed for respiratory symptoms. Her parents were
instructed to make a return appointment 2 weeks later
for reevaluation of I.E. and discussion of blood test
results.
2. What is the immunologic basis for a positive skin
test?
At I.E.’s return appointment 2 weeks later, labora-
tory tests revealed that she had a serum IgE level of
1200 kU/mL (normal range, 0 to 180) and a total white
blood cell count of 7000/mm3 (normal, 4300 to 10,800/
mm3), with an absolute eosinophil count of 700/mm3
(normal, <500). When she returned to the allergist’s
ofﬁce 1 week later, her respiratory status on physical
examination
was
signiﬁcantly
improved,
with
no
audible wheezing. I.E.’s FEV1 had improved to 85% of
normal. The family was told that I.E. had reversible
airway obstruction, possibly triggered by a viral illness
and possibly related to cat and dust allergies. The
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
313
 
physician advised that, although rehoming the cat is
ideal, at the very least the cat should be kept out of I.E.’s
bedroom. The mother was told that smoking in the
house probably was contributing to I.E.’s symptoms.
The physician recommended that I.E. continue to use
the short-acting inhaler for acute episodes of wheezing
or shortness of breath. She was asked to return in
3 months, or sooner if she used the inhaler more than
2 days per week or if she awakened at night with
symptoms more than once a month.
3. What is the mechanism for the increased IgE levels
seen in patients who have allergic symptoms?
The family cat was given to a neighbor, and I.E. did
well on the therapy for approximately 6 months,
experiencing only mild wheezing a few times. The next
spring, she began to have more frequent episodes of
coughing and wheezing. During a soccer game one
Saturday, she became very short of breath, and her
parents brought her to the emergency department (ED)
of the local hospital. After conﬁrming that she was
wheezing and showed signs of accessory respiratory
muscle use, the ED physician treated her with a nebu-
lized b2-agonist bronchodilator and an oral cortico-
steroid. After 6 hours, her symptoms resolved, and she
was sent home. The following week, I.E. was brought to
her allergist, who changed her inhaler prescription to a
combined corticosteroid/long-acting b agonist. She has
subsequently been well, with occasional mild attacks
that are cleared by the inhaler.
4. What are the therapeutic approaches to allergic
asthma?
Answers to Questions for Case 3
1. Atopic reactions to environmental antigens (aller-
gens) are mediated by IgE and mast cells and may
manifest in a variety of ways (see Chapter 11). The
signs and symptoms usually reﬂect the site of entry
of the allergen. Hay fever (allergic rhinitis) and
asthma usually are responses to inhaled allergens,
whereas urticaria and eczema more often occur
with skin exposure or ingestion. Food allergies may
also cause gastrointestinal or respiratory symptoms.
The most dramatic presentation of allergies to insect
venom, foods, or drugs is anaphylaxis, a reaction
characterized by systemic vasodilation, increased
vascular
permeability,
and
airway
obstruction
(laryngeal edema or bronchoconstriction). Without
intervention, patients with anaphylaxis may progress
to asphyxia and cardiovascular collapse.
2. If an individual with an allergy is challenged with a
small dose of the allergen injected into the skin, there
is immediate release of histamine from triggered
mast cells, which produces a central wheal of edema
(from leakage of plasma) and the surrounding ﬂare
of vascular congestion (from vessel dilation). The
injected allergen binds to previously produced IgE
antibodies, which coat mast cells by attaching to
Fcε receptors. The allergy skin test should not be
confused with the skin test used to assess prior sensi-
tization to certain infectious agents, such as Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis. A positive tuberculosis skin
test is an example of a delayed-type hypersensitivity
(DTH) reaction, mediated by antigen-stimulated
type 1 helper T (Th1) cells, which release cytokines
such as interferon-g (IFN-g), leading to macrophage
activation and inﬂammation (see Chapter 6). Serum
allergen-speciﬁc IgE tests are also routinely per-
formed and give complementary information to
traditional allergy skin testing.
3. For unknown reasons, patients with atopy mount type
2 helper T (Th2) cell responses to a variety of essen-
tially harmless protein antigens, in which Th2 cells
produce interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, and IL-13 and
follicular T helper (Tfh) cells produce IL-4 and IL-
13.IL-4 andIL-13induce IgEclass switchinginB cells,
IL-5activates eosinophils,andIL-13 stimulatesmucus
production (see Chapters 6 and 11). Atopy tends to
Flare
Wheal
Fig. A.4 Positive result on prick skin testing for environmental
antigens. Small amounts of the antigens are applied into the
superﬁcial layers of the skin using a short needle to prick the
skin. If mast cells are present with bound immunoglobulin E
speciﬁc for the test antigen, the antigen will cross-link the Fc
receptors to which the IgE is bound. This induces degranulation
of the mast cells and the release of mediators that cause the
wheal and ﬂare reaction.
314
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
 
run in families, and genetic susceptibility is clearly
involved. Attention has been focused especially on
genes on the long arm of chromosome 5 (5q) that
encode several Th2 cytokines; on 11q, where the
gene for the a chain of the IgE receptor is located;
and on genes on chromosomes 2 and 9, which encode
the IL-33 receptor (ST2) and IL-33, respectively. IL-33
is a cytokine secreted by epithelial cells that activates
group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2), which may
play a role in inducing strong Th2 responses.
4. A major therapeutic approach for allergies is pre-
vention by avoiding exposure to precipitating aller-
gens, identiﬁed through either allergy skin testing or
serum IgE measurement. Although pharmacologic
therapy previously has been focused on treating
the symptoms of bronchoconstriction by elevating
intracellular
cyclic
adenosine
monophosphate
(cAMP) levels (using b2-adrenergic agents and in-
hibitors of cAMP degradation), the balance of ther-
apy has shifted to the use of antiinﬂammatory
agents. These include corticosteroids (which block
cytokine release) and receptor antagonists for lipid
mediators (e.g., leukotrienes). Newer treatments
that have been developed for treatment of asthma
and other allergies include mAbs targeting IgE, IL-
4/IL-13 receptors, IL-5, IL-33, and thymic stromal
lymphopoietin (TSLP). The anticytokine therapies
are often effective in treating patients with severe
asthma characterized by evidence of strong type 2
immune responses, such as high eosinophil counts
and eosinophilic airway inﬂammation (called T2-
high asthma). The most effective treatment for
anaphylaxis is the administration of epinephrine
through intramuscular injection. Epinephrine causes
blood vessel constriction, dilation of bronchioles,
and increased cardiac output, thereby reversing the
fall in blood pressure and airway obstruction.
CASE 4: SYSTEMIC LUPUS
ERYTHEMATOSUS
N.Z., a 25-year-old woman, presented to her primary
care physician with complaints of joint pain involving
her wrists, ﬁngers, and ankles. When seen in the phy-
sician’s ofﬁce, N.Z. had normal body temperature, heart
rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rate. There was a
noticeable red rash on her cheeks, most marked around
her nose, sparing the nasolabial folds, and on ques-
tioning she said the redness worsened after being in the
sun for 1 or 2 hours. The joints of her hands and wrists
were swollen and tender. The other physical examina-
tion ﬁndings were unremarkable.
Her physician took a blood sample for various tests.
Her hematocrit was 35% (normal, 37% to 48%). The
total white blood cell count was 9800/mm3 (within
normal range), with a normal differential count. The
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 40 mm/hr
(normal, 1 to 20), reﬂecting systemic inﬂammation with
cytokine-induced production of acute phase proteins.
Her serum antinuclear antibody (ANA) test was posi-
tive at 1:2560 dilution (normally, negative at 1:40
dilution) with a homogeneous pattern. Other laboratory
ﬁndings were unremarkable. On the basis of these
ﬁndings, a diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) was made. N.Z.’s physician prescribed oral
prednisone (a corticosteroid) and hydroxychloroquine;
with this treatment, her joint pain subsided.
1. What is the signiﬁcance of the positive result for the
ANA test?
Three months later, N.Z. began feeling unusually
tired and thought she had the ﬂu. For approximately a
week she had noticed that her ankles were swollen, and
she had difﬁculty putting on her shoes. She returned to
her primary care physician. Her ankles and feet showed
severe edema (swollen as a result of extra ﬂuid in the
tissue). Her abdomen appeared slightly distended, with
a mild shifting dullness to percussion (a sign of an
abnormally large amount of ﬂuid in the peritoneal
cavity). Her physician ordered several laboratory tests.
Serum anti-dsDNA was 25 IU/ml (normal <10 U/ml),
and her ESR was 120 mm/hr. Serum albumin was 0.8
g/dl (normal, 3.5 to 5.0). Measurement of serum com-
plement proteins revealed a C3 of 42 mg/dl (normal, 80
to 180) and a C4 of 5 mg/dl (normal, 15 to 45). Uri-
nalysis showed 4þ proteinuria, both red and white
blood cells, and numerous hyaline and granular casts. A
24-hour urine sample contained 4 g of protein.
2. What is the likely reason for the decreased comple-
ment levels and the abnormalities in blood and uri-
nary proteins?
Because of the abnormal urinalysis ﬁndings, the
physician recommended a renal biopsy, which was
performed 1 week later. The biopsy specimen was
examined by routine histologic methods, immunoﬂuo-
rescence, and electron microscopy (Fig. A.5).
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
315
 
3. What is the explanation for the pathologic changes
seen in the kidney?
The physician made the diagnosis of proliferative
lupus glomerulonephritis, prescribed a higher dose of
prednisone, and recommended treatment with a cyto-
toxic drug (mycophenolate). N.Z.’s proteinuria and
edema subsided over a 2-week period, and serum C3
levels returned to normal. Her corticosteroid dose was
tapered to a lower amount. Over the next few years, she
had intermittent ﬂare-ups of her disease, with joint pain
and edema and laboratory tests indicating depressed C3
levels and proteinuria. These were effectively managed
with corticosteroids. Over the past 2 years she has
received a calcineurin inhibitor called voclosporin twice
a day orally, her renal function has stabilized, and N.Z.
has been able to lead an active life.
Answers to Questions for Case 4
1. A positive ANA test reveals the presence of serum
antibodies that bind to components of cellular
nuclei. The test is performed by placing different di-
lutions of the patient’s serum on top of a monolayer
of human cells on a glass slide. A second ﬂuores-
cently labeled anti-Ig antibody is then added, and
the cells are examined with a ﬂuorescent microscope
to detect if any serum antibodies bound to the nuclei.
The ANA titer is the maximum dilution of the serum
that
still
produces
detectable
nuclear
staining.
Almost all patients with SLE have ANAs, which
may be speciﬁc for histones, other nuclear proteins,
or double-stranded DNA. These are autoantibodies,
and their production is evidence of autoimmunity.
ANAs are not speciﬁc for SLE, and this test is typi-
cally supplemented with a more speciﬁc test for an-
tibodies against double-stranded DNA and Smith,
ribonucleoprotein, SS-A, and SS-B antigens. Autoan-
tibodies also may be produced against various cell
membrane protein antigens. The development of au-
toantibodies generally precedes the clinical onset of
SLE by as much as 9 to 10 years, and anti-dsDNA
titers can be used to assess disease activity.
2. Some of the autoantibodies form circulating im-
mune complexes by binding to antigens in the
blood. Nuclear antigens may be increased in the cir-
culation of patients with SLE because of increased
apoptosis of several cell types (e.g., white blood cells,
keratinocytes) and defective clearance of apoptotic
cells. When these immune complexes deposit in
the basement membranes of vessel walls, they may
activate the classical pathway of complement, lead-
ing to inﬂammation, and depletion of complement
proteins
through
consumption.
Inﬂammation
caused by the immune complexes in the kidney
leads to leakage of protein and red blood cells into
Granular deposits of immunoglobulin
and complement in the basement membrane
A
B
C
Fig. A.5 Glomerulonephritis with immune complex deposition in systemic lupus erythematosus. A, Light
micrograph of a renal biopsy specimen in which neutrophilic inﬁltration in a glomerulus can be seen. B,
Immunoﬂuorescence micrograph showing granular deposits of immunoglobulin G (IgG) along the basement
membrane. (In this technique, called immunoﬂuorescence microscopy, a frozen section of the kidney is
incubated with a ﬂuorescein-conjugated antibody against IgG, and the site of deposition of the IgG is deﬁned
by determining where the ﬂuorescence is located.) C, Electron micrograph of the same tissue revealing im-
mune complex deposition. (Courtesy Dr. Helmut Rennke, Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.)
316
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
 
the urine. The loss of protein in the urine results in
reduced plasma albumin, reduction of osmotic pres-
sure of the plasma, and ﬂuid loss into the tissues.
This explains the edema of the feet and abdominal
distention.
3. The pathologic changes in the kidney result from
the deposition of circulating immune complexes
in the basement membranes of renal glomeruli.
In addition, autoantibodies may bind directly to
tissue antigens and form in situ immune com-
plexes. These deposits can be seen by immunoﬂuo-
rescence (indicating type of antibody deposited)
and electron microscopy (showing exact localiza-
tion). The immune complexes activate comple-
ment,
and
leukocytes
are
recruited
by
complement by-products (C3a, C5a) and by bind-
ing of leukocyte Fc receptors to the IgG molecules
in the complexes. These leukocytes become acti-
vated, and they produce reactive oxygen species
and lysosomal enzymes that damage the glomer-
ular basement membrane. These ﬁndings are char-
acteristic of immune complexemediated tissue
injury, and complexes may deposit in joints and
small blood vessels anywhere in the body, as well
as in the kidney. SLE is a prototype of an immune
complex disease (see Chapter 11).
CASE 5: HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY
VIRUS INFECTION: ACQUIRED
IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME
J.C. was a 28-year-old assistant carpenter who pre-
sented to a clinic physician with 3 weeks of low-grade
fevers, sore throat, and lymphadenopathy. Physical
examination revealed “track marks,” and when asked,
the patient stated that 2 months earlier, he had begun
using heroin with shared needles because he could no
longer afford the cost of escalating doses of street
oxycodone. Other ﬁndings on physical examination
included lymphadenopathy and a faint, diffuse rash.
Point-of-care tests for Epstein-Barr virus infection
(monospot) and oropharyngeal streptococcal infection
(rapid strep) were negative, as were blood cultures for
bacteria and fungi. He was discharged with a diagnosis
of a presumed viral syndrome.
1. What is the signiﬁcance of 3 weeks of low-grade fe-
vers and lymphadenopathy?
J.C. was seen the next week in the infectious diseases
clinic, where a fourth-generation enzyme-linked immu-
nosorbent assay (ELISA) performed on his serum was
found to be negative for antiehuman immunodeﬁciency
virus (HIV) antibody but positive for HIV nucleocapsid
p24. A follow-up HIV-1/HIV-2 differentiation assay did
not detect antibodies to either HIV-1 or HIV-2, sug-
gesting viral antigenemia without seropositivity. The
concentration of HIV viral genomes in his blood (viral
load) was determined to be 700,000/ml, and his blood
CD4þ T cell count was 300/mm3, with a reversal of the
normal CD4/CD8 ratio (Fig. A.6). Hepatitis B virus
(HBV) ELISAs were negative for antibodies speciﬁc for
HBV surface and core antigens. HIV genotyping showed
a lysine-to-asparagine mutation at codon 103 (K103N) of
the HIV reverse transcriptase gene. Antiretroviral therapy
(ART) was recommended, however clinical follow-up
and care engagement was not established and treatment
was never initiated.
2. What was this patient’s major risk factor for
acquiring HIV infection? What are other risk factors
for HIV infection?
3. Why do the HIV tests include testing for the pres-
ence of both HIV antibodies and p24 protein?
Six months later, J.C. was seen at a community
hospital for an abscess at an injection site. After incision
and drainage, he declined the advice of his treating
physicians to pursue additional medical evaluation. A
CD4þ T cell count obtained at that time was 500/mm3,
and viral load was 15,000. He again declined to initiate
ART. Six years later, J.C. was admitted to the hospital
after a week of fevers and shortness of breath. A chest x-
ray showed faint, diffuse inﬁltrates, and oxygen satu-
ration was 90%. Initial microscopic examination of
sputum stained for fungi (silver stain) was unrevealing,
but he was started on antibiotics (trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole) plus prednisone. PCR testing of
sputum was positive for Pneumocystis jirovecii. J.C.’s
condition initially worsened, but eventually he recov-
ered fully. A repeat CD4þ T cell count was now 150,
with a viral load of 50,000 copies/ml. At this point, J.C.
expressed desire to initiate ART and was started on
dolutegravir (an HIV integrase inhibitor), plus two
nucleoside/nucleotide analog inhibitors of the HIV
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
317
 
reverse
transcriptase
(nucleoside/nucleotide
analog
reverse transcriptase inhibitors [NRTIs]), tenofovir/
emtricitabine. He was also continued on trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole at lower doses for prophylaxis. He
was advised to stop smoking.
4. Why does ART therapy for HIV typically include
two or three different antiviral drugs?
5. What caused the gradual decline in J.C.’s CD4þ
T cell count?
6. Why were antibiotics and prednisone started in the
patient before a diagnosis of P. jirovecii infection
was established by PCR?
One year later, his CD4 count was 800 and his viral
load was undetectable, but he developed methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection of
his mitral valve (staphylococcal infective endocarditis),
requiring surgical replacement with a bioprosthetic
valve. Preoperative cardiac catheterization showed sig-
niﬁcant coronary artery disease. Postoperatively, he was
able to discontinue heroin use with methadone main-
tenance. His antiretroviral drugs were continued, but
the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was stopped. He
has remained in good health since. His long-term
partner remains HIV negative.
7. What are the main risks to J.C.’s life at this point?
Answers to Questions for Case 5
1. This pattern is referred to as acute HIV syndrome.
Although a very large number of infectious agents
can cause an acute viral syndrome for a few days,
the persistence in this case suggests one of a rela-
tively small number of causes in a young, previously
healthy person, including HIV infection. However,
acute HIV infection also can be asymptomatic or
substantially less symptomatic than what this pa-
tient experienced.
2. Intravenous drug use with sharing of needles and
syringes is the major risk factor for HIV infection
in this patient. Shared needles among people who
inject drugs transmit blood-borne viral particles
from one infected person to others. Other major
risk factors for HIV infection include sexual inter-
course with an infected person, transfusion of
contaminated blood products, and birth from an
infected mother (see Chapter 12). Intravenous
drug use accounts for less than 10% of HIV cases
in the United States. Most infections (70%) are in
men who have sex with other men, and the
Normal individual
CD4-APC
CD4-APC
CD8-PE
CD8-PE
HIV-infected patient
1395 CD4 T cells/mm3
66 CD4 T cells/mm3
A
B
Fig. A.6 Flow cytometry analysis of CD4þ and CD8þ T cells in blood of patient with human immunodefi-
ciency virus (HIV) infection. A suspension of the patient’s white blood cells was incubated with monoclonal
antibodies speciﬁc for CD4 and CD8. The anti-CD4 antibody was labeled with the ﬂuorochrome allophyco-
cyanin (APC), and the anti-CD8 antibody was labeled with the ﬂuorochrome phycoerythrin (PE). These two
ﬂuorochromes emit light of different colors when excited by the appropriate wavelengths. The cell suspen-
sions were analyzed in a ﬂow cytometer, which can enumerate the number of cells stained by each of the
differently labeled antibodies. In this way, the number of CD4þ and CD8þ T cells can be determined. Shown
here are two-color plots of a control blood sample (A) and that of the patient (B). The CD4þ T cells are shown in
orange (upper left quadrant), and the CD8þ T cells are shown in green (lower right quadrant). Note that these
are not the colors of light emitted by the APC and PE ﬂuorochromes.
318
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
 
remainder are typically acquired via penile-vaginal
intercourse (approximately 25%). Globally, more
than 90% of new infections occur in heterosexuals.
The demographics of the epidemic have changed
over the past few decades.
3. In some patients presenting with acute infection,
there often has been insufﬁcient time to develop an
antibody response, but levels of virus are high, so
viral proteins can be readily detected. So-called
fourth-generation tests detect both viral p24 protein
antigens and anti-HIV antibodies and thus can be
used to diagnose HIV infection in the window period
before antibodies develop. These combined tests were
approved in the United States in 2010, several years
later than in other countries. If the screening test is
positive, it would be followed up with more speciﬁc
assays to distinguish HIV-1 from HIV-2 infection,
and PCR tests to determine numbers of circulating
viral particles and genotype of viral nucleic acid.
4. HIV has a very high mutation rate. Mutations in the
reverse-transcriptase gene that render the enzyme
resistant to nucleoside inhibitors occur frequently
in patients receiving these drugs. Resistance to pro-
tease inhibitors may come about by similar mecha-
nisms. Triple-drug therapy including drugs from at
least two different classes of antiretroviral agents (or
more recently, dual-drug therapy with an integrase
inhibitor and a drug from another class in select pa-
tient groups) greatly reduces the chances of the virus
developing drug resistance, but poor adherence can
contribute to emergence of resistant strains. Nonnu-
cleoside
analog
reverse
transcriptase
inhibitors
(NNRTIs) are also effective anti-HIV drugs, but
the lysine-to-asparagine mutation at codon 103
(K103N) of the HIV reverse transcriptase gene,
discovered at the time of diagnosis, would make
this
patient’s
virus
resistant
to
many
ﬁrst-
generation NNRTIs. (Notably, unlike many other
resistance mutations, viruses with the K103N muta-
tion are often transmitted between individuals
because this mutation does not impose signiﬁcant
ﬁtness costs on the virus and therefore it can be
maintained even in the absence of selective pressure
from ART.) Integrase inhibitors (speciﬁcally inte-
grase
strand
transfer
inhibitors
[INSTIs])
are
another major class of anti-HIV drugs used in com-
bination therapy that have more recently become a
key component of ﬁrst-line ART regimens. Other
drug classes include viral protease inhibitors and in-
hibitors of HIV entry into and fusion with cells.
5. After initial infection, which often starts in mucosal
tissues, HIV rapidly enters various types of cells in
the body, mainly CD4þ T lymphocytes, but also
dendritic cells and mononuclear phagocytes. The
gradual decline in CD4þ T cells in this patient was
caused by repetitive cycles of HIV infection of
CD4þ T cells in lymphoid organs, leading to death
of the cells. The symptoms of acquired immunode-
ﬁciency syndrome (AIDS), including development
of most AIDS-deﬁning infections and cancers,
more commonly occur after the blood count of
CD4þ T cells falls below 200 cells/mm3, reﬂecting
a severe depletion of T cells in the lymphoid organs.
6. This presentation in a person with known HIV infec-
tion is so highly suggestive of P. jirovecii pneumonia
(PJP) that initiation of presumptive PJP treatment is
appropriate pending additional diagnostic evaluation.
The deﬁciencies in T cellemediated immunity in pa-
tients with AIDS lead to impaired immunity to vi-
ruses, fungi, and protozoa that otherwise are easily
controlled by an intact immune system, allowing
for the development of opportunistic infections.
P. jirovecii is a fungal organism that can live within
phagocytes, but usually it is eradicated by the action
of activated CD4þ T cells. In the ﬁrst days of PJP
treatment, a potent inﬂammatory response to the
dying microorganisms can cause dangerous clinical
worsening, so steroid antiinﬂammatories are started
immediately for severe cases.
7. With well-controlled HIV infection, patients can
have a near-normal life expectancy, and most deaths
are from causes not directly related to HIV infec-
tion. Both HIV infection itself and some of the an-
tiretroviral
drugs
accelerate
coronary
artery
disease; hence, infected persons who are effectively
treated
with
antiretrovirals
tend
to
die
more
frequently of disorders not directly related to the
viral infection. The highest noneHIV-related risk
to this patient’s health was active intravenous drug
use, now discontinued. In addition, people with
well-suppressed HIV infection very rarely transmit
the virus to others, so treatment can both control
infection and prevent ongoing chains of transmis-
sion (“treatment as prevention”).
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
319
 
CASE 6: SARS CoV-2 INFECTION: COVID-19
C.V. was a 63-year-old convenience store manager
with a history of type 2 diabetes and hypertension
who developed new-onset muscle aches, cough, and
headache, which persisted over 4 days. He still had an
appetite and could smell and taste his food, and
therefore he thought it was unlikely that he had
COVID-19. He received one dose of an mRNA SARS-
CoV-2 vaccine 8 months ago, but because the wave of
infections in the community had started to decline
over the past several months, he decided not to follow
up for additional doses, and he rarely wore a mask in
the store where he worked. On the ﬁfth day after
symptom onset, he felt much worse, and fearing he
may have COVID-19, he called his primary care
physician’s ofﬁce. They advised he get tested for
SARS-CoV-2 infection at a drive-through testing
center in his neighborhood and then isolate himself
from his partner and others until the test results were
available. After returning from the testing center, he
felt fatigued, short of breath while climbing the stairs
in his home to his bedroom, and experienced difﬁ-
culty breathing that night. The next morning, his
partner drove him to the ER of the community hos-
pital, where initial evaluation revealed a fever of
37.5C, a rapid respiratory rate, a blood O2 saturation
on room air of 88% (normal >95). A chest CT scan
showed
bilateral
ground-glass
opaciﬁcations
(Fig. A.7). The results of the SARS-CoV-2 PCR test
from the day before came back positive. He was
admitted to the intensive care unit, intubated, and
treated with dexamethasone (a corticosteroid) and
remdesivir (a viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
inhibitor).
1. SARS-CoV-2, like many viruses, stimulates innate
immune responses in infected hosts. How does
this occur and how does the virus evade innate
immunity?
C.V.’s partner, W.V., a 65-year-old woman with no
signiﬁcant chronic health problems, had received two
doses of an mRNA COVID vaccine the previous year,
and a booster shot 3 months ago. She developed a mild
sore throat and runny nose on the day C.V. was
admitted, and she was tested for SARS-CoV-2. Her
results were also positive, but her upper respiratory
symptoms abated over 2 days.
2. What is the major way the adaptive immune system
protects against SARS-CoV-2; how does vaccination
work to enhance this protection?
C.V.’s clinical course in the ICU was complicated by
a persistent need for mechanical ventilation, pulmonary
A
B
Fig. A.7 Pulmonary disease in severe COVID-19. A, A chest
CT scan showing the appearance of lungs damaged in a lethal
case of severe disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection.
White-appearing areas, so called “ground-glass opacities”
(arrows) represent airspaces ﬁlled with inﬂammatory inﬁltrates
and ﬂuid, which are incapable of gas exchange. These air-
spaces would be dark (radiolucent) in normal lungs. B, An H&E
stained histologic section of lung tissue obtained at autopsy
showing hyaline membranes composed of plasma proteins
that have leaked out of damaged blood vessels and line the
alveolar walls (arrows), typical of diffuse alveolar damage that
corresponds to the ground-glass opacities seen in panel B.
This histopathology corresponds to a clinical diagnosis of acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is seen in most
cases of lethal COVID-19. (Courtesy Dr. Robert Padera,
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts.)
320
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
 
embolism requiring anticoagulation, and heart failure.
He gradually improved, was extubated after 4 weeks,
and was discharged from the hospital after 6 weeks. He
was vaccinated 2 weeks later. Since then, he has suffered
from persistent fatigue, chest pain, and brain fog.
3. What are the major challenges for vaccine develop-
ment and implementation that have been elucidated
by the COVID COVD-19 pandemic?
Answers to Questions for Case 6
1. The major way viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 activate
innate immune responses is through viral nucleic
acids binding to intracellular pattern recognition re-
ceptors, including endosomal Toll-like receptor 7,
which recognizes ssRNA, and cytosolic RIG-I and
MDA5, which recognize features typical of viral
but not mammalian RNAs. When they bind their li-
gands, these receptors activate signaling pathways
that result in host cell production of type I IFNs,
which in turn bind to receptors on host cells to
induce an antiviral state. SARS-CoV-2 evades innate
immunity by structural features of its genomic RNA
that shield it from innate immune recognition and
by blocking signaling that induces type I IFNs and
signaling downstream of type I IFN receptors.
2. A major way adaptive immunity protects against
SARS-CoV-2 infection is by high-afﬁnity neutral-
izing antibodies that recognize parts of the viral
spike proteins that bind to host angiotensin-
converting enzyme-2 (ACE2). SARS-CoV-2 enters
host cells by binding to ACE2, and thus antiespike
protein antibodies block viral infection of the cells.
Non-neutralizing antibodies that recognize viral
spike proteins can activate complement, help phago-
cytose free virus, or trigger other Fc receptore
directed activities. The production of effective anti-
bodies depends on stimulation of CD4þ Tfh cells,
which recognize peptides derived from viral pro-
teins, which are processed and bound to host class
II MHC molecules. The Tfh cells collaborate with
spike proteinespeciﬁc B cells to induce germinal
center reactions yielding long-lived plasma cells
that produce high-afﬁnity antiespike protein anti-
bodies and memory B cells. CD8þ cytotoxic T lym-
phocytes (CTL) speciﬁc for peptides derived from
other viral proteins also play a role in combatting
SARS-CoV-2 infection by killing infected cells.
3. Like other RNA viruses, replication of the SARS-
CoV-2 RNA genome is highly error prone, thereby
generating many mutations. During the course of
the COVID-19 pandemic, several successive waves
of infection have rapidly spread worldwide, each
with a major variant of SARS-CoV-2 carrying muta-
tions that alter the spike protein structure, and are
thus capable, at least in part, of evading neutraliza-
tion by antibodies generated in responses to infec-
tion
by
previous
forms
of
the
virus.
(The
mutations likely increase the ability of the virus to
infect and spread.) The dominance of these variants
has evolved under the selective pressures of adaptive
immune responses to viral infection as well as to
SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. This is the major way
SARS-CoV-2 has evaded adaptive immunity and is
the major challenge for SARS-CoV-2 vaccine devel-
opment going forward. Nonetheless, the vaccines
used in the mass vaccination program, which are
based on the spike protein sequences found in the
ﬁrst wave of infections in 2019 and 2020, remain
highly effective in preventing serious illness and
death from later SARS-CoV-2 variants. The second
major
challenge
for
vaccination
programs
is
achieving a high rate of vaccination worldwide,
which is hampered logistically by poverty, reluc-
tance, and disinformation.
APPENDIX III
Clinical Cases
321
 
CHAPTER 1
1. Innate immunity responds immediately to infec-
tions and injury with effector cells and molecules
that are always present and functional, whereas
adaptive immune responses require activation of
clones of lymphocytes to expand and differentiate
into effector cells that can ﬁght infection, a process
that takes several days. The innate immune system
uses a limited number of receptors, which recognize
different molecular patterns common to many spe-
cies of microbes, whereas the adaptive immune sys-
tem uses two types of highly speciﬁc antigens
receptors, each with millions of variations and
each expressed by a different clone of lymphocytes,
which recognize distinct molecular features of anti-
gens. Innate immune responses are mostly identical
in quality and magnitude upon repeated exposures
to the same type of microbe, whereas the adaptive
immune system generates long-lived memory that
protects against subsequent infections by the same
species and responds more rapidly in a specialized
manner to eliminate repeat infections.
2. The two types of adaptive immunity are cell-mediated
immunity and humoral immunity. Cell-mediated im-
munity, mediated by T cells, is essential for protection
against pathogens that infect tissue cells or phago-
cytes. Humoral immunity, which is mediated by anti-
bodies,
provides
protection
primarily
against
pathogensthatare locatedoutsideofcells. Manypath-
ogens have extracellular and intracellular phases of
their life cycle, such as viruses, and are defended
againstby bothcell-mediatedand humoralimmunity.
3. B lymphocytes express surface immunoglobulin
(Ig), which functions as their antigen receptor, and
mediate humoral immunity. Following activation,
B lymphocytes differentiate into antibody-secreting
plasma cells. T lymphocytes express the T cell anti-
gen receptor (TCR) and either CD4 or CD8 and
mediate cell-mediated immune responses. After
activation by peptide antigens displayed by cell sur-
face major histocompatibility complex (MHC) mol-
ecules, CD4þ T cells secrete cytokines and express
membrane-bound activating ligands, which induce
inﬂammation, enhance the functions of phagocytes,
and promote B cell antibody responses. After activa-
tion by peptide antigens displayed by MHC mole-
cules, CD8þ T cells release cytotoxic proteins that
kill infected cells and tumor cells.
4. Naive lymphocytes are mature B or T cells that have
not yet encountered a foreign antigen. Following
activation by antigen, naive lymphocytes proliferate
and differentiate into cells that acquire the ability to
protect against or eliminate pathogens. These lym-
phocytes are known as effector cells. Most effector
cells die after the antigen is eliminated, but a subset
of previously activated lymphocytes known as mem-
ory cells live for extended periods. Memory lympho-
cytes not only survive for long times but also
respond more rapidly and vigorously than do naive
lymphocytes when challenged by antigen.
5. B lymphocytes reside in follicles in secondary (pe-
ripheral) lymphoid organs. T cells reside in the par-
afollicular
cortex
of
lymph
nodes
and
the
periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths of the spleen. B
and T cells are maintained in these locations by
the action of speciﬁc cytokines called chemokines,
which are secreted by stromal cells in the different
regions of the lymphoid organ and bind to different
chemokine receptors expressed on B and T cells.
6. Naive lymphocytes home from the blood into sec-
ondary lymphoid organs, and then, via lymphatics
exiting lymph nodes or through blood vessels in
the spleen, they migrate back into the blood and
recirculate through other secondary lymphoid or-
gans. Effector lymphocytes are generated in second-
ary lymphoid organs, and most migrate into blood
and then home to the tissue site where the activating
antigen may be located.
CHAPTER 2
1. Innate immunity is directed against common mo-
lecular patterns shared by different microbes and
the products of damaged cells and is mediated by
cellular receptors located in the plasma membrane
322
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
(where they recognize extracellular microbes), endo-
somal vesicles (ingested microbes), and cytosol.
Some secreted proteins of limited diversity also
recognize microbes. Adaptive immunity uses an
extremely diverse set of antigen receptors (cell sur-
face
and
secreted
antibodies
and
cell
surface
TCRs) to recognize a wide range of microbial and
nonmicrobial antigens.
2. Examples of microbial substances recognized by
the innate immune system include lipopolysaccha-
ride recognized by Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4);
peptidoglycan
recognized
by
TLR-2;
ﬂagellin
recognized by TLR-5; microbial DNA recognized
by TLR-9 and by cytoplasmic DNA sensors; viral
RNAs recognized by endosomal TLR-3, -7, and -8
and by cytosolic RIG-like receptors; bacterial pepti-
doglycans recognized by cytoplasmic NOD-like re-
ceptors; and mannans recognized by the cell
surface
mannose
receptor
and
by
mannose-
binding protein in the blood.
3. Inﬂammasomes are multiprotein complexes found in
the cytoplasm of phagocytes, dendritic cells (DCs),
and other cell types that respond to pathogens or
cell stress by inﬂammatory cytokine secretion or cell
death. Several types of inﬂammasomes generate an
enzyme that proteolytically cleaves a precursor of
the cytokine interleukin-1b (IL-1b), producing an
active proinﬂammatory form of IL-1b that is released
from the cell. One example is the inﬂammasome that
contains a NOD family molecule called NLRP3 and
the proteolytic enzyme caspase-1. NLRP3 responds
to many different stimuli that indicate cell infection
or injury, leading to activation of caspase-1, which
then cleaves the IL-1b precursor. Stimuli that activate
the NLRP3 inﬂammasome include various microbial
products, crystals such as sodium urate and choles-
terol, reduced potassium concentration, and reactive
oxygen species.
4. The skin provides a relatively impermeable multilay-
ered physical epithelial barrier by virtue of a surface
layer of keratin produced by the skin epithelial cells
called keratinocytes and by tight junctions between
the keratinocytes. The intestinal tract is lined by a
single layer of epithelial cells, also held together by
tight junctions. Some of the intestinal epithelial cells
secrete a layer of mucus that serves as a microbial
barrier. Both skin and intestinal epithelial cells
secrete antimicrobial peptide antibiotics, and both
of these epithelial barriers also contain intraepithelial
lymphocytes that may aid in antimicrobial defense.
5. Phagocytes express a variety of receptors that recog-
nize microbial carbohydrates, Fc receptors that bind
microbes coated (opsonized) by antibodies, and
complement receptors that bind microbes opsonized
by complement proteins. Microbes that bind to
these receptors are internalized into phagosomes,
which fuse with lysosomes, where the microbes are
destroyed by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species
and lysosomal enzymes.
6. Natural killer (NK) cells express inhibitory receptors
that recognize MHC class I molecules on healthy
host cells and can then inhibit NK cell activation.
In virally infected cells, MHC class I molecules may
be downregulated and therefore fail to engage inhib-
itory receptors, and at the same time, ligands for acti-
vating NK cell receptors are expressed. As a result,
NK cells are activated to kill these infected cells.
7. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-1 stimulate
inﬂammation in part by activating endothelial cells
that line blood vessels to express molecules that re-
cruit neutrophils and monocytes out of the blood
vessels and into sites of infection. IL-12 made by
macrophages and dendritic cells contributes to NK
cell and T cell activation. Type I interferons inhibit
viral replication, thus inducing an antiviral state in
infected and adjacent cells, and also may enhance
viral antigen display by infected cells for recognition
by T cells.
8. Innate immune responses induce the expression of
costimulators on dendritic cells that can provide sig-
nals for T cell activation that work together with sig-
nals
produced
by
antigen
recognition.
Innate
immune cells also make cytokines that promote
the adaptive immune responses. Complement acti-
vation as part of the innate immune response can
lead to the generation of complement fragments
that enhance B lymphocyte activation.
CHAPTER 3
1. Antigens that enter through epithelial barriers, such
as skin or intestines, are captured by dendritic cells
that reside in or below the epithelium, and the den-
dritic cells transport the antigens to the draining
lymph nodes, where the antigens are displayed to
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
323
 
lymphocytes. Cell-free antigens also may enter sec-
ondary lymphoid organs and be captured by resi-
dent dendritic cells.
2. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) mole-
cules are cell surface proteins that bind peptides
derived from protein antigens and display them
for recognition by T cells. Human MHC proteins
are called human leukocyte antigen (HLA) mole-
cules. Their physiologic function is peptide antigen
presentation to T cells. They were initially discov-
ered as products of polymorphic genes that mediate
transplant rejection (hence the name MHC) or
induce antileukocyte antibody responses in multipa-
rous women (hence the name HLA).
3. Proteins that are produced in the cytosol or are
internalized from outside the cell into endosomes
and are then transported to the cytosol are digested
by cytosolic organelles called proteasomes, and the
peptides generated by the proteasomes are presented
by class I MHC molecules. Proteins from outside the
cell that are internalized into endocytic vesicles may
be processed by lysosomal proteases, and the pep-
tides generated in this way are presented by class
II MHC molecules.
4. Protein antigens in the cytosol are cleaved into pep-
tides by proteasomes, and the peptides are trans-
ported into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by the
TAP molecule. Once inside the ER, these peptides
bind to newly produced class I MHC molecules.
The peptideeclass I MHC complex is then trans-
ported to and displayed on the cell surface. MHC
class II a and b chains are produced in the ER,
where they assemble with each other and with an
invariant chain that occludes the antigen binding
cleft. The MHC class IIeinvariant chain complex
is
transported
to
a
late
endosomal/lysosomal
compartment,
where
the
invariant
chain
is
degraded, leaving a peptide called CLIP in the cleft.
Proteins internalized by the endocytic pathway may
be degraded into peptides by proteases in late endo-
somes and lysosomes. Many peptides generated in
this way displace CLIP and bind tightly to the cleft
of the class II MHC molecules, which are then trans-
ported to and displayed on the cell surface.
5. CD4þ T cells (both naive cells and helper T (Th)
cells derived from the naive cells) recognize peptide
antigens bound to class II MHC molecules, and
CD8þ T lymphocytes (both naive cells and the
cytotoxic T lymphocytes derived from the naive
cells) recognize MHC class Iepeptide complexes.
The CD4 coreceptor on the T cells binds to class
II MHC molecules on antigen-presenting cells, and
the CD8 coreceptor on T cells binds to class I
MHC molecules on antigen-presenting cells and
infected target cells.
CHAPTER 4
1. Antibody and TCR proteins contain variable do-
mains that are involved in antigen recognition and
constant domains that, in the case of antibodies,
mediate
effector
functions.
Variable
domains
contain hypervariable regions (sequences that differ
among different antibodies or TCRs) that form the
binding sites for antigens.
2. Antibodies can recognize many types of molecules,
including small chemicals, proteins, carbohydrates,
lipids, and nucleic acids. In proteins, antibodies
can recognize conformational or linear features,
called epitopes. TCRs can recognize only linear pep-
tides ranging from 8 to 20 amino acid residues, that
are proteolytically generated from proteins and
bound to the clefts of MHC molecules.
3. Diversity of antibodies and TCRs is generated by
V-D-J recombination, which is the joining of indi-
vidual V, D and J DNA segments in developing lym-
phocytes from a choice of many such segments that
are spatially separated in the inherited DNA of anti-
body and TCR gene loci. Variations in nucleotide
sequences introduced by the use of different V, D,
and J segment combinations (combinatorial diver-
sity), and loss or enzymatic introduction of unin-
herited sequence variations between the segments
during
V-D-J
joining
(junctional
diversity)
contribute to diversity, with junctional alterations
making the largest contribution.
4. Checkpoints in lymphocyte development are stages
that must be successfully completed to permit sur-
vival and further maturation of the cells. The ﬁrst
checkpoint in B and T cell maturation involves the
selection of pre-B and pre-T cells that have produc-
tively rearranged the m heavy-chain gene in the case
of B lineage cells and the TCR b chain gene in the
case of developing T cells. The second checkpoint
is after production of complete antigen receptors
324
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
and ensures that only cells with the proper V-D-J
recombination can mature. Positive selection is a
process in which T cells that can recognize self
MHC molecules weakly are allowed to survive and
express the type of coreceptor (CD4 or CD8) that
matches the type of MHC molecule recognized.
5. Negative selection results in the deletion or editing
of strongly self-reactive lymphocytes, in the thymus
for T cells and in the bone marrow for B cells. This
process
eliminates
many
self
antigenereactive
lymphocytes.
CHAPTER 5
1. The TCR complex is made up of the TCR a and b
chains, which are responsible for antigen recogni-
tion, and the CD3 and z proteins, which are
required for signal transduction.
2. Molecules other than the TCR used by T cells to
respond to antigens include the CD4 and CD8 cor-
eceptors, which bind to class II and class I MHC
molecules,
respectively;
costimulatory
receptors
such
as
CD28,
which
bind
to
costimulators
expressed
on
activated
antigen-presenting
cells
(APCs); and adhesion molecules such as the integrin
LFA-1, which mediate T cell adhesion to APCs (and
also control the migration of the T cells).
3. Costimulation refers to signals delivered to a
lymphocyte that are required for activation in addi-
tion
to
but
independent
of
antigen
receptor
signaling.
Costimulatory signals
are
commonly
referred to as a “second signal” (antigen being
“signal 1”) and provide lymphocytes with the infor-
mation that the antigen they are recognizing may be
of microbial origin. B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86)
are the major costimulators on APCs, which bind
to CD28 on T cells.
4. Antigen recognition results in the CD4 or CD8 cor-
eceptors in T cells bringing the LCK tyrosine kinase
bound to their cytosolic tails in proximity to CD3
and z chain ITAMs. Phosphorylation of the ITAMs
by LCK results in the recruitment and activation of
the ZAP-70 tyrosine kinase, which in turn phos-
phorylates several other adaptor protein and en-
zymes, thereby initiating many different signaling
pathways by activating different downstream en-
zymes. Some of these pathways include activation
of phospholipase Cg, resulting in calcium signaling
and the subsequent activation of the NFAT tran-
scription factor; activation of PKCF, resulting in
the activation of the nuclear factor (NF)ekB tran-
scription factor; and activation of MAP kinases,
leading to the production of the AP-1 transcription
factor. These transcription factors enter the nucleus
and promote expression of many genes that encode
proteins required for T cell clonal expansion, differ-
entiation, and effector functions.
5. The major growth factor for T cells is interleukin-2
(IL-2). It is produced by T cells in response to anti-
gen receptor signals and costimulation. T cells that
have recognized antigens express increased levels
of receptors for IL-2 and thus preferentially respond
to the growth factor during immune responses to
the antigens. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) also need
IL-2 for their survival and function.
6. CD4þ helper T cells activate other cells (B lympho-
cytes, macrophages) by the surface molecule CD40-
ligand engaging CD40 on the other cells and by the
actions of secreted cytokines.
7. Memory cells survive after the antigen is cleared,
slowly proliferate to maintain their numbers for
months to years, and respond more rapidly and
strongly to antigen exposure than do naive cells.
8. Two proteins in the CD28 family that are expressed
on T cells and act to inhibit T cell responses are
CTLA-4 and PD-1. CTLA-4 is expressed on acti-
vated conventional T cells and is always expressed
on regulatory T cells. It binds to B7-1 and B7-2
with higher afﬁnity than CD28 binds these mole-
cules, and therefore CTLA-4 prevents the B7 pro-
teins from costimulating T cells. PD-1 is expressed
on activated T cells, and upon binding PD-Ll or
PD-L2 on antigen-presenting cell, delivers inhibi-
tory signals that block the activating signals gener-
ated by the TCR and CD28.
9. Naive T cells express the adhesion molecule L-
selectin and the chemokine receptor CCR7, which
mediate homing to secondary lymphoid organs,
such as lymph nodes. Differentiated effector cells
lose expression of these molecules and instead ex-
press adhesion molecules that bind to molecules
on endothelium exposed to inﬂammatory cytokines.
The effector cells also express receptors for chemo-
kines produced at sites of inﬂammation, thus prefer-
entially migrating to these sites.
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
325
 
CHAPTER 6
1. Intracellular microbes that reside in phagosomes of
macrophages, including several bacterial and fungal
species, are eliminated by Th cells, especially those
of the Th1 subset that activate the phagocytes to
destroy ingested microbes. Microbes whose life cy-
cle includes presence in the cytosol, such as viruses,
may be eliminated by CD8þ T cellemediated
killing of the infected cells, thus eliminating the
reservoir of infection.
2. Th1 cells secrete the cytokine interferon-g (IFN-g),
which activates macrophages to kill phagocytosed
microbes. Th2 cells secrete IL-4 and IL-13, which
stimulate intestinal mucus production and gut
peristalsis, and IL-5, which activates eosinophils.
IL-4 and IL-13 secreted by follicular helper T
(Tfh) cells induce B cell IgE production, which
contributes to immunity against helminths. Th2
cells are involved in defense against helminths.
Th17 cells secrete IL-17, which enhances neutro-
phil responses, that ingest and destroy extracellular
fungi and bacteria, and IL-22, which promotes
repair of epithelial barriers injured by microbes.
3. In additon to activating macrophges by secreting
interferon-g, Th1 cells also express CD40 ligand,
which activates macrophages by engaging CD40.
Macrophages activated by Th1 cells make increased
nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species. These free
radicals can destroy ingested microbes. Activated
macrophages also produce increased amounts of
lysosomal enzymes, which help to destroy microbes,
and cytokines such as IL-1, TNF, IL-6 and chemo-
kines, all of which promote inﬂammation and call
more leukocytes into the reaction.
4. CD8þ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) that recog-
nize micobial peptide antigen displayed by class I
MHC on an infected tissue cell release granules
that contain perforin and granzymes, which enter
the infected cells
and
induce
their
death
by
apoptosis.
5. Some intracellular microbes evade immunity by pre-
venting
phagolysosomal
fusion.
Many
viruses
inhibit antigen presentation and some may inacti-
vate effector T cells.
CHAPTER 7
1. The signals that induce B cell responses to protein
antigens include binding of the protein to mem-
brane immunoglobulin (Ig) on the B cell, and subse-
quent signals delivered by Tfh cells, including
secreted cytokines that bind to cytokine receptors
on the B cell, and CD40 ligand on activated Th cells,
which bind to CD40 on the B cell. The signals that
induce B cell responses to a polysaccharide antigen
are generated by the binding of the polysaccharide,
which is polyvalent, to multiple membrane Ig mole-
cules on the B cell, thereby cross-linking B cell re-
ceptors
and
activating
signal
transduction
pathways. Complement fragments bound to anti-
gens engage the complement receptor CR2 (CD21)
on B cells, which generates signals that increase B
cell activation. This is especially important for poly-
saccharide and other nonprotein antigens, which
cannot activate helper T cells. Activation of Toll-
like receptors on B cells by microbial molecules at
the same time as B cell receptor (BCR) antigen
recognition may also contribute to B cell activation.
2. Secondary antibody responses develop more quickly
and are of greater magnitude than primary immune
responses. Secondary responses to protein antigens
also differ from primary responses in that the anti-
bodies produced are higher-afﬁnity IgG, IgA, or
IgE antibodies, whereas low-afﬁnity IgM antibodies
are mainly produced in the primary response.
3. B cells express membrane Ig molecules that bind
intact proteins and facilitate their endocytosis. The
internalized proteins are processed into peptides,
and the peptides are bound to class II MHC mole-
cules and displayed on the B cell surface. Th cells
speciﬁc for peptide-MHC complexes presented by
a B cell lead to activation of the T cell. Thus, a B
cell and a T cell recognize different parts of the
same protein in sequence. The B cell recognition oc-
curs ﬁrst and is independent of the T cell, and the
T cell recognition is second and requires B cell pre-
sentation of a peptide fragment of the antigen. The
initial BeT interactions occur at the interface of
the B and T cell zones of lymph nodes or spleen,
just outside the follicles. These interactions drive
326
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
differentiation of helper T cells into Tfh cells, and
then both the activated B cells and Tfh cells migrate
into the follicle, where a germinal center reaction
ensues. B cell presentation of peptide-MHC antigen
to Tfh cells and Tfh cell activation of the B cells via
cytokines and CD40L continue in the germinal
center.
4. Signals delivered by Th cells induce heavy-chain iso-
type (class) switching in B cells. These signals
include CD40 ligand, which binds to CD40 on B
cells, and cytokines secreted by the Th cells, which
bind to cytokine receptors on the B cell. The cyto-
kine signals determine which heavy-chain gene locus
will become accessible for switch recombination,
and the CD40 signal induces expression of the
AID enzyme, which is responsible for initiating the
DNA breaks that are required for switch recombina-
tion. Heavy-chain isotype switching is important
because it allows the antibody response to be special-
ized to particular locations and type of microbes. For
example, IgE is important for eradicating worm in-
fections; IgA secreted into the gut is important to
combat intestinal pathogens; and IgG is transported
through the placenta and is important for protecting
newborns from infections. Switching to some sub-
types of IgG also enhances complement- and
phagocyte-mediated
defense
against
microbes
because these subtypes bind most avidly to phago-
cyte Fc receptors or to complement proteins.
5. Afﬁnity maturation is the increase in the average af-
ﬁnity of antibodies for a protein antigen that occurs
as an immune response develops over time. The
process occurs in the germinal center and requires
signals from Th cells, which induces expression of
the AID enzyme in the B cells, which causes DNA
breaks
and
error-prone
repair.
Thus,
rapidly
dividing B cells undergo point mutations in the
variable-region genes of the heavy-chain and light-
chain loci. B cells in which these mutations result
in increased afﬁnity of the antibodies they produce
have a selective advantage for binding to the antigen
displayed by follicular dendritic cells and for pre-
senting the antigen to Tfh cells. These B cells receive
signals that prevent apoptotic death, and thus the
highest-afﬁnity B cells are selected to survive and
develop into antibody-secreting plasma cells.
6. Antibodies produced in response to T-independent
polysaccharide and lipid antigens are predominantly
IgM antibodies of relatively low afﬁnity. These anti-
gens are inefﬁcient at generating long-lived plasma
cells and memory B cells because of the absence of
Th cell signals, so the IgM response to TI antigens
wanes relatively quickly.
CHAPTER 8
1. The N-terminal variable regions of antibodies are
involved in antigen binding and neutralization of
microbes and toxins. The Fc portion of the heavy-
chain constant region is involved in binding and
activating complement and binding to Fc receptors
in various cells, which is important for phagocytosis,
antibody-mediated cellular cytotoxicity by NK cells,
transport across mucosal epithelia and placenta, and
maintenance of prolonged half-life in the blood.
2. Class
switching
allows
antibodies
to
perform
different effector functions that are particularly
suited to certain infections, and it allows delivery
of the antibody to certain sites of infection. For
example, some IgG subclasses bind well to Fc recep-
tors on phagocytes, permitting internalization and
killing of extracellular microbes. IgG antibodies are
also transported through the placenta into the fetus,
and protect the newborn from infections. IgA anti-
bodies are secreted into the lumen of the gut, where
they can bind to pathogenic microbes and prevent
them from invading through the intestinal epithelial
barrier. Afﬁnity maturation improves the ability of
antibodies to bind tightly to pathogens and therefore
more effectively neutralize the microbes and target
them for destruction by complement or phagocytes.
3. Neutralization prevents microbes located in mucosal
secretions, blood, or extracellular tissue ﬂuid from
binding to cellular receptors, which is a ﬁrst step
in infecting cells. For example, entry of viruses
into cells requires binding to speciﬁc cell surface re-
ceptors. Antibody binding to viral envelope antigens
blocks the virus from binding to their receptors.
Neutralization also inhibits the spread of microbes
from an infected cell to another cell.
4. The variable domains of IgG antibodies speciﬁcally
bind to antigens on microbial surfaces, a process
called opsonization, and then constant domains in
the Fc region of the IgG antibodies bind to Fc recep-
tors on macrophages or neutrophils. Binding of the
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
327
 
antibody to the Fc receptor stimulates internaliza-
tion of the microbe by phagocytosis and activates
the phagocyte, and the microbe is killed by various
mechanisms inside the cell.
5. The classical pathway of complement is activated
when the complement protein C1 binds to the Fc re-
gions of IgG or IgM molecules in antibody-antigen
complexes. In the alternative pathway, the comple-
ment protein C3 is spontaneously hydrolyzed to
form C3b, which then binds covalently to microbial
cell surfaces. In the lectin pathway, the ﬁrst step is
binding of the protein mannose-binding lectin
(MBL) to mannose residues on microbial surfaces.
In all three pathways, the ﬁrst step is followed by
activation of a cascade of proteases, generating an
enzymatic complex called C3 convertase, which is
covalently attached to the microbial surface. This
enzyme cleaves C3 to produce a number of active
proteins and initiate the late steps of complement
activation.
6. Host cells have regulatory proteins on their cell sur-
faces, including decay-accelerating factor (DAF),
complement receptor 1 (CR1), and C4-binding pro-
tein (C4bp) that prevent the formation of the C3
convertase on healthy host cells. These regulatory
proteins are not expressed by microbes. Alternative
pathway complement proteins also tend to not bind
to normal host cells. The regulatory proteins may be
overwhelmed if large amounts of antibodies attach
to host cells, leading to complement activation on
these cells, as occurs in some autoimmune diseases.
7. The main functions of the complement system are
to promote inﬂammation, opsonize microbes for
phagocyte clearance, and directly lyse microbes.
Inﬂammation is promoted by the complement pro-
tein fragments C5a and C3a. Opsonization is medi-
ated mainly by C3b. Lysis is mediated by the
membrane attack complex, which is composed of
C5b, C6, C7, C8, and polymerized C9.
8. IgA and some IgM antibodies are transported by the
poly-Ig receptor from the lamina propria (where
they are produced), through mucosal epithelial cells,
into the lumen of the gut or the airways, where they
neutralize pathogens.
9. Maternal IgG is transported by the neonatal Fc re-
ceptor
into
the
fetal
circulation
through
the
placenta, so the baby is born with a full range of an-
tibodies against microbes that the mother has been
exposed to in the past. Maternal IgA and IgG in
breast milk are ingested by the nursing baby and
protect against intestinal pathogens.
CHAPTER 9
1. The adaptive immune system does not normally
mount effective immune responses to self molecules.
This state of immune unresponsiveness is called
tolerance and is important because T and B cells
expressing antigen receptors that may recognize
self-antigens arise during lymphocyte development,
and these lymphocytes must be controlled or elimi-
nated to prevent autoimmune disease. In addition,
the immune system has to be tolerant of foreign
(paternal) antigens in the fetus and commensal mi-
crobes. The mechanisms of tolerance induction may
be therapeutically exploited to inhibit harmful im-
mune responses to allergens, self antigens, and
transplants.
2. Central tolerance is the elimination or inactivation
of self-reactive T and B cells during their develop-
ment in the thymus or bone marrow, respectively.
Central tolerance is induced in immature T cells
in the thymus after they express TCRs. If a devel-
oping T cell recognizes, with high avidity, peptides
derived from self proteins bound to self MHC pre-
sented by thymic antigen-presenting cells (APCs),
signals will be generated that lead to apoptosis of
the T cell (called clonal deletion or negative selec-
tion). Surviving CD4þ T cells may develop into pro-
tective Tregs. Furthermore, some proteins mainly
expressed by cells in a particular peripheral tissue
type or organ may be also expressed by medullary
thymic epithelial cells (MTECs) under the control
of the AIRE protein. The developing T cells that
recognize peptides from these self proteins in com-
plex with self MHC are deleted. Central tolerance
develops in immature B cells after they express a
functional membrane B cell receptor complex.
Recognition of self antigens by immature B cells
leads to apoptosis or to receptor editing, whereby
a new round of V-J recombination in the light-
chain genes generates new speciﬁcities that are not
self-reactive.
3. Most Tregs are CD4þ T cells that express the IL-2
receptor a chain CD25 and the transcription factor
FOXP3.
Tregs
develop
in
the
thymus
from
328
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
immature thymocytes as a consequence of self anti-
gen recognition. Tregs can also differentiate from
mature naive T cells in peripheral lymphoid tissues
as a result of antigen recognition together with sig-
nals from cytokines such as transforming growth
factor b (TGF-b). Tregs protect against autoimmu-
nity
by
suppressing
activation
of
self-reactive
T cells by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) or by
directly inhibiting the T cells. The principal mecha-
nisms by which Tregs suppress immune responses
include blocking and removal of B7 costimulators
on APCs by CTLA-4 (which is expressed constitu-
tively on Tregs), secretion of immunosuppressive
cytokines (e.g., TGF-b, IL-10), and consumption of
the growth factor IL-2.
4. Peripheral tolerance may be induced by several
mechanisms that lead to dysfunctional states of
self-reactive T cells. Anergy is a long-lasting condi-
tion in which a T cell will not respond to antigen
stimulation. Anergy is induced in naive T cells
when they recognize peptideeMHC antigen without
costimulation. This may also occur when “imma-
ture” dendritic cells, which have not been exposed
to microbial stimuli, process and present self
peptideeMHC to T cells. Such DCs will not express
sufﬁcient levels of B7-1, B7-2, or other molecules to
provide costimulation, and therefore the self-reactive
T cell will become anergic. Alternatively, anergy may
be induced when Tregs block costimulation via
CTLA-4. Anergy may fail as a peripheral tolerance
mechanism during an infection when a T cell recog-
nizes self peptideeMHC on a DC that has been acti-
vated by innate responses to the microbe. A related
phenomenon, called “exhaustion,” occurs when
T cells are repeatedly stimulated (e.g., by tumors
and chronic infections). These T cells respond
initially but begin to express inhibitory receptors
such as PD-1 and can no longer effectively respond
to antigen. Exhaustion may protect against self tissue
damage by cross-reactive T cells during exuberant or
prolonged responses to infection.
5. The mechanisms that prevent immune responses to
commensal organisms include abundant IL-10e
producing Tregs, inhibitory signaling of Toll-like re-
ceptors in gut dendritic cells, and mucus and epithe-
lial barriers keeping microbes away from the
intestinal immune system. Tolerance to the alloge-
neic fetus is maintained by Tregs, exclusion of
inﬂammatory
cells
from
the
pregnant
uterus,
impaired antigen presentation, and inhibition of
Th1 responses in the placenta.
6. Multiple genes likely contribute to the development
of common autoimmune diseases. Particular MHC
alleles are frequently associated with autoimmunity.
MHC genes may be important in the development
of autoimmunity because they present native or
chemically modiﬁed self peptides to T cells. Many
non-MHC genes have been implicated in various
autoimmune diseases, but their roles are largely un-
deﬁned. Several rare autoimmune diseases are
caused by single-gene mutations that interfere with
mechanisms of tolerance. These include mutations
in the genes encoding AIRE, CTLA-4, FOXP3,
FAS, and complement C2.
7. Infections may promote the development of autoim-
munity by (a) inducing costimulatory molecule
expression by APCs that present self antigens to
lymphocytes; (b) causing inﬂammation and tissue
damage, which exposes normally sequestered self
antigens to the immune system; and (c) molecular
mimicry, if the microbe expresses an antigen molec-
ularly similar to a self antigen and thereby simulates
an immune response (antibodies or T cells) that
cross-reacts with self antigens.
CHAPTER 10
1. Because genomic instability is a hallmark of cancer
cells, tumors often contain many mutated genes
that produce proteins (neoantigens) that are not
normally present and thus may appear foreign to
the immune system and induce immune responses.
Tumors may overexpress or inappropriately express
antigens that are normally expressed only at low
levels in normal tissues or only during development
and therefore do not induce tolerance. Some tumors
caused by oncogenic viruses may express viral anti-
gens that induce immune responses.
2. Some tumors occur more frequently in immuno-
compromised hosts than in people with normal im-
mune systems. The presence of abundant CD8þ,
effector Th1, and memory T cells in or around
some tumors is predictive of a better prognosis. In
experimental animals, immunologic rejection of tu-
mors can be demonstrated by transplanting tumor
cells
in
animals
that
have
been
previously
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
329
 
immunized with the tumor cells or by transfer of
T cells from tumor-bearing animals. Drugs that
block T cell inhibitory molecules enhance patients’
T cell responses to their tumors and prevent pro-
gression of tumor growth.
3. Naive CD8þ T cells recognize tumor antigens in the
same way they recognize microbial antigens: by
TCR binding to tumor-derived peptides displayed
on class I MHC molecules on dendritic cells. This
means the DC must internalize tumor cells (or their
products) and process the internalized tumor pro-
teins by the class I MHC pathway, which involves
proteasomal degradation of the proteins into pep-
tides. The presentation of peptides derived from
internalized proteins on class I MHC molecules is
called cross-presentation. The DC displays not
only
tumor-derived
peptide
antigens
to
naive
CD8þ T cells but also costimulators. The combina-
tion of antigen and costimulators activates clonal
expansion and differentiation of the naive CD8þ
T cells into effector cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
4. Tumor immune evasion mechanisms include down-
regulation of MHC molecules to avoid T cell recog-
nition of tumor antigens; loss of expression of tumor
antigens; secretion of immunosuppressive cytokines
(e.g., TGF-b); engagement of inhibitory receptors on
T cells (e.g., CTLA-4, PD-1). Tumors may also pro-
mote other cellular suppressors of immune re-
sponses, including regulatory T cells (Tregs) and
myeloid-derived suppressor cells.
5. Host immune responses to tumor antigens can be
enhanced by treating the tumor-bearing patient
with antibodies such as antieCTLA-4 or antie
PD-1 that block T cell inhibitory receptors, so called
“immune checkpoint blockade.” These therapies are
often complicated by autoimmune reactions against
various tissues. Some tumors are treated by adoptive
transfer of a patient’s T cells that have been geneti-
cally engineered ex vivo to express chimeric antigen
receptors (CARs) speciﬁc for a tumor antigen. CARs
use an antibody-like domain to bind the tumor an-
tigens linked to signaling domains that are active in
T cells (signaling domains from the TCR complex
and costimulatory receptors). CAReT cell therapy
is often complicated by severe systemic inﬂamma-
tion caused by release of cytokines from the acti-
vated
T
cells,
as
well
as
poorly
explained
neurotoxicity. Passive immunity to tumors can be
induced by administering antitumor antibodies or
T cells expressing tumor-speciﬁc antigen receptors.
6. Allogeneic MHC molecules with any bound peptide
are likely to resemble self MHC plus a foreign pep-
tide, and therefore normal T cells may cross-react
with the allogeneic molecules. There are many thou-
sands of allogeneic MHC molecules on every graft
cell displaying many different donor peptides.
Many of these peptide-MHC complexes may be
recognized by a graft recipient’s T cells. Individuals
develop tolerance to self antigens (self peptideeself
MHC complexes) but are not tolerant to the foreign
antigens of a graft (foreign MHC with self or foreign
peptides).
7. Allografts may be attacked by alloreactive T cells that
are activated after transplantation. CD8þ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes recognize allogeneic class I MHC mole-
cules on graft cells and directly kill those cells. CD4þ
T cells recognize allogeneic class II MHC molecules
and initiate inﬂammatory responses that damage
the graft cells. These T cell responses contribute to
acute cellular rejection. In chronic rejection, alloreac-
tive T cells may induce inﬂammation that promotes
graft vascular disease, ultimately leading to graft fail-
ure from inadequate blood supply. Allografts may be
rejected by antibodies against allogeneic MHC or
other minor histocompatibility antigens. If the anti-
bodies are preformed in the recipient as a result of
prior pregnancy, transfusions, or transplantation,
they may bind to graft endothelial cells and cause hy-
peracute rejection. If the antibodies form as a result
of exposure to the allograft after transplantation,
they may cause acute humoral rejection.
8. Patients in need of a transplant may be screened to
test for the presence of serum antibodies that react
with different MHC molecules. Donors whose
MHC molecules are recognized by the patients’ an-
tibodies will not be used. Recipients may be typed
for the HLA alleles they have, and organs can be
chosen with the best-matched alleles. HLA matching
is essential for hematopoietic stem cell transplanta-
tion but is not as important for solid organ trans-
plants. Rejection of solid organ grafts is prevented
mainly by treating the recipient with immunosup-
pressive
drugs,
such
as
calcineurin
inhibitors
(e.g., cyclosporine, tacrolimus), mTOR inhibitors
(e.g., rapamycin), antieT cell antibodies, corticoste-
roids, and antimetabolites (mycophenolate mofetil).
330
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
9. T cells transplanted with the hematopoietic stem
cells can respond to minor histocompatibility mole-
cules in the recipient, causing graft-versus-host dis-
ease. Recipients are also often immunodeﬁcient as
their immune systems are reconstituted.
CHAPTER 11
1. Hypersensitivity refers to tissue injury and disease
caused by immune responses. Immediate hypersen-
sitivity (type I hypersensitivity) is caused by the
release of mediators from mast cells triggered by an-
tigen cross-linking of immunoglobulin E (IgE)
bound to IgE-speciﬁc Fc receptors. Antibodies spe-
ciﬁc for cell or tissue antigens can cause damage
by activating complement and engaging phagocytes
(type
II
hypersensitivity);
antibodies
can
also
destroy circulating cells and block essential mole-
cules or their receptors. Antigen-antibody com-
plexes
(immune
complexes)
deposit
in
blood
vessels, causing inﬂammation and thrombosis, lead-
ing to tissue injury (type III hypersensitivity). Reac-
tions of T lymphocytes, often against self antigens in
tissues, can cause inﬂammation and tissue damage
(type IV hypersensitivity).
2. Damaging immune responses may be elicited by self
antigens (autoimmunity), environmental antigens
and chemicals (allergies and other types of hyper-
sensitivity), and microbial infections.
3. Exposure to an environmental antigen induces dif-
ferentiation of IL-4eproducing T follicular helper
T cells, which in turn induce IgE antibody responses
to the antigen. The IgE binds to high-afﬁnity IgE-
speciﬁc Fcε receptors on mast cells in tissues
throughout the body. On subsequent exposure to
the same antigen, the mast cellebound IgE mole-
cules bind the antigen and become cross-linked,
generating signals from the associated Fcε receptors
that lead to mast cell granule release, production of
leukotrienes and prostaglandins, and synthesis and
secretion of cytokines. Vasoactive amines such as
histamine, released from the granules, and prosta-
glandins cause acute vascular changes leading to
increased blood vessel permeability and edema, usu-
ally within minutes of exposure to the antigen. The
late-phase reaction is an inﬂammatory response that
develops over hours in which blood leukocytes are
recruited to the site of mast cell degranulation,
caused by TNF and other cytokines secreted by
the mast cells.
4. Allergic rhinitis and sinusitis are immediate hyper-
sensitivity reactions to inhaled allergens, such as
pollen proteins, leading to upper airway mucosal
mast cell secretion of histamine, IL-13 production
by Th2 cells, and long-lasting inﬂammation due to
various cytokines. Food allergies are caused by
ingested allergens leading to intestinal mucosal
mast cell histamine release, causing increased peri-
stalsis. Allergic bronchial asthma is caused by
inhaled allergens inducing bronchial mast cell
release of mediators, including leukotrienes, which
cause bronchial constriction and airway obstruction,
excessive secretion of mucus in the airways, and
bronchial
smooth
muscle
hypertrophy.
Atopic
dermatitis (eczema) develops in the setting of defec-
tive skin barrier function leading to local bacterial
infections and the activation of keratinocytes to
secrete cytokines that promote type 2 immune re-
sponses. Patients with eczema may develop chronic
late-phase reactions in the skin, and children with
eczema are at increased risk of developing food al-
lergies and asthma. Anaphylaxis is a severe systemic
immediate hypersensitivity reaction characterized
by shock and airway obstruction resulting from
mast cell degranulation in many tissue sites, usually
after exposure to an antigen that is injected or
ingested. Immediate hypersensitivity diseases are
treated by inhibiting mast cell degranulation, antag-
onizing the effects of mast cell mediators, and
reducing inﬂammation. Drugs include antihista-
mines for hay fever, inhaled b-adrenergic agonists
and corticosteroids for asthma, and epinephrine in
anaphylaxis. Some patients beneﬁt from repeated
administration of small doses of allergens, called
desensitization. Antibodies that block IgE binding
to their receptors on mast cells or block various cy-
tokines or their receptors, including IL-4, IL-5, IL-
33, and thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), are
now approved for the treatment of some forms of
asthma and atopic dermatitis.
5. Antibodies cause tissue injury and disease by acti-
vating cytotoxic and inﬂammatory effector functions,
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
331
 
mainly complement activation and opsonization and
phagocytosis via Fc receptors. Some antibodies may
cause disease by binding to and interfering with the
normal function of a particular protein.
6. Examples of diseases caused by antibodies speciﬁc
for cell surface or tissue antigens include autoim-
mune thrombocytopenia or anemia caused by anti-
bodies speciﬁc for platelet or red cell membrane
proteins and blistering diseases such as pemphigus
vulgaris, caused by antibodies against cell adhesion
proteins on skin keratinocytes. In pernicious ane-
mia, autoantibodies speciﬁc for intrinsic factor, a
protein required for absorption of vitamin B12,
decrease the intestinal uptake of this vitamin, lead-
ing to anemia and neurologic problems. In some
forms of glomerulonephritis, antibodies bind to ma-
trix proteins in the glomerular basement membrane
and induce inﬂammatory damage. In rheumatic fe-
ver, cardiac inﬂammation is caused by an antibody
speciﬁc for a streptococcal bacterial antigen that
cross-reacts with a myocardial antigen.
7. Immune complexes deposit in the walls of blood
vessels and cause inﬂammation of the vessel
(vasculitis), which leads to blood clotting in the
vessel lumen (thrombosis) and loss of blood supply
to tissues supplied by the vessels. The site of im-
mune complex deposition is not related to the spec-
iﬁcity
of
the
antibodies.
Therefore,
immune
complex disease may simultaneously affect many
different tissue sites, as occurs in systemic lupus er-
ythematosus, arteritis syndromes associated with
chronic infections, and serum sickness after thera-
peutic injection of antibodies from another species.
Diseases caused by antibodies against cell surface
or extracellular matrix proteins are usually charac-
terized by injury and loss of function restricted to
the particular organ or tissue that expresses the
protein.
8. Type 1 diabetes is caused by CD4þ and CD8þ
T cells that are speciﬁc for pancreatic islet cell pro-
teins and that destroy insulin-producing cells, lead-
ing
to
impaired
glucose
metabolism
and
cardiovascular disease. Multiple sclerosis is caused
by CD4þ T cells speciﬁc for central nervous system
(CNS) myelin sheath proteins that cause inﬂamma-
tion, demyelination, and CNS motor and sensory
symptoms. Contact hypersensitivity (e.g., poison
ivy, nickel hypersensitivity) is caused by T cells
speciﬁc for skin proteins that are modiﬁed by plant
toxins, metals, and other chemicals, leading to
inﬂammation and blistering.
CHAPTER 12
1. Infections are the most common manifestation of im-
munodeﬁciency diseases. The type of infection may
vary with the type of deﬁciency. B cell/antibody deﬁ-
ciencies result in increased infections with bacteria
and fungi that live and replicate outside cells, as well
as viral infections, such as respiratory and gastrointes-
tinal viruses, that are normally combatted by neutral-
izing antibodies. In contrast, T cell deﬁciencies result
in increased infections by microbes that live and
reproduce inside cells, such as mycobacteria and
certain fungi and viruses. Malignant tumors are also
increased in patients with immunodeﬁciency disease.
2. Mutations of the common g chain (gc) of cytokine
receptors, adenosine deaminase, RAG1, and RAG2
all block both T cell and B cell maturation, leading
to
severe
combined
immunodeﬁciency
disease
(SCID). Mutations in Bruton tyrosine kinase block
B cell maturation, causing X-linked agammaglobu-
linemia. Mutations in transcription factors needed
to induce class II MHC expression cause the bare
lymphocyte syndrome, leading to impaired CD4þ
T cell development and failure to activate the few
CD4þ T cells that do mature. In DiGeorge syn-
drome, a deletion of a part of chromosome 22 causes
a defect in thymic development, leading to a failure
of T cell maturation.
3. Class II MHC deﬁciency (see Question 2) results in
poor cell-mediated immunity and poor T dependent
B cell responses, leading to susceptibility to a variety
of infections. Mutations in CD40 ligand (CD40L)
result in X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome, character-
ized by an inability of helper T cells to activate
both B cells and macrophages, resulting in defective
T cell dependent B cell responses and defective acti-
vation of macrophages. Affected boys have low IgG
and defective cell-mediated immunity and are sus-
ceptible to infections with extracellular bacterial the
intracellular fungus Pneumocystis jiroveci. Many
other mutations affecting various T and B cell
signaling
pathways
and
receptors
have
been
described. Examples include mendelian susceptibility
332
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
 
to mycobacterial disease, which is characterized by
impaired Th1-mediated immunity against intracel-
lular infections as a result of mutations of genes
required for IFN-geproducing T cells or IFN-g re-
ceptor signaling, and common variable immunodeﬁ-
ciency, which is due to mutations in genes involved
in B cell maturation and activation, leading to poor
antibody responses.
4. HIV enters T cells by binding to CD4 and the che-
mokine receptor CXCR4 or CCR5, leading to fusion
of the virus with the host cell membrane. Once inside
the cell, the virus is uncoated by viral protease, its
RNA genome is copied into DNA by viral reverse
transcriptase, and the DNA integrates into the host
cell’s DNA by the action of viral integrase. The inte-
grated viral DNA is transcribed into viral mRNA by
host enzymes, viral proteins are translated (also by
host cell enzymes), and new viral particles are formed
and released by cell surface budding.
5. The major clinical problems caused by HIV infec-
tions are opportunistic infections, certain tumors
caused by oncogenic viruses (EBV, Kaposi sarcoma
herpesvirus), neurocognitive defects, and wasting.
The infections are caused by a profound loss of
T
cellemediated
and
T-dependent
antibody-
mediated immunity, mainly due to the death of
infected CD4þ T cells. The increase in tumors re-
ﬂects reduced T cellemediated immune surveil-
lance against oncogenic viruses and transformed
cells. The neurocognitive abnormality reﬂects loss
of microglial and perhaps neuronal function of un-
clear pathogenesis. The wasting syndrome is caused
by altered metabolism and reduced caloric intake,
possibly a result of cytokines produced during
repeated and chronic infections. Many of these
clinical manifestations have been greatly reduced
by treatment with combinations of antiretroviral
drugs.
ANSWERS TO REVIEW QUESTIONS
333
 
