S C H E D U L E  O F  C O N T R O L L E D  D R U G S1
SCHEDULE I
(All nonresearch use illegal under federal law.)
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol)
Narcotics:
Heroin and many nonmarketed synthetic narcotics
Hallucinogens:
LSD
MDA, STP, DMT, DET, mescaline, peyote, bufotenine, ibogaine, 
psilocybin, phencyclidine (PCP; veterinary drug only)
Marijuana
Methaqualone
SCHEDULE II
(No telephone prescriptions, no refills.)2
Opioids:
Opium
Opium alkaloids and derived phenanthrene alkaloids: codeine, 
morphine, (Avinza, Kadian, MSContin, Roxanol), hydromorphone 
(Dilaudid ), oxymorphone (, Exalgo), oxycodone (dihydroxycodei-
none, a component of Oxycontin, Percodan, Percocet, Roxicodone, 
Tylox)
Designated synthetic drugs: meperidine (Demerol), methadone, 
levorphanol (Levo-Dromoran), fentanyl (Duragesic, Actiq, 
Fentora), alfentanil (Alfenta), sufentanil (Sufenta), remifentanil 
(Ultiva), tapentadol (Nycynta)
Stimulants:
Coca leaves and cocaine
Amphetamine
Amphetamine complex (Biphetamine)
Amphetamine salts (Adderall)
Dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine, Procentra)
Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse)
Methamphetamine (Desoxyn)
Methylphenidate (Ritalin, Concerta, Methylin, Daytrana, Medadate)
Above in mixtures with other controlled or uncontrolled drugs
Cannabinoids:
Nabilone (Cesamet)
Depressants:
Amobarbital (Amytal)
Pentobarbital (Nembutal)
Secobarbital (Seconal)
SCHEDULE III
(Prescription must be rewritten after 6 months or five refills.)
Opioids:
Buprenorphine (Buprenex, Subutex )
Mixture of above Buprenorphine and Naloxone (Suboxone)
The following opioids in combination with one or more active non-
opioid ingredients, provided the amount does not exceed that shown:
Codeine and dihydrocodeine: not to exceed 1800 mg/dL or 90 mg/
tablet or other dosage unit
Dihydrocodeinone (hydrocodone in Hycodan, Vicodin, and 
Lortab): not to exceed 300 mg/dL or 15 mg/tablet
Opium: 500 mg/dL or 25 mg/5 mL or other dosage unit (paregoric)
Stimulants:
Benzphetamine (Didrex)
Phendimetrazine (Bontril)
Depressants:
Schedule II barbiturates in mixtures with noncontrolled drugs or in 
suppository dosage form
Butabarbital (Butisol)
Ketamine (Ketalar)
Cannabinoids:
Dronabinol (Marinol)
SCHEDULE I
(All nonresearch use illegal under federal law.)
Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol)
Narcotics:
Heroin and many nonmarketed synthetic narcotics
Hallucinogens:
LSD
MDA, STP, DMT, DET, mescaline, peyote, bufotenine, ibogaine, 
psilocybin, phencyclidine (PCP; veterinary drug only)
Marijuana
Methaqualone
SCHEDULE II
(No telephone prescriptions, no refills.)2
Opioids:
Opium
Opium alkaloids and derived phenanthrene alkaloids: codeine, 
morphine, (Avinza, Kadian, MSContin, Roxanol), hydromorphone
(Dilaudid ), oxymorphone (, Exalgo), oxycodone (dihydroxycodei-
none, a component of Oxycontin, Percodan, Percocet, Roxicodone,
Tylox)
Designated synthetic drugs: meperidine (Demerol), methadone, 
levorphanol (Levo-Dromoran), fentanyl (Duragesic, Actiq,
Fentora), alfentanil (Alfenta), sufentanil (Sufenta), remifentanil 
(Ultiva), tapentadol (Nycynta)
Stimulants:
Coca leaves and cocaine
Amphetamine
Amphetamine complex (Biphetamine)
Amphetamine salts (Adderall)
Dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine, Procentra)
Lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse)
Methamphetamine (Desoxyn)
Methylphenidate (Ritalin, Concerta, Methylin, Daytrana, Medadate)
Above in mixtures with other controlled or uncontrolled drugs
Cannabinoids:
Nabilone (Cesamet)
Depressants:
Amobarbital (Amytal)
Pentobarbital (Nembutal)
Secobarbital (Seconal)
SCHEDULE III
(Prescription must be rewritten after 6 months or five refills.)
Opioids:
Buprenorphine (Buprenex, Subutex )
Mixture of above Buprenorphine and Naloxone (Suboxone)
The following opioids in combination with one or more active non-
opioid ingredients, provided the amount does not exceed that shown:
Codeine and dihydrocodeine: not to exceed 1800 mg/dL or 90 mg/
tablet or other dosage unit
Dihydrocodeinone (hydrocodone in Hycodan, Vicodin, and 
Lortab): not to exceed 300 mg/dL or 15 mg/tablet
Opium: 500 mg/dL or 25 mg/5 mL or other dosage unit (paregoric)
Stimulants:
Benzphetamine (Didrex)
Phendimetrazine (Bontril)
Depressants:
Schedule II barbiturates in mixtures with noncontrolled drugs or in
suppository dosage form
Butabarbital (Butisol)
Ketamine (Ketalar)
Cannabinoids:
Dronabinol (Marinol)
Anabolic Steroids:
Fluoxymesterone (Androxy)
Methyltestosterone (Android, Testred, Methitest)
Nandrolone decanoate (Deca-Durabolin) Non US
Nandrolone phenpropionate (Durabolin) Non US
Oxandrolone (Oxandrin), Oxymetholone (Androl-50)
Stanozolol (Winstrol),
Testolactone (Teslac), 
Testosterone and its esters
SCHEDULE IV
(Prescription must be rewritten after 6 months or five refills; differs from 
Schedule III in penalties for illegal possession.)
Opioids:
Butorphanol (Stadol) 
Difenoxin 1 mg + atropine 25 mcg (Motofen)
Pentazocine (Talwin)
Stimulants:
Armodafinil (Nuvigil)
Diethylpropion (Tenuate)  not in US
Modafinil (Provigil)
Phentermine (Ionamin, Adipex-P)
Depressants:
Benzodiazepines
Alprazolam (Xanax)
Chlordiazepoxide (Librium)
Clonazepam (Klonopin)
Clorazepate (Tranxene)
Diazepam (Valium)
Estazolam (ProSom)
Flurazepam (Dalmane)
Halazepam (Paxipam)
Lorazepam (Ativan)
Midazolam (Versed)
Oxazepam (Serax)
Prazepam (Centrax)
Quazepam (Doral)
Temazepam (Restoril)
Triazolam (Halcion)
Chloral hydrate (Somnote)
Eszopiclone (Lunesta)
Meprobamate (Equanil, Miltown, etc)
Methobarbital (Mebaral)
Methohexital (Brevital)
Paraldehyde
Phenobarbital
Zaleplon (Sonata)
Zolpidem (Ambien)
SCHEDULE V
(As any other nonopioid prescription drug)
Codeine: 200 mg/100 mL 
Difenoxin preparations: 0.5 mg + 25 mcg atropine
Dihydrocodeine preparations: 10 mg/100 mL 
Diphenoxylate (not more than 2.5 mg and not less than 0.025 mg of 
atropine per dosage unit, as in Lomotil)
Ethylmorphine preparations: 100 mg/100 mL
Opium preparations: 100 mg/100 mL 
Pregabalin (Lyrica)
Pyrovalerone (Centroton, Thymergix)
1See http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/pubs/scheduling.html for additional details.
2Emergency prescriptions may be telephoned if followed within 7 days by a valid written prescription annotated to indicate that it was previously placed by 
telephone.
 Basic & Clinical
Pharmacology
Edited by
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD
Professor Emeritus
Department of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology
University of California, San Francisco
Associate Editors
Susan B. Masters, PhD
Professor of Pharmacology & Academy Chair of Pharmacology Education
Department of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology
University of California, San Francisco
Anthony J. Trevor, PhD
Professor Emeritus
Department of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology
University of California, San Francisco
Twelfth Edition
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Milan New Delhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Toronto
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Mi
Milan New Delhlhi San Ju n
an
S
 Seo lul
S
 Sin
ingapore
S
 S d
ydney Toront
nto
a LANGE medical book
Copyright © 2012 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this 
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the 
publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-176402-5
MHID: 0-07-176402-X
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-176401-8,    
MHID: 0-07-176401-1.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in 
an editorial fashion only, and to the beneﬁ t of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this 
book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a 
representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
Previous editions copyright © 2010, 2009, 2007, 2004, 2001 by McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.; copyright © 1998, 1995, 1992, 1989, 1987 by Appleton & Lange; 
copyright © 1984, 1982 by Lange Medical Publications
Notice
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are required. The 
authors and the publisher of this work have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is complete and generally 
in accord with the standards accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes in medical sciences, neither the 
authors nor the publisher nor any other party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants that the information contained herein 
is in every respect accurate or complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions or for the results obtained from use of the information 
contained in this work. Readers are encouraged to conﬁ rm the information contained herein with other sources. For example and in particular, readers are advised 
to check the product information sheet included in the package of each drug they plan to administer to be certain that the information contained in this work is 
accurate and that changes have not been made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications for administration. This recommendation
is of particular importance in connection with new or infrequently used drugs.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGrawHill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is 
subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, 
disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or 
any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly 
prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, 
ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE 
ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill 
and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or 
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for 
any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall 
McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability 
to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever 
whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
S E C T I O N  I
BASIC PRINCIPLES  1
1. Introduction
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 1
2. Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics
Mark von Zastrow, MD, PhD 15
3.  Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: 
Rational Dosing & the Time Course 
of Drug Action
Nicholas H. G. Holford, MB, ChB, FRACP 37
4.  Drug Biotransformation
Maria Almira Correia, PhD 53
5.  Development & Regulation of Drugs
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 69
S E C T I O N  II
AUTONOMIC DRUGS  79
6.  Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 79
7.  Cholinoceptor-Activating & 
Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs
Achilles J. Pappano, PhD 97
8. Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs
Achilles J. Pappano, PhD 115
9.  Adrenoceptor Agonists & 
Sympathomimetic Drugs
Italo Biaggioni, MD, & David Robertson, MD 129
10.  Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs
David Robertson, MD, & Italo Biaggioni, MD 151
S E C T I O N  III
CARDIOVASCULAR-RENAL 
DRUGS 169
11.  Antihypertensive Agents
Neal L. Benowitz, MD 169
12.  Vasodilators & the Treatment 
of Angina Pectoris
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 193
13.  Drugs Used in Heart Failure
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 211
14.  Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias
Joseph R. Hume, PhD, & Augustus O. Grant, MD, 
PhD 227
15.  Diuretic Agents 
Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD 251
S E C T I O N  IV
DRUGS WITH IMPORTANT ACTIONS 
ON SMOOTH MUSCLE 273
16.  Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 273
17. Vasoactive Peptides
Ian A. Reid, PhD 295
18.  The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, 
Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & 
Related Compounds
Emer M. Smyth, PhD, & Garret A. 
FitzGerald, MD 313
19. Nitric Oxide
Samie R. Jaffrey, MD, PhD 331
Contents
Schedule of Controlled Drugs Inside Front Cover
Preface vii
Authors ix
Key Features xii
iii
iv    CONTENTS
20. Drugs Used in Asthma
Homer A. Boushey, MD 
339
S E C T I O N  V
DRUGS THAT ACT IN THE
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 359
21.  Introduction to the Pharmacology 
of CNS Drugs
Roger A. Nicoll, MD 359
22. Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs
Anthony J. Trevor, PhD, & 
Walter L. Way, MD 373
23. The Alcohols
Susan B. Masters, PhD 389
24. Antiseizure Drugs
Roger J. Porter, MD, &
Brian S. Meldrum, MB, PhD 403
25. General Anesthetics
Helge Eilers, MD, & Spencer Yost, MD 429
26. Local Anesthetics
Kenneth Drasner, MD 449
27. Skeletal Muscle Relaxants
Marieke Kruidering-Hall, PhD, & 
Lundy Campbell, MD 465
28.  Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism 
& Other Movement Disorders
Michael J. Aminoff, MD, DSc, FRCP 483
29.  Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium
Herbert Meltzer, MD, PhD 501
30.  Antidepressant Agents
Charles DeBattista, MD 521
31.  Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists
Mark A. Schumacher, PhD, MD, Allan I. 
Basbaum, PhD, & Walter L. Way, MD 543
32.  Drugs of Abuse
Christian Lüscher, MD 565
iv    CONTENTS
S E C T I O N  VI
DRUGS USED TO TREAT DISEASES OF 
THE BLOOD, INFLAMMATION, 
& GOUT 581
33.  Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic 
Growth Factors
Susan B. Masters, PhD 581
34.  Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation
James L. Zehnder, MD 601
35.  Agents Used in Dyslipidemia
Mary J. Malloy, MD, & John P. Kane, MD, PhD 619
36.  Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs, 
Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs, 
Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used 
in Gout
Daniel E. Furst, MD, Robert W. Ulrich, PharmD, & 
Shraddha Prakash, MD 635
S E C T I O N  VII
ENDOCRINE DRUGS 659
37.  Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones
Susan B. Masters, PhD, & Stephen M. 
Rosenthal, MD 659
38. Thyroid & Antithyroid Drugs
Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, & Francis S. 
Greenspan, MD, FACP 681
39.  Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical 
Antagonists
George P. Chrousos, MD 697
40.  The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors
George P. Chrousos, MD 715
41. Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs
Martha S. Nolte Kennedy, MD 743
42.  Agents That Affect Bone Mineral 
Homeostasis
Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD 769
CONTENTS    v
S E C T I O N  VIII
CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC DRUGS 789
43.  Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & 
Membrane-Active Antibiotics
Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, & 
Lisa G. Winston, MD 790
44.  Tetracyclines, Macrolides, Clindamycin, 
Chloramphenicol, Streptogramins, 
& Oxazolidinones
Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, & 
Lisa G. Winston, MD 809
45. Aminoglycosides & Spectinomycin
Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, &
Lisa G. Winston, MD 821
46.  Sulfonamides, Trimethoprim, 
& Quinolones
Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, & 
Lisa G. Winston, MD 831
47.  Antimycobacterial Drugs
Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, & 
Lisa G. Winston, MD 839
48. Antifungal Agents
Don Sheppard, MD, & 
Harry W. Lampiris, MD 849
49. Antiviral Agents
Sharon Safrin, MD  861
50.  Miscellaneous Antimicrobial Agents; 
Disinfectants, Antiseptics, & Sterilants
Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, & 
Lisa G. Winston, MD 891
51. Clinical Use of Antimicrobial Agents
Harry W. Lampiris, MD, & Daniel S. Maddix, 
PharmD 901
52. Antiprotozoal Drugs
Philip J. Rosenthal, MD 915
53.  Clinical Pharmacology of the 
Antihelminthic Drugs
Philip  J. Rosenthal, MD 937
54.  Cancer Chemotherapy
Edward Chu, MD, & Alan C. Sartorelli, PhD 949
55.  Immunopharmacology
Douglas F. Lake, PhD, Adrienne D. Briggs, MD, & 
Emmanuel T. Akporiaye, PhD 977
S E C T I O N  IX
TOXICOLOGY 1001
56.  Introduction to Toxicology: Occupational 
& Environmental
Daniel T. Teitelbaum, MD 1001
57.  Heavy Metal Intoxication & Chelators
Michael J. Kosnett, MD, MPH 1013
58.  Management of the Poisoned Patient
Kent R. Olson, MD 1027
S E C T I O N  X
SPECIAL TOPICS 1039
59.  Special Aspects of Perinatal & 
Pediatric Pharmacology
Gideon Koren, MD 1039
60. Special Aspects of Geriatric Pharmacology
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 1051
61. Dermatologic Pharmacology
Dirk B. Robertson, MD, & 
Howard I. Maibach, MD 1061
62.  Drugs Used in the Treatment of 
Gastrointestinal Diseases
Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD 1081
63.  Therapeutic & Toxic Potential of 
Over-the-Counter Agents
Robin L. Corelli, PharmD 1115
64.  Dietary Supplements & Herbal Medications
Cathi E. Dennehy, PharmD, & Candy Tsourounis, 
PharmD 1125
CONTENTS    v
vi    CONTENTS
65. Rational Prescribing & Prescription Writing
Paul W. Lofholm, PharmD, &
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 1139
66.  Important Drug Interactions & 
Their Mechanisms
John R. Horn, PharmD, FCCP 1149
Appendix: Vaccines, Immune Globulins, 
& Other Complex Biologic Products
Harry W. Lampiris, MD, & Daniel S. Maddix, 
PharmD 1163
Index  1171
The twelfth edition of Basic & Clinical Pharmacology continues 
the important changes inaugurated in the eleventh edition, with 
extensive use of full-color illustrations and expanded coverage of 
transporters, pharmacogenomics, and new drugs. Case studies 
have been added to several chapters and answers to questions 
posed in the case studies now appear at the end of each chapter. 
As in prior editions, the book is designed to provide a compre-
hensive, authoritative, and readable pharmacology textbook for 
students in the health sciences. Frequent revision is necessary to 
keep pace with the rapid changes in pharmacology and therapeu-
tics; the 2–3 year revision cycle of the printed text is among the 
shortest in the field and the availability of an online version pro-
vides even greater currency. In addition to the full-color illustra-
tions, other new features have been introduced. The Case Study 
Answer section at the end of chapters will make the learning pro-
cess even more interesting and efficient. The book also offers 
special features that make it a useful reference for house officers 
and practicing clinicians.
Information is organized according to the sequence used in 
many pharmacology courses and in integrated curricula: basic 
principles; autonomic drugs; cardiovascular-renal drugs; drugs with 
important actions on smooth muscle; central nervous system 
drugs; drugs used to treat inflammation, gout, and diseases of the 
blood; endocrine drugs; chemotherapeutic drugs; toxicology; and 
special topics. This sequence builds new information on a founda-
tion of information already assimilated. For example, early presen-
tation of autonomic nervous system pharmacology allows students 
to integrate the physiology and neuroscience they have learned 
elsewhere with the pharmacology they are learning and prepares 
them to understand the autonomic effects of other drugs. This is 
especially important for the cardiovascular and central nervous 
system drug groups. However, chapters can be used equally well in 
courses and curricula that present these topics in a different 
sequence.
Within each chapter, emphasis is placed on discussion of drug 
groups and prototypes rather than offering repetitive detail about 
individual drugs. Selection of the subject matter and the order of 
its presentation are based on the accumulated experience of teach-
ing this material to thousands of medical, pharmacy, dental, 
podiatry, nursing, and other health science students.
Major features that make this book particularly useful in inte-
grated curricula include sections that specifically address the clini-
cal choice and use of drugs in patients and the monitoring of their 
effects—in other words, clinical pharmacology is an integral part of 
this text. Lists of the commercial preparations available, including 
trade and generic names and dosage formulations, are provided at 
the end of each chapter for easy reference by the house officer or 
practitioner writing a chart order or prescription.
Significant revisions in this edition 
include:
• In addition to the Case Studies used to open many chapters, 
Case Study Answers at the end of these chapters provide an 
introduction to the clinical applications of the drugs discussed. 
• A Drug Summary Table is placed at the conclusion of most 
chapters; these provide a concise recapitulation of the most 
important drugs.
• Many new illustrations in full color provide significantly more 
information about drug mechanisms and effects and help to 
clarify important concepts.
• Major revisions of the chapters on sympathomimetic, sym-
pathoplegic, antipsychotic, antidepressant, antidiabetic, anti-
inflammatory, and antiviral drugs, prostaglandins, nitric 
oxide, hypothalamic and pituitary hormones, and immuno-
pharmacology.
• Continued expansion of the coverage of general concepts relat-
ing to newly discovered receptors, receptor mechanisms, and 
drug transporters.
• Descriptions of important new drugs released through August 
2011.
An important related educational resource is Katzung & 
Trevor’s Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, ninth edition 
(Trevor AJ, Katzung BG, & Masters SB: McGraw-Hill, 2010). 
This book provides a succinct review of pharmacology with over 
one thousand sample examination questions and answers. It is 
especially helpful to students preparing for board-type examina-
tions. A more highly condensed source of information suitable 
for review purposes is USMLE Road Map: Pharmacology, second 
edition (Katzung BG, Trevor AJ: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
This edition marks the 30th year of publication of Basic & 
Clinical Pharmacology. The widespread adoption of the first eleven 
editions indicates that this book fills an important need. We 
believe that the twelfth edition will satisfy this need even more 
successfully. Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, Indonesian, 
Japanese, Korean, and Turkish translations are available. 
Translations into other languages are under way; the publisher 
may be contacted for further information.
I wish to acknowledge the prior and continuing efforts of my 
contributing authors and the major contributions of the staff at 
Lange Medical Publications, Appleton & Lange, and McGraw-Hill, 
Preface
vii
viii    CONTENTS
viii    PREFACE
and of our editors for this edition, Donna Frassetto and Rachel 
D’Annucci Henriquez. I also wish to thank my wife, Alice Camp, 
for her expert proofreading contributions since the first edition. 
This edition is dedicated to the memory of James Ransom, 
PhD, the long-time Senior Editor at Lange Medical Publications, 
who provided major inspiration and invaluable guidance through 
the first eight editions of the book. Without him, this book would 
not exist.
Suggestions and comments about Basic & Clinical Pharmacology 
are always welcome. They may be sent to me in care of the
publisher. 
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD
San Francisco
December, 2011
Authors 
Emmanuel T. Akporiaye, PhD
Adjunct Professor, Oregon Health Sciences University, 
Laboratory Chief, Earle A. Chiles Research Institute, 
Providence Cancer Center, Portland
Michael J. Aminoff, MD, DSc, FRCP
Professor, Department of Neurology, University of 
California, San Francisco
Allan I. Basbaum, PhD
Professor and Chair, Department of Anatomy and 
W.M. Keck Foundation Center for Integrative 
Neuroscience, University of California, San Francisco
Neal L. Benowitz, MD
Professor of Medicine and Bioengineering  & Therapeutic 
Science, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco
Italo Biaggioni, MD
Professor of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville
Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, and 
Co-Director, Special Diagnostic and Treatment Unit, 
University of California, San Francisco, and Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco
Homer A. Boushey, MD
Chief, Asthma Clinical Research Center and Division of 
Allergy & Immunology; Professor of Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco
Adrienne D. Briggs, MD
Clinical Director, Bone Marrow Transplant Program, 
Banner Good Samaritan Hospital, Phoenix
Lundy Campbell, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesiology and 
Perioperative Medicine, University of California 
San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco
George P. Chrousos, MD
Professor & Chair, First Department of Pediatrics, Athens 
University Medical School, Athens
Edward Chu, MD
Professor of Medicine and Pharmacology & Chemical 
Biology; Chief, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Deputy 
Director, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh
Robin L. Corelli, PharmD
Clinical Professor, Department of Clinical Pharmacy, 
School of Pharmacy, University of California, San 
Francisco
Maria Almira Correia, PhD
Professor of Pharmacology, Pharmaceutical Chemistry 
and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Cellular 
& Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco
Charles DeBattista, MD
Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford
Daniel H. Deck, PharmD
Assistant Clinical Professor, School of Pharmacy, 
University of California, San Francisco; Infectious 
Diseases Clinical Pharmacist, San Francisco General 
Hospital
Cathi E. Dennehy, PharmD
Professor, Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of 
California, San Francisco School of Pharmacy
Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP
Professor of Clinical Pharmacy and Clinical Professor of 
Family and Community Medicine, Department of Clinical 
Pharmacy and Department of Family and Community 
Medicine, Schools of Pharmacy and Medicine, University 
of California, San Francisco
Kenneth Drasner, MD
Profesor of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, University 
of California, San Francisco
Helge Eilers, MD
Professor of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, University 
of California, San Francisco
ix
x    AUTHORS
Garret A. FitzGerald, MD
Chair, Department of Pharmacology; Director, Institute 
for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman 
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia
Daniel E. Furst, MD
Carl M. Pearson Professor of Rheumatology, Director, 
Rheumatology Clinical Research Center, Department of 
Rheumatology, University of California, Los Angeles
Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham
Francis S. Greenspan, MD, FACP
Clinical Professor of Medicine and Radiology and Chief, 
Thyroid Clinic, Division of Endocrinology, Department of 
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco
Nicholas H. G. Holford, MB, ChB, FRACP
Professor, Department of Pharmacology and Clinical 
Pharmacology, University of Auckland Medical School, 
Auckland
John R. Horn, PharmD, FCCP
Professor of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Washington; Associate Director of Pharmacy Services, 
Department of Medicine, University of Washington 
Medicine, Seattle
Joseph R. Hume, PhD
Professor and Chairman, Department of Pharmacology; 
Adjunct Professor, Department of Physiology and Cell 
Biology, University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno 
Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco
Samie R. Jaffrey, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Pharmacology, Department of 
Pharmacology, Cornell University Weill Medical College, 
New York City
John P. Kane, MD, PhD
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine; Professor 
of Biochemistry and Biophysics; Associate Director, 
Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of 
California, San Francisco
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Cellular & Molecular 
Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco
Gideon Koren, MD
Professor of Pediatrics, Pharmacology, Pharmacy, 
Medicine and Medical Genetics; Director, Motherisk 
Program, University of Toronto
Michael J. Kosnett, MD, MPH
Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, Division of 
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of 
Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver
Marieke Kruidering-Hall, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Cellular and 
Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San 
Francisco 
Douglas F. Lake, PhD
Associate Professor, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State 
University, Tempe
Harry W. Lampiris, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco
Paul W. Lofholm, PharmD
Clinical Professor of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, 
University of California, San Francisco
Christian Lüscher, MD
Departments of Basic and Clincial Neurosciences, Medical 
Faculty, University Hospital of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland
Daniel S. Maddix, PharmD
Associate Clinical Professor of Pharmacy, University of 
California, San Francisco
Howard I. Maibach, MD
Professor of Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, 
University of California, San Francisco
Mary J. Malloy, MD
Clinical Professor of Pediatrics and Medicine, 
Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Cardiovascular 
Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco
Susan B. Masters, PhD
Professor of Pharmacology & Academy Chair of 
Pharmacology Education, Department of Cellular & 
Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco
Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD
Professor of Clinical Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco; Chief of Gastroenterology, San Francisco 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center
Brian S. Meldrum, MB, PhD
Professor Emeritus, GKT School of Medicine, 
Guy’s Campus, London
Herbert Meltzer, MD, PhD
Professor of Psychiatry and Pharmacology, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville
Roger A. Nicoll, MD
Professor of Pharmacology and Physiology, Departments 
of Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, 
University of California, San Francisco
AUTHORS    xi
Martha S. Nolte Kennedy, MD
Clinical Professor, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco
Kent R. Olson, MD
Clinical Professor, Departments of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, University of California, San Francisco; 
Medical Director, San Francisco Division, California 
Poison Control System
Achilles J. Pappano, PhD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Cell Biology and 
Calhoun Cardiology Center, University of Connecticut 
Health Center, Farmington
Roger J. Porter, MD
Adjunct Professor of Neurology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; Adjunct Professor of 
Pharmacology, Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda
Shraddha Prakash, MD 
Senior Fellow in Rheumatology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles
Ian A. Reid, PhD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Physiology, University 
of California, San Francisco
David Robertson, MD
Elton Yates Professor of Medicine, Pharmacology and 
Neurology, Vanderbilt University; Director, Clinical & 
Translational Research Center, Vanderbilt Institute for 
Clinical and Translational Research, Nashville
Dirk B. Robertson, MD
Professor of Clinical Dermatology, Department of 
Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta
Philip J. Rosenthal, MD
Professor of Medicine, University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco General Hospital
Stephen M. Rosenthal, MD 
Professor of Pediatrics, Associate Program Director, 
Pediatric Endocrinology; Director, Pediatric Endocrine 
Outpatient Services, University of California, 
San Francisco
Sharon Safrin, MD
Associate Clinical Professor, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco; President, 
Safrin Clinical Research 
Alan C. Sartorelli, PhD
Alfred Gilman Professor of Pharmacology, Department of 
Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven
Mark A. Schumacher, PhD, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Anesthesia and 
Perioperative Care, University of California, San Francisco
Don Sheppard, MD
Associate Professor, Departments of Microbiology and 
Immunology and Medicine, McGill University; Program 
Director, McGill Royal College Training Program in 
Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Montreal
Emer M. Smyth, PhD
Assistant Professor, Department of Pharmacology, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia
Daniel T. Teitelbaum, MD
Professor, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, and Colorado School of Mines, Golden
Anthony J. Trevor, PhD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Cellular & Molecular 
Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco
Candy Tsourounis, PharmD
Professor of Clinical Pharmacy, Medication Outcomes 
Center, University of California, San Francisco School of 
Pharmacy
Robert W. Ulrich, PharmD
Senior Clinical Science Manager, Abbott Laboratories Inc., 
Covina, California
Mark von Zastrow, MD, PhD
Professor, Departments of Psychiatry and Cellular & 
Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco
Walter L. Way, MD*
Professor Emeritus, Departments of Anesthesia and 
Cellular & Molecular Pharmacology, University of 
California, San Francisco
Lisa G. Winston, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, Division of 
Infectious Diseases, University of California, San Francisco; 
Hospital Epidemiologist, San Francisco General Hospital
Spencer Yost, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative 
Care, University of California, San Francisco; Medical 
Director, UCSF-Mt. Zion ICU, Chief of Anesthesia, 
UCSF-Mt. Zion Hospital
James L. Zehnder, MD
Professor of Pathology and Medicine, Pathology Department, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford
∗Deceased
xii
KEY FEATURES    xiii
This page intentionally left blank 
1
 A 26-year-old man is brought by friends to the emergency 
department of the city hospital because he has been behav-
ing strangely for several days. A known user of metham-
phetamine, he has not eaten or slept in 48 hours. He 
threatened to shoot one of his friends because he believes 
this friend is plotting against him. On admission, the man is 
extremely agitated, appears to be underweight, and is unable 
to give a coherent history. He has to be restrained to prevent 
 SECTION I BASIC PRINCIPLES 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Introduction 
 Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 
C A S E  S T U D Y
him from walking out of the emergency department and 
into traffic on the street. His blood pressure is 160/100 mm 
Hg, heart rate 100, temperature 39°C, and respirations 30/
min. His arms show evidence of numerous intravenous 
injections. The remainder of his physical examination is 
unremarkable. After evaluation, the man is given a sedative, 
fluids, a diuretic, and ammonium chloride parenterally. 
What is the purpose of the ammonium chloride? 
1
 Pharmacology can be defined as the study of substances that 
interact with living systems through chemical processes, especially 
by binding to regulatory molecules and activating or inhibiting 
normal body processes. These substances may be chemicals 
administered to achieve a beneficial therapeutic effect on some 
process within the patient or for their toxic effects on regulatory 
processes in parasites infecting the patient. Such deliberate thera-
peutic applications may be considered the proper role of  medical 
pharmacology, which is often defined as the science of substances 
used to prevent, diagnose, and treat disease.  Toxicology is the 
branch of pharmacology that deals with the undesirable effects of 
chemicals on living systems, from individual cells to humans to 
complex ecosystems ( Figure 1–1 ). 
 THE HISTORY OF PHARMACOLOGY 
 Prehistoric people undoubtedly recognized the beneficial or 
toxic effects of many plant and animal materials. Early written 
records from China and Egypt and the traditions of India list 
remedies of many types, including a few that are still recognized 
as useful drugs today. Most, however, were worthless or actually 
harmful. In the 1500 years or so preceding the present, there 
were sporadic attempts to introduce rational methods into 
medicine, but none was successful owing to the dominance of 
systems of thought that purported to explain all of biology and 
disease without the need for experimentation and observation. 
These schools promulgated bizarre notions such as the idea that 
2    SECTION I Basic Principles
disease was caused by excesses of bile or blood in the body, that 
wounds could be healed by applying a salve to the weapon that 
caused the wound, and so on. 
 Around the end of the 17th century, and following the example 
of the physical sciences, reliance on observation and experimentation 
began to replace theorizing in medicine. As the value of these 
methods in the study of disease became clear, physicians in Great 
Britain and on the Continent began to apply them to the effects 
of traditional drugs used in their own practices. Thus,  materia 
medica —the science of drug preparation and the medical use of 
drugs—began to develop as the precursor to pharmacology. 
However, any real understanding of the mechanisms of action of 
drugs was prevented by the absence of methods for purifying 
active agents from the crude materials that were available and—
even more—by the lack of methods for testing hypotheses about 
the nature of drug actions. 
 In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, François Magendie, 
and later his student Claude Bernard, began to develop the meth-
ods of  experimental physiology and  pharmacology. Advances in 
chemistry and the further development of physiology in the 18th, 
19th, and early 20th centuries laid the foundation needed for 
understanding how drugs work at the organ and tissue levels. 
Paradoxically, real advances in basic pharmacology during this 
time were accompanied by an outburst of unscientific claims by 
manufacturers and marketers of worthless “patent medicines.” 
Not until the concepts of rational therapeutics, especially that of 
the  controlled clinical trial, were reintroduced into medicine—
only about 60 years ago—did it become possible to accurately 
evaluate therapeutic claims. 
 Around the same time, a major expansion of research efforts in 
all areas of biology began. As new concepts and new techniques 
were introduced, information accumulated about drug action and 
the biologic substrate of that action, the  drug receptor. During 
the last half-century, many fundamentally new drug groups and 
new members of old groups were introduced. The last three 
decades have seen an even more rapid growth of information and 
understanding of the molecular basis for drug action. The molec-
ular mechanisms of action of many drugs have now been identi-
fied, and numerous receptors have been isolated, structurally 
characterized, and cloned. In fact, the use of receptor identifica-
tion methods (described in Chapter 2) has led to the discovery of 
many orphan receptors—receptors for which no ligand has been 
discovered and whose function can only be surmised. Studies of 
the local molecular environment of receptors have shown that 
receptors and effectors do not function in isolation; they are 
strongly influenced by other receptors and by companion regula-
tory proteins. 
 Pharmacogenomics —the relation of the individual’s genetic 
makeup to his or her response to specific drugs—is close to 
becoming a practical area of therapy (see Box: Pharmacology & 
Genetics). Decoding of the genomes of many species—from 
bacteria to humans—has led to the recognition of unsuspected 
relationships between receptor families and the ways that recep-
tor proteins have evolved. Discovery that small segments of RNA 
can interfere with protein synthesis with extreme selectivity has 
led to investigation of  small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and 
 microRNAs (miRNAs) as therapeutic agents. Similarly, short 
nucleotide chains called  antisense oligonucleotides (ANOs) 
synthesized to be complementary to natural RNA or DNA can 
interfere with the readout of genes and the transcription of RNA. 
These intracellular targets may provide the next major wave of 
advances in therapeutics. 
 The extension of scientific principles into everyday therapeutics is 
still going on, although the medication-consuming public is still 
exposed to vast amounts of inaccurate, incomplete, or unscientific 
information regarding the pharmacologic effects of chemicals. This has 
resulted in the irrational use of innumerable expensive, ineffective, 
and sometimes harmful remedies and the growth of a huge “alterna-
tive health care” industry. Unfortunately, manipulation of the legisla-
tive process in the United States has allowed many substances 
promoted for health—but not promoted specifically as “drugs”—to 
avoid meeting the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) standards 
described in Chapter 5. Conversely, lack of understanding of basic 
scientific principles in biology and statistics and the absence of critical 
thinking about public health issues have led to rejection of medical 
Chemical
Patient
Intended
target
tissues
Unintended
targets
Medical pharmacology
and toxicology
Therapeutic
effects
Pharmacodynamics
Pharmacokinetics
Environmental
toxicology
Environment
Other
organisms
Toxic
effects
More
organisms
Food
chain
 FIGURE 1–1  Major areas of study in pharmacology. The actions 
of chemicals can be divided into two large domains. The first ( left 
side ) is that of medical pharmacology and toxicology, which is aimed 
at understanding the actions of drugs as chemicals on individual 
organisms, especially humans and domestic animals. Both beneficial 
and toxic effects are included. Pharmacokinetics deals with the 
absorption, distribution, and elimination of drugs. Pharmaco-
dynamics concerns the actions of the chemical on the organism. The 
second domain ( right side ) is that of environmental toxicology, which 
is concerned with the effects of chemicals on all organisms and their 
survival in groups and as species. 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction    3
science by a segment of the public and to a common tendency to 
assume that all adverse drug effects are the result of malpractice. 
 Two general principles that the student should remember are (1) 
that  all substances can under certain circumstances be toxic, and the 
chemicals in botanicals (herbs and plant extracts) are no different 
from chemicals in manufactured drugs except for the proportion of 
impurities (greater in botanicals); and, (2) that all dietary supplements 
and all therapies promoted as health-enhancing should meet the same 
standards of efficacy and safety as conventional drugs and medical 
therapies. That is, there should be no artificial separation between 
scientific medicine and “alternative” or “complementary” medicine. 
 PHARMACOLOGY & THE 
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY 
 A truly new drug (one that does not simply mimic the structure 
and action of previously available drugs) requires the discovery of 
a new drug  target , ie, the pathophysiologic process or substrate of 
a disease. Such discoveries are usually made in public sector insti-
tutions (universities and research institutes), and the molecules 
that have beneficial effects on such targets are often discovered in 
the same laboratories. However, the  development of new drugs usu-
ally takes place in industrial laboratories because optimization of a 
class of new drugs requires painstaking and expensive chemical, 
pharmacologic, and toxicologic research. In fact, much of the 
recent progress in the application of drugs to disease problems can 
be ascribed to the pharmaceutical industry including “big pharma,” 
the multibillion-dollar corporations that specialize in drug discov-
ery and development. As described in Chapter 5, these companies 
are uniquely skilled in exploiting discoveries from academic and 
governmental laboratories and translating these basic findings into 
commercially successful therapeutic breakthroughs. 
 Such breakthroughs come at a price, however, and the escalat-
ing cost of drugs has become a significant contributor to the 
inflationary increase in the cost of health care. Development of 
new drugs is enormously expensive, and to survive and prosper, 
big pharma must pay the costs of drug development and market-
ing and return a profit to its shareholders. Today, considerable 
controversy surrounds drug pricing. Critics claim that the costs of 
development and marketing are grossly inflated by marketing 
activities, which may consume as much as 25% or more of a com-
pany’s budget in advertising and other promotional efforts. 
Furthermore, profit margins for big pharma have historically 
exceeded all other industries by a significant factor. Finally, pricing 
schedules for many drugs vary dramatically from country to coun-
try and even within countries, where large organizations can 
negotiate favorable prices and small ones cannot. Some countries 
have already addressed these inequities, and it seems likely that all 
countries will have to do so during the next few decades. 
 GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF 
PHARMACOLOGY 
 THE NATURE OF DRUGS 
 In the most general sense, a drug may be defined as any substance 
that brings about a change in biologic function through its 
chemical actions. In most cases, the drug molecule interacts as an 
Pharmacology & Genetics
 It has been known for centuries that certain diseases are inherited, 
and we now understand that individuals with such diseases have 
a heritable abnormality in their DNA. During the last 10 years, the 
genomes of humans, mice, and many other organisms have been 
decoded in considerable detail. This has opened the door to a 
remarkable range of new approaches to research and treatment. It 
is now possible in the case of some inherited diseases to define 
exactly which DNA base pairs are anomalous and in which chro-
mosome they appear. In a small number of animal models of such 
diseases, it has been possible to correct the abnormality by gene 
therapy, ie, insertion of an appropriate “healthy” gene into somatic 
cells. Human somatic cell  gene therapy has been attempted, but 
the technical difficulties are great. 
 Studies of a newly discovered receptor or endogenous ligand 
are often confounded by incomplete knowledge of the exact role 
of that receptor or ligand. One of the most powerful of the new 
genetic techniques is the ability to breed animals (usually mice) in 
which the gene for the receptor or its endogenous ligand has 
been “knocked out,” ie, mutated so that the gene product is 
absent or nonfunctional. Homozygous  knockout mice usually 
have complete suppression of that function, whereas heterozy-
gous animals usually have partial suppression. Observation of 
the behavior, biochemistry, and physiology of the knockout mice 
often defines the role of the missing gene product very clearly. 
When the products of a particular gene are so essential that even 
heterozygotes do not survive to birth, it is sometimes possible to 
breed “knockdown” versions with only limited suppression of 
function. Conversely, “knockin” mice, which overexpress certain 
proteins of interest, have been bred. 
 Some patients respond to certain drugs with greater than usual 
sensitivity to standard doses. It is now clear that such increased 
sensitivity is often due to a very small genetic modification that 
results in decreased activity of a particular enzyme responsible for 
eliminating that drug. (Such variations are discussed in Chapter 4.) 
 Pharmacogenomics (or pharmacogenetics) is the study of the 
genetic variations that cause differences in drug response among 
individuals or populations. Future clinicians may screen every 
patient for a variety of such differences before prescribing a drug. 
4    SECTION I Basic Principles
 agonist (activator) or  antagonist (inhibitor) with a specific mol-
ecule in the biologic system that plays a regulatory role. This target 
molecule is called a  receptor . The nature of receptors is discussed 
more fully in Chapter 2. In a very small number of cases, drugs 
known as  chemical antagonists may interact directly with other 
drugs, whereas a few drugs (osmotic agents) interact almost exclu-
sively with water molecules. Drugs may be synthesized within the 
body (eg,  hormones ) or may be chemicals  not synthesized in the 
body (ie,  xenobiotics, from the Greek  xenos , meaning “stranger”). 
 Poisons are drugs that have almost exclusively harmful effects. 
However, Paracelsus (1493–1541) famously stated that “the dose 
makes the poison,” meaning that any substance can be harmful if 
taken in the wrong dosage.  Toxins are usually defined as poisons 
of biologic origin, ie, synthesized by plants or animals, in contrast 
to inorganic poisons such as lead and arsenic. 
 To interact chemically with its receptor, a drug molecule must 
have the appropriate size, electrical charge, shape, and atomic 
composition. Furthermore, a drug is often administered at a loca-
tion distant from its intended site of action, eg, a pill given orally 
to relieve a headache. Therefore, a useful drug must have the nec-
essary properties to be transported from its site of administration 
to its site of action. Finally, a practical drug should be inactivated 
or excreted from the body at a reasonable rate so that its actions 
will be of appropriate duration. 
 The Physical Nature of Drugs 
 Drugs may be solid at room temperature (eg, aspirin, atropine), 
liquid (eg, nicotine, ethanol), or gaseous (eg, nitrous oxide). These 
factors often determine the best route of administration. The most 
common routes of administration are described in  Table 3–3 . The 
various classes of organic compounds—carbohydrates, proteins, 
lipids, and their constituents—are all represented in pharmacol-
ogy. As noted above, oligonucleotides, in the form of small seg-
ments of RNA, have entered clinical trials and are on the threshold 
of introduction into therapeutics. 
 A number of useful or dangerous drugs are inorganic elements, 
eg, lithium, iron, and heavy metals. Many organic drugs are weak 
acids or bases. This fact has important implications for the way 
they are handled by the body, because pH differences in the vari-
ous compartments of the body may alter the degree of ionization 
of such drugs (see text that follows). 
 Drug Size 
 The molecular size of drugs varies from very small (lithium ion, 
MW 7) to very large (eg, alteplase [t-PA], a protein of MW 
59,050). However, most drugs have molecular weights between 
100 and 1000. The lower limit of this narrow range is probably set 
by the requirements for specificity of action. To have a good “fit” 
to only one type of receptor, a drug molecule must be sufficiently 
unique in shape, charge, and other properties, to prevent its bind-
ing to other receptors. To achieve such selective binding, it appears 
that a molecule should in most cases be at least 100 MW units in 
size. The upper limit in molecular weight is determined primarily 
by the requirement that drugs must be able to move within the 
body (eg, from the site of administration to the site of action). 
Drugs much larger than MW 1000 do not diffuse readily between 
compartments of the body (see Permeation, in following text). 
Therefore, very large drugs (usually proteins) must often be 
administered directly into the compartment where they have their 
effect. In the case of alteplase, a clot-dissolving enzyme, the drug 
is administered directly into the vascular compartment by intrave-
nous or intra-arterial infusion. 
 Drug Reactivity and Drug-Receptor Bonds 
 Drugs interact with receptors by means of chemical forces or 
bonds. These are of three major types:  covalent, electrostatic, and 
 hydrophobic. Covalent bonds are very strong and in many cases 
not reversible under biologic conditions. Thus, the covalent bond 
formed between the acetyl group of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) 
and cyclooxygenase, its enzyme target in platelets, is not readily 
broken. The platelet aggregation–blocking effect of aspirin lasts 
long after free acetylsalicylic acid has disappeared from the blood-
stream (about 15 minutes) and is reversed only by the synthesis of 
new enzyme in new platelets, a process that takes several days. 
Other examples of highly reactive, covalent bond-forming drugs 
are the DNA-alkylating agents used in cancer chemotherapy to 
disrupt cell division in the tumor. 
 Electrostatic bonding is much more common than covalent 
bonding in drug-receptor interactions. Electrostatic bonds vary 
from relatively strong linkages between permanently charged ionic 
molecules to weaker hydrogen bonds and very weak induced 
dipole interactions such as van der Waals forces and similar phe-
nomena. Electrostatic bonds are weaker than covalent bonds. 
 Hydrophobic bonds are usually quite weak and are probably 
important in the interactions of highly lipid-soluble drugs with 
the lipids of cell membranes and perhaps in the interaction of 
drugs with the internal walls of receptor “pockets.” 
 The specific nature of a particular drug-receptor bond is of less 
practical importance than the fact that drugs that bind through 
weak bonds to their receptors are generally more selective than 
drugs that bind by means of very strong bonds. This is because weak 
bonds require a very precise fit of the drug to its receptor if an inter-
action is to occur. Only a few receptor types are likely to provide 
such a precise fit for a particular drug structure. Thus, if we wished 
to design a highly selective short-acting drug for a particular recep-
tor, we would avoid highly reactive molecules that form covalent 
bonds and instead choose a molecule that forms weaker bonds. 
 A few substances that are almost completely inert in the 
chemical sense nevertheless have significant pharmacologic effects. 
For example, xenon, an “inert” gas, has anesthetic effects at ele-
vated pressures. 
 Drug Shape 
 The shape of a drug molecule must be such as to permit binding to 
its receptor site via the bonds just described. Optimally, the drug’s 
shape is complementary to that of the receptor site in the same way 
that a key is complementary to a lock. Furthermore, the phenome-
non of  chirality (stereoisomerism) is so common in biology that 
more than half of all useful drugs are chiral molecules; that is, they 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction    5
can exist as enantiomeric pairs. Drugs with two asymmetric centers 
have four diastereomers, eg, ephedrine, a sympathomimetic drug. In 
most cases, one of these enantiomers is much more potent than its 
mirror image enantiomer, reflecting a better fit to the receptor mol-
ecule. If one imagines the receptor site to be like a glove into which 
the drug molecule must fit to bring about its effect, it is clear why a 
“left-oriented” drug is more effective in binding to a left-hand 
receptor than its “right-oriented” enantiomer. 
 The more active enantiomer at one type of receptor site may 
not be more active at another receptor type, eg, a type that may be 
responsible for some other effect. For example, carvedilol, a drug 
that interacts with adrenoceptors, has a single chiral center and 
thus two enantiomers ( Figure 1–2 ,  Table 1–1 ). One of these 
enantiomers, the  (S) (−) isomer, is a potent β-receptor blocker. The 
 (R) (+) isomer is 100-fold weaker at the β receptor. However, the 
isomers are approximately equipotent as α-receptor blockers. 
Ketamine is an intravenous anesthetic. The (+) enantiomer is a 
more potent anesthetic and is less toxic than the (−) enantiomer. 
Unfortunately, the drug is still used as the racemic mixture. 
 Finally, because enzymes are usually stereoselective, one drug 
enantiomer is often more susceptible than the other to drug-
metabolizing enzymes. As a result, the duration of action of one 
enantiomer may be quite different from that of the other. 
Similarly, drug transporters may be stereoselective. 
 Unfortunately, most studies of clinical efficacy and drug elimi-
nation in humans have been carried out with racemic mixtures of 
drugs rather than with the separate enantiomers. At present, only a 
small percentage of the chiral drugs used clinically are marketed as 
the active isomer—the rest are available only as racemic mixtures. 
As a result, many patients are receiving drug doses of which 50% 
is less active, inactive, or actively toxic. Some drugs are currently 
available in both the racemic and the pure, active isomer forms. 
Unfortunately, the hope that administration of the pure, active 
enantiomer would decrease adverse effects relative to those pro-
duced by racemic formulations has not been firmly established. 
However, there is increasing interest at both the scientific and the 
regulatory levels in making more chiral drugs available as their 
active enantiomers. 
More active isomer
Flat, hydrophobic regions
Polar region
Less active isomer
X
*
*
 FIGURE 1–2  Cartoon illustrating the nonsuperimposibility of the two stereoisomers of carvedilol on the β receptor. The “receptor surface” 
has been grossly oversimplified. The chiral center carbon is denoted with an asterisk. One of the two isomers fits the three-dimensional configu-
ration of binding site of the β-adrenoceptor molecule very well ( left ), and three groups, including an important polar moiety (an hydroxyl group, 
indicated by the central dashed line), bind to key areas of the surface. The less active isomer cannot orient all three binding areas to the recep-
tor surface ( right ). (Molecule generated by means of Jmol, an open-source Java viewer for chemical structures in 3D [http://jmol.sourceforge.
net/] with data from DrugBank [http://www.drugbank.ca].) 
TABLE 1–1  Dissociation constants (Kd) of the 
enantiomers and racemate of carvedilol.
Form of Carvedilol
α Receptors 
(Kd, nmol/L1)
        β Receptors 
        (Kd, nmol/L)
R(+) enantiomer
14
45
S(−) enantiomer
16
0.4
R,S(±) enantiomers
11
0.9
1The Kd is the concentration for 50% saturation of the receptors and is inversely pro-
portionate to the affinity of the drug for the receptors.
Data from Ruffolo RR et al: The pharmacology of carvedilol. Eur J Pharmacol 
1990;38:S82.
6    SECTION I Basic Principles
 Rational Drug Design 
 Rational design of drugs implies the ability to predict the appropri-
ate molecular structure of a drug on the basis of information about 
its biologic receptor. Until recently, no receptor was known in suf-
ficient detail to permit such drug design. Instead, drugs were devel-
oped through random testing of chemicals or modification of drugs 
already known to have some effect (see Chapter 5). However, the 
characterization of many receptors during the past three decades has 
changed this picture. A few drugs now in use were developed 
through molecular design based on knowledge of the three-dimen-
sional structure of the receptor site. Computer programs are now 
available that can iteratively optimize drug structures to fit known 
receptors. As more becomes known about receptor structure, ratio-
nal drug design will become more common. 
 Receptor Nomenclature 
 The spectacular success of newer, more efficient ways to identify 
and characterize receptors (see Chapter 2) has resulted in a variety 
of differing, and sometimes confusing, systems for naming them. 
This in turn has led to a number of suggestions regarding more 
rational methods of naming receptors. The interested reader is 
referred for details to the efforts of the International Union of 
Pharmacology (IUPHAR)  Committee on Receptor Nomenclature and 
Drug Classification (reported in various issues of  Pharmacological 
Reviews ) and to Alexander SPH, Mathie A, Peters JA: Guide to 
receptors and channels (GRAC), 4th edition.  Br J Pharmacol 
2009;158(Suppl 1):S1–S254. The chapters in this book mainly 
use these sources for naming receptors. 
 DRUG-BODY INTERACTIONS 
 The interactions between a drug and the body are conveniently 
divided into two classes. The actions of the drug on the body are 
termed  pharmacodynamic processes ( Figure 1–1 ); the principles 
of pharmacodynamics are presented in greater detail in Chapter 2. 
These properties determine the group in which the drug is classi-
fied, and they play the major role in deciding whether that group 
is appropriate therapy for a particular symptom or disease. The 
actions of the body on the drug are called  pharmacokinetic pro-
cesses and are described in Chapters 3 and 4. Pharmacokinetic 
processes govern the absorption, distribution, and elimination of 
drugs and are of great practical importance in the choice and 
administration of a particular drug for a particular patient, eg, a 
patient with impaired renal function. The following paragraphs 
provide a brief introduction to pharmacodynamics and pharma-
cokinetics. 
 Pharmacodynamic Principles 
 Most drugs must bind to a receptor to bring about an effect. 
However, at the cellular level, drug binding is only the first in 
what is often a complex sequence of steps: 
 • Drug (D) + receptor-effector (R) → drug-receptor-effector 
complex → effect 
 • D + R → drug-receptor complex → effector molecule → effect 
 • D + R → D-R complex → activation of coupling molecule → 
effector molecule → effect 
 • Inhibition of metabolism of endogenous activator → increased 
activator action on an effector molecule → increased effect 
 Note that the final change in function is accomplished by an 
 effector mechanism. The effector may be part of the receptor 
molecule or may be a separate molecule. A very large number of 
receptors communicate with their effectors through coupling mol-
ecules, as described in Chapter 2. 
 A. Types of Drug-Receptor Interactions 
 
Agonist drugs bind to and  activate the receptor in some fashion, 
which directly or indirectly brings about the effect ( Figure 
1–3 A). Receptor activation involves a change in conformation in 
the cases that have been studied at the molecular structure level. 
Some receptors incorporate effector machinery in the same mol-
ecule, so that drug binding brings about the effect directly, eg, 
opening of an ion channel or activation of enzyme activity. 
Other receptors are linked through one or more intervening 
coupling molecules to a separate effector molecule. The five 
major types of drug-receptor-effector coupling systems are dis-
cussed in Chapter 2.  Pharmacologic antagonist drugs, by bind-
ing to a receptor, compete with and prevent binding by other 
molecules. For example, acetylcholine receptor blockers such as 
atropine are antagonists because they prevent access of acetylcho-
line and similar agonist drugs to the acetylcholine receptor site 
and they stabilize the receptor in its inactive state (or some state 
other than the acetylcholine-activated state). These agents reduce 
the effects of acetylcholine and similar molecules in the body 
( Figure 1–3 B), but their action can be overcome by increasing the 
dosage of agonist. Some antagonists bind very tightly to the recep-
tor site in an irreversible or pseudoirreversible fashion and cannot 
be displaced by increasing the agonist concentration. Drugs that 
bind to the same receptor molecule but do not prevent binding of 
the agonist are said to act  allosterically and may enhance ( Figure 
1–3 C) or inhibit ( Figure 1–3 D) the action of the agonist mole-
cule. Allosteric inhibition is not overcome by increasing the dose 
of agonist. 
 B. Agonists That Inhibit Their Binding Molecules 
 
Some drugs mimic agonist drugs by inhibiting the molecules 
responsible for terminating the action of an endogenous agonist. 
For example, acetylcholinesterase  inhibitors , by slowing the 
destruction of endogenous acetylcholine, cause cholinomimetic 
effects that closely resemble the actions of cholinoceptor  agonist 
molecules even though cholinesterase inhibitors do not bind or 
only incidentally bind to cholinoceptors (see Chapter 7). Because 
they amplify the effects of physiologically released agonist ligands, 
their effects are sometimes more selective and less toxic than those 
of exogenous agonists. 
 C. Agonists, Partial Agonists, and Inverse Agonists 
 Figure 1–4 describes a useful model of drug-receptor interaction. 
As indicated, the receptor is postulated to exist in the inactive, 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction    7
nonfunctional form (R i ) and in the activated form (R a ). 
Thermodynamic considerations indicate that even in the absence 
of any agonist, some of the receptor pool must exist in the R a form 
some of the time and may produce the same physiologic effect as 
agonist-induced activity. This effect, occurring in the absence of 
agonist, is termed  constitutive activity. Agonists are those drugs 
that have a much higher affinity for the R a configuration and 
stabilize it, so that a large percentage of the total pool resides in 
the R a –D fraction and a large effect is produced. The recognition 
of constitutive activity may depend on the receptor density, the 
concentration of coupling molecules (if a coupled system), and the 
number of effectors in the system. 
 Many agonist drugs, when administered at concentrations suf-
ficient to saturate the receptor pool, can activate their receptor-ef-
fector systems to the maximum extent of which the system is 
capable; that is, they cause a shift of almost all of the receptor pool 
to the R a –D pool. Such drugs are termed  full agonists. Other drugs, 
called  partial agonists, bind to the same receptors and activate them 
in the same way but do not evoke as great a response, no matter 
how high the concentration. In the model in  Figure 1–4 , partial 
agonists do not stabilize the R a configuration as fully as full ago-
nists, so that a significant fraction of receptors exists in the R i –D 
pool. Such drugs are said to have low  intrinsic efficacy. Thus, 
pindolol, a β-adrenoceptor partial agonist, may act either as an 
agonist (if no full agonist is present) or as an antagonist (if a full 
agonist such as epinephrine is present). (See Chapter 2.) Intrinsic 
efficacy is independent of affinity (as usually measured) for the 
receptor. 
 In the same model, conventional antagonist action can be 
explained as fixing the fractions of drug-bound R i and R a in the 
same relative amounts as in the absence of any drug. In this situa-
tion, no change will be observed, so the drug will appear to be 
without effect. However, the presence of the antagonist at the 
receptor site will block access of agonists to the receptor and pre-
vent the usual agonist effect. Such blocking action can be termed 
 neutral antagonism. 
+
–
Drug
Receptor
Agonist
Allosteric
activator
Allosteric inhibitor
Competitive
inhibitor
D
C
B
A
Effects
Log Dose
Response
A+C
A alone
A+B
A+D
 FIGURE 1–3  Drugs may interact with receptors in several ways. The effects resulting from these interactions are diagrammed in the dose-
response curves at the right. Drugs that alter the agonist ( A ) response may activate the agonist binding site, compete with the agonist (compet-
itive inhibitors,  B ), or act at separate (allosteric) sites, increasing ( C ) or decreasing ( D ) the response to the agonist. Allosteric activators ( C ) may 
increase the efficacy of the agonist or its binding affinity. The curve shown reflects an increase in efficacy; an increase in affinity would result in 
a leftward shift of the curve. 
8    SECTION I Basic Principles
 What will happen if a drug has a much stronger affinity for the 
R i than for the R a state and stabilizes a large fraction in the R i –D 
pool? In this scenario the drug would reduce any constitutive 
activity, thus resulting in effects that are the opposite of the effects 
produced by conventional agonists at that receptor. Such drugs 
have been termed  inverse agonists ( Figure 1–4 ). One of the best 
documented examples of such a system is the γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA A ) receptor-effector (a chloride channel) in the nervous 
system. This receptor is activated by the endogenous transmitter 
GABA and causes inhibition of postsynaptic cells. Conventional 
exogenous agonists such as benzodiazepines also facilitate the 
receptor-effector system and cause GABA-like inhibition with 
sedation as the therapeutic result. This inhibition can be blocked 
by conventional neutral antagonists such as flumazenil. In addi-
tion, inverse agonists have been found that cause anxiety and 
agitation, the inverse of sedation (see Chapter 22). Similar inverse 
agonists have been found for β-adrenoceptors, histamine H 1 and 
H 2 receptors, and several other receptor systems. 
 D. Duration of Drug Action  
Termination of drug action is a result of one of several processes. 
In some cases, the effect lasts only as long as the drug occupies the 
receptor, and dissociation of drug from the receptor automatically 
terminates the effect. In many cases, however, the action may 
persist after the drug has dissociated because, for example, some 
coupling molecule is still present in activated form. In the case of 
drugs that bind covalently to the receptor site, the effect may per-
sist until the drug-receptor complex is destroyed and new recep-
tors or enzymes are synthesized, as described previously for aspirin. 
In addition, many receptor-effector systems incorporate desensiti-
zation mechanisms for preventing excessive activation when ago-
nist molecules continue to be present for long periods. (See 
Chapter 2 for additional details.) 
 E. Receptors and Inert Binding Sites 
 
To function as a receptor, an endogenous molecule must first be 
 selective in choosing ligands (drug molecules) to bind; and second, 
it must  change its function upon binding in such a way that the 
function of the biologic system (cell, tissue, etc) is altered. The 
selectivity characteristic is required to avoid constant activation of 
the receptor by promiscuous binding of many different ligands. The 
ability to change function is clearly necessary if the ligand is to cause 
a pharmacologic effect. The body contains a vast array of molecules 
that are capable of binding drugs, however, and not all of these 
endogenous molecules are regulatory molecules. Binding of a drug 
to a nonregulatory molecule such as plasma albumin will result in 
no detectable change in the function of the biologic system, so this 
endogenous molecule can be called an  inert binding site. Such 
binding is not completely without significance, however, because it 
affects the distribution of drug within the body and determines the 
amount of free drug in the circulation. Both of these factors are of 
pharmacokinetic importance (see also Chapter 3). 
 Pharmacokinetic Principles 
 In practical therapeutics, a drug should be able to reach its 
intended site of action after administration by some convenient 
route. In many cases, the active drug molecule is sufficiently lipid-
soluble and stable to be given as such. In some cases, however, an 
inactive precursor chemical that is readily absorbed and distrib-
uted must be administered and then converted to the active drug 
by biologic processes—inside the body. Such a precursor chemical 
is called a  prodrug. 
 In only a few situations is it possible to apply a drug directly to 
its target tissue, eg, by topical application of an anti-inflammatory 
agent to inflamed skin or mucous membrane. Most often, a drug 
is administered into one body compartment, eg, the gut, and must 
move to its site of action in another compartment, eg, the brain in 
the case of an antiseizure medication. This requires that the drug 
be  absorbed into the blood from its site of administration and 
 distributed to its site of action,  permeating through the various 
Ri
Ra
Ra – D
Ri – D
D
D
Effect
Ra + Da
Ra + Dpa
Ra + Ri
Ri + Di
Log Dose
Constitutive
activity
Response
Ra + Dant + Ri + Dant
Antagonist
Inverse agonist
Partial agonist
Full agonist
Effect
 FIGURE 1–4  A model of drug-receptor interaction. The receptor 
is able to assume two conformations. In the R i conformation, it is 
inactive and produces no effect, even when combined with a drug 
molecule. In the R a conformation, the receptor can activate down-
stream mechanisms that produce a small observable effect, even in 
the absence of drug (constitutive activity). In the absence of drugs, 
the two isoforms are in equilibrium, and the R i form is favored. 
Conventional full agonist drugs have a much higher affinity for the R a 
conformation, and mass action thus favors the formation of the R a –D 
complex with a much larger observed effect. Partial agonists have an 
intermediate affinity for both R i and R a forms. Conventional antago-
nists, according to this hypothesis, have equal affinity for both recep-
tor forms and maintain the same level of constitutive activity. Inverse 
agonists, on the other hand, have a much higher affinity for the R i 
form, reduce constitutive activity, and may produce a contrasting 
physiologic result. 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction    9
barriers that separate these compartments. For a drug given orally 
to produce an effect in the central nervous system, these barriers 
include the tissues that make up the wall of the intestine, the walls 
of the capillaries that perfuse the gut, and the blood-brain barrier, 
the walls of the capillaries that perfuse the brain. Finally, after 
bringing about its effect, a drug should be  eliminated at a reason-
able rate by metabolic inactivation, by excretion from the body, or 
by a combination of these processes. 
 A. Permeation 
 
Drug permeation proceeds by several mechanisms. Passive diffu-
sion in an aqueous or lipid medium is common, but active pro-
cesses play a role in the movement of many drugs, especially those 
whose molecules are too large to diffuse readily ( Figure 1–5 ). 
 1. Aqueous diffusion— Aqueous diffusion occurs within the 
larger aqueous compartments of the body (interstitial space, cyto-
sol, etc) and across epithelial membrane tight junctions and the 
endothelial lining of blood vessels through aqueous pores that—in 
some tissues—permit the passage of molecules as large as MW 
20,000–30,000. * See  Figure 1–5 A. 
 Aqueous diffusion of drug molecules is usually driven by the 
concentration gradient of the permeating drug, a downhill move-
ment described by Fick’s law (see below). Drug molecules that are 
bound to large plasma proteins (eg, albumin) do not permeate 
most vascular aqueous pores. If the drug is charged, its flux is also 
influenced by electrical fields (eg, the membrane potential 
and—in parts of the nephron—the transtubular potential). 
 2. Lipid diffusion— Lipid diffusion is the most important limit-
ing factor for drug permeation because of the large number of 
lipid barriers that separate the compartments of the body. Because 
these lipid barriers separate aqueous compartments, the 
 lipid:aqueous partition  coefficient of a drug determines how 
readily the molecule moves between aqueous and lipid media. In 
the case of weak acids and weak bases (which gain or lose electrical 
charge-bearing protons, depending on the pH), the ability to 
move from aqueous to lipid or vice versa varies with the pH of the 
medium, because charged molecules attract water molecules. The 
ratio of lipid-soluble form to water-soluble form for a weak acid 
or weak base is expressed by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation 
(described in the following text). See  Figure 1–5 B. 
 3. Special carriers— Special carrier molecules exist for many 
substances that are important for cell function and too large or too 
insoluble in lipid to diffuse passively through membranes, eg, 
peptides, amino acids, and glucose. These carriers bring about 
movement by active transport or facilitated diffusion and, unlike 
passive diffusion, are selective, saturable, and inhibitable. Because 
many drugs are or resemble such naturally occurring peptides, 
amino acids, or sugars, they can use these carriers to cross mem-
branes. See  Figure 1–5 C. 
 Many cells also contain less selective membrane carriers that are 
specialized for expelling foreign molecules. One large family of such 
transporters binds adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and is called the 
ABC (ATP-binding cassette) family. This family includes the 
 P-glycoprotein or  multidrug resistance type 1 (MDR1) trans-
porter found in the brain, testes, and other tissues, and in some 
drug-resistant neoplastic cells,  Table 1–2 . Similar transport molecules 
from the ABC family, the  multidrug resistance-associated pro-
tein (MRP) transporters, play important roles in the excretion of 
some drugs or their metabolites into urine and bile and in the 
resistance of some tumors to chemotherapeutic drugs. Several other 
transporter families have been identified that do not bind ATP but 
use ion gradients to drive transport. Some of these (the solute car-
rier [SLC] family) are particularly important in the uptake of 
neurotransmitters across nerve-ending membranes. The latter car-
riers are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6. 
 4. Endocytosis and exocytosis— A few substances are so large or 
impermeant that they can enter cells only by endocytosis, the pro-
cess by which the substance is bound at a cell-surface receptor, 
Lumen
Interstitium
A
B
C
D
 FIGURE 1–5  Mechanisms of drug permeation. Drugs may diffuse passively through aqueous channels in the intercellular junctions (eg, 
tight junctions,  A ), or through lipid cell membranes ( B ). Drugs with the appropriate characteristics may be transported by carriers into or out of 
cells ( C ). Very impermeant drugs may also bind to cell surface receptors (dark binding sites), be engulfed by the cell membrane (endocytosis), 
and then released inside the cell or expelled via the membrane-limited vesicles out of the cell into the extracellular space (exocytosis,  D ). 
∗The capillaries of the brain, the testes, and some other tissues are char-
acterized by the absence of pores that permit aqueous diffusion. They 
may also contain high concentrations of drug export pumps (MDR 
pumps; see text). These tissues are therefore protected or “sanctuary” 
sites from many circulating drugs.
10    SECTION I Basic Principles
engulfed by the cell membrane, and carried into the cell by pinching 
off of the newly formed vesicle inside the membrane. The substance 
can then be released inside the cytosol by breakdown of the vesicle 
membrane,  Figure 1–5 D. This process is responsible for the trans-
port of vitamin B 12 , complexed with a binding protein (intrinsic 
factor) across the wall of the gut into the blood. Similarly, iron is 
transported into hemoglobin-synthesizing red blood cell precursors 
in association with the protein transferrin. Specific receptors for the 
transport proteins must be present for this process to work. 
 The reverse process (exocytosis) is responsible for the secretion 
of many substances from cells. For example, many neurotransmit-
ter substances are stored in membrane-bound vesicles in nerve 
endings to protect them from metabolic destruction in the cyto-
plasm. Appropriate activation of the nerve ending causes fusion of 
the storage vesicle with the cell membrane and expulsion of its 
contents into the extracellular space (see Chapter 6). 
 B. Fick’s Law of Diffusion 
 
The passive flux of molecules down a concentration gradient is 
given by Fick’s law: 
 
 where C 1 is the higher concentration, C 2 is the lower concentra-
tion, area is the cross-sectional area of the diffusion path, perme-
ability coefficient is a measure of the mobility of the drug 
molecules in the medium of the diffusion path, and thickness is 
the thickness (length) of the diffusion path. In the case of lipid 
diffusion, the lipid:aqueous partition coefficient is a major deter-
minant of mobility of the drug, because it determines how readily 
the drug enters the lipid membrane from the aqueous medium. 
 C. Ionization of Weak Acids and Weak Bases; the 
Henderson-Hasselbalch Equation 
 
The electrostatic charge of an ionized molecule attracts water 
dipoles and results in a polar, relatively water-soluble and lipid-in-
soluble complex. Because lipid diffusion depends on relatively high 
lipid solubility, ionization of drugs may markedly reduce their abil-
ity to permeate membranes. A very large percentage of the drugs in 
use are weak acids or weak bases ( Table 1–3 ). For drugs, a weak 
acid is best defined as a neutral molecule that can reversibly dis-
sociate into an anion (a negatively charged molecule) and a proton 
(a hydrogen ion). For example, aspirin dissociates as follows: 
 A drug that is a weak base can be defined as a neutral molecule 
that can form a cation (a positively charged molecule) by combin-
ing with a proton. For example, pyrimethamine, an antimalarial 
drug, undergoes the following association-dissociation process: 
 Note that the protonated form of a weak acid is the neutral, 
more lipid-soluble form, whereas the unprotonated form of a 
weak base is the neutral form. The law of mass action requires that 
these reactions move to the left in an acid environment (low pH, 
excess protons available) and to the right in an alkaline environ-
ment. The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation relates the ratio of 
protonated to unprotonated weak acid or weak base to the mole-
cule’s pK a and the pH of the medium as follows: 
 
 This equation applies to both acidic and basic drugs. Inspection 
confirms that the lower the pH relative to the pK a , the greater will 
be the fraction of drug in the protonated form. Because the 
uncharged form is the more lipid-soluble, more of a weak acid will 
be in the lipid-soluble form at acid pH, whereas more of a basic 
drug will be in the lipid-soluble form at alkaline pH. 
TABLE 1–2  Some transport molecules important in pharmacology.
Transporter
Physiologic Function
Pharmacologic Significance
NET
Norepinephrine reuptake from synapse
Target of cocaine and some tricyclic antidepressants
SERT
Serotonin reuptake from synapse
Target of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and some tricyclic 
antidepressants
VMAT
Transport of dopamine and norepinephrine into 
adrenergic vesicles in nerve endings
Target of reserpine and tetrabenazine
MDR1
Transport of many xenobiotics out of cells
Increased expression confers resistance to certain anticancer drugs; 
inhibition increases blood levels of digoxin
MRP1
Leukotriene secretion
Confers resistance to certain anticancer and antifungal drugs
MDR1, multidrug resistance protein-1; MRP1, multidrug resistance-associated protein-1; NET, norepinephrine transporter; SERT, serotonin reuptake transporter; VMAT, vesicular 
monoamine transporter.
CHAPTER 1 Introduction    11
TABLE 1–3  Ionization constants of some common drugs.
Drug
pKa
1
Drug
pKa
1
Drug
pKa
1
Weak acids
Weak bases
Weak bases (cont’d)
 Acetaminophen
9.5
 Albuterol (salbutamol)
9.3
Isoproterenol
8.6
Acetazolamide
7.2
Allopurinol
9.4, 12.32
Lidocaine
7.9
Ampicillin
2.5
Alprenolol
9.6
Metaraminol
8.6
Aspirin
3.5
Amiloride
8.7
Methadone
8.4
Chlorothiazide
6.8, 9.42
Amiodarone
6.6
Methamphetamine
10.0
Chlorpropamide
5.0
Amphetamine
9.8
Methyldopa
10.6
Ciprofloxacin
6.1, 8.72
Atropine
9.7
Metoprolol
9.8
Cromolyn
2.0
Bupivacaine
8.1
Morphine
7.9
Ethacrynic acid
2.5
Chlordiazepoxide
4.6
Nicotine
7.9, 3.12
Furosemide
3.9
Chloroquine
10.8, 8.4
Norepinephrine
8.6
Ibuprofen
4.4, 5.22
Chlorpheniramine
9.2
Pentazocine
7.9
Levodopa
2.3
Chlorpromazine
9.3
Phenylephrine
9.8
Methotrexate
4.8
Clonidine
8.3
Physostigmine
7.9, 1.82
Methyldopa
2.2, 9.22
Cocaine
8.5
Pilocarpine
6.9, 1.42
Penicillamine
1.8
Codeine
8.2
Pindolol
8.6
Pentobarbital
8.1
Cyclizine
8.2
Procainamide
9.2
Phenobarbital
7.4
Desipramine
10.2
Procaine
9.0
Phenytoin
8.3
Diazepam
3.0
Promethazine
9.1
Propylthiouracil
8.3
Diphenhydramine
8.8
Propranolol
9.4
Salicylic acid
3.0
Diphenoxylate
7.1
Pseudoephedrine
9.8
Sulfadiazine
6.5
Ephedrine
9.6
Pyrimethamine
7.0–7.33
Sulfapyridine
8.4
Epinephrine
8.7
Quinidine
8.5, 4.42
Theophylline
8.8
Ergotamine
6.3
Scopolamine
8.1
Tolbutamide
5.3
Fluphenazine
8.0, 3.92
Strychnine
8.0, 2.32
Warfarin
5.0
Hydralazine
7.1
Terbutaline
10.1
Imipramine
9.5
Thioridazine
9.5
1The pKa is that pH at which the concentrations of the ionized and nonionized forms are equal.
2More than one ionizable group.
3Isoelectric point.
 Application of this principle is made in the manipulation of 
drug excretion by the kidney. Almost all drugs are filtered at the 
glomerulus. If a drug is in a lipid-soluble form during its passage 
down the renal tubule, a significant fraction will be reabsorbed by 
simple passive diffusion. If the goal is to accelerate excretion of 
the drug (eg, in a case of drug overdose), it is important to pre-
vent its reabsorption from the tubule. This can often be accom-
plished by adjusting urine pH to make certain that most of the 
drug is in the ionized state, as shown in  Figure 1–6 . As a result of 
this partitioning effect, the drug is “trapped” in the urine. Thus, 
weak acids are usually excreted faster in alkaline urine; weak bases 
are usually excreted faster in acidic urine. Other body fluids in 
which pH differences from blood pH may cause trapping or 
reabsorption are the contents of the stomach and small intestine; 
breast milk; aqueous humor; and vaginal and prostatic secretions 
( Table 1–4 ). 
 As suggested by  Table 1–3 , a large number of drugs are weak 
bases. Most of these bases are amine-containing molecules. The 
nitrogen of a neutral amine has three atoms associated with it plus 
a pair of unshared electrons (see the display that follows). The 
three atoms may consist of one carbon (designated “R”) and two 
hydrogens (a  primary amine ), two carbons and one hydrogen (a 
 secondary amine ), or three carbon atoms (a  tertiary amine ). 
Each of these three forms may reversibly bind a proton with the 
unshared electrons. Some drugs have a fourth carbon-nitrogen 
bond; these are  quaternary amines . However, the quaternary 
amine is permanently charged and has no unshared electrons with 
which to reversibly bind a proton. Therefore, primary, secondary, 
12    SECTION I Basic Principles
and tertiary amines may undergo reversible protonation and vary 
their lipid solubility with pH, but quaternary amines are always in 
the poorly lipid-soluble charged form. 
Interstitium
pH 7.4
Urine
pH 6.0
H
H
R
N
H
H
H
R
N
+
H
H
H
H+
H+
R
N
+
H
H
R
N
10 mg
0.398 mg
0.001 mg
0.001 mg
10 mg
total
0.399 mg
total
Cells of the
nephron
Lipid
diffusion
 FIGURE 1–6  Trapping of a weak base (methamphetamine) in the urine when the urine is more acidic than the blood. In the hypothetical 
case illustrated, the diffusible uncharged form of the drug has equilibrated across the membrane, but the total concentration (charged plus 
uncharged) in the urine (more than 10 mg) is 25 times higher than in the blood (0.4 mg). 
 DRUG GROUPS 
 To learn each pertinent fact about each of the many hundreds of 
drugs mentioned in this book would be an impractical goal and, 
fortunately, is unnecessary. Almost all the several thousand drugs 
currently available can be arranged into about 70 groups. Many of 
the drugs within each group are very similar in pharmacodynamic 
actions and in their pharmacokinetic properties as well. For most 
groups, one or more  prototype drugs can be identified that typify 
TABLE 1–4 Body fluids with potential for drug “trapping” through the pH-partitioning phenomenon.
Body Fluid
Range of pH
Total Fluid: Blood 
Concentration Ratios 
for Sulfadiazine 
(acid, pKa 6.5)1
Total Fluid: Blood 
Concentration Ratios 
for Pyrimethamine 
(base, pKa 7.0)1
Urine
5.0–8.0
0.12–4.65
72.24–0.79
Breast milk
6.4–7.62
0.2–1.77
3.56–0.89
Jejunum, ileum contents
7.5–8.03
1.23–3.54
0.94–0.79
Stomach contents
1.92–2.592
0.114
85,993–18,386
Prostatic secretions
6.45–7.42
0.21
3.25–1.0
Vaginal secretions
3.4–4.23
0.114
2848–452
1Body fluid protonated-to-unprotonated drug ratios were calculated using each of the pH extremes cited; a blood pH of 7.4 was used for blood:drug ratio. For example, the 
steady-state urine:blood ratio for sulfadiazine is 0.12 at a urine pH of 5.0; this ratio is 4.65 at a urine pH of 8.0. Thus, sulfadiazine is much more effectively trapped and excreted 
in alkaline urine.
2Lentner C (editor): Geigy Scientific Tables, vol 1, 8th ed. Ciba Geigy, 1981.
3Bowman WC, Rand MJ: Textbook of Pharmacology, 2nd ed. Blackwell, 1980.
4Insignificant change in ratios over the physiologic pH range.
CHAPTER 1 Introduction    13
the most important characteristics of the group. This permits clas-
sification of other important drugs in the group as variants of the 
prototype, so that only the prototype must be learned in detail and, 
for the remaining drugs, only the differences from the prototype. 
 SOURCES OF INFORMATION 
 Students who wish to review the field of pharmacology in prepara-
tion for an examination are referred to  Pharmacology: Examination 
and Board Review, by Trevor, Katzung, and Masters (McGraw-
Hill, 2010). This book provides over 1000 questions and explana-
tions in USMLE format. A short study guide is  USMLE Road 
Map: Pharmacology, by Katzung and Trevor (McGraw-Hill, 2006). 
 Road Map contains numerous tables, figures, mnemonics, and 
USMLE-type clinical vignettes. 
 The references at the end of each chapter in this book were 
selected to provide reviews or classic publications of information 
specific to those chapters. More detailed questions relating to basic 
or clinical research are best answered by referring to the journals 
covering general pharmacology and clinical specialties. For the 
student and the physician, three periodicals can be recommended 
as especially useful sources of current information about drugs: 
 The New England Journal of Medicine , which publishes much 
original drug-related clinical research as well as frequent reviews of 
topics in pharmacology;  The Medical Letter on Drugs and 
Therapeutics , which publishes brief critical reviews of new and old 
therapies, mostly pharmacologic; and  Drugs , which publishes 
extensive reviews of drugs and drug groups. 
 Other sources of information pertinent to the United States 
should be mentioned as well. The “package insert” is a summary 
of information that the manufacturer is required to place in the 
prescription sales package;  Physicians’ Desk Reference (PDR) is a 
compendium of package inserts published annually with supple-
ments twice a year. It is sold in bookstores and distributed free to 
licensed physicians. The package insert consists of a brief descrip-
tion of the pharmacology of the product. This brochure contains 
much practical information, and it is also used as a means of shift-
ing liability for untoward drug reactions from the manufacturer 
onto the practitioner. Therefore, the manufacturer typically lists 
every toxic effect ever reported, no matter how rare.  Micromedex is 
an extensive subscription website maintained by the Thomson 
Corporation (http://clinical.thomsonhealthcare.com/products/phy-
sicians/). It provides downloads for personal digital assistant 
devices, online drug dosage and interaction information, and 
toxicologic information. A useful and objective quarterly hand-
book that presents information on drug toxicity and interactions 
is  Drug Interactions: Analysis and Management . Finally, the FDA 
maintains an Internet website that carries news regarding recent 
drug approvals, withdrawals, warnings, etc. It can be accessed at 
http://www.fda.gov. The MedWatch drug safety program is a free 
e-mail notification service that provides news of FDA drug warn-
ings and withdrawals. Subscriptions may be obtained at https://
service.govdelivery.com/service/user.html?code=USFDA. 
 REFERENCES 
 Drug Interactions: Analysis and Management (quarterly) . Wolters Kluwer 
Publications. 
 Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review , 9th ed. McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
Symposium: Allosterism and collateral efficacy. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
2007;28(8):entire issue. 
 USMLE Road Map: Pharmacology ; McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
 The Medical Letter on Drugs and Therapeutics. The Medical Letter, Inc. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
In the case study, the patient intravenously self-administered 
an overdose of methamphetamine, a weak base. This drug is 
freely filtered at the glomerulus, but can be rapidly reab-
sorbed in the renal tubule. Administration of ammonium 
chloride acidifies the urine, converting a larger fraction of 
the drug to the protonated, charged form, which is poorly 
reabsorbed and thus more rapidly eliminated. Note that not 
all experts recommend forced diuresis and urinary pH 
manipulation after methamphetamine overdose because of 
the risk of renal damage (see  Figure 1–6 ).
This page intentionally left blank 
15
 A 51-year-old man presents to his medical clinic due to dif-
ficulty breathing. The patient is afebrile and normotensive, 
but tachypneic. Auscultation of the chest reveals diffuse 
wheezes. The physician provisionally makes the diagnosis of 
bronchial asthma and administers epinephrine by intramus-
cular injection, improving the patient’s breathing over several 
minutes. A normal chest X-ray is subsequently obtained, and 
C A S E  S T U D Y
the medical history is remarkable only for mild hyperten-
sion that was recently treated with propranolol. The physi-
cian instructs the patient to discontinue use of propranolol, 
and changes the patient’s antihypertensive medication to 
verapamil. Why is the physician correct to discontinue 
propranolol? Why is verapamil a better choice for managing 
hypertension in this patient? 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Drug Receptors & 
Pharmacodynamics
 Mark von Zastrow, MD, PhD∗ 
  ∗  The author thanks Henry R. Bourne, MD, for major contributions to 
this chapter.
 Therapeutic and toxic effects of drugs result from their interac-
tions with molecules in the patient. Most drugs act by associating 
with specific macromolecules in ways that alter the macromole-
cules’ biochemical or biophysical activities. This idea, more than a 
century old, is embodied in the term  receptor: the component of 
a cell or organism that interacts with a drug and initiates the chain 
of events leading to the drug’s observed effects. 
 Receptors have become the central focus of investigation of 
drug effects and their mechanisms of action (pharmacodynamics). 
The receptor concept, extended to endocrinology, immunology, 
and molecular biology, has proved essential for explaining many 
aspects of biologic regulation. Many drug receptors have been 
isolated and characterized in detail, thus opening the way to pre-
cise understanding of the molecular basis of drug action. 
 The receptor concept has important practical consequences for 
the development of drugs and for arriving at therapeutic decisions 
in clinical practice. These consequences form the basis for under-
standing the actions and clinical uses of drugs described in almost 
every chapter of this book. They may be briefly summarized as 
follows: 
 1. Receptors largely determine the quantitative relations 
between dose or concentration of drug and pharmacologic 
effects. The receptor’s affinity for binding a drug determines the 
concentration of drug required to form a significant number of 
drug-receptor complexes, and the total number of receptors 
may limit the maximal effect a drug may produce. 
 2. Receptors are responsible for selectivity of drug action. The 
molecular size, shape, and electrical charge of a drug determine 
whether—and with what affinity—it will bind to a particular 
receptor among the vast array of chemically different binding 
sites available in a cell, tissue, or patient. Accordingly, changes 
in the chemical structure of a drug can dramatically increase or 
decrease a new drug’s affinities for different classes of receptors, 
with resulting alterations in therapeutic and toxic effects. 
 3. Receptors mediate the actions of pharmacologic agonists 
and antagonists. Some drugs and many natural ligands, such 
as hormones and neurotransmitters, regulate the function of 
receptor macromolecules as  agonists ; this means that they 
activate the receptor to signal as a direct result of binding to it. 
Some agonists activate a single kind of receptor to produce all 
their biologic functions, whereas others selectively promote 
one receptor function more than another. 
 
   Other drugs act as pharmacologic  antagonists ; that is, they 
bind to receptors but do not activate generation of a signal; con-
sequently, they interfere with the ability of an agonist to activate 
the receptor. The effect of a so-called “pure” antagonist on a cell 
or in a patient depends entirely on its preventing the binding of 
agonist molecules and blocking their biologic actions. Other 
2
16    SECTION I Basic Principles
antagonists, in addition to preventing agonist binding, sup-
press the basal signaling (“constitutive”) activity of receptors. 
Some of the most useful drugs in clinical medicine are phar-
macologic antagonists. 
 MACROMOLECULAR NATURE 
OF DRUG RECEPTORS 
 Most receptors are proteins, presumably because the structures of 
polypeptides provide both the necessary diversity and the neces-
sary specificity of shape and electrical charge. Receptors vary 
greatly in structure and can be identified in many ways. 
Traditionally, drug binding was used to identify or purify recep-
tors from tissue extracts; consequently, receptors were discovered 
after the drugs that bind to them. However, advances in molecular 
biology and genome sequencing have effectively reversed this 
order. Now receptors are being discovered by predicted structure 
or sequence homology to other (known) receptors, and drugs that 
bind to them are developed later using chemical screening meth-
ods. This effort has revealed, for many known drugs, a larger 
diversity of receptors than previously anticipated. It has also iden-
tified a number of  “orphan” receptors, so-called because their 
ligands are presently unknown, which may prove to be useful 
targets for the development of new drugs. 
 The best-characterized drug receptors are  regulatory proteins, 
which mediate the actions of endogenous chemical signals such as 
neurotransmitters, autacoids, and hormones. This class of recep-
tors mediates the effects of many of the most useful therapeutic 
agents. The molecular structures and biochemical mechanisms of 
these regulatory receptors are described in a later section entitled 
Signaling Mechanisms & Drug Action. 
 Other classes of proteins that have been clearly identified as 
drug receptors include  enzymes, which may be inhibited (or, less 
commonly, activated) by binding a drug (eg, dihydrofolate 
reductase, the receptor for the antineoplastic drug methotrexate); 
 transport proteins (eg, Na + /K + -ATPase, the membrane receptor 
for cardioactive digitalis glycosides); and  structural proteins (eg, 
tubulin, the receptor for colchicine, an anti-inflammatory agent). 
 This chapter deals with three aspects of drug receptor function, 
presented in increasing order of complexity: (1) receptors as deter-
minants of the quantitative relation between the concentration of 
a drug and the pharmacologic response, (2) receptors as regulatory 
proteins and components of chemical signaling mechanisms that 
provide targets for important drugs, and (3) receptors as key deter-
minants of the therapeutic and toxic effects of drugs in patients. 
 RELATION BETWEEN DRUG 
CONCENTRATION & RESPONSE 
 The relation between dose of a drug and the clinically observed 
response may be complex. In carefully controlled in vitro systems, 
however, the relation between concentration of a drug and its 
effect is often simple and can be described with mathematical 
precision. This idealized relation underlies the more complex rela-
tions between dose and effect that occur when drugs are given to 
patients. 
 Concentration-Effect Curves & Receptor 
Binding of Agonists 
 Even in intact animals or patients, responses to low doses of a drug 
usually increase in direct proportion to dose. As doses increase, 
however, the response increment diminishes; finally, doses may be 
reached at which no further increase in response can be achieved. 
In idealized or in vitro systems, the relation between drug concen-
tration and effect is described by a hyperbolic curve ( Figure 2–1 A) 
according to the following equation: 
 
 where E is the effect observed at concentration C, E max is the 
maximal response that can be produced by the drug, and EC 50 is 
the concentration of drug that produces 50% of maximal effect. 
 This hyperbolic relation resembles the mass action law, which 
describes association between two molecules of a given affinity. This 
resemblance suggests that drug agonists act by binding to (“occupy-
ing”) a distinct class of biologic molecules with a characteristic affin-
ity for the drug receptor. Radioactive receptor ligands have been used 
to confirm this occupancy assumption in many drug-receptor sys-
tems. In these systems, drug bound to receptors (B) relates to the 
concentration of free (unbound) drug (C) as depicted in  Figure 2–1 B 
and as described by an analogous equation: 
 
 in which B max indicates the total concentration of receptor sites 
(ie, sites bound to the drug at infinitely high concentrations of free 
drug) and K d (the equilibrium dissociation constant) represents 
the concentration of free drug at which half-maximal binding is 
observed. This constant characterizes the receptor’s affinity for 
binding the drug in a reciprocal fashion: If the K d is low, binding 
affinity is high, and vice versa. The EC 50 and K d may be identical, 
but need not be, as discussed below. Dose-response data are often 
presented as a plot of the drug effect (ordinate) against the  loga-
rithm of the dose or concentration (abscissa). This mathematical 
maneuver transforms the hyperbolic curve of  Figure 2–1 into a 
sigmoid curve with a linear midportion (eg,  Figure 2–2 ). This 
expands the scale of the concentration axis at low concentrations 
(where the effect is changing rapidly) and compresses it at high 
concentrations (where the effect is changing slowly), but has no 
special biologic or pharmacologic significance. 
 Receptor-Effector Coupling & 
Spare Receptors 
 When a receptor is occupied by an agonist, the resulting conforma-
tional change is only the first of many steps usually required to 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    17
produce a pharmacologic response. The transduction process that 
links drug occupancy of receptors and pharmacologic response is 
often termed  coupling. The relative efficiency of occupancy-response 
coupling is partially determined by the initial conformational change 
in the receptor; thus, the effects of full agonists can be considered 
more efficiently coupled to receptor occupancy than can the effects 
of partial agonists (described in text that follows). Coupling effi-
ciency is also determined by the biochemical events that transduce 
receptor occupancy into cellular response. Sometimes the biologic 
effect of the drug is linearly related to the number of receptors 
bound. This is often true for drug-regulated ion channels, eg, in 
which the ion current produced by the drug is directly proportional 
to the number of receptors (ion channels) bound. In other cases, the 
biologic response is a more complex function of drug binding to 
receptors. This is often true for receptors linked to enzymatic signal 
transduction cascades, eg, in which the biologic response often 
increases disproportionately to the number of receptors occupied by 
drug. 
 Many factors can contribute to nonlinear occupancy-response 
coupling, and often these factors are only partially understood. 
The concept of  “spare” receptors, regardless of the precise bio-
chemical mechanism involved, can help us to think about these 
effects. Receptors are said to be “spare” for a given pharmacologic 
response if it is possible to elicit a maximal biologic response at a 
concentration of agonist that does not result in occupancy of the 
full complement of available receptors. Experimentally, spare 
receptors may be demonstrated by using irreversible antagonists to 
prevent binding of agonist to a proportion of available receptors 
and showing that high concentrations of agonist can still produce 
an undiminished maximal response ( Figure 2–2 ). Thus, the same 
maximal inotropic response of heart muscle to catecholamines can 
be elicited even under conditions in which 90% of the β adreno-
ceptors are occupied by a quasi-irreversible antagonist. Accordingly, 
myocardial cells are said to contain a large proportion of spare β 
adrenoceptors. 
 How can we account for the phenomenon of spare receptors? 
In the example of the β adrenoceptor, receptor activation pro-
motes binding of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to an interme-
diate signaling protein and activation of the signaling 
intermediate may greatly outlast the agonist-receptor interaction 
(see the following section on G Proteins & Second Messengers). 
In such a case, the “spareness” of receptors is  temporal . Maximal 
Drug effect (E)
Emax
Bmax
Drug concentration (C) 
Drug concentration (C) 
A
B
EC50
Kd
1.0
0.5
1.0
0.5
Receptor-bound drug (B)
 FIGURE 2–1  Relations between drug concentration and drug effect ( A ) or receptor-bound drug ( B ). The drug concentrations at which 
effect or receptor occupancy is half-maximal are denoted by EC 50 and K d , respectively. 
0.5
Agonist effect
A
B
C
D
E
EC50 (C)
EC50 (B)
EC50 (A)
Agonist concentration (C) (log scale)
EC50 (D,E)    Kd 
 FIGURE 2–2  Logarithmic transformation of the dose axis and 
experimental demonstration of spare receptors, using different con-
centrations of an irreversible antagonist. Curve  A shows agonist 
response in the absence of antagonist. After treatment with a low 
concentration of antagonist (curve  B ), the curve is shifted to the 
right. Maximal responsiveness is preserved, however, because the 
remaining available receptors are still in excess of the number 
required. In curve  C, produced after treatment with a larger concen-
tration of antagonist, the available receptors are no longer “spare”; 
instead, they are just sufficient to mediate an undiminished maximal 
response. Still higher concentrations of antagonist (curves  D and  E ) 
reduce the number of available receptors to the point that maximal 
response is diminished. The apparent EC 50 of the agonist in curves  D 
and  E may approximate the K d that characterizes the binding affinity 
of the agonist for the receptor. 
18    SECTION I Basic Principles
response can be elicited by activation of relatively few receptors 
because the response initiated by an individual ligand-receptor 
binding event persists longer than the binding event itself. 
 In other cases, in which the biochemical mechanism is not 
understood, we imagine that the receptors might be  spare in num-
ber . If the concentration or amount of cellular components other 
than the receptors limits the coupling of receptor occupancy to 
response, then a maximal response can occur without occupancy 
of all receptors. Thus, the sensitivity of a cell or tissue to a particu-
lar concentration of agonist depends not only on the  affinity of the 
receptor for binding the agonist (characterized by the K d ) but also 
on the  degree of spareness —the total number of receptors present 
compared with the number actually needed to elicit a maximal 
biologic response. 
 The concept of spare receptors is very useful clinically because 
it allows one to think precisely about the effects of drug dosage 
without needing to consider biochemical details of the signaling 
response. The K d of the agonist-receptor interaction determines 
what fraction (B/B max ) of total receptors will be occupied at a 
given free concentration (C) of agonist regardless of the receptor 
concentration: 
 
 Imagine a responding cell with four receptors and four effec-
tors. Here the number of effectors does not limit the maximal 
response, and the receptors are  not spare in number. Consequently, 
an agonist present at a concentration equal to the K d will occupy 
50% of the receptors, and half of the effectors will be activated, 
producing a half-maximal response (ie, two receptors stimulate 
two effectors). Now imagine that the number of receptors 
increases 10-fold to 40 receptors but that the total number of 
effectors remains constant. Most of the receptors are now spare in 
number. As a result, a much lower concentration of agonist suf-
fices to occupy 2 of the 40 receptors (5% of the receptors), and 
this same low concentration of agonist is able to elicit a half-
maximal response (two of four effectors activated). Thus, it is 
possible to change the sensitivity of tissues with spare receptors by 
changing receptor number. 
 Competitive & Irreversible Antagonists 
 Receptor antagonists bind to receptors but do not activate them. 
The primary action of antagonists is to prevent agonists (other 
drugs or endogenous regulatory molecules) from activating recep-
tors. Some antagonists (so-called “inverse agonists,” see Chapter 
1), also reduce receptor activity below basal levels observed in the 
absence of bound ligand. Antagonists are divided into two classes 
depending on whether or not they  reversibly compete with agonists 
for binding to receptors. 
 In the presence of a fixed concentration of agonist, increasing 
concentrations of a reversible  competitive antagonist progres-
sively inhibit the agonist response; high antagonist concentra-
tions prevent response completely. Conversely, sufficiently high 
concentrations of agonist can surmount the effect of a given con-
centration of the antagonist; that is, the E max for the agonist 
remains the same for any fixed concentration of antagonist 
( Figure 2–3 A). Because the antagonism is competitive, the pres-
ence of antagonist increases the agonist concentration required 
Agonist effect (E)
Agonist effect (E)
Agonist +
competitive antagonist
Agonist +
noncompetitive antagonist
C' = C (1 + [ l ] / K)
EC50
C
Agonist 
alone
Agonist concentration
Agonist concentration
Agonist 
alone
A
B
 FIGURE 2–3  Changes in agonist concentration-effect curves produced by a competitive antagonist ( A ) or by an irreversible antagonist ( B ). 
In the presence of a competitive antagonist, higher concentrations of agonist are required to produce a given effect; thus the agonist concen-
tration (C’) required for a given effect in the presence of concentration [I] of an antagonist is shifted to the right, as shown. High agonist concen-
trations can overcome inhibition by a competitive antagonist. This is not the case with an irreversible (or noncompetitive) antagonist, which 
reduces the maximal effect the agonist can achieve, although it may not change its EC 50 . 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    19
for a given degree of response, and so the agonist concentration-
effect curve is shifted to the right. 
 The concentration (C′) of an agonist required to produce a 
given effect in the presence of a fixed concentration ([I]) of com-
petitive antagonist is greater than the agonist concentration (C) 
required to produce the same effect in the absence of the antago-
nist. The ratio of these two agonist concentrations (dose ratio) is 
related to the dissociation constant (K i ) of the antagonist by the 
Schild equation: 
C'
[l]
C
Ki
= 1 +
 
 Pharmacologists often use this relation to determine the K i of 
a competitive antagonist. Even without knowledge of the relation 
between agonist occupancy of the receptor and response, the K i 
can be determined simply and accurately. As shown in  Figure 2–3 , 
concentration-response curves are obtained in the presence and 
in the absence of a fixed concentration of competitive antagonist; 
comparison of the agonist concentrations required to produce 
identical degrees of pharmacologic effect in the two situations 
reveals the antagonist’s K i . If C′ is twice C, for example, then 
[I] = K i . 
 For the clinician, this mathematical relation has two important 
therapeutic implications: 
1.  The degree of inhibition produced by a competitive antagonist 
depends on the concentration of antagonist. The competitive 
β-adrenoceptor antagonist propranolol provides a useful 
example. Patients receiving a fixed dose of this drug exhibit a 
wide range of plasma concentrations, owing to differences 
among individuals in clearance of propranolol. As a result, 
inhibitory effects on physiologic responses to norepinephrine 
and epinephrine (endogenous adrenergic receptor agonists) 
may vary widely, and the dose of propranolol must be adjusted 
accordingly. 
 2. Clinical response to a competitive antagonist also depends on 
the concentration of agonist that is competing for binding to 
receptors. Again, propranolol provides a useful example: When 
this drug is administered at moderate doses sufficient to block 
the effect of basal levels of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine, 
resting heart rate is decreased. However, the increase in the 
release of norepinephrine and epinephrine that occurs with 
exercise, postural changes, or emotional stress may suffice to 
overcome this competitive antagonism. Accordingly, the same 
dose of propranolol may have little effect under these condi-
tions, thereby altering therapeutic response. 
 Some receptor antagonists bind to the receptor in an  irrevers-
ible or nearly irreversible fashion, either by forming a covalent 
bond with the receptor or by binding so tightly that, for practical 
purposes, the receptor is unavailable for binding of agonist. After 
occupancy of some proportion of receptors by such an antagonist, 
the number of remaining unoccupied receptors may be too low for 
the agonist (even at high concentrations) to elicit a response com-
parable to the previous maximal response ( Figure 2–3 B). If spare 
receptors are present, however, a lower dose of an irreversible 
antagonist may leave enough receptors unoccupied to allow 
achievement of maximum response to agonist, although a higher 
agonist concentration will be required ( Figure 2–2 B and C; see 
Receptor-Effector Coupling & Spare Receptors). 
 Therapeutically, irreversible antagonists present distinct advan-
tages and disadvantages. Once the irreversible antagonist has 
occupied the receptor, it need not be present in unbound form to 
inhibit agonist responses. Consequently, the duration of action of 
such an irreversible antagonist is relatively independent of its own 
rate of elimination and more dependent on the rate of turnover of 
receptor molecules. 
 Phenoxybenzamine, an irreversible α-adrenoceptor antagonist, 
is used to control the hypertension caused by catecholamines 
released from pheochromocytoma, a tumor of the adrenal 
medulla. If administration of phenoxybenzamine lowers blood 
pressure, blockade will be maintained even when the tumor epi-
sodically releases very large amounts of catecholamine. In this 
case, the ability to prevent responses to varying and high concen-
trations of agonist is a therapeutic advantage. If overdose occurs, 
however, a real problem may arise. If the α-adrenoceptor blockade 
cannot be overcome, excess effects of the drug must be antago-
nized “physiologically,” ie, by using a pressor agent that does not 
act via α receptors. 
 Antagonists can function noncompetitively in a different way; 
that is, by binding to a site on the receptor protein separate from 
the agonist binding site, and thereby modifying receptor activity 
without blocking agonist binding (see Figure 1–3C and D). 
Although these drugs act noncompetitively, their actions are 
reversible if they do not bind covalently. Such drugs are often 
called  allosteric modulators . For example, benzodiazepines bind 
noncompetitively to ion channels activated by the neurotransmit-
ter γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), enhancing the net activating 
effect of GABA on channel conductance. 
 Partial Agonists 
 Based on the maximal pharmacologic response that occurs when all 
receptors are occupied, agonists can be divided into two classes: 
 partial agonists produce a lower response, at full receptor occu-
pancy, than do  full agonists. Partial agonists produce concentra-
tion-effect curves that resemble those observed with full agonists in 
the presence of an antagonist that irreversibly blocks some of the 
receptor sites (compare  Figures 2–2 [curve D] and 2–4B). It is 
important to emphasize that the failure of partial agonists to pro-
duce a maximal response is not due to decreased affinity for binding 
to receptors. Indeed, a partial agonist’s inability to cause a maximal 
pharmacologic response, even when present at high concentrations 
that saturate binding to all receptors, is indicated by the fact that 
partial agonists competitively inhibit the responses produced by full 
agonists ( Figure 2–4 C). Many drugs used clinically as antagonists are 
actually weak partial agonists. Partial agonism can be useful in some 
clinical circumstances. For example, buprenorphine, a partial agonist 
of μ-opioid receptors, is a generally safer analgesic drug than mor-
phine because it produces less respiratory depression in overdose. 
Buprenorphine is effectively antianalgesic when administered to 
20    SECTION I Basic Principles
morphine-dependent individuals, however, and may precipitate a 
drug withdrawal syndrome due to competitive inhibition of mor-
phine’s agonist action. 
 Other Mechanisms of Drug Antagonism 
 Not all the mechanisms of antagonism involve interactions of 
drugs or endogenous ligands at a single type of receptor, and some 
types of antagonism do not involve a receptor at all. For example, 
protamine, a protein that is positively charged at physiologic pH, 
can be used clinically to counteract the effects of heparin, an anti-
coagulant that is negatively charged. In this case, one drug acts as 
a  chemical antagonist of the other simply by ionic binding that 
makes the other drug unavailable for interactions with proteins 
involved in blood clotting. 
 Another type of antagonism is  physiologic antagonism between 
endogenous regulatory pathways mediated by different receptors. 
For example, several catabolic actions of the glucocorticoid 
hormones lead to increased blood sugar, an effect that is physio-
logically opposed by insulin. Although glucocorticoids and insulin 
act on quite distinct receptor-effector systems, the clinician must 
sometimes administer insulin to oppose the hyperglycemic effects 
of a glucocorticoid hormone, whether the latter is elevated by 
endogenous synthesis (eg, a tumor of the adrenal cortex) or as a 
result of glucocorticoid therapy. 
 In general, use of a drug as a physiologic antagonist produces 
effects that are less specific and less easy to control than are the 
effects of a receptor-specific antagonist. Thus, for example, to treat 
bradycardia caused by increased release of acetylcholine from 
vagus nerve endings, the physician could use isoproterenol, a 
β-adrenoceptor agonist that increases heart rate by mimicking 
sympathetic stimulation of the heart. However, use of this physi-
ologic antagonist would be less rational—and potentially more 
dangerous—than would use of a receptor-specific antagonist such 
as atropine (a competitive antagonist at the receptors at which 
acetylcholine slows heart rate). 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Response
Partial agonist 
component
Full agonist 
component
Total response 
log (Partial agonist)
C
–6
–8
–10
100
80
60
40
20
0
Percentage of maximal binding
Partial agonist
Full agonist
log (Partial agonist)
A
Partial agonist
Full agonist
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Response
log (Full agonist or partial agonist)
B
–6
–8
–10
–6
–8
–10
 FIGURE 2–4  A: The percentage of receptor occupancy resulting from full agonist (present at a single concentration) binding to receptors 
in the presence of increasing concentrations of a partial agonist. Because the full agonist (filled squares) and the partial agonist (open squares) 
compete to bind to the same receptor sites, when occupancy by the partial agonist increases, binding of the full agonist decreases.  B: When 
each of the two drugs is used alone and response is measured, occupancy of all the receptors by the partial agonist produces a lower maximal 
response than does similar occupancy by the full agonist.  C: Simultaneous treatment with a single concentration of full agonist and increasing 
concentrations of the partial agonist produces the response patterns shown in the bottom panel. The fractional response caused by a single 
high concentration of the full agonist (filled squares) decreases as increasing concentrations of the partial agonist compete to bind to the 
receptor with increasing success; at the same time the portion of the response caused by the partial agonist (open squares) increases, while the 
total response—ie, the sum of responses to the two drugs (filled triangles)—gradually decreases, eventually reaching the value produced by 
partial agonist alone (compare with B). 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    21
 SIGNALING MECHANISMS & DRUG 
ACTION 
 Until now we have considered receptor interactions and drug 
effects in terms of equations and concentration-effect curves. We 
must also understand the molecular mechanisms by which a drug 
acts. Such understanding allows us to ask basic questions with 
important clinical implications: 
 •  Why do some drugs produce effects that persist for minutes, 
hours, or even days after the drug is no longer present? 
 • Why do responses to other drugs diminish rapidly with pro-
longed or repeated administration? 
 • How do cellular mechanisms for amplifying external chemical 
signals explain the phenomenon of spare receptors? 
 • Why do chemically similar drugs often exhibit extraordinary 
selectivity in their actions? 
•  Do these mechanisms provide targets for developing new drugs? 
 Most transmembrane signaling is accomplished by a small 
number of different molecular mechanisms. Each type of mecha-
nism has been adapted, through the evolution of distinctive pro-
tein families, to transduce many different signals. These protein 
families include receptors on the cell surface and within the cell, 
as well as enzymes and other components that generate, amplify, 
coordinate, and terminate postreceptor signaling by chemical sec-
ond messengers in the cytoplasm. This section first discusses the 
mechanisms for carrying chemical information across the plasma 
membrane and then outlines key features of cytoplasmic second 
messengers. 
 Five basic mechanisms of transmembrane signaling are well 
understood ( Figure 2–5 ). Each uses a different strategy to 
circumvent the barrier posed by the lipid bilayer of the plasma 
membrane. These strategies use (1) a lipid-soluble ligand that 
crosses the membrane and acts on an intracellular receptor; (2) a 
transmembrane receptor protein whose intracellular enzymatic 
activity is allosterically regulated by a ligand that binds to a site on 
the protein’s extracellular domain; (3) a transmembrane receptor 
that binds and stimulates a protein tyrosine kinase; (4) a ligand-
gated transmembrane ion channel that can be induced to open or 
close by the binding of a ligand; or (5) a transmembrane receptor 
protein that stimulates a GTP-binding signal transducer protein 
(G protein), which in turn modulates production of an intracellu-
lar second messenger. 
 Although the five established mechanisms do not account 
for all the chemical signals conveyed across cell membranes, 
they do transduce many of the most important signals exploited 
in pharmacotherapy. 
 Intracellular Receptors for 
Lipid-Soluble Agents 
 Several biologic ligands are sufficiently lipid-soluble to cross the 
plasma membrane and act on intracellular receptors. One class of 
such ligands includes steroids (corticosteroids, mineralocorticoids, 
sex steroids, vitamin D), and thyroid hormone, whose receptors 
stimulate the transcription of genes by binding to specific DNA 
sequences near the gene whose expression is to be regulated. Many 
of the target DNA sequences (called  response elements ) have 
been identified. 
 These “gene-active” receptors belong to a protein family that 
evolved from a common precursor. Dissection of the receptors by 
C
D
Y
Y~P
Outside
cell
Drug
Inside
cell
Membrane
A
B
G
1
2
3
5
4
R
R
R
R
R
E
 FIGURE 2–5  Known transmembrane signaling mechanisms:  1: A lipid-soluble chemical signal crosses the plasma membrane and acts on 
an intracellular receptor (which may be an enzyme or a regulator of gene transcription);  2: the signal binds to the extracellular domain of a 
transmembrane protein, thereby activating an enzymatic activity of its cytoplasmic domain;  3: the signal binds to the extracellular domain of a 
transmembrane receptor bound to a separate protein tyrosine kinase, which it activates;  4: the signal binds to and directly regulates the open-
ing of an ion channel;  5: the signal binds to a cell-surface receptor linked to an effector enzyme by a G protein. (A, C, substrates; B, D, products; 
R, receptor; G, G protein; E, effector [enzyme or ion channel]; Y, tyrosine; P, phosphate.) 
22    SECTION I Basic Principles
recombinant DNA techniques has provided insights into their 
molecular mechanism. For example, binding of glucocorticoid 
hormone to its normal receptor protein relieves an inhibitory 
constraint on the transcription-stimulating activity of the protein. 
 Figure 2–6 schematically depicts the molecular mechanism of 
glucocorticoid action: In the absence of hormone, the receptor is 
bound to hsp90, a protein that appears to prevent normal folding 
of several structural domains of the receptor. Binding of hormone 
to the ligand-binding domain triggers release of hsp90. This 
allows the DNA-binding and transcription-activating domains of 
the receptor to fold into their functionally active conformations, 
so that the activated receptor can initiate transcription of target 
genes. 
 The mechanism used by hormones that act by regulating gene 
expression has two therapeutically important consequences: 
 1. All of these hormones produce their effects after a characteristic 
lag period of 30 minutes to several hours—the time required 
for the synthesis of new proteins. This means that the gene-
active hormones cannot be expected to alter a pathologic state 
within minutes (eg, glucocorticoids will not immediately 
relieve the symptoms of acute bronchial asthma). 
2.  The effects of these agents can persist for hours or days after the 
agonist concentration has been reduced to zero. The persis-
tence of effect is primarily due to the relatively slow turnover 
of most enzymes and proteins, which can remain active in cells 
for hours or days after they have been synthesized. Consequently, 
it means that the beneficial (or toxic) effects of a gene-active 
hormone usually decrease slowly when administration of the 
hormone is stopped. 
 Ligand-Regulated Transmembrane 
Enzymes Including Receptor 
Tyrosine Kinases 
 This class of receptor molecules mediates the first steps in signal-
ing by insulin, epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived 
growth factor (PDGF), atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), trans-
forming growth factor-β (TGF-β), and many other trophic hor-
mones. These receptors are polypeptides consisting of an 
extracellular hormone-binding domain and a cytoplasmic enzyme 
domain, which may be a protein tyrosine kinase, a serine kinase, 
or a guanylyl cyclase ( Figure 2–7 ). In all these receptors, the two 
domains are connected by a hydrophobic segment of the polypep-
tide that crosses the lipid bilayer of the plasma membrane. 
 The receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathway begins with 
binding of ligand, typically a polypeptide hormone or growth fac-
tor, to the receptor’s extracellular domain. The resulting change in 
receptor conformation causes two receptor molecules to bind to 
one another  (dimerize) , which in turn brings together the tyrosine 
kinase domains, which become enzymatically active, and phos-
phorylate one another as well as additional downstream signaling 
proteins. Activated receptors catalyze phosphorylation of tyrosine 
residues on different target signaling proteins, thereby allowing a 
single type of activated receptor to modulate a number of bio-
chemical processes. (Some receptor tyrosine kinases form oligo-
meric complexes larger than dimers upon activation by ligand, but 
the pharmacologic significance of such higher-order complexes is 
presently unclear.) 
 Insulin, for example, uses a single class of receptors to trigger 
increased uptake of glucose and amino acids and to regulate 
metabolism of glycogen and triglycerides in the cell. Similarly, 
each of the growth factors initiates in its specific target cells a 
complex program of cellular events ranging from altered mem-
brane transport of ions and metabolites to changes in the expres-
sion of many genes. 
 Inhibitors of receptor tyrosine kinases are finding increased use 
in neoplastic disorders in which excessive growth factor signaling 
is often involved. Some of these inhibitors are monoclonal anti-
bodies (eg, trastuzumab, cetuximab), which bind to the extracel-
lular domain of a particular receptor and interfere with binding of 
growth factor. Other inhibitors are membrane-permeant “small 
molecule” chemicals (eg, gefitinib, erlotinib), which inhibit the 
receptor’s kinase activity in the cytoplasm. 
 The intensity and duration of action of EGF, PDGF, and other 
agents that act via receptor tyrosine kinases are limited by a process 
Ligand-binding
domain
DNA-binding
domain
Transcription-
activating
domain
Altered transcription
of specific genes
hsp90
hsp90
Steroid
 FIGURE 2–6  Mechanism of glucocorticoid action. The glucocor-
ticoid receptor polypeptide is schematically depicted as a protein 
with three distinct domains. A heat-shock protein, hsp90, binds to 
the receptor in the absence of hormone and prevents folding into 
the active conformation of the receptor. Binding of a hormone ligand 
(steroid) causes dissociation of the hsp90 stabilizer and permits con-
version to the active configuration. 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    23
called receptor  down-regulation. Ligand binding often induces 
accelerated endocytosis of receptors from the cell surface, followed 
by the degradation of those receptors (and their bound ligands). 
When this process occurs at a rate faster than de novo synthesis of 
receptors, the total number of cell-surface receptors is reduced 
(down-regulated), and the cell’s responsiveness to ligand is corre-
spondingly diminished. A well-understood example is the EGF 
receptor tyrosine kinase, which undergoes rapid endocytosis fol-
lowed by proteolysis in lysosomes after EGF binding; genetic 
mutations that interfere with this process cause excessive growth 
factor-induced cell proliferation and are associated with an 
increased susceptibility to certain types of cancer. Endocytosis of 
other receptor tyrosine kinases, most notably receptors for nerve 
growth factor, serves a very different function. Internalized nerve 
growth factor receptors are not rapidly degraded and are translo-
cated in endocytic vesicles from the distal axon, where receptors 
are activated by nerve growth factor released from the innervated 
tissue, to the cell body. In the cell body, the growth factor signal is 
transduced to transcription factors regulating the expression of 
genes controlling cell survival. This process effectively transports a 
critical survival signal from its site of release to its site of signaling 
effect, and does so over a remarkably long distance—up to 1 meter 
in certain sensory neurons. 
 A number of regulators of growth and differentiation, including 
TGF-β, act on another class of transmembrane receptor enzymes 
that phosphorylate serine and threonine residues. ANP, an impor-
tant regulator of blood volume and vascular tone, acts on a trans-
membrane receptor whose intracellular domain, a guanylyl cyclase, 
generates cGMP (see below). Receptors in both groups, like the 
receptor tyrosine kinases, are active in their dimeric forms. 
 Cytokine Receptors 
 Cytokine receptors respond to a heterogeneous group of peptide 
ligands, which include growth hormone, erythropoietin, several 
kinds of interferon, and other regulators of growth and differen-
tiation. These receptors use a mechanism ( Figure 2–8 ) closely 
resembling that of receptor tyrosine kinases, except that in this 
case, the protein tyrosine kinase activity is not intrinsic to the 
receptor molecule. Instead, a separate protein tyrosine kinase, 
from the Janus-kinase (JAK) family, binds noncovalently to the 
receptor. As in the case of the EGF receptor, cytokine receptors 
dimerize after they bind the activating ligand, allowing the bound 
JAKs to become activated and to phosphorylate tyrosine residues 
on the receptor. Phosphorylated tyrosine residues on the receptor’s 
cytoplasmic surface then set in motion a complex signaling dance 
by binding another set of proteins, called STATs (signal transduc-
ers and activators of transcription). The bound STATs are them-
selves phosphorylated by the JAKs, two STAT molecules dimerize 
(attaching to one another’s tyrosine phosphates), and finally the 
STAT/STAT dimer dissociates from the receptor and travels to the 
nucleus, where it regulates transcription of specific genes. 
 Ligand- and Voltage-Gated Channels 
 Many of the most useful drugs in clinical medicine act by mimick-
ing or blocking the actions of endogenous ligands that regulate the 
flow of ions through plasma membrane channels. The natural 
ligands are acetylcholine, serotonin, GABA, and glutamate. All of 
these agents are synaptic transmitters. 
 Each of their receptors transmits its signal across the plasma 
membrane by increasing transmembrane conductance of the 
Y
Y
Y
Y
+EGF
EGF molecules
–EGF
ATP
ADP
P
P
S~P
Inside
Outside
S
Y
 FIGURE 2–7  Mechanism of activation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor, a representative receptor tyrosine kinase. The 
receptor polypeptide has extracellular and cytoplasmic domains, depicted above and below the plasma membrane. Upon binding of EGF 
(circle), the receptor converts from its inactive monomeric state ( left ) to an active dimeric state ( right ), in which two receptor polypeptides bind 
noncovalently. The cytoplasmic domains become phosphorylated (P) on specific tyrosine residues (Y), and their enzymatic activities are 
activated, catalyzing phosphorylation of substrate proteins (S). 
24    SECTION I Basic Principles
relevant ion and thereby altering the electrical potential across the 
membrane. For example, acetylcholine causes the opening of the 
ion channel in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR), 
which allows Na + to flow down its concentration gradient into 
cells, producing a localized excitatory postsynaptic potential—a 
depolarization. 
 The nAChR is one of the best characterized of all cell-surface 
receptors for hormones or neurotransmitters ( Figure 2–9 ). One 
form of this receptor is a pentamer made up of four different 
polypeptide subunits (eg, two α chains plus one β, one γ, and one 
δ chain, all with molecular weights ranging from 43,000 to 
50,000). These polypeptides, each of which crosses the lipid 
bilayer four times, form a cylindrical structure that is 8 nm in 
diameter. When acetylcholine binds to sites on the α subunits, a 
conformational change occurs that results in the transient opening 
of a central aqueous channel through which sodium ions penetrate 
from the extracellular fluid into the cell. 
 The time elapsed between the binding of the agonist to a 
ligand-gated channel and the cellular response can often be mea-
sured in milliseconds. The rapidity of this signaling mechanism is 
crucially important for moment-to-moment transfer of informa-
tion across synapses. Ligand-gated ion channels can be regulated 
by multiple mechanisms, including phosphorylation and endocy-
tosis. In the central nervous system, these mechanisms contribute 
to synaptic plasticity involved in learning and memory. 
 Voltage-gated ion channels do not bind neurotransmitters 
directly but are controlled by membrane potential; such channels 
are also important drug targets. For example, verapamil inhibits 
voltage-gated calcium channels that are present in the heart and in 
vascular smooth muscle, producing antiarrhythmic effects and 
reducing blood pressure without mimicking or antagonizing any 
known endogenous transmitter. 
Cytokine molecules
+ Cytokine
R
R
R
R
Y~P
P~Y
STAT
P~Y
P~Y
Y~P
Y~P
JAK
JAK
JAK
JAK
STAT
STAT
STAT
 FIGURE 2–8  Cytokine receptors, like receptor tyrosine kinases, have extracellular and intracellular domains and form dimers. However, 
after activation by an appropriate ligand, separate mobile protein tyrosine kinase molecules (JAK) are activated, resulting in phosphorylation of 
signal transducers and activation of transcription (STAT) molecules. STAT dimers then travel to the nucleus, where they regulate transcription. 
Na+
Na+
ACh
ACh
β
α
α
γ
δ
Outside
Inside
 FIGURE 2–9  The nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptor, a ligand-
gated ion channel. The receptor molecule is depicted as embedded 
in a rectangular piece of plasma membrane, with extracellular fluid 
above and cytoplasm below. Composed of five subunits (two α, one 
β, one γ, and one δ), the receptor opens a central transmembrane ion 
channel when ACh binds to sites on the extracellular domain of its α 
subunits. 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    25
 G Proteins & Second Messengers 
 Many extracellular ligands act by increasing the intracellular con-
centrations of second messengers such as  cyclic adenosine-3′,5′-
monophosphate (cAMP), calcium ion, or the  phosphoinositides 
(described below). In most cases, they use a transmembrane sig-
naling system with three separate components. First, the extracel-
lular ligand is selectively detected by a cell-surface receptor. The 
receptor in turn triggers the activation of a G protein located on 
the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane. The activated G 
protein then changes the activity of an effector element, usually an 
enzyme or ion channel. This element then changes the concentra-
tion of the intracellular second messenger. For cAMP, the effector 
enzyme is adenylyl cyclase, a membrane protein that converts 
intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cAMP. The corre-
sponding G protein, G s , stimulates adenylyl cyclase after being 
activated by hormones and neurotransmitters that act via specific 
G s -coupled receptors. There are many examples of such receptors, 
including β adrenoceptors, glucagon receptors, thyrotropin recep-
tors, and certain subtypes of dopamine and serotonin receptors. 
 G s and other G proteins use a molecular mechanism that 
involves binding and hydrolysis of GTP ( Figure 2–10 ). This 
mechanism allows the transduced signal to be amplified. For 
example, a neurotransmitter such as norepinephrine may encoun-
ter its membrane receptor for only a few milliseconds. When the 
encounter generates a GTP-bound G s molecule, however, the 
duration of activation of adenylyl cyclase depends on the longevity 
of GTP binding to G s rather than on the receptor’s affinity for 
norepinephrine. Indeed, like other G proteins, GTP-bound G s 
may remain active for tens of seconds, enormously amplifying the 
original signal. This mechanism also helps explain how signaling 
by G proteins produces the phenomenon of spare receptors. The 
family of G proteins contains several functionally diverse sub-
families ( Table 2–1 ), each of which mediates effects of a particular 
set of receptors to a distinctive group of effectors. Note that an 
endogenous ligand (eg, norepinephrine, acetylcholine, serotonin, 
many others not listed in  Table 2–1 ) may bind and stimulate 
receptors that couple to different subsets of G proteins. The appar-
ent promiscuity of such a ligand allows it to elicit different G 
protein-dependent responses in different cells. For instance, the 
body responds to danger by using catecholamines (norepinephrine 
and epinephrine) both to increase heart rate and to induce con-
striction of blood vessels in the skin, by acting on G s -coupled β 
adrenoceptors and G q -coupled α 1 adrenoceptors, respectively. 
Ligand promiscuity also offers opportunities in drug development 
(see Receptor Classes & Drug Development in the following 
text). 
 Receptors coupled to G proteins are often called “G protein-
coupled receptors”  (GPCRs) , “seven-transmembrane” (7-TM), or 
“serpentine” receptors. GPCRs make up the largest receptor fam-
ily and are so-named because the receptor polypeptide chain 
“snakes” across the plasma membrane seven times ( Figure 2–11 ). 
Receptors for adrenergic amines, serotonin, acetylcholine (musca-
rinic but not nicotinic), many peptide hormones, odorants, and 
even visual receptors (in retinal rod and cone cells) all belong to 
the GPCR family. All were derived from a common evolutionary 
precursor. A few GPCRs (eg, GABA B and metabotropic glutamate 
receptors) require stable assembly into either  homodimers (com-
plexes of two identical receptor polypeptides) or  heterodimers 
(complexes of different isoforms) for functional activity. However, 
in contrast to tyrosine kinase and cytokine receptors, most GPCRs 
are thought to be able to function as monomers. 
 All GPCRs transduce signals across the plasma membrane in 
essentially the same way. Often the agonist ligand—eg, a cate-
cholamine or acetylcholine—is bound in a pocket enclosed by 
the transmembrane regions of the receptor (as in  Figure 2–11 ). 
The resulting change in conformation of these regions is trans-
mitted to cytoplasmic loops of the receptor, which in turn acti-
vate the appropriate G protein by promoting replacement of 
GDP by GTP, as described above. Amino acids in the third cyto-
plasmic loop of the GPCR polypeptide are generally thought to 
play a key role in mediating receptor interaction with G proteins 
(shown by arrows in  Figure 2–11 ). The structural basis for ligand 
binding to β adrenoceptors was determined recently using X-ray 
crystallography. 
 Receptor Regulation 
 G protein-mediated responses to drugs and hormonal agonists often 
attenuate with time ( Figure 2–12 , top). After reaching an initial 
high level, the response (eg, cellular cAMP accumulation, Na + 
influx, contractility, etc) diminishes over seconds or minutes, even 
in the continued presence of the agonist. This  “desensitization” is 
often rapidly reversible; a second exposure to agonist, if provided a 
few minutes after termination of the first exposure, results in a 
response similar to the initial response. 
G–GTP
GTP
GDP
R
Agonist
R*
E
E*
Pi
G–GDP
 FIGURE 2–10  The guanine nucleotide-dependent activation-
inactivation cycle of G proteins. The agonist activates the receptor 
(R→R*), which promotes release of GDP from the G protein (G), 
allowing entry of GTP into the nucleotide binding site. In its GTP-
bound state (GGTP), the G protein regulates activity of an effector 
enzyme or ion channel (E→E*). The signal is terminated by hydrolysis 
of GTP, followed by return of the system to the basal unstimulated 
state. Open arrows denote regulatory effects. (P i , inorganic 
phosphate.) 
26    SECTION I Basic Principles
 Many GPCRs are regulated by phosphorylation, as illustrated 
by rapid desensitization of the β adrenoceptor. The agonist-induced 
change in conformation of the receptor causes it to bind, activate, 
and serve as a substrate for a family of specific receptor kinases, 
called G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs). The activated 
GRK then phosphorylates serine residues in the receptor’s carboxyl 
terminal tail (Figure 2-12, panel B). The presence of phosphoser-
ines increases the receptor’s affinity for binding a third protein, 
β-arrestin. Binding of β-arrestin to cytoplasmic loops of the recep-
tor diminishes the receptor’s ability to interact with G s , thereby 
reducing the agonist response (ie, stimulation of adenylyl cyclase). 
Upon removal of agonist, GRK activation is terminated, and the 
desensitization process can be reversed by cellular phosphatases. 
 For β adrenoceptors, and many other GPCRs, β-arrestin bind-
ing also accelerates endocytosis of receptors from the plasma 
membrane. Endocytosis of receptors promotes their dephosphory-
lation by a receptor phosphatase that is present at high concentra-
tion on endosome membranes, and receptors then return to the 
plasma membrane. This helps explain the ability of cells to recover 
receptor-mediated signaling responsiveness very efficiently after 
agonist-induced desensitization. Several GPCRs—including 
β adrenoceptors if persistently activated—instead traffic to lyso-
somes after endocytosis and are degraded. This process effectively 
attenuates (rather than restores) cellular responsiveness, similar to 
the process of down-regulation described above for the epidermal 
growth factor receptor. Thus, depending on the particular receptor 
and duration of activation, endocytosis can contribute to either 
rapid recovery or prolonged attenuation of cellular responsiveness 
( Figure 2–12 ). 
 Well-Established Second Messengers 
 A. Cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate (cAMP) 
 
Acting as an intracellular second messenger, cAMP mediates such 
hormonal responses as the mobilization of stored energy (the 
breakdown of carbohydrates in liver or triglycerides in fat cells 
stimulated by β-adrenomimetic catecholamines), conservation of 
water by the kidney (mediated by vasopressin), Ca 2+ homeostasis 
(regulated by parathyroid hormone), and increased rate and con-
tractile force of heart muscle (β-adrenomimetic catecholamines). 
It also regulates the production of adrenal and sex steroids (in 
response to corticotropin or follicle-stimulating hormone), relax-
ation of smooth muscle, and many other endocrine and neural 
processes. 
TABLE 2–1 G proteins and their receptors and effectors.
G Protein
Receptors for
Effector/Signaling Pathway
Gs
β-Adrenergic amines, glucagon, histamine, serotonin, and many 
other hormones
↑ Adenylyl cyclase →↑ cAMP
Gi1, Gi2, Gi3
α2-Adrenergic amines, acetylcholine (muscarinic), opioids, sero-
tonin, and many others
Several, including:
 ↓ Adenylyl cyclase →↓ cAMP
 Open cardiac K+ channels →↓ heart rate
Golf
Odorants (olfactory epithelium)
↑ Adenylyl cyclase →↑ cAMP
Go
Neurotransmitters in brain (not yet specifically identified)
Not yet clear
Gq
Acetylcholine (muscarinic), bombesin, serotonin (5-HT2), and 
many others
↑ Phospholipase C →↑ IP3, diacylglycerol, cytoplasmic Ca2+
Gt1, Gt2
Photons (rhodopsin and color opsins in retinal rod and cone cells)
↑ cGMP phosphodiesterase →↓ cGMP (phototransduction)
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate.
Inside
Outside
G
protein
VI
IV
VII
III
I
II
C
OH
OH
OH
HO
Agonist
V
N
Ag
 FIGURE 2–11  Transmembrane topology of a typical “serpen-
tine” GPCR. The receptor’s amino (N) terminal is extracellular (above 
the plane of the membrane), and its carboxyl (C) terminal intracellu-
lar. The terminals are connected by a polypeptide chain that tra-
verses the plane of the membrane seven times. The hydrophobic 
transmembrane segments (light color) are designated by Roman 
numerals (I–VII). The agonist (Ag) approaches the receptor from the 
extracellular fluid and binds to a site surrounded by the transmem-
brane regions of the receptor protein. G proteins interact with cyto-
plasmic regions of the receptor, especially with portions of the third 
cytoplasmic loop between transmembrane regions V and VI. The 
receptor’s cytoplasmic terminal tail contains numerous serine and 
threonine residues whose hydroxyl (-OH) groups can be phosphory-
lated. This phosphorylation may be associated with diminished 
receptor-G protein interaction. 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    27
A
Agonist
Time
1
2
1
2
3
4
5
Response
(cAMP)
B
P'ase
Agonist in extracellular space
β−Arr
P
P
P
P
P
P
GS
GRK
1
2
ATP
Coated pit
3
6
4
5
Lysosome
Endosomes
-OH
-OH
-OH
-OH
-OH
-OH
-OH
-OH
-OH
 FIGURE 2–12  Rapid desensitization, resensitization, and down-regulation of β adrenoceptors.  A: Response to a β-adrenoceptor agonist 
(ordinate) versus time (abscissa). (Numbers refer to the phases of receptor function in B.) Exposure of cells to agonist (indicated by the 
light-colored bar) produces a cyclic AMP response. A reduced cAMP response is observed in the continued presence of agonist; this “desensiti-
zation” typically occurs within a few minutes. If agonist is removed after a short time (typically several to tens of minutes, indicated by broken 
line on abscissa), cells recover full responsiveness to a subsequent addition of agonist (second light-colored bar). This “resensitization” fails to 
occur, or occurs incompletely, if cells are exposed to agonist repeatedly or over a more prolonged time period.  B: Agonist binding to receptors 
initiates signaling by promoting receptor interaction with G proteins (G s ) located in the cytoplasm (step 1 in the diagram). Agonist-activated 
receptors are phosphorylated by a G protein-coupled receptor kinase (GRK), preventing receptor interaction with G s and promoting binding of 
a different protein, β-arrestin (β-Arr), to the receptor (step 2). The receptor-arrestin complex binds to coated pits, promoting receptor internal-
ization (step 3). Dissociation of agonist from internalized receptors reduces β-Arr binding affinity, allowing dephosphorylation of receptors by a 
phosphatase (P’ase, step 4) and return of receptors to the plasma membrane (step 5); together, these events result in the efficient resensitiza-
tion of cellular responsiveness. Repeated or prolonged exposure of cells to agonist favors the delivery of internalized receptors to lysosomes 
(step 6), promoting receptor down-regulation rather than resensitization. 
28    SECTION I Basic Principles
 cAMP exerts most of its effects by stimulating cAMP-dependent 
protein kinases ( Figure 2–13 ). These kinases are composed of a 
cAMP-binding regulatory (R) dimer and two catalytic (C) chains. 
When cAMP binds to the R dimer, active C chains are released to 
diffuse through the cytoplasm and nucleus, where they transfer 
phosphate from ATP to appropriate substrate proteins, often 
enzymes. The specificity of the regulatory effects of cAMP resides 
in the distinct protein substrates of the kinases that are expressed 
in different cells. For example, liver is rich in phosphorylase kinase 
and glycogen synthase, enzymes whose reciprocal regulation by 
cAMP-dependent phosphorylation governs carbohydrate storage 
and release. 
 When the hormonal stimulus stops, the intracellular actions of 
cAMP are terminated by an elaborate series of enzymes. cAMP-
stimulated phosphorylation of enzyme substrates is rapidly 
reversed by a diverse group of specific and nonspecific phos-
phatases. cAMP itself is degraded to 5′-AMP by several cyclic 
nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDE;  Figure 2–13 ). Milrinone, a 
selective inhibitor of type 3 phosphodiesterases that are expressed 
in cardiac muscle cells, has been used as an adjunctive agent in 
treating acute heart failure. Competitive inhibition of cAMP deg-
radation is one way that caffeine, theophylline, and other meth-
ylxanthines produce their effects (see Chapter 20). 
 B. Phosphoinositides and Calcium 
 
Another well-studied second messenger system involves hormonal 
stimulation of phosphoinositide hydrolysis ( Figure 2–14 ). Some 
of the hormones, neurotransmitters, and growth factors that trig-
ger this pathway bind to receptors linked to G proteins, whereas 
others bind to receptor tyrosine kinases. In all cases, the crucial 
step is stimulation of a membrane enzyme, phospholipase C (PLC), 
which splits a minor phospholipid component of the plasma 
membrane, phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP 2 ), into 
two second messengers,  diacylglycerol (DAG) and  inositol-
1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP 3 or  InsP 3 ). Diacylglycerol is confined to 
the membrane, where it activates a phospholipid- and calcium-
sensitive protein kinase called protein kinase C. IP 3 is water-solu-
ble and diffuses through the cytoplasm to trigger release of Ca 2+ 
by binding to ligand-gated calcium channels in the limiting mem-
branes of internal storage vesicles. Elevated cytoplasmic Ca 2+ 
concentration resulting from IP 3 -promoted opening of these 
channels promotes the binding of Ca 2+ to the calcium-binding 
protein calmodulin, which regulates activities of other enzymes, 
including calcium-dependent protein kinases. 
 With its multiple second messengers and protein kinases, the 
phosphoinositide signaling pathway is much more complex than 
the cAMP pathway. For example, different cell types may con-
tain one or more specialized calcium- and calmodulin-dependent 
kinases with limited substrate specificity (eg, myosin light-chain 
kinase) in addition to a general calcium- and calmodulin-
dependent kinase that can phosphorylate a wide variety of protein 
Rec
Gs
AC
ATP
cAMP
5'-AMP
PDE
R2   cAMP4
R2C2
2C*
ATP
ADP
S
S~P
Pi
P'ase
Response
Agonist
Membrane
 FIGURE 2–13  The cAMP second messenger pathway. Key 
proteins include hormone receptors (Rec), a stimulatory G protein 
(G s ), catalytic adenylyl cyclase (AC), phosphodiesterases (PDE) that 
hydrolyze cAMP, cAMP-dependent kinases, with regulatory (R) and 
catalytic (C) subunits, protein substrates (S) of the kinases, and 
phosphatases (P’ase), which remove phosphates from substrate 
proteins. Open arrows denote regulatory effects. 
PK-C*
R
G
PLC
Agonist
PIP2
DAG
CaM-E *
CaM
E
IP3
Response
Membrane
ATP
ADP
S
S~P
Pi
Ca2+
 FIGURE 2–14  The Ca 2+ -phosphoinositide signaling pathway. 
Key proteins include hormone receptors (R), a G protein (G), a 
phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PLC), protein kinase C 
substrates of the kinase (S), calmodulin (CaM), and calmodulin-
binding enzymes (E), including kinases, phosphodiesterases, etc. 
(PIP 2 , phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate; DAG, diacylglycerol; IP 3 , 
inositol trisphosphate. Asterisk denotes activated state. Open arrows 
denote regulatory effects.) 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    29
substrates. Furthermore, at least nine structurally distinct types of 
protein kinase C have been identified. 
 As in the cAMP system, multiple mechanisms damp or termi-
nate signaling by this pathway. IP 3 is inactivated by dephosphory-
lation; diacylglycerol is either phosphorylated to yield phosphatidic 
acid, which is then converted back into phospholipids, or it is 
deacylated to yield arachidonic acid; Ca 2+ is actively removed from 
the cytoplasm by Ca 2+ pumps. 
 These and other nonreceptor elements of the calcium-phos-
phoinositide signaling pathway are of considerable importance in 
pharmacotherapy. For example, lithium ion, used in treatment of 
bipolar (manic-depressive) disorder, affects the cellular metabo-
lism of phosphoinositides (see Chapter 29). 
 C. Cyclic Guanosine Monophosphate (cGMP)  
Unlike cAMP, the ubiquitous and versatile carrier of diverse mes-
sages, cGMP has established signaling roles in only a few cell 
types. In intestinal mucosa and vascular smooth muscle, the 
cGMP-based signal transduction mechanism closely parallels the 
cAMP-mediated signaling mechanism. Ligands detected by cell-
surface receptors stimulate membrane-bound guanylyl cyclase to 
produce cGMP, and cGMP acts by stimulating a cGMP-dependent 
protein kinase. The actions of cGMP in these cells are terminated 
by enzymatic degradation of the cyclic nucleotide and by dephos-
phorylation of kinase substrates. 
 Increased cGMP concentration causes relaxation of vascular 
smooth muscle by a kinase-mediated mechanism that results in 
dephosphorylation of myosin light chains (see Figure 12–2). In 
these smooth muscle cells, cGMP synthesis can be elevated by two 
transmembrane signaling mechanisms utilizing two different gua-
nylyl cyclases. Atrial natriuretic peptide, a blood-borne peptide 
hormone, stimulates a transmembrane receptor by binding to its 
extracellular domain, thereby activating the guanylyl cyclase activ-
ity that resides in the receptor’s intracellular domain. The other 
mechanism mediates responses to nitric oxide (NO; see Chapter 
19), which is generated in vascular endothelial cells in response to 
natural vasodilator agents such as acetylcholine and histamine. 
After entering the target cell, nitric oxide binds to and activates a 
cytoplasmic guanylyl cyclase (see Figure 19–2). A number of use-
ful vasodilating drugs, such as nitroglycerin and sodium nitroprus-
side used in treating cardiac ischemia and acute hypertension, act 
by generating or mimicking nitric oxide. Other drugs produce 
vasodilation by inhibiting specific phosphodiesterases, thereby 
interfering with the metabolic breakdown of cGMP. One such 
drug is sildenafil, used in treating erectile dysfunction and pulmo-
nary hypertension (see Chapter 12). 
 Interplay among Signaling Mechanisms 
 The calcium-phosphoinositide and cAMP signaling pathways 
oppose one another in some cells and are complementary in oth-
ers. For example, vasopressor agents that contract smooth muscle 
act by IP 3 -mediated mobilization of Ca 2+ , whereas agents that 
relax smooth muscle often act by elevation of cAMP. In contrast, 
cAMP and phosphoinositide second messengers act together to 
stimulate glucose release from the liver. 
 Phosphorylation: A Common Theme 
 Almost all second messenger signaling involves reversible phos-
phorylation, which performs two principal functions in signaling: 
amplification and flexible regulation. In  amplification, rather like 
GTP bound to a G protein, the attachment of a phosphoryl group 
to a serine, threonine, or tyrosine residue powerfully amplifies the 
initial regulatory signal by recording a molecular memory that the 
pathway has been activated; dephosphorylation erases the mem-
ory, taking a longer time to do so than is required for dissociation 
of an allosteric ligand. In  flexible regulation, differing substrate 
specificities of the multiple protein kinases regulated by second 
messengers provide branch points in signaling pathways that may 
be independently regulated. In this way, cAMP, Ca 2+ , or other 
second messengers can use the presence or absence of particular 
kinases or kinase substrates to produce quite different effects in 
different cell types. Inhibitors of protein kinases have great poten-
tial as therapeutic agents, particularly in neoplastic diseases. 
Trastuzumab, an antibody that antagonizes growth factor receptor 
signaling (discussed earlier), is a useful therapeutic agent for breast 
cancer. Another example of this general approach is imatinib, a 
small molecule inhibitor of the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase Abl, 
which is activated by growth factor signaling pathways. Imatinib 
is effective for treating chronic myelogenous leukemia, which is 
caused by a chromosomal translocation event that produces an 
active Bcr/Abl fusion protein in hematopoietic cells. 
 RECEPTOR CLASSES & 
DRUG DEVELOPMENT 
 The existence of a specific drug receptor is usually inferred from 
studying the  structure-activity relationship of a group of struc-
turally similar congeners of the drug that mimic or antagonize its 
effects. Thus, if a series of related agonists exhibits identical rela-
tive potencies in producing two distinct effects, it is likely that the 
two effects are mediated by similar or identical receptor molecules. 
In addition, if identical receptors mediate both effects, a competi-
tive antagonist will inhibit both responses with the same K i ; a 
second competitive antagonist will inhibit both responses with its 
own characteristic K i . Thus, studies of the relation between struc-
ture and activity of a series of agonists and antagonists can identify 
a species of receptor that mediates a set of pharmacologic 
responses. 
 Exactly the same experimental procedure can show that 
observed effects of a drug are mediated by  different receptors. In 
this case, effects mediated by different receptors may exhibit dif-
ferent orders of potency among agonists and different K i values for 
each competitive antagonist. 
 Wherever we look, evolution has created many different recep-
tors that function to mediate responses to any individual chemical 
signal. In some cases, the same chemical acts on completely differ-
ent structural receptor classes. For example, acetylcholine uses 
ligand-gated ion channels (nicotinic AChRs) to initiate a fast (in 
milliseconds) excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in postgan-
glionic neurons. Acetylcholine also activates a separate class of G 
30    SECTION I Basic Principles
protein-coupled receptors (muscarinic AChRs), which mediate 
slower (seconds to minutes) modulatory effects on the same neurons. 
In addition, each structural class usually includes multiple subtypes of 
receptor, often with significantly different signaling or regulatory 
properties. For example, many biogenic amines (eg, norepinephrine, 
acetylcholine, and serotonin) activate more than one receptor, each of 
which may activate a different G protein, as previously described (see 
also  Table 2–1 ). The existence of many receptor classes and subtypes 
for the same endogenous ligand has created important opportunities 
for drug development. For example, propranolol, a selective antago-
nist of β adrenoceptors, can reduce an accelerated heart rate without 
preventing the sympathetic nervous system from causing vasocon-
striction, an effect mediated by α 1 receptors. 
 The principle of drug selectivity may even apply to structurally 
identical receptors expressed in different cells, eg, receptors for 
steroids such as estrogen ( Figure 2–6 ). Different cell types express 
different accessory proteins, which interact with steroid receptors 
and change the functional effects of drug-receptor interaction. For 
example, tamoxifen acts as an  antagonist on estrogen receptors 
expressed in mammary tissue but as an  agonist on estrogen recep-
tors in bone. Consequently, tamoxifen may be useful not only in 
the treatment and prophylaxis of breast cancer but also in the 
prevention of osteoporosis by increasing bone density (see 
Chapters 40 and 42). Tamoxifen may also create complications in 
postmenopausal women, however, by exerting an agonist action in 
the uterus, stimulating endometrial cell proliferation. 
 New drug development is not confined to agents that act on 
receptors for extracellular chemical signals. Increasingly, pharma-
ceutical chemists are determining whether elements of signaling 
pathways distal to the receptors may also serve as targets of selec-
tive and useful drugs. We have already discussed drugs that act on 
phosphodiesterase and some intracellular kinases. There are several 
additional kinase inhibitors presently in clinical trials, as well as 
preclinical efforts directed at developing inhibitors of G proteins. 
 RELATION BETWEEN DRUG DOSE & 
CLINICAL RESPONSE 
 We have dealt with receptors as molecules and shown how receptors 
can quantitatively account for the relation between dose or concen-
tration of a drug and pharmacologic responses, at least in an ideal-
ized system. When faced with a patient who needs treatment, the 
prescriber must make a choice among a variety of possible drugs and 
devise a dosage regimen that is likely to produce maximal benefit 
and minimal toxicity. To make rational therapeutic decisions, the 
prescriber must understand how drug-receptor interactions underlie 
the relations between dose and response in patients, the nature and 
causes of variation in pharmacologic responsiveness, and the clinical 
implications of selectivity of drug action. 
 Dose & Response in Patients 
 A. Graded Dose-Response Relations 
 
To choose among drugs and to determine appropriate doses of a 
drug, the prescriber must know the relative  pharmacologic 
potency and  maximal efficacy of the drugs in relation to the 
desired therapeutic effect. These two important terms, often con-
fusing to students and clinicians, can be explained by referring to 
 Figure 2–15 , which depicts graded dose-response curves that relate 
the dose of four different drugs to the magnitude of a particular 
therapeutic effect. 
 1. Potency— Drugs A and B are said to be more potent than 
drugs C and D because of the relative positions of their dose-re-
sponse curves along the  dose axis of  Figure 2–15 . Potency refers 
to the concentration (EC 50 ) or dose (ED 50 ) of a drug required to 
produce 50% of that drug’s maximal effect. Thus, the pharmaco-
logic potency of drug A in  Figure 2–15 is less than that of drug B, 
a partial agonist because the EC 50 of A is greater than the EC 50 of 
B. Potency of a drug depends in part on the affinity (K d ) of recep-
tors for binding the drug and in part on the efficiency with which 
drug-receptor interaction is coupled to response. Note that some 
doses of drug A can produce larger effects than any dose of drug 
B, despite the fact that we describe drug B as pharmacologically 
more potent. The reason for this is that drug A has a larger maxi-
mal efficacy (as described below). 
 For clinical use, it is important to distinguish between a drug’s 
potency and its efficacy. The clinical effectiveness of a drug 
depends not on its potency (EC 50 ), but on its maximal efficacy 
(see below) and its ability to reach the relevant receptors. This 
ability can depend on its route of administration, absorption, 
distribution through the body, and clearance from the blood or 
site of action. In deciding which of two drugs to administer to a 
patient, the prescriber must usually consider their relative effec-
tiveness rather than their relative potency. Pharmacologic potency 
can largely determine the administered dose of the chosen drug. 
 For therapeutic purposes, the potency of a drug should be 
stated in dosage units, usually in terms of a particular therapeutic 
Log drug dose
Response
A
B
C
D
 FIGURE 2–15  Graded dose-response curves for four drugs, illus-
trating different pharmacologic potencies and different maximal effi-
cacies. (See text.) 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    31
end point (eg, 50 mg for mild sedation, 1 mcg/kg/min for an 
increase in heart rate of 25 bpm). Relative potency, the ratio of 
equi-effective doses (0.2, 10, etc), may be used in comparing one 
drug with another. 
 2. Maximal efficacy— This parameter reflects the limit of the 
dose-response relation on the  response axis. Drugs A, C, and D 
in  Figure 2–15 have equal maximal efficacy, and all have greater 
maximal efficacy than drug B. The maximal efficacy (sometimes 
referred to simply as efficacy) of a drug is obviously crucial for 
making clinical decisions when a large response is needed. It may 
be determined by the drug’s mode of interactions with receptors 
(as with partial agonists ∗ or by characteristics of the receptor-effec-
tor system involved. 
 Thus, diuretics that act on one portion of the nephron may 
produce much greater excretion of fluid and electrolytes than 
diuretics that act elsewhere. In addition, the  practical efficacy of a 
drug for achieving a therapeutic end point (eg, increased cardiac 
contractility) may be limited by the drug’s propensity to cause a 
toxic effect (eg, fatal cardiac arrhythmia) even if the drug could 
otherwise produce a greater therapeutic effect. 
 B. Shape of Dose-Response Curves 
 
Although the responses depicted in curves A, B, and C of  Figure 
2–15 approximate the shape of a simple Michaelis-Menten rela-
tion (transformed to a logarithmic plot), some clinical responses 
do not. Extremely steep dose-response curves (eg, curve D) may 
have important clinical consequences if the upper portion of the 
curve represents an undesirable extent of response (eg, coma 
caused by a sedative-hypnotic). Steep dose-response curves in 
patients can result from cooperative interactions of several differ-
ent actions of a drug (eg, effects on brain, heart, and peripheral 
vessels, all contributing to lowering of blood pressure). 
 C. Quantal Dose-Effect Curves 
 
Graded dose-response curves of the sort described above have 
certain limitations in their application to clinical decision making. 
For example, such curves may be impossible to construct if the 
pharmacologic response is an either-or (quantal) event, such as 
prevention of convulsions, arrhythmia, or death. Furthermore, the 
clinical relevance of a quantitative dose-response relation in a 
single patient, no matter how precisely defined, may be limited in 
application to other patients, owing to the great potential vari-
ability among patients in severity of disease and responsiveness to 
drugs. 
 Some of these difficulties may be avoided by determining the 
dose of drug required to produce a specified magnitude of effect 
in a large number of individual patients or experimental animals 
and plotting the cumulative frequency distribution of responders 
versus the log dose ( Figure 2–16 ). The specified quantal effect may 
be chosen on the basis of clinical relevance (eg, relief of headache) 
or for preservation of safety of experimental subjects (eg, using low 
doses of a cardiac stimulant and specifying an increase in heart rate 
of 20 bpm as the quantal effect), or it may be an inherently quan-
tal event (eg, death of an experimental animal). For most drugs, 
the doses required to produce a specified quantal effect in indi-
viduals are lognormally distributed; that is, a frequency distribu-
tion of such responses plotted against the log of the dose produces 
a gaussian normal curve of variation (colored areas,  Figure 2–16 ). 
When these responses are summated, the resulting cumulative 
frequency distribution constitutes a quantal dose-effect curve (or 
dose-percent curve) of the proportion or percentage of individuals 
who exhibit the effect plotted as a function of log dose. 
 The quantal dose-effect curve is often characterized by stating 
the  median effective dose (ED 50 ), which is the dose at which 
50% of individuals exhibit the specified quantal effect. (Note that 
the abbreviation ED 50 has a different meaning in this context from 
its meaning in relation to graded dose-effect curves, described in 
previous text). Similarly, the dose required to produce a particular 
toxic effect in 50% of animals is called the  median toxic dose 
(TD 50 ). If the toxic effect is death of the animal, a  median lethal 
dose (LD 50 ) may be experimentally defined. Such values provide 
a convenient way of comparing the potencies of drugs in 
 ∗ Note that “maximal efficacy,” used in a therapeutic context, does not 
have exactly the same meaning that the term denotes in the more spe-
cialized context of drug-receptor interactions described earlier in this 
chapter. In an idealized in vitro system, efficacy denotes the relative 
maximal efficacy of agonists and partial agonists that act via the same 
receptor. In therapeutics, efficacy denotes the extent or degree of an 
effect that can be achieved in the intact patient. Thus, therapeutic effi-
cacy may be affected by the characteristics of a particular drug-receptor 
interaction, but it also depends on a host of other factors as noted in the 
text.
100
50
Percent individuals responding
Percent requiring
dose to achieve
desired effect
Percent 
requiring
dose for a
lethal effect
Cumulative percent
exhibiting
therapeutic effect
Cumulative percent
dead at each dose
Dose (mg)
ED50
LD50
1.25 2.5
10
20
40
80
160 320 640
5
 FIGURE 2–16  Quantal dose-effect plots. Shaded boxes (and the 
accompanying bell-shaped curves) indicate the frequency distribu-
tion of doses of drug required to produce a specified effect; that is, 
the percentage of animals that required a particular dose to exhibit 
the effect. The open boxes (and the corresponding colored curves) 
indicate the cumulative frequency distribution of responses, which 
are lognormally distributed. 
32    SECTION I Basic Principles
experimental and clinical settings: Thus, if the ED 50 s of two drugs 
for producing a specified quantal effect are 5 and 500 mg, respec-
tively, then the first drug can be said to be 100 times more potent 
than the second for that particular effect. Similarly, one can obtain 
a valuable index of the selectivity of a drug’s action by comparing 
its ED 50 s for two different quantal effects in a population (eg, 
cough suppression versus sedation for opioid drugs). 
 Quantal dose-effect curves may also be used to generate informa-
tion regarding the margin of safety to be expected from a particular 
drug used to produce a specified effect. One measure, which relates 
the dose of a drug required to produce a desired effect to that which 
produces an undesired effect, is the  therapeutic index. In animal 
studies, the therapeutic index is usually defined as the ratio of the 
TD 50 to the ED 50 for some therapeutically relevant effect. The pre-
cision possible in animal experiments may make it useful to use such 
a therapeutic index to estimate the potential benefit of a drug in 
humans. Of course, the therapeutic index of a drug in humans is 
almost never known with real precision; instead, drug trials and 
accumulated clinical experience often reveal a range of usually effec-
tive doses and a different (but sometimes overlapping) range of 
possibly toxic doses. The clinically acceptable risk of toxicity 
depends critically on the severity of the disease being treated. For 
example, the dose range that provides relief from an ordinary head-
ache in the majority of patients should be very much lower than the 
dose range that produces serious toxicity, even if the toxicity occurs 
in a small minority of patients. However, for treatment of a lethal 
disease such as Hodgkin’s lymphoma, the acceptable difference 
between therapeutic and toxic doses may be smaller. 
 Finally, note that the quantal dose-effect curve and the graded 
dose-response curve summarize somewhat different sets of infor-
mation, although both appear sigmoid in shape on a semilogarith-
mic plot (compare  Figures 2–15 and  2–16 ). Critical information 
required for making rational therapeutic decisions can be obtained 
from each type of curve. Both curves provide information regard-
ing the  potency and  selectivity of drugs; the graded dose-response 
curve indicates the  maximal efficacy of a drug, and the quantal 
dose-effect curve indicates the potential  variability of responsive-
ness among individuals. 
 Variation in Drug Responsiveness 
 Individuals may vary considerably in their response to a drug; 
indeed, a single individual may respond differently to the same 
drug at different times during the course of treatment. Occasionally, 
individuals exhibit an unusual or  idiosyncratic drug response, 
one that is infrequently observed in most patients. The idiosyn-
cratic responses are usually caused by genetic differences in 
metabolism of the drug or by immunologic mechanisms, includ-
ing allergic reactions. 
 Quantitative variations in drug response are in general more 
common and more clinically important. An individual patient is 
 hyporeactive or  hyperreactive to a drug in that the intensity of 
effect of a given dose of drug is diminished or increased compared 
with the effect seen in most individuals. ( Note: The term  hypersen-
sitivity usually refers to allergic or other immunologic responses to 
drugs.) With some drugs, the intensity of response to a given dose 
may change during the course of therapy; in these cases, responsive-
ness usually decreases as a consequence of continued drug adminis-
tration, producing a state of relative  tolerance to the drug’s effects. 
When responsiveness diminishes rapidly after administration of a 
drug, the response is said to be subject to  tachyphylaxis. 
 Even before administering the first dose of a drug, the pre-
scriber should consider factors that may help in predicting the 
direction and extent of possible variations in responsiveness. These 
include the propensity of a particular drug to produce tolerance or 
tachyphylaxis as well as the effects of age, sex, body size, disease 
state, genetic factors, and simultaneous administration of other 
drugs. 
 Four general mechanisms may contribute to variation in drug 
responsiveness among patients or within an individual patient at 
different times. 
 A. Alteration in Concentration of Drug That Reaches 
the Receptor 
 Patients may differ in the rate of absorption of a drug, in distribut-
ing it through body compartments, or in clearing the drug from 
the blood (see Chapter 3). By altering the concentration of drug 
that reaches relevant receptors, such pharmacokinetic differences 
may alter the clinical response. Some differences can be predicted 
on the basis of age, weight, sex, disease state, and liver and kidney 
function, and by testing specifically for genetic differences that 
may result from inheritance of a functionally distinctive comple-
ment of drug-metabolizing enzymes (see Chapters 3 and 4). 
Another important mechanism influencing drug availability is 
active transport of drug from the cytoplasm, mediated by a family 
of membrane transporters encoded by the so-called multidrug 
resistance ( MDR ) genes. For example, up-regulation of  MDR 
gene-encoded transporter expression is a major mechanism by 
which tumor cells develop resistance to anticancer drugs. 
 B. Variation in Concentration of an Endogenous 
Receptor Ligand 
 
This mechanism contributes greatly to variability in responses to 
pharmacologic antagonists. Thus, propranolol, a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist, markedly slows the heart rate of a patient whose 
endogenous catecholamines are elevated (as in pheochromocy-
toma) but does not affect the resting heart rate of a well-trained 
marathon runner. A partial agonist may exhibit even more dra-
matically different responses: Saralasin, a weak partial agonist at 
angiotensin II receptors, lowers blood pressure in patients with 
hypertension caused by increased angiotensin II production and 
raises blood pressure in patients who produce normal amounts of 
angiotensin. 
 C. Alterations in Number or Function of Receptors   
Experimental studies have documented changes in drug response 
caused by increases or decreases in the number of receptor sites or 
by alterations in the efficiency of coupling of receptors to distal 
effector mechanisms. In some cases, the change in receptor num-
ber is caused by other hormones; for example, thyroid hormones 
increase both the number of β receptors in rat heart muscle and 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    33
cardiac sensitivity to catecholamines. Similar changes probably 
contribute to the tachycardia of thyrotoxicosis in patients and may 
account for the usefulness of propranolol, a β-adrenoceptor 
antagonist, in ameliorating symptoms of this disease. 
 In other cases, the agonist ligand itself induces a decrease in the 
number (eg, down-regulation) or coupling efficiency (eg, desensiti-
zation) of its receptors. These mechanisms (discussed previously 
under Signaling Mechanisms & Drug Actions) may contribute to 
two clinically important phenomena: first, tachyphylaxis or toler-
ance to the effects of some drugs (eg, biogenic amines and their 
congeners), and second, the “overshoot” phenomena that follow 
withdrawal of certain drugs. These phenomena can occur with 
either agonists or antagonists. An antagonist may increase the 
number of receptors in a critical cell or tissue by preventing down-
regulation caused by an endogenous agonist. When the antagonist 
is withdrawn, the elevated number of receptors can produce an 
exaggerated response to physiologic concentrations of agonist. 
Potentially disastrous withdrawal symptoms can result for the oppo-
site reason when administration of an agonist drug is discontinued. 
In this situation, the number of receptors, which has been decreased 
by drug-induced down-regulation, is too low for endogenous ago-
nist to produce effective stimulation. For example, the withdrawal 
of clonidine (a drug whose α 2 -adrenoceptor agonist activity reduces 
blood pressure) can produce hypertensive crisis, probably because 
the drug down-regulates α 2 adrenoceptors (see Chapter 11). 
 Genetic factors also can play an important role in altering the 
number or function of specific receptors. For example, a specific 
genetic variant of the α 2C adrenoceptor—when inherited together 
with a specific variant of the α 1 adrenoceptor—confers increased 
risk for developing heart failure, which may be reduced by early 
intervention using antagonist drugs. The identification of such 
genetic factors, part of the rapidly developing field of pharmaco-
genetics, holds promise for clinical diagnosis and in the future 
may help physicians design the most appropriate pharmacologic 
therapy for individual patients. 
 Another interesting example of genetic determination of effects 
on drug response is seen in the treatment of cancers involving 
excessive growth factor signaling. Somatic mutations affecting the 
tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor 
confer enhanced sensitivity to kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib in 
certain lung cancers. This effect enhances the antineoplastic effect 
of the drug and, because the somatic mutation is specific to the 
tumor and not present in the host, the therapeutic index of these 
drugs can be significantly enhanced in patients whose tumors 
harbor such mutations. 
 D. Changes in Components of Response Distal 
to the Receptor 
 
Although a drug initiates its actions by binding to receptors, the 
response observed in a patient depends on the functional integrity 
of biochemical processes in the responding cell and physiologic 
regulation by interacting organ systems. Clinically, changes in 
these postreceptor processes represent the largest and most impor-
tant class of mechanisms that cause variation in responsiveness to 
drug therapy. 
 Before initiating therapy with a drug, the prescriber should be 
aware of patient characteristics that may limit the clinical response. 
These characteristics include the age and general health of the 
patient and—most importantly—the severity and pathophysio-
logic mechanism of the disease. The most important potential 
cause of failure to achieve a satisfactory response is that the diag-
nosis is wrong or physiologically incomplete. Drug therapy is 
always most successful when it is accurately directed at the 
pathophysiologic mechanism responsible for the disease. 
 When the diagnosis is correct and the drug is appropriate, an 
unsatisfactory therapeutic response can often be traced to com-
pensatory mechanisms in the patient that respond to and oppose 
the beneficial effects of the drug. Compensatory increases in sym-
pathetic nervous tone and fluid retention by the kidney, for 
example, can contribute to tolerance to antihypertensive effects of 
a vasodilator drug. In such cases, additional drugs may be required 
to achieve a useful therapeutic result. 
 Clinical Selectivity: Beneficial versus Toxic 
Effects of Drugs 
 Although we classify drugs according to their principal actions, it 
is clear that  no drug causes only a single, specific effect . Why is this 
so? It is exceedingly unlikely that any kind of drug molecule will 
bind to only a single type of receptor molecule, if only because 
the number of potential receptors in every patient is astronomi-
cally large. Even if the chemical structure of a drug allowed it to 
bind to only one kind of receptor, the biochemical processes 
controlled by such receptors would take place in many cell types 
and would be coupled to many other biochemical functions; as a 
result, the patient and the prescriber would probably perceive 
more than one drug effect. Accordingly, drugs are only  selective —
rather than specific—in their actions, because they bind to one or 
a few types of receptor more tightly than to others and because 
these receptors control discrete processes that result in distinct 
effects. 
 It is only because of their selectivity that drugs are useful in 
clinical medicine. Selectivity can be measured by comparing bind-
ing affinities of a drug to different receptors or by comparing ED 50 s 
for different effects of a drug in vivo. In drug development and in 
clinical medicine, selectivity is usually considered by separating 
effects into two categories:  beneficial or  therapeutic effects ver-
sus  toxic or  adverse effects. Pharmaceutical advertisements and 
prescribers occasionally use the term  side effect, implying that the 
effect in question is insignificant or occurs via a pathway that is to 
one side of the principal action of the drug; such implications are 
frequently erroneous. 
 A. Beneficial and Toxic Effects Mediated by the Same 
Receptor-Effector Mechanism 
 
Much of the serious drug toxicity in clinical practice represents a 
direct pharmacologic extension of the therapeutic actions of the 
drug. In some of these cases (eg, bleeding caused by anticoagulant 
therapy; hypoglycemic coma due to insulin), toxicity may be 
avoided by judicious management of the dose of drug adminis-
tered, guided by careful monitoring of effect (measurements of 
34    SECTION I Basic Principles
blood coagulation or serum glucose) and aided by ancillary mea-
sures (avoiding tissue trauma that may lead to hemorrhage; regula-
tion of carbohydrate intake). In still other cases, the toxicity may 
be avoided by not administering the drug at all, if the therapeutic 
indication is weak or if other therapy is available. 
 In certain situations, a drug is clearly necessary and beneficial 
but produces unacceptable toxicity when given in doses that pro-
duce optimal benefit. In such situations, it may be necessary to 
add another drug to the treatment regimen. In treating hyperten-
sion, for example, administration of a second drug often allows 
the prescriber to reduce the dose and toxicity of the first drug (see 
Chapter 11). 
 B. Beneficial and Toxic Effects Mediated by Identical 
Receptors but in Different Tissues or by Different 
Effector Pathways 
 
Many drugs produce both their desired effects and adverse effects 
by acting on a single receptor type in different tissues. Examples 
discussed in this book include: digitalis glycosides, which act by 
inhibiting Na + /K + -ATPase in cell membranes; methotrexate, 
which inhibits the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase; and glucocor-
ticoid hormones. 
 Three therapeutic strategies are used to avoid or mitigate this 
sort of toxicity. First, the drug should always be administered at 
the lowest dose that produces acceptable benefit. Second, adjunc-
tive drugs that act through different receptor mechanisms and 
produce different toxicities may allow lowering the dose of the 
first drug, thus limiting its toxicity (eg, use of other immunosup-
pressive agents added to glucocorticoids in treating inflammatory 
disorders). Third, selectivity of the drug’s actions may be increased 
by manipulating the concentrations of drug available to receptors 
in different parts of the body, for example, by aerosol administra-
tion of a glucocorticoid to the bronchi in asthma. 
 C. Beneficial and Toxic Effects Mediated by Different 
Types of Receptors 
 
Therapeutic advantages resulting from new chemical entities with 
improved receptor selectivity were mentioned earlier in this chapter 
and are described in detail in later chapters. Such drugs include α- 
and β-selective adrenoceptor agonists and antagonists, H 1 and H 2 
antihistamines, nicotinic and muscarinic blocking agents, and 
receptor-selective steroid hormones. All these receptors are grouped 
in functional families, each responsive to a small class of endog-
enous agonists. The receptors and their associated therapeutic 
uses were discovered by analyzing effects of the physiologic 
chemical signals—catecholamines, histamine, acetylcholine, and 
corticosteroids. 
 Several other drugs were discovered by exploiting therapeutic 
or toxic effects of chemically similar agents observed in a clinical 
context. Examples include quinidine, the sulfonylureas, thiazide 
diuretics, tricyclic antidepressants, opioid drugs, and phenothiaz-
ine antipsychotics. Often the new agents turn out to interact with 
receptors for endogenous substances (eg, opioids and phenothiaz-
ines for endogenous opioid and dopamine receptors, respectively). 
It is likely that other new drugs will be found to do so in the 
future, perhaps leading to the discovery of new classes of receptors 
and endogenous ligands for future drug development. 
 Thus, the propensity of drugs to bind to different classes of 
receptor sites is not only a potentially vexing problem in treat-
ing patients, it also presents a continuing challenge to pharma-
cology and an opportunity for developing new and more useful 
drugs. 
 REFERENCES 
 Berridge MJ: Unlocking the secrets of cell signaling. Ann Rev Physiol 2005;67:1. 
 Cabrera-Vera TM et al: Insights into G protein structure, function, and regulation. 
Endocr Rev 2003;24:765. 
 Civelli O et al: Orphan GPCRs and their ligands. Pharmacol Ther 
2006;110:525. 
 Davies MA, Samuels Y: Analysis of the genome to personalize therapy for mela-
noma. Oncogene 2010;29:5545. 
 Feng XH, Derynck R: Specificity and versatility in TGF-beta signaling through 
Smads. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2005;21:659. 
 Galandrin S, Oligny-Longpre G, Bouvier M: The evasive nature of drug efficacy: 
Implications for drug discovery. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2007;28:423. 
 Ginty DD, Segal RA: Retrograde neurotrophin signaling: Trk-ing along the axon. 
Curr Opin Neurobiol 2002;12:268. 
 Gouaux E, MacKinnon R: Principles of selective ion transport in channels and 
pumps. Science 2005;310:1461. 
 Hermiston ML et al: Reciprocal regulation of lymphocyte activation by tyrosine 
kinases and phosphatases. J Clin Invest 2002;109:9. 
 Kenakin T: Principles: Receptor theory in molecular pharmacology. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci 2004;25:186. 
 Mosesson Y, Yarden Y: Oncogenic growth factor receptors: Implications for signal 
transduction therapy. Semin Cancer Biol 2004;14:262. 
 Pawson T: Dynamic control of signaling by modular adaptor proteins. Curr Opin 
Cell Biol 2007;19:112. 
 Rajagopal S, Rajagopal K, Lefkowitz RJ: Teaching old receptors new tricks- biasing 
seven-transmembrane receptors. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010;9:373. 
 Roden DM, George AL Jr: The genetic basis of variability in drug responses. Nat 
Rev Drug Discov 2002;1:37. 
 Rosenbaum DM, Rasmussen SG, Kobilka BK: The structure and function of 
G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature 2009;459:356. 
 Rotella DP: Phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors: Current status and potential applica-
tions. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2002;1:674. 
 Small KM, McGraw DW, Liggett SB: Pharmacology and physiology of human 
adrenergic receptor polymorphisms. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 
2003;43:381. 
 Sorkin A, von Zastrow M: Endocytosis and signaling: Intertwining molecular 
networks. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009;10:609. 
 Yu FH et al: Overview of molecular relationships in the voltage-gated ion channel 
superfamily. Pharmacol Rev 2005;57:387. 
 Yuan TL, Cantley LC: PI3K pathway alterations in cancer: Variations on a theme. 
Oncogene 2008;27:5497. 
CHAPTER 2 Drug Receptors & Pharmacodynamics    35
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Propranolol, a nonselective β-adrenoceptor blocker, is a use-
ful antihypertensive agent because it reduces cardiac output 
and probably vascular resistance as well. However, it also 
prevents β 2 -receptor-induced bronchodilation and may pre-
cipitate bronchoconstriction in susceptible individuals. 
Calcium channel blockers such as verapamil also reduce 
blood pressure but do not cause bronchoconstriction or pre-
vent bronchodilation. Selection of the most appropriate drug 
or drug group for one condition requires awareness of the 
other conditions a patient may have and the receptor selec-
tivity of the drug groups available.
This page intentionally left blank 
37
C A S E  S T U D Y
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 The goal of therapeutics is to achieve a desired beneficial effect 
with minimal adverse effects. When a medicine has been selected 
for a patient, the clinician must determine the dose that most 
closely achieves this goal. A rational approach to this objective 
combines the principles of pharmacokinetics with pharmacody-
namics to clarify the dose-effect relationship ( Figure 3–1 ). 
Pharmacodynamics governs the concentration-effect part of the 
interaction, whereas pharmacokinetics deals with the dose-
concentration part (Holford & Sheiner, 1981). The pharma-
cokinetic processes of absorption, distribution, and elimination 
determine how rapidly and for how long the drug will appear at 
the target organ. The pharmacodynamic concepts of maximum 
response and sensitivity determine the magnitude of the effect at 
a particular concentration (see E max and C 50 , Chapter 2; C 50 is 
also known as EC 50 ). 
 Figure 3–1 illustrates a fundamental hypothesis of pharmacol-
ogy, namely, that a relationship exists between a beneficial or toxic 
effect of a drug and the concentration of the drug. This hypothesis 
has been documented for many drugs, as indicated by the Target 
Concentrations and Toxic Concentrations columns in  Table 3–1 . 
The apparent lack of such a relationship for some drugs does not 
weaken the basic hypothesis but points to the need to consider the 
time course of concentration at the actual site of pharmacologic 
effect (see below). 
 Knowing the relationship between dose, drug concentration, 
and effects allows the clinician to take into account the various 
pathologic and physiologic features of a particular patient that 
make him or her different from the average individual in respond-
ing to a drug. The importance of pharmacokinetics and pharma-
codynamics in patient care thus rests upon the improvement in 
therapeutic benefit and reduction in toxicity that can be achieved 
by application of these principles. 
 PHARMACOKINETICS 
 The “standard” dose of a drug is based on trials in healthy volunteers 
and patients with average ability to absorb, distribute, and eliminate 
3
Pharmacokinetics & 
Pharmacodynamics: 
Rational Dosing &
the Time Course 
of Drug Action
 Nicholas H. G. Holford, MB, ChB, FRACP 
An 85-year-old, 60-kg woman with a serum creatinine of 
1.8 mg/dL has atrial fibrillation. A decision has been 
made to use digoxin to control the rapid heart rate. The 
target concentration of digoxin for the treatment of atrial 
fibrillation is 2 ng/mL. Tablets of digoxin contain 62.5 
micrograms and 250 micrograms (mcg). What mainte-
nance dose would you recommend? 
38    SECTION I Basic Principles
the drug (see Clinical Trials: The IND and NDA in Chapter 5). This 
dose will not be suitable for every patient. Several physiologic pro-
cesses (eg, maturation of organ function in infants) and pathologic 
processes (eg, heart failure, renal failure) dictate dosage adjustment in 
individual patients. These processes modify specific pharmacokinetic 
parameters. The two basic parameters are  clearance, the measure of 
the ability of the body to eliminate the drug; and  volume of distri-
bution, the measure of the apparent space in the body available to 
contain the drug. These parameters are illustrated schematically in 
 Figure 3–2 where the volume of the beakers into which the drugs 
diffuse represents the volume of distribution and the size of the out-
flow “drain” in Figures 3–2B and 3–2D represents the clearance. 
 Volume of Distribution 
 Volume of distribution (V) relates the amount of drug in the body 
to the concentration of drug (C) in blood or plasma: 
 
 The volume of distribution may be defined with respect to 
blood, plasma, or water (unbound drug), depending on the con-
centration used in equation (1) (C = C b , C p , or C u ). 
 That the V calculated from equation (1) is an  apparent volume 
may be appreciated by comparing the volumes of distribution of 
drugs such as digoxin or chloroquine (Table 3–1) with some of 
the physical volumes of the body (Table 3–2). Volume of distri-
bution can vastly exceed any physical volume in the body because 
it is the volume  apparently necessary to contain the amount of 
drug  homogeneously at the concentration found in the blood, 
plasma, or water. Drugs with very high volumes of distribution 
have much higher concentrations in extravascular tissue than in 
the vascular compartment, ie, they are  not homogeneously distrib-
uted. Drugs that are completely retained within the vascular com-
partment, on the other hand, have a minimum possible volume of 
distribution equal to the blood component in which they are dis-
tributed, eg, 0.04 L/kg body weight or 2.8 L/70 kg (Table 3–2) 
for a drug that is restricted to the plasma compartment. 
 Clearance 
 Drug clearance principles are similar to the clearance concepts of 
renal physiology. Clearance of a drug is the factor that predicts the 
rate of elimination in relation to the drug concentration: 
 
 
 Clearance, like volume of distribution, may be defined with 
respect to blood (CL b ), plasma (CL p ), or unbound in water (CL u ), 
depending on the concentration measured. 
 It is important to note the additive character of clearance. 
Elimination of drug from the body may involve processes occur-
ring in the kidney, the lung, the liver, and other organs. Dividing 
the rate of elimination at each organ by the concentration of 
drug presented to it yields the respective clearance at that organ. 
Absorption
Distribution
Pharmacokinetics
Elimination
Pharmacologic effect
Clinical response
Effectiveness
Pharmacodynamics
Toxicity
Drug concentration
in systemic circulation
Drug concentration
at site of action
Dose of drug
administered
Drug in tissues
of distribution
Drug metabolized or excreted
 FIGURE 3–1  The relationship between dose and effect can be separated into pharmacokinetic (dose-concentration) and pharmacody-
namic (concentration-effect) components. Concentration provides the link between pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and is the focus 
of the target concentration approach to rational dosing. The three primary processes of pharmacokinetics are absorption, distribution, and 
elimination. 
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: Rational Dosing & the Time Course of Drug Action    39
TABLE 3–1  Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters for selected drugs. 
(See Speight & Holford, 1997, for a more comprehensive listing.)
Drug
Oral 
Availability 
(F) (%)
Urinary 
Excretion 
(%)1
Bound  in 
Plasma 
(%)
Clearance 
(L/h/70 kg)2
Volume 
of Distri-
bution 
(L/70 kg)
Half-Life (h)
Target 
Concentration
Toxic 
Concentration
Acetaminophen
88
3
0
21
67
2
15 mg/L
> 300 mg/L
Acyclovir
23
75
15
19.8
48
2.4
…
…
Amikacin
…
98
4
5.46
19
2.3
10 mg/L3…
…
Amoxicillin
93
86
18
10.8
15
1.7
…
…
Amphotericin
…
4
90
1.92
53
18
…
…
Ampicillin
62
82
18
16.2
20
1.3
…
…
Aspirin
68
1
49
39
11
0.25
…
…
Atenolol
56
94
5
10.2
67
6.1
1 mg/L
…
Atropine
50
57
18
24.6
120
4.3
…
…
Captopril
65
38
30
50.4
57
2.2
50 ng/mL
…
Carbamazepine
70
1
74
5.34
98
15
6 mg/L
> 9 mg/L
Cephalexin
90
91
14
18
18
0.9
…
…
Cephalothin
…
52
71
28.2
18
0.57
…
…
Chloramphenicol
80
25
53
10.2
66
2.7
…
…
Chlordiazepoxide
100
1
97
2.28
21
10
1 mg/L
…
Chloroquine
89
61
61
45
13,000
214
20 ng/mL
250 ng/mL
Chlorpropamide
90
20
96
0.126
6.8
33
…
…
Cimetidine
62
62
19
32.4
70
1.9
0.8 mg/L
…
Ciprofloxacin
60
65
40
25.2
130
4.1
…
…
Clonidine
95
62
20
12.6
150
12
1 ng/mL
…
Cyclosporine
30
1
98
23.9
244
15
200 ng/mL
> 400 ng/mL
Diazepam
100
1
99
1.62
77
43
300 ng/mL
…
Digoxin
70
67
25
9
500
39
1 ng/mL
> 2 ng/mL
Diltiazem
44
4
78
50.4
220
3.7
…
…
Disopyramide
83
55
2
5.04
41
6
3 mg/mL
> 8 mg/mL
Enalapril
95
90
55
9
40
3
> 0.5 ng/mL
…
Erythromycin
35
12
84
38.4
55
1.6
…
…
Ethambutol
77
79
5
36
110
3.1
…
> 10 mg/L
Fluoxetine
60
3
94
40.2
2500
53
…
…
Furosemide
61
66
99
8.4
7.7
1.5
…
> 25 mg/L
Gentamicin
…
76
10
4.7
20
3
3 mg/L3
…
Hydralazine
40
10
87
234
105
1
100 ng/mL
…
Imipramine
40
2
90
63
1600
18
200 ng/mL
> 1 mg/L
Indomethacin
98
15
90
8.4
18
2.4
1 mg/L
> 5 mg/L
Labetalol
18
5
50
105
660
4.9
0.1 mg/L
…
Lidocaine
35
2
70
38.4
77
1.8
3 mg/L
> 6 mg/L
Lithium
100
95
0
1.5
55
22
0.7 mEq/L
> 2 mEq/L
(continued)
40    SECTION I Basic Principles
TABLE 3–1  Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters for selected drugs. (Continued)
Drug
Oral 
Availability 
(F) (%)
Urinary 
Excretion 
(%)1
Bound in 
Plasma 
(%)
Clearance 
(L/h/70 kg)2
Volume 
of Distri-
bution 
(L/70 kg)
Half-Life (h)
Target 
Concentration
Toxic 
Concentration
Meperidine
52
12
58
72
310
3.2
0.5 mg/L
…
Methotrexate
70
48
34
9
39
7.2
750 μM-h4,5
> 950 μM-h
Metoprolol
38
10
11
63
290
3.2
25 ng/mL
…
Metronidazole
99
10
10
5.4
52
8.5
4 mg/L
…
Midazolam
44
56
95
27.6
77
1.9
…
…
Morphine
24
8
35
60
230
1.9
15 ng/mL
…
Nifedipine
50
0
96
29.4
55
1.8
50 ng/mL
…
Nortriptyline
51
2
92
30
1300
31
100 ng/mL
> 500 ng/mL
Phenobarbital
100
24
51
0.258
38
98
15 mg/L
> 30 mg/L
Phenytoin
90
2
89
Conc 
dependent5
45
Conc 
dependent6
10 mg/L
> 20 mg/L
Prazosin
68
1
95
12.6
42
2.9
…
…
Procainamide
83
67
16
36
130
3
5 mg/L
> 14 mg/L
Propranolol
26
1
87
50.4
270
3.9
20 ng/mL
…
Pyridostigmine
14
85
…
36
77
1.9
75 ng/mL
…
Quinidine
80
18
87
19.8
190
6.2
3 mg/L
> 8 mg/L
Ranitidine
52
69
15
43.8
91
2.1
100 ng/mL
…
Rifampin
?
7
89
14.4
68
3.5
…
…
Salicylic acid
100
15
85
0.84
12
13
200 mg/L
> 200 mg/L
Sulfamethoxazole
100
14
62
1.32
15
10
…
…
Terbutaline
14
56
20
14.4
125
14
2 ng/mL
…
Tetracycline
77
58
65
7.2
105
11
…
…
Theophylline
96
18
56
2.8
35
8.1
10 mg/L
> 20 mg/L
Tobramycin
…
90
10
4.62
18
2.2
…
…
Tocainide
89
38
10
10.8
210
14
10 mg/L
…
Tolbutamide
93
0
96
1.02
7
5.9
100 mg/L
…
Trimethoprim
100
69
44
9
130
11
…
…
Tubocurarine
…
63
50
8.1
27
2
0.6 mg/L
…
Valproic acid
100
2
93
0.462
9.1
14
75 mg/L
> 150 mg/L
Vancomycin
…
79
30
5.88
27
5.6
20 mg/L3
…
Verapamil
22
3
90
63
350
4
…
…
Warfarin
93
3
99
0.192
9.8
37
…
…
Zidovudine
63
18
25
61.8
98
1.1
…
…
1Assuming creatinine clearance 100 mL/min/70 kg.
2Convert to mL/min by multiplying the number given by 16.6.
3 Average steady-state concentration.
4Target area under the concentration-time curve after a single dose.
5Can be estimated from measured C using CL = Vmax/(Km + C); Vmax = 415 mg/d, Km = 5 mg/L. See text.
6 Varies because of concentration-dependent clearance.
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: Rational Dosing & the Time Course of Drug Action    41
Amount
in blood
Blood
0
Time
Amount
in blood
Blood
0
Time
Extravascular
volume
Blood
Amount
in blood
0
Time
Amount
in blood
0
Time
Extravascular
volume
Blood
A
B
C
D
 FIGURE 3–2  Models of drug distribution and elimination. The 
effect of adding drug to the blood by rapid intravenous injection is 
represented by expelling a known amount of the agent into a beaker. 
The time course of the amount of drug in the beaker is shown in the 
graphs at the right. In the first example ( A ), there is no movement of 
drug out of the beaker, so the graph shows only a steep rise to maxi-
mum followed by a plateau. In the second example ( B ), a route of 
elimination is present, and the graph shows a slow decay after a 
sharp rise to a maximum. Because the level of material in the beaker 
falls, the “pressure” driving the elimination process also falls, and the 
slope of the curve decreases. This is an exponential decay curve. In 
the third model ( C ), drug placed in the first compartment (“blood”) 
equilibrates rapidly with the second compartment (“extravascular 
volume”) and the amount of drug in “blood” declines exponentially 
to a new steady state. The fourth model ( D ) illustrates a more realistic 
combination of elimination mechanism and extravascular equilibra-
tion. The resulting graph shows an early distribution phase followed 
by the slower elimination phase. 
Added together, these separate clearances equal total systemic 
clearance: 
 
 
 “Other” tissues of elimination could include the lungs and 
additional sites of metabolism, eg, blood or muscle. 
 The two major sites of drug elimination are the kidneys and the 
liver. Clearance of unchanged drug in the urine represents renal clear-
ance. Within the liver, drug elimination occurs via biotransformation 
of parent drug to one or more metabolites, or excretion of unchanged 
drug into the bile, or both. The pathways of biotransformation are 
discussed in Chapter 4. For most drugs, clearance is constant over the 
concentration range encountered in clinical settings, ie, elimination is 
not saturable, and the rate of drug elimination is directly proportional 
to concentration (rearranging equation [2]): 
 
 
 This is usually referred to as first-order elimination. When 
clearance is first-order, it can be estimated by calculating the  area 
under the curve (AUC) of the time-concentration profile after a 
dose. Clearance is calculated from the dose divided by the AUC. 
 A. Capacity-Limited Elimination 
 
For drugs that exhibit capacity-limited elimination (eg, pheny-
toin, ethanol), clearance will vary depending on the concentration 
TABLE 3–2  Physical volumes (in L/kg body weight) of 
some body compartments into which 
drugs may be distributed.
Compartment and 
Volume
Examples of Drugs
Water
Total body water 
(0.6 L/kg1)
Small water-soluble molecules: eg, 
ethanol
Extracellular water 
(0.2 L/kg)
Larger water-soluble molecules: eg, 
gentamicin
Blood (0.08 L/kg); 
plasma (0.04 L/kg)
Strongly plasma protein-bound 
molecules and very large molecules: 
eg, heparin
Fat (0.2-0.35 L/kg)
Highly lipid-soluble molecules: eg, DDT
Bone (0.07 L/kg)
Certain ions: eg, lead, fluoride
1An average figure. Total body water in a young lean man might be 0.7 L/kg; in an 
obese woman, 0.5 L/kg.
42    SECTION I Basic Principles
of drug that is achieved (Table 3–1). Capacity-limited elimination 
is also known as mixed-order, saturable, dose- or concentration-
dependent, nonlinear, and Michaelis-Menten elimination. 
 Most drug elimination pathways will become saturated if the 
dose and therefore the concentration are high enough. When 
blood flow to an organ does not limit elimination (see below), the 
relation between elimination rate and concentration (C) is 
expressed mathematically in equation (5): 
 
 The maximum elimination capacity is V max , and K m is the drug 
concentration at which the rate of elimination is 50% of V max . At 
concentrations that are high relative to the K m , the elimination 
rate is almost independent of concentration—a state of “pseudo-
zero order” elimination. If dosing rate exceeds elimination capac-
ity, steady state cannot be achieved: The concentration will keep 
on rising as long as dosing continues. This pattern of capacity-
limited elimination is important for three drugs in common use: 
ethanol, phenytoin, and aspirin. Clearance has no real meaning 
for drugs with capacity-limited elimination, and AUC should not 
be used to describe the elimination of such drugs. 
 B. Flow-Dependent Elimination 
 
In contrast to capacity-limited drug elimination, some drugs are 
cleared very readily by the organ of elimination, so that at any 
clinically realistic concentration of the drug, most of the drug in 
the blood perfusing the organ is eliminated on the first pass of the 
drug through it. The elimination of these drugs will thus depend 
primarily on the rate of drug delivery to the organ of elimination. 
Such drugs (see Table 4–7) can be called “high-extraction” drugs 
since they are almost completely extracted from the blood by the 
organ. Blood flow to the organ is the main determinant of drug 
delivery, but plasma protein binding and blood cell partitioning 
may also be important for extensively bound drugs that are highly 
extracted. 
 Half-Life 
 Half-life ( t 1/2 ) is the time required to change the amount of drug in 
the body by one-half during elimination (or during a constant 
infusion). In the simplest case—and the most useful in designing 
drug dosage regimens—the body may be considered as a single 
compartment (as illustrated in  Figure 3–2 B) of a size equal to the 
volume of distribution (V). The time course of drug in the body 
will depend on both the volume of distribution and the clearance: 
 
 
 Because drug elimination can be described by an exponential 
process, the time taken for a twofold decrease can be shown to be 
proportional to the natural logarithm of 2. The constant 0.7 in 
equation (6) is an approximation to the natural logarithm of 2. 
 Half-life is useful because it indicates the time required to 
attain 50% of steady state—or to decay 50% from steady-state 
conditions—after a change in the rate of drug administration. 
 Figure 3–3 shows the time course of drug accumulation during a 
constant-rate drug infusion and the time course of drug elimina-
tion after stopping an infusion that has reached steady state. 
 Disease states can affect both of the physiologically related 
primary pharmacokinetic parameters: volume of distribution and 
clearance. A change in half-life will not necessarily reflect a change 
in drug elimination. For example, patients with chronic renal 
failure have decreased renal clearance of digoxin but also a 
decreased volume of distribution; the increase in digoxin half-life 
is not as great as might be expected based on the change in renal 
function. The decrease in volume of distribution is due to the 
decreased renal and skeletal muscle mass and consequent decreased 
tissue binding of digoxin to Na + /K + -ATPase. 
 Many drugs will exhibit multicompartment pharmacokinetics 
(as illustrated in Figures 3–2C and 3–2D). Under these condi-
tions, the “true” terminal half-life, as given in  Table 3–1 , will be 
greater than that calculated from equation (6). 
 Drug Accumulation 
 Whenever drug doses are repeated, the drug will accumulate in the 
body until dosing stops. This is because it takes an infinite time 
(in theory) to eliminate all of a given dose. In practical terms, this 
means that if the dosing interval is shorter than four half-lives, 
accumulation will be detectable. 
 Accumulation is inversely proportional to the fraction of the 
dose lost in each dosing interval. The fraction lost is 1 minus the 
fraction remaining just before the next dose. The fraction 
remaining can be predicted from the dosing interval and the 
100
75
50
25
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Plasma concentration
(% of steady state)
Time (half-lives)
Elimination
Accumulation
 FIGURE 3–3  The time course of drug accumulation and elimi-
nation.  Solid line: Plasma concentrations reflecting drug accumula-
tion during a constant-rate infusion of a drug. Fifty percent of the 
steady-state concentration is reached after one half-life, 75% after 
two half-lives, and over 90% after four half-lives.  Dashed line: 
Plasma concentrations reflecting drug elimination after a constant- 
rate infusion of a drug had reached steady state. Fifty percent of 
the drug is lost after one half-life, 75% after two half-lives, etc. The 
“rule of thumb” that four half-lives must elapse after starting a 
drug-dosing regimen before full effects will be seen is based on the 
approach of the accumulation curve to over 90% of the final 
steady-state concentration. 
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: Rational Dosing & the Time Course of Drug Action    43
half-life. A convenient index of accumulation is the  accumula-
tion factor: 
 
 For a drug given once every half-life, the accumulation factor 
is 1/0.5, or 2. The accumulation factor predicts the ratio of the 
steady-state concentration to that seen at the same time following 
the first dose. Thus, the peak concentrations after intermittent 
doses at steady state will be equal to the peak concentration after 
the first dose multiplied by the accumulation factor. 
 Bioavailability 
 Bioavailability is defined as the fraction of unchanged drug reach-
ing the systemic circulation following administration by any route 
(Table 3–3). The area under the blood concentration-time curve 
(AUC) is proportional to the extent of bioavailability for a drug if 
its elimination is first-order ( Figure 3–4 ). For an intravenous dose 
of the drug, bioavailability is assumed to be equal to unity. For a 
drug administered orally, bioavailability may be less than 100% 
for two main reasons—incomplete extent of absorption across the 
gut wall and first-pass elimination by the liver (see below). 
 A. Extent of Absorption 
 
After oral administration, a drug may be incompletely absorbed, 
eg, only 70% of a dose of digoxin reaches the systemic circulation. 
This is mainly due to lack of absorption from the gut. Other drugs 
are either too hydrophilic (eg, atenolol) or too lipophilic (eg, acy-
clovir) to be absorbed easily, and their low bioavailability is also 
due to incomplete absorption. If too hydrophilic, the drug cannot 
cross the lipid cell membrane; if too lipophilic, the drug is not 
soluble enough to cross the water layer adjacent to the cell. Drugs 
may not be absorbed because of a reverse transporter associated 
with P-glycoprotein. This process actively pumps drug out of gut 
wall cells back into the gut lumen. Inhibition of P-glycoprotein 
and gut wall metabolism, eg, by grapefruit juice, may be associated 
with substantially increased drug absorption. 
 B. First-Pass Elimination 
 
Following absorption across the gut wall, the portal blood delivers 
the drug to the liver prior to entry into the systemic circulation. A 
drug can be metabolized in the gut wall (eg, by the CYP3A4 
enzyme system) or even in the portal blood, but most commonly 
it is the liver that is responsible for metabolism before the drug 
reaches the systemic circulation. In addition, the liver can excrete 
the drug into the bile. Any of these sites can contribute to this 
reduction in bioavailability, and the overall process is known as 
first-pass elimination. The effect of first-pass hepatic elimination 
on bioavailability is expressed as the extraction ratio (ER): 
 
 
 where Q is hepatic blood flow, normally about 90 L/h in a person 
weighing 70 kg. 
 The systemic bioavailability of the drug (F) can be predicted 
from the extent of absorption (f) and the extraction ratio (ER): 
 
TABLE 3–3  Routes of administration, bioavailability, 
and general characteristics.
Route
Bioavailability (%)
Characteristics
Intravenous (IV)
100 (by definition)
Most rapid onset
Intramuscular (IM)
75 to ≤ 100
Large volumes often fea-
sible; may be painful
Subcutaneous (SC)
75 to ≤100
Smaller volumes than 
IM; may be painful
Oral (PO)
5 to < 100
Most convenient; first-
pass effect may be sig-
nificant
Rectal (PR)
30 to < 100
Less first-pass effect 
than oral
Inhalation
5 to < 100
Often very rapid onset
Transdermal
80 to ≤ 100
Usually very slow 
absorption; used for lack 
of first-pass effect; pro-
longed duration of 
action
Concentration of drug in blood
A: Drug rapidly and completely available
C: Drug completely available but rate only half of A
B: Only half of availability of A but rate equal to A
TC
Time
A
B
C
 FIGURE 3-4  Blood concentration-time curves, illustrating how 
changes in the rate of absorption and extent of bioavailability can 
influence both the duration of action and the effectiveness of the 
same total dose of a drug administered in three different formula-
tions. The dashed line indicates the target concentration (TC) of the 
drug in the blood. 
44    SECTION I Basic Principles
 A drug such as morphine is almost completely absorbed (f = 1), 
so that loss in the gut is negligible. However, the hepatic extrac-
tion ratio for morphine is morphine clearance (60 L/h/70 kg) 
divided by hepatic blood flow (90 L/h/70 kg) or 0.67, so (1 – ER) 
is 0.33. The bioavailability of morphine is therefore expected to be 
about 33%, which is close to the observed value (Table 3–1). 
 C. Rate of Absorption 
 
The distinction between rate and extent of absorption is shown in 
 Figure 3–4 . The rate of absorption is determined by the site of 
administration and the drug formulation. Both the rate of 
absorption and the extent of input can influence the clinical 
effectiveness of a drug. For the three different dosage forms depicted 
in  Figure 3–4 , there would be significant differences in the inten-
sity of clinical effect. Dosage form B would require twice the dose 
to attain blood concentrations equivalent to those of dosage form 
A. Differences in rate of absorption may become important for 
drugs given as a single dose, such as a hypnotic used to induce 
sleep. In this case, drug from dosage form A would reach its target 
concentration earlier than drug from dosage form C; concentra-
tions from A would also reach a higher level and remain above the 
target concentration for a longer period. In a multiple dosing regi-
men, dosage forms A and C would yield the same average blood 
level concentrations, although dosage form A would show some-
what greater maximum and lower minimum concentrations. 
 The mechanism of drug absorption is said to be zero-order 
when the rate is independent of the amount of drug remaining in 
the gut, eg, when it is determined by the rate of gastric emptying 
or by a controlled-release drug formulation. In contrast, when the 
dose is dissolved in gastrointestinal fluids, the rate of absorption is 
usually proportional to the gastrointestinal concentration and is 
said to be first-order. 
 Extraction Ratio & the First-Pass Effect 
 Systemic clearance is not affected by bioavailability. However, 
clearance can markedly affect the extent of availability because it 
determines the extraction ratio (equation [8a]). Of course, thera-
peutic blood concentrations may still be reached by the oral route 
of administration if larger doses are given. However, in this case, 
the concentrations of the drug  metabolites will be increased sig-
nificantly over those that would occur following intravenous 
administration. Lidocaine and verapamil are both used to treat 
cardiac arrhythmias and have bioavailability less than 40%, but 
lidocaine is never given orally because its metabolites are believed 
to contribute to central nervous system toxicity. Other drugs that 
are highly extracted by the liver include isoniazid, morphine, pro-
pranolol, and several tricyclic antidepressants (Table 3–1). 
 Drugs with high extraction ratios will show marked variations 
in bioavailability between subjects because of differences in 
hepatic function and blood flow. These differences can explain the 
marked variation in drug concentrations that occurs among indi-
viduals given similar doses of highly extracted drugs. For drugs 
that are highly extracted by the liver, bypassing hepatic sites of 
elimination (eg, in hepatic cirrhosis with portosystemic shunting) 
will result in substantial increases in drug availability, whereas for 
drugs that are poorly extracted by the liver (for which the differ-
ence between entering and exiting drug concentration is small), 
shunting of blood past the liver will cause little change in avail-
ability. Drugs in  Table 3–1 that are poorly extracted by the liver 
include chlorpropamide, diazepam, phenytoin, theophylline, 
tolbutamide, and warfarin. 
 Alternative Routes of Administration & the 
First-Pass Effect 
 There are several reasons for different routes of administration 
used in clinical medicine (Table 3–3)—for convenience (eg, oral), 
to maximize concentration at the site of action and minimize it 
elsewhere (eg, topical), to prolong the duration of drug absorption 
(eg, transdermal), or to avoid the first-pass effect. 
 The hepatic first-pass effect can be avoided to a great extent by 
use of sublingual tablets and transdermal preparations and to a 
lesser extent by use of rectal suppositories. Sublingual absorption 
provides direct access to systemic—not portal—veins. The trans-
dermal route offers the same advantage. Drugs absorbed from 
suppositories in the lower rectum enter vessels that drain into the 
inferior vena cava, thus bypassing the liver. However, suppositories 
tend to move upward in the rectum into a region where veins that 
lead to the liver predominate. Thus, only about 50% of a rectal 
dose can be assumed to bypass the liver. 
 Although drugs administered by inhalation bypass the hepatic 
first-pass effect, the lung may also serve as a site of first-pass loss 
by excretion and possibly metabolism for drugs administered by 
nongastrointestinal (“parenteral”) routes. 
 THE TIME COURSE OF DRUG EFFECT 
 The principles of pharmacokinetics (discussed in this chapter) and 
those of pharmacodynamics (discussed in Chapter 2 and Holford & 
Sheiner, 1981) provide a framework for understanding the time 
course of drug effect. 
 Immediate Effects 
 In the simplest case, drug effects are directly related to plasma 
concentrations, but this does not necessarily mean that effects 
simply parallel the time course of concentrations. Because the 
relationship between drug concentration and effect is not linear 
(recall the E max model described in Chapter 2), the effect will not 
usually be linearly proportional to the concentration. 
 Consider the effect of an angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitor, such as enalapril, on plasma ACE. The half-life 
of enalapril is about 3 hours. After an oral dose of 10 mg, the peak 
plasma concentration at 3 hours is about 64 ng/mL. Enalapril is 
usually given once a day, so seven half-lives will elapse from the 
time of peak concentration to the end of the dosing interval. The 
concentration of enalapril after each half-life and the correspond-
ing extent of ACE inhibition are shown in  Figure 3–5 . The extent 
of inhibition of ACE is calculated using the E max model, where 
E max , the maximum extent of inhibition, is 100% and the C 50 , the 
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: Rational Dosing & the Time Course of Drug Action    45
concentration of the drug that produces 50% of maximum effect, 
is about 1 ng/mL. 
 Note that plasma concentrations of enalapril change by a factor 
of 16 over the first 12 hours (four half-lives) after the peak, but 
ACE inhibition has only decreased by 20%. Because the concen-
trations over this time are so high in relation to the C 50 , the effect 
on ACE is almost constant. After 24 hours, ACE is still 33% 
inhibited. This explains why a drug with a short half-life can be 
given once a day and still maintain its effect throughout the day. 
The key factor is a high initial concentration in relation to the C 50 . 
Even though the plasma concentration at 24 hours is less than 1% 
of its peak, this low concentration is still half the C 50 . This is very 
common for drugs that act on enzymes (eg, ACE inhibitors) or 
compete at receptors (eg, propranolol). 
 When concentrations are in the range between four times and 
one fourth of the C 50 , the time course of effect is essentially a 
linear function of time. It takes four half-lives for concentrations 
to drop from an effect of 80% to 20% of E max —15% of the effect 
is lost every half-life over this concentration range. At concentra-
tions below one fourth the C 50 , the effect becomes almost directly 
proportional to concentration and the time course of drug effect 
will follow the exponential decline of concentration. It is only 
when the concentration is low in relation to the C 50 that the con-
cept of a “half-life of drug effect” has any meaning. 
 Delayed Effects 
 Changes in drug effects are often delayed in relation to changes in 
plasma concentration. This delay may reflect the time required for 
the drug to distribute from plasma to the site of action. This will 
be the case for almost all drugs. The delay due to distribution is a 
pharmacokinetic phenomenon that can account for delays of a 
few minutes. This distributional delay can account for the lag of 
effects after rapid intravenous injection of central nervous system 
(CNS)–active agents such as thiopental. 
 A common reason for more delayed drug effects—especially those 
that take many hours or even days to occur—is the slow turnover of 
a physiologic substance that is involved in the expression of the drug 
effect. For example, warfarin works as an anticoagulant by inhibiting 
vitamin K epoxidase in the liver. This action of warfarin occurs rap-
idly, and inhibition of the enzyme is closely related to plasma concen-
trations of warfarin. The  clinical  effect of warfarin, eg, on the 
International Normalized Ratio (INR), reflects a decrease in the con-
centration of the prothrombin complex of clotting factors. Inhibition 
of vitamin K epoxidase decreases the synthesis of these clotting fac-
tors, but the complex has a long half-life (about 14 hours), and it is 
this half-life that determines how long it takes for the concentration 
of clotting factors to reach a new steady state and for a drug effect to 
reflect the average warfarin plasma concentration. 
 Cumulative Effects 
 Some drug effects are more obviously related to a cumulative 
action than to a rapidly reversible one. The renal toxicity of 
aminoglycoside antibiotics (eg, gentamicin) is greater when 
administered as a constant infusion than with intermittent dosing. 
It is the accumulation of aminoglycoside in the renal cortex that is 
thought to cause renal damage. Even though both dosing schemes 
produce the same average steady-state concentration, the intermit-
tent dosing scheme produces much higher peak concentrations, 
which saturate an uptake mechanism into the cortex; thus, total 
aminoglycoside accumulation is less. The difference in toxicity is 
a predictable consequence of the different patterns of concentra-
tion and the saturable uptake mechanism. 
 The effect of many drugs used to treat cancer also reflects a 
cumulative action—eg, the extent of binding of a drug to DNA is 
proportional to drug concentration and is usually irreversible. The 
effect on tumor growth is therefore a consequence of cumulative 
exposure to the drug. Measures of cumulative exposure, such as 
AUC, provide a means to individualize treatment. 
 THE TARGET CONCENTRATION 
APPROACH TO DESIGNING A RATIONAL 
DOSAGE REGIMEN 
 A rational dosage regimen is based on the assumption that there is 
a  target concentration that will produce the desired therapeutic 
effect. By considering the pharmacokinetic factors that determine 
the dose-concentration relationship, it is possible to individualize 
the dose regimen to achieve the target concentration. The effective 
concentration ranges shown in  Table 3–1 are a guide to the con-
centrations measured when patients are being effectively treated. 
The initial target concentration should usually be chosen from the 
lower end of this range. In some cases, the target concentration 
will also depend on the specific therapeutic objective—eg, the 
control of atrial fibrillation by digoxin often requires a target 
100
80
60
40
20
0
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Conc
Effect
 FIGURE 3–5  Time course of angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitor concentrations and effects. The blue line shows the 
plasma enalapril concentrations in nanograms per milliliter after a 
single oral dose. The red line indicates the percentage inhibition of 
its target, ACE. Note the different shapes of the concentration-time 
course (exponentially decreasing) and the effect-time course (linearly 
decreasing in its central portion). 
46    SECTION I Basic Principles
concentration of 2 ng/mL, while heart failure is usually adequately 
managed with a target concentration of 1 ng/mL. 
 Maintenance Dose 
 In most clinical situations, drugs are administered in such a way 
as to maintain a steady state of drug in the body, ie, just enough 
drug is given in each dose to replace the drug eliminated since the 
preceding dose. Thus, calculation of the appropriate maintenance 
dose is a primary goal. Clearance is the most important pharma-
cokinetic term to be considered in defining a rational steady-state 
drug dosage regimen. At steady state, the dosing rate (“rate in”) 
must equal the rate of elimination (“rate out”). Substitution of the 
target concentration (TC) for concentration (C) in equation (4) 
predicts the maintenance dosing rate: 
 
 
 Thus, if the desired target concentration is known, the clearance 
in that patient will determine the dosing rate. If the drug is given 
by a route that has a bioavailability less than 100%, then the dosing 
rate predicted by equation (9) must be modified. For oral dosing: 
 
 
 If intermittent doses are given, the maintenance dose is calcu-
lated from: 
 
 
 (See Box: Example: Maintenance Dose Calculations.) 
 Note that the steady-state concentration achieved by con-
tinuous infusion or the average concentration following inter-
mittent dosing depends only on clearance. The volume of 
distribution and the half-life need not be known in order to 
determine the average plasma concentration expected from a 
given dosing rate or to predict the dosing rate for a desired tar-
get concentration.  Figure 3–6 shows that at different dosing 
intervals, the concentration-time curves will have different 
maximum and minimum values even though the average level 
will always be 10 mg/L. 
 Estimates of dosing rate and average steady-state concentra-
tions, which may be calculated using clearance, are independent 
of any specific pharmacokinetic model. In contrast, the determi-
nation of maximum and minimum steady-state concentrations 
requires further assumptions about the pharmacokinetic model. 
The accumulation factor (equation [7]) assumes that the drug fol-
lows a one-compartment body model ( Figure 3–2 B), and the peak 
concentration prediction assumes that the absorption rate is much 
faster than the elimination rate. For the calculation of estimated 
maximum and minimum concentrations in a clinical situation, 
these assumptions are usually reasonable. 
 Loading Dose 
 When the time to reach steady state is appreciable, as it is for drugs 
with long half-lives, it may be desirable to administer a loading 
dose that promptly raises the concentration of drug in plasma to 
the target concentration. In theory, only the amount of the load-
ing dose need be computed—not the rate of its administration—
and, to a first approximation, this is so. The volume of distribution 
is the proportionality factor that relates the total amount of drug 
in the body to the concentration; if a loading dose is to achieve the 
target concentration, then from equation (1): 
Example: Maintenance Dose Calculations
A target plasma theophylline concentration of 10 mg/L is desired 
to relieve acute bronchial asthma in a patient. If the patient is a 
nonsmoker and otherwise normal except for asthma, we may use 
the mean clearance given in Table 3–1, ie, 2.8 L/h/70 kg. Since the 
drug will be given as an intravenous infusion, F = 1.
Dosing rate = CL × TC
 
= 2.8 L / h / 70 kg × 10 mg / L
 
= 28 mg / h / 70 kg
Therefore, in this patient, the proper infusion rate would be 
28 mg/h/70 kg.
If the asthma attack is relieved, the clinician might want to 
maintain this plasma level using oral theophylline, which might 
be given every 12 hours using an extended-release formulation 
to approximate a continuous intravenous infusion. According to 
Table 3–1, Foral is 0.96. When the dosing interval is 12 hours, the 
size of each maintenance dose would be:
Maintenance
dose
× Dosing interval
= Dosing rate
F
× 12 hours
= 28 mg / h
0.96
= 350 mg
A tablet or capsule size close to the ideal dose of 350 mg would 
then be prescribed at 12-hourly intervals. If an 8-hour dosing inter-
val was used, the ideal dose would be 233 mg; and if the drug was 
given once a day, the dose would be 700 mg. In practice, F could 
be omitted from the calculation since it is so close to 1.
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: Rational Dosing & the Time Course of Drug Action    47
 
 For the theophylline example given in the Box, Example: 
Maintenance Dose Calculations, the loading dose would be 350 
mg (35 L × 10 mg/L) for a 70-kg person. For most drugs, the 
loading dose can be given as a single dose by the chosen route of 
administration. 
 Up to this point, we have ignored the fact that some drugs 
follow more complex multicompartment pharmacokinetics, eg, 
the distribution process illustrated by the two-compartment 
model in  Figure 3–2 . This is justified in the great majority of 
cases. However, in some cases the distribution phase may not be 
ignored, particularly in connection with the calculation of load-
ing doses. If the rate of absorption is rapid relative to distribution 
(this is always true for rapid intravenous administration), the 
concentration of drug in plasma that results from an appropriate 
loading dose—calculated using the apparent volume of distribu-
tion—can initially be considerably higher than desired. Severe 
toxicity may occur, albeit transiently. This may be particularly 
important, eg, in the administration of antiarrhythmic drugs 
such as lidocaine, where an almost immediate toxic response may 
occur. Thus, while the estimation of the  amount of a loading dose 
may be quite correct, the  rate of administration can sometimes be 
crucial in preventing excessive drug concentrations, and slow 
administration of an intravenous drug (over minutes rather than 
seconds) is almost always prudent practice. 
 When intermittent doses are given, the loading dose calcu-
lated from equation (12) will only reach the average steady-
state concentration and will not match the peak steady-state 
concentration ( Figure 3–6 ). To match the peak steady-state con-
centration, the loading dose can be calculated from equation (13): 
 
 
 TARGET CONCENTRATION 
INTERVENTION: APPLICATION OF 
PHARMACOKINETICS & 
PHARMACODYNAMICS TO DOSE 
INDIVIDUALIZATION 
 The basic principles outlined above can be applied to the interpre-
tation of clinical drug concentration measurements on the basis of 
three major pharmacokinetic variables: absorption, clearance, and 
volume of distribution (and the derived variable, half-life). In addi-
tion, it may be necessary to consider two pharmacodynamic vari-
ables: maximum effect attainable in the target tissue and the 
sensitivity of the tissue to the drug. Diseases may modify all of 
these parameters, and the ability to predict the effect of disease 
states on pharmacokinetic parameters is important in properly 
adjusting dosage in such cases. (See Box: The Target Concentration 
Strategy.) 
 Pharmacokinetic Variables 
 A. Absorption 
 
The amount of drug that enters the body depends on the patient’s 
adherence to the prescribed regimen and on the rate and extent of 
transfer from the site of administration to the blood. 
0   
0
16
10
15
24
20
25
32
8
5
40
48
56
64
72
80
88
96
Plasma concentration (mg/L)
Time (h)
 FIGURE 3–6  Relationship between frequency of dosing and maximum and minimum plasma concentrations when a steady-state theo-
phylline plasma level of 10 mg/L is desired. The smoothly rising black line shows the plasma concentration achieved with an intravenous infu-
sion of 28 mg/h. The doses for 8-hourly administration (orange line) are 224 mg; for 24-hourly administration (blue line), 672 mg. In each of the 
three cases, the mean steady-state plasma concentration is 10 mg/L. 
48    SECTION I Basic Principles
 Overdosage and underdosage relative to the prescribed 
dosage—both aspects of failure of adherence—can frequently be 
detected by concentration measurements when gross deviations 
from expected values are obtained. If adherence is found to be 
adequate, absorption abnormalities in the small bowel may be the 
cause of abnormally low concentrations. Variations in the extent 
of bioavailability are rarely caused by irregularities in the manufac-
ture of the particular drug formulation. More commonly, varia-
tions in bioavailability are due to metabolism during absorption. 
 B. Clearance  
Abnormal clearance may be anticipated when there is major 
impairment of the function of the kidney, liver, or heart. Creatinine 
clearance is a useful quantitative indicator of renal function. 
Conversely, drug clearance may be a useful indicator of the func-
tional consequences of heart, kidney, or liver failure, often with 
greater precision than clinical findings or other laboratory tests. For 
example, when renal function is changing rapidly, estimation of the 
clearance of aminoglycoside antibiotics may be a more accurate 
indicator of glomerular filtration than serum creatinine. 
 Hepatic disease has been shown to reduce the clearance and 
prolong the half-life of many drugs. However, for many other 
drugs known to be eliminated by hepatic processes, no changes in 
clearance or half-life have been noted with similar hepatic disease. 
This reflects the fact that hepatic disease does not always affect the 
hepatic intrinsic clearance. At present, there is no reliable marker 
The Target Concentration Strategy
of hepatic drug-metabolizing function that can be used to predict 
changes in liver clearance in a manner analogous to the use of 
creatinine clearance as a marker of renal drug clearance. 
 C. Volume of Distribution 
 
The apparent volume of distribution reflects a balance between 
binding to tissues, which decreases plasma concentration and 
makes the apparent volume larger, and binding to plasma pro-
teins, which increases plasma concentration and makes the appar-
ent volume smaller. Changes in either tissue or plasma binding 
can change the apparent volume of distribution determined from 
plasma concentration measurements. Older people have a relative 
decrease in skeletal muscle mass and tend to have a smaller appar-
ent volume of distribution of digoxin (which binds to muscle 
proteins). The volume of distribution may be overestimated in 
obese patients if based on body weight and the drug does not enter 
fatty tissues well, as is the case with digoxin. In contrast, theophyl-
line has a volume of distribution similar to that of total body 
water. Adipose tissue has almost as much water in it as other tis-
sues, so that the apparent total volume of distribution of theophyl-
line is proportional to body weight even in obese patients. 
 Abnormal accumulation of fluid—edema, ascites, pleural 
effusion—can markedly increase the volume of distribution of 
drugs such as gentamicin that are hydrophilic and have small vol-
umes of distribution. 
 D. Half-Life 
 The differences between clearance and half-life are important in 
defining the underlying mechanisms for the effect of a disease 
state on drug disposition. For example, the half-life of diazepam 
increases with patient age. When clearance is related to age, it is 
found that clearance of this drug does not change with age. The 
increasing half-life for diazepam actually results from changes in 
the volume of distribution with age; the metabolic processes 
responsible for eliminating the drug are fairly constant. 
 Pharmacodynamic Variables 
 A. Maximum Effect 
 All pharmacologic responses must have a maximum effect (E max ). No 
matter how high the drug concentration goes, a point will be reached 
beyond which no further increment in response is achieved. 
 If increasing the dose in a particular patient does not lead to a 
further clinical response, it is possible that the maximum effect has 
been reached. Recognition of maximum effect is helpful in avoid-
ing ineffectual increases of dose with the attendant risk of toxicity. 
 B. Sensitivity  
The sensitivity of the target organ to drug concentration is 
reflected by the concentration required to produce 50% of maxi-
mum effect, the C 50 . Diminished sensitivity to the drug can be 
detected by measuring drug concentrations that are usually asso-
ciated with therapeutic response in a patient who has not 
responded. This may be a result of abnormal physiology—eg, 
hyperkalemia diminishes responsiveness to digoxin—or drug 
Recognition of the essential role of concentration in linking 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics leads naturally to 
the target concentration strategy. Pharmacodynamic princi-
ples can be used to predict the concentration required to 
achieve a particular degree of therapeutic effect. This target 
concentration can then be achieved by using pharmacoki-
netic principles to arrive at a suitable dosing regimen (Holford, 
1999). The target concentration strategy is a process for opti-
mizing the dose in an individual on the basis of a measured 
surrogate response such as drug concentration: 
 
1. Choose the target concentration, TC. 
 
 2.  Predict volume of distribution (V) and clearance (CL) 
based on standard population values (eg,  Table 3–1 ) 
with adjustments for factors such as weight and renal 
function. 
 
3.  Give a loading dose or maintenance dose calculated 
from TC, V, and CL. 
 
4.  Measure the patient’s response and drug concentra-
tion. 
 
5.  Revise V and/or CL based on the measured concentra-
tion. 
 
6.  Repeat steps 3–5, adjusting the predicted dose to 
achieve TC. 
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: Rational Dosing & the Time Course of Drug Action    49
antagonism—eg, calcium channel blockers impair the inotropic 
response to digoxin. 
 Increased sensitivity to a drug is usually signaled by exaggerated 
responses to small or moderate doses. The pharmacodynamic 
nature of this sensitivity can be confirmed by measuring drug 
concentrations that are low in relation to the observed effect. 
 INTERPRETATION OF DRUG 
CONCENTRATION MEASUREMENTS 
 Clearance 
 Clearance is the single most important factor determining drug 
concentrations. The interpretation of measurements of drug con-
centrations depends on a clear understanding of three factors that 
may influence clearance: the dose, the organ blood flow, and the 
intrinsic function of the liver or kidneys. Each of these factors 
should be considered when interpreting clearance estimated from 
a drug concentration measurement. It must also be recognized 
that changes in protein binding may lead the unwary to believe 
there is a change in clearance when in fact drug elimination is not 
altered (see Box: Plasma Protein Binding: Is It Important?). 
Factors affecting protein binding include the following: 
 1.  Albumin concentration: Drugs such as phenytoin, salicylates, 
and disopyramide are extensively bound to plasma albumin. 
Albumin levels are low in many disease states, resulting in 
lower total drug concentrations. 
 2.  Alpha 1 -acid glycoprotein concentration: α 1 -Acid glycopro-
tein is an important binding protein with binding sites for 
drugs such as quinidine, lidocaine, and propranolol. It is 
increased in acute inflammatory disorders and causes major 
changes in total plasma concentration of these drugs even 
though drug elimination is unchanged. 
 3.  Capacity-limited protein binding: The binding of drugs to 
plasma proteins is capacity-limited. Therapeutic concentra-
tions of salicylates and prednisolone show concentration-de-
pendent protein binding. Because unbound drug concentration 
is determined by dosing rate and clearance—which is not 
altered, in the case of these low-extraction-ratio drugs, by pro-
tein binding—increases in dosing rate will cause corresponding 
changes in the pharmacodynamically important unbound 
concentration. In contrast, total drug concentration will increase 
less rapidly than the dosing rate would suggest as protein bind-
ing approaches saturation at higher concentrations. 
 Dosing History 
 An accurate dosing history is essential if one is to obtain maxi-
mum value from a drug concentration measurement. In fact, if the 
dosing history is unknown or incomplete, a drug concentration 
measurement loses all predictive value. 
 Timing of Samples for 
Concentration Measurement 
 Information about the rate and extent of drug absorption in a 
particular patient is rarely of great clinical importance. However, 
absorption usually occurs during the first 2 hours after a drug dose 
and varies according to food intake, posture, and activity. 
Therefore, it is important to avoid drawing blood until absorption 
is complete (about 2 hours after an oral dose). Attempts to mea-
sure peak concentrations early after oral dosing are usually unsuc-
cessful and compromise the validity of the measurement, because 
one cannot be certain that absorption is complete. 
 Some drugs such as digoxin and lithium take several hours 
to distribute to tissues. Digoxin samples should be taken at least 
6 hours after the last dose and lithium just before the next dose 
(usually 24 hours after the last dose). Aminoglycosides distribute 
Plasma protein binding is often mentioned as a factor playing a 
role in pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and drug interac-
tions. However, there are no clinically relevant examples of 
changes in drug disposition or effects that can be clearly ascribed 
to changes in plasma protein binding (Benet & Hoener, 2002). 
The idea that if a drug is displaced from plasma proteins it would 
increase the unbound drug concentration and increase the drug 
effect and, perhaps, produce toxicity seems a simple and obvious 
mechanism. Unfortunately, this simple theory, which is appropri-
ate for a test tube, does not work in the body, which is an open 
system capable of eliminating unbound drug.
First, a seemingly dramatic change in the unbound fraction 
from 1% to 10% releases less than 5% of the total amount of drug 
in the body into the unbound pool because less than one third of 
the drug in the body is bound to plasma proteins even in the most 
extreme cases, eg, warfarin. Drug displaced from plasma protein 
will of course distribute throughout the volume of distribution, so 
Plasma Protein Binding: Is It Important?
that a 5% increase in the amount of unbound drug in the body 
produces at most a 5% increase in pharmacologically active 
unbound drug at the site of action.
Second, when the amount of unbound drug in plasma 
increases, the rate of elimination will increase (if unbound clear-
ance is unchanged), and after four half-lives the unbound con-
centration will return to its previous steady-state value. When 
drug interactions associated with protein binding displacement 
and clinically important effects have been studied, it has been 
found that the displacing drug is also an inhibitor of clearance, 
and it is the change in clearance of the unbound drug that is the 
relevant mechanism explaining the interaction.
The clinical importance of plasma protein binding is only to 
help interpretation of measured drug concentrations. When 
plasma proteins are lower than normal, then total drug concen-
trations will be lower but unbound concentrations will not be 
affected.
50    SECTION I Basic Principles
quite rapidly, but it is still prudent to wait 1 hour after giving the 
dose before taking a sample. 
 Clearance is readily estimated from the dosing rate and mean 
steady-state concentration. Blood samples should be appropriately 
timed to estimate steady-state concentration. Provided steady state 
has been approached (at least three half-lives of constant dosing), 
a sample obtained near the midpoint of the dosing interval will 
usually be close to the mean steady-state concentration. 
 Initial Predictions of Volume of 
Distribution & Clearance 
 A. Volume of Distribution 
 
Volume of distribution is commonly calculated for a particular 
patient using body weight (70-kg body weight is assumed for the 
values in  Table 3–1 ). If a patient is obese, drugs that do not read-
ily penetrate fat (eg, gentamicin and digoxin) should have their 
volumes calculated from fat-free mass (FFM) as shown below. 
Total body weight (WT) is in kilograms and height (HTM) is in 
meters: 
 
For women: FFM (kg) = 37.99 x HTM2 x WT
35.98 x HTM2 + WT
(14a) 
      
For men: FFM (kg) = 42.92 x HTM2 x WT
30.93 x HTM2 + WT
(14b) 
 Patients with edema, ascites, or pleural effusions offer a larger 
volume of distribution to the aminoglycoside antibiotics (eg, gen-
tamicin) than is predicted by body weight. In such patients, the 
weight should be corrected as follows: Subtract an estimate of the 
weight of the excess fluid accumulation from the measured weight. 
Use the resultant “normal” body weight to calculate the normal 
volume of distribution. Finally, this normal volume should be 
increased by 1 L for each estimated kilogram of excess fluid. This 
correction is important because of the relatively small volumes of 
distribution of these water-soluble drugs. 
 B. Clearance 
 Drugs cleared by the renal route often require adjustment of clear-
ance in proportion to renal function. This can be conveniently 
estimated from the creatinine clearance, calculated from a single 
serum creatinine measurement and the predicted creatinine pro-
duction rate. 
 The predicted creatinine production rate in women is 85% of 
the calculated value, because they have a smaller muscle mass per 
kilogram and it is muscle mass that determines creatinine pro-
duction. Muscle mass as a fraction of body weight decreases with 
age, which is why age appears in the Cockcroft-Gault equation. ∗ 
 The decrease of renal function with age is independent of the 
decrease in creatinine production. Because of the difficulty of 
obtaining complete urine collections, creatinine clearance calcu-
lated in this way is at least as reliable as estimates based on urine 
collections. The fat-free mass (equation [14]) should be consid-
ered rather than total body weight for obese patients, and correc-
tion should be made for muscle wasting in severely ill patients. 
 Revising Individual Estimates of Volume of 
Distribution & Clearance 
 The commonsense approach to the interpretation of drug concen-
trations compares predictions of pharmacokinetic parameters and 
expected concentrations to measured values. If measured concen-
trations differ by more than 20% from predicted values, revised 
estimates of V or CL for that patient should be calculated using 
equation (1) or equation (2). If the change calculated is more than 
a 100% increase or 50% decrease in either V or CL, the assump-
tions made about the timing of the sample and the dosing history 
should be critically examined. 
 For example, if a patient is taking 0.25 mg of digoxin a day, a 
clinician may expect the digoxin concentration to be about 1 ng/
mL. This is based on typical values for bioavailability of 70% and 
total clearance of about 7 L/h (CL renal 4 L/h, CL nonrenal 3 L/h). If 
the patient has heart failure, the nonrenal (hepatic) clearance 
might be halved because of hepatic congestion and hypoxia, so the 
expected clearance would become 5.5 L/h. The concentration is 
then expected to be about 1.3 ng/mL. Suppose that the concentra-
tion actually measured is 2 ng/mL. Common sense would suggest 
halving the daily dose to achieve a target concentration of 1 ng/mL. 
This approach implies a revised clearance of 3.5 L/h. The smaller 
clearance compared with the expected value of 5.5 L/h may reflect 
additional renal functional impairment due to heart failure. 
 This technique will often be misleading if steady state has not 
been reached. At least a week of regular dosing (three to four half-
lives) must elapse before the implicit method will be reliable. 
 REFERENCES 
 Benet LZ, Hoener B: Changes in plasma protein binding have little clinical rele-
vance. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2002;71:115. 
 Holford NHG: Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic principles. 2011; http://
www.fmhs.auckland.ac.nz/sms/pharmacology/holford/teaching/medsci722 
 Holford NHG: Target concentration intervention: Beyond Y2K. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol 1999:48:9. 
 Holford NHG, Sheiner LB: Understanding the dose-effect relationship. Clin 
Pharmacokinet 1981;6:429. 
 Speight T, Holford NHG:  Avery’s Drug Treatment , 4th ed. Adis International, 
1997. 
 ∗ The Cockcroft-Gault equation is given in Chapter 60.
CHAPTER 3 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics: Rational Dosing & the Time Course of Drug Action    51
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Sixty seven percent of total standard digoxin clearance is 
renal, so the standard renal clearance is 0.67 × 9 L/h = 
6 L/h/70 kg with creatinine clearance of 100 mL/min and 
nonrenal clearance is (1 – 0.67) × 9 L/h = 3 L/h/70 kg (see 
 Table 3–1 for standard pharmacokinetic parameters). Her 
predicted creatinine clearance is 22 mL/min (Cockcroft & 
Gault), so for digoxin, her renal clearance is 6 × 22/100 × 
60/70 = 1.1 L/h, nonrenal clearance 2.7 × 60/70 = 2.6 L/h, and 
total clearance 3.7 L/h. The parenteral maintenance dose rate 
is 2 mcg/L × 3.7 L/h = 7.4 mcg/h. Once-a-day oral dosing with 
bioavailability of 0.7 would require a daily maintenance dose 
of 7.4/0.7 × 24 = 254 mcg/day. A practical dose would be one 
250 mcg tablet per day.
This page intentionally left blank 
53
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Humans are exposed daily to a wide variety of foreign compounds 
called  xenobiotics —substances absorbed across the lungs or skin 
or, more commonly, ingested either unintentionally as compounds 
present in food and drink or deliberately as drugs for therapeutic 
or “recreational” purposes. Exposure to environmental xenobiotics 
may be inadvertent and accidental or—when they are present as 
components of air, water, and food—inescapable. Some xenobiot-
ics are innocuous, but many can provoke biologic responses. Such 
biologic responses often depend on conversion of the absorbed 
substance into an active metabolite. The discussion that follows is 
applicable to xenobiotics in general (including drugs) and to some 
extent to endogenous compounds. 
 WHY IS DRUG BIOTRANSFORMATION 
NECESSARY? 
 Renal excretion plays a pivotal role in terminating the biologic 
activity of some drugs, particularly those that have small molecu-
lar volumes or possess polar characteristics, such as functional 
groups that are fully ionized at physiologic pH. However, many 
drugs do not possess such physicochemical properties. Pharma-
cologically active organic molecules tend to be lipophilic and 
remain unionized or only partially ionized at physiologic pH; 
these are readily reabsorbed from the glomerular filtrate in the 
nephron. Certain lipophilic compounds are often strongly bound 
to plasma proteins and may not be readily filtered at the glomeru-
lus. Consequently, most drugs would have a prolonged duration 
of action if termination of their action depended solely on renal 
excretion. 
 An alternative process that can lead to the termination or 
alteration of biologic activity is metabolism. In general, lipophilic 
xenobiotics are transformed to more polar and hence more readily 
excreted products. The role that metabolism plays in the inactiva-
tion of lipid-soluble drugs can be quite dramatic. For example, 
lipophilic barbiturates such as thiopental and pentobarbital would 
have extremely long half-lives if it were not for their metabolic 
conversion to more water-soluble compounds. 
 Metabolic products are often less pharmacodynamically active 
than the parent drug and may even be inactive. However, some 
biotransformation products have  enhanced activity or toxic prop-
erties. It is noteworthy that the synthesis of endogenous sub-
strates such as steroid hormones, cholesterol, active vitamin D 
congeners, and bile acids involves many pathways catalyzed by 
enzymes associated with the metabolism of xenobiotics. Finally, 
drug-metabolizing enzymes have been exploited in the design of 
pharmacologically inactive prodrugs that are converted to active 
molecules in the body. 
 THE ROLE OF BIOTRANSFORMATION IN 
DRUG DISPOSITION 
 Most metabolic biotransformations occur at some point between 
absorption of the drug into the general circulation and its renal 
elimination. A few transformations occur in the intestinal lumen 
or intestinal wall. In general, all of these reactions can be assigned 
to one of two major categories called  phase I and  phase II 
reactions ( Figure 4–1 ). 
 Phase I reactions usually convert the parent drug to a more 
polar metabolite by introducing or unmasking a functional group 
(−OH, −NH 2 , −SH). Often these metabolites are inactive, 
although in some instances activity is only modified or even 
enhanced. 
 If phase I metabolites are sufficiently polar, they may be readily 
excreted. However, many phase I products are not eliminated 
rapidly and undergo a subsequent reaction in which an endoge-
nous substrate such as glucuronic acid, sulfuric acid, acetic acid, or 
an amino acid combines with the newly incorporated functional 
group to form a highly polar conjugate. Such conjugation or syn-
thetic reactions are the hallmarks of phase II metabolism. A great 
variety of drugs undergo these sequential biotransformation reac-
tions, although in some instances the parent drug may already 
possess a functional group that may form a conjugate directly. For 
example, the hydrazide moiety of isoniazid is known to form an 
 N -acetyl conjugate in a phase II reaction. This conjugate is then a 
4
Drug Biotransformation
 Maria Almira Correia, PhD 
54    SECTION I Basic Principles
substrate for a phase I type reaction, namely, hydrolysis to isonico-
tinic acid ( Figure 4–2 ). Thus, phase II reactions may actually 
precede phase I reactions. 
 WHERE DO DRUG 
BIOTRANSFORMATIONS OCCUR? 
 Although every tissue has some ability to metabolize drugs, the 
liver is the principal organ of drug metabolism. Other tissues that 
display considerable activity include the gastrointestinal tract, the 
lungs, the skin, the kidneys, and the brain. After oral administra-
tion, many drugs (eg, isoproterenol, meperidine, pentazocine, 
morphine) are absorbed intact from the small intestine and trans-
ported first via the portal system to the liver, where they undergo 
extensive metabolism. This process is called the  first-pass effect 
(see  Chapter 3 ). Some orally administered drugs (eg, clonazepam, 
chlorpromazine, cyclosporine) are more extensively metabolized 
in the intestine than in the liver, while others (eg, midazolam) 
undergo significant (≈ 50%) intestinal metabolism. Thus, intesti-
nal metabolism can contribute to the overall first-pass effect, and 
individuals with compromised liver function may rely increasingly 
on such intestinal metabolism for drug elimination. Compromise 
of intestinal metabolism of certain drugs (eg, felodipine, 
cyclosporine A) can also result in significant elevation of their 
plasma levels and clinically relevant drug-drug interactions (DDIs, 
see below). First-pass effects may so greatly limit the bioavailability 
of orally administered drugs (eg, lidocaine) that alternative routes 
of administration must be used to achieve therapeutically effective 
blood levels. Furthermore, the lower gut harbors intestinal micro-
organisms that are capable of many biotransformation reactions. 
In addition, drugs may be metabolized by gastric acid (eg, peni-
cillin), by digestive enzymes (eg, polypeptides such as insulin), or 
by enzymes in the wall of the intestine (eg, sympathomimetic 
catecholamines). 
 Although drug biotransformation in vivo can occur by sponta-
neous, noncatalyzed chemical reactions, most transformations are 
catalyzed by specific cellular enzymes. At the subcellular level, 
these enzymes may be located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 
mitochondria, cytosol, lysosomes, or even the nuclear envelope or 
plasma membrane. 
 MICROSOMAL MIXED FUNCTION 
OXIDASE SYSTEM & PHASE I REACTIONS 
 Many drug-metabolizing enzymes are located in the lipophilic 
endoplasmic reticulum membranes of the liver and other tissues. 
Absorption
Metabolism
Elimination
Phase I
Drug metabolite with
modified activity
Inactive drug
metabolite
Phase II
Conjugate
Conjugate
Drug
Drug
Lipophilic
Hydrophilic
Conjugate
Drug
 FIGURE 4–1  Phase I and phase II reactions, and direct elimination, in drug biodisposition. Phase II reactions may also precede phase I 
reactions. 
C
C
O
O
N
H
N
OH + CH3
Isonicotinic acid
NH2
Hepatotoxicity
Acetylation of
macromolecules 
(proteins)
C
C
O
O
N
N
H
N
H
Phase I (hydrolysis)
CH3 
C
O
N
N
H
Phase II (acetylation)
NH2 
(acetylhydrazine)
 (N-acetyl INH)
 (INH)
 FIGURE 4–2  Phase II activation of isoniazid (INH) to a hepatotoxic 
metabolite. 
CHAPTER 4 Drug Biotransformation    55
When these lamellar membranes are isolated by homogenization 
and fractionation of the cell, they re-form into vesicles called 
 microsomes. Microsomes retain most of the morphologic and 
functional characteristics of the intact membranes, including the 
rough and smooth surface features of the rough (ribosome-
studded) and smooth (no ribosomes) endoplasmic reticulum. 
Whereas the rough microsomes tend to be dedicated to protein 
synthesis, the smooth microsomes are relatively rich in enzymes 
responsible for oxidative drug metabolism. In particular, they 
contain the important class of enzymes known as the  mixed func-
tion oxidases (MFOs), or  monooxygenases. The activity of these 
enzymes requires both a reducing agent (nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate [NADPH]) and molecular oxygen; in a 
typical reaction, one molecule of oxygen is consumed (reduced) 
per substrate molecule, with one oxygen atom appearing in the 
product and the other in the form of water. 
 In this oxidation-reduction process, two microsomal enzymes 
play a key role. The first of these is a flavoprotein,  NADPH-
cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR) . One mole of this 
enzyme contains 1 mol each of flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and 
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD). The second microsomal 
enzyme is a hemoprotein called  cytochrome P450, which serves 
as the terminal oxidase. In fact, the microsomal membrane har-
bors multiple forms of this hemoprotein, and this multiplicity is 
increased by repeated administration of or exposure to exogenous 
chemicals (see text that follows). The name cytochrome P450 
(abbreviated as  P450 or  CYP ) is derived from the spectral proper-
ties of this hemoprotein. In its reduced (ferrous) form, it binds 
carbon monoxide to give a complex that absorbs light maximally 
at 450 nm. The relative abundance of P450s, compared with that 
of the reductase in the liver, contributes to making P450 heme 
reduction a rate-limiting step in hepatic drug oxidations. 
 Microsomal drug oxidations require P450, P450 reductase, 
NADPH, and molecular oxygen. A simplified scheme of the oxida-
tive cycle is presented in  Figure 4–3 . Briefly, oxidized (Fe 3+ ) P450 
combines with a drug substrate to form a binary complex (step 1). 
NADPH donates an electron to the flavoprotein P450 reductase, 
which in turn reduces the oxidized P450-drug complex (step 2). A 
second electron is introduced from NADPH via the same P450 
reductase, which serves to reduce molecular oxygen and to form an 
“activated oxygen”-P450-substrate complex (step 3). This complex 
in turn transfers activated oxygen to the drug substrate to form the 
oxidized product (step 4). 
 The potent oxidizing properties of this activated oxygen permit 
oxidation of a large number of substrates. Substrate specificity is 
very low for this enzyme complex. High lipid solubility is the only 
common structural feature of the wide variety of structurally unre-
lated drugs and chemicals that serve as substrates in this system 
(Table 4–1). However, compared with many other enzymes 
including phase II enzymes, P450s are remarkably sluggish cata-
lysts, and their drug biotransformation reactions are slow. 
 HUMAN LIVER P450 ENZYMES 
 Gene arrays combined with immunoblotting analyses of microsomal 
preparations, as well as the use of relatively selective functional 
markers and selective P450 inhibitors, have identified numerous 
P450 isoforms (CYP: 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C18, 2C19, 
2D6, 2E1, 3A4, 3A5, 4A11, and 7) in the human liver. Of these, 
 CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, 
and  CYP3A4 appear to be the most important forms, accounting 
for approximately 15%, 4%, 1%, 20%, 5%, 10%, and 30%, 
respectively, of the total human liver P450 content. Together, they 
NADP+
NADPH
RH
P450[Fe+2]
Flavoprotein
(reduced)
Flavoprotein
(oxidized)
RH
P450[Fe+2]
RH
P450[Fe+3]
P450[Fe+3]
ROH
P450[Fe+3]
2H+
e−
e−
P450 Reductase
P450
CO
CO
RH
P450[Fe+2]
H2O
O2
O2
Drug
RH
ROH
2
3
4
1
 FIGURE 4–3  Cytochrome P450 cycle in drug oxidations. RH, parent drug; ROH, oxidized metabolite; e − , electron. 
56    SECTION I Basic Principles
Reaction Class
Structural Change
Drug Substrates
Oxidations
Cytochrome P450-dependent oxidations:
Aromatic hydroxylations
Acetanilide, propranolol, phenobarbital, pheny-
toin, phenylbutazone, amphetamine, warfarin, 
17α-ethinyl estradiol, naphthalene, benzpyrene
Aliphatic hydroxylations
Amobarbital, pentobarbital, secobarbital, chlor-
propamide, ibuprofen, meprobamate, gluteth-
imide, phenylbutazone, digitoxin
Epoxidation
Aldrin
Oxidative dealkylation
N-Dealkylation
Morphine, ethylmorphine, benzphetamine, ami-
nopyrine, caffeine, theophylline
O-Dealkylation
Codeine, p-nitroanisole
S-Dealkylation
6-Methylthiopurine, methitural
N-Oxidation
Primary amines
Aniline, chlorphentermine
Secondary amines
2-Acetylaminofluorene, acetaminophen
Tertiary amines
Nicotine, methaqualone
S-Oxidation
Thioridazine, cimetidine, chlorpromazine
Deamination
Amphetamine, diazepam
Desulfuration
Thiopental
(continued )
R
OH
R
O
R
RCH2CH3 
 RCH2CH2OH
RCH2CH3 
 RCHCH3
OH
O
H
H
C
R
C
CHR 
 R
RCH
RNHCH3 
 RNH2 + CH2O
ROCH3 
 ROH + CH2O
RSCH3 
 RSH + CH2O
RNH2
 
 RNHOH
NH  
 
R1
R2
N
R1
R2
OH
N 
R1
R3
R2
N→O
R1
R3
R2
S  
 
R1
R2
S
R1
R2
O
RCHCH3 
 R
NH2
NH2
OH
O
C
CCH3 + NH3
CH3 
 R
C 
R1
R2
S  
 
C
R1
R2
O
TABLE 4–1 Phase I reactions.  
CHAPTER 4 Drug Biotransformation    57
TABLE 4–1 Phase I reactions.  (Continued)
Cytochrome P450- dependent oxidations: (continued)
Parathion
Dechlorination
Carbon tetrachloride
Cytochrome P450-independent oxidations:
Flavin monooxygenase
(Ziegler’s enzyme)
Chlorpromazine, amitriptyline, 
benzphetamine
Desipramine, nortriptyline
Methimazole, propylthiouracil
Amine oxidases
Phenylethylamine, epinephrine
Dehydrogenations
Ethanol
Reductions
Azo reductions
Prontosil, tartrazine
Nitro reductions
Nitrobenzene, chloramphenicol, clonazepam, 
dantrolene
Carbonyl reductions
Metyrapone, methadone, naloxone
Hydrolyses
Esters
Procaine, succinylcholine, aspirin, clofibrate, 
methylphenidate
Amides
Procainamide, lidocaine, indomethacin
Reaction Class
Structural Change
Drug Substrates
P 
R1
R2
S  
 
P
R1
R2
O
CCl4  
 [CCl3
•] 
 CHCl3
R3N+→O–
R3N 
R3N+OH
H+
RCH2N
N
CH2R 
CH2R 
 RCH2 
N
RCH
O–
CH2R
OH
H
N
N
SH 
N
N
SOH 
N
N
SO2H
RCH2NH2  
 RCHO + NH3
RCH2OH 
 RCHO
RN
NR1 
 RNH
NHR1 
 RNH2 + R1NH2
RNO2
 
 RNO 
 RNHOH 
 RNH2
RCR
 RCHR
O
OH
R1COOR2  
 R1COOH + R2OH
RCONHR1 
 RCOOH + R1NH2
are responsible for catalyzing the bulk of the hepatic drug and 
xenobiotic metabolism ( Table 4–2 ,  Figure 4–4 ). 
 It is noteworthy that CYP3A4 alone is responsible for the 
metabolism of over 50% of the prescription drugs metabolized by 
the liver. The involvement of individual P450s in the metabolism 
of a given drug may be screened in vitro by means of selective 
functional markers, selective chemical P450 inhibitors, and P450 
antibodies. In vivo, such screening may be accomplished by means 
of relatively selective noninvasive markers, which include breath 
tests or urinary analyses of specific metabolites after administra-
tion of a P450-selective substrate probe. 
 Enzyme Induction 
 Some of the chemically dissimilar P450 substrate drugs, on 
repeated administration,  induce P450 expression by enhancing the 
58    SECTION I Basic Principles
rate of its synthesis or reducing its rate of degradation ( Table 4–2 ). 
Induction results in accelerated substrate metabolism and usually 
in a decrease in the pharmacologic action of the inducer and also 
of co-administered drugs. However, in the case of drugs meta-
bolically transformed to reactive metabolites, enzyme induction 
may exacerbate metabolite-mediated toxicity. 
 Various substrates induce P450 isoforms having different 
molecular masses and exhibiting different substrate specificities 
and immunochemical and spectral characteristics. 
 Environmental chemicals and pollutants are also capable of 
inducing P450 enzymes. As previously noted, exposure to 
benzo[ a ]pyrene and other polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, 
which are present in tobacco smoke, charcoal-broiled meat, and 
other organic pyrolysis products, is known to induce CYP1A 
enzymes and to alter the rates of drug metabolism. Other environ-
mental chemicals known to induce specific P450s include the 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which were once used widely in 
industry as insulating materials and plasticizers, and 2,3,7,8-
tetrachlorodibenzo- p -dioxin (dioxin, TCDD), a trace byproduct of 
the chemical synthesis of the defoliant 2,4,5-T (see  Chapter 56 ). 
 Increased P450 synthesis requires enhanced transcription and 
translation along with increased synthesis of heme, its prosthetic 
cofactor. A cytoplasmic receptor (termed AhR) for polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbons (eg, benzo[ a ]pyrene, dioxin) has been identi-
fied. The translocation of the inducer-receptor complex into the 
nucleus, followed by ligand-induced dimerization with Arnt, a 
closely related nuclear protein, leads to subsequent activation of 
regulatory elements of  CYP1A genes, resulting in their induction. 
This is also the mechanism of CYP1A induction by cruciferous 
vegetables, and the proton pump inhibitor, omeprazole. A preg-
nane X receptor (PXR), a member of the steroid-retinoid-thyroid 
hormone receptor family, has recently been shown to mediate 
CYP3A induction by various chemicals (dexamethasone, 
rifampin, mifepristone, phenobarbital, atorvastatin, and hyperforin, 
TABLE 4–2  Human liver P450s (CYPs), and some of the drugs metabolized (substrates), inducers, and 
selective inhibitors.
CYP
Substrates
Inducers
Inhibitors
1A2
Acetaminophen, antipyrine, caffeine, clomipramine, phenacetin, 
tacrine, tamoxifen, theophylline, warfarin
Smoking, charcoal-broiled 
foods, cruciferous 
vegetables, omeprazole
Galangin, furafylline, fluvoxamine
2A6
Coumarin, tobacco nitrosamines, nicotine (to cotinine and 
2′-hydroxynicotine)
Rifampin, phenobarbital
Tranylcypromine, menthofuran, 
methoxsalen
2B6
Artemisinin, bupropion, cyclophosphamide, efavirenz, ifosfamide, 
ketamine, S-mephobarbital, S-mephenytoin (N-demethylation to 
nirvanol), methadone, nevirapine, propofol, selegiline, sertraline, 
ticlopidine
Phenobarbital, 
cyclophosphamide
Ticlopidine, clopidogrel
2C8
Taxol, all-trans-retinoic acid
Rifampin, barbiturates
Trimethoprim
2C9
Celecoxib, flurbiprofen, hexobarbital, ibuprofen, losartan, phenytoin, 
tolbutamide, trimethadione, sulfaphenazole, S-warfarin, ticrynafen
Barbiturates, rifampin
Tienilic acid, sulfaphenazole
2C18
Tolbutamide, phenytoin
Phenobarbital
2C19
Diazepam, S-mephenytoin, naproxen, nirvanol, omeprazole, 
propranolol
Barbiturates, rifampin
N3-benzylnirvanol, 
N3-benzylphenobarbital, 
fluconazole
2D6
Bufuralol, bupranolol, clomipramine, clozapine, codeine, debrisoquin, 
dextromethorphan, encainide, flecainide, fluoxetine, guanoxan, 
haloperidol, hydrocodone, 4-methoxy-amphetamine, metoprolol, 
mexiletine, oxycodone, paroxetine, phenformin, propafenone, 
propoxyphene, risperidone, selegiline (deprenyl), sparteine, 
tamoxifen, thioridazine, timolol, tricyclic antidepressants
Unknown
Quinidine, paroxetine
2E1
Acetaminophen, chlorzoxazone, enflurane, halothane, ethanol 
(a minor pathway)
Ethanol, isoniazid
4-Methylpyrazole, disulfiram
3A41
Acetaminophen, alfentanil, amiodarone, astemizole, cisapride, 
cocaine, cortisol, cyclosporine, dapsone, diazepam, dihydroergot-
amine, dihydropyridines, diltiazem, erythromycin, ethinyl estradiol, 
gestodene, indinavir, lidocaine, lovastatin, macrolides, methadone, 
miconazole, midazolam, mifepristone, nifedipine, paclitaxel, proges-
terone, quinidine, rapamycin, ritonavir, saquinavir, spironolactone, 
sulfamethoxazole, sufentanil, tacrolimus, tamoxifen, terfenadine, 
testosterone, tetrahydrocannabinol, triazolam, troleandomycin, 
verapamil
Barbiturates,
carbamazepine, 
glucocorticoids, 
pioglitazone, phenytoin, 
rifampin, St. John’s wort
Azamulin, clarithromycin, diltiazem, 
erythromycin,  fluconazole, 
grapefruit juice (furanocoumarins), 
itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
ritonavir, troleandomycin
1CYP3A5 has similar substrate and inhibitor profiles, but except for a few drugs is generally less active than CYP3A4.
CHAPTER 4 Drug Biotransformation    59
a constituent of St. John’s wort) in the liver and intestinal mucosa. 
A similar receptor, the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), 
has been identified for the relatively large and structurally diverse 
phenobarbital class of inducers of CYP2B6, CYP2C9, and 
CYP3A4. Peroxisome proliferator receptor α (PPAR-α) is yet 
another nuclear receptor highly expressed in liver and kidneys, 
which uses lipid-lowering drugs (eg, fenofibrate and gemfibrozil) 
as ligands. Consistent with its major role in the regulation of fatty 
acid metabolism, PPAR-α mediates the induction of CYP4A 
enzymes, responsible for the metabolism of fatty acids such as 
arachidonic acid and its physiologically relevant derivatives. It is 
noteworthy that on binding of its particular ligand, PXR, CAR, 
and PPAR-α each form heterodimers with another nuclear recep-
tor, the retinoid X-receptor (RXR). This heterodimer in turn 
binds to response elements within the promoter regions of specific 
 P450 genes to induce gene expression. 
 P450 enzymes may also be induced by  substrate stabilization, 
eg, decreased degradation, as is the case with troleandomycin- or 
clotrimazole-mediated induction of CYP3A enzymes, the ethanol-
mediated induction of CYP2E1, and the isosafrole-mediated 
induction of CYP1A2. 
 Enzyme Inhibition 
 Certain drug substrates inhibit cytochrome P450 enzyme activity 
( Table 4–2 ). Imidazole-containing drugs such as cimetidine and 
ketoconazole bind tightly to the P450 heme iron and effectively 
reduce the metabolism of endogenous substrates (eg, testosterone) 
or other co-administered drugs through competitive inhibition. 
Macrolide antibiotics such as troleandomycin, erythromycin, and 
erythromycin derivatives are metabolized, apparently by CYP3A, 
to metabolites that complex the cytochrome P450 heme iron and 
render it catalytically inactive. Another compound that acts 
through this mechanism is the inhibitor proadifen (SKF-525-A, 
used in research), which binds tightly to the heme iron and quasi-
irreversibly inactivates the enzyme, thereby inhibiting the metabo-
lism of potential substrates. 
 Some substrates irreversibly inhibit P450s via covalent interac-
tion of a metabolically generated reactive intermediate that may 
react with the P450 apoprotein or heme moiety or even cause the 
heme to fragment and irreversibly modify the apoprotein. The 
antibiotic chloramphenicol is metabolized by CYP2B1 to a species 
that modifies the P450 protein and thus also inactivates the 
enzyme. A growing list of such  suicide inhibitors —inactivators 
that attack the heme or the protein moiety—includes certain ste-
roids (ethinyl estradiol, norethindrone, and spironolactone); 
fluroxene; allobarbital; the analgesic sedatives allylisopropylacetyl- 
urea, diethylpentenamide, and ethchlorvynol; carbon disulfide; 
grapefruit furanocoumarins; selegiline; phencyclidine; ticlopidine 
and clopidogrel; ritonavir; and propylthiouracil. On the other 
hand, the barbiturate secobarbital is found to inactivate CYP2B1 
by modification of  both its heme and protein moieties. Other 
metabolically activated drugs whose P450 inactivation mechanism 
is not fully elucidated are mifepristone, troglitazone, raloxifene, 
and tamoxifen. 
 PHASE II REACTIONS 
 Parent drugs or their phase I metabolites that contain suitable 
chemical groups often undergo coupling or conjugation reac-
tions with an endogenous substance to yield  drug conjugates 
( Table 4–3 ). In general, conjugates are polar molecules that are 
readily excreted and often inactive. Conjugate formation involves 
high-energy intermediates and specific transfer enzymes. Such 
enzymes ( transferases) may be located in microsomes or in the 
cytosol. Of these,  uridine 5′-diphosphate (UDP)-glucuronosyl 
transferases ( UGTs) are the most dominant enzymes ( Figure 4–4 ). 
These microsomal enzymes catalyze the coupling of an activated 
endogenous substance (such as the UDP derivative of glucuronic 
acid) with a drug (or endogenous compound such as bilirubin, the 
end product of heme metabolism). Nineteen  UGT genes ( UGTA1 
CYP1A1/2
CYP1B1
A
B
CYP2A6
CYP2B6
CYP2C8/9
CYP2C19
CYP2D6
CYP2E1
NATs
TPMT
Others
GSTs
UGTs
SULTs
CYP3A4/5
DPYD
Epoxide
hydrolase
Esterases
Others
 FIGURE 4–4  Relative contributions of various cytochrome P450 
isoforms ( A ) and different phase II pathways ( B ) to metabolism of 
drugs in clinical use. Many drugs are metabolized by two or more of 
these pathways. Note that two pathways, CYP3A4/5 and UGT, are 
involved in the metabolism of more than 75% of drugs in use. DPYD, 
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase; GST, glutathione- S -transferase; 
NAT,  N -acetyltransferase; SULT, sulfotransferase; TPMT, thiopurine 
methyltransferase; UGT, UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Brunton LL, Lazo JS, Parker KL:  Goodman & Gilman’s The 
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics , 11th ed. McGraw-Hill Medical, 2006.) 
60    SECTION I Basic Principles
and  UGT2 ) encode UGT proteins involved in the metabolism of 
drugs and xenobiotics. Similarly, 11 human sulfotransferases 
(SULTs) catalyze the sulfation of substrates using 3′- 
phosphoadenosine 5´-phosphosulfate (PAPS) as the endogenous 
sulfate donor. Cytosolic and microsomal glutathione (GSH) trans-
ferases (GSTs) are also engaged in the metabolism of drugs and 
xenobiotics, and in that of leukotrienes and prostaglandins, 
respectively. Chemicals containing an aromatic amine or a hydra-
zine moiety (eg, isoniazid) are substrates of cytosolic 
 N -acetyltransferases (NATs), encoded by  NAT1 and  NAT2 genes, 
which utilize  acetyl-CoA as the endogenous cofactor. 
 S -Adenosyl-L-methionine ( SAMe ; AdoMet)-mediated  O -,  N -, 
and  S -methylation of drugs and xenobiotics by methyltransferases 
( MTs) also occurs. Finally, endobiotic, drug, and xenobiotic 
epoxides generated via P450-catalyzed oxidations can also be 
hydrolyzed by microsomal or cytosolic epoxide hydrolases ( EHs ). 
Conjugation of an activated drug such as the S-CoA derivative 
of benzoic acid, with an endogenous substrate, such as glycine, 
also occurs. Because the endogenous substrates originate in the 
diet, nutrition plays a critical role in the regulation of drug 
conjugations. 
 Phase II reactions are relatively faster than P450-catalyzed reac-
tions, thus effectively accelerating drug biotransformation. 
 Drug conjugations were once believed to represent terminal 
inactivation events and as such have been viewed as “true detoxi-
fication” reactions. However, this concept must be modified, 
because it is now known that certain conjugation reactions (acyl 
glucuronidation of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 
 O -sulfation of  N -hydroxyacetylaminofluorene, and  N -acetylation 
of isoniazid) may lead to the formation of reactive species respon-
sible for the toxicity of the drugs. Furthermore, sulfation is known 
to activate the orally active prodrug minoxidil into a very effica-
cious vasodilator, and morphine-6-glucuronide is more potent 
than morphine itself. 
 METABOLISM OF DRUGS TO TOXIC 
PRODUCTS 
 Metabolism of drugs and other foreign chemicals may not always 
be an innocuous biochemical event leading to detoxification and 
elimination of the compound. Indeed, as previously noted, several 
compounds have been shown to be metabolically transformed to 
reactive intermediates that are toxic to various organs. Such toxic 
reactions may not be apparent at low levels of exposure to parent 
compounds when alternative detoxification mechanisms are not yet 
overwhelmed or compromised and when the availability of endog-
enous detoxifying cosubstrates (GSH, glucuronic acid, sulfate) is 
not limited. However, when these resources are exhausted, the 
toxic pathway may prevail, resulting in overt organ toxicity or 
carcinogenesis. The number of specific examples of such drug-
induced toxicity is expanding rapidly. An example is acetamino-
phen (paracetamol)-induced hepatotoxicity ( Figure 4–5 ). 
Acetaminophen, an analgesic antipyretic drug, is quite safe in 
therapeutic doses (1.2 g/d for an adult). It normally undergoes 
glucuronidation and sulfation to the corresponding conjugates, 
which together make up 95% of the total excreted metabolites. 
The alternative P450-dependent GSH conjugation pathway 
TABLE 4–3 Phase II reactions.
Type of Conjugation
Endogenous Reactant
Transferase (Location)
Types of Substrates
Examples
Glucuronidation
UDP glucuronic acid
UDP glucuronosyltrans-
ferase (microsomes)
Phenols, alcohols, carboxylic 
acids, hydroxylamines, 
sulfonamides
Nitrophenol, morphine, 
acetaminophen, diazepam, 
N-hydroxydapsone, sulfathi-
azole, meprobamate, 
digitoxin, digoxin
Acetylation
Acetyl-CoA
N–Acetyltransferase 
(cytosol)
Amines
Sulfonamides, isoniazid, clon-
azepam, dapsone, mescaline
Glutathione conjugation
Glutathione (GSH)
GSH-S-transferase 
(cytosol, microsomes)
Epoxides, arene oxides, nitro 
groups, hydroxylamines
Acetaminophen, ethacrynic 
acid, bromobenzene
Glycine conjugation
Glycine
Acyl-CoA glycinetrans-
ferase (mitochondria)
Acyl-CoA derivatives of 
carboxylic acids
Salicylic acid, benzoic acid, 
nicotinic acid, cinnamic acid, 
cholic acid, deoxycholic acid
Sulfation
Phosphoadenosyl 
phosphosulfate
Sulfotransferase 
(cytosol)
Phenols, alcohols, aromatic 
amines
Estrone, aniline, phenol, 3-
hydroxycoumarin, acetamin-
ophen, methyldopa
Methylation
S-Adenosylmethionine
Transmethylases 
(cytosol)
Catecholamines, phenols, 
amines
Dopamine, epinephrine, 
pyridine, histamine, thiouracil
Water conjugation
Water
Epoxide hydrolase 
(microsomes)
Arene oxides, cis-disubstituted 
and monosubstituted oxiranes
Benzopyrene 7,8-epoxide, 
styrene 1,2-oxide, carbam-
azepine epoxide
(cytosol)
Alkene oxides, fatty acid 
epoxides
Leukotriene A4
CHAPTER 4 Drug Biotransformation    61
accounts for the remaining 5%. When acetaminophen intake far 
exceeds therapeutic doses, the glucuronidation and sulfation path-
ways are saturated, and the P450-dependent pathway becomes 
increasingly important. Little or no hepatotoxicity results as long 
as hepatic GSH is available for conjugation. However, with time, 
hepatic GSH is depleted faster than it can be regenerated, and a 
reactive, toxic metabolite accumulates. In the absence of intracel-
lular nucleophiles such as GSH, this reactive metabolite 
( N -acetylbenzoiminoquinone) reacts with nucleophilic groups of 
cellular proteins, resulting in hepatotoxicity. 
 The chemical and toxicologic characterization of the electro-
philic nature of the reactive acetaminophen metabolite has led 
to the development of effective antidotes—cysteamine and 
 N -acetylcysteine. Administration of  N -acetylcysteine (the safer of 
the two) within 8–16 hours after acetaminophen overdosage has 
been shown to protect victims from fulminant hepatotoxicity and 
death (see  Chapter 58 ). Administration of GSH is not effective 
because it does not cross cell membranes readily. 
 CLINICAL RELEVANCE OF DRUG 
METABOLISM 
 The dose and frequency of administration required to achieve 
effective therapeutic blood and tissue levels vary in different 
patients because of individual differences in drug distribution and 
rates of drug metabolism and elimination. These differences are 
determined by genetic factors and nongenetic variables, such as 
age, sex, liver size, liver function, circadian rhythm, body tem-
perature, and nutritional and environmental factors such as con-
comitant exposure to inducers or inhibitors of drug metabolism. 
The discussion that follows summarizes the most important of 
these variables. 
 Individual Differences 
 Individual differences in metabolic rate depend on the nature of 
the drug itself. Thus, within the same population, steady-state 
plasma levels may reflect a 30-fold variation in the metabolism of 
one drug and only a two-fold variation in the metabolism of 
another. 
 Genetic Factors 
 Genetic factors that influence enzyme levels account for some of 
these differences, giving rise to “genetic polymorphisms” in drug 
metabolism. The first examples of drugs found to be subject to 
genetic polymorphisms were the muscle relaxant succinylcholine, 
the anti-tuberculosis drug isoniazid, and the anticoagulant warfarin. 
A true genetic polymorphism is defined as the occurrence of a 
variant allele of a gene at a population frequency of ≥ 1%, result-
ing in altered expression or functional activity of the gene product, 
or both. Well-defined and clinically relevant genetic polymor-
phisms in both phase I and phase II drug-metabolizing enzymes 
exist that result in altered efficacy of drug therapy or adverse drug 
reactions ( ADRs ). The latter frequently necessitate dose adjust-
ment ( Table 4–4 ), a consideration particularly crucial for drugs 
with low therapeutic indices. 
 A. Phase I Enzyme Polymorphisms 
 
Genetically determined defects in the phase I oxidative metabo-
lism of several drugs have been reported ( Table 4–4 ). These defects 
are often transmitted as autosomal recessive traits and may be 
expressed at any one of the multiple metabolic transformations 
that a chemical might undergo. Human liver P450s 3A4, 2C9, 
2D6, 2C19, 1A2, and 2B6 are responsible for about 75% of all 
clinically relevant phase I drug metabolism ( Figure 4–4 ), and thus 
for about 60% of all physiologic drug biotransformation and 
elimination. Thus, genetic polymorphisms of these enzymes, by 
significantly influencing phase I drug metabolism, can alter their 
+GSH
GSH-Conjugation
Mercapturic Acid 
Conjugate
Reactive Toxic
Intermediates
Glucuronidation
Acetaminophen
Sulfation
+ Nucleophillic
    Cell Macromolecules
        (Protein-SH)
Nontoxic
sulfate
Nontoxic
glucuronide
LIVER CELL DEATH
CYP2E1
CYP3A4
NHCOCH3
COOH
NHCOCH3
NHCOCH3
SO3H
O SO3H 
O
O
OH
OH
OH
HONCOCH3
OH
NCOCH3
O
OH
COOH
O
O
OH
OH
UDP
O
ADP
NHCOCH3
OH
SG
NHCOCH3
OH
S-Protein
NHCOCH3
SCH2CHNHCOCH3
COOH
OH
OH
+
 FIGURE 4–5  Metabolism of acetaminophen (top center) to 
hepatotoxic metabolites. GSH, glutathione; SG, glutathione moiety. 
62    SECTION I Basic Principles
TABLE 4–4 Some examples of genetic polymorphisms in phase I and phase II drug metabolism.
Enzyme Involved
Defect
Genotype
Drug and Therapeutic Use
Clinical Consequences1
CYP1A2
N-Demethylation
EM
Caffeine (CNS stimulant)
Reduced CNS stimulation due to increased gene 
inducibility and thus increased metabolism/
clearance in cigarette smokers and frequent 
ingesters of omeprazole.
N-Demethylation
PM
Caffeine (CNS stimulant)
Enhanced CNS stimulation.
CYP2A6
Oxidation
PM
Nicotine (cholinoceptor 
stimulant)
Nicotine toxicity. Lesser craving for frequent 
cigarette smoking.
Oxidation
EM
Nicotine (cholinoceptor 
stimulant)
Increased nicotine metabolism. Greater craving 
for frequent cigarette smoking.
Oxidation
PM
Coumarin (anticoagulant)
Increased risk of bleeding.
Oxidation
EM
Coumarin (anticoagulant)
Increased clearance. Greater risk of platelet 
aggregation and thrombosis.
CYP2B6
Oxidation, 
N-Dechloroethylation
PM
Cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide 
(anticancer)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs.
Oxidation
PM
Efavirenz (anti-HIV)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs.
CYP2C8
Hydroxylation
PM
Repaglinide, rosiglitazone, 
pioglitazone (antidiabetic)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs.
Hydroxylation
PM
Paclitaxel (anticancer)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs 
(myelosuppression).
N-Deethylation/ 
N-Dealkylation
PM
Amodiaquine, chloroquine 
(antimalarial)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs.
N-Deethylation
PM
Amiodarone (antiarrhythmic)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs.
CYP2C9
Hydroxylation
PM
Celecoxib, diclofenac, flurbiprofen, 
S-ibuprofen (NSAIDs)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs.
Hydroxylation
PM
S-Warfarin, S-acenocoumarol 
(anticoagulants)
Enhanced bleeding risk. Clinically highly relevant. 
Dose adjustment required.
Hydroxylation
PM
Tolbutamide (antidiabetic)
Cardiotoxicity.
Hydroxylation
PM
Phenytoin (antiepileptic)
Nystagmus, diplopia, and ataxia.
CYP2C19
N-Demethylation
PM
Amitriptyline, clomipramine 
(antidepressants)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs. Dose 
adjustment required.
Oxidation
PM
Moclobemide (MAOI)
N-Demethylation
PM
Citalopram (SSRI)
Increased risk of gastrointestinal side effects.
O-Demethylation
PM
Omeprazole (PPI)
Increased therapeutic efficacy.
Hydroxylation
PM
Mephenytoin (antiepileptic)
Overdose toxicity.
N-Demethylation
EM
Escitalopram (antidepressants)
Increased gene transcription resulting in 
increased activity and thus reduced therapeutic 
efficacy.
O-Demethylation
EM
Omeprazole (PPI)
Reduced therapeutic efficacy.
Hydroxylation
EM
Tamoxifen (anticancer)
Increased metabolic activation, increased 
therapeutic efficacy; reduced risk of relapse. Dose 
adjustment required.
Oxidative cyclization
EM
Chlorproguanil (antimalarial)
Increased metabolic activation, increased 
therapeutic efficacy. Dose adjustment required.
Oxidation
EM
Clopidogrel (antiplatelet)
Increased metabolic activation, increased 
therapeutic efficacy. Dose adjustment required.
CYP2D6
Oxidation
PM
Bufuralol (β-adrenoceptor 
blocker)
Exacerbation of β blockade, nausea.
O-Demethylation
PM
Codeine (analgesic)
Reduced metabolic activation to morphine and 
thus reduced analgesia.
Oxidation
PM
Debrisoquin (antihypertensive)
Orthostatic hypotension.
(continued)
CHAPTER 4 Drug Biotransformation    63
pharmacokinetics and the magnitude or the duration of drug 
response and associated events. 
 Three P450 genetic polymorphisms have been particularly well 
characterized, affording some insight into possible underlying 
molecular mechanisms, and are clinically noteworthy, as they 
require therapeutic dosage adjustment. The first is the  debrisoquin-
sparteine oxidation type of polymorphism, which apparently 
occurs in 3–10% of Caucasians and is inherited as an autosomal 
recessive trait. In affected individuals, the  CYP2D6 -dependent 
oxidations of debrisoquin and other drugs ( Table 4–2 ;  Figure 4–6 ) 
are impaired. These defects in oxidative drug metabolism are 
TABLE 4–4 Some examples of genetic polymorphisms in phase I and phase II drug metabolism.
Enzyme Involved
Defect
Genotype
Drug and Therapeutic Use
Clinical Consequences1
N-Demethylation
PM
Nortriptyline (antidepressant)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs.
Oxidation
PM
Sparteine
Oxytocic symptoms.
O-Demethylation
PM
Dextromethorphan (antitussive)
Reduced clearance. Increased risk of ADRs.
O-Demethylation
PM
Tramadol (analgesic)
Increased risk of seizures.
Hydroxylation
PM
Tamoxifen (anticancer)
Reduced metabolic activation to the therapeuti-
cally active endoxifen and thus reduced thera-
peutic efficacy.
O-Demethylation
UM
Codeine (analgesic)
Increased metabolic activation to morphine and 
thus increased risk of respiratory depression.
N-Demethylation
UM
Nortriptyline (antidepressant)
Reduced therapeutic efficacy due to increased 
clearance.
O-Demethylation
UM
Tramadol (analgesic)
Reduced therapeutic efficacy due to increased 
clearance.
CYP3A4
PM?
All drugs metabolized by this 
enzyme would be potentially 
affected
Reduced clearance. Dose adjustment may be 
required to avoid drug-drug interactions.
CYP3A5
PM?
Saquinavir, and other CYP3A 
substrates
Usually less catalytically active than CYP3A4. A 
higher frequency of a functional CYP3A5∗1 allele 
is seen in Africans than in Caucasians; the latter 
most often carry the defective CYP3A5∗3 allele. 
This may significantly affect therapeutics of 
CYP3A substrates in CYP3A5∗1 or CYP3A5∗3 
homozygous individuals.
ALDH
Aldehyde 
dehydrogenation
PM
Ethanol (recreational drug)
Facial flushing, hypotension, tachycardia, nausea, 
vomiting.
BCHE
Ester hydrolysis
PM
Succinylcholine (muscle relaxant) 
Mivacurium (neuromuscular 
blocker) 
Cocaine (CNS stimulant)
Prolonged apnea. 
Prolonged muscle paralysis. 
Increased blood pressure, tachycardia, ventricular 
arrhythmias.
GST
GSH-conjugation
PM
Acetaminophen (analgesic), 
Busulfan (anticancer)
Impaired GSH conjugation due to gene deletion.
NAT2
N-Acetylation
PM
Hydralazine (antihypertensive)
Lupus erythematosus-like syndrome.
N-Acetylation
PM
Isoniazid (antitubercular)
Peripheral neuropathy.
TPMT
S-Methylation
PM
6-Thiopurines (anticancer)
Myelotoxicity.
UGT1A1
Glucuronidation
PM
Bilirubin (heme metabolite)
Hyperbilirubinemia.
Irinotecan (anticancer)
Reduced clearance. Dose adjustment may be 
required to avoid toxicity (GI dysfunction, 
immunosuppression).
1Observed or predictable.
ADR, adverse drug reaction; EM, extensive metabolizer; PM, poor metabolizer; UM, ultrarapid metabolizer.
(Continued)
probably co-inherited. The precise molecular basis for the defect 
appears to be faulty expression of the P450 protein due to either 
defective mRNA splicing or protein folding, resulting in little or 
no isoform-catalyzed drug metabolism and thereby conferring a 
 poor metabolizer (PM) phenotype. This PM phenotype corre-
lates with a higher risk of relapse in patients with breast cancer 
treated with tamoxifen, an anti-cancer drug that relies on its 
CYP2D6-dependent metabolic activation to endoxifen for its 
efficacy. More recently, however, another polymorphic genotype 
has been reported that results in  ultrarapid metabolism of rele-
vant drugs due to the presence of CYP2D6 allelic variants with 
64    SECTION I Basic Principles
up to 13 gene copies in tandem. This ultrarapid metabolizer ( UM ) 
genotype is most common in Ethiopians and Saudi Arabians, 
populations that display it in up to one third of individuals. As a 
result, these subjects require two-fold to three-fold higher daily 
doses of nortriptyline (an antidepressant and a CYP2D6 substrate) 
to achieve therapeutic plasma levels. The poor responsiveness to 
antidepressant therapy of the UM phenotype also clinically cor-
relates with a higher incidence of suicides relative to that of deaths 
due to natural causes in this patient population. Conversely, in 
these UM populations the prodrug codeine (another CYP2D6 
substrate) is metabolized much faster to morphine, often resulting 
in undesirable adverse effects of morphine, such as abdominal 
pain. Indeed, intake of high doses of codeine by a mother of the 
ultrarapid metabolizer type was held responsible for the morphine-
induced death of her breast-fed infant. 
 The second well-studied genetic drug polymorphism involves 
the stereoselective  aromatic (4)-hydroxylation of the anticonvul-
sant mephenytoin, catalyzed by  CYP2C19. This polymorphism, 
which is also inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, occurs in 
3–5% of Caucasians and 18–23% of Japanese populations. It is 
genetically independent of the debrisoquin-sparteine polymor-
phism. In normal “ extensive metabolizers ” (EMs) ( S )-
mephenytoin is extensively hydroxylated by CYP2C19 at the 
4 position of the phenyl ring before its glucuronidation and rapid 
excretion in the urine, whereas ( R )-mephenytoin is slowly 
 N -demethylated to nirvanol, an active metabolite. PMs however, 
appear to totally lack the stereospecific ( S )-mephenytoin hydroxy-
lase activity, so both ( S )- and ( R )-mephenytoin enantiomers are 
 N -demethylated to nirvanol, which accumulates in much higher 
concentrations. Thus, PMs of mephenytoin show signs of pro-
found sedation and ataxia after doses of the drug that are well 
tolerated by normal metabolizers. Two defective CYP2C19 variant 
alleles (CYP2C19∗2 and CYP2C19∗3), the latter predominant in 
Asians, are responsible for the PM genotype. The molecular bases 
include splicing defects resulting in a truncated, nonfunctional 
protein. CYP2C19 is responsible for the metabolism of various 
clinically relevant drugs ( Table 4–4 ). Thus, it is clinically impor-
tant to recognize that the safety of each of these drugs may be 
severely reduced in persons with the PM phenotype. On the other 
hand, the PM phenotype can notably increase the therapeutic 
efficacy of omeprazole, a proton-pump inhibitor, in gastric ulcer 
and gastroesophageal reflux diseases. 
 Another CYP2C19 variant allele (CYP2C19∗17) exists that is 
associated with increased transcription and thus higher CYP2C19 
expression and even higher functional activity than that of the 
wild type CYP2C19-carrying EMs. Individuals carrying this 
CYP2C19∗17 allele exhibit higher metabolic activation of pro-
drugs such as the breast cancer drug tamoxifen, the antimalarial 
chlorproguanil, and the antiplatelet drug clopidogrel. The former 
event is associated with a lower risk of breast cancer relapse, and 
the latter event with an increased risk of bleeding. Carriers of the 
CYP2C19∗17 allele are also known to enhance the metabolism 
and thus the elimination of drugs such as the antidepressants esci-
talopram and imipramine, as well as the antifungal voriconazole. 
This consequently impairs the therapeutic efficacy of these drugs, 
thus requiring clinical dosage adjustments. 
 The third relatively well-characterized genetic polymorphism is 
that of  CYP2C9. Two well-characterized variants of this enzyme 
exist, each with amino acid mutations that result in altered metab-
olism. The CYP2C9∗2 allele encodes an Arg144Cys mutation, 
exhibiting impaired functional interactions with  POR . The other 
allelic variant, CYP2C9∗3 , encodes an enzyme with an Ile359Leu 
mutation that has lowered affinity for many substrates. For 
example, individuals displaying the CYP2C9∗3 phenotype have 
greatly reduced tolerance for the anticoagulant warfarin. The war-
farin clearance in CYP2C9∗3-homozygous individuals is about 
10% of normal values, and these people have a much lower toler-
ance for the drug than those who are homozygous for the normal 
wild type allele. These individuals also have a much higher risk of 
adverse effects with warfarin (eg, bleeding) and with other 
CYP2C9 substrates such as phenytoin, losartan, tolbutamide, and 
some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( Table 4–4 ). 
 Allelic variants of CYP3A4 have also been reported, but their 
contribution to its well-known interindividual variability in drug 
metabolism apparently is limited. On the other hand, the expres-
sion of  CYP3A5, another human liver isoform, is markedly poly-
morphic, ranging from 0% to 100% of the total hepatic CYP3A 
content. This CYP3A5 protein polymorphism is now known to 
result from a single nucleotide polymorphism ( SNP ) within 
intron 3, which enables normally spliced CYP3A5 transcripts in 
25
20
15
10
5
0
Relative frequency
–1.0
–2.0
0
1.0
2.0
Log10 metabolic ratio
URM
PM
EM
 FIGURE 4–6  Genetic polymorphism in debrisoquin 4-hydroxylation 
by CYP2D6 in a Caucasian population. The semilog frequency distri-
bution histogram of the metabolic ratio (MR; defined as percent of 
dose excreted as unchanged debrisoquin divided by the percent of 
dose excreted as 4-hydroxydebrisoquin metabolite) in the 8-hour 
urine collected after oral ingestion of 12.8 mg debrisoquin sulfate 
(equivalent to 10 mg free debrisoquin base). Individuals with 
MR values > 12.6 were phenotyped as poor metabolizers (PM,  red 
bars ), and those with MR values < 12.6 but > 0.2 were designated as 
extensive metabolizers (EM,  blue bars ). Those with MR values < 0.2 
were designated as ultrarapid metabolizers (URM,  green bars ) based 
on the MR values (0.01–0.1) of individuals with documented multiple 
copies of CYP2D6 allelic variants resulting from inherited amplifica-
tion of this gene. (Data from Woolhouse et al: Debrisoquin hydroxylation poly-
morphism among Ghanians and Caucasians. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1979;26:584.) 
CHAPTER 4 Drug Biotransformation    65
5% of Caucasians, 29% of Japanese, 27% of Chinese, 30% of 
Koreans, and 73% of African Americans. Thus, it can significantly 
contribute to interindividual differences in the metabolism of 
preferential CYP3A5 substrates such as midazolam. Two other 
CYP3A5 allelic variants that result in a PM phenotype are also 
known. 
 Polymorphisms in the  CYP2A6 gene have also been recently 
characterized, and their prevalence is apparently racially linked. 
CYP2A6 is responsible for nicotine oxidation, and tobacco smok-
ers with low CYP2A6 activity consume less and have a lower 
incidence of lung cancer. CYP2A6 1B allelic variants associated 
with faster rates of nicotine metabolism have been recently discov-
ered. It remains to be determined whether patients with these 
faster variants will fall into the converse paradigm of increased 
smoking behavior and lung cancer incidence. 
 Additional genetic polymorphisms in drug metabolism (eg, 
 CYP2B6 ) that are inherited independently from those already 
described are being discovered. For instance, a 20- to 250-fold 
variation in interindividual CYP2B6 expression partly due to 
genetic polymorphisms has been reported. This may have a sig-
nificant impact on the metabolism of several clinically relevant 
drugs such as cyclophosphamide, methadone, efavirenz, selegiline, 
and propofol. Studies of theophylline metabolism in monozygotic 
and dizygotic twins that included pedigree analysis of various 
families have revealed that a distinct polymorphism may exist for 
this drug and may be inherited as a recessive genetic trait. Genetic 
drug metabolism polymorphisms also appear to occur for amin-
opyrine and carbocysteine oxidations. Regularly updated informa-
tion on human P450 polymorphisms is available at http://www.
imm.ki.se/CYPalleles/. 
 Although genetic polymorphisms in drug oxidations often 
involve specific P450 enzymes, such genetic variations can also 
occur in other enzymes. Recently, genetic polymorphisms in 
POR, the essential P450 electron donor, have been reported. In 
particular, an allelic variant (at a 28% frequency) encoding a POR 
A503V mutation has been reported to result in impaired CYP17-
dependent sex steroid synthesis and impaired CYP3A4- and 
CYP2D6-dependent drug metabolism in vitro. Its involvement in 
clinically relevant drug metabolism, while predictable, remains to 
be established. Descriptions of a polymorphism in the oxidation 
of trimethylamine, believed to be metabolized largely by the  flavin 
monooxygenase (Ziegler’s enzyme), result in the “fish-odor 
syndrome” in slow metabolizers, thus suggesting that genetic vari-
ants of other non–P450-dependent oxidative enzymes may also 
contribute to such polymorphisms. 
 B. Phase II Enzyme Polymorphisms 
 
Succinylcholine is metabolized only half as rapidly in persons with 
genetically determined deficiency in pseudocholinesterase (now 
generally referred to as butyrylcholinesterase [ BCHE ]) as in per-
sons with normally functioning enzyme. Different mutations, 
inherited as autosomal recessive traits, account for the enzyme 
deficiency. Deficient individuals treated with succinylcholine as a 
surgical muscle relaxant may become susceptible to prolonged 
respiratory paralysis (succinylcholine apnea). Similar pharmacoge-
netic differences are seen in the acetylation of isoniazid. The defect 
in slow acetylators (of isoniazid and similar amines) appears to be 
caused by the synthesis of less of the NAT2 enzyme rather than of 
an abnormal form of it. Inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, 
the  slow acetylator phenotype occurs in about 50% of blacks 
and whites in the USA, more frequently in Europeans living in 
high northern latitudes, and much less commonly in Asians and 
Inuits (Eskimos). The slow acetylator phenotype is also associated 
with a higher incidence of isoniazid-induced peripheral neuritis, 
drug-induced autoimmune disorders, and bicyclic aromatic 
amine-induced bladder cancer. 
 A clinically important polymorphism of the  TPMT (thiopurine 
S-methyltransferase) gene is encountered in Europeans (frequency, 
1:300), resulting in a rapidly degraded mutant enzyme and conse-
quently deficient  S -methylation of aromatic and heterocyclic 
sulfhydryl compounds including the anti-cancer thiopurine drugs 
6-mercaptopurine, thioguanine, and azathioprine, required for 
their detoxification. Patients inheriting this polymorphism as an 
autosomal recessive trait are at high risk of thiopurine drug-in-
duced fatal hematopoietic toxicity. 
 Genetic polymorphisms in the expression of other phase II 
enzymes (UGTs and GSTs) also occur. Thus, UGT polymor-
phisms ( UGT1A1∗28 ) are associated with hyperbilirubinemic 
diseases (Gilbert’s syndrome) as well as toxic side effects due to 
impaired drug conjugation and/or elimination (eg, the anticancer 
drug irinotecan). Similarly, genetic polymorphisms ( GSTM1 ) in 
GST (mu1 isoform) expression can lead to significant adverse 
effects and toxicities of drugs dependent on its GSH conjugation 
for elimination. 
 C. The Role of Pharmacogenetic Testing in Clinically 
Safe & Effective Drug Therapy 
 Despite our improved understanding of the molecular basis of 
pharmacogenetic defects in drug-metabolizing enzymes, their 
impact on drug therapy and ADRs, and the availability of vali-
dated pharmacogenetic biomarkers to identify patients at risk, this 
clinically relevant information has not been effectively translated 
to patient care. Thus, the much-heralded potential for personal-
ized medicine, except in a few instances of drugs with a relatively 
low therapeutic index (eg, warfarin), has remained largely unreal-
ized. This is so even though 98% of US physicians are apparently 
aware that such genetic information may significantly influence 
therapy. This is partly due to the lack of adequate training in 
translating this knowledge to medical practice, and partly due to 
the logistics of genetic testing and the issue of cost-effectiveness. 
Severe ADRs are known to contribute to 100,000 annual US 
deaths, about 7% of all hospital admissions, and an increased aver-
age length of hospital stay. Genotype information could greatly 
enhance safe and efficacious clinical therapy through dose adjust-
ment or alternative drug therapy, thereby curbing much of the 
rising ADR incidence and its associated costs. 
 Diet & Environmental Factors 
 Diet and environmental factors contribute to individual variations in 
drug metabolism. Charcoal-broiled foods and cruciferous vegetables 
66    SECTION I Basic Principles
are known to induce CYP1A enzymes, whereas grapefruit juice is 
known to inhibit the CYP3A metabolism of co-administered drug 
substrates ( Table 4–2 ). Cigarette smokers metabolize some drugs 
more rapidly than nonsmokers because of enzyme induction (see 
previous section). Industrial workers exposed to some pesticides 
metabolize certain drugs more rapidly than unexposed individu-
als. Such differences make it difficult to determine effective and 
safe doses of drugs that have narrow therapeutic indices. 
 Age & Sex 
 Increased susceptibility to the pharmacologic or toxic activity of 
drugs has been reported in very young and very old patients com-
pared with young adults (see  Chapters 59 and  60 ). Although this 
may reflect differences in absorption, distribution, and elimina-
tion, differences in drug metabolism also play a role. Slower 
metabolism could be due to reduced activity of metabolic enzymes 
or reduced availability of essential endogenous cofactors. 
 Sex-dependent variations in drug metabolism have been well 
documented in rats but not in other rodents. Young adult male 
rats metabolize drugs much faster than mature female rats or pre-
pubertal male rats. These differences in drug metabolism have 
been clearly associated with androgenic hormones. Clinical reports 
suggest that similar sex-dependent differences in drug metabolism 
also exist in humans for ethanol, propranolol, some benzodiaz-
epines, estrogens, and salicylates. 
 Drug-Drug Interactions during 
Metabolism 
 Many substrates, by virtue of their relatively high lipophilicity, are 
not only retained at the active site of the enzyme but remain non-
specifically bound to the lipid endoplasmic reticulum membrane. 
In this state, they may induce microsomal enzymes, particularly 
after repeated use. Acutely, depending on the residual drug levels 
at the active site, they also may competitively inhibit metabolism 
of a simultaneously administered drug. 
 Enzyme-inducing drugs include various sedative-hypnotics, 
antipsychotics, anticonvulsants, the antitubercular drug rifampin, 
and insecticides ( Table 4–5 ). Patients who routinely ingest barbi-
turates, other sedative-hypnotics, or certain antipsychotic drugs 
may require considerably higher doses of warfarin to maintain a 
therapeutic effect. On the other hand, discontinuance of the seda-
tive inducer may result in reduced metabolism of the anticoagu-
lant and bleeding—a toxic effect of the ensuing enhanced plasma 
levels of the anticoagulant. Similar interactions have been observed 
in individuals receiving various combinations of drug regimens 
such as rifampin, antipsychotics, or sedatives with contraceptive 
agents, sedatives with anticonvulsant drugs, and even alcohol with 
hypoglycemic drugs (tolbutamide). 
 It must also be noted that an inducer may enhance not only the 
metabolism of other drugs but also its own metabolism. Thus, 
continued use of some drugs may result in a pharmacokinetic type 
of  tolerance —progressively reduced therapeutic effectiveness due 
to enhancement of their own metabolism. 
TABLE 4–5  Partial list of drugs that enhance drug 
metabolism in humans.
Inducer
Drugs Whose Metabolism Is Enhanced
Benzo[a]pyrene
Theophylline
Carbamazepine
Carbamazepine, clonazepam, itraconazole
Chlorcyclizine
Steroid hormones
Ethchlorvynol
Warfarin
Glutethimide
Antipyrine, glutethimide, warfarin
Griseofulvin
Warfarin
Phenobarbital and 
other barbiturates1
Barbiturates, chloramphenicol, chlorpromazine, 
cortisol, coumarin anticoagulants, desmethyl- 
imipramine, digitoxin, doxorubicin, estradiol, 
itraconazole, phenylbutazone, phenytoin, 
quinine, testosterone
Phenylbutazone
Aminopyrine, cortisol, digitoxin
Phenytoin
Cortisol, dexamethasone, digitoxin, itraconazole, 
theophylline
Rifampin
Coumarin anticoagulants, digitoxin, glucocorti-
coids, itraconazole, methadone, metoprolol, 
oral contraceptives, prednisone, propranolol, 
quinidine, saquinavir
Ritonavir2
Midazolam
St. John’s wort
Alprazolam, cyclosporine, digoxin, indinavir, 
oral contraceptives, ritonavir, simvastatin, 
tacrolimus, warfarin
1Secobarbital is an exception. See Table 4–6 and text.
2With chronic (repeated) administration; acutely, ritonavir is a potent CYP3A4 
inhibitor/inactivator.
 Conversely, simultaneous administration of two or more drugs 
may result in impaired elimination of the more slowly metabolized 
drug and prolongation or potentiation of its pharmacologic effects 
( Table 4–6 ). Both competitive substrate inhibition and irreversible 
substrate-mediated enzyme inactivation may augment plasma 
drug levels and lead to toxic effects from drugs with narrow thera-
peutic indices. Indeed, such acute interactions of terfenadine (a 
second-generation antihistamine) with a CYP3A4 substrate-
inhibitor (ketoconazole, erythromycin, or grapefruit juice) resulted 
in fatal cardiac arrhythmias (torsades de pointe) requiring its with-
drawal from the market. Similar drug-drug interactions with 
CYP3A4 substrate-inhibitors (such as the antibiotics erythromy-
cin and clarithromycin, the antidepressant nefazodone, the anti-
fungals itraconazole and ketoconazole, and the HIV protease 
inhibitors indinavir and ritonavir), and consequent cardiotoxicity 
led to withdrawal or restricted use of the 5-HT 4 agonist, cisapride. 
Similarly, allopurinol both prolongs the duration and enhances 
the chemotherapeutic and toxic actions of mercaptopurine by 
competitive inhibition of xanthine oxidase. Consequently, to 
avoid bone marrow toxicity, the dose of mercaptopurine must be 
reduced in patients receiving allopurinol. Cimetidine, a drug used 
in the treatment of peptic ulcer, has been shown to potentiate the 
pharmacologic actions of anticoagulants and sedatives. The 
metabolism of the sedative chlordiazepoxide has been shown to be 
CHAPTER 4 Drug Biotransformation    67
TABLE 4–6  Partial list of drugs that inhibit drug 
metabolism in humans.
Inhibitor1
Drug Whose Metabolism Is 
Inhibited
Allopurinol, chloramphenicol, 
isoniazid
Antipyrine, dicumarol, probenecid, 
tolbutamide
Chlorpromazine
Propranolol
Cimetidine
Chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, 
warfarin, others
Dicumarol
Phenytoin
Diethylpentenamide
Diethylpentenamide
Disulfiram
Antipyrine, ethanol, phenytoin, 
warfarin
Ethanol
Chlordiazepoxide (?), diazepam (?), 
methanol
Grapefruit juice2
Alprazolam, atorvastatin, cisapride, 
cyclosporine, midazolam, triazolam
Itraconazole
Alfentanil, alprazolam, astemizole, 
atorvastatin, buspirone, cisapride, 
cyclosporine, delavirdine, diazepam, 
digoxin, felodipine, indinavir, 
loratadine, lovastatin, midazolam, 
nisoldipine, phenytoin, quinidine, 
ritonavir, saquinavir, sildenafil, 
simvastatin, sirolimus, tacrolimus, 
triazolam, verapamil, warfarin
Ketoconazole
Astemizole, cyclosporine, 
terfenadine
Nortriptyline
Antipyrine
Oral contraceptives
Antipyrine
Phenylbutazone
Phenytoin, tolbutamide
Ritonavir
Amiodarone, cisapride, itraconazole, 
midazolam, triazolam
Saquinavir
Cisapride, ergot derivatives, 
midazolam, triazolam
Secobarbital
Secobarbital
Spironolactone
Digoxin
Troleandomycin
Theophylline, methylprednisolone
1While some inhibitors are selective for a given P450 enzyme, others are more general 
and can inhibit several P450s concurrently.
2Active components in grapefruit juice include furanocoumarins such as 6′, 
7′-dihydroxybergamottin (which inactivates both intestinal and liver CYP3A4) as well 
as other unknown components that inhibit P-glycoprotein-mediated intestinal drug 
efflux and consequently further enhance the bioavailability of certain drugs such as 
cyclosporine.
TABLE 4–7  Rapidly metabolized drugs whose 
hepatic clearance is blood flow-limited.
Alprenolol
Lidocaine
Amitriptyline
Meperidine
Clomethiazole
Morphine
Desipramine
Pentazocine
Imipramine
Propoxyphene
Isoniazid
Propranolol
Labetalol
Verapamil
inhibited by 63% after a single dose of cimetidine; such effects are 
reversed within 48 hours after withdrawal of cimetidine. 
 Impaired metabolism may also result if a simultaneously 
administered drug irreversibly inactivates a common metabolizing 
enzyme. These inhibitors, in the course of their metabolism by 
cytochrome P450, inactivate the enzyme and result in impairment 
of their own metabolism and that of other cosubstrates. This is 
indeed the case of the furanocoumarins in grapefruit juice that 
inactivate CYP3A4 in the intestinal mucosa and consequently 
enhance its proteolytic degradation. This impairment of their intes-
tinal first-pass CYP3A4-dependent metabolism significantly 
enhances the bioavailability of drugs, such as felodipine, nifedipine, 
terfenadine, verapamil, ethinylestradiol, saquinavir, and cyclosporine 
A, and is associated with clinically relevant drug-drug and food-
drug interactions. 
 Recovery from these interactions is dependent on CYP3A4 
resynthesis and thus may be slow. 
 Interactions between Drugs & 
Endogenous Compounds 
 Some drugs require conjugation with endogenous substrates such 
as GSH, glucuronic acid, or sulfate for their inactivation. 
Consequently, different drugs may compete for the same endoge-
nous substrates, and the faster-reacting drug may effectively 
deplete endogenous substrate levels and impair the metabolism of 
the slower-reacting drug. If the latter has a steep dose-response 
curve or a narrow margin of safety, potentiation of its therapeutic 
and toxic effects may result. 
 Diseases Affecting Drug Metabolism 
 Acute or chronic diseases that affect liver architecture or function 
markedly affect hepatic metabolism of some drugs. Such condi-
tions include alcoholic hepatitis, active or inactive alcoholic 
cirrhosis, hemochromatosis, chronic active hepatitis, biliary cir-
rhosis, and acute viral or drug-induced hepatitis. Depending on 
their severity, these conditions may significantly impair hepatic 
drug-metabolizing enzymes, particularly microsomal oxidases, 
and thereby markedly affect drug elimination. For example, the 
half-lives of chlordiazepoxide and diazepam in patients with liver 
cirrhosis or acute viral hepatitis are greatly increased, with a cor-
responding increase in their effects. Consequently, these drugs 
may cause coma in patients with liver disease when given in ordi-
nary doses. 
 Some drugs are metabolized so readily that even marked 
reduction in liver function does not significantly prolong their 
action. However, cardiac disease, by limiting blood flow to the 
liver, may impair disposition of those drugs whose metabolism is 
flow-limited ( Table 4–7 ). These drugs are so readily metabolized 
by the liver that hepatic clearance is essentially equal to liver blood 
68    SECTION I Basic Principles
flow. Pulmonary disease may also affect drug metabolism, as indi-
cated by the impaired hydrolysis of procainamide and procaine in 
patients with chronic respiratory insufficiency and the increased 
half-life of antipyrine (a P450 functional probe) in patients with 
lung cancer. The impaired enzyme activity or defective formation 
of enzymes associated with heavy metal poisoning or porphyria 
also results in reduced hepatic drug metabolism. 
 Although the effects of endocrine dysfunction on drug metab-
olism have been well explored in experimental animal models, 
corresponding data for humans with endocrine disorders are 
scanty. Thyroid dysfunction has been associated with altered 
metabolism of some drugs and of some endogenous compounds 
as well. Hypothyroidism increases the half-life of antipyrine, 
digoxin, methimazole, and some β blockers, whereas hyperthy-
roidism has the opposite effect. A few clinical studies in diabetic 
patients indicate no apparent impairment of drug metabolism, 
although impairment has been noted in diabetic rats. Malfunctions 
of the pituitary, adrenal cortex, and gonads markedly reduce 
hepatic drug metabolism in rats. On the basis of these findings, it 
may be supposed that such disorders could significantly affect 
drug metabolism in humans. However, until sufficient evidence is 
obtained from clinical studies in patients, such extrapolations 
must be considered tentative. 
 Finally, the release of inflammatory mediators, cytokines, and 
nitric oxide associated with bacterial or viral infections, cancer, or 
inflammation are known to impair drug metabolism by inactivat-
ing P450s and enhancing their degradation. 
 REFERENCES 
 Benowitz NL: Pharmacology of nicotine: Addiction, smoking-induced disease, and 
therapeutics. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2009;49:57. 
 Correia MA: Human and rat liver cytochromes P450: Functional markers, 
diagnostic inhibitor probes and parameters frequently used in P450 studies. 
In: Ortiz de Montellano P (editor).  Cytochrome P450: Structure, Mechanism 
and Biochemistry , 3rd ed. Kluwer-Academic/Plenum Press, 2005. 
 Correia MA, Ortiz de Montellano P: Inhibitors of cytochrome P-450 and possi-
bilities for their therapeutic application. In: Ruckpaul K (editor):  Frontiers in 
Biotransformation , vol 8. Taylor & Francis, 1993. 
 Correia MA, Ortiz de Montellano P: Inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes. In: 
Ortiz de Montellano P (editor). Cytochrome P450: Structure,  Mechanism 
and Biochemistry , 3rd ed. KluwerAcademic/Plenum Press, 2005. 
 Daly AK: Pharmacogenetics and human genetic polymorphisms. Biochem J 
2010;429:435. 
 Guengerich FP: Human cytochrome P450 enzymes. In: Ortiz de Montellano P 
(editor).  Cytochrome P450: Structure, Mechanism and Biochemistry , 3rd ed. 
Kluwer-Academic/Plenum Press, 2005. 
 Guengerich FP: Role of cytochrome P450 enzymes in drug-drug interactions. Adv 
Pharmacol 1997;43:7. 
 Hustert E et al: The genetic determinants of the CYP3A5 polymorphism. 
Pharmacogenetics 2001;11:773. 
 Ingelman-Sundberg M et al: Influence of cytochrome P450 polymorphisms on 
drug therapies: Pharmacogenetic, pharmacoepigenetic and clinical aspects. 
Pharmacol Ther 2007;116:496. 
 Ingelman-Sundberg M, Sim SC: Pharmacogenetic biomarkers as tools for 
improved drug therapy; emphasis on the cytochrome P450 system. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun 2010;396:90. 
 Ingelman-Sundberg M: Pharmacogenetics: An opportunity for a safer and more 
efficient pharmacotherapy. J Intern Med 2001;250:186. 
 Kroemer HK, Klotz U: Glucuronidation of drugs: A reevaluation of the pharma-
cological significance of the conjugates and modulating factors. Clin 
Pharmacokinet 1992;23:292. 
 Kuehl P et al: Sequence diversity in CYP3A promoters and characterization of the 
genetic basis of polymorphic CYP3A5 expression. Nat Genet 2001;27:383. 
 Lown KS et al: Grapefruit juice increases felodipine oral availability in humans by 
decreasing intestinal CYP3A protein expression. J Clin Invest 
1997;99:2545. 
 Meyer UA: Pharmacogenetics—Five decades of therapeutic lessons from genetic 
diversity. Nat Rev Genet 2004;5:669. 
 Morgan ET et al: Regulation of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in 
infection, inflammation, and cancer. Drug Metab Dispos 2008;36:205. 
 Nelson DR et al: The P450 superfamily: Update on new sequences, gene mapping, 
accession numbers, and nomenclature. Pharmacogenetics 1996;6:1. 
 Nelson DR et al: Updated human P450 sequences available at http://drnelson.
utmem.edu/human.P450.seqs.html. 
 Sueyoshi T, Negishi M: Phenobarbital response elements of cytochrome P450 
genes and nuclear receptors. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2001;41:123. 
 Thummel KE, Wilkinson GR: In vitro and in vivo drug interactions involving 
human CYP3A. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1998;38:389. 
 Wang L, McLeod HL, Weinshilboum RM: Genomics and drug response. N Engl 
J Med 2011;364:1144. 
 Williams SN et al: Induction of cytochrome P450 enzymes. In: Ortiz de 
Montellano PR (editor).  Cytochrome P450. Structure, Mechanism, and 
Biochemistry . Plenum Press, 2005;  and references therein . 
 Willson TM, Kliewer SA: PXR, CAR and drug metabolism. Nat Rev Drug Discov 
2002;1:259. 
 Xu C et al: CYP2A6 genetic variation and potential consequences. Adv Drug 
Delivery Rev 2002;54:1245. 
69
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 A few useful drugs have been known since humans first began 
ingesting or injecting substances and recording the results (see The 
History of Pharmacology in  Chapter 1 ), but the majority of agents 
in current use have been developed during the last 100 years using 
a variety of pharmacologic and toxicologic techniques. These new 
chemicals and the efforts to market them have in turn led to a 
variety of methods of legal regulation. This chapter describes the 
methods of new drug development and some aspects of drug 
regulation in the United States. 
 The most common first steps in the development of a new 
drug are the discovery or synthesis of a potential new drug com-
pound or the elucidation of a new drug target. When a new drug 
molecule is synthesized or discovered, subsequent steps seek an 
understanding of the drug’s interactions with its biologic targets. 
Repeated application of this approach leads to compounds with 
increased efficacy, potency, and selectivity ( Figure 5–1 ). In the 
United States, the safety and efficacy of drugs must be defined 
before marketing can be legally carried out. In addition to in vitro 
studies, relevant biologic effects, drug metabolism, pharmacoki-
netic profiles, and particularly an assessment of the relative safety 
of the drug must be characterized in vivo in animals before human 
drug trials can be started. With regulatory approval, human test-
ing may then go forward (usually in three phases) before the drug 
is considered for approval for general use. A fourth phase of data 
gathering and safety monitoring is becoming increasingly impor-
tant and follows after approval for marketing. Once approved, the 
great majority of drugs become available for use by any appropri-
ately licensed practitioner. Highly toxic drugs that are nevertheless 
considered valuable in lethal diseases may be approved for 
restricted use by practitioners who have undergone special train-
ing in their use and who maintain detailed records. 
 THE PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY 
 Careful analysis indicates that a majority of new drugs  originate in 
research carried out in public sector institutions (universities, 
research institutes). However, because of the economic investment 
required and the need to efficiently access and integrate multiple 
technologies, most new drugs are then  developed in pharmaceuti-
cal companies. Enormous and increasing costs, with estimates 
from $150 million to several billion, are involved in the develop-
ment of a single new drug that reaches the marketplace. Only 2 of 
10 marketed drugs return their research and development (R&D) 
investments, thus providing considerable motivation to develop 
“blockbuster drugs.” Thousands of compounds may be synthe-
sized and hundreds of thousands tested from libraries of com-
pounds for each successful new drug lead, which then frequently 
needs to be further optimized for reasons of potency, selectivity, 
drug metabolism, and dosing convenience before each drug 
reaches the market. Increasing regulatory challenges and litigation 
resulting from real or suspected drug toxicity after approval fur-
ther increase the cost of developing new drugs. Unfortunately, 
only 10–15% of the new drugs that achieve marketing approval 
represent significant advances in safety and effectiveness; the 
remainder are merely molecular variants (“me-too drugs”) on true 
breakthrough drugs. 
 In spite of the cost of development, the financial rewards in 
drug development can be enormous. The global market for phar-
maceuticals in 2007 was estimated to be $712 billion and the 
return on investment in the pharmaceutical industry is among the 
highest of all industries. This is ensured by setting the price of a 
new, important drug very high and lowering the price only when 
competition forces it down; for example, when me-too variants or 
generic versions of the original molecule become available. Even 
in Europe, where drug prices are lower than in the USA, industry 
profits are comparable. The 2007 worldwide sales of the top-selling 
drug (Lipitor) exceeded $12 billion. In the USA, approximately 
10–12% of the health care dollar is presently spent on prescription 
drugs. At the same time, the investment in drugs can have 
Development & 
Regulation of Drugs
 Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD∗ 
 ∗ The author thanks Barry A. Berkowitz, PhD, a previous author of this 
chapter, for his contributions.
5
70    SECTION I Basic Principles
enormous health benefits—new drugs can reduce suffering and 
save lives. 
 DRUG DISCOVERY 
 Most new drugs or drug products are discovered or developed 
through the following approaches: (1) identification or elucida-
tion of a new drug target; (2) rational design of a new molecule 
based on an understanding of biologic mechanisms and drug 
receptor structure; (3) screening for biologic activity of large num-
bers of natural products, banks of previously discovered chemical 
entities, or large libraries of peptides, nucleic acids, and other 
organic molecules; and (4) chemical modification of a known 
active molecule, resulting in a me-too analog. Steps (1) and (2) are 
often carried out in academic research laboratories, but the costs 
of steps (3) and (4) usually ensure that industry carries them out. 
 Once a new drug target or promising molecule has been identi-
fied, the process of moving from the basic science laboratory to 
the clinic begins. This  translational research involves the pre-
clinical and clinical steps described next. 
 Drug Screening 
 Regardless of the source or the key idea leading to a drug candi-
date molecule, testing it involves a sequence of experimentation 
and characterization called drug screening. A variety of assays at 
the molecular, cellular, organ system, and whole animal levels are 
used to define the activity and selectivity of the drug. The type and 
number of initial screening tests depend on the pharmacologic 
and therapeutic goal. For example, anti-infective drugs may be 
tested against a variety of infectious organisms, some of which are 
resistant to standard agents; hypoglycemic drugs may be tested for 
their ability to lower blood sugar, etc. 
 The molecule will also be studied for a broad array of other 
actions to determine the mechanism of action and selectivity of 
the drug. This can reveal both expected and unexpected toxic 
effects. Occasionally, an unexpected therapeutic action is seren-
dipitously discovered by a careful observer. The selection of com-
pounds for development is most efficiently conducted in animal 
models of human disease. Where good predictive preclinical mod-
els exist (eg, antibacterials, hypertension, or thrombotic disease), 
we generally have good or excellent drugs. Good drugs or break-
through improvements are conspicuously lacking and slow for 
diseases for which preclinical models are poor or not yet available, 
eg, autism and Alzheimer’s disease. 
 Studies are performed during drug screening to define the 
pharmacologic profile of the drug at the molecular, cellular, 
organ, system, and organism levels. The value of these tests is 
highly dependent on the reproducibility and reliability of the 
assays. For example, a broad range of tests would be performed on 
a drug designed to act as an antagonist for a new vascular target for 
the treatment of hypertension. 
 At the molecular level, the compound would be screened for 
activity on the target, for example, receptor binding affinity to cell 
membranes containing the homologous animal receptors (or if 
possible, on the cloned human receptors). Early studies would be 
done to predict effects that might later cause undesired drug 
metabolism or toxicologic complications. For example, studies on 
liver cytochrome P450 enzymes would be performed to determine 
whether the molecule of interest is likely to be a substrate or 
inhibitor of these enzymes or to interfere with the metabolism of 
other drugs. Effects on cardiac ion channels such as the hERG 
(Is it safe,
pharmacokinetics?)
Phase 1
20–100
subjects
100–200
patients
In vitro
studies
Biologic
products
Chemical
synthesis,
optimization
0
Years (average)
2
20
4
8–9
Animal
testing
Clinical
testing
Marketing
Generics
become
available
IND
(Investigational
New Drug)
NDA
(New Drug
Application)
(Patent expires
20 years after filing 
of application)
Lead
compound
Efficacy,
selectivity,
mechanism
Drug metabolism, safety assessment
(Postmarketing
surveillance)
(Does it work
in patients?)
Phase 2
(Does it work,
double blind?)
1000–6000 patients
Phase 3
Phase 4
 FIGURE 5–1  The development and testing process required to bring a drug to market in the USA. Some of the requirements may be 
different for drugs used in life-threatening diseases (see text). 
CHAPTER 5 Development & Regulation of Drugs     71
potassium channel, possibly predictive of life-threatening arrhyth-
mias, are considered. 
 Effects on cell function determine whether the drug is an ago-
nist, partial agonist, inverse agonist, or antagonist at the relevant 
receptors. Isolated tissues, especially vascular smooth muscle, 
would be used to characterize the pharmacologic activity and 
selectivity of the new compound in comparison with reference 
compounds. Comparison with other drugs would also be under-
taken in other in vitro preparations such as gastrointestinal and 
bronchial smooth muscle. At each step in this process, the com-
pound would have to meet specific performance and selectivity 
criteria to be carried further. 
 Whole animal studies are generally necessary to determine the 
effect of the drug on organ systems and disease models. 
Cardiovascular and renal function studies of new drugs are gener-
ally first performed in normal animals. Studies on disease models, 
if available, are then performed. For a candidate antihypertensive 
drug, animals with hypertension would be treated to see whether 
blood pressure was lowered in a dose-related manner and to char-
acterize other effects of the compound. Evidence would be col-
lected on duration of action and efficacy after oral and parenteral 
administration. If the agent possessed useful activity, it would be 
further studied for possible adverse effects on other major organs, 
including the respiratory, gastrointestinal, endocrine, and central 
nervous systems. 
 These studies might suggest the need for further chemical 
modification (compound optimization) to achieve more desirable 
pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic properties. For example, 
oral administration studies might show that the drug was poorly 
absorbed or rapidly metabolized in the liver; modification to 
improve bioavailability might be indicated. If the drug was to be 
administered long term, an assessment of tolerance development 
would be made. For drugs related to or having mechanisms of 
action similar to those known to cause physical or psychological 
dependence, abuse potential would also be studied. Drug interac-
tions would be examined. 
 The desired result of this screening procedure (which may have 
to be repeated several times with analogs or congeners of the 
original molecule) is a  lead compound , ie, a leading candidate for 
a successful new drug. A patent application would be filed for a 
novel compound (a composition of matter patent) that is effica-
cious, or for a new and nonobvious therapeutic use (a use patent) 
for a previously known chemical entity. 
 PRECLINICAL SAFETY & TOXICITY 
TESTING 
 All drugs are toxic in some individuals at some dose. Seeking to cor-
rectly define the limiting toxicities of drugs and the therapeutic 
index comparing benefits and risks of a new drug is an essential 
part of the new drug development process. Most drug candidates 
fail to reach the market, but the art of drug development consists 
of effective assessment and management of risk versus benefit and 
not total risk avoidance. 
 Candidate drugs that survive the initial screening procedures 
must be carefully evaluated for potential risks before and during 
clinical testing. Depending on the proposed use of the drug, pre-
clinical toxicity testing includes most or all of the procedures shown 
in  Table 5–1 . Although no chemical can be certified as completely 
“safe” (free of risk), the objective is to estimate the risk associated 
with exposure to the drug candidate and to consider this in the 
context of therapeutic needs and likely duration of drug use. 
 The goals of preclinical toxicity studies include identifying 
potential human toxicities, designing tests to further define the 
toxic mechanisms, and predicting the most relevant toxicities to be 
monitored in clinical trials. In addition to the studies shown in 
 Table 5–1 , several quantitative estimates are desirable. These 
include the  no-effect dose —the maximum dose at which a speci-
fied toxic effect is not seen; the  minimum lethal dose —the small-
est dose that is observed to kill any experimental animal; and, if 
necessary, the  median lethal dose (LD 50 ) —the dose that kills 
TABLE 5–1 Safety tests.
Type of Test
Approach and Goals
Acute toxicity
Usually two species, two routes. Determine the no-effect dose and the maximum tolerated dose. In some 
cases, determine the acute dose that is lethal in approximately 50% of animals.
Subacute or subchronic toxicity
Three doses, two species. Two weeks to 3 months of testing may be required before clinical trials. The 
longer the duration of expected clinical use, the longer the subacute test. Determine biochemical, 
physiologic effects.
Chronic toxicity
Rodent and at least one nonrodent species for ≥ 6 months. Required when drug is intended to be used in 
humans for prolonged periods. Usually run concurrently with clinical trials. Determine same end points 
as subacute toxicity tests.
Effect on reproductive performance
Two species, usually one rodent and rabbits. Test effects on animal mating behavior, reproduction, 
parturition, progeny, birth defects, postnatal development.
Carcinogenic potential
Two years, two species. Required when drug is intended to be used in humans for prolonged periods. 
Determine gross and histologic pathology.
Mutagenic potential
Test effects on genetic stability and mutations in bacteria (Ames test) or mammalian cells in culture; 
dominant lethal test and clastogenicity in mice.
72    SECTION I Basic Principles
approximately 50% of the animals. Presently, the LD 50 is estimated 
from the smallest number of animals possible. These doses are used 
to calculate the initial dose to be tried in humans, usually taken as 
one hundredth to one tenth of the no-effect dose in animals. 
 It is important to recognize the limitations of preclinical test-
ing. These include the following: 
 1. Toxicity testing is time-consuming and expensive. Two to 6 years 
may be required to collect and analyze data on toxicity before 
the drug can be considered ready for testing in humans. 
 2. Large numbers of animals may be needed to obtain valid pre-
clinical data. Scientists are properly concerned about this situ-
ation, and progress has been made toward reducing the 
numbers required while still obtaining valid data. Cell and tis-
sue culture in vitro methods and computer modeling are 
increasingly being used, but their predictive value is still lim-
ited. Nevertheless, some segments of the public attempt to halt 
all animal testing in the unfounded belief that it has become 
unnecessary. 
3.  Extrapolations of therapeutic index and toxicity data from 
animals to humans are reasonably predictive for many but not 
for all toxicities. Seeking an improved process, a Predictive 
Safety Testing Consortium of five of America’s largest pharma-
ceutical companies with an advisory role by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) has been formed to share internally 
developed laboratory methods to predict the safety of new 
treatments before they are tested in humans. In 2007, this 
group presented to the FDA a list of biomarkers for early kid-
ney damage. 
 4. For statistical reasons, rare adverse effects are unlikely to be 
detected in preclinical testing. 
 EVALUATION IN HUMANS 
 Less than one third of the drugs tested in clinical trials reach the 
marketplace. Federal law in the USA and ethical considerations 
require that the study of new drugs in humans be conducted in 
accordance with stringent guidelines. Scientifically valid results are 
not guaranteed simply by conforming to government regulations, 
however, and the design and execution of a good clinical trial 
require interdisciplinary personnel including basic scientists, clini-
cal pharmacologists, clinician specialists, statisticians, and others. 
The need for careful design and execution is based on three major 
confounding factors inherent in the study of any drug in 
humans. 
 Confounding Factors in Clinical Trials 
 A. The Variable Natural History of Most Diseases 
 
Many diseases tend to wax and wane in severity; some disappear 
spontaneously, even, on occasion, cancer. A good experimental 
design takes into account the natural history of the disease by 
evaluating a large enough population of subjects over a sufficient 
period of time. Further protection against errors of interpretation 
caused by disease fluctuations is sometimes provided by using a 
crossover design, which consists of alternating periods of admin-
istration of test drug, placebo preparation (the control), and the 
standard treatment (positive control), if any, in each subject. These 
sequences are systematically varied, so that different subsets of 
patients receive each of the possible sequences of treatment. 
 B. The Presence of Other Diseases and Risk Factors 
 
Known and unknown diseases and risk factors (including lifestyles 
of subjects) may influence the results of a clinical study. For 
example, some diseases alter the pharmacokinetics of drugs (see 
 Chapters 3 and  4 ). Other drugs and some foods alter the pharma-
cokinetics of many drugs. Concentrations of blood or tissue com-
ponents being monitored as a measure of the effect of the new 
agent may be influenced by other diseases or other drugs. Attempts 
to avoid this hazard usually involve the crossover technique (when 
feasible) and proper selection and assignment of patients to each 
of the study groups. This requires obtaining accurate diagnostic 
tests, medical and pharmacologic histories (including use of recre-
ational drugs), and the use of statistically valid methods of ran-
domization in assigning subjects to particular study groups. There 
is growing interest in analyzing genetic variations as part of the 
trial that may influence whether a person responds to a particular 
drug. It has been shown that age, gender, and pregnancy influence 
the pharmacokinetics of some drugs, but these factors have not 
been adequately studied because of legal restrictions and reluc-
tance to expose these populations to unknown risks. 
 C. Subject and Observer Bias and Other Factors 
 
Most patients tend to respond in a positive way to any therapeutic 
intervention by interested, caring, and enthusiastic medical per-
sonnel. The manifestation of this phenomenon in the subject is 
the  placebo response (Latin, “I shall please”) and may involve 
objective physiologic and biochemical changes as well as changes 
in subjective complaints associated with the disease. The placebo 
response is usually quantitated by administration of an inert mate-
rial with exactly the same physical appearance, odor, consistency, 
etc, as the active dosage form. The magnitude of the response var-
ies considerably from patient to patient and may also be influ-
enced by the duration of the study. In some conditions, a positive 
response may be noted in as many as 30–40% of subjects given 
placebo. Placebo adverse effects and “toxicity” also occur but usu-
ally involve subjective effects: stomach upset, insomnia, sedation, 
and so on. 
 Subject bias effects can be quantitated—and minimized rela-
tive to the response measured during active therapy—by the 
 single-blind design. This involves use of a placebo as described 
above, administered to the same subjects in a crossover design, if 
possible, or to a separate control group of well-matched subjects. 
Observer bias can be taken into account by disguising the identity 
of the medication being used—placebo or active form—from 
both the subjects and the personnel evaluating the subjects’ 
responses ( double-blind design). In this design, a third party 
holds the code identifying each medication packet, and the code 
is not broken until all the clinical data have been collected. 
 Drug effects seen in clinical trials are obviously affected by the 
patient taking the drugs at the dose and frequency prescribed. In 
a recent phase 2 study, one third of the patients who said they were 
taking the drug were found by blood analysis to have not taken the 
CHAPTER 5 Development & Regulation of Drugs     73
drug. Confirmation of  compliance with protocols (also known as 
 adherence ) is a necessary element to consider. 
 The various types of studies and the conclusions that may be 
drawn from them are described in the accompanying text box. 
(See Box: Drug Studies—The Types of Evidence.) 
 The Food & Drug Administration 
 The FDA is the administrative body that oversees the drug evalu-
ation process in the USA and grants approval for marketing of 
new drug products. To receive FDA approval for marketing, the 
originating institution or company (almost always the latter) must 
submit evidence of safety and effectiveness. Outside the USA, the 
regulatory and drug approval process is generally similar to that in 
the USA. 
 As its name suggests, the FDA is also responsible for certain 
aspects of food safety, a role it shares with the US Department of 
Agriculture (USDA). Shared responsibility results in complica-
tions when questions arise regarding the use of drugs, eg, antibiot-
ics, in food animals. A different type of problem arises when 
so-called food supplements are found to contain active drugs, eg, 
sildenafil analogs in “energy food” supplements. 
 The FDA’s authority to regulate drugs derives from specific 
legislation ( Table 5–2 ). If a drug has not been shown through 
adequately controlled testing to be “safe and effective” for a specific 
use, it cannot be marketed in interstate commerce for this use.∗ 
 Unfortunately, “safe” can mean different things to the patient, 
the physician, and society. Complete absence of risk is impossible 
to demonstrate, but this fact may not be understood by the public, 
who frequently assume that any medication sold with the approval 
of the FDA should be free of serious “side effects.” This confusion 
is a major factor in litigation and dissatisfaction with aspects of 
drugs and medical care. 
 The history of drug regulation ( Table 5–2 ) reflects several 
health events that precipitated major shifts in public opinion. The 
Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 became law in response to rev-
elations of unsanitary and unethical practices in the meat-packing 
industry. The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938 was 
largely a reaction to deaths associated with the use of a preparation 
of sulfanilamide marketed before it and its vehicle were adequately 
 ∗ Although the FDA does not directly control drug commerce within 
states, a variety of state and federal laws control interstate production 
and marketing of drugs.
Drug Studies—The Types of Evidence*
 As described in this chapter, drugs are studied in a variety of 
ways, from 30-minute test tube experiments with isolated 
enzymes and receptors to decades-long observations of popula-
tions of patients. The conclusions that can be drawn from such 
different types of studies can be summarized as follows. 
 Basic research is designed to answer specific, usually single, 
questions under tightly controlled laboratory conditions, eg, does 
drug  x inhibit enzyme  y ? The basic question may then be extended, 
eg, if drug  x inhibits enzyme  y , what is the concentration-response 
relationship? Such experiments are usually reproducible and 
often lead to reliable insights into the mechanism of the drug’s 
action. 
 First-in-human studies include phase 1–3 trials. Once a drug 
receives FDA approval for use in humans,  case reports and  case 
series consist of observations by clinicians of the effects of drug 
(or other) treatments in one or more patients. These results often 
reveal unpredictable benefits and toxicities but do not generally 
test a prespecified hypothesis and cannot prove cause and 
effect.  Analytic epidemiologic studies consist of observations 
designed to test a specified hypothesis, eg, that thiazolidine-
dione antidiabetic drugs are associated with adverse cardiovas-
cular events.  Cohort epidemiologic studies utilize populations of 
patients that have (exposed group) and have not (control group) 
been exposed to the agents under study and ask whether the 
exposed groups show a higher or lower incidence of the effect. 
 Case control epidemiologic studies utilize populations of patients 
that have displayed the end point under study and ask whether 
they have been exposed or not exposed to the drugs in question. 
Such epidemiologic studies add weight to conjectures but can-
not control all confounding variables and therefore cannot con-
clusively prove cause and effect. 
 Meta-analyses utilize rigorous evaluation and grouping of 
similar studies to increase the number of subjects studied and 
hence the statistical power of results obtained in multiple pub-
lished studies. While the numbers may be dramatically increased 
by meta-analysis, the individual studies still suffer from their 
varying methods and end points and a meta-analysis cannot 
prove cause and effect.  Large randomized controlled trials are 
designed to answer specific questions about the effects of medi-
cations on clinical end points or important surrogate end points, 
using large enough samples of patients and allocating them to 
control and experimental treatments using rigorous randomiza-
tion methods. Randomization is the best method for distributing 
all foreseen confounding factors, as well as unknown confound-
ers, equally between the experimental and control groups. When 
properly carried out, such studies are rarely invalidated and can 
be very convincing. 
 * I thank Ralph Gonzales, MD, for helpful comments. 
74    SECTION I Basic Principles
tested. The Kefauver-Harris amendments of 1962 were, in part, 
the result of a teratogenic drug disaster involving thalidomide. 
This agent was introduced in Europe in 1957–1958 and, based on 
animal tests then commonly used, was marketed as a “nontoxic” 
hypnotic and promoted as being especially useful during preg-
nancy. In 1961, reports were published suggesting that thalido-
mide was responsible for a dramatic increase in the incidence of a 
rare birth defect called phocomelia, a condition involving shorten-
ing or complete absence of the arms and legs. Epidemiologic stud-
ies provided strong evidence for the association of this defect with 
thalidomide use by women during the first trimester of pregnancy, 
and the drug was withdrawn from sale worldwide. An estimated 
10,000 children were born with birth defects because of maternal 
exposure to this one agent. The tragedy led to the requirement for 
more extensive testing of new drugs for teratogenic effects and 
stimulated passage of the Kefauver-Harris Amendments of 1962, 
even though the drug was not then approved for use in the USA. 
In spite of its disastrous fetal toxicity and effects in pregnancy, 
thalidomide is a relatively safe drug for humans other than the 
fetus. Even the most serious risk of toxicities may be avoided or 
managed if understood, and despite its toxicity, thalidomide is 
now approved by the FDA for limited use as a potent immuno-
regulatory agent and to treat certain forms of leprosy. 
 Clinical Trials: The IND & NDA 
 Once a new drug is judged ready to be studied in humans, a 
Notice of Claimed Investigational Exemption for a New Drug 
(IND) must be filed with the FDA ( Figure 5–1 ). The IND 
includes (1) information on the composition and source of the 
drug, (2) chemical and manufacturing information, (3) all data 
from animal studies, (4) proposed plans for clinical trials, (5) the 
names and credentials of physicians who will conduct the clinical 
trials, and (6) a compilation of the key data relevant to study of 
the drug in humans that has been made available to investigators 
and their institutional review boards. 
 It often requires 4–6 years of clinical testing to accumulate and 
analyze all required data. Testing in humans is begun only after 
sufficient acute and subacute animal toxicity studies have been 
completed. Chronic safety testing in animals, including carcinoge-
nicity studies, is usually done concurrently with clinical trials. In 
each of the three formal phases of clinical trials, volunteers or 
TABLE 5–2 Some major legislation pertaining to drugs in the United States.
Law
Purpose and Effect
Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906
Prohibited mislabeling and adulteration of drugs.
Opium Exclusion Act of 1909
Prohibited importation of opium.
Amendment (1912) to the Pure Food 
and Drug Act
Prohibited false or fraudulent advertising claims.
Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914
Established regulations for use of opium, opiates, and cocaine (marijuana added in 1937).
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 
1938
Required that new drugs be safe as well as pure (but did not require proof of efficacy). Enforcement by FDA.
Durham-Humphrey Act of 1952
Vested in the FDA the power to determine which products could be sold without prescription.
Kefauver-Harris Amendments (1962) 
to the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
Required proof of efficacy as well as safety for new drugs and for drugs released since 1938; established 
guidelines for reporting of information about adverse reactions, clinical testing, and advertising of new drugs.
Comprehensive Drug Abuse 
Prevention and Control Act (1970)
Outlined strict controls in the manufacture, distribution, and prescribing of habit-forming drugs; established 
drug schedules and programs to prevent and treat drug addiction.
Orphan Drug Amendments of 1983
Provided incentives for development of drugs that treat diseases with less than 200,000 patients in USA.
Drug Price Competition and Patent 
Restoration Act of 1984
Abbreviated new drug applications for generic drugs. Required bioequivalence data. Patent life extended 
by amount of time drug delayed by FDA review process. Cannot exceed 5 extra years or extend to more than 
14 years post-NDA approval.
Prescription Drug User Fee Act 
(1992, reauthorized 2007)
Manufacturers pay user fees for certain new drug applications.
Dietary Supplement Health and 
Education Act (1994)
Established standards with respect to dietary supplements but prohibited full FDA review of supplements 
and botanicals as drugs. Required the establishment of specific ingredient and nutrition information labeling 
that defines dietary supplements and classifies them as part of the food supply but allows unregulated 
advertising.
Bioterrorism Act of 2002
Enhanced controls on dangerous biologic agents and toxins. Seeks to protect safety of food, water, and drug 
supply.
Food and Drug Administration 
Amendments Act of 2007
Granted FDA greater authority over drug marketing, labeling, and direct-to-consumer advertising; required 
post-approval studies, established active surveillance systems, made clinical trial operations and results more 
visible to the public.
CHAPTER 5 Development & Regulation of Drugs     75
patients must be informed of the investigational status of the drug 
as well as the possible risks and must be allowed to decline or to 
consent to participate and receive the drug. These regulations are 
based on the ethical principles set forth in the Declaration of 
Helsinki (1966). In addition to the approval of the sponsoring 
organization and the FDA, an interdisciplinary institutional 
review board (IRB) at the facility where the clinical drug trial will 
be conducted must review and approve the scientific and ethical 
plans for testing in humans. 
 In  phase 1 , the effects of the drug as a function of dosage are 
established in a small number (20–100) of healthy volunteers. 
Although a goal is to find the maximum tolerated dose, the study 
is designed to prevent severe toxicity. If the drug is expected to have 
significant toxicity, as may be the case in cancer and AIDS therapy, 
volunteer patients with the disease are used in phase 1 rather than 
normal volunteers. Phase 1 trials are done to determine the prob-
able limits of the safe clinical dosage range. These trials may be 
nonblind or “open”; that is, both the investigators and the subjects 
know what is being given. Alternatively, they may be “blinded” and 
placebo controlled. The choice of design depends on the drug, 
disease, goals of investigators, and ethical considerations. Many 
predictable toxicities are detected in this phase. Pharmacokinetic 
measurements of absorption, half-life, and metabolism are often 
done. Phase 1 studies are usually performed in research centers by 
specially trained clinical pharmacologists. 
 In  phase 2 , the drug is studied in patients with the target dis-
ease to determine its efficacy (“proof of concept”), and the doses 
to be used in any follow-on trials. A modest number of patients 
(100–200) are studied in detail. A single-blind design may be 
used, with an inert placebo medication and an established active 
drug (positive control) in addition to the investigational agent. 
Phase 2 trials are usually done in special clinical centers (eg, uni-
versity hospitals). A broader range of toxicities may be detected in 
this phase. Phase 2 trials have the highest rate of drug failures, and 
only 25% of innovative drugs move on to phase 3. 
 In  phase 3 , the drug is evaluated in much larger numbers of 
patients with the target disease—usually thousands—to further 
establish and confirm safety and efficacy. Using information gath-
ered in phases 1 and 2, phase 3 trials are designed to minimize 
errors caused by placebo effects, variable course of the disease, etc. 
Therefore, double-blind and crossover techniques are often used. 
Phase 3 trials are usually performed in settings similar to those 
anticipated for the ultimate use of the drug. Phase 3 studies can be 
difficult to design and execute and are usually expensive because of 
the large numbers of patients involved and the masses of data that 
must be collected and analyzed. The drug is formulated as intended 
for the market. The investigators are usually specialists in the dis-
ease being treated. Certain toxic effects, especially those caused by 
immunologic processes, may first become apparent in phase 3. 
 If phase 3 results meet expectations, application is made for 
permission to market the new agent. Marketing approval requires 
submission of a New Drug Application (NDA)—or for biologicals, 
a Biological License Application—to the FDA. The application 
contains, often in hundreds of volumes, full reports of all preclini-
cal and clinical data pertaining to the drug under review. The 
number of subjects studied in support of the new drug application 
has been increasing and currently averages more than 5000 
patients for new drugs of novel structure (new molecular entities). 
The duration of the FDA review leading to approval (or denial) of 
the new drug application may vary from months to years. Priority 
approvals are designated for products that represent significant 
improvements compared with marketed products; in 2007, the 
median priority approval time was 6 months. Standard approvals, 
which take longer, are designated for products judged similar to 
those on the market—in 2007, the median standard approval time 
was 10.2 months. If problems arise, eg, unexpected but possibly 
serious toxicities, additional studies may be required and the 
approval process may extend to several years. 
 In cases in which an urgent need is perceived (eg, cancer che-
motherapy), the process of preclinical and clinical testing and 
FDA review may be accelerated. For serious diseases, the FDA 
may permit extensive but controlled marketing of a new drug 
before phase 3 studies are completed; for life-threatening diseases, 
it may permit controlled marketing even before phase 2 studies 
have been completed. Roughly 50% of drugs in phase 3 trials 
involve early, controlled marketing. Such “accelerated approval” is 
usually granted with the requirement that careful monitoring of 
the effectiveness and toxicity of the drug be carried out and 
reported to the FDA. Unfortunately, FDA enforcement of this 
requirement has not always been adequate. 
 Once approval to market a drug has been obtained,  phase 4 
begins. This constitutes monitoring the safety of the new drug 
under actual conditions of use in large numbers of patients. The 
importance of careful and complete reporting of toxicity by physi-
cians after marketing begins can be appreciated by noting that 
many important drug-induced effects have an incidence of 1 in 
10,000 or less and that some adverse effects may become apparent 
only after chronic dosing. The sample size required to disclose 
drug-induced events or toxicities is very large for such rare events. 
For example, several hundred thousand patients may have to be 
exposed before the first case is observed of a toxicity that occurs 
with an average incidence of 1 in 10,000. Therefore, low-incidence 
drug effects are not generally detected before phase 4 no matter 
how carefully the studies are executed. Phase 4 has no fixed dura-
tion. As with monitoring of drugs granted accelerated approval, 
phase 4 monitoring has often been lax. 
 The time from the filing of a patent application to approval for 
marketing of a new drug may be 5 years or considerably longer. 
Since the lifetime of a patent is 20 years in the USA, the owner of 
the patent (usually a pharmaceutical company) has exclusive rights 
for marketing the product for only a limited time after approval of 
the new drug application. Because the FDA review process can be 
lengthy, the time consumed by the review is sometimes added to 
the patent life. However, the extension (up to 5 years) cannot 
increase the total life of the patent to more than 14 years after 
approval of a new drug application. As of 2005, the average effec-
tive patent life for major pharmaceuticals was 11 years. After 
expiration of the patent, any company may produce the drug, file 
an abbreviated new drug application (ANDA), demonstrate 
required equivalence, and, with FDA approval, market the drug as 
a  generic product without paying license fees to the original pat-
ent owner. Currently, 67% of prescriptions in the USA are for 
76    SECTION I Basic Principles
generic drugs. Even biotechnology-based drugs such as antibodies 
and other proteins are now qualifying for generic designation, and 
this has fueled regulatory concerns. 
 A  trademark is the drug’s proprietary trade name and is usu-
ally registered; this registered name may be legally protected as 
long as it is used. A generically equivalent product, unless specially 
licensed, cannot be sold under the trademark name and is often 
designated by the official generic name. Generic prescribing is 
described in  Chapter 65 . 
 The FDA drug approval process is one of the rate-limiting fac-
tors in the time it takes for a drug to be marketed and to reach 
patients. The Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) of 1992, 
reauthorized in 2007, attempts to make more FDA resources 
available to the drug approval process and increase efficiency 
through use of fees collected from the drug companies that pro-
duce certain human drugs and biologic products. In 2009, the 
FDA approved 19 new molecular entity drug applications for new 
nonbiologic entities and six biological license applications, one 
more than in 2008. The traditional sequential and linear drug 
development process previously described is being increasingly 
modified in an attempt to safely accelerate clinical trials that pro-
vide “proof of mechanism” of action and “proof of concept” that 
the drug does work in the target disease. In these newer approaches, 
certain development activities such as full dose-response studies, 
final drug formulation work, and long-term toxicology studies 
may be deferred. It is hoped that this approach will focus resources 
on drugs more likely to succeed and minimize later-stage failures. 
In one example, a phase 0 (phase zero) clinical trial is designed to 
study the pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic properties of a 
drug and its links to useful biomarkers and measures of mecha-
nism. Unlike a phase 1 trial with dose-response studies, in a phase 
0 trial, a limited number of low doses are administered. These tri-
als are not designed to be therapeutic. 
 Conflicts of Interest 
 Several factors in the development and marketing of drugs result 
in conflicts of interest. Use of pharmaceutical industry funding to 
support FDA approval processes raises the possibility of conflicts 
of interest within the FDA. Supporters of this policy point out 
that chronic FDA underfunding by the government allows for few 
alternatives. Another important source of conflicts of interest is 
the dependence of the FDA on outside panels of experts that are 
recruited from the scientific and clinical community to advise the 
government agency on questions regarding drug approval or with-
drawal. Such experts are often recipients of grants from the com-
panies producing the drugs in question. The need for favorable 
data in the new drug application leads to phase 2 and 3 trials in 
which the new agent is compared only to placebo, not to older, 
effective drugs. As a result, data regarding the efficacy and toxicity 
of the new drug  relative to a known effective agent may not be avail-
able when the new drug is first marketed. 
 Manufacturers promoting a new agent may pay physicians to 
use it in preference to older drugs with which they are more famil-
iar. Manufacturers sponsor small and often poorly designed clini-
cal studies after marketing approval and aid in the publication of 
favorable results but may retard publication of unfavorable results. 
The need for physicians to meet continuing medical education 
(CME) requirements in order to maintain their licenses encour-
ages manufacturers to sponsor conferences and courses, often in 
highly attractive vacation sites, and new drugs are often featured 
in such courses. Recognition of the obvious conflicts of interest is 
leading some clinical specialty organizations to reject industry 
support of such conferences. Finally, the common practice of dis-
tributing free samples of new drugs to practicing physicians has 
both positive and negative effects. The samples allow physicians to 
try out new drugs without incurring any cost to the patient. On 
the other hand, new drugs are usually much more expensive than 
older agents and when the free samples run out, the patient (or 
insurance carrier) may be forced to pay much more for treatment 
than if the older, cheaper, and possibly equally effective drug were 
used. Finally, when the patent for a drug is nearing expiration, the 
patent-holding manufacturer may try to extend its exclusive mar-
keting privilege by paying generic manufacturers to  not introduce 
a generic version (“pay to delay”). 
 Translational Research 
 Unfortunately, the rate of introduction of new drugs has fallen 
during the last two decades. This has raised concerns about our 
ability to deal with the increasing prevalence of resistant microor-
ganisms, and the problems of degenerative diseases in an aging 
population. In an effort to facilitate this process, the National 
Institutes of Health are currently (2011) considering the establish-
ment of a new institute specializing in translational research. 
 Adverse Drug Reactions 
 An adverse drug event (ADE) or reaction to a drug (ADR) is a 
harmful or unintended response. Adverse drug reactions are 
claimed to be the fourth leading cause of death, higher than pul-
monary disease, AIDS, accidents, and automobile deaths. The 
FDA has further estimated that 300,000 preventable adverse events 
occur in hospitals, many as a result of confusing medical informa-
tion or lack of information (for example, regarding drug incompat-
ibilities). Some adverse reactions, such as overdose, excessive effects, 
and drug interactions, may occur in anyone. Adverse reactions 
occurring only in susceptible patients include intolerance, idiosyn-
crasy (frequently genetic in origin), and allergy (usually immuno-
logically mediated). During IND studies and clinical trials before 
FDA approval, all adverse events (serious, life-threatening, dis-
abling, reasonably drug related, or unexpected) must be reported. 
After FDA approval to market a drug, surveillance, evaluation, and 
reporting must continue for any adverse events that are related to 
use of the drug, including overdose, accident, failure of expected 
action, events occurring from drug withdrawal, and unexpected 
events not listed in labeling. Events that are both serious and unex-
pected must be reported to the FDA within 15 days. In 2008, the 
FDA began publishing quarterly a list of drugs being investigated 
for potential safety risks. The ability to predict and avoid adverse 
drug reactions and optimize a drug’s therapeutic index is an 
increasing focus of pharmacogenetic and personalized medicine. 
CHAPTER 5 Development & Regulation of Drugs     77
It is hoped that greater use of electronic health records will reduce 
some of these risks (see  Chapter 65 ). 
 Orphan Drugs & Treatment 
of Rare Diseases 
 Drugs for rare diseases—so-called orphan drugs—can be difficult 
to research, develop, and market. Proof of drug safety and efficacy 
in small populations must be established, but doing so is a complex 
process. Furthermore, because basic research in the pathophysiol-
ogy and mechanisms of rare diseases receives relatively little atten-
tion or funding in both academic and industrial settings, recognized 
rational targets for drug action may be few. In addition, the cost of 
developing a drug can greatly influence priorities when the target 
population is relatively small. Funding for development of drugs 
for rare diseases or ignored diseases that do not receive priority 
attention from the traditional industry has received increasing sup-
port via philanthropy or similar funding from not-for-profit foun-
dations such as the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, the Huntington’s 
Disease Society of America, and the Gates Foundation. 
 The Orphan Drug Amendments of 1983 provides incentives 
for the development of drugs for treatment of a rare disease or 
condition defined as “any disease or condition which (a) affects 
less than 200,000 persons in the U.S. or (b) affects more than 
200,000 persons in the U.S. but for which there is no reasonable 
expectation that the cost of developing and making available in 
the U.S. a drug for such disease or condition will be recovered 
from sales in the U.S. of such drug.” Since 1983, the FDA has 
approved for marketing more than 300 orphan drugs to treat 
more than 82 rare diseases. 
 REFERENCES 
 Avorn J: Debate about funding comparative effectiveness research. N Engl J Med 
2009;360:1927. 
 Avorn J:  Powerful Medicines: The Benefits and Risks and Costs of Prescription Drugs. 
Alfred A. Knopf, 2004. 
 Boutron I et al: Reporting and interpretation of randomized controlled trials with 
statistically nonsignificant results for primary outcomes. JAMA 
2010;303:2058. 
 Brown WA: The placebo effect. Sci Am 1998;1:91. 
 DiMasi JA: Rising research and development costs for new drugs in a cost contain-
ment environment. J Health Econ 2003;22:151. 
Editor’s Page: Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association: Declaration of 
Helsinki. Clin Res 1966;14:193.
 Evans RP:  Drug and Biological Development: From Molecule to Product and Beyond. 
Springer, 2007. 
 FDA website: http://www.fda.gov 
 Ferrara N et al: Discovery and development of bevacizumab, an anti-VEGF anti-
body for treating cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2004;3(5):391. 
 Grabowski H, Vernon J, DiMasi J: Returns on research and development for 1990s 
new drug introductions. Pharmacoeconomics 2002;20(Suppl 3):11. 
 Hennekens CH, DeMets D: Statistical association and causation. Contributions of 
different types of evidence. JAMA 2011;305:1134. 
 Hoffman GA, Harrington A, Fields, HK: Pain and the placebo response: What 
have we learned. Perspect Biol Med 2005;48:248. 
 Holaday JW, Berkowitz BA: Antiangiogenic drugs: Insights into drug development 
from endostatin, Avastin, and thalidomide. Mol Interv 2009;9:157. 
 Huang S-M, Temple R: Is this the drug or dose for you? Impact and consideration 
of ethnic factors in global drug development, regulatory review, and clinical 
practice. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2008;84:287; or http://www.fda.gov/cder/
genomics/publications.htm 
 Hughes B: 2009 FDA drug approvals. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010;9:89 
 Kesselheim AS et al: Whistle-blowers experiences in fraud litigation against phar-
maceutical companies. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1832. 
 Lee C-J et al: Clinical Trials of Drugs and Biopharmaceuticals. CRC Publishing, 
2005. 
 Lesko LJ: The critical path of warfarin dosing: Finding an optimal dosing strategy 
using pharmacogenetics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2008;84:301; http://www.
fda.gov/cder/genomics/publications.htm 
 Light DW: Global drug discovery: Europe is ahead. Health Affairs 2009;28:969. 
 Mogolian E, Mrydral P: What’s the difference between brand-name and generic 
prescription drugs? Sci Am 2004;Dec 13; http://www.sciam.com/article.
cfm?id=whats-the-difference-betw-2004-12-13 
 Ng R: Drugs from Discovery to Approval. Wiley-Blackwell, 2008. 
 Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America website: http://www.
phrma.org 
 Rockey SJ, Collins FS: Managing financial conflict of interest in biomedical 
research. JAMA 2010;303:2400 
 Scheindlin S: Demystifying the new drug application. Molec Interventions 
2004;4:188. 
 Sistare FD, DeGeorge JJ: Preclinical predictors of clinical safety: Opportunities for 
improvement. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2007;82(2):210. 
 Stevens AJ et al: The role of public sector research in the discovery of drugs and 
vaccines. N Engl J Med 2011;364:535. 
This page intentionally left blank 
79
 A teenage boy is seen at the office of a dental surgeon for 
extraction of an impacted wisdom tooth. He is so nervous 
that the dentist decides to administer a sedative to calm the 
boy. After intravenous administration of the sedative (pro-
methazine), the boy relaxes and the extraction is accom-
plished with no complications. However, when the boy 
stands up from the dental chair, he turns very pale and faints. 
Lying on the floor, he rapidly regains consciousness, but has 
a rapid heart rate of 120 bpm and a blood pressure of only 
SECTION II AUTONOMIC DRUGS
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Introduction to 
Autonomic Pharmacology
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD
C A S E  S T U D Y
110/70 mm Hg. When he sits up, his heart rate increases to 
140 bpm, his pressure drops to 80/40 mm Hg, and he com-
plains of faintness. He is helped to a couch in the reception 
area, where he rests for 30 minutes. At the end of this time 
the boy is able to sit up without symptoms and, after an addi-
tional 15 minutes, is able to stand without difficulty. What 
autonomic effects might promethazine have that would 
explain the patient’s signs and symptoms? Why did his heart 
rate increase when his blood pressure dropped?  
 The nervous system is conventionally divided into the central 
nervous system (CNS; the brain and spinal cord) and the periph-
eral nervous system (PNS; neuronal tissues outside the CNS). 
The motor (efferent) portion of the nervous system can be 
divided into two major subdivisions: autonomic and somatic. 
The  autonomic nervous system (ANS) is largely independent 
(autonomous) in that its activities are not under direct conscious 
control. It is concerned primarily with visceral functions such as 
cardiac output, blood flow to various organs, and digestion, 
which are necessary for life. Evidence is accumulating that the 
ANS, especially the vagus nerve, also influences immune func-
tion and some CNS functions such as seizure discharge. The 
 somatic subdivision is largely concerned with consciously con-
trolled functions such as movement, respiration, and posture. 
Both systems have important afferent (sensory) inputs that pro-
vide information regarding the internal and external environments 
and modify motor output through reflex arcs of varying size and 
complexity. 
6
80    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
 The nervous system has several properties in common with the 
endocrine system, which is the other major system for control of 
body function. These include high-level integration in the brain, 
the ability to influence processes in distant regions of the body, 
and extensive use of negative feedback. Both systems use chemi-
cals for the transmission of information. In the nervous system, 
chemical transmission occurs between nerve cells and between 
nerve cells and their effector cells. Chemical transmission takes 
place through the release of small amounts of transmitter sub-
stances from the nerve terminals into the synaptic cleft. The trans-
mitter crosses the cleft by diffusion and activates or inhibits the 
postsynaptic cell by binding to a specialized receptor molecule. In 
a few cases,  retrograde transmission may occur from the postsyn-
aptic cell to the presynaptic neuron terminal and modify its sub-
sequent activity. 
 By using drugs that mimic or block the actions of chemical 
transmitters, we can selectively modify many autonomic functions. 
These functions involve a variety of effector tissues, including 
cardiac muscle, smooth muscle, vascular endothelium, exocrine 
glands, and presynaptic nerve terminals. Autonomic drugs are use-
ful in many clinical conditions. Unfortunately, a very large num-
ber of drugs used for other purposes have unwanted effects on 
autonomic function (see Case Study). 
 ANATOMY OF THE AUTONOMIC 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 The ANS lends itself to division on anatomic grounds into two 
major portions: the  sympathetic (thoracolumbar) division and the 
 parasympathetic (craniosacral) division ( Figure 6–1 ). Neurons in 
both divisions originate in nuclei within the CNS and give rise to 
preganglionic efferent fibers that exit from the brain stem or spinal 
cord and terminate in motor ganglia. The sympathetic preganglionic 
Medulla 
D
D1
Spinal cord
ACh  
ACh  
ACh  
ACh  
ACh  
ACh  
ACh  
ACh  
N
N
N
N
N
N
M
M
NE
Adrenal 
medulla
Epi, NE
Parasympathetic 
Cardiac and smooth muscle,
gland cells, nerve terminals
Cardiac and smooth muscle,
gland cells, nerve terminals
Sympathetic 
Somatic
Skeletal muscle
Voluntary motor nerve
Sympathetic 
Renal vascular smooth muscle
Sympathetic 
Sweat glands
α, β
 FIGURE 6–1  Schematic diagram comparing some anatomic and neurotransmitter features of autonomic and somatic motor nerves. Only 
the primary transmitter substances are shown. Parasympathetic ganglia are not shown because most are in or near the wall of the organ 
innervated. Cholinergic nerves are shown in blue; noradrenergic in red; and dopaminergic in green. Note that some sympathetic postganglionic 
fibers release acetylcholine or dopamine rather than norepinephrine. The adrenal medulla, a modified sympathetic ganglion, receives sympathetic 
preganglionic fibers and releases epinephrine and norepinephrine into the blood. ACh, acetylcholine; D, dopamine; Epi, epinephrine; M, 
muscarinic receptors; N, nicotinic receptors; NE, norepinephrine. 
CHAPTER 6 Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology    81
fibers leave the CNS through the thoracic and lumbar spinal nerves. 
The parasympathetic preganglionic fibers leave the CNS through 
the cranial nerves (especially the third, seventh, ninth, and tenth) 
and the third and fourth sacral spinal nerve roots. 
 Most sympathetic preganglionic fibers are short and terminate 
in ganglia located in the  paravertebral chains that lie on either side 
of the spinal column. The remaining sympathetic preganglionic 
fibers are somewhat longer and terminate in  prevertebral ganglia, 
which lie in front of the vertebrae, usually on the ventral surface of 
the aorta. From the ganglia, postganglionic sympathetic fibers run 
to the tissues innervated. Some preganglionic parasympathetic 
fibers terminate in parasympathetic ganglia located outside the 
organs innervated: the  ciliary, pterygopalatine, submandibular, 
otic, and several  pelvic ganglia. However, the majority of para-
sympathetic preganglionic fibers terminate on ganglion cells dis-
tributed diffusely or in networks in the walls of the innervated 
organs. Note that the terms “sympathetic” and “parasympathetic” 
are anatomic designations and do not depend on the type of trans-
mitter chemical released from the nerve endings nor on the kind of 
effect—excitatory or inhibitory—evoked by nerve activity. 
 In addition to these clearly defined peripheral motor portions 
of the ANS, large numbers of afferent fibers run from the periph-
ery to integrating centers, including the enteric plexuses in the 
gut, the autonomic ganglia, and the CNS. Many of the sensory 
pathways that end in the CNS terminate in the integrating centers 
of the hypothalamus and medulla and evoke reflex motor activity 
that is carried to the effector cells by the efferent fibers described 
previously. There is increasing evidence that some of these sensory 
fibers also have peripheral motor functions. 
 The  enteric nervous system (ENS) is a large and highly orga-
nized collection of neurons located in the walls of the gastrointes-
tinal (GI) system ( Figure 6–2 ). It is sometimes considered a third 
EC
EC
EC
EC
EC
EC
EC
EC
EC
EC
EPAN
IPAN
IN
ACh, CGRP
EN
NP
5HT
NP
Sympathetic
postganglionic
      fibers
Parasympathetic
preganglionic 
          fibers
ACh
IN
EN
LM
MP
CM
SMP
Lumen
Serosa
IPAN
ACh, CGRP
ACh
NE
ACh
NP
NE
ACh
EN
IN
IPAN
5HT
5HT
5HT
5HT
ACh
EC
EC
EC
EC
EC
SC
AC
AC
SC
SC
 FIGURE 6–2  A highly simplified diagram of the intestinal wall and some of the circuitry of the enteric nervous system (ENS). The ENS 
receives input from both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic systems and sends afferent impulses to sympathetic ganglia and to the 
central nervous system. Many transmitter or neuromodulator substances have been identified in the ENS; see  Table 6–1 . ACh, acetylcholine; 
AC, absorptive cell; CM, circular muscle layer; EC, enterochromaffin cell; EN, excitatory neuron; EPAN, extrinsic primary afferent neuron; 5HT, 
serotonin; IN, inhibitory neuron; IPAN, intrinsic primary afferent neuron; LM, longitudinal muscle layer; MP, myenteric plexus; NE, norepinephrine; 
NP, neuropeptides; SC, secretory cell; SMP, submucosal plexus. 
82    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
division of the ANS. It is found in the wall of the GI tract from the 
esophagus to the distal colon and is involved in both motor and 
secretory activities of the gut. It is particularly critical in the motor 
activity of the colon. The ENS includes the  myenteric plexus (the 
plexus of Auerbach) and the  submucous plexus (the plexus of 
Meissner). These neuronal networks receive preganglionic fibers 
from the parasympathetic system and postganglionic sympathetic 
axons. They also receive sensory input from within the wall of the 
gut. Fibers from the neuronal cell bodies in these plexuses travel 
forward, backward, and in a circular direction to the smooth 
muscle of the gut to control motility and to secretory cells in the 
mucosa. Sensory fibers transmit chemical and mechanical informa-
tion from the mucosa and from stretch receptors to motor neurons 
in the plexuses and to postganglionic neurons in the sympathetic 
ganglia. The parasympathetic and sympathetic fibers that synapse 
on enteric plexus neurons appear to play a modulatory role, as 
indicated by the observation that deprivation of input from both 
ANS divisions does not abolish GI activity. In fact, selective dener-
vation may result in greatly enhanced motor activity. 
 The ENS functions in a semiautonomous manner, utilizing 
input from the motor outflow of the ANS for modulation of GI 
activity and sending sensory information back to the CNS. The 
ENS also provides the necessary synchronization of impulses that, 
for example, ensures forward, not backward, propulsion of gut 
contents and relaxation of sphincters when the gut wall contracts. 
 The  anatomy of autonomic synapses and junctions determines 
the localization of transmitter effects around nerve endings. 
Classic synapses such as the mammalian neuromuscular junction 
and most neuron-neuron synapses are relatively “tight” in that the 
nerve terminates in small boutons very close to the tissue inner-
vated, so that the diffusion path from nerve terminal to postsyn-
aptic receptors is very short. The effects are thus relatively rapid 
and localized. In contrast, junctions between autonomic neuron 
terminals and effector cells (smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, 
glands) differ from classic synapses in that transmitter is often 
released from a chain of varicosities in the postganglionic nerve 
fiber in the region of the smooth muscle cells rather than from 
boutons, and autonomic junctional clefts are wider than somatic 
synaptic clefts. Effects are thus slower in onset and discharge of a 
single motor fiber often activates or inhibits many effector cells. 
 NEUROTRANSMITTER CHEMISTRY OF 
THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 An important traditional classification of autonomic nerves is 
based on the primary transmitter molecules—acetylcholine or 
norepinephrine—released from their terminal boutons and vari-
cosities. A large number of peripheral ANS fibers synthesize and 
release acetylcholine; they are  cholinergic fibers; that is, they work 
by releasing acetylcholine. As shown in  Figure 6–1 , these include 
all preganglionic efferent autonomic fibers and the somatic (non-
autonomic) motor fibers to skeletal muscle as well. Thus, almost 
all efferent fibers leaving the CNS are cholinergic. In addition, 
most parasympathetic postganglionic and a few sympathetic 
postganglionic fibers are cholinergic. A significant number of 
parasympathetic postganglionic neurons utilize nitric oxide or 
peptides as the primary transmitter or cotransmitters. 
 Most postganglionic sympathetic fibers release norepinephrine 
(also known as noradrenaline); they are  noradrenergic (often 
called simply “adrenergic”) fibers; that is, they work by releasing 
norepinephrine (noradrenaline). These transmitter characteristics 
are presented schematically in  Figure 6–1 . As noted, some sympa-
thetic fibers release acetylcholine. Dopamine is a very important 
transmitter in the CNS, and there is evidence that it may be 
released by some peripheral sympathetic fibers. Adrenal medullary 
cells, which are embryologically analogous to postganglionic sym-
pathetic neurons, release a mixture of epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine. Finally, most autonomic nerves also release several 
 cotransmitter substances (described in the text that follows), in 
addition to the primary transmitters just described. 
 Five key features of neurotransmitter function provide poten-
tial targets for pharmacologic therapy:  synthesis, storage, release, 
and  termination of action of the transmitter, and  receptor 
effects. These processes are discussed next. 
 Cholinergic Transmission 
 The terminals and varicosities of cholinergic neurons contain large 
numbers of small membrane-bound vesicles concentrated near the 
synaptic portion of the cell membrane ( Figure 6–3 ) as well as a 
smaller number of large dense-cored vesicles located farther from 
the synaptic membrane. The large vesicles contain a high concen-
tration of peptide cotransmitters ( Table 6–1 ), whereas the smaller 
clear vesicles contain most of the acetylcholine. Vesicles are ini-
tially synthesized in the neuron cell body and carried to the termi-
nal by axonal transport. They may also be recycled several times 
within the terminal. Vesicles are provided with  vesicle-associated 
membrane proteins (VAMPs), which serve to align them with 
release sites on the inner neuronal cell membrane and participate 
in triggering the release of transmitter. The release site on the 
inner surface of the nerve terminal membrane contains  synapto-
somal nerve-associated proteins (SNAPs) , which interact with 
VAMPs. 
 Acetylcholine is synthesized in the cytoplasm from acetyl-CoA 
and choline through the catalytic action of the enzyme  choline 
acetyltransferase (ChAT). Acetyl-CoA is synthesized in mito-
chondria, which are present in large numbers in the nerve ending. 
Choline is transported from the extracellular fluid into the neuron 
terminal by a sodium-dependent membrane  choline transporter 
( CHT ;  Figure 6–3 ). This symporter can be blocked by a group of 
research drugs called  hemicholiniums. Once synthesized, acetyl-
choline is transported from the cytoplasm into the vesicles by a 
 vesicle-associated transporter (VAT) that is driven by proton 
efflux ( Figure 6–3 ). This antiporter can be blocked by the research 
drug  vesamicol. Acetylcholine synthesis is a rapid process capable 
of supporting a very high rate of transmitter release. Storage of 
acetylcholine is accomplished by the packaging of “quanta” of 
acetylcholine molecules (usually 1000 to 50,000 molecules in each 
vesicle). Most of the vesicular acetylcholine (ACh) is bound to 
negatively charged  vesicular proteoglycan (VPG). 
CHAPTER 6 Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology    83
receptors
Na+
Ca2+
Calcium
channel
Choline
Axon
Nerve
terminal
Postsynaptic cell
ACh
ATP, P
VAMPs
SNAPs
Other
receptors
Presynaptic
receptors
Hemicholiniums
Hetero-
receptor
Vesamicol
Acetylcholine
autoreceptor
Choline
Acetate
Cholinoceptors
Botulinum
toxin
ACh
CHT
H+
ACh
ATP, P
ACh
AcCoA + Choline
ChAT
VAT
Acetylcholinesterase
 FIGURE 6–3  Schematic illustration of a generalized cholinergic junction (not to scale). Choline is transported into the presynaptic nerve 
terminal by a sodium-dependent choline transporter (CHT). This transporter can be inhibited by hemicholinium drugs. In the cytoplasm, 
acetylcholine is synthesized from choline and acetyl-CoA (AcCoA) by the enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT). Acetylcholine is then 
transported into the storage vesicle by a second carrier, the vesicle-associated transporter (VAT), which can be inhibited by vesamicol. Peptides 
(P), adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and proteoglycan are also stored in the vesicle. Release of transmitter occurs when voltage-sensitive calcium 
channels in the terminal membrane are opened, allowing an influx of calcium. The resulting increase in intracellular calcium causes fusion of 
vesicles with the surface membrane and exocytotic expulsion of acetylcholine and cotransmitters into the junctional cleft (see text). This step 
can be blocked by botulinum toxin. Acetylcholine’s action is terminated by metabolism by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase. Receptors on the 
presynaptic nerve ending modulate transmitter release. SNAPs, synaptosome-associated proteins; VAMPs, vesicle-associated membrane proteins. 
 Vesicles are concentrated on the inner surface of the nerve 
terminal facing the synapse through the interaction of so-called 
SNARE proteins on the vesicle (a subgroup of VAMPs called 
v-SNAREs, especially  synaptobrevin ) and on the inside of the 
terminal cell membrane (SNAPs called t-SNAREs, especially 
 syntaxin and  SNAP-25 ). Physiologic release of transmitter from 
the vesicles is dependent on extracellular calcium and occurs when 
an action potential reaches the terminal and triggers sufficient 
84    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
influx of calcium ions via N-type calcium channels. Calcium 
interacts with the VAMP  synaptotagmin on the vesicle mem-
brane and triggers fusion of the vesicle membrane with the termi-
nal membrane and opening of a pore into the synapse. The 
opening of the pore and inrush of cations results in release of the 
acetylcholine from the proteoglycan and exocytotic expulsion into 
the synaptic cleft. One depolarization of a somatic motor nerve 
may release several hundred quanta into the synaptic cleft. One 
depolarization of an autonomic postganglionic nerve varicosity or 
terminal probably releases less and releases it over a larger area. In 
addition to acetylcholine, several cotransmitters are released at the 
same time ( Table 6–1 ). The acetylcholine vesicle release process is 
blocked by  botulinum toxin through the enzymatic removal of 
two amino acids from one or more of the fusion proteins. 
 After release from the presynaptic terminal, acetylcholine mol-
ecules may bind to and activate an acetylcholine receptor 
( cholinoceptor ). Eventually (and usually very rapidly), all of the 
acetylcholine released diffuses within range of an  acetylcholinest-
erase (AChE) molecule. AChE very efficiently splits acetylcholine 
into choline and acetate, neither of which has significant transmit-
ter effect, and thereby terminates the action of the transmitter 
( Figure 6–3 ). Most cholinergic synapses are richly supplied with 
acetylcholinesterase; the half-life of acetylcholine molecules in the 
synapse is therefore very short (a fraction of a second). 
Acetylcholinesterase is also found in other tissues, eg, red blood 
cells. (Other cholinesterases with a lower specificity for acetylcho-
line, including butyrylcholinesterase [pseudocholinesterase], are 
found in blood plasma, liver, glia, and many other tissues.) 
 Adrenergic Transmission 
 Adrenergic neurons ( Figure 6–4 ) transport a precursor amino acid 
(tyrosine) into the nerve ending, then synthesize the catecholamine 
transmitter ( Figure 6–5 ), and finally store it in membrane-bound 
vesicles. In most sympathetic postganglionic neurons, norepi-
nephrine is the final product. In the adrenal medulla and certain 
areas of the brain, some norepinephrine is further converted to 
epinephrine. In dopaminergic neurons, synthesis terminates with 
TABLE 6–1  Some of the transmitter substances found in autonomic nervous system, enteric nervous system, and 
nonadrenergic, noncholinergic neurons.1
Substance
Probable Roles
Acetylcholine (ACh)
The primary transmitter at ANS ganglia, at the somatic neuromuscular junction, and at parasympathetic 
postganglionic nerve endings. A primary excitatory transmitter to smooth muscle and secretory cells in 
the ENS. Probably also the major neuron-to-neuron (“ganglionic”) transmitter in the ENS.
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
Acts as a transmitter or cotransmitter at many ANS-effector synapses.
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)
Found with substance P in cardiovascular sensory nerve fibers. Present in some secretomotor ENS neurons 
and interneurons. A cardiac stimulant.
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
May act as a cotransmitter in some excitatory neuromuscular ENS neurons.
Dopamine
A modulatory transmitter in some ganglia and the ENS. Probably a postganglionic sympathetic transmitter 
in renal blood vessels.
Enkephalin and related opioid 
peptides
Present in some secretomotor and interneurons in the ENS. Appear to inhibit ACh release and thereby 
inhibit peristalsis. May stimulate secretion.
Galanin
Present in secretomotor neurons; may play a role in appetite-satiety mechanisms.
GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid)
May have presynaptic effects on excitatory ENS nerve terminals. Has some relaxant effect on the gut. 
Probably not a major transmitter in the ENS.
Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP)
Extremely potent excitatory transmitter to gastrin cells. Also known as mammalian bombesin.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY)
Found in many noradrenergic neurons. Present in some secretomotor neurons in the ENS and may inhibit 
secretion of water and electrolytes by the gut. Causes long-lasting vasoconstriction. It is also a cotransmit-
ter in some parasympathetic postganglionic neurons.
Nitric oxide (NO)
A cotransmitter at inhibitory ENS and other neuromuscular junctions; may be especially important at 
sphincters. Cholinergic nerves innervating blood vessels appear to activate the synthesis of NO by vascular 
endothelium. NO is synthesized on demand by nitric oxide synthase, NOS, not stored; see Chapter 19.
Norepinephrine (NE)
The primary transmitter at most sympathetic postganglionic nerve endings.
Serotonin (5-HT)
An important transmitter or cotransmitter at excitatory neuron-to-neuron junctions in the ENS.
Substance P, related tachykinins 
Substance P is an important sensory neuron transmitter in the ENS and elsewhere. Tachykinins appear to 
be excitatory cotransmitters with ACh at ENS neuromuscular junctions. Found with CGRP in cardiovascular 
sensory neurons. Substance P is a vasodilator (probably via release of nitric oxide).
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)
Excitatory secretomotor transmitter in the ENS; may also be an inhibitory ENS neuromuscular cotransmit-
ter. A probable cotransmitter in many cholinergic neurons. A vasodilator (found in many perivascular neu-
rons) and cardiac stimulant.
1See Chapter 21 for transmitters found in the central nervous system.
CHAPTER 6 Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology    85
dopamine. Several processes in these nerve terminals are potential 
sites of drug action. One of these, the conversion of tyrosine to 
dopa, is the rate-limiting step in catecholamine transmitter syn-
thesis. It can be inhibited by the tyrosine analog  metyrosine. A 
high-affinity antiporter for catecholamines located in the wall of 
the storage vesicle  (vesicular monoamine transporter, VMAT) 
can be inhibited by the  reserpine alkaloids. Reserpine causes 
depletion of transmitter stores. Another transporter  (norepi-
nephrine transporter, NET) carries norepinephrine and similar 
molecules back into the cell cytoplasm from the synaptic cleft 
+
VMAT
+
Ca2+
Calcium
channel
Tyrosine
Axon
Nerve
terminal
AMPs
SNAPs
Other
Presynaptic
receptors
Hetero-
receptor
Bretylium,
guanethidine
NE
H
NE
ATP, P
Tyr
A
Dopamine
Dopa
Postsynaptic cell
Diffusion
Metyrosine
Adrenoceptors
Autoreceptor
Reserpine
Cocaine,
tricyclic
antidepressants
Tyrosine
hydroxylase
NE,
ATP, P
NET
Na
V
receptors
 FIGURE 6–4  Schematic diagram of a generalized noradrenergic junction (not to scale). Tyrosine is transported into the noradrenergic ending 
or varicosity by a sodium-dependent carrier (A). Tyrosine is converted to dopamine (see  Figure 6–5 for details), and transported into the vesicle by 
the vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT), which can be blocked by reserpine. The same carrier transports norepinephrine (NE) and several 
other amines into these granules. Dopamine is converted to NE in the vesicle by dopamine-β-hydroxylase. Physiologic release of transmitter occurs 
when an action potential opens voltage-sensitive calcium channels and increases intracellular calcium. Fusion of vesicles with the surface membrane 
results in expulsion of norepinephrine, cotransmitters, and dopamine-β-hydroxylase. Release can be blocked by drugs such as guanethidine and 
bretylium. After release, norepinephrine diffuses out of the cleft or is transported into the cytoplasm of the terminal by the norepinephrine transporter 
(NET), which can be blocked by cocaine and tricyclic antidepressants, or into postjunctional or perijunctional cells. Regulatory receptors are present 
on the presynaptic terminal. SNAPs, synaptosome-associated proteins; VAMPs, vesicle-associated membrane proteins. 
86    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
( Figure 6–4 ; NET). NET is also commonly called uptake 1 or 
reuptake 1 and is partially responsible for the termination of syn-
aptic activity. NET can be inhibited by  cocaine and  tricyclic 
antidepressant drugs, resulting in an increase of transmitter activ-
ity in the synaptic cleft (see Box: Neurotransmitter Uptake Carriers). 
 Release of the vesicular transmitter store from noradrenergic 
nerve endings is similar to the calcium-dependent process previ-
ously described for cholinergic terminals. In addition to the pri-
mary transmitter (norepinephrine), adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 
dopamine-β-hydroxylase, and peptide cotransmitters are also 
released into the synaptic cleft. Indirectly acting and mixed sym-
pathomimetics, eg,  tyramine,  amphetamines, and  ephedrine, 
are capable of releasing stored transmitter from noradrenergic 
nerve endings by a calcium-independent process. These drugs are 
poor agonists (some are inactive) at adrenoceptors, but they are 
excellent substrates for monoamine transporters. As a result, they 
are avidly taken up into noradrenergic nerve endings by NET. In 
the nerve ending, they are then transported by VMAT into the 
vesicles, displacing norepinephrine, which is subsequently expelled 
into the synaptic space by reverse transport via NET. Amphetamines 
C
C
O
C
H
H
H
NH2
OH
HO
Tyrosine
C
C
O
C
H
H
H
NH2
OH
HO
Dopa
HO
C
C
H
H
H
H
NH2
HO
Dopamine
HO
C
C
H
H
O
H
H
NH2
HO
Norepinephrine
HO
C
C
H
H
O
H
H
NH
HO
Epinephrine
HO
CH3
C
C
H
H
H
H
NH2
HO
Tyramine
C
C
H
H
O
H
H
NH2
HO
Octopamine
– COOH
Metyrosine
–
Tyrosine hydroxylase
L-Amino acid
decarboxylase
Dopamine
β-hydroxylase
Dopamine β-hydroxylase
Hydroxylase
(from liver)
Dopa decarboxylase
Phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase
 FIGURE 6–5  Biosynthesis of catecholamines. The rate-limiting step, conversion of tyrosine to dopa, can be inhibited by metyrosine 
(α-methyltyrosine). The alternative pathway shown by the dashed arrows has not been found to be of physiologic significance in humans. 
However, tyramine and octopamine may accumulate in patients treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Greenspan FS, Gardner DG [editors]:  Basic and Clinical Endocrinology, 7th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2003.) 
CHAPTER 6 Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology    87
also inhibit monoamine oxidase and have other effects that result 
in increased norepinephrine activity in the synapse. Their action 
does not require vesicle exocytosis. 
 Norepinephrine and epinephrine can be metabolized by several 
enzymes, as shown in  Figure 6–6 . Because of the high activity of 
monoamine oxidase in the mitochondria of the nerve terminal, 
there is significant turnover of norepinephrine even in the resting 
terminal. Since the metabolic products are excreted in the urine, 
an estimate of catecholamine turnover can be obtained from labo-
ratory analysis of total metabolites (sometimes referred to as 
“VMA and metanephrines”) in a 24-hour urine sample. However, 
metabolism is not the primary mechanism for termination of 
action of norepinephrine physiologically released from noradren-
ergic nerves. Termination of noradrenergic transmission results 
from two processes: simple diffusion away from the receptor site 
(with eventual metabolism in the plasma or liver) and reuptake 
into the nerve terminal by NET ( Figure 6–4 ) or into perisynaptic 
glia or other cells. 
 Cotransmitters in Cholinergic & 
Adrenergic Nerves 
 As previously noted, the vesicles of both cholinergic and adrener-
gic nerves contain other substances in addition to the primary 
transmitter, sometimes in the same vesicles and sometimes in a 
separate vesicle population. Some of the substances identified to 
date are listed in  Table 6–1 . Many of these substances are also 
 primary transmitters in the nonadrenergic, noncholinergic nerves 
described in the text that follows. They appear to play several roles 
in the function of nerves that release acetylcholine or norepineph-
rine. In some cases, they provide a faster or slower action to sup-
plement or modulate the effects of the primary transmitter. They 
also participate in feedback inhibition of the same and nearby 
nerve terminals. 
 AUTONOMIC RECEPTORS 
 Historically, structure-activity analyses, with careful comparisons of 
the potency of series of autonomic agonist and antagonist analogs, 
led to the definition of different autonomic receptor subtypes, 
including muscarinic and nicotinic cholinoceptors, and α, β, and 
dopamine adrenoceptors ( Table 6–2 ). Subsequently, binding of 
isotope-labeled ligands permitted the purification and characteriza-
tion of several of the receptor molecules. Molecular biology now 
provides techniques for the discovery and expression of genes that 
code for related receptors within these groups (see  Chapter 2 ). 
 The primary acetylcholine receptor subtypes were named after 
the alkaloids originally used in their identification: muscarine and 
nicotine, thus  muscarinic and  nicotinic receptors. In the case of 
receptors associated with noradrenergic nerves, the use of the 
names of the agonists (noradrenaline, phenylephrine, isoprotere-
nol, and others) was not practicable. Therefore, the term  adreno-
ceptor is widely used to describe receptors that respond to 
catecholamines such as norepinephrine. By analogy, the term 
 cholinoceptor denotes receptors (both muscarinic and nicotinic) 
that respond to acetylcholine. In North America, receptors were 
colloquially named after the nerves that usually innervate them; 
thus,  adrenergic (or noradrenergic)  receptors and  cholinergic 
receptors. The general class of adrenoceptors can be further sub-
divided into ` -adrenoceptor,  a - adrenoceptor, and  dopamine-
receptor types on the basis of both agonist and antagonist 
selectivity and on genomic grounds. Development of more selec-
tive blocking drugs has led to the naming of subclasses within 
these major types; for example, within the α-adrenoceptor class, 
α 1 and α 2 receptors differ in both agonist and antagonist selectivity. 
Specific examples of such selective drugs are given in the chapters 
that follow. 
 NONADRENERGIC, NONCHOLINERGIC 
(NANC) NEURONS 
 It has been known for many years that autonomic effector tissues 
(eg, gut, airways, bladder) contain nerve fibers that do not show the 
histochemical characteristics of either cholinergic or adrenergic 
fibers. Both motor and sensory NANC fibers are present. Although 
peptides are the most common transmitter substances found in 
these nerve endings, other substances, eg, nitric oxide synthase and 
purines, are also present in many nerve terminals ( Table 6–1 ). 
Capsaicin, a neurotoxin derived from chili peppers, can cause the 
Neurotransmitter Uptake Carriers
As noted in  Chapter 1 , several large families of transport pro-
teins have been identified. The most important of these are 
the ABC (ATP-Binding Cassette) and SLC (SoLute Carrier) trans-
porter families. As indicated by the name, the ABC carriers 
utilize ATP for transport. The SLC proteins are cotransporters 
and in most cases, use the movement of sodium down its 
concentration gradient as the energy source. Under some cir-
cumstances, they also transport transmitters in the reverse 
direction in a sodium-independent fashion.
NET, SLC6A2, the norepinephrine transporter, is a member 
of the SLC family, as are similar transporters responsible for 
the reuptake of dopamine (DAT, SLC6A3) and 5-HT (serotonin, 
SERT, SLC6A4) into the neurons that release these transmit-
ters. These transport proteins are found in peripheral tissues 
and in the CNS wherever neurons utilizing these transmitters 
are located.
NET is important in the peripheral actions of cocaine and 
the amphetamines. In the CNS, NET and SERT are important 
targets of several antidepressant drug classes (see Chapter 30). 
The most important inhibitory transmitter in the CNS, 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), is the substrate for at least three 
SLC transporters: GAT1, GAT2, and GAT3. GAT1 is the target of 
an antiseizure medication (see Chapter 24). Other SLC proteins 
transport glutamate, the major excitatory CNS transmitter.
88    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
release of transmitter (especially substance P) from such neurons 
and, if given in high doses, destruction of the neuron. 
 The enteric system in the gut wall ( Figure 6–2 ) is the most exten-
sively studied system containing NANC neurons in addition to 
cholinergic and adrenergic fibers. In the small intestine, for example, 
these neurons contain one or more of the following: nitric oxide 
synthase (which produces nitric oxide; NO), calcitonin gene-related 
peptide, cholecystokinin, dynorphin, enkephalins, gastrin-releasing 
peptide, 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), neuropeptide Y, soma-
tostatin, substance P, and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). Some 
neurons contain as many as five different transmitters. 
 The sensory fibers in the nonadrenergic, noncholinergic sys-
tems are probably better termed “sensory-efferent” or “sensory-
local effector” fibers because, when activated by a sensory input, 
they are capable of releasing transmitter peptides from the sensory 
ending itself, from local axon branches, and from collaterals that 
terminate in the autonomic ganglia. These peptides are potent 
agonists in many autonomic effector tissues. 
 FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF 
AUTONOMIC ACTIVITY 
 Autonomic function is integrated and regulated at many levels, 
from the CNS to the effector cells. Most regulation uses negative 
feedback, but several other mechanisms have been identified. 
Negative feedback is particularly important in the responses of the 
ANS to the administration of autonomic drugs. 
CH3O
C
OH
O
CH3O
C
OH
O
CH3O
C
OH
O
CH3O
CH3O
C
OH
O
COMT
COMT
COMT
MAO
MAO
MAO
MAO
COMT
MAO
COMT
MAO
CH
OH
CH2
NHCH3
HO
HO
CH
OH
CH2
NHCH3
HO
CH
OH
HO
HO
CH
OH
CH2
NH2
HO
HO
CH2
CH2
NH2
HO
HO
CH
OH
HO
CH2
NH2
CH2
HO
HO
CH2
CH2
NH2
HO
CH2
HO
CH
OH
HO
Epinephrine
Norepinephrine
Dopamine
Dihydroxymandelic acid
Dihydroxyphenylacetic acid
3-Methoxytyramine
Metanephrine
Normetanephrine
3-Methoxy-4-hydroxy-
mandelic acid
(VMA)
Homovanillic acid
 FIGURE 6–6  Metabolism of catecholamines by catechol- O- methyltransferase (COMT) and monoamine oxidase (MAO). (Modified and repro-
duced, with permission, from Greenspan FS, Gardner DG [editors]:  Basic and Clinical Endocrinology, 7th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2003.) 
CHAPTER 6 Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology    89
TABLE 6–2 Major autonomic receptor types.
Receptor Name
Typical Locations
Result of Ligand Binding
Cholinoceptors
 Muscarinic M1
CNS neurons, sympathetic postganglionic neurons, some presynaptic sites
Formation of IP3 and DAG, increased intracellular 
calcium
 Muscarinic M2
Myocardium, smooth muscle, some presynaptic sites; CNS neurons
Opening of potassium channels,
 inhibition of adenylyl cyclase
 Muscarinic M3
Exocrine glands, vessels (smooth muscle and endothelium); CNS neurons
Like M1 receptor-ligand binding
 Muscarinic M4
CNS neurons; possibly vagal nerve endings
Like M2 receptor-ligand binding
 Muscarinic M5
Vascular endothelium, especially cerebral vessels; CNS neurons
Like M1 receptor-ligand binding
 Nicotinic NN
Postganglionic neurons, some presynaptic cholinergic terminals; receptors 
typically contain two α3 and one β4 type subunits in addition to γ and δ 
subunits
Opening of Na+, K+ channels, depolarization
 Nicotinic NM
Skeletal muscle neuromuscular end plates; receptors typically contain two 
α1 and β1 type subunits in addition to γ and δ subunits
Opening of Na+, K+ channels, depolarization
Adrenoceptors
 Alpha1
Postsynaptic effector cells, especially smooth muscle
Formation of IP3 and DAG, increased intracellular 
calcium
 Alpha2
Presynaptic adrenergic nerve terminals, platelets, lipocytes, smooth muscle
Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase, decreased cAMP
 Beta1
Postsynaptic effector cells, especially heart, lipocytes, brain; presynaptic 
adrenergic and cholinergic nerve terminals, juxtaglomerular apparatus of 
renal tubules, ciliary body epithelium
Stimulation of adenylyl cyclase, increased cAMP
 Beta2
Postsynaptic effector cells, especially smooth muscle and cardiac muscle
Stimulation of adenylyl cyclase and increased 
cAMP. Activates cardiac Gi under some conditions.
 Beta3
Postsynaptic effector cells, especially lipocytes; heart
Stimulation of adenylyl cyclase and increased cAMP1
Dopamine receptors
 D1 (DA1), D5
Brain; effector tissues, especially smooth muscle of the renal vascular bed
Stimulation of adenylyl cyclase and increased cAMP
 D2 (DA2)
Brain; effector tissues, especially smooth muscle; presynaptic nerve 
terminals
Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase; increased 
potassium conductance
 D3
Brain
Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase
 D4
Brain, cardiovascular system
Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase
1Cardiac β3-receptor function is poorly understood, but activation does not appear to result in stimulation of rate or force.
 Central Integration 
 At the highest level—midbrain and medulla—the two divisions of 
the ANS and the endocrine system are integrated with each other, 
with sensory input, and with information from higher CNS centers, 
including the cerebral cortex. These interactions are such that early 
investigators called the parasympathetic system a  trophotropic one 
(ie, leading to growth) used to “rest and digest” and the sympathetic 
system an  ergotropic one (ie, leading to energy expenditure), which 
is activated for “fight or flight.” Although such terms offer little 
insight into the mechanisms involved, they do provide simple descrip-
tions applicable to many of the actions of the systems ( Table 6–3 ). For 
example, slowing of the heart and stimulation of digestive activity are 
typical energy-conserving and storing actions of the parasympathetic 
system. In contrast, cardiac stimulation, increased blood sugar, and 
cutaneous vasoconstriction are responses produced by sympathetic 
discharge that are suited to fighting or surviving attack. 
 At a more subtle level of interactions in the brain stem, medulla, and 
spinal cord, there are important cooperative interactions between the 
parasympathetic and sympathetic systems. For some organs, sensory 
fibers associated with the parasympathetic system exert reflex control 
over motor outflow in the sympathetic system. Thus, the sensory 
carotid sinus baroreceptor fibers in the glossopharyngeal nerve have a 
major influence on sympathetic outflow from the vasomotor center. 
This example is described in greater detail in the following text. 
Similarly, parasympathetic sensory fibers in the wall of the urinary blad-
der significantly influence sympathetic inhibitory outflow to that organ. 
Within the ENS, sensory fibers from the wall of the gut synapse on 
both preganglionic and postganglionic motor cells that control intesti-
nal smooth muscle and secretory cells ( Figure 6–2 ). 
 Integration of Cardiovascular Function 
 Autonomic reflexes are particularly important in understanding 
cardiovascular responses to autonomic drugs. As indicated in 
 Figure 6–7 , the primary controlled variable in cardiovascular func-
tion is  mean arterial pressure. Changes in any variable contribut-
ing to mean arterial pressure (eg, a drug-induced increase in 
peripheral vascular resistance) evoke powerful  homeostatic second-
ary responses that tend to compensate for the directly evoked 
90    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
TABLE 6–3  Direct effects of autonomic nerve activity on some organ systems. Autonomic drug effects are similar 
but not identical (see text).
Effect of
Sympathetic Activity
Parasympathetic Activity
Organ
Action1
Receptor2
Action
Receptor2
Eye
 Iris radial muscle
Contracts
α1
…
…
 Iris circular muscle
…
…
Contracts
M3
 Ciliary muscle
[Relaxes]
β
Contracts
M3
Heart
 Sinoatrial node
Accelerates
β1, β2
Decelerates
M2
 Ectopic pacemakers
Accelerates
β1, β2
…
…
 Contractility
Increases
β1, β2
Decreases (atria)
M2
Blood vessels
 Skin, splanchnic vessels
Contracts
α
…
…
 Skeletal muscle vessels
Relaxes
β2
…
…
[Contracts]
α
…
…
Relaxes3
M3
…
…
Endothelium of vessels in heart, 
brain, viscera
…
…
Synthesizes and releases EDRF4
M3, M5
5
Bronchiolar smooth muscle
Relaxes
β2
Contracts
M3
Gastrointestinal tract
 Smooth muscle
  Walls
Relaxes
α2, 6β2
Contracts
M3
  Sphincters
Contracts
α1
Relaxes
M3
 Secretion
…
…
Increases
M3
Genitourinary smooth muscle
 Bladder wall
Relaxes
β2
Contracts
M3
 Sphincter
Contracts
α1
Relaxes
M3
 Uterus, pregnant
Relaxes
β2
…
…
Contracts
α
Contracts
M3
 Penis, seminal vesicles
Ejaculation
α
Erection
M
Skin
 Pilomotor smooth muscle
Contracts
α
…
…
 Sweat glands
…
…
  Eccrine
Increases
M
…
…
  Apocrine (stress)
Increases
α
…
…
Metabolic functions
 Liver
Gluconeogenesis
β2, α
…
…
 Liver
Glycogenolysis
β2, α
…
…
 Fat cells
Lipolysis
β3
…
…
 Kidney
Renin release
β1
…
…
1Less important actions are shown in brackets.
2Specific receptor type: α, alpha; β, beta; M, muscarinic.
3Vascular smooth muscle in skeletal muscle has sympathetic cholinergic dilator fibers.
4The endothelium of most blood vessels releases EDRF (endothelium-derived relaxing factor), which causes marked vasodilation, in response to muscarinic stimuli. 
Parasympathetic fibers innervate muscarinic receptors in vessels in the viscera and brain, and sympathetic cholinergic fibers innervate skeletal muscle blood vessels. The mus-
carinic receptors in the other vessels of the peripheral circulation are not innervated and respond only to circulating muscarinic agonists.
5Cerebral blood vessels dilate in response to M5 receptor activation.
6Probably through presynaptic inhibition of parasympathetic activity.
CHAPTER 6 Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology    91
change. The homeostatic response may be sufficient to reduce the 
change in mean arterial pressure and to reverse the drug’s effects on 
heart rate. A slow infusion of norepinephrine provides a useful 
example. This agent produces direct effects on both vascular and 
cardiac muscle. It is a powerful vasoconstrictor and, by increasing 
peripheral vascular resistance, increases mean arterial pressure. In the 
absence of reflex control—in a patient who has had a heart trans-
plant, for example—the drug’s effect on the heart is also stimulatory; 
that is, it increases heart rate and contractile force. However, in a 
subject with intact reflexes, the negative feedback response to 
increased mean arterial pressure causes decreased sympathetic out-
flow to the heart and a powerful increase in parasympathetic (vagus 
nerve) discharge at the cardiac pacemaker. This response is mediated 
by increased firing by the baroreceptor nerves of the carotid sinus and 
the aortic arch. Increased baroreceptor activity causes the changes 
mentioned in central sympathetic and vagal outflow. As a result, the 
 net effect of ordinary pressor doses of norepinephrine in a normal 
subject is to produce a marked increase in peripheral vascular resis-
tance, an increase in mean arterial pressure, and a consistent  slowing 
of heart rate. Bradycardia, the reflex compensatory response elicited 
by this agent, is the  exact opposite of the drug’s direct action; yet it is 
completely predictable if the integration of cardiovascular function 
by the ANS is understood. 
 Presynaptic Regulation 
 The principle of negative feedback control is also found at the 
presynaptic level of autonomic function. Important presynaptic 
feedback inhibitory control mechanisms have been shown to exist 
at most nerve endings. A well-documented mechanism involves 
the α 2 receptor located on noradrenergic nerve terminals. This 
receptor is activated by norepinephrine and similar molecules; 
activation diminishes further release of norepinephrine from these 
nerve endings ( Table 6–4 ). The mechanism of this G protein-
mediated effect involves inhibition of the inward calcium current 
that causes vesicular fusion and transmitter release. Conversely, a 
presynaptic β receptor appears to facilitate the release of norepi-
nephrine from some adrenergic neurons. Presynaptic receptors 
Baroreceptors
Peripheral
vascular
resistance
Contractile
force
Venous
tone
Aldosterone
Blood
volume
Venous
return
Stroke
volume
Renal blood
flow/pressure
Hormonal
feedback loop
Autonomic
feedback loop
Renin
Angiotensin
+
+
Mean
arterial
pressure
+
Heart
rate
Cardiac
output
–
Parasympathetic
autonomic
nervous
system
+
Sympathetic
autonomic
nervous
system
VASOMOTOR CENTER
 FIGURE 6–7  Autonomic and hormonal control of cardiovascular function. Note that two feedback loops are present: the autonomic ner-
vous system loop and the hormonal loop. The sympathetic nervous system directly influences four major variables: peripheral vascular resis-
tance, heart rate, force, and venous tone. It also directly modulates renin production (not shown). The parasympathetic nervous system directly 
influences heart rate. In addition to its role in stimulating aldosterone secretion, angiotensin II directly increases peripheral vascular resistance 
and facilitates sympathetic effects (not shown). The net feedback effect of each loop is to compensate for changes in arterial blood pressure. 
Thus, decreased blood pressure due to blood loss would evoke increased sympathetic outflow and renin release. Conversely, elevated pressure 
due to the administration of a vasoconstrictor drug would cause reduced sympathetic outflow, reduced renin release, and increased parasym-
pathetic (vagal) outflow. 
92    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
that respond to the primary transmitter substance released by the 
nerve ending are called  autoreceptors. Autoreceptors are usually 
inhibitory, but in addition to the excitatory β receptors on nor- 
adrenergic fibers, many cholinergic fibers, especially somatic 
motor fibers, have excitatory nicotinic autoreceptors. 
 Control of transmitter release is not limited to modulation by 
the transmitter itself. Nerve terminals also carry regulatory recep-
tors that respond to many other substances. Such  heteroreceptors 
may be activated by substances released from other nerve termi-
nals that synapse with the nerve ending. For example, some vagal 
fibers in the myocardium synapse on sympathetic noradrenergic 
nerve terminals and inhibit norepinephrine release. Alternatively, 
the ligands for these receptors may diffuse to the receptors from 
the blood or from nearby tissues. Some of the transmitters and 
receptors identified to date are listed in  Table 6–4 . Presynaptic 
regulation by a variety of endogenous chemicals probably occurs 
in all nerve fibers. 
 Postsynaptic Regulation 
 Postsynaptic regulation can be considered from two perspectives: 
modulation by previous activity at the primary receptor (which may 
up- or down-regulate receptor number or desensitize receptors; see 
 Chapter 2 ), and modulation by other simultaneous events. 
 The first mechanism has been well documented in several 
receptor-effector systems. Up-regulation and down-regulation are 
known to occur in response to decreased or increased activation, 
respectively, of the receptors. An extreme form of up-regulation 
occurs after denervation of some tissues, resulting in  denervation 
supersensitivity of the tissue to activators of that receptor type. In 
skeletal muscle, for example, nicotinic receptors are normally 
restricted to the end-plate regions underlying somatic motor nerve 
terminals. Surgical denervation results in marked proliferation of 
nicotinic cholinoceptors over all parts of the fiber, including areas 
not previously associated with any motor nerve junctions. A phar-
macologic supersensitivity related to denervation supersensitivity 
occurs in autonomic effector tissues after administration of drugs 
that deplete transmitter stores and prevent activation of the post-
synaptic receptors for a sufficient period of time. For example, 
prolonged administration of large doses of reserpine, a norepi-
nephrine depleter, can cause increased sensitivity of the smooth 
muscle and cardiac muscle effector cells served by the depleted 
sympathetic fibers. 
 The second mechanism involves modulation of the primary 
transmitter-receptor event by events evoked by the same or other 
transmitters acting on different postsynaptic receptors. Ganglionic 
transmission is a good example of this phenomenon ( Figure 6–8 ). 
The postganglionic cells are activated (depolarized) as a result of 
binding of an appropriate ligand to a neuronal nicotinic (N N ) ace-
tylcholine receptor. The resulting fast  excitatory postsynaptic 
potential (EPSP) evokes a propagated action potential if threshold 
is reached. This event is often followed by a small and slowly devel-
oping but longer-lasting hyperpolarizing afterpotential—a slow 
 inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP). This hyperpolarization 
involves opening of potassium channels by M 2 cholinoceptors. The 
IPSP is followed by a small, slow excitatory postsynaptic potential 
caused by closure of potassium channels linked to M 1 cholinocep-
tors. Finally, a late, very slow EPSP may be evoked by peptides 
released from other fibers. These slow potentials serve to modulate 
the responsiveness of the postsynaptic cell to subsequent primary 
TABLE 6–4 Autoreceptor, heteroreceptor, and modulatory effects on nerve terminals in peripheral synapses.1
Transmitter/Modulator
Receptor Type
Neuron Terminals Where Found
Inhibitory effects
 Acetylcholine
M2, M1
Adrenergic, enteric nervous system
 Norepinephrine
Alpha2
Adrenergic
 Dopamine
D2; less evidence for D1
Adrenergic
 Serotonin (5-HT)
5-HT1, 5-HT2, 5-HT3
Cholinergic preganglionic
 ATP and adenosine
P2 (ATP), P1 (adenosine)
Adrenergic autonomic and ENS cholinergic neurons
 Histamine
H3, possibly H2
H3 type identified on CNS adrenergic and serotonergic neurons
 Enkephalin
Delta (also mu, kappa)
Adrenergic, ENS cholinergic
 Neuropeptide Y
Y1, Y2 (NPY)
Adrenergic, some cholinergic
 Prostaglandin E1, E2
EP3
Adrenergic
Excitatory effects
 Epinephrine
Beta2
Adrenergic, somatic motor cholinergic
 Acetylcholine
NM
Somatic motor cholinergic
 Angiotensin II
AT1
Adrenergic
1A provisional list. The number of transmitters and locations will undoubtedly increase with additional research.
CHAPTER 6 Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology    93
excitatory presynaptic nerve activity. (See  Chapter 21 for additional 
examples.) 
 PHARMACOLOGIC MODIFICATION OF 
AUTONOMIC FUNCTION 
 Because transmission involves different mechanisms in differ-
ent segments of the ANS, some drugs produce highly specific 
effects, whereas others are much less selective in their actions. 
mV
Preganglionic 
axon
Postganglionic 
neuron
Electrode
Spike
EPSP
Milliseconds
Seconds
(Receptor types)
Time
Minutes
Peptides
0
–100
N
N
M1
M2
IPSP
Slow
EPSP
Late, slow
EPSP
Membrane
potential
 FIGURE 6–8  Excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP and IPSP) in an autonomic ganglion cell. The postganglionic neuron 
shown at the left with a recording electrode might undergo the membrane potential changes shown schematically in the recording. The 
response begins with two EPSP responses to nicotinic (N) receptor activation, the first not reaching threshold. The second, suprathreshold, EPSP 
evokes an action potential, which is followed by an IPSP, probably evoked by M 2 receptor activation (with possible participation from dopamine 
receptor activation). The IPSP is, in turn, followed by a slower, M 1 -dependent EPSP, and this is sometimes followed by a still slower peptide-
induced excitatory postsynaptic potential. 
A summary of the steps in transmission of impulses, from the 
CNS to the autonomic effector cells, is presented in  Table 6–5 . 
Drugs that block action potential propagation (local anesthetics 
and some natural toxins) are very nonselective in their action, 
since they act on a process that is common to all neurons. On 
the other hand, drugs that act on the biochemical processes 
involved in transmitter synthesis and storage are more selective, 
since the biochemistry of each transmitter differs, eg, norepi-
nephrine synthesis is very different from acetylcholine synthesis. 
Activation or blockade of effector cell receptors offers maximum 
Pharmacology of the Eye
The eye is a good example of an organ with multiple autonomic 
functions, controlled by several autonomic receptors. As shown in 
Figure 6–9, the anterior chamber is the site of several autonomic 
effector tissues. These tissues include three muscles (pupillary dila-
tor and constrictor muscles in the iris and the ciliary muscle) and 
the secretory epithelium of the ciliary body.
Parasympathetic nerve activity and muscarinic cholinomimet-
ics mediate contraction of the circular pupillary constrictor muscle 
and of the ciliary muscle. Contraction of the pupillary constrictor 
muscle causes miosis, a reduction in pupil size. Miosis is usually 
present in patients exposed to large systemic or small topical 
doses of cholinomimetics, especially organophosphate cholinest-
erase inhibitors. Ciliary muscle contraction causes accommoda-
tion of focus for near vision. Marked contraction of the ciliary 
muscle, which often occurs with cholinesterase inhibitor 
intoxication, is called cyclospasm. Ciliary muscle contraction also 
puts tension on the trabecular meshwork, opening its pores and 
facilitating outflow of the aqueous humor into the canal of 
Schlemm. Increased outflow reduces intraocular pressure, a very 
useful result in patients with glaucoma. All of these effects are 
prevented or reversed by muscarinic blocking drugs such as 
atropine.
Alpha adrenoceptors mediate contraction of the radially ori-
ented pupillary dilator muscle fibers in the iris and result in 
mydriasis. This occurs during sympathetic discharge and when 
α-agonist drugs such as phenylephrine are placed in the conjunc-
tival sac. Beta adrenoceptors on the ciliary epithelium facilitate 
the secretion of aqueous humor. Blocking these receptors (with 
β-blocking drugs) reduces the secretory activity and reduces 
intraocular pressure, providing another therapy for glaucoma.
94    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
TABLE 6–5 Steps in autonomic transmission: Effects of drugs.
Process Affected
Drug Example
Site
Action
Action potential 
propagation
Local anesthetics, tetrodotoxin,1 
saxitoxin2
Nerve axons
Block voltage-gated sodium 
channels; block conduction
Transmitter synthesis
Hemicholiniums
Cholinergic nerve terminals: membrane
Block uptake of choline and slow 
synthesis
α-Methyltyrosine (metyrosine)
Adrenergic nerve terminals and adrenal 
medulla: cytoplasm
Inhibits tyrosine hydroxylase and 
blocks synthesis of catecholamines
Transmitter storage
Vesamicol
Cholinergic terminals: VAT on vesicles
Prevents storage, depletes
Reserpine
Adrenergic terminals: VMAT on vesicles
Prevents storage, depletes
Transmitter release
Many3
Nerve terminal membrane receptors
Modulate release
ω-Conotoxin GVIA4
Nerve terminal calcium channels
Reduces transmitter release
Botulinum toxin
Cholinergic vesicles
Prevents release
α-Latrotoxin5
Cholinergic and adrenergic vesicles
Causes explosive transmitter release
Tyramine, amphetamine
Adrenergic nerve terminals
Promote transmitter release
Transmitter reuptake 
after release
Cocaine, tricyclic 
antidepressants
Adrenergic nerve terminals, NET
Inhibit uptake; increase transmitter 
effect on postsynaptic receptors
Receptor activation 
or blockade
Norepinephrine
Receptors at adrenergic junctions
Binds α receptors; causes 
contraction
Phentolamine
Receptors at adrenergic junctions
Binds α receptors; prevents 
activation
Isoproterenol
Receptors at adrenergic junctions
Binds β receptors; activates adenylyl 
cyclase
Propranolol
Receptors at adrenergic junctions
Binds β receptors; prevents 
activation
Nicotine
Receptors at nicotinic cholinergic junctions 
(autonomic ganglia, neuromuscular end plates)
Binds nicotinic receptors; opens ion 
channel in postsynaptic membrane
Tubocurarine
Neuromuscular end plates
Prevents activation
Bethanechol
Receptors, parasympathetic effector cells 
(smooth muscle, glands)
Binds and activates muscarinic 
receptors
Atropine
Receptors, parasympathetic effector cells
Binds muscarinic receptors; prevents 
activation
Enzymatic 
inactivation of 
transmitter
Neostigmine
Cholinergic synapses (acetylcholinesterase)
Inhibits enzyme; prolongs and 
intensifies transmitter action
Tranylcypromine
Adrenergic nerve terminals (monoamine 
oxidase)
Inhibits enzyme; increases stored 
transmitter pool
1Toxin of puffer fish, California newt.
2Toxin of Gonyaulax (red tide organism).
3Norepinephrine, dopamine, acetylcholine, angiotensin II, various prostaglandins, etc.
4Toxin of marine snails of the genus Conus.
5Black widow spider venom.
VAT, vesicle-associated transporter; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter; NET, norepinephrine transporter.
flexibility and selectivity of effect attainable with currently 
available drugs: adrenoceptors are easily distinguished from 
cholinoceptors. Furthermore, individual receptor subgroups 
can often be selectively activated or blocked within each major 
type. Some examples are given in the Box: Pharmacology of the 
Eye. Even greater selectivity may be attainable in the future 
using drugs that target post-traditional receptor processes, eg, 
receptors for second messengers. 
 The next four chapters provide many more examples of this 
useful diversity of autonomic control processes. 
CHAPTER 6 Introduction to Autonomic Pharmacology    95
 REFERENCES 
 Andersson K-E, Wein AJ: Pharmacology of the lower urinary tract: Basis for cur-
rent and future treatments of urinary incontinence. Pharmacol Rev 
2004;56:581. 
 Bengel FM et al: Clinical determinants of ventricular sympathetic reinnervation 
after orthotopic heart transplantation. Circulation 2002;106:831. 
 Birdsall NJM: Class A GPCR heterodimers: Evidence from binding studies. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci 2010;31:499. 
 Boehm S, Kubista H: Fine tuning of sympathetic transmitter release via ionotropic 
and metabotropic presynaptic receptors. Pharmacol Rev 2002;54:43. 
 Broten TP et al: Role of endothelium-derived relaxing factor in parasympathetic 
coronary vasodilation. Am J Physiol 1992;262:H1579. 
 Burnstock G: Non-synaptic transmission at autonomic neuroeffector junctions. 
Neurochem Int 2008;52:14. 
 Fagerlund MJ, Eriksson LI: Current concepts in neuromuscular transmission. Br J 
Anaesthesia 2009;103:108. 
 Freeman R: Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. N Engl J Med 2008;358:615. 
 Furchgott RF: Role of endothelium in responses of vascular smooth muscle to 
drugs. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1984;24:175. 
 Galligan JJ: Ligand-gated ion channels in the enteric nervous system. 
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2002;14:611. 
 Gershon MD, Tack J: The serotonin signaling system: From basic understanding 
to drug development for functional GI disorders. Gastroenterology 
2007;132:397. 
 Goldstein DS et al: Dysautonomias: Clinical disorders of the autonomic nervous 
system. Ann Intern Med 2002;137:753. 
 Johnston GR, Webster NR: Cytokines and the immunomodulatory function of 
the vagus nerve. Br J Anaesthesiol 2009;102:453. 
 Kirstein SL, Insel PA: Autonomic nervous system pharmacogenomics: A progress 
report. Pharmacol Rev 2004;56:31. 
 Langer SZ: Presynaptic receptors regulating transmitter release. Neurochem Int 
2008;52:26. 
 Mikoshiba K: IP 3 receptor/Ca 2+ channel: From discovery to new signaling con-
cepts. J Neurochem 2007;102:1426. 
 Shibasaki M, Crandall CG: Mechanisms and controllers of eccrine sweating in 
humans. Front Biosci (Schol Ed) 2011;2:685. 
 Symposium: Gastrointestinal Reviews. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2007;7:555. 
 Tobin G, Giglio D, Lundgren O: Muscarinic receptor subtypes in the alimentary 
tract. J Physiol Pharmacol 2009;60:3. 
 Toda N, Herman AG: Gastrointestinal function regulation by nitrergic efferent 
nerves. Pharmacol Rev 2005;57:315. 
 Vernino S, Hopkins S, Wang Z: Autonomic ganglia, acetylcholine antibodies, and 
autoimmune gangliopathy. Auton Neurosci 2009;146:3. 
 Verrier RL, Tan A: Heart rate, autonomic markers, and cardiac mortality. Heart 
Rhythm 2009;6 (Suppl 11):S68. 
 Westfall DP, Todorov LD, Mihaylova-Todorova ST: ATP as a cotransmitter in 
sympathetic nerves and its inactivation by releasable enzymes. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther 2002;303:439. 
 Whittaker VP: Some currently neglected aspects of cholinergic function. J Mol 
Neurosci 2010;40:7 
Ciliary muscle (M)
Ciliary epithelium (β)
chamber
Dilator (α
Sphincter (M)
Lens
abecular meshwork
Canal of Schlemm
Iris
Sclera
Cornea
Anterior
)
Tr
 FIGURE 6–9  Structures of the anterior chamber of the eye. Tissues with significant autonomic functions and the associated ANS receptors 
are shown in this schematic diagram. Aqueous humor is secreted by the epithelium of the ciliary body, flows into the space in front of the iris, 
flows through the trabecular meshwork, and exits via the canal of Schlemm ( arrow ). Blockade of the β adrenoceptors associated with the ciliary 
epithelium causes decreased secretion of aqueous. Blood vessels (not shown) in the sclera are also under autonomic control and influence 
aqueous drainage. 
96    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Promethazine has potent α-adrenoceptor blocking activity 
in addition to its sedative, antianxiety effect. As a result, the 
normal autonomic response to postural change (sympathetic 
vasoconstriction upon standing up) was temporarily lost in 
the patient in this case. Marked orthostatic hypotension and 
syncope resulted with transient recovery upon lying down. 
The heart rate increased when the baroreceptors detected the 
drop in blood pressure because promethazine blocks α 
receptors (dominant in the vessels) but not β receptors 
(dominant in the heart).
97
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Acetylcholine-receptor stimulants and cholinesterase inhibitors make 
up a large group of drugs that mimic acetylcholine (cholinomimetic 
agents) ( Figure 7–1 ). Cholinoceptor stimulants are classified phar-
macologically by their spectrum of action, depending on the type of 
receptor—muscarinic or nicotinic—that is activated. Cholino-
mimetics are also classified by their mechanism of action because 
some bind directly to (and activate) cholinoceptors whereas others act 
indirectly by inhibiting the hydrolysis of endogenous acetylcholine. 
 SPECTRUM OF ACTION OF 
CHOLINOMIMETIC DRUGS 
 Early studies of the parasympathetic nervous system showed that 
the alkaloid  muscarine mimicked the effects of parasympathetic 
nerve discharge; that is, the effects were  parasympathomimetic. 
Application of muscarine to ganglia and to autonomic effector 
tissues (smooth muscle, heart, exocrine glands) showed that the 
parasympathomimetic action of the alkaloid occurred through an 
action on receptors at effector cells, not those in ganglia. The 
effects of acetylcholine itself and of other cholinomimetic drugs at 
autonomic neuroeffector junctions are called  parasympathomimetic 
effects and are mediated by muscarinic receptors. In contrast, low 
concentrations of the alkaloid  nicotine stimulated autonomic 
ganglia and skeletal muscle neuromuscular junctions but not auto-
nomic effector cells. The ganglion and skeletal muscle receptors 
were therefore labeled nicotinic. When acetylcholine was later 
identified as the physiologic transmitter at both muscarinic and 
nicotinic receptors, both receptors were recognized as cholinocep-
tor subtypes. 
 Cholinoceptors are members of either G protein–linked 
(muscarinic) or ion channel (nicotinic) families on the basis of 
their transmembrane signaling mechanisms. Muscarinic receptors 
contain seven transmembrane domains whose third cytoplasmic 
loop is coupled to G proteins that function as transducers (see 
 Figure 2–11 ). These receptors regulate the production of intracel-
lular second messengers and modulate certain ion channels via 
their G proteins. Agonist selectivity is determined by the subtypes 
of muscarinic receptors and G proteins that are present in a given 
cell ( Table 7–1 ). When expressed in cells, muscarinic receptors 
form dimers or oligomers that are thought to function in receptor 
movement between the endoplasmic reticulum and plasma mem-
brane. Conceivably, agonist or antagonist ligands could signal by 
changing the ratio of monomeric to oligomeric receptors. 
Muscarinic receptors are located on plasma membranes of cells in 
the central nervous system, in organs innervated by parasympathetic 
7
Cholinoceptor-Activating 
& Cholinesterase-Inhibiting 
Drugs
 Achilles J. Pappano, PhD 
C A S E  S T U D Y
In mid-afternoon, a coworker brings 43-year-old JM to the 
emergency department because he is unable to continue pick-
ing vegetables. His gait is unsteady and he walks with support 
from his colleague. JM has difficulty speaking and swallow-
ing, his vision is blurred, and his eyes are filled with tears. His 
coworker notes that JM was working in a field that had been 
sprayed early in the morning with a material that had the 
odor of sulfur. Within 3 hours after starting his work, JM 
complained of tightness in his chest that made breathing dif-
ficult, and he called for help before becoming disoriented. 
 How would you proceed to evaluate and treat JM? What 
should be done for his coworker?
98    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
nerves as well as on some tissues that are not innervated by these 
nerves, eg, endothelial cells ( Table 7–1 ), and on those tissues 
innervated by postganglionic sympathetic cholinergic nerves. 
 Nicotinic receptors are part of a transmembrane polypeptide 
whose subunits form cation-selective ion channels (see  Figure 2–9 ). 
These receptors are located on plasma membranes of postgangli-
onic cells in all autonomic ganglia, of muscles innervated by 
somatic motor fibers, and of some central nervous system neurons 
(see  Figure 6–1 ). 
 Nonselective cholinoceptor stimulants in sufficient dosage can 
produce very diffuse and marked alterations in organ system function 
because acetylcholine has multiple sites of action where it initiates 
both excitatory and inhibitory effects. Fortunately, drugs are available 
that have a degree of selectivity, so that desired effects can often be 
achieved while avoiding or minimizing adverse effects. 
 Selectivity of action is based on several factors. Some drugs 
stimulate either muscarinic receptors or nicotinic receptors selec-
tively. Some agents stimulate nicotinic receptors at neuromuscular 
junctions preferentially and have less effect on nicotinic receptors 
in ganglia. Organ selectivity can also be achieved by using appro-
priate routes of administration (“pharmacokinetic selectivity”). 
For example, muscarinic stimulants can be administered topically 
to the surface of the eye to modify ocular function while minimiz-
ing systemic effects. 
 Cholinoceptor stimulants
Nerve
Heart and
smooth muscle
Glands and 
endothelium
Alkaloids
Choline esters
Direct-acting
drugs
Neuromuscular
end plate,
skeletal muscle 
Nicotinic
Receptors
Muscarinic
  ACh
Indirect-acting
drugs
Autonomic
ganglion
cells
Reversible
Irreversible
 FIGURE 7–1  The major groups of cholinoceptor-activating drugs, receptors, and target tissues. ACh, acetylcholine. 
TABLE 7–1 Subtypes and characteristics of cholinoceptors.
Receptor Type
Other Names
Location
Structural Features
Postreceptor Mechanism
M1
Nerves
Seven transmembrane segments, 
Gq/11 protein-linked
IP3, DAG cascade
M2
Cardiac M2
Heart, nerves, smooth 
muscle
Seven transmembrane segments, 
Gi/o protein-linked
Inhibition of cAMP pro-
duction, activation of 
K+ channels
M3
Glands, smooth muscle, 
endothelium
Seven transmembrane segments, 
Gq/11 protein-linked
IP3, DAG cascade
M4
CNS
Seven transmembrane segments, Gi/o 
protein-linked
Inhibition of cAMP 
production
M5
CNS
Seven transmembrane segments, 
Gq/11 protein-linked
IP3, DAG cascade
NM
Muscle type, end plate 
receptor
Skeletal muscle neuromus-
cular junction
Pentamer1 [(α1)2β1δγ)]
Na+, K+ depolarizing ion 
channel
NN
Neuronal type, ganglion 
receptor
CNS, postganglionic cell 
body, dendrites
Pentamer1 with α and β subunits 
only, eg, (α4)2(β2)3 (CNS) or 
α3α5(β2)3 (ganglia)
Na+, K+ depolarizing ion 
channel
1Pentameric structure in Torpedo electric organ and fetal mammalian muscle has two α1 subunits and one each of β1, δ, and γ subunits. The stoichiometry is indicated by sub-
scripts, eg, [(α1) 2 β1 δ γ]. In adult muscle, the γ subunit is replaced by an ε subunit. There are twelve neuronal nicotinic receptors with nine α (α2-α10) subunits and three (β2-β4) 
subunits. The subunit composition varies among different mammalian tissues.
DAG, diacylglycerol; IP3, inositol trisphosphate.
Data from Millar NS: Assembly and subunit diversity of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Biochem Soc Trans 2003;31:869.
CHAPTER 7 Cholinoceptor-Activating & Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs    99
 MODE OF ACTION OF 
CHOLINOMIMETIC DRUGS 
 Direct-acting cholinomimetic agents bind to and activate muscar-
inic or nicotinic receptors ( Figure 7–1 ). Indirect-acting agents 
produce their primary effects by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, 
which hydrolyzes acetylcholine to choline and acetic acid (see 
 Figure 6–3 ). By inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, the indirect-acting 
drugs increase the endogenous acetylcholine concentration in syn-
aptic clefts and neuroeffector junctions. The excess acetylcholine, 
in turn, stimulates cholinoceptors to evoke increased responses. 
These drugs act primarily where acetylcholine is physiologically 
released and are thus  amplifiers of endogenous acetylcholine. 
 Some cholinesterase inhibitors also inhibit butyrylcholinesterase 
(pseudocholinesterase). However, inhibition of butyrylcholinest-
erase plays little role in the action of indirect-acting cholinomimetic 
drugs because this enzyme is not important in the physiologic ter-
mination of synaptic acetylcholine action. Some quaternary cholin-
esterase inhibitors also have a modest direct action as well, eg, 
neostigmine, which activates neuromuscular nicotinic cholinocep-
tors directly in addition to blocking cholinesterase. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE DIRECTACTING 
CHOLINOCEPTOR STIMULANTS 
 The direct-acting cholinomimetic drugs can be divided on the 
basis of chemical structure into esters of choline (including acetyl-
choline) and alkaloids (such as muscarine and nicotine). Many of 
these drugs have effects on both receptors; acetylcholine is typical. 
A few of them are highly selective for the muscarinic or for the 
nicotinic receptor. However, none of the clinically useful drugs is 
selective for receptor subtypes in either class. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Structure 
 
Four important choline esters that have been studied extensively 
are shown in  Figure 7–2 . Their permanently charged quaternary 
ammonium group renders them relatively insoluble in lipids. 
Many naturally occurring and synthetic cholinomimetic drugs 
that are not choline esters have been identified; a few of these are 
shown in  Figure 7–3 . The muscarinic receptor is strongly stereo-
selective:  (S) -bethanechol is almost 1000 times more potent than 
 (R) -bethanechol. 
 B. Absorption, Distribution, and Metabolism 
 
Choline esters are poorly absorbed and poorly distributed into the 
central nervous system because they are hydrophilic. Although all 
are hydrolyzed in the gastrointestinal tract (and less active by the 
oral route), they differ markedly in their susceptibility to hydrolysis 
by cholinesterase. Acetylcholine is very rapidly hydrolyzed (see 
 Chapter 6 ); large amounts must be infused intravenously to 
achieve concentrations sufficient to produce detectable effects. A 
large intravenous bolus injection has a brief effect, typically 5–20 
seconds, whereas intramuscular and subcutaneous injections pro-
duce only local effects. Methacholine is more resistant to hydroly-
sis, and the carbamic acid esters carbachol and bethanechol are 
still more resistant to hydrolysis by cholinesterase and have corre-
spondingly longer durations of action. The β-methyl group 
(methacholine, bethanechol) reduces the potency of these drugs at 
nicotinic receptors ( Table 7–2 ). 
 The tertiary natural cholinomimetic alkaloids (pilocarpine, 
nicotine, lobeline;  Figure 7–3 ) are well absorbed from most sites 
of administration. Nicotine, a liquid, is sufficiently lipid-soluble 
to be absorbed across the skin. Muscarine, a quaternary amine, is 
less completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract than the 
tertiary amines but is nevertheless toxic when ingested—eg, in 
certain mushrooms—and it even enters the brain. Lobeline is a 
plant derivative similar to nicotine. These amines are excreted 
chiefly by the kidneys. Acidification of the urine accelerates clear-
ance of the tertiary amines (see  Chapter 1 ). 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 
Activation of the parasympathetic nervous system modifies organ 
function by two major mechanisms. First, acetylcholine released 
H2N
Acetylcholine
Methacholine
(acetyl-β-methylcholine)
O
H3C
C
O
CH2
N+
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
H3C
C
O
CH
N+
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Carbachol
(carbamoylcholine)
Bethanechol
(carbamoyl-β-methylcholine)
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
C
O
CH
N+
CH2
CH3
O
H2N
C
O
CH2
N+
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
 FIGURE 7–2  Molecular structures of four choline esters. 
Acetylcholine and methacholine are acetic acid esters of choline and 
β-methylcholine, respectively. Carbachol and bethanechol are 
carbamic acid esters of the same alcohols. 
100    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
from parasympathetic nerves activates muscarinic receptors on 
effector cells to alter organ function directly. Second, acetylcholine 
released from parasympathetic nerves interacts with muscarinic 
receptors on nerve terminals to inhibit the release of their neu-
rotransmitter. By this mechanism, acetylcholine release and circu-
lating muscarinic agonists indirectly alter organ function by 
modulating the effects of the parasympathetic and sympathetic 
nervous systems and perhaps nonadrenergic, noncholinergic 
(NANC) systems. 
 As indicated in  Chapter 6 , muscarinic receptor subtypes have 
been characterized by binding studies and cloned. Several cellular 
events occur when muscarinic receptors are activated, one or more 
of which might serve as second messengers for muscarinic activa-
tion. All muscarinic receptors appear to be of the G protein-coupled 
type (see  Chapter 2 and  Table 7–1 ). Muscarinic agonist binding 
activates the inositol trisphosphate (IP 3 ), diacylglycerol (DAG) 
cascade. Some evidence implicates DAG in the opening of smooth 
muscle calcium channels; IP 3 releases calcium from endoplasmic 
and sarcoplasmic reticulum. Muscarinic agonists also increase 
cellular cGMP concentrations. Activation of muscarinic receptors 
also increases potassium flux across cardiac cell membranes 
( Figure 7–4 A) and decreases it in ganglion and smooth muscle 
cells. This effect is mediated by the binding of an activated G 
protein βγ subunit directly to the channel. Finally, muscarinic 
receptor activation in some tissues (eg, heart, intestine) inhibits 
adenylyl cyclase activity. Moreover, muscarinic agonists attenuate 
the activation of adenylyl cyclase and modulate the increase in 
cAMP levels induced by hormones such as catecholamines. These 
muscarinic effects on cAMP generation reduce the physiologic 
response of the organ to stimulatory hormones. 
 The mechanism of nicotinic receptor activation has been stud-
ied in great detail, taking advantage of three factors: (1) the recep-
tor is present in extremely high concentration in the membranes 
of the electric organs of electric fish; (2) α-bungarotoxin, a com-
ponent of certain snake venoms, binds tightly to the receptors and 
is readily labeled as a marker for isolation procedures; and 
(3) receptor activation results in easily measured electrical and 
ionic changes in the cells involved. The nicotinic receptor in 
muscle tissues is a pentamer of four types of glycoprotein sub-
units (one monomer occurs twice) with a total molecular weight 
of about 250,000 ( Figure 7–4 B). The neuronal nicotinic recep-
tor consists of α and β subunits only ( Table 7–1 ). Each subunit 
has four transmembrane segments. The nicotinic receptor has 
two agonist binding sites at the interfaces formed by the two α 
subunits and two adjacent subunits (β, γ, ε). Agonist binding to 
the receptor sites causes a conformational change in the protein 
(channel opening) that allows sodium and potassium ions to dif-
fuse rapidly down their concentration gradients (calcium ions 
may also carry charge through the nicotinic receptor ion channel). 
Binding of an agonist molecule by one of the two receptor sites 
only modestly increases the probability of channel opening; 
simultaneous binding of agonist by both of the receptor sites 
N
Lobeline
CH3
CH2
CH
OH
C6H5
CH2
C
O
C6H5
N
Nicotine
CH3
N
Action chiefly nicotinic
Action chiefly muscarinic
Pilocarpine
O
Muscarine
CH2
+N
H3C
HO
O
CH2
O
H3C
CH2
N
N
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
 FIGURE 7–3  Structures of some cholinomimetic alkaloids. 
TABLE 7–2 Properties of choline esters.
Choline Ester
Susceptibility to 
Cholinesterase
Muscarinic 
Action
Nicotinic 
Action
Acetylcholine 
chloride
++++
+++
+++
Methacholine 
chloride
+
++++
None
Carbachol 
chloride
Negligible
++
+++
Bethanechol 
chloride
Negligible
++
None
CHAPTER 7 Cholinoceptor-Activating & Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs    101
–
β
γ
α
ACh
ACh
Vagus nerve varicosity
ACh
M2R
Sinoatrial nodal cell
AC
IK, ACh
If
ICa
ATP
cAMP
PKA∗
ATP
A
B
End plate
Channel closed
Channel open
ACh
Somatic motor nerve
End plates
Skeletal muscle
Acetate
Choline
AChE
ACh
Na+
Excitation
Contraction
EPSP
Action
potential
+
ACh
Chan
ne
l
β
α
γ
Gi/o
 FIGURE 7–4  Muscarinic and nicotinic signaling.  A: Muscarinic transmission to the sinoatrial node in heart. Acetylcholine (ACh) released 
from a varicosity of a postganglionic cholinergic axon interacts with a muscarinic receptor (M 2 R) linked via G i/o to K + channel opening, which 
causes hyperpolarization, and to inhibition of cAMP synthesis. Reduced cAMP causes voltage-dependent opening of pacemaker channels (I f ) to 
shift to more negative potentials, and reduces the phosphorylation and availability of L-type Ca 2+ channels (I Ca ).  B: Nicotinic transmission at the 
skeletal neuromuscular junction. ACh released from the motor nerve terminal interacts with subunits of the pentameric nicotinic receptor to 
open it, allowing Na + influx to produce an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). The EPSP depolarizes the muscle membrane, generating an 
action potential, and triggering contraction. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) in the extracellular matrix hydrolyzes ACh. 
102    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
greatly enhances opening probability. Nicotinic receptor activation 
causes depolarization of the nerve cell or neuromuscular end 
plate membrane. In skeletal muscle, the depolarization initiates 
an action potential that propagates across the muscle membrane 
and causes contraction ( Figure 7–4 B). 
 Prolonged agonist occupancy of the nicotinic receptor abolishes 
the effector response; that is, the postganglionic neuron stops firing 
(ganglionic effect), and the skeletal muscle cell relaxes (neuromus-
cular end plate effect). Furthermore, the continued presence of the 
nicotinic agonist prevents electrical recovery of the postjunctional 
membrane. Thus, a state of “depolarizing blockade” occurs initially 
during persistent agonist occupancy of the receptor. Continued 
agonist occupancy is associated with return of membrane voltage 
to the resting level. The receptor becomes desensitized to agonist, 
and this state is refractory to reversal by other agonists. As 
described in  Chapter 27 , this effect can be exploited for producing 
muscle paralysis. 
 B. Organ System Effects  
Most of the direct organ system effects of muscarinic cholinoceptor 
stimulants are readily predicted from knowledge of the effects of 
parasympathetic nerve stimulation (see  Table 6–3 ) and the distri-
bution of muscarinic receptors. Effects of a typical agent such as 
acetylcholine are listed in  Table 7–3 . The effects of nicotinic ago-
nists are similarly predictable from knowledge of the physiology of 
the autonomic ganglia and skeletal muscle motor end plate. 
 1. Eye— Muscarinic agonists instilled into the conjunctival sac 
cause contraction of the smooth muscle of the iris sphincter (result-
ing in miosis) and of the ciliary muscle (resulting in accommoda-
tion). As a result, the iris is pulled away from the angle of the anterior 
chamber, and the trabecular meshwork at the base of the ciliary 
muscle is opened. Both effects facilitate aqueous humor outflow into 
the canal of Schlemm, which drains the anterior chamber. 
 2. Cardiovascular system— The primary cardiovascular 
effects of muscarinic agonists are reduction in peripheral vascular 
resistance and changes in heart rate. The direct effects listed in 
 Table 7–3 are modified by important homeostatic reflexes, as 
described in  Chapter 6 and depicted in  Figure 6–7 . Intravenous 
infusions of minimally effective doses of acetylcholine in humans 
(eg, 20–50 mcg/min) cause vasodilation, resulting in a reduction 
in blood pressure, often accompanied by a reflex increase in heart 
rate. Larger doses of acetylcholine produce bradycardia and 
decrease atrioventricular node conduction velocity in addition to 
hypotension. 
 The direct cardiac actions of muscarinic stimulants include the 
following: (1) an increase in a potassium current (I K(ACh) ) in the 
cells of the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes, in Purkinje cells, 
and also in atrial and ventricular muscle cells; (2) a decrease in the 
slow inward calcium current (I Ca ) in heart cells; and (3) a reduc-
tion in the hyperpolarization-activated current (I f ) that underlies 
diastolic depolarization ( Figure 7–4 A). All these actions are medi-
ated by M 2 receptors and contribute to slowing the pacemaker 
rate. Effects (1) and (2) cause hyperpolarization, reduce action 
potential duration, and decrease the contractility of atrial and 
ventricular cells. Predictably, knockout of M 2 receptors eliminates 
the bradycardic effect of vagal stimulation and the negative chro-
notropic effect of carbachol on sinoatrial rate. 
 The direct slowing of sinoatrial rate and atrioventricular con-
duction that is produced by muscarinic agonists is often opposed 
by reflex sympathetic discharge, elicited by the decrease in blood 
pressure (see  Figure 6–7 ). The resultant sympathetic-parasympathetic 
interaction is complex because muscarinic modulation of sympa-
thetic influences occurs by inhibition of norepinephrine release 
and by postjunctional cellular effects. Muscarinic receptors that 
are present on postganglionic parasympathetic nerve terminals 
allow neurally released acetylcholine to inhibit its own secretion. 
The neuronal muscarinic receptors need not be the same subtype 
as found on effector cells. Therefore, the net effect on heart rate 
depends on local concentrations of the agonist in the heart and in 
the vessels and on the level of reflex responsiveness. 
TABLE 7–3  Effects of direct-acting cholinoceptor 
stimulants.*
Organ
Response
Eye
 Sphincter muscle of iris
Contraction (miosis)
 Ciliary muscle
Contraction for near vision
Heart
 Sinoatrial node
Decrease in rate (negative chronotropy)
 Atria
Decrease in contractile strength 
(negative inotropy). Decrease in refrac-
tory period
 Atrioventricular node
Decrease in conduction velocity 
(negative dromotropy). Increase in 
refractory period
 Ventricles
Small decrease in contractile strength
Blood vessels
 Arteries, veins
Dilation (via EDRF). Constriction 
(high-dose direct effect)
Lung
 Bronchial muscle
Contraction (bronchoconstriction)
 Bronchial glands
Stimulation
Gastrointestinal tract
 Motility
Increase
 Sphincters
Relaxation
 Secretion
Stimulation
Urinary bladder
 Detrusor
Contraction
 Trigone and sphincter
Relaxation
Glands
 Sweat, salivary, lacrimal, 
    nasopharyngeal
Secretion
EDRF, endothelium-derived relaxing factor.
*Only the direct effects are indicated; homeostatic responses to these direct actions 
may be important (see text).
CHAPTER 7 Cholinoceptor-Activating & Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs    103
 Parasympathetic innervation of the ventricles is much less 
extensive than that of the atria; activation of ventricular muscar-
inic receptors causes much less physiologic effect than that seen in 
atria. However, the effects of muscarinic agonists on ventricular 
function are clearly evident during sympathetic nerve stimulation 
because of muscarinic modulation of sympathetic effects (“accen-
tuated antagonism”). 
 In the intact organism, intravascular injection of muscarinic 
agonists produces marked vasodilation. However, earlier studies 
of isolated blood vessels often showed a contractile response to 
these agents. It is now known that acetylcholine-induced vasodi-
lation arises from activation of M 3 receptors and requires the 
presence of intact endothelium ( Figure 7–5 ). Muscarinic ago-
nists release endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF), iden-
tified as nitric oxide (NO), from the endothelial cells. The NO 
diffuses to adjacent vascular smooth muscle, where it activates 
guanylyl cyclase and increases cGMP, resulting in relaxation (see 
 Figure 12–2 ). Isolated vessels prepared with the endothelium 
preserved consistently reproduce the vasodilation seen in the 
intact organism. The relaxing effect of acetylcholine was maximal 
at 3 × 10 −7 M ( Figure 7–5 ). This effect was eliminated in the 
absence of endothelium, and acetylcholine, at concentrations 
greater than 10 −7 M, then caused contraction. This results from a 
direct effect of acetylcholine on vascular smooth muscle in which 
activation of M 3 receptors stimulates IP 3 production and releases 
intracellular calcium. 
 Parasympathetic nerves can regulate arteriolar tone in vascular 
beds in thoracic and abdominal visceral organs. Acetylcholine 
released from postganglionic parasympathetic nerves relaxes coro-
nary arteriolar smooth muscle via the NO/cGMP pathway in 
humans as described above. Damage to the endothelium, as 
occurs with atherosclerosis, eliminates this action, and acetylcho-
line is then able to contract arterial smooth muscle and produce 
vasoconstriction. Parasympathetic nerve stimulation also causes 
vasodilation in cerebral blood vessels; however, the effect often 
appears as a result of NO released either from NANC (nitrergic) 
neurons or as a cotransmitter from cholinergic nerves. The relative 
contributions of cholinergic and NANC neurons to the vascular 
effects of parasympathetic nerve stimulation are not known for 
most viscera. Skeletal muscle receives sympathetic cholinergic 
vasodilator nerves, but the view that acetylcholine causes vasodila-
tion in this vascular bed has not been verified experimentally. 
Nitric oxide, rather than acetylcholine, may be released from these 
neurons. However, this vascular bed responds to exogenous cho-
line esters because of the presence of M 3 receptors on endothelial 
and smooth muscle cells. 
 The cardiovascular effects of all the choline esters are similar to 
those of acetylcholine—the main difference being in their potency 
and duration of action. Because of the resistance of methacholine, 
carbachol, and bethanechol to acetylcholinesterase, lower doses 
given intravenously are sufficient to produce effects similar to 
those of acetylcholine, and the duration of action of these syn-
thetic choline esters is longer. The cardiovascular effects of most of 
the cholinomimetic natural alkaloids and the synthetic analogs are 
also generally similar to those of acetylcholine. 
 Pilocarpine is an interesting exception to the above statement. 
If given intravenously (an experimental exercise), it may produce 
hypertension after a brief initial hypotensive response. The longer-
lasting hypertensive effect can be traced to sympathetic ganglionic 
discharge caused by activation of postganglionic cell membrane 
M 1 receptors, which close K + channels and elicit slow excitatory 
(depolarizing) postsynaptic potentials. This effect, like the 
hypotensive effect, can be blocked by atropine, an antimuscarinic 
drug. 
 3. Respiratory system— Muscarinic stimulants contract the 
smooth muscle of the bronchial tree. In addition, the glands of the 
tracheobronchial mucosa are stimulated to secrete. This combina-
tion of effects can occasionally cause symptoms, especially in 
individuals with asthma. The bronchoconstriction caused by mus-
carinic agonists is eliminated in knockout animals in which the 
M 3 receptor has been mutated. 
NA –8
NA –8
–8
–7.5
–7
–6.5
–6
W
ACh 
–8 –7.5 –7–6.5
Unrubbed
Rubbed
–6
W
ACh
Tension
Time
 FIGURE 7–5  Activation of endothelial cell muscarinic receptors by acetylcholine (Ach) releases endothelium-derived relaxing factor 
(nitric oxide), which causes relaxation of vascular smooth muscle precontracted with norepinephrine, 10 −8 M. Removal of the endothelium by 
rubbing eliminates the relaxant effect and reveals contraction caused by direct action of Ach on vascular smooth muscle. (NA, noradrenaline 
[norepinephrine]. Numbers indicate the log concentration applied at the time indicated.) (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Furchgott RF, 
Zawadzki JV: The obligatory role of endothelial cells in the relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by acetylcholine. Nature 1980;288:373.) 
104    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
 4. Gastrointestinal tract— Administration of muscarinic ago-
nists, as in parasympathetic nervous system stimulation, increases 
the secretory and motor activity of the gut. The salivary and gas-
tric glands are strongly stimulated; the pancreas and small intesti-
nal glands are stimulated less so. Peristaltic activity is increased 
throughout the gut, and most sphincters are relaxed. Stimulation 
of contraction in this organ system involves depolarization of the 
smooth muscle cell membrane and increased calcium influx. 
Muscarinic agonists do not cause contraction of the ileum in 
mutant mice lacking M 2 and M 3 receptors. The M 3 receptor is 
required for direct activation of smooth muscle contraction, 
whereas the M 2 receptor reduces cAMP formation and relaxation 
caused by sympathomimetic drugs. 
 5. Genitourinary tract— Muscarinic agonists stimulate the 
detrusor muscle and relax the trigone and sphincter muscles of the 
bladder, thus promoting voiding. The function of M 2 and M 3 
receptors in the urinary bladder appears to be the same as in intes-
tinal smooth muscle. The human uterus is not notably sensitive to 
muscarinic agonists. 
 6. Miscellaneous secretory glands— Muscarinic agonists 
stimulate secretion by thermoregulatory sweat, lacrimal, and 
nasopharyngeal glands. 
 7. Central nervous system— The central nervous system con-
tains both muscarinic and nicotinic receptors, the brain being 
relatively richer in muscarinic sites and the spinal cord containing 
a preponderance of nicotinic sites. The physiologic roles of these 
receptors are discussed in  Chapter 21 . 
 All five muscarinic receptor subtypes have been detected in the 
central nervous system. The roles of M 1 through M 3 have been 
analyzed by means of experiments in knockout mice. The M 1 
subtype is richly expressed in brain areas involved in cognition. 
Knockout of M 1 receptors was associated with impaired neuronal 
plasticity in the forebrain, and pilocarpine did not induce seizures 
in M 1 mutant mice. The central nervous system effects of the 
synthetic muscarinic agonist oxotremorine (tremor, hypothermia, 
and antinociception) were lacking in mice with homozygously 
mutated M 2 receptors. Animals lacking M 3 receptors, especially 
those in the hypothalamus, had reduced appetite and diminished 
body fat mass. 
 In spite of the smaller ratio of nicotinic to muscarinic recep-
tors, nicotine and lobeline ( Figure 7–3 ) have important effects on 
the brain stem and cortex. Activation of nicotinic receptors occurs 
at presynaptic and postsynaptic loci. Presynaptic nicotinic recep-
tors allow acetylcholine and nicotine to regulate the release of 
several neurotransmitters (glutamate, serotonin, GABA, dop-
amine, and norepinephrine). Acetylcholine regulates norepineph-
rine release via α3β4 nicotinic receptors in the hippocampus and 
inhibits acetylcholine release from neurons in the hippocampus 
and cortex. The α4β2 oligomer is the most abundant nicotinic 
receptor in the brain. Chronic exposure to nicotine has a dual 
effect at nicotinic receptors: activation (depolarization) followed 
by desensitization. The former effect is associated with greater 
release of dopamine in the mesolimbic system. This effect is 
thought to contribute to the mild alerting action and the addictive 
property of nicotine absorbed from tobacco. When the β 2 sub-
units are deleted in reconstitution experiments, acetylcholine 
binding is reduced, as is the release of dopamine. The later desen-
sitization of the nicotinic receptor is accompanied by increased 
high-affinity agonist binding and an upregulation of nicotinic 
binding sites, especially those of the α4β2 oligomer. Sustained 
desensitization may contribute to the benefits of nicotine replace-
ment therapy in smoking cessation regimens. In high concentra-
tions, nicotine induces tremor, emesis, and stimulation of the 
respiratory center. At still higher levels, nicotine causes convul-
sions, which may terminate in fatal coma. The lethal effects on the 
central nervous system and the fact that nicotine is readily 
absorbed form the basis for the use of nicotine as an insecticide. 
 8. Peripheral nervous system— Autonomic ganglia are 
important sites of nicotinic synaptic action. The nicotinic agents 
shown in  Figure 7–3 cause marked activation of these nicotinic 
receptors and initiate action potentials in postganglionic neurons 
(see  Figure 6–8 ). Nicotine itself has a somewhat greater affinity for 
neuronal than for skeletal muscle nicotinic receptors. The action 
is the same on both parasympathetic and sympathetic ganglia. The 
initial response therefore often resembles simultaneous discharge 
of both the parasympathetic and the sympathetic nervous systems. 
In the case of the cardiovascular system, the effects of nicotine are 
chiefly sympathomimetic. Dramatic hypertension is produced by 
parenteral injection of nicotine; sympathetic tachycardia may 
alternate with a bradycardia mediated by vagal discharge. In the 
gastrointestinal and urinary tracts, the effects are largely parasym-
pathomimetic: nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and voiding of urine 
are commonly observed. Prolonged exposure may result in depo-
larizing blockade of the ganglia. 
 Neuronal nicotinic receptors are present on sensory nerve 
endings—especially afferent nerves in coronary arteries and the 
carotid and aortic bodies as well as on the glomus cells of the lat-
ter. Activation of these receptors by nicotinic stimulants and of 
muscarinic receptors on glomus cells by muscarinic stimulants 
elicits complex medullary responses, including respiratory altera-
tions and vagal discharge. 
 9. Neuromuscular junction— The nicotinic receptors on the 
neuromuscular end plate apparatus are similar but not identical 
to the receptors in the autonomic ganglia ( Table 7–1 ). Both types 
respond to acetylcholine and nicotine. (However, as noted in 
 Chapter 8 , the receptors differ in their structural requirements for 
nicotinic blocking drugs.) When a nicotinic agonist is applied 
directly (by iontophoresis or by intra-arterial injection), an 
immediate depolarization of the end plate results, caused by an 
increase in permeability to sodium and potassium ions ( Figure 
7–4 ). The contractile response varies from disorganized fascicula-
tions of independent motor units to a strong contraction of the 
entire muscle depending on the synchronization of depolariza-
tion of end plates throughout the muscle. Depolarizing nicotinic 
agents that are not rapidly hydrolyzed (like nicotine itself) cause 
rapid development of depolarization blockade; transmission 
CHAPTER 7 Cholinoceptor-Activating & Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs    105
blockade persists even when the membrane has repolarized (dis-
cussed further in Chapters 8 and 27). This latter phase of block 
is manifested as flaccid paralysis in the case of skeletal muscle. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE INDIRECTACTING 
CHOLINOMIMETICS 
 The actions of acetylcholine released from autonomic and somatic 
motor nerves are terminated by enzymatic hydrolysis of the mol-
ecule. Hydrolysis is accomplished by the action of acetylcholinest-
erase, which is present in high concentrations in cholinergic 
synapses. The indirect-acting cholinomimetics have their primary 
effect at the active site of this enzyme, although some also have 
direct actions at nicotinic receptors. The chief differences between 
members of the group are chemical and pharmacokinetic—their 
pharmacodynamic properties are almost identical. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Structure  
There are three chemical groups of cholinesterase inhibitors: 
(1) simple alcohols bearing a quaternary ammonium group, eg, 
edrophonium; (2) carbamic acid esters of alcohols having quater-
nary or tertiary ammonium groups (carbamates, eg, neostigmine); 
and (3) organic derivatives of phosphoric acid (organophosphates, 
eg, echothiophate). Examples of the first two groups are shown in 
 Figure 7–6 . Edrophonium, neostigmine, and pyridostigmine are 
synthetic quaternary ammonium agents used in medicine. 
Physostigmine (eserine) is a naturally occurring tertiary amine of 
greater lipid solubility that is also used in therapeutics. Carbaryl 
(carbaril) is typical of a large group of carbamate insecticides 
designed for very high lipid solubility, so that absorption into the 
insect and distribution to its central nervous system are very rapid. 
 A few of the estimated 50,000 organophosphates are shown in 
 Figure 7–7 . Many of the organophosphates (echothiophate is an 
exception) are highly lipid-soluble liquids. Echothiophate, a thio-
choline derivative, is of clinical value because it retains the very 
long duration of action of other organophosphates but is more 
stable in aqueous solution. Soman is an extremely potent “nerve 
gas.” Parathion and malathion are thiophosphate (sulfur-containing 
phosphate) prodrugs that are inactive as such; they are converted 
to the phosphate derivatives in animals and plants and are used as 
insecticides. 
 B. Absorption, Distribution, and Metabolism 
 
Absorption of the quaternary carbamates from the conjunctiva, skin, 
gut and lungs is predictably poor, since their permanent charge ren-
ders them relatively insoluble in lipids. Thus, much larger doses are 
required for oral administration than for parenteral injection. 
Distribution into the central nervous system is negligible. 
Physostigmine, in contrast, is well absorbed from all sites and can be 
used topically in the eye ( Table 7–4 ). It is distributed into the central 
nervous system and is more toxic than the more polar quaternary 
carbamates. The carbamates are relatively stable in aqueous solution 
but can be metabolized by nonspecific esterases in the body as well 
as by cholinesterase. However, the duration of their effect is deter-
mined chiefly by the stability of the inhibitor-enzyme complex (see 
Mechanism of Action, below), not by metabolism or excretion. 
 The organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitors (except for 
echothiophate) are well absorbed from the skin, lung, gut, and 
+N
+N
N
C
O
[2]
[1]
Neostigmine
NH
C
O
H
N
C
O
O
N
N
Physostigmine
HO
Carbaryl
Edrophonium
O
O
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
C2H5
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
 FIGURE 7–6  Cholinesterase inhibitors. Neostigmine exemplifies the typical ester composed of carbamic acid ([1]) and a phenol bearing a 
quaternary ammonium group ([2]). Physostigmine, a naturally occurring carbamate, is a tertiary amine. Edrophonium is not an ester but binds 
to the active site of the enzyme. Carbaryl is used as an insecticide. 
106    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
conjunctiva—thereby making them dangerous to humans and 
highly effective as insecticides. They are relatively less stable than the 
carbamates when dissolved in water and thus have a limited half-life 
in the environment (compared with another major class of insecti-
cides, the halogenated hydrocarbons, eg, DDT). Echothiophate is 
highly polar and more stable than most other organophosphates. 
When prepared in aqueous solution for ophthalmic use, it retains 
activity for weeks. 
 The thiophosphate insecticides (parathion, malathion, and 
related compounds) are quite lipid-soluble and are rapidly 
absorbed by all routes. They must be activated in the body by 
conversion to the oxygen analogs ( Figure 7–7 ), a process that 
occurs rapidly in both insects and vertebrates. Malathion and a 
few other organophosphate insecticides are also rapidly metabo-
lized by other pathways to inactive products in birds and mam-
mals but not in insects; these agents are therefore considered safe 
enough for sale to the general public. Unfortunately, fish cannot 
detoxify malathion, and significant numbers of fish have died 
from the heavy use of this agent on and near waterways. Parathion 
is not detoxified effectively in vertebrates; thus, it is considerably 
more dangerous than malathion to humans and livestock and is 
not available for general public use in the USA. 
 All the organophosphates except echothiophate are distributed 
to all parts of the body, including the central nervous system. 
Therefore, central nervous system toxicity is an important compo-
nent of poisoning with these agents. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 
Acetylcholinesterase is the primary target of these drugs, but 
butyrylcholinesterase is also inhibited. Acetylcholinesterase is an 
extremely active enzyme. In the initial catalytic step, acetylcholine 
binds to the enzyme’s active site and is hydrolyzed, yielding free 
choline and the acetylated enzyme. In the second step, the cova-
lent acetyl-enzyme bond is split, with the addition of water 
(hydration). The entire process occurs in approximately 150 
microseconds. 
 All the cholinesterase inhibitors increase the concentration of 
endogenous acetylcholine at cholinoceptors by inhibiting acetyl-
cholinesterase. However, the molecular details of their interaction 
with the enzyme vary according to the three chemical subgroups 
mentioned above. 
O
P
O
O
S
NO2
Parathion
O
P
O
O
O
Paraoxon
S
P
O
H3C
H3C
O
S
C
CH
O
C2H5
O
C
CH2
O
C2H5
O
S
P
O
Malathion
Malaoxon
S
P
O
H5C2
H5C2
H5C2
H5C2
O
O
N
+
CH2
CH2
Echothiophate
F
P
O
CH
H3C
O
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Soman
C
 FIGURE 7–7  Structures of some organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitors. The dashed lines indicate the bond that is hydrolyzed in 
binding to the enzyme. The shaded ester bonds in malathion represent the points of detoxification of the molecule in mammals and birds. 
TABLE 7–4  Therapeutic uses and durations of action 
of cholinesterase inhibitors.
Uses
Approximate Duration 
of Action
Alcohols
 Edrophonium
Myasthenia gravis, 
ileus, arrhythmias
5–15 minutes
Carbamates and related agents
 Neostigmine
Myasthenia gravis, 
ileus
0.5–2 hours
 Pyridostigmine
Myasthenia gravis
3–6 hours
 Physostigmine
Glaucoma
0.5–2 hours
 Ambenonium
Myasthenia gravis
4–8 hours
 Demecarium
Glaucoma
4–6 hours
Organophosphates
 Echothiophate
Glaucoma
100 hours
CHAPTER 7 Cholinoceptor-Activating & Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs    107
 The first group, of which edrophonium is the example, consists 
of quaternary alcohols. These agents reversibly bind electrostatically 
and by hydrogen bonds to the active site, thus preventing access of 
acetylcholine. The enzyme-inhibitor complex does not involve a 
covalent bond and is correspondingly short-lived (on the order of 
2–10 minutes). The second group consists of carbamate esters, eg, 
neostigmine and physostigmine. These agents undergo a two-step 
hydrolysis sequence analogous to that described for acetylcholine. 
However, the covalent bond of the  carbamoylated enzyme is consid-
erably more resistant to the second (hydration) process, and this 
step is correspondingly prolonged (on the order of 30 minutes to 
6 hours). The third group consists of the organophosphates. These 
agents also undergo initial binding and hydrolysis by the enzyme, 
resulting in a  phosphorylated active site. The covalent phosphorus-
enzyme bond is extremely stable and hydrolyzes in water at a very 
slow rate (hundreds of hours). After the initial binding-hydrolysis 
step, the phosphorylated enzyme complex may undergo a process 
called  aging. This process apparently involves the breaking of one 
of the oxygen-phosphorus bonds of the inhibitor and further 
strengthens the phosphorus-enzyme bond. The rate of aging varies 
with the particular organophosphate compound. For example, 
aging occurs within 10 minutes with the chemical warfare agent 
soman, but as much as 48 hours later with the drug VX. If given 
before aging has occurred, strong nucleophiles like pralidoxime are 
able to break the phosphorus-enzyme bond and can be used as 
“cholinesterase regenerator” drugs for organophosphate insecticide 
poisoning (see  Chapter 8 ). Once aging has occurred, the enzyme-
inhibitor complex is even more stable and is more difficult to break, 
even with oxime regenerator compounds. 
 The organophosphate inhibitors are sometimes referred to as 
“irreversible” cholinesterase inhibitors, and edrophonium and the 
carbamates are considered “reversible” inhibitors because of the 
marked differences in duration of action. However, the molecular 
mechanisms of action of the three groups do not support this 
simplistic description. 
 B. Organ System Effects  
The most prominent pharmacologic effects of cholinesterase 
inhibitors are on the cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems, 
the eye, and the skeletal muscle neuromuscular junction (as 
described in the Case Study). Because the primary action is to 
amplify the actions of endogenous acetylcholine, the effects are 
similar (but not always identical) to the effects of the direct-acting 
cholinomimetic agonists. 
 1. Central nervous system— In low concentrations, the lipid-
soluble cholinesterase inhibitors cause diffuse activation on the 
electroencephalogram and a subjective alerting response. In higher 
concentrations, they cause generalized convulsions, which may be 
followed by coma and respiratory arrest. 
 2. Eye, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, urinary 
tract— The effects of the cholinesterase inhibitors on these organ 
systems, all of which are well innervated by the parasympathetic 
nervous system, are qualitatively quite similar to the effects of the 
direct-acting cholinomimetics ( Table 7–3 ). 
 3. Cardiovascular system— The cholinesterase inhibitors can 
increase activity in both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia 
supplying the heart and at the acetylcholine receptors on neuro-
effector cells (cardiac and vascular smooth muscles) that receive 
cholinergic innervation. 
 In the heart, the effects on the parasympathetic limb predomi-
nate. Thus, cholinesterase inhibitors such as edrophonium, phy-
sostigmine, or neostigmine mimic the effects of vagal nerve 
activation on the heart. Negative chronotropic, dromotropic, and 
inotropic effects are produced, and cardiac output falls. The fall in 
cardiac output is attributable to bradycardia, decreased atrial con-
tractility, and some reduction in ventricular contractility. The lat-
ter effect occurs as a result of prejunctional inhibition of 
norepinephrine release as well as inhibition of postjunctional cel-
lular sympathetic effects. 
 Cholinesterase inhibitors have minimal effects by direct action 
on vascular smooth muscle because most vascular beds lack cho-
linergic innervation (coronary vasculature is an exception). At 
moderate doses, cholinesterase inhibitors cause an increase in sys-
temic vascular resistance and blood pressure that is initiated at 
sympathetic ganglia in the case of quaternary nitrogen compounds 
and also at central sympathetic centers in the case of lipid-soluble 
agents. Atropine, acting in the central and peripheral nervous 
systems, can prevent the increase of blood pressure and the 
increased plasma norepinephrine. 
 The  net cardiovascular effects of moderate doses of cholinest-
erase inhibitors therefore consist of modest bradycardia, a fall in 
cardiac output, and an increased vascular resistance that results in 
a rise in blood pressure. (Thus, in patients with Alzheimer’s disease 
who have hypertension, treatment with cholinesterase inhibitors 
requires that blood pressure be monitored to adjust antihyperten-
sive therapy.) At high (toxic) doses of cholinesterase inhibitors, 
marked bradycardia occurs, cardiac output decreases significantly, 
and hypotension supervenes. 
 4. Neuromuscular junction— The cholinesterase inhibitors 
have important therapeutic and toxic effects at the skeletal muscle 
neuromuscular junction. Low (therapeutic) concentrations mod-
erately prolong and intensify the actions of physiologically released 
acetylcholine. This increases the strength of contraction, especially 
in muscles weakened by curare-like neuromuscular blocking 
agents or by myasthenia gravis. At higher concentrations, the 
accumulation of acetylcholine may result in fibrillation of muscle 
fibers. Antidromic firing of the motor neuron may also occur, 
resulting in fasciculations that involve an entire motor unit. With 
marked inhibition of acetylcholinesterase, depolarizing neuromus-
cular blockade occurs and that may be followed by a phase 
of nondepolarizing blockade as seen with succinylcholine (see 
 Table 27–2 and  Figure 27–7 ). 
 Some quaternary carbamate cholinesterase inhibitors, eg, neo-
stigmine, have an additional  direct nicotinic agonist effect at the 
neuromuscular junction. This may contribute to the effectiveness 
of these agents as therapy for myasthenia. 
108    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE CHOLINOMIMETICS 
 The major therapeutic uses of the cholinomimetics are to treat 
diseases of the eye (glaucoma, accommodative esotropia), the gas-
trointestinal and urinary tracts (postoperative atony, neurogenic 
bladder), and the neuromuscular junction (myasthenia gravis, 
curare-induced neuromuscular paralysis), and to treat patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease. Cholinesterase inhibitors are occasion-
ally used in the treatment of atropine overdosage and, very rarely, 
in the therapy of certain atrial arrhythmias. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. The Eye 
 
Glaucoma is a disease characterized by increased intraocular pres-
sure. Muscarinic stimulants and cholinesterase inhibitors reduce 
intraocular pressure by causing contraction of the ciliary body so as 
to facilitate outflow of aqueous humor and perhaps also by dimin-
ishing the rate of its secretion (see  Figure 6–9 ). In the past, glau-
coma was treated with either direct agonists (pilocarpine, 
methacholine, carbachol) or cholinesterase inhibitors (physostig-
mine, demecarium, echothiophate, isoflurophate). For chronic 
glaucoma, these drugs have been largely replaced by topical 
β blockers and prostaglandin derivatives. 
 Acute angle-closure glaucoma is a medical emergency that is 
frequently treated initially with drugs but usually requires surgery 
for permanent correction. Initial therapy often consists of a com-
bination of a direct muscarinic agonist and a cholinesterase 
inhibitor (eg, pilocarpine plus physostigmine) as well as other 
drugs. Once the intraocular pressure is controlled and the danger 
of vision loss is diminished, the patient can be prepared for correc-
tive surgery (iridectomy). Open-angle glaucoma and some cases of 
secondary glaucoma are chronic diseases that are not amenable to 
traditional surgical correction, although newer laser techniques 
appear to be useful. Other treatments for glaucoma are described 
in the Box, Treatment of Glaucoma in  Chapter 10 . 
 Accommodative esotropia (strabismus caused by hyperme-
tropic accommodative error) in young children is sometimes 
diagnosed and treated with cholinomimetic agonists. Dosage is 
similar to or higher than that used for glaucoma. 
 B. Gastrointestinal and Urinary Tracts 
 
In clinical disorders that involve depression of smooth muscle 
activity without obstruction, cholinomimetic drugs with direct or 
indirect muscarinic effects may be helpful. These disorders include 
postoperative ileus (atony or paralysis of the stomach or bowel 
following surgical manipulation) and congenital megacolon. 
Urinary retention may occur postoperatively or postpartum or 
may be secondary to spinal cord injury or disease (neurogenic 
bladder). Cholinomimetics are also sometimes used to increase the 
tone of the lower esophageal sphincter in patients with reflux 
esophagitis. Of the choline esters, bethanechol is the most widely 
used for these disorders. For gastrointestinal problems, it is usually 
administered orally in a dose of 10–25 mg three or four times 
daily. In patients with urinary retention, bethanechol can be given 
subcutaneously in a dose of 5 mg and repeated in 30 minutes if 
necessary. Of the cholinesterase inhibitors, neostigmine is the 
most widely used for these applications. For paralytic ileus or 
atony of the urinary bladder, neostigmine can be given subcutane-
ously in a dose of 0.5–1 mg. If patients are able to take the drug 
by mouth, neostigmine can be given orally in a dose of 15 mg. In 
all of these situations, the clinician must be certain that there is no 
mechanical obstruction to outflow before using the cholinomi-
metic. Otherwise, the drug may exacerbate the problem and may 
even cause perforation as a result of increased pressure. 
 Pilocarpine has long been used to increase salivary secretion. 
Cevimeline, a quinuclidine derivative of acetylcholine, is a new 
direct-acting muscarinic agonist used for the treatment of dry 
mouth associated with Sjögren’s syndrome and that caused by 
radiation damage of the salivary glands. 
 C. Neuromuscular Junction 
 
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease affecting skeletal 
muscle neuromuscular junctions. In this disease, antibodies are 
produced against the main immunogenic region found on α1 
subunits of the nicotinic receptor-channel complex. Antibodies 
are detected in 85% of myasthenic patients. The antibodies reduce 
nicotinic receptor function by (1) cross-linking receptors, a pro-
cess that stimulates their internalization and degradation; (2) caus-
ing lysis of the postsynaptic membrane; and (3) binding to the 
nicotinic receptor and inhibiting function. Frequent findings are 
ptosis, diplopia, difficulty in speaking and swallowing, and 
extremity weakness. Severe disease may affect all the muscles, 
including those necessary for respiration. The disease resembles 
the neuromuscular paralysis produced by  d -tubocurarine and 
similar nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs (see 
 Chapter 27 ). Patients with myasthenia are exquisitely sensitive to 
the action of curariform drugs and other drugs that interfere with 
neuromuscular transmission, eg, aminoglycoside antibiotics. 
 Cholinesterase inhibitors—but not direct-acting acetylcholine 
receptor agonists—are extremely valuable as therapy for myasthe-
nia. Patients with ocular myasthenia may be treated with cholin-
esterase inhibitors alone ( Figure 7–4 B). Patients having more 
widespread muscle weakness are also treated with immunosup-
pressant drugs (steroids, cyclosporine, and azathioprine). In some 
patients, the thymus gland is removed; very severely affected 
patients may benefit from administration of immunoglobulins 
and from plasmapheresis. 
 Edrophonium is sometimes used as a diagnostic test for myasthe-
nia. A 2 mg dose is injected intravenously after baseline muscle 
strength has been measured. If no reaction occurs after 45 seconds, 
an additional 8 mg may be injected. If the patient has myasthenia 
gravis, an improvement in muscle strength that lasts about 5 minutes 
can usually be observed. 
 Clinical situations in which severe myasthenia (myasthenic 
crisis) must be distinguished from excessive drug therapy (cholin-
ergic crisis) usually occur in very ill myasthenic patients and must 
be managed in hospital with adequate emergency support systems 
(eg, mechanical ventilators) available. Edrophonium can be used 
to assess the adequacy of treatment with the longer-acting 
CHAPTER 7 Cholinoceptor-Activating & Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs    109
cholinesterase inhibitors usually prescribed in patients with myas-
thenia gravis. If excessive amounts of cholinesterase inhibitor have 
been used, patients may become paradoxically weak because of 
nicotinic depolarizing blockade of the motor end plate. These 
patients may also exhibit symptoms of excessive stimulation of 
muscarinic receptors (abdominal cramps, diarrhea, increased sali-
vation, excessive bronchial secretions, miosis, bradycardia). Small 
doses of edrophonium (1–2 mg intravenously) will produce no 
relief or even worsen weakness if the patient is receiving excessive 
cholinesterase inhibitor therapy. On the other hand, if the patient 
improves with edrophonium, an increase in cholinesterase inhibi-
tor dosage may be indicated. 
 Long-term therapy for myasthenia gravis is usually accom-
plished with pyridostigmine; neostigmine or ambenonium are 
alternatives. The doses are titrated to optimum levels based on 
changes in muscle strength. These drugs are relatively short-acting 
and therefore require frequent dosing (every 6 hours for pyri-
dostigmine and ambenonium and every 4 hours for neostigmine; 
 Table 7–4 ). Sustained-release preparations are available but should 
be used only at night and if needed. Longer-acting cholinesterase 
inhibitors such as the organophosphate agents are not used, 
because the dose requirement in this disease changes too rapidly 
to permit smooth control of symptoms with long-acting drugs. 
 If muscarinic effects of such therapy are prominent, they can be 
controlled by the administration of antimuscarinic drugs such as 
atropine. Frequently, tolerance to the muscarinic effects of the cholin-
esterase inhibitors develops, so atropine treatment is not required. 
 Neuromuscular blockade is frequently produced as an adjunct to 
surgical anesthesia, using nondepolarizing neuromuscular relaxants 
such as pancuronium and newer agents (see  Chapter 27 ). After 
surgery, it is usually desirable to reverse this pharmacologic paralysis 
promptly. This can be easily accomplished with cholinesterase 
inhibitors; neostigmine and edrophonium are the drugs of choice. 
They are given intravenously or intramuscularly for prompt effect. 
 D. Heart  
The short-acting cholinesterase inhibitor edrophonium was used 
to treat supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, particularly paroxys-
mal supraventricular tachycardia. In this application, edropho-
nium has been replaced by newer drugs with different mechanisms 
(adenosine and the calcium channel blockers verapamil and dilti-
azem, see  Chapter 14 ). 
 E. Antimuscarinic Drug Intoxication 
 Atropine intoxication is potentially lethal in children (see  Chapter 8 ) 
and may cause prolonged severe behavioral disturbances and 
arrhythmias in adults. The tricyclic antidepressants, when taken in 
overdosage (often with suicidal intent), also cause severe muscar-
inic blockade (see  Chapter 30 ). The muscarinic receptor blockade 
produced by all these agents is competitive in nature and can be 
overcome by increasing the amount of endogenous acetylcholine at 
the neuroeffector junctions. Theoretically, a cholinesterase inhibi-
tor could be used to reverse these effects. Physostigmine has been 
used for this application because it enters the central nervous sys-
tem and reverses the central as well as the peripheral signs of 
muscarinic blockade. However, as described below, physostigmine 
itself can produce dangerous central nervous system effects, and 
such therapy is therefore used only in patients with dangerous 
elevation of body temperature or very rapid supraventricular 
tachycardia (see also  Chapter 58 ). 
 F. Central Nervous System 
 Tacrine is a drug with anticholinesterase and other cholinomi-
metic actions that has been used for the treatment of mild to 
moderate Alzheimer’s disease. Tacrine’s efficacy is modest, and 
hepatic toxicity is significant. Donepezil, galantamine, and 
rivastigmine are newer, more selective acetylcholinesterase inhibi-
tors that appear to have the same modest clinical benefit as tacrine 
in treatment of cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer’s patients. 
Donepezil may be given once daily because of its long half-life, 
and it lacks the hepatotoxic effect of tacrine. However, no trials 
comparing these newer drugs with tacrine have been reported. 
These drugs are discussed in  Chapter 60 . 
 Toxicity 
 The toxic potential of the cholinoceptor stimulants varies mark-
edly depending on their absorption, access to the central nervous 
system, and metabolism. 
 A. Direct-Acting Muscarinic Stimulants 
 
Drugs such as pilocarpine and the choline esters cause predictable 
signs of muscarinic excess when given in overdosage. These effects 
include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, urinary urgency, salivation, 
sweating, cutaneous vasodilation, and bronchial constriction. The 
effects are all blocked competitively by atropine and its congeners. 
 Certain mushrooms, especially those of the genus  Inocybe , 
contain muscarinic alkaloids. Ingestion of these mushrooms 
causes typical signs of muscarinic excess within 15–30 minutes. 
These effects can be very uncomfortable but are rarely fatal. 
Treatment is with atropine, 1–2 mg parenterally. ( Amanita 
muscaria, the first source of muscarine, contains very low concen-
trations of the alkaloid.) 
 B. Direct-Acting Nicotinic Stimulants 
 Nicotine itself is the only common cause of this type of poisoning. 
(Varenicline toxicity is discussed elsewhere in this chapter.) The 
acute toxicity of the alkaloid is well defined but much less impor-
tant than the chronic effects associated with smoking. In addition 
to tobacco products, nicotine is also used in insecticides. 
 1. Acute toxicity— The fatal dose of nicotine is approximately 
40 mg, or 1 drop of the pure liquid. This is the amount of nicotine 
in two regular cigarettes. Fortunately, most of the nicotine in ciga-
rettes is destroyed by burning or escapes via the “sidestream” 
smoke. Ingestion of nicotine insecticides or of tobacco by infants 
and children is usually followed by vomiting, limiting the amount 
of the alkaloid absorbed. 
 The toxic effects of a large dose of nicotine are simple extensions 
of the effects described previously. The most dangerous are (1) central 
110    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
stimulant actions, which cause convulsions and may progress to 
coma and respiratory arrest; (2) skeletal muscle end plate depolariza-
tion, which may lead to depolarization blockade and respiratory 
paralysis; and (3) hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias. 
 Treatment of acute nicotine poisoning is largely symptom-
directed. Muscarinic excess resulting from parasympathetic gan-
glion stimulation can be controlled with atropine. Central 
stimulation is usually treated with parenteral anticonvulsants such 
as diazepam. Neuromuscular blockade is not responsive to phar-
macologic treatment and may require mechanical ventilation. 
 Fortunately, nicotine is metabolized and excreted relatively 
rapidly. Patients who survive the first 4 hours usually recover com-
pletely if hypoxia and brain damage have not occurred. 
 2. Chronic nicotine toxicity— The health costs of tobacco 
smoking to the smoker and its socioeconomic costs to the general 
public are still incompletely understood. However, the 1979 
 Surgeon General’s Report on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention 
stated that “cigarette smoking is clearly the largest single prevent-
able cause of illness and premature death in the United States.” 
This statement has been supported by numerous subsequent stud-
ies. Unfortunately, the fact that the most important of the tobac-
co-associated diseases are delayed in onset reduces the health 
incentive to stop smoking. 
 Clearly, the addictive power of cigarettes is directly related to their 
nicotine content. It is not known to what extent nicotine per se 
contributes to the other well-documented adverse effects of chronic 
tobacco use. It appears highly probable that nicotine contributes to 
the increased risk of vascular disease and sudden coronary death 
associated with smoking. Also, nicotine probably contributes to the 
high incidence of ulcer recurrences in smokers with peptic ulcer. 
 There are several approaches to help patients stop smoking. One 
approach is replacement therapy with nicotine in the form of gum, 
transdermal patch, nasal spray, or inhaler. All these forms have low 
abuse potential and are effective in patients motivated to stop smok-
ing. Their action derives from slow absorption of nicotine that 
occupies α4β2 receptors in the central nervous system and reduces 
the desire to smoke and the pleasurable feelings of smoking. 
 Another quite effective agent for smoking cessation is  vareni-
cline, a synthetic drug with partial agonist action at α4β2 nicotinic 
receptors. Varenicline also has antagonist properties that persist 
because of its long half-life; this prevents the stimulant effect of nico-
tine at presynaptic α4β2 receptors that causes release of dopamine. 
However, its use is limited by nausea and insomnia and also by exac-
erbation of psychiatric illnesses, including anxiety and depression. 
Suicidal ideation has also been reported in some patients; this is cur-
rently being evaluated. The efficacy of varenicline is superior to that 
of bupropion, an antidepressant (see  Chapter 30 ). Some of bupro-
pion’s efficacy in smoking cessation therapy stems from its noncom-
petitive antagonism (see  Chapter 2 ) of nicotinic receptors where it 
displays some selectivity among neuronal subtypes. 
 C. Cholinesterase Inhibitors 
 
The acute toxic effects of the cholinesterase inhibitors, like those 
of the direct-acting agents, are direct extensions of their pharma-
cologic actions. The major source of such intoxications is pesticide 
use in agriculture and in the home. Approximately 100 organo-
phosphate and 20 carbamate cholinesterase inhibitors are available 
in pesticides and veterinary vermifuges used in the USA. 
Cholinesterase inhibitors used in agriculture can cause slowly or 
rapidly developing symptoms, as described in the Case Study, 
which persist for days. The cholinesterase inhibitors used as 
chemical warfare agents (soman, sarin, VX) induce effects rapidly 
because of the large concentrations present. 
 Acute intoxication must be recognized and treated promptly 
in patients with heavy exposure. The dominant initial signs are 
those of muscarinic excess: miosis, salivation, sweating, bronchial 
constriction, vomiting, and diarrhea. Central nervous system 
involvement (cognitive disturbances, convulsions, and coma) 
usually follows rapidly, accompanied by peripheral nicotinic 
effects, especially depolarizing neuromuscular blockade. Therapy 
always includes (1) maintenance of vital signs—respiration in 
particular may be impaired; (2) decontamination to prevent fur-
ther absorption—this may require removal of all clothing and 
washing of the skin in cases of exposure to dusts and sprays; and 
(3) atropine parenterally in large doses, given as often as required 
to control signs of muscarinic excess. Therapy often also includes 
treatment with pralidoxime, as described in  Chapter 8 , and 
administration of benzodiazepines for seizures. 
 Preventive therapy for cholinesterase inhibitors used as chem-
ical warfare agents has been developed to protect soldiers and 
civilians. Personnel are given autoinjection syringes containing a 
carbamate, pyridostigmine, and atropine. Protection is provided 
by pyridostigmine, which, by prior binding to the enzyme, 
impedes binding of organophosphate agents and thereby prevents 
prolonged inhibition of cholinesterase. The protection is limited 
to the peripheral nervous system because pyridostigmine does not 
readily enter the central nervous system. Enzyme inhibition by 
pyridostigmine dissipates within hours ( Table 7–4 ), a duration of 
time that allows clearance of the organophosphate agent from 
the body. 
 Chronic exposure to certain organophosphate compounds, 
including some organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitors, causes 
delayed neuropathy associated with demyelination of axons. 
 Triorthocresyl phosphate, an additive in lubricating oils, is the 
prototype agent of this class. The effects are not caused by cholin-
esterase inhibition but rather by neuropathy target esterase (NTE) 
inhibition whose symptoms (weakness of upper and lower extrem-
ities, unsteady gait) appear 1–2 weeks after exposure. Another 
nerve toxicity called intermediate syndrome occurs 1–4 days after 
exposure to organophosphate insecticides. This syndrome is also 
characterized by muscle weakness; its origin is not known but it 
appears to be related to cholinesterase inhibition. 
CHAPTER 7 Cholinoceptor-Activating & Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs    111
SUMMARY Drugs Used for Cholinomimetic Effects
Subclass
Mechanism 
of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
DIRECT-ACTING CHOLINE ESTERS
 • Bethanechol
Muscarinic agonist • 
negligible effect at 
nicotinic receptors
Activates M1 through M3 
receptors in all peripheral 
tissues • causes increased 
secretion, smooth muscle 
contraction (except vascular 
smooth muscle relaxes), and 
changes in heart rate
Postoperative and neuro-
genic ileus and urinary reten-
tion
Oral and parenteral, duration ∼ 30 
min • does not enter central nervous 
system (CNS) • Toxicity: Excessive 
parasympathomimetic effects, espe-
cially bronchospasm in asthmatics • 
Interactions: Additive with other 
parasympathomimetics
 • Carbachol: Nonselective muscarinic and nicotinic agonist; otherwise similar to bethanechol; used topically almost exclusively for glaucoma
DIRECT-ACTING MUSCARINIC ALKALOIDS OR SYNTHETICS
 • Pilocarpine
Like bethanechol, 
partial agonist
Like bethanechol
Glaucoma; Sjögren’s 
syndrome
Oral lozenge and topical • Toxicity & 
interactions: Like bethanechol
 • Cevimeline: Synthetic M3-selective; similar to pilocarpine
DIRECT-ACTING NICOTINIC AGONISTS
 • Nicotine
Agonist at both NN 
and NM receptors
Activates autonomic post-
ganglionic neurons (both 
sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic) and skeletal muscle 
neuromuscular end plates • 
enters CNS and activates NN 
receptors
Medical use in smoking ces-
sation • nonmedical use in 
smoking and in insecticides
Oral gum, patch for smoking cessa-
tion • Toxicity: Increased gastrointes-
tinal (GI) activity, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea acutely • increased blood 
pressure • high doses cause seizures 
• long-term GI and cardiovascular 
risk factor • Interactions: Additive 
with CNS stimulants
 • Varenicline: Selective partial agonist at α4β2 nicotinic receptors; used exclusively for smoking cessation
SHORT-ACTING CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITOR (ALCOHOL)
 • Edrophonium
Alcohol, binds 
briefly to active site 
of acetylcholinest-
erase (AChE) and 
prevents access of 
acetylcholine (ACh)
Amplifies all actions of ACh • 
increases parasympathetic 
activity and somatic neuro-
muscular transmission
Diagnosis and acute treat-
ment of myasthenia gravis
Parenteral • quaternary amine • does 
not enter CNS • Toxicity: 
Parasympathomimetic excess • 
Interactions: Additive with parasym-
pathomimetics
INTERMEDIATE-ACTING CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS (CARBAMATES)
 • Neostigmine
Forms covalent 
bond with AChE, 
but hydrolyzed and 
released
Like edrophonium, but lon-
ger-acting
Myasthenia gravis • postoper-
ative and neurogenic ileus 
and urinary retention
Oral and parenteral; quaternary 
amine, does not enter CNS. Duration 
2–4 h • Toxicity & interactions: Like 
edrophonium
 • Pyridostigmine: Like neostigmine, but longer-acting (4–6 h); used in myasthenia
 • Physostigmine: Like neostigmine, but natural alkaloid tertiary amine; enters CNS
LONG-ACTING CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS (ORGANOPHOSPHATES)
 • Echothiophate
Like neostigmine, 
but released more 
slowly
Like neostigmine, but 
longer-acting
Obsolete • was used in 
glaucoma
Topical only • Toxicity: Brow ache, 
uveitis, blurred vision
 •  Malathion: Insecticide, relatively safe for mammals and birds because metabolized by other enzymes to inactive products; some medical use as ectoparasiticide
 • Parathion, others: Insecticide, dangerous for all animals; toxicity important because of agricultural use and exposure of farm workers (see text)
 • Sarin, others: “Nerve gas,” used exclusively in warfare and terrorism
112    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
DIRECT-ACTING CHOLINOMIMETICS
Acetylcholine (Miochol-E)
Ophthalmic: 1% intraocular solution
Bethanechol (generic, Urecholine)
Oral: 5, 10, 25, 50 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for SC injection
Carbachol
Ophthalmic (topical, Isopto Carbachol, Carboptic): 0.75, 1.5, 2.25, 
3% solution
Ophthalmic (intraocular, Miostat, Carbastat): 0.01% solution
Cevimeline (Evoxac)
Oral: 30 mg capsules
Nicotine
Transdermal: 5-21 mg/day absorbed/patch
Inhalation: 0.5-4 mg/dose
Gum: 2-4 mg/dose
Pilocarpine (generic, Isopto Carpine)
Ophthalmic (topical): 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10% solutions, 4% gel
Ophthalmic sustained-release inserts (Ocusert Pilo-20, Ocusert 
Pilo-40): release 20 and 40 mcg pilocarpine per hour for 1 week, 
respectively
Oral (Salagen): 5 mg tablets
Varenicline (Chantix)
Oral: 0.5, 1 mg tablets
CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS
Ambenonium (Mytelase)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
DIRECT-ACTING CHOLINOMIMETICS
Acetylcholine (Miochol-E)
Ophthalmic: 1% intraocular solution
Bethanechol (generic, Urecholine)
Oral: 5, 10, 25, 50 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for SC injection
Carbachol
Ophthalmic (topical, Isopto Carbachol, Carboptic): 0.75, 1.5, 2.25, 
3% solution
Ophthalmic (intraocular, Miostat, Carbastat): 0.01% solution
Cevimeline (Evoxac)
Oral: 30 mg capsules
Nicotine
Transdermal: 5-21 mg/day absorbed/patch
Inhalation: 0.5-4 mg/dose
Gum: 2-4 mg/dose
Pilocarpine (generic, Isopto Carpine)
Ophthalmic (topical): 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10% solutions, 4% gel
Ophthalmic sustained-release inserts (Ocusert Pilo-20, Ocusert
Pilo-40): release 20 and 40 mcg pilocarpine per hour for 1 week, 
respectively
Oral (Salagen): 5 mg tablets
Varenicline (Chantix)
Oral: 0.5, 1 mg tablets
CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS
Ambenonium (Mytelase)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
Demecarium (Humorsol)
Ophthalmic: 0.125, 0.25% solution
Donepezil (Aricept)
Oral: 5, 10, 23 mg tablets
Echothiophate (Phospholine)
Ophthalmic: 1.5 mg powder to reconstitute for 0.03, 0.06, 0.125% 
solution
Edrophonium (generic, Tensilon)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IM or IV injection
Galantamine (Reminyl, Razadyne)
Oral: 4, 8, 12 mg tablets; 8, 16, 24 mg extended-release capsules; 
4 mg/mL solution
Neostigmine (generic, Prostigmin)
Oral: 15 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2.5 mg/mL solution
Physostigmine (generic, Eserine)
Ophthalmic: 0.25% ointment; 0.25, 0.5% solution
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for IM or slow IV injection
Pyridostigmine (Mestinon, Regonol)
Oral: 30, 60 mg tablets; 180 mg sustained-release tablets; 12 mg/mL
syrup
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IM or slow IV injection
Rivastigmine (Exelon)
Oral: 1.5, 3, 4.5, 6 mg tablets; 2 mg/mL solution; transdermal 
patch 4.6 or 9.5 mg/24 h
Tacrine (Cognex)
Oral: 10, 20, 30, 40 mg tablets
 REFERENCES 
 Aaron CK: Organophosphates and carbamates. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, 
Burns MJ (editors):  Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of 
Poisoning and Drug Overdose , 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
2007:1171. 
 Benowitz N: Nicotine addiction. N Engl J Med 2010;362:2295. 
 Celie PH et al: Nicotine and carbamylcholine binding to nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors as studied in AChBP crystal structures. Neuron 2004;41:907. 
 Chen L: In pursuit of the high-resolution structure of nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors. J Physiol 2004;588:557. 
 Conti-Fine B, Milani M, Kaminski HJ: Myasthenia gravis: past, present, and 
future. J Clin Invest 2006;116:2843. 
 Ehlert FJ: Contractile role of M2 and M3 muscarinic receptors in gastrointestinal, 
airway and urinary bladder smooth muscle. Life Sci 2003;74:355. 
 Gerthoffer WT: Signal-transduction pathways that regulate visceral smooth muscle 
function. III. Coupling of muscarinic receptors to signaling kinases and 
effector proteins in gastrointestinal smooth muscles. Am J Physiol 
2005;288:G849. 
 Giacobini E (editor):  Cholinesterases and Cholinesterase Inhibitors . London: Martin 
Dunitz, 2000. 
 Harvey RD, Belevych AE: Muscarinic regulation of cardiac ion channels. Br J 
Pharmacol 2003;139:1074. 
 Hern JA et al: Formation and dissociation of M 1 muscarinic receptor dimers seen 
by total internal reflection fluorescence imaging of single molecules. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:2693. 
 Lamping KG et al: Muscarinic (M) receptors in coronary circulation. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol 2004;24:1253. 
 Lazartigues E et al: Spontaneously hypertensive rats cholinergic hyper-responsiveness: 
Central and peripheral pharmacological mechanisms. Br J Pharmacol 
1999;127:1657. 
 Matsui M et al: Increased relaxant action of forskolin and isoproterenol against 
muscarinic agonist-induced contractions in smooth muscle from M 2 recep-
tor knockout mice. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2003;305:106. 
 Mavragani CP, Moutsopoulos HM: Conventional therapy of Sjögren’s syndrome. 
Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 2007;32:284. 
 Millar NS: Assembly and subunit diversity of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. 
Biochem Soc Trans 2003;31:869. 
 Molitor H: A comparative study of the effects of five choline compounds used in 
therapeutics: Acetylcholine chloride, acetyl-beta-methylcholine chloride, 
carbaminoyl choline, ethyl ether beta-methylcholine chloride, carbaminoyl 
beta-methylcholine chloride. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1936;58:337. 
 Okamoto H et al: Muscarinic agonist potencies at three different effector systems 
linked to the M(2) or M(3) receptor in longitudinal smooth muscle of 
guinea-pig small intestine. Br J Pharmacol 2002;135:1765. 
 Picciotto MR et al: It is not “either/or”: Activation and desensitization of nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors both contribute to behaviors related to nicotine 
addiction and mood. Prog Neurobiol 2008;84:329. 
 The Surgeon General:  Smoking and Health . US Department of Health and Human 
Services, 1979. 
 Wess J et al: Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors: Mutant mice provide new insights 
for drug development. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2007;6:721. 
CHAPTER 7 Cholinoceptor-Activating & Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Drugs    113
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient’s presentation is characteristic of poisoning by 
organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitors. Ask the coworker 
if he can identify the agent used. Decontaminate the patient 
by removal of clothing and washing affected areas. Ensure an 
open airway and ventilate with oxygen. For muscarinic 
excess, administer atropine (0.5–5 mg) intravenously until 
signs of muscarinic excess (dyspnea, lacrimation, confu-
sion) subside. To treat nicotinic excess, infuse 2-PAM 
(initially a 1–2% solution in 15–30 minutes) followed by 
infusion of 1% solution (200–500 mg/h) until muscle fas-
ciculations cease. If needed, decontaminate the coworker 
and isolate all contaminated clothing.
This page intentionally left blank 
115
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Cholinoceptor antagonists, like agonists, are divided into mus-
carinic and nicotinic subgroups on the basis of their specific 
receptor affinities. Ganglion blockers and neuromuscular junc-
tion blockers make up the antinicotinic drugs. The ganglion-
blocking drugs have little clinical use and are discussed at the 
end of this chapter. Neuromuscular blockers are discussed in 
 Chapter 27 . This chapter emphasizes drugs that block muscar-
inic cholinoceptors. 
 Five subtypes of muscarinic receptors have been identified, 
primarily on the basis of data from ligand-binding and cDNA-
cloning experiments (see  Chapters 6 and  7 ). A standard terminol-
ogy (M 1 through M 5 ) for these subtypes is now in common use, 
and evidence—based mostly on selective agonists and antagonists—
indicates that functional differences exist between several of these 
subtypes. 
 The M 1 receptor subtype is located on central nervous system 
(CNS) neurons, sympathetic postganglionic cell bodies, and 
many presynaptic sites. M 2 receptors are located in the myocar-
dium, smooth muscle organs, and some neuronal sites. M 3 recep-
tors are most common on effector cell membranes, especially 
glandular and smooth muscle cells. M 4 and M 5 receptors are less 
prominent and appear to play a greater role in the CNS than in 
the periphery. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE MUSCARINIC RECEPTOR
BLOCKING DRUGS 
 Muscarinic antagonists are sometimes called parasympatholytic 
because they block the effects of parasympathetic autonomic dis-
charge. However, they do not “lyse” parasympathetic nerves, and 
they have some effects that are not predictable from block of the 
parasympathetic nervous system. For these reasons, the term “anti-
muscarinic” is preferable. 
 Naturally occurring compounds with antimuscarinic effects 
have been known and used for millennia as medicines, poisons, 
and cosmetics.  Atropine is the prototype of these drugs. Many 
similar plant alkaloids are known, and hundreds of synthetic anti-
muscarinic compounds have been prepared. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Source and Chemistry 
 
Atropine and its naturally occurring congeners are tertiary amine 
alkaloid esters of tropic acid ( Figure 8–1 ). Atropine (hyoscyamine) 
is found in the plant  Atropa belladonna , or deadly nightshade, and 
C A S E  S T U D Y
8
Cholinoceptor-
Blocking Drugs
 Achilles J. Pappano, PhD 
JH, a 63-year-old architect, complains of urinary symptoms 
to his family physician. He has hypertension, and during 
the last 8 years, he has been adequately managed with a 
thiazide diuretic and an angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor. During the same period, JH developed the signs 
of benign prostatic hypertrophy, which eventually required 
prostatectomy to relieve symptoms. He now complains that 
he has an increased urge to urinate as well as urinary fre-
quency, and this has disrupted the pattern of his daily life. 
What do you suspect is the cause of JH’s problem? What 
information would you gather to confirm your diagnosis? 
What treatment steps would you initiate?
116    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
in  Datura stramonium , also known as jimson-weed (Jamestown 
weed), sacred Datura, or thorn apple.  Scopolamine (hyoscine) 
occurs in  Hyoscyamus niger , or henbane, as the  l (−) stereoisomer. 
Naturally occurring atropine is  l (−)-hyoscyamine, but the com-
pound readily racemizes, so the commercial material is racemic 
 d,l -hyoscyamine. The  l (−) isomers of both alkaloids are at least 
100 times more potent than the  d (+) isomers. 
 A variety of semisynthetic and fully synthetic molecules have anti-
muscarinic effects. The tertiary members of these classes ( Figure 8–2 ) 
are often used for their effects on the eye or the CNS. Many anti-
histaminic (see  Chapter 16 ), antipsychotic (see  Chapter 29 ), and 
antidepressant (see  Chapter 30 ) drugs have similar structures and, 
predictably, significant antimuscarinic effects. 
 Quaternary amine antimuscarinic agents ( Figure 8–2 ) have 
been developed to produce more peripheral effects and reduced 
CNS effects. 
 B. Absorption 
 
Natural alkaloids and most tertiary antimuscarinic drugs are well 
absorbed from the gut and conjunctival membranes. When 
applied in a suitable vehicle, some (eg, scopolamine) are even 
absorbed across the skin (transdermal route). In contrast, only 
10–30% of a dose of a quaternary antimuscarinic drug is absorbed 
after oral administration, reflecting the decreased lipid solubility 
of the charged molecule. 
 C. Distribution 
 Atropine and the other tertiary agents are widely distributed in the 
body. Significant levels are achieved in the CNS within 30 min-
utes to 1 hour, and this can limit the dose tolerated when the drug 
is taken for its peripheral effects. Scopolamine is rapidly and fully 
distributed into the CNS where it has greater effects than most 
other antimuscarinic drugs. In contrast, the quaternary derivatives 
are poorly taken up by the brain and therefore are relatively 
free—at low doses—of CNS effects. 
 D. Metabolism and Excretion 
 
After administration, the elimination of atropine from the blood 
occurs in two phases: the  t ½ of the rapid phase is 2 hours and that 
of the slow phase is approximately 13 hours. About 50% of the dose 
is excreted unchanged in the urine. Most of the rest appears in the 
urine as hydrolysis and conjugation products. The drug’s effect on 
parasympathetic function declines rapidly in all organs except the 
eye. Effects on the iris and ciliary muscle persist for ≥ 72 hours. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Atropine causes reversible (surmountable) blockade (see  Chapter 2 ) 
of cholinomimetic actions at muscarinic receptors; that is, block-
ade by a small dose of atropine can be overcome by a larger con-
centration of acetylcholine or equivalent muscarinic agonist. 
Mutation experiments suggest that aspartate in the third trans-
membrane segment of the heptahelical receptor forms an ionic 
bond with the nitrogen atom of acetylcholine; this amino acid is 
also required for binding of antimuscarinic drugs. When atropine 
binds to the muscarinic receptor, it prevents actions such as the 
release of inositol trisphosphate (IP 3 ) and the inhibition of adeny-
lyl cyclase that are caused by muscarinic agonists (see  Chapter 7 ). 
Muscarinic antagonists were traditionally viewed as neutral com-
pounds that occupied the receptor and prevented agonist binding. 
Recent evidence indicates that muscarinic receptors are constitu-
tively active, and most drugs that block the actions of acetylcho-
line are inverse agonists (see  Chapter 1 ) that shift the equilibrium 
to the inactive state of the receptor. Muscarinic blocking drugs 
that are inverse agonists include atropine, pirenzepine, trihexy-
phenidyl, AF-DX 116, 4-DAMP, ipratropium, glycopyrrolate, 
and a methyl derivative of scopolamine ( Table 8–1 ). 
 The effectiveness of antimuscarinic drugs varies with the tissue 
and with the source of agonist. Tissues most sensitive to atropine are 
the salivary, bronchial, and sweat glands. Secretion of acid by the 
gastric parietal cells is the least sensitive. In most tissues, antimusca-
rinic agents block exogenously administered cholinoceptor agonists 
more effectively than endogenously released acetylcholine. 
 Atropine is highly selective for muscarinic receptors. Its 
potency at nicotinic receptors is much lower, and actions at non-
muscarinic receptors are generally undetectable clinically. 
 Atropine does not distinguish among the M 1 , M 2 , and M 3 
subgroups of muscarinic receptors. In contrast, other antimuscar-
inic drugs are moderately selective for one or another of these 
subgroups ( Table 8–1 ). Most synthetic antimuscarinic drugs are 
considerably less selective than atropine in interactions with non-
muscarinic receptors. For example, some quaternary amine anti-
muscarinic agents have significant ganglion-blocking actions, and 
others are potent histamine receptor blockers. The antimuscarinic 
effects of other agents, eg, antipsychotic and antidepressant drugs, 
have been mentioned. Their relative selectivity for muscarinic 
receptor subtypes has not been defined. 
 B. Organ System Effects 
1.  Central nervous system— In the doses usually used, atropine 
has minimal stimulant effects on the CNS, especially the parasympa-
thetic medullary centers, and a slower, longer-lasting sedative effect on 
the brain. Scopolamine has more marked central effects, producing 
Tropic acid
Base
C
H
HOCH2
O
C
CH3
N
O
O
[1]
[2]
 FIGURE 8–1  The structure of atropine (oxygen [red] at  [1] is 
missing) or scopolamine (oxygen present). In homatropine, the 
hydroxymethyl at  [2] is replaced by a hydroxyl group, and the oxygen 
at  [1] is absent. 
CHAPTER 8 Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs    117
Propantheline
Quaternary amines for gastrointestinal applications (peptic disease, hypermotility):
Glycopyrrolate
Tertiary amines for peripheral applications:
Pirenzepine
(peptic disease)
S
S
Tropicamide
(mydriatric, cycloplegic)
Quaternary amine for use in asthma:
C
C
O
O
O
N
+
Tiotropium
CH
O
Tertiary amine for Parkinson’s disease:
Benztropine
CH3
CH3
OH
H
CH3
O
H
O
+
C
C
O
O
OH
+
O
C3H7
H3C
CH3
CH2
CH2
C3H7
N
CH3
C
C
O
O
Dicyclomine
(peptic disease, hypermotility)
N
O
N
CH
O
C
N
N
N
N
N
C2H5
C2H5
COCH2CH2N
CH2OH
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
N
N
 FIGURE 8–2  Structures of some semisynthetic and synthetic antimuscarinic drugs. 
118    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
drowsiness when given in recommended dosages and amnesia in sensi-
tive individuals. In toxic doses, scopolamine, and to a lesser degree 
atropine, can cause excitement, agitation, hallucinations, and coma. 
 The tremor of Parkinson’s disease is reduced by centrally acting 
antimuscarinic drugs, and atropine—in the form of belladonna 
extract—was one of the first drugs used in the therapy of this dis-
ease. As discussed in  Chapter 28 , parkinsonian tremor and rigidity 
seem to result from a  relative excess of cholinergic activity because 
of a deficiency of dopaminergic activity in the basal ganglia-stria-
tum system. The combination of an antimuscarinic agent with a 
dopamine precursor drug (levodopa) can sometimes provide more 
effective therapy than either drug alone. 
 Vestibular disturbances, especially motion sickness, appear to 
involve muscarinic cholinergic transmission. Scopolamine is often 
effective in preventing or reversing these disturbances. 
2.  Eye— The pupillary constrictor muscle (see Figure 6–9) depends 
on muscarinic cholinoceptor activation. This activation is blocked by 
topical atropine and other tertiary antimuscarinic drugs and results in 
unopposed sympathetic dilator activity and  mydriasis ( Figure 8–3 ). 
Dilated pupils were considered cosmetically desirable during the 
Renaissance and account for the name belladonna (Italian, “beauti-
ful lady”) applied to the plant and its active extract because of the 
use of the extract as eye drops during that time. 
 The second important ocular effect of antimuscarinic drugs is 
to weaken contraction of the ciliary muscle, or  cycloplegia. 
Cycloplegia results in loss of the ability to accommodate; the fully 
atropinized eye cannot focus for near vision ( Figure 8–3 ). 
 Both mydriasis and cycloplegia are useful in ophthalmology. 
They are also potentially hazardous, since acute glaucoma may be 
induced in patients with a narrow anterior chamber angle. 
 A third ocular effect of antimuscarinic drugs is to reduce lacri-
mal secretion. Patients occasionally complain of dry or “sandy” 
eyes when receiving large doses of antimuscarinic drugs. 
3.  Cardiovascular system— The sinoatrial node is very sensi-
tive to muscarinic receptor blockade. Moderate to high therapeu-
tic doses of atropine cause tachycardia in the innervated and 
spontaneously beating heart by blockade of vagal slowing. 
However, lower doses often result in initial bradycardia before the 
effects of peripheral vagal block become manifest ( Figure 8–4 ). 
This slowing may be due to block of prejunctional M 1 receptors 
(autoreceptors, see Figure 6–3) on vagal postganglionic fibers that 
normally limit acetylcholine release in the sinus node and other 
tissues. The same mechanisms operate in the atrioventricular 
node; in the presence of high vagal tone, atropine can significantly 
reduce the PR interval of the electrocardiogram by blocking mus-
carinic receptors in the atrioventricular node. Muscarinic effects 
on atrial muscle are similarly blocked, but these effects are of no 
clinical significance except in atrial flutter and fibrillation. The 
ventricles are less affected by antimuscarinic drugs at therapeutic 
levels because of a lesser degree of vagal control. In toxic concen-
trations, the drugs can cause intraventricular conduction block 
that has been attributed to a local anesthetic action. 
 Most blood vessels, except those in thoracic and abdominal 
viscera, receive no direct innervation from the parasympathetic 
system. However, parasympathetic nerve stimulation dilates coro-
nary arteries, and sympathetic cholinergic nerves cause vasodilation 
in the skeletal muscle vascular bed (see  Chapter 6 ). Atropine can 
block this vasodilation. Furthermore, almost all vessels contain 
endothelial muscarinic receptors that mediate vasodilation (see 
 Chapter 7 ). These receptors are readily blocked by antimuscarinic 
TABLE 8–1 Muscarinic receptor subgroups important in peripheral tissues and their antagonists.
Subgroup
Property
M1
M2
M3
Primary locations
Nerves
Heart, nerves, smooth muscle
Glands, smooth muscle, endothelium
Dominant effector system
↑ IP3, ↑ DAG
↓ cAMP, ↑ K+ channel current
↑ IP3, ↑ DAG
Antagonists
Pirenzepine, telenzepine, 
dicyclomine,2 trihexyphenidyl3
Gallamine,1 methoctramine, 
AF-DX 1164
4-DAMP, darifenacin, solifenacin, oxybu-
tynin, tolterodine
Approximate dissociation 
constant5
Atropine
1
1
1
Pirenzepine
25
300
500
AF-DX 116
2000
65
4000
Darifenacin
70
55
8
1In clinical use as a neuromuscular blocking agent (obsolete).
2In clinical use as an intestinal antispasmodic agent.
3In clinical use in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
4Compound used in research only.
5Relative to atropine. Smaller numbers indicate higher affinity.
AF-DX 116, 11-({2-[(diethylamino)methyl]-1-piperidinyl}acetyl)-5,11-dihydro-6H-pyrido-[2,3-b](1,4)benzodiazepine-6-one; DAG, diacylglycerol; IP3, inositol trisphosphate; 
4-DAMP, 4-diphenylacetoxy-N-methylpiperidine.
CHAPTER 8 Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs    119
drugs. At toxic doses, and in some individuals at normal doses, 
antimuscarinic agents cause cutaneous vasodilation, especially in 
the upper portion of the body. The mechanism is unknown. 
 The net cardiovascular effects of atropine in patients with nor-
mal hemodynamics are not dramatic: tachycardia may occur, but 
there is little effect on blood pressure. However, the cardiovascular 
effects of administered direct-acting muscarinic agonists are easily 
prevented. 
4.  Respiratory system— Both smooth muscle and secretory 
glands of the airway receive vagal innervation and contain muscarinic 
receptors. Even in normal individuals, administration of atropine 
can cause some bronchodilation and reduce secretion. The effect is 
more significant in patients with airway disease, although the anti-
muscarinic drugs are not as useful as the β-adrenoceptor stimulants 
in the treatment of asthma (see  Chapter 20 ). The effectiveness of 
nonselective antimuscarinic drugs in treating chronic obstructive 
0 15 30 45 60
90
1
2
4
6
8
10
Time (minutes)
(days)
Accommodation
Pupil
Accommodation (diopters)
Pupil diameter (mm)
10
8
6
4
2
0
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
0.5
1.0
0
0              0.1              1               10             100
Receptor occupancy
Effect
Heart rate (beats/min)
Atropine dose (μg/kg)
A
B
- * - M2-ChR occupancy (fraction)
*
* *
*
*
*
0.5
0
1.0
0               0.1             1               10            100
Effect
Salivary flow (g/min)
Atropine dose (μg/kg)
- * - M2-ChR occupancy (fraction)
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
*
*
*
*
Receptor 
occupancy
 FIGURE 8–3  Effects of topical scopolamine drops on pupil diameter (mm) and accommodation (diopters) in the normal human eye. One 
drop of 0.5% solution of drug was applied at zero time, and a second drop was administered at 30 minutes ( arrows ). The responses of 42 eyes 
were averaged. Note the extremely slow recovery. (Redrawn from Marron J: Cycloplegia and mydriasis by use of atropine, scopolamine, and homatropine-paredrine. 
Arch Ophthalmol 1940;23:340.) 
 FIGURE 8–4  Effects of increasing doses of atropine on heart rate ( A ) and salivary flow ( B ) compared with muscarinic receptor occupancy in 
humans. The parasympathomimetic effect of low-dose atropine is attributed to blockade of prejunctional muscarinic receptors that suppress 
acetylcholine release. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Wellstein A, Pitschner HF: Complex dose-response curves of atropine in man explained by differ-
ent functions of M 1 and M 2 cholinoceptors. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 1988;338:19.) 
120    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
pulmonary disease (COPD) is limited because block of autoin-
hibitory M 2 receptors on postganglionic parasympathetic nerves 
can oppose the bronchodilation caused by block of M 3 receptors 
on airway smooth muscle. Nevertheless, antimuscarinic agents are 
valuable in some patients with asthma or COPD. 
 Antimuscarinic drugs are frequently used before the adminis-
tration of inhalant anesthetics to reduce the accumulation of 
secretions in the trachea and the possibility of laryngospasm. 
5.  Gastrointestinal tract— Blockade of muscarinic receptors 
has dramatic effects on motility and some of the secretory func-
tions of the gut. However, even complete muscarinic block cannot 
totally abolish activity in this organ system, since local hormones 
and noncholinergic neurons in the enteric nervous system (see 
Chapters 6 and 62) also modulate gastrointestinal function. As in 
other tissues, exogenously administered muscarinic stimulants are 
more effectively blocked than are the effects of parasympathetic 
(vagal) nerve activity. The removal of autoinhibition, a negative 
feedback mechanism by which neural acetylcholine suppresses its 
own release, might explain the lower efficacy of antimuscarinic 
drugs against the effects of endogenous acetylcholine. 
 Antimuscarinic drugs have marked effects on salivary secretion; 
dry mouth occurs frequently in patients taking antimuscarinic drugs 
for Parkinson’s disease or urinary conditions ( Figure 8–5 ). Gastric 
secretion is blocked less effectively: the volume and amount of acid, 
pepsin, and mucin are all reduced, but large doses of atropine may 
be required. Basal secretion is blocked more effectively than that 
stimulated by food, nicotine, or alcohol. Pirenzepine and a more 
potent analog, telenzepine, reduce gastric acid secretion with fewer 
adverse effects than atropine and other less selective agents. This was 
thought to result from a selective blockade of excitatory M 1 muscar-
inic receptors on vagal ganglion cells innervating the stomach, as 
suggested by their high ratio of M 1 to M 3 affinity ( Table 8–1 ). 
However, carbachol was found to stimulate gastric acid secretion in 
animals with M 1 receptors knocked out; M 3 receptors were impli-
cated and pirenzepine opposed this effect of carbachol, an indication 
that pirenzepine is selective but not specific for M 1 receptors. The 
mechanism of vagal regulation of gastric acid secretion likely involves 
multiple muscarinic receptor-dependent pathways. Pirenzepine and 
telenzepine are investigational in the USA. Pancreatic and intestinal 
secretion are little affected by atropine; these processes are primarily 
under hormonal rather than vagal control. 
 Gastrointestinal smooth muscle motility is affected from the 
stomach to the colon. In general, the walls of the viscera are 
relaxed, and both tone and propulsive movements are diminished. 
Therefore, gastric emptying time is prolonged, and intestinal tran-
sit time is lengthened. Diarrhea due to overdosage with parasym-
pathomimetic agents is readily stopped, and even diarrhea caused 
by nonautonomic agents can usually be temporarily controlled. 
However, intestinal “paralysis” induced by antimuscarinic drugs is 
temporary; local mechanisms within the enteric nervous system 
usually reestablish at least some peristalsis after 1–3 days of anti-
muscarinic drug therapy. 
 6. Genitourinary tract— The antimuscarinic action of atropine 
and its analogs relaxes smooth muscle of the ureters and bladder 
wall and slows voiding ( Figure 8–5 ). This action is useful in the 
treatment of spasm induced by mild inflammation, surgery, and 
certain neurologic conditions, but it can precipitate urinary reten-
tion in men who have prostatic hyperplasia (see following section, 
Clinical Pharmacology of the Muscarinic Receptor-Blocking Drugs). 
The antimuscarinic drugs have no significant effect on the uterus. 
 7. Sweat glands— Atropine suppresses thermoregulatory sweat-
ing. Sympathetic cholinergic fibers innervate eccrine sweat glands, 
and their muscarinic receptors are readily accessible to antimusca-
rinic drugs. In adults, body temperature is elevated by this effect 
only if large doses are administered, but in infants and children 
even ordinary doses may cause “atropine fever.” 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE MUSCARINIC RECEPTOR
BLOCKING DRUGS 
 Therapeutic Applications 
 The antimuscarinic drugs have applications in several of the major 
organ systems and in the treatment of poisoning by muscarinic 
agonists. 
 A. Central Nervous System Disorders 
 1. Parkinson’s disease— The treatment of Parkinson’s disease 
is often an exercise in polypharmacy, since no single agent is fully 
effective over the course of the disease. Most antimuscarinic drugs 
promoted for this application (see Table 28–1) were developed 
before levodopa became available. Their use is accompanied by all 
of the adverse effects described below, but the drugs remain useful 
as adjunctive therapy in some patients. 
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.5
1.0
2.0 mg
Salivation
Micturition
speed
Heart rate
Accommodation
Percent change
Atropine dose (log scale)
 FIGURE 8–5  Effects of subcutaneous injection of atropine on 
salivation, speed of micturition (voiding), heart rate, and accommo-
dation in normal adults. Note that salivation is the most sensitive of 
these variables, accommodation the least. (Data from Herxheimer A: Br J 
Pharmacol 1958;13:184.) 
CHAPTER 8 Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs    121
 2. Motion sickness— Certain vestibular disorders respond to 
antimuscarinic drugs (and to antihistaminic agents with antimus-
carinic effects). Scopolamine is one of the oldest remedies for 
seasickness and is as effective as any more recently introduced 
agent. It can be given by injection or by mouth or as a transdermal 
patch. The patch formulation produces significant blood levels 
over 48–72 hours. Useful doses by any route usually cause signifi-
cant sedation and dry mouth. 
 B. Ophthalmologic Disorders 
 
Accurate measurement of refractive error in uncooperative patients, 
eg, young children, requires ciliary paralysis. Also, ophthalmo-
scopic examination of the retina is greatly facilitated by mydriasis. 
Therefore, antimuscarinic agents, administered topically as eye 
drops or ointment, are very helpful in doing a complete examina-
tion. For adults and older children, the shorter-acting drugs are 
preferred ( Table 8–2 ). For younger children, the greater efficacy of 
atropine is sometimes necessary, but the possibility of antimusca-
rinic poisoning is correspondingly increased. Drug loss from the 
conjunctival sac via the nasolacrimal duct into the nasopharynx 
can be diminished by the use of the ointment form rather than 
drops. Formerly, ophthalmic antimuscarinic drugs were selected 
from the tertiary amine subgroup to ensure good penetration after 
conjunctival application. Recent experiments in animals, however, 
suggest that glycopyrrolate, a quaternary agent, is as rapid in onset 
and as long-lasting as atropine. 
 Antimuscarinic drugs should never be used for mydriasis unless 
cycloplegia or prolonged action is required. Alpha-adrenoceptor 
stimulant drugs, eg, phenylephrine, produce a short-lasting 
mydriasis that is usually sufficient for funduscopic examination 
(see  Chapter 9 ). 
 A second ophthalmologic use is to prevent synechia (adhesion) 
formation in uveitis and iritis. The longer-lasting preparations, 
especially homatropine, are valuable for this indication. 
 C. Respiratory Disorders 
 
The use of atropine became part of routine preoperative medica-
tion when anesthetics such as ether were used, because these irri-
tant anesthetics markedly increased airway secretions and were 
associated with frequent episodes of laryngospasm. Preanesthetic 
injection of atropine or scopolamine could prevent these hazard-
ous effects. Scopolamine also produces significant amnesia for the 
events associated with surgery and obstetric delivery, a side effect 
that was considered desirable. On the other hand, urinary reten-
tion and intestinal hypomotility following surgery were often 
exacerbated by antimuscarinic drugs. Newer inhalational anesthet-
ics are far less irritating to the airways. 
 Patients with  COPD, a condition that occurs more frequently in 
older patients, particularly chronic smokers, benefit from broncho-
dilators, especially antimuscarinic agents.  Ipratropium and  tiotro-
pium (see  Figure 8–2 ), synthetic analogs of atropine, are used as 
inhalational drugs in COPD. The aerosol route of administration 
has the advantage of maximal concentration at the bronchial target 
tissue with reduced systemic effects. This application is discussed in 
greater detail in  Chapter 20 . Tiotropium has a longer bronchodila-
tor action than ipratropium and can be given once daily because it 
dissociates slowly from M 3 receptors. It has a terminal elimination 
 t 1/2 of 5–6 days; steady-state plasma levels are achieved in about 25 
days with single daily administration. Tiotropium reduces the inci-
dence of COPD exacerbations and is a useful adjunct to pulmonary 
rehabilitation in increasing exercise tolerance. The hyperactive neu-
ral bronchoconstrictor reflex present in most individuals with 
 asthma is mediated by the vagus, acting on muscarinic receptors on 
bronchial smooth muscle cells. Ipratropium and tiotropium are also 
used as inhalational drugs in asthma. 
 D. Cardiovascular Disorders 
 
Marked reflex vagal discharge sometimes accompanies the pain of 
myocardial infarction (eg, vasovagal attack) and may depress 
sinoatrial or atrioventricular node function sufficiently to impair 
cardiac output. Parenteral atropine or a similar antimuscarinic 
drug is appropriate therapy in this situation. Rare individuals 
without other detectable cardiac disease have hyperactive carotid 
sinus reflexes and may experience faintness or even syncope as a 
result of vagal discharge in response to pressure on the neck, eg, 
from a tight collar. Such individuals may benefit from the judi-
cious use of atropine or a related antimuscarinic agent. 
 Pathophysiology can influence muscarinic activity in other ways 
as well. Circulating autoantibodies against the second extracellular 
loop of cardiac M 2 muscarinic receptors have been detected in 
some patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy and those 
afflicted with Chagas’ disease caused by the protozoan  Trypanosoma 
cruzi. Patients with Graves’ disease (hyperthyroidism) also have 
such autoantibodies that may facilitate the development of atrial 
fibrillation. These antibodies exert parasympathomimetic actions 
on the heart that are prevented by atropine. In animals immunized 
with a peptide from the second extracellular loop of the M 2 recep-
tor, the antibody is an allosteric modulator of the receptor. 
Although their role in the pathology of heart diseases is unknown, 
these antibodies should provide clues to the molecular basis of 
receptor activation because their site of action differs from the 
orthosteric site where acetylcholine binds (see  Chapter 2 ). 
 E. Gastrointestinal Disorders 
 
Antimuscarinic agents are now rarely used for peptic ulcer disease 
in the USA (see  Chapter 62 ). Antimuscarinic agents can provide 
some relief in the treatment of common traveler’s diarrhea and 
other mild or self-limited conditions of hypermotility. They are 
TABLE 8–2   Antimuscarinic drugs used in 
ophthalmology.
Drug
Duration of 
Effect (days)
Usual Concentration (%)
Atropine
7–10
0.5–1
Scopolamine
3–7
0.25
Homatropine
1–3
2–5
Cyclopentolate
1
0.5–2
Tropicamide
0.25
0.5–1
122    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
often combined with an opioid antidiarrheal drug, an extremely 
effective therapy. In this combination, however, the very low dos-
age of the antimuscarinic drug functions primarily to discourage 
abuse of the opioid agent. The classic combination of atropine 
with diphenoxylate, a nonanalgesic congener of meperidine, is 
available under many names (eg, Lomotil) in both tablet and liq-
uid form (see  Chapter 62 ). 
 F. Urinary Disorders 
 Atropine and other antimuscarinic drugs have been used to provide 
symptomatic relief in the treatment of urinary urgency caused by 
minor inflammatory bladder disorders ( Table 8–3 ). However, spe-
cific antimicrobial therapy is essential in bacterial cystitis. In the 
human urinary bladder, M 2 and M 3 receptors are expressed pre-
dominantly with the M 3 subtype mediating direct activation of 
contraction. As in intestinal smooth muscle, the M 2 subtype 
appears to act indirectly by inhibiting relaxation by norepinephrine 
and epinephrine. 
 Receptors for acetylcholine on the urothelium (the epithelial 
lining of the urinary tract) and on afferent nerves as well as the 
detrusor muscle provide a broad basis for the action of antimusca-
rinic drugs in the treatment of overactive bladder.  Oxybutynin, 
which is somewhat selective for M 3 receptors, is used to relieve 
bladder spasm after urologic surgery, eg, prostatectomy. It is also 
valuable in reducing involuntary voiding in patients with neuro-
logic disease, eg, children with meningomyelocele. Oral oxybu-
tynin or instillation of the drug by catheter into the bladder in such 
patients appears to improve bladder capacity and continence and 
to reduce infection and renal damage. Transdermally applied oxy-
butynin or its oral extended-release formulation reduces the need 
for multiple daily doses.  Trospium, a nonselective antagonist, has 
been approved and is comparable in efficacy and side effects to 
oxybutynin.  Darifenacin and  solifenacin are recently approved 
antagonists that have greater selectivity for M 3 receptors than oxy-
butynin or trospium. Darifenacin and solifenacin have the advan-
tage of once-daily dosing because of their long half-lives.  Tolterodine 
and  fesoterodine, M 3 -selective antimuscarinics, are available for use 
in adults with urinary incontinence. They have many of the quali-
ties of darifenacin and solifenacin and are available in extended- 
release tablets. The convenience of the newer and longer-acting 
drugs has not been accompanied by improvements in overall effi-
cacy or by reductions in side effects such as dry mouth. An alterna-
tive treatment for urinary incontinence refractory to antimuscarinic 
drugs is intrabladder injection of botulinum toxin A. Botulinum 
toxin is reported to reduce urinary incontinence for several months 
after a single treatment by interfering with the co-release of ATP 
with neuronal acetylcholine (see Figure 6–3). Blockade of the acti-
vation of sensory nerves in the urothelium by ATP may account for 
a large part of this effect of botulinum toxin. This approach is not 
an FDA-approved indication at present. 
 Imipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant drug with strong anti-
muscarinic actions, has long been used to reduce incontinence in 
institutionalized elderly patients. It is moderately effective but 
causes significant CNS toxicity.  Propiverine, a newer antimusca-
rinic agent, has been approved for this purpose. 
 Antimuscarinic agents have also been used in urolithiasis to 
relieve the painful ureteral smooth muscle spasm caused by pas-
sage of the stone. However, their usefulness in this condition is 
debatable. 
 G. Cholinergic Poisoning 
 
Severe cholinergic excess is a medical emergency, especially in rural 
communities where cholinesterase inhibitor insecticides are com-
monly used and in cultures where wild mushrooms are frequently 
eaten. The potential use of cholinesterase inhibitors as chemical 
warfare “nerve gases” also requires an awareness of the methods for 
treating acute poisoning (see  Chapter 58 ). 
 1. Antimuscarinic therapy— Both the nicotinic and the mus-
carinic effects of the cholinesterase inhibitors can be life-threatening. 
Unfortunately, there is no effective method for directly blocking 
the nicotinic effects of cholinesterase inhibition, because nicotinic 
agonists  and antagonists cause blockade of transmission (see 
 Chapter 27 ). To reverse the muscarinic effects, a tertiary (not 
quaternary) amine drug must be used (preferably atropine) to treat 
the CNS effects as well as the peripheral effects of the organophos-
phate inhibitors. Large doses of atropine may be needed to oppose 
the muscarinic effects of extremely potent agents like parathion 
TABLE 8–3  Antimuscarinic drugs used in 
gastrointestinal and genitourinary 
conditions.
Drug
Usual Dosage
Quaternary amines
 Anisotropine
50 mg tid
 Clidinium
2.5 mg tid–qid
 Glycopyrrolate
1 mg bid–tid
 Isopropamide
5 mg bid
 Mepenzolate
25–50 mg qid
 Methantheline
50–100 mg qid
 Methscopolamine
2.5 mg qid
 Oxyphenonium
5–10 mg qid
 Propantheline
15 mg qid
 Tridihexethyl
25–50 mg tid–qid
 Trospium
20 mg bid
Tertiary amines
 Atropine
0.4 mg tid–qid
 Darifenacin
7.5 mg qd
 Dicyclomine
10–20 mg qid
 Oxybutynin
5 mg tid
 Oxyphencyclimine
10 mg bid
 Propiverine
15 mg bid–tid
 Scopolamine
0.4 mg tid
 Solifenacin
5 mg qd
 Tolterodine
2 mg bid
CHAPTER 8 Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs    123
and chemical warfare nerve gases: 1–2 mg of atropine sulfate may 
be given intravenously every 5–15 minutes until signs of effect 
(dry mouth, reversal of miosis) appear. The drug may have to be 
given many times, since the acute effects of the cholinesterase 
inhibitor may last 24–48 hours or longer. In this life-threatening 
situation, as much as 1 g of atropine per day may be required for 
as long as 1 month for full control of muscarinic excess. 
 2. Cholinesterase regenerator compounds— A second class 
of compounds, composed of substituted oximes capable of regen-
erating active enzyme from the organophosphorus-cholinesterase 
complex, is also available to treat organophosphorus poisoning. 
These oxime agents include pralidoxime (PAM), diacetylmon-
oxime (DAM), obidoxime, and others. 
Pralidoxime
Diacetylmonoxime
C
NOH
CH3
+N
C
C
O
NOH
H3C
H3C
 Organophosphates cause phosphorylation of the serine OH 
group at the active site of cholinesterase. The oxime group 
(ÓNOH) has a very high affinity for the phosphorus atom, for 
which it competes with serine OH. These oximes can hydrolyze 
the phosphorylated enzyme and regenerate active enzyme from 
the organophosphorus-cholinesterase complex if the complex has 
not “aged” (see  Chapter 7 ). Pralidoxime is the most extensively 
studied—in humans—of the agents shown and the only one avail-
able for clinical use in the USA. It is most effective in regenerating 
the cholinesterase associated with skeletal muscle neuromuscular 
junctions. Pralidoxime and obidoxime are ineffective in reversing 
the central effects of organophosphate poisoning because each has 
positively charged quaternary ammonium groups that prevent 
entry into the CNS. Diacetylmonoxime, on the other hand, 
crosses the blood-brain barrier and, in experimental animals, can 
regenerate some of the CNS cholinesterase. 
 Pralidoxime is administered by intravenous infusion, 1–2 g 
given over 15–30 minutes. In spite of the likelihood of aging of 
the phosphate-enzyme complex, recent reports suggest that 
administration of multiple doses of pralidoxime over several days 
may be useful in severe poisoning. In excessive doses, pralidoxime 
can induce neuromuscular weakness and other adverse effects. 
Pralidoxime is  not recommended for the reversal of inhibition of 
acetylcholinesterase by carbamate inhibitors. Further details of 
treatment of anticholinesterase toxicity are given in  Chapter 58 . 
 A third approach to protection against excessive acetylcholin-
esterase inhibition is  pretreatment with reversible enzyme inhibi-
tors to prevent binding of the irreversible organophosphate 
inhibitor. This prophylaxis can be achieved with pyridostigmine 
but is reserved for situations in which possibly lethal poisoning is 
anticipated, eg, chemical warfare (see  Chapter 7 ). Simultaneous 
use of atropine is required to control muscarinic excess. 
 Mushroom poisoning has traditionally been divided into 
rapid-onset and delayed-onset types. The rapid-onset type is usu-
ally apparent within 30 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion of the 
mushrooms, and can be caused by a variety of toxins. Some of 
these produce simple upset stomach; others can have disulfiram-
like effects; some cause hallucinations; and a few mushrooms (eg, 
Inocybe species) can produce signs of muscarinic excess: nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, urinary urgency, sweating, salivation, and 
sometimes bronchoconstriction. Parenteral atropine, 1–2 mg, is 
effective treatment in such intoxications. Despite its name, 
 Amanita muscaria contains not only muscarine (the alkaloid was 
named after the mushroom), but also numerous other alkaloids, 
including antimuscarinic agents, and ingestion of  A muscaria 
often causes signs of atropine poisoning, not muscarine excess. 
 Delayed-onset mushroom poisoning, usually caused by 
 Amanita phalloides, A virosa, Galerina autumnalis, or  G marginata, 
manifests its first symptoms 6–12 hours after ingestion. Although 
the initial symptoms usually include nausea and vomiting, the 
major toxicity involves hepatic and renal cellular injury by ama-
toxins that inhibit RNA polymerase. Atropine is of no value in 
this form of mushroom poisoning (see  Chapter 58 ). 
 H. Other Applications 
 
Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) is sometimes reduced by anti-
muscarinic agents. However, relief is incomplete at best, probably 
because apocrine rather than eccrine glands are usually involved. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Treatment with atropine or its congeners directed at one organ 
system almost always induces undesirable effects in other organ 
systems. Thus, mydriasis and cycloplegia are adverse effects 
when an antimuscarinic agent is used to reduce gastrointestinal 
secretion or motility, even though they are therapeutic effects 
when the drug is used in ophthalmology. 
 At higher concentrations, atropine causes block of all parasym-
pathetic functions. However, atropine is a remarkably safe drug  in 
adults . Atropine poisoning has occurred as a result of attempted 
suicide, but most cases are due to attempts to induce hallucina-
tions. Poisoned individuals manifest dry mouth, mydriasis, tachy-
cardia, hot and flushed skin, agitation, and delirium for as long as 
1 week. Body temperature is frequently elevated. These effects are 
memorialized in the adage, “dry as a bone, blind as a bat, red as a 
beet, mad as a hatter.” 
 Unfortunately, children, especially infants, are very sensitive to 
the hyperthermic effects of atropine. Although accidental admin-
istration of over 400 mg has been followed by recovery, deaths 
have followed doses as small as 2 mg. Therefore, atropine should 
be considered a highly dangerous drug when overdose occurs in 
infants or children. 
 Overdoses of atropine or its congeners are generally treated 
symptomatically (see  Chapter 58 ). Poison control experts discour-
age the use of physostigmine or another cholinesterase inhibitor to 
reverse the effects of atropine overdose because symptomatic man-
agement is more effective and less dangerous. When physostig-
mine is deemed necessary,  small doses are given  slowly intravenously 
124    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
(1–4 mg in adults, 0.5–1 mg in children). Symptomatic treatment 
may require temperature control with cooling blankets and seizure 
control with diazepam. 
 Poisoning caused by high doses of quaternary antimuscarinic 
drugs is associated with all of the peripheral signs of parasympathetic 
blockade but few or none of the CNS effects of atropine. These 
more polar drugs may cause significant ganglionic blockade, how-
ever, with marked orthostatic hypotension (see below). Treatment 
of the antimuscarinic effects, if required, can be carried out with a 
quaternary cholinesterase inhibitor such as neostigmine. Control 
of hypotension may require the administration of a sympathomi-
metic drug such as phenylephrine. 
 Recent evidence indicates that some centrally acting drugs 
(tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
anti-anxiety agents) with antimuscarinic actions impair memory 
and cognition in older patients. 
 Contraindications 
 Contraindications to the use of antimuscarinic drugs are relative, 
not absolute. Obvious muscarinic excess, especially that caused by 
cholinesterase inhibitors, can always be treated with atropine. 
 Antimuscarinic drugs are contraindicated in patients with 
glaucoma, especially angle-closure glaucoma. Even systemic use of 
moderate doses may precipitate angle closure (and acute glau-
coma) in patients with shallow anterior chambers. 
 In elderly men, antimuscarinic drugs should always be used 
with caution and should be avoided in those with a history of 
prostatic hyperplasia. 
 Because the antimuscarinic drugs slow gastric emptying, they 
may  increase symptoms in patients with gastric ulcer. Nonselective 
antimuscarinic agents should never be used to treat acid-peptic 
disease (see  Chapter 62 ). 
 ■ BASIC & CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY OF THE 
GANGLIONBLOCKING DRUGS 
 Ganglion-blocking agents competitively block the action of ace-
tylcholine and similar agonists at nicotinic receptors of both para-
sympathetic and sympathetic autonomic ganglia. Some members 
of the group also block the ion channel that is gated by the nico-
tinic cholinoceptor. The ganglion-blocking drugs are important 
and used in pharmacologic and physiologic research because they 
can block all autonomic outflow. However, their lack of selectivity 
confers such a broad range of undesirable effects that they have 
limited clinical use. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 All ganglion-blocking drugs of interest are synthetic amines. 
 Tetraethylammonium  (TEA), the first to be recognized as hav-
ing this action, has a very short duration of action. Hexamethonium 
 (“C6”) was developed and was introduced clinically as the first 
drug effective for management of hypertension. As shown in 
 Figure 8–6 , there is an obvious relationship between the struc-
tures of the agonist acetylcholine and the nicotinic antagonists 
tetraethylammonium and hexamethonium. Decamethonium, the 
“C10” analog of hexamethonium, is a depolarizing neuromuscu-
lar blocking agent. 
 Mecamylamine, a secondary amine, was developed to improve 
the degree and extent of absorption from the gastrointestinal tract 
because the quaternary amine ganglion-blocking compounds were 
poorly and erratically absorbed after oral administration. 
 Trimethaphan, a short-acting ganglion blocker, is inactive orally 
and is given by intravenous infusion. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Ganglionic nicotinic receptors, like those of the skeletal muscle 
neuromuscular junction, are subject to both depolarizing and non-
depolarizing blockade (see Chapters 7 and 27). Nicotine itself, 
carbamoylcholine, and even acetylcholine (if amplified with a cho-
linesterase inhibitor) can produce depolarizing ganglion block. 
 Drugs now used as ganglion blockers are classified as nondepo-
larizing competitive antagonists. However, hexamethonium actu-
ally produces most of its blockade by occupying sites in or on the 
nicotinic ion channel, not by occupying the cholinoceptor itself. 
In contrast, trimethaphan appears to block the nicotinic receptor, 
not the channel pore. Blockade can be surmounted by increasing 
the concentration of an agonist, eg, acetylcholine. 
 B. Organ System Effects 
 1. Central nervous system— Mecamylamine, unlike the qua-
ternary amine agents and trimethaphan, crosses the blood-brain 
barrier and readily enters the CNS. Sedation, tremor, choreiform 
movements, and mental aberrations have been reported as effects 
of mecamylamine. 
CH3
CH3
CH3
NH
CH3
Mecamylamine
CH3
CH2
N+
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
Tetraethylammonium
Hexamethonium
CH3
N+
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
+N
CH3
N+
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
O
C
CH3
O
Acetylcholine
 FIGURE 8–6  Some ganglion-blocking drugs. Acetylcholine is 
shown for reference. 
CHAPTER 8 Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs    125
 2. Eye— The ganglion-blocking drugs cause a predictable 
cycloplegia with loss of accommodation because the ciliary muscle 
receives innervation primarily from the parasympathetic nervous 
system. The effect on the pupil is not so easily predicted, since the 
iris receives both sympathetic innervation (mediating pupillary 
dilation) and parasympathetic innervation (mediating pupillary 
constriction). Ganglionic blockade often causes moderate dilation 
of the pupil because parasympathetic tone usually dominates this 
tissue. 
 3. Cardiovascular system— Blood vessels receive chiefly vaso-
constrictor fibers from the sympathetic nervous system; therefore, 
ganglionic blockade causes a marked decrease in arteriolar and 
venomotor tone. The blood pressure may fall precipitously because 
both peripheral vascular resistance and venous return are decreased 
(see Figure 6–7). Hypotension is especially marked in the upright 
position (orthostatic or postural hypotension), because postural 
reflexes that normally prevent venous pooling are blocked. 
 Cardiac effects include diminished contractility and, because 
the sinoatrial node is usually dominated by the parasympathetic 
nervous system, a moderate tachycardia. 
 4. Gastrointestinal tract— Secretion is reduced, although not 
enough to effectively treat peptic disease. Motility is profoundly 
inhibited, and constipation can be marked. 
 5. Other systems— Genitourinary smooth muscle is partially 
dependent on autonomic innervation for normal function. 
Therefore, ganglionic blockade causes hesitancy in urination and 
may precipitate urinary retention in men with prostatic hyperplasia. 
Sexual function is impaired in that both erection and ejaculation 
may be prevented by moderate doses. 
 Thermoregulatory sweating is reduced by the ganglion-blocking 
drugs. However, hyperthermia is not a problem except in very 
warm environments, because cutaneous vasodilation is usually suf-
ficient to maintain a normal body temperature. 
 6. Response to autonomic drugs— Patients receiving ganglion-
blocking drugs are fully responsive to autonomic drugs acting on 
muscarinic, α-, and β-adrenergic receptors because these effector 
cell receptors are not blocked. In fact, responses may be exagger-
ated or even reversed (eg, intravenously administered norepineph-
rine may cause tachycardia rather than bradycardia), because 
homeostatic reflexes, which normally moderate autonomic 
responses, are absent. 
 Clinical Applications & Toxicity 
 Ganglion blockers are used infrequently because more selective 
autonomic blocking agents are available. Mecamylamine blocks 
central nicotinic receptors and has been advocated as a possible 
adjunct with the transdermal nicotine patch to reduce nicotine 
craving in patients attempting to quit smoking. Trimethaphan is 
occasionally used in the treatment of hypertensive emergencies 
and dissecting aortic aneurysm; in producing hypotension, which 
can be of value in neurosurgery to reduce bleeding in the operative 
field; and in the treatment of patients undergoing electroconvul-
sive therapy. The toxicity of the ganglion-blocking drugs is limited 
to the autonomic effects already described. For most patients, 
these effects are intolerable except for acute use. 
126    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
SUMMARY Drugs with Anticholinergic Actions
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
MOTION SICKNESS DRUGS
 • Scopolamine
Unknown mechanism in 
CNS
Reduces vertigo, 
postoperative 
nausea
Prevention of motion sick-
ness and postoperative 
nausea and vomiting
Transdermal patch used for motion sickness 
• IM injection for postoperative use • Toxicity: 
Tachycardia, blurred vision, xerostomia, delir-
ium • Interactions: With other antimuscarinics
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
 • Dicyclomine
Competitive antagonism 
at M3 receptors
Reduces smooth 
muscle and secretory 
activity of gut
Irritable bowel syndrome, 
minor diarrhea
Available in oral and parenteral forms • short t½ 
but action lasts up to 6 hours • Toxicity: 
Tachycardia, confusion, urinary retention, 
increased intraocular pressure • Interactions: 
With other antimuscarinics
 • Hyoscyamine: Longer duration of action
 • Glycopyrrolate: Similar to dicyclomine
OPHTHALMOLOGY
 • Atropine
Competitive antagonism 
at all M receptors
Causes mydriasis and 
cycloplegia
Retinal examination; 
prevention of synechiae 
after surgery
Used as drops • long (5–6 days) action 
• Toxicity: Increased intraocular pressure in 
closed-angle glaucoma • Interactions: With 
other antimuscarinics
 • Scopolamine: Faster onset of action than atropine
 • Homatropine: Shorter duration of action (12–24 h)
 • Cyclopentolate: Shorter duration of action (3–6 h)
 • Tropicamide: Shortest duration of action (15–60 min)
RESPIRATORY (ASTHMA, COPD)
 • Ipratropium
Competitive, nonselective 
antagonist at M receptors
Reduces or prevents 
bronchospasm
Prevention and relief 
of acute episodes of 
bronchospasm
Aerosol canister, up to qid 
• Toxicity: Xerostomia, cough
• Interactions: With other antimuscarinics
 • Tiotropium: Longer duration of action; used qd
URINARY
 •  Oxybutynin
Slightly M3-selective  
muscarinic antagonist
Reduces detrusor 
smooth muscle 
tone, spasms
Urge incontinence; postop-
erative spasms
Oral, IV, patch formulations 
• Toxicity: Tachycardia, constipation, increased 
intraocular pressure, xerostomia 
• Patch: Pruritus • Interactions: With other 
antimuscarinics
 • Darifenacin, solifenacin, and tolterodine: Tertiary amines with somewhat greater selectivity for M3 receptors
 • Trospium: Quaternary amine with less CNS effect
CHOLINERGIC POISONING
 • Atropine
Nonselective competitive 
antagonist at all muscar-
inic receptors in CNS and 
periphery
Blocks muscarinic 
excess at exocrine 
glands, heart, 
smooth muscle
Mandatory antidote for 
severe cholinesterase 
inhibitor poisoning
Intravenous infusion until antimuscarinic signs 
appear
• continue as long as necessary
• Toxicity: Insignificant as long as AChE 
inhibition continues
 • Pralidoxime
Very high affinity for 
phosphorus atom but 
does not enter CNS
Regenerates active 
AChE; can relieve 
skeletal muscle end 
plate block
Usual antidote for early-
stage (48 h) cholinesterase 
inhibitor poisoning
Intravenous every 4–6 h
• Toxicity: Can cause muscle weakness in 
overdose
AChE, acetylcholinesterase; CNS, central nervous system; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
CHAPTER 8 Cholinoceptor-Blocking Drugs    127
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
ANTIMUSCARINIC ANTICHOLINERGIC 
DRUGS*
Atropine (generic)
Oral: 0.4, 0.6 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.05, 0.1, 0.4, 0.5, 1 mg/mL for injection; Atropen: 0.25, 
0.5, 2 mg pen injectors
Ophthalmic (generic, Isopto Atropine): 0.5, 1, 2% drops; 0.5, 1% 
ointments
Belladonna alkaloids, extract or tincture (generic)
Oral: 0.27–0.33 mg/mL liquid
Clidinium (generic, Quarzan, others)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg capsules
Cyclopentolate (generic, Cyclogyl, others)
Ophthalmic: 0.5, 1, 2% solution
Darifenacin (Enablex)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets (extended release)
Dicyclomine (generic, Bentyl, others)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules; 20 mg tablets; 10 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for intramuscular injection
Fesoterodine (Toviaz)
Oral: 4, 8 mg extended-release tablets
Flavoxate (Urispas)
Oral: 100 mg tablets
Glycopyrrolate (generic, Robinul)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.2 mg/mL for injection
Homatropine (generic, Isopto Homatropine, others)
Ophthalmic: 2, 5% solution
l-Hyoscyamine (Anaspaz, Cystospaz-M, Levsin, others)
Oral: 0.125, 0.25 mg tablets; 0.375, 0.75 mg timed-release 
capsules; 0.125 mg/5 mL oral elixir and solution
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for injection
Ipratropium (generic, Atrovent)
Aerosol: 200 dose metered-dose inhaler (0.17 mg/dose)
Solution for nebulizer: 0.02%
Nasal spray: 0.03, 0.06%
Mepenzolate (Cantil)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Methantheline (Banthine)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Methscopolamine (generic, Pamine)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Oxybutynin (generic, Ditropan)
Oral: 5 mg tablets; 5, 10 mg extended-release tablets; patch 
(3.9 mg/day); 5 mg/5 mL syrup
Topical: 10% gel
Propantheline (generic, Pro-Banthine, others)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets
Scopolamine (generic)
Oral: 0.4 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.4 mg/mL for injection
Ophthalmic (Isopto Hyoscine): 0.25% solution
Transdermal (Transderm Scop): 1.5 mg (delivers 0.5 mg/24 h)patch; 
extended-release patch (delivers 0.33 mg/24 h)
Solifenacin (Vesicare)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Tiotropium (Spiriva)
Aerosol: 18 mcg tablet for inhaler
Tolterodine (Detrol)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets; 2, 4 mg extended-release capsules
Tridihexethyl (Pathilon)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Tropicamide (generic, Mydriacyl Ophthalmic, others)
Ophthalmic: 0.5, 1% drops
Trospium (Spasmex, Sanctura)
Oral: 20 mg tablets; 60 mg extended-release capsule
Suppository: 0.75, 1.0 mg
Parenteral: 0.6 mg/mL
GANGLION BLOCKERS
Mecamylamine (Inversine)
Oral: 2.5, 10 mg tablets
Trimethaphan (Arfonad)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL
CHOLINESTERASE REGENERATOR
Pralidoxime (generic, Protopam)
Parenteral: 1 g vial with 20 mL diluent for IV administration; 
600 mg in 2 mL autoinjector
∗Antimuscarinic drugs used in parkinsonism are listed in Chapter 28.
128    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
 REFERENCES 
 Aihaara T et al: Cholinergically stimulated gastric acid secretion is mediated by M 3 
and M 5 but not M 1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors in mice. Am J Physiol 
2005;288:G1199. 
 Andersson KE: Antimuscarinics for treatment of overactive bladder. Lancet Neurol 
2004;3:46. 
 Brodde OE et al: Presence, distribution and physiological function of adrenergic 
and muscarinic receptor subtypes in the human heart. Basic Res Cardiol 
2001;96:528. 
 Carrière I et al: Drugs with anticholinergic properties, cognitive decline, and 
dementia in an elderly general population. Arch Intern Med 
2009;169:1317. 
 Casaburi R et al: Improvement in exercise tolerance with the combination of 
tiotropium and pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with COPD. Chest 
2005;127:809. 
 Casarosa P et al: The constitutive activity of the human muscarinic M3 receptor 
unmasks differences in the pharmacology of anticholinergics. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther 2010;333:201. 
 Chapple CR et al: A comparison of the efficacy and tolerability of solifenacin suc-
cinate and extended release tolterodine at treating overactive bladder syn-
drome: Results of the STAR trial. Eur Urol 2005;48:464. 
 Fowler CJ et al: The neural control of micturition. Nat Rev Neurosci 
2008:9:453. 
 Fukusaki M et al: Effects of controlled hypotension with sevoflurane anesthesia on 
hepatic function of surgical patients. Eur J Anaesthesiol 1999;16:111. 
 Hegde SS: Muscarinic receptors in the bladder: From basic research to therapeu-
tics. Br J Pharmacol 2006;147:S80. 
 Kranke P et al: The efficacy and safety of transdermal scopolamine for the preven-
tion of postoperative nausea and vomiting: A quantitative systematic review. 
Anesth Analg 2002;95:133. 
 Lawrence GW et al: Excitatory cholinergic and purinergic signaling in bladder are 
equally susceptible to botulinum neurotoxin A consistent with co-release of 
transmitters from efferent fibers. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2010;334:1080. 
 Moreland RB et al: Emerging pharmacologic approaches for the treatment of lower 
urinary tract disorders. J Pharm Exp Ther 2004;308:797. 
 Olson K: Mushrooms. In: Olson K (editor).  Poisoning & Drug Overdose, 5th ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
 Petrides G et al: Trimethaphan (Arfonad) control of hypertension and tachycardia 
during electroconvulsive therapy: A double-blind study. J Clin Anesth 
1996;8:104. 
 Profita M et al: Smoke, choline acetyltransferase, muscarinic receptors, and fibro-
blast proliferation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther 2009;329:753. 
 Stavrakis S et al: Activating autoantibodies to the beta-1 adrenergic and m2 mus-
carinic receptors facilitate atrial fibrillation in patients with Graves’ hyper-
thyroidism. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;54:1309. 
 Xie G et al: Cholinergic agonist-induced pepsinogen secretion from murine gastric 
chief cells is mediated by M 1 and M 3 muscarinic receptors. Am J Physiol 
2005;289:G521. 
 Young JM et al: Mecamylamine: New therapeutic uses and toxicity/risk profile. 
Clin Ther 2001;23:532. 
 Zhang L et al: A missense mutation in the CHRM2 gene is associated with famil-
ial dilated cardiomyopathy. Circ Res 2008;102:1426. 
 Treatment of Anticholinesterase Poisoning 
 Jokanovic M: Medical treatment of acute poisoning with organophosphorus and 
carbamate pesticides. Toxicol Lett 2009;190:107. 
 Newmark J: Nerve agents: Pathophysiology and treatment of poisoning. Semin 
Neurol 2004:24:185. 
 Thiermann H et al: Pharmacokinetics of obidoxime in patients poisoned with 
organophosphorus compounds. Toxicol Lett 2010;197:236. 
 Weinbroum AA: Pathophysiological and clinical aspects of combat anticholinest-
erase poisoning. Br Med Bull 2005;72:119. 
 Worek R et al: Recent advances in evaluation of oxime efficacy in nerve agent 
poisoning by in vitro analysis. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2007;219:226. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
JH’s symptoms are often displayed by patients following 
prostatectomy to relieve significant obstruction of bladder 
outflow. Urge incontinence can occur in patients whose pro-
static hypertrophy caused instability of the detrusor muscle. 
He should be advised that urinary incontinence and urinary 
frequency can diminish with time after prostatectomy as 
detrusor muscle instability subsides. JH can be helped by 
daily administration of a single tablet of extended-release 
tolterodine (4 mg/day) or oxybutynin (5–10 mg/day). A 
transdermal patch containing oxybutynin (3.9 mg/day) is 
also available.
129
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 The sympathetic nervous system is an important regulator of vir-
tually all organ systems. This is particularly evident in the regula-
tion of blood pressure. As illustrated in the case study, the 
autonomic nervous system is crucial for the maintenance of blood 
pressure even under relatively minor situations of stress (eg, the 
gravitational stress of standing). 
 The ultimate effects of sympathetic stimulation are mediated 
by release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, which then 
activates adrenoceptors on postsynaptic sites (see  Chapter 6 ). Also, 
in response to a variety of stimuli such as stress, the adrenal 
medulla releases epinephrine, which is transported in the blood to 
target tissues. In other words, epinephrine acts as a hormone, 
whereas norepinephrine acts as a neurotransmitter. 
C A S E  S T U D Y
9
Adrenoceptor Agonists & 
Sympathomimetic Drugs
 Italo Biaggioni, MD,  & David Robertson, MD∗
 ∗ The authors thank Drs. Vsevolod Gurevich and Randy Blakely for 
helpful comments.
 A 68-year-old man presents with a complaint of light-headedness 
on standing that is worse after meals and in hot environments. 
Symptoms started about 4 years ago and have slowly pro-
gressed to the point that he is disabled. He has fainted several 
times, but always recovers consciousness almost as soon as he 
falls. Review of symptoms reveals slight worsening of constipa-
tion, urinary retention out of proportion to prostate size, and 
decreased sweating. He is otherwise healthy with no history of 
hypertension, diabetes, or Parkinson’s disease. Because of his 
urinary retention, he was placed on the α 1 antagonist tamsu-
losin but he could not tolerate it because of worsening of 
orthostatic hypotension. Physical examination revealed a 
blood pressure of 167/84 mm Hg supine and 106/55 mm Hg 
standing. There was an inadequate compensatory increase in 
heart rate (from 84 to 88 bpm), considering the degree of 
orthostatic hypotension. Physical examination is otherwise 
unremarkable with no evidence of peripheral neuropathy or 
parkinsonian features. Laboratory examinations are negative 
except for plasma norepinephrine, which is low at 98 pg/mL 
(normal is 250–400 pg/mL for his age). A diagnosis of pure 
autonomic failure is made, based on the clinical picture and 
the absence of drugs that could induce orthostatic hypoten-
sion and diseases commonly associated with autonomic neu-
ropathy (eg, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease). What precautions 
should this patient observe in using sympathomimetic drugs? 
Can such drugs be used in his treatment? 
 
 Drugs that mimic the actions of epinephrine or norepineph-
rine have traditionally been termed  sympathomimetic drugs. 
The sympathomimetics can be grouped by mode of action and by 
the spectrum of receptors that they activate. Some of these drugs 
(eg, norepinephrine and epinephrine) are  direct agonists; that is, 
they directly interact with and activate adrenoceptors. Others are 
 indirect agonists because their actions are dependent on their abil-
ity to enhance the actions of endogenous catecholamines. These 
indirect agents may have either of two different mechanisms: (1) 
they may displace stored catecholamines from the adrenergic 
nerve ending (eg, the mechanism of action of tyramine), or they 
may decrease the clearance of released norepinephrine either by 
(2a) inhibiting reuptake of catecholamines already released (eg, 
the mechanism of action of cocaine and tricyclic antidepressants) 
or (2b) preventing the enzymatic metabolism of norepinephrine 
(monoamine oxidase and catechol- O -methyltransferase inhibi-
tors). Some drugs have both direct and indirect actions. Both 
130    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
types of sympathomimetics, direct and indirect, ultimately cause 
activation of adrenoceptors, leading to some or all of the charac-
teristic effects of endogenous catecholamines. 
 The pharmacologic effects of direct agonists depend on the 
route of administration, their relative affinity for adrenoreceptor 
subtypes, and the relative expression of these receptor subtypes in 
target tissues. The pharmacologic effects of indirect sympathomi-
metics are greater under conditions of increased sympathetic activ-
ity and norepinephrine storage and release. 
 ■ MOLECULAR PHARMACOLOGY 
UNDERLYING THE ACTIONS OF 
SYMPATHOMIMETIC DRUGS 
 The effects of catecholamines are mediated by cell-surface recep-
tors. Adrenoceptors are typical G protein-coupled receptors 
(GPCRs; see  Chapter 2 ). The receptor protein has an extracellular 
N-terminus, traverses the membrane seven times (transmembrane 
domains) forming three extracellular and three intracellular loops, 
and has an intracellular C-terminus ( Figure 9–1 ). G protein-
coupled receptors are coupled by G proteins to the various effec-
tor proteins whose activities are regulated by those receptors. Each 
G protein is a heterotrimer consisting of α, β, and γ subunits. G 
proteins are classified on the basis of their distinctive α subunits. 
G proteins of particular importance for adrenoceptor function 
include G s , the stimulatory G protein of adenylyl cyclase; G i and 
G o , the inhibitory G proteins of adenylyl cyclase; and G q and G 11 , 
the G proteins coupling α receptors to phospholipase C. The 
activation of G protein-coupled receptors by catecholamines pro-
motes the dissociation of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) from the 
α subunit of the appropriate G protein. Guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP) then binds to this G protein, and the α subunit dissociates 
from the β-γ unit. The activated GTP-bound α subunit then 
regulates the activity of its effector. Effectors of adrenoceptor-
activated α subunits include adenylyl cyclase, cGMP phosphodi-
esterase, phospholipase C, and ion channels. The α subunit is 
inactivated by hydrolysis of the bound GTP to GDP and phos-
phate, and the subsequent reassociation of the α subunit with the 
β-γ subunit. The β-γ subunits have additional independent effects, 
acting on a variety of effectors such as ion channels and enzymes. 
 Adrenoreceptors were initially characterized pharmacologically, 
with α receptors having the comparative potencies epinephrine ≥ 
norepinephrine >> isoproterenol, and β receptors having the com-
parative potencies isoproterenol > epinephrine ≥ norepinephrine. 
The development of selective antagonists revealed the presence of 
subtypes of these receptors, which were finally characterized by 
Alpha1
receptor
Phospholipase C
Agonist
Gq
GDP
Ca2+-dependent
       protein kinase
IP3
GTP
+
β
γ
*
αq
αq
Free
calcium
Stored
calcium
{
Activated 
protein kinase
Activated 
PKC
PKC
DAG
Ptdlns 4,5P2
+
+
 FIGURE 9–1  Activation of α 1 responses. Stimulation of α 1 receptors by catecholamines leads to the activation of a G q -coupling protein. The 
activated α subunit (α q *) of this G protein activates the effector, phospholipase C, which leads to the release of IP 3 (inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate) 
and DAG (diacylglycerol) from phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns 4,5P 2 ). IP 3 stimulates the release of sequestered stores of calcium, 
leading to an increased concentration of cytoplasmic Ca 2+ . Ca 2+ may then activate Ca 2+ -dependent protein kinases, which in turn phosphorylate 
their substrates. DAG activates protein kinase C (PKC). GTP, guanosine triphosphate; GDP, guanosine diphosphate. See text for additional effects 
of α 1 -receptor activation. 
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     131
molecular cloning. We now know that unique genes encode the 
receptor subtypes listed in  Table 9–1 . 
 Likewise, the endogenous catecholamine dopamine produces a 
variety of biologic effects that are mediated by interactions with 
specific dopamine receptors ( Table 9–1 ). These receptors are dis-
tinct from α and β receptors and are particularly important in the 
brain (see Chapters 21 and 29) and in the splanchnic and renal 
vasculature. Molecular cloning has identified several distinct genes 
encoding five receptor subtypes, two D 1 -like receptors (D 1 and 
D 5 ) and three D 2 -like (D 2 , D 3 , and D 4 ). Further complexity 
occurs because of the presence of introns within the coding region 
of the D 2 -like receptor genes, which allows for alternative splicing 
of the exons in this major subtype. There is extensive polymorphic 
variation in the D 4 human receptor gene. These subtypes may 
have importance for understanding the efficacy and adverse effects 
of novel antipsychotic drugs (see  Chapter 29 ). 
 Receptor Types 
 A. Alpha Receptors 
 
Alpha 1 receptors are coupled via G proteins in the G q family to 
phospholipase C. This enzyme hydrolyzes polyphosphoinositides, 
leading to the formation of  inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP 3 ) and 
 diacylglycerol (DAG) ( Table 9–1 ,  Figure 9–1 ). IP 3 promotes the 
release of sequestered Ca 2+ from intracellular stores, which increases 
the cytoplasmic concentration of free Ca 2+ and the activation of 
various calcium-dependent protein kinases. Activation of these 
receptors may also increase influx of calcium across the cell’s plasma 
membrane. IP 3 is sequentially dephosphorylated, which ultimately 
leads to the formation of free inositol. DAG activates protein kinase 
C, which modulates activity of many signaling pathways. In addi-
tion, α 1 receptors activate signal transduction pathways that were 
originally described for peptide growth factor receptors that activate 
tyrosine kinases. For example, α 1 receptors have been found to acti-
vate mitogen-activated kinases (MAP kinases) and polyphospho-
inositol-3-kinase (PI-3-kinase). These pathways may have 
importance for the α 1 -receptor–mediated stimulation of cell growth 
and proliferation through the regulation of gene expression. 
 Alpha 2 receptors inhibit adenylyl cyclase activity and cause 
intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels to 
decrease. Alpha 2 -receptor–mediated inhibition of adenylyl cyclase 
activity is transduced by the inhibitory regulatory protein, G i 
( Figure 9–2 ). It is likely that not only α, but also the β-γ subunits 
of G i contribute to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. Alpha 2 receptors 
use other signaling pathways, including regulation of ion channel 
activities and the activities of important enzymes involved in sig-
nal transduction. Indeed, some of the effects of α 2 adrenoceptors 
are independent of their ability to inhibit adenylyl cyclase; for 
example, α 2 -receptor agonists cause platelet aggregation and a 
decrease in platelet cAMP levels, but it is not clear whether aggre-
gation is the result of the decrease in cAMP or other mechanisms 
involving G i -regulated effectors. 
 B. Beta Receptors 
 
Activation of all three receptor subtypes (β 1 , β 2 , and β 3 ) results in 
stimulation of adenylyl cyclase and increased conversion of 
TABLE 9–1 Adrenoceptor types and subtypes.
Receptor
Agonist
Antagonist
G Protein
Effects
Gene on Chromosome
`1 type
Phenylephrine
Prazosin
Gq
↑ IP3, DAG common to all
 α1A
C8
 α1B
C5
 α1D
C20
`2 type
Clonidine
Yohimbine
Gi
↓ cAMP common to all
 α2A
Oxymetazoline
C10
 α2B
Prazosin
C2
 α2C
Prazosin
C4
a type
Isoproterenol
Propranolol
Gs
↑ cAMP common to all
 β1
Dobutamine
Betaxolol
C10
 β2
Albuterol
Butoxamine
C5
 β3
C8
Dopamine type
Dopamine
 D1
Fenoldopam
Gs
↑ cAMP
C5
 D2
Bromocriptine
Gi
↓ cAMP
C11
 D3
Gi
↓ cAMP
C3
 D4
Clozapine
Gi
↓ cAMP
C11
 D5
Gs
↑ cAMP
C4
132    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cAMP ( Table 9–1 ,  Figure 9–2 ). 
Activation of the cyclase enzyme is mediated by the stimulatory 
coupling protein G s . Cyclic AMP is the major second messenger 
of β-receptor activation. For example, in the liver of many species, 
β-receptor–activated cAMP synthesis leads to a cascade of events 
culminating in the activation of glycogen phosphorylase. In the 
heart, β-receptor–activated cAMP synthesis increases the influx of 
calcium across the cell membrane and its sequestration inside the 
cell. Beta-receptor activation also promotes the relaxation of 
smooth muscle. Although the mechanism of the smooth muscle 
effect is uncertain, it may involve the phosphorylation of myosin 
light-chain kinase to an inactive form (see  Figure 12–1 ). Beta 
adrenoceptors may activate voltage-sensitive calcium channels in 
the heart via G s -mediated enhancement independently of changes 
in cAMP concentration. Under certain circumstances, β 2 recep-
tors may couple to G q proteins. These receptors have been dem-
onstrated to activate additional kinases, such as MAP kinases, by 
forming multi-subunit complexes within cells, which contain 
multiple signaling molecules. 
 The β 3 adrenoreceptor is a lower affinity receptor compared 
with β 1 and β 2 receptors but is more resistant to desensitization. It 
is found in several tissues, but its physiologic or pathologic role in 
humans is not clear. Selective agonists and antagonists have been 
developed but are not clinically available. 
 C. Dopamine Receptors 
 
The D 1 receptor is typically associated with the stimulation of 
adenylyl cyclase ( Table 9–1 ); for example, D 1 -receptor–induced 
smooth muscle relaxation is presumably due to cAMP accumula-
tion in the smooth muscle of those vascular beds in which dop-
amine is a vasodilator. D 2 receptors have been found to inhibit 
adenylyl cyclase activity, open potassium channels, and decrease 
calcium influx. 
{
{
Agonist
+
+
+
–
Agonist
Beta
receptor
Alpha2
receptor
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GTP
Enzyme
Enzyme-PO4
Biologic effect
R2C2 protein kinase
ADP
ATP
2R
GTP
GTP
ATP
cAMP
αS
αS
αi
αi
βγ
β
γ
2C
*
GTP
*
GS
Gi
GS
Adenylyl
cyclase
 FIGURE 9–2  Activation and inhibition of adenylyl cyclase by agonists that bind to catecholamine receptors. Binding to β adrenoceptors 
stimulates adenylyl cyclase by activating the stimulatory G protein, G s , which leads to the dissociation of its α subunit charged with GTP. This 
activated α s subunit directly activates adenylyl cyclase, resulting in an increased rate of synthesis of cAMP. Alpha 2 -adrenoceptor ligands inhibit 
adenylyl cyclase by causing dissociation of the inhibitory G protein, G i , into its subunits; ie, an activated α i subunit charged with GTP and a β-γ 
unit. The mechanism by which these subunits inhibit adenylyl cyclase is uncertain. cAMP binds to the regulatory subunit ( R  ) of cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase, leading to the liberation of active catalytic subunits  (C ) that phosphorylate specific protein substrates and modify their activity. 
These catalytic units also phosphorylate the cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), which modifies gene expression. See text for other 
actions of β and α 2 adrenoceptors. 
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     133
 Receptor Selectivity 
 Many clinically available adrenergic agonists have selectivity for 
the major (α 1 and α 2 versus β) adrenoreceptor types, but not for 
the subtypes of these major groups. Examples of clinically useful 
sympathomimetic agonists that are relatively selective for α 1 -, α 2 -, 
and β-adrenoceptor subgroups are compared with some nonselec-
tive agents in  Table 9–2 . Selectivity means that a drug may prefer-
entially bind to one subgroup of receptors at concentrations too 
low to interact extensively with another subgroup. However, selec-
tivity is not usually absolute (nearly absolute selectivity has been 
termed “specificity”), and at higher concentrations, a drug may 
also interact with related classes of receptors. The effects of a given 
drug may depend not only on its selectivity to adrenoreceptor 
types, but also to the relative expression of receptor subtypes in a 
given tissue. (see Box: Receptor Selectivity and Physiologic 
Functions of Adrenoceptor Subtypes). 
 Receptor Regulation 
 Responses mediated by adrenoceptors are not fixed and static. The 
number and function of adrenoceptors on the cell surface and 
their responses may be regulated by catecholamines themselves, 
other hormones and drugs, age, and a number of disease states (see 
 Chapter 2 ). These changes may modify the magnitude of a tissue’s 
physiologic response to catecholamines and can be important 
clinically during the course of treatment. One of the best-studied 
examples of receptor regulation is the  desensitization of adreno-
ceptors that may occur after exposure to catecholamines and other 
sympathomimetic drugs. After a cell or tissue has been exposed for 
a period of time to an agonist, that tissue often becomes less 
responsive to further stimulation by that agent (see  Figure 2–12 ). 
Other terms such as tolerance, refractoriness, and tachyphylaxis 
have also been used to denote desensitization. This process has 
potential clinical significance because it may limit the therapeutic 
response to sympathomimetic agents. 
 Many mechanisms have been found to contribute to desensiti-
zation. Some mechanisms function relatively slowly, over the 
course of hours or days, and these typically involve transcriptional 
or translational changes in the receptor protein level, or its migra-
tion to the cell surface. Other mechanisms of desensitization occur 
quickly, within minutes. Rapid modulation of receptor function 
in desensitized cells may involve critical covalent modification of 
the receptor, especially by phosphorylation on specific amino acid 
residues, association of these receptors with other proteins, or 
changes in their subcellular location. 
 There are two major categories of desensitization of responses 
mediated by G protein-coupled receptors.  Homologous desensi-
tization refers to loss of responsiveness exclusively of the receptors 
that have been exposed to repeated or sustained activation by an 
agonist.  Heterologous desensitization refers to the process by 
which desensitization of one receptor by its agonists also results in 
desensitization of another receptor that has not been directly acti-
vated by the agonist in question. 
 A major mechanism of desensitization that occurs rapidly 
involves phosphorylation of receptors by members of the  G protein-
coupled receptor kinase (GRK) family, of which there are seven 
members. Specific adrenoceptors become substrates for these 
kinases only when they are bound to an agonist. This mechanism 
is an example of homologous desensitization because it specifically 
involves only agonist-occupied receptors. 
 Phosphorylation of these receptors enhances their affinity 
for  arrestins , a family of four widely expressed proteins. Upon 
binding of arrestin, the capacity of the receptor to activate G 
proteins is blunted, presumably as a result of steric hindrance 
TABLE 9–2 Relative receptor affinities.
Relative Receptor Affinities
Alpha agonists
 Phenylephrine, methoxamine
α1 > α2 >>>>> β
 Clonidine, methylnorepinephrine
α2 > α1 >>>>> β
Mixed alpha and beta agonists
 Norepinephrine
α1 = α2; β1 >> β2
 Epinephrine
α1 = α2; β1 = β2
Beta agonists
 Dobutamine1
β1 > β2 >>>> α
 Isoproterenol
β1 = β2 >>>> α
 Albuterol, terbutaline, 
    metaproterenol, ritodrine
β2 >> β1 >>>> α
Dopamine agonists
 Dopamine
D1 = D2 >> β >> α
 Fenoldopam
D1 >> D2
1See text.
Receptor Selectivity and Physiologic 
Functions of Adrenoceptor Subtypes: 
Lessons from Knockout Mice
 Since pharmacologic tools used to evaluate the function of 
adrenoceptor subtypes have some limitations, a number of 
knockout mice have been developed with one or more adre-
noceptor genes subjected to loss of function mutations, as 
described in  Chapter 1 (see Box: Pharmacology & Genetics). 
These models have their own complexities, and extrapola-
tions from mice to humans may be uncertain. Nonetheless, 
these studies have yielded some novel insights. For example, 
α-adrenoceptor subtypes play an important role in cardiac 
responses, the α 2A -adrenoceptor subtype is critical in trans-
ducing the effects of α 2 agonists on blood pressure control, 
and β 1 receptors play a predominant role in directly increas-
ing heart rate in the mouse heart. 
134    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
(see  Figure 2–12 ). Arrestin then interacts with clathrin and 
clathrin adaptor AP2, leading to endocytosis of the receptor. In 
addition to blunting responses requiring the presence of the 
receptor on the cell surface, these regulatory processes may also 
contribute to novel mechanisms of receptor signaling via intra-
cellular pathways. 
 Receptor desensitization may also be mediated by second-
messenger feedback. For example, β adrenoceptors stimulate 
cAMP accumulation, which leads to activation of protein kinase 
A; protein kinase A can phosphorylate residues on β receptors, 
resulting in inhibition of receptor function. For the β 2 receptor, 
phosphorylation occurs on serine residues both in the third cyto-
plasmic loop and in the carboxyl terminal tail of the receptor. 
Similarly, activation of protein kinase C by G q -coupled receptors 
may lead to phosphorylation of this class of G protein-coupled 
receptors. This second-messenger feedback mechanism has been 
termed heterologous desensitization because activated protein 
kinase A or protein kinase C may phosphorylate any structurally 
similar receptor with the appropriate consensus sites for phospho-
rylation by these enzymes. 
 Adrenoceptor Polymorphisms 
 Since elucidation of the sequences of the genes encoding the α 1 , 
α 2 , and β subtypes of adrenoceptors, it has become clear that there 
are relatively common genetic polymorphisms for many of these 
receptor subtypes in humans. Some of these may lead to changes 
in critical amino acid sequences that have pharmacologic impor-
tance. Often, distinct polymorphisms occur in specific combina-
tions termed  haplotypes . Some polymorphisms have been shown 
to alter susceptibility to diseases such as heart failure, others to 
alter the propensity of a receptor to desensitize, and still others to 
alter therapeutic responses to drugs in diseases such as asthma. 
This remains an area of active research because studies have 
reported inconsistent results as to the pathophysiologic impor-
tance of some polymorphisms. 
 The Norepinephrine Transporter 
 When norepinephrine is released into the synaptic cleft, it binds 
to postsynaptic adrenoceptors to elicit the expected physiologic 
effect. However, just as the release of neurotransmitters is a tightly 
regulated process, the mechanisms for removal of neurotransmit-
ter must also be highly effective. The norepinephrine transporter 
(NET) is the principal route by which this occurs. It is particularly 
efficient in the synapses of the heart, where up to 90% of released 
norepinephrine is removed by the NET. Remaining synaptic nor-
epinephrine may escape into the extrasynaptic space and enter the 
bloodstream or be taken up into extraneuronal cells and metabo-
lized by catecholamine- N -methyltransferase. In other sites such as 
the vasculature, where synaptic structures are less well developed, 
removal may still be 60% or more by NET. The NET, often situ-
ated on the presynaptic neuronal membrane, pumps the synaptic 
norepinephrine back into the neuron cell cytoplasm. In the cell, 
this norepinephrine may reenter the vesicles or undergo metabo-
lism through monoamine oxidase to dihydroxyphenylglycol 
(DHPG). Elsewhere in the body similar transporters remove dop-
amine (dopamine transporter, DAT), serotonin (serotonin trans-
porter, SERT), and other neurotransmitters. The NET, surprisingly, 
has equivalent affinity for dopamine as for norepinephrine, and it 
can sometimes clear dopamine in brain areas where DAT is low, 
like the cortex. 
 Blockade of the NET, eg, by the nonselective psychostimulant 
cocaine or the NET selective agents atomoxetine or reboxetine, 
impairs this primary site of norepinephrine removal and thus 
synaptic norepinephrine levels rise, leading to greater stimulation 
of α and β adrenoceptors. In the periphery this effect may pro-
duce a clinical picture of sympathetic activation, but it is often 
counterbalanced by concomitant stimulation of α 2 adrenoceptors 
in the brainstem that reduces sympathetic activation. 
 However, the function of the norepinephrine and dopamine 
transporters is complex, and drugs can interact with the NET to 
actually reverse the direction of transport and induce the release of 
intraneuronal neurotransmitter. This is illustrated in  Figure 9–3 . 
Under normal circumstances (panel A), presynaptic NET (red) 
inactivates and recycles norepinephrine (NE, red) released by 
vesicular fusion. In panel B, amphetamine (black) acts as both an 
NET substrate and a reuptake blocker, eliciting reverse transport 
and blocking normal uptake, thereby increasing NE levels in and 
beyond the synaptic cleft. In panel C, agents such as methylpheni-
date and cocaine (hexagons) block NET-mediated NE reuptake 
and enhance NE signaling. 
 ■ MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY OF 
SYMPATHOMIMETIC DRUGS 
 Phenylethylamine may be considered the parent compound from 
which sympathomimetic drugs are derived ( Figure 9–4 ). This 
compound consists of a benzene ring with an ethylamine side 
chain. Substitutions may be made on (1) the benzene ring, (2) the 
terminal amino group, and (3) the α or β carbons of the ethylamino 
chain. Substitution by –OH groups at the 3 and 4 positions yields 
sympathomimetic drugs collectively known as catecholamines. 
The effects of modification of phenylethylamine are to change the 
affinity of the drugs for α and β receptors, spanning the range 
from almost pure α activity (methoxamine) to almost pure β 
activity (isoproterenol), as well as to influence the intrinsic ability 
to activate the receptors. 
 In addition to determining relative affinity to receptor subtype, 
chemical structure also determines the pharmacokinetic properties 
and bioavailability of these molecules. 
 A. Substitution on the Benzene Ring 
 
Maximal α and β activity is found with catecholamines, ie, drugs 
having –OH groups at the 3 and 4 positions on the benzene ring. 
The absence of one or the other of these groups, particularly the 
hydroxyl at C 3 , without other substitutions on the ring may dra-
matically reduce the potency of the drug. For example, phe-
nylephrine ( Figure 9–5 ) is much less potent than epinephrine; 
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     135
indeed, α-receptor affinity is decreased about 100-fold and β 
activity is almost negligible except at very high concentrations. 
On the other hand, catecholamines are subject to inactivation by 
catechol- O -methyltransferase (COMT), and because this enzyme 
is found in the gut and liver, catecholamines are not active orally 
(see  Chapter 6 ). Absence of one or both –OH groups on the phe-
nyl ring increases the bioavailability after oral administration and 
prolongs the duration of action. Furthermore, absence of ring 
–OH groups tends to increase the distribution of the molecule to 
the central nervous system. For example, ephedrine and amphet-
amine ( Figure 9–5 ) are orally active, have a prolonged duration of 
action, and produce central nervous system effects not typically 
observed with the catecholamines. 
 B. Substitution on the Amino Group 
 Increasing the size of alkyl substituents on the amino group tends 
to increase β-receptor activity. For example, methyl substitution 
on norepinephrine, yielding epinephrine, enhances activity at β 2 
receptors. Beta activity is further enhanced with isopropyl substi-
tution at the amino group (isoproterenol). Beta 2 -selective agonists 
generally require a large amino substituent group. The larger the 
substituent on the amino group, the lower the activity at α recep-
tors; for example, isoproterenol is very weak at α receptors. 
 C. Substitution on the Alpha Carbon 
 Substitutions at the α carbon block oxidation by monoamine oxi-
dase (MAO) and prolong the action of such drugs, particularly the 
VMAT
NET
NET
NE
C
Cocaine
NE
Blocked
transport
Effector cell
VMAT
NET
NET
NE
A
NE
Postganglionic
sympathetic
nerve ending
Effector cell
VMAT
NET
NET
NE
B
Amphetamine
NE
Reversed
transport
Effector cell
 FIGURE 9–3  Pharmacologic targeting of monoamine transporters. Commonly used drugs such as antidepressants, amphetamines, and 
cocaine target monoamine (norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin) transporters with different potencies.  A shows the mechanism of 
reuptake of norepinephrine (NE) back into the noradrenergic neuron via the norepinephrine transporter (NET), where a proportion is 
sequestered in presynaptic vesicles through the vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT).  B and  C show the effects of amphetamine and 
cocaine on these pathways. See text for details. 
136    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
noncatecholamines. Ephedrine and amphetamine are examples of 
α-substituted compounds ( Figure 9–5 ). Alpha-methyl com-
pounds are also called phenylisopropylamines. In addition to 
their resistance to oxidation by MAO, some phenylisopropylam-
ines have an enhanced ability to displace catecholamines from 
storage sites in noradrenergic nerves (see  Chapter 6 ). Therefore, a 
portion of their activity is dependent on the presence of normal 
norepinephrine stores in the body; they are indirectly acting 
sympathomimetics. 
 D. Substitution on the Beta Carbon 
 Direct-acting agonists typically have a β-hydroxyl group, although 
dopamine does not. In addition to facilitating activation of adre-
noceptors, this hydroxyl group may be important for storage of 
sympathomimetic amines in neural vesicles. 
 ORGAN SYSTEM EFFECTS OF 
SYMPATHOMIMETIC DRUGS 
 Cardiovascular System 
 General outlines of the cellular actions of sympathomimetics are 
presented in  Tables 6–3 and  9–3 . Sympathomimetics have promi-
nent cardiovascular effects because of widespread distribution of α 
and β adrenoceptors in the heart, blood vessels, and neural and 
hormonal systems involved in blood pressure regulation. The net 
effect of a given sympathomimetic in the intact organism depends 
not only on its relative selectivity for α or β adrenoceptors and its 
pharmacologic action at those receptors; any effect these agents 
have on blood pressure is counteracted by compensatory barore-
flex mechanisms aimed at restoring homeostasis. 
 The effects of sympathomimetic drugs on blood pressure can 
be explained on the basis of their effects on heart rate, myocardial 
function, peripheral vascular resistance, and venous return (see 
 Figure 6–7 and  Table 9–4 ). The endogenous catecholamines, nor-
epinephrine and epinephrine, have complex cardiovascular effects 
CH2
HO
HO
Catechol
CH2
NH2
α
β
Phenylethylamine
1
2
3
4
5
6
HO
HO
Norepinephrine
CH2
CH
NH2
OH
HO
HO
Epinephrine
CH2
CH
NH
OH
CH3
HO
HO
Isoproterenol
CH2
CH
NH
OH
HO
HO
Dopamine
CH2
CH2
NH2
CH
CH3
CH3
 FIGURE 9–4  Phenylethylamine and some important catecholamines. Catechol is shown for reference. 
HO
Phenylephrine
CH2
CH
NH
OH
CH3
Ephedrine
CH
CH3
CH
NH
OH
CH3
CH3O
Methoxamine
CH
CH3
CH
NH2
OH
CH
CH3
CH2
NH2
Amphetamine
OCH3
 FIGURE 9–5  Some examples of noncatecholamine sympath-
omimetic drugs. The isopropyl group is highlighted in color. 
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     137
because they activate both α and β receptors. It is easier to under-
stand these actions by first describing the cardiovascular effect of 
sympathomimetics that are selective for a given adrenoreceptor. 
 A. Effects of Alpha 1 -Receptor Activation 
 
Alpha 1 receptors are widely expressed in vascular beds, and their 
activation leads to arterial and venous vasoconstriction. Their 
direct effect on cardiac function is of relatively less importance. A 
relatively pure α agonist such as phenylephrine increases periph-
eral arterial resistance and decreases venous capacitance. The 
enhanced arterial resistance usually leads to a dose-dependent rise 
in blood pressure ( Figure 9–6 ). In the presence of normal cardio-
vascular reflexes, the rise in blood pressure elicits a baroreceptor-
mediated increase in vagal tone with slowing of the heart rate, 
which may be quite marked ( Figure 9–7 ). However, cardiac out-
put may not diminish in proportion to this reduction in rate, since 
increased venous return may increase stroke volume. Furthermore, 
direct α-adrenoceptor stimulation of the heart may have a modest 
positive inotropic action. The magnitude of the restraining effect 
of the baroreflex is quite dramatic. If baroreflex function is 
removed by pretreatment with the ganglionic blocker trimethaphan, 
the pressor effect of phenylephrine is increased approximately 
tenfold, and bradycardia is no longer observed ( Figure 9–7 ), con-
firming that the decrease in heart rate associated with the increase 
in blood pressure induced by phenylephrine was reflex in nature 
rather than a direct effect of α 1 -receptor activation. 
 Patients who have an impairment of autonomic function (due to 
pure autonomic failure as in the case study or to more common 
conditions such as diabetic autonomic neuropathy) exhibit this 
extreme hypersensitivity to most pressor and depressor stimuli, 
including medications. This is to a large extent due to failure of 
baroreflex buffering. Such patients may have exaggerated increases in 
heart rate or blood pressure when taking sympathomimetics with 
β- and α-adrenergic activity, respectively. This, however, can be used 
as an advantage in their treatment. The α agonist midodrine is com-
monly used to ameliorate orthostatic hypotension in these patients. 
 There are major differences in receptor types predominantly 
expressed in the various vascular beds ( Table 9–4 ). The skin vessels 
have predominantly α receptors and constrict in response to epi-
nephrine and norepinephrine, as do the splanchnic vessels. Vessels 
in skeletal muscle may constrict or dilate depending on whether α 
or β receptors are activated. The blood vessels of the nasal mucosa 
express α receptors, and local vasoconstriction induced by sym-
pathomimetics explains their decongestant action (see Therapeutic 
Uses of Sympathomimetic Drugs). 
 B. Effects of Alpha 2 -Receptor Activation 
 Alpha 2 adrenoceptors are present in the vasculature, and their acti-
vation leads to vasoconstriction. This effect, however, is observed 
only when α 2 agonists are given locally, by rapid intravenous injec-
tion or in very high oral doses. When given systemically, these 
vascular effects are obscured by the central effects of α 2 receptors, 
which lead to inhibition of sympathetic tone and blood pressure. 
Hence, α 2 agonists are used as sympatholytics in the treatment of 
hypertension (see  Chapter 11 ). In patients with pure autonomic 
failure, characterized by neural degeneration of postganglionic 
noradrenergic fibers, clonidine may increase blood pressure because 
the central sympatholytic effects of clonidine become irrelevant, 
whereas the peripheral vasoconstriction remains intact. 
 C. Effects of Beta-Receptor Activation 
 The blood pressure response to a β-adrenoceptor agonist depends 
on its contrasting effects on the heart and the vasculature. 
Stimulation of β receptors in the heart increases cardiac output by 
increasing contractility and by direct activation of the sinus node 
to increase heart rate. Beta agonists also decrease peripheral resis-
tance by activating β 2 receptors, leading to vasodilation in certain 
vascular beds ( Table 9–4 ). Isoproterenol is a nonselective β agonist; 
it activates both β 1 and β 2 receptors. The net effect is to maintain 
or slightly increase systolic pressure and to lower diastolic pressure, 
so that mean blood pressure is decreased ( Figure 9–6 ). 
 Direct effects on the heart are determined largely by β 1 recep-
tors, although β 2 and to a lesser extent α receptors are also 
involved, especially in heart failure. Beta-receptor activation 
results in increased calcium influx in cardiac cells. This has both 
TABLE 9–3 Distribution of adrenoceptor subtypes.
Type
Tissue
Actions
α1
Most vascular smooth 
muscle (innervated)
Contraction
Pupillary dilator muscle
Contraction (dilates pupil)
Pilomotor smooth muscle
Erects hair
Prostate
Contraction
Heart
Increases force of con-
traction
α2
Postsynaptic CNS neurons
Probably multiple
Platelets
Aggregation
Adrenergic and cholinergic 
nerve terminals
Inhibits transmitter 
release
Some vascular smooth 
muscle
Contraction
Fat cells
Inhibits lipolysis
β1
Heart, juxtaglomerular cells
Increases force and rate 
of contraction; increases 
renin release
β2
Respiratory, uterine, and 
vascular smooth muscle
Promotes smooth muscle 
relaxation
Skeletal muscle
Promotes potassium 
uptake
Human liver
Activates glycogenolysis
β3
Fat cells
Activates lipolysis
D1
Smooth muscle
Dilates renal blood 
vessels
D2
Nerve endings
Modulates transmitter 
release
138    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
electrical and mechanical consequences. Pacemaker activity—
both normal (sinoatrial node) and abnormal (eg, Purkinje 
fibers)—is increased ( positive chronotropic effect). Conduction 
velocity in the atrioventricular node is increased ( positive dromo-
tropic effect), and the refractory period is decreased. Intrinsic 
contractility is increased ( positive inotropic effect), and relax-
ation is accelerated. As a result, the twitch response of isolated 
cardiac muscle is increased in tension but abbreviated in duration. 
In the intact heart, intraventricular pressure rises and falls more 
rapidly, and ejection time is decreased. These direct effects are eas-
ily demonstrated in the absence of reflexes evoked by changes in 
blood pressure, eg, in isolated myocardial preparations and in 
patients with ganglionic blockade. In the presence of normal reflex 
activity, the direct effects on heart rate may be dominated by a 
reflex response to blood pressure changes. Physiologic stimulation 
of the heart by catecholamines tends to increase coronary blood 
flow. Expression of β 3 adrenoreceptors has been detected in the 
human heart and may be upregulated in disease states, but its 
relevance to human disease is unclear. 
 D. Effects of Dopamine-Receptor Activation 
 
Intravenous administration of dopamine promotes vasodilation of 
renal, splanchnic, coronary, cerebral, and perhaps other resistance 
vessels, via activation of D 1 receptors. Activation of the D 1 recep-
tors in the renal vasculature may also induce natriuresis. The renal 
effects of dopamine have been used clinically to improve perfusion 
to the kidney in situations of oliguria (abnormally low urinary 
output). The activation of presynaptic D 2 receptors suppresses 
norepinephrine release, but it is unclear if this contributes to car-
diovascular effects of dopamine. In addition, dopamine activates 
β 1 receptors in the heart. At low doses, peripheral resistance may 
decrease. At higher rates of infusion, dopamine activates vascular 
α receptors, leading to vasoconstriction, including in the renal 
vascular bed. Consequently, high rates of infusion of dopamine 
may mimic the actions of epinephrine. 
 Noncardiac Effects of Sympathomimetics 
 Adrenoceptors are distributed in virtually all organ systems. This 
section focuses on the activation of adrenoceptors that are 
responsible for the therapeutic effects of sympathomimetics or 
that explain their adverse effects. A more detailed description of 
the therapeutic use of sympathomimetics is given later in this 
chapter. 
 Activation of β 2 receptors in  bronchial smooth muscle leads 
to bronchodilation, and β 2 agonists are important in the treat-
ment of asthma (see  Chapter 20 and  Table 9–3 ). 
 In the  eye, the radial pupillary dilator muscle of the iris con-
tains α receptors; activation by drugs such as phenylephrine causes 
mydriasis (see  Figure 6–9 ). Alpha stimulants also have important 
effects on intraocular pressure. Alpha agonists increase the outflow 
of aqueous humor from the eye and can be used clinically to 
reduce intraocular pressure. In contrast, β agonists have little 
effect, but β  antagonists decrease the production of aqueous 
humor. These effects are important in the treatment of glaucoma 
(see  Chapter 10 ), a leading cause of blindness. 
TABLE 9–4 Cardiovascular responses to sympathomimetic amines.
Phenylephrine
Epinephrine
lsoproterenol
Vascular resistance (tone)
 Cutaneous, mucous membranes (α)
↑↑
↑↑
0
 Skeletal muscle (β2, α)
↑
↓ or ↑
↓↓
 Renal (α, D1)
↑
↑
↓
 Splanchnic (α, β)
↑↑
↓ or ↑1
↓
 Total peripheral resistance
↑↑↑
↓ or ↑1
↓↓
 Venous tone (α, β)
↑
↑
↓
Cardiac
 Contractility (β1)
0 or ↑
↑↑↑
↑↑↑
 Heart rate (predominantly β1)
↓↓ (vagal reflex)
↑ or ↓
↑↑↑
 Stroke volume
0, ↓, ↑
↑
↑
 Cardiac output
↓
↑
↑↑
Blood pressure
 Mean
↑↑
↑
↓
 Diastolic
↑↑
↓ or ↑1
↓↓
 Systolic
↑↑
↑↑
0 or ↓
 Pulse pressure
0
↑↑
↑↑
1Small doses decrease, large doses increase.
↑ = increase; ↓ = decrease; 0 = no change.
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     139
 In  genitourinary organs, the bladder base, urethral sphincter, 
and prostate contain α receptors that mediate contraction and 
therefore promote urinary continence. The specific subtype of α 1 
receptor involved in mediating constriction of the bladder base and 
prostate is uncertain, but α 1A receptors probably play an important 
role. This effect explains why urinary retention is a potential 
adverse effect of administration of the α 1 agonist midodrine. 
 Alpha-receptor activation in the ductus deferens, seminal vesi-
cles, and prostate plays a role in normal ejaculation. The detumes-
cence of erectile tissue that normally follows ejaculation is also 
brought about by norepinephrine (and possibly neuropeptide Y) 
released from sympathetic nerves. Alpha activation appears to have 
a similar detumescent effect on erectile tissue in female animals. 
 The  salivary glands contain adrenoceptors that regulate the 
secretion of amylase and water. However, certain sympathomi-
metic drugs, eg, clonidine, produce symptoms of dry mouth. The 
mechanism of this effect is uncertain; it is likely that central ner-
vous system effects are responsible, although peripheral effects 
may contribute. 
 The  apocrine sweat glands, located on the palms of the hands 
and a few other areas, respond to adrenoceptor stimulants with 
increased sweat production. These are the apocrine nonthermo-
regulatory glands usually associated with psychological stress. 
(The diffusely distributed thermoregulatory eccrine sweat glands 
are regulated by  sympathetic cholinergic postganglionic nerves that 
activate muscarinic cholinoceptors; see  Chapter 6 .) 
 Sympathomimetic drugs have important effects on intermedi-
ary  metabolism. Activation of β adrenoceptors in fat cells leads to 
increased lipolysis with enhanced release of free fatty acids and 
glycerol into the blood. Beta 3 adrenoceptors play a role in mediat-
ing this response in animals, but their role in humans is probably 
minor. Human fat cells also contain α 2 receptors that inhibit 
lipolysis by decreasing intracellular cAMP. Sympathomimetic 
drugs enhance glycogenolysis in the liver, which leads to increased 
glucose release into the circulation. In the human liver, the effects 
of catecholamines are probably mediated mainly by β receptors, 
though α 1 receptors may also play a role. Catecholamines in high 
concentration may also cause metabolic acidosis. Activation of β 2 
adrenoceptors by endogenous epinephrine or by sympathomi-
metic drugs promotes the uptake of potassium into cells, leading 
to a fall in extracellular potassium. This may result in a fall in the 
plasma potassium concentration during stress or protect against a 
rise in plasma potassium during exercise. Blockade of these recep-
tors may accentuate the rise in plasma potassium that occurs dur-
ing exercise. On the other hand, epinephrine has been used to 
treat hyperkalemia in certain conditions, but other alternatives are 
more commonly used. Beta receptors and α 2 receptors that are 
expressed in pancreatic islets tend to increase and decrease insulin 
secretion, respectively, although the major regulator of insulin 
release is the plasma concentration of glucose. 
 Catecholamines are important endogenous regulators of  hor-
mone secretion from a number of glands. As mentioned above, 
 FIGURE 9–6  Effects of an α-selective (phenylephrine), β-selective (isoproterenol), and nonselective (epinephrine) sympathomimetic, given 
as an intravenous bolus injection to a dog. Reflexes are blunted but not eliminated in this anesthetized animal. BP, blood pressure; HR, heart rate. 
140    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
insulin secretion is stimulated by β receptors and inhibited by α 2 
receptors. Similarly, renin secretion is stimulated by β 1 and inhib-
ited by α 2 receptors; indeed, β-receptor antagonist drugs may lower 
blood pressure in patients with hypertension at least in part by low-
ering plasma renin. Adrenoceptors also modulate the secretion of 
parathyroid hormone, calcitonin, thyroxine, and gastrin; however, 
the physiologic significance of these control mechanisms is probably 
limited. In high concentrations, epinephrine and related agents 
cause leukocytosis, in part by promoting demargination of seques-
tered white blood cells back into the general circulation. 
 The action of sympathomimetics on the  central nervous sys-
tem varies dramatically, depending on their ability to cross the 
blood-brain barrier. The catecholamines are almost completely 
excluded by this barrier, and subjective CNS effects are noted 
only at the highest rates of infusion. These effects have been 
described as ranging from “nervousness” to “an adrenaline rush” 
or “a feeling of impending disaster.” Furthermore, peripheral 
effects of β-adrenoceptor agonists such as tachycardia and tremor 
are similar to the somatic manifestations of anxiety. In contrast, 
noncatecholamines with indirect actions, such as amphetamines, 
which readily enter the central nervous system from the circulation, 
produce qualitatively very different CNS effects. These actions vary 
from mild alerting, with improved attention to boring tasks; 
through elevation of mood, insomnia, euphoria, and anorexia; to 
full-blown psychotic behavior. These effects are not readily assigned 
to either α- or β-mediated actions and may represent enhancement 
of dopamine-mediated processes or other effects of these drugs in 
the CNS. 
 SPECIFIC SYMPATHOMIMETIC DRUGS 
 Endogenous Catecholamines 
 Epinephrine (adrenaline) is an agonist at both α and β receptors. 
It is therefore a very potent vasoconstrictor and cardiac stimulant. 
The rise in systolic blood pressure that occurs after epinephrine 
release or administration is caused by its positive inotropic and 
chronotropic actions on the heart (predominantly β 1 receptors) 
and the vasoconstriction induced in many vascular beds (α recep-
tors). Epinephrine also activates β 2 receptors in some vessels (eg, 
skeletal muscle blood vessels), leading to their dilation. 
Consequently, total peripheral resistance may actually fall, explaining 
0
100
0
80
BP
mm Hg
HR
bpm
Intact
Ganglionic blockade
0
100
0
100
Phe
75 μg
Phe
7.5 μg
 FIGURE 9–7  Effects of ganglionic blockade on the response to phenylephrine (Phe) in a human subject.  Left: The cardiovascular effect of 
the selective α agonist phenylephrine when given as an intravenous bolus to a subject with intact autonomic baroreflex function. Note that the 
increase in blood pressure (BP) is associated with a baroreflex-mediated compensatory decrease in heart rate (HR).  Right: The response in the 
same subject after autonomic reflexes were abolished by the ganglionic blocker trimethaphan. Note that resting blood pressure is decreased 
and heart rate is increased by trimethaphan because of sympathetic and parasympathetic withdrawal (HR scale is different). In the absence of 
baroreflex buffering, approximately a tenfold lower dose of phenylephrine is required to produce a similar increase in blood pressure. Note also 
the lack of compensatory decrease in heart rate. 
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     141
the fall in diastolic pressure that is sometimes seen with epineph-
rine injection ( Figure 9–6 ;  Table 9–4 ). Activation of β 2 receptors 
in skeletal muscle contributes to increased blood flow during exer-
cise. Under physiologic conditions, epinephrine functions largely 
as a hormone; after release from the adrenal medulla into the 
blood, it acts on distant cells. 
 Norepinephrine (levarterenol, noradrenaline) is an agonist at 
both α 1 and α 2 receptors. Norepinephrine also activates β 1 recep-
tors with similar potency as epinephrine, but has relatively little 
effect on β 2 receptors. Consequently, norepinephrine increases 
peripheral resistance and both diastolic and systolic blood pressure. 
Compensatory baroreflex activation tends to overcome the direct 
positive chronotropic effects of norepinephrine; however, the posi-
tive inotropic effects on the heart are maintained. 
 Dopamine is the immediate precursor in the synthesis of nor-
epinephrine (see  Figure 6–5 ). Its cardiovascular effects were 
described above. Endogenous dopamine may have more impor-
tant effects in regulating sodium excretion and renal function. It 
is an important neurotransmitter in the central nervous system 
and is involved in the reward stimulus relevant to addiction. Its 
deficiency in the basal ganglia leads to Parkinson’s disease, which 
is treated with its precursor levodopa. Dopamine receptors are also 
targets for antipsychotic drugs. 
 Direct-Acting Sympathomimetics 
 Phenylephrine was discussed previously when describing the 
actions of a relatively pure α 1 agonist ( Table 9–2 ). Because it is not 
a catechol derivative ( Figure 9–4 ), it is not inactivated by COMT 
and has a longer duration of action than the catecholamines. It is 
an effective mydriatic and decongestant and can be used to raise 
the blood pressure ( Figure 9–6 ). 
 Midodrine is a prodrug that is enzymatically hydrolyzed to 
desglymidodrine, a selective α 1 -receptor agonist. The peak concen-
tration of desglymidodrine is achieved about 1 hour after midodrine 
is administered. The primary indication for midodrine is the treat-
ment of orthostatic hypotension, typically due to impaired auto-
nomic nervous system function. Although the drug has efficacy in 
diminishing the fall of blood pressure when the patient is standing, 
it may cause hypertension when the subject is supine. The Food and 
Drug Administration considered withdrawing approval of this drug 
in 2010 because required postapproval studies that verify the clinical 
benefit of the drug had not been done. Action was suspended in 
response to prescriber and patient requests. 
 Methoxamine acts pharmacologically like phenylephrine, 
since it is predominantly a direct-acting α 1 -receptor agonist. It 
may cause a prolonged increase in blood pressure due to vasocon-
striction; it also causes a vagally mediated bradycardia. Methoxamine 
is available for parenteral use, but clinical applications are rare and 
limited to hypotensive states. 
 Alpha 2 - selective agonists have an important ability to decrease 
blood pressure through actions in the central nervous system even 
though direct application to a blood vessel may cause vasocon-
striction. Such drugs (eg,  clonidine, methyldopa, guanfacine, 
guanabenz ) are useful in the treatment of hypertension (and some 
other conditions) and are discussed in  Chapter 11 . Sedation is a 
recognized side effect of these drugs, and newer α 2 -agonists (with 
activity also at imidazoline receptors) with fewer central nervous 
system side effects are available outside the USA for the treatment 
of hypertension ( moxonidine, rilmenidine). On the other hand, 
the primary indication of  dexmedetomidine is for sedation of 
initially intubated and mechanically ventilated patients during 
treatment in an intensive care setting. It also reduces the require-
ments for opioids in pain control. Finally,  tizanidine is used as a 
central muscle relaxant. 
 Xylometazoline and  oxymetazoline are direct-acting α ago-
nists. These drugs have been used as topical decongestants because 
of their ability to promote constriction of the nasal mucosa. When 
taken in large doses, oxymetazoline may cause hypotension, pre-
sumably because of a central clonidine-like effect (see  Chapter 
11 ). Oxymetazoline has significant affinity for α 2A receptors. 
 Isoproterenol (isoprenaline) is a very potent β-receptor agonist 
and has little effect on α receptors. The drug has positive chrono-
tropic and inotropic actions; because isoproterenol activates β 
receptors almost exclusively, it is a potent vasodilator. These actions 
lead to a marked increase in cardiac output associated with a fall in 
diastolic and mean arterial pressure and a lesser decrease or a slight 
increase in systolic pressure ( Table 9–4 ;  Figure 9–6 ). 
 Beta-selective agonists are very important because the separa-
tion of β 1 and β 2 effects ( Table 9–2 ), although incomplete, is 
sufficient to reduce adverse effects in several clinical applications. 
 Beta 1 -selective agents include  dobutamine and a partial ago-
nist,  prenalterol ( Figure 9–8 ). Because they are less effective in 
activating vasodilator β 2 receptors, they may increase cardiac out-
put with less reflex tachycardia than occurs with nonselective β 
agonists such as isoproterenol.  Dobutamine was initially consid-
ered a relatively β 1 -selective agonist, but its actions are more com-
plex. Its chemical structure resembles dopamine, but its actions are 
mediated mostly by activation of α and β receptors. Clinical 
preparations of dobutamine are a racemic mixture of (−) and (+) 
isomers, each with contrasting activity at α 1 and α 2 receptors. The 
(+) isomer is a potent β 1 agonist and an α 1 -receptor antagonist. 
The (−) isomer is a potent α 1 agonist, which is capable of causing 
significant vasoconstriction when given alone. The resultant car-
diovascular effects of dobutamine reflect this complex pharmacol-
ogy. Dobutamine has a positive inotropic action caused by the 
isomer with predominantly β-receptor activity. It has relatively 
greater inotropic than chronotropic effect compared with isopro-
terenol. Activation of α 1 receptors probably explains why periph-
eral resistance does not decrease significantly. 
 Beta 2 -selective agents have achieved an important place in the 
treatment of asthma and are discussed in  Chapter 20 . An addi-
tional application is to achieve uterine relaxation in premature 
labor (ritodrine; see below). Some examples of β 2 -selective drugs 
currently in use are shown in  Figures 9–8 and  20–4 ; many more 
are available or under investigation. 
 Mixed-Acting Sympathomimetics 
 Ephedrine occurs in various plants and has been used in China 
for over 2000 years; it was introduced into Western medicine in 
1924 as the first orally active sympathomimetic drug. It is found 
142    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
in ma huang, a popular herbal medication (see  Chapter 64 ). Ma 
huang contains multiple ephedrine-like alkaloids in addition to 
ephedrine. Because ephedrine is a noncatechol phenylisopro-
pylamine ( Figure 9–5 ), it has high bioavailability and a relatively 
long duration of action—hours rather than minutes. As with 
many other phenylisopropylamines, a significant fraction of the 
drug is excreted unchanged in the urine. Since it is a weak base, its 
excretion can be accelerated by acidification of the urine. 
 Ephedrine has not been extensively studied in humans despite 
its long history of use. Its ability to activate β receptors probably 
accounted for its earlier use in asthma. Because it gains access to 
the central nervous system, it is a mild stimulant. Ingestion of 
ephedrine alkaloids contained in ma huang has raised important 
safety concerns.  Pseudoephedrine, one of four ephedrine 
enantiomers, has been available over the counter as a component 
of many decongestant mixtures. However, the use of pseu-
doephedrine as a precursor in the illicit manufacture of metham-
phetamine has led to restrictions on its sale. 
 Phenylpropanolamine was a common component in over-
the-counter appetite suppressants. It was removed from the mar-
ket because its use was associated with hemorrhagic strokes in 
young women. The mechanism of this potential adverse effect is 
unknown, but the drug can increase blood pressure in patients 
with impaired autonomic reflexes. 
 Indirect-Acting Sympathomimetics 
 As noted previously, indirect-acting sympathomimetics can have 
one of two different mechanisms ( Figure 9–3 ). First, they may 
enter the sympathetic nerve ending and displace stored cate-
cholamine transmitter. Such drugs have been called amphetamine-
like or “displacers.” Second, they may inhibit the reuptake of 
released transmitter by interfering with the action of the norepi-
nephrine transporter, NET. 
 A. Amphetamine-Like 
 
Amphetamine is a racemic mixture of phenylisopropylamine 
( Figure 9–5 ) that is important chiefly because of its use and misuse 
as a central nervous system stimulant (see  Chapter 32 ). 
Pharmacokinetically, it is similar to ephedrine; however, amphet-
amine even more readily enters the central nervous system, where 
it has marked stimulant effects on mood and alertness and a 
depressant effect on appetite. Its D-isomer is more potent than the 
L-isomer. Amphetamine’s actions are mediated through the release 
of norepinephrine and, to some extent, dopamine. 
 Methamphetamine ( N -methylamphetamine) is very similar to 
amphetamine with an even higher ratio of central to peripheral 
actions.  Phenmetrazine is a variant phenylisopropylamine with 
amphetamine-like effects. It has been promoted as an anorexiant 
and is also a popular drug of abuse.  Methylphenidate is an 
amphetamine variant whose major pharmacologic effects and 
abuse potential are similar to those of amphetamine. 
Methylphenidate may be effective in some children with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (see Therapeutic Uses of 
Sympathomimetic Drugs).  Modafinil is a psychostimulant that 
differs from amphetamine in structure, neurochemical profile, and 
behavioral effects. Its mechanism of action is not fully known. It 
Dobutamine
CH2
CH2
CH
HO
HO
CH3
HO
HO
HO
CH2
CH2
NH
HO
Ritodrine
CH2
CH2
HO
CH
CH3
CH
NH
HO
Prenalterol
BETA1-SELECTIVE
BETA2-SELECTIVE
CH2
O
CH
CH2
NH
CH(CH3)2
OH
OH
Terbutaline
OH
CH
CH2
NH
C(CH3)3
 FIGURE 9–8  Examples of β 1 - and β 2 -selective agonists. 
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     143
inhibits both norepinephrine and dopamine transporters, and it 
increases synaptic concentrations not only of norepinephrine and 
dopamine, but also of serotonin and glutamate, while decreasing 
GABA levels. It is used primarily to improve wakefulness in nar-
colepsy and some other conditions. It is often associated with 
increases in blood pressure and heart rate, though these are usually 
mild (see Therapeutic Uses of Sympathomimetic Drugs). 
 Tyramine (see  Figure 6–5 ) is a normal by product of tyrosine 
metabolism in the body and can be produced in high concentra-
tions in protein-rich foods by decarboxylation of tyrosine during 
fermentation ( Table 9–5 ). It is readily metabolized by MAO in the 
liver and is normally inactive when taken orally because of a very 
high first-pass effect, ie, low bioavailability. If administered paren-
terally, it has an indirect sympathomimetic action caused by the 
release of stored catecholamines. Consequently, tyramine’s spec-
trum of action is similar to that of norepinephrine. In patients 
treated with MAO inhibitors—particularly inhibitors of the 
MAO-A isoform—this effect of tyramine may be greatly intensi-
fied, leading to marked increases in blood pressure. This occurs 
because of increased bioavailability of tyramine and increased 
neuronal stores of catecholamines. Patients taking MAO inhibi-
tors must be very careful to avoid tyramine-containing foods. 
There are differences in the effects of various MAO inhibitors on 
tyramine bioavailability, and isoform-specific or reversible enzyme 
antagonists may be safer (see Chapters 28 and 30). 
 B. Catecholamine Reuptake Inhibitors  
 Many inhibitors of the amine transporters for norepinephrine, dop-
amine, and serotonin are used clinically. Although specificity is not 
absolute, some are highly selective for one of the transporters. Many 
antidepressants, particularly the older tricyclic antidepressants, can 
inhibit norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake to different degrees. 
This may lead to orthostatic tachycardia as a side effect. Some anti-
depressants of this class, particularly imipramine, can induce ortho-
static hypotension presumably by their clonidine-like effect or by 
blocking α 1 receptors, but the mechanism remains unclear. 
 Atomoxetine is a selective inhibitor of the norepinephrine 
reuptake transporter. Its actions, therefore, are mediated by poten-
tiation of norepinephrine levels in noradrenergic synapses. It is 
used in the treatment of attention deficit disorders (see below). 
Atomoxetine has surprisingly little cardiovascular effect because it 
has a clonidine-like effect in the central nervous system to decrease 
sympathetic outflow while at the same time potentiating the 
effects of norepinephrine in the periphery. However, it may 
increase blood pressure in some patients. Norepinephrine reuptake 
is particularly important in the heart, especially during sympa-
thetic stimulation, and this explains why atomoxetine and other 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors frequently cause orthostatic 
tachycardia.  Reboxetine has similar characteristics as atomox-
etine.  Sibutramine is a serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitor and was initially approved by the FDA as an appetite 
suppressant for long-term treatment of obesity. It has been taken 
off the market in the United States and several other countries 
because it has been associated with a small increase in cardiovascu-
lar events including strokes in patients with a history of cardiovas-
cular disease, which outweighed the benefits gained by modest 
weight reduction.  Duloxetine is a widely used antidepressant with 
balanced serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitory effects 
(see  Chapter 30 ). Increased cardiovascular risk has not been 
reported with duloxetine. Duloxetine and  milnacipran , another 
serotonin and norepinephrine transporter blocker, are approved 
for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia (see Chapter 30). 
 Cocaine is a local anesthetic with a peripheral sympathomi-
metic action that results from inhibition of transmitter reuptake at 
noradrenergic synapses (Figure 9-3). It readily enters the central 
nervous system and produces an amphetamine-like psychological 
effect that is shorter lasting and more intense than amphetamine. 
The major action of cocaine in the central nervous system is to 
inhibit dopamine reuptake into neurons in the “pleasure centers” 
of the brain. These properties and the fact that a rapid onset of 
action can be obtained when smoked, snorted into the nose, or 
injected, has made cocaine a heavily abused drug (see  Chapter 32 ). 
It is interesting that dopamine-transporter knockout mice still 
self-administer cocaine, suggesting that cocaine may have addi-
tional pharmacologic targets. 
 Dopamine Agonists 
 Levodopa, which is converted to dopamine in the body, and  dop-
amine agonists with central actions are of considerable value in 
the treatment of Parkinson’s disease and prolactinemia. These 
agents are discussed in Chapters 28 and 37. 
TABLE 9–5  Foods reputed to have a high content of 
tyramine or other sympathomimetic 
agents.
Food
Tyramine Content of an 
Average Serving
Beer
4–45 mg
Broad beans, fava beans
Negligible (but contains dop-
amine)
Cheese, natural or aged
Nil to 130 mg (cheddar, Gruyère, 
and Stilton especially high)
Chicken liver
Nil to 9 mg
Chocolate
Negligible (but contains phenyl-
ethylamine)
Sausage, fermented (eg, salami, 
pepperoni, summer sausage)
Nil to 74 mg
Smoked or pickled fish (eg, pick-
led herring)
Nil to 198 mg
Snails
(No data found)
Wine (red)
Nil to 3 mg
Yeast (eg, dietary brewer’s yeast 
supplements)
2–68 mg
Note: In a patient taking an irreversible monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor drug, 
20–50 mg of tyramine in a meal may increase the blood pressure significantly (see 
also Chapter 30: Antidepressant Agents). Note that only cheese, sausage, pickled fish, 
and yeast supplements contain sufficient tyramine to be consistently dangerous. This 
does not rule out the possibility that some preparations of other foods might contain 
significantly greater than average amounts of tyramine. Amounts in mg as per regular 
food portion.
144    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
 Fenoldopam is a D 1 -receptor agonist that selectively leads to 
peripheral vasodilation in some vascular beds. The primary indica-
tion for fenoldopam is in the intravenous treatment of severe 
hypertension (see  Chapter 11 ). 
 THERAPEUTIC USES OF 
SYMPATHOMIMETIC DRUGS 
 Cardiovascular Applications 
 In keeping with the critical role of the sympathetic nervous system 
in the control of blood pressure, a major area of application of the 
sympathomimetics is in cardiovascular conditions. 
 A. Treatment of Acute Hypotension 
 
Acute hypotension may occur in a variety of settings such as severe 
hemorrhage, decreased blood volume, cardiac arrhythmias, neuro-
logic disease or accidents, adverse reactions or overdose of medica-
tions such as antihypertensive drugs, and infection. If cerebral, 
renal, and cardiac perfusion is maintained, hypotension itself does 
not usually require vigorous direct treatment. Rather, placing the 
patient in the recumbent position and ensuring adequate fluid 
volume while the primary problem is determined and treated is 
usually the correct course of action. The use of sympathomimetic 
drugs merely to elevate a blood pressure that is not an immediate 
threat to the patient may increase morbidity. Sympathomimetic 
drugs may be used in a hypotensive emergency to preserve cerebral 
and coronary blood flow. The treatment is usually of short dura-
tion while the appropriate intravenous fluid or blood is being 
administered. Direct-acting α agonists such as  norepinephrine, 
phenylephrine, and  methoxamine have been used in this setting 
when vasoconstriction is desired. 
 Shock is a complex acute cardiovascular syndrome that results 
in a critical reduction in perfusion of vital tissues and a wide range 
of systemic effects. Shock is usually associated with hypotension, 
an altered mental state, oliguria, and metabolic acidosis. If 
untreated, shock usually progresses to a refractory deteriorating 
state and death. The three major mechanisms responsible for 
shock are hypovolemia, cardiac insufficiency, and altered vascular 
resistance. Volume replacement and treatment of the underlying 
disease are the mainstays of the treatment of shock. Although 
sympathomimetic drugs have been used in the treatment of virtu-
ally all forms of shock, their efficacy is unclear. 
 In most forms of shock, intense vasoconstriction, mediated by 
reflex sympathetic nervous system activation, is present. Indeed, 
efforts aimed at reducing rather than increasing peripheral resis-
tance may be more fruitful to improve cerebral, coronary, and 
renal perfusion. A decision to use vasoconstrictors or vasodilators 
is best made on the basis of information about the underlying 
cause. Their use  may require invasive monitoring. 
 Cardiogenic shock and acute heart failure, usually due to mas-
sive myocardial infarction, has a poor prognosis. Mechanically 
assisted perfusion and emergency cardiac surgery have been utilized 
in some settings. Optimal fluid replacement requires monitoring of 
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and other parameters of cardiac 
function. Positive inotropic agents such as dopamine or dobutamine 
may provide short-term relief of heart failure symptoms in patients 
with advanced ventricular dysfunction. In low to moderate doses, 
these drugs may increase cardiac output and, compared with norepi-
nephrine, cause relatively little peripheral vasoconstriction. 
Isoproterenol increases heart rate and work more than either dop-
amine or dobutamine. See  Chapter 13 for a discussion of shock 
associated with myocardial infarction. 
 Unfortunately, the patient with shock may not respond to any 
of these therapeutic maneuvers; the temptation is then to use vaso-
constrictors to maintain blood pressure. Coronary perfusion may 
be improved, but this gain may be offset by increased myocardial 
oxygen demands as well as more severe vasoconstriction in blood 
vessels to the abdominal viscera. Therefore, the goal of therapy in 
shock should be to optimize tissue perfusion, not blood pressure. 
 B. Chronic Orthostatic Hypotension 
 On standing, gravitational forces induce venous pooling, resulting 
in decreased venous return. Normally, a decrease in blood pressure 
is prevented by reflex sympathetic activation with increased heart 
rate, and peripheral arterial and venous vasoconstriction. Impairment 
of autonomic reflexes that regulate blood pressure can lead to 
chronic orthostatic hypotension. This is more often due to medica-
tions that can interfere with autonomic function (eg, imipramine 
and other tricyclic antidepressants, α blockers for the treatment of 
urinary retention, and diuretics) diabetes, and other diseases causing 
peripheral autonomic neuropathies, and less commonly, primary 
degenerative disorders of the autonomic nervous system, as in the 
case study described at the beginning of the chapter. 
 Increasing peripheral resistance is one of the strategies to treat 
chronic orthostatic hypotension, and drugs activating α receptors 
can be used for this purpose. Midodrine, an orally active α 1 ago-
nist, is frequently used for this indication. Other sympathomimet-
ics, such as oral ephedrine or phenylephrine, can be tried. 
 C. Cardiac Applications 
 
Catecholamines such as isoproterenol and epinephrine have been 
used in the temporary emergency management of complete heart 
block and cardiac arrest. Epinephrine may be useful in cardiac 
arrest in part by redistributing blood flow during cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation to coronaries and to the brain. However, elec-
tronic pacemakers are both safer and more effective in heart block 
and should be inserted as soon as possible if there is any indication 
of continued high-degree block. 
 Dobutamine injection is used as a pharmacologic  cardiac 
stress test . Dobutamine augments myocardial contractility and 
promotes coronary and systemic vasodilation. These actions lead 
to increased heart rate and increased myocardial work and can 
reveal areas of ischemia in the myocardium that are detected by 
echocardiogram or nuclear medicine techniques. Dobutamine is 
often used in patients unable to exercise during the stress test. 
 D. Inducing Local Vasoconstriction 
 
Reduction of local or regional blood flow is desirable for achieving 
hemostasis in surgery, for reducing diffusion of local anesthetics 
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     145
away from the site of administration, and for reducing mucous 
membrane congestion. In each instance, α-receptor activation is 
desired, and the choice of agent depends on the maximal efficacy 
required, the desired duration of action, and the route of admin-
istration. 
 Effective pharmacologic hemostasis, often necessary for facial, 
oral, and nasopharyngeal surgery, requires drugs of high efficacy 
that can be administered in high concentration by local application. 
Epinephrine is usually applied topically in nasal packs (for epistaxis) 
or in a gingival string (for gingivectomy). Cocaine is still sometimes 
used for nasopharyngeal surgery because it combines a hemostatic 
effect with local anesthesia. Occasionally, cocaine is mixed with 
epinephrine for maximum hemostasis and local anesthesia. 
 Combining α agonists with some local anesthetics greatly pro-
longs the duration of infiltration nerve block; the total dose of 
local anesthetic (and the probability of toxicity) can therefore be 
reduced. Epinephrine, 1:200,000, is the favored agent for this 
application, but norepinephrine, phenylephrine, and other α ago-
nists have also been used. Systemic effects on the heart and periph-
eral vasculature may occur even with local drug administration 
but are usually minimal. Use of epinephrine with local anesthesia 
of acral vascular beds (digits, nose, and ears) has not been advised 
because of fear of ischemic necrosis. Recent studies suggest that it 
can be used (with caution) for this indication. 
 Mucous membrane decongestants are α agonists that reduce 
the discomfort of hay fever and, to a lesser extent, the common 
cold by decreasing the volume of the nasal mucosa. These effects 
are probably mediated by α 1 receptors. Unfortunately, rebound 
hyperemia may follow the use of these agents, and repeated topical 
use of high drug concentrations may result in ischemic changes in 
the mucous membranes, probably as a result of vasoconstriction of 
nutrient arteries. Constriction of these vessels may involve activa-
tion of α 2 receptors, and phenylephrine is often used in nasal 
decongestant sprays. A longer duration of action—at the cost of 
much lower local concentrations and greater potential for cardiac 
and central nervous system effects—can be achieved by the oral 
administration of agents such as ephedrine or one of its isomers, 
pseudoephedrine. Long-acting topical decongestants include xylo-
metazoline and oxymetazoline. Most of these mucous membrane 
decongestants are available as over-the-counter products. 
 Pulmonary Applications 
 One of the most important uses of sympathomimetic drugs is in 
the therapy of bronchial asthma. Beta 2 -selective drugs (albuterol, 
metaproterenol, terbutaline) are used for this purpose. Short-
acting preparations can be used only transiently for acute treat-
ment of asthma symptoms. For chronic asthma treatment in 
adults, long-acting β 2 agonists should only be used as an addition 
to steroids because they may increase morbidity if used alone. 
There is less agreement about their benefit in children. Long-
acting β 2 agonists are also used in patients with chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease (COPD). Nonselective drugs are now 
rarely used because they are likely to have more adverse effects 
than the selective drugs. The use of β agonists for the management 
of asthma is discussed in  Chapter 20 . 
 Anaphylaxis 
 Anaphylactic shock and related immediate (type I) IgE-mediated 
reactions affect both the respiratory and the cardiovascular sys-
tems. The syndrome of bronchospasm, mucous membrane con-
gestion, angioedema, and severe hypotension usually responds 
rapidly to the parenteral administration of  epinephrine, 0.3–0.5 
mg (0.3–0.5 mL of a 1:1000 epinephrine solution). Intramuscular 
injection may be the preferred route of administration, since skin 
blood flow (and hence systemic drug absorption from subcutane-
ous injection) is unpredictable in hypotensive patients. In some 
patients with impaired cardiovascular function, intravenous injec-
tion of epinephrine may be required. Glucocorticoids and antihis-
tamines (both H 1 - and H 2 -receptor antagonists) may be useful as 
secondary therapy in anaphylaxis. The use of these agents precedes 
the era of controlled clinical trials, but extensive experimental and 
clinical experience supports the use of epinephrine as the agent of 
choice in anaphylaxis, presumably because epinephrine activates 
α, β1, and β2 receptors, all of which may be important in reversing 
the pathophysiologic processes underlying anaphylaxis. It is rec-
ommended that patients at risk for insect sting hypersensitivity, 
severe food allergies, or other types of anaphylaxis carry epineph-
rine in an autoinjector (EpiPen) for self-administration. 
 Ophthalmic Applications 
 Phenylephrine is an effective mydriatic agent frequently used to 
facilitate examination of the retina. It is also a useful decongestant 
for minor allergic hyperemia and itching of the conjunctival mem-
branes. Sympathomimetics administered as ophthalmic drops are 
also useful in localizing the lesion in Horner’s syndrome. (See Box: 
An Application of Basic Pharmacology to a Clinical Problem.) 
 Glaucoma responds to a variety of sympathomimetic and sym-
pathoplegic drugs. (See Box, The Treatment of Glaucoma, in 
 Chapter 10 .) Epinephrine and its prodrug dipivefrin are now rarely 
used, but β-blocking agents are among the most important thera-
pies.  Apraclonidine and  brimonidine are α 2 -selective agonists that 
also lower intraocular pressure and are approved for use in glau-
coma. The mechanism of action of these drugs in treating glaucoma 
is still uncertain; direct neuroprotective effects may be involved in 
addition to the benefits of lowering intraocular pressure. 
 Genitourinary Applications 
 As noted above, β 2 -selective agents relax the pregnant uterus. 
 Ritodrine, terbutaline, and similar drugs have been used to sup-
press premature labor. The goal is to defer labor long enough to 
ensure adequate maturation of the fetus. These drugs may delay 
labor for several days. This may afford time to administer corticos-
teroid drugs, which decrease the incidence of neonatal respiratory 
distress syndrome. However, meta-analysis of older trials and a 
randomized study suggest that β-agonist therapy may have no 
significant benefit on perinatal infant mortality and may increase 
maternal morbidity. 
 Oral sympathomimetic therapy is occasionally useful in the 
treatment of stress incontinence. Ephedrine or pseudoephedrine 
may be tried. 
146    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
 Central Nervous System Applications 
 The amphetamines have a mood-elevating (euphoriant) effect; this 
effect is the basis for the widespread abuse of this drug group (see 
 Chapter 32 ). The amphetamines also have an alerting, sleep-defer-
ring action that is manifested by improved attention to repetitive 
tasks and by acceleration and desynchronization of the electroen-
cephalogram. A therapeutic application of this effect is in the treat-
ment of narcolepsy.  Modafinil, a new amphetamine substitute, is 
approved for use in narcolepsy and is claimed to have fewer disad-
vantages (excessive mood changes, insomnia, and abuse potential) 
than amphetamine in this condition. The appetite-suppressing 
effect of these agents is easily demonstrated in experimental ani-
mals. In obese humans, an encouraging initial response may be 
observed, but there is no evidence that long-term improvement in 
weight control can be achieved with amphetamines alone, espe-
cially when administered for a relatively short course. A final appli-
cation of the central nervous system-active sympathomimetics is in 
the attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a behavioral 
syndrome consisting of short attention span, hyperkinetic physical 
behavior, and learning problems. Some patients with this syn-
drome respond well to low doses of  methylphenidate and related 
agents. Extended-release formulations of methylphenidate may 
simplify dosing regimens and increase adherence to therapy, espe-
cially in school-age children. Slow or continuous-release preparations 
of the α 2 agonists clonidine and guanfacine are also effective in 
children with ADHD. Clinical trials suggest that modafinil may 
also be useful in ADHD, but because the safety profile in children 
has not been defined, it has not gained approval by the FDA for 
this indication. 
 Additional Therapeutic Uses 
 Although the primary use of the α 2 agonist  clonidine is in the 
treatment of hypertension (see  Chapter 11 ), the drug has been 
found to have efficacy in the treatment of diarrhea in diabetics 
with autonomic neuropathy, perhaps because of its ability to 
enhance salt and water absorption from the intestine. In addition, 
clonidine has efficacy in diminishing craving for narcotics and 
alcohol during withdrawal and may facilitate cessation of cigarette 
smoking. Clonidine has also been used to diminish menopausal 
hot flushes and is being used experimentally to reduce hemody-
namic instability during general anesthesia.  Dexmedetomidine is 
an α 2 agonist used for sedation under intensive care circumstances 
and during anesthesia (see  Chapter 25 ). It blunts the sympathetic 
response to surgery, which may be beneficial in some situations. It 
lowers opioid requirements for pain control and does not depress 
ventilation. Clonidine is also sometimes used as a premedication 
before anesthesia.  Tizanidine is an α 2 agonist that is used as a 
muscle relaxant (see  Chapter 27 ). 
An Application of Basic Pharmacology to a Clinical Problem
 Horner’s syndrome is a condition—usually unilateral—that 
results from interruption of the sympathetic nerves to the face. 
The effects include vasodilation, ptosis, miosis, and loss of sweat-
ing on the affected side. The syndrome can be caused by either a 
preganglionic or a postganglionic lesion, such as a tumor. 
Knowledge of the location of the lesion (preganglionic or post-
ganglionic) helps determine the optimal therapy.
 A localized lesion in a nerve causes degeneration of the distal 
portion of that fiber and loss of transmitter contents from the 
degenerated nerve ending—without affecting neurons inner-
vated by the fiber. Therefore, a preganglionic lesion leaves the 
postganglionic adrenergic neuron intact, whereas a postgangli-
onic lesion results in degeneration of the adrenergic nerve end-
ings and loss of stored catecholamines from them. Because 
indirectly acting sympathomimetics require normal stores of 
catecholamines, such drugs can be used to test for the presence 
of normal adrenergic nerve endings. The iris, because it is easily 
visible and responsive to topical sympathomimetics, is a conve-
nient assay tissue in the patient.
 If the lesion of Horner’s syndrome is postganglionic, indirectly 
acting sympathomimetics (eg, cocaine, hydroxyamphetamine) 
will not dilate the abnormally constricted pupil because cate-
cholamines have been lost from the nerve endings in the iris. In 
contrast, the pupil dilates in response to phenylephrine, which 
acts directly on the α receptors on the smooth muscle of the iris. 
A patient with a preganglionic lesion, on the other hand, shows 
a normal response to both drugs, since the postganglionic fibers 
and their catecholamine stores remain intact in this situation. 
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     147
SUMMARY Sympathomimetic Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
`1 AGONISTS
 • Midodrine
Activates phospholipase C, 
resulting in increased intracellu-
lar calcium and vasoconstriction
Vascular smooth muscle con-
traction increasing blood 
pressure (BP)
Orthostatic hypoten-
sion
Oral • prodrug converted to 
active drug with a 1-h peak 
effect • Toxicity: Supine hyperten-
sion, piloerection (goose bumps), 
and urinary retention
 • Phenylephrine: Can be used IV for short-term maintenance of BP in acute hypotension and intranasally to produce local vasoconstriction as a decongestant
`2 AGONISTS
 • Clonidine
Inhibits adenylyl cyclase and 
interacts with other intracellular 
pathways
Vasoconstriction is masked 
by central sympatholytic 
effect, which lowers BP
Hypertension
Oral • transdermal • peak effect 
1–3 h • half-life of oral drug 
~12 h • produces dry mouth and 
sedation
 • a-Methyldopa, guanfacine, and guanabenz: Also used as central sympatholytics
 • Dexmedetomidine: Prominent sedative effects and used in anesthesia
 • Tizanidine: Used as a muscle relaxant
 • Apraclonidine and brimonidine: Used in glaucoma to reduce intraocular pressure
a1 AGONISTS
 • Dobutamine
1
Activates adenylyl cyclase, 
increasing myocardial
 contractility
Positive inotropic effect
Cardiogenic shock, 
acute heart failure
IV • requires dose titration to 
desired effect
B2 AGONISTS
 • Albuterol
Activates adenylyl cyclase
Bronchial smooth muscle 
dilation
Asthma
Inhalation • duration 4–6 h
• Toxicity: Tremor, tachycardia
 • See other b2 agonists in Chapter 20
DOPAMINE
D1 Agonists
 • Fenoldopam
Activates adenylyl cyclase
Vascular smooth muscle 
relaxation
Hypertension
Requires dose titration to 
desired effect
D2 Agonists
 • Bromocriptine
Inhibits adenylyl cyclase and 
interacts with other intracellular 
pathways
Mimics dopamine actions in 
the central nervous system
Parkinson’s disease, 
prolactinemia
Oral • Toxicity: Nausea, headache, 
orthostatic hypotension
 • See other D2 agonists in Chapters 28 and 37
1Dobutamine has other actions in addition to b1-agonist effect. See text for details.
148    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
Amphetamine, racemic mixture (generic)
(attention deficit hyperactivity disorder [ADHD], narcolepsy)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Oral (Adderall): 1:1:1:1 mixtures of amphetamine sulfate, amphet-
amine aspartate, dextroamphetamine sulfate, and dextroamphet-
amine saccharate, formulated to contain a total of 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 
15, 20, or 30 mg in tablets; or 10, 20, or 30 mg in capsules
Apraclonidine (Iopidine)
(glaucoma)
Topical: 0.5, 1% ophthalmic solutions
Armodafinil (Nuvigil)
(narcolepsy)
Oral: 50, 150, 250 mg tablets
Brimonidine (Alphagan)
(glaucoma)
Topical: 0.15, 0.2% ophthalmic solution
Dexmedetomidine (Precedex)
(sedation)
Parenteral: 100 mcg/mL
Dexmethylphenidate (Focalin)
(ADHD)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Oral sustained release: 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 mg capsules
Dextroamphetamine (generic, Dexedrine)
(ADHD, narcolepsy)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Oral sustained release: 5, 10, 15 mg capsules
Oral mixtures with amphetamine: see Amphetamine (Adderall)
Dobutamine (generic, Dobutrex)
(hypotension)
Parenteral: 12.5 mg/mL in 20 mL vials for injection
Dopamine (generic, Intropin)
(hypotension)
Parenteral: 40, 80, 160 mg/mL for injection; 80, 160, 320 mg/100 
mL in 5% D/W for injection
Ephedrine (generic)
(hypotension, asthma)
Oral: 25 mg capsules
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection
Epinephrine (generic, Adrenalin Chloride, others)
(anaphylaxis, hypotension, asthma)
Parenteral: 1:1000 (1 mg/mL), 1:2000 (0.5 mg/mL), 1:10,000 (0.1 
mg/mL), 1:100,000 (0.01 mg/mL) for injection
Parenteral autoinjector (EpiPen): 1:1000 (1 mg/mL), 1:2000 (0.5 mg/
mL)
Ophthalmic: 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2% drops
Nasal: 0.1% drops and spray
Aerosol for bronchospasm (Primatene Mist, Bronkaid Mist): 0.22 
mg/spray
Solution for nebulizer aerosol: 1:100
Fenoldopam (Corlopam)
(hypertension)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Hydroxyamphetamine (Paremyd)
(mydriatic)
Ophthalmic: 1% drops (includes 0.25% tropicamide)
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E 1
Amphetamine, racemic mixture (generic)
(attention deficit hyperactivity disorder [ADHD], narcolepsy)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Oral (Adderall): 1:1:1:1 mixtures of amphetamine sulfate, amphet-
amine aspartate, dextroamphetamine sulfate, and dextroamphet-
amine saccharate, formulated to contain a total of 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5,
15, 20, or 30 mg in tablets; or 10, 20, or 30 mg in capsules
Apraclonidine (Iopidine)
(glaucoma)
Topical: 0.5, 1% ophthalmic solutions
Armodafinil (Nuvigil)
(narcolepsy)
Oral: 50, 150, 250 mg tablets
Brimonidine (Alphagan)
(glaucoma)
Topical: 0.15, 0.2% ophthalmic solution
Dexmedetomidine (Precedex)
(sedation)
Parenteral: 100 mcg/mL
Dexmethylphenidate (Focalin)
(ADHD)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Oral sustained release: 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 mg capsules
Dextroamphetamine (generic, Dexedrine)
(ADHD, narcolepsy)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Oral sustained release: 5, 10, 15 mg capsules
Oral mixtures with amphetamine: see Amphetamine (Adderall)
Dobutamine (generic, Dobutrex)
(hypotension)
Parenteral: 12.5 mg/mL in 20 mL vials for injection
Dopamine (generic, Intropin)
(hypotension)
Parenteral: 40, 80, 160 mg/mL for injection; 80, 160, 320 mg/100
mL in 5% D/W for injection
Ephedrine (generic)
(hypotension, asthma)
Oral: 25 mg capsules
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection
Epinephrine (generic, Adrenalin Chloride, others)
(anaphylaxis, hypotension, asthma)
Parenteral: 1:1000 (1 mg/mL), 1:2000 (0.5 mg/mL), 1:10,000 (0.1
mg/mL), 1:100,000 (0.01 mg/mL) for injection
Parenteral autoinjector (EpiPen): 1:1000 (1 mg/mL), 1:2000 (0.5 mg/
mL)
Ophthalmic: 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2% drops
Nasal: 0.1% drops and spray
Aerosol for bronchospasm (Primatene Mist, Bronkaid Mist): 0.22
mg/spray
Solution for nebulizer aerosol: 1:100
Fenoldopam (Corlopam)
(hypertension)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Hydroxyamphetamine (Paremyd)
(mydriatic)
Ophthalmic: 1% drops (includes 0.25% tropicamide)
Isoproterenol (generic, Isuprel)
(bradycardia)
Parenteral: 1:5000 (0.2 mg/mL), 1:50,000 (0.02 mg/mL) for injection
Metaraminol (Aramine)
(hypotension)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Methamphetamine (Desoxyn)
(ADHD)
Oral: 5 mg tablets
Methylphenidate (generic, Ritalin, Ritalin-SR)
(ADHD, narcolepsy)
Oral: 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
Oral sustained release: 10, 18, 20, 27, 36, 54 mg tablets; 20, 30, 
40 mg capsules
Midodrine (ProAmatine)
(hypotension)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Modafinil (Provigil)
(narcolepsy)
Oral: 100, 200 mg tablets
Naphazoline (generic, Privine)
(decongestant)
Nasal: 0.05% drops and spray
Ophthalmic: 0.012, 0.02, 0.03, 0.1% drops
Norepinephrine (generic, Levophed)
(hypotension)
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
Oxymetazoline (generic, Afrin, Neo-Synephrine 12 Hour, Visine LR)
(decongestant)
Nasal: 0.05% spray
Ophthalmic: 0.025% drops
Phenylephrine (generic, Neo-Synephrine)
(hypotension, decongestant)
Oral: 10 mg chewable tablets
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Nasal: 0.125, 0.16, 0.25, 0.5, 1% drops and spray
Ophthalmic: 0.12, 2.5, 10% solution
Pseudoephedrine (generic, Sudafed)
(decongestant)
Oral: 30, 60 mg tablets; 30, 60 mg capsules; 15, 30 mg/5 mL syrups; 
7.5 mg/0.8 mL drops
Oral extended release: 120, 240 mg tablets, capsules
Tetrahydrozoline (generic, Visine)
(decongestant)
Nasal: 0.05, 0.1% drops
Ophthalmic: 0.05% drops
Tizanidine (Zanaflex)
(muscle relaxant)
Oral: 2, 4, 6 mg capsules; 2, 4 mg tablets
Xylometazoline (generic, Otrivin)
(decongestant)
Nasal: 0.05, 0.1% drops
1Primary clinical indications are given in parentheses. α2 agonists used in hypertension are listed in Chapter 11. β2 Agonists used in asthma are listed in 
Chapter 20. Norepinephrine transporter inhibitors are listed in Chapter 30. The primary clinical indications are given in parentheses.
CHAPTER 9 Adrenoceptor Agonists & Sympathomimetic Drugs     149
 REFERENCES 
 Brown SG: Cardiovascular aspects of anaphylaxis: Implications for treatment and 
diagnosis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;5:359. 
 Evans WE, McLeod HL: Pharmacogenomics—drug disposition, drug targets, and 
side effects. N Engl J Med 2003;348:538. 
 Gainetdinov RR et al: Desensitization of G protein-coupled receptors and neu-
ronal functions. Annu Rev Neurosci 2004;27:107. 
 Hawrylyshyn KA et al: Update on human alpha1-adrenoceptor subtype signaling 
and genomic organization. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2004;25:449. 
 Holmes A, Lachowicz JE, Sibley DR: Phenotypic analysis of dopamine receptor 
knockout mice: Recent insights into the functional specificity of dopamine 
receptor subtypes. Neuropharmacology 2004;47:1117. 
 Johnson M: Molecular mechanisms of β 2 -adrenergic receptor function, response, 
and regulation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117:18. 
 Kaufmann H, Biaggioni I: Orthostatic hypotension. In Shapira AHV (editor): 
 Neurology and Clinical Neurosciences. Mosby Elsevier, 2007:354-361. 
 Koch WJ: Genetic and phenotypic targeting of beta-adrenergic signaling in heart 
failure. Mol Cell Biochem 2004;263:5. 
 Koshimizu T et al: Recent progress in alpha 1 -adrenoceptor pharmacology. Biol 
Pharm Bull 2002;25:401. 
 Lefkowitz RJ, Shenoy SK: Transduction of receptor signals by beta-arrestins. 
Science 2005;308:512. 
 Minzenberg MJ, Carter CS: Modafinil: A review of neurochemical actions and 
effects on cognition. Neuropsychopharmacol 2008;33:1477. 
 Mitler MM, Hayduk R: Benefits and risks of pharmacotherapy for narcolepsy. 
Drug Saf 2002;25:791. 
 Oldenburg O et al: Treatment of orthostatic hypotension. Curr Opin Pharmacol 
2002;2:740. 
 Philipp M, Hein L: Adrenergic receptor knockout mice: Distinct functions of 9 
receptor subtypes. Pharmacol Ther 2004;101:65. 
 Rockman HA, Koch WJ, Lefkowitz RJ: Seven-transmembrane-spanning receptors 
and heart function. Nature 2002;415:206. 
 Sandilands AJ, O’Shaughnessy KM: The functional significance of genetic varia-
tion within the beta-adrenoceptor. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2005;60:235. 
 Sicherer SH, Simons FE: Self-injectable epinephrine for first-aid management of 
anaphylaxis. Pediatrics 2007;119:638. 
 Simons FE: Anaphylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2008;121:S402. 
 Small KM, McGraw DW, Liggett SB: Pharmacology and physiology of human 
adrenergic receptor polymorphisms. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 
2003;43:381. 
 Wechsler ME, Israel E: How pharmacogenomics will play a role in the manage-
ment of asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;172:12. 
 Wechsler ME et al: Beta-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms and response to sal-
meterol. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;173:519. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The clinical picture is that of autonomic failure. The best 
indicator of this is the profound drop in orthostatic blood 
pressure without an adequate compensatory increase in 
heart rate. Pure autonomic failure is a neurodegenerative 
disorder selectively affecting peripheral autonomic fibers. 
Patients’ blood pressure is critically dependent on whatever 
residual sympathetic tone they have, hence the symptomatic 
worsening of orthostatic hypotension that occurred when 
this patient was given the α blocker tamsulosin. Conversely, 
these patients are hypersensitive to the pressor effects of 
α agonists and other sympathomimetics. For example, the 
α agonist midodrine can increase blood pressure signifi-
cantly at doses that have no effect in normal subjects and can 
be used to treat their orthostatic hypotension. Caution 
should be observed in the use of sympathomimetics (includ-
ing over-the-counter agents) and sympatholytic drugs.
This page intentionally left blank 
151
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Catecholamines play a role in many physiologic and pathophysi-
ologic responses as described in  Chapter 9 . Drugs that block their 
receptors therefore have important effects, some of which are of 
great clinical value. These effects vary dramatically according to 
the drug’s selectivity for α and β receptors. The classification of 
adrenoceptors into α 1 , α 2 , and β subtypes and the effects of acti-
vating these receptors are discussed in  Chapters 6 and  9 . Blockade 
of peripheral dopamine receptors is of minor clinical importance 
at present. In contrast, blockade of central nervous system dop-
amine receptors is very important; drugs that act on these recep-
tors are discussed in  Chapters 21 and  29 . This chapter deals with 
pharmacologic antagonist drugs whose major effect is to occupy 
α 1 , α 2 , or β receptors outside the central nervous system and pre-
vent their activation by catecholamines and related agonists. 
 For pharmacologic research, α 1 - and α 2 -adrenoceptor antago-
nist drugs have been very useful in the experimental exploration of 
autonomic nervous system function. In clinical therapeutics, non-
selective α antagonists are used in the treatment of pheochromo-
cytoma (tumors that secrete catecholamines), and α 1 -selective 
C A S E  S T U D Y
antagonists are used in primary hypertension and benign prostatic 
hyperplasia. Beta-receptor antagonist drugs are useful in a much 
wider variety of clinical conditions and are firmly established in 
the treatment of hypertension, ischemic heart disease, arrhyth-
mias, endocrinologic and neurologic disorders, glaucoma, and 
other conditions. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE ALPHARECEPTOR 
ANTAGONIST DRUGS 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Alpha-receptor antagonists may be reversible or irreversible in 
their interaction with these receptors. Reversible antagonists dis-
sociate from receptors, and the block can be surmounted with 
sufficiently high concentrations of agonists; irreversible drugs do 
not dissociate and cannot be surmounted. Phentolamine and pra-
zosin ( Figure 10–1 ) are examples of reversible antagonists. These 
drugs and labetalol—drugs used primarily for their antihyperten-
sive effects—as well as several ergot derivatives (see  Chapter 16 ) 
are also reversible α-adrenoceptor antagonists or partial agonists. 
Phenoxybenzamine, an agent related to the nitrogen mustards, 
10
Adrenoceptor 
Antagonist Drugs
 David Robertson, MD, &  Italo Biaggioni, MD∗ 
∗The authors thank Dr Randy Blakely for helpful comments, Dr Brett 
English for improving tables, and our students at Vanderbilt for advice 
on conceptual clarity.
A 46-year-old woman sees her physician because of palpita-
tions and headaches. She enjoyed good health until 1 year ago 
when spells of rapid heartbeat began. These became more 
severe and were eventually accompanied by throbbing head-
aches and drenching sweats. Physical examination revealed a 
blood pressure of 150/90 mm Hg and heart rate of 88 bpm. 
During the physical examination, palpation of the abdomen 
elicited a sudden and typical episode, with a rise in blood 
pressure to 210/120 mm Hg, heart rate to 122 bpm, profuse 
sweating, and facial pallor. This was accompanied by severe 
headache. What is the likely cause of her episodes? What 
caused the blood pressure and heart rate to rise so high dur-
ing the examination? What treatments might help this 
patient?
152    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
forms a reactive ethyleneimonium intermediate ( Figure 10–1 ) that 
covalently binds to α receptors, resulting in irreversible blockade. 
 Figure 10–2 illustrates the effects of a reversible drug in compari-
son with those of an irreversible agent. 
 As discussed in  Chapters 1 and  2 , the duration of action of a 
reversible antagonist is largely dependent on the half-life of the 
drug in the body and the rate at which it dissociates from its recep-
tor: The shorter the half-life of the drug in the body, the less time 
it takes for the effects of the drug to dissipate. In contrast, the 
effects of an irreversible antagonist may persist long after the drug 
has been cleared from the plasma. In the case of phenoxyben-
zamine, the restoration of tissue responsiveness after extensive 
α-receptor blockade is dependent on synthesis of new receptors, 
which may take several days. The rate of return of α 1 -adrenoceptor 
responsiveness may be particularly important in patients having a 
sudden cardiovascular event or who become candidates for urgent 
surgery. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Cardiovascular Effects 
 
Because arteriolar and venous tone are determined to a large 
extent by α receptors on vascular smooth muscle, α-receptor 
antagonist drugs cause a lowering of peripheral vascular resistance 
and blood pressure ( Figure 10–3 ). These drugs can prevent the 
pressor effects of usual doses of α agonists; indeed, in the case of 
agonists with both α and β 2 effects (eg, epinephrine), selective 
α-receptor antagonism may convert a pressor to a depressor 
response ( Figure 10–3 ). This change in response is called  epi-
nephrine reversal; it illustrates how the activation of both α and 
β receptors in the vasculature may lead to opposite responses. 
Alpha-receptor antagonists often cause orthostatic hypotension 
and reflex tachycardia; nonselective (α 1 = α 2 ,  Table 10–1 ) blockers 
usually cause significant tachycardia if blood pressure is lowered 
below normal. Orthostatic hypotension is due to antagonism of 
sympathetic nervous system stimulation of α 1 receptors in vascu-
lar smooth muscle; contraction of veins is an important compo-
nent of the normal capacity to maintain blood pressure in the 
upright position since it decreases venous pooling in the periphery. 
Constriction of arterioles in the legs also contributes to the normal 
orthostatic response. Tachycardia may be more marked with 
agents that block α 2 -presynaptic receptors in the heart, since the 
augmented release of norepinephrine will further stimulate β 
receptors in the heart. 
 B. Other Effects 
 
Blockade of α receptors in other tissues elicits miosis (small 
pupils) and nasal stuffiness. Alpha 1 receptors are expressed in the 
base of the bladder and the prostate, and their blockade decreases 
resistance to the flow of urine. Alpha blockers, therefore, are used 
N
C
N
N
H
Phentolamine
O
CH
CI
+
Phenoxybenzamine
Active (ethyleneimonium)
intermediate
NH2
N
N
C
O
O
Prazosin
H3C
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3O
CH3O
N
N
CH2
CH2
CI–
N+
R2
R1
CH2
N
CH2
HO
O
CH3
CH2
O
CH2
CH2
NH
CH
CH3
CH2
SO2NH2
CH3
O
Tamsulosin
 FIGURE 10–1  Structure of several α-receptor–blocking drugs. 
CHAPTER 10 Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs    153
0
50
100
100
50
0
2.4
20
160
1.2
10
80
Percent of maximum tension
Percent of maximum tension
Norepinephrine (μmol/L) 
Norepinephrine (μmol/L) 
Control
20 μmol/L
10 μmol/L
Control
0.4 μmol/L
0.8 μmol/L
Competitive antagonist
Irreversible antagonist
 FIGURE 10–2  Dose-response curves to norepinephrine in the presence of two different α-adrenoceptor–blocking drugs. The tension pro-
duced in isolated strips of cat spleen, a tissue rich in α receptors, was measured in response to graded doses of norepinephrine.  Left: Tolazoline, 
a reversible blocker, shifted the curve to the right without decreasing the maximum response when present at concentrations of 10 and 20 
μmol/L.  Right: Dibenamine, an analog of phenoxybenzamine and irreversible in its action, reduced the maximum response attainable at both 
concentrations tested. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Bickerton RK: The response of isolated strips of cat spleen to sympathomimetic drugs and their 
antagonists. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1963;142:99.) 
 FIGURE 10–3  Top: Effects of phentolamine, an α-receptor–blocking drug, on blood pressure in an anesthetized dog. Epinephrine reversal 
is demonstrated by tracings showing the response to epinephrine before  (middle) and after  (bottom) phentolamine. All drugs given intrave-
nously. BP, blood pressure; HR, heart rate. 
154    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
therapeutically for the treatment of urinary retention due to pros-
tatic hyperplasia (see below). Individual agents may have other 
important effects in addition to α-receptor antagonism (see 
below). 
 SPECIFIC AGENTS 
 Phenoxybenzamine binds covalently to α receptors, causing irre-
versible blockade of long duration (14–48 hours or longer). It is 
somewhat selective for α 1 receptors but less so than prazosin ( Table 
10–1 ). The drug also inhibits reuptake of released norepinephrine 
by presynaptic adrenergic nerve terminals. Phenoxybenzamine 
blocks histamine (H 1 ), acetylcholine, and serotonin receptors as 
well as α receptors (see  Chapter 16 ). 
 The pharmacologic actions of phenoxybenzamine are primarily 
related to antagonism of α-receptor–mediated events. The most 
significant effect is attenuation of catecholamine-induced vasocon-
striction. While phenoxybenzamine causes relatively little fall in 
blood pressure in normal supine individuals, it reduces blood pres-
sure when sympathetic tone is high, eg, as a result of upright pos-
ture or because of reduced blood volume. Cardiac output may be 
increased because of reflex effects and because of some blockade of 
presynaptic α 2 receptors in cardiac sympathetic nerves. 
 Phenoxybenzamine is absorbed after oral administration, 
although bioavailability is low and its kinetic properties are not 
well known. The drug is usually given orally, starting with dosages 
of 10 mg/d and progressively increasing the dose until the desired 
effect is achieved. A dosage of less than 100 mg/d is usually suffi-
cient to achieve adequate α-receptor blockade. The major use of 
phenoxybenzamine is in the treatment of pheochromocytoma (see 
below). 
 Most adverse effects of phenoxybenzamine derive from its 
α-receptor–blocking action; the most important are orthostatic 
hypotension and tachycardia. Nasal stuffiness and inhibition of 
ejaculation also occur. Since phenoxybenzamine enters the central 
nervous system, it may cause less specific effects, including fatigue, 
sedation, and nausea. Because phenoxybenzamine is an alkylating 
agent, it may have other adverse effects that have not yet been 
characterized. 
 Phentolamine is a potent competitive antagonist at both α 1 
and α 2 receptors ( Table 10–1 ). Phentolamine reduces peripheral 
resistance through blockade of α 1 receptors and possibly α 2 recep-
tors on vascular smooth muscle. Its cardiac stimulation is due to 
antagonism of presynaptic α 2 receptors (leading to enhanced 
release of norepinephrine from sympathetic nerves) and sympa-
thetic activation from baroreflex mechanisms. Phentolamine also 
has minor inhibitory effects at serotonin receptors and agonist 
effects at muscarinic and H 1 and H 2 histamine receptors. 
Phentolamine’s principal adverse effects are related to cardiac 
stimulation, which may cause severe tachycardia, arrhythmias, and 
myocardial ischemia. Phentolamine has been used in the treat-
ment of pheochromocytoma. In addition it is sometimes used to 
reverse local anesthesia in soft tissue sites; local anesthetics are 
often given with vasoconstrictors that slow their removal. Local 
phentolamine permits reversal at the end of the procedure. 
Unfortunately oral and intravenous formulations of phentolamine 
are no longer consistently available in the United States. 
 Prazosin is a piperazinyl quinazoline effective in the manage-
ment of hypertension (see  Chapter 11 ). It is highly selective for α 1 
receptors and typically 1000-fold less potent at α 2 receptors. This 
may partially explain the relative absence of tachycardia seen with 
prazosin compared with that of phentolamine and phenoxyben-
zamine. Prazosin relaxes both arterial and venous vascular smooth 
muscle, as well as smooth muscle in the prostate, due to blockade 
of α 1 receptors. Prazosin is extensively metabolized in humans; 
because of metabolic degradation by the liver, only about 50% of 
the drug is available after oral administration. The half-life is nor-
mally about 3 hours. 
 Terazosin is another reversible α 1 -selective antagonist that is 
effective in hypertension (see  Chapter 11 ); it is also approved for use 
in men with urinary symptoms due to benign prostatic hyperplasia 
(BPH). Terazosin has high bioavailability but is extensively metabo-
lized in the liver, with only a small fraction of unchanged drug 
excreted in the urine. The half-life of terazosin is 9–12 hours. 
 Doxazosin is efficacious in the treatment of hypertension and 
BPH. It differs from prazosin and terazosin in having a longer 
half-life of about 22 hours. It has moderate bioavailability and is 
extensively metabolized, with very little parent drug excreted in 
urine or feces. Doxazosin has active metabolites, although their 
contribution to the drug’s effects is probably small. 
 Tamsulosin is a competitive α 1 antagonist with a structure 
quite different from that of most other α 1 -receptor blockers. It has 
high bioavailability and a half-life of 9–15 hours. It is metabolized 
extensively in the liver. Tamsulosin has higher affinity for α 1A and 
α 1D receptors than for the α 1B subtype. Evidence suggests that 
tamsulosin has relatively greater potency in inhibiting contraction 
TABLE 10–1  Relative selectivity of antagonists for 
adrenoceptors.
Receptor Affinity
Alpha antagonists
 Prazosin, terazosin, doxazosin
α1 >>>> α2
 Phenoxybenzamine
α1 > α2
 Phentolamine
α1 = α2
 Yohimbine, tolazoline
α2 >> α1
Mixed antagonists
 Labetalol, carvedilol
β1 = β2 ≥ α1 > α2
Beta antagonists
Metoprolol, acebutolol, 
alprenolol, atenolol, betaxolol, 
celiprolol, esmolol, nebivolol
β1 >>> β2
Propranolol, carteolol, 
penbutolol, pindolol, timolol
β1 = β2
 Butoxamine
β2 >>> β1
CHAPTER 10 Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs    155
in  prostate smooth muscle versus  vascular smooth muscle compared 
with other α 1 -selective antagonists. The drug’s efficacy in BPH 
suggests that the α 1A subtype may be the most important α sub-
type mediating prostate smooth muscle contraction. Furthermore, 
compared with other antagonists, tamsulosin has less effect on 
standing blood pressure in patients. Nevertheless, caution is appro-
priate in using any α antagonist in patients with diminished sym-
pathetic nervous system function. Patients receiving oral tamsulosin 
and undergoing cataract surgery are at increased risk of the intra-
operative floppy iris syndrome (IFIS), characterized by the billow-
ing of a flaccid iris, propensity for iris prolapse, and progressive 
intraoperative pupillary constriction. These effects increase the risk 
of cataract surgery, and complications are more likely in the ensu-
ing 14 days if patients are taking these agents. 
 OTHER ALPHA-ADRENOCEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS 
 Alfuzosin is an α 1 -selective quinazoline derivative that is approved 
for use in BPH. It has a bioavailability of about 60%, is extensively 
metabolized, and has an elimination half-life of about 5 hours. It 
may increase risk of QT prolongation in susceptible individuals. 
 Silodosin resembles tamsulosin in blocking the α 1A receptor and 
is used in treatment of BPH.  Indoramin is another α 1 -selective 
antagonist that also has efficacy as an antihypertensive. It is not 
available in the USA.  Urapidil is an α 1 antagonist (its primary 
effect) that also has weak α 2 -agonist and 5-HT 1A -agonist actions 
and weak antagonist action at β 1 receptors. It is used in Europe as 
an antihypertensive agent and for benign prostatic hyperplasia. 
 Labetalol has both α 1 -selective and β-antagonistic effects; it is 
discussed below. Neuroleptic drugs such as  chlorpromazine and 
 haloperidol are potent dopamine receptor antagonists but are also 
antagonists at α receptors. Their antagonism of α receptors prob-
ably contributes to some of their adverse effects, particularly 
hypotension. Similarly, the antidepressant  trazodone has the 
capacity to block α 1 receptors. Ergot derivatives, eg,  ergotamine 
and  dihydroergotamine, cause reversible α-receptor blockade, 
probably via a partial agonist action (see  Chapter 16 ). 
 Yohimbine, an indole alkaloid, is an α 2 -selective antagonist. 
It is sometimes used in the treatment of orthostatic hypotension 
because it promotes norepinephrine release through blockade of 
α 2 receptors in both the central nervous system and the periph-
ery. This increases central sympathetic activation and also pro-
motes increased norepinephrine release in the periphery. It was 
once widely used to treat male erectile dysfunction but has been 
superseded by phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors like sildenafil (see 
 Chapter 12 ). Yohimbine can greatly elevate blood pressure if 
administered to patients receiving norepinephrine transport 
blocking drugs. Yohimbine reverses the antihypertensive effects of 
α 2 -adrenoceptor agonists such as clonidine. It is used in veterinary 
medicine to reverse anesthesia produced by xylazine, an α 2 agonist 
used to calm animals. Although yohimbine has been taken off the 
market in the USA solely for financial reasons, it is available as a 
“nutritional” supplement. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE ALPHARECEPTOR
BLOCKING DRUGS 
 Pheochromocytoma 
 Pheochromocytoma is a tumor of the adrenal medulla or sympa-
thetic ganglion cells. The tumor secretes catecholamines, espe-
cially norepinephrine and epinephrine. The patient in the case 
study at the beginning of this chapter had a left adrenal pheochro-
mocytoma that was identified by imaging. In addition, she had 
elevated plasma and urinary norepinephrine, epinephrine, and 
their metabolites, normetanephrine and metanephrine. 
 The diagnosis of pheochromocytoma is confirmed on the basis 
of elevated plasma or urinary levels of catecholamines, metaneph-
rine, and normetanephrine (see  Chapter 6 ). Once diagnosed bio-
chemically, techniques to localize a pheochromocytoma include 
computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging scans and 
scanning with radiomarkers such as  131 I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine 
(MIBG), a norepinephrine transporter substrate that is taken up 
by tumor cells. 
 The major clinical use of phenoxybenzamine is in the manage-
ment of pheochromocytoma. Patients have many symptoms and 
signs of catecholamine excess, including intermittent or sustained 
hypertension, headaches, palpitations, and increased sweating. 
 Release of stored catecholamines from pheochromocytomas 
may occur in response to physical pressure, chemical stimulation, 
or spontaneously. When it occurs during operative manipulation 
of pheochromocytoma, the resulting hypertension may be con-
trolled with α-receptor blockade or nitroprusside. Nitroprusside is 
preferred because its effects can be more readily titrated and it has 
a shorter duration of action. 
 Alpha-receptor antagonists are most useful in the preoperative 
management of patients with pheochromocytoma ( Figure 10–4 ). 
Administration of phenoxybenzamine in the preoperative period 
helps to control hypertension and tends to reverse chronic changes 
resulting from excessive catecholamine secretion such as plasma 
volume contraction, if present. Furthermore, the patient’s opera-
tive course may be simplified. Oral doses of 10 mg/d can be 
increased at intervals of several days until hypertension is con-
trolled. Some physicians give phenoxybenzamine to patients with 
pheochromocytoma for 1–3 weeks before surgery. Other surgeons 
prefer to operate on patients in the absence of treatment with 
phenoxybenzamine, counting on modern anesthetic techniques to 
control blood pressure and heart rate during surgery. 
Phenoxybenzamine can be very useful in the chronic treatment of 
inoperable or metastatic pheochromocytoma. Although there is 
less experience with alternative drugs, hypertension in patients 
with pheochromocytoma may also respond to reversible α 1 -
selective antagonists or to conventional calcium channel antago-
nists. Beta-receptor antagonists may be required after α-receptor 
blockade has been instituted to reverse the cardiac effects of exces-
sive catecholamines. Beta antagonists should not be used prior to 
establishing effective α-receptor blockade, since unopposed 
156    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
β-receptor blockade could theoretically cause blood pressure eleva-
tion from increased vasoconstriction. 
 Pheochromocytoma is sometimes treated with  metyrosine 
(α-methyltyrosine), the α-methyl analog of tyrosine. This agent is 
a competitive inhibitor of tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting 
step in the synthesis of dopamine, norepinephrine, and epineph-
rine (see  Figure 6–5 ). Metyrosine is especially useful in symptom-
atic patients with inoperable or metastatic pheochromocytoma. 
Because it has access to the central nervous system, metyrosine can 
cause extrapyramidal effects due to reduced dopamine levels. 
 Hypertensive Emergencies 
 The α-adrenoceptor antagonist drugs have limited application in 
the management of hypertensive emergencies, but labetalol has 
been used in this setting (see  Chapter 11 ). In theory, α-adrenoceptor 
antagonists are most useful when increased blood pressure reflects 
excess circulating concentrations of α agonists, eg, in pheochro-
mocytoma, overdosage of sympathomimetic drugs, or clonidine 
withdrawal. However, other drugs are generally preferable, since 
considerable experience is necessary to use α-adrenoceptor antag-
onist drugs safely in these settings. 
 Chronic Hypertension 
 Members of the prazosin family of α 1 -selective antagonists are effica-
cious drugs in the treatment of mild to moderate systemic hyperten-
sion (see  Chapter 11 ). They are generally well tolerated, but they are 
not usually recommended as monotherapy for hypertension because 
other classes of antihypertensives are more effective in preventing 
heart failure. Their major adverse effect is orthostatic hypotension, 
which may be severe after the first few doses but is otherwise uncom-
mon. Nonselective α antagonists are not used in primary systemic 
hypertension. Prazosin and related drugs may also be associated with 
dizziness. Orthostatic changes in blood pressure should be checked 
routinely in any patient being treated for hypertension. 
 It is interesting that the use of α-adrenoceptor antagonists such 
as prazosin has been found to be associated with either no changes 
in plasma lipids or increased concentrations of high-density lipo-
proteins (HDL), which could be a favorable alteration. The 
mechanism for this effect is not known. 
 Peripheral Vascular Disease 
 Alpha-receptor–blocking drugs do not seem to be effective in the 
treatment of peripheral vascular occlusive disease characterized by 
morphologic changes that limit flow in the vessels. Occasionally, 
individuals with Raynaud’s phenomenon and other conditions 
involving excessive reversible vasospasm in the peripheral circula-
tion do benefit from prazosin or phenoxybenzamine, although 
calcium channel blockers may be preferable for most patients. 
 Urinary Obstruction 
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia is common in elderly men. Various 
surgical treatments are effective in relieving the urinary symptoms 
of BPH; however, drug therapy is efficacious in many patients. 
The mechanism of action in improving urine flow involves partial 
reversal of smooth muscle contraction in the enlarged prostate and 
in the bladder base. It has been suggested that some α 1 -receptor 
antagonists may have additional effects on cells in the prostate that 
help improve symptoms. 
 Prazosin, doxazosin, and terazosin are all efficacious in patients 
with BPH. These drugs are particularly useful in patients who also 
have hypertension. Considerable interest has focused on which 
α 1 -receptor subtype is most important for smooth muscle contrac-
tion in the prostate:  subtype-selective α 1A -receptor antagonists may 
have improved efficacy and safety in treating this disease. As indi-
cated above, tamsulosin is also efficacious in BPH and has rela-
tively minor effects on blood pressure at a low dose. This drug may 
be preferred in patients who have experienced orthostatic hypoten-
sion with other α 1 -receptor antagonists. 
 Erectile Dysfunction 
 A combination of phentolamine with the nonspecific smooth 
muscle relaxant papaverine, when injected directly into the penis, 
may cause erections in men with sexual dysfunction. Long-term 
administration may result in fibrotic reactions. Systemic absorption 
Blood pressure (mm Hg)
100
80
60
40
80
40
0
20
0
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Weeks
Dibenzyline
mg/d
Supine
Standing
 FIGURE 10–4  Effects of phenoxybenzamine (Dibenzyline) on 
blood pressure in a patient with pheochromocytoma. Dosage of the 
drug was begun in the fourth week as shown by the shaded bar. 
Supine systolic and diastolic pressures are indicated by the circles, 
and the standing pressures by triangles and the hatched area. Note 
that the α-blocking drug dramatically reduced blood pressure. The 
reduction in orthostatic hypotension, which was marked before 
treatment, is probably due to normalization of blood volume, a vari-
able that is sometimes markedly reduced in patients with longstand-
ing pheochromocytoma-induced hypertension. (Redrawn and 
reproduced, with permission, from Engelman E, Sjoerdsma A: Chronic medical ther-
apy for pheochromocytoma. Ann Intern Med 1961;61:229.) 
CHAPTER 10 Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs    157
may lead to orthostatic hypotension; priapism may require direct 
treatment with an α-adrenoceptor agonist such as phenylephrine. 
Alternative therapies for erectile dysfunction include prostaglan-
dins (see  Chapter 18 ), sildenafil and other cGMP phosphodi-
esterase inhibitors (see  Chapter 12 ), and apomorphine. 
 Applications of Alpha 2 Antagonists 
 Alpha 2 antagonists have relatively little clinical usefulness. They 
have limited benefit in male erectile dysfunction. There has been 
experimental interest in the development of highly selective antag-
onists for treatment of type 2 diabetes (α 2 receptors inhibit insulin 
secretion), and for treatment of psychiatric depression. It is likely 
that better understanding of the subtypes of α 2 receptors will lead 
to development of clinically useful subtype-selective new drugs. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE BETARECEPTOR 
ANTAGONIST DRUGS 
 Beta-receptor antagonists share the common feature of antagoniz-
ing the effects of catecholamines at β adrenoceptors. Beta-blocking 
drugs occupy β receptors and competitively reduce receptor occu-
pancy by catecholamines and other β agonists. (A few members of 
this group, used only for experimental purposes, bind irreversibly 
to β receptors.) Most β-blocking drugs in clinical use are pure 
antagonists; that is, the occupancy of a β receptor by such a drug 
causes no activation of the receptor. However, some are partial 
agonists; that is, they cause partial activation of the receptor, albeit 
less than that caused by the full agonists epinephrine and isoprot-
erenol. As described in  Chapter 2 , partial agonists inhibit the 
activation of β receptors in the presence of high catecholamine 
concentrations but moderately activate the receptors in the 
absence of endogenous agonists. Finally, evidence suggests that 
some β blockers (eg, betaxolol, metoprolol) are  inverse agonists —
drugs that reduce constitutive activity of β receptors—in some 
tissues. The clinical significance of this property is not known. 
 The β-receptor–blocking drugs differ in their relative affinities 
for β 1 and β 2 receptors ( Table 10–1 ). Some have a higher affinity 
for β 1 than for β 2 receptors, and this selectivity may have impor-
tant clinical implications. Since none of the clinically available 
β-receptor antagonists are absolutely specific for β 1 receptors, the 
selectivity is dose-related; it tends to diminish at higher drug con-
centrations. Other major differences among β antagonists relate to 
their pharmacokinetic characteristics and local anesthetic mem-
brane-stabilizing effects. 
 Chemically, most β-receptor antagonist drugs ( Figure 10–5 ) 
resemble isoproterenol to some degree (see  Figure 9–4 ). 
 Pharmacokinetic Properties of the 
Beta-Receptor Antagonists 
 A. Absorption 
 Most of the drugs in this class are well absorbed after oral admin-
istration; peak concentrations occur 1–3 hours after ingestion. 
Sustained-release preparations of propranolol and metoprolol are 
available. 
 B. Bioavailability  
Propranolol undergoes extensive hepatic (first-pass) metabolism; 
its bioavailability is relatively low ( Table 10–2 ). The proportion of 
drug reaching the systemic circulation increases as the dose is 
increased, suggesting that hepatic extraction mechanisms may 
become saturated. A major consequence of the low bioavailability 
of propranolol is that oral administration of the drug leads to 
much lower drug concentrations than are achieved after intrave-
nous injection of the same dose. Because the first-pass effect varies 
among individuals, there is great individual variability in the 
plasma concentrations achieved after oral propranolol. For the 
same reason, bioavailability is limited to varying degrees for most 
β antagonists with the exception of betaxolol, penbutolol, pin-
dolol, and sotalol. 
 C. Distribution and Clearance 
 The β antagonists are rapidly distributed and have large volumes of 
distribution. Propranolol and penbutolol are quite lipophilic and 
readily cross the blood-brain barrier ( Table 10–2 ). Most β antago-
nists have half-lives in the range of 3–10 hours. A major exception 
is esmolol, which is rapidly hydrolyzed and has a half-life of 
approximately 10 minutes. Propranolol and metoprolol are exten-
sively metabolized in the liver, with little unchanged drug appear-
ing in the urine. The cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) genotype 
is a major determinant of interindividual differences in metoprolol 
plasma clearance (see  Chapter 4 ). Poor metabolizers exhibit three-
fold to tenfold higher plasma concentrations after administration 
of metoprolol than extensive metabolizers. Atenolol, celiprolol, and 
pindolol are less completely metabolized. Nadolol is excreted 
unchanged in the urine and has the longest half-life of any available 
β antagonist (up to 24 hours). The half-life of nadolol is prolonged 
in renal failure. The elimination of drugs such as propranolol may 
be prolonged in the presence of liver disease, diminished hepatic 
blood flow, or hepatic enzyme inhibition. It is notable that the 
pharmacodynamic effects of these drugs are sometimes prolonged 
well beyond the time predicted from half-life data. 
 Pharmacodynamics of the Beta-Receptor 
Antagonist Drugs 
 Most of the effects of these drugs are due to occupation and block-
ade of β receptors. However, some actions may be due to other 
effects, including partial agonist activity at β receptors and local 
anesthetic action, which differ among the β blockers ( Table 10–2 ). 
 A. Effects on the Cardiovascular System 
 Beta-blocking drugs given chronically lower blood pressure in 
patients with hypertension (see  Chapter 11 ). The mechanisms 
involved are not fully understood but probably include suppres-
sion of renin release and effects in the central nervous system. 
These drugs do  not usually cause hypotension in healthy individu-
als with normal blood pressure. 
158    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
 Beta-receptor antagonists have prominent effects on the heart 
( Figure 10–6 ) and are very valuable in the treatment of angina (see 
 Chapter 12 ) and chronic heart failure (see  Chapter 13 ) and fol-
lowing myocardial infarction (see  Chapter 14 ). The negative ino-
tropic and chronotropic effects reflect the role of adrenoceptors in 
regulating these functions. Slowed atrioventricular conduction 
with an increased PR interval is a related result of adrenoceptor 
blockade in the atrioventricular node. In the vascular system, 
β-receptor blockade opposes β 2 -mediated vasodilation. This may 
acutely lead to a rise in peripheral resistance from unopposed 
α-receptor–mediated effects as the sympathetic nervous system 
discharges in response to lowered blood pressure due to the fall in 
cardiac output. Nonselective and β 1 -blocking drugs antagonize 
the release of renin caused by the sympathetic nervous system. 
 Overall, although the acute effects of these drugs may include 
a rise in peripheral resistance, chronic drug administration leads to 
a fall in peripheral resistance in patients with hypertension. 
 B. Effects on the Respiratory Tract  
Blockade of the β 2 receptors in bronchial smooth muscle may lead 
to an increase in airway resistance, particularly in patients with 
asthma. Beta 1 -receptor antagonists such as metoprolol and atenolol 
may have some advantage over nonselective β antagonists when 
blockade of β 1 receptors in the heart is desired and β 2 -receptor 
blockade is undesirable. However, no currently available β 1 -
selective antagonist is sufficiently specific to  completely avoid 
interactions with β 2 adrenoceptors. Consequently, these drugs 
should generally be avoided in patients with asthma. On the other 
Propranolol
O
CH2
CH
CH2
NH
OH
CH(CH3)2
Metoprolol
O
CH2
CH
CH2
NH
OH
CH(CH3)2
CH2
CH2
O
CH3
Timolol
O
CH2
CH
CH2
NH
OH
N
O
N
N
S
C(CH3)3
Pindolol
O
CH2
CH
CH2
NH
OH
CH(CH3)2 
N
H
Atenolol
O
CH2
CH
CH2
NH
OH
CH(CH3)2
CH2
C
NH2
O
Labetalol
CH2
CH
CH2
NH
C
NH2
O
OH
CH3
CH
CH2
HO
Nebivolol
OH
OH
F
CH2
CH2
NH
CH
CH
O
F
O
 FIGURE 10–5  Structures of some β-receptor antagonists. 
CHAPTER 10 Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs    159
TABLE 10–2 Properties of several beta-receptor–blocking drugs.
Selectivity
Partial Agonist 
Activity
Local Anesthetic 
Action
Lipid 
Solubility
Elimination 
Half-life
Approximate 
Bioavailability
Acebutolol
β1
Yes
Yes
Low
3–4 hours
50
Atenolol
β1
No
No
Low
6–9 hours
40
Betaxolol
β1
No
Slight
Low
14–22 hours
90
Bisoprolol
β1
No
No
Low
9–12 hours
80
Carteolol
None
Yes
No
Low
6 hours
85
Carvedilol1
None
No
No
Moderate
7–10 hours
25–35
Celiprolol
β1
Yes
No
Low
4–5 hours
70
Esmolol
β1
No
No
Low
10 minutes
0
Labetalol1
None
Yes
Yes
Low
5 hours
30
Metoprolol
β1
No
Yes
Moderate
3–4 hours
50
Nadolol
None
No
No
Low
14–24 hours
33
Nebivolol
β1
?2
No
Low
11–30 hours
12–96
Penbutolol
None
Yes
No
High
5 hours
>90
Pindolol
None
Yes
Yes
Moderate
3–4 hours
90
Propranolol
None
No
Yes
High
3.5–6 hours
303
Sotalol
None
No
No
Low
12 hours
90
Timolol
None
No
No
Moderate
4–5 hours
50
1Carvedilol and labetalol also cause α1-adrenoceptor blockade.
2β3 agonist.
3Bioavailability is dose-dependent.
Arterial 
pressure
(mm Hg)
Cardiac
contractile
force
Heart rate
(beats/min)
1 μg/kg Epinephrine
1 μg/kg Epinephrine
1 min
Propranolol
0.5 mg/kg
200
200
100
100
0
2
1
0
Aortic flow
(L/min)
 FIGURE 10–6  The effect in an anesthetized dog of the injection of epinephrine before and after propranolol. In the presence of a 
β-receptor–blocking agent, epinephrine no longer augments the force of contraction (measured by a strain gauge attached to the ventricular 
wall) nor increases cardiac rate. Blood pressure is still elevated by epinephrine because vasoconstriction is not blocked. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Shanks RG: The pharmacology of β sympathetic blockade. Am J Cardiol 1966;18:312.) 
160    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
hand, many patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) may tolerate these drugs quite well and the benefits, for 
example in patients with concomitant ischemic heart disease, may 
outweigh the risks. 
 C. Effects on the Eye 
 Beta-blocking agents reduce intraocular pressure, especially in 
glaucoma. The mechanism usually reported is decreased aqueous 
humor production. (See Clinical Pharmacology and Box: The 
Treatment of Glaucoma.) 
 D. Metabolic and Endocrine Effects 
 Beta-receptor antagonists such as propranolol inhibit sympathetic 
nervous system stimulation of lipolysis. The effects on carbohy-
drate metabolism are less clear, though glycogenolysis in the 
human liver is at least partially inhibited after β 2 -receptor block-
ade. Glucagon is the primary hormone used to combat hypogly-
cemia; it is unclear to what extent β antagonists impair recovery 
from hypoglycemia, but they should be used with caution in 
insulin-dependent diabetic patients. This may be particularly 
important in diabetic patients with inadequate glucagon reserve 
and in pancreatectomized patients since catecholamines may be 
the major factors in stimulating glucose release from the liver in 
response to hypoglycemia. Beta 1 -receptor–selective drugs may be 
less prone to inhibit recovery from hypoglycemia. Beta-receptor 
antagonists are much safer in those type 2 diabetic patients who 
do not have hypoglycemic episodes. 
 The chronic use of β-adrenoceptor antagonists has been associ-
ated with increased plasma concentrations of very-low-density 
lipoproteins (VLDL) and decreased concentrations of HDL choles-
terol. Both of these changes are potentially unfavorable in terms of 
risk of cardiovascular disease. Although low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) concentrations generally do not change, there is a variable 
decline in the HDL cholesterol/LDL cholesterol ratio that may 
increase the risk of coronary artery disease. These changes tend to 
occur with both selective and nonselective β blockers, though they 
may be less likely to occur with β blockers possessing intrinsic sym-
pathomimetic activity (partial agonists). The mechanisms by which 
β-receptor antagonists cause these changes are not understood, 
though changes in sensitivity to insulin action may contribute. 
 E. Effects Not Related to Beta-Blockade 
 Partial β-agonist activity was significant in the first β-blocking 
drug synthesized, dichloroisoproterenol. It has been suggested that 
retention of some intrinsic sympathomimetic activity is desirable 
to prevent untoward effects such as precipitation of asthma or 
excessive bradycardia. Pindolol and other partial agonists are 
noted in  Table 10–2 . It is not yet clear to what extent partial ago-
nism is clinically valuable. Furthermore, these drugs may not be as 
effective as the pure antagonists in secondary prevention of myo-
cardial infarction. However, they may be useful in patients who 
develop symptomatic bradycardia or bronchoconstriction in 
response to pure antagonist β-adrenoceptor drugs, but only if they 
are strongly indicated for a particular clinical indication. 
The Treatment of Glaucoma
 Glaucoma is a major cause of blindness and of great pharma-
cologic interest because the chronic form often responds to 
drug therapy. The primary manifestation is increased intraoc-
ular pressure not initially associated with symptoms. Without 
treatment, increased intraocular pressure results in damage 
to the retina and optic nerve, with restriction of visual fields 
and, eventually, blindness. Intraocular pressure is easily mea-
sured as part of the routine ophthalmologic examination. 
Two major types of glaucoma are recognized: open-angle 
and closed-angle (also called narrow-angle). The closed-angle 
form is associated with a shallow anterior chamber, in which 
a dilated iris can occlude the outflow drainage pathway at the 
angle between the cornea and the ciliary body (see  Figure 
6–9 ). This form is associated with acute and painful increases 
of pressure, which must be controlled on an emergency basis 
with drugs or prevented by surgical removal of part of the iris 
(iridectomy). The open-angle form of glaucoma is a chronic 
condition, and treatment is largely pharmacologic. Because 
intraocular pressure is a function of the balance between 
fluid input and drainage out of the globe, the strategies for 
the treatment of open-angle glaucoma fall into two classes: 
reduction of aqueous humor secretion and enhancement of 
aqueous outflow. Five general groups of drugs—cholinomi-
metics, α agonists, β blockers, prostaglandin F 2α analogs, and 
diuretics—have been found to be useful in reducing intraoc-
ular pressure and can be related to these strategies as shown 
in  Table 10–3 . Of the five drug groups listed in  Table 10–3 , the 
prostaglandin analogs and the β blockers are the most popu-
lar. This popularity results from convenience (once- or twice-
daily dosing) and relative lack of adverse effects (except, in 
the case of β blockers, in patients with asthma or cardiac 
pacemaker or conduction pathway disease). Other drugs that 
have been reported to reduce intraocular pressure include 
prostaglandin E 2 and marijuana. The use of drugs in acute 
closed-angle glaucoma is limited to cholinomimetics, aceta-
zolamide, and osmotic agents preceding surgery. The onset 
of action of the other agents is too slow in this situation. 
 Local anesthetic action, also known as “membrane-stabilizing” 
action, is a prominent effect of several β blockers ( Table 10–2 ). 
This action is the result of typical local anesthetic blockade of 
sodium channels (see  Chapter 26 ) and can be demonstrated 
experimentally in isolated neurons, heart muscle, and skeletal 
muscle membrane. However, it is unlikely that this effect is 
important after systemic administration of these drugs, since the 
concentration in plasma usually achieved by these routes is too 
low for the anesthetic effects to be evident. The membrane-
stabilizing β blockers are not used topically on the eye, because 
local anesthesia of the cornea would be highly undesirable. Sotalol 
CHAPTER 10 Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs    161
is a nonselective β-receptor antagonist that lacks local anesthetic 
action but has marked class III antiarrhythmic effects, reflecting 
potassium channel blockade (see  Chapter 14 ). 
 SPECIFIC AGENTS (SEE  TABLE 10–2 ) 
 Propranolol is the prototypical β-blocking drug. As noted above, 
it has low and dose-dependent bioavailability. A long-acting form 
of propranolol is available; prolonged absorption of the drug may 
occur over a 24-hour period. The drug has negligible effects at α 
and muscarinic receptors; however, it may block some serotonin 
receptors in the brain, though the clinical significance is unclear. 
It has no detectable partial agonist action at β receptors. 
 Metoprolol, atenolol, and several other drugs ( Table 10–2 ) are 
members of the β 1 -selective group. These agents may be safer in 
patients who experience bronchoconstriction in response to pro-
pranolol. Since their β 1 selectivity is rather modest, they should be 
used with great caution, if at all, in patients with a history of 
asthma. However, in selected patients with COPD the benefits 
may exceed the risks, eg, in patients with myocardial infarction. 
Beta 1 -selective antagonists may be preferable in patients with dia-
betes or peripheral vascular disease when therapy with a β blocker 
is required, since β 2 receptors are probably important in liver 
(recovery from hypoglycemia) and blood vessels (vasodilation). 
 Nebivolol is the most highly selective β 1 -adrenergic receptor 
blocker, though some of its metabolites do not have this level of 
specificity. Nebivolol has the additional quality of eliciting vasodi-
lation. This is due to an action of the drug on endothelial nitric 
oxide production. Nebivolol may increase insulin sensitivity and 
does not adversely affect lipid profile. 
 Nadolol is noteworthy for its very long duration of action; its 
spectrum of action is similar to that of timolol.  Timolol is a non-
selective agent with no local anesthetic activity. It has excellent 
ocular hypotensive effects when administered topically in the eye. 
 Levobunolol (nonselective) and  betaxolol (β 1 -selective) are also 
used for topical ophthalmic application in glaucoma; the latter 
drug may be less likely to induce bronchoconstriction than non-
selective antagonists.  Carteolol is a nonselective β-receptor 
antagonist. 
 Pindolol, acebutolol, carteolol, bopindolol, * oxprenolol,* 
celiprolol,* and  penbutolol are of interest because they have par-
tial β-agonist activity. They are effective in the major cardiovascu-
lar applications of the β-blocking group (hypertension and 
angina). Although these partial agonists may be less likely to cause 
bradycardia and abnormalities in plasma lipids than are antago-
nists, the overall clinical significance of intrinsic sympathomimetic 
activity remains uncertain. Pindolol, perhaps as a result of actions 
on serotonin signaling, may potentiate the action of traditional 
antidepressant medications. Celiprolol is a β 1 -selective antagonist 
with a modest capacity to activate β 2 receptors. 
 There is limited evidence suggesting that celiprolol may have less 
adverse bronchoconstrictor effect in asthma and may even promote 
bronchodilation. Acebutolol is also a β 1 -selective antagonist. 
TABLE 10–3 Drugs used in open-angle glaucoma.
Mechanism
Methods of Administration
Cholinomimetics
 Pilocarpine, carbachol, physostigmine, 
echothiophate, demecarium
Ciliary muscle contraction, opening of trabecular 
meshwork; increased outflow
Topical drops or gel; plastic film slow-release 
insert
Alpha agonists
 Nonselective
Increased outflow
Topical drops
  Epinephrine, dipivefrin
 Alpha2-selective
Decreased aqueous secretion
  Apraclonidine
Topical, postlaser only
  Brimonidine
Topical
Beta blockers
Timolol, betaxolol, carteolol, 
levobunolol, metipranolol
Decreased aqueous secretion from the ciliary 
epithelium
Topical drops
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
 Dorzolamide, brinzolamide
Decreased aqueous secretion due to lack of HCO3
−
Topical
Acetazolamide, dichlorphenamide, 
methazolamide
Oral
Prostaglandins
Latanoprost, bimatoprost, travoprost, 
unoprostone
Increased outflow
Topical
∗Not available in the USA
162    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
 Labetalol is a reversible adrenoceptor antagonist available as a 
racemic mixture of two pairs of chiral isomers (the molecule has 
two centers of asymmetry). The ( S,S )- and ( R,S )-isomers are nearly 
inactive, the ( S,R )-isomer is a potent α blocker, and the ( R,R )-
isomer is a potent β blocker. Labetalol’s affinity for α receptors is 
less than that of phentolamine, but labetalol is α 1 -selective. Its 
β-blocking potency is somewhat lower than that of propranolol. 
Hypotension induced by labetalol is accompanied by less tachy-
cardia than occurs with phentolamine and similar α blockers. 
 Carvedilol, medroxalol,* and  bucindolol* are nonselective 
β-receptor antagonists with some capacity to block α 1 -adrenergic 
receptors. Carvedilol antagonizes the actions of catecholamines 
more potently at β receptors than at α 1 receptors. The drug has a 
half-life of 6–8 hours. It is extensively metabolized in the liver, and 
stereoselective metabolism of its two isomers is observed. Since 
metabolism of ( R )-carvedilol is influenced by polymorphisms in 
CYP2D6 activity and by drugs that inhibit this enzyme’s activity 
(such as quinidine and fluoxetine, see  Chapter 4 ), drug interac-
tions may occur. Carvedilol also appears to attenuate oxygen free 
radical–initiated lipid peroxidation and to inhibit vascular smooth 
muscle mitogenesis independently of adrenoceptor blockade. 
These effects may contribute to the clinical benefits of the drug in 
chronic heart failure (see  Chapter 13 ). 
 Esmolol is an ultra-short–acting β 1 -selective adrenoceptor 
antagonist. The structure of esmolol contains an ester linkage; 
esterases in red blood cells rapidly metabolize esmolol to a metab-
olite that has a low affinity for β receptors. Consequently, esmolol 
has a short half-life (about 10 minutes). Therefore, during con-
tinuous infusions of esmolol, steady-state concentrations are 
achieved quickly, and the therapeutic actions of the drug are ter-
minated rapidly when its infusion is discontinued. Esmolol may 
be safer to use than longer-acting antagonists in critically ill 
patients who require a β-adrenoceptor antagonist. Esmolol is use-
ful in controlling supraventricular arrhythmias, arrhythmias asso-
ciated with thyrotoxicosis, perioperative hypertension, and 
myocardial ischemia in acutely ill patients. 
 Butoxamine is a research drug selective for β 2 receptors. 
Selective β 2 -blocking drugs have not been actively sought because 
there is no obvious clinical application for them; none is available 
for clinical use. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE BETARECEPTORBLOCKING 
DRUGS 
 Hypertension 
 The β-adrenoceptor–blocking drugs have proved to be effective 
and well tolerated in hypertension. Although many hypertensive 
patients respond to a β blocker used alone, the drug is often used 
with either a diuretic or a vasodilator. In spite of the short half-life 
of many β antagonists, these drugs may be administered once or 
twice daily and still have an adequate therapeutic effect. Labetalol, 
a competitive α and β antagonist, is effective in hypertension, 
though its ultimate role is yet to be determined. Use of these 
agents is discussed in greater detail in  Chapter 11 . There is some 
evidence that drugs in this class may be less effective in the elderly 
and in individuals of African ancestry. However, these differences 
are relatively small and may not apply to an individual patient. 
Indeed, since effects on blood pressure are easily measured, the 
therapeutic outcome for this indication can be readily detected in 
any patient. 
 Ischemic Heart Disease 
 Beta-adrenoceptor blockers reduce the frequency of anginal epi-
sodes and improve exercise tolerance in many patients with angina 
(see  Chapter 12 ). These actions relate to the blockade of cardiac β 
receptors, resulting in decreased cardiac work and reduction in oxy-
gen demand. Slowing and regularization of the heart rate may 
contribute to clinical benefits ( Figure 10–7 ). Multiple large-scale 
prospective studies indicate that the long-term use of  timolol, pro-
pranolol, or  metoprolol in patients who have had a myocardial 
infarction prolongs survival ( Figure 10–8 ). At the present time, data 
are less compelling for the use of other than the three mentioned 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists for this indication. It is significant that 
surveys in many populations have indicated that β-receptor antago-
nists are underused, leading to unnecessary morbidity and mortal-
ity. In addition, β-adrenoceptor antagonists are strongly indicated in 
the acute phase of a myocardial infarction. In this setting, relative 
contraindications include bradycardia, hypotension, moderate or 
severe left ventricular failure, shock, heart block, and active airways 
disease. It has been suggested that certain polymorphisms in β 2 -
adrenoceptor genes may influence survival among patients receiving 
antagonists after acute coronary syndromes. 
 Cardiac Arrhythmias 
 Beta antagonists are often effective in the treatment of both 
supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias (see  Chapter 14 ). It 
has been suggested that the improved survival following myocardial 
infarction in patients using β antagonists ( Figure 10–8 ) is due to 
suppression of arrhythmias, but this has not been proved. By 
increasing the atrioventricular nodal refractory period, β antagonists 
slow ventricular response rates in atrial flutter and fibrillation. These 
drugs can also reduce ventricular ectopic beats, particularly if the 
ectopic activity has been precipitated by catecholamines. Sotalol has 
antiarrhythmic effects involving ion channel blockade in addition to 
its β-blocking action; these are discussed in  Chapter 14 . 
 Heart Failure 
 Clinical trials have demonstrated that at least three β antagonists—
metoprolol, bisoprolol, and carvedilol—are effective in reducing 
mortality in selected patients with chronic heart failure. Although 
administration of these drugs may worsen acute congestive heart 
failure, cautious long-term use with gradual dose increments in 
patients who tolerate them may prolong life. Although mecha-
nisms are uncertain, there appear to be beneficial effects on 
∗Not available in the USA.
CHAPTER 10 Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs    163
myocardial remodeling and in decreasing the risk of sudden death 
(see  Chapter 13 ). 
 Other Cardiovascular Disorders 
 Beta-receptor antagonists have been found to increase stroke vol-
ume in some patients with obstructive cardiomyopathy. This 
beneficial effect is thought to result from the slowing of ventricu-
lar ejection and decreased outflow resistance. Beta antagonists are 
useful in dissecting aortic aneurysm to decrease the rate of devel-
opment of systolic pressure. Beta antagonists are also useful in 
selected at-risk patients in the prevention of adverse cardiovascular 
outcomes resulting from noncardiac surgery. 
 Glaucoma (See Box: The Treatment of 
Glaucoma) 
 Systemic administration of β-blocking drugs for other indications 
was found serendipitously to reduce intraocular pressure in 
patients with glaucoma. Subsequently, it was found that topical 
administration also reduces intraocular pressure. The mechanism 
appears to involve reduced production of aqueous humor by the 
ciliary body, which is physiologically activated by cAMP. Timolol 
and related β antagonists are suitable for local use in the eye 
because they lack local anesthetic properties. Beta antagonists 
appear to have an efficacy comparable to that of epinephrine or 
pilocarpine in open-angle glaucoma and are far better tolerated by 
most patients. While the maximal daily dose applied locally 
(1 mg) is small compared with the systemic doses commonly used 
in the treatment of hypertension or angina (10–60 mg), sufficient 
timolol may be absorbed from the eye to cause serious adverse 
effects on the heart and airways in susceptible individuals. Topical 
timolol may interact with orally administered verapamil and 
increase the risk of heart block. 
 Betaxolol, carteolol, levobunolol, and metipranolol are also 
approved for the treatment of glaucoma. Betaxolol has the poten-
tial advantage of being β 1 -selective; to what extent this potential 
Drama
Comedy
Documentary
110
90
70
50
Heart rate
10
30
50
70
90
110
Time (min)
 FIGURE 10–7  Heart rate in a patient with ischemic heart disease measured by telemetry while watching television. Measurements were 
begun 1 hour after receiving placebo ( upper line, red ) or 40 mg of oxprenolol ( lower line, blue ), a nonselective β antagonist with partial agonist 
activity. Not only was the heart rate decreased by the drug under the conditions of this experiment, it also varied much less in response to 
stimuli. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Taylor SH: Oxprenolol in clinical practice. Am J Cardiol 1983;52:34D.) 
Placebo
Timolol
p = 0.0028
Time (mo)
0
12
24
36
48
60
72
.00
.05
.10
.15
.20
.25
.30
Cumulative mortality rate
 FIGURE 10–8  Effects of β-blocker therapy on life-table cumu-
lated rates of mortality from all causes over 6 years among 1884 
patients surviving myocardial infarctions. Patients were randomly 
assigned to treatment with placebo ( dashed red line ) or timolol ( solid 
blue line ). (Reproduced, with permission, from Pederson TR: Six-year follow-up of 
the Norwegian multicenter study on timolol after acute myocardial infarction. N 
Engl J Med 1985;313:1055.) 
164    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
advantage might diminish systemic adverse effects remains to be 
determined. The drug apparently has caused worsening of pulmo-
nary symptoms in some patients. 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Excessive catecholamine action is an important aspect of the 
pathophysiology of hyperthyroidism, especially in relation to the 
heart (see  Chapter 38 ). The β antagonists are beneficial in this 
condition. The effects presumably relate to blockade of adreno-
ceptors and perhaps in part to the inhibition of peripheral conver-
sion of thyroxine to triiodothyronine. The latter action may vary 
from one β antagonist to another. Propranolol has been used 
extensively in patients with thyroid storm (severe hyperthyroid-
ism); it is used cautiously in patients with this condition to control 
supraventricular tachycardias that often precipitate heart failure. 
 Neurologic Diseases 
 Propranolol reduces the frequency and intensity of  migraine 
headache . Other β-receptor antagonists with preventive efficacy 
include metoprolol and probably also atenolol, timolol, and 
nadolol. The mechanism is not known. Since sympathetic activ-
ity may enhance skeletal muscle tremor, it is not surprising that 
β antagonists have been found to reduce certain  tremors (see 
 Chapter 28 ). The somatic manifestations of anxiety may respond 
dramatically to low doses of propranolol, particularly when taken 
prophylactically. For example, benefit has been found in musicians 
with  performance anxiety  (“stage fright”). Propranolol may 
contribute to the symptomatic treatment of alcohol withdrawal in 
some patients. 
 Miscellaneous 
 Beta-receptor antagonists have been found to diminish portal 
vein pressure in patients with cirrhosis. There is evidence that 
both propranolol and nadolol decrease the incidence of the first 
episode of bleeding from esophageal varices and decrease the 
mortality rate associated with bleeding in patients with cirrhosis. 
Nadolol in combination with isosorbide mononitrate appears to 
be more efficacious than sclerotherapy in preventing rebleeding 
in patients who have previously bled from esophageal varices. 
Variceal band ligation in combination with a β antagonist may be 
more efficacious. 
 CHOICE OF A BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR 
ANTAGONIST DRUG 
 Propranolol is the standard against which newer β antagonists 
developed for systemic use have been compared. In many years of 
very wide use, propranolol has been found to be a safe and effec-
tive drug for many indications. Since it is possible that some 
actions of a β-receptor antagonist may relate to some other effect 
of the drug, these drugs should not be considered interchangeable 
for all applications. For example, only β antagonists known to be 
effective in stable heart failure or in prophylactic therapy after 
myocardial infarction should be used for those indications. It is 
possible that the beneficial effects of one drug in these settings 
might not be shared by another drug in the same class. The pos-
sible advantages and disadvantages of β-receptor antagonists that 
are partial agonists have not been clearly defined in clinical set-
tings, although current evidence suggests that they are probably 
less efficacious in secondary prevention after a myocardial infarc-
tion compared with pure antagonists. 
 CLINICAL TOXICITY OF THE 
BETA-RECEPTOR ANTAGONIST DRUGS 
 Many adverse effects have been reported for propranolol but 
most are minor. Bradycardia is the most common adverse cardiac 
effect of β-blocking drugs. Sometimes patients note coolness of 
hands and feet in winter. Central nervous system effects include 
mild sedation, vivid dreams, and rarely, depression. Discontinuing 
the use of β blockers in any patient who develops psychiatric 
depression should be seriously considered if clinically feasible. It 
has been claimed that β-receptor antagonist drugs with low lipid 
solubility are associated with a lower incidence of central nervous 
system adverse effects than compounds with higher lipid solubil-
ity ( Table 10–2 ). Further studies designed to compare the central 
nervous system adverse effects of various drugs are required before 
specific recommendations can be made, though it seems reason-
able to try the hydrophilic drugs nadolol or atenolol in a patient 
who experiences unpleasant central nervous system effects with 
other β blockers. 
 The major adverse effects of β-receptor antagonist drugs relate 
to the predictable consequences of β blockade. Beta 2 -receptor 
blockade associated with the use of nonselective agents commonly 
causes worsening of preexisting asthma and other forms of airway 
obstruction without having these consequences in normal indi-
viduals. Indeed, relatively trivial asthma may become severe after 
β blockade. However, because of their lifesaving potential in car-
diovascular disease, strong consideration should be given to indi-
vidualized therapeutic trials in some classes of patients, eg, those 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who have appropriate 
indications for β blockers. While β 1 -selective drugs may have less 
effect on airways than nonselective β antagonists, they must be 
used very cautiously in patients with reactive airway disease. Beta 1 -
selective antagonists are generally well tolerated in patients with 
mild to moderate peripheral vascular disease, but caution is 
required in patients with severe peripheral vascular disease or 
vasospastic disorders. 
 Beta-receptor blockade depresses myocardial contractility and 
excitability. In patients with abnormal myocardial function, car-
diac output may be dependent on sympathetic drive. If this 
stimulus is removed by β blockade, cardiac decompensation may 
ensue. Thus, caution must be exercised in starting a β-receptor 
antagonist in patients with compensated heart failure even though 
long-term use of these drugs in these patients may prolong life. A 
life-threatening adverse cardiac effect of a β antagonist may be 
overcome directly with isoproterenol or with glucagon (glucagon 
CHAPTER 10 Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs    165
stimulates the heart via glucagon receptors, which are not blocked 
by β antagonists), but neither of these methods is without hazard. 
A very small dose of a β antagonist (eg, 10 mg of propranolol) may 
provoke severe cardiac failure in a susceptible individual. Beta 
blockers may interact with the calcium antagonist verapamil; 
severe hypotension, bradycardia, heart failure, and cardiac con-
duction abnormalities have all been described. These adverse 
effects may even arise in susceptible patients taking a topical (oph-
thalmic) β blocker and oral verapamil. 
 Patients with ischemic heart disease or renovascular hyperten-
sion may be at increased risk if β blockade is suddenly interrupted. 
The mechanism of this effect might involve up-regulation of the 
number of β receptors. Until better evidence is available regarding 
the magnitude of the risk, prudence dictates the gradual tapering 
rather than abrupt cessation of dosage when these drugs are dis-
continued, especially drugs with short half-lives, such as propra-
nolol and metoprolol. 
 The incidence of hypoglycemic episodes exacerbated by 
β-blocking agents in diabetics is unknown. Nevertheless, it is 
inadvisable to use β antagonists in insulin-dependent diabetic 
patients who are subject to frequent hypoglycemic reactions if 
alternative therapies are available. Beta 1 -selective antagonists offer 
some advantage in these patients, since the rate of recovery from 
hypoglycemia may be faster compared with that in diabetics 
receiving nonselective β-adrenoceptor antagonists. There is con-
siderable potential benefit from these drugs in diabetics after a 
myocardial infarction, so the balance of risk versus benefit must be 
evaluated in individual patients. 
SUMMARY Sympathetic Antagonists
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
ALPHA-ADRENOCEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
 • Phenoxybenzamine
Irreversibly blocks α1 and α2• 
indirect baroreflex activation
Lowers blood pressure (BP) • 
heart rate (HR) rises due to 
baroreflex activation
Pheochromocytoma • high 
catecholamine states
Irreversible blocker • duration 
> 1 day • Toxicity: Orthostatic 
hypotension • tachycardia 
• myocardial ischemia
 • Phentolamine
Reversibly blocks α1 and α2
Blocks α-mediated vasocon-
striction, lowers BP, increases 
HR (baroreflex)
Pheochromocytoma
Half-life ~45 min after 
IV injection
 • Prazosin
 • Doxazosin
 • Terazosin
Block α1, but not α2
Lower BP
Hypertension • benign pro-
static hyperplasia
Larger depressor effect with first 
dose may cause orthostatic 
hypotension
 • Tamsulosin
Tamsulosin is slightly selective 
for α1A
α1A Blockade may relax pros-
tatic smooth muscles more 
than vascular smooth muscle
Benign prostatic hyperpla-
sia
Orthostatic hypotension may be 
less common with this subtype
 • Yohimbine
Blocks α2• elicits increased cen-
tral sympathetic activity • 
increased norepinephrine 
release
Raises BP and HR
Male erectile dysfunction • 
hypotension
May cause anxiety • excess pres-
sor effect if norepinephrine 
transporter is blocked
 • Labetalol (see 
carvedilol section below)
β > α1 block
Lowers BP with limited HR 
increase
Hypertension
Oral, parenteral • Toxicity: Less 
tachycardia than other α1 agents
BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
 • Propranolol
 • Nadolol
 • Timolol
Block β1 and β2
Lower HR and BP • reduce 
renin
Hypertension • angina pec-
toris • arrhythmias • 
migraine • hyperthyroidism
Oral, parenteral • Toxicity: 
Bradycardia • worsened asthma • 
fatigue • vivid dreams • cold 
hands
 • Metoprolol
 • Atenolol
 • Alprenolol
 • Betaxolol
 • Nebivolol
Block β1 > β2
Lower HR and BP • reduce 
renin • may be safer in 
asthma
Angina pectoris • hyperten-
sion • arrhythmias
Toxicity: Bradycardia • fatigue • 
vivid dreams • cold hands
(continued )
166    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E *
ALPHA BLOCKERS
Alfuzosin (Uroxatral)
Oral: 10 mg tablets (extended release)
Doxazosin (generic, Cardura)
Oral: 1, 2, 4, 8 mg tablets; 4, 8 mg extended-release tablets
Phenoxybenzamine (Dibenzyline)
Oral: 10 mg capsules
Phentolamine (generic)
Parenteral: 5 mg/vial for injection
Prazosin (generic, Minipress)
Oral: 1, 2, 5 mg capsules
Silodosin (Rapaflow)
Oral: 4, 8 mg capsules
Tamsulosin (Flomax)
Oral: 0.4 mg capsule
Terazosin (generic, Hytrin)
Oral: 1, 2, 5, 10 mg tablets, capsules
Tolazoline (Priscoline)
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL for injection
BETA BLOCKERS
Acebutolol (generic, Sectral)
Oral: 200, 400 mg capsules
Atenolol (generic, Tenormin)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for IV injection
Betaxolol
Oral (Kerlone): 10, 20 mg tablets
Ophthalmic (generic, Betoptic): 0.25%, 0.5% drops
Bisoprolol (generic, Zebeta)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Carteolol
Oral (Cartrol): 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Ophthalmic (generic, Ocupress): 1% drops
Carvedilol (Coreg)
Oral: 3.125, 6.25, 12.5, 25 mg tablets; 10, 20, 40, 80 mg extended-
release capsules
Esmolol (Brevibloc)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV injection; 250 mg/mL for IV infusion
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
 • Butoxamine
1
Blocks β2 > β1
Increases peripheral resis-
tance
No clinical indication
Toxicity: Asthma provocation
 • Pindolol
 • Acebutolol
 • Carteolol
 • Bopindolol
1
 • Oxprenolol
1
 • Celiprolol
1
 • Penbutolol
β1, β2, with intrinsic sympath-
omimetic (partial agonist) 
effect
Lowers BP • modestly lower 
HR
Hypertension • arrhythmias 
• migraine • may avoid 
worsening of bradycardia
Oral • Toxicity: Fatigue • vivid 
dreams • cold hands
 • Carvedilol
 • Medroxalol
1
 • Bucindolol
1 
       (see labetalol above)
β > α1 block
Heart failure
Oral, long half-life • Toxicity: 
Fatigue
 • Esmolol
β1 > β2
Very brief cardiac β blockade
Rapid control of BP and 
arrhythmias, thyrotoxicosis 
and myocardial ischemia 
intraoperatively
Parenteral only • half-life ~ 10 
min • Toxicity: Bradycardia • 
hypotension
TYROSINE HYDROXYLASE INHIBITOR
 • Metyrosine
Blocks tyrosine hydroxylase • 
reduces synthesis of dopamine, 
norepinephrine, and 
epinephrine
Lowers BP • in central ner-
vous system may elicit 
extrapyramidal effects (due 
to low dopamine)
Pheochromocytoma
Toxicity: Extrapyramidal symp-
toms • orthostatic hypotension 
• crystalluria
1Not available in the USA.
∗In the USA 
CHAPTER 10 Adrenoceptor Antagonist Drugs    167
 REFERENCES 
 Ambrosio G et al: β-Blockade with nebivolol for prevention of acute ischaemic 
events in elderly patients with heart failure. Heart 2011;97:209. 
 Bell CM et al. Association between tamsulosin and serious ophthalmic adverse 
events in older men following cataract surgery. JAMA 2009;301:1991. 
 Blakely RD, DeFelice LJ: All aglow about presynaptic receptor regulation of neu-
rotransmitter transporters. Mol Pharmacol 2007;71:1206. 
 Blaufarb I, Pfeifer TM, Frishman WH: Beta-blockers: Drug interactions of clinical 
significance. Drug Saf 1995;13:359. 
 Boyer TD: Primary prophylaxis for variceal bleeding: Are we there yet? 
Gastroenterology 2005;128:1120. 
 Berruezo A, Brugada J: Beta blockers: Is the reduction of sudden death related to 
pure electrophysiologic effects? Cardiovasc Drug Ther 2008;22:163. 
 Brantigan CO, Brantigan TA, Joseph N: Effect of beta blockade and beta stimula-
tion on stage fright. Am J Med 1982;72:88. 
 Bristow M: Antiadrenergic therapy of chronic heart failure: Surprises and new 
opportunities. Circulation 2003;107:1100. 
 Cheng J, Kamiya K, Kodama I: Carvedilol: Molecular and cellular basis for its 
multifaceted therapeutic potential. Cardiovasc Drug Rev 2001;19:152. 
 Cleland JG: Beta-blockers for heart failure: Why, which, when, and where. Med 
Clin North Am 2003;87:339. 
 Eisenhofer G et al: Current progress and future challenges in the biochemical 
diagnosis and treatment of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. Horm 
Metab Res 2008;40:329. 
 Ellison KE, Gandhi G: Optimising the use of beta-adrenoceptor antagonists in 
coronary artery disease. Drugs 2005;65:787. 
 Fitzgerald JD: Do partial agonist beta-blockers have improved clinical utility? 
Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 1993;7:303. 
 Freemantle N et al: Beta blockade after myocardial infarction: Systematic review 
and meta regression analysis. BMJ 1999;318:1730. 
 Kamp O et al: Nebivolol: Haemodynamic effects and clinical significance of com-
bined β-blockade and nitric oxide release. Drugs 2010;70:41. 
 Kaplan SA et al: Combination therapy using oral β-blockers and intracavernosal 
injection in men with erectile dysfunction. Urology 1998;52:739. 
 Kyprianou N: Doxazosin and terazosin suppress prostate growth by inducing 
apoptosis: Clinical significance. J Urol 2003;169:1520. 
 Lanfear et al: β 2 -Adrenergic receptor genotype and survival among patients receiv-
ing β-blocker therapy after an acute coronary syndrome. JAMA 
2005;294:1526. 
 Lepor H et al: The efficacy of terazosin, finasteride, or both in benign prostate 
hyperplasia. N Engl J Med 1996;335:533. 
 Maggio PM, Taheri PA: Perioperative issues: Myocardial ischemia and protection–
beta-blockade. Surg Clin North Am 2005;85:1091. 
 Marquis RE, Whitson JT: Management of glaucoma: Focus on pharmacological 
therapy. Drugs Aging 2005;22:1. 
 McVary KT: Alfuzosin for symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia: Long-term 
experience. J Urol 2006;175:35. 
 Nickerson M: The pharmacology of adrenergic blockade. Pharmacol Rev 
1949;1:27. 
 Nickel JC, Sander S, Moon TD: A meta-analysis of the vascular-related safety 
profile and efficacy of alpha-adrenergic blockers for symptoms related to 
benign prostatic hyperplasia. Int J Clin Pract 2008;62:1547. 
 Perez DM: Structure-function of alpha 1 -adrenergic receptors. Biochem Pharmacol 
2007;73:1051. 
 Pojoga L et al: Beta-2 adrenergic receptor diplotype defines a subset of salt-sensitive 
hypertension. Hypertension 2006;48:892. 
 Roehrborn CG, Schwinn DA: Alpha 1 -adrenergic receptors and their inhibitors in 
lower urinary tract symptoms and benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Urol 
2004;171:1029. 
 Schwinn DA, Roehrborn CG. Alpha1-adrenoceptor subtypes and lower urinary 
tract symptoms. Int J Urol 2008;15:193. 
 Tank J et al: Yohimbine attenuates baroreflex-mediated bradycardia in humans. 
Hypertension 2007:50:899. 
 Wespes E: Intracavernous injection as an option for aging men with erectile dys-
function. Aging Male 2002;5:177. 
 Wilt TJ, MacDonald R, Rutks I: Tamsulosin for benign prostatic hyperplasia. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;(1):CD002081. 
Labetalol (generic, Normodyne, Trandate)
Oral: 100, 200, 300 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Levobunolol (Betagan Liquifilm, others)
Ophthalmic: 0.25, 0.5% drops
Metipranolol (Optipranolol)
Ophthalmic: 0.3% drops
Metoprolol (generic, Lopressor, Toprol)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets
Oral sustained release: 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
Nadolol (generic, Corgard)
Oral: 20, 40, 80, 120, 160 mg tablets
Nebivolol (Bystolic)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Penbutolol (Levatol)
Oral: 20 mg tablets
Pindolol (generic, Visken)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Propranolol (generic, Inderal)
Oral: 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 90 mg tablets; 4, 8, 80 mg/mL solutions
Oral sustained release: 60, 80, 120, 160 mg capsules
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
Sotalol (generic, Betapace)
Oral: 80, 120, 160, 240 mg tablets
Timolol
Oral (generic, Blocadren): 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
Ophthalmic (generic, Timoptic): 0.25, 0.5% drops, gel
TYROSINE HYDROXYLASE INHIBITOR
Metyrosine (Demser)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Labetalol (generic, Normodyne, Trandate)
Oral: 100, 200, 300 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Levobunolol (Betagan Liquifilm, others)
Ophthalmic: 0.25, 0.5% drops
Metipranolol (Optipranolol)
Ophthalmic: 0.3% drops
Metoprolol (generic, Lopressor, Toprol)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets
Oral sustained release: 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
Nadolol (generic, Corgard)
Oral: 20, 40, 80, 120, 160 mg tablets
Nebivolol (Bystolic)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Penbutolol (Levatol)
Oral: 20 mg tablets
Pindolol (generic, Visken)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Propranolol (generic, Inderal)
Oral: 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 90 mg tablets; 4, 8, 80 mg/mL solutions
Oral sustained release: 60, 80, 120, 160 mg capsules
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
Sotalol (generic, Betapace)
Oral: 80, 120, 160, 240 mg tablets
Timolol
Oral (generic, Blocadren): 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
Ophthalmic (generic, Timoptic): 0.25, 0.5% drops, gel
TYROSINE HYDROXYLASE INHIBITOR
Metyrosine (Demser)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
168    SECTION II Autonomic Drugs
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient had a pheochromocytoma. The tumor secretes 
catecholamines, especially norepinephrine and epinephrine, 
resulting in increases in blood pressure (via α 1 receptors) and 
heart rate (via β 1 receptors). The pheochromocytoma was in 
the left adrenal gland and was identified by MIBG imaging, 
which labels tissues that have norepinephrine transporters on 
their cell surface (see text). In addition, she had elevated 
plasma and urinary norepinephrine, epinephrine, and their 
metabolites, normetanephrine and metanephrine. The cate-
cholamines made the blood pressure surge and the heart rate 
increase, producing a typical episode during her examination, 
perhaps set off in this case by external pressure as the physi-
cian palpated the abdomen. Her profuse sweating was typical 
and partly due to α 1 receptors, though the large magnitude of 
drenching sweats in pheochromocytoma has never been fully 
explained. Treatment would consist of preoperative control of 
blood pressure and normalization of blood volume if reduced, 
followed by surgical resection of the tumor. Control of blood 
pressure extremes might be necessary during surgery, proba-
bly with nitroprusside.
169
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
11
SECTION III CARDIOVASCULAR-RENAL DRUGS
Antihypertensive Agents
 Neal L. Benowitz, MD 
A 35-year-old man presents with a blood pressure of 150/95 
mm Hg. He has been generally healthy, is sedentary, drinks 
several cocktails per day, and does not smoke cigarettes. He 
has a family history of hypertension, and his father died of a 
myocardial infarction at age 55. Physical examination is 
remarkable only for moderate obesity. Total cholesterol is 
220, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level is 
40 mg/dL. Fasting glucose is 105 mg/dL. Chest x-ray is nor-
mal. Electrocardiogram shows left ventricular enlargement. 
How would you treat this patient?
 Hypertension is the most common cardiovascular disease. In a 
survey carried out in 2007/2008, hypertension was found in 29% 
of American adults. The prevalence varies with age, race, educa-
tion, and many other variables. According to some studies, 
60–80% of both men and women will develop hypertension by 
age 80. Sustained arterial hypertension damages blood vessels in 
kidney, heart, and brain and leads to an increased incidence of 
renal failure, coronary disease, heart failure, stroke, and dementia. 
Effective pharmacologic lowering of blood pressure has been 
shown to prevent damage to blood vessels and to substantially 
reduce morbidity and mortality rates. Unfortunately, several sur-
veys indicate that only one third to one half of Americans with 
hypertension have adequate blood pressure control. Many effec-
tive drugs are available. Knowledge of their antihypertensive 
mechanisms and sites of action allows accurate prediction of effi-
cacy and toxicity. As a result, rational use of these agents, alone or 
in combination, can lower blood pressure with minimal risk of 
serious toxicity in most patients. 
 HYPERTENSION & REGULATION OF 
BLOOD PRESSURE 
 Diagnosis 
 The diagnosis of hypertension is based on repeated, reproducible 
measurements of elevated blood pressure ( Table 11–1 ). The diagno-
sis serves primarily as a prediction of consequences for the patient; 
it seldom includes a statement about the cause of hypertension. 
 Epidemiologic studies indicate that the risks of damage to 
kidney, heart, and brain are directly related to the extent of blood 
pressure elevation. Even mild hypertension (blood pressure 
170    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
contributing to the development of hypertension. Increase in blood 
pressure with aging does not occur in populations with low daily 
sodium intake. Patients with labile hypertension appear more likely 
than normal controls to have blood pressure elevations after salt 
loading. 
 The heritability of essential hypertension is estimated to be 
about 30%. Mutations in several genes have been linked to various 
rare causes of hypertension. Functional variations of the genes for 
angiotensinogen, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), the β 2 
adrenoceptor, and α adducin (a cytoskeletal protein) appear to 
contribute to some cases of essential hypertension. 
 Normal Regulation of Blood Pressure 
 According to the hydraulic equation, arterial blood pressure (BP) 
is directly proportionate to the product of the blood flow (cardiac 
output, CO) and the resistance to passage of blood through pre-
capillary arterioles (peripheral vascular resistance, PVR):
 BP = CO × PVR 
 Physiologically, in both normal and hypertensive individuals, 
blood pressure is maintained by moment-to-moment regulation 
of cardiac output and peripheral vascular resistance, exerted at 
three anatomic sites ( Figure 11–1 ): arterioles, postcapillary venules 
(capacitance vessels), and heart. A fourth anatomic control site, 
the kidney, contributes to maintenance of blood pressure by regu-
lating the volume of intravascular fluid. Baroreflexes, mediated by 
autonomic nerves, act in combination with humoral mechanisms, 
including the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, to coordinate 
function at these four control sites and to maintain normal blood 
pressure. Finally, local release of vasoactive substances from vascu-
lar endothelium may also be involved in the regulation of vascular 
TABLE 11–1  Classification of hypertension on the 
basis of blood pressure.
Systolic/Diastolic Pressure 
(mm Hg)
Category
< 120/80
Normal
120–135/80–89
Prehypertension
≥ 140/90
Hypertension
140–159/90–99
Stage 1
≥ 160/100
Stage 2
From the Joint National Committee on prevention, detection, evaluation, and treat-
ment of high blood pressure. JAMA 2003;289:2560.
4. Volume
       Kidneys
2. Capacitance
    Venules
1. Resistance
    Arterioles
3. Pump output
    Heart
Aldosterone
Angiotensin
Renin
CNS–
Sympathetic nerves
 FIGURE 11–1  Anatomic sites of blood pressure control. 
140/90 mm Hg) increases the risk of eventual end-organ damage. 
Starting at 115/75 mm Hg, cardiovascular disease risk doubles 
with each increment of 20/10 mm Hg throughout the blood pres-
sure range. Both systolic hypertension and diastolic hypertension 
are associated with end-organ damage; so-called isolated systolic 
hypertension is not benign. The risks—and therefore the urgency 
of instituting therapy—increase in proportion to the magnitude of 
blood pressure elevation. The risk of end-organ damage at any 
level of blood pressure or age is greater in African Americans and 
relatively less in premenopausal women than in men. Other posi-
tive risk factors include smoking; metabolic syndrome, including 
obesity, dyslipidemia, and diabetes; manifestations of end-organ 
damage at the time of diagnosis; and a family history of cardiovas-
cular disease. 
 It should be noted that the diagnosis of hypertension depends 
on measurement of blood pressure and not on symptoms reported 
by the patient. In fact, hypertension is usually asymptomatic until 
overt end-organ damage is imminent or has already occurred. 
 Etiology of Hypertension 
 A specific cause of hypertension can be established in only 
10–15% of patients. Patients in whom no specific cause of hyper-
tension can be found are said to have  essential or primary hyper-
tension . Patients with a specific etiology are said to have secondary 
hypertension. It is important to consider specific causes in each 
case, however, because some of them are amenable to definitive 
surgical treatment: renal artery constriction, coarctation of 
the aorta, pheochromocytoma, Cushing’s disease, and primary 
aldosteronism. 
 In most cases, elevated blood pressure is associated with an over-
all increase in resistance to flow of blood through arterioles, whereas 
cardiac output is usually normal. Meticulous investigation of auto-
nomic nervous system function, baroreceptor reflexes, the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone system, and the kidney has failed to identify 
a single abnormality as the cause of increased peripheral vascular 
resistance in essential hypertension. It appears, therefore, that ele-
vated blood pressure is usually caused by a combination of several 
(multifactorial) abnormalities. Epidemiologic evidence points to 
genetic factors, psychological stress, and environmental and dietary 
factors (increased salt and decreased potassium or calcium intake) as 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    171
resistance. For example, endothelin-1 (see Chapter 17) constricts 
and nitric oxide (see Chapter 19) dilates blood vessels. 
 Blood pressure in a hypertensive patient is controlled by the 
same mechanisms that are operative in normotensive subjects. 
Regulation of blood pressure in hypertensive patients differs from 
healthy patients in that the baroreceptors and the renal blood 
volume-pressure control systems appear to be “set” at a higher 
level of blood pressure. All antihypertensive drugs act by interfer-
ing with these normal mechanisms, which are reviewed below. 
 A. Postural Baroreflex  
Baroreflexes are responsible for rapid, moment-to-moment adjust-
ments in blood pressure, such as in transition from a reclining to 
an upright posture ( Figure 11–2 ). Central sympathetic neurons 
arising from the vasomotor area of the medulla are tonically active. 
Carotid baroreceptors are stimulated by the stretch of the vessel 
walls brought about by the internal pressure (arterial blood pres-
sure). Baroreceptor activation inhibits central sympathetic dis-
charge. Conversely, reduction in stretch results in a reduction in 
baroreceptor activity. Thus, in the case of a transition to upright 
posture, baroreceptors sense the reduction in arterial pressure that 
results from pooling of blood in the veins below the level of the 
heart as reduced wall stretch, and sympathetic discharge is disin-
hibited. The reflex increase in sympathetic outflow acts through 
nerve endings to increase peripheral vascular resistance (constric-
tion of arterioles) and cardiac output (direct stimulation of the 
heart and constriction of capacitance vessels, which increases 
venous return to the heart), thereby restoring normal blood pres-
sure. The same baroreflex acts in response to any event that lowers 
arterial pressure, including a primary reduction in peripheral vas-
cular resistance (eg, caused by a vasodilating agent) or a reduction 
in intravascular volume (eg, due to hemorrhage or to loss of salt 
and water via the kidney). 
 B. Renal Response to Decreased Blood Pressure 
 By controlling blood volume, the kidney is primarily responsible 
for long-term blood pressure control. A reduction in renal perfu-
sion pressure causes intrarenal redistribution of blood flow and 
increased reabsorption of salt and water. In addition, decreased 
pressure in renal arterioles as well as sympathetic neural activity 
(via β adrenoceptors) stimulates production of renin, which 
increases production of angiotensin II (see  Figure 11–1 and 
Chapter 17). Angiotensin II causes (1) direct constriction of resis-
tance vessels and (2) stimulation of aldosterone synthesis in the 
adrenal cortex, which increases renal sodium absorption and intra-
vascular blood volume. Vasopressin released from the posterior 
pituitary gland also plays a role in maintenance of blood pressure 
through its ability to regulate water reabsorption by the kidney 
(see Chapters 15 and 17). 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
 All antihypertensive agents act at one or more of the four ana-
tomic control sites depicted in  Figure 11–1 and produce their 
effects by interfering with normal mechanisms of blood pressure 
regulation. A useful classification of these agents categorizes them 
according to the principal regulatory site or mechanism on which 
they act ( Figure 11–3 ). Because of their common mechanisms of 
action, drugs within each category tend to produce a similar spec-
trum of toxicities. The categories include the following: 
 1.  Diuretics, which lower blood pressure by depleting the body 
of sodium and reducing blood volume and perhaps by other 
mechanisms. 
Brain-
stem
2. Nucleus of the tractus solitarius
X
XI
XII
3. Vasomotor 
     center
Inhibitory interneurons
Spinal
cord
4. Autonomic
     ganglion
5. Sympathetic
     nerve ending
Arterial blood pressure
1. Baroreceptor
    in carotid sinus
6. α or β 
    receptor
5
Sensory fiber
Motor fibers
IC
6
CP
 FIGURE 11–2  Baroreceptor reflex arc. 
172    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 2.  Sympathoplegic agents, which lower blood pressure by reduc-
ing peripheral vascular resistance, inhibiting cardiac function, 
and increasing venous pooling in capacitance vessels. (The lat-
ter two effects reduce cardiac output.) These agents are further 
subdivided according to their putative sites of action in the 
sympathetic reflex arc (see below). 
 3.  Direct vasodilators, which reduce pressure by relaxing vascu-
lar smooth muscle, thus dilating resistance vessels and—to 
varying degrees—increasing capacitance as well. 
 4.  Agents that block production or action of angiotensin and 
thereby reduce peripheral vascular resistance and (potentially) 
blood volume. 
 The fact that these drug groups act by different mechanisms 
permits the combination of drugs from two or more groups with 
increased efficacy and, in some cases, decreased toxicity. (See Box: 
Resistant Hypertension & Polypharmacy.) 
 DRUGS THAT ALTER SODIUM & 
WATER BALANCE 
 Dietary sodium restriction has been known for many years to decrease 
blood pressure in hypertensive patients. With the advent of diuretics, 
sodium restriction was thought to be less important. However, there 
is now general agreement that dietary control of blood pressure is a 
relatively nontoxic therapeutic measure and may even be preventive. 
Even modest dietary sodium restriction lowers blood pressure (though 
to varying extents) in many hypertensive persons. 
Vasomotor center
Methyldopa
Clonidine
Guanabenz
Guanfacine
Sympathetic ganglia
Trimethaphan
Vascular smooth muscle
Hydralazine
Minoxidil
Nitroprusside
Diazoxide
Sympathetic nerve terminals
Guanethidine
Guanadrel
Reserpine
Propranolol and
    other β-blockers
Losartan and 
    other angiotensin 
    receptor blockers
Angiotensin
receptors of vessels
Prazosin and 
    other α1-blockers
α-Receptors of vessels
Thiazides, etc
Propranolol and 
    other β-blockers
β-Receptors of juxtaglomerular
cells that release renin
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin I
Angiotensinogen
Renin
Angiotensin-
converting
enzyme
Captopril and 
    other ACE inhibitors
Kidney tubules
Verapamil and other 
    calcium channel 
    blockers
Fenoldopam
β-Receptors of heart
Aliskiren
 FIGURE 11–3  Sites of action of the major classes of antihypertensive drugs. 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    173
 Mechanisms of Action & Hemodynamic 
Effects of Diuretics 
 Diuretics lower blood pressure primarily by depleting body sodium 
stores. Initially, diuretics reduce blood pressure by reducing blood 
volume and cardiac output; peripheral vascular resistance may 
increase. After 6–8 weeks, cardiac output returns toward normal 
while peripheral vascular resistance declines. Sodium is believed to 
contribute to vascular resistance by increasing vessel stiffness and 
neural reactivity, possibly related to altered sodium-calcium 
exchange with a resultant increase in intracellular calcium. These 
effects are reversed by diuretics or sodium restriction. 
 Diuretics are effective in lowering blood pressure by 10–15 mm Hg 
in most patients, and diuretics alone often provide adequate treat-
ment for mild or moderate essential hypertension. In more severe 
hypertension, diuretics are used in combination with sympathople-
gic and vasodilator drugs to control the tendency toward sodium 
retention caused by these agents. Vascular responsiveness—ie, the 
ability to either constrict or dilate—is diminished by sympathople-
gic and vasodilator drugs, so that the vasculature behaves like an 
inflexible tube. As a consequence, blood pressure becomes exqui-
sitely sensitive to blood volume. Thus, in severe hypertension, when 
multiple drugs are used, blood pressure may be well controlled 
when blood volume is 95% of normal but much too high when 
blood volume is 105% of normal. 
 Use of Diuretics 
 The sites of action within the kidney and the pharmacokinetics of 
various diuretic drugs are discussed in Chapter 15. Thiazide 
diuretics are appropriate for most patients with mild or moderate 
hypertension and normal renal and cardiac function. More power-
ful diuretics (eg, those acting on the loop of Henle) such as furo-
semide are necessary in severe hypertension, when multiple drugs 
with sodium-retaining properties are used; in renal insufficiency, 
when glomerular filtration rate is less than 30 or 40 mL/min; and 
in cardiac failure or cirrhosis, in which sodium retention is 
marked. 
 Potassium-sparing diuretics are useful both to avoid excessive 
potassium depletion and to enhance the natriuretic effects of 
other diuretics. Aldosterone receptor antagonists in particular 
also have a favorable effect on cardiac function in people with 
heart failure. 
 Some pharmacokinetic characteristics and the initial and usual 
maintenance dosages of hydrochlorothiazide are listed in  Table 
11–2 . Although thiazide diuretics are more natriuretic at higher 
Resistant Hypertension & Polypharmacy
 Monotherapy of hypertension (treatment with a single drug) is 
desirable because compliance is likely to be better and cost is 
lower, and because in some cases adverse effects are fewer. 
However, most patients with hypertension require two or more 
drugs, preferably acting by different mechanisms (polyphar-
macy). According to some estimates, up to 40% of patients may 
respond inadequately even to two agents and are considered to 
have “resistant hypertension.” Some of these patients have treat-
able secondary hypertension that has been missed, but most do 
not and three or more drugs are required. 
 One rationale for polypharmacy in hypertension is that most 
drugs evoke compensatory regulatory mechanisms for maintain-
ing blood pressure (see Figures 6–7 and 11–1), which may mark-
edly limit their effect. For example, vasodilators such as 
hydralazine cause a significant decrease in peripheral vascular 
resistance, but evoke a strong compensatory tachycardia and 
salt and water retention (Figure 11–4) that is capable of almost 
completely reversing their effect. The addition of a β blocker 
prevents the tachycardia; addition of a diuretic (eg, hydrochloro-
thiazide) prevents the salt and water retention. In effect, all three 
drugs increase the sensitivity of the cardiovascular system to 
each other’s actions. 
 A second reason is that some drugs have only modest maxi-
mum efficacy but reduction of long-term morbidity mandates 
their use. Many studies of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors report a maximal lowering of blood pressure of less 
than 10 mm Hg. In patients with stage 2 hypertension (pressure 
> 160/100 mm Hg), this is inadequate to prevent all the sequelae 
of hypertension, but ACE inhibitors have important long-term 
benefits in preventing or reducing renal disease in diabetic per-
sons, and reduction of heart failure. 
 Finally, the toxicity of some effective drugs prevents their 
use at maximally effective dosage. The widespread indiscrimi-
nate use of β blockers has been criticized because several large 
clinical trials indicate that some members of the group, eg, 
metoprolol and carvedilol, have a greater benefit than others, 
eg, atenolol. However, all β blockers appear to have similar ben-
efits in reducing mortality after myocardial infarction, so these 
drugs are particularly indicated in patients with an infarct and 
hypertension. 
 In practice, when hypertension does not respond adequately 
to a regimen of one drug, a second drug from a different class 
with a different mechanism of action and different pattern of 
toxicity is added. If the response is still inadequate and compli-
ance is known to be good, a third drug should be added. If three 
drugs (usually including a diuretic) are inadequate, dietary 
sodium restriction and an additional drug may be necessary. 
174    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
doses (up to 100–200 mg of hydrochlorothiazide), when used 
as a single agent, lower doses (25–50 mg) exert as much anti-
hypertensive effect as do higher doses. In contrast to thiazides, 
the blood pressure response to loop diuretics continues to 
increase at doses many times greater than the usual therapeutic 
dose. 
 Toxicity of Diuretics 
 In the treatment of hypertension, the most common adverse effect 
of diuretics (except for potassium-sparing diuretics) is potassium 
depletion. Although mild degrees of hypokalemia are tolerated well 
by many patients, hypokalemia may be hazardous in persons taking 
digitalis, those who have chronic arrhythmias, or those with acute 
myocardial infarction or left ventricular dysfunction. Potassium 
loss is coupled to reabsorption of sodium, and restriction of dietary 
sodium intake therefore minimizes potassium loss. Diuretics may 
also cause magnesium depletion, impair glucose tolerance, and 
increase serum lipid concentrations. Diuretics increase uric acid 
concentrations and may precipitate gout. The use of low doses 
minimizes these adverse metabolic effects without impairing the 
antihypertensive action. Potassium-sparing diuretics may produce 
hyperkalemia, particularly in patients with renal insufficiency and 
those taking ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers; 
spironolactone (a steroid) is associated with gynecomastia. 
 DRUGS THAT ALTER SYMPATHETIC 
NERVOUS SYSTEM FUNCTION 
 In many patients, hypertension is initiated and sustained at least in 
part by sympathetic neural activation. In patients with moderate to 
severe hypertension, most effective drug regimens include an 
agent that inhibits function of the sympathetic nervous system. 
Drugs in this group are classified according to the site at which 
they impair the sympathetic reflex arc ( Figure 11–2 ). This neuro-
anatomic classification explains prominent differences in cardiovas-
cular effects of drugs and allows the clinician to predict interactions 
of these drugs with one another and with other drugs. 
 The subclasses of sympathoplegic drugs exhibit different pat-
terns of potential toxicity. Drugs that lower blood pressure by 
actions on the central nervous system tend to cause sedation and 
mental depression and may produce disturbances of sleep, includ-
ing nightmares. Drugs that act by inhibiting transmission through 
Increased
renin
release
heart
rate
systemic
vascular
resistance
sympathetic
nervous system
outflow
Vasodilator
drugs
Decreased
arterial
pressure
Increased
angiotensin II
Increased
aldosterone
Increased
Increased
cardiac
contractility
Increased
venous
capacitance
Decreased
arterial
pressure
Increased
cardiac
output
Increased
Sodium retention,
increased plasma
volume
Decreased
renal
sodium
excretion
Increased
1
1
2
2
2
Decreased
systemic
vascular
resistance
 FIGURE 11–4  Compensatory responses to vasodilators; basis for combination therapy with β blockers and diuretics. 1  Effect blocked by 
diuretics. 2  Effect blocked by β blockers. 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    175
autonomic ganglia (ganglion blockers) produce toxicity from 
inhibition of parasympathetic regulation, in addition to profound 
sympathetic blockade and are no longer used. Drugs that act 
chiefly by reducing release of norepinephrine from sympathetic 
nerve endings cause effects that are similar to those of surgical 
sympathectomy, including inhibition of ejaculation, and hypoten-
sion that is increased by upright posture and after exercise. Drugs 
that block postsynaptic adrenoceptors produce a more selective 
spectrum of effects depending on the class of receptor to which 
they bind. Although not discussed in this chapter, it should be 
noted that renal sympathetic denervation is effective in lowering 
blood pressure in patients with hypertension resistant to antihyper-
tensive drugs. 
 Finally, one should note that  all of the agents that lower blood 
pressure by altering sympathetic function can elicit compensatory 
effects through mechanisms that are not dependent on adrenergic 
nerves. Thus, the antihypertensive effect of any of these agents 
used alone may be limited by retention of sodium by the kidney 
and expansion of blood volume. For this reason, sympathoplegic 
antihypertensive drugs are most effective when used concomi-
tantly with a diuretic. 
 CENTRALLY ACTING 
SYMPATHOPLEGIC DRUGS 
 Centrally acting sympathoplegic drugs were once widely used in 
the treatment of hypertension. With the exception of clonidine, 
these drugs are rarely used today. 
 Mechanisms & Sites of Action 
 These agents reduce sympathetic outflow from vasomotor centers 
in the brainstem but allow these centers to retain or even increase 
their sensitivity to baroreceptor control. Accordingly, the antihy-
pertensive and toxic actions of these drugs are generally less depen-
dent on posture than are the effects of drugs that act directly on 
peripheral sympathetic neurons. 
 Methyldopa (L-α-methyl-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) is an 
analog of L-dopa and is converted to α-methyldopamine and 
α-methylnorepinephrine; this pathway directly parallels the synthesis 
of norepinephrine from dopa illustrated in Figure 6–5. Alpha-
methylnorepinephrine is stored in adrenergic nerve vesicles, where it 
stoichiometrically replaces norepinephrine, and is released by nerve 
TABLE 11–2 Pharmacokinetic characteristics and dosage of selected oral antihypertensive drugs.
Drug
Half-life (h)
Bioavailability 
(percent)
Suggested 
Initial Dose
Usual Maintenance 
Dose Range
Reduction of Dosage Required in 
Moderate Renal Insufficiency1
Amlodipine
35
65
2.5 mg/d
5–10 mg/d
No
Atenolol
6
60
50 mg/d
50–100 mg/d
Yes
Benazepril
0.62
35
5–10 mg/d
20–40 mg/d
Yes
Captopril
2.2
65
50–75 mg/d
75–150 mg/d
Yes
Clonidine
8–12
95
0.2 mg/d
0.2–1.2 mg/d
Yes
Diltiazem
3.5
40
120–140 mg/d
240–360 mg/d
No
Guanethidine
120
3–50
10 mg/d
25–50 mg/d
Possible
Hydralazine
1.5–3
25
40 mg/d
40–200 mg/d
No
Hydrochlorothiazide
12
70
25 mg/d
25–50 mg/d
No
Lisinopril
12
25
10 mg/d
10–80 mg/d
Yes
Losartan
1–23
36
50 mg/d
25–100 mg/d
No
Methyldopa
2
25
1 g/d
1–2 g/d
No
Metoprolol
3–7
40
50–100 mg/d
200–400 mg/d
No
Minoxidil
4
90
5–10 mg/d
40 mg/d
No
Nebivolol
12
Nd4
5 mg/d
10–40 mg/d
No
Nifedipine
2
50
30 mg/d
30–60 mg/d
No
Prazosin
3–4
70
3 mg/d
10–30 mg/d
No
Propranolol
3–5
25
80 mg/d
80–480 mg/d
No
Reserpine
24–48
50
0.25 mg/d
0.25 mg/d
No
Verapamil
4–6
22
180 mg/d
240–480 mg/d
No
1Creatinine clearance ≥ 30 mL/min. Many of these drugs do require dosage adjustment if creatinine clearance falls below 30 mL/min.
2The active metabolite of benazepril has a half-life of 10 hours.
3The active metabolite of losartan has a half-life of 3–4 hours.
4Nd, not determined.
176    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
stimulation to interact with postsynaptic adrenoceptors. However, 
this replacement of norepinephrine by a false transmitter in periph-
eral neurons is  not responsible for methyldopa’s antihypertensive 
effect, because the α-methylnorepinephrine released is an effective 
agonist at the α adrenoceptors that mediate peripheral sympathetic 
constriction of arterioles and venules. In fact, methyldopa’s antihy-
pertensive action appears to be due to stimulation of  central α adre-
noceptors by α-methylnorepinephrine or α-methyldopamine. 
 The antihypertensive action of  clonidine, a 2-imidazoline 
derivative, was discovered in the course of testing the drug for use 
as a nasal decongestant. 
 After intravenous injection, clonidine produces a brief rise in 
blood pressure followed by more prolonged hypotension. The 
pressor response is due to direct stimulation of α adrenoceptors in 
arterioles. The drug is classified as a partial agonist at α receptors 
because it also inhibits pressor effects of other α agonists. 
 Considerable evidence indicates that the hypotensive effect of 
clonidine is exerted at α adrenoceptors in the medulla of the 
brain. In animals, the hypotensive effect of clonidine is prevented 
by central administration of α antagonists. Clonidine reduces 
sympathetic and increases parasympathetic tone, resulting in 
blood pressure lowering and bradycardia. The reduction in pres-
sure is accompanied by a decrease in circulating catecholamine 
levels. These observations suggest that clonidine sensitizes brain- 
stem vasomotor centers to inhibition by baroreflexes. 
 Thus, studies of clonidine and methyldopa suggest that nor-
mal regulation of blood pressure involves central adrenergic 
neurons that modulate baroreceptor reflexes. Clonidine and α- 
methylnorepinephrine bind more tightly to α 2 than to α 1 adreno-
ceptors. As noted in Chapter 6, α 2 receptors are located on 
presynaptic adrenergic neurons as well as some postsynaptic sites. 
It is possible that clonidine and α-methylnorepinephrine act in 
the brain to reduce norepinephrine release onto relevant receptor 
sites. Alternatively, these drugs may act on postsynaptic α 2 adre-
noceptors to inhibit activity of appropriate neurons. Finally, cloni-
dine also binds to a nonadrenoceptor site, the  imidazoline 
receptor, which may also mediate antihypertensive effects. 
 Methyldopa and clonidine produce slightly different hemody-
namic effects: clonidine lowers heart rate and cardiac output more than 
does methyldopa. This difference suggests that these two drugs do not 
have identical sites of action. They may act primarily on different 
populations of neurons in the vasomotor centers of the brainstem. 
 Guanabenz and  guanfacine are centrally active antihyperten-
sive drugs that share the central α-adrenoceptor–stimulating 
effects of clonidine. They do not appear to offer any advantages 
over clonidine and are rarely used. 
 METHYLDOPA 
 Methyldopa was widely used in the past but is now used primarily 
for hypertension during pregnancy. It lowers blood pressure 
chiefly by reducing peripheral vascular resistance, with a variable 
reduction in heart rate and cardiac output. 
 Most cardiovascular reflexes remain intact after administration 
of methyldopa, and blood pressure reduction is not markedly 
dependent on posture. Postural (orthostatic) hypotension some-
times occurs, particularly in volume-depleted patients. One 
potential advantage of methyldopa is that it causes reduction in 
renal vascular resistance. 
OH
HO
HO
C
C
O
NH2
CH2
α-Methyldopa
(α-methyl group in color)
CH3
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Pharmacokinetic characteristics of methyldopa are listed in 
 Table 11–2 . Methyldopa enters the brain via an aromatic amino 
acid transporter. The usual oral dose of methyldopa produces its 
maximal antihypertensive effect in 4–6 hours, and the effect can 
persist for up to 24 hours. Because the effect depends on accumu-
lation and storage of a metabolite (α-methylnorepinephrine) in 
the vesicles of nerve endings, the action persists after the parent 
drug has disappeared from the circulation. 
 Toxicity 
 The most common undesirable effect of methyldopa is sedation, 
particularly at the onset of treatment. With long-term therapy, 
patients may complain of persistent mental lassitude and impaired 
mental concentration. Nightmares, mental depression, vertigo, 
and extrapyramidal signs may occur but are relatively infrequent. 
Lactation, associated with increased prolactin secretion, can occur 
both in men and in women treated with methyldopa. This toxicity 
is probably mediated by inhibition of dopaminergic mechanisms 
in the hypothalamus. 
 Other important adverse effects of methyldopa are develop-
ment of a positive Coombs test (occurring in 10–20% of patients 
undergoing therapy for longer than 12 months), which sometimes 
makes cross-matching blood for transfusion difficult and rarely is 
associated with hemolytic anemia, as well as hepatitis and drug 
fever. Discontinuation of the drug usually results in prompt rever-
sal of these abnormalities. 
 CLONIDINE 
 Blood pressure lowering by clonidine results from reduction of 
cardiac output due to decreased heart rate and relaxation of capaci-
tance vessels, as well as a reduction in peripheral vascular resistance. 
 
Clonidine
NH
CI
CI
N
N
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    177
 Reduction in arterial blood pressure by clonidine is accompa-
nied by decreased renal vascular resistance and maintenance of 
renal blood flow. As with methyldopa, clonidine reduces blood 
pressure in the supine position and only rarely causes postural 
hypotension. Pressor effects of clonidine are not observed after 
ingestion of therapeutic doses of clonidine, but severe hyperten-
sion can complicate a massive overdose. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Typical pharmacokinetic characteristics are listed in  Table 11–2 . 
 Clonidine is lipid-soluble and rapidly enters the brain from the 
circulation. Because of its relatively short half-life and the fact that 
its antihypertensive effect is directly related to blood concentration, 
oral clonidine must be given twice a day (or as a patch, below) to 
maintain smooth blood pressure control. However, as is not the 
case with methyldopa, the dose-response curve of clonidine is such 
that increasing doses are more effective (but also more toxic). 
 A transdermal preparation of clonidine that reduces blood 
pressure for 7 days after a single application is also available. This 
preparation appears to produce less sedation than clonidine tablets 
but is often associated with local skin reactions. 
 Toxicity 
 Dry mouth and sedation are common. Both effects are centrally 
mediated and dose-dependent and coincide temporally with the 
drug’s antihypertensive effect. 
 Clonidine should not be given to patients who are at risk for 
mental depression and should be withdrawn if depression occurs 
during therapy. Concomitant treatment with tricyclic antidepres-
sants may block the antihypertensive effect of clonidine. The 
interaction is believed to be due to α-adrenoceptor–blocking 
actions of the tricyclics. 
 Withdrawal of clonidine after protracted use, particularly with 
high dosages (more than 1 mg/d), can result in life-threatening 
hypertensive crisis mediated by increased sympathetic nervous 
activity. Patients exhibit nervousness, tachycardia, headache, and 
sweating after omitting one or two doses of the drug. Because of 
the risk of severe hypertensive crisis when clonidine is suddenly 
withdrawn, all patients who take clonidine should be warned of 
the possibility. If the drug must be stopped, it should be done 
gradually while other antihypertensive agents are being substi-
tuted. Treatment of the hypertensive crisis consists of reinstitution 
of clonidine therapy or administration of α- and β-adrenoceptor–
blocking agents. 
 GANGLION-BLOCKING AGENTS 
 Historically, drugs that block activation of postganglionic auto-
nomic neurons by acetylcholine were among the first agents used 
in the treatment of hypertension. Most such drugs are no longer 
available clinically because of intolerable toxicities related to their 
primary action (see below). 
 Ganglion blockers competitively block nicotinic cholinoceptors 
on postganglionic neurons in both sympathetic and parasympathetic 
ganglia. In addition, these drugs may directly block the nicotinic 
acetylcholine channel, in the same fashion as neuromuscular nico-
tinic blockers (see Figure 27–6). 
 The adverse effects of ganglion blockers are direct extensions of 
their pharmacologic effects. These effects include both sym-
pathoplegia (excessive orthostatic hypotension and sexual dys-
function) and parasympathoplegia (constipation, urinary retention, 
precipitation of glaucoma, blurred vision, dry mouth, etc). These 
severe toxicities are the major reason for the abandonment of 
ganglion blockers for the therapy of hypertension. 
 ADRENERGIC NEURON-BLOCKING 
AGENTS 
 These drugs lower blood pressure by preventing normal physio-
logic release of norepinephrine from postganglionic sympathetic 
neurons. 
 Guanethidine 
 In high enough doses, guanethidine can produce profound sym-
pathoplegia. The resulting high maximal efficacy of this agent made 
it the mainstay of outpatient therapy of severe hypertension for many 
years. For the same reason, guanethidine can produce all of the tox-
icities expected from “pharmacologic sympathectomy,” including 
marked postural hypotension, diarrhea, and impaired ejaculation. 
Because of these adverse effects, guanethidine is now rarely used. 
 Guanethidine is too polar to enter the central nervous system. 
As a result, this drug has none of the central effects seen with many 
of the other antihypertensive agents described in this chapter. 
 Guanadrel is a guanethidine-like drug that is available in the 
USA.  Bethanidine and  debrisoquin , antihypertensive agents not 
available for clinical use in the USA, are similar. 
 A. Mechanism and Sites of Action  
Guanethidine inhibits the release of norepinephrine from sympa-
thetic nerve endings (see Figure 6–4). This effect is probably 
responsible for most of the sympathoplegia that occurs in patients. 
Guanethidine is transported across the sympathetic nerve mem-
brane by the same mechanism that transports norepinephrine 
itself (NET, uptake 1), and uptake is essential for the drug’s action. 
Once guanethidine has entered the nerve, it is concentrated in 
transmitter vesicles, where it replaces norepinephrine. Because it 
replaces norepinephrine, the drug causes a gradual depletion of 
norepinephrine stores in the nerve ending. 
 Because neuronal uptake is necessary for the hypotensive activ-
ity of guanethidine, drugs that block the catecholamine uptake 
process or displace amines from the nerve terminal (see Chapter 6) 
block its effects. These include cocaine, amphetamine, tricyclic 
antidepressants, phenothiazines, and phenoxybenzamine. 
 B. Pharmacokinetics and Dosage 
 
Because of guanethidine’s long half-life (5 days), the onset of sym-
pathoplegia is gradual (maximal effect in 1–2 weeks), and sym-
pathoplegia persists for a comparable period after cessation of 
178    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
therapy. The dose should not ordinarily be increased at intervals 
shorter than 2 weeks. 
 C. Toxicity  
Therapeutic use of guanethidine is often associated with symp-
tomatic postural hypotension and hypotension following exercise, 
particularly when the drug is given in high doses. Guanethidine-
induced sympathoplegia in men may be associated with delayed or 
retrograde ejaculation (into the bladder). Guanethidine com-
monly causes diarrhea, which results from increased gastrointesti-
nal motility due to parasympathetic predominance in controlling 
the activity of intestinal smooth muscle. 
 Interactions with other drugs may complicate guanethidine 
therapy. Sympathomimetic agents, at doses available in over-the-
counter cold preparations, can produce hypertension in patients 
taking guanethidine. Similarly, guanethidine can produce hyper-
tensive crisis by releasing catecholamines in patients with pheo-
chromocytoma. When tricyclic antidepressants are administered 
to patients taking guanethidine, the drug’s antihypertensive effect 
is attenuated, and severe hypertension may follow. 
 Reserpine 
 Reserpine, an alkaloid extracted from the roots of an Indian plant, 
Rauwolfia serpentina, was one of the first effective drugs used on a 
large scale in the treatment of hypertension. At present, it is rarely 
used owing to its adverse effects. 
 A. Mechanism and Sites of Action 
 
Reserpine blocks the ability of aminergic transmitter vesicles to take 
up and store biogenic amines, probably by interfering with the 
vesicular membrane-associated transporter (VMAT, see Figure 6–4). 
This effect occurs throughout the body, resulting in depletion of 
norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin in both central and 
peripheral neurons. Chromaffin granules of the adrenal medulla 
are also depleted of catecholamines, although to a lesser extent 
than are the vesicles of neurons. Reserpine’s effects on adrenergic 
vesicles appear irreversible; trace amounts of the drug remain 
bound to vesicular membranes for many days. 
 Depletion of peripheral amines probably accounts for much of 
the beneficial antihypertensive effect of reserpine, but a central 
component cannot be ruled out. Reserpine readily enters the 
brain, and depletion of cerebral amine stores causes sedation, 
mental depression, and parkinsonism symptoms. 
 At lower doses used for treatment of mild hypertension, reser-
pine lowers blood pressure by a combination of decreased cardiac 
output and decreased peripheral vascular resistance. 
 B. Pharmacokinetics and Dosage  
See  Table 11–2 . 
 C. Toxicity  
At the low doses usually administered, reserpine produces little 
postural hypotension. Most of the unwanted effects of reserpine 
result from actions on the brain or gastrointestinal tract. 
 High doses of reserpine characteristically produce sedation, 
lassitude, nightmares, and severe mental depression; occasionally, 
these occur even in patients receiving low doses (0.25 mg/d). 
Much less frequently, ordinary low doses of reserpine produce 
extrapyramidal effects resembling Parkinson’s disease, probably as 
a result of dopamine depletion in the corpus striatum. Although 
these central effects are uncommon, it should be stressed that 
they may occur at any time, even after months of uneventful 
treatment. Patients with a history of mental depression should 
not receive reserpine, and the drug should be stopped if depres-
sion appears. 
 Reserpine rather often produces mild diarrhea and gastrointes-
tinal cramps and increases gastric acid secretion. The drug should 
not be given to patients with a history of peptic ulcer. 
 ADRENOCEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 The detailed pharmacology of α- and β-adrenoceptor blockers is 
presented in Chapter 10. 
 BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR–BLOCKING 
AGENTS 
 Of the large number of β blockers tested, most have been shown 
to be effective in lowering blood pressure. The pharmacologic 
properties of several of these agents differ in ways that may confer 
therapeutic benefits in certain clinical situations. 
 Propranolol 
 Propranolol was the first β blocker shown to be effective in hyper-
tension and ischemic heart disease. Propranolol has now been 
largely replaced by cardioselective β blockers such as metoprolol 
and atenolol. All β-adrenoceptor–blocking agents are useful for 
lowering blood pressure in mild to moderate hypertension. In 
severe hypertension, β blockers are especially useful in preventing 
the reflex tachycardia that often results from treatment with direct 
vasodilators. Beta blockers have been shown to reduce mortality 
after a myocardial infarction and some also reduce mortality in 
patients with heart failure; they are particularly advantageous for 
treating hypertension in patients with these conditions (see 
Chapter 13). 
 A. Mechanism and Sites of Action 
 
Propranolol’s efficacy in treating hypertension as well as most of 
its toxic effects result from nonselective β blockade. Propranolol 
decreases blood pressure primarily as a result of a decrease in car-
diac output. Other β blockers may decrease cardiac output or 
decrease peripheral vascular resistance to various degrees, depend-
ing on cardioselectivity and partial agonist activities. 
 Propranolol inhibits the stimulation of renin production by 
catecholamines (mediated by β 1 receptors). It is likely that propra-
nolol’s effect is due in part to depression of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system. Although most effective in patients with high 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    179
plasma renin activity, propranolol also reduces blood pressure in 
hypertensive patients with normal or even low renin activity. Beta 
blockers might also act on peripheral presynaptic β adrenoceptors 
to reduce sympathetic vasoconstrictor nerve activity. 
 In mild to moderate hypertension, propranolol produces a 
significant reduction in blood pressure without prominent pos-
tural hypotension. 
 B. Pharmacokinetics and Dosage 
 See  Table 11–2 . Resting bradycardia and a reduction in the heart 
rate during exercise are indicators of propranolol’s β-blocking 
effect, and changes in these parameters may be used as guides for 
regulating dosage. Propranolol can be administered twice daily, 
and slow-release preparations are available. 
 C. Toxicity 
 
The principal toxicities of propranolol result from blockade of 
cardiac, vascular, or bronchial β receptors and are described in 
more detail in Chapter 10. The most important of these predict-
able extensions of the β-blocking action occur in patients with 
bradycardia or cardiac conduction disease, asthma, peripheral 
vascular insufficiency, and diabetes. 
 When propranolol is discontinued after prolonged regular use, 
some patients experience a withdrawal syndrome, manifested by 
nervousness, tachycardia, increased intensity of angina, and 
increase of blood pressure. Myocardial infarction has been 
reported in a few patients. Although the incidence of these com-
plications is probably low, propranolol should not be discontinued 
abruptly. The withdrawal syndrome may involve up-regulation or 
supersensitivity of β adrenoceptors. 
 Metoprolol & Atenolol 
 Metoprolol and atenolol, which are cardioselective, are the most 
widely used β blockers in the treatment of hypertension. 
Metoprolol is approximately equipotent to propranolol in inhibit-
ing stimulation of β 1 adrenoceptors such as those in the heart but 
50- to 100-fold less potent than propranolol in blocking β 2 receptors. 
Relative cardioselectivity may be advantageous in treating hyper-
tensive patients who also suffer from asthma, diabetes, or periph-
eral vascular disease. Although cardioselectivity is not complete, 
metoprolol causes less bronchial constriction than propranolol at 
doses that produce equal inhibition of β 1- adrenoceptor responses. 
Metoprolol is extensively metabolized by CYP2D6 with high first-
pass metabolism. The drug has a relatively short half-life of 4–6 
hours, but the extended-release preparation can be dosed once 
daily ( Table 11–2 ). Sustained-release metoprolol is effective in 
reducing mortality from heart failure and is particularly useful in 
patients with hypertension and heart failure. 
 Atenolol is not extensively metabolized and is excreted primarily 
in the urine with a half-life of 6 hours; it is usually dosed once daily. 
Recent studies have found atenolol less effective than metoprolol in 
preventing the complications of hypertension. A possible reason for 
this difference is that once-daily dosing does not maintain adequate 
blood levels of atenolol. The usual dosage is 50–100 mg/d. Patients 
with reduced renal function should receive lower doses. 
 Nadolol, Carteolol, Betaxolol, & Bisoprolol 
 Nadolol and carteolol, nonselective β-receptor antagonists, are not 
appreciably metabolized and are excreted to a considerable extent 
in the urine. Betaxolol and bisoprolol are β 1 -selective blockers that 
are primarily metabolized in the liver but have long half-lives. 
Because of these relatively long half-lives, these drugs can be 
administered once daily. Nadolol is usually begun at a dosage of 
40 mg/d, carteolol at 2.5 mg/d, betaxolol at 10 mg/d, and biso-
prolol at 5 mg/d. Increases in dosage to obtain a satisfactory 
therapeutic effect should take place no more often than every 4 or 
5 days. Patients with reduced renal function should receive corre-
spondingly reduced doses of nadolol and carteolol. 
 Pindolol, Acebutolol, & Penbutolol 
 Pindolol, acebutolol, and penbutolol are partial agonists, ie, β 
blockers with some intrinsic sympathomimetic activity. They 
lower blood pressure by decreasing vascular resistance and appear 
to depress cardiac output or heart rate less than other β blockers, 
perhaps because of significantly greater agonist than antagonist 
effects at β 2 receptors. This may be particularly beneficial for 
patients with bradyarrhythmias or peripheral vascular disease. 
Daily doses of pindolol start at 10 mg; of acebutolol, at 400 mg; 
and of penbutolol, at 20 mg. 
 Labetalol, Carvedilol, & Nebivolol 
 These drugs have both β-blocking and vasodilating effects. 
Labetalol is formulated as a racemic mixture of four isomers (it 
has two centers of asymmetry). Two of these isomers—the  (S,S) - 
and  (R,S) -isomers—are relatively inactive, a third  (S,R) - is a 
potent α blocker, and the last  (R,R) - is a potent β blocker. 
Labetalol has a 3:1 ratio of β:α antagonism after oral dosing. 
Blood pressure is lowered by reduction of systemic vascular resis-
tance (via α blockade) without significant alteration in heart rate 
or cardiac output. Because of its combined α- and β-blocking 
activity, labetalol is useful in treating the hypertension of pheo-
chromocytoma and hypertensive emergencies. Oral daily doses of 
labetalol range from 200 to 2400 mg/d. Labetalol is given as 
repeated intravenous bolus injections of 20–80 mg to treat hyper-
tensive emergencies. 
 Carvedilol, like labetalol, is administered as a racemic mixture. 
The  S (–) isomer is a nonselective β-adrenoceptor blocker, but both 
 S (–) and  R (+) isomers have approximately equal α-blocking 
potency. The isomers are stereoselectively metabolized in the liver, 
which means that their elimination half-lives may differ. The aver-
age half-life is 7–10 hours. The usual starting dosage of carvedilol 
for ordinary hypertension is 6.25 mg twice daily. Carvedilol reduces 
mortality in patients with heart failure and is therefore particularly 
useful in patients with both heart failure and hypertension. 
 Nebivolol is a β 1 -selective blocker with vasodilating properties 
that are not mediated by α blockade. D-Nebivolol has highly selec-
tive β 1 blocking effects, while the L-isomer causes vasodilation; the 
drug is marketed as a racemic mixture. The vasodilating effect may 
be due to an increase in endothelial release of nitric oxide via 
induction of endothelial nitric oxide synthase. The hemodynamic 
180    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
effects of nebivolol therefore differ from those of pure β blockers 
in that peripheral vascular resistance is acutely lowered (by nebi-
volol) as opposed to increased acutely (by the older agents). 
Nebivolol is extensively metabolized and has active metabolites. 
The half-life is 10–12 hours, but the drug can be given once daily. 
Dosing is generally started at 5 mg/d, with dose escalation as high 
as 40 mg, if necessary. The efficacy of nebivolol is similar to that 
of other antihypertensive agents, but several studies report fewer 
adverse effects. 
 Esmolol 
 Esmolol is a β 1 -selective blocker that is rapidly metabolized via 
hydrolysis by red blood cell esterases. It has a short half-life 
(9–10 minutes) and is administered by constant intravenous 
infusion. Esmolol is generally administered as a loading dose 
(0.5–1 mg/kg), followed by a constant infusion. The infusion is 
typically started at 50–150 mcg/kg/min, and the dose increased 
every 5 minutes, up to 300 mcg/kg/min, as needed to achieve the 
desired therapeutic effect. Esmolol is used for management of 
intraoperative and postoperative hypertension, and sometimes for 
hypertensive emergencies, particularly when hypertension is asso-
ciated with tachycardia. 
 PRAZOSIN & OTHER ALPHA 1 BLOCKERS 
 Mechanism & Sites of Action 
 Prazosin, terazosin, and doxazosin produce most of their antihy-
pertensive effects by selectively blocking α 1 receptors in arterioles 
and venules. These agents produce less reflex tachycardia when 
lowering blood pressure than do nonselective α antagonists such 
as phentolamine. Alpha 1 -receptor selectivity allows norepineph-
rine to exert unopposed negative feedback (mediated by presynap-
tic α 2 receptors) on its own release (see Chapter 6); in contrast, 
phentolamine blocks both presynaptic and postsynaptic α receptors, 
with the result that reflex activation of sympathetic neurons by 
phentolamine’s effects produces greater release of transmitter onto 
β receptors and correspondingly greater cardioacceleration. 
 Alpha blockers reduce arterial pressure by dilating both resis-
tance and capacitance vessels. As expected, blood pressure is 
reduced more in the upright than in the supine position. Retention 
of salt and water occurs when these drugs are administered with-
out a diuretic. The drugs are more effective when used in combi-
nation with other agents, such as a β blocker and a diuretic, than 
when used alone. Owing to their beneficial effects in men with 
prostatic hyperplasia and bladder obstruction symptoms, these 
drugs are used primarily in men with concurrent hypertension and 
benign prostatic hyperplasia. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Pharmacokinetic characteristics of prazosin are listed in  Table 11–2 . 
Terazosin is also extensively metabolized but undergoes very little 
first-pass metabolism and has a half-life of 12 hours. Doxazosin has 
an intermediate bioavailability and a half-life of 22 hours. 
 Terazosin can often be given once daily, with doses of 5–20 
mg/d. Doxazosin is usually given once daily starting at 1 mg/d and 
progressing to 4 mg/d or more as needed. Although long-term 
treatment with these α blockers causes relatively little postural 
hypotension, a precipitous drop in standing blood pressure devel-
ops in some patients shortly after the first dose is absorbed. For 
this reason, the first dose should be small and should be adminis-
tered at bedtime. Although the mechanism of this first-dose phe-
nomenon is not clear, it occurs more commonly in patients who 
are salt- and volume-depleted. 
 Aside from the first-dose phenomenon, the reported toxicities 
of the α 1 blockers are relatively infrequent and mild. These 
include dizziness, palpitations, headache, and lassitude. Some 
patients develop a positive test for antinuclear factor in serum 
while on prazosin therapy, but this has not been associated with 
rheumatic symptoms. The α 1 blockers do not adversely and may 
even beneficially affect plasma lipid profiles, but this action has 
not been shown to confer any benefit on clinical outcomes. 
 OTHER ALPHA-ADRENOCEPTOR–
BLOCKING AGENTS 
 The nonselective agents, phentolamine and phenoxybenzamine, 
are useful in diagnosis and treatment of pheochromocytoma and 
in other clinical situations associated with exaggerated release of 
catecholamines (eg, phentolamine may be combined with propra-
nolol to treat the clonidine withdrawal syndrome, described previ-
ously). Their pharmacology is described in Chapter 10. 
 VASODILATORS  
 Mechanism & Sites of Action 
 This class of drugs includes the oral vasodilators, hydralazine and 
minoxidil, which are used for long-term outpatient therapy of 
hypertension; the parenteral vasodilators, nitroprusside, diazoxide, 
and fenoldopam, which are used to treat hypertensive emergencies; 
the calcium channel blockers, which are used in both circumstances; 
and the nitrates, which are used mainly in angina ( Table 11–3 ). 
 Chapter 12 contains additional discussion of vasodilators. All 
the vasodilators that are useful in hypertension relax smooth 
muscle of arterioles, thereby decreasing systemic vascular resis-
tance. Sodium nitroprusside and the nitrates also relax veins. 
Decreased arterial resistance and decreased mean arterial blood 
pressure elicit compensatory responses, mediated by baroreceptors 
and the sympathetic nervous system ( Figure 11–4 ), as well as 
renin, angiotensin, and aldosterone. Because sympathetic reflexes 
are intact, vasodilator therapy does not cause orthostatic hypoten-
sion or sexual dysfunction. 
 Vasodilators work best in combination with other antihyper-
tensive drugs that oppose the compensatory cardiovascular 
responses. (See Box: Resistant Hypertension & Polypharmacy.) 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    181
 HYDRALAZINE 
 Hydralazine, a hydrazine derivative, dilates arterioles but not 
veins. It has been available for many years, although it was initially 
thought not to be particularly effective because tachyphylaxis to its 
antihypertensive effects developed rapidly. The benefits of combi-
nation therapy are now recognized, and hydralazine may be used 
more effectively, particularly in severe hypertension. The combi-
nation of hydralazine with nitrates is effective in heart failure and 
should be considered in patients with both hypertension and heart 
failure, especially in African-American patients. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Hydralazine is well absorbed and rapidly metabolized by the liver 
during the first pass, so that bioavailability is low (averaging 25%) 
and variable among individuals. It is metabolized in part by acety-
lation at a rate that appears to be bimodally distributed in the 
population (see Chapter 4). As a consequence, rapid acetylators 
have greater first-pass metabolism, lower blood levels, and less 
antihypertensive benefit from a given dose than do slow acetyla-
tors. The half-life of hydralazine ranges from 1.5 to 3 hours, but 
vascular effects persist longer than do blood concentrations, pos-
sibly due to avid binding to vascular tissue. 
Hydralazine
N
H
NH2
N
N
 
 Usual dosage ranges from 40 mg/d to 200 mg/d. The higher 
dosage was selected as the dose at which there is a small possibility 
of developing the lupus erythematosus-like syndrome described in 
the next section. However, higher dosages result in greater vasodi-
lation and may be used if necessary. Dosing two or three times 
daily provides smooth control of blood pressure. 
 Toxicity 
 The most common adverse effects of hydralazine are headache, nau-
sea, anorexia, palpitations, sweating, and flushing. In patients with 
ischemic heart disease, reflex tachycardia and sympathetic stimula-
tion may provoke angina or ischemic arrhythmias. With dosages of 
400 mg/d or more, there is a 10–20% incidence—chiefly in persons 
who slowly acetylate the drug—of a syndrome characterized by arth-
ralgia, myalgia, skin rashes, and fever that resembles lupus erythema-
tosus. The syndrome is not associated with renal damage and is 
reversed by discontinuance of hydralazine. Peripheral neuropathy 
and drug fever are other serious but uncommon adverse effects. 
 MINOXIDIL 
 Minoxidil is a very efficacious orally active vasodilator. The 
effect results from the opening of potassium channels in smooth 
muscle membranes by minoxidil sulfate, the active metabolite. 
Increased potassium permeability stabilizes the membrane at its 
resting potential and makes contraction less likely. Like hydrala-
zine, minoxidil dilates arterioles but not veins. Because of its 
greater potential antihypertensive effect, minoxidil should 
replace hydralazine when maximal doses of the latter are not 
effective or in patients with renal failure and severe hyperten-
sion, who do not respond well to hydralazine. 
 
Minoxidil
NH2
H2N
O
N
N
N
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Pharmacokinetic parameters of minoxidil are listed in  Table 11–2 . 
Even more than with hydralazine, the use of minoxidil is associ-
ated with reflex sympathetic stimulation and sodium and fluid 
retention. Minoxidil must be used in combination with a β 
blocker and a loop diuretic. 
 Toxicity 
 Tachycardia, palpitations, angina, and edema are observed when 
doses of β blockers and diuretics are inadequate. Headache, sweat-
ing, and hypertrichosis, which is particularly bothersome in 
women, are relatively common. Minoxidil illustrates how one 
person’s toxicity may become another person’s therapy. Topical 
minoxidil (as Rogaine) is used as a stimulant to hair growth for 
correction of baldness. 
TABLE 11–3  Mechanisms of action of vasodilators.
Mechanism
Examples
Release of nitric oxide from drug or 
endothelium
Nitroprusside, hydralazine, 
nitrates,1 histamine, 
acetylcholine
Reduction of calcium influx
Verapamil, diltiazem, 
nifedipine
Hyperpolarization of smooth 
muscle membrane through 
opening of potassium channels
Minoxidil, diazoxide
Activation of dopamine receptors
Fenoldopam
1See Chapter 12.
182    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 SODIUM NITROPRUSSIDE 
 Sodium nitroprusside is a powerful parenterally administered 
vasodilator that is used in treating hypertensive emergencies as 
well as severe heart failure. Nitroprusside dilates both arterial and 
venous vessels, resulting in reduced peripheral vascular resistance 
and venous return. The action occurs as a result of activation of 
guanylyl cyclase, either via release of nitric oxide or by direct 
stimulation of the enzyme. The result is increased intracellular 
cGMP, which relaxes vascular smooth muscle (Figure 12–2). 
 In the absence of heart failure, blood pressure decreases, owing to 
decreased vascular resistance, whereas cardiac output does not change 
or decreases slightly. In patients with heart failure and low cardiac 
output, output often increases owing to afterload reduction. 
 
Nitroprusside
CN–
+NO
CN–
CN–
CN–
CN–
Fe2+
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Nitroprusside is a complex of iron, cyanide groups, and a nitroso 
moiety. It is rapidly metabolized by uptake into red blood cells 
with liberation of cyanide. Cyanide in turn is metabolized by the 
mitochondrial enzyme rhodanase, in the presence of a sulfur 
donor, to the less toxic thiocyanate. Thiocyanate is distributed in 
extracellular fluid and slowly eliminated by the kidney. 
 Nitroprusside rapidly lowers blood pressure, and its effects 
disappear within 1–10 minutes after discontinuation. The drug 
is given by intravenous infusion. Sodium nitroprusside in aque-
ous solution is sensitive to light and must therefore be made up 
fresh before each administration and covered with opaque foil. 
Infusion solutions should be changed after several hours. 
Dosage typically begins at 0.5 mcg/kg/min and may be 
increased up to 10 mcg/kg/min as necessary to control blood 
pressure. Higher rates of infusion, if continued for more than 
an hour, may result in toxicity. Because of its efficacy and rapid 
onset of effect, nitroprusside should be administered by infu-
sion pump and arterial blood pressure continuously monitored 
via intra-arterial recording. 
 Toxicity 
 Other than excessive blood pressure lowering, the most serious 
toxicity is related to accumulation of cyanide; metabolic acidosis, 
arrhythmias, excessive hypotension, and death have resulted. In a 
few cases, toxicity after relatively low doses of nitroprusside suggested 
a defect in cyanide metabolism. Administration of sodium thiosul-
fate as a sulfur donor facilitates metabolism of cyanide. 
Hydroxocobalamin combines with cyanide to form the nontoxic 
cyanocobalamin. Both have been advocated for prophylaxis or 
treatment of cyanide poisoning during nitroprusside infusion. 
Thiocyanate may accumulate over the course of prolonged admin-
istration, usually several days or more, particularly in patients with 
renal insufficiency who do not excrete thiocyanate at a normal 
rate. Thiocyanate toxicity is manifested as weakness, disorienta-
tion, psychosis, muscle spasms, and convulsions, and the diagnosis 
is confirmed by finding serum concentrations greater than 10 mg/dL. 
Rarely, delayed hypothyroidism occurs, owing to thiocyanate inhi-
bition of iodide uptake by the thyroid. Methemoglobinemia dur-
ing infusion of nitroprusside has also been reported. 
 DIAZOXIDE 
 Diazoxide is an effective and relatively long-acting parenterally 
administered arteriolar dilator that is occasionally used to treat 
hypertensive emergencies. Diminishing usage suggests that it may 
be withdrawn. Injection of diazoxide results in a rapid fall in sys-
temic vascular resistance and mean arterial blood pressure. Studies 
of its mechanism suggest that it prevents vascular smooth muscle 
contraction by opening potassium channels and stabilizing the 
membrane potential at the resting level. 
O2
CH3
NH
N
S
Diazoxide
CI
 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Diazoxide is similar chemically to the thiazide diuretics but has no 
diuretic activity. It is bound extensively to serum albumin and to 
vascular tissue. Diazoxide is partially metabolized; its metabolic 
pathways are not well characterized. The remainder is excreted 
unchanged. Its half-life is approximately 24 hours, but the relation-
ship between blood concentration and hypotensive action is not 
well established. The blood pressure-lowering effect after a rapid 
injection is established within 5 minutes and lasts for 4–12 hours. 
 When diazoxide was first marketed, a dose of 300 mg by rapid 
injection was recommended. It appears, however, that excessive 
hypotension can be avoided by beginning with smaller doses 
(50–150 mg). If necessary, doses of 150 mg may be repeated every 
5 to 15 minutes until blood pressure is lowered satisfactorily. 
Nearly all patients respond to a maximum of three or four doses. 
Alternatively, diazoxide may be administered by intravenous infu-
sion at rates of 15–30 mg/min. Because of reduced protein bind-
ing, hypotension occurs after smaller doses in persons with 
chronic renal failure, and smaller doses should be administered to 
these patients. The hypotensive effects of diazoxide are also greater 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    183
when patients are pretreated with β blockers to prevent the reflex 
tachycardia and associated increase in cardiac output. 
 Toxicity 
 The most significant toxicity from diazoxide has been excessive 
hypotension, resulting from the recommendation to use a fixed 
dose of 300 mg in all patients. Such hypotension has resulted in 
stroke and myocardial infarction. The reflex sympathetic response 
can provoke angina, electrocardiographic evidence of ischemia, 
and cardiac failure in patients with ischemic heart disease, and 
diazoxide should be avoided in this situation. 
 Diazoxide inhibits insulin release from the pancreas (probably 
by opening potassium channels in the beta cell membrane) and is 
used to treat hypoglycemia secondary to insulinoma. Occasionally, 
hyperglycemia complicates diazoxide use, particularly in persons 
with renal insufficiency. 
 In contrast to the structurally related thiazide diuretics, diazox-
ide causes renal salt and water retention. However, because the 
drug is used for short periods only, this is rarely a problem. 
 FENOLDOPAM 
 Fenoldopam is a peripheral arteriolar dilator used for hypertensive 
emergencies and postoperative hypertension. It acts primarily as 
an agonist of dopamine D 1 receptors, resulting in dilation of 
peripheral arteries and natriuresis. The commercial product is a 
racemic mixture with the (R )-isomer mediating the pharmaco-
logic activity. 
 Fenoldopam is rapidly metabolized, primarily by conjugation. 
Its half-life is 10 minutes. The drug is administered by continuous 
intravenous infusion. Fenoldopam is initiated at a low dosage 
(0.1 mcg/kg/min), and the dose is then titrated upward every 15 
or 20 minutes to a maximum dose of 1.6 mcg/kg/min or until the 
desired blood pressure reduction is achieved. 
 As with other direct vasodilators, the major toxicities are 
reflex tachycardia, headache, and flushing. Fenoldopam also 
increases intraocular pressure and should be avoided in patients 
with glaucoma. 
 CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS 
 In addition to their antianginal (see Chapter 12) and antiarrhyth-
mic effects (see Chapter 14), calcium channel blockers also reduce 
peripheral resistance and blood pressure. The mechanism of action 
in hypertension (and, in part, in angina) is inhibition of calcium 
influx into arterial smooth muscle cells. 
 Verapamil, diltiazem, and the  dihydropyridine family ( amlo-
dipine, felodipine, isradipine, nicardipine, nifedipine, and 
 nisoldipine ) are all equally effective in lowering blood pressure, 
and many formulations are currently approved for this use in the 
USA.  Clevidipine is a newer member of this group that is formu-
lated for intravenous use only. 
 Hemodynamic differences among calcium channel blockers 
may influence the choice of a particular agent. Nifedipine and the 
other dihydropyridine agents are more selective as vasodilators and 
have less cardiac depressant effect than verapamil and diltiazem. 
Reflex sympathetic activation with slight tachycardia maintains or 
increases cardiac output in most patients given dihydropyridines. 
Verapamil has the greatest depressant effect on the heart and may 
decrease heart rate and cardiac output. Diltiazem has intermediate 
actions. The pharmacology and toxicity of these drugs is discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 12. Doses of calcium channel blockers 
used in treating hypertension are similar to those used in treating 
angina. Some epidemiologic studies reported an increased risk of 
myocardial infarction or mortality in patients receiving short-act-
ing nifedipine for hypertension. It is therefore recommended that 
short-acting oral dihydropyridines not be used for hypertension. 
Sustained-release calcium blockers or calcium blockers with long 
half-lives provide smoother blood pressure control and are more 
appropriate for treatment of chronic hypertension. Intravenous 
nicardipine and clevidipine are available for the treatment of 
hypertension when oral therapy is not feasible; parenteral vera-
pamil and diltiazem can also be used for the same indication. 
Nicardipine is typically infused at rates of 2–15 mg/h. Clevidipine 
is infused starting at 1–2 mg/h and progressing to 4–6 mg/h. It 
has a rapid onset of action and has been used in acute hyperten-
sion occurring during surgery. Oral short-acting nifedipine has 
been used in emergency management of severe hypertension. 
 ■ INHIBITORS OF ANGIOTENSIN 
 Renin, angiotensin, and aldosterone play important roles in at least 
some people with essential hypertension. Approximately 20% of 
patients with essential hypertension have inappropriately low and 
20% have inappropriately high plasma renin activity. Blood pres-
sure of patients with high-renin hypertension responds well to 
drugs that interfere with the system, supporting a role for excess 
renin and angiotensin in this population. 
 Mechanism & Sites of Action 
 Renin release from the kidney cortex is stimulated by reduced 
renal arterial pressure, sympathetic neural stimulation, and 
reduced sodium delivery or increased sodium concentration at the 
distal renal tubule (see Chapter 17). Renin acts upon angio-
tensinogen to split off the inactive precursor decapeptide angio-
tensin I. Angiotensin I is then converted, primarily by endothelial 
ACE, to the arterial vasoconstrictor octapeptide angiotensin II 
( Figure 11–5 ), which is in turn converted in the adrenal gland to 
angiotensin III. Angiotensin II has vasoconstrictor and sodium-
retaining activity. Angiotensin II and III both stimulate aldoster-
one release. Angiotensin may contribute to maintaining high 
vascular resistance in hypertensive states associated with high 
plasma renin activity, such as renal arterial stenosis, some types of 
intrinsic renal disease, and malignant hypertension, as well as in 
essential hypertension after treatment with sodium restriction, 
diuretics, or vasodilators. However, even in low-renin hypertensive 
states, these drugs can lower blood pressure (see below). 
184    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 A parallel system for angiotensin generation exists in several 
other tissues (eg, heart) and may be responsible for trophic 
changes such as cardiac hypertrophy. The converting enzyme 
involved in tissue angiotensin II synthesis is also inhibited by ACE 
inhibitors. 
 Three classes of drugs act specifically on the renin-angiotensin 
system: ACE inhibitors; the competitive inhibitors of angiotensin 
at its receptors, including losartan and other nonpeptide antago-
nists; and aliskiren, an orally active renin antagonist (see Chapter 
17). A fourth group of drugs, the aldosterone receptor inhibitors 
(eg, spironolactone, eplerenone) are discussed with the diuretics. In 
addition, β blockers, as noted earlier, can reduce renin secretion. 
 ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME 
(ACE) INHIBITORS 
 Captopril and other drugs in this class inhibit the converting 
enzyme peptidyl dipeptidase that hydrolyzes angiotensin I to 
angiotensin II and (under the name plasma kininase) inactivates 
bradykinin, a potent vasodilator, which works at least in part by 
stimulating release of nitric oxide and prostacyclin. The hypoten-
sive activity of captopril results both from an inhibitory action on 
the renin-angiotensin system and a stimulating action on the 
kallikrein-kinin system ( Figure 11–5 ). The latter mechanism has 
been demonstrated by showing that a bradykinin receptor antag-
onist,  icatibant (see Chapter 17), blunts the blood pressure-
lowering effect of captopril. 
 Enalapril is an oral prodrug that is converted by hydrolysis to 
a converting enzyme inhibitor, enalaprilat, with effects similar to 
those of captopril. Enalaprilat itself is available only for intrave-
nous use, primarily for hypertensive emergencies. Lisinopril is a 
lysine derivative of enalaprilat.  Benazepril, fosinopril, moexipril, 
perindopril, quinapril, ramipril, and  trandolapril are other 
long-acting members of the class. All are prodrugs, like enalapril, 
and are converted to the active agents by hydrolysis, primarily in 
the liver. 
 Angiotensin II inhibitors lower blood pressure principally by 
decreasing peripheral vascular resistance. Cardiac output and heart 
rate are not significantly changed. Unlike direct vasodilators, these 
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
Aldosterone
secretion
Vasoconstriction
Increased sodium
and water retention
Increased peripheral
vascular resistance
Increased
blood pressure
Kininogen
Bradykinin
Inactive
metabolites
Increased
prostaglandin
synthesis
Vasodilation
Decreased peripheral
vascular resistance
Decreased
blood pressure
Kallikrein
Renin
–
–
Aliskiren
–
Spironolactone,
eplerenone
ACE
inhibitors
ARBs
Angiotensin-converting enzyme
(kininase II)
–
–
 FIGURE 11–5 Sites of action of drugs that interfere with the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; 
ARBs, angiotensin receptor blockers. 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    185
toxic effects seen more typically include altered sense of taste, 
allergic skin rashes, and drug fever, which may occur in up to 10% 
of patients. 
 Important drug interactions include those with potassium 
supplements or potassium-sparing diuretics, which can result in 
hyperkalemia. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may impair 
the hypotensive effects of ACE inhibitors by blocking bradykinin-
mediated vasodilation, which is at least in part, prostaglandin 
mediated. 
 ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR-BLOCKING 
AGENTS 
 Losartan and  valsartan were the first marketed blockers of the 
angiotensin II type 1 (AT 1 ) receptor.  Candesartan, eprosartan, 
irbesartan, telmisartan, and  olmesartan are also available. They 
have no effect on bradykinin metabolism and are therefore more 
selective blockers of angiotensin effects than ACE inhibitors. They 
also have the potential for more complete inhibition of angio-
tensin action compared with ACE inhibitors because there are 
enzymes other than ACE that are capable of generating angio-
tensin II. Angiotensin receptor blockers provide benefits similar to 
those of ACE inhibitors in patients with heart failure and chronic 
kidney disease. Losartan’s pharmacokinetic parameters are listed in 
 Table 11–2 . The adverse effects are similar to those described for 
ACE inhibitors, including the hazard of use during pregnancy. 
Cough and angioedema can occur but are less common with 
angiotensin receptor blockers than with ACE inhibitors. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE AGENTS 
 Hypertension presents a unique problem in therapeutics. It is usu-
ally a lifelong disease that causes few symptoms until the advanced 
stage. For effective treatment, medicines that may be expensive 
and sometimes produce adverse effects must be consumed daily. 
Thus, the physician must establish with certainty that hyperten-
sion is persistent and requires treatment and must exclude second-
ary causes of hypertension that might be treated by definitive 
surgical procedures. Persistence of hypertension, particularly in 
persons with mild elevation of blood pressure, should be estab-
lished by finding an elevated blood pressure on at least three dif-
ferent office visits. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring may be 
the best predictor of risk and therefore of need for therapy in mild 
hypertension. Isolated systolic hypertension and hypertension in 
the elderly also benefit from therapy. 
 Once the presence of hypertension is established, the question 
of whether to treat and which drugs to use must be considered. 
The level of blood pressure, the age of the patient, the severity of 
organ damage (if any) due to high blood pressure, and the pres-
ence of cardiovascular risk factors all must be considered. 
Assessment of renal function and the presence of proteinuria are 
useful in antihypertensive drug selection. At this stage, the patient 
agents do not result in reflex sympathetic activation and can be 
used safely in persons with ischemic heart disease. The absence of 
reflex tachycardia may be due to downward resetting of the 
baroreceptors or to enhanced parasympathetic activity. 
 Although converting enzyme inhibitors are most effective in 
conditions associated with high plasma renin activity, there is no 
good correlation among subjects between plasma renin activity 
and antihypertensive response. Accordingly, renin profiling is 
unnecessary. 
 ACE inhibitors have a particularly useful role in treating 
patients with chronic kidney disease because they diminish pro-
teinuria and stabilize renal function (even in the absence of lower-
ing of blood pressure). This effect is particularly valuable in 
diabetes, and these drugs are now recommended in diabetes even 
in the absence of hypertension. These benefits probably result 
from improved intrarenal hemodynamics, with decreased glom-
erular efferent arteriolar resistance and a resulting reduction of 
intraglomerular capillary pressure. ACE inhibitors have also 
proved to be extremely useful in the treatment of heart failure, and 
after myocardial infarction, and there is recent evidence that ACE 
inhibitors reduce the incidence of diabetes in patients with high 
cardiovascular risk (see Chapter 13). 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Captopril’s pharmacokinetic parameters and dosing recommenda-
tions are set forth in  Table 11–2 . Peak concentrations of enalapri-
lat, the active metabolite of enalapril, occur 3–4 hours after dosing 
with enalapril. The half-life of enalaprilat is about 11 hours. 
Typical doses of enalapril are 10–20 mg once or twice daily. 
Lisinopril has a half-life of 12 hours. Doses of 10–80 mg once 
daily are effective in most patients. All of the ACE inhibitors 
except fosinopril and moexipril are eliminated primarily by the 
kidneys; doses of these drugs should be reduced in patients with 
renal insufficiency. 
 Toxicity 
 Severe hypotension can occur after initial doses of any ACE 
inhibitor in patients who are hypovolemic as a result of diuretics, 
salt restriction, or gastrointestinal fluid loss. Other adverse 
effects common to all ACE inhibitors include acute renal failure 
(particularly in patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis or 
stenosis of the renal artery of a solitary kidney), hyperkalemia, 
dry cough sometimes accompanied by wheezing, and angio-
edema. Hyperkalemia is more likely to occur in patients with 
renal insufficiency or diabetes. Bradykinin and substance P seem 
to be responsible for the cough and angioedema seen with ACE 
inhibition. 
 ACE inhibitors are contraindicated during the second and 
third trimesters of pregnancy because of the risk of fetal hypoten-
sion, anuria, and renal failure, sometimes associated with fetal 
malformations or death. Recent evidence also implicates first-
trimester exposure to ACE inhibitors in increased teratogenic risk. 
Captopril, particularly when given in high doses to patients with 
renal insufficiency, may cause neutropenia or proteinuria. Minor 
186    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
must be educated about the nature of hypertension and the 
importance of treatment so that he or she can make an informed 
decision regarding therapy. 
 Once the decision is made to treat, a therapeutic regimen must 
be developed. Selection of drugs is dictated by the level of blood 
pressure, the presence and severity of end organ damage, and the 
presence of other diseases. Severe high blood pressure with life-
threatening complications requires more rapid treatment with 
more efficacious drugs. Most patients with essential hypertension, 
however, have had elevated blood pressure for months or years, 
and therapy is best initiated in a gradual fashion. 
 Education about the natural history of hypertension and the 
importance of treatment compliance as well as potential adverse 
effects of drugs is essential. Obesity should be treated and drugs 
that increase blood pressure (sympathomimetic decongestants, 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, oral contraceptives, and 
some herbal medications) should be eliminated if possible. 
Follow-up visits should be frequent enough to convince the 
patient that the physician thinks the illness is serious. With each 
follow-up visit, the importance of treatment should be reinforced 
and questions concerning dosing or side effects of medication 
encouraged. Other factors that may improve compliance are sim-
plifying dosing regimens and having the patient monitor blood 
pressure at home. 
 OUTPATIENT THERAPY OF 
HYPERTENSION 
 The initial step in treating hypertension may be nonpharmaco-
logic. As discussed previously, sodium restriction may be effective 
treatment for many patients with mild hypertension. The average 
American diet contains about 200 mEq of sodium per day. A 
reasonable dietary goal in treating hypertension is 70–100 mEq of 
sodium per day, which can be achieved by not salting food during 
or after cooking and by avoiding processed foods that contain 
large amounts of sodium. Eating a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, 
and low-fat dairy products with a reduced content of saturated 
and total fat, and moderation of alcohol intake (no more than two 
drinks per day) also lower blood pressure. 
 Weight reduction even without sodium restriction has been 
shown to normalize blood pressure in up to 75% of overweight 
patients with mild to moderate hypertension. Regular exercise has 
been shown in some but not all studies to lower blood pressure in 
hypertensive patients. 
 For pharmacologic management of mild hypertension, blood 
pressure can be normalized in many patients with a single drug. 
However, most patients with hypertension require two or more 
antihypertensive medications (see Box: Resistant Hypertension & 
Polypharmacy). Thiazide diuretics, β blockers, ACE inhibitors, 
angiotensin receptor blockers, and calcium channel blockers have 
all been shown to reduce complications of hypertension and may 
be used for initial drug therapy. There has been concern that 
diuretics, by adversely affecting the serum lipid profile or impairing 
glucose tolerance, may add to the risk of coronary disease, thereby 
offsetting the benefit of blood pressure reduction. However, a 
recent large clinical trial comparing different classes of antihyper-
tensive mediations for initial therapy found that chlorthalidone (a 
thiazide diuretic) was as effective as other agents in reducing coro-
nary heart disease death and nonfatal myocardial infarction, and 
was superior to amlodipine in preventing heart failure and superior 
to lisinopril in preventing stroke. 
 The presence of concomitant disease should influence selection 
of antihypertensive drugs because two diseases may benefit from a 
single drug. For example, drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin 
system are particularly useful in patients with diabetes or evidence 
of chronic kidney disease with proteinuria. Beta blockers or cal-
cium channel blockers are useful in patients who also have angina; 
diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, β blockers 
or hydralazine combined with nitrates in patients who also have 
heart failure; and α 1 blockers in men who have benign prostatic 
hyperplasia. Race may also affect drug selection: African Americans 
respond better on average to diuretics and calcium channel block-
ers than to β blockers and ACE inhibitors. Ethnic Chinese patients 
are more sensitive to the effects of β blockers and may require lower 
doses. 
 If a single drug does not adequately control blood pressure, 
drugs with different sites of action can be combined to effectively 
lower blood pressure while minimizing toxicity (“stepped care”). If 
a diuretic is not used initially, it is often selected as the second 
drug. If three drugs are required, combining a diuretic, a sym-
pathoplegic agent or an ACE inhibitor, and a direct vasodilator 
(eg, hydralazine or a calcium channel blocker) is often effective. In 
the USA, fixed-dose drug combinations containing a β blocker, an 
ACE inhibitor, or an angiotensin receptor blocker plus a thiazide, 
and a calcium channel blocker plus an ACE inhibitor are available. 
Fixed-dose combinations have the drawback of not allowing for 
titration of individual drug doses but have the advantage of allow-
ing fewer pills to be taken, potentially enhancing compliance. 
 Assessment of blood pressure during office visits should include 
measurement of recumbent, sitting, and standing pressures. An 
attempt should be made to normalize blood pressure in the pos-
ture or activity level that is customary for the patient. The large 
Hypertension Optimal Treatment study suggests that the optimal 
blood pressure end point is 138/83 mm Hg. Lowering blood pres-
sure below this level produces no further benefit. In diabetic 
patients, however, there is a continued reduction of event rates 
with progressively lower blood pressures. Systolic hypertension 
(> 140 mm Hg in the presence of normal diastolic blood pressure) 
is a strong cardiovascular risk factor in people older than 50 years 
of age and should be treated. 
 In addition to noncompliance with medication, causes of failure 
to respond to drug therapy include excessive sodium intake and 
inadequate diuretic therapy with excessive blood volume, and drugs 
such as tricyclic antidepressants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs, over-the-counter sympathomimetics, abuse of stimulants 
(amphetamine or cocaine), or excessive doses of caffeine and oral 
contraceptives that can interfere with actions of some antihyper-
tensive drugs or directly raise blood pressure. 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    187
 MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTENSIVE 
EMERGENCIES 
 Despite the large number of patients with chronic hypertension, 
hypertensive emergencies are relatively rare. Marked or sudden 
elevation of blood pressure may be a serious threat to life, however, 
and prompt control of blood pressure is indicated. Most fre-
quently, hypertensive emergencies occur in patients whose hyper-
tension is severe and poorly controlled and in those who suddenly 
discontinue antihypertensive medications. 
 Clinical Presentation & Pathophysiology 
 Hypertensive emergencies include hypertension associated with 
vascular damage (termed malignant hypertension) and hyperten-
sion associated with hemodynamic complications such as heart 
failure, stroke, or dissecting aortic aneurysm. The underlying 
pathologic process in malignant hypertension is a progressive arte-
riopathy with inflammation and necrosis of arterioles. Vascular 
lesions occur in the kidney, which releases renin, which in turn 
stimulates production of angiotensin and aldosterone, which fur-
ther increase blood pressure. 
 Hypertensive encephalopathy is a classic feature of malignant 
hypertension. Its clinical presentation consists of severe headache, 
mental confusion, and apprehension. Blurred vision, nausea and 
vomiting, and focal neurologic deficits are common. If untreated, 
the syndrome may progress over a period of 12–48 hours to con-
vulsions, stupor, coma, and even death. 
 Treatment of Hypertensive Emergencies 
 The general management of hypertensive emergencies requires 
monitoring the patient in an intensive care unit with continuous 
recording of arterial blood pressure. Fluid intake and output must 
be monitored carefully and body weight measured daily as an indi-
cator of total body fluid volume during the course of therapy. 
 Parenteral antihypertensive medications are used to lower blood 
pressure rapidly (within a few hours); as soon as reasonable blood 
pressure control is achieved, oral antihypertensive therapy should 
be substituted because this allows smoother long-term manage-
ment of hypertension. The goal of treatment in the first few hours 
or days is not complete normalization of blood pressure because 
chronic hypertension is associated with autoregulatory changes in 
cerebral blood flow. Thus, rapid normalization of blood pressure 
may lead to cerebral hypoperfusion and brain injury. Rather, blood 
pressure should be lowered by about 25%, maintaining diastolic 
blood pressure at no less than 100–110 mm Hg. Subsequently, 
blood pressure can be reduced to normal levels using oral medica-
tions over several weeks. The drug most commonly used to treat 
hypertensive emergencies is the vasodilator sodium nitroprusside. 
Other parenteral drugs that may be effective include fenoldopam, 
nitroglycerin, labetalol, calcium channel blockers, diazoxide, and 
hydralazine. Esmolol is often used to manage intraoperative and 
postoperative hypertension. Diuretics such as furosemide are 
administered to prevent the volume expansion that typically occurs 
during administration of powerful vasodilators. 
SUMMARY Drugs Used in Hypertension
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
DIURETICS
 • Thiazides: 
        Hydrochlorothiazide
Block Na/Cl transporter in 
renal distal convoluted tubule
Reduce blood volume and poorly 
understood vascular effects
Hypertension, mild heart 
failure
 • Loop diuretics: 
        Furosemide
Block Na/K/2Cl transporter in 
renal loop of Henle
Like thiazides • greater efficacy
Severe hypertension, heart 
failure
See Chapter 15
 • Spironolactone
 • Eplerenone
Block aldosterone receptor in 
renal collecting tubule
Increase Na and decrease K excretion 
• poorly understood reduction in 
heart failure mortality
Aldosteronism, heart 
failure, hypertension
SYMPATHOPLEGICS, CENTRALLY ACTING
 • Clonidine, methyl
       dopa
Activate α2 adrenoceptors
Reduce central sympathetic 
outflow • reduce norepinephrine 
release from noradrenergic nerve 
endings
Hypertension • clonidine 
also used in withdrawal 
from abused drugs
Oral • clonidine also patch • 
Toxicity: sedation • 
methyldopa hemolytic 
anemia
SYMPATHETIC NERVE TERMINAL BLOCKERS
 • Reserpine
Blocks vesicular amine 
transporter in noradrenergic 
nerves and depletes 
transmitter stores
Reduce all sympathetic effects, 
especially cardiovascular, and 
reduce blood pressure
Hypertension but rarely 
used
Oral • long duration (days) • 
Toxicity: Reserpine: psychiatric 
depression, gastrointestinal 
disturbances 
 • Guanethidine
Interferes with amine release 
and replaces norepinephrine 
in vesicles
Same as reserpine
Same as reserpine
Guanethidine: Severe 
orthostatic hypotension • 
sexual dysfunction
(continued )
188    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
` BLOCKERS
 • Prazosin
 • Terazosin
 • Doxazosin
Selectively block α1 
adrenoceptors
Prevent sympathetic 
vasoconstriction • reduce 
prostatic smooth muscle tone
Hypertension • benign 
prostatic hyperplasia
Oral • Toxicity: Orthostatic 
hypotension
a BLOCKERS
 • Metoprolol, others
 • Carvedilol
Block β1 receptors; carvedilol 
also blocks α receptors
Prevent sympathetic cardiac 
stimulation • reduce renin secretion
Hypertension • heart 
failure
See Chapter 10
 • Propranolol: Nonselective prototype b blocker
 • Atenolol: Very widely used b1-selective blocker
VASODILATORS
 • Verapamil
 • Diltiazem
Nonselective block of L-type 
calcium channels
Reduce cardiac rate and output • 
reduce vascular resistance
Hypertension, angina, 
arrhythmias
See Chapter 12
 • Nifedipine, 
        amlodipine,  other
        dihydropyridines
Block vascular calcium 
channels > cardiac calcium 
channels
Reduce vascular resistance
Hypertension, angina
See Chapter 12
 • Hydralazine
Causes nitric oxide release
Vasodilation • reduce vascular 
resistance • arterioles more 
sensitive than veins • reflex 
tachycardia
Hypertension • minoxidil 
also used to treat hair loss
Oral • Toxicity: Angina, 
tachycardia • Hydralazine: 
Lupus-like syndrome
 • Minoxidil
Metabolite opens K channels 
in vascular smooth muscle
Minoxidil: Hypertrichosis
PARENTERAL AGENTS
 • Nitroprusside
 • Fenoldopam
 • Diazoxide
 • Labetalol   
Releases nitric oxide
Activates D1 receptors
Opens K channels
α, β blocker
Powerful vasodilation
Hypertensive emergencies
Parenteral • short duration • 
Toxicity: Excessive 
hypotension, shock
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME (ACE) INHIBITORS
 • Captopril, many 
        others
Inhibit angiotensin- 
converting enzyme
Reduce angiotensin II levels • 
reduce vasoconstriction and 
aldosterone secretion • increase 
bradykinin
Hypertension • heart 
failure, diabetes
Oral • Toxicity: Cough, 
angioedema • hyperkalemia 
• renal impairment 
• teratogenic
ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR BLOCKERS (ARBs)
 • Losartan, many 
        others
Block AT1 angiotensin 
receptors
Same as ACE inhibitors but no 
increase in bradykinin
Hypertension • heart 
failure
Oral • Toxicity: Same as ACE 
inhibitors but less cough
RENIN INHIBITOR
 • Aliskiren
Inhibits enzyme activity of 
renin
Reduces angiotensin I and II and 
aldosterone
Hypertension
Oral • Toxicity: Hyperkalemia, 
renal impairment • potential 
teratogen
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    189
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
 BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR BLOCKERS
Acebutolol (generic, Sectral)
Oral: 200, 400 mg capsules
Atenolol (generic, Tenormin)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for injection
Betaxolol (Kerlone)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets
Bisoprolol (Zebeta)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Carteolol (Cartrol)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Carvedilol (Coreg)
Oral: 3.125, 6.25, 12.5, 25 mg tablets; 10, 20, 40, 80 mg extended- 
release capsules
Esmolol (BreviBloc)
Parenteral: 10, 250 mg/mL for injection
Labetalol (generic, Normodyne, Trandate)
Oral: 100, 200, 300 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Metoprolol (generic, Lopressor)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets
Oral extended-release (Toprol-XL): 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
Nadolol (generic, Corgard)
Oral: 20, 40, 80, 120, 160 mg tablets
Nebivolol (Bystolic)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Penbutolol (Levatol)
Oral: 20 mg tablets
Pindolol (generic, Visken)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Propranolol (generic, Inderal)
Oral: 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 90 mg tablets; 4, 8 mg/mL oral solution; 
Intensol, 80 mg/mL solution
Oral sustained-release (generic, Inderal LA): 60, 80, 120, 160 mg 
capsules
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
Timolol (generic, Blocadren)
Oral: 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
CENTRALLY ACTING SYMPATHOPLEGIC 
DRUGS
Clonidine (generic, Catapres)
Oral: 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 mg tablets
Transdermal (Catapres-TTS): patches that release 0.1, 0.2, 
0.3 mg/24 h
Guanabenz (generic, Wytensin)
Oral: 4, 8 mg tablets
Guanfacine (Tenex)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets
Methyldopa (generic)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets
Parenteral (Methyldopate HCl): 50 mg/mL for injection
POSTGANGLIONIC SYMPATHETIC NERVE 
TERMINAL BLOCKERS
Guanadrel (Hylorel)
Oral: 10, 25 mg tablets
Guanethidine (Ismelin)
Oral: 10, 25 mg tablets
Reserpine (generic)
Oral: 0.1, 0.25 mg tablets
ALPHA1–SELECTIVE ADRENOCEPTOR 
BLOCKERS
Doxazosin (generic, Cardura)
Oral: 1, 2, 4, 8 mg tablets
Prazosin (generic, Minipress)
Oral: 1, 2, 5 mg capsules
Terazosin (generic, Hytrin)
Oral: 1, 2, 5, 10 mg capsules and tablets
GANGLION-BLOCKING AGENTS
Mecamylamine (Inversine)
Oral: 2.5 mg tablets
VASODILATORS USED IN HYPERTENSION
Diazoxide (Hyperstat IV)
Parenteral: 15 mg/mL ampule
Oral (Proglycem): 50 mg capsule; 50 mg/mL oral suspension (for 
insulinoma)
Fenoldopam (generic, Corlopam)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Hydralazine (generic, Apresoline)
Oral: 10, 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL for injection
Minoxidil (generic, Loniten)
Oral: 2.5, 10 mg tablets
Topical (generic, Rogaine): 2% lotion
Nitroprusside (generic, Nitropress)
Parenteral: 50 mg/vial
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Amlodipine (generic, Norvasc)
Oral 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Clevidipine (Cleviprex)
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL emulsion for injection
Diltiazem (generic, Cardizem)
Oral: 30, 60, 90, 120 mg tablets (unlabeled in hypertension)
Oral sustained-release (Cardizem CD, Cardizem SR, Dilacor XL): 60, 
90, 120, 180, 240, 300, 360, 420 mg capsules
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
190    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 REFERENCES 
 ACE Inhibitors in Diabetic Nephropathy Trialist Group: Should all patients with 
type 1 diabetes mellitus and microalbuminuria receive angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors? A meta-analysis of individual patient data. Ann Intern 
Med 2001;134:370. 
 ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Collaborative Research 
Group: Major outcomes of high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blockers vs 
diuretic: The antihypertensive and lipid-lowering treatment to prevent heart 
attack trial. JAMA 2002;288:2981. 
 Appel LJ et al: The importance of population-wide sodium reduction as a means 
to prevent cardiovascular disease and stroke: A call to action from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation 2011;123:1138. 
 Appel LJ et al: Intensive blood-pressure control in hypertensive chronic kidney 
disease. N Engl J Med 2010;363:918. 
 Appel LJ et al: Effects of comprehensive lifestyle modification on blood pressure 
control: Main results of the PREMIER clinical trial. JAMA 
2003;289:2083. 
 Aronow WS et al: ACCF/AHA 2011 Expert consensus document on hypertension 
in the elderly: A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation 
Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents. Circulation 2011; 
123:2434. 
Felodipine (generic, Plendil)
Oral extended-release: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Isradipine (generic, DynaCirc)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg capsules; 5, 10 mg controlled-release tablets
Nicardipine (generic, Cardene)
Oral: 20, 30 mg capsules
Oral sustained-release (Cardene SR): 30, 45, 60 mg capsules
Parenteral (Cardene I.V.): 0.1, 2.5 mg/mL for injection
Nifedipine (generic, Adalat, Procardia)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules (off-label use in hypertension)
Oral extended-release (Adalat CC, Procardia-XL): 30, 60, 90 mg 
tablets
Nisoldipine (Sular)
Oral extended-release: 8.5, 17, 25.5, 34 mg tablets
Verapamil (generic, Calan, Isoptin)
Oral: 40, 80, 120 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release (generic, Calan SR, Verelan): 120, 180, 240 mg 
tablets; 100, 120, 180, 200, 240, 300, 360 mg capsules
Parenteral: 2.5 mg/mL for injection
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME 
INHIBITORS
Benazepril (generic, Lotensin)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Captopril (generic, Capoten)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Enalapril (generic, Vasotec)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
Parenteral (Enalaprilat): 1.25 mg/mL for injection
Fosinopril (generic, Monopril)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Lisinopril (generic, Prinivil, Zestril)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Moexipril (generic, Univasc)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets
Perindopril (Aceon)
Oral: 2, 4, 8 mg tablets
Quinapril (Accupril)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Ramipril (Altace)
Oral: 1.25, 2.5, 5, 10 mg capsules
Trandolapril (Mavik)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR BLOCKERS
Azilsartan (Edarbi)
Oral: 40, 80 mg tablets
Candesartan (Atacand)
Oral: 4, 8, 16, 32 mg tablets
Eprosartan (Teveten)
Oral: 600 mg tablets
Irbesartan (Avapro)
Oral: 75, 150, 300 mg tablets
Losartan (Cozaar)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Olmesartan (Benicar)
Oral: 5, 20, 40 mg tablets
Telmisartan (Micardis)
Oral: 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
Valsartan (Diovan)
Oral: 40, 80, 160, 320 mg tablet
RENIN INHIBITOR
Aliskiren (Tekturna)
Oral: 150, 300 mg tablets 
Felodipine (generic, Plendil)
Oral extended-release: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Isradipine (generic, DynaCirc)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg capsules; 5, 10 mg controlled-release tablets
Nicardipine (generic, Cardene)
Oral: 20, 30 mg capsules
Oral sustained-release (Cardene SR): 30, 45, 60 mg capsules
Parenteral (Cardene I.V.): 0.1, 2.5 mg/mL for injection
Nifedipine (generic, Adalat, Procardia)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules (off-label use in hypertension)
Oral extended-release (Adalat CC, Procardia-XL): 30, 60, 90 mg
tablets
Nisoldipine (Sular)
Oral extended-release: 8.5, 17, 25.5, 34 mg tablets
Verapamil (generic, Calan, Isoptin)
Oral: 40, 80, 120 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release (generic, Calan SR, Verelan): 120, 180, 240 mg 
tablets; 100, 120, 180, 200, 240, 300, 360 mg capsules
Parenteral: 2.5 mg/mL for injection
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME 
INHIBITORS
Benazepril (generic, Lotensin)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Captopril (generic, Capoten)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Enalapril (generic, Vasotec)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
Parenteral (Enalaprilat): 1.25 mg/mL for injection
Fosinopril (generic, Monopril)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Lisinopril (generic, Prinivil, Zestril)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Moexipril (generic, Univasc)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets
Perindopril (Aceon)
Oral: 2, 4, 8 mg tablets
Quinapril (Accupril)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Ramipril (Altace)
Oral: 1.25, 2.5, 5, 10 mg capsules
Trandolapril (Mavik)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR BLOCKERS
Azilsartan (Edarbi)
Oral: 40, 80 mg tablets
Candesartan (Atacand)
Oral: 4, 8, 16, 32 mg tablets
Eprosartan (Teveten)
Oral: 600 mg tablets
Irbesartan (Avapro)
Oral: 75, 150, 300 mg tablets
Losartan (Cozaar)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Olmesartan (Benicar)
Oral: 5, 20, 40 mg tablets
Telmisartan (Micardis)
Oral: 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
Valsartan (Diovan)
Oral: 40, 80, 160, 320 mg tablet
RENIN INHIBITOR
Aliskiren (Tekturna)
Oral: 150, 300 mg tablets
 Aronson S et al: The ECLIPSE trials: Comparative studies of clevidipine to nitro-
glycerin, sodium nitroprusside, and nicardipine for acute hypertension in 
cardiac surgery patients. Anesth Alang 2008;107:1110. 
 August P: Initial treatment of hypertension. N Engl J Med 2003;348:610. 
 Bangalore S et al: Beta-blockers for primary prevention of heart failure in patients 
with hypertension: Insights from a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2008;52:1062. 
 Calhoun DA et al: Resistant hypertension: Diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment: 
A scientific statement from the American Heart Association Professional 
Education Committee of the Council for High Blood Pressure Research. 
Circulation 2008;117:e510. 
 Chobanian AV et al: The Seventh report of the Joint National Committee on 
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. 
JAMA 2003;289:2560. 
 Egan BM et al: US trends in prevalence, awareness, treatment, and control of 
hypertension, 1988-2008. JAMA 2010;303:2043. 
 Esler MD et al: Renal sympathetic denervation in patients with treatment-resistant 
hypertension (The Symplicity HTN-2 Trial): A randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet 2010;376:1903. 
 Garg J, Messerli AW, Bakris GL: Evaluation and treatment of patients with sys-
temic hypertension. Circulation 2002;105:2458. 
 Hajjar I et al: Hypertension, white matter hyperintensities, and concurrent impair-
ments in mobility, cognition, and mood: The Cardiovascular Health Study. 
Circulation 2011;123:858. 
CHAPTER 11 Antihypertensive Agents    191
 Heran BS et al: Blood pressure lowering efficacy of angiotensin converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors for primary hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2008;(4):CD003823. 
 Jamerson K et al: Benazepril plus amlodipine or hydrochlorothiazide for hyperten-
sion in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med 2008;359:2417. 
 Khan NA et al: The 2008 Canadian Hypertension Education Program recom-
mendations for the management of hypertension: Part 2—therapy. Can J 
Cardiol 2008;24:465. 
 Krum H et al: Device-based antihypertensive therapy: Therapeutic modulation of 
the autonomic nervous system. Circulation 2011;123:209. 
 Mark PE, Varon J: Hypertensive crisis. Challenges and management. Chest 
2007;131:1949. 
 Mauer M et al: Renal and retinal effects of enalapril and losartan in type 1 diabetes. 
N Engl J Med 2009;361:40. 
 Moser M, Setaro JF: Resistant or difficult-to-control hypertension. N Engl J Med 
2006;355:385. 
 Psaty BM et al: Health outcomes associated with various antihypertensive therapies 
used as first-line agents: A network meta-analysis. JAMA 2003;289:2534. 
 Ram CV: Angiotensin receptor blockers: Current status and future prospects. Am 
J Med 2008;121:656. 
 Sacks FM, Campos H: Dietary therapy in hypertension. N Engl J Med 
2010;362:2102. 
 Thompson AM et al: Antihypertensive treatment and secondary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease events among persons without hypertension: A meta-
analysis. JAMA 2011;305:913. 
 Verdecchia P et al: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and calcium channel 
blockers for coronary heart disease and stroke prevention. Hypertension 
2005;46:386. 
 Vermes E et al: Enalapril reduces the incidence of diabetes in patients with chronic 
heart failure: Insight from the Studies of Left Ventricular Dysfunction 
(SOLVD). Circulation 2003;107:1291. 
 Wang TJ, Ramachandran SV: Epidemiology of uncontrolled hypertension in the 
United States. Circulation 2005;112:1651. 
 Wing LMH et al: A comparison of outcomes with angiotensin-converting-enzyme 
inhibitors and diuretics for hypertension in the elderly. N Engl J Med 
2003;348:583. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient has JNC stage 1 hypertension (see Table 11-1). 
The first question in management is how urgent is it to treat 
the hypertension. Cardiovascular risk factors in this man 
include family history of early coronary disease and elevated 
cholesterol. Evidence of end-organ impact includes left ven-
tricular enlargement on EKG. The strong family history sug-
gests that this patient has essential hypertension. However, 
the patient should undergo the usual screening tests includ-
ing renal function, thyroid function, and serum electrolyte 
measurements. An echocardiogram should also be consid-
ered to determine whether the patient has left ventricular 
hypertrophy secondary to valvular or other structural heart 
disease as opposed to hypertension.
Initial management in this patient can be behavioral, 
including dietary changes and aerobic exercise. However, 
most patients like this will require medication. Thiazide 
diuretics in low doses are inexpensive, have relatively few 
side effects, and are effective in many patients with mild 
hypertension. Other first-line agents include angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors and calcium channel blockers. 
Beta blockers might be considered if the patient had coro-
nary disease or had labile hypertension. A single agent 
should be prescribed and the patient reassessed in a month. 
If a second agent is needed, one of the two agents should be 
a thiazide diuretic. Once blood pressure is controlled, 
patients should be followed periodically to reinforce the need 
for compliance with both lifestyle changes and medications.
This page intentionally left blank 
193
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Ischemic heart disease is one of the most common cardiovascular 
disease in developed countries, and angina pectoris is the most 
common condition involving tissue ischemia in which vasodilator 
drugs are used. The name angina pectoris denotes chest pain 
caused by accumulation of metabolites resulting from myocardial 
ischemia. The organic nitrates, eg,  nitroglycerin , are the mainstay 
of therapy for the immediate relief of angina. Another group of 
vasodilators, the  calcium channel blockers , is also important, 
especially for prophylaxis, and β  blockers , which are not vasodila-
tors, are also useful in prophylaxis. Several newer groups of drugs 
are under investigation, including drugs that alter myocardial 
metabolism and selective cardiac rate inhibitors. 
 By far the most common cause of angina is atheromatous 
obstruction of the large coronary vessels (coronary artery disease, 
CAD). Inadequate blood flow in the presence of CAD results in 
 effort angina , also known as  classic angina . However, transient 
spasm of localized portions of these vessels, which is usually associ-
ated with underlying atheromas, can also cause significant myo-
cardial ischemia and pain ( vasospastic or  variant angina ). Variant 
angina is also called Prinzmetal angina. 
C A S E  S T U D Y
 The primary cause of angina pectoris is an imbalance between 
the oxygen requirement of the heart and the oxygen supplied to it 
via the coronary vessels. In effort angina, the imbalance occurs 
when the myocardial oxygen requirement increases, especially 
during exercise, and coronary blood flow does not increase pro-
portionately. The resulting ischemia usually leads to pain. In fact, 
coronary flow reserve is frequently impaired in such patients 
because of endothelial dysfunction, which is associated with 
impaired vasodilation. As a result, ischemia may occur at a lower 
level of myocardial oxygen demand. In some individuals, the isch-
emia is not always accompanied by pain, resulting in “silent” or 
“ambulatory” ischemia. In variant angina, oxygen delivery decreases 
as a result of reversible coronary vasospasm. 
 Unstable angina , an  acute coronary syndrome , is said to be pres-
ent when episodes of angina occur at rest and when there is an increase 
in the severity, frequency, and duration of chest pain in patients with 
previously stable angina. Unstable angina is caused by episodes of 
increased epicardial coronary artery resistance or small platelet clots 
occurring in the vicinity of an atherosclerotic plaque. In most cases, 
formation of labile partially occlusive thrombi at the site of a fissured 
or ulcerated plaque is the mechanism for reduction in flow. The course 
and the prognosis of unstable angina are variable, but this subset of 
acute coronary syndrome is associated with a high risk of myocardial 
infarction and death and is considered a medical emergency. 
12
Vasodilators & the 
Treatment of 
Angina Pectoris
 Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD∗ 
∗The author thanks Dr. Kanu Chatterjee, MB, FRCP, who was coauthor 
of this chapter in prior editions.
 A 74-year-old man presents with a history of anterior chest 
pressure whenever he walks more than one block. The chest 
discomfort is diffuse, and he cannot localize it; sometimes it 
radiates to his lower jaw. The discomfort is more severe when 
he walks after meals but is relieved within 5–10 minutes 
when he stops walking. Assuming that a diagnosis of stable 
effort angina is correct, what medical treatments should be 
implemented to reduce the acute pain of an attack and to 
prevent future attacks? 
194    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 In theory, the imbalance between oxygen delivery and myocar-
dial oxygen demand can be corrected by  decreasing oxygen 
demand or by  increasing delivery (by increasing coronary flow). 
In effort angina, oxygen demand can be reduced by decreasing 
cardiac work or, according to some studies, by shifting myocardial 
metabolism to substrates that require less oxygen per unit of ade-
nosine triphosphate (ATP) produced. In variant angina, on the 
other hand, spasm of coronary vessels can be reversed by nitrate or 
calcium channel-blocking vasodilators. Lipid-lowering drugs, 
especially the “statins,” have become extremely important in the 
long-term treatment of atherosclerotic disease (see Chapter 35). In 
unstable angina, vigorous measures are taken to achieve both—
increase oxygen delivery and decrease oxygen demand. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ANGINA 
 Determinants of Myocardial Oxygen 
Demand 
 The major determinants of myocardial oxygen requirement are set 
forth in  Table 12–1 . The effect of arterial blood pressure is medi-
ated through its effect on wall stress. As a consequence of its 
continuous activity, the heart’s oxygen needs are relatively high, 
and it extracts approximately 75% of the available oxygen even in 
the absence of stress. The myocardial oxygen requirement increases 
when there is an increase in heart rate, contractility, arterial pres-
sure, or ventricular volume. These hemodynamic alterations fre-
quently occur during physical exercise and sympathetic discharge, 
which often precipitate angina in patients with obstructive coro-
nary artery disease. 
 Drugs that reduce cardiac size, rate, or force reduce cardiac 
oxygen demand. Thus, vasodilators, β blockers, and calcium block-
ers have predictable benefits in angina. A small, late component of 
sodium current helps to maintain the long plateau and prolong the 
calcium current of myocardial action potentials. Drugs that block 
this late sodium current can indirectly reduce calcium influx and 
consequently reduce cardiac contractile force. The heart favors fatty 
acids as a substrate for energy production. However, oxidation of 
fatty acids requires more oxygen per unit of ATP generated than 
oxidation of carbohydrates. Therefore, drugs that shift myocardial 
metabolism toward greater use of glucose (fatty acid oxidation 
inhibitors) have the potential, at least in theory, to reduce the oxy-
gen demand without altering hemodynamics. 
 Determinants of Coronary Blood Flow & 
Myocardial Oxygen Supply 
 Increased demand for oxygen in the normal heart is met by aug-
menting coronary blood flow. Coronary blood flow is directly 
related to the perfusion pressure (aortic diastolic pressure) and the 
duration of diastole. Because coronary flow drops to negligible 
values during systole, the duration of diastole becomes a limiting 
factor for myocardial perfusion during tachycardia. Coronary 
blood flow is inversely proportional to coronary vascular resis-
tance. Resistance is determined mainly by intrinsic factors—
including metabolic products and autonomic activity—and by 
various pharmacologic agents. Damage to the endothelium of 
coronary vessels has been shown to alter their ability to dilate and 
to increase coronary vascular resistance. 
 Determinants of Vascular Tone 
 Peripheral arteriolar and venous tone (smooth muscle tension) both 
play a role in determining myocardial wall stress ( Table 12–1 ). 
Arteriolar tone directly controls peripheral vascular resistance and 
thus arterial blood pressure. In systole, intraventricular pressure 
must exceed aortic pressure to eject blood; arterial blood pressure 
thus determines the systolic wall stress in an important way. Venous 
tone determines the capacity of the venous circulation and con-
trols the amount of blood sequestered in the venous system versus 
the amount returned to the heart. Venous tone thereby determines 
the diastolic wall stress. 
 The regulation of smooth muscle contraction and relaxation is 
shown schematically in  Figure 12–1 . The mechanisms of action of 
the major types of vasodilators are listed in  Table 11–2 . As shown 
in  Figures 12–1 and  12–2 , drugs may relax vascular smooth 
muscle in several ways: 
 1.  Increasing cGMP: As indicated in  Figures 12–1 and  12–2 , 
cGMP facilitates the dephosphorylation of myosin light 
chains, preventing the interaction of myosin with actin.  Nitric 
oxide is an effective activator of soluble guanylyl cyclase and 
acts mainly through this mechanism. Important molecular 
donors of nitric oxide include  nitroprusside (see Chapters 11 
and 19) and the organic  nitrates used in angina. 
 2.  Decreasing intracellular Ca 2+ : Calcium channel blockers 
predictably cause vasodilation because they reduce intracel-
lular Ca 2+ , a major modulator of the activation of myosin 
light chain kinase ( Figure 12–1 ). Beta  blockers and  calcium 
channel blockers also reduce Ca 2+ influx in cardiac muscle 
fibers, thereby reducing rate, contractility, and oxygen require-
ment under most circumstances. 
 3.  Stabilizing or preventing depolarization of the vascular 
smooth muscle cell membrane: The membrane potential of 
excitable cells is stabilized near the resting potential by increas-
ing potassium permeability. Potassium channel openers, such 
as minoxidil sulfate (see Chapter 11) increase the permeability 
of K + channels, probably ATP-dependent K + channels. Certain 
newer agents under investigation for use in angina (eg, nic-
orandil) may act, in part, by this mechanism. 
 4.  Increasing cAMP in vascular smooth muscle cells: As shown 
in  Figure 12–1 , an increase in cAMP increases the rate of inac-
tivation of myosin light chain kinase, the enzyme responsible 
TABLE 12–1  Determinants of myocardial oxygen 
consumption.
Wall stress
 Intraventricular pressure
 Ventricular radius (volume)
 Wall thickness
Heart rate
Contractility
CHAPTER 12 Vasodilators & the Treatment of Angina Pectoris    195
Myosin-LC kinase
(MLCK)
MLCK*
Myosin-LC-PO4
Ca2+
channel
blockers
ATP
cAMP
+
–
+
K+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Calmodulin
– Calmodulin complex
Myosin-LC
cGMP
Contraction
Relaxation
Myosin
light chains
(myosin-LC)
Actin
Ca2+
+
+
β2 agonists
Vascular smooth muscle cell
MLCK(PO4)2
 FIGURE 12–1  Control of smooth muscle contraction and site of action of calcium channel-blocking drugs. Contraction is triggered (red 
arrows) by influx of calcium (which can be blocked by calcium channel blockers) through transmembrane calcium channels. The calcium com-
bines with calmodulin to form a complex that converts the enzyme myosin light-chain kinase to its active form (MLCK∗). The latter phosphory-
lates the myosin light chains, thereby initiating the interaction of myosin with actin. Other proteins, calponin and caldesmon (not shown), 
inhibit the ATPase activity of myosin during the relaxation of smooth muscle. Interaction with the Ca 2+ -calmodulin complex reduces their 
interaction with myosin during the contraction cycle. Beta 2 agonists (and other substances that increase cAMP) may cause relaxation in smooth 
muscle (blue arrows) by accelerating the inactivation of MLCK and by facilitating the expulsion of calcium from the cell (not shown). cGMP 
facilitates relaxation by the mechanism shown in  Figure 12–2 . 
for triggering the interaction of actin with myosin in these 
cells. This appears to be the mechanism of vasodilation caused 
by β 2 agonists, drugs that are not used in angina (because they 
cause too much cardiac stimulation), and by fenoldopam, a D 1 
agonist used in hypertensive emergencies. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DRUGS USED TO TREAT ANGINA 
 Drug Action in Angina 
 The three drug groups traditionally used in angina (organic nitrates, 
calcium channel blockers, and β blockers)  decrease myocardial oxygen 
requirement by decreasing the determinants of oxygen demand 
(heart rate, ventricular volume, blood pressure, and contractility). In 
some patients, the nitrates and the calcium channel blockers may 
cause a redistribution of coronary flow and  increase oxygen delivery 
to ischemic tissue. In variant angina, these two drug groups also 
increase myocardial oxygen delivery by reversing coronary artery 
spasm. The newer drugs, represented by ranolazine and ivabradine, 
are discussed later. 
 NITRATES & NITRITES 
 Chemistry 
 These agents are simple nitric and nitrous acid esters of polyalco-
hols.  Nitroglycerin may be considered the prototype of the group. 
Although nitroglycerin is used in the manufacture of dynamite, 
the systemic formulations used in medicine are not explosive. The 
conventional sublingual tablet form of nitroglycerin may lose 
potency when stored as a result of volatilization and adsorption to 
plastic surfaces. Therefore, it should be kept in tightly closed glass 
containers. Nitroglycerin is not sensitive to light. 
196    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 All therapeutically active agents in the nitrate group appear to 
have identical mechanisms of action and similar toxicities, 
although susceptibility to tolerance may vary. Therefore, pharma-
cokinetic factors govern the choice of agent and mode of therapy 
when using the nitrates. 
 
HC
Nitroglycerin
(glyceryl trinitrate)
O
NO2
H2C
H2C
O
NO2
O
NO2
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The liver contains a high-capacity organic nitrate reductase that 
removes nitrate groups in a stepwise fashion from the parent 
molecule and ultimately inactivates the drug. Therefore, oral bio-
availability of the traditional organic nitrates (eg, nitroglycerin and 
 isosorbide dinitrate ) is low (typically < 10–20%). For this rea-
son, the sublingual route, which avoids the first-pass effect, is 
preferred for achieving a therapeutic blood level rapidly. 
Nitroglycerin and isosorbide dinitrate both are absorbed effi-
ciently by this route and reach therapeutic blood levels within a 
few minutes. However, the total dose administered by this route 
must be limited to avoid excessive effect; therefore, the total dura-
tion of effect is brief (15–30 minutes). When much longer dura-
tion of action is needed, oral preparations can be given that 
contain an amount of drug sufficient to result in sustained sys-
temic blood levels of the parent drug plus active metabolites. 
Other routes of administration available for nitroglycerin include 
transdermal and buccal absorption from slow-release preparations 
(described below). 
Ca2+
Ca2+
NO
GTP
cGMP
GMP
Myosin-LC
Contraction
Relaxation
Myosin
light chains
(myosin-LC)
Actin
+
–
Nitrates
Nitrites
Arginine
Nitric oxide (NO)
Capillary
endothelial
cells
Blood vessel lumen
Interstitium
Vascular smooth
muscle cell
Nitrates
Nitrites
Sildenafil
 FIGURE 12–2  Mechanism of action of nitrates, nitrites, and other substances that increase the concentration of nitric oxide (NO) in 
vascular smooth muscle cells. Steps leading to relaxation are shown with blue arrows. MLCK∗, activated myosin light-chain kinase (see  
Figure 12–1 ). GC∗, activated guanylyl cyclase; PDE, phosphodiesterase; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase. 
CHAPTER 12 Vasodilators & the Treatment of Angina Pectoris    197
 Amyl nitrite and related nitrites are highly volatile liquids. 
Amyl nitrite is available in fragile glass ampules packaged in a 
protective cloth covering. The ampule can be crushed with the 
fingers, resulting in rapid release of vapors inhalable through the 
cloth covering. The inhalation route provides very rapid absorp-
tion and, like the sublingual route, avoids the hepatic first-pass 
effect. Because of its unpleasant odor and short duration of action, 
amyl nitrite is now obsolete for angina. 
 Once absorbed, the unchanged nitrate compounds have half-
lives of only 2–8 minutes. The partially denitrated metabolites have 
much longer half-lives (up to 3 hours). Of the nitroglycerin 
metabolites (two dinitroglycerins and two mononitro forms), the 
1,2-dinitro derivative has significant vasodilator efficacy and prob-
ably provides most of the therapeutic effect of orally administered 
nitroglycerin. The 5-mononitrate metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate 
is an active metabolite of the latter drug and is available for oral use 
as  isosorbide mononitrate . It has a bioavailability of 100%. 
 Excretion, primarily in the form of glucuronide derivatives of 
the denitrated metabolites, is largely by way of the kidney. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action in Smooth Muscle 
 After more than a century of study, the mechanism of action of 
nitroglycerin is still not fully understood. There is general agree-
ment that the drug must be bioactivated with the release of nitric 
oxide. Unlike nitroprusside and some other direct nitric oxide 
donors, nitroglycerin activation requires enzymatic action. 
Nitroglycerin can be denitrated by glutathione S-transferase in 
smooth muscle and other cells. A mitochondrial enzyme, aldehyde 
dehydrogenase isoform 2 (ALDH2) and possibly isoform 3, 
ALDH3, is also capable of activating nitroglycerin and releasing 
nitric oxide. The differential selectivity of glutathione S-transferase 
and ALDH2 for different organic nitrates suggests that the 
ALDH2 may be the more important enzyme for nitroglycerin 
bioactivation. Free nitrite ion is released, which is then converted 
to  nitric oxide (see Chapter 19). Nitric oxide (probably com-
plexed with cysteine) combines with the heme group of soluble 
guanylyl cyclase, activating that enzyme and causing an increase in 
cGMP. As shown in  Figure 12–2 , formation of cGMP represents 
a first step toward smooth muscle relaxation. The production of 
prostaglandin E or prostacyclin (PGI 2 ) and membrane hyperpo-
larization may also be involved. There is no evidence that auto-
nomic receptors are involved in the primary nitrate response. 
However, autonomic reflex responses, evoked when hypotensive 
doses are given, are common. 
 As described in the following text, tolerance is an important 
consideration in the use of nitrates. Although tolerance may be 
caused in part by a decrease in tissue sulfhydryl groups, eg, on 
cysteine, it can be only partially prevented or reversed with a 
sulfhydryl-regenerating agent. Increased generation of oxygen free 
radicals during nitrate therapy may be another important mecha-
nism of tolerance. Recent evidence suggests that diminished avail-
ability of calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP, a potent 
vasodilator) is also associated with nitrate tolerance. 
 Nicorandil and several other investigational antianginal agents 
appear to combine the activity of nitric oxide release with potas-
sium channel-opening action, thus providing an additional 
mechanism for causing vasodilation. Nitroglycerin has not been 
reported to open potassium channels. 
 B. Organ System Effects 
 
Nitroglycerin relaxes all types of smooth muscle regardless of the 
cause of the preexisting muscle tone ( Figure 12–3 ). It has practi-
cally no direct effect on cardiac or skeletal muscle. 
 1.  Vascular smooth muscle— All segments of the vascular 
system from large arteries through large veins relax in response to 
nitroglycerin. Most evidence suggests a gradient of response, with 
veins responding at the lowest concentrations, arteries at slightly 
higher ones. The epicardial coronary arteries are sensitive, but 
concentric atheromas can prevent significant dilation. On the 
other hand, eccentric lesions permit an increase in flow when 
nitrates relax the smooth muscle on the side away from the lesion. 
Arterioles and precapillary sphincters are dilated least, partly 
because of reflex responses and partly because different vessels vary 
in their ability to release nitric oxide from the drug. 
 A primary direct result of an effective dose of nitroglycerin is 
marked relaxation of veins with increased venous capacitance and 
decreased ventricular preload. Pulmonary vascular pressures and 
heart size are significantly reduced. In the absence of heart failure, 
cardiac output is reduced. Because venous capacitance is increased, 
orthostatic hypotension may be marked and syncope can result. 
Dilation of large epicardial coronary arteries may improve oxygen 
delivery in the presence of eccentric atheromas. Temporal artery 
pulsations and a throbbing headache associated with meningeal 
artery pulsations are common effects of nitroglycerin and amyl 
nitrite. In heart failure, preload is often abnormally high; the nitrates 
and other vasodilators, by reducing preload, may have a beneficial 
effect on cardiac output in this condition (see Chapter 13). 
 The indirect effects of nitroglycerin consist of those compensa-
tory responses evoked by baroreceptors and hormonal mecha-
nisms responding to decreased arterial pressure (see Figure 6–7); 
this often results in tachycardia and increased cardiac contractility. 
Retention of salt and water may also be significant, especially with 
intermediate- and long-acting nitrates. These compensatory 
responses contribute to the development of tolerance. 
 In normal subjects without coronary disease, nitroglycerin can 
induce a significant, if transient, increase in total coronary blood 
flow. In contrast, there is no evidence that total coronary flow is 
increased in patients with angina due to atherosclerotic obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease. However, some studies suggest that 
redistribution of coronary flow from normal to ischemic regions 
may play a role in nitroglycerin’s therapeutic effect. Nitroglycerin 
also exerts a weak negative inotropic effect on the heart via nitric 
oxide. 
 2.  Other smooth muscle organs— Relaxation of smooth 
muscle of the bronchi, gastrointestinal tract (including biliary 
system), and genitourinary tract has been demonstrated experi-
mentally. Because of their brief duration, these actions of the 
198    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
nitrates are rarely of any clinical value. During recent decades, the 
use of amyl nitrite and isobutyl nitrite (not nitrates) by inhalation 
as recreational (sex-enhancing) drugs has become popular with 
some segments of the population. Nitrites readily release nitric oxide 
in erectile tissue as well as vascular smooth muscle and activate 
guanylyl cyclase. The resulting increase in cGMP causes dephospho-
rylation of myosin light chains and relaxation ( Figure 12–2 ), which 
enhances erection. The pharmacologic approach to erectile dys-
function is are discussed in the Box: Drugs Used in the Treatment 
of Erectile Dysfunction. 
 3.  Action on platelets— Nitric oxide released from nitroglycerin 
stimulates guanylyl cyclase in platelets as in smooth muscle. The 
increase in cGMP that results is responsible for a decrease in platelet 
aggregation. Unfortunately, recent prospective trials have estab-
lished no survival benefit when nitroglycerin is used in acute myo-
cardial infarction. In contrast, intravenous nitroglycerin may be of 
value in unstable angina, in part through its action on platelets. 
 4.  Other effects— Nitrite ion reacts with hemoglobin (which 
contains ferrous iron) to produce methemoglobin (which contains 
ferric iron). Because methemoglobin has a very low affinity for 
oxygen, large doses of nitrites can result in pseudocyanosis, tissue 
hypoxia, and death. Fortunately, the plasma level of nitrite result-
ing from even large doses of organic and inorganic nitrates is too 
low to cause significant methemoglobinemia in adults. In nursing 
infants, the intestinal flora is capable of converting significant 
amounts of inorganic nitrate, eg, from well water, to nitrite ion. In 
addition, sodium nitrite is used as a curing agent for meats, eg, 
corned beef. Thus, inadvertent exposure to large amounts of 
nitrite ion can occur and may produce serious toxicity. 
 One therapeutic application of this otherwise toxic effect of 
nitrite has been discovered. Cyanide poisoning results from com-
plexing of cytochrome iron by the CN − ion. Methemoglobin iron 
has a very high affinity for CN − ; thus, administration of sodium 
nitrite (NaNO 2 ) soon after cyanide exposure regenerates active 
cytochrome. The cyanmethemoglobin produced can be further 
detoxified by the intravenous administration of sodium thiosulfate 
(Na 2 S 2 O 3 ); this results in formation of thiocyanate ion (SCN − ), a 
less toxic ion that is readily excreted. Methemoglobinemia, if 
excessive, can be treated by giving methylene blue intravenously. 
This antidotal procedure is now being replaced by hydroxocobala-
min, a form of vitamin B 12 , which also has a very high affinity for 
cyanide and converts it to another form of vitamin B 12 . 
 Toxicity & Tolerance 
 A. Acute Adverse Effects 
 
The major acute toxicities of organic nitrates are direct extensions 
of therapeutic vasodilation: orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia, 
and throbbing headache. Glaucoma, once thought to be a con-
traindication, does not worsen, and nitrates can be used safely in 
the presence of increased intraocular pressure. Nitrates are con-
traindicated, however, if intracranial pressure is elevated. Rarely, 
transdermal nitroglycerin patches have ignited when external defi-
brillator electroshock was applied to the chest of patients in ven-
tricular fibrillation. Such patches should be removed before use of 
external defibrillators to prevent superficial burns. 
+
10 mN
A
K
NTG
+
10 mN
B
NE
NTG
10 mN
10 min
10 mN
C
K+
Verapamil
10 min
NE
NE
K
+
K
 FIGURE 12–3  Effects of vasodilators on contractions of human vein segments studied in vitro. A shows contractions induced by two vaso-
constrictor agents, norepinephrine (NE) and potassium (K + ). B shows the relaxation induced by nitroglycerin (NTG), 4 μmol/L. The relaxation is 
prompt. C shows the relaxation induced by verapamil, 2.2 μmol/L. The relaxation is slower but more sustained. (Modified and reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Mikkelsen E, Andersson KE, Bengtsson B: Effects of verapamil and nitroglycerin on contractile responses to potassium and noradrenaline in isolated human periph-
eral veins. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol 1978;42:14.) 
CHAPTER 12 Vasodilators & the Treatment of Angina Pectoris    199
 B. Tolerance 
 
With continuous exposure to nitrates, isolated smooth muscle 
may develop complete tolerance (tachyphylaxis), and the intact 
human becomes progressively more tolerant when long-acting 
preparations (oral, transdermal) or continuous intravenous infu-
sions are used for more than a few hours without interruption. 
The mechanisms by which tolerance develops are not completely 
understood. As previously noted, diminished release of nitric 
oxide resulting from reduced bioactivation may be partly respon-
sible for tolerance to nitroglycerin. Systemic compensation also 
plays a role in tolerance in the intact human. Initially, significant 
sympathetic discharge occurs, and after one or more days of 
therapy with long-acting nitrates, retention of salt and water may 
reverse the favorable hemodynamic changes normally caused by 
nitroglycerin. 
 Tolerance does not occur equally with all nitric oxide donors. 
Nitroprusside, for example, retains activity over long periods. 
Other organic nitrates appear to be less susceptible than nitroglyc-
erin to the development of tolerance. In cell-free systems, soluble 
guanylate cyclase is inhibited, possibly by nitrosylation of the 
enzyme, only after prolonged exposure to exceedingly high nitro-
glycerin concentrations. In contrast, treatment with antioxidants 
that protect ALDH2 and similar enzymes appears to prevent or 
reduce tolerance. This suggests that tolerance is a function of 
diminished bioactivation of organic nitrates and to a lesser degree, 
a loss of soluble guanylate cyclase responsiveness to nitric oxide. 
 Continuous exposure to high levels of nitrates can occur in the 
chemical industry, especially where explosives are manufactured. 
When contamination of the workplace with volatile organic nitrate 
compounds is severe, workers find that upon starting their work 
 Erectile dysfunction in men has long been the subject of research 
(by both amateur and professional scientists). Among the sub-
stances used in the past and generally discredited are “Spanish 
Fly” (a bladder and urethral irritant), yohimbine (an α 2 antago-
nist; see Chapter 10), nutmeg, and mixtures containing lead, 
arsenic, or strychnine. Substances currently favored by practitio-
ners of herbal medicine but of dubious value include ginseng 
and kava. 
 Scientific studies of the process have shown that erection 
requires relaxation of the nonvascular smooth muscle of the cor-
pora cavernosa. This relaxation permits inflow of blood at nearly 
arterial pressure into the sinuses of the cavernosa, and it is the 
pressure of the blood that causes erection. (With regard to other 
aspects of male sexual function, ejaculation requires intact sym-
pathetic motor function, while orgasm involves independent 
superficial and deep sensory nerves.) Physiologic erection occurs 
in response to the release of nitric oxide from nonadrenergic-
noncholinergic nerves (see Chapter 6) associated with parasym-
pathetic discharge. Thus, parasympathetic motor innervation 
must be intact and nitric oxide synthesis must be active. (It 
appears that a similar process occurs in female erectile tissues.) 
Certain other smooth muscle relaxants—eg, PGE 1 analogs or α 
antagonists—if present in high enough concentration, can inde-
pendently cause sufficient cavernosal relaxation to result in erec-
tion. As noted in the text, nitric oxide activates guanylyl cyclase, 
which increases the concentration of cGMP, and the latter sec-
ond messenger stimulates the dephosphorylation of myosin 
light chains ( Figure 12–2 ) and relaxation of the smooth muscle. 
Thus, any drug that increases cGMP might be of value in erectile 
dysfunction if normal innervation is present. Sildenafil (Viagra) 
acts to increase cGMP by inhibiting its breakdown by phospho-
diesterase isoform 5 (PDE-5). The drug has been very successful 
Drugs Used in the Treatment of Erectile Dysfunction
in the marketplace because it can be taken orally. However, 
sildenafil is of little or no value in men with loss of potency due to 
cord injury or other damage to innervation and in men lacking 
libido. Furthermore, sildenafil potentiates the action of nitrates 
used for angina, and severe hypotension and a few myocardial 
infarctions have been reported in men taking both drugs. It is 
recommended that at least 6 hours pass between use of a nitrate 
and the ingestion of sildenafil. Sildenafil also has effects on color 
vision, causing difficulty in blue-green discrimination. Two similar 
PDE-5 inhibitors,  tadalafil and  vardenafil , are available. It is 
important to be aware that numerous nonprescription mail-order 
products that contain sildenafil analogs such as hydroxythioho-
mosildenafil and sulfoaildenafil have been marketed as “male 
enhancement” agents. These products are not approved by the 
FDA and incur the same risk of dangerous interactions with 
nitrates as the approved agents. 
 PDE-5 inhibitors have also been studied for possible use in 
other conditions. Clinical studies show distinct benefit in some 
patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension but not in patients 
with advanced idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The drugs have 
possible benefit in systemic hypertension, cystic fibrosis, and 
benign prostatic hyperplasia. Both sildenafil and tadalafil are cur-
rently approved for pulmonary hypertension. Preclinical studies 
suggest that sildenafil may be useful in preventing apoptosis and 
cardiac remodeling after ischemia and reperfusion. 
 The drug most commonly used in patients who do not 
respond to sildenafil is  alprostadil , a PGE 1 analog (see Chapter 18) 
that can be injected directly into the cavernosa or placed in the 
urethra as a minisuppository, from which it diffuses into the cav-
ernosal tissue. Phentolamine can be used by injection into the 
cavernosa. These drugs will cause erection in most men who do 
not respond to sildenafil. 
200    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
week (Monday), they suffer headache and transient dizziness 
(“Monday disease”). After a day or so, these symptoms disappear 
owing to the development of tolerance. Over the weekend, when 
exposure to the chemicals is reduced, tolerance disappears, so symp-
toms recur each Monday. Other hazards of industrial exposure, 
including dependence, have been reported. There is no evidence 
that physical dependence develops as a result of the therapeutic use 
of short-acting nitrates for angina, even in large doses. 
 C. Carcinogenicity of Nitrate and Nitrite Derivatives  
Nitrosamines are small molecules with the structure R 2 –N–NO 
formed from the combination of nitrates and nitrites with amines. 
Some nitrosamines are powerful carcinogens in animals, appar-
ently through conversion to reactive derivatives. Although there is 
no direct proof that these agents cause cancer in humans, there is 
a strong epidemiologic correlation between the incidence of 
esophageal and gastric carcinoma and the nitrate content of food 
in certain cultures. Nitrosamines are also found in tobacco and in 
cigarette smoke. There is no evidence that the small doses of 
nitrates used in the treatment of angina result in significant body 
levels of nitrosamines. 
 Mechanisms of Clinical Effect 
 The beneficial and deleterious effects of nitrate-induced vasodila-
tion are summarized in  Table 12–2 . 
 A. Nitrate Effects in Angina of Effort 
 
Decreased venous return to the heart and the resulting reduction 
of intracardiac volume are important beneficial hemodynamic 
effects of nitrates. Arterial pressure also decreases. Decreased 
intraventricular pressure and left ventricular volume are associ-
ated with decreased wall tension (Laplace relation) and decreased 
myocardial oxygen requirement. In rare instances, a paradoxical 
increase in myocardial oxygen demand may occur as a result of 
excessive reflex tachycardia and increased contractility. 
 Intracoronary, intravenous, or sublingual nitrate administra-
tion consistently increases the caliber of the large epicardial coro-
nary arteries except where blocked by concentric atheromas. 
Coronary arteriolar resistance tends to decrease, though to a lesser 
extent. However, nitrates administered by the usual systemic 
routes may decrease overall coronary blood flow (and myocardial 
oxygen consumption) if cardiac output is reduced due to decreased 
venous return. The reduction in oxygen consumption is the major 
mechanism for the relief of effort angina. 
 B. Nitrate Effects in Variant Angina 
 
Nitrates benefit patients with variant angina by relaxing the 
smooth muscle of the epicardial coronary arteries and relieving 
coronary artery spasm. 
 C. Nitrate Effects in Unstable Angina 
 Nitrates are also useful in the treatment of the acute coronary 
syndrome of unstable angina, but the precise mechanism for their 
beneficial effects is not clear. Because both increased coronary 
vascular tone and increased myocardial oxygen demand can pre-
cipitate rest angina in these patients, nitrates may exert their 
beneficial effects both by dilating the epicardial coronary arteries 
and by simultaneously reducing myocardial oxygen demand. As 
previously noted, nitroglycerin also decreases platelet aggregation, 
and this effect may be of importance in unstable angina. 
 Clinical Use of Nitrates 
 Some of the forms of nitroglycerin and its congeners are listed in 
 Table 12–3 . Because of its rapid onset of action (1–3 minutes), 
sublingual nitroglycerin is the most frequently used agent for the 
immediate treatment of angina. Because its duration of action is 
short (not exceeding 20–30 minutes), it is not suitable for main-
tenance therapy. The onset of action of intravenous nitroglycerin 
is also rapid (minutes), but its hemodynamic effects are quickly 
reversed when the infusion is stopped. Clinical use of intravenous 
nitroglycerin is therefore restricted to the treatment of severe, 
recurrent rest angina. Slowly absorbed preparations of nitroglyc-
erin include a buccal form, oral preparations, and several transder-
mal forms. These formulations have been shown to provide blood 
concentrations for long periods but, as noted above, this leads to 
the development of tolerance. 
 The hemodynamic effects of sublingual or chewable isosorbide 
dinitrate and the oral organic nitrates are similar to those of nitro-
glycerin given by the same route. The recommended dosage sched-
ules for commonly used long-acting nitrate preparations, along 
with their durations of action, are listed in  Table 12–3 . Although 
transdermal administration may provide blood levels of nitroglyc-
erin for 24 hours or longer, the full hemodynamic effects usually 
do not persist for more than 6–8 hours. The clinical efficacy of 
TABLE 12–2  Beneficial and deleterious effects of 
nitrates in the treatment of angina.
Effect
Result
Potential beneficial effects
 Decreased ventricular volume
 Decreased arterial pressure
 Decreased ejection time
Decreased myocardial oxygen 
requirement
Vasodilation of epicardial cor-
onary arteries
Relief of coronary artery spasm
 Increased collateral flow
Improved perfusion to ischemic 
myocardium
Decreased left ventricular 
diastolic pressure
Improved subendocardial 
perfusion
Potential deleterious effects
 Reflex tachycardia
Increased myocardial oxygen 
requirement
Reflex increase in contractility
Increased myocardial oxygen 
requirement
Decreased diastolic perfusion 
time due to tachycardia
Decreased coronary perfusion
CHAPTER 12 Vasodilators & the Treatment of Angina Pectoris    201
slow-release forms of nitroglycerin in maintenance therapy of 
angina is thus limited by the development of significant tolerance. 
Therefore, a nitrate-free period of at least 8 hours between doses 
should be observed to reduce or prevent tolerance. 
 OTHER NITRO-VASODILATORS 
 Nicorandil is a nicotinamide nitrate ester that has vasodilating 
properties in normal coronary arteries but more complex effects in 
patients with angina. Clinical studies suggest that it reduces both 
preload and afterload. It also provides some myocardial protection 
via preconditioning by activation of cardiac K ATP channels. One 
large trial showed a significant reduction in relative risk of fatal and 
nonfatal coronary events in patients receiving the drug. Nicorandil 
is currently approved for use in the treatment of angina in Europe 
and Japan and has been submitted for approval in the USA. 
 CALCIUM CHANNEL-BLOCKING DRUGS 
 It has been known since the late 1800s that transmembrane cal-
cium influx is necessary for the contraction of smooth and cardiac 
muscle. The discovery of a calcium channel in cardiac muscle was 
followed by the finding of several different types of calcium chan-
nels in different tissues ( Table 12–4 ). The discovery of these chan-
nels made possible the measurement of the calcium current, I Ca , 
and subsequently, the development of clinically useful blocking 
TABLE 12–3 Nitrate and nitrite drugs used in the treatment of angina.
Drug
Dose
Duration of Action
Short-acting
 Nitroglycerin, sublingual
0.15–1.2 mg
10–30 minutes
 Isosorbide dinitrate, sublingual
2.5–5 mg
10–60 minutes
 Amyl nitrite, inhalant
0.18–0.3 mL
3–5 minutes
Long-acting
 Nitroglycerin, oral sustained-action
6.5–13 mg per 6–8 hours
6–8 hours
 Nitroglycerin, 2% ointment, transdermal
1–1.5 inches per 4 hours
3–6 hours
 Nitroglycerin, slow-release, buccal
1–2 mg per 4 hours
3–6 hours
 Nitroglycerin, slow-release patch, transdermal
10–25 mg per 24 hours (one patch per day)
8–10 hours
 Isosorbide dinitrate, sublingual
2.5–10 mg per 2 hours
1.5–2 hours
 Isosorbide dinitrate, oral
10–60 mg per 4–6 hours
4–6 hours
 Isosorbide dinitrate, chewable oral
5–10 mg per 2–4 hours
2–3 hours
 Isosorbide mononitrate, oral
20 mg per 12 hours
6–10 hours
TABLE 12–4 Properties of several recognized voltage-activated calcium channels.
Type
Channel Name
Where Found
Properties of the 
Calcium Current
Blocked By
L
CaV1.1–CaV1.4
Cardiac, skeletal, smooth muscle, neu-
rons (CaV1.4 is found in retina), endocrine 
cells, bone
Long, large, high threshold
Verapamil, DHPs, Cd2+, ω-aga-IIIA
T
CaV3.1–CaV3.3
Heart, neurons
Short, small, low threshold
sFTX, flunarizine, Ni2+ (CaV3.2 only), 
mibefradil1
N
CaV2.2
Neurons, sperm2
Short, high threshold
Ziconotide,3 gabapentin,4 ω-CTXGVIA, 
ω-aga-IIIA, Cd2+
P/Q
CaV2.1
Neurons
Long, high threshold
ω-CTX-MVIIC, ω-aga-IVA
R
CaV2.3
Neurons, sperm2
Pacemaking
SNX-482, ω-aga-IIIA
1Antianginal drug withdrawn from market.
2Channel types associated with sperm flagellar activity may be of the Catsper1–4 variety.
3Synthetic snail peptide analgesic (see Chapter 31).
4Antiseizure agent (see Chapter 24).
DHPs, dihydropyridines (eg, nifedipine); sFTX, synthetic funnel web spider toxin; ω-CTX, conotoxins extracted from several marine snails of the genus Conus; ω-aga-IIIA and 
ω-aga-IVA, toxins of the funnel web spider, Agelenopsis aperta; SNX-482, a toxin of the African tarantula, Hysterocrates gigas.
202    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
drugs. Although the blockers currently available for clinical use in 
cardiovascular conditions are exclusively L-type calcium channel 
blockers, selective blockers of other types of calcium channels are 
under intensive investigation. Certain antiseizure drugs are 
thought to act, at least in part, through calcium channel (espe-
cially T-type) blockade in neurons (see Chapter 24). 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Verapamil, the first clinically useful member of this group, was the 
result of attempts to synthesize more active analogs of papaverine, 
a vasodilator alkaloid found in the opium poppy. Since then, doz-
ens of agents of varying structure have been found to have the 
same fundamental pharmacologic action ( Table 12–5 ). Three 
chemically dissimilar calcium channel blockers are shown in 
 Figure 12–4 . Nifedipine is the prototype of the dihydropyridine 
family of calcium channel blockers; dozens of molecules in this 
family have been investigated, and several are currently approved 
in the USA for angina and other indications. Nifedipine is the 
most extensively studied of this group, but the properties of the 
other dihydropyridines can be assumed to be similar to it unless 
otherwise noted. 
 The calcium channel blockers are orally active agents and are 
characterized by high first-pass effect, high plasma protein bind-
ing, and extensive metabolism. Verapamil and diltiazem are also 
used by the intravenous route. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 
The voltage-gated L-type calcium channel is the dominant type 
in cardiac and smooth muscle and is known to contain several 
drug receptors. It consists of α 1 (the larger, pore-forming sub-
unit), α 2 , β, γ, and δ subunits. Four variant α 1 subunits have 
been recognized. Nifedipine and other dihydropyridines have 
been demonstrated to bind to one site on the α 1 subunit, whereas 
verapamil and diltiazem appear to bind to closely related but not 
identical receptors in another region of the same subunit. Binding 
of a drug to the verapamil or diltiazem receptors allosterically 
affects dihydropyridine binding. These receptor regions are ste-
reoselective, since marked differences in both stereoisomer-bind-
ing affinity and pharmacologic potency are observed for 
enantiomers of verapamil, diltiazem, and optically active nife-
dipine congeners. 
 Blockade of calcium channels by these drugs resembles that of 
sodium channel blockade by local anesthetics (see Chapters 14 
and 26). The drugs act from the inner side of the membrane and 
bind more effectively to open channels and inactivated channels. 
Binding of the drug reduces the frequency of opening in response 
to depolarization. The result is a marked decrease in transmem-
brane calcium current, which in smooth muscle results in long-
lasting relaxation ( Figure 12–3 ) and in cardiac muscle results in 
reduction in contractility throughout the heart and decreases in 
sinus node pacemaker rate and atrioventricular node conduction 
velocity. ∗ Although some neuronal cells harbor L-type calcium 
channels, their sensitivity to these drugs is lower because the chan-
nels in these cells spend less time in the open and inactivated 
states. 
 Smooth muscle responses to calcium influx through ligand-
gated calcium channels are also reduced by these drugs but not as 
markedly. The block can be partially reversed by elevating the 
concentration of calcium, although the levels of calcium required 
are not easily attainable in patients. Block can also be partially 
TABLE 12–5 Clinical pharmacology of some calcium channel-blocking drugs.
Drug
Oral 
Bioavailability (%)
Half-life 
(hours)
Indication
Dosage
Dihydropyridines
 Amlodipine
65–90
30–50
Angina, hypertension
5–10 mg orally once daily
 Felodipine
15–20
11–16
Hypertension, Raynaud’s phenomenon
5–10 mg orally once daily
 Isradipine
15–25
8
Hypertension
2.5–10 mg orally twice daily
 Nicardipine
35
2–4
Angina, hypertension
20–40 mg orally every 8 hours
 Nifedipine
45–70
4
Angina, hypertension, Raynaud’s 
phenomenon
3–10 mcg/kg IV; 20–40 mg orally every 
8 hours
 Nisoldipine
< 10
6–12
Hypertension
20–40 mg orally once daily
 Nitrendipine
10–30
5–12
Investigational
20 mg orally once or twice daily
Miscellaneous
 Diltiazem
40–65
3–4
Angina, hypertension, Raynaud’s 
phenomenon
75–150 mcg/kg IV; 30–80 mg orally 
every 6 hours
 Verapamil
20–35
6
Angina, hypertension, arrhythmias, 
migraine
75–150 mcg/kg IV; 80–160 mg orally 
every 8 hours
∗At very low doses and under certain circumstances, some dihydropyri-
dines increase calcium influx. Some special dihydropyridines, eg, Bay 
K 8644, actually increase calcium influx over most of their dose range.
CHAPTER 12 Vasodilators & the Treatment of Angina Pectoris    203
reversed by the use of drugs that increase the transmembrane flux 
of calcium, such as sympathomimetics. 
 Other types of calcium channels are less sensitive to blockade 
by these calcium channel blockers ( Table 12–4 ). Therefore, tissues 
in which these other channel types play a major role—neurons 
and most secretory glands—are much less affected by these drugs 
than are cardiac and smooth muscle.  Mibefradil is a selective 
T-type calcium channel blocker that was introduced for antiar-
rhythmic use but has been withdrawn. Ion channels other than 
calcium channels are much less sensitive to these drugs. Potassium 
channels in vascular smooth muscle are inhibited by verapamil, 
thus limiting the vasodilation produced by this drug. Sodium 
channels as well as calcium channels are blocked by bepridil, an 
obsolete antiarrhythmic drug. 
 B. Organ System Effects 
 1. Smooth muscle— Most types of smooth muscle are depen-
dent on transmembrane calcium influx for normal resting tone 
and contractile responses. These cells are relaxed by the calcium 
channel blockers ( Figure 12–3 ). Vascular smooth muscle appears 
to be the most sensitive, but similar relaxation can be shown for 
bronchiolar, gastrointestinal, and uterine smooth muscle. In the 
vascular system, arterioles appear to be more sensitive than veins; 
orthostatic hypotension is not a common adverse effect. Blood 
pressure is reduced with all calcium channel blockers (see Chapter 11). 
Women may be more sensitive than men to the hypotensive action 
of diltiazem. The reduction in peripheral vascular resistance is one 
mechanism by which these agents may benefit the patient with 
angina of effort. Reduction of coronary artery spasm has been 
demonstrated in patients with variant angina. 
 Important differences in vascular selectivity exist among the 
calcium channel blockers. In general, the dihydropyridines have a 
greater ratio of vascular smooth muscle effects relative to cardiac 
effects than do diltiazem and verapamil. The relatively smaller 
effect of verapamil on vasodilation may be the result of simultane-
ous blockade of vascular smooth muscle potassium channels 
described earlier. Furthermore, the dihydropyridines may differ in 
their potency in different vascular beds. For example, nimodipine 
is claimed to be particularly selective for cerebral blood vessels. 
Splice variants in the structure of the α 1 channel subunit appear 
to account for these differences. 
 2. Cardiac muscle— Cardiac muscle is highly dependent on cal-
cium influx during each action potential for normal function. 
Impulse generation in the sinoatrial node and conduction in the 
atrioventricular node—so-called slow-response, or calcium-dependent, 
action potentials—may be reduced or blocked by all of the calcium 
channel blockers. Excitation-contraction coupling in all cardiac cells 
requires calcium influx, so these drugs reduce cardiac contractility in 
a dose-dependent fashion. In some cases, cardiac output may also 
decrease. This reduction in cardiac mechanical function is another 
mechanism by which the calcium channel blockers can reduce the 
oxygen requirement in patients with angina. 
 Important differences between the available calcium channel 
blockers arise from the details of their interactions with cardiac ion 
channels and, as noted above, differences in their relative smooth 
muscle versus cardiac effects. Sodium channel block is modest with 
verapamil, and still less marked with diltiazem. It is negligible with 
nifedipine and other dihydropyridines. Verapamil and diltiazem 
interact kinetically with the calcium channel receptor in a different 
manner than the dihydropyridines; they block tachycardias in 
O
Verapamil
CH2
C
H3C
O
H3C
CH
CH3
H3C
C
N
CH2
CH2
N
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
O
CH3
O
NO2
CH3
C
O
CH3
O
C
O
O
O
CH3
N
H
N
S
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
N
O
C
CH3
O
O
Diltiazem
H3C
H3C
Nifedipine
 FIGURE 12–4  Chemical structures of several calcium channel-blocking drugs. 
204    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
calcium-dependent cells, eg, the atrioventricular node, more selec-
tively than do the dihydropyridines. (See Chapter 14 for additional 
details.) On the other hand, the dihydropyridines appear to block 
smooth muscle calcium channels at concentrations below those 
required for significant cardiac effects; they are therefore less depres-
sant on the heart than verapamil or diltiazem. 
 3. Skeletal muscle— Skeletal muscle is not depressed by the 
calcium channel blockers because it uses intracellular pools of 
calcium to support excitation-contraction coupling and does not 
require as much transmembrane calcium influx. 
 4. Cerebral vasospasm and infarct following subarach-
noid hemorrhage— Nimodipine, a member of the dihydropyri-
dine group of calcium channel blockers, has a high affinity for 
cerebral blood vessels and appears to reduce morbidity after a 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. Nimodipine was approved for use in 
patients who have had a hemorrhagic stroke, but it has recently 
been withdrawn. Nicardipine has similar effects and is used by 
intravenous and intracerebral arterial infusion to prevent cerebral 
vasospasm associated with stroke. Verapamil as well, despite its 
lack of vasoselectivity, is used by the intra-arterial route in stroke. 
Some evidence suggests that calcium channel blockers may also 
reduce cerebral damage after thromboembolic stroke. 
 5. Other effects— Calcium channel blockers minimally interfere 
with stimulus-secretion coupling in glands and nerve endings 
because of differences between calcium channel type and sensitivity 
in different tissues. Verapamil has been shown to inhibit insulin 
release in humans, but the dosages required are greater than those 
used in management of angina and other cardiovascular conditions. 
 A significant body of evidence suggests that the calcium chan-
nel blockers may interfere with platelet aggregation in vitro and 
prevent or attenuate the development of atheromatous lesions in 
animals. However, clinical studies have not established their role 
in human blood clotting and atherosclerosis. 
 Verapamil has been shown to block the P-glycoprotein respon-
sible for the transport of many foreign drugs out of cancer (and 
other) cells (see Chapter 1); other calcium channel blockers appear 
to have a similar effect. This action is not stereospecific. Verapamil 
has been shown to partially reverse the resistance of cancer cells to 
many chemotherapeutic drugs in vitro. Some clinical results sug-
gest similar effects in patients (see Chapter 54). Animal research 
suggests possible future roles of calcium blockers in the treatment 
of osteoporosis, fertility disorders and male contraception, 
immune modulation, and even schistosomiasis. Verapamil does 
not appear to block transmembrane divalent metal ion transport-
ers such as DMT1. 
 Toxicity 
 The most important toxic effects reported for calcium channel 
blockers are direct extensions of their therapeutic action. Excessive 
inhibition of calcium influx can cause serious cardiac depression, 
including bradycardia, atrioventricular block, cardiac arrest, and 
heart failure. These effects have been rare in clinical use. 
 Retrospective case-control studies reported that immediate-
acting nifedipine increased the risk of myocardial infarction in 
patients with hypertension. Slow-release and long-acting dihydro-
pyridine calcium channel blockers are usually well tolerated. 
However, dihydropyridines, compared with angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, have been reported to increase the risk 
of adverse cardiac events in patients with hypertension with or 
without diabetes. These results suggest that relatively short-acting 
calcium channel blockers such as prompt-release nifedipine have 
the potential to enhance the risk of adverse cardiac events and 
should be avoided. Patients receiving β-blocking drugs are more 
sensitive to the cardiodepressant effects of calcium channel block-
ers. Minor toxicities (troublesome but not usually requiring dis-
continuance of therapy) include flushing, dizziness, nausea, 
constipation, and peripheral edema. Constipation is particularly 
common with verapamil. 
 Mechanisms of Clinical Effects 
 Calcium channel blockers decrease myocardial contractile force, 
which reduces myocardial oxygen requirements. Calcium channel 
block in arterial smooth muscle decreases arterial and intraven-
tricular pressure. Some of these drugs (eg, verapamil, diltiazem) 
also possess a nonspecific antiadrenergic effect, which may con-
tribute to peripheral vasodilation. As a result of all of these effects, 
left ventricular wall stress declines, which reduces myocardial oxy-
gen requirements. Decreased heart rate with the use of verapamil 
or diltiazem causes a further decrease in myocardial oxygen 
demand. Calcium channel-blocking agents also relieve and pre-
vent focal coronary artery spasm in variant angina. Use of these 
agents has thus emerged as the most effective prophylactic treat-
ment for this form of angina pectoris. 
 Sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodal tissues, which are mainly 
composed of calcium-dependent, slow-response cells, are affected 
markedly by verapamil, moderately by diltiazem, and much less by 
dihydropyridines. Thus, verapamil and diltiazem decrease atrio-
ventricular nodal conduction and are often effective in the man-
agement of supraventricular reentry tachycardia and in decreasing 
ventricular responses in atrial fibrillation or flutter. Nifedipine 
does not affect atrioventricular conduction. Nonspecific sympa-
thetic antagonism is most marked with diltiazem and much less 
with verapamil. Nifedipine does not appear to have this effect. 
Significant reflex tachycardia in response to hypotension occurs 
most frequently with nifedipine and less so with diltiazem and 
verapamil. These differences in pharmacologic effects should be 
considered in selecting calcium channel-blocking agents for the 
management of angina. 
 Clinical Uses of Calcium 
Channel-Blocking Drugs 
 In addition to angina, calcium channel blockers have well-documented 
efficacy in hypertension (see Chapter 11) and supraventricular 
tachyarrhythmias (see Chapter 14). They also show moderate 
efficacy in a variety of other conditions, including hypertrophic 
CHAPTER 12 Vasodilators & the Treatment of Angina Pectoris    205
cardiomyopathy, migraine, and Raynaud’s phenomenon. Nifedipine 
has some efficacy in preterm labor but is more toxic and not as 
effective as  atosiban , an investigational oxytocin antagonist (see 
Chapter 17). 
 The pharmacokinetic properties of these drugs are set forth in 
 Table 12–5 . The choice of a particular calcium channel-blocking 
agent should be made with knowledge of its specific potential 
adverse effects as well as its pharmacologic properties. Nifedipine 
does not decrease atrioventricular conduction and therefore can be 
used more safely than verapamil or diltiazem in the presence of 
atrioventricular conduction abnormalities. A combination of vera-
pamil or diltiazem with β blockers may produce atrioventricular 
block and depression of ventricular function. In the presence of 
overt heart failure, all calcium channel blockers can cause further 
worsening of failure as a result of their negative inotropic effect. 
 Amlodipine , however, does not increase mortality in patients 
with heart failure due to nonischemic left ventricular systolic dys-
function and can be used safely in these patients. 
 In patients with relatively low blood pressure, dihydropyri-
dines can cause further deleterious lowering of pressure. Verapamil 
and diltiazem appear to produce less hypotension and may be 
better tolerated in these circumstances. In patients with a history 
of atrial tachycardia, flutter, and fibrillation, verapamil and dilti-
azem provide a distinct advantage because of their antiarrhythmic 
effects. In the patient receiving digitalis, verapamil should be used 
with caution, because it may increase digoxin blood levels 
through a pharmacokinetic interaction. Although increases in 
digoxin blood level have also been demonstrated with diltiazem 
and nifedipine, such interactions are less consistent than with 
verapamil. 
 In patients with unstable angina, immediate-release short-
acting calcium channel blockers can increase the risk of adverse 
cardiac events and therefore are contraindicated (see Toxicity, 
above). However, in patients with non–Q-wave myocardial infarc-
tion, diltiazem can decrease the frequency of postinfarction angina 
and may be used. 
 BETA-BLOCKING DRUGS 
 Although they are not vasodilators (with the exception of carvedilol 
and nebivolol), β-blocking drugs (see Chapter 10) are extremely 
useful in the management of effort angina. The beneficial effects of 
β-blocking agents are related to their hemodynamic effects—
decreased heart rate, blood pressure, and contractility—which 
decrease myocardial oxygen requirements at rest and during exer-
cise. Lower heart rate is also associated with an increase in diastolic 
perfusion time that may increase coronary perfusion. However, 
reduction of heart rate and blood pressure, and consequently 
decreased myocardial oxygen consumption, appear to be the most 
important mechanisms for relief of angina and improved exercise 
tolerance. Beta blockers may also be valuable in treating silent or 
ambulatory ischemia. Because this condition causes no pain, it is 
usually detected by the appearance of typical electrocardiographic 
signs of ischemia. The total amount of “ischemic time” per day is 
reduced by long-term therapy with a β blocker. Beta-blocking 
agents decrease mortality of patients with recent myocardial infarc-
tion and improve survival and prevent stroke in patients with 
hypertension. Randomized trials in patients with stable angina 
have shown better outcome and symptomatic improvement with 
β blockers compared with calcium channel blockers. 
 Undesirable effects of β-blocking agents in angina include an 
increase in end-diastolic volume and an increase in ejection time, 
both of which tend to increase myocardial oxygen requirement. 
These deleterious effects of β-blocking agents can be balanced by 
the concomitant use of nitrates as described below. 
 Contraindications to the use of β blockers are asthma and 
other bronchospastic conditions, severe bradycardia, atrioventric-
ular blockade, bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome, and severe 
unstable left ventricular failure. Potential complications include 
fatigue, impaired exercise tolerance, insomnia, unpleasant dreams, 
worsening of claudication, and erectile dysfunction. 
 NEWER ANTIANGINAL DRUGS 
 Because of the high prevalence of angina, new drugs are actively 
sought for its treatment. Some of the drugs or drug groups cur-
rently under investigation are listed in  Table 12–6 . 
 Ranolazine is a newer antianginal drug that appears to act by 
reducing a late sodium current (I Na ) that facilitates calcium entry 
via the sodium-calcium exchanger (see Chapter 13). The resulting 
reduction in intracellular calcium concentration reduces cardiac 
contractility and work. Ranolazine is approved for use in angina 
in the USA. 
 Certain metabolic modulators (eg,  trimetazidine ) are known as 
 pFOX inhibitors because they partially inhibit the fatty acid oxida-
tion pathway in myocardium. Because metabolism shifts to oxida-
tion of fatty acids in ischemic myocardium, the oxygen requirement 
per unit of ATP produced increases. Partial inhibition of the enzyme 
TABLE 12–6  New drugs or drug groups under 
investigation for use in angina.
Drugs
Amiloride
Capsaicin
Direct bradycardic agents, eg, ivabradine
Inhibitors of slowly inactivating sodium current, eg, ranolazine
Metabolic modulators, eg, trimetazidine
Nitric oxide donors, eg, L-arginine
Potassium channel activators, eg, nicorandil
Protein kinase G facilitators, eg, detanonoate
Rho-kinase inhibitors, eg, fasudil
Sulfonylureas, eg, glibenclamide
Thiazolidinediones
Vasopeptidase inhibitors
Xanthine oxidase inhibitors, eg, allopurinol
206    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
required for fatty acid oxidation (long-chain 3-ketoacyl thiolase, 
LC-3KAT) appears to improve the metabolic status of ischemic tis-
sue. (Ranolazine was initially assigned to this group of agents.). 
Trimetazidine is not approved for use in angina in the USA. A much 
older drug,  allopurinol , represents another type of metabolic 
modifier. Allopurinol inhibits xanthine oxidase (see Chapter 36), an 
enzyme that contributes to oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunc-
tion. A recent study suggests that high-dose allopurinol prolongs 
exercise time in patients with atherosclerotic angina. 
 So-called  bradycardic drugs, relatively selective I f sodium chan-
nel blockers (eg, ivabradine), reduce cardiac rate by inhibiting 
the hyperpolarization-activated sodium channel in the sinoatrial 
node. No other significant hemodynamic effects have been 
reported. Ivabradine appears to reduce anginal attacks with an 
efficacy similar to that of calcium channel blockers and β block-
ers. The lack of effect on gastrointestinal and bronchial smooth 
muscle is an advantage of ivabradine, and Food and Drug 
Administration approval is expected. 
 The Rho kinases comprise a family of enzymes that inhibit 
vascular relaxation and diverse functions of several other cell 
types. Excessive activity of these enzymes has been implicated in 
coronary spasm, pulmonary hypertension, apoptosis, and other 
conditions. Drugs targeting the enzyme have therefore been 
sought for possible clinical applications. Fasudil is an inhibitor 
of smooth muscle Rho kinase and reduces coronary vasospasm 
in experimental animals. In clinical trials in patients with CAD, 
it has improved performance in stress tests. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DRUGS USED TO TREAT ANGINA 
 Because the most common cause of angina is atherosclerotic dis-
ease of the coronaries (CAD), therapy must address the underly-
ing causes of CAD as well as the immediate symptoms of angina. 
In addition to reducing the need for antianginal therapy, such 
primary management has been shown to reduce major cardiac 
events such as myocardial infarction. 
 First-line therapy of CAD depends on modification of risk fac-
tors such as smoking, hypertension (see Chapter 11), hyperlipi-
demia (see Chapter 35), obesity, and clinical depression. In 
addition, antiplatelet drugs (see Chapter 34) are very important. 
 Specific pharmacologic therapy to prevent myocardial infarction 
and death consists of antiplatelet agents (aspirin, ADP receptor 
blockers, Chapter 34) and lipid-lowering agents, especially statins 
(Chapter 35). Aggressive therapy with statins has been shown to 
reduce the incidence and severity of ischemia in patients during 
exercise testing and the incidence of cardiac events (including infarc-
tion and death) in clinical trials. ACE inhibitors also reduce the risk 
of adverse cardiac events in patients at high risk for CAD, although 
they have not been consistently shown to exert antianginal effects. In 
patients with unstable angina and non-ST-segment elevation myo-
cardial infarction, aggressive therapy consisting of coronary stenting, 
antilipid drugs, heparin, and antiplatelet agents is recommended. 
 The treatment of established angina and other manifestations 
of myocardial ischemia includes the corrective measures previously 
described as well as treatment to prevent or relieve symptoms. 
Treatment of symptoms is based on reduction of myocardial oxy-
gen demand and increase of coronary blood flow to the potentially 
ischemic myocardium to restore the balance between myocardial 
oxygen supply and demand. 
 Angina of Effort 
 Many studies have demonstrated that nitrates, calcium channel 
blockers, and β blockers increase time to onset of angina and ST 
depression during treadmill tests in patients with angina of effort 
( Figure 12–5 ). Although exercise tolerance increases, there is usu-
ally no change in the angina threshold, ie, the rate-pressure prod-
uct at which symptoms occur. 
 For maintenance therapy of chronic stable angina, long-acting 
nitrates, calcium channel-blocking agents, or β blockers may be 
chosen; the drug of choice depends on the individual patient’s 
response. In hypertensive patients, monotherapy with either slow-
release or long-acting calcium channel blockers or β blockers may 
be adequate. In normotensive patients, long-acting nitrates may 
be suitable. The combination of a β blocker with a calcium chan-
nel blocker (eg, propranolol with nifedipine) or two different 
calcium channel blockers (eg, nifedipine and verapamil) has been 
shown to be more effective than individual drugs used alone. If 
response to a single drug is inadequate, a drug from a different 
class should be added to maximize the beneficial reduction of 
cardiac work while minimizing undesirable effects ( Table 12–7 ). 
Some patients may require therapy with all three drug groups. 
HR × BP ÷ 100
175
125
75
Treadmill time (s)
0
100
200
300
400
Control
120 mg/d
240 mg/d
360 mg/d
 FIGURE 12–5  Effects of diltiazem on the double product (heart 
rate × systolic blood pressure) in a group of 20 patients with angina 
of effort. In a double-blind study using a standard protocol, patients 
were tested on a treadmill during treatment with placebo and three 
doses of the drug. Heart rate (HR) and systolic blood pressure (BP) 
were recorded at 180 seconds of exercise (midpoints of lines) and at 
the time of onset of anginal symptoms (rightmost points). Note that 
the drug treatment decreased the double product at all times during 
exercise and prolonged the time to appearance of symptoms. (Data 
from Lindenberg BS et al: Efficacy and safety of incremental doses of diltiazem for 
the treatment of angina. J Am Coll Cardiol 1983;2:1129. Used with permission of the 
American College of Cardiology.) 
CHAPTER 12 Vasodilators & the Treatment of Angina Pectoris    207
 Surgical revascularization (ie, coronary artery bypass grafting 
[CABG]) and catheter-based revascularization (ie, percutaneous 
coronary intervention [PCI]) are the primary methods for 
promptly restoring coronary blood flow and increasing oxygen 
supply in unstable or medically refractory angina. 
 Vasospastic Angina 
 Nitrates and the calcium channel blockers are effective drugs for 
relieving and preventing ischemic episodes in patients with variant 
angina. In approximately 70% of patients treated with nitrates 
plus calcium channel blockers, angina attacks are completely abol-
ished; in another 20%, marked reduction of frequency of anginal 
episodes is observed. Prevention of coronary artery spasm (with or 
without fixed atherosclerotic coronary artery lesions) is the princi-
pal mechanism for this beneficial response. All presently available 
calcium channel blockers appear to be equally effective, and the 
choice of a particular drug should depend on the patient. Surgical 
revascularization and angioplasty are not indicated in patients 
with variant angina. 
 Unstable Angina & Acute Coronary 
Syndromes 
 In patients with unstable angina with recurrent ischemic episodes 
at rest, recurrent platelet-rich nonocclusive thrombus formation is 
the principal mechanism. Aggressive antiplatelet therapy with a 
combination of aspirin and clopidogrel is indicated. Intravenous 
heparin or subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin is also 
indicated in most patients. If percutaneous coronary intervention 
with stenting is required, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors such as 
abciximab should be added. In addition, therapy with nitroglyc-
erin and β blockers should be considered; calcium channel block-
ers should be added in refractory cases for relief of myocardial 
ischemia. Primary lipid-lowering and ACE-inhibitor therapy 
should also be initiated. 
 TREATMENT OF PERIPHERAL ARTERY 
DISEASE (PAD) & INTERMITTENT 
CLAUDICATION 
 Atherosclerosis can result in ischemia of peripheral muscles just as 
coronary artery disease causes cardiac ischemia. Pain (claudication) 
occurs in skeletal muscles, especially in the legs, during exercise and 
disappears with rest. Although claudication is not immediately life-
threatening, peripheral artery disease is associated with increased 
mortality, can severely limit exercise tolerance, and may be associ-
ated with chronic ischemic ulcers and susceptibility to infection. 
 Intermittent claudication results from obstruction of blood flow 
by atheromas in large and medium arteries. Treatment is primarily 
directed at reversal or control of atherosclerosis and requires mea-
surement and control of hyperlipidemia (see Chapter 35), hyper-
tension (see Chapter 11), and obesity; cessation of smoking; and 
control of diabetes, if present. Physical therapy and exercise train-
ing is of proven benefit. Conventional vasodilators are of no ben-
efit because vessels distal to the obstructive lesions are usually 
already dilated at rest. Antiplatelet drugs such as aspirin or clopi-
dogrel are often used to prevent clotting in the region of plaques. 
Two drugs are used almost exclusively for peripheral artery disease. 
 Pentoxifylline , a xanthine derivative, is thought to act by reducing 
the viscosity of blood, allowing it to flow more easily through par-
tially obstructed areas. Cilostazol, a phosphodiesterase type 3 
(PDE3) inhibitor, is poorly understood, but may have selective 
antiplatelet and vasodilating effects. Both drugs have been shown 
to increase exercise tolerance in patients with severe claudication. 
Percutaneous angioplasty with stenting is often effective in patients 
with medically intractable signs and symptoms of ischemia. 
TABLE 12–7 Effects of nitrates alone and with a blockers or calcium channel blockers in angina pectoris.
Nitrates Alone
Beta Blockers or Calcium 
Channel Blockers
Combined Nitrates with Beta Blockers or 
Calcium Channel Blockers
Heart rate
Reflex1 increase
Decrease
Decrease
Arterial pressure
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
End-diastolic volume
Decrease
Increase
None or decrease
Contractility
Reflex1 increase
Decrease
None
Ejection time
Decrease1
Increase
None
1Baroreceptor reflex.
Note: Undesirable effects are shown in italics.
208    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
SUMMARY Drugs Used in Angina Pectoris
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
NITRATES
 • Nitroglycerin
Releases nitric oxide in 
smooth muscle, which acti-
vates guanylyl cyclase and 
increases cGMP
Smooth muscle relaxation, 
especially in vessels • other 
smooth muscle is relaxed but 
not as markedly • vasodila-
tion decreases venous return 
and heart size • may increase 
coronary flow in some areas 
and in variant angina
Angina: Sublingual form for 
acute episodes • oral and 
transdermal forms for pro-
phylaxis • IV form for acute 
coronary syndrome
High first-pass effect, so sublingual 
dose is much smaller than oral 
• high lipid solubility ensures rapid 
absorption • Toxicity: Orthostatic 
hypotension, tachycardia, headache • 
Interactions: Synergistic hypotension 
with phosphodiesterase type 5 
inhibitors (sildenafil, etc)
 • Isosorbide dinitrate: Very similar to nitroglycerin, slightly longer duration of action
 • Isosorbide mononitrate: Active metabolite of the dinitrate; used orally for prophylaxis
BETA BLOCKERS
 • Propranolol
Nonselective competitive 
antagonist at 
β adrenoceptors
Decreased heart rate, 
cardiac output, and blood 
pressure • decreases 
myocardial oxygen demand
Prophylaxis of angina • for 
other applications, see 
Chapters 10, 11, and 13
Oral and parenteral, 4–6 h duration of 
action • Toxicity: Asthma, atrioventricu-
lar block, acute heart failure, sedation • 
Interactions: Additive with all cardiac 
depressants
 • Atenolol, metoprolol, others: b1-Selective blockers, less risk of bronchospasm, but still significant
 • See Chapters 10 and 11 for other b blockers and their applications
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
 • Verapamil, 
        diltiazem
Nonselective block of L-type 
calcium channels in vessels 
and heart
Reduced vascular resistance, 
cardiac rate, and cardiac 
force results in decreased 
oxygen demand
Prophylaxis of angina, hyper-
tension, others
Oral, IV, duration 4–8 h • Toxicity: 
Atrioventricular block, acute heart 
failure; constipation, edema • 
Interactions: Additive with other 
cardiac depressants and hypotensive 
drugs
 • Nifedipine (a 
        dihydropyridine)
Block of vascular L-type 
calcium channels > cardiac 
channels
Like verapamil and diltiazem; 
less cardiac effect
Prophylaxis of angina, hyper-
tension
Oral, duration 4–6 h • Toxicity: Excessive 
hypotension, baroreceptor reflex 
tachycardia • Interactions: Additive with 
other vasodilators
 • Other dihydropyridines: Like nifedipine but slower onset and longer duration (up to 12 h or longer)
MISCELLANEOUS
 • Ranolazine
Inhibits late sodium current 
in heart • also may modify 
fatty acid oxidation
Reduces cardiac oxygen 
demand • fatty acid oxidation 
modification may improve 
efficiency of cardiac oxygen 
utilization
Prophylaxis of angina
Oral, duration 6–8 h • Toxicity: QT inter-
val prolongation, nausea, constipation, 
dizziness • Interactions: Inhibitors of 
CYP3A increase ranolazine concentra-
tion and duration of action
 • Ivabradine: Investigational inhibitor of sinoatrial pacemaker; reduction of heart rate reduces oxygen demand
CHAPTER 12 Vasodilators & the Treatment of Angina Pectoris    209
NITRATES & NITRITES
Amyl nitrite (generic)
Inhalant: 0.3 mL capsules
Isosorbide dinitrate (generic, Isordil)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 mg tablets; 5, 10 mg chewable tablets
Oral sustained-release (Isochron, Dilatrate SR): 40 mg tablets and 
capsules
Sublingual: 2.5, 5 mg sublingual tablets
Isosorbide mononitrate (Ismo, others)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets; extended-release: 30, 60, 120 mg tablets
Nitroglycerin
Sublingual or buccal: 0.3, 0.4, 0.6 mg tablets; 0.4 mg/metered dose 
aerosol spray
Oral sustained-release (generic, Nitro-Time): 2.5, 6.5, 9 mg capsules
Parenteral (generic): 5 mg/mL for IV administration; 100, 200, 
400 mcg/mL in dextrose for IV infusion
Transdermal patches (generic, Nitrek, Nitro-Dur, Transderm-Nitro): 
to release at rates of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6, or 0.8 mg/h
Topical ointment (generic, Nitro-Bid): 20 mg/mL ointment (1 inch, 
or 25 mm, of ointment contains about 15 mg nitroglycerin)
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Amlodipine (generic, Norvasc, AmVaz)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Clevidipine (Cleviprex) (approved only for use in 
 hypertensive emergencies)
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for IV infusion
Diltiazem (Cardizem, generic)
Oral: 30, 60, 90, 120 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release (Cardizem SR, Dilacor XL, others): 60, 90, 
120, 180, 240, 300, 360, 420 mg capsules, tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Felodipine (generic, Plendil)
Oral extended-release: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Isradipine (DynaCirc)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg capsules
Oral controlled-release: 5, 10 mg tablets
Nicardipine (Cardene, others)
Oral: 20, 30 mg capsules
Oral sustained-release (Cardene SR): 30, 45, 60 mg capsules
Parenteral (Cardene I.V.): 2.5 mg/mL
Nifedipine (Adalat, Procardia, others)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules
Oral extended-release (Procardia XL, Adalat CC): 30, 60, 90 mg 
tablets
Nisoldipine (Sular)
Oral extended-release: 8.5, 17, 25.5, 34 mg tablets
Verapamil (generic, Calan, Isoptin)
Oral: 40, 80, 120 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release: 100, 120, 180, 240 mg tablets or capsules
Parenteral: 2.5 mg/mL for injection
BETA BLOCKERS
See Chapter 10.
SODIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Ranolazine (Ranexa)
Oral: 500, 1000 mg extended-release tablets
DRUGS FOR ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Sildenafil (Viagra, Revatio)
Oral: 20 (approved for use in pulmonary arterial hypertension), 25, 
50, 100 mg tablets
Tadalafil (Cialis, Adcirca)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets (20 mg approved for use in pulmonary 
hypertension)
Vardenafil (Levitra)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
DRUGS FOR PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE
Cilostazol (generic, Pletal)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets
Pentoxifylline (generic, Trental)
Oral: 400 mg controlled-release, extended-release tablets
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
NITRATES & NITRITES
Amyl nitrite (generic)
Inhalant: 0.3 mL capsules
Isosorbide dinitrate (generic, Isordil)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 mg tablets; 5, 10 mg chewable tablets
Oral sustained-release (Isochron, Dilatrate SR): 40 mg tablets and
capsules
Sublingual: 2.5, 5 mg sublingual tablets
Isosorbide mononitrate (Ismo, others)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets; extended-release: 30, 60, 120 mg tablets
Nitroglycerin
Sublingual or buccal: 0.3, 0.4, 0.6 mg tablets; 0.4 mg/metered dose
aerosol spray
Oral sustained-release (generic, Nitro-Time): 2.5, 6.5, 9 mg capsules
Parenteral (generic): 5 mg/mL for IV administration; 100, 200, 
400 mcg/mL in dextrose for IV infusion
Transdermal patches (generic, Nitrek, Nitro-Dur, Transderm-Nitro):
to release at rates of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6, or 0.8 mg/h
Topical ointment (generic, Nitro-Bid): 20 mg/mL ointment (1 inch, 
or 25 mm, of ointment contains about 15 mg nitroglycerin)
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Amlodipine (generic, Norvasc, AmVaz)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Clevidipine (Cleviprex) (approved only for use in
 hypertensive emergencies)
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for IV infusion
Diltiazem (Cardizem, generic)
Oral: 30, 60, 90, 120 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release (Cardizem SR, Dilacor XL, others): 60, 90, 
120, 180, 240, 300, 360, 420 mg capsules, tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Felodipine (generic, Plendil)
Oral extended-release: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Isradipine (DynaCirc)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg capsules
Oral controlled-release: 5, 10 mg tablets
Nicardipine (Cardene, others)
Oral: 20, 30 mg capsules
Oral sustained-release (Cardene SR): 30, 45, 60 mg capsules
Parenteral (Cardene I.V.): 2.5 mg/mL
Nifedipine (Adalat, Procardia, others)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules
Oral extended-release (Procardia XL, Adalat CC): 30, 60, 90 mg 
tablets
Nisoldipine (Sular)
Oral extended-release: 8.5, 17, 25.5, 34 mg tablets
Verapamil (generic, Calan, Isoptin)
Oral: 40, 80, 120 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release: 100, 120, 180, 240 mg tablets or capsules
Parenteral: 2.5 mg/mL for injection
BETA BLOCKERS
See Chapter 10.
SODIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Ranolazine (Ranexa)
Oral: 500, 1000 mg extended-release tablets
DRUGS FOR ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION
Sildenafil (Viagra, Revatio)
Oral: 20 (approved for use in pulmonary arterial hypertension), 25,
50, 100 mg tablets
Tadalafil (Cialis, Adcirca)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets (20 mg approved for use in pulmonary 
hypertension)
Vardenafil (Levitra)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
DRUGS FOR PERIPHERAL ARTERY DISEASE
Cilostazol (generic, Pletal)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets
Pentoxifylline (generic, Trental)
Oral: 400 mg controlled-release, extended-release tablets
 REFERENCES 
 Borer JS: Clinical effect of ‘pure’ heart rate slowing with a prototype If inhibitor: 
placebo-controlled experience with ivabradine. Adv Cardiol 2006;43:54. 
 Carmichael P, Lieben J: Sudden death in explosives workers. Arch Environ Health 
1963;7:50. 
 Chaitman BR: Efficacy and safety of a metabolic modulator drug in chronic stable 
angina: Review of evidence from clinical trials. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther 
2004;9(Suppl 1):S47. 
 Chaitman BR et al: Effects of ranolazine, with atenolol, amlodipine, or diltiazem 
on exercise tolerance and angina frequency in patients with severe chronic 
angina. A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004;291:309. 
Chen Z, Zhang J, Stamler JS: Identification of the enzymatic mechanism of 
nitroglycerin bioactivation. Proc Nat Acad Sci 2002;99:8306.
 DeWitt CR, Waksman JC: Pharmacology, pathophysiology and management of 
calcium channel blocker and beta-blocker toxicity. Toxicol Rev 
2004;23:223. 
 Fraker TD Jr, Fihn SD: 2007 Chronic angina focused update of the ACC/AHA 
2002 guidelines for the management of patients with chronic stable angina. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;50:2264. 
 Ignarro LJ et al: Mechanism of vascular smooth muscle relaxation by organic 
nitrates, nitrites, nitroprusside, and nitric oxide: Evidence for the involve-
ment of S-nitrosothiols as active intermediates. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 
1981;218:739. 
 Kannam JP, Aroesty JM, Gersh BJ: Overview of the management of stable angina 
pectoris. UpToDate, 2010. http://www.uptodate.com. 
 Kast R et al: Cardiovascular effects of a novel potent and highly selective asaindole-
based inhibitor of Rho-kinase. Br J Pharmacol 2007;152:1070. 
210    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 Lacinova L: Voltage-dependent calcium channels. Gen Physiol Biophys 
2005;24(Suppl 1):1. 
 Mayer B, Beretta M: The enigma of nitroglycerin bioactivation and nitrate toler-
ance: News, views and troubles. Br J Pharmacol 2008;155:170. 
 McLaughlin VV et al: Expert consensus document on pulmonary hypertension. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:1573. 
 Peng J, Li Y-J: New insights into nitroglycerin effects and tolerance: Role of calci-
tonin gene-related peptide. Eur J Pharmacol 2008; 586:9. 
 Pollack CV, Braunwald E: 2007 Update to the ACC/AHA guidelines for the man-
agement of patients with unstable angina and non-ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction: Implications for emergency department practice. Ann 
Emerg Med 2008;51:591. 
 Saint DA: The cardiac persistent sodium current: An appealing therapeutic target? 
Br J Pharmacol 2008;153:1133. 
 Simmons M, Laham RJ: New therapies for angina pectoris. UpToDate, 2010. 
http://www.uptodate.com 
 Stone GW et al: A prospective natural-history study of coronary atherosclerosis. 
N Eng J Med 2011;364:226. 
 Triggle DJ: Calcium channel antagonists: clinical uses—past, present and future. 
Biochem Pharmacol 2007;74:1. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The case described is typical of stable atherosclerotic angina. 
Treatment of acute episodes should include sublingual tab-
lets or sprayed nitroglycerin, 0.4–0.6 mg. Relief of discom-
fort within 2–4 minutes can be expected. If anginal episodes 
are frequent, or to prevent episodes of angina, a β blocker 
such as metoprolol should be tried first. If contraindications 
to the use of a β blocker are present, a medium- to long-
acting calcium channel blocker such as verapamil, diltiazem, 
or amlodipine is likely to be effective.
211
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Heart failure occurs when cardiac output is inadequate to provide 
the oxygen needed by the body. It is a highly lethal condition, with 
a 5-year mortality rate conventionally said to be about 50%. The 
most common cause of heart failure in the USA is coronary artery 
disease, with hypertension also an important factor. Two major 
types of failure may be distinguished. Approximately 50% of 
younger patients have  systolic failure, with reduced mechanical 
pumping action (contractility) and reduced ejection fraction. The 
remaining group has  diastolic failure, with stiffening and loss of 
adequate relaxation playing a major role in reducing filling and 
cardiac output; ejection fraction may be normal even though 
stroke volume is significantly reduced. The proportion of patients 
with diastolic failure increases with age. Because other cardiovas-
cular conditions (especially myocardial infarction) are now being 
treated more effectively, more patients are surviving long enough 
for heart failure to develop, making heart failure one of the cardio-
vascular conditions that is actually increasing in prevalence. 
 Heart failure is a progressive disease that is characterized by a 
gradual reduction in cardiac performance, punctuated in many cases 
by episodes of acute decompensation, often requiring hospitalization. 
Treatment is therefore directed at two somewhat different goals: (1) 
reducing symptoms and slowing progression as much as possible 
during relatively stable periods and (2) managing acute episodes of 
decompensated failure. These factors are discussed in Clinical 
Pharmacology of Drugs Used in Heart Failure. 
 Although it is believed that the primary defect in early systolic 
heart failure resides in the excitation-contraction coupling machin-
ery of the heart, the clinical condition also involves many other 
processes and organs, including the baroreceptor reflex, the sym-
pathetic nervous system, the kidneys, angiotensin II and other 
peptides, aldosterone, and apoptosis of cardiac cells. Recognition 
of these factors has resulted in evolution of a variety of drug treat-
ment strategies ( Table 13–1 ). 
 Large clinical trials have shown that therapy directed at non-
cardiac targets is more valuable in the long-term treatment of 
heart failure than traditional positive inotropic agents (cardiac 
glycosides [digitalis]). Extensive trials have shown that ACE 
inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, certain β blockers, 
aldosterone receptor antagonists, and combined hydralazine-
nitrate therapy are the only agents in current use that actually 
prolong life in patients with chronic heart failure. These strategies 
are useful in both systolic and diastolic failure. Positive inotropic 
drugs, on the other hand, are helpful mainly in acute systolic fail-
ure. Cardiac glycosides also reduce symptoms in chronic systolic 
C A S E  S T U D Y
13
Drugs Used in 
Heart Failure
 Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD∗ 
 ∗ The author thanks Dr. William W. Parmley, MD, who was coauthor of 
this chapter in prior editions.
 A 65-year-old man has developed shortness of breath with 
exertion several weeks after experiencing a viral illness. This 
is accompanied by swelling of the feet and ankles and 
increasing fatigue. On physical examination he is found to 
be mildly short of breath lying down, but feels better sitting 
upright. Pulse is 105 and regular, and blood pressure is 
90/60 mm Hg. His lungs show crackles at both bases, and his 
jugular venous pressure is elevated. The liver is enlarged, and 
there is 3+ edema of the ankles and feet. An echocardiogram 
shows a dilated, poorly contracting heart with a left ventricu-
lar ejection fraction of about 20% (normal: 60%). The pre-
sumptive diagnosis is dilated cardiomyopathy secondary to a 
viral infection with stage C, class III heart failure. What treat-
ment is indicated? 
212    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
heart failure. Other positive inotropic drugs have consistently 
 reduced survival in chronic failure, and their use is discouraged. 
 Control of Normal Cardiac Contractility 
 The vigor of contraction of heart muscle is determined by several 
processes that lead to the movement of actin and myosin filaments 
in the cardiac sarcomere ( Figure 13–1 ). Ultimately, contraction 
results from the interaction of  activator calcium (during systole) 
with the actin-troponin-tropomyosin system, thereby releasing the 
actin-myosin interaction. This activator calcium is released from 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). The amount released depends on 
the amount stored in the SR and on the amount of  trigger calcium 
that enters the cell during the plateau of the action potential. 
 A. Sensitivity of the Contractile Proteins to Calcium and 
Other Contractile Protein Modifications 
 
The determinants of calcium sensitivity, ie, the curve relating the 
shortening of cardiac myofibrils to the cytoplasmic calcium con-
centration, are incompletely understood, but several types of drugs 
can be shown to affect calcium sensitivity in vitro.  Levosimendan 
is the most recent example of a drug that increases calcium sensi-
tivity (it may also inhibit phosphodiesterase) and reduces symp-
toms in models of heart failure. 
 A recent report suggests that an experimental drug,  omecantiv 
mecarbil ( CK-1827452), alters the rate of transition of myosin 
from a low-actin-binding state to a strongly actin-bound force-
generating state. Preliminary studies in experimental animal mod-
els of heart failure indicate that this agent may provide a new 
approach to the treatment of heart failure in humans. Clinical tri-
als are underway. 
 B. Amount of Calcium Released from the Sarcoplasmic 
Reticulum 
 
A small rise in free cytoplasmic calcium, brought about by calcium 
influx during the action potential, triggers the opening of calcium-
gated, ryanodine-sensitive calcium channels (RyR2) in the mem-
brane of the cardiac SR and the rapid release of a large amount of 
the ion into the cytoplasm in the vicinity of the actin-troponin-
tropomyosin complex. The amount released is proportional to the 
amount stored in the SR and the amount of trigger calcium that 
enters the cell through the cell membrane. (Ryanodine is a potent 
negative inotropic plant alkaloid that interferes with the release of 
calcium through cardiac SR channels.) 
 C. Amount of Calcium Stored in the Sarcoplasmic 
Reticulum 
 The SR membrane contains a very efficient calcium uptake trans-
porter known as the sarcoplasmic endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ -
ATPase (SERCA). This pump maintains free cytoplasmic calcium 
at very low levels during diastole by pumping calcium into the SR. 
SERCA is normally inhibited by phospholamban; phosphoryla-
tion of phospholamban by protein kinase A (eg, by β agonists) 
removes this inhibition. The amount of calcium sequestered in the 
SR is thus determined, in part, by the amount accessible to this 
transporter and the activity of the sympathetic nervous system. 
This in turn is dependent on the balance of calcium influx (pri-
marily through the voltage-gated membrane L-type calcium chan-
nels) and calcium efflux, the amount removed from the cell 
(primarily via the sodium-calcium exchanger, a transporter in the 
cell membrane). The amount of Ca 2+ released from the SR 
depends on the response of the RyR channels to trigger Ca 2+ . 
 D. Amount of Trigger Calcium 
 The amount of trigger calcium that enters the cell depends on the 
availability of membrane calcium channels and the duration of 
their opening. As described in Chapters 6 and 9, sympathomimet-
ics cause an increase in calcium influx through an action on these 
channels. Conversely, the calcium channel blockers (see  Chapter 
12 ) reduce this influx and depress contractility. 
 E. Activity of the Sodium-Calcium Exchanger 
 This antiporter (NCX) uses the sodium gradient to move calcium 
against its concentration gradient from the cytoplasm to the extra-
cellular space. Extracellular concentrations of these ions are much 
less labile than intracellular concentrations under physiologic con-
ditions. The sodium-calcium exchanger’s ability to carry out this 
transport is thus strongly dependent on the intracellular concen-
trations of both ions, especially sodium. 
 F. Intracellular Sodium Concentration and Activity of 
Na + /K+ -ATPase 
 
Na + /K + -ATPase, by removing intracellular sodium, is the major 
determinant of sodium concentration in the cell. The sodium 
influx through voltage-gated channels, which occurs as a normal 
part of almost all cardiac action potentials, is another determinant, 
although the amount of sodium that enters with each action 
potential is much less than 1% of the total intracellular sodium. 
Na + /K + -ATPase appears to be the primary target of  digoxin and 
other cardiac glycosides. 
 Pathophysiology of Heart Failure 
 Heart failure is a syndrome with many causes that may involve one 
or both ventricles. Cardiac output is usually below the normal 
range (“low-output” failure). Systolic dysfunction, with reduced 
TABLE 13–1 Drug groups used in heart failure.
Chronic heart failure
Acute heart failure
Diuretics
Diuretics
Aldosterone receptor antagonists
Vasodilators
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors
Beta agonists
Angiotensin receptor blockers
Bipyridines
Beta blockers
Natriuretic peptide
Cardiac glycosides
Vasodilators
CHAPTER 13 Drugs Used in Heart Failure    213
Na+
K+
Ca2+
NCX
Cav–L
Interstitium
Cell membrane
Cytoplasm
Z
Actin-tropomyosin-
troponin
Myosin
ATP
ATP
Ca2+
CalS
CalS
CalS
CalS
Ca2+
Ca2+
SERCA
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Ca2+
Ca2+ sensitizers
Ca2+ channel blockers
+
Digoxin
ATP
RyR
Ca2+
Myofibril syncytium
Sarcomere
CalS
Trigger Ca2+
β agonists
–
–
+
Na+/K+-ATPase
 FIGURE 13–1  Schematic diagram of a cardiac muscle sarcomere, with sites of action of several drugs that alter contractility. Na + /K + -ATPase, 
the sodium pump, is the site of action of cardiac glycosides. NCX is the sodium-calcium exchanger. Ca v -L is the voltage-gated, L-type calcium 
channel. SERCA (sarcoplasmic endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ -ATPase) is a calcium transporter ATPase that pumps calcium into the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum (SR). CalS is calcium bound to calsequestrin, a high-capacity Ca 2+ -binding protein. RyR (ryanodine RyR2 receptor) is a calcium-activated 
calcium channel in the membrane of the SR that is triggered to release stored calcium. Calcium sensitizers act at the actin-troponin-tropomyosin 
complex where activator calcium brings about the contractile interaction of actin and myosin. Black arrows represent processes that initiate 
contraction or support basal tone. Green arrows represent processes that promote relaxation. 
214    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
cardiac output and significantly reduced ejection fraction (< 45%; 
normal > 60%), is typical of acute failure, especially that resulting 
from myocardial infarction. Diastolic dysfunction often occurs as 
a result of hypertrophy and stiffening of the myocardium, and 
although cardiac output is reduced, ejection fraction may be nor-
mal. Heart failure due to diastolic dysfunction does not usually 
respond optimally to positive inotropic drugs. 
 “High-output” failure is a rare form of heart failure. In this 
condition, the demands of the body are so great that even increased 
cardiac output is insufficient. High-output failure can result from 
hyperthyroidism, beriberi, anemia, and arteriovenous shunts. This 
form of failure responds poorly to the drugs discussed in this chap-
ter and should be treated by correcting the underlying cause. 
 The primary signs and symptoms of all types of heart failure 
include tachycardia, decreased exercise tolerance, shortness of 
breath, and cardiomegaly. Peripheral and pulmonary edema (the 
congestion of congestive heart failure) are often but not always 
present. Decreased exercise tolerance with rapid muscular fatigue 
is the major direct consequence of diminished cardiac output. The 
other manifestations result from the attempts by the body to com-
pensate for the intrinsic cardiac defect. 
 Neurohumoral (extrinsic) compensation involves two major 
mechanisms (previously presented in  Figure 6–7 )—the sympa-
thetic nervous system and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone hor-
monal response—plus several others. Some of the detrimental as 
well as beneficial features of these compensatory responses are 
illustrated in  Figure 13–2 . The baroreceptor reflex appears to be 
reset, with a lower sensitivity to arterial pressure, in patients with 
heart failure. As a result, baroreceptor sensory input to the vaso-
motor center is reduced even at normal pressures; sympathetic 
outflow is increased, and parasympathetic outflow is decreased. 
Increased sympathetic outflow causes tachycardia, increased car-
diac contractility, and increased vascular tone. Vascular tone is 
further increased by angiotensin II and endothelin, a potent vaso-
constrictor released by vascular endothelial cells. Vasoconstriction 
increases afterload, which further reduces ejection fraction and 
cardiac output. The result is a vicious cycle that is characteristic of 
heart failure ( Figure 13–3 ). Neurohumoral antagonists and vaso-
dilators reduce heart failure mortality by interrupting the cycle 
and slowing the downward spiral. 
 After a relatively short exposure to increased sympathetic drive, 
complex down-regulatory changes in the cardiac β 1 -adrenoceptor–
G protein-effector system take place that result in diminished 
stimulatory effects. Beta 2 receptors are  not down-regulated and 
may develop increased coupling to the IP 3 -DAG cascade. It has 
also been suggested that cardiac β 3 receptors (which do not appear 
to be down-regulated in failure) may mediate  negative inotropic 
effects. Excessive β activation can lead to leakage of calcium from 
the SR via RyR channels and contributes to stiffening of the ven-
tricles and arrhythmias. Prolonged β activation also increases cas-
pases, the enzymes responsible for apoptosis. Increased angiotensin 
II production leads to increased aldosterone secretion (with 
sodium and water retention), to increased afterload, and to 
remodeling of both heart and vessels (discussed below). Other 
hormones are released, including natriuretic peptide, endothelin, 
and vasopressin (see  Chapter 17 ). Within the heart, failure-
induced changes have been documented in calcium handling in 
the SR by SERCA and phospholamban; in transcription factors 
that lead to hypertrophy and fibrosis; in mitochondrial function, 
which is critical for energy production in the overworked heart; 
Cardiac output
Force
Preload
Angiotensin II
Rate
Afterload
Remodeling
Carotid sinus firing
Sympathetic
discharge
Cardiac output
(via compensation)
Renin
release
Renal blood flow
 FIGURE 13–2  Some compensatory responses that occur during 
congestive heart failure. In addition to the effects shown, sympathetic 
discharge facilitates renin release, and angiotensin II increases 
norepinephrine release by sympathetic nerve endings ( dashed 
arrows ). 
Cardiac performance
1
CO
NE, A  
ET
NE, A  
ET
Afterload
Afterload
Time
EF
2
B
NE, A  
ET
Afterload
EF
EF
CO
CO
 FIGURE 13–3  Vicious spiral of progression of heart failure. 
Decreased cardiac output (CO) activates production of neurohor-
mones (NE, norepinephrine; AII, angiotensin II; ET, endothelin), which 
cause vasoconstriction and increased afterload. This further reduces 
ejection fraction (EF) and CO, and the cycle repeats. The downward 
spiral is continued until a new steady state is reached in which CO is 
lower and afterload is higher than is optimal for normal activity. 
Circled points 1, 2, and B represent points on the ventricular function 
curves depicted in  Figure 13–4 . 
CHAPTER 13 Drugs Used in Heart Failure    215
and in ion channels, especially potassium channels, which facili-
tate arrhythmogenesis, a primary cause of death in heart failure. 
Phosphorylation of RyR channels in the sarcoplasmic reticulum 
enhances and dephosphorylation reduces Ca 2+ release; studies in 
animal models indicate that the enzyme primarily responsible 
for RyR dephosphorylation, protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), is up-
regulated in heart failure. These cellular changes provide many 
potential targets for future drugs. 
 The most important intrinsic compensatory mechanism is 
 myocardial hypertrophy. This increase in muscle mass helps 
maintain cardiac performance. However, after an initial beneficial 
effect, hypertrophy can lead to ischemic changes, impairment 
of diastolic filling, and alterations in ventricular geometry. 
 Remodeling is the term applied to dilation (other than that due to 
passive stretch) and other slow structural changes that occur in the 
stressed myocardium. It may include proliferation of connective 
tissue cells as well as abnormal myocardial cells with some bio-
chemical characteristics of fetal myocytes. Ultimately, myocytes in 
the failing heart die at an accelerated rate through apoptosis, leav-
ing the remaining myocytes subject to even greater stress. 
 Pathophysiology of Cardiac Performance 
 Cardiac performance is a function of four primary factors: 
 1. Preload: When some measure of left ventricular performance 
such as stroke volume or stroke work is plotted as a function of 
left ventricular filling pressure or end-diastolic fiber length, the 
resulting curve is termed the left ventricular function curve 
( Figure 13–4 ). The ascending limb (< 15 mm Hg filling pres-
sure) represents the classic Frank-Starling relation described in 
physiology texts. Beyond approximately 15 mm Hg, there is a 
plateau of performance. Preloads greater than 20–25 mm Hg 
result in pulmonary congestion. As noted above, preload is usu-
ally increased in heart failure because of increased blood volume 
and venous tone. Because the function curve of the failing heart 
is lower, the plateau is reached at much lower values of stroke 
work or output. Increased fiber length or filling pressure 
increases oxygen demand in the myocardium, as described in 
 Chapter 12 . Reduction of high filling pressure is the goal of salt 
restriction and diuretic therapy in heart failure. Venodilator 
drugs (eg, nitroglycerin) also reduce preload by redistributing 
blood away from the chest into peripheral veins. 
 2. Afterload: Afterload is the resistance against which the heart 
must pump blood and is represented by aortic impedance and 
systemic vascular resistance. As noted in  Figure 13–2 , as cardiac 
output falls in chronic failure, a reflex increase in systemic vas-
cular resistance occurs, mediated in part by increased sympa-
thetic outflow and circulating catecholamines and in part by 
activation of the renin-angiotensin system. Endothelin, a potent 
vasoconstrictor peptide, is also involved. This sets the stage for 
the use of drugs that reduce arteriolar tone in heart failure. 
 3. Contractility: Heart muscle obtained by biopsy from patients 
with chronic low-output failure demonstrates a reduction in 
intrinsic contractility. As contractility decreases in the patient, 
there is a reduction in the velocity of muscle shortening, the 
rate of intraventricular pressure development (dP/dt), and the 
stroke output achieved ( Figure 13–4 ). However, the heart is 
usually still capable of some increase in all of these measures of 
contractility in response to inotropic drugs. 
 4. Heart rate: The heart rate is a major determinant of cardiac 
output. As the intrinsic function of the heart decreases in fail-
ure and stroke volume diminishes, an increase in heart rate—
through sympathetic activation of β adrenoceptors—is the first 
compensatory mechanism that comes into play to maintain 
cardiac output. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DRUGS USED IN HEART FAILURE 
 Although digitalis is not the first drug and never the only drug 
used in heart failure, we begin our discussion with this group 
because other drugs are discussed in more detail in other 
chapters.  
 DIGITALIS 
 Digitalis is the genus name for the family of plants that provide 
most of the medically useful  cardiac glycosides , eg, digoxin. Such 
plants have been known for thousands of years but were used 
erratically and with variable success until 1785, when William 
100
80
60
40
20
0
LV stroke work (g-m/m2)
10
40
0
20
LV filling pressure (mm Hg)
30
Depressed
Shock
Normal range
+ Ino
A
1
Vaso
2
B
 FIGURE 13–4  Relation of left ventricular (LV) performance to 
filling pressure in patients with acute myocardial infarction, an 
important cause of heart failure. The upper line indicates the range 
for normal, healthy individuals. At a given level of exercise, the heart 
operates at a stable point, eg, point A. In heart failure, function is 
shifted down and to the right, through points 1 and 2, finally 
reaching point B. A “pure” positive inotropic drug (+ Ino) would move 
the operating point upward by increasing cardiac stroke work. 
A vasodilator (Vaso) would move the point leftward by reducing 
filling pressure. Successful therapy usually results in both effects. 
(Modified and reproduced with permission, from Swan HJC, Parmley WW: 
Congestive heart failure. In: Sodeman WA Jr, Sodeman TM [editors]:  Pathologic 
Physiology. Saunders, 1979.) 
216    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
Withering, an English physician and botanist, published a mono-
graph describing the clinical effects of an extract of the purple 
foxglove plant ( Digitalis  purpurea , a major source of these agents). 
 Chemistry 
 All of the cardiac glycosides, or cardenolides—of which  digoxin is 
the prototype—combine a steroid nucleus linked to a lactone ring 
at the 17 position and a series of sugars at carbon 3 of the nucleus. 
Because they lack an easily ionizable group, their solubility is not 
pH-dependent. Digoxin is obtained from  Digitalis lanata , the white 
foxglove, but many common plants (eg, oleander, lily of the valley, 
and milkweed) contain cardiac glycosides with similar properties. 
 
1
4
3
2
6
5
10
B
12
11
H
14
13
7
8
15
19
18
17
O
H3C
CH3
9
16
H
HO
20
21
C      O
22
23
O
H
Sugar
Aglycone
(genin)
Steroid
Lactone
H
OH
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Digoxin, the only cardiac glycoside used in the USA, is 65–80% 
absorbed after oral administration. Absorption of other glycosides 
varies from zero to nearly 100%. Once present in the blood, all 
cardiac glycosides are widely distributed to tissues, including the 
central nervous system. 
 Digoxin is not extensively metabolized in humans; almost two 
thirds is excreted unchanged by the kidneys. Its renal clearance is 
proportional to creatinine clearance, and the half-life is 36–40 
hours in patients with normal renal function. Equations and 
nomograms are available for adjusting digoxin dosage in patients 
with renal impairment. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Digoxin has multiple direct and indirect cardiovascular effects, 
with both therapeutic and toxic consequences. In addition, it has 
undesirable effects on the central nervous system and gut. 
 At the molecular level, all therapeutically useful cardiac glyco-
sides  inhibit Na +/K + -ATPase, the membrane-bound transporter 
often called the  sodium pump ( Figure 13–1 ). Although several 
isoforms of this ATPase occur and have varying sensitivity to car-
diac glycosides, they are highly conserved in evolution. Inhibition 
of this transporter over most of the dose range has been extensively 
documented in all tissues studied. It is probable that this inhibi-
tory action is largely responsible for the therapeutic effect (positive 
inotropy) as well as a major portion of the toxicity of digitalis. 
Other molecular-level effects of digitalis have been studied in the 
heart and are discussed below. The fact that a receptor for cardiac 
glycosides exists on the sodium pump has prompted some investi-
gators to propose that an endogenous digitalis-like steroid, possi-
bly  ouabain or  marinobufagenin , must exist. Furthermore, 
additional functions of Na + /K + -ATPase have been postulated, 
involving apoptosis, cell growth and differentiation, immunity, 
and carbohydrate metabolism. 
 A. Cardiac Effects 
 1. Mechanical effects— Cardiac glycosides increase contrac-
tion of the cardiac sarcomere by increasing the free calcium con-
centration in the vicinity of the contractile proteins during systole. 
The increase in calcium concentration is the result of a two-step 
process: first, an  increase of intracellular sodium concentration 
because of Na + /K + -ATPase inhibition; and second, a relative 
 reduction of calcium expulsion from the cell by the sodium-
calcium exchanger (NCX in  Figure 13–1 ) caused by the increase 
in intracellular sodium. The increased cytoplasmic calcium is 
sequestered by SERCA in the SR for later release. Other mecha-
nisms have been proposed but are not well supported. 
 The net result of the action of therapeutic concentrations of a 
cardiac glycoside is a distinctive increase in cardiac contractility 
( Figure 13–5 , bottom trace, panels A and B). In isolated myocar-
dial preparations, the rate of development of tension and of relax-
ation are both increased, with little or no change in time to peak 
tension. This effect occurs in both normal and failing myocar-
dium, but in the intact patient the responses are modified by 
cardiovascular reflexes and the pathophysiology of heart failure. 
 2. Electrical effects— The effects of digitalis on the electrical 
properties of the heart are a mixture of direct and autonomic 
actions. Direct actions on the membranes of cardiac cells follow a 
well-defined progression: an early, brief prolongation of the action 
potential, followed by shortening (especially the plateau phase). 
The decrease in action potential duration is probably the result of 
increased potassium conductance that is caused by increased intra-
cellular calcium (see  Chapter 14 ). All these effects can be observed 
at therapeutic concentrations in the absence of overt toxicity 
( Table 13–2 ). 
 At higher concentrations, resting membrane potential is 
reduced (made less negative) as a result of inhibition of the 
sodium pump and reduced intracellular potassium. As toxicity 
progresses, oscillatory depolarizing afterpotentials appear follow-
ing normally evoked action potentials ( Figure 13–5 , panel C). 
The afterpotentials (also known as  delayed after-depolariza-
tions, DADs) are associated with overloading of the intracellular 
calcium stores and oscillations in the free intracellular calcium 
ion concentration. When afterpotentials reach threshold, they 
elicit action potentials ( premature depolarizations, ectopic 
“beats”) that are coupled to the preceding normal action poten-
tials. If afterpotentials in the Purkinje conducting system regu-
larly reach threshold in this way, bigeminy will be recorded on 
the electrocardiogram ( Figure 13–6 ). With further intoxication, 
each afterpotential-evoked action potential will itself elicit a 
suprathreshold after-potential, and a self-sustaining tachycardia will 
CHAPTER 13 Drugs Used in Heart Failure    217
be established. If allowed to progress, such a tachycardia may 
deteriorate into fibrillation; in the case of ventricular fibrillation, 
the arrhythmia will be rapidly fatal unless corrected. 
 Autonomic actions of cardiac glycosides on the heart involve 
both the parasympathetic and the sympathetic systems. In the 
lower portion of the dose range, cardioselective parasympathomi-
metic effects predominate. In fact, these atropine-blockable effects 
account for a significant portion of the early electrical effects of 
digitalis ( Table 13–2 ). This action involves sensitization of the 
baroreceptors, central vagal stimulation, and facilitation of musca-
rinic transmission at the cardiac muscle cell. Because cholinergic 
innervation is much richer in the atria, these actions affect atrial 
and atrioventricular nodal function more than Purkinje or ven-
tricular function. Some of the cholinomimetic effects are useful in 
the treatment of certain arrhythmias. At toxic levels, sympathetic 
outflow is increased by digitalis. This effect is not essential for 
typical digitalis toxicity but sensitizes the myocardium and exag-
gerates all the toxic effects of the drug. 
 The most common cardiac manifestations of digitalis toxicity 
include atrioventricular junctional rhythm, premature ventricular 
depolarizations, bigeminal rhythm, and second-degree atrioven-
tricular blockade. However, it is claimed that digitalis can cause 
virtually any arrhythmia. 
 B. Effects on Other Organs 
 
Cardiac glycosides affect all excitable tissues, including smooth 
muscle and the central nervous system. The gastrointestinal tract 
is the most common site of digitalis toxicity outside the heart. The 
effects include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. This 
toxicity is caused in part by direct effects on the gastrointestinal 
tract and in part by central nervous system actions. 
 Central nervous system effects include vagal and chemoreceptor 
trigger zone stimulation. Less often, disorientation and hallucinations—
especially in the elderly—and visual disturbances are noted. The 
latter effect may include aberrations of color perception. 
Gynecomastia is a rare effect reported in men taking digitalis. 
TABLE 13–2 Effects of digoxin on electrical properties of cardiac tissues.
Tissue or Variable
Effects at Therapeutic Dosage
Effects at Toxic Dosage
Sinus node
↓ Rate
↓ Rate
Atrial muscle
↓ Refractory period
↓ Refractory period, arrhythmias
Atrioventricular node
↓ Conduction velocity, ↑ refractory period
↓ Refractory period, arrhythmias
Purkinje system, ventricular muscle
Slight ↓ refractory period
Extrasystoles, tachycardia, fibrillation
Electrocardiogram
↑ PR interval, ↓ QT interval
Tachycardia, fibrillation, arrest at extremely high dosage
0
10–4
L/Lmax
0
3 mg
100 ms
mV
–50
Membrane 
potential
Contraction
Calcium 
detector
light
Control
Ouabain 10–7 mol/L
25 min
A
B
C
Ouabain 47 minutes
 FIGURE 13–5  Effects of a cardiac glycoside, ouabain, on isolated cardiac tissue. The top tracing shows action potentials evoked during the 
control period (panel  A ), early in the “therapeutic” phase ( B ), and later, when toxicity is present ( C ). The middle tracing shows the light (L) 
emitted by the calcium-detecting protein aequorin (relative to the maximum possible, L max ) and is roughly proportional to the free intracellular 
calcium concentration. The bottom tracing records the tension elicited by the action potentials. The early phase of ouabain action (panel  B ) 
shows a slight shortening of action potential and a marked increase in free intracellular calcium concentration and contractile tension. The toxic 
phase (panel  C ) is associated with depolarization of the resting potential, a marked shortening of the action potential, and the appearance of an 
oscillatory depolarization, calcium increment, and contraction ( arrows ). (Unpublished data kindly provided by P Hess and H Gil Wier.) 
218    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 C. Interactions with Potassium, Calcium, and Magnesium 
Potassium and digitalis interact in two ways. First, they inhibit 
each other’s binding to Na + /K + -ATPase; therefore, hyperkalemia 
reduces the enzyme-inhibiting actions of cardiac glycosides, 
whereas hypokalemia facilitates these actions. Second, abnormal 
cardiac automaticity is inhibited by hyperkalemia (see  Chapter 14 ). 
Moderately increased extracellular K + therefore reduces the effects 
of digitalis, especially the toxic effects. 
 Calcium ion facilitates the toxic actions of cardiac glycosides by 
accelerating the overloading of intracellular calcium stores that 
appears to be responsible for digitalis-induced abnormal automa-
ticity. Hypercalcemia therefore increases the risk of a digitalis-in-
duced arrhythmia. The effects of magnesium ion are opposite to 
those of calcium. These interactions mandate careful evaluation of 
serum electrolytes in patients with digitalis-induced arrhythmias. 
 OTHER POSITIVE INOTROPIC 
DRUGS USED IN HEART FAILURE 
 Istaroxime is an investigational steroid derivative that increases 
contractility by inhibiting Na + /K + -ATPase (like cardiac glycosides) 
but in addition facilitates sequestration of Ca 2+ by the SR. The 
latter action may render the drug less arrhythmogenic than 
digoxin. Istaroxime is in phase 2 clinical trials. 
 Drugs that inhibit  phosphodiesterases, the family of enzymes 
that inactivate cAMP and cGMP, have long been used in therapy 
of heart failure. Although they have positive inotropic effects, 
most of their benefits appear to derive from vasodilation, as dis-
cussed below. The bipyridines  inamrinone and  milrinone are the 
most successful of these agents found to date, but their usefulness 
is limited.  Levosimendan, a drug that sensitizes the troponin 
system to calcium, also appears to inhibit phosphodiesterase and 
to cause some vasodilation in addition to its inotropic effects. 
Some clinical trials suggest that this drug may be useful in patients 
with heart failure, and the drug has been approved in some countries 
(not the USA). A group of β-adrenoceptor stimulants has also 
been used as digitalis substitutes, but they may increase mortality 
(see below). 
 BIPYRIDINES 
 Inamrinone (previously called amrinone) and milrinone are 
bipyridine compounds that inhibit phosphodiesterase isozyme 3 
(PDE-3). They are active orally as well as parenterally but are 
available only in parenteral forms. They have elimination half-lives 
of 3–6 hours, with 10–40% being excreted in the urine. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The bipyridines increase myocardial contractility by increasing 
inward calcium flux in the heart during the action potential; they 
may also alter the intracellular movements of calcium by influencing 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum. They also have an important vasodilat-
ing effect. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase results in an increase in 
cAMP and the increase in contractility and vasodilation. 
 The toxicity of inamrinone includes nausea and vomiting; 
arrhythmias, thrombocytopenia, and liver enzyme changes have 
also been reported in a significant number of patients. This drug 
has been withdrawn in some countries. Milrinone appears less 
likely to cause bone marrow and liver toxicity than inamrinone, 
but it does cause arrhythmias. Inamrinone and milrinone are now 
used only intravenously and only for acute heart failure or severe 
exacerbation of chronic heart failure. 
 BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR AGONISTS 
 The general pharmacology of these agents is discussed in  Chapter 9 . 
The selective β 1 agonist that has been most widely used in patients 
with heart failure is  dobutamine. This parenteral drug produces 
an increase in cardiac output together with a decrease in ventricu-
lar filling pressure. Some tachycardia and an increase in myocar-
dial oxygen consumption have been reported. Therefore, the 
potential for producing angina or arrhythmias in patients with 
coronary artery disease is significant, as is the tachyphylaxis that 
accompanies the use of any β stimulant. Intermittent dobutamine 
infusion may benefit some patients with chronic heart failure. 
 Dopamine has also been used in acute heart failure and may be 
particularly helpful if there is a need to raise blood pressure. 
 DRUGS WITHOUT POSITIVE 
INOTROPIC EFFECTS USED IN 
HEART FAILURE 
 These agents—not positive inotropic drugs—are the first-line 
therapies for chronic heart failure. The drugs most commonly 
used are diuretics, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor antago-
nists, aldosterone antagonists, and β blockers ( Table 13–1 ). In 
acute failure, diuretics and vasodilators play important roles. 
NSR
PVB
NSR
PVB
V6
ST
 FIGURE 13–6  Electrocardiographic record showing digitalis-
induced bigeminy. The complexes marked NSR are normal sinus 
rhythm beats; an inverted T wave and depressed ST segment are 
present. The complexes marked PVB are premature ventricular beats 
and are the electrocardiographic manifestations of depolarizations 
evoked by delayed oscillatory afterpotentials as shown in  Figure 
13–5 . (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Goldman MJ:  Principles of 
Clinical Electrocardiography, 12th ed. Lange, 1986.) 
CHAPTER 13 Drugs Used in Heart Failure    219
 DIURETICS 
 Diuretics, especially furosemide, are drugs of choice in heart failure 
and are discussed in detail in  Chapter 15 . They have no direct 
effect on cardiac contractility; their major mechanism of action in 
heart failure is to reduce venous pressure and ventricular preload. 
This results in reduction of salt and water retention and edema and 
its symptoms. The reduction of cardiac size, which leads to 
improved pump efficiency, is of major importance in systolic fail-
ure. Spironolactone and eplerenone, the aldosterone antagonist 
diuretics (see  Chapter 15 ), have the additional benefit of decreasing 
morbidity and mortality in patients with severe heart failure who 
are also receiving ACE inhibitors and other standard therapy. One 
possible mechanism for this benefit lies in accumulating evidence 
that aldosterone may also cause myocardial and vascular fibrosis 
and baroreceptor dysfunction in addition to its renal effects. 
 ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME 
INHIBITORS, ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR 
BLOCKERS, & RELATED AGENTS 
 ACE inhibitors such as  captopril are introduced in  Chapter 11 
and discussed again in  Chapter 17 . These versatile drugs reduce 
peripheral resistance and thereby reduce afterload; they also reduce 
salt and water retention (by reducing aldosterone secretion) and in 
that way reduce preload. The reduction in tissue angiotensin levels 
also reduces sympathetic activity through diminution of angio-
tensin’s presynaptic effects on norepinephrine release. Finally, these 
drugs reduce the long-term remodeling of the heart and vessels, an 
effect that may be responsible for the observed reduction in mortal-
ity and morbidity (see Clinical Pharmacology). 
 Angiotensin AT 1 receptor blockers such as  losartan (see 
Chapters 11 and 17) appear to have similar but more limited 
beneficial effects. Angiotensin receptor blockers should be consid-
ered in patients intolerant of ACE inhibitors because of incessant 
cough. In some trials, candesartan was beneficial when  added to 
an ACE inhibitor. 
 Aliskiren, a renin inhibitor recently approved for hyperten-
sion, is in clinical trials for heart failure. Preliminary results sug-
gest an efficacy similar to that of ACE inhibitors. 
 VASODILATORS 
 Vasodilators are effective in acute heart failure because they pro-
vide a reduction in preload (through venodilation), or reduction 
in afterload (through arteriolar dilation), or both. Some evidence 
suggests that long-term use of hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate 
can also reduce damaging remodeling of the heart. 
 A synthetic form of the endogenous peptide  brain natriuretic 
peptide (BNP) is approved for use in acute (not chronic) cardiac 
failure as  nesiritide. This recombinant product increases cGMP 
in smooth muscle cells and reduces venous and arteriolar tone in 
experimental preparations. It also causes diuresis. The peptide has 
a short half-life of about 18 minutes and is administered as a bolus 
intravenous dose followed by continuous infusion. Excessive 
hypotension is the most common adverse effect. Reports of sig-
nificant renal damage and deaths have resulted in extra warnings 
regarding this agent, and it should be used with great caution. 
 Plasma concentrations of  endogenous BNP rise in most patients 
with heart failure and are correlated with severity. Measurement of 
plasma BNP has become a useful diagnostic or prognostic test in 
some centers. 
 Related peptides include atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and 
urodilatin, a similar peptide produced in the kidney.  Carperitide and 
 ularitide, respectively, are investigational synthetic analogs of these 
endogenous peptides and are in clinical trials (see  Chapter 15 ). 
 Bosentan and  tezosentan, orally active competitive inhibitors 
of endothelin (see  Chapter 17 ), have been shown to have some 
benefits in experimental animal models with heart failure, but 
results in human trials have been disappointing. Bosentan is 
approved for use in pulmonary hypertension (see  Chapter 11 ). It 
has significant teratogenic and hepatotoxic effects. 
 BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR BLOCKERS 
 Most patients with chronic heart failure respond favorably to cer-
tain β blockers in spite of the fact that these drugs can precipitate 
acute decompensation of cardiac function (see  Chapter 10 ). 
Studies with bisoprolol, carvedilol, metoprolol, and nebivolol 
showed a reduction in mortality in patients with stable severe 
heart failure, but this effect was not observed with another β 
blocker, bucindolol. A full understanding of the beneficial action 
of β blockade is lacking, but suggested mechanisms include 
attenuation of the adverse effects of high concentrations of cate-
cholamines (including apoptosis), up-regulation of β receptors, 
decreased heart rate, and reduced remodeling through inhibition 
of the mitogenic activity of catecholamines. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DRUGS USED IN HEART FAILURE 
 The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
(ACC/AHA) guidelines for management of chronic heart failure 
specify four stages in the development of heart failure ( Table 13–3 ). 
Patients in stage A are at high risk because of other disease but 
have no signs or symptoms of heart failure. Stage B patients have 
evidence of structural heart disease but no symptoms of heart 
failure. Stage C patients have structural heart disease and symp-
toms of failure, and symptoms are responsive to ordinary therapy. 
Stage D patients have heart failure refractory to ordinary therapy, 
and special interventions (resynchronization therapy, transplant) 
are required. 
 Once stage C is reached, the severity of heart failure is usually 
described according to a scale devised by the New York Heart 
Association. Class I failure is associated with no limitations on 
ordinary activities, and symptoms that occur only with greater 
than ordinary exercise. Class II is characterized by slight limitation 
of activities, and results in fatigue and palpitations with ordinary 
220    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
physical activity. Class III failure results in no symptoms at rest, 
but fatigue, shortness of breath, and tachycardia occur with less 
than ordinary physical activity. Class IV is associated with symp-
toms even when the patient is at rest. 
 MANAGEMENT OF CHRONIC 
HEART FAILURE 
 The major steps in the management of patients with chronic heart 
failure are outlined in  Table 13–3 . The 2009 update to the ACC/
AHA 2005 guidelines suggests that treatment of patients at high 
risk (stages A and B) should be focused on control of hyperten-
sion, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes, if present. Once symptoms 
and signs of failure are present, stage C has been entered, and 
active treatment of failure must be initiated. 
 SODIUM REMOVAL 
 Sodium removal—by dietary salt restriction and a diuretic—is the 
mainstay in management of symptomatic heart failure, especially 
if edema is present. In very mild failure a  thiazide diuretic may be 
tried, but a loop agent such as  furosemide is usually required. 
Sodium loss causes secondary loss of potassium, which is particu-
larly hazardous if the patient is to be given digitalis. Hypokalemia 
can be treated with potassium supplementation or through the 
addition of an ACE inhibitor or a potassium-sparing diuretic such 
as spironolactone. Spironolactone or eplerenone should probably 
be considered in all patients with moderate or severe heart failure, 
since both appear to reduce both morbidity and mortality. 
 ACE INHIBITORS & ANGIOTENSIN 
RECEPTOR BLOCKERS 
 In patients with left ventricular dysfunction but no edema, an 
ACE inhibitor should be the first drug used. Several large studies 
have showed clearly that ACE inhibitors are superior to both pla-
cebo and to vasodilators and must be considered, along with 
diuretics, as first-line therapy for chronic heart failure. However, 
ACE inhibitors cannot replace digoxin in patients already receiv-
ing the glycoside because patients withdrawn from digoxin dete-
riorate while on ACE inhibitor therapy. 
 By reducing preload and afterload in asymptomatic patients, 
ACE inhibitors (eg,  enalapril ) slow the progress of ventricular 
dilation and thus slow the downward spiral of heart failure. 
Consequently, ACE inhibitors are beneficial in all subsets of 
patients—from those who are asymptomatic to those in severe 
chronic failure. This benefit appears to be a class effect; that is, all 
ACE inhibitors appear to be effective. 
 The angiotensin II AT 1 receptor blockers (ARBs, eg,  losartan ) 
produce beneficial hemodynamic effects similar to those of ACE 
inhibitors. However, large clinical trials suggest that angiotensin 
receptor blockers are best reserved for patients who cannot tolerate 
ACE inhibitors (usually because of cough). 
 VASODILATORS 
 Vasodilator drugs can be divided into selective arteriolar dilators, 
venous dilators, and drugs with nonselective vasodilating effects. 
The choice of agent should be based on the patient’s signs and 
symptoms and hemodynamic measurements. Thus, in patients 
with high filling pressures in whom the principal symptom is 
dyspnea, venous dilators such as long-acting  nitrates will be most 
helpful in reducing filling pressures and the symptoms of pulmo-
nary congestion. In patients in whom fatigue due to low left ven-
tricular output is a primary symptom, an arteriolar dilator such as 
 hydralazine may be helpful in increasing forward cardiac output. 
In most patients with severe chronic failure that responds poorly 
to other therapy, the problem usually involves both elevated filling 
pressures and reduced cardiac output. In these circumstances, dila-
tion of both arterioles and veins is required. In a trial in African-
American patients already receiving ACE inhibitors, addition of 
hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate reduced mortality. As a result, 
a fixed combination of these two agents has been made available 
as isosorbide dinitrate/hydralazine  (BiDil) , and this is currently 
approved for use only in African Americans. 
TABLE 13–3 Classification and treatment of chronic heart failure.
ACC/AHA Stage1
NYHA Class2
Description
Management
A
Prefailure
No symptoms but risk factors present3
Treat obesity, hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, 
etc
B
I
Symptoms with severe exercise
ACEI/ARB, β blocker, diuretic
C
II/III
Symptoms with marked (class II) or mild 
(class III) exercise
Add aldosterone antagonist, digoxin; CRT, hydralazine/
nitrate4
D
IV
Severe symptoms at rest
Transplant, LVAD
1American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association classification.
2New York Heart Association classification.
3Risk factors include hypertension, myocardial infarct, diabetes.
4For selected populations, eg, African American.
ACEI, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; CRT, cardiac resynchronization therapy; LVAD, left ventricular assist device.
CHAPTER 13 Drugs Used in Heart Failure    221
 BETA BLOCKERS & ION CHANNEL 
BLOCKERS 
 Trials of β-blocker therapy in patients with heart failure are based 
on the hypothesis that excessive tachycardia and adverse effects of 
high catecholamine levels on the heart contribute to the down-
ward course of heart failure. The results clearly indicate that such 
therapy is beneficial if initiated cautiously at low doses, even 
though acutely blocking the supportive effects of catecholamines 
can worsen heart failure. Several months of therapy may be 
required before improvement is noted; this usually consists of a 
slight rise in ejection fraction, slower heart rate, and reduction in 
symptoms. As noted above, not all β blockers have proved useful, 
but  bisoprolol, carvedilol,  metoprolol, and  nebivolol have been 
shown to reduce mortality. 
 In contrast, the calcium-blocking drugs appear to have no role 
in the treatment of patients with heart failure. Their depressant 
effects on the heart may worsen heart failure. On the other hand, 
slowing of heart rate with  ivabradine (an I f blocker, see  Chapter 12 ) 
appears to be of benefit. 
 Digitalis 
 Digoxin is indicated in patients with heart failure and atrial fibril-
lation. It is usually given only when diuretics and ACE inhibitors 
have failed to control symptoms. Only about 50% of patients with 
normal sinus rhythm (usually those with documented systolic 
dysfunction) will have relief of heart failure from digitalis. Better 
results are obtained in patients with atrial fibrillation. If the deci-
sion is made to use a cardiac glycoside, digoxin is the one chosen 
in most cases (and the only one available in the USA). When 
symptoms are mild, slow loading (digitalization) with 0.125–0.25 
mg per day is safer and just as effective as the rapid method 
(0.5–0.75 mg every 8 hours for three doses, followed by 0.125–
0.25 mg per day). 
 Determining the optimal level of digitalis effect may be diffi-
cult. Unfortunately, toxic effects may occur before the therapeutic 
end point is detected. Measurement of plasma digoxin levels is 
useful in patients who appear unusually resistant or sensitive; a 
level of 1 ng/mL or less is appropriate. 
 Because it has a moderate but persistent positive inotropic 
effect, digitalis can, in theory, reverse all the signs and symptoms 
of heart failure. Although the net effect of the drug on mortality 
is mixed, it reduces hospitalization and deaths from progressive 
heart failure at the expense of an increase in sudden death. It is 
important to note that the mortality rate is reduced in patients 
with serum digoxin concentrations of less than 0.9 ng/mL but 
increased in those with digoxin levels greater than 1.5 ng/mL. 
 Other Clinical Uses of Digitalis 
 Digitalis is useful in the management of atrial arrhythmias because 
of its cardioselective parasympathomimetic effects. In atrial flutter 
and fibrillation, the depressant effect of the drug on atrioventricu-
lar conduction helps control an excessively high ventricular rate. 
Digitalis has also been used in the control of paroxysmal atrial and 
atrioventricular nodal tachycardia. At present, calcium channel 
blockers and adenosine are preferred for this application. Digoxin 
is explicitly contraindicated in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-
White syndrome and atrial fibrillation (see  Chapter 14 ). 
 Toxicity 
 In spite of its limited benefits and recognized hazards, digitalis is 
still heavily used and toxicity is common. Therapy for toxicity 
manifested as visual changes or gastrointestinal disturbances gen-
erally requires no more than reducing the dose of the drug. If 
cardiac arrhythmia is present and can be ascribed to digitalis, more 
vigorous therapy may be necessary. Serum digitalis and potassium 
levels and the electrocardiogram should always be monitored dur-
ing therapy of significant digitalis toxicity. Electrolyte status 
should be corrected if abnormal (see above). Monitoring of potas-
sium levels is particularly important in patients on renal dialysis. 
 In severe digitalis intoxication, serum potassium will already be 
elevated at the time of diagnosis (because of potassium loss from 
the intracellular compartment of skeletal muscle and other tis-
sues). Furthermore, automaticity is usually depressed, and antiar-
rhythmic agents administered in this setting may lead to cardiac 
arrest. Such patients are best treated with prompt insertion of a 
temporary cardiac pacemaker catheter and administration of digi-
talis antibodies  (digoxin immune fab). These antibodies recog-
nize digitoxin and cardiac glycosides from many other plants in 
addition to digoxin. They are extremely useful in reversing severe 
intoxication with most glycosides. 
 Digitalis-induced arrhythmias are frequently made worse by 
cardioversion; this therapy should be reserved for ventricular 
fibrillation if the arrhythmia is glycoside-induced. 
 CARDIAC RESYNCHRONIZATION 
THERAPY 
 Patients with normal sinus rhythm and a wide QRS interval, eg, 
greater than 120 ms, have impaired synchronization of right and 
left ventricular contraction. Poor synchronization of ventricular 
contraction results in diminished cardiac output. Resynchronization, 
with left ventricular or biventricular pacing, has been shown to 
reduce mortality in patients with chronic heart failure who were 
already receiving optimal medical therapy. 
 MANAGEMENT OF DIASTOLIC 
HEART FAILURE 
 Most clinical trials have been carried out in patients with systolic 
dysfunction, so the evidence regarding the superiority or inferior-
ity of drugs in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction is 
meager. Most authorities support the use of the drug groups 
described above, and the SENIORS 2009 study suggests that 
nebivolol is effective in both systolic and diastolic failure. Control 
of hypertension is particularly important, and revascularization 
should be considered if coronary artery disease is present. 
222    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
Tachycardia limits filling time; therefore, bradycardic drugs may 
be particularly useful, at least in theory. 
 MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE 
HEART FAILURE 
 Acute heart failure occurs frequently in patients with chronic fail-
ure. Such episodes are usually associated with increased exertion, 
emotion, excess salt intake, nonadherence to medical therapy, or 
increased metabolic demand occasioned by fever, anemia, etc. A 
particularly common and important cause of acute failure—with 
or without chronic failure—is acute myocardial infarction. 
 Patients with acute myocardial infarction are best treated with 
emergency revascularization using either coronary angioplasty and 
a stent, or a thrombolytic agent. Even with revascularization, acute 
failure may develop in such patients. Many of the signs and symp-
toms of acute and chronic failure are identical, but their therapies 
diverge because of the need for more rapid response and the rela-
tively greater frequency and severity of pulmonary vascular con-
gestion in the acute form. 
 Measurements of arterial pressure, cardiac output, stroke work 
index, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure are particularly 
useful in patients with acute myocardial infarction and acute heart 
failure. Such patients can be usefully characterized on the basis of 
three hemodynamic measurements: arterial pressure, left ventricu-
lar filling pressure, and cardiac index. When filling pressure is 
greater than 15 mm Hg and stroke work index is less than 20 g-m/m 2 , 
the mortality rate is high. Intermediate levels of these two variables 
imply a much better prognosis. 
 Intravenous treatment is the rule in acute heart failure. Among 
diuretics, furosemide is the most commonly used. Dopamine or 
dobutamine are positive inotropic drugs with prompt onset and 
short durations of action; they are most useful in patients with 
severe hypotension. Levosimendan has been approved for use in 
acute failure in Europe, and noninferiority has been demonstrated 
against dobutamine. Vasodilators in use in patients with acute 
decompensation include nitroprusside, nitroglycerine, and 
nesiritide. Reduction in afterload often improves ejection fraction, 
but improved survival has not been documented. A small subset 
of patients in acute heart failure will have hyponatremia, presum-
ably due to increased vasopressin activity. A V 1a and V 2 receptor 
antagonist,  conivaptan, is approved for parenteral treatment of 
euvolemic hyponatremia. Several clinical trials have indicated that 
this drug and related V 2 antagonists  (tolvaptan) may have a ben-
eficial effect in some patients with acute heart failure and hypona-
tremia. Thus far, vasopressin antagonists do not seem to reduce 
mortality. 
SUMMARY Drugs Used in Heart Failure
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
DIURETICS
 • Furosemide
Loop diuretic: Decreases NaCl 
and KCl reabsorption in thick 
ascending limb of the loop of 
Henle in the nephron (see 
Chapter 15)
Increased excretion of salt 
and water • reduces 
cardiac preload and 
afterload • reduces 
pulmonary and peripheral 
edema
Acute and chronic heart 
failure • severe hyperten-
sion • edematous 
conditions 
Oral and IV • duration 2–4 h • Toxicity: 
Hypovolemia, hypokalemia, 
orthostatic hypotension, ototoxicity, 
sulfonamide allergy
 • Hydrochlorothiazide
Decreases NaCl reabsorption 
in the distal convoluted tubule
Same as furosemide, but 
less efficacious
Mild chronic failure • mild-
moderate hypertension • 
hypercalciuria • has not 
been shown to reduce 
mortality
Oral only • duration 10–12 h • Toxicity: 
Hyponatremia, hypokalemia, 
hyperglycemia, hyperuricemia, 
hyperlipidemia, sulfonamide allergy
 • Three other loop diuretics: Bumetanide and torsemide similar to furosemide; ethacrynic acid not a sulfonamide
 • Many other thiazides: All basically similar to hydrochlorothiazide, differing only in pharmacokinetics
ALDOSTERONE ANTAGONISTS
 • Spironolactone
Blocks cytoplasmic aldoster-
one receptors in collecting 
tubules of nephron • possible 
membrane effect
Increased salt and water 
excretion • reduces remod-
eling • reduces mortality
Chronic heart failure • 
aldosteronism (cirrhosis, 
adrenal tumor) • hyperten-
sion • has been shown to 
reduce mortality
Oral • duration 24–72 h (slow onset 
and offset) • Toxicity: Hyperkalemia, 
antiandrogen actions
 • Eplerenone: Similar to spironolactone; more selective antialdosterone effect; no significant antiandrogen action; has been shown to reduce mortality
(continued )
CHAPTER 13 Drugs Used in Heart Failure    223
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
ANGIOTENSIN ANTAGONISTS
Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors: 
 • Captopril
Inhibits ACE • reduces AII 
formation by inhibiting con-
version of AI to All
Arteriolar and venous 
dilation • reduces aldoster-
one secretion • reduces 
cardiac remodeling
Chronic heart failure • 
hypertension • diabetic 
renal disease • has been 
shown to reduce mortality
Oral • half-life 2–4 h but given in large 
doses so duration 12–24 h • Toxicity: 
Cough, hyperkalemia, angioneurotic 
edema • Interactions: Additive with 
other angiotensin antagonists
Angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARBs):
 • Losartan
Antagonize AII effects at AT1 
receptors
Like ACE inhibitors
Like ACE inhibitors • used 
in patients intolerant to 
ACE inhibitors • has been 
shown to reduce mortality
Oral • duration 6–8 h • Toxicity: 
Hyperkalemia; angioneurotic edema • 
Interactions: Additive with other 
angiotensin antagonists
 • Enalapril, many other ACE inhibitors: Like captopril
 •  Candesartan, many other ARBs: Like losartan
BETA BLOCKERS
 • Carvedilol
Competitively blocks β1 
receptors (see Chapter 10)
Slows heart rate • reduces 
blood pressure • poorly 
understood effects • 
reduces heart failure 
mortality
Chronic heart failure: To 
slow progression • reduce 
mortality in moderate and 
severe heart failure • many 
other indications in 
Chapter 10
Oral • duration 10–12 h • Toxicity: 
Bronchospasm, bradycardia, 
atrioventricular block, acute cardiac 
decompensation • see Chapter 10 for 
other toxicities and interactions
 • Metoprolol, bisoprolol, nebivolol: Select group of b blockers that have been shown to reduce heart failure mortality
CARDIAC GLYCOSIDE
 • Digoxin
Na
+/K
+-ATPase inhibition 
results in reduced Ca
2+ expul-
sion and increased Ca
2+ stored 
in sarcoplasmic reticulum
Increases cardiac 
contractility • cardiac 
parasympathomimetic 
effect (slowed sinus 
heart rate, slowed 
atrioventricular 
conduction)
Chronic symptomatic heart 
failure • rapid ventricular 
rate in atrial fibrillation • 
has not been definitively 
shown to reduce mortality
Oral, parenteral • duration 36–40 h • 
Toxicity: Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea • 
cardiac arrhythmias
VASODILATORS
Venodilators:
 • Isosorbide dinitrate
Releases nitric oxide (NO) • 
activates guanylyl cyclase (see 
Chapter 12)
Venodilation • reduces 
preload and ventricular 
stretch
Acute and chronic heart 
failure • angina
Oral • 4–6 h duration • Toxicity: 
Postural hypotension, tachycardia, 
headache • Interactions: Additive with 
other vasodilators and synergistic 
with phosphodiesterase type 5 
inhibitors
Arteriolar dilators: 
 • Hydralazine
Probably increases NO 
synthesis in endothelium (see 
Chapter 11)
Reduces blood pressure 
and afterload • results in 
increased cardiac output
Hydralazine plus nitrates 
have reduced mortality
Oral • 8–12 h duration • Toxicity: 
Tachycardia, fluid retention, lupus-like 
syndrome
Combined arteriolar and 
venodilator: 
 • Nitroprusside
Releases NO spontaneously • 
activates guanylyl cyclase
Marked vasodilation • 
reduces preload and 
afterload
Acute cardiac decompen-
sation • hypertensive emer-
gencies (malignant 
hypertension)
IV only • duration 1–2 min • Toxicity: 
Excessive hypotension, thiocyanate 
and cyanide toxicity • Interactions: 
Additive with other vasodilators
BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR AGONISTS
 • Dobutamine
Beta1-selective agonist • 
increases cAMP synthesis
Increases cardiac 
contractility, output
Acute decompensated 
heart failure • intermittent 
therapy in chronic failure 
reduces symptoms
IV only • duration a few minutes 
• Toxicity: Arrhythmias • Interactions: 
Additive with other sympathomimetics
 • Dopamine
Dopamine receptor agonist • 
higher doses activate β and α 
adrenoceptors
Increases renal blood flow 
• higher doses increase 
cardiac force and blood 
pressure
Acute decompensated 
heart failure • shock
IV only • duration a few minutes • 
Toxicity: Arrhythmias • Interactions: 
Additive with sympathomimetics
(continued )
224    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
DIURETICS
See Chapter 15.
DIGITALIS
Digoxin (generic, Lanoxicaps, Lanoxin)
Oral: 0.125, 0.25 mg tablets; 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 mg capsules∗; 0.05 mg/mL 
elixir
Parenteral: 0.1, 0.25 mg/mL for injection
DIGITALIS ANTIBODY
Digoxin immune fab (ovine) (Digibind, DigiFab)
Parenteral: 38 or 40 mg per vial with 75 mg sorbitol lyophilized 
powder to reconstitute for IV injection. Each vial will bind 
approximately 0.5 mg digoxin or digitoxin.
SYMPATHOMIMETICS MOST COMMONLY 
USED IN CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
Dobutamine (generic)
Parenteral: 12.5 mg/mL for IV infusion
Dopamine (generic, Intropin)
Parenteral: 40, 80, 160 mg/mL for IV injection; 80, 160, 320 mg/dL 
in 5% dextrose for IV infusion
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME 
INHIBITORS
Benazepril (generic, Lotensin)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Captopril (generic, Capoten)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Enalapril (generic, Vasotec, Vasotec I.V.)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1.25 mg enalaprilat/mL
Fosinopril (generic, Monopril)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Lisinopril (generic, Prinivil, Zestril)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 mg tablets
Moexipril (generic, Univasc)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets
Perindopril (Aceon)
Oral: 2, 4, 8 mg tablets
Quinapril (generic, Accupril)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Ramipril (Altace)
Oral: 1.25, 2.5, 5, 10 mg capsules
Trandolapril (Mavik)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR BLOCKERS
Candesartan (Atacand)
Oral: 4, 8, 16, 32 mg tablets
Eprosartan (Teveten)
Oral: 600 mg tablets
Irbesartan (Avapro)
Oral: 75, 150, 300 mg tablets
Losartan (Cozaar)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Olmesartan (Benicar)
Oral: 5, 20, 40 mg tablets
Telmisartan (Micardis)
Oral: 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
Valsartan (Diovan)
Oral: 40, 80, 160, 320 mg tablets
BETA BLOCKERS THAT HAVE REDUCED 
MORTALITY IN HEART FAILURE
Bisoprolol (generic, Zebeta, off-label use)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
DIURETICS
See Chapter 15.
DIGITALIS
Digoxin (generic, Lanoxicaps, Lanoxin)
Oral: 0.125, 0.25 mg tablets; 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 mg capsules∗; 0.05 mg/mL
elixir
Parenteral: 0.1, 0.25 mg/mL for injection
DIGITALIS ANTIBODY
Digoxin immune fab (ovine) (Digibind, DigiFab)
Parenteral: 38 or 40 mg per vial with 75 mg sorbitol lyophilized
powder to reconstitute for IV injection. Each vial will bind
approximately 0.5 mg digoxin or digitoxin.
SYMPATHOMIMETICS MOST COMMONLY
USED IN CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE
Dobutamine (generic)
Parenteral: 12.5 mg/mL for IV infusion
Dopamine (generic, Intropin)
Parenteral: 40, 80, 160 mg/mL for IV injection; 80, 160, 320 mg/dL
in 5% dextrose for IV infusion
ANGIOTENSIN-CONVERTING ENZYME
INHIBITORS
Benazepril (generic, Lotensin)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Captopril (generic, Capoten)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Enalapril (generic, Vasotec, Vasotec I.V.)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1.25 mg enalaprilat/mL
Fosinopril (generic, Monopril)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Lisinopril (generic, Prinivil, Zestril)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 mg tablets
Moexipril (generic, Univasc)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets
Perindopril (Aceon)
Oral: 2, 4, 8 mg tablets
Quinapril (generic, Accupril)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Ramipril (Altace)
Oral: 1.25, 2.5, 5, 10 mg capsules
Trandolapril (Mavik)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR BLOCKERS
Candesartan (Atacand)
Oral: 4, 8, 16, 32 mg tablets
Eprosartan (Teveten)
Oral: 600 mg tablets
Irbesartan (Avapro)
Oral: 75, 150, 300 mg tablets
Losartan (Cozaar)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Olmesartan (Benicar)
Oral: 5, 20, 40 mg tablets
Telmisartan (Micardis)
Oral: 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
Valsartan (Diovan)
Oral: 40, 80, 160, 320 mg tablets
BETA BLOCKERS THAT HAVE REDUCED
MORTALITY IN HEART FAILURE
Bisoprolol (generic, Zebeta, off-label use)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
BIPYRIDINES
 • Inamrinone, 
        milrinone
Phosphodiesterase type 3 
inhibitors • decrease cAMP 
breakdown
Vasodilators; lower periph-
eral vascular resistance • 
also increase cardiac 
contractility
Acute decompensated 
heart failure • increase 
mortality in chronic failure
IV only • duration 3–6 h • Toxicity: 
Arrhythmias • Interactions: Additive 
with other arrhythmogenic agents
NATRIURETIC PEPTIDE
 • Nesiritide
Activates BNP receptors, 
increases cGMP
Vasodilation • diuresis
Acute decompensated 
failure • has not been 
shown to reduce mortality
IV only • duration 18 minutes • 
Toxicity: Renal damage, hypotension, 
may increase mortality
CHAPTER 13 Drugs Used in Heart Failure    225
∗Digoxin capsules (Lanoxicaps) have greater bioavailability than digoxin tablets.
Carvedilol (Coreg)
Oral: 3.125, 6.25, 12.5, 25 mg tablets; 10, 20, 40, 80 mg extended-re-
lease capsules
Metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol XL)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets; 25, 50, 100, 200 mg extended-release 
tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for IV injection
Nebivolol (Bystolic)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
ALDOSTERONE ANTAGONISTS
Spironolactone (generic, Aldactone)
Oral: 25, 50 mg tablets
Eplerenone (Inspra)
Oral: 25, 50 mg tablets
OTHER DRUGS
Hydralazine (generic) (see Chapter 11)
Isosorbide dinitrate (see Chapter 12)
Nitroglycerine (see Chapter 12)
Hydralazine plus isosorbide dinitrate fixed dose (BiDil)
Oral: 37.5 mg hydralazine + 20 mg isosorbide dinitrate tablets
Inamrinone (generic)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IV injection
Milrinone (generic, Primacor)
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for IV injection
Nesiritide (Natrecor)
Parenteral: 1.58 mg powder to reconstitute for IV injection
Bosentan (Tracleer)
Oral: 62.5, 125 mg tablets
Carvedilol (Coreg)
Oral: 3.125, 6.25, 12.5, 25 mg tablets; 10, 20, 40, 80 mg extended-re-
lease capsules
Metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol XL)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets; 25, 50, 100, 200 mg extended-release
tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for IV injection
Nebivolol (Bystolic)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
ALDOSTERONE ANTAGONISTS
Spironolactone (generic, Aldactone)
Oral: 25, 50 mg tablets
Eplerenone (Inspra)
Oral: 25, 50 mg tablets
OTHER DRUGS
Hydralazine (generic) (see Chapter 11)
Isosorbide dinitrate (see Chapter 12)
Nitroglycerine (see Chapter 12)
Hydralazine plus isosorbide dinitrate fixed dose (BiDil)
Oral: 37.5 mg hydralazine + 20 mg isosorbide dinitrate tablets
Inamrinone (generic)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IV injection
Milrinone (generic, Primacor)
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for IV injection
Nesiritide (Natrecor)
Parenteral: 1.58 mg powder to reconstitute for IV injection
Bosentan (Tracleer)
Oral: 62.5, 125 mg tablets
 REFERENCES 
 Abraham WT, Greenberg BH, Yancy CW: Pharmacologic therapies across the 
continuum of left ventricular dysfunction. Am J Cardiol 2008;102 
(Suppl):21G. 
 Ahmed A et al: Effectiveness of digoxin in reducing one-year mortality in chronic 
heart failure in the Digitalis Investigation Group trial. Am J Cardiol 
2009;103:82. 
 Arnold JM et al: Canadian Cardiovascular Society Consensus Conference 
Recommendations on Heart Failure. Can J Cardiol 2006;22:23. 
Bagrov AY, Shapiro JI, Federova OV: Endogenous cardiotonic steroids: Physiology, 
pharmacology, and novel therapeutic targets. Pharmacol Rev 2009;61:9.
 Cleland JCF et al: The effect of cardiac resynchronization on morbidity and mor-
tality in heart failure. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1539. 
 Colucci WS: Overview of the therapy of heart failure due to systolic dysfunction. 
UpToDate, 2010. http://www.UpToDate.com. 
 CONSENSUS Trial Study Group: Effects of enalapril on mortality in severe con-
gestive heart failure. N Engl J Med 1987;316:1429. 
 DeLuca L et al: Overview of emerging pharmacologic agents for acute heart failure 
syndromes. Eur J Heart Fail 2008;10:201. 
 Elkayam U et al: Vasodilators in the management of acute heart failure. Crit Care 
Med 2008;36:S95. 
 Ikeda Y, Hoshijima M, Chien KR: Toward biologically targeted therapy of calcium 
cycling defects in heart failure. Physiology 2008;28:6. 
 Jessup M et al: 2009 Focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of heart failure in adults. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2009;53:e1. 
 Klapholtz M: β-Blocker use for the stages of heart failure. Mayo Clin Proc 
2009;84:718. 
 Lingrel JB: The physiological significance of the cardiotonic steroid/ouabain-
binding site of the Na,K-ATPase. Annu Rev Physiol 2010;72:395. 
 Malik FI et al: Cardiac myosin activation: A potential therapeutic approach for 
systolic heart failure. Science 2011;331:1439. 
 Post SR, Hammond HK, Insel PA: β-Adrenergic receptors and receptor signaling 
in heart failure. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1999;39:343. 
 Ramani GV, Ur PA, Mehra MR: Chronic heart failure: Contemporary diagnosis 
and management. Mayo Clin Proc 2010;85:180. 
 Rathbone SS et al: Association of serum digoxin concentration and outcomes in 
patients with heart failure. JAMA 2003;289:871. 
 Seed A et al: Neurohumoral effects of the new orally active renin inhibitor, 
aliskiren, in chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail 2007;9:1120. 
 Shekelle PG et al: Efficacy of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and beta 
blockers in the management of left ventricular systolic dysfunction according 
to race, gender, and diabetic status: A meta-analysis of major clinical trials. J 
Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:1529. 
 Taur Y, Frishman WH: The cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) and its role in heart 
disease. Cardiol Rev 2005;13:142. 
 Taylor AL et al: Combination of isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine in blacks with 
heart failure. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2049. 
 Topalian S, Ginsberg F, Parrillo JE: Cardiogenic shock. Crit Care Med 
2008;36:S66. 
 van Veldhuisen DJ et al: Beta-blockade with nebivolol in elderly heart failure 
patients with impaired and preserved left ventricular ejection fraction. Data 
from SENIORS (Study of Effects of Nebivolol Intervention on Outcomes 
and Rehospitalization in Seniors with Heart Failure). J Am Coll Cardiol 
2009;53:2150. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient has a low ejection fraction with systolic heart 
failure. He was placed on a low-sodium diet and treated with 
a diuretic (furosemide 40 mg twice daily). On this therapy, he 
was less short of breath on exertion and could also lie flat 
without dyspnea. An angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitor was added (enalapril 20 mg twice daily), and over 
the next few weeks, he continued to feel better. Because of 
continued shortness of breath on exercise, digoxin 0.25 mg/d 
was added with a further improvement in exercise tolerance. 
Addition of a β blocker and eplerenone is being considered.
This page intentionally left blank 
227
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 A 69-year-old retired teacher presents with a 1-month 
history of palpitations, intermittent shortness of breath, 
and fatigue. She has a history of hypertension. An ECG 
shows atrial fibrillation with a ventricular response of 
122 bpm and signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. She is 
anticoagulated with warfarin and started on sustained-
release metoprolol 50 mg/d. After 7 days, her rhythm 
reverts to normal sinus spontaneously. However, over the 
14
Agents Used in Cardiac
Arrhythmias
Joseph R. Hume, PhD, &
Augustus O. Grant, MD, PhD
C A S E  S T U D Y
ensuing month, she continues to have intermittent palpita-
tions and fatigue. Continuous ECG recording over a 48-hour 
period documents paroxysms of atrial fibrillation with heart 
rates of 88–114 bpm. An echocardiogram shows a left ven-
tricular ejection fraction of 38% with no localized wall 
motion abnormality. At this stage, would you initiate treat-
ment with an antiarrhythmic drug to maintain normal sinus 
rhythm, and if so, what drug would you choose?
Cardiac arrhythmias are a common problem in clinical prac-
tice, occurring in up to 25% of patients treated with digitalis, 
50% of anesthetized patients, and over 80% of patients with 
acute myocardial infarction. Arrhythmias may require treat-
ment because rhythms that are too rapid, too slow, or asyn-
chronous can reduce cardiac output. Some arrhythmias can 
precipitate more serious or even lethal rhythm disturbances; 
for example, early premature ventricular depolarizations can 
precipitate ventricular fibrillation. In such patients, antiar-
rhythmic drugs may be lifesaving. On the other hand, the 
hazards of antiarrhythmic drugs—and in particular the fact 
that they can  precipitate lethal arrhythmias in some patients—
has led to a reevaluation of their relative risks and benefits. In 
general, treatment of asymptomatic or minimally symptom-
atic arrhythmias should be avoided for this reason. 
 Arrhythmias can be treated with the drugs discussed in this 
chapter and with nonpharmacologic therapies such as pacemakers, 
cardioversion, catheter ablation, and surgery. This chapter describes 
the pharmacology of drugs that suppress arrhythmias by a direct 
action on the cardiac cell membrane. Other modes of therapy are 
discussed briefly (see Box: The Nonpharmacologic Therapy of 
Cardiac Arrhythmias). 
 ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY OF NORMAL 
CARDIAC RHYTHM 
 The electrical impulse that triggers a normal cardiac contrac-
tion originates at regular intervals in the sinoatrial (SA) 
node ( Figure 14–1 ), usually at a frequency of 60–100 bpm. 
This impulse spreads rapidly through the atria and enters the 
atrioventricular (AV) node, which is normally the only con-
duction pathway between the atria and ventricles. Conduction 
through the AV node is slow, requiring about 0.15 seconds. 
(This delay provides time for atrial contraction to propel 
blood into the ventricles.) The impulse then propagates over 
the His-Purkinje system and invades all parts of the ventri-
cles, beginning with the endocardial surface near the apex and 
ending with the epicardial surface at the base of the heart. 
Ventricular activation is complete in less than 0.1 seconds; 
therefore, contraction of all of the ventricular muscle is nor-
mally synchronous and hemodynamically effective. 
 Arrhythmias consist of cardiac depolarizations that deviate from the 
above description in one or more aspects: there is an abnormality in the 
site of origin of the impulse, its rate or regularity, or its conduction . 
228    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 FIGURE 14–1  Schematic representation of the heart and normal cardiac electrical activity (intracellular recordings from areas indicated 
and ECG). Sinoatrial (SA) node, atrioventricular (AV) node, and Purkinje cells display pacemaker activity (phase 4 depolarization). The ECG is the 
body surface manifestation of the depolarization and repolarization waves of the heart. The P wave is generated by atrial depolarization, the 
QRS by ventricular muscle depolarization, and the T wave by ventricular repolarization. Thus, the PR interval is a measure of conduction time 
from atrium to ventricle, and the QRS duration indicates the time required for all of the ventricular cells to be activated (ie, the intraventricular 
conduction time). The QT interval reflects the duration of the ventricular action potential. 
Tricuspid
valve
Mitral
valve
Action potential phases
0:  Upstroke
1:  Early-fast repolarization
2:  Plateau
3:  Repolarization
4:  Diastole
200 ms
Q S
P
ECG
R
T
4
3
Overshoot
1
2
Phase
0
Purkinje
Ventricle
Superior
vena cava
SA node
Atrium
AV node
Phase 0
3
4
mV
0
-100
Resting potential
PR
QT
 Ionic Basis of Membrane Electrical Activity 
 The transmembrane potential of cardiac cells is determined by the 
concentrations of several ions—chiefly sodium (Na + ), potassium 
(K + ), calcium (Ca 2+ ), and chloride (Cl – )—on either side of the mem-
brane and the permeability of the membrane to each ion. These 
water-soluble ions are unable to freely diffuse across the lipid cell 
membrane in response to their electrical and concentration gradi-
ents; they require aqueous channels (specific pore-forming proteins) 
for such diffusion. Thus, ions move across cell membranes in 
response to their gradients only at specific times during the cardiac 
cycle when these ion channels are open. The movements of the ions 
produce currents that form the basis of the cardiac action potential. 
Individual channels are relatively ion-specific, and the flux of ions 
through them is controlled by “gates” (flexible portions of the 
peptide chains that make up the channel proteins). Each type of 
channel has its own type of gate (sodium, calcium, and some potas-
sium channels are each thought to have two types of gates). The 
channels primarily responsible for the cardiac action potential 
(sodium, calcium, and several potassium) are opened and closed 
(“gated”) by voltage changes across the cell membrane; that is, they 
are voltage-sensitive. Most are also modulated by ion concentra-
tions and metabolic conditions, and some potassium channels are 
primarily ligand- rather than voltage-gated. 
 All the ionic currents that are currently thought to contribute to 
the cardiac action potential are illustrated in  Figure 14–2 . At rest, 
most cells are not significantly permeable to sodium, but at the start 
of each action potential, they become quite permeable (see below). 
In electrophysiologic terms, the conductance of the fast sodium 
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    229
channel suddenly increases in response to a depolarizing stimulus. 
Similarly, calcium enters and potassium leaves the cell with each 
action potential. Therefore, in addition to ion channels, the cell must 
have mechanisms to maintain stable transmembrane ionic condi-
tions by establishing and maintaining ion gradients. The most 
important of these active mechanisms is the sodium pump, Na + /
K + -ATPase, described in  Chapter 13 . This pump and other active 
ion carriers contribute indirectly to the transmembrane potential by 
maintaining the gradients necessary for diffusion through channels. 
In addition, some pumps and exchangers produce net current flow 
(eg, by exchanging three Na + for two K + ions) and hence are termed 
“electrogenic.” 
 When the cardiac cell membrane becomes permeable to a spe-
cific ion (ie, when the channels selective for that ion are open), 
movement of that ion across the cell membrane is determined by 
Ohm’s law: current = voltage ÷ resistance, or current = voltage × 
conductance. Conductance is determined by the properties of the 
individual ion channel protein. The voltage term is the difference 
between the actual membrane potential and the reversal potential 
for that ion (the membrane potential at which no current would 
flow even if channels were open). For example, in the case of 
sodium in a cardiac cell at rest, there is a substantial concentration 
gradient (140 mmol/L Na + outside; 10–15 mmol/L Na + inside) 
and an electrical gradient (0 mV outside; −90 mV inside) that 
would drive Na + into cells. Sodium does not enter the cell at rest 
because sodium channels are closed; when sodium channels open, 
the very large influx of Na + accounts for phase 0 depolarization of 
the action potential. The situation for K + in the resting cardiac cell 
is quite different. Here, the concentration gradient (140 mmol/L 
inside; 4 mmol/L outside) would drive the ion out of the cell, but 
the electrical gradient would drive it in; that is, the inward gradi-
ent is in equilibrium with the outward gradient. In fact, certain 
potassium channels (“inward rectifier” channels) are open in the 
resting cell, but little current flows through them because of this 
balance. The equilibrium, or  reversal potential, for ions is deter-
mined by the  Nernst equation: 
Eion = 61 × log Ce
Ci
 where C e and C i are the extracellular and intracellular concentra-
tions, respectively, multiplied by their activity coefficients. Note 
that raising extracellular potassium makes E K less negative. When 
this occurs, the membrane depolarizes until the new E K is reached. 
Thus, extracellular potassium concentration and inward rectifier 
channel function are the major factors determining the membrane 
potential of the resting cardiac cell. The conditions required for 
application of the Nernst equation are approximated at the peak of 
Phase 4
0
1
2
3
L-type
T-type
Na+ current
Ca2+
current
Na+/Ca2+ exchange
Na+/K+-ATPase
transient
outward
current
delayed
rectifiers
(lK)
inward rectifier, lK1
pacemaker current, lf
lTO1
lTO2
lKs
lKr
lKur
lKP
lCl
Gene/protein
SCN5A/Nav 1.5
CACNA1/Cav 1.2
CACNA1G,1/Cav 3.1, 3.2
KCND3/ Kv 4.3
KCNA4/ Kv 1.4
KCNA1/ KvLQT 1
KCNH2/ hERG
KCNA5/ Kv 1.5
CFTR/CFTR
KCNJ1/Kir 2.1
HCN2, 4/HCN2, 4
SLC8A1/NCX 1
NKAIN1-4/Na, K-pump
inward
outward
 FIGURE 14–2  Schematic diagram of the ion permeability changes and transport processes that occur during an action potential and the 
diastolic period following it. Yellow indicates inward (depolarizing) membrane currents; blue indicates outward (repolarizing) membrane cur-
rents. Multiple subtypes of potassium and calcium currents, with different sensitivities to blocking drugs, have been identified. The right side of 
the figure lists the genes and proteins responsible for each type of channel or transporter. 
230    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
the overshoot (using sodium concentrations) and during rest (using 
potassium concentrations) in most nonpacemaker cardiac cells. If 
the permeability is significant for both potassium and sodium, the 
Nernst equation is not a good predictor of membrane potential, 
but the  Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation may be used: 
Emem = 61 × log PK × Ke + PNa × Nae 
PK × Ki + PNa × Nai  
 In pacemaker cells (whether normal or ectopic), spontaneous 
depolarization (the pacemaker potential) occurs during diastole 
(phase 4,  Figure 14–1 ). This depolarization results from a gradual 
increase of depolarizing current through special hyperpolarization-
activated ion channels (I f , also called I h ) in pacemaker cells. The 
effect of changing extracellular potassium is more complex in a 
pacemaker cell than it is in a nonpacemaker cell because the effect 
on permeability to potassium is much more important in a pace-
maker (see Box: Effects of Potassium). In a pacemaker—especially 
an ectopic one—the end result of an increase in extracellular 
potassium is usually to slow or stop the pacemaker. Conversely, 
hypokalemia often facilitates ectopic pacemakers. 
 The Active Cell Membrane 
 In normal atrial, Purkinje, and ventricular cells, the action 
potential upstroke (phase 0) is dependent on sodium current. 
From a functional point of view, it is convenient to describe the 
behavior of the sodium current in terms of three channel states 
( Figure 14–3 ). The cardiac sodium channel protein has been 
 The effects of changes in serum potassium on cardiac action 
potential duration, pacemaker rate, and arrhythmias can 
appear somewhat paradoxical if changes are predicted based 
solely on a consideration of changes in the potassium  electro-
chemical gradient. In the heart, however, changes in serum 
potassium concentration have the additional effect of alter-
ing potassium  conductance (increased extracellular potas-
sium increases potassium conductance) independent of 
simple changes in electrochemical driving force, and this 
effect often predominates. As a result, the actual observed 
effects of  hyperkalemia include reduced action potential 
duration, slowed conduction, decreased pacemaker rate, and 
decreased pacemaker arrhythmogenesis. Conversely, the 
actual observed effects of  hypokalemia include prolonged 
action potential duration, increased pacemaker rate, and 
increased pacemaker arrhythmogenesis. Furthermore, pace-
maker rate and arrhythmias involving ectopic pacemaker 
cells appear to be more sensitive to changes in serum potas-
sium concentration, compared with cells of the sinoatrial 
node. These effects of serum potassium on the heart probably 
contribute to the observed increased sensitivity to potassium 
channel-blocking antiarrhythmic agents (quinidine or sotalol) 
during hypokalemia, eg, accentuated action potential prolon-
gation and tendency to cause torsades de pointes. 
Effects of Potassium
Recovery
+
+
+
+
+
h
Resting
Activated
Inactivated
Intracellular
Na+
Threshold
Extracellular
Na+
m
m
h
m
m
Na+
40
0
-40
-60
40
0
-40
-60
40
0
-40
-60
h
m
m
Membrane
potential (mV)
 FIGURE 14–3  A schematic representation of Na + channels cycling through different conformational states during the cardiac action 
potential. Transitions between resting, activated, and inactivated states are dependent on membrane potential and time. The activation gate is 
shown as  m and the inactivation gate as  h. Potentials typical for each state are shown under each channel schematic as a function of time. The 
dashed line indicates that part of the action potential during which most Na + channels are completely or partially inactivated and unavailable 
for reactivation. 
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    231
cloned, and it is now recognized that these channel states actu-
ally represent different protein conformations. In addition, 
regions of the protein that confer specific behaviors, such as volt-
age sensing, pore formation, and inactivation, are now being 
identified. The gates described below and in  Figure 14–3 repre-
sent such regions. 
 Depolarization to the threshold voltage results in opening of 
the activation ( m ) gates of sodium channels ( Figure 14–3 , 
middle). If the inactivation ( h ) gates of these channels have 
not already closed, the channels are now open or activated, 
and sodium permeability is markedly increased, greatly exceed-
ing the permeability for any other ion. Extracellular sodium 
therefore diffuses down its electrochemical gradient into the 
cell, and the membrane potential very rapidly approaches 
the sodium equilibrium potential, E Na (about +70 mV when 
Na e = 140 mmol/L and Na i = 10 mmol/L). This intense 
sodium current is very brief because opening of the  m gates upon 
depolarization is promptly followed by closure of the  h gates and 
inactivation of the sodium channels ( Figure 14–3 , right). 
 Most calcium channels become activated and inactivated in 
what appears to be the same way as sodium channels, but in the 
case of the most common type of cardiac calcium channel (the “L” 
type), the transitions occur more slowly and at more positive 
potentials. The action potential plateau (phases 1 and 2) reflects 
the turning off of most of the sodium current, the waxing and 
waning of calcium current, and the slow development of a repolar-
izing potassium current. 
 Final repolarization (phase 3) of the action potential results 
from completion of sodium and calcium channel inactivation and 
the growth of potassium permeability, so that the membrane 
potential once again approaches the potassium equilibrium poten-
tial. The major potassium currents involved in phase 3 repolariza-
tion include a rapidly activating potassium current (I Kr ) and a 
slowly activating potassium current (I Ks ). These two potassium cur-
rents are sometimes discussed together as “I K .” It is noteworthy that 
a different potassium current, distinct from I Kr and I Ks , may control 
repolarization in SA nodal cells. This explains why some drugs that 
block either I Kr or I Ks may prolong repolarization in Purkinje and 
ventricular cells, but have little effect on SA nodal repolarization 
(see Box: Molecular & Genetic Basis of Cardiac Arrhythmias).  
 The Effect of Resting Potential 
on Action Potentials 
 A key factor in the pathophysiology of arrhythmias and the 
actions of antiarrhythmic drugs is the relation between the resting 
potential of a cell and the action potentials that can be evoked in 
it ( Figure 14–4 , left panel). Because the inactivation gates of 
sodium channels in the resting membrane close over the potential 
range −75 to −55 mV, fewer sodium channels are “available” for 
diffusion of sodium ions when an action potential is evoked from 
a resting potential of −60 mV than when it is evoked from a resting 
potential of −80 mV. Important consequences of the reduction in 
peak sodium permeability include reduced maximum upstroke 
velocity (called  .Vmax , for maximum rate of change of membrane 
voltage), reduced action potential amplitude, reduced excitability, 
and reduced conduction velocity. 
 During the plateau of the action potential, most sodium chan-
nels are inactivated. Upon repolarization, recovery from inactiva-
tion takes place (in the terminology of  Figure 14–3 , the  h gates 
reopen), making the channels again available for excitation. The 
time between phase 0 and sufficient recovery of sodium channels 
in phase 3 to permit a new propagated response to an external 
stimulus is the  refractory period. Changes in refractoriness 
(determined by either altered recovery from inactivation or altered 
action potential duration) can be important in the genesis or sup-
pression of certain arrhythmias. Another important effect of less 
negative resting potential is prolongation of this recovery time, as 
shown in  Figure 14–4 (right panel). The prolongation of recovery 
time is reflected in an increase in the effective refractory period. 
 A brief, sudden, depolarizing stimulus, whether caused by 
a propagating action potential or by an external electrode 
arrangement, causes the opening of large numbers of activation 
gates before a significant number of inactivation gates can close. 
In contrast, slow reduction (depolarization) of the resting poten-
tial, whether brought about by hyperkalemia, sodium pump 
blockade, or ischemic cell damage, results in depressed sodium 
currents during the upstrokes of action potentials. Depolarization 
of the resting potential to levels positive to −55 mV abolishes 
sodium currents, since all sodium channels are inactivated. 
However, such severely depolarized cells have been found to sup-
port special action potentials under circumstances that increase 
calcium permeability or decrease potassium permeability. These 
“slow responses”—slow upstroke velocity and slow conduction—
depend on a calcium inward current and constitute the normal 
electrical activity in the SA and AV nodes, since these tissues 
have a normal resting potential in the range of −50 to −70 mV. 
Slow responses may also be important for certain arrhythmias. 
 Modern techniques of molecular biology and electrophysiol-
ogy can identify multiple subtypes of calcium and potassium 
channels. One way in which such subtypes may differ is in sensi-
tivity to drug effects, so drugs targeting specific channel subtypes 
may be developed in the future. 
 MECHANISMS OF ARRHYTHMIAS 
 Many factors can precipitate or exacerbate arrhythmias: ischemia, 
hypoxia, acidosis or alkalosis, electrolyte abnormalities, excessive 
catecholamine exposure, autonomic influences, drug toxicity (eg, 
digitalis or antiarrhythmic drugs), overstretching of cardiac fibers, 
and the presence of scarred or otherwise diseased tissue. However, all 
arrhythmias result from (1) disturbances in impulse formation, (2) 
disturbances in impulse conduction, or (3) both. 
 Disturbances of Impulse Formation 
 The interval between depolarizations of a pacemaker cell is the 
sum of the duration of the action potential and the duration of the 
diastolic interval. Shortening of either duration results in an 
232    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 It is now possible to define the molecular basis of several congenital 
and acquired cardiac arrhythmias. The best example is the polymor-
phic ventricular tachycardia known as torsades de pointes (shown in 
 Figure 14–8 ), which is associated with prolongation of the QT interval 
(especially at the onset of the tachycardia), syncope, and sudden 
death. This must represent prolongation of the action potential of at 
least some ventricular cells ( Figure 14–1 ). The effect can, in theory, be 
attributed to either increased inward current (gain of function) or 
decreased outward current (loss of function) during the plateau of 
the action potential. In fact, recent molecular genetic studies have 
identified up to 300 different mutations in at least eight ion channel 
genes that produce the congenital long QT (LQT) syndrome 
( Table 14–1 ), and different mutations may have different clinical 
implications. Loss-of-function mutations in potassium channel genes 
produce decreases in outward repolarizing current and are respon-
sible for LQT subtypes 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7.  HERG and  KCNE2 ( MiRP1 ) genes 
encode subunits of the rapid delayed rectifier potassium current (I Kr ), 
whereas  KCNQ1 and  KCNE1 ( minK ) encode subunits of the slow 
delayed rectifier potassium current (I Ks ).  KCNJ2 encodes an inwardly 
rectifying potassium current (I Kir ). In contrast, gain-of-function muta-
tions in the sodium channel gene ( SCN5A ) or calcium channel gene 
( CACNA1c ) cause increases in inward plateau current and are respon-
sible for LQT subtypes 3 and 8, respectively. 
 Molecular genetic studies have identified the reason why con-
genital and acquired cases of torsades de pointes can be so strik-
ingly similar. The potassium channel I Kr (encoded by  HERG ) is 
blocked or modified by many drugs (eg, quinidine, sotalol) or elec-
trolyte abnormalities (hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalce-
mia) that also produce torsades de pointes. Thus, the identification 
of the precise molecular mechanisms underlying various forms of 
 Molecular & Genetic Basis of Cardiac Arrhythmias
 the LQT syndromes now raises the possibility that specific therapies 
may be developed for individuals with defined molecular abnor-
malities. Indeed, preliminary reports suggest that the sodium chan-
nel blocker mexiletine can correct the clinical manifestations of 
congenital LQT subtype 3 syndrome. It is likely that torsades de 
pointes originates from triggered upstrokes arising from early after-
depolarizations ( Figure 14–5 ). Thus, therapy is directed at correcting 
hypokalemia, eliminating triggered upstrokes (eg, by using β block-
ers or magnesium), or shortening the action potential (eg, by 
increasing heart rate with isoproterenol or pacing)—or all of these. 
 The molecular basis of several other congenital cardiac arrhyth-
mias associated with sudden death has also recently been identi-
fied. Three forms of short QT syndrome have been identified that 
are linked to gain-of-function mutations in three different potas-
sium channel genes ( KCNH2, KCNQ1, and  KCNJ2 ). Catecholaminergic 
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, a disease that is characterized 
by stress- or emotion-induced syncope, can be caused by genetic 
mutations in two different proteins in the sarcoplasmic reticulum 
that control intracellular calcium homeostasis. Mutations in two 
different ion channel genes ( HCN4 and  SCN5A ) have been linked to 
congenital forms of sick sinus syndrome. The Brugada syndrome, 
which is characterized by ventricular fibrillation associated with 
persistent ST-segment elevation, and progressive cardiac conduc-
tion disorder (PCCD), characterized by impaired conduction in the 
His-Purkinje system and right or left bundle block leading to com-
plete atrioventricular block, have both been linked to several loss-
of-function mutations in the sodium channel gene,  SCN5A . At least 
one form of familial atrial fibrillation is caused by a gain-of-function 
mutation in the potassium channel gene,  KCNQ1 . 
Drug
Resting membrane potential (mV)
Control
Drug
Control
Channels available, percent of maximum
Recovery time constant (ms)
100
0
–120
–100
–80
–60
Resting membrane potential (mV)
100,000
10,000
1000
100
10
0
–120
–100
–80
–60
 FIGURE 14–4  Dependence of sodium channel function on the membrane potential preceding the stimulus.  Left: The fraction of sodium 
channels available for opening in response to a stimulus is determined by the membrane potential immediately preceding the stimulus. The 
decrease in the fraction available when the resting potential is depolarized in the absence of a drug (control curve) results from the 
voltage-dependent closure of  h gates in the channels. The curve labeled  Drug illustrates the effect of a typical local anesthetic antiarrhythmic 
drug. Most sodium channels are inactivated during the plateau of the action potential.  Right: The time constant for recovery from inactivation 
after repolarization also depends on the resting potential. In the absence of drug, recovery occurs in less than 10 ms at normal resting poten-
tials (−85 to −95 mV). Depolarized cells recover more slowly (note logarithmic scale). In the presence of a sodium channel-blocking drug, the 
time constant of recovery is increased, but the increase is far greater at depolarized potentials than at more negative ones. 
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    233
TABLE 14–1 Molecular and genetic basis of some cardiac arrhythmias.
Type
Chromosome
Involved
Defective Gene
Ion Channel or
Proteins Affected
Result
LQT-1
11
KCNQ1
IKs
LF
LQT-2
7
KCNH2 (HERG)
IKr
LF
LQT-3
3
SCN5A
INa
GF
LQT-4
4
Ankyrin-B1
LF
LQT-5
21
KCNE1 (minK)
IKs
LF
LQT-6
21
KCNE2 (MiRP1)
IKr
LF
LQT-72
17
KCNJ2
IKir
LF
LQT-83
12
CACNA1c
ICa
GF
SQT-1
7
KCNH2
IKr
GF
SQT-2
11
KCNQ1
IKs
GF
SQT-3
17
KCNJ2
IKir
GF
CPVT-14
1
hRyR2
Ryanodine receptor
GF
CPVT-2
1
CASQ2
Calsequestrin
LF
Sick sinus syndrome
15 or 3
HCN4 or SCN5A5
LF
Brugada syndrome
3
SCN5A
INa
LF
PCCD
3
SCN5A
INa
LF
Familial atrial fibrillation
11
KCNQ1
IKs
GF
1Ankyrins are intracellular proteins that associate with a variety of transport proteins including Na+ channels, Na+/K+-ATPase, Na+, Ca2+ exchange, and Ca2+ release channels.
2Also known as Andersen syndrome.
3Also known as Timothy syndrome; multiple organ dysfunction, including autism.
4CPVT, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia; mutations in intracellular ryanodine Ca2+ release channel or the Ca2+ buffer protein, calsequestrin, may result in 
enhanced sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ leakage or enhanced Ca2+ release during adrenergic stimulation, causing triggered arrhythmogenesis.
5HCN4 encodes a pacemaker current in sinoatrial nodal cells; mutations in sodium channel gene (SCN5A) cause conduction defects.
GF, gain of function; LF, loss of function; LQT, long QT syndrome; PCCD, progressive cardiac conduction disorder; SQT, short QT syndrome.
increase in pacemaker rate. The more important of the two, dia-
stolic interval, is determined primarily by the slope of phase
4 depolarization (pacemaker potential). Vagal discharge and 
β-receptor–blocking drugs slow normal pacemaker rate by reduc-
ing the phase 4 slope (acetylcholine also makes the maximum 
diastolic potential more negative). Acceleration of pacemaker dis-
charge is often brought about by increased phase 4 depolarization 
slope, which can be caused by hypokalemia, β-adrenoceptor 
stimulation, positive chronotropic drugs, fiber stretch, acidosis, 
and partial depolarization by currents of injury. 
 Latent pacemakers (cells that show slow phase 4 depolarization 
even under normal conditions, eg, some Purkinje fibers) are par-
ticularly prone to acceleration by the above mechanisms. However, 
all cardiac cells, including normally quiescent atrial and ventricu-
lar cells, may show repetitive pacemaker activity when depolarized 
under appropriate conditions, especially if hypokalemia is also 
present. 
 Afterdepolarizations ( Figure 14–5 ) are transient depolariza-
tions that interrupt phase 3  (early afterdepolarizations, EADs) 
or phase 4  (delayed afterdepolarizations, DADs). EADs are usu-
ally exacerbated at  slow heart rates and are thought to contribute 
to the development of long QT-related arrhythmias (see Box: 
Molecular & Genetic Basis of Cardiac Arrhythmias). DADs, on 
the other hand, often occur when intracellular calcium is increased 
(see  Chapter 13 ). They are exacerbated by  fast heart rates and are 
thought to be responsible for some arrhythmias related to digitalis 
excess, to catecholamines, and to myocardial ischemia. 
 Disturbances of Impulse Conduction 
 Severely depressed conduction may result in simple  block, eg, AV 
nodal block or bundle branch block. Because parasympathetic con-
trol of AV conduction is significant, partial AV block is sometimes 
relieved by atropine. Another common abnormality of conduction 
is  reentry (also known as “circus movement”), in which one 
impulse reenters and excites areas of the heart more than once 
( Figure 14–6 ). 
 The path of the reentering impulse may be confined to very small 
areas, eg, within or near the AV node, or it may involve large portions 
of the atrial or ventricular walls. Some forms of reentry are strictly 
anatomically determined; for example, in Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome, the reentry circuit consists of atrial tissue, the AV node, 
ventricular tissue, and an accessory AV connection (bundle of Kent, 
a bypass tract). In other cases (eg, atrial or ventricular fibrillation), 
234    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
multiple reentry circuits, determined by the varying properties of the 
cardiac tissue, may meander through the heart in apparently random 
paths. The circulating impulse often gives off “daughter impulses” 
that can spread to the rest of the heart. Depending on how many 
round trips through the pathway the reentrant impulse makes before 
dying out, the arrhythmia may be manifest as one or a few extra beats 
or as a sustained tachycardia. 
 For reentry to occur, three conditions must coexist, as indi-
cated in  Figure 14–6 . (1) There must be an obstacle (anatomic 
or physiologic) to homogeneous conduction, thus establishing 
a circuit around which the reentrant wavefront can propagate. 
(2) There must be unidirectional block at some point in the 
circuit; that is, conduction must die out in one direction but 
continue in the opposite direction (as shown in  Figure 14–6 , the 
impulse can gradually decrease as it invades progressively more 
depolarized tissue until it finally blocks—a process known as dec-
remental conduction). (3) Conduction time around the circuit 
must be long enough that the retrograde impulse does not enter 
refractory tissue as it travels around the obstacle; that is, the con-
duction time must exceed the effective refractory period. It is 
important to note that reentry depends on conduction that has 
been depressed by some critical amount, usually as a result of 
injury or ischemia. If conduction velocity is too slow, bidirectional 
block rather than unidirectional block occurs; if the reentering 
impulse is too weak, conduction may fail, or the impulse may 
arrive so late that it collides with the next regular impulse. On the 
other hand, if conduction is too rapid—ie, almost normal—bidi-
rectional conduction rather than unidirectional block will occur. 
Even in the presence of unidirectional block, if the impulse travels 
around the obstacle too rapidly, it will reach tissue that is still 
refractory. Representative electrocardiograms of important arrhyth-
mias are shown in  Figures 14–7 and  14–8 . 
 Slowing of conduction may be due to depression of sodium 
current, depression of calcium current (the latter especially in the 
AV node), or both. Drugs that abolish reentry usually work by 
 FIGURE 14–6  Schematic diagram of a reentry circuit that might occur in small bifurcating branches of the Purkinje system where they 
enter the ventricular wall.  A: Normally, electrical excitation branches around the circuit, is transmitted to the ventricular branches, and becomes 
extinguished at the other end of the circuit due to collision of impulses.  B: An area of unidirectional block develops in one of the branches, pre-
venting anterograde impulse transmission at the site of block, but the retrograde impulse may be propagated through the site of block if the 
impulse finds excitable tissue; that is, the refractory period is shorter than the conduction time. This impulse then reexcites tissue it had previ-
ously passed through, and a reentry arrhythmia is established. 
A. Normal conduction
B. Unidirectional block
Purkinje twig
Depressed region
Retrograde
impulse
Forward impulse
obstructed and extinguished
Early afterdepolarization
(arises from the plateau)
Delayed afterdepolarization
(arises from the resting 
potential)
Prolonged
plateau
0 mV
–70
0 mV
–70
0.5 sec
 FIGURE 14–5  Two forms of abnormal activity, early ( top ) and 
delayed afterdepolarizations ( bottom ). In both cases, abnormal 
depolarizations arise during or after a normally evoked action poten-
tial. They are therefore often referred to as “triggered” automaticity; 
that is, they require a normal action potential for their initiation. 
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    235
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE ANTIARRHYTHMIC AGENTS 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Arrhythmias are caused by abnormal pacemaker activity or abnor-
mal impulse propagation. Thus, the aim of therapy of the arrhyth-
mias is to reduce ectopic pacemaker activity and modify conduction 
or refractoriness in reentry circuits to disable circus movement. 
The major pharmacologic mechanisms currently available for 
accomplishing these goals are (1) sodium channel blockade, (2) 
blockade of sympathetic autonomic effects in the heart, (3) pro-
longation of the effective refractory period, and (4) calcium chan-
nel blockade. 
 Antiarrhythmic drugs decrease the automaticity of ectopic pace-
makers more than that of the SA node. They also reduce conduction 
and excitability and increase the refractory period to a greater extent 
in depolarized tissue than in normally polarized tissue. This is 
accomplished chiefly by selectively blocking the sodium or calcium 
channels of depolarized cells ( Figure 14–9 ). Therapeutically useful 
channel-blocking drugs bind readily to activated channels (ie, dur-
ing phase 0) or inactivated channels (ie, during phase 2) but bind 
poorly or not at all to rested channels. Therefore, these drugs block 
electrical activity when there is a fast tachycardia (many channel 
activations and inactivations per unit time) or when there is signifi-
cant loss of resting potential (many inactivated channels during 
rest). This type of drug action is often described as  use-dependent 
or  state-dependent; that is, channels that are being used frequently, 
or in an inactivated state, are more susceptible to block. Channels 
in normal cells that become blocked by a drug during normal 
activation-inactivation cycles will rapidly lose the drug from the 
receptors during the resting portion of the cycle ( Figure 14–9 ). 
Channels in myocardium that is chronically depolarized (ie, has a 
resting potential more positive than −75 mV) recover from block 
very slowly if at all (see also right panel,  Figure 14–4 ). 
 In cells with abnormal automaticity, most of these drugs reduce 
the phase 4 slope by blocking either sodium or calcium channels, 
thereby reducing the ratio of sodium (or calcium) permeability to 
potassium permeability. As a result, the membrane potential during 
phase 4 stabilizes closer to the potassium equilibrium potential. In 
addition, some agents may increase the threshold (make it more 
positive). β-Adrenoceptor–blocking drugs indirectly reduce the 
phase 4 slope by blocking the positive chronotropic action of nor-
epinephrine in the heart. 
 In reentry arrhythmias, which depend on critically depressed 
conduction, most antiarrhythmic agents slow conduction fur-
ther by one or both of two mechanisms: (1) steady-state 
reduction in the number of available unblocked channels, 
which reduces the excitatory currents to a level below that 
required for propagation ( Figure 14–4 , left); and (2) prolonga-
tion of recovery time of the channels still able to reach the rested 
and available state, which increases the effective refractory period 
( Figure 14–4 , right). As a result, early extrasystoles are unable to 
propagate at all; later impulses propagate more slowly and are 
subject to bidirectional conduction block. 
 FIGURE 14–7  Electrocardiograms of normal sinus rhythm and 
some common arrhythmias. Major deflections (P, Q, R, S, and T) are 
labeled in each electrocardiographic record except in panel 5, in 
which electrical activity is completely disorganized and none of these 
deflections is recognizable. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from 
Goldman MJ:  Principles of Clinical Electrocardiography , 11th ed. McGraw-Hill, 1982.) 
T
T
T
V1
P
R
T
aVF
P'
S
S
S
S
S
R
QS
QS
T
T
T
R
R
After digitalis
Before digitalis
S
P'
P'
R
P'
P'
P'
V2
V1
Panel 3:
Atrial
fibrillation
Panel 2:
Atrial
flutter
Panel 1:
Normal
sinus
rhythm
Panel 4:
Ventricular
tachycardia
(starting at
arrow)
Panel 5:
Ventricular
fibrillation
V1
V4
further slowing depressed conduction (by blocking the sodium or 
calcium current) and causing bidirectional block. In theory, accel-
erating conduction (by increasing sodium or calcium current) 
would also be effective, but only under unusual circumstances 
does this mechanism explain the action of any available drug. 
 Lengthening (or shortening) of the refractory period may also 
make reentry less likely. The longer the refractory period in tissue 
near the site of block, the greater the chance that the tissue will 
still be refractory when reentry is attempted. (Alternatively, the 
shorter the refractory period in the depressed region, the less likely 
it is that unidirectional block will occur.) Thus, increased disper-
sion of refractoriness is one contributor to reentry, and drugs may 
suppress arrhythmias by reducing such dispersion. 
236    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 FIGURE 14–8  Electrocardiogram from a patient with the long QT syndrome during two episodes of torsades de pointes. The polymorphic 
ventricular tachycardia is seen at the start of this tracing and spontaneously halts at the middle of the panel. A single normal sinus beat (NSB) 
with an extremely prolonged QT interval follows, succeeded immediately by another episode of ventricular tachycardia of the torsades type. 
The usual symptoms include dizziness or transient loss of consciousness. (Reproduced, with permission, from  Basic and Clinical Pharmacology , 10th edition, 
McGraw-Hill, 2007.) 
Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
(torsade de pointes)
Prolonged QT interval
NSB
 By these mechanisms, antiarrhythmic drugs can suppress ecto-
pic automaticity and abnormal conduction occurring in depolar-
ized cells—rendering them electrically silent—while minimally 
affecting the electrical activity in normally polarized parts of the 
heart. However, as dosage is increased, these agents also depress 
conduction in normal tissue, eventually resulting in  drug-in-
duced arrhythmias. Furthermore, a drug concentration that is 
therapeutic (antiarrhythmic) under the initial circumstances of 
treatment may become “proarrhythmic” (arrhythmogenic) dur-
ing fast heart rates (more development of block), acidosis 
(slower recovery from block for most drugs), hyperkalemia, or 
ischemia. 
 ■ SPECIFIC ANTIARRHYTHMIC 
AGENTS 
 The most widely used scheme for the classification of antiarrhyth-
mic drug actions recognizes four classes: 
 1. Class 1 action is sodium channel blockade. Subclasses 
of this action reflect effects on the action potential 
duration (APD) and the kinetics of sodium channel 
blockade. Drugs with class 1A action prolong the APD 
and dissociate from the channel with intermediate 
kinetics; drugs with class 1B action shorten the APD in 
some tissues of the heart and dissociate from the chan-
nel with rapid kinetics; and drugs with class 1C action 
have minimal effects on the APD and dissociate from 
the channel with slow kinetics. 
2.  Class 2 action is sympatholytic. Drugs with this action 
reduce β-adrenergic activity in the heart. 
3.  Class 3 action manifests as prolongation of the APD. Most 
drugs with this action block the rapid component of the 
delayed rectifier potassium current, I Kr . 
 4. Class 4 action is blockade of the cardiac calcium current. This 
action slows conduction in regions where the action potential 
upstroke is calcium dependent, eg, the SA and AV nodes. 
 A given drug may have multiple classes of action as indicated 
by its membrane and electrocardiographic (ECG) effects ( Tables 
14–2 and  14–3 ). For example, amiodarone shares all four classes 
of action. Drugs are usually discussed according to the predomi-
nant class of action. Certain antiarrhythmic agents, eg, adenosine 
and magnesium, do not fit readily into this scheme and are 
described separately. 
 SODIUM CHANNEL-BLOCKING 
DRUGS (CLASS 1) 
 Drugs with local anesthetic action block sodium channels and 
reduce the sodium current, I Na . They are the oldest group of anti-
arrhythmic drugs and are still widely used. 
 PROCAINAMIDE (SUBGROUP 1A) 
 Cardiac Effects 
 By blocking sodium channels, procainamide slows the upstroke 
of the action potential, slows conduction, and prolongs the QRS 
duration of the ECG. The drug also prolongs the APD (a class 3 
action) by nonspecific blockade of potassium channels. The drug 
may be somewhat less effective than quinidine (see below) in 
suppressing abnormal ectopic pacemaker activity but more effec-
tive in blocking sodium channels in depolarized cells. 
O
C
Procainamide
CH2
H2N
CH2
H
N
N
C2H5
C2H5
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    237
 Procainamide has direct depressant actions on SA and AV nodes, 
and these actions are only slightly counterbalanced by drug-
induced vagal block. 
 Extracardiac Effects 
 Procainamide has ganglion-blocking properties. This action 
reduces peripheral vascular resistance and can cause hypotension, 
particularly with intravenous use. However, in therapeutic con-
centrations, its peripheral vascular effects are less prominent than 
those of quinidine. Hypotension is usually associated with exces-
sively rapid procainamide infusion or the presence of severe 
underlying left ventricular dysfunction. 
 Toxicity 
 Procainamide’s cardiotoxic effects include excessive action poten-
tial prolongation, QT-interval prolongation, and induction 
of torsades de pointes arrhythmia and syncope. Excessive slow-
ing of conduction can also occur. New arrhythmias can be 
precipitated. 
 A troublesome adverse effect of long-term procainamide 
therapy is a syndrome resembling lupus erythematosus and usu-
ally consisting of arthralgia and arthritis. In some patients, 
pleuritis, pericarditis, or parenchymal pulmonary disease also 
occurs. Renal lupus is rarely induced by procainamide. During 
long-term therapy, serologic abnormalities (eg, increased anti-
nuclear antibody titer) occur in nearly all patients, and in the 
absence of symptoms, these are not an indication to stop drug 
therapy. Approximately one third of patients receiving long-
term procainamide therapy develop these reversible lupus-
related symptoms. 
 Other adverse effects include nausea and diarrhea (in about 
10% of cases), rash, fever, hepatitis (< 5%), and agranulocytosis 
(approximately 0.2%). 
 FIGURE 14–9  State- and frequency-dependent block of sodium channels by antiarrhythmic drugs.  Top: Diagram of a mechanism for the 
selective depressant action of antiarrhythmic drugs on sodium channels. The upper portion of the figure shows the population of channels 
moving through a cycle of activity during an action potential in the absence of drugs: R (rested) → A (activated) → I (inactivated). Recovery 
takes place via the I → R pathway. Antiarrhythmic drugs (D) that act by blocking sodium channels can bind to their receptors in the channels, as 
shown by the vertical arrows, to form drug-channel complexes, indicated as R-D, A-D, and I-D. Binding of the drugs to the receptor varies with 
the state of the channel. Most sodium channel blockers bind to the active and inactivated channel receptor much more strongly than to the 
rested channel. Furthermore, recovery from the I-D state to the R-D state is much slower than from I to R. As a result, rapid activity (more activa-
tions and inactivations) and depolarization of the resting potential (more channels in the I state) will favor blockade of the channels and selec-
tively suppress arrhythmic cells.  Bottom: Progressive reduction of inward sodium current (downward deflections) in the presence of a lidocaine 
derivative. The largest curve is the initial sodium current elicited by a depolarizing voltage step; subsequent sodium current amplitudes are pro-
gressively reduced owing to prior accumulated block and block during each depolarization. (Adapted, with permission, from Starmer FC, Grant AO, Strauss 
HC: Mechanisms of use-dependent block of sodium channels in excitable membranes by local anesthetics. Biophys J 1984;46:15.) 
R
A
I
R-D
A-D
I-D
Unblocked
Blocked
Sodium current (microamps / cm2)
0
–460
–920
–1380
–1840
–2300
Time (ms)
0
1
2
3
4
5
238    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Procainamide can be administered safely by intravenous and intra-
muscular routes and is well absorbed orally. A metabolite 
( N -acetylprocainamide, NAPA) has class 3 activity. Excessive 
accumulation of NAPA has been implicated in torsades de pointes 
during procainamide therapy, especially in patients with renal 
failure. Some individuals rapidly acetylate procainamide and 
develop high levels of NAPA. The lupus syndrome appears to be 
less common in these patients. 
 Procainamide is eliminated by hepatic metabolism to NAPA 
and by renal elimination. Its half-life is only 3–4 hours, which 
necessitates frequent dosing or use of a slow-release formulation 
(the usual practice). NAPA is eliminated by the kidneys. Thus, 
procainamide dosage must be reduced in patients with renal fail-
ure. The reduced volume of distribution and renal clearance associ-
ated with heart failure also require reduction in dosage. The 
half-life of NAPA is considerably longer than that of procainamide, 
and it therefore accumulates more slowly. Thus, it is important to 
measure plasma levels of both procainamide and NAPA, especially 
in patients with circulatory or renal impairment. 
 If a rapid procainamide effect is needed, an intravenous load-
ing dose of up to 12 mg/kg can be given at a rate of 0.3 mg/kg/
min or less rapidly. This dose is followed by a maintenance dosage 
of 2–5 mg/min, with careful monitoring of plasma levels. The risk 
of gastrointestinal (GI) or cardiac toxicity rises at plasma concen-
trations greater than 8 mcg/mL or NAPA concentrations greater 
than 20 mcg/mL. 
 To control ventricular arrhythmias, a total procainamide dos-
age of 2–5 g/d is usually required. In an occasional patient who 
accumulates high levels of NAPA, less frequent dosing may be 
possible. This is also possible in renal disease, where procainamide 
elimination is slowed. 
 Therapeutic Use 
 Procainamide is effective against most atrial and ventricular 
arrhythmias. However, many clinicians attempt to avoid long-
term therapy because of the requirement for frequent dosing and 
the common occurrence of lupus-related effects. Procainamide is 
the drug of second or third choice (after lidocaine or amiodarone) 
in most coronary care units for the treatment of sustained ven-
tricular arrhythmias associated with acute myocardial infarction. 
 QUINIDINE (SUBGROUP 1A) 
 Cardiac Effects 
 Quinidine has actions similar to those of procainamide: it slows the 
upstroke of the action potential, slows conduction, and prolongs 
TABLE 14–2 Membrane actions of antiarrhythmic drugs.
Drug
     Block of Sodium Channels
 Refractory Period
Calcium 
Channel 
Blockade
Effect on 
Pacemaker 
Activity
Sympatholytic 
Action
Normal Cells
Depolarized 
Cells
Normal Cells
Depolarized Cells
Adenosine
0
0
0
0
+
0
+
Amiodarone
+
+++
↑↑
↑↑
+
↓↓
+
Diltiazem
0
0
0
0
+++
↓↓
0
Disopyramide
+
+++
↑
↑↑
+
↓
0
Dofetilide
0
0
↑
?
0
0
0
Dronedarone
+
+
na
na
+
na
+
Esmolol
0
+
0
na
0
↓↓
+++
Flecainide
+
+++
0
↑
0
↓↓
0
Ibutilide
0
0
↑
?
0
0
0
Lidocaine
0
+++
↓
↑↑
0
↓↓
0
Mexiletine
0
+++
0
↑↑
0
↓↓
0
Procainamide
+
+++
↑
↑↑↑
0
↓
+
Propafenone
+
++
↑
↑↑
+
↓↓
+
Propranolol
0
+
↓
↑↑
0
↓↓
+++
Quinidine
+
++
↑
↑↑
0
↓↓
+
Sotalol
0
0
↑↑
↑↑↑
0
↓↓
++
Verapamil
0
+
0
↑
+++
↓↓
+
Vernakalant
+
+
+
+
na
0
na
na, data not available.
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    239
the QRS duration of the ECG, by blockade of sodium channels. 
The drug also prolongs the action potential duration by blockade 
of several potassium channels. Its toxic cardiac effects include 
excessive QT-interval prolongation and induction of torsades 
de pointes arrhythmia. Toxic concentrations of quinidine also 
produce excessive sodium channel blockade with slowed 
conduction throughout the heart. 
N
N
CH
CH2
Quinidine
H
OH
CH3
O
C
 Extracardiac Effects 
 Adverse GI effects of diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting are observed 
in one third to one half of patients. A syndrome of headache, dizziness, 
and tinnitus  (cinchonism) is observed at toxic drug concentra-
tions. Idiosyncratic or immunologic reactions, including thrombo-
cytopenia, hepatitis, angioneurotic edema, and fever, are observed 
rarely. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Therapeutic Use 
 Quinidine is readily absorbed from the GI tract and eliminated by 
hepatic metabolism. It is rarely used because of cardiac and extra-
cardiac adverse effects and the availability of better-tolerated anti-
arrhythmic drugs. 
 DISOPYRAMIDE (SUBGROUP 1A) 
 Cardiac Effects 
 The effects of disopyramide are very similar to those of procain-
amide and quinidine. Its cardiac antimuscarinic effects are even 
more marked than those of quinidine. Therefore, a drug that slows 
AV conduction should be administered with disopyramide when 
treating atrial flutter or fibrillation. 
TABLE 14–3 Clinical pharmacologic properties of antiarrhythmic drugs.
Effect on SA 
Nodal Rate
Effect on AV 
Nodal 
Refractory 
Period
PR Interval
QRS 
Duration
QT 
Interval
Usefulness in Arrhythmias
Drug
Supra–
ventricular
Ventricular
Half-Life
Adenosine
↓ ↑
↑↑↑
↑↑↑
0
0
++++
?
< 10 s
Amiodarone
↓↓1
↑↑
Variable
↑
↑↑↑↑
+++
+++
(weeks)
Diltiazem
↑↓
↑↑
↑
0
0
+++
–
4–8 h
Disopyramide
↑↓1,2
↑↓2
↑↓2
↑↑
↑↑
+
+++
7–8 h
Dofetilide
↓(?)
0
0
0
↑↑
++
None
7 h
Dronedarone
↑
+++
–
24 h
Esmolol
↓↓
↑↑
↑↑
0
0
+
+
10 min
Flecainide
None,↓
↑
↑
↑↑↑
0
+3
++++
20 h
Ibutilide
↓ (?)
0
0
0
↑↑
++
?
6 h
Lidocaine
None1
None
0
0
0
None4
+++
1–2 h
Mexiletine
None1
None
0
0
0
None
+++
12 h
Procainamide
↓1
↑↓2
↑↓2
↑↑
↑↑
+
+++
3–4 h
Propafenone
0, ↓
↑
↑
↑↑↑
0
+
+++
5–7 h
Propranolol
↓↓
↑↑
↑↑
0
0
+
+
5 h
Quinidine
↑↓1,2
↑↓2
↑↓2
↑↑
↑↑
+
+++
6 h
Sotalol
↓↓
↑↑
↑↑
0
↑↑↑
+++
+++
7 h
Verapamil
↓↓
↑↑
↑↑
0
0
+++
–
7 h
Vernakalant
↑
↑
+++
–
2 h
1May suppress diseased sinus nodes.
2Anticholinergic effect and direct depressant action.
3Especially in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.
4May be effective in atrial arrhythmias caused by digitalis.
5Half-life of active metabolites much longer.
240    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
C
N
N
O
C
Disopyramide
CH2
H2N
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
CH2
 Toxicity 
 Toxic concentrations of disopyramide can precipitate all of the 
electrophysiologic disturbances described under quinidine. As a 
result of its negative inotropic effect, disopyramide may precipi-
tate heart failure de novo or in patients with preexisting depression 
of left ventricular function. Because of this effect, disopyramide is 
not used as a first-line antiarrhythmic agent in the USA. It should 
not be used in patients with heart failure. 
 Disopyramide’s atropine-like activity accounts for most of its 
symptomatic adverse effects: urinary retention (most often, but 
not exclusively, in male patients with prostatic hyperplasia), dry 
mouth, blurred vision, constipation, and worsening of preexisting 
glaucoma. These effects may require discontinuation of the drug. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 In the USA, disopyramide is only available for oral use. The typi-
cal oral dosage of disopyramide is 150 mg three times a day, but 
up to 1 g/d has been used. In patients with renal impairment, dos-
age must be reduced. Because of the danger of precipitating heart 
failure, loading doses are not recommended. 
 Therapeutic Use 
 Although disopyramide has been shown to be effective in a variety 
of supraventricular arrhythmias, in the USA it is approved only for 
the treatment of ventricular arrhythmias. 
 LIDOCAINE (SUBGROUP 1B) 
 Lidocaine has a low incidence of toxicity and a high degree of 
effectiveness in arrhythmias associated with acute myocardial 
infarction. It is used only by the intravenous route. 
O
C
Lidocaine
CH2
CH3
H
N
CH3
N
C2H5
C2H5
 Cardiac Effects 
 Lidocaine blocks activated and inactivated sodium channels with 
rapid kinetics ( Figure 14–10 ); the inactivated state block ensures 
greater effects on cells with long action potentials such as Purkinje 
and ventricular cells, compared with atrial cells. The rapid kinetics 
at normal resting potentials result in recovery from block between 
action potentials and no effect on conduction. The increased inac-
tivation and slower unbinding kinetics result in the selective 
depression of conduction in depolarized cells. Little effect is seen 
on the ECG in normal sinus rhythm. 
 Toxicity 
 Lidocaine is one of the least cardiotoxic of the currently used 
sodium channel blockers. Proarrhythmic effects, including SA node 
arrest, worsening of impaired conduction, and ventricular arrhyth-
mias, are uncommon with lidocaine use. In large doses, especially in 
patients with preexisting heart failure, lidocaine may cause hypoten-
sion—partly by depressing myocardial contractility. 
 Lidocaine’s most common adverse effects—like those of other 
local anesthetics—are neurologic: paresthesias, tremor, nausea of 
central origin, lightheadedness, hearing disturbances, slurred speech, 
and convulsions. These occur most commonly in elderly or other-
wise vulnerable patients or when a bolus of the drug is given too 
800
100
0
0
–100
–85
–80
–75
Channels blocked (%)
Membrane potential (mV)
–70
Time (ms)
 FIGURE 14–10  Computer simulation of the effect of resting 
membrane potential on the blocking and unblocking of sodium channels 
by lidocaine as the membrane depolarizes.  Upper tracing: Action potentials 
in a ventricular muscle cell.  Lower tracing: Percentage of channels 
blocked by the drug. An 800 ms time segment is shown. Extra passage of 
time is indicated by breaks in the traces.  Left side: At the normal resting 
potential of –85 mV, the drug combines with open (activated) and 
inactivated channels during each action potential, but block is rapidly 
reversed during diastole because the affinity of the drug for its receptor is 
so low when the channel recovers to the resting state at –85 mV.  Middle: 
Metabolic injury is simulated, eg, ischemia due to coronary occlusion, 
that causes gradual depolarization over time. With subsequent action 
potentials arising from more depolarized potentials, the fraction of channels 
blocked increases because more channels remain in the inactivated state 
at less negative potentials ( Figure 14–4 , left), and the time constant for 
unblocking during diastole rapidly increases at less negative resting 
potentials ( Figure 14–4 , right).  Right: Because of marked drug binding, 
conduction block and loss of excitability in this tissue result; that is, the 
“sick” (depolarized) tissue is selectively suppressed. 
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    241
rapidly. The effects are dose-related and usually short-lived; seizures 
respond to intravenous diazepam. In general, if plasma levels above 
9 mcg/mL are avoided, lidocaine is well tolerated. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Because of its extensive first-pass hepatic metabolism, only 3% of 
orally administered lidocaine appears in the plasma. Thus, lido-
caine must be given parenterally. Lidocaine has a half-life of 1–2 
hours. In adults, a loading dose of 150–200 mg administered 
over about 15 minutes (as a single infusion or as a series of slow 
boluses) should be followed by a maintenance infusion of 2–4 
mg/min to achieve a therapeutic plasma level of 2–6 mcg/mL. 
Determination of lidocaine plasma levels is of great value in 
adjusting the infusion rate. Occasional patients with myocardial 
infarction or other acute illness require (and tolerate) higher con-
centrations. This may be due to increased plasma α 1 -acid glyco-
protein, an acute-phase reactant protein that binds lidocaine, 
making less free drug available to exert its pharmacologic effects. 
 In patients with heart failure, lidocaine’s volume of distribu-
tion and total body clearance may both be decreased. Therefore, 
both loading and maintenance doses should be decreased. Since 
these effects counterbalance each other, the half-life may not be 
increased as much as predicted from clearance changes alone. In 
patients with liver disease, plasma clearance is markedly reduced 
and the volume of distribution is often increased; the elimina-
tion half-life in such cases may be increased threefold or more. 
In liver disease, the maintenance dose should be decreased, but 
usual loading doses can be given. Elimination half-life deter-
mines the time to steady state. Although steady-state concentra-
tions may be achieved in 8–10 hours in normal patients and 
patients with heart failure, 24–36 hours may be required in 
those with liver disease. Drugs that decrease liver blood flow (eg, 
propranolol, cimetidine) reduce lidocaine clearance and so 
increase the risk of toxicity unless infusion rates are decreased. 
With infusions lasting more than 24 hours, clearance falls and 
plasma concentrations rise. Renal disease has no major effect on 
lidocaine disposition. 
 Therapeutic Use 
 Lidocaine is the agent of choice for termination of ventricular 
tachycardia and prevention of ventricular fibrillation after cardio-
version in the setting of acute ischemia. However, routine  prophy-
lactic use of lidocaine in this setting may actually increase total 
mortality, possibly by increasing the incidence of asystole, and is 
not the standard of care. Most physicians administer IV lidocaine 
only to patients with arrhythmias. 
 MEXILETINE (SUBGROUP 1B) 
 Mexiletine is an orally active congener of lidocaine. Its electro-
physiologic and antiarrhythmic actions are similar to those of 
lidocaine. (The anticonvulsant phenytoin [see  Chapter 24 ] also 
exerts similar electrophysiologic effects and has been used as an 
antiarrhythmic.) Mexiletine is used in the treatment of ventricular 
arrhythmias. The elimination half-life is 8–20 hours and permits 
administration two or three times per day. The usual daily dosage 
of mexiletine is 600–1200 mg/d. Dose-related adverse effects are 
seen frequently at therapeutic dosage. These are predominantly 
neurologic, including tremor, blurred vision, and lethargy. Nausea 
is also a common effect. 
O
CH2
CH
CH3
NH2
CH3
CH3
Mexiletine
 Mexiletine has also shown significant efficacy in relieving 
chronic pain, especially pain due to diabetic neuropathy and 
nerve injury. The usual dosage is 450–750 mg/d orally. This 
application is off label. 
 FLECAINIDE (SUBGROUP 1C) 
 Flecainide is a potent blocker of sodium and potassium channels 
with slow unblocking kinetics. (Note that although it does block 
certain potassium channels, it does not prolong the action poten-
tial or the QT interval.) It is currently used for patients with 
otherwise normal hearts who have supraventricular arrhythmias. It 
has no antimuscarinic effects. 
O
C
Flecainide  
CH2
CF3
NH
CH2
O
CF3
CH2
O
N
 Flecainide is very effective in suppressing premature ventricular 
contractions. However, it may cause severe exacerbation of 
arrhythmia even when normal doses are administered to patients 
with preexisting ventricular tachyarrhythmias and those with a 
previous myocardial infarction and ventricular ectopy. This was 
dramatically demonstrated in the Cardiac Arrhythmia Suppression 
Trial (CAST), which was terminated prematurely because of a two 
and one-half-fold increase in mortality rate in the patients receiv-
ing flecainide and similar group 1C drugs. Flecainide is well 
absorbed and has a half-life of approximately 20 hours. Elimination 
is both by hepatic metabolism and by the kidney. The usual dos-
age of flecainide is 100–200 mg twice a day. 
 PROPAFENONE (SUBGROUP 1C) 
 Propafenone has some structural similarities to propranolol and 
possesses weak β-blocking activity. Its spectrum of action is very 
similar to that of quinidine, but it does not prolong the action 
potential. Its sodium channel-blocking kinetics are similar to that 
of flecainide. Propafenone is metabolized in the liver, with an 
242    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
average half-life of 5–7 hours. The usual daily dosage of 
propafenone is 450–900 mg in three divided doses. The drug is 
used primarily for supraventricular arrhythmias. The most com-
mon adverse effects are a metallic taste and constipation; arrhyth-
mia exacerbation can also occur. 
 MORICIZINE (SUBGROUP 1C) 
 Moricizine is an antiarrhythmic phenothiazine derivative that was 
used for treatment of ventricular arrhythmias. It is a relatively 
potent sodium channel blocker that does not prolong action poten-
tial duration. Moricizine has been withdrawn from the US market. 
 BETA-ADRENOCEPTOR–BLOCKING 
DRUGS (CLASS 2) 
 Cardiac Effects 
 Propranolol and similar drugs have antiarrhythmic properties by vir-
tue of their β-receptor–blocking action and direct membrane effects. 
As described in  Chapter 10 , some of these drugs have selectivity for 
cardiac β 1 receptors, some have intrinsic sympathomimetic activity, 
some have marked direct membrane effects, and some prolong the 
cardiac action potential. The relative contributions of the β-blocking 
and direct membrane effects to the antiarrhythmic effects of these 
drugs are not fully known. Although β blockers are fairly well toler-
ated, their efficacy for suppression of ventricular ectopic depolariza-
tions is lower than that of sodium channel blockers. However, there is 
good evidence that these agents can prevent recurrent infarction and 
sudden death in patients recovering from acute myocardial infarction 
(see  Chapter 10 ). 
 Esmolol is a short-acting β blocker used primarily as an anti-
arrhythmic drug for intraoperative and other acute arrhythmias. See 
 Chapter 10 for more information.  Sotalol is a nonselective β-blocking 
drug that prolongs the action potential (class 3 action). 
 DRUGS THAT PROLONG EFFECTIVE 
REFRACTORY PERIOD BY 
PROLONGING THE ACTION 
POTENTIAL (CLASS 3) 
 These drugs prolong action potentials, usually by blocking potas-
sium channels in cardiac muscle or by enhancing inward current, 
eg, through sodium channels. Action potential prolongation by 
most of these drugs often exhibits the undesirable property of 
“reverse use-dependence”: action potential prolongation is least 
marked at fast rates (where it is desirable) and most marked at slow 
rates, where it can contribute to the risk of torsades de pointes. 
 Although most drugs in the class evoke QT prolongation, there 
is considerable variability among drugs in their proarrhythmic ten-
dency to cause torsades de pointes despite significant QT-interval 
prolongation. Recent studies suggest that excessive QT prolonga-
tion alone may not be the best predictor of drug-induced torsades 
de pointes. Other important factors in addition to QT prolongation 
include action potential stability and development of a triangular 
shape (triangulation), reverse use-dependence, and dispersion of 
repolarization. 
 AMIODARONE 
 In the USA, amiodarone is approved for oral and intravenous use to 
treat serious ventricular arrhythmias. However, the drug is also 
highly effective for the treatment of supraventricular arrhythmias 
such as atrial fibrillation. As a result of its broad spectrum of anti-
arrhythmic action, it is very extensively used for a wide variety of 
arrhythmias. Amiodarone has unusual pharmacokinetics and impor-
tant extracardiac adverse effects.  Dronedarone, an analog that lacks 
iodine atoms, recently received Food and Drug Administration 
approval for the treatment of atrial flutter and fibrillation.  Celivarone 
is another noniodinated benzofuran derivative similar to drone-
darone that is currently undergoing clinical trials for the preven-
tion of ventricular tachycardia recurrence. 
Amiodarone
O
C
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
O
CH2
N
C2H5
C2H5
I
I
 Cardiac Effects 
 Amiodarone markedly prolongs the action potential duration (and 
the QT interval on the ECG) by blockade of I Kr . During chronic 
administration, I Ks is also blocked. The action potential duration 
is prolonged uniformly over a wide range of heart rates; that is, the 
drug does not have reverse use-dependent action. In spite of its 
present classification as a class 3 agent, amiodarone also signifi-
cantly blocks inactivated sodium channels. Its action potential-
prolonging action reinforces this effect. Amiodarone also has weak 
adrenergic and calcium channel-blocking actions. Consequences 
of these actions include slowing of the heart rate and AV node 
conduction. The broad spectrum of actions may account for its 
relatively high efficacy and its low incidence of torsades de pointes 
despite significant QT-interval prolongation. 
 Extracardiac Effects 
 Amiodarone causes peripheral vasodilation. This action is promi-
nent after intravenous administration and may be related to the 
action of the vehicle. 
 Toxicity 
 Amiodarone may produce symptomatic bradycardia and heart 
block in patients with preexisting sinus or AV node disease. The 
drug accumulates in many tissues, including the heart (10–50 
times more so than in plasma), lung, liver, and skin, and is 
concentrated in tears. Dose-related pulmonary toxicity is the most 
important adverse effect. Even on a low dose of 200 mg/d or less, 
fatal pulmonary fibrosis may be observed in 1% of patients. 
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    243
Abnormal liver function tests and hypersensitivity hepatitis may 
develop during amiodarone treatment and liver function tests 
should be monitored regularly. The skin deposits result in a pho-
todermatitis and a gray-blue skin discoloration in sun-exposed 
areas, eg, the malar regions. After a few weeks of treatment, 
asymptomatic corneal microdeposits are present in virtually all 
patients treated with amiodarone. Halos develop in the peripheral 
visual fields of some patients. Drug discontinuation is usually not 
required. Rarely, an optic neuritis may progress to blindness. 
 Amiodarone blocks the peripheral conversion of thyroxine (T 4 ) 
to triiodothyronine (T 3 ). It is also a potential source of large 
amounts of inorganic iodine. Amiodarone may result in hypothy-
roidism or hyperthyroidism. Thyroid function should be evaluated 
before initiating treatment and should be monitored periodically. 
Because effects have been described in virtually every organ system, 
amiodarone treatment should be reevaluated whenever new symp-
toms develop in a patient, including arrhythmia aggravation. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Amiodarone is variably absorbed with a bioavailability of 35–65%. 
It undergoes hepatic metabolism, and the major metabolite, des-
ethylamiodarone, is bioactive. The elimination half-life is com-
plex, with a rapid component of 3–10 days (50% of the drug) and 
a slower component of several weeks. After discontinuation of the 
drug, effects are maintained for 1–3 months. Measurable tissue 
levels may be observed up to 1 year after discontinuation. A total 
loading dose of 10 g is usually achieved with 0.8–1.2 g daily doses. 
The maintenance dose is 200–400 mg daily. Pharmacologic effects 
may be achieved rapidly by intravenous loading. QT-prolonging 
effect is modest with this route of administration, whereas brady-
cardia and AV block may be significant. 
 Amiodarone has many important drug interactions, and all 
medications should be reviewed when the drug is initiated and 
when the dose is adjusted. Amiodarone is a substrate for liver cyto-
chrome CYP3A4, and its levels are increased by drugs that inhibit 
this enzyme, eg, the histamine H 2 blocker cimetidine. Drugs that 
induce CYP3A4, eg, rifampin, decrease amiodarone concentration 
when coadministered. Amiodarone inhibits several cytochrome 
P450 enzymes and may result in high levels of many drugs, includ-
ing statins, digoxin, and warfarin. The dose of warfarin should be 
reduced by one third to one half following initiation of amio-
darone, and prothrombin times should be closely monitored. 
 Therapeutic Use 
 Low doses (100–200 mg/d) of amiodarone are effective in main-
taining normal sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation. 
The drug is effective in the prevention of recurrent ventricular 
tachycardia. It is not associated with an increase in mortality in 
patients with coronary artery disease or heart failure. In many 
centers, the implanted cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) has suc-
ceeded drug therapy as the primary treatment modality for ven-
tricular tachycardia, but amiodarone may be used for ventricular 
tachycardia as adjuvant therapy to decrease the frequency of 
uncomfortable cardioverter defibrillator discharges. The drug 
increases the pacing and defibrillation threshold and these devices 
require retesting after a maintenance dose has been achieved. 
 DRONEDARONE 
 Dronedarone is a structural analog of amiodarone in which the 
iodine atoms have been removed from the phenyl ring and a meth-
anesulfonyl group added to the benzofuran ring. The design was 
intended to eliminate action of the parent drug on thyroxine 
metabolism and to modify the half-life of the drug. No thyroid 
dysfunction or pulmonary toxicity has been reported in short-term 
studies. However, liver toxicity, including two severe cases requiring 
liver transplantation, has been reported. Like amiodarone, drone-
darone has multichannel actions, including blocking I Kr , I Ks , I Ca , 
and I Na . It also has β-adrenergic–blocking action. The drug has a 
half-life of 24 hours and can be administered twice daily at a fixed 
dose of 400 mg. Dronedarone absorption increases twofold to 
threefold when taken with food, and this information should be 
communicated to patients as a part of the dosing instructions. 
Dronedarone elimination is primarily non-renal. However, it inhib-
its tubular secretion of creatinine, resulting in a 10–20% increase in 
serum creatinine. However, because glomerular filtration rate is 
unchanged, no adjustments are required. Dronedarone is both a sub-
strate and an inhibitor of CY3A4 and should not be co-administered 
with potent inhibitors of this enzyme, such as the azole and similar 
antifungal agents, and protease inhibitors. 
 Dronedarone restores sinus rhythm in a small percentage of 
patients (< 15%) with atrial fibrillation. It produces a 10- to 
15-bpm reduction of the ventricular rate compared to placebo. 
Dronedarone doubled the interval between episodes of atrial fibril-
lation recurrence in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. 
Initial studies suggested a reduction in mortality or hospitalization 
in patients with atrial fibrillation. However, a study of dronedarone’s 
effects in permanent atrial fibrillation was terminated in 2011 
because of increased risk of  death, stroke, and heart failure. 
Similarly, a trial of dronedarone in advanced heart failure was termi-
nated prematurely because of an increase in mortality. The drug 
carries a “black box” warning against its use in acute decompensated 
or advanced (class IV) heart failure. 
 VERNAKALANT 
 The limited success of highly specific drugs that target single ion 
channels and the efficacy of multi-ion channel blockers such as 
amiodarone have shifted the emphasis in antiarrhythmic drug 
development to the latter class of drugs. Vernakalant is a multi-ion 
channel blocker that was developed for the treatment of atrial 
fibrillation. 
 Vernakalant prolongs the atrial effective refractory period and 
slows conduction over the AV node. Ventricular effective refrac-
tory period is unchanged. In the maximal clinical dose of 
1800 mg/day, vernakalant does not change the QT interval on the 
ECG. Vernakalant blocks I Kur , I ACh , and I to . These currents play 
key roles in atrial repolarization and their block accounts for the 
prolongation of the atrial effective refractory period. The drug is a 
less potent blocker of I Kr and, as a result, produces less APD pro-
longation in the ventricle; that is, the APD-prolonging effect is 
relatively atrium specific. Vernakalant also produces use-dependent 
block of the sodium channel. Recovery from block is fast, such 
244    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
that significant blockade is observed only at fast rates or at low 
membrane potentials. In the therapeutic concentration range, 
vernakalant has no effect on heart rate. 
 Toxicity 
 Adverse effects of vernakalant include dysgeusia (disturbance of 
taste), sneezing, paresthesia, cough, and hypotension. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Therapeutic Uses 
 Pharmacokinetic data for vernakalant are limited. After IV admin-
istration, the drug is metabolized in the liver by CYP2D6 with a 
half-life of 2 hours. However, on an oral regimen of 900 mg twice 
daily, a sustained blood concentration was observed over a 12-hour 
interval. Clinical trials with the oral drug have used a twice-daily 
dosing regimen. 
 Intravenous vernakalant is effective in converting recent-onset 
atrial fibrillation to normal sinus rhythm in 50% of patients. Final 
approval for this purpose is pending. The drug is undergoing 
clinical trials for maintenance of normal sinus rhythm in patients 
with paroxysmal or persistent atrial fibrillation. 
 SOTALOL 
 Sotalol has both β-adrenergic receptor-blocking (class 2) and 
action potential-prolonging (class 3) actions. The drug is formu-
lated as a racemic mixture of D- and L-sotalol. All the β-adrenergic–
blocking activity resides in the L-isomer; the D- and L-isomers 
share action potential prolonging actions. Beta-adrenergic–
blocking action is not cardioselective and is maximal at doses 
below those required for action potential prolongation. 
CH3SO2NH
OH
CHCH2NHCH(CH3)2
Sotalol
 Sotalol is well absorbed orally with bioavailability of approxi-
mately 100%. It is not metabolized in the liver and is not bound 
to plasma proteins. Excretion is predominantly by the kidneys in 
the unchanged form with a half-life of approximately 12 hours. 
Because of its relatively simple pharmacokinetics, solatol exhibits 
few direct drug interactions. Its most significant cardiac adverse 
effect is an extension of its pharmacologic action: a dose-related 
incidence of torsades de pointes that approaches 6% at the highest 
recommended daily dose. Patients with overt heart failure may 
experience further depression of left ventricular function during 
treatment with sotalol. 
 Sotalol is approved for the treatment of life-threatening ven-
tricular arrhythmias and the maintenance of sinus rhythm in 
patients with atrial fibrillation. It is also approved for treatment of 
supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias in the pediatric age 
group. Sotalol decreases the threshold for cardiac defibrillation. 
 DOFETILIDE 
 Dofetilide has class 3 action potential prolonging action. This 
action is effected by a dose-dependent blockade of the rapid com-
ponent of the delayed rectifier potassium current (I Kr ) and the 
blockade of I Kr increases in hypokalemia. Dofetilide produces no 
relevant blockade of the other potassium channels or the sodium 
channel. Because of the slow rate of recovery from blockade, the 
extent of blockade shows little dependence on stimulation fre-
quency. However, dofetilide does show less action potential pro-
longation at rapid rates because of the increased importance of 
other potassium channels such as I Ks at higher frequencies. 
 Dofetilide is 100% bioavailable. Verapamil increases peak 
plasma dofetilide concentration by increasing intestinal blood 
flow. Eighty percent of an oral dose is eliminated unchanged by 
the kidneys; the remainder is eliminated in the urine as inactive 
metabolites. Inhibitors of the renal cation secretion mechanism, 
eg, cimetidine, prolong the half-life of dofetilide. Since the 
QT-prolonging effects and risks of ventricular proarrhythmia are 
directly related to plasma concentration, dofetilide dosage must be 
based on the estimated creatinine clearance. Treatment with 
dofetilide should be initiated in hospital after baseline measure-
ment of the rate-corrected QT interval (QT c ) and serum electro-
lytes. A baseline QT c of > 450 ms (500 ms in the presence of an 
intraventricular conduction delay), bradycardia of < 50 bpm, and 
hypokalemia are relative contraindications to its use. 
 Dofetilide is approved for the maintenance of normal sinus 
rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation. It is also effective in 
restoring normal sinus rhythm in patients with atrial fibrillation. 
 IBUTILIDE 
 Ibutilide, like dofetilide, slows cardiac depolarization by blockade 
of the rapid component (I Kr ) of the delayed rectifier potassium 
current. Activation of slow inward sodium current has also been 
suggested as an additional mechanism of action potential prolon-
gation. After intravenous administration, ibutilide is rapidly 
cleared by hepatic metabolism. The metabolites are excreted by 
the kidney. The elimination half-life averages 6 hours. 
 Intravenous ibutilide is used for the acute conversion of atrial 
flutter and atrial fibrillation to normal sinus rhythm. The drug is 
more effective in atrial flutter than atrial fibrillation, with a mean 
time to termination of 20 minutes. The most important adverse 
effect is excessive QT-interval prolongation and torsades de 
pointes. Patients require continuous ECG monitoring for 4 hours 
after ibutilide infusion or until QT c returns to baseline. 
 CALCIUM CHANNEL-BLOCKING
DRUGS (CLASS 4) 
 These drugs, of which verapamil is the prototype, were first intro-
duced as antianginal agents and are discussed in greater detail in 
 Chapter 12 . Verapamil and diltiazem also have antiarrhythmic 
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    245
effects. The dihydropyridines (eg, nifedipine) do not share anti-
arrhythmic efficacy and may  precipitate arrhythmias. 
 VERAPAMIL 
 Cardiac Effects 
 Verapamil blocks both activated and inactivated L-type calcium 
channels. Thus, its effect is more marked in tissues that fire fre-
quently, those that are less completely polarized at rest, and those 
in which activation depends exclusively on the calcium current, 
such as the SA and AV nodes. AV nodal conduction time and 
effective refractory period are consistently prolonged by therapeu-
tic concentrations. Verapamil usually slows the SA node by its 
direct action, but its hypotensive action may occasionally result in 
a small reflex increase of SA rate. 
 Verapamil can suppress both early and delayed afterdepolariza-
tions and may antagonize slow responses arising in severely depo-
larized tissue. 
 Extracardiac Effects 
 Verapamil causes peripheral vasodilation, which may be beneficial 
in hypertension and peripheral vasospastic disorders. Its effects on 
smooth muscle produce a number of extracardiac effects (see 
 Chapter 12 ). 
 Toxicity 
 Verapamil’s cardiotoxic effects are dose-related and usually avoid-
able. A common error has been to administer intravenous vera-
pamil to a patient with ventricular tachycardia misdiagnosed as 
supraventricular tachycardia. In this setting, hypotension and 
ventricular fibrillation can occur. Verapamil’s negative inotropic 
effects may limit its clinical usefulness in diseased hearts (see 
 Chapter 12 ). Verapamil can induce AV block when used in large 
doses or in patients with AV nodal disease. This block can be 
treated with atropine and β-receptor stimulants. 
 Adverse extracardiac effects include constipation, lassitude, 
nervousness, and peripheral edema. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 The half-life of verapamil is approximately 7 hours. It is exten-
sively metabolized by the liver; after oral administration, its bio-
availability is only about 20%. Therefore, verapamil must be 
administered with caution in patients with hepatic dysfunction or 
impaired hepatic perfusion. 
 In adult patients without heart failure or SA or AV nodal dis-
ease, parenteral verapamil can be used to terminate supraventricu-
lar tachycardia, although adenosine is the agent of first choice. 
Verapamil dosage is an initial bolus of 5 mg administered over 
2–5 minutes, followed a few minutes later by a second 5 mg bolus 
if needed. Thereafter, doses of 5–10 mg can be administered every 
4–6 hours, or a constant infusion of 0.4 mcg/kg/min may be 
used. 
 Effective oral dosages are higher than intravenous dosage 
because of first-pass metabolism and range from 120 mg to 640 mg 
daily, divided into three or four doses. 
 Therapeutic Use 
 Supraventricular tachycardia is the major arrhythmia indication 
for verapamil. Adenosine or verapamil are preferred over older 
treatments (propranolol, digoxin, edrophonium, and vasocon-
strictor agents) and cardioversion for termination. Verapamil can 
also reduce the ventricular rate in atrial fibrillation and flutter. It 
only rarely converts atrial flutter and fibrillation to sinus rhythm. 
Verapamil is occasionally useful in ventricular arrhythmias. 
However, intravenous verapamil in a patient with sustained ven-
tricular tachycardia can cause hemodynamic collapse. 
 DILTIAZEM 
 Diltiazem appears to be similar in efficacy to verapamil in the 
management of supraventricular arrhythmias, including rate con-
trol in atrial fibrillation. An intravenous form of diltiazem is avail-
able for the latter indication and causes hypotension or 
bradyarrhythmias relatively infrequently. 
 MISCELLANEOUS 
ANTIARRHYTHMIC AGENTS 
 Certain agents used for the treatment of arrhythmias do not fit the 
conventional class 1–4 organization. These include digitalis (dis-
cussed in  Chapter 13 ), adenosine, magnesium, and potassium. It is 
also becoming clear that certain nonantiarrhythmic drugs, such as 
drugs acting on the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, fish oil, 
and statins, can reduce recurrence of tachycardias and fibrillation 
in patients with coronary heart disease or congestive heart failure. 
 ADENOSINE 
 Mechanism & Clinical Use 
 Adenosine is a nucleoside that occurs naturally throughout the 
body. Its half-life in the blood is less than 10 seconds. Its mecha-
nism of action involves activation of an inward rectifier K + current 
and inhibition of calcium current. The results of these actions are 
marked hyperpolarization and suppression of calcium-dependent 
action potentials. When given as a bolus dose, adenosine directly 
inhibits AV nodal conduction and increases the AV nodal refrac-
tory period but has lesser effects on the SA node. Adenosine is 
currently the drug of choice for prompt conversion of paroxysmal 
supraventricular tachycardia to sinus rhythm because of its high 
efficacy (90–95%) and very short duration of action. It is usually 
given in a bolus dose of 6 mg followed, if necessary, by a dose of 
12 mg. An uncommon variant of ventricular tachycardia is adenosine-
sensitive. The drug is less effective in the presence of adenosine receptor 
blockers such as theophylline or caffeine, and its effects are potentiated 
by adenosine uptake inhibitors such as dipyridamole. 
246    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 Toxicity 
 Adenosine causes flushing in about 20% of patients and shortness 
of breath or chest burning (perhaps related to bronchospasm) in 
over 10%. Induction of high-grade AV block may occur but is 
very short-lived. Atrial fibrillation may occur. Less common tox-
icities include headache, hypotension, nausea, and paresthesias. 
 MAGNESIUM 
 Originally used for patients with digitalis-induced arrhythmias who 
were hypomagnesemic, magnesium infusion has been found to have 
antiarrhythmic effects in some patients with normal serum magnesium 
levels. The mechanisms of these effects are not known, but magnesium 
is recognized to influence Na + /K + -ATPase, sodium channels, certain 
potassium channels, and calcium channels. Magnesium therapy appears 
to be indicated in patients with digitalis-induced arrhythmias if hypo-
magnesemia is present; it is also indicated in some patients with torsades 
de pointes even if serum magnesium is normal. The usual dosage is 1 g 
(as sulfate) given intravenously over 20 minutes and repeated once if 
necessary. A full understanding of the action and indications for the use 
of magnesium as an antiarrhythmic drug awaits further investigation. 
 POTASSIUM 
 The significance of the potassium ion concentrations inside and 
outside the cardiac cell membrane was discussed earlier in this chap-
ter. The effects of increasing serum K + can be summarized as (1) a 
resting potential depolarizing action and (2) a membrane potential 
stabilizing action, the latter caused by increased potassium permea-
bility. Hypokalemia results in an increased risk of early and delayed 
afterdepolarizations, and ectopic pacemaker activity, especially in the 
presence of digitalis. Hyperkalemia depresses ectopic pacemakers 
(severe hyperkalemia is required to suppress the SA node) and slows 
conduction. Because both insufficient and excess potassium is poten-
tially arrhythmogenic, potassium therapy is directed toward normal-
izing potassium gradients and pools in the body. 
 ■ PRINCIPLES IN THE CLINICAL 
USE OF ANTIARRHYTHMIC AGENTS 
 The margin between efficacy and toxicity is particularly narrow 
for antiarrhythmic drugs. Risks and benefits must be carefully 
considered (see Box: Antiarrhythmic Drug-Use Principles Applied 
to Atrial Fibrillation). 
 Pretreatment Evaluation 
 Several important steps must be taken before initiation of any 
antiarrhythmic therapy: 
 1. Eliminate the cause. Precipitating factors must be recognized 
and eliminated if possible. These include not only abnormali-
ties of internal homeostasis, such as hypoxia or electrolyte 
abnormalities (especially hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia), 
but also drug therapy and underlying disease states such as 
hyperthyroidism or cardiac disease. It is important to separate 
this abnormal substrate from triggering factors, such as myo-
cardial ischemia or acute cardiac dilation, which may be treat-
able and reversible by different means. 
 2. Make a firm diagnosis. A firm arrhythmia diagnosis should be 
established. For example, the misuse of verapamil in patients 
with ventricular tachycardia mistakenly diagnosed as supraven-
tricular tachycardia can lead to catastrophic hypotension and 
cardiac arrest. As increasingly sophisticated methods to charac-
terize underlying arrhythmia mechanisms become available 
and are validated, it may be possible to direct certain drugs 
toward specific arrhythmia mechanisms. 
3.  Determine the baseline condition. Underlying heart disease is 
a critical determinant of drug selection for a particular arrhyth-
mia in a particular patient. A key question is whether the heart 
is structurally abnormal. Few antiarrhythmic drugs have docu-
mented safety in patients with congestive heart failure or isch-
emic heart disease. In fact, some drugs pose a documented 
proarrhythmic risk in certain disease states, eg, class 1C drugs 
in patients with ischemic heart disease. A reliable baseline 
should be established against which to judge the efficacy of any 
The Nonpharmacologic Therapy of Cardiac Arrhythmias
 It was recognized over 100 years ago that reentry in simple in vitro 
models (eg, rings of conducting tissues) was permanently interrupted 
by transecting the reentry circuit. This concept is now applied in 
cardiac arrhythmias with defined anatomic pathways—eg, atrio-
ventricular reentry using accessory pathways, atrioventricular 
node reentry, atrial flutter, and some forms of ventricular tachy-
cardia—by treatment with  radiofrequency catheter ablation or 
extreme cold,  cryoablation. Mapping of reentrant pathways and 
ablation can be carried out by means of catheters threaded into 
the heart from peripheral arteries and veins. Recent studies have 
shown that paroxysmal and persistent atrial fibrillation may arise 
from one of the pulmonary veins. Both forms of atrial fibrilla-
tion can be cured by electrically isolating the pulmonary 
veins by radiofrequency catheter ablation or during concomitant 
cardiac surgery. 
 Another form of nonpharmacologic therapy is the  implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD), a device that can automatically 
detect and treat potentially fatal arrhythmias such as ventricular fibril-
lation. ICDs are now widely used in patients who have been resusci-
tated from such arrhythmias, and several trials have shown that ICD 
treatment reduces mortality in patients with coronary artery disease 
who have an ejection fraction ≤ 30% and in patients with class II or III 
heart failure and no prior history of arrhythmias. The increasing use of 
nonpharmacologic antiarrhythmic therapies reflects both advances 
in the relevant technologies and an increasing appreciation of the 
dangers of long-term therapy with currently available drugs. 
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    247
subsequent antiarrhythmic intervention. Several methods are 
now available for such baseline quantification. These include pro-
longed ambulatory monitoring, electrophysiologic studies that 
reproduce a target arrhythmia, reproduction of a target arrhyth-
mia by treadmill exercise, or the use of transtelephonic monitor-
ing for recording of sporadic but symptomatic arrhythmias. 
4.  Question the need for therapy. The mere identification of an 
abnormality of cardiac rhythm does not necessarily require that 
the arrhythmia be treated. An excellent justification for conser-
vative treatment was provided by the Cardiac Arrhythmia 
Suppression Trial (CAST) referred to earlier. 
 Benefits & Risks 
 The benefits of antiarrhythmic therapy are actually relatively dif-
ficult to establish. Two types of benefits can be envisioned: reduc-
tion of arrhythmia-related symptoms, such as palpitations, 
syncope, or cardiac arrest; and reduction in long-term mortality 
in asymptomatic patients. Among drugs discussed here, only 
β blockers have been definitely associated with reduction of mor-
tality in relatively asymptomatic patients, and the mechanism 
underlying this effect is not established (see  Chapter 10 ). 
 Antiarrhythmic therapy carries with it a number of risks. In 
some cases, the risk of an adverse reaction is clearly related to high 
dosages or plasma concentrations. Examples include lidocaine-
induced tremor or quinidine-induced cinchonism. In other cases, 
adverse reactions are unrelated to high plasma concentrations (eg, 
procainamide-induced agranulocytosis). For many serious adverse 
reactions to antiarrhythmic drugs, the  combination of drug ther-
apy and the underlying heart disease appears important. 
 Several specific syndromes of arrhythmia provocation by anti-
arrhythmic drugs have also been identified, each with its underly-
ing pathophysiologic mechanism and risk factors. Drugs such as 
quinidine, sotalol, ibutilide, and dofetilide, which act—at least in 
part—by slowing repolarization and prolonging cardiac action 
potentials, can result in marked QT prolongation and torsades de 
pointes. Treatment for torsades requires recognition of the 
arrhythmia, withdrawal of any offending agent, correction of 
hypokalemia, and treatment with maneuvers to increase heart rate 
(pacing or isoproterenol); intravenous magnesium also appears 
effective, even in patients with normal magnesium levels. 
 Drugs that markedly slow conduction, such as flecainide, or high 
concentrations of quinidine, can result in an increased frequency of 
reentry arrhythmias, notably ventricular tachycardia in patients with 
prior myocardial infarction in whom a potential reentry circuit may 
be present. Treatment here consists of recognition, withdrawal of 
the offending agent, and intravenous sodium. 
 Conduct of Antiarrhythmic Therapy 
 The urgency of the clinical situation determines the route and 
rate of drug initiation. When immediate drug action is required, 
the intravenous route is preferred. Therapeutic drug levels can be 
achieved by administration of multiple  slow intravenous boluses. 
Drug therapy can be considered effective when the target arrhyth-
mia is suppressed (according to the measure used to quantify it at 
baseline) and toxicities are absent. Conversely, drug therapy 
should not be considered ineffective unless toxicities occur at a 
time when arrhythmias are not suppressed. 
 Monitoring plasma drug concentrations can be a useful adjunct 
to managing antiarrhythmic therapy. Plasma drug concentrations 
are also important in establishing compliance during long-term 
therapy as well as in detecting drug interactions that may result in 
very high concentrations at low drug dosages or very low concen-
trations at high dosages. 
 Atrial fibrillation is the most common sustained arrhythmia 
observed clinically. Its prevalence increases from ~ 0.5% in indi-
viduals younger than 65 years of age to 10% in individuals older 
than 80. Diagnosis is usually straightforward by means of an ECG. 
The ECG may also enable the identification of a prior myocardial 
infarction, left ventricular hypertrophy, and ventricular pre-exci-
tation. Hyperthyroidism is an important treatable cause of atrial 
fibrillation, and a thyroid panel should be obtained at the time of 
diagnosis to exclude this possibility. With the clinical history and 
physical examination as a guide, the presence and extent of the 
underlying heart disease should be evaluated, preferably using 
noninvasive techniques such as echocardiography. 
 Treatment of atrial fibrillation is initiated to relieve patient 
symptoms and prevent the complications of thromboembolism 
and tachycardia-induced heart failure, the result of prolonged 
uncontrolled heart rates. The initial treatment objective is con-
trol of the ventricular rate. This is usually achieved by use of a 
calcium channel-blocking drug alone or in combination with a 
Antiarrhythmic Drug-Use Principles Applied to Atrial Fibrillation
β-adrenergic blocker. Digoxin may be of value in the presence of 
heart failure. A second objective is a restoration and mainte-
nance of normal sinus rhythm. Several studies show that rate 
control (maintenance of ventricular rate in the range of 60–80 
bpm) has a better benefit-to-risk outcome than rhythm control 
(conversion to normal sinus rhythm) in the long-term health of 
patients with atrial fibrillation. If rhythm control is deemed desir-
able, sinus rhythm is usually restored by DC cardioversion in the 
USA; in some countries, a class 1 antiarrhythmic drug is used 
initially. For patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, normal 
sinus rhythm may be restored with a single large oral dose of 
propafenone or flecainide, provided that safety is initially docu-
mented in a monitored setting. Intravenous ibutilide can restore 
sinus rhythm promptly. For restoration of sinus rhythm in an 
emergency, eg, atrial fibrillation associated with hypotension or 
angina, DC cardioversion is the preferred modality. A class 1 or 
class 3 antiarrhythmic drug is then used to maintain normal 
sinus rhythm. 
248    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
SUMMARY Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
CLASS 1A
 • Procainamide
INa (primary) and IKr 
(secondary) 
blockade
Slows conduction velocity and 
pacemaker rate • prolongs action 
potential duration and dissociates 
from INa channel with intermedi-
ate kinetics • direct depressant 
effects on sinoatrial (SA) and atrio-
ventricular (AV) nodes
Most atrial and ventricu-
lar arrhythmias • drug of 
second choice for most 
sustained ventricular 
arrhythmias associated 
with acute myocardial 
infarction
Oral, IV, IM • eliminated by hepatic 
metabolism to N-acetylprocainamide 
(NAPA; see text) and renal elimination • 
NAPA implicated in torsades de pointes in 
patients with renal failure • Toxicity: 
Hypotension • long-term therapy produces 
reversible lupus-related symptoms
 • Quinidine: Similar to procainamide but more toxic (cinchonism, torsades); rarely used in arrhythmias; see Chapter 52 for malaria
 • Disopyramide: Similar to procainamide but significant antimuscarinic effects; may precipitate heart failure; not commonly used
CLASS 1B
 • Lidocaine
Sodium channel 
(INa) blockade
Blocks activated and inactivated 
channels with fast kinetics • does 
not prolong and may shorten 
action potential
Terminate ventricular 
tachycardias and prevent 
ventricular fibrillation 
after cardioversion
IV • first-pass hepatic metabolism • reduce 
dose in patients with heart failure or liver 
disease • Toxicity: Neurologic symptoms
 • Mexiletine: Orally active congener of lidocaine; used in ventricular arrhythmias, chronic pain syndromes
CLASS 1C
 • Flecainide
Sodium channel 
(INa) blockade
Dissociates from channel with 
slow kinetics • no change in action 
potential duration
Supraventricular arrhythmias 
in patients with normal 
heart • do not use in
ischemic conditions
(post-myocardial infarction)
Oral • hepatic and kidney metabolism • half 
life ∼ 20 h • Toxicity: Proarrhythmic
 • Propafenone: Orally active, weak b-blocking activity; supraventricular arrhythmias; hepatic metabolism
 • Moricizine: Phenothiazine derivative, orally active; ventricular arrhythmias, proarrhythmic. Withdrawn in USA.
CLASS 2
 • Propranolol
β-Adrenoceptor 
blockade
Direct membrane effects (sodium 
channel block) and prolongation 
of action potential duration • 
slows SA node automaticity and 
AV nodal conduction velocity
Atrial arrhythmias and
prevention of recurrent 
infarction and sudden 
death
Oral, parenteral • duration 4–6 h • Toxicity: 
Asthma, AV blockade, acute heart failure
• Interactions: With other cardiac depres-
sants and hypotensive drugs
 • Esmolol: Short-acting, IV only; used for intraoperative and other acute arrhythmias
CLASS 3
 • Amiodarone
Blocks IKr, INa, ICa-L 
channels, 
β adrenoceptors
Prolongs action potential duration 
and QT interval • slows heart rate 
and AV node conduction • low 
incidence of torsades de pointes
Serious ventricular 
arrhythmias and 
supraventricular 
arrhythmias
Oral, IV • variable absorption and tissue 
accumulation • hepatic metabolism, 
elimination complex and slow • 
Toxicity: Bradycardia and heart block in 
diseased heart, peripheral vasodilation, 
pulmonary and hepatic toxicity • 
hyper- or hypothyroidism. • Interactions: 
Many, based on CYP metabolism
 • Dofetilide
IKr block
Prolongs action potential, effective 
refractory period
Maintenance or restora-
tion of sinus rhythm in 
atrial fibrillation
Oral • renal excretion • Toxicity: Torsades de 
pointes (initiate in hospital) • Interactions: 
Additive with other QT-prolonging drugs
 • Sotalol: b-Adrenergic and IKr blocker, direct action potential prolongation properties, use for ventricular arrhythmias, atrial fibrillation
 • Ibutilide: Potassium channel blocker, may activate inward current; IV use for conversion in atrial flutter and fibrillation
 • Dronedarone: Amiodarone derivative; multichannel actions, reduces mortality in patients with atrial fibrillation
 • Vernakalant: Investigational, multichannel actions in atria, prolongs atrial refractoriness, effective in atrial fibrillation
(continued)
CHAPTER 14 Agents Used in Cardiac Arrhythmias    249
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
CLASS 4
 • Verapamil
Calcium channel 
(ICa-L type) blockade
Slows SA node automaticity and 
AV nodal conduction velocity • 
decreases cardiac contractility • 
reduces blood pressure
Supraventricular 
tachycardias, 
hypertension, angina
Oral, IV • hepatic metabolism • caution in 
patients with hepatic dysfunction • Toxicity 
& Interactions: See Chapter 12
 • Diltiazem: Equivalent to verapamil
MISCELLANEOUS
 • Adenosine
Activates inward
rectifier IK • blocks ICa
Very brief, usually complete 
AV blockade
Paroxysmal supraventric-
ular tachycardias
IV only • duration 10–15 seconds• Toxicity: 
Flushing, chest tightness, dizziness • 
Interactions: Minimal
 • Magnesium
Poorly understood • 
interacts with Na
+/
K
+-ATPase, K
+, and 
Ca
2+ channels
Normalizes or increases 
plasma Mg
2+
Torsades de pointes 
• digitalis-induced 
arrhythmias
IV • duration dependent on dosage • 
Toxicity: Muscle weakness in overdose
 • Potassium
Increases K
+ perme-
ability, K
+ currents
Slows ectopic pacemakers • slows 
conduction velocity in heart
Digitalis-induced arrhyth-
mias • arrhythmias associ-
ated with hypokalemia
Oral, IV • Toxicity: Reentrant arrhythmias, 
fibrillation or arrest in overdose
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
SODIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Disopyramide (generic, Norpace)
Oral: 100, 150 mg capsules
Oral controlled-release (generic, Norpace CR): 100, 150 capsules
Flecainide (generic, Tambocor)
Oral: 50, 100, 150 mg tablets
Lidocaine (generic, Xylocaine)
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for IM injection; 10, 20 mg/mL for IV injec-
tion; 40, 100, 200 mg/mL for IV admixtures; 2, 4, 8 mg/mL pre-
mixed IV (5% D/W) solution
Mexiletine (Mexitil)
Oral: 150, 200, 250 mg capsules
Procainamide (generic, Pronestyl, others)
Oral: 250, 375, 500 mg tablets and capsules
Oral sustained-release (generic, Procan-SR): 250, 500, 750, 1000 mg 
tablets
Parenteral: 500 mg/mL for injection
Propafenone (generic, Rythmol)
Oral: 150, 225, 300 mg tablets, capsules
Quinidine sulfate [83% quinidine base] (generic)
Oral: 200, 300 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release (Quinidex Extentabs): 300 mg tablets
Quinidine gluconate [62% quinidine base] (generic)
Oral sustained-release: 324 mg tablets
Parenteral: 80 mg/mL for injection
Quinidine polygalacturonate [60% quinidine base] (Cardioquin)
Oral: 275 mg tablets
BETA BLOCKERS LABELED FOR USE AS
ANTIARRHYTHMICS
Acebutolol (generic, Sectral)
Oral: 200, 400 mg capsules
Esmolol (Brevibloc)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL, 250 mg/mL for IV injection
Propranolol (generic, Inderal)
Oral: 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 90 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release: 60, 80, 120, 160 mg capsules
Oral solution: 4, 8 mg/mL
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
ACTION POTENTIAL-PROLONGING AGENTS
Amiodarone (generic, Cordarone)
Oral: 100, 200, 400 mg tablets
Parenteral: 150 mg/3 mL for IV infusion
Dofetilide (Tikosyn)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mcg capsules
Dronedarone (Multac)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Ibutilide (Corvert)
Parenteral: 0.1 g/mL solution for IV infusion
Sotalol (generic, Betapace)
Oral: 80, 120, 160, 240 mg capsules
250    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient has significant symptoms during recurrent epi-
sodes of atrial fibrillation. The peak heart rate is not particu-
larly high. Maintenance of sinus rhythm appears to be 
important in this patient. The echocardiogram demonstrates 
impairment of left ventricular function. Selection of a drug 
that is tolerated in heart failure and has documented ability to 
convert or prevent atrial fibrillation, eg, dofetilide or amio-
darone, would be appropriate.
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Diltiazem (generic, Cardizem, Dilacor)
Oral: 30, 60, 90, 120 mg tablets; 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, 300, 340, 
420 mg extended- or sustained-release capsules (not labeled for use 
in arrhythmias)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IV injection
Verapamil (generic, Calan, Isoptin)
Oral: 40, 80, 120 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release (Calan SR, Isoptin SR): 100, 120, 180, 240 mg 
capsules
Parenteral: 5 mg/2 mL for injection
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
Diltiazem (generic, Cardizem, Dilacor)
Oral: 30, 60, 90, 120 mg tablets; 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, 300, 340, 
420 mg extended- or sustained-release capsules (not labeled for use 
in arrhythmias)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IV injection
Verapamil (generic, Calan, Isoptin)
Oral: 40, 80, 120 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release (Calan SR, Isoptin SR): 100, 120, 180, 240 mg
capsules
Parenteral: 5 mg/2 mL for injection
MISCELLANEOUS
Adenosine (generic, Adenocard)
Parenteral: 3 mg/mL for injection
Magnesium sulfate
Parenteral: 125, 500 mg/mL for IV infusion
 REFERENCES 
 Antzelevitch C, Shimizu W: Cellular mechanisms underlying the long QT syn-
drome. Curr Opin Cardiol 2002;17:43. 
 Chen YH et al: KCNQ1 gain-of-function mutation in familial atrial fibrillation. 
Science 2003;299:251. 
 Cho HC, Marban E: Biological therapies for cardiac arrhythmias-can genes and 
cells replace drugs and devices? Circ Res 2010;106:674. 
 Cho H-S, Takano M, Noma A: The electrophysiological properties of spontane-
ously beating pacemaker cells isolated from mouse sinoatrial node. J Physiol 
2003;550:169. 
 Das MK, Zipes DP: Antiarrhythmic and nonantiarrhythmic drugs for sudden 
cardiac death prevention. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 2010;55(5):438. 
 Duan D et al: Functional role of anion channels in cardiac diseases. Acta Pharmacol 
Sin 2005;26:265. 
 Dumaine R, Antzelevitch C: Molecular mechanisms underlying the long QT 
syndrome. Curr Opin Cardiol 2002;17:36. 
 Echt DS et al for the CAST Investigators: Mortality and morbidity in patients 
receiving encainide, flecainide, or placebo. The Cardiac Arrhythmia 
Suppression Trial. N Engl J Med 1991;324:781. 
 Fedida D: Vernakalant (RSD1235): A novel, atrial-selective antifibrillatory agent. 
Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2007;16:519. 
 Fuster V et al: ACC/AHA/ESC Guidelines for the management of patients with 
atrial fibrillation. Circulation 2006;114:700. 
 Grant AO: Recent advances in the treatment of arrhythmias. Circ J 2003;67:651. 
 Grant AO: Cardiac ion channels. Circ Arrhythmia Electrophysiol 2009;2:185. 
 Hondeghem LM: Relative contributions of TRIaD and QT to proarrhythmia. 
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2007;18:655. 
 IRCCS Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri: Genetic mutations and inherited 
arrhythmias. http://www.fsm.it/cardmoc. 
 Keating MT, Sanguinetti MC: Molecular and cellular mechanisms of cardiac 
arrhythmias. Cell 2001;104:569. 
 Khan IA: Clinical and therapeutic aspects of congenital and acquired long QT 
syndrome. Am J Med 2002;112:58. 
 Marrus SB, Nerbonne JM: Mechanisms linking short- and long-term electrical 
remodeling in the heart. . .is it a stretch? Channels 2008;2(2):117. 
 Mohler PJ, Gramolini AO, Bennett V: Ankyrins. J Cell Biol 2002;115:1565. 
 Morady F: Catheter ablation of supraventricular arrhythmias: State of the art.
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2004;15:124. 
 Splawski I, et al: Severe arrhythmia disorder caused by cardiac L-type calcium 
channel mutations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:8089. 
 Srivatsa U, Wadhani N, Singh AB: Mechanisms of antiarrhythmic drug actions 
and their clinical relevance for controlling disorders of cardiac rhythm. Curr 
Cardiol Rep 2002;4:401. 
 Starmer FC, Grant AO, Strauss HC: Mechanisms of use-dependent block of 
sodium channels in excitable membranes by local anesthetics. Biophys J 
1984;46:15. 
 Subbiah RN, Campbell TJ, Vandenberg JI: Inherited cardiac arrhythmia syn-
dromes: What have they taught us about arrhythmias and anti-arrhythmic 
therapy? Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2004;31:906. 
 van Gelder I et al: A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients 
with recurrent persistent atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1834. 
 Wehrens XHT, Lehnart SE, Marks AR: Ryanodine receptor-targeted anti-arrhyth-
mic therapy. NY Acad Sci 2005;1047:366. 
 Wolbrette D et al: Dronedarone for the treatment of atrial fibrillation and atrial 
flutter: Approval and efficacy. Vasc Health Risk Manag 2010;6:517. 
 Wyse DG et al: A comparison of rate control and rhythm control in patients with 
atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1825. 
251
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Abnormalities in fluid volume and electrolyte composition are 
common and important clinical disorders. Drugs that block spe-
cific transport functions of the renal tubules are valuable clinical 
tools in the treatment of these disorders. Although various agents 
that increase urine volume (diuretics) have been described since 
antiquity, it was not until 1937 that carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 
were first described and not until 1957 that a much more useful 
and powerful diuretic agent (chlorothiazide) became available. 
 Technically, a “diuretic” is an agent that increases urine vol-
ume, whereas a “natriuretic” causes an increase in renal sodium 
excretion and an “aquaretic” increases excretion of solute-free 
water. Because natriuretics almost always also increase water excre-
tion, they are usually called diuretics. Osmotic diuretics and 
antidiuretic hormone antagonists (see Agents That Alter Water 
Excretion) are aquaretics that are not directly natriuretic. 
 This chapter is divided into three sections. The first section cov-
ers major renal tubule transport mechanisms. The nephron is 
divided structurally and functionally into several segments 
( Figure 15–1 ,  Table 15–1 ). Several autacoids, which exert multiple, 
complex events on renal physiologic processes (adenosine, prosta-
glandins, and urodilatin, a renal autacoid closely related to atrial 
natriuretic peptide), are also discussed. The second section describes 
the pharmacology of diuretic agents. Many diuretics exert their 
effects on specific membrane transport proteins in renal tubular 
epithelial cells. Other diuretics exert osmotic effects that prevent 
water reabsorption (mannitol), inhibit enzymes (acetazolamide), or 
interfere with hormone receptors in renal epithelial cells (vaptans, or 
vasopressin antagonists). The physiology of each nephron segment 
is closely linked to the basic pharmacology of the drugs acting there, 
which is discussed in the second section. The third section of the 
chapter describes the clinical applications of diuretics. 
 ■ RENAL TUBULE TRANSPORT 
MECHANISMS 
 PROXIMAL TUBULE 
 Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO 3 ), sodium chloride (NaCl), glu-
cose, amino acids, and other organic solutes are reabsorbed via 
specific transport systems in the early proximal tubule (proximal 
convoluted tubule, PCT). Potassium ions (K + ) are reabsorbed via 
the paracellular pathway. Water is reabsorbed passively, maintain-
ing the osmolality of proximal tubular fluid at a nearly constant 
level. As tubule fluid is processed along the length of the proximal 
tubule, the luminal concentrations of these solutes decrease rela-
tive to the concentration of inulin, an experimental marker that is 
filtered but neither secreted nor absorbed by renal tubules. 
Approximately 66% of filtered sodium ions (Na + ), 85% of the 
NaHCO 3 , 65% of the K + , 60% of the water, and virtually all of 
the filtered glucose and amino acids are reabsorbed in the proxi-
mal tubule. 
15
Diuretic Agents
Harlan E. Ives, MD, PhD
  C A S E  S T U D Y
A 65-year-old man comes to the emergency department with 
severe shortness of breath. His wife reports that he has long 
known that he is hypertensive but never had symptoms, so 
he refused to take antihypertensive medications. During the 
last month, he has noted increasing ankle edema, reduced 
exercise tolerance, and difficulty sleeping lying down, but he 
reports no episodes of chest pain or discomfort. He now has 
pitting edema to the knees and is acutely uncomfortable 
lying down. Vital signs include blood pressure 190/140 mm 
Hg, pulse 120 bpm, and respiratory rate 20/min. Chest aus-
cultation reveals loud rhonchi, but an electrocardiogram is 
negative except for evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy. 
He is given a diuretic intravenously and admitted to intensive 
care. What diuretic would be most appropriate for this man’s 
case of acute pulmonary edema associated with heart failure? 
What are the possible toxicities of this therapy?
252    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
Glomerulus
Proximal 
convoluted
tubule
NaCl
NaHCO3
Proximal
straight tubule
Cortex
Outer medulla
Diuretics
1    Acetazolamide
2    Osmotic agents (mannitol)
3    Loop agents (eg, furosemide)
4    Thiazides
5    Aldosterone antagonists
6    ADH antagonists
      Adenosine
2
Thin
descending
limb
H2O
H2O
H2O
(+ADH)
Inner medulla
Loop of
Henle
Thin
ascending
limb
Thick
ascending
limb
Na+
K+
K+
2Cl−
Ca2+
Mg2+
NaCl
Distal convoluted
tubule  
Ca2+
(+PTH)
K+
H+
Collecting
tubule
NaCl
(+aldosterone)
Collecting
duct
?
4
K+
H+
1
2
4
3
5
6
2
7
7
7
7
7
TABLE 15–1 Major segments of the nephron and their functions.
Segment
Functions
Water 
Permeability
Primary Transporters 
and Drug Targets at 
Apical Membrane
Diuretic with Major Action
Glomerulus
Formation of glomerular filtrate
Extremely high
None
None
Proximal convoluted 
tubule (PCT)
Reabsorption of 65% of filtered Na+/K+/
CA2+, and Mg2+; 85% of NaHCO3, and 
nearly 100% of glucose and amino 
acids. Isosmotic reabsorption of water.
Very high
Na/H1 (NHE3), carbonic 
anhydrase
Carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors
Adenosine antagonists 
(under investigation)
Proximal tubule, straight 
segments
Secretion and reabsorption of organic 
acids and bases, including uric acid and 
most diuretics
Very high
Acid (eg, uric acid) and 
base transporters
None
Thin descending limb of 
Henle’s loop
Passive reabsorption of water
High
Aquaporins
None
Thick ascending limb of 
Henle’s loop (TAL)
Active reabsorption of 15–25% of
filtered Na+/K+/Cl−; secondary
reabsorption of Ca2+ and Mg2+
Very low
Na/K/2Cl (NKCC2)
Loop diuretics
Distal convoluted tubule 
(DCT)
Active reabsorption of 4–8% of filtered 
Na+ and Cl−; Ca2+ reabsorption under 
parathyroid hormone control
Very low
Na/Cl (NCC)
Thiazides
Cortical collecting tubule 
(CCT)
Na+ reabsorption (2–5%) coupled to K+ 
and H+ secretion
Variable2
Na channels (ENaC), K 
channels,1 H+ 
transporter,1 aquaporins
K+-sparing diuretics 
Adenosine antagonists 
(under investigation)
Medullary collecting duct
Water reabsorption under vasopressin 
control
Variable2
Aquaporins
Vasopressin antagonists
1Not a target of currently available drugs.
2Controlled by vasopressin activity.
 FIGURE 15–1  Tubule transport systems and sites of action of diuretics. ADH, antidiuretic hormone; PTH, parathyroid hormone. 
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    253
 Of the various solutes reabsorbed in the proximal tubule, the 
most relevant to diuretic action are NaHCO 3 and NaCl. Of the 
currently available diuretics, only one group (carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors, which block NaHCO 3 reabsorption) acts predomi-
nantly in the PCT. In view of the large quantity of NaCl absorbed 
in this segment, a drug that specifically blocked proximal tubular 
absorption of NaCl could be a particularly powerful diuretic. 
Adenosine receptor antagonists, which are currently under intense 
clinical investigation, act mainly in the PCT and appear to induce 
a NaCl, rather than a NaHCO 3 diuresis. Sodium bicarbonate 
reabsorption by the PCT is initiated by the action of a Na + /H + 
exchanger (NHE3) located in the luminal membrane of the 
proximal tubule epithelial cell ( Figure 15–2 ). This transport sys-
tem allows Na + to enter the cell from the tubular lumen in 
exchange for a proton (H + ) from inside the cell. As in all portions 
of the nephron, Na + /K + -ATPase in the basolateral membrane 
pumps the reabsorbed Na + into the interstitium so as to maintain 
a low intracellular Na + concentration. The H + secreted into the 
lumen combines with bicarbonate (HCO 3 − ) to form H 2 CO 3 (car-
bonic acid), which is rapidly dehydrated to CO 2 and H 2 O by 
carbonic anhydrase. Carbon dioxide produced by dehydration of 
H 2 CO 3 enters the proximal tubule cell by simple diffusion where 
it is then rehydrated back to H 2 CO 3 , also facilitated by intracel-
lular carbonic anhydrase. After dissociation of H 2 CO 3 , the H + is 
available for transport by the Na + /H + exchanger, and the HCO 3 − 
is transported out of the cell by a basolateral membrane trans-
porter ( Figure 15–2 ). Bicarbonate reabsorption by the proximal 
tubule is thus dependent on carbonic anhydrase activity. This 
enzyme can be inhibited by acetazolamide and other carbonic 
anhydrase inhibitors. 
 Adenosine, which is released as a result of hypoxia and ATP 
consumption, is a molecule with four different receptors and com-
plex effects on Na + transport in several segments of the nephron. 
Although it reduces glomerular filtration rate (GFR) to decrease 
energy consumption by the kidney, adenosine actually increases 
proximal reabsorption of Na + via stimulation of NHE3 activity. A 
new class of drugs, the adenosine A 1 -receptor antagonists, have 
recently been found to significantly blunt both proximal tubule 
NHE3 activity and collecting duct NaCl reabsorption, and to 
have potent vasomotor effects in the renal microvasculature (see 
below, under Autacoids, Pharmacology of Diuretic Agents, and 
under Heart Failure). 
 Because HCO 3 − and organic solutes have been largely removed 
from the tubular fluid in the late proximal tubule, the residual 
luminal fluid contains predominantly NaCl. Under these condi-
tions, Na + reabsorption continues, but the H + secreted by the 
Na + /H + exchanger can no longer bind to HCO 3 − . Free H + causes 
luminal pH to fall, activating a poorly defined Cl − /base exchanger 
( Figure 15–2 ). The net effect of parallel Na + /H + exchange and 
Cl − /base exchange is NaCl reabsorption. As yet, there are no 
diuretic agents that are known to act on this conjoint process. 
 Water is reabsorbed in the PCT in response to osmotic forces, 
so luminal fluid osmolality remains nearly constant along its 
length, and an impermeant solute like inulin rises in concentra-
tion as water is reabsorbed. If large amounts of an impermeant 
solute such as mannitol (an osmotic diuretic) are present in the 
tubular fluid, water reabsorption causes the concentration of the 
solute to rise, so that as salt concentrations become diminished 
further, water reabsorption is prevented. 
 Organic acid secretory systems are located in the middle third of 
the straight part of the proximal tubule (S 2 segment). These systems 
secrete a variety of organic acids (uric acid, nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory drugs [NSAIDs], diuretics, antibiotics, etc) into the luminal 
fluid from the blood. These systems thus help deliver diuretics to the 
luminal side of the tubule, where most of them act. Organic base 
secretory systems (creatinine, choline, etc) are also present, in the early 
(S 1 ) and middle (S 2 ) segments of the proximal tubule. 
 LOOP OF HENLE 
 At the boundary between the inner and outer stripes of the outer 
medulla, the proximal tubule empties into the thin descending 
limb of Henle’s loop. Water is extracted from the descending limb 
of this loop by osmotic forces found in the hypertonic medullary 
interstitium. As in the proximal tubule, impermeant luminal sol-
utes such as mannitol oppose this water extraction and thus have 
aquaretic activity. The thin  ascending limb is relatively water-im-
permeable but is permeable to some solutes. 
 The thick ascending limb (TAL), which follows the thin limb of 
Henle’s loop, actively reabsorbs NaCl from the lumen (about 25% of 
the filtered sodium), but unlike the proximal tubule and the thin 
descending limb of Henle’s loop, it is nearly impermeable to water. 
Lumen-
urine
Proximal
convoluted
tubule
Interstitium-
blood
Na+
Na+
HCO3– + H+ 
K+
H2CO3
H2CO3
CO2 + H2O
Cl–
Base–
H2O + CO2
H
+ + HCO3
–
CA
+
CA
ATP
NHE3
Na+
 FIGURE 15–2  Apical membrane Na + /H + exchange (via NHE3) 
and bicarbonate reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubule cell. 
Na + /K + -ATPase is present in the basolateral membrane to maintain 
intracellular sodium and potassium levels within the normal range. 
Because of rapid equilibration, concentrations of the solutes are 
approximately equal in the interstitial fluid and the blood. Carbonic 
anhydrase (CA) is found in other locations in addition to the brush 
border of the luminal membrane. 
254    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
Salt reabsorption in the TAL therefore dilutes the tubular fluid, and 
it is called a  diluting segment . Medullary portions of the TAL contrib-
ute to medullary hypertonicity and thereby also play an important 
role in concentration of urine by the collecting duct. 
 The NaCl transport system in the luminal membrane of the 
TAL is a Na + /K + /2Cl − cotransporter (called NKCC2 or NK2CL) 
( Figure 15–3 ). This transporter is selectively blocked by diuretic 
agents known as “loop” diuretics (see later in chapter). Although the 
Na + /K + /2Cl − transporter is itself electrically neutral (two cations and 
two anions are cotransported), the action of the transporter contrib-
utes to excess K + accumulation within the cell. Back diffusion of this 
K + into the tubular lumen causes a lumen-positive electrical poten-
tial that provides the driving force for reabsorption of cations— 
including magnesium and calcium—via the paracellular pathway. 
Thus, inhibition of salt transport in the TAL by loop diuretics, 
which reduces the lumen-positive potential, causes an increase in 
urinary excretion of divalent cations in addition to NaCl. 
 DISTAL CONVOLUTED TUBULE 
 Only about 10% of the filtered NaCl is reabsorbed in the distal 
convoluted tubule (DCT). Like the TAL of Henle’s loop, this seg-
ment is relatively impermeable to water, and NaCl reabsorption 
further dilutes the tubular fluid. The mechanism of NaCl trans-
port in the DCT is an electrically neutral thiazide-sensitive Na + 
and Cl − cotransporter (NCC,  Figure 15–4 ). 
 Because K + does not recycle across the apical membrane of the 
DCT as it does in the TAL, there is no lumen-positive potential 
in this segment, and Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ are not driven out of the 
tubular lumen by electrical forces. Instead, Ca 2+ is actively reab-
sorbed by the DCT epithelial cell via an apical Ca 2+ channel and 
basolateral Na + /Ca 2+ exchanger ( Figure 15–4 ). This process is 
regulated by parathyroid hormone. 
 COLLECTING TUBULE SYSTEM 
 The collecting tubule system that connects the DCT to the renal 
pelvis and the ureter consists of several sequential tubular segments: 
the connecting tubule, the collecting tubule, and the collecting duct 
(formed by the connection of two or more collecting tubules). 
Although these tubule segments may be anatomically distinct, the 
physiologic gradations are more gradual, and in terms of diuretic 
activity it is easier to think of this complex as a single segment of the 
nephron containing several distinct cell types. The collecting tubule 
system is responsible for only 2–5% of NaCl reabsorption by the 
kidney. Despite this small contribution, it plays an important role 
in renal physiology and in diuretic action. As the final site of NaCl 
reabsorption, the collecting system is responsible for tight regulation 
of body fluid volume and for determining the final Na + concentra-
tion of the urine. Furthermore, the collecting system is the site at 
which mineralocorticoids exert a significant influence. Lastly, this is 
the most important site of K + secretion by the kidney and the site 
at which virtually all diuretic-induced changes in K + balance occur. 
 The mechanism of NaCl reabsorption in the collecting tubule 
system is distinct from the mechanisms found in other tubule seg-
ments. The  principal cells are the major sites of Na + , K + , and 
water transport ( Figures 15–5 and  15–6 ), and the  intercalated 
cells (α, β) are the primary sites of H + (α cells) or bicarbonate (β 
cells) secretion. The α and β intercalated cells are very similar, 
except that the membrane locations of the H + -ATPase and Cl/HCO 3 − 
exchanger are reversed. Principal cells do not contain apical 
Lumen-
urine
Thick
ascending
limb
Interstitium-
blood
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
K+
K+
Cl–
2Cl–
(+) Potential
Mg2+, Ca2+
NKCC2
ATP
 FIGURE 15–3  Ion transport pathways across the luminal and 
basolateral membranes of the thick ascending limb cell. The lumen 
positive electrical potential created by K + back diffusion drives divalent 
(and monovalent) cation reabsorption via the paracellular pathway. 
NKCC2 is the primary transporter in the luminal membrane. 
 FIGURE 15–4  Ion transport pathways across the luminal and 
basolateral membranes of the distal convoluted tubule cell. As in all 
tubular cells, Na + /K + ATPase is present in the basolateral membrane. 
NCC is the primary sodium and chloride transporter in the luminal 
membrane. (R, parathyroid hormone [PTH] receptor.) 
Lumen-
urine
Distal
convoluted
tubule
Interstitium-
blood
Na+
Na+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
K+
PTH
Cl–
Na+
H+
R
+
NCC
ATP
ATP
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    255
increase in the transepithelial electrical potential and a dramatic 
increase in both Na + reabsorption and K + secretion. 
 The collecting tubule system is also the site at which the final 
urine concentration is determined. In addition to their role in con-
trol of Na + absorption and K + secretion ( Figure 15–5 ), principal 
cells also contain a regulated system of water channels ( Figure 
15–6 ). Antidiuretic hormone (ADH, also called arginine vasopres-
sin, AVP) controls the permeability of these cells to water by regulat-
ing the insertion of pre-formed water channels (aquaporin-2, 
AQP2) into the apical membrane. Vasopressin receptors in the vas-
culature and central nervous system (CNS) are V 1 receptors, and 
those in the kidney are V 2 receptors. V 2 receptors act via a G pro-
tein-coupled, cAMP-mediated process. In the absence of ADH, the 
collecting tubule (and duct) is impermeable to water, and dilute 
urine is produced. ADH markedly increases water permeability, and 
this leads to the formation of a more concentrated final urine. ADH 
also stimulates the insertion of urea transporter UT1 molecules into 
the apical membranes of collecting duct cells in the medulla. 
 Urea concentration in the medulla plays an important role 
maintaining the high osmolarity of the medulla and in the con-
centration of urine. ADH secretion is regulated by serum osmola-
lity and by volume status. A new class of drugs, the vaptans (see 
under Agents That Alter Water Excretion), are ADH antagonists. 
R
Cl–
Lumen-
urine
Collecting
tubule
Interstitium-
blood
Na+
K+
 Cl–
Na+
K+
Aldosterone
Principal cell
Intercalated cell
H+
HCO3–
ENaC
+
+
ATP
ATP
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
V2
V2
AQP3,4
R
R
cAMP
AQP2
Lumen-
urine
Interstitium-
blood
AQP2
ADH
Collecting
tubule
+
 FIGURE 15–5  Ion transport pathways across the luminal and 
basolateral membranes of collecting tubule and collecting duct cells. 
Inward diffusion of Na + via the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) 
leaves a lumen-negative potential, which drives reabsorption of Cl − 
and efflux of K + . (R, aldosterone receptor.) 
 FIGURE 15–6  Water transport across the luminal and basolateral 
membranes of collecting duct cells. Above, low water permeability 
exists in the absence of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Below, in the 
presence of ADH, aquaporins are inserted into the apical membrane, 
greatly increasing water permeability. (AQP2, apical aquaporin water 
channels; AQP3,4, basolateral aquaporin water channels; V 2 , vaso-
pressin V 2 receptor.) 
cotransport systems for Na + and other ions, unlike cells in other 
nephron segments. Principal cell membranes exhibit separate ion 
channels for Na + and K + . Since these channels exclude anions, 
transport of Na + or K + leads to a net movement of charge across 
the membrane. Because Na + entry into the principal cell pre-
dominates over K + secretion into the lumen, a 10–50 mV lumen-
negative electrical potential develops. Sodium that enters the 
principal cell from the tubular fluid is then transported back to the 
blood via the basolateral Na + /K + -ATPase ( Figure 15–5 ). The 
10–50 mV lumen-negative electrical potential drives the transport 
of Cl − back to the blood via the paracellular pathway and draws 
K + out of cells through the apical membrane K + channel. Thus, 
there is an important relationship between Na + delivery to the 
collecting tubule system and the resulting secretion of K + . 
Upstream diuretics increase Na + delivery to this site and enhance 
K + secretion. If Na + is delivered to the collecting system with an 
anion that cannot be reabsorbed as readily as Cl − (eg, HCO 3 − ), the 
lumen-negative potential is increased, and K + secretion is enhanced. 
This mechanism, combined with enhanced aldosterone secretion 
due to volume depletion, is the basis for most diuretic-induced K + 
wasting. Adenosine antagonists, which act upstream at the proximal 
tubule, but also at the collecting duct, are perhaps the only diuretics 
that violate this principle (see below). Reabsorption of Na + via the 
epithelial Na channel (ENaC) and its coupled secretion of K + is 
regulated by aldosterone. This steroid hormone, through its actions 
on gene transcription, increases the activity of both apical mem-
brane channels and the basolateral Na + /K + -ATPase. This leads to an 
256    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 RENAL AUTACOIDS 
 A number of locally produced compounds exhibit physiologic 
effects within the kidney and are therefore referred to as  autacoids , 
or  paracrine factors . Several of these autacoids (adenosine, the 
prostaglandins, and urodilatin) appear to have important effects 
on the pharmacology of diuretics. Since these effects are complex, 
they will be treated independently of the individual tubule seg-
ments discussed above. 
 ADENOSINE 
 Adenosine is an unphosphorylated ribonucleoside whose actions 
in the kidney have been intensively studied. As in all tissues, renal 
adenosine concentrations rise in response to hypoxia and ATP 
consumption. In most tissues, hypoxia results in compensatory 
vasodilation and, if cardiac output is sufficient, increased blood 
flow. The kidney has different requirements because increased 
blood flow leads to an increase in GFR and greater solute delivery 
to the tubules. This increased delivery would increase tubule work 
and ATP consumption. In contrast, in the hypoxic kidney, ade-
nosine actually decreases blood flow and GFR. Because the 
medulla is always more hypoxic than the cortex, adenosine 
increases Na + reabsorption from the reduced flow in the cortex, so 
that delivery to medullary segments will be even further reduced. 
 There are four distinct adenosine receptors (A 1 , A 2a , A 2b , and 
A 3 ), all of which have been found in the kidney. However, prob-
ably only one of these (A 1 ) is of importance with regard to the 
pharmacology of diuretics. The adenosine A 1 receptor is found on 
the pre-glomerular afferent arteriole, as well as the PCT and most 
other tubule segments. Adenosine is known to affect ion transport 
in the PCT, the medullary TAL, and collecting tubules. In addi-
tion, adenosine (via A 1 receptors on the afferent arteriole) reduces 
blood flow to the glomerulus (and GFR) and is also the key signal-
ing molecule in the process of tubuloglomerular feedback (see 
below, under Heart Failure). 
 In addition to its effects on GFR, adenosine significantly alters 
Na + transport in several segments. In the proximal tubule, adenos-
ine has a biphasic effect on NHE3 activity: enhancement at low 
concentrations and inhibition at very high concentrations. 
However, adenosine receptor antagonists have generally been 
found to block the enhancement of NHE3 activity and thus 
exhibit diuretic activity (see below). It is particularly interesting 
that unlike other diuretics that act upstream of the collecting 
tubules, adenosine antagonists do not cause wasting of K. This 
important finding suggests that in addition to their effects on 
NHE3, adenosine antagonists must also blunt K + secretion in the 
cortical collecting tubule. Adenosine A 1 receptors have been found 
in the collecting tubule, but the precise mechanism by which 
adenosine blunts K + secretion is not well understood. 
 PROSTAGLANDINS 
 Prostaglandins are autacoids that contribute importantly to renal 
physiology, and to the function of many other organs (see 
Chapter 18). Five prostaglandin subtypes (PGE 2 , PGI 2 , PGD 2 , 
PGF 2α , and thromboxane [TXA 2 ] are synthesized in the kidney 
and have receptors in this organ. The role of some of these receptors 
in renal physiology is not yet completely understood. However, 
PGE 2 (acting on EP 1 , EP 3 , and possibly EP 2 ) has been shown to 
play a role in the activity of certain diuretics. Among its many 
actions, PGE 2 blunts Na + reabsorption in the TAL of Henle’s loop 
and ADH-mediated water transport in collecting tubules. These 
actions of PGE 2 contribute significantly to the diuretic efficacy of 
loop diuretics. Blockade of prostaglandin synthesis with NSAIDs 
can therefore interfere with loop diuretic activity. 
 PEPTIDES 
 There is growing interest in the natriuretic peptides (ANP, BNP, 
and CNP, see Chapter 17), which induce natriuresis through sev-
eral different mechanisms. ANP and BNP are synthesized in the 
heart, while CNP comes primarily from the CNS. Some of these 
peptides exert both vascular effects (see Chapter 17) and sodium 
transport effects in the kidney, which participate in causing natri-
uresis. A fourth natriuretic peptide, urodilatin, is structurally very 
similar to ANP but is synthesized and functions only in the kid-
ney. Urodilatin is made in distal tubule epithelial cells and blunts 
Na + reabsorption through effects on Na + uptake channels and 
Na + /K + -ATPase at the downstream collecting tubule system. In 
addition, through effects on vascular smooth muscle, it reduces 
glomerular afferent and increases glomerular efferent vasomotor 
tone. These effects cause an increase in GFR, which adds to the 
natriuretic activity. Ularitide is a recombinant peptide that mimics 
the activity of urodilatin. It is currently under intense investiga-
tion and may become available for clinical use in the near future. 
 The cardiac peptides ANP and BNP have pronounced systemic 
vascular effects. The receptors ANP A and ANP B , also known as NPR A 
and NPR B , are transmembrane molecules with guanylyl cyclase cata-
lytic activity at the cytoplasmic domains. Of interest, both peptides 
increase GFR through effects on glomerular arteriolar vasomotor tone 
and also exhibit diuretic activity. CNP has very little diuretic activity. 
Three agents in this group are in clinical use or under investigation: 
nesiritide (BNP), carperitide (ANP, available only in Japan), and ular-
itide (urodilatin, under investigation). Intravenous ularitide has been 
studied extensively for use in acute heart failure. It can dramatically 
improve cardiovascular parameters and promote diuresis without 
reducing creatinine clearance. There is also evidence that nesiritide 
(simulating BNP) may enhance the activity of other diuretics while 
helping to maintain stable renal function. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF
DIURETIC AGENTS 
 CARBONIC ANHYDRASE 
INHIBITORS 
 Carbonic anhydrase is present in many nephron sites, but the 
predominant location of this enzyme is the epithelial cells of the 
PCT ( Figure 15–2 ), where it catalyzes the dehydration of H 2 CO 3 
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    257
to CO 2 at the luminal membrane and rehydration of CO 2 to 
H 2 CO 3 in the cytoplasm as previously described. By blocking 
carbonic anhydrase, inhibitors blunt NaHCO 3 reabsorption and 
cause diuresis. 
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors were the forerunners of modern 
diuretics. They were discovered in 1937 when it was found that 
bacteriostatic sulfonamides caused an alkaline diuresis and hyper-
chloremic metabolic acidosis. With the development of newer 
agents, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are now rarely used as 
diuretics, but they still have several specific applications that are 
discussed below. The prototypical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor is 
 acetazolamide. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are well absorbed after oral 
administration. An increase in urine pH from the HCO 3 − diuresis 
is apparent within 30 minutes, is maximal at 2 hours, and persists 
for 12 hours after a single dose. Excretion of the drug is by secre-
tion in the proximal tubule S 2 segment. Therefore, dosing must be 
reduced in renal insufficiency. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Inhibition of carbonic anhydrase activity profoundly depresses 
HCO 3 − reabsorption in the PCT. At its maximal safe dosage, 85% 
of the HCO 3 − reabsorptive capacity of the superficial PCT is 
inhibited. Some HCO 3 − can still be absorbed at other nephron 
sites by carbonic anhydrase–independent mechanisms, so the 
overall effect of maximal acetazolamide dosage is only about 45% 
inhibition of whole kidney HCO 3 − reabsorption. Nevertheless, 
carbonic anhydrase inhibition causes significant HCO 3 − losses and 
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis ( Table 15–2 ). Because of 
reduced HCO 3 − in the glomerular filtrate and the fact that 
HCO 3 − depletion leads to enhanced NaCl reabsorption by the 
remainder of the nephron, the diuretic efficacy of acetazolamide 
decreases significantly with use over several days. 
 At present, the major clinical applications of acetazolamide 
involve carbonic anhydrase–dependent HCO 3 − and fluid transport at 
sites other than the kidney. The ciliary body of the eye secretes 
HCO 3 − from the blood into the aqueous humor. Likewise, forma-
tion of cerebrospinal fluid by the choroid plexus involves HCO 3 − 
secretion. Although these processes remove HCO 3 − from the 
blood (the direction opposite of that in the proximal tubule), they 
are similarly inhibited by carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. 
 Clinical Indications & Dosage ( Table 15–3 ) 
 A. Glaucoma 
 The reduction of aqueous humor formation by carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors decreases the intraocular pressure. This effect is 
valuable in the management of glaucoma, making it the most 
common indication for use of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. 
Topically active agents, which reduce intraocular pressure without 
producing renal or systemic effects, are available (dorzolamide, 
brinzolamide). 
 B. Urinary Alkalinization 
 Uric acid and cystine are relatively insoluble and may form stones 
in acidic urine. Therefore, in cystinuria, a disorder of cystine reab-
sorption, solubility of cystine can be enhanced by increasing uri-
nary pH from 7.0 to 7.5 with carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. In 
the case of uric acid, pH needs to be raised only to 6.0 or 6.5. In 
the absence of HCO 3 − administration, these effects of acetazol-
amide last only 2–3 days, so prolonged therapy requires oral 
HCO 3 − . Excessive urinary alkalinization can lead to stone forma-
tion from calcium salts (see below), so urine pH should be fol-
lowed during treatment with acetazolamide. 
 C. Metabolic Alkalosis 
 Metabolic alkalosis is generally treated by correction of abnor-
malities in total body K + , intravascular volume, or mineralocorti-
coid levels. However, when the alkalosis is due to excessive use of 
diuretics in patients with severe heart failure, replacement of intra-
vascular volume may be contraindicated. In these cases, acetazol-
amide can be useful in correcting the alkalosis as well as producing 
a small additional diuresis for correction of volume overload. 
Acetazolamide can also be used to rapidly correct the metabolic 
alkalosis that may appear following the correction of respiratory 
acidosis. 
 D. Acute Mountain Sickness 
 Weakness, dizziness, insomnia, headache, and nausea can occur in 
mountain travelers who rapidly ascend above 3000 m. The symp-
toms are usually mild and last for a few days. In more serious cases, 
TABLE 15–2  Changes in urinary electrolyte patterns 
and body pH in response to diuretic 
drugs.
                                                                      Urinary Electrolytes
Group
NaCl
NaHCO3
K+
Body pH
Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors
+
+++
+
↓
Loop agents
++++
0
+
↑
Thiazides
++
+
+
↑
Loop agents plus
thiazides
+++++
+
++
↑
K+-sparing agents
+
(+)
−
↓
+, increase; −, decrease; 0, no change; ↓, acidosis; ↑, alkalosis.
TABLE 15–3  Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors used 
orally in the treatment of glaucoma.
Drug
Usual Oral Dosage
Dichlorphenamide
50 mg 1–3 times daily
Methazolamide
50–100 mg 2–3 times daily
258    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
rapidly progressing pulmonary or cerebral edema can be life-
threatening. By decreasing cerebrospinal fluid formation and by 
decreasing the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid and brain, acetazol-
amide can increase ventilation and diminish symptoms of moun-
tain sickness. This mild metabolic central and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) acidosis is also useful in the treatment of sleep apnea. 
 E. Other Uses 
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors have been used as adjuvants in the 
treatment of epilepsy and in some forms of hypokalemic periodic 
paralysis. They are also useful in treating patients with CSF leak-
age (usually caused by tumor or head trauma, but often idio-
pathic). By reducing the rate of CSF formation and intracranial 
pressure, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors can significantly slow the 
rate of CSF leakage. Finally, they also increase urinary phosphate 
excretion during severe hyperphosphatemia. 
 Toxicity 
 A. Hyperchloremic Metabolic Acidosis 
 Acidosis predictably results from chronic reduction of body 
HCO 3 − stores by carbonic anhydrase inhibitors ( Table 15–2 ) and 
limits the diuretic efficacy of these drugs to 2 or 3 days. Unlike the 
diuretic effect, acidosis persists as long as the drug is continued. 
 B. Renal Stones 
 Phosphaturia and hypercalciuria occur during the bicarbonaturic 
response to inhibitors of carbonic anhydrase. Renal excretion of solu-
bilizing factors (eg, citrate) may also decline with chronic use. 
Calcium salts are relatively insoluble at alkaline pH, which means that 
the potential for renal stone formation from these salts is enhanced. 
 C. Renal Potassium Wasting 
 Potassium (K + ) wasting can occur because the increased Na + pre-
sented to the collecting tubule (with HCO 3 − ) is partially reab-
sorbed, increasing the lumen-negative electrical potential in that 
segment and enhancing K + secretion. This effect can be counter-
acted by simultaneous administration of potassium chloride or a 
K + -sparing diuretic. Potassium wasting is theoretically a problem 
with any diuretic that presents increased Na + delivery to the collect-
ing tubule. However, the new adenosine A 1 -receptor antagonists 
(see below) appear to avoid this toxicity by blunting Na + reabsorp-
tion in the collecting tubules as well as the proximal tubules. 
 D. Other Toxicities 
 Drowsiness and paresthesias are common following large doses of 
acetazolamide. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors may accumulate in 
patients with renal failure, leading to nervous system toxicity. 
Hypersensitivity reactions (fever, rashes, bone marrow suppres-
sion, and interstitial nephritis) may also occur. 
 Contraindications 
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor–induced alkalinization of the urine 
decreases urinary excretion of NH 4 + (by converting it to rapidly 
reabsorbed NH 3 ) and may contribute to the development of 
 hyperammonemia and  hepatic encephalopathy in patients with 
cirrhosis. 
 ADENOSINE A 1 -RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS 
 In addition to their potentially beneficial effect in preventing 
tubuloglomerular feedback (see below, under Heart Failure), ade-
nosine receptor antagonists interfere with the activation of NHE3 
in the PCT and the adenosine-mediated enhancement of collect-
ing tubule K+ secretion. Thus, adenosine receptor antagonists 
should be very useful diuretics. 
 Caffeine and theophylline have long been known to be weak 
diuretics because of their modest and nonspecific inhibition of 
adenosine receptors. A more selective A 1 antagonist, rolofylline, 
was recently withdrawn from study because of CNS toxicity and 
unexpected negative effects on GFR. However, newer adenosine 
inhibitors that are much more potent and more specific have been 
synthesized. Several of these (Aventri [BG9928], SLV320, and 
BG9719) are under study and if found to be less toxic than 
rolofylline, may become available as diuretics that avoid the 
diuretic effects of K + wasting and decreased GFR resulting from 
tubuloglomerular feedback. 
 LOOP DIURETICS 
 Loop diuretics selectively inhibit NaCl reabsorption in the TAL. 
Because of the large NaCl absorptive capacity of this segment and 
the fact that the diuretic action of these drugs is not limited by 
development of acidosis, as is the case with the carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors, loop diuretics are the most efficacious diuretic agents 
currently available. 
 Chemistry 
 The two prototypical drugs of this group are  furosemide and 
 ethacrynic acid. The structures of these diuretics are shown in 
 Figure 15–7 . In addition to furosemide,  bumetanide and 
 torsemide are sulfonamide loop diuretics. 
 Ethacrynic acid—not a sulfonamide derivative—is a phenoxy-
acetic acid derivative containing an adjacent ketone and methyl-
ene group ( Figure 15–7 ). The methylene group (shaded in figure) 
forms an adduct with the free sulfhydryl group of cysteine. The 
cysteine adduct appears to be an active form of the drug. 
 Organic  mercurial diuretics also inhibit salt transport in the 
TAL but are no longer used because of their toxicity. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The loop diuretics are rapidly absorbed. They are eliminated by 
the kidney by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. 
Absorption of oral torsemide is more rapid (1 hour) than that of 
furosemide (2–3 hours) and is nearly as complete as with intrave-
nous administration. The duration of effect for furosemide is usu-
ally 2–3 hours. The effect of torsemide lasts 4–6 hours. Half-life 
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    259
depends on renal function. Since loop agents act on the luminal 
side of the tubule, their diuretic activity correlates with their secre-
tion by the proximal tubule. Reduction in the secretion of loop 
diuretics may result from simultaneous administration of agents 
such as NSAIDs or probenecid, which compete for weak acid 
secretion in the proximal tubule. Metabolites of ethacrynic acid 
and furosemide have been identified, but it is not known if they 
have any diuretic activity. Torsemide has at least one active metab-
olite with a half-life considerably longer than that of the parent 
compound. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Loop diuretics inhibit NKCC2, the luminal Na + /K + /2Cl − trans-
porter in the TAL of Henle’s loop. By inhibiting this transporter, 
the loop diuretics reduce the reabsorption of NaCl and also 
diminish the lumen-positive potential that comes from K + recy-
cling ( Figure 15–3 ). This positive potential normally drives 
divalent cation reabsorption in the TAL ( Figure 15–3 ), and by 
reducing this potential, loop diuretics cause an increase in Mg 2+ 
and Ca 2+ excretion. Prolonged use can cause significant hypomag-
nesemia in some patients. Since vitamin D–induced intestinal 
absorption and parathyroid hormone-induced renal reabsorption 
of Ca 2+ can be increased, loop diuretics do not generally cause 
 hypocalcemia. However, in disorders that cause hypercalcemia, 
Ca 2+ excretion can be usefully enhanced by treatment with loop 
diuretics combined with saline infusions. 
 Loop diuretics have also been shown to induce expression of 
one of the cyclooxygenases (COX-2), which participates in the 
synthesis of prostaglandins from arachidonic acid. At least one of 
these prostaglandins, PGE 2 , inhibits salt transport in the TAL and 
thus participates in the renal actions of loop diuretics. NSAIDs 
(eg, indomethacin), which blunt cyclooxygenase activity, can 
interfere with the actions of loop diuretics by reducing prostaglandin 
synthesis in the kidney. This interference is minimal in otherwise 
normal subjects but may be significant in patients with nephrotic 
syndrome or hepatic cirrhosis. 
 Loop agents have direct effects on blood flow through several 
vascular beds. Furosemide increases renal blood flow via prosta-
glandin actions on kidney vasculature. Both furosemide and 
ethacrynic acid have also been shown to reduce pulmonary con-
gestion and left ventricular filling pressures in heart failure before 
a measurable increase in urinary output occurs. These effects on 
peripheral vascular tone are also due to release of renal prostaglan-
dins that were induced by the diuretics. 
 Clinical Indications & Dosage ( Table 15–4 ) 
 The most important indications for the use of the loop diuretics 
include  acute pulmonary edema, other edematous conditions, 
and  acute hypercalcemia. The use of loop diuretics in these con-
ditions is discussed below in Clinical Pharmacology. Other indica-
tions for loop diuretics include hyperkalemia, acute renal failure, 
and anion overdose. 
 A. Hyperkalemia 
 In mild hyperkalemia—or after acute management of severe 
hyperkalemia by other measures—loop diuretics can significantly 
enhance urinary excretion of K + . This response is enhanced by 
simultaneous NaCl and water administration. 
 B. Acute Renal Failure 
 Loop agents can increase the rate of urine flow and enhance K + 
excretion in acute renal failure. However, they cannot prevent or 
shorten the duration of renal failure. If a large pigment load has 
precipitated acute renal failure (or threatens to), loop agents may 
help flush out intratubular casts and ameliorate intratubular 
obstruction. On the other hand, loop agents can actually worsen 
cast formation in myeloma and light chain nephropathy because 
increased distal Cl − concentration enhances secretion of Tamm-
Horsfall protein, which then aggregates with myeloma Bence 
Jones proteins. 
 C. Anion Overdose 
 Loop diuretics are useful in treating toxic ingestions of bromide, 
fluoride, and iodide, which are reabsorbed in the TAL. Saline solu-
tion must be administered to replace urinary losses of Na + and to 
provide Cl − , so as to avoid extracellular fluid volume depletion. 
O
COOH
1
2
3
4
5
6
H2N
Cl
O2S
NH
CH2
Furosemide
O
Ethacrynic acid
COOH
CH2
Cl
Cl
C
C
O
C2H5
H2C
TABLE 15–4 Typical dosages of loop diuretics.
Drug
Total Daily Oral Dose1
Bumetanide
0.5–2 mg
Ethacrynic acid
50–200 mg
Furosemide
20–80 mg
Torsemide
5–20 mg
1As single dose or in two divided doses.
 FIGURE 15–7  Two loop diuretics. The shaded methylene group 
on ethacrynic acid is reactive and may combine with free sulfhydryl 
groups. 
260    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 Toxicity 
 A. Hypokalemic Metabolic Alkalosis 
 By inhibiting salt reabsorption in the TAL, loop diuretics increase 
Na + delivery to the collecting duct. Increased delivery leads to 
increased secretion of K + and H + by the duct, causing hypokalemic 
metabolic alkalosis ( Table 15–2 ). This toxicity is a function of the 
magnitude of the diuresis and can be reversed by K + replacement 
and correction of hypovolemia. 
 B. Ototoxicity 
 Loop diuretics occasionally cause dose-related hearing loss that is 
usually reversible. It is most common in patients who have dimin-
ished renal function or who are also receiving other ototoxic 
agents such as aminoglycoside antibiotics. 
 C. Hyperuricemia 
 Loop diuretics can cause hyperuricemia and precipitate attacks of 
gout. This is caused by hypovolemia-associated enhancement of 
uric acid reabsorption in the proximal tubule. It may be prevented 
by using lower doses to avoid development of hypovolemia. 
 D. Hypomagnesemia 
 Magnesium depletion is a predictable consequence of the chronic 
use of loop agents and occurs most often in patients with dietary 
magnesium deficiency. It can be reversed by administration of oral 
magnesium preparations. 
 E. Allergic and Other Reactions 
 All loop diuretics, with the exception of ethacrynic acid, are 
sulfonamides. Therefore, skin rash, eosinophilia, and less 
often, interstitial nephritis are occasional adverse effects of 
these drugs. This toxicity usually resolves rapidly after drug 
withdrawal. Allergic reactions are much less common with 
ethacrynic acid. 
 Because Henle’s loop is indirectly responsible for water 
reabsorption by the downstream collecting duct, loop diuretics 
can cause severe dehydration. Hyponatremia is less common 
than with the thiazides (see below), but patients who increase 
water intake in response to hypovolemia-induced thirst can 
become severely hyponatremic with loop agents. Loop agents 
can cause hypercalciuria, which can lead to mild hypocalcemia 
and secondary hyperparathyroidism. On the other hand, loop 
agents can have the opposite effect (hypercalcemia) in volume-
depleted patients who have another—previously occult—cause 
for hypercalcemia, such as metastatic breast or squamous cell 
lung carcinoma. 
 Contraindications 
 Furosemide, bumetanide, and torsemide may exhibit allergic 
cross-reactivity in patients who are sensitive to other sulfonamides, 
but this appears to be very rare. Overzealous use of any diuretic is 
dangerous in hepatic cirrhosis, borderline renal failure, or heart 
failure. 
 THIAZIDES 
 The thiazide diuretics were discovered in 1957, as a result of 
efforts to synthesize more potent carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. It 
subsequently became clear that the thiazides inhibit NaCl, rather 
than NaHCO 3 − transport and that their action was predominantly 
in the DCT, rather than the PCT. Some members of this group 
retain significant carbonic anhydrase inhibitory activity (eg, chlor-
thalidone). The prototypical thiazide is  hydrochlorothiazide 
(HCTZ). 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Like carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and three loop diuretics, all of the 
thiazides have an unsubstituted sulfonamide group ( Figure 15–8 ). 
 All thiazides can be administered orally, but there are differ-
ences in their metabolism. Chlorothiazide, the parent of the 
group, is not very lipid-soluble and must be given in relatively 
large doses. It is the only thiazide available for parenteral adminis-
tration. HCTZ is considerably more potent and should be used in 
much lower doses ( Table 15–5 ). Chlorthalidone is slowly absorbed 
and has a longer duration of action. Although indapamide is 
excreted primarily by the biliary system, enough of the active form 
is cleared by the kidney to exert its diuretic effect in the DCT. 
Cl
H2N
O2S
H
N
S
O2
Cl
H2N
O2S
CO
NH
CH3
N
Cl
H2N
O2S
O
CH3
CH3
N
Indapamide
Metolazone
Hydrochlorothiazide
NH
H
N
 FIGURE 15–8  Hydrochlorothiazide and related agents. 
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    261
All thiazides are secreted by the organic acid secretory system in 
the proximal tubule and compete with the secretion of uric acid 
by that system. As a result, thiazide use may blunt uric acid secre-
tion and elevate serum uric acid level. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Thiazides inhibit NaCl reabsorption from the luminal side of 
epithelial cells in the DCT by blocking the Na + /Cl − transporter 
(NCC). In contrast to the situation in the TAL, in which loop 
diuretics inhibit Ca 2+ reabsorption, thiazides actually enhance 
Ca 2+ reabsorption. This enhancement has been postulated to 
result from effects in both the proximal and distal convoluted 
tubules. In the proximal tubule, thiazide-induced volume deple-
tion leads to enhanced Na + and passive Ca 2+ reabsorption. In the 
DCT, lowering of intracellular Na + by thiazide-induced blockade 
of Na + entry enhances Na + /Ca 2+ exchange in the basolateral mem-
brane ( Figure 15–4 ), and increases overall reabsorption of Ca 2+ . 
Although thiazides rarely cause hypercalcemia as the result of this 
enhanced reabsorption, they can unmask hypercalcemia due to 
other causes (eg, hyperparathyroidism, carcinoma, sarcoidosis). 
Thiazides are useful in the treatment of kidney stones caused by 
hypercalciuria. 
 The action of thiazides depends in part on renal prostaglandin 
production. As described for loop diuretics, the actions of thia-
zides can also be inhibited by NSAIDs under certain conditions. 
 Clinical Indications & Dosage ( Table 15–5 ) 
 The major indications for thiazide diuretics are (1) hypertension, 
(2) heart failure, (3) nephrolithiasis due to idiopathic hypercalci-
uria, and (4) nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Use of the thiazides 
in each of these conditions is described below in Clinical 
Pharmacology of Diuretic Agents. 
 Toxicity 
 A. Hypokalemic Metabolic Alkalosis and Hyperuricemia 
 These toxicities are similar to those observed with loop diuretics 
(see previous text and  Table 15–2 ). 
 B. Impaired Carbohydrate Tolerance 
 Hyperglycemia may occur in patients who are overtly diabetic or 
who have even mildly abnormal glucose tolerance tests. The effect 
is due to both impaired pancreatic release of insulin and dimin-
ished tissue utilization of glucose. Hyperglycemia may be partially 
reversible with correction of hypokalemia. 
 C. Hyperlipidemia 
 Thiazides cause a 5–15% increase in total serum cholesterol and 
low-density lipoproteins (LDLs). These levels may return toward 
baseline after prolonged use. 
 D. Hyponatremia 
 Hyponatremia is an important adverse effect of thiazide diuretics. 
It is caused by a combination of hypovolemia-induced elevation of 
ADH, reduction in the diluting capacity of the kidney, and 
increased thirst. It can be prevented by reducing the dose of the 
drug or limiting water intake. 
 E. Allergic Reactions 
 The thiazides are sulfonamides and share cross-reactivity with 
other members of this chemical group. Photosensitivity or gener-
alized dermatitis occurs rarely. Serious allergic reactions are 
extremely rare but do include hemolytic anemia, thrombocytope-
nia, and acute necrotizing pancreatitis. 
 F. Other Toxicities 
 Weakness, fatigability, and paresthesias similar to those of car-
bonic anhydrase inhibitors may occur. Impotence has been 
reported but is probably related to volume depletion. 
 Contraindications 
 Excessive use of any diuretic is dangerous in patients with hepatic 
cirrhosis, borderline renal failure, or heart failure (see text that 
follows). 
 POTASSIUM-SPARING DIURETICS 
 Potassium-sparing diuretics prevent K + secretion by antagonizing 
the effects of aldosterone in collecting tubules. Inhibition may 
occur by direct pharmacologic antagonism of mineralocorticoid 
receptors  (spironolactone, eplerenone) or by inhibition of Na + 
influx through ion channels in the luminal membrane  (amiloride, 
triamterene). This latter property appears to be shared by ade-
nosine antagonists, which primarily blunt Na + reabsorption in 
the PCT, but also blunt Na + reabsorption and K + secretion in 
collecting tubules. Finally, ularitide (recombinant urodilatin), 
which is currently still under investigation, blunts Na + uptake 
TABLE 15–5 Thiazides and related diuretics.
Drug
Total Daily Oral 
Dose
Frequency of Daily 
Administration
Bendroflumethiazide
2.5–10 mg
Single dose
Chlorothiazide
0.5–2 g
Two divided doses
Chlorthalidone1
25–50 mg
Single dose
Hydrochlorothiazide
25–100 mg
Single dose
Hydroflumethiazide
12.5–50 mg
Two divided doses
Indapamide1
2.5–10 mg
Single dose
Methyclothiazide
2.5–10 mg
Single dose
Metolazone1
2.5–10 mg
Single dose
Polythiazide
1–4 mg
Single dose
Quinethazone1
25–100 mg
Single dose
Trichlormethiazide
1–4 mg
Single dose
1Not a thiazide but a sulfonamide qualitatively similar to the thiazides.
262    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
and Na + /K + -ATPase in collecting tubules and increases GFR 
through its vascular effects. Nesiritide, which is now commercially 
available for intravenous use only, increases GFR and blunts Na + 
reabsorption in both proximal and collecting tubules. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 The structures of spironolactone and amiloride are shown in 
 Figure 15–9 . 
 Spironolactone is a synthetic steroid that acts as a competitive 
antagonist to aldosterone. Onset and duration of its action are 
determined by the kinetics of the aldosterone response in the tar-
get tissue. Substantial inactivation of spironolactone occurs in the 
liver. Overall, spironolactone has a rather slow onset of action, 
requiring several days before full therapeutic effect is achieved. 
Eplerenone is a spironolactone analog with much greater selectiv-
ity for the mineralocorticoid receptor. It is several hundredfold less 
active on androgen and progesterone receptors than spironolac-
tone, and therefore, eplerenone has considerably fewer adverse 
effects.
Amiloride and triamterene are direct inhibitors of Na + influx in 
the CCT (cortical collecting tubule). Triamterene is metabolized 
in the liver, but renal excretion is a major route of elimination for 
the active form and the metabolites. Because triamterene is exten-
sively metabolized, it has a shorter half-life and must be given 
more frequently than amiloride (which is not metabolized). 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Potassium-sparing diuretics reduce Na + absorption in the collect-
ing tubules and ducts. Potassium absorption (and K + secretion) at 
this site is regulated by aldosterone, as described above. Aldosterone 
antagonists interfere with this process. Similar effects are observed 
with respect to H + handling by the intercalated cells of the collect-
ing tubule, in part explaining the metabolic acidosis seen with 
aldosterone antagonists ( Table 15–2 ). 
 Spironolactone and eplerenone bind to mineralocorticoid recep-
tors and blunt aldosterone activity. Amiloride and triamterene do 
not block aldosterone, but instead directly interfere with Na + entry 
through the epithelial Na + channels (ENaC, Figure 15-5), in the 
apical membrane of the collecting tubule. Since K + secretion is 
coupled with Na + entry in this segment, these agents are also effec-
tive K + -sparing diuretics.
The actions of the aldosterone antagonists depend on renal pros-
taglandin production. The actions of K + -sparing diuretics can be 
inhibited by NSAIDs under certain conditions. 
 Clinical Indications & Dosage ( Table 15–6 ) 
 Potassium-sparing diuretics are most useful in states of mineralo-
corticoid excess or hyperaldosteronism (also called aldosteronism), 
due either to primary hypersecretion (Conn’s syndrome, ectopic 
adrenocorticotropic hormone production) or secondary hyperal-
dosteronism (evoked by heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis, nephrotic 
syndrome, or other conditions associated with diminished effec-
tive intravascular volume). Use of diuretics such as thiazides or 
loop agents can cause or exacerbate volume contraction and may 
cause secondary hyperaldosteronism. In the setting of enhanced 
mineralocorticoid secretion and excessive delivery of Na + to distal 
nephron sites, renal K + wasting occurs. Potassium-sparing diuret-
ics of either type may be used in this setting to blunt the K + secre-
tory response. 
 It has also been found that low doses of eplerenone (25–50 mg/d) 
may interfere with some of the fibrotic and inflammatory effects 
of aldosterone. By doing so, it can slow the progression of albu-
minuria in diabetic patients. More important is that eplerenone 
has been found to reduce myocardial perfusion defects after myo-
cardial infarction. In one clinical study, eplerenone reduced 
TABLE 15–6  Potassium-sparing diuretics and 
combination preparations.
Trade Name
Potassium-Sparing 
Agent
Hydrochlorothiazide
Aldactazide
Spironolactone 25 mg
50 mg
Aldactone
Spironolactone 25, 50, 
or 100 mg
…
Dyazide
Triamterene 37.5 mg
25 mg
Dyrenium
Triamterene 50 or
100 mg
…
Inspra1
Eplerenone 25, 50, or 
100 mg
…
Maxzide
Triamterene 75 mg
50 mg
Maxzide-25 mg
Triamterene 37.5 mg
25 mg
Midamor
Amiloride 5 mg
…
Moduretic
Amiloride 5 mg
50 mg
1Eplerenone is currently approved for use only in hypertension.
S
C
CH3
O
H3C
H3C
O
O
O
N
N
CO
NH2
Cl
H2N
NH
C
NH2
NH
Spironolactone
Amiloride
 FIGURE 15–9  Potassium-sparing diuretics. 
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    263
mortality rate by 15% (compared with placebo) in patients with 
mild to moderate heart failure after myocardial infarction. 
 Toxicity 
 A. Hyperkalemia 
 Unlike most other diuretics, K + -sparing diuretics reduce urinary 
excretion of K + ( Table 15–2 ) and can cause mild, moderate, or 
even life-threatening hyperkalemia. The risk of this complication 
is greatly increased by renal disease (in which maximal K + excre-
tion may be reduced) or by the use of other drugs that reduce or 
inhibit renin (β blockers, NSAIDs, aliskiren) or angiotensin II 
activity (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin 
receptor inhibitors). Since most other diuretic agents lead to K + 
losses, hyperkalemia is more common when K + -sparing diuretics 
are used as the sole diuretic agent, especially in patients with renal 
insufficiency. With fixed-dosage combinations of K + -sparing and 
thiazide diuretics, the thiazide-induced hypokalemia and meta-
bolic alkalosis are ameliorated. However, because of variations in 
the bioavailability of the components of fixed-dosage forms, the 
thiazide-associated adverse effects often predominate. Therefore, 
it is generally preferable to adjust the doses of the two drugs 
separately. 
 B. Hyperchloremic Metabolic Acidosis 
 By inhibiting H + secretion in parallel with K + secretion, the K + -
sparing diuretics can cause acidosis similar to that seen with type 
IV renal tubular acidosis. 
 C. Gynecomastia 
 Synthetic steroids may cause endocrine abnormalities by actions 
on other steroid receptors. Gynecomastia, impotence, and benign 
prostatic hyperplasia (very rare) all have been reported with 
spironolactone. Such effects have not been reported with epler-
enone, presumably because it is much more selective than 
spironolactone for the mineralocorticoid receptor and virtually 
inactive on androgen or progesterone receptors. 
 D. Acute Renal Failure 
 The combination of triamterene with indomethacin has been 
reported to cause acute renal failure. This has not been reported 
with other K + -sparing diuretics. 
 E. Kidney Stones 
 Triamterene is only slightly soluble and may precipitate in the 
urine, causing kidney stones. 
 Contraindications 
 Potassium-sparing agents can cause severe, even fatal, hyper-
kalemia in susceptible patients. Patients with chronic renal insuf-
ficiency are especially vulnerable and should rarely be treated with 
these diuretics. Oral K + administration should be discontinued if 
K + -sparing diuretics are administered. Concomitant use of other 
agents that blunt the renin-angiotensin system (β blockers, ACE 
inhibitors, ARBs) increases the likelihood of hyperkalemia. 
Patients with liver disease may have impaired metabolism of tri-
amterene and spironolactone, so dosing must be carefully adjusted. 
Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (eg, erythromycin, fluconazole, dilti-
azem, and grapefruit juice) can markedly increase blood levels of 
eplerenone, but not spironolactone. 
 AGENTS THAT ALTER WATER 
EXCRETION (AQUARETICS)  
 OSMOTIC DIURETICS 
 The proximal tubule and descending limb of Henle’s loop are 
freely permeable to water ( Table 15–1 ). Any osmotically active 
agent that is filtered by the glomerulus but not reabsorbed causes 
water to be retained in these segments and promotes a water diure-
sis. Such agents can be used to reduce intracranial pressure and to 
promote prompt removal of renal toxins. The prototypic osmotic 
diuretic is  mannitol. Glucose is not used clinically as a diuretic 
but frequently causes osmotic diuresis (glycosuria) in patients with 
hyperglycemia. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Mannitol is poorly absorbed by the GI tract, and when adminis-
tered orally, it causes osmotic diarrhea rather than diuresis. For 
systemic effect, mannitol must be given intravenously. Mannitol is 
not metabolized and is excreted by glomerular filtration within 
30–60 minutes, without any important tubular reabsorption or 
secretion. It must be used cautiously in patients with even mild 
renal insufficiency (see below). 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Osmotic diuretics have their major effect in the proximal tubule 
and the descending limb of Henle’s loop. Through osmotic effects, 
they also oppose the action of ADH in the collecting tubule. The 
presence of a nonreabsorbable solute such as mannitol prevents 
the normal absorption of water by interposing a countervailing 
osmotic force. As a result, urine volume increases. The increase in 
urine flow rate decreases the contact time between fluid and the 
tubular epithelium, thus reducing Na + as well as water reabsorp-
tion. The resulting natriuresis is of lesser magnitude than the 
water diuresis, leading eventually to excessive water loss and 
hypernatremia. 
 Clinical Indications & Dosage 
 A. Increase of Urine Volume 
 Osmotic diuretics are used to increase water excretion in prefer-
ence to sodium excretion. This effect can be useful when avid Na + 
retention limits the response to conventional agents. It can be used 
to maintain urine volume and to prevent anuria that might other-
wise result from presentation of large pigment loads to the kidney 
(eg, from hemolysis or rhabdomyolysis). Some oliguric patients do 
not respond to osmotic diuretics. Therefore, a test dose of mannitol 
264    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
(12.5 g intravenously) should be given before starting a continu-
ous infusion. Mannitol should not be continued unless there is an 
increase in urine flow rate to more than 50 mL/h during the 3 
hours after the test dose. Mannitol (12.5–25 g intravenously) can 
be repeated every 1–2 hours to maintain urine flow rate greater 
than 100 mL/h. Prolonged use of mannitol is not advised. 
 B. Reduction of Intracranial and Intraocular Pressure 
 Osmotic diuretics alter Starling forces so that water leaves cells and 
reduces intracellular volume. This effect is used to reduce intrac-
ranial pressure in neurologic conditions and to reduce intraocular 
pressure before ophthalmologic procedures. A dose of 1–2 g/kg 
mannitol is administered intravenously. Intracranial pressure, 
which must be monitored, should fall in 60–90 minutes. 
 Toxicity 
 A. Extracellular Volume Expansion 
 Mannitol is rapidly distributed in the extracellular compartment 
and extracts water from cells. Prior to the diuresis, this leads to 
expansion of the extracellular volume and hyponatremia. This 
effect can complicate heart failure and may produce florid pulmo-
nary edema. Headache, nausea, and vomiting are commonly 
observed in patients treated with osmotic diuretics. 
 B. Dehydration, Hyperkalemia, and Hypernatremia 
 Excessive use of mannitol without adequate water replacement can 
ultimately lead to severe dehydration, free water losses, and hyper-
natremia. As water is extracted from cells, intracellular K + concen-
tration rises, leading to cellular losses and hyperkalemia. These 
complications can be avoided by careful attention to serum ion 
composition and fluid balance. 
 C. Hyponatremia 
 When used in patients with severe renal impairment, parenterally 
administered mannitol cannot be excreted and is retained intrave-
nously. This causes osmotic extraction of water from cells, leading 
to hyponatremia. 
 ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE (ADH, 
VASOPRESSIN) AGONISTS 
 Vasopressin and  desmopressin are used in the treatment of cen-
tral diabetes insipidus. They are discussed in Chapter 37. Their 
renal action appears to be mediated primarily via V 2 ADH recep-
tors, although V 1a receptors may also be involved. 
 ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE ANTAGONISTS 
 A variety of medical conditions, including congestive heart failure 
(CHF) and the syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion 
(SIADH), cause water retention as a result of excessive ADH 
secretion. Patients with CHF who are on diuretics frequently 
develop hyponatremia secondary to excessive ADH secretion.
Dangerous hyponatremia can result. 
 Until recently, two nonselective agents, lithium (discussed in 
Chapter 29) and demeclocycline (a tetracycline antimicrobial drug 
discussed in Chapter 44), were used for their well-known interfer-
ence with ADH activity. The mechanism for this interference has 
not been completely determined for either of these agents. 
Demeclocycline is used more often than lithium because of the 
many side effects of lithium administration. However, demeclocy-
cline is now being rapidly replaced by several specific ADH recep-
tor antagonists (vaptans), which have yielded encouraging clinical 
results. 
 There are three known vasopressin receptors,V 1a , V 1b , and V 2 . V 1 
receptors are expressed in the vasculature and CNS, while V 2 recep-
tors are expressed specifically in the kidney.  Conivaptan (currently 
available only for intravenous use) exhibits activity against both V 1a 
and V 2 receptors (see below). The oral agents  tolvaptan, lixivaptan, 
and satavaptan are selectively active against the V 2 receptor. 
Lixivaptan and satavaptan are still under clinical investigation, but 
tolvaptan, which recently received Food and Drug Administration 
approval, is very effective in treatment of hyponatremia and as an 
adjunct to standard diuretic therapy in patients with CHF.  
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The half-life of conivaptan and demeclocycline is 5–10 hours, 
while that of tolvaptan is 12–24 hours. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Antidiuretic hormone antagonists inhibit the effects of ADH in 
the collecting tubule. Conivaptan and tolvaptan are direct ADH 
receptor antagonists, while both lithium and demeclocycline 
reduce ADH-induced cAMP by mechanisms that are not yet com-
pletely clarified. 
 Clinical Indications & Dosage 
 A. Syndrome of Inappropriate ADH Secretion 
 Antidiuretic hormone antagonists are used to manage SIADH 
when water restriction has failed to correct the abnormality. This 
generally occurs in the outpatient setting, where water restriction 
cannot be enforced, but can occur in the hospital when large 
quantities of intravenous fluid are needed for other purposes. 
Demeclocycline (600–1200 mg/d) or tolvaptan (15–60 mg/d) can 
be used for SIADH. Appropriate plasma levels of demeclocycline 
(2 mcg/mL) should be maintained by monitoring, but tolvaptan 
levels are not routinely monitored. Unlike demeclocycline or 
tolvaptan, conivaptan is administered intravenously and is not 
suitable for chronic use in outpatients. Lixivaptan and satavaptan 
may also soon be available for oral use. 
 B. Other Causes of Elevated Antidiuretic Hormone 
 Antidiuretic hormone is also elevated in response to diminished effec-
tive circulating blood volume, as often occurs in heart failure. When 
treatment by volume replacement is not desirable, hyponatremia may 
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    265
result. As for SIADH, water restriction is often the treatment of 
choice. In patients with heart failure, this approach is often unsuccess-
ful in view of increased thirst and the large number of oral medica-
tions being used. For patients with heart failure, intravenous 
conivaptan may be particularly useful because it has been found that 
the blockade of V 1a receptors by this drug leads to decreased periph-
eral vascular resistance and increased cardiac output. 
 Toxicity 
 A. Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus 
 If serum Na + is not monitored closely, any ADH antagonist can 
cause severe hypernatremia and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. If 
lithium is being used for a psychiatric disorder, nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus can be treated with a thiazide diuretic or amiloride 
(see Diabetes Insipidus, below). 
 B. Renal Failure 
 Both lithium and demeclocycline have been reported to cause 
acute renal failure. Long-term lithium therapy may also cause 
chronic interstitial nephritis. 
 C. Other 
 Dry mouth and thirst are common with many of these drugs. 
Tolvaptan may cause hypotension. Multiple adverse effects associated 
with lithium therapy have been found and are discussed in 
Chapter 29. Demeclocycline should be avoided in patients with liver 
disease (see Chapter 44) and in children younger than 12 years. 
 DIURETIC COMBINATIONS  
 LOOP AGENTS & THIAZIDES 
 Some patients are refractory to the usual dose of loop diuretics or 
become refractory after an initial response. Since these agents have 
a short half-life (2–6 hours), refractoriness may be due to an exces-
sive interval between doses. Renal Na + retention may be greatly 
increased during the time period when the drug is no longer 
active. After the dosing interval for loop agents is minimized or 
the dose is maximized, the use of two drugs acting at different 
nephron sites may exhibit dramatic synergy. Loop agents and 
thiazides in combination often produce diuresis when neither 
agent acting alone is even minimally effective. There are several 
reasons for this phenomenon. 
 First, salt reabsorption in either the TAL or the DCT can 
increase when the other is blocked. Inhibition of both can therefore 
produce more than an additive diuretic response. Second, thiazide 
diuretics often produce a mild natriuresis in the proximal tubule 
that is usually masked by increased reabsorption in the TAL. The 
combination of loop diuretics and thiazides can therefore block Na + 
reabsorption, to some extent, from all three segments. 
 Metolazone is the thiazide-like drug usually used in patients 
refractory to loop agents alone, but it is likely that other thiazides 
would be as effective. Moreover, metolazone is available only in an 
oral preparation, whereas chlorothiazide can be given parenterally. 
 The combination of loop diuretics and thiazides can mobilize 
large amounts of fluid, even in patients who have not responded 
to single agents. Therefore, close hemodynamic monitoring is 
essential. Routine outpatient use is not recommended. Furthermore, 
K + wasting is extremely common and may require parenteral K + 
administration with careful monitoring of fluid and electrolyte 
status. 
 POTASSIUM-SPARING DIURETICS & 
PROXIMAL TUBULE DIURETICS, LOOP 
AGENTS, OR THIAZIDES 
 Hypokalemia often develops in patients taking carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors, loop diuretics, or thiazides. This can usually be man-
aged by dietary NaCl restriction or by taking dietary KCl supple-
ments. When hypokalemia cannot be managed in this way, the 
addition of a K + -sparing diuretic can significantly lower K + excre-
tion. Although this approach is generally safe, it should be avoided 
in patients with renal insufficiency and in those receiving angio-
tensin antagonists such as ACE inhibitors, in whom life-threaten-
ing hyperkalemia can develop in response to K + -sparing diuretics. 
It is not yet known whether adenosine receptor antagonists, which 
are K + -sparing diuretics (but which act primarily in the proximal 
tubule), will cause hyperkalemia. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DIURETIC AGENTS 
 A summary of the effects of diuretics on urinary electrolyte excre-
tion is shown in  Table 15–2 . 
 EDEMATOUS STATES 
 A common reason for diuretic use is for reduction of peripheral or 
pulmonary edema that has accumulated as a result of cardiac, 
renal, or vascular diseases that reduce blood flow to the kidney. 
This reduction is sensed as insufficient effective arterial blood 
volume and leads to salt and water retention, which expands blood 
volume and eventually causes edema formation. Judicious use of 
diuretics can mobilize this interstitial edema without significant 
reductions in plasma volume. However, excessive diuretic therapy 
may compromise the effective arterial blood volume and reduce 
the perfusion of vital organs. Therefore, the use of diuretics to 
mobilize edema requires careful monitoring of the patient’s hemo-
dynamic status and an understanding of the pathophysiology of 
the underlying illness. 
 HEART FAILURE 
 When cardiac output is reduced by heart failure, the resultant 
changes in blood pressure and blood flow to the kidney are sensed 
as hypovolemia and lead to renal retention of salt and water. This 
266    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
physiologic response initially increases intravascular volume and 
venous return to the heart and may partially restore the cardiac 
output toward normal (see Chapter 13). 
 If the underlying disease causes cardiac output to deteriorate 
despite expansion of plasma volume, the kidney continues to 
retain salt and water, which then leaks from the vasculature and 
becomes interstitial or pulmonary edema. At this point, diuretic 
use becomes necessary to reduce the accumulation of edema, par-
ticularly in the lungs. Reduction of pulmonary vascular conges-
tion with diuretics may actually improve oxygenation and thereby 
improve myocardial function. Reduction of preload can reduce 
the size of the heart, allowing it to work at a more efficient fiber 
length. Edema associated with heart failure is generally managed 
with loop diuretics. In some instances, salt and water retention 
may become so severe that a combination of thiazides and loop 
diuretics is necessary. 
 In treating the heart failure patient with diuretics, it must 
always be remembered that cardiac output in these patients is 
being maintained in part by high filling pressures. Therefore, 
excessive use of diuretics may diminish venous return and further 
impair cardiac output. This is especially critical in right ventricular 
heart failure. Systemic, rather than pulmonary vascular, conges-
tion is the hallmark of this disorder. Diuretic-induced volume 
contraction predictably reduces venous return and can severely 
compromise cardiac output if left ventricular filling pressure is 
reduced below 15 mm Hg (see Chapter 13). Reduction in cardiac 
output, resulting from either left or right ventricular dysfunction, 
also eventually leads to renal dysfunction resulting from reduced 
perfusion pressures. 
 Increased delivery of salt to the TAL leads to activation of the 
macula densa and a reduction in GFR by tubuloglomerular feed-
back. The mechanism of this feedback is secretion of adenosine by 
macula densa cells, which causes afferent arteriolar vasoconstric-
tion through activation of A 1 adenosine receptors on the afferent 
arteriole. This vasoconstriction reduces GFR. Tubuloglomerular 
feedback–mediated reduction in GFR exacerbates the reduction 
that was initially caused by decreased cardiac output. Recent 
work with adenosine receptor antagonists has shown that it may 
soon be possible to circumvent this complication of diuretic 
therapy in heart failure patients by blunting tubuloglomerular 
feedback. 
 Diuretic-induced metabolic alkalosis, exacerbated by hypo-
kalemia, is another adverse effect that may further compromise 
cardiac function. This complication can be treated with replacement 
of K + and restoration of intravascular volume with saline; however, 
severe heart failure may preclude the use of saline even in patients 
who have received excessive diuretic therapy. In these cases, adjunc-
tive use of acetazolamide helps to correct the alkalosis. 
 Another serious toxicity of diuretic use in the cardiac patient is 
hypokalemia. Hypokalemia can exacerbate underlying cardiac 
arrhythmias and contribute to digitalis toxicity. This can usually 
be avoided by having the patient reduce Na + intake while taking 
diuretics, thus decreasing Na + delivery to the K + -secreting collect-
ing tubule. Patients who are noncompliant with a low Na + diet 
must take oral KCl supplements or a K + -sparing diuretic. 
 KIDNEY DISEASE AND RENAL FAILURE 
 A variety of diseases interfere with the kidney’s critical role in 
volume homeostasis. Although some renal disorders cause salt 
wasting, most cause retention of salt and water. When renal failure 
is severe (GFR < 5 mL/min), diuretic agents are of little benefit, 
because glomerular filtration is insufficient to generate or sustain 
a natriuretic response. However, a large number of patients, and 
even dialysis patients, with milder degrees of renal insufficiency 
(GFR of 5–15 mL/min), can be treated with diuretics when they 
retain excessive volumes of fluid between dialysis treatments. 
There is still interest in the question as to whether diuretic 
therapy can alter the severity or the outcome of acute renal failure. 
This is because “nonoliguric” forms of acute renal insufficiency 
have better outcomes than “oliguric” (< 400–500 mL/24 h urine 
output) acute renal failure. Almost all studies of this question have 
shown that diuretic therapy helps in the short-term fluid manage-
ment of these patients with acute renal failure, but that it has no 
impact on the long-term outcome. 
 Many glomerular diseases, such as those associated with diabe-
tes mellitus or systemic lupus erythematosus, exhibit renal reten-
tion of salt and water. The cause of this sodium retention is not 
precisely known, but it probably involves disordered regulation of 
the renal microcirculation and tubular function through release of 
vasoconstrictors, prostaglandins, cytokines, and other mediators. 
When edema or hypertension develops in these patients, diuretic 
therapy can be very effective. 
 Certain forms of renal disease, particularly diabetic nephropa-
thy, are frequently associated with development of hyperkalemia at 
a relatively early stage of renal failure. In these cases, a thiazide or 
loop diuretic will enhance K + excretion by increasing delivery of 
salt to the K + -secreting collecting tubule. 
 Patients with renal diseases leading to the nephrotic syndrome 
often present complex problems in volume management. These 
patients may exhibit fluid retention in the form of ascites or 
edema but have reduced plasma volume due to reduced plasma 
oncotic pressures. This is very often the case in patients with 
“minimal change” nephropathy. In these patients, diuretic use may 
cause further reductions in plasma volume that can impair GFR 
and may lead to orthostatic hypotension. Most other causes of 
nephrotic syndrome are associated with primary retention of salt 
and water by the kidney, leading to expanded plasma volume and 
hypertension despite the low plasma oncotic pressure. In these 
cases, diuretic therapy may be beneficial in controlling the volume-
dependent component of hypertension. 
 In choosing a diuretic for the patient with kidney disease, 
there are a number of important limitations. Acetazolamide 
must usually be avoided because it causes NaHCO 3 excretion 
and can exacerbate acidosis. Potassium-sparing diuretics may 
cause hyperkalemia. Thiazide diuretics were previously thought 
to be ineffective when GFR falls below 30 mL/min. More 
recently, it has been found that thiazides, which are of little ben-
efit when used alone, can be used to significantly reduce the dose 
of loop diuretics needed to promote diuresis in a patient with 
GFR of 5–15 mL/min. Thus, high-dose loop diuretics (up to 
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    267
 NONEDEMATOUS STATES  
 HYPERTENSION 
 The diuretic and mild vasodilator actions of the thiazides are useful 
in treating virtually all patients with essential hypertension and may 
be sufficient in many. Although hydrochlorothiazide is the most 
widely used diuretic for hypertension, chlorthalidone may be more 
effective because of its much longer half-life. Loop diuretics are 
usually reserved for patients with mild renal insufficiency (GFR 
< 30–40 mL/min) or heart failure. Moderate restriction of dietary 
Na + intake (60–100 mEq/d) has been shown to potentiate the 
effects of diuretics in essential hypertension and to lessen renal K + 
wasting. A K + -sparing diuretic can be added to reduce K + wasting. 
 There has been debate about whether thiazides should be used 
as the initial therapy in treatment of hypertension. Their relatively 
mild efficacy sometimes limits their use as monotherapy. However, 
a very large study of over 30,000 participants has shown that 
inexpensive diuretics like thiazides result in outcomes that are 
similar or superior to those found with ACE inhibitor or calcium 
channel-blocker therapy. This important result reinforces the 
importance of thiazide therapy in hypertension. 
 Although diuretics are often successful as monotherapy, they 
also play an important role in patients who require multiple drugs 
to control blood pressure. Diuretics enhance the efficacy of many 
agents, particularly ACE inhibitors. Patients being treated with 
powerful vasodilators such as hydralazine or minoxidil usually 
require simultaneous diuretics because the vasodilators cause sig-
nificant salt and water retention. 
 NEPHROLITHIASIS 
 Approximately two thirds of kidney stones contain Ca 2+ phosphate 
or Ca 2+ oxalate. While there are numerous medical conditions 
(hyperparathyroidism, hypervitaminosis D, sarcoidosis, malignan-
cies, etc) that cause hypercalciuria, many patients with such stones 
exhibit a defect in proximal tubular Ca 2+ reabsorption. This can be 
treated with thiazide diuretics, which enhance Ca 2+ reabsorption in 
the DCT and thus reduce the urinary Ca 2+ concentration. Fluid 
intake should be increased, but salt intake must be reduced, since 
excess dietary NaCl will overwhelm the hypocalciuric effect of thi-
azides. Dietary Ca 2+ should not be restricted, as this can lead to 
negative total body Ca 2+ balance. Calcium stones may also be 
caused by increased intestinal absorption of Ca 2+ , or they may be 
idiopathic. In these situations, thiazides are also effective but should 
be used as adjunctive therapy with other measures. 
 HYPERCALCEMIA 
 Hypercalcemia can be a medical emergency (see Chapter 42). 
Because loop diuretics reduce Ca 2+ reabsorption significantly, they 
can be quite effective in promoting Ca 2+ diuresis. However, loop 
diuretics alone can cause marked volume contraction. If this occurs, 
loop diuretics are ineffective (and potentially counterproductive) 
500 mg of furosemide/d) or a combination of metolazone (5–10 
mg/d) and much smaller doses of furosemide (40–80 mg/d) may 
be useful in treating volume overload in dialysis or predialysis 
patients. There has been some interest in the use of osmotic 
diuretics such as mannitol, because this drug can shrink swollen 
epithelial cells and may theoretically reduce tubular obstruction. 
Unfortunately, there is no evidence that mannitol can prevent 
ischemic or toxic acute renal failure. Mannitol may be useful in 
the management of hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria. Lastly, 
although excessive use of diuretics can impair renal function in 
all patients, the consequences are obviously more serious in 
patients with underlying renal disease. 
 HEPATIC CIRRHOSIS 
 Liver disease is often associated with edema and ascites in con-
junction with elevated portal hydrostatic pressures and reduced 
plasma oncotic pressures. Mechanisms for retention of Na + by the 
kidney in this setting include diminished renal perfusion (from 
systemic vascular alterations), diminished plasma volume (due to 
ascites formation), and diminished oncotic pressure (hypoalbu-
minemia). In addition, there may be primary Na + retention due to 
elevated plasma aldosterone levels. 
 When ascites and edema become severe, diuretic therapy can 
be very useful. However, cirrhotic patients are often resistant to 
loop diuretics because of decreased secretion of the drug into the 
tubular fluid and because of high aldosterone levels. In contrast, 
cirrhotic edema is unusually responsive to spironolactone and 
eplerenone. The combination of loop diuretics and an aldosterone 
receptor antagonist may be useful in some patients. However, 
considerable caution is necessary in the use of aldosterone antago-
nists in cirrhotic patients with even mild renal insufficiency 
because of the potential for causing serious hyperkalemia. 
 It is important to note that, even more than in heart failure, 
overly aggressive use of diuretics in this setting can be disastrous. 
Vigorous diuretic therapy can cause marked depletion of intra-
vascular volume, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis. 
Hepatorenal syndrome and hepatic encephalopathy are the 
unfortunate consequences of excessive diuretic use in the cir-
rhotic patient. 
 IDIOPATHIC EDEMA 
 Idiopathic edema (fluctuating salt retention and edema) is a syn-
drome found most often in 20–30 year-old women. Despite 
intensive study, the pathophysiology remains obscure. Some stud-
ies suggest that surreptitious, intermittent diuretic use may actu-
ally contribute to the syndrome and should be ruled out before 
additional therapy is pursued. While spironolactone has been used 
for idiopathic edema, it should probably be managed with moder-
ate salt restriction alone if possible. Compression stockings have 
also been used but appear to be of variable benefit. 
268    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
because Ca 2+ reabsorption in the proximal tubule would be 
enhanced. Thus, saline must be administered simultaneously with 
loop diuretics if an effective Ca 2+ diuresis is to be maintained. The 
usual approach is to infuse normal saline and furosemide (80–120 
mg) intravenously. Once the diuresis begins, the rate of saline 
infusion can be matched with the urine flow rate to avoid volume 
depletion. Potassium chloride may be added to the saline infusion 
as needed. 
 DIABETES INSIPIDUS 
 Diabetes insipidus is due to either deficient production of ADH 
(neurogenic or central diabetes insipidus) or inadequate respon-
siveness to ADH (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus [NDI]). 
Administration of supplementary ADH or one of its analogs is 
effective only in central diabetes insipidus. Thiazide diuretics can 
reduce polyuria and polydipsia in both types of diabetes insipidus. 
Lithium, used in the treatment of manic-depressive disorder, is a 
common cause of NDI, and thiazide diuretics have been found to 
be very helpful in treating it. This seemingly paradoxic beneficial 
effect of thiazides was previously thought to be mediated through 
plasma volume reduction, with an associated fall in GFR, leading 
to enhanced proximal reabsorption of NaCl and water and 
decreased delivery of fluid to the downstream diluting segments. 
However, in the case of Li + -induced NDI, it is now known that 
HCTZ causes increased osmolality in the inner medulla 
(papilla) and a partial correction of the Li + -induced reduction in 
aquaporin-2 expression. HCTZ also leads to increased expression 
of Na + transporters in the DCT and CCT segments of the 
nephron. Thus, the maximum volume of dilute urine that can be 
produced is significantly reduced in NDI. Dietary sodium restric-
tion can potentiate the beneficial effects of thiazides on urine 
volume in this setting. Serum Li + levels must be carefully moni-
tored in these patients, because diuretics may reduce renal clear-
ance of Li + and raise plasma Li + levels into the toxic range (see 
Chapter 29). Lithium-induced polyuria can also be partially 
reversed by amiloride, which blocks Li + entry into collecting duct 
cells, much as it blocks Na + entry. As mentioned above, thiazides 
are also beneficial in other forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipi-
dus. It is not yet clear whether this is via the same mechanism that 
has been found in Li + -induced NDI. 
SUMMARY Diuretic Agents
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
 •  Acetazolamide, 
others
Inhibition of the enzyme 
prevents dehydration of 
H2CO3 and hydration of 
CO2 in the proximal convo-
luted tubule
Reduces reabsorption of HCO3
−, causing 
self-limited diuresis • hyperchloremic 
metabolic acidosis reduces body pH, 
reduces intraocular pressure
Glaucoma, mountain sick-
ness, edema with alkalosis
Oral and topical preparations 
available • duration of action ∼ 
8–12 h • Toxicity: Metabolic acido-
sis, renal stones, hyperammone-
mia in cirrhotics
 • Brinzolamide, dorzolamide: Topical for glaucoma
LOOP DIURETICS
 •  Furosemide
Inhibition of the Na/K/2Cl 
transporter in the ascend-
ing limb of Henle’s loop
Marked increase in NaCl excretion, some 
K wasting, hypokalemic metabolic alka-
losis, increased urine Ca and Mg
Pulmonary edema, periph-
eral edema, hypertension, 
acute hypercalcemia or 
hyperkalemia, acute renal 
failure, anion overdose
Oral and parenteral preparations
• duration of action 2–4 h
• Toxicity: Ototoxicity, hypovolemia, 
K wasting, hyperuricemia,
hypomagnesemia
 • Bumetanide, torsemide: Sulfonamide loop agents like furosemide
 • Ethacrynic acid: Not a sulfonamide but has typical loop activity and some uricosuric action
THIAZIDES
 •  Hydrochlorothia-
zide
Inhibition of the Na/Cl 
transporter in the distal 
convoluted tubule
Modest increase in NaCl excretion • some 
K wasting • hypokalemic metabolic
alkalosis • decreased urine Ca
Hypertension, mild heart fail-
ure, nephrolithiasis, nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus
Oral • duration 8–12 h • Toxicity: 
Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, 
hyperuricemia, hyperglycemia, 
hyponatremia
 • Metolazone: Popular for use with loop agents for synergistic effects
 • Chlorothiazide: Only parenteral thiazide available (IV)
 • Chlorthalidone: Long half-life (50–60 h) due to binding to red blood cells 
(continued)
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    269
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
POTASSIUM-SPARING DIURETICS
 • Spironolactone
Pharmacologic antagonist 
of aldosterone in collect-
ing tubules • weak antago-
nism of androgen 
receptors
Reduces Na retention and K wasting in 
kidney • poorly understood antagonism 
of aldosterone in heart and vessels
Aldosteronism from any 
cause • hypokalemia due to 
other diuretics • postmyocar-
dial infarction
Slow onset and offset of effect 
• duration 24–48 h •Toxicity:
Hyperkalemia, gynecomastia 
(spironolactone, not eplerenone) 
• additive interaction with other 
K-retaining drugs
 • Amiloride
Blocks epithelial sodium 
channels in collecting 
tubules
Reduces Na retention and K wasting 
• increases lithium clearance
Hypokalemia from other 
diuretics • reduces lithium-
induced polyuria
Orally active • duration 24 h
• Toxicity: Hyperkalemic
metabolic acidosis
 • Eplerenone: Like spironolactone, more selective for aldosterone receptor
 • Triamterene: Mechanism like amiloride, much less potent, more toxic
OSMOTIC DIURETICS
 • Mannitol
Physical osmotic effect on 
tissue water distribution 
because it is retained in 
the vascular compartment
Marked increase in urine flow, reduced 
brain volume, decreased intraocular
pressure, initial hyponatremia, then 
hypernatremia
Renal failure due to increased 
solute load (rhabdomyolysis, 
chemotherapy), increased 
intracranial pressure,
glaucoma
IV administration • Toxicity: 
Nausea, vomiting, headache
VASOPRESSIN (ADH) ANTAGONISTS
 • Conivaptan
Antagonist at V1a and V2 
ADH receptors
Reduces water reabsorption, increases 
plasma Na concentration, vasodilation
Hyponatremia, congestive 
heart failure
IV only, usually continuous
• Toxicity: Infusion site reactions, 
thirst, polyuria, hypernatremia 
 • Tolvaptan
Selective antagonist at V2 
ADH receptors
Reduces water reabsorption, increases 
plasma Na concentration
Hyponatremia, SIADH
Oral • duration 12–24 h • Toxicity: 
Polyuria (frequency), thirst, 
hypernatremia
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Acetazolamide (generic, Diamox)
Oral: 125, 250 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release: 500 mg capsules
Parenteral: 500 mg powder for injection
Amiloride (generic, Midamor, combination drugs1)
Oral: 5 mg tablets
Bendroflumethiazide (Naturetin, combination drugs1)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Brinzolamide (Azopt) (For ocular conditions)
Ophthalmic: 1% suspension
Bumetanide (generic, Bumex)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/2 mL ampule for IV or IM injection
Chlorothiazide (generic, Diuril)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; 250 mg/5 mL oral suspension
Parenteral: 500 mg for injection
Chlorthalidone (generic, Hygroton, Thalitone, combination 
 drugs1)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Conivaptan (Vaprisol)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL; 20  mg/100 mL D5W for IV injection
Demeclocycline (Declomycin)
Oral: 150 mg tablets and capsules; 300 mg tablets
Acetazolamide (generic, Diamox)
Oral: 125, 250 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release: 500 mg capsules
Parenteral: 500 mg powder for injection
Amiloride (generic, Midamor, combination drugs1)
Oral: 5 mg tablets
Bendroflumethiazide (Naturetin, combination drugs1)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Brinzolamide (Azopt) (For ocular conditions)
Ophthalmic: 1% suspension
Bumetanide (generic, Bumex)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/2 mL ampule for IV or IM injection
Chlorothiazide (generic, Diuril)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; 250 mg/5 mL oral suspension
Parenteral: 500 mg for injection
Chlorthalidone (generic, Hygroton, Thalitone, combination
drugs1)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Conivaptan (Vaprisol)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL; 20  mg/100 mL D5W for IV injection
Demeclocycline (Declomycin)
Oral: 150 mg tablets and capsules; 300 mg tablets
Dichlorphenamide (Daranide)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Dorzolamide (Trusopt) (For ocular conditions)
Ophthalmic: 2% solution
Eplerenone (Inspra)
Oral: 25, 50 mg tablets
Ethacrynic acid (Edecrin)
Oral: 25, 50 mg tablets
Parenteral: 50 mg IV injection
Furosemide (generic, Lasix, others)
Oral: 20, 40, 80 mg tablets; 8, 10 mg/mL oral solutions
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IM or IV injection
Hydrochlorothiazide (generic, Esidrix, Hydro-DIURIL, combination 
 drugs1)
Oral: 12.5 mg capsules; 25, 50, 100 mg tablets; 10, 100 mg/mL
solution
Hydroflumethiazide (generic, Saluron)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Indapamide (generic, Lozol)
Oral: 1.25, 2.5 mg tablets
Mannitol (generic, Osmitrol)
Parenteral: 5, 10, 15, 20% solution, for injection
270    SECTION III Cardiovascular-Renal Drugs
 REFERENCES 
 ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Collaborative Research 
Group: Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs 
diuretic: The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent 
Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT). JAMA 2002;288:2981. 
 Berl T et al: Oral Tolvaptan is safe and effective in chronic hyponatremia. J Am Soc 
Nephrol 2010;21:705. 
 BMJ group: Eplerenone after myocardial infarction? Drug Ther Bull 2008;46(1):1.
 Brenner BM (editor):  Brenner & Rector’s The Kidney , 8th ed. Saunders, 2008. 
 Chow T et al:  Ginkgo biloba and acetazolamide prophylaxis for acute mountain 
sickness. Arch Intern Med 2005;165:296. 
 Cooper BE: Diuresis in renal failure: Treat the patient, not the urine output. Crit 
Care Med 2009;37:761. 
 Costello-Boerrigter LC, Boerrigter G, Burnett JC Jr: Revisiting salt and water 
retention: New diuretics, aquaretics, and natriuretics. Med Clin North Am 
2003;87:475. 
 Ely JW et al: Approach to leg edema of unclear etiology. J Am Board Family Med 
2006;19:148. 
 Ernst ME, Moser M: Use of diuretics in patients with hypertension. N Engl J Med 
2009;361:2153. 
 Forssmann W-G, Meyer M, Forsmann K: The renal urodilatin system: Clinical 
implications. Cardiovasc Res 2001;51(3):450. 
 Ginès P, Schrier RW: Renal failure in cirrhosis. N Engl J Med 2009;361:1279. 
 Gross P: Treatment of hyponatremia. Intern Med 2008;47:885. 
 Hall PM: Nephrolithiasis: Treatment, causes, and prevention. Cleveland Clinic J 
Med 2009;76:583. 
 Hao C-M, Breyer MD: Physiological regulation of prostaglandins in the kidney. 
Annu Rev Physiol 2008;70:357. 
 Hays RM: Vasopressin antagonists: Progress and promise. N Engl J Med 
2006;355:146. 
 Hill JA, Yancy CW, Abraham WT: Beyond diuretics: Management of vol-
ume overload in acute heart failure syndromes. Am J Med 2006; 
119:S37. 
 Hocher B: Adenosine A1 receptor antagonists in clinical research and develop-
ment. Kidney Int 2010;78(5):438. 
 Kaplan NM: The place of diuretics in preventing cardiovascular events. J Hum 
Hypertens 2004;18:S29. 
 Kim G-H et al: Antidiuretic effect of hydrochlorothiazide in lithium-induced 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is associated with upregulation of aquaporin-2, 
Na-Cl co-transporter, and epithelial sodium channel. J Am Soc Nephrol 
2004;15:2836. 
 Lee C, Burnett J: Natriuretic peptides and therapeutic applications. Heart Failure 
Rev 2007;12:131. 
 Lüss H et al: Renal effects of ularitide in patients with decompensated heart failure. 
Am Heart J 2008;155:1012. 
 Mitrovic V et al: Cardio-renal effects of the A1 adenosine receptor antagonist 
SLV320 in patients with heart failure. Circ Heart Fail 2009;2:523. 
 Na KY et al: Upregulation of Na + transporter abundance in response to chronic 
thiazide or loop diuretic treatment in rats. Am J Physiol 2003;284:F133. 
 Nijenhuis T et al: Enhanced passive Ca 2+ reabsorption and reduced Mg 2+ channel 
abundance explains thiazide-induced hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia. J 
Clin Invest 2005;115:1651. 
 Rejnmark L et al: Effects of long-term treatment with loop diuretics on bone 
mineral density, calciotropic hormones and bone turnover. J Intern Med 
2005;257:176. 
 Shlipak MG, Massie BM: The clinical challenge of cardiorenal syndrome. 
Circulation 2004;110:1514. 
 Sica DA, Gehr TWB: Diuretic use in stage 5 chronic kidney disease and end-stage 
renal disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2003;12:483. 
 Smyth EM et al: Prostanoids in health and disease. J Lipid Res 2009;50:S423. 
 Tavares M et al: New pharmacologic therapies in acute heart failure. Crit Care Med 
2008;36:S112. 
 Tovar-Palacio C et al: Ion and diuretic specificity of chimeric proteins between 
apical Na + -K + -2Cl − and Na + -Cl − cotransporters. Am J Physiol 
2004;287:F570. 
 Vallon V et al: Adenosine and kidney function. Physiol Rev 2006;86:901. 
 Vallon V et al: Adenosine and kidney function: Potential implications in patients 
with heart failure. Eur J Heart Failure 2008;10:176. 
 Vigen R, Weideman RA, Reilly RF: Thiazides diuretics in the treatment of neph-
rolithiasis; are we using them in an evidence-based fashion? Int Urol Nephrol 
2010;Epub Aug 25. 
 Wakai, R, Roberts IG, Schierhout G: Mannitol for acute traumatic brain injury. 
Cochrane Library (online publication) Issue 4, 2008. 
 Wilcox C: New insights into diuretic use in patients with chronic renal disease. J 
Am Soc Nephrol 2002;13:798. 
 
 
 
1Combination drugs: see Table 15-6
Methazolamide (generic, Neptazane) (For ocular conditions)
Oral: 25, 50 mg tablets
Methyclothiazide (generic, Aquatensen, Enduron)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Metolazone (Mykrox, Zaroxolyn) (Note: Bioavailability of Mykrox is 
 greater than that of Zaroxolyn.)
Oral: 0.5 (Mykrox); 2.5, 5, 10 mg (Zaroxolyn) tablets
Nesiritide (Natrecor)
Parenteral: 1.5 mg vial for dilution into 250 mL IV solution 
(6 mcg/mL)
Polythiazide (Renese, combination drugs1)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
Quinethazone (Hydromox)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Spironolactone (generic, Aldactone , combination drugs1)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Tolvaptan (Samsca)
Oral: 15, 30 mg tablets
Torsemide (Demadex)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 100 mg tablets
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Triamterene (Dyrenium)
Oral: 50, 100 mg capsules
Trichlormethiazide (generic, Diurese, Naqua, others)
Oral: 2, 4 mg tablets
Methazolamide (generic, Neptazane) (For ocular conditions)
Oral: 25, 50 mg tablets
Methyclothiazide (generic, Aquatensen, Enduron)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Metolazone (Mykrox, Zaroxolyn) (Note: Bioavailability of Mykrox is 
 greater than that of Zaroxolyn.)
Oral: 0.5 (Mykrox); 2.5, 5, 10 mg (Zaroxolyn) tablets
Nesiritide (Natrecor)
Parenteral: 1.5 mg vial for dilution into 250 mL IV solution
(6 mcg/mL)
Polythiazide (Renese, combination drugs1)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
Quinethazone (Hydromox)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Spironolactone (generic, Aldactone , combination drugs1)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Tolvaptan (Samsca)
Oral: 15, 30 mg tablets
Torsemide (Demadex)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 100 mg tablets
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Triamterene (Dyrenium)
Oral: 50, 100 mg capsules
Trichlormethiazide (generic, Diurese, Naqua, others)
Oral: 2, 4 mg tablets
CHAPTER 15 Diuretic Agents    271
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The diuretic most commonly used for congestive heart fail-
ure is a loop diuretic like furosemide, which is administered 
IV, in a dosage of 40 mg, followed if necessary by oral admin-
istration, 20–80 mg/24 h. For this patient, furosemide would 
probably be needed chronically, since it blunts the symptoms 
of congestive heart failure but does not reverse the ventricular 
damage that caused the symptoms. A common problem 
when beginning effective diuretic treatment is a reduction of 
glomerular filtration rate. Other adverse effects of loop 
diuretics include hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, ototoxic-
ity, hyperuricemia, hypomagnesemia, and allergic reactions.
This page intentionally left blank 
273
 SECTION IV DRUGS WITH IMPORTANT ACTIONS ON 
SMOOTH MUSCLE 
 Histamine, Serotonin, 
& the Ergot Alkaloids 
 Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 
  It has long been known that many tissues contain substances that, 
when released by various stimuli, cause physiologic effects such as 
reddening of the skin, pain or itching, and bronchospasm. Later, 
it was discovered that many of these substances are also present in 
nervous tissue and have multiple functions. Histamine and sero-
tonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) are biologically active amines 
that function as neurotransmitters and are found in non-neural 
tissues, have complex physiologic and pathologic effects through 
multiple receptor subtypes, and are often released locally. Together 
with endogenous peptides (see Chapter 17), prostaglandins and 
leukotrienes (see Chapter 18), and cytokines (see Chapter 55), 
they constitute the  autacoid group of drugs. 
 Because of their broad and largely undesirable peripheral 
effects, neither histamine nor serotonin has any clinical applica-
tion in the treatment of disease. However, compounds that 
 selectively activate certain receptor subtypes or selectively antago-
nize the actions of these amines are of considerable clinical useful-
ness. This chapter therefore emphasizes the basic pharmacology of 
the agonist amines and the clinical pharmacology of the more 
selective agonist and antagonist drugs. The ergot alkaloids, 
16
C A S E  S T U D Y
  A 35-year-old man visits his family practitioner with a com-
plaint of red, raised, itchy wheals on his arms and legs. Two 
days earlier, he had eaten a spicy meal at a restaurant he had 
not previously visited. The following morning, he woke up 
with the palms of his hands and the soles of his feet red and 
itchy. During the day, similar raised, itchy lesions appeared on 
his arms and legs, and some are now appearing on his trunk. 
He reports a similar, milder episode 2 years ago, from which 
he recovered without treatment. Physical examination reveals 
no respiratory symptoms and no evidence of pharyngeal 
edema. The practitioner makes a diagnosis of urticaria (hives) 
caused by food allergy and suggests that the patient take an 
over-the-counter antihistamine. The following day the patient 
calls saying that the antihistamine has reduced the itching 
slightly, but the wheals are still present and new ones are 
appearing. What other therapeutic measures are appropriate? 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
274    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
compounds with partial agonist activity at serotonin and several 
other receptors, are discussed at the end of the chapter. 
 ■ HISTAMINE 
 Histamine was synthesized in 1907 and later isolated from mam-
malian tissues. Early hypotheses concerning the possible physio-
logic roles of tissue histamine were based on similarities between 
the effects of intravenously administered histamine and the symp-
toms of anaphylactic shock and tissue injury. Marked species 
variation is observed, but in humans histamine is an important 
mediator of immediate allergic (such as urticaria) and inflamma-
tory reactions, although it plays only a modest role in anaphylaxis. 
Histamine plays an important role in gastric acid secretion (see 
Chapter 62) and functions as a neurotransmitter and neuromodu-
lator (see Chapters 6 and 21). Newer evidence indicates that his-
tamine also plays a role in immune functions and chemotaxis of 
white blood cells. 
 BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF HISTAMINE 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Histamine occurs in plants as well as in animal tissues and is a 
component of some venoms and stinging secretions. 
 Histamine is formed by decarboxylation of the amino acid 
L-histidine, a reaction catalyzed in mammalian tissues by the 
enzyme histidine decarboxylase. Once formed, histamine is either 
stored or rapidly inactivated. Very little histamine is excreted 
unchanged. The major metabolic pathways involve conversion to 
 N -methylhistamine, methylimidazoleacetic acid, and imida-
zoleacetic acid (IAA). Certain neoplasms (systemic mastocytosis, 
urticaria pigmentosa, gastric carcinoid, and occasionally myelog-
enous leukemia) are associated with increased numbers of mast 
cells or basophils and with increased excretion of histamine and its 
metabolites. 
N
CH2
HN
CH2
NH2
Histamine
 Most tissue histamine is sequestered and bound in granules 
(vesicles) in mast cells or basophils; the histamine content of many 
tissues is directly related to their mast cell content. The bound 
form of histamine is biologically inactive, but as noted below, 
many stimuli can trigger the release of mast cell histamine, allow-
ing the free amine to exert its actions on surrounding tissues. Mast 
cells are especially rich at sites of potential tissue injury—nose, 
mouth, and feet; internal body surfaces; and blood vessels, par-
ticularly at pressure points and bifurcations. 
 Non-mast cell histamine is found in several tissues, including 
the brain, where it functions as a neurotransmitter. Strong evi-
dence implicates endogenous neurotransmitter histamine in many 
brain functions such as neuroendocrine control, cardiovascular 
regulation, thermal and body weight regulation, and sleep and 
arousal (see Chapters 21 and 37). 
 A second important nonneuronal site of histamine storage and 
release is the enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells of the fundus of 
the stomach. ECL cells release histamine, one of the primary gas-
tric acid secretagogues, to activate the acid-producing parietal cells 
of the mucosa (see Chapter 62). 
 Storage & Release of Histamine 
 The stores of histamine in mast cells can be released through sev-
eral mechanisms. 
 A. Immunologic Release 
 Immunologic processes account for the most important pathophys-
iologic mechanism of mast cell and basophil histamine release. 
These cells, if sensitized by IgE antibodies attached to their surface 
membranes, degranulate explosively when exposed to the appro-
priate antigen (see  Figure 55–5 , effector phase). This type of 
release also requires energy and calcium. Degranulation leads to 
the simultaneous release of histamine, adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP), and other mediators that are stored together in the gran-
ules. Histamine released by this mechanism is a mediator in 
immediate (type I) allergic reactions, such as hay fever and acute 
urticaria. Substances released during IgG- or IgM-mediated 
immune reactions that activate the complement cascade also 
release histamine from mast cells and basophils. 
 By a negative feedback control mechanism mediated by H 2 
receptors, histamine appears to modulate its own release and that of 
other mediators from sensitized mast cells in some tissues. In 
humans, mast cells in skin and basophils show this negative feed-
back mechanism; lung mast cells do not. Thus, histamine may act 
to limit the intensity of the allergic reaction in the skin and blood. 
 Endogenous histamine has a modulating role in a variety of 
inflammatory and immune responses. Upon injury to a tissue, 
released histamine causes local vasodilation and leakage of plasma-
containing mediators of acute inflammation (complement, 
C-reactive protein) and antibodies. Histamine has an active 
chemotactic attraction for inflammatory cells (neutrophils, eosino-
phils, basophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes). Histamine inhib-
its the release of lysosome contents and several T- and B-lymphocyte 
functions. Most of these actions are mediated by H 2 or H 4 recep-
tors. Release of peptides from nerves in response to inflammation 
is also probably modulated by histamine, in this case acting 
through presynaptic H 3 receptors. 
 B. Chemical and Mechanical Release 
 Certain amines, including drugs such as morphine and tubocura-
rine, can displace histamine from its bound form within cells. This 
type of release does not require energy and is not associated with 
mast cell injury or degranulation. Loss of granules from the mast 
cell also releases histamine, since sodium ions in the extracellular 
fluid rapidly displace the amine from the complex. Chemical and 
mechanical mast cell injury causes degranulation and histamine 
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    275
release.  Compound 48/80 , an experimental drug, selectively 
releases histamine from tissue mast cells by an exocytotic degranu-
lation process requiring energy and calcium. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Histamine exerts its biologic actions by combining with specific 
cellular receptors located on the surface membrane. Four different 
histamine receptors have been characterized and are designated 
H 1 –H 4 ; they are described in  Table 16–1 . Unlike the other amine 
transmitter receptors discussed previously, no subfamilies have 
been found within these major types, although different splice 
variants of several receptor types have been described. 
 All four receptor types have been cloned and belong to the large 
superfamily of receptors having seven membrane-spanning regions 
and coupled with G proteins (GPCR). The structures of the H 1 and 
H 2 receptors differ significantly and appear to be more closely related 
to muscarinic and 5-HT 1 receptors, respectively, than to each other. 
The H 4 receptor has about 40% homology with the H 3 receptor but 
does not seem to be closely related to any other histamine receptor. 
All four histamine receptors have been shown to have constitutive 
activity in some systems; thus, some antihistamines previously con-
sidered to be traditional pharmacologic antagonists must now be 
considered to be inverse agonists (see Chapters 1 and 2). Indeed, 
many first- and second-generation H 1 blockers (see below) function 
as inverse agonists. Furthermore, a single molecule may be an agonist 
at one histamine receptor and an antagonist or inverse agonist at 
another. For example, clobenpropit, an agonist at H 4 receptors, is an 
antagonist or inverse agonist at H 3 receptors ( Table 16–1 ). 
 In the brain, H 1 and H 2 receptors are located on postsynaptic 
membranes, whereas H 3 receptors are predominantly presynaptic. 
Activation of H 1 receptors, which are present in endothelium, 
smooth muscle cells, and nerve endings, usually elicits an increase in 
phosphoinositol hydrolysis and an increase in inositol trisphosphate 
(IP 3 ) and intracellular calcium. Activation of H 2 receptors, present 
in gastric mucosa, cardiac muscle cells, and some immune cells, 
increases intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) via 
G s . Like the β 2 adrenoceptor, under certain circumstances the H 2 
receptor may couple to G q , activating the IP 3 -DAG (inositol 1,4,5-
trisphosphate-diacylglycerol) cascade. Activation of H 3 receptors 
decreases transmitter release from histaminergic and other neurons, 
probably mediated by a decrease in calcium influx through N-type 
calcium channels in nerve endings. H 4 receptors are found mainly 
on leukocytes in the bone marrow and circulating blood. H 4 recep-
tors appear to have very important chemotactic effects on eosino-
phils and mast cells. In this role, they seem to play a part in 
inflammation and allergy. They may also modulate production of 
these cell types and they may mediate, in part, the previously recog-
nized effects of histamine on cytokine production. 
 B. Tissue and Organ System Effects of Histamine 
 Histamine exerts powerful effects on smooth and cardiac muscle, 
on certain endothelial and nerve cells, on the secretory cells of the 
stomach, and on inflammatory cells. However, sensitivity to hista-
mine varies greatly among species. Guinea pigs are exquisitely 
sensitive; humans, dogs, and cats somewhat less so; and mice and 
rats very much less so. 
 1. Nervous system— Histamine is a powerful stimulant of sen-
sory nerve endings, especially those mediating pain and itching. 
This H 1 -mediated effect is an important component of the urti-
carial response and reactions to insect and nettle stings. Some 
evidence suggests that local high concentrations can also depolar-
ize efferent (axonal) nerve endings (see Triple Response, item 8 in 
this list). In the mouse, and probably in humans, respiratory neu-
rons signaling inspiration and expiration are modulated by H 1 
receptors. H 1 and H 3 receptors play important roles in appetite 
and satiety; antipsychotic drugs that block these receptors cause 
significant weight gain (see Chapter 29). Presynaptic H 3 receptors 
play important roles in modulating release of several transmitters 
in the nervous system. H 3 agonists reduce the release of acetylcho-
line, amine, and peptide transmitters in various areas of the brain 
and in peripheral nerves. 
 2. Cardiovascular system— In humans, injection or infusion 
of histamine causes a decrease in systolic and diastolic blood pres-
sure and an increase in heart rate. The blood pressure changes are 
caused by the direct vasodilator action of histamine on arterioles 
and precapillary sphincters; the increase in heart rate involves both 
stimulatory actions of histamine on the heart and a reflex tachy-
cardia. Flushing, a sense of warmth, and headache may also occur 
during histamine administration, consistent with the vasodilation. 
TABLE 16–1 Histamine receptor subtypes.
Receptor 
Subtype
Distribution
Postreceptor 
Mechanism
Partially Selective 
Agonists
Partially Selective Antagonists or 
Inverse Agonists
H1
Smooth muscle, endothelium, brain
Gq, ↑ IP3, DAG
Histaprodifen
Mepyramine,1 triprolidine, cetirizine
H2
Gastric mucosa, cardiac muscle, mast cells, brain
Gs, ↑ cAMP
Amthamine
Cimetidine,1 ranitidine,1 tiotidine
H3
Presynaptic autoreceptors and heteroreceptors: 
brain, myenteric plexus, other neurons
Gi, ↓ cAMP
R-α-Methylhistamine, 
imetit, immepip
Thioperamide,1 iodophenpropit, 
clobenpropit,1 tiprolisant1
H4
Eosinophils, neutrophils, CD4 T cells
Gi, ↓ cAMP
Clobenpropit, imetit, 
clozapine
Thioperamide1
1Inverse agonist.
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; DAG, diacylglycerol; IP3, inositol trisphosphate.
276    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
Vasodilation elicited by small doses of histamine is caused by 
H 1 -receptor activation and is mediated mainly by release of nitric 
oxide from the endothelium (see Chapter 19). The decrease in 
blood pressure is usually accompanied by a reflex tachycardia. 
Higher doses of histamine activate the H 2 -mediated cAMP pro-
cess of vasodilation and direct cardiac stimulation. In humans, the 
cardiovascular effects of small doses of histamine can usually be 
antagonized by H 1 -receptor antagonists alone. 
 Histamine-induced edema results from the action of the amine 
on H 1 receptors in the vessels of the microcirculation, especially the 
postcapillary vessels. The effect is associated with the separation of 
the endothelial cells, which permits the transudation of fluid and 
molecules as large as small proteins into the perivascular tissue. This 
effect is responsible for urticaria (hives), which signals the release of 
histamine in the skin. Studies of endothelial cells suggest that actin 
and myosin within these cells cause contraction, resulting in separa-
tion of the endothelial cells and increased permeability. 
 Direct cardiac effects of histamine include both increased con-
tractility and increased pacemaker rate. These effects are mediated 
chiefly by H 2 receptors. In human atrial muscle, histamine can also 
decrease contractility; this effect is mediated by H 1 receptors. The 
physiologic significance of these cardiac actions is not clear. Some 
of the cardiovascular signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis are due to 
released histamine, although several other mediators are involved 
and appear to be more important than histamine in humans. 
 3. Bronchiolar smooth muscle— In both humans and guinea 
pigs, histamine causes bronchoconstriction mediated by H 1 recep-
tors. In the guinea pig, this effect is the cause of death from his-
tamine toxicity, but in humans with normal airways, broncho-
constriction following small doses of histamine is not marked. 
However, patients with asthma are very sensitive to histamine. The 
bronchoconstriction induced in these patients probably represents 
a hyperactive neural response, since such patients also respond 
excessively to many other stimuli, and the response to histamine 
can be blocked by autonomic blocking drugs such as ganglion 
blocking agents as well as by H 1 -receptor antagonists (see Chapter 
20). Although methacholine provocation is more commonly used, 
tests using small doses of inhaled histamine have been used in the 
diagnosis of bronchial hyperreactivity in patients with suspected 
asthma or cystic fibrosis. Such individuals may be 100 to 1000 
times more sensitive to histamine (and methacholine) than are 
normal subjects. Curiously, a few species (eg, rabbit) respond to 
histamine with broncho dilation , reflecting the dominance of the 
H 2 receptor in their airways. 
 4. Gastrointestinal tract smooth muscle— Histamine causes 
contraction of intestinal smooth muscle, and histamine-induced 
contraction of guinea pig ileum is a standard bioassay for this amine. 
The human gut is not as sensitive as that of the guinea pig, but large 
doses of histamine may cause diarrhea, partly as a result of this 
effect. This action of histamine is mediated by H 1 receptors. 
 5. Other smooth muscle organs— In humans, histamine gen-
erally has insignificant effects on the smooth muscle of the eye and 
genitourinary tract. However, pregnant women suffering anaphylactic 
reactions may abort as a result of histamine-induced contractions, 
and in some species the sensitivity of the uterus is sufficient to form 
the basis for a bioassay. 
 6. Secretory tissue— Histamine has long been recognized as a 
powerful stimulant of gastric acid secretion and, to a lesser extent, 
of gastric pepsin and intrinsic factor production. The effect is 
caused by activation of H 2 receptors on gastric parietal cells and is 
associated with increased adenylyl cyclase activity, cAMP concen-
tration, and intracellular Ca 2+ concentration. Other stimulants of 
gastric acid secretion such as acetylcholine and gastrin do not 
increase cAMP even though their maximal effects on acid output 
can be reduced—but not abolished—by H 2 -receptor antagonists. 
These actions are discussed in more detail in Chapter 62. 
Histamine also stimulates secretion in the small and large intes-
tine. In contrast, H 3 -selective histamine agonists  inhibit acid secre-
tion stimulated by food or pentagastrin in several species. 
 Histamine has much smaller effects on the activity of other 
glandular tissue at ordinary concentrations. Very high concentra-
tions can cause adrenal medullary discharge. 
 7. Metabolic effects— Recent studies of H 3 -receptor knockout 
mice demonstrate that absence of this receptor results in animals 
with increased food intake, decreased energy expenditure, and 
obesity. They also show insulin resistance and increased blood 
levels of leptin and insulin. It is not yet known whether the H 3 
receptor has a similar role in humans, but intensive research is 
underway to determine whether H 3 agonists are useful in the 
treatment of obesity. 
 8. The “triple response”— Intradermal injection of histamine 
causes a characteristic red spot, edema, and flare response that was 
first described many years ago. The effect involves three separate cell 
types: smooth muscle in the microcirculation, capillary or venular 
endothelium, and sensory nerve endings. At the site of injection, a 
reddening appears owing to dilation of small vessels, followed soon 
by an edematous wheal at the injection site and a red irregular flare 
surrounding the wheal. The flare is said to be caused by an axon 
reflex. A sensation of itching may accompany these effects. 
 Similar local effects may be produced by injecting histamine 
liberators (compound 48/80, morphine, etc) intradermally or by 
applying the appropriate antigens to the skin of a sensitized per-
son. Although most of these local effects can be prevented by 
adequate doses of an H 1 -receptor–blocking agent, H 2 and H 3 
receptors may also be involved. 
 9. Other effects possibly mediated by histamine 
receptors— In addition to the local stimulation of peripheral 
pain nerve endings via H 3 and H 1 receptors, histamine may play 
a role in nociception in the central nervous system.  Burimamide, 
an early candidate for H 2 -blocking action, and newer analogs with 
no effect on H 1 , H 2 , or H 3 receptors, have been shown to have 
significant analgesic action in rodents when administered into the 
central nervous system. The analgesia is said to be comparable to 
that produced by opioids, but tolerance, respiratory depression, 
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    277
and constipation have not been reported. Although the mecha-
nism of this action is not known, these compounds may represent 
an important new class of analgesics. 
 Other Histamine Agonists 
 Small substitutions on the imidazole ring of histamine signifi-
cantly modify the selectivity of the compounds for the histamine 
receptor subtypes. Some of these are listed in  Table 16–1 . 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
HISTAMINE 
 Clinical Uses 
 In pulmonary function laboratories, histamine aerosol has been 
used as a  provocative test of bronchial hyperreactivity. Histamine 
has no other current clinical applications. 
 Toxicity & Contraindications 
 Adverse effects of histamine release, like those following adminis-
tration of histamine, are dose related. Flushing, hypotension, 
tachycardia, headache, wheals, bronchoconstriction, and gastroin-
testinal upset are noted. These effects are also observed after the 
ingestion of spoiled fish (scombroid fish poisoning), and there is 
evidence that histamine produced by bacterial action in the flesh 
of the fish is the major causative agent. 
 Histamine should not be given to patients with asthma (except 
as part of a carefully monitored test of pulmonary function) or to 
patients with active ulcer disease or gastrointestinal bleeding. 
 HISTAMINE ANTAGONISTS 
 The effects of histamine released in the body can be reduced in 
several ways.  Physiologic antagonists , especially epinephrine, 
have smooth muscle actions opposite to those of histamine, but 
they act at different receptors. This is important clinically because 
injection of epinephrine can be lifesaving in systemic  anaphylaxis 
and in other conditions in which massive release of histamine—
and other more important mediators—occurs. 
 Release inhibitors reduce the degranulation of mast cells that 
results from immunologic triggering by antigen-IgE interaction. 
 Cromolyn and  nedocromil appear to have this effect (see Chapter 20) 
and have been used in the treatment of asthma, although the 
molecular mechanism underlying their action is not fully under-
stood. Beta 2 -adrenoceptor agonists also appear capable of reducing 
histamine release. 
 Histamine  receptor antagonists represent a third approach to 
the reduction of histamine-mediated responses. For over 60 years, 
compounds have been available that competitively antagonize many 
of the actions of histamine on smooth muscle. However, not until 
the H 2 -receptor antagonist burimamide was described in 1972 was 
it possible to antagonize the gastric acid-stimulating activity of his-
tamine. The development of selective H 2 -receptor antagonists has 
led to more effective therapy for peptic disease (see Chapter 62). 
Selective H 3 and H 4 antagonists are not yet available for clinical 
use. However, potent and partially selective experimental H 3 -
receptor antagonists, thioperamide and clobenpropit, have been 
developed. 
 ■ HISTAMINE RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS 
 H 1 -RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 Compounds that competitively block histamine or act as inverse 
agonists at H 1 receptors have been used in the treatment of allergic 
conditions for many years, and in the discussion that follows are 
referred to as antagonists. Many H 1 antagonists are currently mar-
keted in the USA. A large number are available without prescrip-
tion, both alone and in combination formulations such as “cold 
pills” and “sleep aids” (see Chapter 63). 
 BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
H 1 -RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 The H 1 antagonists are conveniently divided into first-generation 
and second-generation agents. These groups are distinguished by 
the relatively strong sedative effects of most of the first-generation 
drugs. The first-generation agents are also more likely to block 
autonomic receptors. Second-generation H 1 blockers are less 
sedating, owing in part to their less complete distribution into the 
central nervous system. All the H 1 antagonists are stable amines 
with the general structure illustrated in  Figure 16–1 . Doses of 
some of these drugs are given in  Table 16–2 . 
 These agents are rapidly absorbed after oral administration, with 
peak blood concentrations occurring in 1–2 hours. They are widely 
distributed throughout the body, and the first-generation drugs 
enter the central nervous system readily. Some of them are exten-
sively metabolized, primarily by microsomal systems in the liver. 
Several of the second-generation agents are metabolized by the 
CYP3A4 system and thus are subject to important interactions 
when other drugs (such as ketoconazole) inhibit this subtype of 
P450 enzymes. Most of the drugs have an effective duration of 
action of 4–6 hours following a single dose, but meclizine and sev-
eral second-generation agents are longer-acting, with a duration of 
action of 12–24 hours. The newer agents are considerably less lipid-
soluble than the first-generation drugs and are substrates of the 
P-glycoprotein transporter in the blood-brain barrier; as a result 
they enter the central nervous system with difficulty or not at all. 
Many H 1 antagonists have active metabolites. The active metabo-
lites of hydroxyzine, terfenadine, and loratadine are available as 
drugs (cetirizine, fexofenadine, and desloratadine, respectively). 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Both neutral H 1 antagonists and inverse H 1 agonists reduce or 
block the actions of histamine by reversible competitive binding 
278    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
to the H 1 receptor. Several have been clearly shown to be inverse 
agonists, and it is possible that all act by this mechanism. They 
have negligible potency at the H 2 receptor and little at the H 3 
receptor. For example, histamine-induced contraction of bron-
chiolar or gastrointestinal smooth muscle can be completely 
blocked by these agents, but the effects on gastric acid secretion 
and the heart are unmodified. 
 The first-generation H 1 -receptor antagonists have many actions 
in addition to blockade of the actions of histamine. The large 
number of these actions probably results from the similarity of the 
general structure ( Figure 16–1 ) to the structure of drugs that have 
effects at muscarinic cholinoceptor, α adrenoceptor, serotonin, 
and local anesthetic receptor sites. Some of these actions are of 
therapeutic value and some are undesirable. 
 1. Sedation— A common effect of first-generation H 1 antago-
nists is sedation, but the intensity of this effect varies among chemi-
cal subgroups ( Table 16–2 ) and among patients as well. The effect 
is sufficiently prominent with some agents to make them useful as 
“sleep aids” (see Chapter 63) and unsuitable for daytime use. The 
effect resembles that of some antimuscarinic drugs and is considered 
very different from the disinhibited sedation produced by sedative-
hypnotic drugs. Compulsive use has not been reported. At ordinary 
dosages, children occasionally (and adults rarely) manifest excitation 
rather than sedation. At very high toxic dose levels, marked stimula-
tion, agitation, and even convulsions may precede coma. Second-
generation H 1 antagonists have little or no sedative or stimulant 
actions. These drugs (or their active metabolites) also have far fewer 
autonomic effects than the first-generation antihistamines. 
 2. Antinausea and antiemetic actions— Several first-
generation H 1 antagonists have significant activity in preventing 
motion sickness ( Table 16–2 ). They are less effective against an 
episode of motion sickness already present. Certain H 1 antagonists, 
notably doxylamine (in Bendectin), were used widely in the past in 
the treatment of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (see below). 
 3. Antiparkinsonism effects— Some of the H 1 antagonists, 
especially  diphenhydramine , have significant acute suppressant 
effects on the extrapyramidal symptoms associated with certain 
antipsychotic drugs. This drug is given parenterally for acute dys-
tonic reactions to antipsychotics. 
 4. Anticholinoceptor actions— Many first-generation agents, 
especially those of the ethanolamine and ethylenediamine sub-
groups, have significant atropine-like effects on peripheral musca-
rinic receptors. This action may be responsible for some of the 
(uncertain) benefits reported for nonallergic rhinorrhea but may 
also cause urinary retention and blurred vision. 
 5. Adrenoceptor-blocking actions— Alpha-receptor block-
ing effects can be demonstrated for many H 1 antagonists, espe-
cially those in the phenothiazine subgroup, eg,  promethazine . 
This action may cause orthostatic hypotension in susceptible indi-
viduals. Beta-receptor blockade is not observed. 
 6. Serotonin-blocking action— Strong blocking effects at sero-
tonin receptors have been demonstrated for some first-generation 
 FIGURE 16–1  General structure of H 1 -antagonist drugs and examples of the major subgroups. Chemical subgroups are indicated by 
shading. 
General structure
X is: C or N
Y is: C, O, or omitted
X
Y
C
C
N
Ethers or ethanolamine derivative
CH
O
CH2
N
Diphenhydramine or dimenhydrinate
CH2
CH3
CH3
Alkylamine derivative
Chlorpheniramine
CH2
CH2
CI
N
CH
N
CH3
CH3
Piperidine derivative
Fexofenadine
C
OH
N
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
OH
C
COOH
CH3
CH3
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    279
TABLE 16–2 Some H1 antihistaminic drugs in clinical use.
Drugs
Usual Adult 
Dose
Anticholinergic 
Activity
Comments
FIRST-GENERATION ANTIHISTAMINES
Ethanolamines
Carbinoxamine (Clistin)
4–8 mg
+++
Slight to moderate sedation
Dimenhydrinate (salt of diphenhydramine) 
(Dramamine)
50 mg
+++
Marked sedation; anti-motion sickness activity
Diphenhydramine (Benadryl, etc)
25–50 mg
+++
Marked sedation; anti-motion sickness activity
Piperazine derivatives
Hydroxyzine (Atarax, etc)
15–100 mg
nd
Marked sedation
Cyclizine (Marezine)
25–50 mg
–
Slight sedation; anti-motion sickness activity
Meclizine (Bonine, etc)
25–50 mg
–
Slight sedation; anti-motion sickness activity
Alkylamines
Brompheniramine (Dimetane, etc)
4–8 mg
+
Slight sedation
Chlorpheniramine (Chlor-Trimeton, etc)
4–8 mg
+
Slight sedation; common component of OTC “cold” 
medication
Phenothiazine derivative
Promethazine (Phenergan, etc)
10–25 mg
+++
Marked sedation; antiemetic; α block
Miscellaneous
Cyproheptadine (Periactin, etc)
4 mg
+
Moderate sedation; significant antiserotonin activity
SECOND-GENERATION ANTIHISTAMINES
Piperidine
Fexofenadine (Allegra)
60 mg
–
Miscellaneous
Loratadine (Claritin), desloratadine 
(Clarinex)
10 mg (deslorat-
adine, 5 mg)
–
Longer action; used at 5 mg dosage
Cetirizine (Zyrtec)
5–10 mg
–
nd, no data found.
H 1 antagonists, notably  cyproheptadine . This drug is promoted 
as an antiserotonin agent and is discussed with that drug group. 
Nevertheless, its structure resembles that of the phenothiazine 
antihistamines, and it is a potent H 1 -blocking agent. 
 7. Local anesthesia— Several first-generation H 1 antagonists 
are potent local anesthetics. They block sodium channels in excit-
able membranes in the same fashion as procaine and lidocaine. 
Diphenhydramine and promethazine are actually more potent 
than procaine as local anesthetics. They are occasionally used to 
produce local anesthesia in patients allergic to conventional local 
anesthetic drugs. A small number of these agents also block potas-
sium channels; this action is discussed below (see Toxicity). 
 8. Other actions— Certain H 1 antagonists, eg, cetirizine, inhibit 
mast cell release of histamine and some other mediators of inflam-
mation. This action is not due to H 1 -receptor blockade and may 
reflect an H 4 -receptor effect (see below). The mechanism is not 
fully understood but could play a role in the beneficial effects of 
these drugs in the treatment of allergies such as rhinitis. A few 
H 1 antagonists (eg, terfenadine, acrivastine) have been shown to 
inhibit the P-glycoprotein transporter found in cancer cells, the 
epithelium of the gut, and the capillaries of the brain. The signifi-
cance of this effect is not known. 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
H 1 -RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 Clinical Uses 
 First-generation H 1 -receptor blockers are among the most extensively 
promoted and used over-the-counter drugs. The prevalence of allergic 
conditions and the  relative safety of the drugs contribute to this heavy 
use. The fact that they do cause sedation contributes to heavy prescrib-
ing and over-the-counter use of second-generation antihistamines. 
 A. Allergic Reactions 
 The H 1 antihistaminic agents are often the first drugs used to 
prevent or treat the symptoms of allergic reactions. In allergic 
rhinitis (hay fever), the H 1 antagonists are second-line drugs after 
280    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
glucocorticoids administered by nasal spray. In urticaria, in which 
histamine is the primary mediator, the H 1 antagonists are the 
drugs of choice and are often quite effective if given before expo-
sure. However, in bronchial asthma, which involves several media-
tors, the H 1 antagonists are largely ineffective. 
 Angioedema may be precipitated by histamine release but 
appears to be maintained by peptide kinins that are not affected 
by antihistaminic agents. For atopic dermatitis, antihistaminic 
drugs such as diphenhydramine are used mostly for their sedative 
side effect, which reduces awareness of itching. 
 The H 1 antihistamines used for treating allergic conditions 
such as hay fever are usually selected with the goal of minimizing 
sedative effects; in the USA, the drugs in widest use are the 
alkylamines and the second-generation nonsedating agents. 
However, the sedative effect and the therapeutic efficacy of differ-
ent agents vary widely among individuals. In addition, the clinical 
effectiveness of one group may diminish with continued use, and 
switching to another group may restore drug effectiveness for as 
yet unexplained reasons. 
 The second-generation H 1 antagonists are used mainly for the 
treatment of allergic rhinitis and chronic urticaria. Several double-
blind comparisons with older agents (eg, chlorpheniramine) indi-
cated about equal therapeutic efficacy. However, sedation and 
interference with safe operation of machinery, which occur in 
about 50% of subjects taking first-generation antihistamines, 
occurred in only about 7% of subjects taking second-generation 
agents. The newer drugs are much more expensive, even in over-
the-counter generic formulations. 
 B. Motion Sickness and Vestibular Disturbances 
 Scopolamine (see Chapter 8) and certain first-generation H 1 
antagonists are the most effective agents available for the preven-
tion of motion sickness. The antihistaminic drugs with the great-
est effectiveness in this application are diphenhydramine and 
promethazine. Dimenhydrinate, which is promoted almost exclu-
sively for the treatment of motion sickness, is a salt of diphenhy-
dramine and has similar efficacy. The piperazines (cyclizine and 
meclizine) also have significant activity in preventing motion sick-
ness and are less sedating than diphenhydramine in most patients. 
Dosage is the same as that recommended for allergic disorders 
( Table 16–2 ). Both scopolamine and the H 1 antagonists are more 
effective in preventing motion sickness when combined with 
ephedrine or amphetamine. 
 It has been claimed that the antihistaminic agents effective in 
prophylaxis of motion sickness are also useful in Ménière’s syn-
drome, but efficacy in the latter application is not established. 
 C. Nausea and Vomiting of Pregnancy 
 Several H 1 -antagonist drugs have been studied for possible use in 
treating “morning sickness.” The piperazine derivatives were with-
drawn from such use when it was demonstrated that they have 
teratogenic effects in rodents. Doxylamine, an ethanolamine H 1 
antagonist, was promoted for this application as a component of 
Bendectin, a prescription medication that also contained pyridoxine. 
Possible teratogenic effects of doxylamine were widely publicized 
in the lay press after 1978 as a result of a few case reports of fetal 
malformation that occurred after maternal ingestion of Bendectin. 
However, several large prospective studies involving over 60,000 
pregnancies, of which more than 3000 involved maternal 
Bendectin ingestion, disclosed no increase in the incidence of 
birth defects. Nonetheless, because of the continuing controversy, 
adverse publicity, and lawsuits, the manufacturer of Bendectin 
withdrew the product from the market. 
 Toxicity 
 The wide spectrum of nonantihistaminic effects of the H 1 antihista-
mines is described above. Several of these effects (sedation, antimus-
carinic action) have been used for therapeutic purposes, especially in 
over-the-counter remedies (see Chapter 63). Nevertheless, these two 
effects constitute the most common undesirable actions when these 
drugs are used to block histamine receptors. 
 Less common toxic effects of systemic use include excitation and 
convulsions in children, postural hypotension, and allergic responses. 
Drug allergy is relatively common after topical use of H 1 antago-
nists. The effects of severe systemic overdosage of the older agents 
resemble those of atropine overdosage and are treated in the same 
way (see Chapters 8 and 58). Overdosage of astemizole or terfena-
dine may induce cardiac arrhythmias; the same effect may be caused 
at normal dosage by interaction with enzyme inhibitors (see Drug 
Interactions). These drugs are no longer marketed in the USA. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Lethal ventricular arrhythmias occurred in several patients taking 
either of the early second-generation agents, terfenadine or astem-
izole, in combination with ketoconazole, itraconazole, or mac-
rolide antibiotics such as erythromycin. These antimicrobial drugs 
inhibit the metabolism of many drugs by CYP3A4 and cause sig-
nificant increases in blood concentrations of the antihistamines. 
The mechanism of this toxicity involves blockade of the HERG 
(I Kr ) potassium channels in the heart that contribute to repolariza-
tion of the action potential (see Chapter 14). The result is prolon-
gation and a change in shape of the action potential, and these 
changes lead to arrhythmias. Both terfenadine and astemizole were 
withdrawn from the US market in recognition of these problems. 
Where still available, terfenadine and astemizole should be consid-
ered to be contraindicated in patients taking ketoconazole, itra-
conazole, or macrolides and in patients with liver disease. 
Grapefruit juice also inhibits CYP3A4 and has been shown to 
increase blood levels of terfenadine significantly. 
 For those H 1 antagonists that cause significant sedation, con-
current use of other drugs that cause central nervous system 
depression produces additive effects and is contraindicated while 
driving or operating machinery. Similarly, the autonomic blocking 
effects of older antihistamines are additive with those of antimus-
carinic and α-blocking drugs. 
 H 2 -RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 The development of H 2 -receptor antagonists was based on the 
observation that H 1 antagonists had no effect on histamine-induced 
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    281
acid secretion in the stomach. Molecular manipulation of the 
histamine molecule resulted in drugs that blocked acid secretion 
and had no H 1 agonist or antagonist effects. Like the other hista-
mine receptors, the H 2 receptor displays constitutive activity, and 
some H 2 blockers are inverse agonists. 
 The high prevalence of peptic ulcer disease created great interest in 
the therapeutic potential of the H 2 -receptor antagonists when first 
discovered. Although these agents are not the most efficacious avail-
able, their ability to reduce gastric acid secretion with very low toxicity 
has made them extremely popular as over-the-counter preparations. 
These drugs are discussed in more detail in Chapter 62. 
 H 3 - & H 4 -RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 Although no selective H 3 or H 4 ligands are presently available for 
general clinical use, there is great interest in their therapeutic 
potential. H 3 -selective ligands may be of value in sleep disorders, 
narcolepsy, obesity, and cognitive and psychiatric disorders. 
Tiprolisant, an inverse H 3 -receptor agonist, has been shown to 
reduce sleep cycles in mutant mice and in humans with narco-
lepsy. Increased obesity has been demonstrated in both H 1 - and 
H 3 -receptor knockout mice. As noted in Chapter 29, several 
newer antipsychotic drugs have significant affinity for H 3 
receptors. 
 Because of the homology between the H 3 and H 4 receptors, 
many H 3 ligands also have affinity for the H 4 receptor. H 4 blockers 
have potential in chronic inflammatory conditions such as asthma, 
in which eosinophils and mast cells play a prominent role. No 
selective H 4 ligand is available for use in humans, but in addition 
to research agents listed in  Table 16–1 , many H 1 -selective blockers 
(eg, diphenhydramine, cetirizine, loratadine) show some affinity 
for this receptor. Several studies have suggested that H 4 -receptor 
antagonists may be useful in pruritus, asthma, allergic rhinitis, and 
pain conditions. 
 ■ SEROTONIN 
5HYDROXYTRYPTAMINE 
 Before the identification of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), it was 
known that when blood is allowed to clot, a vasoconstrictor 
(tonic) substance is released from the clot into the serum. This 
substance was called serotonin. Independent studies established 
the existence of a smooth muscle stimulant in intestinal mucosa. 
This was called enteramine. The synthesis of 5-hydroxytryptamine 
in 1951 led to the identification of serotonin and enteramine as 
the same metabolite of 5-hydroxytryptophan. 
 Serotonin is an important neurotransmitter, a local hormone in 
the gut, a component of the platelet clotting process, and is 
thought to play a role in migraine headache and several other 
clinical conditions, including carcinoid syndrome . This syndrome 
is an unusual manifestation of carcinoid tumor, a neoplasm of 
enterochromaffin cells. In patients whose tumor is not surgically 
resectable, a serotonin antagonist may constitute a useful treatment. 
 BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF SEROTONIN 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Like histamine, serotonin is widely distributed in nature, being found 
in plant and animal tissues, venoms, and stings. It is synthesized in 
biologic systems from the amino acid L-tryptophan by hydroxylation 
of the indole ring followed by decarboxylation of the amino acid 
( Figure 16–2 ). Hydroxylation at C5 by tryptophan hydroxylase-1 is 
the rate-limiting step and can be blocked by  p -chlorophenylalanine 
(PCPA; fenclonine) and by  p -chloroamphetamine. These agents have 
been used experimentally to reduce serotonin synthesis in carcinoid 
syndrome but are too toxic for general clinical use. 
 After synthesis, the free amine is stored or is rapidly inacti-
vated, usually by oxidation by monoamine oxidase (MAO). In the 
pineal gland, serotonin serves as a precursor of melatonin, a mel-
anocyte-stimulating hormone. In mammals (including humans), 
over 90% of the serotonin in the body is found in enterochrom-
affin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. In the blood, serotonin is 
found in platelets, which are able to concentrate the amine by 
means of an active serotonin transporter mechanism (SERT) 
similar to that in the membrane of serotonergic nerve endings. 
Once transported into the platelet or nerve ending, 5-HT is con-
centrated in vesicles by a vesicle-associated transporter (VAT) that 
is blocked by  reserpine . Serotonin is also found in the raphe 
nuclei of the brainstem, which contain cell bodies of serotonergic 
 FIGURE 16–2  Synthesis of serotonin and melatonin from 
L-tryptophan. 
L-tryptophan
5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)
Melatonin
(N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine)
O
CH2
NH3
+
COO–
CH
N
H
CH2
HO
NH2
CH2
N
H
CH2
H3C
CH3
O
N
CH2
C
N
H
H
282    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
neurons that synthesize, store, and release serotonin as a transmit-
ter. Stored serotonin can be depleted by reserpine in much the 
same manner as this drug depletes catecholamines from vesicles in 
adrenergic nerves and the adrenal medulla (see Chapter 6). 
 Brain serotonergic neurons are involved in numerous diffuse 
functions such as mood, sleep, appetite, and temperature regula-
tion, as well as the perception of pain, the regulation of blood 
pressure, and vomiting (see Chapter 21). Serotonin also appears to 
be involved in clinical conditions such as depression, anxiety, and 
migraine. Serotonergic neurons are also found in the enteric ner-
vous system of the gastrointestinal tract and around blood vessels. 
In rodents (but not in humans), serotonin is found in mast cells. 
 The function of serotonin in enterochromaffin cells is not fully 
understood. These cells synthesize serotonin, store the amine in a 
complex with adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and other substances 
in granules, and release serotonin in response to mechanical and 
neuronal stimuli. This serotonin interacts in a paracrine fashion 
with several different 5-HT receptors in the gut. Some of the 
released serotonin diffuses into blood vessels and is taken up and 
stored in platelets. 
 Serotonin is metabolized by MAO, and the intermediate 
product, 5-hydroxyindoleacetaldehyde, is further oxidized by 
aldehyde dehydrogenase to 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA). 
In humans consuming a normal diet, the excretion of 5-HIAA is 
a measure of serotonin synthesis. Therefore, the 24-hour excre-
tion of 5-HIAA can be used as a diagnostic test for tumors that 
synthesize excessive quantities of serotonin, especially carcinoid 
tumor. A few foods (eg, bananas) contain large amounts of sero-
tonin or its precursors and must be prohibited during such diag-
nostic tests. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanisms of Action 
 Serotonin exerts many actions and, like histamine, displays many 
species differences, making generalizations difficult. The actions of 
serotonin are mediated through a remarkably large number of cell 
membrane receptors. The serotonin receptors that have been char-
acterized thus far are listed in  Table 16–3 . Seven families of 5-HT-
receptor subtypes (those given numeric subscripts 1 through 7) 
have been identified, six involving G protein-coupled receptors of 
the usual 7-transmembrane serpentine type and one a ligand-
gated ion channel. The latter (5-HT 3 ) receptor is a member of the 
nicotinic/GABA A family of Na + /K + channel proteins. 
 B. Tissue and Organ System Effects 
 1. Nervous system— Serotonin is present in a variety of sites 
in the brain. Its role as a neurotransmitter and its relation to the 
actions of drugs acting in the central nervous system are dis-
cussed in Chapters 21 and 30. Serotonin is also a precursor of 
melatonin in the pineal gland ( Figure 16–2 ; see Box: Melatonin 
Pharmacology).  Repinotan , a 5-HT 1A agonist currently in clinical 
trials, appears to have some antinociceptive action at higher doses 
while reversing opioid-induced respiratory depression. 
TABLE 16–3 Serotonin receptor subtypes currently recognized. (See also Chapter 21.)
Receptor 
Subtype
Distribution
Postreceptor 
Mechanism
Partially Selective Agonists
Partially Selective 
Antagonists
5-HT1A
Raphe nuclei, hippocampus
Gi, ↓ cAMP
8-OH-DPAT,1 repinotan
WAY1006351
5-HT1B
Substantia nigra, globus 
pallidus, basal ganglia
Gi, ↓ cAMP
Sumatriptan, L6942471
5-HT1D
Brain
Gi, ↓ cAMP
Sumatriptan, eletriptan
5-HT1E
Cortex, putamen
Gi, ↓ cAMP
5-HT1F
Cortex, hippocampus
Gi, ↓ cAMP
LY33448641
5-HT1P
Enteric nervous system
Go, slow EPSP
5-Hydroxyindalpine
Renzapride
5-HT2A
Platelets, smooth muscle, 
cerebral cortex
Gq, ↑ IP3
α-Methyl-5-HT, DOI1
Ketanserin
5-HT2B
Stomach fundus
Gq, ↑ IP3
α-Methyl-5-HT, DOI1
RS1274451
5-HT2C
Choroid, hippocampus, 
substantia nigra
Gq, ↑ IP3
α-Methyl-5-HT, DOI,1 lorcaserin
Mesulergine
5-HT3
Area postrema, sensory 
and enteric nerves
Receptor is a Na+/
K+ ion channel
2-Methyl-5-HT, m-chlorophenylbiguanide
Granisetron, ondansetron, 
others
5-HT4
CNS and myenteric neurons, 
smooth muscle
Gs, ↑ cAMP
BIMU8,1 renzapride, metoclopramide
GR1138081
5-HT5A,B
Brain
↓ cAMP
5-HT6,7
Brain
Gs, ↑ cAMP
Clozapine (5-HT7)
1Research agents; for chemical names see Alexander SPH, Mathie A, Peters JA: Guide to receptors and channels (GRAC). Br J Pharmacol 2009;158 (Suppl 1):S12.
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential; IP3, inositol trisphosphate.
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    283
 5-HT 3 receptors in the gastrointestinal tract and in the vomit-
ing center of the medulla participate in the vomiting reflex (see 
Chapter 62). They are particularly important in vomiting caused 
by chemical triggers such as cancer chemotherapy drugs. 5-HT 1P 
and 5-HT 4 receptors also play important roles in enteric nervous 
system function. 
 Like histamine, serotonin is a potent stimulant of pain and itch 
sensory nerve endings and is responsible for some of the symptoms 
caused by insect and plant stings. In addition, serotonin is a pow-
erful activator of chemosensitive endings located in the coronary 
vascular bed. Activation of 5-HT 3 receptors on these afferent vagal 
nerve endings is associated with the  chemoreceptor reflex (also 
known as the Bezold-Jarisch reflex). The reflex response consists of 
marked bradycardia and hypotension, and its physiologic role is 
uncertain. The bradycardia is mediated by vagal outflow to the 
heart and can be blocked by atropine. The hypotension is a con-
sequence of the decrease in cardiac output that results from brady-
cardia. A variety of other agents can activate the chemoreceptor 
reflex. These include nicotinic cholinoceptor agonists and some 
cardiac glycosides, eg, ouabain. 
 2. Respiratory system— Serotonin has a small direct stimulant 
effect on bronchiolar smooth muscle in normal humans, probably 
via 5-HT 2A receptors. It also appears to facilitate acetylcholine 
release from bronchial vagal nerve endings. In patients with carci-
noid syndrome, episodes of bronchoconstriction occur in response 
to elevated levels of the amine or peptides released from the tumor. 
Serotonin may also cause hyperventilation as a result of the 
chemoreceptor reflex or stimulation of bronchial sensory nerve 
endings. 
 3. Cardiovascular system— Serotonin directly causes the con-
traction of vascular smooth muscle, mainly through 5-HT 2 recep-
tors. In humans, serotonin is a powerful vasoconstrictor except in 
skeletal muscle and the heart, where it dilates blood vessels. 
At least part of this 5-HT-induced vasodilation requires the pres-
ence of vascular endothelial cells. When the endothelium is dam-
aged, coronary vessels are constricted by 5-HT. As noted previously, 
serotonin can also elicit reflex bradycardia by activation of 5-HT 3 
receptors on chemoreceptor nerve endings. A triphasic blood pres-
sure response is often seen following injection of serotonin in 
experimental animals. Initially, there is a decrease in heart rate, 
cardiac output, and blood pressure caused by the chemoreceptor 
response. After this decrease, blood pressure increases as a result of 
vasoconstriction. The third phase is again a decrease in blood pres-
sure attributed to vasodilation in vessels supplying skeletal muscle. 
Pulmonary and renal vessels seem especially sensitive to the vaso-
constrictor action of serotonin. 
 Studies in knockout mice suggest that 5-HT, acting on 
5-HT 1A , 5-HT 2 , and 5-HT 4 receptors, is needed for normal car-
diac development in the fetus. On the other hand, chronic expo-
sure of adults to 5-HT 2B agonists is associated with valvulopathy 
and adult mice lacking the 5-HT 2B receptor gene are protected 
from cardiac hypertrophy. Preliminary studies suggest that 5-HT 2B 
antagonists can prevent development of pulmonary hypertension 
in animal models. 
 Serotonin also constricts veins, and venoconstriction with 
increased capillary filling appears to be responsible for the flush 
that is observed after serotonin administration or release from a 
carcinoid tumor. Serotonin has small direct positive chronotropic 
and inotropic effects on the heart, which are probably of no clinical 
 Melatonin Pharmacology 
 Melatonin is  N -acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine ( Figure 16–2 ), a 
simple methoxylated and  N -acetylated product of serotonin 
found in the pineal gland. It is produced and released primarily 
at night and has long been suspected of playing a role in diurnal 
cycles of animals and the sleep-wake behavior of humans.
Melatonin receptors have been characterized in the central ner-
vous system and several peripheral tissues. In the brain, MT 1 and 
MT 2 receptors are found in membranes of neurons in the supra-
chiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus, an area associated—
from lesioning experiments—with circadian rhythm. MT 1 and 
MT 2 are seven-transmembrane G i protein-coupled receptors. The 
result of receptor binding is inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. A third 
receptor, MT 3 , is an enzyme; binding to this site has a poorly 
defined physiologic role, possibly related to intraocular pressure. 
Activation of the MT 1 receptor results in sleepiness, whereas the 
MT 2 receptor may be related to the light-dark synchronization of 
the biologic circadian clock. Melatonin has also been implicated 
in energy metabolism and obesity, and administration of the 
agent reduces body weight in certain animal models. However, 
its role in these processes is poorly understood and there is no 
evidence that melatonin itself is of any value in obesity in 
humans. Other studies suggest that melatonin has antiapoptotic 
effects in experimental models. Recent research implicates 
melatonin receptors in depressive disorders.
 Melatonin is promoted commercially as a sleep aid by the 
food supplement industry (see Chapter 64). There is an extensive 
literature supporting its use in ameliorating jet lag. It is used in 
oral doses of 0.5–5 mg, usually administered at the destination 
bedtime.  Ramelteon is a selective MT 1 and MT 2 agonist that is 
approved for the medical treatment of insomnia. This drug has 
no addiction liability (it is not a controlled substance), and it 
appears to be distinctly more efficacious than melatonin (but 
less efficacious than benzodiazepines) as a hypnotic. It is metab-
olized by P450 enzymes and should not be used in individuals 
taking CYP1A2 inhibitors. It has a half-life of 1–3 hours and an 
active metabolite with a half-life of up to 5 hours. The toxicity of 
ramelteon is as yet poorly defined, but prolactin levels were 
elevated in one clinical trial.  Agomelatine , an MT 1 and MT 2 ago-
nist and a 5-HT 2C antagonist, has recently been approved in 
Europe for use in major depressive disorder. 
284    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
significance. However, prolonged elevation of the blood level of 
serotonin (which occurs in carcinoid syndrome) is associated with 
pathologic alterations in the endocardium (subendocardial fibro-
plasia), which may result in valvular or electrical malfunction. 
 Serotonin causes blood platelets to aggregate by activating 
5-HT 2 receptors. This response, in contrast to aggregation 
induced during normal clot formation, is not accompanied by the 
release of serotonin stored in the platelets. The physiologic role of 
this effect is unclear. 
 4. Gastrointestinal tract— Serotonin is a powerful stimulant 
of gastrointestinal smooth muscle, increasing tone and facilitating 
peristalsis. This action is caused by the direct action of serotonin 
on 5-HT 2 smooth muscle receptors plus a stimulating action on 
ganglion cells located in the enteric nervous system (see Chapter 6). 
5-HT 1A and 5-HT 7 receptors may also be involved in this complex 
action. Activation of 5-HT 4 receptors in the enteric nervous sys-
tem causes increased acetylcholine release and thereby mediates a 
motility-enhancing or “prokinetic” effect of selective serotonin 
agonists such as cisapride. These agents are useful in several gastro-
intestinal disorders (see Chapter 62). Overproduction of serotonin 
(and other substances) in carcinoid tumor is associated with severe 
diarrhea. Serotonin has little effect on gastrointestinal secretions, 
and what effects it has are generally inhibitory. 
 5. Skeletal muscle and the eye— 5-HT 2 receptors are present 
on skeletal muscle membranes, but their physiologic role is not 
understood.  Serotonin syndrome is a condition associated with 
skeletal muscle contractions and precipitated when MAO inhibitors 
are given with serotonin agonists, especially antidepressants of the 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor class (SSRIs; see Chapter 30). 
Although the hyperthermia of serotonin syndrome results from 
excessive muscle contraction, serotonin syndrome is probably 
caused by a central nervous system effect of these drugs ( Table 16–4 
and Box: Serotonin Syndrome and Similar Syndromes). 
 Studies in animal models of glaucoma indicate that 5-HT 2A 
agonists reduce intraocular pressure. This action can be blocked by 
ketanserin and similar 5-HT 2 antagonists. 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
SEROTONIN 
 Serotonin Agonists 
 Serotonin has no clinical applications as a drug. However, several 
receptor subtype-selective agonists have proved to be of value. 
 Buspirone, a 5-HT 1A agonist, has received wide attention for its 
usefulness as an effective nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic (see 
TABLE 16–4 Characteristics of serotonin syndrome and other hyperthermic syndromes.
Syndrome
Precipitating Drugs
Clinical Presentation
Therapy1
Serotonin 
syndrome
SSRIs, second-generation antidepressants, 
MAOIs, linezolid, tramadol, meperidine, 
fentanyl, ondansetron, sumatriptan, MDMA, 
LSD, St. John’s wort, ginseng
Hypertension, hyperreflexia, tremor, 
clonus, hyperthermia, hyperactive 
bowel sounds, diarrhea, mydriasis, 
agitation, coma; onset within hours
Sedation (benzodiazepines), 
paralysis, intubation, and ventilation; 
consider 5-HT2 block with cyprohepta-
dine or chlorpromazine
Neuroleptic 
malignant 
syndrome
D2-blocking antipsychotics
Acute severe parkinsonism; hyperten-
sion, hyperthermia, normal or reduced 
bowel sounds, onset over 1–3 days
Diphenhydramine (parenteral), cooling 
if temperature is very high, sedation 
with benzodiazepines
Malignant 
hyperthermia
Volatile anesthetics, succinylcholine
Hyperthermia, muscle rigidity, hyper-
tension, tachycardia; onset within 
minutes
Dantrolene, cooling
1Precipitating drugs should be discontinued immediately. First-line therapy is in bold font.
MAOIs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors; MDMA, methylenedioxy-methamphetamine (ecstasy); SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
 Serotonin Syndrome and Similar Syndromes 
 Excess synaptic serotonin causes a serious, potentially fatal syn-
drome that is diagnosed on the basis of a history of administration 
of a serotonergic drug within recent weeks and physical findings 
( Table 16–4 ). It has some characteristics in common with neurolep-
tic malignant syndrome (NMS) and malignant hyperthermia (MH), 
but its pathophysiology and management are quite different.
As suggested by the drugs that precipitate it, serotonin 
syndrome occurs when overdose with a single drug, or concur-
rent use of several drugs, results in excess serotonergic activity in 
the central nervous system. It is predictable and not idiosyncratic, 
but milder forms may easily be misdiagnosed. In experimental 
animal models, many of the signs of the syndrome can be 
reversed by administration of 5-HT 2 antagonists; however, other 
5-HT receptors may be involved as well. Dantrolene is of no value, 
unlike the treatment of MH. 
 NMS is idiosyncratic rather than predictable and appears to be 
associated with hypersensitivity to the parkinsonism-inducing 
effects of D 2 -blocking antipsychotics in certain individuals. MH is 
associated with a genetic defect in the RyR1 calcium channel of 
skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum that permits uncontrolled 
calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum when precipitat-
ing drugs are given (see Chapter 27). 
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    285
Chapter 22).  Dexfenfluramine, another selective 5-HT agonist, 
was widely used as an appetite suppressant but was withdrawn 
because of cardiac valve toxicity. Appetite suppression appears to 
be associated with agonist action at 5-HT 2C receptors in the cen-
tral nervous system. 
 5-HT 1D/1B Agonists & Migraine Headache 
 The 5-HT 1D/1B agonists ( triptans, eg,  sumatriptan ) are used 
almost exclusively for migraine headache. Migraine in its “classic” 
form is characterized by an aura of variable duration that may 
involve nausea, vomiting, visual scotomas or even hemianopsia, 
and speech abnormalities; the aura is followed by a severe throb-
bing unilateral headache that lasts for a few hours to 1–2 days. 
“Common” migraine lacks the aura phase, but the headache is 
similar. After a century of intense study, the pathophysiology of 
migraine is still poorly understood and controversial. Although 
the symptom pattern and duration of prodrome and headache 
vary markedly among patients, the severity of migraine headache 
justifies vigorous therapy in the great majority of cases. 
 Migraine involves the trigeminal nerve distribution to intracra-
nial (and possibly extracranial) arteries. These nerves release pep-
tide neurotransmitters, especially  calcitonin gene-related peptide 
(CGRP; see Chapter 17), an extremely powerful vasodilator. 
Substance P and neurokinin A may also be involved. Extravasation 
of plasma and plasma proteins into the perivascular space appears 
to be a common feature of animal migraine models and is found 
in biopsy specimens from migraine patients. This effect probably 
reflects the action of the neuropeptides on the vessels. The 
mechanical stretching caused by this perivascular edema may be 
the immediate cause of activation of pain nerve endings in the 
dura. The onset of headache is sometimes associated with a 
marked increase in amplitude of temporal artery pulsations, and 
relief of pain by administration of effective therapy is sometimes 
accompanied by diminution of the arterial pulsations. 
 The mechanisms of action of drugs used in migraine are poorly 
understood, in part because they include such a wide variety of 
drug groups and actions. In addition to the triptans, these include 
ergot alkaloids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesic agents, 
β-adrenoceptor blockers, calcium channel blockers, tricyclic anti-
depressants and SSRIs, and several antiseizure agents. Furthermore, 
some of these drug groups are effective only for prophylaxis and 
not for the acute attack. 
 Two primary hypotheses have been proposed to explain the 
actions of these drugs. First, the triptans, the ergot alkaloids, and 
antidepressants may activate 5-HT 1D/1B receptors on presynaptic 
trigeminal nerve endings to inhibit the release of vasodilating pep-
tides, and antiseizure agents may suppress excessive firing of these 
nerve endings. Second, the vasoconstrictor actions of direct 5-HT 
agonists (the triptans and ergot) may prevent vasodilation and 
stretching of the pain endings. It is possible that both mechanisms 
contribute in the case of some drugs. Sumatriptan and its conge-
ners are currently first-line therapy for acute severe migraine attacks 
in most patients ( Figure 16–3 ). However, they should not be used 
in patients at risk for coronary artery disease. Anti-inflammatory 
analgesics such as aspirin and ibuprofen are often helpful in 
controlling the pain of migraine. Rarely, parenteral opioids may be 
needed in refractory cases. For patients with very severe nausea and 
vomiting, parenteral metoclopramide may be helpful. 
 Propranolol, amitriptyline, and some calcium channel block-
ers have been found to be effective for the prophylaxis of migraine 
in some patients. They are of no value in the treatment of acute 
migraine. The anticonvulsants  valproic acid and  topiramate (see 
Chapter 24) have also been found to have prophylactic efficacy in 
many migraine patients.  Flunarizine, a calcium channel blocker 
used in Europe, has been reported in clinical trials to effectively 
reduce the severity of the acute attack and to prevent recurrences. 
 Verapamil appears to have modest efficacy as prophylaxis against 
migraine. 
 Sumatriptan and the other triptans are selective agonists for 
5-HT 1D and 5-HT 1B receptors; the similarity of the triptan struc-
ture to that of the 5-HT nucleus can be seen in the structure 
below. These receptor types are found in cerebral and meningeal 
vessels and mediate vasoconstriction. They are also found on neu-
rons and probably function as presynaptic inhibitory receptors.
Sumatriptan
SO2
NH
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
N
N
 
 The efficacies of all the triptan 5-HT 1 agonists in migraine are 
equal to each other and equivalent to or greater than those of other 
acute drug treatments, eg, parenteral, oral, and rectal ergot alka-
loids. The pharmacokinetics of the triptans differ significantly and 
are set forth in  Table 16–5 . Most adverse effects are mild and 
80
60
40
20
0
Percent of patients
Persistent
nausea
Photophobia
Persistent
pain
(P = placebo, S = sumatriptan)
Treatment
100
P
S
P
S
P
S
 FIGURE 16–3  Effects of sumatriptan (734 patients) or placebo 
(370 patients) on symptoms of acute migraine headache 60 minutes 
after injection of 6 mg subcutaneously. All differences between 
placebo and sumatriptan were statistically significant. (Data from Cady 
RK et al: Treatment of acute migraine with subcutaneous sumatriptan. JAMA 
1991;265:2831.) 
286    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
include altered sensations (tingling, warmth, etc), dizziness, muscle 
weakness, neck pain, and for parenteral sumatriptan, injection site 
reactions. Chest discomfort occurs in 1–5% of patients, and chest 
pain has been reported, probably because of the ability of these 
drugs to cause coronary vasospasm. They are therefore contraindi-
cated in patients with coronary artery disease and in patients with 
angina. Another disadvantage is the fact that their duration of 
effect (especially that of almotriptan, sumatriptan, rizatriptan, and 
zolmitriptan,  Table 16–5 ) is often shorter than the duration of the 
headache. As a result, several doses may be required during a pro-
longed migraine attack, but their adverse effects limit the maxi-
mum safe daily dosage. In addition, these drugs are expensive. 
Naratriptan and eletriptan are contraindicated in patients with 
severe hepatic or renal impairment or peripheral vascular syn-
dromes; frovatriptan in patients with peripheral vascular disease; 
and zolmitriptan in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syn-
drome. The brand name triptans are extremely expensive; thus 
generic sumatriptan should be used whenever possible. 
 Other Serotonin Agonists in Clinical Use 
 Cisapride, a 5-HT 4 agonist, was used in the treatment of gastro-
esophageal reflux and motility disorders. Because of toxicity, it is 
now available only for compassionate use in the USA.  Tegaserod, 
a 5-HT 4 partial agonist, is used for irritable bowel syndrome with 
constipation. These drugs are discussed in Chapter 62. 
 Compounds such as  fluoxetine and other SSRIs, which modu-
late serotonergic transmission by blocking reuptake of the trans-
mitter, are among the most widely prescribed drugs for the 
management of depression and similar disorders. These drugs are 
discussed in Chapter 30. 
 SEROTONIN ANTAGONISTS 
 The actions of serotonin, like those of histamine, can be antago-
nized in several ways. Such antagonism is clearly desirable in those 
rare patients who have carcinoid tumor and may also be valuable 
in certain other conditions. 
 As noted, serotonin synthesis can be inhibited by  p -
chlorophenylalanine and  p -chloroamphetamine. However, these 
agents are too toxic for general use. Storage of serotonin can be 
inhibited by the use of reserpine, but the sympatholytic effects of 
this drug (see Chapter 11) and the high levels of circulating sero-
tonin that result from release prevent its use in carcinoid. 
Therefore, receptor blockade is the major therapeutic approach to 
conditions of serotonin excess. 
 SEROTONIN-RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS 
 A wide variety of drugs with actions at other receptors (eg, α 
adrenoceptors, H 1 -histamine receptors) also have serotonin 
receptor-blocking effects.  Phenoxybenzamine (see Chapter 10) 
has a long-lasting blocking action at 5-HT 2 receptors. In addition, 
the ergot alkaloids discussed in the last portion of this chapter are 
partial agonists at serotonin receptors. 
 Cyproheptadine resembles the phenothiazine antihistaminic 
agents in chemical structure and has potent H 1 -receptor–blocking 
as well as 5-HT 2 –blocking actions. The actions of cyproheptadine 
are predictable from its H 1 histamine and 5-HT receptor affini-
ties. It prevents the smooth muscle effects of both amines but has 
no effect on the gastric secretion stimulated by histamine. It also 
has significant antimuscarinic effects and causes sedation. 
 The major clinical applications of cyproheptadine are in the treat-
ment of the smooth muscle manifestations of carcinoid tumor and in 
cold-induced urticaria. The usual dosage in adults is 12–16 mg/d in 
three or four divided doses. It is of some value in serotonin syndrome, 
but because it is available only in tablet form, cyproheptadine must be 
crushed and administered by stomach tube in unconscious patients. 
 Ketanserin blocks 5-HT 2 receptors on smooth muscle and other 
tissues and has little or no reported antagonist activity at other 5-HT 
or H 1 receptors. However, this drug potently blocks vascular α 1 
adrenoceptors. The drug blocks 5-HT 2 receptors on platelets and 
antagonizes platelet aggregation promoted by serotonin. The mecha-
nism involved in ketanserin’s hypotensive action probably involves 
α 1 adrenoceptor blockade more than 5-HT 2 receptor blockade. 
Ketanserin is available in Europe for the treatment of hypertension 
and vasospastic conditions but has not been approved in the USA. 
 Ritanserin, another 5-HT 2 antagonist, has little or no α-blocking 
TABLE 16–5 Pharmacokinetics of triptans.
Drug
Routes
Time to Onset (h)
Single Dose (mg)
Maximum Dose 
per Day (mg)
Half-Life (h)
Almotriptan
Oral
2.6
6.25–12.5
25
3.3
Eletriptan
Oral
2
20–40
80
4
Frovatriptan
Oral
3
2.5
7.5
27
Naratriptan
Oral
2
1–2.5
5
5.5
Rizatriptan
Oral
1–2.5
5–10
30
2
Sumatriptan
Oral, nasal, subcutaneous, 
rectal
1.5 (0.2 for subcutaneous)
25–100 (PO), 20 nasal, 
6 subcutaneous, 25 rectal
200
2
Zolmitriptan
Oral, nasal
1.5–3
2.5–5
10
2.8
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    287
action. It has been reported to alter bleeding time and to reduce 
thromboxane formation, presumably by altering platelet function. 
 Ondansetron is the prototypical 5-HT 3 antagonist. This drug 
and its analogs are very important in the prevention of nausea and 
vomiting associated with surgery and cancer chemotherapy. They 
are discussed in Chapter 62. 
 Considering the diverse effects attributed to serotonin and the 
heterogeneous nature of 5-HT receptors, other selective 5-HT 
antagonists may prove to be clinically useful. 
 ■ THE ERGOT ALKALOIDS 
 Ergot alkaloids are produced by  Claviceps purpurea , a fungus that 
infects grasses and grains—especially rye—under damp growing 
or storage conditions. This fungus synthesizes histamine, acetyl-
choline, tyramine, and other biologically active products in addi-
tion to a score or more of unique ergot alkaloids. These alkaloids 
affect α adrenoceptors, dopamine receptors, 5-HT receptors, and 
perhaps other receptor types. Similar alkaloids are produced by 
fungi parasitic to a number of other grass-like plants. 
 The accidental ingestion of ergot alkaloids in contaminated 
grain can be traced back more than 2000 years from descriptions 
of epidemics of ergot poisoning ( ergotism ). The most dramatic 
effects of poisoning are dementia with florid hallucinations; pro-
longed vasospasm, which may result in gangrene; and stimulation 
of uterine smooth muscle, which in pregnancy may result in 
abortion. In medieval times, ergot poisoning was called 
 St. Anthony’s fire after the saint whose help was sought in reliev-
ing the burning pain of vasospastic ischemia. Identifiable epi-
demics have occurred sporadically up to modern times (see Box: 
Ergot Poisoning: Not Just an Ancient Disease) and mandate con-
tinuous surveillance of all grains used for food. Poisoning of graz-
ing animals is common in many areas because the fungi may 
grow on pasture grasses. 
 In addition to the effects noted above, the ergot alkaloids pro-
duce a variety of other central nervous system and peripheral 
effects. Detailed structure-activity analysis and appropriate semi-
synthetic modifications have yielded a large number of agents of 
experimental and clinical interest. 
 BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF ERGOT 
ALKALOIDS 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Two major families of compounds that incorporate the tetracyclic 
 ergoline nucleus may be identified; the amine alkaloids and the 
peptide alkaloids ( Table 16–6 ). Drugs of therapeutic and toxico-
logic importance are found in both groups. 
 The ergot alkaloids are variably absorbed from the gastrointes-
tinal tract. The oral dose of ergotamine is about 10 times larger 
than the intramuscular dose, but the speed of absorption and peak 
blood levels after oral administration can be improved by admin-
istration with caffeine (see below). The amine alkaloids are also 
absorbed from the rectum and the buccal cavity and after admin-
istration by aerosol inhaler. Absorption after intramuscular injec-
tion is slow but usually reliable. Semisynthetic analogs such as 
bromocriptine and cabergoline are well absorbed from the gastro-
intestinal tract. 
 The ergot alkaloids are extensively metabolized in the body. 
The primary metabolites are hydroxylated in the A ring, and pep-
tide alkaloids are also modified in the peptide moiety. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 The ergot alkaloids act on several types of receptors. As shown by 
the color outlines in  Table 16–6 , the nuclei of both catecholamines 
(phenylethylamine,  left panel  ) and 5-HT (indole,  right panel  ) can 
be discerned in the ergoline nucleus. Their effects include agonist, 
partial agonist, and antagonist actions at α adrenoceptors and 
serotonin receptors (especially 5-HT 1A and 5-HT 1D ; less for 5-HT 2 
and 5-HT 3 ); and agonist or partial agonist actions at central ner-
vous system dopamine receptors ( Table 16–7 ). Furthermore, some 
members of the ergot family have a high affinity for presynaptic 
receptors, whereas others are more selective for postjunctional 
receptors. There is a powerful stimulant effect on the uterus that 
seems to be most closely associated with agonist or partial agonist 
effects at 5-HT 2 receptors. Structural variations increase the selec-
tivity of certain members of the family for specific receptor types. 
 Ergot Poisoning: Not Just an Ancient Disease 
 As noted in the text, epidemics of ergotism, or poisoning by 
ergot-contaminated grain, are known to have occurred sporadi-
cally in ancient times and through the Middle Ages. It is easy to 
imagine the social chaos that might result if fiery pain, gangrene, 
hallucinations, convulsions, and abortions occurred simultane-
ously throughout a community in which all or most of the people 
believed in witchcraft, demonic possession, and the visitation of 
supernatural punishments upon humans for their misdeeds. 
Fortunately, such beliefs are uncommon today. However, ergot-
ism has not disappeared. A most convincing demonstration of 
ergotism occurred in the small French village of Pont-Saint-Esprit 
in 1951. It was described in the  British Medical Journal in 1951 
(Gabbai et al, 1951) and in a later book-length narrative account 
(Fuller, 1968). Several hundred individuals suffered symptoms of 
hallucinations, convulsions, and ischemia—and several died—
after eating bread made from contaminated flour. Similar events 
have occurred even more recently when poverty, famine, or 
incompetence resulted in the consumption of contaminated 
grain. Ergot toxicity caused by excessive self-medication with 
pharmaceutical ergot preparations is still occasionally reported. 
288    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
TABLE 16–6 Major ergoline derivatives (ergot alkaloids).
H
Amine alkaloids
Peptide alkaloids
R1
R8
Ergotamine1
CH2
H
CH3
α-Ergocryptine
H
CH(CH3)2
CH2
CH(CH3)2
Bromocriptine
Br
CH(CH3)2
CH2
CH(CH3)2
Lysergic acid
H
COOH
6-Methylergoline
H
H
Lysergic acid
   diethylamide
   (LSD)
H
C
O
N(CH2
CH3)2
Ergonovine
   (ergometrine)
H
C
O
NHCHCH3
CH2OH
R2
R2′
R5′
10
9
CH3
N
C
H
1
2
R2
O
NH
2′
R2′
O
O
R5′
H
5′
O
N
N
12
13
14 15
A
10
11
16 C 4
8
9
7
6
5
CH3
R8
1
3
2
B
N
D
N
HN
R1
1Dihydroergotamine lacks the double bond between carbons 9 and 10.
 B. Organ System Effects 
 1. Central nervous system— As indicated by traditional 
descriptions of ergotism, certain of the naturally occurring alka-
loids are powerful hallucinogens. Lysergic acid diethylamide 
(LSD; “acid”) is a synthetic ergot compound that clearly demon-
strates this action. The drug has been used in the laboratory as a 
potent peripheral 5-HT 2  antagonist , but good evidence suggests 
that its behavioral effects are mediated by  agonist effects at pre-
junctional or postjunctional 5-HT 2 receptors in the central ner-
vous system. In spite of extensive research, no clinical value has 
been discovered for LSD’s dramatic central nervous system effects. 
Abuse of this drug has waxed and waned but is still widespread. It 
is discussed in Chapter 32. 
 Dopamine receptors in the central nervous system play impor-
tant roles in extrapyramidal motor control and the regulation of 
pituitary prolactin release. The actions of the peptide ergoline 
 bromocriptine on the extrapyramidal system are discussed in 
Chapter 28. Of all the currently available ergot derivatives, bro-
mocriptine,  cabergoline, and  pergolide have the highest selectiv-
ity for the pituitary dopamine receptors. These drugs directly 
suppress prolactin secretion from pituitary cells by activating regu-
latory dopamine receptors (see Chapter 37). They compete for 
TABLE 16–7 Effects of ergot alkaloids at several receptors.1
Ergot Alkaloid
` Adrenoceptor
Dopamine Receptor
Serotonin Receptor (5-HT2)
Uterine Smooth 
Muscle Stimulation
Bromocriptine
–
+ + +
–
0
Ergonovine
+ +
– (PA)
+ + +
Ergotamine
– – (PA)
0
+ (PA)
+ + +
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
0
+ + +
– – (+ + in CNS)
+
Methysergide
+/0
+/0
– – – (PA)
+/0
1Agonist effects are indicated by +, antagonist by –, no effect by 0. Relative affinity for the receptor is indicated by the number of + or – signs. PA means partial agonist (both 
agonist and antagonist effects can be detected).
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    289
binding to these sites with dopamine itself and with other dop-
amine agonists such as apomorphine. They bind with high affinity 
and dissociate slowly. 
 2. Vascular smooth muscle— The action of ergot alkaloids on 
vascular smooth muscle is drug, species, and vessel dependent, so 
few generalizations are possible. In humans, ergotamine and simi-
lar compounds constrict most vessels in nanomolar concentrations 
( Figure 16–4 ). The vasospasm is prolonged. This response is par-
tially blocked by conventional α-blocking agents. However, ergot-
amine’s effect is also associated with “epinephrine reversal” (see 
Chapter 10) and with  blockade of the response to other α agonists. 
This dual effect reflects the drug’s partial agonist action ( Table 16–7 ). 
Because ergotamine dissociates very slowly from the α receptor, it 
produces very long-lasting agonist and antagonist effects at this 
receptor. There is little or no effect at β adrenoceptors. 
 Although much of the vasoconstriction elicited by ergot alkaloids 
can be ascribed to partial agonist effects at α adrenoceptors, some may 
be the result of effects at 5-HT receptors. Ergotamine, ergonovine, 
and methysergide all have partial agonist effects at 5-HT 2 vascular 
receptors. The remarkably specific antimigraine action of the ergot 
derivatives was originally thought to be related to their actions on 
vascular serotonin receptors. Current hypotheses, however, emphasize 
their action on prejunctional neuronal 5-HT receptors. 
 After overdosage with ergotamine and similar agents, vasos-
pasm is severe and prolonged (see Toxicity, below). This vasospasm 
is not easily reversed by α antagonists, serotonin antagonists, or 
combinations of both. 
 Ergotamine is typical of the ergot alkaloids that have a strong 
vasoconstrictor spectrum of action. The hydrogenation of ergot 
alkaloids at the 9 and 10 positions ( Table 16–6 ) yields dihydro 
derivatives that have reduced serotonin partial agonist and vasocon-
strictor effects and increased selective α-receptor–blocking actions. 
 3. Uterine smooth muscle— The stimulant action of ergot 
alkaloids on the uterus, as on vascular smooth muscle, appears to 
combine α agonist, serotonin agonist, and other effects. 
Furthermore, the sensitivity of the uterus to the stimulant effects 
of ergot increases dramatically during pregnancy, perhaps because 
of increasing dominance of α 1 receptors as pregnancy progresses. 
As a result, the uterus at term is more sensitive to ergot than 
earlier in pregnancy and far more sensitive than the nonpregnant 
organ. 
 In very small doses, ergot preparations can evoke rhythmic 
contraction and relaxation of the uterus. At higher concentrations, 
these drugs induce powerful and prolonged contracture. 
Ergonovine is more selective than other ergot alkaloids in affecting 
the uterus and is the agent of choice in obstetric applications of 
the ergot drugs although oxytocin, the peptide hormone, is pre-
ferred in most cases. 
 4. Other smooth muscle organs— In most patients, the ergot 
alkaloids have little or no significant effect on bronchiolar or uri-
nary smooth muscle. The gastrointestinal tract, on the other hand, 
is quite sensitive. Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea may be induced 
even by low doses in some patients. The effect is consistent with 
action on the central nervous system emetic center and on gastro-
intestinal serotonin receptors. 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
OF ERGOT ALKALOIDS 
 Clinical Uses 
 In spite of their significant toxicities, ergot alkaloids are still widely 
used in patients with migraine headache or pituitary dysfunction, 
but only occasionally in the postpartum patient. 
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−10
−9
−8
−7
−6
−5
−4
Concentration (log M)
Percent of maximum 5-HT contraction
DHE
ERG
MS
MT
5-HT
NE
 FIGURE 16–4  Effects of ergot derivatives on contraction of isolated segments of human basilar artery strips removed at surgery. All of the 
ergot derivatives are partial agonists, and all are more potent than the full agonists, norepinephrine and serotonin. DHE, dihydroergotamine; 
ERG, ergotamine; 5-HT, serotonin; MS, methysergide; MT, methylergometrine; NE, norepinephrine. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from 
Müller-Schweinitzer E. In:  5-Hydroxytryptamine Mechanisms in Primary Headaches. Oleson J, Saxena PR [editors]. Raven Press, 1992.) 
290    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 A. Migraine 
 Ergot derivatives are highly specific for migraine pain; they are not 
analgesic for any other condition. Although the triptan drugs 
discussed above are preferred by most clinicians and patients, tra-
ditional therapy with ergotamine can also be effective when given 
during the prodrome of an attack; it becomes progressively less 
effective if delayed. Ergotamine tartrate is available for oral, sub-
lingual, rectal suppository, and inhaler use. It is often combined 
with caffeine (100 mg caffeine for each 1 mg ergotamine tartrate) 
to facilitate absorption of the ergot alkaloid. 
 The vasoconstriction induced by ergotamine is long-lasting and 
cumulative when the drug is taken repeatedly, as in a severe migraine 
attack. Therefore, patients must be carefully informed that no more 
than 6 mg of the oral preparation may be taken for each attack and 
no more than 10 mg per week. For very severe attacks, ergotamine 
tartrate, 0.25–0.5 mg, may be given intravenously or intramuscu-
larly. Dihydroergotamine , 0.5–1 mg intravenously, is favored by 
some clinicians for treatment of intractable migraine. Intranasal 
dihydroergotamine may also be effective. Methysergide , which was 
used for migraine prophylaxis in the past, was withdrawn because of 
toxicity, see below. 
 B. Hyperprolactinemia 
 Increased serum levels of the anterior pituitary hormone prolactin 
are associated with secreting tumors of the gland and also with the 
use of centrally acting dopamine antagonists, especially the D 2 -
blocking antipsychotic drugs. Because of negative feedback effects, 
hyperprolactinemia is associated with amenorrhea and infertility 
in women as well as galactorrhea in both sexes. Rarely, the prolac-
tin surge that occurs around the end of term pregnancy may be 
associated with heart failure; cabergoline has been used to treat 
this cardiac condition successfully. 
 Bromocriptine is extremely effective in reducing the high levels 
of prolactin that result from pituitary tumors and has even been 
associated with regression of the tumor in some cases. The usual 
dosage of bromocriptine is 2.5 mg two or three times daily. 
Cabergoline is similar but more potent. Bromocriptine has also 
been used in the same dosage to suppress physiologic lactation. 
However, serious postpartum cardiovascular toxicity has been 
reported in association with the latter use of bromocriptine or 
pergolide, and this application is discouraged (see Chapter 37). 
 C. Postpartum Hemorrhage 
 The uterus at term is extremely sensitive to the stimulant action of 
ergot, and even moderate doses produce a prolonged and powerful 
spasm of the muscle quite unlike natural labor. Therefore, ergot 
derivatives should be used only for control of postpartum uterine 
bleeding and should never be given before delivery. Oxytocin is 
the preferred agent for control of postpartum hemorrhage, but if 
this peptide agent is ineffective, ergonovine maleate, 0.2 mg given 
intramuscularly, can be tried. It is usually effective within 
1–5 minutes and is less toxic than other ergot derivatives for this 
application. It is given at the time of delivery of the placenta or 
immediately afterward if bleeding is significant. 
 D. Diagnosis of Variant Angina 
 Ergonovine given intravenously produces prompt vasoconstric-
tion during coronary angiography to diagnose variant angina if 
reactive segments of the coronary arteries are present. In Europe, 
methylergometrine has been used for this purpose. 
 E. Senile Cerebral Insufficiency 
 Dihydroergotoxine, a mixture of dihydro-α-ergocryptine and 
three similar dihydrogenated peptide ergot alkaloids (ergoloid 
mesylates), has been promoted for many years for the relief of 
senility and more recently for the treatment of Alzheimer’s demen-
tia. There is no useful evidence that this drug has significant 
benefit. 
 Toxicity & Contraindications 
 The most common toxic effects of the ergot derivatives are 
gastrointestinal disturbances, including diarrhea, nausea, and 
vomiting. Activation of the medullary vomiting center and of the 
gastrointestinal serotonin receptors is involved. Since migraine 
attacks are often associated with these symptoms before therapy
is begun, these adverse effects are rarely contraindications to the 
use of ergot. 
 A more dangerous toxic effect—usually associated with over-
dosage—of agents like ergotamine and ergonovine is prolonged 
vasospasm. This sign of vascular smooth muscle stimulation may 
result in gangrene and may require amputation. Bowel infarction 
has also been reported and may require resection. Peripheral vas-
cular vasospasm caused by ergot is refractory to most vasodilators, 
but infusion of large doses of nitroprusside or nitroglycerin has 
been successful in some cases. 
 Chronic therapy with methysergide was associated with con-
nective tissue proliferation in the retroperitoneal space, the pleural 
cavity, and the endocardial tissue of the heart. These changes 
occurred insidiously over months and presented as hydronephrosis 
(from obstruction of the ureters) or a cardiac murmur (from dis-
tortion of the valves of the heart). In some cases, valve damage 
required surgical replacement. As a result, this drug was with-
drawn from the US market. Similar fibrotic change has resulted 
from the chronic use of 5-HT agonists promoted in the past for 
weight loss (fenfluramine, dexfenfluramine). 
 Other toxic effects of the ergot alkaloids include drowsiness 
and, in the case of methysergide, occasional instances of central 
stimulation and hallucinations. In fact, methysergide was some-
times used as a substitute for LSD by members of the so-called 
drug culture. 
 Contraindications to the use of ergot derivatives consist of the 
obstructive vascular diseases, especially symptomatic coronary 
artery disease, and collagen diseases. 
 There is no evidence that ordinary use of ergotamine for 
migraine is hazardous in pregnancy. However, most clinicians 
counsel restraint in the use of the ergot derivatives by pregnant 
patients. Use to deliberately cause abortion is contraindicated 
because the high doses required often cause dangerous vasocon-
striction. 
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    291
SUMMARY Drugs with Actions on Histamine and Serotonin Receptors; Ergot 
Alkaloids
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
H1 ANTIHISTAMINES
First generation:
 • Diphenhydramine
Competitive 
antagonism/inverse 
agonism at H1 
receptors
Reduces or prevents histamine 
effects on smooth muscle, 
immune cells • also blocks 
muscarinic and α adrenoceptors 
• highly sedative
IgE immediate 
allergies, especially 
hay fever, urticaria 
• often used as a 
sedative, antiemetic, 
and anti-motion 
sickness drug
Oral and parenteral • duration 4–6 h • Toxicity: 
Sedation when used in hay fever, muscarinic 
blockade symptoms, orthostatic hypotension 
• Interactions: Additive sedation with other 
sedatives, including alcohol • some inhibition of 
CYP2D6, may prolong action of some β blockers
Second generation:
 • Cetirizine
Competitive 
antagonism/inverse 
agonism at H1 
receptors
Reduces or prevents histamine 
effects on smooth muscle, 
immune cells
IgE immediate 
allergies, especially 
hay fever, urticaria
Oral • duration 12–24 h • Toxicity: Sedation and 
arrhythmias in overdose • Interactions: Minimal
 • Other first-generation H1 blockers: Chlorpheniramine is a less sedating H1 blocker with fewer autonomic effects
 • Other second-generation H1 blockers: Loratadine, desloratadine, and fexofenadine are very similar to cetirizine
H2 ANTIHISTAMINES
 • Cimetidine (see Chapter 62)
SEROTONIN AGONISTS
5-HT1B/1D:
 • Sumatriptan
Partial agonist at 
5-HT1B/1D receptors
Effects not fully understood 
• may reduce release of 
calcitonin gene-related peptide 
and perivascular edema in 
cerebral circulation
Migraine and cluster 
headache
Oral, nasal, parenteral • duration 2 h • Toxicity: 
Paresthesias, dizziness, coronary vasoconstriction 
• Interactions: Additive with other vasoconstrictors
 • Other triptans: Similar to sumatriptan except for pharmacokinetics (2–6 h duration of action); much more expensive than generic sumatriptan
5-HT4:
 • Tegaserod (see Chapter 62)
SEROTONIN BLOCKERS
5-HT2:
 •  Ketanserin (not 
available in USA)
Competitive blockade 
at 5-HT2 receptors
Prevents vasoconstriction and 
bronchospasm of carcinoid syn-
drome
Hypertension 
• carcinoid syndrome 
associated with 
carcinoid tumor
Oral • duration 12–24 h • Toxicity: Hypotension 
5-HT3:
 • Ondansetron (see Chapter 62)
ERGOT ALKALOIDS
Vasoselective:
 • Ergotamine
Mixed partial agonist 
effects at 5-HT2 and α 
adrenoceptors
Causes marked smooth muscle 
contraction but blocks 
α-agonist vasoconstriction
Migraine and cluster 
headache
Oral, parenteral • duration 12–24 h • Toxicity: 
Prolonged vasospasm causing angina, gangrene; 
uterine spasm
Uteroselective:
 • Ergonovine
Mixed partial agonist 
effects at 5-HT2 and α 
adrenoceptors
Same as ergotamine • some 
selectivity for uterine smooth 
muscle
Postpartum bleeding 
• migraine headache
Oral, parenteral (methylergonovine) 
• duration 2–4 h • Toxicity: Same as ergotamine
CNS selective:
 •  Lysergic acid 
diethylamide
Central nervous sys-
tem (CNS) 5-HT2 and 
dopamine agonist • 
5-HT2 antagonist in 
periphery
Hallucinations 
• psychotomimetic
None • widely abused
Oral • duration several hours • Toxicity: Prolonged 
psychotic state, flashbacks
 • Bromocriptine, pergolide: Ergot derivatives used in Parkinson’s disease (see Chapter 28) and prolactinoma (see Chapter 37)
292    SECTION IV  Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
ANTIHISTAMINES (H1 BLOCKERS)*
Azelastine
Nasal (Astelin): 137 mcg/puff nasal spray
Ophthalmic (Optivar): 0.5 mg/mL solution
Brompheniramine (generic, Brovex)
Oral: 6, 12 mg extended-release tablets; 12 mg chewable tablets; 
2, 8, 12 mg/5 mL suspension
Buclizine (Bucladin-S Softabs)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Carbinoxamine (generic, Histex)
Oral: 4 mg tablets; 8, 10 mg extended-release capsules; 1.5, 3.6, 
4 mg/5 mL liquid
Cetirizine (generic, Zyrtec)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 5, 10 mg chewable tablets; 5 mg/5 mL syrup
Chlorpheniramine (generic, Chlor-Trimeton)
Oral: 2 mg chewable tablets; 4 mg tablets; 2 mg/5 mL syrup
Oral sustained-release: 8, 12, 16 mg tablets; 8, 12 mg capsules
Clemastine (generic, Tavist)
Oral: 1.34, 2.68 mg tablets; 0.67 mg/5 mL syrup
Cyclizine (Marezine)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Cyproheptadine (generic)
Oral: 4 mg tablets; 2 mg/5 mL syrup
Desloratadine (Clarinex)
Oral: 5 mg tablets; 2.5, 5 mg rapidly disintegrating tablets; 
2.5 mg/5 mL syrup
Dimenhydrinate (Dramamine, others)†
Oral: 50 mg tablets; 50 mg chewable tablets; 12.5/5 mL, 
12.5 mg/4 mL, 15.62 mg/5 mL liquid
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IM or IV injection
Diphenhydramine (generic, Benadryl)
Oral: 12.5, 25 mg chewable tablets; 25, 50 mg tablets, capsules 
12.5 mg orally disintegrating tablets; 12.5, 25 mg/5 mL elixir 
and syrup
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection
Epinastine (Elestat)
Ophthalmic: 0.05% solution
Fexofenadine (generic, Allegra)
Oral: 30, 60, 180 mg tablets; 30 mg rapidly disintegrating tablets; 
6 mg/mL suspension
Hydroxyzine (generic, Vistaril)
Oral: 10, 25, 50 mg tablets; 25, 50, 100 mg capsules; 10 mg/5 mL 
syrup; 25 mg/5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg/mL for injection
Ketotifen (Zaditor)
Ophthalmic: 0.025% solution
Levocabastine (Livostin)
Ophthalmic: 0.05% solution
Levocetirizine (Xyzal)
Oral: 5 mg tablets
Loratadine (generic, Claritin, Tavist)
Oral: 10 mg tablets; 5 mg chewable tablets; 10 mg rapidly 
disintegrating tablets; 1 mg/mL syrup
Meclizine (generic, Antivert)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50 mg tablets; 25 mg capsules; 
25 mg chewable tablets
Olopatadine (Patanol)
Ophthalmic: 0.1% solution
Phenindamine (Nolahist)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Promethazine (generic, Phenergan)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50 mg tablets; 6.25 mg/5 mL syrups
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg/mL for injection
Rectal: 12.5, 25, 50 mg suppositories
Triprolidine (Zymine)
Oral: 1.25 mg/5 mL liquid
H2 BLOCKERS
See Chapter 62.
5-HT AGONISTS
Almotriptan (Axert)
Oral: 6.25, 12.5 mg tablets
Eletriptan (Relpax)
Oral: 24.2, 48.5 mg tablets (equivalent to 20, 40 mg base)
Frovatriptan (Frova)
Oral: 2.5 mg tablets
Naratriptan (Amerge)
Oral: 1, 2.5 mg tablets
Rizatriptan
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets (Maxalt); 5, 10 mg orally disintegrating 
tablets (Maxalt-MLT)
Sumatriptan (generic, Imitrex)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets; generic formulation available
Nasal: 5, 20 mg unit dose spray devices
Parenteral: 4, 6 mg/0.5 mL in SELFdose autoinjection units for 
subcutaneous injection
Zolmitriptan (Zomig)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg tablets; 2.5 mg orally disintegrating tablets
Nasal: 5 mg
5-HT ANTAGONISTS
See Chapter 62.
MELATONIN RECEPTOR AGONISTS
Ramelteon (Rozarem)
Oral: 8 mg tablets
ERGOT ALKALOIDS
Dihydroergotamine
Nasal (Migranal): 4 mg/mL nasal spray
Parenteral (D.H.E. 45): 1 mg/mL for injection
Ergonovine (Ergotrate)
Oral: 0.2 mg tablets
Ergotamine mixtures (generic, Cafergot)
Oral: 1 mg ergotamine/100 mg caffeine tablets
Rectal: 2 mg ergotamine/100 mg caffeine suppositories
Ergotamine tartrate (Ergomar)
Sublingual: 2 mg sublingual tablets
Methylergonovine (Methergine)
Oral: 0.2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.2 mg/mL for injection
*Several other antihistamines are available only in combination products with, for example, phenylephrine.
†Dimenhydrinate is the chlorotheophylline salt of diphenhydramine.
CHAPTER 16 Histamine, Serotonin, & the Ergot Alkaloids    293
 REFERENCES 
 Histamine 
 Arrang J-M, Morisset S, Gbahou F: Constitutive activity of the histamine H 3 
receptor. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2007;28:350. 
 Barnes PJ: Histamine and serotonin. Pulm Pharmacol Ther 2001;14:329. 
 Bond RA, IJzerman AP: Recent developments in constitutive receptor activity and 
inverse agonism, and their potential for GPCR drug discovery. Trend 
Pharmacol Sci 2006;27:92. 
 deShazo RD, Kemp SF: Pharmacotherapy of allergic rhinitis. www.UpToDate.
com, 2010. 
 Gemkow MJ et al: The histamine H3 receptor as a therapeutic drug target for CNS 
disorders. Drug Discov Today 2009;14:509. 
 Lieberman P: Anaphylaxis. Med Clin North Am 2006;90:77. 
 Lin J-S et al: An inverse agonist of the histamine H 3 receptor improves wakefulness 
in narcolepsy: Studies in orexin –/– mice and patients. Neurobiol Dis 
2008;30:74. 
 Preuss H et al: Constitutive activity and ligand selectivity of human, guinea pig, rat, 
and canine histamine H 2 receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Therap 2007;321:983. 
 Smits RA, Leurs R, deEdech JP: Major advances in the development of histamine 
H 4 receptor ligands. Drug Discov Today 2009;14:745. 
 Thurmond RL, Gelfand EW, Dunford PJ: The role of histamine H 1 and H 4 recep-
tors in allergic inflammation: The search for new antihistamines. Nat Rev 
Drug Dis 2008;7:41. 
 Tokita S, Takahashi K, Kotani H: Recent advances in molecular pharmacology of 
the histamine systems: Physiology and pharmacology of histamine H 3 recep-
tor: Roles in feeding regulation and therapeutic potential for metabolic dis-
orders. J Pharmacol Sci 2006;101:12. 
 Serotonin 
 Bajwa ZH, Sabahat A: Acute treatment of migraine in adults. www.UpToDate.
com, 2010. 
 Barrenetxe J, Delagrange P, Martinez JA: Physiologic and metabolic functions of 
melatonin. J Physiol Biochem 2004;60:61. 
 Boyer EW, Shannon M: The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J Med 2005;352:
1112. 
 Elangbam CS: Drug-induced valvulopathy: An update. Toxicol Path 2010; 
38:837. 
 Frank C: Recognition and treatment of serotonin syndrome. Can Fam Physician 
2008;54:988. 
 Isbister GK, Buckley NA, Whyte IM: Serotonin toxicity: A practical approach to 
diagnosis and treatment. Med J Aust 2007;187:361. 
 Loder E: Triptan therapy in migraine. N Engl J Med 2010;363:63. 
 Porvasnik SL et al: PRX-08066, a novel 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2B antago-
nist, reduces monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension and right 
ventricular hypertrophy in rats. J Pharmacol Exp Therap 2010;334:364. 
 Prunet-Marcassus B et al: Melatonin reduces body weight gain in Sprague-Dawley 
rats with diet-induced obesity. Endocrinology 2003;144:5347. 
 Raymond JR et al: Multiplicity of mechanisms of serotonin receptor signal trans-
duction. Pharmacol Ther 2001;92:179. 
 Sack RL: Jet lag. N Engl J Med 2010;362:440. 
 Ergot Alkaloids: Historical 
 Fuller JG:  The Day of St. Anthony’s Fire . Macmillan, 1968; Signet, 1969. 
 Gabbai Dr, Lisbonne Dr, Pourquier Dr: Ergot poisoning at Pont St. Esprit. Br Med J 
1951;Sept 15:650. 
 Ergot Alkaloids: Pharmacology 
 Dierckx RA et al: Intraarterial sodium nitroprusside infusion in the treatment of 
severe ergotism. Clin Neuropharmacol 1986;9:542. 
 Dildy GA: Postpartum hemorrhage: New management options. Clin Obstet 
Gynecol 2002;45:330. 
 Mantegani S, Brambilla E, Varasi M: Ergoline derivatives: Receptor affinity and 
selectivity. Farmaco 1999;54:288. 
 Porter JK, Thompson FN Jr: Effects of fescue toxicosis on reproduction in live-
stock. J Animal Sci 1992;70:1594. 
 Snow V et al: Pharmacologic management of acute attacks of migraine and preven-
tion of migraine headache. Ann Intern Med 2002;137:840. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient demonstrates typical symptoms, signs, and course 
of urticaria due to food allergy. The failure of the antihista-
mine to control fully the signs and symptoms is also common. 
In such cases, addition of oral corticosteroids is often the 
most effective measure. Because the condition is self-limiting 
(assuming the patient does not repeat the allergen challenge), 
a tapering high-dose regimen, using prednisone, is relatively 
safe and effective. This consists of 50–100 mg prednisone on 
days 1 and 2, 30–75 mg on days 3 and 4, 15–40 mg on days 5 
and 6, 5–10 mg on days 7, 8, and 9, and none thereafter if 
symptoms do not recur.
This page intentionally left blank 
295
 Vasoactive Peptides 
C A S E  S T U D Y
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Peptides are used by most tissues for cell-to-cell communication. As 
noted in Chapters 6 and 21, they play important roles as transmitters 
in the autonomic and central nervous systems. Several peptides exert 
important direct effects on vascular and other smooth muscles. These 
peptides include vasoconstrictors ( angiotensin II, vasopressin, 
endothelins, neuropeptide Y , and  urotensin ) and vasodilators 
( bradykinin and related  kinins, natriuretic peptides, vasoactive 
intestinal peptide, substance P, neurotensin, calcitonin gene-
related peptide , and  adrenomedullin ). This chapter focuses on the 
smooth muscle actions of the peptides. 
 ■ ANGIOTENSIN 
 BIOSYNTHESIS OF ANGIOTENSIN 
 The pathway for the formation and metabolism of angiotensin 
II (ANG II) is summarized in  Figure 17–1 . The principal steps 
include enzymatic cleavage of angiotensin I (ANG I) from 
angiotensinogen by renin, conversion of ANG I to ANG II by 
converting enzyme, and degradation of ANG II by several 
peptidases. 
 During a routine check, a 45-year-old man was found to have 
high blood pressure (165/100 mm Hg). Blood pressure 
remained high on two follow-up visits. His physician initially 
prescribed hydrochlorothiazide, a diuretic commonly used 
to treat hypertension. Although his blood pressure was 
reduced by hydrochlorothiazide, it remained at a hypertensive 
level (145/95 mm Hg), and he was referred to the university 
hypertension clinic. Your evaluation reveals that the patient 
has elevated plasma renin activity and aldosterone concen-
tration. Hydrochlorothiazide is therefore replaced with 
enalapril, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. 
Enalapril lowers the blood pressure to almost normotensive 
levels. However, after several weeks on the new drug, the 
patient returns complaining of a persistent cough. In addition, 
some signs of angioedema are detected. How does enalapril 
lower blood pressure? Why does it occasionally cause cough-
ing and angioedema? What other drugs could be used to 
inhibit renin secretion or suppress the renin-angiotensin 
system, and decrease blood pressure, without the adverse 
effects of enalapril? 
 Renin 
 Renin is an aspartyl protease enzyme that specifically catalyzes the 
hydrolytic release of the decapeptide ANG I from angiotensinogen. 
It is synthesized as a prepromolecule that is processed to prorenin, 
which has poorly understood actions (see below), and then to active 
renin, a glycoprotein consisting of 340 amino acids. 
 Renin in the circulation originates in the kidneys. Enzymes 
with renin-like activity are present in several extrarenal tissues, 
including blood vessels, uterus, salivary glands, and adrenal cortex, 
but no physiologic role for these enzymes has been established. 
Within the kidney, renin is synthesized and stored in the juxta-
glomerular apparatus of the nephron. Specialized granular cells 
called juxtaglomerular cells are the site of synthesis, storage, and 
release of renin. The macula densa is a specialized segment of the 
nephron that is closely associated with the vascular components of 
the juxtaglomerular apparatus. The vascular and tubular compo-
nents of the juxtaglomerular apparatus, including the juxtaglom-
erular cells, are innervated by noradrenergic neurons. 
 Control of Renin Release 
 The rate at which renin is released by the kidney is the primary 
determinant of activity of the renin-angiotensin system. Active 
17
 Ian A. Reid, PhD 
296    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
renin is released by exocytosis immediately upon stimulation of 
the juxtaglomerular apparatus. Prorenin is released constitutively, 
usually at a rate higher than that of active renin, thus accounting 
for the fact that prorenin can constitute 80–90% of the total renin 
in the circulation. The significance of circulating prorenin is dis-
cussed at the end of this section. Active renin release is controlled 
by a variety of factors, including a renal vascular receptor, the 
macula densa, the sympathetic nervous system, and ANG II. 
 A. Macula Densa 
 Renin release is controlled in part by the macula densa, a structure 
that has a close anatomic association with the afferent arteriole. 
The initial step involves the detection of some function of NaCl 
concentration in, or delivery to, the distal tubule, possibly by the 
Na + /K + /2Cl – cotransporter. The macula densa then signals changes 
in renin release by the juxtaglomerular cells such that there is an 
inverse relationship between NaCl delivery or concentration and 
renin release. Potential candidates for signal transmission include 
prostaglandin E 2 (PGE 2 ) and nitric oxide, which stimulate renin 
release, and adenosine, which inhibits it. 
 B. Renal Baroreceptor 
 The renal baroreceptor mediates an inverse relationship between 
renal artery pressure and renin release. The mechanism is not 
completely understood but it appears that the juxtaglomerular 
cells are sensitive to stretch and that increased stretch results in 
decreased renin release. The decrease may result from influx of 
calcium which, somewhat paradoxically, inhibits renin release. 
The paracrine factors PGE 2 , nitric oxide, and adenosine have also 
been implicated in the baroreceptor control of renin release. 
 C. Sympathetic Nervous System 
 Norepinephrine released from renal sympathetic nerves stimu-
lates renin release indirectly by α-adrenergic activation of the 
renal baroreceptor and macula densa mechanisms, and directly 
by an action on the juxtaglomerular cells. In humans, the direct 
effect is mediated by β 1 adrenoceptors. Through this mecha-
nism, reflex activation of the sympathetic nervous system by 
hypotension or hypovolemia leads to activation of the renin-
angiotensin system. 
 D. Angiotensin 
 Angiotensin II inhibits renin release. The inhibition results from 
increased blood pressure acting by way of the renal baroreceptor and 
macula densa mechanisms, and from a direct action of the peptide 
on the juxtaglomerular cells. The direct inhibition is mediated by 
increased intracellular Ca 2+ concentration and forms the basis of a 
short-loop negative feedback mechanism controlling renin release. 
Interruption of this feedback with drugs that inhibit the renin-
angiotensin system (see below) results in stimulation of renin release. 
 E. Intracellular Signaling Pathways 
 The release of renin by the juxtaglomerular cells is controlled by 
interplay among three intracellular messengers: cAMP, cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), and free cytosolic Ca 2+ con-
centration ( Figure 17–2 ). cAMP plays a major role; maneuvers 
that increase cAMP levels, including activation of adenylyl cyclase, 
inhibition of cAMP phosphodiesterases, and administration of 
cAMP analogs, increase renin release. Increases in Ca 2+ can result 
from increased entry of extracellular Ca 2+ or mobilization of Ca 2+ 
from intracellular stores, while increases in cGMP levels can result 
from activation of soluble or particulate guanylyl cyclase. Ca 2+ and 
cGMP appear to alter renin release indirectly, primarily by chang-
ing cAMP levels. 
 F. Pharmacologic Alteration of Renin Release 
 The release of renin is altered by a wide variety of pharmacologic 
agents. Renin release is stimulated by vasodilators (hydralazine, 
minoxidil, nitroprusside), β-adrenoceptor agonists, α-adrenoceptor 
antagonists, phosphodiesterase inhibitors (eg, theophylline, milri-
none, rolipram), and most diuretics and anesthetics. This stimula-
tion can be accounted for by the control mechanisms just 
described. Drugs that inhibit renin release are discussed below. 
 Many of the peptides reviewed in this chapter also alter renin 
release. Release is stimulated by adrenomedullin, bradykinin, and 
1     2     3    4   5    6    7     8      9   10    11  12  13   14
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-Ile-His-Pro-Phe-His-Leu-Val-Ile-His-Asn–R
Angiotensinogen
Renin
Prorenin
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-Ile-His-Pro-Phe-His-Leu
Angiotensin I
Converting enzyme
Aminopeptidase
Angiotensin II
Angiotensin III
Angiotensinases
Peptide fragments
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-Ile-His-Pro-Phe
Arg-Val-Tyr-Ile-His-Pro-Phe
 FIGURE 17–1  Chemistry of the renin-angiotensin system. The 
amino acid sequence of the amino terminal of human angiotensino-
gen is shown. R denotes the remainder of the protein molecule. See 
text for additional steps in the formation and metabolism of angio-
tensin peptides. 
CHAPTER 17 Vasoactive Peptides    297
calcitonin gene-related peptide, and inhibited by atrial natriuretic 
peptide, endothelin, substance P, and vasopressin. 
 Angiotensinogen 
 Angiotensinogen is the circulating protein substrate from which 
renin cleaves ANG I. It is synthesized in the liver. Human angio-
tensinogen is a glycoprotein with a molecular weight of approxi-
mately 57,000. The 14 amino acids at the amino terminal of the 
molecule are shown in  Figure 17–1 . In humans, the concentra-
tion of angiotensinogen in the circulation is less than the K m of 
the renin-angiotensinogen reaction and is therefore an impor-
tant determinant of the rate of formation of angiotensin. 
 The production of angiotensinogen is increased by corticosteroids, 
estrogens, thyroid hormones, and ANG II. It is also elevated during 
pregnancy and in women taking estrogen-containing oral contracep-
tives. The increased plasma angiotensinogen concentration is thought 
to contribute to the hypertension that may occur in these situations. 
 Angiotensin I 
 Although ANG I contains the peptide sequences necessary for all 
of the actions of the renin-angiotensin system, it has little or no 
biologic activity. Instead, it must be converted to ANG II by con-
verting enzyme ( Figure 17–1 ). ANG I may also be acted on by 
plasma or tissue aminopeptidases to form [des-Asp 1 ]angiotensin I; 
this in turn is converted to [des-Asp 1 ]angiotensin II (commonly 
known as angiotensin III) by converting enzyme. 
 Converting Enzyme (ACE, Peptidyl 
Dipeptidase, Kininase II) 
 Converting enzyme is a dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase with two 
active sites that catalyzes the cleavage of dipeptides from the 
carboxyl terminal of certain peptides. Its most important sub-
strates are ANG I, which it converts to ANG II, and bradykinin, 
which it inactivates (see Kinins, below). It also cleaves enkepha-
lins and substance P, but the physiologic significance of these 
effects has not been established. The action of converting 
enzyme is prevented by a penultimate prolyl residue in the sub-
strate, and ANG II is therefore not hydrolyzed by converting 
enzyme. Converting enzyme is distributed widely in the body. In 
most tissues, converting enzyme is located on the luminal sur-
face of vascular endothelial cells and is thus in close contact with 
the circulation. 
 A homolog of converting enzyme known as ACE2 was recently 
found to be highly expressed in vascular endothelial cells of the 
kidneys, heart, and testes. Unlike converting enzyme, ACE2 has only 
one active site and functions as a carboxypeptidase rather than a 
dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase. It removes a single amino acid from the 
C-terminal of ANG I forming ANG 1-9 ( Figure 17–3 ), which is inac-
tive but is converted to ANG 1-7 by ACE. ACE2 also converts ANG 
AMP
ER
AMP
ATP
cAMP
cGMP
cGMP
cGK
GTP
GTP
PLC
DAG
ANG II
AC
Adenosine
Macula densa
Renal nerves
Renal
baroreceptor
Active renin
NO
sGC
NE
PDE1
PIP2
IP3
PGE2
PDE3
Gi
Gs
PKA
ANP
PKC
GC-A
Renin
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
+
+
+
+
–
–
Ca2+
Ca2+
 FIGURE 17–2  Major physiologic inputs to renin release and proposed integration with signaling pathways in the juxtaglomerular cell. AC, 
adenylyl cyclase; ANG II, angiotensin II; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; cGK, protein kinase G; DAG, diacylglycerol; GC-A, particulate guanylyl 
cyclase; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; IP 3 , inositol trisphosphate; NE, norepinephrine; NO, nitric oxide; PDE, phosphodiesterase; PKA, protein 
kinase A; PLC, phospholipase C; sGC, soluble guanylyl cyclase. (Redrawn, with permission, from Castrop H et al: Physiology of kidney renin. Physiol Rev 
2010;90:607.) 
298    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
II to ANG 1-7. ANG 1-7 has vasodilator activity, apparently medi-
ated by the orphan heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding pro-
tein-coupled receptor (Mas receptor). This vasodilation may serve to 
counteract the vasoconstrictor activity of ANG II. ACE2 also differs 
from ACE in that it does not hydrolyze bradykinin and is not inhib-
ited by converting enzyme inhibitors (see below). Thus, the enzyme 
more closely resembles an angiotensinase than a converting enzyme. 
 Angiotensinase 
 Angiotensin II, which has a plasma half-life of 15–60 seconds, is 
removed rapidly from the circulation by a variety of peptidases col-
lectively referred to as angiotensinase. It is metabolized during passage 
through most vascular beds (a notable exception being the lung). 
Most metabolites of ANG II are biologically inactive, but the initial 
product of aminopeptidase action—[des-Asp1]angiotensin II—retains 
considerable biologic activity. 
 ACTIONS OF ANGIOTENSIN II 
 Angiotensin II exerts important actions at vascular smooth mus-
cle, adrenal cortex, kidney, heart, and brain via the receptors 
described below. Through these actions, the renin-angiotensin 
system plays a key role in the regulation of fluid and electrolyte 
balance and arterial blood pressure. Excessive activity of the 
renin-angiotensin system can result in hypertension and disorders 
of fluid and electrolyte homeostasis. 
 Blood Pressure 
 Angiotensin II is a very potent pressor agent—on a molar basis, 
approximately 40 times more potent than norepinephrine. The 
pressor response to intravenous ANG II is rapid in onset (10–15 
seconds) and sustained during long-term infusions. A large com-
ponent of the pressor response is due to direct contraction of 
vascular—especially arteriolar—smooth muscle. In addition, 
however, ANG II can also increase blood pressure through actions 
on the brain and autonomic nervous system. The pressor response 
to ANG II is usually accompanied by little or no reflex bradycar-
dia because the peptide acts on the brain to reset the baroreceptor 
reflex control of heart rate to a higher pressure. 
 Angiotensin II also interacts with the autonomic nervous sys-
tem. It stimulates autonomic ganglia, increases the release of epi-
nephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal medulla, and most 
important, facilitates sympathetic transmission by an action at 
adrenergic nerve terminals. The latter effect involves both increased 
release and reduced reuptake of norepinephrine. Angiotensin II 
also has a less important direct positive inotropic action on the 
heart. 
 Adrenal Cortex & Kidney 
 Angiotensin II acts directly on the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal 
cortex to stimulate aldosterone synthesis and release. At higher 
concentrations, ANG II also stimulates glucocorticoid synthesis. 
Angiotensin II acts on the kidney to cause renal vasoconstriction, 
increase proximal tubular sodium reabsorption, and inhibit the 
release of renin. 
 Central Nervous System 
 In addition to its central effects on blood pressure, ANG II acts on 
the central nervous system to stimulate drinking (dipsogenic 
effect) and increase the secretion of vasopressin and adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone (ACTH). The physiologic significance of the 
effects of ANG II on drinking and pituitary hormone secretion is 
not known. 
 Cell Growth 
 Angiotensin II is mitogenic for vascular and cardiac muscle cells 
and may contribute to the development of cardiovascular hyper-
trophy. It also exerts a variety of important effects on the vascular 
endothelium. Indeed, overactivity of the renin-angiotensin system 
has been implicated as one of the most significant factors in the 
development of hypertensive vascular disease. Considerable evi-
dence now indicates that ACE inhibitors and ANG II receptor 
antagonists (see below) slow or prevent morphologic changes 
(remodeling) following myocardial infarction that would other-
wise lead to heart failure.  The stimulation of vascular and cardiac 
growth by ANG II is mediated by other pathways, probably recep-
tor and nonreceptor tyrosine kinases such as the Janus tyrosine 
Angiotensinogen
ANG I
ANG II
Blood pressure
Sodium balance
Inflammation
Proliferation
Hypertrophy
AT1
receptor
(Pro)renin
receptor
Prorenin
Renin
Binding
Activation
Mas
receptor
AT2
receptor
ACE
ANG 1–9
ANG 1–7
ACE
ACE2
ACE2
+
+
+
–
–
–
 FIGURE 17–3  The renin-angiotensin system showing the estab-
lished system (black) and recently discovered pathways involving the 
(pro)renin receptor (red) and ANG 1-7 (blue). (Redrawn, with permission, 
from Castrop H et al: Physiology of kidney renin. Physiol Rev 2010;90:607.) 
CHAPTER 17 Vasoactive Peptides    299
kinase Jak2, and by increased transcription of specific genes (see 
Chapter 2). 
 ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTORS & 
MECHANISM OF ACTION 
 Angiotensin II receptors are widely distributed in the body. 
Like the receptors for other peptide hormones, ANG II recep-
tors are G protein-coupled and located on the plasma mem-
brane of target cells, and this permits rapid onset of the various 
actions of ANG II. Two distinct subtypes of ANG II receptors, 
termed  AT 1 and  AT 2 , have been identified on the basis of their 
differential affinity for antagonists and their sensitivity to 
sulfhydryl-reducing agents. AT 1 receptors have a high affinity 
for the inhibitor losartan and a low affinity for PD 123177 (an 
experimental nonpeptide antagonist), whereas AT 2 receptors 
have a high affinity for PD 123177 and a low affinity for losar-
tan. Angiotensin II and saralasin (see below) bind equally to 
both subtypes. The relative proportion of the two subtypes var-
ies from tissue to tissue: AT 1 receptors predominate in vascular 
smooth muscle. Most of the known actions of ANG II are 
mediated by the AT 1 receptor, a G q protein-coupled receptor. 
Binding of ANG II to AT 1 receptors in vascular smooth muscle 
results in activation of phospholipase C and generation of 
inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol (see Chapter 2). 
These events, which occur within seconds, result in smooth 
muscle contraction. 
 The AT 2 receptor has a structure and affinity for ANG II 
similar to those of the AT 1 receptor. In contrast, however, 
stimulation of AT 2 receptors causes vasodilation that may serve 
to counteract the vasoconstriction resulting from AT 1 receptor 
stimulation. AT 2 receptor-mediated vasodilation appears to be 
nitric oxide-dependent and may involve the bradykinin B 2 
receptor-nitric oxide-cGMP pathway. AT 2 receptors are present 
at high density in all tissues during fetal development, but they 
are much less abundant in the adult where they are expressed 
at high concentration only in the adrenal medulla, reproduc-
tive tissues, vascular endothelium, and parts of the brain. AT 2 
receptors are up-regulated in pathologic conditions including 
heart failure and myocardial infarction. The functions of the 
AT 2 receptor appear to include fetal tissue development, inhi-
bition of growth and proliferation, cell differentiation, apopto-
sis, and vasodilation. 
 INHIBITION OF THE RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN 
SYSTEM 
 In view of the importance of the renin-angiotensin system in car-
diovascular disease, considerable effort has been directed to devel-
oping drugs that inhibit the system. A wide variety of agents that 
block the formation or action of ANG II is now available. Some 
of these drugs block renin release, but most inhibit the conversion 
of ANG I to ANG II, block angiotensin AT 1 receptors, or inhibit 
the enzymatic action of renin. 
 Drugs That Block Renin Release 
 Several drugs that interfere with the sympathetic nervous system 
inhibit the release of renin. Examples are clonidine and propranolol. 
Clonidine inhibits renin release by causing a centrally mediated 
reduction in renal sympathetic nerve activity, and it may also exert 
a direct intrarenal action. Propranolol and other β-adrenoceptor–
blocking drugs act by blocking the intrarenal and extrarenal β recep-
tors involved in the neural control of renin release. 
 Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 
Inhibitors 
 An important class of orally active  ACE inhibitors, directed 
against the active site of ACE, is now extensively used. 
 Captopril and  enalapril are examples of the many potent ACE 
inhibitors that are available. These drugs differ in their 
structure and pharmacokinetics, but they are interchangeable 
in clinical use. ACE inhibitors decrease systemic vascular 
resistance without increasing heart rate, and they promote 
natriuresis. As described in Chapters 11 and 13, they are 
effective in the treatment of hypertension, decrease morbidity 
and mortality in heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction 
after myocardial infarction, and delay the progression of 
diabetic nephropathy. 
 ACE inhibitors not only block the conversion of ANG I to 
ANG II but also inhibit the degradation of other substances, 
including bradykinin, substance P, and enkephalins. The action of 
ACE inhibitors to inhibit bradykinin metabolism contributes 
significantly to their hypotensive action (see  Figure 11–5 ) and is 
apparently responsible for some adverse side effects, including 
cough and angioedema. These drugs are contraindicated in preg-
nancy because they cause fetal kidney damage. 
 Angiotensin Receptor Blockers 
 Potent peptide antagonists of the action of ANG II are available 
for research use. The best-known of these is the partial agonist, 
 saralasin . Saralasin lowers blood pressure in hypertensive patients 
but may elicit pressor responses, particularly when circulating 
ANG II levels are low. Because it must be administered intrave-
nously, saralasin is used only for investigation of renin-dependent 
hypertension and other hyperreninemic states. 
 The  non peptide ANG II receptor blockers (ARBs) are of much 
greater interest.  Losartan, valsartan, eprosartan, irbesartan, 
candesartan, olmesartan , and  telmisartan are orally active, 
potent, and specific competitive antagonists of angiotensin AT 1 
receptors. The efficacy of these drugs in hypertension is similar to 
that of ACE inhibitors, but they are associated with a lower inci-
dence of cough. Like ACE inhibitors, ARBs slow the progression 
of diabetic nephropathy and valsartan has been reported to 
decrease the  incidence of diabetes in patients with impaired glu-
cose tolerance. The antagonists are also effective in the treatment 
of heart failure and provide a useful alternative when ACE inhibi-
tors are not well tolerated. ARBs are generally well tolerated but 
should not be used by patients with nondiabetic renal disease or 
in pregnancy. 
300    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 Marfan syndrome is a connective tissue disorder associated 
with aortic disease and other abnormalities involving increased 
transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling. Since ANG II 
increases TGF-β levels, it was reasoned that blockade of the renin-
angiotensin system might be beneficial in Marfan syndrome. 
Promising initial results have been obtained with losartan, and 
clinical trials are underway. 
 The currently available ARBs are selective for the AT 1 receptor. 
Since prolonged treatment with the drugs disinhibits renin release 
and increases circulating ANG II levels, there may be increased 
stimulation of AT 2 receptors. This may be significant in view of 
the evidence that activation of the AT 2 receptor causes vasodila-
tion and other beneficial effects. AT 2 receptor antagonists such as 
PD 123177 are available for research but have no clinical applica-
tions at this time. However, a selective AT 2  agonist , compound 21, 
lowers blood pressure in hypertensive animals and may be benefi-
cial in human hypertension. The clinical benefits of ARBs are 
similar to those of ACE inhibitors, and it is not clear if one group 
of drugs has significant advantages over the other. Combination 
therapy with an ACE inhibitor plus an ARB has a number of 
potential advantages and is currently being investigated. 
 Renin Inhibitors 
 Cleavage of angiotensinogen by renin (Figures 17–1 and 17–3) is 
the rate-limiting step in the formation of ANG II and thus repre-
sents a logical target for inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system. 
Drugs that inhibit renin have been available for many years but have 
been limited by low potency, poor bioavailability, and short dura-
tion of action. However, a new class of nonpeptide, low-molecular- 
weight, orally active inhibitors has recently been developed. 
 Aliskiren is the most advanced of these and the first to be 
approved for the treatment of hypertension. In healthy subjects, 
aliskiren produces a dose-dependent reduction in plasma renin 
activity and ANG I and II and aldosterone concentrations. In 
patients with hypertension, many of whom have elevated plasma 
renin levels, aliskiren suppresses plasma renin activity and causes 
dose-related reductions in blood pressure similar to those pro-
duced by ACE inhibitors and ARBs. The safety and tolerability of 
aliskiren appear to be comparable to angiotensin antagonists and 
placebo. Aliskiren is contraindicated in pregnancy. 
 Inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system with ACE inhibitors 
or ARBs may be incomplete because the drugs disrupt the negative 
feedback action of ANG II on renin release and thereby increase 
plasma renin activity. Other antihypertensive drugs, notably hydro-
chlorothiazide and other diuretics, also increase plasma renin activ-
ity. Aliskiren not only decreases baseline plasma renin activity in 
hypertensive subjects but also eliminates the rise produced by ACE 
inhibitors, ARBs, and diuretics and thereby results in a greater anti-
hypertensive effect. Renin inhibition has thus proved to be an 
important new approach to the treatment of hypertension. 
 Prorenin Receptors 
 For many years, prorenin was considered to be an inactive pre-
cursor of renin, with no function of its own. Thus the observation 
noted above in the section on renin that prorenin circulates at 
high levels was surprising. Recently, however, a receptor that 
preferentially binds prorenin has been identified. Since it also 
binds active renin, the receptor is referred to as the (pro)renin 
receptor. 
 The receptor is a 350-amino acid protein with a single trans-
membrane domain. When prorenin binds to the (pro)renin 
receptor, it undergoes a conformational change and becomes 
fully active. The catalytic activity of active renin also increases 
further when it binds to the receptor. The activated prorenin and 
renin interact with circulating angiotensinogen to form angio-
tensin ( Figure 17–3 ). However, binding of prorenin to the recep-
tor also activates intracellular signaling pathways that differ 
depending on the cell type. For example, in mesangial and vas-
cular smooth muscle cells, prorenin binding activates MAP 
kinases and expression of profibrotic molecules. Thus, elevated 
prorenin levels (as occur, for example, in diabetes mellitus) could 
produce a variety of adverse effects via both angiotensin-depen-
dent and independent pathways. Recent research indicates that 
the (pro)renin receptor is functionally linked to the vacuolar 
proton-ATPase (ATP6ap2) and is necessary for Wnt signaling 
pathways involved (independently of renin) in stem cell biology, 
embryology, and cancer. 
 A synthetic peptide named handle region peptide (HRP), 
which consists of the amino acid sequence corresponding to 
the “handle” region of the prorenin prosegment, has been 
synthesized and shown to competitively inhibit binding of 
prorenin to the (pro)renin receptor. HRP has beneficial effects 
in the kidneys of diabetic rats and there is considerable inter-
est in developing noncompetitive antagonists of the (pro)renin 
receptor. 
 This novel receptor could be important in cardiovascular and 
other diseases, but at the present time its role in human pathology 
is far from clear. 
 ■ KININS 
 BIOSYNTHESIS OF KININS 
 Kinins are potent vasodilator peptides formed enzymatically by 
the action of enzymes known as kallikreins or kininogenases act-
ing on protein substrates called kininogens. The kallikrein-kinin 
system has several features in common with the renin-angiotensin 
system. 
 Kallikreins 
 Kallikreins are present in plasma and in several organs and tissues, 
including the kidneys, pancreas, intestine, sweat glands, and sali-
vary glands. Plasma prekallikrein can be activated to kallikrein by 
trypsin, Hageman factor, and possibly kallikrein itself. In general, 
the biochemical properties of tissue kallikreins are different from 
those of plasma kallikreins. Kallikreins can convert prorenin to 
active renin, but the physiologic significance of this action has not 
been established. 
CHAPTER 17 Vasoactive Peptides    301
 Kininogens 
 Kininogens—the precursors of kinins and substrates of 
kallikreins—are present in plasma, lymph, and interstitial fluid. 
Two kininogens are known to be present in plasma: a low-
molecular-weight form (LMW kininogen) and a high-molecular-
weight form (HMW kininogen). About 15–20% of the total 
plasma kininogen is in the HMW form. It is thought that LMW 
kininogen crosses capillary walls and serves as the substrate for 
tissue kallikreins, whereas HMW kininogen is confined to the 
bloodstream and serves as the substrate for plasma kallikrein. 
 FORMATION OF KININS IN PLASMA & 
TISSUES 
 The pathway for the formation and metabolism of kinins is shown 
in  Figure 17–4 . Three kinins have been identified in mammals: 
 bradykinin, lysylbradykinin (also known as  kallidin ), and  methi-
onyllysylbradykinin . Each contains bradykinin in its structure. 
 Each kinin is formed from a kininogen by the action of a dif-
ferent enzyme. Bradykinin is released by plasma kallikrein, lysyl-
bradykinin by tissue kallikrein, and methionyllysylbradykinin by 
pepsin and pepsin-like enzymes. The three kinins have been found 
in plasma and urine. Bradykinin is the predominant kinin in 
plasma, whereas lysylbradykinin is the major urinary form. 
 PHYSIOLOGIC & PATHOLOGIC EFFECTS 
OF KININS 
 Effects on the Cardiovascular System 
 Kinins produce marked arteriolar dilation in several vascular beds, 
including the heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, liver, and intestine. In 
this respect, kinins are approximately 10 times more potent on a 
molar basis than histamine. The vasodilation may result from a 
direct inhibitory effect of kinins on arteriolar smooth muscle or 
may be mediated by the release of nitric oxide or vasodilator pros-
taglandins such as PGE 2 and PGI 2 . In contrast, the predominant 
effect of kinins on veins is contraction; again, this may result from 
direct stimulation of venous smooth muscle or from the release of 
venoconstrictor prostaglandins such as PGF 2α . Kinins also pro-
duce contraction of most visceral smooth muscle. 
 When injected intravenously, kinins produce a rapid but brief fall 
in blood pressure that is due to their arteriolar vasodilator action. 
Intravenous infusions of the peptide fail to produce a sustained 
decrease in blood pressure; prolonged hypotension can only be pro-
duced by progressively increasing the rate of infusion. The rapid 
reversibility of the hypotensive response to kinins is due primarily to 
reflex increases in heart rate, myocardial contractility, and cardiac 
output. In some species, bradykinin produces a biphasic change in 
blood pressure—an initial hypotensive response followed by an 
increase above the preinjection level. The increase in blood pressure 
may be due to a reflex activation of the sympathetic nervous system, 
but under some conditions, bradykinin can directly release cate-
cholamines from the adrenal medulla and stimulate sympathetic 
ganglia. Bradykinin also increases blood pressure when injected into 
the central nervous system, but the physiologic significance of this 
effect is not clear, since it is unlikely that kinins cross the blood-brain 
barrier. (Note, however, that bradykinin can increase the permeability 
of the blood-brain barrier to some other substances.) Kinins have no 
consistent effect on sympathetic or parasympathetic nerve endings. 
 The arteriolar dilation produced by kinins causes an increase in 
pressure and flow in the capillary bed, thus favoring efflux of fluid 
from blood to tissues. This effect may be facilitated by increased 
capillary permeability resulting from contraction of endothelial 
cells and widening of intercellular junctions, and by increased 
venous pressure secondary to constriction of veins. As a result of 
these changes, water and solutes pass from the blood to the extra-
cellular fluid, lymph flow increases, and edema may result. 
 The role that endogenous kinins play in the regulation of 
blood pressure is not clear. They do not appear to participate in 
the control of blood pressure under resting conditions but may 
play a role in postexercise hypotension. 
 Effects on Endocrine & Exocrine Glands 
 As noted earlier, prekallikreins and kallikreins are present in sev-
eral glands, including the pancreas, kidney, intestine, salivary 
glands, and sweat glands, and they can be released into the secre-
tory fluids of these glands. The function of the enzymes in these 
tissues is not known. Since kinins have such marked effects on 
smooth muscle, they may modulate the tone of salivary and pan-
creatic ducts, help regulate gastrointestinal motility, and act as 
local modulators of blood flow. Kinins also influence the tran-
sepithelial transport of water, electrolytes, glucose, and amino 
acids, and may regulate the transport of these substances in the 
gastrointestinal tract and kidney. Finally, kallikreins may play a 
role in the physiologic activation of various prohormones, includ-
ing proinsulin and prorenin. 
 FIGURE 17–4  The kallikrein-kinin system. Kininase II is identical 
to converting enzyme peptidyl dipeptidase (ACE). 
Hageman factor
Trypsin
Kallikrein
Plasma
prekallikrein
Plasma kallikrein
HMW kininogen
Bradykinin
Kininases
I and II
Inactive
fragments
LMW kininogen
Kallidin
Tissue kallikreins
+
+
+
Aminopeptidases
302    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 Role in Inflammation & Pain 
 Bradykinin has long been known to produce the four classic 
symptoms of inflammation—redness, local heat, swelling, and 
pain. Kinins are rapidly generated after tissue injury and play a 
pivotal role in the development and maintenance of these inflam-
matory processes. 
 Kinins are potent pain-producing substances when applied to 
a blister base or injected intradermally. They elicit pain by stimu-
lating nociceptive afferents in the skin and viscera. 
 Other Effects 
 There is evidence that bradykinin may play a beneficial, protective 
role in certain cardiovascular diseases and ischemic stroke-induced 
brain injury. On the other hand, it has been implicated in cancer 
and some central nervous system diseases. 
 KININ RECEPTORS & MECHANISMS OF 
ACTION 
 The biologic actions of kinins are mediated by specific receptors 
located on the membranes of the target tissues. Two types of kinin 
receptors, termed B 1 and B 2 , have been defined based on the rank 
orders of agonist potencies; both are G protein-coupled receptors. 
(Note that B here stands for bradykinin, not for β adrenoceptor.) 
Bradykinin displays the highest affinity in most B 2 receptor sys-
tems, followed by lys-bradykinin and then by met-lys-bradykinin. 
One exception is the B 2 receptor that mediates contraction of 
venous smooth muscle; this appears to be most sensitive to lys-
bradykinin. Recent evidence suggests the existence of two B 2 -
receptor subtypes, which have been termed B 2A and B 2B . 
 B 1 receptors appear to have a very limited distribution in mam-
malian tissues and have few known functional roles. Studies with 
knockout mice that lack functional B 1 receptors suggest that these 
receptors participate in the inflammatory response and may also 
be important in long-lasting kinin effects such as collagen synthe-
sis and cell multiplication. By contrast, B 2 receptors have a wide-
spread distribution that is consistent with the multitude of 
biologic effects that are mediated by this receptor type. Agonist 
binding to B 2 receptors sets in motion multiple signal transduc-
tion events, including calcium mobilization, chloride transport, 
formation of nitric oxide, and activation of phospholipase C, 
phospholipase A 2 , and adenylyl cyclase. 
 METABOLISM OF KININS 
 Kinins are metabolized rapidly (half-life < 15 seconds) by nonspe-
cific exopeptidases or endopeptidases, commonly referred to as 
kininases. Two plasma kininases have been well characterized. 
Kininase I, apparently synthesized in the liver, is a carboxypepti-
dase that releases the carboxyl terminal arginine residue. Kininase 
II is present in plasma and vascular endothelial cells throughout 
the body. It is identical to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE, 
peptidyl dipeptidase), discussed above. Kininase II inactivates 
kinins by cleaving the carboxyl terminal dipeptide phenylalanyl-
arginine. Like angiotensin I, bradykinin is almost completely 
hydrolyzed during a single passage through the pulmonary vascu-
lar bed. 
 DRUGS AFFECTING THE 
KALLIKREIN-KININ SYSTEM 
 Drugs that modify the activity of the kallikrein-kinin system are 
available, though none are in wide clinical use. Considerable effort 
has been directed toward developing kinin receptor antagonists, 
since such drugs have considerable therapeutic potential as anti-
inflammatory and antinociceptive agents. Competitive antago-
nists of both B 1 and B 2 receptors are available for research use. 
Examples of B 1 receptor antagonists are the peptides [Leu 8 -des-
Arg 9 ]bradykinin and Lys[Leu 8 -des-Arg 9 ]bradykinin. The first B 2 
receptor antagonists to be discovered were also peptide derivatives 
of bradykinin. These first-generation antagonists were used exten-
sively in animal studies of kinin receptor pharmacology. However, 
their half-life is short, and they are almost inactive on the human 
B 2 receptor. 
 Icatibant is a second-generation B 2 receptor antagonist. It is a 
decapeptide with an affinity for the B 2 receptor similar to that of 
bradykinin and is absorbed rapidly after subcutaneous administra-
tion. Icatibant has been shown to be effective in the treatment of 
hereditary angioedema, an autosomal dominant disorder character-
ized by recurrent episodes of bradykinin-mediated angioedema of 
the airways, gastrointestinal tract, extremities, and genitalia. It may 
also be useful in other conditions including drug-induced angio-
edema, airway disease, thermal injury, ascites, and pancreatitis. 
 Recently, a third generation of B 2 -receptor antagonists was 
developed; examples are FR 173657, FR 172357, and NPC 
18884. These antagonists block both human and animal B 2 recep-
tors and are orally active. They have been reported to inhibit 
bradykinin-induced bronchoconstriction in guinea pigs, carra-
geenin-induced inflammation in rats, and capsaicin-induced 
nociception in mice. These antagonists have promise for the treat-
ment of inflammatory pain in humans. 
 SSR240612 is a new, potent, and orally active selective antago-
nist of B 1 receptors in humans and several animal species. It exhib-
its analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities in mice and rats and 
is currently in preclinical development for the treatment of 
inflammatory and neurogenic pain. 
 The synthesis of kinins can be inhibited with the kallikrein 
inhibitor aprotinin. Kinin synthesis can also be blocked with 
 ecallantide , a newly developed recombinant plasma kallikrein 
inhibitor which, like the B 2 -receptor antagonist icatibant, is 
effective in the treatment of hereditary angioedema. Actions of 
kinins mediated by prostaglandin generation can be blocked 
nonspecifically with inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis such as 
aspirin. Conversely, the actions of kinins can be enhanced with 
ACE inhibitors, which block the degradation of the peptides. 
Indeed, as noted above, inhibition of bradykinin metabolism by 
ACE inhibitors contributes significantly to their antihyperten-
sive action. 
CHAPTER 17 Vasoactive Peptides    303
 Selective B 2 agonists are under study and have been shown to 
be effective in some animal models of human cardiovascular dis-
ease. These drugs have potential for the treatment of hyperten-
sion, myocardial hypertrophy, and other diseases. 
 ■ VASOPRESSIN 
 Vasopressin ( arginine vasopressin, AVP; antidiuretic hormone, 
ADH ) plays an important role in the long-term control of blood 
pressure through its action on the kidney to increase water reab-
sorption. This and other aspects of the physiology of AVP are 
discussed in Chapters 15 and 37 and will not be reviewed here. 
 AVP also plays an important role in the short-term regula-
tion of arterial pressure by its vasoconstrictor action. It 
increases total peripheral resistance when infused in doses less 
than those required to produce maximum urine concentration. 
Such doses do not normally increase arterial pressure because 
the vasopressor activity of the peptide is buffered by a reflex 
decrease in cardiac output. When the influence of this reflex is 
removed, eg, in shock, pressor sensitivity to AVP is greatly 
increased. Pressor sensitivity to AVP is also enhanced in 
patients with idiopathic orthostatic hypotension. Higher doses 
of AVP increase blood pressure even when baroreceptor reflexes 
are intact. 
 VASOPRESSIN RECEPTORS & 
ANTAGONISTS 
 Three subtypes of AVP receptors have been identified; all are G pro-
tein-coupled.  V 1a receptors mediate the vasoconstrictor action of 
AVP;  V 1b receptors mediate release of ACTH by pituitary cortico-
tropes; and  V 2 receptors mediate the antidiuretic action. V 1a effects 
are mediated by G q activation of phospholipase C, formation of 
inositol trisphosphate, and increased intracellular calcium concentra-
tion. V 2 effects are mediated by G s activation of adenylyl cyclase. 
 AVP analogs selective for vasoconstrictor or antidiuretic activ-
ity have been synthesized. The most specific V 1 vasoconstrictor 
agonist synthesized to date is [Phe 2 , Ile 3 , Orn 8 ]vasotocin. Selective 
V 2 antidiuretic analogs include 1-deamino[D-Arg 8 ]arginine vaso-
pressin (dDAVP) and 1-deamino[Val 4 ,D-Arg 8 ]arginine vasopres-
sin (dVDAVP). 
 AVP has proved beneficial in the treatment of vasodilatory 
shock states, at least in part by virtue of its V 1a agonist activity. 
 Terlipressin (triglycyl lysine vasopressin), a synthetic vasopressin 
analog that is converted to lysine vasopressin in the body, is also 
effective. It may have advantages over AVP because it is more 
selective for V 1 receptors and has a longer half-life. 
 Antagonists of the vasoconstrictor action of AVP are also avail-
able. The peptide antagonist d(CH2) 5 [Tyr(Me) 2 ]AVP also has 
antioxytocic activity but does not antagonize the antidiuretic 
action of AVP. A related antagonist d(CH2) 5 [Tyr(Me) 2 ,Dab 5 ]AVP 
lacks oxytocin antagonism but has less anti-V 1 activity. Recently, 
nonpeptide, orally active V 1a -receptor antagonists have been dis-
covered, examples being  relcovaptan and SRX251 . 
 The V 1a antagonists have been particularly useful in revealing the 
important role that AVP plays in blood pressure regulation in situ-
ations such as dehydration and hemorrhage. They have potential as 
therapeutic agents for the treatment of such diverse diseases and 
conditions as Raynaud’s disease, hypertension, heart failure, brain 
edema, motion sickness, cancer, preterm labor, and anger reduction. 
To date, most studies have focused on heart failure; promising 
results have been obtained with V 2 antagonists such as  tolvaptan , 
which is, however, currently approved only for use in hyponatremia. 
V 1a antagonists also have potential, and  conivaptan (YM087), a 
drug with both V 1a and V 2 antagonist activity, has also been 
approved for treatment of hyponatremia (see Chapter 15). 
 ■ NATRIURETIC PEPTIDES 
 Synthesis & Structure 
 The atria and other tissues of mammals contain a family of pep-
tides with natriuretic, diuretic, vasorelaxant, and other properties. 
The family includes atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), brain natri-
uretic peptide (BNP), and C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP). The 
peptides share a common 17-amino-acid disulfide ring with vari-
able C- and N-terminals ( Figure 17–5 ). A fourth peptide, urodila-
tin, has the same structure as ANP with an extension of four 
amino acids at the N-terminal. The renal effects of these peptides 
are discussed in Chapter 15. 
 Ser  Leu  Arg  Arg  Ser  Ser
 Gly  Arg  Met
 Gly
 Ala
 Gln
 Tyr  Arg  Phe  Ser  Asn
 Cys
 Cys
 Gly
 Leu
 Gly  Ser
 Phe
 Gly
 Asp
 Arg
 Ile
H2N
HOOC
ANP
 Met  Val  Gln
 Ser  Pro  Lys
 Gly  Ser  Gly
 Arg  Lys  Met
 Ser
 Ser
 Ser
 Arg
 His
 Arg  Leu  Val  Lys
 Cys
 Cys
 Gly
 Leu
 Gly  Ser
 Phe
 Gly
 Asp
 Arg
 Ile
HOOC
H2N
BNP
 Gly  Leu Ser  Lys  Gly
 Leu  Lys  Leu
 Gly
 Ser
 Met
 Cys
 Cys
 Gly
 Leu
 Gly  Ser
 Phe
 Gly
 Asp
 Arg
 Ile
H2N
HOOC
CNP
 FIGURE 17–5  Structures of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), brain 
natriuretic peptide (BNP), and C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP). 
Sequences common to the peptides are indicated in green. 
304    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 ANP is derived from the carboxyl terminal end of a common 
precursor termed preproANP. ANP is synthesized primarily in 
cardiac atrial cells, but it is also synthesized in ventricular myocar-
dium, by neurons in the central and peripheral nervous systems, 
and in the lungs. 
 The most important stimulus to the release of ANP from the 
heart is atrial stretch via mechanosensitive ion channels. ANP 
release is also increased by volume expansion, changing from the 
standing to the supine position, and exercise. ANP release can also 
be increased by sympathetic stimulation via α 1A adrenoceptors, 
endothelins via the ET A -receptor subtype (see below), glucocorti-
coids, and AVP. Plasma ANP concentration increases in several 
pathologic states, including heart failure, primary aldosteronism, 
chronic renal failure, and inappropriate ADH secretion syndrome. 
 Administration of ANP produces prompt and marked increases 
in sodium excretion and urine flow. Glomerular filtration rate 
increases, with little or no change in renal blood flow, so that the 
filtration fraction increases. The ANP-induced natriuresis is due 
to both the increase in glomerular filtration rate and a decrease in 
proximal tubular sodium reabsorption. ANP also inhibits the 
release of renin, aldosterone, and AVP; these changes may also 
increase sodium and water excretion. Finally, ANP causes vasodi-
lation and decreases arterial blood pressure. Suppression of ANP 
production or blockade of its action impairs the natriuretic 
response to volume expansion, and increases blood pressure. 
 BNP was originally isolated from porcine brain but, like ANP, 
it is synthesized primarily in the heart. It exists in two forms, hav-
ing either 26 or 32 amino acids ( Figure 17–5 ). Like ANP, the 
release of BNP appears to be volume related; indeed, the two 
peptides may be co-secreted. BNP exhibits natriuretic, diuretic, 
and hypotensive activities similar to those of ANP but circulates 
at a lower concentration. 
 CNP consists of 22 amino acids ( Figure 17–5 ). It is located 
predominantly in the central nervous system but is also present in 
several other tissues including the vascular endothelium, kidneys, 
and intestine. It has not been found in significant concentrations 
in the circulation. CNP has less natriuretic and diuretic activity 
than ANP and BNP but is a potent vasodilator and may play a 
role in the regulation of peripheral resistance. 
 Urodilatin is synthesized in the distal tubules of the kidneys by 
alternative processing of the ANP precursor. It elicits potent natriure-
sis and diuresis, and thus functions as a paracrine regulator of sodium 
and water excretion. It also relaxes vascular smooth muscle. 
 Pharmacodynamics & Pharmacokinetics 
 The biologic actions of the natriuretic peptides are mediated 
through association with specific high-affinity receptors located on 
the surface of the target cells. Three receptor subtypes termed  ANP A , 
ANP B , and  ANP C (also known as NPR 1 , NPR 2 , and NPR 3 ) have 
been identified. The ANP A receptor consists of a 120 kDa mem-
brane-spanning protein with enzymatic activity associated with its 
intracellular domain. Its primary ligands are ANP and BNP. The 
ANP B receptor is similar in structure to the ANP A receptor, but its 
primary ligand appears to be CNP. The ANP A and ANP B receptors, 
but not the ANP C receptor, are guanylyl cyclase enzymes. 
 The natriuretic peptides have a short half-life in the circula-
tion. They are metabolized in the kidneys, liver, and lungs by the 
neutral endopeptidase NEP 24.11. Inhibition of this endopepti-
dase results in increases in circulating levels of the natriuretic 
peptides, natriuresis, and diuresis. The peptides are also removed 
from the circulation by binding to ANP C receptors in the vascular 
endothelium. This receptor binds the natriuretic peptides with 
equal affinity. The receptor and bound peptide are internalized, 
the peptide is degraded enzymatically, and the receptor is returned 
to the cell surface. Patients with heart failure have high plasma 
levels of ANP and BNP; the latter has emerged as a diagnostic and 
prognostic marker in this condition. 
 ■ VASOPEPTIDASE INHIBITORS 
 Vasopeptidase inhibitors constitute a new class of cardiovascular 
drugs that inhibit two metalloprotease enzymes, NEP 24.11 and 
ACE. They thus simultaneously increase the levels of natriuretic 
peptides and decrease the formation of ANG II. As a result, they 
enhance vasodilation, reduce vasoconstriction, and increase 
sodium excretion, in turn reducing peripheral vascular resistance 
and blood pressure. 
 Recently developed vasopeptidase inhibitors include  omapa-
trilat, sampatrilat, and  fasidotrilat . Omapatrilat, which has 
received the most attention, lowers blood pressure in animal mod-
els of hypertension as well as in hypertensive patients, and 
improves cardiac function in patients with heart failure. 
Unfortunately, omapatrilat causes a significant incidence of 
angioedema in addition to cough and dizziness and has not been 
approved for clinical use. 
 ■ ENDOTHELINS 
 The endothelium is the source of a variety of substances with 
vasodilator (PGI 2 and nitric oxide) and vasoconstrictor activities. 
The latter include the endothelin family, potent vasoconstrictor 
peptides that were first isolated from aortic endothelial cells. 
 Biosynthesis, Structure, & Clearance 
 Three isoforms of endothelin have been identified: the originally 
described endothelin,  ET-1, and two similar peptides,  ET-2 and 
 ET-3 . Each isoform is a product of a different gene and is synthe-
sized as a prepro form that is processed to a propeptide and then 
to the mature peptide. Processing to the mature peptides occurs 
through the action of endothelin-converting enzyme. Each 
endothelin is a 21-amino-acid peptide containing two disulfide 
bridges. The structure of ET-1 is shown in  Figure 17–6 . 
 Endothelins are widely distributed in the body. ET-1 is the 
predominant endothelin secreted by the vascular endothelium. It 
is also produced by neurons and astrocytes in the central nervous 
system and in endometrial, renal mesangial, Sertoli, breast epithe-
lial, and other cells. ET-2 is produced predominantly in the kid-
neys and intestine, whereas ET-3 is found in highest concentration 
CHAPTER 17 Vasoactive Peptides    305
 The signal transduction mechanisms triggered by binding of 
ET-1 to its vascular receptors include stimulation of phospholipase 
C, formation of inositol trisphosphate, and release of calcium from 
the endoplasmic reticulum, which results in vasoconstriction. 
Conversely, stimulation of PGI 2 and nitric oxide synthesis results in 
decreased intracellular calcium concentration and vasodilation. 
 INHIBITORS OF ENDOTHELIN SYNTHESIS 
& ACTION 
 The endothelin system can be blocked with receptor antagonists 
and drugs that block endothelin-converting enzyme. Endothelin 
ET A or ET B receptors can be blocked selectively, or both can be 
blocked with nonselective ET A -ET B antagonists. 
 Bosentan is a nonselective receptor blocker. It is active orally, 
and blocks both the initial transient depressor (ET B ) and the pro-
longed pressor (ET A ) responses to intravenous endothelin. Many 
orally active endothelin receptor antagonists with increased selec-
tivity have been developed and are available for research use. 
Examples include the selective ET A antagonists  ambrisentan , 
which has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration 
to treat pulmonary artery hypertension, and  sitaxsentan . 
 Met
 Leu
 Trp
 His  Leu
 Ile
 Ile
 Cys
 Cys  Ser
 Asp
 Cys
 Glu
 Lys
 Asp
 Ser
 Ser
 Cys
 Tyr  Phe
 Val
N 
C 
 FIGURE 17–6  Structure of human endothelin-1. 
in the brain but is also present in the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, 
and kidneys. Endothelins are present in the blood but in low con-
centration; they apparently act locally in a paracrine or autocrine 
fashion rather than as circulating hormones. 
 The expression of the ET-1 gene is increased by growth 
factors and cytokines, including transforming growth factor-β 
(TGF-β) and interleukin 1 (IL-1), vasoactive substances 
including ANG II and AVP, and mechanical stress. Expression is 
inhibited by nitric oxide, prostacyclin, and ANP. 
 Clearance of endothelins from the circulation is rapid and 
involves both enzymatic degradation by NEP 24.11 and clearance 
by the ET B receptor. 
 Actions 
 Endothelins exert widespread actions in the body. In particular, 
they cause potent dose-dependent vasoconstriction in most vascu-
lar beds. Intravenous administration of ET-1 causes a rapid and 
transient decrease in arterial blood pressure followed by a sus-
tained increase. The depressor response results from release of 
prostacyclin and nitric oxide from the vascular endothelium, 
whereas the pressor response is due to direct contraction of vascu-
lar smooth muscle. Endothelins also exert direct positive inotropic 
and chronotropic actions on the heart and are potent coronary 
vasoconstrictors. They act on the kidneys to cause vasoconstric-
tion and decrease glomerular filtration rate and sodium and water 
excretion. In the respiratory system, they cause potent contraction 
of tracheal and bronchial smooth muscle. Endothelins interact 
with several endocrine systems, increasing the secretion of renin, 
aldosterone, AVP, and ANP. They exert a variety of actions on the 
central and peripheral nervous systems, the gastrointestinal sys-
tem, the liver, the urinary tract, the male and female reproductive 
systems, the eye, the skeletal system, and the skin. Finally, ET-1 is 
a potent mitogen for vascular smooth muscle cells, cardiac myo-
cytes, and glomerular mesangial cells. 
 Endothelin receptors are widespread in the body. Two endothe-
lin receptor subtypes, termed  ET A and  ET B , have been cloned and 
sequenced. ET A receptors have a high affinity for ET-1 and a low 
affinity for ET-3 and are located on smooth muscle cells, where 
they mediate vasoconstriction ( Figure 17–7 ). ET B receptors have 
approximately equal affinities for ET-1 and ET-3 and are primar-
ily located on vascular endothelial cells, where they mediate release 
of PGI 2 and nitric oxide. Some ET B receptors are also present on 
smooth muscle cells and mediate vasoconstriction. Both receptor 
subtypes belong to the G protein-coupled seven-transmembrane 
domain family of receptors. 
N
(CH3)3C
O
N
N
N
N
O
O
S
OCH3
OH
Bosentan
O
 The formation of endothelins can be blocked by inhibiting 
endothelin-converting enzyme with phosphoramidon. Phospho-
ramidon is not specific for endothelin-converting enzyme, but more 
selective inhibitors including CGS35066 are now available for 
research. Although the therapeutic potential of these drugs appeared 
similar to that of the endothelin receptor antagonists (see below), their 
use has been eclipsed by endothelin antagonists. 
 Physiologic & Pathologic Roles of 
Endothelin: Effects of Endothelin 
Antagonists 
 Systemic administration of endothelin receptor antagonists or 
endothelin-converting enzyme inhibitors causes vasodilation and 
decreases arterial pressure in humans and experimental animals. 
Intra-arterial administration of the drugs also causes slow-onset 
forearm vasodilation in humans. These observations provide evi-
dence that the endothelin system participates in the regulation of 
vascular tone, even under resting conditions. The activity of the 
306    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
system is higher in males than in females. It increases with age, an 
effect that can be counteracted by regular aerobic exercise. 
 Increased production of ET-1 has been implicated in a variety 
of cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension, cardiac hyper-
trophy, heart failure, atherosclerosis, coronary artery disease, and 
myocardial infarction. ET-1 also participates in pulmonary dis-
eases, including asthma and pulmonary hypertension; renal dis-
eases; and several malignancies, including ovarian cancer. 
 Endothelin antagonists have considerable potential for the 
treatment of these diseases. Indeed, endothelin antagonism with 
bosentan, sitaxsentan, and ambrisentan has proved to be a moder-
ately effective and generally well-tolerated treatment for patients 
with pulmonary arterial hypertension, an important condition 
with few effective treatments. Other promising targets for these 
drugs are resistant hypertension, chronic renal disease, connective 
tissue disease, and subarachnoid hemorrhage. On the other hand, 
clinical trials of the drugs in the treatment of congestive heart 
failure have been disappointing. 
 Endothelin antagonists occasionally cause systemic hypoten-
sion, increased heart rate, facial flushing or edema, and headaches. 
Potential gastrointestinal effects include nausea, vomiting, and 
constipation. Because of their teratogenic effects, endothelin antag-
onists are contraindicated in pregnancy. Bosentan has been associ-
ated with fatal hepatotoxicity, and patients taking this drug must 
have monthly liver function tests. Negative pregnancy test results 
are required for women of child-bearing age to take this drug. 
 ■ VASOACTIVE INTESTINAL 
PEPTIDE 
 Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is a 28-amino-acid peptide 
that belongs to the glucagon-secretin family of peptides. VIP is 
widely distributed in the central and peripheral nervous systems, 
where it functions as one of the major peptide neurotransmitters. 
It is present in cholinergic presynaptic neurons in the central ner-
vous system, and in peripheral peptidergic neurons innervating 
diverse tissues including the heart, lungs, gastrointestinal and 
urogenital tracts, skin, eyes, ovaries, and thyroid gland. Many 
blood vessels are innervated by VIP neurons. VIP is also present in 
key organs of the immune system including the thymus, spleen, 
and lymph nodes. Although VIP is present in blood, where it 
Interstitium
Vascular
endothelium
PreproET-1
BigET-1
ET-1
ET-1
L-Arg
NO
ECE
PGI2
NO
PGI2
ETB
Vascular
smooth muscle
Vasoconstriction
Proliferation
Vasodilation
Antiproliferation
ETA
ETB
Blood
–
+
Low shear
stress
ANG II
Cytokines
Thrombin
High shear
stress
NO
PGI2
ANP
 FIGURE 17–7  Generation of endothelin-1 (ET-1) in the vascular endothelium, and its direct and indirect effects on smooth muscle cells 
mediated by ET A and ET B receptors. ANG II, angiotensin II; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; ECE, endothelial-converting enzyme; NO, nitric oxide; 
PGI 2 , prostaglandin I 2 . 
CHAPTER 17 Vasoactive Peptides    307
undergoes rapid degradation, it does not appear to function as a 
hormone. VIP participates in a wide variety of biologic functions 
including metabolic processes, secretion of endocrine and exocrine 
glands, cell differentiation, smooth muscle relaxation, and the 
immune response. 
 VIP exerts significant effects on the cardiovascular system. It 
produces marked vasodilation in most vascular beds and in this 
regard is more potent on a molar basis than acetylcholine. In the 
heart, VIP causes coronary vasodilation and exerts positive inotro-
pic and chronotropic effects. It may thus participate in the regula-
tion of coronary blood flow, cardiac contraction, and heart rate. 
 The effects of VIP are mediated by G protein-coupled recep-
tors; two subtypes,  VPAC1 and  VPAC2 , have been cloned from 
human tissues. Both subtypes are widely distributed in the central 
nervous system and in the heart, blood vessels, and other tissues. 
VIP has a high affinity for both receptor subtypes. Binding of 
VIP to its receptors results in activation of adenylyl cyclase and 
formation of cAMP, which is responsible for the vasodilation and 
many other effects of the peptide. Other actions may be mediated 
by inositol trisphosphate synthesis and calcium mobilization. VIP 
can also bind with low affinity to the VIP-like peptide pituitary 
adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide receptor, PAC1. 
 VIP analogs with longer half-lives than the native peptide are 
now available for research use. An example is stearyl-Nle 17 -VIP. 
These drugs have potential as therapeutic agents for cardiovascu-
lar, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and nervous system diseases. They 
may also be effective in treating various inflammatory diseases and 
diabetes. Indeed, some VIP derivatives are currently undergoing 
preclinical and clinical testing for the treatment of type 2 diabetes 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Unfortunately, their 
use is currently limited by several issues including poor oral avail-
ability, rapid metabolism in the blood, and hypotension. VIP 
receptor antagonists are also being developed. 
 ■ SUBSTANCE P 
 Substance P belongs to the  tachykinin family of peptides, which 
share the common carboxyl terminal sequence Phe-Gly-Leu-Met. 
Other members of this family are  neurokinin A and  neurokinin 
B. Substance P is an undecapeptide, while neurokinins A and B 
are decapeptides. 
 Substance P is present in the central nervous system, where it 
is a neurotransmitter (see Chapter 21), and in the gastrointestinal 
tract, where it may play a role as a transmitter in the enteric ner-
vous system and as a local hormone (see Chapter 6). 
 Substance P is the most important member of the tachykinin 
family. It exerts a variety of incompletely understood central 
actions that implicate the peptide in behavior, anxiety, depression, 
nausea, and emesis. It is a potent arteriolar vasodilator, producing 
marked hypotension in humans and several animal species. The 
vasodilation is mediated by release of nitric oxide from the 
endothelium. Conversely, substance P causes contraction of 
venous, intestinal, and bronchial smooth muscle. It also stimulates 
secretion by the salivary glands and causes diuresis and natriuresis 
by the kidneys. 
 The actions of substance P and neurokinins A and B are medi-
ated by three G q protein-coupled tachykinin receptors designated 
 NK 1 ,  NK 2 , and  NK 3 . Substance P is the preferred ligand for the 
NK 1 receptor, the predominant tachykinin receptor in the human 
brain. However, neurokinins A and B also possess considerable 
affinity for this receptor. In humans, most of the central and 
peripheral effects of substance P are mediated by NK 1 receptors. 
All three receptor subtypes are coupled to inositol trisphosphate 
synthesis and calcium mobilization. 
 Several nonpeptide NK 1 receptor antagonists have been devel-
oped. These compounds are highly selective and orally active, and 
enter the brain. Recent clinical trials have shown that these 
antagonists may be useful in treating depression and other disor-
ders and in preventing chemotherapy-induced emesis. The first of 
these to be approved for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced 
and postoperative nausea and vomiting is  aprepitant (see Chapter 
62). Fosaprepitant is a prodrug that is converted to aprepitant 
after intravenous administration and may be a useful parenteral 
alternative to oral aprepitant. 
 ■ NEUROTENSIN 
 Neurotensin (NT) is a tridecapeptide that was first isolated from 
the central nervous system but subsequently was found to be pres-
ent in the gastrointestinal tract and in the circulation. It is synthe-
sized as part of a larger precursor that also contains  neuromedin 
 N , a six-amino-acid NT-like peptide. 
 In the brain, processing of the precursor leads primarily to the 
formation of NT and neuromedin N; these are released together 
from nerve endings. In the gut, processing leads mainly to the 
formation of NT and a larger peptide that contains the neurome-
din N sequence at the carboxyl terminal. Both peptides are 
secreted into the circulation after ingestion of food. Most of the 
activity of NT is mediated by the last six amino acids, NT(8-13). 
 Like many other neuropeptides, NT serves a dual function as 
a neurotransmitter or neuromodulator in the central nervous sys-
tem and as a local hormone in the periphery. When administered 
centrally, NT exerts potent effects including hypothermia, anti-
nociception, and modulation of dopamine and glutamate neu-
rotransmission. When administered into the peripheral circulation, 
it causes vasodilation, hypotension, increased vascular permeabil-
ity, increased secretion of several anterior pituitary hormones, 
hyperglycemia, inhibition of gastric acid and pepsin secretion, and 
inhibition of gastric motility. It also exerts effects on the immune 
system. 
 In the central nervous system, there are close associations 
between NT and dopamine systems, and NT may be involved in 
clinical disorders involving dopamine pathways such as schizophre-
nia, Parkinson’s disease, and drug abuse. Consistent with this, it has 
been shown that central administration of NT produces effects in 
rodents similar to those produced by antipsychotic drugs. 
 The effects of NT are mediated by three subtypes of NT recep-
tors, designated  NTR 1 , NTR 2 , and  NTR 3 , also known as NTS 1 , 
NTS 2 , and  NTS 3 . NTR 1 and NTR 2 receptors belong to the G q 
protein-coupled superfamily with seven transmembrane domains; 
308    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
the NTR 3 receptor is a single transmembrane domain protein that 
belongs to a family of sorting proteins. 
 NT receptor agonists that cross the blood-brain barrier, all 
peptide analogs of NT(8-13), have been developed. Conversely, 
NT receptors can be blocked with the nonpeptide antagonists 
SR142948A and meclinertant (SR48692). SR142948A is a potent 
antagonist of the hypothermia and analgesia produced by centrally 
administered NT. It also blocks the cardiovascular effects of sys-
temic NT. The development of drugs that selectively target or 
block NT receptors has resulted in potential therapeutic agents for 
the treatment of schizophrenia and Parkinson’s disease, as well as 
drug abuse. 
 ■ CALCITONIN GENERELATED 
PEPTIDE 
 Calcitonin gene-related peptide ( CGRP ) is a member of the calci-
tonin family of peptides, which also includes calcitonin, adreno-
medullin (see below), and amylin. CGRP consists of 37 amino 
acids. Like calcitonin, CGRP is present in large quantities in the 
C cells of the thyroid gland. It is also distributed widely in the 
central and peripheral nervous systems, cardiovascular and respira-
tory systems, and gastrointestinal tract. In the cardiovascular sys-
tem CGRP-containing fibers are more abundant around arteries 
than around veins, and in atria than in ventricles. CGRP fibers are 
associated with most smooth muscles of the gastrointestinal tract. 
CGRP is found with substance P (see above) in some of these 
regions and with acetylcholine in others. 
 When CGRP is injected into the central nervous system, it 
produces a variety of effects, including hypertension and sup-
pression of feeding. When injected into the systemic circula-
tion, the peptide causes hypotension and tachycardia. The 
hypotensive action of CGRP results from the potent vasodila-
tor action of the peptide; indeed, CGRP is the most potent 
vasodilator yet discovered. It dilates multiple vascular beds, but 
the coronary circulation is particularly sensitive. The vasodila-
tion is mediated via a nonendothelial mechanism through 
activation of adenylyl cyclase. 
 Although CGRP receptors have traditionally been divided into 
two classes, CGRP 1 and CGRP 2 , it now seems likely that the 
actions of CGRP are mediated by a single receptor. Specifically, 
the seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled calcitonin-like pro-
tein receptor (CLR) co-assembles with the receptor activity-modifying 
protein RAMP1 to form a functional single CGRP receptor that 
can activate both G s and G q . Peptide and nonpeptide antagonists 
of the receptor have been developed. CGRP 8-37 has been used 
extensively to investigate the actions of CGRP but displays affinity 
for related receptors including those for adrenomedullin (see 
below). Nonpeptide CGRP receptor antagonists target the inter-
face between CLR and RAMP1 and thereby make them more 
selective for the CGRP receptor. These antagonists display species 
selectivity and are more selective for human than rodent receptors. 
Examples are  olcegepant and  telcagepant . 
 Evidence is accumulating that release of CGRP from trigemi-
nal nerves plays a central role in the pathophysiology of migraine. 
The peptide is released during migraine attacks, and successful 
treatment of migraine with a selective serotonin agonist normal-
izes cranial CGRP levels. Clinical trials with olcegepant and tel-
cagepant have demonstrated that CGRP antagonism is an 
effective, well-tolerated treatment for migraine. 
 ■ ADRENOMEDULLIN 
 Adrenomedullin (AM) was first discovered in human adrenal 
medullary pheochromocytoma tissue. It is a 52-amino-acid pep-
tide with a six-amino-acid ring and a C-terminal amidation 
sequence. Like CGRP, AM is a member of the calcitonin family of 
peptides. A related peptide termed adrenomedullin 2, also called 
intermedin, has been identified in humans and other mammals. 
 AM is widely distributed in the body. The highest concentra-
tions are found in the adrenal glands, hypothalamus, and anterior 
pituitary, but high levels are also present in the kidneys, lungs, 
cardiovascular system, and gastrointestinal tract. AM in plasma 
apparently originates in the heart and vasculature. 
 In animals, AM dilates resistance vessels in the kidney, brain, 
lung, hind limbs, and mesentery, resulting in a marked, long-
lasting hypotension. The hypotension in turn causes reflex 
increases in heart rate and cardiac output. These responses also 
occur during intravenous infusion of the peptide in healthy 
human subjects. AM also acts on the kidneys to increase sodium 
excretion and renin release, and it exerts other endocrine effects 
including inhibition of aldosterone and insulin secretion. It acts 
on the central nervous system to increase sympathetic outflow. 
 The diverse actions of AM are mediated by a receptor closely 
related to the CGRP receptor (see above). CLR co-assembles with 
RAMP subtypes 2 and 3, thus forming a receptor-coreceptor system. 
Binding of AM to CLR activates G s and triggers cAMP formation in 
vascular smooth muscle cells, and increases nitric oxide production in 
endothelial cells. Other signaling pathways are also involved. 
 Circulating AM levels increase during intense exercise. They 
also increase in a number of pathologic states, including essential 
hypertension, cardiac and renal failure, and septic shock. The roles 
of AM in these states remain to be defined, but it is currently 
thought that the peptide functions as a physiologic antagonist of 
the actions of vasoconstrictors including ET-1 and ANG II. By 
virtue of these actions, AM may protect against cardiovascular 
overload and injury, and AM may be beneficial in the treatment 
of some cardiovascular diseases. 
 ■ NEUROPEPTIDE Y 
 Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a member of the family that also 
includes peptide YY and pancreatic polypeptide. Each of these 
peptides consists of 36 amino acids. 
 NPY is one of the most abundant neuropeptides in both the 
central and peripheral nervous systems. In the sympathetic nervous 
CHAPTER 17 Vasoactive Peptides    309
system, NPY is frequently localized in noradrenergic neurons and 
apparently functions both as a vasoconstrictor and as a cotransmit-
ter with norepinephrine. Peptide YY and pancreatic polypeptide 
are both gut endocrine peptides. 
 NPY produces a variety of central nervous system effects, includ-
ing increased feeding (it is one of the most potent orexigenic mol-
ecules in the brain), hypotension, hypothermia, respiratory 
depression, and activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
axis. Other effects include vasoconstriction of cerebral blood vessels, 
positive chronotropic and inotropic actions on the heart, and hyper-
tension. The peptide is a potent renal vasoconstrictor and suppresses 
renin secretion, but can cause diuresis and natriuresis. Prejunctional 
neuronal actions include inhibition of transmitter release from sym-
pathetic and parasympathetic nerves. Vascular actions include direct 
vasoconstriction, potentiation of the action of vasoconstrictors, and 
inhibition of the action of vasodilators. 
 These diverse effects are mediated by four subtypes of NPY 
receptors designated  Y 1 , Y 2 , Y 4 , and Y 5 . The receptors have 
been cloned and shown to be G i protein-coupled receptors 
linked to mobilization of Ca 2+ and inhibition of adenylyl 
cyclase. Y 1 and Y 2 receptors are of major importance in the 
cardiovascular and other peripheral effects of the peptide. Y 4 
receptors have a high affinity for pancreatic polypeptide and 
may be a receptor for the pancreatic peptide rather than for 
NPY. Y 5 receptors are found mainly in the central nervous 
system and may be involved in the control of food intake. They 
also mediate the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adre-
nal axis by NPY. 
 Selective nonpeptide NPY receptor antagonists are now avail-
able for research. The first nonpeptide Y 1 receptor antagonist, 
BIBP3226, is also the most thoroughly studied. It has a short half-
life in vivo. In animal models, it blocks the vasoconstrictor and 
pressor responses to NPY. Structurally related Y 1 antagonists 
include BIB03304 and H409/22; the latter has been tested in 
humans. SR120107A and SR120819A are orally active Y 1 antago-
nists and have a long duration of action. BIIE0246 is the first 
nonpeptide antagonist selective for the Y 2 receptor; it does not 
cross the blood-brain barrier. Useful Y 4 antagonists are not avail-
able. The Y 5 antagonists MK-0557 and S-2367 have been tested 
in clinical trials for obesity. 
 These drugs have been useful in analyzing the role of NPY in 
cardiovascular regulation. It now appears that the peptide is not 
important in the regulation of hemodynamics under normal resting 
conditions but may be of increased importance in cardiovascular 
disorders including hypertension and heart failure. Other studies have 
implicated NPY in feeding disorders, obesity, alcoholism, anxiety, 
depression, epilepsy, pain, cancer, and bone physiology. Y 1 and par-
ticularly Y 5 receptor antagonists have potential as antiobesity agents. 
 ■ UROTENSIN 
 Urotensin II (UII) was originally identified in fish, but isoforms 
are now known to be present in the human and other mammalian 
species. Human UII is an 11-amino acid peptide. Major sites of 
UII expression in humans include the brain, spinal cord, and 
kidneys. UII is also present in plasma, and potential sources of this 
circulating peptide include the heart, lungs, liver, and kidneys. 
The stimulus to UII release has not been identified but increased 
blood pressure has been implicated in some studies. 
 In vitro, UII is a potent constrictor of vascular smooth muscle; 
its activity depends on the type of blood vessel and the species 
from which it was obtained. Vasoconstriction occurs primarily in 
arterial vessels, where UII can be more potent than ET-1, making 
it the most potent known vasoconstrictor. However, under some 
conditions, UII may cause vasodilation. In vivo, UII has complex 
hemodynamic effects, the most prominent being regional vaso-
constriction and cardiac depression. In some ways, these effects 
resemble those produced by ET-1. Nevertheless, the role of the 
peptide in the normal regulation of vascular tone and blood pres-
sure in humans appears to be minor. 
 The actions of UII are mediated by a G q protein-coupled 
receptor referred to as the UT receptor. UT receptors are widely 
distributed in the brain, spinal cord, heart, vascular smooth mus-
cle, skeletal muscle, and pancreas. Some effects of the peptide 
including vasoconstriction are mediated by the phospholipase C, 
inositol trisphosphate-diacylglycerol signal transduction pathway. 
 Urantide (“urotensin antagonist peptide”), a penicillamine-
substituted derivative of UII, is a UII receptor antagonist. A non-
peptide antagonist,  palosuran , has also been developed and used 
in clinical studies. 
 Although UII appears to play only a minor role in health, evi-
dence is accumulating that it is involved in cardiovascular and other 
diseases. In particular, it has been reported that plasma UII levels are 
increased in hypertension, heart failure, atherosclerosis, diabetes 
mellitus, and renal failure, and palosuran may benefit diabetic 
patients with renal disease. Nevertheless, the role of UII in disease is 
poorly understood. Indeed it is possible that rather than contribut-
ing to these diseases, UII may actually play a protective role. 
310    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
SUMMARY Drugs That Interact with Vasoactive Peptide Systems
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
ANGIOTENSIN RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
 • Valsartan
Selective competitive antagonist of angio-
tensin AT1 receptors
Arteriolar dilation • decreased aldosterone 
secretion • increased sodium and water 
excretion
Hypertension
 • Eprosartan, irbesartan, candesartan, olmesartan, telmisartan: Similar to valsartan
CONVERTING ENZYME INHIBITORS
 • Enalapril
Inhibits conversion of angiotensin I to 
angiotensin II
Arteriolar dilation • decreased aldosterone 
secretion • increased sodium and water 
excretion
Hypertension • heart 
failure
 • Captopril and many others: Similar to enalapril
RENIN INHIBITORS
 • Aliskiren
Inhibits catalytic activity of renin
Arteriolar dilation • decreased aldosterone 
secretion • increased sodium and water 
excretion
Hypertension
KININ INHIBITORS
 • Icatibant
Selective antagonist of kinin B2 receptors
Blocks effects of kinins on pain, hyperalgesia, 
and inflammation
Hereditary angioedema
 • Ecallantide: Plasma kallikrein inhibitor
VASOPRESSIN AGONISTS
 • Arginine vasopressin
Agonist of vasopressin V1 (and V2) receptors
Vasoconstriction
Vasodilatory shock
 • Terlipressin: More selective for V1 receptor
VASOPRESSIN ANTAGONISTS
 • Conivaptan
Antagonist of vasopressin V1 (and V2) 
receptors
Vasodilation
Potential use in hyper-
tension and heart fail-
ure • hyponatremia
 • Relcovaptan: Increased selectivity for V1 receptor
NATRIURETIC PEPTIDES
 • Nesiritide
Agonist of natriuretic peptide receptors
Increased sodium and water excretion • vaso-
dilation
Heart failure
 • Uralitide: Synthetic form of urodilatin
VASOPEPTIDASE INHIBITORS
 • Omapatrilat
Decreases metabolism of natriuretic pep-
tides and formation of angiotensin II
Vasodilation • increased sodium and water 
excretion
Hypertension • heart 
failure
1
ENDOTHELIN ANTAGONISTS
 • Bosentan
Nonselective antagonist of endothelin ETA 
and ETB receptors
Vasodilation
Pulmonary arterial 
hypertension
 • Sitaxsentan, ambrisentan: Selective for ETA receptors
VASOACTIVE INTESTINAL PEPTIDE AGONISTS
 • Stearyl-Nle
17-VIP
Agonist of VPAC1 and VPAC2 receptors
Vasodilation • multiple metabolic, endocrine, 
and other effects
Type 2 diabetes • 
chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
1
(continued )
CHAPTER 17 Vasoactive Peptides    311
 REFERENCES 
 Angiotensin 
 Balakumar P, Jagadeesh G: Cardiovascular and renal pathologic implications of pro-
renin, renin, and the (pro)renin receptor: Promising young players from the old 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 2010;56:570. 
 Beierwaltes WH: The role of calcium in the regulation of renin secretion. Am J 
Physiol Renal Physiol 2010;298:F1. 
 Castrop H et al: Physiology of kidney renin. Physiol Rev 2010;90:607. 
 Ichihara A et al: New approaches to blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone 
system: Characteristics and usefulness of the direct renin inhibitor aliskiren. 
J Pharmacol Sci 2009;113:296. 
 Ichihara A et al: Renin, prorenin and the kidney: A new chapter in an old saga. J 
Nephrol 2009;22:306. 
 Kurtz A: Renin release: Sites, mechanisms, and control. Annu Rev Physiol 
2011;73:377. 
 Matt P et al: Recent advances in understanding Marfan syndrome: Should we now 
treat surgical patients with losartan? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2008;135:389. 
 McMurray JJ et al: Effect of valsartan on the incidence of diabetes and cardiovas-
cular events. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1477. 
 Nguyen G: Renin, (pro)renin and receptor: An update. Clin Sci (Lond) 
2011;120:169. 
 Sihn G et al: Physiology of the (pro)renin receptor: Wnt of change? Kidney Int 
2010;78:246. 
 Uresin Y et al: Efficacy and safety of the direct renin inhibitor aliskiren and 
ramipril alone or in combination in patients with diabetes and hypertension. 
J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst 2007;8:190. 
 Varagic J et al: New angiotensins. J Mol Med 2008;86:663. 
 Zheng Z et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of aliskiren and angiotensin 
receptor blockers in the management of essential hypertension. J Renin 
Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst 2011;12:102 
 Kinins 
 Cicardi M et al: Ecallantide for the treatment of acute attacks in hereditary angio-
edema. N Engl J Med 2010;363:523. 
 Cicardi M et al: Icatibant, a new bradykinin-receptor antagonist, in hereditary 
angioedema. N Engl J Med 2010;363:532. 
 Costa-Neto CM et al: Participation of kallikrein-kinin system in different patholo-
gies. Int Immunopharmacol 2008;8:135. 
 Leeb-Lundberg LM et al: International union of pharmacology. XLV. Classification 
of the kinin receptor family: From molecular mechanisms to pathophysio-
logical consequences. Pharmacol Rev 2005;57:27. 
 Longhurst HJ: Management of acute attacks of hereditary angioedema: Potential 
role of icatibant. Vasc Health Risk Manag 2010;6:795. 
 Vasopressin 
 Lange M, Ertmer C, Westphal M: Vasopressin vs. terlipressin in the treatment of 
cardiovascular failure in sepsis. Intensive Care Med 2008;34:821. 
 Manning M et al: Peptide and non-peptide agonists and antagonists for the vaso-
pressin and oxytocin V1a, V1b, V2 and OT receptors: Research tools and 
potential therapeutic agents. Prog Brain Res 2008;170:473. 
 Maybauer MO et al: Physiology of the vasopressin receptors. Best Pract Res Clin 
Anaesthesiol 2008;22:253. 
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
SUBSTANCE P ANTAGONISTS
 • Aprepitant
Selective antagonist of tachykinin NK1 
receptors
Blocks several central nervous system effects 
of substance P
Prevention of 
chemotherapy-
induced nausea and 
vomiting
 • Fosaprepitant: Prodrug that is converted to aprepitant
NEUROTENSIN AGONISTS
 • PD149163
Agonist of central neurotensin receptors
Interacts with central dopamine systems
Potential for treatment 
of schizophrenia and 
Parkinson’s disease
NEUROTENSIN ANTAGONISTS
 •  Meclinertant
Antagonist of central and peripheral neuro-
tensin receptors
Blocks some central and peripheral 
(vasodilator) actions of neurotensin
None identified
CALCITONIN GENE-RELATED PEPTIDE ANTAGONISTS
 • Telcagepant, olcegepant
Antagonists of the calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (CGRP) receptor
Blocks some central and peripheral 
(vasodilator) actions of CGRP
Migraine
1
NEUROPEPTIDE Y ANTAGONISTS
 • BIBP3226
Selective antagonist of neuropeptide Y1 
receptors
Blocks vasoconstrictor response to 
neurotensin
Potential antiobesity 
agent
 • BIIE0246: Selective for Y2 receptor
 • MK-0557: Selective for Y5 receptor
UROTENSIN ANTAGONISTS
 • Palosuran
Antagonist of urotensin receptors
Blocks vasoconstrictor action of urotensin
Diabetic renal failure
1
1Undergoing preclinical or clinical evaluation.
312    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 Natriuretic Peptides 
 Federico C: Natriuretic peptide system and cardiovascular disease. Heart Views 
2010;11:1. 
 Luss H et al: Renal effects of ularitide in patients with decompensated heart failure. 
Am Heart J 2008;155:1012. 
 Saito Y: Roles of atrial natriuretic peptide and its therapeutic use. J Cardiol 
2010;56:262. 
 Vogel MW, Chen HH: Novel natriuretic peptides: New compounds and new 
approaches. Curr Heart Fail Rep 2011;8:22. 
 Endothelins 
 Cartin-Ceba R et al: Safety and efficacy of ambrisentan for the therapy of por-
topulmonary hypertension. Chest 2011;139:109. 
 Kasimay O et al: Diet-supported aerobic exercise reduces blood endothelin-1 and 
nitric oxide levels in individuals with impaired glucose tolerance. J Clin 
Lipidol 2010;4:427. 
 Kawanabe Y, Nauli SM: Endothelin. Cell Mol Life Sci 2011;68:195. 
 Tostes RC et al: Endothelin, sex and hypertension. Clin Sci (Lond) 2008;114:85. 
 Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide 
 Onoue S, Misaka S, Yamada S: Structure-activity relationship of vasoactive intesti-
nal peptide (VIP): Potent agonists and potential clinical applications. 
Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 2008;377:579. 
 White CM et al: Therapeutic potential of vasoactive intestinal peptide and its 
receptors in neurological disorders. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 
2010;9:661. 
 Substance P 
 Curran MP, Robinson DM: Aprepitant: A review of its use in the prevention of 
nausea and vomiting. Drugs 2009;69:1853. 
 Hokfelt T, Pernow B, Wahren J: Substance P: A pioneer amongst neuropeptides. J 
Intern Med 2001;249:27. 
 Mizuta K et al: Expression and coupling of neurokinin receptor subtypes to 
inositol phosphate and calcium signaling pathways in human airway 
smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2008; 
294:L523. 
 Navari RM: Fosaprepitant: A neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist for the prevention 
of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 
2008;8:1733. 
 Neurotensin 
 Boules M et al: Neurotensin agonists: Potential in the treatment of schizophrenia. 
CNS Drugs 2007;21:13. 
 Ferraro L et al: Emerging evidence for neurotensin receptor 1 antagonists as novel 
pharmaceutics in neurodegenerative disorders. Mini Rev Med Chem 
2009;9:1429. 
 Hwang JI et al: Phylogenetic history, pharmacological features, and signal trans-
duction of neurotensin receptors in vertebrates. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
2009;1163:169. 
 Katsanos GS et al: Biology of neurotensin: Revisited study. Int J Immunopathol 
Pharmacol 2008;21:255. 
 Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide 
 Edvinsson L, Ho TW: CGRP receptor antagonism and migraine. Neurotherapeutics 
2010;7:164. 
 Villalon CM, Olesen J: The role of CGRP in the pathophysiology of migraine and 
efficacy of CGRP receptor antagonists as acute antimigraine drugs. Pharmacol 
Ther 2009;124:309. 
 Walker CS et al: Regulation of signal transduction by calcitonin gene-related pep-
tide receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2010;31:476. 
 Adrenomedullin 
 Bell D, McDermott BJ: Intermedin (adrenomedullin-2): A novel counter-regulatory 
peptide in the cardiovascular and renal systems. Br J Pharmacol 
2008;153(Suppl 1):S247. 
 Yanagawa B, Nagaya N: Adrenomedullin: Molecular mechanisms and its role in 
cardiac disease. Amino Acids 2007;32:157. 
 Neuropeptide Y 
 Brothers SP, Wahlestedt C: Therapeutic potential of neuropeptide Y (NPY) recep-
tor ligands. EMBO Mol Med 2010;2:429. 
 Parker SL, Balasubramaniam A: Neuropeptide Y Y2 receptor in health and disease. 
Br J Pharmacol 2008;153:420. 
 Thorsell A: Brain neuropeptide Y and corticotropin-releasing hormone in mediat-
ing stress and anxiety. Exp Biol Med 2010;235:1163. 
 Urotensin 
 Cheriyan J et al: The effects of urotensin II and urantide on forearm blood flow 
and systemic haemodynamics in humans. Br J Clin Pharmacol 
2009;68:518. 
 McDonald J, Batuwangala M, Lambert DG: Role of urotensin II and its receptor 
in health and disease. J Anesth 2007;21:378. 
 Russell FD: Urotensin II in cardiovascular regulation. Vasc Health Risk Manag 
2008;4:775. 
 General 
 Paulis L, Unger T: Novel therapeutic targets for hypertension. Nat Rev Cardiol 
2010;7:431. 
 Takahashi K et al: The renin-angiotensin system, adrenomedullins and urotensin 
II in the kidney: Possible renoprotection via the kidney peptide systems. 
Peptides 2009;30:1575. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Enalapril lowers blood pressure by blocking the conversion 
of angiotensin I to angiotensin II (ANG II). Since converting 
enzyme also inactivates bradykinin, enalapril increases bra-
dykinin levels, and this is responsible for adverse side effects 
such as cough and angioedema. This problem could be 
avoided by using a renin inhibitor, eg, aliskiren, or an ANG II 
receptor antagonist, eg, losartan, instead of an ACE inhibitor, 
to block the renin-angiotensin system.
18
313
 The eicosanoids are oxygenation products of polyunsaturated 
long-chain fatty acids. They are ubiquitous in the animal kingdom 
and are also found—together with their precursors—in a variety 
of plants. They constitute a very large family of compounds that 
are highly potent and display an extraordinarily wide spectrum of 
biologic activity. Because of their biologic activity, the eicosanoids, 
their specific receptor antagonists and enzyme inhibitors, and 
their plant and fish oil precursors have great therapeutic potential. 
 ARACHIDONIC ACID & OTHER 
POLYUNSATURATED PRECURSORS 
 Arachidonic acid (AA), or 5,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid, the 
most abundant of the eicosanoid precursors, is a 20-carbon (C20) 
fatty acid containing four double bonds (designated C20:4–6). 
AA must first be released or mobilized from the sn-2 position of 
membrane phospholipids by one or more lipases of the phospho-
lipase A 2 (PLA 2 ) type ( Figure 18–1 ) for eicosanoid synthesis to 
occur. At least three classes of phospholipases mediate arachido-
nate release from membrane lipids: cytosolic (c) PLA 2 , secretory 
(s) PLA 2 , and calcium-independent (i) PLA 2 . Chemical and 
physical stimuli activate the Ca 2+ -dependent translocation of 
group IVA cPLA 2 , which has high affinity for AA, to the mem-
brane, where it releases arachidonate. Multiple additional PLA 2 
isoforms (group VI iPLA 2 and sPLA 2 from groups IIA, V, and X) 
have been characterized. Under nonstimulated conditions, AA 
liberated by iPLA 2 is reincorporated into cell membranes, so there 
is negligible eicosanoid biosynthesis. While cPLA 2 dominates in 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
the acute release of AA, inducible sPLA 2 contributes under condi-
tions of sustained or intense stimulation of AA production. AA 
can also be released by a combination of phospholipase C and 
diglyceride lipase. 
 Following mobilization, AA is oxygenated by four separate 
routes: the cyclooxygenase (COX), lipoxygenase, P450 epoxyge-
nase, and isoeicosanoid pathways ( Figure 18–1 ). Among factors 
determining the type of eicosanoid synthesized are (1) the sub-
strate lipid species, (2) the type of cell, and (3) the manner in 
which the cell is stimulated. Distinct but related products can be 
 The Eicosanoids: 
Prostaglandins, 
Thromboxanes, 
Leukotrienes, & 
Related Compounds 
 Emer M. Smyth, PhD, & Garret A. FitzGerald, MD 
A C R O N Y M S
AA
Arachidonic acid
COX
Cyclooxygenase
DHET
Dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acid
EET
Epoxyeicosatrienoic acid
HETE
Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid
HPETE
Hydroxyperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid
LTB, LTC
Leukotriene B, C, etc
LOX
Lipoxygenase
LXA, LXB
Lipoxin A, B
NSAID
Nonsteroidal anti-infl ammatory drug
PGE, PGF
Prostaglandin E, F, etc
PLA, PLC
Phospholipase A, C
TXA, TXB
Thromboxane A, B
314    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
formed from precursors other than AA. For example, homo-γ-
linoleic acid (C20:3–6) or eicosapentaenoic acid (C20:5–3, EPA) 
yields products that differ quantitatively and qualitatively from 
those derived from AA. This shift in product formation is the 
basis for using fatty acids obtained from cold-water fish or from 
plants as nutritional supplements in humans. For example, 
thromboxane (TXA 2 ), a powerful vasoconstrictor and platelet 
agonist, is synthesized from AA via the COX pathway. COX 
metabolism of EPA yields TXA 3 , which is relatively inactive. 
3-Series prostaglandins, such as prostaglandin E 3 (PGE 3 ), can 
also act as partial agonists or antagonists thereby reducing the 
activity of their AA-derived 2-series counterparts. The hypothesis 
that dietary eicosapentaenoate substitution for arachidonate 
could reduce the incidence of cardiovascular disease and cancer is 
a focus of current investigation. 
 SYNTHESIS OF EICOSANOIDS 
 Products of Prostaglandin Endoperoxide 
Synthases (Cyclooxygenases) 
 Two unique COX isozymes convert AA into prostaglandin 
endoperoxides. PGH synthase-1  (COX-1) is expressed constitu-
tively in most cells. In contrast, PGH synthase-2  (COX-2) is 
inducible; its expression varies depending on the stimulus. COX-2 
is an immediate early-response gene product that is markedly 
up-regulated by shear stress, growth factors, tumor promoters, and 
cytokines. COX-1 generates prostanoids for “housekeeping” such 
as gastric epithelial cytoprotection, whereas COX-2 is the major 
source of prostanoids in inflammation and cancer. This distinc-
tion is overly simplistic, however; there are both physiologic and 
pathophysiologic processes in which each enzyme is uniquely 
involved and others in which they function coordinately. For 
example, endothelial COX-2 is the primary source of vascular 
prostacyclin (PGI 2 ), whereas renal COX-2-derived prostanoids are 
important for normal renal development and maintenance of 
function. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; see 
Chapter 36) exert their therapeutic effects through inhibition of 
the COXs. Indomethacin and sulindac are slightly selective for 
COX-1. Meclofenamate and ibuprofen are approximately equipo-
tent on COX-1 and COX-2, whereas celecoxib = diclofenac < 
rofecoxib = lumiracoxib < etoricoxib in inhibition of COX-2 
(listed in order of increasing average selectivity). Aspirin acetylates 
and inhibits both enzymes covalently. Low doses (< 100 mg/d) 
inhibit preferentially, but not exclusively, platelet COX-1, whereas 
higher doses inhibit both systemic COX-1 and COX-2. 
 Both COX-1 and COX-2 promote the uptake of two mole-
cules of oxygen by cyclization of arachidonic acid to yield a C 9 –C 11 
endoperoxide C 15 hydroperoxide ( Figure 18–2 ). This product is 
PGG 2 , which is then rapidly modified by the peroxidase moiety of 
the COX enzyme to add a 15-hydroxyl group that is essential for 
biologic activity. This product is PGH 2 . Both endoperoxides are 
highly unstable. Analogous families—PGH 1 and PGH 3 and all 
 FIGURE 18–1 Pathways of arachidonic acid (AA) release and metabolism. 
Phospholipase A2
Diverse physical, chemical,
inflammatory and mitogenic stimuli
Isoprostanes
Free radicals
COOH
AA (20:4 cis D5,8,11,14)
Epoxyeicosatrienoic acids
(EETs)
HETEs
Leukotrienes
Lipoxins
Prostaglandins
Prostacyclin
Thromboxane
Prostanoids
1
5
6
8
9
11
12
14
15
19
20
Arachidonic acid esterified in
membrane phospholipids
Lipoxygenases
(LOX)
Cyclooxygenases
(COX)
Cytochrome
P450
CHAPTER 18 The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds    315
their subsequent products—are derived from homo-γ-linolenic 
acid and eicosapentaenoic acid, respectively. 
 The prostaglandins, thromboxane, and prostacyclin, collec-
tively termed the prostanoids, are generated from PGH 2 through 
the action of downstream isomerases and synthases. These termi-
nal enzymes are expressed in a relatively cell-specific fashion, such 
that most cells make one or two dominant prostanoids. The pros-
taglandins differ from each other in two ways: (1) in the substitu-
ents of the pentane ring (indicated by the last letter, eg, E and F 
in PGE and PGF) and (2) in the number of double bonds in the 
side chains (indicated by the subscript, eg, PGE 1 , PGE 2 ). PGH 2 is 
metabolized by prostacyclin, thromboxane, and PGF synthases 
(PGIS, TXAS, and PGFS) to PGI 2 , TXA 2 , and PGF 2α , respec-
tively. Two additional enzymes, 9,11-endoperoxide reductase and 
9-ketoreductase, provide for PGF 2α synthesis from PGH 2 and 
PGE 2 , respectively. At least three PGE 2 synthases have been iden-
tified: microsomal (m) PGES-1, the more readily inducible 
mPGES-2, and cytosolic PGES. There are two distinct PGDS 
isoforms, the lipocalin-type PGDS and the hematopoietic PGDS. 
 Several products of the arachidonate series are of current clini-
cal importance.  Alprostadil (PGE 1 ) may be used for its smooth 
muscle relaxing effects to maintain the ductus arteriosus patent in 
some neonates awaiting cardiac surgery and in the treatment of 
impotence.  Misoprostol, a PGE 1 derivative, is a cytoprotective 
prostaglandin used in preventing peptic ulcer and in combination 
with mifepristone (RU-486) for terminating early pregnancies. 
 PGE 2 and  PGF 2  are used in obstetrics to induce labor. 
 Latanoprost and several similar compounds are topically active 
PGF 2α derivatives used in ophthalmology to treat open-angle 
glaucoma.  Prostacyclin (PGI 2 , epoprostenol) is synthesized 
mainly by the vascular endothelium and is a powerful vasodilator 
and inhibitor of platelet aggregation. It is used clinically to treat 
pulmonary hypertension and portopulmonary hypertension. In 
contrast,  thromboxane (TXA 2 ) has undesirable properties (aggre-
gation of platelets, vasoconstriction). Therefore TXA 2 -receptor 
antagonists and synthesis inhibitors have been developed for car-
diovascular indications, although these (except for aspirin) have 
yet to establish a place in clinical usage. 
 FIGURE 18–2  Prostanoid biosynthesis. Compound names are enclosed in boxes. 
COOH
COX-1
COX-2
COX-1
COX-2
Cyclooxygenase
Peroxidase
COOH
O
O
COOH
O
O
OH
COOH
O
HO
HO
O
O
COOH
COOH
HO
PGG2
PGI2
(prostacyclin)
PGD2
PGF2α
PGE2
PGF
PGH2
TXA2
(thromboxane)
OOH
OH
OH
OH
COOH
COOH
OH
OH
O
COOH
OH
O
O
15-deoxy-  12,14
-PGJ2
Arachidonic acid
HO
316    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 All the naturally occurring COX products undergo rapid 
metabolism to inactive products either by hydration (for PGI 2 and 
TXA 2 ) or by oxidation of the key 15-hydroxyl group to the cor-
responding ketone by prostaglandin 15-hydroxy prostaglandin 
dehydrogenase (15-PGDH) after cellular uptake via an organic 
anion transporter polypeptide (OATP 2A1). Further metabolism 
is by Δ 13 reduction, β-oxidation, and ω-oxidation. The inactive 
metabolites can be determined in blood and urine by immunoassay 
or mass spectrometry as a measure of the in vivo synthesis of their 
parent compounds. 
 Products of Lipoxygenase 
 The metabolism of AA by the  5-, 12-, and 15-lipoxygenases (LOX) 
results in the production of hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acids 
(HPETEs), which rapidly convert to hydroxy derivatives (HETEs) 
and leukotrienes ( Figure 18–3 ). The most actively investigated leu-
kotrienes are those produced by the 5-LOX present in leukocytes 
(neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, and monocyte-macrophages) 
and other inflammatory cells such as mast cells and dendritic cells. 
This pathway is of great interest since it is associated with asthma, 
anaphylactic shock, and cardiovascular disease. Stimulation of 
these cells elevates intracellular Ca 2+ and releases arachidonate; 
incorporation of molecular oxygen by 5-LOX, in association with 
 5-LOX-activating protein (FLAP), then yields the unstable 
epoxide leukotriene A 4 (LTA 4 ). This intermediate is either con-
verted to the dihydroxy leukotriene B 4 (LTB 4 ), via the action of 
LTA 4 hydrolase, or is conjugated with glutathione to yield leukot-
riene C 4 (LTC 4 ), by LTC 4 synthase. Sequential degradation of the 
glutathione moiety by peptidases yields LTD 4 and LTE 4 . These 
three products, LTC 4 , D 4 , and E 4 , are called cysteinyl leukot-
rienes. Although leukotrienes are predominantly generated in 
leukocytes, non-leukocyte cells (eg, endothelial cells) that express 
enzymes downstream of 5-LOX/FLAP can take up and convert 
leukocyte-derived LTA 4 in a process termed transcellular biosyn-
thesis. Transcellular formation of prostaglandins has also been 
shown; for example, endothelial cells can use platelet PGH 2 to 
form PGI 2 . 
 FIGURE 18–3  Leukotriene (LT) biosynthesis. LTC 4 , LTD 4 , and LTE 4 are known collectively as the cysteinyl (Cys) LTs. FLAP, 5-LOX-activating pro-
tein; GT, glutamyl transpeptidase; GL, glutamyl leukotrienase. *Additional products include 5,6-; 8,9-; and 14,15-EET; and 19-, 18-, 17-, and 16-HETE. 
11,12-EET*
20-HETE*
CYP2C, 2J
CYP3A, 4A, 4F O
Dipeptidase
COOH
COOH
OOH
COOH
COOH
CH2OH
5-LOX
5-LOX
Cysteinyl
leukotrienes
(CysLTs)
γ-GT
γ-GL
FLAP
5(S)-HPETE
LTA4
LTC4 synthase
LTA4 hydrolase
LTB4
LTD4
LTE4
LTC4
Arachidonic acid
S − Cys − Gly
Glu
C5H11
COOH
COOH
COOH
O
OH
OH
OH
S − Cys − Gly
C5H11
S − Cys 
C5H11
COOH
OH
COOH
OH
CHAPTER 18 The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds    317
 LTC 4 and  LTD 4 are potent bronchoconstrictors and are recog-
nized as the primary components of the  slow-reacting substance 
of anaphylaxis (SRS-A) that is secreted in asthma and anaphy-
laxis. There are four current approaches to antileukotriene drug 
development: 5-LOX enzyme inhibitors, leukotriene-receptor 
antagonists, inhibitors of FLAP, and phospholipase A 2 inhibitors. 
 LTA 4 , the primary product of 5-LOX, can be converted with 
appropriate stimulation via 12-LOX in platelets to the  lipoxins 
LXA 4 and LXB 4 in vitro. These mediators can also be generated 
through 5-LOX metabolism of 15-HETE, the product of 
15-LOX-2 metabolism of arachidonic acid. 15-LOX-1 prefers 
linoleic acid as a substrate forming 15S-hydroxyoctadecadienoic 
acid. The stereochemical isomer, 15( R )-HETE, may be derived 
from the action of aspirin-acetylated COX-2 and further trans-
formed in leukocytes by 5-LOX to 15-epi-LXA 4 or 15-epi-LXB 4 , 
the so-called aspirin-triggered lipoxins. Synthetic lipoxins and 
epi-lipoxins exert anti-inflammatory actions when applied in 
vivo. Although these compounds can be formed from endoge-
nous substrates in vitro and when synthesized may have potent 
biologic effects, the importance of the endogenous compounds in 
vivo in human biology remains ill defined. 12-HETE, a product 
of 12-LOX, can also undergo a catalyzed molecular rearrange-
ment to epoxyhydroxyeicosatrienoic acids called  hepoxilins. 
Proinflammatory effects of synthetic hepoxilins have been 
reported although their biologic relevance is unclear. 
 The LOXs located in epidermal cells are distinct from “conven-
tional” enzymes—arachidonic acid and linoleic acid are appar-
ently not the natural substrates for epidermal LOX. Epidermal 
accumulation of 12( R  )-HETE is a feature of psoriasis and ich-
thyosis and inhibitors of 12( R )-LOX are under investigation for 
the treatment of these proliferative skin disorders. 
 Epoxygenase Products 
 Specific isozymes of microsomal cytochrome P450 monooxyge-
nases convert AA to hydroxy- or epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (Figures 
18–1 and 18–3). The products are 20-HETE, generated by the 
CYP hydroxylases (CYP3A, 4A, 4F) and the 5,6-, 8,9-, 11,12-, 
and 14,15-epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs), which arise from the 
CYP epoxygenase (2J, 2C). Their biosynthesis can be altered by 
pharmacologic, nutritional, and genetic factors that affect P450 
expression. The biologic actions of the EETs are reduced by their 
conversion to the corresponding, and biologically less active, dihy-
droxyeicosatrienoic acids (DHETs) through the action of soluble 
epoxide hydrolase (sEH). Unlike the prostaglandins, the EETs can 
be esterified into phospholipids, which then act as storage sites. 
Intracellular fatty acid-binding proteins promote EET uptake into 
cells, incorporation into phospholipids, and availability to sEH. 
EETs are synthesized in endothelial cells and cause vasodilation in 
a number of vascular beds by activating the smooth muscle large 
conductance Ca 2+ -activated K + channels. This results in smooth 
muscle cell hyperpolarization and vasodilation, leading to reduced 
blood pressure. Substantial evidence indicates that EETs may 
function as  endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factors, par-
ticularly in the coronary circulation. Consequently there is interest 
in inhibitors of soluble sEH as potential antithrombotic and anti-
hypertensive drugs. An exception to the general response to EETs 
as vasodilators is the pulmonary vasculature where they cause 
vasoconstriction. It is unclear yet whether this activity of EETs 
may limit the potential clinical use of sEH inhibitors. Down-
regulation of pulmonary sEH may contribute to pulmonary 
hypertension. Anti-inflammatory, antiapoptotic, and proangio-
genic actions of the EETs have also been reported. 
 Isoeicosanoids 
 The isoeicosanoids, a family of eicosanoid isomers, are formed 
nonenzymatically by direct free radical-based action on AA and 
related lipid substrates. Isoprostanes are prostaglandin stereoiso-
mers. Because prostaglandins have many asymmetric centers, they 
have a large number of potential stereoisomers. COX is not 
needed for the formation of the isoprostanes, and its inhibition 
with aspirin or other NSAIDs should not affect the isoprostane 
pathway. The primary epimerization mechanism is peroxidation 
of arachidonate by free radicals. Peroxidation occurs while arachi-
donic acid is still esterified to the membrane phospholipids. Thus, 
unlike prostaglandins, these stereoisomers are “stored” as part of 
the membrane. They are then cleaved by phospholipases, circu-
late, and are excreted in urine. Isoprostanes are present in relatively 
large amounts (tenfold greater in blood and urine than the COX-
derived prostaglandins). They have potent vasoconstrictor effects 
when infused into renal and other vascular beds and may activate 
prostanoid receptors. They also may modulate other aspects of 
vascular function, including leukocyte and platelet adhesive inter-
actions and angiogenesis. It has been speculated that they may 
contribute to the pathophysiology of inflammatory responses in a 
manner insensitive to COX inhibitors. A particular difficulty in 
assessing the likely biologic functions of isoprostanes—several of 
which have been shown to serve as incidental ligands at prosta-
glandin receptors—is that while high concentrations of individual 
isoprostanes may be necessary to elicit a response, multiple com-
pounds are formed coincidentally in vivo under conditions of 
oxidant stress. Analogous leukotriene and EET isomers have been 
described. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
EICOSANOIDS 
 MECHANISMS & EFFECTS OF 
EICOSANOIDS 
 Receptor Mechanisms 
 As a result of their short half-lives, the eicosanoids act mainly in 
an autocrine and a paracrine fashion, ie, close to the site of their 
synthesis, and not as circulating hormones. These ligands bind to 
receptors on the cell surface, and pharmacologic specificity is 
determined by receptor density and type on different cells 
( Figure 18–4 ). A single gene product has been identified for the 
PGI 2 (IP), PGF 2α (FP), and TXA 2 (TP) receptors, while four dis-
tinct PGE 2 receptors (EPs 1–4) and two PGD 2 receptors (DP 1 and 
318    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
DP 2 ) have been cloned. Additional isoforms of the human TP (α 
and β), FP (A and B), and EP 3 (I, II, III, IV, V, VI, e, and f) recep-
tors can arise through differential mRNA splicing. Two receptors 
exist for both LTB 4 (BLT 1 and BLT 2 ) and the cysteinyl leukot-
rienes (cysLT 1 and cysLT 2 ). The formyl peptide (fMLP)-1 receptor 
can be activated by lipoxin A4 and consequently has been termed 
the ALX receptor. All of these receptors are G protein-coupled; 
properties of the best-studied receptors are listed in  Table 18–1 . 
 EP 2 , EP 4 , IP, and DP 1 receptors activate adenylyl cyclase via G s . 
This leads to increased intracellular cAMP levels, which in turn 
activate specific protein kinases (see Chapter 2). EP 1 , FP, and TP 
activate phosphatidylinositol metabolism, leading to the forma-
tion of inositol trisphosphate, with subsequent mobilization of 
Ca 2+ stores and an increase of free intracellular Ca 2+ . TP also 
couples to multiple G proteins, including G 12/13 and G 16 , to 
stimulate small G protein signaling pathways, and may activate or 
inhibit adenylyl cyclase via G s (TPα) or G i (TPβ), respectively. 
EP 3 isoforms can couple to both elevation of intracellular calcium 
and to increased or decreased cAMP. The DP 2 receptor (also 
known as the chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule 
expressed on TH2 cells, or CRTH2), which is unrelated to the 
other prostanoid receptors, is a member of the fMLP (formylated 
MetLeuPhe) receptor superfamily. This receptor couples through 
a G i -type G protein and leads to inhibition of cAMP synthesis and 
increases in intracellular Ca 2+ in a variety of cell types. 
 LTB 4 also causes inositol trisphosphate release via the BLT 1 
receptor, causing activation, degranulation, and superoxide anion 
generation in leukocytes. The BLT 2 receptor, a low-affinity recep-
tor for LTB 4 , is also bound with reasonable affinity by 12( S  )- and 
12( R )-HETE, although the biologic relevance of this observation 
is not clear. CysLT 1 and cysLT 2 couple to G q , leading to increased 
intracellular Ca 2+ . Studies have also placed G i downstream of 
cysLT 2 . An orphan receptor, GPR17, binds cysLTs and may nega-
tively regulate the function of cysLT 1 , but its physiologic role 
remains ill defined. As noted above, the EETs promote vasodila-
tion via paracrine activation of calcium-activated potassium chan-
nels on smooth muscle cells leading to hyperpolarization and 
relaxation. This occurs in a manner consistent with activation of a 
G s -coupled receptor, although a specific EET receptor has yet to 
be identified. EETs may also act in an autocrine manner directly 
activating endothelial transient receptor potential channels to 
cause endothelial hyperpolarization, which is then transferred to 
the smooth muscle cells by gap junctions or potassium ions. 
Specific receptors for isoprostanes have not been identified, and 
the biologic importance of their capacity to act as incidental 
ligands at prostaglandin receptors remains to be established. 
 FIGURE 18–4  Prostanoid receptors and their signaling pathways. fMLP, formylated MetLeuPhe, a small peptide receptor; PLC-β, 
phospholipase C-β. All of the receptors shown are of the seven-transmembrane, G protein-coupled type. The terms “relaxant,” “contractile,” and 
“inhibitory” refer to the phylogenetic characterization of their primary effects. **All EP 3 isoforms couple through G i but some can also activate 
G s or G 12/13 pathways. RhoGEF, rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor. See text for additional details. 
1
Adenylyl
Cyclase
PLC-
Biologic Effects
DP2/
CR H2
β
RhoGEF
Rho activation
cAMP
Ca2+
“relaxant”
“contractile”
“inhibitory”
fMLP RECEPTOR FAMILY
**
+
αs
α12/13
αq
αi
α16
β γ
β γ
β γ
β γ
β γ
+
+
+
+
–
–
IP
EP2
EP4
DP1
TP
FP
EP
EP3
+
Biological Effects
CHAPTER 18 The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds    319
TABLE 18–1 Eicosanoid receptors.1
Receptor (human)
Endogenous Ligand
Secondary Ligands
G Protein; Second Messenger
Major Phenotype(s) in Knockout Mice
DP1
PGD2
Gs; ↑cAMP
↓Allergic asthma
DP2, CRTH2
PGD2
15d-PGJ2
Gi; ↑Ca2+
i, ↓cAMP
↑Allergic airway inflammation
↓Cutaneous inflammation
EP1
PGE2
PGI2
Gq; ↑Ca2+
i
↓Colon carcinogenesis
EP2
PGE2
Gs; ↑cAMP
Impaired ovulation and fertilization
Salt-sensitive hypertension
EP3 I, II, III, IV, V, VI, e, f
PGE2
Gi; ↓cAMP, ↑Ca2+
i
Resistance to pyrogens
Gs; ↑cAMP
↓Acute cutaneous inflammation
Gq; ↑PLC, ↑Ca2+
i
EP4
PGE2
Gs; ↑cAMP
↓Bone mass/density in aged mice
↑Bowel inflammatory/immune response
↓Colon carcinogenesis
Patent ductus arteriosus
FPA,B
PGF2α
isoPs
Gq; ↑PLC, ↑Ca2+
i
Parturition failure
IP
PGl2
PGE2
Gs; ↑cAMP
↑Thrombotic response
↑Response to vascular injury
↑Atherosclerosis
↑Cardiac fibrosis
Salt-sensitive hypertension
↓Joint inflammation
TPα,β
TXA2
isoPs
Gq, G12/13, G16; ↑PLC, ↑Ca2+
i, 
Rho activation
↑Bleeding time
↓Response to vascular injury
↓Atherosclerosis
↑Survival after cardiac allograft
BLT1
LTB4
G16, Gi; ↑Ca2+
i, ↓cAMP
Some suppression of inflammatory 
response
BLT2
LTB4
12(S)-HETE
Gq-like, Gi-like, G12-like, ↑Ca2+
i
Not known
12(R)-HETE
CysLT1
LTD4
LTC4/LTE4
Gq; ↑PLC, ↑Ca2+
i
↓Innate and adaptive immune vascular 
permeability response
↑Pulmonary inflammatory and fibrotic 
response
CysLT2
LTC4/LTD4
LTE4
Gq; ↑PLC, ↑Ca2+
i
↓Pulmonary inflammatory and fibrotic 
response
1Splice variants for the eicosanoid receptors are indicated where appropriate.
Ca2+
i, intracellular calcium; cAMP, cyclic adenosine 3’,5’-monophosphate; PLC, phospholipase C; isoPs, isoprostanes; 15d-PGJ2, 15-deoxy-Δ12,14-PGJ2.
320    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 Although prostanoids can activate peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptors (PPARs) if added in sufficient concentration in 
vitro, it remains questionable whether these compounds attain 
concentrations sufficient to function as endogenous nuclear-
receptor ligands in vivo. 
 Effects of Prostaglandins & Thromboxanes 
 The prostaglandins and thromboxanes have major effects on 
smooth muscle in the vasculature, airways, and gastrointestinal 
and reproductive tracts. Contraction of smooth muscle is medi-
ated by the release of calcium, while relaxing effects are mediated 
by the generation of cAMP. Many of the eicosanoids’ contractile 
effects on smooth muscle can be inhibited by lowering extracel-
lular calcium or by using calcium channel-blocking drugs. Other 
important targets include platelets and monocytes, kidneys, the 
central nervous system, autonomic presynaptic nerve terminals, 
sensory nerve endings, endocrine organs, adipose tissue, and the 
eye (the effects on the eye may involve smooth muscle). 
 A.  Smooth Muscle 
 1. Vascular— TXA 2 is a potent vasoconstrictor. It is also a 
smooth muscle cell mitogen and is the only eicosanoid that has 
convincingly been shown to have this effect. The mitogenic effect 
is potentiated by exposure of smooth muscle cells to testosterone, 
which up-regulates smooth muscle cell TP expression. PGF 2α is 
also a vasoconstrictor but is not a smooth muscle mitogen. 
Another vasoconstrictor is the isoprostane 8-iso-PGF 2α , also 
known as iPF 2 αIII, which may act via the TP receptor. 
 Vasodilator prostaglandins, especially PGI 2 and PGE 2 , promote 
vasodilation by increasing cAMP and decreasing smooth muscle 
intracellular calcium, primarily via the IP and EP 4 receptors. 
Vascular PGI 2 is synthesized by both smooth muscle and endothe-
lial cells, with the COX-2 isoform in the latter cell type being the 
major contributor. In the microcirculation, PGE 2 is a vasodilator 
produced by endothelial cells. PGI 2 inhibits proliferation of 
smooth muscle cells, an action that may be particularly relevant in 
pulmonary hypertension. PGD 2 may also function as a vasodila-
tor—in particular as a dominant mediator of flushing induced by 
the lipid-lowering drug niacin—although the role of this pros-
tanoid in the cardiovascular system remains under investigation. 
 2. Gastrointestinal tract— Most of the prostaglandins and 
thromboxanes activate gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Longi-
tudinal muscle is contracted by PGE 2 (via EP 3 ) and PGF 2α (via 
FP), whereas circular muscle is contracted strongly by PGF 2α and 
weakly by PGI 2 , and is relaxed by PGE 2 (via EP 4 ). Administration 
of either PGE 2 or PGF 2α results in colicky cramps (see Clinical 
Pharmacology of Eicosanoids, below). The leukotrienes also have 
powerful contractile effects. 
 3. Airways— Respiratory smooth muscle is relaxed by PGE 2 and 
PGI 2 and contracted by PGD 2 , TXA 2 , and PGF 2α . Studies of DP 1 
and DP 2 receptor knockout mice suggest an important role of this 
prostanoid in asthma, although the DP 2 receptor appears more 
relevant to allergic airway diseases. The cysteinyl leukotrienes are 
also bronchoconstrictors. They act principally on smooth muscle 
in peripheral airways and are a thousand times more potent than 
histamine, both in vitro and in vivo. They also stimulate bronchial 
mucus secretion and cause mucosal edema. Bronchospasm occurs 
in about 10% of people taking NSAIDs, possibly because of a 
shift in arachidonate metabolism from COX metabolism to leu-
kotriene formation. 
 4. Reproductive— The actions of prostaglandins on reproduc-
tive smooth muscle are discussed below under section D, 
Reproductive Organs. 
 B. Platelets 
 Platelet aggregation is markedly affected by eicosanoids. Low con-
centrations of PGE 2 enhance (via EP 3 ), whereas higher concentra-
tions inhibit (via IP), platelet aggregation. Both PGD 2 and PGI 2 
inhibit aggregation via, respectively, DP 1 - and IP-dependent eleva-
tion in cAMP generation. Unlike their human counterparts, 
mouse platelets do not express DP 1 . TXA 2 is the major product of 
COX-1, the only COX isoform expressed in mature platelets. 
Itself a platelet aggregator, TXA 2 amplifies the effects of other, 
more potent, platelet agonists such as thrombin. The TP-G q sig-
naling pathway elevates intracellular Ca 2+ and activates protein 
kinase C, facilitating platelet aggregation and TXA 2 biosynthesis. 
Activation of G 12 /G 13 induces Rho/Rho-kinase–dependent regu-
lation of myosin light chain phosphorylation leading to platelet 
shape change. Mutations in the human TP have been associated 
with mild bleeding disorders. The platelet actions of TXA 2 are 
restrained in vivo by PGI 2 , which inhibits platelet aggregation by 
all recognized agonists. Platelet COX-1-derived TXA 2 biosynthe-
sis is increased during platelet activation and aggregation and is 
irreversibly inhibited by chronic administration of aspirin at low 
doses. Urinary metabolites of TXA 2 increase in clinical syndromes 
of platelet activation such as myocardial infarction and stroke. 
Macrophage COX-2 appears to contribute roughly 10% of the 
increment in TXA 2 biosynthesis observed in smokers, while the 
rest is derived from platelet COX-1. A variable contribution, pre-
sumably from macrophage COX-2, may be insensitive to the 
effects of low-dose aspirin. In a single trial comparing low- and 
high-dose aspirin, no increase in benefit was associated with 
increased dose; in fact, this study, as well as indirect comparisons 
across placebo-controlled trials, suggests an inverse dose-response 
relationship, perhaps reflecting increasing inhibition of PGI 2 syn-
thesis at higher doses of aspirin. 
 C. Kidney 
 Both the medulla and the cortex of the kidney synthesize prostaglan-
dins, the medulla substantially more than the cortex. COX-1 is 
expressed mainly in cortical and medullary collecting ducts and 
mesangial cells, arteriolar endothelium, and epithelial cells of 
Bowman’s capsule. COX-2 is restricted to the renal medullary inter-
stitial cells, the macula densa, and the cortical thick ascending limb. 
 The major renal eicosanoid products are PGE 2 and PGI 2 , fol-
lowed by PGF 2α and TXA 2 . The kidney also synthesizes several 
hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids, leukotrienes, cytochrome P450 
CHAPTER 18 The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds    321
products, and epoxides. Prostaglandins play important roles in 
maintaining blood pressure and regulating renal function, particu-
larly in marginally functioning kidneys and volume-contracted 
states. Under these circumstances, renal cortical COX-2-derived 
PGE 2 and PGI 2 maintain renal blood flow and glomerular filtra-
tion rate through their local vasodilating effects. These prostaglan-
dins also modulate systemic blood pressure through regulation of 
water and sodium excretion. Expression of medullary COX-2 and 
mPGES-1 is increased under conditions of high salt intake. COX-
2-derived prostanoids increase medullary blood flow and inhibit 
tubular sodium reabsorption, while COX-1-derived products pro-
mote salt excretion in the collecting ducts. Increased water clear-
ance probably results from an attenuation of the action of 
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) on adenylyl cyclase. Loss of these 
effects may underlie the systemic or salt-sensitive hypertension 
often associated with COX inhibition. A common mispercep-
tion—often articulated in discussion of the cardiovascular toxicity 
of drugs such as rofecoxib—is that hypertension secondary to 
NSAID administration is somehow independent of the inhibition 
of prostaglandins. Loop diuretics, eg, furosemide, produce some 
of their effect by stimulating COX activity. In the normal kidney, 
this increases the synthesis of the vasodilator prostaglandins. 
Therefore, patient response to a loop diuretic is diminished if a 
COX inhibitor is administered concurrently (see Chapter 15). 
 There is an additional layer of complexity associated with the 
effects of renal prostaglandins. In contrast to the medullary 
enzyme, cortical COX-2 expression is increased by low salt intake, 
leading to increased renin release. This elevates glomerular filtra-
tion rate and contributes to enhanced sodium reabsorption and a 
rise in blood pressure. PGE 2 is thought to stimulate renin release 
through activation of EP 4 or EP 2 . PGI 2 can also stimulate renin 
release and this may be relevant to maintenance of blood pressure 
in volume-contracted conditions and to the pathogenesis of reno-
vascular hypertension. Inhibition of COX-2 may reduce blood 
pressure in these settings. 
 TXA 2 causes intrarenal vasoconstriction (and perhaps an ADH-
like effect), resulting in a decline in renal function. The normal 
kidney synthesizes only small amounts of TXA 2 . However, in renal 
conditions involving inflammatory cell infiltration (such as glom-
erulonephritis and renal transplant rejection), the inflammatory 
cells (monocyte-macrophages) release substantial amounts of 
TXA 2 . Theoretically, TXA 2 synthase inhibitors or receptor antago-
nists should improve renal function in these patients, but no such 
drug is clinically available. Hypertension is associated with increased 
TXA 2 and decreased PGE 2 and PGI 2 synthesis in some animal 
models, eg, the Goldblatt kidney model. It is not known whether 
these changes are primary contributing factors or secondary 
responses. Similarly, increased TXA 2 formation has been reported 
in cyclosporine-induced nephrotoxicity, but no causal relationship 
has been established. PGF 2α may elevate blood pressure by regulat-
ing renin release in the kidney. Although more research is necessary, 
FP antagonists have potential as novel antihypertensive drugs. 
 D. Reproductive Organs 
 1. Female reproductive organs— Animal studies demon-
strate a role for PGE 2 and PGF 2α in early reproductive processes 
such as ovulation, luteolysis, and fertilization. Uterine muscle is 
contracted by PGF 2α , TXA 2 , and low concentrations of PGE 2 ; 
PGI 2 and high concentrations of PGE 2 cause relaxation. PGF 2α , 
together with oxytocin, is essential for the onset of parturition. 
The effects of prostaglandins on uterine function are discussed 
below (see Clinical Pharmacology of Eicosanoids). 
 2. Male reproductive organs— Despite the discovery of pros-
taglandins in seminal fluid, and their uterotropic effects, the role 
of prostaglandins in semen is still conjectural. The major source of 
these prostaglandins is the seminal vesicle; the prostate, despite the 
name “prostaglandin,” and the testes synthesize only small 
amounts. The factors that regulate the concentration of prosta-
glandins in human seminal plasma are not known in detail, but 
testosterone does promote prostaglandin production. Thromboxane 
and leukotrienes have not been found in seminal plasma. Men 
with a low seminal fluid concentration of prostaglandins are rela-
tively infertile. 
 Smooth muscle-relaxing prostaglandins such as PGE 1 enhance 
penile erection by relaxing the smooth muscle of the corpora cav-
ernosa (see Clinical Pharmacology of Eicosanoids). 
 E. Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems 
 1. Fever— PGE 2 increases body temperature, predominantly via 
EP 3 , although EP 1 also plays a role, especially when administered 
directly into the cerebral ventricles. Exogenous PGF 2α and PGI 2 
induce fever, whereas PGD 2 and TXA 2 do not. Endogenous pyro-
gens release interleukin-1, which in turn promotes the synthesis 
and release of PGE 2 . This synthesis is blocked by aspirin and other 
antipyretic compounds. 
 2. Sleep— When infused into the cerebral ventricles, PGD 2 
induces natural sleep (as determined by electroencephalographic 
analysis) via activation of DP 1 receptors and secondary release of 
adenosine. PGE 2 infusion into the posterior hypothalamus causes 
wakefulness. 
 3. Neurotransmission— PGE compounds inhibit the release 
of norepinephrine from postganglionic sympathetic nerve end-
ings. Moreover, NSAIDs increase norepinephrine release in vivo, 
suggesting that the prostaglandins play a physiologic role in this 
process. Thus, vasoconstriction observed during treatment with 
COX inhibitors may be due, in part, to increased release of nor-
epinephrine as well as to inhibition of the endothelial synthesis of 
the vasodilators PGE 2 and PGI 2 . PGE 2 and PGI 2 sensitize the 
peripheral nerve endings to painful stimuli by increasing their 
terminal membrane excitability. Prostaglandins also modulate 
pain centrally. Both COX-1 and COX-2 are expressed in the spi-
nal cord and release prostaglandins in response to peripheral pain 
stimuli. PGE 2 , and perhaps also PGD 2 , PGI 2 , and PGF 2α , con-
tribute to so-called central sensitization, an increase in excitability 
of spinal dorsal horn neurons, that augments pain intensity, wid-
ens the area of pain perception, and results in pain from normally 
innocuous stimuli. 
322    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 F. Inflammation and Immunity 
 PGE 2 and PGI 2 are the predominant prostanoids associated with 
inflammation. Both markedly enhance edema formation and leu-
kocyte infiltration by promoting blood flow in the inflamed 
region. PGE 2 and PGI 2 , through activation of EP 2 and IP, respec-
tively, increase vascular permeability and leukocyte infiltration. 
Through its action as a platelet agonist, TXA 2 can also increase 
platelet-leukocyte interactions. Although probably not made by 
lymphocytes, prostaglandins may contribute positively or nega-
tively to lymphocyte function. PGE 2 and TXA 2 may play a role in 
T-lymphocyte development by regulating apoptosis of immature 
thymocytes. PGE 2 suppresses the immunologic response by inhib-
iting differentiation of B lymphocytes into antibody-secreting 
plasma cells, thus depressing the humoral antibody response. It 
also inhibits cytotoxic T-cell function, mitogen-stimulated prolif-
eration of T lymphocytes, and the release of cytokines by sensi-
tized T H 1 lymphocytes. PGE 2 can modify myeloid cell 
differentiation promoting type 2 immune-suppressive macrophage 
and myeloid suppressor cell phenotypes. These effects likely con-
tribute to immune escape in tumors where infiltrating myeloid-
derived cells predominantly display type 2 phenotypes. PGD 2 , a 
major product of mast cells, is a potent chemoattractant for 
eosinophils in which it also induces degranulation and leukotriene 
biosynthesis. PGD 2 also induces chemotaxis and migration of 
T H 2 lymphocytes mainly via activation of DP 2 , although a role for 
DP 1 has also been established. It remains unclear how these two 
receptors coordinate the actions of PGD 2 in inflammation and 
immunity. A degradation product of PGD 2 , 15d-PGJ 2 , at concen-
trations actually formed in vivo, may also activate eosinophils via 
the DP 2 (CRT H 2) receptor. 
 G. Bone Metabolism 
 Prostaglandins are abundant in skeletal tissue and are produced by 
osteoblasts and adjacent hematopoietic cells. The major effect of 
prostaglandins (especially PGE 2 , acting on EP 4 ) in vivo is to 
increase bone turnover, ie, stimulation of bone resorption and 
formation. EP 4 receptor deletion in mice results in an imbalance 
between bone resorption and formation, leading to a negative balance 
of bone mass and density in older animals. Prostaglandins may 
mediate the effects of mechanical forces on bones and changes in 
bone during inflammation. EP 4 -receptor deletion and inhibition 
of prostaglandin biosynthesis have both been associated with 
impaired fracture healing in animal models. COX inhibitors can 
also slow skeletal muscle healing by interfering with prostaglandin 
effects on myocyte proliferation, differentiation, and fibrosis 
in response to injury. Prostaglandins may contribute to the bone 
loss that occurs at menopause; it has been speculated that NSAIDs 
may be of therapeutic value in osteoporosis and bone loss preven-
tion in older women. However, controlled evaluation of such 
therapeutic interventions has not been carried out. NSAIDs, espe-
cially those specific for inhibition of COX-2, delay bone healing 
in experimental models of fracture. 
 H. Eye 
 PGE and PGF derivatives lower intraocular pressure. The mecha-
nism of this action is unclear but probably involves increased 
outflow of aqueous humor from the anterior chamber via the 
uveoscleral pathway (see Clinical Pharmacology of Eicosanoids). 
 I. Cancer 
 There has been significant interest in the role of prostaglandins, 
and in particular the COX-2 pathway, in the development of 
malignancies. Pharmacologic inhibition or genetic deletion of 
COX-2 restrains tumor formation in models of colon, breast, lung, 
and other cancers. Large human epidemiologic studies have found 
that the incidental use of NSAIDs is associated with significant 
reductions in relative risk for developing these and other cancers. 
Chronic low-dose aspirin does not appear to have a substantial 
impact on cancer incidence; however, it is associated with reduced 
cancer death in a number of studies. In patients with familial poly-
posis coli, COX inhibitors significantly decrease polyp formation. 
Polymorphisms in COX-2 have been associated with increased risk 
of some cancers. Several studies have suggested that COX-2 expres-
sion is associated with markers of tumor progression in breast 
cancer. In mouse mammary tissue, COX-2 is oncogenic whereas 
NSAID use is associated with a reduced risk of breast cancer in 
women, especially for hormone receptor-positive tumors. Despite 
the support for COX-2 as the predominant source of oncogenic 
prostaglandins, randomized clinical trials have not been performed 
to determine whether superior anti-oncogenic effects occur with 
selective inhibition of COX-2, compared with nonselective 
NSAIDs. Indeed data from animal models and epidemiologic 
studies in humans are consistent with a role for COX-1 as well as 
COX-2 in the production of oncogenic prostanoids. 
 PGE 2 , which is considered the principal oncogenic prostanoid, 
facilitates tumor initiation, progression, and metastasis through 
multiple biologic effects, increasing proliferation and angiogenesis, 
inhibiting apoptosis, augmenting cellular invasiveness, and modu-
lating immunosuppression. Augmented expression of mPGES-1 is 
evident in tumors, and preclinical studies support the potential 
use of mPGES-1 inhibitors in chemoprevention or treatment. In 
tumors reduced levels of OATP2A1 and 15-PGDH, which medi-
ate cellular uptake and metabolic inactivation of PGE 2 , respec-
tively, likely contribute to sustained PGE 2 activity. The pro- and 
anti-oncogenic roles of other prostanoids remain under investiga-
tion, with TXA 2 emerging as another likely procarcinogenic 
mediator, deriving either from macrophage COX-2 or platelet 
COX-1. Studies in mice lacking EP 1 , EP 2 , or EP 4 receptors con-
firm reduced disease in multiple carcinogenesis models. EP 3 , in 
contrast, plays no role or may even play a protective role in some 
cancers. Transactivation of epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) has been linked with the oncogenic activity of PGE 2 . 
 Effects of Lipoxygenase & Cytochrome 
P450-Derived Metabolites 
 The actions of lipoxygenases generate compounds that can regu-
late specific cellular responses important in inflammation and 
immunity. Cytochrome P450-derived metabolites affect nephron 
transport functions either directly or via metabolism to active 
compounds (see below). The biologic functions of the various 
forms of hydroxy- and hydroperoxyeicosaenoic acids are largely 
unknown, but their pharmacologic potency is impressive. 
CHAPTER 18 The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds    323
 A. Blood Cells and Inflammation 
 LTB 4 , acting at the BLT 1 receptor, is a potent chemoattractant for 
T lymphocytes, eosinophils, monocytes, and possibly mast cells; 
the cysteinyl leukotrienes are potent chemoattractants for eosino-
phils and T lymphocytes. Cysteinyl leukotrienes may also generate 
distinct sets of cytokines through activation of mast cell cysLT 1 
and cysLT 2 . At higher concentrations, these leukotrienes also pro-
mote eosinophil adherence, degranulation, cytokine or chemokine 
release, and oxygen radical formation. Cysteinyl leukotrienes also 
contribute to inflammation by increasing endothelial permeabil-
ity, thus promoting migration of inflammatory cells to the site of 
inflammation. The leukotrienes have been strongly implicated in 
the pathogenesis of inflammation, especially in chronic diseases 
such as asthma and inflammatory bowel disease. 
 Lipoxins have diverse effects on leukocytes, including activa-
tion of monocytes and macrophages and inhibition of neutrophil, 
eosinophil, and lymphocyte activation. Both lipoxin A and lipoxin 
B inhibit natural killer cell cytotoxicity. 
 B. Heart and Smooth Muscle 
 1. Cardiovascular— 12( S  )-HETE promotes vascular smooth 
muscle cell proliferation and migration at low concentrations; it 
may play a role in myointimal proliferation that occurs after vas-
cular injury such as that caused by angioplasty. Its stereoisomer, 
12( R )-HETE, is not a chemoattractant, but is a potent inhibitor 
of the Na + /K + -ATPase in the cornea. LTC 4 and LTD 4 reduce myo-
cardial contractility and coronary blood flow, leading to cardiac 
depression. Lipoxin A and lipoxin B exert coronary vasoconstric-
tor effects in vitro. In addition to their vasodilatory action, EETs 
may reduce cardiac hypertrophy as well as systemic and pulmo-
nary vascular smooth muscle proliferation and migration. 
 2. Gastrointestinal— Human colonic epithelial cells synthesize 
LTB 4 , a chemoattractant for neutrophils. The colonic mucosa of 
patients with inflammatory bowel disease contains substantially 
increased amounts of LTB 4 . 
 3. Airways— The cysteinyl leukotrienes, particularly LTC 4 and 
LTD 4 , are potent bronchoconstrictors and cause increased micro-
vascular permeability, plasma exudation, and mucus secretion in 
the airways. Controversies exist over whether the pattern and 
specificity of the leukotriene receptors differ in animal models and 
humans. LTC 4 -specific receptors have not been found in human 
lung tissue, whereas both high- and low-affinity LTD 4 receptors 
are present. 
 C. Renal System 
 There is substantial evidence for a role of the epoxygenase prod-
ucts in regulating renal function although their exact role in the 
human kidney remains unclear. Both 20-HETE and the EETs are 
generated in renal tissue. 20-HETE, which potently blocks 
the smooth muscle cell Ca 2+ -activated K + channel and leads to 
vasoconstriction of the renal arteries, has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of hypertension. In contrast, studies support an anti-
hypertensive effect of the EETs because of their vasodilating and 
natriuretic actions. EETs increase renal blood flow and may protect 
against inflammatory renal damage by limiting glomerular mac-
rophage infiltration. Inhibitors of soluble epoxide hydrolase, 
which prolong the biologic activities of the EETs, are being devel-
oped as potential new antihypertensive drugs. In vitro studies, and 
work in animal models, support targeting soluble epoxide hydro-
lase for blood pressure control, although the potential for pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction and tumor promotion through antiapoptotic 
actions require careful investigation. 
 D. Miscellaneous 
 The effects of these products on the reproductive organs have not 
been elucidated. Similarly, actions on the nervous system have 
been suggested but not confirmed. 12-HETE stimulates the 
release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex and mediates a por-
tion of the aldosterone release stimulated by angiotensin II but not 
that by adrenocorticotropic hormone. Very low concentrations of 
LTC 4 increase and higher concentrations of arachidonate-derived 
epoxides augment luteinizing hormone (LH) and LH-releasing 
hormone release from isolated rat anterior pituitary cells. 
 INHIBITION OF EICOSANOID SYNTHESIS 
 Corticosteroids block all the known pathways of eicosanoid syn-
thesis, perhaps in part by stimulating the synthesis of several 
inhibitory proteins collectively called annexins or lipocortins. 
They inhibit phospholipase A 2 activity, probably by interfering 
with phospholipid binding, thus preventing the release of arachi-
donic acid. 
 The NSAIDs (eg,  indomethacin, ibuprofen ; see Chapter 36) 
block both prostaglandin and thromboxane formation by revers-
ibly inhibiting COX activity. The traditional NSAIDs are not 
selective for COX-1 or COX-2. Selective COX-2 inhibitors, 
which were developed more recently, vary—as do the older 
drugs—in their degree of selectivity. Indeed, there is considerable 
variability between (and within) individuals in the selectivity 
attained by the same dose of the same NSAID. Aspirin is an irre-
versible COX inhibitor. In platelets, which lack nuclei, COX-1 
(the only isoform expressed in mature platelets) cannot be restored 
via protein biosynthesis, resulting in extended inhibition of TXA 2 
biosynthesis. 
 EP-receptor agonists and antagonists are under evaluation in 
the treatment of bone fracture and osteoporosis, whereas TP- 
receptor antagonists are being investigated for usefulness in treat-
ment of cardiovascular syndromes. Direct inhibition of PGE 2 
biosynthesis through selective inhibition of the inducible mPGES-1 
isoform is also under examination for potential therapeutic effi-
cacy in pain and inflammation, cardiovascular disease, and chemo-
prevention of cancer. 
 Although they remain less effective than inhaled corticoster-
oids, a 5-LOX inhibitor ( zileuton ) and selective antagonists of the 
CysLT 1 receptor for leukotrienes ( zafirlukast, montelukast, and 
 pranlukast; see Chapter 20) are used clinically in mild to moder-
ate asthma. Growing evidence for a role of the leukotrienes in 
cardiovascular disease has expanded the potential clinical applica-
tions of leukotriene modifiers. Conflicting data have been reported 
in animal studies depending on the disease model used and the 
324    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
molecular target (5-LOX versus FLAP). Human genetic studies 
initially demonstrated a link between cardiovascular disease and 
polymorphisms in the leukotriene biosynthetic enzymes, in par-
ticular FLAP, in some populations. However, these results have 
not been substantiated in more recent, larger studies. 
 NSAIDs usually do not inhibit lipoxygenase activity at concen-
trations that inhibit COX activity. In fact, by preventing arachi-
donic acid conversion via the COX pathway, NSAIDs may cause 
more substrate to be metabolized through the lipoxygenase path-
ways, leading to an increased formation of the inflammatory leu-
kotrienes. Even among the COX-dependent pathways, inhibiting 
the synthesis of one derivative may increase the synthesis of an 
enzymatically related product. Therefore, drugs that inhibit both 
COX and lipoxygenase are being developed. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
EICOSANOIDS 
 Several approaches have been used in the clinical application of 
eicosanoids. First, stable oral or parenteral long-acting analogs of 
the naturally occurring prostaglandins have been developed 
( Figure 18–5 ). Second, enzyme inhibitors and receptor antago-
nists have been developed to interfere with the synthesis or effects 
of the eicosanoids. The discovery of COX-2 as a major source of 
inflammatory prostanoids led to the development of selective 
COX-2 inhibitors in an effort to preserve the gastrointestinal and 
renal functions directed through COX-1, thereby reducing toxic-
ity. However, it is apparent that the marked decrease in biosynthe-
sis of PGI 2 that follows COX-2 inhibition occurring without a 
concurrent inhibition of platelet COX-1-derived TXA 2 removes a 
protective constraint on endogenous mediators of cardiovascular 
dysfunction and leads to an increase in cardiovascular events in 
patients taking selective COX-2 inhibitors. Third, efforts at 
dietary manipulation—to change the polyunsaturated fatty acid 
precursors in the cell membrane phospholipids and so change 
eicosanoid synthesis—is used extensively in over-the-counter 
products and in diets emphasizing increased consumption of cold-
water fish. 
 Female Reproductive System 
 Studies with knockout mice have confirmed a role for prostaglan-
dins in reproduction and parturition. COX-1-derived PGF 2α 
appears important for luteolysis, consistent with delayed parturi-
tion in COX-1-deficient mice. A complex interplay between 
PGF 2α and oxytocin is critical to the onset of labor. EP 2 receptor-
deficient mice demonstrate a preimplantation defect, which under-
lies some of the breeding difficulties seen in COX-2 knockouts. 
 A. Abortion 
 PGE 2 and PGF 2α have potent oxytocic actions. The ability of the 
E and F prostaglandins and their analogs to terminate pregnancy 
at any stage by promoting uterine contractions has been adapted 
to common clinical use. Many studies worldwide have estab-
lished that prostaglandin administration efficiently terminates 
pregnancy. The drugs are used for first- and second-trimester 
abortion and for priming or ripening the cervix before abortion. 
These prostaglandins appear to soften the cervix by increasing 
proteoglycan content and changing the biophysical properties of 
collagen. 
 Dinoprostone, a synthetic preparation of PGE 2 , is adminis-
tered vaginally for oxytocic use. In the USA, it is approved for 
inducing abortion in the second trimester of pregnancy, for 
missed abortion, for benign hydatidiform mole, and for ripen-
ing of the cervix for induction of labor in patients at or near 
term. 
 Dinoprostone stimulates the contraction of the uterus through-
out pregnancy. As the pregnancy progresses, the uterus increases 
its contractile response, and the contractile effect of oxytocin is 
potentiated as well. Dinoprostone also directly affects the collage-
nase of the cervix, resulting in softening. The vaginal dose enters 
the maternal circulation, and a small amount is absorbed directly 
by the uterus via the cervix and the lymphatic system. Dinoprostone 
is metabolized in local tissues and on the first pass through the 
lungs (about 95%). The metabolites are mainly excreted in the 
urine. The plasma half-life is 2.5–5 minutes. 
 For the induction of labor, dinoprostone is used either as a gel 
(0.5 mg PGE 2 ) or as a controlled-release formulation (10 mg 
PGE 2 ) that releases PGE 2 in vivo at a rate of about 0.3 mg/h over 
12 hours. An advantage of the controlled-release formulation is a 
lower incidence of gastrointestinal side effects (< 1%). 
 For abortifacient purposes, the recommended dosage is a 
20-mg dinoprostone vaginal suppository repeated at 3- to 5-hour 
intervals depending on the response of the uterus. The mean time 
to abortion is 17 hours, but in more than 25% of cases, the abor-
tion is incomplete and requires additional intervention. 
 For softening of the cervix at term, the preparations used are 
either a single vaginal insert containing 10 mg PGE 2 or a vaginal 
gel containing 0.5 mg PGE 2 administered every 6 hours. The 
softening of the cervix for induction of labor substantially short-
ens the time to onset of labor and the delivery time. 
 Antiprogestins (eg,  mifepristone ) have been combined with an 
oral oxytocic synthetic analog of PGE 1 ( misoprostol ) to produce 
early abortion. This regimen is available in the USA and Europe 
(see Chapter 40). The ease of use and the effectiveness of the com-
bination have aroused considerable opposition in some quarters. 
The major toxicities are cramping pain and diarrhea. The oral and 
vaginal routes of administration are equally effective, but the 
vaginal route has been associated with an increased incidence of 
sepsis, so the oral route is now recommended. 
 An analog of PGF 2α is also used in obstetrics. This drug,  car-
boprost tromethamine (15-methyl-PGF 2α ; the 15-methyl group 
prolongs the duration of action) is used to induce second-trimester 
abortions and to control postpartum hemorrhage that is not 
responding to conventional methods of management. The success 
rate is approximately 80%. It is administered as a single 250-mcg 
intramuscular injection, repeated if necessary. Vomiting and diar-
rhea occur commonly, probably because of gastrointestinal smooth 
muscle stimulation. In some patients transient bronchoconstric-
tion can occur. Transient elevations in temperature are seen in 
approximately one eighth of patients. 
CHAPTER 18 The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds    325
 FIGURE 18–5  Chemical structures of some prostaglandins and prostaglandin analogs currently in clinical use. 
OH
Misoprostol
(prostaglandin E1 analog)
OH
CH3
O
HO
COOCH3
COOH
Carboprost tromethamine
(prostaglandin F2` analog)
OH
H3C
HO
COOH
Alprostadil
(prostaglandin E1)
OH
OH
O
HO
Prostaglandin F2`
(PGF2`)
HO
HO
COOH
OH
OH
COOH
Dinoprostone
(prostaglandin E2, PGE2)
O
HO
COOH
Epoprostenol
(prostacyclin, PGI2)
O
HO
Treprostinil sodium
OH
OH
OCH2CO–
2
H
H
Na+
COOH
OH
OH
Iloprost
CH3
 B. Facilitation of Labor 
 Numerous studies have shown that PGE 2 , PGF 2α , and their ana-
logs effectively initiate and stimulate labor, but PGF 2α is one tenth 
as potent as PGE 2 . There appears to be no difference in the efficacy 
of PGE 2 and PGF 2α when they are administered intravenously; 
however, the most common usage is local application of PGE 2 
analogs (dinoprostone) to promote labor through ripening of the 
cervix. These agents and oxytocin have similar success rates and 
comparable induction-to-delivery intervals. The adverse effects of 
the prostaglandins are moderate, with a slightly higher incidence 
of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea than that produced by oxytocin. 
PGF 2α has more gastrointestinal toxicity than PGE 2 . Neither drug 
has significant maternal cardiovascular toxicity in the recom-
mended doses. In fact, PGE 2 must be infused at a rate about 20 
times faster than that used for induction of labor to decrease blood 
pressure and increase heart rate. PGF 2α is a bronchoconstrictor and 
should be used with caution in women with asthma; however, 
neither asthma attacks nor bronchoconstriction have been observed 
during the induction of labor. Although both PGE 2 and PGF 2α 
pass the fetoplacental barrier, fetal toxicity is uncommon. 
 The effects of oral PGE 2 administration (0.5–1.5 mg/h) have 
been compared with those of intravenous oxytocin and oral 
326    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
demoxytocin, an oxytocin derivative, in the induction of labor. 
Oral PGE 2 is superior to the oral oxytocin derivative and in most 
studies is as efficient as intravenous oxytocin. Oral PGF 2α causes 
too much gastrointestinal toxicity to be useful by this route. 
 Theoretically, PGE 2 and PGF 2α should be superior to oxytocin 
for inducing labor in women with preeclampsia-eclampsia or car-
diac and renal diseases because, unlike oxytocin, they have no 
antidiuretic effect. In addition, PGE 2 has natriuretic effects. 
However, the clinical benefits of these effects have not been docu-
mented. In cases of intrauterine fetal death, the prostaglandins 
alone or with oxytocin seem to cause delivery effectively. 
 C. Dysmenorrhea 
 Primary dysmenorrhea is attributable to increased endometrial syn-
thesis of PGE 2 and PGF 2α during menstruation, with contractions 
of the uterus that lead to ischemic pain. NSAIDs successfully inhibit 
the formation of these prostaglandins (see Chapter 36) and so 
relieve dysmenorrhea in 75–85% of cases. Some of these drugs are 
available over the counter. Aspirin is also effective in dysmenorrhea, 
but because it has low potency and is quickly hydrolyzed, large doses 
and frequent administration are necessary. In addition, the acetyla-
tion of platelet COX, causing irreversible inhibition of platelet 
TXA 2 synthesis, may increase the amount of menstrual bleeding. 
 Male Reproductive System 
 Intracavernosal injection or urethral suppository therapy with  alpros-
tadil (PGE 1 ) is a second-line treatment for erectile dysfunction. Doses 
of 2.5–25 mcg are used. Penile pain is a frequent side effect, which 
may be related to the algesic effects of PGE derivatives; however, only 
a few patients discontinue the use because of pain. Prolonged erection 
and priapism are side effects that occur in less than 4% of patients and 
are minimized by careful titration to the minimal effective dose. 
When given by injection, alprostadil may be used as monotherapy or 
in combination with either papaverine or phentolamine. 
 Renal System 
 Increased biosynthesis of prostaglandins has been associated with 
one form of Bartter’s syndrome. This is a rare disease characterized 
by low-to-normal blood pressure, decreased sensitivity to angio-
tensin, hyperreninemia, hyperaldosteronism, and excessive loss of 
K + . There also is an increased excretion of prostaglandins, espe-
cially PGE metabolites, in the urine. After long-term administra-
tion of COX inhibitors, sensitivity to angiotensin, plasma renin 
values, and the concentration of aldosterone in plasma return to 
normal. Although plasma K + rises, it remains low, and urinary 
wasting of K + persists. Whether an increase in prostaglandin bio-
synthesis is the cause of Bartter’s syndrome or a reflection of a 
more basic physiologic defect is not yet known. 
 Cardiovascular System 
 The vasodilator effects of PGE compounds have been studied 
extensively in hypertensive patients. These compounds also pro-
mote sodium diuresis. Practical application will require derivatives 
with oral activity, longer half-lives, and fewer adverse effects. 
 A. Pulmonary Hypertension 
 PGI 2 lowers peripheral, pulmonary, and coronary vascular resistance. It 
has been used to treat primary pulmonary hypertension as well as sec-
ondary pulmonary hypertension, which sometimes occurs after mitral 
valve surgery. In addition, prostacyclin has been used successfully to 
treat portopulmonary hypertension, which arises secondary to liver 
disease. The first commercial preparation of PGI 2 ( epoprostenol ) 
approved for treatment of primary pulmonary hypertension improves 
symptoms, prolongs survival, and delays or prevents the need for lung 
or lung-heart transplantation. Side effects include flushing, headache, 
hypotension, nausea, and diarrhea. The extremely short plasma half-life 
(3–5 minutes) of epoprostenol necessitates continuous intravenous 
infusion through a central line for long-term treatment, which is its 
greatest limitation. Several prostacyclin analogs with longer half-lives 
have been developed and used clinically.  Iloprost (half-life about 
30 minutes) is usually inhaled six to nine times per day, although it has 
been delivered by intravenous administration outside the USA. 
 Treprostinil (half-life about 4 hours) may be delivered by subcutaneous 
or intravenous infusion. 
 B. Peripheral Vascular Disease 
 A number of studies have investigated the use of PGE 1 and PGI 2 
compounds in Raynaud’s phenomenon and peripheral arterial 
disease. However, these studies are mostly small and uncontrolled, 
and these therapies do not have an established place in the treat-
ment of peripheral vascular disease. 
 C. Patent Ductus Arteriosus 
 Patency of the fetal ductus arteriosus depends on COX-2-
derived PGE 2 acting on the EP 4 receptor. At birth, reduced 
PGE 2 levels, a consequence of increased PGE 2 metabolism, 
allow ductus arteriosus closure. In certain types of congenital 
heart disease (eg, transposition of the great arteries, pulmonary 
atresia, pulmonary artery stenosis), it is important to maintain 
the patency of the neonate’s ductus arteriosus until corrective 
surgery can be carried out. This can be achieved with alprostadil 
(PGE 1 ). Like PGE 2 , PGE 1 is a vasodilator and an inhibitor of 
platelet aggregation, and it contracts uterine and intestinal 
smooth muscle. Adverse effects include apnea, bradycardia, 
hypotension, and hyperpyrexia. Because of rapid pulmonary 
clearance (the half-life is about 5–10 minutes in healthy adults 
and neonates), the drug must be continuously infused at an 
initial rate of 0.05–0.1 mcg/kg/min, which may be increased to 
0.4 mcg/kg/min. Prolonged treatment has been associated with 
ductal fragility and rupture. 
 In delayed closure of the ductus arteriosus, COX inhibitors are 
often used to inhibit synthesis of PGE 2 and so close the ductus. 
Premature infants in whom respiratory distress develops due to 
failure of ductus closure can be treated with a high degree of suc-
cess with indomethacin. This treatment often precludes the need 
for surgical closure of the ductus. 
 Blood 
 As noted above, eicosanoids are involved in thrombosis because 
TXA 2 promotes platelet aggregation while PGI 2 , and perhaps also 
CHAPTER 18 The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds    327
PGE 2 and PGD 2 , are platelet antagonists. Chronic administration 
of low-dose aspirin (81 mg/d) selectively and irreversibly inhibits 
platelet COX-1 without modifying the activity of systemic COX-1 
or COX-2 (see Chapter 34). Because their effects are reversible 
within the typical dosing interval, nonselective NSAIDs (eg, ibu-
profen) do not reproduce this effect, although naproxen, because 
of its variably prolonged half-life, may provide antiplatelet benefit 
in some individuals. TXA 2 , in addition to activating platelets, 
amplifies the response to other platelet agonists; hence inhibition 
of its synthesis inhibits secondary aggregation of platelets induced 
by adenosine diphosphate, by low concentrations of thrombin and 
collagen, and by epinephrine. Not surprisingly, selective COX-2 
inhibitors do not alter platelet TXA 2 biosynthesis and are not 
platelet inhibitors. However, COX-2-derived PGI 2 generation is 
substantially suppressed during selective COX-2 inhibition, 
removing a restraint on the cardiovascular action of TXA 2 , and 
other platelet agonists. It is highly likely that selective depression 
of PGI 2 generation contributes to the increased thrombotic events 
in humans treated with selective COX-2 inhibitors. 
 Overview analyses have shown that low-dose aspirin reduces 
the secondary incidence of heart attack and stroke by about 25%. 
However, low-dose aspirin also elevates the low risk of serious 
gastrointestinal bleeding about twofold over placebo. Low-dose 
aspirin also reduces the incidence of first myocardial infarction. 
However, in this case, the benefit versus risk of gastrointestinal 
bleeding is less clear. The effects of aspirin on platelet function are 
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 34. 
 Respiratory System 
 PGE 2 is a powerful bronchodilator when given in aerosol form. 
Unfortunately, it also promotes coughing, and an analog that pos-
sesses only the bronchodilator properties has been difficult to 
obtain. 
 PGF 2α and TXA 2 are both strong bronchoconstrictors and were 
once thought to be primary mediators in asthma. Polymorphisms in 
the genes for PGD 2 synthase, both DP receptors, and the TP recep-
tor have been linked with asthma in humans. DP antagonists, par-
ticularly those directed against DP 2 , are being investigated as 
potential treatments for allergic diseases including asthma. However, 
the cysteinyl leukotrienes—LTC 4 , LTD 4 , and LTE 4 —probably 
dominate during asthmatic constriction of the airways. As described 
in Chapter 20, leukotriene-receptor inhibitors (eg,  zafirlukast, 
montelukast ) are effective in asthma. A lipoxygenase inhibitor 
( zileuton ) has also been used in asthma but is not as popular as the 
receptor inhibitors. It remains unclear whether leukotrienes are 
partially responsible for acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
 Corticosteroids and cromolyn are also useful in asthma. 
Corticosteroids inhibit eicosanoid synthesis and thus limit the 
amounts of eicosanoid mediator available for release. Cromolyn 
appears to inhibit the release of eicosanoids and other mediators 
such as histamine and platelet-activating factor from mast cells. 
 Gastrointestinal System 
 The word “cytoprotection” was coined to signify the remarkable 
protective effect of the E prostaglandins against peptic ulcers in 
animals at doses that do not reduce acid secretion. Since then, 
numerous experimental and clinical investigations have shown that 
the PGE compounds and their analogs protect against peptic ulcers 
produced by either steroids or NSAIDs.  Misoprostol is an orally 
active synthetic analog of PGE 1 . The FDA-approved indication is 
for prevention of NSAID-induced peptic ulcers. The drug is 
administered at a dosage of 200 mcg four times daily with food. 
This and other PGE analogs (eg, enprostil) are cytoprotective at low 
doses and inhibit gastric acid secretion at higher doses. Misoprostol 
use is low, probably because of its adverse effects including abdom-
inal discomfort and occasional diarrhea. Dose-dependent bone pain 
and hyperostosis have been described in patients with liver disease 
who were given long-term PGE treatment. 
 Selective COX-2 inhibitors were developed in an effort to spare 
gastric COX-1 so that the natural cytoprotection by locally syn-
thesized PGE 2 and PGI 2 is undisturbed (see Chapter 36). 
However, this benefit is seen only with highly selective inhibitors 
and may be offset by increased cardiovascular toxicity. 
 Immune System 
 Cells of the immune system contribute substantially to eico-
sanoid biosynthesis during an immune reaction. T and B lym-
phocytes are not primary synthetic sources; however, they may 
supply arachidonic acid to monocyte-macrophages for eicosanoid 
synthesis. In addition, there is evidence for eicosanoid-mediated 
cell-cell interaction by platelets, erythrocytes, leukocytes, and 
endothelial cells. 
 The eicosanoids modulate the effects of the immune system. 
PGE 2 and PGI 2 limit T-lymphocyte proliferation in vitro, as do 
corticosteroids. PGE 2 also inhibits B-lymphocyte differentiation 
and the antigen-presenting function of myeloid-derived cells, sup-
pressing the immune response. T-cell clonal expansion is attenu-
ated through inhibition of interleukin-1 and interleukin-2 and 
class II antigen expression by macrophages or other antigen-presenting 
cells. The leukotrienes, TXA 2 , and platelet-activating factor stimu-
late T-cell clonal expansion. These compounds stimulate the for-
mation of interleukin-1 and interleukin-2 as well as the expression 
of interleukin-2 receptors. The leukotrienes also promote 
interferon-γ release and can replace interleukin-2 as a stimulator 
of interferon-γ. PGD 2 induces chemotaxis and migration of T H 2 
lymphocytes. These in vitro effects of the eicosanoids agree with 
in vivo findings in animals with acute organ transplant rejection, 
as described below. 
 A. Cell-Mediated Organ Transplant Rejection 
 Acute organ transplant rejection is a cell-mediated immune 
response (see Chapter 55). Administration of PGI 2 to renal trans-
plant patients has reversed the rejection process in some cases. 
Experimental in vitro and in vivo data show that PGE 2 and PGI 2 
can attenuate T-cell proliferation and rejection, which can also be 
seen with drugs that inhibit TXA 2 and leukotriene formation. In 
organ transplant patients, urinary excretion of metabolites of 
TXA 2 increases during acute rejection. Corticosteroids, the first-
line drugs used for treatment of acute rejection because of their 
lymphotoxic effects, inhibit both phospholipase and COX-2 
activity. 
328    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 B. Inflammation 
 Aspirin has been used to treat arthritis of all types for approxi-
mately 100 years, but its mechanism of action—inhibition of COX 
activity—was not discovered until 1971. COX-2 appears to be the 
form of the enzyme most associated with cells involved in the 
inflammatory process, although, as outlined above, COX-1 also 
contributes significantly to prostaglandin biosynthesis during 
inflammation. Aspirin and other anti-inflammatory agents that 
inhibit COX are discussed in Chapter 36. 
 C. Rheumatoid Arthritis 
 In rheumatoid arthritis, immune complexes are deposited in the 
affected joints, causing an inflammatory response that is amplified 
by eicosanoids. Lymphocytes and macrophages accumulate in the 
synovium, whereas leukocytes localize mainly in the synovial fluid. 
The major eicosanoids produced by leukocytes are leukotrienes, 
which facilitate T-cell proliferation and act as chemoattractants. 
Human macrophages synthesize the COX products PGE 2 and 
TXA 2 and large amounts of leukotrienes. 
 D. Infection 
 The relationship of eicosanoids to infection is not well defined. 
The association between the use of the anti-inflammatory steroids 
and increased risk of infection is well established. However, 
NSAIDs do not seem to alter patient responses to infection. 
 Glaucoma 
 Latanoprost, a stable long-acting PGF 2α derivative, was the first 
prostanoid used for glaucoma. The success of latanoprost has 
stimulated development of similar prostanoids with ocular 
hypotensive effects, and  bimatoprost, travoprost, and  unoprostone
are now available. These drugs act at the FP receptor and are 
administered as drops into the conjunctival sac once or twice daily. 
Adverse effects include irreversible brown pigmentation of the iris 
and eyelashes, drying of the eyes, and conjunctivitis. 
 DIETARY MANIPULATION OF 
ARACHIDONIC ACID METABOLISM 
 Because arachidonic acid is derived from dietary linoleic and 
α-linolenic acids, which are essential fatty acids, the effects of 
dietary manipulation on arachidonic acid metabolism have been 
extensively studied. Two approaches have been used. The first adds 
corn, safflower, and sunflower oils, which contain linoleic acid 
(C18:2), to the diet. The second approach adds oils containing 
eicosapentaenoic (C20:5) and docosahexaenoic acids (C22:6), so-
called omega-3 fatty acids, from cold-water fish. Both types of diet 
change the phospholipid composition of cell membranes by 
replacing arachidonic acid with the dietary fatty acids. Diets high 
in fish oils have been shown to impact ex vivo indices of platelet 
and leukocyte function, blood pressure, and triglycerides with dif-
ferent dose-response relationships. There is an abundance of epi-
demiologic data relating diets high in fatty fish to a reduction in 
the incidence of myocardial infarction and sudden cardiac death 
although there is more ambiguity about stroke. Of course, epide-
miologic data may confound such diets with a reduction in satu-
rated fats and other elements of a “healthy” lifestyle. In addition, 
some data from prospective randomized trials suggest that such 
dietary interventions may reduce the incidence of sudden death. 
Experiments in vitro suggest that fish oils protect against experi-
mentally induced arrhythmogenesis, platelet aggregation, vaso-
motor spasm, and dyslipidemias. 
 NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY 
DRUGS ARE LISTED IN CHAPTER 36.
Alprostadil
Penile injection (Caverject, Edex): 5, 10, 20, 40 mcg sterile powder 
for reconstitution
Parenteral (Prostin VR Pediatric): 500 mcg/mL ampules
Bimatoprost (Lumigan)
Ophthalmic drops: 0.03% solution
Carboprost tromethamine (Hemabate)
Parenteral: 250 mcg carboprost and 83 mcg tromethamine per mL 
ampules
Dinoprostone [prostaglandin E2](Prostin E2, Prepidil, Cervidil)
Vaginal: 20 mg suppositories, 0.5 mg gel, 10 mg controlled-release 
system
Epoprostenol [prostacyclin] (Flolan)
Intravenous: 0.5, 1.5 mg powder to reconstitute
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Iloprost (Ventavis)
Inhalation: 10 mcg/mL solution
Latanoprost (Xalatan)
Topical: 0.005% ophthalmic solution
Misoprostol (generic, Cytotec)
Oral: 100 and 200 mcg tablets
Montelukast (Singulair)
Oral: 4, 5 mg chewable tablets, 10 mg tablets, 4 mg granules
Travoprost (Travatan)
Ophthalmic solution: 0.004%
Treprostinil (Remodulin)
Parenteral: 1, 2.5, 5, 10 mg/mL for intravenous infusion or 
subcutaneous
Zafirlukast (Accolate)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets
Zileuton (Zyflo)
Oral: 600 mg tablets 
CHAPTER 18 The Eicosanoids: Prostaglandins, Thromboxanes, Leukotrienes, & Related Compounds    329
 REFERENCES 
 Breyer RM et al: Prostanoid receptors: Subtypes and signaling. Annu Rev Pharmacol 
Toxicol 2001;41:661. 
 Brink C et al: International Union of Pharmacology XXXVII. Nomenclature for 
leukotriene and lipoxin receptors. Pharmacol Rev 2003;55:195. 
 Cheng HF, Harris RC: Cyclooxygenases, the kidney, and hypertension. 
Hypertension 2004;43:525. 
 Christin-Maitre S, Bouchard P, Spitz IM: Medical termination of pregnancy. 
N Engl J Med 2000;342:946. 
 Grosser T, Fries S, FitzGerald GA: Biological basis for the cardiovascular conse-
quences of COX-2 inhibition: Therapeutic challenges and opportunities. 
J Clin Invest 2006;116:4. 
 Hao CM, Breyer MD: Physiological regulation of prostaglandins in the kidney. 
Annu Rev Physiol 2008;70:357. 
 Hata AN, Breyer RM: Pharmacology and signaling of prostaglandin receptors: 
Multiple roles in inflammation and immune modulation. Pharmacol Ther 
2004;103:147. 
 Leonhardt A et al: Expression of prostanoid receptors in human ductus arteriosus. 
Br J Pharmacol 2003;138:655. 
 Martel-Pelletier J et al: Therapeutic role of dual inhibitors of 5-LOX and COX, 
selective and non-selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Ann 
Rheum Dis 2003;62:501. 
 Matsuoka T, Narumiya S: Prostaglandin receptor signaling in disease. Scientific 
World Journal 2007;7:1329. 
 Narumiya S, FitzGerald GA: Genetic and pharmacological analysis of prostanoid 
receptor function. J Clin Invest 2001;108:25. 
 Rokach J et al: Nomenclature of isoprostanes: A proposal. Prostaglandins 
1997;54:853. 
 Smith WL, Dewitt DL, Garavito MR: Cyclooxygenases: Structural, cellular, and 
molecular biology. Annu Rev Biochem 2000;69:145. 
 Smyth EM, FitzGerald GA: Prostaglandin mediators. In: Bradshaw RD, Dennis 
EA (editors):  Handbook of Cell Signaling . Elsevier, 2009. 
 Steiropoulos P, Trakada G, Bouros D: Current pharmacological treatment of pul-
monary arterial hypertension. Curr Clin Pharmacol 2008;3:11. 
 Wang D, Dubois RN: Prostaglandins and cancer. Gut 2006;55:115. 
 Wang D, Mann JR, DuBois RN: The role of prostaglandins and other eicosanoids 
in the gastrointestinal tract. Gastroenterology 2005;128:1445. 
This page intentionally left blank 
331
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Nitric Oxide 
 Samie R. Jaffrey, MD, PhD 
 Nitric oxide (NO) is a gaseous signaling molecule that readily dif-
fuses across cell membranes and regulates a wide range of physio-
logic and pathophysiologic processes including cardiovascular, 
inflammatory, and neuronal functions. Nitric oxide should not be 
confused with nitrous oxide (N 2 O), an anesthetic gas, nor with 
nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ), a toxic pulmonary irritant gas. 
 ■ DISCOVERY OF ENDOGENOUSLY 
GENERATED NITRIC OXIDE 
 Because NO is an environmental pollutant, the finding that NO 
is synthesized by cells and activates specific intracellular signaling 
pathways was unexpected. The first indication that NO is gener-
ated in cells came from studies of cultured macrophages, which 
showed that treatment with inflammatory mediators, such as bac-
terial endotoxin, resulted in the production of nitrate and nitrite, 
molecules that are byproducts of NO breakdown. Similarly, injec-
tion of endotoxin in animals elevated urinary nitrite and nitrate. 
 The second indication came from studies of vascular regulation. 
Several molecules, such as acetylcholine, were known to cause 
relaxation of blood vessels. This effect occurred only when the ves-
sels were prepared so that the luminal endothelial cells covering the 
smooth muscle of the vessel wall were retained. Subsequent studies 
showed that endothelial cells respond to these vasorelaxants by 
releasing a soluble  endothelial-derived relaxing factor (EDRF). 
EDRF acts on vascular muscle to elicit relaxation. These findings 
prompted an intense search for the identity of EDRF. 
 At the same time, it was observed that exogenous application 
of NO or organic nitrates, which are metabolized to NO, elicit a 
variety of effects including inhibition of platelet aggregation and 
vasorelaxation. These effects were particularly intriguing, since 
they appeared to involve the activation of highly specific cellular 
responses, rather than more general cytotoxic responses. 
Comparison of the biochemical and pharmacological properties of 
EDRF and NO provided initial evidence that NO is the major 
bioactive component of EDRF. These findings also made it clear 
that exogenously applied NO and NO-releasing compounds 
(nitrates, nitrites, nitroprusside; see Chapters 11 and 12) elicited 
their effects by recruiting physiologic signaling pathways that 
normally mediate the actions of endogenously generated NO. 
 ■ NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHESIS, 
SIGNALING MECHANISMS, & 
INACTIVATION 
 Synthesis 
 NO, written as NO •  to indicate an unpaired electron in its 
chemical structure, or simply NO, is a highly reactive signaling 
molecule that is made by any of three closely related NO synthase 
(NOS, EC 1.14.13.49) isoenzymes, each of which is encoded by 
a separate gene and named for the initial cell type from which it 
was isolated ( Table 19–1 ). These enzymes, neuronal NOS (nNOS 
or NOS-1), macrophage or inducible NOS (iNOS or NOS-2), 
and endothelial NOS (eNOS or NOS-3), despite their names, are 
each expressed in a wide variety of cell types, often with an over-
lapping distribution. These isoforms generate NO from the amino 
acid  L -arginine in an O 2 - and NADPH-dependent reaction 
( Figure 19–1 ). This enzymatic reaction involves enzyme-bound 
cofactors, including heme, tetrahydrobiopterin, and flavin adenine 
dinucleotide (FAD). In the case of nNOS and eNOS, NO synthe-
sis is triggered by agents and processes that increase cytosolic cal-
cium concentrations. Cytosolic calcium forms complexes with 
calmodulin, an abundant calcium-binding protein, which then 
binds and activates eNOS and nNOS. On the other hand, iNOS 
is not regulated by calcium, but is constitutively active. In mac-
rophages and several other cell types, inflammatory mediators 
induce the transcriptional activation of the iNOS gene, resulting 
in accumulation of iNOS and increased synthesis of NO. 
 Signaling Mechanisms 
 NO mediates its effects by covalent modification of proteins. 
There are three major targets of NO ( Figure 19–1 ): 
 1. Metalloproteins— NO interacts with metals, especially iron 
in heme. The major target of NO is soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC), 
19
332    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
a heme-containing enzyme that generates cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate (cGMP) from guanosine triphosphate (GTP). 
NO binds to the heme in sGC, resulting in enzyme activation and 
elevation in intracellular cGMP levels. cGMP activates protein 
kinase G (PKG), which phosphorylates specific proteins. In blood 
vessels, NO-dependent elevations in cGMP and PKG activity 
result in the phosphorylation of proteins that lead to reduced 
cytosolic calcium levels and subsequently reduced contraction of 
vascular smooth muscle. Interaction of NO with other metallo-
proteins mediates some of the cytotoxic effects of NO associated 
with NO overproduction, eg, by activated macrophages. For 
example, NO inhibits metalloproteins involved in cellular respira-
tion, such as the citric acid cycle enzyme aconitase and the electron 
transport chain protein cytochrome oxidase. Inhibition of heme-
containing cytochrome P450 enzymes by NO is a major patho-
genic mechanism in inflammatory liver disease. 
 2. Thiols— NO reacts with thiols (compounds containing the 
–SH group) to form nitrosothiols. In proteins, the thiol moiety is 
found in the amino acid cysteine. This posttranslational modifica-
tion, termed  S -nitrosylation or  S -nitrosation, requires either met-
als or O 2 to catalyze the formation of the nitrosothiol adduct. 
 S -nitrosylation is highly specific, with only certain cysteine resi-
dues in proteins becoming  S -nitrosylated.  S -nitrosylation can alter 
the function, stability, or localization of target proteins. Although 
the physiologic roles of protein nitrosylation are not fully 
TABLE 19–1 Properties of the three isoforms of nitric oxide synthase (NOS). 
Isoform Names
Property
NOS-1
NOS-2
NOS-3
Other names
nNOS (neuronal NOS)
iNOS (inducible NOS)
eNOS (endothelial NOS)
Tissue
Neurons, skeletal muscle
Macrophages, smooth muscle cells
Endothelial cells, neurons
Expression
Constitutive
Transcriptional induction
Constitutive
Calcium regulation
Yes
No
Yes
 FIGURE 19–1  Synthesis and reactions of nitric oxide (NO).  L -NMMA inhibits nitric oxide synthase. NO complexes with the iron in hemopro-
teins (eg, guanylyl cyclase), resulting in the activation of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) synthesis and cGMP target proteins such as 
protein kinase G. Under conditions of oxidative stress, NO can react with superoxide to nitrate tyrosine. GTP, guanosine triphosphate. 
NO
+
NO2
H2N
HN
N
S
O
NADPH, O2
OH
O
Superoxide
Cysteine
S-nitrosylation
Activation of
guanylyl cyclase
Tyrosine
nitration
Heme iron in
Guanylyl cyclase
NOS
L-NMMA
Arginine
Citrulline
cGMP
Protein kinase G
GTP
H2N
HN
N+H2
NH+3
COO−
COO−
NH+3
COO−
NH+3
COO−
NH+3
O2, metals
CHAPTER 19 Nitric Oxide    333
established, major targets of  S -nitrosylation are H-ras, a regulator 
of cell proliferation that is activated by  S -nitrosylation, and the 
metabolic enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, 
which is inhibited when it is  S -nitrosylated. Denitrosylation of 
proteins is poorly understood but may involve enzymes, such as 
thioredoxin, or chemical reduction by intracellular reducing 
agents such as glutathione, an abundant intracellular sulfhydryl-
containing compound. Glutathione can also be  S -nitrosylated 
under physiologic conditions to generate  S -nitrosoglutathione. 
 S -nitrosoglutathione may serve as an endogenous stabilized form 
of NO or as a carrier of NO. Vascular glutathione is decreased in 
diabetes mellitus and atherosclerosis, and the resulting deficiency 
of  S -nitrosoglutathione may account for the increased incidence of 
cardiovascular complications in these conditions. 
 3. Tyrosine nitration— NO undergoes both oxidative and 
reductive reactions, resulting in a variety of oxides of nitrogen that 
can nitrosylate thiols and nitrate tyrosines (described below) or are 
stable oxidation products ( Table 19–2 ). NO reacts very efficiently 
with superoxide to form peroxynitrite (ONOO – ), a highly reactive 
oxidant that leads to DNA damage, nitration of tyrosine, and 
oxidation of cysteine to disulfides or to various sulfur oxides 
(SO x ). Several cellular enzymes synthesize superoxide, and the 
activity of these enzymes, as well as NO synthesis, is increased in 
numerous inflammatory and degenerative diseases, resulting in an 
increase in peroxynitrite levels. Numerous proteins are susceptible 
to peroxynitrite-catalyzed tyrosine nitration, and this irreversible 
modification can be associated with either activation or inhibition 
of protein function. Detection of tyrosine nitration in tissue is 
often used as a marker of oxidative stress and tissue damage, 
although a direct causal role of tyrosine nitration in the pathogen-
esis of any disease has not been definitively established. 
Peroxynitrite-mediated protein modification is mitigated by intra-
cellular levels of glutathione, which can protect against tissue 
damage by scavenging peroxynitrite. Factors that regulate the 
biosynthesis and decomposition of glutathione may have impor-
tant consequences on the toxicity of NO. 
 Inactivation 
 NO is highly labile due to its rapid reaction with metals, O 2 , and 
reactive oxygen species. NO can react with heme and hemopro-
teins, including oxyhemoglobin, which oxidizes NO to nitrate. 
The reaction of NO with hemoglobin may also lead to 
 S -nitrosylation of hemoglobin, resulting in transport of NO 
throughout the vasculature. NO is also inactivated by reaction 
with O 2 to form nitrogen dioxide. NO reacts with superoxide, 
which results in the formation of the highly reactive oxidizing spe-
cies, peroxynitrite. Scavengers of superoxide anion such as super-
oxide dismutase may protect NO, enhancing its potency and 
prolonging its duration of action. 
 ■ PHARMACOLOGIC 
MANIPULATION OF NITRIC OXIDE 
 Inhibitors of Nitric Oxide Synthesis 
 The primary strategy to reduce NO generation in cells is to use 
NOS inhibitors. The majority of these inhibitors are arginine 
analogs that bind to the NOS arginine-binding site. Since each of 
the NOS isoforms has high structural similarity, most of these 
inhibitors do not exhibit selectivity for individual NOS isoforms. 
In inflammatory disorders and sepsis (see below), inhibition of the 
iNOS isoform is potentially beneficial, whereas nNOS-specific 
inhibitors may be useful for the treatment of neurodegenerative 
conditions. However, administration of nonselective NOS inhibi-
tors leads to concurrent inhibition of eNOS, which impairs its 
homeostatic signaling and also results in vasoconstriction and 
TABLE 19–2 Oxides of nitrogen.
Name
Structure
Known Function
Nitric oxide (NO)
Vasodilator, platelet inhibitor, immune regulator, neurotransmitter
Peroxynitrite (NO3–)
Oxidant and nitrating agent
Nitroxyl anion (NO–)
Can form from nonspecific donation of an electron from metals to NO•
Exhibits NO-like effects, possibly by first being oxidized to NO
Nitrous oxide (N2O)
Anesthetic
Dinitrogen trioxide (N2O3)
Auto-oxidation product of NO that can nitrosylate protein thiols
Nitrite (NO2–)
Stable oxidation product of NO•
Slowly metabolized to nitrosothiols, and decomposes to NO at acidic pH
Nitrate (NO3–)
Stable oxidation product of NO•
334    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
potential ischemic damage. Thus, NOS isoform-selective inhibi-
tors are being designed that exploit subtle differences in substrate 
binding sites between the isoforms, as well as newer iso-
form-selective inhibitors that prevent NOS dimerization, the 
conformation required for enzymatic activity. The efficacy of 
NOS isoform-selective inhibitors in medical conditions is under 
investigation. 
 Nitric Oxide Donors 
 NO donors, which release NO or related NO species, are used to 
elicit smooth muscle relaxation. Different classes of NO donors 
have differing biologic properties, depending on the nature of the 
NO species released and the mechanism that is responsible for 
its release. 
 1. Organic nitrates— Nitroglycerin, which dilates veins and 
coronary arteries, is metabolized to NO by mitochondrial alde-
hyde reductase, an enzyme enriched in venous smooth muscle, 
accounting for the potent venodilating activity of this molecule. 
Venous dilation decreases cardiac preload, which along with 
coronary artery dilation accounts for the antianginal effects of 
nitroglycerin. Other organic nitrates, such as isosorbide dini-
trate, are metabolized to an NO-releasing species through a 
poorly understood enzymatic pathway. Unlike NO, organic 
nitrates have less significant effects on aggregation of platelets, 
which appear to lack the enzymatic pathways necessary for rapid 
metabolic activation. Organic nitrates exhibit rapid tolerance 
during continuous administration. This nitrate tolerance may 
derive from the generation of reactive oxygen species that inhibit 
mitochondrial aldehyde reductase, endogenous NO synthesis, 
and other pathways (see Chapter 12). 
 2. Organic nitrites— Organic nitrites, such as the antianginal 
inhalant amyl nitrite, also require metabolic activation to elicit 
vasorelaxation, although the responsible enzyme has not been 
identified. Nitrites are arterial vasodilators and do not exhibit the 
rapid tolerance seen with nitrates. Amyl nitrite is abused for 
euphoric effects and combining it with phosphodiesterase inhibi-
tors, such as sildenafil, can cause lethal hypotension. Amyl nitrite 
has been largely replaced by nitrates, such as nitroglycerin, which 
are more easily administered. 
 3. Sodium nitroprusside— Sodium nitroprusside, which 
dilates arterioles and venules, is used for rapid pressure reduction 
in arterial hypertension. In response to light as well as chemical or 
enzymatic mechanisms in cell membranes, sodium nitroprusside 
breaks down to generate five cyanide molecules and a single NO. 
See Chapter 11 for additional details. 
 4. NO gas inhalation— NO itself can be used therapeutically. 
Inhalation of NO results in reduced pulmonary artery pressure 
and improved perfusion of ventilated areas of the lung. Inhaled 
NO is used for pulmonary hypertension, acute hypoxemia, and 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and there is evidence of short-term 
improvements in pulmonary function. Inhaled NO is stored as a 
compressed gas mixture with nitrogen, which does not readily 
react with NO, and further diluted to the desired concentration 
upon administration. NO can react with O 2 to form nitrogen 
dioxide, a pulmonary irritant that can cause deterioration of lung 
function (see Chapter 56). Additionally, NO can induce the for-
mation of methemoglobin, a form of hemoglobin containing Fe 3+ 
rather than Fe 2+ , which does not bind O 2 (see also Chapter 12). 
Therefore, nitrogen dioxide and methemoglobin levels are moni-
tored during inhaled NO treatment. 
 5. Alternate strategies— Another mechanism to potentiate 
the actions of NO is to inhibit the phosphodiesterase enzymes 
that degrade cGMP. Inhibitors of type 5 phosphodiesterase such 
as sildenafil result in prolongation of the duration of NO-induced 
cGMP elevations in a variety of tissues (see Chapter 12). 
 ■ NITRIC OXIDE IN DISEASE 
 VASCULAR EFFECTS 
 NO has a significant effect on vascular smooth muscle tone and 
blood pressure. Numerous endothelium-dependent vasodilators, 
such as acetylcholine and bradykinin, act by increasing intracel-
lular calcium levels in endothelial cells, leading to the synthesis of 
NO. NO diffuses to vascular smooth muscle leading to vasorelax-
ation ( Figure 19–2 ). Mice with a knockout mutation in the eNOS 
gene display increased vascular tone and elevated mean arterial 
pressure, indicating that eNOS is a fundamental regulator of 
blood pressure. 
 Apart from being a vasodilator and regulating blood pressure, 
NO also has antithrombotic effects. Both endothelial cells and 
platelets contain eNOS, which acts via an NO-cGMP pathway to 
inhibit platelet activation, an initiator of thrombus formation. 
Thus, in diseases associated with endothelial dysfunction, the 
associated decrease in NO generation leads to an increased pro-
pensity for abnormal platelet function and thrombosis. NO may 
have an additional inhibitory effect on blood coagulation by 
enhancing fibrinolysis via an effect on plasminogen. 
 NO also protects against atherogenesis. A major antiathero-
genic mechanism of NO involves the inhibition of proliferation 
and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells. In animal models, 
myointimal proliferation following angioplasty can be blocked by 
NO donors, by NOS gene transfer, and by NO inhalation. NO 
reduces endothelial adhesion of monocytes and leukocytes, which 
are early steps in the development of atheromatous plaques. This 
effect is due to the inhibitory effect of NO on the expression of 
adhesion molecules on the endothelial surface. In addition, NO 
may act as an antioxidant, blocking the oxidation of low-density 
lipoproteins and thus preventing or reducing the formation of 
foam cells in the vascular wall. Plaque formation is also affected by 
NO-dependent reduction in endothelial cell permeability to lipo-
proteins. The importance of eNOS in cardiovascular disease is 
supported by experiments showing increased atherosclerosis in 
animals treated with eNOS inhibitors. Atherosclerosis risk factors, 
CHAPTER 19 Nitric Oxide    335
such as smoking, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and hypertension, are 
associated with decreased endothelial NO production, and thus 
enhance atherogenesis. 
 SEPTIC SHOCK 
 Sepsis is a systemic inflammatory response caused by infection. 
Endotoxin components from the bacterial wall along with 
endogenously generated tumor necrosis factor-α and other 
cytokines induce synthesis of iNOS in macrophages, neutro-
phils, and T cells, as well as hepatocytes, smooth muscle cells, 
endothelial cells, and fibroblasts. This widespread generation of 
NO results in exaggerated hypotension, shock, and, in some 
cases, death. This hypotension is reduced or reversed by NOS 
inhibitors in humans as well as in animal models ( Table 19–3 ). 
A similar reversal of hypotension is produced by compounds 
that prevent the action of NO, such as the sGC inhibitor meth-
ylene blue. Furthermore, knockout mice lacking a functional 
iNOS gene are more resistant to endotoxin than wild-type mice. 
However, despite the ability of NOS inhibitors to ameliorate 
hypotension in sepsis, there is no overall improvement in sur-
vival in patients with gram-negative sepsis treated with NOS 
inhibitors. The absence of benefit may reflect the inability of the 
NOS inhibitors used in these trials to differentiate between 
NOS isoforms, or may reflect concurrent inhibition of beneficial 
aspects of iNOS signaling. 
Acetylcholine,
bradykinin
Endothelial
cell
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Arginine
NO
eNOS
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+•CaM
CaM
PKG
cGMP
GTP
GMP
Phosphodiesterase
Vascular
smooth
muscle
cell
Contraction
Soluble
guanylyl
cyclase
-
-
Blood
 FIGURE 19–2  Regulation of vasorelaxation by endothelial-derived nitric oxide (NO). Endogenous vasodilators, eg, acetylcholine and 
bradykinin, activate NO synthesis in the luminal endothelial cells, leading to calcium (Ca 2+ ) efflux from the endoplasmic reticulum into the 
cytoplasm. Calcium binds to calmodulin (CaM), which activates endothelial NO synthase (eNOS), resulting in NO synthesis from  L -arginine. 
NO diffuses into smooth muscle cells, where it activates soluble guanylyl cyclase and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) synthesis from 
guanosine triphosphate (GTP). cGMP binds and activates protein kinase G (PKG), resulting in an overall reduction in calcium influx, and 
inhibition of calcium-dependent muscle contraction. PKG can also block other pathways that lead to muscle contraction. cGMP signaling is 
terminated by phosphodiesterases, which convert cGMP to GMP. 
TABLE 19–3  Some inhibitors of nitric oxide synthesis 
or action.
Inhibitor
Mechanism
Comment
N ω-Monomethyl-
L-arginine 
(L-NMMA)
Competitive inhibitor, 
binds arginine-binding 
site in NOS
Nonselective NOS 
inhibitor
N ω-Nitro-L-
arginine methyl 
ester (L-NAME)
Competitive inhibitor, 
binds arginine-binding 
site in NOS
Nonselective NOS 
inhibitor
7-Nitroindazole
Competitive inhibitor, 
binds both 
tetrahydrobiopterin 
and arginine-binding 
sites in NOS
Partially selective for 
NOS-1 in vivo
BBS-2
Inhibits iNOS 
dimerization
Also weakly inhibits 
nNOS and eNOS
Hemoglobin
NO scavenger
NOS, nitric oxide SYNTHASE; BBS-2, a pyrimide imidazole.
 INFECTION & INFLAMMATION 
 The generation of NO has both beneficial and detrimental roles 
in the host immune response and in inflammation. The host 
response to infection or injury involves the recruitment of leuko-
cytes and the release of inflammatory mediators, such as tumor 
336    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
necrosis factor and interleukin-1. This leads to induction of iNOS 
in leukocytes, fibroblasts, and other cell types. The NO that is 
produced, along with peroxynitrite that forms from its interaction 
with superoxide, is an important microbicide. NO also appears to 
play an important protective role in the body via immune cell 
function. When challenged with foreign antigens, T H 1 cells (see 
Chapter 55) respond by synthesizing NO, which has roles in T H 1 
cells. The importance of NO in T H 1 cell function is demonstrated 
by the impaired protective response to injected parasites in animal 
models after inhibition of iNOS. NO also stimulates the synthesis 
of inflammatory prostaglandins by activating cyclooxygenase 
isoenzyme 2 (COX-2). Through its effects on COX-2, its direct 
vasodilatory effects, and other mechanisms, NO generated during 
inflammation contributes to the erythema, vascular permeability, 
and subsequent edema associated with acute inflammation. 
 However, in both acute and chronic inflammatory condi-
tions, prolonged or excessive NO production may exacerbate 
tissue injury. Indeed, psoriasis lesions, airway epithelium in 
asthma, and inflammatory bowel lesions in humans all demon-
strate elevated levels of NO and iNOS, suggesting that persistent 
iNOS induction may contribute to disease pathogenesis. 
Moreover, these tissues also exhibit increased levels of nitroty-
rosine, indicating excessive formation of peroxynitrite. In several 
animal models of arthritis, increasing NO production by dietary 
 L -arginine supplementation exacerbates arthritis, whereas pro-
tection is seen with iNOS inhibitors. Thus, inhibition of the 
NO pathway may have a beneficial effect on a variety of acute 
and chronic inflammatory diseases. 
 THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 NO has an important role in the central nervous system as a 
neurotransmitter (see Chapter 21). Unlike classic transmitters 
such as glutamate or dopamine, which are stored in synaptic 
vesicles and released in the synaptic cleft upon vesicle fusion, 
NO is not stored, but rather is synthesized on demand and 
immediately diffuses to neighboring cells. NO synthesis is 
induced at postsynaptic sites in neurons, most commonly upon 
activation of the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptor, which 
results in calcium influx and activation of nNOS. In several 
neuronal subtypes, eNOS is also present and activated by neu-
rotransmitter pathways that lead to calcium influx. NO synthe-
sized postsynaptically may function as a retrograde messenger 
and diffuse to the presynaptic terminal to enhance the efficiency 
of neurotransmitter release, thereby regulating synaptic plastic-
ity, the process of synapse strengthening that underlies learning 
and memory. Because aberrant NMDA receptor activation and 
excessive NO synthesis is linked to excitotoxic neuronal death in 
several neurologic diseases, including stroke, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, and Parkinson’s disease, therapy with NOS inhibitors 
may reduce neuronal damage in these conditions. However, 
clinical trials have not clearly supported the benefit of NOS 
inhibition, which may reflect nonselectivity of the inhibitors, 
resulting in inhibition of the beneficial effects of eNOS. 
 THE PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 Nonadrenergic, noncholinergic (NANC) neurons are widely 
distributed in peripheral tissues, especially the gastrointestinal 
and reproductive tracts (see Chapter 6). Considerable evidence 
implicates NO as a mediator of certain NANC actions, and 
some NANC neurons appear to release NO. Penile erection is 
thought to be caused by the release of NO from NANC neurons; 
NO promotes relaxation of the smooth muscle in the corpora 
cavernosa—the initiating factor in penile erection—and inhibi-
tors of NOS have been shown to prevent erection caused by 
pelvic nerve stimulation in the rat. An established approach in 
treating erectile dysfunction is to enhance the effect of NO sig-
naling by inhibiting the breakdown of cGMP by the phosphodi-
esterase (PDE isoform 5) present in the smooth muscle of the 
corpora cavernosa with drugs such as sildenafil, tadalafil, and 
vardenafil (see Chapter 12). 
 RESPIRATORY DISORDERS 
 NO is administered by inhalation (see Preparations Available) to 
newborns with hypoxic respiratory failure associated with pulmo-
nary hypertension. The current treatment for severely defective gas 
exchange in the newborn is with extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation (ECMO), which does not directly affect pulmonary 
vascular pressures. NO inhalation dilates pulmonary vessels, 
resulting in decreased pulmonary vascular resistance and reduced 
pulmonary artery pressure. Inhaled NO also improves oxygen-
ation by reducing mismatch of ventilation and perfusion in the 
lung. Inhalation of NO results in dilation of pulmonary vessels in 
areas of the lung with better ventilation, thereby redistributing 
pulmonary blood flow away from poorly ventilated areas. NO 
inhalation does not typically exert pronounced effects on the sys-
temic circulation. Inhaled NO has also been shown to improve 
cardiopulmonary function in adult patients with pulmonary 
artery hypertension. 
 An additional approach for treating pulmonary hypertension is to 
potentiate the actions of NO in pulmonary vascular beds. Due to the 
enrichment of PDE-5 in pulmonary vascular beds, PDE-5 inhibitors 
such as sildenafil and tadalafil induce vasodilation and marked reduc-
tions in pulmonary hypertension (see also Chapter 12). 
CHAPTER 19 Nitric Oxide    337
SUMMARY Nitric Oxide
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicity, 
Interactions
NITRIC OXIDE (NO)
NO activates soluble 
guanylyl cyclase to 
elevate cGMP levels 
in vascular smooth 
muscle
Vasodilator • relaxes 
other smooth muscle • 
inhalation of NO leads to 
increased blood flow to parts 
of the lung exposed to NO 
and decreased pulmonary 
vascular resistance
Hypoxic respiratory failure 
and pulmonary hypertension
Inhaled gas • Toxicity: 
Methemoglobinemia
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
 Nitric Oxide (INOmax)
Inhalation: 100, 800 ppm gas 
 REFERENCES 
 Chen Z, Stamler JS: Bioactivation of nitroglycerin by the mitochondrial aldehyde 
dehydrogenase. Trends Cardiovasc Med 2006;16:259. 
 Griffiths MJ, Evans TW: Inhaled nitric oxide therapy in adults. N Engl J Med 
2005;353:2683. 
 Guix FX et al: The physiology and pathophysiology of nitric oxide in the brain. 
Prog Neurobiol 2005;76:126. 
 McMillan K et al: Allosteric inhibitors of inducible nitric oxide synthase dimeriza-
tion discovered via combinatorial chemistry. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 
2000;97:1506. 
 Moncada S, Higgs EA: The discovery of nitric oxide and its role in vascular biol-
ogy. Br J Pharmacol 2006;147:S193. 
 Napoli C, Ignarro LJ: Nitric oxide-releasing drugs. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 
2003;43:97. 
 Paige JS, Jaffrey, SR: Pharmacologic manipulation of nitric oxide signaling: 
Targeting NOS dimerization and protein-protein interactions. Curr Topics 
Med Chem 2007;7:97. 
 Ramani GV, Park MH: Update on the clinical utility of sildenafil in the treatment 
of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Drug Des Devel Ther 2010;4:61. 
 Wimalawansa SJ: Nitric oxide: New evidence for novel therapeutic indications. 
Expert Opin Pharmacother 2008;9:1935. 
This page intentionally left blank 
339
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Drugs Used in Asthma 
 Homer A. Boushey, MD  
 Asthma is characterized clinically by recurrent bouts of shortness 
of breath, chest tightness, and wheezing, often associated with 
coughing; physiologically by widespread, reversible narrowing of 
the bronchial airways and a marked increase in bronchial respon-
siveness to inhaled stimuli; and pathologically by lymphocytic, 
eosinophilic inflammation of the bronchial mucosa. It is also char-
acterized pathologically by “remodeling” of the bronchial mucosa, 
with thickening of the lamina reticularis beneath the airway epi-
thelium and hyperplasia of the cells of all structural elements of 
the airway wall—vessels, smooth muscle, and secretory glands and 
goblet cells. 
 In mild asthma, symptoms occur only occasionally, as on expo-
sure to allergens or certain pollutants, on exercise, or after viral 
upper respiratory infection. More severe forms of asthma are asso-
ciated with frequent attacks of wheezing dyspnea, especially at 
night, or with chronic airway narrowing, causing chronic respira-
tory impairment. These consequences of asthma are regarded as 
largely preventable, because effective treatments for relief of acute 
bronchoconstriction (“short-term relievers”) and for reduction in 
symptoms and prevention of attacks (“long-term controllers”) are 
available. The persistence of high medical costs for asthma care, 
driven largely by the costs of emergency department or hospital 
treatment of asthma exacerbations, are believed to reflect under-
utilization of the treatments available. 
 The causes of airway narrowing in acute asthmatic attacks, or 
“asthma exacerbations,” include contraction of airway smooth 
muscle, inspissation of viscid mucus plugs in the airway lumen, 
and thickening of the bronchial mucosa from edema, cellular 
infiltration, and hyperplasia of secretory, vascular, and smooth 
muscle cells. Of these causes of airway obstruction, contraction of 
smooth muscle is most easily reversed by current therapy; reversal 
of the edema and cellular infiltration requires sustained treatment 
with anti-inflammatory agents. 
 Short-term relief is thus most effectively achieved by agents 
that relax airway smooth muscle, of which β-adrenoceptor stimu-
lants (see Chapter 9) are the most effective and most widely used. 
Theophylline, a methylxanthine drug, and antimuscarinic agents 
(see Chapter 8) are sometimes also used for reversal of airway 
constriction. 
 Long-term control is most effectively achieved with an 
anti-inflammatory agent such as an inhaled corticosteroid. It can 
also be achieved, though less effectively, with a leukotriene pathway 
antagonist or an inhibitor of mast cell degranulation, such as cro-
molyn or nedocromil. Finally, clinical trials have established the 
efficacy of treatment for severe asthma with a humanized monoclo-
nal antibody, omalizumab, which is specifically targeted against 
IgE, the antibody responsible for allergic sensitization. 
 The distinction between “short-term relievers” and “long-term 
controllers” is blurred. Inhaled corticosteroids, regarded as long-
term controllers, produce modest immediate bronchodilation. 
Theophylline, regarded as a bronchodilator, inhibits some lympho-
cyte functions and modestly reduces airway mucosal inflammation. 
Theophylline may also enhance the anti-inflammatory action of 
inhaled corticosteroids. This is also true of long-acting β-adrenoceptor 
20
 A 10-year-old girl with a history of poorly controlled asthma 
presents to the emergency department with severe shortness 
of breath and audible inspiratory and expiratory wheezing. 
She is pale, refuses to lie down, and appears extremely fright-
ened. Her pulse is 120 bpm and respirations 32/min. Her 
mother states that the girl has just recovered from a mild case 
of flu and had seemed comfortable until this afternoon. The 
girl uses an inhaler (albuterol) but “only when really needed” 
because her parents are afraid that she will become too 
dependent on medication. She administered two puffs from 
her inhaler just before coming to the hospital, but “the 
inhaler doesn’t seem to have helped.” What emergency mea-
sures are indicated? How should her long-term management 
be altered? 
 C A S E  S T U D Y
340    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 stimulants, like salmeterol and formoterol, which are effective in 
improving asthma control when added to inhaled corticosteroid 
treatment, though neither is anti-inflammatory when taken as a 
single agent. 
 This chapter presents the basic pharmacology of the methyl-
xanthines, cromolyn, leukotriene pathway inhibitors, and mono-
clonal anti-IgE antibody—agents whose medical use is almost 
exclusively for pulmonary disease. The other classes of drugs 
listed above are discussed in relation to the therapy of asthma. 
 PATHOGENESIS OF ASTHMA 
 The classic immunologic model of asthma presents it as a disease 
mediated by reaginic immune globulin (IgE). Foreign materials 
that provoke IgE production are described as “allergens”; the 
most common are proteins from house dust mite, cockroach, 
animal danders, molds, and pollens. The tendency to produce 
IgE antibodies is genetically determined; asthma and other aller-
gic diseases cluster in families. Once produced, IgE antibodies 
bind to mast cells in the airway mucosa ( Figure 20–1 ). On 
 reexposure to a specific allergen, antigen-antibody interaction on 
the surface of the mast cells triggers both the release of mediators 
stored in the cells’ granules and the synthesis and release of other 
mediators. The histamine, tryptase, leukotrienes C 4 and D 4 , and 
prostaglandin D 2 that are released diffuse through the airway 
mucosa, triggering the muscle contraction and vascular leakage 
responsible for the acute bronchoconstriction of the “early asth-
matic response.” This response is often followed in 3–6 hours by 
Cell infiltration
Smooth muscle
Blood vessel
Airway wall
Histamine
Tryptase
ALLERGEN
T lymphocyte
IgE
Mast cell
Eosinophil
Neutrophil
ECP
MBP
Proteases
PAF
PGD2
LTC4
PAF
IL-4
IL-5
GM-CSF
TNF
TGF
100
75
FEV1
0
8
Time (h)
Early reaction
Late reaction
PGD2
 FIGURE 20–1  Conceptual model for the immunopathogenesis of asthma. Exposure to allergen causes synthesis of IgE, which binds to 
mast cells in the airway mucosa. On reexposure to allergen, antigen-antibody interaction on mast cell surfaces triggers release of mediators of 
anaphylaxis: histamine, tryptase, prostaglandin D 2 (PGD 2 ), leukotriene C 4 , and platelet-activating factor (PAF). These agents provoke contraction 
of airway smooth muscle, causing the immediate fall in FEV 1 . Reexposure to allergen also causes the synthesis and release of a variety of cyto-
kines: interleukins 4 and 5, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and tissue growth factor 
(TGF) from T cells and mast cells. These cytokines in turn attract and activate eosinophils and neutrophils, whose products include eosinophil 
cationic protein (ECP), major basic protein (MBP), proteases, and platelet-activating factor. These mediators cause the edema, mucus hyperse-
cretion, smooth muscle contraction, and increase in bronchial reactivity associated with the late asthmatic response, indicated by a second fall 
in FEV 1 3-6 hours after the exposure. 
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    341
a second, more sustained phase of bronchoconstriction, the “late 
asthmatic response,” which is associated with an influx of inflam-
matory cells into the bronchial mucosa and with an increase in 
bronchial reactivity that may last for several weeks after a single 
inhalation of allergen. The mediators responsible for this late 
response are thought to be cytokines characteristically produced 
by T H 2 lymphocytes, especially interleukins 5, 9, and 13. These 
cytokines are thought to attract and activate eosinophils, stimu-
late IgE production by B lymphocytes, and stimulate mucus 
production by bronchial epithelial cells. It is not clear whether 
lymphocytes or mast cells in the airway mucosa are the primary 
source of the mediators responsible for the late inflammatory 
response, but the benefits of corticosteroid therapy are attributed 
to their inhibition of the production of pro-inflammatory cyto-
kines in the airways. 
 The allergen challenge model does not reproduce all the fea-
tures of asthma. Most asthma attacks are not triggered by inhala-
tion of allergens. They are triggered by viral respiratory infection. 
Some adults with asthma have no evidence of allergic sensitivity to 
allergens, and even in people with allergic sensitivity, the severity 
of symptoms correlates poorly with levels of allergen in the atmo-
sphere. Moreover, bronchospasm can be provoked by nonaller-
genic stimuli such as distilled water, exercise, cold air, sulfur 
dioxide, and rapid respiratory maneuvers. 
 This tendency to develop bronchospasm on encountering 
stimuli that do not affect healthy nonasthmatic airways is charac-
teristic of asthma and is sometimes called “nonspecific bronchial 
hyperreactivity” to distinguish it from bronchial responsiveness to 
specific antigens. Bronchial reactivity is assessed by measuring the 
fall in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) provoked by 
inhaling serially increasing concentrations of aerosolized metha-
choline. The exaggerated reactivity of the airways appears to be 
fundamental to asthma’s pathogenesis, because it is nearly ubiqui-
tous in patients with asthma and its degree roughly correlates with 
the clinical severity of the disease. 
 The mechanisms underlying bronchial hyperreactivity are 
somehow related to inflammation of the airway mucosa. The 
agents that increase bronchial reactivity, such as ozone exposure, 
allergen inhalation, and infection with respiratory viruses, also 
cause airway inflammation. The increase in reactivity due to aller-
gen inhalation is associated with an increase in both eosinophils 
and polymorphonuclear leukocytes in bronchial lavage fluid. The 
increase in reactivity that is associated with the late asthmatic 
response to allergen inhalation ( Figure 20–1 ) is sustained and, 
because it is prevented by treatment with an inhaled corticoster-
oid, is thought to be caused by airway inflammation. 
 Whatever the mechanisms responsible for bronchial hyperreac-
tivity, bronchoconstriction itself seems to result not simply from 
the direct effect of the released mediators but also from their acti-
vation of neural or humoral pathways. Evidence for the impor-
tance of neural pathways stems largely from studies of laboratory 
animals. The bronchospasm provoked in dogs by inhalation of 
histamine is reduced by pretreatment with an inhaled topical 
anesthetic agent, by transection of the vagus nerves, and by pre-
treatment with atropine. Studies of asthmatic humans, however, 
have shown that treatment with atropine causes only a reduction 
in—not abolition of—the bronchospastic responses to antigens 
and to nonantigenic stimuli. It is possible that activity in another 
neural pathway, such as the nonadrenergic, noncholinergic sys-
tem, contributes to bronchomotor responses to stimuli 
( Figure 20–2 ). 
 The hypothesis suggested by these studies—that asthmatic 
bronchospasm results from a combination of release of media-
tors and an exaggeration of responsiveness to their effects—
predicts that asthma may be effectively treated by drugs with 
different modes of action. Asthmatic bronchospasm might be 
reversed or prevented, for example, by drugs that reduce the 
amount of IgE bound to mast cells (anti-IgE antibody), pre-
vent mast cell degranulation (cromolyn or nedocromil, sym-
pathomimetic agents, calcium channel blockers), block the 
action of the products released (antihistamines and leukotriene 
receptor antagonists), inhibit the effect of acetylcholine released 
from vagal motor nerves (muscarinic antagonists), or directly 
relax airway smooth muscle (sympathomimetic agents, 
theophylline). 
 The second approach to the treatment of asthma is aimed not 
only at preventing or reversing acute bronchospasm but at reducing 
the level of bronchial responsiveness. Because increased responsive-
ness appears to be linked to airway inflammation and because air-
way inflammation is a feature of late asthmatic responses, this 
strategy is implemented both by reducing exposure to the allergens 
that provoke inflammation and by prolonged therapy with anti-
inflammatory agents, especially inhaled corticosteroids. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
AGENTS USED IN THE 
TREATMENT OF ASTHMA 
 The drugs most used for management of asthma are adrenoceptor 
agonists, or sympathomimetic agents (used as “relievers” or bron-
chodilators) and inhaled corticosteroids (used as “controllers” or 
anti-inflammatory agents). Their basic pharmacology is presented 
elsewhere (see Chapters 9 and 39). In this chapter, we review their 
pharmacology relevant to asthma. 
 SYMPATHOMIMETIC AGENTS 
 The adrenoceptor agonists have several pharmacologic actions 
that are important in the treatment of asthma. They relax airway 
smooth muscle and inhibit release of bronchoconstricting mediators 
from mast cells. They may also inhibit microvascular leakage and 
increase mucociliary transport by increasing ciliary activity. As in 
other tissues, the β agonists stimulate adenylyl cyclase and increase 
the formation of intracellular cAMP ( Figure 20–3 ). 
 The best-characterized action of the adrenoceptor agonists in 
the airways is relaxation of airway smooth muscle. Although there 
is no evidence for direct sympathetic innervation of human airway 
smooth muscle, ample evidence exists for the presence of adreno-
ceptors on airway smooth muscle. In general, stimulation of β 2 
342    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
receptors relaxes airway smooth muscle, inhibits mediator release, 
and causes tachycardia and skeletal muscle tremor as side effects. 
 The sympathomimetic agents that have been widely used in 
the treatment of asthma include epinephrine, ephedrine, isopro-
terenol, and albuterol and other β 2 -selective agents ( Figure 20–4 ). 
Because epinephrine and isoproterenol increase the rate and force 
of cardiac contraction (mediated mainly by β 1 receptors), they are 
reserved for special situations (see below). 
 In general, adrenoceptor agonists are best delivered by inhala-
tion because this results in the greatest local effect on airway 
smooth muscle with the least systemic toxicity. Aerosol deposi-
tion depends on the particle size, the pattern of breathing, and 
the geometry of the airways. Even with particles in the optimal 
size range of 2–5 mm, 80–90% of the total dose of aerosol is 
deposited in the mouth or pharynx. Particles under 1–2 μm 
remain suspended and may be exhaled. Bronchial deposition of 
an aerosol is increased by slow inhalation of a nearly full breath 
and by more than 5 seconds of breath-holding at the end of 
inspiration. 
 Epinephrine is an effective, rapidly acting bronchodilator 
when injected subcutaneously (0.4 mL of 1:1000 solution) or 
inhaled as a microaerosol from a pressurized canister (320 mcg per 
puff). Maximal bronchodilation is achieved 15 minutes after 
inhalation and lasts 60–90 minutes. Because epinephrine stimu-
lates α and β 1 as well as β 2 receptors, tachycardia, arrhythmias, 
and worsening of angina pectoris are troublesome adverse effects. 
The cardiovascular effects of epinephrine are of value for treating 
the acute vasodilation and shock as well as the bronchospasm of 
anaphylaxis, but its use in asthma has been displaced by other, 
more β 2 -selective agents. 
 Ephedrine was used in China for more than 2000 years before 
its introduction into Western medicine in 1924. Compared with 
epinephrine, ephedrine has a longer duration, oral activity, more 
pronounced central effects, and much lower potency. Because of 
Vagal
efferent
Vagal
afferent
Airway
Transmitter (ACh)
Preganglionic fiber
Postganglionic neuron
Smooth muscle cells
Mucosa
Inhaled irritant
Sensory receptor
Tissue response cells 
(mast cell or eosinophil)
Mediators from
response cell
Lumen
CNS
 FIGURE 20–2  Mechanisms of response to inhaled irritants. The airway is represented microscopically by a cross-section of the wall with 
branching vagal sensory endings lying adjacent to the lumen. Afferent pathways in the vagus nerves travel to the central nervous system; effer-
ent pathways from the central nervous system travel to efferent ganglia. Postganglionic fibers release acetylcholine (ACh), which binds to mus-
carinic receptors on airway smooth muscle. Inhaled materials may provoke bronchoconstriction by several possible mechanisms. First, they may 
trigger the release of chemical mediators from mast cells. Second, they may stimulate afferent receptors to initiate reflex bronchoconstriction or 
to release tachykinins (eg, substance P) that directly stimulate smooth muscle contraction. 
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    343
the development of more efficacious and β 2 -selective agonists, 
ephedrine is now used infrequently in treating asthma. 
 Isoproterenol is a potent bronchodilator; when inhaled as a 
microaerosol from a pressurized canister, 80–120 mcg isopro-
terenol causes maximal bronchodilation within 5 minutes. Isopro-
terenol has a 60- to 90-minute duration of action. An increase in 
the asthma mortality rate that occurred in the United Kingdom in 
the mid-1960s was attributed to cardiac arrhythmias resulting 
from the use of high doses of inhaled isoproterenol. It is now 
rarely used for asthma. 
 Beta 2 -Selective Drugs 
 The β 2 -selective adrenoceptor agonist drugs, particularly albuterol, 
are the most widely used sympathomimetics for the treatment of 
the bronchoconstriction of asthma at present ( Figure 20–4 ). These 
 FIGURE 20–3  Bronchodilation is promoted by cAMP. Intracellular levels of cAMP can be increased by β-adrenoceptor agonists, which 
increase the rate of its synthesis by adenylyl cyclase (AC); or by phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors such as theophylline, which slow the rate of 
its degradation. Bronchoconstriction can be inhibited by muscarinic antagonists and possibly by adenosine antagonists. 
–
–
+
+
+
Bronchodilation
ATP
AMP
Acetylcholine
Adenosine
Bronchoconstriction
AC
cAMP
PDE
Theophylline
Theophylline
Muscarinic
antagonists
–
+
Beta agonists
Bronchial tone
 FIGURE 20–4  Structures of isoproterenol and several β 2 -selective analogs. 
HO
CH3
CH3
CH
Isoproterenol
NH
OH
CH
CH2
HO
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
Terbutaline
NH
OH
CH
CH2
HO
HO
HO
CH3
CH3
CH
Metaproterenol
NH
OH
CH
CH2
HO
CH3
CH3
CH3
C
Albuterol (salbutamol)
NH
OH
CH
CH2
CH2OH
HO
Salmeterol
NH
OH
CH
CH2
CH2
(CH2)4
(CH2)2
CH2
O
CH2
CH2
CH2OH
HO
344    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
agents differ structurally from epinephrine in having a larger 
substitution on the amino group and in the position of the 
hydroxyl groups on the aromatic ring. They are effective after 
inhaled or oral administration and have a long duration of 
action. 
 Albuterol, terbutaline, metaproterenol, and  pirbuterol are 
available as metered-dose inhalers. Given by inhalation, these 
agents cause bronchodilation equivalent to that produced by iso-
proterenol. Bronchodilation is maximal within 15–30 minutes 
and persists for 3–4 hours. All can be diluted in saline for admin-
istration from a hand-held nebulizer. Because the particles gener-
ated by a nebulizer are much larger than those from a metered-dose 
inhaler, much higher doses must be given (2.5–5.0 mg vs 
100–400 mcg) but are no more effective. Nebulized therapy 
should thus be reserved for patients unable to coordinate inhala-
tion from a metered-dose inhaler. 
 Most preparations of β 2 -selective drugs are a mixture of  R and 
 S isomers. Only the  R isomer activates the β-agonist receptor. 
Reasoning that the  S isomer may promote inflammation, a puri-
fied preparation of the  R isomer of albuterol has been developed 
(levalbuterol). Whether this actually presents significant advan-
tages in clinical use is unproven. 
 Albuterol and terbutaline are also available in tablet form. One 
tablet two or three times daily is the usual regimen; the principal 
adverse effects of skeletal muscle tremor, nervousness, and occa-
sional weakness may be reduced by starting the patient on half-
strength tablets for the first 2 weeks of therapy. This route of 
administration presents no advantage over inhaled treatment and 
is thus rarely prescribed. 
 Of these agents, only terbutaline is available for subcutaneous 
injection (0.25 mg). The indications for this route are similar to 
those for subcutaneous epinephrine—severe asthma requiring 
emergency treatment when aerosolized therapy is not available or 
has been ineffective—but it should be remembered that terbuta-
line’s longer duration of action means that cumulative effects may 
be seen after repeated injections. 
 A new generation of long-acting β 2 -selective agonists includes 
 salmeterol (a partial agonist) and  formoterol (a full agonist). 
Both drugs are potent selective β 2 agonists that achieve their long 
duration of action (12 hours or more) as a result of high lipid 
solubility. This permits them to dissolve in the smooth muscle cell 
membrane in high concentrations or, possibly, attach to “moor-
ing” molecules in the vicinity of the adrenoceptor. These drugs 
appear to interact with inhaled corticosteroids to improve asthma 
control. Because they have no anti-inflammatory action, they are 
not recommended as monotherapy for asthma. An ultra-long act-
ing β agonist, indacaterol, is currently approved in Europe. It 
needs to be taken only once a day but is used only for the treat-
ment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Data on 
its efficacy and safety in management of asthma are lacking. 
 Toxicities 
 The use of sympathomimetic agents by inhalation at first raised 
fears about possible cardiac arrhythmias and about hypoxemia 
acutely and tachyphylaxis or tolerance when given repeatedly. It is 
true that the vasodilating action of β 2 -agonist treatment may 
increase perfusion of poorly ventilated lung units, transiently 
decreasing arterial oxygen tension (PaO 2 ). This effect is usually 
small, however, and may occur with any bronchodilator drug; the 
significance of such an effect depends on the initial PaO 2 of the 
patient. Administration of supplemental oxygen, routine in treat-
ment of an acute severe attack of asthma, eliminates any concern 
over this effect. The other concern, that customary doses of 
β-agonist treatment may cause lethal cardiac arrhythmias, appears 
unsubstantiated. In patients presenting for emergency treatment 
of severe asthma, irregularities in cardiac rhythm  improve with the 
improvements in gas exchange effected by bronchodilator treat-
ment and oxygen administration. 
 The concept that β-agonist drugs worsen clinical asthma by 
inducing tachyphylaxis to their own action has not been established. 
Most studies have shown only a small change in the bronchodilator 
response to β stimulation after prolonged treatment with β-agonist 
drugs, but some studies have shown a loss in the ability of 
β-agonist treatment to inhibit the response to subsequent chal-
lenge with exercise, methacholine, or antigen challenge (referred 
to as a loss of bronchoprotective action). 
 Although it is true that β 2 -adrenoceptor agonists appear to be 
safe and effective bronchodilators when taken on an “as needed” 
basis for relief of symptoms, there is some evidence of risk of 
adverse effects from chronic treatment with long-acting β ago-
nists. These risks were suspected to be greater for individuals 
carrying a genetic variant for the β receptor, specifically at the 
B-16 locus of the β receptor. Retrospective analyses of studies of 
regular treatment with an inhaled β agonist suggested that 
asthma control deteriorated among patients homozygous for 
arginine at this locus, a genotype found in 16% of the Caucasian 
population and more commonly in African Americans in the 
USA. It was thus tempting to speculate that a genetic variant 
may underlie the report of an increase in asthma mortality from 
regular use of a long-acting β agonist in studies involving very 
large numbers of patients (see below), but it should be noted 
that only trivial differences were observed in multiple measures 
of asthma control in a study comparing patients with the Arg/
Arg or Gly/Gly genotypes treated with salmeterol in combina-
tion with an inhaled corticosteroid. While studies so far have 
failed to prove that genetic variations at this particular site in the 
gene for the β receptor are related to adverse responses to pro-
longed β-agonist treatment, pharmacogenetic studies of asthma 
treatment will continue to be an active focus of research, as an 
approach to the development of “personalized therapy” for 
asthma and other diseases. 
 METHYLXANTHINE DRUGS 
 The three important methylxanthines are  theophylline, theobro-
mine, and  caffeine. Their major source is beverages (tea, cocoa, 
and coffee, respectively). The importance of theophylline as a 
therapeutic agent in the treatment of asthma has waned as the 
greater effectiveness of inhaled adrenoceptor agents for acute 
asthma and of inhaled anti-inflammatory agents for chronic 
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    345
asthma has been established, but theophylline’s very low cost is an 
important advantage for economically disadvantaged patients in 
societies in which health care resources are limited. 
 Chemistry 
 As shown below, theophylline is 1,3-dimethylxanthine; theobro- 
mine is 3,7-dimethylxanthine; and caffeine is 1,3,7-trimethylxan-
thine. A theophylline preparation commonly used for therapeutic 
purposes is  aminophylline, a theophylline-ethylenediamine com-
plex. The pharmacokinetics of theophylline are discussed below 
(see Clinical Uses of Methylxanthines). The metabolic products, 
partially demethylated xanthines (not uric acid), are excreted in 
the urine. 
 
Xanthine
Theobromine
N
O
HN
N
N
O
CH3
CH3
Caffeine
N
O
N
N
O
CH3
CH3
N
H3C
Theophylline
N
O
N
O
CH3
N
H3C
H
N
N
H
O
HN
N
H
N
O
6
1
2
3
5
4
8
7
9
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Several mechanisms have been proposed for the actions of meth-
ylxanthines, but none has been firmly established. At high concen-
trations, they can be shown in vitro to inhibit several members of 
the phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzyme family ( Figure 20–3 ). 
Because the phosphodiesterases hydrolyze cyclic nucleotides, this 
inhibition results in higher concentrations of intracellular cAMP 
and, in some tissues, cGMP. Cyclic AMP is responsible for a 
myriad of cellular functions including, but not limited to, stimula-
tion of cardiac function, relaxation of smooth muscle, and reduc-
tion in the immune and inflammatory activity of specific cells. 
 Of the various isoforms of phosphodiesterase that have been 
identified, PDE4 appears to be the most directly involved in 
actions of methylxanthines on airway smooth muscle and on 
inflammatory cells. The inhibition of PDE4 in inflammatory cells 
reduces their release of cytokines and chemokines, which in turn 
results in a decrease in immune cell migration and activation. 
 In an effort to reduce toxicity while maintaining therapeutic 
efficacy, selective inhibitors of different isoforms of PDE4 were 
developed. Many were abandoned after clinical trials showed that 
their toxicities of nausea, headache, and diarrhea restricted dosing 
to subtherapeutic levels, but one,  roflumilast, has recently been 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a treat-
ment for COPD, though not for asthma. 
 Another proposed mechanism is inhibition of cell surface 
receptors for adenosine. These receptors modulate adenylyl cyclase 
activity, and adenosine has been shown to provoke contraction of 
isolated airway smooth muscle and histamine release from airway 
mast cells. It has been shown, however, that xanthine derivatives 
devoid of adenosine antagonism (eg, enprofylline) may be potent 
in inhibiting bronchoconstriction in asthmatic subjects. 
 Some research suggests that the efficacy of theophyllines may 
be due to a third mechanism of action: enhancement of histone 
deacetylation. Acetylation of core histones is necessary for activa-
tion of inflammatory gene transcription. Corticosteroids act, at 
least in part, by recruiting histone deacetylactylases to the site of 
inflammatory gene transcription, an action enhanced by low-dose 
theophylline. This interaction should predict that low-dose theo-
phylline treatment would enhance the effectiveness of corticoster-
oid treatment, and some clinical trials indeed support the idea that 
theophylline treatment is effective in restoring corticosteroid 
responsiveness in asthmatics who smoke and in patients with 
some forms of COPD. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The methylxanthines have effects on the central nervous system, 
kidney, and cardiac and skeletal muscle as well as smooth muscle. 
Of the three agents, theophylline is most selective in its smooth 
muscle effects, whereas caffeine has the most marked central ner-
vous system effects. 
 A. Central Nervous System Effects 
 In low and moderate doses, the methylxanthines—especially 
caffeine—cause mild cortical arousal with increased alertness and 
deferral of fatigue. The caffeine contained in beverages—eg, 100 mg 
in a cup of coffee—is sufficient to cause nervousness and insomnia 
in sensitive individuals and slight bronchodilation in patients with 
asthma. The larger doses necessary for more effective bronchodila-
tion commonly cause nervousness and tremor in some patients. 
Very high doses, from accidental or suicidal overdose, cause medul-
lary stimulation and convulsions and may lead to death. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 The methylxanthines have positive chronotropic and inotropic 
effects. At low concentrations, these effects appear to result from 
inhibition of presynaptic adenosine receptors in sympathetic nerves 
increasing catecholamine release at nerve endings. The higher con-
centrations (> 10 μmol/L, 2 mg/L) associated with inhibition of 
phosphodiesterase and increases in cAMP may result in increased 
influx of calcium. At much higher concentrations (> 100 μmol/L), 
sequestration of calcium by the sarcoplasmic reticulum is impaired. 
 The clinical expression of these effects on cardiovascular func-
tion varies among individuals. Ordinary consumption of coffee and 
other methylxanthine-containing beverages usually produces slight 
tachycardia, an increase in cardiac output, and an increase in periph-
eral resistance, raising blood pressure slightly. In sensitive individu-
als, consumption of a few cups of coffee may result in arrhythmias. 
346    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
In large doses, these agents also relax vascular smooth muscle except 
in cerebral blood vessels, where they cause contraction. 
 Methylxanthines decrease blood viscosity and may improve 
blood flow under certain conditions. The mechanism of this 
action is not well defined, but the effect is exploited in the treat-
ment of intermittent claudication with  pentoxifylline, a dimeth-
ylxanthine agent. However, no evidence suggests that this therapy 
is superior to other approaches. 
 C. Effects on Gastrointestinal Tract 
 The methylxanthines stimulate secretion of both gastric acid and 
digestive enzymes. However, even decaffeinated coffee has a 
potent stimulant effect on secretion, which means that the pri-
mary secretagogue in coffee is not caffeine. 
 D. Effects on Kidney 
 The methylxanthines—especially theophylline—are weak diuret-
ics. This effect may involve both increased glomerular filtration 
and reduced tubular sodium reabsorption. The diuresis is not of 
sufficient magnitude to be therapeutically useful. 
 E. Effects on Smooth Muscle 
 The bronchodilation produced by the methylxanthines is the 
major therapeutic action in asthma. Tolerance does not develop, 
but adverse effects, especially in the central nervous system, may 
limit the dose (see below). In addition to their effect on airway 
smooth muscle, these agents—in sufficient concentration—inhibit 
antigen-induced release of histamine from lung tissue; their effect 
on mucociliary transport is unknown. 
 F. Effects on Skeletal Muscle 
 The respiratory actions of the methylxanthines may not be con-
fined to the airways, for they also strengthen the contractions of 
isolated skeletal muscle in vitro and improve contractility and 
reverse fatigue of the diaphragm in patients with COPD. This 
effect on diaphragmatic performance—rather than an effect on 
the respiratory center—may account for theophylline’s ability to 
improve the ventilatory response to hypoxia and to diminish dys-
pnea even in patients with irreversible airflow obstruction. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Of the xanthines, theophylline is the most effective bronchodilator, 
and it has been shown repeatedly both to relieve airflow obstruc-
tion in acute asthma and to reduce the severity of symptoms and 
time lost from work or school in patients with chronic asthma. 
Theophylline base is only slightly soluble in water, so it has been 
administered as several salts containing varying amounts of theo-
phylline base. Most preparations are well absorbed from the gastro-
intestinal tract, but absorption of rectal suppositories is unreliable. 
 Improvements in theophylline preparations have come from 
alterations in the physical state of the drugs rather than from new 
chemical formulations. For example, the increased surface area of 
anhydrous theophylline in a microcrystalline form facilitates 
solubilization for complete and rapid absorption after oral 
administration. Numerous sustained-release preparations (see 
Preparations Available) are available and can produce therapeutic 
blood levels for 12 hours or more. These preparations offer the 
advantages of less frequent drug administration, less fluctuation of 
theophylline blood levels, and, in many cases, more effective treat-
ment of nocturnal bronchospasm. 
 Theophylline should be used only where methods to measure 
theophylline blood levels are available because it has a narrow thera-
peutic window, and its therapeutic and toxic effects are related to its 
blood level. Improvement in pulmonary function is correlated with 
plasma concentration in the range of 5–20 mg/L. Anorexia, nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal discomfort, headache, and anxiety occur at 
concentrations of 15 mg/L in some patients and become common 
at concentrations greater than 20 mg/L. Higher levels (> 40 mg/L) 
may cause seizures or arrhythmias; these may not be preceded by 
gastrointestinal or neurologic warning symptoms. 
 The plasma clearance of theophylline varies widely. Theophy-
lline is metabolized by the liver, so usual doses may lead to toxic 
concentrations of the drug in patients with liver disease. Conversely, 
clearance may be increased through the induction of hepatic 
enzymes by cigarette smoking or by changes in diet. In normal 
adults, the mean plasma clearance is 0.69 mL/kg/min. Children 
clear theophylline faster than adults (1–1.5 mL/kg/min). Neonates 
and young infants have the slowest clearance (see Chapter 60). 
Even when maintenance doses are altered to correct for the above 
factors, plasma concentrations vary widely. 
 Theophylline improves long-term control of asthma when 
taken as the sole maintenance treatment or when added to inhaled 
corticosteroids. It is inexpensive, and it can be taken orally. Its use, 
however, also requires occasional measurement of plasma levels; it 
often causes unpleasant minor side effects (especially insomnia); 
and accidental or intentional overdose can result in severe toxicity 
or death. For oral therapy with the prompt-release formulation, 
the usual dose is 3–4 mg/kg of theophylline every 6 hours. 
Changes in dosage result in a new steady-state concentration of 
theophylline in 1–2 days, so the dosage may be increased at inter-
vals of 2–3 days until therapeutic plasma concentrations are 
achieved (10–20 mg/L) or until adverse effects develop. 
 ANTIMUSCARINIC AGENTS 
 Observation of the use of leaves from  Datura stramonium for 
asthma treatment in India led to the discovery of atropine, a 
potent competitive inhibitor of acetylcholine at postganglionic 
muscarinic receptors, as a bronchodilator. Interest in the potential 
value of antimuscarinic agents increased with demonstration of 
the importance of the vagus nerves in bronchospastic responses of 
laboratory animals and with the development of a potent atropine 
analog that is poorly absorbed after aerosol administration and is 
therefore relatively free of systemic atropine-like effects. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Muscarinic antagonists competitively inhibit the effect of acetyl-
choline at muscarinic receptors (see Chapter 8). In the airways, 
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    347
acetylcholine is released from efferent endings of the vagus nerves, 
and muscarinic antagonists block the contraction of airway 
smooth muscle and the increase in secretion of mucus that occurs 
in response to vagal activity ( Figure 20–2 ). Very high 
concentrations—well above those achieved even with maximal 
therapy—are required to inhibit the response of airway smooth 
muscle to nonmuscarinic stimulation. This selectivity of muscar-
inic antagonists accounts for their usefulness as investigative tools 
in examining the role of parasympathetic pathways in broncho-
motor responses but limits their usefulness in preventing broncho-
spasm. In the doses given, antimuscarinic agents inhibit only that 
portion of the response mediated by muscarinic receptors, which 
varies by stimulus, and which further appears to vary among indi-
vidual responses to the same stimulus. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Antimuscarinic agents are effective bronchodilators. When 
given intravenously, atropine, the prototypical muscarinic 
antagonist, causes bronchodilation at a lower dose than that 
needed to cause an increase in heart rate. The selectivity of 
atropine’s effect can be increased further by administering the 
drug by inhalation or by use of a more selective quaternary 
ammonium derivative of atropine,  ipratropium bromide. 
Ipratropium can be delivered in high doses by this route because 
it is poorly absorbed into the circulation and does not readily 
enter the central nervous system. Studies with this agent have 
shown that the degree of involvement of parasympathetic path-
ways in bronchomotor responses varies among subjects. In 
some, bronchoconstriction is inhibited effectively; in others, 
only modestly. The failure of higher doses of the muscarinic 
antagonist to further inhibit the response in these individuals 
indicates that mechanisms other than parasympathetic reflex 
pathways must be involved. 
 Even in the subjects least protected by this antimuscarinic 
agent, however, the bronchodilation and partial inhibition of pro-
voked bronchoconstriction are of potential clinical value, and 
antimuscarinic agents are valuable for patients intolerant of 
inhaled β-agonist agents. Although antimuscarinic drugs appear 
to be slightly less effective than β-agonist agents in reversing asth-
matic bronchospasm, the addition of ipratropium enhances the 
bronchodilation produced by nebulized albuterol in acute severe 
asthma. 
 Ipratropium appears to be at least as effective in patients with 
COPD that includes a partially reversible component. A longer-
acting, selective antimuscarinic agent,  tiotropium, is approved as 
a treatment for COPD. It binds to M 1 , M 2 , and M 3 receptors with 
equal affinity, but dissociates most rapidly from M 2 receptors, 
expressed on the efferent nerve ending. This means that tiotropium 
does not inhibit the M 2 -receptor–mediated auto–down-regulation 
of acetylcholine release, and thus confers a degree of receptor 
selectivity. Tiotropium is also taken by inhalation, and a single 
dose of 18 mcg has 24-hour duration of action. Daily inhalation 
of tiotropium has been shown not only to improve functional 
capacity of patients with COPD, but also to reduce the frequency 
of exacerbations of their condition, and tiotropium is approved by 
the FDA as a treatment for COPD. It has not been approved as a 
treatment for asthma, but the addition of tiotropium has recently 
been shown to be as effective as the addition of a long-acting 
β-agonist in asthmatic patients insufficiently controlled by inhaled 
corticosteroid therapy alone. 
 CORTICOSTEROIDS 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Corticosteroids have been used to treat asthma since 1950 and are 
presumed to act by their broad anti-inflammatory efficacy, medi-
ated in part by inhibition of production of inflammatory cyto-
kines (see Chapter 39). They do not relax airway smooth muscle 
directly but reduce bronchial reactivity and reduce the frequency 
of asthma exacerbations if taken regularly. Their effect on airway 
obstruction may be due in part to their contraction of engorged 
vessels in the bronchial mucosa and their potentiation of the 
effects of β-receptor agonists, but their most important action is 
inhibition of the infiltration of asthmatic airways by lymphocytes, 
eosinophils, and mast cells. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Clinical studies of corticosteroids consistently show them to be 
effective in improving all indices of asthma control—severity of 
symptoms, tests of airway caliber and bronchial reactivity, fre-
quency of exacerbations, and quality of life. Because of severe 
adverse effects when given chronically, oral and parenteral corti-
costeroids are reserved for patients who require urgent treatment, 
ie, those who have not improved adequately with bronchodilators 
or who experience worsening symptoms despite maintenance 
therapy. Regular or “controller” therapy is maintained with aerosol 
corticosteroids. 
 Urgent treatment is often begun with an oral dose of 30–60 mg 
prednisone per day or an intravenous dose of 1 mg/kg methyl-
prednisolone every 6–12 hours; the daily dose is decreased after 
airway obstruction has improved. In most patients, systemic cor-
ticosteroid therapy can be discontinued in 7–10 days, but in other 
patients symptoms may worsen as the dose is decreased to lower 
levels. Because adrenal suppression by corticosteroids is related to 
dose and because secretion of endogenous corticosteroids has a 
diurnal variation, it is customary to administer corticosteroids 
early in the morning after endogenous adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone secretion has peaked. For prevention of nocturnal asthma, 
however, oral or inhaled corticosteroids are most effective when 
given in the late afternoon. 
 Aerosol treatment is the most effective way to avoid the sys-
temic adverse effects of corticosteroid therapy. The introduction of 
corticosteroids such as  beclomethasone, budesonide, cicle-
sonide, flunisolide, fluticasone, mometasone, and  triamcino-
lone has made it possible to deliver corticosteroids to the airways 
with minimal systemic absorption. An average daily dose of four 
puffs twice daily of beclomethasone (400 mcg/d) is equivalent to 
about 10–15 mg/d of oral prednisone for the control of asthma, 
with far fewer systemic effects. Indeed, one of the cautions in 
348    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
switching patients from oral to inhaled corticosteroid therapy is to 
taper oral therapy slowly to avoid precipitation of adrenal insuffi-
ciency. In patients requiring continued prednisone treatment 
despite inhalation of standard doses of an aerosol corticosteroid, 
higher doses appear to be more effective; inhalation of high doses 
of both fluticasone and ciclesonide, for example, have been shown 
to be effective in weaning patients from chronic prednisone ther-
apy. Although these high doses of inhaled steroids may cause 
adrenal suppression, the risks of systemic toxicity from chronic use 
appear negligible compared with those of the oral corticosteroid 
therapy they replace. 
 A special problem caused by inhaled topical corticosteroids 
is the occurrence of oropharyngeal candidiasis. The risk of this 
complication can be reduced by having patients gargle water 
and spit after each inhaled treatment. Hoarseness can also 
result from a direct local effect of inhaled corticosteroids on the 
vocal cords. These agents are remarkably free of other short-
term complications in adults but may increase the risks of 
osteoporosis and cataracts over the long term. In children, 
inhaled corticosteroid therapy has been shown to slow the rate 
of growth by about 1 cm over the first year of treatment, but 
not the rate of growth thereafter, so that the effect on adult 
height is minimal. 
 A novel approach to minimizing the risk of toxicity from sys-
temic absorption of an inhaled corticosteroid underlay the devel-
opment of  ciclesonide. This recently approved corticosteroid is 
inhaled as a prodrug activated by cleavage by esterases in bronchial 
epithelial cells. When absorbed into the circulation, the active 
product is tightly bound to serum proteins, and so has little access 
to glucocorticoid receptors in skin, eye, and bone, minimizing its 
risk of causing cutaneous thinning, cataracts, osteoporosis, or 
temporary slowing of growth. Ciclesonide has been shown to be 
effective in improving asthma control in clinical trials, but studies 
have not yet proven that its use is associated with the significant 
reduction in systemic toxicity predicted from its design as a pro-
drug with low corticosteroid activity, activated to a much more 
potent corticosteroid agonist by esterases at its site of deposition 
in the airways. 
 Chronic use of inhaled corticosteroids effectively reduces 
symptoms and improves pulmonary function in patients with 
mild asthma. Such use also reduces or eliminates the need for 
oral corticosteroids in patients with more severe disease. In con-
trast to β-stimulant agents and theophylline, chronic use of 
inhaled corticosteroids reduces bronchial reactivity. Because of 
the efficacy and safety of inhaled corticosteroids, national and 
international guidelines for asthma management recommend 
their prescription for patients who require more than occasional 
inhalations of a β agonist for relief of symptoms. This therapy is 
continued for 10–12 weeks and then withdrawn to determine 
whether more prolonged therapy is needed. Inhaled corticoster-
oids are not curative. In most patients, the manifestations of 
asthma return within a few weeks after stopping therapy even if 
they have been taken in high doses for 2 years or longer. A 
prospective, placebo-controlled study of the early, sustained use 
of an inhaled corticosteroids in young children with asthma 
showed significantly greater improvement in asthma symptoms, 
pulmonary function, and frequency of asthma exacerbations 
over the 2 years of treatment, but no difference in overall asthma 
control 3 months after the end of the trial. Inhaled corticoster-
oids are thus properly labeled as “controllers.” They are effective 
only so long as they are taken. 
 Another approach to reducing the risk of long-term, twice-
daily use of inhaled corticosteroids is to administer them only 
intermittently, when symptoms of asthma flare. Taking a single 
inhalation of an inhaled corticosteroid with each inhalation of a 
short-acting β-agonist reliever (eg, an inhalation of beclometha-
sone for each inhalation of albuterol) or taking a 5–10 day course 
of twice-daily high-dose budesonide or beclomethasone when 
asthma symptoms worsen has been found to be as effective as 
regular daily therapy in adults and children with mild to moderate 
asthma, although these approaches to treatment are neither 
endorsed by guidelines for asthma management nor approved by 
the FDA. 
 CROMOLYN & NEDOCROMIL 
 Cromolyn sodium (disodium cromoglycate) and nedocromil 
sodium were once widely used for asthma management, especially 
in children, but have now been supplanted so completely by other 
therapies that they are mostly of historic interest. Both have low 
solubility, are poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, and 
must be inhaled as a microfine powder or microfine suspension. 
When taken by inhalation, they effectively inhibit both antigen- 
and exercise-induced asthma, and chronic use (four times daily) 
slightly reduces the overall level of bronchial reactivity. However, 
these drugs have no effect on airway smooth muscle tone and are 
ineffective in reversing asthmatic bronchospasm; they are only of 
value when taken prophylactically. 
 
Cromolyn sodium
OCH2CH
Na+ –OC
O
O
O
CH2O
CO–Na+
O
O
O
OH
Na+ –OC
O
N
O H3CCH2
CH2CH2CH3
CO–Na+
O
O
O
Nedocromil sodium
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Cromolyn and nedocromil are thought to alter the function of 
delayed chloride channels in the cell membranes, inhibiting cell 
activation. This action on airway nerves is thought to mediate 
nedocromil’s inhibition of cough; on mast cells, the same 
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    349
mechanism is responsible for inhibition of the early response to 
antigen challenge and on eosinophils, for inhibition of the 
inflammatory response to inhalation of allergens. The inhibitory 
effect on mast cells appears to be specific for cell type, since 
cromolyn has little inhibitory effect on mediator release from 
human basophils. It may also be specific for different organs, 
since cromolyn inhibits mast cell degranulation in human and 
primate lung but not in skin. This in turn may reflect known 
differences in mast cells found in different sites, as in their neu-
tral protease content. 
 At one time, the idea that cromolyn inhibits mast cell degranu-
lation was so well accepted that the inhibition of a response by 
cromolyn was thought to indicate the involvement of mast cells in 
the response. This simplistic idea was overturned in part by the 
finding that cromolyn and nedocromil inhibit the function of cells 
other than mast cells and in part by the finding that nedocromil 
inhibits appearance of the late response even when given after the 
early response to antigen challenge, ie, after mast cell degranula-
tion has occurred. 
 Clinical Uses 
 In short-term clinical trials, pretreatment with cromolyn or nedo-
cromil blocks the bronchoconstriction caused by allergen inhala-
tion, by exercise, by sulfur dioxide, and by a variety of causes of 
occupational asthma. This acute protective effect of a single treat-
ment makes cromolyn useful for administration shortly before 
exercise or before unavoidable exposure to an allergen. 
 When taken regularly (two to four puffs two to four times 
daily) by patients with perennial (nonseasonal) asthma, both 
agents modestly but significantly reduce symptomatic severity and 
the need for bronchodilator medications, particularly in young 
patients with extrinsic asthma. These drugs are not as potent nor 
as predictably effective as inhaled corticosteroids, and the only 
way of determining whether a patient will respond is by a thera-
peutic trial of 4 weeks’ duration. 
 Cromolyn and nedocromil solutions are also useful in reducing 
symptoms of  allergic rhinoconjunctivitis. Applying the solution 
by nasal spray or eye drops several times a day is effective in about 
75% of patients, even during the peak pollen season. 
 Because the drugs are so poorly absorbed, adverse effects of 
cromolyn and nedocromil are minor and are localized to the sites 
of deposition. These include such minor symptoms as throat irri-
tation, cough, and mouth dryness, and, rarely, chest tightness, and 
wheezing. Some of these symptoms can be prevented by inhaling 
a β 2 -adrenoceptor agonist before cromolyn or nedocromil treat-
ment. Serious adverse effects are rare. Reversible dermatitis, myo-
sitis, or gastroenteritis occurs in less than 2% of patients, and a 
very few cases of pulmonary infiltration with eosinophilia and 
anaphylaxis have been reported. This lack of toxicity accounts for 
cromolyn’s formerly widespread use in children, especially those at 
ages of rapid growth. Its place in treatment of childhood asthma 
has lately diminished, however, because of the significantly greater 
efficacy of even low-dose corticosteroid treatment and because of 
the availability of an alternate nonsteroidal controller class of 
medication, the leukotriene pathway inhibitors (see below). 
 LEUKOTRIENE PATHWAY INHIBITORS 
 Because of the evidence of leukotriene involvement in many 
inflammatory diseases (see Chapter 18) and in anaphylaxis, consid-
erable effort has been expended on the development of drugs that 
block the synthesis of these arachidonic acid derivatives or their 
receptors. Leukotrienes result from the action of 5-lipoxygenase on 
arachidonic acid and are synthesized by a variety of inflammatory 
cells in the airways, including eosinophils, mast cells, macrophages, 
and basophils. Leukotriene B 4 (LTB 4 ) is a potent neutrophil 
chemoattractant, and LTC 4 and LTD 4 exert many effects known to 
occur in asthma, including bronchoconstriction, increased bron-
chial reactivity, mucosal edema, and mucus hypersecretion. Early 
studies established that antigen challenge of sensitized human lung 
tissue results in the generation of leukotrienes, whereas other stud-
ies of human subjects have shown that inhalation of leukotrienes 
causes not only bronchoconstriction but also an increase in bron-
chial reactivity to histamine that persists for several days. 
 Two approaches to interrupting the leukotriene pathway have 
been pursued: inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase, thereby preventing 
leukotriene synthesis; and inhibition of the binding of LTD 4 to its 
receptor on target tissues, thereby preventing its action. Efficacy in 
blocking airway responses to exercise and to antigen challenge has 
been shown for drugs in both categories:  zileuton, a 5-lipoxygenase 
inhibitor, and  zafirlukast and  montelukast, LTD 4 -receptor 
antagonists. All have been shown to improve asthma control and 
to reduce the frequency of asthma exacerbations in outpatient 
clinical trials. Their effects on symptoms, airway caliber, bronchial 
reactivity, and airway inflammation are less marked than the 
effects of inhaled corticosteroids, but they are more nearly equal 
in reducing the frequency of exacerbations. Their principal advan-
tage is that they are taken orally; some patients—especially chil-
dren—comply poorly with inhaled therapies. Montelukast is 
approved for children as young as 6 years of age. 
 
H
CH3
CH3
S
O
NH
Zafirlukast
Zileuton
O
O
O
OCH3
O
N
S
N
O
CH3
CH
OH
N
NH2
C
Cl
N
S
H3C
H3C
HO
COO–Na+
Montelukast
 
350    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 Some patients appear to have particularly favorable responses, 
but no clinical features allow identification of “responders” before 
a trial of therapy. In the USA, zileuton is approved for use in an 
oral dosage of 1200 mg of the sustained-release form twice daily; 
zafirlukast, 20 mg twice daily; and montelukast, 10 mg (for 
adults) or 4 mg (for children) once daily. 
 Trials with leukotriene inhibitors have demonstrated an 
important role for leukotrienes in aspirin-induced asthma. It has 
long been known that 5–10% of asthmatics are exquisitely sensi-
tive to aspirin, so that ingestion of even a very small dose causes 
profound bronchoconstriction and symptoms of systemic release 
of histamine, such as flushing and abdominal cramping. Because 
this reaction to aspirin is not associated with any evidence of 
allergic sensitization to aspirin or its metabolites and because it is 
produced by any of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, it 
is thought to result from inhibition of prostaglandin synthetase 
(cyclooxygenase), shifting arachidonic acid metabolism from the 
prostaglandin to the leukotriene pathway. Support for this idea 
was provided by the demonstration that leukotriene pathway 
inhibitors impressively reduce the response to aspirin challenge 
and improve overall control of asthma on a day-to-day basis. 
 Of these agents, zileuton is the least prescribed because of 
reports of liver toxicity. The receptor antagonists appear to have 
little toxicity. Reports of Churg-Strauss syndrome (a systemic 
vasculitis accompanied by worsening asthma, pulmonary infil-
trates, and eosinophilia) appear to have been coincidental, with 
the syndrome unmasked by the reduction in prednisone dosage 
made possible by the addition of zafirlukast or montelukast. Of 
these two, montelukast is the most prescribed, probably because it 
can be taken without regard to meals, and because of the conve-
nience of once-daily treatment. 
 OTHER DRUGS IN THE TREATMENT OF 
ASTHMA 
 Anti-IgE Monoclonal Antibodies 
 An entirely new approach to the treatment of asthma exploits 
advances in molecular biology to target IgE antibody. From a col-
lection of monoclonal antibodies raised in mice against IgE anti-
body itself, a monoclonal antibody was selected that is targeted 
against the portion of IgE that binds to its receptors (FCε-R1 and 
FCε-R2 receptors) on mast cells and other inflammatory cells. 
 Omalizumab (an anti-IgE monoclonal antibody) inhibits the 
binding of IgE to mast cells but does not activate IgE already 
bound to these cells and thus does not provoke mast cell degranu-
lation. The murine antibody has been genetically humanized by 
replacing all but a small fraction of its amino acids with those 
found in human proteins, and it does not appear to cause sensiti-
zation when given to human subjects. 
 Administration of omalizumab to asthmatic patients for 10 
weeks lowers plasma IgE to undetectable levels and significantly 
reduces the magnitude of both early and late bronchospastic 
responses to antigen challenge. Repeated administration lessens 
asthma severity and reduces the corticosteroid requirement in 
patients with moderate to severe disease, especially those with a 
clear environmental antigen precipitating factor, and improves 
nasal and conjunctival symptoms in patients with perennial or 
seasonal allergic rhinitis. Omalizumab’s most important effect is 
reduction of the frequency and severity of asthma exacerbations, 
even while enabling a reduction in corticosteroid requirements. 
Combined analysis of several clinical trials has shown that the 
patients most likely to respond are, fortunately, those with the 
greatest need: those with a history of repeated exacerbations, a 
high requirement for corticosteroid treatment, and poor pulmo-
nary function. Similarly, the exacerbations most prevented are the 
ones most important to prevent: Omalizumab treatment reduced 
exacerbations requiring hospitalization by 88%. These benefits 
justify the high cost of this treatment in selected individuals with 
severe disease characterized by frequent exacerbations. 
 POSSIBLE FUTURE THERAPIES 
 The rapid advance in the scientific description of the immuno-
pathogenesis of asthma has spurred the development of many new 
therapies targeting different sites in the immune cascade. These 
include monoclonal antibodies directed against cytokines (IL-4, 
IL-5, IL-13), antagonists of cell adhesion molecules, protease 
inhibitors, and immunomodulators aimed at shifting CD4 lym-
phocytes from the T H 2 to the T H 1 phenotype or at selective inhibi-
tion of the subset of T H 2 lymphocytes directed against particular 
antigens. There is evidence that asthma may be aggravated—or 
even caused—by chronic airway infection with  Chlamydia pneu-
moniae or  Mycoplasma pneumoniae. This may explain the reports 
of benefit to some patients from treatment with macrolide antibi-
otics, but a recent trial of prolonged treatment with clarithromy-
cin (500 mg twice daily for weeks) failed to improve asthma 
control in patients with moderately severe asthma. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DRUGS USED IN THE TREATMENT 
OF ASTHMA 
 Asthma is best thought of as a disease in two time domains. In the 
present domain, it is important for the distress it causes—cough, 
nocturnal awakenings, and shortness of breath that interferes with 
the ability to exercise or to pursue desired activities. For mild 
asthma, occasional inhalation of a bronchodilator may be all that 
is needed. For more severe asthma, treatment with a long-term 
controller, like an inhaled corticosteroid, is necessary to relieve 
symptoms and restore function. The second domain of asthma is 
the risk it presents of future events, such as exacerbations, or of 
progressive loss of pulmonary function. A patient’s satisfaction 
with his or her ability to control symptoms and maintain function 
by frequent use of an inhaled β 2 agonist does not mean that the 
risk of future events is also controlled. In fact, use of two or more 
canisters of an inhaled β agonist per month is a marker of 
increased risk of asthma fatality. 
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    351
 The challenges of assessing severity and adjusting therapy for 
these two domains of asthma are different. For relief of distress in 
the present domain, the key information can be obtained by ask-
ing specific questions about the frequency and severity of symp-
toms, the frequency of use of an inhaled β 2 agonist for relief of 
symptoms, the frequency of nocturnal awakenings, and the ability 
to exercise. Estimating the risk for future exacerbations is more 
difficult. In general, patients with poorly controlled symptoms in 
the present have a heightened risk of exacerbations in the future, 
but some patients seem unaware of the severity of their underlying 
airflow obstruction (sometimes described as “poor perceivers”) 
and can be identified only by measurement of pulmonary func-
tion, as by spirometry. Reductions in the FEV 1 correlate with 
heightened risk of attacks of asthma in the future. Other possible 
markers of heightened risk are unstable pulmonary function (large 
variations in FEV 1 from visit to visit, large change with broncho-
dilator treatment), extreme bronchial reactivity, or high numbers 
of eosinophils in sputum or of nitric oxide in exhaled air. 
Assessment of these features may identify patients who need 
increases in therapy for protection against exacerbations. 
 BRONCHODILATORS 
 Bronchodilators, such as inhaled albuterol, are rapidly effective, 
safe, and inexpensive. Patients with only occasional symptoms of 
asthma require no more than an inhaled β 2 -receptor agonist taken 
on an as-needed basis. If symptoms require this “rescue” therapy 
more than twice a week, if nocturnal symptoms occur more than 
twice a month, or if the FEV 1 is less than 80% predicted, addi-
tional treatment is needed. The treatment first recommended is a 
low dose of an inhaled corticosteroid, although treatment with a 
leukotriene receptor antagonist or with cromolyn may be used. 
Theophylline is now largely reserved for patients in whom symp-
toms remain poorly controlled despite the combination of regular 
treatment with an inhaled anti-inflammatory agent and as-needed 
use of a β 2 agonist. If the addition of theophylline fails to improve 
symptoms or if adverse effects become bothersome, it is important 
to check the plasma level of theophylline to be sure it is in the 
therapeutic range (10–20 mg/L). 
 An important caveat for patients with mild asthma is that 
although the risk of a severe, life-threatening attack is lower than in 
patients with severe asthma, it is not zero. All patients with asthma 
should be instructed in a simple action plan for severe, frightening 
attacks: to take up to four puffs of albuterol every 20 minutes over 
1 hour. If they do not note clear improvement after the first four 
puffs, they should take the additional treatments while on their way 
to an emergency department or some other higher level of care. 
 MUSCARINIC ANTAGONISTS 
 Inhaled muscarinic antagonists have so far earned a limited place 
in the treatment of asthma. The effects of short-acting agents 
(eg, ipratropium bromide) on baseline airway resistance is nearly 
as great as, but no greater than, those of the sympathomimetic 
drugs, so they are used largely as alternative therapies for patients 
intolerant of β 2 -adrenoceptor agonists. The airway effects of anti-
muscarinic and sympathomimetic drugs given in full doses have 
been shown to be additive only in patients with severe airflow 
obstruction who present for emergency care. 
 The long-acting antimuscarinic agent tiotropium has not yet 
earned a place in the treatment for asthma, although it has been 
shown to be as effective as a long-acting β2-agonist when used in 
 addition to an inhaled corticosteroid treatment for that condition. As 
a treatment for COPD, tiotropium both improves functional capac-
ity, presumably through its action as a bronchodilator, and reduces the 
frequency of exacerbations, through mechanisms not yet defined. 
 Although it was predicted that muscarinic antagonists would 
dry airway secretions and interfere with mucociliary clearance, 
direct measurements of fluid volume secretion from single airway 
submucosal glands in animals show that atropine decreases base-
line secretory rates only slightly. The drugs do, however, inhibit 
the increase in mucus secretion caused by vagal stimulation. No 
cases of inspissation of mucus have been reported following 
administration of these drugs. 
 CORTICOSTEROIDS 
 If asthmatic symptoms occur frequently or if significant airflow 
obstruction persists despite bronchodilator therapy, inhaled corti-
costeroids should be started. For patients with severe symptoms or 
severe airflow obstruction (eg, FEV 1 < 50% predicted), initial 
treatment with a combination of inhaled and oral corticosteroid 
(eg, 30 mg/d of prednisone for 3 weeks) is appropriate. Once 
clinical improvement is noted, usually after 7–10 days, the oral 
dose should be discontinued or reduced to the minimum neces-
sary to control symptoms. 
 An issue for inhaled corticosteroid treatment is patient adher-
ence. Analysis of prescription renewals shows that corticosteroids 
are taken regularly by a minority of patients. This may be a func-
tion of a general “steroid phobia” fostered by emphasis in the lay 
press on the hazards of long-term oral corticosteroid therapy and 
by ignorance of the difference between corticosteroids and ana-
bolic steroids, taken to enhance muscle strength by now-infamous 
athletes. This fear of corticosteroid toxicity makes it hard to per-
suade patients whose symptoms have improved after starting treat-
ment that they should continue it for protection against attacks. 
This context accounts for the interest in reports that instructing 
patients with mild but persistent asthma to take inhaled cortico-
steroid therapy only when their symptoms worsen is as effective in 
maintaining pulmonary function and preventing attacks as is tak-
ing the inhaled corticosteroid twice each day (see above). 
 In patients with more severe asthma whose symptoms are inad-
equately controlled by a standard dose of an inhaled corticoster-
oid, two options may be considered: to double the dose of inhaled 
corticosteroid or to combine it with another drug. The addition of 
theophylline or a leukotriene-receptor antagonist modestly 
increases asthma control, but the most impressive benefits are 
noted from addition of a  long-acting inhaled β 2 -receptor agonist 
(salmeterol or formoterol). Many studies have shown this 
352    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
combination therapy to be more effective than doubling the dose 
of the inhaled corticosteroid for reducing symptoms, reducing the 
“as-needed” use of albuterol, and preventing attacks of asthma. 
Combinations of an inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting β 
agonist in a single inhaler are now commonly prescribed (eg, flu-
ticasone and salmeterol [Advair]; budesonide and formoterol 
[Symbicort]). Offsetting the clear benefits is evidence of a statisti-
cally significant increase in the very low risk of fatal asthma attacks 
from use of a long-acting β agonist, perhaps even when taken in 
combination with an inhaled corticosteroid. This evidence 
prompted the FDA to issue a “black box” warning that the use of 
a long-acting β agonist is associated with a small but statistically 
significant increase in the risk of death or near-death from an 
asthma attack, especially in African Americans. The FDA did not 
withdraw approval of these drugs, for it recognizes that they are 
clinically effective. The major implications of the “black box” 
warning for the practitioner are: (1) that patients with mild to 
moderate asthma should be treated with a low-dose inhaled corti-
costeroid alone, and additional therapy considered only if their 
asthma is not well controlled; and, (2) that if their asthma is not 
well controlled, the possible increase in risk of a rare event, asthma 
fatality, should be discussed in presenting the options for 
treatment—an increase to a higher dose of the inhaled 
corticosteroid versus addition of a long-acting β agonist. 
 The FDA’s warning has not so far had much effect on prescrip-
tions for combinations of an inhaled corticosteroid with a 
long-acting β agonist, probably because their combination in a 
single inhaler offers several advantages. Combination inhalers are 
convenient; they ensure that the long-acting β agonist will not be 
taken as monotherapy (known not to protect against attacks); and 
they produce prompt, sustained improvements in clinical symp-
toms and pulmonary function and reduce the frequency of exac-
erbations requiring oral corticosteroid treatment. In patients 
prescribed such combination treatment, it is important to provide 
explicit instructions that a rapid-acting inhaled β 2 agonist, such as 
albuterol, should be used as needed for relief of acute symptoms. 
 An emerging approach to treatment takes advantage of the rapid-
ity of onset of the bronchodilator action of the long-acting β agonist 
formoterol delivered in fixed-dose combination with the inhaled 
corticosteroid budesonide in Symbicort metered-dose inhalers. 
Several studies have confirmed that twice-daily and as-needed inhala-
tion of this combination is as effective in preventing asthma exacer-
bations as a four-times-higher dose of budesonide twice daily with 
only albuterol for relief of symptoms. Use of this flexible dosing 
strategy is widespread in Europe, but is not approved in the USA. 
 LEUKOTRIENE ANTAGONISTS; 
CROMOLYN & NEDOCROMIL 
 A leukotriene receptor antagonist taken as an oral tablet may be 
considered as an alternative to inhaled corticosteroid treatment in 
patients with symptoms occurring more than twice a week or those 
who are awakened from sleep by asthma more than twice a month. 
This place in asthma therapy was once held by cromolyn and nedo-
cromil, but neither is now available in the USA. Although these 
treatments are not as effective as even a low dose of an inhaled 
corticosteroid, both avoid the issue of “steroid phobia” described 
above and are commonly used in the treatment of children. 
 The leukotriene receptor antagonist montelukast (Singulair) is 
widely prescribed, especially by primary care providers. This drug, 
taken orally, is easy to administer and appears to be used more 
regularly than inhaled corticosteroids. Leukotriene receptor antag-
onists are rarely associated with troublesome side effects. Because 
of concerns over the possible long-term toxicity of systemic 
absorption of inhaled corticosteroids, this maintenance therapy is 
widely used for treating children in the USA. 
 ANTI-IGE MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY 
 Treatment with omalizumab, the monoclonal humanized anti-IgE 
antibody, is reserved for patients with chronic severe asthma inad-
equately controlled by high-dose inhaled corticosteroid plus long-
acting β-agonist combination treatment (eg, fluticasone, 500 mcg, 
plus salmeterol, 50 mcg, inhaled twice daily). Omalizumab 
reduces lymphocytic, eosinophilic bronchial inflammation and 
effectively reduces the frequency and severity of exacerbations. It 
is reserved for patients with demonstrated IgE-mediated sensitiv-
ity (by positive skin test or radioallergosorbent test [RAST] to 
common allergens) and an IgE level within a range that can be 
reduced sufficiently by twice-weekly subcutaneous injection. 
 OTHER ANTI-INFLAMMATORY 
THERAPIES 
 Some reports suggest that agents commonly used to treat rheu-
matoid arthritis may also be used to treat patients with chronic 
steroid-dependent asthma. The development of an alternative 
treatment is important, because chronic treatment with oral cor-
ticosteroids may cause osteoporosis, cataracts, glucose intoler-
ance, worsening of hypertension, and cushingoid changes in 
appearance. Initial studies suggested that oral methotrexate or 
gold salt injections were beneficial in prednisone-dependent asth-
matic patients, but subsequent studies did not confirm this 
promise. In contrast, the benefit from treatment with cyclosporine 
seems real. However, this drug’s great toxicity makes this finding 
only a source of hope that other immunomodulatory therapies 
will ultimately be developed for the small proportion of patients 
whose asthma can be managed only with high oral doses of pred-
nisone. An immunomodulatory therapy recently reported to 
improve asthma is injection of etanercept, a TNF-α antagonist 
used in the treatment of ankylosing spondylitis and severe rheu-
matoid arthritis. 
 MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE ASTHMA 
 The treatment of acute attacks of asthma in patients reporting to 
the hospital requires close, continuous clinical assessment and 
repeated objective measurement of lung function. For patients 
with mild attacks, inhalation of a β 2 -receptor agonist is as effective 
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    353
as subcutaneous injection of epinephrine. Both of these treat-
ments are more effective than intravenous administration of 
aminophylline (a soluble salt of theophylline). Severe attacks 
require treatment with oxygen, frequent or continuous adminis-
tration of aerosolized albuterol, and systemic treatment with 
prednisone or methylprednisolone (0.5 mg/kg every 6–12 hours). 
Even this aggressive treatment is not invariably effective, and 
patients must be watched closely for signs of deterioration. 
General anesthesia, intubation, and mechanical ventilation of 
asthmatic patients cannot be undertaken lightly but may be life-
saving if respiratory failure supervenes. 
 PROSPECTS FOR PREVENTION 
 The high prevalence of asthma in the developed world and its 
rapid increases in the developing world call for a strategy for pri-
mary prevention. Strict antigen avoidance during infancy, once 
thought to be sensible, has now been shown to be ineffective. In 
fact, growing up from birth on a farm with domestic animals or 
in a household where cats or dogs are kept as pets appears to  pro-
tect against developing asthma. The best hope seems to lie in 
understanding the mechanisms by which microbial exposures dur-
ing infancy foster development of a balanced immune response 
and then mimicking the effects of natural environmental expo-
sures through administration of harmless microbial commensals 
(probiotics) or of nutrients that foster their growth (prebiotics) in 
the intestinal tract during the critical period of immune develop-
ment in early infancy. 
 TREATMENT OF CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE 
PULMONARY DISEASE (COPD) 
 COPD is characterized by airflow limitation that is not fully 
reversible with bronchodilator treatment. The airflow limitation is 
usually progressive and is believed to reflect an abnormal 
inflammatory response of the lung to noxious particles or gases. 
The condition is most often a consequence of prolonged habitual 
cigarette smoking, but approximately 15% of cases occur in 
nonsmokers. Although COPD is different from asthma, some of 
the same drugs are used in its treatment. This section discusses the 
drugs that are useful in both conditions. 
 Although asthma and COPD are both characterized by airway 
inflammation, reduction in maximum expiratory flow, and epi-
sodic exacerbations of airflow obstruction, most often triggered by 
viral respiratory infection, they differ in many important respects. 
Most important among them are differences in the populations 
affected, characteristics of airway inflammation, reversibility of 
airflow obstruction, responsiveness to corticosteroid treatment, 
and course and prognosis. Compared to asthma, COPD occurs in 
older patients, is associated with neutrophilic rather than eosino-
philic inflammation, is poorly responsive even to high-dose 
inhaled corticosteroid therapy, and is associated with progressive, 
inexorable loss of pulmonary function over time, especially with 
continued cigarette smoking. 
 Despite these differences, the approaches to treatment are 
similar, although the benefits expected (and achieved) are less for 
COPD than for asthma. For relief of acute symptoms, inhalation 
of a short-acting β agonist (eg, albuterol), of an anticholinergic 
drug (eg, ipratropium bromide), or of the two in combination is 
usually effective. For patients with persistent symptoms of exer-
tional dyspnea and limitation of activities, regular use of a long-
acting bronchodilator, whether a long-acting β agonist (eg, 
salmeterol) or a long-acting anticholinergic (eg, tiotropium) is 
indicated. For patients with severe airflow obstruction or with a 
history of prior exacerbations, regular use of an inhaled cortico-
steroid reduces the frequency of future exacerbations. Theophylline 
may have a particular place in the treatment of COPD, as it may 
improve contractile function of the diaphragm, thus improving 
ventilatory capacity. The major difference in treatment of these 
conditions centers on management of exacerbations. The use of 
antibiotics in this context is routine in COPD, because such exac-
erbations involve bacterial infection of the lower airways far more 
often in COPD than in asthma. 
354    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
SUMMARY Drugs Used in Asthma
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities
BETA AGONISTS
 • Albuterol
Selective β2 agonist
Prompt, efficacious 
bronchodilation
Asthma, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) 
• drug of choice in acute 
asthmatic bronchospasm
Aerosol inhalation • duration several 
hours • also available for nebulizer 
and parenteral use • Toxicity: Tremor, 
tachycardia • overdose: arrhythmias
 • Salmeterol
Selective β2 agonist
Slow onset, primarily 
preventive action; potenti-
ates corticosteroid effects
Asthma prophylaxis
Aerosol inhalation • duration 12–24 h 
• Toxicity: Tremor, tachycardia 
• overdose: arrhythmias
 • Metaproterenol, terbutaline: Similar to albuterol; terbutaline available as an oral drug
 • Formoterol: Similar to salmeterol
 • Epinephrine
Nonselective α and 
β agonist
Bronchodilation plus all 
other sympathomimetic 
effects on cardiovascular and 
other organ systems (see 
Chapter 9)
Anaphylaxis, asthma, others 
(see Chapter 9) • rarely used 
for asthma (β2-selective 
agents preferred)
Aerosol, nebulizer, or parenteral 
• see Chapter 9
 • Isoproterenol
β1 and β2 agonist
Bronchodilation plus power-
ful cardiovascular effects
Asthma, but β2-selective 
agents preferred
Aerosol, nebulizer, or parenteral 
• see Chapter 9
CORTICOSTEROIDS, INHALED
 • Fluticasone
Alters gene 
expression
Reduces mediators of 
inflammation • powerful 
prophylaxis of exacerbations
Asthma • adjunct in COPD 
• hay fever (nasal)
Aerosol • duration hours • Toxicity: 
Limited by aerosol application 
• candidal infection, vocal cord 
changes
 • Beclomethasone, budesonide, flunisolide, others: Similar to fluticasone
CORTICOSTEROIDS, SYSTEMIC
 • Prednisone
Like fluticasone
Like fluticasone
Asthma • adjunct in COPD
Oral • duration 12–24 hours 
• Toxicity: Multiple • see Chapter 39
 • Methylprednisolone: Parenteral agent like prednisone
STABILIZERS OF MAST AND OTHER CELLS
 •  Cromolyn, nedocromil (no 
longer available in the USA)
Alter function of 
delayed chloride 
channels • inhibits 
inflammatory cell 
activation
Prevents acute bronchos-
pasm
Asthma (other routes used 
for ocular, nasal, and 
gastrointestinal allergy)
Aerosol • duration 6–8 h • Toxicity: 
Cough • not absorbed so other 
toxicities are minimal
METHYLXANTHINES
 • Theophylline
Uncertain 
• phosphodiesterase 
inhibition • adenos-
ine receptor 
antagonist
Bronchodilation, cardiac 
stimulation, increased 
skeletal muscle strength 
(diaphragm)
Asthma, COPD
Oral • duration 8–12 h but 
extended-release preparations often 
used • Toxicity: Multiple (see text)
LEUKOTRIENE ANTAGONISTS
 • Montelukast, zafirlukast
Block leukotriene D4 
receptors
Block airway response to 
exercise and antigen 
challenge
Prophylaxis of asthma, 
especially in children and in 
aspirin-induced asthma
Oral • duration hours • Toxicity: 
Minimal
 • Zileuton: Inhibits lipoxygenase, reduces synthesis of leukotrienes
IGE ANTIBODY
 • Omalizumab
Humanized IgE anti-
body reduces circu-
lating IgE
Reduces frequency of 
asthma exacerbations
Severe asthma inadequately 
controlled by above agents
Parenteral • duration 2–4 d • Toxicity: 
Injection site reactions (anaphylaxis 
extremely rare)
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    355
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
SYMPATHOMIMETICS USED IN ASTHMA
Albuterol (generic, Proventil, Ventolin)
Inhalant: 90 mcg/puff aerosol; 0.021, 0.042, 0.083, 0.5, 0.63% 
solution for nebulization
Oral: 2, 4 mg tablets; 2 mg/5 mL syrup
Oral sustained-release: 4, 8 mg tablets
Albuterol/Ipratropium (Combivent, DuoNeb)
Inhalant: 103 mcg albuterol + 18 mcg ipratropium/puff; 3 mg 
albuterol + 0.5 mg ipratropium/3 mL solution for nebulization
Arformoterol (Brovana)
Inhalant: 15 mcg/2 mL solution for nebulization
Bitolterol (Tornalate)
Inhalant: 0.2% solution for nebulization
Ephedrine (generic)
Oral: 25 mg capsules
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection
Epinephrine (generic, Adrenalin)
Inhalant: 1, 10 mg/mL for nebulization; 0.22 mg/spray epinephrine 
base aerosol
Parenteral: 1:10,000 (0.1 mg/mL), 1:1000 (1 mg/mL)
Formoterol (Foradil)
Inhalant: 12 mcg/unit inhalant powder; 1% solution for nebulization
Formoterol/Budesonide (Symbicort)
Inhalant: 4.5 mcg/80 mcg, 4.5 mcg/160 mcg /puff
Isoetharine (generic)
Inhalant: 1% solution for nebulization
Isoproterenol (generic, Isuprel)
Inhalant: 0.5, 1% for nebulization; 80, 131 mcg/puff aerosols
Parenteral: 0.02, 0.2 mg/mL for injection
Levalbuterol (Xenopex)
Inhalant: 0.31, 0.63, 1.25 mg/3 mL solution
Metaproterenol (Alupent, generic)
Inhalant: 0.65 mg/puff aerosol in 7, 14 g containers; 0.4, 0.6, 5% for 
nebulization
Pirbuterol (Maxair)
Inhalant: 0.2 mg/puff aerosol in 80 and 300 dose containers
Salmeterol (Serevent)
Inhalant powder: 50 mcg/unit
Salmeterol/Fluticasone (Advair Diskus)
Inhalant: 100, 250, 500 mcg fluticasone + 50 mcg salmeterol/unit
Terbutaline (generic, Brethine)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
AEROSOL CORTICOSTEROIDS (SEE ALSO 
CHAPTER 39)
Beclomethasone (QVAR)
Aerosol: 40, 80 mcg/puff in 100 dose containers
Budesonide (Pulmicort)
Aerosol powder (Turbuhaler): 160 mcg/activation
Inhalation suspension (Respules): 0.25, 0.5 mg/2 mL
Flunisolide (AeroBid, Aerospan)
Aerosol: 80, 250 mcg/puff in 80, 100, and 120 dose containers
Fluticasone (Flovent)
Aerosol: 44, 110, and 220 mcg/puff in 120 dose container; powder, 50, 
100, 250 mcg/activation
Mometasone (Asmanex Twisthaler)
Inhalant: 110, 220 mcg/actuation in 14, 30, 60, 120 dose units
Triamcinolone (Azmacort)
Aerosol: 75 mcg/puff in 240 dose container
LEUKOTRIENE INHIBITORS
Montelukast (Singulair)
Oral: 10 mg tablets; 4, 5 mg chewable tablets; 4 mg/packet granules
Zafirlukast (Accolate)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets
Zileuton (Zyflo)
Oral: 600 mg tablets; 600 mg extended-release tablets
PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS
Aminophylline (theophylline ethylenediamine, 79% theophylline) 
(generic)
Oral: 100, 200 mg tablets
Parenteral: 250 mg/10 mL for injection
Roflumilast (Daliresp)
Oral: 500 mcg tablets
Theophylline (generic, Elixophyllin, Slo-Phyllin, Uniphyl, Theo-Dur, 
Theo-24, others)
Oral: 50 mg/5 mL elixirs
Oral extended-release, 12 hours: 100, 200, 300, 450 mg tablets
Oral extended-release, 24 hours: 100, 200, 300 mg tablets and capsules; 
400, 600 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.08, 1.6, 2.0, 3.2, 4 mg/mL, theophylline and 5% dextrose 
for injection
OTHER METHYLXANTHINES
Dyphylline (Dylix, Lufyllin)
Oral: 200, 400 mg tablets; 100 mg/15 mL elixir
Pentoxifylline (generic, Trental)
Oral: 400 mg tablets and controlled-release tablets
Note: Pentoxifylline is labeled for use in intermittent claudication only.
ANTIMUSCARINIC DRUGS USED IN ASTHMA
Ipratropium (generic, Atrovent)
Aerosol: 17 (freon-free), 18 mcg/puff in 200 metered-dose inhaler; 
0.02% (500 mcg/vial) for nebulization
Nasal spray: 21, 42 mcg/spray
Tiotropium (Spiriva)
Aerosol: 18 mcg/puff in 6 packs
ANTIBODY
Omalizumab (Xolair)
Powder for SC injection: 202.5 mg
356    SECTION IV Drugs with Important Actions on Smooth Muscle
 REFERENCES 
 Pathophysiology of Airway Disease 
 Boushey H et al: Asthma. In Mason R et al (editors):  Textbook of Respiratory 
Medicine. Elsevier Saunders, 2005:1168. 
 Locksley RM: Asthma and allergic inflammation. Cell 2010;140:777. 
 Asthma Treatment 
 Bateman ED et al: Overall asthma control: The relationship between current con-
trol and future risk. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:600. 
 Fanta CH: Drug therapy: Asthma. N Engl J Med 2009;360:1002. 
 Beta Agonists 
 Ducharme FM et al: Addition of long-acting beta2-agonists to inhaled corticoster-
oids versus same dose inhaled corticosteroids for chronic asthma in adults 
and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;(5):CD005535. 
 Kelly HW, Harkins MS, Boushey H: The role of inhaled long-acting beta-2 ago-
nists in the management of asthma. J Natl Med Assoc 2006;98:8. 
 Walters E, Walters J, Gibson P: Regular treatment with long acting beta agonists 
versus daily regular treatment with short acting beta agonists in adults 
and children with stable asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002;(4): 
CD003901. 
 Methylxanthines & Roflumilast 
 Ito K et al: A molecular mechanism of action of theophylline: Induction of histone 
deacetylase activity to decrease inflammatory gene expression. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 2002;99:8921. 
 Rabe KF: Roflumilast for the treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 
Expert Rev Respir Med 2010;4:543. 
 Spina D: PDE4 inhibitors: Current status. Br J Pharmacol 2008;155:308. 
 Cromolyn & Nedocromil 
 Guevara J et al: Inhaled corticosteroids versus sodium cromoglycate in children 
and adults with asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006;(2):CD003558. 
 Yoshihara S et al: Effects of early intervention with inhaled sodium cromoglycate 
in childhood asthma. Lung 2006;184:63. 
 Corticosteroids 
 Barnes P: How corticosteroids control inflammation: Quintiles Prize Lecture 
2005. Br J Pharmacol 2006;148:245. 
 Boushey HA et al: Daily versus as-needed corticosteroids for mild persistent 
asthma. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1519. 
 O’Byrne PM et al: Budesonide/formoterol combination therapy as both mainte-
nance and reliever medication in asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2005;171:129. 
 Suissa S et al: Low-dose inhaled corticosteroids and the prevention of death from 
asthma. N Engl J Med 2000;343:332. 
 Antimuscarinic Drugs 
 Gross N: Anticholinergic agents in asthma and COPD. Eur J Pharmacol 
2006;8:533 
 Lee AM, Jacoby DB, Fryer AD: Selective muscarinic receptor antagonists for airway 
diseases. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2001;1:223. 
 Peters SP et al: Tiotropium bromide step-up therapy for adults with uncontrolled 
asthma. N Engl J Med 2010;363:1715. 
 Leukotriene Pathway Inhibitors 
 Calhoun WJ: Anti-leukotrienes for asthma. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2001;1:230. 
 Krawiec ME, Wenzel SE: Leukotriene inhibitors and non-steroidal therapies in the 
treatment of asthma. Exp Opin Invest Drugs 2001;2:47. 
 Wang L et al: Cost-effectiveness analysis of fluticasone versus montelukast in chil-
dren with mild-to-moderate persistent asthma in the Pediatric Asthma 
Controller Trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;127:161. 
 Anti-IgE Therapy 
 Walker S et al: Anti-IgE for chronic asthma in adults and children. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2006;(2):CD003559. 
 Clinical Management of Airway Disease 
 Barnes PJ: Drugs for asthma. Br J Pharmacol 2006;147(Suppl 1):S297. 
 Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3): Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
asthma. National Institutes of Health, 2008;  http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/
guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.htm . 
 Tattersfield AE et al: Asthma. Lancet 2002;360:1313. 
 Treatment of COPD 
 Buist S for the Executive Committee, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive 
Lung Disease: Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and preven-
tion of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Medical Communications 
Resources, 2007;  http://www.goldcopd.com . 
 Matera MG, Page CP, Cazzola M: Novel bronchodilators for the treatment of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2011;32:495. 
 Vogelmeier C et al: Tiotropium versus salmeterol for the prevention of exacerba-
tions of COPD. N Engl J Med 2011;364;1093. 
CHAPTER 20 Drugs Used in Asthma    357
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 This patient demonstrates the destabilizing effects of a respi-
ratory infection on asthma, and the parents demonstrate the 
common (and dangerous) phobia about “overuse” of bron-
chodilator or steroid inhalers. The patient has signs of immi-
nent respiratory failure, including her refusal to lie down, her 
fear, and her tachycardia—which cannot be attributed to her 
minimal treatment with albuterol. Critically important 
immediate steps are to administer high-flow oxygen and to 
start albuterol by nebulization. Adding ipratropium (Atrovent) 
to the nebulized solution is recommended. A corticosteroid 
(0.5–1.0 mg/kg of methylprednisolone) should be adminis-
tered intravenously. It is also advisable to alert the intensive 
care unit, because a patient with severe bronchospasm who 
tires can slip into respiratory failure quickly, and intubation 
can be difficult.
 Fortunately, most patients treated in hospital emergency 
departments do well. Asthma mortality is rare (fewer than 
5000 deaths per year among a population of 20 million 
asthmatics in the USA), but when it occurs, it is often out of 
hospital. Presuming this patient recovers, she needs adjust-
ments to her therapy before discharge. The strongest predic-
tor of severe attacks of asthma is their occurrence in the past. 
Thus, this patient needs to be started on a long-term control-
ler, especially an inhaled corticosteroid, and needs instruc-
tion in an action plan for managing severe symptoms. This 
can be as simple as advising her and her parents that if she 
has a severe attack that frightens her, she can take up to four 
puffs of albuterol every 15 minutes, but if the first treatment 
does not bring significant relief, she should take the next 
four puffs while on her way to an emergency department or 
urgent care clinic. She should also be given a prescription for 
prednisone, with instructions to take 40–60 mg orally for 
severe attacks, but not to wait for it to take effect if she 
remains severely short of breath even after albuterol inhala-
tions. Asthma is a chronic disease, and good care requires 
close follow-up and creation of a provider-patient partner-
ship for optimal management. 
This page intentionally left blank 
359
 SECTION V DRUGS THAT ACT IN THE 
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 Introduction to the 
Pharmacology of 
CNS Drugs 
 Drugs acting in the central nervous system (CNS) were among the 
first to be discovered by primitive humans and are still the most 
widely used group of pharmacologic agents. In addition to their 
use in therapy, many drugs acting on the CNS are used without 
prescription to increase the sense of well-being. 
 The mechanisms by which various drugs act in the CNS have 
not always been clearly understood. In recent decades, however, 
dramatic advances have been made in the methodology of CNS 
pharmacology. It is now possible to study the action of a drug on 
individual cells and even single ion channels within synapses. The 
information obtained from such studies is the basis for several 
major developments in studies of the CNS. 
 First, it is clear that nearly all drugs with CNS effects act on 
specific receptors that modulate synaptic transmission. A very few 
agents such as general anesthetics and alcohol may have nonspe-
cific actions on membranes (although these exceptions are not 
fully accepted), but even these non–receptor-mediated actions 
result in demonstrable alterations in synaptic transmission. 
 Second, drugs are among the most important tools for study-
ing all aspects of CNS physiology, from the mechanism of convul-
sions to the laying down of long-term memory. As described 
below, agonists that mimic natural transmitters (and in many cases 
are more selective than the endogenous substances) and antagonists 
are extremely useful in such studies. The Box, Natural Toxins: 
Tools for Characterizing Ion Channels, describes a few of these 
substances. 
 Third, unraveling the actions of drugs with known clinical 
efficacy has led to some of the most fruitful hypotheses regarding 
the mechanisms of disease. For example, information about the 
action of antipsychotic drugs on dopamine receptors has provided 
the basis for important hypotheses regarding the pathophysiology 
of schizophrenia. Studies of the effects of a variety of agonists and 
antagonists on γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors have 
resulted in new concepts pertaining to the pathophysiology of 
several diseases, including anxiety and epilepsy. 
 This chapter provides an introduction to the functional orga-
nization of the CNS and its synaptic transmitters as a basis for 
understanding the actions of the drugs described in the following 
chapters. 
 Methods for the Study of CNS 
Pharmacology 
 Like many areas of science, major progress in the study of CNS 
drugs has depended on the development of new experimental 
techniques. The first detailed description of synaptic transmission 
 Roger A. Nicoll, MD 
21
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
360    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
( Figure 21–2 A and B). Voltage-gated channels respond to changes 
in the membrane potential of the cell. The voltage-gated sodium 
channel described in  Chapter 14 for the heart is an example of the 
first type of channel. In nerve cells, these channels are concen-
trated on the initial segment and the axon and are responsible for 
the fast action potential, which transmits the signal from cell body 
to nerve terminal. There are many types of voltage-sensitive 
calcium and potassium channels on the cell body, dendrites, and 
initial segment, which act on a much slower time scale and modu-
late the rate at which the neuron discharges. For example, some 
types of potassium channels opened by depolarization of the cell 
result in slowing of further depolarization and act as a brake to 
limit further action potential discharge. 
 Neurotransmitters exert their effects on neurons by binding to 
two distinct classes of receptor. The first class is referred to as 
 ligand-gated channels , or  ionotropic receptors. The receptor 
consists of subunits, and binding of ligand directly opens the 
channel, which is an integral parts of the receptor complex (see 
 Figure 22–6 ). These channels are insensitive or only weakly sensi-
tive to membrane potential. Activation of these channels typically 
 Natural Toxins: Tools For Characterizing 
Ion Channels 
 Evolution is tireless in the development of natural toxins. A 
vast number of variations are possible with even a small num-
ber of amino acids in peptides, and peptides make up only 
one of a broad array of toxic compounds. For example, the 
predatory marine snail genus  Conus is estimated to include at 
least 500 different species. Each species kills or paralyzes its 
prey with a venom that contains 50–200 different peptides or 
proteins. Furthermore, there is little duplication of peptides 
among  Conus species. Other animals with useful toxins 
include snakes, frogs, spiders, bees, wasps, and scorpions. 
Plant species with toxic (or therapeutic) substances are too 
numerous to mention here; they are referred to in many chap-
ters of this book.
Since many toxins act on ion channels, they provide a wealth 
of chemical tools for studying the function of these channels. 
In fact, much of our current understanding of the properties of 
ion channels comes from studies utilizing only a small per-
centage of the highly potent and selective toxins that are now 
available. The toxins typically target voltage-sensitive ion 
channels, but a number of very useful toxins block ionotropic 
neurotransmitter receptors.  Table 21–1 lists some of the toxins 
most commonly used in research, their mode of action, and 
their source. 
TABLE 21–1  Some toxins used to characterize 
ion channels.
Channel Types
Mode of Toxin Action
Source
Voltage-gated
Sodium channels
Tetrodotoxin (TTX)
Blocks channel from 
outside
Puffer fish
Batrachotoxin (BTX)
Slows inactivation, 
shifts activation
Colombian 
frog
Potassium channels
Apamin
Blocks “small 
Ca-activated” K channel
Honeybee
Charybdotoxin
Blocks “big 
Ca-activated” K channel
Scorpion
Calcium channels
Omega conotoxin 
(ω-CTX-GVIA)
Blocks N-type channel
Pacific cone 
snail
Agatoxin (ω-AGAIVA)
Blocks P-type channel
Funnel web 
spider
Ligand-gated
Nicotinic ACh receptor
α-Bungarotoxin
Irreversible antagonist
Marine 
snake
GABAA receptor
Picrotoxin
Blocks channel
South 
Pacific plant
Glycine receptor
Strychnine
Competitive antagonist
Indian plant
AMPA receptor
Philanthotoxin
Blocks channel
Wasp
was made possible by the invention of glass microelectrodes, which 
permit intracellular recording. The development of the brain slice 
technique permitted an analysis of the physiology and pharmacol-
ogy of synapses. Detailed electrophysiologic studies of the action 
of drugs on both voltage- and transmitter-operated channels were 
further facilitated by the introduction of the patch clamp tech-
nique, which permits the recording of current through single chan-
nels. Channels can be expressed in cultured cells and the currents 
evoked by their activation recorded ( Figure 21–1 ). Histochemical, 
immunologic, and radioisotopic methods have made it possible to 
map the distribution of specific transmitters, their associated 
enzyme systems, and their receptors. Molecular cloning has had a 
major impact on our understanding of CNS receptors. These tech-
niques make it possible to determine the precise molecular struc-
ture of the receptors and their associated channels. Finally, mice 
with mutated genes for specific receptors or enzymes (knockout 
mice) can provide important information regarding the physio-
logic and pharmacologic roles of these components. 
 ION CHANNELS & NEUROTRANSMITTER 
RECEPTORS 
 The membranes of nerve cells contain two types of channels 
defined on the basis of the mechanisms controlling their gating 
(opening and closing):  voltage-gated and  ligand-gated channels 
CHAPTER 21 Introduction to the Pharmacology of CNS Drugs    361
results in a brief (a few milliseconds to tens of milliseconds) open-
ing of the channel. Ligand-gated channels are responsible for fast 
synaptic transmission typical of hierarchical pathways in the CNS 
(see following text). 
 The second class of neurotransmitter receptor is referred to as 
 metabotropic receptors. These are seven-transmembrane G 
protein-coupled receptors of the type described in  Chapter 2 . The 
binding of neurotransmitter to this type of receptor does not result 
in the direct gating of a channel. Rather, binding to the receptor 
engages a G protein, which results in the production of second mes-
sengers that modulate voltage-gated channels. These interactions 
can occur entirely with the plane of the membrane and are referred 
to as  membrane-delimited pathways ( Figure 21–2 C). In this case, 
the G protein (often the βγ subunit) interacts directly with the 
voltage-gated ion channel. In general, two types of voltage-gated ion 
channels are the targets of this type of signaling: calcium channels 
and potassium channels. When G proteins interact with calcium 
channels, they inhibit channel function. This mechanism accounts 
for the presynaptic inhibition that occurs when presynaptic 
metabotropic receptors are activated. In contrast, when these recep-
tors are postsynaptic, they activate (cause the opening of) potassium 
channels, resulting in a slow postsynaptic inhibition. Metabotropic 
receptors can also modulate voltage-gated channels less directly by 
the generation of  diffusible second messengers ( Figure 21–2 D). A 
classic example of this type of action is provided by the β adrenocep-
tor, which generates cAMP via the activation of adenylyl cyclase (see 
 Chapter 2 ). Whereas membrane-delimited actions occur within 
microdomains in the membrane, second messenger-mediated 
effects can occur over considerable distances. Finally, an important 
consequence of the involvement of G proteins in receptor signaling 
is that, in contrast to the brief effect of ionotropic receptors, the 
effects of metabotropic receptor activation can last tens of seconds 
to minutes. Metabotropic receptors predominate in the diffuse neu-
ronal systems in the CNS (see below). 
 THE SYNAPSE & SYNAPTIC POTENTIALS 
 The communication between neurons in the CNS occurs through 
chemical synapses in the majority of cases. (A few instances of 
electrical coupling between neurons have been documented, and 
such coupling may play a role in synchronizing neuronal dis-
charge. However, it is unlikely that these electrical synapses are an 
important site of drug action.) The events involved in synaptic 
transmission can be summarized as follows. 
 An action potential in the presynaptic fiber propagates into the 
synaptic terminal and activates voltage-sensitive calcium channels in 
the membrane of the terminal (see  Figure 6–3 ). The calcium chan-
nels responsible for the release of transmitter are generally resistant 
to the calcium channel-blocking agents discussed in  Chapter 12 
(verapamil, etc) but are sensitive to blockade by certain marine toxins 
and metal ions (see  Tables 21–1 and  12–4 ). Calcium flows into the 
terminal, and the increase in intraterminal calcium concentration 
promotes the fusion of synaptic vesicles with the presynaptic mem-
brane. The transmitter contained in the vesicles is released into the 
synaptic cleft and diffuses to the receptors on the postsynaptic mem-
brane. Binding of the transmitter to its receptor causes a brief change 
in membrane conductance (permeability to ions) of the postsynaptic 
cell. The time delay from the arrival of the presynaptic action poten-
tial to the onset of the postsynaptic response is approximately 
τ = 2.9 ms
τfast = 5.9 ms
τslow = 26 ms (22%)
10 pA
50 ms
20 pA
50 ms
Glutamate
Glutamate + STG
Glutamate + STG
Glutamate
A
B
C
D
4 pA
50 ms
 FIGURE 21–1  Whole-cell and single-channel currents. Modern techniques permit the recording of neuronal currents in response to the 
application of transmitters and modulators of transmission.  A: Averaged and summed whole-cell currents evoked by the application of 
glutamate (inward currents are downward).  B: Currents evoked by glutamate in the presence of a modulator (stargazin, STG).  C: Single-channel 
currents evoked by glutamate alone.  D: Single-channel currents evoked by glutamate plus stargazin. Note the prolonged channel openings in 
the presence of stargazin. (Reproduced, with permission, from Tomita et al: Stargazin modulates AMPA receptor gating and trafficking by distinct domains. 
Nature 2005;435:1052.) 
362    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
0.5 ms. Most of this delay is consumed by the release process, par-
ticularly the time required for calcium channels to open. 
 The first systematic analysis of synaptic potentials in the CNS 
was in the early 1950s by Eccles and associates, who recorded intra-
cellularly from spinal motor neurons. When a microelectrode enters 
a cell, there is a sudden change in the potential recorded by the 
electrode, which is typically about –70 mV ( Figure 21–3 ). This is the 
resting membrane potential of the neuron. Two types of pathways—
excitatory and inhibitory—impinge on the motor neuron. 
 When an excitatory pathway is stimulated, a small depolariza-
tion or  excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) is recorded. 
This potential is due to the excitatory transmitter acting on an 
ionotropic receptor, causing an increase in cation permeability. 
Changing the stimulus intensity to the pathway, and therefore the 
number of presynaptic fibers activated, results in a graded change 
in the size of the depolarization. When a sufficient number of 
excitatory fibers are activated, the excitatory postsynaptic potential 
 FIGURE 21–2  Types of ion channels and neurotransmitter receptors in the CNS.  A shows a voltage-gated channel in which a voltage 
sensor component of the protein controls the gating ( broken arrow ) of the channel.  B shows a ligand-gated channel in which the binding of 
the neurotransmitter to the ionotropic channel receptor controls the gating ( broken arrow ) of the channel.  C shows a G protein-coupled 
(metabotropic) receptor, which, when bound, activates a G protein that then interacts directly to modulate an ion channel.  D shows a G 
protein-coupled receptor, which, when bound, activates a G protein that then activates an enzyme. The activated enzyme generates a diffusible 
second messenger, eg, cAMP, which interacts to modulate an ion channel. 
β
α
γ
β
α
γ
Voltage-gated
A
Ligand-gated ion channel
(ionotropic)
B
C
Receptor
G protein
Membrane-delimited metabotropic ion channel
D
Receptor
G protein
Enzyme
Diffusible second messenger metabotropic ion channel
Diffusible messenger
++
– –
++
– –
++
– –
0
–60
–70
mV
E
EPSP
Time
E
Resting potential
Threshold
Microelectrode
enters cell
 FIGURE 21–3  Excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSP) and 
spike generation. The figure shows entry of a microelectrode into a 
postsynaptic cell and subsequent recording of a resting membrane 
potential of –70 mV. Stimulation of an excitatory pathway (E) 
generates transient depolarization. Increasing the stimulus strength 
(second E) increases the size of the depolarization, so that the 
threshold for spike generation is reached. 
CHAPTER 21 Introduction to the Pharmacology of CNS Drugs    363
depolarizes the postsynaptic cell to threshold, and an all-or-none 
action potential is generated. 
 When an inhibitory pathway is stimulated, the postsynaptic 
membrane is hyperpolarized owing to the selective opening of 
chloride channels, producing an  inhibitory postsynaptic poten-
tial (IPSP) ( Figure 21–4 ). However, because the equilibrium 
potential for chloride is only slightly more negative than the rest-
ing potential (∼ –65 mV), the hyperpolarization is small and 
contributes only modestly to the inhibitory action. The opening 
of the chloride channel during the inhibitory postsynaptic poten-
tial makes the neuron “leaky” so that changes in membrane poten-
tial are more difficult to achieve. This shunting effect decreases the 
change in membrane potential during the excitatory postsynaptic 
potential. As a result, an excitatory postsynaptic potential that 
evoked an action potential under resting conditions fails to evoke 
an action potential during the inhibitory postsynaptic potential 
( Figure 21–4 ). A second type of inhibition is  presynaptic inhibi-
tion. It was first described for sensory fibers entering the spinal 
cord, where excitatory synaptic terminals receive synapses called 
axoaxonic synapses (described later). When activated, axoaxonic 
synapses reduce the amount of transmitter released from the ter-
minals of sensory fibers. It is interesting that presynaptic inhibi-
tory receptors are present on almost all presynaptic terminals in 
the brain even though axoaxonic synapses appear to be restricted 
to the spinal cord. In the brain, transmitter spills over to neighbor-
ing synapses to activate the presynaptic receptors. 
 SITES OF DRUG ACTION 
 Virtually all the drugs that act in the CNS produce their effects by 
modifying some step in chemical synaptic transmission. 
 Figure 21–5 illustrates some of the steps that can be altered. These 
transmitter-dependent actions can be divided into presynaptic and 
postsynaptic categories. 
 Drugs acting on the synthesis, storage, metabolism, and 
release of neurotransmitters fall into the presynaptic category. 
Synaptic transmission can be depressed by blockade of transmit-
ter synthesis or storage. For example, reserpine depletes monoam-
ine synapses of transmitters by interfering with intracellular 
storage. Blockade of transmitter catabolism inside the nerve ter-
minal can increase transmitter concentrations and has been 
reported to increase the amount of transmitter released per 
impulse. Drugs can also alter the release of transmitters. The 
stimulant amphetamine induces the release of catecholamines 
from adrenergic synapses (see  Chapters 6 and  32 ). Capsaicin 
causes the release of the peptide substance P from sensory neu-
rons, and tetanus toxin blocks the release of transmitters. After a 
transmitter has been released into the synaptic cleft, its action is 
terminated either by uptake or by degradation. For most neu-
rotransmitters, there are uptake mechanisms into the synaptic 
terminal and also into surrounding neuroglia. Cocaine, for 
example, blocks the uptake of catecholamines at adrenergic syn-
apses and thus potentiates the action of these amines. However, 
acetylcholine is inactivated by enzymatic degradation, not 
reuptake. Anticholinesterases block the degradation of acetylcho-
line and thereby prolong its action. No uptake mechanism has 
been found for any of the numerous CNS peptides, and it has yet 
to be demonstrated whether specific enzymatic degradation ter-
minates the action of peptide transmitters. 
 In the postsynaptic region, the transmitter receptor provides 
the primary site of drug action. Drugs can act either as neu-
rotransmitter agonists, such as the opioids, which mimic the 
action of enkephalin, or they can block receptor function. 
Receptor antagonism is a common mechanism of action for CNS 
drugs. An example is strychnine’s blockade of the receptor for the 
inhibitory transmitter glycine. This block, which underlies 
strychnine’s convulsant action, illustrates how the blockade of 
inhibitory processes results in excitation. Drugs can also act 
directly on the ion channel of ionotropic receptors. For example, 
barbiturates can enter and block the channel of many excitatory 
ionotropic receptors. In the case of metabotropic receptors, drugs 
can act at any of the steps downstream of the receptor. Perhaps 
the best example is provided by the methylxanthines, which can 
modify neurotransmitter responses mediated through the second-
messenger cAMP. At high concentrations, the methylxanthines 
elevate the level of cAMP by blocking its metabolism and thereby 
prolong its action. 
 The traditional view of the synapse is that it functions like a 
valve, transmitting information in one direction. However, it is 
now clear that the synapse can generate signals that feed back onto 
the presynaptic terminal to modify transmitter release. 
Endocannabinoids are the best documented example of such 
 retrograde signaling. Postsynaptic activity leads to the synthesis and 
release of endocannabinoids, which then bind to receptors on the 
presynaptic terminal. Although the gas nitric oxide (NO) has long 
been proposed as a retrograde messenger, its physiologic role in the 
CNS is still not well understood. 
 The selectivity of CNS drug action is based almost entirely on 
the fact that different transmitters are used by different groups of 
0
–60
–70
mV
IPSP
Threshold
E
I
E
Time
 FIGURE 21–4  Interaction of excitatory and inhibitory synapses. 
On the left, a suprathreshold stimulus is given to an excitatory 
pathway (E) and an action potential is evoked. On the right, this same 
stim ulus is given shortly after activating an inhibitory pathway (I), 
which results in an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) that 
prevents the excitatory potential from reaching threshold. 
364    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
neurons. Furthermore, these transmitters are often segregated into 
neuronal systems that subserve broadly different CNS functions. 
Without such segregation, it would be impossible to selectively 
modify CNS function, even if one had a drug that operated on a 
single neurotransmitter system. That such segregation does occur 
has provided neuroscientists with a powerful pharmacologic 
approach for analyzing CNS function and treating pathologic 
conditions. 
 IDENTIFICATION OF CENTRAL 
NEUROTRANSMITTERS 
 Because drug selectivity is based on the fact that different pathways 
use different transmitters, a primary goal of neuropharmacologists 
is to identify the transmitters in CNS pathways. Establishing that 
a chemical substance is a transmitter has been far more difficult for 
central synapses than for peripheral synapses. The following criteria 
have been established for transmitter identification. 
 Localization 
 Approaches that have been used to prove that a suspected trans-
mitter resides in the presynaptic terminal of the pathway under 
study include biochemical analysis of regional concentrations of 
suspected transmitters and immunocytochemical techniques for 
enzymes and peptides. 
 Release 
 To determine whether the substance is released from a particular 
region, local collection (in vivo) of the extracellular fluid can 
sometimes be accomplished. In addition, slices of brain tissue can 
be electrically or chemically stimulated in vitro and the released 
substances measured. To determine whether the release is relevant 
to synaptic transmission, it is important to establish that the 
release is calcium-dependent. 
 Synaptic Mimicry 
 Finally, application of the suspected substance should produce a 
response that mimics the action of the transmitter released by nerve 
stimulation. Furthermore, application of a selective antagonist should 
block the response. Micro-iontophoresis, which permits highly local-
ized drug administration, has been a valuable technique in assessing 
the action of suspected transmitters. Because of the complexity of the 
CNS, specific pharmacologic antagonism of a synaptic response pro-
vides a particularly powerful technique for transmitter identification. 
 CELLULAR ORGANIZATION OF THE 
BRAIN 
 Most of the neuronal systems in the CNS can be divided into two 
broad categories:  hierarchical systems and  nonspecific or  diffuse 
neuronal systems. 
Metabolism
Synthesis
Storage
Release
Ionic conductance
Receptor
Degradation
Uptake
3
10
7
8
9
4
1
Glia
2
6
6
5
Presynaptic neuron
Postsynatptic neuron
 FIGURE 21–5  Sites of drug action. Schematic drawing of steps at which drugs can alter synaptic transmission. (1) Action potential in 
presynaptic fiber; (2) synthesis of transmitter; (3) storage; (4) metabolism; (5) release; (6) reuptake into the nerve ending or uptake into a glial 
cell; (7) degradation; (8) receptor for the transmitter; (9) receptor-induced increase or decrease in ionic conductance; (10) retrograde signaling. 
CHAPTER 21 Introduction to the Pharmacology of CNS Drugs    365
 Hierarchical Systems 
 Hierarchical systems include all the pathways directly involved in 
sensory perception and motor control. The pathways are generally 
clearly delineated, being composed of large myelinated fibers that 
can often conduct action potentials at a rate of more than 50 m/s. 
The information is typically phasic and occurs in bursts of action 
potentials. In sensory systems, the information is processed 
sequentially by successive integrations at each relay nucleus on its 
way to the cortex. A lesion at any link incapacitates the system. 
Within each nucleus and in the cortex, there are two types of cells: 
 relay or  projection neurons and  local circuit neurons 
( Figure 21–6 A). The projection neurons that form the intercon-
necting pathways transmit signals over long distances. The cell 
bodies are relatively large, and their axons emit collaterals that 
arborize extensively in the vicinity of the neuron. These neurons 
are excitatory, and their synaptic influences, which involve iono-
tropic receptors, are very short-lived. 
 The excitatory transmitter released from these cells is, in most 
instances,  glutamate. Local circuit neurons are typically smaller 
than projection neurons, and their axons arborize in the immedi-
ate vicinity of the cell body. Most of these neurons are inhibitory, 
and they release either  GABA or  glycine. They synapse primarily 
on the cell body of the projection neurons but can also synapse on 
the dendrites of projection neurons as well as with each other. Two 
common types of pathways for these neurons ( Figure 21–6 A) 
include recurrent feedback pathways and feed-forward pathways. 
A special class of local circuit neurons in the spinal cord forms 
axoaxonic synapses on the terminals of sensory axons ( Figure 
21–6 B). In some sensory pathways such as the retina and olfactory 
bulb, local circuit neurons may actually lack an axon and release 
neurotransmitter from dendritic synapses in a graded fashion in 
the absence of action potentials. 
 Although there is a great variety of synaptic connections in 
these hierarchical systems, the fact that a limited number of trans-
mitters are used by these neurons indicates that any major phar-
macologic manipulation of this system will have a profound effect 
on the overall excitability of the CNS. For instance, selectively 
blocking GABA A receptors with a drug such as picrotoxin results 
in generalized convulsions. Thus, although the mechanism of 
action of picrotoxin is specific in blocking the effects of GABA, 
the overall functional effect appears to be quite nonspecific, 
because GABA-mediated synaptic inhibition is so widely utilized 
in the brain. 
 Nonspecific or Diffuse Neuronal Systems 
 Neuronal systems that contain one of the monoamines—
norepinephrine, dopamine, or 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)—
provide examples in this category. Certain other pathways 
emanating from the reticular formation and possibly some 
peptide-containing pathways also fall into this category. These 
systems differ in fundamental ways from the hierarchical systems, 
and the noradrenergic systems serve to illustrate the differences. 
 Noradrenergic cell bodies are found primarily in a compact 
cell group called the locus caeruleus located in the caudal pon-
tine central gray matter. The number of neurons in this cell 
group is small, approximately 1500 on each side of the brain in 
the rat. 
 Because these axons are fine and unmyelinated, they conduct 
very slowly, at about 0.5 m/s. The axons branch repeatedly and 
are extraordinarily divergent. Branches from the same neuron can 
innervate several functionally different parts of the CNS. In the 
neocortex, these fibers have a tangential organization and there-
fore can monosynaptically influence large areas of cortex. The 
pattern of innervation by noradrenergic fibers in the cortex and 
nuclei of the hierarchical systems is diffuse, and these fibers form 
a very small percentage of the total number in the area. In addi-
tion, the axons are studded with periodic enlargements called 
varicosities, which contain large numbers of vesicles. In some 
instances, these varicosities do not form synaptic contacts, sug-
gesting that norepinephrine may be released in a rather diffuse 
manner, as occurs with the noradrenergic autonomic innervation 
of smooth muscle. This indicates that the cellular targets of these 
Feed-forward
Relay
neurons
Relay
neurons
Local circuit
neurons
Local 
circuit
neuron
Recurrent
Axoaxonic interaction
E
E
E
E
E
I
I
I
E
A
B
Feed-forward and 
recurrent interaction
 FIGURE 21–6  Pathways in the central nervous system.  A shows 
parts of three relay neurons (blue) and two types of inhibitory path-
ways, recurrent and feed-forward. The inhibitory neurons are shown 
in gray.  B shows the pathway responsible for presynaptic inhibition 
in which the axon of an inhibitory neuron (gray) synapses on the 
axon terminal of an excitatory fiber (blue). 
366    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
systems are determined largely by the location of the receptors 
rather than by the location of the release sites. Finally, most neu-
rotransmitters utilized by diffuse neuronal systems, including 
norepinephrine, act—perhaps exclusively—on metabotropic 
receptors and therefore initiate long-lasting synaptic effects. 
Based on these observations, it is clear that the monoamine sys-
tems cannot be conveying topographically specific types of infor-
mation; rather, vast areas of the CNS must be affected 
simultaneously and in a rather uniform way. It is not surprising, 
then, that these systems have been implicated in such global func-
tions as sleeping and waking, attention, appetite, and emotional 
states. 
 CENTRAL NEUROTRANSMITTERS 
 A vast number of small molecules have been isolated from the 
brain, and studies using a variety of approaches suggest that the 
agents listed in  Table 21–2 are neurotransmitters. A brief sum-
mary of the evidence for some of these compounds follows. 
 Amino Acids 
 The amino acids of primary interest to the pharmacologist fall 
into two categories: the acidic amino acid glutamate and the neu-
tral amino acids glycine and GABA. All these compounds are 
TABLE 21–2  Summary of neurotransmitter pharmacology in the central nervous system.
Transmitter
Anatomy
Receptor Subtypes and 
Preferred Agonists
Receptor Antagonists
Mechanisms
Acetylcholine
Cell bodies at all levels; 
long and short 
connections
Muscarinic (M1): 
muscarine
Pirenzepine, atropine
Excitatory: ↓ in K+ conductance; 
↑ IP3, DAG
Muscarinic (M2): 
muscarine, bethanechol
Atropine, 
methoctramine
Inhibitory: ↑ K+ conductance; 
↓ cAMP
Motoneuron-Renshaw 
cell synapse
Nicotinic: nicotine
Dihydro-β-erythroidine, 
α-bungarotoxin
Excitatory: ↑ cation conductance
Dopamine
Cell bodies at all levels; 
short, medium, and 
long connections
D1
Phenothiazines
Inhibitory (?): ↑ cAMP
D2: bromocriptine
Phenothiazines, 
butyrophenones
Inhibitory (presynaptic): ↓ Ca2+; 
Inhibitory (postsynaptic): ↑ in K+ 
conductance, ↓ cAMP
GABA
Supraspinal and 
spinal interneurons 
involved in pre- and 
postsynaptic inhibition
GABAA: muscimol
Bicuculline, picrotoxin
Inhibitory: ↑ Cl– conductance
GABAB: baclofen
2-OH saclofen
Inhibitory (presynaptic): ↓ Ca2+ 
conductance; Inhibitory (postsyn-
aptic): ↑ K+ conductance
Glutamate
Relay neurons at all 
levels and some 
interneurons
N-Methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA): NMDA
2-Amino-5-
phosphonovalerate, 
dizocilpine
Excitatory: ↑ cation conductance, 
particularly Ca2+
AMPA: AMPA
CNQX
Excitatory: ↑ cation conductance
Kainate: kainic acid, 
domoic acid
Metabotropic: ACPD, 
quisqualate
MCPG
Inhibitory (presynaptic): ↓ Ca2+ 
conductance, ↓ cAMP; Excitatory: 
↓ K+ conductance, ↑ IP3, DAG
Glycine
Spinal interneurons 
and some brainstem 
interneurons
Taurine, β-alanine
Strychnine
Inhibitory: ↑ Cl– conductance
5-Hydroxytryptamine 
(serotonin)
Cell bodies in mid-
brain and pons project 
to all levels
5-HT1A: LSD
Metergoline, spiperone
Inhibitory: ↑ K+ conductance, 
↓ cAMP
5-HT2A: LSD
Ketanserin
Excitatory: ↓ K+ conductance, 
↑ IP3, DAG
(continued)
CHAPTER 21 Introduction to the Pharmacology of CNS Drugs    367
present in high concentrations in the CNS and are extremely 
potent modifiers of neuronal excitability. 
 A. Glutamate 
 Excitatory synaptic transmission is mediated by glutamate, which 
is present in very high concentrations in excitatory synaptic vesi-
cles (∼100 mM). Glutamate is released into the synaptic cleft by 
Ca 2+ -dependent exocytosis ( Figure 21–7 ). The released glutamate 
acts on postsynaptic glutamate receptors and is cleared by gluta-
mate transporters present on surrounding glia. In glia, glutamate 
is converted to glutamine by glutamine synthetase, released from 
the glia, taken up by the nerve terminal, and converted back to 
glutamate by the enzyme glutaminase. The high concentration of 
glutamate in synaptic vesicles is achieved by the  vesicular gluta-
mate transporter (VGLUT). 
 Almost all neurons that have been tested are strongly excited by 
glutamate. This excitation is caused by the activation of both 
ionotropic and metabotropic receptors, which have been exten-
sively characterized by molecular cloning. The ionotropic recep-
tors can be further divided into three subtypes based on the action 
of selective agonists: α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-
propionic acid (AMPA), kainic acid (KA), and N -methyl-D-aspartate 
TABLE 21–2  Summary of neurotransmitter pharmacology in the central nervous system.
Transmitter
Anatomy
Receptor Subtypes and 
Preferred Agonists
Receptor Antagonists
Mechanisms
5-HT3: 2-methyl-5-HT
Ondansetron
Excitatory: ↑ cation conductance
5-HT4
Excitatory: ↓ K+ conductance
Norepinephrine
Cell bodies in pons and 
brainstem project to all 
levels
α1: phenylephrine
Prazosin
Excitatory: ↓ K+ conductance, 
↑ IP3, DAG
α2: clonidine
Yohimbine
Inhibitory (presynaptic): ↓ Ca2+ 
conductance; Inhibitory: ↑ K+ 
conductance, ↓ cAMP
β1: isoproterenol, 
dobutamine
Atenolol, practolol
Excitatory: ↓ K+ conductance, 
↑ cAMP
β2: albuterol
Butoxamine
Inhibitory: may involve ↑ in electro-
genic sodium pump; ↑ cAMP
Histamine
Cells in ventral poste-
rior hypothalamus
H1: 2(m-fluorophenyl)-
histamine
Mepyramine
Excitatory: ↓ K+ conductance, ↑ IP3, 
DAG
H2: dimaprit
Ranitidine
Excitatory: ↓ K+ conductance, 
↑ cAMP
H3: R-α-methyl-
histamine
Thioperamide
Inhibitory autoreceptors
Opioid peptides
Cell bodies at all levels; 
long and short connec-
tions
Mu: bendorphin
Naloxone
Inhibitory (presynaptic): ↓ Ca2+ 
conductance, ↓ cAMP
Delta: enkephalin
Naloxone
Inhibitory (postsynaptic): ↑ K+ 
conductance, ↓ cAMP
Kappa: dynorphin
Naloxone
Tachykinins
Primary sensory neu-
rons, cell bodies at all 
levels; long and short 
connections
NK1: substance P 
methylester, aprepitant
Aprepitant
Excitatory: ↓ K+ conductance, 
↑ IP3, DAG
NK2
NK3
Endocannabinoids
Widely distributed
CB1: anandamide, 
2-arachidonyglycerol
Rimonabant
Inhibitory (presynaptic): ↓ Ca2+ 
conductance, ↓ cAMP
Note: Many other central transmitters have been identified (see text).
ACPD, trans-1-amino-cyclopentyl-1,3-dicarboxylate; AMPA, DL-α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CQNX, 6-cyano- 
7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione; DAG, diacylglycerol; IP3, inositol trisphosphate; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MCPG, α-methyl-4-carboxyphenylglycine.
(Continued)
368    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 (NMDA). All the ionotropic receptors are composed of four sub-
units. AMPA receptors, which are present on all neurons, are 
heterotetramers assembled from four subunits (GluA1–GluA4). 
The majority of AMPA receptors contain the GluA2 subunit and 
are permeable to Na + and K + , but not to Ca 2+ . Some AMPA recep-
tors, typically present on inhibitory interneurons, lack the GluA2 
subunit and are also permeable to Ca 2+ . 
 Kainate receptors are not as uniformly distributed as AMPA 
receptors, being expressed at high levels in the hippocampus, cere-
bellum, and spinal cord. They are formed from a number of sub-
unit combinations (GluK1–GluK5). Although GluK4 and GluK5 
are unable to form channels on their own, their presence in the 
receptor changes the receptor’s affinity and kinetics. Similar to 
AMPA receptors, kainate receptors are permeable to Na + and K + 
and in some subunit combinations can also be permeable to Ca 2+ . 
 NMDA receptors are as ubiquitous as AMPA receptors, being 
present on essentially all neurons in the CNS. All NMDA 
receptors require the presence of the subunit GluN1. The channel 
also contains one or two NR2 subunits (GluN2A–GluN2D). 
Unlike AMPA and kainate receptors, all NMDA receptors are 
highly permeable to Ca 2+ as well as to Na + and K + . NMDA recep-
tor function is controlled in a number of intriguing ways. In addi-
tion to glutamate binding, the channel also requires the binding 
of glycine to a separate site. The physiologic role of glycine bind-
ing is unclear because the glycine site appears to be saturated at 
normal ambient levels of glycine. Another key difference between 
AMPA and kainate receptors on the one hand, and NMDA recep-
tors on the other, is that AMPA and kainate receptor activation 
results in channel opening at resting membrane potential, whereas 
NMDA receptor activation does not. This is due to the voltage-
dependent block of the NMDA pore by extracellular Mg 2+ . When 
the neuron is strongly depolarized, as occurs with intense activa-
tion of the synapse or by activation of neighboring synapses, Mg 2+ 
is expelled and the channel opens. Thus, there are two require-
ments for NMDA receptor channel opening: Glutamate must 
bind the receptor and the membrane must be depolarized. The 
rise in intracellular Ca 2+ that accompanies channel opening results 
in a long-lasting enhancement in synaptic strength that is referred 
Glutamine
Glutamate
Glutamine
Glutamate
MGluR
AMPAR
NMDAR
C
A
B
Glutaminase
Glutamine
synthetase
PSD
D
Na+,Ca2+
 FIGURE 21–7  Schematic diagram of a glutamate synapse. Glutamine is imported into the glutamatergic neuron  (A) and converted into 
glutamate by glutaminase. The glutamate is then concentrated in vesicles by the vesicular glutamate transporter. Upon release into the syn-
apse, glutamate can interact with AMPA and NMDA ionotropic receptor channels (AMPAR, NMDAR) in the postsynaptic density (PSD) and with 
metabotropic receptors (MGluR) on the postsynaptic cell  (B) . Synaptic transmission is terminated by active transport of the glutamate into a 
neighboring glial cell  (C) by a glutamate transporter. It is synthesized into glutamine by glutamine synthetase and exported into the gluta-
matergic axon.  (D) shows a model NMDA receptor channel complex consisting of a tetrameric protein that becomes permeable to Na + and Ca 2+ 
when it binds a glutamate molecule. 
CHAPTER 21 Introduction to the Pharmacology of CNS Drugs    369
to as  long-term potentiation (LTP). The change can last for 
many hours or even days and is generally accepted as an important 
cellular mechanism underlying learning and memory. 
 The metabotropic glutamate receptors are G protein-coupled 
receptors that act indirectly on ion channels via G proteins. 
Metabotropic receptors (mGluR1–mGluR8) have been divided 
into three groups (I, II, and III). A variety of agonists and antago-
nists have been developed that interact selectively with the differ-
ent groups. Group I receptors are typically located postsynaptically 
and are thought to cause neuronal excitation by activating a non-
selective cation channel. These receptors also activate phospholi-
pase C, leading to inositol trisphosphate-mediated intracellular 
Ca 2+ release. In contrast, group II and group III receptors are 
typically located on presynaptic nerve terminals and act as inhib-
itory autoreceptors. Activation of these receptors causes the inhi-
bition of Ca 2+ channels, resulting in inhibition of transmitter 
release. These receptors are activated only when the concentration 
of glutamate rises to high levels during repetitive stimulation of 
the synapse. Activation of these receptors causes the inhibition of 
adenylyl cyclase and decreases cAMP generation. 
 The postsynaptic membrane at excitatory synapses is thickened 
and referred to as the  postsynaptic density (PSD;  Figure 21–7 ). 
This is a highly complex structure containing glutamate receptors, 
signaling proteins, scaffolding proteins, and cytoskeletal proteins. 
A typical excitatory synapse contains AMPA receptors, which tend 
to be located toward the periphery, and NMDA receptors, which 
are concentrated in the center. Kainate receptors are present at a 
subset of excitatory synapses, but their exact location is unknown. 
Metabotropic glutamate receptors (group I), which are localized 
just outside the postsynaptic density, are also present at some 
excitatory synapses. 
 B. GABA and Glycine 
 Both GABA and glycine are inhibitory neurotransmitters, which 
are typically released from local interneurons. Interneurons that 
release glycine are restricted to the spinal cord and brainstem, 
whereas interneurons releasing GABA are present throughout the 
CNS, including the spinal cord. It is interesting that some 
interneurons in the spinal cord can release both GABA and gly-
cine. Glycine receptors are pentameric structures that are selec-
tively permeable to Cl – . Strychnine, which is a potent spinal cord 
convulsant and has been used in some rat poisons, selectively 
blocks glycine receptors. 
 GABA receptors are divided into two main types: GABA A 
and GABA B . Inhibitory postsynaptic potentials in many areas of 
the brain have a fast and slow component. The fast component 
is mediated by GABA A receptors and the slow component by 
GABA B receptors. The difference in kinetics stems from the dif-
ferences in coupling of the receptors to ion channels. GABA A 
receptors are ionotropic receptors and, like glycine receptors, 
are pentameric structures that are selectively permeable to Cl – . 
These receptors are selectively inhibited by picrotoxin and bicu-
culline, both of which cause generalized convulsions. A great 
many subunits for GABA A receptors have been cloned; this 
accounts for the large diversity in the pharmacology of GABA A 
receptors, making them key targets for clinically useful agents 
(see  Chapter 22 ). GABA B receptors are metabotropic receptors 
that are selectively activated by the antispastic drug baclofen. 
These receptors are coupled to G proteins that, depending on 
their cellular location, either inhibit Ca 2+ channels or activate 
K + channels. The GABA B component of the inhibitory postsyn-
aptic potential is due to a selective increase in K + conductance. 
This inhibitory postsynaptic potential is long-lasting and slow 
because the coupling of receptor activation to K + channel open-
ing is indirect and delayed. GABA B receptors are localized to the 
perisynaptic region and thus require the spillover of GABA 
from the synaptic cleft. GABA B receptors are also present on the 
axon terminals of many excitatory and inhibitory synapses. In 
this case, GABA spills over onto these presynaptic GABA B 
receptors, inhibiting transmitter release by inhibiting Ca 2+ 
channels. In addition to their coupling to ion channels, GABA B 
receptors also inhibit adenylyl cyclase and decrease cAMP 
generation. 
 Acetylcholine 
 Acetylcholine was the first compound to be identified pharma-
cologically as a transmitter in the CNS. Eccles showed in the 
early 1950s that excitation of Renshaw cells by motor axon 
collaterals in the spinal cord was blocked by nicotinic antago-
nists. Furthermore, Renshaw cells were extremely sensitive to 
nicotinic agonists. These experiments were remarkable for two 
reasons. First, this early success at identifying a transmitter for 
a central synapse was followed by disappointment because it 
remained the sole central synapse for which the transmitter was 
known until the late 1960s, when comparable data became 
available for GABA and glycine. Second, the motor axon col-
lateral synapse remains one of the best-documented examples 
of a cholinergic nicotinic synapse in the mammalian CNS, 
despite the rather widespread distribution of nicotinic recep-
tors as defined by in situ hybridization studies. Most CNS 
responses to acetylcholine are mediated by a large family of G 
protein-coupled muscarinic receptors. At a few sites, acetylcho-
line causes slow inhibition of the neuron by activating the M 2 
subtype of receptor, which opens potassium channels. A far 
more widespread muscarinic action in response to acetylcho-
line is a slow excitation that in some cases is mediated by M 1 
receptors. These muscarinic effects are much slower than either 
nicotinic effects on Renshaw cells or the effect of amino acids. 
Furthermore, this M 1 muscarinic excitation is unusual in that 
acetylcholine produces it by  decreasing the membrane permea-
bility to potassium, ie, the opposite of conventional transmitter 
action. 
 A number of pathways contain acetylcholine, including neu-
rons in the neostriatum, the medial septal nucleus, and the reticu-
lar formation. Cholinergic pathways appear to play an important 
role in cognitive functions, especially memory. Presenile dementia 
of the Alzheimer type is reportedly associated with a profound loss 
of cholinergic neurons. However, the specificity of this loss has 
been questioned because the levels of other putative transmitters, 
eg, somatostatin, are also decreased. 
370    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Monoamines 
 Monoamines include the catecholamines (dopamine and norepi-
nephrine) and 5-hydroxytryptamine. Although these compounds 
are present in very small amounts in the CNS, they can be local-
ized using extremely sensitive histochemical methods. These path-
ways are the site of action of many drugs; for example, the CNS 
stimulants cocaine and amphetamine appear to act primarily at 
catecholamine synapses. Cocaine blocks the reuptake of dopamine 
and norepinephrine, whereas amphetamines cause presynaptic 
terminals to release these transmitters. 
 A. Dopamine 
 The major pathways containing dopamine are the projection 
linking the substantia nigra to the neostriatum and the projec-
tion linking the ventral tegmental region to limbic structures, 
particularly the limbic cortex. The therapeutic action of the 
antiparkinsonism drug levodopa is associated with the former 
area (see  Chapter 28 ), whereas the therapeutic action of the 
antipsychotic drugs is thought to be associated with the latter 
(see  Chapter 29 ). Dopamine-containing neurons in the tubero-
basal ventral hypothalamus play an important role in regulating 
hypothalamohypophysial function. Five dopamine receptors 
have been identified, and they fall into two categories: D 1 -like 
(D 1 and D 5 ) and D 2 -like (D 2 , D 3 , D 4 ). All dopamine receptors 
are metabotropic. Dopamine generally exerts a slow inhibitory 
action on CNS neurons. This action has been best characterized 
on dopamine-containing substantia nigra neurons, where D 2 -
receptor activation opens potassium channels via the G i coupling 
protein. 
 B. Norepinephrine 
 Most noradrenergic neurons are located in the locus caeruleus 
or the lateral tegmental area of the reticular formation. 
Although the density of fibers innervating various sites differs 
considerably, most regions of the CNS receive diffuse nor-
adrenergic input. All noradrenergic receptor subtypes are 
metabotropic. When applied to neurons, norepinephrine can 
hyperpolarize them by increasing potassium conductance. This 
effect is mediated by α 2 receptors and has been characterized 
most thoroughly on locus caeruleus neurons. In many regions 
of the CNS, norepinephrine actually enhances excitatory 
inputs by both indirect and direct mechanisms. The indirect 
mechanism involves disinhibition; that is, inhibitory local cir-
cuit neurons are inhibited. The direct mechanism involves 
blockade of potassium conductances that slow neuronal dis-
charge. Depending on the type of neuron, this effect is medi-
ated by either α 1 or β receptors. Facilitation of excitatory 
synaptic transmission is in accordance with many of the behav-
ioral processes thought to involve noradrenergic pathways, eg, 
attention and arousal. 
 C. 5-Hydroxytryptamine 
 Most 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin) pathways originate 
from neurons in the raphe or midline regions of the pons and 
upper brainstem. 5-HT is contained in unmyelinated fibers that 
diffusely innervate most regions of the CNS, but the density of 
the innervation varies. 5-HT acts on more than a dozen receptor 
subtypes. Except for the 5-HT 3 receptor, all of these receptors are 
metabotropic. The ionotropic 5-HT 3 receptor exerts a rapid 
excitatory action at a very limited number of sites in the CNS. In 
most areas of the CNS, 5-HT has a strong inhibitory action. This 
action is mediated by 5-HT 1A receptors and is associated with 
membrane hyperpolarization caused by an increase in potassium 
conductance. It has been found that 5-HT 1A receptors and 
GABA B receptors activate the same population of potassium 
channels. Some cell types are slowly excited by 5-HT owing to its 
blockade of potassium channels via 5-HT 2 or 5-HT 4 receptors. 
Both excitatory and inhibitory actions can occur on the same 
neuron. It has often been speculated that 5-HT pathways may be 
involved in the hallucinations induced by LSD (lysergic acid), 
since this compound can antagonize the peripheral actions of 
5-HT. However, LSD does not appear to be a 5-HT antagonist 
in the CNS, and typical LSD-induced behavior is still seen in 
animals after raphe nuclei are destroyed. Other proposed regula-
tory functions of 5-HT-containing neurons include sleep, tem-
perature, appetite, and neuroendocrine control. 
 Peptides 
 A great many CNS peptides have been discovered that produce 
dramatic effects both on animal behavior and on the activity of 
individual neurons. Many of the peptides have been mapped with 
immunohistochemical techniques and include opioid peptides 
(eg, enkephalins, endorphins), neurotensin, substance P, soma-
tostatin, cholecystokinin, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, neu-
ropeptide Y, and thyrotropin-releasing hormone. As in the 
peripheral autonomic nervous system, peptides often coexist with 
a conventional nonpeptide transmitter in the same neuron. A 
good example of the approaches used to define the role of these 
peptides in the CNS comes from studies on substance P and its 
association with sensory fibers. Substance P is contained in and 
released from small unmyelinated primary sensory neurons in the 
spinal cord and brainstem and causes a slow excitatory postsyn-
aptic potential in target neurons. These sensory fibers are known 
to transmit noxious stimuli, and it is therefore surprising that—
although substance P receptor antagonists can modify responses 
to certain types of pain—they do not block the response. 
Glutamate, which is released with substance P from these syn-
apses, presumably plays an important role in transmitting pain 
stimuli. Substance P is certainly involved in many other functions 
because it is found in many areas of the CNS that are unrelated 
to pain pathways. 
 Many of these peptides are also found in peripheral structures, 
including peripheral synapses. They are described in  Chapters 6 
and  17 . 
 Nitric Oxide 
 The CNS contains a substantial amount of nitric oxide syn-
thase (NOS) within certain classes of neurons. This neuronal 
CHAPTER 21 Introduction to the Pharmacology of CNS Drugs    371
NOS is an enzyme activated by calcium-calmodulin, and acti-
vation of NMDA receptors, which increases intracellular cal-
cium, results in the generation of nitric oxide. Although a 
physiologic role for nitric oxide has been clearly established for 
vascular smooth muscle, its role in synaptic transmission and 
synaptic plasticity remains controversial. Perhaps the strongest 
case for a role of nitric oxide in neuronal signaling in the CNS 
is for long-term depression of synaptic transmission in the 
cerebellum. 
 Endocannabinoids 
 The primary psychoactive ingredient in cannabis, Δ 9 -
tetrahy drocannabinol (Δ 9 -THC), affects the brain mainly by 
activating a specific cannabinoid receptor, CB 1 . CB 1 receptors 
are expressed at high levels in many brain regions, and they are 
primarily located on presynaptic terminals. Several endogenous 
brain lipids, including anandamide and 2-arachidonylglycerol 
(2-AG), have been identified as CB 1 ligands. These ligands are 
not stored, as are classic neurotransmitters, but instead are 
rapidly synthesized by neurons in response to depolarization 
and consequent calcium influx. Activation of metabotropic 
receptors (eg, by acetylcholine and glutamate) can also activate 
the formation of 2-AG. In further contradistinction to classic 
neurotransmitters, endogenous cannabinoids can function as 
retrograde synaptic messengers: They are released from post-
synaptic neurons and travel backward across synapses, activat-
ing CB 1 receptors on presynaptic neurons and suppressing 
transmitter release. This suppression can be transient or long 
lasting, depending on the pattern of activity. Cannabinoids 
may affect memory, cognition, and pain perception by this 
mechanism. 
 REFERENCES 
 Aizenman CD et al: Use-dependent changes in synaptic strength at the Purkinje 
cell to deep nuclear synapse. Prog Brain Res 2000;124:257. 
 Bredt DS, Nicoll RA: AMPA receptor trafficking at excitatory synapses. Neuron 
2003;40:361. 
 Catterall WA et al: Compendium of voltage-gated ion channels: Calcium channels. 
Pharmacol Rev 2003;55:579. 
 Catterall WA, Goldin AL, Waxman SG: Compendium of voltage-gated ion chan-
nels: Sodium channels. Pharmacol Rev 2003;55:575. 
 Clapham DE et al: Compendium of voltage-gated ion channels: Transient receptor 
potential channels. Pharmacol Rev 2003;55:591. 
 Fremeau RT, Jr et al: VGLUTs define subsets of excitatory neurons and suggest 
novel roles for glutamate. Trends Neurosci 2004;27:98. 
 Freund TF, Katona I, Piomelli D: Role of endogenous cannabinoids in synaptic 
signaling. Physiol Rev 2003;83:1017. 
 Gouaux E, MacKinnon R: Principles of selective ion transport in channels and 
pumps. Science 2005;310:1461. 
 Hall ZW: In:  An Introduction to Molecular Neurobiology. Sinauer, 1992. 
 Hille B:  Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes , 3rd ed. Sinauer, 2001. 
 Julius D, Basbaum AI: Molecular mechanisms of nociception. Nature 
2001;413:203. 
 Koles L, Furst S, Illes P: P2X and P2Y receptors as possible targets of therapeutic 
manipulations in CNS illnesses. Drug News Perspect 2005;18:85. 
 Malenka RC, Nicoll RA: Long-term potentiation—A decade of progress? Science 
1999;285:1870. 
 Mody I, Pearce RA: Diversity of inhibitory neurotransmission through GABA(A) 
receptors. Trends Neurosci 2004;27:569. 
 Moran MM, Xu H, Clapham DE: TRP ion channels in the nervous system. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 2004;14:362. 
 Nestler EJ, Hyman SE, Malenka RC:  Molecular Neuropharmacology, 2nd ed. 
McGraw-Hill, 2009. 
 Rudolph U, Mohler H: Analysis of GABAA receptor function and dissection of the 
pharmacology of benzodiazepines and general anesthetics through mouse 
genetics. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2004;44:475. 
 Sudhof TC: The synaptic vesicle cycle. Annu Rev Neurosci 2004;27:509. 
 Wilson RI, Nicoll RA: Endocannabinoid signaling in the brain. Science 
2002;296:678. 
This page intentionally left blank 
373
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Assignment of a drug to the sedative-hypnotic class indicates that 
it is able to cause sedation (with concomitant relief of anxiety) or 
to encourage sleep. Because there is considerable chemical varia-
tion within the group, this drug classification is based on clinical 
uses rather than on similarities in chemical structure. Anxiety 
states and sleep disorders are common problems, and sedative-
hypnotics are widely prescribed drugs worldwide. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
SEDATIVEHYPNOTICS 
 An effective  sedative (anxiolytic) agent should reduce anxiety and 
exert a calming effect. The degree of central nervous system 
depression caused by a sedative should be the minimum consistent 
with therapeutic efficacy. A  hypnotic drug should produce drows-
iness and encourage the onset and maintenance of a state of sleep. 
Hypnotic effects involve more pronounced depression of the cen-
tral nervous system than sedation, and this can be achieved with 
many drugs in this class simply by increasing the dose. Graded 
dose-dependent depression of central nervous system function is a 
characteristic of most sedative-hypnotics. However, individual 
drugs differ in the relationship between the dose and the degree of 
central nervous system depression. Two examples of such 
dose-response relationships are shown in  Figure 22–1 . The linear 
slope for drug A is typical of many of the older sedative-hypnotics, 
including the barbiturates and alcohols. With such drugs, an 
increase in dose higher than that needed for hypnosis may lead to 
a state of general anesthesia. At still higher doses, these sedative-
hypnotics may depress respiratory and vasomotor centers in the 
medulla, leading to coma and death. Deviations from a linear 
dose-response relationship, as shown for drug B, require propor-
tionately greater dosage increments to achieve central nervous 
system depression more profound than hypnosis. This appears to 
be the case for benzodiazepines and for certain newer hypnotics 
that have a similar mechanism of action. 
 Chemical Classification 
 The  benzodiazepines are widely used sedative-hypnotics. All of 
the structures shown in  Figure 22–2 are 1,4-benzodiazepines, and 
most contain a carboxamide group in the 7-membered heterocy-
clic ring structure. An electronegative substituent in the 7 posi-
tion, such as a halogen or a nitro group, is required for 
sedative-hypnotic activity. The structures of triazolam and alprazo-
lam include the addition of a triazole ring at the 1,2-position. 
 The chemical structures of some older and less commonly used 
sedative-hypnotics, including several  barbiturates , are shown in 
 Figure 22–3 . Glutethimide and meprobamate are of distinctive 
chemical structure but are practically equivalent to barbiturates in 
their pharmacologic effects. They are rarely used. The sedative-
 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs 
 Anthony J. Trevor, PhD, &  Walter L. Way, MD 
C A S E  S T U D Y
 At her annual physical examination, a 53-year-old middle 
school teacher complains that she has been experiencing 
difficulty falling asleep and after falling asleep awakens sev-
eral times during the night. These episodes occur almost 
nightly and are having a negative impact on her teaching 
functions. She has tried various over-the-counter sleep rem-
edies, but they were of little help and she experienced “hang-
over” effects the next day. Her general health is good, she is 
not overweight, and she takes no prescription drugs. She 
drinks one cup of decaffeinated coffee in the morning; how-
ever, she drinks as many as six cans per day of diet cola. She 
drinks a glass of wine with her evening meal but does not 
like stronger spirits. What other aspects of this patient’s his-
tory would you like to know? What therapeutic measures 
are appropriate for this patient? What drug, or drugs 
(if any), would you prescribe? 
22
374    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
hypnotic class also includes compounds of simpler chemical struc-
ture, including  ethanol (see  Chapter 23 ) and  chloral hydrate . 
 Several drugs with novel chemical structures have been intro-
duced more recently for use in sleep disorders.  Zolpidem , an 
imidazopyridine,  zaleplon , a pyrazolopyrimidine, and  eszo- 
piclone , a cyclopyrrolone ( Figure 22–4 ), although structurally 
unrelated to benzodiazepines, share a similar mechanism of 
action, as described below. Eszopiclone is the  (S) -enantiomer of 
zopiclone, a hypnotic drug that has been available outside the 
United States since 1989.  Ramelteon , a melatonin receptor ago-
nist, is a more recently introduced hypnotic drug (see Box: 
Ramelteon).  Buspirone is a slow-onset anxiolytic agent whose 
actions are quite different from those of conventional sedative-
hypnotics (see Box: Buspirone). 
 FIGURE 22–1  Dose-response curves for two hypothetical 
sedative-hypnotics. 
CNS effects
Coma
Anesthesia
Hypnosis
Sedation
Increasing dose
Drug B
Drug A
 FIGURE 22–2  Chemical structures of some benzodiazepines. 
Cl
Cl
Cl
Diazepam
Chlordiazepoxide
Flurazepam
Cl
Cl
Cl
Desmethyldiazepam
Oxazepam
Lorazepam
NO2
Nitrazepam
Triazolam
Alprazolam
N
H3C
1
2
3
N
4
5
6
7
8
9
N
N
O
H
N
CH3
N
N
F
Cl
Cl
O
CH2
CH2
N
C2H5
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
H
N
H
N
N
N
N
H
N
O
H
N
N
C2H5
H3C
H3C
Cl
N
N
N
N
Cl
N
N
N
N
CHAPTER 22 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs    375
 Other classes of drugs that exert sedative effects include anti-
psychotics (see  Chapter 29 ) and many antidepressant drugs (see 
 Chapter 30 ). The latter are currently used widely in the manage-
ment of chronic anxiety disorders. Certain antihistaminic agents 
including diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, and promethazine (see 
 Chapter 16 ) cause sedation but commonly also exert marked 
effects on the peripheral autonomic nervous system. Antihistaminic 
drugs with sedative effects are available as over-the-counter 
sleep aids. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption and Distribution 
 The rates of oral absorption of sedative-hypnotics differ 
depending on a number of factors, including lipophilicity. For 
example, the absorption of triazolam is extremely rapid, and 
that of diazepam and the active metabolite of clorazepate is 
more rapid than other commonly used benzodiazepines. 
Clorazepate, a prodrug, is converted to its active form, 
desmethyldiazepam (nordiazepam), by acid hydrolysis in the 
stomach. Most of the barbiturates and other older sedative-
hypnotics, as well as the newer hypnotics (eszopiclone, zaleplon, 
zolpidem), are absorbed rapidly into the blood following oral 
administration. 
 Lipid solubility plays a major role in determining the rate at 
which a particular sedative-hypnotic enters the central nervous 
system. This property is responsible for the rapid onset of 
central nervous system effects of triazolam, thiopental 
(see  Chapter 25 ), and the newer hypnotics eszopiclone, zaleplon, 
and zolpidem. 
 All sedative-hypnotics cross the placental barrier during 
pregnancy. If sedative-hypnotics are given during the 
predelivery period, they may contribute to the depression of 
neonatal vital functions. Sedative-hypnotics are also detectable 
in breast milk and may exert depressant effects in the 
nursing infant. 
 B. Biotransformation 
 Metabolic transformation to more water-soluble metabolites is 
necessary for clearance of sedative-hypnotics from the body. The 
microsomal drug-metabolizing enzyme systems of the liver are 
 FIGURE 22–3  Chemical structures of some barbiturates and other sedative-hypnotics. 
CH3
CH2
Pentobarbital
Barbiturate nucleus
5
6
1
2
3
4
O
O
O
HN
HN
R1:
CH2
CH
R2:
R1:
R2:
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH
CH2
R1:
CH2
CH
R2:
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
Phenobarbital
CH2
R1:
R2:
CH3
Secobarbital
O
HN
C2H5
O
Glutethimide
CH2
C
O
NH2
CH3
H2N
C
O
O
CH2
C3H7
C
O
Meprobamate
CH
CCl3
HO
HO
Chloral hydrate
 FIGURE 22–4  Chemical structures of newer hypnotics. 
Zolpidem
Zaleplon
Eszopiclone
H3C
CH3
CH2
N(CH3)2
CO
CH3
N
CO
CH2
CH3
CN
N
N
N
N
N
O
O
C
CH3
O
N
Cl
N
N
N
N
N
376    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
most important in this regard, so elimination half-life of these drugs 
depends mainly on the rate of their metabolic transformation. 
 1. Benzodiazepines— Hepatic metabolism accounts for the 
clearance of all benzodiazepines. The patterns and rates of metab-
olism depend on the individual drugs. Most benzodiazepines 
undergo microsomal oxidation (phase I reactions), including 
 N- dealkylation and aliphatic hydroxylation catalyzed by cyto-
chrome P450 isozymes, especially CYP3A4. The metabolites are 
subsequently conjugated (phase II reactions) to form glucuronides 
that are excreted in the urine. However, many phase I metabolites 
of benzodiazepines are pharmacologically active, some with long 
half-lives ( Figure 22–5 ). For example, desmethyldiazepam, which 
has an elimination half-life of more than 40 hours, is an active 
metabolite of chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, prazepam, and 
clorazepate. Alprazolam and triazolam undergo α-hydroxylation, 
and the resulting metabolites appear to exert short-lived pharma-
cologic effects because they are rapidly conjugated to form inactive 
glucuronides. The short elimination half-life of triazolam (2–3 hours) 
favors its use as a hypnotic rather than as a sedative drug. 
 The formation of active metabolites has complicated studies on 
the pharmacokinetics of the benzodiazepines in humans because 
the elimination half-life of the parent drug may have little relation 
to the time course of pharmacologic effects. Benzodiazepines for 
which the parent drug or active metabolites have long half-lives 
are predictably more likely to cause cumulative effects with mul-
tiple doses. Cumulative and residual effects such as excessive 
drowsiness appear to be less of a problem with such drugs as 
estazolam, oxazepam, and lorazepam, which have relatively short 
 Ramelteon 
 Melatonin receptors are thought to be involved in maintain-
ing circadian rhythms underlying the sleep-wake cycle (see 
 Chapter 16 ). Ramelteon (Rozerem), a novel hypnotic drug 
specifically useful for patients who have difficulty in falling 
asleep, is an agonist at MT 1 and MT 2 melatonin receptors 
located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the brain. The drug 
has no direct effects on GABAergic neurotransmission in the 
central nervous system. In polysomnography studies of 
patients with chronic insomnia, ramelteon reduced the 
latency of persistent sleep with no effects on sleep architec-
ture and no rebound insomnia or significant withdrawal 
symptoms. Ramelteon has minimal potential for abuse, is not 
a controlled substance, and regular use does not result in 
dependence . The drug is rapidly absorbed after oral adminis-
tration and undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism, form-
ing an active metabolite with longer half-life (2–5 hours) than 
the parent drug. The CYP1A2 isoform of cytochrome P450 is 
mainly responsible for the metabolism of ramelteon, but the 
CYP2C9 isoform is also involved. The drug should not be used 
in combination with inhibitors of CYP1A2 (eg, ciprofloxacin, 
fluvoxamine, tacrine, zileuton) or CYP2C9 (eg, fluconazole) 
and should be used with caution in patients with liver dys-
function. The CYP inducer rifampin markedly reduces the 
plasma levels of both ramelteon and its active metabolite. 
Adverse effects of ramelteon include dizziness, somnolence, 
fatigue, and endocrine changes as well as decreases in testos-
terone and increases in prolactin. Ramelteon is an FDA preg-
nancy category C drug. 
 Buspirone
 Buspirone has selective anxiolytic effects, and its pharmaco-
logic characteristics differ from those of other drugs described 
in this chapter. Buspirone relieves anxiety without causing 
marked sedative, hypnotic, or euphoric effects. Unlike benzo-
diazepines, the drug has no anticonvulsant or muscle relaxant 
properties. Buspirone does not interact directly with 
GABAergic systems. It may exert its anxiolytic effects by act-
ing as a partial agonist at brain 5-HT 1A receptors, but it also 
has affinity for brain dopamine D 2 receptors. Buspirone-
treated patients show no rebound anxiety or withdrawal 
signs on abrupt discontinuance. The drug is not effective in 
blocking the acute withdrawal syndrome resulting from 
abrupt cessation of use of benzodiazepines or other sedative-
hypnotics. Buspirone has minimal abuse liability. In marked 
contrast to the benzodiazepines, the anxiolytic effects of bus-
pirone may take more than a week to become established, 
making the drug unsuitable for management of acute anxiety 
states. The drug is used in generalized anxiety states but is 
less effective in panic disorders.
 Buspirone is rapidly absorbed orally but undergoes exten-
sive first-pass metabolism via hydroxylation and dealkylation 
reactions to form several active metabolites. The major 
metabolite is 1-(2-pyrimidyl)-piperazine (1-PP), which has 
α 2 -adrenoceptor–blocking actions and which enters the cen-
tral nervous system to reach higher levels than the parent 
drug. It is not known what role (if any) 1-PP plays in the central 
actions of buspirone. The elimination half-life of buspirone is 
2–4 hours, and liver dysfunction may slow its clearance. 
Rifampin, an inducer of cytochrome P450, decreases the half-
life of buspirone; inhibitors of CYP3A4 (eg, erythromycin, 
ketoconazole, grapefruit juice, nefazodone) can markedly 
increase its plasma levels.
 Buspirone causes less psychomotor impairment than ben-
zodiazepines and does not affect driving skills. The drug does 
not potentiate effects of conventional sedative-hypnotic 
drugs, ethanol, or tricyclic antidepressants, and elderly patients 
do not appear to be more sensitive to its actions. Nonspecific 
chest pain, tachycardia, palpitations, dizziness, nervousness, 
tinnitus, gastrointestinal distress, and paresthesias and a dose-
dependent pupillary constriction may occur. Blood pressure 
may be significantly elevated in patients receiving MAO 
inhibitors. Buspirone is an FDA pregnancy category B drug. 
CHAPTER 22 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs    377
half-lives and are metabolized directly to inactive glucuronides. 
Some pharmacokinetic properties of selected benzodiazepines are 
listed in  Table 22–1 . The metabolism of several commonly used 
benzodiazepines including diazepam, midazolam, and triazolam is 
affected by inhibitors and inducers of hepatic P450 isozymes 
(see  Chapter 4 ). 
 2. Barbiturates— With the exception of phenobarbital, only 
insignificant quantities of the barbiturates are excreted unchanged. 
The major metabolic pathways involve oxidation by hepatic 
enzymes to form alcohols, acids, and ketones, which appear in the 
urine as glucuronide conjugates. The overall rate of hepatic 
metabolism in humans depends on the individual drug but (with 
the exception of the thiobarbiturates) is usually slow. The elimina-
tion half-lives of secobarbital and pentobarbital range from 18 to 
48 hours in different individuals. The elimination half-life of phe-
nobarbital in humans is 4–5 days. Multiple dosing with these 
agents can lead to cumulative effects. 
 3. Newer hypnotics— After oral administration of the standard 
formulation, zolpidem reaches peak plasma levels in 1.6 hours. A 
biphasic release formulation extends plasma levels by approximately 
 FIGURE 22–5  Biotransformation of benzodiazepines. (Boldface, drugs available for clinical use in various countries; *, active metabolite.) 
URINARY
EXCRETION
Hydroxyethyl-
flurazepam*
Desalkyl-
flurazepam*
Flurazepam
Oxazepam*
Desmethyldiazepam*
Alpha-hydroxy metabolites*
Alprazolam and triazolam
Lorazepam
Demoxepam*
Desmethylchlordiazepoxide*
Chlordiazepoxide
Prazepam
Clorazepate (inactive)
Diazepam
CONJUGATION
TABLE 22–1 Pharmacokinetic properties of some benzodiazepines and newer hypnotics in humans.
Drug
Peak Blood Level (hours)
Elimination Half-Life1 (hours)
Comments
Alprazolam
1–2
12–15
Rapid oral absorption
Chlordiazepoxide
2–4
15–40
Active metabolites; erratic bioavailability from IM injection
Clorazepate
1–2 (nordiazepam)
50–100
Prodrug; hydrolyzed to active form in stomach
Diazepam
1–2
20–80
Active metabolites; erratic bioavailability from IM injection
Eszopiclone
1
6
Minor active metabolites
Flurazepam
1–2
40–100
Active metabolites with long half-lives
Lorazepam
1–6
10–20
No active metabolites
Oxazepam
2–4
10–20
No active metabolites
Temazepam
2–3
10–40
Slow oral absorption
Triazolam
1
2–3
Rapid onset; short duration of action
Zaleplon
< 1
1–2
Metabolized via aldehyde dehydrogenase
Zolpidem
1–3
1.5–3.5
No active metabolites
1Includes half-lives of major metabolites.
378    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
2 hours. Zolpidem is rapidly metabolized to inactive metabolites via 
oxidation and hydroxylation by hepatic cytochromes P450 including 
the CYP3A4 isozyme. The elimination half-life of the drug is 1.5–
3.5 hours, with clearance decreased in elderly patients. Zaleplon is 
metabolized to inactive metabolites, mainly by hepatic aldehyde 
oxidase and partly by the cytochrome P450 isoform CYP3A4. The 
half-life of the drug is about 1 hour. Dosage should be reduced in 
patients with hepatic impairment and in the elderly. Cimetidine, 
which inhibits both aldehyde dehydrogenase and CYP3A4, mark-
edly increases the peak plasma level of zaleplon. Eszopiclone is 
metabolized by hepatic cytochromes P450 (especially CYP3A4) to 
form the inactive  N -oxide derivative and weakly active desmethyl-
eszopiclone. The elimination half-life of eszopiclone is approxi-
mately 6 hours and is prolonged in the elderly and in the presence 
of inhibitors of CYP3A4 (eg, ketoconazole). Inducers of CYP3A4 
(eg, rifampin) increase the hepatic metabolism of eszopiclone. 
 C. Excretion 
 The water-soluble metabolites of sedative-hypnotics, mostly formed 
via the conjugation of phase I metabolites, are excreted mainly via the 
kidney. In most cases, changes in renal function do not have a 
marked effect on the elimination of parent drugs. Phenobarbital is 
excreted unchanged in the urine to a certain extent (20–30% in 
humans), and its elimination rate can be increased significantly by 
alkalinization of the urine. This is partly due to increased ionization 
at alkaline pH, since phenobarbital is a weak acid with a pK a of 7.4. 
 D. Factors Affecting Biodisposition 
 The biodisposition of sedative-hypnotics can be influenced by 
several factors, particularly alterations in hepatic function result-
ing from disease or drug-induced increases or decreases in 
microsomal enzyme activities (see  Chapter 4 ). 
 In very old patients and in patients with severe liver disease, the 
elimination half-lives of these drugs are often increased signifi-
cantly. In such cases, multiple normal doses of these sedative-
hypnotics can result in excessive central nervous system effects. 
 The activity of hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing enzymes 
may be increased in patients exposed to certain older sedative-
hypnotics on a long-term basis (enzyme induction; see  Chapter 4 ). 
Barbiturates (especially phenobarbital) and meprobamate are most 
likely to cause this effect, which may result in an increase in their 
own hepatic metabolism as well as that of other drugs. Increased 
biotransformation of other pharmacologic agents as a result of 
enzyme induction by barbiturates is a potential mechanism under-
lying drug interactions (see  Chapter 66 ). In contrast, benzodiaz-
epines and the newer hypnotics do not change hepatic 
drug-metabolizing enzyme activity with continuous use. 
 Pharmacodynamics of Benzodiazepines, 
Barbiturates, & Newer Hypnotics 
 A. Molecular Pharmacology of the GABA A Receptor 
 The benzodiazepines, the barbiturates, zolpidem, zaleplon, eszopi-
clone, and many other drugs bind to molecular components of the 
GABA A receptor in neuronal membranes in the central nervous 
system. This receptor, which functions as a chloride ion channel, 
is activated by the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA (see 
Chapter 21 ). 
 The GABA A receptor has a pentameric structure assembled 
from five subunits (each with four membrane-spanning domains) 
selected from multiple polypeptide classes (α, β, γ, δ, ε, π, ρ, etc). 
Multiple subunits of several of these classes have been character-
ized, among them six different α (eg, α1 through α6), four β, and 
three γ. A model of the GABA A receptor-chloride ion channel 
macromolecular complex is shown in  Figure 22–6 . 
 A major isoform of the GABA A receptor that is found in many 
regions of the brain consists of two α1, two β2, and one γ2 
subunits. In this isoform, the two binding sites for GABA are 
located between adjacent α1 and β2 subunits, and the binding 
pocket for benzodiazepines (the  BZ site of the GABA A receptor) 
is between an α1 and the γ2 subunit. However, GABA A receptors 
in different areas of the central nervous system consist of various 
combinations of the essential subunits, and the benzodiazepines 
bind to many of these, including receptor isoforms containing α2, 
α3, and α5 subunits. Barbiturates also bind to multiple isoforms 
 FIGURE 22–6  A model of the GABA A receptor-chloride ion 
channel macromolecular complex. A hetero-oligomeric glycoprotein, 
the complex consists of five or more membrane-spanning subunits. 
Multiple forms of α, β, and γ subunits are arranged in different penta-
meric combinations so that GABA A receptors exhibit molecular 
heterogeneity. GABA appears to interact at two sites between α and β 
subunits, triggering chloride channel opening with resulting mem-
brane hyperpolarization. Binding of benzodiazepines and the newer 
hypnotic drugs such as zolpidem occurs at a single site between α 
and γ subunits, facilitating the process of chloride ion channel 
opening. The benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil also binds at this 
site and can reverse the hypnotic effects of zolpidem. Note that these 
binding sites are distinct from those of the barbiturates. (See also text 
and Box: The Versatility of the Chloride Channel GABA Receptor 
Complex.) 
α
α
Extracellular
Intracellular
Ion channel
Cl–
GABA
GABA
β
β
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Flumazenil
Zolpidem
γ
CHAPTER 22 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs    379
of the GABA A receptor but at different sites from those with 
which benzodiazepines interact. In contrast to benzodiazepines, 
zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone bind more selectively because 
these drugs interact only with GABA A -receptor isoforms that 
contain α1 subunits. The heterogeneity of GABA A receptors may 
constitute the molecular basis for the varied pharmacologic actions 
of benzodiazepines and related drugs (see Box: GABA Receptor 
Heterogeneity & Pharmacologic Selectivity). 
 In contrast to GABA itself, benzodiazepines and other sedative-
hypnotics have a low affinity for GABA B receptors, which are acti-
vated by the spasmolytic drug baclofen (see Chapters 21 and 27). 
 B. Neuropharmacology 
 GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter 
in the central nervous system (see  Chapter 21 ). Electrophysiologic 
studies have shown that benzodiazepines potentiate GABAergic inhi-
bition at all levels of the neuraxis, including the spinal cord, hypo-
thalamus, hippocampus, substantia nigra, cerebellar cortex, and 
cerebral cortex. Benzodiazepines appear to increase the efficiency of 
GABAergic synaptic inhibition. The benzodiazepines do not substi-
tute for GABA but appear to enhance GABA’s effects allosterically 
without directly activating GABA A receptors or opening the associ-
ated chloride channels. The enhancement in chloride ion conduc-
tance induced by the interaction of benzodiazepines with GABA takes 
the form of an increase in the  frequency of channel-opening events. 
 Barbiturates also facilitate the actions of GABA at multiple 
sites in the central nervous system, but—in contrast to 
benzodiazepines—they appear to increase the  duration of the 
GABA-gated chloride channel openings. At high concentrations, 
the barbiturates may also be GABA-mimetic, directly activating 
chloride channels. These effects involve a binding site or sites 
distinct from the benzodiazepine binding sites. Barbiturates are 
less selective in their actions than benzodiazepines, because they 
also depress the actions of the excitatory neurotransmitter glu-
tamic acid via binding to the AMPA receptor. Barbiturates also 
exert nonsynaptic membrane effects in parallel with their effects 
on GABA and glutamate neurotransmission. This multiplicity of 
sites of action of barbiturates may be the basis for their ability to 
induce full surgical anesthesia (see  Chapter 25 ) and for their 
more pronounced central depressant effects (which result in their 
low margin of safety) compared with benzodiazepines and the 
newer hypnotics. 
 C. Benzodiazepine Binding Site Ligands 
 The components of the GABA A receptor-chloride ion channel mac-
romolecule that function as benzodiazepine binding sites exhibit 
heterogeneity (see Box: The Versatility of the Chloride Channel 
GABA Receptor Complex). Three types of ligand-benzodiazepine 
receptor interactions have been reported: (1)  Agonists facilitate 
GABA actions, and this occurs at multiple BZ binding sites in the 
case of the benzodiazepines. As noted above, the nonbenzodiaz-
epines zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone are selective agonists at 
the BZ sites that contain an α1 subunit. Endogenous agonist 
ligands for the BZ binding sites have been proposed, because 
benzodiazepine-like chemicals have been isolated from brain tissue 
of animals never exposed to these drugs. Nonbenzodiazepine 
molecules that have affinity for BZ sites on the GABA A receptor 
have also been detected in human brain. (2)  Antagonists are typi-
fied by the synthetic benzodiazepine derivative  flumazenil, which 
blocks the actions of benzodiazepines, eszopiclone, zaleplon, and 
zolpidem but does not antagonize the actions of barbiturates, mep-
robamate, or ethanol. Certain endogenous neuropeptides are also 
capable of blocking the interaction of benzodiazepines with BZ 
binding sites. (3)  Inverse agonists act as negative allosteric modula-
tors of GABA-receptor function (see  Chapter 1 ). Their interaction 
with BZ sites on the GABA A receptor can  produce anxiety and sei-
zures, an action that has been demonstrated for several compounds, 
especially the β-carbolines, eg,  n- butyl-β-carboline-3-carboxylate 
(β-CCB). In addition to their direct actions, these molecules can 
block the binding and the effects of benzodiazepines. 
 The physiologic significance of endogenous modulators of 
GABA functions in the central nervous system remains unclear. To 
date, it has not been established that the putative endogenous 
ligands of BZ binding sites play a role in the control of states of 
anxiety, sleep patterns, or any other characteristic behavioral 
expression of central nervous system function. 
 GABA Receptor Heterogeneity & 
Pharmacologic Selectivity 
 Studies involving strains of genetically engineered (“knock-
out”) rodents have demonstrated that the specific pharmaco-
logic actions elicited by benzodiazepines and other drugs that 
modulate GABA actions are influenced by the composition of 
the subunits assembled to form the GABA A receptor. 
Benzodiazepines interact primarily with brain GABA A recep-
tors in which the α subunits (isoforms 1, 2, 3, and 5) have a 
conserved histidine residue in the N-terminal domain. Mice in 
which a point mutation has been inserted converting histidine 
to arginine in the α1 subunit show resistance to both the 
sedative and amnestic effects of benzodiazepines, but anxi-
olytic and muscle-relaxing effects are largely unchanged. 
These animals are also unresponsive to the hypnotic actions of 
zolpidem and zaleplon, drugs that bind selectively to GABA A 
receptors containing α1 subunits. In contrast, mice with selec-
tive histidine-arginine mutations in the α2 or α3 subunits of 
GABA A receptors show selective resistance to the antianxiety 
effects of benzodiazepines. Based on studies of this type, it has 
been suggested that α1 subunits in GABA A receptors mediate 
sedation, amnesia, and ataxic effects of benzodiazepines, 
whereas α2 and α3 subunits are involved in their anxiolytic 
and muscle-relaxing actions. Other mutation studies have led 
to suggestions that an α5 subtype is involved in at least some 
of the memory impairment caused by benzodiazepines. It 
should be emphasized that these studies involving genetic 
manipulations of the GABA A receptor utilize rodent models of 
the anxiolytic and amnestic actions of drugs. 
380    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 D. Organ Level Effects 
 1. Sedation— Benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and most older 
sedative-hypnotic drugs exert calming effects with concomitant 
reduction of anxiety at relatively low doses. In most cases, how-
ever, the anxiolytic actions of sedative-hypnotics are accompa-
nied by some depressant effects on psychomotor and cognitive 
functions. In experimental animal models, benzodiazepines and 
older sedative-hypnotic drugs are able to disinhibit punishment-
suppressed behavior. This disinhibition has been equated with 
antianxiety effects of sedative-hypnotics, and it is not a charac-
teristic of all drugs that have sedative effects, eg, the tricyclic 
antidepressants and antihistamines. However, the disinhibition 
of previously suppressed behavior may be more related to behav-
ioral disinhibitory effects of sedative-hypnotics, including 
euphoria, impaired judgment, and loss of self-control, which can 
occur at dosages in the range of those used for management of 
anxiety. The benzodiazepines also exert dose-dependent antero-
grade amnesic effects (inability to remember events occurring 
during the drug’s duration of action). 
 2. Hypnosis— By definition, all of the sedative-hypnotics 
induce sleep if high enough doses are given. The effects of sedative-
hypnotics on the stages of sleep depend on several factors, 
including the specific drug, the dose, and the frequency of its 
administration. The general effects of benzodiazepines and older 
sedative-hypnotics on patterns of normal sleep are as fol-
lows: (1) the latency of sleep onset is decreased (time to fall 
asleep); (2) the duration of stage 2 NREM (nonrapid eye move-
ment) sleep is increased; (3) the duration of REM sleep is 
decreased; and (4) the duration of stage 4 NREM slow-wave 
sleep is decreased. The newer hypnotics all decrease the latency 
to persistent sleep. Zolpidem decreases REM sleep but has 
minimal effect on slow-wave sleep. Zaleplon decreases the 
latency of sleep onset with little effect on total sleep time, 
NREM, or REM sleep. Eszopiclone increases total sleep time, 
mainly via increases in stage 2 NREM sleep, and at low doses has 
little effect on sleep patterns. At the highest recommended dose, 
eszopiclone decreases REM sleep. 
 More rapid onset of sleep and prolongation of stage 2 are 
presumably clinically useful effects. However, the significance of 
sedative-hypnotic drug effects on REM and slow-wave sleep is 
not clear. Deliberate interruption of REM sleep causes anxiety 
and irritability followed by a rebound increase in REM sleep at 
the end of the experiment. A similar pattern of “REM rebound” 
can be detected following abrupt cessation of drug treatment 
with older sedative-hypnotics, especially when drugs with short 
durations of action (eg, triazolam) are used at high doses. With 
respect to zolpidem and the other newer hypnotics, there is little 
evidence of REM rebound when these drugs are discontinued 
after use of recommended doses. However, rebound insomnia 
occurs with both zolpidem and zaleplon if used at higher doses. 
Despite possible reductions in slow-wave sleep, there are no 
reports of disturbances in the secretion of pituitary or adrenal 
hormones when either barbiturates or benzodiazepines are used 
as hypnotics. The use of sedative-hypnotics for more than 1–2 
weeks leads to some tolerance to their effects on sleep patterns. 
 3. Anesthesia— As shown in  Figure 22–1 , high doses of certain 
sedative-hypnotics depress the central nervous system to the point 
known as stage III of general anesthesia (see  Chapter 25 ). 
However, the suitability of a particular agent as an adjunct in 
anesthesia depends mainly on the physicochemical properties that 
determine its rapidity of onset and duration of effect. Among the 
barbiturates, thiopental and methohexital are very lipid-soluble, 
penetrating brain tissue rapidly following intravenous administra-
tion, a characteristic favoring their use for the induction of anes-
thesia. Rapid tissue redistribution (not rapid elimination) accounts 
for the short duration of action of these drugs, a feature useful in 
recovery from anesthesia. 
 Benzodiazepines—including diazepam, lorazepam, and 
midazolam—are used intravenously in anesthesia (see  Chapter 
25 ), often in combination with other agents. Not surprisingly, 
benzodiazepines given in large doses as adjuncts to general anes-
thetics may contribute to a persistent postanesthetic respiratory 
depression. This is probably related to their relatively long half-
lives and the formation of active metabolites. However, if neces-
sary, such depressant actions of the benzodiazepines are usually 
reversible with flumazenil. 
 The Versatility of the Chloride Channel 
GABA Receptor Complex 
 The GABA A -chloride channel macromolecular complex is one 
of the most versatile drug-responsive machines in the body. In 
addition to the benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and the newer 
hypnotics (eg, zolpidem), many other drugs with central nervous 
system effects can modify the function of this important iono-
tropic receptor. These include alcohol and certain intravenous 
anesthetics (etomidate, propofol) in addition to thiopental. 
For example, etomidate and propofol (see  Chapter 25 ) appear 
to act selectively at GABA A receptors that contain β 2 and β 3 
subunits, the latter suggested to be the most important with 
respect to the hypnotic and muscle-relaxing actions of these 
anesthetic agents. The anesthetic steroid alphaxalone is 
thought to interact with GABA A receptors, and these recep-
tors may also be targets for some of the actions of volatile 
anesthetics (eg, halothane). Most of these agents facilitate or 
mimic the action of GABA. However, it has not been shown 
that all these drugs act exclusively by this mechanism. Other 
drugs used in the management of seizure disorders indirectly 
influence the activity of the GABA A -chloride channel macro-
molecular complex by inhibiting GABA metabolism (eg, 
vigabatrin) or reuptake of the transmitter (eg, tiagabine). 
Central nervous system excitatory agents that act on the chloride 
channel include picrotoxin and bicuculline. These convulsant 
drugs block the channel directly (picrotoxin) or interfere with 
GABA binding (bicuculline). 
CHAPTER 22 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs    381
 4. Anticonvulsant effects— Many sedative-hypnotics are 
capable of inhibiting the development and spread of epileptiform 
electrical activity in the central nervous system. Some selectivity 
exists in that some members of the group can exert anticonvulsant 
effects without marked central nervous system depression 
(although psychomotor function may be impaired). Several 
benzodiazepines—including clonazepam, nitrazepam, lorazepam, 
and diazepam—are sufficiently selective to be clinically useful in 
the management of seizures (see  Chapter 24 ). Of the barbiturates, 
phenobarbital and metharbital (converted to phenobarbital in the 
body) are effective in the treatment of generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, though not the drugs of first choice. Zolpidem, zaleplon, 
and eszopiclone lack anticonvulsant activity, presumably because 
of their more selective binding than that of benzodiazepines to 
GABA A receptor isoforms. 
 5. Muscle relaxation— Some sedative-hypnotics, particularly 
members of the carbamate (eg, meprobamate) and benzodiazepine 
groups, exert inhibitory effects on polysynaptic reflexes and inter-
nuncial transmission and at high doses may also depress transmis-
sion at the skeletal neuromuscular junction. Somewhat selective 
actions of this type that lead to muscle relaxation can be readily 
demonstrated in animals and have led to claims of usefulness for 
relaxing contracted voluntary muscle in muscle spasm (see Clinical 
Pharmacology). Muscle relaxation is not a characteristic action of 
zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone. 
 6. Effects on respiration and cardiovascular function— At 
hypnotic doses in healthy patients, the effects of sedative-hypnotics 
on respiration are comparable to changes during natural sleep. 
However, even at therapeutic doses, sedative-hypnotics can pro-
duce significant respiratory depression in patients with pulmonary 
disease. Effects on respiration are dose-related, and depression of 
the medullary respiratory center is the usual cause of death due to 
overdose of sedative-hypnotics. 
 At doses up to those causing hypnosis, no significant effects on 
the cardiovascular system are observed in healthy patients. 
However, in hypovolemic states, heart failure, and other diseases 
that impair cardiovascular function, normal doses of sedative-
hypnotics may cause cardiovascular depression, probably as a 
result of actions on the medullary vasomotor centers. At toxic 
doses, myocardial contractility and vascular tone may both be 
depressed by central and peripheral effects, leading to circulatory 
collapse. Respiratory and cardiovascular effects are more marked 
when sedative-hypnotics are given intravenously. 
 Tolerance & Dependence 
 Tolerance—decreased responsiveness to a drug following repeated 
exposure—is a common feature of sedative-hypnotic use. It may 
result in the need for an increase in the dose required to maintain 
symptomatic improvement or to promote sleep. It is important to 
recognize that partial cross-tolerance occurs between the sedative-
hypnotics described here and also with ethanol (see  Chapter 
23 )—a feature of some clinical importance, as explained below. 
The mechanisms responsible for tolerance to sedative-hypnotics 
are not well understood. An increase in the rate of drug metabo-
lism (metabolic tolerance) may be partly responsible in the case of 
chronic administration of barbiturates, but changes in responsive-
ness of the central nervous system (pharmacodynamic tolerance) 
are of greater importance for most sedative-hypnotics. In the case 
of benzodiazepines, the development of tolerance in animals has 
been associated with down-regulation of brain benzodiazepine 
receptors. Tolerance has been reported to occur with the extended 
use of zolpidem. Minimal tolerance was observed with the use of 
zaleplon over a 5-week period and eszopiclone over a 6-month 
period. 
 The perceived desirable properties of relief of anxiety, eupho-
ria, disinhibition, and promotion of sleep have led to the compul-
sive misuse of virtually all sedative-hypnotics. (See  Chapter 32 for 
a detailed discussion.) For this reason, most sedative-hypnotic 
drugs are classified as Schedule III or Schedule IV drugs for pre-
scribing purposes in the United States. The consequences of abuse 
of these agents can be defined in both psychological and physio-
logic terms. The psychological component may initially parallel 
simple neurotic behavior patterns difficult to differentiate from 
those of the inveterate coffee drinker or cigarette smoker. When 
the pattern of sedative-hypnotic use becomes compulsive (addic-
tion, see  Chapter 32 ), more serious complications develop, includ-
ing dependence and tolerance. 
 Dependence can be described as an altered physiologic state 
that requires continuous drug administration to prevent an absti-
nence or withdrawal syndrome. In the case of sedative-hypnotics, 
this syndrome is characterized by states of increased anxiety, insomnia, 
and central nervous system excitability that may progress to con-
vulsions. Most sedative-hypnotics—including benzodiazepines—
are capable of causing dependence when used on a long-term basis. 
However, the severity of withdrawal symptoms differs among indi-
vidual drugs and depends also on the magnitude of the dose used 
immediately before cessation of use. When higher doses of sedative-
hypnotics are used, abrupt withdrawal leads to more serious with-
drawal signs. Differences in the severity of withdrawal symptoms 
resulting from individual sedative-hypnotics relate in part to half-
life, since drugs with long half-lives are eliminated slowly enough 
to accomplish gradual withdrawal with few physical symptoms. 
The use of drugs with very short half-lives for hypnotic effects may 
lead to signs of withdrawal even between doses. For example, triazolam, 
a benzodiazepine with a half-life of about 4 hours, has been reported 
to cause daytime anxiety when used to treat sleep disorders. The 
abrupt cessation of use of zolpidem, zaleplon, or eszopiclone may 
also result in withdrawal symptoms, though usually of less intensity 
than those seen with benzodiazepines. 
 BENZODIAZEPINE ANTAGONISTS: 
FLUMAZENIL 
 Flumazenil is one of several 1,4-benzodiazepine derivatives with a 
high affinity for the benzodiazepine binding site on the GABA A 
receptor that act as competitive antagonists. It blocks many of the 
actions of benzodiazepines, zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone, 
but does not antagonize the central nervous system effects of other 
382    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
sedative-hypnotics, ethanol, opioids, or general anesthetics. 
Flumazenil is approved for use in reversing the central nervous 
system depressant effects of benzodiazepine overdose and to has-
ten recovery following use of these drugs in anesthetic and diag-
nostic procedures. Although the drug reverses the sedative effects 
of benzodiazepines, antagonism of benzodiazepine-induced respi-
ratory depression is less predictable. When given intravenously, 
flumazenil acts rapidly but has a short half-life (0.7–1.3 hours) 
due to rapid hepatic clearance. Because all benzodiazepines have a 
longer duration of action than flumazenil, sedation commonly 
recurs, requiring repeated administration of the antagonist. 
 Adverse effects of flumazenil include agitation, confusion, diz-
ziness, and nausea. Flumazenil may cause a severe precipitated 
abstinence syndrome in patients who have developed marked 
benzodiazepine dependence. In patients who have ingested benzo-
diazepines with tricyclic antidepressants, seizures and cardiac 
arrhythmias may follow flumazenil administration. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
SEDATIVEHYPNOTICS 
 TREATMENT OF ANXIETY STATES 
 The psychological, behavioral, and physiological responses that 
characterize anxiety can take many forms. Typically, the psychic 
awareness of anxiety is accompanied by enhanced vigilance, motor 
tension, and autonomic hyperactivity. Anxiety is often secondary 
to organic disease states—acute myocardial infarction, angina 
pectoris, gastrointestinal ulcers, etc—which themselves require 
specific therapy. Another class of secondary anxiety states (situa-
tional anxiety) results from circumstances that may have to be 
dealt with only once or a few times, including anticipation of 
frightening medical or dental procedures and family illness or 
other stressful event. Even though situational anxiety tends to be 
self-limiting, the short-term use of sedative-hypnotics may be 
appropriate for the treatment of this and certain disease-associated 
anxiety states. Similarly, the use of a sedative-hypnotic as pre-
medication prior to surgery or some unpleasant medical procedure 
is rational and proper ( Table 22–2 ). 
 Excessive or unreasonable anxiety about life circumstances 
(generalized anxiety disorder, GAD), panic disorders, and agora-
phobia are also amenable to drug therapy, sometimes in conjunc-
tion with psychotherapy. The benzodiazepines continue to be used 
for the management of acute anxiety states and for rapid control 
of panic attacks. They are also used, though much less commonly 
than in the past, in the long-term management of GAD and panic 
disorders. Anxiety symptoms may be relieved by many benzodiaz-
epines, but it is not always easy to demonstrate the superiority of 
one drug over another. Alprazolam has been used in the treatment 
of panic disorders and agoraphobia and appears to be more selec-
tive in these conditions than other benzodiazepines. The choice of 
benzodiazepines for the treatment of anxiety is based on several 
sound pharmacologic principles: (1) a rapid onset of action; (2) a 
relatively high therapeutic index (see drug B in  Figure 22–1 ), plus 
availability of flumazenil for treatment of overdose; (3) a low risk 
of drug interactions based on liver enzyme induction; and (4) 
minimal effects on cardiovascular or autonomic functions. 
 Disadvantages of the benzodiazepines include the risk of 
dependence, depression of central nervous system functions, and 
amnestic effects. In addition, the benzodiazepines exert additive 
central nervous system depression when administered with other 
drugs, including ethanol. The patient should be warned of this 
possibility to avoid impairment of performance of any task requir-
ing mental alertness and motor coordination. In the treatment of 
generalized anxiety disorders and certain phobias, newer antide-
pressants, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) 
and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), are 
now considered by many authorities to be drugs of first choice (see 
 Chapter 30 ). However, these agents have a slow onset of action 
and thus, limited effectiveness in acute anxiety states. 
 Sedative-hypnotics should be used with appropriate caution so 
as to minimize adverse effects. A dose should be prescribed that 
does not impair mentation or motor functions during waking 
hours. Some patients may tolerate the drug better if most of the 
daily dose is given at bedtime, with smaller doses during the day. 
Prescriptions should be written for short periods, since there is 
little justification for long-term therapy (defined as use of thera-
peutic doses for 2 months or longer). The physician should make 
an effort to assess the efficacy of therapy from the patient’s subjec-
tive responses. Combinations of antianxiety agents should be 
avoided, and people taking sedatives should be cautioned about 
the consumption of alcohol and the concurrent use of over-the-
counter medications containing antihistaminic or anticholinergic 
drugs (see  Chapter 63 ). 
 TREATMENT OF SLEEP PROBLEMS 
 Sleep disorders are common and often result from inadequate treat-
ment of underlying medical conditions or psychiatric illness. True 
primary insomnia is rare. Nonpharmacologic therapies that are useful 
for sleep problems include proper diet and exercise, avoiding stimu-
lants before retiring, ensuring a comfortable sleeping environment, 
and retiring at a regular time each night. In some cases, however, the 
patient will need and should be given a sedative-hypnotic for a 
TABLE 22–2 Clinical uses of sedative-hypnotics.
For relief of anxiety
For insomnia
For sedation and amnesia before and during medical and surgical 
procedures
For treatment of epilepsy and seizure states
As a component of balanced anesthesia (intravenous administration)
For control of ethanol or other sedative-hypnotic withdrawal states
For muscle relaxation in specific neuromuscular disorders
As diagnostic aids or for treatment in psychiatry
CHAPTER 22 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs    383
limited period. It should be noted that the abrupt discontinuance of 
many drugs in this class can lead to rebound insomnia. 
 Benzodiazepines can cause a dose-dependent decrease in both 
REM and slow-wave sleep, though to a lesser extent than the 
barbiturates. The newer hypnotics zolpidem, zaleplon, and 
eszopiclone are less likely than the benzodiazepines to change 
sleep patterns. However, so little is known about the clinical 
impact of these effects that statements about the desirability of a 
particular drug based on its effects on sleep architecture have 
more theoretical than practical significance. Clinical criteria of 
efficacy in alleviating a particular sleeping problem are more 
useful. The drug selected should be one that provides sleep of 
fairly rapid onset (decreased sleep latency) and sufficient 
duration, with minimal “hangover” effects such as drowsiness, 
dysphoria, and mental or motor depression the following day. 
Older drugs such as chloral hydrate, secobarbital, and pentobar-
bital continue to be used occasionally, but zolpidem, zaleplon, 
eszopiclone, or benzodiazepines are generally preferred. Daytime 
sedation is more common with benzodiazepines that have slow 
elimination rates (eg, lorazepam) and those that are biotrans-
formed to active metabolites (eg, flurazepam, quazepam). If 
benzodiazepines are used nightly, tolerance can occur, which 
may lead to dose increases by the patient to produce the desired 
effect. Anterograde amnesia occurs to some degree with all ben-
zodiazepines used for hypnosis. 
 Eszopiclone, zaleplon, and zolpidem have efficacies similar 
to those of the hypnotic benzodiazepines in the management of 
sleep disorders. Favorable clinical features of zolpidem and the 
other newer hypnotics include rapid onset of activity and mod-
est day-after psychomotor depression with few amnestic effects. 
Zolpidem, one of the most frequently prescribed hypnotic 
drugs in the United States, is available in a biphasic release 
formulation that provides sustained drug levels for sleep main-
tenance. Zaleplon acts rapidly, and because of its short half-life, 
the drug has value in the management of patients who awaken 
early in the sleep cycle. At recommended doses, zaleplon and 
eszopiclone (despite its relatively long half-life) appear to cause 
less amnesia or day-after somnolence than zolpidem or benzo-
diazepines. The drugs in this class commonly used for sedation 
and hypnosis are listed in  Table 22–3 together with recom-
mended doses. 
 Note: The failure of insomnia to remit after 7–10 days of treat-
ment may indicate the presence of a primary psychiatric or medi-
cal illness that should be evaluated. Long-term use of hypnotics is 
an irrational and dangerous medical practice. 
 OTHER THERAPEUTIC USES 
 Table 22–2 summarizes several other important clinical uses of 
drugs in the sedative-hypnotic class. Drugs used in the manage-
ment of seizure disorders and as intravenous agents in anesthesia 
are discussed in Chapters 24 and 25. 
 For sedative and possible amnestic effects during medical or 
surgical procedures such as endoscopy and bronchoscopy—as well 
as for premedication prior to anesthesia—oral formulations of 
shorter-acting drugs are preferred. 
 Long-acting drugs such as chlordiazepoxide and diazepam and, 
to a lesser extent, phenobarbital are administered in progressively 
decreasing doses to patients during withdrawal from physiologic 
dependence on ethanol or other sedative-hypnotics. Parenteral 
lorazepam is used to suppress the symptoms of delirium tremens. 
 Meprobamate and the benzodiazepines have frequently been 
used as central muscle relaxants, though evidence for general effi-
cacy without accompanying sedation is lacking. A possible excep-
tion is diazepam, which has useful relaxant effects in skeletal 
muscle spasticity of central origin (see  Chapter 27 ). 
 Psychiatric uses of benzodiazepines other than treatment of 
anxiety states include the initial management of mania and the 
control of drug-induced hyperexcitability states (eg, phencyclidine 
intoxication). Sedative-hypnotics are also used occasionally as 
diagnostic aids in neurology and psychiatry. 
TABLE 22–3 Dosages of drugs used commonly for sedation and hypnosis.
Sedation
Hypnosis
Drug
Dosage
Drug
Dosage (at Bedtime)
Alprazolam
0.25–0.5 mg 2–3 times daily
Chloral hydrate
500–1000 mg
Buspirone
5–10 mg 2–3 times daily
Estazolam
0.5–2 mg
Chlordiazepoxide
10–20 mg 2–3 times daily
Eszopiclone
1–3 mg
Clorazepate
5–7.5 mg twice daily
Lorazepam
2–4 mg
Diazepam
5 mg twice daily
Quazepam
7.5–15 mg
Halazepam
20–40 mg 3–4 times daily
Secobarbital
100–200 mg
Lorazepam
1–2 mg once or twice daily
Temazepam
7.5–30 mg
Oxazepam
15–30 mg 3–4 times daily
Triazolam
0.125–0.5 mg
Phenobarbital
15–30 mg 2–3 times daily
Zaleplon
5–20 mg
Zolpidem
5–10 mg
384    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 CLINICAL TOXICOLOGY OF 
SEDATIVE-HYPNOTICS 
 Direct Toxic Actions 
 Many of the common adverse effects of sedative-hypnotics result 
from dose-related depression of the central nervous system. 
Relatively low doses may lead to drowsiness, impaired judgment, 
and diminished motor skills, sometimes with a significant impact 
on driving ability, job performance, and personal relationships. 
Sleep driving and other somnambulistic behavior with no memory 
of the event has occurred with the sedative-hypnotic drugs used in 
sleep disorders, prompting the Food and Drug Administration in 
2007 to issue warnings of this potential hazard. Benzodiazepines 
may cause a significant dose-related anterograde amnesia; they can 
significantly impair ability to learn new information, particularly 
that involving effortful cognitive processes, while leaving the 
retrieval of previously learned information intact. This effect is 
utilized for uncomfortable clinical procedures, eg, endoscopy, 
because the patient is able to cooperate during the procedure but 
amnesic regarding it afterward. The criminal use of benzodiaz-
epines in cases of “date rape” is based on their dose-dependent 
amnestic effects. Hangover effects are not uncommon following 
use of hypnotic drugs with long elimination half-lives. Because 
elderly patients are more sensitive to the effects of sedative-hypnotics, 
doses approximately half of those used in younger adults are safer 
and usually as effective.  The most common reversible cause of confu-
sional states in the elderly is overuse of sedative-hypnotics. At higher 
doses, toxicity may present as lethargy or a state of exhaustion or, 
alternatively, as gross symptoms equivalent to those of ethanol 
intoxication. The physician should be aware of variability among 
patients in terms of doses causing adverse effects. An increased 
sensitivity to sedative-hypnotics is more common in patients with 
cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, or hepatic impairment 
and in older patients. Sedative-hypnotics can exacerbate breathing 
problems in patients with chronic pulmonary disease and in those 
with symptomatic sleep apnea. 
 Sedative-hypnotics are the drugs most frequently involved in 
deliberate overdoses, in part because of their general availability as 
very commonly prescribed pharmacologic agents. The benzodiaz-
epines are considered to be safer drugs in this respect, since they 
have flatter dose-response curves. Epidemiologic studies on the 
incidence of drug-related deaths support this general assumption—eg, 
0.3 deaths per million tablets of diazepam prescribed versus 11.6 
deaths per million capsules of secobarbital in one study. Alprazolam 
is purportedly more toxic in overdose than other benzodiazepines. 
Of course, many factors other than the specific sedative-hypnotic 
could influence such data—particularly the presence of other 
central nervous system depressants, including ethanol. In fact, 
most serious cases of drug overdosage, intentional or accidental, 
do involve polypharmacy; and when combinations of agents are 
taken, the practical safety of benzodiazepines may be less than the 
foregoing would imply. 
 The lethal dose of any sedative-hypnotic varies with the patient 
and the circumstances (see  Chapter 58 ). If discovery of the ingestion 
is made early and a conservative treatment regimen is started, the 
outcome is rarely fatal, even following very high doses. On the 
other hand, for most sedative-hypnotics—with the exception of 
benzodiazepines and possibly the newer hypnotic drugs that have 
a similar mechanism of action—a dose as low as ten times the 
hypnotic dose may be fatal if the patient is not discovered or does 
not seek help in time. With severe toxicity, the respiratory depres-
sion from central actions of the drug may be complicated by 
aspiration of gastric contents in the unattended patient—an even 
more likely occurrence if ethanol is present. Cardiovascular 
depression further complicates successful resuscitation. In such 
patients, treatment consists of ensuring a patent airway, with 
mechanical ventilation if needed, and maintenance of plasma 
volume, renal output, and cardiac function. Use of a positive ino-
tropic drug such as dopamine, which preserves renal blood flow, is 
sometimes indicated. Hemodialysis or hemoperfusion may be 
used to hasten elimination of some of these drugs. 
 Flumazenil reverses the sedative actions of benzodiazepines, 
and those of eszopiclone, zaleplon, and zolpidem, although experi-
ence with its use in overdose of the newer hypnotics is limited. 
However, its duration of action is short, its antagonism of respira-
tory depression is unpredictable, and there is a risk of precipitation 
of withdrawal symptoms in long-term users of benzodiazepines 
(see below). Consequently, the use of flumazenil in benzodiaz-
epine overdose  must be accompanied by adequate monitoring and 
support of respiratory function. The extensive clinical use of tri-
azolam has led to reports of serious central nervous system effects 
including behavioral disinhibition, delirium, aggression, and vio-
lence. Although behavioral disinhibition may occur with any 
sedative-hypnotic drug, it does not appear to be more prevalent 
with triazolam than with other benzodiazepines. Disinhibitory 
reactions during benzodiazepine treatment are more clearly associ-
ated with the use of very high doses and the pretreatment level of 
patient hostility. 
 Adverse effects of the sedative-hypnotics that are not referable 
to their central nervous system actions occur infrequently. 
Hypersensitivity reactions, including skin rashes, occur only occa-
sionally with most drugs of this class. Reports of teratogenicity 
leading to fetal deformation following use of certain benzodiaz-
epines have resulted in FDA assignment of individual benzodiaz-
epines to either category D or X in terms of pregnancy risk. Most 
barbiturates are FDA pregnancy category D. Eszopiclone, ramelt-
eon, zaleplon, and zolpidem are category C, while buspirone is a 
pregnancy category B drug. Because barbiturates enhance porphy-
rin synthesis, they are  absolutely contraindicated in patients with a 
history of acute intermittent porphyria, variegate porphyria, 
hereditary coproporphyria, or symptomatic porphyria. 
 Alterations in Drug Response 
 Depending on the dosage and the duration of use, tolerance 
occurs in varying degrees to many of the pharmacologic effects of 
sedative-hypnotics. However, it should not be assumed that the 
degree of tolerance achieved is identical for all pharmacologic 
effects. There is evidence that the lethal dose range is not altered 
CHAPTER 22 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs    385
significantly by the long-term use of sedative-hypnotics. Cross-
tolerance between the different sedative-hypnotics, including 
ethanol, can lead to an unsatisfactory therapeutic response when 
standard doses of a drug are used in a patient with a recent history 
of excessive use of these agents. However, there have been very few 
reports of tolerance development when eszopiclone, zolpidem, or 
zaleplon was used for less than 4 weeks. 
 With the long-term use of sedative-hypnotics, especially if 
doses are increased, a state of dependence can occur. This may 
develop to a degree unparalleled by any other drug group,  including 
the opioids. Withdrawal from a sedative-hypnotic can have severe 
and life-threatening manifestations. Withdrawal symptoms range 
from restlessness, anxiety, weakness, and orthostatic hypotension 
to hyperactive reflexes and generalized seizures. Symptoms of 
withdrawal are usually more severe following discontinuance of 
sedative-hypnotics with shorter half-lives. However, eszopiclone, 
zolpidem, and zaleplon appear to be exceptions to this, because 
withdrawal symptoms are minimal following abrupt discontinu-
ance of these newer short-acting agents. Symptoms are less pro-
nounced with longer-acting drugs, which may partly accomplish 
their own tapered withdrawal by virtue of their slow elimination. 
Cross-dependence, defined as the ability of one drug to suppress 
abstinence symptoms from discontinuance of another drug, is 
quite marked among sedative-hypnotics. This provides the ration-
ale for therapeutic regimens in the management of withdrawal 
states: Longer-acting drugs such as chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, 
and phenobarbital can be used to alleviate withdrawal symptoms 
of shorter-acting drugs, including ethanol. 
 Drug Interactions 
 The most common drug interactions involving sedative-hypnotics 
are interactions with other central nervous system depressant 
drugs, leading to additive effects. These interactions have some 
therapeutic usefulness when these drugs are used as adjuvants in 
anesthesia practice. However, if not anticipated, such interactions 
can lead to serious consequences, including enhanced depression 
with concomitant use of many other drugs. Additive effects can be 
predicted with concomitant use of alcoholic beverages, opioid 
analgesics, anticonvulsants, and phenothiazines. Less obvious but 
just as important is enhanced central nervous system depression 
with a variety of antihistamines, antihypertensive agents, and 
antidepressant drugs of the tricyclic class. 
 Interactions involving changes in the activity of hepatic 
drug-metabolizing enzyme systems have been discussed 
(see also Chapters 4 and 66). 
386    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
SUMMARY Sedative-Hypnotics
Subclass and Examples
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
BENZODIAZEPINES
 • Alprazolam 
 • Chlordiazepoxide 
 • Clorazepate 
 • Clonazepam 
 • Diazepam 
 • Estazolam 
 • Flurazepam 
 • Lorazepam 
 • Midazolam 
 • Oxazepam 
 • Quazepam 
 • Temazepam 
 • Triazolam
Bind to specific GABAA 
receptor subunits at 
central nervous system 
(CNS) neuronal synapses 
facilitating frequency of 
GABA-mediated chloride 
ion channel 
opening—enhance 
membrane hyperpolariza-
tion
Dose-dependent depressant 
effects on the CNS including 
sedation and relief of 
anxiety • amnesia • hypnosis 
• anesthesia • coma and 
respiratory depression
Acute anxiety states 
• panic attacks • generalized 
anxiety disorder 
• insomnia and other 
sleep disorders 
• relaxation of skeletal 
muscle • anesthesia 
(adjunctive) • seizure 
disorders
Half-lives from 2–40 h • oral activity 
• Hepatic metabolism—some active 
metabolites • Toxicity: Extensions 
of CNS depressant effects 
• dependence liability • Interactions: 
Additive CNS depression with 
ethanol and many other drugs
BENZODIAZEPINE ANTAGONIST
 • Flumazenil
Antagonist at 
benzodiazepine binding 
sites on the GABAA receptor
Blocks actions of 
benzodiazepines and 
zolpidem but not other 
sedative-hypnotic drugs
Management of 
benzodiazepine overdose
IV • short half-life • Toxicity: 
Agitation • confusion • possible 
withdrawal symptoms in 
benzodiazepine dependence
BARBITURATES
 • Amobarbital 
 • Butabarbital 
 • Mephobarbital 
 • Pentobarbital 
 • Phenobarbital 
 • Secobarbital
Bind to specific GABAA 
receptor subunits at CNS 
neuronal synapses increas-
ing duration of GABA-
mediated chloride ion 
channel opening • enhance 
membrane hyperpolariza-
tion
Dose-dependent depressant 
effects on the CNS including 
sedation and relief of 
anxiety • amnesia • hypnosis 
• anesthesia • coma and 
respiratory depression 
• steeper dose-response 
relationship than 
benzodiazepines
Anesthesia (thiopental) 
• insomnia (secobarbital) 
• seizure disorders 
(phenobarbital)
Half-lives from 4–60 h • oral activity 
• Hepatic metabolism—phenobarbital 
20% renal elimination • Toxicity: 
Extensions of CNS depressant 
effects • dependence liability > 
benzodiazepines • Interactions: 
Additive CNS depression with 
ethanol and many other drugs 
• induction of hepatic 
drug-metabolizing enzymes
NEWER HYPNOTICS
 • Eszopiclone
 • Zaleplon
 • Zolpidem
Bind selectively to a sub-
group of GABAA receptors, 
acting like benzodiazepines 
to enhance membrane 
hyperpolarization
Rapid onset of hypnosis 
with few amnestic effects 
or day-after psychomotor 
depression or somnolence
Sleep disorders, especially 
those categorized by 
difficulty in falling asleep
Oral activity • short half-lives • CYP 
substrates • Toxicity:  Extensions 
of CNS depressant effects 
• dependence liability • Interactions: 
Additive CNS depression with 
ethanol and many other drugs
MELATONIN RECEPTOR AGONIST
 • Ramelteon
Activates MT1 and MT2 
receptors in suprachiasmatic 
nuclei in the CNS
Rapid onset of sleep with 
minimal rebound insomnia 
or withdrawal symptoms
Sleep disorders, especially 
those categorized by 
difficulty in falling asleep 
• not a controlled 
substance
Oral activity • forms active metabo-
lite via CYP1A2 • Toxicity: Dizziness 
• fatigue • endocrine changes 
• Interactions: Fluvoxamine inhibits 
metabolism
5-HT-RECEPTOR AGONIST
 • Buspirone
Mechanism uncertain: 
Partial agonist at 5-HT 
receptors but also affinity 
for D2 receptors
Slow onset (1–2 weeks) 
of anxiolytic effects 
• minimal psychomotor 
impairment—no additive 
CNS depression with 
sedative-hypnotic drugs
Generalized anxiety states
Oral activity • forms active metabo-
lite • short half-life • Toxicity: 
Tachycardia • paresthesias 
• gastrointestinal distress 
• Interactions: CYP3A4 inducers 
and inhibitors
CHAPTER 22 Sedative-Hypnotic Drugs    387
BENZODIAZEPINES
Alprazolam (generic, Xanax)
Oral: 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets, extended-release tablets, and orally 
disintegrating tablets; 1.0 mg/mL solution
Chlordiazepoxide (generic, Librium)
Oral: 5, 10, 25 mg capsules
Clorazepate (generic, Tranxene)
Oral: 3.75, 7.5, 15 mg tablets and capsules
Oral sustained-release: 11.25, 22.5 mg tablets
Clonazepam (generic, Klonopin)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets; 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2 mg orally 
disintegrating tablets
Diazepam (generic, Valium)
Oral: 2, 5, 10 mg tablets; 1, 5 mg/mL solutions
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Estazolam (generic, ProSom)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets
Flurazepam (generic, Dalmane)
Oral: 15, 30 mg capsules
Lorazepam (generic, Ativan)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets; 2 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 2, 4 mg/mL for injection
Midazolam (Versed)
Oral: 2 mg/mL syrup
Parenteral: 1, 5 mg/mL in 1, 2, 5, 10 mL vials for injection
Oxazepam (generic)
Oral: 10, 15, 30 mg capsules
Quazepam (Doral)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets
Temazepam (generic, Restoril)
Oral: 7.5, 15, 22.5, 30 mg capsules
Triazolam (generic, Halcion)
Oral: 0.125, 0.25 mg tablets
BENZODIAZEPINE ANTAGONIST
Flumazenil (generic, Romazicon)
Parenteral: 0.1 mg/mL for IV injection
BARBITURATES
Amobarbital (Amytal)
Parenteral: powder in 250, 500 mg vials to reconstitute for injection
Mephobarbital (Mebaral)
Oral: 32, 50, 100 mg tablets
Pentobarbital (generic, Nembutal Sodium)
Oral: 50, 100 mg capsules; 4 mg/mL elixir
Rectal: 30, 60, 120, 200 mg suppositories
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection
Phenobarbital (generic, Luminal Sodium)
Oral: 15, 16, 30, 60, 90, 100 mg tablets; 16 mg capsules; 
15, 20 mg/5 mL elixirs
Parenteral: 30, 60, 65, 130 mg/mL for injection
Secobarbital (generic, Seconal)
Oral: 100 mg capsules
MISCELLANEOUS DRUGS
Buspirone (generic, BuSpar)
Oral: 5, 7.5, 10, 15, 30 mg tablets
Chloral hydrate (generic, Aquachloral Supprettes)
Oral: 500 mg capsules; 250, 500 mg/5 mL syrups
Rectal: 324, 648 mg suppositories
Eszopiclone (Lunesta)
Oral: 1, 2, 3 mg tablets
Hydroxyzine (generic, Atarax, Vistaril)
Oral: 10, 25, 50, 100 mg tablets; 25, 50, 100 mg capsules; 
10 mg/5 mL syrup; 25 mg/5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg/mL for injection
Meprobamate (generic, Equanil, Miltown)
Oral: 200, 400 mg tablets
Paraldehyde (generic)
Oral, rectal liquids: 1 g/mL
Ramelteon (Rozerem)
Oral: 8 mg tablets
Zaleplon (Sonata)
Oral: 5, 10 mg capsules
Zolpidem (generic, Ambien, Ambien-CR)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 6.25, 12.5 mg extended-release tablets
 REFERENCES 
 Budur K et al: Advances in treating insomnia. Cleve Clin J Med 2007;74:251. 
 Chouinard G: Issues in the clinical use of benzodiazepines: Potency, withdrawal, 
and rebound. J Clin Psychiatry 2004;65(Suppl 5):7. 
 Clayton T et al: An updated unified pharmacophore model of the benzodiazepine 
binding site on gamma-aminobutyric acid(a) receptors: Correlation with 
comparative models. Curr Med Chem 2007;14:2755. 
 Cloos JM, Ferreira V: Current use of benzodiazepines in anxiety disorders. Curr 
Opin Psychiatry 2009;22:90. 
 Da Settimo F et al: GABA A/Bz receptor subtypes as targets for selective drugs .
Curr Med Chem 2007;14:2680. 
 Drover DR: Comparative pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of short-acting 
hypnosedatives: Zaleplon, zolpidem and zopiclone. Clin Pharmacokinet 
2004;43:227. 
 Hanson SM, Czajkowski C: Structural mechanisms underlying benzodiazepine 
modulation of the GABA(A) receptor. J Neurosci 2008;28:3490. 
 Lader M et al: Withdrawing benzodiazepines in primary care. CNS Drugs 
2009;23:19. 
 Miyamoto M: Pharmacology of ramelteon, a selective MT1/MT2 receptor agonist: 
A novel therapeutic drug for sleep disorders. CNS Neurosci Ther 
2009;15:32. 
 Morin AK et al: Therapeutic options for sleep-maintenance and sleep-onset insomnia. 
Pharmacotherapy 2007;27:89. 
 Najib J: Eszopiclone, a nonbenzodiazepine sedative-hypnotic for the treatment of 
transient and chronic insomnia. Clin Ther 2006;28:491. 
 Neubauer DN: New directions in the pharmacologic treatment of insomnia. 
Primary Psychiatry 2006;13:51. 
 Ramakrishnan K et al: Treatment options for insomnia. Am Fam Physician 
2007;76:526. 
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
388    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Rudolph U, Mohler H: GABA-based therapeutic approaches: GABA A receptor 
subtype functions. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2006;6:18. 
 Sanger DJ. The pharmacology and mechanism of action of new generation, non-
benzodiazepine hypnotic agents. CNS Drugs 2004;18(Suppl 1):9. 
 Schutte-Rodin S et al: Clinical guideline for the evaluation and management of 
chronic insomnia in adults. J Clin Sleep Med 2008;4:487. 
 Simpson D, Curran MP: Ramelteon: A review of its use in insomnia. Drugs 
2008:68:1901. 
 Siriwardena AN et al: Magic bullets for insomnia? Patient’s use and experiences of 
newer (Z drugs) versus older (benzodiazepine) hypnotics for sleep problems 
in primary care. Br J Gen Pract 2008;58:417. 
 Verster JC et al: Residual effects of sleep medication on driving ability. Sleep Med 
Rev 2004;8:309. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Common etiologies of insomnia include  situational 
(eg, work or financial stress, interpersonal conflict),  medical 
(eg, asthma, chronic pain),  psychiatric (eg, mood, anxiety 
disorders), and  drug-induced (eg, diuretics, steroids, stim-
ulants). Such aspects of the patient’s history would be of 
value in determining an appropriate course of action. For 
example, reducing this patient’s consumption of diet cola 
(which commonly contains caffeine) might be of clinical 
value, as could nonpharmacologic approaches including 
stimulus control and sleep hygiene procedures. In terms of 
drug therapy (short term if possible), the pharmacokinetics 
of zolpidem and eszopiclone (but not zaleplon) are appro-
priate for a patient who has trouble both in falling asleep 
and staying asleep. Both drugs exhibit minimal next-day 
psychomotor performance or rebound insomnia on 
discontinuance.
23
 Alcohol, primarily in the form of ethyl alcohol (ethanol), has 
occupied an important place in the history of humankind for at 
least 8000 years. In Western society, beer and wine were a main 
staple of daily life until the 19th century. These relatively dilute 
alcoholic beverages were preferred over water, which was known 
to be associated with acute and chronic illness. They provided 
important calories and nutrients and served as a main source of 
daily liquid intake. As systems for improved sanitation and water 
purification were introduced in the 1800s, beer and wine became 
less important components of the human diet, and the con-
sumption of alcoholic beverages, including distilled preparations 
with higher concentrations of alcohol, shifted toward their 
present-day role, in many societies, as a socially acceptable form 
of recreation. 
 Today, alcohol is widely consumed. Like other sedative-hypnotic 
drugs, alcohol in low to moderate amounts relieves anxiety and 
fosters a feeling of well-being or even euphoria. However, alcohol 
is also the most commonly abused drug in the world, and the 
cause of vast medical and societal costs. In the United States, 
approximately 75% of the adult population drinks alcohol regularly. 
The majority of this drinking population is able to enjoy the plea-
surable effects of alcohol without allowing alcohol consumption 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
to become a health risk. However, about 8% of the general popu-
lation in the United States has an  alcohol-use disorder. Individuals 
who use alcohol in dangerous situations (eg, drinking and driving 
or combining alcohol with other medications) or continue to 
drink alcohol in spite of adverse consequences related directly to 
their alcohol consumption suffer from  alcohol abuse. Individuals 
with  alcohol dependence have characteristics of alcohol abuse 
and additionally exhibit physical dependence on alcohol (toler-
ance to alcohol and signs and symptoms upon withdrawal) . They 
also demonstrate an inability to control their drinking and devote 
much time to getting and using alcohol, or recovering from its 
effects. The alcohol-use disorders are complex, with genetic as well 
as environmental determinants. 
 The societal and medical costs of alcohol abuse are staggering. 
It is estimated that about 30% of all people admitted to hospitals 
have coexisting alcohol problems. Once in the hospital, people 
with chronic alcoholism generally have poorer outcomes. In addi-
tion, each year tens of thousands of children are born with mor-
phologic and functional defects resulting from prenatal exposure 
to ethanol. Despite the investment of many resources and much 
basic research, alcoholism remains a common chronic disease that 
is difficult to treat. 
 The Alcohols 
 Susan B. Masters, PhD  
C A S E  S T U D Y
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 An 18-year-old college freshman began drinking alcohol at 
8:30 pm during a hazing event at his new fraternity. Between 
8:30 and approximately midnight, he and several other 
pledges consumed beer and a bottle of whiskey, and then he 
consumed most of a bottle of rum at the urging of upper-
classmen. The young man complained of feeling nauseated, 
lay down on a couch, and began to lose consciousness. Two 
upperclassmen carried him to his bedroom, placed him on 
his stomach, and positioned a trash can nearby. 
Approximately 10 minutes later, the freshman was found 
unconscious and covered with vomit. There was a delay in 
treatment because the upperclassmen called the college 
police instead of calling 911. After the call was transferred 
to 911, emergency medical technicians responded quickly 
and discovered that the young man was not breathing and 
that he had choked on his vomit. He was rushed to the hos-
pital, where he remained in a coma for 2 days before ulti-
mately being pronounced dead. The patient’s blood alcohol 
concentration shortly after arriving at the hospital was 
510 mg/dL. What was the cause of this patient’s death? If he 
had received medical care sooner, what treatment might 
have prevented his death? 
389
390    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Ethanol and many other alcohols with potentially toxic effects 
are used as fuels and in industry—some in enormous quantities. In 
addition to ethanol, methanol and ethylene glycol toxicity occurs 
with sufficient frequency to warrant discussion in this chapter. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ETHANOL 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Ethanol is a small water-soluble molecule that is absorbed rapidly 
from the gastrointestinal tract. After ingestion of alcohol in the 
fasting state, peak blood alcohol concentrations are reached within 
30 minutes. The presence of food in the stomach delays absorp-
tion by slowing gastric emptying. Distribution is rapid, with tissue 
levels approximating the concentration in blood. The volume of 
distribution for ethanol approximates total body water (0.5–0.7 L/kg). 
For an equivalent oral dose of alcohol, women have a higher peak 
concentration than men, in part because women have a lower total 
body water content and in part because of differences in first-pass 
metabolism. In the central nervous system (CNS), the concentra-
tion of ethanol rises quickly, since the brain receives a large pro-
portion of total blood flow and ethanol readily crosses biologic 
membranes. 
 Over 90% of alcohol consumed is oxidized in the liver; much 
of the remainder is excreted through the lungs and in the urine. 
The excretion of a small but consistent proportion of alcohol by 
the lungs can be quantified with breath alcohol tests that serve as 
a basis for a legal definition of “driving under the influence” in 
many countries. At levels of ethanol usually achieved in blood, the 
rate of oxidation follows zero-order kinetics; that is, it is indepen-
dent of time and concentration of the drug. The typical adult can 
metabolize 7–10 g (150–220 mmol) of alcohol per hour, the 
equivalent of approximately one “drink” [10 oz (300 mL) beer, 
3.5 oz (105 mL) wine, or 1 oz (30 mL) distilled 80-proof spirits]. 
 Two major pathways of alcohol metabolism to acetaldehyde 
have been identified ( Figure 23–1 ). Acetaldehyde is then oxidized 
to acetate by a third metabolic process. 
 A. Alcohol Dehydrogenase Pathway 
 The primary pathway for alcohol metabolism involves alcohol dehy-
drogenase (ADH), a family of cytosolic enzymes that catalyze the 
conversion of alcohol to acetaldehyde ( Figure 23–1 , left). These 
enzymes are located mainly in the liver, but small amounts are found 
in other organs such as the brain and stomach. There is considerable 
genetic variation in ADH enzymes, affecting the rate of ethanol 
metabolism and also appearing to alter vulnerability to alcohol-
abuse disorders. For example, one ADH allele (the  ADH1B*2 
allele), which is associated with rapid conversion of ethanol to acet-
aldehyde, has been found to be protective against alcohol dependence 
in several ethnic populations and especially East Asians. 
 Some metabolism of ethanol by ADH occurs in the stomach in 
men, but a smaller amount occurs in women, who appear to have 
lower levels of the gastric enzyme. This difference in gastric 
metabolism of alcohol in women probably contributes to the sex-
related differences in blood alcohol concentrations noted above. 
 During conversion of ethanol by ADH to acetaldehyde, hydro-
gen ion is transferred from ethanol to the cofactor nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide (NAD + ) to form NADH. As a net result, 
alcohol oxidation generates an excess of reducing equivalents in 
the liver, chiefly as NADH. The excess NADH production 
appears to contribute to the metabolic disorders that accompany 
chronic alcoholism and to both the lactic acidosis and hypoglyce-
mia that frequently accompany acute alcohol poisoning. 
 B. Microsomal Ethanol-Oxidizing System (MEOS) 
 This enzyme system, also known as the mixed function oxidase 
system, uses NADPH as a cofactor in the metabolism of ethanol 
( Figure 23–1 , right) and consists primarily of cytochrome P450 
2E1, 1A2, and 3A4 (see  Chapter 4 ). 
 During chronic alcohol consumption, MEOS activity is 
induced. As a result, chronic alcohol consumption results in sig-
nificant increases not only in ethanol metabolism but also in the 
clearance of other drugs eliminated by the cytochrome P450s that 
constitute the MEOS system, and in the generation of the toxic 
byproducts of cytochrome P450 reactions (toxins, free radicals, 
H 2 O 2 ). 
 C. Acetaldehyde Metabolism 
 Much of the acetaldehyde formed from alcohol is oxidized in the 
liver in a reaction catalyzed by mitochondrial NAD-dependent 
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). The product of this reaction is 
acetate ( Figure 23–1 ), which can be further metabolized to CO 2 
and water, or used to form acetyl-CoA. 
FIGURE 23–1 Metabolism of ethanol by alcohol dehydrogenase 
and the microsomal ethanol-oxidizing system (MEOS). Alcohol dehy-
drogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase are inhibited by fomepizole 
and disulfiram, respectively. NAD+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleo-
tide; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.
NAD+
NADPH + O2
NADH
NADP+ + H2O
Acetaldehyde
CH3CHO
Fomepizole
Alcohol
dehydrogenase
Ethanol
CH3CH2OH
MEOS
Aldehyde
dehydrogenase
–
Disulfiram
Acetate
CH3COO–
NAD+
NADH
–
CHAPTER 23 The Alcohols    391
 Oxidation of acetaldehyde is inhibited by  disulfiram , a drug 
that has been used to deter drinking by patients with alcohol 
dependence. When ethanol is consumed in the presence of disul-
firam, acetaldehyde accumulates and causes an unpleasant reaction 
of facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and headache. 
Several other drugs (eg, metronidazole, cefotetan, trimethoprim) 
inhibit ALDH and can cause a disulfiram-like reaction if com-
bined with ethanol. 
 Some people, primarily of East Asian descent, have genetic 
deficiency in the activity of the mitochondrial form of ALDH, 
which is encoded by the  ALDH2 gene. When these individuals 
drink alcohol, they develop high blood acetaldehyde concentra-
tions and experience a noxious reaction similar to that seen with 
the combination of disulfiram and ethanol. This form of ALDH, 
with reduced activity, is strongly protective against alcohol-use 
disorders. 
 Pharmacodynamics of Acute Ethanol 
Consumption 
 A. Central Nervous System 
 The CNS is markedly affected by acute alcohol consumption. 
Alcohol causes sedation, relief of anxiety and, at higher concentra-
tions, slurred speech, ataxia, impaired judgment, and disinhibited 
behavior, a condition usually called intoxication or drunkenness 
( Table 23–1 ). These CNS effects are most marked as the blood 
level is rising, because acute tolerance to the effects of alcohol 
occurs after a few hours of drinking. For chronic drinkers who are 
tolerant to the effects of alcohol, higher concentrations are needed 
to elicit these CNS effects. For example, an individual with chronic 
alcoholism may appear sober or only slightly intoxicated with a 
blood alcohol concentration of 300–400 mg/dL, whereas this level 
is associated with marked intoxication or even coma in a nontoler-
ant individual. The propensity of moderate doses of alcohol to 
inhibit the attention and information-processing skills as well as 
the motor skills required for operation of motor vehicles has pro-
found effects. Approximately 30–40% of all traffic accidents 
resulting in a fatality in the United States involve at least one person 
with blood alcohol near or above the legal level of intoxication, and 
drunken driving is a leading cause of death in young adults. 
 Like other sedative-hypnotic drugs, alcohol is a CNS depres-
sant. At high blood concentrations, it induces coma, respiratory 
depression, and death. 
 Ethanol affects a large number of membrane proteins that 
participate in signaling pathways, including neurotransmitter 
receptors for amines, amino acids, opioids, and neuropeptides; 
enzymes such as Na + /K + -ATPase, adenylyl cyclase, phosphoinositide-
specific phospholipase C; a nucleoside transporter; and ion channels. 
Much attention has focused on alcohol’s effects on neurotransmis-
sion by glutamate and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the main 
excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in the CNS. Acute 
ethanol exposure enhances the action of GABA at GABA A recep-
tors, which is consistent with the ability of GABA-mimetics to 
intensify many of the acute effects of alcohol and of GABA A 
antagonists to attenuate some of the actions of ethanol. Ethanol 
inhibits the ability of glutamate to open the cation channel associ-
ated with the  N -methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype of gluta-
mate receptors. The NMDA receptor is implicated in many 
aspects of cognitive function, including learning and memory. 
“Blackouts”—periods of memory loss that occur with high levels 
of alcohol—may result from inhibition of NMDA receptor activa-
tion. Experiments that use modern genetic approaches eventually 
will yield a more precise definition of ethanol’s direct and indirect 
targets. In recent years, experiments with mutant strains of mice, 
worms, and flies have reinforced the importance of previously 
identified targets and helped identify new candidates, including a 
calcium-regulated and voltage-gated potassium channel that may 
be one of ethanol’s direct targets (see Box: What Can Drunken 
Worms, Flies, and Mice Tell Us about Alcohol?). 
 B. Heart 
 Significant depression of myocardial contractility has been 
observed in individuals who acutely consume moderate amounts 
of alcohol, ie, at a blood concentration above 100 mg/dL. 
 C. Smooth Muscle 
 Ethanol is a vasodilator, probably as a result of both CNS effects 
(depression of the vasomotor center) and direct smooth muscle 
relaxation caused by its metabolite, acetaldehyde. In cases of severe 
overdose, hypothermia—caused by vasodilation—may be marked 
in cold environments. Ethanol also relaxes the uterus and—before 
the introduction of more effective and safer uterine relaxants (eg, 
calcium channel antagonists)—was used intravenously for the 
suppression of premature labor. 
 Consequences of Chronic Alcohol 
Consumption 
 Chronic alcohol consumption profoundly affects the function of 
several vital organs—particularly the liver—and the nervous, gastro-
intestinal, cardiovascular, and immune systems. Since ethanol has 
low potency, it requires concentrations thousands of times higher 
than other misused drugs (eg, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines) to 
produce its intoxicating effects. As a result, ethanol is consumed in 
quantities that are unusually large for a pharmacologically active 
TABLE 23–1  Blood alcohol concentration (BAC) and 
clinical effects in nontolerant 
individuals.
BAC (mg/dL)1
Clinical Effect
50–100
Sedation, subjective “high,” slower reaction times
100–200
Impaired motor function, slurred speech, ataxia
200–300
Emesis, stupor
300–400
Coma
> 400
Respiratory depression, death
1In many parts of the United States, a blood level above 80–100 mg/dL for adults or 
5–20 mg/dL for persons under 21 is sufficient for conviction of driving while “under 
the influence.”
392    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
drug. The tissue damage caused by chronic alcohol ingestion results 
from a combination of the direct effects of ethanol and acetaldehyde, 
and the metabolic consequences of processing a heavy load of a meta-
bolically active substance. Specific mechanisms implicated in tissue 
damage include increased oxidative stress coupled with depletion of 
glutathione, damage to mitochondria, growth factor dysregulation, 
and potentiation of cytokine-induced injury. 
 Chronic consumption of large amounts of alcohol is associated 
with an increased risk of death. Deaths linked to alcohol con-
sumption are caused by liver disease, cancer, accidents, and suicide. 
 A. Liver and Gastrointestinal Tract 
 Liver disease is the most common medical complication of alco-
hol abuse; an estimated 15–30% of chronic heavy drinkers even-
tually develop severe liver disease. Alcoholic fatty liver, a reversible 
condition, may progress to alcoholic hepatitis and finally to cir-
rhosis and liver failure. In the United States, chronic alcohol abuse 
is the leading cause of liver cirrhosis and of the need for liver 
transplantation. The risk of developing liver disease is related both 
to the average amount of daily consumption and to the duration 
of alcohol abuse. Women appear to be more susceptible to alcohol 
hepatotoxicity than men. Concurrent infection with hepatitis B or 
C virus increases the risk of severe liver disease. 
 The pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease is a multifactorial 
process involving metabolic repercussions of ethanol oxidation in 
the liver, dysregulation of fatty acid oxidation and synthesis, and 
activation of the innate immune system by a combination of 
direct effects of ethanol and its metabolites and by bacterial endo-
toxins that access the liver as a result of ethanol-induced changes 
in the intestinal tract. Tumor necrosis factor-α, a proinflammatory 
cytokine that is consistently elevated in animal models of alcoholic 
liver disease and in patients with alcoholic liver disease, appears to 
play a pivotal role in the progression of alcoholic liver disease and 
may be a fruitful therapeutic target. 
 Other portions of the gastrointestinal tract can also be injured. 
Chronic alcohol ingestion is by far the most common cause of 
chronic pancreatitis in the Western world. In addition to its direct 
toxic effect on pancreatic acinar cells, alcohol alters pancreatic 
epithelial permeability and promotes the formation of protein 
plugs and calcium carbonate-containing stones. 
 For a drug like ethanol, which exhibits low potency and speci-
ficity, and modifies complex behaviors, the precise roles of its 
many direct and indirect targets are difficult to define. 
Increasingly, ethanol researchers are employing genetic 
approaches to complement standard neurobiologic experi-
mentation. Three experimental animal systems for which pow-
erful genetic techniques exist—mice, flies, and worms—have 
yielded intriguing results. 
 Strains of mice with abnormal sensitivity to ethanol were 
identified many years ago by breeding and selection programs. 
Using sophisticated genetic mapping and sequencing tech-
niques, researchers have made progress in identifying the genes 
that confer these traits. A more targeted approach is the use of 
transgenic mice to test hypotheses about specific genes. For 
example, after earlier experiments suggested a link between 
brain neuropeptide Y (NPY) and ethanol, researchers used two 
transgenic mouse models to further investigate the link. They 
found that a strain of mice that lacks the gene for NPY—NPY 
knockout mice—consume more ethanol than control mice and 
are less sensitive to ethanol’s sedative effects. As would be 
expected if increased concentrations of NPY in the brain make 
mice more sensitive to ethanol, a strain of mice that overex-
presses NPY drinks less alcohol than the controls even though 
their total consumption of food and liquid is normal. Work with 
other transgenic knockout mice supports the central role in etha-
nol responses of signaling molecules that have long been 
believed to be involved (eg, GABA A , glutamate, dopamine, opioid, 
and serotonin receptors) and has helped build the case for newer 
candidates such as NPY and corticotropin-releasing hormone, 
cannabinoid receptors, ion channels, and protein kinase C. 
 It is easy to imagine mice having measurable behavioral 
responses to alcohol, but drunken worms and fruit flies are 
harder to imagine. Actually, both invertebrates respond to etha-
nol in ways that parallel mammalian responses.  Drosophila mela-
nogaster fruit flies exposed to ethanol vapor show increased 
locomotion at low concentrations but at higher concentrations, 
become poorly coordinated, sedated, and finally immobile. 
These behaviors can be monitored by sophisticated laser or 
video tracking methods or with an ingenious “chromatography” 
column that separates relatively insensitive flies from inebriated 
flies, which drop to the bottom of the column. The worm 
 Caenorhabditis elegans similarly exhibits increased locomotion at 
low ethanol concentrations and, at higher concentrations, 
reduced locomotion, sedation, and—something that can be 
turned into an effective screen for mutant worms that are resis-
tant to ethanol—impaired egg laying. The advantage of using 
flies and worms as genetic models for ethanol research is their 
relatively simple neuroanatomy, well-established techniques for 
genetic manipulation, an extensive library of well-characterized 
mutants, and completely or nearly completely solved genetic 
codes. Already, much information has accumulated about candi-
date proteins involved with the effects of ethanol in flies.  In an 
elegant study on  C elegans , researchers found evidence that a 
calcium-activated, voltage-gated BK potassium channel is a 
direct target of ethanol. This channel, which is activated by etha-
nol, has close homologs in flies and vertebrates, and evidence is 
accumulating that ethanol has similar effects in these homologs. 
Genetic experiments in these model systems should provide 
information that will help narrow and focus research into the 
complex and important effects of ethanol in humans. 
 What Can Drunken Worms, Flies, and Mice Tell Us about Alcohol? 
CHAPTER 23 The Alcohols    393
 Individuals with chronic alcoholism are prone to gastritis and 
have increased susceptibility to blood and plasma protein loss during 
drinking, which may contribute to anemia and protein malnutri-
tion. Alcohol also injures the small intestine, leading to diarrhea, 
weight loss, and multiple vitamin deficiencies. 
 Malnutrition from dietary deficiency and vitamin deficiencies 
due to malabsorption are common in alcoholism. Malabsorption 
of water-soluble vitamins is especially severe. 
 B. Nervous System 
 1. Tolerance and dependence— The consumption of alcohol 
in high doses over a long period results in tolerance and in physical 
and psychological dependence. Tolerance to the intoxicating 
effects of alcohol is a complex process involving poorly understood 
changes in the nervous system as well as the metabolic changes 
described earlier. As with other sedative-hypnotic drugs, there is a 
limit to tolerance, so that only a relatively small increase in the 
lethal dose occurs with increasing alcohol use. 
 Chronic alcohol drinkers, when forced to reduce or discon-
tinue alcohol, experience a withdrawal syndrome, which indicates 
the existence of physical dependence. Alcohol withdrawal symptoms 
classically consist of hyperexcitability in mild cases and seizures, 
toxic psychosis, and  delirium tremens in severe ones. The dose, 
rate, and duration of alcohol consumption determine the intensity 
of the withdrawal syndrome. When consumption has been very 
high, merely reducing the rate of consumption may lead to signs 
of withdrawal. 
 Psychological dependence on alcohol is characterized by a com-
pulsive desire to experience the rewarding effects of alcohol and, for 
current drinkers, a desire to avoid the negative consequences of 
withdrawal. People who have recovered from alcoholism and become 
abstinent still experience periods of intense craving for alcohol that 
can be triggered by environmental cues associated in the past with 
drinking, such as familiar places, groups of people, or events. 
 The molecular basis of alcohol tolerance and dependence is not 
known with certainty, nor is it known whether the two phenom-
ena reflect opposing effects on a shared molecular pathway. 
Tolerance may result from ethanol-induced up-regulation of a 
pathway in response to the continuous presence of ethanol. 
Dependence may result from overactivity of that same pathway 
after the ethanol effect dissipates and before the system has time 
to return to a normal ethanol-free state. 
 Chronic exposure of animals or cultured cells to alcohol elicits 
a multitude of adaptive responses involving neurotransmitters and 
their receptors, ion channels, and enzymes that participate in signal 
transduction pathways. Up-regulation of the NMDA subtype of 
glutamate receptors and voltage-sensitive Ca 2+ channels may 
underlie the seizures that accompany the alcohol withdrawal syn-
drome. Based on the ability of sedative-hypnotic drugs that 
enhance GABAergic neurotransmission to substitute for alcohol 
during alcohol withdrawal and evidence of down-regulation of 
GABA A -mediated responses with chronic alcohol exposure, 
changes in GABA neurotransmission are believed to play a central 
role in tolerance and withdrawal. 
 Like other drugs of abuse, ethanol modulates neural activity in 
the brain’s mesolimbic dopamine reward circuit and increases 
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens (see  Chapter 32 ). 
Alcohol affects local concentrations of serotonin, opioids, and 
dopamine—neurotransmitters involved in the brain reward system—
and has complex effects on the expression of receptors for these 
neurotransmitters and their signaling pathways. The discovery 
that naltrexone, a nonselective opioid receptor antagonist, helps 
patients who are recovering from alcoholism abstain from drink-
ing supports the idea that a common neurochemical reward system 
is shared by very different drugs associated with physical and psy-
chological dependence. There is also convincing evidence from 
animal models that ethanol intake and seeking behavior are 
reduced by antagonists of another important regulator of the brain 
reward system, the cannabinoid CB1 receptor, which is the 
molecular target of active ingredients in marijuana. Two other 
important neuroendocrine systems that appear to play key roles in 
modulating ethanol-seeking activity in experimental animals are 
the appetite-regulating system—which uses peptides such as leptin, 
ghrelin, and neuropeptide Y—and the stress response system, 
which is controlled by corticotropin-releasing factor. 
 2. Neurotoxicity— Consumption of large amounts of alcohol 
over extended periods (usually years) often leads to neurologic 
deficits. The most common neurologic abnormality in chronic 
alcoholism is generalized symmetric peripheral nerve injury, which 
begins with distal paresthesias of the hands and feet. Degenerative 
changes can also result in gait disturbances and ataxia. Other neu-
rologic disturbances associated with alcoholism include dementia 
and, rarely, demyelinating disease. 
 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is a relatively uncommon but 
important entity characterized by paralysis of the external eye 
muscles, ataxia, and a confused state that can progress to coma and 
death. It is associated with thiamine deficiency but is rarely seen in 
the absence of alcoholism. Because of the importance of thiamine 
in this pathologic condition and the absence of toxicity associated 
with thiamine administration, all patients suspected of having 
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (including virtually all patients who 
present to the emergency department with altered consciousness, 
seizures, or both) should receive thiamine therapy. Often, the ocular 
signs, ataxia, and confusion improve promptly upon administra-
tion of thiamine. However, most patients are left with a chronic 
disabling memory disorder known as Korsakoff’s psychosis. 
 Alcohol may also impair visual acuity, with painless blurring 
that occurs over several weeks of heavy alcohol consumption. 
Changes are usually bilateral and symmetric and may be followed 
by optic nerve degeneration. Ingestion of ethanol substitutes such 
as methanol (see Pharmacology of Other Alcohols) causes severe 
visual disturbances. 
 C. Cardiovascular System 
 1. Cardiomyopathy and heart failure— Alcohol has complex 
effects on the cardiovascular system. Heavy alcohol consumption 
of long duration is associated with a dilated cardiomyopathy with 
ventricular hypertrophy and fibrosis. In animals and humans, 
alcohol induces a number of changes in heart cells that may con-
tribute to cardiomyopathy. They include membrane disruption, 
depressed function of mitochondria and sarcoplasmic reticulum, 
394    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
intracellular accumulation of phospholipids and fatty acids, and 
up-regulation of voltage-gated calcium channels. There is evidence 
that patients with alcohol-induced dilated cardiomyopathy do 
significantly worse than patients with idiopathic dilated cardio-
myopathy, even though cessation of drinking is associated with a 
reduction in cardiac size and improved function. The poorer prog-
nosis for patients who continue to drink appears to be due in part 
to interference by ethanol with the beneficial effects of β blockers 
and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. 
 2. Arrhythmias— Heavy drinking—and especially “binge” 
drinking—are associated with both atrial and ventricular arrhyth-
mias. Patients undergoing alcohol withdrawal syndrome can 
develop severe arrhythmias that may reflect abnormalities of 
potassium or magnesium metabolism as well as enhanced release 
of catecholamines. Seizures, syncope, and sudden death during 
alcohol withdrawal may be due to these arrhythmias. 
 3. Hypertension— A link between heavier alcohol consump-
tion (more than three drinks per day) and hypertension has been 
firmly established in epidemiologic studies. Alcohol is estimated 
to be responsible for approximately 5% of cases of hypertension, 
making it one of the most common causes of reversible hyperten-
sion. This association is independent of obesity, salt intake, coffee 
drinking, and cigarette smoking. A reduction in alcohol intake 
appears to be effective in lowering blood pressure in hypertensives 
who are also heavy drinkers; the hypertension seen in this popula-
tion is also responsive to standard blood pressure medications. 
 4. Coronary heart disease— Although the deleterious effects 
of excessive alcohol use on the cardiovascular system are well estab-
lished, there is strong epidemiologic evidence that moderate alcohol 
consumption actually prevents coronary heart disease (CHD), 
ischemic stroke, and peripheral arterial disease. This type of rela-
tionship between mortality and the dose of a drug is called a 
“J-shaped” relationship. Results of these clinical studies are sup-
ported by ethanol’s ability to raise serum levels of high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (the form of cholesterol that appears 
to protect against atherosclerosis; see  Chapter 35 ), by its ability to 
inhibit some of the inflammatory processes that underlie athero-
sclerosis while also increasing production of the endogenous anti-
coagulant tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA, see  Chapter 34 ), and 
by the presence in alcoholic beverages (especially red wine) of anti-
oxidants and other substances that may protect against atheroscle-
rosis. These observational studies are intriguing, but randomized 
clinical trials examining the possible benefit of moderate alcohol 
consumption in prevention of CHD have not been carried out. 
 D. Blood 
 Alcohol indirectly affects hematopoiesis through metabolic and 
nutritional effects and may also directly inhibit the proliferation of 
all cellular elements in bone marrow. The most common hemato-
logic disorder seen in chronic drinkers is mild anemia resulting 
from alcohol-related folic acid deficiency. Iron deficiency anemia 
may result from gastrointestinal bleeding. Alcohol has also been 
implicated as a cause of several hemolytic syndromes, some of 
which are associated with hyperlipidemia and severe liver disease. 
 E. Endocrine System and Electrolyte Balance 
 Chronic alcohol use has important effects on the endocrine system 
and on fluid and electrolyte balance. Clinical reports of gyneco-
mastia and testicular atrophy in alcoholics with or without 
cirrhosis suggest a derangement in steroid hormone balance. 
 Individuals with chronic liver disease may have disorders of fluid 
and electrolyte balance, including ascites, edema, and effusions. 
Alterations of whole body potassium induced by vomiting and diar-
rhea, as well as severe secondary aldosteronism, may contribute to 
muscle weakness and can be worsened by diuretic therapy. The 
metabolic derangements caused by metabolism of large amounts of 
ethanol can result in hypoglycemia, as a result of impaired hepatic 
gluconeogenesis, and in ketosis, caused by excessive lipolytic factors, 
especially increased cortisol and growth hormone. 
 F. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
 Chronic maternal alcohol abuse during pregnancy is associated 
with teratogenic effects, and alcohol is a leading cause of mental 
retardation and congenital malformation. The abnormalities that 
have been characterized as fetal alcohol syndrome include (1) 
intrauterine growth retardation, (2) microcephaly, (3) poor coor-
dination, (4) underdevelopment of midfacial region (appearing as 
a flattened face), and (5) minor joint anomalies. More severe cases 
may include congenital heart defects and mental retardation. 
Although the level of alcohol intake required to cause serious neu-
rologic deficits appears quite high, the threshold for more subtle 
neurologic deficits is uncertain. 
 The mechanisms that underlie ethanol’s teratogenic effects are 
unknown. Ethanol rapidly crosses the placenta and reaches concentra-
tions in the fetus that are similar to those in maternal blood. The fetal 
liver has little or no alcohol dehydrogenase activity, so the fetus must 
rely on maternal and placental enzymes for elimination of alcohol. 
 The neuropathologic abnormalities seen in humans and in ani-
mal models of fetal alcohol syndrome indicate that ethanol triggers 
apoptotic neurodegeneration and also causes aberrant neuronal and 
glial migration in the developing nervous system. In tissue culture 
systems, ethanol causes a striking reduction in neurite outgrowth. 
 G. Immune System 
 The effects of alcohol on the immune system are complex; 
immune function in some tissues is inhibited (eg, the lung), 
whereas pathologic, hyperactive immune function in other tissues 
is triggered (eg, liver, pancreas). In addition, acute and chronic 
exposure to alcohol have widely different effects on immune func-
tion. The types of immunologic changes reported for the lung 
include suppression of the function of alveolar macrophages, inhi-
bition of chemotaxis of granulocytes, and reduced number and 
function of T cells. In the liver, there is enhanced function of key 
cells of the innate immune system (eg, Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate 
cells) and increased cytokine production. In addition to the 
inflammatory damage that chronic heavy alcohol use precipitates 
in the liver and pancreas, it predisposes to infections, especially of 
CHAPTER 23 The Alcohols    395
the lung, and worsens the morbidity and increases the mortality 
risk of patients with pneumonia. 
 H. Increased Risk of Cancer 
 Chronic alcohol use increases the risk for cancer of the mouth, 
pharynx, larynx, esophagus, and liver. Evidence also points to a 
small increase in the risk of breast cancer in women. Much more 
information is required before a threshold level for alcohol con-
sumption as it relates to cancer can be established. Alcohol itself 
does not appear to be a carcinogen in most test systems. However, 
its primary metabolite, acetaldehyde, can damage DNA, as can 
the reactive oxygen species produced by increased cytochrome 
P450 activity. Other factors implicated in the link between alcohol 
and cancer include changes in folate metabolism and the growth-
promoting effects of chronic inflammation. 
 Alcohol-Drug Interactions 
 Interactions between ethanol and other drugs can have important 
clinical effects resulting from alterations in the pharmacokinetics 
or pharmacodynamics of the second drug. 
 The most common pharmacokinetic alcohol-drug interactions 
stem from alcohol-induced increases of drug-metabolizing 
enzymes, as described in  Chapter 4 . Thus, prolonged intake of 
alcohol without damage to the liver can enhance the metabolic 
biotransformation of other drugs. Ethanol-mediated induction of 
hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes is particularly important with 
regard to acetaminophen. Chronic consumption of three or more 
drinks per day increases the risk of hepatotoxicity due to toxic or 
even high therapeutic levels of acetaminophen as a result of 
increased P450-mediated conversion of acetaminophen to reactive 
hepatotoxic metabolites (see  Figure 4–4 ). In 1998, the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) announced that all over-the-counter 
products containing acetaminophen must carry a warning about 
the relation between chronic ethanol consumption and acetamin-
ophen-induced hepatotoxicity. 
 In contrast,  acute alcohol use can inhibit metabolism of other 
drugs because of decreased enzyme activity or decreased liver 
blood flow. Phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, and sedative-
hypnotic drugs are the most important drugs that interact with 
alcohol by this pharmacokinetic mechanism. 
 Pharmacodynamic interactions are also of great clinical signifi-
cance. The additive CNS depression that occurs when alcohol is 
combined with other CNS depressants, particularly sedative-hypnotics, 
is most important. Alcohol also potentiates the pharmacologic 
effects of many nonsedative drugs, including vasodilators and oral 
hypoglycemic agents. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
OF ETHANOL 
 Alcohol is the cause of more preventable morbidity and mortality 
than all other drugs combined with the exception of tobacco. The 
search for specific etiologic factors or the identification of significant 
predisposing variables for alcohol abuse has generally led to disap-
pointing results. Personality type, severe life stresses, psychiatric 
disorders, and parental role models are not reliable predictors of 
alcohol abuse. Although environmental factors clearly play a role, 
evidence suggests that there is a large genetic contribution to the 
development of alcoholism. Not surprisingly, polymorphisms in 
alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase that lead to 
increased aldehyde accumulation and its associated facial flushing, 
nausea, and hypotension appear to protect against alcoholism. 
Much attention in genetic mapping experiments has focused on 
membrane-signaling proteins known to be affected by ethanol and 
on protein constituents of reward pathways in the brain. 
Polymorphisms associated with a relative insensitivity to alcohol 
and presumably thereby a greater risk of alcohol abuse have been 
identified in genes encoding an α subunit of the GABA A receptor, 
an M 2 muscarinic receptor, a serotonin transporter, adenylyl 
cyclase, and a potassium channel. The link between a polymor-
phism in an opioid receptor gene and a blunted response to 
naltrexone raises the possibility of genotype-guided pharmaco-
therapy for alcohol dependence. 
 MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE ALCOHOL 
INTOXICATION 
 Nontolerant individuals who consume alcohol in large quantities 
develop typical effects of acute sedative-hypnotic drug overdose 
along with the cardiovascular effects previously described (vasodila-
tion, tachycardia) and gastrointestinal irritation. Since tolerance is 
not absolute, even individuals with chronic alcohol dependence 
may become severely intoxicated if sufficient alcohol is consumed. 
 The most important goals in the treatment of acute alcohol 
intoxication are to prevent severe respiratory depression and aspi-
ration of vomitus. Even with very high blood ethanol levels, survival 
is probable as long as the respiratory and cardiovascular systems 
can be supported. The average blood alcohol concentration in 
fatal cases is above 400 mg/dL; however, the lethal dose of alcohol 
varies because of varying degrees of tolerance. 
 Electrolyte imbalances often need to be corrected and metabolic 
alterations may require treatment of hypoglycemia and ketoacido-
sis by administration of  glucose .  Thiamine is given to protect 
against Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. Patients who are dehy-
drated and vomiting should also receive electrolyte solutions. If 
vomiting is severe, large amounts of potassium may be required as 
long as renal function is normal. 
 MANAGEMENT OF ALCOHOL 
WITHDRAWAL SYNDROME 
 Abrupt alcohol discontinuation in an individual with alcohol 
dependence leads to a characteristic syndrome of motor agitation, 
anxiety, insomnia, and reduction of seizure threshold. The severity 
of the syndrome is usually proportionate to the degree and dura-
tion of alcohol abuse. However, this can be greatly modified by the 
use of other sedatives as well as by associated factors (eg, diabetes, 
396    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
injury). In its mildest form, the alcohol withdrawal syndrome of 
increased pulse and blood pressure, tremor, anxiety, and insomnia 
occurs 6–8 hours after alcohol consumption is stopped ( Figure 23–2 ). 
These effects usually lessen in 1–2 days, although some such as 
anxiety and sleep disturbances can be seen at decreasing levels for 
several months. In some patients, more severe acute reactions 
occur, with patients at risk of withdrawal seizures or alcoholic hal-
lucinations during the first 1–5 days of withdrawal. Alcohol with-
drawal is one of the most common causes of seizures in adults. 
Several days later, individuals can develop the syndrome of delirium 
tremens, which is characterized by delirium, agitation, autonomic 
nervous system instability, low-grade fever, and diaphoresis. 
 The major objective of drug therapy in the alcohol withdrawal 
period is prevention of seizures, delirium, and arrhythmias. 
Potassium, magnesium, and phosphate balance should be restored 
as rapidly as is consistent with renal function. Thiamine therapy is 
initiated in all cases. Individuals in mild alcohol withdrawal do 
not need any other pharmacologic assistance. 
 Specific drug treatment for detoxification in more severe cases 
involves two basic principles: substituting a long-acting sedative-
hypnotic drug for alcohol and then gradually reducing (“taper-
ing”) the dose of the long-acting drug. Because of their wide 
margin of safety, benzodiazepines are preferred. The choice of a 
specific agent in this class is generally based on pharmacokinetic 
or economic considerations. Long-acting benzodiazepines, includ-
ing chlordiazepoxide and diazepam, have the advantage of requir-
ing less frequent dosing. Since their pharmacologically active 
metabolites are eliminated slowly, the long-acting drugs provide a 
built-in tapering effect. A disadvantage of the long-acting drugs is 
that they and their active metabolites may accumulate, especially 
in patients with compromised liver function. Short-acting drugs 
such as lorazepam and oxazepam are rapidly converted to inactive 
water-soluble metabolites that will not accumulate, and for this 
reason the short-acting drugs are especially useful in alcoholic 
patients with liver disease. Benzodiazepines can be administered 
orally in mild or moderate cases, or parenterally for patients with 
more severe withdrawal reactions. 
 After the alcohol withdrawal syndrome has been treated 
acutely, sedative-hypnotic medications must be tapered slowly 
over several weeks. Complete detoxification is not achieved with 
just a few days of alcohol abstinence. Several months may be 
required for restoration of normal nervous system function, espe-
cially sleep. 
 TREATMENT OF ALCOHOLISM 
 After detoxification, psychosocial therapy either in intensive inpa-
tient or in outpatient rehabilitation programs serves as the primary 
treatment for alcohol dependence. Other psychiatric problems, 
most commonly depressive or anxiety disorders, often coexist with 
alcoholism and, if untreated, can contribute to the tendency of 
detoxified alcoholics to relapse. Treatment for these associated 
disorders with counseling and drugs can help decrease the rate of 
relapse for alcoholic patients. 
 Three drugs—disulfiram, naltrexone, and acamprosate—have 
FDA approval for adjunctive treatment of alcohol dependence. 
 Naltrexone 
 Naltrexone, a relatively long-acting opioid antagonist, blocks the 
effects at μ opioid receptors (see  Chapter 31 ). Studies in experi-
mental animals first suggested a link between alcohol consump-
tion and opioids. Injection of small amounts of opioids was 
followed by an increase in alcohol drinking, whereas adminis-
tration of opioid antagonists inhibited self-administration of 
alcohol. 
 FIGURE 23–2  Time course of events during the alcohol withdrawal syndrome. The signs and symptoms that manifest earliest are anxiety, 
insomnia, tremor, palpitations, nausea, and anorexia as well as (in severe syndromes) hallucinations and seizures. Delirium tremens typically 
develops 48–72 hours after alcohol discontinuation. The earliest symptoms (anxiety, insomnia, etc) can persist, in a milder form, for several 
months after alcohol discontinuation. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Delirium tremens
(tachycardia, hypertension, low-grade fever,
tremor, diaphoresis, delirium, agitation)
Days since alcohol discontinuation
Anxiety, insomnia,
tremor, palpitations,
nausea, anorexia
Withdrawal
seizures
Alcoholic
hallucinations
30-90
9
CHAPTER 23 The Alcohols    397
 Naltrexone, both alone and in combination with behavioral 
counseling, has been shown in a number of short-term (12- to 
16-week) placebo-controlled trials to reduce the rate of relapse to 
either drinking or alcohol dependence and to reduce craving for 
alcohol, especially in patients with high rates of naltrexone adher-
ence. Naltrexone was approved in 1994 by the FDA for treatment 
of alcohol dependence. 
 Naltrexone is generally taken once a day in an oral dose of 
50 mg for treatment of alcoholism. An extended-release formula-
tion administered as an IM injection once every 4 weeks is also 
effective. The drug can cause dose-dependent hepatotoxicity and 
should be used with caution in patients with evidence of mild 
abnormalities in serum aminotransferase activity. The combina-
tion of naltrexone plus disulfiram should be avoided, since both 
drugs are potential hepatotoxins. Administration of naltrexone to 
patients who are physically dependent on opioids precipitates an 
acute withdrawal syndrome, so patients must be opioid-free before 
initiating naltrexone therapy. Naltrexone also blocks the therapeu-
tic analgesic effects of usual doses of opioids. 
 Acamprosate 
 Acamprosate has been used in Europe for a number of years to 
treat alcohol dependence and was approved for this use by the 
FDA in 2004. Like ethanol, acamprosate has many molecular 
effects including actions on GABA, glutamate, serotonergic, 
noradrenergic, and dopaminergic receptors. Probably its best-
characterized actions are as a weak NMDA-receptor antagonist 
and a GABA A -receptor activator. In European clinical trials, acam-
prosate reduced short-term and long-term (more than 6 months) 
relapse rates when combined with psychotherapy. In a large 
American trial that compared acamprosate with naltrexone and 
with combined acamprosate and naltrexone therapy (the 
COMBINE study), acamprosate did not show a statistically sig-
nificant effect alone or in combination with naltrexone. 
 Acamprosate is administered as 1–2 enteric-coated 333 mg 
tablets three times daily. It is poorly absorbed, and food reduces its 
absorption even further. Acamprosate is widely distributed and is 
eliminated renally. It does not appear to participate in drug-drug 
interactions. The most common adverse effects are gastrointestinal 
(nausea, vomiting, diarrhea) and rash. It should not be used in 
patients with severe renal impairment. 
 Disulfiram 
 Disulfiram causes extreme discomfort in patients who drink alco-
holic beverages. Disulfiram alone has little effect; however, flush-
ing, throbbing headache, nausea, vomiting, sweating, hypotension, 
and confusion occur within a few minutes after an individual tak-
ing disulfiram drinks alcohol. The effects may last 30 minutes in 
mild cases or several hours in severe ones. Disulfiram acts by 
inhibiting aldehyde dehydrogenase. Thus, alcohol is metabolized 
as usual, but acetaldehyde accumulates. 
 Disulfiram is rapidly and completely absorbed from the gastro-
intestinal tract; however, a period of 12 hours is required for its 
full action. Its elimination rate is slow, so that its action may persist 
for several days after the last dose. The drug inhibits the metabolism 
of many other therapeutic agents, including phenytoin, oral anti-
coagulants, and isoniazid. It should not be administered with 
medications that contain alcohol, including nonprescription 
medications such as those listed in  Table 63–3 . Disulfiram can 
cause small increases in liver function tests. Its safety in pregnancy 
has not been demonstrated. 
 Because adherence to disulfiram therapy is low and because the 
evidence from clinical trials for its effectiveness is weak, disulfiram 
is no longer commonly used. 
 Other Drugs 
 Several other drugs have shown efficacy in maintaining abstinence 
and reducing craving in chronic alcoholism, although none has 
FDA approval yet for this use. Such drugs include ondansetron, a 
serotonin 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonist (see Chapters 16, 62); topi-
ramate, a drug used for partial and generalized tonic-clonic sei-
zures (see  Chapter 24 ); and baclofen, a GABA B receptor antagonist 
used as a spasmolytic (see  Chapter 27 ). Based on evidence from 
model systems, efforts are underway to explore agents that modu-
late cannabinoid CB1 receptors, corticotropin-releasing factor 
receptors, and GABA receptor systems, as well as several other 
possible targets. Rimonabant, a CB1 receptor antagonist, has been 
shown to suppress alcohol-related behaviors in animal models and 
is being tested in clinical trials of alcoholism. 
 ■ PHARMACOLOGY OF OTHER 
ALCOHOLS 
 Other alcohols related to ethanol have wide applications as indus-
trial solvents and occasionally cause severe poisoning. Of these, 
 methanol and  ethylene glycol are two of the most common 
causes of intoxication. 
 METHANOL 
 Methanol (methyl alcohol, wood alcohol) is widely used in the 
industrial production of synthetic organic compounds and as a 
constituent of many commercial solvents. In the home, methanol 
is most frequently found in the form of “canned heat” or in 
windshield-washing products. Poisonings occur from accidental 
ingestion of methanol-containing products or when it is misguid-
edly ingested as an ethanol substitute. 
 Methanol can be absorbed through the skin or from the respi-
ratory or gastrointestinal tract and is then distributed in body 
water. The primary mechanism of elimination of methanol in 
humans is by oxidation to formaldehyde, formic acid, and CO 2 
( Figure 23–3 ). 
 Animal species show great variability in mean lethal doses of 
methanol. The special susceptibility of humans to methanol toxic-
ity is due to metabolism to formate and formaldehyde, not to 
methanol itself. Since the conversion of methanol to its toxic 
metabolites is relatively slow, there is often a delay of 6–30 hours 
before the appearance of severe toxicity. 
398    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Physical findings in early methanol poisoning are generally 
nonspecific, such as inebriation and gastritis, and possibly an ele-
vated osmolar gap (see  Chapter 58 ). In severe cases, the odor of 
formaldehyde may be present on the breath or in the urine. After a 
delay, the most characteristic symptom in methanol poisoning—
visual disturbance—occurs along with anion gap metabolic acido-
sis. The visual disturbance is frequently described as “like being in 
a snowstorm” and can progress to blindness. Changes in the retina 
may sometimes be detected on examination, but these are usually 
late. The development of bradycardia, prolonged coma, seizures, 
and resistant acidosis all imply a poor prognosis. The cause of death 
in fatal cases is sudden cessation of respiration. A serum methanol 
concentration higher than 20 mg/dL warrants treatment, and a 
concentration higher than 50 mg/dL is considered serious enough 
to require hemodialysis. Serum formate levels are a better indica-
tion of clinical pathology but are not widely available. 
 The first treatment for methanol poisoning, as in all critical 
poisoning situations, is support of respiration. There are three 
specific modalities of treatment for severe methanol poisoning: 
suppression of metabolism by alcohol dehydrogenase to toxic 
products, hemodialysis to enhance removal of methanol and its 
toxic products, and alkalinization to counteract metabolic acidosis. 
 The enzyme chiefly responsible for methanol oxidation in the 
liver is alcohol dehydrogenase ( Figure 23–3 ).  Fomepizole, an 
alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor, is approved for the treatment of 
methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning. It is administered intra-
venously in a loading dose of 15 mg/kg followed by 10 mg/kg 
every 12 hours for 48 hours and then 15 mg/kg every 12 hours 
thereafter until the serum methanol level falls below 20–30 mg/dL. 
The dosage increase after 48 hours is based on evidence that 
fomepizole rapidly induces its own metabolism by the cytochrome 
P450 system. Patients undergoing hemodialysis are given fomepizole 
more frequently (6 hours after the loading dose and every 4 hours 
thereafter). Fomepizole appears to be safe during the short time it 
is administered for treatment of methanol or ethylene glycol poi-
soning. The most common adverse effects are burning at the infu-
sion site, headache, nausea, and dizziness. Intravenous ethanol is 
an alternative to fomepizole. It has a higher affinity than methanol 
for alcohol dehydrogenase; thus, saturation of the enzyme with 
ethanol reduces formate production. Ethanol is used intravenously 
as treatment for methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning. The 
dose-dependent characteristics of ethanol metabolism and the 
variability of ethanol metabolism require frequent monitoring of 
blood ethanol levels to ensure appropriate alcohol concentration. 
 In cases of severe poisoning, hemodialysis (discussed in 
 Chapter 58 ) can be used to eliminate both methanol and formate 
from the blood. Two other measures are commonly taken. Because 
of profound metabolic acidosis in methanol poisoning, treatment 
with bicarbonate often is necessary. Since folate-dependent sys-
tems are responsible for the oxidation of formic acid to CO 2 in 
humans ( Figure 23–3 ), folinic and folic acid are often adminis-
tered to patients poisoned with methanol, although this has never 
been fully tested in clinical studies. 
 ETHYLENE GLYCOL 
 Polyhydric alcohols such as ethylene glycol (CH 2 OHCH 2 OH) are 
used as heat exchangers, in antifreeze formulations, and as indus-
trial solvents. Young children and animals are sometimes attracted 
by the sweet taste of ethylene glycol and, rarely, it is ingested 
intentionally as an ethanol substitute or in attempted suicide. 
Although ethylene glycol itself is relatively harmless and elimi-
nated by the kidney, it is metabolized to toxic aldehydes and 
oxalate. 
 Three stages of ethylene glycol overdose occur. Within the 
first few hours after ingestion, there is transient excitation fol-
lowed by CNS depression. After a delay of 4–12 hours, severe 
metabolic acidosis develops from accumulation of acid metabo-
lites and lactate. Finally, delayed renal insufficiency follows depo-
sition of oxalate in renal tubules. The key to the diagnosis of 
ethylene glycol poisoning is recognition of anion gap acidosis, 
osmolar gap, and oxalate crystals in the urine in a patient without 
visual symptoms. 
 As with methanol poisoning, early fomepizole is the standard 
treatment for ethylene glycol poisoning. Intravenous treatment 
with fomepizole is initiated immediately, as described above for 
methanol poisoning, and continued until the patient’s serum 
ethylene glycol concentration drops below a toxic threshold 
(20–30 mg/dL). Intravenous ethanol is an alternative to fomepi-
zole in ethylene glycol poisoning. Hemodialysis effectively removes 
ethylene glycol and its toxic metabolites and is recommended for 
patients with a serum ethylene glycol concentration above 50 mg/dL, 
significant metabolic acidosis, and significant renal impairment. 
Fomepizole has reduced the need for hemodialysis, especially in 
patients with less severe acidosis and intact renal function. 
FIGURE 23–3 Methanol is converted to the toxic metabolites 
formaldehyde and formate by alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde 
dehydrogenase. By inhibiting alcohol dehydrogenase, fomepizole 
and ethanol reduce the formation of toxic metabolites.
CH3OH
Methanol
H2CO
Formaldehyde
HCOO–
Formate
CO2 + H2O
Alcohol
dehydrogenase
Aldehyde
dehydrogenase
Folate-dependent
pathway
–
–
Ethanol
Fomepizole
CHAPTER 23 The Alcohols    399
SUMMARY The Alcohols and Associated Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
ALCOHOLS
 • Ethanol
Multiple effects on neurotransmitter 
receptors, ion channels, and signaling 
pathways
Antidote in methanol and ethylene 
glycol poisoning
Zero-order metabolism • duration 
depends on dose • Toxicity: Acutely, central 
nervous system depression and respira-
tory failure • chronically, damage to many 
systems, including liver, pancreas, gastro-
intestinal tract, and central and peripheral 
nervous systems • Interactions: Induces 
CYP2E1 • increased conversion of 
acetaminophen to toxic metabolite
 •  Methanol: Poisonings result in toxic levels of formate, which causes characteristic visual disturbance plus coma, seizures, acidosis, and death due to respiratory failure
 • Ethylene glycol: Poisoning creates toxic aldehydes and oxalate, which causes kidney damage and severe acidosis
DRUGS USED IN ACUTE ETHANOL WITHDRAWAL
 •  Benzodiazepines 
(eg, chlordiazepoxide, 
diazepam, lorazepam)
BDZ receptor agonists that facilitate 
GABA-mediated activation of GABAA 
receptors
Prevention and treatment of acute ethanol 
withdrawal syndrome
See Chapter 22
 • Thiamine (vitamin B1)
Essential vitamin required for synthesis 
of the coenzyme thiamine 
pyrophosphate
Administered to patients suspected of 
having alcoholism (those exhibiting acute 
alcohol intoxication or alcohol withdrawal 
syndrome) to prevent Wernicke-Korsakoff 
syndrome
Administered parenterally • Toxicity: None 
• Interactions: None
DRUGS USED IN CHRONIC ALCOHOLISM
 • Naltrexone
Nonselective competitive antagonist 
of opioid receptors
Reduced risk of relapse in individuals 
with alcoholism
Available as an oral or long-acting paren-
teral formulation • Toxicity: GI effects and 
liver toxicity; will precipitate a withdrawal 
reaction in individuals physically depen-
dent on opioids and will prevent the 
analgesic effect of opioids
 • Acamprosate
Poorly understood NMDA receptor 
antagonist and GABAA agonist effects
Reduced risk of relapse in individuals 
with alcoholism
Toxicity: GI effects and rash
 • Disulfiram
Inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase, result-
ing in aldehyde accumulation during 
ethanol ingestion
Deterrent to drinking in individuals 
with alcohol dependence
Toxicity: Little effect alone but severe and 
potentially dangerous flushing, headache, 
nausea, vomiting, and hypotension when 
combined with ethanol
DRUGS USED IN ACUTE METHANOL OR ETHYLENE GLYCOL TOXICITY
 • Fomepizole
Inhibits alcohol dehydrogenase, prevents 
conversion of methanol and ethylene 
glycol to toxic metabolites
Methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning
Orphan drug • Toxicity: Headache, nausea, 
dizziness, rare allergic reactions
 •  Ethanol: Higher affinity than methanol or ethylene glycol for alcohol dehydrogenase; used to reduce metabolism of methanol and ethylene glycol to toxic products
400    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
DRUGS FOR THE TREATMENT OF ACUTE 
ALCOHOL WITHDRAWAL SYNDROME (see 
also Chapter 22 for other benzodiazepines)
Chlordiazepoxide HCl (generic, Librium)
Oral: 5, 10, 25 mg tablets
Diazepam (generic, Valium)
Oral: 2, 5, 10 mg tablets; 1, 5 mg/mL solutions
Rectal: 2.5, 10, 20 mg gel
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Lorazepam (generic, Ativan)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets; 2 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 2, 4 mg/mL for injection
Oxazepam (generic)
Oral: 10, 15, 30 mg capsules
Thiamine HCl (generic)
Oral: 50, 100, 250, 500 mg tablets or capsules
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for injection
DRUGS FOR THE PREVENTION OF 
ALCOHOL ABUSE
Acamprosate Calcium (Campral)
Oral: 333 mg delayed-release tablets
DRUGS FOR THE TREATMENT OF ACUTE
ALCOHOL WITHDRAWAL SYNDROME (see
also Chapter 22 for other benzodiazepines)
Chlordiazepoxide HCl (generic, Librium)
Oral: 5, 10, 25 mg tablets
Diazepam (generic, Valium)
Oral: 2, 5, 10 mg tablets; 1, 5 mg/mL solutions
Rectal: 2.5, 10, 20 mg gel
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Lorazepam (generic, Ativan)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets; 2 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 2, 4 mg/mL for injection
Oxazepam (generic)
Oral: 10, 15, 30 mg capsules
Thiamine HCl (generic)
Oral: 50, 100, 250, 500 mg tablets or capsules
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for injection
DRUGS FOR THE PREVENTION OF
ALCOHOL ABUSE
Acamprosate Calcium (Campral)
Oral: 333 mg delayed-release tablets
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Disulfiram (Antabuse)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets
Naltrexone HCl (generic, ReVia)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Parenteral (Vivitrol): 380 mg for IM injection once per month
DRUGS FOR THE TREATMENT OF 
ACUTE METHANOL OR ETHYLENE 
GLYCOL POISONING
Ethanol (generic)
Parenteral: 5% or 10% ethanol and 5% dextrose in water for 
IV infusion
Fomepizole (generic, Antizol)
Parenteral: 1 g/mL concentrate for IV injection 
 REFERENCES 
 Anton RF: Naltrexone for the management of alcohol dependence. N Engl J Med 
2008;359:715. 
 Anton RF et al: Combined pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for 
alcohol dependence: The COMBINE study: A randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA 2006;295:2003. 
 Brent J: Fomepizole for ethylene glycol and methanol poisoning. N Engl J Med 
2009;360:2216. 
 Brodie MS et al: Ethanol interactions with calcium-dependent potassium channels. 
Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2007;31:1625. 
 CDC Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Website: http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/fas/
Chen YC et al: Polymorphism of ethanol-metabolism genes and alcoholism: 
Correlation of allelic variations with the pharmacokinetic and pharmacody-
namic consequences. Chem Biol Interact 2009;178:2. 
 Colombo G et al: The cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist, rimonabant, as a 
promising pharmacotherapy for alcohol dependence: Preclinical evidence. 
Mol Neurobiol 2007;36:102. 
 Crabbe JC et al: Alcohol-related genes: Contributions from studies with genetically 
engineered mice. Addict Biol 2006;11:195. 
 Das SK, Vasudevan DM: Alcohol-induced oxidative stress. Life Sci 2007;
81:177. 
 Edenberg HJ: The genetics of alcohol metabolism: Role of alcohol dehydrogenase 
and aldehyde dehydrogenase variants. Alcohol Res Health 2007;
30:5. 
 Heilig M, Egli M: Pharmacologic treatment of alcohol dependence: Target symp-
toms and target mechanisms. Pharmacol Ther 2006;111:855. 
 Johnson BA: Update on neuropharmacological treatments for alcoholism: 
Scientific basis and clinical findings. Biochem Pharmacol 2008;75:34. 
 Lepik KJ et al: Adverse drug events associated with the antidotes for methanol and 
ethylene glycol poisoning: A comparison of ethanol and fomepizole. Ann 
Emerg Med 2009;53:439. 
 Lieber CS: Medical disorders of alcoholism. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1058. 
 Lobo IA, Harris RA: GABA(A) receptors and alcohol. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
2008;90:90. 
 Mayfield RD, Harris RA, Schuckit MA: Genetic factors influencing alcohol 
dependence. Br J Pharmacol 2008;154:275. 
 McIntire SL: Ethanol. WormBook 2010;29:1. 
 National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Website: http://www.niaaa.
nih.gov/
Olson KR et al (editors):  Poisoning and Drug Overdose , 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, 
2006. 
 Shuckit MA: Alcohol-use disorders. Lancet 2009;373:492. 
 Shuckit MA:  Drug and Alcohol Abuse: A Clinical Guide to Diagnosis and Treatment,
6th ed. Springer, 2006. 
 Srisurapanont M, Jarusuraisin N: Opioid antagonists for alcohol dependence. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;(1):CD001867. 
 Tetrault JM, O’Connor PG: Substance abuse and withdrawal in the critical care 
setting. Crit Care Clin 2008;24:767. 
 Wolf FW, Heberlein U: Invertebrate models of drug abuse. J Neurobiol 
2003;54:161. 
 You M, Crabb DW: Recent advances in alcoholic liver disease II. Minireview: 
Molecular mechanisms of alcoholic fatty liver. Am J Physiol Gastrointest 
Liver Physiol 2004;287:G1. 
CHAPTER 23 The Alcohols    401
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
This young man exhibits classic signs and symptoms of 
acute alcohol poisoning, which is confirmed by the blood 
alcohol concentration. We do not know from the case 
whether the patient was tolerant to the effects of alcohol but 
note that his blood alcohol concentration was in the lethal 
range for a nontolerant individual. Death most likely 
resulted from respiratory and cardiovascular collapse prior 
to medical treatment, complicated by a chemical pneumoni-
tis secondary to aspiration of vomitus. The treatment of 
acute alcohol poisoning includes standard supportive care 
of airway, breathing, and circulation (see  Chapter 58 ). 
Intravenous access would be obtained and used to adminis-
ter dextrose and thiamine, as well as other electrolytes and 
vitamins. If a young, previously healthy individual receives 
medical care in time, supportive care will most likely be 
highly effective. As the patient recovers, it is important to be 
vigilant for signs and symptoms of the alcohol withdrawal 
syndrome.
This page intentionally left blank 
403
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Antiseizure Drugs 
 Roger J. Porter, MD, & 
 Brian S. Meldrum, MB, PhD  
 Approximately 1% of the world’s population has epilepsy, the 
second most common neurologic disorder after stroke. Although 
standard therapy permits control of seizures in 80% of these 
patients, millions (500,000 people in the USA alone) have 
uncontrolled epilepsy. Epilepsy is a heterogeneous symptom 
complex—a chronic disorder characterized by recurrent seizures. 
Seizures are finite episodes of brain dysfunction resulting from 
abnormal discharge of cerebral neurons. The causes of seizures are 
many and include the full range of neurologic diseases—from 
infection to neoplasm and head injury. In some subgroups, 
heredity has proved to be a predominant factor. Single gene 
defects, usually of an autosomal dominant nature involving genes 
coding voltage-gated ion channels or GABA A receptors, have 
been shown to account for a small number of familial generalized 
epilepsies. Commonly, one family shows multiple epilepsy syn-
dromes including, for example, febrile seizures, absence attacks, 
and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. 
 The antiseizure drugs described in this chapter are also used in 
patients with febrile seizures or with seizures occurring as part of 
an acute illness such as meningitis. The term “epilepsy” is not usu-
ally applied to such patients unless chronic seizures develop later. 
Seizures are occasionally caused by an acute underlying toxic or 
metabolic disorder, in which case appropriate therapy should be 
directed toward the specific abnormality, eg, hypocalcemia. In 
most cases of epilepsy, however, the choice of medication depends 
on the empiric seizure classification. 
 Drug Development for Epilepsy 
 For a long time it was assumed that a single  antiepileptic drug 
(AED ) could be developed for the treatment of all forms of epi-
lepsy. However, the causes of epilepsy are extremely diverse, 
encompassing genetic and developmental defects and infective, 
traumatic, neoplastic, and degenerative disease processes. Drug 
therapy to date shows little evidence of etiologic specificity. 
There is some specificity according to seizure type ( Table 24–1 ), 
which is most clearly seen with generalized seizures of the 
absence type. These are typically seen with 2–3 Hz spike-and-wave 
24
 A 23-year-old woman presents to the office for consultation 
regarding her antiseizure medications. Seven years ago, this 
otherwise healthy young woman had a generalized tonic-
clonic seizure (GTCS)  at home. She was rushed to the emer-
gency department, at which time she was alert but complained 
of headache. A consulting neurologist placed her on leveti-
racetam, 500 mg bid. Four days later, EEG showed rare right 
temporal sharp waves. MRI was normal. One year after this 
episode, a repeat EEG was unchanged, and levetiracetam was 
gradually increased to 1000 mg bid. The patient had no 
significant adverse effects from this dosage. At age 21, she 
had a second GTCS while in college; further discussion with 
her roommate at that time revealed a history of two recent 
episodes of 1–2 minutes of altered consciousness with lip 
smacking (complex partial seizures). A repeat EEG showed 
occasional right temporal spikes. Lamotrigine was gradually 
added to the regimen to a dosage of 200 mg bid. Since then, 
the patient has been seizure-free for almost 2 years but now 
comes to the office for a medication review. Gradual discon-
tinuation of levetiracetam is planned if the patient continues 
to do well for another year, although risk of recurrent seizures 
is always present when medications are withdrawn. 
 C A S E  S T U D Y  *  
∗This case description includes the answers to implied questions regard-
ing therapy.
404    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
discharges on the electroencephalogram, which respond to etho-
suximide and valproate but can be exacerbated by phenytoin and 
carbamazepine. Drugs acting selectively on absence seizures can 
be identified by animal screens, using either threshold pentyle-
netetrazol clonic seizures in mice or rats or mutant mice showing 
absence-like episodes (so-called lethargic, star-gazer, or tottering 
mutants). In contrast, the maximal electroshock (MES) test, 
with suppression of the tonic extensor phase, identifies drugs 
such as phenytoin, carbamazepine, and lamotrigine, which are 
active against generalized tonic-clonic seizures and complex par-
tial seizures. The maximal electroshock test as the major initial 
screen for new drugs has led predominantly to the identification 
of drugs with a mechanism of action involving prolonged inac-
tivation of the voltage-gated Na + channel. Limbic seizures 
induced in rats by the process of electrical kindling (involving 
repeated episodes of focal electrical stimulation) probably pro-
vide a better screen for predicting efficacy in complex partial 
seizures. 
 Existing antiseizure drugs provide adequate seizure control 
in about two thirds of patients. So-called “drug resistance” may 
be observed from the onset of attempted therapy or may 
develop after a period of relatively successful therapy. 
Explanations are being sought in terms of impaired access of the 
drugs to target sites or insensitivity of target molecules to them. 
In children, some severe seizure syndromes associated with pro-
gressive brain damage are very difficult to treat. In adults, some 
focal seizures are refractory to medications. Some, particularly 
in the temporal lobe, are amenable to surgical resection. Some 
of the drug-resistant population may respond to  vagus nerve 
stimulation (VNS), a nonpharmacologic treatment for epilepsy 
now widely approved for treatment of patients with partial sei-
zures. VNS is indicated for refractory cases or for patients in 
whom antiseizure drugs are poorly tolerated. Stimulating elec-
trodes are implanted on the left vagus nerve, and the pacemaker 
is implanted in the chest wall or axilla. Use of this device may 
permit seizure control with lower doses of drugs. Other devices, 
using various paradigms of electrical stimulation, are in clinical 
development. 
 New antiseizure drugs are being sought not only by the screen-
ing tests noted above but also by more focused approaches. 
Compounds are sought that act by one of three mechanisms: 
(1) enhancement of GABAergic (inhibitory) transmission, (2) 
diminution of excitatory (usually glutamatergic) transmission, or 
(3) modification of ionic conductances. Presynaptic effects on 
transmitter release appear particularly important, and some 
molecular targets are known, eg, SV 2 A (see below). 
 Although it is widely recognized that current antiseizure drugs 
are palliative rather than curative, successful strategies for identify-
ing drugs that are either disease modifying or that prevent epilep-
togenesis have proved elusive. Neuronal targets for current and 
potential antiseizure drugs include both excitatory and inhibitory 
synapses.  Figure 24–1 represents a glutamatergic (excitatory) 
synapse, and  Figure 24–2 indicates targets in a GABAergic 
(inhibitory) synapse. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTISEIZURE DRUGS 
 Chemistry 
 Until 1990, approximately 16 antiseizure drugs were available, 
and 13 of them can be classified into five very similar chemical 
groups: barbiturates, hydantoins, oxazolidinediones, succinim-
ides, and acetylureas. These groups have in common a similar 
heterocyclic ring structure with a variety of substituents 
( Figure 24–3 ). For drugs with this basic structure, the substitu-
ents on the heterocyclic ring determine the pharmacologic class, 
either anti-MES or antipentylenetetrazol. Very small changes in 
structure can dramatically alter the mechanism of action and 
clinical properties of the compound. The remaining drugs in 
this older group—carbamazepine, valproic acid, and the benzo- 
diazepines—are structurally dissimilar, as are the newer com-
pounds marketed since 1990, ie, eslicarbazepine, felbamate, 
gabapentin, lacosamide, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, oxcarba-
zepine, pregabalin, retigabine, rufinamide, stiripentol, tiagabine, 
topiramate, vigabatrin, and zonisamide. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The antiseizure drugs exhibit many similar pharmacokinetic 
properties—even those whose structural and chemical properties 
are quite diverse—because most have been selected for oral activ-
ity and all must enter the central nervous system. Although many 
of these compounds are only slightly soluble, absorption is usually 
good, with 80–100% of the dose reaching the circulation. Most 
antiseizure drugs (other than phenytoin, tiagabine, and valproic 
acid) are not highly bound to plasma proteins. 
 Antiseizure drugs are cleared chiefly by hepatic mechanisms, 
although they have low extraction ratios (see  Chapter 3 ). Many 
are converted to active metabolites that are also cleared by the 
TABLE 24–1 Classification of seizure types.
Partial seizures
Simple partial seizures
Complex partial seizures
Partial seizures secondarily generalized
Generalized seizures
Generalized tonic-clonic (grand mal) seizures
Absence (petit mal) seizures
Tonic seizures
Atonic seizures
Clonic and myoclonic seizures
Infantile spasms1
1An epileptic syndrome rather than a specific seizure type; drugs useful in infantile 
spasms will be reviewed separately.
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    405
CRMP-2
mGluR3
mGluR7,8
mGluR5
mGluR3
mGluR1
EAAT
AMPA
AMPA
NMDA
EAAT
mGluR2
NTFs
Trk
VG-Na+
VG-Ca2+(N)
VG-Na+
VG-Na+
VG-Ca2+(P/Q)
VG-Ca2+(T)
SV2A
2
7
6
2
3
4
5
1
V
V
VG
3
PA
β
α
γ
β
α
γ
β
α
γ
β
α
γ
β
α
γ
β
α
γ
K+
Presynaptic
nerve
terminal
Postsynaptic
cell
Glia
 FIGURE 24–1  Molecular targets for antiseizure drugs at the excitatory, glutamatergic synapse. Presynaptic targets diminishing 
glutamate release include 1, voltage-gated (VG) Na + channels (phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and lacosamide); 2, VG-Ca 2+ channels 
(ethosuximide, lamotrigine, gabapentin, and pregabalin); 3, K + channels (retigabine); synaptic vesicle proteins, 4, SV 2 A (levetiracetam); and 5, 
CRMP-2, collapsin-response mediator protein-2 (lacosamide). Postsynaptic targets include 6, AMPA receptors (blocked by phenobarbital, 
topiramate, and lamotrigine) and 7, NMDA receptors (blocked by felbamate). EAAT, excitatory amino acid transporter. Red dots represent 
glutamate. 
406    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
β
α
γ
β
α
γ
5
4
1
1
2
2
3
3
β
α
γ
VG-Na+
VG-Ca2+(N)
VG-Ca2+(T)
mGluR3
K+
K
Presynaptic
axon terminal
GABAB
GABAA
(tonic, slow IPSP)
Postsynaptic density
Postsynaptic
cell soma
GABAA
(phasic,
fast IPSP)
GABAB
Glia
GABA-T
GABA-T
Kir
+
+
GAT-1
GAT-1
SV2A
 FIGURE 24–2  Molecular targets for antiseizure drugs at the inhibitory, GABAergic synapse. These include “specific” targets: 1, GABA 
transporters (especially GAT-1, tiagabine); 2, GABA-transaminase (GABA-T, vigabatrin); 3, GABA A receptors (benzodiazepines); potentially, 
4, GABA B receptors; and 5, synaptic vesicular proteins (SVA2). Effects may also be mediated by “nonspecific” targets such as by voltage-gated 
(VG) ion channels and synaptic proteins. IPSP, inhibitory postsynaptic potential. Blue dots represent GABA. 
liver. These drugs are predominantly distributed into total body 
water. Plasma clearance is relatively slow; many antiseizure 
drugs are therefore considered to be medium to long acting. 
Some have half-lives longer than 12 hours. Many of the older 
antiseizure drugs are potent inducers of hepatic microsomal 
enzyme activity. Compliance is better with less frequent admin-
istration; thus extended-release formulations permitting once- 
or twice-daily administration may offer an advantage. 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    407
 DRUGS USED IN PARTIAL SEIZURES 
& GENERALIZED TONIC-CLONIC 
SEIZURES 
 The classic major drugs for partial and generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures are phenytoin (and congeners), carbamazepine, valproate, 
and the barbiturates. However, the availability of newer drugs—
eslicarbazepine, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, gabapentin, oxcarba-
zepine, pregabalin, retigabine, topiramate, vigabatrin, lacosamide, 
and zonisamide—is altering clinical practice in countries where 
these compounds are available. The next section of the chapter is 
a description of major drugs from a historical and structural per-
spective. Factors involved in the clinical choice of drugs are 
described in the last section of the chapter. 
 PHENYTOIN 
 Phenytoin is the oldest nonsedative antiseizure drug, introduced 
in 1938 after a systematic evaluation of compounds such as phe-
nobarbital that altered electrically induced seizures in laboratory 
animals. It was known for decades as  diphenylhydantoin. 
 Chemistry 
 Phenytoin is a diphenyl-substituted hydantoin with the structure 
shown. It has much lower sedative properties than compounds 
with alkyl substituents at the 5 position. A more soluble prodrug 
of phenytoin,  fosphenytoin, is available for parenteral use; this 
phosphate ester compound is rapidly converted to phenytoin in 
the plasma. 
 
5
3 N
H
C
C
C
O
H
N
O
Phenytoin
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Phenytoin has major effects on several physiologic systems. It 
alters Na + , K + , and Ca 2+ conductance, membrane potentials, and 
the concentrations of amino acids and the neurotransmitters nor-
epinephrine, acetylcholine, and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). 
Studies with neurons in cell culture show that phenytoin blocks 
sustained high-frequency repetitive firing of action potentials 
( Figure 24–4 ). This effect is seen at therapeutically relevant con-
centrations. It is a use-dependent effect (see  Chapter 14 ) on Na + 
conductance, arising from preferential binding to—and prolonga-
tion of—the inactivated state of the Na + channel. This effect is 
also seen with therapeutically relevant concentrations of carbam-
azepine, lamotrigine, and valproate and probably contributes to 
their antiseizure action in the electroshock model and in partial 
seizures. Phenytoin also blocks the persistent Na + current, as do 
several other AEDs including valproate, topiramate, and ethosux-
imide. 
 In addition, phenytoin paradoxically causes excitation in some 
cerebral neurons. A reduction of calcium permeability, with inhi-
bition of calcium influx across the cell membrane, may explain the 
ability of phenytoin to inhibit a variety of calcium-induced secre-
tory processes, including release of hormones and neurotransmit-
ters. Recording of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials 
show that phenytoin decreases the synaptic release of glutamate 
1
5
4
2
3 N
R3
C
R1
R2
C
O
C
O
X
 FIGURE 24–3  Antiseizure heterocyclic ring structure. The X var-
ies as follows: hydantoin derivatives, –N–; barbiturates, –C–N–; oxazo-
lidinediones, –O–; succinimides, –C–; acetylureas, –NH 2 (N connected 
to C 2 ). R 1 , R 2 , and R 3 vary within each subgroup. 
On
Off
On
Off
On
Off
On
Off
Control
Time
Phenytoin
Carbamazepine
Sodium valproate
Voltage
 FIGURE 24–4  Effects of three antiseizure drugs on sustained high-frequency firing of action potentials by cultured neurons. Intracellular 
recordings were made from neurons while depolarizing current pulses, approximately 0.75 s in duration, were applied (on-off step changes 
indicated by arrows). In the absence of drug, a series of high-frequency repetitive action potentials filled the entire duration of the current 
pulse. Phenytoin, carbamazepine, and sodium valproate all markedly reduced the number of action potentials elicited by the current pulses. 
(Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Macdonald RL, Meldrum BS: Principles of anti-epileptic drug action. In: Levy RH et al [editors]:  Antiepileptic Drugs, 
4th ed. Raven Press, 1995.) 
408    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
and enhances the release of GABA. The mechanism of phenytoin’s 
action probably involves a combination of actions at several levels. 
At therapeutic concentrations, the major action of phenytoin is to 
block Na + channels and inhibit the generation of rapidly repetitive 
action potentials. Presynaptic actions on glutamate and GABA 
release probably arise from actions other than those on voltage-
gated Na + channels. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Phenytoin is effective against partial seizures and generalized tonic-
clonic seizures. In the latter, it appears to be effective against attacks 
that are either primary or secondary to another seizure type. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Absorption of phenytoin is highly dependent on the formulation 
of the dosage form. Particle size and pharmaceutical additives 
affect both the rate and the extent of absorption. Absorption of 
phenytoin sodium from the gastrointestinal tract is nearly com-
plete in most patients, although the time to peak may range from 
3 to 12 hours. Absorption after intramuscular injection is unpre-
dictable, and some drug precipitation in the muscle occurs; this 
route of administration is not recommended for phenytoin. In 
contrast, fosphenytoin, a more soluble phosphate prodrug of phe-
nytoin, is well absorbed after intramuscular administration. 
 Phenytoin is highly bound to plasma proteins. The total 
plasma level decreases when the percentage that is bound decreases, 
as in uremia or hypoalbuminemia, but correlation of free levels 
with clinical states remains uncertain. Drug concentration in cere-
brospinal fluid is proportionate to the free plasma level. Phenytoin 
accumulates in brain, liver, muscle, and fat. 
 Phenytoin is metabolized to inactive metabolites that are 
excreted in the urine. Only a very small proportion of the dose is 
excreted unchanged. 
 The elimination of phenytoin is dose-dependent. At very low 
blood levels, phenytoin metabolism follows first-order kinetics. 
However, as blood levels rise within the therapeutic range, the 
maximum capacity of the liver to metabolize phenytoin is 
approached. Further increases in dosage, though relatively small, 
may produce very large changes in phenytoin concentrations 
( Figure 24–5 ). In such cases, the half-life of the drug increases 
markedly, steady state is not achieved in routine fashion (since the 
plasma level continues to rise), and patients quickly develop symp-
toms of toxicity. 
 The half-life of phenytoin varies from 12 to 36 hours, with an 
average of 24 hours for most patients in the low to mid therapeu-
tic range. Much longer half-lives are observed at higher concentra-
tions. At low blood levels, it takes 5–7 days to reach steady-state 
blood levels after every dosage change; at higher levels, it may be 
4–6 weeks before blood levels are stable. 
 Therapeutic Levels & Dosage 
 The therapeutic plasma level of phenytoin for most patients is 
between 10 and 20 mcg/mL. A loading dose can be given either 
orally or intravenously; the latter, using fosphenytoin, is the 
method of choice for convulsive status epilepticus (discussed 
later). When oral therapy is started, it is common to begin 
adults at a dosage of 300 mg/d, regardless of body weight. This 
may be acceptable in some patients, but it frequently yields 
steady-state blood levels below 10 mcg/mL, which is the mini-
mum therapeutic level for most patients. If seizures continue, 
higher doses are usually necessary to achieve plasma levels in the 
upper therapeutic range. Because of its dose-dependent kinet-
ics, some toxicity may occur with only small increments in dos-
age. The phenytoin dosage should be increased each time by 
only 25–30 mg in adults, and ample time should be allowed for 
the new steady state to be achieved before further increasing the 
dosage. A common clinical error is to increase the dosage 
directly from 300 mg/d to 400 mg/d; toxicity frequently occurs 
at a variable time thereafter. In children, a dosage of 5 mg/kg/d 
should be followed by readjustment after steady-state plasma 
levels are obtained. 
 Two types of oral phenytoin sodium are currently available in 
the USA, differing in their respective rates of dissolution; one is 
absorbed rapidly and one more slowly. Only the slow-release 
extended-action formulation can be given in a single daily dos-
age, and care must be used when changing brands (see 
Preparations Available). Although a few patients being given 
phenytoin on a long-term basis have been proved to have low 
blood levels from poor absorption or rapid metabolism, the most 
common cause of low levels is poor compliance. Fosphenytoin 
sodium is available for intravenous or intramuscular use and 
replaces intravenous phenytoin sodium, a much less soluble 
form of the drug. 
0
200
400
600
800
30
20
10
0
Phenytoin dosage (mg/d)
Serum phenytoin concentration (mg/L)
 FIGURE 24–5  Nonlinear relationship of phenytoin dosage and 
plasma concentrations. Five patients (identified by different sym-
bols) received increasing dosages of phenytoin by mouth, and the 
steady-state serum concentration was measured at each dosage. 
The curves are not linear, since, as the dosage increases, the metab-
olism is saturable. Note also the marked variation among patients in 
the serum levels achieved at any dosage. (Modified, with permission, 
from Jusko WJ: Bioavailability and disposition kinetics of phenytoin in man. 
In: Kellaway P, Peterson I [editors]:  Quantitative Analytic Studies in Epilepsy. 
Raven Press, 1977.) 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    409
 Drug Interactions & Interference with 
Laboratory Tests 
 Drug interactions involving phenytoin are primarily related to 
protein binding or to metabolism. Since phenytoin is 90% bound 
to plasma proteins, other highly bound drugs, such as phenylbuta-
zone and sulfonamides, can displace phenytoin from its binding 
site. In theory, such displacement may cause a transient increase in 
free drug. A decrease in protein binding—eg, from hypoalbumin-
emia—results in a decrease in the total plasma concentration of 
drug but not the free concentration. Intoxication may occur if 
efforts are made to maintain total drug levels in the therapeutic 
range by increasing the dose. The protein binding of phenytoin is 
decreased in the presence of renal disease. The drug has an affinity 
for thyroid-binding globulin, which confuses some tests of thyroid 
function; the most reliable screening test of thyroid function in 
patients taking phenytoin appears to be measurement of thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH). 
 Phenytoin has been shown to induce microsomal enzymes 
responsible for the metabolism of a number of drugs. Autostimu-
lation of its own metabolism, however, appears to be insignificant. 
 Toxicity 
 Dose-related adverse effects caused by phenytoin are often similar 
to those caused by other antiseizure drugs in this group, making 
differentiation difficult in patients receiving multiple drugs. 
Nystagmus occurs early, as does loss of smooth extraocular pursuit 
movements, but neither is an indication for decreasing the dose. 
Diplopia and ataxia are the most common dose-related adverse 
effects requiring dosage adjustment; sedation usually occurs only 
at considerably higher levels. Gingival hyperplasia and hirsutism 
occur to some degree in most patients; the latter can be especially 
unpleasant in women. Long-term use is associated in some 
patients with coarsening of facial features and with mild periph-
eral neuropathy, usually manifested by diminished deep tendon 
reflexes in the lower extremities. Long-term use may also result in 
abnormalities of vitamin D metabolism, leading to osteomalacia. 
Low folate levels and megaloblastic anemia have been reported, 
but the clinical importance of these observations is unknown. 
 Idiosyncratic reactions to phenytoin are relatively rare. A skin 
rash may indicate hypersensitivity of the patient to the drug. Fever 
may also occur, and in rare cases the skin lesions may be severe and 
exfoliative. Lymphadenopathy may be difficult to distinguish 
from malignant lymphoma, and although some studies suggest a 
causal relationship between phenytoin and Hodgkin’s disease, the 
data are far from conclusive. Hematologic complications are 
exceedingly rare, although agranulocytosis has been reported in 
combination with fever and rash. 
 MEPHENYTOIN, ETHOTOIN, & 
PHENACEMIDE 
 Many congeners of phenytoin have been synthesized, but only 
three have been marketed in the USA, and one of these 
(phenacemide) has been withdrawn. The other two congeners, 
mephenytoin and ethotoin, like phenytoin, appear to be most 
effective against generalized tonic-clonic seizures and partial 
seizures. No well-controlled clinical trials have documented their 
effectiveness. The incidence of severe reactions such as dermati-
tis, agranulocytosis, or hepatitis is higher for mephenytoin than 
for phenytoin. 
 Ethotoin may be recommended for patients who are hyper-
sensitive to phenytoin, but larger doses are required. The 
adverse effects and toxicity are generally less severe than those 
associated with phenytoin, but the drug appears to be less 
effective. 
 Both ethotoin and mephenytoin share with phenytoin the 
property of saturable metabolism within the therapeutic dosage 
range. Careful monitoring of the patient during dosage alterations 
with either drug is essential. Mephenytoin is metabolized to 5,5-
ethylphenylhydantoin via demethylation. This metabolite, 
 nirvanol, contributes most of the antiseizure activity of mepheny-
toin. Both mephenytoin and nirvanol are hydroxylated and 
undergo subsequent conjugation and excretion. Therapeutic levels 
for mephenytoin range from 5 to 16 mcg/mL, and levels above 
20 mcg/mL are considered toxic. 
 Therapeutic blood levels of nirvanol are between 25 and 
40 mcg/mL. A therapeutic range for ethotoin has not been 
established. 
 CARBAMAZEPINE 
 Closely related to imipramine and other antidepressants, carbam-
azepine is a tricyclic compound effective in treatment of bipolar 
depression. It was initially marketed for the treatment of trigemi-
nal neuralgia but has proved useful for epilepsy as well. 
 Chemistry 
 Although not obvious from a two-dimensional representation of 
its structure, carbamazepine has many similarities to phenytoin. 
The ureide moiety (–N–CO–NH 2 ) in the heterocyclic ring of 
most antiseizure drugs is also present in carbamazepine. Three-
dimensional structural studies indicate that its spatial conforma-
tion is similar to that of phenytoin. 
 
NH2
O
N
Carbamazepine
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 The mechanism of action of carbamazepine appears to be similar 
to that of phenytoin. Like phenytoin, carbamazepine shows activ-
ity against maximal electroshock seizures. Carbamazepine, like 
phenytoin, blocks Na + channels at therapeutic concentrations and 
410    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
inhibits high-frequency repetitive firing in neurons in culture 
( Figure 24–4 ). It also acts presynaptically to decrease synaptic 
transmission. Potentiation of a voltage-gated K + current has also 
been described. These effects probably account for the anticonvul-
sant action of carbamazepine. Binding studies show that carbam-
azepine interacts with adenosine receptors, but the functional 
significance of this observation is not known. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Although carbamazepine has long been considered a drug of choice 
for both partial seizures and generalized tonic-clonic seizures, some 
of the newer antiseizure drugs are beginning to displace it from this 
role. Carbamazepine is not sedative in its usual therapeutic range. 
The drug is also very effective in some patients with trigeminal 
neuralgia, although older patients may tolerate higher doses poorly, 
with ataxia and unsteadiness. Carbamazepine is also useful for 
controlling mania in some patients with bipolar disorder. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The rate of absorption of carbamazepine varies widely among 
patients, although almost complete absorption apparently occurs 
in all. Peak levels are usually achieved 6–8 hours after administra-
tion. Slowing absorption by giving the drug after meals helps the 
patient tolerate larger total daily doses. 
 Distribution is slow, and the volume of distribution is roughly 
1 L/kg. The drug is approximately 70% bound to plasma proteins; 
no displacement of other drugs from protein binding sites has 
been observed. 
 Carbamazepine has a very low systemic clearance of approxi-
mately 1 L/kg/d at the start of therapy. The drug has a notable 
ability to induce microsomal enzymes. Typically, the half-life of 
36 hours observed in subjects after an initial single dose decreases 
to as little as 8–12 hours in subjects receiving continuous therapy. 
Considerable dosage adjustments are thus to be expected during 
the first weeks of therapy. Carbamazepine also alters the clearance 
of other drugs (see below). 
 Carbamazepine is completely metabolized in humans to several 
derivatives. One of these, carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide, has been 
shown to have anticonvulsant activity. The contribution of this 
and other metabolites to the clinical activity of carbamazepine is 
unknown. 
 Therapeutic Levels & Dosage 
 Carbamazepine is available only in oral form. The drug is effective 
in children, in whom a dosage of 15–25 mg/kg/d is appropriate. 
In adults, daily doses of 1 g or even 2 g are tolerated. Higher dos-
age is achieved by giving multiple divided doses daily. Extended-
release preparations permit twice-daily dosing for most patients. 
In patients in whom the blood is drawn just before the morning 
dose (trough level), the therapeutic level is usually 4–8 mcg/mL. 
Although many patients complain of diplopia at drug levels above 
7 mcg/mL, others can tolerate levels above 10 mcg/mL, especially 
with monotherapy. Extended-release formulations that overcome 
some of these issues are now available. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Drug interactions involving carbamazepine are almost exclu-
sively related to the drug’s enzyme-inducing properties. As 
noted previously, the increased metabolic capacity of the hepatic 
enzymes may cause a reduction in steady-state carbamazepine 
concentrations and an increased rate of metabolism of other 
drugs, eg, primidone, phenytoin, ethosuximide, valproic acid, 
and clonazepam. Other drugs such as valproic acid may inhibit 
carbamazepine clearance and increase steady-state carbam-
azepine blood levels. Other anticonvulsants, however, such as 
phenytoin and phenobarbital, may decrease steady-state con-
centrations of carbamazepine through enzyme induction. No 
clinically significant protein-binding interactions have been 
reported. 
 Toxicity 
 The most common dose-related adverse effects of carbamazepine 
are diplopia and ataxia. The diplopia often occurs first and may 
last less than an hour during a particular time of day. Rearrangement 
of the divided daily dose can often remedy this complaint. Other 
dose-related complaints include mild gastrointestinal upsets, 
unsteadiness, and, at much higher doses, drowsiness. Hyponatremia 
and water intoxication have occasionally occurred and may be 
dose related. 
 Considerable concern exists regarding the occurrence of idio-
syncratic blood dyscrasias with carbamazepine, including fatal 
cases of aplastic anemia and agranulocytosis. Most of these have 
been in elderly patients with trigeminal neuralgia, and most have 
occurred within the first 4 months of treatment. The mild and 
persistent leukopenia seen in some patients is not necessarily an 
indication to stop treatment but requires careful monitoring. 
The most common idiosyncratic reaction is an erythematous 
skin rash; other responses such as hepatic dysfunction are 
unusual. 
 OXCARBAZEPINE 
 Oxcarbazepine is closely related to carbamazepine and is useful in 
the same seizure types, but it may have an improved toxicity pro-
file. Oxcarbazepine has a half-life of only 1–2 hours. Its activity, 
therefore, resides almost exclusively in the 10-hydroxy metabolite 
(especially the  S (+) enantiomer, eslicarbazepine), to which it is 
rapidly converted and which has a half-life similar to that of car-
bamazepine, ie, 8–12 hours. The drug is mostly excreted as the 
glucuronide of the 10-hydroxy metabolite. 
 
O
NH2
O
N
Oxcarbazepine
 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    411
 Oxcarbazepine is less potent than carbamazepine, both in ani-
mal models of epilepsy and in epileptic patients; clinical doses of 
oxcarbazepine may need to be 50% higher than those of carbam-
azepine to obtain equivalent seizure control. Some studies report 
fewer hypersensitivity reactions to oxcarbazepine, and cross-reac-
tivity with carbamazepine does not always occur. Furthermore, the 
drug appears to induce hepatic enzymes to a lesser extent than 
carbamazepine, minimizing drug interactions. Although hypona-
tremia may occur more commonly with oxcarbazepine than with 
carbamazepine, most adverse effects that occur with oxcarbazepine 
are similar in character to reactions reported with carbamazepine. 
 ESLICARBAZINE 
 Eslicarbazepine acetate (ESL) is a prodrug that has been approved 
in Europe as adjunctive therapy in adults with partial-onset sei-
zures, with or without secondary generalization. ESL is more 
rapidly converted to  S (+)-licarbazine (eslicarbazine) than is oxcar-
bazepine; clearly both prodrugs have the same metabolite as active 
product. The mechanism of action of carbamazepine, oxcarba-
zepine, and ESL appears to be the same, ie, blocking of voltage-
gated Na + channels. The  R (–) enantiomer has some activity, but 
much less than its counterpart. 
 Clinically, the drug is similar to carbamazepine and oxcarba-
zepine in its spectrum of action, but it is less well studied in other 
possible indications. The possible advantage of ESL is its once-
daily dosing regimen. The measured half-life of the  S (+) enantiomer 
is 9–11 hours. The drug is administered at a dosage of 400–
1200 mg/d; titration is typically required for the higher doses. 
 Minimal drug level effects are observed with coadministration 
of carbamazepine, levetiracetam, lamotrigine, topiramate, and 
valproate. Oral contraceptives may be less effective with concomi-
tant ESL administration. 
 PHENOBARBITAL 
 Aside from the bromides, phenobarbital is the oldest of the currently 
available antiseizure drugs. Although it has long been considered one 
of the safest of the antiseizure agents, the use of other medications 
with lesser sedative effects has been urged. Many consider the barbi-
turates the drugs of choice for seizures only in infants. 
 Chemistry 
 The four derivatives of barbituric acid clinically useful as antisei-
zure drugs are phenobarbital, mephobarbital, metharbital, and 
primidone. The first three are so similar that they are considered 
together. Metharbital is methylated barbital, and mephobarbital is 
methylated phenobarbital; both are demethylated in vivo. The 
pKas of these three weak acid compounds range from 7.3 to 7.9. 
Slight changes in the normal acid-base balance, therefore, can 
cause significant fluctuation in the ratio of the ionized to the non-
ionized species. This is particularly important for phenobarbital, 
the most commonly used barbiturate, whose pKa is similar to the 
plasma pH of 7.4. 
 The three-dimensional conformations of the phenobarbital 
and  N -methylphenobarbital molecules are similar to that of phe-
nytoin. Both compounds possess a phenyl ring and are active 
against partial seizures. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 The exact mechanism of action of phenobarbital is unknown, but 
enhancement of inhibitory processes and diminution of excitatory 
transmission probably contribute significantly. Recent data indicate 
that phenobarbital may selectively suppress abnormal neurons, 
inhibiting the spread and suppressing firing from the foci. Like 
phenytoin, phenobarbital suppresses high-frequency repetitive fir-
ing in neurons in culture through an action on Na + conductance, 
but only at high concentrations. Also at high concentrations, barbi-
turates block some Ca 2+ currents (L-type and N-type). Phenobarbital 
binds to an allosteric regulatory site on the GABA A receptor, and it 
enhances the GABA receptor-mediated current by prolonging the 
openings of the Cl – channels (see  Chapter 22 ). Phenobarbital can 
also decrease excitatory responses. An effect on glutamate release is 
probably more significant than blockade of AMPA responses (see 
 Chapter 21 ). Both the enhancement of GABA-mediated inhibition 
and the reduction of glutamate-mediated excitation are seen with 
therapeutically relevant concentrations of phenobarbital. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Phenobarbital is useful in the treatment of partial seizures and 
generalized tonic-clonic seizures, although the drug is often tried 
for virtually every seizure type, especially when attacks are difficult 
to control. There is little evidence for its effectiveness in general-
ized seizures such as absence, atonic attacks, and infantile spasms; 
it may worsen certain patients with these seizure types. 
 Some physicians prefer either metharbital (no longer readily 
available) or mephobarbital (especially the latter) to phenobarbital 
because of supposed decreased adverse effects. Only anecdotal 
data are available to support such comparisons. 
 Pharmacokinetics, Therapeutic Levels, & 
Dosage 
 For pharmacokinetics, drug interactions, and toxicity of pheno-
barbital, see  Chapter 22 . 
 The therapeutic levels of phenobarbital in most patients range 
from 10 mcg/mL to 40 mcg/mL. Documentation of effectiveness 
is best in febrile seizures, and levels below 15 mcg/mL appear inef-
fective for prevention of febrile seizure recurrence. The upper end 
of the therapeutic range is more difficult to define because many 
patients appear to tolerate chronic levels above 40 mcg/mL. 
 PRIMIDONE 
 Primidone, or 2-desoxyphenobarbital ( Figure 24–6 ), was first 
marketed in the early 1950s. It was later reported that primidone 
was metabolized to phenobarbital and phenylethylmalonamide 
(PEMA). All three compounds are active anticonvulsants. 
412    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Mechanism of Action 
 Although primidone is converted to phenobarbital, the mechanism 
of action of primidone itself may be more like that of phenytoin. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Primidone, like its metabolites, is effective against partial seizures 
and generalized tonic-clonic seizures and may be more effective 
than phenobarbital. It was previously considered to be the drug of 
choice for complex partial seizures, but later studies of partial sei-
zures in adults strongly suggest that carbamazepine and phenytoin 
are superior to primidone. Attempts to determine the relative 
potencies of the parent drug and its two metabolites have been 
conducted in newborn infants, in whom drug-metabolizing 
enzyme systems are very immature and in whom primidone is 
only slowly metabolized. Primidone has been shown to be effec-
tive in controlling seizures in this group and in older patients 
beginning treatment with primidone; older patients show seizure 
control before phenobarbital concentrations reach the therapeutic 
range. Finally, studies of maximal electroshock seizures in animals 
suggest that primidone has an anticonvulsant action independent 
of its conversion to phenobarbital and PEMA (the latter is 
relatively weak). 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Primidone is completely absorbed, usually reaching peak concen-
trations about 3 hours after oral administration, although consid-
erable variation has been reported. Primidone is generally 
distributed in total body water, with a volume of distribution of 
0.6 L/kg. It is not highly bound to plasma proteins; approximately 
70% circulates as unbound drug. 
 Primidone is metabolized by oxidation to phenobarbital, 
which accumulates very slowly, and by scission of the heterocyclic 
ring to form PEMA ( Figure 24–6 ). Both primidone and pheno-
barbital also undergo subsequent conjugation and excretion. 
 Primidone has a larger clearance than most other antiseizure 
drugs (2 L/kg/d), corresponding to a half-life of 6–8 hours. 
PEMA clearance is approximately half that of primidone, but 
phenobarbital has a very low clearance (see  Table 3–1 ). The 
appearance of phenobarbital corresponds to the disappearance 
of primidone. Phenobarbital therefore accumulates very slowly 
but eventually reaches therapeutic concentrations in most 
patients when therapeutic doses of primidone are administered. 
During chronic therapy, phenobarbital levels derived from 
primidone are usually two to three times higher than primidone 
levels. 
 Therapeutic Levels & Dosage 
 Primidone is most efficacious when plasma levels are in the range 
of 8–12 mcg/mL. Concomitant levels of its metabolite, pheno-
barbital, at steady state usually vary from 15 to 30 mcg/mL. 
Dosages of 10–20 mg/kg/d are necessary to obtain these levels. It 
is very important, however, to start primidone at low doses and 
gradually increase over days to a few weeks to avoid prominent 
sedation and gastrointestinal complaints. When adjusting doses 
of the drug, it is important to remember that the parent drug 
reaches steady state rapidly (30–40 hours), but the active metabo-
lites phenobarbital (20 days) and PEMA (3–4 days) reach steady 
state much more slowly. 
 Toxicity 
 The dose-related adverse effects of primidone are similar to those 
of its metabolite, phenobarbital, except that drowsiness occurs 
early in treatment and may be prominent if the initial dose is too 
large. Gradual increments are indicated when starting the drug in 
either children or adults. 
 FELBAMATE 
 Felbamate has been approved and marketed in the USA and in 
some European countries. Although it is effective in some patients 
with partial seizures, the drug causes aplastic anemia and severe 
hepatitis at unexpectedly high rates and has been relegated to the 
status of a third-line drug for refractory cases. 
 Felbamate appears to have multiple mechanisms of action. It 
produces a use-dependent block of the NMDA receptor, with 
selectivity for the NR1-2B subtype. It also produces a barbitu-
rate-like potentiation of GABA A receptor responses. Felbamate 
has a half-life of 20 hours (somewhat shorter when administered 
with either phenytoin or carbamazepine) and is metabolized by 
hydroxylation and conjugation; a significant percentage of the 
drug is excreted unchanged in the urine. When added to treat-
ment with other antiseizure drugs, felbamate increases plasma 
phenytoin and valproic acid levels but decreases levels of 
carbamazepine. 
NH2
NH2
Phenylethylmalonamide (PEMA)
O
O
NH
Primidone
H5C2
O
O
N
H
O
H5C2
C
C
C
NH
Phenobarbital
H5C2
O
O
N
H
 FIGURE 24–6  Primidone and its active metabolites. 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    413
 
CH2OCNH2
CH
Felbamate
O
CH2OCNH2
O
 
 In spite of the seriousness of the adverse effects, thousands of 
patients worldwide utilize this medication. Usual dosages are 
2000–4000 mg/d in adults, and effective plasma levels range from 
30 mcg/mL to 100 mcg/mL. In addition to its usefulness in partial 
seizures, felbamate has proved effective against the seizures that 
occur in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. 
 GABAPENTIN & PREGABALIN 
 Gabapentin is an amino acid, an analog of GABA, that is effective 
against partial seizures. Originally planned as a spasmolytic, it was 
found to be more effective as an antiseizure drug. Pregabalin is 
another GABA analog, closely related to gabapentin. This drug 
has been approved for both antiseizure activity and for its analgesic 
properties. 
 Gabapentin
CH2
H2
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
CH2
CH2
NH2
COOH
C
Pregabalin
CH
H
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH2
COOH
C
CH3
CH3
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 In spite of their close structural resemblance to GABA, gabapentin 
and pregabalin do not act directly on GABA receptors. They may, 
however, modify the synaptic or nonsynaptic release of GABA. An 
increase in brain GABA concentration is observed in patients 
receiving gabapentin. Gabapentin is transported into the brain by 
the  L -amino acid transporter. Gabapentin and pregabalin bind 
avidly to the α 2 δ subunit of voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels. This 
appears to underlie the main mechanism of action, which is 
decreasing Ca 2+ entry, with a predominant effect on presynaptic 
N-type channels. A decrease in the synaptic release of glutamate 
provides the antiepileptic effect. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Gabapentin is effective as an adjunct against partial seizures and 
generalized tonic-clonic seizures at dosages that range up to 
2400 mg/d in controlled clinical trials. Open follow-up studies 
permitted dosages up to 4800 mg/d, but data are inconclusive on 
the effectiveness or tolerability of such doses. Monotherapy studies 
also document some efficacy. Some clinicians have found that very 
high dosages are needed to achieve improvement in seizure control. 
Effectiveness in other seizure types has not been well demonstrated. 
Gabapentin has also been promoted for the treatment of neuro-
pathic pain and is now indicated for postherpetic neuralgia in 
adults at doses of 1800 mg and above. The most common adverse 
effects are somnolence, dizziness, ataxia, headache, and tremor. 
 Pregabalin is approved for the adjunctive treatment of partial 
seizures, with or without secondary generalization; controlled 
clinical trials have documented its effectiveness. It is available only 
in oral form, and the dosage ranges from 150 to 600 mg/d, usually 
in two or three divided doses. Pregabalin is also approved for use 
in neuropathic pain, including painful diabetic peripheral neu-
ropathy and postherpetic neuralgia. It is the first drug in the USA 
approved for fibromyalgia. In Europe it is approved for general-
ized anxiety disorder. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Gabapentin is not metabolized and does not induce hepatic 
enzymes. Absorption is nonlinear and dose-dependent at very high 
doses, but the elimination kinetics are linear. The drug is not 
bound to plasma proteins. Drug-drug interactions are negligible. 
Elimination is via renal mechanisms; the drug is excreted unchanged. 
The half-life is relatively short, ranging from 5 to 8 hours; the drug 
is typically administered two or three times per day. 
 Pregabalin, like gabapentin, is not metabolized and is almost 
entirely excreted unchanged in the urine. It is not bound to 
plasma proteins and has virtually no drug-drug interactions, again 
resembling the characteristics of gabapentin. Likewise, other drugs 
do not affect the pharmacokinetics of pregabalin. The half-life of 
pregabalin ranges from about 4.5 hours to 7.0 hours, thus requir-
ing more than once-daily dosing in most patients. 
 LACOSAMIDE 
 Lacosamide is an amino acid-related compound that has been 
studied in both pain syndromes and partial seizures. The drug was 
approved in Europe and the USA in 2008 for the treatment of 
partial seizures. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Activity resides in the  R (–) enantiomer. Two effects relevant to the 
mechanism of action of lacosamide as an antiseizure drug have been 
described. Lacosamide enhances  slow inactivation of voltage-gated 
Na + channels (in contrast to the prolongation of fast inactivation 
shown by other AEDs). It also binds to the collapsin-response media-
tor protein, CRMP-2, thereby blocking the effect of neurotrophic 
factors such as BDNF and NT3 on axonal and dendritic growth. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Lacosamide is approved as adjunctive therapy in the treatment of 
partial-onset seizures with or without secondary generalization in 
patients with epilepsy who are age 16–17 years and older. Clinical 
414    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
trials include three multicenter, randomized placebo-controlled 
studies with more than 1300 patients. Treatment was effective at 
both 200 and 400 mg/d. Adverse effects were dizziness, headache, 
nausea, and diplopia. In the open-label follow-up study, at dosages 
ranging from 100 to 800 mg/d, many patients continued lacos-
amide treatment for 24 to 30 months. The drug is typically 
administered twice daily, beginning with 50 mg doses and increas-
ing by 100 mg increments weekly. An intravenous formulation 
provides short-term replacement for the oral drug. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Oral lacosamide is rapidly and completely absorbed in adults, with 
no food effect. Bioavailability is nearly 100%. The plasma concen-
trations are proportional to dosage up to 800 mg orally. Peak 
concentrations occur from 1 to 4 hours after oral dosing, with an 
elimination half-life of 13 hours. There are no active metabolites 
and protein binding is minimal. Lacosamide does not induce or 
inhibit cytochrome P450 isoenzymes, so drug interactions are 
negligible. 
 LAMOTRIGINE 
 Lamotrigine was developed when some investigators thought that 
the antifolate effects of certain antiseizure drugs (eg, phenytoin) 
might contribute to their effectiveness. Several phenyltriazines 
were developed, and though their antifolate properties were weak, 
some were active in seizure screening tests. 
 
NH2
Lamotrigine
Cl
Cl
H2N
N
N
N
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Lamotrigine, like phenytoin, suppresses sustained rapid firing of 
neurons and produces a voltage- and use-dependent blockade of 
Na + channels. This action probably explains lamotrigine’s efficacy 
in focal epilepsy. It appears likely that lamotrigine also inhibits 
voltage-gated Ca 2+ channels, particularly the N- and P/Q-type 
channels, which would account for its efficacy in primary general-
ized seizures in childhood, including absence attacks. Lamotrigine 
also decreases the synaptic release of glutamate. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Although most controlled studies have evaluated lamotrigine as 
add-on therapy, it is generally agreed that the drug is effective as 
monotherapy for partial seizures, and lamotrigine is now widely 
prescribed for this indication. The drug is also active against absence 
and myoclonic seizures in children and is approved for seizure con-
trol in the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Lamotrigine is also effective 
for bipolar disorder. Adverse effects include dizziness, headache, 
diplopia, nausea, somnolence, and skin rash. The rash is considered 
a typical hypersensitivity reaction. Although the risk of rash may be 
diminished by introducing the drug slowly, pediatric patients are at 
greatest risk, some studies suggest that a potentially life-threatening 
dermatitis will develop in 1–2% of pediatric patients. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Lamotrigine is almost completely absorbed and has a volume of 
distribution in the range of 1–1.4 L/kg. Protein binding is only 
about 55%. The drug has linear kinetics and is metabolized pri-
marily by glucuronidation to the 2- N -glucuronide, which is 
excreted in the urine. Lamotrigine has a half-life of approximately 
24 hours in normal volunteers; this decreases to 13–15 hours in 
patients taking enzyme-inducing drugs. Lamotrigine is effective 
against partial seizures in adults at dosages typically between 100 
and 300 mg/d and with a therapeutic blood level near 3 mcg/mL. 
Valproate causes a twofold increase in the drug’s half-life; in 
patients receiving valproate, the initial dosage of lamotrigine must 
be reduced to 25 mg every other day. 
 LEVETIRACETAM 
 Levetiracetam is a piracetam analog that is ineffective against sei-
zures induced by maximum electroshock or pentylenetetrazol but 
has prominent activity in the kindling model. This is the first 
major drug with this unusual preclinical profile that is effective 
against partial seizures. 
 
Levetiracetam
O
C
N
CH2
O
C
CH
NH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Levetiracetam binds selectively to the synaptic vesicular protein 
SV 2 A. The function of this protein is not understood but it is 
likely that levetiracetam modifies the synaptic release of glutamate 
and GABA through an action on vesicular function. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Levetiracetam is marketed for the adjunctive treatment of partial 
seizures in adults and children for primary generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures and for the myoclonic seizures of juvenile myoclonic epi-
lepsy. Adult dosing can begin with 500 or 1000 mg/d. The dosage 
can be increased every 2–4 weeks by 1000 mg to a maximum dosage 
of 3000 mg/d. The drug is dosed twice daily. Adverse effects include 
somnolence, asthenia, ataxia, and dizziness. Less common but more 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    415
serious are mood and behavioral changes; psychotic reactions are 
rare. Drug interactions are minimal; levetiracetam is not metabo-
lized by cytochrome P450. Oral formulations include extended-
release tablets; an intravenous preparation is also available. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Oral absorption of levetiracetam is nearly complete; it is rapid and 
unaffected by food, with peak plasma concentrations in 1.3 hours. 
Kinetics are linear. Protein binding is less than 10%. The plasma 
half-life is 6–8 hours, but may be longer in the elderly. Two thirds 
of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine; the drug has no 
known active metabolites. 
RETIGABINE (EZOGABINE)
Retigabine (ezogabine in the USA) was approved as an anti-seizure 
drug in Europe and the USA in 2010. It is a potassium-channel 
facilitator and unique in its mechanism of action. Absorption is not 
affected by food and kinetics are linear; drug interactions are mini-
mal. Clinical trials demonstrated efficacy in partial seizures, and 
approval is for the adjunctive treatment of partial-onset seizures in 
adults. Doses range from 600 to 1200 mg/day, with 900 mg/day 
expected to be the median. The current dosage form requires three-
times-per-day administration, and the dose must be titrated in most 
patients. Most adverse effects are dose-related and include dizziness, 
somnolence, blurred vision, confusion, and dysarthria. Bladder 
dysfunction, mostly mild and related to the drug’s mechanism of 
action, was observed in 8-9% of patients in the clinical trials.  
 RUFINAMIDE 
 Rufinamide is a triazole derivative with little similarity to other 
antiseizure drugs. 
 
N
NH2
N
N
F
Rufinamide
O
F
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Rufinamide is protective in the maximal electroshock and penty-
lenetetrazol tests in rats and mice. It decreases sustained high-
frequency firing of neurons in vitro and is thought to prolong the 
inactive state of the Na + channel. Significant interactions with GABA 
systems or metabotropic glutamate receptors have not been seen. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Rufinamide is approved in the USA for adjunctive treatment of sei-
zures associated with the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome in patients age 
4 years and older. The drug is effective against all seizure types in this 
syndrome and specifically against tonic-atonic seizures. Recent data 
also suggest it may be effective against partial seizures. Treatment in 
children is typically started at 10 mg/kg/d in two equally divided 
doses and gradually increased to 45 mg/kg/d or 3200 mg/d, which-
ever is lower. Adults can begin with 400–800 mg/d in two equally 
divided doses up to a maximum of 3200 mg/d as tolerated. The drug 
should be given with food. The most common adverse events are 
somnolence, vomiting, pyrexia, and diarrhea. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Rufinamide is well absorbed, but plasma concentrations peak 
between 4 and 6 hours. The half-life is 6–10 hours, and minimal 
plasma protein binding is observed. Although cytochrome P450 
enzymes are not involved, the drug is extensively metabolized to 
inactive products. Most of the drug is excreted in the urine; an 
acid metabolite accounts for about two thirds of the dose. In one 
study, rufinamide did not appear to significantly affect the plasma 
concentrations of other drugs used for the Lennox-Gastaut syn-
drome such as topiramate, lamotrigine, or valproic acid, but con-
flicting data suggest more robust interactions with other AEDs, 
including effects on rufinamide levels, especially in children. 
 STIRIPENTOL 
 Stiripentol, though not a new molecule, was approved in Europe 
in 2007 for a very specific type of epilepsy. The drug is used with 
clobazam and valproate in the adjunctive therapy of refractory 
generalized tonic-clonic seizures in patients with severe myoclo-
nic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI, Dravet’s syndrome) whose sei-
zures are not adequately controlled with clobazam and valproate. 
The drug is legally imported into the USA on a compassionate 
use basis. The mechanism of action of stiripentol is not well 
understood but it has been shown to enhance GABAergic trans-
mission in the brain, partly through a barbiturate-like effect, ie, 
prolonged opening of the Cl – channels in GABA A receptors. It also 
increases GABA levels in the brain. It can increase the effect of 
other AEDs by slowing their inactivation by cytochrome P450. 
 Stiripentol is a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and 
CYP2C19. Adverse effects of stiripentol itself are few, but the drug 
can dramatically increase the levels of valproate, clobazam, and the 
active metabolite of the latter, norclobazam. These drugs must be 
used cautiously together to avoid adverse effects. Dosing is com-
plex, typically beginning with a reduction of the concomitant 
medication; stiripentol is then started at 10 mg/kg/d and increased 
gradually to tolerability or to much higher doses. The kinetics of 
stiripentol are nonlinear. 
 TIAGABINE 
 Tiagabine is a derivative of nipecotic acid and was “rationally 
designed” as an inhibitor of GABA uptake (as opposed to discov-
ery through random screening). 
416    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 
COOH
S
S
CH3
CH3
Tiagabine
CH2
N
CH2
CH
C
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Tiagabine is an inhibitor of GABA uptake in both neurons and 
glia. It preferentially inhibits the transporter isoform 1 (GAT-1) 
rather than GAT-2 or GAT-3 and increases extracellular GABA 
levels in the forebrain and hippocampus where GAT-1 is prefer-
entially expressed. It prolongs the inhibitory action of synapti-
cally released GABA, but its most significant effect may be 
potentiation of tonic inhibition. In rodents, it is potent against 
kindled seizures but weak against the maximal electroshock 
model, consistent with its predominant action in the forebrain 
and hippocampus. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Tiagabine is indicated for the adjunctive treatment of partial sei-
zures and is effective in doses ranging from 16 to 56 mg/d. 
Divided doses as often as four times daily are sometimes required. 
Minor adverse events are dose related and include nervousness, 
dizziness, tremor, difficulty in concentrating, and depression. 
Excessive confusion, somnolence, or ataxia may require discon-
tinuation. Psychosis occurs rarely. The drug can  cause seizures in 
some patients, notably those taking the drug for other indications. 
Rash is an uncommon idiosyncratic adverse effect. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Tiagabine is 90–100% bioavailable, has linear kinetics, and is 
highly protein bound. The half-life is 5–8 hours and decreases in 
the presence of enzyme-inducing drugs. Food decreases the peak 
plasma concentration but not the area under the concentration 
curve (see  Chapter 3 ). Hepatic impairment causes a slight decrease 
in clearance and may necessitate a lower dose. The drug is oxidized 
in the liver by CYP3A. Elimination is primarily in the feces 
(60–65%) and urine (25%). 
 TOPIRAMATE 
 Topiramate is a substituted monosaccharide that is structurally 
different from all other antiseizure drugs. 
 
CH3
CH3
Topiramate
O
O
O
CH3
CH3
O
O
CH2
OSO2NH2
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Topiramate blocks repetitive firing of cultured spinal cord neu-
rons, as do phenytoin and carbamazepine. Its mechanism of 
action, therefore, is likely to involve blocking of voltage-gated Na + 
channels. It also acts on high-voltage activated (L-type) Ca 2+ chan-
nels. Topiramate potentiates the inhibitory effect of GABA, acting 
at a site different from the benzodiazepine or barbiturate sites. 
Topiramate also depresses the excitatory action of kainate on glu-
tamate receptors. The multiple effects of topiramate may arise 
through a primary action on kinases altering the phosphorylation 
of voltage-gated and ligand-gated ion channels. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Clinical trials of topiramate as monotherapy demonstrated effi-
cacy against partial and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The drug 
is also approved for the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, and may be 
effective in infantile spasms and even absence seizures. Topiramate 
is also approved for the treatment of migraine headaches. The use 
of the drug in psychiatric disorders is controversial; convincing 
controlled data are lacking. Dosages typically range from 200 to 
600 mg/d, with a few patients tolerating dosages higher than 
1000 mg/d. Most clinicians begin at a low dose (50 mg/d) and 
increase slowly to prevent adverse effects. Several studies have used 
topiramate in monotherapy with encouraging results. Although 
no idiosyncratic reactions have been noted, dose-related adverse 
effects occur most frequently in the first 4 weeks and include 
somnolence, fatigue, dizziness, cognitive slowing, paresthesias, 
nervousness, and confusion. Acute myopia and glaucoma may 
require prompt drug withdrawal. Urolithiasis has also been 
reported. The drug is teratogenic in animal models, and hypospa-
dias has been reported in male infants exposed in utero to topira-
mate; no causal relationship, however, could be established. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Topiramate is rapidly absorbed (about 2 hours) and is 80% bio-
available. There is no food effect on absorption, minimal (15%) 
plasma protein binding, and only moderate (20–50%) metabo-
lism; no active metabolites are formed. The drug is primarily 
excreted unchanged in the urine. The half-life is 20–30 hours. 
Although increased levels are seen with renal failure and hepatic 
impairment, there is no age or gender effect, no autoinduction, no 
inhibition of metabolism, and kinetics are linear. Drug interac-
tions do occur and can be complex, but the major effect is on 
topiramate levels rather than on the levels of other antiseizure 
drugs. Birth control pills may be less effective in the presence of 
topiramate, and higher estrogen doses may be required. 
 VIGABATRIN 
 Current investigations that seek drugs to enhance the effects of 
GABA include efforts to find GABA agonists and prodrugs, 
GABA transaminase inhibitors, and GABA uptake inhibitors. 
Vigabatrin is one such drug. 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    417
 
CH
COOH
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH2
Vigabatrin
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Vigabatrin is an irreversible inhibitor of GABA aminotransferase 
(GABA-T), the enzyme responsible for the degradation of GABA. 
It may also inhibit the vesicular GABA transporter. Vigabatrin 
produces a sustained increase in the extracellular concentration of 
GABA in the brain. This leads to some desensitization of synaptic 
GABA A receptors but prolonged activation of nonsynaptic GABA A 
receptors that provide tonic inhibition. A decrease in brain glu-
tamine synthetase activity is probably secondary to the increased 
GABA concentrations. It is effective in a wide range of seizure 
models. Vigabatrin is marketed as a racemate; the  S (+) enantiomer 
is active and the  R (–) enantiomer appears to be inactive. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Vigabatrin is useful in the treatment of partial seizures and infantile 
spasms. The half-life is approximately 6–8 hours, but considerable 
evidence suggests that the pharmacodynamic activity of the drug is 
more prolonged and not well correlated with the plasma half-life. 
In infants, the dosage is 50–150 mg/d. In adults, vigabatrin should 
be started at an oral dosage of 500 mg twice daily; a total of 2–3 g 
(rarely more) daily may be required for full effectiveness. 
 Typical toxicities include drowsiness, dizziness, and weight 
gain. Less common but more troublesome adverse reactions are 
agitation, confusion, and psychosis; preexisting mental illness is a 
relative contraindication. The drug was delayed in its worldwide 
introduction by the appearance in rats and dogs of a reversible 
intramyelinic edema. This phenomenon has now been detected in 
infants taking the drug; the clinical significance is unknown. In 
addition, long-term therapy with vigabatrin has been associated 
with development of peripheral visual field defects in 30–50% of 
patients. The lesions are located in the retina, increase with drug 
exposure, and are usually not reversible. Newer techniques such as 
optical coherence tomography may better define the defect, which 
has proved difficult to quantify. Vigabatrin is usually reserved for 
use in patients with infantile spasms or with complex partial sei-
zures refractory to other treatments. 
 ZONISAMIDE 
 Zonisamide is a sulfonamide derivative. Its primary site of action 
appears to be the Na + channel; it also acts on T-type voltage-gated 
Ca 2+ channels. The drug is effective against partial and generalized 
tonic-clonic seizures and may also be useful against infantile 
spasms and certain myoclonias. It has good bioavailability, linear 
kinetics, low protein-binding, renal excretion, and a half-life of 
1–3 days. Dosages range from 100 to 600 mg/d in adults and 
from 4 to 12 mg/d in children. Adverse effects include drowsiness, 
cognitive impairment, and potentially serious skin rashes. 
Zonisamide does not interact with other antiseizure drugs. 
 DRUGS USED IN GENERALIZED 
SEIZURES 
 ETHOSUXIMIDE 
 Ethosuximide was introduced in 1960 as the third of three marketed 
succinimides in the USA. Ethosuximide has very little activity 
against maximal electroshock but considerable efficacy against pen-
tylenetetrazol seizures; it was introduced as a “pure petit mal” drug. 
 Chemistry 
 Ethosuximide is the last antiseizure drug to be marketed whose 
origin is in the cyclic ureide structure. The three antiseizure 
succinimides marketed in the USA are ethosuximide, phensuximide, 
and methsuximide. Methsuximide and phensuximide have phenyl 
substituents, whereas ethosuximide is 2-ethyl-2-methylsuccinimide. 
 
N
H
C2
H5C2
C
O
C
H2
O
H3C
Ethosuximide
C1
4C
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Ethosuximide has an important effect on Ca 2+ currents, reducing 
the low-threshold (T-type) current. This effect is seen at therapeuti-
cally relevant concentrations in thalamic neurons. The T-type Ca 2+ 
currents are thought to provide a pacemaker current in thalamic 
neurons responsible for generating the rhythmic cortical discharge 
of an absence attack. Inhibition of this current could therefore 
account for the specific therapeutic action of ethosuximide. A 
recently described effect on inwardly rectifying K + channels may 
also be significant. 
 Clinical Uses 
 As predicted from its activity in laboratory models, ethosuximide 
is particularly effective against absence seizures, but has a very 
narrow spectrum of clinical activity. Documentation of its 
effectiveness in human absence seizures was achieved with long-
term electroencephalographic recording techniques. Data continue 
to show that ethosuximide and valproate are the drugs of choice 
for absence seizures and are more effective than lamotrigine. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Absorption is complete following administration of the oral dosage 
forms. Peak levels are observed 3–7 hours after oral administration 
of the capsules. Ethosuximide is not protein-bound. The drug is 
completely metabolized, principally by hydroxylation, to inactive 
metabolites. Ethosuximide has a very low total body clearance 
(0.25 L/kg/d). This corresponds to a half-life of approximately 
40 hours, although values from 18 to 72 hours have been reported. 
418    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Therapeutic Levels & Dosage 
 Therapeutic levels of 60–100 mcg/mL can be achieved in adults 
with dosages of 750–1500 mg/d, although lower or higher dos-
ages and blood levels (up to 125 mcg/mL) may be necessary and 
tolerated in some patients. Ethosuximide has a linear relation-
ship between dose and steady-state plasma levels. The drug 
might be administered as a single daily dose were it not for its 
adverse gastrointestinal effects; twice-a-day dosage is common. 
 Drug Interactions & Toxicity 
 Administration of ethosuximide with valproic acid results in a 
decrease in ethosuximide clearance and higher steady-state con-
centrations owing to inhibition of metabolism. No other impor-
tant drug interactions have been reported for the succinimides. 
The most common dose-related adverse effect of ethosuximide is 
gastric distress, including pain, nausea, and vomiting. When an 
adverse effect does occur, temporary dosage reductions may allow 
adaptation. Other dose-related adverse effects are transient leth-
argy or fatigue and, much less commonly, headache, dizziness, 
hiccup, and euphoria. Behavioral changes are usually in the direc-
tion of improvement. Non–dose-related or idiosyncratic adverse 
effects of ethosuximide are extremely uncommon. 
 PHENSUXIMIDE & METHSUXIMIDE 
 Phensuximide (no longer readily available) and methsuximide are 
phenylsuccinimides that were developed and marketed before 
ethosuximide. They are used primarily as anti-absence drugs. 
Methsuximide is generally considered more toxic, and phensuxim-
ide less effective, than ethosuximide. Unlike ethosuximide, these 
two compounds have some activity against maximal electroshock 
seizures, and methsuximide has been used for partial seizures by 
some investigators. 
 VALPROIC ACID & SODIUM VALPROATE 
 Sodium valproate, also used as the free acid, valproic acid, was found 
to have antiseizure properties when used as a solvent in the search for 
other drugs effective against seizures. It was marketed in France in 
1969 but was not licensed in the USA until 1978. Valproic acid is 
fully ionized at body pH, and for that reason the active form of the 
drug may be assumed to be the valproate ion regardless of whether 
valproic acid or a salt of the acid is administered. 
 Chemistry 
 Valproic acid is one of a series of fatty carboxylic acids that have 
antiseizure activity; this activity appears to be greatest for carbon 
chain lengths of five to eight atoms. The amides and esters of 
valproic acid are also active antiseizure agents. 
 
CH
CH2
Valproic acid
COOH
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 The time course of valproate’s anticonvulsant activity appears to 
be poorly correlated with blood or tissue levels of the parent drug, 
an observation giving rise to considerable speculation regarding 
both the active species and the mechanism of action of valproic 
acid. Valproate is active against both pentylenetetrazol and maxi-
mal electroshock seizures. Like phenytoin and carbamazepine, 
valproate blocks sustained high-frequency repetitive firing of neu-
rons in culture at therapeutically relevant concentrations. Its 
action against partial seizures may be a consequence of this effect 
on Na + currents. Blockade of NMDA receptor-mediated excita-
tion may also be important. Much attention has been paid to the 
effects of valproate on GABA. Several studies have shown 
increased levels of GABA in the brain after administration of val-
proate, although the mechanism for this increase remains unclear. 
An effect of valproate to facilitate glutamic acid decarboxylase 
(GAD), the enzyme responsible for GABA synthesis, has been 
described. An inhibitory effect on the GABA transporter GAT-1 
may contribute. At very high concentrations, valproate inhibits 
GABA transaminase in the brain, thus blocking degradation of 
GABA. However, at the relatively low doses of valproate needed to 
abolish pentylenetetrazol seizures, brain GABA levels may remain 
unchanged. Valproate produces a reduction in the aspartate con-
tent of rodent brain, but the relevance of this effect to its anticon-
vulsant action is not known. 
 Valproic acid is a potent inhibitor of histone deacetylase and 
through this mechanism changes the transcription of many genes. 
A similar effect, but to a lesser degree, is shown by some other 
antiseizure drugs (topiramate, carbamazepine, and a metabolite of 
levetiracetam). 
 Clinical Uses 
 Valproate is very effective against absence seizures and is often 
preferred to ethosuximide when the patient has concomitant 
generalized tonic-clonic attacks. Valproate is unique in its ability 
to control certain types of myoclonic seizures; in some cases the 
effect is very dramatic. The drug is effective in tonic-clonic 
seizures, especially those that are primarily generalized. A few 
patients with atonic attacks may also respond, and some evidence 
suggests that the drug is effective in partial seizures. Its use in 
epilepsy is at least as broad as that of any other drug. Intravenous 
formulations are occasionally used to treat status epilepticus. 
 Other uses of valproate include management of bipolar 
disorder and migraine prophylaxis. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Valproate is well absorbed after an oral dose, with bioavailability 
greater than 80%. Peak blood levels are observed within 2 hours. 
Food may delay absorption, and decreased toxicity may result if 
the drug is given after meals. 
 Valproic acid is 90% bound to plasma proteins, although the 
fraction bound is somewhat reduced at blood levels greater than 150 
mcg/mL. Since valproate is both highly ionized and highly protein-
bound, its distribution is essentially confined to extracellular water, 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    419
with a volume of distribution of approximately 0.15 L/kg. At higher 
doses, there is an increased free fraction of valproate, resulting in 
lower total drug levels than expected. It may be clinically useful, 
therefore, to measure both total and free drug levels. Clearance for 
valproate is low and dose dependent; its half-life varies from 9 to 
18 hours. Approximately 20% of the drug is excreted as a direct 
conjugate of valproate. 
 The sodium salt of valproate is marketed in Europe as a tablet 
and is quite hygroscopic. In Central and South America, the mag-
nesium salt is available, which is considerably less hygroscopic. 
The free acid of valproate was first marketed in the USA in a cap-
sule containing corn oil; the sodium salt is also available in syrup, 
primarily for pediatric use. An enteric-coated tablet of divalproex 
sodium is also marketed in the USA. This improved product, a 1:1 
coordination compound of valproic acid and sodium valproate, is 
as bioavailable as the capsule but is absorbed much more slowly 
and is preferred by many patients. Peak concentrations following 
administration of the enteric-coated tablets are seen in 3–4 hours. 
Various extended-release preparations are available; not all are 
bioequivalent and may require dosage adjustment. 
 Therapeutic Levels & Dosage 
 Dosages of 25–30 mg/kg/d may be adequate in some patients, but 
others may require 60 mg/kg/d or even more. Therapeutic levels 
of valproate range from 50 to 100 mcg/mL. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Valproate displaces phenytoin from plasma proteins. In addition 
to binding interactions, valproate inhibits the metabolism of 
several drugs, including phenobarbital, phenytoin, and 
carbamazepine, leading to higher steady-state concentrations of 
these agents. The inhibition of phenobarbital metabolism, for 
example, may cause levels of the barbiturate to rise steeply, causing 
stupor or coma. Valproate can dramatically decrease the clearance 
of lamotrigine. 
 Toxicity 
 The most common dose-related adverse effects of valproate are 
nausea, vomiting, and other gastrointestinal complaints such as 
abdominal pain and heartburn. The drug should be started gradu-
ally to avoid these symptoms. Sedation is uncommon with val-
proate alone but may be striking when valproate is added to 
phenobarbital. A fine tremor is frequently seen at higher levels. 
Other reversible adverse effects, seen in a small number of patients, 
include weight gain, increased appetite, and hair loss. 
 The idiosyncratic toxicity of valproate is largely limited to 
hepatotoxicity, but this may be severe; there seems little doubt that 
the hepatotoxicity of valproate has been responsible for more than 
50 fatalities in the USA alone. The risk is greatest for patients 
under 2 years of age and for those taking multiple medications. 
Initial aspartate aminotransferase values may not be elevated in 
susceptible patients, although these levels do eventually become 
abnormal. Most fatalities have occurred within 4 months after 
initiation of therapy. Some clinicians recommend treatment with 
oral or intravenous  L -carnitine as soon as severe hepatotoxicity is 
suspected. Careful monitoring of liver function is recommended 
when starting the drug; the hepatotoxicity is reversible in some 
cases if the drug is withdrawn. The other observed idiosyncratic 
response with valproate is thrombocytopenia, although 
documented cases of abnormal bleeding are lacking. It should be 
noted that valproate is an effective and popular antiseizure drug 
and that only a very small number of patients have had severe 
toxic effects from its use. 
 Several epidemiologic studies of valproate have confirmed a 
substantial increase in the incidence of spina bifida in the off-
spring of women who took valproate during pregnancy. In addi-
tion, an increased incidence of cardiovascular, orofacial, and 
digital abnormalities has been reported. These observations must 
be strongly considered in the choice of drugs during pregnancy. 
 OXAZOLIDINEDIONES 
 Trimethadione, the first oxazolidinedione ( Figure 24–3 ), was 
introduced as an antiseizure drug in 1945 and remained the drug 
of choice for absence seizures until the introduction of succinim-
ides in the 1950s. Use of the oxazolidinediones—trimethadione, 
paramethadione, and dimethadione—is now very limited; the lat-
ter two are not readily available. 
 These compounds are active against pentylenetetrazol-induced 
seizures. Trimethadione raises the threshold for seizure discharges 
after repetitive thalamic stimulation. It—or, more notably, its 
active metabolite dimethadione—has the same effect on thalamic 
Ca 2+ currents as ethosuximide (reducing the T-type Ca 2+ current). 
Thus, suppression of absence seizures is likely to depend on inhib-
iting the pacemaker action of thalamic neurons. 
 Trimethadione is rapidly absorbed, with peak levels reached 
within 1 hour after drug administration. It is not bound to 
plasma proteins. Trimethadione is completely metabolized in the 
liver by demethylation to dimethadione, which may exert the 
major antiseizure activity. Dimethadione has an extremely long 
half-life (240 hours). The therapeutic plasma level range for 
trimethadione has never been established, although trimethadi-
one blood levels higher than 20 mcg/mL and dimethadione levels 
higher than 700 mcg/mL have been suggested. A dosage of 30 
mg/kg/d of trimethadione is necessary to achieve these levels in 
adults. 
 The most common and bothersome dose-related adverse effect 
of the oxazolidinediones is sedation. Trimethadione has been asso-
ciated with many other toxic adverse effects, some of which are 
severe. These drugs should not be used during pregnancy. 
 OTHER DRUGS USED IN 
MANAGEMENT OF EPILEPSY 
 Some drugs not classifiable by application to seizure type are dis-
cussed in this section. 
420    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 BENZODIAZEPINES 
 Six benzodiazepines play prominent roles in the therapy of epi-
lepsy (see also  Chapter 22 ). Although many benzodiazepines are 
similar chemically, subtle structural alterations result in differences 
in activity and pharmacokinetics. They have two mechanisms of 
antiseizure action, which are shown to different degrees by the six 
compounds. This is evident from the fact that diazepam is rela-
tively more potent against electroshock and clonazepam against 
pentylenetetrazol (the latter effect correlating with an action at the 
GABA-benzodiazepine allosteric receptor sites). Possible mecha-
nisms of action are discussed in  Chapter 22 . 
 Diazepam given intravenously or rectally is highly effective for 
stopping continuous seizure activity, especially generalized tonic-
clonic status epilepticus (see below). The drug is occasionally 
given orally on a long-term basis, although it is not considered 
very effective in this application, probably because of the rapid 
development of tolerance. A rectal gel is available for refractory 
patients who need acute control of bouts of seizure activity. 
 Lorazepam appears in some studies to be more effective and lon-
ger acting than diazepam in the treatment of status epilepticus and 
is preferred by some experts. 
 Clonazepam is a long-acting drug with documented efficacy 
against absence seizures; on a milligram basis, it is one of the most 
potent antiseizure agents known. It is also effective in some cases 
of myoclonic seizures and has been tried in infantile spasms. 
Sedation is prominent, especially on initiation of therapy; starting 
doses should be small. Maximal tolerated doses are usually in the 
range of 0.1–0.2 mg/kg, but many weeks of gradually increasing 
daily doses may be needed to achieve these dosages in some 
patients.  Nitrazepam is not marketed in the USA but is used in 
many other countries, especially for infantile spasms and myoclo-
nic seizures. It is less potent than clonazepam, and superiority to 
that drug has not been documented. 
 Clorazepate dipotassium is approved in the USA as an adjunct 
to treatment of complex partial seizures in adults. Drowsiness and 
lethargy are common adverse effects, but as long as the drug is 
increased gradually, dosages as high as 45 mg/d can be given. 
 Clobazam is not available in the USA but is marketed in most 
countries and is widely used in a variety of seizure types. It is a 1,5-
benzodiazepine (other marketed benzodiazepines are 1,4-benzodiaz-
epines) and reportedly has less sedative potential than benzodiazepines 
marketed in the USA. Whether the drug has significant clinical 
advantages is not clear. It has a half-life of 18 hours and is effective 
at dosages of 0.5–1 mg/kg/d. It does interact with some other anti-
seizure drugs and causes adverse effects typical of the benzodiaz-
epines; efficacy, in some patients, is limited by the development of 
tolerance. It has an active metabolite, norclobazam. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 See  Chapter 22 . 
 Limitations 
 Two prominent aspects of benzodiazepines limit their usefulness. 
The first is their pronounced sedative effect, which is unfortunate 
both in the treatment of status epilepticus and in chronic therapy. 
Children may manifest a paradoxical hyperactivity, as with 
barbiturates. The second problem is tolerance, in which seizures 
may respond initially but recur within a few months. The remark-
able antiseizure potency of these compounds often cannot be 
realized because of these limiting factors. 
 ACETAZOLAMIDE 
 Acetazolamide is a diuretic whose main action is the inhibition of 
carbonic anhydrase (see  Chapter 15 ). Mild acidosis in the brain 
may be the mechanism by which the drug exerts its antiseizure 
activity; alternatively, the depolarizing action of bicarbonate ions 
moving out of neurons via GABA receptor ion channels may be 
diminished by carbonic anhydrase inhibition. Acetazolamide has 
been used for all types of seizures but is severely limited by the 
rapid development of tolerance, with return of seizures usually 
within a few weeks. The drug may have a special role in epileptic 
women who experience seizure exacerbations at the time of men-
ses; seizure control may be improved and tolerance may not 
develop because the drug is not administered continuously. The 
usual dosage is approximately 10 mg/kg/d to a maximum of 
1000 mg/d. 
 Another carbonic anhydrase inhibitor,  sulthiame, was not 
found to be effective as an anticonvulsant in clinical trials in the 
USA. It is marketed in a number of other countries. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTISEIZURE DRUGS  
 SEIZURE CLASSIFICATION 
 In general, the type of medication used for epilepsy depends on 
the empiric nature of the seizure. For this reason, considerable 
effort has been expended to classify seizures so that clinicians will 
be able to make a “seizure diagnosis” and on that basis prescribe 
appropriate therapy. Errors in seizure diagnosis cause use of the 
wrong drugs, and an unpleasant cycle ensues in which poor seizure 
control is followed by increasing drug doses and medication toxic-
ity. As noted, seizures are divided into two groups: partial and 
generalized. Drugs used for partial seizures are more or less the 
same for all subtypes of partial seizures, but drugs used for general-
ized seizures are determined by the individual seizure subtype. A 
summary of the international classification of epileptic seizures is 
presented in  Table 24–1 . 
 Partial Seizures 
 Partial seizures are those in which a localized onset of the attack 
can be ascertained, either by clinical observation or by electroen-
cephalographic recording; the attack begins in a specific locus in 
the brain. There are three types of partial seizures, determined to 
some extent by the degree of brain involvement by the abnormal 
discharge. 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    421
 The least complicated partial seizure is the  simple partial 
seizure, characterized by minimal spread of the abnormal discharge 
such that normal consciousness and awareness are preserved. For 
example, the patient may have a sudden onset of clonic jerking of 
an extremity lasting 60–90 seconds; residual weakness may last for 
15–30 minutes after the attack. The patient is completely aware of 
the attack and can describe it in detail. The electroencephalogram 
may show an abnormal discharge highly localized to the involved 
portion of the brain. 
 The  complex partial seizure also has a localized onset, but the 
discharge becomes more widespread (usually bilateral) and almost 
always involves the limbic system. Most complex partial seizures 
arise from one of the temporal lobes, possibly because of the 
susceptibility of this area of the brain to insults such as hypoxia or 
infection. Clinically, the patient may have a brief warning followed 
by an alteration of consciousness during which some patients stare 
and others stagger or even fall. Most, however, demonstrate 
fragments of integrated motor behavior called  automatisms for 
which the patient has no memory. Typical automatisms are lip 
smacking, swallowing, fumbling, scratching, and even walking 
about. After 30–120 seconds, the patient makes a gradual recovery 
to normal consciousness but may feel tired or ill for several hours 
after the attack. 
 The last type of partial seizure is the  secondarily generalized 
attack, in which a partial seizure immediately precedes a general-
ized tonic-clonic (grand mal) seizure. This seizure type is described 
in the text that follows. 
 Generalized Seizures 
 Generalized seizures are those in which there is no evidence of 
localized onset. The group is quite heterogeneous. 
 Generalized tonic-clonic (grand mal) seizures are the most 
dramatic of all epileptic seizures and are characterized by tonic 
rigidity of all extremities, followed in 15–30 seconds by a tremor 
that is actually an interruption of the tonus by relaxation. As the 
relaxation phases become longer, the attack enters the clonic 
phase, with massive jerking of the body. The clonic jerking slows 
over 60–120 seconds, and the patient is usually left in a stuporous 
state. The tongue or cheek may be bitten, and urinary inconti-
nence is common. Primary generalized tonic-clonic seizures begin 
without evidence of localized onset, whereas secondary generalized 
tonic-clonic seizures are preceded by another seizure type, usually 
a partial seizure. The medical treatment of both primary and 
secondary generalized tonic-clonic seizures is the same and uses 
drugs appropriate for  partial seizures. 
 The  absence (petit mal) seizure is characterized by both 
sudden onset and abrupt cessation. Its duration is usually less than 
10 seconds and rarely more than 45 seconds. Consciousness is 
altered; the attack may also be associated with mild clonic jerking 
of the eyelids or extremities, with postural tone changes, auto-
nomic phenomena, and automatisms. The occurrence of automa-
tisms can complicate the clinical differentiation from complex 
partial seizures in some patients. Absence attacks begin in child-
hood or adolescence and may occur up to hundreds of times a day. 
The electroencephalogram during the seizure shows a highly 
characteristic 2.5–3.5 Hz spike-and-wave pattern. Atypical absence 
patients have seizures with postural changes that are more abrupt, 
and such patients are often mentally retarded; the electroencepha-
logram may show a slower spike-and-wave discharge, and the sei-
zures may be more refractory to therapy. 
 Myoclonic jerking is seen, to a greater or lesser extent, in a 
wide variety of seizures, including generalized tonic-clonic sei-
zures, partial seizures, absence seizures, and infantile spasms. 
Treatment of seizures that include myoclonic jerking should be 
directed at the primary seizure type rather than at the myoclonus. 
Some patients, however, have myoclonic jerking as the major sei-
zure type, and some have frequent myoclonic jerking and occa-
sional generalized tonic-clonic seizures without overt signs of 
neurologic deficit. Many kinds of myoclonus exist, and much 
effort has gone into attempts to classify this entity. 
 Atonic seizures are those in which the patient has sudden loss 
of postural tone. If standing, the patient falls suddenly to the floor 
and may be injured. If seated, the head and torso may suddenly 
drop forward. Although most often seen in children, this seizure 
type is not unusual in adults. Many patients with atonic seizures 
wear helmets to prevent head injury. Momentary  increased tone 
may be observed in some patients, hence the use of the term 
“tonic-atonic seizure.” 
 Infantile spasms are an epileptic syndrome and not a seizure 
type. The attacks, though sometimes fragmentary, are most often 
bilateral and are included for pragmatic purposes with the general-
ized seizures. These attacks are most often characterized clinically 
by brief, recurrent myoclonic jerks of the body with sudden flex-
ion or extension of the body and limbs; the forms of infantile 
spasms are, however, quite heterogeneous. Ninety percent of 
affected patients have their first attack before the age of 1 year. 
Most patients are intellectually delayed, presumably from the 
same cause as the spasms. The cause is unknown in many patients, 
but such widely disparate disorders as infection, kernicterus, 
tuberous sclerosis, and hypoglycemia have been implicated. In 
some cases, the electroencephalogram is characteristic. Drugs used 
to treat infantile spasms are effective only in some patients; there 
is little evidence that the cognitive retardation is alleviated by 
therapy, even when the attacks disappear. 
 THERAPEUTIC STRATEGY 
 In designing a therapeutic strategy, the use of a single drug is pre-
ferred, especially in patients who are not severely affected and who 
can benefit from the advantage of fewer adverse effects using 
monotherapy. For patients with hard-to-control seizures, multiple 
drugs are usually utilized simultaneously. 
 For most of the older antiseizure drugs, relationships between 
blood levels and therapeutic effects have been characterized to a 
high degree. The same is true for the pharmacokinetics of these 
drugs. These relationships provide significant advantages in the 
development of therapeutic strategies for the treatment of epilepsy. 
The therapeutic index for most antiseizure drugs is low, and toxicity 
is not uncommon. Thus, effective treatment of seizures often 
requires an awareness of the therapeutic levels and pharmacokinetic 
422    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
properties as well as the characteristic toxicities of each agent. 
Measurements of antiseizure drug plasma levels can be very useful 
when combined with clinical observations and pharmacokinetic 
data ( Table 24–2 ). The relationship between seizure control and 
plasma drug levels is variable and often less clear for the drugs 
marketed since 1990. 
 MANAGEMENT OF EPILEPSY  
 PARTIAL SEIZURES & GENERALIZED 
TONIC-CLONIC SEIZURES 
 For many years, the choice of drugs for partial and tonic-clonic 
seizures was usually limited to phenytoin, carbamazepine, or bar-
biturates. There was a strong tendency to limit the use of sedative 
antiseizure drugs such as barbiturates and benzodiazepines to 
patients who could not tolerate other medications; this trend led, 
in the 1980s, to increased use of carbamazepine. Although car-
bamazepine and phenytoin remain widely used, most newer drugs 
(marketed after 1990) are effective against these same seizure 
types. With the older drugs, efficacy and long-term adverse effects 
are well established; this creates a confidence level in spite of 
questionable tolerability. Most newer drugs have a broader spec-
trum of activity, and many are well tolerated; therefore, the newer 
drugs are often preferred to the older ones. Although some data 
suggest that most of these newer drugs confer an increased risk of 
nontraumatic fractures, choosing a drug on this basis is not yet 
practical. 
 GENERALIZED SEIZURES 
 The issues (described above) related to choosing between old and 
new drugs apply to the generalized group of seizures as well. 
 The drugs used for generalized tonic-clonic seizures are the 
same as for partial seizures; in addition, valproate is clearly 
useful. 
 At least three drugs are effective against absence seizures. Two 
are nonsedating and therefore preferred: ethosuximide and val-
proate. Clonazepam is also highly effective but has disadvantages 
of dose-related adverse effects and development of tolerance. 
Lamotrigine and topiramate may also be useful. 
 Specific myoclonic syndromes are usually treated with val-
proate; an intravenous formulation can be used acutely if needed. 
It is nonsedating and can be dramatically effective. Other patients 
TABLE 24–2 Serum concentrations reference ranges for some antiseizure drugs.
Antiseizure Drug
Reference Range (μmol/L)1
Conversion Factor (F)2
OLDER DRUGS
Carbamazepine
15–45
4.23
Clobazam
0.1–1.0
3.32
Clonazepam
60–220 nmol/L
3.17
Ethosuximide
300–600
7.08
Phenytoin
40–80
3.96
Phenobarbital
50–130
4.31
Valproate
300–600
7.08
NEWER DRUGS (Post-1990)
Felbamate
125–250
4.20
Gabapentin
70–120
5.83
Lamotrigine
10–60
3.90
Levetiracetam
30–240
5.88
Oxcarbazepine3
50–140
3.96
Pregabalin4
1–50
6.33
Tiagabine
50–250 nmol/L
2.43
Topiramate
15–60
2.95
Zonisamide
45–180
4.71
1  These data are provided only as a general guideline. Many patients will respond better at different levels and some patients may have drug-related adverse events within the 
listed average therapeutic ranges.
2  To convert to mcg/mL or mg/L, divide μmol/L by the conversion factor F.
3  Monohydroxy- metabolite.
4  Not well established.
Modified and updated, with permission, from Johannessen SI, Landmark CJ: Value of therapeutic drug monitoring in epilepsy. Expert Rev Neurother 2008;8: 929.
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    423
respond to clonazepam, nitrazepam, or other benzodiazepines, 
although high doses may be necessary, with accompanying 
drowsiness. Zonisamide and levetiracetam may be useful. Another 
specific myoclonic syndrome, juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, can be 
aggravated by phenytoin or carbamazepine; valproate is the drug 
of choice followed by lamotrigine and topiramate. 
 Atonic seizures are often refractory to all available medications, 
although some reports suggest that valproate may be beneficial, as 
may lamotrigine. Benzodiazepines have been reported to improve 
seizure control in some of these patients but may worsen the 
attacks in others. Felbamate has been demonstrated to be effective 
in some patients, although the drug’s idiosyncratic toxicity limits 
its use. If the loss of tone appears to be part of another seizure type 
(eg, absence or complex partial seizures), every effort should be 
made to treat the other seizure type vigorously, hoping for simul-
taneous alleviation of the atonic component of the seizure. The 
ketogenic diet may also be useful. 
 DRUGS USED IN INFANTILE SPASMS 
 The treatment of infantile spasms is unfortunately limited to 
improvement of control of the seizures rather than other features 
of the disorder, such as retardation. Most patients receive a course 
of intramuscular corticotropin, although some clinicians note that 
prednisone may be equally effective and can be given orally. 
Clinical trials have been unable to settle the matter. In either case, 
therapy must often be discontinued because of adverse effects. If 
seizures recur, repeat courses of corticotropin or corticosteroids 
can be given, or other drugs may be tried. A repository corticotro-
pin for injection is now approved in the USA for the treatment of 
infantile spasms, either of cryptogenic or symptomatic etiology. 
Other drugs widely used are the benzodiazepines such as clonaze-
pam or nitrazepam; their efficacy in this heterogeneous syndrome 
may be nearly as good as that of corticosteroids. Vigabatrin is 
effective and is considered the drug of choice by many pediatric 
neurologists. The mechanism of action of corticosteroids or corti-
cotropin in the treatment of infantile spasms is unknown but may 
involve reduction in inflammatory processes. 
 STATUS EPILEPTICUS 
 There are many forms of status epilepticus. The most common, 
generalized tonic-clonic status epilepticus, is a life-threatening 
emergency, requiring immediate cardiovascular, respiratory, and 
metabolic management as well as pharmacologic therapy. The lat-
ter virtually always requires intravenous administration of antisei-
zure medications. Diazepam is the most effective drug in most 
patients for stopping the attacks and is given directly by intrave-
nous push to a maximum total dose of 20–30 mg in adults. 
Intravenous diazepam may depress respiration (less frequently, 
cardiovascular function), and facilities for resuscitation must be 
immediately at hand during its administration. The effect of diaz-
epam is not lasting, but the 30- to 40-minute seizure-free interval 
allows more definitive therapy to be initiated. Some physicians 
prefer lorazepam, which is equivalent to diazepam in effect and 
perhaps somewhat longer acting. For patients who are not actually 
in the throes of a seizure, diazepam therapy can be omitted and 
the patient treated at once with a long-acting drug such as 
phenytoin. 
 Until the introduction of fosphenytoin, the mainstay of con-
tinuing therapy for status epilepticus was intravenous phenytoin, 
which is effective and nonsedating. It can be given as a loading 
dose of 13–18 mg/kg in adults; the usual error is to give too little. 
Administration should be at a maximum rate of 50 mg/min. It is 
safest to give the drug directly by intravenous push, but it can also 
be diluted in saline; it precipitates rapidly in the presence of 
glucose. Careful monitoring of cardiac rhythm and blood pressure 
is necessary, especially in elderly people. At least part of the cardio-
toxicity is from the propylene glycol in which the phenytoin is 
dissolved. Fosphenytoin, which is freely soluble in intravenous 
solutions without the need for propylene glycol or other solubiliz-
ing agents, is a safer parenteral agent. Because of its greater 
molecular weight, this prodrug is two thirds to three quarters as 
potent as phenytoin on a milligram basis. 
 In previously treated epileptic patients, the administration of a 
large loading dose of phenytoin may cause some dose-related tox-
icity such as ataxia. This is usually a relatively minor problem 
during the acute status episode and is easily alleviated by later 
adjustment of plasma levels. 
 For patients who do not respond to phenytoin, phenobarbital 
can be given in large doses: 100–200 mg intravenously to a total of 
400–800 mg. Respiratory depression is a common complication, 
especially if benzodiazepines have already been given, and there 
should be no hesitation in instituting intubation and ventilation. 
 Although other drugs such as lidocaine have been recom-
mended for the treatment of generalized tonic-clonic status epi-
lepticus, general anesthesia is usually necessary in highly resistant 
cases. 
 For patients in absence status, benzodiazepines are still drugs of 
first choice. Rarely, intravenous valproate may be required. 
 SPECIAL ASPECTS OF THE 
TOXICOLOGY OF ANTISEIZURE 
DRUGS 
 TERATOGENICITY 
 The potential teratogenicity of antiseizure drugs is controversial 
and important. It is important because teratogenicity resulting 
from long-term drug treatment of millions of people throughout 
the world may have a profound effect even if the effect occurs in 
only a small percentage of cases. It is controversial because both 
epilepsy and antiseizure drugs are heterogeneous, and few epileptic 
patients are available for study who are not receiving these drugs. 
Furthermore, patients with severe epilepsy, in whom genetic fac-
tors rather than drug factors may be of greater importance in the 
occurrence of fetal malformations, are often receiving multiple 
antiseizure drugs in high doses. 
424    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 In spite of these limitations, it appears—from whatever 
cause—that children born to mothers taking antiseizure drugs 
have an increased risk, perhaps twofold, of congenital malforma-
tions. Phenytoin has been implicated in a specific syndrome called 
 fetal hydantoin syndrome, although not all investigators are 
convinced of its existence and a similar syndrome has been attrib-
uted both to phenobarbital and to carbamazepine. Valproate, as 
noted above, has also been implicated in a specific malformation, 
spina bifida. It is estimated that a pregnant woman taking valproic 
acid or sodium valproate has a 1–2% risk of having a child with 
spina bifida. Topiramate has shown some teratogenicity in animal 
testing and, as noted earlier, in the human male fetus. 
 In dealing with the clinical problem of a pregnant woman with 
epilepsy, most epileptologists agree that although it is important to 
minimize exposure to antiseizure drugs, both in numbers and dos-
ages, it is also important not to allow maternal seizures to go 
unchecked. 
 WITHDRAWAL 
 Withdrawal of antiseizure drugs, whether by accident or by 
design, can cause increased seizure frequency and severity. The two 
factors to consider are the effects of the withdrawal itself and the 
need for continued drug suppression of seizures in the individual 
patient. In many patients, both factors must be considered. It is 
important to note, however, that the abrupt discontinuance of 
antiseizure drugs ordinarily does not cause seizures in nonepileptic 
patients, provided that the drug levels are not above the usual 
therapeutic range when the drug is stopped. 
 Some drugs are more easily withdrawn than others. In general, 
withdrawal of anti-absence drugs is easier than withdrawal of drugs 
needed for partial or generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Barbiturates 
and benzodiazepines are the most difficult to discontinue; weeks or 
months may be required, with very gradual dosage decrements, to 
accomplish their complete outpatient removal. 
 Because of the heterogeneity of epilepsy, complete discontinu-
ance of antiseizure drug administration is an especially difficult 
problem. If a patient is seizure-free for 3 or 4 years, a trial of 
gradual discontinuance is often warranted. 
 OVERDOSE 
 Antiseizure drugs are central nervous system depressants but are 
rarely lethal. Very high blood levels are usually necessary before 
overdoses can be considered life-threatening. The most dangerous 
effect of antiseizure drugs after large overdoses is respiratory 
depression, which may be potentiated by other agents, such as 
alcohol. Treatment of antiseizure drug overdose is supportive; 
stimulants should not be used. Efforts to hasten removal of anti-
seizure drugs, such as alkalinization of the urine (phenytoin is a 
weak acid), are usually ineffective. 
 SUICIDALITY 
 An FDA analysis of suicidal behavior during clinical trials of anti-
seizure drugs was carried out in 2008. The presence of either sui-
cidal behavior or suicidal ideation was 0.37% in patients taking 
active drugs and 0.24% in patients taking placebo. This, accord-
ing to one analyst, represents an additional 2 of 1000 patients with 
such thoughts or behaviors. It is noteworthy that, although the 
entire class may receive some changes in labeling, the odds ratios 
for carbamazepine and for valproate were less than 1, and no data 
were available for phenytoin. Whether this effect is real or inextri-
cably associated with this serious, debilitating disorder—with its 
inherently high rate of suicidality—is unclear. 
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    425
(continued)
SUMMARY Antiseizure Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Pharmacokinetics
Clinical 
Applications
Toxicities, Interactions
CYCLIC UREIDES
 •  Phenytoin, 
fosphenytoin
Block high-frequency firing 
of neurons through action 
on voltage-gated (VG) Na
+ 
channels • decreases synap-
tic release of glutamate
Absorption is formulation 
dependent • highly bound to 
plasma proteins • no active 
metabolites • dose-dependent 
elimination, t1/2 12–36 h • fos-
phenytoin is for IV, IM routes
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures
Toxicity: Diplopia, ataxia, gingival 
hyperplasia, hirsutism, neuropathy 
• Interactions: Phenobarbital, carbam-
azepine, isoniazid, felbamate, oxcarba-
zepine, topiramate, fluoxetine, fluconazole, 
digoxin, quinidine, cyclosporine, steroids, 
oral contraceptives, others
 • Primidone
Similar to phenytoin but 
converted to phenobarbital
Well absorbed orally • not highly 
bound to plasma proteins • 
peak concentrations in 2–6 h 
• t1/2 10–25 h • two active 
metabolites (phenobarbital 
and phenylethylmalonamide)
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures
Toxicity: Sedation, cognitive issues, ataxia, 
hyperactivity • Interactions: Similar to 
phenobarbital
 • Phenobarbital
Enhances phasic GABAA 
receptor responses • reduces 
excitatory synaptic responses
Nearly complete absorption 
• not significantly bound to 
plasma proteins • peak concen-
trations in 0.5–4 h • no active 
metabolites • t1/2 varies from 
75 to 125 h
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures, 
myoclonic seizures, gener-
alized seizures, neonatal 
seizures, status epilepticus
Toxicity: Sedation, cognitive issues, ataxia, 
hyperactivity • Interactions: Valproate, 
carbamazepine, felbamate, phenytoin, 
cyclosporine, felodipine, lamotrigine, 
nifedipine, nimodipine, steroids, 
theophylline, verapamil, others
 • Ethosuximide
Reduces low-threshold Ca
2+ 
currents (T-type)
Well absorbed orally, with peak 
levels in 3–7 h • not protein-
bound • completely metabo-
lized to inactive compounds 
• t1/2 typically 40 h
Absence seizures
Toxicity: Nausea, headache, dizziness, 
hyperactivity • Interactions: Valproate, 
phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, 
rifampicin
TRICYCLICS
 • Carbamazepine
Blocks high-frequency firing 
of neurons through action 
on VG Na
+ channels • 
decreases synaptic release of 
glutamate
Well absorbed orally, with peak 
levels in 6–8 h • no significant 
protein binding • metabolized 
in part to active 10-11-epoxide 
• t1/2 of parent ranges from 8 to 
12 h in treated patients to 36 h 
in normal subjects
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures
Toxicity: Nausea, diplopia, ataxia, hypona-
tremia, headache • Interactions: Phenytoin, 
carbamazepine, valproate, fluoxetine, 
verapamil, macrolide antibiotics, isoniazid, 
propoxyphene, danazol, phenobarbital, 
primidone, many others
 • Oxcarbazepine: Similar to carbamazepine; shorter half-life but active metabolite with longer duration and fewer interactions reported
 •  Eslicarbazepine acetate: Similar to oxcarbazepine but shown to be effective when given once daily and may be more rapidly converted to the active metabolite
BENZODIAZEPINES
 • Diazepam
Potentiates GABAA responses
Well absorbed orally • rectal 
administration gives peak 
concentration in ~1 h with 90% 
bioavailability • IV for status 
epilepticus • highly protein-
bound • extensively metabo-
lized to several active 
metabolites • t1/2 ~2 d
Status epilepticus, seizure 
clusters
Toxicity: Sedation • Interactions: Minimal
 • Clonazepam
As for diazepam
>80% bioavailability • exten-
sively metabolized but no active 
metabolites • t1/2 20–50 h
Absence seizures, myoclo-
nic seizures, infantile 
spasms
Toxicity: Similar to diazepam • Interactions: 
Minimal
 • Lorazepam: Similar to diazepam
 • Clobazam: Indications include absence seizures, myoclonic seizures, infantile spasms
426    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Pharmacokinetics
Clinical 
Applications
Toxicities, Interactions
GABA DERIVATIVES
 • Gabapentin
Decreases excitatory 
transmission by acting on VG 
Ca
2+ channels presynaptically 
(α2δ subunit)
Bioavailability 50%, decreasing 
with increasing doses • not 
bound to plasma proteins • not 
metabolized • t1/2 6–8 h
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures, 
generalized seizures
Toxicity: Somnolence, dizziness, ataxia 
• Interactions: Minimal
 • Pregabalin
As for gabapentin
Well absorbed orally • not 
bound to plasma proteins • not 
metabolized • t1/2 6–7 h
Partial seizures
Toxicity: Somnolence, dizziness, ataxia 
• Interactions: Minimal
 • Vigabatrin
Irreversibly inhibits GABA-
transaminase
70% bioavailable • not bound to 
plasma proteins • not 
metabolized, • t1/2 5–7 h (not rel-
evant because of mechanism of 
action)
Partial seizures, infantile 
spasms
Toxicity: Drowsiness, dizziness, psychosis, 
visual field loss • Interactions: Minimal
OTHER
 • Valproate
Blocks high-frequency firing 
of neurons • modifies amino 
acid metabolism
Well absorbed from several 
formulations • highly bound to 
plasma proteins • extensively 
metabolized • t1/2 9–16 h
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures, 
generalized seizures, 
absence seizures, 
myoclonic seizures
Toxicity: Nausea, tremor, weight gain, hair 
loss, teratogenic, hepatotoxic • Interactions: 
Phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, 
lamotrigine, felbamate, rifampin, 
ethosuximide, primidone
 • Lamotrigine
Prolongs inactivation of VG 
Na
+ channels • acts presyn-
aptically on VG Ca
2+ chan-
nels, decreasing glutamate 
release
Well absorbed orally • no signifi-
cant protein binding • exten-
sively metabolized, but no 
active metabolites • t1/2 25–35 h
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, generalized 
seizures, partial seizures, 
absence seizures
Toxicity: Dizziness, headache, diplopia, rash 
• Interactions: Valproate, carbamazepine, 
oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, 
primidone, succinimides, sertraline, 
topiramate
 • Levetiracetam
Action on synaptic protein 
SV2A
Well absorbed orally • not 
bound to plasma proteins • 
metabolized to 3 inactive 
metabolites • t1/2 6–11 h
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures, 
generalized seizures
Toxicity: Nervousness, dizziness, depres-
sion, seizures • Interactions: Rare
 • Retigabine
Enhances K
+ channel 
opening
Readily absorbed • requires 
3-times daily dosing
Adjunctive treatment of 
partial seizures
Toxicity: Dizziness, somnolence, confusion, 
blurred vision • Interactions: minimal
 • Rufinamide
Prolongs inactivation of VG 
Na
+ channels
Well absorbed orally • peak con-
centrations in 4–6 h • t1/2 6–10 h 
• minimal plasma protein bind-
ing • no active metabolites • 
mostly excreted in urine
Adjunctive treatment of 
the Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome
Toxicity: Somnolence, vomiting, pyrexia, 
diarrhea • Interactions: Not metabolized via 
P450 enzymes, but antiseizure drug 
interactions may be present
 • Tiagabine
Blocks GABA reuptake in 
forebrain by selective 
blockade of GAT-1
Well absorbed • highly bound to 
plasma proteins • extensively 
metabolized, but no active 
metabolites • t1/2 4–8 h
Partial seizures
Toxicity: Nervousness, dizziness, depres-
sion, seizures • Interactions: Phenobarbital, 
phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone
 • Topiramate
Multiple actions on synaptic 
function, probably via 
actions on phosphorylation
Well absorbed • not bound to 
plasma proteins • extensively 
metabolized, but 40% excreted 
unchanged in the urine • no 
active metabolites • t1/2 20 h, but 
decreases with concomitant 
drugs
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures, 
generalized seizures, 
absence seizures, migraine
Toxicity: Somnolence, cognitive slowing, 
confusion, paresthesias • Interactions: 
Phenytoin, carbamazepine, oral 
contraceptives, lamotrigine, lithium?
 • Zonisamide
Blocks high-frequency firing 
via action on VG Na
+ chan-
nels
Approximately 70% bioavailable 
orally • minimally bound to 
plasma proteins • >50% 
metabolized • t1/2 50–70 h
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures, 
myoclonic seizures
Toxicity: Drowsiness, cognitive impairment, 
confusion, poor concentration • 
Interactions: Minimal
 • Lacosamide
Enhances slow inactivation 
of Na
+ channels • blocks 
effect of neurotrophins (via 
CRMP-2)
Well absorbed • minimal protein 
binding • one major nonactive 
metabolite • t1/2 12–14 h
Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, partial seizures
Toxicity: Dizziness, headache, nausea 
• small increase in PR interval • Interactions: 
Minimal
CHAPTER 24 Antiseizure Drugs    427
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
Carbamazepine (generic, Tegretol)
Oral: 200 mg tablets; 100 mg chewable tablets; 100 mg/5 mL 
suspension
Oral extended-release: 100, 200, 400 mg tablets; 200, 300 mg capsules
Clonazepam (generic, Klonopin)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets
Clorazepate dipotassium (generic, Tranxene)
Oral: 3.75, 7.5, 15 mg tablets, capsules
Oral sustained-release (Tranxene-SD): 11.25, 22.5 mg tablets
Diazepam (generic, Valium, others)
Oral: 2, 5, 10 mg tablets; 5 mg/5 mL, 5 mg/mL solutions
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IV injection
Rectal: 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20 mg viscous rectal solution
Eslicarbazepine (Stedesa)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Ethosuximide (generic, Zarontin)
Oral: 250 mg capsules; 250 mg/5 mL syrup
Ethotoin (Peganone)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets
Felbamate (Felbatol)
Oral: 400, 600 mg tablets; 600 mg/5 mL suspension
Fosphenytoin (Cerebyx)
Parenteral: 75 mg/mL for IV or IM injection
Gabapentin (Neurontin)
Oral: 100, 300, 400 mg capsules; 600, 800 mg filmtabs; 50 mg/mL 
solution
Lacosamide (Vimpat)
Oral: 50, 100, 150, 200, 300 mg tablets, 15 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV injection
Lamotrigine (generic, Lamictal)
Oral: 25, 100, 150, 200 mg tablets; 2, 5, 25 mg chewable tablets
Levetiracetam (generic, Keppra)
Oral: 250, 500, 750, 1000 mg tablets, 100 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for injection
Lorazepam (generic, Ativan)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets; 2 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 2, 4 mg/mL for IV or IM injection
Mephenytoin (Mesantoin)
Oral: 100 mg tablets
Mephobarbital (Mebaral)
Oral: 32, 50, 100 mg tablets
Methsuximide (Celontin)
Oral: 150, 300 mg capsules
Oxcarbazepine (Trileptal)
Oral: 100, 300, 600 mg tablets; 60 mg/mL suspension
Pentobarbital sodium (generic, Nembutal)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IV or IM injection
Phenobarbital (generic, Luminal Sodium, others)
Oral: 15, 16, 30, 60, 90, 100 mg tablets; 16 mg capsules; 15, 20 mg/5 mL 
elixirs
Parenteral: 30, 60, 65, 130 mg/mL for IV or IM injection
Phenytoin (generic, Dilantin, others)
Oral (prompt release): 100 mg capsules; 50 mg chewable tablets; 
125 mg/5 mL suspension
Oral extended action: 30, 100 mg capsules
Oral slow release (Phenytek): 200, 300 mg capsules
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IV injection
Pregabalin (Lyrica)
Oral: 25, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200, 300 mg capsules
Primidone (generic, Mysoline)
Oral: 50, 250 mg tablets; 250 mg/5 mL suspension
Retigabine (Trobalt in Europe; ezogabine, Potiga in the USA)
Rufinamide (Banzel)
Oral: 200, 400 mg tablets
Stiripentol (Diacomit)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules
Tiagabine (Gabitril)
Oral: 2, 4, 12, 16, 20 mg tablets
Topiramate (Topamax)
Oral: 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets; 15, 25 mg sprinkle capsules
Trimethadione (Tridione)
Oral: 150 mg chewable tablets; 300 mg capsules; 40 mg/mL solution
Valproic acid (generic, Depakene)
Oral: 250 mg capsules; 250 mg/5 mL syrup (sodium valproate)
Oral sustained-release (Depakote): 125, 250, 500 mg tablets (as 
divalproex sodium)
Parenteral (Depacon): 100 mg/mL in 5 mL vial for IV injection
Vigabatrin (Sabril)
Oral: 500 mg tablets; 500 mg powder for solution
Zonisamide (generic, Zonegran)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
 REFERENCES 
 Arroyo S: Rufinamide. Neurotherapeutics 2007;4:155. 
 Avorn J: Drug warnings that can cause fits—communicating risks in a data-poor 
environment. N Engl J Med 2008;359:991. 
 Bialer M: Progress report on new antiepileptic drugs: A summary of the tenth 
EILAT conference (EILAT X). Epilepsy Res 2010;92:89. 
 Brodie MJ et al: Rufinamide for the adjunctive treatment of partial seizures in 
adults and adolescents: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. Epilepsia 
2009;50:1899. 
 Cross SA, Curran MP: Lacosamide in partial onset seizures. Drugs 2009;69:449. 
 Ettinger AB, Argoff CE: Use of antiepileptic drugs for non-epileptic conditions: 
Psychiatric disorders and chronic pain. Neurotherapeutics 2007;4:75. 
 Faught, E.  Ezogabine: A new angle on potassium gates. Epilepsy Currents, 2011; 
11:75. 
 French JA et al: Historical control monotherapy design in the treatment of epi-
lepsy. Epilepsia 2010:51:1936. 
 Glauser TA et al: Ethosuximide, valproic acid, and lamotrigine in childhood 
absence epilepsy . N Engl J Med 2010;362:790. 
 Kaminski RM et al: SV2A is a broad-spectrum anticonvulsant target: Functional 
correlation between protein binding and seizure protection in models of 
both partial and generalized epilepsy. Neuropharmacol 2008;54:715. 
 Kobayashi T et al: Inhibitory effects of the antiepileptic drug ethosuximide on 
G-protein-activated inwardly rectifying K+ channels. Neuropharmacol 
2009;56:499. 
 Meldrum BS, Rogawski MA: Molecular targets for antiepileptic drug develop-
ment. Neurotherapeutics 2007;4:18. 
 Molgaard-Nielsen D, Hviid A: Newer-generation antiepileptic drugs and the risk 
of major birth defects. JAMA 2011;305:1996 
 Porter RJ et al: Clinical development of drugs for epilepsy: A review of approaches 
in the United States and Europe. Epilepsy Research 2010;89:163. 
This page intentionally left blank 
429
 For centuries, humankind has relied on natural medicines and 
physical methods to control surgical pain. Historical texts describe 
the sedative effects of cannabis, henbane, mandrake, and opium 
poppy. Physical methods such as cold, nerve compression, carotid 
artery occlusion, and cerebral concussion were also employed, 
with variable effect. Although surgery was performed under ether 
anesthesia as early as 1842, the first public demonstration of surgi-
cal general anesthesia in 1846 is usually considered to be the start 
of a new era of anesthesia. For the first time physicians had a reli-
able means to keep their patients from experiencing pain during 
surgical procedures. 
 The neurophysiologic state produced by general anesthetics is 
characterized by five primary effects:  unconsciousness, amnesia, 
analgesia, inhibition of autonomic reflexes, and skeletal mus-
cle relaxation . None of the currently available anesthetic agents 
when used alone can achieve all five of these desired effects. In 
addition, an ideal anesthetic drug should induce rapid, smooth 
loss of consciousness, be rapidly reversible upon discontinuation, 
and possess a wide margin of safety. 
 The modern practice of anesthesiology relies on the use of com-
binations of intravenous and inhaled drugs ( balanced anesthesia 
techniques) to take advantage of the favorable properties of each 
agent while minimizing their adverse effects. The choice of anes-
thetic technique is determined by the type of diagnostic, therapeu-
tic, or surgical intervention to be performed. For minor superficial 
surgery or for invasive diagnostic procedures, oral or parenteral 
sedatives can be used in combination with local anesthetics, so-
called  monitored anesthesia care techniques (see Box: Sedation & 
Monitored Anesthesia Care, and  Chapter 26 ). These techniques 
provide profound analgesia, with retention of the patient’s ability 
to maintain a patent airway and to respond to verbal commands. 
For more extensive surgical procedures, anesthesia may begin with 
preoperative benzodiazepines, be induced with an intravenous 
agent (eg, thiopental or propofol), and be maintained with a com-
bination of inhaled (eg, volatile agents, nitrous oxide) or intrave-
nous (eg, propofol, opioid analgesics) drugs, or both. 
 MECHANISM OF GENERAL 
ANESTHETIC ACTION 
 General anesthetics have been in clinical use for more than 160 
years but their mechanism of action remains unknown. Initial 
research focused on identifying a single biologic site of action for 
these drugs. In recent years this “unitary theory” of anesthetic action 
has been supplanted by a more complex picture of molecular targets 
located at multiple levels of the central nervous system (CNS). 
 Anesthetics affect neurons at various cellular locations, but the 
primary focus has been on the synapse. A presynaptic action may 
alter the release of neurotransmitters, whereas a postsynaptic effect 
may change the frequency or amplitude of impulses exiting the 
synapse. At the organ level, the effect of anesthetics may result from 
 General Anesthetics 
 Helge Eilers, MD, &
 Spencer Yost, MD 
25
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 An elderly man with type 2 diabetes mellitus and ischemic 
pain in the lower extremity is scheduled for femoral-to-
popliteal bypass surgery. He has a history of hypertension 
and coronary artery disease with symptoms of stable angina 
and can walk only half a block before pain in his legs forces 
him to stop. He has a 50 pack-year smoking history but 
stopped 2 years ago. His medications include atenolol, 
atorvastatin, and hydrochlorothiazide. The nurse in the pre-
operative holding area obtains the following vital signs: tem-
perature 36.8°C (98.2°F), blood pressure 168/100 mm Hg, 
heart rate 78 bpm, oxygen saturation by pulse oximeter 96% 
while breathing room air, pain 5/10 in the right lower leg. 
What anesthetic agents will you choose and why? Does the 
choice of anesthetic make a difference? 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
430    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
strengthening inhibition or from diminishing excitation within the 
CNS. Studies on isolated spinal cord tissue have demonstrated that 
excitatory transmission is impaired more strongly by anesthetics 
than inhibitory effects are potentiated. 
 Chloride channels (γ-aminobutyric acid-A [GABA A ] and glycine 
receptors) and potassium channels (K 2P , possibly K v , and K ATP chan-
nels) remain the primary  inhibitory ion channels considered legiti-
mate candidates of anesthetic action.  Excitatory ion channel targets 
include those activated by acetylcholine (nicotinic and muscarinic 
receptors), by excitatory amino acids (amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-
4-isoxazol-propionic acid [AMPA], kainate, and  N -methyl- D -
aspartate [NMDA] receptors), or by serotonin (5-HT 2 and 5-HT 3 
receptors).  Figure 25–1 depicts the relation of these inhibitory and 
excitatory targets of anesthetics within the context of the nerve 
terminal. 
 ■ INHALED ANESTHETICS 
 A clear distinction should be made between volatile and gaseous 
anesthetics, both of which are administered by inhalation. Volatile 
anesthetics (halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, desflurane, sevoflu-
rane) have low vapor pressures and thus high boiling points so that 
they are liquids at room temperature (20 o C) and sea-level ambient 
pressure, whereas gaseous anesthetics (nitrous oxide, xenon) have 
high vapor pressures and low boiling points such that they are in 
gas form at room temperature.  Figure 25–2 shows the chemical 
structures of important, clinically used, inhaled anesthetics. 
 PHARMACOKINETICS 
 Inhaled anesthetics, volatile as well as gaseous, are taken up 
through gas exchange in the alveoli. Uptake from the alveoli into 
the blood and distribution and partitioning into the effect com-
partments are important determinants of the kinetics of these 
agents. As previously mentioned, an ideal anesthetic should have 
a rapid onset (induction), and its effect should be rapidly termi-
nated. To achieve this, the effect site concentration in the CNS 
(brain and spinal cord) will need to change rapidly. Several factors 
determine how quickly the CNS concentration changes. 
 Uptake & Distribution 
 A. Inspired Concentration and Ventilation 
 The driving force for uptake of an inhaled anesthetic is the alveo-
lar concentration. Two parameters that can be controlled by the 
anesthesiologist determine how quickly the alveolar concentration 
changes: (1)  inspired concentration or  partial pressure, and (2)  alveolar 
ventilation . The partial pressure of an inhaled anesthetic in the 
inspired gas mixture directly affects the maximum partial pressure 
that can be achieved in the alveoli and the rate of increase of 
 Sedation & Monitored Anesthesia Care 
 Many diagnostic and minor therapeutic surgical procedures can 
be performed without general anesthesia using sedation-based 
anesthetic techniques. In this setting, regional or local anesthesia 
supplemented with midazolam or propofol and opioid analgesics 
(or ketamine) may be a more appropriate and safer approach 
than general anesthesia for superficial surgical procedures. This 
anesthetic technique is known as monitored anesthesia care, 
often abbreviated as MAC, not to be confused with the minimal 
alveolar concentration for the comparison of potencies of inhaled 
anesthetics (see text and Box: What Does Anesthesia Represent & 
Where Does It Work?). The technique typically involves the use of 
intravenous midazolam for premedication (to provide anxiolysis, 
amnesia, and mild sedation) followed by a titrated, variable-rate 
propofol infusion (to provide moderate to deep levels of seda-
tion). A potent opioid analgesic or ketamine may be added to 
minimize the discomfort associated with the injection of local 
anesthesia and the surgical manipulations. 
 Another approach, used primarily by nonanesthesiologists, is 
called  conscious sedation . This technique refers to drug-induced 
alleviation of anxiety and pain in combination with an altered 
level of consciousness associated with the use of smaller doses of 
sedative medications. In this state the patient retains the ability to 
maintain a patent airway and is responsive to verbal commands. 
A wide variety of intravenous anesthetic drugs have proved to be 
useful drugs in conscious sedation techniques (eg, diazepam, 
midazolam, propofol). Use of benzodiazepines and opioid anal-
gesics (eg, fentanyl) in conscious sedation protocols has the 
advantage of being reversible by the specific receptor antagonist 
drugs (flumazenil and naloxone, respectively). 
 A specialized form of sedation is occasionally required in 
the ICU, when patients are under severe stress and require 
mechanical ventilation for prolonged periods. In this situation, 
sedative-hypnotic drugs and low doses of intravenous anesthet-
ics may be combined. Recently, dexmedetomidine has become a 
popular choice for this indication. 
 Deep sedation is similar to a light state of general (intrave-
nous) anesthesia involving decreased consciousness from which 
the patient is not easily aroused. The transition from deep seda-
tion to general anesthesia is fluid, and it is sometimes difficult to 
clearly determine where the transition is. Because deep sedation 
is often accompanied by a loss of protective reflexes, an inability 
to maintain a patent airway, and lack of verbal responsiveness to 
surgical stimuli, this state may be indistinguishable from intrave-
nous anesthesia. Intravenous agents used in deep sedation pro-
tocols mainly include the sedative-hypnotics propofol and 
midazolam, sometimes in combination with potent opioid anal-
gesics or ketamine, depending on the level of pain associated 
with the surgery or procedure. 
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    431
FIGURE 25–1 Putative targets of anesthetic action. Anesthetic drugs may increase inhibitory synaptic activity or diminish excitatory 
activity. ACh, acetylcholine; GABAA, γ-aminobutyric acid-A.
Anesthetics
Glutamate
or ACh
Action
potential
Postsynaptic neuron 
nACh
receptor
NMDA
receptor
B
Presynaptic neuron
Ca2+
Ca2+
Mg2+
Ca2+
Mg2+
Mg2+
Na+
Ca2+
Na+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Anesthetics
GABA
or Glycine
Action
potential
A
Presynaptic neuron
Mg2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Postsynaptic neuron 
Glycine
receptor
channel
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
K+
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
Cl-
GABAA
receptor
the partial pressure in the alveoli and, ultimately, the blood. 
Increases in the inspired partial pressure increase the rate of rise in 
the alveoli and thus accelerate induction. The increase of partial 
pressure in the alveoli is usually expressed as a ratio of alveolar 
concentration (F A ) over inspired concentration (F I ); the faster F A /F I 
approaches 1 (1 representing the equilibrium), the faster anesthe-
sia will occur during an inhaled induction. 
 The other parameter that directly controls the rate by which 
F A /F I approaches 1 is alveolar ventilation. An increase in ventilation 
will increase the rate of rise. The magnitude of the effect varies 
432    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
FIGURE 25–2 Chemical structures of inhaled anesthetics.
Nitrous oxide
Halothane
N
N
O
C
H
F
C
F
Br
F
Cl
Enflurane
C
H
C
F
F
Cl
F
C
H
O
F
F
Isoflurane
C
F
C
F
H
F
Cl
C
H
O
F
F
Sevoflurane
C
F
C
F
H
F
F
C
F
F
C
F
O
H
H
Desflurane
C
F
C
F
H
F
F
C
F
O
H
F
Xe
Xenon
according to the blood:gas partition coefficient. An increase in 
pulmonary ventilation is accompanied by only a slight increase 
in arterial tension of an anesthetic with low blood solubility, but 
can significantly increase tension of agents with moderate to high 
blood solubility ( Figure 25–3 ). For example, a fourfold increase in 
the ventilation rate almost doubles the F A /F I ratio for halothane 
during the first 10 minutes of administration but increases the 
F A /F I ratio for nitrous oxide by only 15%. Thus, hyperventilation 
increases the speed of induction of anesthesia with inhaled anes-
thetics that would normally have a slow onset. Depression of res-
piration by opioid analgesics slows the onset of anesthesia of 
inhaled anesthetics unless ventilation is manually or mechanically 
assisted. 
 B. Factors Controlling Uptake 
 The increase of F A /F I , which is an important determinant of the 
speed of induction, is opposed by the uptake of anesthetic into the 
blood, which is determined by pharmacokinetic parameters 
unique to the anesthetic agent as well as patient factors. 
 1. Solubility— One of the most important factors influencing 
the transfer of an anesthetic from the lungs to the arterial blood is 
its solubility characteristics ( Table 25–1 ). The blood:gas partition 
coefficient is a useful index of solubility and defines the relative 
affinity of an anesthetic for the blood compared with that of 
inspired gas. The partition coefficients for desflurane and nitrous 
oxide, which are relatively insoluble in blood, are extremely low. 
When an anesthetic with low blood solubility diffuses from the 
lung into the arterial blood, relatively few molecules are required 
to raise its partial pressure; therefore, the arterial tension rises 
rapidly ( Figure 25–4 , top; nitrous oxide, desflurane, sevoflurane). 
Conversely, for anesthetics with moderate to high solubility 
( Figure 25–4 , bottom; halothane, isoflurane), more molecules 
Airway
Alveoli
Blood
Brain
Airway
Alveoli
Blood
Brain
Nitrous oxide
Halothane
FIGURE 25–3 Why induction of anesthesia is slower with more soluble anesthetic gases. In this schematic diagram, solubility in blood is 
represented by the relative size of the blood compartment (the more soluble, the larger the compartment). Relative partial pressures of the 
agents in the compartments are indicated by the degree of filling of each compartment. For a given concentration or partial pressure of the two 
anesthetic gases in the inspired air, it will take much longer for the blood partial pressure of the more soluble gas (halothane) to rise to the 
same partial pressure as in the alveoli. Since the concentration of the anesthetic agent in the brain can rise no faster than the concentration in 
the blood, the onset of anesthesia will be slower with halothane than with nitrous oxide.
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    433
dissolve before partial pressure changes significantly, and arterial 
tension of the gas increases less rapidly. A blood:gas partition coef-
ficient of 0.47 for nitrous oxide means that at equilibrium, the 
concentration in blood is 0.47 times the concentration in the 
alveolar space (gas). A larger blood:gas partition coefficient pro-
duces a greater uptake of anesthetic and therefore reduces the time 
required for F A /F I to approach 1 (equilibrium,  Figure 25–4 ). 
 2. Cardiac output— Changes in pulmonary blood flow have 
obvious effects on the uptake of anesthetic gases from the alveolar 
space. An increase in pulmonary blood flow (ie, increased cardiac 
output) will increase the uptake of anesthetic, thereby decreasing 
the rate by which F A /F I rises, which will decrease the rate of induc-
tion of anesthesia. To better understand this mechanism, one 
should think about the effect of cardiac output in combination 
with the tissue distribution and uptake of anesthetic into other 
tissue compartments. An increase in cardiac output and pulmonary 
blood flow will increase uptake of anesthetic into the blood, but 
the anesthetic taken up will be distributed in all tissues, not just 
the CNS. Cerebral blood flow is well regulated and the increased 
cardiac output will therefore increase delivery of anesthetic to other 
tissues and not the brain. 
 3. Alveolar-venous partial pressure difference— The anes-
thetic partial pressure difference between alveolar and mixed 
venous blood is dependent mainly on uptake of the anesthetic by 
the tissues, including nonneural tissues. Depending on the rate 
and extent of tissue uptake, venous blood returning to the lungs 
may contain significantly less anesthetic than arterial blood. The 
greater this difference in anesthetic gas tensions, the more time it 
will take to achieve equilibrium with brain tissue. Anesthetic 
uptake into tissues is influenced by factors similar to those that 
determine transfer of the anesthetic from the lung to the intravas-
cular space, including tissue:blood partition coefficients, rates of 
blood flow to the tissues, and concentration gradients. 
 During the induction phase of anesthesia (and the initial phase 
of the maintenance period), the tissues that exert greatest influ-
ence on the arteriovenous anesthetic concentration gradient are 
those that are highly perfused (eg, brain, heart, liver, kidneys, and 
splanchnic bed). Combined, these tissues receive over 75% of the 
resting cardiac output. In the case of volatile anesthetics with rela-
tively high solubility in highly perfused tissues, venous blood 
concentration initially is very low, and equilibrium with the alveo-
lar space is achieved slowly. 
 During maintenance of anesthesia with inhaled anesthetics, the 
drug continues to be transferred between various tissues at rates 
dependent on the solubility of the agent, the concentration gradi-
ent between the blood and the tissue, and the tissue blood flow. 
Although muscle and skin constitute 50% of the total body mass, 
anesthetics accumulate more slowly in these tissues than in highly 
perfused tissues (eg, brain) because they receive only one fifth of 
the resting cardiac output. Although most anesthetic agents are 
highly soluble in adipose (fatty) tissues, the relatively low blood 
TABLE 25–1 Pharmacologic properties of inhaled anesthetics.
Anesthetic
Blood:Gas 
Partition 
Coefficient1
Brain:Blood 
Partition 
Coefficient1
Minimal 
Alveolar 
Concentration 
(MAC) (%)2
Metabolism
Comments
Nitrous oxide
0.47 
1.1
> 100
None
Incomplete anesthetic; rapid onset and recovery
Desflurane
0.42
1.3
6–7
< 0.05%
Low volatility; poor induction agent (pungent); rapid 
recovery
Sevoflurane
0.69
1.7
2.0
2–5% (fluoride)
Rapid onset and recovery; unstable in soda-lime
Isoflurane
1.40
2.6
1.40
< 2%
Medium rate of onset and recovery
Enflurane
1.80
1.4
1.7
8%
Medium rate of onset and recovery
Halothane
2.30
2.9
0.75
> 40%
Medium rate of onset and recovery
1 Partition coefficients (at 37°C) are from multiple literature sources.
2 MAC is the anesthetic concentration that produces immobility in 50% of patients exposed to a noxious stimulus.
Halothane
Sevoflurane
Nitrous oxide
Desflurane
Isoflurane
FA/FI
1
0.5
0
10
Time (min)
20
30
0
FIGURE 25–4 The alveolar anesthetic concentration (FA) 
approaches the inspired anesthetic concentration (FI) fastest for the 
least soluble agents.
434    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
perfusion to these tissues delays accumulation, and equilibrium is 
unlikely to occur with most anesthetics during a typical 1- to 
3-hour operation. 
 The combined effect of ventilation, solubility in the different 
tissues, cardiac output, and blood flow distribution determines the 
rate of rise of F A /F I characteristic of each drug ( Figure 25–5 ). 
When inducing anesthesia by inhalation only, the rate by which 
F A /F I approaches 1 will determine the speed of induction. 
 Elimination 
 Recovery from inhalation anesthesia follows some of the same 
principles in reverse that are important during induction. The 
time to recovery from inhalation anesthesia depends on the rate of 
elimination of the anesthetic from the brain. One of the most 
important factors governing rate of recovery is the blood:gas parti-
tion coefficient of the anesthetic agent. Other factors controlling 
rate of recovery include pulmonary blood flow, magnitude of 
ventilation, and tissue solubility of the anesthetic. Two features 
differentiate the recovery phase from the induction phase. First, 
transfer of an anesthetic from the lungs to blood can be enhanced 
by increasing its concentration in inspired air, but the reverse 
transfer process cannot be enhanced because the concentration in 
the lungs cannot be reduced below zero. Second, at the beginning 
of the recovery phase, the anesthetic gas tension in different tissues 
may be quite variable, depending on the specific agent and the 
duration of anesthesia. In contrast, at the start of induction of 
anesthesia the initial anesthetic tension is zero in all tissues. 
 Inhaled anesthetics that are relatively insoluble in blood (ie, 
possess low blood:gas partition coefficients) and brain are elimi-
nated at faster rates than the more soluble anesthetics. The washout 
of nitrous oxide, desflurane, and sevoflurane occurs at a rapid rate, 
leading to a more rapid recovery from their anesthetic effects com-
pared with halothane and isoflurane. Halothane is approximately 
twice as soluble in brain tissue and five times more soluble in 
blood than nitrous oxide and desflurane; its elimination therefore 
takes place more slowly, and recovery from halothane- and isoflu-
rane-based anesthesia is predictably less rapid. 
 The duration of exposure to the anesthetic can also have a sig-
nificant effect on the recovery time, especially in the case of the 
more soluble anesthetics (eg, halothane and isoflurane). 
Accumulation of anesthetics in muscle, skin, and fat increases with 
prolonged exposure (especially in obese patients), and blood tension 
may decline slowly during recovery as the anesthetic is slowly elimi-
nated from these tissues. Although recovery may be rapid even with 
the more soluble agents following a short period of exposure, recovery 
is slow after prolonged administration of halothane or isoflurane. 
 A. Ventilation 
 Two parameters that can be manipulated by the anesthesiologist 
are useful in controlling the speed of induction of and recovery 
from inhaled anesthesia: (1) concentration of anesthetic in the 
inspired gas and (2) alveolar ventilation. Because the concentra-
tion of anesthetic in the inspired gas cannot be reduced below 
zero, ventilation is the only way to speed recovery. 
 B. Metabolism 
 Modern inhaled anesthetics are eliminated mainly by ventilation 
and are only metabolized to a very small extent; thus, metabolism 
of these drugs does not play a significant role in the termination of 
their effect. However, metabolism may have important implications 
for their toxicity (see Toxicity of Anesthetic Agents). Hepatic 
metabolism may also contribute to the elimination of and recovery 
from some older volatile anesthetics. For example, halothane is 
eliminated more rapidly during recovery than enflurane, which 
would not be predicted from their respective tissue solubility. This 
increased elimination occurs because over 40% of inspired halo-
thane is metabolized during an average anesthetic procedure, 
whereas less than 10% of enflurane is metabolized over the same 
period. 
 In terms of the extent of hepatic metabolism, the rank order for 
the inhaled anesthetics is halothane > enflurane > sevoflurane > 
isoflurane > desflurane > nitrous oxide ( Table 25–1 ). Nitrous 
oxide is not metabolized by human tissues. However, bacteria in 
the gastrointestinal tract may be able to break down the nitrous 
oxide molecule. 
 PHARMACODYNAMICS 
 Organ System Effects of Inhaled 
Anesthetics 
 A. Cerebral Effects 
 Anesthetic potency is currently described by the minimal alveolar 
concentration (MAC) required to prevent a response to a surgical 
FA/FI
1.0
0.5
0
2
8
2
8
20
10
Halothane
Nitrous oxide
Ventilation (L/min)
30
Time (min)
40
50
FIGURE 25–5 Effect of ventilation on FA/FI. Increased ventilation 
(8 versus 2 L/min) has a much greater effect on equilibration of 
halothane than nitrous oxide.
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    435
 What Does Anesthesia Represent & Where Does It Work? 
 Anesthetic action has three principal components: immobility, 
amnesia, and unconsciousness. 
 Immobility 
 Immobility is the easiest anesthetic end point to measure. 
Edmond Eger and colleagues introduced the concept of minimal 
alveolar concentration (MAC) to quantify the potency of an inha-
lational anesthetic. They defined 1.0 MAC as the partial pressure 
of an inhalational anesthetic in the alveoli of the lungs at which 
50% of a population of nonrelaxed patients remained immobile 
at the time of a skin incision. Anesthetic immobility is mediated 
primarily by neural inhibition within the spinal cord. 
 Amnesia 
 The ablation of memory arises from several locations in the CNS, 
including the hippocampus, amygdala, prefrontal cortex, and 
regions of the sensory and motor cortices. Memory researchers 
differentiate two types of memory: (1) explicit memory, ie, specific 
awareness or consciousness under anesthesia, and (2) implicit 
memory, the unconscious acquisition of information under ade-
quate levels of anesthesia. Their studies have found that formation 
of both types of memory is reliably prevented at low MAC values 
(0.2–0.4 MAC). Prevention of explicit memory (awareness) has 
spurred the development of monitors such as the bispectral 
index, electroencephalogram, and entropy monitor of auditory 
evoked potentials to recognize inadequate planes of anesthesia. 
 Consciousness 
 The ability of anesthetic drugs to abolish consciousness requires 
action at anatomic locations responsible for the formation of 
human consciousness. Leading neuroscientists studying con-
sciousness identify three regions in the brain involved in generat-
ing personal awareness: the cerebral cortex, the thalamus, and 
the reticular activating system. These regions seem to interact as 
a cortical system via identified pathways, producing a state in 
which humans are awake, aware, and perceiving. 
  Our current state of understanding supports the following 
framework: sensory stimuli conducted through the reticular for-
mation of the brainstem into supratentorial signaling loops, con-
necting the thalamus with various regions of the cortex, are the 
foundation of consciousness. These neural pathways involved in 
the development of consciousness are disrupted by anesthetics. 
incision (see Box: What Does Anesthesia Represent & Where 
Does It Work?). 
 Inhaled anesthetics (like intravenous anesthetics, discussed 
later) decrease the metabolic activity of the brain. Decreased 
cerebral metabolic rate (CMR) generally reduces blood flow 
within the brain. However, volatile anesthetics also cause cerebral 
vasodilation, which can increase cerebral blood flow. The net 
effect on cerebral blood flow (increase, decrease, or no change) 
depends on the concentration of anesthetic delivered. At 0.5 
MAC, the reduction in CMR is greater than the vasodilation 
caused by the anesthetic, so cerebral blood flow is decreased. 
Conversely, at 1.5 MAC, vasodilation by the anesthetic is greater 
than the reduction in CMR, so cerebral blood flow is increased. In 
between, at 1.0 MAC, the effects are balanced and cerebral blood 
flow is unchanged. An increase in cerebral blood flow is clinically 
undesirable in patients who have increased intracranial pressure 
because of brain tumor, intracranial hemorrhage, or head injury. 
Therefore, administration of high concentrations of volatile anes-
thetics is undesirable in patients with increased intracranial pressure. 
Hyperventilation can be used to attenuate this response; decreas-
ing the Pa CO 2 (the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial 
blood) through hyperventilation causes cerebral vasoconstriction. 
If the patient is hyperventilated before the volatile agent is started, 
the increase in intracranial pressure can be minimized. 
 Nitrous oxide can increase cerebral blood flow and cause 
increased intracranial pressure. This effect is most likely caused by 
activation of the sympathetic nervous system (as described above). 
Therefore, nitrous oxide may be combined with other agents 
(intravenous anesthetics) or techniques (hyperventilation) that 
reduce cerebral blood flow in patients with increased intracranial 
pressure. 
 Potent inhaled anesthetics produce a basic pattern of change to 
brain electrical activity as recorded by standard electroencephalog-
raphy (EEG). Isoflurane, desflurane, sevoflurane, halothane, and 
enflurane produce initial activation of the EEG at low doses and 
then slowing of electrical activity up to doses of 1.0–1.5 MAC. At 
higher concentrations, EEG suppression increases to the point of 
electrical silence with isoflurane at 2.0–2.5 MAC. Isolated epilep-
tic-like patterns may also be seen between 1.0 and 2.0 MAC, especially 
with sevoflurane and enflurane, but frank clinical seizure activity has 
been observed only with enflurane. Nitrous oxide used alone causes 
fast electrical oscillations emanating from the frontal cortex at doses 
associated with analgesia and depressed consciousness. 
 Traditionally, anesthetic effects on the brain produce four stages 
or levels of increasing depth of CNS depression (Guedel’s signs, 
derived from observations of the effects of inhaled diethyl ether): 
 Stage I—analgesia: The patient initially experiences analgesia 
without amnesia. Later in stage I, both analgesia and amnesia are 
produced.  Stage II—excitement: During this stage, the patient 
appears delirious, may vocalize but is completely amnesic. 
Respiration is rapid, and heart rate and blood pressure increase. 
Duration and severity of this light stage of anesthesia is 
shortened by rapidly increasing the concentration of the agent. 
 Stage III—surgical anesthesia: This stage begins with slowing of 
436    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
respiration and heart rate and extends to complete cessation of 
spontaneous respiration (apnea). Four planes of stage III are 
described based on changes in ocular movements, eye reflexes, and 
pupil size, indicating increasing depth of anesthesia.  Stage 
IV—medullary depression: This deep stage of anesthesia repre-
sents severe depression of the CNS, including the vasomotor center 
in the medulla and respiratory center in the brainstem. Without 
circulatory and respiratory support, death would rapidly ensue. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 Halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane all 
depress normal cardiac contractility (halothane and enflurane 
more so than isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane). As a result, 
all volatile agents tend to decrease mean arterial pressure in direct 
proportion to their alveolar concentration. With halothane and 
enflurane, the reduced arterial pressure is caused primarily by 
myocardial depression (reduced cardiac output) and there is little 
change in systemic vascular resistance. In contrast, isoflurane, 
desflurane, and sevoflurane produce greater vasodilation with 
minimal effect on cardiac output. These differences may have 
important implications for patients with heart failure. Because 
isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane better preserve cardiac out-
put as well as reduce preload (ventricular filling) and afterload 
(systemic vascular resistance), these agents may be better choices 
for patients with impaired myocardial function. 
 Nitrous oxide also depresses myocardial function in a concen-
tration-dependent manner. This depression may be significantly 
offset by a concomitant activation of the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem resulting in preservation of cardiac output. Therefore, admin-
istration of nitrous oxide in combination with the more potent 
volatile anesthetics can minimize circulatory depressant effects by 
both anesthetic-sparing and sympathetic-activating actions. 
 Because all inhaled anesthetics produce a dose-dependent 
decrease in arterial blood pressure, activation of autonomic ner-
vous system reflexes may trigger increased heart rate. However, 
halothane, enflurane, and sevoflurane have little effect on heart 
rate, probably because they attenuate baroreceptor input into the 
autonomic nervous system. Desflurane and isoflurane significantly 
increase heart rate because they cause less depression of the barore-
ceptor reflex. In addition, desflurane can trigger transient sympa-
thetic activation—with elevated catecholamine levels—to cause 
marked increases in heart rate and blood pressure during adminis-
tration of high desflurane concentrations or when desflurane 
concentrations are changed rapidly. 
 Inhaled anesthetics tend to reduce myocardial oxygen con-
sumption, which reflects depression of normal cardiac contractility 
and decreased arterial blood pressure. In addition, inhaled anes-
thetics produce coronary vasodilation. The net effect of decreased 
oxygen demand and increased coronary flow (oxygen supply) is 
improved myocardial oxygenation. However, other factors such as 
surgical stimulation, intravascular volume status, blood oxygen 
levels, and withdrawal of perioperative β blockers, may tilt the 
oxygen supply-demand balance toward myocardial ischemia. 
 Halothane and, to a lesser extent, other volatile anesthetics 
sensitize the myocardium to epinephrine and circulating 
catecholamines. Ventricular arrhythmias may occur when patients 
under anesthesia with halothane are given sympathomimetic 
drugs or have high circulating levels of endogenous catecholamines 
(eg, anxious patients, administration of epinephrine-containing 
local anesthetics, inadequate intraoperative anesthesia or analgesia, 
patients with pheochromocytomas). This effect is less marked for 
isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane. 
 C. Respiratory Effects 
 All volatile anesthetics possess varying degrees of bronchodilating 
properties, an effect of value in patients with active wheezing and 
in status asthmaticus. However, airway irritation, which may pro-
voke coughing or breath-holding, is induced by the pungency of 
some volatile anesthetics. The pungency of isoflurane and desflu-
rane makes these agents less suitable for induction of anesthesia in 
patients with active bronchospasm. These reactions rarely occur 
with halothane and sevoflurane, which are considered nonpungent. 
Therefore, the bronchodilating action of halothane and sevoflurane 
makes them the agents of choice in patients with underlying airway 
problems. Nitrous oxide is also nonpungent and can facilitate inha-
lational induction of anesthesia in a patient with bronchospasm. 
 The control of breathing is significantly affected by inhaled 
anesthetics. With the exception of nitrous oxide, all inhaled anes-
thetics in current use cause a dose-dependent decrease in tidal 
volume and an increase in respiratory rate (rapid shallow breath-
ing pattern). However, the increase in respiratory rate varies 
among agents and does not fully compensate for the decrease in 
tidal volume, resulting in a decrease in alveolar ventilation. In 
addition, all volatile anesthetics are respiratory depressants, as 
defined by a reduced ventilatory response to increased levels of 
carbon dioxide in the blood. The degree of ventilatory depression 
varies among the volatile agents, with isoflurane and enflurane 
being the most depressant. By this hypoventilation mechanism, all 
volatile anesthetics increase the resting level of PaCO 2 . 
 Volatile anesthetics also raise the apneic threshold (PaCO 2 level 
below which apnea occurs through lack of CO 2 -driven respiratory 
stimulation) and decrease the ventilatory response to hypoxia. In 
practice, the respiratory depressant effects of anesthetics are over-
come by assisting (controlling) ventilation mechanically. The 
ventilatory depression produced by inhaled anesthetics may be 
counteracted by surgical stimulation; however, low, subanesthetic 
concentrations of volatile anesthetic present after surgery in the 
early recovery period can continue to depress the compensatory 
increase in ventilation normally caused by hypoxia. 
 Inhaled anesthetics also depress mucociliary function in the 
airway. During prolonged exposure to inhaled anesthetics, mucus 
pooling and plugging may result in atelectasis and the develop-
ment of postoperative respiratory complications, including hypox-
emia and respiratory infections. 
 D. Renal Effects 
 Inhaled anesthetics tend to decrease glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR) and urine flow. Renal blood flow may also be decreased by 
some agents but filtration fraction is increased, implying that 
autoregulatory control of efferent arteriole tone helps compensate 
and limits the reduction in GFR. In general these anesthetic 
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    437
effects are minor compared with the stress of surgery itself and 
usually reversible after discontinuation of the anesthetic. 
 E. Hepatic Effects 
 Volatile anesthetics cause a concentration-dependent decrease in 
portal vein blood flow that parallels the decline in cardiac output 
produced by these agents. However, total hepatic blood flow may be 
relatively preserved as hepatic artery blood flow to the liver may 
increase or stay the same. Although transient changes in liver func-
tion tests may occur following exposure to volatile anesthetics, per-
sistent elevation in liver enzymes is rare except following repeated 
exposures to halothane (see Toxicity of Anesthetic Agents). 
 F. Effects on Uterine Smooth Muscle 
 Nitrous oxide appears to have little effect on uterine musculature. 
However, the halogenated anesthetics are potent uterine muscle 
relaxants and produce this effect in a concentration-dependent 
fashion. This pharmacologic effect can be helpful when profound 
uterine relaxation is required for intrauterine fetal manipulation or 
manual extraction of a retained placenta during delivery. However, 
it can also lead to increased uterine bleeding. 
 Toxicity of Anesthetic Agents 
 A. Acute Toxicity 
 1. Nephrotoxicity— Metabolism of enflurane and sevoflurane 
may generate compounds that are potentially nephrotoxic. Although 
their metabolism can liberate nephrotoxic fluoride ions, significant 
renal injury has been reported only for enflurane with prolonged 
exposure. The insolubility and rapid elimination of sevoflurane may 
prevent toxicity. This drug may be degraded by carbon dioxide 
absorbents in anesthesia machines to form a nephrotoxic vinyl ether 
compound termed “compound A” which, in high concentrations, 
has caused proximal tubular necrosis in rats. Nevertheless, there 
have been no reports of renal injury in humans receiving sevoflurane 
anesthesia. Moreover, exposure to sevoflurane does not produce any 
change in standard markers of renal function. 
 2. Hematotoxicity— Prolonged exposure to nitrous oxide 
decreases methionine synthase activity, which theoretically could 
cause megaloblastic anemia. Megaloblastic bone marrow changes 
have been observed in patients after 12-hour exposure to 50% 
nitrous oxide. Chronic exposure of dental personnel to nitrous 
oxide in inadequately ventilated dental operating suites is a poten-
tial occupational hazard. 
 All inhaled anesthetics can produce some carbon monoxide 
(CO) from their interaction with strong bases in dry carbon diox-
ide absorbers. CO binds to hemoglobin with high affinity, reduc-
ing oxygen delivery to tissues. Desflurane produces the most CO, 
and intraoperative formation of CO has been reported. CO pro-
duction can be avoided simply by using fresh carbon dioxide 
absorbent and by preventing its complete desiccation. 
 3. Malignant hyperthermia— Malignant hyperthermia is a 
heritable genetic disorder of skeletal muscle that occurs in susceptible 
individuals exposed to volatile anesthetics while undergoing gen-
eral anesthesia (see  Chapter 16 and  Table 16–4 ). The depolarizing 
muscle relaxant succinylcholine may also trigger malignant hyper-
thermia. The malignant hyperthermia syndrome consists of mus-
cle rigidity, hyperthermia, rapid onset of tachycardia and 
hypercapnia, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis following 
exposure to one or more triggering agents. Malignant hyper-
thermia is a rare but important cause of anesthetic morbidity and 
mortality. The specific biochemical abnormality is an increase in 
free cytosolic calcium concentration in skeletal muscle cells. 
Treatment includes administration of dantrolene (to reduce cal-
cium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum) and appropriate 
measures to reduce body temperature and restore electrolyte and 
acid-base balance (see  Chapter 27 ). 
 Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility is characterized by 
genetic heterogeneity, and several predisposing clinical myopathies 
have been identified. It has been associated with mutations in the 
gene coding for the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RyR1), 
the calcium release channel on the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and 
mutant alleles of the gene encoding the α 1 subunit of the human 
skeletal muscle L-type voltage-dependent calcium channel. 
However, the genetic loci identified to date account for less than 
50% of malignant hyperthermia-susceptible individuals, and 
genetic testing cannot definitively determine malignant hyper-
thermia susceptibility. Currently, the most reliable test to establish 
susceptibility is the in vitro caffeine-halothane contracture test 
using skeletal muscle biopsy samples. 
 4. Hepatotoxicity (halothane hepatitis)— Hepatic dysfunc-
tion following surgery and general anesthesia is most likely caused 
by hypovolemic shock, infection conferred by blood transfusion, 
or other surgical stresses rather than by volatile anesthetic toxicity. 
However, a small subset of individuals previously exposed to 
halothane has developed fulminant hepatic failure. The incidence 
of severe hepatotoxicity following exposure to halothane is esti-
mated to be in the range of 1 in 20,000–35,000. The mechanisms 
underlying halothane hepatotoxicity remain unclear, but studies 
in animals implicate the formation of reactive metabolites that 
either cause direct hepatocellular damage (eg, free radicals) or 
initiate immune-mediated responses. Cases of hepatitis following 
exposure to other volatile anesthetics, including enflurane, isoflu-
rane, and desflurane, have rarely been reported. 
 B. Chronic Toxicity 
 1. Mutagenicity, teratogenicity, and reproductive effects—
 Under normal conditions, inhaled anesthetics including nitrous 
oxide are neither mutagens nor carcinogens in patients. Nitrous 
oxide can be directly teratogenic in animals under conditions of 
extremely high exposure. Halothane, enflurane, isoflurane, desflu-
rane, and sevoflurane may be teratogenic in rodents as a result of 
physiologic changes associated with the anesthesia rather than 
through a direct teratogenic effect. 
 The most consistent finding in surveys conducted to determine 
the reproductive success of female operating room personnel has 
been a questionably higher-than-expected incidence of miscarriages. 
438    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
However, there are several problems in interpreting these studies. 
The association of obstetric problems with surgery and anesthesia in 
pregnant patients is also an important consideration. In the USA, at 
least 50,000 pregnant women each year undergo anesthesia and 
surgery for indications unrelated to pregnancy. The risk of abortion 
is clearly higher following this experience. It is not obvious, how-
ever, whether the underlying disease, surgery, anesthesia, or a com-
bination of these factors is the cause of the increased risk 
 2. Carcinogenicity— Epidemiologic studies suggested an 
increase in the cancer rate in operating room personnel who were 
exposed to trace concentrations of anesthetic agents. However, no 
study has demonstrated the existence of a causal relationship 
between anesthetics and cancer. Many other factors might account 
for the questionably positive results seen after a careful review of 
epidemiologic data. Most operating rooms now use scavenging 
systems to remove trace concentrations of anesthetics released from 
anesthetic machines. 
 ■ INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS 
 Intravenous nonopioid anesthetics play an important role in the 
practice of modern anesthesia. They are widely used to facilitate 
rapid induction of anesthesia and have replaced inhalation as the 
preferred method of anesthesia induction in most settings except for 
pediatric anesthesia. Intravenous agents are also commonly used to 
provide sedation during monitored anesthesia care and for patients 
in intensive care (ICU) settings. With the introduction of propofol, 
intravenous anesthesia also became an option for the maintenance of 
anesthesia. However, similar to the inhaled agents, the currently avail-
able intravenous anesthetics are not ideal anesthetic drugs in the sense 
of producing all and only the five desired effects (unconsciousness, 
amnesia, analgesia, inhibition of autonomic reflexes, and skeletal 
muscle relaxation). Therefore,  balanced anesthesia with multiple 
drugs (inhaled anesthetics, sedative-hypnotics, opioids, neuromuscular 
blocking drugs) is generally used to minimize unwanted side effects. 
 The intravenous anesthetics used for induction of general anes-
thesia are lipophilic and preferentially partition into highly per-
fused lipophilic tissues (brain, spinal cord), which accounts for 
their rapid onset of action. Regardless of the extent and speed of 
their metabolism, termination of the effect of a single bolus is 
determined by redistribution of the drug into less perfused and 
inactive tissues such as skeletal muscle and fat. Thus, all drugs used 
for induction of anesthesia have a similar duration of action when 
administered as a single bolus dose despite significant differences in 
their metabolism.  Figure 25–6 shows the chemical structures of 
common clinically used intravenous anesthetics.  Table 25–2 lists 
pharmacokinetic properties of these and other intravenous agents. 
 PROPOFOL 
 In most countries, propofol is the most frequently administered 
drug for induction of anesthesia and has largely replaced barbitu-
rates for this indication. Because its pharmacokinetic profile 
S
N
H
O
N
H
O
C2H5
CH
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
Thiopental
N
F
N
CH3
Cl
N
Midazolam
Cl
HN
CH3
O
Ketamine
Etomidate
C2H5OC
CHCH3
N
N
O
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
OH
Propofol
FIGURE 25–6 Chemical structures of some intravenous anesthetics.
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    439
TABLE 25–2 Pharmacokinetic properties of intravenous anesthetics.
Drug
Induction 
Dose 
(mg/kg IV)
Duration of 
Action (min)
Vdss (L/kg)
t½ 
Distribution 
(min)
Protein Binding 
(%)
CL (mL/kg/min)
t½ Elimination 
(h)
Dexmedetomidine
NA
NA
2–3
6
94
10–30
2–3
Diazepam
0.3–0.6
15–30
0.7–1.7
10–5
98
0.2–0.5
20–50
Etomidate
0.2–0.3
3–8
2.5–4.5
2–4
77
18–25
2.9–5.3
Ketamine
1–2
5–10
3.1
11–16
12
12–17
2–4
Lorazepam
0.03–0.1
60–120
0.8–1.3
3–10
98
0.8–1.8
11–22
Methohexital
1–1.5
4–7
2.2
5–6
73
11
4
Midazolam
0.1–0.3
15–20
1.1–1.7
7–15
94
6.4–11
1.7–2.6
Propofol
1–2.5
3–8
2–10
2–4
97
20–30
4–23
Thiopental
3–5
5–10
2.5
2–4
83
3.4
11
Note: The duration of action reflects the duration after a typical single IV dose given for induction of anesthesia. Data are for average adult patients. 
CL, clearance; NA, not applicable; Vdss, volume of distribution at steady state.
allows for continuous infusions, propofol is also used during 
maintenance of anesthesia and is a common choice for sedation 
in the setting of monitored anesthesia care. Increasingly, propofol 
is also used for sedation in the ICU as well as conscious sedation 
and short-duration general anesthesia in locations outside the 
operating room (eg, interventional radiology suites, emergency 
department; see Box: Sedation & Monitored Anesthesia Care, 
earlier). 
 Propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) is an alkyl phenol with hyp-
notic properties that is chemically distinct from other groups of 
intravenous anesthetics ( Figure 25–6 ). Because of its poor solubil-
ity in water, it is formulated as an emulsion containing 10% soy-
bean oil, 2.25% glycerol, and 1.2% lecithin, the major component 
of the egg yolk phosphatide fraction. Hence, susceptible patients 
may experience allergic reactions. The solution appears milky white 
and slightly viscous, has a pH of approximately 7, and a propofol 
concentration of 1% (10 mg/mL). In some countries, a 2% formu-
lation is available. Although retardants of bacterial growth are 
added to the formulations, solutions should be used as soon as pos-
sible (no more than 8 hours after opening the vial) and proper 
sterile technique is essential. The addition of metabisulfite in one 
of the formulations has raised concern regarding its use in patients 
with reactive airway disease (eg, asthma) or sulfite allergies. 
 The presumed mechanism of action of propofol is through 
potentiation of the chloride current mediated through the GABA A 
receptor complex. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Propofol is rapidly metabolized in the liver; the resulting water-
soluble compounds are presumed to be inactive and are excreted 
through the kidneys. Plasma clearance is high and exceeds hepatic 
blood flow, indicating the importance of extrahepatic metabolism, 
which is thought to occur to a significant extent in the lungs and 
may account for the elimination of up to 30% of a bolus dose of 
the drug ( Table 25–2 ). The recovery from propofol is more complete, 
with less “hangover” than that observed with thiopental, likely due 
to the high plasma clearance. However, as with other intravenous 
drugs, transfer of propofol from the plasma (central) compart-
ment and the associated termination of drug effect after a single 
bolus dose are mainly the result of redistribution from highly 
perfused (brain) to less-well-perfused (skeletal muscle) compart-
ments ( Figure 25–7 ). As with other intravenous agents, awakening 
after an induction dose of propofol usually occurs within 8–10 
minutes. The kinetics of propofol (and other intravenous anes-
thetics) after a single bolus dose or continuous infusion are best 
described by means of a three-compartment model. Such models 
have been used as the basis for developing systems of target-
controlled infusions. 
Percent of dose
Lean tissues
Brain and 
viscera
Blood
Fat
Time (min)
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.125
0.5
1
4
16
64
256
FIGURE 25–7 Redistribution of thiopental after an intravenous 
bolus administration. The redistribution curves for other intravenous 
anesthetics look similar after a bolus injection, explaining that the 
recovery times are similar despite remarkable differences in 
metabolism. Note that the time axis is not linear.
440    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 The  context-sensitive half-time of a drug describes the 
elimination half-time after a continuous infusion as a function of 
the duration of the infusion and is an important factor in the 
suitability of a drug for use as maintenance anesthetic. The 
context-sensitive half-time of propofol is brief, even after a prolonged 
infusion, and recovery remains relatively prompt ( Figure 25–8 ). 
 Organ System Effects 
 A. CNS Effects 
 Propofol acts as hypnotic but does not have analgesic properties. 
Although the drug leads to a general suppression of CNS activity, 
excitatory effects such as twitching or spontaneous movement are 
occasionally observed during induction of anesthesia. These 
effects may resemble seizure activity; however, most studies sup-
port an anticonvulsant effect of propofol, and the drug may be 
safely administered to patients with seizure disorders. Propofol 
decreases cerebral blood flow and the cerebral metabolic rate for 
oxygen (CMRO 2 ), which decreases intracranial pressure (ICP) 
and intraocular pressure; the magnitude of these changes is com-
parable to that of thiopental. Although propofol can produce a 
desired decrease in ICP, the combination of reduced cerebral 
blood flow and reduced mean arterial pressure due to peripheral 
vasodilation can critically decrease cerebral perfusion pressure. 
 When administered in large doses, propofol produces burst 
suppression in the EEG, an end point that has been used when 
administering intravenous anesthetics for neuroprotection during 
neurosurgical procedures. Evidence from animal studies suggests 
that propofol’s neuroprotective effects during focal ischemia are 
similar to those of thiopental and isoflurane. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 Compared with other induction drugs, propofol produces the 
most pronounced decrease in systemic blood pressure; this is a 
result of profound vasodilation in both arterial and venous circulations 
leading to reductions in preload and afterload. This effect on sys-
temic blood pressure is more pronounced with increased age, in 
patients with reduced intravascular fluid volume, and with rapid 
injection. Because the hypotensive effects are further augmented by 
the inhibition of the normal baroreflex response, the vasodilation 
only leads to a small increase in heart rate. Profound bradycardia 
and asystole after the administration of propofol have been described 
in healthy adults despite prophylactic anticholinergic drugs. 
 C. Respiratory Effects 
 Propofol is a potent respiratory depressant and generally produces 
apnea after an induction dose. A maintenance infusion reduces 
minute ventilation through reductions in tidal volume and respi-
ratory rate, with the effect on tidal volume being more pro-
nounced. In addition, the ventilatory response to hypoxia and 
hypercapnia is reduced. Propofol causes a greater reduction in 
upper airway reflexes than thiopental does, which makes it well 
suited for instrumentation of the airway, such as placement of a 
laryngeal mask airway. 
 D. Other Effects 
 Although propofol, unlike volatile anesthetics, does not augment 
neuromuscular block, studies have found good intubating condi-
tions after propofol induction without the use of neuromuscular 
blocking agents. Unexpected tachycardia occurring during propo-
fol anesthesia should prompt laboratory evaluation for possible 
metabolic acidosis (propofol infusion syndrome). An interesting 
and desirable side effect of propofol is its antiemetic activity. Pain 
on injection is a common complaint and can be reduced by pre-
medication with an opioid or coadministration with lidocaine. 
Dilution of propofol and the use of larger veins for injection can 
also reduce the incidence and severity of injection pain. 
 Clinical Uses & Dosage 
 The most common use of propofol is to facilitate induction of 
general anesthesia by bolus injection of 1–2.5 mg/kg IV. Increasing 
age, reduced cardiovascular reserve, or premedication with benzo-
diazepines or opioids reduces the required induction dose; children 
require higher doses (2.5–3.5 mg/kg IV). Generally, titration of the 
induction dose helps to prevent severe hemodynamic changes. 
Propofol is often used for maintenance of anesthesia either as part 
of a balanced anesthesia regimen in combination with volatile 
anesthetics, nitrous oxide, sedative-hypnotics, and opioids or as 
part of a total intravenous anesthetic technique, usually in combi-
nation with opioids. Therapeutic plasma concentrations for main-
tenance of anesthesia normally range between 3 and 8 mcg/mL 
(typically requiring a continuous infusion rate between 100 and 
200 mcg/kg/min) when combined with nitrous oxide or opioids. 
 When used for sedation of mechanically ventilated patients in 
the ICU or for sedation during procedures, the required plasma 
concentration is 1–2 mcg/mL, which can be achieved with a con-
tinuous infusion at 25–75 mcg/kg/min. Because of its pronounced 
respiratory depressant effect and narrow therapeutic range, propo-
fol should be administered only by individuals trained in airway 
management. 
Infusion duration (h)
0
150
50
0
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
Thiopental
7
8
9
Context-sensitive half-time (min)
Midazolam
Ketamine
Propofol
Etomidate
 FIGURE 25–8  The context-sensitive half-time of common intra-
venous anesthetics. Even after a prolonged infusion, the half-time of 
propofol is relatively short, which makes propofol the preferred 
choice for intravenous anesthesia. Ketamine and etomidate have 
similar characteristics but their use is limited by other effects. 
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    441
 Subanesthetic doses of propofol can be used to treat postopera-
tive nausea and vomiting (10–20 mg IV as bolus or 10 mcg/kg/min 
as an infusion). 
 FOSPROPOFOL 
 As previously noted, injection pain during administration of 
propofol is often perceived as severe, and the lipid emulsion has 
several disadvantages. Intense research has focused on finding 
alternative formulations or related drugs that would address some 
of these problems. Fospropofol is a water-soluble prodrug of 
propofol, chemically described as 2,6-diisopropylphenoxymethyl 
phosphate disodium salt, that was licensed by the Food and Drug 
Administration in 2008 as a sedating agent for use in adult 
patients during monitored anesthesia care. The prodrug is rapidly 
metabolized by alkaline phosphatase, producing propofol, phos-
phate, and formaldehyde. The formaldehyde is metabolized by 
aldehyde dehydrogenase in the liver and in erythrocytes. The 
available fospropofol formulation is a sterile, aqueous, colorless, 
and clear solution that is supplied in a single-dose vial at a concen-
tration of 35 mg/mL under the trade name Lusedra. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Organ System Effects 
 Because the active compound is propofol and fospropofol is a 
prodrug that requires metabolism to form propofol, the pharma-
cokinetics are more complex than for propofol itself. Multi-
compartment models with two compartments for fospropofol and 
three for propofol have been used to describe the kinetics. 
 The effect profile is similar to that of propofol, but onset and 
recovery are prolonged compared with propofol because the pro-
drug must first be converted into an active form. Although patients 
receiving fospropofol do not appear to experience the injection 
pain typical of propofol, a common adverse effect is the experience 
of paresthesia, often in the perianal region, which occurs in up to 
74% of patients. The mechanism for this effect is unknown. 
 Clinical Uses & Dosage 
 Fospropofol is approved for sedation during monitored anesthesia 
care. Supplemental oxygen must be administered to all patients 
receiving the drug. As with propofol, airway compromise is a major 
concern. Hence, it is recommended that fospropofol be adminis-
tered only by personnel trained in airway management. The rec-
ommended standard dosage is an initial bolus dose of 6.5 mg/kg 
IV followed by supplemental doses of 1.6 mg/kg IV as needed. For 
patients weighing more than 90 kg or less than 60 kg, 90 or 60 kg 
should be used to calculate the dose, respectively. The dose should 
be reduced by 25% in patients older than 65 years and in those 
with an American Society of Anesthesiologists status of 3 or 4. 
 BARBITURATES 
 This section focuses on the use of thiopental and methohexital for 
induction of general anesthesia; however, these barbiturate hypnotics 
have been largely replaced as induction agents by propofol. Other 
barbiturates as well as general barbiturate pharmacology are dis-
cussed in  Chapter 22 . 
 The anesthetic effect of barbiturates presumably involves a 
combination of enhancement of inhibitory and inhibition of 
excitatory neurotransmission. Although the effects on inhibitory 
transmission probably result from activation of the GABA A 
receptor complex, the effects on excitatory transmission are less 
well understood. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Thiopental and methohexital undergo hepatic metabolism, mostly 
by oxidation but also by  N -dealkylation, desulfuration, and 
destruction of the barbituric acid ring structure. Barbiturates 
should not be administered to patients with acute intermittent 
porphyria because they increase the production of porphyrins 
through stimulation of aminolevulinic acid synthetase. 
Methohexital has a shorter elimination half-time than thiopental 
due to its larger plasma clearance ( Table 25–2 ), leading to a faster 
and more complete recovery after bolus injection. Although thio-
pental is metabolized more slowly and has a long elimination 
half-time, recovery after a single bolus injection is comparable to 
that of methohexital and propofol because it depends on redistri-
bution to inactive tissue sites rather than on metabolism ( Figure 
25–7 ). However, if administered through repeated bolus injec-
tions or continuous infusion, recovery will be markedly prolonged 
because elimination will depend on metabolism under these cir-
cumstances (see also context-sensitive half-time,  Figure 25–8 ). 
 Organ System Effects 
 A. CNS Effects 
 Barbiturates produce dose-dependent CNS depression ranging 
from sedation to general anesthesia when administered as bolus 
injections. They do not produce analgesia; instead, some evidence 
suggests they may reduce the pain threshold causing hyperalgesia. 
Barbiturates are potent cerebral vasoconstrictors and produce pre-
dictable decreases in cerebral blood flow, cerebral blood volume, 
and ICP. As a result, they decrease CMRO 2 consumption in a 
dose-dependent manner up to a dose at which they suppress all 
EEG activity. The ability of barbiturates to decrease ICP and 
CMRO 2 makes these drugs useful in the management of patients 
with space-occupying intracranial lesions. They may provide neu-
roprotection from focal cerebral ischemia (stroke, surgical retrac-
tion, temporary clips during aneurysm surgery), but probably not 
from global cerebral ischemia (eg, from cardiac arrest). Except for 
methohexital, barbiturates decrease electrical activity on the EEG and 
can be used as anticonvulsants. In contrast, methohexital activates 
epileptic foci and may therefore be useful to facilitate electroconvulsive 
therapy or during the identification of epileptic foci during surgery. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 The decrease in systemic blood pressure associated with adminis-
tration of barbiturates for induction of anesthesia is primarily due 
to peripheral vasodilation and is usually smaller than the blood 
pressure decrease associated with propofol. There are also direct 
negative inotropic effects on the heart. However, inhibition of the 
442    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
baroreceptor reflex is less pronounced than with propofol; thus, 
compensatory increases in heart rate limit the decrease in blood 
pressure and make it transient. The depressant effects on sys-
temic blood pressure are increased in patients with hypovolemia, 
cardiac tamponade, cardiomyopathy, coronary artery disease, or 
cardiac valvular disease because such patients are less able to 
compensate for the effects of peripheral vasodilation. Hemo-
dynamic effects are also more pronounced with larger doses and 
rapid injection. 
 C. Respiratory Effects 
 Barbiturates are respiratory depressants, and a usual induction dose 
of thiopental or methohexital typically produces transient apnea, 
which will be more pronounced if other respiratory depressants are 
also administered. Barbiturates lead to decreased minute ventilation 
through reduced tidal volumes and respiratory rate and also 
decrease the ventilatory responses to hypercapnia and hypoxia. 
Resumption of spontaneous breathing after an anesthetic induction 
dose of a barbiturate is characterized by a slow breathing rate and 
decreased tidal volume. Suppression of laryngeal reflexes and cough 
reflexes is probably not as profound as after an equianesthetic 
propofol administration, which makes barbiturates an inferior 
choice for airway instrumentation in the absence of neuromuscular 
blocking drugs. Furthermore, stimulation of the upper airway or 
trachea (eg, by secretions, laryngeal mask airway, direct laryngos-
copy, tracheal intubation) during inadequate depression of airway 
reflexes may result in laryngospasm or bronchospasm. This phe-
nomenon is not unique to barbiturates but is true whenever the 
drug dose is inadequate to suppress the airway reflexes. 
 D. Other Effects 
 Accidental intra-arterial injection of barbiturates results in excru-
ciating pain and intense vasoconstriction, often leading to severe 
tissue injury involving gangrene. Approaches to treatment include 
blockade of the sympathetic nervous system (eg, stellate ganglion 
block) in the involved extremity. If extravasation occurs, some 
authorities recommend local injection of the area with 0.5% lido-
caine (5–10 mL) in an attempt to dilute the barbiturate concen-
tration. Life-threatening allergic reactions to barbiturates are rare, 
with an estimated occurrence of 1 in 30,000 patients. However, 
barbiturate-induced histamine release occasionally is seen. 
 Clinical Uses & Dosage 
 The principal clinical uses of thiopental (3–5 mg/kg IV) or metho-
hexital (1–1.5 mg/kg IV) is for induction of anesthesia (uncon-
sciousness), which usually occurs in less than 30 seconds. Patients 
may experience a garlic or onion taste after administration. 
Barbiturates such as methohexital (20–30 mg/kg) may be adminis-
tered per rectum to facilitate induction of anesthesia in mentally 
challenged and uncooperative pediatric patients. When a barbitu-
rate is administered with the goal of neuroprotection, an isoelectric 
EEG indicating maximal reduction of CMR O 2 has traditionally 
been used as the end point. More recent data demonstrating equal 
protection after smaller doses have challenged this practice. The use 
of smaller doses is less frequently associated with hypotension, thus 
making it easier to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion pressure, 
especially in the setting of increased ICP. 
 BENZODIAZEPINES 
 Benzodiazepines commonly used in the perioperative period 
include midazolam, lorazepam, and less frequently, diazepam. 
Benzodiazepines are unique among the group of intravenous anes-
thetics in that their action can readily be terminated by adminis-
tration of their selective antagonist, flumazenil. Their most desired 
effects are anxiolysis and anterograde amnesia, which are extremely 
useful for premedication. 
 The chemical structure and pharmacodynamics of the benzo-
diazepines are discussed in detail in  Chapter 22 . 
 Pharmacokinetics in the Anesthesia 
Setting 
 The highly lipid-soluble benzodiazepines rapidly enter the CNS, 
which accounts for their rapid onset of action, followed by redis-
tribution to inactive tissue sites and subsequent termination of the 
drug effect. Additional information regarding the pharmacokinet-
ics of the benzodiazepines may be found in  Chapter 22 . 
 Despite its prompt passage into the brain, midazolam is con-
sidered to have a slower effect-site equilibration time than propo-
fol and thiopental. In this regard, intravenous doses of midazolam 
should be sufficiently spaced to permit the peak clinical effect to 
be recognized before a repeat dose is considered. Midazolam has 
the shortest context-sensitive half-time, which makes it the only 
one of the three benzodiazepine drugs suitable for continuous 
infusion ( Figure 25–8 ). 
 Organ System Effects 
 A. CNS Effects 
 Similar to propofol and barbiturates, benzodiazepines decrease 
CMRO 2 and cerebral blood flow, but to a smaller extent. There 
appears to be a ceiling effect for benzodiazepine-induced decreases 
in CMRO 2 as evidenced by midazolam’s inability to produce an 
isoelectric EEG. Patients with decreased intracranial compliance 
demonstrate little or no change in ICP after the administration of 
midazolam. Although neuroprotective properties have not been 
shown for benzodiazepines, these drugs are potent anticonvulsants 
used in the treatment of status epilepticus, alcohol withdrawal, 
and local anesthetic-induced seizures. The CNS effects of 
benzodiazepines can be promptly terminated by administration 
of the selective benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil, which 
improves their safety profile. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 If used for the induction of anesthesia, midazolam produces a 
greater decrease in systemic blood pressure than comparable doses 
of diazepam. These changes are most likely due to peripheral vaso-
dilation inasmuch as cardiac output is not changed. Similar to 
other intravenous induction agents, midazolam’s effect on sys-
temic blood pressure is exaggerated in hypovolemic patients. 
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    443
 C. Respiratory Effects 
 Benzodiazepines produce minimal depression of ventilation, although 
transient apnea may follow rapid intravenous administration of 
midazolam for induction of anesthesia, especially in the presence of 
opioid premedication. Benzodiazepines decrease the ventilatory 
response to carbon dioxide, but this effect is not usually significant if 
they are administered alone. More severe respiratory depression can 
occur when benzodiazepines are administered together with opioids. 
Another problem affecting ventilation is airway obstruction induced 
by the hypnotic effects of benzodiazepines. 
 D. Other Effects 
 Pain during intravenous and intramuscular injection and subse-
quent thrombophlebitis are most pronounced with diazepam and 
reflect the poor water solubility of this benzodiazepine, which 
requires an organic solvent in the formulation. Despite its better 
solubility (which eliminates the need for an organic solvent), 
midazolam may also produce pain on injection. Allergic reactions 
to benzodiazepines are rare to nonexistent. 
 Clinical Uses & Dosage 
 Benzodiazepines are most commonly used for preoperative medi-
cation, intravenous sedation, and suppression of seizure activity. 
Less frequently, midazolam and diazepam may also be used to 
induce general anesthesia. The slow onset and prolonged duration 
of action of lorazepam limit its usefulness for preoperative medica-
tion or induction of anesthesia, especially when rapid and sus-
tained awakening at the end of surgery is desirable. Although 
flumazenil (8–15 mcg/kg IV) may be useful for treating patients 
experiencing delayed awakening, its duration of action is brief 
(about 20 minutes) and resedation may occur. 
 The amnestic, anxiolytic, and sedative effects of benzodiaz-
epines make this class of drugs the most popular choice for preop-
erative medication. Midazolam (1–2 mg IV) is effective for 
premedication, sedation during regional anesthesia, and brief 
therapeutic procedures. Midazolam has a more rapid onset, with 
greater amnesia and less postoperative sedation, than diazepam. 
Midazolam is also the most commonly used oral premedication 
for children; 0.5 mg/kg administered orally 30 minutes before 
induction of anesthesia provides reliable sedation and anxiolysis in 
children without producing delayed awakening. 
 The synergistic effects between benzodiazepines and other 
drugs, especially opioids and propofol, can be used to achieve bet-
ter sedation and analgesia but may also greatly enhance their 
combined respiratory depression and may lead to airway obstruc-
tion or apnea. Because benzodiazepine effects are more pro-
nounced with increasing age, dose reduction and careful titration 
may be necessary in elderly patients. 
 General anesthesia can be induced by the administration of 
midazolam (0.1–0.3 mg/kg IV), but the onset of unconsciousness 
is slower than after the administration of thiopental, propofol, or 
etomidate. Delayed awakening is a potential disadvantage, limiting 
the usefulness of benzodiazepines for induction of general anesthe-
sia despite their advantage of less pronounced circulatory effects. 
 ETOMIDATE 
 Etomidate ( Figure 24–6 ) is an intravenous anesthetic with 
hypnotic but not analgesic effects and is often chosen for its 
minimal hemodynamic effects. Although its pharmacokinetics 
are favorable, endocrine side effects limit its use for continuous 
infusions. Etomidate is a carboxylated imidazole derivative that 
is poorly soluble in water and is therefore supplied as a 2 mg/mL 
solution in 35% propylene glycol. The solution has a pH of 6.9 
and thus does not cause problems with precipitation as thiopen-
tal does. Etomidate appears to have GABA-like effects and seems 
to act primarily through potentiation of GABA A -mediated 
chloride currents, like most other intravenous anesthetics. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 An induction dose of etomidate produces rapid onset of anesthesia, 
and recovery depends on redistribution to inactive tissue sites, 
comparable to thiopental and propofol. Metabolism is primarily by 
ester hydrolysis to inactive metabolites, which are then excreted in 
urine (78%) and bile (22%). Less than 3% of an administered dose 
of etomidate is excreted as unchanged drug in urine. Clearance of 
etomidate is about five times that of thiopental, as reflected by a 
shorter elimination half-time ( Table 25–2 ). The duration of action 
is linearly related to the dose, with each 0.1 mg/kg providing about 
100 seconds of unconsciousness. Because of etomidate’s minimal 
effects on hemodynamics and short context-sensitive half-time, 
larger doses, repeated boluses, or continuous infusions can safely be 
administered. Etomidate, like most other intravenous anesthetics, 
is highly protein bound (77%), primarily to albumin. 
 Organ System Effects 
 A. CNS Effects 
 Etomidate is a potent cerebral vasoconstrictor, as reflected by 
decreases in cerebral blood flow and ICP. These effects are similar 
to those produced by comparable doses of thiopental. Despite its 
reduction of CMRO 2 , etomidate has failed to show neuroprotective 
properties in animal studies, and human studies are lacking. The 
frequency of excitatory spikes on the EEG after the administration 
of etomidate is greater than with thiopental. Similar to metho-
hexital, etomidate may activate seizure foci, manifested as fast 
activity on the EEG. In addition, spontaneous movements charac-
terized as myoclonus occur in more than 50% of patients receiving 
etomidate, and this myoclonic activity may be associated with 
seizure-like activity on the EEG. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 A characteristic and desired feature of induction of anesthesia 
with etomidate is cardiovascular stability after bolus injection. In 
this regard, decrease in systemic blood pressure is modest or 
absent and principally reflects a decrease in systemic vascular 
resistance. Therefore, the systemic blood pressure-lowering effects 
of etomidate are probably exaggerated in the presence of hypo-
volemia, and optimization of the patient’s intravascular fluid 
volume status before induction of anesthesia should be achieved. 
444    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
Etomidate produces minimal changes in heart rate and cardiac 
output. Its depressant effects on myocardial contractility are 
minimal at concentrations used for induction of anesthesia. 
 C. Respiratory Effects 
 The depressant effects of etomidate on ventilation are less pro-
nounced than those of barbiturates, although apnea may occasion-
ally follow rapid intravenous injection of the drug. Depression of 
ventilation may be exaggerated when etomidate is combined with 
inhaled anesthetics or opioids. 
 D. Endocrine Effects 
 Etomidate causes adrenocortical suppression by producing a dose-
dependent inhibition of 11β-hydroxylase, an enzyme necessary for 
the conversion of cholesterol to cortisol. This suppression lasts 
4–8 hours after an induction dose of the drug. Despite concerns 
regarding this finding, no outcome studies have demonstrated an 
adverse effect. However, because of its endocrine effects, etomi-
date is not used as continuous infusion. 
 Clinical Uses & Dosage 
 Etomidate is an alternative to propofol and barbiturates for the 
rapid intravenous induction of anesthesia, especially in patients 
with compromised myocardial contractility. After a standard 
induction dose (0.2–0.3 mg/kg IV), the onset of unconsciousness 
is comparable to that achieved by thiopental and propofol. 
Similar to propofol, during intravenous injection of etomidate 
there is a high incidence of pain, which may be followed by 
venous irritation. Involuntary myoclonic movements are also 
common but may be masked by the concomitant administration 
of neuromuscular blocking drugs. Awakening after a single intra-
venous dose of etomidate is rapid, with little evidence of any 
residual depressant effects. Etomidate does not produce analgesia, 
and postoperative nausea and vomiting may be more common 
than after the administration of thiopental or propofol. 
 KETAMINE 
 Ketamine ( Figure 25–6 ) is a partially water-soluble and highly lipid-
soluble phencyclidine derivative differing from most other intrave-
nous anesthetics in that it produces significant analgesia. The 
characteristic state observed after an induction dose of ketamine is 
known as “dissociative anesthesia,” wherein the patient’s eyes remain 
open with a slow nystagmic gaze (cataleptic state). Of the two ste-
reoisomers the  S (+) form is more potent than the  R (–) isomer, but 
only the racemic mixture of ketamine is available in the USA. 
 Ketamine’s mechanism of action is complex, but the major 
effect is probably produced through inhibition of the NMDA 
receptor complex. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The high lipid solubility of ketamine ensures a rapid onset of its 
effect. As with other intravenous induction drugs, the effect of a 
single bolus injection is terminated by redistribution to inactive 
tissue sites. Metabolism occurs primarily in the liver and involves 
 N -demethylation by the cytochrome P450 system. Norketamine, 
the primary active metabolite, is less potent (one third to one fifth 
the potency of ketamine) and is subsequently hydroxylated and 
conjugated into water-soluble inactive metabolites that are excreted 
in urine. Ketamine is the only intravenous anesthetic that has low 
protein binding (12%) ( Table 25–2 ). 
 Organ System Effects 
 If ketamine is administered as the sole anesthetic, amnesia is 
not as complete as with the benzodiazepines. Reflexes are 
often preserved, but it cannot be assumed that patients are 
able to protect the upper airway. The eyes remain open and 
the pupils are moderately dilated with a nystagmic gaze. 
Frequently, lacrimation and salivation are increased, and pre-
medication with an anticholinergic drug may be indicated to 
limit this effect. 
 A. CNS Effects 
 In contrast to other intravenous anesthetics, ketamine is 
considered to be a cerebral vasodilator that  increases cerebral 
blood flow, as well as CMRO 2 . For these reasons, ketamine has 
traditionally not been recommended for use in patients with 
intracranial pathology, especially increased ICP. Nevertheless, 
these perceived undesirable effects on cerebral blood flow may 
be blunted by the maintenance of normocapnia. Despite the 
potential to produce myoclonic activity, ketamine is considered 
an anticonvulsant and may be recommended for treatment 
of status epilepticus when more conventional drugs are 
ineffective. 
 Unpleasant emergence reactions after administration are the 
main factor limiting ketamine’s use. Such reactions may include 
vivid colorful dreams, hallucinations, out-of-body experiences, 
and increased and distorted visual, tactile, and auditory sensitivity. 
These reactions can be associated with fear and confusion, but a 
euphoric state may also be induced, which explains the potential 
for abuse of the drug. Children usually have a lower incidence of 
and less severe emergence reactions. Combination with a benzodi-
azepine may be indicated to limit the unpleasant emergence reac-
tions and also increase amnesia. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 Ketamine can produce transient but significant  increases in sys-
temic blood pressure, heart rate, and cardiac output, presumably 
by centrally mediated sympathetic stimulation. These effects, 
which are associated with increased cardiac workload and myocar-
dial oxygen consumption, are not always desirable and can be 
blunted by coadministration of benzodiazepines, opioids, or 
inhaled anesthetics. Though the effect is more controversial, ket-
amine is considered to be a direct myocardial depressant. This 
property is usually masked by its stimulation of the sympathetic 
nervous system but may become apparent in critically ill patients 
with limited ability to increase their sympathetic nervous system 
activity. 
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    445
 C. Respiratory Effects 
 Ketamine is not thought to produce significant respiratory depres-
sion. When it is used as a single drug, the respiratory response to 
hypercapnia is preserved and blood gases remain stable. Transient 
hypoventilation and, in rare cases, a short period of apnea can 
follow rapid administration of a large intravenous dose for induc-
tion of anesthesia. The ability to protect the upper airway in the 
presence of ketamine cannot be assumed despite the presence of 
active airway reflexes. Especially in children, the risk for laryngo-
spasm because of increased salivation must be considered; this risk 
can be reduced by premedication with an anticholinergic drug. 
Ketamine relaxes bronchial smooth muscles and may be helpful in 
patients with reactive airways and in the management of patients 
experiencing bronchoconstriction. 
 Clinical Uses & Dosage 
 Its unique properties, including profound analgesia, stimulation 
of the sympathetic nervous system, bronchodilation, and minimal 
respiratory depression, make ketamine an important alternative to 
the other intravenous anesthetics and a desirable adjunct in many 
cases despite the unpleasent psychotomimetic effects. Moreover, 
ketamine can be administered by multiple routes (intravenous, 
intramuscular, oral, rectal, epidural), thus making it a useful 
option for premedication in mentally challenged and uncoopera-
tive pediatric patients. 
 Induction of anesthesia can be achieved with ketamine, 1–2 mg/kg 
intravenously or 4–6 mg/kg intramuscularly. Though the drug is 
not commonly used for maintenance of anesthesia, its short con-
text-sensitive half-time makes ketamine a candidate for this pur-
pose. For example, general anesthesia can be achieved with the 
infusion of ketamine, 15–45 mcg/kg/min, plus 50–70% nitrous 
oxide or by ketamine alone, 30–90 mcg/kg/min. 
 Small bolus doses of ketamine (0.2–0.8 mg/kg IV) may be 
useful during regional anesthesia when additional analgesia is 
needed (eg, cesarean delivery under neuraxial anesthesia with an 
insufficient regional block). Ketamine provides effective analgesia 
without compromise of the airway. An infusion of a subanalgesic 
dose of ketamine (3–5 mcg/kg/min) during general anesthesia and 
in the early postoperative period may be useful to produce analge-
sia or reduce opioid tolerance and opioid-induced hyperalgesia. 
The use of ketamine has always been limited by its unpleasant 
psychotomimetic side effects, but its unique features make it a 
very valuable alternative in certain settings, mostly because of the 
potent analgesia with minimal respiratory depression. Most 
recently it has become popular as an adjunct administered at 
subanalgesic doses to limit or reverse opioid tolerance. 
 DEXMEDETOMIDINE 
 Dexmedetomidine is a highly selective α 2 -adrenergic agonist. 
Recognition of the usefulness of α 2 agonists is based on observa-
tions of decreased anesthetic requirements in patients receiving 
chronic clonidine therapy. The effects of dexmedetomidine can be 
antagonized with α 2 -antagonist drugs. Dexmedetomidine is the 
active  S -enantiomer of medetomidine, a highly selective α 2 -
adrenergic agonist imidazole derivative that is used in veterinary 
medicine. Dexmedetomidine is water soluble and available as a 
parenteral formulation. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Dexmedetomidine undergoes rapid hepatic metabolism involving 
conjugation,  N -methylation, and hydroxylation, followed by con-
jugation. Metabolites are excreted in the urine and bile. Clearance 
is high, and the elimination half-time is short ( Table 25–2 ). 
However, there is a significant increase in the context-sensitive 
half-time from 4 minutes after a 10-minute infusion to 250 minutes 
after an 8-hour infusion. 
 Organ System Effects 
 A. CNS Effects 
 Dexmedetomidine produces its selective α 2 -agonist effects through 
activation of CNS α 2 receptors. Hypnosis presumably results from 
stimulation of α 2 receptors in the locus caeruleus, and the analge-
sic effect originates at the level of the spinal cord. The sedative 
effect produced by dexmedetomidine has a different quality than 
that produced by other intravenous anesthetics in that it more 
completely resembles a physiologic sleep state through activation 
of endogenous sleep pathways. Dexmedetomidine is likely to be 
associated with a decrease in cerebral blood flow without signifi-
cant changes in ICP and CMRO 2 . It has the potential to lead to 
the development of tolerance and dependence. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 Dexmedetomidine infusion results in moderate decreases in heart 
rate and systemic vascular resistance and, consequently, a decrease 
in systemic blood pressure. A bolus injection may produce a tran-
sient increase in systemic blood pressure and pronounced decrease 
in heart rate, an effect that is probably mediated through activa-
tion of peripheral α 2 adrenoceptors. Bradycardia associated with 
dexmedetomidine infusion may require treatment. Heart block, 
severe bradycardia, and asystole have been observed and may 
result from unopposed vagal stimulation. The response to anti-
cholinergic drugs is unchanged. 
 C. Respiratory Effects 
 The effects of dexmedetomidine on the respiratory system are a 
small to moderate decrease in tidal volume and very little change 
in the respiratory rate. The ventilatory response to carbon dioxide 
is unchanged. Although the respiratory effects are mild, upper 
airway obstruction as a result of sedation is possible. In addition, 
dexmedetomidine has a synergistic sedative effect when combined 
with other sedative-hypnotics. 
 Clinical Uses & Dosage 
 Dexmedetomidine is principally used for the short-term sedation 
of intubated and ventilated patients in an ICU setting. In the 
operating room, dexmedetomidine may be used as an adjunct to 
446    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
general anesthesia or to provide sedation, eg, during awake fiberop-
tic tracheal intubation or regional anesthesia. When administered 
during general anesthesia, dexmedetomidine (0.5–1 mcg/kg load-
ing dose over 10–15 minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.2–0.7 
mcg/kg/h) decreases the dose requirements for inhaled and injected 
anesthetics. Awakening and the transition to the postoperative set-
ting may benefit from dexmedetomidine-produced sedative and 
analgesic effects without respiratory depression. 
 OPIOID ANALGESICS 
 Opioids are analgesic agents and are distinct from general anesthet-
ics and hypnotics. Even when high doses of opioid analgesics are 
administered, recall cannot be prevented reliably unless hypnotic 
agents such as benzodiazepines also are used. Opioid analgesics are 
routinely used to achieve postoperative analgesia and intraopera-
tively as part of a balanced anesthesia regimen as described earlier 
(see Intravenous Anesthetics). Their pharmacology and clinical use 
are described in greater detail in  Chapter 31 . 
 In addition to their use as part of a balanced anesthesia regi-
men, opioids in large doses have been used in combination with 
large doses of benzodiazepines to achieve a general anesthetic state, 
particularly in patients with limited circulatory reserve who 
undergo cardiac surgery. When administered in large doses, potent 
opioids such as fentanyl can induce chest wall (and laryngeal) 
rigidity, thereby acutely impairing mechanical ventilation. 
Furthermore, large doses of potent opioids may speed up the 
development of tolerance and complicate postoperative pain man-
agement. 
 CURRENT CLINICAL PRACTICE 
 The practice of clinical anesthesia requires integrating the pharmacol-
ogy and the known adverse effects of these potent drugs with the 
pathophysiologic state of individual patients. The judgment and experi-
ence of the anesthesiologist is tested by every patient to produce the 
proper depth of anesthesia required to allow invasive surgery to proceed 
despite major medical problems present in the sickest patients. 
Desflurane (Suprane)
Liquid: 240 mL for inhalation
Dexmedetomidine (Precedex)
Parenteral: 100 mcg/mL for IV infusion
Diazepam (generic, Valium)
Oral: 2, 5, 10 mg tablets; 1 mg/mL and 5 mg/mL solution
Oral sustained-release: 15 mg capsules
Rectal: 2.5, 10, 20 mg gel
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Droperidol (generic, Inapsine)
Parenteral: 2.5 mg/mL for IV or IM injection
Enflurane (Enflurane, Ethrane)
Liquid: 125, 250 mL for inhalation
Etomidate (Amidate)
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL for injection
Fospropofol (Lusedra)
Parenteral: 35 mg/mL in 30 mL vials
Halothane (generic, Fluothane)
Liquid: 125, 250 mL for inhalation
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E *
Isoflurane (Isoflurane, Forane)
Liquid: 100 mL for inhalation
Ketamine (generic, Ketalar)
Parenteral: 10, 50, 100 mg/mL for injection
Lorazepam (generic, Ativan)
Parenteral: 2, 4 mg/mL for injection
Methohexital (Brevital)
Parenteral: 0.5, 2.5, 5 g powder to reconstitute for injection
Midazolam (generic, Versed)
Parenteral: 1, 5 mg/mL for injection in 1, 2, 5, 10 mL vials
Oral: 2 mg/mL syrup for children
Nitrous oxide (gas, supplied in blue cylinders)
Propofol (generic, Diprivan)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV injection
Sevoflurane (generic, Ultane)
Liquid: 250 mL for inhalation
Thiopental (generic, Pentothal)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute 20, 25 mg/mL for IV injection
∗See Chapter 31 for formulations of opioid agents used in anesthesia.
CHAPTER 25 General Anesthetics    447
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
This patient has significant underlying cardiac risk involv-
ing major stressful surgery. Balanced anesthesia would begin 
with intravenous agents that cause minimal changes in blood 
pressure and heart rate such as propofol or etomidate, com-
bined with potent analgesics such as fentanyl (see  Chapter 31 ) 
to block undesirable stimulation of autonomic reflexes. Main-
tenance of anesthesia could incorporate inhaled anesthetics 
that ensure unconsciousness and amnesia, additional intra-
venous agents to provide intraoperative and postoperative 
analgesia, and, if needed, neuromuscular blocking drugs 
(see  Chapter 27 ) to induce muscle relaxation. The choice of 
inhaled agent(s) would be made based on the desire to 
maintain sufficient myocardial contractility, systemic blood 
pressure, and cardiac output for adequate perfusion of criti-
cal organs throughout the operation. Rapid emergence from 
the combined effects of the chosen anesthetic drugs would 
facilitate the patient’s return to a baseline state of heart func-
tion, breathing, and mentation.
 REFERENCES 
 Eger EI II: The effect of inspired concentration on the rate of rise of alveolar con-
centration. Anesthesiology 1963;89:774. 
 Eger EI II: Uptake and distribution. In: Miller RD (editor):  Anesthesia, 7th ed. 
Churchill Livingstone, 2010. 
 Eger EI II, Saidman LJ, Brandstater B: Minimum alveolar anesthetic concentra-
tion: A standard of anesthetic potency. Anesthesiology 1965;26:756. 
 Fragen RJ:  Drug Infusions in Anesthesiology. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
2005. 
 Hemmings HC et al: Emerging molecular mechanisms of general anesthetic 
action. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2005;26:503. 
 Lugli AK, Yost CS, Kindler CH: Anesthetic mechanisms: Update on the challenge 
of unravelling the mystery of anaesthesia. Eur J Anaesth 2009;26:807. 
 Olkkola KT, Ahonen J: Midazolam and other benzodiazepines. Handb Exp 
Pharmacol 2008;182:335. 
 Reves JG et al: Intravenous anesthetics. In: Miller RD (editor): Anesthesia, 7th ed. 
Churchill Livingstone, 2010. 
 Rudolph U et al: Sedatives, anxiolytics, and amnestics. In: Evers AS, Maze M (edi-
tors):  Anesthetic Pharmacology: Physiologic Principles and Clinical Practice. 
Churchill Livingstone, 2004. 
 Stoelting R, Hillier S: Barbiturates. In: Stoelting RK, Hillier SC (editors): 
 Pharmacology and Physiology in Anesthetic Practice . Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2005. 
 Yasuda N et al: Kinetics of desflurane, isoflurane, and halothane in humans. 
Anesthesiology 1991;70:489. 
This page intentionally left blank 
449
 Local Anesthetics 
C A S E  S T U D Y
26
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Simply stated, local anesthesia refers to loss of sensation in a lim-
ited region of the body. This is accomplished by disruption of 
afferent neural traffic via inhibition of impulse generation or 
propagation. Such blockade may bring with it other physiologic 
changes such as muscle paralysis and suppression of somatic or 
visceral reflexes, and these effects might be desirable or undesirable 
depending on the particular circumstances. Nonetheless, in most 
cases, it is the loss of sensation, or at least the achievement of local-
ized analgesia, that is the primary goal. 
 Although local anesthetics are often used as analgesics, it is their 
ability to provide complete loss of all sensory modalities that is their 
distinguishing characteristic. The contrast with general anesthesia 
should be obvious, but it is perhaps worthwhile to emphasize that 
with local anesthesia the drug is delivered directly to the target 
organ, and the systemic circulation serves only to diminish or termi-
nate its effect. Local anesthesia can also be produced by various 
chemical or physical means. However, in routine clinical practice, it 
is achieved with a rather narrow spectrum of compounds, and 
recovery is normally spontaneous, predictable, and without residual 
effects. The development of these compounds has a rich history (see 
Box: Historical Development of Local Anesthesia), punctuated by 
serendipitous observations, delayed starts, and an evolution driven 
more by concerns for safety than improvements in efficacy. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
LOCAL ANESTHETICS 
 Chemistry 
 Most local anesthetic agents consist of a lipophilic group (eg, 
an aromatic ring) connected by an intermediate chain via an 
ester or amide to an ionizable group (eg, a tertiary amine) 
( Table 26–1 ). In addition to the general physical properties of 
the molecules, specific stereochemical configurations are asso-
ciated with differences in the potency of stereoisomers (eg, 
levobupivacaine, ropivacaine). Because ester links are more 
prone to hydrolysis than amide links, esters usually have a 
shorter duration of action. 
 Local anesthetics are weak bases and are usually made available 
clinically as salts to increase solubility and stability. In the body, they 
exist either as the uncharged base or as a cation (see  Chapter 1 , 
Ionization of Weak Acids and Weak Bases). The relative proportions 
of these two forms are governed by their pKa and the pH of the 
body fluids according to the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 
which can be expressed as: 
 pKa = pH – log [base]/[conjugate acid] 
 If the concentration of base and conjugate acid are equal, the 
second portion of the right side of the equation drops out, as log 
1 = 0, leaving: 
 pKa = pH (where base = conjugate acid) 
 ∗ The author thanks Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD, and Paul F. White, 
PhD, MD, for contributions to this chapter in previous editions.
 A 67-year-old woman is scheduled for elective total knee 
arthroplasty. What local anesthetic agents would be most 
appropriate if surgical anesthesia were to be administered 
using a spinal or an epidural technique, and what potential 
complications might arise from their use? What anesthet-
ics would be most appropriate for providing postoperative 
analgesia via an indwelling epidural or peripheral nerve 
catheter? 
 Kenneth Drasner, MD∗ 
450    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Thus, pKa can be seen as an effective way to consider the ten-
dency for compounds to exist in a charged or uncharged form, 
ie, the lower the pKa, the greater the percentage of uncharged 
species at a given pH. Because the pKa of most local anesthetics 
is in the range of 7.5–9.0, the charged, cationic form will con-
stitute the larger percentage at physiologic pH. A glaring 
exception is benzocaine, which has a pKa around 3.5, and thus 
exists solely as the nonionized base under normal physiologic 
conditions. 
 This issue of ionization is of critical importance because the 
cationic form is the most active at the receptor site. However, the 
story is a bit more complex, because the receptor site for local 
anesthetics is at the inner vestibule of the sodium channel, and the 
charged form of the anesthetic penetrates biologic membranes 
poorly. Thus, the uncharged form is important for cell penetra-
tion. After penetration into the cytoplasm, equilibration leads to 
formation and binding of the charged cation at the sodium chan-
nel, and hence the production of a clinical effect. Drug may also 
reach the receptor laterally through what has been termed the 
hydrophobic pathway ( Figure 26–1 ). As a clinical consequence, 
 Historical Development of Local Anesthesia 
 Although the numbing properties of cocaine were recognized for 
centuries, one might consider September 15, 1884, to mark the 
“birth of local anesthesia.” Based on work performed by Carl 
Koller, cocaine’s numbing effect on the cornea was demonstrated 
before the Ophthalmological Congress in Heidelberg, ushering in 
the era of surgical anesthesia. Unfortunately, with widespread use 
came recognition of cocaine’s significant CNS and cardiac toxicity, 
which along with its addiction potential, tempered enthusiasm 
for this application. As the early investigator Mattison com-
mented, “the risk of untoward results have robbed this peerless 
drug of much favor in the minds of many surgeons, and so 
deprived them of a most valued ally.” As cocaine was known to be 
a benzoic acid ester, the search for alternative local anesthetics 
focused on this class of compounds, resulting in the identification 
of benzocaine shortly before the turn of the last century. However, 
benzocaine proved to have limited utility due to its marked 
hydrophobicity, and was thus relegated to topical anesthesia, a 
use for which it still finds limited application in current clinical 
practice. The first useful injectable local anesthetic, procaine, was 
introduced shortly thereafter by Einhorn, and its structure has 
served as the template for the development of the most com-
monly used modern local anesthetics. The three basic structural 
elements of these compounds can be appreciated by review of 
 Table 26–1 : an aromatic ring, conferring lipophilicity, an ionizable 
tertiary amine, conferring hydrophilicity, and an intermediate 
chain connecting these via an ester or amide linkage. 
 One of procaine’s limitations was its short duration of action, a 
drawback overcome with the introduction of tetracaine in 1928. 
Unfortunately, tetracaine demonstrated significant toxicity when 
employed for high-volume peripheral blocks, ultimately reducing 
its common usage to spinal anesthesia. Both procaine and tetra-
caine shared another drawback: their ester linkage conferred insta-
bility, and particularly in the case of procaine, the free aromatic acid 
released during ester hydrolysis of the parent compound was 
believed to be the source of relatively frequent allergic reactions. 
 Löfgren and Lundqvist circumvented the problem of instabil-
ity with the introduction of lidocaine in 1948. Lidocaine was the 
first in a series of amino-amide local anesthetics that would come 
to dominate the second half of the 20th century. Lidocaine had a 
more favorable duration of action than procaine, and less sys-
temic toxicity than tetracaine. To this day, it remains one of the 
most versatile and widely used anesthetics. Nonetheless, some 
applications required more prolonged block than that afforded 
by lidocaine, a pharmacologic void that was filled with the intro-
duction of bupivacaine, a more lipophilic and more potent anes-
thetic. Unfortunately, bupivacaine was found to have greater 
propensity for significant effects on cardiac conduction and func-
tion, which at times proved lethal. Recognition of this potential 
for cardiac toxicity led to changes in anesthetic practice, and sig-
nificant toxicity became sufficiently rare for it to remain a widely 
used anesthetic for nearly every regional technique in modern 
clinical practice. Nonetheless, this inherent cardiotoxicity would 
drive developmental work leading to the introduction of two 
recent additions to the anesthetic armamentarium, levobupiva-
caine and ropivacaine. The former is the  S (–) enantiomer of bupi-
vacaine, which has less affinity for cardiac sodium channels than 
its  R (+) counterpart. Ropivacaine, another  S (–) enantiomer, 
shares this reduced affinity for cardiac sodium channels, while 
being slightly less potent than bupivacaine or levobupivacaine. 
local anesthetics are less effective when they are injected into 
infected tissues because the low extracellular pH favors the charged 
form, with less of the neutral base available for diffusion across the 
membrane. Conversely, adding bicarbonate to a local anesthet-
ic—a strategy sometimes utilized in clinical practice—will raise 
the effective concentration of the nonionized form and thus 
shorten the onset time of a regional block. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 When local anesthetics are used for local, peripheral, and cen-
tral neuraxial anesthesia—their most common clinical applica-
tions—systemic absorption, distribution, and elimination 
serve only to diminish or terminate their effect. Thus, classic 
pharmacokinetics plays a lesser role than with systemic thera-
peutics, yet remains important to the anesthetic’s duration and 
critical to the potential development of adverse reactions, spe-
cifically cardiac and central nervous system (CNS) toxicity. 
 Some pharmacokinetic properties of the commonly used amide 
local anesthetics are summarized in  Table 26–2 . The pharmacokinetics 
CHAPTER 26 Local Anesthetics     451
TABLE 26–1 Structure and properties of some ester and amide local anesthetics.1
Structure
Potency (Procaine = 1)
Duration of Action
Esters
Cocaine
N
C
CH3
O
O
CH3
O
C
O
2
Medium
Procaine (Novocain)
H2N
O
N
C
O
C2H5
C2H5
CH2
CH2
1
Short
Tetracaine 
(Pontocaine)
O
N
C
O
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
HN
C4H9
16
Long
Benzocaine
O
C
O
CH3
CH2
H2N
Surface use only
Amides
Lidocaine (Xylocaine)
O
NH
N
C
CH2
C2H5
C2H5
CH3
CH3
4
Medium
Mepivacaine 
(Carbocaine, 
Isocaine)
CH3
CH3
O
NH
C
N
CH3
2
Medium
Bupivacaine 
(Marcaine), 
Levobupivacaine 
(Chirocaine)
CH3
CH3
O
NH
C
N
C4H9
16
Long
Ropivacaine 
(Naropin)
CH3
CH3
O
NH
C
N
C3H7
16
Long
Articaine
CH3
O
NH
C
O
C
CH
CH3
NH
OCH
C3H7
S
nf
2
Medium
1Other chemical types are available including ethers (pramoxine), ketones (dyclonine), and phenetidin derivatives (phenacaine).
2Data not found.
452    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
with intercostal blocks among the highest, and sciatic and femoral 
among the lowest ( Figure 26–2 ). When vasoconstrictors are used 
with local anesthetics, the resultant reduction in blood flow serves 
to reduce the rate of systemic absorption and thus diminishes peak 
serum levels. This effect is generally most evident with the shorter-
acting, less potent, and less lipid-soluble anesthetics. 
 B. Distribution 
 1. Localized— As local anesthetic is usually injected directly at the 
site of the target organ, distribution within this compartment plays 
an essential role with respect to achievement of clinical effect. For 
example, anesthetics delivered into the subarachnoid space will be 
diluted with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the pattern of distribu-
tion will be dependent upon a host of factors, among the most 
critical being the specific gravity relative to that of CSF and the 
patient’s position. Solutions are termed hyperbaric, isobaric, and 
hypobaric, and will respectively descend, remain relatively static, or 
ascend, within the subarachnoid space due to gravity when the 
patient sits upright. A review and analysis of relevant literature cited 
25 factors that have been invoked as determinants of spread of local 
anesthetic in CSF, which can be broadly classified as characteristics 
of the anesthetic solution, CSF constituents, patient characteristics, 
and techniques of injection. Somewhat similar considerations apply 
to epidural and peripheral blocks. 
 2. Systemic— The peak blood levels achieved during major con-
duction anesthesia will be minimally affected by the concentration of 
anesthetic or the speed of injection. The disposition of these agents 
can be well approximated by a two-compartment model. The initial 
alpha phase reflects rapid distribution in blood and highly perfused 
organs (eg, brain, liver, heart, kidney), characterized by a steep expo-
nential decline in concentration. This is followed by a slower declin-
ing beta phase reflecting distribution into less well perfused tissue (eg, 
muscle, gut), and may assume a nearly linear rate of decline. The 
potential toxicity of the local anesthetics is affected by the protective 
effect afforded by uptake by the lungs, which serve to attenuate the 
arterial concentration, though the time course and magnitude of this 
effect have not been adequately characterized. 
 C. Metabolism and Excretion 
 The amide local anesthetics are converted to more water-soluble 
metabolites in the liver (amide type) or in plasma (ester type), 
 FIGURE 26–1  Schematic diagram depicting paths of local 
anesthetic (LA) to receptor sites. Extracellular anesthetic exists in 
equilibrium between charged and uncharged forms. The charged 
cation penetrates lipid membranes poorly; intracellular access is 
thus achieved by passage of the uncharged form. Intracellular 
re-equilibration results in formation of the more active charged 
species, which binds to the receptor at the inner vestibule of the 
sodium channel. Anesthetic may also gain access more directly 
by diffusing laterally within the membrane (hydrophobic 
pathway). 
Extracellular
Intracellular
Sodium
channel
+
LA+H
LAH+
LA+H+
LAH+
LA
of the ester-based local anesthetics has not been extensively studied 
owing to their rapid breakdown in plasma (elimination half-life < 1 
minute). 
 A. Absorption 
 Systemic absorption of injected local anesthetic from the site of 
administration is determined by several factors, including dosage, 
site of injection, drug-tissue binding, local tissue blood flow, use 
of a vasoconstrictor (eg, epinephrine), and the physicochemical 
properties of the drug itself. Anesthetics that are more lipid soluble 
are generally more potent, have a longer duration of action, and 
take longer to achieve their clinical effect. Extensive protein bind-
ing also serves to increase the duration of action. 
 Application of a local anesthetic to a highly vascular area such as 
the tracheal mucosa or the tissue surrounding intercostal nerves 
results in more rapid absorption and thus higher blood levels than if 
the local anesthetic is injected into a poorly perfused tissue such as 
subcutaneous fat. When used for major conduction blocks, the peak 
serum levels will vary as a function of the specific site of injection, 
TABLE 26–2  Pharmacokinetic properties of several amide local anesthetics.
Agent
t1/2 Distribution (min)
t1/2 Elimination (h)
Vdss (L)
CL (L/min)
Bupivacaine
28
3.5
72
0.47
Lidocaine
10
1.6
91
0.95
Mepivacaine
7
1.9
84
0.78
Prilocaine
5
1.5
261
2.84
Ropivacaine
23
4.2
47
0.44
CL, clearance; Vdss, volume of distribution at steady state.
CHAPTER 26 Local Anesthetics     453
which are excreted in the urine. Since local anesthetics in the 
uncharged form diffuse readily through lipid membranes, little or 
no urinary excretion of the neutral form occurs. Acidification of 
urine promotes ionization of the tertiary amine base to the more 
water-soluble charged form, leading to more rapid elimination. 
Ester-type local anesthetics are hydrolyzed very rapidly in the 
blood by circulating butyrylcholinesterase to inactive metabolites. 
For example, the half-lives of procaine and chloroprocaine in 
plasma are less than a minute. However, excessive concentrations 
may accumulate in patients with reduced or absent plasma hydro-
lysis secondary to atypical plasma cholinesterase. 
 The amide local anesthetics undergo complex biotransforma-
tion in the liver, which includes hydroxylation and  N -dealkylation 
by liver microsomal cytochrome P450 isozymes. There is consid-
erable variation in the rate of liver metabolism of individual amide 
compounds, with prilocaine (fastest) > lidocaine > mepivacaine > 
ropivacaine ≈ bupivacaine and levobupivacaine (slowest). As a 
result, toxicity from amide-type local anesthetics is more likely to 
occur in patients with hepatic disease. For example, the average 
elimination half-life of lidocaine may be increased from 1.6 hours 
in normal patients ( t ½ ,  Table 26–2 ) to more than 6 hours in 
patients with severe liver disease. Many other drugs used in anesthe-
sia are metabolized by the same P450 isozymes, and concomitant 
administration of these competing drugs may slow the hepatic 
metabolism of the local anesthetics. Decreased hepatic elimination 
of local anesthetics would also be anticipated in patients with 
reduced hepatic blood flow. For example, the hepatic elimination 
of lidocaine in patients anesthetized with volatile anesthetics 
(which reduce liver blood flow) is slower than in patients anesthe-
tized with intravenous anesthetic techniques. Delayed metabolism 
due to impaired hepatic blood flow may likewise occur in patients 
with congestive heart failure. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 1. Membrane potential— The primary mechanism of action 
of local anesthetics is blockade of voltage-gated sodium channels 
( Figure 26–1 ). The excitable membrane of nerve axons, like the 
membrane of cardiac muscle (see  Chapter 14 ) and neuronal cell 
bodies (see  Chapter 21 ), maintains a resting transmembrane 
potential of –90 to –60 mV. During excitation, the sodium chan-
nels open, and a fast, inward sodium current quickly depolarizes 
the membrane toward the sodium equilibrium potential (+40 
mV). As a result of this depolarization process, the sodium chan-
nels close (inactivate) and potassium channels open. The outward 
flow of potassium repolarizes the membrane toward the potassium 
equilibrium potential (about –95 mV); repolarization returns the 
sodium channels to the rested state with a characteristic recovery 
time that determines the refractory period. The transmembrane 
ionic gradients are maintained by the sodium pump. These ionic 
fluxes are similar to, but simpler than, those in heart muscle, and 
local anesthetics have similar effects in both tissues. 
 2. Sodium channel isoforms— Each sodium channel con-
sists of a single alpha subunit containing a central ion-conducting 
pore associated with accessory beta subunits. The pore-forming 
alpha subunit is actually sufficient for functional expression, 
but the kinetics and voltage dependence of channel gating are 
modified by the beta subunit. A variety of different sodium 
channels have been characterized by electrophysiologic record-
ing, and subsequently isolated and cloned, while mutational 
analysis has allowed for identification of the essential compo-
nents of the local anesthetic binding site. Nine members of a 
mammalian family of sodium channels have been so character-
ized and classified as Na v 1.1–Na v 1.9, where the chemical sym-
bol represents the primary ion, the subscript denotes the 
physiologic regulator (in this case voltage), the initial number 
denotes the gene, and the number following the period indi-
cates the particular isoform. 
 3. Channel blockade— Biologic toxins such as batrachotoxin, 
aconitine, veratridine, and some scorpion venoms bind to recep-
tors within the channel and prevent inactivation. This results in 
prolonged influx of sodium through the channel and depolariza-
tion of the resting potential. The marine toxins tetrodotoxin 
(TTX) and saxitoxin have clinical effects that largely resemble 
those of local anesthetics (ie, block of conduction without a 
change in the resting potential). However, in contrast to the 
 FIGURE 26–2  Comparative peak blood levels of several local 
anesthetic agents following administration into various anatomic 
sites. (Modified, with permission, from Covino BD, Vassals HG: Local Anesthetics: 
Mechanism of Action in Clinical Use. Grune & Stratton, 1976.) 
Mepivacaine
500 mg
Intercostal
Intercostal
Intercostal
Intercostal
Caudal
Caudal
Caudal
Epidural
Epidural
Epidural
Epidural
Brachial plexus
Brachial plexus
Brachial plexus
Subcutaneous
Sciatic femoral
Lidocaine
400 mg
Prilocaine
400 mg
Etidocaine
300 mg
Blood levels (mcg/mL)
2
4
6
8
454    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
local anesthetics, their binding site is located near the extracel-
lular surface. The sensitivity of these channels to TTX varies, 
and subclassification based on this pharmacologic sensitivity has 
important physiologic and therapeutic implications. Six of the 
aforementioned channels are sensitive to nanomolar concentra-
tion of this biotoxin (TTX-S), while three are resistant (TTX-R). 
Of the latter, Na v 1.8 and Na v 1.9 appear to be exclusively 
expressed in dorsal root ganglia nociceptors, which raises the 
developmental possibility of targeting these specific neuronal 
subpopulations. Such fine-tuned analgesic therapy has the theo-
retical potential of providing effective analgesia, while limiting 
the significant adverse effects produced by nonspecific sodium 
channel blockers. 
 When progressively increasing concentrations of a local anes-
thetic are applied to a nerve fiber, the threshold for excitation 
increases, impulse conduction slows, the rate of rise of the action 
potential declines, action potential amplitude decreases, and, 
finally, the ability to generate an action potential is completely 
abolished. These progressive effects result from binding of the 
local anesthetic to more and more sodium channels. If the 
sodium current is blocked over a critical length of the nerve, 
propagation across the blocked area is no longer possible. In 
myelinated nerves, the critical length appears to be two to three 
nodes of Ranvier. At the minimum dose required to block 
propagation, the resting potential is not significantly altered. 
 The blockade of sodium channels by most local anesthetics 
is both voltage and time dependent: Channels in the rested 
state, which predominate at more negative membrane poten-
tials, have a much lower affinity for local anesthetics than 
activated (open state) and inactivated channels, which pre-
dominate at more positive membrane potentials (see  Figure 
14–10 ). Therefore, the effect of a given drug concentration is 
more marked in rapidly firing axons than in resting fibers 
( Figure 26–3 ). Between successive action potentials, a portion 
of the sodium channels will recover from the local anesthetic 
block (see  Figure 14–10 ). The recovery from drug-induced 
block is 10–1000 times slower than the recovery of channels 
from normal inactivation (as shown for the cardiac membrane 
in  Figure 14–4 ). As a result, the refractory period is lengthened 
and the nerve conducts fewer action potentials. 
 Elevated extracellular calcium partially antagonizes the action 
of local anesthetics owing to the calcium-induced increase in the 
surface potential on the membrane (which favors the low-affin-
ity rested state). Conversely, increases in extracellular potassium 
depolarize the membrane potential and favor the inactivated 
state, enhancing the effect of local anesthetics. 
 4. Other effects— Currently used local anesthetics bind to 
the sodium channel with low affinity and poor specificity, and 
there are multiple other sites for which their affinity is nearly 
the same as that for sodium channel binding. Thus, at clini-
cally relevant concentrations, local anesthetics are potentially 
active at countless other channels (eg, potassium and calcium), 
enzymes (eg, adenylate cyclase, carnitine-acylcarnitine translo-
case), and receptors (eg,  N -methyl- D -aspartate [NMDA], G 
protein-coupled, 5-HT 3 , neurokinin-1 [substance P receptor]). 
 FIGURE 26–3  Effect of repetitive activity on the block of sodium 
current produced by a local anesthetic in a myelinated axon. A series 
of 25 pulses was applied, and the resulting sodium currents 
(downward deflections) are superimposed. Note that the current 
produced by the pulses rapidly decreased from the first to the 25th 
pulse. A long rest period after the train resulted in recovery from 
block, but the block could be reinstated by a subsequent train. nA, 
nanoamperes. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Courtney KR: 
Mechanism of frequency-dependent inhibition of sodium currents in frog myelinated 
nerve by the lidocaine derivative GEA. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1975;195:225.) 
1
1
2
3
25
2
3
nA
1 ms
Time
Sodium current
Use
The role that such ancillary effects play in achievement of local 
anesthesia appears to be important but is poorly understood. 
Further, interactions with these other sites are likely the basis 
for numerous differences between the local anesthetics with 
respect to anesthetic effects (eg, differential block) and toxici-
ties that do not parallel anesthetic potency, and thus are not 
adequately accounted for solely by blockade of the voltage-
gated sodium channel. 
 The actions of circulating local anesthetics at such diverse 
sites exert a multitude of effects, some of which go beyond pain 
control, including some that are also potentially beneficial. For 
example, there is evidence to suggest that the blunting of the 
stress response and improvements in perioperative outcome that 
may occur with epidural anesthesia derive in part from an action 
of the anesthetic beyond its sodium channel block. Circulating 
anesthetics also demonstrate antithrombotic effects having an 
impact on coagulation, platelet aggregation, and the microcircu-
lation, as well as modulation of inflammation. 
 B. Structure-Activity Characteristics of
Local Anesthetics 
 The smaller and more highly lipophilic local anesthetics have a 
faster rate of interaction with the sodium channel receptor. As 
previously noted, potency is also positively correlated with 
lipid solubility. Lidocaine, procaine, and mepivacaine are more 
water soluble than tetracaine, bupivacaine, and ropivacaine. 
The latter agents are more potent and have longer durations of 
local anesthetic action. These long-acting local anesthetics also 
bind more extensively to proteins and can be displaced from 
these binding sites by other protein-bound drugs. In the case 
of optically active agents (eg, bupivacaine), the  R (+) isomer 
can usually be shown to be slightly more potent than the  S (–) 
isomer (levobupivacaine). 
CHAPTER 26 Local Anesthetics     455
 C. Neuronal Factors Affecting Block 
 1. Differential block— Since local anesthetics are capable of 
blocking all nerves, their actions are not limited to the desired 
loss of sensation from sites of noxious (painful) stimuli. With 
central neuraxial techniques (spinal or epidural), motor paraly-
sis may impair respiratory activity, and autonomic nerve block-
ade may promote hypotension. Further, while motor paralysis 
may be desirable during surgery, it may be disadvantageous in 
other settings. For example, motor weakness occurring as a 
consequence of epidural anesthesia during obstetrical labor 
may limit the ability of the patient to bear down (ie, “push”) 
during delivery. Similarly, when used for postoperative 
analgesia, weakness may hamper ability to ambulate without 
assistance and pose a risk of falling, while residual autonomic 
blockade may interfere with bladder function, resulting in uri-
nary retention and the need for bladder catheterization. These 
issues are particular problematic in the setting of ambulatory 
(same-day) surgery, which represents an ever-increasing 
percentage of surgical caseloads. 
 2. Intrinsic susceptibility of nerve fibers— Nerve fibers 
differ significantly in their susceptibility to local anesthetic 
blockade. It has been traditionally taught, and still often cited, 
that local anesthetics preferentially block smaller diameter 
fibers first because the distance over which such fibers can pas-
sively propagate an electrical impulse is shorter. However, a 
variable proportion of large fibers are blocked prior to the 
disappearance of the small fiber component of the compound 
action potential. Most notably, myelinated nerves tend to be 
blocked before unmyelinated nerves of the same diameter. 
For example, preganglionic B fibers are blocked before the 
smaller unmyelinated C fibers involved in pain transmission 
( Table 26–3 ). 
 Another important factor underlying differential block 
derives from the state- and use-dependent mechanism of action 
of local anesthetics. Blockade by these drugs is more marked at 
higher frequencies of depolarization. Sensory (pain) fibers have 
a high firing rate and relatively long action potential duration. 
Motor fibers fire at a slower rate and have a shorter action 
potential duration. As type A delta and C fibers participate in 
high-frequency pain transmission, this characteristic may favor 
blockade of these fibers earlier and with lower concentrations 
of local anesthetics. The potential impact of such effects man-
dates cautious interpretation of non-physiologic experiments 
evaluating intrinsic susceptibility of nerves to conduction 
block by local anesthetics. 
 3. Anatomic arrangement— In addition to the effect of 
intrinsic vulnerability to local anesthetic block, the anatomic 
organization of the peripheral nerve bundle may impact the 
onset and susceptibility of its components. As one would pre-
dict based on the necessity of having proximal sensory fibers 
join the nerve trunk last, the core will contain sensory fibers 
innervating the most distal sites. Anesthetic placed outside the 
nerve bundle will thus reach and anesthetize the proximal 
fibers located at the outer portion of the bundle first, and sen-
sory block will occur in sequence from proximal to distal. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
LOCAL ANESTHETICS 
 Local anesthetics can provide highly effective analgesia in well-
defined regions of the body. The usual routes of administration 
include topical application (eg, nasal mucosa, wound [incision 
site] margins), injection in the vicinity of peripheral nerve endings 
(perineural infiltration) and major nerve trunks (blocks), and 
injection into the epidural or subarachnoid spaces surrounding 
the spinal cord ( Figure 26–4 ). 
 Clinical Block Characteristics 
 In clinical practice, there is generally an orderly evolution of 
block components beginning with sympathetic transmission and 
TABLE 26–3 Relative size and susceptibility of different types of nerve fibers to local anesthetics.
Fiber Type
Function
Diameter (μm)
Myelination
Conduction
Velocity (m/s)
Sensitivity to Block
Type A
Alpha
Proprioception, motor
12–20
Heavy
70–120
+
Beta
Touch, pressure
5–12
Heavy
30–70
++
Gamma
Muscle spindles
3–6
Heavy
15–30
++
Delta
Pain, temperature
2–5
Heavy
5–25
+++
Type B
Preganglionic
autonomic
< 3
Light
3–15
++++
Type C
Dorsal root
Pain
0.4–1.2
None
0.5–2.3
++++
Sympathetic
Postganglionic
0.3–1.3
None
0.7–2.3
++++
456    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
progressing to temperature, pain, light touch, and finally motor 
block. This is most readily appreciated during onset of spinal 
anesthesia, where a spatial discrepancy can be detected in modal-
ities, the most vulnerable components achieving greater derma-
tomal (cephalad) spread. Thus, loss of the sensation of cold 
(often assessed by a wet alcohol sponge) will be roughly two seg-
ments above the analgesic level for pinprick, which in turn will 
be roughly two segments rostral to loss of light touch recogni-
tion. However, because of the anatomic considerations noted 
earlier for peripheral nerve trunks, onset with peripheral blocks 
is more variable, and proximal motor weakness may precede 
onset of more distal sensory loss. Additionally, anesthetic solu-
tion is not generally deposited evenly around a nerve bundle, 
and longitudinal spread and radial penetration into the nerve 
trunk are far from uniform. 
 With respect to differential block, it is worth noting that 
“successful” surgical anesthesia may require loss of touch, not just 
ablation of pain, as some patients will find even the sensation of 
touch distressing during surgery, often fearing that the procedure 
may become painful. Further, while differences may exist in 
modalities, it is not possible with conventional techniques to pro-
duce surgical anesthesia without some loss of motor function. 
Caudal
block
Spinal block
Subarachnoid space
in spinal canal
Base of
spinal cord
(Conus medullaris)
Dura
Epidural space
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
Epidural space
in caudal canal
Filum terminale
Cauda equina
Epidural block
 FIGURE 26–4  Schematic diagram of the typical sites of injection of local anesthetics in and around the spinal canal. When local 
anesthetics are injected extradurally, it is referred to as an epidural block. A caudal block is a specific type of epidural block in which a 
needle is inserted into the caudal canal via the sacral hiatus. Injections around peripheral nerves are known as perineural blocks (eg, 
paravertebral block). Finally, injection into cerebrospinal fluid in the subarachnoid (intrathecal) space is referred to as a spinal block. 
CHAPTER 26 Local Anesthetics     457
 A. Effect of Added Vasoconstrictors 
 Several benefits may be derived from addition of a vasoconstrictor to 
a local anesthetic. First, localized neuronal uptake is enhanced because 
of higher sustained local tissue concentrations that can translate clini-
cally into a longer duration block. This may enable adequate anesthe-
sia for more prolonged procedures, extended duration of postoperative 
pain control, and lower total anesthetic requirement. Second, peak 
blood levels will be lowered as absorption is more closely matched to 
metabolism and elimination, and the risk of systemic toxic effects is 
reduced. Moreover, when incorporated into a spinal anesthetic, epi-
nephrine may not only contribute to prolongation of the local anes-
thetic effect via its vasoconstrictor properties, but also exert a direct 
analgesic effect mediated by postsynaptic α 2 adrenoceptors within the 
spinal cord. Recognition of this potential has led to the clinical use of 
the α 2 agonist clonidine as a local anesthetic adjuvant for spinal 
anesthesia. 
 Conversely, inclusion of epinephrine may have untoward 
effects. The addition of epinephrine to anesthetic solutions can 
potentiate the neurotoxicity of local anesthetics used for periph-
eral nerve blocks or spinal anesthesia. Further, the use of a vaso-
constrictor agent in an area that lacks adequate collateral flow (eg, 
digital block) is generally avoided, though some have questioned 
the validity of this proscription. 
 B. Intentional Use of Systemic Local Anesthetics 
 Although the principal use of local anesthetics is to achieve anesthe-
sia in a restricted area, these agents are sometimes deliberately 
administered systemically to take advantage of suppressive effects on 
pain processing. In addition to documented reductions in anesthetic 
requirement and postoperative pain, systemic administration of 
local anesthetics has been used with some success in the treatment 
of chronic pain, and this effect may outlast the duration of anes-
thetic exposure. The achievement of pain control by systemic 
administration of local anesthetics is thought to derive, at least in 
part, from the suppression of abnormal ectopic discharge, an effect 
observed at concentrations of local anesthetic an order of magnitude 
lower than those required for blockade of propagation of action 
potentials in normal nerves. Consequently, these effects can be 
achieved without the adverse effects that would derive from failure 
of normal nerve conduction. Escalating doses of anesthetic appear 
to exert the following systemic actions: (1) low concentrations may 
preferentially suppress ectopic impulse generation in chronically 
injured peripheral nerves; (2) moderate concentrations may sup-
press central sensitization, which would explain therapeutic benefit 
that may extend beyond the anesthetic exposure; and (3) higher 
concentrations will produce general analgesic effects and may cul-
minate in serious toxicity. 
 Toxicity 
 Local anesthetic toxicity derives from two distinct processes: (1) 
systemic effects following inadvertent intravascular injection or 
absorption of the local anesthetic from the site of administration; 
and (2) neurotoxicity resulting from local effects produced by 
direct contact with neural elements. 
 A. Systemic Toxicity 
 The dose of local anesthetic used for epidural anesthesia or high-
volume peripheral blocks is sufficient to produce major clinical 
toxicity, even death. To minimize risk, maximum recommended 
doses for each drug for each general application have been pro-
mulgated. The concept underlying this approach is that absorp-
tion from the site of injection should appropriately match 
metabolism, thereby preventing toxic serum levels. However, 
these recommendations do not consider patient characteristics 
or concomitant risk factors, nor do they take into account the 
specific peripheral nerve block performed, which has a signifi-
cant impact on the rate of systemic uptake ( Figure 26–2 ). Most 
importantly, they fail to afford protection from toxicity induced 
by inadvertent intravascular injection (occasionally into an 
artery, but more commonly a vein). 
 1. CNS toxicity— All local anesthetics have the ability to pro-
duce sedation, light-headedness, visual and auditory distur-
bances, and restlessness when high plasma concentrations result 
from rapid absorption or inadvertent intravascular administra-
tion. An early symptom of local anesthetic toxicity is circumoral 
and tongue numbness and a metallic taste. At higher concentra-
tions, nystagmus and muscular twitching occur, followed by 
tonic-clonic convulsions. Local anesthetics apparently cause 
depression of cortical inhibitory pathways, thereby allowing 
unopposed activity of excitatory neuronal pathways. This transi-
tional stage of unbalanced excitation (ie, seizure activity) is then 
followed by generalized CNS depression. However, this classic 
pattern of evolving toxicity has been largely characterized in 
human volunteer studies (which are ethically constrained to low 
doses), and by graded administration in animal models. 
Deviations from such classic progression are common in clinical 
toxicity and will be influenced by a host of factors, including 
patient vulnerability, the particular anesthetic administered, 
concurrent drugs, and rate of rise of serum drug levels. A recent 
literature review of reported clinical cases of local anesthetic 
cardiac toxicity found prodromal signs of CNS toxicity in only 
18% of cases. 
 When large doses of a local anesthetic are required (eg, for major 
peripheral nerve block or local infiltration for major plastic surgery), 
premedication with a parenteral benzodiazepine (eg, diazepam or 
midazolam) will provide some prophylaxis against local anesthetic-
induced CNS toxicity. However, such premedication will have little, 
if any, effect on cardiovascular toxicity, potentially delaying recogni-
tion of a life-threatening overdose. Of note, administration of a 
propofol infusion or general anesthesia accounted for 5 of the 10 
cases presenting with isolated cardiovascular toxicity in the afore-
mentioned literature review of reported clinical cases. 
 If seizures do occur, it is critical to prevent hypoxemia and 
acidosis, which potentiate anesthetic toxicity. Rapid tracheal intu-
bation can facilitate adequate ventilation and oxygenation, and is 
essential to prevent pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents in 
patients at risk. The effect of hyperventilation is complex, and its 
role in resuscitation following anesthetic overdose is somewhat 
controversial, but it likely offers distinct benefit if used to coun-
teract metabolic acidosis. Seizures induced by local anesthetics 
458    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
should be rapidly controlled to prevent patient harm and exacer-
bation of acidosis. A recent practice advisory from the American 
Society of Regional Anesthesia advocates benzodiazepines as first-
line drugs (eg, midazolam, 0.03–0.06 mg/kg) because of their 
hemodynamic stability, but small doses of propofol (eg, 0.25–0.5 
mg/kg) were considered acceptable alternatives, as they are often 
more immediately available in the setting of local anesthetic 
administration. The motor activity of the seizure can be effectively 
terminated by administration of a neuromuscular blocker, though 
this will not diminish the CNS manifestations, and efforts must 
include therapy directed at the underlying seizure activity. 
 2. Cardiotoxicity— The most feared complications associated 
with local anesthetic administration result from the profound 
effects these agents can have on cardiac conduction and function. 
In 1979, an editorial by Albright reviewed the circumstances of six 
deaths associated with the use of bupivacaine and etidocaine. This 
seminal piece suggested that these relatively new lipophilic and 
potent anesthetics had greater potential cardiotoxicity, and that 
cardiac arrest could occur concurrently or immediately following 
seizures and, most importantly, in the absence of hypoxia or aci-
dosis. Although this suggestion was sharply criticized, subsequent 
clinical experience unfortunately reinforced Albright’s concern—
within 4 years the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) had 
received reports of 12 cases of cardiac arrest associated with the use 
of 0.75% bupivacaine for epidural anesthesia in obstetrics. Further 
support for enhanced cardiotoxicity of these anesthetics came 
from animal studies demonstrating that doses of bupivacaine and 
etidocaine as low as two thirds those producing convulsions could 
induce arrhythmias, while the margin between CNS and cardiac 
toxicity was less than half that for lidocaine. In response, the FDA 
banned the use of 0.75% bupivacaine in obstetrics. In addition, 
incorporation of a test dose became ingrained as a standard of 
anesthetic practice, along with the practice of fractionated admin-
istration of local anesthetic. 
 Although reduction in bupivacaine’s anesthetic concentration 
and changes in anesthetic practice did much to reduce the risk of 
cardiotoxicity, the recognized differences in the toxicity of the 
stereoisomers comprising bupivacaine created an opportunity for 
the development of potentially safer anesthetics (see  Chapter 1 ). 
Investigations demonstrated that the enantiomers of the racemic 
mixture bupivacaine were not equivalent with respect to cardiotox-
icity, the  S (–) enantiomer having better therapeutic advantage, lead-
ing to the subsequent marketing of levobupivacaine. This was 
followed shortly thereafter by ropivacaine, a slightly less potent 
anesthetic than bupivacaine. It should be noted, however, that the 
reduction in toxicity afforded by these compounds is only modest, 
and that risk of significant cardiotoxicity remains a very real concern 
when these anesthetics are administered for high-volume blocks. 
 3. Reversal of bupivacaine toxicity— Recently, a series of 
clinical events, serendipitous observations, systematic experimen-
tation, and astute clinical decisions have identified a relatively 
simple, practical and apparently effective therapy for resistant 
bupivacaine cardiotoxicity using intravenous infusion of lipid. 
Furthermore, this therapy appears to have applications that extend 
beyond bupivacaine cardiotoxicity to the cardiac or CNS toxicity 
induced by an overdose of any lipid-soluble drug (see Box: Lipid 
Resuscitation). 
 B. Localized Toxicity 
 1. Neural injury— From the early introduction of spinal anes-
thesia into clinical practice, sporadic reports of neurologic injury 
associated with this technique raised concern that local anesthetic 
agents were potentially neurotoxic. Following injuries associated 
with Durocaine—a spinal anesthetic formulation containing 
procaine—initial attention focused on the vehicle components. 
However, experimental studies found 10% procaine alone induced 
similar injuries in cats, whereas the vehicle did not. Concern for 
anesthetic neurotoxicity reemerged in the early 1980s with a series 
of reports of major neurologic injury occurring with the use of 
chloroprocaine for epidural anesthesia. In these cases, there was 
evidence that anesthetic intended for the epidural space was inad-
vertently administered intrathecally. As the dose required for spi-
nal anesthesia is roughly an order of magnitude less than for 
epidural anesthesia, injury was apparently the result of excessive 
exposure of the more vulnerable subarachnoid neural elements. 
 With changes in vehicle formulation and in clinical practice, 
concern for toxicity again subsided, only to reemerge a decade 
later with reports of cauda equina syndrome associated with con-
tinuous spinal anesthesia (CSA). In contrast to the more common 
single-injection technique, CSA involves placing a catheter in the 
subarachnoid space to permit repetitive dosing to facilitate ade-
quate anesthesia and maintenance of block for extended periods. 
In these cases the local anesthetic was evidently administered to a 
relatively restricted area of the subarachnoid space; in order to 
extend the block to achieve adequate surgical anesthesia, multiple 
repetitive doses of anesthetic were then administered. By the time 
the block was adequate, neurotoxic concentrations had accumu-
lated in a restricted area of the caudal region of the subarachnoid 
space. Most notably, the anesthetic involved in the majority of 
these cases was lidocaine, a drug most clinicians considered to be 
the least toxic of agents. This was followed by reports of neuro-
toxic injury occurring with lidocaine intended for epidural admin-
istration that had inadvertently been administered intrathecally, 
similar to the cases involving chloroprocaine a decade earlier. The 
occurrence of neurotoxic injury with CSA and subarachnoid 
administration of epidural doses of lidocaine served to establish 
vulnerability whenever excessive anesthetic was administered 
intrathecally, regardless of the specific anesthetic used. Of even 
more concern, subsequent reports provided evidence for injury 
with spinal lidocaine administered at the high end of the recom-
mended clinical dosage, prompting recommendations for a reduc-
tion in maximum dose. These clinical reports (as well as concurrent 
experimental studies) served to dispel the concept that modern 
local anesthetics administered at clinically relevant doses and con-
centrations were incapable of inducing neurotoxic injury. 
 The mechanism of local anesthetic neurotoxicity has been 
extensively investigated in cell culture, isolated axons, and in vivo 
models. These studies have demonstrated a myriad of deleterious 
effects including conduction failure, membrane damage, enzyme 
CHAPTER 26 Local Anesthetics     459
leakage, cytoskeletal disruption, accumulation of intracellular 
calcium, disruption of axonal transport, growth cone collapse, and 
apoptosis. It is not clear what role these factors or others play in 
clinical injury. It is clear, however, that injury does not result from 
blockade of the voltage-gated sodium channel per se, and thus 
clinical effect and toxicity are not tightly linked. 
 2. Transient neurologic symptoms (TNS)— In addition to the 
very rare but devastating neural complications that can occur with 
neuraxial (spinal and epidural) administration of local anesthetics, a 
syndrome of transient pain or dysesthesia, or both, has been recently 
linked to use of lidocaine for spinal anesthesia. Although these symp-
toms are not associated with sensory loss, motor weakness, or bowel 
and bladder dysfunction, the pain can be quite severe, often exceeding 
that induced by the surgical procedure. TNS occurs even at modest 
doses of anesthetic, and has been documented in as many as one third 
of patients receiving lidocaine, with increased risk associated with 
certain patient positions during surgery (eg, lithotomy), and with 
ambulatory anesthesia. Risk with other anesthetics varies consider-
ably. For example, the incidence is only slightly reduced with procaine 
or mepivacaine but appears to be negligible with bupivacaine, prilo-
caine, and chloroprocaine. The etiology and significance of TNS 
remain to be established, but differences between factors affecting 
TNS and experimental animal toxicity argue strongly against a com-
mon mechanism mediating these symptoms and persistent or perma-
nent neurologic deficits. Nonetheless, the high incidence of TNS has 
greatly contributed to dissatisfaction with lidocaine as a spinal anes-
thetic, leading to its near abandonment for this technique (although it 
remains a popular and appropriate anesthetic for all other applications, 
including epidural anesthesia). Chloroprocaine, once considered a 
more toxic anesthetic, is now being explored for short-duration spinal 
anesthesia as an alternative to lidocaine, a compound that has been 
used for well over 50 million spinal anesthetic procedures. 
 ■ COMMONLY USED LOCAL 
ANESTHETICS & THEIR 
APPLICATIONS 
 ARTICAINE 
 Approved for use in the USA as a dental anesthetic in April 
2000, articaine is unique among the amino-amide anesthetics in 
having a thiophene, rather than a benzene ring, as well as an 
additional ester group that is subject to metabolism by plasma 
esterases ( Table 26–1 ). The modification of the ring serves to 
enhance lipophilicity, and thus improve tissue penetration, while 
inclusion of the ester leads to a shorter plasma half-life (approx-
imately 20 minutes) potentially imparting a better therapeutic 
index with respect to systemic toxicity. These characteristics have 
led to widespread popularity in dental anesthesia, where it is 
generally considered to be more effective, and possibly safer, 
than lidocaine, the prior standard. Balanced against these posi-
tive attributes are concerns that development of persistent par-
esthesias, while rare, may be three times more common with 
articaine. However, prilocaine has been associated with an even 
higher relative incidence (twice that of articaine). Importantly, 
these are the only two dental anesthetics that are formulated as 
4% solutions; the others are all marketed at lower concentrations 
 Based on a case of apparent cardiotoxicity from a very low dose 
of bupivacaine in a patient with carnitine deficiency, Weinberg 
postulated that this metabolic derangement led to enhanced 
toxicity due to the accumulation of fatty acids within the cardiac 
myocyte. He hypothesized that administration of lipid would 
similarly potentiate bupivacaine cardiotoxicity, but experiments 
performed to test this hypothesis demonstrated exactly the 
opposite effect. Accordingly, he began systematic laboratory 
investigations, which clearly demonstrated the potential efficacy 
of an intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) for resuscitation from bupi-
vacaine cardiotoxicity. Clinical confirmation came 8 years later 
with the report of the successful resuscitation of a patient who 
sustained an anesthetic-induced (bupivacaine plus mepivacaine) 
cardiac arrest refractory to standard advanced cardiac life sup-
port procedures (ACLS). Numerous similar reports of successful 
resuscitations soon followed, extending this clinical experience 
to other anesthetics including levobupivacaine and ropivacaine, 
anesthetic-induced CNS toxicity, as well as toxicity induced by 
other classes of compounds, eg, bupropion-induced cardiovas-
cular collapse and multiform ventricular tachycardia provoked by 
haloperidol. Laboratory investigations have likewise provided 
evidence of efficacy for treatment of diverse toxic challenges (eg, 
verapamil, clomipramine, and propranolol). 
 The mechanism by which lipid is effective is incompletely 
understood, but its predominant effect appears to stem from its 
ability to extract a lipophilic drug from aqueous plasma and tis-
sue targets, a mechanism termed lipid sink. With respect to bupi-
vacaine cardiotoxicity, there may be an additive effect of restoring 
energy to the myocardium by overcoming bupivacaine-induced 
inhibition of fatty acid transport. Although numerous questions 
remain, the evolving evidence is sufficient to warrant administra-
tion of lipid in cases of systemic anesthetic toxicity. Its use has 
been promulgated by a task force of the American Society of 
Regional Anesthesia, and administration of lipid has been incor-
porated into the most recent revision of ACLS guidelines for 
Cardiac Arrest in Special Situations. Importantly, propofol cannot 
be administered for this purpose, as the relatively enormous vol-
ume of this solution required for lipid therapy would deliver lethal 
quantities of propofol. 
 Lipid Resuscitation 
460    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
(eg, the maximum concentration of lidocaine used for dental 
anesthesia is 2%), and it is well established that anesthetic 
neurotoxicity is, to some extent, concentration-dependent. 
Thus, it is quite possible that enhanced risk derives from the 
formulation rather than from an intrinsic property of the anes-
thetic. In a recent survey of US and Canadian Dental Schools, 
over half of respondents indicated that 4% articaine is no longer 
used for mandibular nerve block. 
 BENZOCAINE 
 As previously noted, benzocaine’s pronounced lipophilicity has 
relegated its application to topical anesthesia. However, despite 
over a century of use for this purpose, its popularity has recently 
diminished owing to increasing concerns regarding its potential to 
induce methemoglobinemia. Elevated levels can be due to inborn 
errors, or can occur with exposure to an oxidizing agent, and such 
is the case with significant exposure to benzocaine (or nitrites, see 
 Chapter 12 ). Because methemoglobin does not transport oxygen, 
elevated levels pose serious risk, with severity obviously paralleling 
blood levels. 
 BUPIVACAINE 
 Based on concerns for cardiotoxicity, bupivacaine is often avoided 
for techniques that demand high volumes of concentrated anes-
thetic, such as epidural or peripheral nerve blocks performed for 
surgical anesthesia. In contrast, relatively low concentrations
(≤ 0.25%) are frequently used to achieve prolonged peripheral 
anesthesia and analgesia for postoperative pain control, and the 
drug enjoys similar popularity where anesthetic infiltration is 
used to control pain from a surgical incision. It is often the agent 
of choice for epidural infusions used for postoperative pain con-
trol and for labor analgesia. Finally, it has a comparatively 
unblemished record as a spinal anesthetic, with a relatively favor-
able therapeutic index with respect to neurotoxicity, and little, if 
any, risk of TNS. However, spinal bupivacaine is not well suited 
for outpatient or ambulatory surgery, because its relatively long 
duration of action can delay recovery, resulting in a longer stay 
prior to discharge to home. 
 CHLOROPROCAINE 
 The introduction of chloroprocaine into clinical practice in 
1951 represented a reversion to the earlier amino-ester tem-
plate. Chloroprocaine gained widespread use as an epidural 
agent in obstetric anesthesia, where its rapid hydrolysis served 
to minimize risk of systemic toxicity or fetal exposure. 
Subsequent reports of neurologic injury associated with appar-
ent intrathecal misplacement of large doses intended for the 
epidural space led to its near abandonment. However, the fre-
quent occurrence of TNS when lidocaine is administered as a 
spinal anesthetic has created an anesthetic void that chloropro-
caine appears well suited to fill. Its onset and duration of action 
are even shorter than those of lidocaine, while presenting little, 
if any, risk of TNS. Although chloroprocaine was never exoner-
ated with respect to the early neurologic injuries associated 
with epidural anesthesia, it is now well appreciated that high 
doses of any local anesthetic, which are not required to achieve 
spinal anesthesia, are capable of inducing neurotoxic injury. In 
addition to chloroprocaine’s emerging use as a spinal anes-
thetic, the drug finds some current use as an epidural anes-
thetic, particularly in circumstances where there is an indwelling 
catheter and the need for quick attainment of surgical anesthe-
sia, such as cesarean section in a laboring parturient with a 
compromised fetus. 
 COCAINE 
 Current clinical use of cocaine is largely restricted to topical anes-
thesia for ear, nose, and throat procedures, where its intense vaso-
constriction can serve to reduce bleeding. Even here, use has 
diminished in favor of other anesthetics combined with vasocon-
strictors because of concerns about systemic toxicity, as well as 
the inconvenience of dispensing and handling this controlled 
substance. 
 ETIDOCAINE 
 Introduced along with bupivacaine, etidocaine has had limited 
application due to its poor block characteristics. It has a tendency 
to produce an inverse differential block (ie, compared with other 
anesthetics such as bupivacaine, it produces excessive motor rela-
tive to sensory block), which is rarely a favorable attribute. 
 LEVOBUPIVACAINE 
 As previously discussed, this  S (–) enantiomer of bupivacaine is 
somewhat less cardiotoxic than the racemic mixture. It is also less 
potent, and tends to have a longer duration of action, though the 
magnitude of these effects is too small to have any substantial 
clinical significance. Interestingly, recent work with lipid resuscita-
tion suggests a potential advantage of levobupivacaine over ropi-
vacaine, as the former is more effectively sequestered into a 
so-called lipid sink, implying greater ability to reverse toxic effects 
should they occur. 
 LIDOCAINE 
 Aside from the issue of a high incidence of TNS with spinal 
administration, lidocaine has had an excellent record as an inter-
mediate duration anesthetic, and remains the reference standard 
against which most anesthetics are compared. 
 MEPIVACAINE 
 Although structurally similar to bupivacaine and ropivacaine ( Table 
26–1 ), mepivacaine displays clinical properties that are comparable to 
CHAPTER 26 Local Anesthetics     461
lidocaine. However, it differs from lidocaine with respect to vasoactiv-
ity, as it has a tendency toward vasoconstriction rather than vasodila-
tion. This characteristic likely accounts for its slightly longer duration 
of action, which has made it a popular choice for major peripheral 
blocks. Lidocaine has retained its dominance over mepivacaine for 
epidural anesthesia, where the routine placement of a catheter negates 
the importance of a longer duration. More importantly, mepivacaine 
is slowly metabolized by the fetus, making it a poor choice for epidu-
ral anesthesia in the parturient. When used for spinal anesthesia, 
mepivacaine has a slightly lower incidence of TNS than lidocaine. 
 PRILOCAINE 
 Prilocaine has the highest clearance of the amino-amide anes-
thetics, imparting reduced risk of systemic toxicity. Unfortunately, 
this is somewhat offset by its propensity to induce methemoglo-
binemia, which results from accumulation of one its metabolites, 
ortho-toluidine, an oxidizing agent. As a spinal anesthetic, prilo-
caine’s duration of action is slightly longer than that of lidocaine, 
and the limited data suggest it carries a low risk of TNS. It is 
gaining increasing use for spinal anesthesia in Europe, where it 
has been marketed specifically for this purpose. No approved 
formulation exists in the USA, nor is there any formulation that 
would be appropriate to use for spinal anesthesia as an off-label 
indication. 
 ROPIVACAINE 
 Ropivacaine is an  S (–) enantiomer in a homologous series that 
includes bupivacaine and mepivacaine, distinguished by its chirality, 
and the propyl group off the piperidine ring ( Table 26–1 ). Its per-
ceived reduced cardiotoxicity has led to widespread use for high-
volume peripheral blocks. It is also a popular choice for epidural 
infusions for control of labor and postoperative pain. Although 
there is some evidence to suggest that ropivacaine might produce a 
more favorable differential block than bupivacaine, the lack of 
equivalent clinical potency adds complexity to such comparisons. 
 EMLA 
 The term eutectic is applied to mixtures in which the combina-
tion of elements has a lower melting temperature than its 
component elements. Lidocaine and prilocaine can combine to 
form such a mixture, which is marketed as EMLA ( E utectic 
 M ixture of  L ocal  Anesthetics ). This formulation, containing 
2.5% of lidocaine and 2.5% prilocaine, permits anesthetic pen-
etration of the keratinized layer of skin, producing localized 
numbness. It is commonly used in pediatrics to anesthetize the 
skin prior to venipuncture for intravenous catheter placement. 
 FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 
 Sustained-Release Formulations 
 The provision of prolonged analgesia or anesthesia, as in the 
case of postoperative pain management, has traditionally been 
accomplished by placement of a catheter to permit continuous 
administration of anesthetic. More recently, efforts have 
focused on drug delivery systems that can slowly release anes-
thetic, thereby providing extended duration without the draw-
backs of a catheter. Sustained-release delivery has the potential 
added advantage of reducing risk of systemic toxicity. 
Preliminary work encapsulating local anesthetic into micro-
spheres, liposomes, and other microparticles has established 
proof of concept, although significant developmental prob-
lems, as well as questions regarding potential tissue toxicity, 
remain to be resolved. 
 Less Toxic Agents; More Selective Agents 
 It has been clearly demonstrated that anesthetic neurotoxicity does 
not result from blockade of the voltage-gated sodium channel. 
Thus, effect and tissue toxicity are not mediated by a common 
mechanism, establishing the possibility of developing compounds 
with considerably better therapeutic indexes. 
 As previously discussed, the identification and subclassifica-
tion of families of neuronal sodium channels has spurred 
research aimed at development of more selective sodium chan-
nel blockers. The variable neuronal distribution of these 
isoforms and the unique role that some play in pain signaling 
suggests that selective blockade of these channels is feasible, 
and may greatly improve the therapeutic index of sodium 
channel modulators. 
462    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
SUMMARY Drugs Used for Local Anesthesia
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities
AMIDES
 • Lidocaine
Blockade of sodium 
channels
Slows, then blocks, action 
potential propagation
Short-duration procedures • 
topical (mucosal), 
intravenous, infiltration, 
spinal, epidural, minor and 
major peripheral blocks
Parenteral (eg, peripheral block, but 
varies significantly based on specific 
site) • duration 1–2 h • 2–4 h with 
epinephrine • Toxicity: Central 
nervous system (CNS) excitation 
(high-volume blocks) and local 
neurotoxicity
 • Bupivacaine
Same as lidocaine
Same as lidocaine
Longer-duration procedures 
(but not used topically or 
intravenously)
Parenteral • duration 3–6 h • Toxicity: 
CNS excitation • cardiovascular 
collapse (high-volume blocks)
 • Prilocaine, mepivacaine: Like lidocaine (but also risk of methemoglobinemia with prilocaine)
 • Ropivacaine, levobupivacaine: Like bupivacaine
ESTERS
 • Chloroprocaine
Like lidocaine
Like lidocaine
Very short procedures (not 
generally used topically or 
intravenously)
Parenteral • duration 30–60 min • 
60–90 min with epinephrine • 
Toxicity: Like lidocaine
 • Cocaine
Same as above • 
also has 
sympathomimetic 
effects
Same as above
Procedures requiring high 
surface activity and 
vasoconstriction
Topical or parenteral • duration 1–2 
h • Toxicity: CNS excitation, 
convulsions, cardiac arrhythmias, 
hypertension, stroke
 • Procaine: Like chloroprocaine (but not used epidurally)
 • Tetracaine: Used primarily for spinal anesthesia; duration 2–3 h
CHAPTER 26 Local Anesthetics     463
Articaine (Septocaine)
Parenteral: 4% with 1:100,000 epinephrine
Benzocaine (generic)
Topical: 5, 6% creams; 15, 20% gels; 5, 20% ointments; 0.8% lotion; 
20% liquid; 20% spray
Bupivacaine (generic, Marcaine, Sensorcaine)
Parenteral: 0.25, 0.5, 0.75% for injection; 0.25, 0.5, 0.75% with 
1:200,000 epinephrine
Chloroprocaine (generic, Nesacaine)
Parenteral: 1, 2, 3% for injection
Cocaine (generic)
Topical: 40, 100 mg/mL regular and viscous solutions; 5, 25 g 
powder
Dibucaine (generic, Nupercainal)
Topical: 1% ointment
Dyclonine (Dyclone)
Topical: 0.5, 1% solution
Levobupivacaine (Chirocaine)
Parenteral: 2.5, 5, 7.5 mg/mL
Lidocaine (generic, Xylocaine)
Parenteral: 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 4% for injection; 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2% with 
1:200,000 epinephrine; 1, 2% with 1:100,000 epinephrine, 2% with 
1:50,000 epinephrine
Topical: 2.5, 5% ointments; 0.5, 4% cream; 0.5, 2.5% gel; 2, 2.5, 4% 
solutions; 23, 46 mg/2 cm2 patch
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Articaine (Septocaine)
Parenteral: 4% with 1:100,000 epinephrine
Benzocaine (generic)
Topical: 5, 6% creams; 15, 20% gels; 5, 20% ointments; 0.8% lotion;
20% liquid; 20% spray
Bupivacaine (generic, Marcaine, Sensorcaine)
Parenteral: 0.25, 0.5, 0.75% for injection; 0.25, 0.5, 0.75% with 
1:200,000 epinephrine
Chloroprocaine (generic, Nesacaine)
Parenteral: 1, 2, 3% for injection
Cocaine (generic)
Topical: 40, 100 mg/mL regular and viscous solutions; 5, 25 g
powder
Dibucaine (generic, Nupercainal)
Topical: 1% ointment
Dyclonine (Dyclone)
Topical: 0.5, 1% solution
Levobupivacaine (Chirocaine)
Parenteral: 2.5, 5, 7.5 mg/mL
Lidocaine (generic, Xylocaine)
Parenteral: 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 4% for injection; 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2% with
1:200,000 epinephrine; 1, 2% with 1:100,000 epinephrine, 2% with
1:50,000 epinephrine
Topical: 2.5, 5% ointments; 0.5, 4% cream; 0.5, 2.5% gel; 2, 2.5, 4% 
solutions; 23, 46 mg/2 cm2 patch
Lidocaine and hydrocortisone
Patch: 3% lidocaine plus 0.5% hydrocortisone
Lidocaine and bupivacaine mixture (Duocaine)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL lidocaine plus 3.75 mg/mL bupivacaine for 
injection
Lidocaine and prilocaine eutectic mixture (EMLA cream)
Topical: lidocaine 2.5% plus prilocaine 2.5%
Mepivacaine (generic, Carbocaine)
Parenteral: 1, 1.5, 2, 3% for injection; 2% with 1:20,000 levonordefrin
Pramoxine (generic, Tronothane)
Topical: 1% cream, lotion, spray, and gel
Prilocaine (Citanest)
Parenteral: 4%; 4% with epinephrine
Procaine (generic, Novocain)
Parenteral: 1, 2, 10% for injection
Proparacaine (generic, Alcaine, others)
0.5% solution for ophthalmic use
Ropivacaine (Naropin)
Parenteral: 0.2, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0% solution for injection
Tetracaine (generic, Pontocaine)
Parenteral: 1% for injection; 0.2, 0.3% with 6% dextrose for spinal 
anesthesia
Topical: 1% ointment; 0.5% solution (ophthalmic); 1, 2% cream; 2% 
solution for nose and throat; 2% gel
 REFERENCES 
 Adverse Reactions with Bupivacaine. FDA Drug Bulletin 1983;13:23 
 Albright GA: Cardiac arrest following regional anesthesia with etidocaine or bupi-
vacaine. Anesthesiology 1979;51:285. 
 Andavan GS, Lemmens-Gruber R: Voltage-gated sodium channels: Mutations, 
channelopathies and targets. Curr Med Chem 2011;18:377. 
 Auroy Y et al: Serious complications related to regional anesthesia: Results of a 
prospective survey in France. Anesthesiology 1997;87:479. 
 Butterworth JF 4th, Strichartz GR: Molecular mechanisms of local anesthesia: A 
review. Anesthesiology 1990;72:711. 
 Catterall WA, Goldin AL, Waxman SG: International Union of Pharmacology. 
XLVII. Nomenclature and structure-function relationships of voltage-gated 
sodium channels. Pharmacol Rev 2005;57:397. 
 Cave G, Harvey M: Intravenous lipid emulsion as antidote beyond local anesthetic 
toxicity: A systematic review. Acad Emerg Med 2009;16:815. 
 de Jong RH, Ronfeld RA, DeRosa RA: Cardiovascular effects of convulsant and 
supraconvulsant doses of amide local anesthetics. Anesth Analg 1982;61:3. 
 Di Gregorio G et al: Clinical presentation of local anesthetic systemic toxicity: A 
review of published cases, 1979 to 2009. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2010;35:181. 
 Drasner K: Chloroprocaine spinal anesthesia: Back to the future? Anesth Analg 
2005;100:549. 
 Drasner K: Lidocaine spinal anesthesia: A vanishing therapeutic index? 
Anesthesiology 1997;87:469. 
 Drasner K: Local anesthetic neurotoxicity: Clinical injury and strategies that may 
minimize risk. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2002;27:576. 
 Drasner K: Local anesthetic systemic toxicity: a historical perspective. Reg Anesth 
Pain Med 2010;35:162. 
 Drasner K et al: Cauda equina syndrome following intended epidural anesthesia. 
Anesthesiology 1992;77:582. 
 Drasner K et al: Persistent sacral sensory deficit induced by intrathecal local anes-
thetic infusion in the rat. Anesthesiology 1994;80:847. 
 Freedman JM et al: Transient neurologic symptoms after spinal anesthesia: An 
epidemiologic study of 1,863 patients. Anesthesiology 1998;89:633. 
 Gold MS et al: Lidocaine toxicity in primary afferent neurons from the rat. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther 1998;285:413. 
 Groban L: Central nervous system and cardiac effects from long-acting amide local 
anesthetic toxicity in the intact animal model. Reg Anesth Pain Med 
2003;28:3. 
 Hampl KF et al: Transient neurologic symptoms after spinal anesthesia. Anesth 
Analg 1995;81:1148. 
 Hashimoto K et al: Epinephrine increases the neurotoxic potential of intrathecally 
administered lidocaine in the rat. Anesthesiology 2001;94:876. 
 Heavner JE: Cardiac toxicity of local anesthetics in the intact isolated heart model: 
A review. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2002;27:545. 
 Hille B: Local anesthetics: Hydrophyilic and hydrophobic pathways for the drug-
receptor interaction. J Gen Physiol 1977;69:497. 
 Holmdahl MH: Xylocain (lidocaine, lignocaine), its discovery and Gordh’s 
contribution to its clinical use. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand Suppl 
1998;113:8. 
 Kouri ME, Kopacz DJ: Spinal 2-chloroprocaine: A comparison with lidocaine in 
volunteers. Anesth Analg 2004;98(1):75-80. 
 Mattison JB: Cocaine poisoning. Med Surg Rep 1891;115:645. 
 Neal JM et al: ASRA practice advisory on local anesthetic systemic toxicity. Reg 
Anesth Pain Med 2010;35:152. 
464    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
If a spinal anesthetic technique were selected, bupivacaine 
would be an excellent choice. It has an adequately long 
duration of action and a relatively unblemished record with 
respect to neurotoxic injury and transient neurologic 
symptoms, which are the complications of most concern 
with spinal anesthetic technique. Although bupivacaine has 
greater potential for cardiotoxicity, this is not a concern 
when the drug is used for spinal anesthesia because of the 
extremely low doses required for intrathecal administra-
tion. If an epidural technique were chosen for the surgical 
procedure, the potential for systemic toxicity would need 
to be considered, making lidocaine or mepivacaine (gener-
ally with epinephrine) preferable to bupivacaine (or even 
ropivacaine or levobupivacaine) because of their better 
therapeutic indexes with respect to cardiotoxicity. However, 
this does not apply to epidural administration for postop-
erative pain control, which involves administration of 
more dilute anesthetic at a slower rate. The most common 
agents used for this indication are bupivacaine, ropiva-
caine, and levobupivacaine.
 Pollock JE: Transient neurologic symptoms: Etiology, risk factors, and manage-
ment. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2002;27:581. 
 Pollock JE et al: Prospective study of the incidence of transient radicular irritation 
in patients undergoing spinal anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1996;84:1361. 
 Pollock JE et al: Spinal nerve function in five volunteers experiencing transient 
neurologic symptoms after lidocaine subarachnoid anesthesia. Anesth Analg 
2000;90:658. 
 Priest BT: Future potential and status of selective sodium channel blockers for the 
treatment of pain. Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel 2009;12:682. 
 Rigler ML et al: Cauda equina syndrome after continuous spinal anesthesia. 
Anesth Analg 1991;72:275. 
 Rose JS, Neal JM, Kopacz DJ: Extended-duration analgesia: Update on micro-
spheres and liposomes. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2005;30:275. 
 Ruetsch YA, Boni T, Borgeat A: From cocaine to ropivacaine: The history of local 
anesthetic drugs. Curr Top Med Chem 2001;1:175. 
 Sakura S et al: Local anesthetic neurotoxicity does not result from blockade of 
voltage-gated sodium channels. Anesth Analg 1995;81:338. 
 Schneider M et al: Transient neurologic toxicity after hyperbaric subarachnoid 
anesthesia with 5% lidocaine. Anesth Analg 1993;76:1154. 
 Sirianni AJ et al: Use of lipid emulsion in the resuscitation of a patient with pro-
longed cardiovascular collapse after overdose of bupropion and lamotrigine. 
Ann Emerg Med 2008;51:412. 
 Taniguchi M, Bollen AW, Drasner K: Sodium bisulfite: Scapegoat for chloropro-
caine neurotoxicity? Anesthesiology 2004;100:85. 
 Tremont-Lukats IW et al: Systemic administration of local anesthetics to relieve 
neuropathic pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Anesth Analg 
2005;101:1738. 
 Weinberg GL et al: Pretreatment or resuscitation with a lipid infusion shifts the 
dose-response to bupivacaine-induced asystole in rats. Anesthesiology 
1998;88:1071. 
27
465
A 30-year-old woman is rushed to the emergency depart-
ment at a major trauma center after a motor vehicle acci-
dent. Although in significant pain, she is awake, alert, and 
able to give a brief history. She states that she was the driver 
and was wearing a seatbelt. There were no passengers in the 
car. Her past medical history is significant only for asthma, 
for which she has been intubated once in the past. She has 
no allergies to medications. There are multiple lacerations 
on her face and extremities and a large open fracture of her 
right femur. An orthopedic surgeon has scheduled immedi-
ate operative repair of the femur fracture, and the plastic 
surgeon wants to suture the facial lacerations at the same 
time. You decide to intubate the patient for the procedure. 
What muscle relaxant would you choose? Would you 
choose the same agent if she had experienced a 30% total 
body burn in a fire at the time of the accident? What if the 
past medical history included right-sided hemiparesis of 
10 years’ duration?
 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants 
 Marieke Kruidering-Hall, PhD, & 
 Lundy Campbell, MD∗ 
 ∗The authors thank Paul F. White, PhD, MD, and Bertram G. Katzung, 
MD, PhD, for contributions to this chapter in previous editions. 
 Drugs that affect skeletal muscle function include two different 
therapeutic groups: those used during surgical procedures and in 
the intensive care unit (ICU) to produce muscle paralysis 
(ie,  neuromuscular blockers ), and those used to reduce spasticity 
in a variety of painful conditions (ie,  spasmolytics ). Neuromuscular 
blocking drugs interfere with transmission at the neuromuscular 
end plate and lack central nervous system activity. These 
compounds are used primarily as adjuncts during general anesthesia 
to facilitate endotracheal intubation and optimize surgical condi-
tions while ensuring adequate ventilation. Drugs in the spasmo-
lytic group have traditionally been called “centrally acting” muscle 
relaxants and are used primarily to treat chronic back pain and 
painful fibromyalgic conditions. Dantrolene, a spasmolytic agent 
that has no significant central effects and is used primarily to treat 
a rare anesthetic-related complication, malignant hyperthermia, is 
also discussed in this chapter. 
 NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING DRUGS 
 History 
 During the 16th century, European explorers found that natives in 
the Amazon Basin of South America were using curare, an arrow 
poison that produced skeletal muscle paralysis, to kill animals. 
The active compound,  d -tubocurarine, and its modern synthetic 
derivatives have had a major influence on the practice of anesthe-
sia and surgery and have proved useful in understanding the basic 
mechanisms involved in neuromuscular transmission. 
 Normal Neuromuscular Function 
 The mechanism of neuromuscular transmission at the motor end 
plate is similar to that described for preganglionic cholinergic nerves 
in  Chapter 6 . The arrival of an action potential at the motor nerve 
terminal causes an influx of calcium and release of the neurotrans-
mitter acetylcholine. Acetylcholine then diffuses across the synaptic 
cleft to activate the nicotinic receptors located on the motor end 
plate. As noted in  Chapter 7 , the adult N M receptor is composed of 
five peptides: two alpha peptides, one beta, one gamma, and one 
delta peptide ( Figure 27–1 ). The binding of two acetylcholine 
C A S E  S T U D Y
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
466    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
molecules to receptors on the α-β and δ-α subunits causes opening 
of the channel. The subsequent movement of sodium and potas-
sium through the channel is associated with a graded depolarization 
of the end plate membrane ( Figure 27–2 ). This change in voltage is 
termed the motor end plate potential. The magnitude of the end 
plate potential is directly related to the amount of acetylcholine 
released. If the potential is small, the permeability and the end plate 
potential return to normal without an impulse being propagated 
from the end plate region to the rest of the muscle membrane. 
However, if the end plate potential is large, the adjacent muscle 
membrane is depolarized, and an action potential will be propa-
gated along the entire muscle fiber. Muscle contraction is then initi-
ated by excitation-contraction coupling. The released acetylcholine 
is quickly removed from the end plate region by both diffusion and 
enzymatic destruction by the local acetylcholinesterase enzyme. 
 At least two additional types of acetylcholine receptors are 
found within the neuromuscular apparatus. One type is located 
on the presynaptic motor axon terminal, and activation of these 
receptors mobilizes additional transmitter for subsequent release 
by moving more acetylcholine vesicles toward the synaptic mem-
brane. The second type of receptor is found on perijunctional cells 
and is not normally involved in neuromuscular transmission. 
However, under certain conditions (eg, prolonged immobiliza-
tion, thermal burns), these receptors may proliferate sufficiently to 
affect subsequent neuromuscular transmission. 
 Skeletal muscle relaxation and paralysis can occur from inter-
ruption of function at several sites along the pathway from the 
central nervous system (CNS) to myelinated somatic nerves, 
unmyelinated motor nerve terminals, nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors, the motor end plate, the muscle membrane, and the 
intracellular muscular contractile apparatus itself. 
 Blockade of end plate function can be accomplished by two 
basic mechanisms. Pharmacologic blockade of the physiologic 
agonist acetylcholine is characteristic of the antagonist neuromus-
cular blocking drugs (ie, nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking 
drugs). These drugs prevent access of the transmitter to its recep-
tor and thereby prevent depolarization. The prototype of this 
nondepolarizing subgroup is  d -tubocurarine. The second type of 
blockade can be produced by an excess of a depolarizing agonist, 
such as acetylcholine. This seemingly paradoxical effect of acetyl-
choline also occurs at the ganglionic nicotinic acetylcholine recep-
tor. The prototypical depolarizing blocking drug is  succinylcholine. 
A similar depolarizing block can be produced by acetylcholine 
itself when high local concentrations are achieved in the synaptic 
 FIGURE 27–1  The adult nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
(nAChR) is an intrinsic membrane protein with five distinct subunits 
(α 2 βδγ).  A: Cartoon of the one of five subunits of the AChR in the 
end plate surface of adult mammalian muscle. Each subunit contains 
four helical domains labeled M1 to M4. The M2 domains line the 
channel pore.  B: Cartoon of the full nAChR. The N termini of two 
subunits cooperate to form two distinct binding pockets for 
acetylcholine (ACh). These pockets occur at the α-β and the δ-α 
subunit interfaces. 
Nerve
terminal 
AChE
ACh
receptors
Muscle
JF
V
M
ACh
Axon
End plate
 FIGURE 27–2  Schematic representation of the neuromuscular 
junction. ACh, acetylcholine; AChE, acetylcholinesterase; JF, junc-
tional folds; M, mitochondrion; V, transmitter vesicle. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Drachman DB: Myasthenia gravis. N Engl J Med 1978;298:135.) 
Na+
Na+
ACh
ACh
A
B
γ
α
β
Outside
Inside
δ
α
M1
M4
M3
M2
CHAPTER 27 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants    467
cleft (eg, by cholinesterase inhibitor intoxication) and by nicotine 
and other nicotinic agonists. However, the neuromuscular block 
produced by depolarizing drugs other than succinylcholine cannot 
be precisely controlled and is of no clinical value. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING 
DRUGS 
 Chemistry 
 All of the available neuromuscular blocking drugs bear a structural 
resemblance to acetylcholine. For example, succinylcholine is two 
acetylcholine molecules linked end-to-end ( Figure 27–3 ). In contrast 
to the single linear structure of succinylcholine and other depolarizing 
drugs, the nondepolarizing agents (eg, pancuronium) conceal the 
“double-acetylcholine” structure in one of two types of bulky, semi-
rigid ring systems ( Figure 27–3 ). Examples of the two major families 
of nondepolarizing blocking drugs—the isoquinoline and steroid 
derivatives—are shown in  Figures 27–4 and  27–5 . Another feature 
common to all currently used neuromuscular blockers is the presence 
of one or two quaternary nitrogens, which makes them poorly lipid 
soluble and limits entry into the CNS.  
 Pharmacokinetics of Neuromuscular 
Blocking Drugs 
 All of the neuromuscular blocking drugs are highly polar com-
p ounds and inactive orally; they must be administered paren terally. 
 A. Nondepolarizing Relaxant Drugs 
 The rate of disappearance of a nondepolarizing neuromuscular 
blocking drug from the blood is characterized by a rapid initial 
distribution phase followed by a slower elimination phase. 
Neuromuscular blocking drugs are highly ionized, do not readily 
cross cell membranes, and are not strongly bound in peripheral 
tissues. Therefore, their volume of distribution (80–140 mL/kg) is 
only slightly larger than the blood volume. 
 The duration of neuromuscular blockade produced by nonde-
polarizing relaxants is strongly correlated with the elimination 
half-life. Drugs that are excreted by the kidney typically have lon-
ger half-lives, leading to longer durations of action (> 35 minutes). 
Drugs eliminated by the liver tend to have shorter half-lives and 
durations of action ( Table 27–1 ). All steroidal muscle relaxants are 
metabolized to their 3-hydroxy, 17-hydroxy, or 3,17-dihydroxy 
products in the liver. The 3-hydroxy metabolites are usually 
40–80% as potent as the parent drug. Under normal circum-
stances, metabolites are not formed in sufficient quantities to 
produce a significant degree of neuromuscular blockade during or 
after anesthesia. However, if the parent compound is administered 
for several days in the ICU setting, the 3-hydroxy metabolite may 
accumulate and cause prolonged paralysis because it has a longer 
half-life than the parent compound. The remaining metabolites 
possess minimal neuromuscular blocking properties. 
 The intermediate-acting steroid muscle relaxants (eg,  vecuro-
nium and  rocuronium ) tend to be more dependent on biliary 
excretion or hepatic metabolism for their elimination. These 
muscle relaxants are more commonly used clinically than the 
long-acting steroid-based drugs (eg, pancuronium). 
 Atracurium ( Figure 27–4 ) is an intermediate-acting isoquino-
line nondepolarizing muscle relaxant. In addition to hepatic 
metabolism, atracurium is inactivated by a form of spontaneous 
breakdown known as Hofmann elimination. The main breakdown 
products are laudanosine and a related quaternary acid, neither of 
which possesses neuromuscular blocking properties. Laudanosine 
is slowly metabolized by the liver and has a longer elimination half-
life (ie, 150 minutes). It readily crosses the blood-brain barrier, and 
high blood concentrations may cause seizures and an increase in 
the volatile anesthetic requirement. During surgical anesthesia, 
blood levels of laudanosine typically range from 0.2 to 1 mcg/mL; 
Acetylcholine
Succinylcholine
O
C
O
CH3
O
H3C
Pancuronium
H
CH3
C
O
CH2
CH2
+N
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
+N
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
+N
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
+N
O
C
CH3
H
CH3
N+
CH3
1
2
3
9
6
8
7
12
17
11
14
16
CH3
 FIGURE 27–3  Structural relationship of succinylcholine, a depo-
larizing agent, and pancuronium, a nondepolarizing agent, to acetyl-
choline, the neuromuscular transmitter. Succinylcholine, originally 
called diacetylcholine, is simply two molecules of acetylcholine 
linked through the acetate methyl groups. Pancuronium may be 
viewed as two acetylcholine-like fragments (outlined in color) ori-
ented on a steroid nucleus. 
468    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
however, with prolonged infusions of atracurium in the ICU, 
laudanosine blood levels may exceed 5 mcg/mL. 
 Atracurium has several stereoisomers, and the potent isomer 
 cisatracurium has become one of the most commonly used 
muscle relaxants in clinical practice. Although cisatracurium 
resembles atracurium, it has less dependence on hepatic inactiva-
tion, produces less laudanosine, and is less likely to release hista-
mine. From the clinical perspective, cisatracurium has all the 
advantages of atracurium with fewer side effects. Therefore, cisa-
tracurium has largely replaced atracurium in clinical practice. 
 Mivacurium , another isoquinoline compound, has the shortest 
duration of action of all nondepolarizing muscle relaxants ( Table 
27–1 ). However, its onset of action is significantly slower than that 
of succinylcholine. In addition, the use of a larger dose to speed the 
onset can be associated with profound histamine release leading to 
hypotension, flushing, and bronchospasm. Clearance of mivacu-
rium by plasma cholinesterase is rapid and independent of the liver 
or kidney ( Table 27–1 ). However, because patients with renal fail-
ure often have decreased levels of plasma cholinesterase, the short 
duration of action of mivacurium may be prolonged in patients 
with impaired renal function. Although mivacurium is no longer 
in widespread clinical use, an investigational ultra-short-acting 
isoquinoline nondepolarizing muscle relaxant, gantacurium, is cur-
rently in phase 3 clinical testing. 
 Gantacurium represents a new class of nondepolarizing neuro-
muscular blockers, called asymmetric mixed-onium chlorofumar-
ates. It is degraded nonenzymatically by adduction of the amino 
acid cysteine and ester bond hydrolysis. Preclinical and clinical 
data indicate gantacurium has a rapid onset of effect and predict-
able duration of action (very short, similar to succinylcholine) that 
can be reversed with edrophonium or administration of cysteine. 
At doses above three times the ED 95 , cardiovascular adverse effects 
have occurred, probably due to histamine release. No broncho-
spasm or pulmonary vasoconstriction has been reported at these 
higher doses. 
 B. Depolarizing Relaxant Drugs 
 The extremely short duration of action of succinylcholine 
(5–10 minutes) is due to its rapid hydrolysis by butyrylcholinesterase 
and pseudocholinesterase in the liver and plasma, respectively. 
Plasma cholinesterase metabolism is the predominant pathway for 
succinylcholine elimination. Since succinylcholine is more rapidly 
metabolized than mivacurium, its duration of action is shorter than 
that of mivacurium ( Table 27–1 ). The primary metabolite of succi-
nylcholine, succinylmonocholine, is rapidly broken down to succinic 
acid and choline. Because plasma cholinesterase has an enormous 
capacity to hydrolyze succinylcholine, only a small percentage of the 
original intravenous dose ever reaches the neuromuscular junction. 
In addition, because there is little if any plasma cholinesterase at the 
motor end plate, a succinylcholine-induced blockade is terminated 
by its diffusion away from the end plate into extracellular fluid. 
Therefore, the circulating levels of plasma cholinesterase influence 
the duration of action of succinylcholine by determining the amount 
of the drug that reaches the motor end plate. 
O
N
N+
HO
OCH3
H
CH3
O
HO
H
CH3
CH3
Tubocurarine
N+
CH2
CH3O
CH3O
CH3
CH2CH2CO(CH2)5OCCH2CH2
O
CH3O
OCH3
O
N+
H2C
OCH3
OCH3
H3C
OCH3
OCH3
Atracurium
CH3O
 FIGURE 27–4  Structures of two isoquinoline neuromuscular blocking drugs. These agents are nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. 
CHAPTER 27 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants    469
 Neuromuscular blockade produced by succinylcholine and 
mivacurium can be prolonged in patients with an abnormal genetic 
variant of plasma cholinesterase. The  dibucaine  number is a measure 
of the ability of a patient to metabolize succinylcholine and can be 
used to identify at-risk patients. Under standardized test conditions, 
dibucaine inhibits the normal enzyme by 80% and the abnormal 
enzyme by only 20%. Many genetic variants of plasma cholines-
terase have been identified, although the dibucaine-related variants 
are the most important. Given the rarity of these genetic variants, 
plasma cholinesterase testing is not a routine clinical procedure. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 The interactions of drugs with the acetylcholine receptor-end 
plate channel have been described at the molecular level. Several 
modes of action of drugs on the receptor are illustrated in 
 Figure 27–6 . 
 A. Nondepolarizing Relaxant Drugs 
 All the neuromuscular blocking drugs in current use in the USA 
except succinylcholine are classified as nondepolarizing agents. 
Although it is no longer in widespread clinical use,  d -tubocurarine 
is considered the prototype neuromuscular blocker. When small 
doses of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants are administered, they 
act predominantly at the nicotinic receptor site by competing with 
acetylcholine. The least potent nondepolarizing relaxants
(eg, rocuronium) have the fastest onset and the shortest duration 
of action. In larger doses, nondepolarizing drugs can enter the 
pore of the ion channel ( Figure 27–1 ) to produce a more intense 
motor blockade. This action further weakens neuromuscular 
transmission and diminishes the ability of the acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors (eg, neostigmine, edrophonium, pyridostigmine) to 
antagonize the effect of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. 
 Nondepolarizing relaxants can also block prejunctional sodium 
channels. As a result of this action, muscle relaxants interfere with 
the mobilization of acetylcholine at the nerve ending and cause 
fade (Figure 27-7). One consequence of the surmountable nature 
of the postsynaptic blockade produced by nondepolarizing muscle 
relaxants is the fact that tetanic stimulation, by releasing a large 
quantity of acetylcholine, is followed by transient posttetanic 
facilitation of the twitch strength (ie, relief of blockade). An 
important clinical consequence of this principle is the reversal of 
residual blockade by cholinesterase inhibitors. The characteristics 
of a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade are summarized in 
 Table 27–2 and  Figure 27–7 . 
 B. Depolarizing Relaxant Drugs 
 1. Phase I block (depolarizing)— Succinylcholine is the only 
clinically useful depolarizing blocking drug. Its neuromuscular 
effects are like those of acetylcholine except that succinylcholine 
produces a longer effect at the myoneural junction. Succinylcholine 
reacts with the nicotinic receptor to open the channel and cause 
depolarization of the motor end plate, and this in turn spreads to 
the adjacent membranes, causing contractions of muscle motor 
units. Data from single-channel recordings indicate that depolar-
izing blockers can enter the channel to produce a prolonged 
“flickering” of the ion conductance ( Figure 27–8 ). Because suc-
cinylcholine is not metabolized effectively at the synapse, the 
depolarized membranes remain depolarized and unresponsive to 
subsequent impulses (ie, a state of depolarizing blockade). 
Furthermore, because excitation-contraction coupling requires 
end plate repolarization (“repriming”) and repetitive firing to 
maintain muscle tension, a flaccid paralysis results. In contrast to 
the nondepolarizing drugs, this so-called phase I (depolarizing) 
block is augmented, not reversed, by cholinesterase inhibitors. 
 The characteristics of a depolarizing neuromuscular blockade 
are summarized in  Table 27–2 and  Figure 27–7 . 
N
+N
+N
CH3
CH3
H
H
H
H
H
CH3
CH3
N+
H
OC 
O
H
CH3CO
O
H
Pancuronium
N
CH3
H
H
H
H
CH3
CH3
N+
H
O
H
CH3CO
O
H
Vecuronium
H
CH3
H
H
H
H
CH3
CH3CO
O
Pipecuronium
CH3
CH3
N+
CH3
CH3
N
CH3
H
H
H
H
CH3
CH2
N+
H
O
HO
Rocuronium
O
C
H
CH
CH2
CH3
N
H
O
H
CH3
C 
O
CH3
OC 
O
CH3
 FIGURE 27–5  Structures of steroid neuromuscular blocking 
drugs (steroid nucleus in color). These agents are all nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants. 
470    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
TABLE 27–1 Pharmacokinetic and dynamic properties of neuromuscular blocking drugs.
Drug
Elimination
Clearance (mL/kg/min)
Approximate Duration 
of Action (minutes)
Approximate Potency 
Relative to Tubocurarine
Isoquinoline derivatives
Atracurium
Spontaneous1
6.6
20–35
1.5
Cisatracurium
Mostly spontaneous
5–6
25–44
1.5
Mivacurium
Plasma ChE2
70–95
10–20
4
Tubocurarine
Kidney (40%)
2.3–2.4
> 50
1
Steroid derivatives
Pancuronium
Kidney (80%)
1.7–1.8
> 35
6
Rocuronium
Liver (75–90%) and kidney
2.9
20–35
0.8
Vecuronium
Liver (75–90%) and kidney
3–5.3
20–35
6
Depolarizing agent
Succinylcholine
Plasma ChE2 (100%)
> 100
< 8
0.4
1Nonenzymatic and enzymatic hydrolysis of ester bonds.
2Butyrylcholinesterase (pseudocholinesterase).
Agonist
Nondepolarizing
blocker
Depolarizing
blocker
Open
blocked
Closed
blocked
Open
normal
Closed
normal
 FIGURE 27–6  Schematic diagram of the interactions of drugs with the acetylcholine receptor on the end plate channel (structures are 
purely symbolic).  Top: The action of the normal agonist, acetylcholine, in opening the channel.  Bottom, left: A nondepolarizing blocker, eg, 
rocuronium, is shown as preventing the opening of the channel when it binds to the receptor.  Bottom, right: A depolarizing blocker, eg, succi-
nylcholine, both occupying the receptor and blocking the channel. Normal closure of the channel gate is prevented and the blocker may move 
rapidly in and out of the pore. Depolarizing blockers may desensitize the end plate by occupying the receptor and causing persistent depolar-
ization. An additional effect of drugs on the end plate channel may occur through changes in the lipid environment surrounding the channel 
(not shown). General anesthetics and alcohols may impair neuromuscular transmission by this mechanism. 
CHAPTER 27 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants    471
 2. Phase II block (desensitizing)— With prolonged exposure 
to succinylcholine, the initial end plate depolarization decreases 
and the membrane becomes repolarized. Despite this repolariza-
tion, the membrane cannot easily be depolarized again because it 
is  desensitized. The mechanism for this desensitizing phase is 
unclear, but some evidence indicates that channel block may 
become more important than agonist action at the receptor in 
phase II of succinylcholine’s neuromuscular blocking action. 
Regardless of the mechanism, the channels behave as if they are in 
a prolonged closed state ( Figure 27–7 ). Later in phase II, the char-
acteristics of the blockade are nearly identical to those of a nonde-
polarizing block (ie, a nonsustained twitch response to a tetanic 
stimulus) ( Figure 27–7 ), with possible reversal by acetylcholines-
terase inhibitors. 
TABLE 27–2  Comparison of a typical nondepolarizing muscle relaxant (rocuronium) and a depolarizing muscle 
relaxant (succinylcholine).
Succinylcholine
Rocuronium
Phase I
Phase II
Administration of tubocurarine
Additive
Antagonistic
Augmented1
Administration of succinylcholine
Antagonistic
Additive
Augmented1
Effect of neostigmine
Antagonistic
Augmented1
Antagonistic
Initial excitatory effect on skeletal muscle
None
Fasciculations
None
Response to a tetanic stimulus
Unsustained (fade)
Sustained2 (no fade)
Unsustained (fade)
Posttetanic facilitation
Yes
No
Yes
Rate of recovery
30–60 min3
4–8 min
> 20 min3
1It is not known whether this interaction is additive or synergistic (superadditive).
2The amplitude is decreased, but the response is sustained.
3The rate depends on the dose and on the completeness of neuromuscular blockade.
Depolarizing Block
No Drug
Phase I
Phase II
Nondepolarizing
Block
Fade
Fade
Fade
Fade
Constant but
diminished
Train-of-four
TOF-R =
1.0
PTC =
> 6
PTC = 3
PTC = 3
TOF-R =
0.4
TOF-R =
1.0
TOF-R =
0.4
Double burst
No fade
Absent
Present
Present
Posttetanic 
potentiation *
*
*
*
 FIGURE 27–7  Muscle contraction responses to different patterns of nerve stimulation used in monitoring skeletal muscle relaxation. The 
alterations produced by a nondepolarizing blocker and depolarizing and desensitizing blockade by succinylcholine are shown. In the train-of-
four (TOF) pattern, four stimuli are applied at 2 Hz. The TOF ratio (TOF-R) is calculated from the strength of the fourth contraction divided by 
that of the first. In the double-burst pattern, three stimuli are applied at 50 Hz, followed by a 700 ms rest period and then repeated. In the 
posttetanic potentiation pattern, several seconds of 50 Hz stimulation are applied, followed by several seconds of rest and then by single stimuli 
at a slow rate (eg, 0.5 Hz). The number of detectable posttetanic twitches is the posttetanic count (PTC). *, first posttetanic contraction. 
472    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING 
DRUGS 
 Skeletal Muscle Paralysis 
 Before the introduction of neuromuscular blocking drugs, pro-
found skeletal muscle relaxation for intracavitary operations could 
be achieved only by producing levels of volatile (inhaled) anesthe-
sia deep enough to produce profound depressant effects on the 
cardiovascular and respiratory systems. The adjunctive use of neu-
romuscular blocking drugs makes it possible to achieve adequate 
muscle relaxation for all types of surgical procedures without the 
cardiorespiratory depressant effects produced by deep anesthesia. 
 Assessment of Neuromuscular Transmission 
 Monitoring the effect of muscle relaxants during surgery (and 
recovery following the administration of cholinesterase inhibitors) 
typically involves the use of a device that produces transdermal 
electrical stimulation of one of the peripheral nerves to the hand 
or facial muscles and recording of the evoked contractions (ie, 
twitch responses). The motor responses to different patterns of 
peripheral nerve stimulation can be recorded in the operating 
room during the procedure ( Figure 27–7 ). The three most com-
monly used patterns include (1) single-twitch stimulation, (2) 
train-of-four (TOF) stimulation, and (3) tetanic stimulation. Two 
newer modalities are also available to monitor neuromuscular 
transmission: double-burst stimulation and posttetanic count. 
 With single-twitch stimulation, a single supramaximal electri-
cal stimulus is applied to a peripheral nerve at frequencies from 
0.1 Hz to 1.0 Hz. The higher frequency is often used during 
induction and reversal to more accurately determine the peak 
(maximal) drug effect. TOF stimulation involves four successive 
supramaximal stimuli given at intervals of 0.5 second (2 Hz). Each 
stimulus in the TOF causes the muscle to contract, and the rela-
tive magnitude of the response of the fourth twitch compared 
with the first twitch is the TOF ratio. With a depolarizing block, 
all four twitches are reduced in a dose-related fashion. With a 
nondepolarizing block, the TOF ratio decreases (“fades”) and is 
inversely proportional to the degree of blockade. During recovery 
from nondepolarizing block, the amount of fade decreases and the 
TOF ratio approaches 1.0. Recovery to a TOF ratio greater than 
0.7 is typically necessary for resumption of spontaneous ventila-
tion. However, complete clinical recovery from a nondepolarizing 
block is considered to require a TOF greater than 0.9. Fade in the 
TOF response after administration of succinylcholine signifies the 
development of a phase II block. 
 Tetanic stimulation consists of a very rapid (30–100 Hz) deliv-
ery of electrical stimuli for several seconds. During a nondepolar-
izing neuromuscular block (and a phase II block after 
succinylcholine), the response is not sustained and fade of the 
twitch responses is observed. Fade in response to tetanic stimula-
tion is normally considered a presynaptic event. However, the 
degree of fade depends primarily on the degree of neuromuscular 
blockade. During a partial nondepolarizing blockade, tetanic 
nerve stimulation is followed by an increase in the posttetanic 
twitch response, so-called posttetanic facilitation of neuromuscu-
lar transmission. During intense neuromuscular blockade, there is 
no response to either tetanic or posttetanic stimulation. As the 
intensity of the block diminishes, the response to posttetanic 
twitch stimulation reappears. The time to reappearance of the first 
response to TOF stimulation is related to the posttetanic count 
and reflects the duration of profound (clinical) neuromuscular 
blockade. To determine the posttetanic count, 5 seconds of 50 Hz 
25 ms
4 pA
 FIGURE 27–8  Action of succinylcholine on single-channel end plate receptor currents in frog muscle. Currents through a single AChR 
channel were recorded using the patch clamp technique. The upper trace was recorded in the presence of a low concentration of 
succinylcholine; the downward deflections represent openings of the channel and passage of inward (depolarizing) current. The lower trace 
was recorded in the presence of a much higher concentration of succinylcholine and shows prolonged “flickering” of the channel as it 
repetitively opens and closes or is “plugged” by the drug. (Reproduced, with permission, from Marshall CG, Ogden DC, Colquhoun D: The actions of 
suxamethonium (succinyldicholine) as an agonist and channel blocker at the nicotinic receptor of frog muscle. J Physiol [Lond] 1990;428:155.) 
CHAPTER 27 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants    473
tetany is applied, followed by 3 seconds of rest, followed by 1 Hz 
pulses for about 10 seconds (10 pulses). The counted number of 
muscle twitches provides an estimation of the depth of blockade. 
For instance, a posttetanic count of 2 suggests no twitch response 
(by TOF) for about 20–30 minutes, and a posttetanic count of 
5 correlates to a no-twitch response (by TOF) of about 10–15 
minutes ( Figure 27–7 , bottom panel). 
 The double-burst stimulation pattern is a newer mode of elec-
trical nerve stimulation developed with the goal of allowing for 
manual detection of residual neuromuscular blockade when it is 
not possible to record the responses to single-twitch, TOF, or 
tetanic stimulation. In this pattern, three nerve stimuli are deliv-
ered at 50 Hz followed by a 700 ms rest period and then by two 
or three additional stimuli at 50 Hz. It is easier to detect fade in 
the responses to double-burst stimulation than to TOF stimula-
tion. The absence of fade in response to double-burst stimulation 
implies that clinically significant residual neuromuscular blockade 
does not exist. 
 The standard approach used for monitoring the clinical effects 
of muscle relaxants during surgery is to use a peripheral nerve 
stimulating device to elicit motor responses, which are visually 
observed by the anesthesiologist. A more quantitative approach to 
neuromuscular monitoring involves the use of acceleromyography 
or force-transduction for measuring the evoked response (ie, 
movement) of the thumb to TOF stimulation over the ulnar nerve 
at the wrist. 
 A. Nondepolarizing Relaxant Drugs 
 During anesthesia, administration of tubocurarine, 0.1–0.4 mg/
kg IV, initially causes motor weakness, followed by the skeletal 
muscles becoming flaccid and inexcitable to electrical stimula-
tion ( Figure 27–9 ). In general, larger muscles (eg, abdominal, 
trunk, paraspinous, diaphragm) are more resistant to neuromus-
cular blockade and recover more rapidly than smaller muscles 
(eg, facial, foot, hand). The diaphragm is usually the last muscle 
to be paralyzed. Assuming that ventilation is adequately main-
tained, no adverse effects occur. When administration of muscle 
relaxants is discontinued, recovery of muscles usually occurs in 
reverse order, with the diaphragm regaining function first. The 
pharmacologic effect of tubocurarine, 0.3 mg/kg IV, usually lasts 
45–60 minutes. However, subtle evidence of residual muscle 
paralysis detected using a neuromuscular monitor may last for 
another hour, increasing the likelihood of adverse outcomes, eg, 
aspiration and decreased hypoxic drive. Potency and duration of 
action of the other nondepolarizing drugs are shown in  Table 
27–1 . In addition to the duration of action, the most important 
property distinguishing the nondepolarizing relaxants is the time 
to onset of the blocking effect, which determines how rapidly 
the patient’s trachea can be intubated. Of the currently available 
nondepolarizing drugs, rocuronium has the most rapid onset 
time (60–120 seconds). 
 B. Depolarizing Relaxant Drugs 
 Following the administration of succinylcholine, 0.75–1.5 mg/kg 
IV, transient muscle fasciculations occur over the chest and abdo-
men within 30 seconds, although general anesthesia and the prior 
administration of a small dose of a nondepolarizing muscle relax-
ant tends to attenuate them. As paralysis develops rapidly (< 90 
seconds), the arm, neck, and leg muscles are initially relaxed fol-
lowed by the respiratory muscles. As a result of succinylcholine’s 
rapid hydrolysis by cholinesterase in the plasma (and liver), the 
duration of neuromuscular block typically lasts less than 10 min-
utes ( Table 27–1 ). 
 Cardiovascular Effects 
 Vecuronium, cisatracurium, and rocuronium have minimal, if 
any, cardiovascular effects. The other nondepolarizing muscle 
relaxants (ie, pancuronium, atracurium, mivacurium) produce 
cardiovascular effects that are mediated by either autonomic or 
Isoflurane
(1.25 MAC)
Halothane
(1.25 MAC)
1 min
Tubocurarine (3 mg/m2)
23 min
1 min
Tubocurarine (6 mg/m2)
11 min
 FIGURE 27–9  Neuromuscular blockade from tubocurarine during equivalent levels of isoflurane and halothane anesthesia in patients. 
Note that isoflurane augments the block far more than does halothane. 
474    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
histamine receptors ( Table 27–3 ). Tubocurarine and, to a lesser 
extent, metocurine, mivacurium, and atracurium can produce 
hypotension as a result of systemic histamine release, and with 
larger doses, ganglionic blockade may occur with tubocurarine 
and metocurine. Premedication with an antihistaminic compound 
attenuates tubocurarine- and mivacurium-induced hypotension. 
Pancuronium causes a moderate increase in heart rate and a 
smaller increase in cardiac output, with little or no change in sys-
temic vascular resistance. Although pancuronium-induced tachy-
cardia is primarily due to a vagolytic action, release of 
norepinephrine from adrenergic nerve endings and blockade of 
neuronal uptake of norepinephrine may be secondary mecha-
nisms. Bronchospasm may be produced by neuromuscular blockers 
that release histamine (eg, mivacurium), but insertion of a endo-
tracheal tube is the most common reason for bronchospasm after 
induction of general anesthesia. 
 Succinylcholine can cause cardiac arrhythmias when admin-
istered during halothane anesthesia. The drug stimulates auto-
nomic cholinoceptors, including the nicotinic receptors at both 
sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia and muscarinic recep-
tors in the heart (eg, sinus node). The negative inotropic and 
chronotropic responses to succinylcholine can be attenuated by 
administration of an anticholinergic drug (eg, glycopyrrolate, 
atropine). With large doses of succinylcholine, positive inotro-
pic and chronotropic effects may be observed. On the other 
hand, bradycardia has been repeatedly observed when a second 
dose of succinylcholine is given less than 5 minutes after the 
initial dose. This transient bradycardia can be prevented by 
thiopental, atropine, ganglionic-blocking drugs, and by pre-
treating with a small dose of a nondepolarizing muscle relaxant 
(eg, pancuronium). Direct myocardial effects, increased musca-
rinic stimulation, and ganglionic stimulation contribute to this 
bradycardic response. 
 Other Adverse Effects of Depolarizing 
Blockade 
 A. Hyperkalemia 
 Patients with burns, nerve damage or neuromuscular disease, 
closed head injury, and other trauma can respond to succinylcho-
line by releasing potassium into the blood, which, on rare occa-
sions, results in cardiac arrest. 
 B. Increased Intraocular Pressure 
 Administration of succinylcholine may be associated with the 
rapid onset of an increase in intraocular pressure (< 60 seconds), 
peaking at 2–4 minutes, and declining after 5 minutes. The 
mechanism may involve tonic contraction of myofibrils or tran-
sient dilation of ocular choroidal blood vessels. Despite the 
increase in intraocular pressure, the use of succinylcholine for 
ophthalmologic operations is not contraindicated unless the ante-
rior chamber is open (“open globe”) due to trauma. 
 C. Increased Intragastric Pressure 
 In heavily muscled patients, the fasciculations associated with suc-
cinylcholine may cause an increase in intragastric pressure ranging 
from 5 to 40 cm H 2 O, increasing the risk for regurgitation and 
aspiration of gastric contents. This complication is more likely to 
occur in patients with delayed gastric emptying (eg, those with 
diabetes), traumatic injury (eg, an emergency case), esophageal 
dysfunction, and morbid obesity. 
 D. Muscle Pain 
 Myalgias are a common postoperative complaint of heavily mus-
cled patients and those who receive large doses (> 1.5 mg/kg) of 
succinylcholine. The true incidence of myalgias related to muscle 
fasciculations is difficult to establish because of confounding 
TABLE 27–3 Effects of neuromuscular blocking drugs on other tissues.
Drug
Effect on Autonomic Ganglia
Effect on Cardiac 
Muscarinic Receptors
Tendency to Cause 
Histamine Release
Isoquinoline derivatives
Atracurium
None
None
Slight
Cisatracurium
None
None
None
Mivacurium
None
None
Moderate
Tubocurarine
Weak block
None
Moderate
Steroid derivatives
Pancuronium
None
Moderate block
None
Rocuronium1
None
Slight
None
Vecuronium
None
None
None
Other agents
Gallamine
None
Strong block
None
Succinylcholine
Stimulation
Stimulation
Slight
1Allergic reactions have been reported.
CHAPTER 27 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants    475
factors, including the anesthetic technique, type of surgery, and 
positioning during the operation. However, the incidence of myal-
gias has been reported to vary from less than 1% to 20%. It occurs 
more frequently in ambulatory than in bedridden patients. The 
pain is thought to be secondary to the unsynchronized contrac-
tions of adjacent muscle fibers just before the onset of paralysis. 
However, there is controversy over whether the incidence of 
muscle pain following succinylcholine is actually higher than with 
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants when other potentially con-
founding factors are taken into consideration. 
 Interactions with Other Drugs 
 A. Anesthetics 
 Inhaled (volatile) anesthetics potentiate the neuromuscular block-
ade produced by nondepolarizing muscle relaxants in a dose-de-
pendent fashion. Of the general anesthetics that have been 
studied, inhaled anesthetics augment the effects of muscle relax-
ants in the following order: isoflurane (most); sevoflurane, desflu-
rane, enflurane, and halothane; and nitrous oxide (least) 
( Figure 27–9 ). The most important factors involved in this 
interaction are the following: (1) nervous system depression at 
sites proximal to the neuromuscular junction (ie, central nervous 
system); (2) increased muscle blood flow (ie, due to peripheral 
vasodilation produced by volatile anesthetics), which allows a 
larger fraction of the injected muscle relaxant to reach the neuro-
muscular junction; and (3) decreased sensitivity of the postjunc-
tional membrane to depolarization. 
 A rare interaction of succinylcholine with volatile anesthetics 
results in  malignant hyperthermia , a condition caused by abnor-
mal release of calcium from stores in skeletal muscle. This condi-
tion is treated with dantrolene and is discussed below under 
Spasmolytic Drugs and in  Chapter 16 . 
 B. Antibiotics 
 Numerous reports have described enhancement of neuromuscu-
lar blockade by antibiotics (eg, aminoglycosides). Many of the 
antibiotics have been shown to cause a depression of evoked 
release of acetylcholine similar to that caused by administering 
magnesium. The mechanism of this prejunctional effect appears 
to be blockade of specific P-type calcium channels in the motor 
nerve terminal. 
 C. Local Anesthetics and Antiarrhythmic Drugs 
 In small doses, local anesthetics can depress posttetanic potentia-
tion via a prejunctional neural effect. In large doses, local anesthet-
ics can block neuromuscular transmission. With higher doses, 
local anesthetics block acetylcholine-induced muscle contractions 
as a result of blockade of the nicotinic receptor ion channels. 
Experimentally, similar effects can be demonstrated with sodium 
channel-blocking antiarrhythmic drugs such as quinidine. 
However, at the doses used for cardiac arrhythmias, this interac-
tion is of little or no clinical significance. Higher concentrations 
of bupivacaine (0.75%) have been associated with cardiac arrhyth-
mias independent of the muscle relaxant used. 
 D. Other Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs 
 The end plate-depolarizing effect of succinylcholine can be antag-
onized by administering a small dose of a nondepolarizing blocker. 
To prevent the fasciculations associated with succinylcholine 
administration, a small nonparalyzing dose of a nondepolarizing 
drug can be given before succinylcholine (eg, d-tubocurarine,
2 mg IV, or pancuronium, 0.5 mg IV). Although this dose usually 
reduces fasciculations and postoperative myalgias, it can increase 
the amount of succinylcholine required for relaxation by 50–90% 
and can produce a feeling of weakness in awake patients. 
Therefore, “pre-curarization” before succinylcholine is no longer 
widely practiced. 
 Effects of Diseases & Aging on the 
Neuromuscular Response 
 Several diseases can diminish or augment the neuromuscular 
blockade produced by nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. 
Myasthenia gravis enhances the neuromuscular blockade pro-
duced by these drugs. Advanced age is associated with a prolonged 
duration of action from nondepolarizing relaxants as a result of 
decreased clearance of the drugs by the liver and kidneys. As a 
result, the dosage of neuromuscular blocking drugs should be 
reduced in older patients (> 70 years). 
 Conversely, patients with severe burns and those with upper 
motor neuron disease are resistant to nondepolarizing muscle 
relaxants. This desensitization is probably caused by proliferation 
of extrajunctional receptors, which results in an increased dose 
requirement for the nondepolarizing relaxant to block a sufficient 
number of receptors. 
 Reversal of Nondepolarizing 
Neuromuscular Blockade 
 The cholinesterase inhibitors effectively antagonize the neuromus-
cular blockade caused by nondepolarizing drugs. Their general 
pharmacology is discussed in  Chapter 7 .  Neostigmine and 
 pyridostigmine antagonize nondepolarizing neuromuscular block-
ade by increasing the availability of acetylcholine at the motor end 
plate, mainly by inhibition of acetylcholinesterase. To a lesser 
extent, these cholinesterase inhibitors also increase the release of 
this transmitter from the motor nerve terminal. In contrast, 
 edrophonium antagonizes neuromuscular blockade purely by 
inhibiting acetylcholinesterase activity. Edrophonium has a more 
rapid onset of action but may be less effective than neostigmine in 
reversing the effects of nondepolarizing blockers in the presence of 
a profound degree of neuromuscular blockade. These differences 
are important in determining recovery from  residual block , the 
neuromuscular blockade remaining after completion of surgery 
and movement of the patient to the recovery room. Unsuspected 
residual block may result in hypoventilation, leading to hypoxia 
and even apnea, especially if patients have received central depres-
sant medications in the early recovery period. 
 Since mivacurium is metabolized by plasma cholinesterase, its 
interaction with the anticholinesterase reversal drugs is less pre-
dictable. On the one hand, the neuromuscular blockade is 
476    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
antagonized because of increased acetylcholine concentrations in 
the synapse. On the other hand, mivacurium concentration may 
be higher because of decreased plasma cholinesterase breakdown 
of the muscle relaxant itself. 
 Sugammadex is a novel reversal agent approved in Europe but 
not yet approved for use in the USA. It is a modified γ-cyclodextran 
that binds tightly to rocuronium in a 1:1 ratio. By binding to 
plasma rocuronium, sugammadex decreases the free plasma 
rocuronium concentration and establishes a concentration gradi-
ent for rocuronium to diffuse away from the neuromuscular junc-
tion back into the circulation, where it is quickly bound by free 
sugammadex. 
 The optimum dose of sugammadex required to achieve ade-
quate reversal of the neuromuscular blocking agent has yet to be 
definitively established. Clinical trials studying safety and efficacy 
have used doses ranging from 0.5 to 16 mg/kg. From 2 mg/kg 
upward, sugammadex dose-dependently reverses rocuronium with 
increasing speed and efficacy. These trials reported no difference 
in prevalence of untoward effects among sugammadex, placebo, 
and neostigmine. The data need to be confirmed in larger trials, 
especially the drug’s potential to elicit allergic or hypersensitivity 
reactions. 
 The sugammadex-rocuronium complex is typically excreted 
unchanged in the urine within 24 hours in patients with normal 
renal function. In patients with renal insufficiency, complete uri-
nary elimination may take much longer. However, due to the 
strong complex formation with rocuronium, no signs of recur-
rence of neuromuscular blockade have been noted up to 48 hours 
after use in such patients. 
 Further large-scale studies will be needed to evaluate the effi-
cacy, safety, and clearance of sugammadex in patient populations 
with various levels of renal failure. 
 Uses of Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs 
 A. Surgical Relaxation 
 One of the most important applications of the neuromuscular 
blockers is in facilitating intracavitary surgery, especially in intra-
abdominal and intrathoracic procedures. 
 B. Endotracheal Intubation 
 By relaxing the pharyngeal and laryngeal muscles, neuromuscular 
blocking drugs facilitate laryngoscopy and placement of the endo-
tracheal tube. Placement of a endotracheal tube ensures an ade-
quate airway and minimizes the risk of pulmonary aspiration 
during general anesthesia. 
 C. Control of Ventilation 
 In critically ill patients who have ventilatory failure from various 
causes (eg, severe bronchospasm, pneumonia, chronic obstructive 
airway disease), it may be necessary to control ventilation to pro-
vide adequate gas exchange and to prevent atelectasis. In the ICU, 
neuromuscular blocking drugs are frequently administered to 
reduce chest wall resistance (ie, improve thoracic compliance) and 
ineffective spontaneous ventilation in intubated patients. 
 D. Treatment of Convulsions 
 Neuromuscular blocking drugs (ie, succinylcholine) are occasion-
ally used to attenuate the peripheral (motor) manifestations of 
convulsions associated with status epilepticus or local anesthetic 
toxicity. Although this approach is effective in eliminating the 
muscular manifestations of the seizures, it has no effect on the 
central processes because neuromuscular blocking drugs do not 
cross the blood-brain barrier. 
 ■ SPASMOLYTIC DRUGS 
 Spasticity is characterized by an increase in tonic stretch reflexes and 
flexor muscle spasms (ie, increased basal muscle tone) together with 
muscle weakness. It is often associated with spinal injury, cerebral 
palsy, multiple sclerosis, and stroke. These conditions often involve 
abnormal function of the bowel and bladder as well as skeletal 
muscle. The mechanisms underlying clinical spasticity appear to 
involve not only the stretch reflex arc itself but also higher centers 
in the CNS (ie, upper motor neuron lesion), with damage to 
descending pathways in the spinal cord resulting in hyperexcitability 
of the alpha motoneurons in the cord. Pharmacologic therapy may 
ameliorate some of the symptoms of spasticity by modifying the 
stretch reflex arc or by interfering directly with skeletal muscle (ie, 
excitation-contraction coupling). The important components 
involved in these processes are shown in  Figure 27–10 . 
 Drugs that modify this reflex arc may modulate excitatory or 
inhibitory synapses (see  Chapter 21 ). Thus, to reduce the hyperac-
tive stretch reflex, it is desirable to reduce the activity of the Ia 
fibers that excite the primary motoneuron or to enhance the activ-
ity of the inhibitory internuncial neurons. These structures are 
shown in greater detail in  Figure 27–11 . 
 A variety of pharmacologic agents described as depressants of 
the spinal “polysynaptic” reflex arc (eg, barbiturates [phenobarbi-
tal] and glycerol ethers [mephenesin]) have been used to treat 
these conditions of excess skeletal muscle tone. However, as illus-
trated in  Figure 27–11 , nonspecific depression of synapses 
involved in the stretch reflex could reduce the desired GABAergic 
inhibitory activity, as well as the excitatory glutamatergic trans-
mission. Currently available drugs can provide significant relief 
from painful muscle spasms, but they are less effective in improv-
ing meaningful function (eg, mobility and return to work). 
 DIAZEPAM 
 As described in  Chapter 22 , benzodiazepines facilitate the action 
of GABA in the central nervous system. Diazepam acts at GABA A 
synapses, and its action in reducing spasticity is at least partly 
mediated in the spinal cord because it is somewhat effective in 
patients with cord transection. Although diazepam can be used in 
patients with muscle spasm of almost any origin (including local 
muscle trauma), it also produces sedation at the doses required to 
reduce muscle tone. The initial dosage is 4 mg/d, and it is gradu-
ally increased to a maximum of 60 mg/d. Other benzodiazepines 
have been used as spasmolytics (eg, midazolam), but clinical expe-
rience with them is limited. 
CHAPTER 27 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants    477
 BACLOFEN 
 Baclofen ( p -chlorophenyl-GABA) was designed to be an orally active 
GABA-mimetic agent and is an agonist at GABA B receptors. 
Activation of these receptors by baclofen results in hyperpolarization, 
probably by increased K + conductance (see  Figure 24–2 ). It has been 
suggested that hyperpolarization causes presynaptic inhibition by 
reducing calcium influx ( Figure 27–11 ) and reduces the release of 
excitatory transmitters in both the brain and the spinal cord. Baclofen 
may also reduce pain in patients with spasticity, perhaps by inhibiting 
the release of substance P (neurokinin-1) in the spinal cord. 
 
CI
CH2
COOH
CH
CH2
NH2
Baclofen
 
 Baclofen is at least as effective as diazepam in reducing spas-
ticity and causes less sedation. In addition, baclofen does not 
reduce overall muscle strength as much as dantrolene. It is rap-
idly and completely absorbed after oral administration and has a 
plasma half-life of 3–4 hours. Dosage is started at 15 mg twice 
daily, increasing as tolerated to 100 mg daily. Adverse effects of 
this drug include drowsiness; however, patients become tolerant 
to the sedative effect with chronic administration. Increased 
seizure activity has been reported in epileptic patients. Therefore, 
withdrawal from baclofen must be done very slowly. 
 Studies have confirmed that intrathecal administration of baclofen 
can control severe spasticity and muscle pain that is not responsive to 
medication by other routes of administration. Owing to the poor 
egress of baclofen from the spinal cord, peripheral symptoms are rare. 
Therefore, higher central concentrations of the drug may be tolerated. 
Partial tolerance to the effect of the drug may occur after several 
months of therapy, but can be overcome by upward dosage adjust-
ments to maintain the beneficial effect. Excessive somnolence, respira-
tory depression, and even coma have been described. Although a 
major disadvantage of this therapeutic approach is the difficulty of 
maintaining the drug delivery catheter in the subarachnoid space, 
risking an acute withdrawal syndrome upon treatment interruption, 
long-term intrathecal baclofen therapy can improve the quality of life 
for patients with severe spastic disorders. 
 Oral baclofen has been studied in several other medical condi-
tions, including patients with intractable low back pain. Preliminary 
studies suggest that it may also be effective in reducing craving in 
recovering alcoholics (see  Chapter 32 ). Finally, it has been alleged 
to be effective in preventing migraine headaches in some patients. 
 TIZANIDINE 
 As noted in  Chapter 11 , α 2 agonists such as clonidine and other 
imidazoline compounds have a variety of effects on the CNS that 
are not fully understood. Among these effects is the ability to 
reduce muscle spasm. Tizanidine is a congener of clonidine that 
Ca2+
Muscle
Spindle
Spinal
cord
Dorsal
root
Myosin
Extrafusal
efferents
Fusimotor
efferents
Ventral
roots
Actin
Skin
E
I
Ia
Cutaneous afferents
la afferents
RyR channels
Sarcoplasmic
       reticulum
 FIGURE 27–10  Diagram of the structures involved in the stretch reflex arc.  I is an inhibitory interneuron;  E indicates an excitatory presynaptic 
terminal;  Ia is a primary intrafusal afferent fiber;  Ca 2+ denotes activator calcium stored in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle;  RyR channels 
indicates the Ca 2+ release channels. (Reproduced, with permission, from Young RR, Delwaide PJ: Drug therapy: Spasticity. N Engl J Med 1981;304:28.) 
478    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
has been studied for its spasmolytic actions. Tizanidine has sig-
nificant α 2 -adrenoceptor agonist effects, but it reduces spasticity 
in experimental models at doses that cause fewer cardiovascular 
effects than clonidine or dexmedetomidine. Tizanidine has 
approximately one tenth to one fifteenth of the blood pressure-
lowering effects of clonidine. Neurophysiologic studies in animals 
and humans suggest that tizanidine reinforces both presynaptic 
and postsynaptic inhibition in the cord. It also inhibits nocicep-
tive transmission in the spinal dorsal horn. Tizanidine’s actions are 
believed to be mediated via restoration of inhibitory suppression 
of the group II spinal interneurons without inducing any changes 
in intrinsic muscle properties. 
 Clinical trials with oral tizanidine report comparable effi-
cacy in relieving muscle spasm to diazepam, baclofen, and 
dantrolene. Tizanidine causes markedly less muscle weakness 
but produces a different spectrum of adverse effects, including 
drowsiness, hypotension, dizziness, dry mouth, asthenia, and 
hepatotoxicity. The drowsiness can be managed by taking the 
drug at night. Tizanidine displays linear pharmacokinetics, and 
dosage requirements vary considerably among patients. Dosage 
must be adjusted in patients with hepatic or renal impairment. 
In addition to its effectiveness in spastic conditions, tizanidine 
also appears to be effective for management of chronic 
migraine. 
 OTHER CENTRALLY ACTING 
SPASMOLYTIC DRUGS 
 Gabapentin is an antiepileptic drug (see  Chapter 24 ) that has 
shown considerable promise as a spasmolytic agent in several 
studies involving patients with multiple sclerosis. Pregabalin is a 
newer analog of gabapentin that may also prove useful in reliev-
ing painful disorders that involve a muscle spasm component. 
 Progabide and  glycine have also been found in preliminary 
studies to reduce spasticity. Progabide is a GABA A and GABA B 
agonist and has active metabolites, including GABA itself. 
 Glycine is another inhibitory amino acid neurotransmitter (see 
 Chapter 21 ) that appears to possess pharmacologic activity when 
given orally and readily passes the blood-brain barrier. 
 Idrocilamide and  riluzole are newer drugs for the treatment of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) that appear to have spasm-
reducing effects, possibly through inhibition of glutamatergic 
transmission in the central nervous system. 
Action
potentials
Tizanidine
GABA
GABAB
Glu
AMPA
Muscle
Corticospinal
pathway
Inhibitory
interneuron
Baclofen
Benzodiazepines
Dantrolene
Motor
neuron
–
–
–
–
–
GABAB
GABAA
α2
α2
 FIGURE 27–11  Postulated sites of spasmolytic action of tizanidine (α 2 ), benzodiazepines (GABA A ), and baclofen (GABA B ) in the spinal cord. 
Tizanidine may also have a postsynaptic inhibitory effect. Dantrolene acts on the sarcoplasmic reticulum in skeletal muscle. Glu, glutamatergic 
neuron. 
CHAPTER 27 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants    479
 DANTROLENE 
 Dantrolene is a hydantoin derivative related to phenytoin that has 
a unique mechanism of spasmolytic activity. In contrast to the 
centrally acting drugs, dantrolene reduces skeletal muscle strength 
by interfering with excitation-contraction coupling in the muscle 
fibers. The normal contractile response involves release of calcium 
from its stores in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (see Figures 13–1 and 
27–10). This activator calcium brings about the tension-generating 
interaction of actin with myosin. Calcium is released from the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum via a calcium channel, called the  ryano-
dine receptor (RyR) channel because the plant alkaloid ryano-
dine combines with a receptor on the channel protein. In the case 
of the skeletal muscle RyR1 channel, ryanodine facilitates the 
open configuration. 
 
Dantrolene
O
N
N
HN
NO2
CH
O
O
 
 Dantrolene interferes with the release of activator calcium 
through this sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium channel by binding 
to the RyR1 and blocking the opening of the channel. Motor 
units that contract rapidly are more sensitive to the drug’s effects 
than are slower-responding units. Cardiac muscle and smooth 
muscle are minimally depressed because the release of calcium 
from their sarcoplasmic reticulum involves a different RyR chan-
nel (RyR2). 
 Treatment with dantrolene is usually initiated with 25 mg daily 
as a single dose, increasing to a maximum of 100 mg four times 
daily as tolerated. Only about one third of an oral dose of dant-
rolene is absorbed, and the elimination half-life of the drug is 
approximately 8 hours. Major adverse effects are generalized 
muscle weakness, sedation, and occasionally hepatitis. 
 A special application of dantrolene is in the treatment of 
 malignant hyperthermia, a rare heritable disorder that can be 
triggered by a variety of stimuli, including general anesthetics (eg, 
volatile anesthetics) and neuromuscular blocking drugs (eg, suc-
cinylcholine; see also  Chapter 16 ). Patients at risk for this condi-
tion have a hereditary alteration in Ca 2+ -induced Ca 2+ release via 
the RyR1 channel or impairment in the ability of the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum to sequester calcium via the Ca 2+ transporter 
( Figure 27–10 ). Several mutations associated with this risk have 
been identified. After administration of one of the triggering 
agents, there is a sudden and prolonged release of calcium, with 
massive muscle contraction, lactic acid production, and increased 
body temperature. Prompt treatment is essential to control acido-
sis and body temperature and to reduce calcium release. The latter 
is accomplished by administering intravenous dantrolene, starting 
with a dose of 1 mg/kg IV, and repeating as necessary to a maxi-
mum dose of 10 mg/kg. 
 BOTULINUM TOXIN 
 The therapeutic use of botulinum toxin for ophthalmic purposes 
and for local muscle spasm was mentioned in  Chapter 6 . Local 
facial injections of botulinum toxin are widely used for the short-
term treatment (1–3 months per treatment) of wrinkles associated 
with aging around the eyes and mouth. Local injection of botuli-
num toxin has also become a useful treatment for generalized 
spastic disorders (eg, cerebral palsy). Most clinical studies to date 
have involved administration in one or two limbs, and the benefits 
appear to persist for weeks to several months after a single treat-
ment. Most studies have used type A botulinum toxin, but type B 
is also available. 
 DRUGS USED TO TREAT ACUTE LOCAL 
MUSCLE SPASM 
 A large number of less well-studied, centrally active drugs (eg, 
 carisoprodol, chlorphenesin, chlorzoxazone, cycloben-
zaprine, metaxalone, methocarbamol, and  orphenadrine ) 
are promoted for the relief of acute muscle spasm caused by 
local tissue trauma or muscle strains. It has been suggested that 
these drugs act primarily at the level of the brainstem. 
Cyclobenzaprine may be regarded as the prototype of the 
group. Cyclobenzaprine is structurally related to the tricyclic 
antidepressants and produces antimuscarinic side effects. It is 
ineffective in treating muscle spasm due to cerebral palsy or 
spinal cord injury. As a result of its strong antimuscarinic 
actions, cyclobenzaprine may cause significant sedation, as well 
as confusion and transient visual hallucinations. The dosage of 
cyclobenzaprine for acute injury-related muscle spasm is
20–40 mg/d orally in divided doses. 
480    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
SUMMARY Skeletal Muscle Relaxants
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
DEPOLARIZING NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING AGENT
 • Succinylcholine
Agonist at nicotinic 
acetylcholine (ACh) 
receptors, especially at 
neuromuscular junctions 
• depolarizes • may 
stimulate ganglionic 
nicotinic ACh and cardiac 
muscarinic ACh receptors
Initial depolarization 
causes transient 
contractions, followed 
by prolonged flaccid 
paralysis • depolarization 
is then followed by 
repolarization that is 
also accompanied by 
paralysis
Placement of endotracheal 
tube at start of anesthetic 
procedure • rarely, control 
of muscle contractions in 
status epilepticus
Rapid metabolism by plasma 
cholinesterase • normal 
duration, ~5 min • Toxicities: 
Arrhythmias • hyperkalemia 
• transient increased intra-
abdominal, intraocular 
pressure • postoperative 
muscle pain
NONDEPOLARIZING NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING AGENTS
 • d-Tubocurarine 
Competitive antagonist at 
nACh receptors, especially 
at neuromuscular junctions
Prevents depolarization 
by ACh, causes flaccid 
paralysis • can cause 
histamine release with 
hypotension • weak 
block of cardiac 
muscarinic ACh 
receptors
Prolonged relaxation for 
surgical procedures 
• superseded by newer 
nondepolarizing agents
Renal excretion • duration, 
~40–60 min • Toxicities: 
Histamine release 
• hypotension • prolonged 
apnea
 • Cisatracurium
Similar to tubocurarine
Like tubocurarine but 
lacks histamine release 
and antimuscarinic 
effects
Prolonged relaxation for 
surgical procedures 
• relaxation of respiratory 
muscles to facilitate 
mechanical ventilation 
in intensive care unit
Not dependent on renal or 
hepatic function • duration, 
~25–45 min • Toxicities: 
Prolonged apnea but less 
toxic than atracurium
 • Rocuronium
Similar to cisatracurium
Like cisatracurium but 
slight antimuscarinic 
effect
Like cisatracurium • useful 
in patients with renal 
impairment
Hepatic metabolism 
• duration, ~20–35 min 
• Toxicities: Like cisatracurium
 • Mivacurium: Rapid onset, short duration (10–20 min); metabolized by plasma cholinesterase
 • Vecuronium: Intermediate duration; metabolized in liver
CENTRALLY ACTING SPASMOLYTIC DRUGS
 • Baclofen
GABAB agonist, facilitates 
spinal inhibition of motor 
neurons
Pre- and postsynaptic 
inhibition of motor 
output
Severe spasticity due to 
cerebral palsy, multiple 
sclerosis, stroke
Oral, intrathecal • Toxicities: 
Sedation, weakness
 • Cyclobenzaprine
Poorly understood inhibi-
tion of muscle stretch reflex 
in spinal cord
Reduction in hyperactive 
muscle reflexes 
• antimuscarinic effects
Acute spasm due to muscle 
injury • inflammation
Hepatic metabolism 
• duration, ~4–6 h • Toxicities: 
Strong antimuscarinic effects
 • Chlorphenesin, methocarbamol, orphenadrine, others: Like cyclobenzaprine with varying degrees of antimuscarinic effect
 • Diazepam
Facilitates GABAergic 
transmission in central 
nervous system (see 
Chapter 22)
Increases interneuron 
inhibition of primary 
motor afferents in spinal 
cord • central sedation
Chronic spasm due to 
cerebral palsy, stroke, spinal 
cord injury • acute spasm 
due to muscle injury
Hepatic metabolism 
• duration, ~12–24 h 
• Toxicities: See Chapter 22
 • Tizanidine
α2-Adrenoceptor agonist in 
the spinal cord
Presynaptic and 
postsynaptic inhibition 
of reflex motor output
Spasm due to multiple 
sclerosis, stroke, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Renal and hepatic 
elimination • duration, 3–6 h 
• Toxicities: Weakness, 
sedation • hypotension
DIRECT-ACTING MUSCLE RELAXANT
 • Dantrolene
Blocks RyR1 Ca
2+-release 
channels in the sarcoplas-
mic reticulum of skeletal 
muscle
Reduces actin-myosin 
interaction • weakens 
skeletal muscle 
contraction
IV: Malignant hyperthermia 
• Oral: Spasm due to 
cerebral palsy, spinal cord 
injury, multiple sclerosis
IV, oral • duration, 4–6 h 
• Toxicities: Muscle weakness
CHAPTER 27 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants    481
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING DRUGS
Atracurium (generic)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Cisatracurium (Nimbex)
Parenteral: 2, 10 mg/mL for IV injection
Mivacurium (Mivacron)
Parenteral: 0.5, 2 mg/mL for injection
Pancuronium (generic)
Parenteral: 1, 2 mg/mL for injection
Rocuronium (generic, Zemuron)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV injection
Succinylcholine (generic, Anectine, Quelicin)
Parenteral: 20, 50, 100 mg/mL for injection; 500, 1000 mg per 
vial powder to reconstitute for injection
Tubocurarine (generic)
Parenteral: 3 mg (20 units)/mL for injection
Vecuronium (generic, Norcuron)
Parenteral: 10, 20 mg powder to reconstitute for injection
MUSCLE RELAXANTS (SPASMOLYTICS)
Baclofen (generic, Lioresal, Gablofen)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets
Intrathecal: 0.05, 0.5, 2 mg/mL
Botulinum toxin type A (Botox)
Parenteral: Powder for solution, 50, 100, 200 units/vial
Botulinum toxin type B (Myobloc)
Parenteral: 5000 units/mL for IM injection
Carisoprodol (generic, Soma)
Oral: 250, 350 mg tablets
Chlorzoxazone (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets, caplets
Cyclobenzaprine (generic, Amrix, Fexmid, Flexeril)
Oral: 5, 7.5, 10 mg tablets; 15, 30 mg capsules
Dantrolene (Dantrium, Revonto)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg capsules
Parenteral: 20 mg per vial powder to reconstitute for injection
Diazepam (generic, Diastat, Valium)
Oral: 2, 5, 10 mg tablets; 5 mg/5 mL, 5 mg/mL solutions
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Rectal: 2.5, 5, 10 mg gel
Gabapentin (Neurontin)
Oral: 100, 300, 400 mg capsules; 600, 800 mg tablets; 50 mg/mL 
oral solution
Note: This drug is labeled for use only in epilepsy and postherpetic 
neuralgia.
Metaxalone (Skelaxin)
Oral: 800 mg tablets
Methocarbamol (generic, Robaxin)
Oral: 500, 750 mg tablets
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for IM, IV injection
Orphenadrine (generic, Norflex)
Oral: 100 mg tablets; 100 mg sustained-release tablets
Parenteral: 30 mg/mL for IM, IV injection
Riluzole (Rilutek)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Note: This drug is labeled only for use in amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.
Tizanidine (Zanaflex)
Oral: 2, 4 mg tablets, capsules; 6 mg capsules
 REFERENCES 
 Neuromuscular Blockers 
 Brull SJ, Murphy GS: Residual neuromuscular block: Lessons unlearned. Part II: 
Methods to reduce the risk of residual weakness. Anesth Analg 
2010;111:129. 
 De Boer HD et al: Reversal of rocuronium-induced (1.2 mg/kg) profound neuro-
muscular blockade by sugammadex. Anesthesiology 2007;107:239. 
 Gibb AJ, Marshall IG: Pre- and postjunctional effects of tubocurarine and other 
nicotinic antagonists during repetitive stimulation in the rat. J Physiol 
1984;351:275. 
 Hemmerling TM, Russo G, Bracco D: Neuromuscular blockade in cardiac sur-
gery: An update for clinicians. Ann Card Anaesth 2008;11:80. 
 Hirsch NP: Neuromuscular junction in health and disease. Br J Anaesth 
2007;99:132. 
 Kampe S et al: Muscle relaxants. Best Prac Res Clin Anesthesiol 2003;17:137. 
 Lee C: Structure, conformation, and action of neuromuscular blocking drugs. Br J 
Anaesth 2001;87:755. 
 Lee C et al: Reversal of profound neuromuscular block by sugammadex adminis-
tered three minutes after rocuronium. Anesthesiology 2009;110:1020. 
 Lien CA et al: Fumarates: Unique nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents 
that are antagonized by cysteine. J Crit Care 2009;24:50. 
 Mace SE: Challenges and advances in intubation: rapid sequence intubation. 
Emerg Med Clin North Am 2008;26:1043. 
 Marshall CG, Ogden DC, Colquhoun D: The actions of suxamethonium (succi-
nyldicholine) as an agonist and channel blocker at the nicotinic receptor of 
frog muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 1990;428:155. 
 Martyn JA: Neuromuscular physiology and pharmacology. In: Miller RD (editor): 
Anesthesia , 7th ed. Churchill Livingstone, 2010. 
 Meakin GH: Recent advances in myorelaxant therapy. Paed Anaesthesia 
2001;11:523. 
 Murphy GS, Brull SJ: Residual neuromuscular block: Lessons unlearned. Part I: 
Definitions, incidence, and adverse physiologic effects of residual neuromus-
cular block. Anesth Analg 2010;111:120. 
 Naguib M: Sugammadex: Another milestone in clinical neuromuscular pharma-
cology. Anesth Analg 2007;104:575. 
 Naguib M, Brull SJ: Update on neuromuscular pharmacology. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2009;22:483. 
 Naguib M, Kopman AF, Ensor JE: Neuromuscular monitoring and postoperative 
residual curarisation: A meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 2007;98:302. 
 Naguib M et al: Advances in neurobiology of the neuromuscular junction: 
Implications for the anesthesiologist. Anesthesiology 2002;96:202. 
 Nicholson WT, Sprung J, Jankowski CJ: Sugammadex: A novel agent for the 
reversal of neuromuscular blockade. Pharmacotherapy 2007;27:1181. 
482    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Pavlin JD, Kent CD: Recovery after ambulatory anesthesia. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 
2008;21:729. 
 Puhringer FK et al: Reversal of profound, high-dose rocuronium-induced neuro-
muscular blockade by sugammadex at two different time points. 
Anesthesiology 2008;109:188. 
 Sacan O, Klein K, White PF: Sugammadex reversal of rocuronium-induced neu-
romuscular blockade: A comparison with neostigmine-glycopyrrolate and 
edrophonium-atropine. Anesth Analg 2007;104:569. 
 Staals LM et al: Reduced clearance of rocuronium and sugammadex in patients 
with severe to end-stage renal failure: A pharmacokinetic study. Br J Anaesth 
2010;104:31. 
 Sunaga H et al: Gantacurium and CW002 do not potentiate muscarinic receptor-
mediated airway smooth muscle constriction in guinea pigs. Anesthesiology 
2010;112:892. 
 Viby-Mogensen J: Neuromuscular monitoring. In: Miller RD (editor):  Anesthesia , 
5th ed. Churchill Livingstone, 2000. 
 Spasmolytics 
 Corcia P, Meininger V: Management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Drugs 
2008;68:1037. 
 Cutter NC et al: Gabapentin effect on spasticity in multiple sclerosis: A placebo-
controlled, randomized trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2000;81:164. 
 Gracies JM, Singer BJ, Dunne JW: The role of botulinum toxin injections in the 
management of muscle overactivity of the lower limb. Disabil Rehabil 
2007;29:1789 
 Groves L, Shellenberger MK, Davis CS: Tizanidine treatment of spasticity: A meta-
analysis of controlled, double-blind, comparative studies with baclofen and 
diazepam. Adv Ther 1998;15:241. 
 Krause T et al: Dantrolene—a review of its pharmacology, therapeutic use and new 
developments. Anaesthesia 2004;59:364. 
 Lopez JR et al: Effects of dantrolene on myoplasmic free [Ca 2+ ] measured in vivo 
in patients susceptible to malignant hyperthermia. Anesthesiology 
1992;76:711. 
 Lovell BV, Marmura MJ: New therapeutic developments in chronic migraine. Curr 
Opin Neurol 2010;23:254. 
 Malanga G, Reiter RD, Garay E: Update on tizanidine for muscle spasticity and 
emerging indications. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2008;9:2209 
 Mirbagheri MM, Chen D, Rymer WZ: Quantification of the effects of an alpha-2 
adrenergic agonist on reflex properties in spinal cord injury using a system 
identification technique. J Neuroeng Rehabil 2010;7:29. 
 Nolan KW, Cole LL, Liptak GS: Use of botulinum toxin type A in children with 
cerebral palsy. Phys Ther 2006;86:573. 
 Ronan S, Gold JT: Nonoperative management of spasticity in children. Childs 
Nerv Syst 2007;23:943 
 Ross JC et al: Acute intrathecal baclofen withdrawal: A brief review of treatment 
options. Neurocrit Care 2011;14:103. 
 Vakhapova V, Auriel E, Karni A: Nightly sublingual tizanidine HCl in multiple 
sclerosis: Clinical efficacy and safety. Clin Neuropharmacol 2010;33:151. 
 Verrotti A et al: Pharmacotherapy of spasticity in children with cerebral palsy. 
Pediatr Neurol 2006;34:1. 
 Ward AB: Spasticity treatment with botulinum toxins. J Neural Transm 
2008;115:607.     
Because of trauma and associated pain, it is assumed that 
gastric emptying will be significantly delayed. To avoid pos-
sible aspiration at the time of intubation, a very rapid-acting 
muscle relaxant should be used so the airway can be secured 
with an endotracheal tube. Therefore, succinylcholine is the 
agent of choice in this case. Despite its side effects, succinyl-
choline has the fastest mechanism of action of any currently 
available skeletal muscle relaxant. An alternative to succinyl-
choline is high-dose (up to 1.2 mg/kg) rocuronium, a nonde-
polarizing muscle relaxant. At this dose, rocuronium has a 
very rapid onset, which approaches but does not quite equal 
that of succinylcholine.
Both burns and neurologic injuries result in the expression 
of extrajunctional acetylcholine receptors. In patients with 
recent burns, succinylcholine use can lead to life-threatening 
hyperkalemia. Although the drug would not result in danger-
ous hyperkalemia if given immediately after a severe neuro-
logic injury, in a patient with a chronic paralysis, its use may 
lead to hyperkalemia. Therefore, succinylcholine would also be 
contraindicated in a patient with long-standing hemiparesis.
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
483
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 Pharmacologic Management 
of Parkinsonism & Other 
Movement Disorders 
 Michael J. Aminoff, MD, DSc, FRCP  
 Several types of abnormal movement are recognized.  Tremor con-
sists of a rhythmic oscillatory movement around a joint and is best 
characterized by its relation to activity. Tremor at rest is character-
istic of parkinsonism, when it is often associated with rigidity and 
an impairment of voluntary activity. Tremor may occur during 
maintenance of sustained posture (postural tremor) or during 
movement (intention tremor). A conspicuous postural tremor is 
the cardinal feature of benign essential or familial tremor. 
Intention tremor occurs in patients with a lesion of the brainstem 
or cerebellum, especially when the superior cerebellar peduncle is 
involved; it may also occur as a manifestation of toxicity from 
alcohol or certain other drugs. 
 Chorea consists of irregular, unpredictable, involuntary muscle 
jerks that occur in different parts of the body and impair voluntary 
activity. In some instances, the proximal muscles of the limbs are 
most severely affected, and because the abnormal movements are 
then particularly violent, the term  ballismus has been used to 
describe them. Chorea may be hereditary or may occur as a com-
plication of a number of general medical disorders and of therapy 
with certain drugs. 
 Abnormal movements may be slow and writhing in character 
( athetosis ) and in some instances are so sustained that they are 
more properly regarded as abnormal postures ( dystonia ). Athetosis 
or dystonia may occur with perinatal brain damage, with focal or 
generalized cerebral lesions, as an acute complication of certain 
drugs, as an accompaniment of diverse neurologic disorders, or as 
an isolated inherited phenomenon of uncertain cause known as 
idiopathic torsion dystonia or dystonia musculorum deformans. 
Various genetic loci have been reported (eg, 9q34, 8p21–q22, 
18p, 1p36.32–p36.13, 14q22.1–q22.2, 19q13, Xq13) depending 
on the age of onset, mode of inheritance, and response to dop-
aminergic therapy. The physiologic basis is uncertain, and treat-
ment is unsatisfactory. 
 Tics are sudden coordinated abnormal movements that tend to 
occur repetitively, particularly about the face and head, especially 
in children, and can be suppressed voluntarily for short periods of 
time. Common tics include repetitive sniffing or shoulder shrug-
ging. Tics may be single or multiple and transient or chronic. 
Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome is characterized by chronic mul-
tiple tics; its pharmacologic management is discussed at the end of 
this chapter. 
 Many of the movement disorders have been attributed to dis-
turbances of the basal ganglia. The basic circuitry of the basal 
ganglia involves three interacting neuronal loops that include the 
cortex and thalamus as well as the basal ganglia themselves 
( Figure 28–1 ). However, the precise function of these anatomic 
structures is not yet fully understood, and it is not possible to 
relate individual symptoms to involvement at specific sites. 
28
 A 64-year-old architect complains of left-hand tremor at rest, 
which interferes with his writing and drawing. He also notes a 
stooped posture, a tendency to drag his left leg when walking, 
and slight unsteadiness on turning. He remains independent 
in all activities of daily living. Examination reveals hypomimia 
(flat facies), hypophonia, a rest tremor of the left arm and leg, 
mild rigidity in all limbs, and impaired rapid alternating move-
ments in the left limbs. Neurologic and general examinations 
are otherwise normal. What is the likely diagnosis and progno-
sis, and how should his condition be managed? 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
484    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 ■ PARKINSONISM 
 Parkinsonism is characterized by a combination of rigidity, bra-
dykinesia, tremor, and postural instability that can occur for a 
variety of reasons but is usually idiopathic (Parkinson’s disease or 
paralysis agitans). Cognitive decline occurs in many patients as the 
disease advances. Other nonmotor symptoms—which are receiv-
ing increasing attention—are affective disorders (anxiety or 
depression), personality changes, abnormalities of autonomic 
function (sphincter or sexual functions; choking; sweating abnor-
malities; and disturbances of blood pressure regulation), sleep 
disorders, and sensory complaints or pain. The disease is generally 
progressive, leading to increasing disability unless effective treat-
ment is provided. 
 Pathogenesis 
 The pathogenesis of parkinsonism seems to relate to a combina-
tion of impaired degradation of proteins, intracellular protein 
accumulation and aggregation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial 
damage, inflammatory cascades, and apoptosis. Studies in twins 
suggest that genetic factors are important, especially when the 
disease occurs in patients under age 50. Recognized genetic abnor-
malities account for 10–15% of cases. Mutations of the α-synuclein 
gene at 4q21 or duplication and triplication of the normal synu-
clein gene are associated with Parkinson’s disease, which is now 
widely recognized as a  synucleinopathy . Mutations of the leucine-
rich repeat kinase 2 ( LRRK2 ) gene at 12cen, and the  UCHL1 gene 
may also cause autosomal dominant parkinsonism. Mutations in 
the  parkin gene (6q25.2–q27) cause early-onset, autosomal reces-
sive, familial parkinsonism, or sporadic juvenile-onset parkin-
sonism. Several other genes or chromosomal regions have been 
associated with familial forms of the disease. Environmental or 
endogenous toxins may also be important in the etiology of the 
disease. Epidemiologic studies reveal that cigarette smoking, cof-
fee, anti-inflammatory drug use, and high serum uric acid levels 
are protective, whereas the incidence of the disease is increased in 
those working in teaching, health care, or farming, and in those 
with lead or manganese exposure or with vitamin D deficiency. 
 The finding of Lewy bodies (intracellular inclusion bodies 
containing α-synuclein) in fetal dopaminergic cells transplanted 
into the brain of parkinsonian patients some years previously has 
provided some support for suggestions that Parkinson’s disease 
may represent a prion disease. 
 Staining for α-synuclein has revealed that pathology is 
more widespread than previously recognized, developing initially 
in the olfactory nucleus and lower brainstem (stage 1 of Braak), 
then the higher brainstem (stage 2), the substantia nigra (stage 3), 
the mesocortex and thalamus (stage 4), and finally the entire neo-
cortex (stage 5). The motor features of Parkinson’s disease develop 
at stage 3 on the Braak scale. 
The normally high concentration of dopamine in the basal 
ganglia of the brain is reduced in parkinsonism, and pharmaco-
logic attempts to restore dopaminergic activity with levodopa and 
dopamine agonists alleviate many of the motor features of the 
disorder. An alternative but complementary approach has been to 
restore the normal balance of cholinergic and dopaminergic influ-
ences on the basal ganglia with antimuscarinic drugs. The 
pathophysiologic basis for these therapies is that in idiopathic 
parkinsonism, dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra that 
normally inhibit the output of GABAergic cells in the corpus 
striatum are lost ( Figure 28–2 ). Drugs that induce parkinsonian 
syndromes either are dopamine receptor antagonists (eg, antipsy-
chotic agents; see  Chapter 29 ) or lead to the destruction of the 
dopaminergic nigrostriatal neurons (eg, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1-
,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine [MPTP]; see below). Various other 
neurotransmitters, such as norepinephrine, are also depleted in the 
brain in parkinsonism, but these deficiencies are of uncertain 
clinical relevance. 
 LEVODOPA 
 Dopamine does not cross the blood-brain barrier and if given into 
the peripheral circulation has no therapeutic effect in parkinsonism. 
However, (–)-3-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)- L -alanine (levodopa), the 
immediate metabolic precursor of dopamine, does enter the brain 
–
+
–
Globus pallidus (internal)
Substantia nigra (pars reticulata)
Striatum
Globus pallidus
(external)  
Subthalamic
nucleus
Thalamus
(ventrolateral-
ventroanterior nuclei)
Direct
pathway
Indirect
pathway
– Dopamine
+ Dopamine
GABA
Substance P
GABA
Glutamate
GABA
GABA
Enkephalin
–
+
–
Cortex
+
Glutamate
Substantia nigra
(pars compacta)
 FIGURE 28–1  Functional circuitry between the cortex, basal 
ganglia, and thalamus. The major neurotransmitters are indicated. In 
Parkinson’s disease, there is degeneration of the pars compacta of the 
substantia nigra, leading to overactivity in the indirect pathway (red) 
and increased glutamatergic activity by the subthalamic nucleus. 
CHAPTER 28 Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders    485
(via an  L -amino acid transporter, LAT), where it is decarboxylated 
to dopamine (see  Figure 6–5 ). Several noncatecholamine dopamine 
receptor agonists have also been developed and may lead to clinical 
benefit, as discussed in the text that follows. 
 Dopamine receptors are discussed in detail in Chapters 21 and 
29. Dopamine receptors of the D 1 type are located in the pars 
compacta of the substantia nigra and presynaptically on striatal 
axons coming from cortical neurons and from dopaminergic cells 
in the substantia nigra. The D 2 receptors are located postsynapti-
cally on striatal neurons and presynaptically on axons in the sub-
stantia nigra belonging to neurons in the basal ganglia. The 
benefits of dopaminergic antiparkinsonism drugs appear to 
depend mostly on stimulation of the D 2 receptors. However, 
D 1- receptor stimulation may also be required for maximal benefit 
and one of the newer drugs is D 3 selective. Dopamine agonist or 
partial agonist ergot derivatives such as lergotrile and bromocrip-
tine that are powerful stimulators of the D 2 receptors have antipar-
kinsonism properties, whereas certain dopamine blockers that are 
selective D 2 antagonists can induce parkinsonism. 
 Chemistry 
 Dopa is the amino acid precursor of dopamine and norepineph-
rine (discussed in  Chapter 6 ). Its structure is shown in  Figure 28–3 . 
Levodopa is the levorotatory stereoisomer of dopa. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Levodopa is rapidly absorbed from the small intestine, but its 
absorption depends on the rate of gastric emptying and the pH of 
the gastric contents. Ingestion of food delays the appearance of 
levodopa in the plasma. Moreover, certain amino acids from 
ingested food can compete with the drug for absorption from the 
gut and for transport from the blood to the brain. Plasma concen-
trations usually peak between 1 and 2 hours after an oral dose, and 
the plasma half-life is usually between 1 and 3 hours, although it 
varies considerably among individuals. About two thirds of the 
dose appears in the urine as metabolites within 8 hours of an oral 
dose, the main metabolic products being 3-methoxy-4- 
hydroxyphenyl acetic acid (homovanillic acid, HVA) and dihy-
droxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC). Unfortunately, only about 
1–3% of administered levodopa actually enters the brain unal-
tered; the remainder is metabolized extracerebrally, predominantly 
by decarboxylation to dopamine, which does not penetrate the 
blood-brain barrier. Accordingly, levodopa must be given in large 
amounts when used alone. However, when given in combination 
with a dopa decarboxylase inhibitor that does not penetrate the 
blood-brain barrier, the peripheral metabolism of levodopa is 
reduced, plasma levels of levodopa are higher, plasma half-life is 
longer, and more dopa is available for entry into the brain 
( Figure 28–4 ). Indeed, concomitant administration of a periph-
eral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor such as carbidopa may reduce 
the daily requirements of levodopa by approximately 75%. 
Substantia
nigra
Corpus
striatum
Dopamine
Acetyl-
choline
GABA
Normal
Parkinsonism
 FIGURE 28–2  Schematic representation of the sequence of 
neurons involved in parkinsonism.  Top: Dopaminergic neurons (red) 
originating in the substantia nigra normally inhibit the GABAergic 
output from the striatum, whereas cholinergic neurons (green) exert 
an excitatory effect.  Bottom: In parkinsonism, there is a selective loss 
of dopaminergic neurons (dashed, red). 
 FIGURE 28–3  Some drugs used in the treatment of parkinsonism. 
Dihydroxyphenylalanine
(DOPA)
CH
CH2
COOH
HO
HO
NH2
Carbidopa
C
CH2
COOH
NH2
HO
HO
NH
CH3
Entacapone
CH2CH3
CH2CH3
CH
C
C
O
O2N
HO
OH
Selegiline
CH
CH2
CH2
N
N
CH
C
N
C
CH3
CH3
486    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Clinical Use 
 The best results of levodopa treatment are obtained in the first few 
years of treatment. This is sometimes because the daily dose of 
levodopa must be reduced over time to avoid adverse effects at doses 
that were well tolerated initially. Some patients become less responsive 
to levodopa, perhaps because of loss of dopaminergic nigrostriatal 
nerve terminals or some pathologic process directly involving striatal 
dopamine receptors. For such reasons, the benefits of levodopa treat-
ment often begin to diminish after about 3 or 4 years of therapy, 
regardless of the initial therapeutic response. Although levodopa 
therapy does not stop the progression of parkinsonism, its early ini-
tiation lowers the mortality rate. However, long-term therapy may 
lead to a number of problems in management such as the on-off 
phenomenon discussed below. The most appropriate time to intro-
duce levodopa therapy must therefore be determined individually. 
 When levodopa is used, it is generally given in combination 
with carbidopa ( Figure 28–3 ), a peripheral dopa decarboxylase 
inhibitor, which reduces peripheral conversion to dopamine. 
Combination treatment is started with a small dose, eg, carbi-
dopa 25 mg, levodopa 100 mg three times daily, and gradually 
increased. It should be taken 30–60 minutes before meals. Most 
patients ultimately require carbidopa 25 mg, levodopa 250 mg 
three or four times daily. It is generally preferable to keep treat-
ment with this agent at a low level (eg, carbidopa-levodopa 
25/100 three times daily) when possible, and to use a dopamine 
agonist instead, to reduce the risk of development of response 
 FIGURE 28–4  Fate of orally administered levodopa and the effect of carbidopa, estimated from animal data. The width of each pathway 
indicates the absolute amount of the drug at each site, whereas the percentages shown denote the relative proportion of the administered 
dose. The benefits of coadministration of carbidopa include reduction of the amount of levodopa required for benefit and of the absolute 
amount diverted to peripheral tissues and an increase in the fraction of the dose that reaches the brain. GI, gastrointestinal. (Data from Nutt JG, 
Fellman JH: Pharmacokinetics of levodopa. Clin Neuropharmacol 1984;7:35.) 
Levodopa
dose
70%
27–29%
Metabolism
in the
GI tract
Peripheral
tissues
(toxicity)
Blood
Gut
Brain
100%
30%
1–3%
Levodopa alone
Blood
Gut
40%
100%
60%
10%
50%
Brain
Levodopa with carbidopa
Metabolism
in the
GI tract
Peripheral
tissues
(toxicity)
Levodopa
dose
CHAPTER 28 Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders    487
fluctuations. A controlled-release formulation of carbidopa-
levodopa is available and may be helpful in patients with estab-
lished response fluctuations or as a means of reducing dosing 
frequency. A formulation of carbidopa-levodopa (10/100, 
25/100, 25/250) that disintegrates in the mouth and is swal-
lowed with the saliva ( Parcopa ) is now available commercially 
and is best taken about 1 hour before meals. The combination 
( Stalevo ) of levodopa, carbidopa, and a catechol- O -methyltrans-
ferase (COMT) inhibitor (entacapone) is discussed in a later 
section. Finally, therapy by  intraduodenal infusion of levodopa-
carbidopa appears to be safe and is superior to a number of oral 
combination therapies in patients with response fluctuations. 
This approach has been used to a greater extent in Europe than 
the USA, but interest is growing. 
 Levodopa can ameliorate all the clinical features of parkin-
sonism, but it is particularly effective in relieving bradykinesia and 
any disabilities resulting from it. When it is first introduced, about 
one third of patients respond very well and one third less well. 
Most of the remainder either are unable to tolerate the medication 
or simply do not respond at all, especially if they do not have clas-
sic Parkinson’s disease. 
 Adverse Effects 
 A. Gastrointestinal Effects 
 When levodopa is given without a peripheral decarboxylase 
inhibitor, anorexia and nausea and vomiting occur in about 80% 
of patients. These adverse effects can be minimized by taking the 
drug in divided doses, with or immediately after meals, and by 
increasing the total daily dose very slowly. Antacids taken 
30–60 minutes before levodopa may also be beneficial. The 
vomiting has been attributed to stimulation of the chemoreceptor 
trigger zone located in the brainstem but outside the blood-brain 
barrier. Fortunately, tolerance to this emetic effect develops in 
many patients. Antiemetics such as phenothiazines should be 
avoided because they reduce the antiparkinsonism effects of 
levodopa and may exacerbate the disease. 
 When levodopa is given in combination with carbidopa, 
adverse gastrointestinal effects are much less frequent and trouble-
some, occurring in less than 20% of cases, so that patients can 
tolerate proportionately higher doses. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 A variety of cardiac arrhythmias have been described in patients 
receiving levodopa, including tachycardia, ventricular extrasysto-
les and, rarely, atrial fibrillation. This effect has been attributed 
to increased catecholamine formation peripherally. The inci-
dence of such arrhythmias is low, even in the presence of estab-
lished cardiac disease, and may be reduced still further if the 
levodopa is taken in combination with a peripheral decarboxylase 
inhibitor. 
 Postural hypotension is common, but often asymptomatic, and 
tends to diminish with continuing treatment. Hypertension may 
also occur, especially in the presence of nonselective monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors or sympathomimetics or when massive doses of 
levodopa are being taken. 
 C. Behavioral Effects 
 A wide variety of adverse mental effects have been reported, 
including depression, anxiety, agitation, insomnia, somnolence, 
confusion, delusions, hallucinations, nightmares, euphoria, and 
other changes in mood or personality. Such adverse effects are 
more common in patients taking levodopa in combination with a 
decarboxylase inhibitor rather than levodopa alone, presumably 
because higher levels are reached in the brain. They may be pre-
cipitated by intercurrent illness or operation. It may be necessary 
to reduce or withdraw the medication. Several atypical antipsy-
chotic agents that have low affinity for dopamine D 2 receptors 
(clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone; see  Chapter 29 ) 
are now available and may be particularly helpful in counteracting 
such behavioral complications. 
 D. Dyskinesias and Response Fluctuations 
 Dyskinesias occur in up to 80% of patients receiving levodopa 
therapy for more than 10 years. The character of dopa dyskinesias 
varies between patients but tends to remain constant in individual 
patients. Choreoathetosis of the face and distal extremities is the 
most common presentation. The development of dyskinesias is 
dose related, but there is considerable individual variation in the 
dose required to produce them. 
 Certain fluctuations in clinical response to levodopa occur 
with increasing frequency as treatment continues. In some 
patients, these fluctuations relate to the timing of levodopa 
intake ( wearing-off reactions or  end-of-dose akinesia ). In 
other instances, fluctuations in clinical state are unrelated to 
the timing of doses ( on-off phenomenon ). In the on-off phe-
nomenon, off-periods of marked akinesia alternate over the 
course of a few hours with on-periods of improved mobility 
but often marked dyskinesia. For patients with severe off-periods 
who are unresponsive to other measures, subcutaneously 
injected apomorphine may provide temporary benefit. The 
phenomenon is most likely to occur in patients who responded 
well to treatment initially. The exact mechanism is unknown. 
The dyskinesias may relate to an unequal distribution of stri-
atal dopamine. Dopaminergic denervation plus chronic pulsa-
tile stimulation of dopamine receptors with levodopa has been 
associated with development of dyskinesias. A lower incidence 
of dyskinesias occurs when levodopa is administered continu-
ously (eg, intraduodenally or intrajejunally), and with drug 
delivery systems that enable a more continuous delivery of 
dopaminergic medication. 
 E. Miscellaneous Adverse Effects 
 Mydriasis may occur and may precipitate an attack of acute 
glaucoma in some patients. Other reported but rare adverse 
effects include various blood dyscrasias; a positive Coombs’ test 
with evidence of hemolysis; hot flushes; aggravation or pre-
cipitation of gout; abnormalities of smell or taste; brownish 
discoloration of saliva, urine, or vaginal secretions; priapism; 
and mild—usually transient—elevations of blood urea nitro-
gen and of serum transaminases, alkaline phosphatase, and 
bilirubin. 
488    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Drug Holidays 
 A drug holiday (discontinuance of the drug for 3–21 days) may 
temporarily improve responsiveness to levodopa and alleviate 
some of its adverse effects but is usually of little help in the man-
agement of the on-off phenomenon. Furthermore, a drug holiday 
carries the risks of aspiration pneumonia, venous thrombosis, 
pulmonary embolism, and depression resulting from the immobil-
ity accompanying severe parkinsonism. For these reasons and 
because of the temporary nature of any benefit, drug holidays are 
not recommended. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Pharmacologic doses of pyridoxine (vitamin B 6 ) enhance the 
extracerebral metabolism of levodopa and may therefore prevent 
its therapeutic effect unless a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor is 
also taken. Levodopa should not be given to patients taking 
monoamine oxidase A inhibitors or within 2 weeks of their dis-
continuance because such a combination can lead to hypertensive 
crises. 
 Contraindications 
 Levodopa should not be given to psychotic patients because it may 
exacerbate the mental disturbance. It is also contraindicated in 
patients with angle-closure glaucoma, but those with chronic 
open-angle glaucoma may be given levodopa if intraocular pres-
sure is well controlled and can be monitored. It is best given 
combined with carbidopa to patients with cardiac disease; even so, 
the risk of cardiac dysrhythmia is slight. Patients with active peptic 
ulcer must also be managed carefully, since gastrointestinal bleed-
ing has occasionally occurred with levodopa. Because levodopa is 
a precursor of skin melanin and conceivably may activate malig-
nant melanoma, it should be used with particular care in patients 
with a history of melanoma or with suspicious undiagnosed skin 
lesions; such patients should be monitored by a dermatologist 
regularly. 
 DOPAMINE RECEPTOR AGONISTS 
 Drugs acting directly on dopamine receptors may have a benefi-
cial effect in addition to that of levodopa ( Figure 28–5 ). Unlike 
levodopa, they do not require enzymatic conversion to an active 
metabolite, have no potentially toxic metabolites, and do not 
compete with other substances for active transport into the 
blood and across the blood-brain barrier. Moreover, drugs selec-
tively affecting certain (but not all) dopamine receptors may 
have more limited adverse effects than levodopa. A number of 
dopamine agonists have antiparkinsonism activity. The older 
dopamine agonists (bromocriptine and pergolide) are ergot 
(ergoline) derivatives (see  Chapter 16 ), and are rarely—if ever—
used to treat parkinsonism. Their side effects are of more con-
cern than those of the newer agents (pramipexole and 
ropinirole). 
 There is no evidence that one agonist is superior to another; 
individual patients, however, may respond to one but not another 
of these agents. Apomorphine is a potent dopamine agonist but is 
discussed separately in a later section in this chapter because it is 
used primarily as a rescue drug for patients with disabling response 
fluctuations to levodopa. 
 Dopamine agonists have an important role as first-line therapy 
for Parkinson’s disease, and their use is associated with a lower 
incidence of the response fluctuations and dyskinesias that occur 
with long-term levodopa therapy. In consequence, dopaminergic 
therapy may best be initiated with a dopamine agonist. Alternatively, 
a low dose of carbidopa plus levodopa (eg, Sinemet-25/100 three 
times daily) is introduced, and a dopamine agonist is then added. 
In either case, the dose of the dopamine agonist is built up gradu-
ally depending on response and tolerance. Dopamine agonists 
may also be given to patients with parkinsonism who are taking 
levodopa and who have end-of-dose akinesia or on-off phenome-
non or are becoming resistant to treatment with levodopa. In such 
circumstances, it is generally necessary to lower the dose of 
levodopa to prevent intolerable adverse effects. The response to a 
dopamine agonist is generally disappointing in patients who have 
never responded to levodopa. 
L-DOPA
L-DOPA
Dopamine
Dopamine
Adverse effects
Brain
Periphery
Blood-brain barrier
COMT
MAO-B
DOPA decarboxylase
COMT
3-OMD
DOPA decarboxylase
Carbidopa
Entacapone,
  tolcapone
3-MT
DOPAC
L-amino acid transporter
+
+
–
–
–
–
+
Dopamine
 receptors
Pramipexole,
ropinirole
Bromocriptine,
pergolide
Tolcapone
Selegiline,
rasagiline 
 FIGURE 28–5  Pharmacologic strategies for dopaminergic 
therapy of Parkinson’s disease. Drugs and their effects are indicated 
(see text). MAO, monoamine oxidase; COMT, catechol- O -methyltrans-
ferase; DOPAC, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; L-DOPA, levodopa; 
3-OMD, 3- O -methyldopa; 3-MT, 3-methoxytyramine. 
CHAPTER 28 Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders    489
 Bromocriptine 
 Bromocriptine is a D 2 agonist; its structure is shown in  Table 16–6 . 
This drug has been widely used to treat Parkinson’s disease in the 
past but is now rarely used for this purpose, having been super-
seded by the newer dopamine agonists. The usual daily dose of 
bromocriptine for parkinsonism varies between 7.5 and 30 mg. To 
minimize adverse effects, the dose is built up slowly over 2 or 3 
months depending on response or the development of adverse 
reactions. 
 Pergolide 
 Pergolide, another ergot derivative, directly stimulates both D 1 
and D 2 receptors. It too has been widely used for parkinsonism 
but is no longer available in the United States because its use has 
been associated with the development of valvular heart disease. 
 Pramipexole 
 Pramipexole is not an ergot derivative, but it has preferential affin-
ity for the D 3 family of receptors. It is effective as monotherapy for 
mild parkinsonism and is also helpful in patients with advanced 
disease, permitting the dose of levodopa to be reduced and 
smoothing out response fluctuations. Pramipexole may ameliorate 
affective symptoms. A possible neuroprotective effect has been 
suggested by its ability to scavenge hydrogen peroxide and enhance 
neurotrophic activity in mesencephalic dopaminergic cell cultures. 
 
N
S
NH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
NH
Pramipexole
 
 Pramipexole is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, reach-
ing peak plasma concentrations in approximately 2 hours, and is 
excreted largely unchanged in the urine. It is started at a dosage of 
0.125 mg three times daily, doubled after 1 week, and again after 
another week. Further increments in the daily dose are by 0.75 mg 
at weekly intervals, depending on response and tolerance. Most 
patients require between 0.5 and 1.5 mg three times daily. Renal 
insufficiency may necessitate dosage adjustment. An extended-re-
lease preparation is now available and is taken once daily at a dose 
equivalent to the total daily dose of standard pramipexole. The 
extended-release preparation is generally more convenient for 
patients and avoids swings in blood levels of the drug over the day. 
 Ropinirole 
 Another nonergoline derivative, ropinirole (now available in a 
generic preparation) is a relatively pure D 2 receptor agonist that is 
effective as monotherapy in patients with mild disease and as a 
means of smoothing the response to levodopa in patients with 
more advanced disease and response fluctuations. It is introduced 
at 0.25 mg three times daily, and the total daily dose is then 
increased by 0.75 mg at weekly intervals until the fourth week and 
by 1.5 mg thereafter. In most instances, a dosage between 2 and 
8 mg three times daily is necessary. Ropinirole is metabolized by 
CYP1A2; other drugs metabolized by this isoform may signifi-
cantly reduce its clearance. A prolonged-release preparation taken 
once daily is now available. 
 
N
N
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
Ropinirole
CH3
CH3
 
 Rotigotine 
 The dopamine agonist rotigotine, delivered daily through a skin 
patch, was approved in 2007 by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for treatment of early Parkinson’s disease. It supposedly pro-
vides more continuous dopaminergic stimulation than oral medica-
tion in early disease; its efficacy in more advanced disease is less clear. 
Benefits and side effects are similar to those of other dopamine ago-
nists but reactions may also occur at the application site and are 
sometimes serious. The product was recalled in the United States in 
2008 because of crystal formation on the patches, affecting the avail-
ability and efficacy of the agonist. It is still available in Europe. 
 Adverse Effects of Dopamine Agonists 
 A. Gastrointestinal Effects 
 Anorexia and nausea and vomiting may occur when a dopamine 
agonist is introduced and can be minimized by taking the medica-
tion with meals. Constipation, dyspepsia, and symptoms of reflux 
esophagitis may also occur. Bleeding from peptic ulceration has 
been reported. 
 B. Cardiovascular Effects 
 Postural hypotension may occur, particularly at the initiation of 
therapy. Painless digital vasospasm is a dose-related complication 
of long-term treatment with the ergot derivatives (bromocriptine 
or pergolide). When cardiac arrhythmias occur, they are an indica-
tion for discontinuing treatment. Peripheral edema is sometimes 
problematic. Cardiac valvulopathy may occur with pergolide. 
 C. Dyskinesias 
 Abnormal movements similar to those introduced by levodopa 
may occur and are reversed by reducing the total dose of dopamin-
ergic drugs being taken. 
 D. Mental Disturbances 
 Confusion, hallucinations, delusions, and other psychiatric reac-
tions are potential complications of dopaminergic treatment and 
are more common and severe with dopamine receptor agonists 
490    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
than with levodopa. Disorders of impulse control may lead to 
compulsive gambling, shopping, betting, sexual activity, and other 
behaviors (see Chapter 32). They clear on withdrawal of the 
offending medication. 
 E. Miscellaneous 
 Headache, nasal congestion, increased arousal, pulmonary infil-
trates, pleural and retroperitoneal fibrosis, and erythromelalgia are 
other reported adverse effects of the ergot-derived dopamine ago-
nists. Cardiac valvulopathies have occurred with pergolide. 
Erythromelalgia consists of red, tender, painful, swollen feet and, 
occasionally, hands, at times associated with arthralgia; symptoms 
and signs clear within a few days of withdrawal of the causal drug. 
In rare instances, an uncontrollable tendency to fall asleep at inap-
propriate times has occurred, particularly in patients receiving 
pramipexole or ropinirole; this requires discontinuation of the 
medication. 
 Contraindications 
 Dopamine agonists are contraindicated in patients with a history 
of psychotic illness or recent myocardial infarction, or with active 
peptic ulceration. The ergot-derived agonists are best avoided in 
patients with peripheral vascular disease. 
 MONOAMINE OXIDASE INHIBITORS 
 Two types of monoamine oxidase have been distinguished in the 
nervous system. Monoamine oxidase A metabolizes norepineph-
rine, serotonin, and dopamine; monoamine oxidase B metabolizes 
dopamine selectively.  Selegiline (deprenyl) ( Figure 28–3 ), a selec-
tive irreversible inhibitor of monoamine oxidase B at normal doses 
(at higher doses it inhibits monoamine oxidase A as well), retards 
the breakdown of dopamine ( Figure 28–5 ); in consequence, it 
enhances and prolongs the antiparkinsonism effect of levodopa 
(thereby allowing the dose of levodopa to be reduced) and may 
reduce mild on-off or wearing-off phenomena. It is therefore used 
as adjunctive therapy for patients with a declining or fluctuating 
response to levodopa. The standard dose of selegiline is 5 mg with 
breakfast and 5 mg with lunch. Selegiline may cause insomnia 
when taken later during the day. 
 Selegiline has only a minor therapeutic effect on parkin-
sonism when given alone. Studies in animals suggest that it may 
reduce disease progression, but trials to test the effect of selegi-
line on the progression of parkinsonism in humans have yielded 
ambiguous results. The findings in a large multicenter study 
were taken to suggest a beneficial effect in slowing disease pro-
gression but may simply have reflected a symptomatic 
response. 
 Rasagiline, another monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, is more 
potent than selegiline in preventing MPTP-induced parkinsonism 
and is being used for early symptomatic treatment. The standard 
dosage is 1 mg/d. Rasagiline is also used as adjunctive therapy at a 
dosage of 0.5 or 1 mg/d to prolong the effects of levodopa-
carbidopa in patients with advanced disease. A large double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, delayed-start study (the ADAGIO trial) to 
evaluate whether it had neuroprotective benefit (ie, slowed the 
disease course) yielded unclear results: a daily dose of 1 mg met all 
the end points of the study and did seem to slow disease progres-
sion, but a 2-mg dose failed to do so. These findings are difficult 
to explain and the decision to use rasagiline for neuroprotective 
purposes therefore remains an individual one. 
 Neither selegiline nor rasagiline should be taken by patients 
receiving meperidine, tramadol, methadone, propoxyphene, 
cyclobenzaprine, or St. John’s wort. The antitussive dextromethor-
phan should also be avoided by patients taking one of the mono-
amine oxidase B inhibitors; indeed, it is wise to advise patients to 
avoid all over-the-counter cold preparations. Rasagiline or selegi-
line should be used with care in patients receiving tricyclic antide-
pressants or serotonin reuptake inhibitors because of the 
theoretical risk of acute toxic interactions of the serotonin syn-
drome type (see  Chapter 16 ), but this is rarely encountered in 
practice. The adverse effects of levodopa may be increased by these 
drugs. 
 The combined administration of levodopa and an inhibitor of 
both forms of monoamine oxidase (ie, a nonselective inhibitor) 
must be avoided, because it may lead to hypertensive crises, prob-
ably because of the peripheral accumulation of norepinephrine. 
 CATECHOL- O -METHYLTRANSFERASE 
INHIBITORS 
 Inhibition of dopa decarboxylase is associated with compen-
satory activation of other pathways of levodopa metabolism, 
especially catechol- O -methyltransferase (COMT), and this 
increases plasma levels of 3- O -methyldopa (3-OMD). Elevated 
levels of 3-OMD have been associated with a poor therapeutic 
response to levodopa, perhaps in part because 3-OMD com-
petes with levodopa for an active carrier mechanism that gov-
erns its transport across the intestinal mucosa and the blood-brain 
barrier. Selective COMT inhibitors such as  tolcapone and 
 entacapone also prolong the action of levodopa by diminishing 
its peripheral metabolism ( Figure 28–5 ). Levodopa clearance is 
decreased, and relative bioavailability of levodopa is thus 
increased. Neither the time to reach peak concentration nor the 
maximal concentration of levodopa is increased. These agents 
may be helpful in patients receiving levodopa who have devel-
oped response fluctuations—leading to a smoother response, 
more prolonged on-time, and the option of reducing total daily 
levodopa dose. Tolcapone and entacapone are both widely avail-
able, but entacapone is generally preferred because it has not 
been associated with hepatotoxicity. 
 The pharmacologic effects of tolcapone and entacapone are 
similar, and both are rapidly absorbed, bound to plasma pro-
teins, and metabolized before excretion. However, tolcapone 
has both central and peripheral effects, whereas the effect of 
entacapone is peripheral. The half-life of both drugs is approxi-
mately 2 hours, but tolcapone is slightly more potent and has a 
longer duration of action. Tolcapone is taken in a standard dos-
age of 100 mg three times daily; some patients require a daily 
CHAPTER 28 Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders    491
dose of twice that amount. By contrast, entacapone (200 mg) 
needs to be taken with each dose of levodopa, up to five times 
daily. 
 Adverse effects of the COMT inhibitors relate in part to 
increased levodopa exposure and include dyskinesias, nausea, and 
confusion. It is often necessary to lower the daily dose of levodopa 
by about 30% in the first 48 hours to avoid or reverse such com-
plications. Other adverse effects include diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
orthostatic hypotension, sleep disturbances, and an orange discol-
oration of the urine. Tolcapone may cause an increase in liver 
enzyme levels and has been associated rarely with death from acute 
hepatic failure; accordingly, its use in the USA requires signed 
patient consent (as provided in the product labeling) plus moni-
toring of liver function tests every 2 weeks during the first year 
and less frequently thereafter. No such toxicity has been reported 
with entacapone. 
 A commercial preparation named  Stalevo consists of a com-
bination of levodopa with both carbidopa and entacapone. It is 
available in three strengths: Stalevo 50 (50 mg levodopa plus 
12.5 mg carbidopa and 200 mg entacapone), Stalevo 100 (100 
mg, 25 mg, and 200 mg, respectively), and Stalevo 150 (150 
mg, 37.5 mg, and 200 mg). Use of this preparation simplifies 
the drug regimen and requires the consumption of a lesser num-
ber of tablets than otherwise. Stalevo is priced at or below the 
price of its individual components. The combination agent may 
provide greater symptomatic benefit than levodopa-carbidopa 
alone. However, despite the convenience of a single combina-
tion preparation, use of Stalevo rather than levodopa-carbidopa 
has been associated with earlier occurrence and increased fre-
quency of dyskinesia. An investigation as to whether the use of 
Stalevo is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular 
events (myocardial infarction, stroke, cardiovascular death) is 
ongoing. 
 APOMORPHINE 
 Subcutaneous injection of apomorphine hydrochloride ( Apokyn ), 
a potent dopamine agonist, is effective for the temporary relief 
(“rescue”) of off-periods of akinesia in patients on optimized dop-
aminergic therapy. It is rapidly taken up in the blood and then the 
brain, leading to clinical benefit that begins within about 10 min-
utes of injection and persists for up to 2 hours. The optimal dose 
is identified by administering increasing test doses until adequate 
benefit is achieved or a maximum of 10 mg is reached. Most 
patients require a dose of 3–6 mg, and this should be given no 
more than about three times daily. 
 Nausea is often troublesome, especially at the initiation of 
apomorphine treatment; accordingly, pretreatment with the anti-
emetic trimethobenzamide (300 mg three times daily) for 3 days 
is recommended before apomorphine is introduced and is then 
continued for at least 1 month, if not indefinitely. Other adverse 
effects include dyskinesias, drowsiness, chest pain, sweating, 
hypotension, and bruising at the injection site. Apomorphine 
should be prescribed only by physicians familiar with its potential 
complications and interactions. 
 AMANTADINE 
 Amantadine, an antiviral agent, was by chance found to have 
antiparkinsonism properties. Its mode of action in parkinsonism 
is unclear, but it may potentiate dopaminergic function by influ-
encing the synthesis, release, or reuptake of dopamine. It has been 
reported to antagonize the effects of adenosine at adenosine A 2A 
receptors, which are receptors that may inhibit D 2 receptor func-
tion. Release of catecholamines from peripheral stores has also 
been documented. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Peak plasma concentrations of amantadine are reached 1–4 hours 
after an oral dose. The plasma half-life is between 2 and 4 hours, 
most of the drug being excreted unchanged in the urine. 
 Clinical Use 
 Amantadine is less efficacious than levodopa, and its benefits may 
be short-lived, often disappearing after only a few weeks of treat-
ment. Nevertheless, during that time it may favorably influence 
the bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor of parkinsonism. The stan-
dard dosage is 100 mg orally two or three times daily. Amantadine 
may also help in reducing iatrogenic dyskinesias in patients with 
advanced disease. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Amantadine has a number of undesirable central nervous system 
effects, all of which can be reversed by stopping the drug. These 
include restlessness, depression, irritability, insomnia, agitation, 
excitement, hallucinations, and confusion. Overdosage may pro-
duce an acute toxic psychosis. With doses several times higher 
than recommended, convulsions have occurred. 
 Livedo reticularis sometimes occurs in patients taking amanta-
dine and usually clears within 1 month after the drug is with-
drawn. Other dermatologic reactions have also been described. 
Peripheral edema, another well-recognized complication, is not 
accompanied by signs of cardiac, hepatic, or renal disease and 
responds to diuretics. Other adverse reactions to amantadine 
include headache, heart failure, postural hypotension, urinary 
retention, and gastrointestinal disturbances (eg, anorexia, nausea, 
constipation, and dry mouth). 
 Amantadine should be used with caution in patients with a 
history of seizures or heart failure. 
 ACETYLCHOLINE-BLOCKING DRUGS 
 A number of centrally acting antimuscarinic preparations are 
available that differ in their potency and in their efficacy in differ-
ent patients. Some of these drugs were discussed in  Chapter 8 . 
These agents may improve the tremor and rigidity of parkin-
sonism but have little effect on bradykinesia. Some of the more 
commonly used drugs are listed in  Table 28–1 . 
492    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Clinical Use 
 Treatment is started with a low dose of one of the drugs in this 
category, the dosage gradually being increased until benefit occurs 
or until adverse effects limit further increments. If patients do not 
respond to one drug, a trial with another member of the drug class 
is warranted and may be successful. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Antimuscarinic drugs have a number of undesirable central ner-
vous system and peripheral effects (see  Chapter 8 ) and are poorly 
tolerated by the elderly. Dyskinesias occur in rare cases. Acute sup-
purative parotitis sometimes occurs as a complication of dryness 
of the mouth. 
 If medication is to be withdrawn, this should be accomplished 
gradually rather than abruptly to prevent acute exacerbation of 
parkinsonism. For contraindications to the use of antimuscarinic 
drugs, see  Chapter 8 . 
 SURGICAL PROCEDURES 
 In patients with advanced disease that is poorly responsive to 
pharmacotherapy, worthwhile benefit may follow thalamotomy 
(for conspicuous tremor) or posteroventral pallidotomy. Ablative 
surgical procedures, however, have generally been replaced by 
functional, reversible lesions induced by high-frequency deep 
brain stimulation, which has a lower morbidity. 
 Stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus or globus pallidus by 
an implanted electrode and stimulator has yielded good results for 
the management of the clinical fluctuations occurring in advanced 
parkinsonism. The anatomic substrate for such therapy is indi-
cated in  Figure 28–1 . Such procedures are contraindicated in 
patients with secondary or atypical parkinsonism, dementia, or 
failure to respond to dopaminergic medication. 
 In a controlled trial of the transplantation of dopaminergic tis-
sue (fetal substantia nigra tissue), symptomatic benefit occurred in 
younger (less than 60 years old) but not older parkinsonian 
patients. In another trial, benefits were inconsequential. 
Furthermore, uncontrollable dyskinesias occurred in some patients 
in both studies, perhaps from a relative excess of dopamine from 
continued fiber outgrowth from the transplant. Additional basic 
studies are required before further trials of cellular therapies—in 
particular, stem cell therapies—are undertaken, and such 
approaches therefore remain investigational. 
 NEUROPROTECTIVE THERAPY 
 Among the compounds under investigation as potential neuro-
 protective agents that may slow disease progression are antioxidants, 
antiapoptotic agents, glutamate antagonists, intraparenchymally 
administered glial-derived neurotrophic factor, coenzyme Q10, 
creatine, and anti-inflammatory drugs. The role of these agents 
remains to be established, however, and their use for therapeutic 
purposes is not indicated at this time. The possibility that rasagiline 
has a protective effect was discussed earlier. 
 GENE THERAPY 
 Three phase 1 (safety) trials of gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease 
have now been completed in the USA. All trials involved infusion 
into the striatum of adeno-associated virus type 2 as the vector for 
the gene. The genes were for glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD, 
to facilitate synthesis of GABA, an inhibitory neurotransmitter), 
infused into the subthalamic nucleus to cause inhibition; for aro-
matic acid decarboxylase (AADC), infused into the putamen to 
increase metabolism of levodopa to dopamine; and for neurturin 
(a growth factor that may enhance the survival of dopaminergic 
neurons), infused into the putamen. All agents were deemed safe 
and the data suggested efficacy. A phase 2 study of the GAD gene 
has been completed and the results are encouraging. A similar 
study of AADC is planned but has not yet started. A phase 2 study 
of neurturin failed to show significant benefit, but a new phase 2 
study has been initiated in which neurturin is infused into the 
substantia nigra as well as the putamen. 
 THERAPY FOR NONMOTOR 
MANIFESTATIONS 
 Persons with cognitive decline may respond to rivastigmine 
(1.5–6 mg twice daily), memantine (5–10 mg daily), or donepezil 
(5–10 mg daily) (see  Chapter 60 ); affective disorders to antide-
pressants or anxiolytic agents (see  Chapter 30 ); excessive daytime 
sleepiness to modafinil (100–400 mg in the morning) (see 
 Chapter 9 ); and bladder and bowel disorders to appropriate symp-
tomatic therapy (see  Chapter 8 ). 
 GENERAL COMMENTS ON DRUG 
MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS WITH 
PARKINSONISM 
 Parkinson’s disease generally follows a progressive course. Moreover, 
the benefits of levodopa therapy often diminish with time, and seri-
ous adverse effects may complicate long-term levodopa treatment. 
Nevertheless, dopaminergic therapy at a relatively early stage may be 
most effective in alleviating symptoms of parkinsonism and may 
TABLE 28–1  Some drugs with antimuscarinic 
properties used in parkinsonism.
Drug
Usual Daily Dose (mg)
Benztropine mesylate
1–6
Biperiden
2–12
Orphenadrine
150–400
Procyclidine
7.5–30
Trihexyphenidyl
6–20
CHAPTER 28 Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders    493
also favorably affect the mortality rate due to the disease. Therefore, 
several strategies have evolved for optimizing dopaminergic therapy, 
as summarized in  Figure 28–5 . Symptomatic treatment of mild 
parkinsonism is probably best avoided until there is some degree of 
disability or until symptoms begin to have a significant impact on 
the patient’s lifestyle. When symptomatic treatment becomes neces-
sary, a trial of rasagiline, amantadine, or an antimuscarinic drug (in 
young patients) may be worthwhile. With disease progression, dop-
aminergic therapy becomes necessary. This can conveniently be 
initiated with a dopamine agonist, either alone or in combination 
with low-dose carbidopa-levodopa therapy. Alternatively, especially 
in older patients, a dopamine agonist can be omitted and the patient 
started immediately on carbidopa-levodopa. Physical therapy is 
helpful in improving mobility. In patients with severe parkinsonism 
and long-term complications of levodopa therapy such as the on-off 
phenomenon, a trial of treatment with a COMT inhibitor or rasa-
giline may be helpful. Regulation of dietary protein intake may also 
improve response fluctuations. Deep brain stimulation is often 
helpful in patients who fail to respond adequately to these measures. 
Treating patients who are young or have mild parkinsonism with 
rasagiline may delay disease progression and merits consideration. 
 DRUG-INDUCED PARKINSONISM 
 Reserpine and the related drug tetrabenazine deplete biogenic 
monoamines from their storage sites, whereas haloperidol, meto-
clopramide, and the phenothiazines block dopamine receptors. 
These drugs may therefore produce a parkinsonian syndrome, 
usually within 3 months after introduction. The disorder tends to 
be symmetric, with inconspicuous tremor, but this is not always 
the case. The syndrome is related to high dosage and clears over 
several weeks or months after withdrawal. If treatment is neces-
sary, antimuscarinic agents are preferred. Levodopa is of no help if 
neuroleptic drugs are continued and may in fact aggravate the 
mental disorder for which antipsychotic drugs were prescribed 
originally. 
 In 1983, a drug-induced form of parkinsonism was discovered 
in individuals who attempted to synthesize and use a narcotic drug 
related to meperidine but actually synthesized and self-adminis-
tered MPTP, as discussed in the Box: MPTP & Parkinsonism. 
 OTHER MOVEMENT DISORDERS 
 Tremor 
 Tremor consists of rhythmic oscillatory movements. Physiologic 
postural tremor, which is a normal phenomenon, is enhanced in 
amplitude by anxiety, fatigue, thyrotoxicosis, and intravenous 
epinephrine or isoproterenol.  Propranolol reduces its amplitude 
and, if administered intra-arterially, prevents the response to iso-
proterenol in the perfused limb, presumably through some 
peripheral action. Certain drugs—especially the bronchodilators, 
valproate, tricyclic antidepressants, and lithium—may produce a 
dose-dependent exaggeration of the normal physiologic tremor 
that is reversed by discontinuing the drug. Although the tremor 
produced by sympathomimetics such as terbutaline (a bronchodi-
lator) is blocked by propranolol, which antagonizes both β 1 and 
β 2 receptors, it is not blocked by metoprolol, a β 1 -selective antag-
onist; this suggests that such tremor is mediated mainly by the β 2 
receptors. 
 Essential tremor is a postural tremor, sometimes familial with 
autosomal dominant inheritance, which is clinically similar to 
physiologic tremor. At least three gene loci ( ETM1 on 3q13,  ETM2 
on 2p24.1, and a locus on 6p23) have been described. Dysfunction 
of β 1 receptors has been implicated in some instances, since the 
tremor may respond dramatically to standard doses of metoprolol 
as well as to propranolol. The most useful approach is with 
propranolol, but whether the response depends on a central or 
 MPTP & Parkinsonism 
 Reports in the early 1980s of a rapidly progressive form of 
parkinsonism in young persons opened a new area of research 
in the etiology and treatment of parkinsonism. The initial 
report described apparently healthy young people who 
attempted to support their opioid habit with a meperidine 
analog synthesized by an amateur chemist. They unwittingly 
self-administered 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
(MPTP) and subsequently developed a very severe form of par-
kinsonism. 
 MPTP is a protoxin that is converted by monoamine oxidase B 
to  N -methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+). MPP+ is selectively 
taken up by cells in the substantia nigra through an active 
mechanism normally responsible for dopamine reuptake. MPP+ 
inhibits mitochondrial complex I, thereby inhibiting oxidative 
phosphorylation. The interaction of MPP+ with complex 
I probably leads to cell death and thus to striatal dopamine 
depletion and parkinsonism. 
 Recognition of the effects of MPTP suggested that spontane-
ously occurring Parkinson’s disease may result from exposure to 
an environmental toxin that is similarly selective in its target. 
However, no such toxin has yet been identified. It also suggested 
a successful means of producing an experimental model of 
Parkinson’s disease in animals, especially nonhuman primates. 
This model is assisting in the development of new antiparkin-
sonism drugs. Pretreatment of exposed animals with a monoam-
ine oxidase B inhibitor such as selegiline prevents the conversion 
of MPTP to MPP+ and thus protects against the occurrence of 
parkinsonism. This observation has provided one reason to 
believe that selegiline or rasagiline may retard the progression of 
Parkinson’s disease in humans. 
494    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
peripheral action is unclear. The pharmacokinetics, pharmaco-
logic effects, and adverse reactions of propranolol are discussed in 
 Chapter 10 . Daily doses of propranolol on the order of 120 mg 
(range, 60–240 mg) are usually required, prescribed as 40–120 mg 
orally twice daily, and reported adverse effects have been few. 
Propranolol should be used with caution in patients with heart 
failure, heart block, asthma, and hypoglycemia. Patients can be 
instructed to take their own pulse and call the physician if signifi-
cant bradycardia develops. Metoprolol is sometimes useful in 
treating tremor when patients have concomitant pulmonary dis-
ease that contraindicates use of propranolol.  Primidone (an anti-
epileptic drug; see  Chapter 24 ), in gradually increasing doses up 
to 250 mg three times daily, is also effective in providing symp-
tomatic control in some cases. Patients with tremor are very sensi-
tive to primidone and often cannot tolerate the doses used to treat 
seizures; they should be started on 50 mg once daily and the daily 
dose increased by 50 mg every 2 weeks depending on response. 
 Topiramate , another antiepileptic drug, may also be helpful in 
a dose of 400 mg daily, built up gradually.  Alprazolam (in doses 
up to 3 mg daily) or  gabapentin (100–2400 mg/d) is helpful in 
some patients. Others are helped by intramuscular injections of 
botulinum toxin. Thalamic stimulation by an implanted electrode 
and stimulator is often worthwhile in advanced cases refractory to 
pharmacotherapy. Diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, mephenesin, and 
antiparkinsonism agents have been advocated in the past but are 
generally worthless. Anecdotal reports of benefit from mirtazapine 
were not confirmed in a double-blind study, which found no 
effect on the tremor in most patients. Small quantities of alcohol 
may suppress essential tremor for a short time but should not be 
recommended as a treatment strategy because of possible behav-
ioral and other complications of alcohol. 
 Intention tremor is present during movement but not at rest; 
sometimes it occurs as a toxic manifestation of alcohol or drugs 
such as phenytoin. Withdrawal or reduction in dosage provides 
dramatic relief. There is no satisfactory pharmacologic treatment 
for intention tremor due to other neurologic disorders. 
 Rest tremor is usually due to parkinsonism. 
 Huntington’s Disease 
 Huntington’s disease is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder 
caused by an abnormality (expansion of a CAG trinucleotide 
repeat that codes for a polyglutamine tract) of the  huntingtin gene 
on chromosome 4. An autosomal recessive form may also occur. 
Huntington disease–like (HDL) disorders are not associated with 
an abnormal CAG trinucleotide repeat number of the  huntingtin 
gene. Autosomal dominant ( HDL1 , 20pter-p12;  HDL2 , 16q24.3) 
and recessive forms ( HDL3 , 4p15.3) occur. 
 Huntington’s disease is characterized by progressive chorea and 
dementia that usually begin in adulthood. The development of 
chorea seems to be related to an imbalance of dopamine, acetyl-
choline, GABA, and perhaps other neurotransmitters in the basal 
ganglia ( Figure 28–6 ). Pharmacologic studies indicate that chorea 
results from functional overactivity in dopaminergic nigrostriatal 
pathways, perhaps because of increased responsiveness of post-
synaptic dopamine receptors or deficiency of a neurotransmitter 
that normally antagonizes dopamine. Drugs that impair dopamin-
ergic neurotransmission, either by depleting central monoamines 
(eg, reserpine, tetrabenazine) or by blocking dopamine receptors 
(eg, phenothiazines, butyrophenones), often alleviate chorea, 
whereas dopamine-like drugs such as levodopa tend to exacerbate 
it. 
 Both GABA and the enzyme (glutamic acid decarboxylase) 
concerned with its synthesis are markedly reduced in the basal 
ganglia of patients with Huntington’s disease, and GABA recep-
tors are usually implicated in inhibitory pathways. There is also a 
significant decline in concentration of choline acetyltransferase, 
the enzyme responsible for synthesizing acetylcholine, in the basal 
ganglia of these patients. These findings may be of pathophysio-
logic significance and have led to attempts to alleviate chorea by 
enhancing central GABA or acetylcholine activity, but with disap-
pointing results. As a consequence, the most commonly used 
drugs for controlling dyskinesia in patients with Huntington’s 
disease are still those that interfere with dopamine activity. With 
all the latter drugs, however, reduction of abnormal movements 
may be associated with iatrogenic parkinsonism. 
 Reserpine depletes cerebral dopamine by preventing intraneu-
ronal storage (see  Chapter 6 ); it is introduced in low doses 
(eg, 0.25 mg daily), and the daily dose is then built up gradually 
(eg, by 0.25 mg every week) until benefit occurs or adverse effects 
become troublesome. A daily dose of 2–5 mg is often effective in 
suppressing abnormal movements, but adverse effects may include 
hypotension, depression, sedation, diarrhea, and nasal congestion. 
 Tetrabenazine (12.5–50 mg orally three times daily) resembles 
reserpine in depleting cerebral dopamine and has less troublesome 
adverse effects. Treatment with postsynaptic dopamine receptor 
blockers such as phenothiazines and butyrophenones may also be 
Substantia
nigra
Corpus
striatum
Dopamine
Acetyl-
choline
GABA
Normal
Huntington’s disease
 FIGURE 28–6  Schematic representation of the sequence of 
neurons involved in Huntington’s chorea.  Top: Dopaminergic 
neurons (red) originating in the substantia nigra normally inhibit the 
GABAergic output from the striatum, whereas cholinergic neurons 
(green) exert an excitatory effect.  Bottom: In Huntington’s chorea, 
some cholinergic neurons may be lost, but even more GABAergic 
neurons (black) degenerate. 
CHAPTER 28 Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders    495
helpful.  Haloperidol is started in a small dose, eg, 1 mg twice daily, 
and increased every 4 days depending on the response. If haloperi-
dol is not helpful, treatment with increasing doses of  perphenazine 
up to a total of about 20 mg daily sometimes helps. Several recent 
reports suggest that  olanzapine may also be useful; the dose varies 
with the patient, but 10 mg daily is often sufficient, although doses 
as high as 30 mg daily are sometimes required. The pharmacoki-
netics and clinical properties of these drugs are considered in 
greater detail elsewhere in this book. Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors may reduce depression, aggression, and agitation. 
 Other Forms of Chorea 
 Benign hereditary chorea is inherited (usually autosomal domi-
nant; possibly also autosomal recessive) or arises spontaneously. 
Chorea develops in early childhood and does not progress during 
adult life; dementia does not occur. In patients with  TITF-1 gene 
mutations, thyroid and pulmonary abnormalities may also be pres-
ent (brain-thyroid-lung syndrome). Familial chorea may also occur 
as part of the chorea-acanthocytosis syndrome, together with oro-
lingual tics, vocalizations, cognitive changes, seizures, peripheral 
neuropathy, and muscle atrophy; serum β-lipoproteins are normal. 
Mutations of the gene encoding chorein at 9q21 may be causal. 
Treatment of these hereditary disorders is symptomatic. 
 Treatment is directed at the underlying cause when chorea 
occurs as a complication of general medical disorders such as thy-
rotoxicosis, polycythemia vera rubra, systemic lupus erythemato-
sus, hypocalcemia, and hepatic cirrhosis. Drug-induced chorea is 
managed by withdrawal of the offending substance, which may be 
levodopa, an antimuscarinic drug, amphetamine, lithium, pheny-
toin, or an oral contraceptive. Neuroleptic drugs may also produce 
an acute or tardive dyskinesia (discussed below). Sydenham’s cho-
rea is temporary and usually so mild that pharmacologic manage-
ment of the dyskinesia is unnecessary, but dopamine-blocking 
drugs are effective in suppressing it. 
 Ballismus 
 The biochemical basis of ballismus is unknown, but the pharma-
cologic approach to management is the same as for chorea. 
Treatment with haloperidol, perphenazine, or other dopamine-
blocking drugs may be helpful. 
 Athetosis & Dystonia 
 The pharmacologic basis of these disorders is unknown, and there 
is no satisfactory medical treatment for them. A subset of patients 
respond well to levodopa medication (dopa-responsive dystonia), 
which is therefore worthy of trial. Occasional patients with dysto-
nia may respond to diazepam, amantadine, antimuscarinic drugs 
(in high dosage), carbamazepine, baclofen, haloperidol, or phe-
nothiazines. A trial of these pharmacologic approaches is worth-
while, though often not successful. Patients with focal dystonias 
such as blepharospasm or torticollis often benefit from injection 
of botulinum toxin into the overactive muscles. Deep brain stimu-
lation may be helpful in medically intractable cases. 
 Tics 
 The pathophysiologic basis of tics is unknown. Chronic multiple 
tics ( Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome ) may require symptomatic 
treatment if the disorder is severe or is having a significant impact 
on the patient’s life. Education of patients, family, and teachers is 
important. 
 A common pharmacologic approach is with  haloperidol . 
Patients are better able to tolerate this drug if treatment is started 
with a small dosage (eg, 0.25 or 0.5 mg daily) and then increased 
gradually (eg, by 0.25 mg every 4 or 5 days) over the following 
weeks depending on response and tolerance. Most patients ulti-
mately require a total daily dose of 3–8 mg. Adverse effects include 
extrapyramidal movement disorders, sedation, dryness of the 
mouth, blurred vision, and gastrointestinal disturbances. 
 Pimozide , another dopamine receptor antagonist, may be helpful 
in patients as a first-line treatment or in those who are either unre-
sponsive to or intolerant of haloperidol. Treatment is started at 
1 mg/d, and the dosage is increased by 1 mg every 5 days; most 
patients require 7–16 mg/d. It has similar side effects to haloperi-
dol but may cause irregularities of cardiac rhythm. 
 Although not approved by the FDA for the treatment of tics or 
Tourette’s syndrome, certain α-adrenergic agonists may be pre-
ferred as an initial treatment because they are less likely to cause 
extrapyramidal side effects than neuroleptics agents.  Clonidine 
reduces motor or vocal tics in about 50% of children so treated. It 
may act by reducing activity in noradrenergic neurons in the locus 
caeruleus. It is introduced at a dose of 2–3 mcg/kg/d, increasing 
after 2 weeks to 4 mcg/kg/d and then, if required, to 5 mcg/kg/d. 
It may cause an initial transient fall in blood pressure. The most 
common adverse effect is sedation; other adverse effects include 
reduced or excessive salivation and diarrhea. Guanfacine, another 
α-adrenergic agonist, has also been used. 
 Phenothiazines such as fluphenazine sometimes help the tics, 
as do dopamine agonists. Atypical antipsychotics, such as risperi-
done and aripiprazole, have a more favorable side-effect profile 
and may be especially worthwhile in patients with significant 
behavioral problems. Clonazepam and carbamazepine have also 
been used. The pharmacologic properties of these drugs are dis-
cussed elsewhere in this book. 
 Injection of botulinum toxin A at the site of problematic tics is 
sometimes helpful. Treatment of any associated attention deficit 
disorder (eg, with clonidine patch, guanfacine, pemoline, meth-
ylphenidate, or dextroamphetamine) or obsessive-compulsive dis-
order (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or clomipramine) 
may be required. Deep brain stimulation is sometimes worthwhile 
in otherwise intractable cases but is best regarded as an investiga-
tional approach at this time. 
 Drug-Induced Dyskinesias 
 Levodopa or dopamine agonists produce diverse dyskinesias as a 
dose-related phenomenon in patients with Parkinson’s disease; 
dose reduction reverses them. Chorea may also develop in patients 
receiving phenytoin, carbamazepine, amphetamines, lithium, and 
oral contraceptives, and it resolves with discontinuance of the 
offending medication. Dystonia has resulted from administration 
496    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
of dopaminergic agents, lithium, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
carbamazepine, and metoclopramide; and postural tremor from 
theophylline, caffeine, lithium, valproic acid, thyroid hormone, 
tricyclic antidepressants, and isoproterenol. 
 The pharmacologic basis of the acute dyskinesia or dystonia 
sometimes precipitated by the first few doses of a phenothiazine is 
not clear. In most instances, parenteral administration of an anti-
muscarinic drug such as benztropine (2 mg intravenously), 
diphenhydramine (50 mg intravenously), or biperiden (2–5 mg 
intravenously or intramuscularly) is helpful, whereas in other 
instances diazepam (10 mg intravenously) alleviates the abnormal 
movements. 
 Tardive dyskinesia, a disorder characterized by a variety of 
abnormal movements, is a common complication of long-term 
neuroleptic or metoclopramide drug treatment (see  Chapter 29 ). Its 
precise pharmacologic basis is unclear. A reduction in dose of the 
offending medication, a dopamine receptor blocker, commonly 
worsens the dyskinesia, whereas an increase in dose may suppress it. 
The drugs most likely to provide immediate symptomatic benefit 
are those interfering with dopaminergic function, either by deple-
tion (eg, reserpine, tetrabenazine) or receptor blockade (eg, phe-
nothiazines, butyrophenones). Paradoxically, the receptor-blocking 
drugs are the very ones that also cause the dyskinesia. 
 Tardive dystonia is usually segmental or focal; generalized 
dystonia is less common and occurs in younger patients. 
Treatment is the same as for tardive dyskinesia, but anticholin-
ergic drugs may also be helpful; focal dystonias may also respond 
to local injection of botulinum A toxin.  Tardive akathisia is 
treated similarly to drug-induced parkinsonism.  Rabbit syn-
drome, another neuroleptic-induced disorder, is manifested by 
rhythmic vertical movements about the mouth; it may respond to 
anticholinergic drugs. 
 Because the tardive syndromes that develop in adults are 
often irreversible and have no satisfactory treatment, care must 
be taken to reduce the likelihood of their occurrence. 
Antipsychotic medication should be prescribed only when neces-
sary and should be withheld periodically to assess the need for 
continued treatment and to unmask incipient dyskinesia. 
Thioridazine, a phenothiazine with a piperidine side chain, is an 
effective antipsychotic agent that seems less likely than most to 
cause extrapyramidal reactions, perhaps because it has little 
effect on dopamine receptors in the striatal system. Finally, anti-
muscarinic drugs should not be prescribed routinely in patients 
receiving neuroleptics, because the combination may increase 
the likelihood of dyskinesia. 
 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, a rare complication of treat-
ment with neuroleptics, is characterized by rigidity, fever, changes in 
mental status, and autonomic dysfunction (see  Table 16–4 ). 
Symptoms typically develop over 1–3 days (rather than minutes to 
hours as in malignant hyperthermia) and may occur at any time 
during treatment. Treatment includes withdrawal of antipsychotic 
drugs, lithium, and anticholinergics; reduction of body tempera-
ture; and rehydration. Dantrolene, dopamine agonists, levodopa, or 
amantadine may be helpful, but there is a high mortality rate (up to 
20%) with neuroleptic malignant syndrome. 
 Restless Legs Syndrome 
 Restless legs syndrome is characterized by an unpleasant creeping 
discomfort that seems to arise deep within the legs and occasion-
ally the arms. Symptoms occur particularly when patients are 
relaxed, especially when they are lying down or sitting, and they 
lead to an urge to move about. Such symptoms may delay the 
onset of sleep. A sleep disorder associated with periodic move-
ments during sleep may also occur. The cause is unknown, but the 
disorder is especially common among pregnant women and also 
among uremic or diabetic patients with neuropathy. In most 
patients, no obvious predisposing cause is found, but several 
genetic loci have been associated with it (12q12-q21, 14q13-q31, 
9p24-p22, 2q33, and 20p13). 
 Symptoms may resolve with correction of coexisting iron-
deficiency anemia and often respond to dopamine agonists, 
levodopa, diazepam, clonazepam, gabapentin, or opiates. 
Dopaminergic therapy is the preferred treatment for restless legs 
syndrome and should be initiated with long-acting dopamine 
agonists (eg,  pramipexole 0.125–0.75 mg or  ropinirole 0.25–4.0 
mg once daily) to avoid the augmentation that may be associated 
with levodopa-carbidopa (100/25 or 200/50 taken about 1 hour 
before bedtime). Augmentation refers to the earlier onset or 
enhancement of symptoms; earlier onset of symptoms at rest; and 
a briefer response to medication. When augmentation occurs with 
levodopa, the daily dose should be reduced or a dopamine agonist 
substituted. If it occurs in patients receiving an agonist, the daily 
dose should be lowered or divided, or opioids substituted. When 
opiates are required, those with long half-lives or low addictive 
potential should be used. Oxycodone is often effective; the dose is 
individualized. Gabapentin is an alternative to opioids and is 
taken once or twice daily (in the evening and before sleep); the 
starting dose is 300 mg daily, building up depending on response 
and tolerance (to approximately 1800 mg daily). A recent study 
suggests that pregabalin, a related drug, is also effective at a daily 
total dosage of 150–300 mg, taken in divided doses. 
 Wilson’s Disease 
 A recessively inherited (13q14.3–q21.1) disorder of copper 
metabolism, Wilson’s disease is characterized biochemically by 
reduced serum copper and ceruloplasmin concentrations, patho-
logically by markedly increased concentration of copper in the 
brain and viscera, and clinically by signs of hepatic and neurologic 
dysfunction. Neurologic signs include tremor, choreiform move-
ments, rigidity, hypokinesia, and dysarthria and dysphagia. 
Siblings of affected patients should be screened for asymptomatic 
Wilson’s disease. 
 Treatment involves the removal of excess copper, followed by 
maintenance of copper balance. Dietary copper should also be 
kept below 2 mg daily.  Penicillamine (dimethylcysteine) has been 
used for many years as the primary agent to remove copper. It is a 
chelating agent that forms a ring complex with copper. It is readily 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and rapidly excreted in the 
urine. A common starting dose in adults is 500 mg three or four 
times daily. After remission occurs, it may be possible to lower the 
CHAPTER 28 Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders    497
maintenance dose, generally to not less than 1 g daily, which must 
thereafter be continued indefinitely. Adverse effects include nausea 
and vomiting, nephrotic syndrome, a lupus-like syndrome, pem-
phigus, myasthenia, arthropathy, optic neuropathy, and various 
blood dyscrasias. In about 10% of instances, neurologic worsening 
occurs with penicillamine. Treatment should be monitored by 
frequent urinalysis and complete blood counts. 
 Trientine hydrochloride, another chelating agent, is preferred by 
many over penicillamine because of the lesser likelihood of drug reac-
tions or neurologic worsening. It may be used in a daily dose of 
1–1.5 g. Trientine appears to have few adverse effects other than mild 
anemia due to iron deficiency in a few patients.  Tetrathiomolybdate 
may be better than trientine for preserving neurologic function in 
patients with neurologic involvement and is taken both with and 
between meals. It is not yet commercially available. 
 Zinc acetate administered orally increases the fecal excretion of 
copper and can be used in combination with these other agents. 
The dose is 50 mg three times a day. Zinc sulfate (200 mg/d 
orally) has also been used to decrease copper absorption. Zinc 
blocks copper absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by induc-
tion of intestinal cell metallothionein. Its main advantage is its low 
toxicity compared with that of other anticopper agents, although 
it may cause gastric irritation when introduced. 
 Liver transplantation is sometimes necessary. The role of 
hepatocyte transplantation and gene therapy is currently under 
investigation. 
SUMMARY Drugs Used for Movement Disorders
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, Interactions
LEVODOPA AND COMBINATIONS
 • Levodopa
Transported into the 
central nervous system 
(CNS) and converted to 
dopamine (which does 
not enter the CNS); also 
converted to dopamine 
in the periphery
Ameliorates all 
symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease 
and causes significant 
peripheral 
dopaminergic effects 
(see text)
Parkinson’s disease: Most 
efficacious therapy but not 
always used as the first drug 
due to development of 
disabling response 
fluctuations over time
Oral • ~ 6–8 h effect • Toxicity: Gastrointestinal upset, 
arrhythmias, dyskinesias, on-off and wearing-off 
phenomena, behavioral disturbances • Interactions: Use 
with carbidopa greatly diminishes required dosage • 
use with COMT or MAO-B inhibitors prolongs duration 
of effect
 •  Levodopa + carbidopa (Sinemet, others): Carbidopa inhibits peripheral metabolism of levodopa to dopamine and reduces required dosage and toxicity; carbidopa does 
not enter CNS
 •  Levodopa + carbidopa + entacapone (Stalevo): Entacapone is a catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor (see below)
DOPAMINE AGONISTS
 • Pramipexole
Direct agonist at D3 
receptors, nonergot
Reduces symptoms of 
parkinsonism
• smooths out 
fluctuations in 
levodopa response
Parkinson’s disease: Can be 
used as initial therapy • also 
effective in on-off 
phenomenon
Oral • ~ 8 h effect • Toxicity: Nausea and vomiting, 
postural hypotension, dyskinesias, confusion, impulse 
control disorders, sleepiness
 •  Ropinirole: Similar to pramipexole; nonergot; relatively pure D2 agonist
 •  Bromocriptine: Ergot derivative; potent agonist at D2 receptors; more toxic than pramipexole or ropinirole; now rarely used for antiparkinsonian effect
 • Apomorphine: Nonergot; subcutaneous route useful for rescue treatment in levodopa-induced dyskinesia; high incidence of nausea and vomiting
MONOAMINE OXIDASE (MAO) INHIBITORS
 • Rasagiline
Inhibits MAO-B 
selectively; higher doses 
also inhibit MAO-A
Increases dopamine 
stores in neurons; may 
have neuroprotective 
effects
Parkinson’s disease: 
Adjunctive to levodopa
• smooths levodopa response
Oral • Toxicity & interactions: May cause serotonin 
syndrome with meperidine, and theoretically also with 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic 
antidepressants
 • Selegiline: Like rasagiline, adjunctive use with levodopa; may be less potent than rasagiline
COMT INHIBITORS
 • Entacapone
Inhibits COMT in periph-
ery • does not enter CNS
Reduces metabolism 
of levodopa and 
prolongs its action
Parkinson’s disease
Oral • Toxicity: Increased levodopa toxicity • nausea, 
dyskinesias, confusion
 • Tolcapone: Like entacapone but enters CNS; some evidence of hepatotoxicity, elevation of liver enzymes
(continued)
498    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Amantadine (Symmetrel, others)
Oral: 100 mg capsules; 10 mg/mL syrup
Apomorphine (Apokyn)
Subcutaneous injection titration kit: 10 mg/mL
Benztropine (Cogentin, others)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for injection
Biperiden (Akineton)
Oral: 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Bromocriptine (Parlodel)
Oral: 2.5 mg tablets; 5 mg capsules
Carbidopa (Lodosyn)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Carbidopa/levodopa (Sinemet, others)
Oral: 10 mg carbidopa and 100 mg levodopa, 25 mg carbidopa and 
100 mg levodopa, 25 mg carbidopa and 250 mg levodopa tablets
Oral extended-release (Sinemet CR, others): 25 mg carbidopa and 
100 mg levodopa; 50 mg carbidopa and 200 mg levodopa
Carbidopa/levodopa/entacapone (Stalevo)
Oral: 12.5 mg carbidopa, 50 mg levodopa, 200 mg entacapone; 
18.75 mg carbidopa, 75 mg levodopa, 200 mg entacapone; 25 mg 
carbidopa, 100 mg levodopa, 200 mg entacapone; 31.25 mg carbi-
dopa, 125 mg levodopa, 200 mg entacapone; 37.5 mg carbidopa, 
150 mg levodopa, 200 mg entacapone; 50 mg carbidopa, 200 mg 
levodopa, 200 mg entacapone
Entacapone (Comtan)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Levodopa (Dopar, others)
Oral: 100, 250, 500 mg tablets, capsules
Orphenadrine (various)
Oral: 100 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release: 100 mg tablets
Parenteral: 30 mg/mL for injection
Penicillamine (Cuprimine, Depen)
Oral: 125, 250 mg capsules; 250 mg tablets
Pergolide (Permax, other)1
Oral: 0.05, 0.25, 1 mg tablets
Pramipexole (Mirapex)
Oral: 0.125, 0.25, 0.75, 1, 1.5 mg tablets; 0.375, 0.75, 1.5, 3.0, 4.5 mg 
extended-release tablets
Procyclidine (Kemadrin)
Oral: 5 mg tablets
Rasagiline (Azilect)
Oral: 0.5, 1 mg tablets
Ropinirole (Requip, Requip XL)
Oral: 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 mg tablets; 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 mg extended-release 
tablets
Selegiline (deprenyl) (generic, Eldepryl)
Oral: 5 mg tablets, capsules; 6, 9, 12 mg transdermal patch
Tetrabenazine (Xenazine)
Oral: 12.5, 25 mg tablets
Tolcapone (Tasmar)
Oral: 100, 200 mg tablets
Trientine (Syprine)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Trihexyphenidyl (Artane, others)
Oral: 2, 5 mg tablets; 2 mg/5 mL elixir
Oral sustained-release (Artane Sequels): 5 mg capsules
1 Not available in the USA.
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, Interactions
ANTIMUSCARINIC AGENTS
 • Benztropine
Antagonist at M recep-
tors in basal ganglia
Reduces tremor and 
rigidity • little effect 
on bradykinesia
Parkinson’s disease
Oral • Toxicity: Typical antimuscarinic effects— sedation, 
mydriasis, urinary retention, constipation, confusion, dry 
mouth
 • Biperiden, orphenadrine, procyclidine, trihexyphenidyl: Similar antimuscarinic agents with CNS effects
DRUGS USED IN HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE
 •  Tetrabenazine, 
reserpine
Deplete amine transmit-
ters, especially dopamine, 
from nerve endings
Reduce chorea 
severity
Huntington’s disease • other 
applications, see Chapter 11
Oral • Toxicity: Hypotension, sedation, depression, 
diarrhea • tetrabenazine somewhat less toxic
 • Haloperidol, other neuroleptics: Sometimes helpful
DRUGS USED IN TOURETTE’S SYNDROME
 •  Haloperidol, 
pimozide
Block central D2 recep-
tors
Reduce vocal and 
motor tic frequency, 
severity
Tourette’s syndrome • other 
applications, see Chapter 29
Oral • Toxicity: Parkinsonism, other dyskinesias • 
sedation • blurred vision • dry mouth • gastrointestinal 
disturbances • pimozide may cause cardiac rhythm 
disturbances
 • Clonidine: Effective in ~ 50% of patients; see Chapter 11 for basic pharmacology
 • Phenothiazines, benzodiazepines, carbamazepine: Sometimes of value
CHAPTER 28 Pharmacologic Management of Parkinsonism & Other Movement Disorders    499
 REFERENCES 
 Allain H et al: Disease-modifying drugs and Parkinson’s disease. Prog Neurobiol 
2008;84:25. 
 Aminoff MJ: Treatment should not be initiated too soon in Parkinson’s disease. 
Ann Neurol 2006;59:562. 
 Angot E et al: Are synucleinopathies prion-like disorders? Lancet Neurol 
2010;9:1128. 
 Antonini A et al: Role of pramipexole in the management of Parkinson’s disease. 
CNS Drugs 2010;24:829. 
 Baldwin CM, Keating GM: Rotigotine transdermal patch: A review of its use in 
the management of Parkinson’s disease. CNS Drugs 2007;21:1039. 
 Bestha DP et al: Management of tics and Tourette’s disorder: An update. Expert 
Opin Pharmacother 2010;11:1813. 
 Bhidayasiri R, Tarsy D: Treatment of dystonia. Expert Rev Neurother 
2006;6:863. 
 Brewer GJ: The use of copper-lowering therapy with tetrathiomolybdate in 
medicine. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2009;18:89. 
 Bronstein JM et al: Deep brain stimulation for Parkinson disease: An expert 
consensus and review of key issues. Arch Neurol 2010;68:165. 
 Christine CW et al: Safety and tolerability of putaminal AADC gene therapy for 
Parkinson disease. Neurology 2009;73:1662. 
 Cummings J, Winblad B: A rivastigmine patch for the treatment of Alzheimer’s 
disease and Parkinson’s disease dementia. Expert Rev Neurother 
2007;7:1457. 
 Deng H et al: Genetics of essential tremor. Brain 2007;130:1456. 
 Earley CJ et al: Restless legs syndrome and periodic leg movements in sleep. Handb 
Clin Neurol 2011;99:913. 
 Follett KA et al: Pallidal versus subthalamic deep-brain stimulation for Parkinson’s 
disease. N Engl J Med 2010;362:2077. 
 Frank S: Tetrabenazine as anti-chorea therapy in Huntington disease: An 
open-label continuation study. Huntington Study Group/TETRA-HD 
Investigators. BMC Neurol 2009;9:62. 
 Frank S, Jankovic J: Advances in the pharmacological management of Huntington’s 
disease. Drugs 2010;70:561. 
 Garcia-Borreguero D et al: Augmentation as a treatment complication of restless 
legs syndrome: Concept and management. Mov Disord 2007;22
(Suppl 18):S476. 
 Garcia-Borreguero D et al: Treatment of restless legs syndrome with pregabalin: A 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Neurology 2010;74:1897. 
 Gasser T: Update on the genetics of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2007;22
(Suppl 17):S343. 
 Haq IU et al: Apomorphine therapy in Parkinson’s disease: A review. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother 2007;8:2799. 
 Hauser RA et al: Double-blind trial of levodopa/carbidopa/entacapone versus 
levodopa/carbidopa in early Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2009;24:541. 
 Huster D: Wilson disease. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2010;24:531. 
 Jankovic J: Treatment of dystonia. Lancet Neurol 2006;5:864. 
 Jankovic J, Stacy M: Medical management of levodopa-associated motor complica-
tions in patients with Parkinson’s disease. CNS Drugs 2007;21:677. 
 Kenney C et al: Long-term tolerability of tetrabenazine in the treatment of hyper-
kinetic movement disorders. Mov Disord 2007;22:193. 
 Kimber TE: An update on Tourette syndrome. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 
2010;10:286. 
 Kordower JH et al: Transplanted dopaminergic neurons develop PD pathologic 
changes: A second case report. Mov Disord 2008;23:2303. 
 Lavenstein BL: Treatment approaches for children with Tourette’s syndrome. Curr 
Neurol Neurosci Rep 2003;3:143. 
 LeWitt PA et al: AAV2-GAD gene therapy for advanced Parkinson’s disease: a 
double-blind, sham-surgery controlled, randomised trial. Lancet Neurol 
2011;10:309. 
 Lorenz D, Deuschl G: Update on pathogenesis and treatment of essential tremor. 
Curr Opin Neurol 2007;20:447. 
 Lorincz MT: Neurologic Wilson’s disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010;1184:173. 
 Maciunas RJ et al: Prospective randomized double-blind trial of bilateral thalamic 
deep brain stimulation in adults with Tourette syndrome. J Neurosurg 
2007;107:1004. 
 Mak CM, Lam CW: Diagnosis of Wilson’s disease: A comprehensive review. Crit 
Rev Clin Lab Sci 2008;45:263. 
 Marks WJ Jr et al: Gene delivery of AAV2-neurturin for Parkinson’s disease: A 
double-blind, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 2010;9:1164. 
 Mink JW et al: Patient selection and assessment recommendations for deep brain 
stimulation in Tourette syndrome. Mov Disord 2006;21:1831. 
 Nakamura K, Aminoff MJ. Huntington’s disease: Clinical characteristics, patho-
genesis and therapies. Drugs Today (Barc) 2007;43:97. 
 Oertel WH et al: State of the art in restless legs syndrome therapy: Practice recom-
mendations for treating restless legs syndrome. Mov Disord 
2007;22(Suppl 18):S466. 
 Olanow CW et al: A double-blind, delayed-start trial of rasagiline in Parkinson’s 
disease. N Engl J Med 2009;361:1268. 
 Olanow CW et al: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, delayed start 
study to assess rasagiline as a disease modifying therapy in Parkinson’s disease 
(the ADAGIO study): Rationale, design, and baseline characteristics. Mov 
Disord 2008;23:2194. 
 Pahwa R et al: Ropinirole 24-hour prolonged release: Randomized, controlled 
study in advanced Parkinson disease. Neurology 2007;68:1108. 
 Perlmutter JS, Mink JW: Deep brain stimulation. Annu Rev Neurosci 
2006;29:229. 
 Potenza MN et al: Drug insight: Impulse control disorders and dopamine therapies 
in Parkinson’s disease. Nat Clin Pract Neurol 2007;3:664. 
 Sadeghi R, Ondo WG: Pharmacological management of essential tremor. Drugs 
2010;70:2215. 
 Schapira AH: Treatment options in the modern management of Parkinson disease. 
Arch Neurol 2007;64:1083. 
 Schilsky ML: Wilson disease: Current status and the future. Biochimie 
2009;91:1278. 
 Schwartz M, Hocherman S: Antipsychotic-induced rabbit syndrome: Epidemiology, 
management and pathophysiology. CNS Drugs 2004;18:213. 
 Seeberger LC, Hauser RA: Levodopa/carbidopa/entacapone in Parkinson’s disease. 
Expert Rev Neurother 2009;9:929. 
 Servello D et al: Deep brain stimulation in 18 patients with severe Gilles de la 
Tourette syndrome refractory to treatment: The surgery and stimulation. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2008;79:136. 
 Singer HS: Treatment of tics and Tourette syndrome. Curr Treat Options Neurol 
2010;12:539. 
 Soares-Weiser KV, Joy C: Miscellaneous treatments for neuroleptic-induced tardive 
dyskinesia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;(2):CD000208. 
 Stocchi F et al: Initiating levodopa/carbidopa therapy with and without entaca-
pone in early Parkinson disease: The STRIDE-PD study. Ann Neurol 
2010;68:18. 
 Suchowersky O et al. Practice parameter: Neuroprotective strategies and alternative 
therapies for Parkinson disease (an evidence-based review). Report of the 
Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. 
Neurology 2006;66:976. 
 Taylor RM et al: Triethylene tetramine dihydrochloride (trientine) in children with 
Wilson disease: Experience at King’s College Hospital and review of the lit-
erature. Eur J Pediatr 2009;168:1061. 
 Trenkwalder C, Paulus W: Restless legs syndrome: Pathophysiology, clinical pre-
sentation and management. Nat Rev Neurol 2010;6:337. 
 Weaver FM et al: Bilateral deep brain stimulation vs best medical therapy for 
patients with advanced Parkinson disease: A randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA 2009;301:63. 
 Weintraub D et al: Impulse control disorders in Parkinson disease: A cross-sectional 
study of 3090 patients. Arch Neurol 2010;67:589. 
 Welter ML et al: Internal pallidal and thalamic stimulation in patients with 
Tourette syndrome. Arch Neurol 2008; 65:952. 
 Wiggelinkhuizen M et al: Systematic review: Clinical efficacy of chelator agents 
and zinc in the initial treatment of Wilson disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2009;29:947. 
 Zesiewicz TA et al: Practice parameter: Therapies for essential tremor: Report of 
the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. 
Neurology 2005;64:2008.  
500    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The relation of the tremor to activity (rest tremor) in this case 
is characteristic of parkinsonism. Examination reveals the 
classic findings of Parkinson’s disease—rest tremor, rigidity, 
bradykinesia, and a gait disturbance; an asymmetry of the 
abnormalities is common in Parkinson’s disease. The prog-
nosis is that symptoms will become more generalized with 
time. Pharmacologic treatment would involve a dopamine 
agonist (pramipexole or ropinirole) but may not need to be 
started now unless the patient is disturbed by his symptoms. 
Although the evidence is incomplete, rasagiline may slow 
disease progression and could also be introduced.
501
 Antipsychotic 
Agents & Lithium 
C A S E  S T U D Y
 ■ ANTIPSYCHOTIC AGENTS 
 Antipsychotic drugs are able to reduce psychotic symptoms in a 
wide variety of conditions, including schizophrenia, bipolar disor-
der, psychotic depression, senile psychoses, various organic psy-
choses, and drug-induced psychoses. They are also able to improve 
mood and reduce anxiety and sleep disturbances, but they are not 
the treatment of choice when these symptoms are the primary 
disturbance in nonpsychotic patients. A  neuroleptic is a subtype 
of antipsychotic drug that produces a high incidence of extrapyra-
midal side effects (EPS) at clinically effective doses, or catalepsy in 
laboratory animals. The  “atypical” antipsychotic drugs, are now 
the most widely used type of antipsychotic drug. 
 History 
 Reserpine and chlorpromazine were the first drugs found to be 
useful to reduce psychotic symptoms in schizophrenia. 
Reserpine was used only briefly for this purpose and is no 
longer of interest as an antipsychotic agent. Chlorpromazine is 
a neuroleptic agent; that is, it produces catalepsy in rodents 
and EPS in humans. The discovery that its antipsychotic 
action was related to dopamine (D or DA)-receptor blockade 
led to the identification of other compounds as antipsychotics 
between the 1950s and 1970s. The discovery of clozapine in 
1959 led to the realization that antipsychotic drugs need not 
cause EPS in humans at clinically effective doses. Clozapine 
was called an atypical antipsychotic drug because of this dis-
sociation; it produces fewer EPS at equivalent antipsychotic 
doses in man and laboratory animals. As a result, there has 
been a major shift in clinical practice away from typical anti-
psychotic drugs towards the use of an ever increasing number 
of atypical drugs, which have other advantages as well. The 
introduction of antipsychotic drugs led to massive changes in 
disease management, including brief instead of life-long hos-
pitalizations. These drugs have also proved to be of great value 
in studying the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and other 
psychoses. It should be noted that schizophrenia and bipolar 
disorder are no longer believed by many to be separate disor-
ders but rather to be part of a continuum of brain disorders 
with psychotic features. 
29
 A 17-year-old male high school student is referred to the psy-
chiatry clinic for evaluation of suspected schizophrenia. After a 
diagnosis is made, haloperidol is prescribed at a gradually 
increasing dose on an outpatient basis. The drug improves the 
patient’s positive symptoms but ultimately causes intolerable 
side effects. Although more costly, risperidone is then pre-
scribed, which, over the course of several weeks of treatment, 
improves his symptoms and is tolerated by the patient. What 
signs and symptoms would support an initial diagnosis of 
schizophrenia? In the treatment of schizophrenia, what benefits 
do the atypical antipsychotic drugs offer over the traditional 
agents such as haloperidol? In addition to the management of 
schizophrenia, what other clinical indications warrant consider-
ation of the use of drugs nominally classified as antipsychotics? 
 ∗ The author acknowledges the contributions of the previous author of 
this chapter, William Z. Potter, MD, PhD.
 .
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Herbert Meltzer, MD, PhD∗ 
502    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Nature of Psychosis & Schizophrenia 
 The term “psychosis” denotes a variety of mental disorders: the 
presence of delusions (false beliefs), various types of hallucina-
tions, usually auditory or visual, but sometimes tactile or olfactory, 
and grossly disorganized thinking in a clear sensorium. 
Schizophrenia is a particular kind of psychosis characterized 
mainly by a clear sensorium but a marked thinking disturbance. 
Psychosis is not unique to schizophrenia and is not present in all 
patients with schizophrenia at all times. 
 Schizophrenia is considered to be a neurodevelopmental disor-
der. This implies that structural and functional changes in the 
brain are present even in utero in some patients, or that they 
develop during childhood and adolescence, or both. Twin, adop-
tion, and family studies have established that schizophrenia is a 
genetic disorder with high heritability. No single gene is involved. 
Current theories involve multiple genes with common and rare 
mutations, including large deletions and insertions (copy number 
variations), combining to produce a very variegated clinical pre-
sentation and course. 
 THE SEROTONIN HYPOTHESIS OF 
SCHIZOPHRENIA 
 The discovery that indole hallucinogens such as LSD (lysergic acid 
diethylamide) and mescaline are serotonin (5-HT) agonists led to 
the search for endogenous hallucinogens in the urine, blood, and 
brains of patients with schizophrenia. This proved fruitless, but 
the identification of many 5-HT-receptor subtypes led to the piv-
otal discovery that 5-HT 2A -receptor and possibly 5-HT2C stimula-
tion was the basis for the hallucinatory effects of these agents. 
 It has been found that 5-HT 2A -receptor blockade is a key 
factor in the mechanism of action of the main class of atypical 
antipsychotic drugs, of which clozapine is the prototype, and 
includes, in order of their introduction around the world, 
melperone, risperidone, zotepine, blonanseine olanzapine, 
quetiapine, ziprasidone, aripiprazole, sertindole, paliperidone, 
iloperidone, asenapine, and lurasidone. These drugs are  inverse 
agonists of the 5-HT 2A receptor; that is, they block the consti-
tutive activity of these receptors. These receptors modulate the 
release of dopamine, norepinephrine, glutamate, GABA and 
acetylcholine, among other neurotransmiters in the cortex, 
limbic region, and striatum. Stimulation of 5-HT 2A receptors 
leads to depolarization of glutamate neurons, but also stabiliza-
tion of  N -methyl- D -aspartate (NMDA) receptors on postsyn-
aptic neurons. Recently, it has been found that hallucinogens 
can modulate the stability of a complex consisting of 5-HT 2A 
and NMDA receptors. 
 5-HT 2C -receptor stimulation provides a further means of 
modulating cortical and limbic dopaminergic activity. Stimulation 
of 5-HT2C receptors leads to inhibition of cortical and limbic dop-
amine release. Many atypical antipsychotic drugs, eg, clozapine, 
asenapine, olanzapine are 5-HT2C inverse agonists. 5-HT 2C agonists 
are currently being studied as antipsychotic agents. 
 THE DOPAMINE HYPOTHESIS OF 
SCHIZOPHRENIA 
 The dopamine hypothesis for schizophrenia was the second 
neurotransmitter-based concept to be developed but is no longer 
considered adequate to explain all aspects of schizophrenia, 
especially the cognitive impairment. Nevertheless, it is still highly 
relevant to understanding the major dimensions of schizophrenia, 
such as positive and negative symptoms (emotional blunting, 
social withdrawal, lack of motivation), cognitive impairment, and 
possibly depression. It is also essential to understanding the 
mechanisms of action of most and probably all antipsychotic 
drugs. 
 Several lines of evidence suggest that excessive limbic dop-
aminergic activity plays a role in psychosis. (1) Many antipsy-
chotic drugs strongly block postsynaptic D 2 receptors in the 
central nervous system, especially in the mesolimbic and 
striatal-frontal system; this includes partial dopamine agonists, 
such as aripiprazole and bifeprunox. (2) Drugs that increase 
dopaminergic activity, such as levodopa, amphetamines, and 
bromocriptine and apomorphine, either aggravate schizophre-
nia psychosis or produce psychosis de novo in some patients. 
(3) Dopamine-receptor density has been found postmortem to 
be increased in the brains of schizophrenics who have not been 
treated with antipsychotic drugs. (4) Some but not all post-
mortem studies of schizophrenic subjects have reported 
increased dopamine levels and D 2 -receptor density in the 
nucleus accumbens, caudate, and putamen. (5) Imaging studies 
have shown increased amphetamine-induced striatal dopamine 
release, increased baseline occupancy of striatal D 2 receptors by 
extracellular dopamine, and other measures consistent with 
increased striatal dopamine synthesis and release. 
 However, the dopamine hypothesis is far from a complete 
explanation of all aspects of schizophrenia.  Diminished cortical 
or hippocampal dopaminergic activity has been suggested to 
underlie the cognitive impairment and negative symptoms of 
schizophrenia. Postmortem and in vivo imaging studies of cor-
tical, limbic, nigral, and striatal dopaminergic neurotransmis-
sion in schizophrenic subjects have reported findings consistent 
with diminished dopaminergic activity in these regions. 
Decreased dopaminergic innervation in medial temporal cor-
tex, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and hippocampus, and 
decreased levels of DOPAC, a metabolite of dopamine, in the 
anterior cingulate have been reported in postmortem studies. 
Imaging studies have found increased prefrontal D 1 -receptor 
levels that correlated with working memory impairments. 
 The fact that several of the atypical antipsychotic drugs have 
much less effect on D 2 receptors and yet are effective in schizo-
phrenia has redirected attention to the role of other dopamine 
receptors and to nondopamine receptors. Serotonin receptors—
particularly the 5-HT 2A -receptor subtype—may mediate synergis-
tic effects or protect against the extrapyramidal consequences of 
D 2 antagonism. As a result of these considerations, the direction 
of research has changed to a greater focus on compounds that may 
act on several transmitter-receptor systems, eg, serotonin and 
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    503
glutamate. The atypical antipsychotic drugs share the property of 
weak D 2 -receptor antagonism and more potent 5-HT 2A -receptor 
blockade. 
 THE GLUTAMATE HYPOTHESIS OF 
SCHIZOPHRENIA 
 Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain 
(see  Chapter 21 ). Phencyclidine and ketamine are noncompetitive 
inhibitors of the NMDA receptor that exacerbate both cogni-
tive impairment and psychosis in patients with schizophrenia. 
PCP and a related drug, MK-801, increase locomotor activity 
and, acutely or chronically, a variety of cognitive impairments 
in rodents and primates. These effects are widely employed as a 
means to develop novel antipsychotic and cognitive-enhancing 
drugs. Selective 5-HT2A antagonists, as well as atypical antipsy-
chotic drugs, are much more potent than D2 antagonists in 
blocking these effects of PCP and MK-801. This was the starting 
point for the hypothesis that hypofunction of NMDA receptors, 
located on GABAergic interneurons, leading to diminished 
inhibitory influences on neuronal function, contributed to 
schizophrenia. The diminished GABAergic activity can induce 
disinhibition of downstream glutamatergic activity, which can 
lead to hyperstimulation of cortical neurons through non-
NMDA receptors. Preliminary evidence suggests that 
LY2140023, a drug that acts as an agonist of the metabotropic 
2/3 glutamate receptor (mGLuR2/3), may be effective in 
schizophrenia. 
 The NMDA receptor, an ion channel, requires glycine for full 
activation. It has been suggested that in patients with schizophre-
nia, the glycine site of the NMDA receptor is not fully saturated. 
There have been several trials of high doses of glycine to promote 
glutamatergic activity, but the results are far from convincing. 
Currently, glycine transport inhibitors are in development as pos-
sible antipsychotic agents. 
 Ampakines are drugs that potentiate currents mediated by 
AMPA-type glutamate receptors. In behavioral tests, ampakines 
are effective in correcting behaviors in various animal models of 
schizophrenia and depression. They protect neurons against neu-
rotoxic insults, in part by mobilizing growth factors such as brain-
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF, see also Chapter 30). 
 BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTIPSYCHOTIC AGENTS 
 Chemical Types 
 A number of chemical structures have been associated with antip-
sychotic properties. The drugs can be classified into several groups 
as shown in  Figures 29–1 and  29–2 . 
CH2
CH2
CH2
N
N
CH2
CH2
OH
Fluphenazine
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
OH
Perphenazine
CH2
CH2
CH2
Trifluoperazine
(10)
(2) 
(10)
(2)
(10)
(2)
Thioridazine
(2)
(10)
CH2
CH2
N
CH3
Chlorpromazine (2)
(10)
CH2
CH2
N
(CH3)2
Aliphatic side chain
N
S
(2)
(7)
C
S
(2)
(9)
Substituting C for N
in the nucleus
Thiothixene
(9)
N
N
CH3
Thioxanthene derivative
Phenothiazine derivatives
Phenothiazine
nucleus
Butyrophenone
F
C
O
CH2
CH2
CH2
N
OH
Cl
CH3
N
N
N
N
Haloperidol
(2)
(10)
CH2
SCH3
Cl
CH
CH2
CH2
SO2N(CH3)2
Piperazine side chain
CF3
CI
CF3
 FIGURE 29–1  Structural formulas of some older antipsychotic drugs: phenothiazines, thioxanthenes, and butyrophenones. Only represen-
tative members of each type are shown. 
504    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 A. Phenothiazine Derivatives 
 Three subfamilies of phenothiazines, based primarily on the 
side chain of the molecule, were once the most widely used of 
the antipsychotic agents. Aliphatic derivatives (eg,  chlorprom-
azine ) and piperidine derivatives (eg,  thioridazine ) are the 
least potent. These drugs produce more sedation and weight 
gain. Piperazine derivatives are more potent (effective in lower 
doses) but not necessarily more efficacious. Perphenazine, a 
piperazine derivative, was the typical antipsychotic drug used 
in the CATIE study described in the following text. The 
piperazine derivatives are also more selective in their pharma-
cologic effects ( Table 29–1 ). 
 Recently, a large study in the USA (CATIE) reported that per-
phenazine was as effective as atypical antipsychotic drugs, with the 
modest exception of olanzapine, and concluded that typical 
antipsychotic drugs are the treatment of choice for schizophrenia 
based on their lower cost. However, there were numerous flaws in 
the design, execution and analysis of this study, leading to it having 
only modest impact on clinical practice. In particular, it failed to 
consider issues such as dosage of olanzapine, inclusion of treatment 
 FIGURE 29–2  Structural formulas of some newer antipsychotic drugs. 
Cl
Loxapine
O
N
N
N
N
N
N
O
N
N
H
CI
CH3
CH2CH3
CI
O
O
CH2
CH3
F
CH
CH2
CH2
N
NH
N
N
O
CH2
F
Molindone
O
F
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
Pimozide
Clozapine
N
N
N
N
H
CH3
N
N
CH3
Olanzapine
N
N
H
S
Risperidone
N
N
S
Quetiapine
CH2
CH2OH
CH2
CH2
O
N
N
S
N
N
H
O
Ziprasidone
N
Aripiprazole
CI
CI
O
CH2(CH2)2CH2O
N
N
N
H
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    505
TABLE 29–1 Antipsychotic drugs: Relation of chemical structure to potency and toxicities.
Chemical Class
Drug
D2/5-HT2A Ratio1
Clinical 
Potency
Extrapyramidal 
Toxicity
Sedative 
Action
Hypotensive 
Actions
Phenothiazines
 Aliphatic
Chlorpromazine
High
Low
Medium
High
High
 Piperazine
Fluphenazine
High
High
High
Low
Very low
Thioxanthene
Thiothixene
Very high
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Butyrophenone
Haloperidol
Medium
High
Very high
Low
Very low
Dibenzodiazepine
Clozapine
Very low
Medium
Very low
Low
Medium
Benzisoxazole
Risperidone
Very low
High
Low
2
Low
Low
Thienobenzodiazepine
Olanzapine
Low
High
Very low
Medium
Low
Dibenzothiazepine
Quetiapine
Low
Low
Very low
Medium
Low to medium
Dihydroindolone
Ziprasidone
Low
Medium
Very low
Low
Very low
Dihydrocarbostyril
Aripiprazole
Medium
High
Very low
Very low
Low
1Ratio of affinity for D2 receptors to affinity for 5-HT2A receptors.
2At dosages below 8 mg/d.
resistant patients, encouragement of patients to switch medica-
tions inherent in the design, risk for tardive dyskinesia following 
long term use of even low dose typical antipsychotics, and the 
necessity of large sample sizes in equivalency studies.  
 B. Thioxanthene Derivatives 
 This group of drugs is exemplified primarily by thiothixene. 
 C. Butyrophenone Derivatives 
 This group, of which  haloperidol is the most widely used, has a 
very different structure from those of the two preceding groups. 
Haloperidol, a butyrophenone, is the most widely used typical 
antipsychotic drug, despite its high level of EPS relative to typical 
antipsychotic drugs. Diphenylbutylpiperidines are closely related 
compounds. The butyrophenones and congeners tend to be more 
potent and to have fewer autonomic effects but greater extrapyra-
midal effects than phenothiazines ( Table 29–1 ). 
 D. Miscellaneous Structures 
 Pimozide and molindone are typical antipsychotic drugs. There is 
no significant difference in efficacy between these newer typical 
and the older typical antipsychotic drugs. 
 E. Atypical Antipsychotic Drugs 
 Clozapine, asenapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, paliperidone, 
risperidone, sertindole, ziprasidone, zotepine, and aripipra-
zole are atypical antipsychotic drugs ( Figure 29–2 ). Clozapine is 
the prototype. Paliperidone is 9-hydroxyrisperidone, the active 
metabolite of risperidone. Risperidone is rapidly converted to 
9-hydroxyrisperidone in vivo in most patients, except for about 
10% of patients who are poor metabolizers. Sertindole is approved 
in some European countries but not in the USA. 
 These drugs have complex pharmacology but they share a 
greater ability to alter 5-HT 2A -receptor activity than to interfere 
with D 2 -receptor action. In most cases, they act as partial agonists 
at the 5-HT1A receptor, which produces synegistic effects with 
5-HT2A receptor antagonism. Most are either 5-HT6 or 5-HT7 
receptor antagonists. 
 Sulpride and sulpiride constitute another class of atypical 
agents. They have equivalent potency for D 2 and D 3 receptors, but 
they are also 5-HT 7 antagonists. They dissociate EPS and antipsy-
chotic efficacy. However, they also produce marked increases in 
serum prolactin levels and are not as free of the risk of tardive 
dyskinesia as are drugs such as clozapine and quetiapine. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Absorption and Distribution 
 Most antipsychotic drugs are readily but incompletely absorbed. 
Furthermore, many undergo significant first-pass metabolism. 
Thus, oral doses of chlorpromazine and thioridazine have sys-
temic availability of 25–35%, whereas haloperidol, which has 
less first-pass metabolism, has an average systemic availability 
of about 65%. 
 Most antipsychotic drugs are highly lipid soluble and protein 
bound (92–99%). They tend to have large volumes of distribu-
tion (usually more than 7 L/kg). They generally have a much 
longer clinical duration of action than would be estimated from 
their plasma half-lives. This is paralleled by prolonged occu-
pancy of D 2 dopamine receptors in the brain by the typical 
antipsychotic drugs. 
 Metabolites of chlorpromazine may be excreted in the urine 
weeks after the last dose of chronically administered drug. Long-
acting injectable formulations may cause some blockade of D 2 
receptors 3–6 months after the last injection. Time to recurrence 
of psychotic symptoms is highly variable after discontinuation of 
antipsychotic drugs. The average time for relapse in stable patients 
with schizophrenia who discontinue their medication is 6 months. 
Clozapine is an exception in that relapse after discontinuation is 
usually rapid and severe. Thus, clozapine should never be discon-
tinued abruptly unless clinically needed because of adverse effects 
506    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
such as myocarditis or agranulocytosis, which are true medical 
emergencies. 
 B. Metabolism 
 Most antipsychotic drugs are almost completely metabolized by 
oxidation or demethylation, catalyzed by liver microsomal cyto-
chrome P450 enzymes. CYP2D6, CYP1A2, and CYP3A4 are 
the major isoforms involved (see  Chapter 4 ). Drug-drug interac-
tions should be considered when combining antipsychotic drugs 
with various other psychotropic drugs or drugs—such as 
ketoconazole—that inhibit various cytochrome P450 enzymes. 
At the typical clinical doses, antipsychotic drugs do not usually 
interfere with the metabolism of other drugs. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The first phenothiazine antipsychotic drugs, with chlorpromazine 
as the prototype, proved to have a wide variety of central nervous 
system, autonomic, and endocrine effects. Although efficacy of 
these drugs is primarily driven by D 2 -receptor blockade, their 
adverse actions were traced to blocking effects at a wide range of 
receptors including α adrenoceptors and muscarinic, H 1 hista-
minic, and 5-HT 2 receptors. 
 A. Dopaminergic Systems 
 Five dopaminergic systems or pathways are important for under-
standing schizophrenia and the mechanism of action of antipsy-
chotic drugs. The first pathway—the one most closely related to 
behavior and psychosis—is the  mesolimbic-mesocortical pathway, 
which projects from cell bodies in the ventral tegmentum in 
separate bundles of axons to the limbic system and neocortex. 
The second system—the  nigrostriatal pathway—consists of 
neurons that project from the substantia nigra to the dorsal 
striatum, which includes the caudate and putamen; it is involved 
in the coordination of voluntary movement. Blockade of the D 2 
receptors in the nigrostriatal pathway is responsible for EPS. The 
third pathway—the  tuberoinfundibular system—arises in the 
arcuate nuclei and periventricular neurons and releases dop-
amine into the pituitary portal circulation. Dopamine released 
by these neurons physiologically inhibits prolactin secretion 
from the anterior pituitary. The fourth dopaminergic system—
the  medullary-periventricular pathway—consists of neurons in 
the motor nucleus of the vagus whose projections are not well 
defined. This system may be involved in eating behavior. The 
fifth pathway—the  incertohypothalamic pathway—forms con-
nections from the medial zona incerta to the hypothalamus and 
the amygdala. It appears to regulate the anticipatory motiva-
tional phase of copulatory behavior in rats. 
 After dopamine was identified as a neurotransmitter in 1959, it 
was shown that its effects on electrical activity in central synapses 
and on production of the second messenger cAMP synthesized by 
adenylyl cyclase could be blocked by antipsychotic drugs such as 
chlorpromazine, haloperidol, and thiothixene. This evidence led 
to the conclusion in the early 1960s that these drugs should be 
considered  dopamine-receptor antagonists and was a key factor 
in the development of dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia 
described earlier in this chapter. The antipsychotic action is now 
thought to be produced (at least in part) by their ability to block 
the effect of dopamine to inhibit the activity of adenylyl cyclase in 
the mesolimbic system. 
 B. Dopamine Receptors and Their Effects 
 At present, five dopamine receptors have been described, con-
sisting of two separate families, the D 1 -like and D 2 -like receptor 
groups. The D 1 receptor is coded by a gene on chromosome 5, 
increases cAMP by G s -coupled activation of adenylyl cyclase, 
and is located mainly in the putamen, nucleus accumbens, and 
olfactory tubercle and cortex. The other member of this family, 
D 5 , is coded by a gene on chromosome 4, also increases cAMP, 
and is found in the hippocampus and hypothalamus. The thera-
peutic potency of antipsychotic drugs does not correlate with 
their affinity for binding to the D 1 receptor ( Figure 29–3 , top) 
 FIGURE 29–3  Correlations between the therapeutic potency 
of antipsychotic drugs and their affinity for binding to dopamine 
D 1 ( top ) or D 2 receptors ( bottom ). Potency is indicated on the hori-
zontal axes; it decreases to the right. Binding affinity for D 1 recep-
tors was measured by displacing the selective D 1 ligand SCH 
23390; affinity for D 2 receptors was similarly measured by displac-
ing the selective D 2 ligand haloperidol. Binding affinity decreases 
upward. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Seeman P: 
Dopamine receptors and the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia. Synapse 
1987;1:133.) 
Clebopride
Molindone
Sulpiride
Haloperidol
Chlorpromazine
Clozapine
Thioridazine
Fluphenazine
Flupenthixol
Trifluperazine
Spiperone
10–5
10–7
10–6
10–8
10–7
10–9
10–8
10–10
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Range and average clinical dose for 
controlling schizophrenia (mg/d–1)
Promazine
Chlorpromazine
Trazodone
Clozapine
Thioridazine
Molindone
Prochlorperazine
Moperone
Trifluperazine
Thiothixene
Haloperidol
Droperidol
Fluphenazine
Pimozide
Trifluperidol
Benperidol
Spiroperidol
D1
D2
K (mol/L) on 3H-SCH 23390 binding
IC50 (mol/L) on 3H-haloperidol binding
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    507
nor did a selective D 1 antagonist prove to be an effective antip-
sychotic in patients with schizophrenia. The D 2 receptor is 
coded on chromosome 11, decreases cAMP (by G i -coupled 
inhibition of adenylyl cyclase), and inhibits calcium channels 
but opens potassium channels. It is found both pre- and post-
synaptically on neurons in the caudate-putamen, nucleus 
accumbens, and olfactory tubercle. A second member of this 
family, the D 3 receptor, also coded by a gene on chromosome 
11, is thought to also decrease cAMP and is located in the fron-
tal cortex, medulla, and midbrain. D 4 receptors also decrease 
cAMP and are concentrated in the cortex. 
 The typical antipsychotic agents block D 2 receptors stereoselec-
tively for the most part, and their binding affinity is very strongly 
correlated with clinical antipsychotic and extrapyramidal potency 
( Figure 29–3 , bottom). In vivo imaging studies of D 2 -receptor 
occupancy indicate that for antipsychotic efficacy, the typical anti-
psychotic drugs must be given in sufficient doses to achieve at least 
60% occupancy of striatal D 2 receptors. This is not required for the 
atypical antipsychotic drugs such as clozapine and olanzapine, 
which are effective at lower occupancy levels of 30–50%, most likely 
because of their concurrent high occupancy of 5-HT 2A receptors. 
The typical antipsychotic drugs produce EPS when the occupancy 
of striatal D 2 receptors reaches 80% or higher. 
 Positron emission tomography (PET) studies with aripiprazole 
show very high occupancy of D 2 receptors, but this drug does not 
cause EPS because it is a partial D 2 -receptor agonist. Aripiprazole 
also gains therapeutic efficacy through its 5-HT 2A antagonism and 
possibly 5-HT 1A partial agonism. 
 These findings have been incorporated into the dopamine 
hypothesis of schizophrenia. However, additional factors complicate 
interpretation of dopamine receptor data. For example, dopamine 
receptors exist in both high- and low-affinity forms, and it is not 
known whether schizophrenia or the antipsychotic drugs alter the 
proportions of receptors in these two forms. 
 Ît has not been convincingly demonstrated that antagonism 
of any dopamine receptor other than the D 2 receptor plays a role 
in the action of antipsychotic drugs. Selective and relatively spe-
cific D1, D 3 -, and D 4 -receptor antagonists have been tested 
repeatedly with no evidence of antipsychotic action. Most of the 
newer atypical antipsychotic agents and some of the traditional 
ones have a higher affinity for the 5-HT 2A receptor than for the 
D 2 receptor ( Table 29–1 ), suggesting an important role for the 
serotonin 5-HT system in the etiology of schizophrenia and the 
action of these drugs. 
 C. Differences among Antipsychotic Drugs 
 Although all effective antipsychotic drugs block D 2 receptors, 
the degree of this blockade in relation to other actions on 
receptors varies considerably among drugs. Vast numbers of 
ligand-receptor binding experiments have been performed in 
an effort to discover a single receptor action that would best 
predict antipsychotic efficacy. A summary of the relative 
receptor-binding affinities of several key agents in such com-
parisons illustrates the difficulty in drawing simple conclusions 
from such experiments: 
 Chlorpromazine: α 1 = 5-HT 2A > D 2 > D 1 
 Haloperidol: D 2 > α 1 > D 4 > 5-HT 2A > D 1 > H 1 
 Clozapine: D 4 = α 1 > 5-HT 2A > D 2 = D 1 
 Olanzapine: 5-HT 2A > H 1 > D 4 > D 2 > α 1 > D 1 
 Aripiprazole: D 2 = 5-HT 2A > D 4 > α 1 = H 1 >> D 1 
 Quetiapine: H 1 > α 1 > M 1,3 > D 2 > 5-HT 2A 
 Thus, most of the atypical and some typical antipsychotic 
agents are at least as potent in inhibiting 5-HT 2 receptors as they 
are in inhibiting D 2 receptors. The newest, aripiprazole, appears to 
be a partial agonist of D 2 receptors. Varying degrees of antagonism 
of α 2 adrenoceptors are also seen with risperidone, clozapine, 
olanzapine, quetiapine, and aripiprazole. 
 Current research is directed toward discovering atypical 
antipsychotic compounds that are either more selective for the 
mesolimbic system (to reduce their effects on the extrapyrami-
dal system) or have effects on central neurotransmitter 
receptors—such as those for acetylcholine and excitatory 
amino acids—that have been proposed as new targets for anti-
psychotic action. 
 In contrast to the difficult search for receptors responsible for 
antipsychotic  efficacy , the differences in receptor effects of various 
antipsychotics do explain many of their  toxicities ( Tables 29–1 and 
 29–2 ). In particular, extrapyramidal toxicity appears to be consis-
tently associated with high D 2 potency. 
 D. Psychological Effects 
 Most antipsychotic drugs cause unpleasant subjective effects in 
nonpsychotic individuals. The mild to severe EPS, including 
akathisia, sleepiness, restlessness, and autonomic effects are unlike 
any associated with more familiar sedatives or hypnotics. 
TABLE 29–2  Adverse pharmacologic effects of 
antipsychotic drugs.
Type
Manifestations
Mechanism
Autonomic nervous 
system
Loss of 
accommodation, dry 
mouth, difficulty uri-
nating, constipation
Muscarinic 
cholinoceptor 
blockade
Orthostatic hypoten-
sion, impotence, fail-
ure to ejaculate
α-Adrenoceptor 
blockade
Central nervous 
system
Parkinson’s syn-
drome, akathisia, 
dystonias
Dopamine-receptor 
blockade
Tardive dyskinesia
Supersensitivity of 
dopamine receptors
Toxic-confusional 
state
Muscarinic blockade
Endocrine system
Amenorrhea-
galactorrhea, 
infertility, impotence
Dopamine-receptor 
blockade resulting in 
hyperprolactinemia
Other
Weight gain
Possibly combined H1 
and 5-HT2 blockade
508    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
Nevertheless, low doses of some of these drugs, particularly que-
tiapine, are used to promote sleep onset and maintenance, 
although there is no approved indication for such usage. 
 People without psychiatric illness given antipsychotic drugs, 
even at low doses, experience impaired performance as judged 
by a number of psychomotor and psychometric tests. Psychotic 
individuals, however, may actually show improvement in their 
performance as the psychosis is alleviated. The ability of the 
atypical antipsychotic drugs to improve some domains of cog-
nition in patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder is 
controversial. Some individuals experience marked improve-
ment, and for that reason, cognition should be assessed in all 
patients with schizophrenia and a trial of an atypical agent 
considered, even if positive symptoms are well controlled by 
typical agents. 
 E. Electroencephalographic Effects 
 Antipsychotic drugs produce shifts in the pattern of electroencepha-
lographic (EEG) frequencies, usually slowing them and increasing 
their synchronization. The slowing (hypersynchrony) is sometimes 
focal or unilateral, which may lead to erroneous diagnostic interpre-
tations. Both the frequency and the amplitude changes induced by 
psychotropic drugs are readily apparent and can be quantitated by 
sophisticated electrophysiologic techniques. Some of the neurolep-
tic agents lower the seizure threshold and induce EEG patterns 
typical of seizure disorders; however, with careful dosage titration, 
most can be used safely in epileptic patients. 
 F. Endocrine Effects 
 Older typical antipsychotic drugs, as well as risperidone and pali-
peridone, produce elevations of prolactin, see Adverse Effects, 
below. Newer antipsychotics such as olanzapine, quetiapine, and 
aripiprazole cause no or minimal increases of prolactin and 
reduced risks of extrapyramidal system dysfunction and tardive 
dyskinesia, reflecting their  diminished D 2 antagonism. 
 G. Cardiovascular Effects 
 The low-potency phenothiazines frequently cause orthostatic 
hypotension and tachycardia. Mean arterial pressure, periph-
eral resistance, and stroke volume are decreased. These effects 
are predictable from the autonomic actions of these agents 
( Table 29–2 ). Abnormal electrocardiograms have been recorded, 
especially with thioridazine. Changes include prolongation of 
QT interval and abnormal configurations of the ST segment 
and T waves. These changes are readily reversed by withdraw-
ing the drug. Thioridazine, however, is  not associated with 
increased risk of torsades more than other typical antipsychot-
ics, whereas haloperidol, which does not increase QT c , is. 
 Among the newest atypical antipsychotics, prolongation of the 
QT or QT c interval has received much attention. Because this was 
believed to indicate an increased risk of dangerous arrhythmias, 
approval of sertindole has been delayed and ziprasidone and que-
tiapine are accompanied by warnings. There is, however, no evi-
dence that this has actually translated into increased incidence of 
arrhythmias. 
 H. Animal Screening Tests 
 Inhibition of conditioned (but not unconditioned) avoidance 
behavior is one of the most predictive tests of antipsychotic action. 
Another is the inhibition of amphetamine- or apomorphine-induced 
stereotyped behavior. Other tests that may predict antipsychotic 
action are reduction of exploratory behavior without undue 
sedation, induction of a cataleptic state, inhibition of intracranial 
self-stimulation of reward areas, and prevention of apomorphine-
induced vomiting. Most of these tests are difficult to relate to any 
model of clinical psychosis. 
 The psychosis produced by phencyclidine (PCP) has been used 
as a model for schizophrenia. Because this drug is an antagonist of 
the NMDA glutamate receptor, attempts have been made to 
develop antipsychotic drugs that work as NMDA agonists. Sigma 
receptor and cholecystokinin type b (CCK b ) antagonism have also 
been suggested as potential targets. Thus far, NMDA receptor-
based models have pointed to agents that modulate glutamate 
release as potential antipsychotics. 5-HT 2A inverse agonists such as 
pimavanserin, ritanserin, and M100907 are potent inhibitors of 
PCP-induced locomotor activity, whereas D 2 antagonists are rela-
tively weak in comparison. Thus, atypical antipsychotic drugs that 
act as 5-HT 2A antagonists appear much more potent than typical 
antipsychotic drugs in PCP models. 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTIPSYCHOTIC AGENTS 
 Indications 
 A. Psychiatric Indications 
 Schizophrenia is the primary indication for antipsychotic agents. 
Antipsychotic drugs are also used very extensively in patients with 
psychotic bipolar disorder (BP1), psychotic depression, and 
treatment-resistant depression. 
 Catatonic forms of schizophrenia are best managed by intrave-
nous benzodiazepines. Antipsychotic drugs may be needed to treat 
psychotic components of that form of the illness after catatonia 
has ended, and they remain the mainstay of treatment for this 
condition. Unfortunately, many patients show little response, and 
virtually none show a complete response. 
 Antipsychotic drugs are also indicated for  schizoaffective 
disorders, which share characteristics of both schizophrenia and 
affective disorders. No fundamental difference between these 
two diagnoses has been reliably demonstrated. It is most likely 
that they are part of a continuum with bipolar psychotic disor-
der. The psychotic aspects of the illness require treatment with 
antipsychotic drugs, which may be used with other drugs such as 
antidepressants, lithium, or valproic acid. The manic phase in 
 bipolar affective disorder often requires treatment with anti-
psychotic agents, although lithium or valproic acid supple-
mented with high-potency benzodiazepines (eg, lorazepam or 
clonazepam) may suffice in milder cases. Recent controlled trials 
support the efficacy of monotherapy with atypical antipsychotics 
in the acute phase (up to 4 weeks) of mania. Aripiprazole, olanzapine, 
quetiapine,  risperidone and ziprasidone  have been approved for 
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    509
treatment of various phases of bipolar disorder. They are most 
effective for the manic phase and for maintenance treatment.  
 As mania subsides, the antipsychotic drug may be withdrawn, 
although maintenance treatment with atypical antipsychotic 
agents has become more common. Nonmanic excited states may 
also be managed by antipsychotics, often in combination with 
benzodiazepines. 
 Other indications for the use of antipsychotics include  Tourette’s 
syndrome, disturbed behavior in patients with  Alzheimer’s disease, 
and, with antidepressants,  psychotic depression. Antipsychotics are 
not indicated for the treatment of various withdrawal syndromes, eg, 
opioid withdrawal. In small doses, antipsychotic drugs have been 
promoted (wrongly) for the relief of anxiety associated with minor 
emotional disorders. The antianxiety sedatives (see  Chapter 22 ) are 
preferred in terms of both safety and acceptability to patients. 
 B. Nonpsychiatric Indications 
 Most older typical antipsychotic drugs, with the exception of thi-
oridazine, have a strong  antiemetic effect. This action is due to 
dopamine-receptor blockade, both centrally (in the chemorecep-
tor trigger zone of the medulla) and peripherally (on receptors in 
the stomach). Some drugs, such as prochlorperazine and benz-
quinamide, are promoted solely as antiemetics. 
 Phenothiazines with shorter side chains have considerable  H 1 -
 receptor-blocking action and have been used for relief of pruritus 
or, in the case of promethazine, as preoperative sedatives. The 
butyrophenone droperidol is used in combination with an opioid, 
fentanyl, in  neuroleptanesthesia. The use of these drugs in anes-
thesia practice is described in  Chapter 25 . 
 Drug Choice 
 Choice among antipsychotic drugs is based mainly on differences 
in adverse effects and possible differences in efficacy. Since use of 
the older drugs is still widespread, especially for patients treated in 
the public sector, knowledge of such agents as chlorpromazine and 
haloperidol remains relevant. Thus, one should be familiar with 
one member of each of the three subfamilies of phenothiazines, a 
member of the thioxanthene and butyrophenone group, and all of 
the newer compounds—clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, que-
tiapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole. Each may have special 
benefits for selected patients. A representative group of antipsy-
chotic drugs is presented in  Table 29–3 . 
TABLE 29–3 Some representative antipsychotic drugs.
Drug Class
Drug
Advantages
Disadvantages
Phenothiazines
 Aliphatic
Chlorpromazine
1
Generic, inexpensive
Many adverse effects, especially 
autonomic
 Piperidine
Thioridazine
2
Slight extrapyramidal syndrome; generic
800 mg/d limit; no parenteral form; 
cardiotoxicity
 Piperazine
Fluphenazine
3
Depot form also available (enanthate, decanoate)
(?) Increased tardive dyskinesia
Thioxanthene
Thiothixene
Parenteral form also available; (?) decreased tardive 
dyskinesia
Uncertain
Butyrophenone
Haloperidol
Parenteral form also available; generic
Severe extrapyramidal syndrome
Dibenzoxazepine
Loxapine
(?) No weight gain
Uncertain
Dibenzodiazepine
Clozapine
May benefit treatment-resistant patients; little 
extrapyramidal toxicity
May cause agranulocytosis in up to 2% 
of patients; dose-related lowering of 
seizure threshold
Benzisoxazole
Risperidone
Broad efficacy; little or no extrapyramidal system 
dysfunction at low doses
Extrapyramidal system dysfunction and 
hypotension with higher doses
Thienobenzodiazepine
Olanzapine
Effective against negative as well as positive 
symptoms; little or no extrapyramidal system 
dysfunction
Weight gain; dose-related lowering of 
seizure threshold
Dibenzothiazepine
Quetiapine
Similar to olanzapine; perhaps less weight gain
May require high doses if there is 
associated hypotension; short t1/2 and 
twice-daily dosing
Dihydroindolone
Ziprasidone
Perhaps less weight gain than clozapine, parenteral 
form available
QTc prolongation
Dihydrocarbostyril
Aripiprazole
Lower weight gain liability, long half-life, novel 
mechanism potential
Uncertain, novel toxicities possible
1Other aliphatic phenothiazines: promazine, triflupromazine.
2Other piperidine phenothiazines: piperacetazine, mesoridazine.
3Other piperazine phenothiazines: acetophenazine, perphenazine, carphenazine, prochlorperazine, trifluoperazine.
510    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 For approximately 70% of patients with schizophrenia, and 
probably for a similar proportion of patients with bipolar disorder 
with psychotic features, typical and atypical antipsychotic drugs 
are of equal efficacy for treating positive symptoms. However, the 
evidence favors atypical drugs for benefit for negative symptoms 
and cognition, for diminished risk of tardive dyskinesia and other 
forms of EPS, and for lesser increases in prolactin levels. 
 Some of the atypical antipsychotic drugs produce more weight 
gain and increases in lipids than some typical antipsychotic drugs. A 
small percentage of patients develop diabetes mellitus, most often 
seen with clozapine and olanzapine. Ziprasidone is the atypical drug 
causing the least weight gain. Risperidone, paliperidone, and aripip-
razole usually produce small increases in weight and lipids. 
Asenapine and quetiapine have an intermediate effect. Clozapine 
and olanzapine frequently result in large increases in weight and 
lipids. Thus, these drugs should be considered as second-line drugs 
unless there is a specific indication. That is the case with clozapine, 
which at high doses (300–900 mg/d) is effective in the majority of 
patients with schizophrenia refractory to other drugs, provided that 
treatment is continued for up to 6 months. Case reports and several 
clinical trials suggest that high-dose olanzapine, ie, doses of 30–45 
mg/d, may also be efficacious in refractory schizophrenia when 
given over a 6-month period. Clozapine is the only atypical anti-
psychotic drug indicated to reduce the risk of suicide. All patients 
with schizophrenia who have made life-threatening suicide attempts 
should be seriously evaluated for switching to clozapine. 
 New antipsychotic drugs have been shown in some trials to be 
more effective than older ones for treating negative symptoms. 
The floridly psychotic form of the illness accompanied by uncon-
trollable behavior probably responds equally well to all potent 
antipsychotics but is still frequently treated with older drugs that 
offer intramuscular formulations for acute and chronic treat-
ment. Moreover, the low cost of the older drugs contributes to 
their widespread use despite their risk of adverse EPS effects. 
Several of the newer antipsychotics, including clozapine, risperi-
done, and olanzapine, show superiority over haloperidol in terms 
of overall response in some controlled trials. More comparative 
studies with aripiprazole are needed to evaluate its relative effi-
cacy. Moreover, the superior adverse-effect profile of the newer 
agents and low to absent risk of tardive dyskinesia suggest that 
these should provide the first line of treatment. 
 The best guide for selecting a drug for an individual patient 
is the patient’s past responses to drugs. At present, clozapine is 
limited to those patients who have failed to respond to substan-
tial doses of conventional antipsychotic drugs. The agranulocy-
tosis and seizures associated with this drug prevent more 
widespread use. Risperidone’s superior side-effect profile (com-
pared with that of haloperidol) at dosages of 6 mg/d or less and 
the lower risk of tardive dyskinesia have contributed to its wide-
spread use. Olanzapine and quetiapine may have even lower risk 
and have also achieved widespread use. 
 Dosage 
 The range of effective dosages among various antipsychotic agents 
is broad. Therapeutic margins are substantial. At appropriate 
dosages, antipsychotics—with the exception of clozapine and per-
haps olanzapine—are of equal efficacy in broadly selected groups 
of patients. However, some patients who fail to respond to one 
drug may respond to another; for this reason, several drugs may 
have to be tried to find the one most effective for an individual 
patient. Patients who have become refractory to two or three 
antipsychotic agents given in substantial doses become candidates 
for treatment with clozapine or high-dose olanzapine. Thirty to 
fifty percent of patients previously refractory to standard doses of 
other antipsychotic drugs respond to these drugs. In such cases, 
the increased risk of clozapine can well be justified. 
 Some dosage relationships between various antipsychotic drugs, 
as well as possible therapeutic ranges, are shown in  Table 29–4 . 
 Parenteral Preparations 
 Well-tolerated parenteral forms of the high-potency older drugs 
haloperidol and fluphenazine are available for rapid initiation of 
treatment as well as for maintenance treatment in noncompliant 
patients. Since the parenterally administered drugs may have much 
greater bioavailability than the oral forms, doses should be only a 
fraction of what might be given orally, and the manufacturer’s lit-
erature should be consulted. Fluphenazine decanoate and haloperi-
dol decanoate are suitable for long-term parenteral maintenance 
therapy in patients who cannot or will not take oral medication. 
 Dosage Schedules 
 Antipsychotic drugs are often given in divided daily doses, titrat-
ing to an effective dosage. The low end of the dosage range in 
 Table 29–4 should be tried for at least several weeks. After an 
TABLE 29–4 Dose relationships of antipsychotics.
Minimum Effective 
Therapeutic Dose 
(mg)
Usual Range of 
Daily Doses (mg)
Chlorpromazine
100
100–1000
Thioridazine
100
100–800
Trifluoperazine
5
5–60
Perphenazine
10
8–64
Fluphenazine
2
2–60
Thiothixene
2
2–120
Haloperidol
2
2–60
Loxapine
10
20–160
Molindone
10
20–200
Clozapine
50
300–600
Olanzapine
5
10–30
Quetiapine
150
150–800
Risperidone
4
4–16
Ziprasidone
40
80–160
Aripiprazole
10
10–30
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    511
effective daily dosage has been defined for an individual patient, 
doses can be given less frequently. Once-daily doses, usually given 
at night, are feasible for many patients during chronic mainte-
nance treatment. Simplification of dosage schedules leads to better 
compliance. 
 Maintenance Treatment 
 A very small minority of schizophrenic patients may recover from 
an acute episode and require no further drug therapy for pro-
longed periods. In most cases, the choice is between “as needed” 
increased doses or the addition of other drugs for exacerbations 
versus continual maintenance treatment with full therapeutic dos-
age. The choice depends on social factors such as the availability 
of family or friends familiar with the symptoms of early relapse 
and ready access to care. 
 Drug Combinations 
 Combining antipsychotic drugs confounds evaluation of the 
efficacy of the drugs being used. Use of combinations, how-
ever, is widespread, with more emerging experimental data 
supporting such practices. Tricyclic antidepressants or, more 
often, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are often 
used with antipsychotic agents for symptoms of depression 
complicating schizophrenia. The evidence for the usefulness of 
this polypharmacy is minimal. Electroconvulsive therapy 
(ECT) is a useful adjunct for antipsychotic drugs, not only for 
treating mood symptoms, but for positive symptom control as 
well. Electroconvulsive therapy can augment clozapine when 
maximum doses of clozapine are ineffective. In contrast, add-
ing risperidone to clozapine is not beneficial. Lithium or valp-
roic acid is sometimes added to antipsychotic agents with 
benefit to patients who do not respond to the latter drugs 
alone. There is some evidence that lamotrigine is more effective 
than any of the other mood stabilizers for this indication (see 
below). It is uncertain whether instances of successful combi-
nation therapy represent misdiagnosed cases of mania or 
schizoaffective disorder. Benzodiazepines may be useful for 
patients with anxiety symptoms or insomnia not controlled by 
antipsychotics. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Most of the unwanted effects of antipsychotic drugs are extensions 
of their known pharmacologic actions (Tables 29–1 and 29–2), 
but a few effects are allergic in nature and some are idiosyncratic. 
 A. Behavioral Effects 
 The older typical antipsychotic drugs are unpleasant to take. 
Many patients stop taking these drugs because of the adverse 
effects, which may be mitigated by giving small doses during the 
day and the major portion at bedtime. A “pseudodepression” that 
may be due to drug-induced akinesia usually responds to treat-
ment with antiparkinsonism drugs. Other pseudodepressions may 
be due to higher doses than needed in a partially remitted patient, 
in which case decreasing the dose may relieve the symptoms. 
Toxic-confusional states may occur with very high doses of drugs 
that have prominent antimuscarinic actions. 
 B. Neurologic Effects 
 Extrapyramidal reactions occurring early during treatment with 
older agents include typical  Parkinson’s syndrome, akathisia 
(uncontrollable restlessness), and  acute dystonic reactions (spastic 
retrocollis or torticollis). Parkinsonism can be treated, when neces-
sary, with conventional antiparkinsonism drugs of the antimuscar-
inic type or, in rare cases, with amantadine. (Levodopa should never 
be used in these patients.) Parkinsonism may be self-limiting, so 
that an attempt to withdraw antiparkinsonism drugs should be 
made every 3–4 months. Akathisia and dystonic reactions also 
respond to such treatment, but many clinicians prefer to use a seda-
tive antihistamine with anticholinergic properties, eg, diphenhy-
dramine, which can be given either parenterally or orally. 
 Tardive dyskinesia, as the name implies, is a late-occurring 
syndrome of abnormal choreoathetoid movements. It is the 
most important unwanted effect of antipsychotic drugs. It has 
been proposed that it is caused by a relative cholinergic defi-
ciency secondary to supersensitivity of dopamine receptors in 
the caudate-putamen. The prevalence varies enormously, but 
tardive dyskinesia is estimated to have occurred in 20–40% of 
chronically treated patients before the introduction of the 
newer atypical antipsychotics. Early recognition is important, 
since advanced cases may be difficult to reverse. Any patient 
with tardive dyskinesia treated with a typical antipsychotic 
drug or possibly risperidone or paliperidone should be switched 
to quetiapine or clozapine, the atypical agents with the least 
likelihood of causing tardive dyskinesia. Many treatments have 
been proposed, but their evaluation is confounded by the fact 
that the course of the disorder is variable and sometimes self-
limited. Reduction in dosage may also be considered. Most 
authorities agree that the first step should be to discontinue or 
reduce the dose of the current antipsychotic agent or switch to 
one of the newer atypical agents. A logical second step would 
be to eliminate all drugs with central anticholinergic action, 
particularly antiparkinsonism drugs and tricyclic antidepres-
sants. These two steps are often enough to bring about 
improvement. If they fail, the addition of diazepam in doses as 
high as 30–40 mg/d may add to the improvement by enhanc-
ing GABAergic activity. 
 Seizures, though recognized as a complication of chlorprom-
azine treatment, were so rare with the high-potency older drugs as 
to merit little consideration. However, de novo seizures may occur 
in 2–5% of patients treated with clozapine. Use of an anticonvul-
sant is able to control seizures in most cases. 
 C. Autonomic Nervous System Effects 
 Most patients are able to tolerate the antimuscarinic adverse 
effects of antipsychotic drugs. Those who are made too uncom-
fortable or who develop urinary retention or other severe symp-
toms can be switched to an agent without significant 
antimuscarinic action. Orthostatic hypotension or impaired 
512    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
ejaculation—common complications of therapy with chlorprom-
azine or mesoridazine—should be managed by switching to drugs 
with less marked adrenoceptor-blocking actions. 
 D. Metabolic and Endocrine Effects 
 Weight gain is very common, especially with clozapine and olan-
zapine, and requires monitoring of food intake, especially carbohy-
drates. Hyperglycemia may develop, but whether secondary to 
weight gain-associated insulin resistance or to other potential 
mechanisms remains to be clarified. Hyperlipidemia may occur. 
The management of weight gain, insulin resistance, and increased 
lipids should include monitoring of weight at each visit and mea-
surement of fasting blood sugar and lipids at 3–6 month intervals. 
Measurement of hemoglobin A 1C may be useful when it is impos-
sible to be sure of obtaining a fasting blood sugar. Diabetic ketoac-
idosis has been reported in a few cases. The triglyceride:HDL ratio 
should be less than 3.5 in fasting samples. Levels higher than that 
indicate increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 
 Hyperprolactinemia in women results in the amenorrhea-
galactorrhea syndrome and infertility; in men, loss of libido, impo-
tence, and infertility may result. Hyperprolactinemia may cause 
osteoporosis, particularly in women. If dose reduction is not indi-
cated, or ineffective in controlling this pattern, switching to one of the 
atypical agents that do not raise prolactin levels, eg, aripiprazole, may 
be indicated. 
 E. Toxic or Allergic Reactions 
 Agranulocytosis, cholestatic jaundice, and skin eruptions occur 
rarely with the high-potency antipsychotic drugs currently used. 
 In contrast to other antipsychotic agents, clozapine causes 
agranulocytosis in a small but significant number of patients—
approximately 1–2% of those treated. This serious, potentially 
fatal effect can develop rapidly, usually between the 6th and 18th 
weeks of therapy. It is not known whether it represents an immune 
reaction, but it appears to be reversible upon discontinuance of 
the drug. Because of the risk of agranulocytosis, patients receiving 
clozapine must have weekly blood counts for the first 6 months of 
treatment and every 3 weeks thereafter. 
 F. Ocular Complications 
 Deposits in the anterior portions of the eye (cornea and lens) are 
a common complication of chlorpromazine therapy. They may 
accentuate the normal processes of aging of the lens. Thioridazine 
is the only antipsychotic drug that causes retinal deposits, which 
in advanced cases may resemble retinitis pigmentosa. The deposits 
are usually associated with “browning” of vision. The maximum 
daily dose of thioridazine has been limited to 800 mg/d to reduce 
the possibility of this complication. 
 G. Cardiac Toxicity 
 Thioridazine in doses exceeding 300 mg daily is almost always 
associated with minor abnormalities of T waves that are easily 
reversible. Overdoses of thioridazine are associated with major 
ventricular arrhythmias, eg, torsades de pointes, cardiac conduc-
tion block, and sudden death; it is not certain whether thioridazine 
can cause these same disorders when used in therapeutic doses. In 
view of possible additive antimuscarinic and quinidine-like actions 
with various tricyclic antidepressants, thioridazine should be com-
bined with the latter drugs only with great care. Among the 
atypical agents, ziprasidone carries the greatest risk of QT prolon-
gation and therefore should not be combined with other drugs 
that prolong the QT interval, including thioridazine, pimozide, 
and group 1A or 3 antiarrhythmic drugs. Clozapine is sometimes 
associated with myocarditis and must be discontinued if myo-
carditis manifests. Sudden death due to arrhythmias is common in 
schizophrenia. It is not always drug-related, and there are no stud-
ies that definitively show increased risk with particular drugs. 
Monitoring of QT c prolongation has proved to be of little use 
unless the values increase to more than 500 ms and this is mani-
fested in multiple rhythm strips or a Holter monitor study. A 
20,000 patient study of ziprasidone versus olanzapine showed 
minimal or no increased risk of torsades de pointes or sudden 
death in patients who were randomized to ziprasidone. 
 H. Use in Pregnancy; Dysmorphogenesis 
 Although antipsychotic drugs appear to be relatively safe in preg-
nancy, a small increase in teratogenic risk could be missed. 
Questions about whether to use these drugs during pregnancy and 
whether to abort a pregnancy in which the fetus has already been 
exposed must be decided individually. If a pregnant woman could 
manage to be free of antipsychotic drugs during pregnancy, this 
would be desirable because of their effects on the neurotransmit-
ters involved in neurodevelopment. 
 I. Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome 
 This life-threatening disorder occurs in patients who are extremely 
sensitive to the extrapyramidal effects of antipsychotic agents (see 
also  Chapter 16 ). The initial symptom is marked muscle rigidity. 
If sweating is impaired, as it often is during treatment with anti-
cholinergic drugs, fever may ensue, often reaching dangerous lev-
els. The stress leukocytosis and high fever associated with this 
syndrome may erroneously suggest an infectious process. 
Autonomic instability, with altered blood pressure and pulse rate, 
is often present. 
 Muscle-type creatine kinase levels are usually elevated, reflect-
ing muscle damage. This syndrome is believed to result from an 
excessively rapid blockade of postsynaptic dopamine receptors. A 
severe form of extrapyramidal syndrome follows. Early in the 
course, vigorous treatment of the extrapyramidal syndrome with 
antiparkinsonism drugs is worthwhile. Muscle relaxants, particu-
larly diazepam, are often useful. Other muscle relaxants, such as 
dantrolene, or dopamine agonists, such as bromocriptine, have 
been reported to be helpful. If fever is present, cooling by physical 
measures should be tried. Various minor forms of this syndrome 
are now recognized. Switching to an atypical drug after recovery is 
indicated. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Antipsychotics produce more important pharmacodynamic than 
pharmacokinetic interactions because of their multiple effects. 
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    513
Additive effects may occur when these drugs are combined with 
others that have sedative effects, α-adrenoceptor–blocking action, 
anticholinergic effects, and—for thioridazine and ziprasidone—
quinidine-like action. 
 A variety of pharmacokinetic interactions have been reported, 
but none are of major clinical significance. 
 Overdoses 
 Poisonings with antipsychotic agents (unlike tricyclic antidepres-
sants) are rarely fatal, with the exception of those due to 
mesoridazine and thioridazine. In general, drowsiness proceeds to 
coma, with an intervening period of agitation. Neuromuscular 
excitability may be increased and proceed to convulsions. Pupils 
are miotic, and deep tendon reflexes are decreased. Hypotension 
and hypothermia are the rule, although fever may be present later 
in the course. The lethal effects of mesoridazine and thioridazine 
are related to induction of ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Patients 
should be given the usual “ABCD” treatment for poisonings (see 
 Chapter 58 ) and treated supportively. Management of overdoses 
of thioridazine and mesoridazine, which are complicated by car-
diac arrhythmias, is similar to that for tricyclic antidepressants (see 
 Chapter 30 ). 
 Psychosocial Treatment & Cognitive 
Remediation 
 Patients with schizophrenia need psychosocial support based 
around activities of daily living, including housing, social 
activities, returning to school, obtaining the optimal level of 
work they may be capable of, and restoring social interactions. 
Unfortunately, funding for this crucial component of treat-
ment has been minimized in recent years. Case management 
and therapy services are a vital part of the treatment program 
that should be provided to patients with schizophrenia. First-
episode patients are particularly needful of this support because 
they often deny their illness and are noncompliant with 
medication. 
 Benefits & Limitations of Drug Treatment 
 As noted at the beginning of this chapter, antipsychotic drugs 
have had a major impact on psychiatric treatment. First, they 
have shifted the vast majority of patients from long-term hospi-
talization to the community. For many patients, this shift has 
provided a better life under more humane circumstances and in 
many cases has made possible life without frequent use of physi-
cal restraints. For others, the tragedy of an aimless existence is 
now being played out in the streets of our communities rather 
than in mental institutions. 
 Second, these antipsychotic drugs have markedly shifted psy-
chiatric thinking to a more biologic orientation. Partly because of 
research stimulated by the effects of these drugs on schizophrenia, 
we now know much more about central nervous system physiol-
ogy and pharmacology than was known before the introduction of 
these agents. However, despite much research, schizophrenia 
remains a scientific mystery and a personal disaster for the patient. 
Although most schizophrenic patients obtain some degree of ben-
efit from these drugs—in some cases substantial benefit—none are 
made well by them. 
 ■ LITHIUM, MOODSTABILIZING 
DRUGS, & OTHER TREATMENT 
FOR BIPOLAR DISORDER 
 Bipolar disorder, once known as manic-depressive illness, was 
conceived of as a psychotic disorder distinct from schizophrenia at 
the end of the 19th century. Before that both of these disorders 
were considered part of a continuum. It is ironic that the weight 
of the evidence today is that there is profound overlap in these 
disorders. This is not to say that there are no pathophysiologically 
important differences or that some drug treatments are differen-
tially effective in these disorders. According to  DSM-IV , they are 
separate disease entities while research continues to define the 
dimensions of these illnesses and their genetic and other biologic 
markers. 
 Lithium was the first agent shown to be useful in the treatment 
of the manic phase of bipolar disorder that was not also an anti-
psychotic drug. Lithium has no known use in schizophrenia. 
Lithium continues to be used for acute-phase illness as well as for 
prevention of recurrent manic and depressive episodes. 
 A group of mood-stabilizing drugs that are also anticonvulsant 
agents has become more widely used than lithium. It includes 
 carbamazepine and  valproic acid for the treatment of acute 
mania and for prevention of its recurrence.  Lamotrigine is 
approved for prevention of recurrence.  Gabapentin, oxcarba-
zepine, and  topiramate are sometimes used to treat bipolar disor-
der but are not approved by the Food and Drug Administration 
for this indication.  Aripiprazole, chlorpromazine, olanzapine, 
quetiapine, risperidone, and  ziprasidone are approved by the 
FDA for treatment of the manic phase of bipolar disorder. 
Olanzapine plus fluoxetine in combination and quetiapine are 
approved for treatment of bipolar depression. 
 Nature of Bipolar Affective Disorder 
 Bipolar affective (manic-depressive) disorder occurs in 1–3% of 
the adult population. It may begin in childhood, but most cases 
are first diagnosed in the third and fourth decades of life. The key 
symptoms of bipolar disorder in the manic phase are excitement, 
hyperactivity, impulsivity, disinhibition, aggression, diminished 
need for sleep, psychotic symptoms in some (but not all) patients, 
and cognitive impairment. Depression in bipolar patients is phe-
nomenologically similar to that of major depression, with the key 
features being depressed mood, diurnal variation, sleep disturbance, 
anxiety, and sometimes, psychotic symptoms. Mixed manic and 
depressive symptoms are also seen. Patients with bipolar disorder 
are at high risk for suicide. 
 The sequence, number, and intensity of manic and depres-
sive episodes are highly variable. The cause of the mood swings 
514    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
characteristic of bipolar affective disorder is unknown, although a 
preponderance of catecholamine-related activity may be present. 
Drugs that increase this activity tend to exacerbate mania, whereas 
those that reduce activity of dopamine or norepinephrine relieve 
mania. Acetylcholine or glutamate may also be involved. The 
nature of the abrupt switch from mania to depression experienced 
by some patients is uncertain. Bipolar disorder has a strong famil-
ial component, and there is abundant evidence that bipolar disor-
der is genetically determined. 
 Many of the genes that increase vulnerability to bipolar disor-
der are common to schizophrenia but some genes appear to be 
unique to each disorder. Genome-wide association studies of psy-
chotic bipolar disorder have shown replicated linkage to chromo-
somes 8p and 13q. Several candidate genes have shown association 
with bipolar disorder with psychotic features and with schizophre-
nia. These include genes for dysbindin,  DAOA/G30 , disrupted-
inschizophrenia-1 ( DISC-1 ), and neuregulin 1. 
 BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
LITHIUM 
 Lithium was first used therapeutically in the mid-19th century in 
patients with gout. It was briefly used as a substitute for sodium 
chloride in hypertensive patients in the 1940s but was banned after 
it proved too toxic for use without monitoring. In 1949, Cade dis-
covered that lithium was an effective treatment for bipolar disorder, 
engendering a series of controlled trials that confirmed its efficacy as 
monotherapy for the manic phase of bipolar disorder. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Lithium is a small monovalent cation. Its pharmacokinetics are 
summarized in  Table 29–5 . 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Despite considerable investigation, the biochemical basis for mood 
stabilizer therapies including lithium and anticonvulsant mood 
stabilizers is not clearly understood. Lithium directly inhibits two 
signal transduction pathways. It both suppresses inositol signaling 
through depletion of intracellular inositol and inhibits glycogen 
synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), a multifunctional protein kinase. 
GSK-3 is a component of diverse intracellular signaling pathways. 
These include signaling via insulin/insulin-like growth factor, brain-
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and the Wnt pathway. All of 
these lead to inhibition of GSK-3. GSK-3 phosphorylates β-catenin, 
resulting in interaction with transcription factors. The pathways 
that are facilitated in this manner modulate energy metabolism, 
provide neuroprotection, and increase neuroplasticity. 
 Studies on the enzyme prolyl oligopeptidase and the sodium 
myoinositol transporter support an inositol depletion mechanism 
for mood-stabilizer action. Valproic acid may indirectly reduce 
GSK-3 activity and can up-regulate gene expression through inhi-
bition of histone deacetylase. Valproic acid also inhibits inositol 
signaling through an inositol depletion mechanism. There is no 
evidence of GSK-3 inhibition by carbamazepine, a second antiepi-
leptic mood stabilizer. In contrast, this drug alters neuronal mor-
phology through an inositol depletion mechanism, as seen with 
lithium and valproic acid. The mood stabilizers may also have 
indirect effects on neurotransmitters and their release. 
 A. Effects on Electrolytes and Ion Transport 
 Lithium is closely related to sodium in its properties. It can substitute 
for sodium in generating action potentials and in Na + -Na + exchange 
across the membrane. It inhibits the latter process; that is, Li + -Na + 
exchange is gradually slowed after lithium is introduced into the body. 
At therapeutic concentrations (around 1 mmol/L), it does not signifi-
cantly affect the Na + -Ca 2+ exchanger or the Na + /K + -ATPase pump. 
 B. Effects on Second Messengers 
 Some of the enzymes affected by lithium are listed in  Table 29–6 . 
One of the best-defined effects of lithium is its action on inositol 
TABLE 29–5 Pharmacokinetics of lithium.
Absorption
Virtually complete within 6–8 hours; peak plasma 
levels in 30 minutes to 2 hours
Distribution
In total body water; slow entry into intracellular 
compartment. Initial volume of distribution is 0.5 
L/kg, rising to 0.7–0.9 L/kg; some sequestration in 
bone. No protein binding.
Metabolism
None
Excretion
Virtually entirely in urine. Lithium clearance 
about 20% of creatinine. Plasma half-life about 
20 hours.
Target plasma
concentration
0.6–1.4 mEq/L
Dosage
0.5 mEq/kg/d in divided doses
TABLE 29–6  Enzymes affected by lithium at 
therapeutic concentrations.
Enzyme
Enzyme Function; Action of Lithium
Inositol monophos-
phatase
The rate-limiting enzyme in inositol 
recycling; inhibited by lithium, resulting in 
depletion of substrate for IP3 production 
(Figure 29–4)
Inositol polyphosphate 
1-phosphatase
Another enzyme in inositol recycling; 
inhibited by lithium, resulting in depletion of 
substrate for IP3 production (Figure 29–4)
Bisphosphate 
nucleotidase
Involved in AMP production; inhibited by 
lithium; may be target that results in lithium-
induced nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Fructose 
1,6-biphosphatase
Involved in gluconeogenesis; inhibition by 
lithium of unknown relevance
Phosphoglucomutase
Involved in glycogenolysis; inhibition by 
lithium of unknown relevance
Glycogen synthase 
kinase-3
Constitutively active enzyme that appears to 
limit neurotrophic and neuroprotective 
processes; lithium inhibits
AMP, adenosine monophosphate; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate.
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    515
phosphates. Early studies of lithium demonstrated changes in brain 
inositol phosphate levels, but the significance of these changes was 
not appreciated until the second-messenger roles of inositol-1,4,5-
trisphosphate (IP 3 ) and diacylglycerol (DAG) were discovered. As 
described in  Chapter 2 , inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol are 
important second messengers for both α-adrenergic and muscarinic 
transmission. Lithium inhibits inositol monophosphatase (IMPase) 
and other important enzymes in the normal recycling of membrane 
phosphoinositides, including conversion of IP 2 (inositol diphos-
phate) to IP 1 (inositol monophosphate) and the conversion of IP 1 
to inositol ( Figure 29–4 ). This block leads to a depletion of free 
inositol and ultimately of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 
(PIP 2 ), the membrane precursor of IP 3 and DAG. Over time, the 
effects of transmitters on the cell diminish in proportion to the 
amount of activity in the PIP 2 -dependent pathways. The activity of 
these pathways is postulated to be markedly increased during a 
manic episode. Treatment with lithium would be expected to 
diminish the activity in these circuits. 
 Studies of noradrenergic effects in isolated brain tissue indicate 
that lithium can inhibit norepinephrine-sensitive adenylyl cyclase. 
Such an effect could relate to both its antidepressant and its anti-
manic effects. The relationship of these effects to lithium’s actions 
on IP 3 mechanisms is currently unknown. 
 Because lithium affects second-messenger systems involving 
both activation of adenylyl cyclase and phosphoinositol turnover, 
it is not surprising that G proteins are also found to be affected. 
Several studies suggest that lithium may uncouple receptors from 
their G proteins; indeed, two of lithium’s most common side 
effects, polyuria and subclinical hypothyroidism, may be due to 
uncoupling of the vasopressin and thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH) receptors from their G proteins. 
 The major current working hypothesis for lithium’s therapeutic 
mechanism of action supposes that its effects on phosphoinositol 
turnover, leading to an early relative reduction of myoinositol in 
human brain, are part of an initiating cascade of intracellular changes. 
Effects on specific isoforms of protein kinase C may be most relevant. 
Alterations of protein kinase C-mediated signaling alter gene expres-
sion and the production of proteins implicated in long-term neuro-
plastic events that could underlie long-term mood stabilization. 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
LITHIUM 
 Bipolar Affective Disorder 
 Until recently, lithium carbonate was the universally preferred 
treatment for bipolar disorder, especially in the manic phase. With 
the approval of valproate, aripiprazole, olanzapine, quetiapine, 
risperidone, and ziprasidone for this indication, a smaller percent-
age of bipolar patients now receive lithium. This trend is rein-
forced by the slow onset of action of lithium, which has often been 
supplemented with concurrent use of antipsychotic drugs or 
potent benzodiazepines in severely manic patients. The overall 
success rate for achieving remission from the manic phase of bipo-
lar disorder can be as high as 80% but lower among patients who 
require hospitalization. A similar situation applies to maintenance 
treatment, which is about 60% effective overall but less in severely 
ill patients. These considerations have led to increased use of com-
bined treatment in severe cases. After mania is controlled, the 
antipsychotic drug may be stopped and benzodiazepines and 
lithium continued as maintenance therapy. 
 The depressive phase of manic-depressive disorder often requires 
concurrent use of an antidepressant drug (see  Chapter 30 ). Tricyclic 
antidepressant agents have been linked to precipitation of mania, 
with more rapid cycling of mood swings, although most patients do 
not show this effect. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are less 
likely to induce mania but may have limited efficacy. Bupropion has 
shown some promise but—like tricyclic antidepressants—may 
induce mania at higher doses. As shown in recent controlled trials, 
the anticonvulsant lamotrigine is effective for many patients with 
bipolar depression. For some patients, however, one of the older 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors may be the antidepressant of choice. 
Quetiapine and the combination of olanzapine and fluoxetine has 
been approved for use in bipolar depression. 
 Unlike antipsychotic or antidepressant drugs, which exert sev-
eral actions on the central or autonomic nervous system, lithium 
ion at therapeutic concentrations is devoid of autonomic blocking 
effects and of activating or sedating effects, although it can pro-
duce nausea and tremor. Most important is that the prophylactic 
use of lithium can prevent both mania and depression. Many 
experts believe that the aggressive marketing of newer drugs has 
inappropriately produced a shift to drugs that are less effective 
than lithium for substantial numbers of patients. 
 Other Applications 
 Recurrent endogenous depression with a cyclic pattern is con-
trolled by either lithium or imipramine, both of which are supe-
rior to placebo. 
 FIGURE 29–4  Effect of lithium on the IP 3 (inositol trisphosphate) 
and DAG (diacylglycerol) second-messenger system. The schematic 
diagram shows the synaptic membrane of a neuron. (PIP 2 , phosphati-
dylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate; PLC, phospholipase C; G, coupling pro-
tein; Effects, activation of protein kinase C, mobilization of 
intracellular Ca 2+ , etc.) Lithium, by inhibiting the recycling of inositol 
substrates, may cause depletion of the second-messenger source 
PIP 2 and therefore reduce the release of IP 3 and DAG. Lithium may 
also act by other mechanisms. 
IP2
IP3
PIP2
PIP
PI
Inositol
IP1
Lithium
Receptor
DAG
Effects
−
−
PLC
G
516    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Schizoaffective disorder, another condition with an affective 
component characterized by a mixture of schizophrenic symptoms 
and depression or excitement, is treated with antipsychotic drugs 
alone or combined with lithium. Various antidepressants are 
added if depression is present. 
 Lithium alone is rarely successful in treating  schizophrenia, 
but adding it to an antipsychotic may salvage an otherwise treat-
ment-resistant patient. Carbamazepine may work equally well 
when added to an antipsychotic drug. 
 An interesting application of lithium that is relatively well sup-
ported by controlled studies is as an adjunct to tricyclic antide-
pressants and SSRIs in patients with  unipolar depression who do 
not respond fully to monotherapy with the antidepressant. For 
this application, concentrations of lithium at the lower end of the 
recommended range for manic-depressive illness appear to be 
adequate. 
 Monitoring Treatment 
 Clinicians rely on measurements of serum lithium concentrations 
for assessing both the dosage required for treatment of acute 
mania and for prophylactic maintenance. These measurements are 
customarily taken 10–12 hours after the last dose, so all data in the 
literature pertaining to these concentrations reflect this interval. 
 An initial determination of serum lithium concentration 
should be obtained about 5 days after the start of treatment, at 
which time steady-state conditions should have been attained. 
If the clinical response suggests a change in dosage, simple 
arithmetic (new dose equals present dose times desired blood 
level divided by present blood level) should produce the desired 
level. The serum concentration attained with the adjusted dos-
age can be checked after another 5 days. Once the desired 
concentration has been achieved, levels can be measured at 
increasing intervals unless the schedule is influenced by inter-
current illness or the introduction of a new drug into the treat-
ment program. 
 Maintenance Treatment 
 The decision to use lithium as  prophylactic treatment depends on 
many factors: the frequency and severity of previous episodes, a cre-
scendo pattern of appearance, and the degree to which the patient is 
willing to follow a program of indefinite maintenance therapy. If the 
present attack was the patient’s first or if the patient is unreliable, one 
might prefer to terminate treatment after the episode has subsided. 
Patients who have one or more episodes of illness per year are candi-
dates for maintenance treatment. Although some patients can be 
maintained with serum levels as low as 0.6 mEq/L, the best results 
have been obtained with higher levels, such as 0.9 mEq/L. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Renal clearance of lithium is reduced about 25% by diuretics 
(eg, thiazides), and doses may need to be reduced by a similar 
amount. A similar reduction in lithium clearance has been 
noted with several of the newer nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs that block synthesis of prostaglandins. This interaction 
has not been reported for either aspirin or acetaminophen. All 
neuroleptics tested to date, with the possible exception of clo-
zapine and the newer atypical antipsychotics, may produce 
more severe extrapyramidal syndromes when combined with 
lithium. 
 Adverse Effects & Complications 
 Many adverse effects associated with lithium treatment occur at 
varying times after treatment is started. Some are harmless, but it 
is important to be alert to adverse effects that may signify impend-
ing serious toxic reactions. 
 A. Neurologic and Psychiatric Adverse Effects 
 Tremor is one of the most common adverse effects of lithium 
treatment, and it occurs with therapeutic doses. Propranolol and 
atenolol, which have been reported to be effective in essential 
tremor, also alleviate lithium-induced tremor. Other reported 
neurologic abnormalities include choreoathetosis, motor hyper-
activity, ataxia, dysarthria, and aphasia. Psychiatric disturbances 
at toxic concentrations are generally marked by mental confu-
sion and withdrawal. Appearance of any new neurologic or psy-
chiatric symptoms or signs is a clear indication for temporarily 
stopping treatment with lithium and for close monitoring of 
serum levels. 
 B. Decreased Thyroid Function 
 Lithium probably decreases thyroid function in most patients 
exposed to the drug, but the effect is reversible or nonprogressive. 
Few patients develop frank thyroid enlargement, and fewer still 
show symptoms of hypothyroidism. Although initial thyroid testing 
followed by regular monitoring of thyroid function has been pro-
posed, such procedures are not cost-effective. Obtaining a serum 
TSH concentration every 6–12 months, however, is prudent. 
 C. Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus and Other Renal 
Adverse Effects 
 Polydipsia and polyuria are common but reversible concomitants 
of lithium treatment, occurring at therapeutic serum concentra-
tions. The principal physiologic lesion involved is loss of respon-
siveness to antidiuretic hormone (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). 
Lithium-induced diabetes insipidus is resistant to vasopressin but 
responds to amiloride. 
 Extensive literature has accumulated concerning other forms of 
renal dysfunction during long-term lithium therapy, including 
chronic interstitial nephritis and minimal-change glomerulopathy 
with nephrotic syndrome. Some instances of decreased glomerular 
filtration rate have been encountered but no instances of marked 
azotemia or renal failure. 
 Patients receiving lithium should avoid dehydration and the asso-
ciated increased concentration of lithium in urine. Periodic tests of 
renal concentrating ability should be performed to detect changes. 
 D. Edema 
 Edema is a common adverse effect of lithium treatment and may 
be related to some effect of lithium on sodium retention. Although 
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    517
weight gain may be expected in patients who become edematous, 
water retention does not account for the weight gain observed in 
up to 30% of patients taking lithium. 
 E. Cardiac Adverse Effects 
 The bradycardia-tachycardia (“sick sinus”) syndrome is a definite 
contraindication to the use of lithium because the ion further 
depresses the sinus node. T-wave flattening is often observed on 
the electrocardiogram but is of questionable significance. 
 F. Use During Pregnancy 
 Renal clearance of lithium increases during pregnancy and reverts 
to lower levels immediately after delivery. A patient whose serum 
lithium concentration is in a good therapeutic range during preg-
nancy may develop toxic levels after delivery. Special care in 
monitoring lithium levels is needed at these times. Lithium is 
transferred to nursing infants through breast milk, in which it has 
a concentration about one third to one half that of serum. Lithium 
toxicity in newborns is manifested by lethargy, cyanosis, poor suck 
and Moro reflexes, and perhaps hepatomegaly. 
 The issue of lithium-induced dysmorphogenesis is not settled. 
An earlier report suggested an increase in cardiac anomalies— 
especially Ebstein’s anomaly—in lithium babies, and it is listed as 
such in  Table 59–1 in this book. However, more recent data suggest 
that lithium carries a relatively low risk of teratogenic effects. 
Further research is needed in this important area. 
 G. Miscellaneous Adverse Effects 
 Transient acneiform eruptions have been noted early in lithium 
treatment. Some of them subside with temporary discontinuance 
of treatment and do not recur with its resumption. Folliculitis is 
less dramatic and probably occurs more frequently. Leukocytosis 
is always present during lithium treatment, probably reflecting a 
direct effect on leukopoiesis rather than mobilization from the 
marginal pool. This adverse effect has now become a therapeutic 
effect in patients with low leukocyte counts. 
 Overdoses 
 Therapeutic overdoses of lithium are more common than those due 
to deliberate or accidental ingestion of the drug. Therapeutic over-
doses are usually due to accumulation of lithium resulting from some 
change in the patient’s status, such as diminished serum sodium, use 
of diuretics, or fluctuating renal function. Since the tissues will have 
already equilibrated with the blood, the plasma concentrations of 
lithium may not be excessively high in proportion to the degree of 
toxicity; any value over 2 mEq/L must be considered as indicating 
likely toxicity. Because lithium is a small ion, it is dialyzed readily. 
Both peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis are effective, although the 
latter is preferred. 
 VALPROIC ACID 
 Valproic acid (valproate), discussed in detail in  Chapter 24 as an 
antiepileptic, has been demonstrated to have antimanic effects and 
is now being widely used for this indication in the USA. (Gabapentin 
is not effective, leaving the mechanism of action of valproate 
unclear.) Overall, valproic acid shows efficacy equivalent to that of 
lithium during the early weeks of treatment. It is significant that 
valproic acid has been effective in some patients who have failed to 
respond to lithium. Moreover, its side-effect profile is such that one 
can rapidly increase the dosage over a few days to produce blood 
levels in the apparent therapeutic range, with nausea being the only 
limiting factor in some patients. The starting dosage is 750 mg/d, 
increasing rapidly to the 1500–2000 mg range with a recommended 
maximum dosage of 60 mg/kg/d. 
 Combinations of valproic acid with other psychotropic medica-
tions likely to be used in the management of either phase of bipolar 
illness are generally well tolerated. Valproic acid is an appropriate first-
line treatment for mania, although it is not clear that it will be as 
effective as lithium as a maintenance treatment in all subsets of 
patients. Many clinicians advocate combining valproic acid and lith-
ium in patients who do not fully respond to either agent alone. 
 CARBAMAZEPINE 
 Carbamazepine has been considered to be a reasonable alternative to 
lithium when the latter is less than optimally efficacious. The mode 
of action of carbamazepine is unclear, and oxcarbazepine is not 
effective. Carbamazepine may be used to treat acute mania and also 
for prophylactic therapy. Adverse effects (discussed in  Chapter 24 ) 
are generally no greater and sometimes less than those associated 
with lithium. Carbamazepine may be used alone or, in refractory 
patients, in combination with lithium or, rarely, valproate. 
 The use of carbamazepine as a mood stabilizer is similar to its use 
as an anticonvulsant (see  Chapter 24 ). Dosage usually begins with 
200 mg twice daily, with increases as needed. Maintenance dosage is 
similar to that used for treating epilepsy, ie, 800–1200 mg/d. Plasma 
concentrations between 3 and 14 mg/L are considered desirable, 
although no therapeutic range has been established. Blood dyscrasias 
have figured prominently in the adverse effects of carbamazepine 
when it is used as an anticonvulsant, but they have not been a major 
problem with its use as a mood stabilizer. Overdoses of carbamazepine 
are a major emergency and should generally be managed like over-
doses of tricyclic antidepressants (see  Chapter 58 ). 
 OTHER DRUGS 
 Lamotrigine has been reported to be useful in preventing the 
depression that often follows the manic phase of bipolar disorder. 
A number of novel agents are under investigation for bipolar 
depression, including riluzole, a neuroprotective agent that is 
approved for use in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; ketamine, a 
noncompetitive NMDA antagonist previously discussed as a drug 
believed to model schizophrenia but thought to act by producing 
relative enhancement of AMPA receptor activity; and AMPA 
receptor potentiators. 
518    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
SUMMARY Antipsychotic Drugs & Lithium
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
PHENOTHIAZINES
 • Chlorpromazine
 • Fluphenazine
 • Thioridazine
THIOXANTHENE
 • Thiothixene
Blockade of D2 
receptors >> 5-HT2A 
receptors
α-Receptor blockade 
(fluphenazine least) • 
muscarinic (M)-receptor 
blockade (especially 
chlorpromazine and 
thioridazine) • H1-receptor 
blockade (chlorpromazine, 
thiothixene) • central nervous 
system (CNS) depression 
(sedation) • decreased seizure 
threshold • QT prolongation 
(thioridazine)
Psychiatric: schizophrenia 
(alleviate positive symptoms), 
bipolar disorder (manic 
phase) • nonpsychiatric: 
antiemesis, preoperative 
sedation (promethazine) 
• pruritus
Oral and parenteral forms, long half-
lives with metabolism-dependent 
elimination • Toxicity: Extensions of 
effects on α- and M-receptors • 
blockade of dopamine receptors may 
result in akathisia, dystonia, 
parkinsonian symptoms, tardive 
dyskinesia, and hyperprolactinemia
BUTYROPHENONE
 • Haloperidol
Blockade of D2 
receptors >> 5-HT2A 
receptors
Some α blockade, but 
minimal M-receptor blockade 
and much less sedation than 
the phenothiazines
Schizophrenia (alleviates 
positive symptoms), bipolar 
disorder (manic phase), 
Huntington’s chorea, 
Tourette’s syndrome
Oral and parenteral forms with 
metabolism-dependent elimination 
• Toxicity: Extrapyramidal dysfunction 
is major adverse effect
ATYPICAL ANTIPSYCHOTICS
 • Aripiprazole
 • Clozapine
 • Olanzapine
 • Quetiapine
 • Risperidone
 • Ziprasidone
Blockade of 5-HT2A 
receptors > blockade 
of D2 receptors
Some α blockade (clozapine, 
risperidone, ziprasidone) and 
M-receptor blockade 
(clozapine, olanzapine) • 
variable H1-receptor 
blockade (all)
Schizophrenia—improve 
both positive and negative 
symptoms • bipolar disorder 
(olanzapine or risperidone 
adjunctive with lithium) • 
agitation in Alzheimer’s and 
Parkinson’s patients (low 
doses) • major depression 
(aripiprazole)
Toxicity: Agranulocytosis (clozapine), 
diabetes (clozapine, olanzapine), 
hypercholesterolemia (clozapine, 
olanzapine), hyperprolactinemia 
(risperidone), QT prolongation 
(ziprasidone), weight gain (clozapine, 
olanzapine)
LITHIUM
Mechanism of action 
uncertain • suppresses 
inositol signaling and 
inhibits glycogen 
synthase kinase-3 
(GSK-3), a 
multifunctional protein 
kinase
No significant antagonistic 
actions on autonomic 
nervous system receptors or 
specific CNS receptors • no 
sedative effects
Bipolar affective disorder—
prophylactic use can prevent 
mood swings between mania 
and depression
Oral absorption, renal elimination • half-
life 20 h • narrow therapeutic window 
(monitor blood levels) • Toxicity: Tremor, 
edema, hypothyroidism, renal 
dysfunction, dysrhythmias • pregnancy 
category D • Interactions: Clearance 
decreased by thiazides and some 
NSAIDs
NEWER AGENTS FOR BIPOLAR DISORDER
 • Carbamazepine
 • Lamotrigine
 • Valproic acid
Mechanism of action in 
bipolar disorder 
unclear (see Chapter 
24 for putative actions 
in seizure disorders)
Carbamazepine causes dose-
related diplopia and ataxia 
• lamotrigine causes nausea, 
dizziness, and headache 
• valproic acid causes 
gastrointestinal distress, 
possible weight gain, 
alopecia
Valproic acid is increasingly 
used as first choice in acute 
mania • carbamazepine and 
lamotrigine are also used 
both in acute mania and for 
prophylaxis in depressive 
phase
Oral absorption • once-daily dosing 
• carbamazepine forms active 
metabolite • lamotrigine and valproic 
acid form conjugates • Toxicity: 
Hematotoxicity and induction of P450 
drug metabolism (carbamazepine), rash 
(lamotrigine), tremor, liver dysfunction, 
weight gain, inhibition of drug 
metabolism (valproic acid)
CHAPTER 29 Antipsychotic Agents & Lithium    519
ANTIPSYCHOTIC AGENTS
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Oral: 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 mg tablets; 1 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 7.5 mg/mL for IM injection
Asenapine (Saphris)
Oral: 5, 10 mg sublingual tablets
Chlorpromazine (generic, Thorazine)
Oral: 10, 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets; 100 mg/mL concentrate
Rectal: 100 mg suppositories
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL for IM injection
Clozapine (generic, Clozaril)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets; 25, 100 mg orally disinte-
grating tablets
Fluphenazine (generic, Prolixin)
Oral: 1, 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets; 2.5 mg/5 mL elixir
Parenteral: (fluphenazine HCl): 2.5 mg/mL for IM injection
Fluphenazine decanoate (generic, Prolixin)
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL for IM or SC injection
Haloperidol (generic, Haldol)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets; 2 mg/mL concentrate
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IM injection
Haloperidol ester (Haldol Decanoate)
Parenteral: 50, 100 mg/mL for IM injection
Loxapine (generic, Loxitane)
Oral: 5, 10, 25, 50 mg capsules
Molindone (Moban)
Oral: 5, 10, 25, 50 mg tablets
Olanzapine (Zyprexa)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 15, 20 mg tablets; 5, 10, 15, 20 mg orally disin-
tegrating tablets
Parenteral: 10 mg powder for injection
Paliperidone (Invega)
Oral: 3, 6, 9 mg extended-release tablets
Perphenazine (generic)
Oral: 2, 4, 8, 16 mg tablets; 16 mg/5 mL concentrate
Pimozide (Orap)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets
Prochlorperazine (generic, Compazine)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 5 mg/5 mL syrup
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
ANTIPSYCHOTIC AGENTS
Aripiprazole (Abilify)
Oral: 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 mg tablets; 1 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 7.5 mg/mL for IM injection
Asenapine (Saphris)
Oral: 5, 10 mg sublingual tablets
Chlorpromazine (generic, Thorazine)
Oral: 10, 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets; 100 mg/mL concentrate
Rectal: 100 mg suppositories
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL for IM injection
Clozapine (generic, Clozaril)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets; 25, 100 mg orally disinte-
grating tablets
Fluphenazine (generic, Prolixin)
Oral: 1, 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets; 2.5 mg/5 mL elixir
Parenteral: (fluphenazine HCl): 2.5 mg/mL for IM injection
Fluphenazine decanoate (generic, Prolixin)
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL for IM or SC injection
Haloperidol (generic, Haldol)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20 mg tablets; 2 mg/mL concentrate
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IM injection
Haloperidol ester (Haldol Decanoate)
Parenteral: 50, 100 mg/mL for IM injection
Loxapine (generic, Loxitane)
Oral: 5, 10, 25, 50 mg capsules
Molindone (Moban)
Oral: 5, 10, 25, 50 mg tablets
Olanzapine (Zyprexa)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 15, 20 mg tablets; 5, 10, 15, 20 mg orally disin-
tegrating tablets
Parenteral: 10 mg powder for injection
Paliperidone (Invega)
Oral: 3, 6, 9 mg extended-release tablets
Perphenazine (generic)
Oral: 2, 4, 8, 16 mg tablets; 16 mg/5 mL concentrate
Pimozide (Orap)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets
Prochlorperazine (generic, Compazine)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 5 mg/5 mL syrup
Oral sustained-release: 10, 15 mg capsules
Rectal: 2.5, 5, 25 mg suppositories
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IM injection
Quetiapine (Seroquel)
Oral: 25, 50, 100, 200, 300, 400 mg tablets; 200, 300, 400 mg extend-
ed-release tablets
Risperidone (Risperdal)
Oral: 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 mg tablets; 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 mg orally disinte-
grating tablets; 1 mg/mL oral solution
Parenteral: 12.5, 25, 37.5, 50 mg powder for injection; long-acting 
injectable 25, 37.5, 50 mg
Thioridazine (generic, Mellaril)
Oral: 10, 15, 25, 50, 100, 150, 200 mg tablets; 30 mg/mL concentrate
Thiothixene (generic, Navane)
Oral: 1, 2, 5, 10, 20 mg capsules
Trifluoperazine (generic)
Oral: 1, 2, 5, 10 mg tablets
Ziprasidone (Geodon)
Oral: 20, 40, 60, 80 mg capsules
Parenteral: 20 mg powder for IM injection
MOOD STABILIZERS
Carbamazepine (generic, Tegretol)
Oral: 200 mg tablets, 100 mg chewable tablets; 100 mg/5 mL oral 
suspension
Oral extended-release: 100, 200, 400 mg tablets; 100, 200, 300 mg 
capsules
Divalproex (Depakote)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mg delayed-release tablets
Lamotrigine (Lamictal)
Oral: 2, 5, 25, 100, 150, 200 mg tablets
Lithium carbonate (generic, Eskalith) (Note: 300 mg lithium 
carbonate = 8.12 mEq Li+.)
Oral: 150, 300, 600 mg capsules; 300 mg tablets; 8 mEq/5 mL syrup
Oral sustained-release: 300, 450 mg tablets
Topiramate (Topamax)
Oral: 25, 50, 100, 200 mg tablets
Valproic acid (generic, Depakene)
Oral: 250 mg capsules; 250 mg/5 mL syrup
 REFERENCES 
 Antipsychotic Drugs 
 Bhattacharjee J, El-Sayeh HG: Aripiprazole versus typical antipsychotic drugs for 
schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;16;(3):CD006617. 
 Breier A, Berg PH: The psychosis of schizophrenia: Prevalence, response to 
atypical antipsychotics, and prediction of outcome. Biol Psychiatry 
1999;46:361. 
 Carlsson A, Waters N, Carlsson ML: Neurotransmitter interactions in 
schizophrenia—therapeutic implications. Biol Psychiatry 1999;46:1388. 
 Coyle JT: Glutamate and schizophrenia: Beyond the dopamine hypothesis. Cell 
Mol Neurobiol 2006;26:365. 
 Ertugrul A, Meltzer HY: Antipsychotic drugs in bipolar disorder. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol 2003;6:277. 
 Escamilla MA, Zavala JM: Genetics of bipolar disorder. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 
2008;10:141. 
 Farde L et al: Central D 2 -dopamine receptor occupancy in schizophrenic patients 
treated with antipsychotic drugs. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1987;45:71. 
 Freudenreich O, Goff DC: Antipsychotic combination therapy in schizophrenia. 
A review of efficacy and risks of current combinations. Acta Psychiatr Scand 
2002;106:323. 
 Fountoulakis KN, Vieta E: Treatment of bipolar disorder: a systematic review of 
available data and clinical perspectives. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2008 
11(7):999-1029.
 Glassman AH: Schizophrenia, antipsychotic drugs, and cardiovascular disease. J 
Clin Psychiatry 2005;66(Suppl 6):5. 
 Grunder G, Nippius H, Carlsson A: The ‘atypicality’ of antipsychotics: A concept 
re-examined and re-defined. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2009;8:197. 
520    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Haddad PM, Anderson IM: Antipsychotic-related QT c prolongation, torsade de 
pointes and sudden death. Drugs 2002;62:1649. 
 Harrison PJ, Weinberger DR: Schizophrenia genes, gene expression, and neuro-
pathology: On the matter of their convergence. Mol Psychiatry 2005; 
10:40. 
 Karam CS et al: Signaling pathways in schizophrenia: Emerging targets and thera-
peutic strategies. Trend Pharmacol Sci 2010;31:381. 
 Large CH, Webster EL, Goff DC: The potential role of lamotrigine in schizophre-
nia. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2005;181:415. 
 Lieberman JA et al: Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic 
schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1209. 
 Lieberman JA et al: Antipsychotic drugs: Comparison in animal models of efficacy, 
neurotransmitter regulation, and neuroprotection. Pharmacol Rev 
2008;60:358. 
 McGavin JK, Goa KL: Aripiprazole. CNS Drugs 2002;16:779. 
 McKeage K, Plosker GL: Amisulpride: A review of its use in the management of 
schizophrenia. CNS Drugs 2004;18:933. 
 Meltzer HY: Treatment of schizophrenia and spectrum disorders: Pharmacotherapy, 
psychosocial treatments, and neurotransmitter interactions. Biol Psychiatry 
1999;46:1321. 
 Meltzer HY, Massey BW: The role of serotonin receptors in the action of atypical 
antipsychotic drugs. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2011;11:59. 
 Meltzer HY et al: Serotonin receptors: Their key role in drugs to treat schizophre-
nia. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2003;27:1159. 
 Meltzer HY et al: A randomized, double-blind comparison of clozapine and high-
dose olanzapine in treatment-resistant patients with schizophrenia. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry 2008;69:274. 
 Newcomer JW, Haupt DW: The metabolic effects of antipsychotic medications. 
Can J Psychiatry 2006;51:480. 
 Patil ST et al: Activation of mGlu2/3 receptors as a new approach to treat 
schizophrenia: A randomized Phase 2 clinical trial. Nat Med 2007;13: 
1102. 
 Schwarz C et al: Valproate for schizophrenia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2008;(3):CD004028. 
 Urichuk L et al: Metabolism of atypical antipsychotics: Involvement of cytochrome 
p450 enzymes and relevance for drug-drug interactions. Curr Drug Metab 
2008;9:410. 
 Walsh T et al: Rare structural variants disrupt multiple genes in neurodevelopmen-
tal pathways in schizophrenia. Science 2008;320:539. 
 Woodward ND et al: A meta-analysis of neuropsychological change to clozapine, 
olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone in schizophrenia. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol 2005;8:457. 
 Zhang A, Neumeyer JL, Baldessarini RJ: Recent progress in development of dop-
amine receptor subtype-selective agents: Potential therapeutics for neuro-
logical and psychiatric disorders. Chem Rev 2007;107:274. 
 Mood Stabilizers 
 Baraban JM, Worley PF, Snyder SH: Second messenger systems and psychoactive 
drug action: Focus on the phosphoinositide system and lithium. Am J 
Psychiatry 1989;146:1251. 
 Bauer MS, Mitchner L: What is a “mood stabilizer”? An evidence-based response. 
Am J Psychiatry 2004;161:3. 
 Bowden CL, Singh V: Valproate in bipolar disorder: 2000 onwards. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand Suppl 2005;(426):13. 
 Catapano LA, Manji HK: Kinases as drug targets in the treatment of bipolar dis-
order. Drug Discov Today 2008;13:295. 
 Fountoulakis KN, Vieta E: Treatment of bipolar disorder: A systematic review of 
available data and clinical perspectives. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 
2008;11:999. 
 Goes FS, Sanders LL, Potash JB: The genetics of psychotic bipolar disorder. Curr 
Psychiatry Rep 2008;10:178. 
 Gould TD, Manji HK: Glycogen synthase kinase-3: A putative molecular target 
for lithium mimetic drugs. Neuropsychopharmacology 2005;30:1223. 
 Jope RS: Anti-bipolar therapy: Mechanism of action of lithium. Mol Psychiatry 
1999;4:117. 
 Mathew SJ, Manji HK, Charney DS: Novel drugs and therapeutic targets for 
severe mood disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology 2008;33:2080. 
 Quiroz JA et al: Emerging experimental therapeutics for bipolar disorder: Clues 
from the molecular pathophysiology. Mol Psychiatry 2004;9:756. 
 Schou M: Lithium treatment at 52. J Affect Disord 2001;67:21. 
 Vieta E, Sanchez-Moreno J: Acute and long-term treatment of mania. Dialogues 
Clin Neurosci 2008;10:165. 
 Yatham LN et al: Third generation anticonvulsants in bipolar disorder: a review 
of efficacy and summary of clinical recommendations. J Clin Psychiatry 
2002;63:275. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R *
Schizophrenia is characterized by a disintegration of thought 
processes and emotional responsiveness. Symptoms com-
monly include auditory hallucinations, paranoid or bizarre 
delusions, disorganized thinking and speech, and social and 
occupational dysfunction. For many patients, typical (eg, 
haloperidol) and atypical agents (eg, risperidone) are of 
equal efficacy for treating positive symptoms. Atypical agents 
are often more effective for treating negative symptoms and 
cognitive dysfunction and have lower risk of tardive dyskinesia 
and hyperprolactinemia. Other indications for the use of 
selected antipsychotics include bipolar disorder, psychotic 
depression, Tourette’s syndrome, disturbed behavior in patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease and in the case of older drugs (eg, 
chlorpromazine), treatment of emesis and pruritus.
∗Case Study Answer contributed by A.J. Trevor
521
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Antidepressant Agents
Charles DeBattista, MD
 The diagnosis of depression still rests primarily on the clinical 
interview. Major depressive disorder (MDD) is characterized 
by depressed mood most of the time for at least 2 weeks and/
or loss of interest or pleasure in most activities. In addition, 
depression is characterized by disturbances in sleep and appe-
tite as well as deficits in cognition and energy. Thoughts of 
guilt, worthlessness, and suicide are common. Coronary artery 
disease, diabetes, and stroke appear to be more common in 
depressed patients, and depression may considerably worsen 
the prognosis for patients with a variety of comorbid medical 
conditions. 
 According to a 2007 report by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, antidepressant drugs were the most 
commonly prescribed medications in the USA at the time of the 
survey. The wisdom of such widespread use of antidepressants is 
debated. However, it is clear that American physicians have been 
increasingly inclined to use antidepressants to treat a host of 
conditions and that patients have been increasingly receptive to 
their use. 
 The primary indication for antidepressant agents is the treat-
ment of MDD. Major depression, with a lifetime prevalence of 
around 17% in the USA and a point prevalence of 5%, is associ-
ated with substantial morbidity and mortality. MDD represents 
one of the most common causes of disability in the developed 
world. In addition, major depression is commonly associated with 
a variety of medical conditions—from chronic pain to coronary 
artery disease. When depression coexists with other medical con-
ditions, the patient’s disease burden increases, and the quality of 
life—and often the prognosis for effective treatment—decreases 
significantly. 
 Some of the growth in antidepressant use may be related to 
the broad application of these agents for conditions other than 
major depression. For example, antidepressants have received 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approvals for the treatment 
30
 A 47-year-old woman presents to her primary care physician 
with a chief complaint of fatigue. She indicates that she was 
promoted to senior manager in her company approximately 
11 months earlier. Although her promotion was welcome 
and came with a sizable raise in pay, it resulted in her having 
to move away from an office and group of colleagues she very 
much enjoyed. In addition, her level of responsibility 
increased dramatically. The patient reports that for the last
7 weeks, she has been waking up at 3 AM every night and 
been unable to go back to sleep. She dreads the day and the 
stresses of the workplace. As a consequence, she is not eating 
as well as she might and has dropped 7% of her body weight 
in the last 3 months. She also reports being so stressed that 
she breaks down crying in the office occasionally and has 
been calling in sick frequently. When she comes home, she 
finds she is less motivated to attend to chores around the 
house and has no motivation, interest, or energy to pursue 
recreational activities that she once enjoyed such as hiking. 
She describes herself as “chronically miserable and worried 
all the time.” Her medical history is notable for chronic neck 
pain from a motor vehicle accident for which she is being 
treated with tramadol and meperidine. In addition, she is on 
hydrochlorothiazide and propranolol for hypertension. The 
patient has a history of one depressive episode after a divorce 
that was treated successfully with fluoxetine. Medical workup 
including complete blood cell count, thyroid function tests, 
and a chemistry panel reveals no abnormalities. She is started 
on fluoxetine for a presumed major depressive episode and 
referred for cognitive behavioral psychotherapy. What 
CYP450 and pharmacodynamic interactions might be associ-
ated with fluoxetine use in this patient? Which class of anti-
depressants would be contraindicated in this patient? 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
522    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
of panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and obsessive-compulsive dis-
order (OCD). In addition, antidepressants are commonly used to 
treat pain disorders such as neuropathic pain and the pain associ-
ated with fibromyalgia. Some antidepressants are used for treat-
ing premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), mitigating the 
vasomotor symptoms of menopause, and treating stress urinary 
incontinence. Thus, antidepressants have a broad spectrum of use 
in medical practice. However, their primary use remains the treat-
ment for MDD. 
 Pathophysiology of Major Depression 
 There has been a marked shift in the last decade in our under-
standing of the pathophysiology of major depression. In addition 
to the older idea that a deficit in function or amount of monoam-
ines (the  monoamine hypothesis ) is central to the biology of 
depression, there is evidence that neurotrophic and endocrine fac-
tors play a major role (the  neurotrophic hypothesis ). Histologic 
studies, structural and functional brain imaging research, genetic 
findings, and steroid research all suggest a complex pathophysiol-
ogy for MDD with important implications for drug treatment. 
 Neurotrophic Hypothesis 
 There is substantial evidence that nerve growth factors such as 
 brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) are critical in the 
regulation of neural plasticity, resilience, and neurogenesis. The 
evidence suggests that depression is associated with the loss of 
neurotrophic support and that effective antidepressant therapies 
increase neurogenesis and synaptic connectivity in cortical areas 
such as the hippocampus. BDNF is thought to exert its influence 
on neuronal survival and growth effects by activating the tyrosine 
kinase receptor B in both neurons and glia ( Figure 30–1 ). 
 Several lines of evidence support the neurotrophic hypothesis. 
Animal and human studies indicate that stress and pain are associ-
ated with a drop in BDNF levels and that this loss of neurotrophic 
support contributes to atrophic structural changes in the hip-
pocampus and perhaps other areas such as the medial frontal 
cortex and anterior cingulate. The hippocampus is known to be 
Dendritic
sprouts
Monoamines
Glutamate
Glucocorticoids
others
Monoamines
Glutamate
others
CREB
CREB
BDNF
BDNF
BDNF
BDNF
Treated state
Depressed state
A
B
–
 FIGURE 30–1  The neurotrophic hypothesis of major depression. Changes in trophic factors (especially brain-derived neurotrophic factor, 
BDNF) and hormones appear to play a major role in the development of major depression ( A ). Successful treatment results in changes in these 
factors ( B ). CREB, cAMP response element-binding (protein). BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor. (Redrawn, with permission, from Nestler EJ: 
Neurobiology of depression. Neuron 2002;34[1]:13–25.) 
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    523
important both in contextual memory and regulation of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Likewise, the anterior 
cingulate plays a role in the integration of emotional stimuli and 
attention functions, whereas the medial orbital frontal cortex is 
also thought to play a role in memory, learning, and emotion. 
 Over 30 structural imaging studies suggest that major depres-
sion is associated with a 5–10% loss of volume in the hippocam-
pus, although some studies have not replicated this finding. 
Depression and chronic stress states have also been associated with 
a substantial loss of volume in the anterior cingulate and medial 
orbital frontal cortex. Loss of volume in structures such as the hip-
pocampus also appears to increase as a function of the duration of 
illness and the amount of time that the depression remains 
untreated. 
 Another source of evidence supporting the neurotrophic 
hypothesis of depression comes from studies of the direct effects 
of BDNF on emotional regulation. Direct infusion of BDNF into 
the midbrain, hippocampus, and lateral ventricles of rodents has 
an antidepressant-like effect in animal models. Moreover, all 
known classes of antidepressants are associated with an increase in 
BDNF levels in animal models with chronic (but not acute) 
administration. This increase in BDNF levels is consistently asso-
ciated with increased neurogenesis in the hippocampus in these 
animal models. Other interventions thought to be effective in the 
treatment of major depression, including electroconvulsive ther-
apy, also appear to robustly stimulate BDNF levels and hippocam-
pus neurogenesis in animal models. 
 Human studies seem to support the animal data on the role of 
neurotrophic factors in stress states. Depression appears to be 
associated with a drop in BDNF levels in the cerebrospinal fluid 
and serum as well as with a decrease in tyrosine kinase receptor B 
activity. Conversely, administration of antidepressants increases 
BDNF levels in clinical trials and may be associated with an 
increase in hippocampus volume in some patients. 
 Much evidence supports the neurotrophic hypothesis of 
depression, but not all evidence is consistent with this concept. 
Animal studies in BDNF knockout mice have not always sug-
gested an increase in depressive or anxious behaviors that would 
be expected with a deficiency of BDNF. In addition, some animal 
studies have found an increase in BDNF levels after some types of 
social stress and an increase rather than a decrease in depressive 
behaviors with lateral ventricle injections of BDNF. 
 A proposed explanation for the discrepant findings on the role 
of neurotrophic factors in depression is that there are polymor-
phisms for BDNF that may yield very different effects. Mutations 
in the  BDNF gene have been found to be associated with altered 
anxiety and depressive behavior in both animal and human 
studies. 
 Thus, the neurotrophic hypothesis continues to be intensely 
investigated and has yielded new insights and potential targets in 
the treatment of MDD. 
 Monoamines and Other Neurotransmitters 
 The monoamine hypothesis of depression ( Figure 30–2 ) suggests 
that depression is related to a deficiency in the amount or function 
of cortical and limbic serotonin (5-HT), norepinephrine (NE), 
and dopamine (DA). 
 Evidence to support the monoamine hypothesis comes from 
several sources. It has been known for many years that reserpine 
treatment, which is known to deplete monoamines, is associated 
with depression in a subset of patients. Similarly, depressed 
patients who respond to serotonergic antidepressants such as flu-
oxetine often rapidly suffer relapse when given diets free of tryp-
tophan, a precursor of serotonin synthesis. Patients who respond 
to noradrenergic antidepressants such as desipramine are less likely 
to relapse on a tryptophan-free diet. Moreover, depleting cate-
cholamines in depressed patients who have previously responded 
to noradrenergic agents likewise tends to be associated with 
relapse. Administration of an inhibitor of norepinephrine synthe-
sis is also associated with a rapid return of depressive symptoms in 
patients who respond to noradrenergic but not necessarily in 
patients who had responded to serotonergic antidepressants. 
 Another line of evidence supporting the monoamine 
hypothesis comes from genetic studies. A functional polymor-
phism exists for the promoter region of the serotonin trans-
porter gene, which regulates how much of the transporter 
protein is available. Subjects who are homozygous for the s 
(short) allele may be more vulnerable to developing major 
depression and suicidal behavior in response to stress. In addi-
tion, homozygotes for the s allele may also be less likely to 
respond to and tolerate serotonergic antidepressants. Conversely, 
subjects with the l (long) allele tend to be more resistant to 
stress and may be more likely to respond to serotonergic anti-
depressants. 
 Studies of depressed patients have sometimes shown an 
alteration in monoamine function. For example, some studies 
have found evidence of alteration in serotonin receptor numbers 
(5-HT 1A and 5-HT 2C ) or norepinephrine (α 2 ) receptors in 
depressed and suicidal patients, but these findings have not been 
consistent. A reduction in the primary serotonin metabolite 
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid in the cerebrospinal fluid is associ-
ated with violent and impulsive behavior, including violent sui-
cide attempts. However, this finding is not specific to major 
depression and is associated more generally with violent and 
impulsive behavior. 
 Finally, perhaps the most convincing line of evidence support-
ing the monoamine hypothesis is the fact that (at the time of this 
writing) all available antidepressants appear to have significant 
effects on the monoamine system. All classes of antidepressants 
appear to enhance the synaptic availability of 5-HT, norepineph-
rine, or dopamine. Attempts to develop antidepressants that work 
on other neurotransmitter systems have not been effective to date. 
 The monoamine hypothesis, like the neurotrophic hypothe-
sis, is at best incomplete. Many studies have not found an 
alteration in function or levels of monoamines in depressed 
patients. In addition, some candidate antidepressant agents 
under study do not act directly on the monoamine system. These 
include glutamate antagonists, melatonin agonists, and gluco-
corticoid-specific agents. Thus, monoamine function appears to 
be an important but not exclusive factor in the pathophysiology 
of depression. 
524    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Neuroendocrine Factors in the 
Pathophysiology of Depression 
 Depression is known to be associated with a number of hormonal 
abnormalities. Among the most replicated of these findings are 
abnormalities in the HPA axis in patients with MDD. Moreover, 
MDD is associated with elevated cortisol levels ( Figure 30–1 ), 
nonsuppression of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) release in 
the dexamethasone suppression test, and chronically elevated levels 
of corticotropin-releasing hormone. The significance of these HPA 
abnormalities is unclear, but they are thought to indicate a dysregu-
lation of the stress hormone axis. More severe types of depression, 
such as psychotic depression, tend to be associated with HPA abnor-
malities more commonly than milder forms of major depression. It 
α β
α
β
MAO-A
Tryptophan
hydroxylase
Tryptophan
Tyrosine
Norepinephrine
Serotonin
Metabolites
β
β
α β
G
G
i
s
cAMP
IP  , DAG
PKC
PKA
CREB
PLC
AC
ATP
3
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Presynaptic
axon
SERT
NET
5-HT
5-HT
Serotonin
receptors
1B
1A
α2
Serotonergic
Noradrenergic
Tyrosine
hydroxylase
Postsynaptic
axon
S
γ
γ
γ
γ
α
α
γ
Adrenoceptor  
 FIGURE 30–2  The amine hypothesis of major depression. Depression appears to be associated with changes in serotonin or 
norepinephrine signaling in the brain (or both) with significant downstream effects. Most antidepressants cause changes in amine signaling. 
AC, adenylyl cyclase; 5-HT, serotonin; CREB, cAMP response element-binding (protein); DAG, diacyl glycerol; IP 3 , inositol trisphosphate; MAO, 
monoamine oxidase; NET, norepinephrine transporter; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC, phospholipase C; SERT, serotonin transporter. (Redrawn, with 
permission, from Belmaker R, Agam G: Major depressive disorder. N Engl J Med 2008;358:59.) 
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    525
is well known that both exogenous glucocorticoids and endogenous 
elevation of cortisol are associated with mood symptoms and cogni-
tive deficits similar to those seen in MDD. 
 Thyroid dysregulation has also been reported in depressed 
patients. Up to 25% of depressed patients are reported to have 
abnormal thyroid function. These include a blunting of 
response of thyrotropin to thyrotropin-releasing hormone, and 
elevations in circulating thyroxine during depressed states. 
Clinical hypothyroidism often presents with depressive symp-
toms, which resolve with thyroid hormone supplementation. 
Thyroid hormones are also commonly used in conjunction 
with standard antidepressants to augment therapeutic effects of 
the latter. 
 Finally, sex steroids are also implicated in the pathophysiology 
of depression. Estrogen deficiency states, which occur in the 
postpartum and postmenopausal periods, are thought to play a 
role in the etiology of depression in some women. Likewise, severe 
testosterone deficiency in men is sometimes associated with 
depressive symptoms. Hormone replacement therapy in 
hypogonadal men and women may be associated with an improve-
ment in mood and depressive symptoms. 
 Integration of Hypotheses Regarding the 
Pathophysiology of Depression 
 The several pathophysiologic hypotheses just described are not 
mutually exclusive. It is evident that the monoamine, neuroendo-
crine, and neurotrophic systems are interrelated in important ways. 
For example, HPA and steroid abnormalities may contribute to sup-
pression of transcription of the  BDNF gene. Glucocorticoid recep-
tors are found in high density in the hippocampus. Binding of these 
hippocampal glucocorticoid receptors by cortisol during chronic 
stress states such as major depression may decrease BDNF synthesis 
and may result in volume loss in stress-sensitive regions such as the 
hippocampus. The chronic activation of monoamine receptors by 
antidepressants appears to have the opposite effect of stress and 
results in an increase in BDNF transcription. In addition, activation 
of monoamine receptors appears to down-regulate the HPA axis 
and may normalize HPA function. 
 One of the weaknesses of the monoamine hypothesis is the fact 
that amine levels increase immediately with antidepressant use, 
but maximum beneficial effects of antidepressants are not seen for 
many weeks. The time required to synthesize neurotrophic factors 
has been proposed as an explanation for this delay of antidepres-
sant effects. Appreciable protein synthesis of products such as 
BDNF typically takes 2 weeks or longer and coincides with the 
clinical course of antidepressant treatment. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTIDEPRESSANTS 
 Chemistry & Subgroups 
 The currently available antidepressants make up a remarkable 
variety of chemical types. These differences and the differences in 
their molecular targets provide the basis for distinguishing several 
subgroups. 
 A. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors 
 The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) represent a 
chemically diverse class of agents that have as their primary 
action the inhibition of the serotonin transporter (SERT) 
( Figure 30–3 ). Fluoxetine was introduced in the United States in 
1988 and quickly became one of the most commonly prescribed 
medications in medical practice. The development of fluoxetine 
emerged out of the search for chemicals that had high affinity for 
monoamine receptors but lacked the affinity for histamine, ace-
tylcholine, and α adrenoceptors that is seen with the tricyclic 
antidepressants (TCAs). There are currently six available SSRIs, 
and they are the most common antidepressants in clinical use. In 
addition to their use in major depression, SSRIs have indications 
in GAD, PTSD, OCD, panic disorder, PMDD, and bulimia. 
 Fluoxetine, sertraline, and  citalopram exist as isomers and are 
formulated in the racemic forms, whereas  paroxetine and 
 fluvoxamine are not optically active.  Escitalopram is the  S 
enantiomer of citalopram. As with all antidepressants, SSRIs are 
highly lipophilic. The popularity of SSRIs stems largely from 
their ease of use, safety in overdose, relative tolerability, cost (all 
except escitalopram are generically available), and broad spec-
trum of uses. 
 B. Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors 
 Two classes of antidepressants act as combined serotonin and 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors: selective  serotonin- 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and  TCAs. 
 1. Selective 
serotonin-norepinephrine 
reuptake 
inhibitors— The SNRIs include  venlafaxine, its metabolite 
 desvenlafaxine, and  duloxetine. Another SNRI,  milnacipran, 
has been approved for the treatment of fibromyalgia in the USA 
but has been studied extensively as an antidepressant. It has 
been available in Europe for several years. In addition to their 
use in major depression, other applications of the SNRIs 
include the treatment of pain disorders including neuropathies 
and fibromyalgia. SNRIs are also used in the treatment of gen-
eralized anxiety, stress urinary incontinence, and vasomotor 
symptoms of menopause. 
CH3
CH3
RO
HO
N
Venlafaxine
R = CH3 :
R = H  
: Desvenlafaxine
526    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 SNRIs are chemically unrelated to each other. Venlafaxine 
was discovered in the process of evaluating chemicals that 
inhibit binding of imipramine. Venlafaxine’s in vivo effects are 
similar to those of imipramine but with a more favorable 
adverse-effect profile. All SNRIs bind the serotonin (SERT) 
and norepinephrine (NET) transporters, as do the TCAs. 
However, unlike the TCAs, the SNRIs do not have much affin-
ity for other receptors. Venlafaxine and desvenlafaxine are 
bicyclic compounds, whereas duloxetine is a three-ring struc-
ture unrelated to the TCAs. Milnacipran contains a cyclopro-
pane ring and is provided as a racemic mixture. 
 
Duloxetine
O
CH
CH2
NHCH3
CH2
S
 
 2. Tricyclic antidepressants— The TCAs were the dominant 
class of antidepressants until the introduction of SSRIs in the 
1980s and 1990s. Nine TCAs are available in the USA, and they 
all have an iminodibenzyl (tricyclic) core ( Figure 30–4 ). The 
chemical differences between the TCAs are relatively subtle. For 
example, the prototype TCA  imipramine and its metabolite, 
 desipramine, differ by only a methyl group in the propylamine 
side chain. However, this minor difference results in a substantial 
change in their pharmacologic profiles. Imipramine is highly 
anticholinergic and is a relatively strong serotonin as well as nor-
epinephrine reuptake inhibitor. In contrast, desipramine is much 
less anticholinergic and is a more potent and somewhat more 
selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor than is imipramine. 
 At the present time, the TCAs are used primarily in depression 
that is unresponsive to more commonly used antidepressants such 
as the SSRIs or SNRIs. Their loss of popularity stems in large part 
from relatively poorer tolerability compared with newer agents, to 
difficulty of use, and to lethality in overdose. Other uses for TCAs 
include the treatment of pain conditions, enuresis, and insomnia. 
 C. 5-HT 2 Antagonists 
 Two antidepressants are thought to act primarily as antagonists at 
the 5-HT 2 receptor:  trazodone and  nefazodone. Trazodone’s 
structure includes a triazolo moiety that is thought to impart anti-
depressant effects. Its primary metabolite, m-chlorphenylpiperazine 
(m-cpp), is a potent 5-HT 2 antagonist. Trazodone was among the 
most commonly prescribed antidepressants until it was supplanted 
by the SSRIs in the late 1980s. The most common use of trazodone 
in current practice is as an unlabeled hypnotic, since it is highly 
sedating and not associated with tolerance or dependence. 
Trazodone
O
N
N
N
CH2
N
N
Cl
CH2
CH2
Fluoxetine
F3C
O
CH
CH2CH2NHCH3
Paroxetine
O
CH2
O
O
H
N
F
NHCH3
CI
CI
Sertraline
O
C
N
F
CH2CH2CH2N
CH3
CH3
Citalopram,
escitalopram
 FIGURE 30–3  Structures of several selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. 
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    527
 Nefazodone is chemically related to trazodone. Its primary 
metabolites, hydroxynefazodone and m-cpp are both inhibitors 
of the 5-HT 2 receptor. Nefazodone received an FDA black box 
warning in 2001 implicating it in hepatotoxicity, including lethal 
cases of hepatic failure. Though still available generically, nefa-
zodone is no longer commonly prescribed. The primary indica-
tions for both nefazodone and trazodone are major depression, 
although both have also been used in the treatment of anxiety 
disorders. 
 
Nefazodone
O
CH2 CH2
CH3CH2
O
N
CH2 CH2
CI
CH2 N
N
N
N
  
 D. Tetracyclic and Unicyclic Antidepressants 
 A number of antidepressants do not fit neatly into the other classes. 
Among these are  bupropion,  mirtazapine, amoxapine, and 
 maprotiline ( Figure 30–5 ). Bupropion has a unicyclic aminoketone 
structure. Its unique structure results in a different side-effect profile 
than most antidepressants (described below). Bupropion somewhat 
resembles amphetamine in chemical structure and, like the stimu-
lant, has central nervous system (CNS) activating properties. 
 Mirtazapine was introduced in 1994 and, like bupropion, is 
one of the few antidepressants not commonly associated with 
sexual side effects. It has a tetracyclic chemical structure and 
belongs to the piperazino-azepine group of compounds. 
 Mirtazapine, amoxapine, and maprotiline have tetracyclic 
structures. Amoxapine is the  N -methylated metabolite of loxa-
pine, an older antipsychotic drug. Amoxapine and maprotiline 
share structural similarities and side effects comparable to the 
TCAs. As a result, these tetracyclics are not commonly prescribed 
in current practice. Their primary use is in MDD that is unre-
sponsive to other agents. 
 E. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors 
 Arguably the first modern class of antidepressants, monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) were introduced in the 1950s but are 
now rarely used in clinical practice because of toxicity and poten-
tially lethal food and drug interactions. Their primary use now is 
in the treatment of depression unresponsive to other antidepres-
sants. However, MAOIs have also been used historically to treat 
anxiety states, including social anxiety and panic disorder. In addi-
tion, selegiline is used for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease (see 
 Chapter 28 ). 
 Current MAOIs include the hydrazine derivatives  phenelzine 
and  isocarboxazid and the non-hydrazines  tranylcypromine, 
selegiline, and  moclobemide (the latter is not available in the 
USA). The hydrazines and tranylcypromine bind irreversibly and 
nonselectively with MAO-A and -B, whereas other MAOIs may 
have more selective or reversible properties. Some of the MAOIs 
R1: = CH(CH2)2N(CH3)2
R1: = CH(CH2)2NHCH3
R1: = (CH2)3NHCH3
R1: = CH(CH2)2N(CH3)2
Imipramine
Amitriptyline
Doxepin
Desipramine
Nortriptyline
Protriptyline
Clomipramine
Trimipramine
R1:–(CH2)3N(CH3)2
R2: H
R2: H
R1: = (CH2)3N(CH3)2
R2: – Cl
R1: = (CH2)3NCH3
R1: = CH2CH(CH)3CH2N(CH3)2
R2: – H
R1
C
N
R1
R2
R1
C
O
R1
 FIGURE 30–4  Structures of the tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). 
528    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
such as tranylcypromine resemble amphetamine in chemical 
structure, whereas other MAOIs such as selegiline have amphet-
amine-like metabolites. As a result, these MAOIs tend to have 
substantial CNS-stimulating effects. 
 
Phenelzine
CH2
CH2
NH
NH2
Tranylcypromine
CH
CH
NH2
CH2
 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The antidepressants share several pharmacokinetic features 
( Table 30–1 ). Most have fairly rapid oral absorption, achieve peak 
plasma levels within 2–3 hours, are tightly bound to plasma pro-
teins, undergo hepatic metabolism, and are renally cleared. 
However, even within classes, the pharmacokinetics of individual 
antidepressants varies considerably. 
 A. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors 
 The prototype SSRI, fluoxetine, differs from other SSRIs in some 
important respects ( Table 30–1 ). Fluoxetine is metabolized to an 
active product, norfluoxetine, which may have plasma concentra-
tions greater than those of fluoxetine. The elimination half-life of 
norfluoxetine is about three times longer than fluoxetine and 
contributes to the longest half-life of all the SSRIs. As a result, 
fluoxetine has to be discontinued 4 weeks or longer before an 
MAOI can be administered to mitigate the risk of serotonin 
syndrome. 
 Fluoxetine and paroxetine are potent inhibitors of the CYP2D6 
isoenzyme, and this contributes to potential drug interactions (see 
Drug Interactions). In contrast, fluvoxamine is an inhibitor of 
CYP3A4, whereas citalopram, escitalopram, and sertraline have 
more modest CYP interactions. 
 B. Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors 
 1. Selective 
serotonin-norepinephrine 
reuptake 
 inhibitors— Venlafaxine is extensively metabolized in the liver 
via the CYP2D6 isoenzyme to  O -desmethylvenlafaxine (desvenla-
faxine). Both have similar half-lives of about 11 hours. Despite the 
relatively short half-lives, both drugs are available in formulations 
that allow once-daily dosing. Venlafaxine and desvenlafaxine have 
the lowest protein binding of all antidepressants (27–30%). 
Unlike most antidepressants, desvenlafaxine is conjugated and 
does not undergo extensive oxidative metabolism. At least 45% of 
desvenlafaxine is excreted unchanged in the urine compared with 
4–8% of venlafaxine. 
 Duloxetine is well absorbed and has a half-life of about 12 hours 
but is dosed once daily. It is tightly bound to protein (97%) and 
undergoes extensive oxidative metabolism via CYP2D6 and 
CYP1A2. Hepatic impairment significantly alters duloxetine levels 
unlike desvenlafaxine. 
 2. Tricyclic antidepressants— The TCAs tend to be well 
absorbed and have long half-lives ( Table 30–1 ). As a result, most 
are dosed once daily at night because of their sedating effects. 
TCAs undergo extensive metabolism via demethylation, aromatic 
hydroxylation, and glucuronide conjugation. Only about 5% of 
TCAs are excreted unchanged in the urine. The TCAs are 
O
N
C
N
NH
Cl
Amoxapine
Maprotiline
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
NH
Bupropion
C
CH
NH
O
CI
C(CH3)3
CH3
Mirtazapine
CH3
N
N
N
 FIGURE 30–5  Structures of the tetracyclics, amoxapine, maprotiline, and mirtazapine and the unicyclic, bupropion. 
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    529
substrates of the CYP2D6 system, and the serum levels of these 
agents tend to be substantially influenced by concurrent adminis-
tration of drugs such as fluoxetine. In addition, genetic polymor-
phism for CYP2D6 may result in low or extensive metabolism of 
the TCAs. 
 The secondary amine TCAs, including desipramine and nor-
triptyline, lack active metabolites and have fairly linear kinetics. 
These TCAs have a wide therapeutic window, and serum levels are 
reliable in predicting response and toxicity. 
 C. 5-HT 2 Antagonists 
 Trazodone and nefazodone are rapidly absorbed and undergo 
extensive hepatic metabolism. Both drugs are extensively bound to 
protein and have limited bioavailability because of extensive 
metabolism. Their short half-lives generally require split dosing 
when used as antidepressants. However, trazodone is often 
 prescribed as a single dose at night as a hypnotic in lower doses 
than are used in the treatment of depression. Both trazodone and 
nefazodone have active metabolites that also exhibit 5-HT 2 
antagonism. Nefazodone is a potent inhibitor of the CYP3A4 
system and may interact with drugs metabolized by this enzyme 
(see Drug Interactions). 
 D. Tetracyclic and Unicyclic Agents 
 Bupropion is rapidly absorbed and has a mean protein binding of 
85%. It undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism and has a sub-
stantial first-pass effect. It has three active metabolites including 
hydroxybupropion; the latter is being developed as an antidepres-
sant. Bupropion has a biphasic elimination with the first phase 
lasting about 1 hour and the second phase lasting 14 hours. 
 Amoxapine is also rapidly absorbed with protein binding of 
about 85%. The half-life is variable, and the drug is often given in 
TABLE 30–1 Pharmacokinetic profiles of selected antidepressants.
Class, Drug
Bioavailability (%)
Plasma t1/2 
(hours)
Active Metabolite 
t1/2 (hours)
Volume of 
Distribution (L/kg)
Protein Binding (%)
SSRIs
Citalopram
80
33–38
ND
15
80
Escitalopram
80
27–32
ND
12–15
80
Fluoxetine
70
48–72
180
12–97
95
Fluvoxamine
90
14–18
14–16
25
80
Paroxetine
50
20–23
ND
28–31
94
Sertraline
45
22–27
62–104
20
98
SNRIs
Duloxetine
50
12–15
ND
10–14
90
Milnacipran
85–90
6–8
ND
5–6
13
Venlafaxine1
45
8–11
9–13
4–10
27
Tricyclics
Amitriptyline
45
31–46
20–92
5–10
90
Clomipramine
50
19–37
54–77
7–20
97
Imipramine
40
9–24
14–62
15–30
84
5-HT2 antagonists
Nefazodone
20
2–4
ND
0.5–1
99
Trazodone
95
3–6
ND
1–3
96
Tetracyclics and unicyclic
Amoxapine
ND
7–12
5–30
0.9–1.2
90
Bupropion
70
11–14
15–25
20–30
84
Maprotiline
70
43–45
ND
23–27
88
Mirtazapine
50
20–40
20–40
3–7
85
MAOIs
Phenelzine
ND
11
ND
ND
ND
Selegiline
4
8–10
9–11
8–10
99
1Desvenlafaxine has similar properties but is less completely metabolized.
MAOIs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors; ND, no data found; SNRIs, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
530    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
divided doses. Amoxapine undergoes extensive hepatic metabo-
lism. One of the active metabolites, 7-hydroxyamoxapine, is a 
potent D 2 blocker and is associated with antipsychotic effects. 
Maprotiline is similarly well absorbed orally and 88% bound to 
protein. It undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism. 
 Mirtazapine is demethylated followed by hydroxylation and 
glucuronide conjugation. Several CYP isozymes are involved in 
the metabolism of mirtazapine, including 2D6, 3A4, and 1A2. 
The half-life of mirtazapine is 20–40 hours, and it is usually dosed 
once in the evening because of its sedating effects. 
 E. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors 
 The different MAOIs are metabolized via different pathways but 
tend to have extensive first-pass effects that may substantially 
decrease bioavailability. Tranylcypromine is ring hydroxylated 
and  N -acetylated, whereas acetylation appears to be a minor path-
way for phenelzine. Selegiline is  N -demethylated and then 
hydroxylated. The MAOIs are well absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract. 
 Because of the prominent first-pass effects and their tendency 
to inhibit MAO in the gut (resulting in tyramine pressor effects), 
alternative routes of administration are being developed. For 
example, selegiline is available in both transdermal and sublingual 
forms that bypass both gut and liver. These routes decrease the risk 
of food interactions and provide substantially increased bioavail-
ability. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 As previously noted, all currently available antidepressants 
enhance monoamine neurotransmission by one of several 
mechanisms. The most common mechanism is inhibition of 
the activity of SERT, NET, or both monoamine transporters 
( Table 30–2 ). Antidepressants that inhibit SERT, NET, or both 
include the SSRIs and SNRIs (by definition), and the TCAs. 
Another mechanism for increasing the availability of monoam-
ines is inhibition of their enzymatic degradation (the MAOIs). 
Additional strategies for enhancing monoamine tone include 
binding presynaptic autoreceptors (mirtazapine) or specific 
postsynaptic receptors (5-HT 2 antagonists and mirtazapine). 
Ultimately, the increased availability of monoamines for bind-
ing in the synaptic cleft results in a cascade of events that 
enhance the transcription of some proteins and the inhibition 
of others. It is the net production of these proteins, including 
BDNF, glucocorticoid receptors, β adrenoceptors, and other 
proteins, that appears to determine the benefits as well as the 
toxicity of a given agent. 
TABLE 30–2 Antidepressant effects on several receptors and transporters.
Antidepressant
ACh M
α1
H1
5-HT2
NET
SERT
Amitriptyline
+++
+++
++
0/+
+
++
Amoxapine
+
++
+
+++
++
+
Bupropion
0
0
0
0
0/+
0
Citalopram, escitalopram
0
0
0
0
+++
Clomipramine
+
++
+
+
+
+++
Desipramine
+
+
+
0/+
+++
+
Doxepin
++
+++
+++
0/+
+
+
Fluoxetine
0
0
0
0/+
0
+++
Fluvoxamine
0
0
0
0
0
+++
Imipramine
++
+
+
0/+
+
++
Maprotiline
+
+
++
0/+
++
0
Mirtazapine
0
0
+++
+
+
0
Nefazodone
0
+
0
++
0/+
+
Nortriptyline
+
+
+
+
++
+
Paroxetine
+
0
0
0
+
+++
Protriptyline
+++
+
+
+
+++
+
Sertraline
0
0
0
0
0
+++
Trazodone
0
++
0/+
++
0
+
Trimipramine
++
++
+++
0/+
0
0
Venlafaxine
0
0
0
0
+
++
ACh M, acetylcholine muscarinic receptor; α1, alpha1-adrenoceptor; H1, histamine1 receptor; 5-HT2, serotonin 5-HT2 receptor; NET, norepinephrine transporter; SERT, serotonin 
transporter.
0/+, minimal affinity; +, mild affinity; ++, moderate affinity; +++, high affinity.
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    531
 A. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors 
 The serotonin transporter (SERT) is a glycoprotein with 12 trans-
membrane regions embedded in the axon terminal and cell body 
membranes of serotonergic neurons. When extracellular serotonin 
binds to receptors on the transporter, conformational changes 
occur in the transporter and serotonin, Na + , and Cl – are moved 
into the cell. Binding of intracellular K + then results in return of 
the transporter to its original conformation and the release of 
serotonin inside the cell. SSRIs allosterically inhibit the trans-
porter by binding the receptor at a site other than active binding 
site for serotonin. At therapeutic doses, about 80% of the activity 
of the transporter is inhibited. Functional polymorphisms exist for 
SERT that determine the activity of the transporter. 
 SSRIs have modest effects on other neurotransmitters. Unlike 
TCAs and SNRIs, there is little evidence that SSRIs have promi-
nent effects on β adrenoceptors or the norepinephrine transporter, 
NET. Binding to the serotonin transporter is associated with tonic 
inhibition of the dopamine system, although there is substantial 
interindividual variability in this effect. The SSRIs do not bind 
aggressively to histamine, muscarinic, or other receptors. 
 B. Drugs That Block Both Serotonin and 
Norepinephrine Transporters 
 A large number of antidepressants have mixed inhibitory effects on 
both serotonin and norepinephrine transporters. The newer agents 
in this class (venlafaxine and duloxetine) are denoted by the acronym 
SNRIs, whereas the agents in the older group are termed TCAs. 
 1. Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors— SNRIs 
bind both the serotonin and the norepinephrine transporters. The 
NET is structurally very similar to the 5-HT transporter. Like the 
serotonin transporter, it is a 12-transmembrane domain complex 
that allosterically binds norepinephrine. The NET also has a mod-
erate affinity for dopamine. 
 Venlafaxine is a weak inhibitor of NET, whereas desvenlafaxine, 
duloxetine, and milnacipran are more balanced inhibitors of both 
SERT and NET. Nonetheless, the affinity of most SNRIs tends to 
be much greater for SERT than for NET. The SNRIs differ from 
the TCAs in that they lack the potent antihistamine, α-adrenergic 
blocking, and anticholinergic effects of the TCAs. As a result, the 
SNRIs tend to be favored over the TCAs in the treatment of MDD 
and pain syndromes because of their better tolerability. 
 2. Tricyclic antidepressants— The TCAs resemble the SNRIs 
in function, and their antidepressant activity is thought to relate 
primarily to their inhibition of 5-HT and norepinephrine reuptake. 
Within the TCAs, there is considerable variability in affinity for 
SERT versus NET. For example, clomipramine has relatively very 
little affinity for NET but potently binds SERT. This selectivity for 
the serotonin transporter contributes to clomipramine’s known 
benefits in the treatment of OCD. On the other hand, the second-
ary amine TCAs, desipramine and nortriptyline, are relatively more 
selective for NET. Although the tertiary amine TCA imipramine 
has more serotonin effects initially, its metabolite, desipramine, 
then balances this effect with more NET inhibition. 
 Common adverse effects of the TCAs, including dry mouth 
and constipation, are attributable to the potent antimuscarinic 
effects of many of these drugs. The TCAs also tend to be potent 
antagonists of the histamine H 1 receptor. TCAs such as doxepin 
are sometimes prescribed as hypnotics and used in treatments for 
pruritus because of their antihistamine properties. The blockade 
of α adrenoceptors can result in substantial orthostatic hypoten-
sion, particularly in older patients. 
 C. 5-HT 2 Antagonists 
 The principle action of both nefazodone and trazodone appears to 
be blockade of the 5-HT 2A receptor. Inhibition of this receptor in 
both animal and human studies is associated with substantial 
antianxiety, antipsychotic, and antidepressant effects. Conversely, 
agonists of the 5-HT 2A receptor, eg, lysergic acid (LSD) and mes-
caline, are often hallucinogenic and anxiogenic. The 5-HT 2A 
receptor is a G protein-coupled receptor and is distributed 
throughout the neocortex. 
 Nefazodone is a weak inhibitor of both SERT and NET but is 
a potent antagonist of the postsynaptic 5-HT 2A receptor, as are its 
metabolites. Trazodone is also a weak but selective inhibitor of 
SERT with little effect on NET. Its primary metabolite, m-cpp, is 
a potent 5-HT 2 antagonist, and much of trazodone’s benefits as an 
antidepressant might be attributed to this effect. Trazodone also 
has weak-to-moderate presynaptic α-adrenergic–blocking proper-
ties and is a modest antagonist of the H 1 receptor. 
 D. Tetracyclic and Unicyclic Antidepressants 
 The actions of bupropion remain poorly understood. Bupropion 
and its major metabolite hydroxybupropion are modest-to-mod-
erate inhibitors of norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake in 
animal studies. However, these effects seem less than are typically 
associated with antidepressant benefit. A more significant effect of 
bupropion is presynaptic release of catecholamines. In animal 
studies, bupropion appears to substantially increase the presynap-
tic availability of norepinephrine, and dopamine to a lesser extent. 
Bupropion has virtually no direct effects on the serotonin system. 
 Mirtazapine has a complex pharmacology. It is an antagonist of 
the presynaptic α 2 autoreceptor and enhances the release of both 
norepinephrine and 5-HT. In addition, mirtazapine is an antago-
nist of 5-HT 2 and 5-HT 3 receptors. Finally, mirtazapine is a potent 
H 1 antagonist, which is associated with the drug’s sedative effects. 
 The actions of amoxapine and maprotiline resemble those of 
TCAs such as desipramine. Both are potent NET inhibitors and 
less potent SERT inhibitors. In addition, both possess anticholin-
ergic properties. Unlike the TCAs or other antidepressants, amox-
apine is a moderate inhibitor of the postsynaptic D 2 receptor. As 
such, amoxapine possesses some antipsychotic properties. 
 E. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors 
 MAOIs act by mitigating the actions of monoamine oxidase in the 
neuron and increasing monoamine content. There are two forms 
of monoamine oxidase. MAO-A is present in both dopamine and 
norepinephrine neurons and is found primarily in the brain, gut, 
placenta, and liver; its primary substrates are norepinephrine, 
532    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
epinephrine, and serotonin. MAO-B is found primarily in sero-
tonergic and histaminergic neurons and is distributed in the brain, 
liver, and platelets. MAO-B acts primarily on tyramine, phenyl-
ethylamine, and benzylamine. Both MAO-A and -B metabolize 
tryptamine and dopamine. 
 MAOIs are classified by their specificity for MAO-A or -B and 
whether their effects are reversible or irreversible. Phenelzine and 
tranylcypromine are examples of irreversible, nonselective MAOIs. 
Moclobemide is a reversible and selective inhibitor of MAO-A but 
is not available in the USA. Moclobemide can be displaced from 
MAO-A by tyramine, and this mitigates the risk of food interac-
tions. In contrast, selegiline is an irreversible MAO-B–specific 
agent at low doses. Selegiline is useful in the treatment of 
Parkinson’s disease at these low doses, but at higher doses it 
becomes a nonselective MAOI similar to other agents. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTIDEPRESSANTS 
 Clinical Indications 
 A. Depression 
 The FDA indication for the use of the antidepressants in the treat-
ment of major depression is fairly broad. Most antidepressants are 
approved for both acute and long-term treatment of major depres-
sion. Acute episodes of MDD tend to last about 6–14 months 
untreated, but at least 20% of episodes last 2 years or longer. 
 The goal of acute treatment of MDD is remission of all symp-
toms. Since antidepressants may not achieve their maximum 
benefit for 1–2 months or longer, it is not unusual for a trial of 
therapy to last 8–12 weeks at therapeutic doses. The antidepres-
sants are successful in achieving remission in about 30–40% of 
patients within a single trial of 8–12 weeks. If an inadequate 
response is obtained, therapy is often switched to another agent or 
augmented by addition of another drug. For example, bupropion, 
an atypical antipsychotic, or mirtazapine might be added to an 
SSRI or SNRI to augment antidepressant benefit if monotherapy 
is unsuccessful. Seventy to eighty percent of patients are able to 
achieve remission with sequenced augmentation or switching 
strategies. Once an adequate response is achieved, continuation 
therapy is recommended for a minimum of 6–12 months to 
reduce the substantial risk of relapse. 
 Approximately 85% of patients who have a single episode of 
MDD will have at least one recurrence in a lifetime. Many patients 
have multiple recurrences, and these recurrences may progress to 
more serious, chronic, and treatment-resistant episodes. Thus, it is 
not unusual for patients to require maintenance treatment to pre-
vent recurrences. Although maintenance treatment studies of more 
than 5 years are uncommon, long-term studies with TCAs, SNRIs, 
and SSRIs suggest a significant protective benefit when given 
chronically. Thus, it is commonly recommended that patients be 
considered for long-term maintenance treatment if they have had 
two or more serious MDD episodes in the previous 5 years or three 
or more serious episodes in a lifetime. 
 It is not clear whether antidepressants are useful for all sub-
types of depression. For example, patients with bipolar depression 
may not benefit much from antidepressants even when added to 
mood stabilizers. In fact, the antidepressants are sometimes asso-
ciated with switches into mania or more rapid cycling. There has 
also been some debate about the overall efficacy of antidepres-
sants in unipolar depression, with some meta-analyses showing 
large effects and others showing more modest effects. Although 
this debate is not likely to be settled immediately, there is little 
debate that antidepressants have important benefits for most 
patients. 
 Psychotherapeutic interventions such as cognitive behavior 
therapy appear to be as effective as antidepressant treatment for 
mild to moderate forms of depression. However, cognitive behav-
ior therapy tends to take longer to be effective and is generally 
more expensive than antidepressant treatment. Psychotherapy is 
often combined with antidepressant treatment, and the combina-
tion appears more effective than either strategy alone. 
 B. Anxiety Disorders 
 After major depression, anxiety disorders represent the most com-
mon application of antidepressants. A number of SSRIs and 
SNRIs have been approved for all the major anxiety disorders, 
including PTSD, OCD, social anxiety disorder, GAD, and panic 
disorder. Panic disorder is characterized by recurrent episodes of 
brief overwhelming anxiety, which often occur without precipi-
tant. Patients may begin to fear having an attack, or they avoid 
situations in which they might have an attack. In contrast, GAD 
is characterized by a chronic, free-floating anxiety and undue 
worry that tends to be chronic in nature. Although older antide-
pressants and drugs of the sedative-hypnotic class are still occa-
sionally used for the treatment of anxiety disorders, SSRIs and 
SNRIs have largely replaced them. 
 The benzodiazepines (see  Chapter 22 ) provide much more 
rapid relief of both generalized anxiety and panic than do any of 
the antidepressants. However, the antidepressants appear to be at 
least as effective and perhaps more effective than benzodiazepines 
in the long-term treatment of these anxiety disorders. Furthermore, 
antidepressants do not carry the risks of dependence and tolerance 
that may occur with the benzodiazepines. 
 OCD is known to respond to serotonergic antidepressants. It 
is characterized by repetitive anxiety-provoking thoughts (obses-
sions) or repetitive behaviors aimed at reducing anxiety (compul-
sions). Clomipramine and several of the SSRIs are approved for 
the treatment of OCD, and they are moderately effective. 
Behavior therapy is usually combined with the antidepressant for 
additional benefits. 
 Social anxiety disorder is an uncommonly diagnosed but a 
fairly common condition in which the patient experiences severe 
anxiety in social interactions. This anxiety may limit their ability 
to function adequately in their jobs or interpersonal relationships. 
Several SSRIs and venlafaxine are approved for the treatment of 
social anxiety. The efficacy of the SSRIs in the treatment of social 
anxiety is greater in some studies than their efficacy in the treat-
ment of MDD. 
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    533
 PTSD is manifested when a traumatic or life-threatening event 
results in intrusive anxiety-provoking thoughts or imagery, hyper-
vigilance, nightmares, and avoidance of situations that remind the 
patient of the trauma. SSRIs are considered first-line treatment for 
PTSD and can benefit a number of symptoms including anxious 
thoughts and hypervigilance. Other treatments, including psycho-
therapeutic interventions, are usually required in addition to 
antidepressants. 
 C. Pain Disorders 
 It has been known for over 40 years that antidepressants possess 
analgesic properties independent of their mood effects. TCAs 
have been used in the treatment of neuropathic and other pain 
conditions since the 1960s. Medications that possess both nor-
epinephrine and 5-HT reuptake blocking properties are often 
useful in treating pain disorders. Ascending corticospinal mono-
amine pathways appear to be important in the endogenous anal-
gesic system. In addition, chronic pain conditions are commonly 
associated with major depression. TCAs continue to be com-
monly used for some of these conditions, and SNRIs are increas-
ingly used. In 2010, duloxetine was approved for the treatment 
of chronic joint and muscle pain. As mentioned earlier, milnaci-
pran has been approved for the treatment of fibromyalgia. Other 
SNRIs, eg, desvenlafaxine, are being investigated for a variety of 
pain conditions from postherpetic neuralgia to chronic 
back pain. 
 D. Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 
 Approximately 5% of women in the child-bearing years will have 
prominent mood and physical symptoms during the late luteal 
phase of almost every cycle; these may include anxiety, depressed 
mood, irritability, insomnia, fatigue, and a variety of other physi-
cal symptoms. These symptoms are more severe than those typi-
cally seen in premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and can be quite 
disruptive to vocational and interpersonal activities. The SSRIs are 
known to be beneficial to many women with PMDD, and fluox-
etine and sertraline have been approved for this indication. 
Treating for 2 weeks out of the month in the luteal phase may be 
as effective as continuous treatment. The rapid effects of SSRIs in 
PMDD may be associated with rapid increases in pregnenolone 
levels. 
 E. Smoking Cessation 
 Bupropion was approved in 1997 as a treatment for smoking ces-
sation. Approximately twice as many people treated with bupro-
pion as with placebo have a reduced urge to smoke. In addition, 
patients taking bupropion appear to experience fewer mood symp-
toms and possibly less weight gain while withdrawing from nico-
tine dependence. Bupropion appears to be about as effective as 
nicotine patches in smoking cessation. The mechanism by which 
bupropion is helpful in this application is unknown, but the drug 
may mimic nicotine’s effects on dopamine and norepinephrine 
and may antagonize nicotinic receptors. Nicotine is also known to 
have antidepressant effects in some people, and bupropion may 
substitute for this effect. 
 Other antidepressants may also have a role in the treatment of 
smoking cessation. Nortriptyline has been shown to be helpful in 
smoking cessation, but the effects have not been as consistent as 
those seen with bupropion. 
 F. Eating Disorders 
 Bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa are potentially devastating 
disorders. Bulimia is characterized by episodic intake of large 
amounts of food (binges) followed by ritualistic purging through 
emesis, the use of laxatives, or other methods. Medical complica-
tions of the purging, such as hypokalemia, are common and dan-
gerous. Anorexia is a disorder in which reduced food intake results 
in a loss of weight of 15% or more of ideal body weight, and the 
person has a morbid fear of gaining weight and a highly distorted 
body image. Anorexia is often chronic and may be fatal in 10% or 
more of cases. 
 Antidepressants appear to be helpful in the treatment of buli-
mia but not anorexia. Fluoxetine was approved for the treatment 
of bulimia in 1996, and other antidepressants have shown benefit 
in reducing the binge-purge cycle. The primary treatment for 
anorexia at this time is refeeding, family therapy, and cognitive 
behavioral therapy. 
 Bupropion may have some benefits in treating obesity. 
Nondepressed, obese patients treated with bupropion were able to 
lose somewhat more weight and maintain the loss relative to a 
similar population treated with placebo. However, the weight loss 
was not robust, and there appear to be more effective options for 
weight loss. 
 G. Other Uses for Antidepressants 
 Antidepressants are used for many other on- and off-label appli-
cations. Enuresis in children is an older labeled use for some 
TCAs, but they are less commonly used now because of their 
side effects. The SNRI duloxetine is approved in Europe for the 
treatment of urinary stress incontinence. Many of the serotoner-
gic antidepressants appear to be helpful for treating vasomotor 
symptoms in perimenopause. Desvenlafaxine is under consider-
ation for FDA approval for the treatment of these vasomotor 
symptoms, and studies have suggested that SSRIs, venlafaxine, 
and nefazodone may also provide benefit. Although serotonergic 
antidepressants are commonly associated with inducing sexual 
adverse effects, some of these effects might prove useful for some 
sexual disorders. For example, SSRIs are known to delay orgasm 
in some patients. For this reason, SSRIs are sometimes used to 
treat premature ejaculation. In addition, bupropion has been 
used to treat sexual adverse effects associated with SSRI use, 
although its efficacy for this use has not been consistently dem-
onstrated in controlled trials. 
 Choosing an Antidepressant 
 The choice of an antidepressant depends first on the indication. 
Not all conditions are equally responsive to all antidepressants. 
However, in the treatment of MDD, it is difficult to demonstrate 
that one antidepressant is consistently more effective than another. 
534    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
Thus, the choice of an antidepressant for the treatment of depres-
sion rests primarily on practical considerations such as cost, avail-
ability, adverse effects, potential drug interactions, the patient’s 
history of response or lack thereof, and patient preference. Other 
factors such as the patient’s age, gender, and medical status may 
also guide antidepressant selection. For example, older patients are 
particularly sensitive to the anticholinergic effects of the TCAs. 
On the other hand, the CYP3A4-inhibiting effects of the SSRI 
fluvoxamine may make this a problematic choice in some older 
patients because fluvoxamine may interact with many other 
medications that an older patient may require. There is some sug-
gestion that female patients may respond to and tolerate seroton-
ergic better than noradrenergic or TCA antidepressants, but the 
data supporting this gender difference have not been consistent. 
Patients with narrow-angle glaucoma may have an exacerbation 
with noradrenergic antidepressants, whereas bupropion and other 
antidepressants are known to lower the seizure threshold in epi-
lepsy patients. 
 At present, SSRIs are the most commonly prescribed first-line 
agents in the treatment of both MDD and anxiety disorders. Their 
popularity comes from their ease of use, tolerability, and safety in 
overdose. The starting dose of the SSRIs is usually the same as the 
therapeutic dose for most patients, and so titration may not be 
required. In addition, most SSRIs are now generically available 
and inexpensive. Other agents, including the SNRIs, bupropion, 
and mirtazapine, are also reasonable first-line agents for the treat-
ment of MDD. Bupropion, mirtazapine, and nefazodone are the 
antidepressants with the least association with sexual side effects 
and are often prescribed for this reason. However, bupropion is 
not thought to be effective in the treatment of the anxiety disor-
ders and may be poorly tolerated in anxious patients. The primary 
indication for bupropion is in the treatment of major depression, 
including seasonal (winter) depression. Off-label uses of bupro-
pion include the treatment of attention deficit hyperkinetic disor-
der (ADHD), and bupropion is commonly combined with other 
antidepressants to augment therapeutic response. The primary 
indication for mirtazapine is in the treatment of major depression. 
However, its strong antihistamine properties have contributed to 
its occasional use as a hypnotic and as an adjunctive treatment to 
more activating antidepressants. 
 The TCAs and MAOIs are now relegated to second- or third-
line treatments for MDD. Both the TCAs and the MAOIs are 
potentially lethal in overdose, require titration to achieve a thera-
peutic dose, have serious drug interactions, and have many trou-
blesome adverse effects. As a consequence, their use in the 
treatment of MDD or anxiety is now reserved for patients who 
have been unresponsive to other agents. Clearly, there are patients 
whose depression responds only to MAOIs or TCAs. Thus, TCAs 
and MAOIs are probably underused in treatment-resistant 
depressed patients. 
 The use of antidepressants outside the treatment of MDD 
tends to require specific agents. For example, the TCAs and SNRIs 
appear to be useful in the treatment of pain conditions, but other 
antidepressant classes appear to be far less effective. SSRIs and the 
highly serotonergic TCA, clomipramine, are effective in the 
treatment of OCD, but noradrenergic antidepressants have not 
proved to be as helpful for this condition. Bupropion and nortrip-
tyline have usefulness in the treatment of smoking cessation, but 
SSRIs have not been proven useful. Thus, outside the treatment of 
depression, the choice of antidepressant is primarily dependent on 
the known benefit of a particular antidepressant or class for a 
particular indication. 
 Dosing 
 The optimal dose of an antidepressant depends on the indication 
and on the patient. For SSRIs, SNRIs, and a number of newer 
agents, the starting dose for the treatment of depression is usually 
a therapeutic dose ( Table 30–3 ). Patients who show little or no 
benefit after at least 4 weeks of treatment may benefit from a 
higher dose even though it has been difficult to show a clear 
advantage for higher doses with SSRIs, SNRIs, and other newer 
antidepressants. The dose is generally titrated to the maximum 
dosage recommended or to the highest dosage tolerated if the 
patient is not responsive to lower doses. Some patients may ben-
efit from doses lower than the usual minimum recommended 
therapeutic dose. TCAs and MAOIs typically require titration to 
a therapeutic dosage over several weeks. Dosing of the TCAs may 
be guided by monitoring TCA serum levels. 
 Some anxiety disorders may require higher doses of antidepres-
sants than are used in the treatment of major depression. For 
example, patients treated for OCD often require maximum or 
somewhat higher than maximum recommended MDD doses to 
achieve optimal benefits. Likewise, the minimum dose of parox-
etine for the effective treatment of panic disorder is higher than 
the minimum dose required for the effective treatment of 
depression. 
 In the treatment of pain disorders, modest doses of TCAs are 
often sufficient. For example, 25–50 mg/d of imipramine might 
be beneficial in the treatment of pain associated with a neuropa-
thy, but this would be a subtherapeutic dose in the treatment of 
MDD. In contrast, SNRIs are usually prescribed in pain disorders 
at the same doses used in the treatment of depression. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Although some potential adverse effects are common to all antide-
pressants, most of their adverse effects are specific to a subclass of 
agents and to their pharmacodynamic effects. An FDA warning 
applied to all antidepressants is the risk of increased suicidality in 
patients under the age 25. The warning suggests that use of antide-
pressants is associated with suicidal ideation and gestures, but not 
completed suicides, in up to 4% of patients under 25 years who 
were prescribed antidepressant in clinical trials. This rate is about 
twice the rate seen with placebo treatment. For those over 25, there 
is either no increased risk or a reduced risk of suicidal thoughts and 
gestures on antidepressants, particularly after age 65. Although a 
small minority of patients may experience a treatment-emergent 
increase in suicidal ideation with antidepressants, the absence of 
treatment of a major depressive episode in all age groups is a par-
ticularly important risk factor in completed suicides. 
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    535
 A. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors 
 The adverse effects of the most commonly prescribed antidepres-
sants—the SSRIs—can be predicted from their potent inhibition 
of SERT. SSRIs enhance serotonergic tone, not just in the brain 
but throughout the body. Increased serotonergic activity in the gut 
is commonly associated with nausea, gastrointestinal upset, diar-
rhea, and other gastrointestinal symptoms. Gastrointestinal adverse 
effects usually emerge early in the course of treatment and tend to 
improve after the first week. Increasing serotonergic tone at the 
level of the spinal cord and above is associated with diminished 
sexual function and interest. As a result, at least 30–40% of 
patients treated with SSRIs report loss of libido, delayed orgasm, 
or diminished arousal. The sexual effects often persist as long as 
the patient remains on the antidepressant but may diminish with 
time. 
 Other adverse effects related to the serotonergic effects of SSRIs 
include an increase in headaches and insomnia or hypersomnia. 
Some patients gain weight while taking SSRIs, particularly parox-
etine. Sudden discontinuation of short half-life SSRIs such as par-
oxetine and sertraline is associated with a discontinuation syndrome 
in some patients characterized by dizziness, paresthesias, and other 
symptoms beginning 1 or 2 days after stopping the drug and per-
sisting for 1 week or longer. 
 Most antidepressants are category C agents by the FDA 
teratogen classification system. There is an association of par-
oxetine with cardiac septal defects in first trimester exposures. 
Thus, paroxetine is a category D agent. Other possible associa-
tions of SSRIs with post-birth complications, including pul-
monary hypertension, have not been clearly established. 
 B. Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors
and Tricyclic Antidepressants 
 SNRIs have many of the serotonergic adverse effects associated 
with SSRIs. In addition, SNRIs may also have noradrenergic 
effects, including increased blood pressure and heart rate, and 
CNS activation, such as insomnia, anxiety, and agitation. The 
hemodynamic effects of SNRIs tend not to be problematic in 
most patients. A dose-related increase in blood pressure has 
been seen more commonly with the immediate-release form of 
venlafaxine than with other SNRIs. Likewise, there are more 
reports of cardiac toxicity with venlafaxine overdose than with 
either the other SNRIs or SSRIs. Duloxetine is rarely associ-
ated with hepatic toxicity in patients with a history of liver 
damage. All the SNRIs have been associated with a discon-
tinuation syndrome resembling that seen with SSRI discon-
tinuation. 
 The primary adverse effects of TCAs have been described in 
the previous text. Anticholinergic effects are perhaps the most 
common. These effects result in dry mouth, constipation, uri-
nary retention, blurred vision, and confusion. They are more 
common with tertiary amine TCAs such as amitriptyline and 
imipramine than with the secondary amine TCAs desipramine 
and nortriptyline. The potent α-blocking property of TCAs 
often results in orthostatic hypotension. H 1 antagonism by the 
TCAs is associated with weight gain and sedation. The TCAs 
are class 1A antiarrhythmic agents (see  Chapter 14 ) and are 
arrhythmogenic at higher doses. Sexual effects are common, 
particularly with highly serotonergic TCAs such as clomip-
ramine. The TCAs have a prominent discontinuation syn-
drome characterized by cholinergic rebound and flulike 
symptoms. 
TABLE 30–3 Antidepressant dose ranges.
Drug
Usual Therapeutic Dosage (mg/d)
SSRIs
Citalopram
20–60
Escitalopram
10–30
Fluoxetine
20–60
Fluvoxamine
100–300
Paroxetine
20–60
Sertraline
50–200
SNRIs
Venlafaxine
75–375
Desvenlafaxine
50–200
Duloxetine
40–120
Milnacipran
100–200
Tricyclics
Amitriptyline
150–300
Clomipramine
100–250
Desipramine
150–300
Doxepin
150–300
Imipramine
150–300
Nortriptyline
50–150
Protriptyline
15–60
Trimipramine maleate
150–300
5-HT2 antagonists
Nefazodone
300–500
Trazodone
150–300
Tetracyclics and unicyclics
Amoxapine
150–400
Bupropion
200–450
Maprotiline
150–225
Mirtazapine
15–45
MAOIs
Isocarboxazid
30–60
Phenelzine
45–90
Selegiline
20–50
Tranylcypromine
30–60
MAOIs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors; SNRIs, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
536    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 C. 5-HT 2 Antagonists 
 The most common adverse effects associated with the 5-HT 2 
antagonists are sedation and gastrointestinal disturbances. Sedative 
effects, particularly with trazodone, can be quite pronounced. 
Thus, it is not surprising that the treatment of insomnia is cur-
rently the primary application of trazodone. The gastrointestinal 
effects appear to be dose-related and are less pronounced than 
those seen with SNRIs or SSRIs. Sexual effects are uncommon 
with nefazodone or trazodone treatment as a result of the relatively 
selective serotonergic effects of these drugs on the 5-HT 2 receptor 
rather than on SERT. However, trazodone has rarely been associ-
ated with inducing priapism. Both nefazodone and trazodone are 
α-blocking agents and may result in a dose-related orthostatic 
hypotension in some patients. Nefazodone has been associated 
with hepatotoxicity, including rare fatalities and cases of fulminant 
hepatic failure requiring transplantation. The rate of serious hepa-
toxicity with nefazodone has been estimated at 1 in 250,000 to 1 
in 300,000 patient-years of nefazodone treatment. 
 D. Tetracyclics and Unicyclics 
 Amoxapine is sometimes associated with a parkinsonian syndrome 
due to its D 2 -blocking action. Mirtazapine has significant sedative 
effect. Maprotiline has a moderately high affinity for NET and 
may cause TCA-like adverse effects and, rarely, seizures. Bupropion 
is occasionally associated with agitation, insomnia, and anorexia. 
 E. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors 
 The most common adverse effects of the MAOIs leading to dis-
continuation of these drugs are orthostatic hypotension and 
weight gain. In addition, the irreversible nonselective MAOIs are 
associated with the highest rates of sexual effects of all the antide-
pressants. Anorgasmia is fairly common with therapeutic doses of 
some MAOIs. The amphetamine-like properties of some MAOIs 
contributes to activation, insomnia, and restlessness in some 
patients. Phenelzine tends to be more sedating than either selegi-
line or tranylcypromine. Confusion is also sometimes associated 
with higher doses of MAOIs. Because they block metabolism of 
tyramine and similar ingested amines, MAOIs may cause danger-
ous interactions with certain foods and with serotonergic drugs 
(see Interactions). Finally, MAOIs have been associated with a 
sudden discontinuation syndrome manifested in a delirium-like 
presentation with psychosis, excitement, and confusion. 
 Overdose 
 Suicide attempts are a common and unfortunate consequence of 
major depression. The lifetime risk of completing suicide in 
patients previously hospitalized with MDD may be as high as 
15%. Overdose is the most common method used in suicide 
attempts, and antidepressants, especially the TCAs, are frequently 
involved. Overdose can induce lethal arrhythmias, including ven-
tricular tachycardia and fibrillation. In addition, blood pressure 
changes and anticholinergic effects including altered mental status 
and seizures are sometimes seen in TCA overdoses. A 1500 mg 
dose of imipramine or amitriptyline (less than 7 days’ supply at 
antidepressant doses) is enough to be lethal in many patients. 
Toddlers taking 100 mg will likely show evidence of toxicity. 
Treatment typically involves cardiac monitoring, airway support, 
and gastric lavage. Sodium bicarbonate is often administered to 
uncouple the TCA from cardiac sodium channels. 
 An overdose with an MAOI can produce a variety of effects 
including autonomic instability, hyperadrenergic symptoms, psy-
chotic symptoms, confusion, delirium, fever, and seizures. 
Management of MAOI overdoses usually involves cardiac moni-
toring, vital signs support, and lavage. 
 Compared with TCAs and MAOIs, the other antidepressants 
are generally much safer in overdose. Fatalities with SSRI overdose 
alone are extremely uncommon. Similarly, SNRIs tend to be 
much safer in overdose than the TCAs. However, venlafaxine has 
been associated with some cardiac toxicity in overdose and appears 
to be less safe than SSRIs. Bupropion is associated with seizures in 
overdose, and mirtazapine may be associated with sedation, disori-
entation, and tachycardia. With the newer agents, fatal overdoses 
often involve the combination of the antidepressant with other 
drugs, including alcohol. Management of overdose with the newer 
antidepressants usually involves emptying of gastric contents and 
vital sign support as the initial intervention. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Antidepressants are commonly prescribed with other psychotropic 
and nonpsychotropic agents. There is potential for drug interac-
tions with all antidepressants, but the most serious of these involve 
the MAOIs and to a lesser extent the TCAs. 
 A. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors 
 The most common interactions with SSRIs are pharmacokinetic 
interactions. For example, paroxetine and fluoxetine are potent 
CYP2D6 inhibitors ( Table 30–4 ). Thus, administration with 2D6 
substrates such as TCAs can lead to dramatic and sometimes 
unpredictable elevations in the tricyclic drug concentration. The 
result may be toxicity from the TCA. Similarly, fluvoxamine, a 
CYP3A4 inhibitor, may elevate the levels of concurrently admin-
istered substrates for this enzyme such as diltiazem and induce 
bradycardia or hypotension. Other SSRIs, such as citalopram and 
escitalopram, are relatively free of pharmacokinetic interactions. 
The most serious interaction with the SSRIs are pharmacody-
namic interactions with MAOIs that produce a serotonin syn-
drome (see below). 
 B. Selective 
Serotonin-Norepinephrine 
Reuptake 
Inhibitors and Tricyclic Antidepressants 
 The SNRIs have relatively fewer CYP450 interactions than the 
SSRIs. Venlafaxine is a substrate but not an inhibitor of CYP2D6 
or other isoenzymes, whereas desvenlafaxine is a minor substrate 
for CYP3A4. Duloxetine is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and 
so may elevate TCA and levels of other CYP2D6 substrates. Like 
all serotonergic antidepressants, SNRIs are contraindicated in 
combination with MAOIs. 
 Elevations of TCA levels may occur when combined with 
CYP2D6 inhibitors or from constitutional factors. About 7% 
of the Caucasian population in the USA has a CYP2D6 
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    537
polymorphism that is associated with slow metabolism of TCAs 
and other 2D6 substrates. Combination of a known CYP2D6 
inhibitor and a TCA in a patient who is a slow metabolizer may 
result in additive effects. Such an interaction has been implicated, 
though rarely, in cases of TCA toxicity. There may also be additive 
TCA effects such as anticholinergic or antihistamine effects when 
combined with other agents that share these properties such as 
benztropine or diphenhydramine. Similarly, antihypertensive drugs 
may exacerbate the orthostatic hypotension induced by TCAs. 
 C. 5-HT 2 Antagonists 
 Nefazodone is an inhibitor of the CYP3A4 isoenzyme, so it can 
raise the level and thus exacerbate adverse effects of many 3A4-
dependent drugs. For example, triazolam levels are increased by 
concurrent administration of nefazodone such that a reduction in 
triazolam dosage by 75% is recommended. Likewise, administra-
tion of nefazodone with simvastatin has been associated with 
20-fold increase in plasma levels of simvastatin. 
 Trazodone is a substrate but not a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4. 
As a result, combining trazodone with potent inhibitors of 
CYP3A4, such as ritonavir or ketoconazole, may lead to substan-
tial increases in trazodone levels. 
 D. Tetracyclic and Unicyclic Antidepressants 
 Bupropion is metabolized primarily by CYP2B6, and its metabolism 
may be altered by drugs such as cyclophosphamide, which is a sub-
strate of 2B6. The major metabolite of bupropion, hydroxybupro-
pion, is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and so can raise desipramine 
levels. Bupropion should be avoided in patients taking MAOIs. 
 Mirtazapine is a substrate for several CYP450 enzymes includ-
ing 2D6, 3A4, and 1A2. Consequently, drugs that inhibit these 
isozymes may raise mirtazapine levels. However, mirtazapine is 
not an inhibitor of these enzymes. The sedating effects of mir-
tazapine may be additive with those of CNS depressants such as 
alcohol and benzodiazepines. 
 Amoxapine and maprotiline share most drug interactions com-
mon to the TCA group. Both are CYP2D6 substrates and should 
be used with caution in combination with inhibitors such as flu-
oxetine. Amoxapine and maprotiline also both have anticholin-
ergic and antihistaminic properties that may be additive with 
drugs that share a similar profile. 
 E. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors 
 MAOIs are associated with two classes of serious drug interac-
tions. The first of these is the pharmacodynamic interaction of 
MAOIs with serotonergic agents including SSRIs, SNRIs, and 
most TCAs along with some analgesic agents such as meperidine. 
These combinations of an MAOI with a serotonergic agent may 
result in a life-threatening  serotonin syndrome (see  Chapter 16 ). 
The serotonin syndrome is thought to be caused by overstimula-
tion of 5-HT receptors in the central gray nuclei and the medulla. 
Symptoms range from mild to lethal and include a triad of cogni-
tive (delirium, coma), autonomic (hypertension, tachycardia, 
diaphoreses), and somatic (myoclonus, hyperreflexia, tremor) 
effects. Most serotonergic antidepressants should be discontinued 
at least 2 weeks before starting an MAOI. Fluoxetine, because of 
its long half-life, should be discontinued for 4–5 weeks before an 
MAOI is initiated. Conversely, an MAOI must be discontinued 
for at least 2 weeks before starting a serotonergic agent. 
 The second serious interaction with MAOIs occurs when an 
MAOI is combined with tyramine in the diet or with sympath-
omimetic substrates of MAO. An MAOI prevents the breakdown 
of tyramine in the gut, and this results in high serum levels that 
enhance peripheral noradrenergic effects, including raising blood 
pressure dramatically. Patients on an MAOI who ingest large 
amounts of dietary tyramine may experience malignant hyperten-
sion and subsequently a stroke or myocardial infarction. Thus, 
patients taking MAOIs require a low-tyramine diet and should 
avoid foods such as aged cheeses, tap beer, soy products, and dried 
sausages, which contain high amounts of tyramine (see  Chapter 9 ). 
Similar sympathomimetics also may cause significant hyperten-
sion when combined with MAOIs. Thus, over-the-counter cold 
preparations that contain pseudoephedrine and phenylpropa-
nolamine are contraindicated in patients taking MAOIs. 
TABLE 30–4 Some antidepressant–CYP450 drug interactions.
Enzyme
Substrates
Inhibitors
Inducers
1A2
Tertiary amine tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), duloxetine, 
theophylline, phenacetin, TCAs (demethylation), clozapine, 
diazepam, caffeine
Fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, moclobemide, 
ramelteon
Tobacco, omeprazole
2C19
TCAs, citalopram (partly), warfarin, tolbutamide, phenytoin, 
diazepam
Fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, sertraline, 
imipramine, ketoconozole, omeprazole
Rifampin
2D6
TCAs, benztropine, perphenazine, clozapine, haloperidol, 
codeine/oxycodone, risperidone, class Ic antiarrhythmics, 
β blockers, trazodone, paroxetine, maprotiline, amoxapine, 
duloxetine, mirtazapine (partly), venlafaxine, bupropion
Fluoxetine, paroxetine, duloxetine, 
hydroxybupropion, methadone, 
cimetidine, haloperidol, quinidine, 
ritonavir
Phenobarbital, rifampin
3A4
Citalopram, escitalopram, TCAs, glucocorticoids, andro-
gens/estrogens, carbamazepine, erythromycin, Ca2+ chan-
nel blockers, protease inhibitors, sildenafil, alprazolam, 
triazolam, vincristine/vinblastine, tamoxifen, zolpidem
Fluvoxamine, nefazodone, sertraline, 
fluoxetine, cimetidine, fluconazole, 
erythromycin, protease inhibitors, 
ketoconazole, verapamil
Barbiturates, glucocorticoids, 
rifampin, modafinil, carbam-
azepine
538    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
SUMMARY Antidepressants
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE INHIBITORS (SSRIS)
 • Fluoxetine
 • Citalopram
 • Escitalopram
 • Paroxetine
 • Sertraline
Highly selective 
blockade of serotonin 
transporter (SERT) • little 
effect on norepinephrine 
transporter (NET)
Acute increase of 
serotonergic synaptic 
activity • slower 
changes in several 
signaling pathways and 
neurotrophic activity
Major depression, anxiety 
disorders • panic disorder 
• obsessive-compulsive 
disorder • post-traumatic 
stress disorder • 
perimenopausal vasomotor 
symptoms • eating disorder 
(bulimia)
Half-lives from 15–75 h • oral activity • Toxicity: 
Well tolerated but cause sexual dysfunction 
• risk of serotonin syndrome with MAOIs
• Interactions: Some CYP inhibition (fluoxetine 2D6, 
3A4; fluvoxamine 1A2; paroxetine 2D6)
 • Fluvoxamine: Similar to above but approved only for obsessive-compulsive behavior
SEROTONIN-NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE INHIBITORS (SNRIS)
 • Duloxetine
 • Venlafaxine
Moderately selective 
blockade of NET and 
SERT
Acute increase in 
serotonergic and 
adrenergic synaptic 
activity • otherwise like 
SSRIs
Major depression, chronic 
pain disorders • fibromyalgia, 
perimenopausal symptoms
Toxicity: Anticholinergic, sedation, hypertension 
(venlafaxine) • Interactions: Some CYP2D6 
inhibition (duloxetine, desvenlafaxine)
 • Desvenlafaxine: Desmethyl metabolite of venlafaxine, metabolism is by phase II rather than CYP phase I
 • Milnacipran: Significantly more selective for NET than SERT; little effect on DAT
TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS (TCAS)
 • Imipramine
 • Many others
Mixed and variable 
blockade of NET and 
SERT
Like SNRIs plus 
significant blockade of 
autonomic nervous 
system and histamine 
receptors
Major depression not respon-
sive to other drugs • chronic 
pain disorders • incontinence 
• obsessive-compulsive disor-
der (clomipramine)
Long half-lives • CYP substrates • active 
metabolites • Toxicity: Anticholinergic, α-blocking 
effects, sedation, weight gain, arrhythmias, and 
seizures in overdose • Interactions: CYP inducers 
and inhibitors
5-HT2 ANTAGONISTS
 • Nefazodone
 • Trazodone
Inhibition of 5-HT2A 
receptor • nefazodone 
also blocks SERT weakly
Trazodone forms a 
metabolite (m-cpp) 
that blocks 5-HT2A,2C 
receptors
Major depression • sedation 
and hypnosis (trazodone)
Relatively short half-lives • active metabolites 
• Toxicity: Modest α- and H1-receptor blockade 
(trazodone) • Interactions: Nefazodone inhibits 
CYP3A4
TETRACYCLICS, UNICYCLIC
 • Bupropion
 • Amoxapine
 • Maprotiline
 • Mirtazapine
Increased 
norepinephrine and 
dopamine activity 
(bupropion) • NET > 
SERT inhibition 
(amoxapine, maprotiline) 
• increased release of 
norepinephrine, 5-HT 
(mirtazapine)
Presynaptic release of 
catecholamines but no 
effect on 5-HT 
(bupropion) 
• amoxapine and 
maprotiline resemble 
TCAs
Major depression • smoking 
cessation (bupropion) 
• sedation (mirtazapine) 
• amoxapine and maprotiline 
rarely used
Extensive metabolism in liver • Toxicity: Lowers 
seizure threshold (amoxapine, bupropion); 
sedation and weight gain (mirtazepine) 
• Interactions: CYP2D6 inhibitor (bupropion)
MONOAMINE OXIDASE INHIBITORS (MAOIS)
 • Phenelzine
 • Tranylcypromine
 • Selegiline
Blockade of MAO-A and 
MAO-B (phenelzine, 
nonselective) • MAO-B 
irreversible selective 
MAO-B inhibition (low- 
dose selegiline)
Transdermal absorp-
tion of selegiline 
achieves levels that 
inhibit MAO-A
Major depression 
unresponsive to other drugs
Very slow elimination • Toxicity: Hypotension, 
insomnia • Interactions: Hypertensive crisis with 
tyramine, other indirect sympathomimetics 
• serotonin syndrome with serotonergic agents, 
meperidine
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    539
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE 
INHIBITORS
Citalopram (generic, Celexa)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg tablets; 10 mg/5 mL solution
Escitalopram (Lexapro)
Oral: 5, 10, 20 mg tablets; 5 mg/5 mL solution
Fluoxetine (generic, Prozac)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg capsules; 10, 20 mg tablets; 20 mg/5 mL liquid
Oral delayed-release (Prozac Weekly): 90 mg capsules
Fluvoxamine (generic, labeled only for obsessive-compulsive 
disorder)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Paroxetine (generic, Paxil)
Oral: 10, 20, 30, 40 mg tablets; 10 mg/5 mL suspension; 12.5, 25, 
37.5 mg controlled-release tablets
Sertraline (generic, Zoloft)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets; 20 mg/mL oral concentrate
Vilazodone (Viibryd)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
SELECTIVE NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE 
INHIBITORS
Desvenlafaxine (Pristiq)
Oral: 50, 100 mg capsules
Duloxetine (Cymbalta)
Oral: 20, 30, 50 mg capsules
Milnacipran (Savella; labeled only for fibromyalgia)
Oral: 12.5, 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Venlafaxine (Effexor)
Oral: 25, 37.5, 50, 75, 100 mg tablets; 37.5, 75, 150 mg extended- 
release capsules
5-HT2 ANTAGONISTS
Nefazodone (generic)
Oral: 50, 100, 150, 200, 250 mg tablets
Trazodone (generic, Desyrel)
Oral: 50, 100, 150, 300 mg tablets
TRICYCLICS
Amitriptyline (generic, Elavil)
Oral: 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 150 mg tablets
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IM injection
Amoxapine (generic)
Oral: 25, 50, 100, 150 mg tablets
Clomipramine (generic, Anafranil; labeled only for obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder)
Oral: 25, 50, 75 mg capsules
Desipramine (generic, Norpramin)
Oral: 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 150 mg tablets
Doxepin (generic, Sinequan)
Oral: 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 150 mg capsules; 10 mg/mL concentrate
Imipramine (generic, Tofranil)
Oral: 10, 25, 50 mg tablets (as hydrochloride); 75, 100, 125, 150 mg 
capsules (as pamoate)
Nortriptyline (generic, Pamelor)
Oral: 10, 25,50, 75 mg capsules; 2 mg/mL solution
Protriptyline (generic, Vivactil)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Trimipramine (Surmontil)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg capsules
TETRACYCLIC AND UNICYCLIC AGENTS
Amoxipine (generic)
Oral: 25, 50, 100, 150 mg tablets
Bupropion (generic, Wellbutrin)
Oral: 75, 100 mg tablets; 100, 150, 200 mg 12-hour sustained-release 
tablets; 150, 300 mg 24-hour sustained-release tablets
Oral: 25, 50, 75 mg tablets
Maprotiline (generic)
Oral: 7.5, 15, 30, 45 mg tablets; 15, 30, 45 mg oral disintegrating tablets
Mirtazapine (generic, Remeron)
Oral: 7.5, 15, 30, 45 mg tablets; 15, 30, 45 mg disintegrating tablets
MONOAMINE OXIDASE INHIBITORS
Isocarboxazid (generic, Marplan)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
Phenelzine (generic, Nardil)
Oral: 15 mg tablets
Selegiline
Oral (generic, Eldepryl): 5 mg tablets, capsules; 1.25 oral disintegrating 
tablets
Tranylcypromine (generic, Parnate)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
540    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 REFERENCES 
 Alessandro S, Kato M: The serotonin transporter gene and effectiveness of SSRIs. 
Expert Rev Neurother 2008;8(1):111. 
 Bab I, Yirmiya R: Depression, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and osteopo-
rosis. Curr Osteoporos Rep 2010;8:185. 
 Barrera AZ, Torres LD, Munoz RF: Prevention of depression: The state of the sci-
ence at the beginning of the 21st century. Int Rev Psychiatry 
2007;19(6):655. 
 Bellingham GA, Peng PW: Duloxetine: A review of its pharmacology and use in 
chronic pain management. Reg Anesth Pain Med 2010;35:294. 
 Belmaker R, Agam G: Major depressive disorder. N Engl J Med 2008;358:55. 
 Bockting CL et al: Continuation and maintenance use of antidepressants in recur-
rent depression. Psychother Psychosom 2008;77(1):17. 
 Bonisch H, Bruss M: The norepinephrine transporter in physiology and disease. 
Handb Exp Pharmacol 2006;175:485. 
 Castren E, Voikar V, Rantamaki T: Role of neurotrophic factors in depression. 
Curr Opin Pharmacol 2007;7(1):18. 
 Chappell AS et al: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of the 
efficacy and safety of duloxetine for the treatment of chronic pain due to 
osteoarthritis of the knee. Pain Pract 2011;11:33. 
 Cipriani A et al: Fluoxetine versus other types of pharmacotherapy for depression. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;(4):CD004185. 
 Cipriani A et al: Metareview on short-term effectiveness and safety of antidepres-
sants for depression: An evidence-based approach to inform clinical practice. 
Can J Psychiatry 2007;52(9):553. 
 de Beaurepaire R: Questions raised by the cytokine hypothesis of depression. Brain 
Behav Immun 2002;16(5):610. 
 Delgado PL: How antidepressants help depression: Mechanisms of action and 
clinical response. J Clin Psychiatry 2004;65(Suppl 4):25. 
 Dhillon S, Scott LJ, Plosker GL: Escitalopram: A review of its use in the manage-
ment of anxiety disorders. CNS Drugs 2006;20(9):763. 
 Dhillon S, Yang LP, Curran MP: Bupropion: A review of its use in the management 
of major depressive disorder. Drugs 2008;68(5):653. 
 Duman RS: Role of neurotrophic factors in the etiology and treatment of mood 
disorders. Neuromolecular Med 2004;5(1):11. 
 Duman RS, Monteggia LM: A neurotrophic model for stress-related mood disor-
ders. Biol Psychiatry 2006;59(12):1116. 
 Dvir Y, Smallwood P: Serotonin syndrome: A complex but easily avoidable condi-
tion. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2008;30(3):284. 
 Fontenelle LF et al: An update on the pharmacological treatment of obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2007;8(5):563. 
 Geisser ME et al: A pooled analysis of two randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials of milnacipran monotherapy in thetreatment of fibromyal-
gia. Pain Pract 2011;11:120. 
 Gether U et al: Neurotransmitter transporters: Molecular function of important 
drug targets. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2006;27(7):375. 
 Gillespie CF, Nemeroff CB: Hypercortisolemia and depression. Psychosom Med 
2005;67(Suppl 1):S26. 
 Gillman PK: A review of serotonin toxicity data: Implications for the mechanisms 
of antidepressant drug action. Biol Psychiatry 2006;59(11):1046. 
 Gillman PK: Tricyclic antidepressant pharmacology and therapeutic drug interac-
tions updated. Br J Pharmacol 2007;151(6):737. 
 Giner L et al: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and the risk for suicidality in 
adolescents: An update. Int J Adolesc Med Health 2005;17(3):211. 
 Gutman DA, Owens MJ: Serotonin and norepinephrine transporter binding pro-
file of SSRIs. Essent Psychopharmacol 2006;7(1):35. 
 Heninger GR, Delgado PL, Charney DS: The revised monoamine theory of 
depression: A modulatory role for monoamines, based on new findings from 
monoamine depletion experiments in humans. Pharmacopsychiatry 
1996;29(1):2. 
 Hirschfeld RM: Antidepressants in long-term therapy: A review of tricyclic antide-
pressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Acta Psychiatr Scand 
Suppl 2000;403:35. 
 Hirschfeld RM: History and evolution of the monoamine hypothesis of depres-
sion. J Clin Psychiatry 2000;61(Suppl 6):4. 
 Holma KM et al: Long-term outcome of major depressive disorder in psychiatric 
patients is variable. J Clin Psychiatry 2008;69(2):196. 
 Jann MW, Slade JH: Antidepressant agents for the treatment of chronic pain and 
depression. Pharmacotherapy 2007;27(11):1571. 
 Kalia M: Neurobiological basis of depression: An update. Metabolism 2005;54(5 
Suppl 1):24. 
 Katz LY et al: Effect of regulatory warnings on antidepressant prescription rates, 
use of health services and outcomes among children, adolescents and young 
adults. CMAJ 2008;178(8):1005. 
 Kozisek ME, Middlemas D, Bylund DB: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and its 
receptor tropomyosin-related kinase B in the mechanism of action of antide-
pressant therapies. Pharmacol Ther 2008;117(1):30. 
 Lee AL, Ogle WO, Sapolsky RM: Stress and depression: Possible links to neuron 
death in the hippocampus. Bipolar Disord 2002;4(2):117. 
 Lesch KP, Gutknecht L: Pharmacogenetics of the serotonin transporter. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2005;29(6):1062. 
 Maletic V et al: Neurobiology of depression: An integrated view of key findings. 
Int J Clin Pract 2007;61(12):2030. 
 Manji HK, Drevets WC, Charney DS: The cellular neurobiology of depression. 
Nat Med 2001;7(5):541. 
 McCleane G: Antidepressants as analgesics. CNS Drugs 2008;22(2):139. 
 McEwen BS: Glucocorticoids, depression, and mood disorders: Structural remod-
eling in the brain. Metabolism 2005;54(5 Suppl 1):20. 
 Mendelson WB: A review of the evidence for the efficacy and safety of trazodone 
in insomnia. J Clin Psychiatry 2005;66(4):469. 
 Moller HJ: Evidence for beneficial effects of antidepressants on suicidality in 
depressive patients: A systematic review. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 
2006;256(6):329. 
 Nestler EJ et al: Neurobiology of depression. Neuron 2002;34(1):13. 
 Pace TW, Hu F, Miller AH: Cytokine-effects on glucocorticoid receptor function: 
Relevance to glucocorticoid resistance and the pathophysiology and treat-
ment of major depression. Brain Behav Immun 2007;21(1):9. 
 Perugi G, Frare F, Toni C: Diagnosis and treatment of agoraphobia with panic 
disorder. CNS Drugs 2007;21(9):741. 
 Sakinofsky I: Treating suicidality in depressive illness. Part 2: Does treatment cure 
or cause suicidality? Can J Psychiatry 2007;52(6 Suppl 1):85S. 
 Schatzberg AF, Cole JO, DeBattista C:  Manual of Clinical Psychopharmacology , 6th 
ed. American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc., 2007. 
 Shapiro JR et al: Bulimia nervosa treatment: A systematic review of randomized 
controlled trials. Int J Eat Disord 20207;40(4):321. 
 Soomro GM et al: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) versus placebo 
for obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2008;(1):CD001765. 
 Stein DJ, Kupfer DJ, Schatzberg AF:  American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook of 
Mood Disorders . American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc., 2006. 
 Stein MB, Stein DJ: Social anxiety disorder. Lancet 2008;371(9618):1115. 
 Stone EA, Lin Y, Quartermain D: A final common pathway for depression? 
Progress toward a general conceptual framework. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
2008;32(3):508. 
 Szegedi A, Schwertfeger N: Mirtazapine: A review of its clinical efficacy and toler-
ability. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2005;6(4):631. 
 Tang SW, Helmeste D: Paroxetine. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2008;9(5):787. 
 Tuccori M et al: Use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy 
and risk of major and cardiovascular malformations: An update. Postgrad 
Med 2010;122:49. 
 Warden D et al: The STAR*D Project results: A comprehensive review of findings. 
Curr Psychiatry Rep 2007;9(6):449. 
 Wheeler BW et al: The population impact on incidence of suicide and non-fatal 
self harm of regulatory action against the use of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors in under 18s in the United Kingdom: Ecological study. Br Med J 
2008;336(7643):542. 
 Wilson KL et al: Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn is associated 
with mode of delivery and not with maternal use of selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors. Am J Perinatol 2010 Jul 6. [Epub ahead of print] 
 Yu S, Holsboer F, Almeida OF: Neuronal actions of glucocorticoids: Focus on 
depression. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2008;108(3-5):300. 
CHAPTER 30 Antidepressant Agents    541
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Fluoxetine, the prototype SSRI, has a number of pharmacoki-
netic and pharmacodynamic interactions. Fluoxetine is a 
CYP450 2D6 inhibitor and thus can inhibit the metabolism 
of 2D6 substrates such as propranolol and other β blockers, 
tricyclic antidepressants, tramadol, opioids such as metha-
done, codeine, and oxycodone, antipsychotics such as halo-
peridol and thioridazine, and many other drugs. This 
inhibition of metabolism can result in significantly higher 
plasma levels of the concurrent drug, and this may lead to an 
increase in adverse reactions associated with that drug.
As a potent inhibitor of the serotonin transporter, fluox-
etine is associated with a number of pharmacodynamic inter-
actions involving serotonergic neurotransmission. The 
combination of tramadol with fluoxetine has occasionally been 
associated with a serotonin syndrome, characterized by dia-
phoreses, autonomic instability, myoclonus, seizures, and 
coma. The combination of fluoxetine with an MAOI is con-
traindicated because of the risk of a fatal serotonin syndrome. 
In addition, meperidine is specifically contraindicated in com-
bination with an MAOI.
This page intentionally left blank 
543
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Morphine, the prototypical opioid agonist, has long been known to 
relieve severe pain with remarkable efficacy. The opium poppy is the 
source of crude opium from which Sertürner in 1803 isolated mor-
phine, the pure alkaloid, naming it after Morpheus, the Greek god 
of dreams. It remains the standard against which all drugs that have 
strong analgesic action are compared. These drugs are collectively 
known as opioid analgesics and include not only the natural and 
semisynthetic alkaloid derivatives from opium but also synthetic 
surrogates, other opioid-like drugs whose actions are blocked by the 
nonselective antagonist naloxone, plus several endogenous peptides 
that interact with the different subtypes of opioid receptors. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE OPIOID ANALGESICS 
 Source 
 Opium, the source of morphine, is obtained from the poppy, 
 Papaver somniferum and  P album . After incision, the poppy seed 
pod exudes a white substance that turns into a brown gum that is 
crude opium. Opium contains many alkaloids, the principal one 
being morphine, which is present in a concentration of about 
10%. Codeine is synthesized commercially from morphine. 
C A S E  S T U D Y
 Classification & Chemistry 
 Opioid drugs include full agonists, partial agonists, and antago-
nists. Morphine is a full agonist at the l (mu)-opioid receptor, 
the major analgesic opioid receptor ( Table 31–1 ). In contrast, 
codeine functions as a partial (or “weak”) μ-receptor agonist. 
Other opioid receptor subtypes include c (delta) and j (kappa) 
receptors. Simple substitution of an allyl group on the nitrogen of 
the full  agonist morphine plus addition of a single hydroxyl group 
results in naloxone, a strong μ-receptor  antagonist . The structures 
of some of these compounds are shown later in this chapter. Some 
opioids, eg, nalbuphine, are capable of producing an agonist (or 
partial agonist) effect at one opioid receptor subtype and an 
antagonist effect at another. The receptor activating properties and 
affinities of opioid analgesics can be manipulated by pharmaceuti-
cal chemistry; in addition, certain opioid analgesics are modified 
in the liver, resulting in compounds with greater analgesic action. 
Chemically, the opioids derived from opium are phenanthrene 
derivatives and include four or more fused rings, while most of the 
synthetic opioids are simpler molecules. 
 Endogenous Opioid Peptides 
 Opioid alkaloids (eg, morphine) produce analgesia through 
actions at receptors in the central nervous system (CNS) that 
respond to certain endogenous peptides with opioid-like pharma-
cologic properties. The general term currently used for these 
endogenous substances is  endogenous opioid peptides. 
31
Opioid Analgesics 
& Antagonists
 Mark A. Schumacher, PhD, MD,  Allan I. Basbaum, PhD, 
&  Walter L. Way, MD∗ 
A 60-year-old man with a history of moderate chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease presents in the emergency 
department with a broken hip suffered in an automobile 
accident. He complains of severe pain. What is the most 
appropriate immediate treatment for his pain? Are any spe-
cial precautions needed?
∗Deceased
544    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Three families of endogenous opioid peptides have been 
described in detail: the  endorphins, the pentapeptide  enkepha-
lins methionine-enkephalin  (met-enkephalin) and leucine-
enkephalin  (leu-enkephalin), and the  dynorphins. The three 
families of opioid receptors have overlapping affinities for these 
endogenous peptides ( Table 31–1 ). 
 The endogenous opioid peptides are derived from three precursor 
proteins: prepro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), preproenkephalin 
(proenkephalin A), and preprodynorphin (proenkephalin B). POMC 
contains the met-enkephalin sequence, β-endorphin, and several 
nonopioid peptides, including adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH), β-lipotropin, and melanocyte-stimulating hormone. 
Preproenkephalin contains six copies of met-enkephalin and one 
copy of leu-enkephalin. Leu- and met-enkephalin have slightly 
higher affinity for the δ (delta) than for the μ-opioid receptor ( Table 
31–1 ). Preprodynorphin yields several active opioid peptides that 
contain the leu-enkephalin sequence. These are  dynorphin A, 
dynorphin B, and α and β  neoendorphins. The endogenous pep-
tides  endomorphin-1 and  endomorphin-2 also possess many of the 
properties of opioid peptides, notably analgesia and high-affinity 
binding to the μ receptor. Endomorphin-1 and -2 selectively activate 
central and peripheral μ-opioid receptors but much about them 
remains unknown, including the identity of their preproendomor-
phin gene. Both the endogenous opioid precursor molecules and the 
endomorphins are present at CNS sites that have been implicated in 
pain modulation. Evidence suggests that they can be released during 
stressful conditions such as pain or the anticipation of pain and 
diminish the sensation of noxious stimuli. Whether acupuncture 
releases endogenous opioid peptides is under investigation. 
 In contrast to the analgesic role of leu- and met-enkephalin, an 
analgesic action of dynorphin A—through its binding to κ 
(kappa)-opioid receptors—remains controversial. Dynorphin A is 
also found in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, where it may play 
a critical role in the  sensitization of nociceptive neurotransmission. 
Increased levels of dynorphin can be found in the dorsal horn after 
tissue injury and inflammation. This elevated dynorphin level is 
proposed to increase pain and induce a state of long-lasting hyper-
algesia. The pronociceptive action of dynorphin in the spinal cord 
appears to be independent of the opioid receptor system but 
dependent on the activation of the bradykinin receptor. Moreover, 
dynorphin A can bind and activate the  N -methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA)-receptor complex, a site of action that is the focus of 
intense therapeutic development. 
 Recently, a novel receptor-ligand system homologous to the 
opioid peptides has been found. The principal receptor for this 
system is the G protein-coupled  orphanin opioid-receptor-like 
subtype 1 (ORL1). Its endogenous ligand has been termed  noci-
ceptin by one group of investigators and  orphanin FQ by another 
group. This ligand-receptor system is currently known as the  N/
OFQ system. Nociceptin is structurally similar to dynorphin 
except for the absence of an N-terminal tyrosine; it acts only at the 
ORL1 receptor, now known as  NOP . The N/OFQ system is 
widely expressed in the CNS and periphery, reflecting its equally 
diverse biology and pharmacology. As a result of experiments 
using highly selective NOP receptor ligands, the N/OFQ system 
has been implicated in both pro- and anti-nociceptive activity as 
well as in the modulation of drug reward, learning, mood, anxiety, 
and cough processes, and of parkinsonism. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Some properties of clinically important opioids are summarized in 
 Table 31–2 . 
 A. Absorption 
 Most opioid analgesics are well absorbed when given by subcuta-
neous, intramuscular, and oral routes. However, because of the 
first-pass effect, the oral dose of the opioid (eg, morphine) may 
need to be much higher than the parenteral dose to elicit a thera-
peutic effect. Considerable interpatient variability exists in first-
pass opioid metabolism, making prediction of an effective oral 
dose difficult. Certain analgesics such as codeine and oxycodone 
are effective orally because they have reduced first-pass metabo-
lism. Nasal insufflation of certain opioids can result in rapid 
therapeutic blood levels by avoiding first-pass metabolism. Other 
routes of opioid administration include oral mucosa via lozenges, 
and transdermal via transdermal patches. The latter can provide 
delivery of potent analgesics over days. Recently an iontophoretic 
transdermal system has been introduced, allowing needle-free 
delivery of fentanyl for patient-controlled analgesia. 
 B. Distribution 
 The uptake of opioids by various organs and tissues is a function 
of both physiologic and chemical factors. Although all opioids 
bind to plasma proteins with varying affinity, the drugs rapidly 
leave the blood compartment and localize in highest concentra-
tions in tissues that are highly perfused such as the brain, lungs, 
liver, kidneys, and spleen. Drug concentrations in skeletal muscle 
may be much lower, but this tissue serves as the main reservoir 
because of its greater bulk. Even though blood flow to fatty tissue 
is much lower than to the highly perfused tissues, accumulation 
TABLE 31–1  Opioid receptor subtypes, their 
functions, and their endogenous 
peptide affinities.
Receptor 
Subtype
Functions
Endogenous 
Opioid Peptide 
Affinity
μ (mu)
Supraspinal and spinal anal-
gesia; sedation; inhibition of 
respiration; slowed gastroin-
testinal transit; modulation of 
hormone and neurotransmit-
ter release
Endorphins > 
enkephalins > 
dynorphins
δ (delta)
Supraspinal and spinal anal-
gesia; modulation of hormone 
and neurotransmitter release
Enkephalins > 
endorphins and 
dynorphins
κ (kappa)
Supraspinal and spinal anal-
gesia; psychotomimetic 
effects; slowed gastrointesti-
nal transit
Dynorphins > > 
endorphins and 
enkephalins
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    545
can be very important, particularly after frequent high-dose 
administration or continuous infusion of highly lipophilic opioids 
that are slowly metabolized, eg, fentanyl. 
 C. Metabolism 
 The opioids are converted in large part to polar metabolites 
(mostly glucuronides), which are then readily excreted by the 
kidneys. For example, morphine, which contains free hydroxyl 
groups, is primarily conjugated to morphine-3-glucuronide 
(M3G), a compound with neuroexcitatory properties. The neuro-
excitatory effects of M3G do not appear to be mediated by 
μ receptors but rather by the GABA/glycinergic system. In con-
trast, approximately 10% of morphine is metabolized to morphine- 
6-glucuronide (M6G), an active metabolite with analgesic potency 
four to six times that of its parent compound. However, these 
relatively polar metabolites have limited ability to cross the blood-
brain barrier and probably do not contribute significantly to the 
usual CNS effects of morphine given acutely. Nevertheless, accu-
mulation of these metabolites may produce unexpected adverse 
effects in patients with renal failure or when exceptionally large 
doses of morphine are administered or high doses are administered 
over long periods. This can result in M3G-induced CNS excita-
tion (seizures) or enhanced and prolonged opioid action produced 
by M6G. CNS uptake of M3G and, to a lesser extent, M6G can 
be enhanced by co-administration with probenecid or with drugs 
that inhibit the P-glycoprotein drug transporter. Like morphine, 
hydromorphone is metabolized by conjugation, yielding hydro-
morphone-3-glucuronide (H3G), which has CNS excitatory 
properties. However, hydromorphone has not been shown to form 
significant amounts of a 6-glucuronide metabolite. 
 The effects of these active metabolites should be considered in 
patients with renal impairment before the administration of mor-
phine or hydromorphone, especially when given at high doses. 
 Esters (eg, heroin, remifentanil) are rapidly hydrolyzed by 
common tissue esterases. Heroin (diacetylmorphine) is hydrolyzed 
to monoacetylmorphine and finally to morphine, which is then 
conjugated with glucuronic acid. 
 Hepatic oxidative metabolism is the primary route of degrada-
tion of the phenylpiperidine opioids (meperidine, fentanyl, alfen-
tanil, sufentanil) and eventually leaves only small quantities of the 
parent compound unchanged for excretion. However, accumula-
tion of a demethylated metabolite of meperidine, normeperidine, 
may occur in patients with decreased renal function and in those 
receiving multiple high doses of the drug. In high concentrations, 
normeperidine may cause seizures. In contrast, no active metabo-
lites of fentanyl have been reported. The P450 isozyme CYP3A4 
TABLE 31–2 Common opioid analgesics.
Generic Name
Receptor Effects1
Approximately 
Equivalent Dose (mg)
Oral:Parenteral 
Potency Ratio
Duration of 
Analgesia (hours)
Maximum 
Efficacy
l
c
j
Morphine2
+++
+
10
Low
4–5
High
Hydromorphone
+++
1.5
Low
4–5
High
Oxymorphone
+++
1.5
Low
3–4
High
Methadone
+++
10
High
4–6
High
Meperidine
+++
60–100
Medium
2–4
High
Fentanyl
+++
0.1
Low
1–1.5
High
Sufentanil
+++
+
+
0.02
Parenteral only
1–1.5
High
Alfentanil
+++
Titrated
Parenteral only
0.25–0.75
High
Remifentanil
+++
Titrated3
Parenteral only
0.054
High
Levorphanol
+++
2–3
High
4–5
High
Codeine
±
30–60
High
3–4
Low
Hydrocodone5
±
5–10
Medium
4–6
Moderate
Oxycodone2,6
++
4.5
Medium
3–4
Mod-High
Pentazocine
±
+
30–50
Medium
3–4
Moderate
Nalbuphine
––
++
10
Parenteral only
3–6
High
Buprenorphine
±
––
––
0.3
Low
4–8
High
Butorphanol
±
+++
2
Parenteral only
3–4
High
1+++, ++, +, strong agonist; ±, partial agonist; ––, antagonist.
2Available in sustained-release forms, morphine (MS Contin); oxycodone (Oxy Contin).
3Administered as an infusion at 0.025–0.2 mcg/kg/min.
4Duration is dependent on a context-sensitive half-time of 3–4 minutes.
5Available in tablets containing acetaminophen (Norco, Vicodin, Lortab, others).
6Available in tablets containing acetaminophen (Percocet); aspirin (Percodan).
546    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
metabolizes fentanyl by  N -dealkylation in the liver. CYP3A4 is 
also present in the mucosa of the small intestine and contributes 
to the first-pass metabolism of fentanyl when it is taken orally. 
Codeine, oxycodone, and hydrocodone undergo metabolism in 
the liver by P450 isozyme CYP2D6, resulting in the production 
of metabolites of greater potency. For example, codeine is de-
methylated to morphine. Genetic polymorphism of CYP2D6 has 
been documented and linked to the variation in analgesic response 
seen among patients. Nevertheless, the metabolites of oxycodone 
and hydrocodone may be of minor consequence; the parent com-
pounds are currently believed to be directly responsible for the 
majority of their analgesic actions. However, oxycodone and its 
metabolites can accumulate under conditions of renal failure and 
have been associated with prolonged action and sedation. In the 
case of codeine, conversion to morphine may be of greater impor-
tance because codeine itself has relatively low affinity for opioid 
receptors. As a result, patients may experience either no significant 
analgesic effect or an exaggerated response based on differences in 
metabolic conversion. For this reason, routine use of codeine, 
especially in pediatric age groups, is being reconsidered. 
 D. Excretion 
 Polar metabolites, including glucuronide conjugates of opioid anal-
gesics, are excreted mainly in the urine. Small amounts of unchanged 
drug may also be found in the urine. In addition, glucuronide con-
jugates are found in the bile, but enterohepatic circulation repre-
sents only a small portion of the excretory process. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Opioid agonists produce analgesia by binding to specific G pro-
tein-coupled receptors that are located in brain and spinal cord 
regions involved in the transmission and modulation of pain 
( Figure 31–1 ). Some effects may be mediated by opioid receptors 
on peripheral sensory nerve endings. 
 1. Receptor types— As noted previously, three major classes of 
opioid receptors (μ, δ, and κ) have been identified in various ner-
vous system sites and in other tissues ( Table 31–1 ). Each of the three 
major receptors has now been cloned. All are members of the G 
protein-coupled family of receptors and show significant amino acid 
sequence homologies. Multiple receptor subtypes have been pro-
posed based on pharmacologic criteria, including μ 1 , μ 2 ; δ 1 , δ 2 ; and 
κ 1 , κ 2 , and κ 3 . However, genes encoding only one subtype from 
each of the μ, δ, and κ receptor families have been isolated and 
characterized thus far. One plausible explanation is that μ-receptor 
subtypes arise from alternate splice variants of a common gene. This 
idea has been supported by the identification of receptor splice vari-
ants in mice and humans. Since an opioid may function with differ-
ent potencies as an agonist, partial agonist, or antagonist at more 
than one receptor class or subtype, it is not surprising that these 
agents are capable of diverse pharmacologic effects. 
 2. Cellular actions— At the molecular level, opioid receptors 
form a family of proteins that physically couple to G proteins and 
through this interaction affect ion channel gating, modulate intra-
cellular Ca 2+ disposition, and alter protein phosphorylation (see 
 Chapter 2 ). The opioids have two well-established direct G 
protein-coupled actions on neurons: (1) they close voltage-gated 
Ca 2+ channels on presynaptic nerve terminals and thereby reduce 
transmitter release, and (2) they hyperpolarize and thus inhibit 
postsynaptic neurons by opening K + channels.  Figure 31–1 
schematically illustrates these effects. The presynaptic action—
depressed transmitter release—has been demonstrated for 
release of a large number of neurotransmitters including gluta-
mate, the principal excitatory amino acid released from nocicep-
tive nerve terminals, as well as acetylcholine, norepinephrine, 
serotonin, and substance P. 
 3. Relation of physiologic effects to receptor type— The 
majority of currently available opioid analgesics act primarily at 
the μ-opioid receptor ( Table 31–2 ). Analgesia and the euphoriant, 
respiratory depressant, and physical dependence properties of 
morphine result principally from actions at μ receptors. In fact, 
the μ receptor was originally defined using the relative potencies 
for clinical analgesia of a series of opioid alkaloids. However, opi-
oid analgesic effects are complex and include interaction with δ 
and κ receptors. This is supported by the study of genetic knock-
outs of the μ, δ, and κ genes in mice. Delta-receptor agonists 
retain analgesic properties in δ receptor knockout mice. The 
development of μ-receptor–selective agonists could be clinically 
useful if their side-effect profiles (respiratory depression, risk of 
dependence) were more favorable than those found with current 
μ-receptor agonists, such as morphine. Although morphine does 
act at κ and δ receptor sites, it is unclear to what extent this con-
tributes to its analgesic action. The endogenous opioid peptides 
differ from most of the alkaloids in their affinity for the δ and 
κ receptors ( Table 31–1 ). 
 In an effort to develop opioid analgesics with a reduced inci-
dence of respiratory depression or propensity for addiction and 
dependence, compounds that show preference for κ opioid recep-
tors have been developed. Butorphanol and nalbuphine have 
shown some clinical success as analgesics, but they can cause dys-
phoric reactions and have limited potency. It is interesting that 
butorphanol has also been shown to cause significantly greater 
analgesia in women than in men. In fact, gender-based differences 
in analgesia mediated by μ- and δ-receptor activation have been 
widely reported. 
 4. Receptor distribution and neural mechanisms of 
analgesia— Opioid receptor binding sites have been localized 
autoradiographically with high-affinity radioligands and with anti-
bodies to unique peptide sequences in each receptor subtype. All 
three major receptors are present in high concentrations in the 
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Receptors are present both on spinal 
cord pain transmission neurons and on the primary afferents that 
relay the pain message to them ( Figure 31–2 , sites A and B). 
Although opioid agonists directly inhibit the dorsal horn pain 
transmission neurons, they also inhibit the release of excitatory 
transmitters from the primary afferents. Within the presynaptic 
terminals, there is evidence that heterodimerization of the μ-opioid 
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    547
and δ-opioid receptors contribute to μ-agonist efficacy (eg, inhibi-
tion of presynaptic voltage-gated calcium channel activity). On the 
other hand, a recent study using a transgenic mouse that expresses 
a δ–receptor-enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) fusion 
protein shows little overlap of μ receptor and δ receptor in the 
dorsal root ganglion neurons. Importantly, the μ receptor is associated 
with TRPV1 and peptide (substance P)-expressing nociceptors, 
whereas δ-receptor expression predominates in the non-peptidergic 
population of nociceptors, including many primary afferents with 
myelinated axons. This is consistent with the action of intrathecal 
μ-receptor– and δ-receptor–selective ligands that are found to block 
heat versus mechanical pain processing, respectively. To what 
 FIGURE 31–1  Potential receptor mechanisms of analgesic drugs. The primary afferent neuron (cell body not shown) originates in the 
periphery and carries pain signals to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, where it synapses via glutamate and neuropeptide transmitters with the 
secondary neuron. Pain stimuli can be attenuated in the periphery (under inflammatory conditions) by opioids acting at μ-opioid receptors 
(MOR) or blocked in the afferent axon by local anesthetics (not shown). Action potentials reaching the dorsal horn can be attenuated at the 
presynaptic ending by opioids and by calcium blockers (ziconotide), α 2 agonists, and possibly, by drugs that increase synaptic concentrations of 
norepinephrine by blocking reuptake (tapentadol). Opioids also inhibit the postsynaptic neuron, as do certain neuropeptide antagonists acting 
at tachykinin (NK1) and other neuropeptide receptors. 
Primary
afferent
fiber
Pain
stimulus
MOR
MOR
2
α
Glutamate
Neuropeptide
Periphery
Dorsal horn
spinal cord
AMPA
NMDA
MOR
K+
K+
Ca2+
Secondary
afferent
neuron
NK1
+
–
–
–
548    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
extent the differential expression of the μ receptor and δ receptor 
in the dorsal root ganglia is characteristic of neurons throughout 
the CNS remains to be determined. 
 Thus, opioids exert a powerful analgesic effect directly on the 
spinal cord. This  spinal action has been exploited clinically by 
direct application of opioid agonists to the spinal cord, which 
provides a regional analgesic effect while reducing the unwanted 
respiratory depression, nausea and vomiting, and sedation that 
may occur from the  supraspinal actions of systemically adminis-
tered opioids. 
 Under most circumstances, opioids are given systemically and 
so act simultaneously at multiple sites. These include not only 
the ascending pathways of pain transmission beginning with 
specialized peripheral sensory terminals that transduce painful 
stimuli ( Figure 31–2 ) but also descending (modulatory) path-
ways ( Figure 31–3 ). At these sites as at others, opioids directly 
inhibit neurons; yet this action results in the  activation of descend-
ing inhibitory neurons that send processes to the spinal cord and 
inhibit pain transmission neurons. This activation has been shown 
to result from the inhibition of inhibitory neurons in several loca-
tions ( Figure 31–4 ). Taken together, interactions at these sites 
increase the overall analgesic effect of opioid agonists. 
 When pain-relieving opioid drugs are given systemically, they 
presumably act upon neuronal circuits normally regulated by 
endogenous opioid peptides. Part of the pain-relieving action of 
exogenous opioids involves the release of endogenous opioid 
peptides. An exogenous opioid agonist (eg, morphine) may act 
primarily and directly at the μ receptor, but this action may 
evoke the release of endogenous opioids that additionally act at 
δ and κ receptors. Thus, even a receptor-selective ligand can initi-
ate a complex sequence of events involving multiple synapses, 
transmitters, and receptor types. 
 Animal and human clinical studies demonstrate that both 
endogenous and exogenous opioids can also produce opioid-
mediated analgesia at sites  outside the CNS. Pain associated 
with inflammation seems especially sensitive to these peripheral 
opioid actions. The presence of functional μ receptors on the 
peripheral terminals of sensory neurons supports this hypothesis. 
B
A
C Ventral caudal
thalamus
Afferent
nociceptor
Spinal cord
Medulla/Pons
Parabrachial
nuclei
Cortex
Transmission
Dorsal horn
Action
potentials
Higher
centers
Action
potentials
Opioid
receptor (MOR)
GABA
GABAA
receptor
Descending
inhibitory
neuron
 FIGURE 31–2 Putative sites of action of opioid analgesics. Sites 
of action on the afferent pain transmission pathway from the periph-
ery to the higher centers are shown.  A: Direct action of opioids on 
inflamed or damaged peripheral tissues (see  Figure 31–1 for detail). 
 B: Inhibition also occurs in the spinal cord (see  Figure 31–1 ). 
 C: Possible sites of action in the thalamus. 
 FIGURE 31–3  Brainstem local circuitry underlying the modulat-
ing effect of μ-opioid receptor (MOR)–mediated analgesia on 
descending pathways. The pain-inhibitory neuron is indirectly acti-
vated by opioids (exogenous or endogenous), which inhibit an inhib-
itory (GABAergic) interneuron. This results in  enhanced inhibition of 
nociceptive processing in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (see 
 Figure 31–4 ). 
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    549
Furthermore, activation of peripheral μ receptors results in a 
decrease in sensory neuron activity and transmitter release. The 
endogenous release of β-endorphin produced by immune cells 
within injured or inflamed tissue represents one source of physi-
ologic peripheral μ-receptor activation. Peripheral administration 
of opioids, eg, into the knees of patients following arthroscopic 
knee surgery, has shown clinical benefit up to 24 hours after 
administration. If they can be developed, opioids selective for a 
peripheral site would be useful adjuncts in the treatment of 
inflammatory pain (see Box: Ion Channels & Novel Analgesic 
Targets). Such compounds could have the additional benefit of 
reducing unwanted effects such as constipation. 
 5. Tolerance and dependence— With frequently repeated 
therapeutic doses of morphine or its surrogates, there is a gradual 
loss in effectiveness; this loss of effectiveness is denoted tolerance. 
To reproduce the original response, a larger dose must be admin-
istered. Along with tolerance, physical dependence develops. 
Physical dependence is defined as a characteristic  withdrawal or 
 abstinence syndrome when a drug is stopped or an antagonist is 
administered (see also  Chapter 32 ). 
 The mechanism of development of tolerance and physical 
dependence is poorly understood, but persistent activation of 
μ receptors such as occurs with the treatment of severe chronic 
pain appears to play a primary role in its induction and mainte-
nance. Current concepts have shifted away from tolerance being 
driven by a simple up-regulation of the cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP) system. Although this process is associated 
with tolerance, it is not sufficient to explain it. A second hypoth-
esis for the development of opioid tolerance and dependence is 
based on the concept of  receptor recycling. Normally, activation 
of μ receptors by endogenous ligands results in endocytosis fol-
lowed by resensitization and recycling of the receptor to the 
plasma membrane (see  Chapter 2 ). However, using genetically 
modified mice, research now shows that the  failure of morphine to 
induce endocytosis of the μ-opioid receptor is an important com-
ponent of tolerance and dependence. In contrast, methadone, a 
μ-receptor agonist used for the  treatment of opioid tolerance and 
dependence, does induce receptor endocytosis. This suggests that 
maintenance of normal sensitivity of μ receptors requires reactiva-
tion by endocytosis and recycling. Another area of research sug-
gests that the δ opioid receptor functions as an independent 
component in the maintenance of tolerance. In addition, the con-
cept of  receptor uncoupling has gained prominence. Under this 
hypothesis, tolerance is due to a dysfunction of structural interac-
tions between the μ receptor and G proteins, second-messenger 
systems, and their target ion channels. Uncoupling and recoupling 
of μ receptor function is likely linked to receptor recycling. 
Moreover, the NMDA-receptor ion channel complex has been 
shown to play a critical role in tolerance development and main-
tenance because NMDA-receptor antagonists such as ketamine 
can block tolerance development. Although a role in endocytosis 
is not yet clearly defined, the development of novel NMDA-
receptor antagonists or other strategies to recouple μ receptors to 
their target ion channels provides hope for achieving a clinically 
effective means to prevent or reverse opioid analgesic tolerance. 
 In addition to the development of tolerance, persistent admin-
istration of opioid analgesics has been observed to  increase the 
sensation of pain leading to a state of hyperalgesia. This phenom-
enon has been observed with several opioid analgesics, including 
morphine, fentanyl, and remifentanil. Spinal dynorphin and acti-
vation of the bradykinin receptor have emerged as important 
candidates for the mediation of opioid-induced hyperalgesia. 
 B. Organ System Effects of Morphine and Its Surrogates 
 The actions described below for morphine, the prototypic opioid 
agonist, can also be observed with other opioid agonists, partial 
agonists, and those with mixed receptor effects. Characteristics of 
specific members of these groups are discussed below. 
 1. Central nervous system effects— The principal effects of 
opioid analgesics with affinity for μ receptors are on the CNS; the 
more important ones include analgesia, euphoria, sedation, and 
respiratory depression. With repeated use, a high degree of toler-
ance occurs to all of these effects ( Table 31–3 ). 
 a. Analgesia— Pain consists of both sensory and affective (emo-
tional) components. Opioid analgesics are unique in that they can 
reduce both aspects of the pain experience, especially the affective 
Cortex
Midbrain
A − Periaqueductal
      gray
B − Rostral ventral
      medulla
Medulla/pons
Spinal cord
C − Dorsal horn
 FIGURE 31–4  Opioid analgesic action on the descending inhibi-
tory pathway. Sites of action of opioids on pain-modulating neurons 
in the midbrain and medulla including the midbrain periaqueductal 
gray area  (A), rostral ventral medulla  (B), and the locus caeruleus 
indirectly control pain transmission pathways by enhancing descend-
ing inhibition to the dorsal horn  (C). 
550    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
aspect. In contrast, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesic 
drugs have no significant effect on the emotional aspects of pain. 
 b. Euphoria— Typically, patients or intravenous drug users who 
receive intravenous morphine experience a pleasant floating sensa-
tion with lessened anxiety and distress. However, dysphoria, an 
unpleasant state characterized by restlessness and malaise, may 
sometimes occur. 
 c. Sedation— Drowsiness and clouding of mentation are com-
mon effects of opioids. There is little or no amnesia. Sleep is 
induced by opioids more frequently in the elderly than in young, 
healthy individuals. Ordinarily, the patient can be easily aroused 
from this sleep. However, the combination of morphine with 
other central depressant drugs such as the sedative-hypnotics may 
result in very deep sleep. Marked sedation occurs more frequently 
with compounds closely related to the phenanthrene derivatives 
and less frequently with the synthetic agents such as meperidine 
and fentanyl. In standard analgesic doses, morphine (a phenan-
threne) disrupts normal rapid eye movement (REM) and non-
REM sleep patterns. This disrupting effect is probably 
characteristic of all opioids. In contrast to humans, a number of 
Ion Channels & Novel Analgesic Targets
 Even the most severe acute pain (lasting hours to days) can usu-
ally be well controlled—with significant but tolerable adverse 
effects—using currently available analgesics, especially the opi-
oids. Chronic pain (lasting weeks to months), however, is not very 
satisfactorily managed with opioids. It is now known that in 
chronic pain, receptors on sensory nerve terminals in the periph-
ery contribute to increased excitability of sensory nerve endings 
(peripheral sensitization). The hyperexcitable sensory neuron 
bombards the spinal cord, leading to increased excitability and 
synaptic alterations in the dorsal horn (central sensitization). Such 
changes appear to be important in chronic inflammatory and 
neuropathic pain states. 
 In the effort to discover better analgesic drugs for chronic 
pain, renewed attention is being paid to synaptic transmission 
in nociception and peripheral sensory transduction. Potentially 
important ion channels associated with these processes in the 
periphery include members of the transient receptor potential 
family such as the capsaicin receptor, TRPV1 (which is acti-
vated by multiple noxious stimuli such as heat, protons, and 
products of inflammation) as well as TRPA1, activated by inflam-
matory mediators; and P2X receptors (which are responsive to 
purines released from tissue damage). Special types of tetrodo-
toxin-resistant voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav 1.7, 1.8, 
1.9) are uniquely associated with nociceptive neurons in dorsal 
root ganglia. Lidocaine and mexiletine, which are useful in 
some chronic pain states, may act by blocking this class of chan-
nels. Genetic polymorphisms of Nav 1.7 are associated with 
either absence or predisposition to pain. Because of the impor-
tance of their peripheral sites of action, therapeutic strategies 
that deliver agents that block peripheral pain transduction or 
transmission have been introduced in the form of transdermal 
patches and balms. Such products that specifically target periph-
eral capsaicin receptors and sodium channel function are 
becoming available. 
 Ziconotide, a blocker of voltage-gated N-type calcium 
channels, is approved for intrathecal analgesia in patients with 
refractory chronic pain. It is a synthetic peptide related to the 
marine snail toxin ω-conotoxin, which selectively blocks these 
calcium channels. Gabapentin/pregabalin, anticonvulsant 
analogs of GABA (see  Chapter 24 ), are effective treatments for 
neuropathic (nerve injury) pain and inflammatory pain acting 
at voltage-gated calcium channels containing the α2δ1 sub-
unit. N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors appear to play a 
very important role in central sensitization at both spinal and 
supraspinal levels. Although certain NMDA antagonists have 
demonstrated analgesic activity (eg, ketamine), it has been 
difficult to find agents with an acceptably low profile of 
adverse effects or neurotoxicity. However, ketamine at very 
small doses appears to improve analgesia and reduce opioid 
requirements under conditions of opioid tolerance. In fact, 
ketamine applied topically has been claimed to have analgesic 
effects. GABA and acetylcholine (through nicotinic receptors) 
appear to control the central synaptic release of several trans-
mitters involved in nociception. Nicotine itself and certain 
nicotine analogs cause analgesia, and their use for postopera-
tive analgesia is under investigation. Finally, work on cannabi-
noids and vanilloids and their receptors suggest that 
D9- tetrahydrocannabinol, which acts primarily on CB1 can-
nabinoid receptors, can synergize with μ-receptor analgesics 
and interact with the TRPV1 capsaicin receptor to produce 
analgesia under certain circumstances. 
 As our understanding of peripheral and central pain trans-
duction improves, additional therapeutic targets and strate-
gies will become available. Combined with our present 
knowledge of opioid analgesics, a “multimodal” approach to 
pain therapy is emerging, which allows the use of complemen-
tary compounds resulting in improved analgesia with fewer 
adverse effects. 
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    551
species (cats, horses, cows, pigs) may manifest excitation rather 
than sedation when given opioids. These paradoxic effects are at 
least partially dose-dependent. 
 d. Respiratory depression— All of the opioid analgesics can 
produce significant respiratory depression by inhibiting brain-
stem respiratory mechanisms. Alveolar PCO 2 may increase, but 
the most reliable indicator of this depression is a depressed 
response to a carbon dioxide challenge. The respiratory depres-
sion is dose-related and is influenced significantly by the degree 
of sensory input occurring at the time. For example, it is possible 
to partially overcome opioid-induced respiratory depression by 
stimulation of various sorts. When strongly painful stimuli that 
have prevented the depressant action of a large dose of an opioid 
are relieved, respiratory depression may suddenly become marked. 
A small to moderate decrease in respiratory function, as measured 
by PaCO 2 elevation, may be well tolerated in the patient without 
prior respiratory impairment. However, in individuals with 
increased intracranial pressure, asthma, chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease, or cor pulmonale, this decrease in respiratory 
function may not be tolerated. Opioid-induced respiratory 
depression remains one of the most difficult clinical challenges in 
the treatment of severe pain. Research is ongoing to understand 
and develop analgesic agents and adjuncts that avoid this effect. 
Research to overcome this problem is focused on μ-receptor phar-
macology and serotonin signaling pathways in the brainstem 
respiratory control centers. 
 e. Cough suppression— Suppression of the cough reflex is a 
well-recognized action of opioids. Codeine in particular has been 
used to advantage in persons suffering from pathologic cough and 
in patients in whom it is necessary to maintain ventilation via an 
endotracheal tube. However, cough suppression by opioids may 
allow accumulation of secretions and thus lead to airway obstruc-
tion and atelectasis. 
 f. Miosis— Constriction of the pupils is seen with virtually all 
opioid agonists. Miosis is a pharmacologic action to which little or 
no tolerance develops ( Table 31–3 ); thus, it is valuable in the 
diagnosis of opioid overdose. Even in highly tolerant addicts, mio-
sis is seen. This action, which can be blocked by opioid antago-
nists, is mediated by parasympathetic pathways, which, in turn, 
can be blocked by atropine. 
 g. Truncal rigidity— An intensification of tone in the large 
trunk muscles has been noted with a number of opioids. It was 
originally believed that truncal rigidity involved a spinal cord 
action of these drugs, but there is now evidence that it results from 
an action at supraspinal levels. Truncal rigidity reduces thoracic 
compliance and thus interferes with ventilation. The effect is most 
apparent when high doses of the highly lipid-soluble opioids (eg, 
fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, remifentanil) are rapidly adminis-
tered intravenously. Truncal rigidity may be overcome by admin-
istration of an opioid antagonist, which of course will also 
antagonize the analgesic action of the opioid. Preventing truncal 
rigidity while preserving analgesia requires the concomitant use of 
neuromuscular blocking agents. 
 h. Nausea and vomiting— The opioid analgesics can activate 
the brainstem chemoreceptor trigger zone to produce nausea and 
vomiting. There may also be a vestibular component in this effect 
because ambulation seems to increase the incidence of nausea and 
vomiting. 
 i. Temperature— Homeostatic regulation of body temperature 
is mediated in part by the action of endogenous opioid peptides in 
the brain. This has been supported by experiments demonstrating 
that administration of μ-opioid receptor agonists such as morphine 
administered to the anterior hypothalamus produces hyperthermia, 
whereas administration of κ agonists induces hypothermia. 
 2. Peripheral effects 
 a. Cardiovascular system— Most opioids have no significant 
direct effects on the heart and, other than bradycardia, no major 
effects on cardiac rhythm. Meperidine is an exception to this gener-
alization because its antimuscarinic action can result in tachycardia. 
Blood pressure is usually well maintained in subjects receiving opi-
oids unless the cardiovascular system is stressed, in which case 
hypotension may occur. This hypotensive effect is probably due to 
peripheral arterial and venous dilation, which has been attributed to 
a number of mechanisms including central depression of vasomotor-
stabilizing mechanisms and release of histamine. No consistent 
effect on cardiac output is seen, and the electrocardiogram is not 
significantly affected. However, caution should be exercised in 
patients with decreased blood volume, because the above mecha-
nisms make these patients susceptible to hypotension. Opioid 
analgesics affect cerebral circulation minimally except when PCO 2 
rises as a consequence of respiratory depression. Increased PCO 2 
leads to cerebral vasodilation associated with a decrease in cerebral 
TABLE 31–3  Degrees of tolerance that may develop 
to some of the effects of the opioids.
High
Moderate
Minimal or None
Analgesia
Bradycardia
Miosis
Euphoria, dysphoria
Constipation
Mental clouding
Convulsions
Sedation
Respiratory 
depression
Antidiuresis
Nausea and 
vomiting
Cough suppression
552    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
vascular resistance, an increase in cerebral blood flow, and an 
increase in intracranial pressure. 
 b. Gastrointestinal tract— Constipation has long been recog-
nized as an effect of opioids, an effect that does not diminish with 
continued use. That is, tolerance does not develop to opioid- 
induced constipation ( Table 31–3 ). Opioid receptors exist in high 
density in the gastrointestinal tract, and the constipating effects of 
the opioids are mediated through an action on the enteric nervous 
system (see  Chapter 6 ) as well as the CNS. In the stomach, motil-
ity (rhythmic contraction and relaxation) may decrease but tone 
(persistent contraction) may increase—particularly in the central 
portion; gastric secretion of hydrochloric acid is decreased. Small 
intestine resting tone is increased, with periodic spasms, but the 
amplitude of nonpropulsive contractions is markedly decreased. 
In the large intestine, propulsive peristaltic waves are diminished 
and tone is increased; this delays passage of the fecal mass and 
allows increased absorption of water, which leads to constipation. 
The large bowel actions are the basis for the use of opioids in the 
management of diarrhea, and constipation is a major problem in 
the use of opioids for control of severe cancer pain. 
 c. Biliary tract— The opioids contract biliary smooth muscle, 
which can result in biliary colic. The sphincter of Oddi may con-
strict, resulting in reflux of biliary and pancreatic secretions and 
elevated plasma amylase and lipase levels. 
 d. Renal— Renal function is depressed by opioids. It is believed 
that in humans this is chiefly due to decreased renal plasma flow. 
In addition, μ opioids have been found to have an antidiuretic 
effect in humans. Mechanisms may involve both the CNS and 
peripheral sites. Opioids also enhance renal tubular sodium reab-
sorption. The role of opioid-induced changes in antidiuretic hor-
mone (ADH) release is controversial. Ureteral and bladder tone 
are increased by therapeutic doses of the opioid analgesics. 
Increased sphincter tone may precipitate urinary retention, espe-
cially in postoperative patients. Occasionally, ureteral colic caused 
by a renal calculus is made worse by opioid-induced increase in 
ureteral tone. 
 e. Uterus— The opioid analgesics may prolong labor. The 
mechanism for this action is unclear, but both peripheral and 
central actions of the opioids can reduce uterine tone. 
 f. Neuroendocrine— Opioid analgesics stimulate the release of 
ADH, prolactin, and somatotropin but inhibit the release of 
luteinizing hormone. These effects suggest that endogenous opi-
oid peptides, through effects in the hypothalamus, regulate these 
systems ( Table 31–1 ). 
 g. Pruritus— Therapeutic doses of the opioid analgesics produce 
flushing and warming of the skin accompanied sometimes by 
sweating and itching; CNS effects and peripheral histamine 
release may be responsible for these reactions. Opioid-induced 
pruritus and occasionally urticaria appear more frequently when 
opioid analgesics are administered parenterally. In addition, when 
opioids such as morphine are administered to the neuraxis by the 
spinal or epidural route, their usefulness may be limited by intense 
pruritus over the lips and torso. 
 h. Miscellaneous— The opioids modulate the immune system 
by effects on lymphocyte proliferation, antibody production, and 
chemotaxis. In addition, leucocytes migrate to the site of tissue 
injury and release opioid peptides, which in turn help counter 
inflammatory pain. However, natural killer cell cytolytic activity 
and lymphocyte proliferative responses to mitogens are usually 
inhibited by opioids. Although the mechanisms involved are com-
plex, activation of central opioid receptors could mediate a sig-
nificant component of the changes observed in peripheral immune 
function. In general, these effects are mediated by the sympathetic 
nervous system in the case of acute administration and by the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system in the case of prolonged 
administration of opioids. 
 C. Effects of Opioids with Both Agonist 
and Antagonist Actions 
 Buprenorphine is an opioid agonist that displays high binding 
affinity but low intrinsic activity at the μ receptor. Its slow rate of 
dissociation from the μ receptor has also made it an attractive 
alternative to methadone for the management of opioid with-
drawal. It functions as an  antagonist at the δ and κ receptors and 
for this reason is referred to as a “mixed agonist-antagonist.” 
Although buprenorphine is used as an analgesic, it can antagonize 
the action of more potent μ agonists such as morphine. 
Buprenorphine also binds to ORL1, the orphanin receptor. 
Whether this property also participates in opposing μ receptor 
function is under study. Pentazocine and nalbuphine are other 
examples of opioid analgesics with mixed agonist-antagonist prop-
erties. Psychotomimetic effects, with hallucinations, nightmares, 
and anxiety, have been reported after use of drugs with mixed 
agonist-antagonist actions. 
 A combined buprenorphine HCl/naloxone HCl dihydrate 
preparation is now available as sublingual tablets and a sublingual 
film for use in a maintenance treatment plan that includes counsel-
ing, psychosocial support, and direction by physicians qualified 
under the Drug Addiction Treatment Act. Both formulations can be 
abused in a manner similar to other opioids, legal or illicit. The 
combination formulations can cause serious respiratory depression 
and death, particularly when extracted and injected intravenously in 
combination with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants (ie, 
sedatives, tranquilizers, or alcohol). It is extremely dangerous to self-
administer benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants while taking 
the buprenorphine-naloxone combination. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE OPIOID ANALGESICS 
 Successful treatment of pain is a challenging task that begins with 
careful attempts to assess the source and magnitude of the pain. 
The amount of pain experienced by the patient is often measured 
by means of a pain Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) or less frequently 
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    553
by marking a line on a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) with word 
descriptors ranging from no pain (0) to excruciating pain (10). In 
either case, values indicate the magnitude of pain as: mild (1–3), 
moderate (4–6), or severe (7–10). A similar scale can be used with 
children and with patients who cannot speak; this scale depicts five 
faces ranging from smiling (no pain) to crying (maximum pain). 
 For a patient in severe pain, the administration of an opioid 
analgesic is usually considered a primary part of the overall man-
agement plan. Determining the route of administration (oral, 
parenteral, neuraxial), duration of drug action, ceiling effect 
(maximal intrinsic activity), duration of therapy, potential for 
adverse effects, and the patient’s past experience with opioids all 
should be addressed. One of the principal errors made by physi-
cians in this setting is failure to adequately assess a patient’s pain 
and to match its severity with an appropriate level of therapy. Just 
as important is the principle that following delivery of the thera-
peutic plan, its effectiveness must be reevaluated and the plan 
modified, if necessary, if the response was excessive or inadequate. 
 Use of opioid drugs in acute situations may be contrasted with 
their use in chronic pain management, in which a multitude of 
other factors must be considered, including the development of 
tolerance to and physical dependence on opioid analgesics. 
 Clinical Use of Opioid Analgesics 
 A. Analgesia 
 Severe,  constant pain is usually relieved with opioid analgesics with 
high intrinsic activity (see  Table 31–2 ), whereas sharp, intermit-
tent pain does not appear to be as effectively controlled. 
 The pain associated with cancer and other terminal illnesses 
must be treated aggressively and often requires a multidisciplinary 
approach for effective management. Such conditions may require 
continuous use of potent opioid analgesics and are associated with 
some degree of tolerance and dependence. However, this should not 
be used as a barrier to providing patients with the best possible care 
and quality of life. Research in the hospice movement has demon-
strated that fixed-interval administration of opioid medication (ie, 
a regular dose at a scheduled time) is more effective in achieving 
pain relief than dosing on demand. New dosage forms of opioids 
that allow slower release of the drug are now available, eg, sus-
tained-release forms of morphine (MS Contin) and oxycodone 
(OxyContin). Their purported advantage is a longer and more 
stable level of analgesia. 
 If disturbances of gastrointestinal function prevent the use of 
oral sustained-release morphine, the fentanyl transdermal system 
(fentanyl patch) can be used over long periods. Furthermore, buc-
cal transmucosal fentanyl can be used for short episodes of break-
through pain (see Alternative Routes of Administration). 
Administration of strong opioids by nasal insufflation has been 
shown to be efficacious, and nasal preparations are now available in 
some countries. Approval of such formulations in the USA is grow-
ing. In addition, stimulant drugs such as the amphetamines have 
been shown to enhance the analgesic actions of the opioids and 
thus may be very useful adjuncts in the patient with chronic pain. 
 Opioid analgesics are often used during obstetric labor. Because 
opioids cross the placental barrier and reach the fetus, care must be 
taken to minimize neonatal depression. If it occurs, immediate injec-
tion of the antagonist naloxone will reverse the depression. The 
phenylpiperidine drugs (eg, meperidine) appear to produce less 
depression, particularly respiratory depression, in newborn infants 
than does morphine; this may justify their use in obstetric practice. 
 The acute, severe pain of renal and biliary colic often requires a 
strong agonist opioid for adequate relief. However, the drug-induced 
increase in smooth muscle tone may cause a paradoxical  increase in 
pain secondary to increased spasm. An increase in the dose of opioid 
is usually successful in providing adequate analgesia. 
 B. Acute Pulmonary Edema 
 The relief produced by intravenous morphine in dyspnea from 
pulmonary edema associated with left ventricular heart failure is 
remarkable. Proposed mechanisms include reduced anxiety ( per-
ception of shortness of breath) and reduced cardiac preload 
(reduced venous tone) and afterload (decreased peripheral resis-
tance). However, if respiratory depression is a problem, furosemide 
may be preferred for the treatment of pulmonary edema. On the 
other hand, morphine can be particularly useful when treating 
painful myocardial ischemia with pulmonary edema. 
 C. Cough 
 Suppression of cough can be obtained at doses lower than those 
needed for analgesia. However, in recent years the use of opioid 
analgesics to allay cough has diminished largely because a number 
of effective synthetic compounds have been developed that are 
neither analgesic nor addictive. These agents are discussed below. 
 D. Diarrhea 
 Diarrhea from almost any cause can be controlled with the opioid 
analgesics, but if diarrhea is associated with infection such use 
must not substitute for appropriate chemotherapy. Crude opium 
preparations (eg, paregoric) were used in the past to control diar-
rhea, but now synthetic surrogates with more selective gastrointes-
tinal effects and few or no CNS effects, eg, diphenoxylate or 
loperamide, are used. Several preparations are available specifically 
for this purpose (see  Chapter 62 ). 
 E. Shivering 
 Although all opioid agonists have some propensity to reduce shiv-
ering, meperidine is reported to have the most pronounced anti-
shivering properties. Meperidine apparently blocks shivering 
mainly through an action on subtypes of the α 2 adrenoceptor. 
 F. Applications in Anesthesia 
 The opioids are frequently used as premedicant drugs before anes-
thesia and surgery because of their sedative, anxiolytic, and analge-
sic properties. They are also used intraoperatively both as adjuncts 
to other anesthetic agents and, in high doses (eg, 0.02–0.075 mg/
kg of fentanyl), as a primary component of the anesthetic regimen 
(see  Chapter 25 ). Opioids are most commonly used in cardiovascu-
lar surgery and other types of high-risk surgery in which a primary 
goal is to minimize cardiovascular depression. In such situations, 
mechanical respiratory assistance must be provided. 
554    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Because of their direct action on the superficial neurons of the 
spinal cord dorsal horn, opioids can also be used as regional anal-
gesics by administration into the epidural or subarachnoid spaces 
of the spinal column. A number of studies have demonstrated that 
long-lasting analgesia with minimal adverse effects can be achieved 
by epidural administration of 3–5 mg of morphine, followed by 
slow infusion through a catheter placed in the epidural space. It 
was initially assumed that the epidural application of opioids 
might selectively produce analgesia without impairment of motor, 
autonomic, or sensory functions other than pain. However, respi-
ratory depression can occur after the drug is injected into the 
epidural space and may require reversal with naloxone. Effects 
such as pruritus and nausea and vomiting are common after epi-
dural and subarachnoid administration of opioids and may also be 
reversed with naloxone if necessary. Currently, the epidural route 
is favored over subarachnoid administration because adverse 
effects are less common and robust outcome studies have shown a 
significant reduction in perioperative mortality and morbidity 
with the use of thoracic epidural analgesia. The use of low doses 
of local anesthetics in combination with fentanyl infused through 
a thoracic epidural catheter has become an accepted method of 
pain control in patients recovering from thoracic and major upper 
abdominal surgery. In rare cases, chronic pain management spe-
cialists may elect to surgically implant a programmable infusion 
pump connected to a spinal catheter for continuous infusion of 
opioids or other analgesic compounds. 
 G. Alternative Routes of Administration 
 Rectal suppositories of morphine and hydromorphone have been 
used when oral and parenteral routes are undesirable. The  transder-
mal patch provides stable blood levels of drug and better pain con-
trol while avoiding the need for repeated parenteral injections. 
Fentanyl has been the most successful opioid in transdermal applica-
tion and is indicated for the management of persistent unremitting 
pain. Because of the complication of fentanyl-induced respiratory 
depression, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends 
that introduction of a transdermal fentanyl patch (25 mcg/h) be 
reserved for patients with an established oral morphine require-
ment of at least 60 mg/d for 1 week or more. Extreme caution 
must be exercised in any patient initiating therapy or undergoing 
a dose increase because the peak effects may not be realized until 
24–48 hours after patch application. The  intranasal route avoids 
repeated parenteral drug injections and the first-pass metabolism 
of orally administered drugs. Butorphanol is the only opioid cur-
rently available in the USA in a nasal formulation, but more are 
expected. Another alternative to parenteral administration is the 
 buccal transmucosal route, which uses a fentanyl citrate lozenge 
or a “lollipop” mounted on a stick. 
 Another type of pain control called  patient-controlled analgesia 
(PCA) is now in widespread use for the management of break-
through pain. With PCA, the patient controls a parenteral (usually 
intravenous) infusion device by pressing a button to deliver a pre-
programmed dose of the desired opioid analgesic. Claims of better 
pain control using less opioid are supported by well-designed 
clinical trials, making this approach very useful in postoperative 
pain control. However, health care personnel must be very familiar 
with the use of PCAs to avoid overdosage secondary to misuse or 
improper programming. There is a proven risk of PCA-associated 
respiratory depression and hypoxia that requires careful monitoring 
of vital signs and sedation level, and provision of supplemental 
oxygen. This risk is increased if patients are concurrently prescribed 
medications with sedative properties such as benzodiazepines. 
 Toxicity & Undesired Effects 
 Direct toxic effects of the opioid analgesics that are extensions of 
their acute pharmacologic actions include respiratory depression, 
nausea, vomiting, and constipation ( Table 31–4 ). In addition, 
tolerance and dependence, diagnosis and treatment of overdosage, 
and contraindications must be considered. 
 A. Tolerance and Dependence 
 Drug dependence of the opioid type is marked by a relatively specific 
withdrawal or abstinence syndrome. Just as there are pharmacologic 
differences between the various opioids, there are also differences in 
psychological dependence and the severity of withdrawal effects. For 
example, withdrawal from dependence on a strong agonist is associ-
ated with more severe withdrawal signs and symptoms than with-
drawal from a mild or moderate agonist. Administration of an opioid 
 antagonist to an opioid-dependent person is followed by brief but 
severe withdrawal symptoms (see antagonist-precipitated withdrawal, 
below). The potential for physical and psychological dependence of 
the partial agonist-antagonist opioids appears to be less than that of 
the strong agonist drugs. 
 1. Tolerance— Although development of tolerance begins with 
the first dose of an opioid, tolerance generally does not become 
clinically manifest until after 2–3 weeks of frequent exposure to 
ordinary therapeutic doses. Nevertheless, perioperative and critical 
care use of ultrapotent opioid analgesics such as remifentanil have 
been shown to induce opioid tolerance within hours. Tolerance 
develops most readily when large doses are given at short intervals 
and is minimized by giving small amounts of drug with longer 
intervals between doses. 
 Depending on the compound and the effect measured, the 
degree of tolerance may be as great as 35-fold. Marked tolerance 
may develop to the analgesic, sedating, and respiratory depressant 
effects. It is possible to produce respiratory arrest in a non-tolerant 
TABLE 31–4  Adverse effects of the opioid analgesics.
Behavioral restlessness, tremulousness, hyperactivity (in dysphoric 
reactions)
Respiratory depression
Nausea and vomiting
Increased intracranial pressure
Postural hypotension accentuated by hypovolemia
Constipation
Urinary retention
Itching around nose, urticaria (more frequent with parenteral and 
spinal administration)
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    555
person with a dose of 60 mg of morphine, whereas in addicts 
maximally tolerant to opioids as much as 2000 mg of morphine 
taken over a 2- or 3-hour period may not produce significant 
respiratory depression. Tolerance also develops to the antidiuretic, 
emetic, and hypotensive effects but not to the miotic, convulsant, 
and constipating actions ( Table 31–3 ). 
 Tolerance to the sedating and respiratory effects of the opioids 
dissipates within a few days after the drugs are discontinued. 
Tolerance to the emetic effects may persist for several months after 
withdrawal of the drug. The rates at which tolerance appears and 
disappears, as well as the degree of tolerance, may also differ con-
siderably among the different opioid analgesics and among indi-
viduals using the same drug. For instance, tolerance to methadone 
develops more slowly and to a lesser degree than to morphine. 
 Tolerance also develops to analgesics with mixed receptor 
effects but to a lesser extent than to the agonists. Such effects as 
hallucinations, sedation, hypothermia, and respiratory depression 
are reduced after repeated administration of the mixed receptor 
drugs. However, tolerance to the latter agents does not generally 
include cross-tolerance to the agonist opioids. It is also important 
to note that tolerance does not develop to the antagonist actions 
of the mixed agents or to those of the pure antagonists. 
 Cross-tolerance is an extremely important characteristic of the 
opioids, ie, patients tolerant to morphine often show a reduction in 
analgesic response to other agonist opioids. This is particularly true 
of those agents with primarily μ-receptor agonist activity. Morphine 
and its congeners exhibit cross-tolerance not only with respect to 
their analgesic actions but also to their euphoriant, sedative, and 
respiratory effects. However, the cross-tolerance existing among the 
μ-receptor agonists can often be partial or incomplete. This clinical 
observation has led to the concept of “opioid rotation,” which has 
been used in the treatment of cancer pain for many years. A patient 
who is experiencing decreasing effectiveness of one opioid analgesic 
regimen is “rotated” to a different opioid analgesic (eg, morphine to 
hydromorphone; hydromorphone to methadone) and typically 
experiences significantly improved analgesia at a reduced overall 
equivalent dosage. Another approach is to “recouple” opioid recep-
tor function through the use of adjunctive nonopioid agents. 
NMDA-receptor antagonists (eg, ketamine) have shown promise in 
preventing or reversing opioid-induced tolerance in animals and 
humans. Use of ketamine is increasing because well-controlled stud-
ies have shown clinical efficacy in reducing postoperative pain and 
opioid requirements in opioid-tolerant patients. Agents that inde-
pendently enhance μ-receptor recycling may also hold promise to 
improve analgesia in the opioid-tolerant patient. 
 The novel use of δ-receptor antagonists with μ-receptor agonists 
is also emerging as a strategy to avoid the development of tolerance. 
This idea has developed around the observation that mice lacking 
the δ-opioid receptor fail to develop tolerance to morphine. 
 2. Dependence— The development of physical dependence is 
an invariable accompaniment of tolerance to repeated administra-
tion of an opioid of the μ type. Failure to continue administering 
the drug results in a characteristic withdrawal or abstinence syn-
drome that reflects an exaggerated rebound from the acute phar-
macologic effects of the opioid. 
 The signs and symptoms of withdrawal include rhinorrhea, lac-
rimation, yawning, chills, gooseflesh (piloerection), hyperventila-
tion, hyperthermia, mydriasis, muscular aches, vomiting, diarrhea, 
anxiety, and hostility. The number and intensity of the signs and 
symptoms are largely dependent on the degree of physical depen-
dence that has developed. Administration of an opioid at this time 
suppresses abstinence signs and symptoms almost immediately. 
 The time of onset, intensity, and duration of abstinence syn-
drome depend on the drug previously used and may be related to 
its biologic half-life. With morphine or heroin, withdrawal signs 
usually start within 6–10 hours after the last dose. Peak effects are 
seen at 36–48 hours, after which most of the signs and symptoms 
gradually subside. By 5 days, most of the effects have disappeared, 
but some may persist for months. In the case of meperidine, the 
withdrawal syndrome largely subsides within 24 hours, whereas 
with methadone several days are required to reach the peak of the 
abstinence syndrome, and it may last as long as 2 weeks. The 
slower subsidence of methadone effects is associated with a less 
intense immediate syndrome, and this is the basis for its use in the 
detoxification of heroin addicts. However, despite the loss of 
physical dependence on the opioid, craving for it may persist. In 
addition to methadone, buprenorphine and clonidine (an α 2 -
noradrenergic receptor agonist) are FDA-approved treatments for 
opioid analgesic detoxification (see  Chapter 32 ). 
 A transient, explosive abstinence syndrome— antagonist-
precipitated withdrawal —can be induced in a subject physically 
dependent on opioids by administering naloxone or another 
antagonist. Within 3 minutes after injection of the antagonist, 
signs and symptoms similar to those seen after abrupt discontinu-
ance appear, peaking in 10–20 minutes and largely subsiding after 
1 hour. Even in the case of methadone, withdrawal of which 
results in a relatively mild abstinence syndrome, the antagonist-
precipitated abstinence syndrome may be very severe. 
 In the case of agents with mixed effects, withdrawal signs and 
symptoms can be induced after repeated administration followed 
by abrupt discontinuance of pentazocine, cyclazocine, or nalor-
phine, but the syndrome appears to be somewhat different from 
that produced by morphine and other agonists. Anxiety, loss of 
appetite and body weight, tachycardia, chills, increase in body 
temperature, and abdominal cramps have been noted. 
 3. Addiction— The euphoria, indifference to stimuli, and seda-
tion usually caused by the opioid analgesics, especially when 
injected intravenously, tend to promote their compulsive use. In 
addition, the addict experiences abdominal effects that have been 
likened to an intense sexual orgasm. These factors constitute the 
primary reasons for opioid abuse liability and are strongly rein-
forced by the development of physical dependence. This disorder 
has been linked to dysregulation of brain regions mediating 
reward and stress (see  Chapter 32 ). 
 Obviously, the risk of causing dependence is an important 
consideration in the therapeutic use of these drugs.  Despite that 
risk, under no circumstances should adequate pain relief ever be with-
held simply because an opioid exhibits potential for abuse or because 
legislative controls complicate the process of prescribing narcotics . 
Furthermore, certain principles can be observed by the clinician to 
556    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
minimize problems presented by tolerance and dependence when 
using opioid analgesics: 
 • Establish therapeutic goals before starting opioid therapy. This 
tends to limit the potential for physical dependence. The patient 
and his or her family should be included in this process. 
 • Once an effective dose is established, attempt to limit dosage to 
this level. This goal is facilitated by use of a written treatment 
contract that specifically prohibits early refills and having mul-
tiple prescribing physicians. 
•  Instead of opioid analgesics—especially in chronic manage-
ment—consider using other types of analgesics or compounds 
exhibiting less pronounced withdrawal symptoms on discon-
tinuance. 
 • Frequently evaluate continuing analgesic therapy and the 
patient’s need for opioids. 
 B. Diagnosis and Treatment of Opioid Overdosage 
 Intravenous injection of naloxone dramatically reverses coma due 
to opioid overdose but not that due to other CNS depressants. 
Use of the antagonist should not, of course, delay the institution 
of other therapeutic measures, especially respiratory support. 
 See also the Antagonists section below and  Chapter 58 . 
 C. Contraindications and Cautions in Therapy 
 1. Use of pure agonists with weak partial agonists— When 
a weak partial agonist such as pentazocine is given to a patient also 
receiving a full agonist (eg, morphine), there is a risk of diminish-
ing analgesia or even inducing a state of withdrawal; combining full 
agonist with partial agonist opioids should be avoided. 
 2. Use in patients with head injuries— Carbon dioxide reten-
tion caused by respiratory depression results in cerebral vasodila-
tion. In patients with elevated intracranial pressure, this may lead 
to lethal alterations in brain function. 
 3. Use during pregnancy— In pregnant women who are 
chronically using opioids, the fetus may become physically 
dependent in utero and manifest withdrawal symptoms in the 
early postpartum period. A daily dose as small as 6 mg of heroin 
(or equivalent) taken by the mother can result in a mild with-
drawal syndrome in the infant, and twice that much may result 
in severe signs and symptoms, including irritability, shrill crying, 
diarrhea, or even seizures. Recognition of the problem is aided by 
a careful history and physical examination. When withdrawal 
symptoms are judged to be relatively mild, treatment is aimed at 
control of these symptoms using such drugs as diazepam; with 
more severe withdrawal, camphorated tincture of opium (parego-
ric; 0.4 mg of morphine/mL) in an oral dose of 0.12–0.24 mL/kg 
is used. Oral doses of methadone (0.1–0.5 mg/kg) have also been 
used. 
 4. Use in patients with impaired pulmonary function— In 
patients with borderline respiratory reserve, the depressant proper-
ties of the opioid analgesics may lead to acute respiratory failure. 
 5. Use in patients with impaired hepatic or renal function—
 Because morphine and its congeners are metabolized primarily in the 
liver, their use in patients in prehepatic coma may be questioned. 
Half-life is prolonged in patients with impaired renal function, and 
morphine and its active glucuronide metabolite may accumulate; 
dosage can often be reduced in such patients. 
 6. Use in patients with endocrine disease— Patients with 
adrenal insufficiency (Addison’s disease) and those with hypothy-
roidism (myxedema) may have prolonged and exaggerated 
responses to opioids. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Because seriously ill or hospitalized patients may require a large 
number of drugs, there is always a possibility of drug interactions 
when the opioid analgesics are administered.  Table 31–5 lists some 
of these drug interactions and the reasons for not combining the 
named drugs with opioids. 
 SPECIFIC AGENTS 
 The following section describes the most important and widely 
used opioid analgesics, along with features peculiar to specific 
agents. Data about doses approximately equivalent to 10 mg of 
intramuscular morphine, oral versus parenteral efficacy, duration 
of analgesia, and intrinsic activity (maximum efficacy) are pre-
sented in  Table 31–2 . 
 STRONG AGONISTS 
 Phenanthrenes 
 Morphine, hydromorphone, and  oxymorphone are strong ago-
nists useful in treating severe pain. These prototypic agents have 
been described in detail above. 
 
Morphine
CH3
O
N
OH
CH2
CH2
HO
1
10 17
3
6
7
TABLE 31–5 Opioid drug interactions.
Drug Group
Interaction with Opioids
Sedative-hypnotics
Increased central nervous system depression, 
particularly respiratory depression.
Antipsychotic 
tranquilizers
Increased sedation. Variable effects on respira-
tory depression. Accentuation of cardiovascular 
effects (antimuscarinic and α-blocking actions).
Monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors
Relative contraindication to all opioid analge-
sics because of the high incidence of hyperpy-
rexic coma; hypertension has also been 
reported.
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    557
 Heroin (diamorphine, diacetylmorphine) is potent and fast-
acting, but its use is prohibited in the USA and Canada. In recent 
years, there has been considerable agitation to revive its use. 
However, double-blind studies have not supported the claim that 
heroin is more effective than morphine in relieving severe chronic 
pain, at least when given by the intramuscular route. 
 Phenylheptylamines 
 Methadone has undergone a dramatic revival as a potent and 
clinically useful analgesic. It can be administered by the oral, intra-
venous, subcutaneous, spinal, and rectal routes. It is well absorbed 
from the gastrointestinal tract and its bioavailability far exceeds 
that of oral morphine. 
O
N
Methadone
 
 Methadone is not only a potent μ-receptor agonist but its race-
mic mixture of D- and L-methadone isomers can also block both 
NMDA receptors and monoaminergic reuptake transporters. 
These nonopioid receptor properties may help explain its ability to 
relieve difficult-to-treat pain (neuropathic, cancer pain), especially 
when a previous trial of morphine has failed. In this regard, when 
analgesic tolerance or intolerable side effects have developed with 
the use of increasing doses of morphine or hydromorphone, “opi-
oid rotation” to methadone has provided superior analgesia at 
10–20% of the morphine-equivalent daily dose. In contrast to its 
use in suppressing symptoms of opioid withdrawal, use of metha-
done as an analgesic typically requires administration at intervals of 
no more than 8 hours. However, given methadone’s highly variable 
pharmacokinetics and long half-life (25–52 hours), initial admin-
istration should be closely monitored to avoid potentially harmful 
adverse effects, especially respiratory depression. Because metha-
done is metabolized by CYP3A4 and CYP2B6 isoforms in the liver, 
inhibition of its metabolic pathway or hepatic dysfunction has also 
been associated with overdose effects, including respiratory depres-
sion or, more rarely, prolonged QT-based cardiac arrhythmias. 
 Methadone is widely used in the treatment of opioid abuse. 
Tolerance and physical dependence develop more slowly with 
methadone than with morphine. The withdrawal signs and symp-
toms occurring after abrupt discontinuance of methadone are 
milder, although more prolonged, than those of morphine. These 
properties make methadone a useful drug for detoxification and 
for maintenance of the chronic relapsing heroin addict. 
 For detoxification of a heroin-dependent addict, low doses of 
methadone (5–10 mg orally) are given two or three times daily for 
2 or 3 days. Upon discontinuing methadone, the addict experi-
ences a mild but endurable withdrawal syndrome. 
 For maintenance therapy of the opioid recidivist, tolerance to 
50–100 mg/d of oral methadone may be deliberately produced; in 
this state, the addict experiences cross-tolerance to heroin, which 
prevents most of the addiction-reinforcing effects of heroin. One 
rationale of maintenance programs is that blocking the reinforcement 
obtained from abuse of illicit opioids removes the drive to obtain 
them, thereby reducing criminal activity and making the addict more 
amenable to psychiatric and rehabilitative therapy. The pharmaco-
logic basis for the use of methadone in maintenance programs is 
sound and the sociologic basis is rational, but some methadone pro-
grams fail because nonpharmacologic management is inadequate. 
 The concurrent administration of methadone to heroin addicts 
known to be recidivists has been questioned because of the 
increased risk of overdose death secondary to respiratory arrest. 
Not only has the number of patients prescribed methadone for 
persistent pain increased, but the incidence of accidental overdose 
and complications related to respiratory depression have also 
increased. Buprenorphine, a partial μ-receptor agonist with long-
acting properties, has been found to be effective in opioid detoxi-
fication and maintenance programs and is presumably associated 
with a lower risk of such overdose fatalities. 
 Phenylpiperidines 
 Fentanyl is one of the most widely used agents in the family of 
synthetic opioids. The fentanyl subgroup now includes  sufenta-
nil, alfentanil, and  remifentanil in addition to the parent com-
pound, fentanyl. 
 
Fentanyl
N
CH2
N
C
CH2
CH3
O
CH2
C6H5
 These opioids differ mainly in their potency and biodisposi-
tion. Sufentanil is five to seven times more potent than fentanyl. 
Alfentanil is considerably less potent than fentanyl, but acts more 
rapidly and has a markedly shorter duration of action. Remifentanil 
is metabolized very rapidly by blood and nonspecific tissue 
esterases, making its pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic half-
lives extremely short. Such properties are useful when these com-
pounds are used in anesthesia practice. Although fentanyl is now 
the predominant analgesic in the phenylpiperidine class,  meperi-
dine continues to be used. This older opioid has significant anti-
muscarinic effects, which may be a contraindication if tachycardia 
would be a problem. Meperidine is also reported to have a nega-
tive inotropic action on the heart. In addition, it has the potential 
for producing seizures secondary to accumulation of its metabo-
lite, normeperidine, in patients receiving high doses or with con-
current renal failure. Given this undesirable profile, use of 
meperidine as a first-line analgesic is becoming increasingly rare. 
 Morphinans 
 Levorphanol is a synthetic opioid analgesic closely resembling 
morphine in its action. 
558    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 MILD TO MODERATE AGONISTS 
 Phenanthrenes 
 Codeine, dihydrocodeine, and  hydrocodone are all somewhat 
less efficacious than morphine and often have adverse effects that 
limit the maximum tolerated dose when one attempts to achieve 
analgesia comparable to that of morphine.  Oxycodone is more 
potent and is prescribed alone in higher doses as immediate-release 
or controlled-release forms for the treatment of moderate to 
severe pain. Combinations of hydrocodone or oxycodone with 
acetaminophen are the predominant formulations of orally 
administered analgesics for the treatment of mild to moderate 
pain. However, there has been a large increase in the use of con-
trolled-release oxycodone at the highest dose range. 
 Since each controlled-release tablet of oxycodone contains a 
large quantity of oxycodone to allow for prolonged action, those 
intent on abusing the old formulation have modified the tablets, 
achieving high levels instantly, resulting in abuse and possible fatal 
overdose. The FDA recently approved a new formulation of the 
controlled-release form of oxycodone that reportedly prevents the 
tablets from being cut, broken, chewed, crushed, or dissolved to 
release more oxycodone. This new formulation will hopefully lead 
to less abuse by snorting or injection. Approximately half a million 
people used a controlled-release form of oxycodone for the first 
time in 2008, which prompted the FDA to require the manufac-
turer to collect data on abuse or misuse of the drug. The FDA is 
also requiring a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) 
that will include the issuance of a medication guide to patients 
and a requirement for prescriber education regarding the appro-
priate use of opioid analgesics in the treatment of pain. (See Box: 
Educating Opioid Prescribers.) 
Codeine
H3C
O
CH3
O
N
OH
CH2
CH2
 
 Phenylheptylamines 
 Propoxyphene is chemically related to methadone but has 
extremely low analgesic activity. Its low efficacy makes it unsuit-
able, even in combination with aspirin, for severe pain. The 
increasing incidence of deaths associated with its use and misuse 
caused it to be withdrawn in the United States. 
 Phenylpiperidines 
 Diphenoxylate and its metabolite,  difenoxin, are not used for 
analgesia but for the treatment of diarrhea. They are scheduled for 
minimal control (difenoxin is Schedule IV, diphenoxylate Schedule 
V; see inside front cover) because the likelihood of their abuse is 
remote. The poor solubility of the compounds limits their use for 
parenteral injection. As antidiarrheal drugs, they are used in com-
bination with atropine. The atropine is added in a concentration 
 The treatment of pain is a difficult clinical-pharmacologic 
problem, and prescribers of opioids have often failed to 
appreciate this difficulty. As a result, there have been large 
increases of drug abuse cases in the USA and a nearly fourfold 
increase in overdose deaths due to prescription opioids 
between 1999 and 2009. These statistics have prompted the 
Food and Drug Administration to formulate plans for opioid 
manufacturers to provide training for all opioid prescribers. 
The FDA is working to devise methods by which this training 
would be mandatory for all prescribers and would emphasize 
the thorough understanding of opioid clinical pharmacology 
with special education about long-acting and extended-
release formulations. The educational emphasis on the long-
acting and sustained-release formulations (eg, methadone, 
oxycodone) reflects their association with skyrocketing mor-
bidity and mortality. 
Educating Opioid Prescribers
too low to have a significant antidiarrheal effect but is presumed 
to further reduce the likelihood of abuse. 
 Loperamide is a phenylpiperidine derivative used to control 
diarrhea. However, due to action on peripheral μ-opioid receptors 
and lack of effect on CNS receptors, there is renewed interest in 
its potential for the treatment of neuropathic pain. Its potential 
for abuse is considered very low because of its limited access to the 
brain. It is therefore available without a prescription. 
 The usual dose with all of these antidiarrheal agents is two 
tablets to start and then one tablet after each diarrheal stool. 
 OPIOIDS WITH MIXED RECEPTOR 
ACTIONS 
 Care should be taken not to administer any partial agonist or drug 
with mixed opioid receptor actions to patients receiving pure ago-
nist drugs because of the unpredictability of both drugs’ effects; 
reduction of analgesia or precipitation of an explosive abstinence 
syndrome may result. 
 Phenanthrenes 
 Nalbuphine is a strong κ-receptor  agonist and a μ-receptor 
 antagonist; it is given parenterally. At higher doses there seems to 
be a definite ceiling—not noted with morphine—to the respira-
tory depressant effect. Unfortunately, when respiratory depression 
does occur, it may be relatively resistant to naloxone reversal. 
 Buprenorphine is a potent and long-acting phenanthrene 
derivative that is a partial μ-receptor agonist and a κ–receptor 
antagonist. Administration by the sublingual route is preferred to 
avoid significant first-pass effect. Its long duration of action is due 
to its slow dissociation from μ receptors. This property renders its 
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    559
effects resistant to naloxone reversal. Its clinical applications are 
much like those of nalbuphine. In addition, studies continue to 
suggest that buprenorphine is as effective as methadone in the 
detoxification and maintenance of heroin abusers. Buprenorphine 
was approved by the FDA in 2002 for the management of opioid 
dependence. In contrast to methadone, high-dose administration 
of buprenorphine results in a μ-opioid  antagonist action, limiting 
its properties of analgesia and respiratory depression. Moreover, 
buprenorphine is also available combined with a pure μ-opioid 
antagonist (Suboxone) to help prevent its diversion for illicit intra-
venous abuse. A slow-release transdermal patch preparation that 
releases drug over a 1-week period is also available. 
 Morphinans 
 Butorphanol produces analgesia equivalent to nalbuphine and 
buprenorphine but appears to produce more sedation at equianal-
gesic doses. Butorphanol is considered to be predominantly a κ 
agonist. However, it may also act as a partial agonist or antagonist 
at the μ receptor. 
 Benzomorphans 
 Pentazocine is a κ agonist with weak μ-antagonist or partial ago-
nist properties. It is the oldest mixed agent available. It may be used 
orally or parenterally. However, because of its irritant properties, 
the injection of pentazocine subcutaneously is not recommended. 
 MISCELLANEOUS 
 Tramadol is a centrally acting analgesic whose mechanism of action 
is predominantly based on blockade of serotonin reuptake. Tramadol 
has also been found to inhibit norepinephrine transporter function. 
Because it is only partially antagonized by naloxone, it is believed to 
be only a weak μ-receptor agonist. The recommended dosage is 
50–100 mg orally four times daily. Toxicity includes association 
with seizures; the drug is relatively contraindicated in patients with 
a history of epilepsy and for use with other drugs that lower the 
seizure threshold. Another serious risk is the development of sero-
tonin syndrome, especially if selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
(SSRI) antidepressants are being administered (see  Chapter 16 ). 
Other side effects include nausea and dizziness, but these symptoms 
typically abate after several days of therapy. It is surprising that no 
clinically significant effects on respiration or the cardiovascular sys-
tem have thus far been reported. Given the fact that the analgesic 
action of tramadol is largely independent of μ-receptor action, tra-
madol may serve as an adjunct with pure opioid agonists in the 
treatment of chronic neuropathic pain. 
 Tapentadol is a newer analgesic with modest μ-opioid receptor 
affinity and significant norepinephrine reuptake-inhibiting action. 
In animal models, its analgesic effects were only moderately 
reduced by naloxone but strongly reduced by an α 2 -adrenoceptor 
antagonist. Furthermore, its binding to the norepinephrine trans-
porter (NET, see  Chapter 6 ) was stronger than that of tramadol, 
whereas its binding to the serotonin transporter (SERT) was less 
than that of tramadol. Tapentadol was approved in 2008 and has 
been shown to be as effective as oxycodone in the treatment of 
moderate to severe pain but with a reduced profile of gastrointesti-
nal complaints such as nausea. Tapentadol carries risk for seizures 
in patients with seizure disorders and for the development of sero-
tonin syndrome. It is unknown how tapentadol compares in clini-
cal utility to tramadol or other analgesics whose mechanism of 
action is not based primarily on opioid receptor pharmacology. 
 ANTITUSSIVES 
 The opioid analgesics are among the most effective drugs available 
for the suppression of cough. This effect is often achieved at doses 
below those necessary to produce analgesia. The receptors involved 
in the antitussive effect appear to differ from those associated with 
the other actions of opioids. For example, the antitussive effect is 
also produced by stereoisomers of opioid molecules that are 
devoid of analgesic effects and addiction liability (see below). 
 The physiologic mechanism of cough is complex, and little is 
known about the specific mechanism of action of the opioid anti-
tussive drugs. It appears likely that both central and peripheral 
effects play a role. 
 The opioid derivatives most commonly used as antitussives are 
 dextromethorphan ,  codeine ,  levopropoxyphene , and  noscap-
ine (levopropoxyphene and noscapine are not available in the 
USA). They should be used with caution in patients taking mono-
amine oxidase inhibitors (see  Table 31–5 ). Antitussive prepara-
tions usually also contain expectorants to thin and liquefy 
respiratory secretions. Importantly, due to increasing reports of 
death in young children taking dextromethorphan in formula-
tions of over-the-counter “cold/cough” medications, its use in 
children less than 6 years of age has been banned by the FDA. 
Moreover, because of variations in the metabolism of codeine, its 
use for any purpose in young children is being reconsidered. 
 Dextromethorphan is the dextrorotatory stereoisomer of a 
methylated derivative of levorphanol. It is purported to be free of 
addictive properties and produces less constipation than codeine. 
The usual antitussive dose is 15–30 mg three or four times daily. 
It is available in many over-the-counter products. Dextromethorphan 
has also been found to enhance the analgesic action of morphine 
and presumably other μ-receptor agonists. However, abuse of its 
purified (powdered) form has been reported to lead to serious 
adverse events including death. 
 Codeine, as noted, has a useful antitussive action at doses lower 
than those required for analgesia. Thus, 15 mg is usually sufficient 
to relieve cough. 
 Levopropoxyphene is the stereoisomer of the weak opioid ago-
nist dextropropoxyphene. It is devoid of opioid effects, although 
sedation has been described as a side effect. The usual antitussive 
dose is 50–100 mg every 4 hours. 
 THE OPIOID ANTAGONISTS 
 The pure opioid antagonist drugs  naloxone, naltrexone, and 
 nalmefene are morphine derivatives with bulkier substituents at 
the N 17 position. These agents have a relatively high affinity for 
560    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
μ-opioid binding sites. They have lower affinity for the other 
receptors but can also reverse agonists at δ and κ sites. 
HO
O
CH2
CH2
O
N
CH2
CH2
CH
HO
Naloxone
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Naloxone is usually given by injection and has a short duration 
of action (1–2 hours) when given by this route. Metabolic dis-
position is chiefly by glucuronide conjugation like that of the 
agonist opioids with free hydroxyl groups. Naltrexone is well 
absorbed after oral administration but may undergo rapid first-
pass metabolism. It has a half-life of 10 hours, and a single oral 
dose of 100 mg blocks the effects of injected heroin for up to 48 
hours. Nalmefene, the newest of these agents, is a derivative of 
naltrexone but is available only for intravenous administration. 
Like naloxone, nalmefene is used for opioid overdose but has a 
longer half-life (8–10 hours). 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 When given in the absence of an agonist drug, these antagonists 
are almost inert at doses that produce marked antagonism of ago-
nist opioid effects. 
 When given intravenously to a morphine-treated subject, the 
antagonist completely and dramatically reverses the opioid effects 
within 1–3 minutes. In individuals who are acutely depressed by 
an overdose of an opioid, the antagonist effectively normalizes 
respiration, level of consciousness, pupil size, bowel activity, and 
awareness of pain. In dependent subjects who appear normal 
while taking opioids, naloxone or naltrexone almost instanta-
neously precipitates an abstinence syndrome. 
 There is no tolerance to the antagonistic action of these agents, 
nor does withdrawal after chronic administration precipitate an 
abstinence syndrome. 
 Clinical Use 
 Naloxone is a pure antagonist and is preferred over older weak 
agonist-antagonist agents that had been used primarily as antago-
nists, eg, nalorphine and levallorphan. 
 The major application of naloxone is in the treatment of acute 
opioid overdose (see also  Chapter 58 ).  It is very important that the 
relatively short duration of action of naloxone be borne in mind, 
because a severely depressed patient may recover after a single dose 
of naloxone and appear normal, only to relapse into coma after 
1–2 hours. 
 The usual initial dose of naloxone is 0.1–0.4 mg intravenously 
for life-threatening respiratory and CNS depression. Maintenance 
is with the same drug, 0.4–0.8 mg given intravenously, and 
repeated whenever necessary. In using naloxone in the severely 
opioid-depressed newborn, it is important to start with doses of 
5–10 mcg/kg and to consider a second dose of up to a total of 
25 mcg/kg if no response is noted. 
 Low-dose naloxone (0.04 mg) has an increasing role in the 
treatment of adverse effects that are commonly associated with 
intravenous or epidural opioids. Careful titration of the naloxone 
dosage can often eliminate the itching, nausea, and vomiting 
while sparing the analgesia. For this purpose, oral naloxone, and 
more recently modified analogs of naloxone and naltrexone, have 
been approved by the FDA. These include  methylnaltrexone 
bromide (Relistor) for the treatment of constipation in patients 
with late-stage advanced illness and  alvimopan (Entereg) for the 
treatment of postoperative ileus following bowel resection surgery. 
The principal mechanism for this selective therapeutic effect is 
believed to be inhibition of peripheral μ receptors in the gut with 
minimal CNS penetration. 
 Because of its long duration of action, naltrexone has been 
proposed as a maintenance drug for addicts in treatment pro-
grams. A single dose given on alternate days blocks virtually all of 
the effects of a dose of heroin. It might be predicted that this 
approach to rehabilitation would not be popular with a large per-
centage of drug users unless they are motivated to become drug-
free. A related use is in combination with morphine sulfate in a 
controlled-release formulation (Embeda) in which 20–100 mg of 
morphine is slowly released over 8–12 hours or longer for the 
control of prolonged postoperative pain. Naltrexone, 0.4–4 mg, is 
sequestered in the center of the formulation pellets and is present 
to prevent the abuse of the morphine (by grinding and extraction 
of the morphine from the capsules). 
 There is evidence that naltrexone decreases the craving for 
alcohol in chronic alcoholics by increasing baseline β-endorphin 
release, and it has been approved by the FDA for this purpose (see 
 Chapter 23 ). Naltrexone also facilitates abstinence from nicotine 
(cigarette smoking) with reduced weight gain. In fact, a combina-
tion of naltrexone plus bupropion ( Chapter 30 ) may also offer an 
effective and synergistic strategy for weight loss. If current trials 
demonstrate cardiovascular safety during prolonged use, this and 
other weight-loss medications compounded with naltrexone may 
eventually win FDA approval. 
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    561
SUMMARY Opioids, Opioid Substitutes, and Opioid Antagonists
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities
STRONG OPIOID AGONISTS
 • Morphine
 • Methadone
 • Fentanyl
Strong μ-receptor agonists 
• variable affinity for δ and κ 
receptors
Analgesia • relief of anxiety 
• sedation • slowed gastro-
intestinal transit
Severe pain • adjunct in anes-
thesia (fentanyl, morphine) 
• pulmonary edema (morphine 
only) • maintenance in rehabili-
tation programs (methadone 
only)
First-pass effect • duration 
1–4 h except methadone, 
4–6 h • Toxicity: Respiratory 
depression • severe constipa-
tion • addiction liability 
• convulsions
 • Hydromorphone, oxymorphone: Like morphine in efficacy, but higher potency
 • Meperidine: Strong agonist with anticholinergic effects
 • Oxycodone: Dose-dependent analgesia
 • Sufentanil, alfentanil, remifentanil: Like fentanyl but shorter durations of action
PARTIAL AGONISTS
 • Codeine
 • Hydrocodone
Less efficacious than morphine 
• can antagonize strong 
agonists
Like strong agonists • 
weaker effects
Mild-moderate pain • cough 
(codeine)
Like strong agonists, toxicity 
dependent on genetic varia-
tion of metabolism
MIXED OPIOID AGONIST-ANTAGONISTS
 • Buprenorphine
Partial μ agonist • κ antagonist
Like strong agonists but 
can antagonize their 
effects • also reduces crav-
ing for alcohol
Moderate pain • some mainte-
nance rehabilitation programs
Long duration of action 4–8 h 
• may precipitate abstinence 
syndrome
 • Nalbuphine
κ Agonist • μ antagonist
Similar to buprenorphine
Moderate pain
Like buprenorphine
ANTITUSSIVES
 • Dextromethorphan
Poorly understood but strong 
and partial μ agonists are also 
effective antitussives
Reduces cough reflex
Acute debilitating cough
30–60 min duration • Toxicity: 
Minimal when taken as 
directed
 • Codeine, levopropoxyphene: Similar to dextromethorphan
OPIOID ANTAGONISTS
 • Naloxone
Antagonist at μ, δ, and κ 
receptors
Rapidly antagonizes all 
opioid effects
Opioid overdose
Duration 1–2 h (may have to 
be repeated when treating 
overdose) • Toxicity: 
Precipitates abstinence syn-
drome in dependent users
 • Naltrexone, nalmefene: Like naloxone but longer durations of action (10+ h); naltrexone is used in maintenance programs and can block heroin effects for up to 
        48 h; naltrexone is also used for alcohol and nicotine dependence; when combined with bupropion, may be effective in weight loss programs
 • Alvimopan, methylnaltrexone bromide: Potent m antagonists with poor entry into the central nervous system; can be used to treat severe opioid-induced 
        constipation without precipitating an abstinence syndrome
OTHER ANALGESICS USED IN MODERATE PAIN
 • Tapentadol
Moderate μ agonist, strong NET 
inhibitor
Analgesia
Moderate pain
Duration 4–6 h • Toxicity: 
Headache; nausea and vomit-
ing; possible dependence
 • Tramadol
Mixed effects: weak μ agonist, 
moderate SERT inhibitor, weak 
NET inhibitor
Analgesia
Moderate pain • adjunct to opi-
oids in chronic pain syndromes
Duration 4–6 h • Toxicity: 
Seizures • risk of serotonin 
syndrome
NET, norepinephrine reuptake transporter; SERT, serotonin reuptake transporter.
562    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
ANALGESIC OPIOIDS
Alfentanil (generic, Alfenta)
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for injection
Buprenorphine (Buprenex, others)
Oral: 2, 8 mg sublingual tablets
Transdermal (Butrans): 5, 10, 20 mcg/h release rate for 1 week/
patch
Parenteral: 0.3 mg/mL for injection
Butorphanol (generic, Stadol)
Parenteral: 1, 2 mg/mL for injection
Nasal (generic, Stadol NS): 10 mg/mL nasal spray
Codeine (sulfate or phosphate) (generic)
Oral: 15, 30, 60 mg tablets; 15 mg/5 mL solution
Parenteral: 15, 30 mg/mL for injection
Fentanyl (generic, other)
Parenteral (generic, Sublimaze): 50 mcg/mL for injection
Fentanyl Transdermal System (Duragesic): 12.5, 25, 50, 75, 
100 mcg/h delivery
Fentanyl Buccal: 100, 200, 400, 600, 800 mcg oral lozenge
Fentanyl Actiq: 200, 400, 600, 800, 1200, 1600 mcg lozenge on a stick
Patient Controlled Transdermal Iontophoretic Fentanyl System: 
40 mcg per dose for delivery
Hydromorphone (generic, Dilaudid)
Oral: 2, 8 mg tablets; 1 mg/mL liquid
Parenteral: 1, 2, 4, 10 mg/mL for injection
Levomethadyl acetate (Orlaam)
Oral: 10 mg/mL solution. Note: Orphan drug approved only for the 
treatment of narcotic addiction.
Levorphanol (generic, Levo-Dromoran)
Oral: 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL for injection
Meperidine (generic, Demerol)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 10, 25, 50, 75, 100 mg per dose for injection
Methadone (generic, Dolophine)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 40 mg dispersible tablets; 1, 2, 10 mg/mL 
solutions
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Morphine sulfate (generic, others)
Oral: 15, 30 mg tablets; 15, 30 mg capsules; 10, 20, 100 mg/5 mL 
solution
Oral sustained-release tablets (MS Contin, others): 15, 30, 60, 100, 
200 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release capsules (Avinza, Kadian): 20, 30, 50, 60, 90, 
100, 120 mg capsules
Oral extended-release capsules (Embeda) (morphine sulfate/nal-
trexone HCl): 20/0.8, 30/1.2, 50/2, 60/2.4, 80/3.2, 100/4 mg
Parenteral: 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, 15, 25, 50 mg/mL for injection
Rectal: 5, 10, 20, 30 mg suppositories
Nalbuphine (generic, Nubain)
Parenteral: 10, 20 mg/mL for injection
Oxycodone (generic)
Oral: 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 mg tablets, capsules; 1, 20 mg/mL solutions
Oral sustained-release (generic, Oxy Contin): 10, 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
Oxymorphone (Numorphan)
Parenteral: 1, 1.5 mg/mL for injection
Rectal: 5 mg suppositories
Pentazocine (Talwin)
Oral: See combinations
Parenteral: 30 mg/mL for injection
Remifentanil (Ultiva)
Parenteral: 1, 2, 5 mg powder for reconstitution for injection
Sufentanil (generic, Sufenta)
Parenteral: 50 mcg/mL for injection
OTHER ANALGESICS
Tapentadol (Nucynta)
Oral: 50, 75, 100 mg tablets
Tramadol (generic, Ultram)
Oral: 50 mg tablets; 100, 200, 300 mg extended-release tablets
Ziconotide (Prialt)
Intrathecal: 25, 100 mcg/mL for programmable pump
ANALGESIC COMBINATIONS2
Codeine/acetaminophen (generic, Tylenol with Codeine, others)
Oral: 15, 30, 60 mg codeine plus 300 or 325 mg acetaminophen 
tablets or capsules; 12 mg codeine plus 120 mg acetaminophen 
tablets
Codeine/aspirin (generic, Empirin Compound, others)
Oral: 30, 60 mg codeine plus 325 mg aspirin tablets
Hydrocodone/acetaminophen (generic, Norco, Vicodin, Lortab, 
others)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 mg hydrocodone plus 500 or 650 mg acetamin-
ophen tablets
Hydrocodone/ibuprofen (Vicoprofen)
Oral: 7.5 mg hydrocodone plus 200 mg ibuprofen
Oxycodone/acetaminophen (generic, Percocet, Tylox, others)
Oral: 5 mg oxycodone plus 325 or 500 mg acetaminophen tablets 
Note: High-dose acetaminophen has potential for hepatic toxicity 
with repeated use.
Oxycodone/aspirin (generic, Percodan)
Oral: 4.9 mg oxycodone plus 325 mg aspirin
OPIOID ANTAGONISTS
Alvimopan (Entereg)
Oral: 12 mg capsules
Methylnaltrexone (Relistor)
Parenteral: 12 mg/0.6 mL for injection
Nalmefene (Revex)
Parenteral: 0.1, 1 mg/mL for injection
Naloxone (generic, Narcan)
Parenteral: 0.4, 1 mg/mL; 0.02 mg/mL (for neonatal use) for 
injection
Naltrexone (generic, ReVia, Depade)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Parenteral: 380 mg suspension for injection
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E 1
ANALGESIC OPIOIDS
Alfentanil (generic, Alfenta)
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for injection
Buprenorphine (Buprenex, others)
Oral: 2, 8 mg sublingual tablets
Transdermal (Butrans): 5, 10, 20 mcg/h release rate for 1 week/
patch
Parenteral: 0.3 mg/mL for injection
Butorphanol (generic, Stadol)
Parenteral: 1, 2 mg/mL for injection
Nasal (generic, Stadol NS): 10 mg/mL nasal spray
Codeine (sulfate or phosphate) (generic)
Oral: 15, 30, 60 mg tablets; 15 mg/5 mL solution
Parenteral: 15, 30 mg/mL for injection
Fentanyl (generic, other)
Parenteral (generic, Sublimaze): 50 mcg/mL for injection
Fentanyl Transdermal System (Duragesic): 12.5, 25, 50, 75,
100 mcg/h delivery
Fentanyl Buccal: 100, 200, 400, 600, 800 mcg oral lozenge
Fentanyl Actiq: 200, 400, 600, 800, 1200, 1600 mcg lozenge on a stick
Patient Controlled Transdermal Iontophoretic Fentanyl System:
40 mcg per dose for delivery
Hydromorphone (generic, Dilaudid)
Oral: 2, 8 mg tablets; 1 mg/mL liquid
Parenteral: 1, 2, 4, 10 mg/mL for injection
Levomethadyl acetate (Orlaam)
Oral: 10 mg/mL solution. Note: Orphan drug approved only for the
treatment of narcotic addiction.
Levorphanol (generic, Levo-Dromoran)
Oral: 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL for injection
Meperidine (generic, Demerol)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 10, 25, 50, 75, 100 mg per dose for injection
Methadone (generic, Dolophine)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 40 mg dispersible tablets; 1, 2, 10 mg/mL
solutions
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Morphine sulfate (generic, others)
Oral: 15, 30 mg tablets; 15, 30 mg capsules; 10, 20, 100 mg/5 mL
solution
Oral sustained-release tablets (MS Contin, others): 15, 30, 60, 100,
200 mg tablets
Oral sustained-release capsules (Avinza, Kadian): 20, 30, 50, 60, 90,
100, 120 mg capsules
Oral extended-release capsules (Embeda) (morphine sulfate/nal-
trexone HCl): 20/0.8, 30/1.2, 50/2, 60/2.4, 80/3.2, 100/4 mg
Parenteral: 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 10, 15, 25, 50 mg/mL for injection
Rectal: 5, 10, 20, 30 mg suppositories
Nalbuphine (generic, Nubain)
Parenteral: 10, 20 mg/mL for injection
Oxycodone (generic)
Oral: 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 mg tablets, capsules; 1, 20 mg/mL solutions
Oral sustained-release (generic, Oxy Contin): 10, 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
Oxymorphone (Numorphan)
Parenteral: 1, 1.5 mg/mL for injection
Rectal: 5 mg suppositories
Pentazocine (Talwin)
Oral: See combinations
Parenteral: 30 mg/mL for injection
Remifentanil (Ultiva)
Parenteral: 1, 2, 5 mg powder for reconstitution for injection
Sufentanil (generic, Sufenta)
Parenteral: 50 mcg/mL for injection
OTHER ANALGESICS
Tapentadol (Nucynta)
Oral: 50, 75, 100 mg tablets
Tramadol (generic, Ultram)
Oral: 50 mg tablets; 100, 200, 300 mg extended-release tablets
Ziconotide (Prialt)
Intrathecal: 25, 100 mcg/mL for programmable pump
ANALGESIC COMBINATIONS2
Codeine/acetaminophen (generic, Tylenol with Codeine, others)
Oral: 15, 30, 60 mg codeine plus 300 or 325 mg acetaminophen
tablets or capsules; 12 mg codeine plus 120 mg acetaminophen
tablets
Codeine/aspirin (generic, Empirin Compound, others)
Oral: 30, 60 mg codeine plus 325 mg aspirin tablets
Hydrocodone/acetaminophen (generic, Norco, Vicodin, Lortab, 
others)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 mg hydrocodone plus 500 or 650 mg acetamin-
ophen tablets
Hydrocodone/ibuprofen (Vicoprofen)
Oral: 7.5 mg hydrocodone plus 200 mg ibuprofen
Oxycodone/acetaminophen (generic, Percocet, Tylox, others)
Oral: 5 mg oxycodone plus 325 or 500 mg acetaminophen tablets 
Note: High-dose acetaminophen has potential for hepatic toxicity 
with repeated use.
Oxycodone/aspirin (generic, Percodan)
Oral: 4.9 mg oxycodone plus 325 mg aspirin
OPIOID ANTAGONISTS
Alvimopan (Entereg)
Oral: 12 mg capsules
Methylnaltrexone (Relistor)
Parenteral: 12 mg/0.6 mL for injection
Nalmefene (Revex)
Parenteral: 0.1, 1 mg/mL for injection
Naloxone (generic, Narcan)
Parenteral: 0.4, 1 mg/mL; 0.02 mg/mL (for neonatal use) for
injection
Naltrexone (generic, ReVia, Depade)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Parenteral: 380 mg suspension for injection
CHAPTER 31 Opioid Analgesics & Antagonists    563
 REFERENCES 
 Angst MS, Clark JD: Opioid-induced hyperalgesia. Anesthesiology 2006; 
104:570. 
 Anton RF: Naltrexone for the management of alcohol dependence. N Eng J Med 
2008;359:715. 
 Basbaum AI et al: Cellular and molecular mechanisms of pain. Cell 
2009;139:267. 
 Basbaum AI, Jessel T: The perception of pain. In: Kandel ER et al (editors): 
Principles of Neural Science, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
 Benedetti C, Premuda L: The history of opium and its derivatives. In: Benedetti C 
et al (editors):  Advances in Pain Research and Therapy, vol 14. Raven Press, 
1990. 
 Bolan EA, Tallarida RJ, Pasternak GW: Synergy between mu opioid ligands: 
Evidence for functional interactions among mu opioid receptor subtypes. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther 2002;303:557. 
 Chu LF, Angst MS, Clark D: Opioid-induced hyperalgesia in humans: Molecular 
mechanisms and clinical considerations. Clin J Pain 2008;24:479. 
 Curran MP et al: Alvimopan. Drugs 2008;68:2011. 
 Dahan A et al: Sex-specific responses to opiates: Animal and human studies. 
Anesth Analg 2008;107:83. 
 Davis MP, Walsh D: Methadone for relief of cancer pain: A review of pharmacoki-
netics, pharmacodynamics, drug interactions and protocols of administra-
tion. Support Care Cancer 2001;9:73. 
 Ferner RE, Daniels AM: Office-based treatment of opioid-dependent patients. N 
Engl J Med 2003;348:81. 
 Ferrante FM: Principles of opioid pharmacotherapy: Practical implications of basic 
mechanisms. J Pain Symptom Manage 1996;11:265. 
 Fields HL, Basbaum AI: Central nervous system mechanisms of pain modulation. 
In: Wall PD, Melzack R (editors):  Textbook of Pain. Churchill Livingstone, 
1999. 
 Fillingim RB, Gear RW: Sex differences in opioid analgesia: Clinical and experi-
mental findings. Eur J Pain 2004;8:413. 
 Fischer BD, Carrigan KA, Dykstra LA: Effects of  N -methyl-D-aspartate receptor 
antagonists on acute morphine-induced and L-methadone-induced antinoci-
ception in mice. J Pain 2005;6:425. 
 Goldman D, Barr CS: Restoring the addicted brain. N Engl J Med 
2002;347:843. 
 Joly V et al: Remifentanil-induced postoperative hyperalgesia and its prevention 
with small-dose ketamine. Anesthesiology 2005;103:147. 
 Julius D, Basbaum AI: Molecular mechanisms of nociception. Nature 
2001;413:203. 
 Kalso E et al: No pain, no gain: Clinical excellence and scientific rigour—lessons 
learned from IA morphine. Pain 2002;98:269. 
 Kiefer BL: Opioids: First lessons from knockout mice. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
1999;20:19. 
 Kim JA et al: Morphine-induced receptor endocytosis in a novel knockin mouse 
reduces tolerance and dependence. Curr Biol 2008;18:129. 
 King T et al: Role of NK-1 neurotransmission in opioid-induced hyperalgesia. Pain 
2005;116:276. 
 Lai J et al: Pronociceptive actions of dynorphin via bradykinin receptors. Neurosci 
Lett 2008;437:175. 
 Lambert DG: The nociceptin/orphanin FQ receptor: A target with broad thera-
peutic potential. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2008;7:694. 
 Laughlin TM, Larson AA, Wilcox GL: Mechanisms of induction of persistent 
nociception by dynorphin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2001;299:6. 
 Liaw WI et al: Distinct expression of synaptic NR2A and NR2B in the central 
nervous system and impaired morphine tolerance and physical dependence 
in mice deficient in postsynaptic density-93 protein. Mol Pain 2008;4:45. 
 McGaraughty S, Heinricher MM: Microinjection of morphine into various 
amygdaloid nuclei differentially affects nociceptive responsiveness and RVM 
neuronal activity. Pain 2002;96:153. 
 Mercadante S, Arcuri E: Opioids and renal function. J Pain 2004;5:2. 
 Meunier J, Mouledous L, Topham CM: The nociceptin (ORL1) receptor: 
Molecular cloning and functional architecture. Peptides 2000;21:893. 
 Mitchell JM, Basbaum AI, Fields HL: A locus and mechanism of action for asso-
ciative morphine tolerance. Nat Neurosci 2000;3:47. 
 Okie S: A flood of opioids, a rising tide of deaths. N Engl J Med 2010;363:1981. 
 Pan YX: Diversity and complexity of the mu opioid receptor gene: Alternate pre-
mRNA splicing and promoters. DNA Cell Biol 2005;24:736. 
 Reimann F et al: Pain perception is altered by a nucleotide polymorphism in 
SCN9A. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;107:5148. 
 Reynolds SM et al: The pharmacology of cough. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
2004;25:569. 
 Rittner HL, Brack A, Stein C: Pain and the immune system. Br J Anaesth 
2008;101:40. 
 Skarke C, Geisslinger G, Lotsch J: Is morphine-3-glucuronide of therapeutic rele-
vance? Pain 2005;116:177. 
 Smith MT: Neuroexcitatory effects of morphine and hydromorphone: Evidence 
implicating the 3-glucuronide metabolites. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 
2000;27:524. 
 Smith MT: Differences between and combinations of opioids revisited. Curr Opin 
Anaesthesiol 2008;21:596. 
 Stein C, Schafer M, Machelska H: Attacking pain at its source: New perspectives 
on opioids. Nat Med 2003;9:1003. 
 Vanderah TW et al: Mechanisms of opioid-induced pain and antinociceptive toler-
ance: Descending facilitation and spinal dynorphin. Pain 2001;92:5. 
 Waldhoer M et al: A heterodimer-selective agonist shows in vivo relevance of G 
protein-coupled receptor dimers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005;102:9050. 
 Wang Z et al: Pronociceptive actions of dynorphin maintain chronic neuropathic 
pain. J Neurosci 2001;21:1779. 
ANTITUSSIVES
Codeine (generic)
Oral: 15, 30, 60 mg tablets; constituent of many proprietary 
syrups2
Dextromethorphan (generic, Benylin DM, Delsym, others)
Oral: 5, 7.5 mg lozenges; 7.5, 10, 15, 30 mg/5 mL syrup; 30 mg sus-
tained-action liquid; constituent of many proprietary syrups2
1Antidiarrheal opioid preparations are listed in Chapter 62.
2Dozens of combination products are available; only a few of the most commonly prescribed are listed here. Codeine combination products available in 
several strengths are usually denoted No. 2 (15 mg codeine), No. 3 (30 mg codeine), and No. 4 (60 mg codeine). Prescribers should be aware of the possible 
danger of renal and hepatic injury with acetaminophen, aspirin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs contained in these analgesic combinations.
ANTITUSSIVES
Codeine (generic)
Oral: 15, 30, 60 mg tablets; constituent of many proprietary 
syrups2
Dextromethorphan (generic, Benylin DM, Delsym, others)
Oral: 5, 7.5 mg lozenges; 7.5, 10, 15, 30 mg/5 mL syrup; 30 mg sus-
tained-action liquid; constituent of many proprietary syrups2
564    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 Wild JE et al: Long-term safety and tolerability of tapentadol extended release for 
the management of chronic low back pain or osteoarthritis pain. Pain Pract 
2010;10:416. 
 Williams JT, Christie MJ, Manzoni O: Cellular and synaptic adaptations mediat-
ing opioid dependence. Physiol Rev 2001;81:299. 
 Woolf CJ, Salter MW: Neuronal plasticity: Increasing the gain in pain. Science 
2000;288:1765. 
 Zhao GM et al: Profound spinal tolerance after repeated exposure to a highly selec-
tive mu-opioid peptide agonist: Role of delta-opioid receptors. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther 2002;302:188. 
 Zubieta JK et al: Regional mu opioid receptor regulation of sensory and affective 
dimensions of pain. Science 2001;293:311. 
 C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R 
 In this case, the treatment of severe pain should be managed 
with the administration of a potent intravenous opioid anal-
gesic such as morphine, hydromorphone, or fentanyl. It is 
expected that he will require frequent reevaluation of both 
the severity of his pain and the presence of potential side 
effects before an additional dose of an opioid analgesic is 
administered. Given his history of pulmonary disease, he is 
also at increased risk of developing respiratory depression. 
Frequent reevaluation of his level of consciousness, respira-
tory rate, fractional oxygen saturation, and other vital 
parameters can help achieve the goal of pain relief and mini-
mize respiratory depression. Concurrent use of sedative 
agents such as benzodiazepines should be avoided if possible 
and used only with great caution. 
565
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Drugs are abused (used in ways that are not medically approved) 
because they cause strong feelings of euphoria or alter perception. 
However, repetitive exposure induces widespread adaptive changes 
in the brain. As a consequence, drug use may become compulsive—
the hallmark of addiction. 
 ■ BASIC NEUROBIOLOGY OF 
DRUG ABUSE 
 DEPENDENCE VERSUS ADDICTION 
 Recent neurobiologic research has led to the conceptual and mecha-
nistic separation of “dependence” and “addiction.” The older term 
“physical dependence” is now denoted as  dependence, whereas 
“psychological dependence” is more simply called  addiction. 
 Every addictive drug causes its own characteristic spectrum of 
acute effects, but all have in common that they induce strong 
feelings of euphoria and reward. With repetitive exposure, addic-
tive drugs induce adaptive changes such as tolerance (ie, escala-
tion of dose to maintain effect). Once the abused drug is no 
longer available, signs of withdrawal become apparent. A combi-
nation of such signs, referred to as the  withdrawal syndrome , 
C A S E  S T U D Y
defines  dependence . Dependence is not always a correlate of drug 
abuse—it can also occur with many classes of nonpsychoactive 
drugs, eg, sympathomimetic vasoconstrictors and bronchodila-
tors, and organic nitrate vasodilators.  Addiction , on the other 
hand, consists of compulsive, relapsing drug use despite negative 
consequences, at times triggered by cravings that occur in 
response to contextual cues (see Box: Animal Models in Addiction 
Research). Although dependence invariably occurs with chronic 
exposure, only a small percentage of subjects develop a habit, lose 
control, and become addicted. For example, very few patients 
who receive opioids as analgesics desire the drug after withdrawal. 
And only one person out of six becomes addicted within 10 years 
of first use of cocaine. Conversely, relapse is very common in 
addicts after a successful withdrawal when, by definition, they are 
no longer dependent. 
 ADDICTIVE DRUGS INCREASE THE LEVEL 
OF DOPAMINE: REINFORCEMENT 
 To understand the long-term changes induced by drugs of abuse, 
their initial molecular and cellular targets must be identified. A com-
bination of approaches in animals and humans, including functional 
imaging, has revealed the mesolimbic dopamine system as the prime 
target of addictive drugs. This system originates in the  ventral teg-
mental area (VTA), a tiny structure at the tip of the brainstem, which 
projects to the  nucleus accumbens, the amygdala, the hippocampus, 
32
Drugs of Abuse
 Christian Lüscher, MD 
A retired accountant developed a tremor and slowing of 
movements and was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease at 
age 67. At that time, his neurologist prescribed levodopa to 
restore dopamine levels. Two years later, motor symptoms 
start to fluctuate and the dopamine receptor agonist ropini-
role is added to his treatment. ∗ A few months later, he devel-
oped a strong interest in gambling, first buying lottery tickets 
and then visiting a casino almost every day. He concealed his 
gambling activity until he had lost more than $100,000. When 
he came for a consultation 5 weeks ago, ropinirole was 
replaced with monoamine oxidase inhibitor therapy. He now 
reports that his interest in gambling has disappeared. Is there 
a link between the dopamine agonist treatment and gambling 
addiction?
 ∗ The treatment of Parkinson’s disease is discussed in  Chapter 28 .
566    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
Animal Models in Addiction Research
 Many of the recent advances in addiction research have been 
made possible by the use of animal models. Since drugs of 
abuse are not only rewarding but also reinforcing, an animal 
will learn a behavior (eg, press a lever) when paired with drug 
administration. In such a self-administration paradigm, the 
number of times an animal is willing to press the lever in order 
to obtain a single dose reflects the strength of reinforcement 
and is therefore a measure of the rewarding properties of a 
drug. Observing withdrawal signs specific for rodents (eg, 
escape jumps or “wet-dog” shakes after abrupt termination of 
chronic morphine administration) allows the quantification of 
dependence. Behavioral tests for addiction in the rodent have 
proven difficult to develop, and so far no test fully captures the 
complexity of the disease. However it is possible to model core 
components of addiction, for example by monitoring behav-
ioral sensitization and conditioned place preference. In the 
first test, an increase in locomotor activity is observed with 
intermittent drug exposure. The latter tests for the preference 
of a particular environment associated with drug exposure by 
measuring the time an animal spends in the compartment 
where a drug was received compared with the compartment 
where only saline was injected (conditioned place preference). 
Both tests have in common that they are sensitive to cue-
conditioned effects of addictive drugs. Subsequent exposures 
to the environment without the drug lead to extinction of the 
place preference, which can be reinstated with a low dose of 
the drug or the presentation of a conditioned stimulus. These 
persistent changes serve as a model of relapse and have been 
linked to synaptic plasticity of excitatory transmission in the 
ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens and prefrontal 
cortex (see also Box: The Dopamine Hypothesis of Addiction). 
Recent findings suggest that prolonged self-administration of 
cocaine leads to behaviors in rats that closely resemble human 
addiction. Such “addicted rats” are very strongly motivated to 
seek cocaine, continue looking for the drug even when no 
longer available, and self-administer cocaine in spite of nega-
tive consequences, such as an electric foot shock. These find-
ings suggest that addiction is a disease that does not respect 
species boundaries. 
the VTA also acts as a strong reinforcer, and systemic administration 
of drugs of abuse causes release of dopamine. Even selective activa-
tion of dopamine neurons is sufficient to elicit behavioral changes 
typically observed with addictive drugs. These very selective inter-
ventions use optogenetic methods. Blue light is delivered in a freely 
moving mouse through light guides to activate channelrhodopsin, a 
light-gated cation channel that is artificially expressed in dopamine 
neurons. 
 As a general rule, all addictive drugs activate the mesolimbic dop-
amine system . The behavioral significance of this increase of dop-
amine is still debated. An appealing hypothesis is that mesolimbic 
dopamine codes for the difference between expected and actual 
reward and thus constitutes a strong learning signal (see Box: The 
Dopamine Hypothesis of Addiction). 
 Since each addictive drug has a specific molecular target that 
engages distinct cellular mechanisms to activate the mesolimbic 
system, three classes can be distinguished: A first group binds to  G io 
 protein-coupled receptors , a second group interacts with  ionotro-
pic receptors or ion channels , and a third group targets the  dop-
amine transporter ( Table 32–1 and  Figure 32–2 ). G protein-coupled 
receptors (GPCRs) of the G io family inhibit neurons through post-
synaptic hyperpolarization and presynaptic regulation of transmitter 
release. In the VTA, the action of these drugs is preferentially on the 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurons that act as local inhibitory 
interneurons. Addictive drugs that bind to ionotropic receptors and 
ion channels can have combined effects on dopamine neurons and 
GABA neurons, eventually leading to enhanced release of dop-
amine. Finally, addictive drugs that interfere with monoamine 
transporters block reuptake or stimulate nonvesicular release of 
dopamine, causing an accumulation of extracellular dopamine in 
target structures. Since neurons of the VTA also express somatoden-
dritic transporters, which normally clear dopamine released by the 
dendrites, class III drugs also increase dopamine level in the VTA. 
Although drugs of this class also affect transporters of other mono-
amines (norepinephrine, serotonin), action on the dopamine trans-
porter remains central for addiction. This is consistent with the 
observations that antidepressants that block serotonin and norepi-
nephrine uptake, but not dopamine uptake, do not cause addiction 
even after prolonged use. 
 DEPENDENCE: TOLERANCE & 
WITHDRAWAL 
 With chronic exposure to addictive drugs, the brain shows signs of 
adaptation. For example, if morphine is used at short intervals, the 
dose has to be progressively increased over the course of several 
days to maintain rewarding or analgesic effects. This phenomenon 
is called tolerance. It may become a serious problem because of 
increasing side effects—eg, respiratory depression—that do not 
show much tolerance and may lead to fatalities associated with 
overdose. 
 Tolerance to opioids may be due to a reduction of the concen-
tration of a drug or a shorter duration of action in a target system 
and the prefrontal cortex ( Figure 32–1 ). Most projection neurons of 
the VTA are dopamine-producing neurons. When the dopamine 
neurons of the VTA begin to fire in bursts, large quantities of dop-
amine are released in the nucleus accumbens and the prefrontal 
cortex. Early animal studies pairing electrical stimulation of the 
VTA with operant responses (eg, lever pressing) that result in strong 
reinforcement established the central role of the mesolimbic dop-
amine system in reward processing. Direct application of drugs into 
CHAPTER 32 Drugs of Abuse    567
(pharmacokinetic tolerance). Alternatively, it may involve changes 
of μ-opioid receptor function (pharmacodynamic tolerance). In 
fact, many μ-opioid receptor agonists promote strong receptor 
phosphorylation that triggers the recruitment of the adaptor pro-
tein β-arrestin, causing G proteins to uncouple from the receptor 
and to internalize within minutes (see  Chapter 2 ). Since this 
decreases signaling, it is tempting to explain tolerance by such a 
mechanism. However, morphine, which strongly induces toler-
ance, does not recruit β-arrestins and fails to promote receptor 
internalization. Conversely, other agonists that drive receptor inter-
nalization very efficiently induce only modest tolerance. Based on 
these observations, it has been hypothesized that desensitization 
and receptor internalization actually protect the cell from over-
stimulation. In this model, morphine, by failing to trigger receptor 
endocytosis, disproportionally stimulates adaptive processes, which 
eventually cause tolerance. Although the molecular identity of 
these processes is still under investigation, they may be similar to 
the ones involved in withdrawal (see below). 
 Adaptive changes become fully apparent once drug exposure is 
terminated. This state is called  withdrawal and is observed to 
varying degrees after chronic exposure to most drugs of abuse. 
Withdrawal from opioids in humans is particularly strong 
(described below). Studies in rodents have added significantly to 
our understanding of the neural and molecular mechanisms that 
underlie dependence. For example, signs of dependence, as well as 
analgesia and reward, are abolished in knockout mice lacking the 
μ-opioid receptor, but not in mice lacking other opioid receptors 
(δ, κ). Although activation of the μ-opioid receptor initially 
strongly inhibits adenylyl cyclase, this inhibition becomes weaker 
after several days of repeated exposure. The reduction of the 
Ventral tegmental area
Nucleus
accumbens
Amygdala
Prefrontal cortex
Hippocampus
A
B
C
D
 FIGURE 32–1  Major connections of the mesolimbic dopamine system in the brain. Schematic diagram of brain sections illustrating that 
the dopamine projections originate in the ventral tegmental area and target the nucleus accumbens, prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and 
hippocampus. The dashed lines on the sagittal section indicate where the horizontal and coronal sections were made. 
568    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
inhibition of adenylyl cyclase is due to a counter-adaptation of the 
enzyme system during exposure to the drug, which results in over-
production of cAMP during subsequent withdrawal. Several 
mechanisms exist for this adenylyl cyclase compensatory response, 
including up-regulation of transcription of the enzyme. Increased 
cAMP concentrations in turn strongly activate the transcription 
factor cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB), 
leading to the regulation of downstream genes. Of the few such 
genes identified to date, one of the most interesting is the gene for 
the endogenous κ-opioid ligand dynorphin. During withdrawal, 
neurons of the nucleus accumbens produce high levels of dynor-
phin, which is then co-released with GABA onto the projection 
neurons of the VTA ( Figure 32–3 ). These cells express κ-opioid 
receptors on their synaptic terminals and on the dendrites. As a 
consequence, they are inhibited and dopamine release is reduced. 
This mechanism exemplifies the adaptive processes engaged during 
dependence and may underlie the intense dysphoria typically 
observed during withdrawal. 
 ADDICTION: A DISEASE OF 
MALADAPTIVE LEARNING 
 Addiction is characterized by a high motivation to obtain and use 
a drug despite negative consequences. With time, drug use 
becomes compulsive (“wanting without liking”). Addiction is a 
recalcitrant, chronic, and stubbornly relapsing disease that is very 
difficult to treat. 
The Dopamine Hypothesis of Addiction
 In the earliest version of the hypothesis described in this chapter, 
mesolimbic dopamine was believed to be the neurochemical cor-
relate of pleasure and reward. However, during the past decade, 
experimental evidence has led to several revisions. Phasic dop-
amine release may actually code for the  prediction error of reward 
rather than the reward itself. This distinction is based on pioneer-
ing observations in monkeys that dopamine neurons in the ventral 
tegmental area (VTA) are most efficiently activated by a reward (eg, 
a few drops of fruit juice) that is not anticipated. When the animal 
learns to predict the occurrence of a reward (eg, by pairing it with 
a stimulus such as a sound), dopamine neurons stop responding 
to the reward itself (juice), but increase their firing rate when the 
conditioned stimulus (sound) occurs. Finally, if reward is predicted 
but not delivered (sound but no juice), dopamine neurons are 
inhibited below their baseline activity and become silent. In other 
words, the mesolimbic system continuously scans the reward situ-
ation. It increases its activity when reward is larger than expected, 
and shuts down in the opposite case, thus coding for the predic-
tion error of reward. 
 Under physiologic conditions the mesolimbic dopamine sig-
nal could represent a learning signal responsible for reinforcing 
constructive behavioral adaptation (eg, learning to press a lever 
for food). Addictive drugs, by directly increasing dopamine, 
would generate a strong but inappropriate learning signal, thus 
hijacking the reward system and leading to pathologic reinforce-
ment. As a consequence, behavior becomes compulsive; that is 
decisions are no longer planned and under control, but auto-
matic, which is the hallmark of addiction. 
 This appealing hypothesis has been challenged based on the 
observation that some reward and drug-related learning is still 
possible in the absence of dopamine. Another intriguing observa-
tion is that mice genetically modified to lack the primary molecu-
lar target of cocaine, the dopamine transporter DAT, still 
self-administer the drug. Only when transporters of other bio-
genic amines are also knocked out does cocaine completely lose 
its rewarding properties. However, in DAT  −/− mice, in which basal 
synaptic dopamine levels are high, cocaine still leads to increased 
dopamine release, presumably because other cocaine-sensitive 
monoamine transporters (NET, SERT) are able to clear some dop-
amine. When cocaine is given, these transporters are also inhib-
ited and dopamine is again increased. As a consequence of this 
substitution among monoamine transporters, fluoxetine (a selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitor, see  Chapter 30 ) becomes 
addictive in DAT  −/− mice. This concept is supported by newer 
evidence showing that deletion of the cocaine binding site on 
DAT leaves basal dopamine levels unchanged but abolishes the 
rewarding effect of cocaine. 
 The dopamine hypothesis of addiction has also been chal-
lenged by the observation that salient stimuli that are not 
rewarding (they may actually even be aversive and therefore 
negative reinforcers) also activate a subpopulation of dopamine 
neurons in the VTA. Some of the neurons that are activated by 
aversive stimuli do in fact release dopamine, while the majority 
of dopamine neurons are actually inhibited by aversive stimuli. 
These recent findings suggest that in parallel to the reward sys-
tem, a system for aversion-learning originates in the VTA. 
 Regardless of the many roles of dopamine under physiologic 
conditions, all addictive drugs significantly increase its concen-
tration in target structures of the mesolimbic projection. This 
suggests that high levels of dopamine may actually be at the 
origin of the adaptive changes that underlie dependence and 
addiction, a concept that is now supported by novel techniques 
that allow controlling the activity of dopamine neurons in vivo. 
In fact manipulations that drive sustained activity of VTA dop-
amine neurons cause the same cellular adaptations and behav-
ioral changes typically observed with addictive drug exposure. 
CHAPTER 32 Drugs of Abuse    569
TABLE 32–1 The mechanistic classification of drugs of abuse.1
Name
Main Molecular Target
Pharmacology
Effect on Dopamine (DA) Neurons
RR2
Drugs That Activate G Protein-Coupled Receptors
Opioids
μ-OR (Gio)
Agonist
Disinhibition
4
Cannabinoids
CB1R (Gio)
Agonist
Disinhibition
2
γ-Hydroxybutyric acid (GHB)
GABABR (Gio)
Weak agonist
Disinhibition
?
LSD, mescaline, psilocybin
5-HT2AR (Gq)
Partial agonist
…
1
Drugs That Bind to Ionotropic Receptors and Ion Channels
Nicotine
nAChR (α2β2)
Agonist
Excitation
4
Alcohol
GABAAR, 5-HT3R, nAChR, 
NMDAR, Kir3 channels
Excitation, disinhibition (?)
3
Benzodiazepines
GABAAR
Positive modulator
Disinhibition
3
Phencyclidine, ketamine
NMDAR
Antagonist
…
1
Drugs That Bind to Transporters of Biogenic Amines
Cocaine
DAT, SERT, NET
Inhibitor
Blocks DA uptake
5
Amphetamine
DAT, NET, SERT, VMAT
Reverses transport
Blocks DA uptake , synaptic depletion
5
Ecstasy
SERT > DAT, NET
Reverses transport
Blocks DA uptake, synaptic depletion
?
5-HTxR, serotonin receptor; CB1R, cannabinoid-1; DAT, dopamine transporter; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; Kir3 channels, G protein-coupled inwardly rectifying potassium chan-
nels; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; μ-OR, μ-opioid receptor; nAChR, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor; NET, norepinephrine transporter; NMDAR, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor; 
SERT, serotonin transporter; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter; ? indicates data not available.
1Drugs fall into one of three categories, targeting either G protein-coupled receptors, ionotropic receptors or ion channels, or biogenic amine transporters.
2RR, relative risk of addiction; 1 = nonaddictive; 5 = highly addictive.
Class II
(benzodiazepines,
nicotine, ethanol):
channels
Class III
(cocaine, amphetamine,
ecstasy): transporters
Class I
(opioids, THC, GHB):
GPCRs
From cortex
Glutamate
Ventral Tegmental Area
Nucleus Accumbens
GABA
GABA
DA
Increased dopamine
(all addictive drugs)
 FIGURE 32–2  Neuropharmacologic classification of addictive drugs by primary target (see text and  Table 32–1 ). DA, dopamine; GABA, 
γ-aminobutyric acid; GHB, γ-hydroxybutyric acid; GPCRs, G protein-coupled receptors; THC, Δ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol. 
 The central problem is that even after successful withdrawal and 
prolonged drug-free periods, addicted individuals have a high risk 
of relapsing. Relapse is typically triggered by one of the following 
three conditions: reexposure to the addictive drug, stress, or a con-
text that recalls prior drug use. It appears that when paired with 
drug use, a neutral stimulus may undergo a switch and motivate 
(“trigger”) addiction-related behavior. This phenomenon may 
involve synaptic plasticity in the target nuclei of the mesolimbic 
projection (eg, nucleus accumbens). Several recent studies suggest 
that the recruitment of the dorsal striatum is responsible for the 
570    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
compulsion. This switch may depend on synaptic plasticity in the 
nucleus accumbens of the ventral striatum, where mesolimbic dop-
amine afferents and cortical glutamatergic afferents converge. If 
dopamine release codes for the prediction error of reward (see Box: 
The Dopamine Hypothesis of Addiction), pharmacologic stimula-
tion of the mesolimbic dopamine systems will generate an unusu-
ally strong learning signal. Unlike natural rewards, addictive drugs 
continue to increase dopamine even when reward is expected. Such 
overriding of the prediction error signal may eventually be respon-
sible for the usurping of memory processes by addictive drugs. 
 The involvement of learning and memory systems in addiction 
is also suggested by clinical studies. For example, the role of con-
text in relapse is supported by the report that soldiers who became 
addicted to heroin during the Vietnam War had significantly bet-
ter outcomes when treated after their return home, compared with 
addicts who remained in the environment where they had taken 
the drug. In other words, cravings may recur at the presentation 
of contextual cues (eg, people, places, or drug paraphernalia). 
Current research therefore focuses on the effects of drugs on asso-
ciative forms of synaptic plasticity, such as long-term potentiation 
(LTP), which underlie learning and memory (see Box: Synaptic 
Plasticity & Addiction). 
 Non-substance-dependent disorders, such as pathologic gam-
bling and compulsive shopping, share many clinical features of 
addiction. Several lines of arguments suggest that they also share 
the underlying neurobiologic mechanisms. This conclusion is 
supported by the clinical observation that, as an adverse effect of 
dopamine agonist medication, patients with Parkinson’s disease 
may become pathologic gamblers (see Case Study). Other 
patients may develop a habit for recreational activities, such as 
shopping, eating compulsively, or becoming excessively involved 
in sexual activity (hypersexuality). Although large-scale studies 
are not yet available, an estimated 1 of 7 parkinsonian patients 
develops an addiction-like behavior when receiving dopamine 
agonists. 
 Large individual differences exist also in vulnerability to substance-
related addiction. Whereas one person may become “hooked” 
after a few doses, others may be able to use a drug occasionally 
during their entire lives without ever having difficulty in stop-
ping. Even when dependence is induced with chronic expo-
sure, only a small percentage of dependent users progress to 
addiction. Recent studies in rats suggest that impulsivity or exces-
sive anxiety may be crucial traits that represent a risk for addic-
tion. The transition to addiction is determined by a combination 
Dynorphin
Dopamine
GABA
VTA
Nucleus accumbens
KOR
KOR
D2R
cAMP
Dynorphin
AC
CREB
DA neuron
KOR
 FIGURE 32–3  CREB-mediated up-regulation of dynorphin during withdrawal from dependence. Supersensitization of adenylyl cyclase 
(AC) leads to an increase of cAMP concentration in medium spiny neurons of the accumbens. This activates the transcription factor CREB, which 
turns on several genes, including that for dynorphin. Dynorphin is then co-released with γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), activating the κ-opioid 
receptor (KOR) located on dopamine neurons of the ventral tegmental area (VTA), thereby leading to pre- and postsynaptic inhibition. D 2 R, 
dopamine D 2 receptor. 
CHAPTER 32 Drugs of Abuse    571
of environmental and genetic factors. Heritability of addiction, 
as determined by comparing monozygotic with dizygotic twins, is 
relatively modest for cannabinoids but very high for cocaine. It is 
of interest that the relative risk for addiction (addiction liability) 
of a drug ( Table 32–1 ) correlates with its heritability, suggesting 
that the neurobiologic basis of addiction common to all drugs is 
what is being inherited. Further genomic analysis indicates that 
only a few alleles (or perhaps even a single recessive allele) need to 
function in combination to produce the phenotype. However, 
identification of the genes involved remains elusive. Although 
some substance-specific candidate genes have been identified (eg, 
alcohol dehydrogenase), future research will also focus on genes 
implicated in the neurobiologic mechanisms common to all 
addictive drugs. 
 NONADDICTIVE DRUGS OF ABUSE 
 Some drugs of abuse do not lead to addiction. This is the case 
for substances that alter perception without causing sensations of 
reward and euphoria, such as the hallucinogens and the dissocia-
tive anesthetics ( Table 32–1 ). Unlike addictive drugs, which 
primarily target the mesolimbic dopamine system, these agents 
primarily target cortical and thalamic circuits. Lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD), for example, activates the serotonin 5-HT 2A 
receptor in the prefrontal cortex, enhancing glutamatergic trans-
mission onto pyramidal neurons. These excitatory afferents 
mainly come from the thalamus and carry sensory information 
of varied modalities, which may constitute a link to enhanced 
perception. Phencyclidine (PCP) and ketamine produce a feel-
ing of separation of mind and body (which is why they are called 
dissociative anesthetics) and, at higher doses, stupor and coma. 
The principal mechanism of action is a use-dependent inhibi-
tion of glutamate receptors of the  N -methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
type. 
 The classification of NMDA antagonists as nonaddictive drugs 
was based on early assessments, which, in the case of PCP, have 
recently been questioned. In fact, animal research shows that PCP 
can increase mesolimbic dopamine concentrations and has some 
reinforcing properties in rodents. Concurrent effects on both thal-
amocortical and mesolimbic systems also exist for other addictive 
drugs. Psychosis-like symptoms can be observed with cannabi-
noids, amphetamines, and cocaine, which may reflect their effects 
on thalamocortical structures. For example, cannabinoids, in 
addition to their documented effects on the mesolimbic dopamine 
system, also enhance excitation in cortical circuits through presyn-
aptic inhibition of GABA release. 
 Hallucinogens and NMDA antagonists, even if they do not 
produce dependence or addiction, can still have long-term effects. 
Flashbacks of altered perception can occur years after LSD use. 
Moreover, chronic use of PCP may lead to an irreversible 
schizophrenia-like psychosis. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DRUGS OF ABUSE 
 Since all addictive drugs increase dopamine concentrations in 
target structures of the mesolimbic projections, we classify them 
on the basis of their molecular targets and the underlying mecha-
nisms ( Table 32–1 and  Figure 32–2 ). The first group contains the 
 opioids, cannabinoids, γ -hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) , and the 
 hallucinogens , which all exert their action through G io protein-
coupled receptors. The second group includes  nicotine, alcohol, 
the benzodiazepines, dissociative anesthetics, and some  inhal-
ants, which interact with ionotropic receptors or ion channels. 
The last group comprises  cocaine, amphetamines, and  ecstasy, 
which all bind to monoamine transporters. The nonaddictive 
drugs are classified using the same criteria. 
Synaptic Plasticity & Addiction
 Long-term potentiation (LTP) is a form of experience-dependent 
synaptic plasticity that is induced by activating glutamate recep-
tors of the  N- methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) type. Since NMDA 
receptors are blocked by magnesium at negative potentials, their 
activation requires the concomitant release of glutamate (presyn-
aptic activity) onto a receiving neuron that is depolarized (post-
synaptic activity). Correlated pre- and postsynaptic activity 
durably enhances synaptic efficacy and triggers the formation of 
new connections. Because associativity is a critical component, 
LTP has become a leading candidate mechanism underlying 
learning and memory. LTP can be elicited at glutamatergic syn-
apses of the mesolimbic reward system and is modulated by 
dopamine. Drugs of abuse could therefore interfere with LTP at 
sites of convergence of dopamine and glutamate projections (eg, 
ventral tegmental area [VTA], nucleus accumbens, or prefrontal 
cortex). Interestingly, exposure to an addictive drug triggers a 
specific form of synaptic plasticity at excitatory afferents (drug-
evoked synaptic plasticity) and reduces GABA A receptor-mediated 
inhibition of the VTA. As a consequence, the excitability of dop-
amine neurons is increased, the synaptic calcium sources altered, 
and the rules for subsequent LTP inverted. Genetic manipulations 
in mice that prevent drug-evoked plasticity at this synapse also 
have effects on persistent changes of drug-associated behavioral 
paradigms such as reinstatement of conditioned place prefer-
ence, further supporting the idea that synaptic plasticity is 
involved in context-dependent components of relapse. 
572    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 DRUGS THAT ACTIVATE 
G IO -COUPLED RECEPTORS 
 OPIOIDS 
 Opioids may have been the first drugs to be abused (preceding 
stimulants), and are still among the most commonly used for 
nonmedical purposes. 
 Pharmacology & Clinical Aspects 
 As described in  Chapter 31 , opioids comprise a large family of 
endogenous and exogenous agonists at three G protein-coupled 
receptors: the μ-, κ-, and δ-opioid receptors. Although all three 
receptors couple to inhibitory G proteins (ie, they all inhibit ade-
nylyl cyclase), they have distinct, sometimes even opposing effects, 
mainly because of the cell type-specific expression throughout the 
brain. In the VTA, for example, μ-opioid receptors are selectively 
expressed on GABA neurons (which they inhibit), whereas 
κ-opioid receptors are expressed on and inhibit dopamine neu-
rons. This may explain why μ-opioid agonists cause euphoria, 
whereas κ agonists induce dysphoria. 
 In line with the latter observations, the rewarding effects of 
morphine are absent in knockout mice lacking μ receptors but 
persist when either of the other opioid receptors are ablated. In the 
VTA, μ opioids cause an inhibition of GABAergic inhibitory 
interneurons, which leads eventually to a disinhibition of dop-
amine neurons. 
 The most commonly abused μ opioids include  morphine, 
heroin (diacetylmorphine, which is rapidly metabolized to mor-
phine),  codeine, and  oxycodone. Meperidine abuse is common 
among health professionals. All of these drugs induce strong toler-
ance and dependence. The withdrawal syndrome may be very 
severe (except for codeine) and includes intense dysphoria, nausea 
or vomiting, muscle aches, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, mydriasis, 
piloerection, sweating, diarrhea, yawning, and fever. Beyond the 
withdrawal syndrome, which usually lasts no longer than a few 
days, individuals who have received opioids as analgesics only rarely 
develop addiction. In contrast, when taken for recreational pur-
poses, opioids are highly addictive. The relative risk of addiction is 
4 out of 5 on a scale of 1 = nonaddictive, 5 = highly addictive. 
 Treatment 
 The opioid antagonist  naloxone reverses the effects of a dose of 
morphine or heroin within minutes. This may be life-saving in the 
case of a massive overdose (see Chapters 31 and 58). Naloxone 
administration also provokes an acute withdrawal (precipitated 
abstinence) syndrome in a dependent person who has recently 
taken an opioid. 
 In the treatment of opioid addiction, a long-acting opioid (eg, 
 methadone ,  buprenorphine ) is often substituted for the shorter-
acting, more rewarding, opioid (eg, heroin). For substitution 
therapy, methadone is given orally once daily, facilitating super-
vised intake. Using a partial agonist (buprenorphine) and the 
much longer half-life (methadone and buprenorphine) may also 
have some beneficial effects (eg, weaker drug sensitization, which 
typically requires intermittent exposures), but it is important to 
realize that abrupt termination of methadone administration 
invariably precipitates a withdrawal syndrome; that is, the subject 
on substitution therapy remains dependent. Some countries (eg, 
Switzerland, Netherlands) even allow substitution of heroin by 
heroin. A follow-up of a cohort of addicts who receive heroin 
injections in a controlled setting and have access to counseling 
indicates that addicts under heroin substitution have an improved 
health status and are better integrated in society. 
 CANNABINOIDS 
 Endogenous cannabinoids that act as neurotransmitters include 
2-arachidonyl glycerol (2-AG) and anandamide, both of which 
bind to CB 1 receptors. These very lipid-soluble compounds are 
released at the postsynaptic somatodendritic membrane, and dif-
fuse through the extracellular space to bind at presynaptic CB 1 
receptors, where they inhibit the release of either glutamate or 
GABA. Because of such backward signaling, endocannabinoids 
are called retrograde messengers. In the hippocampus, release of 
endocannabinoids from pyramidal neurons selectively affects 
inhibitory transmission and may contribute to the induction of 
synaptic plasticity during learning and memory formation. 
 Exogenous cannabinoids, eg in  marijuana , include several 
pharmacologically active substances including D 9 -tetra-
hydrocannabinol (THC) , a powerful psychoactive substance. 
Like opioids, THC causes disinhibition of dopamine neurons, 
mainly by presynaptic inhibition of GABA neurons in the VTA. 
The half-life of THC is about 4 hours. The onset of effects of THC 
after smoking marijuana occurs within minutes and reaches a 
maximum after 1–2 hours. The most prominent effects are eupho-
ria and relaxation. Users also report feelings of well-being, grandios-
ity, and altered perception of passage of time. Dose-dependent 
perceptual changes (eg, visual distortions), drowsiness, diminished 
coordination, and memory impairment may occur. Cannabinoids 
can also create a dysphoric state and, in rare cases following the use 
of very high doses, eg, in  hashish , result in visual hallucinations, 
depersonalization, and frank psychotic episodes. Additional effects 
of THC, eg, increased appetite, attenuation of nausea, decreased 
intraocular pressure, and relief of chronic pain, have led to the use 
of cannabinoids in medical therapeutics. The justification of medic-
inal use of marijuana was comprehensively examined by the 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) of the National Academy of Sciences 
in its 1999 report,  Marijuana & Medicine . This continues to be a 
controversial issue, mainly because of the fear that cannabinoids 
may serve as a gateway to the consumption of “hard” drugs or cause 
schizophrenia in individuals with a predisposition. 
 Chronic exposure to marijuana leads to dependence, which is 
revealed by a distinctive, but mild and short-lived, withdrawal syn-
drome that includes restlessness, irritability, mild agitation, insom-
nia, nausea, and cramping. The relative risk for addiction is 2. 
 The synthetic Δ 9 -THC analog  dronabinol is a Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)-approved cannabinoid agonist currently 
marketed in the USA and some European countries.  Nabilone, an 
CHAPTER 32 Drugs of Abuse    573
older commercial Δ 9 -THC analog, was recently reintroduced in 
the USA for adjunctive therapy in chronic pain management. The 
cannabinoid system is likely to emerge as an important drug target 
in the future because of its apparent involvement in several thera-
peutically desirable effects. 
 GAMMA-HYDROXYBUTYRIC ACID 
 Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) is produced during the 
metabolism of GABA, but the function of this endogenous agent 
is unknown at present. The pharmacology of GHB is complex 
because there are two distinct binding sites. The protein that con-
tains a high-affinity binding site (1 μM) for GHB has been 
cloned, but its involvement in the cellular effects of GHB at phar-
macologic concentrations remains unclear. The low-affinity bind-
ing site (1 mM) has been identified as the GABA B receptor. In 
mice that lack GABA B receptors, even very high doses of GHB 
have no effect; this suggests that GABA B receptors are the sole 
mediators of GHB’s pharmacologic action. 
 GHB was first synthesized in 1960 and introduced as a general 
anesthetic. Because of its narrow safety margin and its addictive 
potential, it is not available in the USA for this purpose at present. 
It can however be prescribed (under restricted access rules) to treat 
narcolepsy, because GHB decreases daytime sleepiness and episodes 
of cataplexy through a mechanism unrelated to the reward system. 
Before causing sedation and coma, GHB causes euphoria, enhanced 
sensory perceptions, a feeling of social closeness, and amnesia. These 
properties have made it a popular “club drug” that goes by colorful 
street names such as “liquid ecstasy,” “grievous bodily harm,” or 
“date rape drug.” As the latter name suggests, GHB has been used 
in date rapes because it is odorless and can be readily dissolved in 
beverages. It is rapidly absorbed after ingestion and reaches a 
maximal plasma concentration 20–30 minutes after ingestion of a 
10–20 mg/kg dose. The elimination half-life is about 30 minutes. 
 Although GABA B receptors are expressed on all neurons of the 
VTA, GABA neurons are much more sensitive to GHB than are 
dopamine neurons ( Figure 32–4 ). This is reflected by the EC 50 s, 
which differ by about one order of magnitude, and indicates the dif-
ference in coupling efficiency of the GABA B receptor and the potas-
sium channels responsible for the hyperpolarization. Because GHB 
is a weak agonist, only GABA neurons are inhibited at the concentra-
tions typically obtained with recreational use. This feature may 
underlie the reinforcing effects of GHB and the basis for addiction 
to the drug. At higher doses, however, GHB also hyperpolarizes 
dopamine neurons, eventually completely inhibiting dopamine 
release. Such an inhibition of the VTA may in turn preclude its 
activation by other addictive drugs and may explain why GHB 
might have some usefulness as an “anticraving” compound. 
 LSD, MESCALINE, & PSILOCYBIN 
 LSD, mescaline, and psilocybin are commonly called hallucino-
gens because of their ability to alter consciousness such that the 
individual senses things that are not present. They induce, often 
in an unpredictable way, perceptual symptoms, including shape 
and color distortion. Psychosis-like manifestations (depersonaliza-
tion, hallucinations, distorted time perception) have led some to 
classify these drugs as psychotomimetics. They also produce 
somatic symptoms (dizziness, nausea, paresthesias, and blurred 
vision). Some users have reported intense reexperiencing of per-
ceptual effects (flashbacks) up to several years after the last drug 
exposure. 
 Hallucinogens differ from most other drugs described in this 
chapter in that they induce neither dependence nor addiction. 
However, repetitive exposure still leads to rapid tolerance (also 
called tachyphylaxis). Animals do not self-administer hallucino-
gens, suggesting that they are not rewarding to them. Additional 
studies show that these drugs also fail to stimulate dopamine 
release, further supporting the idea that only drugs that activate 
the mesolimbic dopamine system are addictive. Instead, halluci-
nogens increase glutamate release in the cortex, presumably by 
enhancing excitatory afferent input via presynaptic serotonin 
receptors (eg, 5HT 2A ) from the thalamus. 
 LSD is an ergot alkaloid. After synthesis, blotter paper or sugar 
cubes are sprinkled with the liquid and allowed to dry. When LSD 
is swallowed, psychoactive effects typically appear after 30 minutes 
and last 6–12 hours. During this time, subjects have impaired 
ability to make rational judgments and understand common dan-
gers, which puts them at risk for accidents and personal injury. 
 In an adult, a typical dose is 20–30 mcg. LSD is considered 
neurotoxic and like most ergot alkaloids, may lead to strong con-
tractions of the uterus that can induce abortion (see  Chapter 16 ). 
 The main molecular target of LSD and other hallucinogens is 
the 5-HT 2A receptor. This receptor couples to G proteins of the 
G q type and generates inositol trisphosphate (IP 3 ), leading to a 
release of intracellular calcium. Although hallucinogens, and LSD 
in particular, have been proposed for several therapeutic indica-
tions, efficacy has never been demonstrated. 
 DRUGS THAT MEDIATE THEIR 
EFFECTS VIA IONOTROPIC 
RECEPTORS  
 NICOTINE 
 In terms of numbers affected, addiction to nicotine exceeds all 
other forms of addiction, touching more than 50% of all adults in 
some countries. Nicotine exposure occurs primarily through 
smoking of tobacco, which causes associated diseases that are 
responsible for many preventable deaths. The chronic use of chew-
ing tobacco and snuff tobacco is also addictive. 
 Nicotine is a selective agonist of the nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor (nAChR) that is normally activated by acetylcholine (see 
Chapters 6 and 7). Based on nicotine’s enhancement of cognitive 
performance and the association of Alzheimer’s dementia with a 
loss of ACh-releasing neurons from the nucleus basalis of Meynert, 
nAChRs are believed to play an important role in many cognitive 
processes. The rewarding effect of nicotine requires involvement of 
574    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
the VTA, in which nAChRs are expressed on dopamine neurons. 
When nicotine excites projection neurons, dopamine is released in 
the nucleus accumbens and the prefrontal cortex, thus fulfilling the 
dopamine requirement of addictive drugs. Recent work has identi-
fied α4β2-containing channels in the VTA as the nAChRs that are 
required for the rewarding effects of nicotine. This statement is 
based on the observation that knockout mice deficient for the β2 
subunit lose interest in self-administering nicotine, and that in 
these mice, this behavior can be restored through an in vivo trans-
fection of the β2 subunit in neurons of the VTA. Electrophysiologic 
evidence suggests that homomeric nAChRs made exclusively of α7 
subunits also contribute to the reinforcing effects of nicotine. 
These receptors are mainly expressed on synaptic terminals of excit-
atory afferents projecting onto the dopamine neurons. They also 
contribute to nicotine-evoked dopamine release and the long-term 
changes induced by the drugs related to addiction (eg, long-term 
synaptic potentiation of excitatory inputs). 
 Nicotine withdrawal is mild compared with opioid withdrawal 
and involves irritability and sleep problems. However, nicotine is 
among the most addictive drugs (relative risk 4), and relapse after 
attempted cessation is very common. 
 Treatment 
 Treatments for nicotine addiction include nicotine itself in forms 
that are slowly absorbed and several other drugs. Nicotine that is 
chewed, inhaled, or transdermally delivered can be substituted for 
the nicotine in cigarettes, thus slowing the pharmacokinetics and 
eliminating the many complications associated with the toxic 
substances found in tobacco smoke. Recently, two partial agonists 
of α4β2-containing nAChRs have been characterized; the plant-
extract  cytisine and its synthetic derivative  varenicline. Both 
work by occupying nAChRs on dopamine neurons of the VTA, 
thus preventing nicotine from exerting its action. Varenicline may 
DA
MOR
MOR
DA
DA
MOR
CB1R
GHB
Opioids
THC
GABA
GABA
GABAAR
GABA
GABAB
Ca2+
Ca2+
βγ
VGCC
GABA
βγ
K+
Kir3
 FIGURE 32–4  Disinhibition of dopamine (DA) neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) through drugs that act via G io -coupled 
receptors.  Top: Opioids target μ-opioid receptors (MORs) that in the VTA are located exclusively on γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) neurons. MORs 
are expressed on the presynaptic terminal of these cells and the somatodendritic compartment of the postsynaptic cells. Each compartment 
has distinct effectors ( insets ). G protein-βγ-mediated inhibition of voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCC) is the major mechanism in the 
presynaptic terminal. Conversely, in dendrites MORs activate K channels.  Middle: Δ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and other cannabinoids 
mainly act through presynaptic inhibition.  Bottom: Gama-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) targets GABA B receptors, which are located on both cell 
types. However, GABA neurons are more sensitive to GHB than are DA neurons, leading to disinhibition at concentrations typically obtained 
with recreational use. CB 1 R, cannabinoid receptors. 
CHAPTER 32 Drugs of Abuse    575
impair the capacity to drive and has been associated with suicidal 
ideation. The antidepressant  bupropion is approved for nicotine 
cessation therapy. It is most effective when combined with behav-
ioral therapies. 
 Many countries have banned smoking in public places to create 
smoke-free environments. This important step not only reduces 
passive smoking and the hazards of secondhand smoke, but also 
the risk that ex-smokers will be exposed to smoke, which as a 
contextual cue, may trigger relapse. 
 BENZODIAZEPINES 
 Benzodiazepines are commonly prescribed as anxiolytics and sleep 
medications. They represent a moderate risk for abuse, which has 
to be weighed against their beneficial effects. Benzodiazepines are 
abused by some persons for their euphoriant effects, but most 
often abuse occurs concomitant with other drugs, eg, to attenuate 
anxiety during withdrawal from opioids. 
 Barbiturates, which preceded benzodiazepines as the most 
commonly abused sedative hypnotics (after ethanol), are now 
rarely prescribed to outpatients and therefore constitute a less 
common prescription drug problem than they did in the past. 
Street sales of barbiturates, however, continue. Management 
of barbiturate withdrawal and addiction is similar to that of 
benzodiazepines. 
 Benzodiazepine dependence is very common, and diagnosis of 
addiction probably often missed. Withdrawal from benzodiaz-
epines occurs within days of stopping the medication and varies as 
a function of the half-life of elimination. Symptoms include irri-
tability, insomnia, phonophobia and photophobia, depression, 
muscle cramps, and even seizures. Typically, these symptoms taper 
off within 1–2 weeks. 
 Benzodiazepines are positive modulators of the GABA A recep-
tor, increasing both single-channel conductance and open-channel 
probability. GABA A receptors are pentameric structures consisting 
of α, β, and γ subunits (see  Chapter 22 ). GABA receptors on 
dopamine neurons of the VTA lack α 1 , a subunit isoform that is 
present in GABA neurons nearby (ie, interneurons). Because of 
this difference, unitary synaptic currents in interneurons are larger 
than those in dopamine neurons, and when this difference is 
amplified by benzodiazepines, interneurons fall silent. GABA is no 
longer released, and benzodiazepines lose their effect on dopamine 
neurons, ultimately leading to disinhibition of the dopamine neu-
rons. The rewarding effects of benzodiazepines are, therefore, 
mediated by α 1 -containing GABA A receptors expressed on VTA 
neurons. Receptors containing α 5 subunits seem to be required 
for tolerance to the sedative effects of benzodiazepines, and studies 
in humans link α 2 β 3 -containing receptors to alcohol dependence 
(the GABA A receptor is also a target of alcohol, see following text). 
Taken together, a picture is emerging linking GABA A receptors 
that contain the α 1 subunit isoform to their addiction liability. By 
extension, α 1 -sparing compounds, which at present remain 
experimental and are not approved for human use, may eventually 
be preferred to treat anxiety disorders because of their reduced risk 
to induced addiction. 
 ALCOHOL 
 Alcohol (ethanol, see  Chapter 23 ) is regularly used by a majority 
of the population in many Western countries. Although only a 
minority becomes dependent and addicted, abuse is a very serious 
public health problem because of the many diseases associated 
with alcoholism. 
 Pharmacology 
 The pharmacology of alcohol is complex, and no single receptor 
mediates all of its effects. On the contrary, alcohol alters the function 
of several receptors and cellular functions, including GABA A recep-
tors, Kir3/GIRK channels, adenosine reuptake (through the equili-
brative nucleoside transporter, ENT1), glycine receptor, NMDA 
receptor, and 5-HT 3 receptor. They are all, with the exception of 
ENT1, either ionotropic receptors or ion channels. It is not clear 
which of these targets is responsible for the increase of dopamine 
release from the mesolimbic reward system. The inhibition of ENT1 
is probably not responsible for the rewarding effects (ENT1 knockout 
mice drink more than controls) but seems to be involved in alcohol 
dependence through an accumulation of adenosine, stimulation of 
adenosine A 2 receptors, and ensuing enhanced CREB signaling. 
 Dependence becomes apparent 6–12 hours after cessation of 
heavy drinking as a withdrawal syndrome that may include tremor 
(mainly of the hands), nausea and vomiting, excessive sweating, 
agitation, and anxiety. In some individuals, this is followed by 
visual, tactile, and auditory hallucinations 12–24 hours after ces-
sation. Generalized seizures may manifest after 24–48 hours. 
Finally, 48–72 hours after cessation, an alcohol withdrawal delir-
ium (delirium tremens) may become apparent in which the person 
hallucinates, is disoriented, and shows evidence of autonomic 
instability. Delirium tremens is associated with 5–15% mortality. 
 Treatment 
 Treatment of ethanol withdrawal is supportive and relies on 
 benzodiazepines, taking care to use compounds such as oxaze-
pam and lorazepam, which are not as dependent on hepatic 
metabolism as most other benzodiazepines. In patients in whom 
monitoring is not reliable and liver function is adequate, a longer-
acting benzodiazepine such as chlordiazepoxide is preferred. 
 As in the treatment of all chronic drug abuse problems, heavy reli-
ance is placed on psychosocial approaches to alcohol addiction. This 
is perhaps even more important for the alcoholic patient because of 
the ubiquitous presence of alcohol in many social contexts. 
 The pharmacologic treatment of alcohol addiction is limited, 
although several compounds, with different goals, have been used. 
Therapy is discussed in  Chapter 23 . 
 KETAMINE & PHENCYCLIDINE (PCP) 
 Ketamine and PCP were developed as general anesthetics (see 
 Chapter 25 ), but only ketamine is still used for this application. Both 
drugs, along with others, are now classified as “club drugs” and sold 
576    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
under names such as “angel dust,” “Hog,” and “Special K.” They owe 
their effects to their use-dependent, noncompetitive antagonism of 
the NMDA receptor. The effects of these substances became appar-
ent when patients undergoing surgery reported unpleasant vivid 
dreams and hallucinations after anesthesia. Ketamine and PCP are 
white crystalline powders in their pure forms, but on the street they 
are also sold as liquids, capsules, or pills, which can be snorted, 
ingested, injected, or smoked. Psychedelic effects last for about 1 hour 
and also include increased blood pressure, impaired memory func-
tion, and visual alterations. At high doses, unpleasant out-of-body 
and near-death experiences have been reported. Although ketamine 
and phencyclidine do not cause dependence and addiction (relative 
risk = 1), chronic exposure, particularly to PCP, may lead to long-
lasting psychosis closely resembling schizophrenia, which may persist 
beyond drug exposure. 
 INHALANTS 
 Inhalant abuse is defined as recreational exposure to chemical 
vapors, such as  nitrates, ketones, and aliphatic and aromatic 
 hydrocarbons . These substances are present in a variety of house-
hold and industrial products that are inhaled by “sniffing,” “huff-
ing,” or “bagging.” Sniffing refers to inhalation from an open 
container, huffing to the soaking of a cloth in the volatile sub-
stance before inhalation, and bagging to breathing in and out of a 
paper or plastic bag filled with fumes. It is common for novices to 
start with sniffing and progress to huffing and bagging as addic-
tion develops. Inhalant abuse is particularly prevalent in children 
and young adults. 
 The exact mechanism of action of most volatile substances 
remains unknown. Altered function of ionotropic receptors and 
ion channels throughout the central nervous system has been 
demonstrated for a few. Nitrous oxide, for example, binds to 
NMDA receptors and fuel additives enhance GABA A receptor 
function. Most inhalants produce euphoria; increased excitability 
of the VTA has been documented for toluene and may underlie its 
addiction risk. Other substances, such as amyl nitrite (“poppers”), 
primarily produce smooth muscle relaxation and enhance erec-
tion, but are not addictive. With chronic exposure to the aromatic 
hydrocarbons (eg, benzene, toluene), toxic effects can be observed 
in many organs, including white matter lesions in the central 
nervous system. Management of overdose remains supportive. 
 DRUGS THAT BIND TO 
TRANSPORTERS OF BIOGENIC 
AMINES  
 Cocaine 
 The prevalence of cocaine abuse has increased greatly over the last 
decade and now represents a major public health problem world-
wide. Cocaine is highly addictive (relative risk = 5), and its use is 
associated with a number of complications. 
 Cocaine is an alkaloid found in the leaves of  Erythroxylon coca, 
a shrub indigenous to the Andes. For more than 100 years, it has 
been extracted and used in clinical medicine, mainly as a local 
anesthetic and to dilate pupils in ophthalmology. Sigmund Freud 
famously proposed its use to treat depression and alcohol depen-
dence, but addiction quickly brought an end to this idea. 
 Cocaine hydrochloride is a water-soluble salt that can be 
injected or absorbed by any mucosal membrane (eg, nasal snort-
ing). When heated in an alkaline solution, it is transformed into 
the free base, “crack cocaine,” which can then be smoked. Inhaled 
crack cocaine is rapidly absorbed in the lungs and penetrates 
swiftly into the brain, producing an almost instantaneous “rush.” 
 In the peripheral nervous system, cocaine inhibits voltage-gated 
sodium channels, thus blocking initiation and conduction of action 
potentials (see  Chapter 26 ). This effect, however, seems responsible 
for neither the acute rewarding nor the addictive effects. In the 
central nervous system, cocaine blocks the uptake of dopamine, 
noradrenaline, and serotonin through their respective transporters. 
The block of the  dopamine transporter (DAT), by increasing 
dopamine concentrations in the nucleus accumbens, has been 
implicated in the rewarding effects of cocaine ( Figure 32–5 ). In 
fact, the rewarding effects of cocaine are abolished in mice with a 
cocaine-insensitive DAT. The activation of the sympathetic ner-
vous system results mainly from blockage of the norepinephrine 
transporter (NET) and leads to an acute increase in arterial pres-
sure, tachycardia, and often, ventricular arrhythmias. Users typi-
cally lose their appetite, are hyperactive, and sleep little. Cocaine 
exposure increases the risk for intracranial hemorrhage, ischemic 
stroke, myocardial infarction, and seizures. Cocaine overdose may 
lead to hyperthermia, coma, and death. 
 Susceptible individuals may become dependent and addicted 
after only a few exposures to cocaine. Although a withdrawal syn-
drome is reported, it is not as strong as that observed with opioids. 
Tolerance may develop, but in some users a reverse tolerance is 
observed; that is, they become sensitized to small doses of cocaine. 
This behavioral sensitization is in part context-dependent. 
Cravings are very strong and underline the very high addiction 
liability of cocaine. To date, no specific antagonist is available, and 
the management of intoxication remains supportive. Developing 
a pharmacologic treatment for cocaine addiction is a top priority. 
 AMPHETAMINES 
 Amphetamines are a group of synthetic, indirect-acting sympath-
omimetic drugs that cause the release of endogenous biogenic 
amines, such as dopamine and noradrenaline (see Chapters 6 and 
9). Amphetamine, methamphetamine, and their many derivatives 
exert their effects by reversing the action of biogenic amine trans-
porters at the plasma membrane. Amphetamines are substrates of 
these transporters and are taken up into the cell ( Figure 32–5 ). 
Once in the cell, amphetamines interfere with the vesicular mono-
amine transporter (VMAT; see Figure 6–4), depleting synaptic 
vesicles of their neurotransmitter content. As a consequence, levels 
of dopamine (or other transmitter amine) in the cytoplasm 
increase and quickly become sufficient to cause release into the 
CHAPTER 32 Drugs of Abuse    577
synapse by reversal of the plasma membrane DAT. Normal vesicu-
lar release of dopamine consequently decreases (because synaptic 
vesicles contain less transmitter), whereas nonvesicular release 
increases. Similar mechanisms apply for other biogenic amines 
(serotonin and norepinephrine). 
 Together with GHB and ecstasy, amphetamines are often 
referred to as “club drugs,” because they are increasingly popular 
in the club scene. They are often produced in small clandestine 
laboratories, which makes their precise chemical identification 
difficult. They differ from ecstasy chiefly in the context of use: 
intravenous administration and “hard core” addiction is far more 
common with amphetamines, especially methamphetamine. In 
general, amphetamines lead to elevated catecholamine levels that 
increase arousal and reduce sleep, whereas the effects on the dop-
amine system mediate euphoria but may also cause abnormal 
movements and precipitate psychotic episodes. Effects on sero-
tonin transmission may play a role in the hallucinogenic and 
anorexigenic functions as well as in the hyperthermia often caused 
by amphetamines. 
 Unlike many other abused drugs, amphetamines are neuro-
toxic. The exact mechanism is not known, but neurotoxicity 
depends on the NMDA receptor and affects mainly serotonin and 
dopamine neurons. 
 Amphetamines are typically taken initially in pill form by abusers, 
but can also be smoked or injected. Heavy users often progress rap-
idly to intravenous administration. Within hours after oral ingestion, 
amphetamines increase alertness and cause euphoria, agitation, and 
confusion. Bruxism (tooth grinding) and skin flushing may occur. 
Effects on heart rate may be minimal with some compounds (eg, 
methamphetamine), but with increasing dosage these agents often 
lead to tachycardia and dysrhythmias. Hypertensive crisis and 
vasoconstriction may lead to stroke. Spread of HIV and hepatitis 
infection in inner cities has been closely associated with needle 
sharing by intravenous users of methamphetamine. 
 With chronic use, amphetamine tolerance may develop, lead-
ing to dose escalation. Withdrawal consists of dysphoria, drowsi-
ness (in some cases, insomnia), and general irritability. 
 ECSTASY (MDMA) 
 Ecstasy is the name of a class of drugs that includes a large variety 
of derivatives of the amphetamine-related compound methylene-
dioxymethamphetamine (MDMA). MDMA was originally used 
in some forms of psychotherapy, but no medically useful effects 
were documented. This is perhaps not surprising, because the 
main effect of ecstasy appears to be to foster feelings of intimacy 
and empathy without impairing intellectual capacities. Today, 
MDMA and its many derivatives are often produced in small 
quantities in ad hoc laboratories and distributed at parties or 
“raves,” where it is taken orally. Ecstasy therefore is the prototypi-
cal designer drug and, as such, is increasingly popular. 
 Similar to the amphetamines, MDMA causes release of bio-
genic amines by reversing the action of their respective transport-
ers. It has a preferential affinity for the  serotonin transporter 
(SERT) and therefore most strongly increases the extracellular 
concentration of serotonin. This release is so profound that there 
is a marked intracellular depletion for 24 hours after a single dose. 
With repetitive administration, serotonin depletion may become 
permanent, which has triggered a debate on its neurotoxicity. 
Although direct proof from animal models for neurotoxicity 
remains weak, several studies report long-term cognitive impair-
ment in heavy users of MDMA. 
 In contrast, there is a wide consensus that MDMA has several 
acute toxic effects, in particular hyperthermia, which along with 
dehydration (eg, caused by an all-night dance party) may be fatal. 
Other complications include serotonin syndrome (mental status 
change, autonomic hyperactivity, and neuromuscular abnormalities, 
DAT
DA
DA
Cocaine
DAT
DAT
DA
DA
DA
Amph
Amph
VMAT
Cocaine
Amphetamine
 FIGURE 32–5  Mechanism of action of cocaine and amphetamine on synaptic terminal of dopamine (DA) neurons.  Left: Cocaine inhibits 
the dopamine transporter (DAT), decreasing DA clearance from the synaptic cleft and causing an increase in extracellular DA concentration. 
 Right: Since amphetamine (Amph) is a substrate of the DAT, it competitively inhibits DA transport. In addition, once in the cell, amphetamine 
interferes with the vesicular monoamine transporter (VMAT) and impedes the filling of synaptic vesicles. As a consequence, vesicles are 
depleted and cytoplasmic DA increases. This leads to a reversal of DAT direction, strongly increasing nonvesicular release of DA, and further 
increasing extracellular DA concentrations. 
578    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
see  Chapter 16 ) and seizures. Following warnings about the dangers 
of MDMA, some users have attempted to compensate for hyper-
thermia by drinking excessive amounts of water, causing water 
intoxication involving severe hyponatremia, seizures, and even death. 
 Withdrawal is marked by a mood “offset” characterized by 
depression lasting up to several weeks. There have also been 
reports of increased aggression during periods of abstinence in 
chronic MDMA users. 
 Taken together, the evidence for irreversible damage to the 
brain, although not completely convincing, implies that even 
occasional recreational use of MDMA cannot be considered safe. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DEPENDENCE & ADDICTION 
 To date no single pharmacologic treatment (even in combination 
with behavioral interventions) efficiently eliminates addiction. 
This is not to say that addiction is irreversible. Pharmacologic 
interventions may in fact be useful at all stages of the disease. This 
is particularly true in the case of a massive overdose, in which 
reversal of drug action may be a life-saving measure. However, in 
this regard, FDA-approved antagonists are available only for opi-
oids and benzodiazepines. 
 Pharmacologic interventions may also aim to alleviate the with-
drawal syndrome, particularly after opioid exposure. On the 
assumption that withdrawal reflects at least in part a hyperactivity 
of central adrenergic systems, the α 2 -adrenoceptor agonist cloni-
dine (also used as a centrally active antihypertensive drug, see 
 Chapter 11 ) has been used with some success to attenuate with-
drawal. Today, most clinicians prefer to manage opioid withdrawal 
by very slowly tapering the administration of long-acting opioids. 
 Another widely accepted treatment is substitution of a legally 
available agonist that acts at the same receptor as the abused drug. 
This approach has been approved for opioids and nicotine. For 
example, heroin addicts may receive methadone to replace heroin; 
smoking addicts may receive nicotine continuously via a transdermal 
patch system to replace smoking. In general, a rapid-acting sub-
stance is replaced with one that acts or is absorbed more slowly. 
Substitution treatments are largely justified by the benefits of 
reducing associated health risks, the reduction of drug-associated 
crime, and better social integration. Although dependence per-
sists, it may be possible, with the support of behavioral interven-
tions, to motivate drug users to gradually reduce the dose and 
become abstinent. 
 The biggest challenge is the treatment of addiction itself. 
Several approaches have been proposed, but all remain experimen-
tal. One approach is to pharmacologically reduce cravings. The 
μ-opioid receptor antagonist and partial agonist  naltrexone is 
FDA-approved for this indication in opioid and alcohol addiction. 
Its effect is modest and may involve a modulation of endogenous 
opioid systems. 
 Clinical trials are currently being conducted with a number of 
drugs, including the high-affinity GABA B -receptor agonist 
 baclofen, and initial results have shown a significant reduction of 
craving. This effect may be mediated by the inhibition of the 
dopamine neurons of the VTA, which is possible at baclofen con-
centrations obtained by oral administration because of its very 
high affinity for the GABA B receptor. 
 Rimonabant is an inverse agonist of the CB 1 receptor that 
behaves like an antagonist of cannabinoids. It was developed for 
smoking cessation and to facilitate weight loss. Because of fre-
quent adverse effects—most notably severe depression carrying a 
substantial risk of suicide—this drug is no longer used clinically. 
It was initially used in conjunction with diet and exercise for 
patients with a body mass index above 30 kg/m 2 (27 kg/m 2 if 
associated risk factors, such as type 2 diabetes or dyslipidemia are 
present). Although a recent large-scale study confirmed that 
rimonabant is effective for smoking cessation and the prevention 
of weight gain in smokers who quit, this indication has never been 
approved. Although the cellular mechanism of rimonabant 
remains to be elucidated, data in rodents convincingly demon-
strate that this compound can reduce self-administration in naive 
as well as drug-experienced animals. 
CHAPTER 32 Drugs of Abuse    579
SUMMARY Drugs Used to Treat Dependence and Addiction
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Application
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
OPIOID RECEPTOR ANTAGONIST
 • Naloxone
Nonselective antagonist of 
opioid receptors
Reverses the acute effects 
of opioids; can 
precipitate severe 
abstinence syndrome
Opioid overdose
Effect much shorter than morphine 
(1–2 h); therefore several injections 
required
 • Naltrexone
Antagonist of opioid 
receptors
Blocks effects of illicit 
opioids
Treatment of alcoholism
Half-life ∼ 4 h
SYNTHETIC OPIOID
 • Methadone
Slow-acting agonist of 
μ-opioid receptor
Acute effects similar to 
morphine (see text)
Substitution therapy for 
opioid addicts
High oral bioavailability • half-life highly 
variable among individuals (range 
4–130 h) • Toxicity: Respiratory 
depression, constipation, miosis, 
tolerance, dependence, and withdrawal 
symptoms
PARTIAL l-OPIOID RECEPTOR AGONIST
 • Buprenorphine
Partial agonist at μ-opioid 
receptors
Attenuates acute effects of 
morphine
Oral substitution therapy for 
opioid addicts
Long half-life (40 h) • formulated 
together with naloxone to avoid illicit IV 
injections
NICOTINIC RECEPTOR PARTIAL AGONIST
 • Varenicline
Partial agonist of nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor of 
the α4β2-type
Occludes “rewarding” 
effects of smoking • height-
ened awareness of colors
Smoking cessation
Toxicity: Nausea and vomiting, 
convulsions, psychiatric changes
 • Cytisine: Natural analog (extracted from laburnum flowers) of varenicline
BENZODIAZEPINES
 • Oxazepam, others
Positive modulators of the 
GABAA receptors, increase 
frequency of channel 
opening
Enhances GABAergic 
synaptic transmission; 
attenuates withdrawal 
symptoms (tremor, 
hallucinations, anxiety) in 
alcoholics • prevents 
withdrawal seizures
Delirium tremens
Half-life 4–15 h • pharmacokinetics not 
affected by decreased liver function
 • Lorazepam: Alternate to oxazepam with similar properties
N-METHYL-D-ASPARTATE (NMDA)
 • Acamprosate
Antagonist of NMDA 
glutamate receptors
May interfere with forms of 
synaptic plasticity that 
depend on NMDA 
receptors
Treatment of alcoholism • 
effective only in combination 
with counseling
Allergic reactions, arrhythmia, and 
low or high blood pressure, 
headaches, insomnia, and impotence 
• hallucinations, particularly in elderly 
patients
CANNABINOID RECEPTOR AGONIST
 • Rimonabant
CB1 receptor inverse 
agonist
Decreases neurotransmitter 
release at GABAergic and 
glutamatergic synapses
Approved in Europe from 
2006 to 2008 to treat obesity, 
then withdrawn because of 
major side effects • Smoking 
cessation has never been 
approved, but remains an 
off-label indication
Major depression, including increased 
risk of suicide
580    SECTION V Drugs That Act in the Central Nervous System
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 Goldman D, Oroszi G, Ducci F: The genetics of addictions: Uncovering the genes. 
Nat Rev Genet 2005;6:521. 
 Hyman SE: Addiction: A disease of learning and memory. Am J Psychiatry 
2005;162:1414. 
 Lüscher C, Malenka RC: Synaptic plasticity in addiction: From molecular changes 
to circuit remodeling. Neuron 2011;69:650. 
 Lüscher C, Ungless MA: The mechanistic classification of addictive drugs. PLoS 
Med 2006;3:e437. 
 Redish AD, Jensen S, Johnson A: A unified framework for addiction: Vulnerabilities 
in the decision process. Behav Brain Sci 2008;31:461. 
 Pharmacology of Drugs of Abuse 
 Benowitz NL: Nicotine addiction. N Engl J Med 2010;362:2295. 
 Mansvelder HD, Keath JR, McGehee DS: Synaptic mechanisms underlie nicotine-
induced excitability of brain reward areas. Neuron 2002;33:905. 
 Maskos U et al: Nicotine reinforcement and cognition restored by targeted expres-
sion of nicotinic receptors. Nature 2005;436:103. 
 Morton J: Ecstasy: Pharmacology and neurotoxicity. Curr Opin Pharmacol 
2005;5:79. 
 Nichols DE: Hallucinogens. Pharmacol Ther 2004;101:131. 
 Snead OC, Gibson KM: Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid. N Engl J Med 
2005;352:2721. 
Sulzer D: How addictive drugs disrupt presynaptic dopamine transmission. 
Neuron 2011; 69:628.
 Sulzer D et al: Mechanisms of neurotransmitter release by amphetamines: A 
review. Prog Neurobiol 2005;75:406. 
 Tan KR et al: Neural basis for addictive properties of benzodiazepines. Nature 
2010;463:769. 
 C A S E  S T U D Y   A N S W E R 
 The patient was diagnosed with pathologic gambling sec-
ondary to the dopamine agonist prescription. Compulsive 
behavior including gambling, binge eating, or hypersexu-
ality is observed in about 15% of patients who receive 
dopamine agonist treatment. The condition is not related 
to Parkinson’s disease, as compulsive behaviors also occur 
in patients with restless legs syndrome who are treated 
with the same medication. The incidence with levodopa is 
lower, and compulsive behavior is sometimes preceded by 
dose escalation. 
581
 A 65-year-old woman with a long-standing history of poorly con-
trolled type 2 diabetes mellitus presents with increasing numbness 
and paresthesias in her extremities, generalized weakness, a sore 
tongue, and gastrointestinal discomfort. Physical examination 
reveals a frail-looking, pale woman with diminished vibration 
sensation, diminished spinal reflexes, and a positive Babinski sign. 
Examination of her oral cavity reveals Hunter’s glossitis, in which 
the tongue appears deep red in color and abnormally smooth and 
shiny due to atrophy of the lingual papillae. Laboratory testing 
reveals a macrocytic anemia based on a hematocrit of 30% 
(normal for women, 37–48%), a hemoglobin concentration of 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
9.4 g/dL (normal for elderly women, 11.7–13.8 g/dL), an ery-
throcyte mean cell volume (MCV) of 123 fL (normal, 84–99 fL), 
an erythrocyte mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) of 
34% (normal, 31–36%), and a low reticulocyte count. Further 
laboratory testing reveals a normal serum folate concentration and 
a serum vitamin B 12 (cobalamin) concentration of 98 pg/mL 
(normal, 250–1100 pg/mL). Results of a Schilling test indicate a 
diagnosis of pernicious anemia. Once megaloblastic anemia was 
identified, why was it important to measure serum concentrations 
of both folic acid and cobalamin? Should this patient be treated 
with oral or parenteral vitamin B 12 ?  
33
SECTION VI DRUGS USED TO TREAT DISEASES OF THE 
BLOOD, INFLAMMATION, & GOUT
  Agents Used in Anemias; 
Hematopoietic Growth 
Factors 
 Susan B. Masters, PhD  
 Hematopoiesis, the production from undifferentiated stem cells of 
circulating erythrocytes, platelets, and leukocytes, is a remarkable 
process that produces over 200 billion new blood cells per day in the 
normal person and even greater numbers of cells in people with 
conditions that cause loss or destruction of blood cells. The 
hematopoietic machinery resides primarily in the bone marrow in 
adults and requires a constant supply of three essential 
 nutrients— iron, vitamin B 12 , and  folic acid —as well as the pres-
ence of  hematopoietic growth factors, proteins that regulate the 
proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells. Inadequate 
supplies of either the essential nutrients or the growth factors 
result in deficiency of functional blood cells.  Anemia, a deficiency in 
582    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
oxygen-carrying erythrocytes, is the most common and several forms 
are easily treated. Sickle cell anemia, a condition resulting from a 
genetic alteration in the hemoglobin molecule, is common but is not 
easily treated. It is discussed in the Box: Sickle Cell Disease and 
Hydroxyurea.  Thrombocytopenia and  neutropenia are not rare, 
and some forms are amenable to drug therapy. In this chapter, we 
first consider treatment of anemia due to deficiency of iron, vitamin 
B 12 , or folic acid and then turn to the medical use of hematopoietic 
growth factors to combat anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutrope-
nia, and to support stem cell transplantation.  
 ■ AGENTS USED IN ANEMIAS 
 IRON 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Iron deficiency is the most common cause of chronic anemia. 
Like other forms of chronic anemia, iron deficiency anemia leads 
to pallor, fatigue, dizziness, exertional dyspnea, and other gener-
alized symptoms of tissue hypoxia. The cardiovascular adaptations 
to chronic anemia—tachycardia, increased cardiac output, vaso-
dilation—can worsen the condition of patients with underlying 
cardiovascular disease. 
 Sickle cell disease is an important genetic cause of hemolytic 
anemia, a form of anemia due to increased erythrocyte destruc-
tion, instead of the reduced mature erythrocyte production seen 
with iron, folic acid, and vitamin B 12 deficiency. Patients with 
sickle cell disease are homozygous for the aberrant β-hemoglobin 
S (HbS) allele or heterozygous for HbS and a second mutated 
β-hemoglobin gene such as hemoglobin C ( HbC ) or β-thal-
assemia. Sickle cell disease has an increased prevalence in 
 individuals of African descent because the heterozygous trait 
confers resistance to malaria. 
 In the majority of patients with sickle cell disease, anemia is 
not the major problem; the anemia is generally well compen-
sated even though such individuals have a chronically low hema-
tocrit (20–30%), a low serum hemoglobin level (7–10 g/dL), and 
an elevated reticulocyte count. Instead, the primary problem is 
that deoxygenated HbS chains form polymeric structures that 
dramatically change erythrocyte shape, reduce deformability, 
and elicit membrane permeability changes that further promote 
hemoglobin polymerization. Abnormal erythrocytes aggregate 
in the microvasculature—where oxygen tension is low and 
hemoglobin is deoxygenated—and cause veno-occlusive dam-
age. The clinical manifestations of sickle cell disease reflect organ 
damage by veno-occlusive events. In the musculoskeletal 
system, this results in characteristic, extremely painful bone and 
joint pain. In the cerebral vascular system, it causes ischemic 
stroke. Damage to the spleen increases the risk of infection, 
particularly by encapsulated bacteria such as  Streptococcus 
pneumoniae . In the pulmonary system, there is an increased risk 
of infection and, in adults, an increase in embolism and pulmo-
nary hypertension. Supportive treatment includes analgesics, 
antibiotics, pneumococcal vaccination, and blood transfu-
sions. In addition, the cancer chemotherapeutic drug hydroxyu-
rea (hydroxycarbamide) reduces veno-occlusive events. It is 
approved in the United States for treatment of adults with recur-
rent sickle cell crises and approved in Europe in adults and chil-
dren with recurrent vaso-occlusive events. As an anticancer drug 
used in the treatment of chronic and acute myelogenous leuke-
mia, hydroxyurea inhibits ribonucleotide reductase and thereby 
depletes deoxynucleoside triphosphate and arrests cells in the S 
phase of the cell cycle (see  Chapter 54 ). In the treatment of sickle 
cell disease, hydroxyurea acts through poorly defined pathways 
to increase the production of fetal hemoglobin γ (HbF), which 
interferes with the polymerization of HbS. Clinical trials have 
shown that hydroxyurea decreases painful crises in adults and 
children with severe sickle cell disease. Its adverse effects include 
hematopoietic depression, gastrointestinal effects, and terato-
genicity in pregnant women. 
 Sickle Cell Disease and Hydroxyurea 
 Iron forms the nucleus of the iron-porphyrin heme ring, which 
together with globin chains forms hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 
reversibly binds oxygen and provides the critical mechanism for 
oxygen delivery from the lungs to other tissues. In the absence of 
adequate iron, small erythrocytes with insufficient hemoglobin 
are formed, giving rise to  microcytic hypochromic anemia. 
Iron-containing heme is also an essential component of myo-
globin, cytochromes, and other proteins with diverse biologic 
functions. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Free inorganic iron is extremely toxic, but iron is required for 
essential proteins such as hemoglobin; therefore, evolution has 
provided an elaborate system for regulating iron absorption, trans-
port, and storage ( Figure 33–1 ). The system uses specialized trans-
port, storage, ferrireductase, and ferroxidase proteins whose 
concentrations are controlled by the body’s demand for hemoglo-
bin synthesis and adequate iron stores ( Table 33–1 ). A peptide 
called hepcidin, produced primarily by liver cells, serves as a key 
central regulator of the system. Nearly all of the iron used to sup-
port hematopoiesis is reclaimed from catalysis of the hemoglobin 
in senescent or damaged erythrocytes. Normally, only a small 
amount of iron is lost from the body each day, so dietary 
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    583
requirements are small and easily fulfilled by the iron available in 
a wide variety of foods. However, in special populations with 
either increased iron requirements (eg, growing children, pregnant 
women) or increased losses of iron (eg, menstruating women), 
iron requirements can exceed normal dietary supplies and iron 
deficiency can develop. 
 A. Absorption 
 The average American diet contains 10–15 mg of elemental iron 
daily. A normal individual absorbs 5–10% of this iron, or about 
0.5–1 mg daily. Iron is absorbed in the duodenum and proximal 
jejunum, although the more distal small intestine can absorb iron 
if necessary. Iron absorption increases in response to low iron stores 
or increased iron requirements. Total iron absorption increases to 
1–2 mg/d in menstruating women and may be as high as 3–4 mg/d 
in pregnant women. 
TfR
Hgb
F
HCP1
Fe3+
Fe2+
DMT1
Fe2+
Gut
lumen
Blood
Intestinal epithelial cells
Tf
F
F
Hgb
Spleen, other tissues
macrophage
TfR
Hepatocyte
Bone marrow
erythrocyte precursor
Senescent
RBC
Hgb
Hgb
1
2
4
3
TfR
TfR
FR
FP
FP
AF
AF
AF
FP
FO
 FIGURE 33–1  Absorption, transport, and storage of iron. Intestinal epithelial cells actively absorb inorganic iron via the divalent metal 
transporter 1 (DMT1) and heme iron via the heme carrier protein 1 (HCP1). Iron that is absorbed or released from absorbed heme iron in the 
intestine ( 1 ) is actively transported into the blood by ferroportin (FP) or complexed with apoferritin (AF) and stored as ferritin (F). In the blood, 
iron is transported by transferrin (Tf) to erythroid precursors in the bone marrow for synthesis of hemoglobin (Hgb) ( 2 ) or to hepatocytes for 
storage as ferritin ( 3 ). The transferrin-iron complex binds to transferrin receptors (TfR) in erythroid precursors and hepatocytes and is internal-
ized. After release of iron, the TfR-Tf complex is recycled to the plasma membrane and Tf is released. Macrophages that phagocytize senescent 
erythrocytes (RBC) reclaim the iron from the RBC hemoglobin and either export it or store it as ferritin ( 4 ). Hepatocytes use several mechanisms 
to take up iron and store the iron as ferritin. FO, ferroxidase. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Trevor A et al: Pharmacology Examination &  Board 
Review , 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2010.) 
TABLE 33–1 Iron distribution in normal adults.1
Iron Content (mg)
Men
Women
Hemoglobin
3050
1700
Myoglobin
430
300
Enzymes
10
8
Transport (transferrin)
8
6
Storage (ferritin and other forms)
750
300
Total
4248
2314
1Values are based on data from various sources and assume that normal men weigh 
80 kg and have a hemoglobin level of 16 g/dL and that normal women weigh 55 kg 
and have a hemoglobin level of 14 g/dL.
Adapted, with permission, from Brown EB: Iron deficiency anemia. In: Wyngaarden JB, 
Smith LH (editors). Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 16th ed. Saunders, 1982.
584    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 Iron is available in a wide variety of foods but is especially 
abundant in meat. The iron in meat protein can be efficiently 
absorbed, because heme iron in meat hemoglobin and myoglobin 
can be absorbed intact without first having to be dissociated into 
elemental iron ( Figure 33–1 ). Iron in other foods, especially veg-
etables and grains, is often tightly bound to organic compounds 
and is much less available for absorption. Nonheme iron in foods 
and iron in inorganic iron salts and complexes must be reduced by 
a ferrireductase to ferrous iron (Fe 2+ ) before it can be absorbed by 
intestinal mucosal cells. 
 Iron crosses the luminal membrane of the intestinal mucosal 
cell by two mechanisms: active transport of ferrous iron by the 
divalent metal transporter DMT1, and absorption of iron com-
plexed with heme ( Figure 33–1 ). Together with iron split from 
absorbed heme, the newly absorbed iron can be actively trans-
ported into the blood across the basolateral membrane by a trans-
porter known as ferroportin and oxidized to ferric iron (Fe 3+ ) by 
the ferroxidase hephaestin. The liver-derived hepcidin inhibits 
intestinal cell iron release by binding to ferroportin and triggering 
its internalization and destruction. Excess iron is stored in intesti-
nal epithelial cells as ferritin, a water-soluble complex consisting of 
a core of ferric hydroxide covered by a shell of a specialized storage 
protein called apoferritin. 
 B. Transport 
 Iron is transported in the plasma bound to  transferrin, a β-globulin 
that can bind two molecules of ferric iron ( Figure 33–1 ). The 
transferrin-iron complex enters maturing erythroid cells by a 
specific receptor mechanism. Transferrin receptors—integral 
membrane glycoproteins present in large numbers on proliferating 
erythroid cells—bind and internalize the transferrin-iron complex 
through the process of receptor-mediated endocytosis. In endo-
somes, the ferric iron is released, reduced to ferrous iron, and 
transported by DMT1 into the cytoplasm, where it is funneled 
into hemoglobin synthesis or stored as ferritin. The transferrin-
transferrin receptor complex is recycled to the cell membrane, 
where the transferrin dissociates and returns to the plasma. This 
process provides an efficient mechanism for supplying the iron 
required by developing red blood cells. 
 Increased erythropoiesis is associated with an increase in the 
number of transferrin receptors on developing erythroid cells and 
a reduction in hepatic hepcidin release. Iron store depletion and 
iron deficiency anemia are associated with an increased concentra-
tion of serum transferrin. 
 C. Storage 
 In addition to the storage of iron in intestinal mucosal cells, iron 
is also stored, primarily as ferritin, in macrophages in the liver, 
spleen, and bone, and in parenchymal liver cells ( Figure 33–1 ). 
The mobilization of iron from macrophages and hepatocytes is 
primarily controlled by hepcidin regulation of ferroportin activity. 
Low hepcidin concentrations result in iron release from these 
storage sites; high hepcidin concentrations inhibit iron release. 
Ferritin is detectable in serum. Since the ferritin present in serum 
is in equilibrium with storage ferritin in reticuloendothelial 
tissues, the serum ferritin level can be used to estimate total body 
iron stores. 
 D. Elimination 
 There is no mechanism for excretion of iron. Small amounts 
are lost in the feces by exfoliation of intestinal mucosal cells, and 
trace amounts are excreted in bile, urine, and sweat. These losses 
account for no more than 1 mg of iron per day. Because the body’s 
ability to excrete iron is so limited, regulation of iron balance must 
be achieved by changing intestinal absorption and storage of iron, 
in response to the body’s needs. As noted below, impaired regula-
tion of iron absorption leads to serious pathology. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 A. Indications for the Use of Iron 
 The only clinical indication for the use of iron preparations is the 
treatment or prevention of iron deficiency anemia. This manifests 
as a hypochromic, microcytic anemia in which the erythrocyte 
mean cell volume (MCV) and the mean cell hemoglobin concen-
tration are low ( Table 33–2 ). Iron deficiency is commonly seen in 
populations with increased iron requirements. These include 
infants, especially premature infants; children during rapid growth 
periods; pregnant and lactating women; and patients with chronic 
kidney disease who lose erythrocytes at a relatively high rate 
during hemodialysis and also form them at a high rate as a result 
of treatment with the erythrocyte growth factor erythropoietin 
(see below). Inadequate iron absorption can also cause iron defi-
ciency. This is seen after gastrectomy and in patients with severe 
small bowel disease that results in generalized malabsorption. 
 The most common cause of iron deficiency in adults is blood 
loss. Menstruating women lose about 30 mg of iron with each 
TABLE 33–2  Distinguishing features of the 
nutritional anemias. 
Nutritional 
Deficiency
Type of Anemia
Laboratory 
Abnormalities
Iron
Microcytic, hypochromic 
with MCV <80 fL and 
MCHC <30%
Low SI <30 mcg/dL with 
increased TIBC, resulting 
in a % transferrin satura-
tion (SI/TIBC) of <10%; 
low serum ferritin level 
(<20 mcg/L)
Folic acid
Vitamin B12
Macrocytic, normochro-
mic with MCV >100 fL 
and normal or elevated 
MCHC
Low serum folic acid 
(<4 ng/mL)
Low serum cobalamin 
(<150 pmol/L) accompa-
nied by increased serum 
homocysteine 
(>13 μmol/L), and 
increased serum 
(>0.4 μmol/L) and urine 
(>3.6 μmol/mol creati-
nine) methylmalonic acid
MCV, mean cell volume; MCHC, mean cell hemoglobin concentration; SI, serum iron; 
TIBC, transferrin iron-binding capacity.
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    585
menstrual period; women with heavy menstrual bleeding may 
lose much more. Thus, many premenopausal women have low 
iron stores or even iron deficiency. In men and postmenopausal 
women, the most common site of blood loss is the gastrointestinal 
tract. Patients with unexplained iron deficiency anemia should be 
evaluated for occult gastrointestinal bleeding. 
 B. Treatment 
 Iron deficiency anemia is treated with oral or parenteral iron 
preparations. Oral iron corrects the anemia just as rapidly and 
completely as parenteral iron in most cases if iron absorption from 
the gastrointestinal tract is normal. An exception is the high 
requirement for iron of patients with advanced chronic kidney 
disease who are undergoing hemodialysis and treatment with 
erythropoietin; for these patients, parenteral iron administration is 
preferred. 
 1. Oral iron therapy— A wide variety of oral iron prepara-
tions is available. Because ferrous iron is most efficiently 
absorbed, ferrous salts should be used. Ferrous sulfate, ferrous 
gluconate, and ferrous fumarate are all effective and inexpensive 
and are recommended for the treatment of most patients. 
 Different iron salts provide different amounts of elemental 
iron, as shown in  Table 33–3 . In an iron-deficient individual, 
about 50–100 mg of iron can be incorporated into hemoglobin 
daily, and about 25% of oral iron given as ferrous salt can be 
absorbed. Therefore, 200–400 mg of elemental iron should be 
given daily to correct iron deficiency most rapidly. Patients 
unable to tolerate such large doses of iron can be given lower daily 
doses of iron, which results in slower but still complete correction 
of iron deficiency. Treatment with oral iron should be continued 
for 3–6 months after correction of the cause of the iron loss. This 
corrects the anemia and replenishes iron stores. 
 Common adverse effects of oral iron therapy include nausea, 
epigastric discomfort, abdominal cramps, constipation, and diar-
rhea. These effects are usually dose-related and can often be over-
come by lowering the daily dose of iron or by taking the tablets 
immediately after or with meals. Some patients have less severe 
gastrointestinal adverse effects with one iron salt than another and 
benefit from changing preparations. Patients taking oral iron 
develop black stools; this has no clinical significance in itself 
but may obscure the diagnosis of continued gastrointestinal 
blood loss. 
 2. Parenteral iron therapy— Parenteral therapy should be 
reserved for patients with documented iron deficiency who are 
unable to tolerate or absorb oral iron and for patients with 
extensive chronic anemia who cannot be maintained with oral 
iron alone. This includes patients with advanced chronic renal 
disease requiring hemodialysis and treatment with erythropoie-
tin, various postgastrectomy conditions and previous small bowel 
resection, inflammatory bowel disease involving the proximal 
small bowel, and malabsorption syndromes. 
 The challenge with parenteral iron therapy is that parenteral 
administration of inorganic free ferric iron produces serious dose-
dependent toxicity, which severely limits the dose that can be 
administered. However, when the ferric iron is formulated as a 
colloid containing particles with a core of iron oxyhydroxide sur-
rounded by a core of carbohydrate, bioactive iron is released slowly 
from the stable colloid particles. In the United States, the three 
available forms of parenteral iron are  iron dextran, sodium ferric 
gluconate complex, and  iron sucrose . 
 Iron dextran is a stable complex of ferric oxyhydroxide and 
dextran polymers containing 50 mg of elemental iron per millili-
ter of solution. It can be given by deep intramuscular injection or 
by intravenous infusion, although the intravenous route is used 
most commonly. Intravenous administration eliminates the local 
pain and tissue staining that often occur with the intramuscular 
route and allows delivery of the entire dose of iron necessary to 
correct the iron deficiency at one time. Adverse effects of intrave-
nous iron dextran therapy include headache, light-headedness, 
fever, arthralgias, nausea and vomiting, back pain, flushing, urti-
caria, bronchospasm, and, rarely, anaphylaxis and death. Owing 
to the risk of a hypersensitivity reaction, a small test dose of iron 
dextran should always be given before full intramuscular or intra-
venous doses are given. Patients with a strong history of allergy 
and patients who have previously received parenteral iron dextran 
are more likely to have hypersensitivity reactions after treatment 
with parenteral iron dextran. The iron dextran formulations 
used clinically are distinguishable as high-molecular-weight and 
low-molecular-weight forms. In the United States, the InFeD 
preparation is a low-molecular-weight form while DexFerrum is 
a high-molecular-weight form. Clinical data—primarily from 
observational studies—indicate that the risk of anaphylaxis is 
largely associated with high-molecular-weight formulations. 
 Sodium ferric gluconate complex and  iron-sucrose complex 
are alternative parenteral iron preparations. These agents can be 
given only by the intravenous route. They appear to be less likely 
than high-molecular-weight iron dextran to cause hypersensitivity 
reactions. 
 For patients treated chronically with parenteral iron, it is 
important to monitor iron storage levels to avoid the serious toxic-
ity associated with iron overload. Unlike oral iron therapy, which 
is subject to the regulatory mechanism provided by the intestinal 
uptake system, parenteral administration—which bypasses this 
TABLE 33–3  Some commonly used oral iron 
preparations.
Preparation
Tablet 
Size
Elemental 
Iron per 
Tablet
Usual Adult 
Dosage for 
Treatment of 
Iron Deficiency 
(Tablets per Day)
Ferrous sulfate, 
hydrated
325 mg
65 mg
2–4
Ferrous sulfate, 
desiccated
200 mg
65 mg
2–4
Ferrous gluconate
325 mg
36 mg
3–4
Ferrous fumarate
325 mg
106 mg
2–3
586    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
regulatory system—can deliver more iron than can be safely stored. 
Iron stores can be estimated on the basis of serum concentrations 
of ferritin and the transferrin saturation, which is the ratio of the 
total serum iron concentration to the total iron-binding capacity 
(TIBC). 
 Clinical Toxicity 
 A. Acute Iron Toxicity 
 Acute iron toxicity is seen almost exclusively in young children 
who accidentally ingest iron tablets. As few as 10 tablets of any of 
the commonly available oral iron preparations can be lethal in 
young children. Adult patients taking oral iron preparations 
should be instructed to store tablets in child-proof containers out 
of the reach of children. Children who are poisoned with oral iron 
experience necrotizing gastroenteritis, with vomiting, abdominal 
pain, and bloody diarrhea followed by shock, lethargy, and dysp-
nea. Subsequently, improvement is often noted, but this may be 
followed by severe metabolic acidosis, coma, and death. Urgent 
treatment is necessary.  Whole bowel irrigation (see  Chapter 58 ) 
should be performed to flush out unabsorbed pills.  Deferoxamine, 
a potent iron-chelating compound, can be given intravenously to 
bind iron that has already been absorbed and to promote its excre-
tion in urine and feces. Activated charcoal, a highly effective 
adsorbent for most toxins,  does not bind iron and thus is ineffec-
tive. Appropriate supportive therapy for gastrointestinal bleeding, 
metabolic acidosis, and shock must also be provided. 
 B. Chronic Iron Toxicity 
 Chronic iron toxicity (iron overload), also known as  hemochro-
matosis, results when excess iron is deposited in the heart, liver, 
pancreas, and other organs. It can lead to organ failure and death. 
It most commonly occurs in patients with inherited hemochroma-
tosis, a disorder characterized by excessive iron absorption, and in 
patients who receive many red cell transfusions over a long period 
of time (eg, individuals with β-thalassemia). 
 Chronic iron overload in the absence of anemia is most effi-
ciently treated by intermittent phlebotomy. One unit of blood can 
be removed every week or so until all of the excess iron is removed. 
Iron chelation therapy using parenteral  deferoxamine or the oral 
iron chelator  deferasirox (see  Chapter 57 ) is less efficient as well 
as more complicated, expensive, and hazardous, but it may be the 
only option for iron overload that cannot be managed by phle-
botomy, as is the case for many individuals with inherited and 
acquired causes of refractory anemia such as thalassemia major, 
sickle cell anemia, aplastic anemia, etc. 
 VITAMIN B 12 
 Vitamin B 12 (cobalamin) serves as a cofactor for several essential 
biochemical reactions in humans. Deficiency of vitamin B 12 leads 
to megaloblastic anemia ( Table 33–2 ), gastrointestinal symptoms, 
and neurologic abnormalities. Although deficiency of vitamin B 12 
due to an inadequate supply in the diet is unusual, deficiency of 
B 12 in adults—especially older adults—due to inadequate absorption 
of dietary vitamin B 12 is a relatively common and easily treated 
disorder. 
 Chemistry 
 Vitamin B 12 consists of a porphyrin-like ring with a central cobalt 
atom attached to a nucleotide. Various organic groups may be 
covalently bound to the cobalt atom, forming different cobalamins. 
Deoxyadenosylcobalamin and methylcobalamin are the active 
forms of the vitamin in humans.  Cyanocobalamin and  hydroxo-
cobalamin (both available for therapeutic use) and other cobala-
mins found in food sources are converted to the active forms. The 
ultimate source of vitamin B 12 is from microbial synthesis; the 
vitamin is not synthesized by animals or plants. The chief dietary 
source of vitamin B 12 is microbially derived vitamin B 12 in meat 
(especially liver), eggs, and dairy products. Vitamin B 12 is some-
times called  extrinsic factor to differentiate it from  intrinsic 
factor, a protein secreted by the stomach that is required for 
gastrointestinal uptake of dietary vitamin B 12 . 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The average American diet contains 5–30 mcg of vitamin B 12 
daily, 1–5 mcg of which is usually absorbed. The vitamin is avidly 
stored, primarily in the liver, with an average adult having a total 
vitamin B 12 storage pool of 3000–5000 mcg. Only trace amounts 
of vitamin B 12 are normally lost in urine and stool. Because the 
normal daily requirements of vitamin B 12 are only about 2 mcg, it 
would take about 5 years for all of the stored vitamin B 12 to be 
exhausted and for megaloblastic anemia to develop if B 12 absorp-
tion were stopped. Vitamin B 12 is absorbed after it complexes with 
intrinsic factor, a glycoprotein secreted by the parietal cells of the 
gastric mucosa. Intrinsic factor combines with the vitamin B 12 
that is liberated from dietary sources in the stomach and duode-
num, and the intrinsic factor-vitamin B 12 complex is subsequently 
absorbed in the distal ileum by a highly selective receptor-
mediated transport system. Vitamin B 12 deficiency in humans 
most often results from malabsorption of vitamin B 12 due either 
to lack of intrinsic factor or to loss or malfunction of the absorp-
tive mechanism in the distal ileum. Nutritional deficiency is rare 
but may be seen in strict vegetarians after many years without 
meat, eggs, or dairy products. 
 Once absorbed, vitamin B 12 is transported to the various cells of 
the body bound to a family of specialized glycoproteins, transcoba-
lamin I, II, and III. Excess vitamin B 12 is stored in the liver. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Two essential enzymatic reactions in humans require vitamin B 12 
( Figure 33–2 ). In one, methylcobalamin serves as an intermediate 
in the transfer of a methyl group from N  5 -methyltetrahydrofolate 
to homocysteine, forming methionine ( Figure 33–2 A;  Figure 33–3 , 
section 1). Without vitamin B 12 , conversion of the major dietary 
and storage folate—N 5 -methyltetrahydrofolate—to tetrahydrofolate, 
the precursor of folate cofactors, cannot occur. As a result, vitamin 
B 12  deficiency leads to deficiency of folate cofactors necessary for 
several biochemical reactions involving the transfer of one-carbon 
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    587
groups. In particular, the depletion of tetrahydrofolate prevents 
synthesis of adequate supplies of the deoxythymidylate (dTMP) 
and purines required for DNA synthesis in rapidly dividing cells, 
as shown in  Figure 33–3 , section 2. The accumulation of folate as 
 N 5 -methyltetrahydrofolate and the associated depletion of tetra-
hydrofolate cofactors in vitamin B 12 deficiency have been referred 
to as the “methylfolate trap.” This is the biochemical step whereby 
vitamin B 12 and folic acid metabolism are linked, and it explains 
why the megaloblastic anemia of vitamin B 12 deficiency can be 
partially corrected by ingestion of large amounts of folic acid. 
Folic acid can be reduced to dihydrofolate by the enzyme dihydro-
folate reductase ( Figure 33–3 , section 3) and thereby serve as a 
source of the tetrahydrofolate required for synthesis of the purines 
and dTMP required for DNA synthesis. 
 Vitamin B 12 deficiency causes the accumulation of homo-
cysteine due to reduced formation of methylcobalamin, which is 
required for the conversion of homocysteine to methionine 
( Figure 33–3 , section 1). The increase in serum homocysteine can 
be used to help establish a diagnosis of vitamin B 12 deficiency 
( Table 33–2 ). There is evidence from observational studies that 
A.  Methyl transfer
Cobalamin
Methylcobalamin
N5-Methyltetrahydrofolate 
Tetrahydrofolate
Methionine
Homocysteine
B.  Isomerization of L-Methylmalonyl-CoA
L-Methylmalonyl-CoA
Methylmalonyl-CoA
mutase
Succinyl-CoA
Deoxyadenosylcobalamin
N5, N10 -Methylenetetrahydrofolate
Thymidylate synthase
Serine transhydroxymethylase
Folate reductase
Dihydrofolate
Glycine
Serine
dUMP
dTMP
DNA synthesis
Folic acid
Purines
Tetrahydrofolate
Methylcobalamin
Cobalamin
Methionine
Homocysteine
N5-Methyltetrahydrofolate
Dietary folates
Folate reductase
2
3
1
 FIGURE 33–2  Enzymatic reactions that use vitamin B 12 . See text 
for details. 
 FIGURE 33–3  Enzymatic reactions that use folates.  Section 1 shows the vitamin B 12 -dependent reaction that allows most dietary folates to 
enter the tetrahydrofolate cofactor pool and becomes the “folate trap” in vitamin B 12 deficiency.  Section 2 shows the dTMP cycle.  Section 3 
shows the pathway by which folic acid enters the tetrahydrofolate cofactor pool. Double arrows indicate pathways with more than one interme-
diate step. 
588    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
elevated serum homocysteine increases the risk of atherosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease. However, randomized clinical trials have not 
shown a definitive reduction in cardiovascular events (myocardial 
infarction, stroke) in patients receiving vitamin supplementation 
that lowers serum homocysteine. 
 The other reaction that requires vitamin B 12 is isomerization of 
methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA by the enzyme methylmalonyl-
CoA mutase ( Figure 33–2 B). In vitamin B 12 deficiency, this con-
version cannot take place and the substrate, methylmalonyl-CoA, 
as well as methylmalonic acid accumulate. The increase in serum 
and urine concentrations of methylmalonic acid can be used to 
support a diagnosis of vitamin B 12 deficiency ( Table 33–2 ). In the 
past, it was thought that abnormal accumulation of methylmalonyl-
CoA causes the neurologic manifestations of vitamin B 12 defi-
ciency. However, newer evidence instead implicates the disruption 
of the methionine synthesis pathway as the cause of neurologic 
problems. Whatever the biochemical explanation for neurologic 
damage, the important point is that administration of folic acid in 
the setting of vitamin B 12 deficiency will not prevent neurologic 
manifestations even though it will largely correct the anemia 
caused by the vitamin B 12 deficiency. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 Vitamin B 12 is used to treat or prevent deficiency. The most char-
acteristic clinical manifestation of vitamin B 12 deficiency is mega-
loblastic, macrocytic anemia ( Table 33–2 ), often with associated 
mild or moderate leukopenia or thrombocytopenia (or both), and 
a characteristic hypercellular bone marrow with an accumulation 
of megaloblastic erythroid and other precursor cells. The neuro-
logic syndrome associated with vitamin B 12 deficiency usually 
begins with paresthesias in peripheral nerves and weakness and 
progresses to spasticity, ataxia, and other central nervous system 
dysfunctions. Correction of vitamin B 12 deficiency arrests the 
progression of neurologic disease, but it may not fully reverse 
neurologic symptoms that have been present for several months. 
Although most patients with neurologic abnormalities caused by 
vitamin B 12 deficiency have megaloblastic anemia when first seen, 
occasional patients have few if any hematologic abnormalities. 
 Once a diagnosis of megaloblastic anemia is made, it must be 
determined whether vitamin B 12 or folic acid deficiency is the 
cause. (Other causes of megaloblastic anemia are very rare.) This 
can usually be accomplished by measuring serum levels of the 
vitamins. The Schilling test, which measures absorption and uri-
nary excretion of radioactively labeled vitamin B 12 , can be used to 
further define the mechanism of vitamin B 12 malabsorption when 
this is found to be the cause of the megaloblastic anemia. 
 The most common causes of vitamin B 12 deficiency are perni-
cious anemia, partial or total gastrectomy, and conditions that affect 
the distal ileum, such as malabsorption syndromes, inflammatory 
bowel disease, or small bowel resection. 
 Pernicious anemia results from defective secretion of intrinsic 
factor by the gastric mucosal cells. Patients with pernicious anemia 
have gastric atrophy and fail to secrete intrinsic factor (as well as 
hydrochloric acid). The Schilling test shows diminished absorp-
tion of radioactively labeled vitamin B 12 , which is corrected when 
intrinsic factor is administered with radioactive B 12 , since the 
vitamin can then be normally absorbed. 
 Vitamin B 12 deficiency also occurs when the region of the dis-
tal ileum that absorbs the vitamin B 12 -intrinsic factor complex is 
damaged, as when the ileum is involved with inflammatory bowel 
disease or when the ileum is surgically resected. In these situations, 
radioactively labeled vitamin B 12 is not absorbed in the Schilling 
test, even when intrinsic factor is added. Rare cases of vitamin B 12 
deficiency in children have been found to be secondary to con-
genital deficiency of intrinsic factor or to defects of the receptor 
sites for vitamin B 12 -intrinsic factor complex located in the distal 
ileum. 
 Almost all cases of vitamin B 12 deficiency are caused by malab-
sorption of the vitamin; therefore, parenteral injections of vitamin 
B 12 are required for therapy. For patients with potentially revers-
ible diseases, the underlying disease should be treated after initial 
treatment with parenteral vitamin B 12 . Most patients, however, do 
not have curable deficiency syndromes and require lifelong treat-
ment with vitamin B 12 . 
 Vitamin B 12 for parenteral injection is available as cyanocoba-
lamin or hydroxocobalamin. Hydroxocobalamin is preferred 
because it is more highly protein-bound and therefore remains 
longer in the circulation. Initial therapy should consist of 100–
1000 mcg of vitamin B 12 intramuscularly daily or every other day 
for 1–2 weeks to replenish body stores. Maintenance therapy con-
sists of 100–1000 mcg intramuscularly once a month for life. If 
neurologic abnormalities are present, maintenance therapy injec-
tions should be given every 1–2 weeks for 6 months before switch-
ing to monthly injections. Oral vitamin B 12 -intrinsic factor 
mixtures and liver extracts should not be used to treat vitamin B 12 
deficiency; however, oral doses of 1000 mcg of vitamin B 12 daily 
are usually sufficient to treat patients with pernicious anemia who 
refuse or cannot tolerate the injections. After pernicious anemia is 
in remission following parenteral vitamin B 12 therapy, the vitamin 
can be administered intranasally as a spray or gel. 
 FOLIC ACID 
 Reduced forms of folic acid are required for essential biochemical 
reactions that provide precursors for the synthesis of amino acids, 
purines, and DNA. Folate deficiency is relatively common, even 
though the deficiency is easily corrected by administration of folic 
acid. The consequences of folate deficiency go beyond the prob-
lem of anemia because folate deficiency is implicated as a cause of 
congenital malformations in newborns and may play a role in 
vascular disease (see Box: Folic Acid Supplementation: A Public 
Health Dilemma). 
 Chemistry 
 Folic acid (pteroylglutamic acid) is composed of a heterocycle 
(pteridine),  p -aminobenzoic acid, and glutamic acid ( Figure 33–4 ). 
Various numbers of glutamic acid moieties are attached to the 
pteroyl portion of the molecule, resulting in monoglutamates, 
triglutamates, or polyglutamates. Folic acid undergoes reduction, 
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    589
catalyzed by the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase (“folate reductase”), 
to give dihydrofolic acid ( Figure 33–3 , section 3). Tetrahydrofolate 
is subsequently transformed to folate cofactors possessing one-car-
bon units attached to the 5-nitrogen, to the 10-nitrogen, or to both 
positions ( Figure 33–3 ). Folate cofactors are interconvertible by 
various enzymatic reactions and serve the important biochemical 
function of donating one-carbon units at various levels of oxida-
tion. In most of these, tetrahydrofolate is regenerated and becomes 
available for reutilization. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The average American diet contains 500–700 mcg of folates daily, 
50–200 mcg of which is usually absorbed, depending on metabolic 
requirements. Pregnant women may absorb as much as 300–400 mcg 
of folic acid daily. Various forms of folic acid are present in a 
wide variety of plant and animal tissues; the richest sources are 
yeast, liver, kidney, and green vegetables. Normally, 5–20 mg of 
folates is stored in the liver and other tissues. Folates are excreted in 
the urine and stool and are also destroyed by catabolism, so serum 
levels fall within a few days when intake is diminished. Because 
body stores of folates are relatively low and daily requirements high, 
folic acid deficiency and megaloblastic anemia can develop within 
1–6 months after the intake of folic acid stops, depending on the 
patient’s nutritional status and the rate of folate utilization. 
 Unaltered folic acid is readily and completely absorbed in the 
proximal jejunum. Dietary folates, however, consist primarily of 
 Starting in January 1998, all products made from enriched grains in 
the United States and Canada were required to be supplemented 
with folic acid. These rulings were issued to reduce the incidence of 
congenital neural tube defects (NTDs). Epidemiologic studies show 
a strong correlation between maternal folic acid deficiency and the 
incidence of NTDs such as spina bifida and anencephaly. The 
requirement for folic acid supplementation is a public health mea-
sure aimed at the significant number of women who do not receive 
prenatal care and are not aware of the importance of adequate folic 
acid ingestion for preventing birth defects in their infants. 
Observational studies from countries that supplement grains with 
folic acid have found that supplementation is associated with a 
significant (20–25%) reduction in NTD rates. Observational studies 
also suggest that rates of other types of congenital anomalies 
(heart and orofacial) have fallen since supplementation began. 
 There may be an added benefit for adults. N  5 -Methyltetrahy-
drofolate is required for the conversion of homocysteine to 
methionine ( Figure 33–2 ;  Figure 33–3 , reaction 1). Impaired syn-
thesis of  N 5 -methyltetrahydrofolate results in elevated serum 
concentrations of homocysteine. Data from several sources sug-
gest a positive correlation between elevated serum homocysteine 
and occlusive vascular diseases such as ischemic heart disease 
and stroke. Clinical data suggest that the folate supplementation 
program has improved the folate status and reduced the preva-
lence of hyperhomocysteinemia in a population of middle-aged 
and older adults who did not use vitamin supplements. There is 
also evidence that adequate folic acid protects against several 
cancers, including colorectal, breast, and cervical cancer. 
 Although the potential benefits of supplemental folic acid 
during pregnancy are compelling, the decision to require folic 
acid in grains was controversial. As described in the text, inges-
tion of folic acid can partially or totally correct the anemia 
caused by vitamin B 12 deficiency. However, folic acid supple-
mentation does not prevent the potentially irreversible neuro-
logic damage caused by vitamin B 12 deficiency. People with 
pernicious anemia and other forms of vitamin B 12 deficiency are 
usually identified because of signs and symptoms of anemia, 
which typically occur before neurologic symptoms. Some oppo-
nents of folic acid supplementation were concerned that 
increased folic acid intake in the general population would mask 
vitamin B 12 deficiency and increase the prevalence of neurologic 
disease in the elderly population. To put this in perspective, 
approximately 4000 pregnancies, including 2500 live births, in 
the United States each year are affected by NTDs. In contrast, it 
is estimated that over 10% of the elderly population in the 
United States, or several million people, are at risk for the neu-
ropsychiatric complications of vitamin B 12 deficiency. In acknowl-
edgment of this controversy, the FDA kept its requirements for 
folic acid supplementation at a somewhat low level. There is also 
concern based on observational and prospective clinical trials 
that high folic acid levels can increase the risk of some diseases, 
such as colorectal cancer, for which folic acid may exhibit a bell-
shaped curve. Further research is needed to more accurately 
define the optimal level of folic acid fortification in food and 
recommendations for folic acid supplementation in different 
populations and age groups. 
 Folic Acid Supplementation: A Public Health Dilemma 
Pteridine
derivative
N
H2N
N
OH
N
N
CH2
HN
PABA
Polyglutamation
site
C
O
H
N
CH
CH2
CH2
COO–
COO–
Glutamic acid
Folic acid
Pteroyl (pteroic acid)
 FIGURE 33–4  The structure of folic acid. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Murray RK et al:  Harper’s Biochemistry, 24th ed. McGraw-Hill, 1996.) 
590    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
polyglutamate forms of N 5 -methyltetrahydrofolate. Before absorp-
tion, all but one of the glutamyl residues of the polyglutamates 
must be hydrolyzed by the enzyme α-1-glutamyl transferase 
(“conjugase”) within the brush border of the intestinal mucosa. 
The monoglutamate N   5 -methyltetrahydrofolate is subsequently 
transported into the bloodstream by both active and passive 
transport and is then widely distributed throughout the body. 
Inside cells,  N 5 -methyltetrahydrofolate is converted to tetrahydro-
folate by the demethylation reaction that requires vitamin B 12 
( Figure 33–3 , section 1). 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Tetrahydrofolate cofactors participate in one-carbon transfer reac-
tions. As described earlier in the discussion of vitamin B 12 , one of 
these essential reactions produces the dTMP needed for DNA synthe-
sis. In this reaction, the enzyme thymidylate synthase catalyzes the 
transfer of the one-carbon unit of N  5 ,  N 10 -methylenetetrahydrofolate 
to deoxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) to form dTMP 
( Figure 33–3 , section 2). Unlike all the other enzymatic reactions 
that use folate cofactors, in this reaction the cofactor is oxidized to 
dihydrofolate, and for each mole of dTMP produced, 1 mole of 
tetrahydrofolate is consumed. In rapidly proliferating tissues, con-
siderable amounts of tetrahydrofolate are consumed in this reac-
tion, and continued DNA synthesis requires continued regeneration 
of tetrahydrofolate by reduction of dihydrofolate, catalyzed by the 
enzyme dihydrofolate reductase. The tetrahydrofolate thus pro-
duced can then reform the cofactor  N 5 , N 10 -methylenetetrahydro-
folate by the action of serine transhydroxymethylase and thus allow 
for the continued synthesis of dTMP. The combined catalytic 
activities of dTMP synthase, dihydrofolate reductase, and serine 
transhydroxymethylase are referred to as the dTMP  synthesis cycle . 
Enzymes in the dTMP cycle are the targets of two anticancer drugs; 
methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate reductase, and a metabolite of 
5-fluorouracil inhibits thymidylate synthase (see  Chapter 54 ). 
 Cofactors of tetrahydrofolate participate in several other 
essential reactions. N  5 -Methylenetetrahydrofolate is required for 
the vitamin B 12 -dependent reaction that generates methionine 
from homocysteine ( Figure 33–2 A;  Figure 33–3 , section 1). In 
addition, tetrahydrofolate cofactors donate one-carbon units dur-
ing the de novo synthesis of essential purines. In these reactions, 
tetrahydrofolate is regenerated and can reenter the tetrahydrofo-
late cofactor pool. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 Folate deficiency results in a megaloblastic anemia that is micro-
scopically indistinguishable from the anemia caused by vitamin 
B 12 deficiency (see above). However, folate deficiency does not 
cause the characteristic neurologic syndrome seen in vitamin B 12 
deficiency. In patients with megaloblastic anemia, folate status is 
assessed with assays for serum folate or for red blood cell folate. 
Red blood cell folate levels are often of greater diagnostic value 
than serum levels, because serum folate levels tend to be labile and 
do not necessarily reflect tissue levels. 
 Folic acid deficiency is often caused by inadequate dietary intake 
of folates. Patients with alcohol dependence and patients with liver 
disease can develop folic acid deficiency because of poor diet and 
diminished hepatic storage of folates. Pregnant women and patients 
with hemolytic anemia have increased folate requirements and may 
become folic acid-deficient, especially if their diets are marginal. 
Evidence implicates maternal folic acid deficiency in the occurrence 
of fetal neural tube defects. (See Box: Folic Acid Supplementation: 
A Public Health Dilemma.) Patients with malabsorption syn-
dromes also frequently develop folic acid deficiency. Patients who 
require renal dialysis are at risk of folic acid deficiency because 
folates are removed from the plasma during the dialysis procedure. 
 Folic acid deficiency can be caused by drugs. Methotrexate 
and, to a lesser extent, trimethoprim and pyrimethamine, inhibit 
dihydrofolate reductase and may result in a deficiency of folate 
cofactors and ultimately in megaloblastic anemia. Long-term 
therapy with phenytoin can also cause folate deficiency, but only 
rarely causes megaloblastic anemia. 
 Parenteral administration of folic acid is rarely necessary, since 
oral folic acid is well absorbed even in patients with malabsorption 
syndromes. A dose of 1 mg folic acid orally daily is sufficient to 
reverse megaloblastic anemia, restore normal serum folate levels, 
and replenish body stores of folates in almost all patients. Therapy 
should be continued until the underlying cause of the deficiency 
is removed or corrected. Therapy may be required indefinitely for 
patients with malabsorption or dietary inadequacy. Folic acid 
supplementation to prevent folic acid deficiency should be consid-
ered in high-risk patients, including pregnant women, patients 
with alcohol dependence, hemolytic anemia, liver disease, or cer-
tain skin diseases, and patients on renal dialysis. 
 ■ HEMATOPOIETIC GROWTH 
FACTORS 
 The hematopoietic growth factors are glycoprotein hormones that 
regulate the proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic 
progenitor cells in the bone marrow. The first growth factors to be 
identified were called colony-stimulating factors because they 
could stimulate the growth of colonies of various bone marrow 
progenitor cells in vitro. Many of these growth factors have been 
purified and cloned, and their effects on hematopoiesis have been 
extensively studied. Quantities of these growth factors sufficient 
for clinical use are produced by recombinant DNA technology. 
 Of the known hematopoietic growth factors,  erythropoietin 
(epoetin alfa and epoetin beta), granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor (G-CSF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and  interleukin-11 (IL-11) are 
currently in clinical use.  Romiplostim is a novel biologic agent 
that activates the thrombopoietin receptor. 
 The hematopoietic growth factors and drugs that mimic their 
action have complex effects on the function of a wide variety of 
cell types, including nonhematologic cells. Their usefulness in 
other areas of medicine, particularly as potential anticancer and 
anti-inflammatory drugs, is being investigated. 
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    591
 ERYTHROPOIETIN 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Erythropoietin, a 34–39 kDa glycoprotein, was the first human 
hematopoietic growth factor to be isolated. It was originally puri-
fied from the urine of patients with severe anemia. Recombinant 
human erythropoietin (rHuEPO, epoetin alfa) is produced in a 
mammalian cell expression system. After intravenous administra-
tion, erythropoietin has a serum half-life of 4–13 hours in patients 
with chronic renal failure. It is not cleared by dialysis. It is mea-
sured in international units (IU). Darbepoetin alfa is a modified 
form of erythropoietin that is more heavily glycosylated as a result 
of changes in amino acids. Darbepoetin alfa has a twofold to 
threefold longer half-life than epoetin alfa. Methoxy polyethylene 
glycol-epoetin beta is an isoform of erythropoietin covalently 
attached to a long polyethylene glycol polymer. This long-lived 
recombinant product is administered as a single intravenous or 
subcutaneous dose at 2-week or monthly intervals, whereas epoe-
tin alfa is generally administered three times a week and darbepo-
etin is administered weekly. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Erythropoietin stimulates erythroid proliferation and differentia-
tion by interacting with erythropoietin receptors on red cell pro-
genitors. The erythropoietin receptor is a member of the JAK/
STAT superfamily of cytokine receptors that use protein phospho-
rylation and transcription factor activation to regulate cellular 
function (see  Chapter 2 ). Erythropoietin also induces release of 
reticulocytes from the bone marrow. Endogenous erythropoietin 
is primarily produced in the kidney. In response to tissue hypoxia, 
more erythropoietin is produced through an increased rate of 
transcription of the erythropoietin gene. This results in correction 
of the anemia, provided that the bone marrow response is not 
impaired by red cell nutritional deficiency (especially iron defi-
ciency), primary bone marrow disorders (see below), or bone 
marrow suppression from drugs or chronic diseases. 
 Normally, an inverse relationship exists between the hematocrit 
or hemoglobin level and the serum erythropoietin level. Nonanemic 
individuals have serum erythropoietin levels of less than 20 IU/L. 
As the hematocrit and hemoglobin levels fall and anemia becomes 
more severe, the serum erythropoietin level rises exponentially. 
Patients with moderately severe anemia usually have erythropoie-
tin levels in the 100–500 IU/L range, and patients with severe 
anemia may have levels of thousands of IU/L. The most important 
exception to this inverse relationship is in the anemia of chronic 
renal failure. In patients with renal disease, erythropoietin levels 
are usually low because the kidneys cannot produce the growth 
factor. These are the patients most likely to respond to treatment 
with exogenous erythropoietin. In most primary bone marrow 
disorders (aplastic anemia, leukemias, myeloproliferative and 
myelodysplastic disorders, etc) and most nutritional and second-
ary anemias, endogenous erythropoietin levels are high, so there is 
less likelihood of a response to exogenous erythropoietin (but 
see below). 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 The availability of erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) has 
had a significant positive impact for patients with several types 
of anemia ( Table 33–4 ). The ESAs consistently improve the 
TABLE 33–4  Clinical uses of hematopoietic growth factors and agents that mimic their actions.
Hematopoietic Growth Factor
Clinical Condition Being 
Treated or Prevented
Recipients
Erythropoietin, darbepoetin alfa
Anemia
Patients with chronic renal failure
HIV-infected patients treated with zidovudine
Cancer patients treated with myelosuppressive cancer 
chemotherapy
Patients scheduled to undergo elective, noncardiac, 
nonvascular surgery
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF; 
filgrastim) and granulocyte-macrophage 
 colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF; 
 sargramostim)
Neutropenia
Cancer patients treated with myelosuppressive cancer 
chemotherapy
Patients with severe chronic neutropenia
Patients recovering from bone marrow transplantation
Stem cell or bone marrow 
transplantation
Patients with nonmyeloid malignancies or other conditions 
being treated with stem cell or bone marrow transplantation
Mobilization of peripheral blood 
progenitor cells (PBPCs)
Donors of stem cells for allogeneic or autologous 
transplantation 
Interleukin-11 (IL-11, oprelvekin)
Thrombocytopenia
Patients with nonmyeloid malignancies who receive 
myelosuppressive cancer chemotherapy
Romiplostim
Thrombocytopenia
Patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
592    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
hematocrit and hemoglobin level, often eliminate the need for 
transfusions, and reliably improve quality of life indices. The 
ESAs are used routinely in patients with anemia secondary to 
chronic kidney disease. In patients treated with an ESA, an 
increase in reticulocyte count is usually observed in about 
10 days and an increase in hematocrit and hemoglobin levels in 
2–6 weeks. Dosages of ESAs are adjusted to maintain a target 
hemoglobin up to, but not exceeding, 10–12 g/dL. To support 
the increased erythropoiesis, nearly all patients with chronic 
kidney disease require oral or parenteral iron supplementation. 
Folate supplementation may also be necessary in some patients. 
 In selected patients, erythropoietin is also used to reduce the 
need for red blood cell transfusion in patients undergoing myelo-
suppressive cancer chemotherapy who have a hemoglobin level 
<10 mg/dL, and for selected patients with low-risk myelodysplas-
tic syndromes and anemia requiring red blood cell transfusion. 
Patients who have disproportionately low serum erythropoietin 
levels for their degree of anemia are most likely to respond to treat-
ment. Patients with endogenous erythropoietin levels of less than 
100 IU/L have the best chance of response, although patients with 
erythropoietin levels between 100 and 500 IU/L respond occa-
sionally. Methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta should not be 
used for treatment of anemia caused by cancer chemotherapy 
because a clinical trial found significantly more deaths among 
patients receiving this form of erythropoietin. 
 Erythropoietin has been used successfully to offset the anemia 
produced by zidovudine treatment in patients with HIV infection 
and in the treatment of the anemia of prematurity. It can also be 
used to reduce the need for transfusion in high-risk patients 
undergoing elective, non-cardiac, nonvascular surgery. 
 Erythropoietin is one of the drugs banned by the International 
Olympic Committee. The use of erythropoietin by athletes is 
based on their hope that increased red blood cell concentration will 
increase oxygen delivery to muscles and improve performance. 
 Toxicity 
 The most common adverse effects of erythropoietin are hyperten-
sion and thrombotic complications. In March 2007, the FDA 
issued a warning that patients with chronic renal failure or cancer 
whose serum hemoglobin is raised to more than 12 g/dL with an 
ESA face a greater risk of a thrombotic event or, in patients with 
advanced head and neck cancers, faster tumor growth. The warn-
ing was primarily based on clinical trial data from patients with 
chronic kidney disease indicating an increased rate of mortality 
and cardiovascular events (stroke, myocardial infarction, worsen-
ing congestive heart failure, and hypertension) in patients dosed 
with an ESA to a target hemoglobin level of 12–16 g/dL or dosed 
to maintain a normal hematocrit (42%) versus a lower target 
hematocrit of 30%. In addition, a meta-analysis of 51 placebo-
controlled trials of ESAs in cancer patients reported an increased 
rate of all-cause mortality and venous thrombosis in those 
receiving an ESA. Based on the accumulated evidence, it is 
recommended that the hemoglobin level not exceed 12 g/dL in 
patients with chronic kidney disease receiving an ESA, and that 
ESAs be used conservatively in cancer patients (eg, when 
hemoglobin levels are <10 g/dL) and with the lowest dose needed 
to avoid transfusion. 
 Allergic reactions to ESAs have been infrequent. There have 
been a small number of cases of pure red cell aplasia (PRCA) 
accompanied by neutralizing antibodies to erythropoietin. PRCA 
was most commonly seen in dialysis patients treated subcutane-
ously for a long period with a particular form of epoetin alfa 
(Eprex with a polysorbate 80 stabilizer rather than human serum 
albumin) that is not available in the United States. After regula-
tory agencies required that Eprex be administered intravenously 
rather than subcutaneously, the rate of ESA-associated PRCA 
diminished. However, rare cases have still been seen with all ESAs 
administered subcutaneously for long periods to patients with 
chronic kidney disease. 
 MYELOID GROWTH FACTORS 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 G-CSF and  GM-CSF, the two myeloid growth factors currently 
available for clinical use, were originally purified from cultured 
human cell lines ( Table 33–4 ). Recombinant human G-CSF 
( rHuG-CSF; filgrastim ) is produced in a bacterial expression 
system. It is a nonglycosylated peptide of 175 amino acids, with a 
molecular weight of 18 kDa. Recombinant human GM-CSF 
( rHuGM-CSF; sargramostim ) is produced in a yeast expression 
system. It is a partially glycosylated peptide of 127 amino acids, 
with three molecular species with molecular weights of 15,500; 
15,800; and 19,500. These preparations have serum half-lives 
of 2–7 hours after intravenous or subcutaneous administration. 
 Pegfilgrastim, a covalent conjugation product of filgrastim and a 
form of polyethylene glycol, has a much longer serum half-life 
than recombinant G-CSF, and it can be injected once per myelo-
suppressive chemotherapy cycle instead of daily for several days. 
 Lenograstim , used widely in Europe, is a glycosylated form of 
recombinant G-CSF. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The myeloid growth factors stimulate proliferation and differen-
tiation by interacting with specific receptors found on myeloid 
progenitor cells. Like the erythropoietin receptor, these receptors 
are members of the JAK/STAT superfamily (see  Chapter 2 ). 
G-CSF stimulates proliferation and differentiation of progenitors 
already committed to the neutrophil lineage. It also activates the 
phagocytic activity of mature neutrophils and prolongs their 
survival in the circulation. G-CSF also has a remarkable ability to 
mobilize hematopoietic stem cells, ie, to increase their concentra-
tion in peripheral blood. This biologic effect underlies a major 
advance in transplantation—the use of  peripheral blood stem 
cells (PBSCs) rather than bone marrow stem cells for autologous 
and allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (see below). 
 GM-CSF has broader biologic actions than G-CSF. It is a 
multipotential hematopoietic growth factor that stimulates prolif-
eration and differentiation of early and late granulocytic progeni-
tor cells as well as erythroid and megakaryocyte progenitors. 
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    593
Like G-CSF, GM-CSF also stimulates the function of mature 
neutrophils. GM-CSF acts together with interleukin-2 to stimu-
late T-cell proliferation and appears to be a locally active factor at 
the site of inflammation. GM-CSF mobilizes peripheral blood 
stem cells, but it is significantly less efficacious and more toxic 
than G-CSF in this regard. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 A. Cancer Chemotherapy-Induced Neutropenia 
 Neutropenia is a common adverse effect of the cytotoxic drugs 
used to treat cancer and increases the risk of serious infection in 
patients receiving chemotherapy. Unlike the treatment of anemia 
and thrombocytopenia, transfusion of neutropenic patients with 
granulocytes collected from donors is performed rarely and with 
limited success. The introduction of G-CSF in 1991 represented 
a milestone in the treatment of chemotherapy-induced neutrope-
nia. This growth factor dramatically accelerates the rate of neutro-
phil recovery after dose-intensive myelosuppressive chemotherapy 
( Figure 33–5 ). It reduces the duration of neutropenia and usually 
raises the nadir count, the lowest neutrophil count seen following 
a cycle of chemotherapy. 
 The ability of G-CSF to increase neutrophil counts after 
myelosuppressive chemotherapy is nearly universal, but its impact 
on clinical outcomes is more variable. Many, but not all, clinical 
trials and meta-analyses have shown that G-CSF reduces episodes 
of febrile neutropenia, requirements for broad-spectrum antibiot-
ics, infections, and days of hospitalization. Clinical trials have not 
shown improved survival in cancer patients treated with G-CSF. 
Clinical guidelines for the use of G-CSF after cytotoxic chemo-
therapy recommend reserving G-CSF for patients at high risk for 
febrile neutropenia based on age, medical history, and disease 
characteristics; patients receiving dose-intensive chemotherapy 
regimens that carry a greater than 40% risk of causing febrile 
neutropenia; patients with a prior episode of febrile neutropenia 
after cytotoxic chemotherapy; patients at high risk for febrile neutro-
penia; and patients who are unlikely to survive an episode of febrile 
neutropenia. Pegfilgrastim is an alternative to G-CSF for prevention 
of chemotherapy-induced febrile neutropenia. Pegfilgrastim can be 
administered once per chemotherapy cycle, and it may shorten the 
period of severe neutropenia slightly more than G-CSF. 
 Like G-CSF and pegfilgrastim, GM-CSF also reduces the dura-
tion of neutropenia after cytotoxic chemotherapy. It has been more 
difficult to show that GM-CSF reduces the incidence of febrile 
neutropenia, probably because GM-CSF itself can induce fever. In 
the treatment of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia, G-CSF, 
5 mcg/kg/d, or GM-CSF, 250 mcg/m 2 /d, is usually started within 
24–72 hours after completing chemotherapy and is continued 
until the absolute neutrophil count is greater than 10,000 cells/μL. 
Pegfilgrastim is given as a single dose of 6 mg. 
 The utility and safety of the myeloid growth factors in the 
postchemotherapy supportive care of patients with acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML) have been the subject of a number of clinical trials. 
Because leukemic cells arise from progenitors whose proliferation 
and differentiation are normally regulated by hematopoietic growth 
factors, including GM-CSF and G-CSF, there was concern that 
myeloid growth factors could stimulate leukemic cell growth and 
increase the rate of relapse. The results of randomized clinical trials 
suggest that both G-CSF and GM-CSF are safe following induction 
and consolidation treatment of myeloid and lymphoblastic leuke-
mia. There has been no evidence that these growth factors reduce 
the rate of remission or increase relapse rate. On the contrary, the 
growth factors accelerate neutrophil recovery and reduce infection 
rates and days of hospitalization. Both G-CSF and GM-CSF have 
FDA approval for treatment of patients with AML. 
 B. Other Applications 
 G-CSF and GM-CSF have also proved to be effective in treating 
the neutropenia associated with  congenital neutropenia, cyclic 
neutropenia, myelodysplasia, and  aplastic anemia. Many 
patients with these disorders respond with a prompt and some-
times dramatic increase in neutrophil count. In some cases, this 
results in a decrease in the frequency of infections. Because neither 
G-CSF nor GM-CSF stimulates the formation of erythrocytes 
and platelets, they are sometimes combined with other growth 
factors for treatment of pancytopenia. 
 The myeloid growth factors play an important role in  autolo-
gous stem cell transplantation for patients undergoing high-dose 
chemotherapy. High-dose chemotherapy with autologous stem 
cell support is increasingly used to treat patients with tumors 
that are resistant to standard doses of chemotherapeutic drugs. 
The high-dose regimens produce extreme myelosuppression; 
the myelosuppression is then counteracted by reinfusion of the 
patient’s own hematopoietic stem cells (which are collected prior 
to chemotherapy). The administration of G-CSF or GM-CSF 
early after autologous stem cell transplantation reduces the time to 
engraftment and to recovery from neutropenia in patients 
receiving stem cells obtained either from bone marrow or from 
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0
4           8         12        16          20         24
Study day
ANC × 109/ L
 FIGURE 33–5  Effects of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF;  red line ) or placebo ( green line ) on absolute neutrophil count 
(ANC) after cytotoxic chemotherapy for lung cancer. Doses of chemo-
therapeutic drugs were administered on days 1 and 3. G-CSF or 
placebo injections were started on day 4 and continued daily 
through day 12 or 16. The first peak in ANC reflects the recruitment 
of mature cells by G-CSF. The second peak reflects a marked increase 
in new neutrophil production by the bone marrow under stimulation 
by G-CSF. (Normal ANC is 2.2–8.6 × 10 9 /L.) (Modified and reproduced, with 
permission, from Crawford J et al: Reduction by granulocyte colony-stimulating fac-
tor of fever and neutropenia induced by chemotherapy in patients with small-cell 
lung cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;325:164.) 
594    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
peripheral blood. These effects are seen in patients being treated 
for lymphoma or for solid tumors. G-CSF and GM-CSF are also 
used to support patients who have received allogeneic bone mar-
row transplantation for treatment of hematologic malignancies or 
bone marrow failure states. In this setting, the growth factors 
speed the recovery from neutropenia without increasing the inci-
dence of acute graft-versus-host disease. 
 Perhaps the most important role of the myeloid growth factors 
in transplantation is for mobilization of PBSCs. Stem cells col-
lected from peripheral blood have nearly replaced bone marrow as 
the hematopoietic preparation used for autologous and allogeneic 
transplantation. The cells can be collected in an outpatient setting 
with a procedure that avoids much of the risk and discomfort of 
bone marrow collection, including the need for general anesthesia. 
In addition, there is evidence that PBSC transplantation results in 
more rapid engraftment of all hematopoietic cell lineages and in 
reduced rates of graft failure or delayed platelet recovery. 
 G-CSF is the cytokine most commonly used for PBSC mobi-
lization because of its increased efficacy and reduced toxicity 
compared with GM-CSF. To mobilize stem cells for autologous 
transplantation, donors are given 5–10 mcg/kg/d subcutaneously 
for 4 days. On the fifth day, they undergo leukapheresis. The suc-
cess of PBSC transplantation depends on transfusion of adequate 
numbers of stem cells. CD34, an antigen present on early pro-
genitor cells and absent from later, committed, cells, is used as a 
marker for the requisite stem cells. The goal is to infuse at least 
5 × 10 6 CD34 cells/kg; this number of CD34 cells usually results 
in prompt and durable engraftment of all cell lineages. It may take 
several separate leukaphereses to collect enough CD34 cells, espe-
cially from older patients and patients who have been exposed to 
radiation therapy or chemotherapy. 
 For patients with multiple myeloma or non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma who respond suboptimally to G-CSF alone, the novel 
hematopoietic stem cell mobilizer  plerixafor can be added to 
G-CSF. Plerixafor is a bicyclam molecule originally developed as an 
anti-HIV drug because of its ability to inhibit the CXC chemokine 
receptor 4 (CXCR4), a co-receptor for HIV entry into CD4+ T 
lymphocytes (see  Chapter 49 ). Early clinical trials of plerixafor 
revealed a remarkable ability to increase CD34 cells in peripheral 
blood. Plerixafor mobilizes CD34 cells by preventing chemokine 
stromal cell-derived factor-1α (SDF-1α) from binding to CXCR4 
and directing the CD34 cells to “home” to the bone marrow. 
Plerixafor is administered by subcutaneous injection after four days 
of G-CSF treatment and 11 hours prior to leukapheresis; it can be 
used with G-CSF for up to four continuous days. Plerixafor is 
eliminated primarily by the renal route and must be dose-
adjusted for patients with renal impairment. The drug is well-
tolerated; the most common adverse effects associated with its 
use are injection site reactions, GI disturbances, dizziness, 
fatigue, and headache. 
 Toxicity 
 Although the three growth factors have similar effects on neutro-
phil counts, G-CSF and pegfilgrastim are used more frequently 
than GM-CSF because they are better tolerated. G-CSF and 
 pegfilgrastim can cause bone pain, which clears when the drugs are 
discontinued. GM-CSF can cause more severe side effects, par-
ticularly at higher doses. These include fever, malaise, arthralgias, 
myalgias, and a capillary leak syndrome characterized by periph-
eral edema and pleural or pericardial effusions. Allergic reactions 
may occur but are infrequent. Splenic rupture is a rare but serious 
complication of the use of G-CSF for PBSC. 
 MEGAKARYOCYTE GROWTH FACTORS 
 Patients with thrombocytopenia have a high risk of hemorrhage. 
Although platelet transfusion is commonly used to treat throm-
bocytopenia, this procedure can cause adverse reactions in the 
recipient; furthermore, a significant number of patients fail to 
exhibit the expected increase in platelet count.  Thrombopoietin 
and  IL-11 both appear to be key endogenous regulators of plate-
let production. A recombinant form of IL-11 was the first agent 
to gain FDA approval for treatment of thrombocytopenia. 
Recombinant human thrombopoietin and a pegylated form of a 
shortened human thrombopoietin protein underwent extensive 
clinical investigation in the 1990s. However, further develop-
ment was abandoned after autoantibodies to the native throm-
bopoietin formed in healthy human subjects and caused 
thrombocytopenia. Efforts shifted to investigation of novel, non-
immunogenic peptide agonists of the thrombopoietin receptor, 
which is known as Mpl. The first of these— romiplostim —was 
approved by the FDA for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
in 2008. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Interleukin-11 is a 65–85 kDa protein produced by fibroblasts 
and stromal cells in the bone marrow.  Oprelvekin, the recombi-
nant form of IL-11 approved for clinical use ( Table 33–4 ), is 
produced by expression in  Escherichia coli . The half-life of IL-11 is 
7–8 hours when the drug is injected subcutaneously. 
 Romiplostim (AMG 531) is a member of new class of thera-
peutics called “peptibodies,” which are peptides with key biologic 
activities covalently linked to antibody fragments that serve to 
extend the peptide’s half-life. Romiplostim contains two disulfide-
bonded human F c fragments, each covalently attached through a 
polyglycine sequence to a peptide chain containing two Mpl-
binding peptides that are linked to one another by a second poly-
glycine sequence. The Mpl-binding peptide was selected from a 
peptide library based on its ability in cell assays to activate the 
thrombopoietin receptor. The Mpl-binding peptide has no 
sequence homology with human thrombopoietin and there is no 
evidence in animal or human studies that the Mpl-binding pep-
tide or romiplostim induces antibodies to thrombopoietin. After 
subcutaneous administration, romiplostim is eliminated by the 
reticuloendothelial system with an average half-life of 3–4 days. Its 
half-life is inversely related to the serum platelet count; it has a 
longer half-life in patients with thrombocytopenia and a shorter 
half-life in patients whose platelet counts have recovered to nor-
mal levels. 
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    595
 Eltrombopag, an orally active small molecule agonist at the 
thrombopoietin receptor, was licensed in 2008 for use in patients 
with severe idiopathic thrombocytopenia who have failed to 
respond adequately to first-line treatments. Because of concerns 
about hepatotoxicity and hemorrhage, eltrombopag is restricted to 
use by registered physicians and patients and its use requires close 
monitoring of liver enzymes. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Interleukin-11 acts through a specific cell surface cytokine recep-
tor to stimulate the growth of multiple lymphoid and myeloid 
cells. It acts synergistically with other growth factors to stimulate 
the growth of primitive megakaryocytic progenitors and, most 
importantly, increases the number of peripheral platelets and 
neutrophils. 
 Romiplostim has high affinity for the human Mpl receptor. It 
causes a dose-dependent increase in platelet count that begins on 
day 5 after subcutaneous administration and peaks at days 12–15. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 Interleukin-11 is approved for the secondary prevention of throm-
bocytopenia in patients receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy for 
treatment of nonmyeloid cancers. Clinical trials show that it 
reduces the number of platelet transfusions required by patients 
who experience severe thrombocytopenia after a previous cycle of 
chemotherapy. Although IL-11 has broad stimulatory effects on 
hematopoietic cell lineages in vitro, it does not appear to have 
significant effects on the leukopenia caused by myelosuppressive 
chemotherapy. Interleukin-11 is given by subcutaneous injection 
at a dose of 50 mcg/kg/d. It is started 6–24 hours after completion 
of chemotherapy and continued for 14–21 days or until the plate-
let count passes the nadir and rises to more than 50,000 cells/μL. 
 In patients with chronic idiopathic thrombocytopenia (ITP) 
who failed to respond adequately to previous treatment with ste-
roids, immunoglobulins, or splenectomy, romiplostim signifi-
cantly increased platelet count in most patients. In a 6-week 
placebo-controlled study in which patients were treated weekly 
with 1 or 3 mcg/kg, 12 of 16 patients reached the targeted platelet 
range of 50,000–450,000 platelets/μL. Romiplostim does not 
appear to decrease the rate of platelet destruction in ITP as platelet 
counts returned to pretreatment levels after the drug’s discontinu-
ation. An open label trial found that many patients maintained a 
platelet count of 100,000 platelets/μL or higher over a 48-week 
period and that over half of the patients were able to discontinue 
other therapies. Romiplostim is initiated as a weekly subcutaneous 
dose of 1 mcg/kg and then continued at the lowest dose required 
to maintain a platelet count of at least 50,000 platelets/μL. 
 Toxicity 
 The most common adverse effects of IL-11 are fatigue, headache, 
dizziness, and cardiovascular effects. The cardiovascular effects 
include anemia (due to hemodilution), dyspnea (due to fluid accu-
mulation in the lungs), and transient atrial arrhythmias. Hypokalemia 
has also been seen in some patients. All of these adverse effects 
appear to be reversible. 
 Romiplostim appears to be well tolerated except for a mild head-
ache on the day of administration. A potential long-term concern is 
that two patients treated with romiplostim had an increase in bone 
marrow reticulin, a possible marker of myelodysplastic or myelopro-
liferative processes. However, neither patient had evidence of increased 
collagen fibrosis or of abnormal bone marrow cytogenetics. 
596    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
SUMMARY Agents Used in Anemias and Hematopoietic Growth Factors
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
IRON
 • Ferrous sulfate
Required for 
biosynthesis of heme and 
heme-containing 
proteins, including hemo-
globin and myoglobin
Adequate supplies 
required for normal heme 
synthesis • deficiency 
results in inadequate 
heme production
Iron deficiency, which 
manifests as microcytic 
anemia • oral preparation
Complicated endogenous 
system for absorbing, 
storing, and transporting 
iron • Toxicity: Acute over-
dose results in necrotizing 
gastroenteritis, abdominal 
pain, bloody diarrhea, 
shock, lethargy, and 
dyspnea • chronic iron 
overload results in hemo-
chromatosis, with damage 
to the heart, liver, pan-
creas, and other organs • 
organ failure and death 
can ensue
 • Ferrous gluconate and ferrous fumarate: Oral iron preparations
 • Iron dextran, iron sucrose complex, and sodium ferric gluconate complex: Parenteral preparations; can cause pain, hypersensitivity reactions
IRON CHELATORS
 •  Deferoxamine (see also 
Chapters 57 and 58)
Chelates excess iron
Reduces toxicity associ-
ated with acute or chronic 
iron overload
Acute iron poisoning; 
inherited or acquired 
hemochromatosis
Preferred route of admin-
istration is IM or SC • 
Toxicity: Rapid IV adminis-
tration may cause 
hypotension • neurotoxicity 
and increased susceptibility 
to certain infections have 
occurred with long-term 
use
 • Deferasirox: Orally administered iron chelator for treatment of hemochromatosis
VITAMIN B12
 • Cyanocobalamin
 •  Hydroxocobalamin
Cofactor required for 
essential enzymatic 
reactions that form tetra-
hydrofolate, convert 
homocysteine to methio-
nine, and metabolize 
L-methylmalonyl-CoA
Adequate supplies 
required for amino acid 
and fatty acid metabolism, 
and DNA synthesis
Vitamin B12 deficiency, 
which manifests as mega-
loblastic anemia and is the 
basis of pernicious anemia
Parenteral vitamin B12 is 
required for pernicious 
anemia and other malab-
sorption syndromes • 
Toxicity: No toxicity 
associated with excess 
vitamin B12
FOLIC ACID
 •  Folacin (pteroylglu-
tamic acid)
Precursor of an essential 
donor of methyl groups 
used for synthesis of 
amino acids, purines, and 
deoxynucleotide
Adequate supplies 
required for essential 
biochemical reactions 
involving amino acid 
metabolism, and purine 
and DNA synthesis
Folic acid deficiency, 
which manifests as mega-
loblastic anemia, and
prevention of congenital 
neural tube defects
Oral; well-absorbed; need 
for parenteral administra-
tion is rare • Toxicity: Folic 
acid is not toxic in over-
dose, but large amounts 
can partially compensate 
for vitamin B12 deficiency 
and put people with 
unrecognized B12 defi-
ciency at risk of neuro-
logic consequences of 
vitamin B12 deficiency, 
which are not compen-
sated by folic acid
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    597
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
ERYTHROCYTE-STIMULATING AGENTS
 • Epoetin alfa
Agonist of erythropoietin 
receptors expressed by 
red cell progenitors
Stimulates erythroid pro-
liferation and differentia-
tion, and induces the 
release of reticulocytes 
from the bone marrow
Anemia, especially anemia 
associated with chronic 
renal failure, HIV infection, 
cancer, and prematurity • 
prevention of the need for 
transfusion in patients 
undergoing certain types 
of elective surgery
IV or SC administration 
1–3 times per week • 
Toxicity: Hypertension, 
thrombotic complications, 
and, very rarely, pure red 
cell aplasia • to reduce the 
risk of serious CV events, 
hemoglobin levels should 
be maintained <12 g/dL
 • Darbepoetin alfa: Long-acting glycosylated form administered weekly
 • Methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta: Long-acting form administered 1–2 times per month
MYELOID GROWTH FACTORS
 •  Granulocyte-
macrophage colony-
stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF; filgrastim)
Stimulates G-CSF recep-
tors expressed on mature 
neutrophils and their 
progenitors
Stimulates neutrophil 
progenitor proliferation 
and differentiation •
activates phagocytic activ-
ity of mature neutrophils 
and extends their survival 
• mobilizes hematopoietic 
stem cells
Neutropenia associated 
with congenital neutrope-
nia, cyclic neutropenia, 
myelodysplasia, and aplas-
tic anemia • secondary 
prevention of neutropenia 
in patients undergoing 
cytotoxic chemotherapy •
mobilization of peripheral 
blood cells in preparation 
for autologous and alloge-
neic stem cell 
transplantation
Daily SC administration •
Toxicity: Bone pain • rarely, 
splenic rupture
 • Pegfilgrastim: Long-acting form of filgrastim that is covalently linked to a type of polyethylene glycol
 •  GM-CSF (sargramostim): Myeloid growth factor that acts through a distinct GM-CSF receptor to stimulate proliferation and differentiation of early and 
late granulocytic progenitor cells, and erythroid and megakaryocyte progenitors; clinical uses are similar to those of G-CSF, but it is more likely than 
GM-CSF to cause fever, arthralgia, myalgia, and capillary leak syndrome
 •  Plerixafor: Antagonist of CXCR4 used in combination with G-CSF for mobilization of peripheral blood cells prior to autologous transplantation in 
patients with multiple myeloma or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma who responded suboptimally to G-CSF alone
MEGAKARYOCYTE GROWTH FACTORS
 •  Oprelvekin (interleu-
kin-11; IL-11)
Recombinant form of an 
endogenous cytokine • 
activates IL-11 receptors
Stimulates growth of 
multiple lymphoid and 
myeloid cells, including 
megakaryocyte progeni-
tors • increases the number 
of circulating platelets and 
neutrophils
Secondary prevention of 
thrombocytopenia in 
patients undergoing cyto-
toxic chemotherapy for 
nonmyeloid cancers
Daily SC injection • Toxicity: 
Fatigue, headache, dizzi-
ness, anemia, fluid accu-
mulation in the lungs, and 
transient atrial arrhythmias
 •  Romiplostim: Genetically engineered protein in which Fc components of a human antibody are fused to multiple copies of a peptide that stimulates 
the thrombopoietin receptors; approved for treatment of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
 • Eltrombopag: Orally active, restricted use
598    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Darbepoetin alfa (Aranesp)
Parenteral: 25, 40, 60, 100, 200, 300, 500 mcg/mL solution for IV or 
SC injection
Deferasirox (Exjade)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mg tablets
Deferoxamine (generic, Desferal)
Parenteral: 500, 2000 mg powder for reconstitution for IM, SC, or 
IV injection
Eltrombopag (Promacta)
Oral: 25, 50, 75 mg tablet
Epoetin alfa (erythropoietin, EPO) (Epogen, Procrit)
Parenteral: 2000, 3000, 4000, 10,000, 20,000, 40,000 IU/mL solution 
for IV or SC injection
Epoetin beta (Methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta) 
 (Mircera)
Parenteral: 50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 600, 1000 mcg/mL solution in 
vials and prefilled syringes for IV or SC injection
Filgrastim (G-CSF) (Neupogen)
Parenteral: 300 mcg/mL, 600 mcg/mL solution in vials and prefilled 
syringes for IV or SC injection
Folic acid (folacin, pteroylglutamic acid) (generic)
Oral: 0.4, 0.8, 1 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL solution for injection
Iron (generic)
Oral: See Table 33–3.
Parenteral (Iron dextran) (InFeD, DexFerrum): 50 mg elemental 
iron/mL solution for IM or IV injection
Parenteral (Sodium ferric gluconate complex) (Ferrlecit): 12.5 mg 
elemental iron/mL solution for IV injection
Parenteral (Iron sucrose) (Venofer): 20 mg elemental iron/mL 
solution for IV injection
Oprelvekin (IL-11) (Neumega)
Parenteral: 5 mg powder for reconstitution for SC injection
Pegfilgrastim (Neulasta)
Parenteral: 6 mg/0.6 mL solution in single-dose syringe
Plerixafor (Mozobil)
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL solution for SC injection
Romiplostim (Nplate)
Parenteral: 250, 500 mcg powder for reconstitution for SC injection
Sargramostim (GM-CSF) (Leukine)
Parenteral: 250 mcg powder for reconstitution; 500 mcg/mL solution
Vitamin B12 (generic cyanocobalamin or hydroxocobalamin)
Oral (cyanocobalamin): 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000 mcg regular tablets 
or lozenges; 500, 1000, 2500, 5000, 6000 mg sublingual tablets 
or lozenges; 1000, 1500 mg controlled-release tablets
Nasal (Nascobal, CaloMist): 500 mcg/spray
Parenteral (cyanocobalamin): 1000, 5000 mcg/mL for IM or SC 
injection
Parenteral (hydroxocobalamin): 1000 mcg/mL solution for IM 
injection; 2.5 g powder for reconstitution (antidote for cyanide 
poisoning) for IV injection
 REFERENCES 
 Auerbach M, Al Talib K: Low-molecular weight iron dextran and iron sucrose have 
similar comparative safety profiles in chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 
2008;73:528. 
 Barzi A, Sekeres MA: Myelodysplastic syndromes: a practical approach to diagnosis 
and treatment. Cleve Clin J Med 2010;77:37. 
 Bhana N: Granulocyte colony-stimulating factors in the management of chemo-
therapy-induced neutropenia: Evidence based review. Curr Opin Oncol 
2007;19:328. 
 Brittenham GM: Iron-chelating therapy for transfusional iron overload. N Engl J 
Med 2011;364:146. 
 Clark SF: Iron deficiency anemia: diagnosis and management. Curr Opin 
Gastroenterol 2009;25:122. 
 Crawford J et al: Reduction by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor of fever and 
neutropenia induced by chemotherapy in patients with small-cell lung 
cancer. N Engl J Med 1991;325:164. 
 Darshan D, Fraer DM, Anderson GJ: Molecular basis of iron-loading disorders. 
Expert Rev Mol Med 2010;12:e36. 
 Gertz MA: Current status of stem cell mobilization. Br J Haematol 2010;150:647. 
 Kessans MR, Gatesman ML, Kockler DR: Plerixafor: A peripheral blood stem cell 
mobilizer. Pharmacotherapy 2010;30:485. 
 McKoy JM et al: Epoetin-associated pure red cell aplasia: Past, present, and future 
considerations. Transfusion 2008;48:1754. 
 Rees DC, Williams TN, Gladwin MT: Sickle-cell disease. Lancet 2010;376:2018. 
 Rizzo JD et al: American Society of Clinical Oncology/American Society of 
Hematology clinical practice guideline update on the use of epoetin and 
darbepoetin in adult patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010;28:4996. 
 Sauer J, Mason JB, Choi SW: Too much folate: a risk factor for cancer and cardio-
vascular disease? Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2009;12:30. 
 Solomon LR: Disorders of cobalamin (vitamin B12) metabolism: Emerging con-
cepts in pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment. Blood Rev 2007;21:113. 
 Stasi R et al: Thrombopoietic agents. Blood Rev 2010;24:179. 
 Winkelmayer WC: Confusion about the appropriate use of erythropoiesis-
stimulating agents in patients undergoing maintenance dialysis. Semin Dial 
2010;23:486. 
 Wolff T et al: Folic acid supplementation for the prevention of neural tube defects: 
An update of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann 
Intern Med 2009;150:632. 
Darbepoetin alfa (Aranesp)
Parenteral: 25, 40, 60, 100, 200, 300, 500 mcg/mL solution for IV or
SC injection
Deferasirox (Exjade)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mg tablets
Deferoxamine (generic, Desferal)
Parenteral: 500, 2000 mg powder for reconstitution for IM, SC, or 
IV injection
Eltrombopag (Promacta)
Oral: 25, 50, 75 mg tablet
Epoetin alfa (erythropoietin, EPO) (Epogen, Procrit)
Parenteral: 2000, 3000, 4000, 10,000, 20,000, 40,000 IU/mL solution 
for IV or SC injection
Epoetin beta (Methoxy polyethylene glycol-epoetin beta) 
(Mircera)
Parenteral: 50, 100, 200, 300, 400, 600, 1000 mcg/mL solution in
vials and prefilled syringes for IV or SC injection
Filgrastim (G-CSF) (Neupogen)
Parenteral: 300 mcg/mL, 600 mcg/mL solution in vials and prefilled 
syringes for IV or SC injection
Folic acid (folacin, pteroylglutamic acid) (generic)
Oral: 0.4, 0.8, 1 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL solution for injection
Iron (generic)
Oral: See Table 33–3.
Parenteral (Iron dextran) (InFeD, DexFerrum): 50 mg elemental
iron/mL solution for IM or IV injection
Parenteral (Sodium ferric gluconate complex) (Ferrlecit): 12.5 mg 
elemental iron/mL solution for IV injection
Parenteral (Iron sucrose) (Venofer): 20 mg elemental iron/mL 
solution for IV injection
Oprelvekin (IL-11) (Neumega)
Parenteral: 5 mg powder for reconstitution for SC injection
Pegfilgrastim (Neulasta)
Parenteral: 6 mg/0.6 mL solution in single-dose syringe
Plerixafor (Mozobil)
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL solution for SC injection
Romiplostim (Nplate)
Parenteral: 250, 500 mcg powder for reconstitution for SC injection
Sargramostim (GM-CSF) (Leukine)
Parenteral: 250 mcg powder for reconstitution; 500 mcg/mL solution
Vitamin B12 (generic cyanocobalamin or hydroxocobalamin)
Oral (cyanocobalamin): 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000 mcg regular tablets
or lozenges; 500, 1000, 2500, 5000, 6000 mg sublingual tablets
or lozenges; 1000, 1500 mg controlled-release tablets
Nasal (Nascobal, CaloMist): 500 mcg/spray
Parenteral (cyanocobalamin): 1000, 5000 mcg/mL for IM or SC
injection
Parenteral (hydroxocobalamin): 1000 mcg/mL solution for IM 
injection; 2.5 g powder for reconstitution (antidote for cyanide
poisoning) for IV injection
CHAPTER 33 Agents Used in Anemias; Hematopoietic Growth Factors    599
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 This patient’s megaloblastic anemia appears to be due to 
vitamin B 12 (cobalamin) deficiency secondary to impaired 
production of intrinsic factor resulting in insufficient absorp-
tion of vitamin B 12 from the GI tract. It is important to mea-
sure serum concentrations of both folic acid and cobalamin 
because megaloblastic anemia can result from deficiency of 
either nutrient. It is especially important to diagnose vitamin 
B 12 deficiency because this deficiency, if untreated, can lead 
to irreversible neurologic damage. Folate supplementation, 
which can compensate for vitamin B 12 -derived anemia, does 
not prevent B12-deficiency neurologic damage. To correct 
this patient’s vitamin B 12 deficiency, she would probably be 
treated parenterally with cobalamin because of her impaired 
oral absorption of vitamin B 12 . Several weeks of daily admin-
istration would be followed with weekly doses until her 
hematocrit returned to normal. Monthly doses would then 
be given to maintain her body stores of vitamin B 12 . 
This page intentionally left blank 
601
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
  Drugs Used in Disorders 
of Coagulation 
 James L. Zehnder, MD 
C A S E  S T U D Y
secreted from platelet granules include adenosine  diphosphate 
(ADP), a powerful inducer of platelet aggregation, and  serotonin 
(5-HT), which stimulates aggregation and vasoconstriction. 
Activation of platelets results in a conformational change in the 
αIIbβIII  integrin (IIb/IIIa) receptor, enabling it to bind fibrinogen, 
which cross-links adjacent platelets, resulting in aggregation and 
formation of a platelet plug ( Figure 34–1 ). Simultaneously, the 
coagulation system cascade is activated, resulting in thrombin gen-
eration and a fibrin clot, which stabilizes the platelet plug (see 
below). Knowledge of the hemostatic mechanism is important for 
diagnosis of bleeding disorders. Patients with defects in the forma-
tion of the primary platelet plug (defects in primary hemostasis, eg, 
platelet function defects, von Willebrand disease) typically bleed 
from surface sites (gingiva, skin, heavy menses) with injury. In 
contrast, patients with defects in the clotting mechanism (second-
ary hemostasis, eg, hemophilia A) tend to bleed into deep tissues 
(joints, muscle, retroperitoneum), often with no apparent inciting 
event, and bleeding may recur unpredictably. 
 The platelet is central to normal hemostasis and thromboem-
bolic disease, and is the target of many therapies discussed in this 
chapter. Platelet-rich thrombi  (white thrombi) form in the high 
flow rate and high shear force environment of arteries. Occlusive 
arterial thrombi cause serious disease by producing downstream 
ischemia of extremities or vital organs, and can result in limb 
 A 25-year-old woman presents to the emergency department 
complaining of acute onset of shortness of breath and pleu-
ritic pain. She had been in her usual state of health until 2 days 
prior when she noted that her left leg was swollen and red. 
Her only medication was oral contraceptives. Family history 
was significant for a history of “blood clots” in multiple 
members of the maternal side of her family. Physical exami-
nation demonstrates an anxious woman with stable vital 
signs. The left lower extremity demonstrates erythema and 
edema and is tender to touch. Ultrasound reveals a deep vein 
thrombosis in the left lower extremity; chest computed 
tomography scan confirms the presence of pulmonary 
emboli. Laboratory blood tests indicate elevated D-dimer 
levels. What therapy is indicated acutely? What are the long-
term therapy options? How long should she be treated? 
Should this individual use oral contraceptives? 
34
 Hemostasis refers to the finely regulated dynamic process of main-
taining fluidity of the blood, repairing vascular injury, and limiting 
blood loss while avoiding vessel occlusion (thrombosis) and inade-
quate perfusion of vital organs. Either extreme—excessive bleeding 
or thrombosis—represents a breakdown of the hemostatic mecha-
nism. Common causes of dysregulated hemostasis include heredi-
tary or acquired defects in the clotting mechanism and secondary 
effects of infection or cancer. The drugs used to inhibit thrombosis 
and to limit abnormal bleeding are the subjects of this chapter. 
 MECHANISMS OF BLOOD COAGULATION 
 The vascular endothelial cell layer lining blood vessels has an anti-
coagulant phenotype, and circulating blood platelets and clotting 
factors do not normally adhere to it to an appreciable extent. In the 
setting of vascular injury, the endothelial cell layer rapidly under-
goes a series of changes resulting in a more procoagulant pheno-
type. Injury exposes reactive subendothelial matrix proteins such as 
collagen and von Willebrand factor, which results in platelet adher-
ence and activation, and secretion and synthesis of vasoconstrictors 
and platelet-recruiting and activating molecules. Thus,  thromboxane 
A 2 (TXA 2 ) is synthesized from arachidonic acid within platelets 
and is a platelet activator and potent vasoconstrictor. Products 
602    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
amputation or organ failure. Venous clots tend to be more fibrin-
rich, contain large numbers of trapped red blood cells, and are 
recognized pathologically as  red thrombi. Venous thrombi can 
cause severe swelling and pain of the affected extremity, but the 
most feared consequence is pulmonary embolism. This occurs 
when part or all of the clot breaks off from its location in the deep 
venous system and travels as an embolus through the right side of 
the heart and into the pulmonary arterial circulation. Sudden 
occlusion of a large pulmonary artery can cause acute right heart 
failure and sudden death. In addition lung ischemia or infarction 
will occur distal to the occluded pulmonary arterial segment. Such 
emboli usually arise from the deep venous system of the proximal 
lower extremities or pelvis. Although all thrombi are mixed, the 
platelet nidus dominates the arterial thrombus and the fibrin tail 
dominates the venous thrombus. 
 BLOOD COAGULATION CASCADE 
 Blood coagulates due to the transformation of soluble fibrinogen 
into insoluble fibrin by the enzyme thrombin. Several circulating 
proteins interact in a cascading series of limited proteolytic reac-
tions ( Figure 34–2 ). At each step, a clotting factor zymogen 
undergoes limited proteolysis and becomes an active protease 
(eg, factor VII is converted to factor VIIa). Each protease factor 
activates the next clotting factor in the sequence, culminating in 
the formation of thrombin (factor IIa). Several of these factors are 
targets for drug therapy ( Table 34–1 ). 
 Thrombin has a central role in hemostasis and has many func-
tions. In clotting, thrombin proteolytically cleaves small peptides 
from fibrinogen, allowing fibrinogen to polymerize and form a 
fibrin clot. Thrombin also activates many upstream clotting fac-
tors, leading to more thrombin generation, and activates factor 
XIII, a transaminase that cross-links the fibrin polymer and stabi-
lizes the clot. Thrombin is a potent platelet activator and mitogen. 
Thrombin also  exerts anti coagulant effects by activating the protein 
C pathway, which attenuates the clotting response ( Figure 34–2 ). 
It should therefore be apparent that the response to vascular injury 
is a complex and precisely modulated process that ensures that 
under normal circumstances, repair of vascular injury occurs with-
out thrombosis and downstream ischemia; that is, the response is 
proportionate and reversible. Eventually vascular remodeling and 
repair occur with reversion to the quiescent resting anticoagulant 
endothelial cell phenotype. 
 Initiation of Clotting: The Tissue 
Factor-VIIa Complex 
 The main initiator of blood coagulation in vivo is the tissue factor 
(TF)-factor VIIa pathway ( Figure 34–2 ). Tissue factor is a trans-
membrane protein ubiquitously expressed outside the vasculature, 
but not normally expressed in an active form within vessels. 
 FIGURE 34–1  Thrombus formation at the site of the damaged vascular wall (EC, endothelial cell) and the role of platelets and clotting 
factors. Platelet membrane receptors include the glycoprotein (GP) Ia receptor, binding to collagen (C); GP Ib receptor, binding von Willebrand 
factor (vWF); and GP IIb/IIIa, which binds fibrinogen and other macromolecules. Antiplatelet prostacyclin (PGI 2 ) is released from the endothe-
lium. Aggregating substances released from the degranulating platelet include adenosine diphosphate (ADP), thromboxane A 2 (TXA 2 ), and 
serotonin (5-HT). Production of factor Xa is detailed in  Figure 34–2 . (Redrawn and reproduced, with permission, from Simoons ML, Decker JW: New directions in 
anticoagulant and antiplatelet treatment. [Editorial.] Br Heart J 1995;74:337.) 
ADP
TXA2
5-HT
vWF
Wall defect
C
PGI2
EC
Degranulation
Intrinsic
Extrinsic
Activation
Fibrin
Fibrinogen
Thrombin
Prothrombin
Xa
GP
IIb/IIIa
GP
IIb/IIIa
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Platelets
GP
IIb/IIIa
GP Ia
GP Ib
CHAPTER 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation    603
The exposure of TF on damaged endothelium or to blood that has 
extravasated into tissue binds TF to factor VIIa. This complex, in 
turn, activates factors X and IX. Factor Xa along with factor Va 
forms the prothrombinase complex on activated cell surfaces, 
which catalyzes the conversion of prothrombin (factor II) to 
thrombin (factor IIa). Thrombin, in turn, activates upstream 
clotting factors, primarily factors V, VIII, and XI, resulting in 
amplification of thrombin generation. The TF-factor VIIa-catalyzed 
activation of factor Xa is regulated by tissue factor pathway 
inhibitor (TFPI). Thus after initial activation of factor X to Xa by 
TF-VIIa, further propagation of the clot is by feedback amplifica-
tion of thrombin through the intrinsic pathway factors VIII and 
IX (this provides an explanation of why patients with deficiency of 
factor VIII or IX—hemophilia A and hemophilia B, respectively—
have a severe bleeding disorder). 
 It is also important to note that the coagulation mechanism in 
vivo does not occur in solution, but is localized to activated  cell 
surfaces expressing anionic phospholipids such as phosphatidylser-
ine, and is mediated by Ca 2+ bridging between the anionic phos-
pholipids and γ-carboxyglutamic acid residues of the clotting 
factors. This is the basis for using calcium chelators such as ethyl-
enediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) or citrate to prevent blood 
from clotting in a test tube. 
 Antithrombin (AT) is an endogenous anticoagulant and a 
member of the serine protease inhibitor (serpin) family; it inacti-
vates the serine proteases IIa, IXa, Xa, XIa, and XIIa. The endog-
enous anticoagulants  protein C and  protein S attenuate the blood 
clotting cascade by proteolysis of the two cofactors Va and VIIIa. 
From an evolutionary standpoint, it is of interest that factors V and 
VIII have an identical overall domain structure and considerable 
homology, consistent with a common ancestor gene; likewise the 
serine proteases are descendants of a trypsin-like common ancestor. 
Thus, the TF–VIIa initiating complex, serine proteases, and cofac-
tors each have their own lineage-specific attenuation mechanism 
( Figure 34–2 ). Defects in natural anticoagulants result in an 
TABLE 34–1  Blood clotting factors and drugs that 
affect them.1
Component or 
Factor
Common Synonym
Target for the 
Action of:
I
Fibrinogen
II
Prothrombin
Heparin (IIa); 
warfarin (synthesis)
III
Tissue thromboplastin
IV
Calcium
V
Proaccelerin
VII
Proconvertin
Warfarin (synthesis)
VIII
Antihemophilic factor (AHF)
IX
Christmas factor, plasma 
thromboplastin component 
(PTC)
Warfarin (synthesis)
X
Stuart-Prower factor
Heparin (Xa); 
warfarin (synthesis)
XI
Plasma thromboplastin 
antecedent (PTA)
XII
Hageman factor
XIII
Fibrin-stabilizing factor
Proteins C and S
Warfarin (synthesis)
Plasminogen
Thrombolytic 
enzymes, amino-
caproic acid
1See Figure 34–2 and text for additional details.
Contact
factors
XIa
Xa
Xa
Va
Wound
Antithrombin III/heparin
Protein C/Protein S
Tissue factor pathway 
inhibitor
Natural Anticoagulant Systems
TF/VIIa
IXa
VIIIa
Tissue
factor,
VIIa
IIa
Va
II
fibrin
clot
Fibrin
fibrinogen
Intrinsic
pathway
(PTT)
Extrinsic
pathway
(PT)
Clotting in the Lab
Clotting in Vivo
VIIIa
IXa
XIa
Thrombin
 FIGURE 34–2  A model of blood coagulation. With tissue factor 
(TF), factor VII forms an activated complex (VIIa-TF) that catalyzes the 
activation of factor IX to factor IXa. Activated factor XIa also catalyzes 
this reaction. Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) inhibits the cata-
lytic action of the VIIa-TF complex. The cascade proceeds as shown, 
resulting ultimately in the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin, an 
essential component of a functional clot. The two major anticoagu-
lant drugs, heparin and warfarin, have very different actions. Heparin, 
acting in the blood, directly activates anticlotting factors, specifically 
antithrombin, which inactivates the factors enclosed in rectangles. 
Warfarin, acting in the liver, inhibits the synthesis of the factors 
enclosed in circles. Proteins C and S exert anticlotting effects by inac-
tivating activated factors Va and VIIIa. 
604    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
increased risk of venous thrombosis. The most common defect in 
the natural anticoagulant system is a mutation in factor V (factor 
V Leiden), which results in resistance to inactivation by the 
protein C, protein S mechanism. 
 Fibrinolysis 
 Fibrinolysis refers to the process of fibrin digestion by the fibrin-
specific protease, plasmin. The fibrinolytic system is similar to the 
coagulation system in that the precursor form of the serine pro-
tease plasmin circulates in an inactive form as plasminogen. In 
response to injury, endothelial cells synthesize and release tissue 
plasminogen activator (t-PA), which converts plasminogen to 
plasmin ( Figure 34–3 ). Plasmin remodels the thrombus and limits 
its extension by proteolytic digestion of fibrin. 
 Both plasminogen and plasmin have specialized protein 
domains (kringles) that bind to exposed lysines on the fibrin clot 
and impart clot specificity to the fibrinolytic process. It should be 
noted that this clot specificity is only observed at  physiologic levels 
of t-PA. At the  pharmacologic levels of t-PA used in thrombolytic 
therapy, clot specificity is lost and a systemic lytic state is created, 
with attendant increase in bleeding risk. As in the coagulation 
cascade, there are negative regulators of fibrinolysis: endothelial 
cells synthesize and release plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI), 
which inhibits t-PA; in addition α 2 antiplasmin circulates in the 
blood at high concentrations and under physiologic conditions 
will rapidly inactivate any plasmin that is not clot-bound. 
However, this regulatory system is overwhelmed by therapeutic 
doses of plasminogen activators. 
 If the coagulation and fibrinolytic systems are pathologically 
activated, the hemostatic system may careen out of control, lead-
ing to generalized intravascular clotting and bleeding. This process 
is called  disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and may 
follow massive tissue injury, advanced cancers, obstetric emergen-
cies such as abruptio placentae or retained products of conception, 
or bacterial sepsis. The treatment of DIC is to control the underly-
ing disease process; if this is not possible, DIC is often fatal. 
 Regulation of the fibrinolytic system is useful in therapeutics. 
Increased fibrinolysis is effective therapy for thrombotic disease. 
 Tissue plasminogen activator, urokinase, and  streptokinase all 
activate the fibrinolytic system ( Figure 34–3 ). Conversely, 
decreased fibrinolysis protects clots from lysis and reduces the 
bleeding of hemostatic failure.  Aminocaproic acid is a clinically 
useful inhibitor of fibrinolysis. Heparin and the oral anticoagulant 
drugs do not affect the fibrinolytic mechanism. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE ANTICOAGULANT DRUGS 
 The ideal anticoagulant drug would prevent pathologic thrombo-
sis and limit reperfusion injury, yet allow a normal response to 
vascular injury and limit bleeding. Theoretically this could be 
accomplished by preservation of the TF-VIIa initiation phase of 
the clotting mechanism with attenuation of the secondary intrin-
sic pathway propagation phase of clot development. At this time 
such a drug does not exist; all anticoagulants and fibrinolytic 
drugs have an increased bleeding risk as their principle toxicity. 
 INDIRECT THROMBIN INHIBITORS 
 The indirect thrombin inhibitors are so-named because their anti-
thrombotic effect is exerted by their interaction with a separate 
protein, antithrombin.  Unfractionated heparin (UFH), low-
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), and the synthetic penta-
saccharide  fondaparinux bind to antithrombin and enhance its 
inactivation of factor Xa ( Figure 34–4 ). Unfractionated heparin 
and to a lesser extent LMWH also enhance antithrombin’s inacti-
vation of thrombin. 
 HEPARIN 
 Chemistry & Mechanism of Action 
 Heparin is a heterogeneous mixture of sulfated mucopolysaccha-
rides. It binds to endothelial cell surfaces and a variety of plasma 
proteins. Its biologic activity is dependent upon the endogenous 
anticoagulant  antithrombin. Antithrombin inhibits clotting fac-
tor proteases, especially thrombin (IIa), IXa, and Xa, by forming 
equimolar stable complexes with them. In the absence of heparin, 
these reactions are slow; in the presence of heparin, they are 
 FIGURE 34–3  Schematic representation of the fibrinolytic 
system. Plasmin is the active fibrinolytic enzyme. Several clinically 
useful activators are shown on the left in bold. Anistreplase is a com-
bination of streptokinase and the proactivator plasminogen. 
Aminocaproic acid (right) inhibits the activation of plasminogen to 
plasmin and is useful in some bleeding disorders. t-PA, tissue plasmi-
nogen activator. 
Plasminogen
Various stimuli
Blood
proactivator
Blood
activator
t-PA, urokinase
Streptokinase
Activator
Proactivator
Anistreplase
Fibrinogen
degradation
products
Fibrinogen
Thrombin
Fibrin clot
Fibrin
degradation
products,
D-dimer
Plasmin
Aminocaproic
acid
Antiactivators
Inhibition
Activation
−
−
+
+
+
+
+
+
Factor XIII
CHAPTER 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation    605
accelerated 1000-fold. Only about a third of the molecules in 
commercial heparin preparations have an accelerating effect 
because the remainder lack the unique pentasaccharide sequence 
needed for high-affinity binding to antithrombin. The active 
heparin molecules bind tightly to antithrombin and cause a con-
formational change in this inhibitor. The conformational change 
of antithrombin exposes its active site for more rapid interaction 
with the proteases (the activated clotting factors). Heparin func-
tions as a cofactor for the antithrombin-protease reaction without 
being consumed. Once the antithrombin-protease complex is 
formed, heparin is released intact for renewed binding to more 
antithrombin. 
 The antithrombin binding region of commercial unfraction-
ated heparin consists of repeating sulfated disaccharide units 
composed of D-glucosamine-L-iduronic acid and D-glucosamine-
D-glucuronic acid. High-molecular-weight (HMW), also known 
as UFH, fractions of heparin with high affinity for antithrombin 
markedly inhibit blood coagulation by inhibiting all three factors, 
especially thrombin and factor Xa. Unfractionated heparin has a 
molecular weight range of 5000–30,000. In contrast, the shorter-
chain low-molecular-weight (LMW) fractions of heparin inhibit 
activated factor X but have less effect on thrombin than the HMW 
species. Nevertheless, numerous studies have demonstrated that 
LMW heparins such as  enoxaparin, dalteparin, and  tinzaparin 
are effective in several thromboembolic conditions. In fact, these 
LMW heparins—in comparison with UFH—have equal efficacy, 
increased bioavailability from the subcutaneous site of injection, and 
less frequent dosing requirements (once or twice daily is sufficient). 
 Because commercial heparin consists of a family of molecules 
of different molecular weights extracted from porcine intestinal 
mucosa and bovine lung, the correlation between the concentra-
tion of a given heparin preparation and its effect on coagulation 
often is poor. Therefore, UFH is standardized by bioassay. 
Heparin was reformulated in 2009 in response to heparin con-
tamination events in 2007 and 2008. The contaminant was iden-
tified as over-sulfated chondroitin sulfate and linked to more 
than150 adverse events in patients, most commonly hypotension, 
nausea, and dyspnea within 30 minutes of infusion. In response 
to this event, heparin sodium was reformulated with stricter qual-
ity control measures and bioassays to make detection of contami-
nants easier. This reformulation led to a decrease in potency of 
approximately 10% from the previous formulation. USP heparin 
is now harmonized to the World Health Organization International 
Standard (IS) unit dose. Enoxaparin is obtained from the same 
sources as regular unfractionated heparin, but doses are specified 
in milligrams. Dalteparin, tinzaparin, and danaparoid (an LMW 
heparanoid containing heparan sulfate, dermatan sulfate, and 
chondroitin sulfate), on the other hand, are specified in anti-factor 
Xa units. 
 Monitoring of Heparin Effect 
 Close monitoring of the  activated partial thromboplastin time 
(aPTT or  PTT ) is necessary in patients receiving UFH. Levels of 
UFH may also be determined by protamine titration (therapeu-
tic levels 0.2–0.4 unit/mL) or anti-Xa units (therapeutic levels 
0.3–0.7 unit/mL). Weight-based dosing of the LMW heparins 
results in predictable pharmacokinetics and plasma levels in 
patients with normal renal function. Therefore, LMW heparin 
levels are not generally measured except in the setting of renal 
insufficiency, obesity, and pregnancy. LMW heparin levels can be 
determined by anti-Xa units. Peak therapeutic levels should be 
0.5–1 unit/mL for twice-daily dosing, determined 4 hours after 
administration, and approximately 1.5 units/mL for once-daily 
dosing. 
 Toxicity 
 A. Bleeding and Miscellaneous Effects 
 The major adverse effect of heparin is bleeding. This risk can be 
decreased by scrupulous patient selection, careful control of dos-
age, and close monitoring. Elderly women and patients with renal 
failure are more prone to hemorrhage. Heparin is of animal origin 
and should be used cautiously in patients with allergy. Increased 
loss of hair and reversible alopecia have been reported. Long-term 
heparin therapy is associated with osteoporosis and spontaneous 
fractures. Heparin accelerates the clearing of postprandial lipemia 
Unfractionated Heparin
LMW Heparin
Antithrombin III
(active)
Antithrombin III
(active)
Factor
Xa
Factor
XIa
Factor
IXa
Thrombin
Thrombin
Antithrombin III
(inactive)
 FIGURE 34–4  Cartoon illustrating differences between fondaparinux, low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWH), and high-molecular-weight 
heparin (HMWH, unfractionated heparin). Activated antithrombin III (AT III) degrades thrombin, factor X, and several other factors. Binding of 
these drugs to AT III can increase the catalytic action of AT III 1000-fold. The combination of AT III with unfractionated heparin increases degra-
dation of both factor Xa and thrombin. Combination with fondaparinux or LMWH more selectively increases degradation of Xa. 
606    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
by causing the release of lipoprotein lipase from tissues, and long-
term use is associated with mineralocorticoid deficiency. 
 B. Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia 
 Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is a systemic hyperco-
agulable state that occurs in 1–4% of individuals treated with 
UFH for a minimum of 7 days. Surgical patients are at greatest 
risk. The reported incidence of HIT is lower in pediatric popula-
tions outside the critical care setting and is relatively rare in preg-
nant women. The risk of HIT may be higher in individuals treated 
with UFH of bovine origin compared with porcine heparin and is 
lower in those treated exclusively with LMWH. 
 Morbidity and mortality in HIT are related to thrombotic 
events. Venous thrombosis occurs most commonly, but occlusion of 
peripheral or central arteries is not infrequent. If an indwelling 
catheter is present, the risk of thrombosis is increased in that 
extremity. Skin necrosis has been described, particularly in individu-
als treated with warfarin in the absence of a direct thrombin inhibi-
tor, presumably due to acute depletion of the vitamin K-dependent 
anticoagulant protein C occurring in the presence of high levels of 
procoagulant proteins and an active hypercoagulable state. 
 The following points should be considered in all patients 
receiving heparin: Platelet counts should be performed frequently; 
thrombocytopenia appearing in a time frame consistent with an 
immune response to heparin should be considered suspicious for 
HIT; and any new thrombus occurring in a patient receiving 
heparin therapy should raise suspicion of HIT. Patients who 
develop HIT are treated by discontinuance of heparin and admin-
istration of a direct thrombin inhibitor. 
 Contraindications 
 Heparin is contraindicated in patients with HIT, hypersensitivity 
to the drug, active bleeding, hemophilia, significant thrombocy-
topenia, purpura, severe hypertension, intracranial hemorrhage, 
infective endocarditis, active tuberculosis, ulcerative lesions of the 
gastrointestinal tract, threatened abortion, visceral carcinoma, or 
advanced hepatic or renal disease. Heparin should be avoided in 
patients who have recently had surgery of the brain, spinal cord, 
or eye, and in patients who are undergoing lumbar puncture or 
regional anesthetic block. Despite the apparent lack of placental 
transfer, heparin should be used in pregnant women only when 
clearly indicated. 
 Administration & Dosage 
 The indications for the use of heparin are described in the section 
on clinical pharmacology. A plasma concentration of heparin of 
0.2–0.4 unit/mL (by protamine titration) or 0.3–0.7 unit/mL 
(anti-Xa units) usually prevents pulmonary emboli in patients 
with established venous thrombosis. This concentration generally 
corresponds to a PTT of 2–3 times baseline. However, the use of 
the PTT for heparin monitoring is problematic. There is no stan-
dardization scheme for the PTT as there is for the prothrombin 
time (PT) and its international normalized ratio (INR). Currently 
more than 300 reagent-instrument combinations are in use, 
and the actual ratios required to obtain an anti-Xa activity of 
0.3–0.7 units/mL are variable, ranging from 1.6 to 6 times control 
PTT. Thus, if the PTT is used for monitoring, the laboratory 
should determine the clotting time that corresponds to the thera-
peutic range by protamine titration or anti-Xa activity, as listed 
above. 
 In addition, some patients have a prolonged baseline PTT due 
to factor deficiency or inhibitors (which could increase bleeding 
risk) or lupus anticoagulant (which is not associated with bleeding 
risk but may be associated with thrombosis risk). Using the PTT 
to assess heparin effect in such patients is very difficult. An alter-
native is to use anti-Xa activity to assess heparin concentration, a 
test now widely available on automated coagulation instruments. 
This approach more accurately measures the heparin concentra-
tion; however, it does not provide the global assessment of intrin-
sic pathway integrity of the PTT. 
 The following strategy is recommended: prior to initiating 
anticoagulant therapy of any type, the integrity of the patient’s 
hemostatic system should be assessed by a careful history of prior 
bleeding events, and baseline PT and PTT. If there is a prolonged 
clotting time, the cause of this (deficiency or inhibitor) should be 
determined prior to initiating therapy, and treatment goals strati-
fied to a risk-benefit assessment. In high-risk patients measuring 
both the PTT and anti-Xa activity may be useful. When  intermit-
tent heparin administration is used, the aPTT or anti-Xa activity 
should be measured 6 hours after the administered dose to main-
tain prolongation of the aPTT to 2–2.5 times that of the control 
value. However, LMW heparin therapy is the preferred option in 
this case, as no monitoring is required in most patients. 
 Continuous intravenous administration of heparin is accom-
plished via an infusion pump. After an initial bolus injection of 
80–100 units/kg, a continuous infusion of about 15–22 units/
kg/h is required to maintain the anti-Xa activity in the range of 
0.3–0.7 units/mL. Low-dose prophylaxis is achieved with subcu-
taneous administration of heparin, 5000 units every 8–12 hours. 
Because of the danger of hematoma formation at the injection 
site, heparin must never be administered intramuscularly. 
 Prophylactic enoxaparin is given subcutaneously in a dosage of 
30 mg twice daily or 40 mg once daily. Full-dose enoxaparin 
therapy is 1 mg/kg subcutaneously every 12 hours. This corre-
sponds to a therapeutic anti-factor Xa level of 0.5–1 unit/mL. 
Selected patients may be treated with enoxaparin 1.5 mg/kg once 
a day, with a target anti-Xa level of 1.5 units/mL. The prophylac-
tic dose of dalteparin is 5000 units subcutaneously once a day; 
therapeutic dosing is 200 units/kg once a day for venous disease 
or 120 units/kg every 12 hours for acute coronary syndrome. 
LMWH should be used with caution in patients with renal insuf-
ficiency or body weight greater than 150 kg. Measurement of the 
anti-Xa level is useful to guide dosing in these individuals. 
 The synthetic pentasaccharide molecule  fondaparinux 
( Figure 34–4 ) avidly binds antithrombin with high specific activ-
ity, resulting in efficient inactivation of factor Xa. Fondaparinux 
has a long half-life of 15 hours, allowing for once-daily dosing by 
subcutaneous administration. Fondaparinux is effective in the 
CHAPTER 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation    607
prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism, and 
appears to not cross-react with pathologic HIT antibodies in most 
individuals. The use of fondaparinux as an alternative anticoagu-
lant in HIT is currently being tested in clinical trials. 
 A major focus of drug development has been to develop orally 
active anticoagulants that do not require monitoring.  Rivaroxaban 
is the first oral factor Xa inhibitor to reach phase III clinical trials. 
The safety and efficacy of rivaroxaban appears to be at least 
equivalent, and possibly superior, to LMW heparins (see below). 
 Reversal of Heparin Action 
 Excessive anticoagulant action of heparin is treated by discontinu-
ance of the drug. If bleeding occurs, administration of a specific 
antagonist such as  protamine sulfate is indicated. Protamine is 
a highly basic, positively charged peptide that combines with 
 negatively charged heparin as an ion pair to form a stable complex 
devoid of anticoagulant activity. For every 100 units of heparin 
remaining in the patient, 1 mg of protamine sulfate is given intra-
venously; the rate of infusion should not exceed 50 mg in any 
10-minute period. Excess protamine must be avoided; it also has an 
anticoagulant effect. Neutralization of LMW heparin by protamine 
is incomplete. Limited experience suggests that 1 mg of protamine 
sulfate may be used to partially neutralize 1 mg of enoxaparin. 
Protamine will not reverse the activity of fondaparinux. Excess dan-
aparoid can be removed by plasmapheresis. 
 ORAL DIRECT FACTOR XA 
INHIBITORS 
 Oral Xa inhibitors, including rivaroxaban and apixaban, are 
approved or in advanced stages of development and along with 
oral thrombin inhibitors (discussed below) are likely to have a 
major impact on antithrombotic pharmacotherapy. These drugs 
inhibit factor Xa, in the final common pathway of clotting (see 
 Figure 34–2 ). These drugs are given as fixed doses and do not 
require monitoring. They have a rapid onset of action and shorter 
half-lives than warfarin (approximately 10 hours but half-life may 
be prolonged in elderly patients or those with renal impairment). 
 Rivaroxaban is approved for prevention of venous throm-
boembolism following hip or knee surgery. The prophylactic dose 
is 10 mg orally per day. A recent large randomized clinical trial of 
DVT treatment compared a higher dose of rivaroxaban (15 mg 
bid for 3 weeks, followed by 20 mg daily) to a standard treatment 
regimen of enoxaparin followed by warfarin. This trial demon-
strated non-inferiority of rivaroxaban in preventing recurrent 
venous thromboembolism and showed no difference in bleeding 
risk. Another trial reported non-inferiority of rivaroxaban to war-
farin for prevention of stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation. 
 Apixaban is currently in clinical development. A recent study 
of patients undergoing total hip replacement compared apixaban 
2.5 mg orally once per day with enoxaparin 40 mg subcutane-
ously once per day. This trial demonstrated the apixaban arm had 
lower rates of venous thromboembolism and similar bleeding 
rates. Another multicenter study randomized patients with recent 
myocardial infarction to apixaban 5 mg or placebo. This trial was 
stopped early because of an increase in bleeding risk without a 
significant decrease in ischemic events. Another trial comparing 
apixaban to aspirin for stroke prevention in atrial fibrillation was 
stopped early because of evidence of increased efficacy in the 
apixaban arm. 
 Thus, it appears that the primary target populations for devel-
opment of both rivaroxaban and apixaban will be prevention and 
treatment of patients with venous thromboembolism and stroke 
prevention in patients with atrial fibrillation. Both of these drugs 
are excreted in part by the kidneys; therefore, the dosage may need 
to be reduced in patients with renal impairment. In such patients, 
use of a hepatically metabolized drug such as warfarin may be a 
better alternative. No antidotes exist for direct Xa inhibitors. 
 DIRECT THROMBIN INHIBITORS 
 The direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs) exert their anticoagulant 
effect by directly binding to the active site of thrombin, thereby 
inhibiting thrombin’s downstream effects. This is in contrast to 
indirect thrombin inhibitors such as heparin and LMWH (see 
above), which act through antithrombin.  Hirudin and  bivaliru-
din are bivalent DTIs in that they bind at both the catalytic or 
active site of thrombin as well as at a substrate recognition site. 
 Argatroban and  melagatran are small molecules that bind only at 
the thrombin active site. 
 PARENTERAL DIRECT THROMBIN 
INHIBITORS 
 Leeches have been used for bloodletting since the age of 
Hippocrates. More recently, surgeons have used medicinal leeches 
 (Hirudo medicinalis) to prevent thrombosis in the fine vessels of 
reattached digits.  Hirudin is a specific, irreversible thrombin 
inhibitor from leech saliva that is now available in recombinant 
form as  lepirudin. Its action is independent of antithrombin, 
which means it can reach and inactivate fibrin-bound thrombin in 
thrombi. Lepirudin has little effect on platelets or the bleeding 
time. Like heparin, it must be administered parenterally and is 
monitored by the aPTT. Lepirudin is approved by the FDA for use 
in patients with thrombosis related to heparin-induced thrombo-
cytopenia. Lepirudin is excreted by the kidney and should be used 
with great caution in patients with renal insufficiency as no anti-
dote exists. Up to 40% of patients who receive long-term infusions 
develop an antibody directed against the thrombin-lepirudin com-
plex. These antigen-antibody complexes are not cleared by the 
kidney and may result in an enhanced anticoagulant effect. Some 
patients re-exposed to the drug have developed life-threatening 
anaphylactic reactions. 
 Bivalirudin, another bivalent inhibitor of thrombin, is admin-
istered intravenously, with a rapid onset and offset of action. The 
drug has a short half-life with clearance that is 20% renal and the 
608    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
remainder metabolic. Bivalirudin also inhibits platelet activation 
and has been FDA-approved for use in percutaneous coronary 
angioplasty. 
 Argatroban is a small molecule thrombin inhibitor that is 
FDA-approved for use in patients with HIT with or without 
thrombosis and coronary angioplasty in patients with HIT. It, too, 
has a short half-life, is given by continuous intravenous infusion, 
and is monitored by aPTT. Its clearance is not affected by renal 
disease but is dependent on liver function; dose reduction is 
required in patients with liver disease. Patients on argatroban will 
demonstrate elevated INRs, rendering the transition to warfarin 
difficult (ie, the INR will reflect contributions from both warfarin 
and argatroban). (INR is discussed in detail in the discussion of 
warfarin administration.) A nomogram is supplied by the manu-
facturer to assist in this transition. No properly designed head-to-
head trials have been performed to determine whether argatroban 
or lepirudin is superior in the treatment of HIT. However, in 
practice, the choice of which DTI to use in a patient with HIT is 
usually dictated by the condition of the clearing organ. If the 
patient has severe renal insufficiency, then argatroban would be 
preferred. If there is severe hepatic insufficiency, then lepirudin 
would be a better choice. 
 ORAL DIRECT THROMBIN INHIBITORS 
 Advantages of oral direct thrombin inhibitors include predictable 
pharmacokinetics and bioavailability, which allow for fixed dosing 
and predictable anticoagulant response, and make routine coagu-
lation monitoring unnecessary. In addition, these agents do not 
interact with P450-interacting drugs, and their rapid onset and 
offset of action allow for immediate anticoagulation, thus avoid-
ing the need for overlap with additional anticoagulant drugs. 
 Dabigatran etexilate mesylate is the first oral direct thrombin 
inhibitor approved by the FDA. Dabigatran was approved in 
2010 to reduce risk of stroke and systemic embolism with nonval-
vular atrial fibrillation. In the EU, dabigatran is approved for 
prevention of venous thromboembolism in patients who have 
undergone hip or knee replacement surgery. The pivotal trial lead-
ing to FDA approval was a study of > 18,000 patients with non-
valvular atrial fibrillation and at least one other defined risk factor. 
Dabigatran at a dose of 150 mg bid was shown to be superior to 
warfarin with an INR target of 2–3 in preventing stroke and sys-
temic embolization. 
 Pharmacology 
 Dabigatran and its metabolites are direct thrombin inhibitors. 
Following oral administration, dabigatran etexilate mesylate is 
converted to dabigatran. The oral bioavailability is 3–7% in nor-
mal volunteers. The drug is a substrate for the P-glycoprotein 
efflux pump; however, P-glycoprotein inhibitors or inducers do 
not have a significant effect on drug clearance. Concomitant use 
of ketoconazole, amiodarone, quinidine, and clopidogrel increases 
the effect of dabigatran. The half-life of the drug in normal volun-
teers is 12–17 hours. Renal impairment results in prolonged drug 
clearance and may require dose adjustment; the drug should be 
avoided in patients with severe renal impairment. 
 Administration & Dosage 
 For prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in nonvalvular 
atrial fibrillation, 150 mg should be given bid to patients with 
creatinine clearance > 30 mL/min. For decreased creatinine clear-
ance of 15–30 mL/min, the dose is 75 mg bid. No monitoring is 
required. Dabigatran will prolong the PTT and thrombin time, 
which can be used to estimate drug effect if necessary. 
 Toxicity 
 As with any anticoagulant drug, the primary toxicity of dabigatran 
is bleeding. In the RE-LY study, there was an increase in gastroin-
testinal adverse reactions and gastrointestinal bleeding compared 
to warfarin. There was also a trend toward increased bleeding with 
dabigatran in patients older than 75 years. There is no antidote for 
dabigatran. In a drug overdose situation, it is important to main-
tain renal function or dialyze if necessary. Use of recombinant 
factor VIIa or prothrombin complex concentrates may be consid-
ered as an unproven, off-label use in cases of life-threatening 
bleeding associated with dabigatran use. 
 Oral direct thrombin inhibitors and oral direct Xa inhibitors 
offer significant advantages over warfarin (discussed next), which 
has a narrow therapeutic window, is affected by diet and many 
drugs, and requires monitoring for dosage adjustment. It appears 
that the oral anti-Xa drugs and oral direct thrombin inhibitors are 
poised to challenge warfarin’s dominance in the prevention and 
therapy of thrombotic disease. 
 WARFARIN & OTHER COUMARIN 
ANTICOAGULANTS 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 The clinical use of the coumarin anticoagulants began with the 
discovery of an anticoagulant substance formed in spoiled sweet 
clover silage which caused hemorrhagic disease in cattle. At the 
behest of local farmers, a chemist at the University of Wisconsin 
identified the toxic agent as bishydroxycoumarin. A synthesized 
derivative, dicumarol and its congeners, most notably warfarin 
( W isconsin  A lumni  R esearch  F oundation, with “arin” from cou-
marin added;  Figure 34–5 ), were initially used as rodenticides. In 
the 1950s warfarin (under the brand name Coumadin) was 
introduced as an antithrombotic agent in humans. Warfarin is 
one of the most commonly prescribed drugs, used by approxi-
mately 1.5 million individuals, and several studies have indicated 
that the drug is significantly underused in clinical situations 
where it has proven benefit. 
 Warfarin is generally administered as the sodium salt and has 
100% bioavailability. Over 99% of racemic warfarin is bound to 
plasma albumin, which may contribute to its small volume of dis-
tribution (the albumin space), its long half-life in plasma (36 hours), 
and the lack of urinary excretion of unchanged drug. Warfarin used 
CHAPTER 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation    609
clinically is a racemic mixture composed of equal amounts of two 
enantiomorphs. The levorotatory S-warfarin is four times more 
potent than the dextrorotatory R-warfarin. This observation is use-
ful in understanding the stereoselective nature of several drug inter-
actions involving warfarin. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Coumarin anticoagulants block the γ-carboxylation of several 
glutamate residues in prothrombin and factors VII, IX, and X 
as well as the endogenous anticoagulant proteins C and S 
( Figure 34–2 ,  Table 34–1 ). The blockade results in incomplete 
coagulation factor molecules that are biologically inactive. The 
protein carboxylation reaction is coupled to the oxidation of 
vitamin K. The vitamin must then be reduced to reactivate it. 
Warfarin prevents reductive metabolism of the inactive vitamin 
K epoxide back to its active hydroquinone form ( Figure 34–6 ). 
Mutational change of the responsible enzyme, vitamin K epox-
ide reductase, can give rise to genetic resistance to warfarin in 
humans and especially in rats. 
 There is an 8- to 12-hour delay in the action of warfarin. Its 
anticoagulant effect results from a balance between partially inhib-
ited synthesis and unaltered degradation of the four vitamin 
K-dependent clotting factors. The resulting inhibition of coagula-
tion is dependent on their degradation half-lives in the circulation. 
These half-lives are 6, 24, 40, and 60 hours for factors VII, IX, X, 
and II, respectively. Larger initial doses of warfarin—up to about 
0.75 mg/kg—hasten the onset of the anticoagulant effect. Beyond 
this dosage, the speed of onset is independent of the dose size. The 
only effect of a larger loading dose is to prolong the time that the 
plasma concentration of drug remains above that required for sup-
pression of clotting factor synthesis. The only difference among 
oral anticoagulants in producing and maintaining hypoprothrom-
binemia is the half-life of each drug. 
 Toxicity 
 Warfarin crosses the placenta readily and can cause a hemorrhagic 
disorder in the fetus. Furthermore, fetal proteins with 
γ-carboxyglutamate residues found in bone and blood may be 
affected by warfarin; the drug can cause a serious birth defect 
CH2
O
O
O
OH
OH
O
O
ONa
O
C
CH2
CO
CH3
Dicumarol
Warfarin sodium
O
O
Phenindione
O
CH3
Phytonadione (vitamin K1)
CH2
CH
C
C16H33
O
CH3
H
*
 FIGURE 34–5  Structural formulas of several oral anticoagulant drugs and of vitamin K. The carbon atom of warfarin shown at the asterisk 
is an asymmetric center. 
CH2
R
O
OH
OH
CH3
KH2
R
CH3
KO
O
O
Warfarin
Carboxylase
O2
CO2
CH2
COO–
Descarboxy-
prothrombin
CH
CH2
COO–
Prothrombin
–OOC
 FIGURE 34–6  Vitamin K cycle—metabolic interconversions of 
vitamin K associated with the synthesis of vitamin K–dependent 
clotting factors. Vitamin K 1 or K 2 is activated by reduction to the 
hydroquinone form (KH 2 ). Stepwise oxidation to vitamin K epoxide 
(KO) is coupled to prothrombin carboxylation by the enzyme carbox-
ylase. The reactivation of vitamin K epoxide is the warfarin-sensitive 
step (warfarin). The R on the vitamin K molecule represents a 
20-carbon phytyl side chain in vitamin K 1 and a 30- to 65-carbon 
polyprenyl side chain in vitamin K 2 . 
610    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
characterized by abnormal bone formation. Thus, warfarin should 
never be administered during pregnancy. Cutaneous necrosis with 
reduced activity of protein C sometimes occurs during the first 
weeks of therapy. Rarely, the same process causes frank infarction 
of the breast, fatty tissues, intestine, and extremities. The patho-
logic lesion associated with the hemorrhagic infarction is venous 
thrombosis, suggesting that it is caused by warfarin-induced 
depression of protein C synthesis. 
 Administration & Dosage 
 Treatment with warfarin should be initiated with standard doses 
of 5–10 mg rather than the large loading doses formerly used. The 
initial adjustment of the prothrombin time takes about 1 week, 
which usually results in a maintenance dose of 5–7 mg/d. The 
 prothrombin time (PT) should be increased to a level represent-
ing a reduction of prothrombin activity to 25% of normal and 
maintained there for long-term therapy. When the activity is less 
than 20%, the warfarin dosage should be reduced or omitted until 
the activity rises above 20%. 
 The therapeutic range for oral anticoagulant therapy is defined 
in terms of an international normalized ratio (INR). The INR is 
the prothrombin time ratio (patient prothrombin time/mean of 
normal prothrombin time for lab) ISI , where the ISI exponent refers 
to the International Sensitivity Index, and is dependent on the 
specific reagents and instruments used for the determination. The 
ISI serves to relate measured prothrombin times to a World 
Health Organization reference standard thromboplastin; thus the 
prothrombin times performed on different properly calibrated 
instruments with a variety of thromboplastin reagents should give 
the same INR results for a given sample. For most reagent and 
instrument combinations in current use, the ISI is close to 1, mak-
ing the INR roughly the ratio of the patient prothrombin time to 
the mean normal prothrombin time. The recommended INR for 
prophylaxis and treatment of thrombotic disease is 2–3. Patients 
with some types of artificial heart valves (eg, tilting disk) or other 
medical conditions increasing thrombotic risk have a recom-
mended range of 2.5–3.5. 
 Occasionally patients exhibit warfarin resistance, defined as 
progression or recurrence of a thrombotic event while in the 
therapeutic range. These individuals may have their INR target 
raised (which is accompanied by an increase in bleeding risk) or be 
changed to an alternative form of anticoagulation (eg, daily injec-
tions of LMWH). Warfarin resistance is most commonly seen in 
patients with advanced cancers, typically of gastrointestinal origin 
(Trousseau’s syndrome). A recent study has demonstrated the 
superiority of LMWH over warfarin in preventing recurrent 
venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer. 
 Drug Interactions 
 The oral anticoagulants often interact with other drugs and with 
disease states. These interactions can be broadly divided into 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic effects ( Table 34–2 ). 
Pharmacokinetic mechanisms for drug interaction with oral 
anticoagulants are mainly enzyme induction, enzyme inhibition, 
and reduced plasma protein binding. Pharmacodynamic mecha-
nisms for interactions with warfarin are synergism (impaired 
hemostasis, reduced clotting factor synthesis, as in hepatic 
disease), competitive antagonism (vitamin K), and an altered 
physiologic control loop for vitamin K (hereditary resistance to 
oral anticoagulants). 
 The most serious interactions with warfarin are those that 
increase the anticoagulant effect and the risk of bleeding. The 
most dangerous of these interactions are the pharmacokinetic 
interactions with the mostly obsolete pyrazolones phenylbuta-
zone and sulfinpyrazone. These drugs not only augment the 
hypoprothrombinemia but also inhibit platelet function and 
may induce peptic ulcer disease (see  Chapter 36 ). The mecha-
nisms for their hypoprothrombinemic interaction are a stereose-
lective inhibition of oxidative metabolic transformation of 
S-warfarin (the more potent isomer) and displacement of albu-
min-bound warfarin, increasing the free fraction. For this and 
other reasons, neither phenylbutazone nor sulfinpyrazone is in 
common use in the USA. Metronidazole, fluconazole, and 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole also stereoselectively inhibit the 
TABLE 34–2 Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug and body interactions with oral anticoagulants.
Increased Prothrombin Time
Decreased Prothrombin Time
Pharmacokinetic
Pharmacodynamic
Pharmacokinetic
Pharmacodynamic
Amiodarone
Drugs
Barbiturates
Drugs
Cimetidine
 Aspirin (high doses)
Cholestyramine
 Diuretics
Disulfiram
  Cephalosporins, third-generation
Rifampin
 Vitamin K
Metronidazole1
 Heparin
Body factors
Fluconazole1
Body factors
 Hereditary resistance
Phenylbutazone1
 Hepatic disease
 Hypothyroidism
Sulfinpyrazone1
 Hyperthyroidism
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
1Stereoselectively inhibits the oxidative metabolism of the S-warfarin enantiomorph of racemic warfarin.
CHAPTER 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation    611
metabolic transformation of  S -warfarin, whereas amiodarone, 
disulfiram, and cimetidine inhibit metabolism of both 
enantiomorphs of warfarin. Aspirin, hepatic disease, and hyper-
thyroidism augment warfarin’s effects—aspirin by its effect on 
platelet function and the latter two by increasing the turnover 
rate of clotting factors. The third-generation cephalosporins 
eliminate the bacteria in the intestinal tract that produce vitamin 
K and, like warfarin, also directly inhibit vitamin K epoxide 
reductase. 
 Barbiturates and rifampin cause a marked  decrease of the anti-
coagulant effect by induction of the hepatic enzymes that trans-
form racemic warfarin. Cholestyramine binds warfarin in the 
intestine and reduces its absorption and bioavailability. 
 Pharmacodynamic reductions of anticoagulant effect occur 
with vitamin K (increased synthesis of clotting factors), the diuretics 
chlorthalidone and spironolactone (clotting factor concentration), 
hereditary resistance (mutation of vitamin K reactivation cycle 
molecules), and hypothyroidism (decreased turnover rate of clot-
ting factors). 
 Drugs with  no significant effect on anticoagulant therapy 
include ethanol, phenothiazines, benzodiazepines, acetamino-
phen, opioids, indomethacin, and most antibiotics. 
 Reversal of Warfarin Action 
 Excessive anticoagulant effect and bleeding from warfarin can be 
reversed by stopping the drug and administering oral or parenteral 
vitamin K 1 (phytonadione), fresh-frozen plasma, prothrombin 
complex concentrates such as Bebulin and Proplex T, and recom-
binant factor VIIa (rFVIIa). The disappearance of excessive effect 
is not correlated with plasma warfarin concentrations but rather 
with re-establishment of normal activity of the clotting factors. A 
modest excess of anticoagulant effect without bleeding may 
require no more than cessation of the drug. The warfarin effect 
can be rapidly reversed in the setting of severe bleeding with the 
administration of prothrombin complex or rFVIIa coupled with 
intravenous vitamin K. It is important to note that due to the long 
half-life of warfarin, a single dose of vitamin K or rFVIIa may not 
be sufficient. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THE FIBRINOLYTIC DRUGS 
 Fibrinolytic drugs rapidly lyse thrombi by catalyzing the for-
mation of the serine protease  plasmin from its precursor zymo-
gen, plasminogen ( Figure 34–3 ). These drugs create a 
generalized lytic state when administered intravenously. Thus, 
both protective hemostatic thrombi and target thromboemboli 
are broken down. The Box: Thrombolytic Drugs for Acute 
Myocardial Infarction describes the use of these drugs in one 
major application. 
 Pharmacology 
 Streptokinase is a protein (but not an enzyme in itself) synthe-
sized by streptococci that combines with the proactivator plasmi-
nogen. This enzymatic complex catalyzes the conversion of 
inactive plasminogen to active plasmin.  Urokinase is a human 
enzyme synthesized by the kidney that directly converts plasmi-
nogen to active plasmin. Plasmin itself cannot be used because 
naturally occurring inhibitors in plasma prevent its effects. 
However, the absence of inhibitors for urokinase and the strepto-
kinase-proactivator complex permits their use clinically. 
Plasmin formed inside a thrombus by these activators is pro-
tected from plasma antiplasmins, which allows it to lyse the 
thrombus from within. 
 Thrombolytic Drugs for Acute Myocardial Infarction 
 The paradigm shift in 1980 on the causation of acute myocardial 
infarction to acute coronary occlusion by a thrombus created 
the rationale for thrombolytic therapy of this common lethal 
disease. At that time—and for the first time—intravenous 
thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction in the 
European Cooperative Study Group trial was found to reduce 
mortality significantly. Later studies, with thousands of patients 
in each trial, provided enough statistical power for the 20% 
reduction in mortality to be considered statistically significant. 
Although the standard of care in areas with adequate facilities 
and experience in percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) 
now favors catheterization and placement of a stent, throm-
bolytic therapy is still very important where PCI is not readily 
available. 
 The proper selection of patients for thrombolytic therapy is 
critical. The diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction is made clini-
cally and is confirmed by electrocardiography. Patients with 
ST-segment elevation and bundle branch block on electrocardi-
ography have the best outcomes. All trials to date show the great-
est benefit for thrombolytic therapy when it is given early, within 
6 hours after symptomatic onset of acute myocardial infarction. 
 Thrombolytic drugs reduce the mortality of acute myocardial 
infarction. The early and appropriate use of any thrombolytic 
drug probably transcends possible advantages of a particular 
drug. Adjunctive drugs such as aspirin, heparin, β blockers, and 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors reduce mortal-
ity even further. The principles of management are outlined in 
Antman, et al, 2008 (see References). 
612    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 Anistreplase (anisoylated plasminogen streptokinase activator 
complex; APSAC) consists of a complex of purified human plas-
minogen and bacterial streptokinase that has been acylated to 
protect the enzyme’s active site. When administered, the acyl 
group spontaneously hydrolyzes, freeing the activated streptoki-
nase-proactivator complex. This product (now discontinued in the 
USA) allows for rapid intravenous injection, greater clot selectivity 
(ie, more activity on plasminogen associated with clots than on 
free plasminogen in the blood), and more thrombolytic activity. 
 Plasminogen can also be activated endogenously by  tissue 
plasminogen activators (t-PAs). These activators preferentially 
activate plasminogen that is bound to fibrin, which (in theory) 
confines fibrinolysis to the formed thrombus and avoids systemic 
activation. Human t-PA is manufactured as  alteplase by means of 
recombinant DNA technology.  Reteplase is another recombinant 
human t-PA from which several amino acid sequences have been 
deleted. Reteplase is less expensive to produce than t-PA. Because 
it lacks the major fibrin-binding domain, reteplase is less fibrin-
specific than t-PA.  Tenecteplase is a mutant form of t-PA that has 
a longer half-life, and it can be given as an intravenous bolus. 
Tenecteplase is slightly more fibrin-specific than t-PA. 
 Indications & Dosage 
 Administration of fibrinolytic drugs by the intravenous route is 
indicated in cases of  pulmonary embolism with hemodynamic 
instability, severe  deep venous thrombosis such as the superior 
vena caval syndrome, and  ascending thrombophlebitis of the 
iliofemoral vein with severe lower extremity edema. These drugs are 
also given intra-arterially, especially for peripheral vascular disease. 
 Thrombolytic therapy in the management of  acute myocar-
dial infarction requires careful patient selection, the use of a 
specific thrombolytic agent, and the benefit of adjuvant therapy. 
Streptokinase is administered by intravenous infusion of a load-
ing dose of 250,000 units, followed by 100,000 units/h for 
24–72 hours. Patients with antistreptococcal antibodies can 
develop fever, allergic reactions, and therapeutic resistance. 
Urokinase requires a loading dose of 300,000 units given over 10 
minutes and a maintenance dose of 300,000 units/h for 12 hours. 
Alteplase (t-PA) is given by intravenous infusion of 60 mg over 
the first hour and then 40 mg at a rate of 20 mg/h. Reteplase is 
given as two intravenous bolus injections of 10 units each, sepa-
rated by 30 minutes. Tenecteplase is given as a single intravenous 
bolus of 0.5 mg/kg. Anistreplase (where available) is given as a 
single intravenous injection of 30 units over 3–5 minutes. A sin-
gle course of fibrinolytic drugs is expensive: hundreds of dollars 
for streptokinase and thousands for urokinase and t-PA. 
 Recombinant t-PA has also been approved for use in acute isch-
emic stroke within 3 hours of symptom onset. In patients without 
hemorrhagic infarct or other contraindications, this therapy has 
been demonstrated to provide better outcomes in several random-
ized clinical trials. The recommended dose is 0.9 mg/kg, not to 
exceed 90 mg, with 10% given as a bolus and the remainder during 
a 1 hour infusion. Streptokinase has been associated with increased 
bleeding risk in acute ischemic stroke when given at a dose of 
1.5 million units, and its use is not recommended in this setting. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
ANTIPLATELET AGENTS 
 Platelet function is regulated by three categories of substances. 
The first group consists of agents generated outside the platelet 
that interact with platelet membrane receptors, eg, catecholamines, 
collagen, thrombin, and prostacyclin. The second category con-
tains agents generated within the platelet that interact with mem-
brane receptors, eg, ADP, prostaglandin D 2 , prostaglandin E 2 , and 
serotonin. The third group comprises agents generated within the 
platelet that act within the platelet, eg, prostaglandin endoperox-
ides and thromboxane A 2 , the cyclic nucleotides cAMP and 
cGMP, and calcium ion. From this list of agents, several targets for 
platelet inhibitory drugs have been identified ( Figure 34–1 ): inhi-
bition of prostaglandin synthesis (aspirin), inhibition of ADP-
induced platelet aggregation (clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticlopidine), 
and blockade of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors on platelets (abcix-
imab, tirofiban, and eptifibatide). Dipyridamole and cilostazol are 
additional antiplatelet drugs. 
 ASPIRIN 
 The prostaglandin  thromboxane A 2 is an arachidonate product 
that causes platelets to change shape, release their granules, and 
aggregate (see  Chapter 18 ). Drugs that antagonize this pathway 
interfere with platelet aggregation in vitro and prolong the bleed-
ing time in vivo. Aspirin is the prototype of this class of drugs. 
 As described in  Chapter 18 , aspirin inhibits the synthesis of 
thromboxane A 2 by irreversible acetylation of the enzyme cycloox-
ygenase. Other salicylates and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs also inhibit cyclooxygenase but have a shorter duration of 
inhibitory action because they cannot acetylate cyclooxygenase; 
that is, their action is reversible. 
 The FDA has approved the use of 325 mg/d aspirin for  primary 
prophylaxis of myocardial infarction but urges caution in this use 
of aspirin by the general population except when prescribed as an 
adjunct to risk factor management by smoking cessation and low-
ering of blood cholesterol and blood pressure. Meta-analysis of 
many published trials of aspirin and other antiplatelet agents con-
firms the value of this intervention in the  secondary prevention of 
vascular events among patients with a history of vascular events. 
 TICLOPIDINE, CLOPIDOGREL, & 
PRASUGREL 
 Ticlopidine, clopidogrel, and prasugrel reduce platelet aggrega-
tion by inhibiting the ADP pathway of platelets. These drugs 
irreversibly block the ADP receptor on platelets. Unlike aspirin, 
these drugs have no effect on prostaglandin metabolism. Use of 
ticlopidine, clopidogrel, or prasugrel to prevent thrombosis is 
now considered standard practice in patients undergoing place-
ment of a coronary stent. As the indications and adverse effects 
of these drugs are different, they will be considered individually. 
CHAPTER 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation    613
 Ticlopidine is approved for prevention of stroke in patients 
with a history of a transient ischemic attack (TIA) or thrombotic 
stroke, and in combination with aspirin for prevention of coro-
nary stent thrombosis. Adverse effects of ticlopidine include nau-
sea, dyspepsia, and diarrhea in up to 20% of patients, hemorrhage 
in 5%, and, most seriously, leukopenia in 1%. The leukopenia is 
detected by regular monitoring of the white blood cell count dur-
ing the first 3 months of treatment. Development of thrombotic 
thrombocytopenic purpura has also been associated with the 
ingestion of ticlopidine. The dosage of ticlopidine is 250 mg twice 
daily. Because of the significant side effect profile, the use of ticlo-
pidine for stroke prevention should be restricted to those who are 
intolerant of or have failed aspirin therapy. Doses of ticlopidine 
less than 500 mg/d may be efficacious with fewer adverse effects. 
 Clopidogrel is approved for patients with unstable angina or 
non-ST-elevation acute myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) in com-
bination with aspirin; for patients with ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction (STEMI); or recent myocardial infarction, stroke, or 
established peripheral arterial disease. For NSTEMI, the dosage is 
a 300 mg loading dose followed by 75 mg daily of clopidogrel, 
with a daily aspirin dose of 75–325 mg. For patients with STEMI, 
the dose is 75 mg daily of clopidogrel, in association with aspirin 
as above; and for recent myocardial infarction, stroke, or periph-
eral vascular disease, the dose is 75 mg/d. 
 Clopidogrel has fewer adverse effects than ticlopidine and is 
rarely associated with neutropenia. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
purpura has been reported. Because of its superior side effect pro-
file and dosing requirements, clopidogrel is frequently preferred 
over ticlopidine. The antithrombotic effects of clopidogrel are 
dose-dependent; within 5 hours after an oral loading dose of 
300 mg, 80% of platelet activity will be inhibited. The mainte-
nance dose of clopidogrel is 75 mg/d, which achieves maximum 
platelet inhibition. The duration of the antiplatelet effect is 
7–10 days. Clopidogrel is a prodrug that requires activation via 
the cytochrome P450 enzyme isoform CYP2C19. Depending on 
the single nucleotide polymorphism inheritance pattern in 
CYP2C19, individuals may be poor metabolizers of clopidogrel, 
and these patients may be at increased risk of cardiovascular events 
due to inadequate drug effect. The FDA has recommended 
CYP2C19 genotyping to identify such patients and advises 
prescribers to consider alternative therapies in poor metabolizers. 
However, more recent studies have questioned the impact of 
CYP2C19 metabolizer status on outcomes. Drugs that impair 
CYP2C19 function, such as omeprazole, should be used with cau-
tion pending clarification of the importance of CYP2C19 status. 
 Prasugrel, similar to clopidogrel, is approved for patients with 
acute coronary syndromes. The drug is given as a 60-mg loading 
dose and then 10 mg/d in combination with aspirin as outlined 
for clopidogrel. The Trial to assess Improvement in Therapeutic 
Outcomes by Optimizing Platelet Inhibition with Prasugrel 
(TRITON-TIMI38) compared prasugrel with clopidogrel in a 
randomized, double-blind trial with aspirin and other standard 
therapies managed with percutaneous coronary interventions. 
This trial showed a reduction in the primary composite cardio-
vascular endpoint (cardiovascular death, nonfatal stroke or non-
fatal myocardial infarction) for prasugrel in comparison with 
clopidogrel. However, the major and minor bleeding risk was 
increased with prasugrel. Prasugrel is contraindicated in patients 
with history of TIA or stroke because of increased bleeding risk. 
Although cytochrome P450 genotype status is an issue with 
 clopidogrel, it does not have an impact on the use of prasugrel. 
 Aspirin & Clopidogrel Resistance 
 The reported incidence of resistance to these drugs varies greatly, 
from less than 5% to 75%. In part this tremendous variation in 
incidence reflects the definition of resistance (recurrent thrombo-
sis while on antiplatelet therapy vs in vitro testing), methods by 
which drug response is measured, and patient compliance. Several 
methods for testing aspirin and clopidogrel resistance in vitro are 
now FDA-approved. However, the incidence of drug resistance 
varies considerably by testing method. These tests may be useful 
in selected patients to assess compliance or the cause of a recurrent 
thrombotic event, but their utility in routine clinical decision 
making outside of clinical trials remains controversial. 
 BLOCKADE OF PLATELET GLYCOPROTEIN 
IIB/IIIA RECEPTORS 
 The glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors are used in patients with 
acute coronary syndromes. These drugs target the platelet IIb/IIIa 
receptor complex ( Figure 34–1 ). The IIb/IIIa complex functions 
as a receptor mainly for fibrinogen and vitronectin but also for 
fibronectin and von Willebrand factor. Activation of this receptor 
complex is the “final common pathway” for platelet aggregation. 
There are approximately 50,000 copies of this complex on the 
surface of each platelet. Persons lacking this receptor have a bleed-
ing disorder called Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia. 
 Abciximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against 
the IIb/IIIa complex including the vitronectin receptor, was the 
first agent approved in this class of drugs. It has been approved for 
use in percutaneous coronary intervention and in acute coronary 
syndromes.  Eptifibatide is an analog of the sequence at the 
extreme carboxyl terminal of the delta chain of fibrinogen, which 
mediates the binding of fibrinogen to the receptor.  Tirofiban is a 
smaller molecule with similar properties. Eptifibatide and tiro-
fiban inhibit ligand binding to the IIb/IIIa receptor by their occu-
pancy of the receptor but do not block the vitronectin receptor. 
 The three agents described above are administered parenterally. 
Oral formulations of IIb/IIIa antagonists are in various stages of 
development. 
 ADDITIONAL ANTIPLATELET-DIRECTED 
DRUGS 
 Dipyridamole is a vasodilator that also inhibits platelet function 
by inhibiting adenosine uptake and cGMP phosphodiesterase 
activity. Dipyridamole by itself has little or no beneficial effect. 
Therefore, therapeutic use of this agent is primarily in combina-
tion with aspirin to prevent cerebrovascular ischemia. It may also 
be used in combination with warfarin for primary prophylaxis of 
614    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
thromboemboli in patients with prosthetic heart valves. A combi-
nation of dipyridamole complexed with 25 mg of aspirin is now 
available for secondary prophylaxis of cerebrovascular disease. 
 Cilostazol is a newer phosphodiesterase inhibitor that pro-
motes vasodilation and inhibition of platelet aggregation. Cilostazol 
is used primarily to treat intermittent claudication. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
DRUGS USED TO PREVENT 
CLOTTING 
 VENOUS THROMBOSIS 
 Risk Factors 
 A. Inherited Disorders 
 The inherited disorders characterized by a tendency to form 
thrombi (thrombophilia) derive from either quantitative or quali-
tative abnormalities of the natural anticoagulant system. 
Deficiencies (loss of function mutations) in the natural anticoagu-
lants antithrombin, protein C, and protein S account for approxi-
mately 15% of selected patients with juvenile or recurrent 
thrombosis and 5–10% of unselected cases of acute venous throm-
bosis. Additional causes of thrombophilia include gain of function 
mutations such as the factor V Leiden mutation and the prothrom-
bin 20210 mutation, elevated clotting factor and cofactor levels, 
and hyperhomocysteinemia that together account for the greater 
number of hypercoagulable patients. Although the loss of function 
mutations is less common, they are associated with the greatest 
thrombosis risk. Some patients have multiple inherited risk factors 
or combinations of inherited and acquired risk factors as discussed 
below. These individuals are at higher risk for recurrent thrombotic 
events and are often considered candidates for lifelong therapy. 
 B. Acquired Disease 
 The increased risk of thromboembolism associated with atrial 
fibrillation and with the placement of mechanical heart valves has 
long been recognized. Similarly, prolonged bed rest, high-risk 
surgical procedures, and the presence of cancer are clearly associ-
ated with an increased incidence of deep venous thrombosis and 
embolism. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is another 
important acquired risk factor. Drugs may function as synergistic 
risk factors in concert with inherited risk factors. For example, 
women who have the factor V Leiden mutation and take oral 
contraceptives have a synergistic increase in risk. 
 Antithrombotic Management 
 A. Prevention 
 Primary prevention of venous thrombosis reduces the incidence of 
and mortality rate from pulmonary emboli. Heparin and warfarin 
may be used to prevent venous thrombosis. Subcutaneous admin-
istration of low-dose unfractionated heparin, LMWH, or fonda-
parinux provides effective prophylaxis. Warfarin is also effective 
but requires laboratory monitoring of the prothrombin time. 
 B. Treatment of Established Disease 
 Treatment for established venous thrombosis is initiated with 
unfractionated or LMWH for the first 5–7 days, with an overlap 
with warfarin. Once therapeutic effects of warfarin have been 
established, therapy with warfarin is continued for a minimum of 
3–6 months. Patients with recurrent disease or identifiable, non-
reversible risk factors may be treated indefinitely. Small thrombi 
confined to the calf veins may be managed without anticoagulants 
if there is documentation over time that the thrombus is not 
extending. 
 Warfarin readily crosses the placenta. It can cause hemorrhage 
at any time during pregnancy as well as developmental defects 
when administered during the first trimester. Therefore, venous 
thromboembolic disease in pregnant women is generally treated 
with heparin, best administered by subcutaneous injection. 
 ARTERIAL THROMBOSIS 
 Activation of platelets is considered an essential process for arterial 
thrombosis. Thus, treatment with platelet-inhibiting drugs such as 
aspirin and clopidogrel or ticlopidine is indicated in patients with 
TIAs and strokes or unstable angina and acute myocardial infarc-
tion. Prasugrel is an alternative to clopidogrel for patients with 
acute coronary syndromes managed with percutaneous coronary 
interventions. In angina and infarction, these drugs are often used 
in conjunction with β blockers, calcium channel blockers, and 
fibrinolytic drugs. 
 ■ DRUGS USED IN BLEEDING 
DISORDERS 
 VITAMIN K 
 Vitamin K confers biologic activity upon prothrombin and factors 
VII, IX, and X by participating in their postribosomal modifica-
tion. Vitamin K is a fat-soluble substance found primarily in leafy 
green vegetables. The dietary requirement is low, because the vita-
min is additionally synthesized by bacteria that colonize the 
human intestine. Two natural forms exist: vitamins K 1 and K 2 . 
Vitamin K 1 (phytonadione;  Figure 34–5 ) is found in food. 
Vitamin K 2 (menaquinone) is found in human tissues and is syn-
thesized by intestinal bacteria. 
 Vitamins K 1 and K 2 require bile salts for absorption from the 
intestinal tract. Vitamin K 1 is available clinically in oral and par-
enteral forms. Onset of effect is delayed for 6 hours but the effect 
is complete by 24 hours when treating depression of prothrombin 
activity by excess warfarin or vitamin K deficiency. Intravenous 
administration of vitamin K 1 should be slow, because rapid infu-
sion can produce dyspnea, chest and back pain, and even death. 
Vitamin K repletion is best achieved with intravenous or oral 
administration, because its bioavailability after subcutaneous 
administration is erratic. Vitamin K 1 is currently administered to 
all newborns to prevent the hemorrhagic disease of vitamin K 
deficiency, which is especially common in premature infants. 
CHAPTER 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation    615
 The water-soluble salt of vitamin K 3 (menadione) should never be used 
in therapeutics . It is particularly ineffective in the treatment of war-
farin overdosage. Vitamin K deficiency frequently occurs in hospi-
talized patients in intensive care units because of poor diet, 
parenteral nutrition, recent surgery, multiple antibiotic therapy, and 
uremia. Severe hepatic failure results in diminished protein synthe-
sis and a hemorrhagic diathesis that is unresponsive to vitamin K. 
 PLASMA FRACTIONS 
 Sources & Preparations 
 Deficiencies in plasma coagulation factors can cause bleeding 
( Table 34–3 ). Spontaneous bleeding occurs when factor activity 
is less than 5–10% of normal. Factor VIII deficiency  (classic 
hemophilia, or  hemophilia A ) and factor IX deficiency 
 (Christmas disease, or  hemophilia B ) account for most of the 
heritable coagulation defects. Concentrated plasma fractions are 
available for the treatment of these deficiencies. Administration 
of plasma-derived, heat- or detergent-treated factor concen-
trates and recombinant factor concentrates are the standard 
treatments for bleeding associated with hemophilia. Lyophilized 
factor VIII concentrates are prepared from large pools of plasma. 
Transmission of viral diseases such as hepatitis B and C and 
HIV is reduced or eliminated by pasteurization and by extraction 
of plasma with solvents and detergents. However, this treatment 
does not remove other potential causes of transmissible diseases 
such as prions. For this reason, recombinant clotting factor 
preparations are recommended whenever possible for factor 
replacement. The best use of these therapeutic materials requires 
diagnostic specificity of the deficient factor and quantitation of 
its activity in plasma. Intermediate purity factor VIII concen-
trates (as opposed to recombinant or high purity concentrates) 
contain significant amounts of von Willebrand factor. Humate-P 
is a factor VIII concentrate that is approved by the FDA for the 
treatment of bleeding associated with von Willebrand disease. 
 Clinical Uses 
 An uncomplicated hemorrhage into a joint should be treated with 
sufficient factor VIII or factor IX replacement to maintain a level 
of at least 30–50% of the normal concentration for 24 hours. Soft 
tissue hematomas require a minimum of 100% activity for 7 days. 
Hematuria requires at least 10% activity for 3 days. Surgery and 
TABLE 34–3 Therapeutic products for the treatment of coagulation disorders.
Factor
Deficiency State
Hemostatic Levels
Half-Life of 
Infused Factor
Replacement Source
I
Hypofibrinogenemia
1 g/dL
4 days
Cryoprecipitate FFP
II
Prothrombin deficiency
30–40%
3 days
Prothrombin complex concentrates (inter-
mediate purity factor IX concentrates)
V
Factor V deficiency
20%
1 day
FFP
VII
Factor VII deficiency
30%
4–6 hours
FFP
Prothrombin complex concentrates (inter-
mediate purity factor IX concentrates) 
Recombinant factor VIIa
VIII
Hemophilia A
30–50% 
100% for major bleeding 
or trauma
12 hours
Recombinant factor VIII products
Plasma-derived high purity concentrates
Cryoprecipitate1
Some patients with mild deficiency will 
respond to DDAVP
IX
Hemophilia B 
Christmas disease
30–50% 
100% for major bleeding 
or trauma
24 hours
Recombinant factor IX products
Plasma-derived high purity concentrates
X
Stuart-Prower defect
25%
36 hours
FFP
Prothrombin complex concentrates
XI
Hemophilia C
30–50%
3 days
FFP
XII
Hageman defect
Not required
Treatment not necessary
von Willebrand
von Willebrand disease
30%
Approximately 
10 hours
Intermediate purity factor VIII concentrates 
that contain von Willebrand factor
Some patients respond to DDAVP
Cryoprecipitate1
XIII
Factor XIII deficiency
5%
6 days
FFP 
Cryoprecipitate
FFP, fresh frozen plasma; DDAVP, 1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin.
Antithrombin and activated protein C concentrates are available for the appropriate indications that include thrombosis in the setting of antithrombin deficiency and sepsis 
respectively.
1Cryoprecipitate should be used to treat bleeding in the setting of factor VIII deficiency and von Willebrand disease only in an emergency in which pathogen-inactivated products 
are not available.
616    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
major trauma require a minimum of 100% activity for 10 days. 
The initial loading dose for factor VIII is 50 units/kg of body 
weight to achieve 100% activity of factor VIII from a baseline of 
1% or less, assuming a normal hemoglobin. Each unit of factor 
VIII per kilogram of body weight raises its activity in plasma 2%. 
Replacement should be administered every 12 hours. Factor IX 
therapy requires twice the dose of factor VIII, but with an admin-
istration of about every 24 hours because of its longer half-life. 
Recombinant factor IX has only 80% recovery compared with 
plasma-derived factor IX products. Therefore, dosing with recom-
binant factor IX requires 120% of the dose used with the plasma-
derived product. 
 Desmopressin acetate increases the factor VIII activity of 
patients with mild hemophilia A or von Willebrand disease. It can 
be used in preparation for minor surgery such as tooth extraction 
without any requirement for infusion of clotting factors if the 
patient has a documented adequate response. High-dose intrana-
sal desmopressin (see  Chapter 17 ) is available and has been shown 
to be efficacious and well tolerated by patients. 
 Freeze-dried concentrates of plasma containing prothrombin, 
factors IX and X, and varied amounts of factor VII (Proplex, etc) 
are commercially available for treating deficiencies of these factors 
( Table 34–3 ). Each unit of factor IX per kilogram of body weight 
raises its activity in plasma 1.5%. Heparin is often added to 
inhibit coagulation factors activated by the manufacturing pro-
cess. However, addition of heparin does not eliminate all throm-
boembolic risk. 
 Some preparations of factor IX concentrate contain  activated 
clotting factors, which has led to their use in treating patients 
with inhibitors or antibodies to factor VIII or factor IX. Two 
products are available expressly for this purpose:  Autoplex (with 
factor VIII correctional activity) and  FEIBA ( F actor  E ight 
 I nhibitor  B ypassing  A ctivity). These products are not uniformly 
successful in arresting hemorrhage, and the factor IX inhibitor 
titers often rise after treatment with them. Acquired inhibitors of 
coagulation factors may also be treated with porcine factor VIII 
(for factor VIII inhibitors) and recombinant activated factor VII. 
Recombinant activated factor VII ( NovoSeven ) is being increas-
ingly used to treat coagulopathy associated with liver disease and 
major blood loss in trauma and surgery. These recombinant and 
plasma-derived factor concentrates are very expensive, and the 
indications for them are very precise. Therefore, close consultation 
with a hematologist knowledgeable in this area is essential. 
 Cryoprecipitate is a plasma protein fraction obtainable from 
whole blood. It is used to treat deficiencies or qualitative abnor-
malities of fibrinogen, such as that which occurs with dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation and liver disease. A single unit of 
cryoprecipitate contains 300 mg of fibrinogen. 
 Cryoprecipitate may also be used for patients with factor VIII 
deficiency and von Willebrand disease if desmopressin is not indi-
cated and a pathogen-inactivated, recombinant, or plasma-derived 
product is not available. The concentration of factor VIII and von 
Willebrand factor in cryoprecipitate is not as great as that found 
in the concentrated plasma fractions. Moreover, cryoprecipitate is 
not treated in any manner to decrease the risk of viral exposure. 
For infusion, the frozen cryoprecipitate unit is thawed and 
 dissolved in a small volume of sterile citrate-saline solution and 
pooled with other units. Rh-negative women with potential for 
childbearing should receive only Rh-negative cryoprecipitate 
because of possible contamination of the product with Rh-positive 
blood cells. 
 RECOMBINANT FACTOR VIIA 
 Recombinant factor VIIa is approved for treatment of inherited or 
acquired hemophilia A or B with inhibitors, treatment of bleeding 
associated with invasive procedures in congenital or acquired 
hemophilia, or factor VII deficiency. In the EU, the drug is also 
approved for treatment of Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia. 
 Factor VIIa initiates activation of the clotting pathway by acti-
vating factor IX and factor X in association with tissue factor (see 
 Figure 34–2 ). The drug is given by bolus injection. For hemo-
philia A or B with inhibitors and bleeding, the dose is 90 mg/kg 
every 2 hours until hemostasis is achieved, and then continued at 
3–6 hour intervals until stable. For congenital factor VII defi-
ciency, the recommended dosage is 15–30 mg/kg every 4–6 hours 
until hemostasis is achieved. 
 Factor VIIa has been widely used for off-label indications, 
including bleeding with trauma, surgery, intracerebral hemorrhage, 
and warfarin toxicity. A major concern of off-label use has been the 
possibility that thrombotic events may be increased. A recent study 
examined rates of thromboembolic events in 35 placebo-controlled 
trials where factor VIIa was administered for nonapproved indica-
tions. This study found an increase in arterial, but not venous, 
thrombotic events, particularly among elderly individuals. 
 FIBRINOLYTIC INHIBITORS: 
AMINOCAPROIC ACID 
 Aminocaproic acid (EACA), which is chemically similar to the 
amino acid lysine, is a synthetic inhibitor of fibrinolysis. It com-
petitively inhibits plasminogen activation ( Figure 34–3 ). It is rap-
idly absorbed orally and is cleared from the body by the kidney. The 
usual oral dosage of EACA is 6 g four times a day. When the drug 
is administered intravenously, a 5 g loading dose should be infused 
over 30 minutes to avoid hypotension.  Tranexamic acid is an ana-
log of aminocaproic acid and has the same properties. It is adminis-
tered orally with a 15 mg/kg loading dose followed by 30 mg/kg 
every 6 hours. 
 Clinical uses of EACA are as adjunctive therapy in hemophilia, 
as therapy for bleeding from fibrinolytic therapy, and as prophy-
laxis for rebleeding from intracranial aneurysms. Treatment success 
has also been reported in patients with postsurgical gastrointestinal 
bleeding and postprostatectomy bleeding and bladder hemorrhage 
secondary to radiation- and drug-induced cystitis. Adverse effects 
of the drug include intravascular thrombosis from inhibition of 
plasminogen activator, hypotension, myopathy, abdominal dis-
comfort, diarrhea, and nasal stuffiness. The drug should not be 
used in patients with disseminated intravascular coagulation or 
genitourinary bleeding of the upper tract, eg, kidney and ureters, 
because of the potential for excessive clotting. 
CHAPTER 34 Drugs Used in Disorders of Coagulation    617
 SERINE PROTEASE INHIBITORS: 
APROTININ 
 Aprotinin is a serine protease inhibitor (serpin) that inhibits 
fibrinolysis by free plasmin and may have other antihemorrhagic 
effects as well. It also inhibits the plasmin-streptokinase complex 
in patients who have received that thrombolytic agent. Aprotinin 
was shown to reduce bleeding—by as much as 50%—from many 
types of surgery, especially that involving extracorporeal circula-
tion for open heart procedures and liver transplantation. However, 
clinical trials and internal data from the manufacturer suggested 
that use of the drug was associated with an increased risk of renal 
failure, heart attack, and stroke. A prospective trial was initiated in 
Canada but halted early because of concerns that use of the drug 
was associated with increased mortality. The drug was removed 
from the market in 2007. 
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Abciximab (ReoPro)
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL for IV injection
Alteplase recombinant [t-PA] (Activase*)
Parenteral: 50, 100 mg lyophilized powder to reconstitute for IV 
injection; 2 mg for catheter clots
Aminocaproic acid (generic, Amicar)
Oral: 500 mg tablets; 250 mg/mL syrup
Parenteral: 250 mg/mL for IV injection
Anisindione (Miradon)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Antihemophilic factor [factor VIII, AHF] (Alphanate, Bioclate,* 
  Helixate,* Hemofil M, Koate-HP, Kogenate,* Monoclate, 
Recombinate,* others)
Parenteral: in vials
Anti-inhibitor coagulant complex (Autoplex T, Feiba VH 
 Immuno)
Parenteral: in vials
Antithrombin III (Thrombate III)
Parenteral: 500, 1000 IU powder to reconstitute for IV injection
Argatroban
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL in 2.5 mL vials
Bivalirudin (Angiomax)
Parenteral: 250 mg per vial
Cilostazol (generic, Pletal)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets
Clopidogrel (generic, Plavix)
Oral: 75, 300 mg tablets
Coagulation factor VIIa recombinant (Novo-Seven*)
Parenteral: 1.2, 4.8 mg powder/vial for IV injection
Dabigatran (Pradaxa)
Oral: 75, 150 mg capsules
Dalteparin (Fragmin)
Parenteral: 2500, 5000, 10,000, 15,000, 18,000 anti-factor Xa 
units/0.2 mL for SC injection only
Danaparoid (Orgaran)
Parenteral: 750 anti-Xa units/vial
Desirudin (Iprivask)
Parenteral: 15 mg for injection
Dipyridamole (generic, Persantine)
Oral: 25, 50, 75 mg tablets
Oral combination product (Aggrenox): 200 mg extended-release 
dipyridamole plus 25 mg extended-release dipyridamole plus 
25 mg aspirin
Enoxaparin (low-molecular-weight heparin, Lovenox)
Parenteral: pre-filled, multiple-dose syringes for SC injection only
Eptifibatide (Integrilin)
Parenteral: 0.75, 2 mg/mL for IV infusion
Factor VIIa: see Coagulation factor VIIa recombinant
Factor VIII: see Antihemophilic factor
Factor IX complex, human (AlphaNine SD, Bebulin VH, BeneFix*, 
 Konyne 80, Mononine, Profilnine SD, Proplex T, Proplex SX-T)
Parenteral: in vials
Fondaparinux (Arixtra)
Parenteral: 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 mg in single-dose pre-filled syringes
Heparin sodium (generic, Liquaemin)
Parenteral: 1000, 2000, 2500, 5000, 10,000, 20,000, 40,000 units/mL 
for injection
Lepirudin (Refludan*)
Parenteral: 50 mg powder for IV injection
Prasugrel (Effient)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Protamine (generic)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Reteplase (Retavase*)
Parenteral: 10.4 IU powder for injection
Rivaroxaban (Xarelto)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
Streptokinase (Streptase)
Parenteral: 250,000, 750,000, 1,500,000 IU per vial powders to 
reconstitute for injection
Tenecteplase (TNKase*)
Parenteral: 50 mg powder for injection
Ticlopidine (Ticlid)
Oral: 250 mg tablets
Tinzaparin (Innohep)
Parenteral: 20,000 anti-Xa units/mL for subcutaneous injection only
Tirofiban (Aggrastat)
Parenteral: 50, 250 mcg/mL for IV infusion
Tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron, Lysteda)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for IV infusion
Urokinase (Abbokinase)
Parenteral: 250,000 IU per vial for systemic use
Vitamin K (generic, various)
Oral: 5 mg tablets
Parenteral: 2, 10 mg/mL solution for injection
Warfarin (generic, Coumadin)
Oral: 1, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.5, 10 mg tablets
∗Recombinant product.
618    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 This patient has pulmonary embolism secondary to a deep 
venous thrombosis (DVT). Immediate therapy with intrave-
nous heparin is indicated. If hemodynamic instability or 
pulmonary function deteriorates, suggesting further embo-
lization to the lung, percutaneous placement of an inferior 
vena cava filter may be considered. Long-term therapy with 
warfarin is traditional standard of care, using a target of 
2–3 international normalized ratio. This patient should be 
advised to use other methods of contraception. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 REFERENCES 
 Blood Coagulation & Bleeding Disorders 
 Dahlback B: Advances in understanding pathogenic mechanisms of thrombophilic 
disorders. Blood 2008;112:19. 
 Greaves M, Watson HG: Approach to the diagnosis and management of mild 
bleeding disorders. J Thromb Haemost 2007;5(Suppl 1):167. 
 Mannucci PM, Levi M: Prevention and treatment of major blood loss. N Engl J 
Med 2007;356:2301. 
 Drugs Used in Thrombotic Disorders 
 Antman E et al: 2007 Focused update of the ACC/AHA guidelines for the man-
agement of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Circulation 
2008;117:296. 
 Crowther MA, Warkentin TE: Bleeding risk and the management of bleeding 
complications in patients undergoing anticoagulant therapy: Focus on new 
anticoagulant agents. Blood 2008;111:4871. 
 Hirsh J et al (editors): Antithrombotic and Thrombolytic Therapy: American 
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines 
(8th Edition). Chest 2008;133(Suppl):110S. 
 Hyek EM: Therapeutic potential of oral factor Xa inhibitors. N Engl J Med 
2010;363:2559. 
 Kishimoto TK et al: Contaminated heparin associated with adverse clinical events 
and activation of the contact system. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2457. 
 Lohrmann J, Becker RC: New anticoagulants—the path from discovery to clinical 
practice. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2827. 
 van Ryn J et al: Dabigatran etexilate—a novel, reversible, oral direct thrombin 
inhibitor: interpretation of coagulation assays and reversal of anticoagulant 
activity. Thromb Haemost 2010;103:1116. 
619
 Mary J. Malloy, MD, &  John P. Kane, MD, PhD 
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
grows with the accumulation of foam cells, collagen, fibrin, and 
frequently calcium. Whereas such lesions can slowly occlude coro-
nary vessels, clinical symptoms are more frequently precipitated by 
rupture of unstable atheromatous plaques, leading to activation of 
platelets and formation of occlusive thrombi. 
 Although treatment of hyperlipidemia can cause slow physical 
regression of plaques, the well-documented reduction in acute coro-
nary events that follows vigorous lipid-lowering treatment is attribut-
able chiefly to mitigation of the inflammatory activity of macrophages 
and is evident within 2–3 months after starting therapy. 
 High-density lipoproteins (HDL) exert several  anti atherogenic 
effects. They participate in retrieval of cholesterol from the artery 
wall and inhibit the oxidation of atherogenic lipoproteins. Low levels 
of HDL (hypoalphalipoproteinemia) are an independent risk factor 
for atherosclerotic disease and thus are a target for intervention. 
 Cigarette smoking is a major risk factor for coronary disease. It 
is associated with reduced levels of HDL, impairment of cholesterol 
retrieval, cytotoxic effects on the endothelium, increased oxidation 
of lipoproteins, and stimulation of thrombogenesis. Diabetes, also a 
major risk factor, is another source of oxidative stress. 
 Normal coronary arteries can dilate in response to ischemia, 
increasing delivery of oxygen to the myocardium. This process is 
35
Agents Used in 
Dyslipidemia
 Plasma lipids are transported in complexes called  lipoproteins. 
Metabolic disorders that involve elevations in any lipoprotein spe-
cies are termed  hyperlipoproteinemias or  hyperlipidemias. 
 Hyperlipemia denotes increased levels of triglycerides. 
 The two major clinical sequelae of hyperlipidemias are acute 
pancreatitis and atherosclerosis. The former occurs in patients 
with marked hyperlipemia. Control of triglycerides can prevent 
recurrent attacks of this life-threatening disease. 
 Atherosclerosis is the leading cause of death for both genders in 
the USA and other Western countries. Lipoproteins that contain 
 apolipoprotein (apo) B-100 convey lipids into the artery wall. 
These are  low-density (LDL), intermediate-density (IDL), 
very-low-density (VLDL), and  lipoprotein(a) (Lp[a]). Remnant 
lipoproteins formed during the catabolism of chylomicrons that 
contain the B-48 protein (apo B-48) can also enter the artery wall, 
contributing to atherosclerosis. 
 Cellular components in atherosclerotic plaques include foam 
cells, which are transformed macrophages, and smooth muscle 
cells filled with  cholesteryl esters. These cellular alterations result 
from endocytosis of modified lipoproteins via at least four species 
of  scavenger receptors. Chemical modification of lipoproteins by 
free radicals creates ligands for these receptors. The atheroma 
 RL, a 42-year-old man with moderately severe coronary artery 
disease, has a body mass index (BMI) of 29, increased abdomi-
nal girth, and hypertension that is well controlled. In addition 
to medicine for hypertension, he is taking 40 mg atorvastatin. 
Current lipid panel (mg/dL): cholesterol 184, triglycerides 200, 
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) 110, HDL-C 34, 
non–HDL-C 150. Lipoprotein(a) (Lp[a]) is twice normal. 
Fasting glucose is 102 mg/dL, and fasting insulin is 38 μU/mL. 
Liver enzymes are normal. Creatine kinase level is mildly ele-
vated. The patient is referred for help with management of his 
dyslipidemia. You advise dietary measures, exercise, and weight 
loss. Which additional drugs would help him achieve his lipo-
protein treatment goals: LDL-C 60–70 mg/dL; triglycerides 
< 120 mg/dL; HDL-C > 45 mg/dL; and reduced level of Lp(a)? 
Would this patient also benefit from a drug to manage insulin 
resistance? If so, which drug? 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
620    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 Triglycerides are removed in extrahepatic tissues through a 
pathway shared with VLDL that involves hydrolysis by the 
 lipoprotein lipase (LPL) system. Decrease in particle diameter 
occurs as triglycerides are depleted. Surface lipids and small apo-
proteins are transferred to HDL. The resultant chylomicron 
remnants are taken up by receptor-mediated endocytosis into 
hepatocytes. 
 B. Very-Low-Density Lipoproteins 
 VLDL are secreted by liver and export triglycerides to peripheral 
tissues ( Figure 35–1 ). VLDL triglycerides are hydrolyzed by LPL, 
yielding free fatty acids for storage in adipose tissue and for oxida-
tion in tissues such as cardiac and skeletal muscle. Depletion of 
triglycerides produces remnants (IDL), some of which undergo 
endocytosis directly by liver. The remainder is converted to LDL 
by further removal of triglycerides mediated by hepatic lipase. 
This process explains the “beta shift” phenomenon, the increase of 
LDL (beta-lipoprotein) in serum as hypertriglyceridemia subsides. 
Increased levels of LDL can also result from increased secretion of 
VLDL and from decreased LDL catabolism. 
 C. Low-Density Lipoproteins 
 LDL is catabolized chiefly in hepatocytes and other cells by 
receptor-mediated endocytosis. Cholesteryl esters from LDL are 
hydrolyzed, yielding free cholesterol for the synthesis of cell 
membranes. Cells also obtain cholesterol by synthesis via a path-
way involving the formation of mevalonic acid by HMG-CoA 
reductase. Production of this enzyme and of LDL receptors is 
transcriptionally regulated by the content of cholesterol in the 
cell. Normally, about 70% of LDL is removed from plasma by 
hepatocytes. Even more cholesterol is delivered to the liver via 
IDL and chylomicrons. Unlike other cells, hepatocytes can 
eliminate cholesterol by secretion in bile and by conversion to 
bile acids. 
 D. Lp(a) Lipoprotein 
 Lp(a) lipoprotein is formed from LDL and the (a) protein, linked 
by a disulfide bridge. The (a) protein is highly homologous with 
plasminogen but is not activated by tissue plasminogen activator. It 
occurs in a number of isoforms of different molecular weights. 
Levels of Lp(a) vary from nil to over 500 mg/dL and are determined 
chiefly by genetic factors. Lp(a) can be found in atherosclerotic 
plaques and may also contribute to coronary disease by inhibiting 
thrombolysis. Levels are elevated in certain inflammatory states. The 
risk of coronary disease is strongly related to the level of Lp(a). A 
common variant (I4399M) in the coding region is associated with 
elevated levels. 
 E. High-Density Lipoproteins 
 The apoproteins of HDL are secreted by the liver and intestine. 
Much of the lipid comes from the surface monolayers of chylomi-
crons and VLDL during lipolysis. HDL also acquires cholesterol 
from peripheral tissues, protecting the cholesterol homeostasis of 
cells. Free cholesterol is transported from the cell membrane by a 
mediated by nitric oxide, acting on smooth muscle cells of the arte-
rial media. This function is impaired by atherogenic lipoproteins, 
thus aggravating ischemia. Reducing levels of atherogenic lipopro-
teins and inhibiting their oxidation restores endothelial function. 
 Because atherogenesis is multifactorial, therapy should be 
directed toward all modifiable risk factors. Atherogenesis is a 
dynamic process. Quantitative angiographic trials have demon-
strated net regression of plaques during aggressive lipid-lowering 
therapy. Primary and secondary prevention trials have shown sig-
nificant reduction in mortality from new coronary events and in 
all-cause mortality. 
 ■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF 
HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIA 
 NORMAL LIPOPROTEIN 
METABOLISM 
 Structure 
 Lipoproteins have hydrophobic core regions containing cholesteryl 
esters and triglycerides surrounded by unesterified cholesterol, phos-
pholipids, and apoproteins. Certain lipoproteins contain very high-
molecular-weight B proteins that exist in two forms:  B-48, formed 
in the intestine and found in chylomicrons and their remnants; and 
 B-100, synthesized in liver and found in  VLDL, VLDL remnants 
 (IDL),  LDL (formed from VLDL), and  Lp(a) lipoproteins. HDL 
consist of at least 20 discrete molecular species. All species contain 
apolipoprotein A-I (apo A-I). Fifty-three other proteins are known 
to be distributed variously among the HDL species. 
 Synthesis & Catabolism 
 A. Chylomicrons 
 Chylomicrons are formed in the intestine and carry  triglycerides 
of dietary origin,  unesterified cholesterol, and  cholesteryl 
esters. They transit the thoracic duct to the bloodstream. 
A C R O N Y M S
Apo
Apolipoprotein
CETP
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein
CK
Creatine kinase
HDL
High-density lipoproteins
HMG-CoA  
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A
IDL
Intermediate-density lipoproteins
LCAT
Lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase
LDL
Low-density lipoproteins
Lp(a)
Lipoprotein(a)
LPL
Lipoprotein lipase
PPAR
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
VLDL
Very-low-density lipoproteins
CHAPTER 35 Agents Used in Dyslipidemia  621
transporter, ABCA1, acquired by a small particle termed prebeta-1 
HDL, and then esterified by lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase 
(LCAT), leading to the formation of larger HDL species. 
Cholesterol is also exported from macrophages by the ABCG1 
transporter to large HDL particles. The cholesteryl esters are 
transferred to VLDL, IDL, LDL, and chylomicron remnants with 
the aid of cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP). Much of the 
cholesteryl ester thus transferred is ultimately delivered to the liver 
by endocytosis of the acceptor lipoproteins. HDL can also deliver 
cholesteryl esters directly to the liver via a docking receptor (scav-
enger receptor, SR-BI) that does not cause endocytosis of the 
lipoproteins. HDL-C levels relate inversely to risk at the popula-
tion level. Among individuals, the capacity to accept exported 
cholesterol can vary widely at identical levels of HDL-C. The abil-
ity of peripheral tissues to export cholesterol via the transporter 
mechanism and the acceptor capacity of HDL are emerging as 
major determinants of coronary atherosclerosis. 
 LIPOPROTEIN DISORDERS 
 Lipoprotein disorders are detected by measuring lipids in serum 
after a 10-hour fast. Risk of heart disease increases with concentra-
tions of the atherogenic lipoproteins, is inversely related to levels 
of HDL, and is modified by other risk factors ( Table 35–1 ). 
Evidence from clinical trials suggests that LDL cholesterol levels 
of 60 mg/dL may be optimal for patients with coronary disease. 
Ideally, triglycerides should be below 120 mg/dL. Although 
LDL-C is still the primary target of treatment, reducing the 
levels of VLDL and IDL is also important. Calculation of non-
HDL cholesterol provides a means of assessing levels of all the 
Hepatocyte
Blood
Capillary
endothelium
Lipoprotein
lipase
FFA
HDL
VLDL
remnant
B-100
ApoC
VLDL
ApoE
HDL
LDL
Peripheral cell
Cholesterol
Cholesteryl
esters
Lysosome
Acetyl-
CoA
HMG-CoA
reductase
Lysosome
Cholesterol
Mevalonic
acid
ApoB,
ApoE,
ApoC
RER
Golgi
vesicle
LDL receptor
*
*
Cholesterol biosynthetic
pathway
 FIGURE 35–1  Metabolism of lipoproteins of hepatic origin. The heavy arrows show the primary pathways. Nascent VLDL are secreted via 
the Golgi apparatus. They acquire additional apo C lipoproteins and apo E from HDL. Very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) are converted to 
VLDL remnants (IDL) by lipolysis via lipoprotein lipase in the vessels of peripheral tissues. In the process, C apolipoproteins and a portion of the 
apo E are given back to high-density lipoproteins (HDL). Some of the VLDL remnants are converted to LDL by further loss of triglycerides and 
loss of apo E. A major pathway for LDL degradation involves the endocytosis of LDL by LDL receptors in the liver and the peripheral tissues, for 
which apo B-100 is the ligand. Dark color denotes cholesteryl esters; light color denotes triglycerides; the asterisk denotes a functional ligand 
for LDL receptors; triangles indicate apo E; circles and squares represent C apolipoproteins. FFA, free fatty acid; RER, rough endoplasmic reticulum. 
(Modified and redrawn, with permission, from Kane J, Malloy M: Disorders of lipoproteins. In: Rosenberg RN et al [editors]:  The Molecular and Genetic Basis of Neurological 
Disease. Butterworth-Heinemann, 1993.) 
622    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
lipoproteins in the VLDL to LDL cascade. Differentiation of 
the disorders requires identification of the lipoproteins involved 
( Table 35–2 ). Diagnosis of a primary disorder usually requires 
further clinical and genetic data as well as ruling out secondary 
hyperlipidemias ( Table 35–3 ). 
 Phenotypes of abnormal lipoprotein distribution are 
described in this section. Drugs mentioned for use in these 
conditions are described in the following section on basic and 
clinical pharmacology. 
 THE PRIMARY 
HYPERTRIGLYCERIDEMIAS 
 Hypertriglyceridemia is associated with increased risk of coronary 
disease. VLDL and IDL have been found in atherosclerotic 
plaques. These patients tend to have cholesterol-rich VLDL of 
small-particle diameter and small, dense LDL. Hypertriglyceridemic 
patients with coronary disease or risk equivalents should be treated 
TABLE 35–1 National Cholesterol Education Program: Adult Treatment Guidelines (2001).
Desirable
Borderline to High1
High
Total cholesterol
< 200 (5.2)2
200–239 (5.2–6.2)2
> 240 (6.2)2
LDL cholesterol
< 130 (3.4)3
130–159 (3.4–4.1)
> 160 (4.1)
HDL cholesterol
> 60 (1.55)
 Men
> 40 (1.04)
 Women
> 50 (1.30)
Triglycerides
< 120 (1.4)
120–199 (1.4–2.3)
> 200 (2.3)
1Consider as high if coronary disease or more than two risk factors are present.
2mg/dL (mmol/L).
3Optimal level is < 100 (2.6); if known atherosclerotic disease, goal is 60–70 mg/dL.
TABLE 35–2 The primary hyperlipoproteinemias and their treatment.
Disorder
Manifestations
Diet + Single Drug1
Drug Combination
Primary chylomicronemia (familial 
lipoprotein lipase or cofactor defi-
ciency; others)
Chylomicrons, VLDL increased
Dietary management (omega-3 
fatty acids, niacin, or fibrate)
Niacin plus fibrate
Familial hypertriglyceridemia-
 Severe
VLDL, chylomicrons increased
Omega-3 fatty acids, niacin, or 
fibrate
Niacin plus fibrate
 Moderate
VLDL increased; chylomicrons 
may be increased
Omega-3 fatty acids, niacin, or 
fibrate
Niacin plus fibrate
Familial combined hyperlipopro-
teinemia
VLDL predominantly 
increased
Omega-3 fatty acids, niacin, 
fibrate, or reductase inhibitor
Two or three of the individual drugs
LDL predominantly increased
Niacin, reductase inhibitor, or 
ezetimibe
Two or three of the individual drugs
VLDL, LDL increased
Omega-3 fatty acids, niacin, or 
reductase inhibitor
Niacin or fibrate plus reductase 
inhibitor2
Familial 
dysbetalipoproteinemia
VLDL remnants, chylomicron 
remnants increased
Omega-3 fatty acids, fibrate, or 
niacin
Fibrate plus niacin, or either plus 
reductase inhibitor
Familial 
hypercholesterolemia
 Heterozygous
LDL increased
Reductase inhibitor, resin, niacin, 
or ezetimibe
Two or three of the individual drugs
 Homozygous
LDL increased
Niacin, atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, 
or ezetimibe
Niacin plus reductase inhibitor plus 
ezetimibe
Familial ligand-defective apo B
LDL increased
Niacin, reductase inhibitor, or 
ezetimibe
Niacin plus reductase inhibitor or 
ezetimibe
Lp(a) hyperlipoproteinemia
Lp(a) increased
Niacin
1Single-drug therapy with marine omega-3 dietary supplement should be evaluated before drug combinations are used.
2Select pharmacologically compatible reductase inhibitor (see text).
CHAPTER 35 Agents Used in Dyslipidemia  623
diagnosed by assay of lipolytic activity after intravenous injection 
of heparin. A presumptive diagnosis is made by demonstrating a 
pronounced decrease in triglycerides a few days after reduction 
of daily fat intake below 15 g. Marked restriction of total dietary 
fat is the basis of effective long-term treatment. Niacin, a fibrate, 
or marine omega-3 fatty acids may be of some benefit if VLDL 
levels are increased. Genetic variants at other loci that participate 
in intravascular lipolysis, including LMF1, apo A-V, GPI-HDL 
BP1, and apo C-III, can have profound effects on triglyceride 
levels. 
 Familial Hypertriglyceridemia 
 A. Severe (Usually Mixed Lipemia) 
 Mixed lipemia usually results from impaired removal of triglyceride-
rich lipoproteins. Factors that increase VLDL production aggravate 
the lipemia because VLDL and chylomicrons are competing sub-
strates for LPL. The primary mixed lipemias probably reflect a vari-
ety of genetic determinants. Most patients have centripetal obesity 
with insulin resistance. Other factors that increase secretion of VLDL 
also worsen the lipemia. Eruptive xanthomas, lipemia retinalis, epi-
gastric pain, and pancreatitis are variably present depending on the 
severity of the lipemia. Treatment is primarily dietary, with restriction 
of total fat, avoidance of alcohol and exogenous estrogens, weight 
reduction, exercise, and supplementation with marine omega-3 fatty 
acids. Most patients also require treatment with a fibrate or niacin. 
 B. Moderate 
 Primary increases of VLDL also reflect a genetic predisposition 
and are worsened by factors that increase the rate of VLDL 
secretion from liver, ie, obesity, alcohol, diabetes, and estrogens. 
Treatment includes addressing these issues and the use of 
fibrates or niacin as needed. Marine omega-3 fatty acids are a 
valuable adjuvant. 
 Familial Combined Hyperlipoproteinemia 
 In this common disorder associated with an increased incidence of 
coronary disease, individuals may have elevated levels of VLDL, 
LDL, or both, and the pattern may change with time. Familial 
combined hyperlipoproteinemia involves an approximate dou-
bling in VLDL secretion and appears to be transmitted as a semi-
dominant trait. Triglycerides can be increased by the factors noted 
above. Elevations of cholesterol and triglycerides are generally 
moderate, and xanthomas are usually absent. Diet alone does not 
normalize lipid levels. A reductase inhibitor alone, or in combina-
tion with niacin or fenofibrate, is usually required to treat these 
patients. When fenofibrate is combined with a reductase inhibitor, 
either pravastatin or rosuvastatin is recommended because neither 
is metabolized via CYP3A4. 
 Familial Dysbetalipoproteinemia 
 In this disorder, remnants of chylomicrons and VLDL accumulate 
and levels of LDL are decreased. Because remnants are rich in 
cholesteryl esters, the level of cholesterol may be as high as that of 
TABLE 35–3  Secondary causes of 
hyperlipoproteinemia.
Hypertriglyceridemia
Hypercholesterolemia
Diabetes mellitus
Hypothyroidism
Alcohol ingestion
Early nephrosis
Severe nephrosis
Resolving lipemia
Estrogens
Immunoglobulin-lipoprotein com-
plex disorders
Uremia
Anorexia nervosa
Corticosteroid excess
Cholestasis
Myxedema
Hypopituitarism
Glycogen storage disease
Corticosteroid excess
Hypopituitarism
Acromegaly
Immunoglobulin-lipoprotein 
complex disorders
Lipodystrophy
Protease inhibitors
aggressively. Patients with triglycerides above 700 mg/dL should 
be treated to prevent acute pancreatitis because the LPL clearance 
mechanism is saturated at about this level. 
 Hypertriglyceridemia is an essential component of the meta-
bolic syndrome, which also includes low levels of HDL-C, insulin 
resistance, hypertension, and abdominal obesity. Hyperuricemia is 
also frequently present. Insulin resistance appears to be central to 
this process. Management of these patients frequently requires, in 
addition to a fibrate or niacin, the use of metformin or a peroxi-
some proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-γ) agonist or 
both (see  Chapter 41 ). In the latter case, pioglitazone is the drug 
of choice because it reduces triglycerides and does not increase 
levels of LDL. The severity of hypertriglyceridemia of any cause is 
increased in the presence of the metabolic syndrome or type 2 
diabetes. 
 Primary Chylomicronemia 
 Chylomicrons are not present in the serum of normal individuals 
who have fasted 10 hours. The recessive traits of deficiency of LPL 
or its cofactor, apo C-II, are usually associated with severe lipemia 
(2000–3000 mg/dL of triglycerides when the patient is consum-
ing a typical American diet). These disorders might not be diag-
nosed until an attack of acute pancreatitis occurs. Patients may 
have eruptive xanthomas, hepatosplenomegaly, hypersplenism, 
and lipid-laden foam cells in bone marrow, liver, and spleen. The 
lipemia is aggravated by estrogens because they stimulate VLDL 
production, and pregnancy may cause marked increases in trigly-
cerides despite strict dietary control. Although these patients have 
a predominant chylomicronemia, they may also have moderately 
elevated VLDL, presenting with a pattern called mixed lipemia 
(fasting chylomicronemia and elevated VLDL). LPL deficiency is 
624    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
triglycerides. Diagnosis is confirmed by the absence of the ε3 and 
ε4 alleles of apo E, the ε2/ε2 genotype. Patients often develop 
tuberous or tuberoeruptive xanthomas, or characteristic planar 
xanthomas of the palmar creases. They tend to be obese, and some 
have impaired glucose tolerance. These factors, as well as hypothy-
roidism, can aggravate the lipemia. Coronary and peripheral ath-
erosclerosis occurs with increased frequency. Weight loss, together 
with decreased fat, cholesterol, and alcohol consumption, may be 
sufficient, but a fibrate or niacin is usually needed to control the 
condition. These agents can be given together in more resistant 
cases, or a reductase inhibitor may be added. 
 Apo E is also secreted by glia in the central nervous system 
and plays a role in sterol transport. The ε4 allele is associated in 
a dose-dependent manner with early-onset Alzheimer’s disease 
(see  Chapter 60 ). 
 THE PRIMARY 
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIAS 
 Familial Hypercholesterolemia 
 Familial hypercholesterolemia is an autosomal dominant trait. 
Although levels of LDL tend to increase throughout childhood, 
the diagnosis can often be made on the basis of elevated umbilical 
cord blood cholesterol. In most heterozygotes, cholesterol levels 
range from 260 to 500 mg/dL. Triglycerides are usually normal, 
tendon xanthomas are often present, and arcus corneae and xan-
thelasma may appear in the third decade. Coronary disease tends 
to occur prematurely. In homozygous familial hypercholester-
olemia, which can lead to coronary disease in childhood, levels of 
cholesterol often exceed 1000 mg/dL and early tuberous and ten-
dinous xanthomas occur. These patients may also develop elevated 
plaque-like xanthomas of the aortic valve, digital webs, buttocks, 
and extremities. 
 Defects of LDL receptors underlie familial hypercholester-
olemia. Some individuals have combined heterozygosity for alleles 
producing nonfunctional and kinetically impaired receptors. In 
heterozygous patients, LDL can be normalized with combined 
drug regimens ( Figure 35–2 ). Homozygotes and those with com-
bined heterozygosity whose receptors retain even minimal func-
tion may partially respond to niacin, ezetimibe, or reductase 
inhibitors. 
 Familial Ligand-Defective Apolipoprotein 
B-100 
 Defects in the domain of apo B-100 that binds to the LDL 
receptor impair the endocytosis of LDL, leading to hypercholes-
terolemia of moderate severity. Tendon xanthomas may occur. 
These disorders are as prevalent as familial hypercholester-
olemia. Response to reductase inhibitors is variable. 
Up-regulation of LDL receptors in liver increases endocytosis of 
LDL precursors but does not increase uptake of ligand-defective 
LDL particles. Niacin often has beneficial effects by reducing 
VLDL production. 
 Familial Combined Hyperlipoproteinemia 
 As described, some persons with familial combined hyperlipopro-
teinemia have only an elevation in LDL. Serum cholesterol is 
usually less than 350 mg/dL. Dietary and drug treatment, usually 
with a reductase inhibitor, is indicated. It may be necessary to add 
niacin or ezetimibe to normalize LDL. 
 Lp(a) Hyperlipoproteinemia 
 This familial disorder, which is associated with increased atherogen-
esis, is determined chiefly by alleles that dictate increased produc-
tion of the (a) protein moiety. Lp(a) can be secondarily elevated in 
patients with severe nephrosis and certain other inflammatory 
states. Niacin reduces levels of Lp(a) in many patients. 
 Other Disorders 
 Deficiency of cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase can increase LDL in the 
heterozygous state. Homozygotes can also have elevated triglycerides, 
resistance to reductase inhibitors, and increased risk of gallstones and 
coronary disease. Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia is due to 
mutations in a protein that normally assists in endocytosis of LDL. 
Some mutations in the  PCSK9 gene also cause isolated elevations of 
LDL. Niacin, ezetimibe, and reductase inhibitors may be useful, vari-
ably, in these disorders. 
B-100
B-100
VLDL
LDL
Blood
R
Hepatocyte
Acetyl-CoA
HMG-CoA
reductase
inhibitors
Cholesterol    
Bile acids
Niacin
Gut
Resins
Ezetimibe
HMG-CoA
 FIGURE 35–2  Sites of action of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, 
niacin, ezetimibe, and resins used in treating hyperlipidemias. Low-
density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors are increased by treatment with 
resins and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. VLDL, very-low-density 
lipoproteins; R, LDL receptor. 
CHAPTER 35 Agents Used in Dyslipidemia  625
 HDL Deficiency 
 Rare genetic disorders, including Tangier disease and LCAT 
(lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase) deficiency, are associated with 
extremely low levels of HDL. Familial hypoalphalipoproteinemia 
is a more common disorder with levels of HDL cholesterol usually 
below 35 mg/dL in men and 45 mg/dL in women. These patients 
tend to have premature atherosclerosis, and the low HDL may be 
the only identified risk factor. Management should include special 
attention to avoidance or treatment of other risk factors. Niacin 
increases HDL in many of these patients. Reductase inhibitors 
and fibric acid derivatives exert lesser effects. 
 In the presence of hypertriglyceridemia, HDL cholesterol is 
low because of exchange of cholesteryl esters from HDL into 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. Treatment of the hypertriglyceri-
demia may increase or normalize the HDL level. 
 SECONDARY 
HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIA 
 Before primary disorders can be diagnosed, secondary causes of 
the phenotype must be considered. The more common conditions 
are summarized in  Table 35–3 . The lipoprotein abnormality usu-
ally resolves if the underlying disorder can be treated successfully. 
■  DIETARY MANAGEMENT OF 
HYPERLIPOPROTEINEMIA 
 Dietary measures are initiated first—unless the patient has evident 
coronary or peripheral vascular disease—and may obviate the 
need for drugs. Patients with familial hypercholesterolemia or 
familial combined hyperlipidemia always require drug therapy. 
Cholesterol and saturated and  trans -fats are the principal factors 
that increase LDL, whereas total fat, alcohol, and excess calories 
increase triglycerides. 
 Sucrose and fructose raise VLDL. Alcohol can cause significant 
hypertriglyceridemia by increasing hepatic secretion of VLDL. 
Synthesis and secretion of VLDL are increased by excess calories. 
During weight loss, LDL and VLDL levels may be much lower 
than can be maintained during neutral caloric balance. The con-
clusion that diet suffices for management can be made only after 
weight has stabilized for at least 1 month. 
 General recommendations include limiting total calories from 
fat to 20–25% of daily intake, saturated fats to less than 8%, and 
cholesterol to less than 200 mg/d. Reductions in serum cholesterol 
range from 10% to 20% on this regimen. Use of complex carbo-
hydrates and fiber is recommended, and  cis -monounsaturated fats 
should predominate. Weight reduction, caloric restriction, and 
avoidance of alcohol are especially important for patients with 
elevated VLDL and IDL. 
 The effect of dietary fats on hypertriglyceridemia is dependent 
on the disposition of double bonds in the fatty acids. Omega-3 
fatty acids found in fish oils, but not those from plant sources, 
activate peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPAR-α) 
and can induce profound reduction of triglycerides in some 
patients. They also have anti-inflammatory and antiarrhythmic 
activities. Omega-3 fatty acids are available over the counter as 
triglycerides from marine sources or as a prescription medication 
(Lovaza) containing ethyl esters of omega-3 fatty acids. The rec-
ommended dose of Lovaza is 4 g/d. It is necessary to determine the 
content of docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid in 
over-the-counter preparations. Appropriate amounts should be 
taken to provide up to 3–4 g of these fatty acids daily. It is impor-
tant to select preparations free of mercury and other contami-
nants. The omega-6 fatty acids present in vegetable oils may cause 
triglycerides to increase. 
 Patients with primary chylomicronemia and some with 
mixed lipemia must consume a diet severely restricted in total 
fat (10–20 g/d, of which 5 g should be vegetable oils rich in essen-
tial fatty acids), and fat-soluble vitamins should be given. 
 Homocysteine, which initiates proatherogenic changes in 
endothelium, can be reduced in many patients by restriction of 
total protein intake to the amount required for amino acid 
replacement. Supplementation with folic acid plus other B vita-
mins is indicated in severe homocysteinemia. 
■  BASIC & CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY OF DRUGS 
USED IN HYPERLIPIDEMIA 
 The decision to use drug therapy for hyperlipidemia is based on 
the specific metabolic defect and its potential for causing athero-
sclerosis or pancreatitis. Suggested regimens for the principal 
lipoprotein disorders are presented in  Table 35–2 . Diet should be 
continued to achieve the full potential of the drug regimen. These 
drugs should be avoided in pregnant and lactating women and 
those likely to become pregnant. All drugs that alter plasma lipo-
protein concentrations may require adjustment of doses of warfa-
rin and indandione anticoagulants. Children with heterozygous 
familial hypercholesterolemia may be treated with a resin or 
reductase inhibitor, usually after 7 or 8 years of age, when myeli-
nation of the central nervous system is essentially complete. The 
decision to treat a child should be based on the level of LDL, other 
risk factors, the family history, and the child’s age. Drugs are rarely 
indicated before age 16 in the absence of multiple risk factors or 
compound genetic dyslipidemias. 
 COMPETITIVE INHIBITORS OF 
HMG-COA REDUCTASE (REDUCTASE 
INHIBITORS; “STATINS”) 
 These compounds are structural analogs of HMG-CoA (3-hydroxy-
3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A,  Figure 35–3 ).  Lovastatin, atorvas-
tatin, fluvastatin, pravastatin,  simvastatin, rosuvastatin, and 
 pitavastatin belong to this class. They are most effective in reduc-
ing LDL. Other effects include decreased oxidative stress and 
vascular inflammation with increased stability of atherosclerotic 
626    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
lesions. It has become standard practice to initiate reductase 
inhibitor therapy immediately after acute coronary syndromes, 
regardless of lipid levels. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Lovastatin and simvastatin are inactive lactone prodrugs that are 
hydrolyzed in the gastrointestinal tract to the active β-hydroxyl 
derivatives, whereas pravastatin has an open, active lactone ring. 
Atorvastatin, fluvastatin, and rosuvastatin are fluorine-containing 
congeners that are active as given. Absorption of the ingested doses 
of the reductase inhibitors varies from 40% to 75% with the excep-
tion of fluvastatin, which is almost completely absorbed. All have 
high first-pass extraction by the liver. Most of the absorbed dose is 
excreted in the bile; 5–20% is excreted in the urine. Plasma half-
lives of these drugs range from 1 to 3 hours except for atorvastatin 
(14 hours), pitavastatin (12 hours), and rosuvastatin (19 hours). 
 Mechanism of Action 
 HMG-CoA reductase mediates the first committed step in sterol 
biosynthesis. The active forms of the reductase inhibitors are struc-
tural analogs of the HMG-CoA intermediate ( Figure 35–3 ) that is 
formed by HMG-CoA reductase in the synthesis of mevalonate. 
These analogs cause partial inhibition of the enzyme and thus may 
impair the synthesis of isoprenoids such as ubiquinone and 
dolichol and the prenylation of proteins. It is not known whether 
this has biologic significance. However, the reductase inhibitors 
clearly induce an increase in high-affinity LDL receptors. This 
effect increases both the fractional catabolic rate of LDL and the 
liver’s extraction of LDL precursors (VLDL remnants) from the 
blood, thus reducing LDL ( Figure 35–2 ). Because of marked first-
pass hepatic extraction, the major effect is on the liver. Preferential 
activity in liver of some congeners appears to be attributable to 
tissue-specific differences in uptake. Modest decreases in plasma 
triglycerides and small increases in HDL also occur. 
 Clinical trials involving many of the statins have demonstrated 
significant reduction of new coronary events and atherothrom-
botic stroke. Mechanisms other than reduction of lipoprotein 
levels appear to be involved. The availability of isoprenyl groups 
from the HMG-CoA pathway for prenylation of proteins is 
reduced by statins, resulting in reduced prenylation of Rho and 
Rab proteins. Prenylated Rho activates Rho kinase, which medi-
ates a number of mechanisms in vascular biology. The observation 
that reduction in new coronary events occurs more rapidly than 
changes in morphology of arterial plaques suggests that these 
pleiotropic effects may be important. Likewise, decreased prenyla-
tion of Rab reduces the accumulation of Aβ protein in neurons, 
possibly mitigating the manifestations of Alzheimer’s disease. 
 Therapeutic Uses & Dosage 
 Reductase inhibitors are useful alone or with resins, niacin, or 
ezetimibe in reducing levels of LDL. Women with hyperlipidemia 
OH
COO–
CH3
S
CoA
HO
OH
COO–
CH3
HMG-CoA reduced
intermediate
Mevalonate
HO
O
H3C
H3C
CH3
O
CH3
O
O
HO
O
H3C
H3C
CH3
O
CH3
OH
COO–
HO
Lovastatin
Lovastatin (active form)
 FIGURE 35–3  Inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase.  Top: The HMG-CoA intermediate that is the immediate precursor of mevalonate, a critical 
compound in the synthesis of cholesterol.  Bottom: The structure of lovastatin and its active form, showing the similarity to the normal HMG-CoA 
intermediate (shaded areas). 
CHAPTER 35 Agents Used in Dyslipidemia  627
who are pregnant, lactating, or likely to become pregnant should 
not be given these agents. Use in children is restricted to selected 
patients with familial hypercholesterolemia or familial combined 
hyperlipidemia. 
 Because cholesterol synthesis occurs predominantly at night, 
reductase inhibitors—except atorvastatin and rosuvastatin—
should be given in the evening if a single daily dose is used. 
Absorption generally (with the exception of pravastatin) is 
enhanced by food. Daily doses of lovastatin vary from 10 to 80 mg. 
Pravastatin is nearly as potent on a mass basis as lovastatin with a 
maximum recommended daily dose of 80 mg. Simvastatin is twice 
as potent and is given in doses of 5–80 mg daily. Because of 
increased risk of myopathy with the 80 mg/day dose, the FDA 
issued labelling for scaled dosing of simvastatin and Vytorin in 
June 2011. Fluvastatin appears to be about half as potent as lovas-
tatin on a mass basis and is given in doses of 10–80 mg daily. 
Atorvastatin is given in doses of 10–80 mg/d, and rosuvastatin, 
the most efficacious agent for severe hypercholesterolemia, at 
5–40 mg/d. The dose-response curves of pravastatin and especially 
of fluvastatin tend to level off in the upper part of the dosage range 
in patients with moderate to severe hypercholesterolemia. Those 
of other statins are somewhat more linear. 
 Toxicity 
 Elevations of serum aminotransferase activity (up to three times 
normal) occur in some patients. This is often intermittent and 
usually not associated with other evidence of hepatic toxicity. 
Therapy may be continued in such patients in the absence of 
symptoms if aminotransferase levels are monitored and stable. In 
some patients, who may have underlying liver disease or a history 
of alcohol abuse, levels may exceed three times normal. This find-
ing portends more severe hepatic toxicity. These patients may 
present with malaise, anorexia, and precipitous decreases in LDL. 
Medication should be discontinued immediately in these patients 
and in asymptomatic patients whose aminotransferase activity is 
persistently elevated to more than three times the upper limit of 
normal. These agents should be used with caution and in reduced 
dosage in patients with hepatic parenchymal disease, Asians, and 
the elderly. Severe hepatic disease may preclude their use. In gen-
eral, aminotransferase activity should be measured at baseline, at 
1–2 months, and then every 6–12 months (if stable). Monitoring 
of liver enzymes should be more frequent if the patient is taking 
other drugs that have potential interactions with the statin. 
Fasting plasma glucose levels tend to increase 5–7 mg/dL with 
statin treatment. 
 Minor increases in creatine kinase (CK) activity in plasma are 
observed in some patients receiving reductase inhibitors, frequently 
associated with heavy physical activity. Rarely, patients may have 
marked elevations in CK activity, often accompanied by general-
ized discomfort or weakness in skeletal muscles. If the drug is not 
discontinued, myoglobinuria can occur, leading to renal injury. 
Myopathy may occur with monotherapy, but there is an increased 
incidence in patients also receiving certain other drugs. Genetic 
variation in an anion transporter (OATP1B1) is associated with 
severe myopathy and rhabdomyolysis induced by statins. 
 The catabolism of lovastatin, simvastatin, and atorvastatin 
proceeds chiefly through CYP3A4, whereas that of fluvastatin and 
rosuvastatin, and to a lesser extent pitavastatin, is mediated by 
CYP2C9. Pravastatin is catabolized through other pathways, 
including sulfation. The 3A4-dependent reductase inhibitors tend 
to accumulate in plasma in the presence of drugs that inhibit or 
compete for the 3A4 cytochrome. These include the macrolide 
antibiotics, cyclosporine, ketoconazole and its congeners, some 
HIV protease inhibitors, tacrolimus, nefazodone, fibrates, parox-
etine, venlafaxine, and others (see  Chapter 4 ). Concomitant use of 
reductase inhibitors with amiodarone or verapamil also causes an 
increased risk of myopathy. 
 Conversely, drugs such as phenytoin, griseofulvin, barbiturates, 
rifampin, and thiazolidinediones increase expression of CYP3A4 
and can reduce the plasma concentrations of the 3A4-dependent 
reductase inhibitors. Inhibitors of CYP2C9 such as ketoconazole 
and its congeners, metronidazole, sulfinpyrazone, amiodarone, and 
cimetidine may increase plasma levels of fluvastatin and rosuvasta-
tin. Pravastatin and rosuvastatin appear to be the statins of choice 
for use with verapamil, the ketoconazole group of antifungal 
agents, macrolides, and cyclosporine. Doses should be kept low 
and the patient monitored frequently. Plasma levels of lovastatin, 
simvastatin, and atorvastatin may be elevated in patients ingesting 
more than 1 liter of grapefruit juice daily. All statins undergo gly-
cosylation, thus creating an interaction with gemfibrozil. 
 Creatine kinase activity should be measured in patients receiving 
potentially interacting drug combinations. In all patients, CK 
should be measured at baseline. If muscle pain, tenderness, or weak-
ness appears, CK should be measured immediately and the drug 
discontinued if activity is elevated significantly over baseline. The 
myopathy usually reverses promptly upon cessation of therapy. If 
the association is unclear, the patient can be rechallenged under 
close surveillance. Myopathy in the absence of elevated CK can 
occur. Rarely, hypersensitivity syndromes have been reported that 
include a lupus-like disorder and peripheral neuropathy. 
 Reductase inhibitors should be temporarily discontinued in the 
event of serious illness, trauma, or major surgery. 
 NIACIN (NICOTINIC ACID) 
 Niacin (but not niacinamide) decreases VLDL and LDL levels, 
and Lp(a) in most patients. It often increases HDL levels signifi-
cantly. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Niacin (vitamin B 3 ) is converted in the body to the amide, which 
is incorporated into niacinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD). It 
is excreted in the urine unmodified and as several metabolites. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Niacin inhibits VLDL secretion, in turn decreasing production of 
LDL ( Figure 35–2 ). Increased clearance of VLDL via the LPL 
pathway contributes to reduction of triglycerides. Niacin has no 
effect on bile acid production. Excretion of neutral sterols in the 
628    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
stool is increased acutely as cholesterol is mobilized from tissue 
pools and a new steady state is reached. The catabolic rate for 
HDL is decreased. Fibrinogen levels are reduced, and levels of 
tissue plasminogen activator appear to increase. Niacin inhibits 
the intracellular lipase of adipose tissue via receptor-mediated 
signaling, possibly reducing VLDL production by decreasing the 
flux of free fatty acids to the liver. Sustained inhibition of lipolysis 
has not been established, however. 
 Therapeutic Uses & Dosage 
 In combination with a resin or reductase inhibitor, niacin normal-
izes LDL in most patients with heterozygous familial hypercholes-
terolemia and other forms of hypercholesterolemia. These 
combinations are also indicated in some cases of nephrosis. In 
severe mixed lipemia that is incompletely responsive to diet, niacin 
often produces marked reduction of triglycerides, an effect 
enhanced by marine omega-3 fatty acids. It is useful in patients 
with combined hyperlipidemia and in those with dysbetalipopro-
teinemia. It is clearly the most effective agent for increasing HDL 
and the only agent that may reduce Lp(a). 
 For treatment of heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, 
most patients require 2–6 g of niacin daily; more than this should 
not be given. For other types of hypercholesterolemia and for 
hypertriglyceridemia, 1.5–3.5 g daily is often sufficient. Crystalline 
niacin should be given in divided doses with meals, starting with 
100 mg two or three times daily and increasing gradually. 
 Toxicity 
 Most persons experience a harmless cutaneous vasodilation and 
sensation of warmth after each dose when niacin is started or the 
dose increased. Taking 81–325 mg of aspirin one half hour before-
hand blunts this prostaglandin-mediated effect. Ibuprofen, once 
daily, also mitigates the flush. Tachyphylaxis to flushing usually 
occurs within a few days at doses above 1.5–3 g daily. Patients 
should be warned to expect the flush and understand that it is a 
harmless side effect. Pruritus, rashes, dry skin or mucous mem-
branes, and acanthosis nigricans have been reported. The latter 
contraindicates use of niacin because of its association with insulin 
resistance. Some patients experience nausea and abdominal dis-
comfort. Many can continue the drug at reduced dosage, with 
inhibitors of gastric acid secretion or with antacids not containing 
aluminum. Niacin should be avoided in most patients with severe 
peptic disease. 
 Reversible elevations in aminotransferases up to twice normal 
may occur, usually not associated with liver toxicity. However, 
liver function should be monitored at baseline and at appropriate 
intervals. Rarely, true hepatotoxicity may occur, and in these cases 
the drug should be discontinued. The association of severe hepatic 
dysfunction, including acute necrosis, with the use of over-the-
counter sustained-release preparations of niacin has been reported. 
This effect has not been noted to date with an extended-release 
preparation, Niaspan, given at bedtime in doses of 2 g or less. 
Carbohydrate tolerance may be moderately impaired, especially in 
obese patients, but this is usually reversible except in some patients 
with latent diabetes. Niacin may be given to diabetics who are 
receiving insulin and to some receiving oral agents. Niacin may 
increase insulin resistance in some patients. This can often be 
addressed by increasing the dose of insulin or the oral agents. 
Hyperuricemia occurs in some patients and occasionally precipi-
tates gout. Allopurinol can be given with niacin if needed. Red cell 
macrocytosis is frequently observed with higher doses of niacin 
and is not an indication for discontinuing treatment. Significant 
platelet deficiency can occur rarely and is reversible on cessation of 
treatment. Rarely, niacin is associated with arrhythmias, mostly 
atrial, and with macular edema. Patients should be instructed to 
report blurring of distance vision. Niacin may potentiate the 
action of antihypertensive agents, requiring adjustment of their 
dosages. Birth defects have been reported in animals given very 
high doses. 
 FIBRIC ACID DERIVATIVES 
(FIBRATES) 
 Gemfibrozil and  fenofibrate decrease levels of VLDL and, in 
some patients, LDL as well. Another fibrate,  bezafibrate, is not 
yet available in the USA. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Gemfibrozil is absorbed quantitatively from the intestine and is 
tightly bound to plasma proteins. It undergoes enterohepatic 
circulation and readily passes the placenta. The plasma half-life is 
1.5 hours. Seventy percent is eliminated through the kidneys, 
mostly unmodified. The liver modifies some of the drug to 
hydroxymethyl, carboxyl, or quinol derivatives. Fenofibrate is an 
isopropyl ester that is hydrolyzed completely in the intestine. Its 
plasma half-life is 20 hours. Sixty percent is excreted in the urine 
as the glucuronide, and about 25% in feces. 
Gemfibrozil
O
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
COOH
CH3
Cl
O
C
C
Fenofibrate
C
O
CH3
O
O
CH(CH3)2
 Mechanism of Action 
 Fibrates function primarily as ligands for the nuclear transcription 
receptor, PPAR-α. They transcriptionally up-regulate LPL, apo 
A-I and apo A-II, and down-regulate apo C-III, an inhibitor of 
lipolysis. A major effect is an increase in oxidation of fatty acids in 
liver and striated muscle ( Figure 35–4 ). They increase lipolysis of 
lipoprotein triglyceride via LPL. Intracellular lipolysis in adipose 
CHAPTER 35 Agents Used in Dyslipidemia  629
tissue is decreased. Levels of VLDL decrease, in part as a result of 
decreased secretion by the liver. Only modest reductions of LDL 
occur in most patients. In others, especially those with combined 
hyperlipidemia, LDL often increases as triglycerides are reduced. 
HDL cholesterol increases moderately. Part of this apparent 
increase is a consequence of decreasing triglycerides in plasma, 
with reduction in exchange of triglycerides into HDL in place of 
cholesteryl esters. 
 Therapeutic Uses & Dosage 
 Fibrates are useful drugs in hypertriglyceridemias in which VLDL 
predominate and in dysbetalipoproteinemia. They also may be of 
benefit in treating the hypertriglyceridemia that results from treat-
ment with viral protease inhibitors. The usual dose of gemfibrozil 
is 600 mg orally once or twice daily. The dosage of fenofibrate 
(as Tricor) is one to three 48 mg tablets (or a single 145 mg tablet) 
daily. Absorption of gemfibrozil is improved when the drug is 
taken with food. 
 Toxicity 
 Rare adverse effects of fibrates include rashes, gastrointestinal symp-
toms, myopathy, arrhythmias, hypokalemia, and high blood levels 
of aminotransferases or alkaline phosphatase. A few patients show 
decreases in white blood count or hematocrit. Both agents potenti-
ate the action of coumarin and indanedione anticoagulants, and 
doses of these agents should be adjusted. Rhabdomyolysis has 
occurred rarely. Risk of myopathy increases when fibrates are given 
with reductase inhibitors. Fenofibrate is the fibrate of choice for use 
in combination with a statin. Fibrates should be avoided in patients 
Skeletal muscle
Fatty acid oxidation
Blood
vessels
Transcription of LPL
Hydrolysis of VLDL
and chylomicron
triglycerides
Secretion
Synthesis
Oxidation
Triglycerides
Fatty acids
Oxidation products
Lipoprotein lipase
Endothelium
Liver
Apo Clll synthesis
Apo Al and Apo AII synthesis
Fatty acids
VLDL,
Chylomicron
 FIGURE 35–4  Hepatic and peripheral effects of fibrates. These effects are mediated by activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor-α, which modulates the expression of several proteins. LPL, lipoprotein lipase; VLDL, very-low-density lipoproteins. 
with hepatic or renal dysfunction. There appears to be a modest 
increase in the risk of cholesterol gallstones, reflecting an increase in 
the cholesterol content of bile. Therefore, fibrates should be used 
with caution in patients with biliary tract disease or in those at high 
risk such as women, obese patients, and Native Americans. 
 BILE ACID-BINDING RESINS 
 Colestipol, cholestyramine, and  colesevelam are useful only for 
isolated increases in LDL. In patients who also have hypertriglyc-
eridemia, VLDL levels may be further increased during treatment 
with resins. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 The bile acid-binding agents are large polymeric cationic exchange 
resins that are insoluble in water. They bind bile acids in the intes-
tinal lumen and prevent their reabsorption. The resin itself is not 
absorbed. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 The bile acids, metabolites of cholesterol, are normally efficiently 
reabsorbed in the jejunum and ileum ( Figure 35–2 ). Excretion is 
increased up to tenfold when resins are given, resulting in 
enhanced conversion of cholesterol to bile acids in liver via 
7α-hydroxylation, which is normally controlled by negative feed-
back by bile acids. Decreased activation of the FXR receptor by 
bile acids may result in a modest increase in plasma triglycerides 
but can also improve glucose metabolism in patients with diabe-
tes. The latter effect is due to increased secretion of the incretin 
630    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
glucagon-like peptide-1 from the intestine, thus increasing insulin 
secretion. Increased uptake of LDL and IDL from plasma results 
from up-regulation of LDL receptors, particularly in liver. 
Therefore, the resins are without effect in patients with homozy-
gous familial hypercholesterolemia who have no functioning 
receptors but may be useful in patients with receptor-defective 
combined heterozygous states. 
 Therapeutic Uses & Dosage 
 The resins are used in treatment of patients with primary hyper-
cholesterolemia, producing approximately 20% reduction in 
LDL cholesterol in maximal dosage. If resins are used to treat 
LDL elevations in persons with combined hyperlipidemia, they 
may cause an increase in VLDL, requiring the addition of a sec-
ond agent such as niacin. Resins are also used in combination 
with other drugs to achieve further hypocholesterolemic effect 
(see below). They may be helpful in relieving pruritus in patients 
who have cholestasis and bile salt accumulation. Because the 
resins bind digitalis glycosides, they may be useful in digitalis 
toxicity. 
 Colestipol and cholestyramine are available as granular prepara-
tions. A gradual increase of dosage of granules from 4 or 5 g/d to 
20 g/d is recommended. Total dosages of 30–32 g/d may be needed 
for maximum effect. The usual dosage for a child is 10–20 g/d. 
Granular resins are mixed with juice or water and allowed to hydrate 
for 1 minute. Colestipol is also available in 1 g tablets that must be 
swallowed whole, with a maximum dose of 16 g daily. Colesevelam 
is available in 625 mg tablets and as a suspension (1875-mg or 
3750-mg packets). The maximum dose is six tablets or 3750 mg as 
suspension, daily. Resins should be taken in two or three doses with 
meals. They lack effect when taken between meals. 
 Toxicity 
 Common complaints are constipation and bloating, usually 
relieved by increasing dietary fiber or mixing psyllium seed 
with the resin. Resins should be avoided in patients with diver-
ticulitis. Heartburn and diarrhea are occasionally reported. In 
patients who have preexisting bowel disease or cholestasis, ste-
atorrhea may occur. Malabsorption of vitamin K occurs rarely, 
leading to hypoprothrombinemia. Prothrombin time should be 
measured frequently in patients who are taking resins and anti-
coagulants. Malabsorption of folic acid has been reported 
rarely. Increased formation of gallstones, particularly in obese 
persons, was an anticipated adverse effect but has rarely 
occurred in practice. 
 Absorption of certain drugs, including those with neutral or 
cationic charge as well as anions, may be impaired by the resins. 
These include digitalis glycosides, thiazides, warfarin, tetracycline, 
thyroxine, iron salts, pravastatin, fluvastatin, ezetimibe, folic acid, 
phenylbutazone, aspirin, and ascorbic acid, among others. In gen-
eral, additional medication (except niacin) should be given 1 hour 
before or at least 2 hours after the resin to ensure adequate absorp-
tion. Colesevelam does not bind digoxin, warfarin, or reductase 
inhibitors. 
 INHIBITORS OF INTESTINAL STEROL 
ABSORPTION 
 Ezetimibe is the first member of a group of drugs that inhibit 
intestinal absorption of phytosterols and cholesterol. Its primary 
clinical effect is reduction of LDL levels. In one trial, patients 
receiving ezetimibe in combination with simvastatin had mar-
ginal, but not statistically significant, increases in carotid intimal-
medial thickness (IMT) compared with those receiving simvastatin 
alone. Interpretation of this observation is difficult for several 
reasons, including the fact that baseline IMT was unexpectedly 
small, probably due to prior lipid-lowering therapy. Because 
reducing LDL levels by virtually every modality has been associ-
ated with reduced risk of coronary events, it is reasonable to 
assume that reduction of LDL by ezetimibe will have a similar 
impact. Further studies are pending. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Ezetimibe is readily absorbed and conjugated in the intestine to an 
active glucuronide, reaching peak blood levels in 12–14 hours. It 
undergoes enterohepatic circulation, and its half-life is 22 hours. 
Approximately 80% of the drug is excreted in feces. Plasma con-
centrations are substantially increased when it is administered 
with fibrates and reduced when it is given with cholestyramine. 
Other resins may also decrease its absorption. There are no sig-
nificant interactions with warfarin or digoxin. 
F
Ezetimibe
O
F
OH
OH
N
 Mechanism of Action 
 Ezetimibe is a selective inhibitor of intestinal absorption of choles-
terol and phytosterols. A transport protein, NPC1L1, appears to 
be the target of the drug. It is effective even in the absence of 
dietary cholesterol because it inhibits reabsorption of cholesterol 
excreted in the bile. 
 Therapeutic Uses & Dosage 
 The effect of ezetimibe on cholesterol absorption is constant over 
the dosage range of 5–20 mg/d. Therefore, a single daily dose of 
10 mg is used. Average reduction in LDL cholesterol with ezetimibe 
alone in patients with primary hypercholesterolemia is about 18%, 
with minimal increases in HDL cholesterol. It is also effective in 
patients with phytosterolemia. Ezetimibe is synergistic with reductase 
inhibitors, producing decrements as great as 25% in LDL choles-
terol beyond that achieved with the reductase inhibitor alone. 
CHAPTER 35 Agents Used in Dyslipidemia  631
 Toxicity 
 Ezetimibe does not appear to be a substrate for cytochrome P450 
enzymes. Experience to date reveals a low incidence of reversible 
impaired hepatic function with a small increase in incidence when 
given with a reductase inhibitor. Myositis has been reported 
rarely. 
 CETP INHIBITORS 
 Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) inhibitors are under 
active investigation. The first drug in this class,  torcetrapib, 
aroused great interest because it markedly increased HDL and 
reduced LDL. However, it was withdrawn from clinical trials 
because it increased cardiovascular events and deaths in the treat-
ment group.  Anacetrapib and  dalcetrapib are analogs currently 
in clinical trials. 
 TREATMENT WITH DRUG 
COMBINATIONS 
 Combined drug therapy is useful (1) when VLDL levels are 
significantly increased during treatment of hypercholester-
olemia with a resin; (2) when LDL and VLDL levels are both 
elevated initially; (3) when LDL or VLDL levels are not nor-
malized with a single agent, or (4) when an elevated level of 
Lp(a) or an HDL deficiency coexists with other hyperlipi-
demias. The lowest effective doses should be used in combina-
tion therapy and the patient should be monitored more closely 
for evidence of toxicity. 
 FIBRIC ACID DERIVATIVES & BILE 
ACID-BINDING RESINS 
 This combination is sometimes useful in treating patients with 
familial combined hyperlipidemia who are intolerant of niacin or 
statins. However, it may increase the risk of cholelithiasis. 
 HMG-COA REDUCTASE INHIBITORS & 
BILE ACID-BINDING RESINS 
 This synergistic combination is useful in the treatment of familial 
hypercholesterolemia but may not control levels of VLDL in some 
patients with familial combined hyperlipoproteinemia. Statins 
should be given 1 hour before or at least 2 hours after the resin to 
ensure their absorption. 
 NIACIN & BILE ACID-BINDING RESINS 
 This combination effectively controls VLDL levels during resin 
therapy of familial combined hyperlipoproteinemia or other disor-
ders involving both increased VLDL and LDL levels. When 
VLDL and LDL levels are both initially increased, doses of niacin 
as low as 1–3 g/d may be sufficient in combination with a resin. 
The niacin-resin combination is effective for treating heterozygous 
familial hypercholesterolemia. 
 The drugs may be taken together, because niacin does not bind 
to the resins. LDL levels in patients with heterozygous familial 
hypercholesterolemia require daily doses of up to 6 g of niacin 
with 24–30 g of resin. 
 NIACIN & REDUCTASE INHIBITORS 
 This regimen is more effective than either agent alone in treating 
hypercholesterolemia. Experience indicates that it is an efficacious 
and practical combination for treatment of familial combined 
hyperlipoproteinemia. 
 REDUCTASE INHIBITORS & EZETIMIBE 
 This combination is highly synergistic in treating primary hyper-
cholesterolemia and has some use in the treatment of patients with 
homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia who have some recep-
tor function. 
 REDUCTASE INHIBITORS & FENOFIBRATE 
 Fenofibrate appears to be complementary with most statins in the 
treatment of familial combined hyperlipoproteinemia and other 
conditions involving elevations of both LDL and VLDL. The 
combination of fenofibrate with rosuvastatin appears to be well 
tolerated. Some other statins may interact unfavorably owing to 
effects on cytochrome P450 metabolism. In any case, particular 
vigilance for liver and muscle toxicity is indicated. 
 COMBINATIONS OF RESINS, EZETIMIBE, 
NIACIN, & REDUCTASE INHIBITORS 
 These agents act in a complementary fashion to normalize 
cholesterol in patients with severe disorders involving elevated LDL. 
The effects are sustained, and little compound toxicity has been 
observed. Effective doses of the individual drugs may be lower than 
when each is used alone; for example, as little as 1–2 g of niacin may 
substantially increase the effects of the other agents. 
632    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
SUMMARY Drugs Used in Dyslipidemia
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
STATINS
 •  Atorvastatin, sim-
vastatin, rosuvas-
tatin, pitavastatin
Inhibit HMG-CoA 
reductase
Reduce cholesterol syn-
thesis and up-regulate 
low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) receptors on hepa-
tocytes • modest reduc-
tion in triglycerides
Atherosclerotic vascu-
lar disease (primary 
and secondary pre-
vention) • acute coro-
nary syndromes
Oral • duration 12–24 h • 
Toxicity: Myopathy, hepatic 
dysfunction • Interactions: 
CYP-dependent metabo-
lism (3A4, 2C9) interacts 
with CYP inhibitors
 • Fluvastatin, pravastatin, lovastatin: Similar but somewhat less efficacious
FIBRATES
 •  Fenofibrate, gem-
fibrozil
Peroxisome prolifera-
tor-activated recep-
tor-alpha (PPAR-α) 
agonists
Decrease secretion of 
very-low-density lipopro-
teins (VLDL) • increase 
lipoprotein lipase activity • 
increase high-density 
lipoproteins (HDL)
Hypertriglyceridemia, 
low HDL
Oral • duration 3–24 h • 
Toxicity: Myopathy, hepatic 
dysfunction
BILE ACID SEQUESTRANTS
 • Colestipol
Binds bile acids in 
gut • prevents reab-
sorption • increases 
cholesterol catabo-
lism • up-regulates 
LDL receptors
Decreases LDL
Elevated LDL, digitalis 
toxicity, pruritus
Oral • taken with meals •
not absorbed • Toxicity: 
Constipation, bloating •
interferes with absorption 
of some drugs and 
vitamins
 • Cholestyramine, colesevelam: Similar to colestipol
STEROL ABSORPTION INHIBITOR
 • Ezetimibe
Blocks sterol trans-
porter NPC1L1 in 
intestine brush bor-
der
Inhibits reabsorption of 
cholesterol excreted in 
bile • decreases LDL and 
phytosterols
Elevated LDL, phyto-
sterolemia
Oral • duration 24 h •
Toxicity: Low incidence 
of hepatic dysfunction, 
myositis
NIACIN
Decreases catabolism 
of apo AI • reduces 
VLDL secretion from 
liver
Increases HDL • decreases 
lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)], LDL, 
and triglycerides
Low HDL • elevated 
VLDL, LDL, Lp(a)
Oral • large doses • Toxicity: 
Gastric irritation, flushing, 
low incidence of hepatic 
toxicity • may reduce 
glucose tolerance
 • Extended-release niacin: Similar to regular niacin
 • Sustained-release niacin (not the same as extended-release product): Should be avoided
CHAPTER 35 Agents Used in Dyslipidemia  633
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Atorvastatin (Lipitor)
Oral: 10, 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
Cholestyramine (generic, Questran, Questran Light)
Oral: 4 g packets anhydrous granules cholestyramine resin
Colesevelam (WelChol)
Oral: 625 mg tablets; 1.875 g and 3.75 g packets powder
Colestipol (Colestid)
Oral: 5 g packets granules; 1 g tablets
Ezetimibe (Zetia)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
Fenofibrate (generic, Tricor, Antara, Lofibra)
Oral: 48, 50, 54, 107, 145, 160 mg tablets; 45, 50, 67, 100, 130, 134, 
135 150, 200 mg capsules
Fluvastatin (Lescol)
Oral: 20, 40 mg capsules; extended-release (Lescol XL): 80 mg capsules
Gemfibrozil (generic, Lopid)
Oral: 600 mg tablets
Lovastatin (generic, Mevacor)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg tablets; extended-release (Altoprev): 20, 40, 60 mg
Niacin, nicotinic acid, vitamin B3 (generic, others)
Oral: 100, 250, 500, 1000 mg tablets; extended-release (Niaspan): 
500, 750, 1000 mg
Omega-3 fatty acids-marine (generic, Lovaza)
Oral: 1 g (300 mg PUFA, generic) or 1 g (900 mg PUFA, Lovaza) 
capsules
Pitavastatin (Livalo)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
Pravastatin (generic, Pravachol)
Oral: 10, 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
Rosuvastatin (Crestor)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40 mg tablets
Simvastatin (generic, Zocor)
Oral: 5, 10, 20, 40, 80 mg tablets
COMBINATION TABLETS
Advicor (extended-release niacin/lovastatin)
Oral: 500/20, 750/20, 1000/20, 1000/40 mg 
tablets
Simcor (extended-release niacin/simvastatin)
Oral: 500/20, 750/20, 1000/20 mg tablets
Vytorin (ezetimibe/simvastatin)
Oral: 10/10, 10/20, 10/40, 10/80 mg tablets
REFERENCES 
 Ballantyne CM et al; Asteroid Investigators. Effect of rosuvastatin therapy on 
coronary artery stenoses assessed by quantitative coronary angiography: A 
study to evaluate the effect of rosuvastatin on intravascular ultrasound-
derived coronary atheroma burden. Circulation 2008;117:2458. 
 Bruckert E, Labreuche J, Amarenco P: Meta-analysis of the effect of nicotinic acid 
alone or in combination on cardiovascular events and atherosclerosis. 
Atherosclerosis 2010;210:353. 
 Brunzell JD et al: Lipoprotein management in patients with cardiometabolic risk: 
Consensus conference report from the ADA and the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008;51(15):1512. 
 Elam M, Lovato E, Ginsberg H: The role of fibrates in cardiovascular disease 
prevention, The ACCORD–lipid perspective. Curr Opin Lipidol 
2011;22:55. 
 Forrester JS: Redefining normal low-density lipoprotein cholesterol: A strategy to 
unseat coronary disease as the nation’s leading killer. J Am Coll Cardiol 
2010;56:630. 
 Grundy SM et al, for the Coordinating Committee of the National Cholesterol 
Education Program: Implications of recent clinical trials for the National 
Cholesterol Education Adult Treatment Panel III guidelines. Circulation 
2004;110:227. 
 Harper CR, Jacobson TA: Evidence-based management of statin myopathy. Curr 
Atheroscler Rep 2010;12:322. 
 Polonsky TS, Davidson MH: Reducing the residual risk of 3-hydroxy-3-methylgl-
utaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitor therapy with combination therapy. 
Am J Cardiol 2008;101(Suppl):27B. 
 Steinberg D et al: Evidence mandating earlier and more aggressive treatment of 
hypercholesterolemia. Circulation 2008;118:672. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
This patient has combined hyperlipidemia. The statin 
should be continued. A drug that reduces VLDL produc-
tion would be beneficial (niacin or fenofibrate). Niacin is 
the preferred agent to increase HDL-C and to reduce tri-
glycerides and Lp(a). However, increased insulin resistance 
may occur, necessitating frequent monitoring and, if 
necessary, the addition of metformin. If the LDL-C goal is 
not reached with the addition of niacin (or fenofibrate), 
the statin dose should be increased. Creatine kinase should 
be monitored. Marine omega-3 fatty acids will help to 
reduce triglycerides.
PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acid.
This page intentionally left blank 
635
 A 48-year-old man presents with complaints of bilateral morn-
ing stiffness in his wrists and knees and pain in these joints on 
exercise. On physical examination, the joints are slightly 
swollen. The rest of the examination is unremarkable. His 
laboratory findings are also negative except for slight anemia, 
elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and positive rheuma-
toid factor. With the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, he is 
started on a regimen of naproxen, 220 mg twice daily. After 
1 week, the dosage is increased to 440 mg twice daily. His 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
symptoms are reduced at this dosage, but he complains of 
significant heartburn that is not controlled by antacids. He is 
then switched to celecoxib, 200 mg twice daily, and on this 
regimen his joint symptoms and heartburn resolve. Two 
years later, he returns with increased joint symptoms. His 
hands, wrists, elbows, feet, and knees are all now involved 
and appear swollen, warm, and tender. What therapeutic 
options should be considered at this time? What are the 
possible complications? 
36
 Nonsteroidal 
Anti-Inflammatory Drugs, 
Disease-Modifying 
Antirheumatic Drugs, 
Nonopioid Analgesics, 
& Drugs Used in Gout 
 Daniel E. Furst, MD ,  Robert W. Ulrich, PharmD, 
&  Shraddha Prakash, MD 
 THE IMMUNE RESPONSE 
 The immune response occurs when immunologically competent 
cells are activated in response to foreign organisms or antigenic 
substances liberated during the acute or chronic inflammatory 
response. The outcome of the immune response for the host may 
be deleterious if it leads to chronic inflammation without resolu-
tion of the underlying injurious process (see  Chapter 55 ). Chronic 
inflammation involves the release of a number of mediators that 
are not prominent in the acute response. One of the most impor-
tant conditions involving these mediators is rheumatoid arthritis, 
in which chronic inflammation results in pain and destruction of 
bone and cartilage that can lead to severe disability and in which 
systemic changes occur that can result in shortening of life. 
 The cell damage associated with inflammation acts on cell 
membranes to release leukocyte lysosomal enzymes; arachidonic 
636    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
acid is then liberated from precursor compounds, and various 
eicosanoids are synthesized. As discussed in  Chapter 18 , the 
cyclooxygenase (COX) pathway of arachidonate metabolism pro-
duces prostaglandins, which have a variety of effects on blood 
vessels, on nerve endings, and on cells involved in inflammation. 
The lipoxygenase pathway of arachidonate metabolism yields leu-
kotrienes, which have a powerful chemotactic effect on eosinophils, 
neutrophils, and macrophages and promote bronchoconstriction 
and alterations in vascular permeability. 
 The discovery of two cyclooxygenase isoforms (COX-1 and 
COX-2) led to the concept that the constitutive COX-1 isoform 
tends to be homeostatic, while COX-2 is induced during inflam-
mation and facilitates the inflammatory response. On this basis, 
highly selective COX-2 inhibitors have been developed and mar-
keted on the assumption that such selective inhibitors would be 
safer than nonselective COX-1 inhibitors but without loss of 
efficacy. 
 Kinins, neuropeptides, and histamine are also released at the 
site of tissue injury, as are complement components, cytokines, 
and other products of leukocytes and platelets. Stimulation of the 
neutrophil membranes produces oxygen-derived free radicals and 
other reactive molecules such as hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl 
radicals. The interaction of these substances with arachidonic acid 
results in the generation of chemotactic substances, thus perpetu-
ating the inflammatory process. 
 THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES 
 The treatment of patients with inflammation involves two pri-
mary goals: first, the relief of symptoms and the maintenance of 
function, which are usually the major continuing complaints of 
the patient; and second, the slowing or arrest of the tissue-damaging 
process. In rheumatoid arthritis, response to therapy can be 
quantitated using several measures such as the Disease Activity 
Scale (DAS), the Clinical Disease Activity Index (CDAI), and 
the American College of Rheumatology Response index (ACR 
Response). The first two are continuous variables denoting both 
state and change, while the latter is solely a change measure. In 
the latter, the scoring values of ACR20, ACR50, and ACR70 
denote the percentage of patients showing an improvement of 
20%, 50%, or 70%, respectively, in a global assessment of signs 
and symptoms. 
 Reduction of inflammation with  nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) often results in relief of pain for 
significant periods. Furthermore, most of the nonopioid analgesics 
(aspirin, etc) have anti-inflammatory effects, so they are appropri-
ate for the treatment of both acute and chronic inflammatory 
conditions. 
 The  glucocorticoids also have powerful anti-inflammatory 
effects and when first introduced were considered to be the ulti-
mate answer to the treatment of inflammatory arthritis. Although 
there are data that low-dose corticosteroids have disease-modifying 
properties, their toxicity makes them less favored than other 
medications, when it is possible to use the others. However, the 
glucocorticoids continue to have a significant role in the long-term 
treatment of arthritis. 
 Another important group of agents is characterized as  disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) and  biologics (a 
subset of the DMARDs). They decrease inflammation, improve 
symptoms, and slow the bone damage associated with rheuma-
toid arthritis. They affect more basic inflammatory mechanisms 
than do glucocorticoids or the NSAIDs. They may also be more 
toxic than those alternative medications. 
 ■ NONSTEROIDAL 
ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS 
 Salicylates and other similar agents used to treat rheumatic disease 
share the capacity to suppress the signs and symptoms of inflam-
mation. These drugs also exert antipyretic and analgesic effects, 
but it is their anti-inflammatory properties that make them most 
useful in the management of disorders in which pain is related to 
the intensity of the inflammatory process. 
 Since aspirin, the original NSAID, has a number of adverse 
effects, many other NSAIDs have been developed in attempts to 
improve upon aspirin’s efficacy and decrease its toxicity. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 The NSAIDs are grouped in several chemical classes, as shown in 
 Figure 36–1 . This chemical diversity yields a broad range of phar-
macokinetic characteristics ( Table 36–1 ). Although there are 
many differences in the kinetics of NSAIDs, they have some gen-
eral properties in common. All but one of the NSAIDs are weak 
organic acids as given; the exception, nabumetone, is a ketone 
prodrug that is metabolized to the acidic active drug. 
 Most of these drugs are well absorbed, and food does not sub-
stantially change their bioavailability. Most of the NSAIDs are 
highly metabolized, some by phase I followed by phase II mecha-
nisms and others by direct glucuronidation (phase II) alone. 
NSAID metabolism proceeds, in large part, by way of the CYP3A 
or CYP2C families of P450 enzymes in the liver. While renal 
excretion is the most important route for final elimination, nearly 
all undergo varying degrees of biliary excretion and reabsorption 
(enterohepatic circulation). In fact, the degree of lower gastroin-
testinal (GI) tract irritation correlates with the amount of entero-
hepatic circulation. Most of the NSAIDs are highly protein-bound 
(∼ 98%), usually to albumin. Most of the NSAIDs (eg, ibuprofen, 
ketoprofen) are racemic mixtures, while one, naproxen, is pro-
vided as a single enantiomer and a few have no chiral center 
(eg, diclofenac). 
 All NSAIDs can be found in synovial fluid after repeated dos-
ing. Drugs with short half-lives remain in the joints longer than 
would be predicted from their half-lives, while drugs with longer 
half-lives disappear from the synovial fluid at a rate proportionate 
to their half-lives. 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     637
and hypertension. As of August 2011, celecoxib and the less selec-
tive meloxicam were the only COX-2 inhibitors marketed in the 
USA. Rofecoxib and valdecoxib, two previously marketed, selec-
tive COX-2 inhibitors, were withdrawn from the market because 
of their association with increased cardiovascular thrombotic 
events. Celecoxib has a Food and Drug Administration initiated 
“black box” warning concerning cardiovascular risks. It has been 
recommended that all NSAID product labels be revised to men-
tion cardiovascular risks. 
 The NSAIDs decrease the sensitivity of vessels to bradykinin 
and histamine, affect lymphokine production from T lympho-
cytes, and reverse the vasodilation of inflammation. To varying 
degrees, all newer NSAIDs are analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and 
antipyretic, and all (except the COX-2-selective agents and the 
nonacetylated salicylates) inhibit platelet aggregation. NSAIDs are 
all gastric irritants and can be associated with GI ulcers and bleeds 
as well, although as a group the newer agents tend to cause less GI 
irritation than aspirin. Nephrotoxicity has been observed for all of 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 NSAID anti-inflammatory activity is mediated chiefly through 
inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis ( Figure 36–2 ). Various 
NSAIDs have additional possible mechanisms of action, including 
inhibition of chemotaxis, down-regulation of interleukin-1 pro-
duction, decreased production of free radicals and superoxide, and 
interference with calcium-mediated intracellular events. Aspirin 
irreversibly acetylates and blocks platelet cyclooxygenase, while 
the non-COX-selective NSAIDs are reversible inhibitors. 
 Selectivity for COX-1 versus COX-2 is variable and incom-
plete for the older NSAIDs, but selective COX-2 inhibitors have 
been synthesized. The selective COX-2 inhibitors do not affect 
platelet function at their usual doses. In testing using human 
whole blood, aspirin, ibuprofen, indomethacin, piroxicam, and 
sulindac are somewhat more effective in inhibiting COX-1. The 
efficacy of COX-2-selective drugs equals that of the older 
NSAIDs, while GI safety may be improved. On the other hand, 
selective COX-2 inhibitors may increase the incidence of edema 
2
C
H
CH
CH
COOH
CH3
Propionic acid derivative
Ibuprofen
Indole derivative
O
COOH
N
C
O
CI
Indomethacin
Fenamate
N
H
COOH
Cl
Meclofenamic acid
Pyrrolealkanoic acid derivative
Tolmetin
C
O
N
COOH
N
N
O
O
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
Pyrazolone derivative
Phenylbutazone
Oxicam
C
O
HO
H3C
NH
N
N
S
O
Piroxicam
CH2
CH3
Phenylalkanoic acid derivative
Flurbiprofen
Naphthylacetic acid prodrug
Nabumetone
NH
CI
Phenylacetic acid derivative 
Diclofenac
CH2CH2CCH3
O
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
CH3
O
Cl
F
CH
COOH
CH3
O
CH3
CH2COOHCI
 FIGURE 36–1  Chemical structures of some NSAIDs. 
638    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
the drugs for which extensive experience has been reported. 
Nephrotoxicity is due, in part, to interference with the autoregula-
tion of renal blood flow, which is modulated by prostaglandins. 
Hepatotoxicity can also occur with any NSAID. 
 Although these drugs effectively inhibit inflammation, there is 
no evidence that—in contrast to drugs such as methotrexate and 
other DMARDs—they alter the course of any arthritic disorder. 
 Several NSAIDs (including aspirin) reduce the incidence of 
colon cancer when taken chronically. Several large epidemiologic 
studies have shown a 50% reduction in relative risk when the drugs 
are taken for 5 years or longer. The mechanism for this protective 
effect is unclear. 
 The NSAIDs have a number of commonalities. Although not all 
NSAIDs are approved by the FDA for the whole range of rheumatic 
diseases, most are probably effective in rheumatoid arthritis, sero-
negative spondyloarthropathies (eg, psoriatic arthritis and arthritis 
associated with inflammatory bowel disease), osteoarthritis, local-
ized musculoskeletal syndromes (eg, sprains and strains, low 
back pain), and gout (except tolmetin, which appears to be ineffec-
tive in gout). 
 Adverse effects are generally quite similar for all of the NSAIDs: 
 1. Central nervous system: Headaches, tinnitus, and dizziness. 
 2. Cardiovascular: Fluid retention, hypertension, edema, and 
rarely, myocardial infarction, and congestive heart failure. 
 3. Gastrointestinal: Abdominal pain, dysplasia, nausea, vomit-
ing, and rarely, ulcers or bleeding. 
 4. Hematologic: Rare thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, or even 
aplastic anemia. 
 5. Hepatic: Abnormal liver function tests and rare liver failure. 
 6.  Pulmonary: Asthma. 
 7. Skin:  Rashes, all types, pruritus. 
 8. Renal: Renal insufficiency, renal failure, hyperkalemia, and 
proteinuria. 
 ASPIRIN 
 Aspirin’s long use and availability without prescription diminishes 
its glamour compared with that of the newer NSAIDs. Aspirin is 
now rarely used as an anti-inflammatory medication and will be 
reviewed only in terms of its anti-platelet effects (ie, doses of 
81–325 mg once daily). 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Salicylic acid is a simple organic acid with a pKa of 3.0. Aspirin 
(acetylsalicylic acid; ASA) has a pKa of 3.5 (see Table 1–3). The 
salicylates are rapidly absorbed from the stomach and upper small 
intestine yielding a peak plasma salicylate level within 1–2 hours. 
Aspirin is absorbed as such and is rapidly hydrolyzed (serum half-
life 15 minutes) to acetic acid and salicylate by esterases in tissue 
and blood ( Figure 36–3 ). Salicylate is nonlinearly bound to albu-
min. Alkalinization of the urine increases the rate of excretion of 
free salicylate and its water-soluble conjugates. 
 Mechanisms of Action 
 Aspirin irreversibly inhibits platelet COX so that aspirin’s anti-
platelet effect lasts 8–10 days (the life of the platelet). In other 
tissues, synthesis of new COX replaces the inactivated enzyme so 
that ordinary doses have a duration of action of 6–12 hours. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Aspirin decreases the incidence of transient ischemic attacks, 
unstable angina, coronary artery thrombosis with myocardial 
infarction, and thrombosis after coronary artery bypass grafting 
(see  Chapter 34 ). 
 Epidemiologic studies suggest that long-term use of aspirin at 
low dosage is associated with a lower incidence of colon cancer, 
possibly related to its COX-inhibiting effects. 
TABLE 36–1  Properties of aspirin and some other 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Drug
Half-Life 
(hours)
Urinary 
Excretion of 
Unchanged 
Drug
Recommended 
Anti-inflammatory 
Dosage
Aspirin
0.25
<2%
1200–1500 mg tid
Salicylate1
2–19
2–30%
See footnote 2
Celecoxib
11
27%3
100–200 mg bid
Diclofenac
1.1
<1%
50–75 mg qid
Diflunisal
13
3–9%
500 mg bid
Etodolac
6.5
<1%
200–300 mg qid
Fenoprofen
2.5
30%
600 mg qid
Flurbiprofen
3.8
<1%
300 mg tid
Ibuprofen
2
<1%
600 mg qid
Indomethacin
4–5
16%
50–70 mg tid
Ketoprofen
1.8
<1%
70 mg tid
Ketorolac
4–10
58%
10 mg qid4
Meloxicam
20
Data not 
found
7.5–15 mg qd
Nabumetone5
26
1%
1000–2000 mg qd6
Naproxen
14
<1%
375 mg bid
Oxaprozin
58
1–4%
1200–1800 mg qd6
Piroxicam
57
4–10%
20 mg qd6
Sulindac
8
7%
200 mg bid
Tolmetin
1
7%
400 mg qid
1Major anti-inflammatory metabolite of aspirin.
2Salicylate is usually given in the form of aspirin.
3Total urinary excretion including metabolites.
4Recommended for treatment of acute (eg, surgical) pain only.
5Nabumetone is a prodrug; the half-life and urinary excretion are for its active 
metabolite.
6A single daily dose is sufficient because of the long half-life.
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     639
–
–
–
–
–
Disturbance of cell membranes
Stimulus
Phospholipids
Arachidonic acid
Phospholipase
Lipoxygenase
Leukotrienes
LTC4/D4/E4
Alteration of vascular
permeability, bronchial
constriction, increased
secretion
Bronchospasm,
congestion,
mucous plugging
LTB4
Phagocyte
attraction,
activation
Inflammation
Prostaglandins
Thromboxane
Prostacyclin
Cyclooxygenase
Leukocyte modulation
Inflammation
Phospholipase inhibitors
Corticosteroids
Fatty acid substitution (diet)
Lipoxygenase inhibitors
Receptor
antagonists
Colchicine
NSAID, ASA
 FIGURE 36–2  Prostanoid mediators derived from arachidonic acid and sites of drug action. ASA, acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin); LT, leuko-
triene; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. 
CH2
CH3
CH3
O
C
C
OH
O
O
Aspirin
OH
C
O
O
Sodium salicylate
Na
OH
C
O–
O
Salicylate
HO
C
O
Acetic acid
OH
C
O
Salicyluric acid
N
H
COOH
OH
C
O
Gentisic acid
(1%)
OH
Free
salicylate
HO
Ester and ether
glucuronides
Conjugation with
glucuronic acid
Conjugation 
with glycine
Oxidation
 FIGURE 36–3  Structure and metabolism of the salicylates. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Meyers FH, Jawetz E, Goldfien A:  Review of 
Medical Pharmacology, 7th ed. McGraw-Hill, 1980.) 
640    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 Adverse Effects 
 In addition to the common side effects listed above, aspirin’s 
main adverse effects at antithrombotic doses are gastric upset 
(intolerance) and gastric and duodenal ulcers. Hepatotoxicity, 
asthma, rashes, GI bleeding, and renal toxicity rarely if ever occur 
at antithrombotic doses. 
 The antiplatelet action of aspirin contraindicates its use by 
patients with hemophilia. Although previously not recommended 
during pregnancy, aspirin may be valuable in treating preeclampsia-
eclampsia. 
 NONACETYLATED SALICYLATES 
 These drugs include magnesium choline salicylate, sodium salicy-
late, and salicyl salicylate. All nonacetylated salicylates are effective 
anti-inflammatory drugs, although they may be less effective anal-
gesics than aspirin. Because they are much less effective than 
aspirin as COX inhibitors and they do not inhibit platelet aggrega-
tion, they may be preferable when COX inhibition is undesirable 
such as in patients with asthma, those with bleeding tendencies, 
and even (under close supervision) those with renal dysfunction. 
 The nonacetylated salicylates are administered in doses up to 
3–4 g of salicylate a day and can be monitored using serum salicy-
late measurements. 
 COX-2 SELECTIVE INHIBITORS 
 COX-2 selective inhibitors, or coxibs, were developed in an attempt 
to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis by the COX-2 isozyme induced 
at sites of inflammation without affecting the action of the consti-
tutively active “housekeeping” COX-1 isozyme found in the GI 
tract, kidneys, and platelets. Coxibs selectively bind to and block the 
active site of the COX-2 enzyme much more effectively than that of 
COX-1. COX-2 inhibitors have analgesic, antipyretic, and anti-in-
flammatory effects similar to those of non-selective NSAIDs but 
with an approximate halving of GI adverse effects. Likewise, COX-2 
inhibitors at usual doses have no impact on platelet aggregation, 
which is mediated by thromboxane produced by the COX-1 
isozyme. In contrast, they do inhibit COX-2-mediated prostacyclin 
synthesis in the vascular endothelium. As a result, COX-2 inhibitors 
do not offer the cardioprotective effects of traditional nonselective 
NSAIDs, which has resulted in some patients taking low-dose 
aspirin in addition to a coxib regimen to maintain this effect. 
Unfortunately, because COX-2 is constitutively active within the 
kidney, recommended doses of COX-2 inhibitors cause renal toxici-
ties similar to those associated with traditional NSAIDs. Clinical 
data have suggested a higher incidence of cardiovascular thrombotic 
events associated with COX-2 inhibitors such as rofecoxib and val-
decoxib, resulting in their withdrawal from the market. 
 Celecoxib 
 Celecoxib is a selective COX-2 inhibitor—about 10–20 times 
more selective for COX-2 than for COX-1. Pharmacokinetic and 
dosage considerations are given in  Table 36–1 . 
 Celecoxib is associated with fewer endoscopic ulcers than most 
other NSAIDs. Probably because it is a sulfonamide, celecoxib 
may cause rashes. It does not affect platelet aggregation at usual 
doses. It interacts occasionally with warfarin—as would be 
expected of a drug metabolized via CYP2C9. Adverse effects are 
the common toxicities listed above. 
O
S
O
H2N
H3C
N
N
CF3
Celecoxib
 Meloxicam 
 Meloxicam is an enolcarboxamide related to piroxicam that pref-
erentially inhibits COX-2 over COX-1, particularly at its lowest 
therapeutic dose of 7.5 mg/d. It is not as selective as celecoxib and 
may be considered “preferentially” selective rather than “highly” 
selective. It is associated with fewer clinical GI symptoms and 
complications than piroxicam, diclofenac, and naproxen. Similarly, 
while meloxicam is known to inhibit synthesis of thromboxane 
A 2 , even at supratherapeutic doses, its blockade of thromboxane 
A 2 does not reach levels that result in decreased in vivo platelet 
function (see common adverse effects above). 
 NONSELECTIVE COX INHIBITORS 
 Diclofenac 
 Diclofenac is a phenylacetic acid derivative that is relatively non-
selective as a COX inhibitor. Pharmacokinetic and dosage charac-
teristics are set forth in  Table 36–1 . 
 Gastrointestinal ulceration may occur less frequently than with 
some other NSAIDs. A preparation combining diclofenac and 
misoprostol decreases upper gastrointestinal ulceration but may 
result in diarrhea. Another combination of diclofenac and 
omeprazole was also effective with respect to the prevention of 
recurrent bleeding, but renal adverse effects were common in 
high-risk patients. Diclofenac, 150 mg/d, appears to impair renal 
blood flow and glomerular filtration rate. Elevation of serum 
aminotransferases occurs more commonly with this drug than 
with other NSAIDs. 
 A 0.1% ophthalmic preparation is promoted for prevention of 
postoperative ophthalmic inflammation and can be used after 
intraocular lens implantation and strabismus surgery. A topical gel 
containing 3% diclofenac is effective for solar keratoses. Diclofenac 
in rectal suppository form can be considered for preemptive anal-
gesia and postoperative nausea. In Europe, diclofenac is also avail-
able as an oral mouthwash and for intramuscular administration. 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     641
 Diflunisal 
 Although diflunisal is derived from salicylic acid, it is not metabo-
lized to salicylic acid or salicylate. It undergoes an enterohepatic 
cycle with reabsorption of its glucuronide metabolite followed by 
cleavage of the glucuronide to again release the active moiety. 
Diflunisal is subject to capacity-limited metabolism, with serum 
half-lives at various dosages approximating that of salicylates 
( Table 36–1 ). In rheumatoid arthritis the recommended dose is 
500–1000 mg daily in two divided doses. It is claimed to be par-
ticularly effective for cancer pain with bone metastases and for 
pain control in dental (third molar) surgery. A 2% diflunisal oral 
ointment is a clinically useful analgesic for painful oral lesions. 
 Because its clearance depends on renal function as well as hepatic 
metabolism, diflunisal’s dosage should be limited in patients with 
significant renal impairment. 
 Etodolac 
 Etodolac is a racemic acetic acid derivative with an intermediate 
half-life ( Table 36–1 ). Etodolac does not undergo chiral inversion 
in the body. The dosage of etodolac is 200–400 mg three to four 
times daily. 
 Flurbiprofen 
 Flurbiprofen is a propionic acid derivative with a possibly more 
complex mechanism of action than other NSAIDs. Its ( S )(–) 
enantiomer inhibits COX nonselectively, but it has been shown in 
rat tissue to also affect tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and nitric 
oxide synthesis. Hepatic metabolism is extensive; its ( R )(+) and ( S )
(–) enantiomers are metabolized differently, and it does not 
undergo chiral conversion. It does demonstrate enterohepatic 
circulation. 
 Flurbiprofen is also available in a topical ophthalmic formula-
tion for inhibition of intraoperative miosis. Flurbiprofen intrave-
nously is effective for perioperative analgesia in minor ear, neck, 
and nose surgery and in lozenge form for sore throat. 
 Although its adverse effect profile is similar to that of other 
NSAIDs in most ways, flurbiprofen is also rarely associated with 
cogwheel rigidity, ataxia, tremor, and myoclonus. 
 Ibuprofen 
 Ibuprofen is a simple derivative of phenylpropionic acid 
( Figure 36–1 ). In doses of about 2400 mg daily, ibuprofen is 
equivalent to 4 g of aspirin in anti-inflammatory effect. 
Pharmacokinetic characteristics are given in  Table 36–1 . 
 Oral ibuprofen is often prescribed in lower doses (<2400 mg/d), 
at which it has analgesic but not anti-inflammatory efficacy. It is 
available over the counter in low-dose forms under several trade 
names. 
 Ibuprofen is effective in closing patent ductus arteriosus in 
preterm infants, with much the same efficacy and safety as indo-
methacin. The oral and intravenous routes are equally effective for 
this indication. A topical cream preparation appears to be absorbed 
into fascia and muscle; an  (S ) (–) formulation has been tested. 
Ibuprofen cream was more effective than placebo cream in the 
treatment of primary knee osteoarthritis. A liquid gel preparation 
of ibuprofen, 400 mg, provides prompt relief and good overall 
efficacy in postsurgical dental pain. 
 In comparison with indomethacin, ibuprofen decreases urine 
output less and also causes less fluid retention. The drug is rela-
tively contraindicated in individuals with nasal polyps, angio-
edema, and bronchospastic reactivity to aspirin. Aseptic meningitis 
(particularly in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus), and 
fluid retention have been reported. Interaction with anticoagu-
lants is uncommon. The concomitant administration of ibuprofen 
and aspirin antagonizes the irreversible platelet inhibition induced 
by aspirin. Thus, treatment with ibuprofen in patients with 
increased cardiovascular risk may limit the cardioprotective effects 
of aspirin. Furthermore, the use of ibuprofen concomitantly with 
aspirin may  decrease the total anti-inflammatory effect. Common 
adverse effects are listed on page 638; rare hematologic effects 
include agranulocytosis and aplastic anemia. 
 Indomethacin 
 Indomethacin, introduced in 1963, is an indole derivative 
( Figure 36–1 ). It is a potent nonselective COX inhibitor and may 
also inhibit phospholipase A and C, reduce neutrophil migration, 
and decrease T-cell and B-cell proliferation. 
 It differs somewhat from other NSAIDs in its indications and 
toxicities. 
 It has been used to accelerate closure of patent ductus arteriosus. 
Indomethacin has been tried in numerous small or uncontrolled 
trials for many other conditions, including Sweet’s syndrome, juve-
nile rheumatoid arthritis, pleurisy, nephrotic syndrome, diabetes 
insipidus, urticarial vasculitis, postepisiotomy pain, and prophy-
laxis of heterotopic ossification in arthroplasty. 
 An ophthalmic preparation is efficacious for conjunctival 
inflammation and to reduce pain after traumatic corneal abrasion. 
Gingival inflammation is reduced after administration of indo-
methacin oral rinse. Epidural injections produce a degree of pain 
relief similar to that achieved with methylprednisolone in post-
laminectomy syndrome. 
 At usual doses, indomethacin has the common side effects listed 
above. The GI effects may include pancreatitis. Headache is expe-
rienced by 15–25% of patients and may be associated with dizzi-
ness, confusion, and depression. Rarely, psychosis with hallucinations 
has been reported. Renal papillary necrosis has also been observed. 
A number of interactions with other drugs have been reported (see 
 Chapter 66 ). Probenecid prolongs indomethacin’s half-life by 
inhibiting both renal and biliary clearance. 
 Ketoprofen 
 Ketoprofen is a propionic acid derivative that inhibits both COX 
(nonselectively) and lipoxygenase. Its pharmacokinetic character-
istics are given in  Table 36–1 . Concurrent administration of 
probenecid elevates ketoprofen levels and prolongs its plasma 
half-life. 
642    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 The effectiveness of ketoprofen at dosages of 100–300 mg/d is 
equivalent to that of other NSAIDs. In spite of its dual effect on 
prostaglandins and leukotrienes, ketoprofen is not superior to 
other NSAIDs in clinical efficacy. Its major adverse effects are on 
the GI tract and the central nervous system (see common adverse 
effects above). 
 Ketorolac 
 Ketorolac is an NSAID promoted for systemic use mainly as an anal-
gesic, not as an anti-inflammatory drug (although it has typical 
NSAID properties). Pharmacokinetics are presented in  Table 36–1 . 
The drug is an effective analgesic and has been used successfully to 
replace morphine in some situations involving mild to moderate 
postsurgical pain. It is most often given intramuscularly or intrave-
nously, but an oral dose formulation is available. When used with an 
opioid, it may decrease the opioid requirement by 25–50%. An oph-
thalmic preparation is available for ocular inflammatory conditions. 
Toxicities are similar to those of other NSAIDs (see page 638), 
although renal toxicity may be more common with chronic use. 
 Nabumetone 
 Nabumetone is the only nonacid NSAID in current use; it is 
converted to the active acetic acid derivative in the body. It is 
given as a ketone prodrug that resembles naproxen in structure 
( Figure 36–1 ). Its half-life of more than 24 hours ( Table 36–1 ) 
permits once-daily dosing, and the drug does not appear to undergo 
enterohepatic circulation. Renal impairment results in a doubling of 
its half-life and a 30% increase in the area under the curve. 
 Its properties are very similar to those of other NSAIDs, though 
it may be less damaging to the stomach than some other NSAIDs 
when given at a dosage of 1000 mg/d. Unfortunately, higher 
dosages (eg, 1500–2000 mg/d) are often needed, and this is a very 
expensive NSAID. Like naproxen, nabumetone has been associated 
with pseudoporphyria and photosensitivity in some patients. 
Other adverse effects mirror those of other NSAIDs. 
 Naproxen 
 Naproxen is a naphthylpropionic acid derivative. It is the only 
NSAID presently marketed as a single enantiomer. Naproxen’s 
free fraction is significantly higher in women than in men, but 
half-life is similar in both sexes ( Table 36–1 ). Naproxen is effective 
for the usual rheumatologic indications and is available in a slow-
release formulation, as an oral suspension, and over the counter. A 
topical preparation and an ophthalmic solution are also available. 
 The incidence of upper GI bleeding in over-the-counter use is 
low but still double that of over-the-counter ibuprofen (perhaps 
due to a dose effect). Rare cases of allergic pneumonitis, leukocy-
toclastic vasculitis, and pseudoporphyria as well as the common 
NSAID-associated adverse effects have been noted. 
 Oxaprozin 
 Oxaprozin is another propionic acid derivative NSAID. As noted 
in  Table 36–1 , its major difference from the other members of this 
subgroup is a very long half-life (50–60 hours), although oxapro-
zin does not undergo enterohepatic circulation. It is mildly urico-
suric, making it potentially more useful in gout than some other 
NSAIDs. Otherwise, the drug has the same benefits and risks 
that are associated with other NSAIDs. 
 Piroxicam 
 Piroxicam, an oxicam ( Figure 36–1 ), is a nonselective COX inhib-
itor that at high concentrations also inhibits polymorphonuclear 
leukocyte migration, decreases oxygen radical production, and 
inhibits lymphocyte function. Its long half-life ( Table 36–1 ) 
permits once-daily dosing. 
 Piroxicam can be used for the usual rheumatic indications. 
When piroxicam is used in dosages higher than 20 mg/d, an 
increased incidence of peptic ulcer and bleeding is encountered. 
Epidemiologic studies suggest that this risk is as much as 9.5 times 
higher with piroxicam than with other NSAIDs (see common 
adverse effects above). 
 Sulindac 
 Sulindac is a sulfoxide prodrug. It is reversibly metabolized to the 
active sulfide metabolite, which is excreted in bile and then 
reabsorbed from the intestine. The enterohepatic cycling prolongs 
the duration of action to 12–16 hours. 
 In addition to its rheumatic disease indications, sulindac 
suppresses familial intestinal polyposis and it may inhibit the 
development of colon, breast, and prostate cancer in humans. It 
appears to inhibit the occurrence of GI cancer in rats. The latter 
effect may be caused by the sulfone rather than the sulfide. 
 Among the more severe adverse reactions, Stevens-Johnson 
epidermal necrolysis syndrome, thrombocytopenia, agranulocyto-
sis, and nephrotic syndrome have all been observed. Like diclofenac, 
sulindac may have some propensity to cause elevation of serum 
aminotransferases; it is also sometimes associated with cholestatic 
liver damage, which disappears when the drug is stopped. 
 Tolmetin 
 Tolmetin is a nonselective COX inhibitor with a short half-life 
(1–2 hours) and is not often used. Its efficacy and toxicity profiles 
are similar to those of other NSAIDs with the following excep-
tions: it is ineffective (for unknown reasons) in the treatment of 
gout, and it may cause (rarely) thrombocytopenic purpura. 
 Other NSAIDs 
 Azapropazone, carprofen, meclofenamate, and  tenoxicam are 
rarely used and are not reviewed here. 
 CHOICE OF NSAID 
 All NSAIDs, including aspirin, are about equally efficacious with 
a few exceptions—tolmetin seems not to be effective for gout, and 
aspirin is less effective than other NSAIDs (eg, indomethacin) for 
ankylosing spondylitis. 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     643
 Thus, NSAIDs tend to be differentiated on the basis of toxicity 
and cost-effectiveness. For example, the GI and renal side effects 
of ketorolac limit its use. Some surveys suggest that indomethacin 
and tolmetin are the NSAIDs associated with the greatest toxicity, 
while salsalate, aspirin, and ibuprofen are least toxic. The selective 
COX-2 inhibitors were not included in these analyses. 
 For patients with renal insufficiency, nonacetylated salicylates 
may be best. Diclofenac and sulindac are associated with more liver 
function test abnormalities than other NSAIDs. The relatively 
expensive, selective COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib is probably safest 
for patients at high risk for GI bleeding but may have a higher risk 
of cardiovascular toxicity. Celecoxib or a nonselective NSAID plus 
omeprazole or misoprostol may be appropriate in patients at high-
est risk for GI bleeding; in this subpopulation of patients, they are 
cost-effective despite their high acquisition costs. 
 The choice of an NSAID thus requires a balance of efficacy, 
cost-effectiveness, safety, and numerous personal factors (eg, other 
drugs also being used, concurrent illness, compliance, medical 
insurance coverage), so that there is no best NSAID for all patients. 
There may, however, be one or two best NSAIDs for a specific 
person. 
 ■ DISEASEMODIFYING 
ANTIRHEUMATIC DRUGS 
 Rheumatoid arthritis is an immunologic disease that causes 
significant systemic effects, shortens life, and reduces mobility and 
quality of life. Interest has centered on finding treatments that 
might arrest—or at least slow—this progression by modifying the 
disease itself. The effects of disease-modifying therapies may 
take 6 weeks to 6 months to become clinically evident, although 
some biologics are effective within 2 weeks or less. 
 These therapies include nonbiologic disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs (usually designated “DMARDs”) such as 
methotrexate, azathioprine, chloroquine and hydroxychloro-
quine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, leflunomide, mycophe-
nolate mofetil, and sulfasalazine. Gold salts, which were once 
extensively used, are no longer recommended because of their 
significant toxicities and questionable efficacy. 
 There are also several biologic DMARDs (designated “biologics”) 
marketed for rheumatoid arthritis: a T-cell-modulating biologic 
(abatacept), a B-cell cytotoxic agent (rituximab), an anti-IL-6 
receptor antibody (tocilizumab), and the TNF-α-blocking agents 
(five drugs). 
 These DMARDs and biologics are discussed alphabetically, 
independent of origin. 
 ABATACEPT 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Abatacept is a co-stimulation modulator biologic that inhibits 
the activation of T cells (see also  Chapter 55 ). After a T cell 
has engaged an antigen-presenting cell (APC), a second signal is 
produced by CD28 on the T cell that interacts with CD80 or 
CD86 on the APC, leading to T-cell activation. Abatacept (which 
contains the endogenous ligand CTLA-4) binds to CD80 and 86, 
thereby inhibiting the binding to CD28 and preventing the 
activation of T cells. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Abatacept is given as three intravenous infusion “induction” doses 
(day 0, week 2, and week 4), followed by monthly infusions. The 
dose is based on body weight; patients weighing less than 60 kg 
receiving 500 mg, those 60–100 kg receiving 750 mg, and those 
more than 100 kg receiving 1000 mg. Dosing regimens in any 
adult group can be increased if needed. The terminal serum half-
life is 13–16 days. Co-administration with methotrexate, NSAIDs, 
and corticosteroids does not influence abatacept clearance. 
 Indications 
 Abatacept can be used as monotherapy or in combination with 
other DMARDs in patients with moderate to severe rheumatoid 
arthritis who have had an inadequate response to other DMARDs. 
It reduces the clinical signs and symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis, 
including slowing of radiographic progression. It is also being 
tested in early rheumatoid arthritis. 
 Adverse Effects 
 There is a slightly increased risk of infection (as with other 
biologic DMARDs), predominantly of the upper respiratory tract. 
Concomitant use with TNF-α antagonists is not recommended 
due to the increased incidence of serious infection. Infusion-related 
reactions and hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis, 
have been reported but are rare. Anti-abatacept antibody forma-
tion is infrequent (<5%) and has no effect on clinical outcomes. 
There is a possible increase in lymphomas but not in other malig-
nancies when using abatacept. 
 AZATHIOPRINE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Azathioprine is a synthetic DMARD that acts through its major 
metabolite, 6-thioguanine. 6-Thioguanine suppresses inosinic acid 
synthesis, B-cell and T-cell function, immunoglobulin produc-
tion, and interleukin-2 secretion (see  Chapter 55 ). 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The metabolism of azathioprine is bimodal in humans, with rapid 
metabolizers clearing the drug four times faster than slow metabo-
lizers. Production of 6-thioguanine is dependent on thiopurine 
methyltransferase (TPMT), and patients with low or absent 
TPMT activity (0.3% of the population) are at particularly high 
risk of myelosuppression by excess concentrations of the parent 
drug, if dosage is not adjusted. 
644    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 Indications 
 Azathioprine is approved for use in rheumatoid arthritis and is 
used at a dosage of 2 mg/kg/d. Controlled trials show efficacy in 
psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis, polymyositis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, and Behçet’s disease. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Azathioprine’s toxicity includes bone marrow suppression, GI 
disturbances, and some increase in infection risk. As noted in 
 Chapter 55 , lymphomas may be increased with azathioprine 
use. Rarely, fever, rash, and hepatotoxicity signal acute allergic 
reactions. 
 CHLOROQUINE & 
HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are nonbiologic drugs 
mainly used for malaria (see  Chapter 52 ) and in the rheumatic 
diseases. The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory action of these 
drugs in rheumatic diseases is unclear. The following mechanisms 
have been proposed: suppression of T-lymphocyte responses to 
mitogens, decreased leukocyte chemotaxis, stabilization of lyso-
somal enzymes, inhibition of DNA and RNA synthesis, and the 
trapping of free radicals. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Antimalarials are rapidly absorbed and 50% protein-bound in the 
plasma. They are very extensively tissue-bound, particularly in mela-
nin-containing tissues such as the eyes. The drugs are deaminated in 
the liver and have blood elimination half-lives of up to 45 days. 
 Indications 
 Antimalarials are approved for rheumatoid arthritis, but they are 
not considered very effective DMARDs. Dose-response and serum 
concentration-response relationships have been documented for 
hydroxychloroquine and dose-loading may increase rate of response. 
Although antimalarials improve symptoms, there is no evidence 
that these compounds alter bony damage in rheumatoid arthritis at 
their usual dosages (up to 6.4 mg/kg/d for hydroxychloroquine or 
200 mg/d for chloroquine). It usually takes 3–6 months to obtain 
a response. Antimalarials are often used in the treatment of the skin 
manifestations, serositis, and joint pains of systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, and they have been used in Sjögren’s syndrome. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Although ocular toxicity (see  Chapter 52 ) may occur at dosages 
greater than 250 mg/d for chloroquine and greater than 6.4 mg/kg/d 
for hydroxychloroquine, it rarely occurs at lower doses. Nevertheless, 
ophthalmologic monitoring every 12 months is advised. Other 
toxicities include dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
rashes, and nightmares. These drugs appear to be relatively safe in 
pregnancy. 
 CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Cyclophosphamide is a synthetic DMARD. Its major active 
metabolite is phosphoramide mustard, which cross-links DNA to 
prevent cell replication. It suppresses T-cell and B-cell function by 
30–40%; T-cell suppression correlates with clinical response in 
the rheumatic diseases. Its pharmacokinetics and toxicities are 
discussed in  Chapter 54 . 
 Indications 
 Cyclophosphamide is active against rheumatoid arthritis when 
given orally at dosages of 2 mg/kg/d but not intravenously. It is 
used regularly to treat systemic lupus erythematosus, vasculitis, 
Wegener’s granulomatosis, and other severe rheumatic diseases. 
 CYCLOSPORINE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Cyclosporine is a peptide antibiotic but is considered a nonbiologic 
DMARD. Through regulation of gene transcription, it inhibits 
interleukin-1 and interleukin-2 receptor production and second-
arily inhibits macrophage–T-cell interaction and T-cell responsive-
ness (see  Chapter 55 ). T-cell-dependent B-cell function is also 
affected. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Cyclosporine absorption is incomplete and somewhat erratic, 
although a microemulsion formulation improves its consistency 
and provides 20–30% bioavailability. Grapefruit juice increases 
cyclosporine bioavailability by as much as 62%. Cyclosporine is 
metabolized by CYP3A and consequently is subject to a large 
number of drug interactions (see Chapters 55 and 66). 
 Indications 
 Cyclosporine is approved for use in rheumatoid arthritis and 
retards the appearance of new bony erosions. Its usual dosage is 
3–5 mg/kg/d divided into two doses. Anecdotal reports suggest 
that it may be useful in systemic lupus erythematosus, polymyosi-
tis and dermatomyositis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, and juvenile 
chronic arthritis. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and to a lesser extent, anemia, are 
predictable. High doses can be cardiotoxic and sterilty may occur 
after chronic dosing at anti-rheumatic doses, especially in women. 
Bladder cancer is very rare but must be looked for, even 5 years after 
cessation of use. 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     645
 LEFLUNOMIDE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Leflunomide, another nonbiologic DMARD, undergoes rapid 
conversion, both in the intestine and in the plasma, to its active 
metabolite, A77-1726. This metabolite inhibits dihydroorotate 
dehydrogenase, leading to a decrease in ribonucleotide synthesis 
and the arrest of stimulated cells in the G 1 phase of cell growth. 
Consequently, leflunomide inhibits T-cell proliferation and pro-
duction of autoantibodies by B cells. Secondary effects include 
increases of interleukin-10 receptor mRNA, decreased interleu-
kin-8 receptor type A mRNA, and decreased TNF-α-dependent 
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) activation. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Leflunomide is completely absorbed and has a mean plasma half-
life of 19 days. Its active metabolite, A77-1726, is thought to have 
approximately the same half-life and is subject to enterohepatic 
recirculation. Cholestyramine can enhance leflunomide excretion 
and increases total clearance by approximately 50%. 
 Indications 
 Leflunomide is as effective as methotrexate in rheumatoid arthri-
tis, including inhibition of bony damage. In one study, combined 
treatment with methotrexate and leflunomide resulted in a 46.2% 
ACR20 response compared with 19.5% in patients receiving 
methotrexate alone. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Diarrhea occurs in approximately 25% of patients given lefluno-
mide, although only about 3–5% discontinue the drug because of 
this side effect. Elevation in liver enzymes can occur. Both effects 
can be reduced by decreasing the dose of leflunomide. Other 
adverse effects associated with leflunomide are mild alopecia, weight 
gain, and increased blood pressure. Leukopenia and thrombocy-
topenia occur rarely. This drug is contraindicated in pregnancy. 
 METHOTREXATE 
 Methotrexate, a synthetic antimetabolite, is now considered the 
first-line DMARD for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and is used 
in 50–70% of patients. It is active in this condition at much lower 
doses than those needed in cancer chemotherapy (see  Chapter 54 ). 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Methotrexate’s principal mechanism of action at the low doses used 
in the rheumatic diseases probably relates to inhibition of amino-
imidazolecarboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR) transformylase and 
thymidylate synthetase. AICAR, which accumulates intracellularly, 
competitively inhibits AMP deaminase, leading to an accumula-
tion of AMP. The AMP is released and converted extracellularly to 
adenosine, which is a potent inhibitor of inflammation. As a result, 
the inflammatory functions of neutrophils, macrophages, den-
dritic cells, and lymphocytes are suppressed. Methotrexate has 
secondary effects on polymorphonuclear chemotaxis. There is 
some effect on dihydrofolate reductase and this affects lymphocyte 
and macrophage function, but this is not its principal mechanism 
of action. Methotrexate has direct inhibitory effects on prolifera-
tion and stimulates apoptosis in immune-inflammatory cells. 
Additionally, it has also been shown to have inhibition of proin-
flammatory cytokines linked to rheumatoid synovitis. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The drug is approximately 70% absorbed after oral administration 
(see  Chapter 54 ). It is metabolized to a less active hydroxylated 
metabolite. Both the parent compound and the metabolite are 
polyglutamated within cells where they stay for prolonged periods. 
Methotrexate’s serum half-life is usually only 6–9 hours, although 
it may be as long as 24 hours in some individuals. Methotrexate’s 
concentration is increased in the presence of hydroxychloroquine, 
which can reduce the clearance or increase the tubular reabsorp-
tion of methotrexate. This drug is excreted principally in the urine, 
but up to 30% may be excreted in bile. 
 Indications 
 Although the most common methotrexate dosing regimen for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is 15–25 mg weekly, there is an 
increased effect up to 30–35 mg weekly. The drug decreases the 
rate of appearance of new erosions. Evidence supports its use in 
juvenile chronic arthritis, and it has been used in psoriasis, psori-
atic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, polymyositis, dermatomyosi-
tis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, giant cell arteritis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, and vasculitis. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Nausea and mucosal ulcers are the most common toxicities. 
Additionally, many other side effects such as leukopenia, anemia, 
stomatitis, GI ulcerations, and alopecia are probably the result of 
inhibiting cellular proliferation. Progressive dose-related hepato-
toxicity in the form of enzyme elevation occurs frequently, but 
cirrhosis is rare (<1%). Liver toxicity is not related to serum 
methotrexate concentrations. Rare hypersensitivity-like lung reac-
tion with acute shortness of breath has been documented, as have 
pseudo-lymphomatous reactions. The incidence of GI and liver 
function test abnormalities can be reduced by the use of leuco-
vorin 24 hours after each weekly dose or by the use of daily folic 
acid, although this may decrease the efficacy of the methotrexate 
by about 10%. This drug is contraindicated in pregnancy. 
 MYCOPHENOLATE MOFETIL 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), a semisynthetic DMARD, is 
converted to mycophenolic acid, the active form of the drug. The 
active product inhibits inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, 
646    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
leading to suppression of T- and B-lymphocyte proliferation. 
Downstream, it interferes with leukocyte adhesion to endothelial 
cells through inhibition of E-selectin, P-selectin, and intercellular 
adhesion molecule 1. MMF’s pharmacokinetics and toxicities are 
discussed in  Chapter 55 . 
 Indications 
 MMF is effective for the treatment of renal disease due to systemic 
lupus erythematosus and may be useful in vasculitis and Wegener’s 
granulomatosis. Although MMF is occasionally used at a dosage 
of 2 g/d to treat rheumatoid arthritis, there are no well-controlled 
data regarding its efficacy in this disease. 
 Adverse Effects
MMF is associated with nausea, dyspepsia and abdominal pain. 
Like azathioprine, it can cause hepatotoxicity although it is not 
associated with the acute febrile hepatotoxicity of that drug. MMF 
can cause leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia. MMF is 
associated with an increased incidence of infections. It is only 
rarely associated with malignancy.
 RITUXIMAB 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Rituximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody biologic agent that 
targets CD20 B lymphocytes (see  Chapter 55 ). This depletion takes 
place through cell-mediated and complement-dependent cytotoxic-
ity and stimulation of cell apoptosis. Depletion of B lymphocytes 
reduces inflammation by decreasing the presentation of antigens to 
T lymphocytes and inhibiting the secretion of proinflammatory 
cytokines. Rituximab rapidly depletes peripheral B cells, although 
this depletion correlates neither with efficacy nor with toxicity. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Rituximab is given as two intravenous infusions of 1000 mg, 
separated by 2 weeks. It may be repeated every 6–9 months, as 
needed. Repeated courses remain effective. Pretreatment with 
intravenous glucocorticoids given 30 minutes prior to infusion 
(usually 100 mg of methylprednisolone) decreases the incidence 
and severity of infusion reactions. 
 Indications 
 Rituximab is indicated for the treatment of moderately to severely 
active rheumatoid arthritis in combination with methotrexate in 
patients with an inadequate response to one or more TNF-α 
antagonists. 
 Adverse Effects 
 About 30% of patients develop rash with the first 1000 mg treat-
ment; this incidence decreases to about 10% with the second 
infusion and progressively decreases with each course of therapy 
thereafter. These rashes do not usually require discontinuation of 
therapy but of course an urticarial or anaphylactoid reaction pre-
cludes further therapy. Immunoglobulins (particularly IgG and 
IgM) may decrease with repeated courses of therapy and infections 
can occur, although they do not seem directly associated with the 
decreases in immunoglobulins. Rituximab has not been associated 
with either activation of tuberculosis or the occurrence of lympho-
mas or other tumors (see  Chapter 55 ). Other adverse effects, like 
cardiovascular events, are rare. 
 SULFASALAZINE 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Sulfasalazine, a synthetic DMARD, is metabolized to sulfapyri-
dine and 5-aminosalicylic acid. The sulfapyridine is probably the 
active moiety when treating rheumatoid arthritis (unlike inflam-
matory bowel disease, see  Chapter 62 ). Some authorities believe 
that the parent compound, sulfasalazine, also has an effect. In 
treated arthritis patients, IgA and IgM rheumatoid factor produc-
tion are decreased. Suppression of T-cell responses to concanavalin 
and inhibition of in vitro B-cell proliferation have also been docu-
mented. In vitro, sulfasalazine or its metabolites inhibit the release 
of inflammatory cytokines, including those produced by mono-
cytes or macrophages, eg, interleukins-1, -6, and -12, and TNF-α. 
These findings suggest a possible mechanism for the clinical 
efficacy of sulfasalazine in rheumatoid arthritis. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Only 10–20% of orally administered sulfasalazine is absorbed, 
although a fraction undergoes enterohepatic recirculation into 
the bowel where it is reduced by intestinal bacteria to liberate 
sulfapyridine and 5-aminosalicylic acid (see Figure 62–8). 
Sulfapyridine is well absorbed while 5-aminosalicylic acid remains 
unabsorbed. Some sulfasalazine is excreted unchanged in the urine 
whereas sulfapyridine is excreted after hepatic acetylation and 
hydroxylation. Sulfasalazine’s half-life is 6–17 hours. 
 Indications 
 Sulfasalazine is effective in rheumatoid arthritis and reduces radio-
logic disease progression. It has also been used in juvenile chronic 
arthritis and in ankylosing spondylitis and its associated uveitis. 
The usual regimen is 2–3 g/d. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Approximately 30% of patients using sulfasalazine discontinue the 
drug because of toxicity. Common adverse effects include nausea, 
vomiting, headache, and rash. Hemolytic anemia and methemo-
globinemia also occur, but rarely. Neutropenia occurs in 1–5% of 
patients, while thrombocytopenia is very rare. Pulmonary toxicity 
and positive double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) are occasionally 
seen, but drug-induced lupus is rare. Reversible infertility occurs 
in men, but sulfasalazine does not affect fertility in women. The 
drug does not appear to be teratogenic. 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     647
 TOCILIZUMAB 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Tocilizumab, a newer biologic humanized antibody, binds to sol-
uble and membrane-bound IL-6 receptors, and inhibit the IL-6-
mediated signaling via these receptors. IL-6 is a proinflammatory 
cytokine produced by different cell types including T cells, B cells, 
monocytes, fibroblasts, and synovial and endothelial cells. IL-6 
is involved in a variety of physiologic processes such as T-cell 
activation, hepatic acute-phase protein synthesis, and stimulation 
of the inflammatory processes involved in diseases such as rheu-
matoid arthritis. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The half-life of tocilizumab is dose-dependent, approximately 
11 days for the 4 mg/kg dose and 13 days for the 8 mg/kg dose. 
IL-6 can suppress several CYP450 isoenzymes; thus, inhibiting 
IL-6 may restore CYP450 activities to higher levels. This may be 
clinically relevant for drugs that are CYP450 substrates and have 
a narrow therapeutic window (eg, cyclosporine or warfarin), and 
dosage adjustment of these medications may be needed. 
 Tocilizumab can be used in combination with nonbiologic 
DMARDs or as monotherapy. The recommended starting dose is 
4 mg/kg intravenously every 4 weeks followed by an increase to 
8 mg/kg dependent on clinical response. Additionally, dosage 
modifications are recommended on the basis of certain laboratory 
changes, elevated liver enzymes, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia. 
 Indications 
 Tocilizumab is indicated for adult patients with moderately to 
severely active rheumatoid arthritis who have had an inadequate 
response to one or more TNF antagonists. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Serious infections including tuberculosis, fungal, viral, and other 
opportunistic infections have occurred. Screening for tuberculosis 
should be done prior to beginning tocilizumab. The most com-
mon adverse reactions were upper respiratory tract infections, 
headache, hypertension, and elevated liver enzymes. 
 Neutropenia and reduction in platelet counts occur occasionally, 
and lipids (eg, cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL, and HDL) should be 
monitored. GI perforation has been reported when using tocilizumab 
in patients with diverticulitis or who are using corticosteroids. 
 TNF-`-BLOCKING AGENTS 
 Cytokines play a central role in the immune response (see 
 Chapter 55 ) and in rheumatoid arthritis. Although a wide range 
of cytokines are expressed in the joints of rheumatoid arthritis 
patients, TNF-α appears to be particularly important in the 
inflammatory process. 
 TNF-α affects cellular function via activation of specific 
membrane-bound TNF receptors (TNFR 1 , TNFR 2 ). Five biologic 
DMARDs interfering with TNF-α have been approved for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other rheumatic diseases 
( Figure 36–4 ). 
 Adalimumab 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Adalimumab is a fully human IgG 1 anti-TNF monoclonal anti-
body. This compound complexes with soluble TNF-α and prevents 
its interaction with p55 and p75 cell surface receptors. This results 
in down-regulation of macrophage and T-cell function. 
Adalimumab
Infliximab
Etanercept
Extracellular domain
of human p75 receptor
VH
CL
CL
VL
VL
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH1
CH1
CH3
CH3
CH2
VH
Fc region of
human IgG1
Fc region of
human IgG1
 FIGURE 36–4  Structures of TNF-α antagonists used in rheumatoid arthritis. C H , constant heavy chain; C L , constant light chain; F c , complex 
immunoglobulin region; V H , variable heavy chain; V L , variable light chain. Red regions, human derived; blue regions, mouse derived. 
648    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 B. Pharmacokinetics 
 Adalimumab is given subcutaneously and has a half-life of 
10–20 days. Its clearance is decreased by more than 40% in the 
presence of methotrexate, and the formation of human anti-
monoclonal antibody is decreased when methotrexate is given at 
the same time. The usual dose in rheumatoid arthritis is 40 mg 
every other week; increased responses may be evident with the 
higher weekly dosing regimen. In psoriasis, 80 mg is given at week 
0, 40 mg at week 1, and then 40 mg every other week thereafter. 
 C. Indications 
 The compound is approved for rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing 
spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, plaque 
psoriasis, and Crohn’s disease. It decreases the rate of formation of 
new erosions. It is effective both as monotherapy and in combina-
tion with methotrexate and other DMARDs. 
 D. Adverse Effects 
 In common with the other TNF-α-blocking agents, the risk of 
bacterial infections and macrophage-dependent infection (including 
tuberculosis and other opportunistic infections) is increased, 
although it remains very low. Patients should be screened for 
latent or active tuberculosis before starting adalimumab or other 
TNF-α-blocking agents. There is no evidence of an increased 
incidence of solid malignancies. It is not clear if the incidence of 
lymphomas is increased by adalimumab. A low incidence of newly 
formed dsDNA antibodies and antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) has 
been documented when using adalimumab, but clinical lupus is 
extremely rare. Rare cases of leukopenia and vasculitis associated 
with adalimumab have been documented. 
 Certolizumab 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Certolizumab is a recombinant, humanized antibody Fab frag-
ment conjugated to a polyethylene glycol (PEG) with specificity 
for human TNF-α. Certolizumab neutralizes membrane-bound 
and soluble TNF-α in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, 
certolizumab does not contain an F c region, found on a complete 
antibody, and does not fix complement or cause antibody-
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity in vitro. 
 B. Pharmacokinetics 
 Certolizumab is given subcutaneously and has a half-life of 14 days. 
The clearance is decreased with decreasing body weight. Methotrexate 
does not alter the pharmacokinetics of certolizumab. However, 
methotrexate does decrease the appearance of anti-certolizumab 
antibodies. The usual dose for rheumatoid arthritis is 400 mg ini-
tially and at weeks 2 and 4, followed by 200 mg every other week. 
 C. Indications 
 Certolizumab is indicated for the treatment of adults with moder-
ately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis. It can be used as mono-
therapy or in combination with nonbiologic DMARDs. Additionally, 
certolizumab is approved to reduce signs and symptoms and main-
tain clinical response in adult patients with Crohn’s disease. 
 D. Adverse Effects 
 Consistent with other TNF-α blockers, the risk of serious infec-
tions, including tuberculosis, fungal, and other opportunistic 
pathogens, is increased and patients should be monitored closely. 
Prior to initiation of treatment, testing for latent tuberculosis 
should be performed. The association of lymphoma and other 
tumors with TNF-α blockers as a class, of which certolizumab is 
a member, is not fully understood. 
 Etanercept 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Etanercept is a recombinant fusion protein consisting of two sol-
uble TNF p75 receptor moieties linked to the F c portion of 
human IgG 1 ( Figure 36–4 ); it binds TNF-α molecules and also 
inhibits lymphotoxin-α. 
 B. Pharmacokinetics 
 Etanercept is given subcutaneously in a dosage of 25 mg twice 
weekly or 50 mg weekly. In psoriasis, 50 mg is given twice weekly 
for 12 weeks followed by 50 mg weekly. The drug is slowly absorbed, 
with peak concentration 72 hours after drug administration. 
Etanercept has a mean serum elimination half-life of 4.5 days. Fifty 
milligrams given once weekly gives the same area under the curve 
and minimum serum concentrations as 25 mg twice weekly. 
 C. Indications 
 Etanercept is approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, 
juvenile chronic arthritis, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylo-
sing spondylitis. It can be used as monotherapy, although over 
70% of patients taking etanercept are also using methotrexate. 
Etanercept decreases the rate of formation of new erosions relative 
to methotrexate alone. It is also being used in other rheumatic 
syndromes such as scleroderma, Wegener’s granulomatosis, giant 
cell arteritis, and sarcoidosis. 
 D. Adverse Effects 
 The incidence of bacterial infections is slightly increased, especially 
soft tissue infections and septic arthritis. Activation of latent tuber-
culosis is lower with etanercept than with other TNF-blocking 
agents. Nevertheless, patients should be screened for latent or active 
tuberculosis before starting this medication. Similarly, opportunistic 
infections can rarely occur when using etanercept. The incidence of 
solid malignancies is not increased, but as with other TNF-blocking 
agents, one must be aware of possible lymphomas (although their 
incidence may not be increased compared with other DMARDs or 
active rheumatoid arthritis itself). While positive ANAs and 
dsDNAs may be found in patients receiving this drug, these find-
ings do not contraindicate continued use if clinical lupus symptoms 
do not occur. Injection site reactions occur in 20–40% of patients, 
although they rarely result in discontinuation of therapy. Anti-
etanercept antibodies are present in up to 16% of treated patients, 
but they do not interfere with efficacy or predict toxicity. 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     649
 Golimumab 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Golimumab is a human monoclonal antibody with a high affinity 
for soluble and membrane-bound TNF-α. Golimumab effectively 
neutralizes the inflammatory effects produced by TNF-α seen in 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. 
 B. Pharmacokinetics 
 Golimumab is administered subcutaneously and has a half-life of 
approximately 14 days. Concomitant use with methotrexate 
showed increased serum levels of golimumab as well as a decrease 
in anti-golimumab antibodies. The recommended dose is 50 mg 
given every 4 weeks. 
 C. Indications 
 Golimumab, given with methotrexate, is indicated for the treat-
ment of moderately to severely active rheumatoid arthritis in adult 
patients. It is also indicated for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis 
and ankylosing spondylitis. 
 D. Adverse Events 
 TNF-α blockers, including golimumab, increase the risk of seri-
ous infections, including tuberculosis, fungal, and other opportu-
nistic pathogens. Prior to initiation of treatment, testing for latent 
tuberculosis should be performed. As with other TNF-α-blocking 
agents, there is a potential association with lymphoma; there is no 
association with other solid tumors (except possibly non-melan-
otic skin cancers). 
 Infliximab 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Infliximab ( Figure 36–4 ) is a chimeric (25% mouse, 75% human) 
IgG 1 monoclonal antibody that binds with high affinity to soluble 
and possibly membrane-bound TNF-α. Its mechanism of action 
probably is the same as that of adalimumab. 
 B. Pharmacokinetics 
 Infliximab is given as an intravenous infusion with “induction” at 
0, 2, and 6 weeks and maintenance every 8 weeks thereafter. 
Dosing is 3–10 mg/kg, although the usual dose is 3–5 mg/kg 
every 8 weeks. There is a relationship between serum concentra-
tion and effect, although individual clearances vary markedly. The 
terminal half-life is 9–12 days without accumulation after repeated 
dosing at the recommended interval of 8 weeks. After intermittent 
therapy, infliximab elicits human antichimeric antibodies in up to 
62% of patients. Concurrent therapy with methotrexate markedly 
decreases the prevalence of human antichimeric antibodies. 
 C. Indications 
 Infliximab is approved for use in rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing 
spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, and Crohn’s disease. It is being used 
in other diseases, including psoriasis, ulcerative colitis, juvenile 
chronic arthritis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, giant cell arteritis, and 
sarcoidosis. In rheumatoid arthritis, a regimen of infliximab plus 
methotrexate decreases the rate of formation of new erosions more 
than methotrexate alone over 12–24 months. Although it is recom-
mended that methotrexate be used in conjunction with infliximab, 
a number of other DMARDs, including antimalarials, azathioprine, 
leflunomide, and cyclosporine, can be used as background therapy 
for this drug. Infliximab is also used as monotherapy, although this 
is neither approved by regulatory agencies nor advisable. 
 D. Adverse Effects 
 Like other TNF-α-blocking agents, infliximab is associated with 
an increased incidence of bacterial infections, including upper 
respiratory tract infections. As a potent macrophage inhibitor, 
infliximab can be associated with activation of latent tuberculosis, 
and patients should be screened for latent or active tuberculosis 
before starting therapy. Other infections have been documented, 
though rarely. There is no evidence of an increased incidence of 
solid malignancies and it is not clear whether the incidence of 
lymphoma is increased with infliximab. Because rare demyelinat-
ing syndromes have been reported, patients with multiple sclerosis 
or neuro-uveitis should not use infliximab. Rare cases of leukope-
nia, hepatitis, activation of hepatitis B, and vasculitis have been 
documented. The incidence of positive ANA and dsDNA anti-
bodies is increased, although clinical lupus erythematosus remains 
an extremely rare occurrence and the presence of ANA and 
dsDNA does not contraindicate the use of infliximab. Infusion 
site reactions correlate with anti-infliximab antibodies. These 
reactions occur in approximately 3–11% of patients, and the com-
bined use of antihistamines and H 2 -blocking agents apparently 
prevents some of these reactions. 
 COMBINATION THERAPY WITH DMARDS 
 In a 1998 study, approximately half of North American rheuma-
tologists treated moderately aggressive rheumatoid arthritis with 
combination therapy, and the use of drug combinations is prob-
ably much higher now. Combinations of DMARDs can be 
designed rationally on the basis of complementary mechanisms of 
action, non-overlapping pharmacokinetics, and non-overlapping 
toxicities. 
 When added to methotrexate background therapy, cyclosporine, 
chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, leflunomide, infliximab, adali-
mumab, rituximab, and etanercept have all shown improved 
efficacy. In contrast, azathioprine, auranofin, or sulfasalazine plus 
methotrexate results in no additional therapeutic benefit. Other 
combinations have occasionally been used, including the combi-
nation of intramuscular gold with hydroxychloroquine. 
 While it might be anticipated that combination therapy could 
result in more toxicity, this is often not the case. Combination 
therapy for patients not responding adequately to monotherapy is 
becoming the rule in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. 
 GLUCOCORTICOID DRUGS 
 The general pharmacology of corticosteroids, including mecha-
nism of action, pharmacokinetics, and other applications, is dis-
cussed in  Chapter 39 . 
650    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 Indications 
 Corticosteroids have been used in 60–70% of rheumatoid arthritis 
patients. Their effects are prompt and dramatic, and they are 
capable of slowing the appearance of new bone erosions. 
Corticosteroids may be administered for certain serious extra-
articular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis such as pericardi-
tis or eye involvement or during periods of exacerbation. When 
prednisone is required for long-term therapy, the dosage should 
not exceed 7.5 mg daily, and gradual reduction of the dose should 
be encouraged. Alternate-day corticosteroid therapy is usually 
unsuccessful in rheumatoid arthritis. 
 Other rheumatic diseases in which the corticosteroids’ potent 
anti-inflammatory effects may be useful include vasculitis, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, Wegener’s granulomatosis, psoriatic arthritis, 
giant cell arteritis, sarcoidosis, and gout. 
 Intra-articular corticosteroids are often helpful to alleviate pain-
ful symptoms and, when successful, are preferable to increasing the 
dosage of systemic medication. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Prolonged use of these drugs leads to serious and disabling toxic 
effects as described in  Chapter 39 . There is controversy over 
whether many of these side effects occur at doses below 7.5 mg 
prednisone equivalent daily, although many experts believe that 
even 3–5 mg/d can cause these effects in susceptible individuals 
when this class of drugs is used over prolonged periods. 
 ■ OTHER ANALGESICS 
 Acetaminophen is one of the most important drugs used in the 
treatment of mild to moderate pain when an anti-inflammatory 
effect is not necessary. Phenacetin, a prodrug that is metabolized 
to acetaminophen, is more toxic than its active metabolite and has 
no rational indications. 
 ACETAMINOPHEN 
 Acetaminophen is the active metabolite of phenacetin and is 
responsible for its analgesic effect. It is a weak COX-1 and COX-2 
inhibitor in peripheral tissues and possesses no significant anti-
inflammatory effects. 
N
C
HO
CH3
N-Acetyl-p-aminophenol
(acetaminophen)
O
H
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Acetaminophen is administered orally. Absorption is related to 
the rate of gastric emptying, and peak blood concentrations are 
usually reached in 30–60 minutes. Acetaminophen is slightly 
bound to plasma proteins and is partially metabolized by hepatic 
microsomal enzymes and converted to acetaminophen sulfate 
and glucuronide, which are pharmacologically inactive (see 
Figure 4–5). Less than 5% is excreted unchanged. A minor but 
highly reactive metabolite ( N -acetyl- p -benzoquinone) is impor-
tant in large doses because it is toxic to both liver and kidney 
(see  Chapter 4 ). The half-life of acetaminophen is 2–3 hours and 
is relatively unaffected by renal function. With toxic doses or liver 
disease, the half-life may be increased twofold or more. 
 Indications 
 Although said to be equivalent to aspirin as an analgesic and 
antipyretic agent, acetaminophen differs in that it lacks anti-
inflammatory properties. It does not affect uric acid levels and 
lacks platelet-inhibiting effects. The drug is useful in mild to moder-
ate pain such as headache, myalgia, postpartum pain, and other cir-
cumstances in which aspirin is an effective analgesic. Acetaminophen 
alone is inadequate therapy for inflammatory conditions such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, although it may be used as an analgesic adjunct 
to anti-inflammatory therapy. For mild analgesia, acetaminophen is 
the preferred drug in patients allergic to aspirin or when salicylates 
are poorly tolerated. It is preferable to aspirin in patients with hemo-
philia or a history of peptic ulcer and in those in whom bronchos-
pasm is precipitated by aspirin. Unlike aspirin, acetaminophen does 
not antagonize the effects of uricosuric agents; it may be used con-
comitantly with probenecid in the treatment of gout. It is preferred 
to aspirin in children with viral infections. 
 Adverse Effects 
 In therapeutic doses, a mild increase in hepatic enzymes may occa-
sionally occur in the absence of jaundice; this is reversible when the 
drug is withdrawn. With larger doses, dizziness, excitement, and 
disorientation may occur. Ingestion of 15 g of acetaminophen may 
be fatal, death being caused by severe hepatotoxicity with centri-
lobular necrosis, sometimes associated with acute renal tubular 
necrosis (see Chapters 4 and 58). Present data indicate that 4–6 g 
acetaminophen is associated with increased liver function test 
abnormalities. Doses greater than 4 g/d are not usually recom-
mended and a history of alcoholism contraindicates even this dose. 
Early symptoms of hepatic damage include nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhea, and abdominal pain. Cases of renal damage without hepatic 
damage have occurred, even after usual doses of acetaminophen. 
Therapy is much less satisfactory than for aspirin overdose. In addi-
tion to supportive therapy, the measure that has proved most useful 
is the provision of sulfhydryl groups in the form of acetylcysteine 
to neutralize the toxic metabolites (see  Chapter 58 ). 
 Hemolytic anemia and methemoglobinemia are very rare adverse 
events. Interstitial nephritis and papillary necrosis—serious compli-
cations of phenacetin—have not occurred nor has GI bleeding. 
Caution is necessary in patients with any type of liver disease. 
 Dosage 
 Acute pain and fever may be effectively treated with 325–500 mg 
four times daily and proportionately less for children. Dosing in 
adults is now recommended not to exceed 4 g/d, in most cases. 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     651
 DRUGS USED IN GOUT 
 Gout is a metabolic disease characterized by recurrent episodes of 
acute arthritis due to deposits of monosodium urate in joints and 
cartilage. Uric acid renal calculi, tophi, and interstitial nephritis 
may also occur. Gout is usually associated with a high serum uric 
acid level (hyperuricemia), a poorly soluble substance that is the 
major end product of purine metabolism. In most mammals, 
uricase converts uric acid to the more soluble allantoin; this enzyme 
is absent in humans. While clinical gouty episodes are associated 
with hyperuricemia, most individuals with hyperuricemia may 
never develop a clinical event from urate crystal deposition. 
 The treatment of gout aims to relieve acute gouty attacks and 
prevent recurrent gouty episodes and urate lithiasis. Therapies for 
acute gout are based on our current understanding of the 
pathophysiologic events that occur in this disease ( Figure 36–5 ). 
Urate crystals are initially phagocytosed by synoviocytes, which 
then release prostaglandins, lysosomal enzymes, and interleukin-1. 
Attracted by these chemotactic mediators, polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes migrate into the joint space and amplify the ongoing 
inflammatory process. In the later phases of the attack, increased 
numbers of mononuclear phagocytes (macrophages) appear, ingest 
the urate crystals, and release more inflammatory mediators. This 
sequence of events suggests that the most effective agents for the 
management of acute urate crystal-induced inflammation are those 
that suppress different phases of leukocyte activation. 
 Before starting chronic urate-lowering therapy for gout, 
patients in whom hyperuricemia is associated with gout and urate 
lithiasis must be clearly distinguished from individuals with only 
hyperuricemia. The efficacy of long-term drug treatment in an 
asymptomatic hyperuricemic person is unproved. In some indi-
viduals, uric acid levels may be elevated up to 2 standard deviations 
above the mean for a lifetime without adverse consequences.  Many 
different agents have been used for the treatment of acute and 
chronic gout. However, non-adherence to these drugs is exceed-
ingly common; adherence has been documented to be as low as 
26–18%, especially in younger patients. Providers should be aware 
of compliance as an important issue. 
 COLCHICINE 
 Although NSAIDs are now the first-line drugs for acute gout, 
colchicine was the primary treatment for many years. Colchicine 
is an alkaloid isolated from the autumn crocus,  Colchicum 
autumnale . Its structure is shown in  Figure 36–6 . 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Colchicine is absorbed readily after oral administration, reaches 
peak plasma levels within 2 hours, and is eliminated with a serum 
half-life of 9 hours. Metabolites are excreted in the intestinal tract 
and urine. 
MNP
MNP
PMN
Colchicine
Synoviocytes
Urate
crystal
PG
LTB4
Indomethacin,
phenylbutazone
PG
PG
Enzymes
MNP
IL-1
IL-1
–
–
–
 FIGURE 36–5  Pathophysiologic events in a gouty joint. 
Synoviocytes phagocytose urate crystals and then secrete inflamma-
tory mediators, which attract and activate polymorphonuclear leuko-
cytes (PMN) and mononuclear phagocytes (MNP) (macrophages). 
Drugs active in gout inhibit crystal phagocytosis and polymorphonu-
clear leukocyte and macrophage release of inflammatory mediators. 
PG, prostaglandin; IL-1, interleukin-1; LTB 4 , leukotriene B 4 . 
N
O
CH3
O
O
H3C
O
H3C
CH3
O
N
H
O
Colchicine
O
CH2
H3C
CH2
H3C
C
O
Probenecid
S
O
CH2
N
O
O
Sulfinpyrazone
C
CH3
OH
S
O
N
CH2
CH2
CH2
 FIGURE 36–6  Colchicine and uricosuric drugs. 
652    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Colchicine relieves the pain and inflammation of gouty arthritis 
in 12–24 hours without altering the metabolism or excretion of 
urates and without other analgesic effects. Colchicine produces its 
anti-inflammatory effects by binding to the intracellular protein 
tubulin, thereby preventing its polymerization into microtubules 
and leading to the inhibition of leukocyte migration and phago-
cytosis. It also inhibits the formation of leukotriene B4. Several of 
colchicine’s adverse effects are produced by its inhibition of tubulin 
polymerization and cell mitosis. 
 Indications 
 Although colchicine is more specific in gout than the NSAIDs, 
NSAIDs (eg, indomethacin and other NSAIDs [except aspirin]) 
are sometimes used in its stead because of the troublesome 
diarrhea associated with colchicine therapy. Colchicine is now 
used between attacks (the “intercritical period”) for prolonged 
prophylaxis (at low doses). It is effective in preventing attacks of 
acute Mediterranean fever and may have a mild beneficial effect in 
sarcoid arthritis and in hepatic cirrhosis. ( Although it has been given 
intravenously, this route is no longer approved by the FDA [2009].) 
 Adverse Effects 
 Colchicine often causes diarrhea and may occasionally cause nau-
sea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Hepatic necrosis, acute renal 
failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and seizures have 
also been observed. Colchicine may rarely cause hair loss and bone 
marrow depression, as well as peripheral neuritis, myopathy, and, 
in some cases, death. The more severe adverse events have been 
associated with the intravenous administration of colchicine. 
Acute overdose is characterized by burning throat pain, bloody 
diarrhea, shock, hematuria, and oliguria. Fatal ascending central 
nervous system depression has been reported. Supportive care is 
the mainstay of treatment. 
 Dosage 
 In prophylaxis (the most common use), the dosage of colchicine is 
0.6 mg one to three times daily. For terminating a gouty attack, 
traditional dosing has been an initial colchicine dose of 0.6 or 1.2 
mg, followed by 0.6 mg every 2 hours until pain resolves, or nau-
sea and diarrhea appear. However, a regimen of 1.2 mg followed 
by a single 0.6 mg oral dose was shown to be as effective as the 
higher dose therapy noted above. Adverse events were less with 
this lower dose regimen. In February 2008, the FDA requested 
that intravenous preparations containing colchicine be discontin-
ued in the USA because of their potential life-threatening adverse 
effects. Therefore, intravenous use of colchicine is not recom-
mended. 
 In July 2009, the FDA approved colchicine for the treatment 
of acute gout, allowing Colcrys (a branded colchicine) marketing 
exclusivity in the USA. Colchicine, per se, rather than Colcrys, is 
available throughout the rest of the world in a generic form. 
 NSAIDS IN GOUT 
 In addition to inhibiting prostaglandin synthase, indomethacin 
and other NSAIDs also inhibit urate crystal phagocytosis. Aspirin 
is not used because it causes renal retention of uric acid at low 
doses (≤ 2.6 g/d). It is uricosuric at doses greater than 3.6 g/d. 
Indomethacin is commonly used in the initial treatment of gout 
as a replacement for colchicine. For acute gout, 50 mg is given 
three times daily; when a response occurs, the dosage is reduced to 
25 mg three times daily for 5–7 days. 
 All other NSAIDs except aspirin, salicylates, and tolmetin have 
been successfully used to treat acute gouty episodes. Oxaprozin, 
which lowers serum uric acid, is theoretically a good choice, 
although it should not be given to patients with uric acid stones 
because it increases uric acid excretion in the urine. These agents 
appear to be as effective and safe as the older drugs. 
 URICOSURIC AGENTS 
 Probenecid and sulfinpyrazone are uricosuric drugs employed to 
decrease the body pool of urate in patients with tophaceous gout or 
in those with increasingly frequent gouty attacks. In a patient who 
excretes large amounts of uric acid, the uricosuric agents should not 
be used. 
 Chemistry 
 Uricosuric drugs are organic acids ( Figure 36–6 ) and, as such, act 
at the anionic transport sites of the renal tubule (see  Chapter 15 ). 
Sulfinpyrazone is a metabolite of an analog of phenylbutazone. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Probenecid is completely reabsorbed by the renal tubules and is 
metabolized slowly with a terminal serum half-life of 5–8 hours. 
Sulfinpyrazone or its active hydroxylated derivative is rapidly 
excreted by the kidneys. Even so, the duration of its effect after 
oral administration is almost as long as that of probenecid, which 
is given once or twice daily. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Uric acid is freely filtered at the glomerulus. Like many other weak 
acids, it is also both reabsorbed and secreted in the middle seg-
ment (S2) of the proximal tubule. Uricosuric drugs—probenecid, 
sulfinpyrazone, and large doses of aspirin—affect these active 
transport sites so that net reabsorption of uric acid in the proximal 
tubule is decreased. Because aspirin in doses of less than 2.6 g daily 
causes net retention of uric acid by inhibiting the secretory trans-
porter, it should not be used for analgesia in patients with gout. 
The secretion of other weak acids (eg, penicillin) is also reduced 
by uricosuric agents. Probenecid was originally developed to pro-
long penicillin blood levels. 
 As the urinary excretion of uric acid increases, the size of the 
urate pool decreases, although the plasma concentration may not 
be greatly reduced. In patients who respond favorably, tophaceous 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     653
deposits of urate are reabsorbed, with relief of arthritis and remin-
eralization of bone. With the ensuing increase in uric acid excre-
tion, a predisposition to the formation of renal stones is augmented 
rather than decreased; therefore, the urine volume should be 
maintained at a high level, and at least early in treatment, the 
urine pH should be kept above 6.0 by the administration of 
alkali. 
 Indications 
 Uricosuric therapy should be initiated in gouty patients with 
underexcretion of uric acid when allopurinol or febuxostat is con-
traindicated or when tophi are present. Therapy should not be 
started until 2–3 weeks after an acute attack. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Adverse effects do not provide a basis for preferring one or the 
other of the uricosuric agents. Both of these organic acids cause 
GI irritation, but sulfinpyrazone is more active in this regard. A 
rash may appear after the use of either compound. Nephrotic 
syndrome has occurred after the use of probenecid. Both sulfin-
pyrazone and probenecid may rarely cause aplastic anemia. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 It is essential to maintain a large urine volume to minimize the 
possibility of stone formation. 
 Dosage 
 Probenecid is usually started at a dosage of 0.5 g orally daily in 
divided doses, progressing to 1 g daily after 1 week. Sulfinpyrazone 
is started at a dosage of 200 mg orally daily, progressing to 
400–800 mg daily. It should be given in divided doses with food 
to reduce adverse GI effects. 
 ALLOPURINOL 
 The preferred and standard-of-care therapy for gout during the 
period between acute episodes is allopurinol, which reduces total 
uric acid body burden by inhibiting xanthine oxidase. 
 Chemistry 
 The structure of allopurinol, an isomer of hypoxanthine, is shown 
in  Figure 36–7 . 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Allopurinol is approximately 80% absorbed after oral administra-
tion and has a terminal serum half-life of 1–2 hours. Like uric 
acid, allopurinol is metabolized by xanthine oxidase, but the 
resulting compound, alloxanthine, retains the capacity to inhibit 
xanthine oxidase and has a long enough duration of action so that 
allopurinol is given only once a day. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Dietary purines are not an important source of uric acid. 
Quantitatively important amounts of purine are formed from 
amino acids, formate, and carbon dioxide in the body. Those 
purine ribonucleotides not incorporated into nucleic acids and 
derived from nucleic acid degradation are converted to xanthine 
or hypoxanthine and oxidized to uric acid ( Figure 36–7 ). 
Allopurinol inhibits this last step, resulting in a fall in the plasma 
urate level and a decrease in the overall urate burden. The more 
soluble xanthine and hypoxanthine are increased. 
 Indications 
 Allopurinol is often the first-line agent for the treatment of 
chronic gout in the period between attacks and it aims to prolong 
Hypoxanthine
N
HN
N
H
N
O
Xanthine
6
1
2
3
5
4
8
7
9
N
H
HN
N
H
N
O
O
N
H
HN
N
H
H
N
O
O
O
Uric acid
Xanthine
oxidase
Xanthine
oxidase
Allopurinol
N
HN
N
H
N
O
Alloxanthine
N
H
HN
N
H
N
O
O
Xanthine
oxidase
 FIGURE 36–7  Inhibition of uric acid synthesis by allopurinol. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Meyers FH, Jawetz E, Goldfien A:  Review of 
Medical Pharmacology, 7th ed. McGraw-Hill, 1980.) 
654    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
the intercritical period. As with uricosuric agents, the therapy is 
begun with the expectation that it will be continued for years if 
not for life. When initiating allopurinol, colchicine or NSAID 
should be used until steady-state serum uric acid is normalized or 
decreased to less than 6 mg/dL and they should be continued for 
3-6 months or even longer if required. Thereafter, colchicine or 
the NSAID can be cautiously stopped while continuing allopurinol 
therapy. In addition to gout, allopurinol is also used as an antipro-
tozoal agent (see  Chapter 52 ) and is indicated to prevent the mas-
sive uricosuria following therapy of blood dyscrasias that could 
otherwise lead to renal calculi. 
 Adverse Effects 
 See above for prophylaxis against an acute attack during the initia-
tion of allopurinol, which can occur as a result of acute changes in 
the serum uric acid level. Among the side effects, GI intolerance 
including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, peripheral neuritis and 
necrotizing vasculitis, bone marrow suppression, and rarely aplastic 
anemia may also occur. Hepatic toxicity and interstitial nephritis 
have been reported. An allergic skin reaction characterized by pru-
ritic maculopapular lesions occurs in 3% of patients. Isolated cases 
of exfoliative dermatitis have been reported. In very rare cases, 
allopurinol has become bound to the lens, resulting in cataracts. 
 Interactions & Cautions 
 When chemotherapeutic purines (eg, azathioprine) are given con-
comitantly with allopurinol, their dosage must be reduced by about 
75%. Allopurinol may also increase the effect of cyclophosphamide. 
Allopurinol inhibits the metabolism of probenecid and oral antico-
agulants and may increase hepatic iron concentration. Safety in 
children and during pregnancy has not been established. 
 Dosage 
 The initial dosage of allopurinol is 100 mg/d. It should be titrated 
upward until serum uric acid is below 6 mg/dL; this level is com-
monly achieved at 300 mg/d but is not restricted to this dose; 
doses as high as 800 mg/d may be needed. 
 As noted above, colchicine or an NSAID should be given dur-
ing the first several weeks of allopurinol therapy to prevent the 
gouty arthritis episodes that sometimes occur. 
 FEBUXOSTAT 
 Febuxostat is a non-purine xanthine oxidase inhibitor that was 
approved by the FDA in February 2009. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Febuxostat is more than 80% absorbed following oral administra-
tion. With maximum concentration achieved in approximately 
1 hour and a half-life of 4–18 hours, once-daily dosing is effective. 
Febuxostat is extensively metabolized in the liver. All of the drug 
and its inactive metabolites appear in the urine, although less than 
5% appears as unchanged drug. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Febuxostat is a potent and selective inhibitor of xanthine oxidase, 
thereby reducing the formation of xanthine and uric acid without 
affecting other enzymes in the purine or pyrimidine metabolic 
pathway. In clinical trials, febuxostat at daily dosing of 80 mg or 
120 mg was more effective in lowering serum urate levels than 
allopurinol at a standard 300 mg daily dose. The urate-lowering 
effect was comparable regardless of the pathogenic cause of 
hyperuricemia—overproduction or underexcretion. 
 Indications 
 Febuxostat is approved at doses of 40, 80, or 120 mg the treatment 
of chronic hyperuricemia in gout patients. Although it appeared 
to be more effective then allopurinol as urate-lowering therapy, the 
allopurinol dosing was limited to 300 mg/d, thus not reflecting 
the actual dosing regimens used in clinical practice. At this time, 
the dose equivalence of allopurinol and febuxostat is unknown. 
 Adverse Effects 
 As with allopurinol, prophylactic treatment with colchicine or 
NSAIDs should be started at the beginning of therapy to avoid 
gout flares. The most frequent treatment-related adverse events are 
liver function abnormalities, diarrhea, headache, and nausea. 
Febuxostat appears to be well tolerated in patients with a history of 
allopurinol intolerance. There does not appear to be an increased 
risk of cardiovascular events. 
 Dosage 
 The recommended starting dose of febuxostat is 40 mg daily. 
Because of the concern for cardiovascular events in the original phase 
3 trials, the FDA approved only 40 mg and 80 mg dosing. No dose 
adjustment is necessary for patients with renal impairment since it is 
highly metabolized into an inactive metabolite by the liver. 
 PEGLOTICASE 
 Pegloticase is the newest urate-lowering therapy; it was approved 
by the FDA in September 2010 for the treatment of refractory 
chronic gout. 
 Chemistry 
 Pegloticase is a recombinant mammalian uricase that is covalently 
attached to methoxy polyethylene glycol (mPEG) to prolong the 
circulating half-life and diminish immunogenic response. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Pegloticase is a rapidly acting intravenous drug, achieving a peak 
decline in uric acid level within 24–72 hours. The serum half-life 
ranges from 6.4 to 13.8 days. Several studies have shown earlier 
clearance of PEG-uricase (mean of 11 days) due to antibody 
response when compared to PEG-uricase antibody-negative 
subjects (mean of 16.1 days). 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     655
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Urate oxidase enzyme, absent in humans and some higher pri-
mates, converts uric acid to allantoin. This product is highly solu-
ble and can be easily eliminated by kidney. Pegloticase has been 
shown to maintain low urate levels for up to 21 days at doses of 
4–12 mg, allowing for IV dosing every 2 weeks. 
 Adverse Effects 
 The most common adverse events include infusion reactions and 
gout flare (especially during the first 3 months of treatment). 
Nephrolithiasis, arthralgia, muscle spasm, headache, anemia, and 
nausea may occur. Other less frequent side effects noted include 
upper respiratory tract infection, peripheral edema, urinary tract 
infection, and diarrhea. There is some concern for hemolytic ane-
mia in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase because 
of the formation of hydrogen peroxide by uricase; therefore, peg-
loticase should be avoided in these patients. Large numbers of 
patients show immune responses to pegloticase. The presence of 
antibody is associated with shortened circulating half-life, loss of 
response leading to a rise in plasma urate levels, and a higher rate 
of infusion reactions. Monitoring of plasma uric acid level, with 
rising level as an indicator of antibody production, allows for safer 
administration and monitoring of efficacy. 
 Dosage 
 The recommended dose for pegloticase is 8 mg IV every 2 weeks. 
As noted for other urate-lowering therapy, patients should be 
started on prophylaxis for acute gout flares (using colchicine) 
while initiating pegloticase. 
 GLUCOCORTICOIDS 
 Corticosteroids are sometimes used in the treatment of severe 
symptomatic gout, by intra-articular, systemic, or subcutaneous 
routes, depending on the degree of pain and inflammation. 
 The most commonly used oral corticosteroid is prednisone. The 
recommended dose is 30–50 mg/d for 1–2 days, tapered over 7–10 
days. Intra-articular injection of 10 mg (small joints), 30 mg (wrist, 
ankle, elbow), and 40 mg (knee) of triamcinolone acetonide can be 
given if the patient is unable to take oral medications. 
 INTERLEUKIN-1 INHIBITORS 
 Drugs targeting the interleukin-1 pathway, such as anakinra, 
canakinumab, and rilonacept, are being investigated for the treat-
ment of gout. Although the data are limited, these agents may 
provide a promising treatment option for acute gout in patients 
with contraindications to, or who are refractory to, traditional 
therapies like NSAIDs and/or colchicine. A recent study suggests 
that canakinumab, a fully human anti-IL-1β monoclonal anti-
body, can provide rapid and sustained pain relief at a dose of 
150 mg subcutaneously. These medications are also being evalu-
ated as therapies for prevention of gout flares while initiating 
urate-lowering therapy. 
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY 
DRUGS
Aspirin, acetylsalicylic acid (generic, Easprin, others)
Oral (regular, enteric-coated, buffered): 81, 165, 325, 500, 650, 800 mg 
tablets; 81, 650, 800 mg timed- or extended-release tablets
Rectal: 120, 200, 300, 600 mg suppositories
Bromfenac (Xibrom)
Ophthalmic: 0.09% solution
Celecoxib (Celebrex)
Oral: 50, 100, 200, 400 mg capsules
Choline salicylate (various)
Oral: 870 mg/5 mL liquid
Diclofenac (generic, Cataflam, Voltaren)
Oral: 50 mg tablets; 25, 50, 75 mg delayed-release tablets; 100 mg 
extended-release tablets
Ophthalmic: 0.1% solution
Diflunisal (generic, Dolobid)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Etodolac (generic, Lodine)
Oral: 200, 300 mg capsules; 400, 500 mg tablets; 400, 500, 600 mg 
extended-release tablets
Fenoprofen (generic, Nalfon)
Oral: 200, 300 mg capsules; 600 mg tablets
Flurbiprofen (generic, Ansaid)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets
Ophthalmic (generic, Ocufen): 0.03% solution
Ibuprofen (generic, Motrin, Rufen, Advil [OTC], Nuprin [OTC], others)
Oral: 100, 200, 400, 600, 800 mg tablets; 50, 100 mg chewable 
tablets; 200 mg capsules; 100 mg/2.5 mL suspension, 100 mg/5 mL 
suspension; 40 mg/mL drops
Indomethacin (generic, Indocin)
Oral: 25, 50 mg capsules; 75 mg sustained-release capsules; 
25 mg/5 mL suspension
Rectal: 50 mg suppositories
Ketoprofen (generic, Orudis)
Oral: 12.5 mg tablets; 25, 50, 75 mg capsules; 100, 150, 200 mg 
extended-release capsules
Ketorolac tromethamine (generic, Toradol)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
Parenteral: 15, 30 mg/mL for IM injection
Ophthalmic: 0.4, 0.5% solution
Magnesium salicylate (Doan’s Pills, Magan, Mobidin)
Oral: 545, 600 mg tablets; 467, 500, 580 mg caplets
656    SECTION VI Drugs Used to Treat Diseases of the Blood, Inflammation, & Gout
Meclofenamate sodium (generic)
Oral: 50, 100 mg capsules
Mefenamic acid (Ponstel)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Meloxicam (Mobic)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets; 7.5 mg/5 mL suspension
Nabumetone (generic)
Oral: 500, 750 mg tablets
Naproxen (generic, Naprosyn, Anaprox, Aleve [OTC])
Oral: 200, 220, 250, 375, 500 mg tablets; 375, 550 mg controlled-
release tablets; 375, 500 mg delayed-release tablets; 125 mg/5 mL 
suspension
Oxaprozin (generic, Daypro)
Oral: 600 mg tablets, capsules
Piroxicam (generic, Feldene)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules
Salsalate, salicylsalicylic acid (generic, Disalcid)
Oral: 500, 750 mg tablets; 500 mg capsules
Sodium salicylate (generic)
Oral: 325, 650 mg enteric-coated tablets
Sodium thiosalicylate (generic, Rexolate)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IM injection
Sulindac (generic, Clinoril)
Oral: 150, 200 mg tablets
Suprofen (Profenal)
Topical: 1% ophthalmic solution
Tolmetin (generic, Tolectin)
Oral: 200, 600 mg tablets; 400 mg capsules
DISEASE-MODIFYING ANTIRHEUMATIC 
DRUGS
Abatacept (Orencia)
Parenteral: 250 mg/vial lyophilized, for reconstitution for IV 
injection
Adalimumab (Humira)
Parenteral: 40 mg/0.8 mL for SC injection
Auranofin (Ridaura)
Oral: 3 mg capsules
Aurothioglucose (Solganal)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL suspension for injection
Certolizumab (Cimzia)
Parenteral: 200 mg powder for solution for subcutaneous injection
Cyclophosphamide: see Chapter 54
Cyclosporine: see Chapter 55
Etanercept (Enbrel)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL, 25 mg powder for SC injection
Gold sodium thiomalate (generic, Aurolate)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection
Golimumab (Simponi)
Parenteral: 50 mg per 0.5 mL solution for SC injection
Infliximab (Remicade)
Parenteral: 100 mg powder for IV infusion
Leflunomide (Arava)
Oral: 10, 20, 100 mg tablets
Methotrexate (generic, Rheumatrex)
Oral: 2.5 mg tablet dose packs; 5, 7.5, 10, 15 mg tablets
Mycophenolate mofetil: see Chapter 55
Penicillamine (Cuprimine, Depen)
Oral: 125, 250 mg capsules; 250 mg tablets
Rituximab (Rituxan)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Sulfasalazine (generic, Azulfidine)
Oral: 500 mg tablets; 500 mg delayed-release tablets
Tocilizumab (Actemra)
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL concentrate for IV administration
ACETAMINOPHEN
Acetaminophen (generic, Tylenol, Tempra, Panadol, Acephen,
 others)
Oral: 160, 325, 500, 650 mg tablets; 80 mg chewable tablets; 
160, 500, 650 mg caplets; 325, 500 mg capsules; 80, 120, 
160 mg/5 mL elixir; 500 mg/15 mL elixir; 80 mg/1.66 mL, 
100 mg/mL solution
Rectal: 80, 120, 125, 300, 325, 650 mg suppositories
DRUGS USED IN GOUT
Allopurinol (generic, Zyloprim)
Oral: 100, 300 mg tablets
Colchicine (generic, Colchrys)
Oral: 0.6 mg tablets
Febuxostat (Uloric)
Oral: 40, 80 mg tablets
Pegloticase (Krystexxa)
Parenteral: 8 mg/mL solution for IV infusion
Probenecid (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Sulfinpyrazone (generic, Anturane)
Oral: 100 mg tablets; 200 mg capsules
Meclofenamate sodium (generic)
Oral: 50, 100 mg capsules
Mefenamic acid (Ponstel)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Meloxicam (Mobic)
Oral: 7.5, 15 mg tablets; 7.5 mg/5 mL suspension
Nabumetone (generic)
Oral: 500, 750 mg tablets
Naproxen (generic, Naprosyn, Anaprox, Aleve [OTC])
Oral: 200, 220, 250, 375, 500 mg tablets; 375, 550 mg controlled-
release tablets; 375, 500 mg delayed-release tablets; 125 mg/5 mL 
suspension
Oxaprozin (generic, Daypro)
Oral: 600 mg tablets, capsules
Piroxicam (generic, Feldene)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules
Salsalate, salicylsalicylic acid (generic, Disalcid)
Oral: 500, 750 mg tablets; 500 mg capsules
Sodium salicylate (generic)
Oral: 325, 650 mg enteric-coated tablets
Sodium thiosalicylate (generic, Rexolate)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IM injection
Sulindac (generic, Clinoril)
Oral: 150, 200 mg tablets
Suprofen (Profenal)
Topical: 1% ophthalmic solution
Tolmetin (generic, Tolectin)
Oral: 200, 600 mg tablets; 400 mg capsules
DISEASE-MODIFYING ANTIRHEUMATIC 
DRUGS
Abatacept (Orencia)
Parenteral: 250 mg/vial lyophilized, for reconstitution for IV 
injection
Adalimumab (Humira)
Parenteral: 40 mg/0.8 mL for SC injection
Auranofin (Ridaura)
Oral: 3 mg capsules
Aurothioglucose (Solganal)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL suspension for injection
Certolizumab (Cimzia)
Parenteral: 200 mg powder for solution for subcutaneous injection
Cyclophosphamide: see Chapter 54
Cyclosporine: see Chapter 55
Etanercept (Enbrel)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL, 25 mg powder for SC injection
Gold sodium thiomalate (generic, Aurolate)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection
Golimumab (Simponi)
Parenteral: 50 mg per 0.5 mL solution for SC injection
Infliximab (Remicade)
Parenteral: 100 mg powder for IV infusion
Leflunomide (Arava)
Oral: 10, 20, 100 mg tablets
Methotrexate (generic, Rheumatrex)
Oral: 2.5 mg tablet dose packs; 5, 7.5, 10, 15 mg tablets
Mycophenolate mofetil: see Chapter 55
Penicillamine (Cuprimine, Depen)
Oral: 125, 250 mg capsules; 250 mg tablets
Rituximab (Rituxan)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Sulfasalazine (generic, Azulfidine)
Oral: 500 mg tablets; 500 mg delayed-release tablets
Tocilizumab (Actemra)
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL concentrate for IV administration
ACETAMINOPHEN
Acetaminophen (generic, Tylenol, Tempra, Panadol, Acephen,
 others)
Oral: 160, 325, 500, 650 mg tablets; 80 mg chewable tablets; 
160, 500, 650 mg caplets; 325, 500 mg capsules; 80, 120,
160 mg/5 mL elixir; 500 mg/15 mL elixir; 80 mg/1.66 mL,
100 mg/mL solution
Rectal: 80, 120, 125, 300, 325, 650 mg suppositories
DRUGS USED IN GOUT
Allopurinol (generic, Zyloprim)
Oral: 100, 300 mg tablets
Colchicine (generic, Colchrys)
Oral: 0.6 mg tablets
Febuxostat (Uloric)
Oral: 40, 80 mg tablets
Pegloticase (Krystexxa)
Parenteral: 8 mg/mL solution for IV infusion
Probenecid (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Sulfinpyrazone (generic, Anturane)
Oral: 100 mg tablets; 200 mg capsules
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 Hellman DB, Imboden JB Jr: Arthritis and musculoskeletal disorders. In: McPhee 
ST, Papadakis MA (editors).  Current Medical Diagnosis & Treatment , 2011. 
McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 NSAIDs 
 Bombardier C et al: Comparison of upper gastrointestinal toxicity of rofecoxib 
and naproxen in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. VIGOR Study Group. 
N Engl J Med 2000;343:1520. 
 Chan FK et al: Celecoxib versus diclofenac and omeprazole in reducing the risk 
of recurrent ulcer bleeding in patients with arthritis. N Engl J Med 
2002;347:2104. 
 Clevers H: Colon cancer—Understanding how NSAIDs work. N Engl J Med 
2006;354:761. 
 Deeks JJ, Smith LA, Bradley MD: Efficacy, tolerability, and upper gastrointestinal 
safety of celecoxib for treatment of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis: 
Systematic review of randomised controlled trials. BMJ 2002;325:619. 
 FitzGerald GA: COX-2 in play at the AHA and FDA. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
2007;28:303. 
 Furst DE et al: Dose response and safety study of meloxicam up to 22.5 mg daily 
in rheumatoid arthritis: A 12 week multi-center, double blind, dose response 
study versus placebo and diclofenac. J Rheumatol 2002;29:436. 
CHAPTER 36 NSAIDs, Antirheumatic Drugs, Nonopioid Analgesics, & Drugs Used in Gout     657
 Knijff-Dutmer EA et al: Platelet function is inhibited by non-selective non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs but not by cyclooxygenase-2-selective inhibitors in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2002;41:458. 
 Lago P et al: Safety and efficacy of ibuprofen versus indomethacin in preterm 
infants treated for patent ductus arteriosus: A randomized controlled trial. 
Eur J Pediatr 2002;161:202. 
 Laine L et al: Serious lower gastrointestinal clinical events with non-selective 
NSAID or coxib use. Gastroenterology 2003;124:288. 
 Moran EM: Epidemiological and clinical aspects of nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drugs and cancer risks. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 2002;21:193. 
 Niccoli L, Bellino S, Cantini F: Renal tolerability of three commonly employed 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in elderly patients with osteoarthritis. 
Clin Exp Rheumatol 2002;20:201. 
 Ray WA et al: COX-2 selective non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and risk of 
serious coronary heart disease. Lancet 2002;360:1071. 
 Rovensky J et al: Treatment of knee osteoarthritis with a topical nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug. Results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled study on the efficacy and safety of a 5% ibuprofen cream. Drugs Exp 
Clin Res 2001;27:209. 
 Vane J, Botting R: Inflammation and the mechanism of action of anti-
inflammatory drugs. FASEB J 1987;1:89. 
 http://www.rheumatology.org/publications/hotline/0305NSAIDs.asp 
 Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs & Glucocorticoids 
 Bongartz T et al: Anti-TNF antibody therapy in rheumatoid arthritis and the risk 
of serious infections and malignancies. JAMA 2006;295:2275. 
 Cronstein B: How does methotrexate suppress inflammation? Clin Exp Rheumatol 
2010:28(Suppl 61):S21. 
 Emery P et al: Golimumab, a human anti-tumor necrosis factor α monoclonal 
antibody, injected subcutaneously every four weeks in methotrexate-naïve 
patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2009;60(8):2272. 
 Emery P et al: IL-6 receptor inhibition with tocilizumab improves treatment out-
comes in patients with rheumatoid arthritis refractory to anti-tumour necro-
sis factor biologicals: results from a 24-week multicentre randomized 
placebo-controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2008;67:1516. 
 Furst DE: Rational use of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs. Drugs 
1990;39:19. 
 Genovese MC et al: Abatacept for rheumatoid arthritis refractory to tumor necro-
sis factor α inhibition. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1114. 
 Keystone E et al: Improvement in patient-reported outcomes in a rituximab trial 
in patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis refractory to anti-tumor necrosis 
factor therapy. Arthritis Rheum 2008;59:785. 
 Kremer J: Toward a better understanding of methotrexate. Arthritis Rheum 
2004;50:1370. 
 Plosker G, Croom K: Sulfasalazine: A review of its use in the management of 
rheumatoid arthritis. Drugs 2006;65:1825. 
 Scott DL, Kingsley GH: Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors for rheumatoid arthritis. 
N Engl J Med 2006;355:704. 
 Smolen J et al: Efficacy and safety of certolizumab pegol plus methotrexate in 
active rheumatoid arthritis: the RAPID 2 study. A randomized controlled 
trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2009;68:797. 
 Teng GG, Turkiewicz AM, Moreland LW: Abatacept: A costimulatory inhibi-
tor for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Expert Opin Biol Ther 
2005;5:1245. 
 Weinblatt M et al: Adalimumab, a fully human anti-tumor necrosis factor α 
monoclonal antibody, for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in patients 
taking concomitant methotrexate. Arthritis Rheum 2003;48(1):35. 
 Other Analgesics 
 Chandrasekharan NV et al: COX-3, a cyclooxygenase-1 variant inhibited by acet-
aminophen and other analgesic/antipyretic drugs: Cloning, structure, and 
expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:13926. 
 Styrt B, Sugarman B: Antipyresis and fever. Arch Intern Med 1990;150:1589. 
 Drugs Used in Gout 
 Becker MA et al: Febuxostat compared with allopurinol in patients with hyperuri-
cemia and gout. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2450. 
 Getting SJ et al: Activation of melanocortin type 3 receptor as a molecular mecha-
nism for adrenocorticotropic hormone efficacy in gouty arthritis. Arthritis 
Rheum 2002;46:2765. 
 Pacher P, Nivorozhkin A, Szabo C: Therapeutic effects of xanthine oxidase inhibi-
tors: Renaissance half a century after the discovery of allopurinol. Pharmacol 
Rev 2006;58:87. 
 Schumacher HR: Febuxostat: A non-purine, selective inhibitor of xanthine oxidase 
for the management of hyperuricaemia in patients with gout. Expert Opin 
Investig Drugs 2005;14:893. 
 So A et al: A pilot study of IL-1 inhibition by anakinra in acute gout. Arthritis Res 
Ther 2007;9:R28. 
 Wallace SL, Singer JZ: Systemic toxicity associated with intravenous administra-
tion of colchicine—Guidelines for use. J Rheumatol 1988;15:495. 
 http://www.fda.gov/cder/drugs/unapproved_drugs/colchicine_qa.htm (Restriction 
on drugs containing colchicine) 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 This patient had good control of his symptoms for 1 year but 
now has a prolonged flare, probably denoting worsening 
disease (not just a temporary flare). In addition to physical 
findings and measurement of acute-phase reactants such as 
sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein, it would be wise to 
get hand and feet radiographs to document whether he has 
developed joint damage. Assuming such damage is found, 
the appropriate approach would be either a combination 
of nonbiologic DMARDs (eg, adding sulfasalazine and 
hydroxychloroquine) or adding a biologic medication, usu-
ally a tumor necrosis factor inhibitor. Follow-up should be 
every 1–3 months to gauge response and toxicity. Adverse 
events requiring caution are an increased risk of infection, 
possible appearance of lymphoma and rare liver function 
test or hematologic abnormalities. Importantly, close 
follow-up should ensue, including changing medications 
every 3–6 months until full disease control is achieved. 
This page intentionally left blank 
659
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
37
 SECTION VII  ENDOCRINE DRUGS 
C A S E  S T U D Y
 Hypothalamic & 
Pituitary Hormones 
 Susan B. Masters, PhD, &  Stephen M. Rosenthal, MD 
 A 3-year-old boy [height 85 cm, –3 standard deviations 
(SD); weight 13 kg, approximately 10th percentile) presents 
with short stature. Review of the past history and growth 
chart demonstrates normal birth weight and birth length, 
but a progressive fall off in height velocity relative to age-
matched normal ranges starting at 6 months of age. Physical 
examination demonstrates short stature and mild general-
ized obesity. Genital examination reveals descended but 
small testes and a phallic length of –2 SD. Laboratory 
evaluation demonstrates growth hormone (GH) deficiency 
and a delayed bone age of 18 months. The patient is started 
on replacement with recombinant human GH at a dose of 
40 mcg/kg/d subcutaneously. After 1 year of treatment, his 
height velocity has increased from 5 cm/yr to 11 cm/yr. 
How does GH stimulate growth in children? What other 
hormone deficiencies are suggested by the patient’s physical 
examination? What other hormone supplementation is this 
patient likely to require? 
 The control of metabolism, growth, and reproduction is mediated 
by a combination of neural and endocrine systems located in the 
hypothalamus and pituitary gland. The pituitary weighs about 0.6 
g and rests at the base of the brain in the bony sella turcica near 
the optic chiasm and the cavernous sinuses. The pituitary consists 
of an anterior lobe (adenohypophysis) and a posterior lobe (neu-
rohypophysis) ( Figure 37–1 ). It is connected to the overlying 
hypothalamus by a stalk of neurosecretory fibers and blood vessels, 
including a portal venous system that drains the hypothalamus 
and perfuses the anterior pituitary. The portal venous system car-
ries small regulatory hormones ( Figure 37–1 ,  Table 37–1 ) from 
the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary. 
 The posterior lobe hormones are synthesized in the hypothala-
mus and transported via the neurosecretory fibers in the stalk of 
the pituitary to the posterior lobe, from which they are released 
into the circulation. 
660    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 Drugs that mimic or block the effects of hypothalamic and 
pituitary hormones have pharmacologic applications in three 
primary areas: (1) as replacement therapy for hormone deficiency 
states; (2) as antagonists for diseases caused by excess production 
of pituitary hormones; and (3) as diagnostic tools for identifying 
several endocrine abnormalities. 
 ■ ANTERIOR PITUITARY 
HORMONES & THEIR 
HYPOTHALAMIC REGULATORS 
 All the hormones produced by the anterior pituitary except pro-
lactin (PRL) are key participants in hormonal systems in which 
they regulate the production of hormones and autocrine-paracrine 
factors by endocrine glands and other peripheral tissues. In these 
systems, the secretion of the pituitary hormone is under the con-
trol of one or more hypothalamic hormones. Each hypothalamic-
pituitary-endocrine gland system or axis provides multiple 
opportunities for complex neuroendocrine regulation of growth 
and development, metabolism, and reproductive function. 
 ANTERIOR PITUITARY & 
HYPOTHALAMIC HORMONE 
RECEPTORS 
 The anterior pituitary hormones can be classified according to 
hormone structure and the types of receptors that they activate. 
 Growth hormone (GH) and  prolactin , single-chain protein 
hormones with significant homology, form one group. Both 
hormones activate receptors of the JAK/STAT superfamily (see 
 Chapter 2 ). Three pituitary hormones— thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH, thyrotropin), follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) , and  luteinizing hormone (LH) —are dimeric proteins 
that activate G protein-coupled receptors (see  Chapter 2 ). TSH, 
FSH, and LH share a common α chain. Their β chains, though 
somewhat similar to each other, differ enough to confer receptor 
 A C R O N Y M S
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (corticotropin)
CRH
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
FSH
Follicle-stimulating hormone
GH
Growth hormone
GHRH
Growth hormone-releasing hormone
GnRH
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
hCG
Human chorionic gonadotropin
hMG
Human menopausal gonadotropin
IGF
Insulin-like growth factor
LH
Luteinizing hormone
PRL
Prolactin
rhGH
Recombinant human growth hormone
SST
Somatostatin
TRH
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
TSH
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (thyrotropin)
DA
Posterior
pituitary
Endocrine
glands, liver, bone
& other tissues
Target tissues
Portal venous 
system
Anterior 
pituitary
+
–
Hypothalamus
SST
Oxytocin
ADH
PRL
GHRH
TRH
CRH
GnRH
GH
TSH
ACTH
LH
FSH
 FIGURE 37–1 The hypothalamic-pituitary endocrine system. 
Except for prolactin, hormones released from the anterior pituitary 
stimulate the production of hormones by a peripheral endocrine 
gland, the liver, or other tissues. Prolactin and the hormones released 
from the posterior pituitary (vasopressin and oxytocin) act directly 
on target tissues. Hypothalamic factors regulate the release of ante-
rior pituitary hormones. ACTH, adrenocorticotropin; ADH, antidi-
uretic hormone [vasopressin]; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; 
DA, dopamine; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; GH, growth hor-
mone; GHRH, growth hormone-releasing hormone; GnRH, gonado-
tropin-releasing hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; PRL, prolactin; 
SST, somatostatin; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; TSH, thyroid-
stimulating hormone. 
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    661
specificity. Finally,  adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) , a 
single peptide cleaved from a larger precursor that also contains 
the peptide β-endorphin (see  Chapter 31 ), represents a third cat-
egory. Like TSH, LH, and FSH, ACTH acts through a G protein-
coupled receptor. A unique feature of the ACTH receptor (also 
known as the melanocortin 2 receptor) is that a transmembrane 
protein, melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein, is essential for 
normal ACTH receptor trafficking and signaling. 
 TSH, FSH, LH, and ACTH share similarities in the regulation 
of their release from the pituitary. Each is under the control of a 
distinctive hypothalamic peptide that stimulates their production 
by acting on G protein-coupled receptors ( Table 37–1 ). TSH 
release is regulated by  thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) , 
whereas the release of LH and FSH (known collectively as gonad-
otropins) is stimulated by pulses of  gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone (GnRH). ACTH release is stimulated by  corticotro-
pin-releasing hormone (CRH). An important regulatory feature 
shared by these four structurally related hormones is that they and 
their hypothalamic releasing factors are subject to feedback inhib-
itory regulation by the hormones whose production they control. 
TSH and TRH production are inhibited by the two key thyroid 
hormones, thyroxine and triiodothyronine (see  Chapter 38 ). 
Gonadotropin and GnRH production is inhibited in women by 
estrogen and progesterone, and in men by testosterone and other 
androgens. ACTH and CRH production are inhibited by cortisol. 
Feedback regulation is critical to the physiologic control of thy-
roid, adrenal cortical, and gonadal function and is also important 
in pharmacologic treatments that affect these systems. 
 The hypothalamic hormonal control of GH and prolactin 
differs from the regulatory systems for TSH, FSH, LH, and 
ACTH. The hypothalamus secretes two hormones that regulate 
GH;  growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) stimulates 
GH production, whereas the peptide  somatostatin (SST) inhibits 
GH production. GH and its primary peripheral mediator,  insu-
lin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) , also provide feedback to inhibit 
GH release. Prolactin production is inhibited by the catecholamine 
 dopamine acting through the D 2 subtype of dopamine receptors. 
The hypothalamus does not produce a hormone that specifically 
stimulates prolactin secretion, although TRH can stimulate 
prolactin release, particularly when TRH concentrations are 
high in the setting of primary hypothyroidism. 
 Whereas all the pituitary and hypothalamic hormones described 
previously are available for use in humans, only a few are of major 
clinical importance. Because of the greater ease of administration 
of target endocrine gland hormones or their synthetic analogs, the 
related hypothalamic and pituitary hormones (TRH, TSH, CRH, 
ACTH, GHRH) are used infrequently as treatments. Some, such 
as ACTH, are used for specialized diagnostic testing. These agents 
are described in  Tables 37–2 and  37–3 and are not discussed fur-
ther in this chapter. In contrast, GH, SST, LH, FSH, GnRH, and 
dopamine or analogs of these hormones are commonly used and 
are described in the following text. 
TABLE 37–1 Links between hypothalamic, anterior pituitary, and target organ hormone or mediator.1
Anterior Pituitary Hormone
Hypothalamic Hormone
Target Organ
Primary Target Organ 
Hormone or Mediator
Growth hormone (GH, somatotropin)
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) (+) 
Somatostatin (−)
Liver, bone, muscle, 
kidney, and others
Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) (+)
Thyroid
Thyroxine, triiodothyronine
Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH)
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) (+)
Adrenal cortex
Cortisol
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) (+)2
Gonads
Estrogen, progesterone, testosterone
Prolactin (PRL)
Dopamine (−)
Breast
—
1All of these hormones act through G protein-coupled receptors except growth hormone and prolactin, which act through JAK/STAT receptors.
2Endogenous GnRH, which is released in pulses, stimulates LH and FSH release. When administered continuously as a drug, GnRH and its analogs inhibit LH and FSH release 
through down-regulation of GnRH receptors. 
(+), stimulant; (–), inhibitor.
TABLE 37–2  Clinical uses of hypothalamic hormones 
and their analogs.
Hypothalamic Hormone
Clinical Uses
Growth hormone-releasing 
hormone (GHRH)
Used rarely as a diagnostic test for GH 
and GHRH sufficiency
Thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH, protirelin)
May be used to diagnose TRH or TSH 
deficiencies
Corticotropin-releasing 
hormone (CRH)
Used rarely to distinguish Cushing’s 
disease from ectopic ACTH secretion
Gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone (GnRH)
May be used in pulses to treat infertility 
caused by GnRH deficiency
Analogs used in long-acting formula-
tions to inhibit gonadal function in 
children with precocious puberty, in 
some transgender/gender variant early 
pubertal adolescents (to block endoge-
nous puberty), in men with prostate 
cancer and women undergoing 
assisted reproductive technology (ART) 
or women who require ovarian sup-
pression for a gynecologic disorder
Dopamine
Dopamine agonists (eg, bromocriptine, 
cabergoline) used for treatment of 
hyperprolactinemia
662    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 GROWTH HORMONE (SOMATOTROPIN) 
Growth hormone, an anterior pituitary hormone, is required dur-
ing childhood and adolescence for attainment of normal adult size 
and has important effects throughout postnatal life on lipid and 
carbohydrate metabolism, and on lean body mass and bone den-
sity. Its growth-promoting effects are primarily mediated via  IGF-I 
( also known as  somatomedin C). Individuals with congenital or 
acquired deficiency of GH during childhood or adolescence fail to 
reach their predicted adult height and have disproportionately 
increased body fat and decreased muscle mass. Adults with GH 
deficiency also have disproportionately low lean body mass. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Structure 
 Growth hormone is a 191-amino-acid peptide with two sulfhydryl 
bridges. Its structure closely resembles that of prolactin. In the 
past, medicinal GH was isolated from the pituitaries of human 
cadavers. However, this form of GH was found to be contami-
nated with prions that could cause Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. For 
this reason, it is no longer used.  Somatropin , the recombinant 
form of GH, has a 191-amino-acid sequence that is identical with 
the predominant native form of human GH. 
 B. Absorption, Metabolism, and Excretion 
 Circulating endogenous GH has a half-life of 20–25 minutes and 
is predominantly cleared by the liver. Recombinant human GH 
(rhGH) is administered subcutaneously 6–7 times per week. Peak 
levels occur in 2–4 hours and active blood levels persist for 
approximately 36 hours. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Growth hormone mediates its effects via cell surface receptors of 
the JAK/STAT cytokine receptor superfamily. Growth hormone 
has two distinct GH receptor binding sites. Dimerization of two 
GH receptors is stimulated by a single GH molecule and acti-
vates signaling cascades mediated by receptor-associated JAK 
tyrosine kinases and STATs (see  Chapter 2 ). GH has complex 
effects on growth, body composition, and carbohydrate, protein, 
and lipid metabolism. The growth-promoting effects are medi-
ated principally through an increase in the production of IGF-I. 
Much of the circulating IGF-I is produced in the liver. GH also 
stimulates production of IGF-I in bone, cartilage, muscle, kid-
ney, and other tissues, where it plays autocrine or paracrine roles. 
GH stimulates longitudinal bone growth until the epiphyses 
close—near the end of puberty. In both children and adults, GH 
has anabolic effects in muscle and catabolic effects in lipid cells 
that shift the balance of body mass to an increase in muscle mass 
and a reduction in adiposity. The direct and indirect effects of 
GH on carbohydrate metabolism are mixed, in part because GH 
and IGF-I have opposite effects on insulin sensitivity. GH 
reduces insulin sensitivity, which results in mild hyperinsulin-
emia, whereas IGF-I has insulin-like effects on glucose transport. 
In patients who are unable to respond to GH because of severe 
GH resistance (caused by GH receptor mutations, post-GH 
receptor signaling mutations, or GH antibodies), the administra-
tion of recombinant human IGF-I may cause hypoglycemia 
because of its insulin-like effects. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 A. Growth Hormone Deficiency 
 GH deficiency can have a genetic basis, may be associated with 
midline developmental defect syndromes (eg, septo-optic dysplasia), 
or can be acquired as a result of damage to the pituitary or 
hypothalamus by a trauma (including breech or traumatic delivery), 
intracranial tumors, infection, infiltrative or hemorrhagic pro-
cesses, or irradiation. Neonates with isolated GH deficiency are 
typically of normal size at birth because prenatal growth is not 
GH-dependent. In contrast, IGF-I is essential for normal prenatal 
and postnatal growth. Through poorly understood mechanisms, 
IGF-I expression and postnatal growth become GH-dependent 
during the first year of life. In childhood, GH deficiency typically 
presents as short stature, often with mild adiposity. Another early 
sign of GH deficiency is hypoglycemia due to unopposed action 
of insulin, to which young children are especially sensitive. Criteria 
for diagnosis of GH deficiency usually include (1) a subnormal 
height velocity for age and (2) a subnormal serum GH response 
following stimulation with at least two GH secretagogues. The 
prevalence of GH deficiency is approximately 1:5000. Therapy 
with rhGH permits many children with short stature due to GH 
deficiency to achieve normal adult height. 
 In the past, it was believed that adults with GH deficiency do 
not exhibit a significant syndrome. However, more detailed 
studies suggest that adults with GH deficiency often have gener-
alized obesity, reduced muscle mass, asthenia, and reduced car-
diac output. GH-deficient adults who have been treated with 
GH have been shown to experience a reversal of many of these 
manifestations. 
 B. Growth Hormone Treatment of Pediatric Patients 
with Short Stature 
 Although the greatest improvement in growth occurs in patients 
with GH deficiency, exogenous GH has some effect on height in 
TABLE 37–3  Diagnostic uses of thyroid-stimulating 
hormone and adrenocorticotropin.
Hormone
Diagnostic Use
Thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH; 
thyrotropin)
In patients who have been treated surgically 
for thyroid carcinoma, to test for recurrence by 
assessing TSH-stimulated whole-body 131I 
scans and serum thyroglobulin determinations
Adrenocorticotropin 
(ACTH)
In patients suspected of adrenal insufficiency, 
either central (CRH/ACTH deficiency) or 
peripheral (cortisol deficiency), in particular in 
suspected cases of congenital adrenal hyper-
plasia. (See Figure 39–1 and Chapter 39.)
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    663
children with short stature caused by factors other than GH defi-
ciency. GH has been approved for several conditions ( Table 37–4 ) 
and has been used experimentally or off-label in many others. 
 Prader-Willi syndrome is an autosomal dominant genetic disease 
associated with growth failure, obesity, and carbohydrate intoler-
ance. In children with Prader-Willi syndrome and growth failure, 
GH treatment decreases body fat and increases lean body mass, 
linear growth, and energy expenditure. 
 GH treatment has also been shown to have a strong beneficial 
effect on final height of girls with  Turner syndrome (45 X karyo-
type and variants). In clinical trials, GH treatment has been shown 
to increase final height in girls with Turner syndrome by 10–15 cm 
(4–6 inches). Because girls with Turner syndrome also have either 
absent or rudimentary ovaries, GH must be judiciously combined 
with gonadal steroids to achieve maximal height. Other condi-
tions of pediatric growth failure for which GH treatment is FDA-
approved include chronic renal insufficiency pre-transplant and 
small-for-gestational-age at birth in which the child’s height 
remains more than 2 standard deviations below the norm at 
2 years of age. 
 A controversial but approved use of GH is for children with 
 idiopathic short stature  (ISS). This is a heterogeneous popula-
tion that has in common no identifiable cause of the short stature. 
Some have arbitrarily defined ISS clinically as having a height at 
least 2.25 standard deviations below the norm for children of the 
same age and an unlikelihood of achieving an adult height that 
will be less than 2.25 standard deviations below the norm. In this 
group of children, many years of GH therapy result in an average 
increase in adult height of 4–7 cm (1.57–2.76 inches) at a cost of 
$5000–$40,000 per year. The complex issues involved in the cost-
risk-benefit relationship of this use of GH are important because 
an estimated 400,000 children in the United States fit the diag-
nostic criteria for ISS. 
 Treatment of children with short stature should be carried out by 
specialists experienced in GH administration. GH dose require-
ments vary with the condition being treated, with GH-deficient 
children typically being most responsive. Children must be observed 
closely for slowing of growth velocity, which could indicate a need 
to increase the dosage or the possibility of epiphyseal fusion or 
intercurrent problems such as hypothyroidism or malnutrition. 
 Other Uses of Growth Hormone 
Growth hormone affects many organ systems and also has a net 
anabolic effect. It has been tested in a number of conditions that 
are associated with a severe catabolic state and is approved for the 
treatment of wasting in patients with AIDS. In 2004, GH was 
approved for treatment of patients with short bowel syndrome 
who are dependent on total parenteral nutrition (TPN). After 
intestinal resection or bypass, the remaining functional intestine 
in many patients undergoes extensive adaptation that allows it to 
adequately absorb nutrients. However, other patients fail to ade-
quately adapt and develop a malabsorption syndrome. GH has 
been shown to increase intestinal growth and improve its function 
in experimental animals. Benefits of GH treatment for patients 
with short bowel syndrome and dependence on total parenteral 
nutrition have mostly been short-lived in the clinical studies that 
have been published to date. Growth hormone is administered with 
glutamine, which also has trophic effects on the intestinal mucosa. 
 GH is a popular component of “anti-aging” programs. Serum 
levels of GH normally decline with aging; anti-aging programs 
claim that injection of GH or administration of drugs purported 
to increase GH release are effective anti-aging remedies. These 
claims are largely unsubstantiated. In contrast studies in mice 
and the nematode  C elegans have clearly demonstrated that ana-
logs of human GH and IGF-I consistently  shorten life span and 
that loss-of-function mutations in the signaling pathways for the 
GH and IGF-I analogs lengthen life span. Another use of GH is 
by athletes for a purported increase in muscle mass and athletic 
performance. GH is one of the drugs banned by the Olympic 
Committee. 
 Although GH has important effects on lipid and carbohydrate 
metabolism and on lean body mass, it does not seem likely to be a 
fruitful direct target for efforts to develop new drugs to treat obe-
sity. However, some of the hormonal and neuroendocrine systems 
that regulate GH secretion are being investigated as possible targets 
for antiobesity drugs (see Box: Treatment of Obesity). 
 In 1993, the FDA approved the use of recombinant bovine 
growth hormone (rbGH) in dairy cattle to increase milk produc-
tion. Although milk and meat from rbGH-treated cows appear to 
be safe, these cows have a higher incidence of mastitis, which 
could increase antibiotic use and result in greater antibiotic resi-
dues in milk and meat. 
TABLE 37–4  Clinical uses of recombinant human 
growth hormone.
Primary Therapeutic 
Objective
Clinical Condition
Growth
Growth failure in pediatric patients 
associated with:
 Growth hormone deficiency
Chronic renal insufficiency 
pre-transplant
Noonan syndrome
Prader-Willi syndrome
Short stature homeobox-
containing gene (SHOX) deficiency
Turner syndrome
Small for gestational age with 
failure to catch up by age 2 years
Idiopathic short stature
Improved metabolic state, 
increased lean body mass, 
sense of well-being
Growth hormone deficiency in 
adults
Increased lean body mass, 
weight, and physical endurance
Wasting in patients with HIV 
infection
Improved gastrointestinal 
function
Short bowel syndrome in patients 
who are also receiving specialized 
nutritional support
664    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
Toxicity & Contraindications 
Children generally tolerate GH treatment well. Adverse events are 
relatively rare and include pseudotumor cerebri; slipped capital 
femoral epiphysis; progression of scoliosis; edema; hyperglycemia; 
and increased risk of asphyxiation in severely obese patients with 
Prader-Willi syndrome and upper airway obstruction or sleep apnea. 
Patients with Turner syndrome have an increased risk of otitis media 
while taking GH. In children with GH deficiency, periodic evaluation 
of the other anterior pituitary hormones may reveal concurrent defi-
ciencies, which also require treatment (eg, with hydrocortisone, 
levothyroxine, or gonadal hormones). Pancreatitis, gynecomastia, 
and nevus growth have occurred in patients receiving GH. Adults 
tend to have more adverse effects from GH therapy. Peripheral 
edema, myalgias, and arthralgias (especially in the hands and wrists) 
occur commonly but remit with dosage reduction. Carpal tunnel 
syndrome can occur. GH treatment increases the activity of cyto-
chrome P450 isoforms, which may reduce the serum levels of drugs 
 TREATMENT OF OBESITY 1 
 It is said that the developed world is experiencing an “epidemic 
of obesity.” This statement is based on statistics showing that in 
the USA, for example, 30–40% of the population is above optimal 
weight and that the excess weight (especially abdominal fat) is 
often associated with the  metabolic syndrome and increased 
risks of cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Since eating behav-
ior is an expression of endocrine, neurophysiologic, and psycho-
logical processes, prevention and treatment of obesity are 
complex. It is not surprising that there is considerable scientific 
and financial interest in developing pharmacologic therapy for 
the condition. 
 Although obesity can be defined as excess adipose tissue, it is 
currently quantitated by means of the body mass index (BMI), 
calculated from BMI = weight (in kilograms)/height2 (in meters). 
Using this measure, a normal BMI is defined as 18.5–24.9; over-
weight, 25–29.9; obese, 30–39.9; and morbidly obese (ie, at very 
high risk), ≥ 40. Some extremely muscular individuals may have a 
BMI higher than 25 and no excess fat; however, the BMI scale 
generally correlates with the degree of obesity and with risk. 
 Although the cause of obesity can be simply stated as energy 
intake (dietary calories) exceeding energy output (resting metab-
olism plus exercise), the actual physiology of weight control is 
extremely complex, and the pathophysiology of obesity is still 
poorly understood. Many hormones and neuronal mechanisms 
regulate intake (appetite, satiety), processing (absorption, conver-
sion to fat, glycogen, etc), and output (thermogenesis, muscle 
work). The fact that a large number of hormones reduce appetite 
(Table 37–4.1, see online version of this book) might appear to 
offer many targets for weight-reducing drug therapy, but despite 
intensive research, no available pharmacologic therapy has 
succeeded in maintaining a weight loss of over 10% for 1 year. 
Furthermore, the social and psychological aspects of eating are 
powerful influences that are independent of or only partially 
dependent on the physiologic control mechanisms. In contrast, 
bariatric (weight-reducing) surgery readily achieves a sustained 
weight loss of 10–40%. Furthermore, surgery that bypasses the 
stomach and upper small intestine (but not simple restrictive 
banding) rapidly reverses some aspects of the metabolic 
syndrome even before significant weight is lost. However, even a 
5–10% loss of weight is associated with a reduction in blood pres-
sure and improved glycemic control. 
 Until approximately 15 years ago, the most popular and 
successful appetite suppressants were the nonselective 5-HT 2 
agonists: fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine. Combined with 
phentermine as Fen-Phen and Dex-Phen, they were moderately 
effective. However, these drugs were found to cause pulmonary 
hypertension and cardiac valve defects and were withdrawn. 
 Older drugs still available in the United States and some other 
countries include phenylpropanolamine, benzphetamine, amphet-
amine, methamphetamine, phentermine, diethylpropion, mazindol, 
and phendimetrazine. These drugs are all amphetamine mimics and 
are central nervous system appetite suppressants; they are generally 
helpful only during the first few weeks of therapy. Their toxicity is 
significant and includes hypertension (with a risk of cerebral hemor-
rhage) and addiction liability. 
 Orlistat is the only non-amphetamine drug currently approved 
in the United States for the treatment of obesity. Two other drugs 
that have been intensely studied are listed in Table 37–5. Clinical 
trials and phase 4 reports suggest that orlistat is modestly effec-
tive for the duration of therapy (up to 1 year) and is probably 
safer than the amphetamine mimics. However, it does not pro-
duce more than a 5–10% loss of weight. Sibutramine was mar-
keted for several years but was withdrawn because of increasing 
evidence of cardiovascular toxicity. Lorcaserin received intense 
study through 2010 and was submitted for approval to the FDA, 
but this was denied on the basis of considerations of inadequate 
safety and effectiveness. 
 Because of the low efficacy of the drugs listed in Table 37–5, 
intensive research continues. (Some drugs approved for other 
indications that reduce appetite and possible future weight loss 
drugs are set forth in Table 37–5.1, see online version of this 
book). Because of the redundancy of the physiologic mecha-
nisms for control of body weight, it seems likely that polyphar-
macy targeting multiple pathways will be needed to achieve 
success. 
1Contributed by B.G. Katzung. 
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    665
metabolized by that enzyme system (see  Chapter 4 ). There has been 
no increased incidence of malignancy among patients receiving GH 
therapy, but GH treatment is contraindicated in a patient with a 
known active malignancy. Proliferative retinopathy may rarely occur. 
GH treatment of critically ill patients appears to  increase mortality. 
MECASERMIN
 A small number of children with growth failure have severe IGF-I 
deficiency that is not responsive to exogenous GH. Causes include 
mutations in the GH receptor and in the GH receptor signaling 
pathway, neutralizing antibodies to GH, and IGF-I gene defects. 
In 2005, the FDA approved two forms of recombinant human 
IGF-I (rhIGF-I) for treatment of severe IGF-I deficiency that is 
not responsive to GH: mecasermin and mecasermin rinfabate. 
Mecasermin is rhIGF-I alone, while mecasermin rinfabate is a 
complex of recombinant human IGF-I (rhIGF-I) and recombi-
nant human insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-3 
(rhIGFBP-3). This binding protein significantly increases the cir-
culating half-life of rhIGF-I. Normally, the great majority of the 
circulating IGF-I is bound to IGFBP-3, which is produced prin-
cipally by the liver under the control of GH. Mecasermin rinfa-
bate is not currently available in the United States. Mecasermin is 
administered subcutaneously twice daily at a recommended start-
ing dosage of 0.04–0.08 mg/kg and increased weekly up to a 
maximum twice-daily dosage of 0.12 mg/kg. 
 The most important adverse effect observed with mecasermin 
is hypoglycemia. To avoid hypoglycemia, the prescribing instruc-
tions require consumption of a carbohydrate-containing meal or 
snack 20 minutes before or after mecasermin administration. 
Several patients have experienced intracranial hypertension and 
asymptomatic elevation of liver enzymes. 
 GROWTH HORMONE ANTAGONISTS 
 The need for antagonists of GH stems from the tendency of 
GH-producing cells (somatotrophs) in the anterior pituitary to form 
GH-secreting tumors. Pituitary adenomas occur most commonly in 
adults. In adults, GH-secreting adenomas cause  acromegaly , which 
is characterized by abnormal growth of cartilage and bone tissue, and 
many organs including skin, muscle, heart, liver, and the gastroin-
testinal tract. Acromegaly adversely affects the skeletal, muscular, 
cardiovascular, respiratory, and metabolic systems. When a 
GH-secreting adenoma occurs before the long bone epiphyses 
close, it leads to the rare condition,  gigantism . Small GH-secreting 
adenomas can be treated with GH antagonists. These include 
somatostatin analogs and dopamine receptor agonists, which 
reduce the production of GH, and the novel GH receptor antago-
nist  pegvisomant , which prevents GH from activating GH signal-
ing pathways. Larger pituitary adenomas produce greater amounts 
of GH and also can impair visual and central nervous system func-
tion by encroaching on nearby brain structures. These are treated 
with transsphenoidal surgery or radiation. 
 Somatostatin Analogs 
 Somatostatin, a 14-amino-acid peptide ( Figure 37–2 ), is found in 
the hypothalamus, other parts of the central nervous system, the 
pancreas, and other sites in the gastrointestinal tract. It inhibits the 
release of GH, TSH, glucagon, insulin, and gastrin. 
 Exogenous somatostatin is rapidly cleared from the circulation, 
with an initial half-life of 1–3 minutes. The kidney appears to play 
an important role in its metabolism and excretion. 
 Somatostatin has limited therapeutic usefulness because of its 
short duration of action and multiple effects in many secretory 
TABLE 37–5 Newer anti-obesity drugs and their effects.
Orlistat
Sibutramine
Lorcaserin
Target organ
Gut
CNS
CNS (peripheral ?)
Target molecule
GI lipase inhibitor
SERT and NET inhibitor
Selective 5-HT2C receptor agonist
Mechanism of action
Reduces absorption of fats since triglycerides 
not split
Reduces appetite
Reduces appetite
Toxicity
GI: Flatulence, steatorrhea, fecal incontinence
Tachycardia, hypertension, infarction
Headache; tumorigenesis in rats
Dosage
130 mg tid
10–15 mg qd
10–20 mg qd
Availability
Over the counter
Prescription; withdrawn in 2010
NDA approval denied by FDA
CNS, central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; SERT, serotonin reuptake transporter; NET, norepinephrine reuptake transporter; tid, three times daily; qd, daily.
 FIGURE 37–2  Above: Amino acid sequence of somatostatin. 
 Below: Sequence of the synthetic analog, octreotide. 
Phe
7
Phe
6
8
Asn
5
10
Lys
Lys
Thr
Phe
Cys
Cys Thr-ol
Acetate
D-Phe
D-Trp
4
11
Cys
3
12
Gly
2
13
Ala
Cys
1
14
Trp
Thr
9
Lys
Phe Thr
Ser
S
S
S
S
Somatostatin
Octreotide
666    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
systems. A series of longer-acting somatostatin analogs that retain 
biologic activity have been developed.  Octreotide , the most 
widely used somatostatin analog ( Figure 37–2 ), is 45 times more 
potent than somatostatin in inhibiting GH release but only twice 
as potent in reducing insulin secretion. Because of this relatively 
reduced effect on pancreatic beta cells, hyperglycemia rarely 
occurs during treatment. The plasma elimination half-life of 
octreotide is about 80 minutes, 30 times longer than that of 
somatostatin. 
 Octreotide, 50–200 mcg given subcutaneously every 8 hours, 
reduces symptoms caused by a variety of hormone-secreting 
tumors: acromegaly; the carcinoid syndrome; gastrinoma; gluca-
gonoma; nesidioblastosis; the watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, and 
achlorhydria (WDHA) syndrome; and diabetic diarrhea. 
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, using radiolabeled octreotide, 
is useful in localizing neuroendocrine tumors having somatostatin 
receptors and helps predict the response to octreotide therapy. 
Octreotide is also useful for the acute control of bleeding from 
esophageal varices. 
 Octreotide acetate injectable long-acting suspension is a slow-
release microsphere formulation. It is instituted only after a brief 
course of shorter-acting octreotide has been demonstrated to be 
effective and tolerated. Injections into alternate gluteal muscles are 
repeated at 4-week intervals in doses of 20–40 mg. 
 Adverse effects of octreotide therapy include nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal cramps, flatulence, and steatorrhea with bulky bowel 
movements. Biliary sludge and gallstones may occur after 6 
months of use in 20–30% of patients. However, the yearly inci-
dence of symptomatic gallstones is about 1%. Cardiac effects 
include sinus bradycardia (25%) and conduction disturbances 
(10%). Pain at the site of injection is common, especially with the 
long-acting octreotide suspension. Vitamin B 12 deficiency may 
occur with long-term use of octreotide. 
 A long-acting formulation of  lanreotide , another octapeptide 
somatostatin analog, was approved by the FDA in 2007 for treat-
ment of acromegaly. Lanreotide appears to have effects comparable 
to those of octreotide on reducing GH levels and normalizing 
IGF-I concentrations. 
 Pegvisomant 
 Pegvisomant is a GH receptor antagonist used to treat acromegaly. 
It is the polyethylene glycol (PEG) derivative of a mutant GH, 
B2036. Like native GH, pegvisomant has two GH receptor bind-
ing sites. However, one of the pegvisomant GH receptor binding 
sites has increased affinity for the GH receptor, whereas its second 
GH receptor binding site has reduced affinity. This differential 
receptor affinity allows the initial step (GH receptor dimerization) 
but blocks the conformational changes required for signal transduc-
tion. Pegvisomant is a less potent GH receptor antagonist than is 
B2036, but pegylation reduces its clearance and improves its overall 
clinical effectiveness. When pegvisomant was administered subcu-
taneously to 160 patients with acromegaly daily for 12 months or 
more, serum levels of IGF-I fell into the normal range in 97%; two 
patients experienced growth of their GH-secreting pituitary tumors 
and two patients developed increases in liver enzymes. 
 THE GONADOTROPINS (FOLLICLE-
STIMULATING HORMONE & LUTEINIZING 
HORMONE) & HUMAN CHORIONIC 
GONADOTROPIN 
 The gonadotropins are produced by a single type of pituitary cell, 
the gonadotroph. These hormones serve complementary func-
tions in the reproductive process. In women, the principal func-
tion of FSH is to direct ovarian follicle development. Both FSH 
and LH are needed for ovarian steroidogenesis. In the ovary, LH 
stimulates androgen production by theca cells in the follicular 
stage of the menstrual cycle, whereas FSH stimulates the conver-
sion by granulosa cells of androgens to estrogens. In the luteal 
phase of the menstrual cycle, estrogen and progesterone produc-
tion is primarily under the control first of LH and then, if preg-
nancy occurs, under the control of human chorionic gonadotropin 
(hCG). Human chorionic gonadotropin is a placental protein 
nearly identical with LH; its actions are mediated through LH 
receptors. 
 In men, FSH is the primary regulator of spermatogenesis, 
whereas LH is the main stimulus for testosterone synthesis in Leydig 
cells. FSH helps maintain high local androgen concentrations in the 
vicinity of developing sperm by stimulating the production of 
androgen-binding protein in Sertoli cells. FSH also stimulates the 
conversion by Sertoli cells of testosterone to estrogen. 
 FSH, LH, and hCG are available in several pharmaceutical 
forms. They are used in states of infertility to stimulate spermato-
genesis in men and to induce ovulation in women. Their most 
common clinical use is for the controlled ovulation hyperstimula-
tion that is the cornerstone of assisted reproductive technologies 
such as in vitro fertilization (IVF, see below). 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 All three hormones—FSH, LH, and hCG—are heterodimers that 
share an identical α chain in addition to a distinct β chain that 
confers receptor specificity. The β chains of hCG and LH are 
nearly identical, and these two hormones are used interchange-
ably. All the gonadotropin preparations are administered by sub-
cutaneous or intramuscular injection, usually on a daily basis. 
Half-lives vary by preparation and route of injection from 10 to 
40 hours. 
 A. Menotropins 
 The first commercial gonadotropin product was extracted from 
the urine of postmenopausal women, which contains a substance 
with FSH-like properties (but with 4% of the potency of FSH) 
and an LH-like substance. This purified extract of FSH and LH 
is known as  menotropins , or human menopausal gonadotropins 
 (hMG) . 
 B. Follicle-Stimulating Hormone 
 Three forms of purified FSH are available.  Urofollitropin , also 
known as uFSH, is a purified preparation of human FSH 
extracted from the urine of postmenopausal women. Virtually all 
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    667
the LH activity has been removed through a form of immuno-
affinity chromatography that uses anti-hCG antibodies. Two 
recombinant forms of FSH  (rFSH) are also available:  follitropin 
alfa and  follitropin beta. The amino acid sequences of these two 
products are identical to that of human FSH. They differ from 
each other and urofollitropin in the composition of carbohydrate 
side chains. The rFSH preparations have a shorter half-life than 
preparations derived from human urine but stimulate estrogen 
secretion at least as efficiently and, in some studies, more effi-
ciently. The rFSH preparations are considerably more expensive. 
 C. Luteinizing Hormone 
 Lutropin alfa, the recombinant form of human LH, was intro-
duced in the United States in 2004. When given by subcutaneous 
injection, it has a half-life of about 10 hours. Lutropin has only 
been approved for use in combination with follitropin alfa for 
stimulation of follicular development in infertile women with 
profound LH deficiency. It has not been approved for use with the 
other preparations of FSH nor for simulating the endogenous LH 
surge that is needed to complete follicular development and pre-
cipitate ovulation. 
 D. Human Chorionic Gonadotropin 
 hCG is produced by the human placenta and excreted into the 
urine, whence it can be extracted and purified. It is a glycoprotein 
consisting of a 92-amino-acid α chain virtually identical to that of 
FSH, LH, and TSH, and a β chain of 145 amino acids that 
resembles that of LH except for the presence of a carboxyl 
terminal sequence of 30 amino acids not present in LH. 
 Choriogonadotropin alfa  (rhCG) is a recombinant form of 
hCG. Because of its greater consistency in biologic activity, rhCG 
is packaged and dosed on the basis of weight rather than units of 
activity. All of the other gonadotropins, including rFSH, are pack-
aged and dosed on the basis of units of activity. The preparation 
of hCG that is purified from human urine is administered by 
intramuscular injection, whereas rhCG is administered by subcu-
taneous injection. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The gonadotropins and hCG exert their effects through G 
protein-coupled receptors. LH and FSH have complex effects on 
reproductive tissues in both sexes. In women, these effects change 
over the time course of a menstrual cycle as a result of a complex 
interplay between concentration-dependent effects of the 
gonadotropins, cross-talk between LH, FSH, and gonadal steroids, 
and the influence of other ovarian hormones. A coordinated 
pattern of FSH and LH secretion during the menstrual cycle (see 
Figure 40–1) is required for normal follicle development, ovula-
tion, and pregnancy. 
 During the first 8 weeks of pregnancy, the progesterone and 
estrogen required to maintain pregnancy are produced by the 
ovarian corpus luteum. For the first few days after ovulation, the 
corpus luteum is maintained by maternal LH. However, as mater-
nal LH concentrations fall owing to increasing concentrations of 
progesterone and estrogen, the corpus luteum will continue to 
function only if the role of maternal LH is taken over by hCG 
produced by the embryo and its new placenta. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 A. Ovulation Induction 
 The gonadotropins are used to induce ovulation in women 
with anovulation that is secondary to hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism, polycystic ovary syndrome, obesity, and other causes. 
Because of the high cost of gonadotropins and the need for close 
monitoring during their administration, they are generally reserved 
for anovulatory women who fail to respond to other less com-
plicated forms of treatment (eg, clomiphene; see  Chapter 40 ). 
Gonadotropins are also used for  controlled ovarian hyperstimu-
lation in assisted reproductive technology procedures. A number 
of protocols make use of gonadotropins in ovulation induction 
and controlled ovulation hyperstimulation, and new protocols are 
continually being developed to improve the rates of success and to 
decrease the two primary risks of ovulation induction: multiple 
pregnancies and the  ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
(OHSS; see below). 
 Although the details differ, all of these protocols are based on 
the complex physiology that underlies a normal menstrual cycle. 
Like a menstrual cycle, ovulation induction is discussed in rela-
tion to a cycle that begins on the first day of a menstrual bleed 
( Figure 37–3 ). Shortly after the first day (usually on day 3), daily 
injections with one of the FSH preparations (hMG, urofollitro-
pin) are begun and are continued for approximately 7–12 days. In 
women with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, follicle develop-
ment requires treatment with a combination of FSH and LH 
because these women do not produce the basal level of LH that is 
required for adequate ovarian estrogen production and normal 
follicle development. The dose and duration of FSH treatment are 
based on the response as measured by the serum estradiol concen-
tration and by ultrasound evaluation of ovarian follicle develop-
ment and endometrial thickness. When exogenous gonadotropins 
are used to stimulate follicle development, there is risk of a pre-
mature endogenous surge in LH owing to the rapidly changing 
hormonal milieu. To prevent this, gonadotropins are almost 
always administered in conjunction with a drug that blocks the 
effects of endogenous GnRH—either continuous administration 
of a GnRH agonist, which down-regulates GnRH receptors or a 
GnRH receptor antagonist (see below and  Figure 37–3 ). 
 When appropriate follicular maturation has occurred, the FSH 
and the GnRH agonist or GnRH antagonist injections are discon-
tinued; the following day, hCG (5000–10,000 IU) is administered 
intramuscularly to induce final follicular maturation and, in ovu-
lation induction protocols, ovulation. The hCG administration is 
followed by insemination in ovulation induction and by oocyte 
retrieval in assisted reproductive technology procedures. Because 
use of GnRH agonists or antagonists during the follicular phase of 
ovulation induction suppresses endogenous LH production, it is 
important to provide exogenous hormonal support of the luteal 
phase. In clinical trials, exogenous progesterone, hCG, or a 
combination of the two have been effective at providing adequate 
luteal support. However, progesterone is preferred for luteal 
668    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
support because hCG carries a higher risk of the ovarian hyper-
stimulation syndrome (see below). 
 B. Male Infertility 
 Most of the signs and symptoms of hypogonadism in males 
(eg, delayed puberty, retention of prepubertal secondary sex char-
acteristics after puberty) can be adequately treated with exogenous 
androgen; however, treatment of infertility in hypogonadal men 
requires the activity of both LH and FSH. For many years, con-
ventional therapy has consisted of initial treatment for 8–12 weeks 
with injections of 1000–2500 IU hCG several times per week. 
After the initial phase, hMG is injected at a dose of 75–150 units 
three times per week. In men with hypogonadal hypogonadism, it 
takes an average of 4–6 months of such treatment for sperm to 
appear in the ejaculate. With the more recent availability of uro-
follitropin, rFSH, and rLH, a number of alternative protocols 
have been developed. An advance that has indirectly benefited 
gonadotropin treatment of male infertility is intracytoplasmic 
sperm injection (ICSI), in which a single sperm is injected directly 
into a mature oocyte that has been retrieved after controlled ovar-
ian hyperstimulation of a female partner. With the advent of ICSI, 
the minimum threshold of spermatogenesis required for preg-
nancy is greatly lowered. 
 C. Outdated Uses 
 Chorionic gonadotropin is approved for the treatment of prepuber-
tal cryptorchidism. Prepubertal boys generally between 4 and 9 years 
of age were treated with IM injections of hCG for 2–6 weeks. 
However, this clinical use is no longer supported because the long-
term efficacy of hormonal treatment of cryptorchidism (∼ 20%) is 
much lower than the long-term efficacy of surgical treatment (> 95%), 
and because of concerns that early childhood treatment with hCG 
treatment has a negative impact on germ cells in addition to 
increasing the risk of precocious puberty. 
 In the United States, chorionic gonadotropin has a black-box 
warning against its use for weight loss. The use of hCG plus severe 
calorie restriction for weight loss was popularized by a publication 
in the 1950s claiming that the hCG selectively mobilizes body fat 
stores. This practice continues today, despite a preponderance of 
subsequent scientific evidence from placebo-controlled trials that 
hCG does not provide any weight loss benefit beyond the weight 
loss associated with severe calorie restriction alone. 
 Toxicity & Contraindications 
 In women treated with gonadotropins and hCG, the two most seri-
ous complications are the  ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
and  multiple pregnancies. Overstimulation of the ovary during 
ovulation induction often leads to uncomplicated ovarian enlarge-
ment that usually resolves spontaneously. The ovarian hyperstimu-
lation syndrome is a more serious complication that occurs in 
0.5–4% of patients. It is characterized by ovarian enlargement, 
ascites, hydrothorax, and hypovolemia, sometimes resulting in 
shock. Hemoperitoneum (from a ruptured ovarian cyst), fever, and 
arterial thromboembolism can occur. 
 The probability of multiple pregnancies is greatly increased 
when ovulation induction and assisted reproductive technologies 
Follicular phase
GnRH
antagonist
Luteal phase
Oocyte
retrieval &
fertilization
Embryo
transfer
or
GnRH agonist
Time (days)
Menses
Gonadotropin
hCG
Progesterone
 FIGURE 37–3  Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation in preparation for an assisted reproductive technology such as in vitro fertilization. 
Follicular phase: Follicle development is stimulated with gonadotropin injections that begin about 3 days after menses begin. When the follicles 
are ready, as assessed by measurement of serum estrogen concentration and ultrasound measurement of follicle size, final oocyte maturation is 
induced by an injection of hCG. Luteal phase: Shortly thereafter oocytes are retrieved and fertilized in vitro. The recipient’s luteal phase is sup-
ported with injections of progesterone. To prevent a premature luteinizing-hormone surge, endogenous gonadotropin secretion is inhibited 
during the follicular phase with either a GnRH agonist or a GnRH antagonist. In most protocols, the GnRH agonist is started midway through the 
preceding luteal cycle. 
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    669
are used. In ovulation induction, the risk of a multiple pregnancy 
is estimated to be 15–20%, whereas the percentage of multiple 
pregnancies in the general population is closer to 1%. Multiple 
pregnancies carry an increased risk of complications, such as gesta-
tional diabetes, preeclampsia, and preterm labor. For in vitro fertil-
ization procedures, the risk of a multiple pregnancy is primarily 
determined by the number of embryos transferred to the recipient. 
A strong trend in recent years has been to transfer fewer embryos. 
 Other reported adverse effects of gonadotropin treatment are 
headache, depression, edema, precocious puberty, and (rarely) 
production of antibodies to hCG. In men treated with gonadotro-
pins, the risk of gynecomastia is directly correlated with the level 
of testosterone produced in response to treatment. An association 
between ovarian cancer, infertility, and fertility drugs has been 
reported. However, it is not known which, if any, fertility drugs 
are causally related to cancer. 
 GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE 
& ITS ANALOGS 
 Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is secreted by neurons in the 
hypothalamus. It travels through the hypothalamic-pituitary 
venous portal plexus to the anterior pituitary, where it binds to G 
protein-coupled receptors on the plasma membranes of gonado-
troph cells.  Pulsatile GnRH secretion is required to stimulate the 
gonadotroph cell to produce and release LH and FSH. 
 Sustained  nonpulsatile administration of GnRH or GnRH 
analogs  inhibits the release of FSH and LH by the pituitary in 
both women and men, resulting in hypogonadism. GnRH ago-
nists are used to produce gonadal suppression in men with pros-
tate cancer. They are also used in women who are undergoing 
assisted reproductive technology procedures or who have a gyne-
cologic problem that is benefited by ovarian suppression. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Structure 
 GnRH is a decapeptide found in all mammals.  Gonadorelin is an 
acetate salt of synthetic human GnRH. Synthetic analogs of 
GnRH include  goserelin, histrelin, leuprolide, nafarelin, and 
 triptorelin. These analogs all have D-amino acids at position 6, 
and all but nafarelin have ethylamide substituted for glycine at 
position 10. Both modifications make them more potent and 
longer-lasting than native GnRH and gonadorelin. 
 B. Pharmacokinetics 
 Gonadorelin can be administered intravenously or subcutane-
ously. GnRH analogs can be administered subcutaneously, intra-
muscularly, via nasal spray (nafarelin), or as a subcutaneous 
implant. The half-life of intravenous gonadorelin is 4 minutes, 
and the half-lives of subcutaneous and intranasal GnRH analogs 
are approximately 3 hours. The duration of clinical uses of GnRH 
agonists varies from a few days for ovulation induction to a num-
ber of years for treatment of metastatic prostate cancer. Therefore, 
preparations have been developed with a range of durations of 
action from several hours (for daily administration) to 1, 4, 6, or 
12 months (depot forms). 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The physiologic actions of GnRH exhibit complex dose-response 
relationships that change dramatically from the fetal period 
through the end of puberty. This is not surprising in view of the 
complex role that GnRH plays in normal reproduction, particu-
larly in female reproduction. Pulsatile GnRH release occurs and is 
responsible for stimulating LH and FSH production during the 
fetal and neonatal period. Subsequently, from the age of 2 years 
until the onset of puberty, GnRH secretion falls off and the pitu-
itary simultaneously exhibits very low sensitivity to GnRH. Just 
before puberty, an increase in the frequency and amplitude of 
GnRH release occurs and then, in early puberty, pituitary sensitiv-
ity to GnRH increases, which is due in part to the effect of increas-
ing concentrations of gonadal steroids. In females, it usually takes 
several months to a year after the onset of puberty for the hypo-
thalamic-pituitary system to produce an LH surge and ovulation. 
By the end of puberty, the system is well established so that men-
strual cycles proceed at relatively constant intervals. The ampli-
tude and frequency of GnRH pulses vary in a regular pattern 
through the menstrual cycle with the highest amplitudes occur-
ring during the luteal phase and the highest frequency occurring 
late in the follicular phase. Lower pulse frequencies favor FSH 
secretion, whereas higher pulse frequencies favor LH secretion. 
Gonadal steroids as well as the peptide hormones activin and 
inhibin have complex modulatory effects on the gonadotropin 
response to GnRH. 
 In the pharmacologic use of GnRH and its analogs, pulsatile 
intravenous administration of gonadorelin every 1–4 hours stimu-
lates FSH and LH secretion. Continuous administration of gona-
dorelin or its longer-acting analogs produces a biphasic response. 
During the first 7–10 days, an agonist effect results in increased 
concentrations of gonadal hormones in males and females; this 
initial phase is referred to as a  flare . After this period, the contin-
ued presence of GnRH results in an inhibitory action that mani-
fests as a drop in the concentration of gonadotropins and gonadal 
steroids. The inhibitory action is due to a combination of receptor 
down-regulation and changes in the signaling pathways activated 
by GnRH. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 The GnRH agonists are occasionally used for stimulation of 
gonadotropin production. They are used far more commonly for 
suppression of gonadotropin release. 
 A. Stimulation 
 1. Female infertility— In the current era of widespread avail-
ability of gonadotropins and assisted reproductive technology, the 
use of pulsatile GnRH administration to treat infertility is uncom-
mon. Although pulsatile GnRH is less likely than gonadotropins 
670    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
to cause multiple pregnancies and the ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome, the inconvenience and cost associated with continuous 
use of an intravenous pump and difficulties obtaining native 
GnRH (gonadorelin) are barriers to pulsatile GnRH. When this 
approach is used, a portable battery-powered programmable 
pump and intravenous tubing deliver pulses of gonadorelin every 
90 minutes. 
 Gonadorelin or a GnRH agonist analog can be used to initiate 
an LH surge and ovulation in women with infertility who are 
undergoing ovulation induction with gonadotropins. Traditionally, 
hCG has been used to initiate ovulation in this situation. However, 
there is some evidence that gonadorelin or a GnRH agonist is less 
likely than hCG to cause multiple ova to be released and less likely 
to cause the ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 
 2. Male infertility— It is possible to use pulsatile gonadorelin 
for infertility in men with hypothalamic hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism. A portable pump infuses gonadorelin intrave-
nously every 90 minutes. Serum testosterone levels and semen 
analyses must be done regularly. At least 3–6 months of pulsatile 
infusions are required before significant numbers of sperm are 
seen. As described above, treatment of hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism is more commonly done with hCG and hMG or their 
recombinant equivalents. 
 3. Diagnosis of LH responsiveness— GnRH can be useful in 
determining whether delayed puberty in a hypogonadotropic 
adolescent is due to constitutional delay or to hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism. The LH response (but not the FSH response) to a 
single dose of GnRH can distinguish between these two condi-
tions. Serum LH levels are measured before and at various times 
after an intravenous or subcutaneous bolus of GnRH. An increase 
in serum LH with a peak that exceeds 15.6 mIU/mL is normal 
and suggests impending puberty. An impaired LH response sug-
gests hypogonadotropic hypogonadism due to either pituitary or 
hypothalamic disease, but does not rule out constitutional delay of 
adolescence. 
 B. Suppression of Gonadotropin Production 
 1. Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation — In the con-
trolled ovarian hyperstimulation that provides multiple mature 
oocytes for assisted reproductive technologies such as in vitro 
fertilization, it is critical to suppress an endogenous LH surge 
that could prematurely trigger ovulation. This suppression is 
most commonly achieved by daily subcutaneous injections of 
leuprolide or daily nasal applications of nafarelin. For leuprolide, 
treatment is commonly initiated with 1.0 mg daily for about 10 
days or until menstrual bleeding occurs. At that point, the dose 
is reduced to 0.5 mg daily until hCG is administered ( Figure 
37–3 ). For nafarelin, the beginning dosage is generally 400 mcg 
twice a day, which is decreased to 200 mcg when menstrual 
bleeding occurs. In women who respond poorly to the standard 
protocol, alternative protocols that use shorter courses and lower 
doses of GnRH agonists may improve the follicular response to 
gonadotropins. 
 2. Endometriosis — Endometriosis is a syndrome of cyclical 
abdominal pain in premenopausal women that is due to the pres-
ence of estrogen-sensitive endometrium-like tissue outside the 
uterus. The pain of endometriosis is often reduced by abolishing 
exposure to the cyclical changes in the concentrations of estrogen 
and progesterone that are a normal part of the menstrual cycle. 
The ovarian suppression induced by continuous treatment with a 
GnRH agonist greatly reduces estrogen and progesterone concen-
trations and prevents cyclical changes. The preferred duration of 
treatment with a GnRH agonist is limited to 6 months because 
ovarian suppression beyond this period can result in decreased 
bone density. Leuprolide, goserelin, and nafarelin are approved for 
this indication. Leuprolide and goserelin are administered as depot 
preparations that provide 1 or 3 months of continuous GnRH 
agonist activity. Nafarelin is administered twice daily as a nasal 
spray at a dose of 0.2 mg per spray. 
 3. Uterine leiomyomata (uterine fibroids)— Uterine leio-
myomata are benign, estrogen-sensitive, fibrous growths in the 
uterus that can cause menorrhagia, with associated anemia and 
pelvic pain. Treatment for 3–6 months with a GnRH agonist 
reduces fibroid size and, when combined with supplemental iron, 
improves anemia. Leuprolide, goserelin, and nafarelin are approved 
for this indication. The doses and routes of administration are 
similar to those described for treatment of endometriosis. 
 4. Prostate cancer— Antiandrogen therapy is the primary 
medical therapy for prostate cancer. Combined antiandrogen 
therapy with continuous GnRH agonist and an androgen receptor 
antagonist such as flutamide (see  Chapter 40 ) is as effective as 
surgical castration in reducing serum testosterone concentrations 
and effects. Leuprolide, goserelin, histrelin, and triptorelin are 
approved for this indication. The preferred formulation is one of 
the long-acting depot forms that provide 1, 3, 4, 6, or 12 months 
of active drug therapy. During the first 7–10 days of GnRH ana-
log therapy, serum testosterone levels increase because of the ago-
nist action of the drug; this can precipitate pain in patients with 
bone metastases, and tumor growth and neurologic symptoms in 
patients with vertebral metastases. It can also temporarily worsen 
symptoms of urinary obstruction. Such tumor flares can usually 
be avoided with the concomitant administration of bicalutamide 
or one of the other androgen receptor antagonists (see  Chapter 40 ). 
Within about 2 weeks, serum testosterone levels fall to the hypo-
gonadal range. 
 5. Central precocious puberty— Continuous administration 
of a GnRH agonist is indicated for treatment of central precocious 
puberty (onset of secondary sex characteristics before 7–8 years in 
girls or 9 years in boys). Before embarking on treatment with a 
GnRH agonist, one must confirm central precocious puberty by 
demonstrating a pubertal gonadotropin response to GnRH or a 
“test dose” of a GnRH analog. Treatment is typically indicated in 
a child whose final height would be otherwise significantly com-
promised (as evidenced by a significantly advanced bone age) or in 
whom the development of pubertal secondary sexual characteristics 
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    671
or menses causes significant emotional distress. While central 
precocious puberty is most often idiopathic, it is important to rule 
out central nervous system pathology with MRI imaging of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary area. 
 Treatment is most commonly carried out with either a monthly 
intramuscular depot injection of leuprolide acetate or with a once-
yearly implant of histrelin acetate. Daily subcutaneous regimens 
and multiple daily nasal spray regimens of GnRH agonists are also 
available. Treatment with a GnRH agonist is generally continued 
to age 11 in females and age 12 in males. 
 6. Other— Other clinical uses for the gonadal suppression pro-
vided by continuous GnRH agonist treatment include advanced 
breast and ovarian cancer; thinning of the endometrial lining in 
preparation for an endometrial ablation procedure in women with 
dysfunctional uterine bleeding; and treatment of amenorrhea and 
infertility in women with polycystic ovary disease. Recently pub-
lished clinical practice guidelines recommend the use of continu-
ous GnRH agonist administration in early pubertal transgender 
adolescents to block endogenous puberty prior to subsequent 
treatment with cross-gender gonadal hormones. 
 Toxicity 
 Gonadorelin can cause headache, light-headedness, nausea, and 
flushing. Local swelling often occurs at subcutaneous injection 
sites. Generalized hypersensitivity dermatitis has occurred after 
long-term subcutaneous administration. Rare acute hypersensitiv-
ity reactions include bronchospasm and anaphylaxis. Sudden 
pituitary apoplexy and blindness have been reported following 
administration of GnRH to a patient with a gonadotropin-secret-
ing pituitary tumor. 
 Continuous treatment of women with a GnRH analog 
(leuprolide, nafarelin, goserelin) causes the typical symptoms of 
menopause, which include hot flushes, sweats, and headaches. 
Depression, diminished libido, generalized pain, vaginal dryness, 
and breast atrophy may also occur. Ovarian cysts may develop 
within the first 2 months of therapy and generally resolve after an 
additional 6 weeks; however, the cysts may persist and require 
discontinuation of therapy. Reduced bone density and osteoporo-
sis may occur with prolonged use, so patients should be monitored 
with bone densitometry before repeated treatment courses. 
Depending on the condition being treated with the GnRH ago-
nist, it may be possible to ameliorate the signs and symptoms of 
the hypoestrogenic state without losing clinical efficacy by adding 
back a small dose of a progestin alone or in combination with a 
low dose of an estrogen. Contraindications to the use of GnRH 
agonists in women include pregnancy and breast-feeding. 
 In men treated with continuous GnRH agonist administra-
tion, adverse effects include hot flushes and sweats, edema, gyne-
comastia, decreased libido, decreased hematocrit, reduced bone 
density, asthenia, and injection site reactions. GnRH analog 
treatment of children is generally well tolerated. However, tem-
porary exacerbation of precocious puberty may occur during the 
first few weeks of therapy. Nafarelin nasal spray may cause or 
aggravate sinusitis. 
 GNRH RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 Three synthetic decapeptides that function as competitive antago-
nists of GnRH receptors are available for clinical use.  Ganirelix, 
cetrorelix, and  degarelix inhibit the secretion of FSH and LH in 
a dose-dependent manner. Ganirelix and cetrorelix are approved 
for use in controlled ovarian hyperstimulation procedures, 
whereas degarelix is approved for men with advanced prostate 
cancer. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Ganirelix and cetrorelix are absorbed rapidly after subcutaneous 
injection. Administration of 0.25 mg daily maintains GnRH 
antagonism. Alternatively, a single 3.0-mg dose of cetrorelix sup-
presses LH secretion for 96 hours. Degarelix therapy is initiated 
with 240 mg administered as two subcutaneous injections. 
Maintenance dosing is with an 80-mg subcutaneous injection 
every 28 days. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 A. Suppression of Gonadotropin Production 
 GnRH antagonists are approved for preventing the LH surge dur-
ing controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. They offer several advan-
tages over continuous treatment with a GnRH agonist. Because 
GnRH antagonists produce an immediate antagonist effect, their 
use can be delayed until day 6–8 of the in vitro fertilization cycle 
( Figure 37–3 ), and thus the duration of administration is shorter. 
They also appear to have a less negative impact on the ovarian 
response to gonadotropin stimulation, which permits a decrease in 
the total duration and dose of gonadotropin. Finally, GnRH 
antagonists are associated with a lower risk of ovarian hyperstimu-
lation syndrome, which can lead to cycle cancellation. On the 
other hand, because their antagonist effects reverse more quickly 
after their discontinuation, adherence to the treatment regimen is 
critical. The antagonists produce a more complete suppression of 
gonadotropin secretion than agonists. There is concern that the 
suppression of LH may inhibit ovarian steroidogenesis to an extent 
that impairs follicular development when recombinant or the puri-
fied form of FSH is used during the follicular phase of an in vitro 
fertilization cycle. Clinical trials have shown a slightly lower rate of 
pregnancy in in vitro fertilization cycles that used GnRH antago-
nist treatment compared with cycles that used GnRH agonist 
treatment. 
 B. Advanced Prostate Cancer 
 Degarelix is approved for the treatment of symptomatic advanced 
prostate cancer. This GnRH antagonist reduces concentrations 
of gonadotropins and androgens more rapidly than GnRH ago-
nists and avoids the testosterone surge seen with GnRH agonist 
therapy. 
 Toxicity 
 When used for controlled ovarian hyperstimulation, ganirelix and 
cetrorelix are well tolerated. The most common adverse effects are 
672    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
nausea and headache. During the treatment of men with prostate 
cancer, degarelix caused injection-site reactions and increases in 
liver enzymes. Like continuous treatment with a GnRH agonist, 
degarelix leads to signs and symptoms of androgen deprivation, 
including hot flushes and weight gain. 
 PROLACTIN 
 Prolactin is a 198-amino-acid peptide hormone produced in the 
anterior pituitary. Its structure resembles that of GH. Prolactin is 
the principal hormone responsible for lactation. Milk production 
is stimulated by prolactin when appropriate circulating levels of 
estrogens, progestins, corticosteroids, and insulin are present. A 
deficiency of prolactin—which can occur in rare states of pituitary 
deficiency—is manifested by failure to lactate or by a luteal phase 
defect. In rare cases of hypothalamic destruction, prolactin levels 
may be elevated as a result of impaired transport of dopamine 
(prolactin-inhibiting hormone) to the pituitary. Much more com-
monly, however, prolactin is elevated as a result of prolactin-secret-
ing adenomas. Hyperprolactinemia produces a syndrome of 
amenorrhea and galactorrhea in women, and loss of libido and 
infertility in men. In the case of large tumors (macroadenomas), it 
can be associated with symptoms of a pituitary mass, including 
visual changes due to compression of the optic nerves. The hypo-
gonadism and infertility associated with hyperprolactinemia result 
from inhibition of GnRH release. 
 No preparation of prolactin is available for use in prolactin-
deficient patients. For patients with symptomatic hyperprolactine-
mia, inhibition of prolactin secretion can be achieved with 
dopamine agonists, which act in the pituitary to inhibit prolactin 
release. 
 DOPAMINE AGONISTS 
 Adenomas that secrete excess prolactin usually retain the sensitiv-
ity to inhibition by dopamine exhibited by the normal pituitary. 
 Bromocriptine and  cabergoline are ergot derivatives (see 
Chapters 16 and 28) with a high affinity for dopamine D 2 recep-
tors.  Quinagolide, a drug approved in Europe, is a nonergot 
agent with similarly high D 2 receptor affinity. The chemical 
structure and pharmacokinetic features of ergot alkaloids are 
presented in  Chapter 16 . 
 Dopamine agonists suppress prolactin release very effectively in 
patients with hyperprolactinemia. GH release is reduced in patients 
with acromegaly, although not as effectively. Bromocriptine has also 
been used in Parkinson’s disease to improve motor function and 
reduce levodopa requirements (see  Chapter 28 ). Newer, nonergot 
D 2 agonists used in Parkinson’s disease (pramipexole and ropinirole; 
see  Chapter 28 ) have been reported to interfere with lactation, but 
they are not approved for use in hyperprolactinemia. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 All available dopamine agonists are active as oral preparations, 
and all are eliminated by metabolism. They can also be absorbed 
systemically after vaginal insertion of tablets. Cabergoline, with a 
half-life of approximately 65 hours, has the longest duration of 
action. Quinagolide has a half-life of about 20 hours, whereas the 
half-life of bromocriptine is about 7 hours. After vaginal adminis-
tration, serum levels peak more slowly. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 A. Hyperprolactinemia 
 A dopamine agonist is the standard medical treatment for hyper-
prolactinemia. These drugs shrink pituitary prolactin-secreting 
tumors, lower circulating prolactin levels, and restore ovulation in 
approximately 70% of women with microadenomas and 30% of 
women with macroadenomas ( Figure 37–4 ). Cabergoline is initi-
ated at 0.25 mg twice weekly orally or vaginally. It can be increased 
gradually, according to serum prolactin determinations, up to a 
maximum of 1 mg twice weekly. Bromocriptine is generally taken 
daily after the evening meal at the initial dose of 1.25 mg; the dose 
B
A
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Serum prolactin (mcg/liter)
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
% of patients
Complete
success
Partial
success
Failure
2
4
6
8 10 12
Weeks of cabergoline therapy
14 16
20
24
22
18
 FIGURE 37–4  Results from a clinical trial of cabergoline in 
women with hyperprolactinemia and anovulation.  A: The dotted 
line indicates the upper limit of normal serum prolactin concentra-
tions.  B: Complete success was defined as pregnancy or at least two 
consecutive menses with evidence of ovulation at least once. Partial 
success was two menstrual cycles without evidence of ovulation or 
just one ovulatory cycle. The most common reasons for withdrawal 
from the trial were nausea, headache, dizziness, abdominal pain, 
and fatigue. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Webster J et al: A 
comparison of cabergoline and bromocriptine in the treatment of hyperpro-
lactinemic amenorrhea. N Engl J Med 1994;331:904.) 
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    673
is then increased as tolerated. Most patients require 2.5–7.5 mg 
daily. Long-acting oral bromocriptine formulations (Parlodel 
SRO) and intramuscular formulations (Parlodel L.A.R.) are 
available outside the United States. 
 B. Physiologic Lactation 
 Dopamine agonists were used in the past to prevent breast 
engorgement when breast-feeding was not desired. Their use for 
this purpose has been discouraged because of toxicity (see Toxicity 
& Contraindications). 
 C. Acromegaly 
 A dopamine agonist alone or in combination with pituitary sur-
gery, radiation therapy, or octreotide administration can be used 
to treat acromegaly. The doses required are higher than those used 
to treat hyperprolactinemia. For example, patients with acromeg-
aly require 20–30 mg/d of bromocriptine and seldom respond 
adequately to bromocriptine alone unless the pituitary tumor 
secretes prolactin as well as GH. 
 Toxicity & Contraindications 
 Dopamine agonists can cause nausea, headache, light-headedness, 
orthostatic hypotension, and fatigue. Psychiatric manifestations 
occasionally occur, even at lower doses, and may take months to 
resolve. Erythromelalgia occurs rarely. High dosages of ergot-
derived preparations can cause cold-induced peripheral digital 
vasospasm. Pulmonary infiltrates have occurred with chronic 
high-dosage therapy. Cabergoline appears to cause nausea less 
often than bromocriptine. Vaginal administration can reduce 
nausea, but may cause local irritation. 
 Dopamine agonist therapy during the early weeks of pregnancy 
has not been associated with an increased risk of spontaneous 
abortion or congenital malformations. Although there has been a 
longer experience with the safety of bromocriptine during early 
pregnancy, there is growing evidence that cabergoline is also safe 
in women with macroadenomas who must continue a dopamine 
agonist during pregnancy. In patients with small pituitary ade-
nomas, dopamine agonist therapy is discontinued upon concep-
tion because growth of microadenomas during pregnancy is rare. 
Patients with very large adenomas require vigilance for tumor 
progression and often require a dopamine agonist throughout 
pregnancy. There have been rare reports of stroke or coronary 
thrombosis in postpartum women taking bromocriptine to sup-
press postpartum lactation. 
 ■ POSTERIOR PITUITARY 
HORMONES 
 The two posterior pituitary hormones—vasopressin and 
oxytocin—are synthesized in neuronal cell bodies in the hypo-
thalamus and transported via their axons to the posterior pituitary, 
where they are stored and then released into the circulation. Each 
has limited but important clinical uses. 
 OXYTOCIN 
 Oxytocin is a peptide hormone secreted by the posterior pituitary 
that participates in labor and delivery and elicits milk ejection in 
lactating women. During the second half of pregnancy, uterine 
smooth muscle shows an increase in the expression of oxytocin 
receptors and becomes increasingly sensitive to the stimulant 
action of endogenous oxytocin. Pharmacologic concentrations of 
oxytocin powerfully stimulate uterine contraction. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Structure 
 Oxytocin is a 9-amino-acid peptide with an intrapeptide disulfide 
cross-link ( Figure 37–5 ). Its amino acid sequence differs from that 
of vasopressin at positions 3 and 8. 
 B. Absorption, Metabolism, and Excretion 
 Oxytocin is administered intravenously for initiation and aug-
mentation of labor. It also can be administered intramuscularly for 
control of postpartum bleeding. Oxytocin is not bound to plasma 
proteins and is eliminated by the kidneys and liver, with a circulat-
ing half-life of 5 minutes. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Oxytocin acts through G protein-coupled receptors and the 
phosphoinositide-calcium second-messenger system to contract 
uterine smooth muscle. Oxytocin also stimulates the release of 
prostaglandins and leukotrienes that augment uterine contraction. 
Oxytocin in small doses increases both the frequency and the force 
of uterine contractions. At higher doses, it produces sustained 
contraction. 
 Oxytocin also causes contraction of myoepithelial cells sur-
rounding mammary alveoli, which leads to milk ejection. Without 
Cys - Tyr - Phe - Gln - Asn - Cys - Pro - Arg - Gly - NH2
S
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Arginine vasopressin
CH2CH2C - Tyr - Phe - Gln - Asn - Cys - Pro - D-Arg - Gly - NH2
S
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Desmopressin
Cys - Tyr - IIe - Gln - Asn - Cys - Pro - Leu - Gly - NH2
S
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Oxytocin
O
 FIGURE 37–5  Posterior pituitary hormones and desmopressin. 
(Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Ganong WF:  Review of Medical 
Physiology, 21st ed. McGraw-Hill, 2003.) 
674    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
oxytocin-induced contraction, normal lactation cannot occur. At 
high concentrations, oxytocin has weak antidiuretic and pressor 
activity due to activation of vasopressin receptors. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 Oxytocin is used to induce labor for conditions requiring early 
vaginal delivery such as Rh problems, maternal diabetes, pre-
eclampsia, or ruptured membranes. It is also used to augment 
abnormal labor that is protracted or displays an arrest disorder. 
Oxytocin has several uses in the immediate postpartum period, 
including the control of uterine hemorrhage after vaginal or 
cesarean delivery. It is sometimes used during second-trimester 
abortions. 
 Before delivery, oxytocin is usually administered intrave-
nously via an infusion pump with appropriate fetal and maternal 
monitoring. For induction of labor, an initial infusion rate of 
0.5–2 mU/min is increased every 30–60 minutes until a physi-
ologic contraction pattern is established. The maximum infusion 
rate is 20 mU/min. For postpartum uterine bleeding, 10–40 units 
are added to 1 L of 5% dextrose, and the infusion rate is titrated 
to control uterine atony. Alternatively, 10 units of oxytocin can 
be administered by intramuscular injection after delivery of the 
placenta. 
 During the antepartum period, oxytocin induces uterine con-
tractions that transiently reduce placental blood flow to the fetus. 
The oxytocin challenge test measures the fetal heart rate response 
to a standardized oxytocin infusion and provides information 
about placental circulatory reserve. An abnormal response, seen as 
late decelerations in the fetal heart rate, indicates fetal hypoxia and 
may warrant immediate cesarean delivery. 
 Toxicity & Contraindications 
 When oxytocin is used judiciously, serious toxicity is rare. The 
toxicity that does occur is due either to excessive stimulation of 
uterine contractions or to inadvertent activation of vasopressin 
receptors. Excessive stimulation of uterine contractions before 
delivery can cause fetal distress, placental abruption, or uterine 
rupture. These complications can be detected early by means of 
standard fetal monitoring equipment. High concentrations 
of oxytocin with activation of vasopressin receptors can cause 
excessive fluid retention, or water intoxication, leading to 
hyponatremia, heart failure, seizures, and death. Bolus injections 
of oxytocin can cause hypotension. To avoid hypotension, oxy-
tocin is administered intravenously as dilute solutions at a con-
trolled rate. 
 Contraindications to oxytocin include fetal distress, prematu-
rity, abnormal fetal presentation, cephalopelvic disproportion, and 
other predispositions for uterine rupture. 
 OXYTOCIN ANTAGONIST 
 Atosiban is an antagonist of the oxytocin receptor that has been 
approved outside the United States as a treatment for preterm 
labor (tocolysis). Atosiban is a modified form of oxytocin that is 
administered by IV infusion for 2–48 hours. In a small number 
of published clinical trials, atosiban appears to be as effective as 
β-adrenoceptor-agonist tocolytics and to produce fewer adverse 
effects. In 1998, however, the FDA decided not to approve ato-
siban based on concerns about efficacy and safety. 
 VASOPRESSIN (ANTIDIURETIC 
HORMONE, ADH) 
 Vasopressin is a peptide hormone released by the posterior pituitary in 
response to rising plasma tonicity or falling blood pressure. Vasopressin 
possesses antidiuretic and vasopressor properties. A deficiency of this 
hormone results in diabetes insipidus (see Chapters 15 and 17). 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Structure 
 Vasopressin is a nonapeptide with a 6-amino-acid ring and a 
3-amino-acid side chain. The residue at position 8 is arginine in 
humans and in most other mammals except pigs and related spe-
cies, whose vasopressin contains lysine at position 8 ( Figure 37–5 ). 
Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP, 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vaso-
pressin) is a long-acting synthetic analog of vasopressin with mini-
mal pressor activity and an antidiuretic-to-pressor ratio 4000 times 
that of vasopressin.  Desmopressin is modified at position 1 and 
contains a D-amino acid at position 8. Like vasopressin and oxytocin, 
desmopressin has a disulfide linkage between positions 1 and 6. 
 B. Absorption, Metabolism, and Excretion 
 Vasopressin is administered by intravenous or intramuscular 
injection. The half-life of circulating vasopressin is approximately 
15 minutes, with renal and hepatic metabolism via reduction of 
the disulfide bond and peptide cleavage. 
 Desmopressin can be administered intravenously, subcutane-
ously, intranasally, or orally. The half-life of circulating desmopres-
sin is 1.5–2.5 hours. Nasal desmopressin is available as a unit dose 
spray that delivers 0.1 mL per spray; it is also available with a 
calibrated nasal tube that can be used to deliver a more precise 
dose. Nasal bioavailability of desmopressin is 3–4%, whereas oral 
bioavailability is less than 1%. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Vasopressin activates two subtypes of G protein-coupled receptors 
(see  Chapter 17 ). V 1 receptors are found on vascular smooth 
muscle cells and mediate vasoconstriction via the coupling protein 
G q . V 2 receptors are found on renal tubule cells and reduce diure-
sis through increased water permeability and water resorption in 
the collecting tubules via G s . Extrarenal V 2 -like receptors regulate 
the release of coagulation factor VIII and von Willebrand factor. 
 Clinical Pharmacology 
 Vasopressin and desmopressin are treatments of choice for pitu-
itary diabetes insipidus. The dosage of desmopressin is 10–40 mcg 
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    675
(0.1–0.4 mL) in two to three divided doses as a nasal spray or, as 
an oral tablet, 0.1–0.2 mg two to three times daily. The dosage by 
injection is 1–4 mcg (0.25–1 mL) every 12–24 hours as needed 
for polyuria, polydipsia, or hypernatremia. Bedtime desmopressin 
therapy, by intranasal or oral administration, ameliorates noctur-
nal enuresis by decreasing nocturnal urine production. Vasopressin 
infusion is effective in some cases of esophageal variceal bleeding 
and colonic diverticular bleeding. 
 Desmopressin is also used for the treatment of coagulopathy in 
hemophilia A and von Willebrand’s disease (see  Chapter 34 ). 
 Toxicity & Contraindications 
 Headache, nausea, abdominal cramps, agitation, and allergic reactions 
occur rarely. Overdosage can result in hyponatremia and seizures. 
 Vasopressin (but not desmopressin) can cause vasoconstriction 
and should be used cautiously in patients with coronary artery 
disease. Nasal insufflation of desmopressin may be less effective 
when nasal congestion is present. 
 VASOPRESSIN ANTAGONISTS 
 A group of nonpeptide antagonists of vasopressin receptors is 
being investigated for use in patients with hyponatremia or acute 
heart failure, which is often associated with elevated concentra-
tions of vasopressin.  Conivaptan has high affinity for both V 1a 
and V 2 receptors.  Tolvaptan has a 30-fold higher affinity for V 2 
than for V 1 receptors. In several clinical trials, both agents relieved 
symptoms and reduced objective signs of hyponatremia and heart 
failure. Conivaptan and tolvaptan are approved by the FDA for 
intravenous administration in hyponatremia. Several other nonse-
lective nonpeptide vasopressin receptor antagonists are being 
investigated for these conditions (see  Chapter 15 ). 
SUMMARY Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones1
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
GROWTH HORMONE (GH)
 • Somatropin
Recombinant form of 
human GH • acts 
through GH receptors 
to increase production 
of IGF-I
Restores normal growth 
and metabolic GH 
effects in GH-deficient 
individuals • increases 
final adult height in 
some children with short 
stature not due to GH 
deficiency
Replacement in GH deficiency 
• increased final adult height in 
children with certain condi-
tions associated with short 
stature (see Table 37–4) • wast-
ing in HIV infection • short 
bowel syndrome
SC injection • Toxicity: Pseudotumor cerebri, 
slipped capital femoral epiphysis, edema, hyper-
glycemia, progression of scoliosis, risk of 
asphyxia in severely obese patients with Prader-
Willi syndrome and upper airway obstruction or 
sleep apnea
IGF-I AGONIST
 • Mecasermin
Recombinant form of 
IGF-I that stimulates 
IGF-I receptors
Improves growth and 
metabolic IGF-I effects in 
individuals with IGF-I 
deficiency due to severe 
GH resistance
Replacement in IGF-I 
deficiency that is not respon-
sive to exogenous GH
SC injection • Toxicity: Hypoglycemia, intracra-
nial hypertension, increased liver enzymes
SOMATOSTATIN ANALOGS
 • Octreotide
Agonist at somatostatin 
receptors
Inhibits production of 
GH and, to a lesser 
extent, of TSH, glucagon, 
insulin, and gastrin
Acromegaly and several other 
hormone-secreting tumors • 
acute control of bleeding from 
esophageal varices
SC or IV injection • long-acting formulation 
injected IM monthly • Toxicity: Gastrointestinal 
disturbances, gallstones, bradycardia, cardiac 
conduction problems
 • Lanreotide: Similar to octreotide; available as a long-acting formulation for acromegaly
GH RECEPTOR ANTAGONIST
 • Pegvisomant
Blocks GH receptors
Ameliorates effects of 
excess GH production
Acromegaly
SC injection • Toxicity: Increased liver enzymes
(continued)
676    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
GONADOTROPINS: FOLLICLE-STIMULATING HORMONE (FSH) ANALOGS
 • Follitropin alfa
Activates FSH receptors
Mimics effects of endog-
enous FSH
Controlled ovulation hyper-
stimulation in women • infertil-
ity due to hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism in men
SC injection • Toxicity: Ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome and multiple pregnancies in women • 
gynecomastia in men • headache, depression, 
edema in both sexes
 • Follitropin beta: A recombinant product with the same peptide sequence as follitropin alfa but differs in its carbohydrate side chains
 • Urofollitropin: Human FSH purified from the urine of postmenopausal women
 • Menotropins (hMG): Extract of the urine of postmenopausal women; contains both FSH and LH activity
GONADOTROPINS: LUTEINIZING HORMONE (LH) ANALOGS
 •  Human 
chorionic gonad-
otropin (hCG)
Agonist at LH receptors
Mimics effects of endog-
enous LH
Initiation of ovulation during 
controlled ovulation hyper-
stimulation • ovarian follicle 
development in women with 
hypogonadotropic hypogo-
nadism • male hypogonado-
tropic hypogonadism
IM injection • Toxicity: Ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome and multiple pregnancies in women • 
gynecomastia in men • headache, depression, 
edema in both sexes
 • Choriogonadotropin alfa: Recombinant form of hCG
 • Lutropin: Recombinant form of human LH
 • Menotropins (hMG): Extract of the urine of postmenopausal women that contains both FSH and LH activity
GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE (GNRH) ANALOGS
 • Leuprolide
Agonist of GnRH 
receptors
Increased LH and FSH 
secretion with intermit-
tent administration • 
reduced LH and FSH 
secretion with pro-
longed continuous 
administration
Ovarian suppression • con-
trolled ovarian hyperstimula-
tion • central precocious 
puberty • block of endogenous 
puberty in some transgender/
gender variant early pubertal 
adolescents • advanced pros-
tate cancer
Administered IV, SC, IM, or intranasally • depot 
formulations are available • Toxicity: Headache, 
light-headedness, nausea, injection site reac-
tions • symptoms of hypogonadism with contin-
uous treatment
 • Gonadorelin: Synthetic human GnRH
 • Other GnRH analogs: Goserelin, histrelin, nafarelin, and triptorelin
GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE (GNRH) RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
 • Ganirelix
Blocks GnRH receptors
Reduces endogenous 
production of LH and 
FSH
Prevention of premature LH 
surges during controlled ovu-
lation hyperstimulation
SC injection • Toxicity: Nausea, headache
 • Cetrorelix: Similar to ganirelix, approved for controlled ovarian hyperstimulation
 • Degarelix: Approved for advanced prostate cancer
DOPAMINE AGONISTS
 • Bromocriptine
Activates dopamine D2 
receptors
Suppresses pituitary 
secretion of prolactin 
and, less effectively, GH • 
dopaminergic effects on 
CNS motor control and 
behavior
Treatment of hyperprolactine-
mia • acromegaly • Parkinson’s 
disease (see Chapter 28)
Administered orally or, for hyperprolactinemia, 
vaginally • Toxicity: Gastrointestinal distur-
bances, orthostatic hypotension, headache, psy-
chiatric disturbances, vasospasm and 
pulmonary infiltrates in high doses
 • Cabergoline: Another ergot derivative with similar effects
OXYTOCIN
Activates oxytocin 
receptors
Increased uterine con-
tractions
Induction and augmentation 
of labor • control of uterine 
hemorrhage after delivery
IV infusion or IM injection • Toxicity: Fetal dis-
tress, placental abruption, uterine rupture, fluid 
retention, hypotension
OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR ANTAGONIST
 • Atosiban
Blocks oxytocin recep-
tors
Decreased uterine con-
tractions
Tocolysis for preterm labor
IV infusion • Toxicity: Concern about increased 
rates of infant death; not FDA approved
(continued)
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    677
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
VASOPRESSIN RECEPTOR AGONISTS
 • Desmopressin
Relatively selective 
vasopressin V2 receptor 
agonist
Acts in the kidney col-
lecting duct cells to 
decrease the excretion 
of water • acts on extra-
renal V2 receptors to 
increase factor VIII and 
von Willebrand factor
Pituitary diabetes insipidus • 
pediatric primary nocturnal 
enuresis • hemophilia A and 
von Willebrand disease
Oral, IV, SC, or intranasal • Toxicity: 
Gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, 
hyponatremia, allergic reactions
 • Vasopressin: Available for treatment of diabetes insipidus and sometimes used to control bleeding from esophageal varices
VASOPRESSIN RECEPTOR ANTAGONIST
 • Conivaptan
Antagonist of vasopres-
sin V1a and V2 receptors
Reduced renal excretion 
of water in conditions 
associated with 
increased vasopressin
Hyponatremia in hospitalized 
patients
IV infusion • Toxicity: Infusion site reactions
 • Tolvaptan: Similar but more selective for vasopressin V2 receptors; oral administration
1See Tables 37-2 and 37-3 for summaries of the clinical uses of the rarely used hypothalamic and pituitary hormones not described in this table.
GROWTH FACTOR AGONISTS & 
ANTAGONISTS
Lanreotide acetate (Somatuline Depot)
Parenteral: 60, 90, 120 mg in single-use prefilled syringe for SC 
injection
Mecasermin (Increlex)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL solution for SC injection
Octreotide acetate (generic, Sandostatin)
Parenteral: 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0 mg/mL solution for SC or IV 
injection
Parenteral depot injection (Sandostatin LAR Depot): 10, 20, 30 mg 
powder in single-use vials to reconstitute for IM injection
Pegvisomant (Somavert)
Parenteral: 10, 15, 20 mg powder in single-use vials to reconstitute 
for SC injection
Somatropin (various)
Parenteral: many dose strengths between 0.2 to 24 mg available to 
reconstitute for SC or IM injection
GONADOTROPIN AGONISTS
& ANTAGONISTS
Cetrorelix acetate (Cetrotide)
Parenteral: 0.25, 3.0 mg in single-use vials for SC injection
Choriogonadotropin alfa [rhCG] (Ovidrel)
Parenteral: 250 mcg in single-dose prefilled syringes for SC 
injection
Chorionic gonadotropin [hCG] (generic, Profasi, Pregnyl)
Parenteral: 10,000 unit powder to reconstitute for IM injection
Degarelix (Firmagon)
Parenteral: 80, 120 mg powder to reconstitute for SC injection
Follitropin alfa [rFSH] (Gonal-f)
Parenteral: 75, 450, 1050 unit powder in vials to reconstitute or 300, 
450, 900 units in prefilled pens with needles for SC injection
Follitropin beta [rFSH] (Follistim)
Parenteral: 37.5, 150 units/mL solution in single-use vials for 175, 
350, 650, 975 units in cartridges for SC injection
Ganirelix acetate (Antagon)
Parenteral: 500 mcg/mL solution in prefilled syringes for SC 
injection
Gonadorelin hydrochloride [GnRH] (Factrel)
Parenteral: 100, 500 mcg powder to reconstitute for SC or intrave-
nous injection
Goserelin acetate (Zoladex)
Parenteral: 3.6, 10.8 mg in prefilled syringes for SC implantation
Histrelin acetate (Supprelin LA, Vantas)
Parenteral: 50 mg SC implant
Leuprolide acetate (generic, Eligard, Lupron)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL solution in multiple-dose vials for SC injection
Parenteral depot polymeric delivery system: 7.5, 22.5, 30, 45 mg in 
a single-dose kit for SC injection
Parenteral depot microsphere suspension: 3.75, 7.5, 11.25, 15, 22.5, 
30 mg in a single-dose kit for IM injection
Lutropin alfa [rLH] (Luveris)
Parenteral: 75 unit powder to reconstitute for SC injection
Menotropins [hMG] (Menopur, Repronex)
Parenteral: 75 IU FSH and 75 IU LH powder to reconstitute for SC 
or IM injection
Nafarelin acetate (Synarel)
Nasal: 2 mg/mL solution
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
GROWTH FACTOR AGONISTS & 
ANTAGONISTS
Lanreotide acetate (Somatuline Depot)
Parenteral: 60, 90, 120 mg in single-use prefilled syringe for SC 
injection
Mecasermin (Increlex)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL solution for SC injection
Octreotide acetate (generic, Sandostatin)
Parenteral: 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0 mg/mL solution for SC or IV
injection
Parenteral depot injection (Sandostatin LAR Depot): 10, 20, 30 mg 
powder in single-use vials to reconstitute for IM injection
Pegvisomant (Somavert)
Parenteral: 10, 15, 20 mg powder in single-use vials to reconstitute 
for SC injection
Somatropin (various)
Parenteral: many dose strengths between 0.2 to 24 mg available to
reconstitute for SC or IM injection
GONADOTROPIN AGONISTS
& ANTAGONISTS
Cetrorelix acetate (Cetrotide)
Parenteral: 0.25, 3.0 mg in single-use vials for SC injection
Choriogonadotropin alfa [rhCG] (Ovidrel)
Parenteral: 250 mcg in single-dose prefilled syringes for SC 
injection
Chorionic gonadotropin [hCG] (generic, Profasi, Pregnyl)
Parenteral: 10,000 unit powder to reconstitute for IM injection
Degarelix (Firmagon)
Parenteral: 80, 120 mg powder to reconstitute for SC injection
Follitropin alfa [rFSH] (Gonal-f)
Parenteral: 75, 450, 1050 unit powder in vials to reconstitute or 300,
450, 900 units in prefilled pens with needles for SC injection
Follitropin beta [rFSH] (Follistim)
Parenteral: 37.5, 150 units/mL solution in single-use vials for 175,
350, 650, 975 units in cartridges for SC injection
Ganirelix acetate (Antagon)
Parenteral: 500 mcg/mL solution in prefilled syringes for SC
injection
Gonadorelin hydrochloride [GnRH] (Factrel)
Parenteral: 100, 500 mcg powder to reconstitute for SC or intrave-
nous injection
Goserelin acetate (Zoladex)
Parenteral: 3.6, 10.8 mg in prefilled syringes for SC implantation
Histrelin acetate (Supprelin LA, Vantas)
Parenteral: 50 mg SC implant
Leuprolide acetate (generic, Eligard, Lupron)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL solution in multiple-dose vials for SC injection
Parenteral depot polymeric delivery system: 7.5, 22.5, 30, 45 mg in
a single-dose kit for SC injection
Parenteral depot microsphere suspension: 3.75, 7.5, 11.25, 15, 22.5,
30 mg in a single-dose kit for IM injection
Lutropin alfa [rLH] (Luveris)
Parenteral: 75 unit powder to reconstitute for SC injection
Menotropins [hMG] (Menopur, Repronex)
Parenteral: 75 IU FSH and 75 IU LH powder to reconstitute for SC 
or IM injection
Nafarelin acetate (Synarel)
Nasal: 2 mg/mL solution
678    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 REFERENCES 
 Barlier A, Jaquet P: Quinagolide—a valuable treatment option for hyperprolac-
tinaemia. Eur J Endocrinol 2006;154:187. 
 Carel JC et al: Consensus statement on the use of gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone analogs in children. Pediatrics 2009;123:752. 
 Carter-Su C, Schwartz J, Smit LS: Molecular mechanism of growth hormone 
action. Annu Rev Physiol 1996;58:187. 
 Chandraharan E, Arulkumaran S: Acute tocolysis. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 
2005;17:151. 
 Colaro A: The prolactinoma. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2009;23:575. 
 Collett-Solberg PF et al: The role of recombinant human insulin-like growth 
factor-I in treating children with short stature. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2008;93(1):10. 
 de Heus R et al: Acute tocolysis for uterine activity reduction in term labor: a 
review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 2008;63(6):383. 
 Devroey P et al: Reproductive biology and IVF: Ovarian stimulation and endo-
metrial receptivity. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2004;15:84. 
 Dong Q, Rosenthal SM: Endocrine disorders of the hypothalamus and pituitary. 
In: Swaiman KF, Ashwal S, Ferriero DM (editors):  Pediatric Neurology, 5th 
ed. Mosby, Inc. (Elsevier, Inc.) 2011, in press. 
 Ebling FJ: The neuroendocrine timing of puberty. Neuroendocrine 
2005;129:675. 
 Gabe SG, Neibyl JR, Simpson JL:  Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies, 
5th ed. Churchill Livingstone, 2007. 
 Han TS, Bouloux PM: What is the optimal therapy for young males with 
hypogonadatropic hypogonadism? Clin Endocrinol 2010;72:731. 
 Hapgood JP et al: Regulation of expression of mammalian gonadotropin-releas-
ing hormone receptor genes. J Neuroendocrinol 2005;17:619. 
 Huirne JA, Homburg R, Lambalk CB: Are GnRH antagonists comparable to 
agonists for use in IVF? Hum Reprod 2007;22 (11):2805. 
 Larson PR et al:  Williams Textbook of Endocrinology , 11th ed. Saunders, 2007. 
 Macklon NS et al: The science behind 25 years of ovulation stimulation for in 
vitro fertilization. Endocr Rev 2006;27:170. 
 Mammen AA, Ferrer FA: Nocturnal enuresis: Medical management. Urol Clin 
North Am 2004;31:491. 
 Manjila S et al: Pharmacological management of acromegaly: A current perspec-
tive. Neurosurg Focus 2010;29:E14. 
 Maughan KL, Heim SW, Galazka SS: Preventing postpartum hemorrhage: 
Managing the third stage of labor. Am Fam Physician 2006;73:1025. 
 Papatsonis D et al: Oxytocin receptor antagonists for inhibiting pre-term labour. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;20:CD004452. 
 Richmond E, Rogol AD: Current indications for growth hormone therapy for 
children and adolescents. Endocr Dev 2010;18:92. 
 Ritzén EM: Undescended testes: A consensus on management. Eur J Endocrinol 
2008;159 (Suppl 1):S87. 
 Rosenfeld RG, Hwa V: The growth hormone cascade and its role in mammalian 
growth. Horm Res 2009;71(Suppl 2):36. 
 Speroff L, Fritz MA:  Clinical Gynecologic Endocrinology and Infertility, 7th ed. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005. 
 Steinberg M: Degarelix: A gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist for the 
management of prostate cancer. Clin Ther 2009;31(Pt 2):2312. 
 Takala J et al: Increased mortality associated with growth hormone treatment in 
critically ill adults. N Engl J Med 1999;341:785. 
 Wales PW et al: Human growth hormone and glutamine for patients with short 
bowel syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;16:CD006321. 
 Webster J et al: A comparison of cabergoline and bromocriptine in the treatment 
of hyperprolactinemic amenorrhea. N Engl J Med 1994;331:904. 
 Wit JM et al: Idiopathic short stature: Definition, epidemiology, and diagnostic 
evaluation. Growth Horm IGF Res 2008;18:89. 
 Obesity 
 Adan RAH et al: Anti-obesity drugs and neural circuits of feeding. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci 2008;29:208. 
 Bloom SR et al: The obesity epidemic: Pharmacological challenges. Molec 
Interventions 2008;8:82. 
 Hofbauer KG, Nicholson JR, Boss O: The obesity epidemic: current and future 
pharmacological treatments. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2007;47:565. 
Triptorelin pamoate (Trelstar)
Parenteral: 3.75, 11.25, 22.5 mg powder to reconstitute for IM 
injection
Urofollitropin (Bravelle)
Parenteral: 75 IU FSH powder to reconstitute for SC injection
PROLACTIN ANTAGONISTS (DOPAMINE 
AGONISTS)
Bromocriptine mesylate (generic, Parlodel)
Oral: 2.5 mg tablets, 5 mg capsules
Cabergoline (generic, Dostinex)
Oral: 0.5 mg tablets
OXYTOCIN
Oxytocin (generic, Pitocin)
Parenteral: 10 units/mL solution for intravenous or IM injection
VASOPRESSIN AGONISTS AND 
ANTAGONISTS
Conivaptan HCl (Vaprisol)
Parenteral: 0.2 mg/mL solution for IV injection
Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP, generic, Minirin, Stimate)
Nasal: 0.1, 1.5 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 4 mcg/mL solution for IV or SC injection
Oral: 0.1, 0.2 mg tablets
Tolvaptan (Samsca)
Oral: 15, 30 mg tablets
Vasopressin (generic, Pitressin)
Parenteral: 20 IU/mL solution for IM, SC or nasal administration
OTHER
Corticorelin ovine triflutate (Acthrel)
Parenteral: 100 mcg powder to reconstitute for IV injection
Corticotropin (H.P. Acthar Gel)
Parenteral: 80 units/mL gelatin for IM or SC administration
Cosyntropin (generic, Cortrosyn)
Parenteral: 0.25 mg powder to reconstitute or 0.25 mg/mL solution 
for IV or IM injection
Thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen)
Parenteral: 1.1 mg powder to reconstitute for IM injection
Triptorelin pamoate (Trelstar)
Parenteral: 3.75, 11.25, 22.5 mg powder to reconstitute for IM
injection
Urofollitropin (Bravelle)
Parenteral: 75 IU FSH powder to reconstitute for SC injection
PROLACTIN ANTAGONISTS (DOPAMINE
AGONISTS)
Bromocriptine mesylate (generic, Parlodel)
Oral: 2.5 mg tablets, 5 mg capsules
Cabergoline (generic, Dostinex)
Oral: 0.5 mg tablets
OXYTOCIN
Oxytocin (generic, Pitocin)
Parenteral: 10 units/mL solution for intravenous or IM injection
VASOPRESSIN AGONISTS AND
ANTAGONISTS
Conivaptan HCl (Vaprisol)
Parenteral: 0.2 mg/mL solution for IV injection
Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP, generic, Minirin, Stimate)
Nasal: 0.1, 1.5 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 4 mcg/mL solution for IV or SC injection
Oral: 0.1, 0.2 mg tablets
Tolvaptan (Samsca)
Oral: 15, 30 mg tablets
Vasopressin (generic, Pitressin)
Parenteral: 20 IU/mL solution for IM, SC or nasal administration
OTHER
Corticorelin ovine triflutate (Acthrel)
Parenteral: 100 mcg powder to reconstitute for IV injection
Corticotropin (H.P. Acthar Gel)
Parenteral: 80 units/mL gelatin for IM or SC administration
Cosyntropin (generic, Cortrosyn)
Parenteral: 0.25 mg powder to reconstitute or 0.25 mg/mL solution
for IV or IM injection
Thyrotropin alfa (Thyrogen)
Parenteral: 1.1 mg powder to reconstitute for IM injection
CHAPTER 37 Hypothalamic & Pituitary Hormones    679
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 While GH may have some direct growth-promoting effects, 
GH is thought to mediate skeletal growth principally through 
epiphyseal production of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), 
which acts principally in an autocrine/paracrine manner. 
IGF-I may also promote statural growth through endocrine 
mechanisms. The findings of small testes and a microphallus 
in this patient suggest a diagnosis of hypogonadism, likely as 
a consequence of gonadotropin deficiency. This patient is at 
risk for multiple hypothalamic/pituitary deficiencies. This 
patient may already have or may subsequently develop ACTH/
cortisol and TSH/thyroid hormone deficiencies and thus may 
require supplementation with hydrocortisone and levo-
thyroxine, in addition to supplementation with GH and testo-
sterone. The patient should also be evaluated for the presence 
of central diabetes insipidus and, if present, treated with 
desmopressin, a V 2 vasopressin receptor-selective analog. 
This page intentionally left blank 
681
 A 33-year-old woman presents with complaints of fatigue, 
sluggishness, weight gain, cold intolerance, dry skin, and 
muscle weakness for the last 2 months. She is so tired that she 
has to take several naps during the day to complete her tasks. 
These complaints are new for her since she used to feel warm 
all the time, had boundless energy causing her some insom-
nia, and states she felt like her heart was going to jump out of 
her chest. She also states that she would like to become preg-
nant in the near future. Her past medical history is signifi-
cant for radioactive iodine therapy (RAI) about 1 year ago 
after a short trial of methimazole and propranolol therapy. 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
She underwent RAI due to her poor medication adherence 
and did not attend routine scheduled appointments after-
ward. On physical examination, her blood pressure is 
130/89 mm Hg with a pulse of 50 bpm. Her weight is 136 lb 
(61.8 kg), an increase of 10 lb (4.5 kg) in the last year. Her 
thyroid gland is not palpable and her reflexes are delayed. 
Laboratory findings include a thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH) level of 24.9 μIU/mL and a free thyroxine level of 
8 pmol/L. Evaluate the management of her past history of 
hyperthyroidism. Identify the available treatment options for 
control of her current thyroid status. 
38
 Thyroid & 
Antithyroid Drugs 
 Betty J. Dong, PharmD, FASHP, FCCP, & 
 Francis S. Greenspan, MD, FACP 
 THYROID PHYSIOLOGY 
 The normal thyroid gland secretes sufficient amounts of the thyroid 
hormones— triiodothyronine (T 3 ) and  tetraiodothyronine 
(T 4 , thyroxine) —to normalize growth and development, body 
temperature, and energy levels. These hormones contain 59% and 
65% (respectively) of iodine as an essential part of the molecule. 
Calcitonin, the second type of thyroid hormone, is important in the 
regulation of calcium metabolism and is discussed in  Chapter 42 . 
 Iodide Metabolism 
 The recommended daily adult iodide (I – ) ∗ intake is 150 mcg 
(200 mcg during pregnancy). 
 Iodide, ingested from food, water, or medication, is rapidly 
absorbed and enters an extracellular fluid pool. The thyroid gland 
removes about 75 mcg a day from this pool for hormone synthesis, 
and the balance is excreted in the urine. If iodide intake is increased, 
the fractional iodine uptake by the thyroid is diminished. 
 Biosynthesis of Thyroid Hormones 
 Once taken up by the thyroid gland, iodide undergoes a series of 
enzymatic reactions that incorporate it into active thyroid hormone 
( Figure 38–1 ). The first step is the transport of iodide into the thy-
roid gland by an intrinsic follicle cell basement membrane protein 
called the sodium/iodide symporter (NIS). This can be inhibited by 
such anions as thiocyanate (SCN – ), pertechnetate (TcO 4 – ), and 
perchlorate (ClO 4 – ). At the apical cell membrane a second I – trans-
port enzyme called pendrin controls the flow of iodide across the 
membrane. Pendrin is also found in the cochlea of the inner ear. If 
pendrin is deficient or absent, a hereditary syndrome of goiter and 
 ∗ In this chapter, the term “iodine” denotes all forms of the element; the term 
“iodide” denotes only the ionic form, I – . 
682    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
deafness, called Pendred’s syndrome, ensues. At the apical cell mem-
brane, iodide is oxidized by thyroidal peroxidase to iodine, in which 
form it rapidly iodinates tyrosine residues within the thyroglobulin 
molecule to form  monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and  diiodotyrosine 
(DIT). This process is called  iodide organification. Thyroidal per-
oxidase is transiently blocked by high levels of intrathyroidal iodide 
and blocked more persistently by thioamide drugs. 
 Two molecules of DIT combine within the thyroglobulin mol-
ecule to form L-thyroxine (T 4 ). One molecule of MIT and one 
molecule of DIT combine to form T 3 . In addition to thyroglobulin, 
other proteins within the gland may be iodinated, but these iodo-
proteins do not have hormonal activity. Thyroxine, T 3 , MIT, and 
DIT are released from thyroglobulin by exocytosis and proteolysis 
of thyroglobulin at the apical colloid border. The MIT and DIT 
are then deiodinated within the gland, and the iodine is reutilized. 
This process of proteolysis is also blocked by high levels of 
intrathyroidal iodide. The ratio of T 4 to T 3 within thyroglobulin 
is approximately 5:1, so that most of the hormone released is thy-
roxine. Most of the T 3 circulating in the blood is derived from 
peripheral metabolism of thyroxine (see below,  Figure 38–2 ). 
–
–
–
–
I−
I−
I°
Transport
Peroxidase
MIT-DIT- T3-T4
Proteolysis
Thyroid gland
Thyroglobulin
Peripheral
tissues
T4, T3
T4, T3
 T3
Blood
Iodides
–
SCN–, ClO4
Iodides,
thioamides
Radiocontrast
  media,
β-blockers,
corticosteroids,
amiodarone
 FIGURE 38–1  Biosynthesis of thyroid hormones. The sites of action of various drugs that interfere with thyroid hormone biosynthesis are shown. 
I
O
HO
I
I
CH2
I
CH
NH2
COOH
INACTIVATION
Deamination
Decarboxylation
Conjugation
   (glucuronide or
   sulfate)
Thyroxine
Deiodination
O
HO
I
I
CH2
I
CH
NH2
COOH
O
HO
I
I
CH2
I
CH
NH2
COOH
Inactivation
3,3′,5′-Triiodothyronine
(reverse T3)
Activation
3,5,3′-Triiodothyronine
(T3)
 FIGURE 38–2  Peripheral metabolism of thyroxine. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Gardner DG, Shoback D [editors]:  Greenspan’s Basic & 
Clinical Endocrinology, 8th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2007.) 
CHAPTER 38 Thyroid & Antithyroid Drugs     683
 Peripheral Metabolism of Thyroid 
Hormones 
 The primary pathway for the peripheral metabolism of thyroxine 
is deiodination. Deiodination of T 4 may occur by monodeiodina-
tion of the outer ring, producing 3,5,3’-triiodothyronine (T 3 ), which 
is three to four times more potent than T 4 . Alternatively, deiodina-
tion may occur in the inner ring, producing 3,3’,5’-triiodothyronine 
(reverse T 3 , or rT 3 ), which is metabolically inactive ( Figure 38–2 ). 
Drugs such as amiodarone, iodinated contrast media, β blockers, 
and corticosteroids, and severe illness or starvation inhibit the 
5’-deiodinase necessary for the conversion of T 4 to T 3 , resulting in 
low T 3 and high rT 3 levels in the serum. The pharmacokinetics of 
thyroid hormones are listed in  Table 38–1 . The low serum levels 
of T 3 and rT 3 in normal individuals are due to the high metabolic 
clearances of these two compounds. 
 Evaluation of Thyroid Function 
 The tests used to evaluate thyroid function are listed in   Table 38–2 . 
 A. Thyroid-Pituitary Relationships 
 Control of thyroid function via thyroid-pituitary feedback is also 
discussed in  Chapter 37 . Briefly, hypothalamic cells secrete 
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) ( Figure 38–3 ). TRH is 
secreted into capillaries of the pituitary portal venous system, and 
in the pituitary gland, TRH stimulates the synthesis and release of 
thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone, TSH). TSH in turn 
stimulates an adenylyl cyclase–mediated mechanism in the thyroid 
cell to increase the synthesis and release of T 4 and T 3 . These 
thyroid hormones act in a negative feedback fashion in the 
 Transport of Thyroid Hormones 
 T 4 and T 3 in plasma are reversibly bound to protein, primarily 
thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG). Only about 0.04% of total T 4 
and 0.4% of T 3 exist in the free form. Many physiologic and 
pathologic states and drugs affect T 4 , T 3 , and thyroid transport. 
However, the actual levels of free hormone generally remain nor-
mal, reflecting feedback control. 
TABLE 38–1 Summary of thyroid hormone kinetics.
Variable
T4
T3
Volume of distribution
10 L
40 L
Extrathyroidal pool
800 mcg
54 mcg
Daily production
75 mcg
25 mcg
Fractional turnover per day
10%
60%
Metabolic clearance per 
day
1.1 L
24 L
Half-life (biologic)
7 days
1 day
Serum levels
 Total
4.8–10.4 mcg/dL
60–181 ng/dL
(62–134 nmol/L)
(0.92–2.79 
nmol/L)
 Free
0.8–2.7 ng/dL
230–420 pg/dL
(10.3–34.7 
pmol/L)
(3.5–6.47 pmol/L)
Amount bound
99.96%
99.6%
Biologic potency
1
4
Oral absorption
80%
95%
TABLE 38–2  Typical values for thyroid function tests.
Name of Test
Normal Value1
Results in Hypothyroidism
Results in Hyperthyroidism
Total thyroxine (T4)
4.8–10.4 mcg/dL (62–134 nmol/L)
Low
High
Total triiodothyronine (T3)
60–181 ng/dL
(0.92–2.79 nmol/L)
Normal or low
High
Free T4 (FT4)
0.8–2.7 ng/dL (10.3–34.7 pmol/L)
Low
High
Free T3 (FT3)
230–420 pg/dL (3.5–6.47 pmol/L)
Low
High
Thyrotropic hormone (TSH)
0.4–4 μIU/mL
(0.4–4 mIU/L)
High2
Low
123I uptake at 24 hours
5–35%
Low
High
Thyroglobulin autoantibodies (Tg-ab)
< 20 IU/mL
Often present
Usually present
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPA)
< 0.8 IU/mL
Often present
Usually present
Isotope scan with 123I or 99mTcO4
Normal pattern
Test not indicated
Diffusely enlarged gland
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNA)
Normal pattern
Test not indicated
Test not indicated
Serum thyroglobulin
< 56 ng/mL
Test not indicated
Test not indicated
Serum calcitonin
Men: < 8 ng/L (< 2.3 pmol/L); 
women: < 4 ng/L (< 1.17 pmol/L)
Test not indicated
Test not indicated
TSH receptor-stimulating antibody or thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI)
< 125%
Test not indicated
Elevated in Graves’ disease
1Results may vary with different laboratories.
2Exception is central hypothyroidism.
684    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
pituitary to block the action of TRH and in the hypothalamus to 
inhibit the synthesis and secretion of TRH. Other hormones or 
drugs may also affect the release of TRH or TSH. 
 B. Autoregulation of the Thyroid Gland 
 The thyroid gland also regulates its uptake of iodide and thyroid 
hormone synthesis by intrathyroidal mechanisms that are inde-
pendent of TSH. These mechanisms are primarily related to the 
level of iodine in the blood. Large doses of iodine inhibit iodide 
organification (Wolff-Chaikoff block, see  Figure 38–1 ). In certain 
disease states (eg, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis), this can inhibit thyroid 
hormone synthesis and result in hypothyroidism. Hyperthyroidism 
can result from the loss of the Wolff-Chaikoff block in susceptible 
individuals (eg, multinodular goiter). 
 C. Abnormal Thyroid Stimulators 
 In Graves’ disease (see below), lymphocytes secrete a TSH recep-
tor-stimulating antibody (TSH-R Ab [stim]), also known as 
H
Hypothalamus
TSH
–
Somato-
statin
–
–
+
TRH
Corticoids
or
dopamine
Cold
Circadian and
pulsatile rhythms
Severe
stress
Acute
psychosis
+
+
+
–
T4,T3
I–
+
–
Thyroid
AP
+
–
 FIGURE 38–3  The hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis. Acute 
psychosis or prolonged exposure to cold may activate the axis. 
Hypothalamic thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulates pituitary 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) release, while somatostatin and 
dopamine inhibit it. TSH stimulates T 4 and T 3 synthesis and release 
from the thyroid, and they in turn inhibit both TRH and TSH synthesis 
and release. Small amounts of iodide are necessary for hormone pro-
duction, but large amounts inhibit T 3 and T 4 production and release. 
Solid arrows, stimulatory influence; dashed arrows, inhibitory influ-
ence. H, hypothalamus; AP, anterior pituitary. 
thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI). This immunoglobulin 
binds to the TSH receptor and stimulates the gland in the same 
fashion as TSH itself. The duration of its effect, however, is much 
longer than that of TSH. TSH receptors are also found in orbital 
fibrocytes, which may be stimulated by high levels of TSH-R Ab 
[stim] and can cause ophthalmopathy. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THYROID & ANTITHYROID DRUGS 
 THYROID HORMONES 
 Chemistry 
 The structural formulas of thyroxine and triiodothyronine as well as 
reverse triiodothyronine (rT 3 ) are shown in  Figure 38–2 . All of these 
naturally occurring molecules are levo (L) isomers. The synthetic 
dextro (D) isomer of thyroxine, dextrothyroxine, has approximately 
4% of the biologic activity of the L-isomer as evidenced by its lesser 
ability to suppress TSH secretion and correct hypothyroidism. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Thyroxine is absorbed best in the duodenum and ileum; absorp-
tion is modified by intraluminal factors such as food, drugs, gas-
tric acidity, and intestinal flora. Oral bioavailability of current 
preparations of L-thyroxine averages 80% ( Table 38–1 ). In con-
trast, T 3 is almost completely absorbed (95%). T 4 and T 3 absorp-
tion appears not to be affected by mild hypothyroidism but may 
be impaired in severe myxedema with ileus. These factors are 
important in switching from oral to parenteral therapy. For paren-
teral use, the intravenous route is preferred for both hormones. 
 In patients with hyperthyroidism, the metabolic clearances of 
T 4 and T 3 are increased and the half-lives decreased; the opposite 
is true in patients with hypothyroidism. Drugs that induce hepatic 
microsomal enzymes (eg, rifampin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, 
phenytoin, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, HIV protease inhibitors) 
increase the metabolism of both T 4 and T 3 ( Table 38–3 ). Despite 
this change in clearance, the normal hormone concentration is 
maintained in the majority of euthyroid patients as a result of 
compensatory hyperfunction of the thyroid. However, patients 
dependent on T 4 replacement medication may require increased 
dosages to maintain clinical effectiveness. A similar compensation 
occurs if binding sites are altered. If TBG sites are increased by 
pregnancy, estrogens, or oral contraceptives, there is an initial shift 
of hormone from the free to the bound state and a decrease in its 
rate of elimination until the normal free hormone concentration 
is restored. Thus, the concentration of total and bound hormone 
will increase, but the concentration of free hormone and the 
steady-state elimination will remain normal. The reverse occurs 
when thyroid binding sites are decreased. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 A model of thyroid hormone action is depicted in  Figure 38–4 , 
which shows the free forms of thyroid hormones, T 4 and T 3 , 
CHAPTER 38 Thyroid & Antithyroid Drugs     685
dissociated from thyroid-binding proteins, entering the cell by active 
transport. Within the cell, T 4 is converted to T 3 by 5’-deiodinase, 
and the T 3 enters the nucleus, where T 3 binds to a specific T 3 
receptor protein, a member of the c- er b oncogene family. (This 
family also includes the steroid hormone receptors and receptors 
for vitamins A and D.) The T 3 receptor exists in two forms, α and β. 
Differing concentrations of receptor forms in different tissues may 
account for variations in T 3 effect on different tissues. 
 Most of the effects of thyroid on metabolic processes appear to 
be mediated by activation of nuclear receptors that lead to 
increased formation of RNA and subsequent protein synthesis, eg, 
increased formation of Na + /K + -ATPase. This is consistent with the 
observation that the action of thyroid is manifested in vivo with a 
time lag of hours or days after its administration. 
 Large numbers of thyroid hormone receptors are found in the 
most hormone-responsive tissues (pituitary, liver, kidney, heart, 
skeletal muscle, lung, and intestine), while few receptor sites occur 
in hormone-unresponsive tissues (spleen, testes). The brain, which 
lacks an anabolic response to T 3 , contains an intermediate number 
of receptors. In congruence with their biologic potencies, the 
affinity of the receptor site for T 4 is about ten times lower than 
that for T 3 . Under some conditions, the number of nuclear recep-
tors may be altered to preserve body homeostasis. For example, 
starvation lowers both circulating T 3 hormone and cellular 
T 3 receptors. 
 Effects of Thyroid Hormones 
 The thyroid hormones are responsible for optimal growth, devel-
opment, function, and maintenance of all body tissues. Excess or 
inadequate amounts result in the signs and symptoms of hyper-
thyroidism or hypothyroidism, respectively ( Table 38–4 ). Since 
T 3 and T 4 are qualitatively similar, they may be considered as one 
hormone in the discussion that follows. 
TABLE 38–3 Drug effects and thyroid function.
Drug Effect
Drugs
Change in thyroid hormone synthesis
Inhibition of TRH or TSH secretion without induction of hypothyroid-
ism or hyperthyroidism
Dopamine, bromocriptine, levodopa, corticosteroids, somatostatin, 
metformin
Inhibition of thyroid hormone synthesis or release with the induction 
of hypothyroidism (or occasionally hyperthyroidism)
Iodides (including amiodarone), lithium, aminoglutethimide, thioamides, 
ethionamide, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (eg, sunitinib, sorafenib, imatinib), 
HIV protease inhibitors
Alteration of thyroid hormone transport and serum total T3 and T4 levels, but usually no modification of FT4 or TSH
Increased TBG
Estrogens, tamoxifen, heroin, methadone, mitotane, fluorouracil
Decreased TBG
Androgens, glucocorticoids
Displacement of T3 and T4 from TBG with transient hyperthyroxinemia
Salicylates, fenclofenac, mefenamic acid, furosemide
Alteration of T4 and T3 metabolism with modified serum T3 and T4 levels but not TSH levels (unless receiving thyroxine replacement therapy)
Increased hepatic metabolism, enhanced degradation of thyroid 
hormone
Nicardipine, bexarotene, phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, rifampin, 
rifabutin, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (eg, sunitinib, sorafenib, imatinib)
Inhibition of 5'-deiodinase with decreased T3, increased rT3
Iopanoic acid, ipodate, amiodarone, β blockers, corticosteroids, propyl-
thiouracil, flavonoids
Other interactions
Interference with T4 absorption
Cholestyramine, chromium picolinate, colestipol, ciprofloxacin, proton 
pump inhibitors, sucralfate, sodium polystyrene sulfonate, raloxifene, 
sevelamer hydrochloride, aluminum hydroxide, ferrous sulfate, calcium 
carbonate, bran, soy, coffee
Induction of autoimmune thyroid disease with hypothyroidism or 
hyperthyroidism
Interferon-α, interleukin-2, interferon-β, lithium, amiodarone, tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (eg, sunitinib, sorafenib, imatinib)
Effect of thyroid function on drug effects
Anticoagulation
Lower doses of warfarin required in hyperthyroidism, higher doses in 
hypothyroidism
Glucose control
Increased hepatic glucose production and glucose intolerance in 
hyperthyroidism; impaired insulin action and glucose disposal in 
hypothyroidism
Cardiac drugs
Higher doses of digoxin required in hyperthyroidism; lower doses in 
hypothyroidism
Sedatives; analgesics
Increased sedative and respiratory depressant effects from sedatives and 
opioids in hypothyroidism; converse in hyperthyroidism
686    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 Thyroid hormone is critical for the development and function-
ing of nervous, skeletal, and reproductive tissues. Its effects depend 
on protein synthesis as well as potentiation of the secretion and 
action of growth hormone. Thyroid deprivation in early life results 
in irreversible mental retardation and dwarfism—typical of 
congenital cretinism. 
 Effects on growth and calorigenesis are accompanied by a per-
vasive influence on metabolism of drugs as well as carbohydrates, 
fats, proteins, and vitamins. Many of these changes are dependent 
upon or modified by activity of other hormones. Conversely, the 
secretion and degradation rates of virtually all other hormones, 
including catecholamines, cortisol, estrogens, testosterone, and 
insulin, are affected by thyroid status. 
 Many of the manifestations of thyroid hyperactivity resemble 
sympathetic nervous system overactivity (especially in the cardio-
vascular system), although catecholamine levels are not increased. 
Changes in catecholamine-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity as 
measured by cAMP are found with changes in thyroid activity. 
B
A
TR-LBD
Corepressor
Coactivator
TR-DBD
TR-LBD
TR-DBD
TRE
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
RXR LBD
Corepressor
RXR DBD
TR LBD
TR DBD
TR-LBD
TR DBD
TRE
Coactivator
Transcription
T3
TBPs
T4
T3
T3
T3
T4
T4
5'Dl
 FIGURE 38–4  Model of the interaction of T 3 with the T 3 receptor.  A:  Inactive phase —the unliganded T 3 receptor dimer bound to the thy-
roid hormone response element (TRE) along with corepressors acts as a suppressor of gene transcription.  B:  Active phase —T 3 and T 4 circulate 
bound to thyroid-binding proteins (TBPs). The free hormones are transported into the cell by a specific transport system. Within the cytoplasm, 
T 4 is converted to T 3 by 5’-deiodinase (5’DI); T 3 then moves into the nucleus. There it binds to the ligand-binding domain of the thyroid receptor 
(TR) monomer. This promotes disruption of the TR homodimer and heterodimerization with retinoid X receptor (RXR) on the TRE, displacement 
of corepressors, and binding of coactivators. The TR-coactivator complex activates gene transcription, which leads to alteration in protein synthe-
sis and cellular phenotype. TR-LBD, T 3 receptor ligand-binding domain; TR-DBD, T 3 receptor DNA-binding domain; RXR-LBD, retinoid X receptor 
ligand-binding domain; RXR-DBD, retinoid X receptor DNA-binding domain; T 3 , triiodothyronine; T 4 , tetraiodothyronine, L-thyroxine. (Modified and 
reproduced, with permission, from Gardner DG, Shoback D [editors]:  Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology, 8th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2007.) 
CHAPTER 38 Thyroid & Antithyroid Drugs     687
Possible explanations include increased numbers of β receptors or 
enhanced amplification of the β-receptor signal. Other clinical 
symptoms reminiscent of excessive epinephrine activity (and par-
tially alleviated by adrenoceptor antagonists) include lid lag and 
retraction, tremor, excessive sweating, anxiety, and nervousness. 
The opposite constellation of effects is seen in hypothyroidism 
( Table 38–4 ). 
 Thyroid Preparations 
 See the Preparations Available section at the end of this chapter for 
a list of available preparations. These preparations may be synthetic 
(levothyroxine, liothyronine, liotrix) or of animal origin (desiccated 
thyroid). 
 Thyroid hormones are not effective and can be detrimental in 
the management of obesity, abnormal vaginal bleeding, or depres-
sion if thyroid hormone levels are normal. Anecdotal reports of a 
beneficial effect of T 3 administered with antidepressants were not 
confirmed in a controlled study. 
 Synthetic levothyroxine is the preparation of choice for thyroid 
replacement and suppression therapy because of its stability, 
content uniformity, low cost, lack of allergenic foreign protein, 
easy laboratory measurement of serum levels, and long half-life 
(7 days), which permits once-daily administration. In addition, T 4 
is converted to T 3 intracellularly; thus, administration of T 4 pro-
duces both hormones. Generic levothyroxine preparations provide 
comparable efficacy and are more cost-effective than branded 
preparations. 
 Although liothyronine (T 3 ) is three to four times more potent 
than levothyroxine, it is not recommended for routine replace-
ment therapy because of its shorter half-life (24 hours), which 
requires multiple daily doses; its higher cost; and the greater dif-
ficulty of monitoring its adequacy of replacement by conventional 
laboratory tests. Furthermore, because of its greater hormone 
activity and consequent greater risk of cardiotoxicity, T 3 should be 
avoided in patients with cardiac disease. It is best used for short-
term suppression of TSH. Because oral administration of T 3 is 
unnecessary, use of the more expensive mixture of thyroxine and 
liothyronine (liotrix) instead of levothyroxine is never required. 
 The use of desiccated thyroid rather than synthetic prepara-
tions is never justified, since the disadvantages of protein antige-
nicity, product instability, variable hormone concentrations, and 
TABLE 38–4 Manifestations of thyrotoxicosis and hypothyroidism.
System
Thyrotoxicosis
Hypothyroidism
Skin and appendages
Warm, moist skin; sweating; heat intolerance; fine, thin hair; 
Plummer’s nails; pretibial dermopathy (Graves’ disease)
Pale, cool, puffy skin; dry and brittle hair; brittle nails
Eyes, face
Retraction of upper lid with wide stare; periorbital edema; 
exophthalmos; diplopia (Graves’ disease)
Drooping of eyelids; periorbital edema; loss of temporal 
aspects of eyebrows; puffy, nonpitting facies; large 
tongue
Cardiovascular system
Decreased peripheral vascular resistance; increased heart 
rate, stroke volume, cardiac output, pulse pressure; high-
output heart failure; increased inotropic and chronotropic 
effects; arrhythmias; angina
Increased peripheral vascular resistance; decreased heart 
rate, stroke volume, cardiac output, pulse pressure; low-
output heart failure; ECG: bradycardia, prolonged PR 
interval, flat T wave, low voltage; pericardial effusion
Respiratory system
Dyspnea; decreased vital capacity
Pleural effusions; hypoventilation and CO2 retention
Gastrointestinal system
Increased appetite; increased frequency of bowel 
movements; hypoproteinemia
Decreased appetite; decreased frequency of bowel 
movements; ascites
Central nervous system
Nervousness; hyperkinesia; emotional lability
Lethargy; general slowing of mental processes; 
neuropathies
Musculoskeletal system
Weakness and muscle fatigue; increased deep tendon 
reflexes; hypercalcemia; osteoporosis
Stiffness and muscle fatigue; decreased deep tendon 
reflexes; increased alkaline phosphatase, LDH, AST
Renal system
Mild polyuria; increased renal blood flow; increased glom-
erular filtration rate
Impaired water excretion; decreased renal blood flow; 
decreased glomerular filtration rate
Hematopoietic system
Increased erythropoiesis; anemia1
Decreased erythropoiesis; anemia1
Reproductive system
Menstrual irregularities; decreased fertility; increased 
gonadal steroid metabolism
Hypermenorrhea; infertility; decreased libido; impotence; 
oligospermia; decreased gonadal steroid metabolism
Metabolic system
Increased basal metabolic rate; negative nitrogen balance; 
hyperglycemia; increased free fatty acids; decreased cho-
lesterol and triglycerides; increased hormone degradation; 
increased requirements for fat- and water-soluble vita-
mins; increased drug metabolism; decreased warfarin 
requirement
Decreased basal metabolic rate; slight positive nitrogen 
balance; delayed degradation of insulin with increased 
sensitivity; increased cholesterol and triglycerides; 
decreased hormone degradation; decreased require-
ments for fat- and water-soluble vitamins; decreased drug 
metabolism; increased warfarin requirement
1The anemia of hyperthyroidism is usually normochromic and caused by increased red blood cell turnover. The anemia of hypothyroidism may be normochromic, hyperchromic, 
or hypochromic and may be due to decreased production rate, decreased iron absorption, decreased folic acid absorption, or to autoimmune pernicious anemia. LDH, lactic 
dehydrogenase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase.
688    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
difficulty in laboratory monitoring far outweigh the advantage 
of lower cost. Significant amounts of T 3 found in some thyroid 
extracts and liotrix may produce significant elevations in T 3 levels 
and toxicity. Equi-effective doses are 100 mg of desiccated thyroid, 
100 mcg of levothyroxine, and 37.5 mcg of liothyronine. 
 The shelf life of synthetic hormone preparations is about 2 years, 
particularly if they are stored in dark bottles to minimize spontane-
ous deiodination. The shelf life of desiccated thyroid is not known 
with certainty, but its potency is better preserved if it is kept dry. 
 ANTITHYROID AGENTS 
 Reduction of thyroid activity and hormone effects can be accom-
plished by agents that interfere with the production of thyroid 
hormones, by agents that modify the tissue response to thyroid 
hormones, or by glandular destruction with radiation or surgery. 
Goitrogens are agents that suppress secretion of T 3 and T 4 to sub-
normal levels and thereby increase TSH, which in turn produces 
glandular enlargement (goiter). The antithyroid compounds used 
clinically include the thioamides, iodides, and radioactive iodine. 
 THIOAMIDES 
 The thioamides methimazole and propylthiouracil are major 
drugs for treatment of thyrotoxicosis. In the United Kingdom, 
carbimazole, which is converted to methimazole in vivo, is widely 
used. Methimazole is about ten times more potent than propylth-
iouracil and is the drug of choice in adults and children. Due to a 
black box warning about severe hepatitis, propylthiouracil should 
be reserved for use during the first trimester of pregnancy, in thy-
roid storm, and in those experiencing adverse reactions to methi-
mazole (other than agranulocytosis or hepatitis). The chemical 
structures of these compounds are shown in  Figure 38–5 . The 
thiocarbamide group is essential for antithyroid activity. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Methimazole is completely absorbed but at variable rates. It is 
readily accumulated by the thyroid gland and has a volume of 
distribution similar to that of propylthiouracil. Excretion is slower 
than with propylthiouracil; 65–70% of a dose is recovered in the 
urine in 48 hours. 
 In contrast, propylthiouracil is rapidly absorbed, reaching peak 
serum levels after 1 hour. The bioavailability of 50–80% may be 
due to incomplete absorption or a large first-pass effect in the 
liver. The volume of distribution approximates total body water 
with accumulation in the thyroid gland. Most of an ingested dose 
of propylthiouracil is excreted by the kidney as the inactive 
glucuronide within 24 hours. 
 The short plasma half-life of these agents (1.5 hours for propyl-
thiouracil and 6 hours for methimazole) has little influence on the 
duration of the antithyroid action or the dosing interval because 
both agents are accumulated by the thyroid gland. For propyl-
thiouracil, giving the drug every 6–8 hours is reasonable since a 
single 100 mg dose can inhibit iodine organification by 60% for 
7 hours. Since a single 30 mg dose of methimazole exerts an anti-
thyroid effect for longer than 24 hours, a single daily dose is effec-
tive in the management of mild to severe hyperthyroidism. 
 Both thioamides cross the placental barrier and are concen-
trated by the fetal thyroid, so that caution must be employed 
when using these drugs in pregnancy. Because of the risk of fetal 
hypothyroidism, both thioamides are classified as Food and Drug 
Administration pregnancy category D (evidence of human fetal 
risk based on adverse reaction data from investigational or market-
ing experience, see  Chapter 59 ). Of the two, propylthiouracil is 
preferable during the first trimester of pregnancy because it is 
more strongly protein-bound and, therefore, crosses the placenta 
less readily. In addition, methimazole has been, albeit rarely, 
associated with congenital malformations. Both thioamides are 
secreted in low concentrations in breast milk but are considered 
safe for the nursing infant. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The thioamides act by multiple mechanisms. The major action is 
to prevent hormone synthesis by inhibiting the thyroid peroxi-
dase-catalyzed reactions and blocking iodine organification. In 
addition, they block coupling of the iodotyrosines. They do not 
block uptake of iodide by the gland. Propylthiouracil and (to a 
much lesser extent) methimazole inhibit the peripheral deiodina-
tion of T 4 and T 3 ( Figure 38–1 ). Since the synthesis rather than 
the release of hormones is affected, the onset of these agents is 
slow, often requiring 3–4 weeks before stores of T 4 are depleted. 
 Toxicity 
 Adverse reactions to the thioamides occur in 3–12% of treated 
patients. Most reactions occur early, especially nausea and gastro-
intestinal distress. An altered sense of taste or smell may occur 
with methimazole. The most common adverse effect is a maculo-
papular pruritic rash (4–6%), at times accompanied by systemic 
signs such as fever. Rare adverse effects include an urticarial rash, 
Propylthiouracil
O
C3H7
H
N
N
H
S
Methimazole
H
N
N
CH3
S
Carbimazole
N
N
CH3
S
O
C
O
C2H5
 FIGURE 38–5  Structure of thioamides. The thiocarbamide 
moiety is shaded in color. 
CHAPTER 38 Thyroid & Antithyroid Drugs     689
vasculitis, a lupus-like reaction, lymphadenopathy, hypopro-
thrombinemia, exfoliative dermatitis, polyserositis, and acute 
arthralgia. An increased risk of severe hepatitis, sometimes result-
ing in death, has been reported with propylthiouracil (black box 
warning), so it should be avoided in children and adults unless no 
other options are available. Cholestatic jaundice is more common 
with methimazole than propylthiouracil. Asymptomatic eleva-
tions in transaminase levels can also occur. 
 The most dangerous complication is agranulocytosis (granulo-
cyte count < 500 cells/mm 3 ), an infrequent but potentially fatal 
adverse reaction. It occurs in 0.1–0.5% of patients taking thioam-
ides, but the risk may be increased in older patients and in those 
receiving more than 40 mg/d of methimazole. The reaction is usu-
ally rapidly reversible when the drug is discontinued, but broad-
spectrum antibiotic therapy may be necessary for complicating 
infections. Colony-stimulating factors (eg, G-CSF; see  Chapter 33 ) 
may hasten recovery of the granulocytes. The cross-sensitivity 
between propylthiouracil and methimazole is about 50%; there-
fore, switching drugs in patients with severe reactions is not 
recommended. 
 ANION INHIBITORS 
 Monovalent anions such as perchlorate (ClO 4 – ), pertechnetate 
(TcO 4 – ), and thiocyanate (SCN – ) can block uptake of iodide by 
the gland through competitive inhibition of the iodide transport 
mechanism. Since these effects can be overcome by large doses of 
iodides, their effectiveness is somewhat unpredictable. 
 The major clinical use for potassium perchlorate is to block 
thyroidal reuptake of I – in patients with iodide-induced hyperthy-
roidism (eg, amiodarone-induced hyperthyroidism). However, 
potassium perchlorate is rarely used clinically because it is associ-
ated with aplastic anemia. 
 IODIDES 
 Prior to the introduction of the thioamides in the 1940s, iodides 
were the major antithyroid agents; today they are rarely used as 
sole therapy. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Iodides have several actions on the thyroid. They inhibit organifi-
cation and hormone release and decrease the size and vascularity 
of the hyperplastic gland. In susceptible individuals, iodides can 
induce hyperthyroidism (Jod-Basedow phenomenon) or precipi-
tate hypothyroidism. 
 In pharmacologic doses (> 6 mg/d), the major action of iodides 
is to inhibit hormone release, possibly through inhibition of 
thyroglobulin proteolysis. Improvement in thyrotoxic symptoms 
occurs rapidly—within 2–7 days—hence the value of iodide 
therapy in thyroid storm. In addition, iodides decrease the vascu-
larity, size, and fragility of a hyperplastic gland, making the drugs 
valuable as preoperative preparation for surgery. 
 Clinical Use of Iodide 
 Disadvantages of iodide therapy include an increase in intraglan-
dular stores of iodine, which may delay onset of thioamide therapy 
or prevent use of radioactive iodine therapy for several weeks. 
Thus, iodides should be initiated after onset of thioamide therapy 
and avoided if treatment with radioactive iodine seems likely. 
Iodide should not be used alone, because the gland will escape 
from the iodide block in 2–8 weeks, and its withdrawal may pro-
duce severe exacerbation of thyrotoxicosis in an iodine-enriched 
gland. Chronic use of iodides in pregnancy should be avoided, 
since they cross the placenta and can cause fetal goiter. In radiation 
emergencies involving release of radioactive iodine isotopes, the 
thyroid-blocking effects of potassium iodide can protect the gland 
from subsequent damage if administered before radiation exposure. 
 Toxicity 
 Adverse reactions to iodine (iodism) are uncommon and in most 
cases reversible upon discontinuance. They include acneiform rash 
(similar to that of bromism), swollen salivary glands, mucous 
membrane ulcerations, conjunctivitis, rhinorrhea, drug fever, metal-
lic taste, bleeding disorders, and rarely, anaphylactoid reactions. 
 RADIOACTIVE IODINE 
 131 I is the only isotope used for treatment of thyrotoxicosis (others 
are used in diagnosis). Administered orally in solution as sodium 
 131 I, it is rapidly absorbed, concentrated by the thyroid, and incor-
porated into storage follicles. Its therapeutic effect depends on 
emission of β rays with an effective half-life of 5 days and a pen-
etration range of 400–2000 μm. Within a few weeks after admin-
istration, destruction of the thyroid parenchyma is evidenced by 
epithelial swelling and necrosis, follicular disruption, edema, and 
leukocyte infiltration. Advantages of radioiodine include easy 
administration, effectiveness, low expense, and absence of pain. 
Fears of radiation-induced genetic damage, leukemia, and neoplasia 
have not been realized after more than 50 years of clinical experi-
ence with radioiodine therapy for hyperthyroidism. Radioactive 
iodine should not be administered to pregnant women or nursing 
mothers, since it crosses the placenta to destroy the fetal thyroid 
gland and is excreted in breast milk. 
 ADRENOCEPTOR-BLOCKING AGENTS 
 Beta blockers without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (eg, 
metoprolol, propranolol, atenolol) are effective therapeutic 
adjuncts in the management of thyrotoxicosis since many of these 
symptoms mimic those associated with sympathetic stimulation. 
Propranolol has been the β blocker most widely studied and used 
in the therapy of thyrotoxicosis. Beta blockers cause clinical 
improvement of hyperthyroid symptoms but do not typically 
alter thyroid hormone levels. Propranolol at doses greater than 
160 mg/d may also reduce T 3 levels approximately 20% by 
inhibiting the peripheral conversion of T 4 to T 3 . 
690    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
TABLE 38–5 Etiology and pathogenesis of hypothyroidism.
Cause
Pathogenesis
Goiter
Degree of Hypothyroidism
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Autoimmune destruction of thyroid
Present early, absent later
Mild to severe
Drug-induced1
Blocked hormone formation2
Present
Mild to moderate
Dyshormonogenesis
Impaired synthesis of  T4 due to enzyme 
deficiency
Present
Mild to severe
Radiation, 131I, x-ray, thyroidectomy
Destruction or removal of gland
Absent
Severe
Congenital (cretinism)
Athyreosis or ectopic thyroid, iodine defi-
ciency; TSH receptor-blocking antibodies
Absent or present
Severe
Secondary (TSH deficit)
Pituitary or hypothalamic disease
Absent
Mild
1Iodides, lithium, fluoride, thioamides, aminosalicylic acid, phenylbutazone, amiodarone, perchlorate, ethionamide, thiocyanate, cytokines (interferons, interleukins), bexarotene, 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, etc. See Table 38–3.
2See Table 38–3 for specific pathogenesis.
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
THYROID & ANTITHYROID DRUGS 
 HYPOTHYROIDISM 
 Hypothyroidism is a syndrome resulting from deficiency of 
thyroid hormones and is manifested largely by a reversible slowing 
down of all body functions ( Table 38–4 ). In infants and children, 
there is striking retardation of growth and development that 
results in dwarfism and irreversible mental retardation. 
 The etiology and pathogenesis of hypothyroidism are outlined 
in  Table 38–5 . Hypothyroidism can occur with or without thyroid 
enlargement (goiter). The laboratory diagnosis of hypothyroidism 
in the adult is easily made by the combination of a low free 
thyroxine and elevated serum TSH ( Table 38–2 ). 
 The most common cause of hypothyroidism in the USA at this 
time is probably Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, an immunologic disorder 
in genetically predisposed individuals. In this condition, there is 
evidence of humoral immunity in the presence of antithyroid anti-
bodies and lymphocyte sensitization to thyroid antigens. Certain 
medications can also cause hypothyroidism ( Table 38–5 ). 
 MANAGEMENT OF HYPOTHYROIDISM 
 Except for hypothyroidism caused by drugs, which can be treated 
in some cases by simply removing the depressant agent, the gen-
eral strategy of replacement therapy is appropriate. The most sat-
isfactory preparation is levothyroxine, administered as either a 
branded or generic preparation. Treatment with combination 
levothyroxine plus liothyronine has not been found to be superior 
to levothyroxine alone. Infants and children require more T 4 per 
kilogram of body weight than adults. The average dosage for an 
infant 1–6 months of age is 10–15 mcg/kg/d, whereas the average 
dosage for an adult is about 1.7 mcg/kg/d. Older adults (> 65 years 
of age) may require less thyroxine for replacement. There is some 
variability in the absorption of thyroxine, so this dosage will vary 
from patient to patient. Since interactions with certain foods 
(eg, bran, soy, coffee) and drugs ( Table 38–3 ) can impair its 
absorption, thyroxine should be administered on an empty stom-
ach (eg, 30 minutes before meals or 1 hour after meals or at 
bedtime). Its long half-life of 7 days permits once-daily dosing. 
Children should be monitored for normal growth and develop-
ment. Serum TSH and free thyroxine should be measured at regu-
lar intervals and TSH maintained within an optimal range of 
0.5–2.5 mU/L. It takes 6–8 weeks after starting a given dose of 
thyroxine to reach steady-state levels in the bloodstream. Thus, 
dosage changes should be made slowly. 
 In long-standing hypothyroidism, in older patients, and in 
patients with underlying cardiac disease, it is imperative to start 
treatment with reduced dosages. In such adult patients, levothy-
roxine is given in a dosage of 12.5–25 mcg/d for 2 weeks, increas-
ing the daily dose by 12.5–25 mcg every 2 weeks until 
euthyroidism or drug toxicity is observed. In older patients, the 
heart is very sensitive to the level of circulating thyroxine, and if 
angina pectoris or cardiac arrhythmia develops, it is essential to 
stop or reduce the dose of thyroxine immediately. In younger 
patients or those with very mild disease, full replacement therapy 
may be started immediately. 
 The toxicity of thyroxine is directly related to the hormone level. 
In children, restlessness, insomnia, and accelerated bone maturation 
and growth may be signs of thyroxine toxicity. In adults, increased 
nervousness, heat intolerance, episodes of palpitation and tachycar-
dia, or unexplained weight loss may be the presenting symptoms. If 
these symptoms are present, it is important to monitor serum TSH 
( Table 38–2 ), which will determine whether the symptoms are due 
to excess thyroxine blood levels. Chronic overtreatment with T 4 , 
particularly in elderly patients, can increase the risk of atrial fibrilla-
tion and accelerated osteoporosis. 
 Special Problems in Management of 
Hypothyroidism 
 A. Myxedema and Coronary Artery Disease 
 Since myxedema frequently occurs in older persons, it is often asso-
ciated with underlying coronary artery disease. In this situation, the 
CHAPTER 38 Thyroid & Antithyroid Drugs     691
low levels of circulating thyroid hormone actually protect the 
heart against increasing demands that could result in angina pec-
toris or myocardial infarction. Correction of myxedema must be 
done cautiously to avoid provoking arrhythmia, angina, or acute 
myocardial infarction. If coronary artery surgery is indicated, it 
should be done first, prior to correction of the myxedema by 
thyroxine administration. 
 B. Myxedema Coma 
 Myxedema coma is an end state of untreated hypothyroidism. 
It is associated with progressive weakness, stupor, hypothermia, 
hypoventilation, hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, water intoxication, 
shock, and death. 
 Myxedema coma is a medical emergency. The patient should 
be treated in the intensive care unit, since tracheal intubation and 
mechanical ventilation may be required. Associated illnesses such 
as infection or heart failure must be treated by appropriate ther-
apy. It is important to give all preparations intravenously, because 
patients with myxedema coma absorb drugs poorly from other 
routes. Intravenous fluids should be administered with caution to 
avoid excessive water intake. These patients have large pools of 
empty T 3 and T 4 binding sites that must be filled before there is 
adequate free thyroxine to affect tissue metabolism. Accordingly, 
the treatment of choice in myxedema coma is to give a loading 
dose of levothyroxine intravenously—usually 300–400 mcg ini-
tially, followed by 50–100 mcg daily. Intravenous T 3 can also be 
used but may be more cardiotoxic and more difficult to monitor. 
Intravenous hydrocortisone is indicated if the patient has associ-
ated adrenal or pituitary insufficiency but is probably not neces-
sary in most patients with primary myxedema. Opioids and 
sedatives must be used with extreme caution. 
 C. Hypothyroidism and Pregnancy 
 Hypothyroid women frequently have anovulatory cycles and are 
therefore relatively infertile until restoration of the euthyroid state. 
This has led to the widespread use of thyroid hormone for infertil-
ity, although there is no evidence for its usefulness in infertile 
euthyroid patients. In a pregnant hypothyroid patient receiving 
thyroxine, it is extremely important that the daily dose of thyrox-
ine be adequate because early development of the fetal brain 
depends on maternal thyroxine. In many hypothyroid patients, an 
increase in the thyroxine dose (about 30–50%) is required to nor-
malize the serum TSH level during pregnancy. It is reasonable to 
counsel women to take an extra 25 mcg thyroxine tablet as soon 
as they are pregnant and to separate thyroxine from prenatal vita-
mins by at least 4 hours. Because of the elevated maternal TBG 
levels and, therefore, elevated total T 4 levels, adequate maternal 
thyroxine dosages warrant maintenance of TSH between 0.5 
and 3.0 mU/L and the total T 4 at or above the upper range of 
normal. 
 D. Subclinical Hypothyroidism 
 Subclinical hypothyroidism, defined as an elevated TSH level and 
normal thyroid hormone levels, is found in 4–10% of the general 
population but increases to 20% in women older than age 50. 
The consensus of expert thyroid organizations concluded that 
thyroid hormone therapy should be considered for patients with 
TSH levels greater than 10 mIU/L while close TSH monitoring is 
appropriate for those with lower TSH elevations. 
 E. Drug-Induced Hypothyroidism 
 Drug-induced hypothyroidism ( Table 38–3 ) can be satisfactorily 
managed with levothyroxine therapy if the offending agent cannot 
be stopped. In the case of amiodarone-induced hypothyroidism, 
levothyroxine therapy may be necessary even after discontinuance 
because of amiodarone’s very long half-life. 
 HYPERTHYROIDISM 
 Hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) is the clinical syndrome that 
results when tissues are exposed to high levels of thyroid hormone 
( Table 38–4 ). 
 GRAVES’ DISEASE 
 The most common form of hyperthyroidism is Graves’ disease, or 
diffuse toxic goiter. The presenting signs and symptoms of Graves’ 
disease are set forth in  Table 38–4 . 
 Pathophysiology 
 Graves’ disease is considered to be an autoimmune disorder in 
which helper T lymphocytes stimulate B lymphocytes to synthe-
size antibodies to thyroidal antigens. The antibody described pre-
viously (TSH-R Ab [stim]) is directed against the TSH receptor 
site in the thyroid cell membrane and has the capacity to stimulate 
growth and biosynthetic activity of the thyroid cell. Spontaneous 
remission occurs but some patients require years of antithyroid 
therapy. 
 Laboratory Diagnosis 
 In most patients with hyperthyroidism, T 3 , T 4 , FT 4 , and FT 3 are 
elevated and TSH is suppressed ( Table 38–2 ). Radioiodine uptake 
is usually markedly elevated as well. Antithyroglobulin, thyroid 
peroxidase, and TSH-R Ab [stim] antibodies are usually present. 
 Management of Graves’ Disease 
 The three primary methods for controlling hyperthyroidism are 
antithyroid drug therapy, surgical thyroidectomy, and destruction 
of the gland with radioactive iodine. 
 A. Antithyroid Drug Therapy 
 Drug therapy is most useful in young patients with small glands 
and mild disease. Methimazole or propylthiouracil is administered 
until the disease undergoes spontaneous remission. This is the 
only therapy that leaves an intact thyroid gland, but it does require 
a long period of treatment and observation (12–18 months), and 
there is a 50–70% incidence of relapse. 
692    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 Methimazole is preferable to propylthiouracil (except in preg-
nancy and thyroid storm) because it has a lower risk of serious 
liver injury and can be administered once daily, which may 
enhance adherence. Antithyroid drug therapy is usually begun 
with divided doses, shifting to maintenance therapy with single 
daily doses when the patient becomes clinically euthyroid. 
However, mild to moderately severe thyrotoxicosis can often be 
controlled with methimazole given in a single morning dose of 
20–40 mg initially for 4–8 weeks to normalize hormone levels. 
Maintenance therapy requires 5–15 mg once daily. Alternatively, 
therapy is started with propylthiouracil, 100–150 mg every 6 or 
8 hours until the patient is euthyroid, followed by gradual reduc-
tion of the dose to the maintenance level of 50–150 mg once daily. 
In addition to inhibiting iodine organification, propylthiouracil 
also inhibits the conversion of T 4 to T 3 , so it brings the level of 
activated thyroid hormone down more quickly than does methi-
mazole. The best clinical guide to remission is reduction in the size 
of the goiter. Laboratory tests most useful in monitoring the 
course of therapy are serum FT 3 , FT 4 , and TSH levels. 
 Reactions to antithyroid drugs have been described above. A 
minor rash can often be controlled by antihistamine therapy. 
Because the more severe reaction of agranulocytosis is often her-
alded by sore throat or high fever, patients receiving antithyroid 
drugs must be instructed to discontinue the drug and seek imme-
diate medical attention if these symptoms develop. White cell and 
differential counts and a throat culture are indicated in such cases, 
followed by appropriate antibiotic therapy. Treatment should also 
be stopped if significant elevations in transaminases occur. 
 B. Thyroidectomy 
 A near-total thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice for patients 
with very large glands or multinodular goiters. Patients are treated 
with antithyroid drugs until euthyroid (about 6 weeks). In 
addition, for 10–14 days prior to surgery, they receive saturated 
solution of potassium iodide, 5 drops twice daily, to diminish 
vascularity of the gland and simplify surgery. About 80–90% of 
patients will require thyroid supplementation following near-total 
thyroidectomy. 
 C. Radioactive Iodine 
 Radioiodine therapy utilizing  131 I is the preferred treatment for 
most patients over 21 years of age. In patients without heart dis-
ease, the therapeutic dose may be given immediately in a range of 
80–120 μCi/g of estimated thyroid weight corrected for uptake. 
In patients with underlying heart disease or severe thyrotoxicosis 
and in elderly patients, it is desirable to treat with antithyroid 
drugs (preferably methimazole) until the patient is euthyroid. The 
medication is then stopped for 5–7 days before the appropriate 
dose of  131 I is administered. Iodides should be avoided to ensure 
maximal  131 I uptake. Six to 12 weeks following the administration 
of radioiodine, the gland will shrink in size and the patient will 
usually become euthyroid or hypothyroid. A second dose may be 
required in some patients. Hypothyroidism occurs in about 80% 
of patients following radioiodine therapy. Serum FT 4 and TSH 
levels should be monitored regularly. When hypothyroidism 
develops, prompt replacement with oral levothyroxine, 50–150 mcg 
daily, should be instituted. 
 D. Adjuncts to Antithyroid Therapy 
 During the acute phase of thyrotoxicosis, β-adrenoceptor–blocking 
agents without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity are extremely 
helpful. Propranolol, 20–40 mg orally every 6 hours, or meto-
prolol, 25–50 mg orally every 6–8 hours, will control tachycardia, 
hypertension, and atrial fibrillation. Beta-adrenoceptor–blocking 
agents are gradually withdrawn as serum thyroxine levels return to 
normal. Diltiazem, 90–120 mg three or four times daily, can be 
used to control tachycardia in patients in whom β blockers are 
contraindicated, eg, those with asthma. Other calcium channel 
blockers may not be as effective as diltiazem. Adequate nutrition 
and vitamin supplements are essential. Barbiturates accelerate T 4 
breakdown (by hepatic enzyme induction) and may be helpful 
both as sedatives and to lower T 4 levels. Bile acid sequestrants (eg, 
cholestyramine) can also rapidly lower T 4 levels by increasing the 
fecal excretion of T 4 . 
 TOXIC UNINODULAR GOITER & TOXIC 
MULTINODULAR GOITER 
 These forms of hyperthyroidism occur often in older women with 
nodular goiters. FT 4 is moderately elevated or occasionally nor-
mal, but FT 3 or T 3 is strikingly elevated. Single toxic adenomas 
can be managed with either surgical excision of the adenoma or 
with radioiodine therapy. Toxic multinodular goiter is usually 
associated with a large goiter and is best treated by preparation 
with methimazole (preferable) or propylthiouracil followed by 
subtotal thyroidectomy. 
 SUBACUTE THYROIDITIS 
 During the acute phase of a viral infection of the thyroid gland, 
there is destruction of thyroid parenchyma with transient release 
of stored thyroid hormones. A similar state may occur in patients 
with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. These episodes of transient thyro-
toxicosis have been termed  spontaneously resolving hyperthyroidism . 
Supportive therapy is usually all that is necessary, such as 
β-adrenoceptor–blocking agents without intrinsic sympathomi-
metic activity (eg, propranolol) for tachycardia and aspirin or 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs to control local pain and 
fever. Corticosteroids may be necessary in severe cases to control 
the inflammation. 
 SPECIAL PROBLEMS 
 Thyroid Storm 
 Thyroid storm, or thyrotoxic crisis, is sudden acute exacerbation 
of all of the symptoms of thyrotoxicosis, presenting as a life-
threatening syndrome. Vigorous management is mandatory. 
Propranolol, 1–2 mg slowly intravenously or 40–80 mg orally 
CHAPTER 38 Thyroid & Antithyroid Drugs     693
every 6 hours, is helpful to control the severe cardiovascular 
manifestations. If propranolol is contraindicated by the presence 
of severe heart failure or asthma, hypertension and tachycardia 
may be controlled with diltiazem, 90–120 mg orally three or four 
times daily or 5–10 mg/h by intravenous infusion (asthmatic 
patients only). Release of thyroid hormones from the gland is 
retarded by the administration of saturated solution of potassium 
iodide, 10 drops orally daily. Hormone synthesis is blocked by the 
administration of propylthiouracil, 250 mg orally every 6 hours. 
If the patient is unable to take propylthiouracil by mouth, a rectal 
formulation ∗  can be prepared and administered in a dosage of 
400 mg every 6 hours as a retention enema. Methimazole may also 
be prepared for rectal administration in a dose of 60 mg daily. 
Hydrocortisone, 50 mg intravenously every 6 hours, will protect 
the patient against shock and will block the conversion of T 4 to 
T 3 , rapidly bringing down the level of thyroactive material in 
the blood. 
 Supportive therapy is essential to control fever, heart failure, 
and any underlying disease process that may have precipitated the 
acute storm. In rare situations, where the above methods are not 
adequate to control the problem, plasmapheresis or peritoneal 
dialysis has been used to lower the levels of circulating thyroxine. 
 Ophthalmopathy 
 Although severe ophthalmopathy is rare, it is difficult to treat. 
Management requires effective treatment of the thyroid disease, 
usually by total surgical excision or  131 I ablation of the gland plus 
oral prednisone therapy (see below). In addition, local therapy 
may be necessary, eg, elevation of the head to diminish periorbital 
edema and artificial tears to relieve corneal drying due to 
exophthalmos. Smoking cessation should be advised to prevent 
progression of the ophthalmopathy. For the severe, acute inflam-
matory reaction, a short course of prednisone, 60–100 mg orally 
daily for about a week and then 60–100 mg every other day, taper-
ing the dose over a period of 6–12 weeks, may be effective. If 
steroid therapy fails or is contraindicated, irradiation of the poste-
rior orbit, using well-collimated high-energy x-ray therapy, will 
frequently result in marked improvement of the acute process. 
Threatened loss of vision is an indication for surgical decompres-
sion of the orbit. Eyelid or eye muscle surgery may be necessary to 
correct residual problems after the acute process has subsided. 
 Dermopathy 
 Dermopathy or pretibial myxedema will often respond to topical 
corticosteroids applied to the involved area and covered with an 
occlusive dressing. 
 Thyrotoxicosis during Pregnancy 
 Ideally, women in the childbearing period with severe disease 
should have definitive therapy with 131 I or subtotal thyroidectomy 
 prior to pregnancy in order to avoid an acute exacerbation of the 
disease during pregnancy or following delivery. If thyrotoxicosis 
does develop during pregnancy, radioiodine is contraindicated 
because it crosses the placenta and may injure the fetal thyroid. 
Propylthiouracil (fewer teratogenic risks than methimazole) can be 
given in the first trimester, and then methimazole can be given for 
the remainder of the pregnancy in order to avoid potential liver 
damage. The dosage of propylthiouracil must be kept to the 
minimum necessary for control of the disease (ie, < 300 mg/d), 
because it may affect the function of the fetal thyroid gland. 
Alternatively, a subtotal thyroidectomy can be safely performed 
during the mid trimester. It is essential to give the patient a thy-
roid supplement during the balance of the pregnancy. 
 Neonatal Graves’ Disease 
 Graves’ disease may occur in the newborn infant, either due to 
passage of maternal TSH-R Ab [stim] through the placenta, 
stimulating the thyroid gland of the neonate, or to genetic trans-
mission of the trait to the fetus. Laboratory studies reveal an ele-
vated free T 4 , a markedly elevated T 3 , and a low TSH—in contrast 
to the normal infant, in whom TSH is elevated at birth. TSH-R 
Ab [stim] is usually found in the serum of both the child and the 
mother. 
 If caused by maternal TSH-R Ab [stim], the disease is usually 
self-limited and subsides over a period of 4–12 weeks, coinciding 
with the fall in the infant’s TSH-R Ab [stim] level. However, 
treatment is necessary because of the severe metabolic stress the 
infant experiences. Therapy includes propylthiouracil in a dose of 
5–10 mg/kg/d in divided doses at 8-hour intervals; Lugol’s solu-
tion (8 mg of iodide per drop), 1 drop every 8 hours; and propra-
nolol, 2 mg/kg/d in divided doses. Careful supportive therapy is 
essential. If the infant is very ill, oral prednisone, 2 mg/kg/d in 
divided doses, will help block conversion of T 4 to T 3 . These 
medications are gradually reduced as the clinical picture improves 
and can be discontinued by 6–12 weeks. 
 SUBCLINICAL HYPERTHYROIDISM 
 Subclinical hyperthyroidism is defined as a suppressed TSH level 
(below the normal range) in conjunction with normal thyroid 
hormone levels. Cardiac toxicity (eg, atrial fibrillation), espe-
cially in older persons, is of greatest concern. The consensus of 
thyroid experts concluded that hyperthyroidism treatment is 
appropriate in those with TSH less than 0.1 mIU/L, while close 
monitoring of the TSH level is appropriate for those with less 
TSH suppression. 
 Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis 
 In addition to those patients who develop hypothyroidism caused 
by amiodarone, approximately 3% of patients receiving this drug 
will develop hyperthyroidism instead. Two types of amiodarone-
induced thyrotoxicosis have been reported: iodine-induced 
(type I), which often occurs in persons with underlying thyroid 
disease (eg, multinodular goiter); and an inflammatory thyroiditis 
∗To prepare a water suspension propylthiouracil enema, grind eight 50 mg 
tablets and suspend the powder in 90 mL of sterile water.
694    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
(type II) that occurs in patients without thyroid disease due to leak-
age of thyroid hormone into the circulation. Treatment of type I 
requires therapy with thioamides, while type II responds best to 
glucocorticoids. Since it is not always possible to differentiate 
between the two types, thioamides and glucocorticoids are often 
administered together. If possible, amiodarone should be discontin-
ued; however, rapid improvement does not occur due to its long 
half-life. 
 NONTOXIC GOITER 
 Nontoxic goiter is a syndrome of thyroid enlargement without 
excessive thyroid hormone production. Enlargement of the 
thyroid gland is often due to TSH stimulation from inadequate 
thyroid hormone synthesis. The most common cause of nontoxic 
goiter worldwide is iodide deficiency, but in the USA, it is 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Other causes include germ-line or 
acquired mutations in genes involved in hormone synthesis, dietary 
goitrogens, and neoplasms (see below). 
 Goiter due to iodide deficiency is best managed by prophylactic 
administration of iodide. The optimal daily iodide intake is 
150–200 mcg. Iodized salt and iodate used as preservatives in flour 
and bread are excellent sources of iodine in the diet. In areas where 
it is difficult to introduce iodized salt or iodate preservatives, a solu-
tion of iodized poppy-seed oil has been administered intramuscu-
larly to provide a long-term source of inorganic iodine. 
 Goiter due to ingestion of goitrogens in the diet is managed 
by elimination of the goitrogen or by adding sufficient thyroxine 
to shut off TSH stimulation. Similarly, in Hashimoto’s thyroidi-
tis and dyshormonogenesis, adequate thyroxine therapy—
150–200 mcg/d orally—will suppress pituitary TSH and result 
in slow regression of the goiter as well as correction of hypothy-
roidism. 
 THYROID NEOPLASMS 
 Neoplasms of the thyroid gland may be benign (adenomas) or 
malignant. The primary diagnostic test is a fine needle aspiration 
biopsy and cytologic examination. Benign lesions may be moni-
tored for growth or symptoms of local obstruction, which would 
mandate surgical excision. Levothyroxine therapy is not recom-
mended for the suppression of benign nodules, especially in iodine 
sufficient areas. Management of thyroid carcinoma requires a total 
thyroidectomy, postoperative radioiodine therapy in selected 
instances, and lifetime replacement with levothyroxine. The evalu-
ation for recurrence of some thyroid malignancies often involves 
withdrawal of thyroxine replacement for 4–6 weeks—accompanied 
by the development of hypothyroidism. Tumor recurrence is likely 
if there is a rise in serum thyroglobulin (ie, a tumor marker) or a 
positive  131 I scan when TSH is elevated. Alternatively, administra-
tion of recombinant human TSH (Thyrogen) can produce com-
parable TSH elevations without discontinuing thyroxine and 
avoiding hypothyroidism. Recombinant human TSH is adminis-
tered intramuscularly once daily for 2 days. A rise in serum thyro-
globulin or a positive  131 I scan will indicate a recurrence of the 
thyroid cancer. 
CHAPTER 38 Thyroid & Antithyroid Drugs     695
SUMMARY Drugs Used in the Management of Thyroid Disease
Class
Mechanism of Action 
and Effects
Indications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
Thyroid Preparations
 • Levothyroxine (T4)
 • Liothyronine (T3)
Activation of nuclear recep-
tors results in gene expres-
sion with RNA formation and 
protein synthesis
Hypothyroidism
See Table 38–1• maximum effect 
seen after 6–8 weeks of therapy • 
Toxicity: See Table 38–4 for symp-
toms of thyroid excess
Antithyroid Agents
THIOAMIDES
 • Methimazole 
 • Propylthiouracil (PTU)
Inhibit thyroid peroxidase 
reactions • block iodine 
organification • inhibit 
peripheral deiodination of T4 
and T3 (primarily PTU)
Hyperthyroidism
Oral • duration of action: 24 h 
(methimazole), 6–8 h (PTU) 
• delayed onset of action • Toxicity: 
Nausea, gastrointestinal distress, 
rash, agranulocytosis, hepatitis 
(PTU black box), hypothyroidism
IODIDES
 • Lugol solution
 • Potassium iodide
Inhibit organification and 
hormone release • reduce 
the size and vascularity of 
the gland
Preparation for surgical 
thyroidectomy
Oral • acute onset within 2–7 days
• Toxicity: Rare (see text)
BETA BLOCKERS
 • Propranolol
Inhibition of β adrenorecep-
tors • inhibit T4 to T3 conver-
sion (only propranolol)
Hyperthyroidism, especially 
thyroid storm • adjunct to con-
trol tachycardia, hypertension, 
and atrial fibrillation
Onset within hours • duration of 
4–6 h (oral propranolol) • Toxicity: 
Asthma, AV blockade, hypotension, 
bradycardia
RADIOACTIVE IODINE 
131I (RAI)
Radiation destruction of 
thyroid parenchyma
Hyperthyroidism • patients 
should be euthyroid or on β 
blockers before RAI • avoid 
in pregnancy or in nursing 
mothers
Oral • half-life 5 days • onset of 
6–12 weeks • maximum effect in 
3–6 months • Toxicity: Sore 
throat, sialitis, hypothyroidism
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
 THYROID AGENTS
Levothyroxine [T4] (generic, Levoxyl, Levo-T, Levothroid, Levolet, 
Novothyrox, Synthroid, Tirosint, Unithroid)
Oral: 25, 50, 75, 88, 100, 112, 125, 137, 150, 175, 200, 300 mcg 
tablets; 13, 25, 50, 75, 88, 100, 112, 125, 137, 150 mcg capsules
Parenteral: 200, 500 mcg per vial (100 mcg/mL when reconstituted) 
for injection
Liothyronine [T3] (generic, Cytomel)
Oral: 5, 25, 50 mcg tablets
Parenteral: 10 mcg/mL
Liotrix [a 4:1 ratio of T4: T3] (Thyrolar)
Oral: tablets containing 12.5, 25, 30, 50, 100, 150 mcg T4 and one 
fourth as much T3
Thyroid desiccated [USP] (generic, Armour, Nature-Throid, 
Westhroid)
Oral: tablets containing 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, 300 mg; cap-
sules containing 120, 180, 300 mg
ANTITHYROID AGENTS
Radioactive iodine (131I) sodium (Iodotope, Sodium Iodide I 131 
Therapeutic)
Oral: available as capsules and solution
Methimazole (generic, Tapazole)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets
Potassium iodide
Oral solution (generic, SSKI): 1 g/mL; (Thyroshield) 65 mg/mL
Oral solution (Lugol’s solution): 100 mg/mL potassium iodide plus 
50 mg/mL iodine
Oral potassium iodide tablets (generic, IOSAT, Thyro-Block, 
Thyro-Safe): 65, 130 mg
Propylthiouracil [PTU] (generic)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Thyrotropin; recombinant human TSH (Thyrogen)
Parenteral: 1.1 mg per vial 
696    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 American Thyroid Association (http://www.thyroid.org). 
 Biondi B, Cooper DS: The clinical significance of subclinical thyroid dysfunc-
tion. Endocr Rev 2008;29:76. 
 Cooper DS et al: The thyroid gland. In: Gardner DG, Shoback D (editors): 
 Greenspan’s Basic & Clinical Endocrinology , 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 Fitzpatrick DL, Russell MA: Diagnosis and management of thyroid disease in 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin N Am 2010;37:173. 
 Galli E, Pingitore A, Iervasi G: The role of thyroid hormone in the 
pathophysiology of heart failure: clinical evidence. Heart Fail Rev 
2010;15:155. 
 Laurberg P et al: Iodine intake as a determinant of thyroid disorders in popula-
tions. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;24:13. 
 Oetting A, Yen PM: New insights into thyroid hormone action. Best Pract Res 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;21:193. 
 Williams GR: Neurodevelopment and neurophysiological actions of thyroid 
hormone. J Neuroendocrinol 2008;20:784. 
 Guidelines 
 Anonymous: The Hormone Foundation's patient guide to the management of 
maternal hypothyroidism before, during and after pregnancy. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2007;92(8)(Suppl):S1. 
 Cooper DS et al: Revised American Thyroid Association management guidelines 
for patients with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 
2009;19(11):1167. 
 Ladenson D et al: American Thyroid Association guidelines for the detection of 
thyroid dysfunction. Arch Intern Med 2000;160:1573. 
 US Department of Health and Human Services: Potassium iodide as a 
thyroid blocking agent in radiation emergencies. December 2001 
(http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/index.htm). 
 Hypothyroidism 
 Dong BJ et al: Bioequivalence of generic and brand-name levothyroxine 
products in the treatment of hypothyroidism. JAMA 1997;277:1205. 
 Joffe RT et al: Treatment of clinical hypothyroidism with thyroxine and 
triiodothyronine: A literature review and meta-analysis. Psychosomatics 
2007;48:379. 
 Jonklaas J et al: Triiodothyronine levels in athyreotic individuals during levothy-
roxine therapy. JAMA 2008;299:769. 
 Lania A et al: Central hypothyroidism. Pituitary 2008;11:181. 
 McDermott MT: In the clinic. Hypothyroidism. Ann Intern Med 2009;
151:ITC61. 
 Hyperthyroidism 
 Abraham P et al: Antithyroid drug regimen for treating Graves’ hyperthy-
roidism. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010 Jan 20;(1):CD003420. 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/o/cochrane/clsysrev/articles/CD003420/pdf_
fs.html. 
 Bahn RS: Graves’ ophthalmopathy. N Engl J Med 2010;362:726. 
 Brent GA: Graves’ disease. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2594. 
 Cooper DS, Rivkees SA: Putting propylthiouracil in perspective. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:1881. 
 Silva JE, Bianco SD: Thyroid-adrenergic interactions: Physiological and clinical 
implications. Thyroid 2008;18:157. 
 Nodules & Cancer (see Guidelines) 
 Miller MC: The patient with a thyroid nodule. Med Clin North Am 
2010;94:1003. 
 The Effects of Drugs on Thyroid Function 
 Barbesino G: Drugs affecting thyroid function. Thyroid 2010;20:763. 
 Burgi H: Iodine excess. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;24:107. 
 Eskes SA, Wiersinga WM: Amiodarone and the thyroid. Best Pract Res Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2009;23:735. 
 Haugen BR: Drugs that suppress TSH or cause central hypothyroidism. Best 
Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009;23:793. 
 Lazarus JH: Lithium and thyroid. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2009;23:723. 
 Sherman SI: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors and the thyroid. Best Pract Res Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2009;23:713. 
 Tomer Y, Menconi F: Interferon induced thyroiditis. Best Pract Res Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2009;23:703. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 This patient presents with the typical signs and symptoms of 
hypothyroidism following radioactive iodine therapy. 
Radioactive iodine therapy and thyroidectomy are reason-
able and effective strategies for definitive treatment of her 
hyperthyroidism, especially before becoming pregnant to 
avoid an acute exacerbation of the disease during pregnancy 
or following delivery. This patient’s hypothyroid symptoms 
are easily corrected by the daily administration of levothy-
roxine, taken orally on an empty stomach. Thyroid function 
tests should be checked after 6–8 weeks and the dosage 
adjusted to achieve a normal TSH and resolution of hypothy-
roid symptoms. 
 
697
 A 19-year-old man complains of anorexia, fatigue, dizziness, 
and weight loss of 8 months’ duration. The examining physi-
cian discovers postural hypotension and moderate vitiligo 
(depigmented areas of skin) and obtains routine blood tests. 
She finds hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and acidosis and 
suspects Addison’s disease. She performs a standard ACTH 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
1–24 stimulation test, which reveals an insufficient plasma 
cortisol response, compatible with primary adrenal insuffi-
ciency. The diagnosis of autoimmune Addison’s disease is 
made, and the patient must start replacement of the hor-
mones he cannot produce himself. How should this patient 
be treated? What precautions should he take? 
39
 Adrenocorticosteroids 
& Adrenocortical 
Antagonists 
 George P. Chrousos, MD 
 The natural adrenocortical hormones are steroid molecules pro-
duced and released by the adrenal cortex. Both natural and syn-
thetic corticosteroids are used for the diagnosis and treatment of 
disorders of adrenal function. They are also used—more often and 
in much larger doses—for treatment of a variety of inflammatory 
and immunologic disorders. 
 Secretion of adrenocortical steroids is controlled by the pitu-
itary release of corticotropin (ACTH). Secretion of the salt-
retaining hormone aldosterone is primarily under the influence 
of angiotensin. Corticotropin has some actions that do not 
depend on its effect on adrenocortical secretion. However, its 
pharmacologic value as an anti-inflammatory agent and its use 
in testing adrenal function depend on its secretory action. Its 
pharmacology is discussed in  Chapter 37 and is reviewed only 
briefly here. 
 Inhibitors of the synthesis or antagonists of the action of 
the adrenocortical steroids are important in the treatment of 
several conditions. These agents are described at the end of this 
chapter. 
 ■ ADRENOCORTICOSTEROIDS 
 The adrenal cortex releases a large number of steroids into the cir-
culation. Some have minimal biologic activity and function pri-
marily as precursors, and there are some for which no function has 
been established. The hormonal steroids may be classified as those 
having important effects on intermediary metabolism and immune 
function ( glucocorticoids ), those having principally salt-retaining 
activity ( mineralocorticoids ), and those having  androgenic or 
 estrogenic activity (see  Chapter 40 ). In humans, the major gluco-
corticoid is  cortisol and the most important mineralocorticoid 
is  aldosterone . Quantitatively, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) 
in its sulfated form (DHEAS) is the major adrenal androgen. 
However, DHEA and two other adrenal androgens, androstenediol 
and androstenedione, are weak androgens or (by conversion) estro-
gens. Adrenal androgens constitute the major endogenous precur-
sors of estrogen in women after menopause and in younger patients 
in whom ovarian function is deficient or absent. 
698    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 THE NATURALLY OCCURRING 
GLUCOCORTICOIDS; CORTISOL 
(HYDROCORTISONE) 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Cortisol (also called hydrocortisone, compound F) exerts a wide 
range of physiologic effects, including regulation of intermediary 
metabolism, cardiovascular function, growth, and immunity. Its 
synthesis and secretion are tightly regulated by the central nervous 
system, which is very sensitive to negative feedback by the circulat-
ing cortisol and exogenous (synthetic) glucocorticoids. Cortisol is 
synthesized from cholesterol (as shown in  Figure 39–1 ). The 
mechanisms controlling its secretion are discussed in  Chapter 37 . 
 In the normal adult, in the absence of stress, 10–20 mg of 
cortisol is secreted daily. The rate of secretion follows a circadian 
rhythm governed by pulses of ACTH that peak in the early morning 
hours and after meals, especially after lunch ( Figure 39–2 ). In 
plasma, cortisol is bound to circulating proteins. Corticosteroid-
binding globulin (CBG), an α 2 globulin synthesized by the liver, 
binds about 90% of the circulating hormone under normal cir-
cumstances. The remainder is free (about 5–10%) or loosely 
bound to albumin (about 5%) and is available to exert its effect on 
target cells. When plasma cortisol levels exceed 20–30 mcg/dL, 
CBG is saturated, and the concentration of free cortisol rises 
rapidly. CBG is increased in pregnancy and with estrogen admin-
istration and in hyperthyroidism. It is decreased by hypothyroid-
ism, genetic defects in synthesis, and protein deficiency states. 
Albumin has a large capacity but low affinity for cortisol, and for 
practical purposes albumin-bound cortisol should be considered 
free. Synthetic corticosteroids such as dexamethasone are largely 
bound to albumin rather than CBG. 
 The half-life of cortisol in the circulation is normally about 
60–90 minutes; it may be increased when hydrocortisone (the 
pharmaceutical preparation of cortisol) is administered in large 
11β-Hydroxylase
(P450c11)
HO
HO
C
O
CH3
Pregnenolone
O
C
O
CH3
Progesterone
(ACTH?)
NADPH
O2
Acetate
Cholesterol
O
C
O
CH2OH
11-Deoxy-
corticosterone
O
C
O
CH2OH
Corticosterone
O
C
O
CH2OH
CHO
Aldosterone
__________
HO
HO
HO
C
O
OH
CH3
17-Hydroxy-
pregnenolone
O
C
O
CH3
17-Hydroxy-
progesterone
HO
O
O
Dehydroepi-
androsterone
__________
___________
O
Δ4-Androstene-
3,17-dione
O
C
O
CH2OH
11β-Deoxycortisol
O
C
O
CH2OH
Cortisol
______
17α-Hydroxylase
(P450c17)
17, 20-Lyase
OH
OH
OH
3β-Dehydrogenase
Δ5, Δ4-Isomerase
NAD+
21β-Hydroxylase
(P450c21)
Testosterone
Estradiol
Mineralocorticoid
pathway
Glucocorticoid
pathway
Androgen and
estrogen pathway
 FIGURE 39–1  Outline of major pathways in adrenocortical hormone biosynthesis. The major secretory products are underlined. 
Pregnenolone is the major precursor of corticosterone and aldosterone, and 17-hydroxypregnenolone is the major precursor of cortisol. The 
enzymes and cofactors for the reactions progressing down each column are shown on the left and across columns at the top of the figure. When 
a particular enzyme is deficient, hormone production is blocked at the points indicated by the shaded bars. (Modified after Welikey et al; reproduced, 
with permission, from Ganong WF:  Review of Medical Physiology, 17th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright © 1995 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) 
CHAPTER 39 Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical Antagonists     699
absence of the hormonal ligand, glucocorticoid receptors are pri-
marily cytoplasmic, in oligomeric complexes with heat-shock 
proteins (hsp). The most important of these are two molecules 
of hsp90, although other proteins are certainly involved. Free 
hormone from the plasma and interstitial fluid enters the cell and 
binds to the receptor, inducing conformational changes that allow 
it to dissociate from the heat shock proteins. The ligand-bound 
receptor complex then is actively transported into the nucleus, 
where it interacts with DNA and nuclear proteins. As a homodi-
mer, it binds to  glucocorticoid receptor elements (GREs) in the 
promoters of responsive genes. The GRE is composed of two 
palindromic sequences that bind to the hormone receptor dimer. 
 In addition to binding to GREs, the ligand-bound receptor also 
forms complexes with and influences the function of other tran-
scription factors, such as AP1 and NF-κB, which act on non-GRE-
containing promoters, to contribute to the regulation of transcription 
of their responsive genes. These transcription factors have broad 
actions on the regulation of growth factors, proinflammatory cytok-
ines, etc, and to a great extent mediate the anti-growth, anti-
inflammatory, and immunosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids. 
 Two genes for the corticoid receptor have been identified: one 
encoding the classic glucocorticoid receptor  (GR) and the other 
encoding the mineralocorticoid receptor ( MR). Alternative splicing 
of human glucocorticoid receptor pre-mRNA generates two highly 
homologous isoforms, termed hGR alpha and hGR beta. Human 
GR alpha is the classic ligand-activated glucocorticoid receptor 
amounts or when stress, hypothyroidism, or liver disease is present. 
Only 1% of cortisol is excreted unchanged in the urine as free 
cortisol; about 20% of cortisol is converted to cortisone by 
11-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the kidney and other tissues 
with mineralocorticoid receptors (see below) before reaching the 
liver. Most cortisol is metabolized in the liver. About one third of 
the cortisol produced daily is excreted in the urine as dihydroxy 
ketone metabolites and is measured as 17-hydroxysteroids (see 
 Figure 39–3 for carbon numbering). Many cortisol metabolites are 
conjugated with glucuronic acid or sulfate at the C 3 and C 21 hydroxyls, 
respectively, in the liver; they are then excreted in the urine. 
 In some species (eg, the rat), corticosterone is the major gluco-
corticoid. It is less firmly bound to protein and therefore metabo-
lized more rapidly. The pathways of its degradation are similar to 
those of cortisol. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Most of the known effects of the glucocorticoids are mediated by 
widely distributed glucocorticoid receptors. These proteins are 
members of the superfamily of nuclear receptors, which includes 
steroid, sterol (vitamin D), thyroid, retinoic acid, and many other 
receptors with unknown or nonexistent ligands (orphan recep-
tors). All these receptors interact with the promoters of—and 
regulate the transcription of—target genes ( Figure 39–4 ). In the 
  Plasma 11-OHCS (mg/dL)
4 PM
8 PM
4 AM
8 AM
Noon
Noon
Midnight
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
25
20
15
10
5
0
Lunch Snack Dinner
Snack Snack
Sleep
Breakfast
Plasma ACTH (pg/mL)
 FIGURE 39–2  Fluctuations in plasma ACTH and glucocorticoids throughout the day in a normal girl (age 16). The ACTH was measured by 
immunoassay and the glucocorticoids as 11-oxysteroids (11-OHCS). Note the marked ACTH and glucocorticoid rises in the morning, before 
awakening from sleep. (Reproduced, with permission, from Krieger DT et al: Characterization of the normal temporal pattern of plasma corticosteroid levels. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1971;32:266.) 
700    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
which, in the hormone-bound state, modulates the expression of 
glucocorticoid-responsive genes. In contrast, hGR beta does not 
bind glucocorticoids and is transcriptionally inactive. However, 
hGR beta is able to inhibit the effects of hormone-activated hGR 
alpha on glucocorticoid-responsive genes, playing the role of a 
physiologically relevant endogenous inhibitor of glucocorticoid 
action. It was recently shown that the two hGR alternative tran-
scripts have eight distinct translation initiation sites; ie, in a human 
cell there may be up to 16 GRα and GRβ isoforms, which may 
form up to 256 homodimers and heterodimers with different tran-
scriptional and possibly non-transcriptional activities. This variabil-
ity suggests that this important class of steroid receptors has complex 
stochastic activities. 
 The prototype glucocorticoid receptor isoform is composed of 
about 800 amino acids and can be divided into three functional 
domains (see Figure 2–6). The glucocorticoid-binding domain is 
located at the carboxyl terminal of the molecule. The DNA-
binding domain is located in the middle of the protein and con-
tains nine cysteine residues. This region folds into a “two-finger” 
structure stabilized by zinc ions connected to cysteines to form 
two tetrahedrons. This part of the molecule binds to the GREs 
that regulate glucocorticoid action on glucocorticoid-regulated 
genes. The zinc fingers represent the basic structure by which the 
DNA-binding domain recognizes specific nucleic acid sequences. 
The amino-terminal domain is involved in the transactivation 
activity of the receptor and increases its specificity. 
 The interaction of glucocorticoid receptors with GREs or 
other transcription factors is facilitated or inhibited by several 
families of proteins called steroid receptor  coregulators , divided 
3
1
9
6
7
11
17
16
16
C
O
CH2OH
OH
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
HO
O
20
21
Cortisol (hydrocortisone)
HO
O
Betamethasone
CH3
F
HO
O
Triamcinolone (acetonide moiety shaded)
F
HO
O
Prednisolone
H
H
H
O
C
O
CH3
CH3
19
C
O
CH2OH
OH
C
O
CH2OH
OH
C
O
CH2OH
 FIGURE 39–3  Chemical structures of several glucocorticoids. The acetonide-substituted derivatives (eg, triamcinolone acetonide) have 
increased surface activity and are useful in dermatology. Dexamethasone is identical to betamethasone except for the configuration of the 
methyl group at C 16 : in betamethasone it is beta (projecting  up from the plane of the rings); in dexamethasone it is alpha. 
into  coactivators and  corepressors . The coregulators do this by 
serving as bridges between the receptors and other nuclear 
proteins and by expressing enzymatic activities such as histone 
acetylase or deacetylase, which alter the conformation of 
nucleosomes and the transcribability of genes. 
 Between 10% and 20% of expressed genes in a cell are regu-
lated by glucocorticoids. The number and affinity of receptors for 
the hormone, the complement of transcription factors and coregu-
lators, and post-transcription events determine the relative speci-
ficity of these hormones’ actions in various cells. The effects of 
glucocorticoids are mainly due to proteins synthesized from 
mRNA transcribed from their target genes. 
 Some of the effects of glucocorticoids can be attributed to their 
binding to mineralocorticoid receptors (MRs). Indeed, MRs bind 
aldosterone and cortisol with similar affinity. A mineralocorticoid 
effect of cortisol is avoided in some tissues by expression of 11β-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2, the enzyme responsible for 
biotransformation to its 11-keto derivative (cortisone), which has 
minimal affinity for aldosterone receptors. 
 Recently, the GR was found to interact with CLOCK/BMAL-1, 
a transcription factor dimer expressed in all tissues and generating 
the circadian rhythm of cortisol secretion at the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus of the hypothalamus. CLOCK is an acetyltransferase that 
acetylates the hinge region of the GR, neutralizing its transcrip-
tional activity and thus rendering target tissues resistant to gluco-
corticoids. Interestingly, the glucocorticoid target tissue sensitivity 
rhythm generated is in reverse phase to that of circulating cortisol 
concentrations, explaining the increased sensitivity of the organism 
to evening administration of glucocorticoids. 
CHAPTER 39 Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical Antagonists     701
 Prompt effects such as initial feedback suppression of pituitary 
ACTH occur in minutes and are too rapid to be explained on the 
basis of gene transcription and protein synthesis. It is not known how 
these effects are mediated. Among the proposed mechanisms are 
direct effects on cell membrane receptors for the hormone or nonge-
nomic effects of the classic hormone-bound glucocorticoid receptor. 
The putative membrane receptors might be entirely different from 
the known intracellular receptors. Recently, all steroid receptors 
(except the MRs) were shown to have palmitoylation motifs that 
allow enzymatic addition of palmitate and increased localization of 
the receptors in the vicinity of plasma membranes. Such receptors are 
available for direct interactions with and effects on various membrane-
associated or cytoplasmic proteins without the need for entry into 
the nucleus and induction of transcriptional actions. 
 B. Physiologic Effects 
 The glucocorticoids have widespread effects because they influ-
ence the function of most cells in the body. The major metabolic 
consequences of glucocorticoid secretion or administration are 
pre-
mRNA
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
mRNA
Protein
Response 
GRE
DNA
(Editing)
Transcription
machinery 
(RNA poly-
merase, etc)
R
R* R*
R*
R*
R
S
(Unstable)
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Hsp90
Hsp90 x
CBG 
Steroid-receptor
dimer (activated)
 FIGURE 39–4  A model of the interaction of a steroid, S (eg, cortisol), and its receptor, R, and the subsequent events in a target cell. The ste-
roid is present in the blood in bound form on the corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) but enters the cell as the free molecule. The intracellular 
receptor is bound to stabilizing proteins, including two molecules of heat-shock protein 90 (hsp90) and several others, denoted as “X” in the 
figure. This receptor complex is incapable of activating transcription. When the complex binds a molecule of cortisol, an unstable complex is 
created and the hsp90 and associated molecules are released. The steroid-receptor complex is now able to dimerize, enter the nucleus, bind to 
a glucocorticoid response element (GRE) on the regulatory region of the gene, and regulate transcription by RNA polymerase II and associated 
transcription factors. A variety of regulatory factors (not shown) may participate in facilitating (coactivators) or inhibiting (corepressors) the 
steroid response. The resulting mRNA is edited and exported to the cytoplasm for the production of protein that brings about the final hor-
mone response. An alternative to the steroid-receptor complex interaction with a GRE is an interaction with and altering the function of other 
transcription factors, such as NF-κB in the nucleus of cells. 
due to direct actions of these hormones in the cell. However, some 
important effects are the result of homeostatic responses by insulin 
and glucagon. Although many of the effects of glucocorticoids are 
dose-related and become magnified when large amounts are 
administered for therapeutic purposes, there are also other effects—
called  permissive effects—without which many normal functions 
become deficient. For example, the response of vascular and bron-
chial smooth muscle to catecholamines is diminished in the 
absence of cortisol and restored by physiologic amounts of this 
glucocorticoid. Similarly, the lipolytic responses of fat cells to 
catecholamines, ACTH, and growth hormone are attenuated in 
the absence of glucocorticoids. 
 C. Metabolic Effects 
 The glucocorticoids have important dose-related effects on carbo-
hydrate, protein, and fat metabolism. The same effects are respon-
sible for some of the serious adverse effects associated with their 
use in therapeutic doses. Glucocorticoids stimulate and are required 
for gluconeogenesis and glycogen synthesis in the fasting state. 
702    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
They stimulate phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, glucose-6-
phosphatase, and glycogen synthase and the release of amino acids 
in the course of muscle catabolism. 
 Glucocorticoids increase serum glucose levels and thus stimu-
late insulin release and inhibit the uptake of glucose by muscle 
cells, while they stimulate hormone sensitive lipase and thus 
lipolysis. The increased insulin secretion stimulates lipogenesis 
and to a lesser degree inhibits lipolysis, leading to a net increase in 
fat deposition combined with increased release of fatty acids and 
glycerol into the circulation. 
 The net results of these actions are most apparent in the fasting 
state, when the supply of glucose from gluconeogenesis, the release 
of amino acids from muscle catabolism, the inhibition of periph-
eral glucose uptake, and the stimulation of lipolysis all contribute 
to maintenance of an adequate glucose supply to the brain. 
 D. Catabolic and Antianabolic Effects 
 Although glucocorticoids stimulate RNA and protein synthesis 
in the liver, they have catabolic and antianabolic effects in lym-
phoid and connective tissue, muscle, peripheral fat, and skin. 
Supraphysiologic amounts of glucocorticoids lead to decreased 
muscle mass and weakness and thinning of the skin. Catabolic 
and antianabolic effects on bone are the cause of osteoporosis in 
Cushing’s syndrome and impose a major limitation in the long-
term therapeutic use of glucocorticoids. In children, glucocorti-
coids reduce growth. This effect may be partially prevented by 
administration of growth hormone in high doses, but this use of 
growth hormone is not recommended. 
 E. Anti-Inflammatory and Immunosuppressive Effects 
 Glucocorticoids dramatically reduce the manifestations of inflam-
mation. This is due to their profound effects on the concentration, 
distribution, and function of peripheral leukocytes and to their 
suppressive effects on the inflammatory cytokines and chemokines 
and on other mediators of inflammation. Inflammation, regardless 
of its cause, is characterized by the extravasation and infiltration of 
leukocytes into the affected tissue. These events are mediated by a 
complex series of interactions of white cell adhesion molecules 
with those on endothelial cells and are inhibited by glucocorti-
coids. After a single dose of a short-acting glucocorticoid, the 
concentration of neutrophils in the circulation increases while the 
lymphocytes (T and B cells), monocytes, eosinophils, and baso-
phils decrease. The changes are maximal at 6 hours and are dissi-
pated in 24 hours. The increase in neutrophils is due both to the 
increased influx into the blood from the bone marrow and to the 
decreased migration from the blood vessels, leading to a reduction 
in the number of cells at the site of inflammation. The reduction 
in circulating lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils 
is primarily the result of their movement from the vascular bed to 
lymphoid tissue. 
 Glucocorticoids also inhibit the functions of tissue mac-
rophages and other antigen-presenting cells. The ability of these 
cells to respond to antigens and mitogens is reduced. The effect 
on macrophages is particularly marked and limits their ability to 
phagocytose and kill microorganisms and to produce tumor 
necrosis factor-α, interleukin-1, metalloproteinases, and plasmi-
nogen activator. Both macrophages and lymphocytes produce less 
interleukin-12 and interferon-γ, important inducers of TH1 cell 
activity, and cellular immunity. 
 In addition to their effects on leukocyte function, glucocorti-
coids influence the inflammatory response by reducing the pros-
taglandin, leukotriene, and platelet-activating factor synthesis 
that results from activation of phospholipase A 2 . Finally, gluco-
corticoids reduce expression of cyclooxygenase-2, the inducible 
form of this enzyme, in inflammatory cells, thus reducing the 
amount of enzyme available to produce prostaglandins (see 
Chapters 18 and 36). 
 Glucocorticoids cause vasoconstriction when applied directly 
to the skin, possibly by suppressing mast cell degranulation. They 
also decrease capillary permeability by reducing the amount of 
histamine released by basophils and mast cells. 
 The anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects of glu-
cocorticoids are largely due to the actions described above. In 
humans, complement activation is unaltered, but its effects are 
inhibited. Antibody production can be reduced by large doses of 
steroids, although it is unaffected by moderate doses (eg, 20 mg/d 
of prednisone). 
 The anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects of 
these agents are widely useful therapeutically but are also respon-
sible for some of their most serious adverse effects (see text that 
follows). 
 F. Other Effects 
 Glucocorticoids have important effects on the nervous system. 
Adrenal insufficiency causes marked slowing of the alpha rhythm 
of the electroencephalogram and is associated with depression. 
Increased amounts of glucocorticoids often produce behavioral 
disturbances in humans: initially insomnia and euphoria and sub-
sequently depression. Large doses of glucocorticoids may increase 
intracranial pressure (pseudotumor cerebri). 
 Glucocorticoids given chronically suppress the pituitary release 
of ACTH, growth hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and 
luteinizing hormone. 
 Large doses of glucocorticoids have been associated with the 
development of peptic ulcer, possibly by suppressing the local 
immune response against  Helicobacter pylori. They also promote 
fat redistribution in the body, with increase of visceral, facial, 
nuchal, and supraclavicular fat, and they appear to antagonize the 
effect of vitamin D on calcium absorption. The glucocorticoids 
also have important effects on the hematopoietic system. In addi-
tion to their effects on leukocytes, they increase the number of 
platelets and red blood cells. 
 Cortisol deficiency results in impaired renal function (particu-
larly glomerular filtration), augmented vasopressin secretion, and 
diminished ability to excrete a water load. 
 Glucocorticoids have important effects on the development of 
the fetal lungs. Indeed, the structural and functional changes in 
the lungs near term, including the production of pulmonary sur-
face-active material required for air breathing (surfactant), are 
stimulated by glucocorticoids. 
CHAPTER 39 Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical Antagonists     703
 SYNTHETIC CORTICOSTEROIDS 
 Glucocorticoids have become important agents for use in the treat-
ment of many inflammatory, immunologic, hematologic, and other 
disorders. This has stimulated the development of many synthetic 
steroids with anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive activity. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 A. Source 
 Pharmaceutical steroids are usually synthesized from cholic acid 
obtained from cattle or steroid sapogenins found in plants. Further 
modifications of these steroids have led to the marketing of a large 
group of synthetic steroids with special characteristics that are 
pharmacologically and therapeutically important ( Table 39–1 ; 
 Figure 39–3 ). 
 B. Disposition 
 The metabolism of the naturally occurring adrenal steroids has been 
discussed above. The synthetic corticosteroids ( Table 39–1 ) are in 
most cases rapidly and completely absorbed when given by mouth. 
Although they are transported and metabolized in a fashion similar 
to that of the endogenous steroids, important differences exist. 
 Alterations in the glucocorticoid molecule influence its affinity 
for glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors as well as its 
protein-binding affinity, side chain stability, rate of elimination, 
and metabolic products. Halogenation at the 9 position, unsatura-
tion of the Δ1–2 bond of the A ring, and methylation at the 2 or 
16 position prolong the half-life by more than 50%. The Δ1 com-
pounds are excreted in the free form. In some cases, the agent 
given is a prodrug; for example, prednisone is rapidly converted to 
the active product prednisolone in the body. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The actions of the synthetic steroids are similar to those of cortisol 
(see above). They bind to the specific intracellular receptor pro-
teins and produce the same effects but have different ratios of 
glucocorticoid to mineralocorticoid potency ( Table 39–1 ). 
 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
 A. Diagnosis and Treatment of Disturbed Adrenal 
Function 
 1. Adrenocortical insufficiency 
 a. Chronic (Addison’s disease)— Chronic adrenocortical insuffi-
ciency is characterized by weakness, fatigue, weight loss, hypoten-
sion, hyperpigmentation, and inability to maintain the blood 
glucose level during fasting. In such individuals, minor noxious, 
TABLE 39–1 Some commonly used natural and synthetic corticosteroids for general use.
Agent
Activity1
Forms Available
Anti-
Inflammatory
Topical
Salt-Retaining
Equivalent Oral 
Dose (mg)
Short- to medium-acting glucocorticoids
Hydrocortisone (cortisol)
1
1
1
20
Oral, injectable, topical
Cortisone
0.8
0
0.8
25
Oral
Prednisone
4
0
0.3
5
Oral
Prednisolone
5
4
0.3
5
Oral, injectable
Methylprednisolone
5
5
0.25
4
Oral, injectable
Meprednisone2
5
0
4
Oral, injectable
Intermediate-acting glucocorticoids
Triamcinolone
5
53
0
4
Oral, injectable, topical
Paramethasone2
10
0
2
Oral, injectable
Fluprednisolone2
15
7
0
1.5
Oral
Long-acting glucocorticoids
Betamethasone
25–40
10
0
0.6
Oral, injectable, topical
Dexamethasone
30
10
0
0.75
Oral, injectable, topical
Mineralocorticoids
Fludrocortisone
10
0
250
2
Oral
Desoxycorticosterone acetate2
0
0
20
Injectable, pellets
1Potency relative to hydrocortisone.
2Outside USA.
3Triamcinolone acetonide: Up to 100.
704    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
traumatic, or infectious stimuli may produce acute adrenal insuffi-
ciency with circulatory shock and even death. 
 In primary adrenal insufficiency, about 20–30 mg of hydrocor-
tisone must be given daily, with increased amounts during periods 
of stress. Although hydrocortisone has some mineralocorticoid 
activity, this must be supplemented by an appropriate amount of 
a salt-retaining hormone such as fludrocortisone. Synthetic gluco-
corticoids that are long-acting and devoid of salt-retaining activity 
should not be administered to these patients. 
 b. Acute— When acute adrenocortical insufficiency is suspected, 
treatment must be instituted immediately. Therapy consists of 
large amounts of parenteral hydrocortisone in addition to correc-
tion of fluid and electrolyte abnormalities and treatment of pre-
cipitating factors. 
 Hydrocortisone sodium succinate or phosphate in doses of 
100 mg intravenously is given every 8 hours until the patient is 
stable. The dose is then gradually reduced, achieving maintenance 
dosage within 5 days. 
 The administration of salt-retaining hormone is resumed when 
the total hydrocortisone dosage has been reduced to 50 mg/d. 
 2. Adrenocortical hypo- and hyperfunction 
 a. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia— This group of disorders is 
characterized by specific defects in the synthesis of cortisol. In 
pregnancies at high risk for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, fetuses 
can be protected from genital abnormalities by administration 
of dexamethasone to the mother. The most common defect is a 
decrease in or lack of P450c21 (21β-hydroxylase) activity. ∗  
 As can be seen in  Figure 39–1 , this would lead to a reduction 
in cortisol synthesis and thus produce a compensatory increase in 
ACTH release. The gland becomes hyperplastic and produces ab-
normally large amounts of precursors such as 17-hydroxyproges-
terone that can be diverted to the androgen pathway, leading to 
virilization. Metabolism of this compound in the liver leads to 
pregnanetriol, which is characteristically excreted into the urine in 
large amounts in this disorder and can be used to make the diag-
nosis and to monitor efficacy of glucocorticoid substitution. 
However, the most reliable method of detecting this disorder is 
the increased response of plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone to 
ACTH stimulation. 
 If the defect is in 11-hydroxylation, large amounts of deoxycor-
ticosterone are produced, and because this steroid has mineralocor-
ticoid activity, hypertension with or without hypokalemic alkalosis 
ensues. When 17-hydroxylation is defective in the adrenals and 
gonads, hypogonadism is also present. However, increased amounts 
of 11-deoxycorticosterone are formed, and the signs and symptoms 
associated with mineralocorticoid excess—such as hypertension 
and hypokalemia—are also observed. 
 When first seen, the infant with congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
may be in acute adrenal crisis and should be treated as described 
above, using appropriate electrolyte solutions and an intravenous 
preparation of hydrocortisone in stress doses. 
 Once the patient is stabilized, oral hydrocortisone, 12–18 mg/m 2 /d 
in two unequally divided doses (two thirds in the morning, one 
third in late afternoon) is begun. The dosage is adjusted to allow 
normal growth and bone maturation and to prevent androgen 
excess. Alternate-day therapy with prednisone has also been used to 
achieve greater ACTH suppression without increasing growth inhi-
bition. Fludrocortisone, 0.05–0.2 mg/d, should also be adminis-
tered by mouth, with added salt to maintain normal blood pressure, 
plasma renin activity, and electrolytes. 
 b. Cushing’s syndrome— Cushing’s syndrome is usually the result 
of bilateral adrenal hyperplasia secondary to an ACTH-secreting 
pituitary adenoma (Cushing’s disease) but occasionally is due to 
tumors or nodular hyperplasia of the adrenal gland or ectopic pro-
duction of ACTH by other tumors. The manifestations are those 
associated with the chronic presence of excessive glucocorticoids. 
When glucocorticoid hypersecretion is marked and prolonged, a 
rounded, plethoric face and trunk obesity are striking in appear-
ance. The manifestations of protein loss are often found and 
include muscle wasting; thinning, purple striae, and easy bruising 
of the skin; poor wound healing; and osteoporosis. Other serious 
disturbances include mental disorders, hypertension, and diabetes. 
This disorder is treated by surgical removal of the tumor produc-
ing ACTH or cortisol, irradiation of the pituitary tumor, or resec-
tion of one or both adrenals. These patients must receive large 
doses of cortisol during and after the surgical procedure. Doses of 
up to 300 mg of soluble hydrocortisone may be given as a continu-
ous intravenous infusion on the day of surgery. The dose must be 
reduced slowly to normal replacement levels, since rapid reduction 
in dose may produce withdrawal symptoms, including fever and 
joint pain. If adrenalectomy has been performed, long-term main-
tenance is similar to that outlined above for adrenal insufficiency. 
 c. Primary generalized glucocorticoid resistance (Chrousos) 
syndrome— This rare sporadic or familial genetic condition is 
usually due to inactivating mutations of the glucocorticoid recep-
tor gene. In its attempt to compensate for the defect, the hypo-
thalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is hyperfunctioning with 
the increased production of ACTH leading to high circulating 
levels of cortisol and cortisol precursors such as corticosterone and 
11-deoxycorticosterone with mineralocorticoid activity, as well as 
of adrenal androgens. These may result in hypertension with or 
without hypokalemic alkalosis and hyperandrogenism expressed 
as virilization and precocious puberty in children and acne, hir-
sutism, male pattern baldness, and menstrual irregularities (mostly 
oligo-amenorrhea and hypofertility) in women. The therapy of 
this syndrome is high doses of synthetic glucocorticoids such as 
dexamethasone with no inherent mineralocorticoid activity. These 
doses are titrated to normalize the production of cortisol, cortisol 
precursors, and adrenal androgens. 
 d. Aldosteronism— Primary aldosteronism usually results from 
the excessive production of aldosterone by an adrenal adenoma. 
However, it may also result from abnormal secretion by hyperplastic 
∗Names for the adrenal steroid synthetic enzymes include the following:
 P450c11 (11-hydroxylase) 
 P450c17 (17-hydroxylase) 
 P450c21 (21-hydroxylase) 
CHAPTER 39 Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical Antagonists     705
glands or from a malignant tumor. The clinical findings of hyper-
tension, weakness, and tetany are related to the continued renal loss 
of potassium, which leads to hypokalemia, alkalosis, and elevation of 
serum sodium concentrations. This syndrome can also be produced 
in disorders of adrenal steroid biosynthesis by excessive secretion of 
deoxycorticosterone, corticosterone, or 18-hydroxycorticosterone—
all compounds with inherent mineralocorticoid activity. 
 In contrast to patients with secondary aldosteronism (see text 
that follows), these patients have low (suppressed) levels of plasma 
renin activity and angiotensin II. When treated with fludrocorti-
sone (0.2 mg twice daily orally for 3 days) or deoxycorticosterone 
acetate (20 mg/d intramuscularly for 3 days—but not available in 
the USA), patients fail to retain sodium and the secretion of aldos-
terone is not significantly reduced. When the disorder is mild, it 
may escape detection if serum potassium levels are used for screen-
ing. However, it may be detected by an increased ratio of plasma 
aldosterone to renin. Patients generally improve when treated with 
spironolactone, an aldosterone receptor-blocking agent, and the 
response to this agent is of diagnostic and therapeutic value. 
 3. Use of glucocorticoids for diagnostic purposes— It is 
sometimes necessary to suppress the production of ACTH to iden-
tify the source of a particular hormone or to establish whether its 
production is influenced by the secretion of ACTH. In these cir-
cumstances, it is advantageous to use a very potent substance such 
as dexamethasone because the use of small quantities reduces the 
possibility of confusion in the interpretation of hormone assays in 
blood or urine. For example, if complete suppression is achieved by 
the use of 50 mg of cortisol, the urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroids 
will be 15–18 mg/24 h, since one third of the dose given will be 
recovered in urine as 17-hydroxycorticosteroid. If an equivalent 
dose of 1.5 mg of dexamethasone is used, the urinary excretion will 
be only 0.5 mg/24 h and blood levels will be low. 
 The dexamethasone suppression test is used for the diagnosis 
of Cushing’s syndrome and has also been used in the differential 
diagnosis of depressive psychiatric states. As a screening test, 1 mg 
dexamethasone is given orally at 11 PM, and a plasma sample is 
obtained the following morning. In normal individuals, the morn-
ing cortisol concentration is usually less than 3 mcg/dL, whereas in 
Cushing’s syndrome the level is usually greater than 5 mcg/dL. The 
results are not reliable in the patient with depression, anxiety, con-
current illness, and other stressful conditions or in the patient who 
is receiving a medication that enhances the catabolism of dexame-
thasone in the liver. To distinguish between hypercortisolism due 
to anxiety, depression, and alcoholism (pseudo-Cushing syndrome) 
and bona fide Cushing’s syndrome, a combined test is carried out, 
consisting of dexamethasone (0.5 mg orally every 6 hours for 2 days) 
followed by a standard corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) 
test (1 mg/kg given as a bolus intravenous infusion 2 hours after 
the last dose of dexamethasone). 
 In patients in whom the diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome has 
been established clinically and confirmed by a finding of elevated 
free cortisol in the urine, suppression with large doses of dexa-
methasone will help to distinguish patients with Cushing’s disease 
from those with steroid-producing tumors of the adrenal cortex or 
with the ectopic ACTH syndrome. Dexamethasone is given in a 
dosage of 0.5 mg orally every 6 hours for 2 days, followed by 2 mg 
orally every 6 hours for 2 days, and the urine is then assayed for 
cortisol or its metabolites (Liddle’s test); or dexamethasone is given 
as a single dose of 8 mg at 11 PM, and the plasma cortisol is mea-
sured at 8 AM the following day. In patients with Cushing’s dis-
ease, the suppressant effect of dexamethasone usually produces a 
50% reduction in hormone levels. In patients in whom suppres-
sion does not occur, the ACTH level will be low in the presence 
of a cortisol-producing adrenal tumor and elevated in patients 
with an ectopic ACTH-producing tumor. 
 B. Corticosteroids and Stimulation of Lung Maturation 
in the Fetus 
 Lung maturation in the fetus is regulated by the fetal secretion of 
cortisol. Treatment of the mother with large doses of glucocorti-
coid reduces the incidence of respiratory distress syndrome in 
infants delivered prematurely. When delivery is anticipated before 
34 weeks of gestation, intramuscular betamethasone, 12 mg, 
followed by an additional dose of 12 mg 18–24 hours later, is 
commonly used. Betamethasone is chosen because maternal pro-
tein binding and placental metabolism of this corticosteroid is less 
than that of cortisol, allowing increased transfer across the placenta 
to the fetus. 
 C. Corticosteroids and Nonadrenal Disorders 
 The synthetic analogs of cortisol are useful in the treatment of a 
diverse group of diseases unrelated to any known disturbance of 
adrenal function ( Table 39–2 ). The usefulness of corticosteroids in 
these disorders is a function of their ability to suppress inflamma-
tory and immune responses and to alter leukocyte function, as 
previously described and as described in  Chapter 55 . These agents 
are useful in disorders in which host response is the cause of 
the major manifestations of the disease. In instances in which the 
inflammatory or immune response is important in controlling the 
pathologic process, therapy with corticosteroids may be dangerous 
but justified to prevent irreparable damage from an inflammatory 
response—if used in conjunction with specific therapy for the 
disease process. 
 Since corticosteroids are not usually curative, the pathologic 
process may progress while clinical manifestations are suppressed. 
Therefore, chronic therapy with these drugs should be undertaken 
with great care and only when the seriousness of the disorder 
warrants their use and when less hazardous measures have been 
exhausted. 
 In general, attempts should be made to bring the disease process 
under control using medium- to intermediate-acting glucocorti-
coids such as prednisone and prednisolone ( Table 39–1 ), as well as 
all ancillary measures possible to keep the dose low. Where possible, 
alternate-day therapy should be used (see the following text). 
Therapy should not be decreased or stopped abruptly. When pro-
longed therapy is anticipated, it is helpful to obtain chest x-rays 
and a tuberculin test, since glucocorticoid therapy can reactivate 
dormant tuberculosis. The presence of diabetes, peptic ulcer, osteo-
porosis, and psychological disturbances should be taken into con-
sideration, and cardiovascular function should be assessed. 
706    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 Treatment for transplant rejection is a very important applica-
tion of glucocorticoids. The efficacy of these agents is based on 
their ability to reduce antigen expression from the grafted tissue, 
delay revascularization, and interfere with the sensitization of 
cytotoxic T lymphocytes and the generation of primary antibody-
forming cells. 
 Toxicity 
 The benefits obtained from glucocorticoids vary considerably. Use 
of these drugs must be carefully weighed in each patient against 
their widespread effects on every part of the organism. The major 
undesirable effects of glucocorticoids are the result of their hor-
monal actions, which lead to the clinical picture of iatrogenic 
Cushing’s syndrome (see later in text). 
 When glucocorticoids are used for short periods (< 2 weeks), it 
is unusual to see serious adverse effects even with moderately large 
doses. However, insomnia, behavioral changes (primarily hypoma-
nia), and acute peptic ulcers are occasionally observed even after 
only a few days of treatment. Acute pancreatitis is a rare but seri-
ous acute adverse effect of high-dose glucocorticoids. 
 A. Metabolic Effects 
 Most patients who are given daily doses of 100 mg of hydrocorti-
sone or more (or the equivalent amount of synthetic steroid) for 
longer than 2 weeks undergo a series of changes that have been 
termed iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome. The rate of development is 
a function of the dosage and the genetic background of the patient. 
In the face, rounding, puffiness, fat deposition, and plethora usu-
ally appear (moon facies). Similarly, fat tends to be redistributed 
from the extremities to the trunk, the back of the neck, and the 
supraclavicular fossae. There is an increased growth of fine hair over 
the face, thighs and trunk. Steroid-induced punctate acne may 
appear, and insomnia and increased appetite are noted. In the treat-
ment of dangerous or disabling disorders, these changes may not 
require cessation of therapy. However, the underlying metabolic 
changes accompanying them can be very serious by the time they 
become obvious. The continuing breakdown of protein and diver-
sion of amino acids to glucose production increase the need for 
insulin and over time result in weight gain; visceral fat deposition; 
myopathy and muscle wasting; thinning of the skin, with striae and 
bruising; hyperglycemia; and eventually osteoporosis, diabetes, and 
aseptic necrosis of the hip. Wound healing is also impaired under 
these circumstances. When diabetes occurs, it is treated with diet 
and insulin. These patients are often resistant to insulin but rarely 
develop ketoacidosis. In general, patients treated with corticoster-
oids should be on high-protein and potassium-enriched diets. 
 B. Other Complications 
 Other serious adverse effects of glucocorticoids include peptic 
ulcers and their consequences. The clinical findings associated with 
certain disorders, particularly bacterial and mycotic infections, may 
be masked by the corticosteroids, and patients must be carefully 
monitored to avoid serious mishap when large doses are used. 
Severe myopathy is more frequent in patients treated with long-
acting glucocorticoids. The administration of such compounds 
has been associated with nausea, dizziness, and weight loss in some 
patients. It is treated by changing drugs, reducing dosage, and 
increasing potassium and protein intake. 
 Hypomania or acute psychosis may occur, particularly in 
patients receiving very large doses of corticosteroids. Long-term 
therapy with intermediate- and long-acting steroids is associated 
with depression and the development of posterior subcapsular 
cataracts. Psychiatric follow-up and periodic slit-lamp examina-
tion is indicated in such patients. Increased intraocular pressure 
is common, and glaucoma may be induced. Benign intracranial 
TABLE 39–2  Some therapeutic indications for the 
use of glucocorticoids in nonadrenal 
disorders.
Disorder
Examples
Allergic reactions
Angioneurotic edema, asthma, bee stings, con-
tact dermatitis, drug reactions, allergic rhinitis, 
serum sickness, urticaria
Collagen-vascular 
disorders
Giant cell arteritis, lupus erythematosus, mixed 
connective tissue syndromes, polymyositis, 
polymyalgia rheumatica, rheumatoid arthritis, 
temporal arteritis
Eye diseases
Acute uveitis, allergic conjunctivitis, choroiditis, 
optic neuritis
Gastrointestinal 
diseases
Inflammatory bowel disease, nontropical sprue, 
subacute hepatic necrosis
Hematologic 
disorders
Acquired hemolytic anemia, acute allergic pur-
pura, leukemia, lymphoma, autoimmune hemo-
lytic anemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, multiple myeloma
Systemic inflam-
mation
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (sustained 
therapy with moderate dosage accelerates 
recovery and decreases mortality)
Infections
Acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis
Inflammatory 
conditions of 
bones and joints
Arthritis, bursitis, tenosynovitis
Neurologic 
disorders
Cerebral edema (large doses of dexamethasone 
are given to patients following brain surgery to 
minimize cerebral edema in the postoperative 
period), multiple sclerosis
Organ transplants
Prevention and treatment of rejection (immu-
nosuppression)
Pulmonary dis-
eases
Aspiration pneumonia, bronchial asthma, pre-
vention of infant respiratory distress syndrome, 
sarcoidosis
Renal disorders
Nephrotic syndrome
Skin diseases
Atopic dermatitis, dermatoses, lichen simplex 
chronicus (localized neurodermatitis), mycosis 
fungoides, pemphigus, seborrheic dermatitis, 
xerosis
Thyroid diseases
Malignant exophthalmos, subacute thyroiditis
Miscellaneous
Hypercalcemia, mountain sickness
CHAPTER 39 Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical Antagonists     707
hypertension also occurs. In dosages of 45 mg/m 2 /d or more of 
hydrocortisone or its equivalent, growth retardation occurs in 
children. Medium-, intermediate-, and long-acting glucocorticoids 
have greater growth-suppressing potency than the natural steroid 
at equivalent doses. 
 When given in larger than physiologic amounts, steroids such as 
cortisone and hydrocortisone, which have mineralocorticoid effects 
in addition to glucocorticoid effects, cause some sodium and fluid 
retention and loss of potassium. In patients with normal cardiovas-
cular and renal function, this leads to a hypokalemic, hypochloremic 
alkalosis and eventually to a rise in blood pressure. In patients with 
hypoproteinemia, renal disease, or liver disease, edema may also 
occur. In patients with heart disease, even small degrees of sodium 
retention may lead to heart failure. These effects can be minimized 
by using synthetic non-salt-retaining steroids, sodium restriction, 
and judicious amounts of potassium supplements. 
 C. Adrenal Suppression 
 When corticosteroids are administered for more than 2 weeks, 
adrenal suppression may occur. If treatment extends over weeks to 
months, the patient should be given appropriate supplementary 
therapy at times of minor stress (two-fold dosage increases for 
24–48 hours) or severe stress (up to ten-fold dosage increases for 
48–72 hours) such as accidental trauma or major surgery. If corti-
costeroid dosage is to be reduced, it should be tapered slowly. If 
therapy is to be stopped, the reduction process should be quite 
slow when the dose reaches replacement levels. It may take 2–12 
months for the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis to function 
acceptably, and cortisol levels may not return to normal for 
another 6–9 months. The glucocorticoid-induced suppression is 
not a pituitary problem, and treatment with ACTH does not 
reduce the time required for the return of normal function. 
 If the dosage is reduced too rapidly in patients receiving gluco-
corticoids for a certain disorder, the symptoms of the disorder may 
reappear or increase in intensity. However, patients without an 
underlying disorder (eg, patients cured surgically of Cushing’s 
disease) also develop symptoms with rapid reductions in cortico-
steroid levels. These symptoms include anorexia, nausea or vomit-
ing, weight loss, lethargy, headache, fever, joint or muscle pain, 
and postural hypotension. Although many of these symptoms 
may reflect true glucocorticoid deficiency, they may also occur in 
the presence of normal or even elevated plasma cortisol levels, sug-
gesting glucocorticoid dependence. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 A. Special Precautions 
 Patients receiving glucocorticoids must be monitored carefully for 
the development of hyperglycemia, glycosuria, sodium retention 
with edema or hypertension, hypokalemia, peptic ulcer, osteopo-
rosis, and hidden infections. 
 The dosage should be kept as low as possible, and intermittent 
administration (eg, alternate-day) should be used when satisfac-
tory therapeutic results can be obtained on this schedule. Even 
patients maintained on relatively low doses of corticosteroids may 
require supplementary therapy at times of stress, such as when 
surgical procedures are performed or intercurrent illness or acci-
dents occur. 
 B. Contraindications 
 Glucocorticoids must be used with great caution in patients with 
peptic ulcer, heart disease or hypertension with heart failure, cer-
tain infectious illnesses such as varicella and tuberculosis, psycho-
ses, diabetes, osteoporosis, or glaucoma. 
 Selection of Drug & Dosage Schedule 
 Glucocorticoid preparations differ with respect to relative anti-
inflammatory and mineralocorticoid effect, duration of action, 
cost, and dosage forms available ( Table 39–1 ), and these factors 
should be taken into account in selecting the drug to be used. 
 A. ACTH versus Adrenocortical Steroids 
 In patients with normal adrenals, ACTH was used in the past to 
induce the endogenous production of cortisol to obtain similar 
effects. However, except when an increase in androgens is desir-
able, the use of ACTH as a therapeutic agent has been abandoned. 
Instances in which ACTH was claimed to be more effective than 
glucocorticoids were probably due to the administration of smaller 
amounts of corticosteroids than were produced by the dosage 
of ACTH. 
 B. Dosage 
 In determining the dosage regimen to be used, the physician must 
consider the seriousness of the disease, the amount of drug likely 
to be required to obtain the desired effect, and the duration of 
therapy. In some diseases, the amount required for maintenance of 
the desired therapeutic effect is less than the dose needed to obtain 
the initial effect, and the lowest possible dosage for the needed 
effect should be determined by gradually lowering the dose until 
a small increase in signs or symptoms is noted. 
 When it is necessary to maintain continuously elevated plasma 
corticosteroid levels to suppress ACTH, a slowly absorbed paren-
teral preparation or small oral doses at frequent intervals are 
required. The opposite situation exists with respect to the use of 
corticosteroids in the treatment of inflammatory and allergic dis-
orders. The same total quantity given in a few doses may be more 
effective than that given in many smaller doses or in a slowly 
absorbed parenteral form. 
 Severe autoimmune conditions involving vital organs must be 
treated aggressively, and undertreatment is as dangerous as over-
treatment. To minimize the deposition of immune complexes and 
the influx of leukocytes and macrophages, 1 mg/kg/d of predni-
sone in divided doses is required initially. This dosage is main-
tained until the serious manifestations respond. The dosage can 
then be gradually reduced. 
 When large doses are required for prolonged periods of time, 
alternate-day administration of the compound may be tried after 
control is achieved. When used in this manner, very large amounts 
(eg, 100 mg of prednisone) can sometimes be administered with less 
708    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
marked adverse effects because there is a recovery period between 
each dose. The transition to an alternate-day schedule can be made 
after the disease process is under control. It should be done gradu-
ally and with additional supportive measures between doses. 
 When selecting a drug for use in large doses, a medium- or 
intermediate-acting synthetic steroid with little mineralocorticoid 
effect is advisable. If possible, it should be given as a single 
morning dose. 
 C. Special Dosage Forms 
 Local therapy, such as topical preparations for skin disease, oph-
thalmic forms for eye disease, intra-articular injections for joint 
disease, inhaled steroids for asthma, and hydrocortisone enemas 
for ulcerative colitis, provides a means of delivering large amounts 
of steroid to the diseased tissue with reduced systemic effects. 
 Beclomethasone dipropionate, and several other glucocorti-
coids—primarily budesonide, flunisolide, and mometasone 
furoate, administered as aerosols—have been found to be extremely 
useful in the treatment of asthma (see  Chapter 20 ). 
 Beclomethasone dipropionate, triamcinolone acetonide, budes-
onide, flunisolide, and mometasone furoate are available as nasal 
sprays for the topical treatment of allergic rhinitis. They are effec-
tive at doses (one or two sprays one, two, or three times daily) that 
in most patients result in plasma levels that are too low to influ-
ence adrenal function or have any other systemic effects. 
 Corticosteroids incorporated in ointments, creams, lotions, 
and sprays are used extensively in dermatology. These preparations 
are discussed in more detail in  Chapter 61 . 
 MINERALOCORTICOIDS (ALDOSTERONE, 
DEOXYCORTICOSTERONE, 
FLUDROCORTISONE) 
 The most important mineralocorticoid in humans is aldosterone. 
However, small amounts of deoxycorticosterone (DOC) are also 
formed and released. Although the amount is normally insignifi-
cant, DOC was of some importance therapeutically in the past. Its 
actions, effects, and metabolism are qualitatively similar to those 
described below for aldosterone. 
 Fludrocortisone, a synthetic corticosteroid, is the most com-
monly prescribed salt-retaining hormone. 
 Aldosterone 
 Aldosterone is synthesized mainly in the zona glomerulosa of 
the adrenal cortex. Its structure and synthesis are illustrated in 
 Figure 39–1 . 
 The rate of aldosterone secretion is subject to several influ-
ences. ACTH produces a moderate stimulation of its release, but 
this effect is not sustained for more than a few days in the normal 
individual. Although aldosterone is no less than one third as effec-
tive as cortisol in suppressing ACTH, the quantities of aldosterone 
produced by the adrenal cortex and its plasma concentrations are 
insufficient to participate in any significant feedback control of 
ACTH secretion. 
 Without ACTH, aldosterone secretion falls to about half the 
normal rate, indicating that other factors, eg, angiotensin, are able 
to maintain and perhaps regulate its secretion (see  Chapter 17 ). 
Independent variations between cortisol and aldosterone secretion 
can also be demonstrated by means of lesions in the nervous 
system such as decerebration, which decreases the secretion of 
cortisol while increasing the secretion of aldosterone. 
 A. Physiologic and Pharmacologic Effects 
 Aldosterone and other steroids with mineralocorticoid properties 
promote the reabsorption of sodium from the distal part of the 
distal convoluted renal tubule and from the cortical collecting 
tubules, loosely coupled to the excretion of potassium and hydro-
gen ion. Sodium reabsorption in the sweat and salivary glands, 
gastrointestinal mucosa, and across cell membranes in general is 
also increased. Excessive levels of aldosterone produced by 
tumors or overdosage with synthetic mineralocorticoids lead to 
hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, increased plasma volume, and 
hypertension. 
 Mineralocorticoids act by binding to the mineralocorticoid 
receptor in the cytoplasm of target cells, especially principal 
cells of the distal convoluted and collecting tubules of the kid-
ney. The drug-receptor complex activates a series of events 
similar to those described above for the glucocorticoids and 
illustrated in  Figure 39–4 . It is of interest that this receptor has 
the same affinity for cortisol, which is present in much higher 
concentrations in the extracellular fluid. The specificity for 
mineralocorticoids in the kidney appears to be conferred, at 
least in part, by the presence of the enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 2, which converts cortisol to cortisone. The 
latter has low affinity for the receptor and is inactive as a min-
eralocorticoid or glucocorticoid in the kidney. The major effect 
of activation of the aldosterone receptor is increased expression 
of Na + /K + -ATPase and the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC). 
 B. Metabolism 
 Aldosterone is secreted at the rate of 100–200 mcg/d in normal 
individuals with a moderate dietary salt intake. The plasma level 
in men (resting supine) is about 0.007 mcg/dL. The half-life of 
aldosterone injected in tracer quantities is 15–20 minutes, and it 
does not appear to be firmly bound to serum proteins. 
 The metabolism of aldosterone is similar to that of cortisol, 
about 50 mcg/24 h appearing in the urine as conjugated tetrahy-
droaldosterone. Approximately 5–15 mcg/24 h is excreted free or 
as the 3-oxo glucuronide. 
 Deoxycorticosterone (DOC) 
 DOC, which also serves as a precursor of aldosterone ( Figure 39–1 ), 
is normally secreted in amounts of about 200 mcg/d. Its half-life 
when injected into the human circulation is about 70 minutes. 
Preliminary estimates of its concentration in plasma are approxi-
mately 0.03 mcg/dL. The control of its secretion differs from 
that of aldosterone in that the secretion of DOC is primarily 
under the control of ACTH. Although the response to ACTH is 
enhanced by dietary sodium restriction, a low-salt diet does not 
CHAPTER 39 Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical Antagonists     709
increase DOC secretion. The secretion of DOC may be markedly 
increased in abnormal conditions such as adrenocortical carci-
noma and congenital adrenal hyperplasia with reduced P450c11 
or P450c17 activity. 
 Fludrocortisone 
 This compound, a potent steroid with both glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid activity, is the most widely used mineralocorti-
coid. Oral doses of 0.1 mg two to seven times weekly have potent 
salt-retaining activity and are used in the treatment of adrenocorti-
cal insufficiency associated with mineralocorticoid deficiency. 
These dosages are too small to have important anti-inflammatory 
or antigrowth effects. 
 ADRENAL ANDROGENS 
 The adrenal cortex secretes large amounts of DHEA and smaller 
amounts of androstenedione and testosterone. Although these 
androgens are thought to contribute to the normal maturation 
process, they do not stimulate or support major androgen-depen-
dent pubertal changes in humans. Recent studies suggest that 
DHEA and its sulfate may have other important physiologic 
actions. If that is correct, these results are probably due to the 
peripheral conversion of DHEA to more potent androgens or to 
estrogens and interaction with androgen and estrogen receptors, 
respectively. Additional effects may be exerted through an interac-
tion with the GABA A and glutamate receptors in the brain or with 
a nuclear receptor in several central and peripheral sites. The 
therapeutic use of DHEA in humans has been explored, but the 
substance has already been adopted with uncritical enthusiasm by 
members of the sports drug culture and the vitamin and food 
supplement culture. 
 The results of a placebo-controlled trial of DHEA in patients 
with systemic lupus erythematosus have been reported as well as 
those of a study of DHEA replacement in women with adrenal 
insufficiency. In both studies a small beneficial effect was seen, 
with significant improvement of the disease in the former and a 
clearly added sense of well-being in the latter. The androgenic or 
estrogenic actions of DHEA could explain the effects of the com-
pound in both situations. 
 ■ ANTAGONISTS OF 
ADRENOCORTICAL AGENTS 
 SYNTHESIS INHIBITORS & 
GLUCOCORTICOID ANTAGONISTS 
 Inhibitors of steroid synthesis act at several different steps and one 
glucocorticoid antagonist acts at the receptor level. 
 Aminoglutethimide 
 Aminoglutethimide ( Figure 39–5 ) blocks the conversion of cho-
lesterol to pregnenolone (see  Figure 39–1 ) and causes a reduction 
NH2
O
O
C2H5
Metyrapone
CH3
CH3
OCH2
CH3C
CH2
C
C
N
N
CH
Mitotane
CI
C
H
H
CI
CI
CI
CI
Ketoconazole
N
N
Aminoglutethimide
N
H
O
O
O
N
N
O
CI
 FIGURE 39–5  Some adrenocortical antagonists. Because of their toxicity, some of these compounds are no longer available in the USA. 
710    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
in the synthesis of all hormonally active steroids. It has been used 
in conjunction with dexamethasone or hydrocortisone to reduce 
or eliminate estrogen production in patients with carcinoma of the 
breast. In a dosage of 1 g/d it was well tolerated; however, with 
higher dosages, lethargy and skin rash were common effects. The 
use of aminoglutethimide in breast cancer patients has now been 
supplanted by tamoxifen or by another class of drugs, the aro-
matase inhibitors (see Chapters 40 and 54). Aminoglutethimide 
can be used in conjunction with metyrapone or ketoconazole to 
reduce steroid secretion in patients with Cushing’s syndrome due 
to adrenocortical cancer who do not respond to mitotane. 
 Aminoglutethimide also apparently increases the clearance of 
some steroids. It has been shown to enhance the metabolism of 
dexamethasone, reducing its half-life from 4–5 hours to 2 hours. 
 Ketoconazole 
 Ketoconazole, an antifungal imidazole derivative (see  Chapter 48 ), 
is a potent and rather nonselective inhibitor of adrenal and 
gonadal steroid synthesis. This compound inhibits the cholesterol 
side-chain cleavage, P450c17, C17,20-lyase, 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase, and P450c11 enzymes required for steroid hor-
mone synthesis. The sensitivity of the P450 enzymes to this com-
pound in mammalian tissues is much lower than that needed to 
treat fungal infections, so that its inhibitory effects on steroid 
biosynthesis are seen only at high doses. 
 Ketoconazole has been used for the treatment of patients 
with Cushing’s syndrome due to several causes. Dosages of 
200–1200 mg/d have produced a reduction in hormone levels 
and clinical improvement in some patients. This drug has some 
hepatotoxicity and should be started at 200 mg/d and slowly 
increased by 200 mg/d every 2–3 days up to a total daily dose 
of 1000 mg. 
 Metyrapone 
 Metyrapone ( Figure 39–5 ) is a relatively selective inhibitor of 
steroid 11-hydroxylation, interfering with cortisol and corticoster-
one synthesis. In the presence of a normal pituitary gland, there is 
a compensatory increase in pituitary ACTH release and adrenal 
11-deoxycortisol secretion. This response is a measure of the 
capacity of the anterior pituitary to produce ACTH and has been 
adapted for clinical use as a diagnostic test. Although the toxicity 
of metyrapone is much lower than that of mitotane (see text that 
follows), the drug may produce transient dizziness and gastroin-
testinal disturbances. This agent has not been widely used for the 
treatment of Cushing’s syndrome. However, in doses of 0.25 g 
twice daily to 1 g four times daily, metyrapone can reduce cortisol 
production to normal levels in some patients with endogenous 
Cushing’s syndrome. Thus, it may be useful in the management of 
severe manifestations of cortisol excess while the cause of this 
condition is being determined or in conjunction with radiation or 
surgical treatment. Metyrapone is the only adrenal-inhibiting 
medication that can be administered to pregnant women with 
Cushing’s syndrome. The major adverse effects observed are salt 
and water retention and hirsutism resulting from diversion of the 
11-deoxycortisol precursor to DOC and androgen synthesis. 
 Metyrapone is commonly used in tests of adrenal function. 
The blood levels of 11-deoxycortisol and the urinary excretion of 
17-hydroxycorticoids are measured before and after administra-
tion of the compound. Normally, there is a twofold or greater 
increase in the urinary 17-hydroxycorticoid excretion. A dose of 
300–500 mg every 4 hours for six doses is often used, and urine 
collections are made on the day before and the day after treatment. 
In patients with Cushing’s syndrome, a normal response to 
metyrapone indicates that the cortisol excess is not the result of a 
cortisol-secreting adrenal carcinoma or adenoma, since secretion 
by such tumors produces suppression of ACTH and atrophy of 
normal adrenal cortex. 
 Pituitary function may also be tested by administering 
metyrapone, 2–3 g orally at midnight and by measuring the level 
of ACTH or 11-deoxycortisol in blood drawn at 8 AM or by 
comparing the excretion of 17-hydroxycorticosteroids in the urine 
during the 24-hour periods preceding and following administra-
tion of the drug. In patients with suspected or known lesions of 
the pituitary, this procedure is a means of estimating the ability 
of the gland to produce ACTH. Metyrapone has been with-
drawn from the market in the USA but is available on a compas-
sionate basis. 
 Trilostane 
 Trilostane is a 3β-17 hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase inhibitor that 
interferes with the synthesis of adrenal and gonadal hormones and 
is comparable to aminoglutethimide. Trilostane’s adverse effects 
are predominantly gastrointestinal; adverse effects occur in about 
50% of patients with both trilostane and aminoglutethimide. 
There is no cross-resistance or crossover of side effects between 
these compounds. Trilostane is not available in the USA. 
 Abiraterone 
 Abiraterone is the newest of the steroid synthesis inhibitors to 
enter clinical trials. It blocks 17α-hydroxylase (P450c17) and 
17,20-lyase ( Figure 39–1 ), and predictably reduces synthesis of 
cortisol and gonadal steroids in the adrenal and gonadal steroids 
in the gonads. A compensatory increase occurs in ACTH and 
aldosterone synthesis, but this can be prevented by concomitant 
administration of dexamethasone. Abiraterone is an orally active 
steroid prodrug and has been studied in the treatment of refrac-
tory prostate cancer. 
 Mifepristone (RU-486) 
 The search for a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist finally suc-
ceeded in the early 1980s with the development of the 11β-
aminophenyl-substituted 19-norsteroid called RU-486, later 
named mifepristone. Unlike the enzyme inhibitors previously 
discussed, mifepristone is a pharmacologic antagonist at the ste-
roid receptor. This compound has strong antiprogestin activity 
and initially was proposed as a contraceptive-contragestive agent. 
High doses of mifepristone exert antiglucocorticoid activity 
by blocking the glucocorticoid receptor, since mifepristone binds 
to it with high affinity, causing (1) some stabilization of the 
CHAPTER 39 Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical Antagonists     711
hsp-glucocorticoid receptor complex and inhibition of the disso-
ciation of the RU-486–bound glucocorticoid receptor from the 
hsp chaperone proteins; and (2) alteration of the interaction of the 
glucocorticoid receptor with coregulators, favoring the formation 
of a transcriptionally inactive complex in the cell nucleus. The 
result is inhibition of glucocorticoid receptor activation. 
 The mean half-life of mifepristone is 20 hours. This is longer 
than that of many natural and synthetic glucocorticoid agonists 
(dexamethasone has a half-life of 4–5 hours). Less than 1% of the 
daily dose is excreted in the urine, suggesting a minor role of kid-
neys in the clearance of the compound. The long plasma half-life 
of mifepristone results from extensive and strong binding to 
plasma proteins. Less than 5% of the compound is found in the 
free form when plasma is analyzed by equilibrium dialysis. 
Mifepristone can bind to albumin and α 1 -acid glycoprotein, but 
it has no affinity for corticosteroid-binding globulin. 
 In humans, mifepristone causes generalized glucocorticoid resis-
tance. Given orally to several patients with Cushing’s syndrome 
due to ectopic ACTH production or adrenal carcinoma, it was 
able to reverse the cushingoid phenotype, to eliminate carbohy-
drate intolerance, normalize blood pressure, to correct thyroid and 
gonadal hormone suppression, and to ameliorate the psychological 
sequelae of hypercortisolism in these patients. At present, this use 
of mifepristone can only be recommended for inoperable patients 
with ectopic ACTH secretion or adrenal carcinoma who have 
failed to respond to other therapeutic manipulations. Its pharma-
cology and use in women as a progesterone antagonist are discussed 
in  Chapter 40 . 
 Mitotane 
 Mitotane ( Figure 39–5 ), a drug related to the DDT class of insec-
ticides, has a nonselective cytotoxic action on the adrenal cortex in 
dogs and to a lesser extent in humans. This drug is administered 
orally in divided doses up to 12 g daily. About one third of 
patients with adrenal carcinoma show a reduction in tumor mass. 
In 80% of patients, the toxic effects are sufficiently severe to 
require dose reduction. These include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, 
depression, somnolence, and skin rashes. The drug has been with-
drawn from the market in the USA but is available on a compas-
sionate basis. 
 MINERALOCORTICOID ANTAGONISTS 
 In addition to agents that interfere with aldosterone synthesis (see 
above), there are steroids that compete with aldosterone for its 
receptor and decrease its effect peripherally. Progesterone is mildly 
active in this respect. 
 Spironolactone is a 7α-acetylthiospironolactone. Its onset of 
action is slow, and the effects last for 2–3 days after the drug is 
discontinued. It is used in the treatment of primary aldosteronism 
in dosages of 50–100 mg/d. This agent reverses many of the 
manifestations of aldosteronism. It has been useful in establishing 
the diagnosis in some patients and in ameliorating the signs and 
symptoms when surgical removal of an adenoma is delayed. When 
used diagnostically for the detection of aldosteronism in 
hypokalemic patients with hypertension, dosages of 400–500 mg/d 
for 4–8 days—with an adequate intake of sodium and potassium—
restore potassium levels to or toward normal. Spironolactone is 
also useful in preparing these patients for surgery. Dosages of 
300–400 mg/d for 2 weeks are used for this purpose and may 
reduce the incidence of cardiac arrhythmias. 
 
S
C
CH3
O
H3C
H3C
O
O
O
Spironolactone
 Spironolactone is also an androgen antagonist and as such is 
sometimes used in the treatment of hirsutism in women. Dosages 
of 50–200 mg/d cause a reduction in the density, diameter, and 
rate of growth of facial hair in patients with idiopathic hirsutism 
or hirsutism secondary to androgen excess. The effect can usually 
be seen in 2 months and becomes maximal in about 6 months. 
 Spironolactone as a diuretic is discussed in  Chapter 15 . The 
drug has benefits in heart failure greater than those predicted from 
its diuretic effects alone (see  Chapter 13 ). Adverse effects reported 
for spironolactone include hyperkalemia, cardiac arrhythmia, 
menstrual abnormalities, gynecomastia, sedation, headache, gas-
trointestinal disturbances, and skin rashes. 
 Eplerenone, another aldosterone antagonist, is approved for 
the treatment of hypertension (see Chapters 11 and 15). Like 
spironolactone, eplerenone has also been found to reduce mortal-
ity in heart failure. This aldosterone receptor antagonist is some-
what more selective than spironolactone and has no reported 
effects on androgen receptors. The standard dosage in hyperten-
sion is 50–100 mg/d. The most common toxicity is hyperkalemia, 
but this is usually mild. 
 Drospirenone, a progestin in an oral contraceptive (see 
 Chapter 40 ), also antagonizes the effects of aldosterone. 
712    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E 1
GLUCOCORTICOIDS FOR ORAL & 
PARENTERAL USE
Betamethasone (Celestone)
Oral: 0.6 mg/5 mL syrup
Betamethasone sodium phosphate (Celestone Phosphate)
Parenteral: 4 mg/mL for IV, IM, intralesional, or intra-articular 
injection
Cortisone (generic, Cortone Acetate)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Dexamethasone (generic, Decadron)
Oral: 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2, 4, 6 mg tablets; 0.5 mg/5 mL elixir; 
0.5 mg/5 mL, 1 mg/mL solution
Dexamethasone acetate (generic, Decadron-LA)
Parenteral: 8 mg/mL suspension for IM, intralesional, or intra-
articular injection; 16 mg/mL suspension for intralesional injection
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate (generic, Decadron 
Phosphate)
Parenteral: 4, 10, 20 mg/mL for IV, IM, intralesional, or intra-
articular injection; 24 mg/mL for IV use only
Hydrocortisone [cortisol] (generic, Cortef)
Oral: 5, 10, 20 mg tablets
Hydrocortisone acetate (generic)
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg/mL suspension for intralesional, soft tissue, 
or intra-articular injection
Hydrocortisone cypionate (Cortef)
Oral: 10 mg/5 mL suspension
Hydrocortisone sodium phosphate (Hydrocortone)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IV, IM, or SC injection
Hydrocortisone sodium succinate (generic, SoluCortef)
Parenteral: 100, 250, 500, 1000 mg/vial for IV, IM injection
Methylprednisolone (generic, Medrol)
Oral: 2, 4, 8, 16, 24, 32 mg tablets
Methylprednisolone acetate (generic, DepoMedrol)
Parenteral: 20, 40, 80 mg/mL for IM, intralesional, or intra-articular 
injection
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate (generic, Solu-Medrol)
Parenteral: 40, 125, 500, 1000, 2000 mg/vial
Prednisolone (generic, Delta-Cortef, Prelone)
Oral: 5 mg tablets; 5, 15 mg/5 mL syrup
Prednisolone acetate (generic)
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg/mL for soft tissue or intra-articular injection
Prednisolone sodium phosphate (generic, Hydeltrasol)
Oral: 5 mg/5 mL solution
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL for IV, IM, intra-articular, or intralesional 
injection
Prednisone (generic, Meticorten)
Oral: 1, 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 50 mg tablets; 1, 5 mg/mL solution and 
syrup
Triamcinolone acetonide (generic, Kenalog)
Parenteral: 3, 10, 40 mg/mL for IM, intra-articular, or intralesional 
injection
Triamcinolone hexacetonide (Aristospan)
Parenteral: 5, 20 mg/mL for intra-articular, intralesional, or sublesional 
injection
MINERALOCORTICOIDS
Fludrocortisone acetate (generic, Florinef Acetate)
Oral: 0.1 mg tablets
ADRENAL STEROID INHIBITORS
Ketoconazole (generic, Nizoral)
Oral: 200 mg tablets (unlabeled use)
Mifepristone (Mifeprex)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Mitotane (Lysodren)
Oral: 500 mg tablets 
1Glucocorticoids for aerosol use: See Chapter 20. Glucocorticoids for dermatologic use: See Chapter 61. Glucocorticoids for gastrointestinal use: See Chapter 62.
 REFERENCES 
 Alesci S et al: Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis: From basic mechanisms to 
clinical aspects. Neuroimmunomodulation 2005;12:1. 
 Bamberger CM, Schulte HM, Chrousos GP: Molecular determinants of gluco-
corticoid receptor function and tissue sensitivity to glucocorticoids. Endocr 
Rev 1996;17:245. 
 Charmandari E, Kino T: Chrousos syndrome: A seminal report, a phylogenetic 
enigma and the clinical implications of glucocorticoid signaling changes. 
Eur J Clin Invest 2010;40:932. 
 Charmandari E, Tsigos C, Chrousos GP: Neuroendocrinology of stress. Ann 
Rev Physiol 2005;67:259. 
 Chrousos GP: Stress and disorders of the stress system. Nat Endocrinol Rev 
2009;5:374. 
 Chrousos GP, Kino T: Glucocorticoid signaling in the cell: Expanding clinical 
implications to complex human behavioral and somatic disorders. In: 
Glucocorticoids and mood: Clinical manifestations, risk factors, and 
molecular mechanisms. Proc NY Acad Sci 2009;1179:153. 
 Elenkov IJ, Chrousos GP: Stress hormones, TH1/TH2 patterns, pro/anti-in-
flammatory cytokines and susceptibility to disease. Trends Endocrinol 
Metab 1999;10:359. 
 Elenkov IJ et al: Cytokine dysregulation, inflammation, and wellbeing. 
Neuroimmunomodulation 2005;12:255. 
 Franchimont D et al: Glucocorticoids and inflammation revisited: The state of 
the art. Neuroimmunomodulation 2002–03;10:247. 
 Graber AL et al: Natural history of pituitary-adrenal recovery following long-term 
suppression with corticosteroids. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1965;25:11. 
 Hochberg Z, Pacak K, Chrousos GP: Endocrine withdrawal syndromes. 
Endocrine Rev 2003;24:523. 
 Kalantaridou S, Chrousos GP: Clinical review 148: Monogenic disorders of 
puberty. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:2481. 
 Kino T, Charmandari E, Chrousos G (editors): Glucocorticoid action: Basic and 
clinical implications. Ann NY Acad Sci 2004;1024 (entire volume). 
 Kino T et al: The GTP-binding (G) protein β interacts with the activated glu-
cocorticoid receptor and suppresses its transcriptional activity in the 
nucleus. J Cell Biol 2005;20:885. 
CHAPTER 39 Adrenocorticosteroids & Adrenocortical Antagonists     713
 Koch CA, Pacak K, Chrousos GP: The molecular pathogenesis of hereditary and 
sporadic adrenocortical and adrenomedullary tumors. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2002;87:5367. 
 Mao J, Regelson W, Kalimi M: Molecular mechanism of RU 486 action: A 
review. Mol Cellular Biochem 1992;109:1. 
 Marik PE et al: Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management 
of corticosteroid insufficiency in critical illness: Recommendations of an 
international task force. Crit Care Med 2008;36:1937. 
 Meduri GU et al: Steroid treatment in ARDS: A critical appraisal of the ARDS 
network trial and the recent literature. Intens Care Med 2008;34:61. 
 Meduri GU et al: Activation and regulation of systemic inflammation in ARDS: 
Rationale for prolonged glucocorticoid therapy. Chest 2009;136:1631. 
 Merke DP et al: Future directions in the study and management of congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Ann Intern Med 
2002;136:320. 
 Nader N, Chrousos GP, Kino T: Interactions of the circadian CLOCK system 
and the HPA axis. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2010;21:277. 
 Pervanidou P, Kanaka-Gantenbein C, Chrousos GP: Assessment of meta-
bolic profile in a clinical setting. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 
2006;9:589. 
 Tsigos C, Chrousos GP: Differential diagnosis and management of Cushing’s 
syndrome. Annu Rev Med 1996;47:443. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 The patient should be placed on replacement oral hydrocor-
tisone at 10 mg/m 2 /d and fludrocortisone at 75 mcg/d. He 
should be given a MedicAlert bracelet and instructions for 
minor and major stress glucocorticoid coverage at 2 times 
and 10 times replacement of hydrocortisone over 24 and 
48 hours, respectively. 
This page intentionally left blank 
715
 A 25-year-old woman with menarche at 13 years and men-
strual periods until about 1 year ago complains of hot flushes, 
skin and vaginal dryness, weakness, poor sleep, and scanty 
and infrequent menstrual periods of a year’s duration. She 
visits her gynecologist, who obtains plasma levels of follicle-
stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone, both of which 
are moderately elevated. She is diagnosed with premature 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
ovarian failure and recommended estrogen and progesterone 
replacement therapy. A dual-energy absorptiometry scan 
(DEXA) reveals a bone density t-score of <2.5 SD, ie, frank 
osteoporosis. How should the ovarian hormones she lacks be 
replaced? What extra measures should she take for her osteo-
porosis while receiving treatment? 
40
 The Gonadal Hormones 
& Inhibitors 
 George P. Chrousos, MD 
 ■ THE OVARY ESTROGENS, 
PROGESTINS, OTHER OVARIAN 
HORMONES, ORAL 
CONTRACEPTIVES, INHIBITORS & 
ANTAGONISTS, & OVULATION
INDUCING AGENTS 
 The ovary has important gametogenic functions that are inte-
grated with its hormonal activity. In the human female, the gonad 
is relatively quiescent during childhood, the period of rapid 
growth and maturation. At puberty, the ovary begins a 30- to 
40-year period of cyclic function called the  menstrual cycle 
because of the regular episodes of bleeding that are its most obvi-
ous manifestation. It then fails to respond to gonadotropins 
secreted by the anterior pituitary gland, and the cessation of cyclic 
bleeding that occurs is called  menopause. 
 The mechanism responsible for the onset of ovarian function 
at the time of puberty is thought to be neural in origin, because 
the immature gonad can be stimulated by gonadotropins already 
present in the pituitary and because the pituitary is responsive to 
exogenous hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone. The 
maturation of centers in the brain may withdraw a childhood-
related inhibitory effect upon hypothalamic arcuate nucleus neurons, 
allowing them to produce  gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH) in pulses with the appropriate amplitude, which stimu-
lates the release of  follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and 
 luteinizing hormone (LH) (see  Chapter 37 ). At first, small 
amounts of the latter two hormones are released during the night, 
and the limited quantities of ovarian estrogen secreted in response 
start to cause breast development. Subsequently, FSH and LH are 
secreted throughout the day and night, causing secretion of higher 
amounts of estrogen and leading to further breast enlargement, 
alterations in fat distribution, and a growth spurt that culminates 
in epiphysial closure in the long bones. The change of ovarian 
function at puberty is called  gonadarche. 
 A year or so after gonadarche, sufficient estrogen is produced 
to induce endometrial changes and periodic bleeding. After the 
first few irregular cycles, which may be anovulatory, normal cyclic 
function is established. 
 At the beginning of each cycle, a variable number of follicles 
(vesicular follicles), each containing an ovum, begin to enlarge in 
response to FSH. After 5 or 6 days, one follicle, called the dominant 
716    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
follicle, begins to develop more rapidly. The outer theca and inner 
granulosa cells of this follicle multiply and, under the influence of 
LH, synthesize and release estrogens at an increasing rate. The 
estrogens appear to inhibit FSH release and may lead to regression 
of the smaller, less mature follicles. The mature dominant ovarian 
follicle consists of an ovum surrounded by a fluid-filled antrum 
lined by granulosa and theca cells. The estrogen secretion reaches 
a peak just before midcycle, and the granulosa cells begin to 
secrete progesterone. These changes stimulate the brief surge in 
LH and FSH release that precedes and causes ovulation. When the 
follicle ruptures, the ovum is released into the abdominal cavity 
near the opening of the uterine tube. 
 Following the above events, the cavity of the ruptured follicle fills 
with blood (corpus hemorrhagicum), and the luteinized theca and 
granulosa cells proliferate and replace the blood to form the corpus 
luteum. The cells of this structure produce estrogens and progester-
one for the remainder of the cycle, or longer if pregnancy occurs. 
 If pregnancy does not occur, the corpus luteum begins to 
degenerate and ceases hormone production, eventually becoming 
a corpus albicans. The endometrium, which proliferated dur-
ing the follicular phase and developed its glandular function 
during the luteal phase, is shed in the process of menstruation. 
These events are summarized in  Figure 40–1 . 
 The ovary normally ceases its gametogenic and endocrine func-
tion with time. This change is accompanied by a cessation in uter-
ine bleeding (menopause) and occurs at a mean age of 52 years in 
the USA. Although the ovary ceases to secrete estrogen, significant 
levels of estrogen persist in many women as a result of conversion 
of adrenal and ovarian steroids such as androstenedione to estrone 
and estradiol in adipose and possibly other nonendocrine tissues. 
 Disturbances in Ovarian Function 
 Disturbances of cyclic function are common even during the peak 
years of reproduction. A minority of these result from inflammatory 
or neoplastic processes that influence the functions of the uterus, 
ovaries, or pituitary. Many of the minor disturbances leading to 
periods of amenorrhea or anovulatory cycles are self-limited. They 
are often associated with emotional or physical stress and reflect 
temporary alterations in the stress centers in the brain that control 
the secretion of GnRH. Anovulatory cycles are also associated with 
eating disorders (bulimia, anorexia nervosa) and with severe exercise 
such as distance running and swimming. Among the more com-
mon organic causes of persistent ovulatory disturbances are pituitary 
prolactinomas and syndromes and tumors characterized by excessive 
ovarian or adrenal androgen production. Normal ovarian function 
can be modified by androgens produced by the adrenal cortex or 
tumors arising from it. The ovary also gives rise to androgen-produc-
ing neoplasms such as arrhenoblastomas, as well as to estrogen-pro-
ducing granulosa cell tumors. 
 THE ESTROGENS 
 Estrogenic activity is shared by a large number of chemical sub-
stances. In addition to the variety of steroidal estrogens derived 
from animal sources, numerous nonsteroidal estrogens have been 
7
0
14
21
28
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
400 
200 
0 
20 
0 
mIU/mL
pg/mL
ng/mL
Gonadotropins
Endometrium
Follicular development
Estradiol
Progesterone
Days
LH
FSH
1
7
14
21
28
 FIGURE 40–1  The menstrual cycle, showing plasma levels of 
pituitary and ovarian hormones and histologic changes. 
A C R O N Y M S
CBG
Corticosteroid-binding globulin (transcortin)
DHEA
Dehydroepiandrosterone
DHEAS
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
ERE
Estrogen response element
FSH
Follicle-stimulating hormone
GnRH
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
HDL
High-density lipoprotein
HRT
Hormone replacement therapy (also called HT)
LDL
Low-density lipoprotein
LH
Luteinizing hormone
PRE
Progesterone response element
SERM
Selective estrogen receptor modulator
SHBG
Sex hormone-binding globulin
TBG
Thyroxine-binding globulin
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     717
the first part of the menstrual cycle estrogens are produced in the 
ovarian follicle by the theca and granulosa cells. After ovulation, 
the estrogens as well as progesterone are synthesized by the 
luteinized granulosa and theca cells of the corpus luteum, and the 
pathways of biosynthesis are slightly different. 
 During pregnancy, a large amount of estrogen is synthesized by 
the fetoplacental unit—consisting of the fetal adrenal zone, secret-
ing androgen precursor, and the placenta, which aromatizes it into 
estrogen. The estriol synthesized by the fetoplacental unit is 
released into the maternal circulation and excreted into the urine. 
Repeated assay of maternal urinary estriol excretion has been used 
in the assessment of fetal well-being. 
 One of the most prolific natural sources of estrogenic substances 
is the stallion, which liberates more of these hormones than the 
pregnant mare or pregnant woman. The equine estrogens—equilenin 
and equilin—and their congeners are unsaturated in the B as well as 
the A ring and are excreted in large quantities in urine, from which 
they can be recovered and used for medicinal purposes. 
 In normal women, estradiol is produced at a rate that varies 
during the menstrual cycle, resulting in plasma levels as low as 
synthesized. Many phenols are estrogenic, and estrogenic activity 
has been identified in such diverse forms of life as those found in 
ocean sediments. Estrogen-mimetic compounds (flavonoids) are 
found in many plants, including saw palmetto, and soybeans and 
other foods. Studies have shown that a diet rich in these plant 
products may cause slight estrogenic effects. Additionally, some 
compounds used in the manufacture of plastics (bisphenols, 
alkylphenols, phthalate phenols) have been found to be estro-
genic. It has been proposed that these agents are associated with 
an increased breast cancer incidence in both women and men in 
the industrialized world. 
 Natural Estrogens 
 The major estrogens produced by women are  estradiol (estradiol-17β, 
E 2 ),  estrone (E 1 ), and  estriol (E 3 ) ( Figure 40–2 ). Estradiol is the 
major secretory product of the ovary. Although some estrone is 
produced in the ovary, most estrone and estriol are formed in the 
liver from estradiol or in peripheral tissues from androstenedione 
and other androgens (see Figure 39–1). As noted above, during 
Luteal phase
Aromatase
Follicular phase
H3C
H3C
O
Androstenedione
O
Testosterone
OH
HO
17β-Estradiol
H3C
H3C
O
OH
H3C
H3C
Estrone
O
HO
H3C
16α-Hydroxyestrone
O
HO
OH
HO
Estriol
OH
H3C
OH
2-Hydroxyestradiol
and other metabolites
2-Hydroxyestrone
and other metabolites
Progesterone
17α-Hydroxypregnenolone
17α-Hydroxyprogesterone
Dehydroepiandrosterone
Pregnenolone
Pregnenolone
16
15
17
2
3 4 5
1
10
6
8
7
9
11
13
14
12
18
19
A
B
C
D
 FIGURE 40–2  Biosynthesis and metabolism of estrogens and testosterone. 
718    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
50 pg/mL in the early follicular phase to as high as 350–850 pg/mL 
at the time of the preovulatory peak ( Figure 40–1 ). 
 Synthetic Estrogens 
 A variety of chemical alterations have been applied to the natural 
estrogens. The most important effect of these alterations has been 
to increase their oral effectiveness. Some structures are shown in 
 Figure 40–3 . Those with therapeutic use are listed in  Table 40–1 . 
 In addition to the steroidal estrogens, a variety of nonsteroidal 
compounds with estrogenic activity have been synthesized and 
used clinically. These include dienestrol, diethylstilbestrol, benze-
strol, hexestrol, methestrol, methallenestril, and chlorotrianisene 
( Figure 40–3 ). 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 When released into the circulation, estradiol binds strongly to an α 2 
globulin (sex hormone-binding globulin [SHBG]) and with lower 
affinity to albumin. Bound estrogen is relatively unavailable for dif-
fusion into cells, and it is the free fraction that is physiologically 
active. Estradiol is converted by the liver and other tissues to estrone 
and estriol ( Figure 40–2 ) and their 2-hydroxylated derivatives and 
conjugated metabolites (which are too insoluble in lipid to cross the 
cell membrane readily) and excreted in the bile. Estrone and estriol 
have low affinity for the estrogen receptor. However, the conjugates 
may be hydrolyzed in the intestine to active, reabsorbable com-
pounds. Estrogens are also excreted in small amounts in the breast 
milk of nursing mothers. 
 Because significant amounts of estrogens and their active 
metabolites are excreted in the bile and reabsorbed from the intes-
tine, the resulting enterohepatic circulation ensures that orally 
administered estrogens will have a high ratio of hepatic to periph-
eral effects. As noted below, the hepatic effects are thought to be 
responsible for some undesirable actions such as synthesis of 
increased clotting factors and plasma renin substrate. The hepatic 
effects of estrogen can be minimized by routes that avoid first-pass 
liver exposure, ie, vaginal, transdermal, or by injection. 
 Physiologic Effects 
 A. Mechanism 
 Plasma estrogens in the blood and interstitial fluid are bound to 
SHBG, from which they dissociate to enter the cell and bind to 
their receptor. Two genes code for two estrogen receptor isoforms, 
HO
Estriol
OH
H3C
OH
HO
Estradiol
OH
H3C
H3C
O
HO
Estrone
HO
Ethinyl estradiol
OH
H3C
C
CH
20
21
O
Mestranol
OH
H3C
C
CH
H3C
O
Quinestrol
OH
H3C
C
CH
Steroidal,
natural
Steroidal,
synthetic
C
CH3
CH3
COOH
O
H3C
CH
C2H5
Methallenestril
O
H3C
C
C
Cl
O
CH3
O
CH3
Chlorotrianisene
HO
C
C
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
HO
Diethylstilbestrol
Nonsteroidal,
synthetic
 FIGURE 40–3  Compounds with estrogenic activity. 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     719
α and β, which are members of the superfamily of steroid, sterol, 
retinoic acid, and thyroid receptors. The estrogen receptors are 
found predominantly in the nucleus bound to heat shock proteins 
that stabilize them (see Figure 39–4). 
 Binding of the hormone to its receptor alters its conformation 
and releases it from the stabilizing proteins (predominantly 
Hsp90). The receptor-hormone complex forms homodimers that 
bind to a specific sequence of nucleotides called  estrogen response 
elements (EREs) in the promoters of various genes and regulate 
their transcription. The ERE is composed of two half-sites arranged 
as a palindrome separated by a small group of nucleotides called 
the spacer. The interaction of a receptor dimer with the ERE also 
involves a number of nuclear proteins, the coregulators, as well as 
components of the transcription machinery. The receptor may 
also bind to other transcription factors to influence the effects of 
these factors on their responsive genes. 
 The relative concentrations and types of receptors, receptor 
coregulators, and transcription factors confer the cell specificity of 
the hormone’s actions. The genomic effects of estrogens are 
mainly due to proteins synthesized by translation of RNA tran-
scribed from a responsive gene. Some of the effects of estrogens are 
indirect, mediated by the autocrine and paracrine actions of auta-
coids such as growth factors, lipids, glycolipids, and cytokines 
produced by the target cells in response to estrogen. 
 Rapid estrogen-induced effects such as granulosa cell Ca 2+ 
uptake and increased uterine blood flow do not require gene acti-
vation. These appear to be mediated by nongenomic effects of the 
classic estrogen receptor-estrogen complex, influencing several 
intracellular signaling pathways. 
 Recently, all steroid receptors except the mineralocorticoid 
receptors were shown to have palmitoylation motifs that allow 
enzymatic addition of palmitate and increased localization of the 
receptors in the vicinity of plasma membranes. Such receptors are 
available for direct interactions with, and effects on, various 
membrane-associated or cytoplasmic proteins without the need for 
entry into the nucleus and induction of transcriptional actions. 
 B. Female Maturation 
 Estrogens are required for the normal sexual maturation and 
growth of the female. They stimulate the development of the 
vagina, uterus, and uterine tubes as well as the secondary sex char-
acteristics. They stimulate stromal development and ductal growth 
in the breast and are responsible for the accelerated growth phase 
and the closing of the epiphyses of the long bones that occur at 
puberty. They contribute to the growth of axillary and pubic hair 
and alter the distribution of body fat to produce typical female 
body contours. Larger quantities also stimulate development of 
pigmentation in the skin, most prominent in the region of the 
nipples and areolae and in the genital region. 
 C. Endometrial Effects 
 In addition to its growth effects on uterine muscle, estrogen plays 
an important role in the development of the endometrial lining. 
When estrogen production is properly coordinated with the pro-
duction of progesterone during the normal human menstrual 
cycle, regular periodic bleeding and shedding of the endometrial 
lining occur. Continuous exposure to estrogens for prolonged 
periods leads to hyperplasia of the endometrium that is usually 
associated with abnormal bleeding patterns. 
 D. Metabolic and Cardiovascular Effects 
 Estrogens have a number of important metabolic and cardiovascu-
lar effects. They seem to be partially responsible for maintenance 
of the normal structure and function of the skin and blood vessels 
in women. Estrogens also decrease the rate of resorption of bone 
by promoting the apoptosis of osteoclasts and by antagonizing the 
osteoclastogenic and pro-osteoclastic effects of parathyroid hor-
mone and interleukin-6. Estrogens also stimulate adipose tissue 
production of leptin and are in part responsible for the higher 
levels of this hormone in women than in men. 
 In addition to stimulating the synthesis of enzymes and growth 
factors leading to uterine and breast growth and differentiation, 
estrogens alter the production and activity of many other proteins 
in the body. Metabolic alterations in the liver are especially impor-
tant, so that there is a higher circulating level of proteins such as 
transcortin (corticosteroid-binding globulin, CBG), thyroxine-
binding globulin (TBG), SHBG, transferrin, renin substrate, and 
fibrinogen. This leads to increased circulating levels of thyroxine, 
estrogen, testosterone, iron, copper, and other substances. 
 Alterations in the composition of the plasma lipids caused by 
estrogens are characterized by an increase in the high-density lipo-
proteins (HDL), a slight reduction in the low-density lipoproteins 
(LDL), and a reduction in total plasma cholesterol levels. Plasma 
triglyceride levels are increased. Estrogens decrease hepatic oxida-
tion of adipose tissue lipid to ketones and increase synthesis of 
triglycerides. 
 E. Effects on Blood Coagulation 
 Estrogens enhance the coagulability of blood. Many changes in 
factors influencing coagulation have been reported, including 
increased circulating levels of factors II, VII, IX, and X and 
TABLE 40–1 Commonly used estrogens.
Preparation
Average Replacement Dosage
Ethinyl estradiol
0.005–0.02 mg/d
Micronized estradiol
1–2 mg/d
Estradiol cypionate
2–5 mg every 3–4 weeks
Estradiol valerate
2–20 mg every other week
Estropipate
1.25–2.5 mg/d
Conjugated, esterified, or mixed estrogenic substances:
 Oral
0.3–1.25 mg/d
 Injectable
0.2–2 mg/d
 Transdermal
Patch
Quinestrol
0.1–0.2 mg/week
Chlorotrianisene
12–25 mg/d
Methallenestril
3–9 mg/d
720    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
decreased antithrombin III, partially as a result of the hepatic 
effects mentioned above. Increased plasminogen levels and 
decreased platelet adhesiveness have also been found (see Hormonal 
Contraception, below). 
 F. Other Effects 
 Estrogens induce the synthesis of progesterone receptors. They 
are responsible for estrous behavior in animals and may influence 
behavior and libido in humans. Administration of estrogens 
stimulates central components of the stress system, including the 
production of corticotropin-releasing hormone and the activity of 
the sympathetic system, and promotes a sense of well-being when 
given to women who are estrogen-deficient. They also facilitate 
the loss of intravascular fluid into the extracellular space, produc-
ing edema. The resulting decrease in plasma volume causes a 
compensatory retention of sodium and water by the kidney. 
Estrogens also modulate sympathetic nervous system control of 
smooth muscle function. 
 Clinical Uses * 
 A. Primary Hypogonadism 
 Estrogens have been used extensively for replacement therapy in 
estrogen-deficient patients. The estrogen deficiency may be due to 
primary failure of development of the ovaries, premature meno-
pause, castration, or menopause. 
 Treatment of primary hypogonadism is usually begun at 
11–13 years of age in order to stimulate the development of 
secondary sex characteristics and menses, to stimulate optimal 
growth, to prevent osteoporosis and to avoid the psychological 
consequences of delayed puberty and estrogen deficiency. 
Treatment attempts to mimic the physiology of puberty. It is initi-
ated with small doses of estrogen (0.3 mg conjugated estrogens or 
5–10 mcg ethinyl estradiol) on days 1–21 each month and is 
slowly increased to adult doses and then maintained until the age 
of menopause (approximately 51 years of age). A progestin is 
added after the first uterine bleeding. When growth is completed, 
chronic therapy consists mainly of the administration of adult 
doses of both estrogens and progestins, as described below. 
 B. Postmenopausal Hormonal Therapy 
 In addition to the signs and symptoms that follow closely upon the 
cessation of normal ovarian function—such as loss of menstrual peri-
ods, vasomotor symptoms, sleep disturbances, and genital atro-
phy—there are longer-lasting changes that influence the health 
and well-being of postmenopausal women. These include an accel-
eration of bone loss, which in susceptible women may lead to ver-
tebral, hip, and wrist fractures; and lipid changes, which may 
contribute to the acceleration of atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis-
ease noted in postmenopausal women. The effects of estrogens on 
bone have been extensively studied, and the effects of hormone 
withdrawal have been well-characterized. However, the role of estro-
gens and progestins in the cause and prevention of cardiovascular 
disease, which is responsible for 350,000 deaths per year, and 
breast cancer, which causes 35,000 deaths per year, is less well 
understood. 
 When normal ovulatory function ceases and the estrogen levels 
fall after menopause, oophorectomy, or premature ovarian failure, 
there is an accelerated rise in plasma cholesterol and LDL concen-
trations, while LDL receptors decline. HDL is not much affected, 
and levels remain higher than in men. Very-low-density lipopro-
tein and triglyceride levels are also relatively unaffected. Since 
cardiovascular disorders account for most deaths in this age group, 
the risk for these disorders constitutes a major consideration in 
deciding whether or not hormonal “replacement” therapy (HRT, 
also correctly called HT) is indicated and influences the selection 
of hormones to be administered. Estrogen replacement therapy 
has a beneficial effect on circulating lipids and lipoproteins, and 
this was earlier thought to be accompanied by a reduction in myo-
cardial infarction by about 50% and of fatal strokes by as much as 
40%. These findings, however, have been disputed by the results 
of a large study from the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) project 
showing no cardiovascular benefit from estrogen plus progestin 
replacement therapy in perimenopausal or older postmenopausal 
patients. In fact, there may be a small increase in cardiovascular 
problems as well as breast cancer in women who received the 
replacement therapy. Interestingly, a small protective effect against 
colon cancer was observed. Although current clinical guidelines 
do not recommend routine hormone therapy in postmenopausal 
women, the validity of the WHI report has been questioned. In 
any case, there is no increased risk for breast cancer if therapy is 
given immediately after menopause and for the first 7 years, while 
the cardiovascular risk depends on the degree of atherosclerosis 
at the onset of therapy. Transdermal or vaginal administration of 
estrogen may be associated with decreased cardiovascular risk 
because it bypasses the liver circulation. Women with premature 
menopause should definitely receive hormone therapy. 
 In some studies, a protective effect of estrogen replacement 
therapy against Alzheimer’s disease was observed. However, several 
other studies have not supported these results. 
 Progestins antagonize estrogen’s effects on LDL and HDL to a 
variable extent. However, one large study has shown that the addi-
tion of a progestin to estrogen replacement therapy does not influ-
ence the cardiovascular risk. 
 Optimal management of the postmenopausal patient requires 
careful assessment of her symptoms as well as consideration of her 
age and the presence of (or risks for) cardiovascular disease, osteo-
porosis, breast cancer, and endometrial cancer. Bearing in mind 
the effects of the gonadal hormones on each of these disorders, the 
goals of therapy can then be defined and the risks of therapy 
assessed and discussed with the patient. 
 If the main indication for therapy is hot flushes and sleep distur-
bances, therapy with the lowest dose of estrogen required for symp-
tomatic relief is recommended. Treatment may be required for only 
a limited period of time and the possible increased risk for breast 
cancer avoided. In women who have undergone hysterectomy, 
estrogens alone can be given 5 days per week or continuously, since 
progestins are not required to reduce the risk for endometrial hyper-
plasia and cancer. Hot flushes, sweating, insomnia, and atrophic 
∗The use of estrogens in contraception is discussed later in this chapter.
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     721
vaginitis are generally relieved by estrogens; many patients experi-
ence some increased sense of well-being; and climacteric depression 
and other psychopathologic states are improved. 
 The role of estrogens in the prevention and treatment of osteo-
porosis has been carefully studied (see  Chapter 42 ). The amount of 
bone present in the body is maximal in the young active adult in the 
third decade of life and begins to decline more rapidly in middle age 
in both men and women. The development of osteoporosis also 
depends on the amount of bone present at the start of this process, 
on vitamin D and calcium intake, and on the degree of physical 
activity. The risk of osteoporosis is highest in smokers who are thin, 
Caucasian, and inactive and have a low calcium intake and a strong 
family history of osteoporosis. Depression also is a major risk factor 
for development of osteoporosis in women. 
 Estrogens should be used in the smallest dosage consistent with 
relief of symptoms. In women who have not undergone hysterec-
tomy, it is most convenient to prescribe estrogen on the first 
21–25 days of each month. The recommended dosages of estrogen 
are 0.3–1.25 mg/d of conjugated estrogen or 0.01–0.02 mg/d of 
ethinyl estradiol. Dosages in the middle of these ranges have been 
shown to be maximally effective in preventing the decrease in 
bone density occurring at menopause. From this point of view, it 
is important to begin therapy as soon as possible after the meno-
pause for maximum effect. In these patients and others not taking 
estrogen, calcium supplements that bring the total daily calcium 
intake up to 1500 mg are useful. 
 Patients at low risk of developing osteoporosis who manifest 
only mild atrophic vaginitis can be treated with topical prepara-
tions. The vaginal route of application is also useful in the treat-
ment of urinary tract symptoms in these patients. It is important 
to realize, however, that although locally administered estrogens 
escape the first-pass effect (so that some undesirable hepatic effects 
are reduced), they are almost completely absorbed into the circula-
tion, and these preparations should be given cyclically. 
 As noted below, the administration of estrogen is associated 
with an increased risk of endometrial carcinoma. The administra-
tion of a progestational agent with the estrogen prevents endome-
trial hyperplasia and markedly reduces the risk of this cancer. 
When estrogen is given for the first 25 days of the month and the 
progestin medroxyprogesterone (10 mg/d) is added during the last 
10–14 days, the risk is only half of that in women not receiving 
hormone replacement therapy. On this regimen, some women will 
experience a return of symptoms during the period off estrogen 
administration. In these patients, the estrogen can be given con-
tinuously. If the progestin produces sedation or other undesirable 
effects, its dose can be reduced to 2.5–5 mg for the last 10 days of 
the cycle with a slight increase in the risk for endometrial hyperpla-
sia. These regimens are usually accompanied by bleeding at the end 
of each cycle. Some women experience migraine headaches during 
the last few days of the cycle. The use of a continuous estrogen 
regimen will often prevent their occurrence. Women who object to 
the cyclic bleeding associated with sequential therapy can also con-
sider continuous therapy. Daily therapy with 0.625 mg of conju-
gated equine estrogens and 2.5–5 mg of medroxyprogesterone will 
eliminate cyclic bleeding, control vasomotor symptoms, prevent 
genital atrophy, maintain bone density, and show a favorable lipid 
profile with a small decrease in LDL and an increase in HDL con-
centrations. These women have endometrial atrophy on biopsy. 
About half of these patients experience breakthrough bleeding 
during the first few months of therapy. Seventy to 80 percent 
become amenorrheic after the first 4 months, and most remain so. 
The main disadvantage of continuous therapy is the need for uter-
ine biopsy if bleeding occurs after the first few months. 
 As noted above, estrogens may also be administered vaginally 
or transdermally. When estrogens are given by these routes, the 
liver is bypassed on the first circulation, and the ratio of the liver 
effects to peripheral effects is reduced. 
 In patients in whom estrogen replacement therapy is contrain-
dicated, such as those with estrogen-sensitive tumors, relief of 
vasomotor symptoms may be obtained by the use of clonidine. 
 C. Other Uses 
 Estrogens combined with progestins can be used to suppress ovu-
lation in patients with intractable dysmenorrhea or when suppres-
sion of ovarian function is used in the treatment of hirsutism and 
amenorrhea due to excessive secretion of androgens by the ovary. 
Under these circumstances, greater suppression may be needed, 
and oral contraceptives containing 50 mcg of estrogen or a com-
bination of a low estrogen pill with GnRH suppression may be 
required. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Adverse effects of variable severity have been reported with the 
therapeutic use of estrogens. Many other effects reported in con-
junction with hormonal contraceptives may be related to their 
estrogen content. These are discussed below. 
 A. Uterine Bleeding 
 Estrogen therapy is a major cause of postmenopausal uterine 
bleeding. Unfortunately, vaginal bleeding at this time of life may 
also be due to carcinoma of the endometrium. To avoid confusion, 
patients should be treated with the smallest amount of estrogen 
possible. It should be given cyclically so that bleeding, if it occurs, 
will be more likely to occur during the withdrawal period. As 
noted above, endometrial hyperplasia can be prevented by admin-
istration of a progestational agent with estrogen in each cycle. 
 B. Cancer 
 The relation of estrogen therapy to cancer continues to be the sub-
ject of active investigation. Although no adverse effect of short-term 
estrogen therapy on the incidence of breast cancer has been dem-
onstrated, a small increase in the incidence of this tumor may occur 
with prolonged therapy. Although the risk factor is small (1.25), the 
impact may be great since this tumor occurs in 10% of women, and 
addition of progesterone does not confer a protective effect. Studies 
indicate that following unilateral excision of breast cancer, women 
receiving tamoxifen (an estrogen partial agonist, see below) show a 
35% decrease in contralateral breast cancer compared with con-
trols. These studies also demonstrate that tamoxifen is well toler-
ated by most patients, produces estrogen-like alterations in plasma 
722    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
lipid levels, and stabilizes bone mineral loss. Studies bearing on the 
possible efficacy of tamoxifen in postmenopausal women at high 
risk for breast cancer are under way. A recent study shows that 
postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy with estrogens plus 
progestins was associated with greater breast epithelial cell prolif-
eration and breast epithelial cell density than estrogens alone or no 
replacement therapy. Furthermore, with estrogens plus progestins, 
breast proliferation was localized to the terminal duct-lobular unit 
of the breast, which is the main site of development of breast can-
cer. Thus, further studies are needed to conclusively assess the pos-
sible association between progestins and breast cancer risk. 
 Many studies show an increased risk of endometrial carcinoma 
in patients taking estrogens alone. The risk seems to vary with the 
dose and duration of treatment: 15 times greater in patients taking 
large doses of estrogen for 5 or more years, in contrast with two to 
four times greater in patients receiving lower doses for short peri-
ods. However, as noted above, the concomitant use of a progestin 
prevents this increased risk and may in fact reduce the incidence 
of endometrial cancer to less than that in the general population. 
 There have been a number of reports of adenocarcinoma of 
the vagina in young women whose mothers were treated with large 
doses of diethylstilbestrol early in pregnancy. These cancers are 
most common in young women (ages 14–44). The incidence is less 
than 1 per 1000 women exposed—too low to establish a cause-
and-effect relationship with certainty. However, the risks for infer-
tility, ectopic pregnancy, and premature delivery are also increased. 
It is now recognized that there is no indication for the use of dieth-
ylstilbestrol during pregnancy, and it should be avoided. It is not 
known whether other estrogens have a similar effect or whether the 
observed phenomena are peculiar to diethylstilbestrol. This agent 
should be used only in the treatment of cancer (eg, of the prostate) 
or as a “morning after” contraceptive (see below). 
 C. Other Effects 
 Nausea and breast tenderness are common and can be minimized 
by using the smallest effective dose of estrogen. Hyperpigmentation 
also occurs. Estrogen therapy is associated with an increase in 
frequency of migraine headaches as well as cholestasis, gallbladder 
disease, and hypertension. 
 Contraindications 
 Estrogens should not be used in patients with estrogen-dependent 
neoplasms such as carcinoma of the endometrium or in those 
with—or at high risk for—carcinoma of the breast. They should 
be avoided in patients with undiagnosed genital bleeding, liver 
disease, or a history of thromboembolic disorder. In addition, the 
use of estrogens should be avoided by heavy smokers. 
 Preparations & Dosages 
 The dosages of commonly used natural and synthetic preparations 
are listed in  Table 40–1 . Although all of the estrogens produce 
almost the same hormonal effects, their potencies vary both 
between agents and depending on the route of administration. As 
noted above, estradiol is the most active endogenous estrogen, and 
it has the highest affinity for the estrogen receptor. However, its 
metabolites estrone and estriol have weak uterine effects. 
 For a given level of gonadotropin suppression, oral estrogen 
preparations have more effect on the circulating levels of CBG, 
SHBG, and a host of other liver proteins, including angiotensino-
gen, than do transdermal preparations. The oral route of adminis-
tration allows greater concentrations of hormone to reach the 
liver, thus increasing the synthesis of these proteins. Transdermal 
preparations were developed to avoid this effect. When adminis-
tered transdermally, 50–100 mcg of estradiol has effects similar to 
those of 0.625–1.25 mg of conjugated oral estrogens on gonado-
tropin concentrations, endometrium, and vaginal epithelium. 
Furthermore, the transdermal estrogen preparations do not sig-
nificantly increase the concentrations of renin substrate, CBG, 
and TBG and do not produce the characteristic changes in serum 
lipids. Combined oral preparations containing 0.625 mg of con-
jugated estrogens and 2.5 mg of medroxyprogesterone acetate are 
available for menopausal replacement therapy. Tablets containing 
0.625 mg of conjugated estrogens and 5 mg of medroxyprogester-
one acetate are available to be used in conjunction with conju-
gated estrogens in a sequential fashion. Estrogens alone are taken 
on days 1–14 and the combination on days 15–28. 
 THE PROGESTINS 
 Natural Progestins: Progesterone 
 Progesterone is the most important progestin in humans. In addi-
tion to having important hormonal effects, it serves as a precursor 
to the estrogens, androgens, and adrenocortical steroids. It is 
synthesized in the ovary, testis, and adrenal cortex from circulating 
cholesterol. Large amounts are also synthesized and released by the 
placenta during pregnancy. 
 In the ovary, progesterone is produced primarily by the corpus 
luteum. Normal males appear to secrete 1–5 mg of progesterone 
daily, resulting in plasma levels of about 0.03 mcg/dL. The level is 
only slightly higher in the female during the follicular phase of 
the cycle, when only a few milligrams per day of progesterone 
are secreted. During the luteal phase, plasma levels range from 
0.5 mcg/dL to more than 2 mcg/dL ( Figure 40–1 ). Plasma levels 
of progesterone are further elevated and reach their peak levels in 
the third trimester of pregnancy. 
 Synthetic Progestins 
 A variety of progestational compounds have been synthesized. 
Some are active when given by mouth. They are not a uniform 
group of compounds, and all of them differ from progesterone in 
one or more respects.  Table 40–2 lists some of these compounds 
and their effects. In general, the 21-carbon compounds (hydroxy-
progesterone, medroxyprogesterone, megestrol, and dimethisterone) 
are the most closely related, pharmacologically as well as chemi-
cally, to progesterone. A new group of third-generation synthetic 
progestins has been introduced, principally as components of oral 
contraceptives. These “19-nor, 13-ethyl” steroid compounds 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     723
include desogestrel ( Figure 40–4 ), gestodene, and norgestimate. 
They are claimed to have lower androgenic activity than older 
synthetic progestins. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Progesterone is rapidly absorbed following administration by any 
route. Its half-life in the plasma is approximately 5 minutes, and 
small amounts are stored temporarily in body fat. It is almost 
completely metabolized in one passage through the liver, and for 
that reason it is quite ineffective when the usual formulation is 
administered orally. However, high-dose oral micronized proges-
terone preparations have been developed that provide adequate 
progestational effect. 
 In the liver, progesterone is metabolized to pregnanediol and 
conjugated with glucuronic acid. It is excreted into the urine as 
pregnanediol glucuronide. The amount of pregnanediol in the 
urine has been used as an index of progesterone secretion. This 
measure has been very useful despite the fact that the proportion 
of secreted progesterone converted to this compound varies from 
day to day and from individual to individual. In addition to pro-
gesterone, 20α- and 20β-hydroxyprogesterone (20α- and 20β-
hydroxy-4-pregnene-3-one) are also found. These compounds 
have about one fifth the progestational activity of progesterone in 
humans and other species. Little is known of their physiologic 
role, but 20α-hydroxyprogesterone is produced in large amounts 
in some species and may be of some importance biologically. 
 The usual routes of administration and durations of action of 
the synthetic progestins are listed in  Table 40–2 . Most of these 
agents are extensively metabolized to inactive products that are 
excreted mainly in the urine. 
 Physiologic Effects 
 A. Mechanism 
 The mechanism of action of progesterone—described in more 
detail above—is similar to that of other steroid hormones. 
Progestins enter the cell and bind to progesterone receptors that are 
distributed between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. The ligand-
receptor complex binds to a progesterone response element (PRE) 
to activate gene transcription. The response element for progester-
one appears to be similar to the corticosteroid response element, 
and the specificity of the response depends upon which receptor 
is present in the cell as well as upon other cell-specific receptor 
coregulators and interacting transcription factors. The progester-
one-receptor complex forms a dimer before binding to DNA. Like 
the estrogen receptor, it can form heterodimers as well as homodi-
mers between two isoforms, A and B. These isoforms are produced 
by alternative splicing of the same gene. 
TABLE 40–2 Properties of some progestational agents.
Route
Duration of 
Action
Activities1
Estrogenic
Androgenic
Antiestrogenic
Antiandrogenic
Anabolic
Progesterone and derivatives
Progesterone
IM
1 day
−
−
+
−
−
Hydroxyprogesterone 
caproate
IM
8–14 days
sl
sl
−
−
−
Medroxyprogesterone 
acetate
IM, PO
Tabs: 1–3 days; 
injection: 4–12 
weeks
−
+
+
−
−
Megestrol acetate
PO
1–3 days
−
+
−
+
−
17-Ethinyl testosterone derivatives
Dimethisterone
PO
1–3 days
−
−
sl
−
−
19-Nortestosterone derivatives
Desogestrel
PO
1–3 days
−
−
−
−
−
Norethynodrel2
PO
1–3 days
+
−
−
−
−
Lynestrenol3
PO
1–3 days
+
+
−
−
+
Norethindrone2
PO
1–3 days
sl
+
+
−
+
Norethindrone acetate2
PO
1–3 days
sl
+
+
−
+
Ethynodiol diacetate2
PO
1–3 days
sl
+
+
−
−
L-Norgestrel2
PO
1–3 days
−
+
+
−
+
1Interpretation: + = active; – = inactive; sl = slightly active. Activities have been reported in various species using various end points and may not apply to humans.
2See Table 40–3.
3Not available in USA.
724    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 B. Effects of Progesterone 
 Progesterone has little effect on protein metabolism. It stimulates 
lipoprotein lipase activity and seems to favor fat deposition. 
The effects on carbohydrate metabolism are more marked. 
Progesterone increases basal insulin levels and the insulin response 
to glucose. There is usually no manifest change in carbohydrate 
tolerance. In the liver, progesterone promotes glycogen storage, 
possibly by facilitating the effect of insulin. Progesterone also 
promotes ketogenesis. 
 Progesterone can compete with aldosterone for the mineralo-
corticoid receptor of the renal tubule, causing a decrease in Na + 
reabsorption. This leads to an increased secretion of aldosterone 
by the adrenal cortex (eg, in pregnancy). Progesterone increases 
body temperature in humans. The mechanism of this effect is not 
known, but an alteration of the temperature-regulating centers in 
the hypothalamus has been suggested. Progesterone also alters the 
function of the respiratory centers. The ventilatory response to 
CO 2 is increased by progesterone but synthetic progestins with an 
ethinyl group do not have respiratory effects. This leads to a mea-
surable reduction in arterial and alveolar PCO 2 during pregnancy 
and in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. Progesterone and 
related steroids also have depressant and hypnotic effects on the 
brain. 
 Progesterone is responsible for the alveolobular development of 
the secretory apparatus in the breast. It also participates in the 
preovulatory LH surge and causes the maturation and secretory 
changes in the endometrium that are seen following ovulation 
( Figure 40–1 ). 
 Progesterone decreases the plasma levels of many amino acids 
and leads to increased urinary nitrogen excretion. It induces 
changes in the structure and function of smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum in experimental animals. 
 Other effects of progesterone and its analogs are noted below 
in the section, Hormonal Contraception. 
 C. Synthetic Progestins 
 The 21-carbon progesterone analogs antagonize aldosterone-
induced sodium retention (see above). The remaining compounds 
(“19-nortestosterone” third-generation agents) produce a decidual 
change in the endometrial stroma, do not support pregnancy 
in test animals, are more effective gonadotropin inhibitors, and 
may have minimal estrogenic and androgenic or anabolic activity 
( Table 40–2 ;  Figure 40–4 ). They are sometimes referred to as 
“impeded androgens.” Progestins without androgenic activity 
include desogestrel, norgestimate, and gestodene. The first two of 
these compounds are dispensed in combination with ethinyl estra-
diol for oral contraception ( Table 40–3 ) in the USA. Oral contra-
ceptives containing the progestins cyproterone acetate (also an 
antiandrogen) in combination with ethinyl estradiol are investiga-
tional in the USA. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Therapeutic Applications 
 The major uses of progestational hormones are for hormone 
replacement therapy (see above) and hormonal contraception (see 
below). In addition, they are useful in producing long-term ovarian 
suppression for other purposes. When used alone in large doses 
parenterally (eg, medroxyprogesterone acetate, 150 mg intramus-
cularly every 90 days), prolonged anovulation and amenorrhea 
result. This therapy has been employed in the treatment of dys-
menorrhea, endometriosis, and bleeding disorders when estrogens 
are contraindicated, and for contraception. The major problem 
20C
O
Progesterone
21CH3
19
O
18
11
13
17
C
O
Hydroxyprogesterone
OH
CH3
CH3
O
C
O
Medroxyprogesterone
OH
CH3
O
CH3
C
C
Dimethisterone
OH
CH3
O
C
CH
Norethindrone
OH
O
C
CH
Desogestrel
OH
CH2
CH2
CH3
 FIGURE 40–4  Progesterone and some progestational agents in clinical use. 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     725
with this regimen is the prolonged time required in some patients 
for ovulatory function to return after cessation of therapy. It should 
not be used for patients planning a pregnancy in the near future. 
Similar regimens will relieve hot flushes in some menopausal 
women and can be used if estrogen therapy is contraindicated. 
 Medroxyprogesterone acetate, 10–20 mg orally twice weekly—or 
intramuscularly in doses of 100 mg/m 2 every 1–2 weeks—will 
prevent menstruation, but it will not arrest accelerated bone 
maturation in children with precocious puberty. 
 Progestins do not appear to have any place in the therapy of 
threatened or habitual abortion. Early reports of the usefulness of 
these agents resulted from the unwarranted assumption that after 
several abortions the likelihood of repeated abortions was over 
90%. When progestational agents were administered to patients 
with previous abortions, a salvage rate of 80% was achieved. It is 
now recognized that similar patients abort only 20% of the time 
even when untreated. On the other hand, progesterone was given 
experimentally to delay premature labor with encouraging results. 
TABLE 40–3 Some oral and implantable contraceptive agents in use.1
         Estrogen (mg)
            Progestin (mg)
Monophasic combination tablets
 Alesse, Aviane, Lessinea, Levlite
Ethinyl estradiol
0.02
L-Norgestrel
0.1
 Levlen, Levora, Nordette, Portia
Ethinyl estradiol
0.03
L-Norgestrel
0.15
 Crysella, Lo-Ovral, Low-Ogestrel
Ethinyl estradiol
0.03
Norgestrel
0.30
 Yasmin
Ethinyl estradiol
0.03
Drospirenone
3.0
 Brevicon, Modicon, Necon 0.5/35, Nortrel 0.5/35
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norethindrone
1.0
 Ortho-Cyclen, Sprintec
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norgestimate
0.25
 Necon 1/35, Norinyl 1+, Nortrel 1/35, Ortho-Novum 1/35
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norethindrone
1.0
 Ovcon-35
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norethindrone
0.4
 Demulen 1/50, Zovia 1/50E
Ethinyl estradiol
0.05
Ethynodiol diacetate
1.0
 Ovcon 50
Ethinyl estradiol
0.05
Norethindrone
1.0
 Ovral-28
Ethinyl estradiol
0.05
D,L-Norgestrel
0.5
 Norinyl 1/50, Ortho-Novum 1/50
Mestranol
0.05
Norethindrone
1.0
Biphasic combination tablets
 Ortho-Novum 10/11, Necon 10/11
  Days 1–10
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norethindrone
0.5
  Days 11–21
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norethindrone
1.0
Triphasic combination tablets
 Enpresse, Triphasil, Tri-Levlen, Trivora
  Days 1–6
Ethinyl estradiol
0.03
L-Norgestrel
0.05
  Days 7–11
Ethinyl estradiol
0.04
L-Norgestrel
0.075
  Days 12–21
Ethinyl estradiol
0.03
L-Norgestrel
0.125
 Ortho-Novum 7/7/7, Necon 7/7/7
  Days 1–7
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norethindrone
0.5
  Days 8–14
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norethindrone
0.75
  Days 15–21
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norethindrone
1.0
 Ortho-Tri-Cyclen
  Days 1–7
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norgestimate
0.18
  Days 8–14
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norgestimate
0.215
  Days 15–21
Ethinyl estradiol
0.035
Norgestimate
0.25
Daily progestin tablets
 Nora-BE, Nor-QD, Ortho Micronor, Jolivette, Camila, Errin
…
Norethindrone
0.35
 Ovrette
…
D,L-Norgestrel
0.075
Implantable progestin preparation
Implanon
…
Etonogestrel (one tube of 68 mg)
1The estrogen-containing compounds are arranged in order of increasing content of estrogen. Other preparations are available. (Ethinyl estradiol and mestranol have similar 
potencies.)
726    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 Progesterone and medroxyprogesterone have been used in the 
treatment of women who have difficulty in conceiving and who 
demonstrate a slow rise in basal body temperature. There is no 
convincing evidence that this treatment is effective. 
 Preparations of progesterone and medroxyprogesterone have 
been used to treat premenstrual syndrome. Controlled studies 
have not confirmed the effectiveness of such therapy except when 
doses sufficient to suppress ovulation have been used. 
 B. Diagnostic Uses 
 Progesterone can be used as a test of estrogen secretion. The 
administration of progesterone, 150 mg/d, or medroxyprogester-
one, 10 mg/d, for 5–7 days, is followed by withdrawal bleeding in 
amenorrheic patients only when the endometrium has been 
stimulated by estrogens. A combination of estrogen and progestin 
can be given to test the responsiveness of the endometrium in 
patients with amenorrhea. 
 Contraindications, Cautions, & Adverse 
Effects 
 Studies of progestational compounds alone and with combination 
oral contraceptives indicate that the progestin in these agents may 
increase blood pressure in some patients. The more androgenic 
progestins also reduce plasma HDL levels in women. (See Hormonal 
Contraception, below.) Two recent studies suggest that combined 
progestin plus estrogen replacement therapy in postmenopausal 
women may increase breast cancer risk significantly compared with 
the risk in women taking estrogen alone. These findings require 
careful examination and if confirmed will lead to important changes 
in postmenopausal hormone replacement practice. 
 OTHER OVARIAN HORMONES 
 The normal ovary produces small amounts of  androgens, includ-
ing testosterone, androstenedione, and dehydroepiandrosterone. 
Of these, only testosterone has a significant amount of biologic 
activity, although androstenedione can be converted to testoster-
one or estrone in peripheral tissues. The normal woman produces 
less than 200 mcg of testosterone in 24 hours, and about one third 
of this is probably formed in the ovary directly. The physiologic 
significance of these small amounts of androgens is not estab-
lished, but they may be partly responsible for normal hair growth 
at puberty, for stimulation of female libido, and, possibly, for 
metabolic effects. Androgen production by the ovary may be 
markedly increased in some abnormal states, usually in association 
with hirsutism and amenorrhea as noted above. 
 The ovary also produces  inhibin and  activin. These peptides 
consist of several combinations of α and β subunits and are 
described in greater detail later. The αβ dimer (inhibin) inhibits 
FSH secretion while the ββ dimer (activin) increases FSH secre-
tion. Studies in primates indicate that inhibin has no direct 
effect on ovarian steroidogenesis but that activin modulates the 
response to LH and FSH. For example, simultaneous treatment 
with activin and human FSH enhances FSH stimulation of 
progesterone synthesis and aromatase activity in granulosa cells. 
When combined with LH, activin suppressed the LH-induced 
progesterone response by 50% but markedly enhanced basal and 
LH-stimulated aromatase activity. Activin may also act as a growth 
factor in other tissues. The physiologic roles of these modulators 
are not fully understood. 
 Relaxin is another peptide that can be extracted from the 
ovary. The three-dimensional structure of relaxin is related to that 
of growth-promoting peptides and is similar to that of insulin. 
Although the amino acid sequence differs from that of insulin, this 
hormone, like insulin, consists of two chains linked by disulfide 
bonds, cleaved from a prohormone. It is found in the ovary, pla-
centa, uterus, and blood. Relaxin synthesis has been demonstrated 
in luteinized granulosa cells of the corpus luteum. It has been 
shown to increase glycogen synthesis and water uptake by the 
myometrium and decreases uterine contractility. In some species, 
it changes the mechanical properties of the cervix and pubic liga-
ments, facilitating delivery. 
 In women, relaxin has been measured by immunoassay. 
Levels were highest immediately after the LH surge and during 
menstruation. A physiologic role for this peptide has not been 
established. 
 Clinical trials with relaxin have been conducted in patients 
with dysmenorrhea. Relaxin has also been administered to patients 
in premature labor and during prolonged labor. When applied to 
the cervix of a woman at term, it facilitates dilation and shortens 
labor. 
 Several other nonsteroidal substances such as corticotropin-
releasing hormone, follistatin, and prostaglandins are produced by 
the ovary. These probably have paracrine effects within the ovary. 
 HORMONAL CONTRACEPTION 
(ORAL, PARENTERAL, & IMPLANTED 
CONTRACEPTIVES) 
 A large number of oral contraceptives containing estrogens or 
progestins (or both) are now available for clinical use ( Table 40–3 ). 
These preparations vary chemically and pharmacologically and 
have many properties in common as well as definite differences 
important for the correct selection of the optimum agent. 
 Two types of preparations are used for oral contraception: 
(1) combinations of estrogens and progestins and (2) continuous 
progestin therapy without concomitant administration of estro-
gens. The combination agents are further divided into  monophasic 
forms (constant dosage of both components during the cycle) and 
 biphasic or  triphasic forms (dosage of one or both components is 
changed once or twice during the cycle). The preparations for 
oral use are all adequately absorbed, and in combination prepara-
tions the pharmacokinetics of neither drug is significantly altered 
by the other. 
 Only one implantable contraceptive preparation is available at 
present in the USA. Etonogestrel, also used in some oral contra-
ceptives, is available in the subcutaneous implant form listed in 
 Table 40–3 . Several hormonal contraceptives are available as 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     727
vaginal rings or intrauterine devices. Intramuscular injection of 
large doses of medroxyprogesterone also provides contraception of 
long duration. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 The combinations of estrogens and progestins exert their contra-
ceptive effect largely through selective inhibition of pituitary func-
tion that results in inhibition of ovulation. The combination agents 
also produce a change in the cervical mucus, in the uterine endo-
metrium, and in motility and secretion in the uterine tubes, all of 
which decrease the likelihood of conception and implantation. The 
continuous use of progestins alone does not always inhibit ovula-
tion. The other factors mentioned, therefore, play a major role in 
the prevention of pregnancy when these agents are used. 
 B. Effects on the Ovary 
 Chronic use of combination agents depresses ovarian function. 
Follicular development is minimal, and corpora lutea, larger fol-
licles, stromal edema, and other morphologic features normally 
seen in ovulating women are absent. The ovaries usually become 
smaller even when enlarged before therapy. 
 The great majority of patients return to normal menstrual pat-
terns when these drugs are discontinued. About 75% will ovulate 
in the first posttreatment cycle and 97% by the third posttreat-
ment cycle. About 2% of patients remain amenorrheic for periods 
of up to several years after administration is stopped. 
 The cytologic findings on vaginal smears vary depending on 
the preparation used. However, with almost all of the combined 
drugs, a low maturation index is found because of the presence of 
progestational agents. 
 C. Effects on the Uterus 
 After prolonged use, the cervix may show some hypertrophy and 
polyp formation. There are also important effects on the cervical 
mucus, making it more like postovulation mucus, ie, thicker and 
less copious. 
 Agents containing both estrogens and progestins produce fur-
ther morphologic and biochemical changes of the endometrial 
stroma under the influence of the progestin, which also stimulates 
glandular secretion throughout the luteal phase. The agents con-
taining “19-nor” progestins—particularly those with the smaller 
amounts of estrogen—tend to produce more glandular atrophy 
and usually less bleeding. 
 D. Effects on the Breast 
 Stimulation of the breasts occurs in most patients receiving 
estrogen-containing agents. Some enlargement is generally noted. 
The administration of estrogens and combinations of estrogens 
and progestins tends to suppress lactation. When the doses are 
small, the effects on breast-feeding are not appreciable. Studies of 
the transport of the oral contraceptives into breast milk suggest 
that only small amounts of these compounds cross into the milk, 
and they have not been considered to be of importance. 
 E. Other Effects of Oral Contraceptives 
 1. Effects on the central nervous system— The central 
nervous system effects of the oral contraceptives have not been 
well studied in humans. A variety of effects of estrogen and pro-
gesterone have been noted in animals. Estrogens tend to increase 
excitability in the brain, whereas progesterone tends to decrease it. 
The thermogenic action of progesterone and some of the synthetic 
progestins is also thought to occur in the central nervous system. 
 It is very difficult to evaluate any behavioral or emotional effects 
of these compounds in humans. Although the incidence of pro-
nounced changes in mood, affect, and behavior appears to be low, 
milder changes are commonly reported, and estrogens are being 
successfully employed in the therapy of premenstrual tension syn-
drome, postpartum depression, and climacteric depression. 
 2. Effects on endocrine function— The inhibition of pitu-
itary gonadotropin secretion has been mentioned. Estrogens also 
alter adrenal structure and function. Estrogens given orally or at 
high doses increase the plasma concentration of the α 2 globulin 
that binds cortisol (corticosteroid-binding globulin). Plasma con-
centrations may be more than double the levels found in untreated 
individuals, and urinary excretion of free cortisol is elevated. 
 These preparations cause alterations in the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system. Plasma renin activity has been found to increase, 
and there is an increase in aldosterone secretion. 
 Thyroxine-binding globulin is increased. As a result, total 
plasma thyroxine (T 4 ) levels are increased to those commonly 
seen during pregnancy. Since more of the thyroxine is bound, the 
free thyroxine level in these patients is normal. Estrogens also 
increase the plasma level of SHBG and decrease plasma levels of 
free androgens by increasing their binding; large amounts of estro-
gen may decrease androgens by gonadotropin suppression. 
 3. Effects on blood— Serious thromboembolic phenomena 
occurring in women taking oral contraceptives gave rise to a great 
many studies of the effects of these compounds on blood coagula-
tion. A clear picture of such effects has not yet emerged. The oral 
contraceptives do not consistently alter bleeding or clotting times. 
The changes that have been observed are similar to those reported 
in pregnancy. There is an increase in factors VII, VIII, IX, and X 
and a decrease in antithrombin III. Increased amounts of coumarin 
anticoagulants may be required to prolong prothrombin time in 
patients taking oral contraceptives. 
 There is an increase in serum iron and total iron-binding 
capacity similar to that reported in patients with hepatitis. 
 Significant alterations in the cellular components of blood have 
not been reported with any consistency. A number of patients 
have been reported to develop folic acid deficiency anemias. 
 4. Effects on the liver— These hormones also have profound 
effects on the function of the liver. Some of these effects are delete-
rious and will be considered below in the section on adverse 
effects. The effects on serum proteins result from the effects of the 
estrogens on the synthesis of the various α 2 globulins and fibrino-
gen. Serum haptoglobins produced in the liver are depressed 
728    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
rather than increased by estrogen. Some of the effects on carbohy-
drate and lipid metabolism are probably influenced by changes in 
liver metabolism (see below). 
 Important alterations in hepatic drug excretion and metabo-
lism also occur. Estrogens in the amounts seen during pregnancy 
or used in oral contraceptive agents delay the clearance of sulfo-
bromophthalein and reduce the flow of bile. The proportion of 
cholic acid in bile acids is increased while the proportion of chen-
odeoxycholic acid is decreased. These changes may be responsible 
for the observed increase in cholelithiasis associated with the use 
of these agents. 
 5. Effects on lipid metabolism— As noted above, estrogens 
increase serum triglycerides and free and esterified cholesterol. 
Phospholipids are also increased, as are HDL; levels of LDL 
usually decrease. Although the effects are marked with doses of 
100 mcg of mestranol or ethinyl estradiol, doses of 50 mcg or 
less have minimal effects. The progestins (particularly the 
“19-nortestosterone” derivatives) tend to antagonize these effects 
of estrogen. Preparations containing small amounts of estrogen 
and a progestin may slightly decrease triglycerides and HDL. 
 6. Effects on carbohydrate metabolism— The administra-
tion of oral contraceptives produces alterations in carbohydrate 
metabolism similar to those observed in pregnancy. There is a 
reduction in the rate of absorption of carbohydrates from the 
gastrointestinal tract. Progesterone increases the basal insulin level 
and the rise in insulin induced by carbohydrate ingestion. 
Preparations with more potent progestins such as norgestrel may 
cause progressive decreases in carbohydrate tolerance over several 
years. However, the changes in glucose tolerance are reversible on 
discontinuing medication. 
 7. Effects on the cardiovascular system— These agents cause 
small increases in cardiac output associated with higher systolic and 
diastolic blood pressure and heart rate. The pressure returns to 
normal when treatment is terminated. Although the magnitude of 
the pressure change is small in most patients, it is marked in a few. 
It is important that blood pressure be followed in each patient. An 
increase in blood pressure has been reported to occur in a few 
postmenopausal women treated with estrogens alone. 
 8. Effects on the skin— The oral contraceptives have been 
noted to increase pigmentation of the skin (chloasma). This effect 
seems to be enhanced in women with dark complexions and by 
exposure to ultraviolet light. Some of the androgen-like progestins 
might increase the production of sebum, causing acne in some 
patients. However, since ovarian androgen is suppressed, many 
patients note decreased sebum production, acne, and terminal hair 
growth. The sequential oral contraceptive preparations as well as 
estrogens alone often decrease sebum production. 
 Clinical Uses 
 The most important use of combined estrogens and progestins 
is for oral contraception. A large number of preparations are 
available for this specific purpose, some of which are listed in 
 Table 40–3 . They are specially packaged for ease of administra-
tion. In general, they are very effective; when these agents are 
taken according to directions, the risk of conception is extremely 
small. The pregnancy rate with combination agents is estimated 
to be about 0.5–1 per 100 woman years at risk. Contraceptive 
failure has been observed in some patients when one or more 
doses are missed, if phenytoin is also being used (which may 
increase catabolism of the compounds), or if antibiotics are 
taken that alter enterohepatic cycling of metabolites. 
 Progestins and estrogens are also useful in the treatment of 
endometriosis. When severe dysmenorrhea is the major symptom, 
the suppression of ovulation with estrogen alone may be followed 
by painless periods. However, in most patients this approach to 
therapy is inadequate. The long-term administration of large doses 
of progestins or combinations of progestins and estrogens prevents 
the periodic breakdown of the endometrial tissue and in some 
cases will lead to endometrial fibrosis and prevent the reactivation 
of implants for prolonged periods. 
 As is true with most hormonal preparations, many of the unde-
sired effects are physiologic or pharmacologic actions that are objec-
tionable only because they are not pertinent to the situation for 
which they are being used. Therefore, the product containing the 
smallest effective amounts of hormones should be selected for use. 
 Adverse Effects 
 The incidence of serious known toxicities associated with the use 
of these drugs is low—far lower than the risks associated with 
pregnancy. There are a number of reversible changes in intermedi-
ary metabolism. Minor adverse effects are frequent, but most are 
mild and many are transient. Continuing problems may respond 
to simple changes in pill formulation. Although it is not often 
necessary to discontinue medication for these reasons, as many as 
one third of all patients started on oral contraception discontinue 
use for reasons other than a desire to become pregnant. 
 A. Mild Adverse Effects 
 1. Nausea, mastalgia, breakthrough bleeding, and edema are 
related to the amount of estrogen in the preparation. These 
effects can often be alleviated by a shift to a preparation con-
taining smaller amounts of estrogen or to agents containing 
progestins with more androgenic effects. 
 2. Changes in serum proteins and other effects on endocrine 
function (see above) must be taken into account when thyroid, 
adrenal, or pituitary function is being evaluated. Increases in 
sedimentation rate are thought to be due to increased levels of 
fibrinogen. 
 3. Headache is mild and often transient. However, migraine is 
often made worse and has been reported to be associated with 
an increased frequency of cerebrovascular accidents. When this 
occurs or when migraine has its onset during therapy with 
these agents, treatment should be discontinued. 
 4. Withdrawal bleeding sometimes fails to occur—most often 
with combination preparations—and may cause confusion 
with regard to pregnancy. If this is disturbing to the patient, a 
different preparation may be tried or other methods of contra-
ception used. 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     729
 B. Moderate Adverse Effects 
 Any of the following may require discontinuance of oral contra-
ceptives: 
 1. Breakthrough bleeding is the most common problem in using 
progestational agents alone for contraception. It occurs in as 
many as 25% of patients. It is more frequently encountered in 
patients taking low-dose preparations than in those taking 
combination pills with higher levels of progestin and estrogen. 
The biphasic and triphasic oral contraceptives ( Table 40–3 ) 
decrease breakthrough bleeding without increasing the total 
hormone content. 
 2. Weight gain is more common with the combination agents 
containing androgen-like progestins. It can usually be con-
trolled by shifting to preparations with less progestin effect or 
by dieting. 
 3. Increased skin pigmentation may occur, especially in dark-
skinned women. It tends to increase with time, the incidence 
being about 5% at the end of the first year and about 40% after 
8 years. It is thought to be exacerbated by vitamin B deficiency. 
It is often reversible upon discontinuance of medication but 
may disappear very slowly. 
 4. Acne may be exacerbated by agents containing androgen-like 
progestins ( Table 40–2 ), whereas agents containing large 
amounts of estrogen usually cause marked improvement in 
acne. 
 5. Hirsutism may also be aggravated by the “19-nortestosterone” 
derivatives, and combinations containing nonandrogenic 
progestins are preferred in these patients. 
 6. Ureteral dilation similar to that observed in pregnancy has 
been reported, and bacteriuria is more frequent. 
 7. Vaginal infections are more common and more difficult to 
treat in patients who are using oral contraceptives. 
 8. Amenorrhea occurs in some patients. Following cessation of 
administration of oral contraceptives, 95% of patients with 
normal menstrual histories resume normal periods and all but 
a few resume normal cycles during the next few months. How-
ever, some patients remain amenorrheic for several years. Many 
of these patients also have galactorrhea. Patients who have had 
menstrual irregularities before taking oral contraceptives are 
particularly susceptible to prolonged amenorrhea when the 
agents are discontinued. Prolactin levels should be measured in 
these patients, since many have prolactinomas. 
 C. Severe Adverse Effects 
 1. Vascular disorders— Thromboembolism was one of the 
earliest of the serious unanticipated effects to be reported and has 
been the most thoroughly studied. 
 a. Venous thromboembolic disease— Superficial or deep throm-
boembolic disease in women not taking oral contraceptives occurs 
in about 1 patient per 1000 woman years. The overall incidence 
of these disorders in patients taking low-dose oral contraceptives 
is about threefold higher. The risk for this disorder is increased 
during the first month of contraceptive use and remains constant 
for several years or more. The risk returns to normal within a 
month when use is discontinued. The risk of venous thrombosis 
or pulmonary embolism is increased among women with predis-
posing conditions such as stasis, altered clotting factors such as 
antithrombin III, increased levels of homocysteine, or injury. 
Genetic disorders, including mutations in the genes governing the 
production of protein C (factor V Leiden), protein S, hepatic 
cofactor II, and others, markedly increase the risk of venous 
thromboembolism. The incidence of these disorders is too low for 
cost-effective screening by current methods, but prior episodes or 
a family history may be helpful in identifying patients with 
increased risk. 
 The incidence of venous thromboembolism appears to be 
related to the estrogen but not the progestin content of oral con-
traceptives and is not related to age, parity, mild obesity, or ciga-
rette smoking. Decreased venous blood flow, endothelial 
proliferation in veins and arteries, and increased coagulability of 
blood resulting from changes in platelet functions and fibrinolytic 
systems contribute to the increased incidence of thrombosis. The 
major plasma inhibitor of thrombin, antithrombin III, is substan-
tially decreased during oral contraceptive use. This change occurs 
in the first month of treatment and lasts as long as treatment per-
sists, reversing within a month thereafter. 
 b. Myocardial infarction— The use of oral contraceptives is 
associated with a slightly higher risk of myocardial infarction in 
women who are obese, have a history of preeclampsia or hyper-
tension, or have hyperlipoproteinemia or diabetes. There is a 
much higher risk in women who smoke. The risk attributable to 
oral contraceptives in women 30–40 years of age who do not 
smoke is about 4 cases per 100,000 users per year, as compared 
with 185 cases per 100,000 among women 40–44 who smoke 
heavily. The association with myocardial infarction is thought to 
involve acceleration of atherogenesis because of decreased glucose 
tolerance, decreased levels of HDL, increased levels of LDL, and 
increased platelet aggregation. In addition, facilitation of coronary 
arterial spasm may play a role in some of these patients. The 
progestational component of oral contraceptives decreases HDL 
cholesterol levels, in proportion to the androgenic activity of the 
progestin. The net effect, therefore, will depend on the specific 
composition of the pill used and the patient’s susceptibility to 
the particular effects. Recent studies suggest that risk of infarc-
tion is not increased in past users who have discontinued oral 
contraceptives. 
 c. Cerebrovascular disease— The risk of stroke is concentrated 
in women over age 35. It is increased in current users of oral con-
traceptives but not in past users. However, subarachnoid hemor-
rhages have been found to be increased among both current and 
past users and may increase with time. The risk of thrombotic 
or hemorrhagic stroke attributable to oral contraceptives (based 
on older, higher-dose preparations) has been estimated to about 
37 cases per 100,000 users per year. 
 In summary, available data indicate that oral contraceptives 
increase the risk of various cardiovascular disorders at all ages and 
among both smokers and nonsmokers. However, this risk appears 
to be concentrated in women 35 years of age or older who are 
heavy smokers. It is clear that these risk factors must be considered 
in each individual patient for whom oral contraceptives are being 
considered. Some experts have suggested that screening for coagu-
lopathy should be performed before starting oral contraception. 
730    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 2. Gastrointestinal disorders— Many cases of cholestatic 
jaundice have been reported in patients taking progestin-containing 
drugs. The differences in incidence of these disorders from one 
population to another suggest that genetic factors may be involved. 
The jaundice caused by these agents is similar to that produced by 
other 17-alkyl-substituted steroids. It is most often observed in the 
first three cycles and is particularly common in women with a his-
tory of cholestatic jaundice during pregnancy. Jaundice and pruri-
tus disappear 1–8 weeks after the drug is discontinued. 
 These agents have also been found to increase the incidence of 
symptomatic gallbladder disease, including cholecystitis and cho-
langitis. This is probably the result of the alterations responsible 
for jaundice and bile acid changes described above. 
 It also appears that the incidence of hepatic adenomas is 
increased in women taking oral contraceptives. Ischemic bowel 
disease secondary to thrombosis of the celiac and superior and 
inferior mesenteric arteries and veins has also been reported in 
women using these drugs. 
 3. Depression— Depression of sufficient degree to require ces-
sation of therapy occurs in about 6% of patients treated with some 
preparations. 
 4. Cancer— The occurrence of malignant tumors in patients 
taking oral contraceptives has been studied extensively. It is now 
clear that these compounds  reduce the risk of endometrial and 
ovarian cancer. The lifetime risk of breast cancer in the population 
as a whole does not seem to be affected by oral contraceptive use. 
Some studies have shown an increased risk in younger women, 
and it is possible that tumors that develop in younger women 
become clinically apparent sooner. The relation of risk of cervical 
cancer to oral contraceptive use is still controversial. It should be 
noted that a number of recent studies associate the use of oral 
contraceptives by women who are infected with human papillo-
mavirus with an increased risk of cervical cancer. 
 5. Other— In addition to the above effects, a number of other 
adverse reactions have been reported for which a causal relation 
has not been established. These include alopecia, erythema multi-
forme, erythema nodosum, and other skin disorders. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 These drugs are contraindicated in patients with thrombophlebitis, 
thromboembolic phenomena, and cardiovascular and cerebrovas-
cular disorders or a past history of these conditions. They should 
not be used to treat vaginal bleeding when the cause is unknown. 
They should be avoided in patients with known or suspected tumors 
of the breast or other estrogen-dependent neoplasms. Since these 
preparations have caused aggravation of preexisting disorders, they 
should be avoided or used with caution in patients with liver 
disease, asthma, eczema, migraine, diabetes, hypertension, optic 
neuritis, retrobulbar neuritis, or convulsive disorders. 
 The oral contraceptives may produce edema, and for that rea-
son they should be used with great caution in patients in heart 
failure or in whom edema is otherwise undesirable or dangerous. 
 Estrogens may increase the rate of growth of fibroids. Therefore, 
for women with these tumors, agents with the smallest amounts 
of estrogen and the most androgenic progestins should be selected. 
The use of progestational agents alone for contraception might be 
especially useful in such patients (see below). 
 These agents are contraindicated in adolescents in whom 
epiphysial closure has not yet been completed. 
 Women using oral contraceptives must be made aware of an 
important interaction that occurs with antimicrobial drugs. 
Because the normal gastrointestinal flora increase the entero-
hepatic cycling (and bioavailability) of estrogens, antimicrobial 
drugs that interfere with these organisms may reduce the efficacy 
of oral contraceptives. Additionally, coadministration with potent 
inducers of the hepatic microsomal metabolizing enzymes, such as 
rifampin, may increase liver catabolism of estrogens or progestins 
and diminish the efficacy of oral contraceptives. 
 Contraception with Progestins Alone 
 Small doses of progestins administered orally or by implantation 
under the skin can be used for contraception. They are particularly 
suited for use in patients for whom estrogen administration is 
undesirable. They are about as effective as intrauterine devices or 
combination pills containing 20–30 mcg of ethinyl estradiol. 
There is a high incidence of abnormal bleeding. 
 Effective contraception can also be achieved by injecting 
150 mg of depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) every 
3 months. After a 150 mg dose, ovulation is inhibited for at least 
14 weeks. Almost all users experience episodes of unpredictable 
spotting and bleeding, particularly during the first year of use. 
Spotting and bleeding decrease with time, and amenorrhea is 
common. This preparation is not desirable for women planning a 
pregnancy soon after cessation of therapy because ovulation sup-
pression can sometimes persist for as long as 18 months after the 
last injection. Long-term DMPA use reduces menstrual blood loss 
and is associated with a decreased risk of endometrial cancer. 
Suppression of endogenous estrogen secretion may be associated 
with a reversible reduction in bone density, and changes in plasma 
lipids are associated with an increased risk of atherosclerosis. 
 The progestin implant method utilizes the subcutaneous 
implantation of capsules containing etonogestrel. These capsules 
release one fifth to one third as much steroid as oral agents, are 
extremely effective, and last for 2–4 years. The low levels of hor-
mone have little effect on lipoprotein and carbohydrate metabo-
lism or blood pressure. The disadvantages include the need for 
surgical insertion and removal of capsules and some irregular 
bleeding rather than predictable menses. An association of intra-
cranial hypertension with an earlier type of implant utilizing 
norgestrel was observed in a small number of women. Patients 
experiencing headache or visual disturbances should be checked 
for papilledema. 
 Contraception with progestins is useful in patients with hepatic 
disease, hypertension, psychosis or mental retardation, or prior 
thromboembolism. The side effects include headache, dizziness, 
bloating and weight gain of 1–2 kg, and a reversible reduction of 
glucose tolerance. 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     731
 Postcoital Contraceptives 
 Pregnancy can be prevented following coitus by the administration 
of estrogens alone, progestin alone, or in combination ( “morning 
after” contraception). When treatment is begun within 72 hours, 
it is effective 99% of the time. Some effective schedules are shown 
in  Table 40–4 . The hormones are often administered with antie-
metics, since 40% of patients have nausea or vomiting. Other 
adverse effects include headache, dizziness, breast tenderness, and 
abdominal and leg cramps. 
 Mifepristone, an antagonist at progesterone and glucocorticoid 
receptors, has a luteolytic effect and is effective as a postcoital 
contraceptive. When combined with a prostaglandin it is also an 
effective abortifacient. 
 Beneficial Effects of Oral Contraceptives 
 It has become apparent that reduction in the dose of the constitu-
ents of oral contraceptives has markedly reduced mild and severe 
adverse effects, providing a relatively safe and convenient method 
of contraception for many young women. Treatment with oral 
contraceptives has also been shown to be associated with many 
benefits unrelated to contraception. These include a reduced risk 
of ovarian cysts, ovarian and endometrial cancer, and benign 
breast disease. There is a lower incidence of ectopic pregnancy. 
Iron deficiency and rheumatoid arthritis are less common, and 
premenstrual symptoms, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, acne, and 
hirsutism may be ameliorated with their use. 
 ■ ESTROGEN & PROGESTERONE 
INHIBITORS & ANTAGONISTS 
 TAMOXIFEN & RELATED PARTIAL 
AGONIST ESTROGENS 
 Tamoxifen, a competitive partial agonist inhibitor of estradiol 
at the estrogen receptor ( Figure 40–5 ), was the first  selective 
estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) to be introduced. It is 
extensively used in the palliative treatment of breast cancer in 
postmenopausal women and is approved for chemoprevention of 
TABLE 40–4  Schedules for use of postcoital 
contraceptives.
Conjugated estrogens: 10 mg three times daily for 5 days
Ethinyl estradiol: 2.5 mg twice daily for 5 days
Diethylstilbestrol: 50 mg daily for 5 days
Mifepristone: 600 mg once with misoprostol, 400 mcg once1
L-Norgestrel: 0.75 mg twice daily for 1 day (eg, Plan B2)
Norgestrel, 0.5 mg, with ethinyl estradiol, 0.05 mg (eg, Ovral, Preven2): 
Two tablets and then two in 12 hours
1Mifepristone given on day 1, misoprostol on day 3.
2Sold as emergency contraceptive kits.
breast cancer in high-risk women (see  Chapter 54 ). It is a non-
steroidal agent (see structure below) that is given orally. Peak 
plasma levels are reached in a few hours. Tamoxifen has an initial 
half-life of 7–14 hours in the circulation and is predominantly 
excreted by the liver. It is used in doses of 10–20 mg twice daily. 
Hot flushes and nausea and vomiting occur in 25% of patients, 
and many other minor adverse effects are observed. Studies of 
patients treated with tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy for early breast 
cancer have shown a 35% decrease in contralateral breast cancer. 
However, adjuvant therapy extended beyond 5 years in patients 
with breast cancer has shown no further improvement in outcome. 
 Toremifene is a structurally similar compound with very similar 
properties, indications, and toxicities. 
 
OCH2CH2N
CH3
CH2CH3
C
C
Tamoxifen
CH3
 Prevention of the expected loss of lumbar spine bone density 
and plasma lipid changes consistent with a reduction in the risk 
for atherosclerosis have also been reported in tamoxifen-treated 
patients following spontaneous or surgical menopause. However, 
this agonist activity also affects the uterus and may increase the 
risk of endometrial cancer. 
 Raloxifene is another partial estrogen agonist-antagonist 
(SERM) at some but not all target tissues. It has similar effects on 
lipids and bone but appears not to stimulate the endometrium or 
breast. Although subject to a high first-pass effect, raloxifene has a 
very large volume of distribution and a long half-life (>24 hours), 
so it can be taken once a day. Raloxifene has been approved in the 
USA for the prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis and pro-
phylaxis of breast cancer in women with risk factors. 
 Clomiphene is an older partial agonist, a weak estrogen that 
also acts as a competitive inhibitor of endogenous estrogens 
( Figure 40–5 ). It has found use as an ovulation-inducing agent 
(see below). 
 MIFEPRISTONE 
 Mifepristone is a “19-norsteroid” that binds strongly to the pro-
gesterone receptor and inhibits the activity of progesterone. The 
drug has luteolytic properties in 80% of women when given in the 
midluteal period. The mechanism of this effect is unknown, but it 
may provide the basis for using mifepristone as a contraceptive 
(as opposed to an abortifacient). However, because the compound 
has a long half-life, large doses may prolong the follicular phase of 
732    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
the subsequent cycle and so make it difficult to use continuously 
for this purpose. A single dose of 600 mg is an effective emergency 
postcoital contraceptive, though it may result in delayed ovulation 
in the following cycle. As noted in  Chapter 39 , the drug also binds 
to and acts as an antagonist at the glucocorticoid receptor. Limited 
clinical studies suggest that mifepristone or other analogs with 
similar properties may be useful in the treatment of endometriosis, 
Cushing’s syndrome, breast cancer, and possibly other neoplasms 
such as meningiomas that contain glucocorticoid or progesterone 
receptors. 
 
N
H3C
O
Mifepristone
OH
C
CCH3
CH3
H3C
 Mifepristone’s major use thus far has been to terminate early 
pregnancies. Doses of 400–600 mg/d for 4 days or 800 mg/d for 
2 days successfully terminated pregnancy in over 85% of the 
women studied. The major adverse effect was prolonged bleeding 
that on most occasions did not require treatment. The combina-
tion of a single oral dose of 600 mg of mifepristone and a vaginal 
pessary containing 1 mg of prostaglandin E 1 or oral misoprostol 
has been found to effectively terminate pregnancy in over 95% of 
patients treated during the first 7 weeks after conception. The 
adverse effects of the medications included vomiting, diarrhea, 
and abdominal or pelvic pain. As many as 5% of patients have 
vaginal bleeding requiring intervention. Because of these adverse 
effects, mifepristone is administered only by physicians at family 
planning centers.  Note: In a very small number of cases, use of a 
vaginal tablet for the prostaglandin dose has been associated with 
sepsis, so it is recommended that  both drugs be given by mouth in 
all patients. 
 ZK 98734 (lilopristone) is a potent experimental progesterone 
inhibitor and abortifacient in doses of 25 mg twice daily. Like 
mifepristone, it also appears to have antiglucocorticoid activity. 
 DANAZOL 
 Danazol, an isoxazole derivative of ethisterone (17α-
ethinyltestosterone) with weak progestational, androgenic, and 
glucocorticoid activities, is used to suppress ovarian function. 
Danazol inhibits the midcycle surge of LH and FSH and can 
prevent the compensatory increase in LH and FSH following 
castration in animals, but it does not significantly lower or sup-
press basal LH or FSH levels in normal women ( Figure 40–5 ). 
Danazol binds to androgen, progesterone, and glucocorticoid recep-
tors and can translocate the androgen receptor into the nucleus to 
initiate androgen-specific RNA synthesis. It does not bind to 
intracellular estrogen receptors, but it does bind to sex hormone-
binding and corticosteroid-binding globulins. It inhibits P450scc 
(the cholesterol side chain-cleaving enzyme), 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase, 17α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, P450c17 
(17α-hydroxylase), P450c11 (11β-hydroxylase), and P450c21 
(21β-hydroxylase). However, it does not inhibit aromatase, the 
enzyme required for estrogen synthesis. It increases the mean 
clearance of progesterone, probably by competing with the 
hormone for binding proteins, and may have similar effects on 
GnRH
FSH, LH
Estradiol
Estrone
Expression in estrogen-responsive cells
Estriol
Fulvestrant
GnRH antagonists
GnRH agonists
SERMs
Estrogen 
response
element
Testosterone
Progesterone
(Luteal phase)
Androstenedione
–
Clomiphene
+
Oral 
contraceptives,
danazol
–
Anastrozole, 
others
–
Ketoconazole, 
danazol
–
–
+/–
+/–
Hypothalamus
Anterior
pituitary
Ovary
 FIGURE 40–5  Control of ovarian secretion and the actions of its 
hormones. In the follicular phase the ovary produces mainly estro-
gens; in the luteal phase it produces estrogens and progesterone. 
SERMs, selective estrogen receptor modulators. See text. 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     733
other active steroid hormones. Ethisterone, a major metabolite 
of danazol, has both progestational and mild androgenic 
effects. 
 Danazol is slowly metabolized in humans, having a half-life of 
over 15 hours. This results in stable circulating levels when the drug 
is administered twice daily. It is highly concentrated in the liver, 
adrenals, and kidneys and is excreted in both feces and urine. 
 Danazol has been employed as an inhibitor of gonadal func-
tion and has found its major use in the treatment of endometrio-
sis. For this purpose, it can be given in a dosage of 600 mg/d. The 
dosage is reduced to 400 mg/d after 1 month and to 200 mg/d in 
2 months. About 85% of patients show marked improvement in 
3–12 months. 
 Danazol has also been used in the treatment of fibrocystic dis-
ease of the breast and hematologic or allergic disorders, including 
hemophilia, Christmas disease, idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
purpura, and angioneurotic edema. 
 The major adverse effects are weight gain, edema, decreased 
breast size, acne and oily skin, increased hair growth, deepening of 
the voice, headache, hot flushes, changes in libido, and muscle 
cramps. Although mild adverse effects are very common, it is 
seldom necessary to discontinue the drug because of them. 
Occasionally, because of its inherent glucocorticoid activity, dana-
zol may cause adrenal suppression. 
 Danazol should be used with great caution in patients with 
hepatic dysfunction, since it has been reported to produce mild to 
moderate hepatocellular damage in some patients, as evidenced by 
enzyme changes. It is also contraindicated during pregnancy and 
breast-feeding, as it may produce urogenital abnormalities in the 
offspring. 
 OTHER INHIBITORS 
 Anastrozole, a selective nonsteroidal inhibitor of aromatase (the 
enzyme required for estrogen synthesis, Figures 40–2 and 40–5), 
is effective in some women whose breast tumors have become 
resistant to tamoxifen (see  Chapter 54 ).  Letrozole is similar. 
 Exemestane, a steroid molecule, is an irreversible inhibitor of 
aromatase. Like anastrozole and letrozole, it is approved for use in 
women with advanced breast cancer (see  Chapter 54 ). 
 Several other aromatase inhibitors are undergoing clinical trials 
in patients with breast cancer.  Fadrozole is an oral nonsteroidal 
(triazole) inhibitor of aromatase activity. These compounds appear 
to be as effective as tamoxifen. In addition to their use in breast 
cancer, aromatase inhibitors have been successfully employed as 
adjuncts to androgen antagonists in the treatment of precocious 
puberty and as primary treatment in the excessive aromatase 
syndrome. 
 Fulvestrant is a pure estrogen receptor antagonist that has 
been somewhat more effective than those with partial agonist 
effects in some patients who have become resistant to tamoxifen. 
ICI 164,384 is a newer antagonist; it inhibits dimerization of the 
occupied estrogen receptor and interferes with its binding to DNA. 
It has also been used experimentally in breast cancer patients who 
have become resistant to tamoxifen. 
 GnRH and its analogs ( nafarelin, buserelin, etc) have become 
important in both stimulating and inhibiting ovarian function. 
They are discussed in  Chapter 37 . 
 OVULATION-INDUCING AGENTS  
 CLOMIPHENE 
 Clomiphene citrate, a partial estrogen agonist, is closely related to 
the estrogen chlorotrianisene ( Figure 40–3 ). This compound is 
well absorbed when taken orally. It has a half-life of 5–7 days and 
is excreted primarily in the urine. It exhibits significant protein 
binding and enterohepatic circulation and is distributed to adipose 
tissues. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Mechanisms of Action 
 Clomiphene is a partial agonist at estrogen receptors. The estro-
genic agonist effects are best demonstrated in animals with marked 
gonadal deficiency. Clomiphene has also been shown to effectively 
inhibit the action of stronger estrogens. In humans it leads to an 
increase in the secretion of gonadotropins and estrogens by inhib-
iting estradiol’s negative feedback effect on the gonadotropins 
( Figure 40–5 ). 
 B. Effects 
 The pharmacologic importance of this compound rests on its abil-
ity to stimulate ovulation in women with oligomenorrhea or 
amenorrhea and ovulatory dysfunction. The majority of patients 
suffer from polycystic ovary syndrome, a common disorder affect-
ing about 7% of women of reproductive age. The syndrome is 
characterized by gonadotropin-dependent ovarian hyperandro-
genism associated with anovulation and infertility. The disorder 
is frequently accompanied by adrenal hyperandrogenism. 
Clomiphene probably blocks the feedback inhibitory influence of 
estrogens on the hypothalamus, causing a surge of gonadotropins, 
which leads to ovulation. 
 Clinical Use 
 Clomiphene is used in the treatment of disorders of ovulation in 
patients who wish to become pregnant. Usually, a single ovulation 
is induced by a single course of therapy, and the patient must be 
treated repeatedly until pregnancy is achieved, since normal ovula-
tory function does not usually resume. The compound is of no 
value in patients with ovarian or pituitary failure. 
 When clomiphene is administered in a dosage of 100 mg/d for 
5 days, a rise in plasma LH and FSH is observed after several days. 
In patients who ovulate, the initial rise is followed by a second rise 
of gonadotropin levels just prior to ovulation. 
 Adverse Effects 
 The most common adverse effects in patients treated with this 
drug are hot flushes, which resemble those experienced by 
734    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
menopausal patients. They tend to be mild, and disappear when 
the drug is discontinued. There have been occasional reports of 
eye symptoms due to intensification and prolongation of afterim-
ages. These are generally of short duration. Headache, constipation, 
allergic skin reactions, and reversible hair loss have been reported 
occasionally. 
 The effective use of clomiphene is associated with some stimu-
lation of the ovaries and usually with ovarian enlargement. The 
degree of enlargement tends to be greater and its incidence higher 
in patients who have enlarged ovaries at the beginning of therapy. 
 A variety of other symptoms such as nausea and vomiting, 
increased nervous tension, depression, fatigue, breast soreness, 
weight gain, urinary frequency, and heavy menses have also been 
reported. However, these appear to result from the hormonal changes 
associated with an ovulatory menstrual cycle rather than from the 
medication. The incidence of multiple pregnancy is approximately 
10%. Clomiphene has not been shown to have an adverse effect 
when inadvertently given to women who are already pregnant. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 Special precautions should be observed in patients with enlarged 
ovaries. These women are thought to be more sensitive to this 
drug and should receive small doses. Any patient who complains 
of abdominal symptoms should be examined carefully. Maximum 
ovarian enlargement occurs after the 5-day course has been com-
pleted, and many patients can be shown to have a palpable 
increase in ovarian size by the seventh to tenth days. Treatment 
with clomiphene for more than a year may be associated with an 
increased risk of low-grade ovarian cancer; however, the evidence 
for this effect is not conclusive. 
 Special precautions must also be taken in patients who have 
visual symptoms associated with clomiphene therapy, since these 
symptoms may make activities such as driving more hazardous. 
 OTHER DRUGS USED IN 
OVULATORY DISORDERS 
 In addition to clomiphene, a variety of other hormonal and non-
hormonal agents are used in treating anovulatory disorders. They 
are discussed in  Chapter 37 . 
 ■ THE TESTIS ANDROGENS & 
ANABOLIC STEROIDS, 
ANTIANDROGENS, & MALE 
CONTRACEPTION 
 The testis, like the ovary, has both gametogenic and endocrine 
functions. The onset of gametogenic function of the testes is con-
trolled largely by the secretion of FSH by the pituitary. High 
concentrations of testosterone locally are also required for con-
tinuing sperm production in the seminiferous tubules. The Sertoli 
cells in the seminiferous tubules may be the source of the estradiol 
produced in the testes via aromatization of locally produced 
testosterone. With LH stimulation, testosterone is produced by 
the interstitial or Leydig cells found in the spaces between the 
seminiferous tubules. 
 The Sertoli cells in the testis synthesize and secrete a variety of 
active proteins, including müllerian duct inhibitory factor, inhibin, 
and activin. As in the ovary, inhibin and activin appear to be the 
product of three genes that produce a common α subunit and two 
β subunits, A and B. Activin is composed of the two β subunits 
(β A β B ). There are two inhibins (A and B), which contain the 
α subunit and one of the β subunits. Activin stimulates pituitary 
FSH release and is structurally similar to transforming growth 
factor-β, which also increases FSH. The inhibins in conjunction 
with testosterone and dihydrotestosterone are responsible for the 
feedback inhibition of pituitary FSH secretion. 
 ANDROGENS & ANABOLIC 
STEROIDS 
 In humans, the most important androgen secreted by the testis 
is testosterone. The pathways of synthesis of testosterone in the 
testes are similar to those previously described for the adrenal 
gland and ovary (Figures 39–1 and 40–2). 
 In men, approximately 8 mg of testosterone is produced daily. 
About 95% is produced by the Leydig cells and only 5% by the 
adrenals. The testis also secretes small amounts of another potent 
androgen, dihydrotestosterone, as well as androstenedione and 
dehydroepiandrosterone, which are weak androgens. Pregnenolone 
and progesterone and their 17-hydroxylated derivatives are also 
released in small amounts. Plasma levels of testosterone in males 
are about 0.6 mcg/dL after puberty and appear to decline after age 
50. Testosterone is also present in the plasma of women in concen-
trations of approximately 0.03 mcg/dL and is derived in approxi-
mately equal parts from the ovaries and adrenals and by the 
peripheral conversion of other hormones. 
 About 65% of circulating testosterone is bound to sex hormone-
binding globulin. SHBG is increased in plasma by estrogen, by 
thyroid hormone, and in patients with cirrhosis of the liver. It is 
decreased by androgen and growth hormone and is lower in obese 
individuals. Most of the remaining testosterone is bound to albu-
min. Approximately 2% remains free and available to enter cells 
and bind to intracellular receptors. 
 METABOLISM 
 In many target tissues, testosterone is converted to dihydrotestos-
terone by 5α-reductase. In these tissues, dihydrotestosterone is the 
major active androgen. The conversion of testosterone to estradiol 
by P450 aromatase also occurs in some tissues, including adipose 
tissue, liver, and the hypothalamus, where it may be of importance 
in regulating gonadal function. 
 The major pathway for the degradation of testosterone in 
humans occurs in the liver, with the reduction of the double bond 
and ketone in the A ring, as is seen in other steroids with a 
Δ 4 -ketone configuration in the A ring. This leads to the produc-
tion of inactive substances such as androsterone and etio-
cholanolone that are then conjugated and excreted in the urine. 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     735
TABLE 40–5  Androgens: Preparations available and 
relative androgenic:anabolic activity in 
animals.
Drug
Androgenic Anabolic 
Activity
Testosterone
1:1
Testosterone cypionate
1:1
Testosterone enanthate
1:1
Methyltestosterone
1:1
Fluoxymesterone
1:2
Oxymetholone
1:3
Oxandrolone
1:3–1:13
Nandrolone decanoate
1:2.5–1:4
 Androstenedione, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), and 
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) are also produced in 
significant amounts in humans, although largely in the adrenal 
gland rather than in the testes. They contribute slightly to the 
normal maturation process supporting other androgen-dependent 
pubertal changes in the human, primarily development of pubic 
and axillary hair and bone maturation. As noted in  Chapter 39 , 
some studies suggest that DHEA and DHEAS may have other 
central nervous system and metabolic effects and may prolong life 
in rabbits. In men they may improve the sense of well-being and 
inhibit atherosclerosis. In a placebo-controlled clinical trial in 
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, DHEA demonstrated 
some beneficial effects (see Adrenal Androgens,  Chapter 39 ). Adrenal 
androgens are to a large extent metabolized in the same fashion as 
testosterone. Both steroids—but particularly androstenedione—
can be converted by peripheral tissues to estrone in very small 
amounts (1–5%). The P450 aromatase enzyme responsible for 
this conversion is also found in the brain and is thought to play an 
important role in development. 
 Physiologic Effects 
 In the normal male, testosterone or its active metabolite 
5α-dihydrotestosterone is responsible for the many changes that 
occur in puberty. In addition to the general growth-promoting 
properties of androgens on body tissues, these hormones are 
responsible for penile and scrotal growth. Changes in the skin 
include the appearance of pubic, axillary, and beard hair. The 
sebaceous glands become more active, and the skin tends to 
become thicker and oilier. The larynx grows and the vocal cords 
become thicker, leading to a lower-pitched voice. Skeletal growth 
is stimulated and epiphysial closure accelerated. Other effects 
include growth of the prostate and seminal vesicles, darkening of 
the skin, and increased skin circulation. Androgens play an impor-
tant role in stimulating and maintaining sexual function in men. 
Androgens increase lean body mass and stimulate body hair 
growth and sebum secretion. Metabolic effects include the reduc-
tion of hormone binding and other carrier proteins and increased 
liver synthesis of clotting factors, triglyceride lipase, α 1 -antitrypsin, 
haptoglobin, and sialic acid. They also stimulate renal erythropoi-
etin secretion and decrease HDL levels. 
 Synthetic Steroids with Androgenic & 
Anabolic Action 
 Testosterone, when administered by mouth, is rapidly absorbed. 
However, it is largely converted to inactive metabolites, and only 
about one sixth of the dose administered is available in active form. 
Testosterone can be administered parenterally, but it has a more 
prolonged absorption time and greater activity in the propionate, 
enanthate, undecanoate, or cypionate ester forms. These derivatives 
are hydrolyzed to release free testosterone at the site of injection. 
Testosterone derivatives alkylated at the 17 position, eg, methyltes-
tosterone and fluoxymesterone, are active when given by mouth. 
 Testosterone and its derivatives have been used for their ana-
bolic effects as well as in the treatment of testosterone deficiency. 
Although testosterone and other known active steroids can be 
isolated in pure form and measured by weight, biologic assays are 
still used in the investigation of new compounds. In some of 
these studies in animals, the anabolic effects of the compound as 
measured by trophic effects on muscles or the reduction of nitrogen 
excretion may be dissociated from the other androgenic effects. This 
has led to the marketing of compounds claimed to have anabolic 
activity associated with only weak androgenic effects. Unfortunately, 
this dissociation is less marked in humans than in the animals used 
for testing ( Table 40–5 ), and all are potent androgens. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 Like other steroids, testosterone acts intracellularly in target cells. 
In skin, prostate, seminal vesicles, and epididymis, it is converted 
to 5α-dihydrotestosterone by 5α-reductase. In these tissues, dihy-
drotestosterone is the dominant androgen. The distribution of this 
enzyme in the fetus is different and has important developmental 
implications. 
 Testosterone and dihydrotestosterone bind to the intracellular 
androgen receptor, initiating a series of events similar to those 
described above for estradiol and progesterone, leading to growth, 
differentiation, and synthesis of a variety of enzymes and other 
functional proteins. 
 B. Effects 
 In the male at puberty, androgens cause development of the sec-
ondary sex characteristics (see above). In the adult male, large 
doses of testosterone—when given alone—or its derivatives sup-
press the secretion of gonadotropins and result in some atrophy of 
the interstitial tissue and the tubules of the testes. Since fairly large 
doses of androgens are required to suppress gonadotropin secre-
tion, it has been postulated that inhibin, in combination with 
androgens, is responsible for the feedback control of secretion. In 
women, androgens are capable of producing changes similar to 
those observed in the prepubertal male. These include growth of 
736    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
facial and body hair, deepening of the voice, enlargement of the 
clitoris, frontal baldness, and prominent musculature. The natural 
androgens stimulate erythrocyte production. 
 The administration of androgens reduces the excretion of nitro-
gen into the urine, indicating an increase in protein synthesis or a 
decrease in protein breakdown within the body. This effect is much 
more pronounced in women and children than in normal men. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Androgen Replacement Therapy in Men 
 Androgens are used to replace or augment endogenous androgen 
secretion in hypogonadal men ( Table 40–6 ). Even in the presence 
of pituitary deficiency, androgens are used rather than gonadotropin 
except when normal spermatogenesis is to be achieved. In patients 
with hypopituitarism, androgens are not added to the treatment 
regimen until puberty, at which time they are instituted in gradually 
increasing doses to achieve the growth spurt and the development 
of secondary sex characteristics. In these patients, therapy should be 
started with long-acting agents such as testosterone enanthate or 
cypionate in doses of 50 mg intramuscularly, initially every 4, then 
every 3, and finally every 2 weeks, with each change taking place 
at 3-month intervals. The dose is then doubled to 100 mg every 
2 weeks until maturation is complete. Finally, it is changed to the 
adult replacement dose of 200 mg at 2-week intervals. 
 Testosterone propionate, though potent, has a short duration 
of action and is not practical for long-term use. Testosterone unde-
canoate can be given orally, administering large amounts of the 
steroid twice daily (eg, 40 mg/d); however, this is not recom-
mended because oral testosterone administration has been associ-
ated with liver tumors. Testosterone can also be administered 
transdermally; skin patches or gels are available for scrotal or other 
skin area application. Two applications daily are usually required 
for replacement therapy. Implanted pellets and other longer-acting 
preparations are under study. The development of polycythemia 
or hypertension may require some reduction in dose. 
 B. Gynecologic Disorders 
 Androgens are used occasionally in the treatment of certain gyne-
cologic disorders, but the undesirable effects in women are such 
that they must be used with great caution. Androgens have been 
used to reduce breast engorgement during the postpartum period, 
usually in conjunction with estrogens. The weak androgen 
danazol is used in the treatment of endometriosis (see above). 
 Androgens are sometimes given in combination with estrogens 
for replacement therapy in the postmenopausal period in an attempt 
to eliminate the endometrial bleeding that may occur when only 
estrogens are used and to enhance libido. They have been used for 
chemotherapy of breast tumors in premenopausal women. 
 C. Use as Protein Anabolic Agents 
 Androgens and anabolic steroids have been used in conjunction 
with dietary measures and exercises in an attempt to reverse pro-
tein loss after trauma, surgery, or prolonged immobilization and 
in patients with debilitating diseases. 
 D. Anemia 
 In the past, large doses of androgens were employed in the treatment 
of refractory anemias such as aplastic anemia, Fanconi’s anemia, sickle 
cell anemia, myelofibrosis, and hemolytic anemias. Recombinant 
erythropoietin has largely replaced androgens for this purpose. 
 E. Osteoporosis 
 Androgens and anabolic agents have been used in the treatment of 
osteoporosis, either alone or in conjunction with estrogens. With 
the exception of substitution therapy in hypogonadism, bisphos-
phonates have largely replaced androgen use for this purpose. 
 F. Use as Growth Stimulators 
 These agents have been used to stimulate growth in boys with 
delayed puberty. If the drugs are used carefully, these children will 
probably achieve their expected adult height. If treatment is too 
vigorous, the patient may grow rapidly at first but will not achieve 
full predicted final stature because of the accelerated epiphysial 
closure that occurs. It is difficult to control this type of therapy 
adequately even with frequent X-ray examination of the epiphyses, 
since the action of the hormones on epiphysial centers may con-
tinue for many months after therapy is discontinued. 
 G. Anabolic Steroid and Androgen Abuse in Sports 
 The use of anabolic steroids by athletes has received worldwide 
attention. Many athletes and their coaches believe that anabolic 
steroids—in doses 10–200 times larger than the daily normal 
physiologic production—increase strength and aggressiveness, 
thereby improving competitive performance. Such effects have been 
unequivocally demonstrated only in women. Furthermore, the 
adverse effects of these drugs clearly make their use inadvisable. 
 H. Aging 
 Androgen production falls with age in men and may contribute to 
the decline in muscle mass, strength, and libido. Preliminary 
studies of androgen replacement in aging males with low andro-
gen levels show an increase in lean body mass and hematocrit and 
a decrease in bone turnover. Longer studies will be required to 
assess the usefulness of this therapy. 
TABLE 40–6  Androgen preparations for replacement 
therapy.
Drug
Route of 
Administration
Dosage
Methyltestosterone
Oral
25–50 mg/d
Sublingual (buccal)
5–10 mg/d
Fluoxymesterone
Oral
2–10 mg/d
Testosterone enanthate
Intramuscular
See text
Testosterone cypionate
Intramuscular
See text
Testosterone
Transdermal
2.5–10 mg/d
Topical gel (1%)
5–10 g/d
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     737
 Adverse Effects 
 The adverse effects of these compounds are due largely to their 
masculinizing actions and are most noticeable in women and pre-
pubertal children. In women, the administration of more than 
200–300 mg of testosterone per month is usually associated with 
hirsutism, acne, amenorrhea, clitoral enlargement, and deepening 
of the voice. These effects may occur with even smaller doses in 
some women. Some of the androgenic steroids exert progesta-
tional activity, leading to endometrial bleeding upon discontinua-
tion. These hormones also alter serum lipids and could conceivably 
increase susceptibility to atherosclerotic disease in women. 
 Except under the most unusual circumstances, androgens 
should not be used in infants. Recent studies in animals suggest 
that administration of androgens in early life may have profound 
effects on maturation of central nervous system centers governing 
sexual development, particularly in the female. Administration of 
these drugs to pregnant women may lead to masculinization or 
undermasculinization of the external genitalia in the female and 
male fetus, respectively. Although the above-mentioned effects 
may be less marked with the anabolic agents, they do occur. 
 Sodium retention and edema are not common but must be 
carefully watched for in patients with heart and kidney disease. 
 Most of the synthetic androgens and anabolic agents are 
17-alkyl-substituted steroids. Administration of drugs with this 
structure is often associated with evidence of hepatic dysfunction. 
Hepatic dysfunction usually occurs early in the course of treat-
ment, and the degree is proportionate to the dose. Bilirubin levels 
may increase until clinical jaundice is apparent. The cholestatic 
jaundice is reversible upon cessation of therapy, and permanent 
changes do not occur. In older males, prostatic hyperplasia may 
develop, causing urinary retention. 
 Replacement therapy in men may cause acne, sleep apnea, 
erythrocytosis, gynecomastia, and azoospermia. Supraphysiologic 
doses of androgens produce azoospermia and decrease in testicular 
size, both of which may take months to recover after cessation of 
therapy. The alkylated androgens in high doses can produce pelio-
sis hepatica, cholestasis, and hepatic failure. They lower plasma 
HDL and may increase LDL. Hepatic adenomas and carcinomas 
have also been reported. Behavioral effects include psychological 
dependence, increased aggressiveness, and psychotic symptoms. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 The use of androgenic steroids is contraindicated in pregnant 
women or women who may become pregnant during the course 
of therapy. 
 Androgens should not be administered to male patients with 
carcinoma of the prostate or breast. Until more is known about the 
effects of these hormones on the central nervous system in develop-
ing children, they should be avoided in infants and young children. 
 Special caution is required in giving these drugs to children to 
produce a growth spurt. In most patients, the use of somatotropin 
is more appropriate (see  Chapter 37 ). 
 Care should be exercised in the administration of these drugs to 
patients with renal or cardiac disease predisposed to edema. If sodium 
and water retention occurs, it will respond to diuretic therapy. 
 Methyltestosterone therapy is associated with creatinuria, but 
the significance of this finding is not known. 
 Caution: Several cases of hepatocellular carcinoma have been 
reported in patients with aplastic anemia treated with androgen 
anabolic therapy. Erythropoietin and colony-stimulating factors 
(see  Chapter 33 ) should be used instead. 
 ANDROGEN SUPPRESSION & 
ANTIANDROGENS 
 ANDROGEN SUPPRESSION 
 The treatment of advanced prostatic carcinoma often requires 
orchiectomy or large doses of estrogens to reduce available endog-
enous androgen. The psychological effects of the former and 
gynecomastia produced by the latter make these approaches unde-
sirable. As noted in  Chapter 37 , the GnRH analogs such as goser-
elin, nafarelin, buserelin, and leuprolide acetate produce effective 
gonadal suppression when blood levels are continuous rather than 
pulsatile (see  Chapter 37 and  Figure 40–6 ). 
 ANTIANDROGENS 
 The potential usefulness of antiandrogens in the treatment of 
patients producing excessive amounts of testosterone has led to the 
search for effective drugs that can be used for this purpose. Several 
approaches to the problem, especially inhibition of synthesis and 
receptor antagonism, have met with some success. 
 Steroid Synthesis Inhibitors 
 Ketoconazole, used primarily in the treatment of fungal disease, 
is an inhibitor of adrenal and gonadal steroid synthesis, as 
described in  Chapter 39 . It does not affect ovarian aromatase, but 
it reduces human placental aromatase activity. It displaces estradiol 
and dihydrotestosterone from sex hormone-binding protein in 
vitro and increases the estradiol:testosterone ratio in plasma in 
vivo by a different mechanism. However, it does not appear to be 
clinically useful in women with increased androgen levels because 
of the toxicity associated with prolonged use of the 400–800 mg/d 
required. The drug has also been used experimentally to treat 
prostatic carcinoma, but the results have not been encouraging. 
Men treated with ketoconazole often develop reversible gyneco-
mastia during therapy; this may be due to the demonstrated 
increase in the estradiol:testosterone ratio. 
 Conversion of Steroid Precursors 
to Androgens 
 Several compounds have been developed that inhibit the 
17-hydroxylation of progesterone or pregnenolone, thereby pre-
venting the action of the side chain-splitting enzyme and the further 
transformation of these steroid precursors to active androgens. A 
few of these compounds have been tested clinically but have been 
738    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
too toxic for prolonged use. As noted in  Chapter 39 ,  abiraterone, 
a newer 17-hydroxylase inhibitor, may prove to be clinically successful. 
 Since dihydrotestosterone—not testosterone—appears to be 
the essential androgen in the prostate, androgen effects in this and 
similar dihydrotestosterone-dependent tissues can be reduced by 
an inhibitor of 5α-reductase ( Figure 40–6 ).  Finasteride, a steroid-
like inhibitor of this enzyme, is orally active and causes a reduction 
in dihydrotestosterone levels that begins within 8 hours after 
administration and lasts for about 24 hours. The half-life is about 
8 hours (longer in elderly individuals). Forty to 50 percent of the 
dose is metabolized; more than half is excreted in the feces. 
Finasteride has been reported to be moderately effective in reduc-
ing prostate size in men with benign prostatic hyperplasia and is 
approved for this use in the USA. The dosage is 5 mg/d. 
 Dutasteride is a similar orally active steroid derivative with a slow 
onset of action and a much longer half-life than finasteride. The 
dosage is 0.5 mg daily. These drugs are not approved for use in 
women or children, although finasteride has been used success-
fully in the treatment of hirsutism in women and early male pat-
tern baldness in men (1 mg/d). 
 
H
O
Finasteride
N
H
C
O
NHC(CH3)3
CH3
CH3
 Receptor Inhibitors 
 Cyproterone and  cyproterone acetate are effective antiandrogens 
that inhibit the action of androgens at the target organ. The ace-
tate form has a marked progestational effect that suppresses the 
feedback enhancement of LH and FSH, leading to a more effec-
tive antiandrogen effect. These compounds have been used in 
women to treat hirsutism and in men to decrease excessive sexual 
drive and are being studied in other conditions in which the 
reduction of androgenic effects would be useful. Cyproterone 
acetate in a dosage of 2 mg/d administered concurrently with an 
estrogen is used in the treatment of hirsutism in women, doubling 
as a contraceptive pill; it has orphan drug status in the USA. 
 Flutamide, a substituted anilide, is a potent antiandrogen that 
has been used in the treatment of prostatic carcinoma. Although 
not a steroid, it behaves like a competitive antagonist at the androgen 
receptor. It is rapidly metabolized in humans. It frequently causes 
mild gynecomastia (probably by increasing testicular estrogen 
production) and occasionally causes mild reversible hepatic toxicity. 
Administration of this compound causes some improvement in most 
patients with prostatic carcinoma who have not had prior endocrine 
therapy. Preliminary studies indicate that flutamide is also useful in 
the management of excess androgen effect in women. 
O
NH
C
Flutamide
CH
CH3
CH3
F3C
O2N
 
GnRH antagonists (1)
GnRH agonists (2)
Ketoconazole,
spironolactone (3)
Testosterone
Finasteride
(4)
Dihydrotestosterone
Androgen-receptor complex
Androgen
response
element
Expression of appropriate
genes in androgen-responsive cells
Flutamide,
cyproterone,
spironolactone
(5)
–
–
–
–
–
+/–
GnRH
LH
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
gonadotrophs
Testis
5α-
Reductase
 FIGURE 40–6  Control of androgen secretion and activity and 
some sites of action of antiandrogens:  (1) competitive inhibition of 
GnRH receptors;  (2) stimulation (+, pulsatile administration) or inhibi-
tion via desensitization of GnRH receptors (–, continuous administra-
tion);  (3) decreased synthesis of testosterone in the testis;
  (4) decreased synthesis of dihydrotestosterone by inhibition of 
5α-reductase;  (5) competition for binding to cytosol androgen 
receptors. 
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     739
 Bicalutamide and  nilutamide are potent orally active antian-
drogens that can be administered as a single daily dose and are 
used in patients with metastatic carcinoma of the prostate. Studies 
in patients with carcinoma of the prostate indicate that these 
agents are well tolerated. Bicalutamide is recommended for use in 
combination with a GnRH analog (to reduce tumor flare) and 
may have fewer gastrointestinal side effects than flutamide. A dos-
age of 150–200 mg/d (when used alone) is required to reduce 
prostate-specific antigen levels to those achieved by castration, 
but, in combination with a GnRH analog, 50 mg/d may be ade-
quate. Nilutamide is approved for use following surgical castration 
in a dosage of 300 mg/d for 30 days followed by 150 mg/d. 
 Spironolactone, a competitive inhibitor of aldosterone (see 
 Chapter 15 ), also competes with dihydrotestosterone for the andro-
gen receptors in target tissues. It also reduces 17α-hydroxylase 
activity, lowering plasma levels of testosterone and androstene-
dione. It is used in dosages of 50–200 mg/d in the treatment of 
hirsutism in women and appears to be as effective as finasteride, 
flutamide, or cyproterone in this condition. 
 CHEMICAL CONTRACEPTION
IN MEN 
 Although many studies have been conducted, an effective oral 
contraceptive for men has not yet been found. For example, various 
androgens, including testosterone and testosterone enanthate, in a 
dosage of 400 mg per month, produced azoospermia in less than 
half the men treated. Minor adverse reactions, including gyneco-
mastia and acne, were encountered. Testosterone in combination 
with danazol was well tolerated but no more effective than testos-
terone alone. Androgens in combination with a progestin such as 
medroxyprogesterone acetate were no more effective. However, 
preliminary studies indicate that the intramuscular administration 
of 100 mg of testosterone enanthate weekly together with 500 mg 
of levonorgestrel daily orally can produce azoospermia in 94% 
of men. 
 Cyproterone acetate, a very potent progestin and antiandrogen, 
also produces oligospermia; however, it does not cause reliable 
contraception. 
 At present, pituitary hormones—and potent antagonist analogs 
of GnRH—are receiving increased attention. A GnRH antagonist 
in combination with testosterone has been shown to produce 
reversible azoospermia in nonhuman primates. 
 GOSSYPOL 
 Extensive trials of this cottonseed derivative have been conducted 
in China. This compound destroys elements of the seminiferous 
epithelium but does not significantly alter the endocrine function 
of the testis. 
 In Chinese studies, large numbers of men were treated with 
20 mg/d of gossypol or gossypol acetic acid for 2 months, fol-
lowed by a maintenance dosage of 60 mg/wk. On this regimen, 
99% of men developed sperm counts below 4 million/mL. 
Preliminary data indicate that recovery (return of normal sperm 
count) following discontinuance of gossypol administration is 
more apt to occur in men whose counts do not fall to extremely 
low levels and when administration is not continued for more 
than 2 years. Hypokalemia is the major adverse effect and may 
lead to transient paralysis. Because of low efficacy and signifi-
cant toxicity, gossypol has been abandoned as a candidate male 
contraceptive. 
740    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E 1
ESTROGENS
Conjugated estrogens (Premarin)
Oral: 0.3, 0.45, 0.625, 0.9, 1.25 mg tablets
Parenteral: 25 mg/5 mL for IM, IV injection
Vaginal: 0.625 mg/g cream base
Diethylstilbestrol (Stilphostrol)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.25 g
Esterified estrogens (Cenestin, Enjuvia, Menest)
Oral: 0.3, 0.45, 0.625, 0.9, 1.25, 2.5 mg tablets
Estradiol cypionate in oil (Depo-Estradiol)
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for IM injection
Estradiol (generic, Estrace, others)
Oral: 0.45, 0.5, 0.9, 1, 1.5, 1.8, 2 mg tablets
Vaginal: 0.1 mg/g cream, 2 mg ring, 25 mcg tablets
Estradiol transdermal (generic, Estraderm, many others)
Transdermal patch: 0.014, 0.025, 0.0375, 0.05, 0.06, 0.075, 0.1 mg/d 
release rates
Topical: 2.5 mg/g emulsion (Estrasorb); 0.75 mg/1.25 g unit dose 
(Estrogel)
Estradiol valerate in oil (generic)
Parenteral: 10, 20, 40 mg/mL for IM injection
Estrone (Menest)
Oral: 0.3, 0.625, 1.25, 2.5 mg tablets
Estropipate (generic, Ogen)
Oral: 0.625, 1.25, 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Vaginal: 1.5 mg/g cream base
PROGESTINS
Levonorgestrel (Norplant)
Kit for subcutaneous implant: 6 capsules of 36 mg each
Intrauterine system: 52 mg
Medroxyprogesterone acetate (generic, Provera)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
Parenteral (Depo-Provera): 150, 400 mg/mL for IM injection
Megestrol acetate (generic, Megace)
Oral: 20, 40 mg tablets; 40, 125 mg/mL suspension
Norethindrone acetate (generic, Aygestin)
Oral: 5 mg tablets
Progesterone (generic)
Oral: 100, 200 mg capsules
Topical: 4, 8% vaginal gel, 100 mg insert
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL in oil for IM injection
Intrauterine contraceptive system: 38 mg in silicone
ANDROGENS & ANABOLIC STEROIDS
Fluoxymesterone (generic)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
Methyltestosterone (generic)
Oral: 10, 25 mg tablets; 10 mg capsules; 10 mg buccal tablets
Nandrolone decanoate (generic)
Parenteral: 100, 200 mg/mL in oil for injection
Oxandrolone (Oxandrin)
Oral: 2.5, 10 mg tablets
Oxymetholone (Androl-50)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Testosterone
Buccal system: 30 mg
Testosterone cypionate in oil (generic, Depo-testosterone)
Parenteral: 100, 200 mg/mL for IM injection
Testosterone enanthate in oil (generic, Delatestryl)
Parenteral: 200 mg/mL for IM injection
Testosterone transdermal system
Patch (Androderm): 2.5, 5 mg/24 h release rate
Gel (AndroGel): 1%
Testosterone pellets (Testopel)
Parenteral: 75 mg/pellet for parenteral injection (not IV)
ANTAGONISTS & INHIBITORS
See also Chapter 37
Anastrozole (Arimidex)
Oral: 1 mg tablets
Bicalutamide (Casodex)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Clomiphene (generic, Clomid, Serophene, Milophene)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Danazol (generic, Danocrine)
Oral: 50, 100, 200 mg capsules
Dutasteride (Avodart)
Oral: 0.5 mg tablets
Exemestane (Aromasin)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Finasteride
Oral: 1 mg tablets (Propecia); 5 mg tablets (Proscar)
Flutamide (Eulexin)
Oral: 125 mg capsules
Fulvestrant (Faslodex)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IM injection
Letrozole (Femara)
Oral: 2.5 mg tablets
Mifepristone (Mifeprex)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Nilutamide (Nilandron)
Oral: 50, 150 mg tablets
Raloxifene (Evista)
Oral: 60 mg tablets
Tamoxifen (generic, Nolvadex)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets; 10 mg/5 mL oral solution
Toremifene (Fareston)
Oral: 60 mg tablets
1Oral contraceptives are listed in Table 40–3.
CHAPTER 40 The Gonadal Hormones & Inhibitors     741
 REFERENCES 
 Acconcia F et al: Palmitoylation-dependent estrogen receptor alpha membrane 
localization: Regulation by 17beta-estradiol. Mol Biol Cell 2005;16:231. 
 Anderson GL et al for the Women’s Health Initiative Steering Committee: 
Effects of conjugated equine estrogen in postmenopausal women with hys-
terectomy. JAMA 2004;291:1701. 
 Bacopoulou F, Greydanus DE, Chrousos GP: Reproductive and contraceptive 
issues in chronically ill adolescents. Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care 
2010;15:389. 
 Bamberger CM, Schulte HM, Chrousos GP: Molecular determinants of gluco-
corticoid receptor function and tissue sensitivity. Endocr Rev 1996;17:221. 
 Basaria S et al: Adverse events associated with testosterone administration. 
N Engl J Med 2010;363:109. 
 Baulieu E-E: Contragestion and other clinical applications of RU 486, an anti-
progesterone at the receptor. Science 1989;245:1351. 
 Bechlioulis A et al: Endothelial function, but not carotid intima-media thick-
ness, is affected early in menopause and is associated with severity of hot 
flushes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:1199. 
 Burkman R, Schlesselman JJ, Zieman M: Safety concerns and health benefits 
associated with oral contraception. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004;190
(Suppl 4):S5. 
 Chlebowski RT et al: Estrogen plus progestin and breast cancer. Incidence and 
mortality in postmenopausal women. JAMA 2010;304:1684. 
 Chrousos GP: Perspective: Stress and sex vs. immunity and inflammation. 
Science Signaling 2010;3:e36. 
 Chrousos GP, Torpy DJ, Gold PW: Interactions between the hypothalamic-pi-
tuitary-adrenal axis and the female reproductive system: Clinical implica-
tions. Ann Intern Med 1998;129:229. 
 Diamanti-Kandarakis E et al: Pathophysiology and types of dyslipidemia in 
PCOS. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2007;18:280. 
 Gomes MPV, Deitcher SR: Risk of venous thromboembolic disease associated 
with hormonal contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy: A clinical 
review. Arch Intern Med 2004;164:1965. 
 Hall JM, McDonnell DP, Korach KS: Allosteric regulation of estrogen receptor 
structure, function, and co-activator recruitment by different estrogen 
response elements. Mol Endocrinol 2002;16:469. 
 Harman SM et al: Longitudinal effects of aging on serum total and free testos-
terone levels in healthy men. Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:724. 
 Kalantaridou S, Chrousos GP: Monogenic disorders of puberty. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:2481. 
 Kalantaridou S et al: Premature ovarian failure, endothelial dysfunction, and 
estrogen-progesterone replacement. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2006;17:101. 
 Kalantaridou SN et al: Impaired endothelial function in young women with 
premature ovarian failure: Normalization with hormone therapy. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2004;89:3907. 
 Kanaka-Gantenbein C et al: Assisted reproduction and its neuroendocrine 
impact on the offspring. Prog Brain Res 2010;182C:161. 
 Manson JE et al: Estrogen plus progestin and the risk of coronary heart disease. 
N Engl J Med 2003;349:523. 
 Merke DP et al: Future directions in the study and management of congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Ann Intern Med 
2002;136:320. 
 Mooradian AD, Morley JD, Korenman SG: Biological action of androgens. 
Endocr Rev 1987;8:1. 
 Naka KK et al: Effect of the insulin sensitizers metformin and pioglitazone on 
endothelial function in young women with polycystic ovary syndrome: 
A prospective randomized study. Fertil Steril 2011;95:203. 
 Price VH: Treatment of hair loss. N Engl J Med 1999;341:964. 
 Rossouw JE et al: Risks and benefits of estrogen plus progestin in healthy post-
menopausal women: Principal results from the Women’s Health Initiative 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002;288:321. 
 Smith RE: A review of selective estrogen receptor modulators in national surgi-
cal adjuvant breast and bowel project clinical trials. Semin Oncol 
2003;30(Suppl 16):4. 
 Snyder PJ et al: Effect of testosterone replacement in hypogonadal men. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2000;85:2670. 
 US Preventive Services Task Force: Hormone therapy for the prevention of chronic 
conditions in postmenopausal women. Ann Intern Med 2005;142:855. 
 Wehrmacher WH, Messmore H: Women’s Health Initiative is fundamentally 
flawed. Gend Med 2005;2:4. 
 Weisberg E: Interactions between oral contraceptives and antifungals/antibacte-
rials. Is contraceptive failure the result? Clin Pharmacokinet 1999;36:309. 
 Young NR et al: Body composition and muscle strength in healthy men 
receiving T enanthate for contraception. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1993;77:1028. 
 Zandi PP et al: Hormone replacement therapy and incidence of Alzheimer’s 
disease in older women. JAMA 2002;288:2123. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 The patient should be advised to start daily transdermal 
estradiol therapy (100 mcg/d) along with oral natural pro-
gesterone (200 mg/d) for the last 12 days of each 28-day 
cycle. On this regimen, her symptoms should disappear 
and normal monthly uterine bleeding resume. She should 
also be advised to get adequate exercise and increase 
her calcium and vitamin D intake as treatment for her 
osteoporosis. 
This page intentionally left blank 
743
 A 56-year-old Hispanic woman presents to her medical prac-
titioner with symptoms of fatigue, increased thirst, frequent 
urination, and exercise intolerance with shortness of breath of 
many months’ duration. She does not get regular medical care 
and is unaware of any medical problems. Her family history 
is significant for obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, and 
coronary artery disease in both parents and several siblings. 
She is not taking any medications. Five of her six children had 
a birthweight of over 9 pounds. Physical examination reveals 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
a BMI (body mass index) of 34, blood pressure of 150/90 mm 
Hg, and evidence of mild peripheral neuropathy. Laboratory 
tests reveal a random blood sugar of 261 mg/dL; this is con-
firmed with a fasting plasma glucose of 192 mg/dL. A fasting 
lipid panel reveals total cholesterol 264 mg/dL, triglycerides 
255 mg/dL, high-density lipoproteins 43 mg/dL, and low-
density lipoproteins 170 mg/dL. What type of diabetes does 
this woman have? What further evaluations should be 
obtained? How would you treat her diabetes? 
41
 Pancreatic Hormones & 
Antidiabetic Drugs 
 Martha S. Nolte Kennedy, MD  
 ■ THE ENDOCRINE PANCREAS 
 The endocrine pancreas in the adult human consists of approxi-
mately 1 million islets of Langerhans interspersed throughout the 
pancreatic gland. Within the islets, at least four hormone-producing 
cells are present ( Table 41–1 ). Their hormone products include 
 insulin, the storage and anabolic hormone of the body;  islet amy-
loid polypeptide (IAPP, or  amylin), which modulates appetite, 
gastric emptying, and glucagon and insulin secretion;  glucagon, the 
hyperglycemic factor that mobilizes glycogen stores;  somatostatin, 
a universal inhibitor of secretory cells;  gastrin, which stimulates 
gastric acid secretion; and  pancreatic peptide, a small protein that 
facilitates digestive processes by a mechanism not yet clarified. 
 Diabetes mellitus is defined as an elevated blood glucose asso-
ciated with absent or inadequate pancreatic insulin secretion, with 
or without concurrent impairment of insulin action. The disease 
states underlying the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus are now classified 
into four categories: type 1,  insulin-dependent diabetes; type 2, 
 non–insulin-dependent diabetes; type 3,  other; and type 4, gesta-
tional diabetes mellitus (Expert Committee, 2003). 
 Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus 
 The hallmark of type 1 diabetes is selective beta cell (B cell) 
destruction and  severe or  absolute insulin deficiency. Type 1 diabetes 
is further subdivided into immune and idiopathic causes. The 
immune form is the most common form of type 1 diabetes. 
Although most patients are younger than 30 years of age at the 
time of diagnosis, the onset can occur at any age. Type 1 diabetes 
is found in all ethnic groups, but the highest incidence is in people 
from northern Europe and from Sardinia. Susceptibility appears 
to involve a multifactorial genetic linkage, but only 10–15% of 
patients have a positive family history. 
 For persons with type 1 diabetes, insulin replacement therapy 
is necessary to sustain life. Pharmacologic insulin is administered 
by injection into the subcutaneous tissue using a manual injection 
device or an insulin pump that continuously infuses insulin under 
744    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
the skin. Interruption of the insulin replacement therapy can be 
life-threatening and can result in  diabetic ketoacidosis or death. 
Diabetic ketoacidosis is caused by insufficient or absent insulin 
and results from excess release of fatty acids and subsequent 
formation of toxic levels of ketoacids. 
 Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 
 Type 2 diabetes is characterized by tissue resistance to the action 
of insulin combined with a  relative deficiency in insulin secretion. 
A given individual may have more resistance or more beta-cell 
deficiency, and the abnormalities may be mild or severe. Although 
insulin is produced by the beta cells in these patients, it is inade-
quate to overcome the resistance, and the blood glucose rises. The 
impaired insulin action also affects fat metabolism, resulting in 
increased free fatty acid flux and triglyceride levels and reciprocally 
low levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL). 
 Individuals with type 2 diabetes may not require insulin to sur-
vive, but 30% or more will benefit from insulin therapy to control 
blood glucose. It is likely that 10–20% of individuals in whom type 2 
diabetes was initially diagnosed actually have both type 1 and type 2 
or a slowly progressing type 1 called latent autoimmune diabetes 
of adults (LADA), and they ultimately require full insulin replace-
ment. Although persons with type 2 diabetes ordinarily do not 
develop ketosis, ketoacidosis may occur as the result of stress such as 
infection or the use of medication that enhances resistance, eg, cor-
ticosteroids. Dehydration in individuals with untreated or poorly 
controlled type 2 diabetes can lead to a life-threatening condition 
called  nonketotic hyperosmolar coma . In this condition, the 
blood glucose may rise to 6–20 times the normal range and an 
altered mental state develops or the person loses consciousness. 
Urgent medical care and rehydration are required. 
 Type 3 Diabetes Mellitus 
 The type 3 designation refers to multiple  other specific causes of an 
elevated blood glucose: pancreatectomy, pancreatitis, nonpancreatic 
diseases, drug therapy, etc. For a detailed list the reader is referred to 
the reference Expert Committee, 2003. 
 Type 4 Diabetes Mellitus 
 Gestational diabetes (GDM) is defined as any abnormality in 
glucose levels noted for the first time during pregnancy. Gestational 
diabetes is diagnosed in approximately 7% of all pregnancies in 
the USA. During pregnancy, the placenta and placental hormones 
create an insulin resistance that is most pronounced in the last 
trimester. Risk assessment for diabetes is suggested starting at the 
first prenatal visit. High-risk women should be screened immedi-
ately. Screening may be deferred in lower-risk women until the 
24th to 28th week of gestation. 
 ■ INSULIN 
 Chemistry 
 Insulin is a small protein with a molecular weight in humans of 
5808. It contains 51 amino acids arranged in two chains (A and B) 
linked by disulfide bridges; there are species differences in the 
amino acids of both chains. Proinsulin, a long single-chain protein 
molecule, is processed within the Golgi apparatus of beta cells and 
packaged into granules, where it is hydrolyzed into insulin and a 
residual connecting segment called C-peptide by removal of four 
amino acids ( Figure 41–1 ). 
TABLE 41–1  Pancreatic islet cells and their secretory 
products.
Cell Types
Approximate 
Percent of Islet 
Mass
Secretory Products
Alpha (A) cell
20
Glucagon, proglucagon
Beta (B) cell
75
Insulin, C-peptide, proinsu-
lin, amylin
Delta (D) cell
3–5
Somatostatin
G cell
1
Gastrin
F cell (PP cell)1
1
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP)
1Within pancreatic polypeptide-rich lobules of adult islets, located only in the poste-
rior portion of the head of the human pancreas, glucagon cells are scarce (< 0.5%) 
and F cells make up as much as 80% of the cells.
A chain
B chain
C-peptide
20
10
21
10
1
1
3
30
31
32
29
28
S
S
S
S
S
S
 FIGURE 41–1  Structure of human proinsulin (C-peptide plus A and B chains) and insulin. Insulin is shown as the shaded (orange color) 
peptide chains, A and B. Differences in the A and B chains and amino acid modifications for the rapid-acting insulin analogs (aspart, lispro, and 
glulisine) and long-acting insulin analogs (glargine and detemir) are discussed in the text. 
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     745
including insulin itself and leptin, α-adrenergic sympathetic 
activity, chronically elevated glucose, and low concentrations of 
fatty acids. Inhibitory drugs include diazoxide, phenytoin, vin-
blastine, and colchicine. 
 One mechanism of stimulated insulin release is diagrammed in 
 Figure 41–2 . As shown in the figure, hyperglycemia results in 
increased intracellular ATP levels, which close the ATP-dependent 
potassium channels. Decreased outward potassium efflux results 
in depolarization of the beta cell and opening of voltage-gated 
calcium channels. The resulting increased intracellular calcium 
triggers secretion of the hormone. The insulin secretagogue drug 
group (sulfonylureas, meglitinides, and D-phenylalanine) exploits 
parts of this mechanism. 
 Insulin Degradation 
 The liver and kidney are the two main organs that remove insulin 
from the circulation. The liver normally clears the blood of 
approximately 60% of the insulin released from the pancreas by 
virtue of its location as the terminal site of portal vein blood flow, 
with the kidney removing 35–40% of the endogenous hormone. 
However, in insulin-treated diabetics receiving subcutaneous 
insulin injections, this ratio is reversed, with as much as 60% of 
exogenous insulin being cleared by the kidney and the liver 
removing no more than 30–40%. The half-life of circulating insu-
lin is 3–5 minutes. 
 Insulin and C-peptide are secreted in equimolar amounts in 
response to all insulin secretagogues; a small quantity of unpro-
cessed or partially hydrolyzed proinsulin is released as well. Although 
proinsulin may have some mild hypoglycemic action, C-peptide has 
no known physiologic function. Granules within the beta cells store 
the insulin in the form of crystals consisting of two atoms of zinc 
and six molecules of insulin. The entire human pancreas contains 
up to 8 mg of insulin, representing approximately 200 biologic 
units. Originally, the unit was defined on the basis of the hypogly-
cemic activity of insulin in rabbits. With improved purification 
techniques, the unit is presently defined on the basis of weight, and 
present insulin standards used for assay purposes contain 28 units 
per milligram. 
 Insulin Secretion 
 Insulin is released from pancreatic beta cells at a low basal rate 
and at a much higher stimulated rate in response to a variety of 
stimuli, especially glucose. Other stimulants such as other sugars 
(eg, mannose), amino acids (especially gluconeogenic amino 
acids, eg, leucine, arginine), hormones such as glucagon-like 
polypeptide-1 (GLP-1), glucose-dependent insulinotropic poly-
peptide (GIP), glucagon, cholecystokinin, high concentrations of 
fatty acids, and β-adrenergic sympathetic activity are recognized. 
Stimulatory drugs are sulfonylureas, meglitinide and nateglinide, 
isoproterenol, and acetylcholine. Inhibitory signals are hormones 
+
–
–
Insulin
Insulin
Exocytosis
Glucose
Glucose
transporter
Metabolism
GLUT2
ATP
K+ channel
Sulfonylurea drugs
(block, depolarize)
Ca2+ channel
(depolarization
opens channel)
Ca2+
Ca2+
K+
(Closes channel,
depolarizes cell)
 FIGURE 41–2  One model of control of insulin release from the pancreatic beta cell by glucose and by sulfonylurea drugs. In the resting cell 
with normal (low) ATP levels, potassium diffuses down its concentration gradient through ATP-gated potassium channels, maintaining the intra-
cellular potential at a fully polarized, negative level. Insulin release is minimal. If glucose concentration rises, ATP production increases, potas-
sium channels close, and depolarization of the cell results. As in muscle and nerve, voltage-gated calcium channels open in response to 
depolarization, allowing more calcium to enter the cell. Increased intracellular calcium results in increased insulin secretion. Insulin secret-
agogues close the ATP-dependent potassium channel, thereby depolarizing the membrane and causing increased insulin release by the same 
mechanism. (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from  Basic & Clinical Endocrinology , 4th ed. Greenspan F, Baxter JD [editors]: Originally published by Appleton & 
Lange. Copyright © 1994 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) 
746    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 Circulating Insulin 
 Basal insulin values of 5–15 μU/mL (30–90 pmol/L) are 
found in normal humans, with a peak rise to 60–90 μU/mL 
(360–540 pmol/L) during meals. 
 The Insulin Receptor 
 After insulin has entered the circulation, it diffuses into tissues, 
where it is bound by specialized receptors that are found on the 
membranes of most tissues. The biologic responses promoted by 
these insulin-receptor complexes have been identified in the pri-
mary target tissues, ie, liver, muscle, and adipose tissue. The recep-
tors bind insulin with high specificity and affinity in the 
picomolar range. The full insulin receptor consists of two cova-
lently linked heterodimers, each containing an α subunit, which 
is entirely extracellular and constitutes the recognition site, and a 
β subunit that spans the membrane ( Figure 41–3 ). The β subunit 
contains a tyrosine kinase. The binding of an insulin molecule 
to the α subunits at the outside surface of the cell activates the 
receptor and through a conformational change brings the catalytic 
loops of the opposing cytoplasmic β subunits into closer proximity. 
This facilitates mutual phosphorylation of tyrosine residues on the 
β subunits and tyrosine kinase activity directed at cytoplasmic 
proteins. 
 The first proteins to be phosphorylated by the activated recep-
tor tyrosine kinases are the docking proteins, insulin receptor 
substrates (IRS). After tyrosine phosphorylation at several critical 
sites, the IRS molecules bind to and activate other kinases—most 
significantly phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase—which produce fur-
ther phosphorylations. Alternatively, they may bind to an adaptor 
protein such as growth factor receptor-binding protein 2, which 
translates the insulin signal to a guanine nucleotide-releasing fac-
tor that ultimately activates the GTP binding protein, ras, and the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) system. The particular 
IRS-phosphorylated tyrosine kinases have binding specificity with 
downstream molecules based on their surrounding 4–5 amino 
acid sequences or motifs that recognize specific Src homology 
2 (SH2) domains on the other protein. This network of phospho-
rylations within the cell represents insulin’s second message and 
results in multiple effects, including translocation of glucose trans-
porters (especially GLUT 4,  Table 41–2 ) to the cell membrane 
with a resultant increase in glucose uptake; increased glycogen 
synthase activity and increased glycogen formation; multiple effects 
on protein synthesis, lipolysis, and lipogenesis; and activation of 
transcription factors that enhance DNA synthesis and cell growth 
and division. 
 Various hormonal agents (eg, glucocorticoids) lower the affinity 
of insulin receptors for insulin; growth hormone in excess increases 
this affinity slightly. Aberrant serine and threonine phosphorylation 
TABLE 41–2 Glucose transporters.
Transporter
Tissues
Glucose Km (mmol/L)
Function
GLUT 1
All tissues, especially red cells, brain
1–2
Basal uptake of glucose; transport across the blood-brain barrier
GLUT 2
Beta cells of pancreas; liver, kidney; gut
15–20
Regulation of insulin release, other aspects of glucose homeostasis
GLUT 3
Brain, placenta
< 1
Uptake into neurons, other tissues
GLUT 4
Muscle, adipose
≈ 5
Insulin-mediated uptake of glucose
GLUT 5
Gut, kidney
1–2
Absorption of fructose
Receptor
Tyrosine
kinase
domains
Phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase pathway
MAP kinase
pathway
ATP
β
subunits
P
P
ADP
Tyr – P
IRS
Tyr
IRS
α
subunits
Insulin molecule
Extracellular
Cytoplasm
+
+
 FIGURE 41–3  Schematic diagram of the insulin receptor 
heterodimer in the activated state. IRS, insulin receptor substrate; 
MAP, mitogen-activated protein; P, phosphate; Tyr, tyrosine. 
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     747
of the insulin receptor β subunits or IRS molecules may result in 
insulin resistance and functional receptor down-regulation. 
 Effects of Insulin on Its Targets 
 Insulin promotes the storage of fat as well as glucose (both sources 
of energy) within specialized target cells ( Figure 41–4 ) and influ-
ences cell growth and the metabolic functions of a wide variety of 
tissues ( Table 41–3 ). 
 Characteristics of Available Insulin 
Preparations 
 Commercial insulin preparations differ in a number of ways, such 
as differences in the recombinant DNA production techniques, 
amino acid sequence, concentration, solubility, and the time of 
onset and duration of their biologic action. 
 A. Principal Types and Duration of Action of Insulin 
Preparations 
 Four principal types of injected insulins are available: (1) rapid-
acting, with very fast onset and short duration; (2) short-acting, with 
rapid onset of action; (3) intermediate-acting; and (4) long-acting, 
with slow onset of action ( Figure 41–5 ,  Table 41–4 ). Injected rapid-
acting and short-acting insulins are dispensed as clear solutions at 
neutral pH and contain small amounts of zinc to improve their 
stability and shelf life. Injected intermediate-acting NPH insulins 
have been modified to provide prolonged action and are dispensed 
as a turbid suspension at neutral pH with protamine in phosphate 
buffer (neutral protamine Hagedorn [NPH] insulin). Insulin 
glargine and insulin detemir are clear, soluble long-acting insulins. 
 The goal of subcutaneous insulin therapy is to replicate normal 
physiologic insulin secretion and replace the background or basal 
(overnight, fasting, and between-meal) as well as bolus or prandial 
(mealtime) insulin. An exact reproduction of the normal glycemic 
profile is not technically possible because of the limitations inher-
ent in subcutaneous administration of insulin. Current regimens 
generally use insulin analogs because of their more predictable 
action. Intensive therapy (“tight control”) attempts to restore near-
normal glucose patterns throughout the day while minimizing the 
risk of hypoglycemia. 
 Intensive regimens involving multiple daily injections (MDI) 
use long-acting insulin analogs to provide basal or background 
coverage, and rapid-acting insulin analogs to meet the mealtime 
requirements. The latter insulins are given as supplemental doses 
to correct transient hyperglycemia. The most sophisticated insulin 
regimen delivers rapid-acting insulin analogs through a continu-
ous subcutaneous insulin infusion device. Conventional therapy 
consists of split-dose injections of mixtures of rapid- or short-
acting and intermediate-acting insulins. 
 1. Rapid-acting insulin— Three injected rapid-acting insulin 
analogs— insulin lispro, insulin aspart , and  insulin glulisine— 
are commercially available. The rapid-acting insulins permit more 
physiologic prandial insulin replacement because their rapid onset 
TABLE 41–3 Endocrine effects of insulin.
Effect on liver:
 Reversal of catabolic features of insulin deficiency
  Inhibits glycogenolysis
  Inhibits conversion of fatty acids and amino acids to keto acids
  Inhibits conversion of amino acids to glucose
 Anabolic action
Promotes glucose storage as glycogen (induces glucokinase and 
glycogen synthase, inhibits phosphorylase)
Increases triglyceride synthesis and very-low-density lipoprotein 
formation
Effect on muscle:
 Increased protein synthesis
  Increases amino acid transport
  Increases ribosomal protein synthesis
 Increased glycogen synthesis
  Increases glucose transport
  Induces glycogen synthase and inhibits phosphorylase
Effect on adipose tissue:
 Increased triglyceride storage
Lipoprotein lipase is induced and activated by insulin to hydro-
lyze triglycerides from lipoproteins
Glucose transport into cell provides glycerol phosphate to permit 
esterification of fatty acids supplied by lipoprotein transport
Intracellular lipase is inhibited by insulin
Pancreas
Vagus
Fat
Liver
Muscle
Intestine
+
+
Substrate
Insulin
Betacytotropic
hormones
 FIGURE 41–4  Insulin promotes synthesis (from circulating nutri-
ents) and storage of glycogen, triglycerides, and protein in its major 
target tissues: liver, fat, and muscle. The release of insulin from the 
pancreas is stimulated by increased blood glucose, incretins, vagal 
nerve stimulation, and other factors (see text). 
748    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
Time (h)
Glucose infusion rate (mg/kg/min)
Insulin lispro, aspart, glulisine
Regular
NPH
Insulin glargine
Insulin detemir
 FIGURE 41–5  Extent and duration of action of various types of insulin as indicated by the glucose infusion rates (mg/kg/min) required to 
maintain a constant glucose concentration. The durations of action shown are typical of an average dose of 0.2–0.3 U/kg. The durations of regu-
lar and NPH insulin increase considerably when dosage is increased. 
TABLE 41–4 Some insulin preparations available in the USA.1
Preparation
Species Source
Concentration
Rapid-acting insulins
 Insulin lispro, Humalog (Lilly)
Human analog
U100
 Insulin aspart, Novolog (Novo Nordisk)
Human analog
U100
 Insulin glulisine, Apidra (Aventis)
Human analog
U100
Short-acting insulins
 Regular Novolin R (Novo Nordisk)
Human
U100
 Regular Humulin R (Lilly)
Human
U100, U500
Intermediate-acting insulins
 NPH Humulin N (Lilly)
Human
U100
 NPH Novolin N (Novo Nordisk)
Human
U100
Premixed insulins
 Novolin 70 NPH/30 regular (Novo Nordisk)
Human
U100
 Humulin 70 NPH/30 regular (Lilly)
Human
U100
 75/25 NPL, Lispro (Lilly)
Human analog
U100
 70/30 NPA, Aspart (Novo Nordisk)
Human analog
U100
Long-acting insulins
 Insulin detemir, Levemir (Novo Nordisk)
Human analog
U100
 Insulin glargine, Lantus (Aventis/Hoechst Marion Roussel)
Human analog
U100
1These agents (except insulin lispro, insulin aspart, insulin detemir, insulin glargine, insulin glulisine, and U500 regular Humulin) are available without a prescription. All 
insulins should be refrigerated and brought to room temperature just before injection.
NPL, neutral protamine lispro; NPA, neutral protamine aspart.
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     749
and early peak action more closely mimic normal endogenous 
prandial insulin secretion than does regular insulin, and they have 
the additional benefit of allowing insulin to be taken immediately 
before the meal without sacrificing glucose control. Their dura-
tion of action is rarely more than 4–5 hours, which decreases the 
risk of late postmeal hypoglycemia. The injected rapid-acting 
insulins have the lowest variability of absorption (approximately 5%) 
of all available commercial insulins (compared with 25% for 
regular insulin and 25% to over 50% for long-acting analog for-
mulations and intermediate insulin, respectively). They are the 
preferred insulins for use in continuous subcutaneous insulin infu-
sion devices. 
 Insulin lispro, the first monomeric insulin analog to be mar-
keted, is produced by recombinant technology wherein two amino 
acids near the carboxyl terminal of the B chain have been reversed 
in position: Proline at position B28 has been moved to B29, and 
lysine at position B29 has been moved to B28 ( Figure 41–1 ). 
Reversing these two amino acids does not interfere in any way 
with insulin lispro’s binding to the insulin receptor, its circulating 
half-life, or its immunogenicity, which are similar to those of 
human regular insulin. However, the advantage of this analog is its 
very low propensity—in contrast to human insulin—to self-
associate in antiparallel fashion and form dimers. To enhance the 
shelf life of insulin in vials, insulin lispro is stabilized into hexa-
mers by a cresol preservative. When injected subcutaneously, the 
drug quickly dissociates into monomers and is rapidly absorbed 
with onset of action within 5–15 minutes and peak activity as 
early as 1 hour. The time to peak action is relatively constant, 
regardless of the dose. 
 Insulin aspart is created by the substitution of the B28 proline 
with a negatively charged aspartic acid ( Figure 41–1 ). This modifica-
tion reduces the normal ProB28 and GlyB23 monomer-monomer 
interaction, thereby inhibiting insulin self-aggregation. Its absorption 
and activity profile are similar to those of insulin lispro, and it is more 
reproducible than regular insulin, but it has binding properties, 
activity, and mitogenicity characteristics similar to those of regular 
insulin in addition to equivalent immunogenicity. 
 Insulin glulisine is formulated by substituting a lysine for 
asparagine at B3 and glutamic acid for lysine at B29. Its absorp-
tion, action, and immunologic characteristics are similar to those 
of other injected rapid-acting insulins. After high-dose insulin 
glulisine interaction with the insulin receptor, there may be down-
stream differences in IRS-2 pathway activation relative to human 
insulin. The clinical significance of such differences is unclear. 
 2. Short-acting insulin— Regular insulin is a short-acting sol-
uble crystalline zinc insulin that is now made by recombinant 
DNA techniques to produce a molecule identical to that of human 
insulin. Its effect appears within 30 minutes, peaks between 2 and 
3 hours after subcutaneous injection, and generally lasts 5–8 hours. 
In high concentrations, eg, in the vial, regular insulin molecules 
self-aggregate in antiparallel fashion to form dimers that stabilize 
around zinc ions to create insulin hexamers. The hexameric nature 
of regular insulin causes a delayed onset and prolongs the time 
to peak action. After subcutaneous injection, the insulin hexamers 
are too large and bulky to be transported across the vascular 
endothelium into the bloodstream. As the insulin depot is diluted 
by interstitial fluid and the concentration begins to fall, the hex-
amers break down into dimers and finally monomers. This results 
in three rates of absorption of the injected insulin, with the final 
monomeric phase having the fastest uptake out of the injection 
site. 
 The clinical consequence is that when regular insulin is admin-
istered at mealtime, the blood glucose rises faster than the insulin 
with resultant early postprandial hyperglycemia and an increased 
risk of late postprandial hypoglycemia. Therefore, regular insulin 
should be injected 30–45 or more minutes before the meal to 
minimize the mismatching. As with all older insulin formulations, 
the duration of action as well as the time of onset and the intensity 
of peak action increase with the size of the dose. Clinically, this is 
a critical issue because the pharmacokinetics and pharmacody-
namics of small doses of regular and NPH insulins differ greatly 
from those of large doses. The delayed absorption, dose-dependent 
duration of action, and variability of absorption (∼ 25%) of regu-
lar human insulin frequently results in a mismatching of insulin 
availability with need, and its use is declining. 
 However, short-acting, regular soluble insulin is the only type 
that should be administered intravenously because the dilution 
causes the hexameric insulin to immediately dissociate into mono-
mers. It is particularly useful for intravenous therapy in the manage-
ment of diabetic ketoacidosis and when the insulin requirement is 
changing rapidly, such as after surgery or during acute infections. 
 3. Intermediate-acting and long-acting insulins 
 a. NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn, or isophane) insulin— -
NPH insulin is an intermediate-acting insulin whose absorption 
and onset of action are delayed by combining appropriate amounts 
of insulin and protamine so that neither is present in an uncom-
plexed form (“isophane”). After subcutaneous injection, prote-
olytic tissue enzymes degrade the protamine to permit absorption 
of insulin. NPH insulin has an onset of approximately 2–5 hours 
and duration of 4–12 hours ( Figure 41–5 ); it is usually mixed 
with regular, lispro, aspart, or glulisine insulin and given two to 
four times daily for insulin replacement. The dose regulates the 
action profile; specifically, small doses have lower, earlier peaks 
and a short duration of action with the converse true for large 
doses. The action of NPH is highly unpredictable, and its vari-
ability of absorption is over 50%. The clinical use of NPH is 
waning because of its adverse pharmacokinetics combined with 
the availability of long-acting insulin analogs that have a more 
predictable and physiologic action. 
 b. Insulin glargine— Insulin glargine is a soluble, “peakless” (ie, 
having a broad plasma concentration plateau), long-acting insulin 
analog. This product was designed to provide reproducible, con-
venient, background insulin replacement. The attachment of two 
arginine molecules to the B-chain carboxyl terminal and substitu-
tion of a glycine for asparagine at the A21 position created an 
analog that is soluble in an acidic solution but precipitates in the 
more neutral body pH after subcutaneous injection. Individual 
750    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
insulin molecules slowly dissolve away from the crystalline depot 
and provide a low, continuous level of circulating insulin. Insulin 
glargine has a slow onset of action (1–1.5 hours) and achieves a 
maximum effect after 4–6 hours. This maximum activity is main-
tained for 11–24 hours or longer. Glargine is usually given once 
daily, although some very insulin-sensitive or insulin-resistant 
individuals benefit from split (twice a day) dosing. To maintain 
solubility, the formulation is unusually acidic (pH 4.0), and insulin 
glargine should not be mixed with other insulins. Separate syringes 
must be used to minimize the risk of contamination and subse-
quent loss of efficacy. The absorption pattern of insulin glargine 
appears to be independent of the anatomic site of injection, and 
this drug is associated with less immunogenicity than human insu-
lin in animal studies. Glargine’s interaction with the insulin recep-
tor is similar to that of native insulin and shows no increase in 
mitogenic activity in vitro. It has sixfold to sevenfold greater bind-
ing than native insulin to the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) 
receptor, but the clinical significance of this is unclear. 
 c. Insulin detemir— This insulin is the most recently developed 
long-acting insulin analog. The terminal threonine is dropped 
from the B30 position and myristic acid (a C-14 fatty acid chain) 
is attached to the terminal B29 lysine. These modifications pro-
long the availability of the injected analog by increasing both 
self-aggregation in subcutaneous tissue and reversible albumin 
binding. Insulin detemir has the most reproducible effect of the 
intermediate- and long-acting insulins, and its use is associated 
with less hypoglycemia than NPH insulin. Insulin detemir has a 
dose-dependent onset of action of 1–2 hours and duration of 
action of more than 12 hours. It is given twice daily to obtain a 
smooth background insulin level. 
 4. Mixtures of insulins— Because intermediate-acting NPH 
insulins require several hours to reach adequate therapeutic levels, 
their use in diabetic patients usually requires supplements of 
rapid- or short-acting insulin before meals. For convenience, these 
are often mixed together in the same syringe before injection. 
Insulin lispro, aspart, and glulisine can be  acutely mixed (ie, just 
before injection) with NPH insulin without affecting their rapid 
absorption. However,  premixed preparations have thus far been 
unstable. To remedy this, intermediate insulins composed of 
isophane complexes of protamine with insulin lispro and insulin 
aspart have been developed. These intermediate insulins have been 
designated as “NPL” (neutral protamine lispro) and “NPA” (neu-
tral protamine aspart) and have the same duration of action as 
NPH insulin. They have the advantage of permitting formulation 
as premixed combinations of NPL and insulin lispro, and as NPA 
and insulin aspart, and they have been shown to be safe and effec-
tive in clinical trials. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
has approved 50%/50% and 75%/25% NPL/insulin lispro and 
70%/30% NPA/insulin aspart premixed formulations. Additional 
ratios are available abroad. Insulin glargine and detemir must be 
given as separate injections. They are not miscible acutely or in a 
premixed preparation with any other insulin formulation. 
 Premixed formulations of 70%/30% NPH/regular continue to 
be available. These preparations have all the limitations of regular 
insulin, namely, highly dose dependent pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic profiles, and variability in absorption. 
 B. Insulin Production 
 Mass production of human insulin and insulin analogs by recom-
binant DNA techniques is carried out by inserting the human or 
a modified human proinsulin gene into  Escherichia coli or yeast 
and treating the extracted proinsulin to form the insulin or insulin 
analog molecules. 
 C. Concentration 
 All insulins in the USA and Canada are available in a concentra-
tion of 100 U/mL (U100). A limited supply of U500 regular 
human insulin is available for use in rare cases of severe insulin 
resistance in which larger doses of insulin are required. 
 Insulin Delivery Systems 
A. Standard Delivery
 The standard mode of insulin therapy is subcutaneous injection 
using conventional disposable needles and syringes. 
 B. Portable Pen Injectors 
 To facilitate multiple subcutaneous injections of insulin, particu-
larly during intensive insulin therapy, portable pen-sized injectors 
have been developed. These contain cartridges of insulin and 
replaceable needles. 
 Disposable insulin pens are also available for selected formula-
tions. These are regular insulin, insulin lispro, insulin aspart, insu-
lin glulisine, insulin glargine, insulin detemir, and several mixtures 
of NPH with regular, lispro, or aspart insulin ( Table 41–4 ). They 
have been well accepted by patients because they eliminate the 
need to carry syringes and bottles of insulin to the workplace and 
while traveling. 
 C. Continuous Subcutaneous Insulin Infusion Devices 
(CSII, Insulin Pumps) 
 Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion devices are external 
open-loop pumps for insulin delivery. The devices have a user-
programmable pump that delivers individualized basal and bolus 
insulin replacement doses based on blood glucose self-monitoring 
results. 
 Normally, the 24-hour background basal rates are prepro-
grammed and relatively constant from day to day, although tem-
porarily altered rates can be superimposed to adjust for a 
short-term change in requirement. For example, the basal delivery 
rate might need to be decreased for several hours because of the 
increased insulin sensitivity associated with strenuous activity. 
 Boluses are used to correct high blood glucose levels and to 
cover mealtime insulin requirements based on the carbohydrate 
content of the food and concurrent activity. Bolus amounts are 
either dynamically programmed or use preprogrammed algo-
rithms. When the boluses are dynamically programmed, the user 
calculates the dose based on the amount of carbohydrate con-
sumed and the current blood glucose level. Alternatively, the meal 
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     751
or snack dose algorithm (grams of carbohydrate covered by a 
unit of insulin) and insulin sensitivity or blood glucose correc-
tion factor (fall in blood glucose level in response to a unit of 
insulin) can be preprogrammed into the pump. If the user enters 
the carbohydrate content of the food and current blood glucose 
value, the insulin pump will calculate the most appropriate dose 
of insulin. Advanced insulin pumps also have an “insulin on 
board” feature that adjusts a high blood glucose correction dose to 
correct for residual activity of previous bolus doses. 
 The traditional pump—which contains an insulin reservoir, 
the program chip, the keypad, and the display screen—is about 
the size of a pager. It is usually placed on a belt or in a pocket, and 
the insulin is infused through thin plastic tubing that is connected 
to the subcutaneously inserted infusion set. The abdomen is the 
favored site for the infusion set, although flanks and thighs are also 
used. The insulin reservoir, tubing, and infusion set need to be 
changed using sterile techniques every 2 or 3 days. Currently, only 
one pump does not require tubing. In this model, the pump is 
attached directly to the infusion set. Programming is done through 
a hand-held unit that communicates wirelessly with the pump. 
CSII delivery is regarded as the most physiologic method of insu-
lin replacement. 
 Use of these continuous infusion devices is encouraged for 
people who are unable to obtain target control while on multiple 
injection regimens and in circumstances in which excellent glyce-
mic control is desired, such as during pregnancy. Optimal use of 
these devices requires responsible involvement and commitment 
by the patient. Insulin aspart, lispro, and glulisine all are specifi-
cally approved for pump use and are preferred pump insulins 
because their favorable pharmacokinetic attributes allow glycemic 
control without increasing the risk of hypoglycemia. 
 Treatment with Insulin 
 The current classification of diabetes mellitus identifies a group of 
patients who have virtually no insulin secretion and whose survival 
depends on administration of exogenous insulin. This insulin-
dependent group (type 1) represents 5–10% of the diabetic 
population in the USA. Most type 2 diabetics do not require exog-
enous insulin for survival, but many need exogenous supplementa-
tion of their endogenous secretion to achieve optimum health. 
 Benefit of Glycemic Control in Diabetes 
Mellitus 
 The consensus of the American Diabetes Association is that inten-
sive glycemic control and targeting normal or near-normal glucose 
control associated with comprehensive self-management training 
should become standard therapy in diabetic patients (see Box: 
Benefits of Tight Glycemic Control in Diabetes). Exceptions include 
patients with advanced renal disease and the elderly, because the 
risks of hypoglycemia may outweigh the benefit of normal or 
near-normal glycemic control in these groups. In children under 
7 years, the extreme susceptibility of the developing brain to incur 
damage from hypoglycemia contraindicates attempts at intensive 
glycemic control. 
 Insulin Regimens 
 A. Intensive Insulin Therapy 
 Intensive insulin regimens are prescribed for almost everyone with 
type 1 diabetes—diabetes associated with a severe deficiency or 
absence of endogenous insulin production—as well as many with 
type 2 diabetes. 
 Generally, the total daily insulin requirement in units is equal 
to the weight in pounds divided by four, or 0.55 times the person’s 
weight in kilograms. Approximately half the total daily insulin 
dose covers the background or basal insulin requirements, and the 
remainder covers meal and snack requirement and high blood 
sugar corrections. This is an approximate calculation and has to be 
individualized. Examples of reduced insulin requirement include 
newly diagnosed persons and those with ongoing endogenous 
insulin production, longstanding diabetes with insulin sensitivity, 
significant renal insufficiency, or other endocrine deficiencies. 
Increased insulin requirements typically occur with obesity, during 
adolescence, during the latter trimesters of pregnancy, and in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes. 
 In intensive insulin regimens, the meal or snack and high blood 
sugar correction boluses are prescribed by formulas. The patient 
uses the formulas to calculate the rapid-acting insulin bolus dose by 
considering how much carbohydrate is in the meal or snack, the 
current plasma glucose, and the target glucose. The formula for 
the meal or snack bolus is expressed as an insulin-to-carbohydrate 
ratio, which refers to how many grams of carbohydrate will be 
disposed of by 1 unit of rapid-acting insulin. The high blood sugar 
correction formula is expressed as the predicted fall in plasma glu-
cose (in mg/dL) after 1 unit of rapid-acting insulin. Diurnal varia-
tions in insulin sensitivity can be accommodated by prescribing 
different basal rates and bolus insulin doses throughout the day. 
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion devices provide the 
most sophisticated and physiologic insulin replacement. 
 B. Conventional Insulin Therapy 
 Conventional insulin therapy is usually prescribed only for certain 
people with type 2 diabetes who are felt not to benefit from inten-
sive glucose control. The insulin regimen ranges from one injec-
tion per day to many injections per day, using intermediate- or 
long-acting insulin alone or with short- or rapid-acting insulin or 
premixed insulins. Referred to as sliding-scale regimens, conven-
tional insulin regimens customarily fix the dose of the intermediate- 
or long-acting insulin, but vary the short- or rapid-acting insulin 
based on the plasma glucose level before the injection. 
 Insulin Treatment of Special Circumstances 
 A. Diabetic Ketoacidosis 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a life-threatening medical emer-
gency caused by inadequate or absent insulin replacement, which 
occurs in people with type 1 diabetes and infrequently in those 
with type 2 diabetes. It typically occurs in newly diagnosed type 
1 patients or in those who have experienced interrupted insulin 
replacement, and rarely in people with type 2 diabetes who 
have concurrent unusually stressful conditions such as sepsis or 
752    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
pancreatitis or are on high-dose steroid therapy. Signs and symp-
toms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, deep slow 
(Kussmaul) breathing, change in mental status, elevated blood and 
urinary ketones and glucose, an arterial blood pH lower than 7.3, 
and low bicarbonate (< 15 mmol/L). 
 The fundamental treatment for DKA includes aggressive intra-
venous hydration and insulin therapy and maintenance of potas-
sium and other electrolyte levels. Fluid and insulin therapy is 
based on the patient’s individual needs and requires frequent 
reevaluation and modification. Close attention has to be given to 
hydration and renal status, the sodium and potassium levels, and 
the rate of correction of plasma glucose and plasma osmolality. 
Fluid therapy generally begins with normal saline. Regular human 
insulin should be used for intravenous therapy with a usual start-
ing dose of about 0.1 IU/kg/h. 
 B. Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic Syndrome 
 Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome (HHS) is diagnosed in per-
sons with type 2 diabetes and is characterized by profound hypergly-
cemia and dehydration. It is associated with inadequate oral hydration, 
especially in elderly patients, with other illnesses, the use of medica-
tion that elevates the blood sugar or causes dehydration, such as 
phenytoin, steroids, diuretics, and β blockers, and with peritoneal 
dialysis and hemodialysis. The diagnostic hallmarks are declining 
mental status and even seizures, a plasma glucose of over 600 mg/dL, 
and a calculated serum osmolality higher than 320 mmol/L. Persons 
with HHS are not acidotic unless DKA is also present. 
 The treatment of HHS centers around aggressive rehydration 
and restoration of glucose and electrolyte homeostasis; the rate of 
correction of these variables must be monitored closely. Low-dose 
insulin therapy may be required. 
 Benefits of Tight Glycemic Control in Diabetes 
 A long-term randomized prospective study involving 1441 type 
1 patients in 29 medical centers reported in 1993 that “near normal-
ization” of blood glucose resulted in a delay in onset and a major 
slowing of progression of microvascular and neuropathic compli-
cations of diabetes during follow-up periods of up to 10 years 
(Diabetes Control and Complications Trial [DCCT] Research 
Group, 1993). In the intensively treated group, mean glycated 
hemoglobin HbA 1c of 7.2% (normal < 6%) and mean blood glu-
cose of 155 mg/dL were achieved, whereas in the conventionally 
treated group, HbA 1c averaged 8.9% with mean blood glucose of 
225 mg/dL. Over the study period, which averaged 7 years, a 
reduction of approximately 60% in risk of diabetic retinopathy, 
nephropathy, and neuropathy was noted in the tight control 
group compared with the standard control group. 
 The DCCT study, in addition, introduced the concept of 
 glycemic memory , which comprises the long-term benefits of any 
significant period of glycemic control. During a 6-year follow-up 
period, both the intensively and the conventionally treated 
groups had similar levels of glycemic control, and both had pro-
gression of carotid intimal-medial thickness. However, the inten-
sively treated cohort had significantly less progression of intimal 
thickness. 
 The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) 
was a very large randomized prospective study carried out to 
study the effects of intensive glycemic control with several types 
of therapies and the effects of blood pressure control in type 2 
diabetic patients. A total of 3867 newly diagnosed type 2 dia-
betic patients were studied over 10 years. A significant fraction of 
these were overweight and hypertensive. Patients were given 
dietary treatment alone or intensive therapy with insulin, chlor-
propamide, glyburide, or glipizide. Metformin was an option for 
patients with inadequate response to other therapies. Tight con-
trol of blood pressure was added as a variable, with an angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, a β blocker, or in some cases, 
a calcium channel blocker available for this purpose. 
 Tight control of diabetes, with reduction of HbA 1c from 9.1% 
to 7%, was shown to reduce the risk of microvascular complica-
tions overall compared with that achieved with conventional 
therapy (mostly diet alone, which decreased HbA 1c to 7.9%). 
Cardiovascular complications were not noted for any particular 
therapy; metformin treatment alone reduced the risk of macro-
vascular disease (myocardial infarction, stroke). Epidemiologic 
analysis of the study suggested that every 1% decrease in the 
HbA 1c achieved an estimated risk reduction of 37% for microvas-
cular complications, 21% for any diabetes-related end point and 
death related to diabetes, and 14% for myocardial infarction. 
 Tight control of hypertension also had a surprisingly signifi-
cant effect on microvascular disease (as well as more conven-
tional hypertension-related sequelae) in these diabetic patients. 
Epidemiologic analysis of the results suggested that every 
10 mm Hg decrease in the systolic pressure achieved an esti-
mated risk reduction of 13% for diabetic microvascular complica-
tions, and 12% for any diabetes-related complication, 15% for 
death related to diabetes, and 11% for myocardial infarction. 
 Post-study monitoring showed that 5 years after the closure 
of the UKPDS, the benefits of intensive management on diabetic 
end points was maintained and the risk reduction for a myocar-
dial infarction became significant. The benefits of metformin 
therapy were maintained. 
 These studies show that tight glycemic control benefits both 
type 1 and type 2 patients. 
 The STOP-NIDDM trial followed 1429 patients with impaired 
glucose tolerance who were randomized to treatment with acar-
bose or placebo over 3 years. This trial demonstrated that normal-
ization of glycemic control in subjects with impaired glucose 
tolerance significantly diminished cardiovascular risk. The acar-
bose-treated group had a significant reduction in the develop-
ment of major cardiovascular events and hypertension. A 
prospective placebo-controlled subgroup analysis has shown a 
marked decrease in the progression of intimal-medial thickness. 
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     753
 Complications of Insulin Therapy 
 A. Hypoglycemia 
 1. Mechanisms and diagnosis— Hypoglycemic reactions are 
the most common complication of insulin therapy. They usually 
result from inadequate carbohydrate consumption, unusual physi-
cal exertion, or too large a dose of insulin. 
 Rapid development of hypoglycemia in persons with intact 
hypoglycemic awareness causes signs of autonomic hyperactivity—
both sympathetic (tachycardia, palpitations, sweating, tremulous-
ness) and parasympathetic (nausea, hunger)—and may progress to 
convulsions and coma if untreated. 
 In persons exposed to frequent hypoglycemic episodes during 
tight glycemic control, autonomic warning signals of hypoglyce-
mia are less common or even absent. This dangerous acquired 
condition is termed “hypoglycemic unawareness.” When patients 
lack the early warning signs of low blood glucose, they may not 
take corrective measures in time. In patients with persistent, 
untreated hypoglycemia, the manifestations of insulin excess 
may develop—confusion, weakness, bizarre behavior, coma, 
seizures—at which point they may not be able to procure or 
safely swallow glucose-containing foods. Hypoglycemic aware-
ness may be restored by preventing frequent hypoglycemic epi-
sodes. An identification bracelet, necklace, or card in the wallet 
or purse, as well as some form of rapidly absorbed glucose, 
should be carried by every diabetic person who is receiving hypo-
glycemic drug therapy. 
 2. Treatment of hypoglycemia— All the manifestations of 
hypoglycemia are relieved by glucose administration. To expedite 
absorption, simple sugar or glucose should be given, preferably in 
liquid form. To treat mild hypoglycemia in a patient who is con-
scious and able to swallow, dextrose tablets, glucose gel, or any 
sugar-containing beverage or food may be given. If more severe 
hypoglycemia has produced unconsciousness or stupor, the treat-
ment of choice is to give 20–50 mL of 50% glucose solution by 
intravenous infusion over a period of 2–3 minutes. If intravenous 
therapy is not available, 1 mg of glucagon injected either subcuta-
neously or intramuscularly may restore consciousness within 
15 minutes to permit ingestion of sugar. If the patient is stuporous 
and glucagon is not available, small amounts of honey or syrup 
can be inserted into the buccal pouch. In general, however, oral 
feeding is contraindicated in unconscious patients. Emergency 
medical services should be called immediately for all episodes of 
severely impaired consciousness. 
 B. Immunopathology of Insulin Therapy 
 At least five molecular classes of insulin antibodies may be pro-
duced in diabetics during the course of insulin therapy: IgA, IgD, 
IgE, IgG, and IgM. There are two major types of immune disor-
ders in these patients: 
 1. Insulin allergy— Insulin allergy, an immediate type hyper-
sensitivity, is a rare condition in which local or systemic urticaria 
results from histamine release from tissue mast cells sensitized by 
anti-insulin IgE antibodies. In severe cases, anaphylaxis results. 
Because sensitivity is often to noninsulin protein contaminants, 
the human and analog insulins have markedly reduced the inci-
dence of insulin allergy, especially local reactions. 
 2. Immune insulin resistance— A low titer of circulating IgG 
anti-insulin antibodies that neutralize the action of insulin to a 
negligible extent develops in most insulin-treated patients. Rarely, 
the titer of insulin antibodies leads to insulin resistance and may 
be associated with other systemic autoimmune processes such as 
lupus erythematosus. 
 C. Lipodystrophy at Injection Sites 
 Injection of animal insulin preparations sometimes led to atrophy 
of subcutaneous fatty tissue at the site of injection. Since the 
development of human and analog insulin preparations of neutral 
pH, this type of immune complication is almost never seen. 
Injection of these newer preparations directly into the atrophic 
area often results in restoration of normal contours. 
 Hypertrophy of subcutaneous fatty tissue remains a problem if 
injected repeatedly at the same site. However, this may be cor-
rected by avoiding the specific injection site or by liposuction. 
 D. Increased Cancer Risk 
 An increased risk of cancer attributed to insulin resistance and 
hyperinsulinemia has been reported in individuals with insulin 
resistance, prediabetes, and type 2 diabetes. Treatment with insu-
lin and sulfonylureas, which increase circulating insulin levels, but 
not metformin possibly exacerbates that risk. These epidemiologic 
observations are preliminary and have not changed prescribing 
guidelines. 
 ■ ORAL ANTIDIABETIC AGENTS 
 Seven categories of oral antidiabetic agents are now available in 
the USA for the treatment of persons with type 2 diabetes: insu-
lin secretagogues (sulfonylureas, meglitinides, D-phenylalanine 
derivatives), biguanides, thiazolidinediones, α-glucosidase inhib-
itors, incretin-based therapies, an amylin analog, and a bile acid-
binding sequestrant. The sulfonylureas and biguanides have 
been available the longest and are the traditional treatment 
choice for type 2 diabetes. Novel classes of rapid-acting insulin 
secretagogues, the meglitinides and D-phenylalanine derivatives, 
are alternatives to the short-acting sulfonylureas. Insulin secret-
agogues increase insulin secretion from beta cells. Biguanides 
decrease hepatic glucose production. The thiazolidinediones 
reduce insulin resistance. The incretin-based therapies control 
post-meal glucose excursions by increasing insulin release and 
decreasing glucagon secretion. The amylin analog also decreases 
post-meal glucose levels and reduces appetite. Alpha-glucosidase 
inhibitors slow the digestion and absorption of starch and disac-
charides. Although still speculative, the mechanism of bile acid 
sequestrant’s glucose-lowering effect is presumed to be related to 
a decrease in hepatic glucose output. 
754    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 INSULIN SECRETAGOGUES: 
SULFONYLUREAS 
 Mechanism of Action 
 The major action of sulfonylureas is to increase insulin release 
from the pancreas ( Table 41–5 ). Two additional mechanisms of 
action have been proposed—a reduction of serum glucagon levels 
and closure of potassium channels in extrapancreatic tissue (which 
are of unknown but probably minimal significance). 
 A. Insulin Release from Pancreatic Beta Cells 
 Sulfonylureas bind to a 140-kDa high-affinity sulfonylurea recep-
tor ( Figure 41–2 ) that is associated with a beta-cell inward rectifier 
ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Binding of a sulfonylurea 
inhibits the efflux of potassium ions through the channel and 
results in depolarization. Depolarization opens a voltage-gated 
calcium channel and results in calcium influx and the release of 
preformed insulin. 
 B. Reduction of Serum Glucagon Concentrations 
 Long-term administration of sulfonylureas to type 2 diabetics 
reduces serum glucagon levels, which may contribute to the hypo-
glycemic effect of the drugs. The mechanism for this suppressive 
effect of sulfonylureas on glucagon levels is unclear but appears to 
involve indirect inhibition due to enhanced release of both insulin 
and somatostatin, which inhibit alpha-cell secretion. 
 Efficacy & Safety of the Sulfonylureas 
 In 1970, the University Group Diabetes Program (UGDP) in the 
USA reported that the number of deaths due to cardiovascular 
disease in diabetic patients treated with tolbutamide was excessive 
compared with either insulin-treated patients or those receiving 
placebos. Owing to design flaws, this study and its conclusions 
were not generally accepted. In the United Kingdom, the UKPDS 
did not find an untoward cardiovascular effect of sulfonylurea 
usage in their large, long-term study. 
 The sulfonylureas continue to be widely prescribed, and six are 
available in the USA ( Table 41–6 ). They are conventionally 
divided into first-generation and second-generation agents, which 
differ primarily in their potency and adverse effects. The first-
generation sulfonylureas are increasingly difficult to procure, and 
as the second-generation agents become generic and less expen-
sive, the older compounds probably will be discontinued. 
 FIRST-GENERATION SULFONYLUREAS 
 Tolbutamide is well absorbed but rapidly metabolized in the 
liver. Its duration of effect is relatively short, with an elimination 
half-life of 4–5 hours, and it is best administered in divided 
doses. Because of its short half-life, it is the safest sulfonylurea for 
elderly diabetics. Prolonged hypoglycemia has been reported 
rarely, mostly in patients receiving certain drugs (eg, dicumarol, 
phenylbutazone, some sulfonamides) that inhibit the metabolism 
of tolbutamide. 
 Chlorpropamide has a half-life of 32 hours and is slowly 
metabolized in the liver to products that retain some biologic 
activity; approximately 20–30% is excreted unchanged in the 
urine. Chlorpropamide also interacts with the drugs mentioned 
above that depend on hepatic oxidative catabolism, and it is 
contraindicated in patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency. 
Dosages higher than 500 mg daily increase the risk of jaundice. 
The average maintenance dosage is 250 mg daily, given as a single 
dose in the morning. Prolonged hypoglycemic reactions are more 
common in elderly patients, and the drug is contraindicated in 
this group. Other adverse effects include a hyperemic flush after 
alcohol ingestion in genetically predisposed patients and dilu-
tional hyponatremia. Hematologic toxicity (transient leukopenia, 
thrombocytopenia) occurs in less than 1% of patients. 
 Tolazamide is comparable to chlorpropamide in potency 
but has a shorter duration of action. Tolazamide is more slowly 
absorbed than the other sulfonylureas, and its effect on blood 
glucose does not appear for several hours. Its half-life is about 
7 hours. Tolazamide is metabolized to several compounds that 
retain hypoglycemic effects. If more than 500 mg/d are required, 
the dose should be divided and given twice daily. 
 SECOND-GENERATION SULFONYLUREAS 
 The second-generation sulfonylureas are prescribed more frequently 
in the USA than are the first-generation agents because they have 
fewer adverse effects and drug interactions. These potent sulfonylu-
rea compounds—glyburide, glipizide, and glimepiride—should be 
used with caution in patients with cardiovascular disease or in elderly 
patients, in whom hypoglycemia would be especially dangerous. 
 Glyburide is metabolized in the liver into products with very 
low hypoglycemic activity. The usual starting dosage is 2.5 mg/d 
TABLE 41–5 Regulation of insulin release in humans.
Stimulants of insulin release
Humoral: Glucose, mannose, leucine, arginine, other amino acids, 
fatty acids (high concentrations)
Hormonal: Glucagon, glucagon-like peptide 1(7–37), glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide, cholecystokinin, gastrin
Neural: β-Adrenergic stimulation, vagal stimulation
Drugs: Sulfonylureas, meglitinide, nateglinide, isoproterenol, 
acetylcholine
Inhibitors of insulin release
Hormonal: Somatostatin, insulin, leptin
Neural: α-Sympathomimetic effect of catecholamines
Drugs: Diazoxide, phenytoin, vinblastine, colchicine
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Greenspan FS, Strewler GJ (editors): 
Basic & Clinical Endocrinology, 5th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. 
Copyright © 1997 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     755
or less, and the average maintenance dosage is 5–10 mg/d given as 
a single morning dose; maintenance dosages higher than 20 mg/d 
are not recommended. A formulation of “micronized” glyburide 
(Glynase PresTab) is available in a variety of tablet sizes. However, 
there is some question as to its bioequivalence with nonmicron-
ized formulations, and the FDA recommends careful monitoring 
to re-titrate dosage when switching from standard glyburide doses 
or from other sulfonylurea drugs. 
 Glyburide has few adverse effects other than its potential for 
causing hypoglycemia. Flushing has rarely been reported after 
ethanol ingestion, and the compound slightly enhances free water 
clearance. Glyburide is contraindicated in the presence of hepatic 
impairment and in patients with renal insufficiency. 
 Glipizide has the shortest half-life (2–4 hours) of the more 
potent agents. For maximum effect in reducing postprandial hyper-
glycemia, this agent should be ingested 30 minutes before breakfast 
because absorption is delayed when the drug is taken with food. The 
recommended starting dosage is 5 mg/d, with up to 15 mg/d given 
as a single dose. When higher daily dosages are required, they 
should be divided and given before meals. The maximum total daily 
dosage recommended by the manufacturer is 40 mg/d, although 
some studies indicate that the maximum therapeutic effect is 
achieved by 15–20 mg of the drug. An extended-release preparation 
(Glucotrol XL) provides 24-hour action after a once-daily morning 
dose (maximum of 20 mg/d). However, this formulation appears to 
have sacrificed its lower propensity for severe hypoglycemia com-
pared with longer-acting glyburide without showing any demon-
strable therapeutic advantages over the latter (which can be obtained 
as a generic drug). 
 Because of its shorter half-life, the regular formulation of glip-
izide is much less likely than glyburide to produce serious hypo-
glycemia. At least 90% of glipizide is metabolized in the liver to 
inactive products, and 10% is excreted unchanged in the urine. 
Glipizide therapy is therefore contraindicated in patients with 
TABLE 41–6 Sulfonylureas.
Sulfonylureas
Chemical Structure
Daily Dose
Duration of 
Action (hours)
Tolbutamide 
(Orinase)
O
C
NH
NH
H3C
SO2
(CH2)3
CH3
0.5–2 g in 
divided doses
6–12
Tolazamide 
(Tolinase)
N
O
C
NH
NH
H3C
SO2
0.1–1 g as sin-
gle dose or in 
divided doses
10–14
Chlorpropamide 
(Diabinese)
O
C
NH
NH
Cl
SO2
(CH2)2
CH3
0.1–0.5 g as 
single dose
Up to 60
Glyburide (gliben-
clamide1) (Diaβeta, 
Micronase, Glynase 
PresTab)
O
C
NH
NH
SO2
O
Cl
C
NH
(CH2)2
OCH3
1.25–20 mg
10–24
Glipizide (glydiazi-
namide1) 
(Glucotrol, 
Glucotrol XL)
H3C
O
C
NH
NH
SO2
NH
(CH2)2
O
C
N
N
5–30 mg 
(20 mg in 
Glucotrol XL)
10–242
Glimepiride 
(Amaryl)
N
CONHCH2CH2
SO2NHCONH
CH3
O
H3C
H5C2
1–4 mg 
12–24
1Outside USA.
2Elimination half-life considerably shorter (see text).
756    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
significant hepatic or renal impairment, who would be at high risk 
for hypoglycemia. 
 Glimepiride is approved for once-daily use as monotherapy or 
in combination with insulin. Glimepiride achieves blood glucose 
lowering with the lowest dose of any sulfonylurea compound. A 
single daily dose of 1 mg has been shown to be effective, and the 
recommended maximal daily dose is 8 mg. Glimepiride has a long 
duration of effect with a half-life of 5 hours, allowing once-daily 
dosing and thereby improving compliance. It is completely metab-
olized by the liver to metabolites with weak or no activity. 
 INSULIN SECRETAGOGUE: 
MEGLITINIDE 
 Repaglinide is the first member of the meglitinide group of 
insulin secretagogues ( Table 41–7 ). These drugs modulate beta-
cell insulin release by regulating potassium efflux through the 
potassium channels previously discussed. There is overlap with the 
sulfonylureas in their molecular sites of action because the megli-
tinides have two binding sites in common with the sulfonylureas 
and one unique binding site. 
 Repaglinide has a very fast onset of action, with a peak concen-
tration and peak effect within approximately 1 hour after inges-
tion, but the duration of action is 4–7 hours. It is hepatically 
cleared by CYP3A4 with a plasma half-life of 1 hour. Because of 
its rapid onset, repaglinide is indicated for use in controlling post-
prandial glucose excursions. The drug should be taken just before 
each meal in doses of 0.25–4 mg (maximum 16 mg/d); hypogly-
cemia is a risk if the meal is delayed or skipped or contains 
inadequate carbohydrate. This drug should be used cautiously in 
individuals with renal and hepatic impairment. Repaglinide is 
approved as monotherapy or in combination with biguanides. 
There is no sulfur in its structure, so repaglinide may be used in 
type 2 diabetics with sulfur or sulfonylurea allergy. 
 INSULIN SECRETAGOGUE: 
D-PHENYLALANINE DERIVATIVE 
 Nateglinide, a D-phenylalanine derivative, is the latest insulin 
secretagogue to become clinically available. Nateglinide stimulates 
very rapid and transient release of insulin from beta cells through 
closure of the ATP-sensitive K + channel. It also partially restores 
initial insulin release in response to an intravenous glucose toler-
ance test. This may be a significant advantage of the drug because 
type 2 diabetes is associated with loss of this initial insulin 
response. The restoration of more normal insulin secretion may 
suppress glucagon release early in the meal and result in less 
endogenous or hepatic glucose production. Nateglinide may have 
a special role in the treatment of individuals with isolated post-
prandial hyperglycemia, but it has minimal effect on overnight or 
fasting glucose levels. Nateglinide is efficacious when given alone 
or in combination with nonsecretagogue oral agents (such as met-
formin). In contrast to other insulin secretagogues, dose titration 
is not required. 
 Nateglinide is ingested just before meals. It is absorbed within 
20 minutes after oral administration with a time to peak concen-
tration of less than 1 hour and is metabolized in the liver by 
CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 with a half-life of about 1 hour. The over-
all duration of action is about 4 hours. Nateglinide amplifies the 
insulin secretory response to a glucose load, but it has a markedly 
diminished effect in the presence of normoglycemia. The incidence 
of hypoglycemia with nateglinide may be the lowest of all the 
secretagogues, and nateglinide has the advantage of being safe in 
those with very reduced renal function. 
TABLE 41–7 Other insulin secretagogues.
Drug
Chemical Structure
Oral Dose
t1/2
Duration of Action 
(hours)
Repaglinide 
(Prandin)
O
H3C
CH3
N
N
H
O
OH
O
CH3
0.25–4 mg before meals
1 hour
4–7
Nateglinide 
(Starlix)
O
O
HO
CH3
CH3
NH
60–120 mg before meals
1 hour
4
Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Greenspan F, Baxter JD [editors]: Basic & Clinical Endocrinology, 4th ed. Originally published by Appleton & Lange. Copyright © 
1994 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     757
 BIGUANIDES 
 The structure of  metformin is shown below. Phenformin (an older 
biguanide) was discontinued in the USA because of its association 
with lactic acidosis and because there was no documentation of any 
long-term benefit from its use. 
Metformin
NH
N
C
C
N
CH3
CH3
H2N
H2N
 Mechanisms of Action 
 A full explanation of the mechanism of action of the biguanides 
remains elusive, but their primary effect is to reduce hepatic glu-
cose production through activation of the enzyme AMP-activated 
protein kinase (AMPK). Possible minor mechanisms of action 
include impairment of renal gluconeogenesis, slowing of glucose 
absorption from the gastrointestinal tract, with increased glucose 
to lactate conversion by enterocytes, direct stimulation of glycoly-
sis in tissues, increased glucose removal from blood, and reduction 
of plasma glucagon levels. The biguanide blood glucose-lowering 
action does not depend on functioning pancreatic beta cells. 
Patients with type 2 diabetes have considerably less fasting hyper-
glycemia as well as lower postprandial hyperglycemia after admin-
istration of biguanides; however, hypoglycemia during biguanide 
therapy is essentially unknown. These agents are therefore more 
appropriately termed “euglycemic” agents. 
 Metabolism & Excretion 
 Metformin has a half-life of 1.5–3 hours, is not bound to plasma 
proteins, is not metabolized, and is excreted by the kidneys as the 
active compound. As a consequence of metformin’s blockade of 
gluconeogenesis, the drug may impair the hepatic metabolism of 
lactic acid. In patients with renal insufficiency, biguanides accu-
mulate and thereby increase the risk of lactic acidosis, which 
appears to be a dose-related complication. 
 Clinical Use 
 Biguanides are recommended as first-line therapy for type 2 dia-
betes. Because metformin is an insulin-sparing agent and does not 
increase body weight or provoke hypoglycemia, it offers obvious 
advantages over insulin or sulfonylureas in treating hyperglycemia 
in such persons. The UKPDS reported that metformin therapy 
decreases the risk of macrovascular as well as microvascular disease; 
this is in contrast to the other therapies, which only modified 
microvascular morbidity. Biguanides are also indicated for use 
in combination with insulin secretagogues or thiazolidinediones 
in type 2 diabetics in whom oral monotherapy is inadequate. 
Metformin is useful in the prevention of type 2 diabetes; the land-
mark Diabetes Prevention Program concluded that metformin is 
efficacious in preventing the new onset of type 2 diabetes in 
middle-aged, obese persons with impaired glucose tolerance and 
fasting hyperglycemia. It is interesting that metformin did not 
prevent diabetes in older, leaner prediabetics. 
 The dosage of metformin is from 500 mg to a maximum of 
2.55 g daily, with the lowest effective dose being recommended. 
Depending on whether the primary abnormality is fasting hyper-
glycemia or postprandial hyperglycemia, metformin therapy can 
be initiated as a once-daily dose at bedtime or before a meal. 
A common schedule for fasting hyperglycemia would be to begin 
with a single 500-mg tablet at bedtime for a week or more. If this 
is tolerated without gastrointestinal discomfort and if hyperglyce-
mia persists, a second 500-mg tablet may be added with the eve-
ning meal. If further dose increases are required, an additional 
500-mg tablet can be added to be taken with breakfast or the 
midday meal, or the larger (850-mg) tablet can be prescribed 
twice daily or even three times daily (the maximum recommended 
dosage) if needed. Dosage should always be divided because inges-
tion of more than 1000 mg at any one time usually provokes sig-
nificant gastrointestinal adverse effects. 
 Epidemiologic studies suggest that metformin use may dra-
matically reduce the risk of some cancers. These data are still 
preliminary, and the speculative mechanism of action is a decrease 
in insulin (which also functions as a growth factor) levels as well 
as direct cellular effects mediated by AMPK. 
 Toxicities 
 The most common toxic effects of metformin are gastrointestinal 
(anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, and diarrhea), 
which occur in up to 20% of patients. They are dose related, tend 
to occur at the onset of therapy, and are often transient. However, 
metformin may have to be discontinued in 3–5% of patients 
because of persistent diarrhea. Absorption of vitamin B 12 appears 
to be reduced during long-term metformin therapy, and annual 
screening of serum vitamin B 12 levels and red blood cell parame-
ters has been encouraged by the manufacturer to determine the 
need for vitamin B 12 injections. In the absence of hypoxia or renal 
or hepatic insufficiency, lactic acidosis is less common with met-
formin therapy than with phenformin therapy. 
 Biguanides are contraindicated in patients with renal disease, 
alcoholism, hepatic disease, or conditions predisposing to tissue 
anoxia (eg, chronic cardiopulmonary dysfunction) because of the 
increased risk of lactic acidosis induced by these drugs. 
 THIAZOLIDINEDIONES 
 Thiazolidinediones (Tzds) act to decrease insulin resistance. Tzds 
are ligands of  peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-
gamma (PPAR-f), part of the steroid and thyroid superfamily of 
nuclear receptors. These PPAR receptors are found in muscle, fat, 
and liver. PPAR-γ receptors modulate the expression of the genes 
involved in lipid and glucose metabolism, insulin signal transduc-
tion, and adipocyte and other tissue differentiation. The available 
Tzds do not have identical clinical effects, and new drug develop-
ment will focus on defining PPAR effects and designing ligands 
that have selective action—much like the selective estrogen recep-
tor modulators (see  Chapter 40 ). 
758    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 In addition to targeting adipocytes, myocytes, and hepatocytes, 
Tzds also have significant effects on vascular endothelium, the 
immune system, the ovaries, and tumor cells. Some of these 
responses may be independent of the PPAR-γ pathway. The Tzd 
oncogenic effects are complex and may be both tumorigenic and 
antitumorigenic. 
 In persons with diabetes, a major site of Tzd action is adipose 
tissue, where the drug promotes glucose uptake and utilization 
and modulates synthesis of lipid hormones or cytokines and other 
proteins involved in energy regulation. Tzds also regulate adipo-
cyte apoptosis and differentiation. Numerous other effects have 
been documented in animal studies, but applicability to human 
tissues has yet to be determined. 
 Two thiazolidinediones are currently available: pioglitazone 
and rosiglitazone ( Table 41–8 ). Their distinct side chains create 
differences in therapeutic action, metabolism, metabolite profile, 
and adverse effects. An earlier compound, troglitazone, was with-
drawn from the market because of hepatic toxicity thought to be 
related to its side chain. 
 Pioglitazone has PPAR-α as well as PPAR-γ activity. It is 
absorbed within 2 hours of ingestion; although food may delay 
uptake, total bioavailability is not affected. Absorption is decreased 
with concomitant use of bile acid sequestrants. Pioglitazone is 
metabolized by CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 to active metabolites. The 
bioavailability of numerous other drugs also degraded by these 
enzymes may be affected by pioglitazone therapy, including estro-
gen-containing oral contraceptives; additional methods of contra-
ception are advised. Pioglitazone may be taken once daily; the 
usual starting dose is 15–30 mg/d, and the maximum is 45 mg/d. 
A triglyceride-lowering effect is observed with pioglitazone and is 
more significant than that of rosiglitazone, presumably because of 
its PPAR-α-binding characteristics. Pioglitazone is approved as a 
monotherapy and in combination with metformin, sulfonylureas, 
and insulin for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. The risk of blad-
der cancer appears to be cumulatively increased with high doses. 
 Rosiglitazone is rapidly absorbed and highly protein-bound. 
It is metabolized in the liver to minimally active metabolites, pre-
dominantly by CYP2C8 and to a lesser extent by CYP2C9. It is 
administered once or twice daily; 2–8 mg is the usual total dose. 
Rosiglitazone shares the common Tzd adverse effects but appears 
to carry more cardiovascular risk than pioglitazone. Concurrent 
administration of nitrates and insulin putatively enhances the risk 
of myocardial infarction and is contraindicated; renin-angiotensin 
system blockers may have a similar risk but are not specifically 
prohibited. Because of toxicities, the FDA now limits rosiglitazone 
prescriptions to patients already on treatment with the medica-
tion, and to those whose blood sugar cannot be controlled with 
other antidiabetic medicines and who, after consultation with 
their provider, do not wish to be on pioglitazone or a pioglitazone-
containing drug.  For those restricted populations, rosiglitazone is 
approved for use in type 2 diabetes as monotherapy, in double combi-
nation therapy with a biguanide or sulfonylurea, or in quadruple 
combination with a biguanide, sulfonylurea, and insulin. 
 Tzds are considered euglycemics and are efficacious in about 
70% of new users. The overall response is similar to that achieved 
with sulfonylurea and biguanide monotherapy. Individuals experi-
encing secondary failure with other oral agents should benefit 
from the addition (rather than substitution) of a Tzd. Because 
their mechanism of action involves gene regulation, the Tzds have 
a slow onset and offset of activity over weeks or even months. 
Combination therapy with sulfonylureas and insulin can lead to 
hypoglycemia and may require dosage adjustment. 
 An adverse effect common to both Tzds is fluid retention, 
which presents as a mild anemia and peripheral edema, especially 
when the drugs are used in combination with insulin or insulin 
secretagogues. Both drugs increase the risk of heart failure. Many 
users have a dose-related weight gain (average 1–3 kg), which may 
be fluid related. Rarely, new or worsening macular edema has been 
reported in association with treatment. Loss of bone mineral den-
sity and increased atypical extremity bone fractures in women are 
described for both compounds, which is postulated to be due to 
decreased osteoblast formation. Studies are ongoing to determine 
whether the demineralization and fracture risk is increased in 
men. Long-term therapy is associated with a drop in triglyceride 
levels and a slight rise in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and low-
density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol values. These agents should 
not be used during pregnancy or in the presence of significant liver 
disease (ALT more than 2.5 times upper limit of normal) or with 
TABLE 41–8 Thiazolidinediones.
Thiazolidinedione
Chemical Structure
Oral Dose
Pioglitazone (Actos)
O
O
O
N
S
NH
15–45 mg once daily
Rosiglitazone (Avandia)
O
O
O
S
NH
N
CH3
2–8 mg once daily
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     759
a concurrent diagnosis of heart failure. Because of the hepatotoxicity 
observed with troglitazone, a discontinued Tzd, the FDA continues 
to require monitoring of liver function tests before initiation 
of Tzd therapy and periodically afterward. To date, hepatotoxicity 
has not been associated with rosiglitazone or pioglitazone. 
Anovulatory women may resume ovulation and should be coun-
seled on the increased risk of pregnancy. 
 Thiazolidinediones have benefit in the  prevention of type 2 dia-
betes. The Diabetes Prevention Trial reported a 75% reduction in 
diabetes incidence rate when troglitazone was administered to 
patients with prediabetes. Another study reported that troglitazone 
therapy significantly decreased the recurrence of diabetes mellitus in 
high-risk Hispanic women with a history of gestational diabetes. 
 Although these medications are highly efficacious, the adverse 
effects of weight gain, congestive heart failure, demineralization 
and increased bone fracture in women; possible (for rosiglitazone) 
worsening of cardiovascular status; and unknown oncogenic risk 
potentially limit their popularity and future use. 
 ALPHA-GLUCOSIDASE INHIBITORS 
 Acarbose and  miglitol are competitive inhibitors of the intestinal 
α-glucosidases and reduce postmeal glucose excursions by delay-
ing the digestion and absorption of starch and disaccharides 
( Table 41–9 ). Only monosaccharides, such as glucose and fruc-
tose, can be transported out of the intestinal lumen and into the 
bloodstream. Complex starches, oligosaccharides, and disaccha-
rides must be broken down into individual monosaccharides 
before being absorbed in the duodenum and upper jejunum. This 
digestion is facilitated by enteric enzymes, including pancreatic 
α-amylase and α-glucosidases that are attached to the brush bor-
der of the intestinal cells. Miglitol differs structurally from acar-
bose and is six times more potent in inhibiting sucrase. Although 
the binding affinity of the two compounds differs, acarbose and 
miglitol both target the α-glucosidases: sucrase, maltase, glu-
coamylase, and dextranase. Miglitol alone has effects on isomaltase 
and on β-glucosidases, which split β-linked sugars such as lactose. 
Acarbose alone has a small effect on α-amylase. The consequence 
of enzyme inhibition is to minimize upper intestinal digestion and 
defer digestion (and thus absorption) of the ingested starch and 
disaccharides to the distal small intestine, thereby lowering post-
meal glycemic excursions as much as 45–60 mg/dL and creating 
an insulin-sparing effect. 
 Monotherapy with these drugs is associated with a modest 
drop (0.5–1%) in glycohemoglobin levels and a 20–25 mg/dL fall 
in fasting glucose levels. They are FDA-approved for persons with 
type 2 diabetes as monotherapy and in combination with sulfo-
nylureas, in which the glycemic effect is additive. Both acarbose 
and miglitol are taken in doses of 25–100 mg just before ingesting 
the first portion of each meal; therapy should be initiated with the 
lowest dose and slowly titrated upward, and a similar amount of 
starch and disaccharides should be ingested at each meal. 
 Prominent adverse effects include flatulence, diarrhea, and 
abdominal pain and result from the appearance of undigested 
carbohydrate in the colon that is then fermented into short-chain 
fatty acids, releasing gas. These adverse effects tend to diminish 
with ongoing use because chronic exposure to carbohydrate induces 
the expression of α-glucosidase in the jejunum and ileum, increas-
ing distal small intestine glucose absorption and minimizing the 
passage of carbohydrate into the colon. Although not a problem 
with monotherapy or combination therapy with a biguanide, 
hypoglycemia may occur with concurrent sulfonylurea treatment. 
Hypoglycemia should be treated with glucose (dextrose) and not 
sucrose, whose breakdown may be blocked. These drugs are con-
traindicated in patients with inflammatory bowel disease or any 
intestinal condition that could be worsened by gas and distention. 
Because both miglitol and acarbose are excreted by the kidneys, 
these medications should not be prescribed in individuals with 
renal impairment. Acarbose has been associated with reversible 
hepatic enzyme elevation and should be used with caution in the 
presence of hepatic disease. 
 The STOP-NIDDM trial demonstrated that α-glucosidase 
therapy in prediabetic persons successfully prevented a significant 
number of new cases of type 2 diabetes and helped restore beta-
cell function, in addition to reducing cardiovascular disease and 
hypertension. Intervention with acarbose also reduced cardiovas-
cular events in persons with diabetes. Diabetes and cardiovascular 
disease prevention may become a further indication for this class 
of medications. 
TABLE 41–9 Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors.
Alpha-Glucosidase 
Inhibitor
Chemical Structure
Oral Dose
Acarbose (Precose)
O
HN
HO
HO
O
CH2OH
CH2OH
O
HO
HO
O
O
HO
HO
OH
HO
HO
HO
CH2OH
CH3
25–100 mg before meals
Miglitol (Glyset)
HO
HO
OH
OH
N
CH2
CH2
OH
25–100 mg before meals
760    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors are infrequently prescribed in the 
United States because of their prominent gastrointestinal adverse 
effects and relatively minor glucose-lowering benefit. 
 BILE ACID SEQUESTRANTS 
 Initially developed as a bile acid sequestrant and cholesterol-lowering 
drug,  colesevelam hydrochloride is now approved as an antihyper-
glycemic therapy for persons with type 2 diabetes who are taking 
other medications or have not achieved adequate control with diet 
and exercise. The exact mechanism of action is unknown but pre-
sumed to involve an interruption of the enterohepatic circulation 
and a decrease in farnesoid X receptor (FXR) activation. FXR is a 
nuclear receptor with multiple effects on cholesterol, glucose, and 
bile acid metabolism. Bile acids are natural ligands of the FXR. 
Additionally, the drug may impair glucose absorption. 
 Colesevelam is administered as a pill or an oral suspension in a 
dosage of 1875 mg twice daily or 3750 mg once daily. It is not sys-
temically absorbed or modified and is eliminated intact in the feces. 
In clinical trials, it lowered the hemoglobin A 1c (HbA 1c ) concentra-
tion about 0.5%, and LDL cholesterol by 15% or more. Side effects 
include gastrointestinal complaints (constipation, indigestion, flatu-
lence). The medication may impair absorption of multiple other 
medications including fat-soluble vitamins, glyburide, levothyroxine, 
and oral contraceptives, and should not be used in individuals with 
hypertriglyceridemia, a history of pancreatitis secondary to hyper-
triglyceridemia, or esophageal, gastric, or intestinal disorders. 
 AMYLIN ANALOG 
 Pramlintide , a synthetic analog of amylin, is an injectable antihy-
perglycemic agent that modulates postprandial glucose levels and is 
approved for preprandial use in persons with type 1 and type 2 
diabetes. It is administered in addition to insulin in those who are 
unable to achieve their target postprandial blood sugar levels. 
Pramlintide suppresses glucagon release via undetermined mecha-
nisms, delays gastric emptying, and has central nervous system-
mediated anorectic effects. It is rapidly absorbed after subcutaneous 
administration; levels peak within 20 minutes, and the duration of 
action is not more than 150 minutes. Pramlintide is renally metab-
olized and excreted, but even at low creatinine clearance there is no 
significant change in bioavailability. It has not been evaluated in 
dialysis patients. The most reliable absorption is from the abdomen 
and thigh; arm administration is less reliable. 
 Pramlintide should be injected immediately before eating; 
doses range from 15 to 60 mcg subcutaneously for individuals 
with type 1 diabetes and from 60 to 120 mcg subcutaneously for 
individuals with type 2 diabetes. Therapy with this agent should 
be initiated with the lowest dose and titrated upward. Because of 
the risk of hypoglycemia, concurrent rapid- or short-acting 
mealtime insulin doses should be decreased by 50% or more. 
Concurrent insulin secretagogue doses also may need to be 
decreased in persons with type 2 diabetes. Pramlintide should 
always be injected by itself with a separate syringe; it cannot be 
mixed with insulin. The major adverse effects of pramlintide are 
hypoglycemia and gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, 
vomiting, and anorexia. 
 GLUCAGON-LIKE POLYPEPTIDE-1 
(GLP-1) RECEPTOR AGONISTS 
 In type 2 diabetes, the release of glucagon-like polypeptide is 
diminished postprandially, which leads to inadequate glucagon 
suppression and excessive hepatic glucose output. Two synthetic 
analogs of glucagon-like polypeptide,  exenatide and  liraglutide, 
are commercially available to help restore GLP-1 activity. These 
therapies have multiple actions such as potentiation of glucose-
mediated insulin secretion, suppression of postprandial glucagon 
release through as-yet unknown mechanisms, slowed gastric emp-
tying, and a central loss of appetite. The increased insulin secre-
tion is speculated to be due in part to an increase in beta-cell mass. 
The increased beta-cell mass may result from decreased beta-cell 
apoptosis, increased beta-cell formation, or both. 
 Exenatide , a derivative of the exendin-4 peptide in Gila monster 
venom, was the first incretin therapy to become available for the 
treatment of diabetes. It has a 53% homology with native GLP-1, 
and a glycine substitution to reduce degradation by dipeptidyl 
peptidase-4 (DPP-4). Exenatide is approved as an injectable, adjunc-
tive therapy in persons with type 2 diabetes treated with metformin 
or metformin plus sulfonylureas who still have suboptimal glycemic 
control. Exenatide is absorbed equally from arm, abdomen, or thigh 
injection sites, reaching a peak concentration in approximately 
2 hours with a duration of action of up to 10 hours. It undergoes 
glomerular filtration, and dosage adjustment is required only when 
the creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min. 
 Exenatide is injected subcutaneously within 60 minutes before a 
meal; therapy is initiated at 5 mcg twice daily, with a maximum 
dosage of 10 mcg twice daily. When exenatide is added to preexist-
ing sulfonylurea therapy, the oral hypoglycemic dosage may need to 
be decreased to prevent hypoglycemia. The major adverse effects are 
nausea (about 44% of users) and vomiting and diarrhea. The nausea 
decreases with ongoing exenatide usage. Exenatide mono- and com-
bination therapy results in HbA 1c reductions from 0.2% to 1.2%. 
Weight loss in the range of 2–3 kg is reported in some users, pre-
sumably because of the nausea and anorectic effects. A serious and, 
in some cases, fatal adverse effect of exenatide is necrotizing and 
hemorrhagic pancreatitis. Antibodies to exenatide are formed with 
chronic use, the clinical significance of which is unclear. 
 Liraglutide is a long-acting synthetic GLP-1 analog with 97% 
homology to native GLP-1 but has a prolonged half-life that 
permits once-daily dosing. Liraglutide interacts with the GLP-1 
receptor and acts to increase insulin and decrease glucagon release. 
 Liraglutide is approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes as 
an injectable therapy in patients who achieve inadequate control 
with diet and exercise, and are receiving concurrent treatment 
with metformin, sulfonylureas, or Tzds. It is not recommended as 
a first-line therapy or for use with insulin. Treatment is initiated at 
0.6 mg and is titrated in weekly increments of 0.6 mg as needed, 
and as tolerated, to achieve glycemic goals. Peak levels are obtained 
in 8–12 hours, and the elimination half-life is about 13 hours. 
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     761
Liraglutide therapy results in a reduction of HbA 1c from 0.8% to 1.5%; 
weight loss ranges from nominal to 3.2 kg.. Experience with lira-
glutide in patients with renal or hepatic impairment is limited and 
it should be used with caution in these populations. 
 Common side effects of liraglutide are headache, nausea, and 
diarrhea; antibody formation, urticaria, and other immune reactions 
also are observed Hypoglycemia can occur with concomitant sulfo-
nylurea use and may require a dose reduction of the oral hypoglyce-
mic agent. Pancreatitis is another serious adverse effect; liraglutide is 
contraindicated in individuals with a history of pancreatitis and 
should be permanently discontinued if pancreatitis develops. Because 
rodents exposed to liraglutide developed thyroid C-cell tumors, there 
is an FDA mandated “black box” warning that liraglutide is contrain-
dicated in individuals with a personal or family history of medullary 
cancer or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. 
 Although they require injection, the GLP-1 receptor ligands 
have gained popularity because of the improved glucose control 
and associated anorexia and weight loss in some users. Safety issues, 
however, may deter future use. 
 DIPEPTIDYL PEPTIDASE-4 (DPP-4) 
INHIBITORS 
 Sitagliptin, saxagliptin, and  linagliptin are inhibitors of DPP-4, 
the enzyme that degrades incretin hormones. These drugs increase 
circulating levels of native GLP-1 and glucose-dependent insulino-
tropic polypeptide (GIP), which ultimately decreases postprandial 
glucose excursions by increasing glucose-mediated insulin secretion 
and decreasing glucagon levels. They are approved as adjunctive 
therapy to diet and exercise in the treatment of individuals with 
type 2 diabetes who have failed to achieve glycemic goals. 
 Sitagliptin has an oral bioavailability of over 85%, achieves 
peak concentrations within 1–4 hours, and has a half-life of 
approximately 12 hours. It is primarily (87%) excreted in the 
urine in part by active tubular secretion of the drug. Hepatic 
metabolism is limited and mediated largely by the cytochrome 
CYP3A4 isoform and, to a lesser degree, by CYP2C8. The metab-
olites have insignificant activity. The usual dosage is 100 mg orally 
once daily. Sitagliptin has been studied as monotherapy and in 
combination with metformin, sulfonylureas, and Tzds. Therapy 
with sitagliptin has resulted in HbA 1c reductions of between 0.5% 
and 1.0%. 
 Common adverse effects include nasopharyngitis, upper respi-
ratory infections, headaches, and hypoglycemia when the drug is 
combined with insulin secretagogues or insulin. There are postmar-
keting reports of acute pancreatitis (fatal and nonfatal) and severe 
allergic and hypersensitivity reactions. Sitagliptin should be imme-
diately discontinued if pancreatitis or allergic and hypersensitivity 
reactions occur. Dosage should be reduced in patients with renal 
impairment and may need to be adjusted to prevent hypoglycemia 
if there is concurrent insulin secretagogue or insulin therapy. 
 Saxagliptin is given orally as 2.5–5 mg daily. The drug reaches 
maximal concentrations within 2 hours (4 hours for its active 
metabolite). It is minimally protein bound, and undergoes hepatic 
metabolism by CYP3A4/5. The major metabolite is active, and 
excretion is by both renal and hepatic pathways. The terminal 
plasma half-life is 2.5 hours for saxagliptin and 3.1 hours for 
its active metabolite. Dosage adjustment is recommended for 
individuals with renal impairment and concurrent use of strong 
CYP3A4/5 inhibitors such as antiviral, antifungal, and certain 
antibacterial agents. 
 Saxagliptin is approved as monotherapy and in combination 
with biguanides, sulfonylureas, and Tzds. It has not been studied 
in combination with insulin. During clinical trials, mono- and 
combination therapy with sitagliptin resulted in an HbA 1c reduc-
tion in the range of 0.4–0.9%. 
 Adverse effects include an increased rate of infections (upper 
respiratory tract and urinary tract), headaches, peripheral edema 
(when combined with a Tzd), hypoglycemia (when combined 
with a sulfonylurea), and hypersensitivity reactions (urticaria, facial 
edema). The dose of a concurrently administered insulin secret-
agogue or insulin may need to be lowered to prevent hypoglycemia. 
 Linagliptin is the most recently introduced drug in this class 
and appears to have properties similar to sitagliptin and saxaglip-
tin. It is approved for use as monotherapy and in combination 
with metformin, glimepiride, and pioglitazone. 
 COMBINATION THERAPY—ORAL 
ANTIDIABETIC AGENTS & 
INJECTABLE MEDICATION 
 Combination Therapy in Type 2 Diabetes 
Mellitus 
 Failure to maintain a good response to therapy over the long term 
owing to a progressive decrease in beta-cell mass, reduction in 
physical activity, decline in lean body mass, or increase in ectopic 
fat deposition remains a disconcerting problem in the manage-
ment of type 2 diabetes. Multiple medications may be required 
to achieve glycemic control. Unless there is a contraindication, 
medical therapy should be initiated with a biguanide. If clinical 
failure occurs with metformin monotherapy, a second agent or 
insulin is added. The second-line drug can be an insulin secret-
agogue, Tzd, incretin-based therapy, amylin analog, or a glucosi-
dase inhibitor; preference is given to sulfonylureas or insulin 
because of cost, adverse effects, and safety concerns. Third-line 
therapy can include metformin, multiple other oral medications, 
or a noninsulin injectable and metformin and intensified insulin 
therapy. Recommended fourth-line therapy is intensified insulin 
management with or without metformin or Tzd. 
 A. Combination Therapy with GLP-1 Receptor Agonists 
 Exenatide and liraglutide are approved for use in individuals who 
fail to achieve desired glycemic control on metformin, sulfonyl-
ureas, metformin plus sulfonylureas, or (for liraglutide) metformin 
plus sulfonylureas and Tzds. Hypoglycemia is a risk when the 
GLP-1 receptor agonists are used with an insulin secretagogue or 
with insulin. The doses of the latter drugs should be reduced at the 
initiation of therapy and subsequently titrated. 
762    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 B. Combination Therapy with DPP-4 Inhibitors 
 Sitagliptin, saxagliptin, and linagliptin are approved for use in 
individuals who fail to achieve desired glycemic control on 
metformin, sulfonylureas, or Tzds. Hypoglycemia is a risk when 
the DPP-4 inhibitors are used with an insulin secretagogue or with 
insulin, and a dosage adjustment of the latter drugs may be 
required to prevent hypoglycemia. 
 C. Combination Therapy with Pramlintide 
 Pramlintide is approved for concurrent mealtime administration 
in individuals with type 2 diabetes treated with insulin, met-
formin, or a sulfonylurea who are unable to achieve their post-
prandial glucose targets. Combination therapy results in a 
significant reduction in early postprandial glucose excursions; 
mealtime insulin or sulfonylurea doses usually have to be reduced 
to prevent hypoglycemia. 
 D. Combination Therapy with Insulin 
 Bedtime insulin has been suggested as an adjunct to oral anti-
diabetic therapy in patients with type 2 diabetes who have not 
responded to maximal oral therapy. Although not formally FDA 
approved, clinical practice has evolved to include sulfonylureas, 
meglitinides, D-phenylalanine derivatives, biguanides, thiazoli-
dinediones, α-glucosidase inhibitors, GLP-1 receptor agonists, 
DPP-4 inhibitors, and bile acid sequestrants given in conjunc-
tion with insulin. National and international committee prac-
tice guidelines, however, recommend avoiding polypharmacy, 
especially with more expensive agents, and urge early introduc-
tion of insulin when an individual is unable to achieve glycemic 
targets. 
 Persons unable to achieve glycemic control with bedtime insulin 
as described generally require full insulin replacement and multiple 
daily injections of insulin. Insulin secretagogues are redundant 
when a person is receiving multiple daily insulin injections, but 
persons with severe insulin resistance may benefit from the addi-
tion of metformin. When metformin is added to the regimen of a 
person already taking insulin, the blood glucose should be closely 
monitored and the insulin dosage decreased as needed to avoid 
hypoglycemia. 
 Combination Therapy in Type 1 Diabetes 
Mellitus 
 Insulin secretagogues (sulfonylureas, meglitinides, or D-phenylalanine 
derivatives), Tzds, metformin, α-glucosidase inhibitors, GLP-1 
receptor agonists, DPP-4 inhibitors, or bile acid sequestrants are  not 
approved for use in type 1 diabetes. 
 Combination Therapy with Pramlintide 
 Pramlintide is approved for concurrent mealtime administration 
in individuals with type 1 diabetes who have poor glucose control 
after eating despite optimal insulin therapy. The addition of pram-
lintide leads to a significant reduction in early postprandial glu-
cose excursions; mealtime insulin doses usually should be reduced 
to prevent hypoglycemia. 
 ■ GLUCAGON 
 Chemistry & Metabolism 
 Glucagon is synthesized in the alpha cells of the pancreatic islets 
of Langerhans ( Table 41–1 ). Glucagon is a peptide—identical in 
all mammals—consisting of a single chain of 29 amino acids, with 
a molecular weight of 3485. Selective proteolytic cleavage converts 
a large precursor molecule of approximately 18,000 MW to glu-
cagon. One of the precursor intermediates consists of a 69-amino-
acid peptide called  glicentin, which contains the glucagon 
sequence interposed between peptide extensions. 
 Glucagon is extensively degraded in the liver and kidney as 
well as in plasma and at its tissue receptor sites. Because of its 
rapid inactivation by plasma, chilling of the collecting tubes and 
addition of inhibitors of proteolytic enzymes are necessary when 
samples of blood are collected for immunoassay of circulating 
glucagon. Its half-life in plasma is between 3 and 6 minutes, which 
is similar to that of insulin. 
 “Gut Glucagon” 
 Glicentin immunoreactivity has been found in cells of the small 
intestine as well as in pancreatic alpha cells and in effluents of 
perfused pancreas. The intestinal cells secrete  enteroglucagon, a 
family of glucagon-like peptides, of which glicentin is a member, 
along with glucagon-like peptides 1 and 2 (GLP-1 and GLP-2). 
Unlike the pancreatic alpha cell, these intestinal cells lack the 
enzymes to convert glucagon precursors to true glucagon by 
removing the carboxyl terminal extension from the molecule. 
 Glucagon-like Peptide 1 (GLP-1) 
 The function of the enteroglucagons has not been clarified, 
although smaller peptides can bind hepatic glucagon receptors 
where they exert partial activity. A derivative of the 37-amino-acid 
form of GLP-1 that lacks the first six amino acids (GLP-1[7–37]) 
is a potent stimulant of insulin synthesis and release and beta-cell 
mass. In addition, it inhibits glucagon secretion, slows gastric 
emptying, and has an anorectic effect. After oral glucose ingestion, 
GLP-1 along with another gut hormone, GIP, accounts for as 
much as 70% of the induced insulin secretion. GLP-1 represents 
the predominant form of GLP in the human intestine and has 
been termed  insulinotropin . It has been considered as a potential 
therapeutic agent in type 2 diabetes. However, GLP-1 requires 
continuous subcutaneous infusion to produce a sustained lower-
ing of both fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia in type 2 dia-
betic patients; therefore, its clinical usefulness is limited. Exenatide 
and liraglutide (see previous text) are GLP-1 receptor agonist ana-
logs with more practical half-lives. 
 Pharmacologic Effects of Glucagon 
 A. Metabolic Effects 
 The first six amino acids at the amino terminal of the glucagon 
molecule bind to specific G s protein-coupled receptors on liver 
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     763
cells. This leads to an increase in cAMP, which facilitates catabo-
lism of stored glycogen and increases gluconeogenesis and keto-
genesis. The immediate pharmacologic result of glucagon infusion 
is to raise blood glucose at the expense of stored hepatic glycogen. 
There is no effect on skeletal muscle glycogen, presumably because 
of the lack of glucagon receptors on skeletal muscle. Pharmacologic 
amounts of glucagon cause release of insulin from normal pancre-
atic beta cells, catecholamines from pheochromocytoma, and cal-
citonin from medullary carcinoma cells. 
 B. Cardiac Effects 
 Glucagon has a potent inotropic and chronotropic effect on the 
heart, mediated by the cAMP mechanism described above. Thus, 
it produces an effect very similar to that of β-adrenoceptor ago-
nists without requiring functioning β receptors. 
 C. Effects on Smooth Muscle 
 Large doses of glucagon produce profound relaxation of the intes-
tine. In contrast to the above effects of the peptide, this action 
on the intestine may be due to mechanisms other than adenylyl 
cyclase activation. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Severe Hypoglycemia 
 The major use of glucagon is for emergency treatment of severe 
hypoglycemic reactions in patients with type 1 diabetes when 
unconsciousness precludes oral feedings and intravenous glucose 
treatment is not possible. Recombinant glucagon is currently 
available in 1-mg vials for parenteral use (Glucagon Emergency 
Kit). Nasal sprays have been developed for this purpose but have 
not yet received FDA approval. 
 B. Endocrine Diagnosis 
 Several tests use glucagon to diagnose endocrine disorders. In 
patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus, a classic research test of 
pancreatic beta-cell secretory reserve uses 1 mg of glucagon 
administered as an intravenous bolus. Because insulin-treated 
patients develop circulating anti-insulin antibodies that interfere 
with radioimmunoassays of insulin, measurements of C-peptide 
are used to indicate beta-cell secretion. 
 C. Beta-Adrenoceptor Blocker Overdose 
 Glucagon is sometimes useful for reversing the cardiac effects of 
an overdose of β-blocking agents because of its ability to increase 
cAMP production in the heart. However, it is not clinically useful 
in the treatment of cardiac failure. 
 D. Radiology of the Bowel 
 Glucagon has been used extensively in radiology as an aid to X-ray 
visualization of the bowel because of its ability to relax the intestine.  
 Adverse Reactions 
 Transient nausea and occasional vomiting can result from gluca-
gon administration. These are generally mild, and glucagon is 
relatively free of severe adverse reactions. It should not be used in 
a patient with pheochromocytoma. 
 ■ ISLET AMYLOID POLYPEPTIDE 
IAPP, AMYLIN 
 Amylin is a 37-amino-acid peptide originally derived from islet 
amyloid deposits in pancreas material from patients with long-
standing type 2 diabetes or insulinomas. It is produced by pancre-
atic beta cells, packaged within beta-cell granules in a concentration 
1–2% that of insulin and co-secreted with insulin in a pulsatile 
manner and in response to physiologic secretory stimuli. 
Approximately 1 molecule of amylin is released for every 
10 molecules of insulin. It circulates in a glycated (active) and 
nonglycated (inactive) form with physiologic concentrations rang-
ing from 4 to 25 pmol/L and is primarily excreted by the kidney. 
Amylin appears to be a member of the superfamily of neuroregula-
tory peptides, with 46% homology with the calcitonin gene-re-
lated peptide CGRP (see  Chapter 17 ). The physiologic effect of 
amylin may be to modulate insulin release by acting as a negative 
feedback on insulin secretion. At pharmacologic doses, amylin 
reduces glucagon secretion, slows gastric emptying by a vagally 
medicated mechanism, and centrally decreases appetite. An analog 
of amylin,  pramlintide (see previous section), differs from amylin 
by the substitution of proline at positions 25, 28, and 29. These 
modifications make pramlintide soluble and non–self-aggregating, 
and suitable for pharmacologic use. 
764    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
SUMMARY Drugs Used for Diabetes
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
INSULINS
 •  Rapid-acting: Lispro, 
aspart, glulisine
 •  Short-acting: Regular
 •  Intermediate-acting: 
NPH
 •  Long-acting: Detemir, 
glargine
Activate insulin receptor
Reduce circulating glucose 
• promote glucose transport 
and oxidation; glycogen, 
lipid, protein synthesis; and 
regulation of gene expression
Type 1 and type 2 
diabetes
Parenteral (SC or IV) • 
duration varies (see text) • 
Toxicity: Hypoglycemia, 
weight gain, lipodystrophy 
(rare)
SULFONYLUREAS
 • Glipizide
 • Glyburide
 • Glimepiride
Insulin secretagogues: 
Close K
+ channels in beta 
cells • increase insulin 
release
In patients with functioning 
beta cells, reduce circulating 
glucose • increase glycogen, 
fat, and protein formation • 
gene regulation
Type 2 diabetes
Orally active • duration 
10–24 h • Toxicity: 
Hypoglycemia, weight 
gain
• Tolazamide, tolbutamide, chlorpropamide: Older sulfonylureas, lower potency, greater toxicity; rarely used
GLITINIDES
 • Repaglinide
Insulin secretagogue: 
Similar to sulfonylureas 
with some overlap in 
binding sites
In patients with functioning 
beta cells, reduces circulat-
ing glucose • increases 
glycogen, fat, and protein 
formation • gene regulation
Type 2 diabetes
Oral • very fast onset of 
action • duration 5–8 h 
• Toxicity: Hypoglycemia
 • Nateglinide
Insulin secretagogue: 
Similar to sulfonylureas 
with some overlap in 
binding sites
In patients with functioning 
beta cells, reduces circulating 
glucose • increases glycogen, 
fat, and protein formation 
• gene regulation
Type 2 diabetes
Oral • very fast
onset and short duration 
(< 4 h) • Toxicity: 
Hypoglycemia
BIGUANIDES
 • Metformin
Obscure: Reduced hepatic 
and renal gluconeogenesis
Decreased endogenous 
glucose production
Type 2 diabetes
Oral • maximal plasma 
concentration in 2–3 h 
• Toxicity: Gastrointestinal 
symptoms, lactic acidosis 
(rare) • cannot use if 
impaired renal/hepatic 
function • congestive 
heart failure (CHF), 
hypoxic/acidotic states, 
alcoholism
ALPHA-GLUCOSIDASE INHIBITORS
 • Acarbose, miglitol
Inhibit intestinal 
α-glucosidases
Reduce conversion of starch 
and disaccharides to mono-
saccharides • reduce post-
prandial hyperglycemia
Type 2 diabetes
Oral • rapid onset • Toxicity: 
Gastrointestinal symptoms 
• cannot use if impaired 
renal/hepatic function, 
intestinal disorders
(continued)
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     765
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
THIAZOLIDINEDIONES
 • Pioglitazone
Regulates gene expres-
sion by binding to PPAR-γ 
and PPAR-α
Reduces insulin resistance
Type 2 diabetes
Oral • long-acting (> 24 h) 
• Toxicity: Fluid retention, 
edema, anemia, weight 
gain, macular edema, 
bone fractures in women • 
cannot use if CHF, hepatic 
disease
 • Rosiglitazone
Regulates gene expres-
sion by binding to PPAR-γ
Reduces insulin resistance
Type 2 diabetes
Oral • long-acting (> 24 h) 
• Toxicity: Fluid retention, 
edema, anemia, weight 
gain, macular edema, 
bone fractures in women • 
cannot use if CHF, hepatic 
disease • may worsen 
heart disease
GLUCAGON-LIKE POLYPEPTIDE-1 (GLP-1) RECEPTOR AGONISTS
 • Exenatide
Analog of GLP-1: Binds to 
GLP-1 receptors
Reduces post-meal glucose 
excursions: Increases 
glucose-mediated insulin 
release, lowers glucagon 
levels, slows gastric empty-
ing, decreases appetite
Type 2 diabetes
Parenteral (SC) • half-life 
∼2.4 h • Toxicity: Nausea, 
headache, vomiting, 
anorexia, mild weight loss, 
pancreatitis
• Liraglutide: Similar to exenatide; duration up to 24 h; immune reactions, possible thyroid carcinoma risk
DIPEPTIDYL PEPTIDASE-4 (DPP-4) INHIBITORS
 • Sitagliptin
DPP-4 inhibitor: Blocks 
degradation of GLP-1, 
raises circulating GLP-1 
levels
Reduces post-meal glucose 
excursions: Increases 
glucose-mediated insulin 
release, lowers glucagon lev-
els, slows gastric emptying, 
decreases appetite
Type 2 diabetes
Oral • half-life ∼12 h • 24-h 
duration of action • 
Toxicity: Rhinitis, upper 
respiratory infections, 
headaches, pancreatitis, 
rare allergic reactions
• Saxagliptin, linagliptin: Similar to sitagliptin; longer duration of action
AMYLIN ANALOG
 • Pramlintide
Analog of amylin: Binds to 
amylin receptors
Reduces post-meal glucose 
excursions: Lowers glucagon 
levels, slows gastric empty-
ing, decreases appetite
Type 1 and type 2 
diabetes
Parenteral (SC) • rapid 
onset • half-life ∼ 48 min • 
Toxicity: Nausea, anorexia, 
hypoglycemia, headache
BILE ACID SEQUESTRANT
  Colesevelam 
hydrochloride
Bile acid binder
Lowers glucose through 
unknown mechanisms
Type 2 diabetes
Oral • 24-h duration of 
action • Toxicity: 
Constipation, indigestion, 
flatulence
766    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
SULFONYLUREAS
Chlorpropamide (generic, Diabinese)
Oral: 100, 250 mg tablets
Glimepiride (generic, Amaryl)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
Glipizide (generic, Glucotrol, Glucotrol XL)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 2.5, 5, 10 mg extended-release tablets
Glyburide (generic, Diaaeta, Micronase, Glynase PresTab)
Oral: 1.25, 2.5, 5 mg tablets; 1.5, 3, 4.5, 6 mg Glynase PresTab, 
micronized tablets
Tolazamide (generic, Tolinase)
Oral: 100, 250, 500 mg tablets
Tolbutamide (generic, Orinase)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
MEGLITINIDE & RELATED DRUGS
Nateglinide (Starlix)
Oral: 60, 120 mg tablets
Repaglinide (Prandin)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets
BIGUANIDE
Metformin (generic, Glucophage, Glucophage XR)
Oral: 500, 850, 1000 mg tablets; extended-release (XR): 500, 750, 
1000 mg tablets; 500 mg/5 mL solution
METFORMIN COMBINATIONS2
Glipizide plus metformin (generic, Metaglip)
Oral: 2.5/250, 2.5/500, 5/500 mg tablets
Glyburide plus metformin (generic, Glucovance)
Oral: 1.25/250, 2.5/500, 5/500 mg tablets
Pioglitazone plus metformin
Oral: 15/500, 15/850 mg tablets
Repaglinide plus metformin
Oral: 1/500, 2/500 mg tablets
Rosiglitazone plus metformin (Avandamet)
Oral: 1/500, 2/500, 4/500, 2/1000, 4/1000 mg tablets
Saxagliptin plus metformin (Kombiglyze)
Oral: 5/500, 5/1000, 2.5/1000 mg tablets
Sitagliptin plus metformin (Janumet)
Oral: 50/500, 50/1000 mg tablets
THIAZOLIDINEDIONE DERIVATIVES
Pioglitazone (Actos)
Oral: 15, 30, 45 mg tablets
Rosiglitazone (Avandia)
Oral: 2, 4, 8 mg tablets
THIAZOLIDINEDIONE COMBINATION
Pioglitazone plus glimepiride (Duetact)
Oral: 30/2, 30/4 mg tablets
Rosiglitazone plus glimepiride (Avandaryl)
Oral: 4/1, 4/2, 4/4, 8/2, 8/4 mg rosiglitazone/mg glimepiride tablets
ALPHA-GLUCOSIDASE INHIBITORS
Acarbose (Precose)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Miglitol (Glyset)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
AMYLIN ANALOGS
Pramlintide (Symlin)
Parenteral: vial: 0.6, 1 mg/mL
GLUCAGON-LIKE POLYPEPTIDE-1 
RECEPTOR AGONISTS
Exenatide (Byetta)
Parenteral: 250 mcg/mL
Liraglutide (Victoza)
Parenteral: 0.6, 1.2, 1.8 mg
DIPEPTIDYL PEPTIDASE-4 INHIBITOR
Linagliptin (Tradjenta)
Oral: tablets [TK]
Saxagliptin (Onglyza)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Sitagliptin (Januvia)
Oral: 25, 50 100 mg tablets
BILE ACID SEQUESTRANT
Colesevelam hydrochloride
Oral: 625 mg tablets, 1.875, 3.75 g packages for oral suspension
GLUCAGON
Glucagon (generic)
Parenteral: 1 mg lyophilized powder to reconstitute for injection
1See Table 41–4 for insulin preparations.
2Other combinations are available.
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E 1
SULFONYLUREAS
Chlorpropamide (generic, Diabinese)
Oral: 100, 250 mg tablets
Glimepiride (generic, Amaryl)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mg tablets
Glipizide (generic, Glucotrol, Glucotrol XL)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 2.5, 5, 10 mg extended-release tablets
Glyburide (generic, Diaaeta, Micronase, Glynase PresTab)
Oral: 1.25, 2.5, 5 mg tablets; 1.5, 3, 4.5, 6 mg Glynase PresTab,
micronized tablets
Tolazamide (generic, Tolinase)
Oral: 100, 250, 500 mg tablets
Tolbutamide (generic, Orinase)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
MEGLITINIDE & RELATED DRUGS
Nateglinide (Starlix)
Oral: 60, 120 mg tablets
Repaglinide (Prandin)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets
BIGUANIDE
Metformin (generic, Glucophage, Glucophage XR)
Oral: 500, 850, 1000 mg tablets; extended-release (XR): 500, 750,
1000 mg tablets; 500 mg/5 mL solution
METFORMIN COMBINATIONS2
Glipizide plus metformin (generic, Metaglip)
Oral: 2.5/250, 2.5/500, 5/500 mg tablets
Glyburide plus metformin (generic, Glucovance)
Oral: 1.25/250, 2.5/500, 5/500 mg tablets
Pioglitazone plus metformin
Oral: 15/500, 15/850 mg tablets
Repaglinide plus metformin
Oral: 1/500, 2/500 mg tablets
Rosiglitazone plus metformin (Avandamet)
Oral: 1/500, 2/500, 4/500, 2/1000, 4/1000 mg tablets
Saxagliptin plus metformin (Kombiglyze)
Oral: 5/500, 5/1000, 2.5/1000 mg tablets
Sitagliptin plus metformin (Janumet)
Oral: 50/500, 50/1000 mg tablets
THIAZOLIDINEDIONE DERIVATIVES
Pioglitazone (Actos)
Oral: 15, 30, 45 mg tablets
Rosiglitazone (Avandia)
Oral: 2, 4, 8 mg tablets
THIAZOLIDINEDIONE COMBINATION
Pioglitazone plus glimepiride (Duetact)
Oral: 30/2, 30/4 mg tablets
Rosiglitazone plus glimepiride (Avandaryl)
Oral: 4/1, 4/2, 4/4, 8/2, 8/4 mg rosiglitazone/mg glimepiride tablets
ALPHA-GLUCOSIDASE INHIBITORS
Acarbose (Precose)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
Miglitol (Glyset)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg tablets
AMYLIN ANALOGS
Pramlintide (Symlin)
Parenteral: vial: 0.6, 1 mg/mL
GLUCAGON-LIKE POLYPEPTIDE-1 
RECEPTOR AGONISTS
Exenatide (Byetta)
Parenteral: 250 mcg/mL
Liraglutide (Victoza)
Parenteral: 0.6, 1.2, 1.8 mg
DIPEPTIDYL PEPTIDASE-4 INHIBITOR
Linagliptin (Tradjenta)
Oral: tablets [TK]
Saxagliptin (Onglyza)
Oral: 2.5, 5 mg tablets
Sitagliptin (Januvia)
Oral: 25, 50 100 mg tablets
BILE ACID SEQUESTRANT
Colesevelam hydrochloride
Oral: 625 mg tablets, 1.875, 3.75 g packages for oral suspension
GLUCAGON
Glucagon (generic)
Parenteral: 1 mg lyophilized powder to reconstitute for injection
CHAPTER 41 Pancreatic Hormones & Antidiabetic Drugs     767
 REFERENCES 
 Action to Control Cardiovascular Risks in Diabetes Study Group: Effects oft 
intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2545. 
 Adler AI et al: Association of systolic blood pressure with macrovascular and 
microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 36): Prospective 
observational study. Br Med J 2000;321:412. 
 ADVANCE Collaborative Group: Intensive blood glucose control and vascular 
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2560. 
 Baggio LA et al: Biology of incretins: GLP-1 and GIP. Gastroenterology 
2007;132:2131. 
 Bloomgarden ZT: Gut-derived incretin hormones and new therapeutic 
approaches. Diabetes Care 2004;27:2554. 
 Bowker SL et al: Increased cancer-related mortality for patients with type 2 
diabetes who use sulfonylureas or insulin. Diabetes Care 2006;29:254. 
 Chaisson JL et al: Acarbose treatment and the risk of cardiovascular disease and 
hypertension in patients with impaired glucose tolerance: The STOP-
NIDDM trial. JAMA 2003;290:486. 
 Chapman I et al: Effect of pramlintide on satiety and food intake in obese sub-
jects and subjects with type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2005;48:838. 
 Davis TM et al: The continuing legacy of the United Kingdom Prospective 
Diabetes Study. Med J Aust 2004;180:104. 
 Diabetes Control and Complications Trial/Epidemiology of Diabetes 
Interventions and Complications Research Group: Intensive diabetes ther-
apy and carotid intima-media thickness in type 1 diabetes mellitus. N Engl 
J Med 2003;348:2294. 
 Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group: Prevention of type 2 diabetes 
with troglitazone in the diabetes prevention program. Diabetes 
2005;54:1150. 
 Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group: Reduction in the incidence of 
type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med 
2002;346:393. 
 Dormandy JA et al: Secondary prevention of macrovascular events in patients 
with type 2 diabetes in the PROactive study (PROspective pioglitAzone 
Clinical Trial in macroVascular Events): A randomized controlled trial. 
Lancet 2005,366:1279. 
 Dunning BE et al: Alpha cell function in health and disease: Influence of 
glucagon-like peptide-1. Diabetologia 2005;48:1700. 
 Dupre J: Extendin-4 normalized postcibial glycemic excursions in type 1 diabetes. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004;89:3469. 
 Dupre J: Glycemic effects of incretins in type 1 diabetes mellitus: A concise 
review, with emphasis on studies in humans. Regul Pept 2005;128:149. 
 Erdmann E et al: Pioglitazone and the risk of cardiovascular events in patients 
with type 2 diabetes receiving concomitant treatment with nitrates, renin-
angiotensin system blockers, or insulin: Results from the PROactive study 
(PROactive 20). Diabetes 2010;2:212. 
 Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus: 
Report of the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification of 
Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 2003;26(Suppl 1):S5. 
 Gaede P et al: Effect of a multifactorial intervention on mortality in type 2 
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2008;358:580. 
 Grossman S: Differentiating incretin therapies based on structure, activity, and 
metabolism: focus on liraglutide. Pharmacotherapy 2009;29(12 Pt 2):25S. 
 Hanefeld M et al: Acarbose reduces the risk for myocardial infarction in type 2 
diabetic patients: Meta-analysis of seven long term studies. Eur Heart J 
2004;25:10. 
 Heinemann L et al: Time action profile of the long-acting insulin analog insulin 
glargine (HOE901) in comparison with those of NPH insulin and placebo. 
Diabetes Care 2000;23:644. 
 Heptulla RA et al: The role of amylin and glucagon in the dampening of glyce-
mic excursions in children with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2005;54:1100. 
 Home PD et al. Rosiglitazone evaluated for cardiovascular outcomes—an 
interim analysis. N Engl J Med 2007;357:28. 
 Houten SM et al: Endocrine functions of bile acids. EMBO J 2006;25:1419. 
 Kahn SE et al: Glycemic durability of rosiglitazone, metformin, or glyburide 
monotherapy. N Engl J Med 2006;355:2427. 
 Kido Y et al: The insulin receptor and its cellular targets. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2001;86:972. 
 Kitabchi A et al: Thirty years of personal experience in hyperglycemic crises: 
Diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:1541. 
 Kolterman O et al: Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and safety of 
exenatide in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am J Health-Syst Pharm 
2005;62:173. 
 Lefebvre P et al: Role of bile acids and bile acid receptors in metabolic regula-
tion. Physiol Rev 2009;89:147. 
 Levien TL: Nateglinide therapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ann Pharmacother 
2001;35:1426. 
 Lincoff AM et al: Pioglitazone and risk of cardiovascular events in patients with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (a meta-analysis of randomized trials). JAMA 
2007;298:1180. 
 Nathan DM et al: Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A 
consensus algorithm for the initiation and adjustment of therapy. Diabetes 
Care 2006;29:1963. 
 Nauck MA et al: Glucagon-like peptide 1 and its derivatives in the treatment of 
diabetes. Regul Pept 2005;128:135. 
 Neumiller JJ et al: Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors for the treatment of type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Pharmacotherapy 2010;30:463. 
 Nissen SE et al: Effect of rosiglitazone on the risk of myocardial infarction and 
death from cardiovascular causes. N Engl J Med 2007;356:2457. 
 Ottensmeyer FP et al: Mechanism of transmembrane signalling: Insulin binding 
and the insulin receptor. Biochemistry 2000;39:12103. 
 Plank J et al: A double-blind, randomized, dose-response study investigating the 
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties of the long-acting insu-
lin analog detemir. Diabetes Care 2005;28:1107. 
 Ranganath LR: The entero-insular axis: Implications for human metabolism. 
Clin Chem Lab Med 2008;46:43. 
 Ratner RE et al: Amylin replacement with pramlintide as an adjunct to insu-
lin therapy improves long term glycemic and weight control in type 1 dia-
betes mellitus: A 1-year randomized controlled trial. Diabetic Med 
2004;21:1204. 
 Reitman ML et al: Pharmacogenetics of metformin response: A step in the path 
toward personalized medicine. J Clin Invest 2007;117:1226. 
 Riche DM et al: Bone loss and fracture risk associated with thiazolidinedione 
therapy. Pharmacotherapy 2010; posted 10.05.2010  www.medscape.com . 
 Schmitz O et al: Amylin agonists: A novel approach in the treatment of diabetes. 
Diabetes 2004;53(Suppl 3):S233. 
 Singh S et al: Long-term risk of cardiovascular events with rosiglitazone (a meta-
analysis). JAMA 2007;298:1189. 
 United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group: Glycemic con-
trol with diet, sulfonylurea, metformin, or insulin in patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus: Progressive requirement for multiple therapies: UKPDS 
49. JAMA 1999;281:2005. 
 United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group: Tight blood 
pressure control and risk of macrovascular and microvascular complications 
in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38. Br Med J 1998;317:703. 
 
768    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 This patient has multiple risk factors for type 2 diabetes. 
Although she does not have a prior history of fasting hyper-
glycemia, glucose intolerance, or gestational diabetes, 
other risk factors are present. Further evaluations that 
should be obtained include HbA 1c concentration, dilated 
retinal examination, baseline laboratory tests, spot urine test 
for microalbumin/creatinine ratio, plasma creatinine level, 
and neurologic examination. The patient should be taught 
how to use a glucose meter and monitor her fingerstick 
blood glucose level, referred to a nutritionist for dietary 
instruction, and given diabetes self-management education. 
Assuming she has no renal or hepatic impairment, hygienic 
interventions (diet and exercise) and metformin would be 
the first line of treatment. If she is unable to achieve adequate 
glycemic control on metformin, an additional agent such an 
insulin secretagogue (ie, sulfonylureas, meglitinide, or nat-
eglinide), insulin, or another antidiabetic medication could 
be added. 
769
 A 65-year-old man is referred to you from his primary care 
physician (PCP) for evaluation and management of possible 
osteoporosis. He saw his PCP for evaluation of low back pain. 
X-rays of the spine showed some degenerative changes in the 
lumbar spine plus several wedge deformities in the thoracic 
spine. The patient is a long-time smoker (up to two packs per 
day) and has two to four glasses of wine with dinner, more on 
the weekends. He has chronic bronchitis, presumably from 
smoking, and has been treated many times with oral prednisone 
for exacerbations of bronchitis. He is currently on 10 mg/d 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
prednisone. Examination shows kyphosis of the thoracic spine, 
with some tenderness to fist percussion over the thoracic spine. 
The DEXA (dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry) measurement 
of the lumbar spine is “within the normal limits,” but the radi-
ologist noted that the reading may be misleading because of 
degenerative changes. The hip measurement shows a T score 
(number of standard deviations by which the patient’s measured 
bone density differs from that of a normal young adult) in the 
femoral neck of –2.2. What further workup should be consid-
ered, and what therapy should be initiated? 
42
 Agents That Affect Bone 
Mineral Homeostasis 
 Daniel D. Bikle, MD, PhD 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY 
 Calcium and phosphate, the major mineral constituents of bone, are 
also two of the most important minerals for general cellular function. 
Accordingly, the body has evolved complex mechanisms to carefully 
maintain calcium and phosphate homeostasis ( Figure 42–1 ). 
Approximately 98% of the 1–2 kg of calcium and 85% of the 1 kg 
of phosphorus in the human adult are found in bone, the principal 
reservoir for these minerals. This reservoir is dynamic, with con-
stant remodeling of bone and ready exchange of bone mineral 
with that in the extracellular fluid. Bone also serves as the princi-
pal structural support for the body and provides the space for 
hematopoiesis. This relationship is more than fortuitous as ele-
ments of the bone marrow affect skeletal processes just as skeletal 
elements affect hematopoeitic processes. Abnormalities in bone 
mineral homeostasis can lead to a wide variety of cellular dysfunc-
tions (eg, tetany, coma, muscle weakness), and to disturbances in 
structural support of the body (eg, osteoporosis with fractures) 
and loss of hematopoietic capacity (eg, infantile osteopetrosis). 
 Calcium and phosphate enter the body from the intestine. The 
average American diet provides 600–1000 mg of calcium per day, 
of which approximately 100–250 mg is absorbed. This amount 
represents net absorption, because both absorption (principally in 
the duodenum and upper jejunum) and secretion (principally in 
the ileum) occur. The quantity of phosphorus in the American 
diet is about the same as that of calcium. However, the efficiency 
of absorption (principally in the jejunum) is greater, ranging from 
70% to 90%, depending on intake. In the steady state, renal excre-
tion of calcium and phosphate balances intestinal absorption. In 
general, over 98% of filtered calcium and 85% of filtered phosphate 
is reabsorbed by the kidney. The movement of calcium and phos-
phate across the intestinal and renal epithelia is closely regulated. 
Dysfunction of the intestine (eg, nontropical sprue) or kidney (eg, 
chronic renal failure) can disrupt bone mineral homeostasis. 
 Three hormones serve as the principal regulators of calcium 
and phosphate homeostasis:  parathyroid hormone (PTH), 
 fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), and  vitamin D 
( Figure 42–2 ). Vitamin D is a prohormone rather than a true 
770    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
hormone, because it must be further metabolized to gain biologic 
activity. PTH stimulates the production of the active metabolite 
of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25[OH] 2 D), in the 
kidney. Other tissues also produce 1,25(OH) 2 D; the control of 
this production differs from that in the kidney, as will be discussed 
subsequently. The complex interplay among PTH, FGF23, and 
1,25(OH) 2 D is discussed in detail later. To summarize briefly: 
1,25(OH) 2 D suppresses the production of PTH as does calcium, 
whereas phosphate stimulates PTH secretion. 1,25(OH) 2 D stim-
ulates the intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate. 
1,25(OH) 2 D and PTH promote both bone formation and resorp-
tion in part by stimulating the proliferation and differentiation of 
osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Both PTH and 1,25(OH) 2 D enhance 
renal retention of calcium, but PTH promotes renal phosphate 
excretion, whereas 1,25(OH) 2 D promotes renal reabsorption of 
phosphate. FGF23 is a recently discovered hormone produced 
primarily by bone that stimulates renal phosphate excretion and 
D(+)
D(+), PTH (+)
CT(–)
D(+), PTH (+)
Serum
Ca, P
Bone
Gut
Ca, P
Ca, P
Ca
P
D(–)
PTH(–)
CT(+)
D(–)
PTH(+)
CT(+)
FGF23(+)
Kidney
 FIGURE 42–1  Mechanisms contributing to bone mineral 
homeostasis. Serum calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P) concentrations 
are controlled principally by three hormones, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D (1,25[OH] 2 D, D), fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), and parathy-
roid hormone (PTH), through their action on absorption from the gut 
and from bone and on renal excretion. PTH and 1,25(OH) 2 D increase 
the input of calcium and phosphorus from bone into the serum and 
stimulate bone formation. 1,25(OH) 2 D also increases calcium and 
phosphate absorption from the gut. In the kidney, 1,25(OH) 2 D 
decreases excretion of both calcium and phosphorus, whereas PTH 
reduces calcium but increases phosphorus excretion. FGF23 stimu-
lates renal excretion of phosphate. Calcitonin (CT) is a less critical 
regulator of calcium homeostasis, but in pharmacologic concentra-
tions can reduce serum calcium and phosphorus by inhibiting bone 
resorption and stimulating their renal excretion. Feedback may alter 
the effects shown; for example, 1,25(OH) 2 D increases urinary calcium 
excretion indirectly through increased calcium absorption from the 
gut and inhibition of PTH secretion and may increase urinary phos-
phate excretion because of increased phosphate absorption from the 
gut and stimulation of FGF23 production. 
inhibits renal production of 1,25(OH) 2 D. 1,25(OH) 2 D and 
phosphate in turn stimulate the production of FGF23. 
 Other hormones—calcitonin, prolactin, growth hormone, insu-
lin, thyroid hormone, glucocorticoids, and sex steroids—influence 
calcium and phosphate homeostasis under certain physiologic cir-
cumstances and can be considered secondary regulators. Deficiency 
or excess of these secondary regulators within a physiologic range 
does not produce the disturbance of calcium and phosphate 
homeostasis that is observed in situations of deficiency or excess of 
PTH, FGF23, and vitamin D. However, certain of these secondary 
regulators—especially calcitonin, glucocorticoids, and estrogens—
are useful therapeutically and discussed in subsequent sections. 
 In addition to these hormonal regulators, calcium and phos-
phate themselves, other ions such as sodium and fluoride, and a 
variety of drugs (bisphosphonates, plicamycin, and diuretics) also 
alter calcium and phosphate homeostasis. 
 PRINCIPAL HORMONAL 
REGULATORS OF BONE MINERAL 
HOMEOSTASIS 
 PARATHYROID HORMONE 
 Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is a single-chain peptide hormone 
composed of 84 amino acids. It is produced in the parathyroid 
gland in a precursor form of 115 amino acids, the remaining 31 
amino terminal amino acids being cleaved off before secretion. 
Within the gland is a calcium-sensitive protease capable of 
cleaving the intact hormone into fragments, thereby providing 
one mechanism by which calcium limits the production of PTH. 
A second mechanism involves the calcium-sensing receptor which, 
when stimulated by calcium, reduces PTH production and secre-
tion. The parathyroid gland also contains the vitamin D receptor 
and the enzyme, CYP27B1, that produces the active metabolite 
of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D) thus 
enabling circulating or endogenously produced 1,25(OH)2D to 
suppress PTH production. Biologic activity resides in the amino 
terminal region such that synthetic PTH 1-34 (available as teri-
paratide) is fully active. Loss of the first two amino terminal amino 
acids eliminates most biologic activity. 
 The metabolic clearance of intact PTH is rapid, with a half-
time of disappearance measured in minutes. Most of the clearance 
occurs in the liver and kidney. The inactive carboxyl terminal frag-
ments produced by metabolism of the intact hormone have a 
much lower clearance, especially in renal failure. In the past, this 
accounted for the very high PTH values observed in patients with 
renal failure when the hormone was measured by radioimmunoas-
says directed against the carboxyl terminal region. Currently, most 
PTH assays differentiate between intact PTH 1-34 and large inac-
tive fragments, so that it is possible to more accurately evaluate 
biologically active PTH status in patients with renal failure. 
 PTH regulates calcium and phosphate flux across cellular 
membranes in bone and kidney, resulting in increased serum 
calcium and decreased serum phosphate ( Figure 42–1 ). In bone, 
PTH increases the activity and number of osteoclasts, the cells 
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     771
formation are enhanced by PTH, the net effect of excess endoge-
nous PTH is to increase bone resorption. However, administra-
tion of exogenous PTH in low and intermittent doses increases 
bone formation without first stimulating bone resorption. This 
net anabolic action may be indirect, involving other growth fac-
tors such as insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1). It has led to the 
approval of recombinant PTH 1-34 ( teriparatide ) for the treat-
ment of osteoporosis. In the kidney, PTH increases tubular reab-
sorption of calcium and magnesium but reduces reabsorption of 
phosphate, amino acids, bicarbonate, sodium, chloride, and sul-
fate. Another important action of PTH on the kidney is stimula-
tion of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25[OH] 2 D) production. 
responsible for bone resorption ( Figure 42–2 ). However, this 
stimulation of osteoclasts is not a direct effect. Rather, PTH acts 
on the osteoblast (the bone-forming cell) to induce membrane-
bound and secreted soluble forms of a protein called  RANK 
ligand (RANKL) . RANKL acts on osteoclasts and osteoclast pre-
cursors to increase both the numbers and activity of osteoclasts. 
This action increases bone remodeling, a specific sequence of cel-
lular events initiated by osteoclastic bone resorption and followed 
by osteoblastic bone formation. An antibody that inhibits the 
action of RANKL has been developed ( denosumab ) for the treat-
ment of excess bone resorption in patients with osteoporosis 
and certain cancers. Although both bone resorption and bone 
Gut
Ca2+
in blood
PTH
PTH
B
A
Calcitonin
Bone
PTH
1,25(OH)2D
25(OH)D
Kidney
FGF23
Parathyroids
Thyroid
Preosteoclast
Preosteoblasts
Stem cells
Monocyte
Bisphosphonates
Calcitonin
Estrogen
Osteoclast
Osteoblasts
Osteoid
RANKL
MCSF
OPG
1,25(OH)2D
1,25(OH)2D
1,25(OH)2D
Calcified
bone
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
 FIGURE 42–2  The hormonal interactions controlling bone mineral homeostasis. In the body ( A ), 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25[OH] 2 D) is 
produced by the kidney under the control of parathyroid hormone (PTH), which stimulates its production, and fibroblast growth factor 23 
(FGF23), which inhibits its production. 1,25(OH) 2 D in turn inhibits the production of PTH by the parathyroid glands and stimulates FGF23 
release from bone. 1,25(OH) 2 D is the principal regulator of intestinal calcium and phosphate absorption. At the level of the bone ( B ), both PTH 
and 1,25(OH) 2 D regulate bone formation and resorption, with each capable of stimulating both processes. This is accomplished by their stimu-
lation of preosteoblast proliferation and differentiation into osteoblasts, the bone-forming cell. PTH and 1,25(OH) 2 D stimulate the expression of 
RANKL by the osteoblast, which, with MCSF, stimulates the differentiation and subsequent activation of osteoclasts, the bone-resorbing cell. 
FGF23 in excess leads to osteomalacia by inhibiting 1,25(OH) 2 D production and lowering phosphate levels. MCSF, macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor; OPG, osteoprotegerin; RANKL, ligand for receptor for activation of nuclear factor-κB. 
772    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 VITAMIN D 
 Vitamin D is a secosteroid produced in the skin from 7-
dehydrocholesterol under the influence of ultraviolet radiation. 
Vitamin D is also found in certain foods and is used to supplement 
dairy products. Both the natural form (vitamin D 3 , cholecalciferol) 
and the plant-derived form (vitamin D 2 , ergocalciferol) are present 
in the diet. These forms differ in that ergocalciferol contains a 
double bond (C 22–23 ) and an additional methyl group in the side 
chain ( Figure 42–3 ). Ergocalciferol and its metabolites bind less 
well than cholecalciferol and its metabolites to vitamin D-binding 
protein, the major transport protein of these compounds in blood, 
and have a different path of catabolism. As a result their half-lives 
are shorter than those of the cholecalciferol metabolites. This influ-
ences treatment strategies, as will be discussed. However, the key 
steps in metabolism and biologic activities of the active metabolites 
are comparable, so with this exception the following comments 
apply equally well to both forms of vitamin D. 
 Vitamin D is a precursor to a number of biologically active 
metabolites ( Figure 42–3 ). Vitamin D is first hydroxylated in the 
liver to form 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25[OH]D, calcifediol). This 
metabolite is further converted in the kidney to a number of 
other forms, the best studied of which are 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D (1,25[OH] 2 D, calcitriol) and 24,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D (24,25[OH] 2 D). The regulation of vitamin D metabolism is 
complex, involving calcium, phosphate, and a variety of hormones, 
the most important of which is PTH, which stimulates, and FGF23, 
which inhibits the production of 1,25(OH) 2 D by the kidney. Of the 
natural metabolites, only vitamin D and 1,25(OH) 2 D (as calcitriol) 
are available for clinical use ( Table 42–1 ). A number of analogs of 
1,25(OH) 2 D have been synthesized to extend the usefulness of 
this metabolite to a variety of nonclassic conditions. Calcipotriene 
(calcipotriol), for example, is being used to treat psoriasis, a hyper-
proliferative skin disorder ( Chapter 61 ). Doxercalciferol and parical-
citol are approved for the treatment of secondary hyperparathyroidism 
in patients with chronic kidney disease. Other analogs are being 
investigated for the treatment of various malignancies. 
 Vitamin D and its metabolites circulate in plasma tightly 
bound to the vitamin D-binding protein. This α-globulin binds 
25(OH)D and 24,25(OH) 2 D with comparable high affinity and 
vitamin D and 1,25(OH) 2 D with lower affinity. As noted above 
the affinity for the D 2 metabolites is less than that for the D 3 
OH
HO
CH2
2 1
3 4
5
6 7
8
9
10
111213
14
1716
15
20
21
22
23
25
26
27
24
HO
CH3
19
7-Dehydrocholesterol
Pre D3
Heat
D3
25(OH)D3
Liver
Kidney
O
H
O
H O
H
1,25(OH)2D3 (calcitriol)
24,25(OH)2D3 (secalciferol)
D3 (cholecalciferol)
+1,25(OH)2D
P
Ca
P
Ca
+PTH
–FGF23
O
H
OH
18
20
21
22
23
25
26
24
27
CH3
28
Ultraviolet
CH3
HO
CH2
HO
CH2
HO
CH2
HO
CH2
 FIGURE 42–3  Conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol to vitamin D 3 and metabolism of D 3 to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 (1,25[OH] 2 D 3 ) and 
24,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 (24,25[OH] 2 D 3 ). Control of the latter step is exerted primarily at the level of the kidney, where low serum phospho-
rus, low serum calcium, and high parathyroid hormone favor the production of 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 , whereas fibroblast growth factor 23 inhibits its pro-
duction. The inset shows the side chain for ergosterol. Ergosterol undergoes similar transformation to vitamin D 2 (ergocalciferol), which, in turn, 
is metabolized to 25-hydroxyvitamin D 2 , 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 2 , and 24,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 2 . In humans, corresponding D 2 and D 3 deriv-
atives have equivalent effects although they differ in pharmacokinetics. 
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     773
metabolites. In normal subjects, the terminal half-life of injected 
calcifediol is 23 days, whereas in anephric subjects it is 42 days. 
The half-life of 24,25(OH) 2 D is probably similar. Tracer studies 
with vitamin D have shown a rapid clearance from the blood. The 
liver appears to be the principal organ for clearance. Excess 
vitamin D is stored in adipose tissue. The metabolic clearance of 
calcitriol in humans indicates a rapid turnover, with a terminal 
half-life measured in hours. Several of the 1,25(OH) 2 D analogs 
are bound poorly by the vitamin D-binding protein. As a result, 
their clearance is very rapid, with a terminal half-life of minutes. 
Such analogs have less of the hypercalcemic, hypercalciuric effects 
of calcitriol, an important aspect of their use for the management 
of conditions such as psoriasis and hyperparathyroidism. 
 The mechanism of action of the vitamin D metabolites remains 
under active investigation. However, 1,25(OH) 2 D is well estab-
lished as the most potent agent with respect to stimulation of intes-
tinal calcium and phosphate transport and bone resorption. 
1,25(OH) 2 D appears to act on the intestine both by induction of 
new protein synthesis (eg, calcium-binding protein and TRPV6, an 
intestinal calcium channel) and by modulation of calcium flux 
across the brush border and basolateral membranes by a means that 
does not require new protein synthesis. The molecular action of 
1,25(OH) 2 D on bone has received less attention. However, like 
PTH, 1,25(OH) 2 D can induce RANKL in osteoblasts and proteins 
such as osteocalcin, which may regulate the mineralization process. 
The metabolites 25(OH)D and 24,25(OH) 2 D are far less potent 
stimulators of intestinal calcium and phosphate transport or bone 
resorption. However, 25(OH)D appears to be more potent than 
1,25(OH) 2 D in stimulating renal reabsorption of calcium and 
phosphate and may be the major metabolite regulating calcium flux 
and contractility in muscle. Specific receptors for 1,25(OH) 2 D exist 
in target tissues. However, the role and even the existence of separate 
receptors for 25(OH)D and 24,25(OH) 2 D remain controversial. 
 The receptor for 1,25(OH) 2 D exists in many tissues—not just 
bone, gut, and kidney. In these “nonclassic” tissues, 1,25(OH) 2 D 
exerts a number of actions including regulation of the secretion of 
PTH, insulin, and renin, dendritic cell as well as T-cell differentiation, 
and proliferation and differentiation of a number of cancer cells. Thus, 
the clinical utility of 1,25(OH) 2 D and its analogs is expanding. 
 FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR 23 
 Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) is a single-chain protein with 
251 amino acids including a 24-amino-acid leader sequence. It 
inhibits 1,25(OH) 2 D production and phosphate reabsorption 
(via the sodium phosphate co-transporters NaPi 2a and 2c) in the 
kidney, leading to both hypophosphatemia and inappropriately low 
levels of circulating 1,25(OH) 2 D. Whereas FGF23 was originally 
identified in certain mesenchymal tumors, osteoblasts and osteo-
cytes in bone appear to be its primary site of production. Other 
tissues can also produce FGF23, though at lower levels. FGF23 
requires  O -glycosylation for its secretion, a glycosylation mediated 
by the glycosyl transferase GALNT3. Mutations in GALNT3 result 
in abnormal deposition of calcium phosphate in periarticular tissues 
(tumoral calcinosis) with elevated phosphate and 1,25(OH) 2 D. 
FGF23 is normally inactivated by cleavage at an RXXR site (amino 
acids 176–179). Mutations in this site lead to excess FGF23, the 
underlying problem in autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic 
rickets. A similar disease, X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, is due 
to mutations in PHEX, an endopeptidase, which initially was 
thought to cleave FGF23. However, this concept has been shown to 
be invalid, and the mechanism by which PHEX mutations lead to 
increased FGF23 levels remains obscure. FGF23 binds to FGF 
receptors 1 and 3c in the presence of the accessory receptor Klotho. 
Both Klotho and the FGF receptor must be present for signaling. 
Mutations in Klotho disrupt FGF23 signaling, resulting in elevated 
phosphate and 1,25(OH) 2 D levels with what has been characterized 
as premature aging. FGF23 production is stimulated by 1,25(OH) 2 D 
and directly or indirectly inhibited by the dentin matrix protein 
DMP1 found in osteocytes. Mutations in DMP1 lead to increased 
FGF23 levels and osteomalacia. 
 INTERACTION OF PTH, FGF23, & 
VITAMIN D 
 A summary of the principal actions of PTH, FGF23, and vitamin 
D on the three main target tissues—intestine, kidney, and bone—is 
presented in  Table 42–2 . The net effect of PTH is to raise serum 
calcium and reduce serum phosphate; the net effect of FGF23 is to 
decrease serum phosphate; the net effect of vitamin D is to raise 
both. Regulation of calcium and phosphate homeostasis is achieved 
through important feedback loops. Calcium is one of two principal 
regulators of PTH secretion. It binds to a novel ion recognition site 
that is part of a G q protein-coupled receptor called the calcium-
sensing receptor (CaSR) that employs the phosphoinositide 
second messenger system to link changes in the extracellular cal-
cium concentration to changes in the intracellular free calcium. As 
serum calcium levels rise and activate this receptor, intracellular 
calcium levels increase and inhibit PTH secretion. This inhibi-
tion by calcium of PTH secretion, along with inhibition of renin 
and atrial natriuretic factor secretion, is the opposite of the effect in 
other tissues such as the beta cell of the pancreas, in which calcium 
stimulates secretion. Phosphate regulates PTH secretion directly 
and indirectly by forming complexes with calcium in the serum. 
Because it is the ionized free concentration of extracellular calcium 
TABLE 42–1  Vitamin D and its major metabolites 
and analogs.
Chemical and Generic Names
Abbreviation
Vitamin D3; cholecalciferol
D3
Vitamin D2; ergocalciferol
D2
25-Hydroxyvitamin D3; calcifediol
25(OH)D3
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3; calcitriol
1,25(OH)2D3
24,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3; secalciferol
24,25(OH)2D3
Dihydrotachysterol
DHT
Calcipotriene (calcipotriol)
None
1α-Hydroxyvitamin D2; doxercalciferol
1α(OH)D2
19-nor-1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D2; paricalcitol
19-nor-1,25(OH)D2
774    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
that is detected by the parathyroid gland, increases in serum phos-
phate levels reduce the ionized calcium, leading to enhanced PTH 
secretion. Such feedback regulation is appropriate to the net effect 
of PTH to raise serum calcium and reduce serum phosphate levels. 
Likewise, both calcium and phosphate at high levels reduce the 
amount of 1,25(OH) 2 D produced by the kidney and increase the 
amount of 24,25(OH) 2 D produced. 
 High serum calcium works directly and indirectly by reducing 
PTH secretion. High serum phosphate works directly and indirectly 
by increasing FGF23 levels. Since 1,25(OH) 2 D raises serum 
calcium and phosphate, whereas 24,25(OH) 2 D has less effect, such 
feedback regulation is again appropriate. 1,25(OH) 2 D directly 
inhibits PTH secretion (independent of its effect on serum calcium) 
by a direct inhibitory effect on PTH gene transcription. This pro-
vides yet another negative feedback loop. In patients with chronic 
renal failure who frequently are deficient in producing 1,25(OH) 2 D, 
loss of this 1,25(OH) 2 D-mediated feedback loop coupled with 
impaired phosphate excretion and intestinal calcium absorption 
often leads to secondary hyperparathyroidism. The ability of 
1,25(OH) 2 D to inhibit PTH secretion directly is being exploited 
with calcitriol analogs that have less effect on serum calcium because 
of their lesser effect on intestinal calcium absorption. Such drugs are 
proving useful in the management of secondary hyperparathy-
roidism accompanying chronic kidney disease and may be useful in 
selected cases of primary hyperparathyroidism. 1,25(OH) 2 D also 
stimulates the production of FGF23. This completes the negative 
feedback loop in that FGF23 inhibits 1,25(OH) 2 D production 
while promoting hypophosphatemia, which in turn inhibits FGF23 
production and stimulates 1,25(OH) 2 D production. 
 SECONDARY HORMONAL 
REGULATORS OF BONE MINERAL 
HOMEOSTASIS 
 A number of hormones modulate the actions of PTH, FGF23, and 
vitamin D in regulating bone mineral homeostasis. Compared with 
that of PTH, FGF23, and vitamin D, the physiologic impact of such 
secondary regulation on bone mineral homeostasis is minor. However, 
in pharmacologic amounts, several of these hormones, including cal-
citonin, glucocorticoids, and estrogens, have actions on bone mineral 
homeostatic mechanisms that can be exploited therapeutically. 
 CALCITONIN 
 The calcitonin secreted by the parafollicular cells of the mamma-
lian thyroid is a single-chain peptide hormone with 32 amino acids 
and a molecular weight of 3600. A disulfide bond between 
positions 1 and 7 is essential for biologic activity. Calcitonin is 
produced from a precursor with MW 15,000. The circulating 
forms of calcitonin are multiple, ranging in size from the monomer 
(MW 3600) to forms with an apparent MW of 60,000. Whether 
such heterogeneity includes precursor forms or covalently linked 
oligomers is not known. Because of its chemical heterogeneity, 
calcitonin preparations are standardized by bioassay in rats. Activity 
is compared to a standard maintained by the British Medical 
Research Council (MRC) and expressed as MRC units. 
 Human calcitonin monomer has a half-life of about 10 minutes. 
Salmon calcitonin has a longer half-life, making it more attractive as 
a therapeutic agent. Much of the clearance occurs in the kidney by 
metabolism; little intact calcitonin appears in the urine. 
 The principal effects of calcitonin are to lower serum calcium 
and phosphate by actions on bone and kidney. Calcitonin inhibits 
osteoclastic bone resorption. Although bone formation is not 
impaired at first after calcitonin administration, with time both 
formation and resorption of bone are reduced. In the kidney, 
calcitonin reduces both calcium and phosphate reabsorption as 
well as reabsorption of other ions, including sodium, potassium, 
and magnesium. Tissues other than bone and kidney are also 
affected by calcitonin. Calcitonin in pharmacologic amounts 
decreases gastrin secretion and reduces gastric acid output while 
increasing secretion of sodium, potassium, chloride, and water in 
the gut. Pentagastrin is a potent stimulator of calcitonin secretion 
(as is hypercalcemia), suggesting a possible physiologic relation-
ship between gastrin and calcitonin. In the adult human, no read-
ily demonstrable problem develops in cases of calcitonin deficiency 
(thyroidectomy) or excess (medullary carcinoma of the thyroid). 
However, the ability of calcitonin to block bone resorption and 
lower serum calcium makes it a useful drug for the treatment of 
Paget’s disease, hypercalcemia, and osteoporosis. 
TABLE 42–2 Actions of parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D, and FGF23 on gut, bone, and kidney.
PTH
Vitamin D
FGF23
Intestine
Increased calcium and phosphate 
absorption (by increased 1,25(OH)2D 
production)
Increased calcium and phosphate 
absorption by 1,25(OH)2D
Decreased calcium and phosphate 
absorption by decreased 
1,25(OH)2 production
Kidney
Decreased calcium excretion, increased 
phosphate excretion
Calcium and phosphate excretion 
may be decreased by 25(OH)D 
and 1,25(OH)2D1
Increased phosphate excretion
Bone
Calcium and phosphate resorption 
increased by high doses. Low doses 
may increase bone formation.
Increased calcium and phosphate 
resorption by 1,25(OH)2D; bone 
formation may be increased by 
1,25(OH)2D and 24,25(OH)2D
Decreased mineralization due to 
hypophosphatemia and low 
1,25(OH)2D levels, but may have a 
direct action on bone as well.
Net effect on serum levels
Serum calcium increased, serum phos-
phate decreased
Serum calcium and phosphate 
both increased
Decreased serum phosphate
1Direct effect. Vitamin D also indirectly increases urine calcium owing to increased calcium absorption from the intestine and decreased PTH.
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     775
 GLUCOCORTICOIDS 
 Glucocorticoid hormones alter bone mineral homeostasis by 
antagonizing vitamin D-stimulated intestinal calcium transport, 
stimulating renal calcium excretion, and blocking bone formation. 
Although these observations underscore the negative impact of 
glucocorticoids on bone mineral homeostasis, these hormones 
have proved useful in reversing the hypercalcemia associated with 
lymphomas and granulomatous diseases such as sarcoidosis (in 
which unregulated ectopic production of 1,25[OH] 2 D occurs) or 
in cases of vitamin D intoxication. Prolonged administration of 
glucocorticoids is a common cause of osteoporosis in adults and 
can cause stunted skeletal development in children. 
 ESTROGENS 
 Estrogens can prevent accelerated bone loss during the immediate 
postmenopausal period and at least transiently increase bone in 
postmenopausal women. 
 The prevailing hypothesis advanced to explain these observa-
tions is that estrogens reduce the bone-resorbing action of PTH. 
Estrogen administration leads to an increased 1,25(OH) 2 D level in 
blood, but estrogens have no direct effect on 1,25(OH) 2 D produc-
tion in vitro. The increased 1,25(OH) 2 D levels in vivo following 
estrogen treatment may result from decreased serum calcium and 
phosphate and increased PTH. Estrogen receptors have been found 
in bone, and estrogen has direct effects on bone remodeling. Case 
reports of men who lack the estrogen receptor or who are unable to 
produce estrogen because of aromatase deficiency noted marked 
osteopenia and failure to close epiphyses. This further substantiates 
the role of estrogen in bone development, even in men. The prin-
cipal therapeutic application for estrogen administration in disor-
ders of bone mineral homeostasis is the treatment or prevention of 
postmenopausal osteoporosis. However, long-term use of estrogen 
has fallen out of favor due to concern about adverse effects. 
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) have been devel-
oped to retain the beneficial effects on bone while minimizing 
deleterious effects on breast, uterus, and the cardiovascular system 
(see Box: Newer Therapies for Osteoporosis and  Chapter 40 ). 
Newer Therapies for Osteoporosis
Bone undergoes a continuous remodeling process involving 
resorption and formation. Any process that disrupts this balance 
by increasing bone resorption relative to formation results in 
osteoporosis. Inadequate gonadal hormone production is a major 
cause of osteoporosis in men and women. Estrogen replacement 
therapy at menopause is a well-established means of preventing 
osteoporosis in the female, but many women fear its adverse 
effects, particularly the increased risk of breast cancer from con-
tinued estrogen use (the well-demonstrated increased risk of 
endometrial cancer is prevented by combining the estrogen with 
a progestin) and do not like the persistence of menstrual bleeding 
that often accompanies this form of therapy. Medical enthusiasm 
for this treatment has waned with the demonstration that it does 
not protect against and may increase the risk of heart disease. 
Raloxifene is the first of the selective estrogen receptor modula-
tors (SERMs; see Chapter 40) to be approved for the prevention of 
osteoporosis. Raloxifene shares some of the beneficial effects of 
estrogen on bone without increasing the risk of breast or endo-
metrial cancer (it may actually reduce the risk of breast cancer). 
Although not as effective as estrogen in increasing bone density, 
raloxifene has been shown to reduce vertebral fractures.
Nonhormonal forms of therapy for osteoporosis with proven 
efficacy in reducing fracture risk have also been developed. 
Bisphosphonates such as alendronate, risedronate, and iban-
dronate have been conclusively shown to increase bone density 
and reduce fractures over at least 5 years when used continu-
ously at a dosage of 10 mg/d or 70 mg/wk for alendronate; 
5 mg/d or 35 mg/wk for risedronate; or 2.5 mg/d or 150 mg/month 
for ibandronate, and more recently intravenous zoledronate, 5 mg 
annually. Side-by-side trials between alendronate and calcitonin 
(another approved nonestrogen drug for osteoporosis) indicated 
a greater efficacy of alendronate. Bisphosphonates are poorly 
absorbed and must be given on an empty stomach or infused 
intravenously. At the higher oral doses used in the treatment of 
Paget’s disease, alendronate causes gastric irritation, but this is 
not a significant problem at the doses recommended for osteo-
porosis when patients are instructed to take the drug with a glass 
of water and remain upright. Denosumab is a human monoclo-
nal antibody directed against RANKL, and is very effective in 
inhibiting osteoclastogenesis and activity. Denosumab is given 
in 60 mg doses subcutaneously every 6 months. All of these 
drugs inhibit bone resorption with secondary effects to inhibit 
bone formation. On the other hand, teriparatide, the recombi-
nant form of PTH 1-34, directly stimulates bone formation. 
However, teriparatide must be given daily by subcutaneous 
injection. Its efficacy in preventing fractures appears to be at 
least as great as that of the bisphosphonates. In all cases, ade-
quate intake of calcium and vitamin D needs to be maintained.
Furthermore, there are several other forms of therapy in the 
pipeline. In Europe, strontium ranelate, a drug that appears to 
stimulate bone formation and inhibit bone resorption, has been 
used for several years with favorable results in large clinical trials; 
approval for use in the USA is expected. Additional promising 
new treatments undergoing clinical trials include an antibody 
against sclerostin (a protein produced by osteocytes that inhibits 
bone formation), that has been shown to stimulate bone forma-
tion, and inhibitors of cathepsin K, an enzyme in osteoclasts that 
facilitates bone resorption.
 Newer Therapies for Osteoporosis 
776    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 NONHORMONAL AGENTS 
AFFECTING BONE MINERAL 
HOMEOSTASIS 
 BISPHOSPHONATES 
 The bisphosphonates are analogs of pyrophosphate in which the 
P-O-P bond has been replaced with a nonhydrolyzable P-C-P 
bond ( Figure 42–4 ). Currently available bisphosphonates include 
 etidronate, pamidronate ,  alendronate,  risedronate, tiludronate , 
 ibandronate , and  zoledronate . With the development of the 
more potent bisphosphonates, etidronate is seldom used. 
 Results from animal and clinical studies indicate that less than 
10% of an oral dose of these drugs is absorbed. Food reduces 
absorption even further, necessitating their administration on an 
empty stomach. A major adverse effect of oral forms of the bis-
phosphonates (risedronate, alendronate, ibandronate) is esopha-
geal and gastric irritation, which limits the use of this route by 
patients with upper gastrointestinal disorders. This complication 
can be circumvented with infusions of pamidronate, zoledronate, 
and ibandronate. Intravenous dosing also allows a larger amount 
of drug to enter the body and markedly reduces the frequency of 
administration (eg, zoledronate is infused once per year). Nearly 
half of the absorbed drug accumulates in bone; the remainder is 
excreted unchanged in the urine. Decreased renal function dic-
tates a reduction in dosage. The portion of drug retained in bone 
depends on the rate of bone turnover; drug in bone often is 
retained for months if not years. 
 The bisphosphonates exert multiple effects on bone mineral 
homeostasis, which make them useful for the treatment of hyper-
calcemia associated with malignancy, for Paget’s disease, and for 
osteoporosis (see Box: Newer Therapies for Osteoporosis). They 
owe at least part of their clinical usefulness and toxicity to their 
ability to retard formation and dissolution of hydroxyapatite 
crystals within and outside the skeletal system. Some of the newer 
bisphosphonates appear to increase bone mineral density well 
beyond the 2-year period predicted for a drug whose effects are 
limited to slowing bone resorption. This may be due to their other 
cellular effects, which include inhibition of 1,25(OH) 2 D produc-
tion, inhibition of intestinal calcium transport, metabolic changes 
in bone cells such as inhibition of glycolysis, inhibition of cell 
growth, and changes in acid and alkaline phosphatase activity. 
 Amino bisphosphonates such as alendronate and risedronate 
inhibit farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase, an enzyme in the 
mevalonate pathway that appears to be critical for osteoclast sur-
vival. The cholesterol-lowering statin drugs (eg, lovastatin), which 
block mevalonate synthesis (see  Chapter 35 ), stimulate bone for-
mation, at least in animal studies. Thus, the mevalonate pathway 
appears to be important in bone cell function and provides new 
targets for drug development. The mevalonate pathway effects 
vary depending on the bisphosphonate (ie, only amino bisphos-
phonates have this property), and may account for some of the 
clinical differences observed in the effects of the various bisphos-
phonates on bone mineral homeostasis. 
 With the exception of the induction of a mineralization defect 
by higher than approved doses of etidronate and gastric and 
esophageal irritation by the oral bisphosphonates, these drugs have 
proved to be remarkably free of adverse effects when used at the 
doses recommended for the treatment of osteoporosis. Esophageal 
irritation can be minimized by taking the drug with a full glass of 
water and remaining upright for 30 minutes or by using the intra-
venous forms of these compounds. Of the other complications, 
osteonecrosis of the jaw has received considerable attention but is 
rare in patients receiving usual doses of bisphosphonates (perhaps 
1/100,000 patient-years). This complication is more frequent 
when high intravenous doses of zoledronate are used to control 
bone metastases and cancer-induced hypercalcemia. More recently, 
concern has been raised about over-suppressing bone turnover, 
and case reports have appeared describing unusual subtrochanteric 
(femur) fractures in patients on long-term bisphosphonate treat-
ment. This complication appears to be rare, comparable to that of 
osteonecrosis of the jaw, but has led some authorities to recom-
mend a “drug holiday” after 5 years of treatment if the clinical 
condition warrants it (ie, if the fracture risk of discontinuing the 
bisphosphonate is not deemed high). 
 DENOSUMAB 
 Denosumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody that binds to 
and prevents the action of RANKL. As described earlier, RANKL 
is produced by osteoblasts. It stimulates osteoclastogenesis via 
RANK, the receptor for RANKL that is present on osteoclasts 
and osteoclast precursors. By interfering with RANKL function, 
C
OH
CH3
P
OH
OH
P
OH
OH
O
O
Etidronate: ethane-1-hydroxy-1,
1-bisphosphonate
O
P
OH
OH
P
OH
OH
O
O
Inorganic pyrophosphoric acid
C
CH2
CH2
P
OH
OH
P
OH
OH
O
O
OH
Pamidronate: 3-Amino-1-hydroxy-
propylidene bisphosphonate 
NH2
Alendronate: 4-Amino-1-hydroxy-butylidene 
bisphosphonate
C
CH2
CH2
P
OH
OH
P
OH
OH
O
O
OH
CH2
NH2
 FIGURE 42–4  The structure of pyrophosphate and of the first 
three bisphosphonates—etidronate, pamidronate, and alendronate—
that were approved for use in the USA. 
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     777
denosumab inhibits osteoclast formation and activity. It is at least 
as effective as the potent bisphosphonates in inhibiting bone 
resorption and has recently been approved for treatment of post-
menopausal osteoporosis and some cancers (prostate and breast). 
The latter application is to limit the development of bone metas-
tases or bone loss resulting from the use of drugs suppressing 
gonadal function. Denosumab is administered subcutaneously 
every 6 months, which avoids gastrointestinal side effects. The 
drug appears to be well tolerated but two concerns remain. First, 
a number of cells in the immune system also express RANKL, 
suggesting that there could be an increased risk of infection associ-
ated with the use of denosumab. Second, because the suppression 
of bone turnover with denosumab is similar to that of the potent 
bisphosphonates, the risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw and subtro-
chanteric fractures may be increased, although this has not been 
reported in the clinical trials leading to its approval by the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA). 
 CALCIMIMETICS 
 Cinacalcet is the first representative of a new class of drugs that 
activates the calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR). CaSR is widely 
distributed but has its greatest concentration in the parathyroid 
gland. By activating the parathyroid gland CaSR, cinacalcet inhib-
its PTH secretion. Cinacalcet is approved for the treatment of 
secondary hyperparathyroidism in chronic kidney disease and for 
the treatment of parathyroid carcinoma. CaSR antagonists are also 
being developed, and may be useful in conditions of hypoparathy-
roidism or as a means to stimulate intermittent PTH secretion in 
the treatment of osteoporosis. 
 PLICAMYCIN (MITHRAMYCIN) 
 Plicamycin is a cytotoxic antibiotic (see  Chapter 54 ) that has been 
used clinically for two disorders of bone mineral metabolism: 
Paget’s disease and hypercalcemia. The cytotoxic properties of the 
drug appear to involve binding to DNA and interruption of 
DNA-directed RNA synthesis. The reasons for its usefulness in 
the treatment of Paget’s disease and hypercalcemia are unclear but 
may relate to the need for protein synthesis to sustain bone resorp-
tion. The doses required to treat Paget’s disease and hypercalcemia 
are about one tenth the amount required to achieve cytotoxic 
effects. With the development of other less toxic drugs for these 
purposes, the clinical use of plicamycin is seldom indicated. 
 THIAZIDE DIURETICS 
 The chemistry and pharmacology of the thiazide family of drugs 
are discussed in  Chapter 15 . The principal application of thiazides 
in the treatment of bone mineral disorders is in reducing renal 
calcium excretion. Thiazides may increase the effectiveness of 
PTH in stimulating reabsorption of calcium by the renal tubules 
or may act on calcium reabsorption secondarily by increasing 
sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule. In the distal tubule, 
thiazides block sodium reabsorption at the luminal surface, 
increasing the calcium-sodium exchange at the basolateral mem-
brane and thus enhancing calcium reabsorption into the blood at 
this site (see  Figure 15–4 ). Thiazides have proved to be useful in 
reducing the hypercalciuria and incidence of urinary stone forma-
tion in subjects with idiopathic hypercalciuria. Part of their efficacy 
in reducing stone formation may lie in their ability to decrease 
urine oxalate excretion and increase urine magnesium and zinc 
levels, both of which inhibit calcium oxalate stone formation. 
 FLUORIDE 
 Fluoride is well established as effective for the prophylaxis of den-
tal caries and has previously been investigated for the treatment of 
osteoporosis. Both therapeutic applications originated from epide-
miologic observations that subjects living in areas with naturally 
fluoridated water (1–2 ppm) had less dental caries and fewer ver-
tebral compression fractures than subjects living in nonfluoridated 
water areas. Fluoride accumulates in bones and teeth, where it 
may stabilize the hydroxyapatite crystal. Such a mechanism may 
explain the effectiveness of fluoride in increasing the resistance of 
teeth to dental caries, but it does not explain its ability to promote 
new bone growth. 
 Fluoride in drinking water appears to be most effective in 
preventing dental caries if consumed before the eruption of the 
permanent teeth. The optimum concentration in drinking water 
supplies is 0.5–1 ppm. Topical application is most effective if done 
just as the teeth erupt. There is little further benefit to giving fluo-
ride after the permanent teeth are fully formed. Excess fluoride in 
drinking water leads to mottling of the enamel proportionate to 
the concentration above 1 ppm. 
 Because of the paucity of agents that stimulate new bone 
growth in patients with osteoporosis, fluoride for this disorder has 
been examined (see Osteoporosis, below). Results of earlier studies 
indicated that fluoride alone, without adequate calcium supple-
mentation, produced osteomalacia. More recent studies, in which 
calcium supplementation has been adequate, have demonstrated 
an improvement in calcium balance, an increase in bone mineral, 
and an increase in trabecular bone volume. Despite these promis-
ing effects of fluoride on bone mass, clinical studies have failed to 
demonstrate a reliable reduction in fractures, and some studies 
showed an increase in fracture rate. At present, fluoride is not 
approved by the FDA for treatment or prevention of osteoporosis, 
and it is unlikely to be. 
 Adverse effects observed—at the doses used for testing fluo-
ride’s effect on bone—include nausea and vomiting, gastrointesti-
nal blood loss, arthralgias, and arthritis in a substantial proportion 
of patients. Such effects are usually responsive to reduction of the 
dose or giving fluoride with meals (or both). 
 STRONTIUM RANELATE 
 Strontium ranelate is composed of two atoms of strontium bound to 
an organic ion, ranelic acid. Although not yet approved for use in the 
USA, this drug is used in Europe for the treatment of osteoporosis. 
Strontium ranelate appears to block differentiation of osteoclasts 
778    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
while promoting their apoptosis, thus inhibiting bone resorption. 
At the same time, strontium ranelate appears to promote bone 
formation. Unlike bisphosphonates, denosumab, or teriparatide, this 
drug increases bone formation markers while inhibiting bone resorp-
tion markers. Large clinical trials have demonstrated its efficacy in 
increasing bone mineral density and decreasing fractures in the spine 
and hip. Toxicities reported thus far are similar to placebo. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
 Individuals with disorders of bone mineral homeostasis usually pres-
ent with abnormalities in serum or urine calcium levels (or both), 
often accompanied by abnormal serum phosphate levels. These 
abnormal mineral concentrations may themselves cause symptoms 
requiring immediate treatment (eg, coma in malignant hypercalce-
mia, tetany in hypocalcemia). More commonly, they serve as clues 
to an underlying disorder in hormonal regulators (eg, primary 
hyperparathyroidism), target tissue response (eg, chronic kidney 
disease), or drug misuse (eg, vitamin D intoxication). In such cases, 
treatment of the underlying disorder is of prime importance. 
 Since bone and kidney play central roles in bone mineral homeo-
stasis, conditions that alter bone mineral homeostasis usually affect 
one or both of these tissues secondarily. Effects on bone can result in 
osteoporosis (abnormal loss of bone; remaining bone histologically 
normal), osteomalacia (abnormal bone formation due to inadequate 
mineralization), or osteitis fibrosa (excessive bone resorption with 
fibrotic replacement of resorption cavities and marrow). Biochemical 
markers of skeletal involvement include changes in serum levels of 
the skeletal isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and 
N- and C- terminal propeptides of type I collagen (reflecting osteo-
blastic activity), and serum and urine levels of tartrate-resistant acid 
phosphatase and collagen breakdown products (reflecting osteoclastic 
activity). The kidney becomes involved when the calcium × phosphate 
product in serum rises above the point at which ectopic calcification 
occurs (nephrocalcinosis) or when the calcium × oxalate (or phos-
phate) product in urine exceeds saturation, leading to nephro-
lithiasis. Subtle early indicators of such renal involvement include 
polyuria, nocturia, and hyposthenuria. Radiologic evidence of 
nephrocalcinosis and stones is not generally observed until later. The 
degree of the ensuing renal failure is best followed by monitoring the 
decline in creatinine clearance. On the other hand, chronic kidney 
disease can be a primary cause of bone disease because of altered 
handling of calcium and phosphate, decreased 1,25(OH) 2 D produc-
tion, and secondary hyperparathyroidism. 
 ABNORMAL SERUM CALCIUM & 
PHOSPHATE LEVELS  
 HYPERCALCEMIA 
 Hypercalcemia causes central nervous system depression, includ-
ing coma, and is potentially lethal. Its major causes (other than 
thiazide therapy) are hyperparathyroidism and cancer, with or 
without bone metastases. Less common causes are hypervitamino-
sis D, sarcoidosis, thyrotoxicosis, milk-alkali syndrome, adrenal 
insufficiency, and immobilization. With the possible exception of 
hypervitaminosis D, the latter disorders seldom require emergency 
lowering of serum calcium. A number of approaches are used to 
manage the hypercalcemic crisis. 
 Saline Diuresis 
 In hypercalcemia of sufficient severity to produce symptoms, 
rapid reduction of serum calcium is required. The first steps 
include rehydration with saline and diuresis with furosemide, 
although the efficacy of furosemide in this setting has not been 
proved and use of the drug for this purpose appears to be falling 
out of favor. Most patients presenting with severe hypercalcemia 
have a substantial component of prerenal azotemia owing to dehy-
dration, which prevents the kidney from compensating for the rise 
in serum calcium by excreting more calcium in the urine. 
Therefore, the initial infusion of 500–1000 mL/h of saline to 
reverse the dehydration and restore urine flow can by itself sub-
stantially lower serum calcium. The addition of a loop diuretic 
such as furosemide following rehydration enhances urine flow and 
also inhibits calcium reabsorption in the ascending limb of the 
loop of Henle (see  Chapter 15 ). Monitoring of central venous 
pressure is important to forestall the development of heart failure 
and pulmonary edema in predisposed subjects. In many subjects, 
saline diuresis suffices to reduce serum calcium to a point at which 
more definitive diagnosis and treatment of the underlying condi-
tion can be achieved. If this is not the case or if more prolonged 
medical treatment of hypercalcemia is required, the following 
agents are available (discussed in order of preference). 
 Bisphosphonates 
 Pamidronate, 60–90 mg, infused over 2–4 hours, and zoledronate, 
4 mg, infused over at least 15 minutes, have been approved for the 
treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy and have largely 
replaced the less effective etidronate for this indication. The bis-
phosphonate effects generally persist for weeks, but treatment can 
be repeated after a 7-day interval if necessary and if renal function 
is not impaired. Some patients experience a self-limited flu-like 
syndrome after the initial infusion, but subsequent infusions gen-
erally do not have this side effect. Repeated doses of these drugs 
have been linked to renal deterioration and osteonecrosis of the 
jaw, but this adverse effect is rare. 
 Calcitonin 
 Calcitonin has proved useful as ancillary treatment in some 
patients. Calcitonin by itself seldom restores serum calcium to 
normal, and refractoriness frequently develops. However, its lack 
of toxicity permits frequent administration at high doses (200 
MRC units or more). An effect on serum calcium is observed 
within 4–6 hours and lasts for 6–10 hours. Calcimar (salmon 
calcitonin) is available for parenteral and nasal administration. 
 Gallium Nitrate 
 Gallium nitrate is approved by the FDA for the management of 
hypercalcemia of malignancy. This drug inhibits bone resorption. 
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     779
At a dosage of 200 mg/m 2 body surface area per day given as a 
continuous intravenous infusion in 5% dextrose for 5 days, 
gallium nitrate proved superior to calcitonin in reducing serum 
calcium in cancer patients. Because of potential nephrotoxicity, 
patients should be well hydrated and have good renal output 
before starting the infusion. 
 Plicamycin (Mithramycin) 
 Because of its toxicity, plicamycin (mithramycin) is not the drug 
of first choice for the treatment of hypercalcemia. However, 
when other forms of therapy fail, 25–50 mcg/kg of plicamycin 
given intravenously usually lowers serum calcium substantially 
within 24–48 hours. This effect can last several days. This dose 
can be repeated as necessary. The most dangerous toxic effect is 
sudden thrombocytopenia followed by hemorrhage. Hepatic and 
renal toxicity can also occur. Hypocalcemia, nausea, and vomiting 
may limit therapy. Use of this drug must be accompanied by care-
ful monitoring of platelet counts, liver and kidney function, and 
serum calcium levels. 
 Phosphate 
 Intravenous phosphate administration is probably the fastest and 
surest way to reduce serum calcium, but it is a hazardous proce-
dure if not done properly. Intravenous phosphate should be used 
only after other methods of treatment (bisphosphonates, calci-
tonin, and saline diuresis) have failed to control symptomatic 
hypercalcemia. Phosphate must be given slowly (50 mmol or 1.5 g 
elemental phosphorus over 6–8 hours) and the patient switched to 
oral phosphate (1–2 g/d elemental phosphorus, as one of the salts 
indicated below) as soon as symptoms of hypercalcemia have 
cleared. The risks of intravenous phosphate therapy include sud-
den hypocalcemia, ectopic calcification, acute renal failure, and 
hypotension. Oral phosphate can also lead to ectopic calcification 
and renal failure if serum calcium and phosphate levels are not 
carefully monitored, but the risk is less and the time of onset 
much longer. Phosphate is available in oral and intravenous forms 
as sodium or potassium salts. Amounts required to provide 1 g of 
elemental phosphorus are as follows: 
 Intravenous: 
 In-Phos: 40 mL 
  Hyper-Phos-K: 15 mL 
 Oral: 
 Fleet Phospho-Soda: 6.2 mL 
  Neutra-Phos: 300 mL 
  K-Phos-Neutral: 4 tablets 
 Glucocorticoids 
 Glucocorticoids have no clear role in the immediate treatment of 
hypercalcemia. However, the chronic hypercalcemia of sarcoidosis, 
vitamin D intoxication, and certain cancers may respond within 
several days to glucocorticoid therapy. Prednisone in oral doses of 
30–60 mg daily is generally used, although equivalent doses of 
other glucocorticoids are effective. The rationale for the use of 
glucocorticoids in these diseases differs, however. The hypercal-
cemia of sarcoidosis is secondary to increased production of 
1,25(OH) 2 D, possibly by the sarcoid tissue itself. Glucocorticoid 
therapy directed at the reduction of sarcoid tissue results in resto-
ration of normal serum calcium and 1,25(OH) 2 D levels. The 
treatment of hypervitaminosis D with glucocorticoids probably 
does not alter vitamin D metabolism significantly but is thought 
to reduce vitamin D-mediated intestinal calcium transport. An 
action of glucocorticoids to reduce vitamin D-mediated bone 
resorption has not been excluded, however. The effect of glucocor-
ticoids on the hypercalcemia of cancer is probably twofold. The 
malignancies responding best to glucocorticoids (ie, multiple 
myeloma and related lymphoproliferative diseases) are sensitive to 
the lytic action of glucocorticoids. Therefore part of the effect may 
be related to decreased tumor mass and activity. Glucocorticoids 
have also been shown to inhibit the secretion or effectiveness of 
cytokines elaborated by multiple myeloma and related cancers 
that stimulate osteoclastic bone resorption. Other causes of 
hypercalcemia—particularly primary hyperparathyroidism—do 
not respond to glucocorticoid therapy. 
 HYPOCALCEMIA 
 The main features of hypocalcemia are neuromuscular—tetany, 
paresthesias, laryngospasm, muscle cramps, and seizures. The 
major causes of hypocalcemia in the adult are hypoparathyroid-
ism, vitamin D deficiency, chronic kidney disease, and malabsorp-
tion. Hypocalcemia can also accompany the infusion of potent 
bisphosphonates and denosumab for the treatment of osteopo-
rosis, but this is seldom of clinical significance unless the patient 
is already hypocalcemic at the onset of the infusion. Neonatal 
hypocalcemia is a common disorder that usually resolves without 
therapy. The roles of PTH, vitamin D, and calcitonin in the neo-
natal syndrome are under investigation. Large infusions of citrated 
blood can produce hypocalcemia secondary to the formation of 
citrate-calcium complexes. Calcium and vitamin D (or its metab-
olites) form the mainstay of treatment of hypocalcemia. 
 Calcium 
 A number of calcium preparations are available for intrave-
nous, intramuscular, and oral use. Calcium gluceptate (0.9 mEq 
calcium/mL), calcium gluconate (0.45 mEq calcium/mL), and 
calcium chloride (0.68–1.36 mEq calcium/mL) are available for 
intravenous therapy. Calcium gluconate is preferred because it is 
less irritating to veins. Oral preparations include calcium carbon-
ate (40% calcium), calcium lactate (13% calcium), calcium phos-
phate (25% calcium), and calcium citrate (21% calcium). Calcium 
carbonate is often the preparation of choice because of its high 
percentage of calcium, ready availability (eg, Tums), low cost, and 
antacid properties. In achlorhydric patients, calcium carbonate 
should be given with meals to increase absorption, or the patient 
should be switched to calcium citrate, which is somewhat better 
absorbed. Combinations of vitamin D and calcium are available, 
but treatment must be tailored to the individual patient and the 
individual disease, a flexibility lost by fixed-dosage combinations. 
780    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
 Treatment of severe symptomatic hypocalcemia can be accom-
plished with slow infusion of 5–20 mL of 10% calcium gluconate. 
Rapid infusion can lead to cardiac arrhythmias. Less severe 
hypocalcemia is best treated with oral forms sufficient to provide 
approximately 400–1200 mg of elemental calcium (1–3 g calcium 
carbonate) per day. Dosage must be adjusted to avoid hypercalcemia 
and hypercalciuria. 
 Vitamin D 
 When rapidity of action is required, 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 (calcitriol), 
0.25–1 mcg daily, is the vitamin D metabolite of choice because 
it is capable of raising serum calcium within 24–48 hours. 
Calcitriol also raises serum phosphate, although this action is 
usually not observed early in treatment. The combined effects of 
calcitriol and all other vitamin D metabolites and analogs on both 
calcium and phosphate make careful monitoring of these mineral 
levels especially important to prevent ectopic calcification sec-
ondary to an abnormally high serum calcium × phosphate prod-
uct. Since the choice of the appropriate vitamin D metabolite or 
analog for long-term treatment of hypocalcemia depends on the 
nature of the underlying disease, further discussion of vitamin D 
treatment is found under the headings of the specific diseases. 
 HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA 
 Hyperphosphatemia is a common complication of renal failure 
and is also found in all types of hypoparathyroidism (idiopathic, 
surgical, and pseudohypoparathyroidism), vitamin D intoxica-
tion, and the rare syndrome of tumoral calcinosis (usually due to 
insufficient bioactive FGF23). Emergency treatment of hyper-
phosphatemia is seldom necessary but can be achieved by dialysis 
or glucose and insulin infusions. In general, control of hyperphos-
phatemia involves restriction of dietary phosphate plus phosphate-
binding gels such as  sevelamer and calcium supplements. Because 
of their potential to induce aluminum-associated bone disease, 
aluminum-containing antacids should be used sparingly and only 
when other measures fail to control the hyperphosphatemia. 
In patients with chronic kidney disease enthusiasm for the use of 
large doses of calcium to control hyperphosphatemia has waned 
because of the risk of ectopic calcification.
 HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA 
 Hypophosphatemia is associated with a variety of conditions, 
including primary hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, 
idiopathic hypercalciuria, conditions associated with increased 
bioactive FGF23 (eg, X-linked and autosomal dominant hypo-
phosphatemic rickets and tumor-induced osteomalacia), other 
forms of renal phosphate wasting (eg, Fanconi’s syndrome), over-
zealous use of phosphate binders, and parenteral nutrition with 
inadequate phosphate content. Acute hypophosphatemia may 
cause a reduction in the intracellular levels of high-energy organic 
phosphates (eg, ATP), interfere with normal hemoglobin-to-tissue 
oxygen transfer by decreasing red cell 2,3-diphosphoglycerate 
levels, and lead to rhabdomyolysis. However, clinically significant 
acute effects of hypophosphatemia are seldom seen, and emer-
gency treatment is generally not indicated. The long-term effects 
of hypophosphatemia include proximal muscle weakness and 
abnormal bone mineralization (osteomalacia). Therefore, hypo-
phosphatemia should be avoided when using forms of therapy 
that can lead to hypophosphatemia (eg, phosphate binders, certain 
types of parenteral nutrition) and treated in conditions that cause 
hypophosphatemia, such as the various forms of hypophos-
phatemic rickets. Oral forms of phosphate are listed above. 
 SPECIFIC DISORDERS INVOLVING 
BONE MINERAL-REGULATING 
HORMONES 
 PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM 
 This rather common disease, if associated with symptoms and 
significant hypercalcemia, is best treated surgically. Oral phos-
phate and bisphosphonates have been tried but cannot be recom-
mended. Asymptomatic patients with mild disease often do not 
get worse and may be left untreated. The calcimimetic agent 
 cinacalcet , discussed previously, has been approved for secondary 
hyperparathyroidism and is in clinical trials for the treatment of 
primary hyperparathyroidism. If such drugs prove efficacious and 
cost effective, medical management of this disease will need to be 
reconsidered. 
 HYPOPARATHYROIDISM 
 In PTH deficiency (idiopathic or surgical hypoparathyroidism) 
or an abnormal target tissue response to PTH (pseudohypopara-
thyroidism), serum calcium falls and serum phosphate rises. In 
such patients, 1,25(OH) 2 D levels are usually low, presumably 
reflecting the lack of stimulation by PTH of 1,25(OH) 2 D pro-
duction. The skeletons of patients with idiopathic or surgical 
hypoparathyroidism are normal except for a slow turnover rate. 
A number of patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism appear to 
have osteitis fibrosa, suggesting that the normal or high PTH 
levels found in such patients are capable of acting on bone but 
not on the kidney. The distinction between pseudohypoparathy-
roidism and idiopathic hypoparathyroidism is made on the basis 
of normal or high PTH levels but deficient renal response 
(ie, diminished excretion of cAMP or phosphate) in patients 
with pseudohypoparathyroidism. 
 The principal therapeutic concern is to restore normocalcemia 
and normophosphatemia. Vitamin D (25,000–100,000 units 
three times per week) and dietary calcium supplements have been 
used in the past. More rapid increments in serum calcium can be 
achieved with calcitriol. Many patients treated with vitamin D 
experience episodes of hypercalcemia. This complication is more 
rapidly reversible with cessation of therapy using calcitriol than 
therapy with vitamin D. This would be of importance to the 
patient in whom such hypercalcemic crises are common. Although 
teriparatide (PTH 1-34) is not approved for the treatment of 
hypoparathyroidism, it can be quite effective in patients who 
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     781
respond poorly to calcium and vitamin D and may become the 
drug of choice for this condition. 
 NUTRITIONAL VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY 
OR INSUFFICIENCY 
 The level of vitamin D thought to be necessary for good health is 
being reexamined with the appreciation that vitamin D acts on a 
large number of cell types beyond those responsible for bone and 
mineral metabolism. A level of 25(OH)D above 10 ng/mL is 
necessary for preventing rickets or osteomalacia. However, 
substantial epidemiologic and some prospective trial data indicate 
that a higher level, such as 30 ng/mL, is required to optimize 
intestinal calcium absorption, optimize the accrual and mainte-
nance of bone mass, reduce falls and fractures, and prevent a wide 
variety of diseases including diabetes mellitus, hyperparathyroid-
ism, autoimmune diseases, and cancer. However, an expert panel 
for the Institute of Medicine (IOM) has recently recommended 
that a level of 20 ng/mL (50 nM) was sufficient for 97.5% of the 
population, although up to 50 ng/mL (125 nM) was considered 
safe. For individuals between the ages of 1–70 yrs 600 iu vitamin 
was thought to be sufficient to meet these goals, although up to 
4000 iu vitamin D was considered safe. These recommendations 
are based primarily on data from randomized placebo controlled 
clinical trials (RCT) that evaluated falls and fractures; data sup-
porting the non skeletal effects of vitamin D were considered too 
preliminary to be used in their recommendations because of lack 
of RCT for these other actions. The lower end of these recom-
mendations has been considered too low and the upper end too 
restrictive by a number of vitamin D experts, but the call for better 
clinical data especially for the non skeletal actions is well taken. 
These guidelines—at least with respect to the lower recommended 
levels of vitamin D supplementation—are unlikely to correct 
vitamin D deficiency in individuals with obesity, dark complex-
ions, limited capacity for sunlight exposure, or malabsorption. 
Furthermore, a large body of data from animal and cell studies 
as well and epidemiologic associations support a large range of 
beneficial actions of vitamin D that with adequate RCT data may 
alter these IOM recommendations. Vitamin D deficiency or 
insufficiency can be treated by higher dosages (4000 units per day 
or 50,000 units per week for several weeks). No other vitamin D 
metabolite is indicated. Because the half-life of vitamin D 3 metab-
olites in blood is greater than that of vitamin D 2 , there may be 
some advantage to using vitamin D 3 supplements, although when 
administered on a daily or weekly schedule these differences may 
be moot. The diet should also contain adequate amounts of cal-
cium and phosphate. 
 CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE 
 The major sequelae of chronic kidney disease that impact bone 
mineral homeostasis are deficient 1,25(OH) 2 D production, reten-
tion of phosphate with an associated reduction in ionized calcium 
levels, and the secondary hyperparathyroidism that results from 
the parathyroid gland response to lowered serum ionized calcium 
and low 1,25(OH) 2 D. FGF23 levels are also increased in this 
disorder in part due to the increased phosphate, and this can fur-
ther reduce 1,25(OH) 2 D production by the kidney. With impaired 
1,25(OH) 2 D production, less calcium is absorbed from the intes-
tine and less bone is resorbed under the influence of PTH. As a 
result hypocalcemia usually develops, furthering the development 
of secondary hyperparathyroidism. The bones show a mixture of 
osteomalacia and osteitis fibrosa. 
 In contrast to the hypocalcemia that is more often associated 
with chronic kidney disease, some patients may become hypercal-
cemic from overzealous treatment with calcium. However, the 
most common cause of hypercalcemia is the development of severe 
secondary (sometimes referred to as tertiary) hyperparathyroidism. 
In such cases, the PTH level in blood is very high. Serum alkaline 
phosphatase levels also tend to be high. Treatment often requires 
parathyroidectomy. A less common circumstance leading to hyper-
calcemia is development of a form of bone disease characterized by 
a profound decrease in bone cell activity and loss of the calcium 
buffering action of bone (adynamic bone disease). In the absence 
of kidney function, any calcium absorbed from the intestine accu-
mulates in the blood. Such patients are very sensitive to the hyper-
calcemic action of 1,25(OH) 2 D. These individuals generally have 
a high serum calcium but nearly normal alkaline phosphatase and 
PTH levels. The bone in such patients may have a high aluminum 
content, especially in the mineralization front, which blocks nor-
mal bone mineralization. These patients do not respond favorably 
to parathyroidectomy. Deferoxamine, an agent used to chelate iron 
(see  Chapter 57 ), also binds aluminum and is being used to treat 
this disorder. However, with the reduction in use of aluminum-
containing phosphate binders, most cases of adynamic bone dis-
ease are not associated with aluminum deposition but are 
attributed to overzealous suppression of PTH secretion. 
 Vitamin D Preparations 
 The choice of vitamin D preparation to be used in the setting of 
chronic kidney disease depends on the type and extent of bone 
disease and hyperparathyroidism. Individuals with vitamin D 
deficiency or insufficiency should first have their 25(OH)D levels 
restored to normal (above 30 ng/mL) with vitamin D. 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 
(calcitriol) rapidly corrects hypocalcemia and at least partially 
reverses secondary hyperparathyroidism and osteitis fibrosa. Many 
patients with muscle weakness and bone pain gain an improved 
sense of well-being. 
 Two analogs of calcitriol—doxercalciferol and paricalcitol—are 
approved for the treatment of secondary hyperparathyroidism of 
chronic kidney disease. Their principal advantage is that they are less 
likely than calcitriol to induce hypercalcemia for any given reduc-
tion in PTH. Their greatest impact is in patients in whom the use 
of calcitriol may lead to unacceptably high serum calcium levels. 
 Regardless of the drug used, careful attention to serum calcium 
and phosphate levels is required. A calcium × phosphate product (in 
mg/dL units) less than 55 is desired with both calcium and phos-
phate in the normal range. Calcium adjustments in the diet and 
dialysis bath and phosphate restriction (dietary and with oral inges-
tion of phosphate binders) should be used along with vitamin D 
metabolites. Monitoring of serum PTH and alkaline phosphatase 
782    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
levels is useful in determining whether therapy is correcting or 
preventing secondary hyperparathyroidism. In patients on dialysis, 
a PTH value of approximately twice the upper limits of normal is 
considered desirable to prevent adynamic bone disease. Although 
not generally available, percutaneous bone biopsies for quantita-
tive histomorphometry may help in choosing appropriate therapy 
and following the effectiveness of such therapy, especially in cases 
suspected of adynamic bone disease. Unlike the rapid changes in 
serum values, changes in bone morphology require months to 
years. Monitoring of serum vitamin D metabolite levels is useful 
for determining adherence, absorption, and metabolism. 
 INTESTINAL OSTEODYSTROPHY 
 A number of gastrointestinal and hepatic diseases cause disordered 
calcium and phosphate homeostasis, which ultimately leads to 
bone disease. The bones in such patients show a combination of 
osteoporosis and osteomalacia. Osteitis fibrosa does not occur, in 
contrast to renal osteodystrophy. The important common feature 
in this group of diseases appears to be malabsorption of calcium 
and vitamin D. Liver disease may, in addition, reduce the produc-
tion of 25(OH)D from vitamin D, although its importance in 
patients other than those with terminal liver failure remains in 
dispute. The malabsorption of vitamin D is probably not limited 
to exogenous vitamin D as the liver secretes into bile a substantial 
number of vitamin D metabolites and conjugates that are nor-
mally reabsorbed in (presumably) the distal jejunum and ileum. 
Interference with this process could deplete the body of endoge-
nous vitamin D metabolites in addition to limiting absorption of 
dietary vitamin D. 
 In mild forms of malabsorption, high doses of vitamin D 
(25,000–50,000 units three times per week) should suffice to raise 
serum levels of 25(OH)D into the normal range. Many patients 
with severe disease do not respond to vitamin D. Clinical experi-
ence with the other metabolites is limited, but both calcitriol and 
calcifediol have been used successfully in doses similar to those 
recommended for treatment of renal osteodystrophy. Theoretically, 
calcifediol should be the drug of choice under these conditions, 
because no impairment of the renal metabolism of 25(OH)D to 
1,25(OH) 2 D and 24,25(OH) 2 D exists in these patients. However, 
calcifediol is no longer available in the USA. Both calcitriol and 
24,25(OH) 2 D may be of importance in reversing the bone dis-
ease. Intramuscular injections of vitamin D would be an alterna-
tive form of therapy, but there are currently no FDA-approved 
intramuscular preparations available in the USA. 
 As in the other diseases discussed, treatment of intestinal 
osteodystrophy with vitamin D and its metabolites should be 
accompanied by appropriate dietary calcium supplementation and 
monitoring of serum calcium and phosphate levels. 
 OSTEOPOROSIS 
 Osteoporosis is defined as abnormal loss of bone predisposing to 
fractures. It is most common in postmenopausal women but also 
occurs in men. The annual direct medical cost of fractures in older 
women and men in the USA is estimated to be 17–20 billion 
dollars per year, and is increasing as our population ages. 
Osteoporosis is most commonly associated with loss of gonadal 
function as in menopause but may also occur as an adverse effect 
of long-term administration of glucocorticoids or other drugs, 
including those that inhibit sex steroid production; as a manifesta-
tion of endocrine disease such as thyrotoxicosis or hyperparathy-
roidism; as a feature of malabsorption syndrome; as a consequence 
of alcohol abuse and cigarette smoking; or without obvious cause 
(idiopathic). The ability of some agents to reverse the bone loss of 
osteoporosis is shown in  Figure 42–5 . The postmenopausal form 
of osteoporosis may be accompanied by lower 1,25(OH) 2 D levels 
and reduced intestinal calcium transport. This form of osteopo-
rosis is due to reduced estrogen production and can be treated 
Estrogen,
denosumab,
calcitonin, or
bisphosphonate
40
20
0
−10
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time (y)
Vitamin D, PTH, Sr2+
No treatment
Percent change in
bone mineral density
 FIGURE 42–5  Typical changes in bone mineral density with time after the onset of menopause, with and without treatment. In the 
untreated condition, bone is lost during aging in both men and women. Strontium (Sr 2+ ), parathyroid hormone (PTH), and vitamin D promote 
bone formation and can increase bone mineral density in subjects who respond to them throughout the period of treatment, although PTH 
and vitamin D in high doses also activate bone resorption. In contrast, estrogen, calcitonin, denosumab, and bisphosphonates block bone 
resorption. This leads to a transient increase in bone mineral density because bone formation is not initially decreased. However, with time, 
both bone formation and bone resorption decrease with these pure antiresorptive agents, and bone mineral density reaches a new plateau. 
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     783
with estrogen (combined with a progestin in women with a uterus 
to prevent endometrial carcinoma). However, concern that estro-
gen increases the risk of breast cancer and fails to reduce or may 
actually increase the development of heart disease has reduced 
enthusiasm for this form of therapy, at least in older individuals. 
 Bisphosphonates are potent inhibitors of bone resorption. 
They increase bone density and reduce the risk of fractures in the 
hip, spine, and other locations.  Alendronate, risedronate, iban-
dronate, and  zoledronate are approved for the treatment of 
osteoporosis, using daily dosing schedules of alendronate, 10 mg/d, 
risedronate, 5 mg/d, or ibandronate, 2.5 mg/d; or weekly schedules 
of alendronate, 70 mg/wk, or risedronate, 35 mg/wk; or monthly 
schedules of ibandronate, 150 mg/month; or quarterly (every 
3 months) injections of ibandronate, 3 mg; or annual infusions of 
zoledronate, 5 mg. These drugs are effective in men as well as 
women and for various causes of osteoporosis. 
 As previously noted, estrogen-like SERMs (selective estrogen 
receptor modulators,  Chapter 40 ) have been developed that 
prevent the increased risk of breast and uterine cancer associated 
with estrogen while maintaining the benefit to bone. The SERM 
 raloxifene is approved for treatment of osteoporosis. Like tamox-
ifen, raloxifene reduces the risk of breast cancer. It protects against 
spine fractures but not hip fractures—unlike bisphosphonates, 
denosumab, and teriparatide, which protect against both. Raloxifene 
does not prevent hot flushes and imposes the same increased risk 
of venous thromboembolism as estrogen. To counter the reduced 
intestinal calcium transport associated with osteoporosis, vitamin D 
therapy is often used in combination with dietary calcium supple-
mentation. There is no clear evidence that pharmacologic doses of 
vitamin D are of much additional benefit beyond cyclic estrogens 
and calcium supplementation. However, in several large studies, 
vitamin D supplementation (800 IU/d) with calcium has been 
shown to improve bone density, reduce falls, and prevent fractures. 
Calcitriol and its analog, 1α(OH)D 3 , have also been shown to 
increase bone mass and reduce fractures. Use of these agents for 
osteoporosis is not FDA-approved, although they are used for this 
purpose in other countries. 
 Teriparatide , the recombinant form of PTH 1-34, is approved 
for treatment of osteoporosis. Teriparatide is given in a dosage of 
20 mcg subcutaneously daily. Teriparatide stimulates new bone 
formation, but unlike fluoride, this new bone appears structurally 
normal and is associated with a substantial reduction in the inci-
dence of fractures. Teriparatide is approved for only 2 years of use. 
Trials examining the sequential use of teriparatide followed by a 
bisphosphonate after 1 or 2 years are in progress and look promis-
ing. Use of teriparatide with a bisphosphonate has not shown 
greater efficacy than the bisphosphonate alone. 
 Calcitonin is approved for use in the treatment of postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis. It has been shown to increase bone mass and 
reduce fractures, but only in the spine. It does not appear to be as 
effective as bisphosphonates or teriparatide. 
 Denosumab , the RANKL inhibitor, has recently been 
approved for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. It is 
given subcutaneously every 6 months in 60 mg doses. Like the 
bisphosphonates it suppresses bone resorption and secondarily 
bone formation. Denosumab reduces the risk of both vertebral 
and nonvertebral fractures with comparable effectiveness to the 
potent bisphosphonates. 
 Strontium ranelate has not been approved in the USA for the 
treatment of osteoporosis but is being used in Europe, generally at 
a dose of 2 g/d. 
 X-LINKED & AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA & RELATED 
DISEASES 
 These disorders usually manifest in childhood as rickets and hypo-
phosphatemia, although they may first present in adults. In both 
X-linked and autosomal dominant hypophosphatemia, biologi-
cally active FGF23 accumulates, leading to phosphate wasting in 
the urine and hypophosphatemia. In autosomal dominant hypo-
phosphatemia, mutations in the FGF23 gene replace an arginine 
required for hydrolysis and result in increased FGF23 stability. 
X-linked hypophosphatemia is caused by mutations in the gene 
encoding the PHEX protein, an endopeptidase. Initially, it was 
thought that FGF23 was a direct substrate for PHEX, but this no 
longer appears to be the case. Tumor-induced osteomalacia is a 
similar acquired syndrome in adults that results from overexpres-
sion of FGF23 in tumor cells. The current concept for all of these 
diseases is that FGF23 blocks the renal uptake of phosphate and 
blocks 1,25(OH) 2 D production leading to rickets in children and 
osteomalacia in adults. Phosphate is critical to normal bone min-
eralization; when phosphate stores are deficient, a clinical and 
pathologic picture resembling vitamin D–dependent rickets 
develops. However, affected children fail to respond to the stan-
dard doses of vitamin D used in the treatment of nutritional 
rickets. A defect in 1,25(OH) 2 D production by the kidney has 
also been noted, because the serum 1,25(OH) 2 D levels tend to be 
low in comparison with the degree of hypophosphatemia observed. 
This combination of low serum phosphate and low or low-
normal serum 1,25(OH) 2 D provides the rationale for treating 
these patients with oral phosphate (1–3 g daily) and calcitriol 
(0.25–2 mcg daily). Reports of such combination therapy are 
encouraging in this otherwise debilitating disease, although pro-
longed treatment often leads to secondary hyperparathyroidism. 
 VITAMIN D–DEPENDENT RICKETS 
TYPES I & II (PSEUDOVITAMIN D 
DEFICIENCY RICKETS & HEREDITARY 
VITAMIN D–RESISTANT RICKETS) 
 These distinctly different autosomal recessive diseases present as 
childhood rickets that do not respond to conventional doses of 
vitamin D. Type I vitamin D–dependent rickets, now known as 
pseudovitamin D deficiency rickets, is due to an isolated deficiency 
of 1,25(OH) 2 D production caused by mutations in 25(OH)-D-
1α-hydroxylase (CYP27B1). This condition can be treated with 
vitamin D (4000 units daily) or calcitriol (0.25–0.5 mcg daily). 
Type II vitamin D–dependent rickets, now known as hereditary 
vitamin D resistant rickets, is caused by mutations in the gene for 
784    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
the vitamin D receptor. The serum levels of 1,25(OH) 2 D are very 
high in type II but inappropriately low for the level of calcium in 
type I vitamin D–dependent rickets. Treatment with large doses of 
calcitriol has been claimed to be effective in restoring normocalce-
mia in some patients, presumably those with a partially functional 
vitamin D receptor, although many patients are completely 
resistant to all forms of vitamin D. Calcium and phosphate infu-
sions have been shown to correct the rickets in some children, 
similar to studies in mice in which the  VDR gene has been deleted. 
These diseases are rare. 
 NEPHROTIC SYNDROME 
 Patients with nephrotic syndrome can lose vitamin D metabolites 
in the urine, presumably by loss of the vitamin D-binding protein. 
Such patients may have very low 25(OH)D levels. Some of them 
develop bone disease. It is not yet clear what value vitamin D 
therapy has in such patients, because therapeutic trials with vita-
min D (or any vitamin D metabolite) have not yet been carried 
out. Because the problem is not related to vitamin D metabolism, 
one would not anticipate any advantage in using the more expen-
sive vitamin D metabolites in place of vitamin D. 
 IDIOPATHIC HYPERCALCIURIA 
 Individuals with idiopathic hypercalciuria, characterized by hyper-
calciuria and nephrolithiasis with normal serum calcium and PTH 
levels, have been divided into three groups: (1) hyperabsorbers, 
patients with increased intestinal absorption of calcium, resulting 
in high-normal serum calcium, low-normal PTH, and a secondary 
increase in urine calcium; (2) renal calcium leakers, patients with 
a primary decrease in renal reabsorption of filtered calcium, lead-
ing to low-normal serum calcium and high-normal serum PTH; 
and (3) renal phosphate leakers, patients with a primary decrease 
in renal reabsorption of phosphate, leading to increased 
1,25(OH) 2 D production, increased intestinal calcium absorption, 
increased ionized serum calcium, low-normal PTH levels, and a 
secondary increase in urine calcium. There is some disagreement 
about this classification, and many patients are not readily catego-
rized. Many such patients present with mild hypophosphatemia, 
and oral phosphate has been used with some success in reducing 
stone formation. However, a clear role for phosphate in the treat-
ment of this disorder has not been established. 
 Therapy with hydrochlorothiazide, up to 50 mg twice daily, or 
chlorthalidone, 50–100 mg daily, is recommended. Loop diuretics 
such as furosemide and ethacrynic acid should not be used because 
they increase urinary calcium excretion. The major toxicity of 
thiazide diuretics, besides hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and 
hyperglycemia, is hypercalcemia. This is seldom more than a 
biochemical observation unless the patient has a disease such as 
hyperparathyroidism in which bone turnover is accelerated. 
Accordingly, one should screen patients for such disorders before 
starting thiazide therapy and monitor serum and urine calcium 
when therapy has begun. 
 An alternative to thiazides is allopurinol. Some studies indicate 
that hyperuricosuria is associated with idiopathic hypercalcemia 
and that a small nidus of urate crystals could lead to the calcium 
oxalate stone formation characteristic of idiopathic hypercalcemia. 
Allopurinol, 100–300 mg daily, may reduce stone formation by 
reducing uric acid excretion. 
 OTHER DISORDERS OF BONE 
MINERAL HOMEOSTASIS 
 PAGET’S DISEASE OF BONE 
 Paget’s disease is a localized bone disorder characterized by uncon-
trolled osteoclastic bone resorption with secondary increases in 
poorly organized bone formation. The cause of Paget’s disease is 
obscure, although some studies suggest that a slow virus may be 
involved. The disease is fairly common, although symptomatic 
bone disease is less common. The biochemical parameters of ele-
vated serum alkaline phosphatase and urinary hydroxyproline are 
useful for diagnosis. Along with the characteristic radiologic and 
bone scan findings, these biochemical determinations provide 
good markers by which to follow therapy. 
 The goal of treatment is to reduce bone pain and stabilize or 
prevent other problems such as progressive deformity, hearing loss, 
high-output cardiac failure, and immobilization hypercalcemia. 
Calcitonin and bisphosphonates are the first-line agents for this 
disease. Treatment failures may respond to plicamycin. Calcitonin 
is administered subcutaneously or intramuscularly in doses of 
50–100 MRC (Medical Research Council) units every day or 
every other day. Nasal inhalation at 200–400 units per day is also 
effective. Higher or more frequent doses have been advocated 
when this initial regimen is ineffective. Improvement in bone pain 
and reduction in serum alkaline phosphatase and urine hydroxy-
proline levels require weeks to months. Often a patient who 
responds well initially loses the response to calcitonin. This refrac-
toriness is not correlated with the development of antibodies. 
 Sodium etidronate, alendronate, risedronate, and tiludronate are 
the bisphosphonates currently approved for clinical use in Paget’s 
disease of bone in the USA. Other bisphosphonates, including 
pamidronate, are being used in other countries. The recommended 
dosages of bisphosphonates are etidronate, 5 mg/kg/d; alendronate, 
40 mg/d; risedronate, 30 mg/d; and tiludronate, 400 mg/d. Long-
term (months to years) remission may be expected in patients 
who respond to a bisphosphonate. Treatment should not exceed 
6 months per course but can be repeated after 6 months if necessary. 
The principal toxicity of etidronate is the development of osteomal-
acia and an increased incidence of fractures when the dosage is 
raised substantially above 5 mg/kg/d. The newer bisphosphonates 
such as risedronate and alendronate do not share this adverse effect. 
Some patients treated with etidronate develop bone pain similar in 
nature to the bone pain of osteomalacia. This subsides after stop-
ping the drug. The principal adverse effect of alendronate and the 
newer bisphosphonates is gastric irritation when used at these high 
doses. This is reversible on cessation of the drug. 
 The use of a potentially lethal cytotoxic drug such as plicamycin 
in a generally benign disorder such as Paget’s disease is recom-
mended only when other less toxic agents (calcitonin, alendronate) 
have failed and the symptoms are debilitating. Clinical data on 
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     785
long-term use of plicamycin are insufficient to determine its useful-
ness for extended therapy. However, short courses involving 15–25 
mcg/kg/d intravenously for 5–10 days followed by 15 mcg/kg 
intravenously each week have been used to control the disease. 
 ENTERIC OXALURIA 
 Patients with short bowel syndromes and associated fat malabsorp-
tion can present with renal stones composed of calcium and 
oxalate. Such patients characteristically have normal or low urine 
calcium levels but elevated urine oxalate levels. The reasons for the 
development of oxaluria in such patients are thought to be twofold: 
first, in the intestinal lumen, calcium (which is now bound to fat) 
fails to bind oxalate and no longer prevents its absorption; second, 
enteric flora, acting on the increased supply of nutrients reaching 
the colon, produce larger amounts of oxalate. Although one would 
ordinarily avoid treating a patient with calcium oxalate stones with 
calcium supplementation, this is precisely what is done in patients 
with enteric oxaluria. The increased intestinal calcium binds the 
excess oxalate and prevents its absorption. One to 2 g of calcium 
carbonate can be given daily in divided doses, with careful moni-
toring of urinary calcium and oxalate to be certain that urinary 
oxalate falls without a dangerous increase in urinary calcium. 
SUMMARY Major Drugs Used in Diseases of Bone Mineral Homeostasis
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Toxicities
VITAMIN D, METABOLITES, ANALOGS
 • Cholecalciferol
 • Ergocalciferol
 • Calcitriol
 • Doxercalciferol
 • Paricalcitol
 • Calcipotriene
Regulate gene transcrip-
tion via the vitamin D 
receptor
Stimulate intestinal calcium 
absorption, bone resorption, 
renal calcium and phosphate 
reabsorption • decrease para-
thyroid hormone (PTH) • 
promote innate immunity • 
inhibit adaptive immunity
Osteoporosis, 
osteomalacia, renal 
failure, malabsorption, 
psoriasis
Hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria 
• the vitamin D preparations 
have much longer half-life 
than the metabolites and 
analogs
BISPHOSPHONATES
 • Alendronate
 • Risedronate
 • Ibandronate
 • Pamidronate
 • Zoledronate
Suppress the activity of 
osteoclasts in part via 
inhibition of farnesyl 
pyrophosphate synthesis
Inhibit bone resorption and 
secondarily bone formation
Osteoporosis, bone 
metastases, hypercal-
cemia
Adynamic bone, possible renal 
failure, rare osteonecrosis of 
the jaw, rare subtrochanteric 
(femur) fractures
HORMONES
 • Teriparatide
 • Calcitonin
These hormones act via 
their cognate G protein-
coupled receptors
Teriparatide stimulates bone 
turnover • calcitonin sup-
presses bone resorption
Both are used in osteo-
porosis • calcitonin is 
used for hypercalcemia
Teriparatide may cause hyper-
calcemia and hypercalciuria
SELECTIVE ESTROGEN RECEPTOR MODULATORS (SERMs)
 • Raloxifene
Interacts selectively with 
estrogen receptors
Inhibits bone resorption with-
out stimulating breast or 
endometrial hyperplasia
Osteoporosis
Does not prevent hot flashes 
• increased risk of venous 
thromboembolism
RANK LIGAND (RANKL) INHIBITOR
 • Denosumab
Monoclonal antibody • 
binds to RANKL and pre-
vents it from stimulating 
osteoclast differentiation 
and function
Blocks bone resorption
Osteoporosis
May increase risk of infections
CALCIUM RECEPTOR AGONIST
 • Cinacalcet
Activates the calcium-
sensing receptor
Inhibits PTH secretion
Hyperparathyroidism
Nausea
MINERALS
 • Calcium
 • Phosphate
 • Strontium
Multiple physiologic 
actions through regulation 
of multiple enzymatic 
pathways
Strontium suppresses bone 
resorption and increases 
bone formation • calcium and 
phosphate required for bone 
mineralization
Osteoporosis • 
osteomalacia • 
deficiencies in calcium 
or phosphate
Ectopic calcification
786    SECTION VII Endocrine Drugs
VITAMIN D, METABOLITES, AND ANALOGS
Calcitriol
Oral (generic, Rocaltrol): 0.25, 0.5 mcg capsules, 1 mcg/mL 
solution
Parenteral (generic, Calcijex): 1, 2 mcg/mL for injection
Cholecalciferol [D3] (vitamin D3, Delta-D)
Oral: numerous forms containing 400–50,000 IU per unit
Doxercalciferol (Hectorol)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2.5 mcg capsules
Parenteral: 2 mcg/mL
Ergocalciferol [D2] (vitamin D2, Calciferol, Drisdol)
Oral: 50,000 IU capsules; 8000 IU/mL drops
Paricalcitol (Zemplar)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mcg capsules
Parenteral: 2, 5 mcg/mL for injection
CALCIUM
Calcium acetate [25% calcium] (generic, PhosLo)
Oral: 668 mg (169 mg calcium) tablets or capsules
Calcium carbonate [40% calcium] (generic, Tums, Cal-Sup, Os-Cal 
500, others)
Oral: Numerous forms available containing 260–600 mg calcium 
per unit
Calcium chloride [27% calcium] (generic)
Parenteral: 10% solution for IV injection
Calcium citrate [21% calcium] (generic, Citracal)
Oral: 950 mg (200 mg calcium), 2376 mg (500 mg calcium)
Calcium glubionate [6.5% calcium] (Calcionate, Calciquid)
Oral: 1.8 g (115 mg calcium)/5 mL syrup
Calcium gluceptate [8% calcium] (Calcium Gluceptate)
Parenteral: 1.1 g/5 mL solution for IM or IV injection
Calcium gluconate [9% calcium] (generic)
Oral: 500 mg (45 mg calcium), 650 mg (58.5 mg calcium), 975 mg 
(87.75 mg calcium), 1 g (90 mg calcium) tablets
Parenteral: 10% solution for IV or IM injection
Calcium lactate [13% calcium] (generic)
Oral: 650 mg (84.5 mg calcium), 770 mg (100 mg calcium) tablets
Tricalcium phosphate [39% calcium] (Posture)
Oral: 1565 mg (600 mg calcium) tablets (as phosphate)
PHOSPHATE AND PHOSPHATE BINDER
Phosphate
Oral (Fleet Phospho-soda): solution containing 2.5 g phosphate/5 mL 
(816 mg phosphorus/5 mL; 751 mg sodium/5 mL)
Oral (K-Phos-Neutral): tablets containing 250 mg phosphorus, 
298 mg sodium, 45 mg phosphorus
Oral (Neutra-Phos): For reconstitution in 75 mL water, packet con-
taining 250 mg phosphorus; 164 mg sodium; 278 mg potassium
Oral (Neutra-Phos-K): For reconstitution in 75 mL water, packet 
containing 250 mg phosphorus; 556 mg potassium; 0 mg sodium
Parenteral (potassium or sodium phosphate): 3 mmol/mL
Sevelamer carbonate or HCl (Renagel, Renvela)
Oral: 400, 800 mg capsules
BISPHOSPHONATES
Alendronate sodium (generic, Fosamax)
Oral: 5, 10, 35, 40, 70 mg tablets; 70 mg/75 mL oral solution
Etidronate disodium (generic, Didronel)
Oral: 200, 400 mg tablets
Ibandronate sodium (Boniva)
Oral: 2.5, 150 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for IV injection
Pamidronate disodium (generic, Aredia)
Parenteral: 30, 60, 90 mg/vial for IV injection
Risedronate sodium (Actonel)
Oral: 5, 30, 35, 75, 150 mg tablets
Tiludronate disodium (Skelid)
Oral: 200 mg tablets (as tiludronic acid)
Zoledronic acid (Zometa)
Parenteral: 4 mg/vial for IV injection
OTHER DRUGS
Calcitonin-Salmon
Nasal spray (Miacalcin): 200 IU/puff
Parenteral (Calcimar, Miacalcin, Salmonine): 200 IU/mL for 
injection
Cinacalcet (Sensipar)
Oral: 30, 60, 90 mg tablets
Denosumab (Prolia)
Parenteral: 60 mg/mL solution for SC injection
Gallium nitrate (Ganite)
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL solution for IV injection
Plicamycin (mithramycin) (Mithracin)
Parenteral: 2.5 mg per vial powder to reconstitute for injection
Sodium fluoride (generic)
Oral: 0.55 mg (0.25 mg F), 1.1 mg (0.5 mg F), 2.2 mg (1.0 mg F) 
tablets; drops
Teriparatide (Forteo)
Subcutaneous: 250 mcg/mL in prefilled pen for SC injectiont
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
VITAMIN D, METABOLITES, AND ANALOGS
Calcitriol
Oral (generic, Rocaltrol): 0.25, 0.5 mcg capsules, 1 mcg/mL 
solution
Parenteral (generic, Calcijex): 1, 2 mcg/mL for injection
Cholecalciferol [D3] (vitamin D3, Delta-D)
Oral: numerous forms containing 400–50,000 IU per unit
Doxercalciferol (Hectorol)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 2.5 mcg capsules
Parenteral: 2 mcg/mL
Ergocalciferol [D2] (vitamin D2, Calciferol, Drisdol)
Oral: 50,000 IU capsules; 8000 IU/mL drops
Paricalcitol (Zemplar)
Oral: 1, 2, 4 mcg capsules
Parenteral: 2, 5 mcg/mL for injection
CALCIUM
Calcium acetate [25% calcium] (generic, PhosLo)
Oral: 668 mg (169 mg calcium) tablets or capsules
Calcium carbonate [40% calcium] (generic, Tums, Cal-Sup, Os-Cal
500, others)
Oral: Numerous forms available containing 260–600 mg calcium
per unit
Calcium chloride [27% calcium] (generic)
Parenteral: 10% solution for IV injection
Calcium citrate [21% calcium] (generic, Citracal)
Oral: 950 mg (200 mg calcium), 2376 mg (500 mg calcium)
Calcium glubionate [6.5% calcium] (Calcionate, Calciquid)
Oral: 1.8 g (115 mg calcium)/5 mL syrup
Calcium gluceptate [8% calcium] (Calcium Gluceptate)
Parenteral: 1.1 g/5 mL solution for IM or IV injection
Calcium gluconate [9% calcium] (generic)
Oral: 500 mg (45 mg calcium), 650 mg (58.5 mg calcium), 975 mg 
(87.75 mg calcium), 1 g (90 mg calcium) tablets
Parenteral: 10% solution for IV or IM injection
Calcium lactate [13% calcium] (generic)
Oral: 650 mg (84.5 mg calcium), 770 mg (100 mg calcium) tablets
Tricalcium phosphate [39% calcium] (Posture)
Oral: 1565 mg (600 mg calcium) tablets (as phosphate)
PHOSPHATE AND PHOSPHATE BINDER
Phosphate
Oral (Fleet Phospho-soda): solution containing 2.5 g phosphate/5 mL
(816 mg phosphorus/5 mL; 751 mg sodium/5 mL)
Oral (K-Phos-Neutral): tablets containing 250 mg phosphorus,
298 mg sodium, 45 mg phosphorus
Oral (Neutra-Phos): For reconstitution in 75 mL water, packet con-
taining 250 mg phosphorus; 164 mg sodium; 278 mg potassium
Oral (Neutra-Phos-K): For reconstitution in 75 mL water, packet 
containing 250 mg phosphorus; 556 mg potassium; 0 mg sodium
Parenteral (potassium or sodium phosphate): 3 mmol/mL
Sevelamer carbonate or HCl (Renagel, Renvela)
Oral: 400, 800 mg capsules
BISPHOSPHONATES
Alendronate sodium (generic, Fosamax)
Oral: 5, 10, 35, 40, 70 mg tablets; 70 mg/75 mL oral solution
Etidronate disodium (generic, Didronel)
Oral: 200, 400 mg tablets
Ibandronate sodium (Boniva)
Oral: 2.5, 150 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1 mg/mL for IV injection
Pamidronate disodium (generic, Aredia)
Parenteral: 30, 60, 90 mg/vial for IV injection
Risedronate sodium (Actonel)
Oral: 5, 30, 35, 75, 150 mg tablets
Tiludronate disodium (Skelid)
Oral: 200 mg tablets (as tiludronic acid)
Zoledronic acid (Zometa)
Parenteral: 4 mg/vial for IV injection
OTHER DRUGS
Calcitonin-Salmon
Nasal spray (Miacalcin): 200 IU/puff
Parenteral (Calcimar, Miacalcin, Salmonine): 200 IU/mL for
injection
Cinacalcet (Sensipar)
Oral: 30, 60, 90 mg tablets
Denosumab (Prolia)
Parenteral: 60 mg/mL solution for SC injection
Gallium nitrate (Ganite)
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL solution for IV injection
Plicamycin (mithramycin) (Mithracin)
Parenteral: 2.5 mg per vial powder to reconstitute for injection
Sodium fluoride (generic)
Oral: 0.55 mg (0.25 mg F), 1.1 mg (0.5 mg F), 2.2 mg (1.0 mg F)
tablets; drops
Teriparatide (Forteo)
Subcutaneous: 250 mcg/mL in prefilled pen for SC injectiont
CHAPTER 42 Agents That Affect Bone Mineral Homeostasis     787
 REFERENCES 
 Becker DJ, Kilgore ML, Morrisey MA: The societal burden of osteoporosis. 
Curr Rheumatol Rep 2010;12:186. 
 Bikle DD: Nonclassic actions of vitamin D. J Clin Endocrinol Metabol 
2009;94:26. 
 Black DM et al: One year of alendronate after one year of parathyroid hormone 
(1-84) for osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2005;353:555. 
 Clines GA, Guise TA: Mechanisms and treatment for bone metastases. Clin Adv 
Hematol Oncol 2004;2:295. 
 Cummings SR et al: Denosumab for prevention of fractures in postmenopausal 
women with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2009;361:756. 
 Favus MJ: Bisphosphonates for osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2010;363:2027. 
 Finkelstein JS et al: The effects of parathyroid hormone, alendronate, or both in 
men with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1216. 
 Green J, Lipton A: Anticancer properties of zoledronic acid. Cancer Invest 
2010;28:944. 
 Holick MF: Vitamin D deficiency. N Engl J Med 2007;357:266. 
Holick MF et al: Evaluation, treatment, and prevention of vitamin D deficiency: 
an Endocrine Sociey Clinical Practice Guideline  J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2011;96:1911.
 Hutton E: Evaluation and management of hypercalcemia. JAAPA 2005;18:30. 
 Kearns AE, Khosla S, Kostenuik PJ: Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB 
ligand and osteoprotegerin regulation of bone remodeling in health and 
disease. Endocr Rev 2008;29:155. 
 Meunier PJ et al: The effects of strontium ranelate on the risk of vertebral 
fractures in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 
2004;350:459. 
 Neer RM et al: Effect of parathyroid hormone (1-34) on fractures and bone 
mineral density in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. N Engl 
J Med 2001;344:1434. 
 Orwoll E et al: Alendronate for the treatment of osteoporosis in men. N Engl 
J Med 2000;343:604. 
 Pettifor JM: Rickets and vitamin D deficiency in children and adolescents. 
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2005;34:537. 
 Qazi RA, Martin KJ: Vitamin D in kidney disease: Pathophysiology and the 
utility of treatment. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2010;39:355. 
Ross AC et al: The 2011 report on dietary reference intakes for calcium and 
vitamin D from the Institute of Medicine: what clinicians need to know. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:53.
 Smith MR et al: Denosumab in men receiving androgen-deprivation therapy for 
prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 2009;361:745. 
 Stewart AF: Clinical practice. Hypercalcemia associated with cancer. N Engl 
J Med 2005;352:373. 
 Strom TM, Juppner H: PHEX, FGF23, DMP1 and beyond. Curr Opin 
Nephrol Hypertens 2008;17:357. 
 Tfelt-Hanson J, Brown EM: The calcium-sensing receptor in normal physiology 
and pathophysiology: A review. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci 2005;42:35. 
 Wüthrich RP, Martin D, Bilezikian JP: The role of calcimimetics in the treat-
ment of hyperparathyroidism. Eur J Clin Invest 2007;37:915. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
 There are multiple reasons for this patient’s osteoporosis, 
including a heavy smoking history, possible alcoholism, 
and chronic inflammatory disease treated with glucocorti-
coids. High levels of cytokines from the chronic inflam-
mation activate osteoclasts. Glucocorticoids increase 
urinary losses of calcium, suppress bone formation, and 
inhibit intestinal calcium absorption as well as decreasing 
gonadotropin production, leading to hypogonadism. 
Management should include measurement of serum tes-
tosterone, serum calcium, and the 24-hour urine calcium 
level, with treatment as appropriate for these secondary 
causes, plus initiation of bisphosphonate or denosumab 
therapy as primary treatment. 
This page intentionally left blank 
789
 INTRODUCTION TO ANTIMICROBIAL 
AGENTS 
 Antimicrobial agents provide some of the most dramatic examples 
of the advances of modern medicine. Many infectious diseases once 
considered incurable and lethal are now amenable to treatment 
with a few pills. The remarkably powerful and specific activity of 
antimicrobial drugs is due to their selectivity for targets that are 
either unique to prokaryote and fungal microorganisms or much 
more important in these organisms than in humans. Among these 
targets are bacterial and fungal cell wall-synthesizing enzymes 
( Chapters 43 and  48 ), the bacterial ribosome ( Chapters 44 and 
 45 ), the enzymes required for nucleotide synthesis and DNA rep-
lication ( Chapter 46 ), and the machinery of viral replication 
( Chapter 49 ). The special group of drugs used in mycobacterial 
infections is discussed in  Chapter 47 . The much older and less 
selective cytotoxic antiseptics and disinfectants are discussed in 
 Chapter 50 . The clinical uses of all these agents are summarized in 
 Chapter 51 . 
 The major problem threatening the continued success of anti-
microbial drugs is the development of resistant organisms. 
Microorganisms can adapt to environmental pressures in a variety 
of effective ways, and their response to antibiotic pressure is no 
exception. An inevitable consequence of antimicrobial usage is the 
selection of resistant microorganisms, perhaps the most obvious 
example of evolution in action. Overuse and inappropriate use of 
antibiotics in patients has fueled a major increase in prevalence 
of multidrug-resistant pathogens. Antibacterial antibiotics are 
misused by providers in a variety of ways, including use in patients 
who are unlikely to have bacterial infections, use over unnecessar-
ily prolonged periods, and use of multiple agents or broad- 
spectrum agents when not needed. 
As a result of antibiotic pressure, highly resistant gram-negative 
organisms with novel mechanisms of resistance are increasingly 
reported. Some of these strains have spread over vast geographic 
areas as a result of patients seeking medical care in different coun-
tries. Much larger quantities of antibiotics have been used in 
agriculture to stimulate growth and prevent infection in farm 
animals and this has added to the selection pressure that results in 
resistant organisms. 
Unfortunately, as the need has grown in recent years, develop-
ment of novel drugs has slowed. The most vulnerable molecular 
targets of antimicrobial drugs have been identified and, in many 
cases, crystallized and characterized. Pending the identification of 
new targets and compounds, it seems likely that over the next decade 
we will have to rely on currently available families of drugs. In the 
face of continuing development of resistance, considerable effort will 
be required to maintain the effectiveness of these drug groups. 
SECTION VIII CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC DRUGS
 ■ BETALACTAM COMPOUNDS 
 PENICILLINS 
 The penicillins share features of chemistry, mechanism of action, 
pharmacology, and immunologic characteristics with cephalosporins, 
monobactams, carbapenems, and β-lactamase inhibitors. All are 
β-lactam compounds, so named because of their four-membered 
lactam ring. 
 Chemistry 
 All penicillins have the basic structure shown in  Figure 43–1 . A 
thiazolidine ring (A) is attached to a β-lactam ring (B) that carries 
a secondary amino group (RNH–). Substituents (R; examples 
shown in  Figure 43–2 ) can be attached to the amino group. 
Structural integrity of the 6-aminopenicillanic acid nucleus (rings A 
plus B) is essential for the biologic activity of these compounds. 
Hydrolysis of the β-lactam ring by bacterial β-lactamases yields 
penicilloic acid, which lacks antibacterial activity. 
 A. Classification 
 Substituents of the 6-aminopenicillanic acid moiety determine the 
essential pharmacologic and antibacterial properties of the result-
ing molecules. Penicillins can be assigned to one of three groups 
(below). Within each of these groups are compounds that are rela-
tively stable to gastric acid and suitable for oral administration, eg, 
penicillin V, dicloxacillin, and amoxicillin. The side chains of 
some representatives of each group are shown in  Figure 43–2 , with 
a few distinguishing characteristics. 
 1. Penicillins (eg, penicillin G)— These have greatest activity 
against gram-positive organisms, gram-negative cocci, and non-
β-lactamase producing anaerobes. However, they have little activ-
ity against gram-negative rods, and they are susceptible to 
hydrolysis by β-lactamases. 
 2. Antistaphylococcal penicillins (eg, nafcillin)— These 
penicillins are resistant to staphylococcal β-lactamases. They are 
 emergency department, the man is febrile (38.7°C [101.7°F]), 
hypotensive (90/54 mm Hg), tachypneic (36/min), and 
tachycardic (110/min). He has no signs of meningismus but 
is oriented only to person. A stat chest x-ray shows a left 
lower lung consolidation consistent with pneumonia. The 
plan is to start empiric antibiotics and perform a lumbar 
puncture to rule out bacterial meningitis. What antibiotic 
regimen should be started to treat both pneumonia and 
meningitis? Does the history of amoxicillin rash affect the 
antibiotic choice? Why or why not?
C A S E  S T U D Y
A 55-year-old man is brought to the local hospital emer-
gency department by ambulance. His wife reports that he 
had been in his normal state of health until 3 days ago when 
he developed a fever and a productive cough. During the 
last 24 hours he has complained of a headache and is 
increasingly confused. His wife reports that his medical his-
tory is significant only for hypertension, for which he takes 
hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril, and that he is allergic to 
amoxicillin. She says that he developed a rash many years 
ago when prescribed amoxicillin for bronchitis. In the 
43
 Beta-Lactam & Other 
Cell Wall- & Membrane-
Active Antibiotics 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Daniel H. Deck, PharmD & 
 Lisa G. Winston, MD∗ 
 ∗ The authors thank Dr. Henry F. Chambers for his contributions to this 
chapter in previous editions.
790
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    791
active against staphylococci and streptococci but not against 
enterococci, anaerobic bacteria, and gram-negative cocci and rods. 
 3. Extended-spectrum penicillins (ampicillin and the 
antipseudomonal penicillins)— These drugs retain the anti-
bacterial spectrum of penicillin and have improved activity against 
gram-negative organisms. Like penicillin, however, they are rela-
tively susceptible to hydrolysis by β-lactamases. 
 B. Penicillin Units and Formulations 
 The activity of penicillin G was originally defined in units. 
Crystalline sodium penicillin G contains approximately 
C
S
N
C
O
CH3
CH3
H
COOH
C
C
C
N
B
R
H
H
H
Amidase
Lactamase
Penicillin
Substituted 6-aminopenicillanic acid
C
S
N
C
O
H
H
CH2
C
C
C
N
B
H
H
H
Cephalosporin
Substituted 7-aminocephalosporanic acid
C
COOH
C
O
R1
R2
N
O
SO3H
C
C
C
N
B
H
H
H
Monobactam
Substituted 3-amino-4-methylmonobactamic acid
(aztreonam)
C
O
R
CH3
COOH
HC
O
C
C
C
N
B
HO
H
H
H3C
S
R
CH2
R:
NH
CH2
NH
CH
Substituted 3-hydroxyethylcarbapenemic acid
(imipenem)
Carbapenem
A
A
 FIGURE 43–1  Core structures of four β-lactam antibiotic families. 
The ring marked B in each structure is the β-lactam ring. The penicil-
lins are susceptible to bacterial metabolism and inactivation by 
 amidases and lactamases at the points shown. Note that the carba-
penems have a different stereochemical configuration in the lactam 
ring that imparts resistance to most common β lactamases. 
Substituents for the penicillin and cephalosporin families are shown 
in Figures 43–2 and 43–6, respectively. 
S
CH
CH
C
N
N
C
R
CH3
CH3
COOH
H
CH
Penicillin G
CH2
CH3
R
Penicillin V
OCH2
Oxacillin 
C
C
O
C
N
CH3
NH2
Cl
Dicloxacillin 
C
CH
Cl
OC2H5
C2H5
C
O
C
N
Nafcillin 
Ampicillin 
NH2
CH
HO
Amoxicillin 
NHCO
CH
Piperacillin 
N
N
O
O
O
Site of amidase action
Site of penicillinase action
(break in β-lactam ring)
6-Aminopenicillanic acid
The following structures can each be substituted 
at the R to produce a new penicillin.
 FIGURE 43–2  Side chains of some penicillins (R groups of  
Figure 43–1 ). 
792    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
1600 units per mg (1 unit = 0.6 mcg; 1 million units of penicillin = 
0.6 g). Semisynthetic penicillins are prescribed by weight rather 
than units. The  minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 
any penicillin (or other antimicrobial) is usually given in mcg/mL. 
Most penicillins are formulated as the sodium or potassium salt of 
the free acid. Potassium penicillin G contains about 1.7 mEq of 
K + per million units of penicillin (2.8 mEq/g). Nafcillin contains 
Na + , 2.8 mEq/g. Procaine salts and benzathine salts of penicillin 
G provide repository forms for intramuscular injection. In dry 
crystalline form, penicillin salts are stable for years at 4°C. 
Solutions lose their activity rapidly (eg, 24 hours at 20°C) and 
must be prepared fresh for administration. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Penicillins, like all β-lactam antibiotics, inhibit bacterial growth 
by interfering with the transpeptidation reaction of  bacterial cell 
wall synthesis . The cell wall is a rigid outer layer unique to bacte-
rial species. It completely surrounds the cytoplasmic membrane 
( Figure 43–3 ), maintains cell shape and integrity, and prevents cell 
lysis from high osmotic pressure. The cell wall is composed of 
a complex, cross-linked polymer of polysaccharides and 
 polypeptides, peptidoglycan (also known as murein or mucopep-
tide). The polysaccharide contains alternating amino sugars, 
 N -acetylglucosamine and  N -acetylmuramic acid ( Figure 43–4 ). A 
five-amino-acid peptide is linked to the  N -acetylmuramic acid 
sugar. This peptide terminates in D-alanyl-D-alanine. Penicillin-
binding protein (PBP, an enzyme) removes the terminal alanine in 
the process of forming a cross-link with a nearby peptide. Cross-
links give the cell wall its structural rigidity. Beta-lactam antibiot-
ics, structural analogs of the natural D-Ala-D-Ala substrate, 
covalently bind to the active site of PBPs. This inhibits the trans-
peptidation reaction ( Figure 43–5 ), halting peptidoglycan synthe-
sis, and the cell dies. The exact mechanism of cell death is not 
completely understood, but autolysins and disruption of cell wall 
morphogenesis are involved. Beta-lactam antibiotics kill bacterial 
cells only when they are actively growing and synthesizing cell 
wall. 
 Resistance 
 Resistance to penicillins and other β-lactams is due to one of four 
general mechanisms: (1) inactivation of antibiotic by β-lactamase, 
(2) modification of target PBPs, (3) impaired penetration of drug to 
target PBPs, and (4) efflux. Beta-lactamase production is the most 
common mechanism of resistance. Hundreds of different 
β-lactamases have been identified. Some, such as those produced by 
 Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae , and  Escherichia coli , 
β Lactamase
PBP
Cytoplasmic
membrane
Periplasmic
space
Cell
wall
Peptidoglycan
Outer
membrane
PBP
Porin
 FIGURE 43–3  A highly simplified diagram of the cell envelope of a gram-negative bacterium. The outer membrane, a lipid bilayer, is 
 present in gram-negative but not gram-positive organisms. It is penetrated by porins, proteins that form channels providing hydrophilic access 
to the cytoplasmic membrane. The peptidoglycan layer is unique to bacteria and is much thicker in gram-positive organisms than in gram- 
negative ones. Together, the outer membrane and the peptidoglycan layer constitute the cell wall. Penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) are 
 membrane proteins that cross-link peptidoglycan. Beta lactamases, if present, reside in the periplasmic space or on the outer surface of the 
cytoplasmic membrane, where they may destroy β-lactam antibiotics that penetrate the outer membrane. 
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    793
are relatively narrow in substrate specificity, preferring penicillins to 
cephalosporins. Other β-lactamases, eg, AmpC β-lactamase pro-
duced by  Pseudomonas aeruginosa and  Enterobacter sp, and extended-
 spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs), hydrolyze both cephalosporins and 
penicillins. Carbapenems are highly resistant to hydrolysis by peni-
cillinases and cephalosporinases, but they are hydrolyzed by 
metallo-β lactamase and carbapenemases. 
 Altered target PBPs are the basis of methicillin resistance in 
staphylococci and of penicillin resistance in pneumococci and 
enterococci. These resistant organisms produce PBPs that have 
low affinity for binding β-lactam antibiotics, and consequently, 
they are not inhibited except at relatively high, often clinically 
unachievable, drug concentrations. 
 Resistance due to impaired penetration of antibiotic to target 
PBPs occurs only in gram-negative species because of their imper-
meable outer cell wall membrane, which is absent in gram-positive 
bacteria. Beta-lactam antibiotics cross the outer membrane and 
enter gram-negative organisms via outer membrane protein 
 channels called porins. Absence of the proper channel or down-
regulation of its production can greatly impair drug entry into the 
cell. Poor penetration alone is usually not sufficient to confer 
resistance because enough antibiotic eventually enters the cell to 
inhibit growth. However, this barrier can become important in the 
presence of a β-lactamase, even a relatively inactive one, as long as 
it can hydrolyze drug faster than it enters the cell. Gram-negative 
organisms also may produce an efflux pump, which consists of 
cytoplasmic and periplasmic protein components that efficiently 
transport some β-lactam antibiotics from the periplasm back 
across the outer membrane. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Absorption of orally administered drug differs greatly for different 
penicillins, depending in part on their acid stability and protein 
binding. Gastrointestinal absorption of nafcillin is erratic, so it is 
not suitable for oral administration. Dicloxacillin, ampicillin, and 
amoxicillin are acid-stable and relatively well absorbed, producing 
serum concentrations in the range of 4–8 mcg/mL after a 500-mg 
oral dose. Absorption of most oral penicillins (amoxicillin being 
an exception) is impaired by food, and the drugs should be admin-
istered at least 1–2 hours before or after a meal. 
 Intravenous administration of penicillin G is preferred to the 
intramuscular route because of irritation and local pain from intra-
muscular injection of large doses. Serum concentrations 30 minutes 
after an intravenous injection of 1 g of a penicillin (equivalent to 
approximately 1.6 million units of penicillin G) are 20–50 mcg/
mL. Only a small amount of the total drug in serum is present as 
free drug, the concentration of which is determined by protein 
binding. Highly protein-bound penicillins (eg, nafcillin) generally 
achieve lower free-drug concentrations in serum than less protein-
bound penicillins (eg, penicillin G or ampicillin). Protein binding 
becomes clinically relevant when the protein-bound percentage is 
approximately 95% or more. Penicillins are widely distributed in 
body fluids and tissues with a few exceptions. They are polar mol-
ecules, so intracellular concentrations are well below those found in 
extracellular fluids. 
L-Ala
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
R
L-Ala
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala
D-Ala
L-Ala
D-Glu
M
G
M
G
M
G
M
G
R
+
Transpeptidase
L-Ala
R
L-Ala
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala
D-Ala
L-Ala
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala*
D-Ala
[Gly]5*
[Gly]5
L-Lys
[Gly]5
[Gly]5
D-Ala
+   D-Ala
L-Ala
R
L-Ala
R
 FIGURE 43–4 The transpeptidation reaction in  Staphylococcus 
aureus that is inhibited by β-lactam antibiotics. The cell wall of gram-
positive bacteria is made up of long peptidoglycan polymer chains 
consisting of the alternating aminohexoses  N -acetylglucosamine 
(G) and  N -acetylmuramic acid (M) with pentapeptide side chains 
linked (in  S aureus ) by pentaglycine bridges. The exact composition 
of the side chains varies among species. The diagram illustrates small 
segments of two such polymer chains and their amino acid side 
chains. These linear polymers must be cross-linked by transpeptida-
tion of the side chains at the points indicated by the asterisk to 
achieve the strength necessary for cell viability. 
794    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Benzathine and procaine penicillins are formulated to delay 
absorption, resulting in prolonged blood and tissue concentra-
tions. A single intramuscular injection of 1.2 million units of 
benzathine penicillin maintains serum levels above 0.02 mcg/mL 
for 10 days, sufficient to treat β-hemolytic streptococcal infection. 
After 3 weeks, levels still exceed 0.003 mcg/mL, which is enough 
to prevent β-hemolytic streptococcal infection. A 600,000 unit 
dose of procaine penicillin yields peak concentrations of 1–2 mcg/
mL and clinically useful concentrations for 12–24 hours after a 
single intramuscular injection. 
 Penicillin concentrations in most tissues are equal to those in 
serum. Penicillin is also excreted into sputum and milk to levels 
3–15% of those in the serum. Penetration into the eye, the prostate, 
and the central nervous system is poor. However, with active 
inflammation of the meninges, as in bacterial meningitis,  penicillin 
concentrations of 1–5 mcg/mL can be achieved with a daily par-
enteral dose of 18–24 million units. These concentrations 
are sufficient to kill susceptible strains of pneumococci and 
meningococci. 
 Penicillin is rapidly excreted by the kidneys; small amounts are 
excreted by other routes. About 10% of renal excretion is by 
glomerular filtration and 90% by tubular secretion. The normal 
half-life of penicillin G is approximately 30 minutes; in renal 
failure, it may be as long as 10 hours. Ampicillin and the 
extended- spectrum penicillins are secreted more slowly than 
penicillin G and have half-lives of 1 hour. For penicillins that are 
cleared by the kidney, the dose must be adjusted according to renal 
function, with approximately one fourth to one third the normal 
dose being administered if creatinine clearance is 10 mL/min 
or less ( Table 43–1 ). 
 Nafcillin is primarily cleared by biliary excretion. Oxacillin, 
dicloxacillin, and cloxacillin are eliminated by both the kidney and 
biliary excretion; no dosage adjustment is required for these drugs 
in renal failure. Because clearance of penicillins is less efficient in 
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
PP       MG
PP       MG       MG       MG    
PP       MG       MG       MG       MG    
MG
MG
MG
MG
MG
MG
4
3
2
2
5
Cytoplasmic
membrane
Periplasmic
space
Cytoplasm
UDP
UDP     G
UDP    M
L-Ala
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala       D-Ala
D-Ala
L-Ala
P
PP
Pc
UMP
PPi
UDP
UMP
UTP
NAcGlc-1-P
Glc-6-P
+
PP
   M      PP
L-Ala
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala
D-Ala
UDP      M   
    L-Ala
    D-Glu
    L-Lys
    D-Ala
    D-Ala
UDP      M     
           L-Ala
           D-Glu
           L-Lys
=
1
                  GM      PP
L-Ala
D-Glu
 
L-Lys
D-Ala
D-Ala
  
        GM      PP
L-Ala
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala
D-Ala
5-Gly       tRNA
[Gly]5
1  Fosfomycin
2  Cycloserine
3  Bacitracin
4  Vancomycin
5  -Lactams
 FIGURE 43–5 The biosynthesis of cell wall peptidoglycan, showing the sites of action of five antibiotics (shaded bars; 1 = fosfomycin, 
2 = cycloserine, 3 = bacitracin, 4 = vancomycin, 5 = β-lactam antibiotics). Bactoprenol (BP) is the lipid membrane carrier that transports building 
blocks across the cytoplasmic membrane; M,  N -acetylmuramic acid; Glc, glucose; NAcGlc or G,  N -acetylglucosamine. 
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    795
the newborn, doses adjusted for weight alone result in higher sys-
temic concentrations for longer periods than in the adult. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Except for oral amoxicillin, penicillins should be given 1–2 hours 
before or after a meal; they should not be given with food to 
minimize binding to food proteins and acid inactivation. Blood 
levels of all penicillins can be raised by simultaneous administra-
tion of probenecid, 0.5 g (10 mg/kg in children) every 6 hours 
orally, which impairs renal tubular secretion of weak acids such as 
β-lactam compounds.  Penicillins should never be used for viral 
infections and should be prescribed only when there is reasonable 
suspicion of, or documented infection with, susceptible organisms . 
 A. Penicillin 
 Penicillin G is a drug of choice for infections caused by streptococci, 
meningococci, some enterococci, penicillin-susceptible pneumo-
cocci, non-β-lactamase-producing staphylococci,  Treponema 
 pallidum and certain other spirochetes,  Clostridium species, 
 Actinomyces and certain other gram-positive rods, and non-β-
lactamase-producing gram-negative anaerobic organisms. Depend-
ing on the organism, the site, and the severity of infection, effective 
doses range between 4 and 24 million units per day administered 
intravenously in four to six divided doses. High-dose penicillin G 
can also be given as a continuous intravenous infusion. 
 Penicillin V, the oral form of penicillin, is indicated only in 
minor infections because of its relatively poor bioavailability, the 
need for dosing four times a day, and its narrow antibacterial 
 spectrum. Amoxicillin (see below) is often used instead. 
 Benzathine penicillin and procaine penicillin G for intramus-
cular injection yield low but prolonged drug levels. A single intra-
muscular injection of benzathine penicillin, 1.2 million units, is 
effective treatment for β-hemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis; 
given intramuscularly once every 3–4 weeks, it prevents reinfec-
tion. Benzathine penicillin G, 2.4 million units intramuscularly 
once a week for 1–3 weeks, is effective in the treatment of syphilis. 
Procaine penicillin G, formerly a work horse for treating uncom-
plicated pneumococcal pneumonia or gonorrhea, is rarely used 
now because many strains are penicillin-resistant. 
TABLE 43–1  Guidelines for dosing of some commonly used penicillins.
Adjusted Dose as a Percentage 
of Normal Dose for Renal 
Failure Based on Creatinine 
Clearance (Clcr)
Antibiotic (Route of 
Administration)
Adult Dose
Pediatric Dose1
Neonatal Dose2
Clcr Approx 
50 mL/min
Clcr Approx 
10 mL/min
Penicillins
 Penicillin G (IV)
1–4 × 106 
units 
q4–6h
25,000–400,000 
units/kg/d in 
4–6 doses
75,000–150,000 
units/kg/d in 
2 or 3 doses
50–75%
25%
 Penicillin V (PO)
0.25–0.5 g qid
25–50 mg/kg/d in 
4 doses
None
None
Antistaphylococcal penicillins
 Cloxacillin, dicloxacillin 
 (PO)
0.25–0.5 g qid
25–50 mg/kg/d in 
4 doses
100%
100%
 Nafcillin (IV)
1–2 g q4–6h
50–100 mg/kg/d in 
4–6 doses
50–75 mg/kg/d in 
2 or 3 doses
100%
100%
 Oxacillin (IV)
1–2 g q4–6h
50–100 mg/kg/d in 
4–6 doses
50–75 mg/kg/d in 
2 or 3 doses
100%
100%
Extended-spectrum penicillins
 Amoxicillin (PO)
0.25–0.5 g tid
20–40 mg/kg/d in 
3 doses
66%
33%
 Amoxicillin/potassium 
 clavulanate (PO)
500/125 tid–
875/125 mg bid
20–40 mg/kg/d in 
3 doses
66%
33%
 Piperacillin (IV)
3–4 g q4–6h
300 mg/kg/d in 
4–6 doses
150 mg/kg/d in 
2 doses
50–75%
25–33%
 Ticarcillin (IV)
3 g q4–6h
200–300 mg/kg/d 
in 4–6 doses
150–200 mg/kg/d in 
2 or 3 doses
50–75%
25–33%
1The total dose should not exceed the adult dose.
2The dose shown is during the first week of life. The daily dose should be increased by approximately 33–50% after the first week of life. The lower dosage range should be used 
for neonates weighing less than 2 kg. After the first month of life, pediatric doses may be used.
796    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 B. Penicillins 
Resistant 
to 
Staphylococcal 
Beta 
Lactamase (Methicillin, Nafcillin, and Isoxazolyl 
Penicillins) 
 These semisynthetic penicillins are indicated for infection by 
β-lactamase-producing staphylococci, although penicillin- 
susceptible strains of streptococci and pneumococci are also suscep-
tible to these agents.  Listeria monocytogenes , enterococci, and 
methicillin-resistant strains of staphylococci are resistant. In recent 
years the empirical use of these drugs has decreased substantially 
because of increasing rates of methicillin-resistance in staphylo-
cocci. However, for infections caused by methicillin-susceptible 
and penicillin-resistant strains of staphylococci, these are consid-
ered the drugs of choice. 
 An isoxazolyl penicillin such as oxacillin, cloxacillin, or dicloxacil-
lin, 0.25–0.5 g orally every 4–6 hours (15–25 mg/kg/d for children), 
is suitable for treatment of mild to moderate localized staphylococcal 
infections. All are relatively acid-stable and have reasonable bioavail-
ability. However, food interferes with absorption, and the drugs 
should be administered 1 hour before or after meals. 
 For serious systemic staphylococcal infections, oxacillin or 
nafcillin, 8–12 g/d, is given by intermittent intravenous infusion 
of 1–2 g every 4–6 hours (50–100 mg/kg/d for children). 
 C. Extended-Spectrum Penicillins (Aminopenicillins, 
Carboxypenicillins, and Ureidopenicillins) 
 These drugs have greater activity than penicillin against gram-
negative bacteria because of their enhanced ability to penetrate the 
gram-negative outer membrane. Like penicillin G, they are inacti-
vated by many β lactamases. 
 The aminopenicillins, ampicillin and amoxicillin, have nearly 
identical spectrums of activity, but amoxicillin is better absorbed 
orally. Amoxicillin, 250–500 mg three times daily, is equivalent to 
the same amount of ampicillin given four times daily. Amoxacillin 
is given orally to treat urinary tract infections, sinusitis, otitis, and 
lower respiratory tract infections. Ampicillin and amoxicillin are 
the most active of the oral β-lactam antibiotics against pneumo-
cocci with elevated MICs to penicillin and are the preferred 
β-lactam antibiotics for treating infections suspected to be caused 
by these strains. Ampicillin (but not amoxicillin) is effective for 
shigellosis. Its use to treat uncomplicated salmonella gastroenteritis 
is controversial because it may prolong the carrier state. 
 Ampicillin, at dosages of 4–12 g/d intravenously, is useful for 
treating serious infections caused by susceptible organisms, includ-
ing anaerobes, enterococci,  L monocytogenes , and β-lactamase-
negative strains of gram-negative cocci and bacilli such as  E coli , and 
 Salmonella sp. Non-β-lactamase producing strains of  H influenzae 
are generally susceptible, but strains that are resistant because of 
altered PBPs are emerging. Many gram-negative species produce β 
lactamases and are resistant, precluding use of ampicillin for empir-
ical therapy of urinary tract infections, meningitis, and typhoid 
fever. Ampicillin is not active against  Klebsiella sp,  Enterobacter 
sp,  P aeruginosa ,  Citrobacter sp,  Serratia marcescens , indole-posi-
tive proteus species, and other gram-negative aerobes that are 
commonly encountered in hospital-acquired infections. These 
organisms produce β lactamase that inactivates ampicillin. 
 Carbenicillin, the first antipseudomonal carboxypenicillin, is 
no longer used in the USA, as there are more active, better toler-
ated alternatives. A carboxypenicillin with activity similar to that 
of carbenicillin is ticarcillin. It is less active than ampicillin against 
enterococci. The ureidopenicillins, piperacillin, mezlocillin, and 
azlocillin, are also active against selected gram-negative bacilli, 
such as  Klebsiella pneumoniae. Although supportive clinical data 
are lacking for superiority of combination therapy over single-
drug therapy, because of the propensity of  P aeruginosa to develop 
resistance during treatment, an antipseudomonal penicillin is fre-
quently used in combination with an aminoglycoside or fluoro-
quinolone for pseudomonal infections outside the urinary tract. 
 Ampicillin, amoxicillin, ticarcillin, and piperacillin are also 
available in combination with one of several β-lactamase inhib-
itors: clavulanic acid, sulbactam, or tazobactam. The addition 
of a β-lactamase inhibitor extends the activity of these penicil-
lins to include β-lactamase-producing strains of  S aureus as well 
as some β-lactamase-producing gram-negative bacteria (see Beta-
Lactamase Inhibitors). 
 Adverse Reactions 
 The penicillins are generally well tolerated, and unfortunately, this 
encourages their misuse and inappropriate use. Most of the serious 
adverse effects are due to hypersensitivity. All penicillins are cross-
sensitizing and cross-reacting. The antigenic determinants are 
degradation products of penicillins, particularly penicilloic acid 
and products of alkaline hydrolysis bound to host protein. A his-
tory of a penicillin reaction is not reliable; about 5–8% of people 
claim such a history, but only a small number of these will have an 
allergic reaction when given penicillin. Less than 1% of persons 
who previously received penicillin without incident will have an 
allergic reaction when given penicillin. Because of the potential for 
anaphylaxis, however, penicillin should be administered with cau-
tion or a substitute drug given if the person has a history of serious 
penicillin allergy. The incidence of allergic reactions in young 
children is negligible. 
 Allergic reactions include anaphylactic shock (very rare—0.05% 
of recipients); serum sickness-type reactions (now rare—urticaria, 
fever, joint swelling, angioneurotic edema, intense pruritus, and 
respiratory compromise occurring 7–12 days after exposure); and a 
variety of skin rashes. Oral lesions, fever, interstitial nephritis (an 
autoimmune reaction to a penicillin-protein complex), eosino-
philia, hemolytic anemia and other hematologic disturbances, and 
vasculitis may also occur. Most patients allergic to penicillins can 
be treated with alternative drugs. However, if necessary (eg, treat-
ment of enterococcal endocarditis or neurosyphilis in a patient 
with serious penicillin allergy), desensitization can be accomplished 
with gradually increasing doses of penicillin. 
 In patients with renal failure, penicillin in high doses can cause 
seizures. Nafcillin is associated with neutropenia; oxacillin can 
cause hepatitis; and methicillin causes interstitial nephritis (and is 
no longer used for this reason). Large doses of penicillins given 
orally may lead to gastrointestinal upset, particularly nausea, 
 vomiting, and diarrhea. Ampicillin has been associated with 
pseudomembranous colitis. Secondary infections such as vaginal 
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    797
candidiasis may occur. Ampicillin and amoxicillin can cause skin 
rashes that are not allergic in nature. These rashes frequently occur 
when aminopenicillins are inappropriately prescribed for a viral 
illness. 
 ■ CEPHALOSPORINS & 
CEPHAMYCINS 
 Cephalosporins are similar to penicillins, but more stable to many 
bacterial β lactamases and therefore have a broader spectrum of 
activity. However, strains of  E coli and  Klebsiella sp expressing 
extended-spectrum β lactamases that can hydrolyze most cepha-
losporins are a growing clinical concern. Cephalosporins are not 
active against enterococci and  L monocytogenes . 
 Chemistry 
 The nucleus of the cephalosporins, 7-aminocephalosporanic acid 
( Figure 43–6 ), bears a close resemblance to 6-aminopenicillanic 
acid ( Figure 43–1 ). The intrinsic antimicrobial activity of natural 
cephalosporins is low, but the attachment of various R 1 and R 2 
groups has yielded hundreds of potent compounds of low toxicity. 
Cephalosporins can be classified into four major groups or gen-
erations, depending mainly on the spectrum of antimicrobial 
activity. 
 FIRST-GENERATION CEPHALOSPORINS 
 First-generation cephalosporins include  cefazolin, cefadroxil, 
cephalexin, cephalothin, cephapirin, and  cephradine. These 
drugs are very active against gram-positive cocci, such as pneumo-
cocci, streptococci, and staphylococci. Traditional cephalosporins are 
not active against methicillin-resistant strains of staphylococci; how-
ever, new compounds have been developed that have activity against 
methicillin-resistant strains (see below).  E coli, K pneumoniae , 
and  Proteus mirabilis are often sensitive, but activity against 
P aeruginosa , indole-positive proteus species,  Enterobacter sp, 
 S marcescens ,  Citrobacter sp, and  Acinetobacter sp is poor. Anaerobic 
cocci (eg, peptococci, peptostreptococci) are usually sensitive, but 
 Bacteroides fragilis is not. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 A. Oral 
 Cephalexin, cephradine, and cefadroxil are absorbed from the gut to 
a variable extent. After oral doses of 500 mg, serum levels are 15–20 
mcg/mL. Urine concentration is usually very high, but in most tis-
sues levels are variable and generally lower than in serum. Cephalexin 
and cephradine are given orally in dosages of 0.25–0.5 g four times 
daily (15–30 mg/kg/d) and cefadroxil in dosages of 0.5–1 g twice 
daily. Excretion is mainly by glomerular filtration and tubular secre-
tion into the urine. Drugs that block tubular secretion, eg, 
probenecid, may increase serum levels substantially. In patients with 
impaired renal function, dosage must be reduced ( Table 43–2 ). 
CH3
CH3
Cephalexin
Cefadroxil
Ceftazidime
Cefepime
Ceftaroline
Cefazolin
N
S
C
N
H2NC
H2N
HOOC
S
N
N
N
N
N
N
CH2
O
N
S
C
R1
NH
O
R2
A
B
R1
R2
O
O
OH
OH
S
S
CH
NH2
COO–
Cefoxitin
Cefaclor
Cefprozil
Cefuroxime
Cefotetan1
Cefotaxime
Cefpodoxime1
Ceftibuten
Cefdinir
Ceftizoxime
Ceftriaxone
CH
NH2
HO
S
S
S
CH2
CH2
CH
HO
NH2
NH2
O
C
C
C
C
N
OCH3
OCH3
N
N
O
S
S
S
C
C
O
O
O
O
C
COOH
N
N
H2N
H2N
OCH3
N
S
C
N
H2N
OCH3
N
S
C
N
H2N
N
S
C
N
H2N
OCH3
CH3
CH3
N
S
S
C
C
C
N
N
H2N
H2N
S
S
N
N+
CH2
N+
CH2
CH2
H
H
CH
CH2
CH3
O
CH3
O
NH2
CH2
O
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH
CH
Cl
C
O
NH2
O
C
CH3
O
C
H3C
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
H
S
N
N
N
H2N
OCH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
 FIGURE 43–6  Structures of some cephalosporins. R 1 and 
R 2 structures are substituents on the 7-aminocephalosporanic acid 
nucleus pictured at the top. Other structures (cefoxitin and below) 
are complete in themselves. 1Additional substituents not shown. 
798    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
TABLE 43–2  Guidelines for dosing of some commonly used cephalosporins and other cell-wall inhibitor 
antibiotics.
Adjusted Dose as a 
Percentage of Normal Dose 
for Renal Failure Based on 
Creatinine Clearance (Clcr)
Antibiotic (Route of 
Administration)
Adult Dose
Pediatric Dose1
Neonatal Dose2
Clcr Approx 
50 mL/min
Clcr Approx 
10 mL/min
First-generation cephalosporins
 Cefadroxil (PO)
0.5–1 g qd–bid
30 mg/kg/d in 2 doses
50%
25%
Cephalexin, 
cephradine (PO)
0.25–0.5 g qid
25–50 mg/kg/d in 4 doses
50%
25%
Cefazolin (IV)
0.5–2 g q8h
25–100 mg/kg/d in 3 or 
4 doses
50%
25%
Second-generation cephalosporins
Cefoxitin (IV)
1–2 g q6–8h
75–150 mg/kg/d in 3 or 
4 doses
50–75%
25%
Cefotetan (IV)
1–2 g q12h
50%
25%
Cefuroxime (IV)
0.75–1.5 g q8h
50–100 mg/kg/d in 3 or 
4 doses
66%
25–33%
Third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins including ceftaroline fosamil
Cefotaxime (IV)
1–2 g q6–12h
50–200 mg/kg/d in 4–6 doses
100 mg/kg/d in 
2 doses
50%
25%
Ceftazidime (IV)
1–2 g q8–12h
75–150 mg/kg/d in 
3 doses
100–150 mg/kg/d in 
2 or 3 doses
50%
25%
Ceftriaxone (IV)
1–4 g q24h
50–100 mg/kg/d in 1 or 
2 doses
50 mg/kg/d qd
None
None
Cefepime (IV)
0.5–2 g q12h
75–120 mg/kg/d in 2 or 
3 divided doses
50%
25%
Ceftaroline fosamil (IV)
600 mg q12h
50–66%
33%
Carbapenems
Ertapenem (IM or IV)
1 g q24h
100%3
50%
Doripenem
500 mg q8h
50%
33%
Imipenem (IV)
0.25–0.5 g q6–8h
75%
50%
Meropenem (IV)
1 g q8h 
(2 g q8h for meningitis)
60–120 mg/kg/d in 3 doses 
(maximum of 2 g q8h)
66%
50%
Glycopeptides
Vancomycin (IV)
30–60 mg/kg/d in 
2–3 doses
40 mg/kg/d in 3 or 4 doses
15 mg/kg load, then 
20 mg/kg/d in 2 doses
40%
10%
Lipopeptides (IV)
Daptomycin
4-6 mg/kg IV daily
None
50%
Telavancin
10 mg/kg IV daily
75%
50%
1The total dose should not exceed the adult dose.
2The dose shown is during the first week of life. The daily dose should be increased by approximately 33–50% after the first week of life. The lower dosage range should be used 
for neonates weighing less than 2 kg. After the first month of life, pediatric doses may be used.
350% of dose for Clcr< 30 mL/min.
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    799
 B. Parenteral 
 Cefazolin is the only first-generation parenteral cephalosporin still 
in general use. After an intravenous infusion of 1 g, the peak level 
of cefazolin is 90–120 mcg/mL. The usual intravenous dosage of 
cefazolin for adults is 0.5–2 g intravenously every 8 hours. 
Cefazolin can also be administered intramuscularly. Excretion is 
via the kidney, and dose adjustments must be made for impaired 
renal function. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Oral drugs may be used for the treatment of urinary tract infec-
tions and staphylococcal or streptococcal infections, including 
cellulitis or soft tissue abscess. However, oral cephalosporins 
should not be relied on in serious systemic infections. 
 Cefazolin penetrates well into most tissues. It is a drug of 
choice for surgical prophylaxis. Cefazolin may also be a choice in 
infections for which it is the least toxic drug (eg, penicillinase-
producing  E coli or  K pneumoniae ) and in individuals with 
staphylococcal or streptococcal infections who have a history of 
penicillin allergy other than immediate hypersensitivity. Cefazolin 
does not penetrate the central nervous system and cannot be used 
to treat meningitis. Cefazolin is an alternative to an antistaphylo-
coccal penicillin for patients who are allergic to penicillin. 
 SECOND-GENERATION 
CEPHALOSPORINS 
 Members of the second-generation cephalosporins include  cefaclor, 
cefamandole, cefonicid, cefuroxime, cefprozil, loracarbef, and 
 ceforanide; and the structurally related cephamycins  cefoxitin, 
cefmetazole , and  cefotetan , which have activity against anaer-
obes. This is a heterogeneous group with marked individual differ-
ences in activity, pharmacokinetics, and toxicity. In general, they 
are active against organisms inhibited by first-generation drugs, 
but in addition they have extended gram-negative coverage. 
 Klebsiella sp (including those resistant to cephalothin) are usually 
sensitive. Cefamandole, cefuroxime, cefonicid, ceforanide, and 
cefaclor are active against  H influenzae but not against serratia or 
 B fragilis . In contrast, cefoxitin, cefmetazole, and cefotetan are 
active against  B fragilis and some serratia strains but are less active 
against  H influenzae . As with first-generation agents, none is active 
against enterococci or  P aeruginosa . Second-generation cepha-
losporins may exhibit in vitro activity against  Enterobacter sp., but 
resistant mutants that constitutively express a chromosomal 
β lactamase that hydrolyzes these compounds (and third-generation 
cephalosporins) are readily selected, and they should not be used 
to treat enterobacter infections. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 A. Oral 
 Cefaclor, cefuroxime axetil, cefprozil, and loracarbef can be given 
orally. The usual dosage for adults is 10–15 mg/kg/d in two to 
four divided doses; children should be given 20–40 mg/kg/d up to 
a maximum of 1 g/d. Except for cefuroxime axetil, these drugs are 
not predictably active against penicillin-non-susceptible pneumo-
cocci and should be used cautiously, if at all, to treat suspected or 
proved pneumococcal infections. Cefaclor is more susceptible to 
β-lactamase hydrolysis compared with the other agents, and its 
usefulness is correspondingly diminished. 
 B. Parenteral 
 After a 1-g intravenous infusion, serum levels are 75–125 mcg/mL 
for most second-generation cephalosporins. Intramuscular admin-
istration is painful and should be avoided. Doses and dosing 
intervals vary depending on the specific agent ( Table 43–2 ). There 
are marked differences in half-life, protein binding, and interval 
between doses. All are renally cleared and require dosage adjust-
ment in renal failure. 
 Clinical Uses 
 The oral second-generation cephalosporins are active against 
β-lactamase-producing  H influenzae or  Moraxella catarrhalis and have 
been primarily used to treat sinusitis, otitis, and lower respiratory tract 
infections, in which these organisms have an important role. Because 
of their activity against anaerobes (including many  B fragilis strains ), 
cefoxitin, cefotetan, or cefmetazole can be used to treat mixed anaero-
bic infections such as peritonitis, diverticulitis, and pelvic inflamma-
tory disease. Cefuroxime is used to treat community-acquired 
pneumonia because it is active against β-lactamase-producing 
 H influenzae or  K pneumoniae and some penicillin-non-susceptible 
pneumococci. Although cefuroxime crosses the blood-brain barrier, it 
is less effective in treatment of meningitis than ceftriaxone or cefo-
taxime and should not be used. 
 THIRD-GENERATION CEPHALOSPORINS 
 Third-generation agents include  cefoperazone, cefotaxime, cef-
tazidime, ceftizoxime, ceftriaxone, cefixime, cefpodoxime prox-
etil, cefdinir, cefditoren pivoxil, ceftibuten, and  moxalactam . 
 Antimicrobial Activity 
 Compared with second-generation agents, these drugs have 
expanded gram-negative coverage, and some are able to cross the 
blood-brain barrier. Third-generation drugs are active against 
 Citrobacter ,  S marcescens , and  Providencia (although resistance can 
emerge during treatment of infections caused by these species due to 
selection of mutants that constitutively produce cephalosporinase).
They are also effective against β-lactamase-producing strains of 
haemophilus and neisseria. Ceftazidime and cefoperazone are the 
only two drugs with useful activity against  P aeruginosa . Like the 
second-generation drugs, third-generation cephalosporins are 
hydrolyzed by constitutively produced AmpC β lactamase, and 
they are not reliably active against  Enterobacter species.  Serratia , 
 Providencia , and  Citrobacter also produce a chromosomally 
encoded cephalosporinase that, when constitutively expressed, can 
confer resistance to third-generation cephalosporins. Ceftizoxime 
and moxalactam are active against  B fragilis . Cefixime, cefdinir, 
800    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
ceftibuten, and cefpodoxime proxetil are oral agents possessing 
similar activity except that cefixime and ceftibuten are much 
less active against pneumococci and have poor activity against 
 S aureus . 
 Pharmacokinetics & Dosage 
 Intravenous infusion of 1 g of a parenteral cephalosporin produces 
serum levels of 60–140 mcg/mL. Third-generation cephalosporins 
penetrate body fluids and tissues well and, with the exception 
of cefoperazone and all oral cephalosporins, achieve levels in 
the cerebrospinal fluid sufficient to inhibit most susceptible 
pathogens. 
 The half-lives of these drugs and the necessary dosing intervals 
vary greatly: Ceftriaxone (half-life 7–8 hours) can be injected once 
every 24 hours at a dosage of 15–50 mg/kg/d. A single daily 
1-g dose is sufficient for most serious infections, with 2 g every 
12 hours recommended for treatment of meningitis. Cefoperazone 
(half-life 2 hours) can be infused every 8–12 hours in a dosage of 
25–100 mg/kg/d. The remaining drugs in the group (half-life 
1–1.7 hours) can be infused every 6–8 hours in dosages between 
2 and 12 g/d, depending on the severity of infection. Cefixime can 
be given orally (200 mg twice daily or 400 mg once daily) for 
urinary tract infections and as a single 400 mg dose for uncompli-
cated gonococcal urethritis and cervicitis. The adult dose for 
 cefpodoxime proxetil or cefditoren pivoxil is 200–400 mg twice 
daily; for ceftibuten, 400 mg once daily; and for cefdinir, 
300 mg/12 h. The excretion of cefoperazone and ceftriaxone is 
mainly through the biliary tract, and no dosage adjustment is 
required in renal insufficiency. The others are excreted by the kidney 
and therefore require dosage adjustment in renal insufficiency. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Third-generation cephalosporins are used to treat a wide variety of 
serious infections caused by organisms that are resistant to most 
other drugs. Strains expressing extended-spectrum β lactamases, 
however, are not susceptible. Third-generation cephalosporins 
should be avoided in treatment of enterobacter infections—even 
if the clinical isolate appears susceptible in vitro—because of 
emergence of resistance. Ceftriaxone and cefotaxime are approved 
for treatment of meningitis, including meningitis caused by pneu-
mococci, meningococci,  H influenzae , and susceptible enteric 
gram-negative rods, but not by  L monocytogenes . Ceftriaxone and 
cefotaxime are the most active cephalosporins against penicillin-
non-susceptible strains of pneumococci and are recommended for 
empirical therapy of serious infections that may be caused by these 
strains. Meningitis caused by strains of pneumococci with penicil-
lin MICs > 1 mcg/mL may not respond even to these agents, and 
addition of vancomycin is recommended. Other potential indica-
tions include empirical therapy of sepsis of unknown cause in 
both the immunocompetent and the immunocompromised 
patient and treatment of infections for which a cephalosporin is 
the least toxic drug available. In neutropenic, febrile immunocom-
promised patients, ceftazidime is often used in combination with 
other antibiotics. 
 FOURTH-GENERATION 
CEPHALOSPORINS 
 Cefepime is an example of a so-called fourth-generation 
 cephalosporin. It is more resistant to hydrolysis by chromosomal 
β lactamases (eg, those produced by  Enterobacter ). However, like 
the third-generation compounds, it is hydrolyzed by extended-
spectrum β lactamases. Cefepime has good activity against 
 P aeruginosa, Enterobacteriaceae , S aureus , and  S pneumoniae . It 
is highly active against  Haemophilus and  Neisseria sp. It penetrates 
well into cerebrospinal fluid. It is cleared by the kidneys and has 
a half-life of 2 hours, and its pharmacokinetic properties are very 
similar to those of ceftazidime. Unlike ceftazidime, however, 
cefepime has good activity against most penicillin-non-susceptible 
strains of streptococci, and it is useful in treatment of entero-
bacter infections. 
 Cephalosporins Active against 
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococci 
 Beta-lactam antibiotics with activity against methicillin-resistant 
staphylococci are currently under development.  Ceftaroline 
 fosamil, the prodrug of the active metabolite ceftaroline, is the 
first such drug to be approved for clinical use in the USA. 
Ceftaroline has increased binding to penicillin-binding protein 2a, 
which mediates methicillin resistance in staphylococci, resulting 
in bactericidal activity against these strains. It has some activity 
against enterococci and a broad gram-negative spectrum, although 
it is not active against extended-spectrum β-lactamase-producing 
strains. Since clinical experience with this and similar investiga-
tional drugs is limited, their role in therapy is not yet defined. 
 ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CEPHALOSPORINS 
 A. Allergy 
 Cephalosporins are sensitizing and may elicit a variety of hyper-
sensitivity reactions that are identical to those of penicillins, 
including anaphylaxis, fever, skin rashes, nephritis, granulocy-
topenia, and hemolytic anemia. However, the chemical nucleus 
of cephalosporins is sufficiently different from that of penicillins 
so that some individuals with a history of penicillin allergy may 
tolerate cephalosporins. The frequency of cross-allergenicity 
between the two groups of drugs is uncertain but is probably 
around 5–10%. Cross-allergenicity appears to be more common 
with penicillins and early generation cephalosporins compared 
with later generation cephalosporins. However, patients with 
a history of anaphylaxis to penicillins should not receive 
 cephalosporins. 
 B. Toxicity 
 Local irritation can produce pain after intramuscular injection and 
thrombophlebitis after intravenous injection. Renal toxicity, 
including interstitial nephritis and tubular necrosis, has been dem-
onstrated with several cephalosporins and caused the withdrawal 
of cephaloridine from clinical use. 
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    801
 Cephalosporins that contain a methylthiotetrazole group (cefa-
mandole, cefmetazole, cefotetan, and cefoperazone) may cause 
hypoprothrombinemia and bleeding disorders. Oral administra-
tion of vitamin K 1 , 10 mg twice weekly, can prevent this. Drugs 
with the methylthiotetrazole ring can also cause severe disulfiram-
like reactions; consequently, alcohol and alcohol-containing 
medications must be avoided. 
 ■ OTHER BETALACTAM DRUGS 
 MONOBACTAMS 
 Monobactams are drugs with a monocyclic β-lactam ring 
( Figure 43–1 ). Their spectrum of activity is limited to aerobic 
gram-negative rods (including  P aeruginosa ). Unlike other β-lactam 
antibiotics, they have no activity against gram-positive bacteria or 
anaerobes.  Aztreonam is the only monobactam available in the 
USA. It has structural similarities to ceftazidime; hence, its gram-
negative spectrum is similar to that of the third-generation cepha-
losporins. It is stable to many β lactamases with the notable 
exceptions being AmpC β lactamases and extended-spectrum 
β lactamases. It penetrates well into the cerebrospinal fluid. 
Aztreonam is given intravenously every 8 hours in a dose of 
1–2 g, providing peak serum levels of 100 mcg/mL. The half-life 
is 1–2 hours and is greatly prolonged in renal failure. 
 Penicillin-allergic patients tolerate aztreonam without reaction. 
Occasional skin rashes and elevations of serum aminotransferases 
occur during administration of aztreonam, but major toxicity is 
uncommon. In patients with a history of penicillin anaphylaxis, aztre-
onam may be used to treat serious infections such as pneumonia, 
meningitis, and sepsis caused by susceptible gram-negative pathogens. 
 BETA-LACTAMASE INHIBITORS 
(CLAVULANIC ACID, SULBACTAM, 
& TAZOBACTAM) 
 These substances resemble β-lactam molecules ( Figure 43–7 ), but 
they have very weak antibacterial action. They are potent inhibitors 
of many but not all bacterial β lactamases and can protect hydrolyz-
able penicillins from inactivation by these enzymes. Beta-lactamase 
inhibitors are most active against Ambler class A β lactamases 
(plasmid-encoded transposable element [TEM] β lactamases in 
particular), such as those produced by staphylococci,  H influenzae, 
N gonorrhoeae, salmonella, shigella,  E coli , and  K pneumoniae . They 
are not good inhibitors of class C β lactamases, which typically are 
chromosomally encoded and inducible, produced by  Enterobacter sp, 
 Citrobacter sp,  S marcescens , and  P aeruginosa , but they do inhibit 
chromosomal β lactamases of  B fragilis and  M catarrhalis . 
 The three inhibitors differ slightly with respect to pharmacol-
ogy, stability, potency, and activity, but these differences usually 
are of little therapeutic significance. Beta-lactamase inhibitors are 
available only in fixed combinations with specific penicillins. The 
antibacterial spectrum of the combination is determined by the 
companion penicillin, not the β-lactamase inhibitor. (The fixed 
combinations available in the USA are listed in Preparations 
Available.) An inhibitor extends the spectrum of a penicillin pro-
vided that the inactivity of the penicillin is due to destruction by 
β lactamase and that the inhibitor is active against the β lactamase 
that is produced. Thus, ampicillin-sulbactam is active against 
β-lactamase-producing  S aureus and  H influenzae but not against 
serratia, which produces a β lactamase that is not inhibited 
by sulbactam. Similarly, if a strain of  P aeruginosa is resistant to 
piperacillin, it is also resistant to piperacillin-tazobactam because 
tazobactam does not inhibit the chromosomal β lactamase pro-
duced by  P aeruginosa . 
 The indications for penicillin-β-lactamase inhibitor combina-
tions are empirical therapy for infections caused by a wide range 
of potential pathogens in both immunocompromised and immu-
nocompetent patients and treatment of mixed aerobic and anaero-
bic infections, such as intra-abdominal infections. Doses are the 
same as those used for the single agents except that the recom-
mended dosage of piperacillin in the piperacillin-tazobactam 
combination is 3–4 g every 6 hours. Adjustments for renal insuf-
ficiency are made based on the penicillin component. 
 CARBAPENEMS 
 The carbapenems are structurally related to β-lactam antibiotics 
( Figure 43–1 ).  Doripenem, ertapenem, imipenem , and 
 meropenem are licensed for use in the USA. Imipenem, the first 
drug of this class, has a wide spectrum with good activity against 
many gram-negative rods, including  P aeruginosa , gram-positive 
C
O
CH
C
N
O
CH
CH2OH
COOH
H2C
Clavulanic acid
O
C
N
CH
H2C
Sulbactam
S
O
O–
COOH
CH3
CH2
R
R = H
Tazobactam
R = 
N
N
N
 FIGURE 43–7 Beta-lactamase inhibitors. 
802    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 organisms, and anaerobes. It is resistant to most β lactamases but 
not carbapenemases or metallo-β lactamases.  Enterococcus faecium , 
methicillin-resistant strains of staphylococci,  Clostridium difficile , 
 Burkholderia cepacia , and  Stenotrophomonas maltophilia are resis-
tant. Imipenem is inactivated by dehydropeptidases in renal 
tubules, resulting in low urinary concentrations. Consequently, it 
is administered together with an inhibitor of renal dehydropepti-
dase,  cilastatin , for clinical use. Doripenem and meropenem are 
similar to imipenem but have slightly greater activity against 
gram-negative aerobes and slightly less activity against gram- 
positives. They are not significantly degraded by renal dehydro-
peptidase and do not require an inhibitor. Ertapenem is less active 
than the other carbapenems against  P aeruginosa and  Acinetobacter 
species. It is not degraded by renal dehydropeptidase. 
 Carbapenems penetrate body tissues and fluids well, including 
the cerebrospinal fluid. All are cleared renally, and the dose must be 
reduced in patients with renal insufficiency. The usual dosage of 
imipenem is 0.25–0.5 g given intravenously every 6–8 hours (half-
life 1 hour). The usual adult dosage of meropenem is 0.5–1 g 
intravenously every 8 hours. The usual adult dosage of doripenem 
is 0.5 g administered as a 1- or 4-hour infusion every 8 hours. 
Ertapenem has the longest half-life (4 hours) and is administered 
as a once-daily dose of 1 g intravenously or intramuscularly. 
Intramuscular ertapenem is irritating, and for that reason the drug 
is formulated with 1% lidocaine for administration by this route. 
 A carbapenem is indicated for infections caused by susceptible 
organisms that are resistant to other available drugs, eg,  P aeruginosa , 
and for treatment of mixed aerobic and anaerobic infections. 
Carbapenems are active against many penicillin-non-susceptible 
strains of pneumococci. Carbapenems are highly active in the 
treatment of enterobacter infections because they are resistant to 
destruction by the β lactamase produced by these organisms. 
Clinical experience suggests that carbapenems are also the treat-
ment of choice for infections caused by extended-spectrum 
β-lactamase-producing gram-negative bacteria. Ertapenem is 
insufficiently active against  P aeruginosa and should not be used to 
treat infections caused by that organism. Imipenem, meropenem, 
or doripenem, with or without an aminoglycoside, may be effec-
tive treatment for febrile neutropenic patients. 
 The most common adverse effects of carbapenems—which 
tend to be more common with imipenem—are nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, skin rashes, and reactions at the infusion sites. Excessive 
levels of imipenem in patients with renal failure may lead to 
 seizures. Meropenem, doripenem, and ertapenem are much less 
likely to cause seizures than imipenem. Patients allergic to penicil-
lins may be allergic to carbapenems as well. 
 ■ GLYCOPEPTIDE ANTIBIOTICS 
 VANCOMYCIN 
 Vancomycin is an antibiotic produced by  Streptococcus orientalis 
and  Amycolatopsis orientalis. With the exception of  Flavobacterium , 
it is active only against gram-positive bacteria. Vancomycin is a 
glycopeptide of molecular weight 1500. It is water soluble and 
quite stable. 
 Mechanisms of Action & Basis 
of Resistance 
 Vancomycin inhibits cell wall synthesis by binding firmly to the 
D-Ala-D-Ala terminus of nascent peptidoglycan pentapeptide 
( Figure 43–5 ). This inhibits the transglycosylase, preventing fur-
ther elongation of peptidoglycan and cross-linking. The peptido-
glycan is thus weakened, and the cell becomes susceptible to lysis. 
The cell membrane is also damaged, which contributes to the 
antibacterial effect. 
 Resistance to vancomycin in enterococci is due to modification 
of the D-Ala-D-Ala binding site of the peptidoglycan building 
block in which the terminal D-Ala is replaced by D-lactate. This 
results in the loss of a critical hydrogen bond that facilitates high-
affinity binding of vancomycin to its target and loss of activity. 
This mechanism is also present in vancomycin-resistant  S aureus 
strains (MIC ≥ 16 mcg/mL), which have acquired the enterococ-
cal resistance determinants. The underlying mechanism for 
reduced vancomycin susceptibility in vancomycin-intermediate 
strains (MICs = 4–8 mcg/mL) of  S aureus is not fully known. 
However these strains have altered cell wall metabolism that 
results in a thickened cell wall with increased numbers of D-Ala-
D-Ala residues, which serve as dead-end binding sites for vanco-
mycin. Vancomycin is sequestered within the cell wall by these 
false targets and may be unable to reach its site of action. 
 Antibacterial Activity 
 Vancomycin is bactericidal for gram-positive bacteria in concentra-
tions of 0.5–10 mcg/mL. Most pathogenic staphylococci, includ-
ing those producing β lactamase and those resistant to nafcillin and 
methicillin, are killed by 2 mcg/mL or less. Vancomycin kills 
staphylococci relatively slowly and only if cells are actively dividing; 
the rate is less than that of the penicillins both in vitro and in vivo. 
Vancomycin is synergistic in vitro with gentamicin and streptomy-
cin against  Enterococcus faecium and  Enterococcus faecalis strains that 
do not exhibit high levels of aminoglycoside resistance. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Vancomycin is poorly absorbed from the intestinal tract and is 
administered orally only for the treatment of antibiotic-associated 
colitis caused by  C difficile . Parenteral doses must be administered 
intravenously. A 1-hour intravenous infusion of 1 g produces 
blood levels of 15–30 mcg/mL for 1–2 hours. The drug is widely 
distributed in the body. Cerebrospinal fluid levels 7–30% of 
simultaneous serum concentrations are achieved if there is menin-
geal inflammation. Ninety percent of the drug is excreted by 
glomerular filtration. In the presence of renal insufficiency, strik-
ing accumulation may occur ( Table 43–2 ). In functionally 
anephric patients, the half-life of vancomycin is 6–10 days. A 
significant amount (roughly 50%) of vancomycin is removed 
 during a standard hemodialysis run when a modern, high-flux 
membrane is used. 
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    803
 Clinical Uses 
 Important indications for parenteral vancomycin are bloodstream 
infections and endocarditis caused by methicillin-resistant staphy-
lococci. However, vancomycin is not as effective as an antistaphy-
lococcal penicillin for treatment of serious infections such as 
endocarditis caused by methicillin-susceptible strains. Vancomycin 
in combination with gentamicin is an alternative regimen for 
treatment of enterococcal endocarditis in a patient with serious 
penicillin allergy. Vancomycin (in combination with cefotaxime, 
ceftriaxone, or rifampin) is also recommended for treatment of 
meningitis suspected or known to be caused by a penicillin-resis-
tant strain of pneumococcus (ie, penicillin MIC > 1 mcg/mL). 
The recommended dosage in a patient with normal renal function 
is 30–60 mg/kg/d in two or three divided doses. The traditional 
dosing regimen in adults with normal renal function is 1 g every 
12 hours (∼ 30 mg/kg/d); however, this dose will not typically 
achieve the trough concentrations (15–20 mcg/mL) recom-
mended for serious infections. For serious infections (see below), 
a starting dose of 45–60 mg/kg/d should be given with titration 
of the dose to achieve trough levels of 15–20 mcg/mL. The dosage 
in children is 40 mg/kg/d in three or four divided doses. Clearance 
of vancomycin is directly proportional to creatinine clearance, and 
the dosage is reduced accordingly in patients with renal insuffi-
ciency. For functionally anephric adult patients, a 1-g dose admin-
istered once a week may be sufficient. For patients receiving 
hemodialysis, a common dosing regimen is a 1-g loading dose fol-
lowed by 500 mg after each dialysis session. Patients receiving a 
prolonged course of therapy should have serum concentrations 
checked. Recommended trough concentrations are 10–15 mcg/mL 
for mild to moderate infections such as cellulitis and 15–20 mcg/mL 
for more serious infections such as endocarditis, meningitis, and 
necrotizing pneumonia. 
 Oral vancomycin, 0.125–0.25 g every 6 hours, is used to treat 
antibiotic-associated colitis caused by  C difficile . Because of the 
emergence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci and the potential 
selective pressure of oral vancomycin for these resistant organisms, 
metronidazole had been preferred as initial therapy over the last 
two decades. However, receipt of oral vancomycin does not appear 
to be a significant risk factor for acquisition of vancomycin- 
resistant enterococci. Additionally, recent clinical data suggest that 
vancomycin is associated with a better clinical response than 
 metronidazole for more severe cases of  C difficile colitis. Therefore, 
oral vancomycin may be used as a first line treatment for severe 
cases or for cases that fail to respond to metronidazole. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Adverse reactions are encountered in about 10% of cases. Most 
reactions are minor. Vancomycin is irritating to tissue, resulting in 
phlebitis at the site of injection. Chills and fever may occur. 
Ototoxicity is rare and nephrotoxicity uncommon with current 
preparations. However, administration with another ototoxic or 
nephrotoxic drug, such as an aminoglycoside, increases the risk of 
these toxicities. Ototoxicity can be minimized by maintaining 
peak serum concentrations below 60 mcg/mL. Among the more 
common reactions is the so-called “red man” or “red neck” 
 syndrome. This infusion-related flushing is caused by release of 
histamine. It can be largely prevented by prolonging the infusion 
period to 1–2 hours or pretreatment with an antihistamine such 
as diphenhydramine. 
 TEICOPLANIN 
 Teicoplanin is a glycopeptide antibiotic that is very similar to 
vancomycin in mechanism of action and antibacterial spectrum. 
Unlike vancomycin, it can be given intramuscularly as well as 
intravenously. Teicoplanin has a long half-life (45–70 hours), per-
mitting once-daily dosing. This drug is available in Europe but has 
not been approved for use in the United States. 
 TELAVANCIN 
 Telavancin is a semisynthetic lipoglycopeptide derived from 
 vancomycin. Telavancin is active versus gram-positive bacteria, 
including strains with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin. 
Telavancin has two mechanisms of action. Like vancomycin, tela-
vancin inhibits cell wall synthesis by binding to the D-Ala-D-Ala 
terminus of peptidoglycan in the growing cell wall. In addition, it 
disrupts the bacterial cell membrane potential and increases mem-
brane permeability. The half-life of telavancin is approximately 
8 hours, which supports once-daily intravenous dosing. Telavancin 
is approved for treatment of complicated skin and soft tissue infec-
tions at a dose of 10 mg/kg IV daily. Unlike vancomycin therapy, 
monitoring of serum telavancin levels is not required. Telavancin 
is potentially teratogenic, so administration to pregnant women 
must be avoided. 
 DALBAVANCIN 
 Dalbavancin is a semisynthetic lipoglycopeptide derived from 
teicoplanin. Dalbavancin shares the same mechanism of action as 
vancomycin and teicoplanin but has improved activity against 
many gram-positive bacteria including methicillin-resistant and 
vancomycin-intermediate  S aureus . It is not active against most 
strains of vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Dalbavancin has an 
extremely long half-life of 6–11 days, which allows for once-
weekly intravenous administration. Development of dalbavancin 
has been put on hold pending additional clinical trials. 
 ■ OTHER CELL WALL OR 
MEMBRANEACTIVE AGENTS 
 DAPTOMYCIN 
 Daptomycin is a novel cyclic lipopeptide fermentation product of 
 Streptomyces roseosporus ( Figure 43–8 ). It was discovered decades 
ago but has only recently been developed as the need for drugs 
804    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
active against resistant organisms has become more acute. Its spec-
trum of activity is similar to that of vancomycin except that it is 
more rapidly bactericidal in vitro and may be active against 
 vancomycin-resistant strains of enterococci and  S aureus . The 
precise mechanism of action is not fully understood, but it is 
known to bind to the cell membrane via calcium-dependent inser-
tion of its lipid tail. This results in depolarization of the cell mem-
brane with potassium efflux and rapid cell death ( Figure 43–9 ). 
Daptomycin is cleared renally. The approved doses are 4 mg/kg/
dose for treatment of skin and soft tissue infections and 6 mg/kg/
dose for treatment of bacteremia and endocarditis once daily in 
patients with normal renal function and every other day in 
patients with creatinine clearance of less than 30 mL/min. For 
serious infections, many experts recommend using doses of dapto-
mycin higher than 6 mg/kg/dose. In clinical trials powered for 
noninferiority, daptomycin was equivalent in efficacy to vancomy-
cin. It can cause myopathy, and creatine phosphokinase levels 
should be monitored weekly. Pulmonary surfactant antagonizes 
daptomycin, and it should not be used to treat pneumonia. 
Daptomycin can also cause an allergic pneumonitis in patients 
receiving prolonged therapy (> 2 weeks). Treatment failures have 
been reported in association with an increase in daptomycin MIC 
for clinical isolates obtained during therapy, but the relation 
between the increase in MIC and treatment failure is unclear at 
this point. Daptomycin is an effective alternative to vancomycin, 
and its ultimate role continues to unfold. 
=
O
=
L-Asp
L-Thr
L-Asp
L-Asn
 L-Trp NH
Decanoic acid
Gly
L-Orn
L-Asp
D-Ala
Gly
D-Ser
3-MeGlu (L-theo)
L-Kyn
O
C
O
 FIGURE 43–8 Structure of daptomycin. (Kyn, deaminated tryptophan.) 
 FIGURE 43–9 Proposed mechanism of action of daptomycin. Daptomycin first binds to the cytoplasmic membrane (step 1) and then forms 
complexes in a calcium-dependent manner (steps 2 and 3). Complex formation causes a rapid loss of cellular potassium, possibly by pore 
 formation, and membrane depolarization. This is followed by arrest of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis resulting in cell death. Cell lysis does 
not occur. 
K+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Daptomycin
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    805
 FOSFOMYCIN 
 Fosfomycin trometamol, a stable salt of fosfomycin (phosphono-
mycin), inhibits a very early stage of bacterial cell wall synthesis 
( Figure 43–5 ). An analog of phosphoenolpyruvate, it is structurally 
unrelated to any other antimicrobial agent. It inhibits the cytoplas-
mic enzyme enolpyruvate transferase by covalently binding to the 
cysteine residue of the active site and blocking the addition of 
phosphoenolpyruvate to UDP-N-acetylglucosamine. This reaction 
is the first step in the formation of UDP- N- acetylmuramic acid, 
the precursor of  N -acetylmuramic acid, which is found only in 
bacterial cell walls. The drug is transported into the bacterial cell by 
glycerophosphate or glucose 6-phosphate transport systems. 
Resistance is due to inadequate transport of drug into the cell. 
 Fosfomycin is active against both gram-positive and gram-
negative organisms at concentrations ≥ 125 mcg/mL. Susceptibility 
tests should be performed in growth medium supplemented with 
glucose 6-phosphate to minimize false-positive indications of 
resistance. In vitro synergism occurs when fosfomycin is combined 
with β-lactam antibiotics, aminoglycosides, or fluoroquinolones. 
 Fosfomycin trometamol is available in both oral and parenteral 
formulations, although only the oral preparation is approved for 
use in the USA. Oral bioavailability is approximately 40%. Peak 
serum concentrations are 10 mcg/mL and 30 mcg/mL following 
a 2-g or 4-g oral dose, respectively. The half-life is approximately 
4 hours. The active drug is excreted by the kidney, with urinary 
concentrations exceeding MICs for most urinary tract pathogens. 
 Fosfomycin is approved for use as a single 3-g dose for treat-
ment of uncomplicated lower urinary tract infections in women. 
The drug appears to be safe for use in pregnancy. 
 BACITRACIN 
 Bacitracin is a cyclic peptide mixture first obtained from the Tracy 
strain of  Bacillus subtilis in 1943. It is active against gram-positive 
microorganisms. Bacitracin inhibits cell wall formation by inter-
fering with dephosphorylation in cycling of the lipid carrier that 
transfers peptidoglycan subunits to the growing cell wall 
( Figure 43–5 ). There is no cross-resistance between bacitracin and 
other antimicrobial drugs. 
 Bacitracin is highly nephrotoxic when administered systemi-
cally and is only used topically ( Chapter 61 ). Bacitracin is poorly 
absorbed. Topical application results in local antibacterial activity 
without systemic toxicity. Bacitracin, 500 units/g in an ointment 
base (often combined with polymyxin or neomycin), is indicated 
for the suppression of mixed bacterial flora in surface lesions of 
the skin, in wounds, or on mucous membranes. Solutions of 
bacitracin containing 100–200 units/mL in saline can be used for 
irrigation of joints, wounds, or the pleural cavity. 
 CYCLOSERINE 
 Cycloserine is an antibiotic produced by  Streptomyces orchidaceous . 
It is water soluble and very unstable at acid pH. Cycloserine inhib-
its many gram-positive and gram-negative organisms, but it is used 
almost exclusively to treat tuberculosis caused by strains of 
 Mycobacterium tuberculosis resistant to first-line agents. Cycloserine is 
a structural analog of D-alanine and inhibits the incorporation of 
D-alanine into peptidoglycan pentapeptide by inhibiting alanine race-
mase, which converts L-alanine to D-alanine, and D-alanyl- D-alanine 
ligase ( Figure 43–5 ). After ingestion of 0.25 g of cycloserine 
blood levels reach 20–30 mcg/mL—sufficient to inhibit many 
strains of mycobacteria and gram-negative bacteria. The drug is 
widely distributed in tissues. Most of the drug is excreted in active 
form into the urine. The dosage for treating tuberculosis is 0.5 to 
1 g/d in two or three divided doses. 
 Cycloserine causes serious dose-related central nervous system 
toxicity with headaches, tremors, acute psychosis, and convul-
sions. If oral dosages are maintained below 0.75 g/d, such effects 
can usually be avoided. 
SUMMARY Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
PENICILLINS
 • Penicillin G
Prevents bacterial cell wall 
 synthesis by binding to and 
inhibiting cell wall 
 transpeptidases
Rapid bactericidal 
activity against 
susceptible 
bacteria
Streptococcal infections, 
meningococcal infections, 
neurosyphilis
IV administration • rapid renal clearance 
(half-life 30 min, so requires frequent dosing 
(every 4 h) • Toxicity: Immediate hypersensi-
tivity, rash, seizures
 • Penicillin V: Oral, low systemic levels limit widespread use
 • Benzathine penicillin, procaine penicillin: Intramuscular, long-acting formulations
 • Nafcillin, oxacillin: Intravenous, added stability to staphylococcal β lactamase, biliary clearance
 • Ampicillin, amoxicillin, ticarcillin, piperacillin: Greater activity versus gram-negative bacteria; addition of β-lactamase inhibitor restores activity against many 
  β-lactamase-producing bacteria
(continued )
806    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
CEPHALOSPORINS
 • Cefazolin
Prevents bacterial cell wall syn-
thesis by binding to and inhibit-
ing cell wall transpeptidases
Rapid bactericidal 
activity against 
susceptible 
 bacteria
Skin and soft tissue 
 infections, urinary tract 
 infections, surgical 
 prophylaxis
IV administration • renal clearance (half-life 
1.5 h) • dosed every 8 h • poor penetration 
into the central nervous system (CNS) • 
Toxicity: Rash, drug fever
 • Cephalexin: Oral, first-generation drug, used for treating skin and soft tissue infections and urinary tract infections
 • Cefuroxime: Oral and intravenous, second-generation drug, improved activity versus pneumococcus and Haemophilus influenzae
 • Cefotetan, cefoxitin: Intravenous, second-generation drugs, activity versus Bacteroides fragilis allows for use in abdominal/pelvic infections
 • Ceftriaxone: Intravenous, third-generation drug, mixed clearance with long half-life (6 hours), good CNS penetration, many uses including pneumonia, 
 
  meningitis, pyelonephritis, and gonorrhea
 • Cefotaxime: Intravenous, third-generation, similar to ceftriaxone; however, clearance is renal and half-life is 1 hour
 • Ceftazidime: Intravenous, third-generation drug, poor gram-positive activity, good activity versus Pseudomonas
 • Cefepime: Intravenous, fourth-generation drug, broad activity with improved stability to chromosomal β lactamase
 • Ceftaroline: Intravenous, active against methicillin-resistant staphylococci, broad gram-negative activity
CARBAPENEMS
 • Imipenem-cilastatin
Prevents bacterial cell wall 
 synthesis by binding to 
and inhibiting cell wall 
 transpeptidases
Rapid bactericidal 
activity against sus-
ceptible bacteria
Serious infections such as 
pneumonia and sepsis
IV administration • renal clearance (half-life 
1 h), dosed every 6–8 h, cilastatin added to 
prevent hydrolysis by renal dehydropepti-
dase • Toxicity: Seizures especially in renal 
failure or with high doses (> 2 g/d)
 • Meropenem, doripenem: Intravenous, similar activity to imipenem; stable to renal dehydropeptidase, lower incidence of seizures
 • Ertapenem: Intravenous, longer half-life allows for once-daily dosing, lacks activity versus Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter
MONOBACTAMS
 • Aztreonam
Prevents bacterial cell wall 
 synthesis by binding to and 
inhibiting cell wall 
 transpeptidases
Rapid bactericidal 
activity against 
susceptible 
 bacteria
Infections caused by aerobic, 
gram-negative bacteria in 
patients with immediate 
hypersensitivity to penicillins
IV administration • renal clearance half-life 
1.5 h • dosed every 8 h • Toxicity: No cross-
allergenicity with penicillins
GLYCOPEPTIDE
 • Vancomycin
Inhibits cell wall synthesis by 
binding to the D-Ala-D-Ala termi-
nus of nascent peptidoglycan
Bactericidal 
 activity against 
susceptible 
 bacteria, slower 
kill than β-lactam 
 antibiotics
Infections caused by gram-
positive bacteria including 
sepsis, endocarditis, and 
meningitis • C difficile colitis 
(oral formulation)
Oral, IV administration • renal clearance 
 (half-life 6 h) • starting dose of 30 mg/kg/d in 
two or three divided doses in patients with 
normal renal function • trough concentra-
tions of 10–15 mcg/mL sufficient for most 
infections • Toxicity: “Red man” syndrome 
• nephrotoxicity uncommon
 • Teicoplanin: Intravenous, similar to vancomycin except that long half-life (45–75 h) permits once-daily dosing
 • Dalbavancin: Intravenous, very long half-life (6–11 days) permits once-weekly dosing, more active than vancomycin
 • Telavancin: Intravenous, dual mechanism of action results in improved activity against bacteria with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin, once-daily dosing
LIPOPEPTIDE
 • Daptomycin
Binds to cell membrane, causing 
depolarization and rapid cell 
death
Bactericidal activ-
ity against suscep-
tible bacteria 
• more rapidly 
bactericidal than 
vancomycin
Infections caused by gram-
positive bacteria including 
sepsis and endocarditis
IV administration • renal clearance (half-life 
8 h) • dosed once daily • inactivated by pul-
monary surfactant so cannot be used to 
treat pneumonia • Toxicity: Myopathy 
• monitoring of weekly creatine 
 phosphokinase levels recommended
CHAPTER 43 Beta-Lactam & Other Cell Wall- & Membrane-Active Antibiotics    807
PENICILLINS
Amoxicillin (generic, Amoxil, others)
Oral: 125, 200, 250, 400 mg chewable tablets; 500, 875 mg tablets; 
250, 500 mg capsules; powder to reconstitute for 50, 125, 200, 250, 
400 mg/mL solution
Amoxicillin/potassium clavulanate (generic, Augmentin)1
Oral: 250, 500, 875 mg tablets; 125, 200, 250, 400 mg chewable 
 tablets; 1000 mg extended-release tablet; powder to reconstitute 
for 125, 200, 250 mg/5 mL suspension
Ampicillin (generic)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules; powder to reconstitute for 125, 250 mg 
suspensions
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (125, 250, 500 mg, 
1, 2 g per vial)
Ampicillin/sulbactam sodium (generic, Unasyn)2
Parenteral: 1, 2 g ampicillin powder to reconstitute for IV or 
IM injection
Carbenicillin (Geocillin)
Oral: 382 mg tablets
Dicloxacillin (generic)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules
Nafcillin (generic)
Parenteral: 1, 2 g per IV piggyback units
Oxacillin (generic)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (0.5, 1, 2, 10 g 
per vial)
Penicillin G (generic, Pentids, Pfizerpen)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 
20 million units)
Penicillin G benzathine (Permapen, Bicillin)
Parenteral: 0.6, 1.2, 2.4 million units per dose
Penicillin G procaine (generic)
Parenteral: 0.6, 1.2 million units/mL for IM injection only
Penicillin V (generic, V-Cillin, Pen-Vee K, others)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; powder to reconstitute for 125, 250 mg/5 mL 
solution
Piperacillin (Pipracil)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (2, 3, 4 g per vial)
Piperacillin and tazobactam sodium (Zosyn)3
Parenteral: 2, 3, 4 g powder to reconstitute for IV injection
Ticarcillin (Ticar)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (1, 3, 6 g per vial)
Ticarcillin/clavulanate potassium (Timentin)4
Parenteral: 3 g powder to reconstitute for injection
CEPHALOSPORINS & OTHER BETA-LACTAM 
DRUGS
Narrow-Spectrum (First-Generation) Cephalosporins
Cefadroxil (generic, Duricef)
Oral: 500 mg capsules; 1 g tablets; 125, 250, 500 mg/5 mL suspension
Cefazolin (generic, Ancef, Kefzol)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (0.25, 0.5, 1 g per 
vial or IV piggyback unit)
Cephalexin (generic, Keflex, others)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules and tablets; 1 g tablets; 125, 250 mg/5 mL 
suspension
Intermediate-Spectrum (Second-Generation) Cephalosporins
Cefaclor (generic, Ceclor)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules; 375, 500 mg extended-release tablets; 
powder to reconstitute for 125, 187, 250, 375 mg/5 mL suspension
Cefmetazole (Zefazone)
Parenteral: 1, 2 g powder for IV injection
Cefotetan (Cefotan)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (1, 2, 10 g per vial)
Cefoxitin (Mefoxin)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (1, 2, 10 g per vial)
Cefprozil (Cefzil)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; powder to reconstitute 125, 250 mg/5 mL 
suspension
Cefuroxime (generic, Ceftin, Kefurox, Zinacef)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mg tablets; 125, 250 mg/5 mL suspension
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (0.75, 1.5, 7.5 g per 
vial or infusion pack)
Loracarbef (Lorabid)
Oral: 200, 400 mg capsules; powder for 100, 200 mg/5 mL suspension
Broad-Spectrum (Third- & Fourth-Generation) Cephalosporins
Cefdinir (Omnicef)
Oral: 300 mg capsules; 125 mg/5 mL suspension
Cefditoren (Spectracef)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Cefepime (Maxipime)
Parenteral: powder for injection 0.5, 1, 2 g
Cefixime (Suprax)
Oral: 200, 400 mg tablets; powder for oral suspension, 
100 mg/5 mL
Cefotaxime (Claforan)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (0.5, 1, 2 g per vial)
Cefpodoxime proxetil (Vantin)
Oral: 100, 200 mg tablets; 50, 100 mg granules for suspension in 5 mL
Ceftaroline fosamil (Teflaro)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (0.6 g per vial)
Ceftazidime (generic, Fortaz, Tazidime)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (0.5, 1, 2 g per vial)
Ceftibuten (Cedax)
Oral: 400 mg capsules; 90, 180 mg/5 mL powder for oral 
suspension
Ceftizoxime (Cefizox)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection and solution for 
injection (0.5, 1, 2 g per vial)
Ceftriaxone (Rocephin)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 10 g 
per vial)
Carbapenems & Monobactam
Aztreonam (Azactam)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (0.5, 1, 2 g)
Doripenem (Doribax)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (500 mg per vial)
Ertapenem (Invanz)
Parenteral: 1 g powder to reconstitute for IV (0.9% diluent) or IM 
(1% lidocaine diluent) injection
Imipenem/cilastatin (Primaxin)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute for injection (250, 500, 750 mg 
imipenem per vial)
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
808    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 REFERENCES 
 Biek D et al: Ceftaroline fosamil: A novel broad-spectrum cephalosporin with expanded 
Gram-positive activity. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010;65(Suppl 4):iv9. 
 Billeter M et al: Dalbavancin: A novel once-weekly lipoglycopeptide antibiotic. 
Clin Infect Dis 2008;46:577. 
 Bush K et al: Anti-MRSA beta-lactams in development, with a focus on ceftobiprole: 
The first anti-MRSA beta-lactam to demonstrate clinical efficacy. Expert Opin 
Investig Drugs 2007;16:419. 
 Carpenter CF, Chambers HF: Daptomycin: Another novel agent for treating infec-
tions due to drug-resistant gram-positive pathogens. Clin Infect Dis 
2004;38:994. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Vancomycin-resistant  Staphylococcus 
aureus —Pennsylvania, 2002. JAMA 2002;288:2116. 
 Chow JW et al:  Enterobacter bacteremia: Clinical features and emergence of anti-
biotic resistance during therapy. Ann Intern Med 1991;115:585. 
 Fowler VG et al: Daptomycin versus standard therapy for bacteremia and endo-
carditis caused by  Staphylococcus aureus . N Engl J Med 2006;355:653. 
 Hiramatsu K et al: Methicillin resistant  Staphylococcus aureus clinical strain with 
reduced vancomycin susceptibility. J Antimicrob Chemother 1997;40:135. 
 Hiramatsu K: Vancomycin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus : A new model of antibi-
otic resistance. Lancet Infect Dis 2001;1:147. 
 Jacoby GA, Munoz-Price LS: The new beta-lactamases. N Engl J Med 
2005;352:380. 
Meropenem (Merrem IV)
Parenteral: powder for injection (0.5, 1 g per vial)
OTHER DRUGS DISCUSSED IN THIS 
CHAPTER
Cycloserine (Seromycin Pulvules)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Daptomycin (Cubicin)
Parenteral: 0.25 or 0.5 g lyophilized powder to reconstitute for 
IV injection
Fosfomycin (Monurol)
Oral: 3 g packet
Telavancin (Vibativ)
Parenteral: 0.25 and 0.75 g powder to reconstitute for IV injection
Vancomycin (generic, Vancocin, Vancoled)
Oral: 125, 250 mg pulvules; powder to reconstitute for 250 mg/5 mL, 
500 mg/6 mL solution
Parenteral: 0.5, 1, 5, 10 g powder to reconstitute for IV injection
1Clavulanate content varies with the formulation; see package insert.
2Sulbactam content is half the ampicillin content.
3Tazobactam content is 12.5% of the piperacillin content.
4Clavulanate content 0.1 g.
Meropenem (Merrem IV)
Parenteral: powder for injection (0.5, 1 g per vial)
OTHER DRUGS DISCUSSED IN THIS
CHAPTER
Cycloserine (Seromycin Pulvules)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Daptomycin (Cubicin)
Parenteral: 0.25 or 0.5 g lyophilized powder to reconstitute for
IV injection
Fosfomycin (Monurol)
Oral: 3 g packet
Telavancin (Vibativ)
Parenteral: 0.25 and 0.75 g powder to reconstitute for IV injection
Vancomycin (generic, Vancocin, Vancoled)
Oral: 125, 250 mg pulvules; powder to reconstitute for 250 mg/5 mL,
500 mg/6 mL solution
Parenteral: 0.5, 1, 5, 10 g powder to reconstitute for IV injection
 Keating GM, Perry CM: Ertapenem: A review of its use in the treatment of bacterial 
infections. Drugs 2005;65:2151. 
 Leonard SN, Rybak MJ: Telavancin: An antimicrobial with a multifunctional 
mechanism of action for the treatment of serious gram-positive infections. 
Pharmacotherapy 2008;28:458. 
 Mandell L: Doripenem: A new carbapenem in the treatment of nosocomial infec-
tions. Clin Infect Dis 2009;49(Suppl 1):S1. 
 Noskin GA et al: National trends in  Staphylococcus aureus infection rates: Impact 
on economic burden and mortality over a 6-year period. Clin Infect Dis 
2007;45:1132. 
 Park MA, Li JT: Diagnosis and management of penicillin allergy. Mayo Clin Proc 
2005;80:405. 
 Rybak M et al: Therapeutic monitoring of vancomycin in adults patients: A con-
sensus review of the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America, and the Society of Infectious Diseases 
Pharmacists. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2009;66:82. 
 Sanders EW Jr, Tenny JH, Kessler RE: Efficacy of cefepime in the treatment of 
infections due to multiply resistant Enterobacter species. Clin Infect Dis 
1996;23:454. 
 Wexler HM: In vitro activity of ertapenem: Review of recent studies. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2004;53(Suppl 2):ii11. 
 Zar FA et al: A comparison of vancomycin and metronidazole for the treat-
ment of  Clostridium difficile -associated diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 
2007;45:302. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
An intravenous third-generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone 
or cefotaxime) with adequate penetration into inflamed 
meninges that is active against the common bacteria that 
cause community-acquired pneumonia and meningitis 
(pneumococcus, meningococcus,  Haemophilus ) should be 
ordered. Vancomycin should also be administered until cul-
ture and sensitivity results are available in case the patient is 
infected with a resistant pneumococcus. Although the patient 
has a history of rash to amoxicillin, the presentation is not 
consistent with an anaphylactic reaction. The aminopenicillins 
are frequently associated with rashes that are not allergic in 
nature. In this instance, cross-reactivity with a cephalosporin 
is unlikely.
809
 Tetracyclines, Macrolides, 
Clindamycin, 
Chloramphenicol, 
Streptogramins, 
& Oxazolidinones 
 Daniel H. Deck, PharmD  
 & Lisa G. Winston, MD 
endocervical canal. No cervical motion tenderness is present. A 
first-catch urine specimen is obtained to be tested for  chlamydia 
and gonococcus. A pregnancy test is also ordered as the patient 
reports she “missed her last period.” Pending these results, the 
decision is made to treat her empirically for gonococcal and 
chlamydial cervicitis. What are two potential treatment options 
for her possible chlamydial infection? How does her potential 
pregnancy affect the treatment decision?
C A S E  S T U D Y
A 19-year-old woman with no significant past medical history 
presents to her college medical clinic complaining of a 2-week 
history of foul-smelling vaginal discharge. She denies any fever 
or abdominal pain but does report vaginal bleeding after sexual 
intercourse. When questioned about her sexual activity, she 
reports having vaginal intercourse, at times unprotected, with 
two men in the last 6 months. A pelvic examination is per-
formed and is positive for mucopurulent discharge from the 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 The drugs described in this chapter inhibit bacterial protein syn-
thesis by binding to and interfering with ribosomes. Most are 
bacteriostatic, but a few are bactericidal against certain organisms. 
44
Because of overuse, tetracycline and macrolide resistance is 
 common. Except for tigecycline and the streptogramins, these 
antibiotics are usually administered orally. 
810    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 ■ TETRACYCLINES 
 All of the tetracyclines have the basic structure shown below: 
OH
R7
H
OH
OH
C
OH
NH2
OH
O
O
O
H
R6
N(CH3)2
R5
10
9
2
3
4
1
5
6
11
7
8
12
CH3
H
CI
35
Renal
Clearance
(mL/min)
R5
R6
R7
Chlortetracycline
CH3
OH
H
90
Oxytetracycline
CH3
H
H
65
Tetracycline
H
H
CI
35
Demeclocycline
CH2*
OH
H
31
Methacycline
CH3*
OH
H
16
Doxycycline
H
H
N(CH3)2
OH at position 6 on methacycline and doxycycline.
10
Minocycline
*There is no 
 Free tetracyclines are crystalline amphoteric substances of low 
solubility. They are available as hydrochlorides, which are more 
soluble. Such solutions are acid and, with the exception of 
 chlortetracycline, fairly stable. Tetracyclines chelate divalent metal 
ions, which can interfere with their absorption and activity. A 
newly approved tetracycline analog, tigecycline, is a glycylcycline 
and a semisynthetic derivative of minocycline. 
N(CH3)2
N(CH3)2
H3C
H3C
CH3
NH2
OH
O
O
OH
O
Tigecycline
O
OH
H
OH
N
N
H
 Mechanism of Action & Antimicrobial 
Activity 
 Tetracyclines are broad-spectrum bacteriostatic antibiotics that 
inhibit protein synthesis. Tetracyclines enter microorganisms in 
part by passive diffusion and in part by an energy-dependent 
 process of active transport. Susceptible organisms concentrate the 
drug intracellularly. Once inside the cell, tetracyclines bind revers-
ibly to the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribosome, blocking the 
binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to the acceptor site on the mRNA-
ribosome complex ( Figure 44–1 ). This prevents addition of amino 
acids to the growing peptide. 
 Tetracyclines are active against many gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria, including certain anaerobes, rickettsiae, chla-
mydiae, and mycoplasmas. The antibacterial activities of most 
tetracyclines are similar except that tetracycline-resistant strains 
may be susceptible to doxycycline, minocycline, and tigecycline, 
all of which are poor substrates for the efflux pump that mediates 
resistance. Differences in clinical efficacy for susceptible organisms 
are minor and attributable largely to features of absorption, distri-
bution, and excretion of individual drugs. 
 Resistance 
 Three mechanisms of resistance to tetracycline analogs have been 
described: (1) impaired influx or increased efflux by an active trans-
port protein pump; (2) ribosome protection due to production of 
proteins that interfere with tetracycline binding to the ribosome; and 
(3) enzymatic inactivation. The most important of these are produc-
tion of an efflux pump and ribosomal protection. Tet(AE) efflux 
pump-expressing gram-negative species are resistant to the older 
tetracyclines, doxycycline, and minocycline. They are susceptible, 
however, to tigecycline, which is not a substrate of these pumps. 
Similarly, the Tet(K) efflux pump of staphylococci confers resistance 
to tetracycline, but not to doxycycline, minocycline, or tigecycline, 
none of which are pump substrates. The Tet(M) ribosomal protection 
protein expressed by gram-positives produces resistance to tetracycline, 
doxycycline, and minocycline, but not to tigecycline, which because of 
its bulky  t -butylglycylamido substituent, has a steric hindrance effect 
on Tet(M) binding to the ribosome. Tigecycline is a substrate of the 
chromosomally encoded multidrug efflux pumps of  Proteus sp and 
 Pseudomonas aeruginosa , accounting for their intrinsic resistance to all 
tetracyclines including tigecycline. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Tetracyclines differ in their absorption after oral administration 
and in their elimination. Absorption after oral administration is 
approximately 30% for chlortetracycline; 60–70% for tetracycline, 
oxytetracycline, demeclocycline, and methacycline; and 95–100% 
for doxycycline and minocycline. Tigecycline is poorly absorbed 
orally and must be administered intravenously. A  portion of an 
orally administered dose of tetracycline remains in the gut lumen, 
alters intestinal flora, and is excreted in the feces. Absorption occurs 
mainly in the upper small intestine and is impaired by food (except 
doxycycline and minocycline); by divalent cations (Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , 
Fe 2+ ) or Al 3+ ; by dairy products and antacids, which contain mul-
tivalent cations; and by alkaline pH. Specially buffered tetracycline 
solutions are formulated for intravenous administration. 
 Tetracyclines are 40–80% bound by serum proteins. Oral 
 dosages of 500 mg every 6 hours of tetracycline hydrochloride or 
oxytetracycline produce peak blood levels of 4–6 mcg/mL. 
Intravenously injected tetracyclines give somewhat higher levels, 
but only temporarily. Peak levels of 2–4 mcg/mL are achieved with 
a 200-mg dose of doxycycline or minocycline. Steady-state peak 
serum concentrations of tigecycline are 0.6 mcg/mL at the standard 
dosage. Tetracyclines are distributed widely to tissues and body 
fluids except for cerebrospinal fluid, where concentrations are 
10–25% of those in serum. Minocycline reaches very high concen-
trations in tears and saliva, which makes it useful for eradication of 
the meningococcal carrier state. Tetracyclines cross the placenta to 
reach the fetus and are also excreted in milk. As a result of chelation 
with calcium, tetracyclines are bound to—and damage—growing 
bones and teeth. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, barbiturates, and 
chronic alcohol ingestion may shorten the half-life of doxycycline 
50% by induction of hepatic enzymes that metabolize the drug. 
 Tetracyclines are excreted mainly in bile and urine. Concentrations 
in bile exceed those in serum tenfold. Some of the drug excreted in 
CHAPTER 44 Tetracyclines, Macrolides, and Others    811
bile is reabsorbed from the intestine  (enterohepatic circulation) and 
may contribute to maintenance of serum levels. Ten to fifty percent 
of various tetracyclines is excreted into the urine, mainly by glom-
erular filtration. Ten to forty percent of the drug is excreted in feces. 
Doxycycline and tigecycline, in contrast to other tetracyclines, are 
eliminated by nonrenal mechanisms, do not accumulate signifi-
cantly, and require no dosage adjustment in renal failure. 
 Tetracyclines are classified as short-acting (chlortetracycline, tet-
racycline, oxytetracycline), intermediate-acting (demeclocycline and 
methacycline), or long-acting (doxycycline and minocycline) based 
on serum half-lives of 6–8 hours, 12 hours, and 16–18 hours, 
respectively. Tigecycline has a half-life of 36 hours. The almost com-
plete absorption and slow excretion of doxycycline and minocycline 
allow for once-daily dosing for certain indications, but by conven-
tion these two drugs are usually dosed twice daily. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A tetracycline is the drug of choice in the treatment of infections 
caused by rickettsiae. Tetracyclines are also excellent drugs for 
the treatment of  Mycoplasma pneumonia , chlamydiae, and some 
 spirochetes. They are used in combination regimens to treat gastric 
and duodenal ulcer disease caused by  Helicobacter pylori . They may 
be used in various gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial infec-
tions, including vibrio infections, provided the organism is not 
resistant. In cholera, tetracyclines rapidly stop the shedding of 
vibrios, but tetracycline resistance has appeared during epidemics. 
Tetracyclines remain effective in most chlamydial infections, 
including sexually transmitted infections. Tetracyclines are no lon-
ger recommended for treatment of gonococcal disease because of 
resistance. A tetracycline—in combination with other antibiot-
ics—is indicated for plague, tularemia, and brucellosis. Tetracyclines 
are sometimes used in the treatment or prophylaxis of protozoal 
infections, eg, those due to  Plasmodium falciparum (see 
 Chapter 52 ). Other uses include treatment of acne, exacerbations 
of bronchitis, community-acquired pneumonia, Lyme disease, 
relapsing fever, leptospirosis, and some nontuberculous mycobacte-
rial infections (eg,  Mycobacterium marinum ). Tetracyclines formerly 
were used for a variety of common infections, including bacterial 
gastroenteritis and urinary tract infections. However, many strains 
of bacteria causing these infections are now resistant, and other 
agents have largely supplanted tetracyclines. 
T
C
M
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
50S
ribosome
30S
Amino acid
Charged
tRNA
mRNA
t5
t5
t6
t6
Uncharged tRNA
 FIGURE 44–1 Steps in bacterial protein synthesis and targets of several antibiotics. Amino acids are shown as numbered circles. The 70S 
ribosomal mRNA complex is shown with its 50S and 30S subunits. In step 1, the charged tRNA unit carrying amino acid 6 binds to the acceptor 
site on the 70S ribosome. The peptidyl tRNA at the donor site, with amino acids 1 through 5, then binds the growing amino acid chain to amino 
acid 6 (peptide bond formation, step 2). The uncharged tRNA left at the donor site is released (step 3), and the new 6-amino acid chain with its 
tRNA shifts to the peptidyl site (translocation, step 4). The antibiotic binding sites are shown schematically as triangles. Chloramphenicol (C) and 
macrolides (M) bind to the 50S subunit and block peptide bond formation (step 2). The tetracyclines (T) bind to the 30S subunit and prevent 
binding of the incoming charged tRNA unit (step 1). 
812    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Minocycline, 200 mg orally daily for 5 days, can eradicate the 
meningococcal carrier state, but because of side effects and resis-
tance of many meningococcal strains, rifampin is preferred. 
 Demeclocycline inhibits the action of antidiuretic hormone in 
the renal tubule and has been used in the treatment of inappropri-
ate secretion of antidiuretic hormone or similar peptides by cer-
tain tumors (see  Chapter 15 ). 
 Tigecycline , the first glycylcycline to reach clinical practice, 
has several unique features that warrant its consideration apart 
from the older tetracyclines. Many tetracycline-resistant strains are 
susceptible to tigecycline because the common resistance determi-
nants have no activity against it. Its spectrum is very broad. 
Coagulase-negative staphylococci and  Staphylococcus aureus , 
including methicillin-resistant, vancomycin-intermediate, and 
vancomycin-resistant strains; streptococci, penicillin-susceptible 
and resistant; enterococci, including vancomycin-resistant strains; 
gram-positive rods; Enterobacteriaceae; multidrug-resistant strains 
of  Acinetobacter sp; anaerobes, both gram-positive and gram- 
negative; rickettsiae,  Chlamydia sp, and  Legionella pneumophila; 
and rapidly growing mycobacteria all are susceptible.  Proteus sp 
and P  aeruginosa , however, are intrinsically resistant. 
 Tigecycline, formulated for intravenous administration only, 
is given as a 100-mg loading dose, then 50 mg every 12 hours. 
As with all tetracyclines, tissue and intracellular penetration is 
excellent; consequently, the volume of distribution is quite large 
and peak serum concentrations are low. Elimination is primarily 
biliary, and no dosage adjustment is needed for patients with 
renal insufficiency. In addition to the tetracycline class effects, 
the chief adverse effect of tigecycline is nausea, which occurs in 
up to one third of patients, and occasionally vomiting. Neither 
nausea nor vomiting usually requires discontinuation of the 
drug. 
 Tigecycline is Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved 
for treatment of skin and skin-structure infection, intra-abdominal 
infections, and community-acquired pneumonia. Because active 
drug concentrations in the urine are relatively low, tigecycline 
may not be effective for urinary tract infections and has no indica-
tion for this use. Because it is active against a wide variety of 
multidrug-resistant nosocomial pathogens (eg, methicillin- 
resistant  S aureus , extended- spectrum β-lactamase-producing 
gram-negatives, and  Acinetobacter sp, tigecycline is a welcome 
addition to the antimicrobial drug group. However, its clinical 
efficacy in infections with multidrug-resistant organisms, com-
pared with other agents, is largely unknown. 
 A. Oral Dosage 
 The oral dosage for rapidly excreted tetracyclines, equivalent to 
tetracycline hydrochloride, is 0.25–0.5 g four times daily for 
adults and 20–40 mg/kg/d for children (8 years of age and older). 
For severe systemic infections, the higher dosage is indicated, at 
least for the first few days. The daily dose is 600 mg for demeclo-
cycline or methacycline, 100 mg once or twice daily for doxycy-
cline, and 100 mg twice daily for minocycline. Doxycycline is the 
oral tetracycline of choice because it can be given twice daily, and 
its absorption is not significantly affected by food. All tetracyclines 
chelate with metals, and none should be orally administered with 
milk, antacids, or ferrous sulfate. To avoid deposition in growing 
bones or teeth, tetracyclines should be avoided in pregnant women 
and children younger than 8 years. 
 B. Parenteral Dosage 
 Several tetracyclines are available for intravenous injection in doses 
of 0.1–0.5 g every 6–12 hours (similar to oral doses) but doxycy-
cline is the usual preferred agent, at a dosage of 100 mg every 
12–24 hours. Intramuscular injection is not recommended 
because of pain and inflammation at the injection site. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Hypersensitivity reactions (drug fever, skin rashes) to tetracyclines 
are uncommon. Most adverse effects are due to direct toxicity of 
the drug or to alteration of microbial flora. 
 A. Gastrointestinal Adverse Effects 
 Nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are the most common reasons for 
discontinuing tetracycline medication. These effects are attribut-
able to direct local irritation of the intestinal tract. Nausea, 
anorexia, and diarrhea can usually be controlled by administering 
the drug with food or carboxymethylcellulose, reducing drug dos-
age, or discontinuing the drug. 
 Tetracyclines alter the normal gastrointestinal flora, with sup-
pression of susceptible coliform organisms and overgrowth of 
pseudomonas, proteus, staphylococci, resistant coliforms, 
clostridia, and candida. This can result in intestinal functional 
disturbances, anal pruritus, vaginal or oral candidiasis, or 
 Clostridium difficile- associated colitis. 
 B. Bony Structures and Teeth 
 Tetracyclines are readily bound to calcium deposited in newly 
formed bone or teeth in young children. When a tetracycline is 
given during pregnancy, it can be deposited in the fetal teeth, 
leading to fluorescence, discoloration, and enamel dysplasia; it 
can also be deposited in bone, where it may cause deformity or 
growth inhibition. Because of these effects, tetracyclines are 
generally avoided in pregnancy. If the drug is given for long 
periods to children younger than 8 years, similar changes can 
result. 
 C. Other Toxicities 
 Tetracyclines can impair hepatic function, especially during 
 pregnancy, in patients with preexisting hepatic insufficiency and 
when high doses are given intravenously. Hepatic necrosis has 
been reported with daily doses of 4 g or more intravenously. 
 Renal tubular acidosis and other renal injury resulting in nitrogen 
retention have been attributed to the administration of outdated 
 tetracycline preparations. Tetracyclines given along with diuretics may 
produce nitrogen retention. Tetracyclines other than doxycycline may 
accumulate to toxic levels in patients with impaired kidney function. 
 Intravenous injection can lead to venous thrombosis. 
Intramuscular injection produces painful local irritation and should 
be avoided. 
CHAPTER 44 Tetracyclines, Macrolides, and Others    813
 Systemically administered tetracycline, especially demeclocy-
cline, can induce sensitivity to sunlight or ultraviolet light, par-
ticularly in fair-skinned persons. 
 Dizziness, vertigo, nausea, and vomiting have been noted par-
ticularly with doxycycline at doses above 100 mg. With dosages of 
200–400 mg/d of minocycline, 35–70% of patients will have these 
reactions. 
 ■ MACROLIDES 
 The macrolides are a group of closely related compounds charac-
terized by a macrocyclic lactone ring (usually containing 14 or 
16 atoms) to which deoxy sugars are attached. The prototype 
drug, erythromycin, which consists of two sugar moieties attached 
to a 14-atom lactone ring, was obtained in 1952 from  Streptomyces 
erythreus . Clarithromycin and azithromycin are semisynthetic 
derivatives of erythromycin. 
N(R1)2
Erythromycin (R1 = CH3, R2 = H) 
Clarithromycin (R1, R2 = CH3) 
Desosamine
Cladinose
Macrolide
ring
R1
R1
OH
R1
OH
R1
O
O
O
O
O
C2H5
HO
OH
O
O
O
OR1
R1
R1
R1
R1
R2
6
R1
 ERYTHROMYCIN 
 Chemistry 
 The general structure of erythromycin is shown with the mac-
rolide ring and the sugars desosamine and cladinose. It is poorly 
soluble in water (0.1%) but dissolves readily in organic solvents. 
Solutions are fairly stable at 4°C but lose activity rapidly at 20°C 
and at acid pH. Erythromycins are usually dispensed as various 
esters and salts. 
 Mechanism of Action & Antimicrobial 
Activity 
 The antibacterial action of erythromycin and other macrolides may 
be inhibitory or bactericidal, particularly at higher concentrations, for 
susceptible organisms. Activity is enhanced at alkaline pH. Inhibition 
of protein synthesis occurs via binding to the 50S ribosomal RNA. 
The binding site is near the peptidyltransferase center, and peptide 
chain elongation (ie, transpeptidation) is prevented by blocking of the 
polypeptide exit tunnel. As a result, peptidyl-tRNA is dissociated 
from the ribosome. Erythromycin also inhibits the formation of the 
50S ribosomal subunit ( Figure 44–1 ). 
 Erythromycin is active against susceptible strains of gram-positive 
organisms, especially pneumococci, streptococci, staphylococci, and 
corynebacteria.  Mycoplasma pneumoniae ,  L pneumophila ,  Chlamydia 
trachomatis ,  Chlamydia psittaci, Chlamydia pneumoniae ,  H pylori , 
 Listeria monocytogenes, and certain mycobacteria  (Mycobacterium 
kansasii, Mycobacterium scrofulaceum) are also susceptible. Gram-
negative organisms such as  Neisseria sp,  Bordetella pertussis, Bartonella 
henselae, and  Bartonella quintana as well as some  Rickettsia species, 
 Treponema pallidum , and  Campylobacter species are susceptible. 
 Haemophilus influenzae is somewhat less susceptible. 
 Resistance to erythromycin is usually plasmid-encoded. Three 
mechanisms have been identified: (1) reduced permeability of the 
cell membrane or active efflux; (2) production (by Enterobacteriaceae) 
of esterases that hydrolyze macrolides; and (3) modification of the 
ribosomal binding site (so-called ribosomal protection) by chromo-
somal mutation or by a macrolide-inducible or constitutive 
 methylase. Efflux and methylase production are the most important 
resistance mechanisms in gram-positive organisms. Cross-resistance 
is complete between erythromycin and the other macrolides. 
Constitutive methylase production also confers resistance to struc-
turally unrelated but mechanistically similar compounds such as 
clindamycin and streptogramin B (so-called macrolide-lincosamide-
streptogramin, or MLS-type B, resistance), which share the same 
ribosomal binding site. Because nonmacrolides are poor inducers of 
the methylase, strains expressing an inducible methylase will appear 
susceptible in vitro. However, constitutive mutants that are resistant 
can be selected out and emerge during therapy with clindamycin. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Erythromycin base is destroyed by stomach acid and must be 
administered with enteric coating. Food interferes with absorption. 
Stearates and esters are fairly acid-resistant and somewhat better 
absorbed. The lauryl salt of the propionyl ester of erythromycin 
(erythromycin estolate) is the best-absorbed oral preparation. Oral 
dosage of 2 g/d results in serum erythromycin base and ester con-
centrations of approximately 2 mcg/mL. However, only the base is 
microbiologically active, and its concentration tends to be similar 
regardless of the formulation. A 500-mg intravenous dose of eryth-
romycin lactobionate produces serum concentrations of 10 mcg/
mL 1 hour after dosing. The serum half-life is approximately 1.5 
hours normally and 5 hours in patients with anuria. Adjustment for 
renal failure is not necessary. Erythromycin is not removed by dialy-
sis. Large amounts of an administered dose are excreted in the bile 
and lost in feces, and only 5% is excreted in the urine. Absorbed 
drug is distributed widely except to the brain and cerebrospinal 
fluid. Erythromycin is taken up by polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
and macrophages. It traverses the placenta and reaches the fetus. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Erythromycin is a drug of choice in corynebacterial infections 
(diphtheria, corynebacterial sepsis, erythrasma); in respiratory, 
814    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
neonatal, ocular, or genital chlamydial infections; and in treatment 
of community-acquired pneumonia because its spectrum of activ-
ity includes pneumococcus,  M pneumoniae , and  L pneumophila. 
Erythromycin is also useful as a penicillin substitute in penicillin-
allergic individuals with infections caused by staphylococci 
(assuming that the isolate is susceptible), streptococci, or pneumo-
cocci. Emergence of erythromycin resistance in strains of group A 
streptococci and pneumococci (penicillin-non-susceptible pneu-
mococci in particular) has made macrolides less attractive as first-
line agents for treatment of pharyngitis, skin and soft tissue 
infections, and pneumonia. Erythromycin has been recommended 
as prophylaxis against endocarditis during dental procedures in 
individuals with valvular heart disease, although clindamycin, 
which is better tolerated, has largely replaced it. Although eryth-
romycin estolate is the best-absorbed salt, it imposes the greatest 
risk of adverse reactions. Therefore, the stearate or succinate salt 
may be preferred. 
 The oral dosage of erythromycin base, stearate, or estolate is 
0.25–0.5 g every 6 hours (for children, 40 mg/kg/d). The dosage 
of erythromycin ethylsuccinate is 0.4–0.6 g every 6 hours. Oral 
erythromycin base (1 g) is sometimes combined with oral 
 neomycin or kanamycin for preoperative preparation of the colon. 
The intravenous dosage of erythromycin gluceptate or lactobion-
ate is 0.5–1.0 g every 6 hours for adults and 20–40 mg/kg/d for 
children. The higher dosage is recommended when treating pneu-
monia caused by  L pneumophila . 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are common. Gastrointestinal 
intolerance, which is due to a direct stimulation of gut motility, is the 
most common reason for discontinuing erythromycin and substitut-
ing another antibiotic. 
 Erythromycins, particularly the estolate, can produce acute 
cholestatic hepatitis (fever, jaundice, impaired liver function), 
probably as a hypersensitivity reaction. Most patients recover from 
this, but hepatitis recurs if the drug is readministered. Other aller-
gic reactions include fever, eosinophilia, and rashes. 
 Erythromycin metabolites inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes 
and, thus, increase the serum concentrations of numerous drugs, 
including theophylline, warfarin, cyclosporine, and methylpredni-
solone. Erythromycin increases serum concentrations of oral 
digoxin by increasing its bioavailability. 
 CLARITHROMYCIN 
 Clarithromycin is derived from erythromycin by addition of a 
methyl group and has improved acid stability and oral absorption 
compared with erythromycin. Its mechanism of action is the same 
as that of erythromycin. Clarithromycin and erythromycin are 
similar with respect to antibacterial activity except that clarithro-
mycin is more active against  Mycobacterium avium complex (see 
 Chapter 47 ). Clarithromycin also has activity against  Mycobacterium 
leprae ,  Toxoplasma gondii, and  H influenzae . Erythromycin-resistant 
streptococci and staphylococci are also resistant to clarithromycin. 
 A 500-mg dose of clarithromycin produces serum concentra-
tions of 2–3 mcg/mL. The longer half-life of clarithromycin 
(6 hours) compared with erythromycin permits twice-daily dosing. 
The recommended dosage is 250–500 mg twice daily or 1000 mg 
of the extended-release formulation once daily. Clarithromycin 
penetrates most tissues well, with concentrations equal to or 
exceeding serum concentrations. 
 Clarithromycin is metabolized in the liver. The major  metabolite 
is 14-hydroxyclarithromycin, which also has antibacterial activity. 
Portions of active drug and this major metabolite are eliminated in 
the urine, and dosage reduction (eg, a 500-mg loading dose, then 
250 mg once or twice daily) is recommended for patients with 
creatinine clearances less than 30 mL/min. Clarithromycin has 
drug interactions similar to those described for erythromycin. 
 The advantages of clarithromycin compared with erythromycin 
are lower incidence of gastrointestinal intolerance and less frequent 
dosing. 
 AZITHROMYCIN 
 Azithromycin, a 15-atom lactone macrolide ring compound, is 
derived from erythromycin by addition of a methylated nitrogen 
into the lactone ring. Its spectrum of activity, mechanism of action, 
and clinical uses are similar to those of clarithromycin. Azithromycin 
is active against  M avium complex and  T gondii . Azithromycin is 
slightly less active than erythromycin and clarithromycin against 
staphylococci and streptococci and slightly more active against 
H influenzae . Azithromycin is highly active against  Chlamydia sp. 
 Azithromycin differs from erythromycin and clarithromycin 
mainly in pharmacokinetic properties. A 500-mg dose of azithromy-
cin produces relatively low serum concentrations of approximately 
0.4 mcg/mL. However, azithromycin penetrates into most tissues 
(except cerebrospinal fluid) and phagocytic cells extremely well, with 
tissue concentrations exceeding serum concentrations by 10- to 
100-fold. The drug is slowly released from tissues (tissue half-life of 
2–4 days) to produce an elimination half-life approaching 3 days. 
These unique properties permit once-daily dosing and shortening of 
the duration of treatment in many cases. For  example, a single 1-g 
dose of azithromycin is as effective as a 7-day course of doxycycline 
for chlamydial cervicitis and urethritis. Community-acquired pneu-
monia can be treated with azithromycin given as a 500-mg loading 
dose, followed by a 250-mg single daily dose for the next 4 days. 
 Azithromycin is rapidly absorbed and well tolerated orally. It 
should be administered 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals. 
Aluminum and magnesium antacids do not alter bioavailability but 
delay absorption and reduce peak serum concentrations. Because it 
has a 15-member (not 14-member) lactone ring, azithromycin does 
not inactivate cytochrome P450 enzymes and, therefore, is free of the 
drug interactions that occur with erythromycin and clarithromycin. 
 KETOLIDES 
 Ketolides are semisynthetic 14-membered-ring macrolides, differ-
ing from erythromycin by substitution of a 3-keto group for the 
neutral sugar l-cladinose.  Telithromycin is approved for limited 
CHAPTER 44 Tetracyclines, Macrolides, and Others    815
clinical use. It is active in vitro against  Streptococcus pyogenes, 
S pneumoniae, S aureus, H influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis , 
 Mycoplasma sp,  L pneumophila,  Chlamydia sp,  H pylori, Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae, B fragilis, T gondii, and certain nontuberculosis 
mycobacteria. Many macrolide-resistant strains are susceptible to 
ketolides because the structural modification of these compounds 
renders them poor substrates for efflux pump-mediated resistance, 
and they bind to ribosomes of some bacterial species with higher 
affinity than macrolides. 
 Oral bioavailability of telithromycin is 57%, and tissue and 
intracellular penetration is generally good. Telithromycin is 
metabolized in the liver and eliminated by a combination of 
 biliary and urinary routes of excretion. It is administered as a 
once-daily dose of 800 mg, which results in peak serum concen-
trations of approximately 2 mcg/mL. It is a reversible inhibitor of 
the CYP3A4 enzyme system and may slightly prolong the QT c 
interval. In the USA, telithromycin is now indicated only for 
treatment of community-acquired bacterial pneumonia. Other 
respiratory tract infections were removed as indications when it 
was recognized that use of telithromycin can result in hepatitis and 
liver failure. 
 ■ CLINDAMYCIN 
 Clindamycin is a chlorine-substituted derivative of  lincomycin , 
an antibiotic that is elaborated by  Streptomyces lincolnensis . 
NH
CI
CH
CH3
OH
OH
HO
Clindamycin
N
C
C3H7
O
O
S
CH3
CH
CH3
 Mechanism of Action & Antibacterial 
Activity 
 Clindamycin, like erythromycin, inhibits protein synthesis by inter-
fering with the formation of initiation complexes and with amino-
acyl translocation reactions. The binding site for clindamycin on the 
50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome is identical with that for 
erythromycin. Streptococci, staphylococci, and pneumococci are 
inhibited by clindamycin, 0.5–5 mcg/mL. Enterococci and gram-
negative aerobic organisms are resistant.  Bacteroides sp and other 
anaerobes, both gram-positive and gram-negative, are usually sus-
ceptible. Resistance to clindamycin, which generally confers cross-
resistance to macrolides, is due to (1) mutation of the ribosomal 
receptor site; (2) modification of the receptor by a constitutively 
expressed methylase (see section on erythromycin resistance, above); 
and (3) enzymatic inactivation of clindamycin. Gram-negative aero-
bic species are intrinsically resistant because of poor permeability of 
the outer membrane. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Oral dosages of clindamycin, 0.15–0.3 g every 8 hours (10–20 mg/
kg/d for children), yield serum levels of 2–3 mcg/mL. When 
administered intravenously, 600 mg of clindamycin every 8 hours 
gives levels of 5–15 mcg/mL. The drug is about 90% protein-
bound. Clindamycin penetrates well into most tissues, with brain 
and cerebrospinal fluid being important exceptions. It penetrates 
well into abscesses and is actively taken up and concentrated by 
phagocytic cells. Clindamycin is metabolized by the liver, and both 
active drug and active metabolites are excreted in bile and urine. 
The half-life is about 2.5 hours in normal individuals, increasing to 
6 hours in patients with anuria. No dosage adjustment is required 
for renal failure. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Clindamycin is indicated for the treatment of skin and soft-tissue 
infections caused by streptococci and staphylococci. It is often 
active against community-acquired strains of methicillin-resistant 
 S aureus , an increasingly common cause of skin and soft tissue 
infections. Clindamycin is also indicated for treatment of anaerobic
infections caused by  Bacteroides sp and other anaerobes that often 
participate in mixed infections. Clindamycin, sometimes in com-
bination with an aminoglycoside or cephalosporin, is used to treat 
penetrating wounds of the abdomen and the gut; infections origi-
nating in the female genital tract, eg, septic abortion, pelvic 
abscesses, or pelvic inflammatory disease; and lung abscesses. 
Clindamycin is now recommended rather than erythromycin for 
prophylaxis of endocarditis in patients with valvular heart disease 
who are undergoing certain dental procedures and have significant 
penicillin allergies. Clindamycin plus primaquine is an effective 
alternative to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for moderate to 
moderately severe  Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia in AIDS 
patients. It is also used in combination with pyrimethamine for 
AIDS-related toxoplasmosis of the brain. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Common adverse effects are diarrhea, nausea, and skin rashes. 
Impaired liver function (with or without jaundice) and neutrope-
nia sometimes occur. Administration of clindamycin is a risk fac-
tor for diarrhea and colitis due to  C difficile . 
 ■ STREPTOGRAMINS 
 Mechanism of Action & Antibacterial 
Activity 
 Quinupristin-dalfopristin is a combination of two streptogramins—
quinupristin, a streptogramin B, and dalfopristin, a streptogramin 
A—in a 30:70 ratio. The streptogramins share the same ribosomal 
binding site as the macrolides and clindamycin and thus inhibit 
protein synthesis in an identical manner. It is rapidly bactericidal 
for most susceptible organisms except  Enterococcus faecium , which 
is killed slowly. Quinupristin-dalfopristin is active against 
816    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 gram-positive cocci, including multidrug-resistant strains of strep-
tococci, penicillin-resistant strains of  S pneumoniae , methicillin-
susceptible and -resistant strains of staphylococci, and  E faecium 
(but not  Enterococcus faecalis ). Resistance is due to modification of 
the quinupristin binding site (MLS-B type resistance), enzymatic 
inactivation of dalfopristin, or efflux. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Quinupristin-dalfopristin is administered intravenously at a 
 dosage of 7.5 mg/kg every 8–12 hours. Peak serum concentrations 
following an infusion of 7.5 mg/kg over 60 minutes are 3 mcg/mL 
for quinupristin and 7 mcg/mL for dalfopristin. Quinupristin and 
dalfopristin are rapidly metabolized, with half-lives of 0.85 and 
0.7 hours, respectively. Elimination is principally by the fecal 
route. Dose adjustment is not necessary for renal failure, perito-
neal dialysis, or hemodialysis. Patients with hepatic insufficiency 
may not tolerate the drug at usual doses, however, because of 
increased area under the concentration curve of both parent drugs 
and metabolites. This may necessitate a dose reduction to 7.5 mg/
kg every 12 hours or 5 mg/kg every 8 hours. Quinupristin and 
dalfopristin significantly inhibit CYP3A4, which metabolizes 
 warfarin, diazepam, astemizole, terfenadine, cisapride, nonnucleo-
side reverse transcriptase inhibitors, and cyclosporine, among 
 others. Dosage reduction of cyclosporine may be necessary. 
 Clinical Uses & Adverse Effects 
 Quinupristin-dalfopristin is approved for treatment of infections 
caused by staphylococci or by vancomycin-resistant strains of 
E faecium , but not  E faecalis , which is intrinsically resistant, prob-
ably because of an efflux-type resistance mechanism. The principal 
toxicities are infusion-related events, such as pain at the infusion 
site, and an arthralgia-myalgia syndrome. 
 ■ CHLORAMPHENICOL 
 Crystalline chloramphenicol is a neutral, stable compound with 
the following structure: 
CH2OH
CHCI2
OH
C
C
Chloramphenicol
N
H
H
H
NO2
O
C
 It is soluble in alcohol but poorly soluble in water. Chlorampheni-
col succinate, which is used for parenteral administration, is highly 
water-soluble. It is hydrolyzed in vivo with liberation of free 
 chloramphenicol. 
 Mechanism of Action & Antimicrobial 
Activity 
 Chloramphenicol is a potent inhibitor of microbial protein synthesis. 
It binds reversibly to the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome 
( Figure 44–1 ) and inhibits peptide bond formation (step 2). 
Chloramphenicol is a bacteriostatic broad-spectrum antibiotic that 
is active against both aerobic and anaerobic gram-positive and gram-
negative organisms. It is active also against  Rickettsiae but not 
 Chlamydiae . Most gram-positive bacteria are inhibited at concentra-
tions of 1–10 mcg/mL, and many gram-negative bacteria are inhib-
ited by concentrations of 0.2–5 mcg/mL. H influenzae,  Neisseria 
meningitidis , and some strains of bacteroides are highly susceptible, 
and for these organisms, chloramphenicol may be bactericidal. 
 Low-level resistance to chloramphenicol may emerge from 
large populations of chloramphenicol-susceptible cells by selec-
tion of mutants that are less permeable to the drug. Clinically 
significant resistance is due to production of chloramphenicol 
acetyltransferase, a plasmid-encoded enzyme that inactivates 
the drug. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The usual dosage of chloramphenicol is 50–100 mg/kg/d. After 
oral administration, crystalline chloramphenicol is rapidly and 
completely absorbed. A 1-g oral dose produces blood levels 
between 10 and 15 mcg/mL. Chloramphenicol palmitate is a pro-
drug that is hydrolyzed in the intestine to yield free  chlorampheni-
col. The parenteral formulation is a prodrug, chloramphenicol 
succinate, which hydrolyzes to yield free chloramphenicol, giving 
blood levels somewhat lower than those achieved with orally 
administered drug. Chloramphenicol is widely distributed to virtu-
ally all tissues and body fluids, including the central nervous system 
and cerebrospinal fluid, such that the concentration of chloram-
phenicol in brain tissue may be equal to that in serum. The drug 
penetrates cell membranes readily. 
 Most of the drug is inactivated either by conjugation with 
glucuronic acid (principally in the liver) or by reduction to inac-
tive aryl amines. Active chloramphenicol (about 10% of the total 
dose administered) and its inactive degradation products (about 
90% of the total) are eliminated in the urine. A small amount of 
active drug is excreted into bile and feces. The systemic dosage of 
chloramphenicol need not be altered in renal insufficiency, but it 
must be reduced markedly in hepatic failure. Newborns less than 
a week old and premature infants also clear chloramphenicol less 
well, and the dosage should be reduced to 25 mg/kg/d. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Because of potential toxicity, bacterial resistance, and the avail-
ability of many other effective alternatives, chloramphenicol is 
rarely used in the United States. It may be considered for treat-
ment of serious rickettsial infections such as typhus and Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. It is an alternative to a β-lactam antibiotic 
for treatment of bacterial meningitis occurring in patients who 
have major hypersensitivity reactions to penicillin. The dosage is 
50–100 mg/kg/d in four divided doses. 
 Chloramphenicol is used topically in the treatment of eye 
infections because of its broad spectrum and its penetration of 
ocular tissues and the aqueous humor. It is ineffective for chla-
mydial infections. 
CHAPTER 44 Tetracyclines, Macrolides, and Others    817
 Adverse Reactions 
 Adults occasionally develop gastrointestinal disturbances, includ-
ing nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. This is rare in children. Oral 
or vaginal candidiasis may occur as a result of alteration of normal 
microbial flora. 
 Chloramphenicol commonly causes a dose-related reversible 
suppression of red cell production at dosages exceeding 50 mg/
kg/d after 1–2 weeks. Aplastic anemia, a rare consequence (1 in 
24,000 to 40,000 courses of therapy) of chloramphenicol admin-
istration by any route, is an idiosyncratic reaction unrelated to 
dose, although it occurs more frequently with prolonged use. It 
tends to be irreversible and can be fatal. 
 Newborn infants lack an effective glucuronic acid conjugation 
mechanism for the degradation and detoxification of chloram-
phenicol. Consequently, when infants are given dosages above 
50 mg/kg/d, the drug may accumulate, resulting in the  gray baby 
syndrome , with vomiting, flaccidity, hypothermia, gray color, shock, 
and vascular collapse. To avoid this toxic effect, chloramphenicol 
should be used with caution in infants and the dosage limited to 
50 mg/kg/d (or less during the first week of life) in full-term infants 
more than 1 week old and 25 mg/kg/d in premature infants. 
 Chloramphenicol inhibits hepatic microsomal enzymes that 
metabolize several drugs. Half-lives of these drugs are prolonged, and 
the serum concentrations of phenytoin, tolbutamide, chlorpropa-
mide, and warfarin are increased. Like other bacteriostatic inhibitors 
of microbial protein synthesis, chloramphenicol can antagonize bac-
tericidal drugs such as penicillins or aminoglycosides. 
 ■ OXAZOLIDINONES 
 Mechanism of Action & Antimicrobial 
Activity 
 Linezolid is a member of the oxazolidinones, a new class of 
 synthetic antimicrobials. It is active against gram-positive organisms 
including staphylococci, streptococci, enterococci, gram-positive 
anaerobic cocci, and gram-positive rods such as corynebacteria, 
 Nocardia sp, and  L monocytogenes . It is primarily a bacteriostatic 
agent but is bactericidal against streptococci. It is also active against 
 Mycobacterium tuberculosis . 
 Linezolid inhibits protein synthesis by preventing formation of 
the ribosome complex that initiates protein synthesis. Its unique 
binding site, located on 23S ribosomal RNA of the 50S subunit, 
results in no cross-resistance with other drug classes. Resistance is 
caused by mutation of the linezolid binding site on 23S ribosomal 
RNA. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Linezolid is 100% bioavailable after oral administration and has a 
half-life of 4–6 hours. It is metabolized by oxidative metabolism, 
yielding two inactive metabolites. It is neither an inducer nor an 
inhibitor of cytochrome P450 enzymes. Peak serum concentra-
tions average 18 mcg/mL following a 600-mg oral dose. The rec-
ommended dosage for most indications is 600 mg twice daily, 
either orally or intravenously. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Linezolid is approved for vancomycin-resistant  E faecium infec-
tions; nosocomial pneumonia; community-acquired pneumonia; 
and both complicated and uncomplicated skin and soft tissue 
infections caused by susceptible gram-positive bacteria. Off-label 
uses of linezolid include treatment of multidrug-resistant tubercu-
losis and  Nocardia infections. 
 Adverse Effects 
 The principal toxicity of linezolid is hematologic; the effects are 
reversible and generally mild. Thrombocytopenia is the most 
 common manifestation (seen in approximately 3% of treatment 
courses), particularly when the drug is administered for longer than 
2 weeks. Anemia and neutropenia may also occur, most commonly 
in patients with a predisposition to or underlying bone marrow 
suppression. Cases of optic and peripheral neuropathy and lactic 
acidosis have been reported with prolonged courses of linezolid. 
These side effects are thought to be related to linezolid-induced 
inhibition of mitochondrial protein synthesis. There are case 
reports of serotonin syndrome occurring when linezolid is co-
administered with serotonergic drugs, most frequently selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants. The FDA issued a 
warning regarding the use of the drug with serotonergic agents in 
2011. 
818    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
SUMMARY Tetracyclines, Macrolides, Clindamycin, Chloramphenicol, 
Streptogramins, & Oxazolidinones
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
TETRACYCLINES
 • Tetracycline
Prevents bacterial protein 
 synthesis by binding to the 30S 
ribosomal subunit
Bacteriostatic activity 
against susceptible bacteria
Infections caused by 
mycoplasma, 
 chlamydiae, rickettsiae, 
some spirochetes 
• malaria • H pylori • acne
Oral • mixed clearance (half-life 
8 h) • dosed every 6 h • divalent 
cations impair oral absorption 
• Toxicity: Gastrointestinal upset, 
hepatotoxicity, photosensitivity, 
deposition in bone and teeth
 • Doxycycline: Oral and IV; longer half-life (18 h) so dosed twice daily; nonrenal elimination; absorption is minimally affected by divalent cations; used to treat 
   community-acquired pneumonia and exacerbations of bronchitis
 • Minocycline: Oral; longer half-life (16 h) so dosed twice daily; frequently causes reversible vestibular toxicity
 • Tigecycline: IV; unaffected by common tetracycline resistance mechanisms; very broad spectrum of activity against gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic 
   bacteria; nausea and vomiting are the primary toxicities
MACROLIDES
 • Erythromycin
Prevents bacterial protein 
 synthesis by binding to the 50S 
ribosomal subunit
Bacteriostatic activity 
against susceptible bacteria
Community-acquired 
pneumonia • pertussis 
• corynebacterial and 
chlamydial infections
Oral, IV • hepatic clearance 
(half-life 1.5 h) • dosed every 6 h 
• cytochrome P450 inhibitor 
• Toxicity: Gastrointestinal upset, 
hepatotoxicity, QTc prolongation
 • Clarithromycin: Oral; longer half-life (4 h) so dosed twice daily; added activity versus M avium complex, toxoplasma, and M leprae
 • Azithromycin: Oral, IV; very long half-life (68 h) allows for once-daily dosing and 5-day course of therapy of community-acquired pneumonia; does not inhibit 
   cytochrome P450 enzymes
 • Telithromycin: Oral; unaffected by efflux-mediated resistance so is active versus many erythromycin-resistant strains of pneumococci; rare cases of fulminant 
   hepatic failure
LINCOSAMIDE
 • Clindamycin
Prevents bacterial protein 
 synthesis by binding to the 50S 
ribosomal subunit
Bacteriostatic activity 
against susceptible bacteria
Skin and soft tissue 
infections • anaerobic 
infections
Oral, IV • hepatic clearance (half-
life 2.5 h) • dosed every 6–8 hours 
• Toxicity: Gastrointestinal upset, 
C difficile colitis
STREPTOGRAMINS
 • Quinupristin-dalfopristin
Prevents bacterial protein 
 synthesis by binding to the 50S 
ribosomal subunit
Rapid bactericidal activity 
against most susceptible 
bacteria
Infections caused by 
staphylococci or 
 vancomycin-resistant 
strains of E faecium
IV • hepatic clearance • dosed 
every 8–12 h • cytochrome P450 
inhibitor • Toxicity: Severe 
 infusion-related myalgias and 
arthralgias
CHLORAMPHENICOL
Prevents bacterial protein 
 synthesis by binding to the 50S 
ribosomal subunit
Bacteriostatic activity 
against susceptible bacteria
Use is rare in the devel-
oped world because of 
serious toxicities
Oral, IV • hepatic clearance (half-
life 2.5 h) • dosage is 50–100 mg/
kg/d in four divided doses 
• Toxicity: Dose-related anemia, 
idiosyncratic aplastic anemia, gray 
baby syndrome
OXAZOLIDINONES
 • Linezolid
Prevents bacterial protein 
 synthesis by binding to the 23S 
ribosomal RNA of 50S subunit
Bacteriostatic activity 
against susceptible bacteria
Infections caused by 
methicillin-resistant 
staphylococci and 
 vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci
Oral, IV • hepatic clearance (half-
life 6 h) • dosed twice-daily 
• Toxicity: Duration-dependent 
bone marrow suppression, 
 neuropathy, and optic neuritis 
• serotonin syndrome may occur 
when coadministered with other 
serotonergic drugs (eg, selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors)
CHAPTER 44 Tetracyclines, Macrolides, and Others    819
CHLORAMPHENICOL
Chloramphenicol (generic, Chloromycetin)
Parenteral: 100 mg powder to reconstitute for injection
TETRACYCLINES
Demeclocycline (Declomycin)
Oral: 150, 300 mg tablets
Doxycycline (generic, Vibramycin, others)
Oral: 20, 50, 75, 100 mg tablets and capsules; powder to reconstitute 
for 25 mg/5 mL suspension; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 100, 200 mg powder to reconstitute for injection
Minocycline (generic, Minocin, various)
Oral: 20, 50, 75, 100 mg tablets and capsules; 50 mg/5 mL 
 suspension
Tetracycline (generic, others)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules; 125 mg/5 mL suspension
Tigecycline (Tygacil)
Parenteral: 50 mg powder to reconstitute for IV administration
MACROLIDES
Azithromycin (Zithromax)
Oral: 250, 500, 600 mg capsules; powder for 100, 200 mg/5 mL oral 
suspension
Parenteral: 500 mg powder for injection
Clarithromycin (generic, Biaxin)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets, 500, 1000 mg extended-release tablets; 
granules for 125, 250 mg/5 mL oral suspension
Erythromycin (generic, others)
Oral (base): 250, 333, 500 mg enteric-coated tablets
Oral (base) delayed-release: 250 mg capsules, 500 mg tablets
Oral (estolate): 125, 250 mg/5 mL suspension
Oral (ethylsuccinate): 400 mg tablets; 200, 400 mg/5 mL suspension
Oral (stearate): 250, 500 mg film-coated tablets
Parenteral: lactobionate, 0.5, 1 g powder to reconstitute for 
IV injection
KETOLIDES
Telithromycin (Ketek)
Oral: 300, 400 mg tablets
LINCOMYCIN
Clindamycin (generic, Cleocin)
Oral: 75, 150, 300 mg capsules; 75 mg/5 mL granules to reconstitute 
for solution
Parenteral: 150 mg/mL in 2, 4, 6, 60 mL vials for injection
STREPTOGRAMINS
Quinupristin and dalfopristin (Synercid)
Parenteral: 30:70 formulation in 500 mg vial for reconstitution for 
IV injection
OXAZOLIDINONE
Linezolid (Zyvox)
Oral: 600 mg tablets; 100 mg powder for 5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL for IV infusion
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
CHLORAMPHENICOL
Chloramphenicol (generic, Chloromycetin)
Parenteral: 100 mg powder to reconstitute for injection
TETRACYCLINES
Demeclocycline (Declomycin)
Oral: 150, 300 mg tablets
Doxycycline (generic, Vibramycin, others)
Oral: 20, 50, 75, 100 mg tablets and capsules; powder to reconstitute 
for 25 mg/5 mL suspension; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 100, 200 mg powder to reconstitute for injection
Minocycline (generic, Minocin, various)
Oral: 20, 50, 75, 100 mg tablets and capsules; 50 mg/5 mL
suspension
Tetracycline (generic, others)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules; 125 mg/5 mL suspension
Tigecycline (Tygacil)
Parenteral: 50 mg powder to reconstitute for IV administration
MACROLIDES
Azithromycin (Zithromax)
Oral: 250, 500, 600 mg capsules; powder for 100, 200 mg/5 mL oral 
suspension
Parenteral: 500 mg powder for injection
Clarithromycin (generic, Biaxin)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets, 500, 1000 mg extended-release tablets;
granules for 125, 250 mg/5 mL oral suspension
Erythromycin (generic, others)
Oral (base): 250, 333, 500 mg enteric-coated tablets
Oral (base) delayed-release: 250 mg capsules, 500 mg tablets
Oral (estolate): 125, 250 mg/5 mL suspension
Oral (ethylsuccinate): 400 mg tablets; 200, 400 mg/5 mL suspension
Oral (stearate): 250, 500 mg film-coated tablets
Parenteral: lactobionate, 0.5, 1 g powder to reconstitute for 
IV injection
KETOLIDES
Telithromycin (Ketek)
Oral: 300, 400 mg tablets
LINCOMYCIN
Clindamycin (generic, Cleocin)
Oral: 75, 150, 300 mg capsules; 75 mg/5 mL granules to reconstitute
for solution
Parenteral: 150 mg/mL in 2, 4, 6, 60 mL vials for injection
STREPTOGRAMINS
Quinupristin and dalfopristin (Synercid)
Parenteral: 30:70 formulation in 500 mg vial for reconstitution for
IV injection
OXAZOLIDINONE
Linezolid (Zyvox)
Oral: 600 mg tablets; 100 mg powder for 5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL for IV infusion
 REFERENCES 
 De Vriese AS et al: Linezolid-induced inhibition of mitochondrial protein 
 synthesis. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42:1111. 
 Fortun J et al: Linezolid for the treatment of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. 
J Antimicrob Chemother 2005;56:180. 
 Gee T et al: Pharmacokinetics and tissue penetration of linezolid following mul-
tiple oral doses. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001;45:1843. 
 Hancock RE: Mechanisms of action of newer antibiotics for gram-positive patho-
gens. Lancet Infect Dis 2005;5:209. 
 Lawrence KR et al: Serotonin toxicity associated with the use of linezolid: A review 
of postmarketing data. Clin Infect Dis 2006;42:1578. 
 Livermore DM. Tigecycline: What is it, and where should it be used? J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2005;56:611. 
 Moran GJ et al: Methicillin-resistant  S aureus infections among patients in the 
emergency department. N Engl J Med 2006;355:666. 
 Noskin GA: Tigecycline: A new glycylcycline for treatment of serious infections. 
Clin Infect Dis 2005;41(Suppl 5):S303. 
 Schlossberg D: Azithromycin and clarithromycin. Med Clin North Am 
1995;79:803. 
 Speer BS, Shoemaker MB, Salyers AA: Bacterial resistance to tetracycline: 
Mechanism, transfer, and clinical significance. Clin Microbiol Rev 
1992;5:387. 
 Zhanel GG et al: The ketolides: A critical review. Drugs 2002;62:1771. 
 Zuckerman JM: Macrolides and ketolides: Azithromycin, clarithromycin, telithro-
mycin. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2004;18:621. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
A tetracycline or a macrolide is effective in the treatment of 
chlamydial cervicitis. Doxycycline at a dose of 100 mg PO bid 
for 7 days is the preferred tetracycline, while azithromycin as a 
single 1 g dose is the preferred macrolide. If the patient is 
 pregnant, then tetracyclines would be contraindicated and she 
should receive azithromycin, which is safe in pregnancy.
This page intentionally left blank 
821
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 The drugs described in this chapter are bactericidal inhibitors 
of protein synthesis that interfere with ribosomal function. 
These agents are useful mainly against aerobic gram-negative 
microorganisms. 
 ■ AMINOGLYCOSIDES 
 The aminoglycosides include  streptomycin, neomycin, kanamy-
cin, amikacin, gentamicin, tobramycin, sisomicin, netilmicin, 
and others. They are used most widely in combination with a 
β-lactam antibiotic in serious infections with gram-negative bac-
teria, in combination with vancomycin or a β-lactam antibiotic 
for gram-positive endocarditis, and for treatment of tuberculosis. 
 General Properties of Aminoglycosides 
 A. Physical and Chemical Properties 
 
Aminoglycosides have a hexose ring, either streptidine (in streptomy-
cin) or 2-deoxystreptamine (in other aminoglycosides), to which 
various amino sugars are attached by glycosidic linkages 
( Figures 45–1 and  45–2 ). They are water-soluble, stable in solu-
tion, and more active at alkaline than at acid pH. 
 B. Mechanism of Action 
 The mode of action of streptomycin has been studied far more 
closely than that of other aminoglycosides, but they probably all 
act similarly. Aminoglycosides are irreversible inhibitors of protein 
synthesis, but the precise mechanism for bactericidal activity is not 
known. The initial event is passive diffusion via porin channels 
across the outer membrane (see  Figure 43–3 ). Drug is then 
actively transported across the cell membrane into the cytoplasm 
by an oxygen-dependent process. The transmembrane electro-
chemical gradient supplies the energy for this process, and trans-
port is coupled to a proton pump. Low extracellular pH and 
anaerobic conditions inhibit transport by reducing the gradient. 
Transport may be enhanced by cell wall-active drugs such as peni-
cillin or vancomycin; this enhancement may be the basis of the 
synergism of these antibiotics with aminoglycosides. 
 Inside the cell, aminoglycosides bind to specific 30S-subunit 
ribosomal proteins (S12 in the case of streptomycin). Protein 
synthesis is inhibited by aminoglycosides in at least three ways 
( Figure 45–3 ): (1) interference with the initiation complex of peptide 
45
Aminoglycosides  
& Spectinomycin
 Daniel H. Deck, PharmD & Lisa G. Winston, MD∗ 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 ∗ The authors thank Dr. Henry F. Chambers for his contributions to 
previous editions.
 A 45-year-old man with no medical history was admitted to 
the intensive care unit (ICU) 10 days ago after suffering 
third-degree burns over 40% of his body. He had been rela-
tively stable until the last 24 hours. Now he is febrile (39.5°C 
[103.1°F]), and his white blood cell count has risen from 
8,500 to 20,000/mm 3 . He has also had an episode of hypoten-
sion (86/50 mm Hg) that responded to a fluid bolus. Blood 
cultures were obtained at the time of his fever and results are 
pending. The ICU attending physician is concerned about 
sepsis and decides to treat with empiric combination therapy 
directed against  Pseudomonas . The combination therapy 
includes tobramycin. The patient weighs 70 kg (154 lb) and 
has an estimated creatinine clearance of 90 mL/min. How 
should tobramycin be dosed using once-daily and conven-
tional dosing strategies? How should each regimen be moni-
tored for efficacy and toxicity? 
822    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
formation; (2) misreading of mRNA, which causes incorporation of 
incorrect amino acids into the peptide and results in a nonfunctional 
or toxic protein; and (3) breakup of polysomes into nonfunctional 
monosomes. These activities occur more or less simultaneously, and 
the overall effect is irreversible and lethal for the cell. 
 C. Mechanisms of Resistance 
 
Three principal mechanisms have been established: (1) production 
of a transferase enzyme or enzymes inactivates the aminoglycoside 
by adenylylation, acetylation, or phosphorylation. This is the prin-
cipal type of resistance encountered clinically. (Specific transferase 
enzymes are discussed below.) (2) There is impaired entry of 
aminoglycoside into the cell. This may be genotypic, resulting from 
mutation or deletion of a porin protein or proteins involved in 
transport and maintenance of the electrochemical gradient; or 
phenotypic, eg, resulting from growth conditions under which the 
oxygen-dependent transport process described above is not func-
tional. (3) The receptor protein on the 30S ribosomal subunit may 
be deleted or altered as a result of a mutation. 
 D. Pharmacokinetics and Once-Daily Dosing 
 
Aminoglycosides are absorbed very poorly from the intact gastro-
intestinal tract, and almost the entire oral dose is excreted in feces 
after oral administration. However, the drugs may be absorbed if 
ulcerations are present. After intramuscular injection, aminoglyco-
sides are well absorbed, giving peak concentrations in blood 
within 30–90 minutes. Aminoglycosides are usually administered 
intravenously as a 30- to 60-minute infusion; after a brief distribu-
tion phase, this results in serum concentrations that are identical 
with those following intramuscular injection. The normal half-life 
of aminoglycosides in serum is 2–3 hours, increasing to 24–48 
hours in patients with significant impairment of renal function. 
Aminoglycosides are only partially and irregularly removed by 
hemodialysis—eg, 40–60% for gentamicin—and even less effec-
tively by peritoneal dialysis. Aminoglycosides are highly polar 
compounds that do not enter cells readily. They are largely 
excluded from the central nervous system and the eye. In the 
CH3
CHO
H2N
CH3
O
HO
HO
HO
C
C
O
O
O
NH
NH
NH
NH
HO
HO
CH2OH
NH
NH2
OH
Streptidine
Streptose
Streptobiosamine
N-methyl-L-
glucosamine
 FIGURE 45–1  Structure of streptomycin. 
H2C
NH2
O
HO
O
1
4
5
HO
OH
R
2
3
I
NH2
NH
1
4
3
HO
O
O
2
6
5
II
4
3
1
2
CH2
OH
OH
4
1
HO
NH2
5
3
2
III
5
H2C
NH2
O
HO
O
I
NH2
NH2
HO
O
O
II
CH2
OH
OH
HO
NH2
III
HC
NH
O
O
4
5
NH2
NH2
R3
R2
R1
I
NH2
NH
3
HO
O
O
II
OH
HO
Gentamicin, netilmicin
Tobramycin
NH
CH3
2
III
Kanamycin 
R =H
Amikacin R =
O
C
CH
CH2
OH
CH2
NH2
CH3
Ring I
R1
R3
R2
C4–C5
bond
Ring II
Gentamicin C1
Gentamicin C2
Gentamicin C1a
Netilmicin
CH3
CH3
H
H
H
H
H
C2H5
CH3
H
H
H
Single
Single
Single
Double
 FIGURE 45–2  Structures of several important aminoglycoside 
antibiotics. Ring II is 2-deoxystreptamine. The resemblance between 
kanamycin and amikacin and between gentamicin, netilmicin, and 
tobramycin can be seen. The circled numerals on the kanamycin mol-
ecule indicate points of attack of plasmid-mediated bacterial trans-
ferase enzymes that can inactivate this drug.  1  ,  2  , and  3  , 
acetyltransferase;  4  , phosphotransferase;  5  , adenylyltransferase. 
Amikacin is resistant to modification at  2  ,  3  ,  4  , and  5  . 
CHAPTER 45 Aminoglycosides & Spectinomycin   823
presence of active inflammation, however, cerebrospinal fluid levels 
reach 20% of plasma levels, and in neonatal meningitis, the levels 
may be higher. Intrathecal or intraventricular injection is required 
for high levels in cerebrospinal fluid. Even after parenteral admin-
istration, concentrations of aminoglycosides are not high in most 
tissues except the renal cortex. Concentration in most secretions is 
also modest; in the bile, it may reach 30% of the blood level. With 
prolonged therapy, diffusion into pleural or synovial fluid may 
result in concentrations 50–90% of that of plasma. 
 Traditionally, aminoglycosides have been administered in two 
or three equally divided doses per day in patients with normal 
renal function. However, administration of the entire daily dose in 
a single injection may be preferred in many clinical situations. 
Aminoglycosides have  concentration-dependent killing ; that is, 
increasing concentrations kill an increasing proportion of bacteria 
and at a more rapid rate. They also have a significant  postantibiotic 
effect, such that the antibacterial activity persists beyond the time 
during which measurable drug is present. The postantibiotic effect 
of aminoglycosides can last several hours. Because of these proper-
ties, a given total amount of aminoglycoside may have better 
efficacy when administered as a single large dose than when 
administered as multiple smaller doses. When administered with 
a cell wall-active antibiotic (a β lactam or vancomycin), aminogly-
cosides exhibit  synergistic killing against certain bacteria. The 
effect of the drugs in combination is greater than the anticipated 
effect of each individual drug, ie, the killing effect of the combina-
tion is more than additive. 
 Adverse effects from aminoglycosides are both time- and 
concentration-dependent. Toxicity is unlikely to occur until a 
certain threshold concentration is reached, but once that concen-
tration is achieved, the time beyond this threshold becomes criti-
cal. This threshold is not precisely defined, but a trough 
concentration above 2 mcg/mL is predictive of toxicity. At clini-
cally relevant doses, the total time above this threshold is greater 
with multiple smaller doses of drug than with a single large dose. 
 Numerous clinical studies demonstrate that a single daily dose 
of aminoglycoside is just as effective—and probably less toxic—
than multiple smaller doses. Therefore, many authorities now 
recommend that aminoglycosides be administered as a single daily 
dose in many clinical situations. However, the efficacy of once-
daily aminoglycoside dosing in combination therapy of enterococ-
cal and staphylococcal endocarditis remains to be defined, and the 
standard low-dose, thrice-daily administration is still recom-
mended. In contrast, there are limited data supporting once-daily 
dosing in streptococcal endocarditis. The role of once-daily dosing 
in pregnancy and in neonates also is not well defined. 
 Once-daily dosing has potential practical advantages. For 
example, repeated determinations of serum concentrations are 
probably unnecessary unless aminoglycoside is given for more than 
3 days. A drug administered once a day rather than three times a 
day is less labor intensive. And once-a-day dosing is more feasible 
for outpatient therapy. 
 Aminoglycosides are cleared by the kidney, and excretion is 
directly proportional to creatinine clearance. To avoid accumulation 
mRNA
30S subunit
5´ 
5´
3´
3´
Nascent peptide chain
50S subunit
Initiation
codon
Normal bacterial cell
Aminoglycoside-treated bacterial cell
Drug (block of 
initiation complex)
Drug (miscoded peptide chain)
Drug (block of 
translocation) 
30S subunit
mRNA
–
 FIGURE 45–3  Putative mechanisms of action of the aminoglycosides in bacteria. Normal protein synthesis is shown in the top panel. At 
least three aminoglycoside effects have been described, as shown in the bottom panel: block of formation of the initiation complex; miscod-
ing of amino acids in the emerging peptide chain due to misreading of the mRNA; and block of translocation on mRNA. Block of movement of 
the ribosome may occur after the formation of a single initiation complex, resulting in an mRNA chain with only a single ribosome on it, a so-
called monosome. (Reproduced, with permission, from Trevor AT, Katzung BG, Masters SB:  Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 6th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2002.) 
824    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
and toxic levels, once-daily dosing of aminoglycosides is generally 
avoided if renal function is impaired. Rapidly changing renal 
function, which may occur with acute kidney injury, must also be 
monitored to avoid overdosing or underdosing. Provided these 
pitfalls are avoided, once-daily aminoglycoside dosing is safe and 
effective. If the creatinine clearance is > 60 mL/min, then a single 
daily dose of 5–7 mg/kg of gentamicin or tobramycin is recom-
mended (15 mg/kg for amikacin). For patients with creatinine 
clearance < 60 mL/min, traditional dosing as described below is 
recommended. With once-daily dosing, serum concentrations 
need not be routinely checked until the second or third day of 
therapy, depending on the stability of renal function and the 
anticipated duration of therapy. It is unnecessary to check peak 
concentrations because they will be high. The goal is to administer 
drug so that concentrations of less than 1 mcg/mL are present 
between 18 and 24 hours after dosing. This provides a sufficient 
period of time for washout of drug to occur before the next dose 
is given. Appropriate trough levels can be accurately determined 
by measuring serum concentrations in samples obtained 2 hours 
and 12 hours after dosing and then adjusting the dose based on 
the actual clearance of drug or by measuring the concentration in 
a sample obtained 8 hours after a dose. If the 8-hour concentra-
tion is between 1.5 mcg/mL and 6 mcg/mL, the target trough can 
be achieved at 18 hours. 
 With traditional dosing, adjustments must be made to prevent 
accumulation of drug and toxicity in patients with renal insuffi-
ciency. Either the dose of drug is kept constant and the interval 
between doses is increased, or the interval is kept constant and the 
dose is reduced. Nomograms and formulas have been constructed 
relating serum creatinine levels to adjustments in treatment regi-
mens. Because aminoglycoside clearance is directly proportional to 
the creatinine clearance, a method for determining the aminogly-
coside dose is to estimate creatinine clearance using the Cockcroft-
Gault formula described in  Chapter 60 . For a traditional twice- or 
thrice-daily dosing regimen, peak serum concentrations should be 
determined from a blood sample obtained 30–60 minutes after a 
dose, and trough concentrations from a sample obtained just 
before the next dose. Doses of gentamicin and tobramycin should 
be adjusted to maintain peak levels between 5 and 10 mcg/mL and 
trough levels < 2 mcg/mL (< 1 mcg/mL is optimal). 
 E. Adverse Effects 
 All aminoglycosides are ototoxic and nephrotoxic. Ototoxicity and 
nephrotoxicity are more likely to be encountered when therapy is 
continued for more than 5 days, at higher doses, in the elderly, and 
in the setting of renal insufficiency. Concurrent use with loop 
diuretics (eg, furosemide, ethacrynic acid) or other nephrotoxic 
antimicrobial agents (eg, vancomycin or amphotericin) can poten-
tiate nephrotoxicity and should be avoided if possible. Ototoxicity 
can manifest either as auditory damage, resulting in tinnitus and 
high-frequency hearing loss initially, or as vestibular damage, evi-
dent by vertigo, ataxia, and loss of balance. Nephrotoxicity results 
in rising serum creatinine levels or reduced creatinine clearance, 
although the earliest indication often is an increase in trough serum 
aminoglycoside concentrations. Neomycin, kanamycin, and amikacin 
are the most ototoxic agents. Streptomycin and gentamicin are the 
most vestibulotoxic. Neomycin, tobramycin, and gentamicin are 
the most nephrotoxic. 
 In very high doses, aminoglycosides can produce a curare-
like effect with neuromuscular blockade that results in respira-
tory paralysis. This paralysis is usually reversible by calcium 
gluconate (given promptly) or neostigmine. Hypersensitivity 
occurs infrequently. 
 F. Clinical Uses 
 
Aminoglycosides are mostly used against gram-negative enteric 
bacteria, especially when the isolate may be drug-resistant and 
when there is suspicion of sepsis. They are almost always used in 
combination with a β-lactam antibiotic to extend coverage to 
include potential gram-positive pathogens and to take advantage 
of the synergism between these two classes of drugs. Penicillin-
aminoglycoside combinations also are used to achieve bactericidal 
activity in treatment of enterococcal endocarditis and to shorten 
duration of therapy for viridans streptococcal and some patients 
with staphylococcal endocarditis. Which aminoglycoside and 
what dose should be used depend on the infection being treated 
and the susceptibility of the isolate. 
 STREPTOMYCIN 
 Streptomycin ( Figure 45–1 ) was isolated from a strain of 
 Streptomyces griseus. The antimicrobial activity of streptomycin is 
typical of that of other aminoglycosides, as are the mechanisms of 
resistance. Resistance has emerged in most species, severely limit-
ing the current usefulness of streptomycin, with the exceptions 
listed below. Ribosomal resistance to streptomycin develops read-
ily, limiting its role as a single agent. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Mycobacterial Infections 
 Streptomycin is mainly used as a second-line agent for treatment of 
tuberculosis. The dosage is 0.5–1 g/d (7.5–15 mg/kg/d for children), 
which is given intramuscularly or intravenously. It should be used 
only in combination with other agents to prevent emergence of 
resistance. See  Chapter 47 for additional information regarding the 
use of streptomycin in mycobacterial infections. 
 B. Nontuberculous Infections 
 In plague, tularemia, and sometimes brucellosis, streptomycin, 1 g/d 
(15 mg/kg/d for children), is given intramuscularly in combina-
tion with an oral tetracycline. 
 Penicillin plus streptomycin is effective for enterococcal endo-
carditis and 2-week therapy of viridans streptococcal endocarditis. 
Gentamicin has largely replaced streptomycin for these indications. 
Streptomycin remains a useful agent for treating enterococcal infec-
tions, however, because approximately 15% of enterococcal iso-
lates that are resistant to gentamicin (and therefore resistant to 
netilmicin, tobramycin, and amikacin) will be susceptible to 
streptomycin. 
CHAPTER 45 Aminoglycosides & Spectinomycin   825
 Adverse Reactions 
 Fever, skin rashes, and other allergic manifestations may result 
from hypersensitivity to streptomycin. This occurs most fre-
quently with prolonged contact with the drug either in patients 
who receive a prolonged course of treatment (eg, for tuberculosis) 
or in medical personnel who handle the drug. Desensitization is 
occasionally successful. 
 Pain at the injection site is common but usually not severe. The 
most serious toxic effect with streptomycin is disturbance of ves-
tibular function—vertigo and loss of balance. The frequency and 
severity of this disturbance are in proportion to the age of the 
patient, the blood levels of the drug, and the duration of admin-
istration. Vestibular dysfunction may follow a few weeks of unusu-
ally high blood levels (eg, in individuals with impaired renal 
function) or months of relatively low blood levels. Vestibular tox-
icity tends to be irreversible. Streptomycin given during pregnancy 
can cause deafness in the newborn and, therefore, is relatively 
contraindicated. 
 GENTAMICIN 
 Gentamicin is an aminoglycoside ( Figure 45–2 ) isolated from 
 Micromonospora purpurea . It is effective against both gram-positive 
and gram-negative organisms, and many of its properties resemble 
those of other aminoglycosides.  Sisomicin is very similar to the 
C1a component of gentamicin. 
 Antimicrobial Activity 
 Gentamicin sulfate, 2–10 mcg/mL, inhibits in vitro many strains 
of staphylococci and coliforms and other gram-negative bacteria. It 
is active alone, but also as a synergistic companion with β-lactam 
antibiotics, against  Escherichia coli ,  Proteus ,  Klebsiella pneumoniae, 
Enterobacter, Serratia ,  Stenotrophomonas , and other gram-negative 
rods that may be resistant to multiple other antibiotics. Like all 
aminoglycosides, it has no activity against anaerobes. 
 Resistance 
 Streptococci and enterococci are relatively resistant to gentamicin 
owing to failure of the drug to penetrate into the cell. However, 
gentamicin in combination with vancomycin or a penicillin pro-
duces a potent bactericidal effect, which in part is due to enhanced 
uptake of drug that occurs with inhibition of cell wall synthesis. 
Resistance to gentamicin rapidly emerges in staphylococci during 
monotherapy owing to selection of permeability mutants. Ribosomal 
resistance is rare. Among gram-negative bacteria, resistance is most 
commonly due to plasmid-encoded aminoglycoside-modifying 
enzymes. Gram-negative bacteria that are gentamicin-resistant usu-
ally are susceptible to amikacin, which is much more resistant to 
modifying enzyme activity. The enterococcal enzyme that modifies 
gentamicin is a bifunctional enzyme that also inactivates amikacin, 
netilmicin, and tobramycin, but not streptomycin; the latter is 
modified by a different enzyme. This is why some gentamicin-
resistant enterococci are susceptible to streptomycin. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Intramuscular or Intravenous Administration 
 Gentamicin is used mainly in severe infections (eg, sepsis and 
pneumonia) caused by gram-negative bacteria that are likely to be 
resistant to other drugs, especially  P aeruginosa ,  Enterobacter sp, 
 Serratia marcescens ,  Proteus sp,  Acinetobacter sp, and  Klebsiella sp. 
It usually is used in combination with a second agent because an 
aminoglycoside alone may not be effective for infections outside 
the urinary tract. For example, gentamicin should not be used as 
a single agent to treat staphylococcal infections because resistance 
develops rapidly. Aminoglycosides also should not be used for 
single-agent therapy of pneumonia because penetration of infected 
lung tissue is poor and local conditions of low pH and low oxygen 
tension contribute to poor activity. Gentamicin 5–6 mg/kg/d 
traditionally is given intravenously in three equal doses, but once-
daily administration is just as effective for some organisms and less 
toxic (see above). 
 Gentamicin, in combination with a cell wall-active antibiotic, is 
also indicated in the treatment of endocarditis caused by gram-
positive bacteria (streptococci, staphylococci, and enterococci). 
The synergistic killing achieved by combination therapy may 
achieve bactericidal activity necessary for cure or allow for the 
shortening of the duration of therapy. The doses of gentamicin 
used for synergy against gram-positive bacteria are lower than tra-
ditional doses. Typically the drug is administered at a dose of 3 mg/
kg/day in three divided doses. Peak levels should be approximately 
3 mcg/mL, while trough levels should be < 1 mcg/mL. There are 
limited data to support administering the 3-mg/kg dose as a single 
daily injection in the treatment of streptococcal endocarditis. 
 B. Topical and Ocular Administration 
 
Creams, ointments, and solutions containing 0.1–0.3% gentami-
cin sulfate have been used for the treatment of infected burns, 
wounds, or skin lesions and in attempts to prevent intravenous 
catheter infections. The effectiveness of topical preparations for 
these indications is unclear. Topical gentamicin is partly inacti-
vated by purulent exudates. Ten mg can be injected subconjuncti-
vally for treatment of ocular infections. 
 C. Intrathecal Administration 
 
Meningitis caused by gram-negative bacteria has been treated by 
the intrathecal injection of gentamicin sulfate, 1–10 mg/d. 
However, neither intrathecal nor intraventricular gentamicin was 
beneficial in neonates with meningitis, and intraventricular gen-
tamicin was toxic, raising questions about the usefulness of this 
form of therapy. Moreover, the availability of third-generation 
cephalosporins for gram-negative meningitis has rendered this 
therapy obsolete in most cases. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Nephrotoxicity is usually reversible and mild. It occurs in 5–25% 
of patients receiving gentamicin for longer than 3–5 days. Such 
toxicity requires, at the very least, adjustment of the dosing regi-
men and should prompt reconsideration of the need for the drug, 
826    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
particularly if there is a less toxic alternative agent. Measurement 
of gentamicin serum levels is essential. Ototoxicity, which tends to 
be irreversible, manifests itself mainly as vestibular dysfunction. 
Loss of hearing can also occur. The incidence of ototoxicity is in 
part genetically determined, having been linked to point muta-
tions in mitochondrial DNA, and occurs in 1–5% for patients 
receiving gentamicin for more than 5 days. Hypersensitivity reac-
tions to gentamicin are uncommon. 
 TOBRAMYCIN 
 This aminoglycoside ( Figure 45–2 ) has an antibacterial spec-
trum similar to that of gentamicin. Although there is some cross-
resistance between gentamicin and tobramycin, it is unpredictable 
in individual strains. Separate laboratory susceptibility tests are 
therefore necessary. 
 The pharmacokinetic properties of tobramycin are virtually 
identical with those of gentamicin. The daily dose of tobramycin 
is 5–6 mg/kg intramuscularly or intravenously, traditionally 
divided into three equal amounts and given every 8 hours. 
Monitoring blood levels in renal insufficiency is an essential guide 
to proper dosing. 
 Tobramycin has almost the same antibacterial spectrum as 
gentamicin with a few exceptions. Gentamicin is slightly more 
active against  S marcescens , whereas tobramycin is slightly more 
active against  P aeruginosa ;  Enterococcus faecalis is susceptible to 
both gentamicin and tobramycin, but  E faecium is resistant to 
tobramycin. Gentamicin and tobramycin are otherwise inter-
changeable clinically. 
 Like other aminoglycosides, tobramycin is ototoxic and neph-
rotoxic. Nephrotoxicity of tobramycin may be slightly less than 
that of gentamicin, but the difference is clinically inconsequential. 
 Tobramycin is also formulated in solution (300 mg in 5 mL) 
for inhalation for treatment of  P aeruginosa lower respiratory tract 
infections complicating cystic fibrosis. The drug is recommended 
as a 300-mg dose regardless of the patient’s age or weight for 
administration twice daily in repeated cycles of 28 days on ther-
apy, followed by 28 days off therapy. Serum concentrations 1 hour 
after inhalation average 1 mcg/mL; consequently, nephrotoxicity 
and ototoxicity rarely occur. Caution should be used when admin-
istering tobramycin to patients with preexisting renal, vestibular, 
or hearing disorders. 
 AMIKACIN 
 Amikacin is a semisynthetic derivative of kanamycin; it is less toxic 
than the parent molecule ( Figure 45–2 ). It is resistant to many 
enzymes that inactivate gentamicin and tobramycin, and it there-
fore can be used against some microorganisms resistant to the 
latter drugs. Many gram-negative bacteria, including many strains 
of  Proteus ,  Pseudomonas ,  Enterobacter , and  Serratia , are inhibited 
by 1–20 mcg/mL amikacin in vitro. After injection of 500 mg of 
amikacin every 12 hours (15 mg/kg/d) intramuscularly, peak levels 
in serum are 10–30 mcg/mL. 
 Strains of multidrug-resistant  Mycobacterium tuberculosis , 
including streptomycin-resistant strains, are usually susceptible to 
amikacin. Kanamycin-resistant strains may be cross-resistant to 
amikacin. The dosage of amikacin for tuberculosis is 7.5–15 mg/
kg/d as a once-daily or two to three times weekly injection and 
always in combination with other drugs to which the isolate is 
susceptible. 
 Like all aminoglycosides, amikacin is nephrotoxic and ototoxic 
(particularly for the auditory portion of the eighth nerve). Serum 
concentrations should be monitored. Target peak serum concen-
trations for an every-12-hours dosing regimen are 20–40 mcg/mL, 
and troughs should be maintained between 4 and 8 mcg/mL. 
 NETILMICIN 
 Netilmicin shares many characteristics with gentamicin and 
tobramycin. However, the addition of an ethyl group to the 
1-amino position of the 2-deoxystreptamine ring (ring II,  Figure 
45–2 ) sterically protects the netilmicin molecule from enzymatic 
degradation at the 3-amino (ring II) and 2-hydroxyl (ring III) 
positions. Consequently, netilmicin may be active against some 
gentamicin-resistant and tobramycin-resistant bacteria. 
 The dosage (5–7 mg/kg/d) and the routes of administration are 
the same as for gentamicin. Netilmicin is largely interchangeable 
with gentamicin or tobramycin but is no longer available in the 
United States. 
 NEOMYCIN & KANAMYCIN 
 Neomycin and kanamycin are closely related.  Paromomycin is 
also a member of this group. All have similar properties. 
 Antimicrobial Activity & Resistance 
 Drugs of the neomycin group are active against gram-positive and 
gram-negative bacteria and some mycobacteria.  P aeruginosa and 
streptococci are generally resistant. Mechanisms of antibacterial 
action and resistance are the same as with other aminoglycosides. 
The widespread use of these drugs in bowel preparation for elec-
tive surgery has resulted in the selection of resistant organisms and 
some outbreaks of enterocolitis in hospitals. Cross-resistance 
between kanamycin and neomycin is complete. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Drugs of the neomycin group are poorly absorbed from the gas-
trointestinal tract. After oral administration, the intestinal flora is 
suppressed or modified, and the drug is excreted in the feces. 
Excretion of any absorbed drug is mainly through glomerular 
filtration into the urine. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Neomycin and kanamycin are now limited to topical and oral use. 
Neomycin is too toxic for parenteral use. With the advent of more 
CHAPTER 45 Aminoglycosides & Spectinomycin   827
potent and less toxic aminoglycosides, parenteral administration 
of kanamycin has also been largely abandoned. Paromomycin has 
recently been shown to be effective against visceral leishmaniasis 
when given parenterally (see  Chapter 52 ), and this serious infec-
tion may represent an important new use for this drug. 
 A. Topical Administration 
 Solutions containing 1–5 mg/mL are used on infected surfaces or 
injected into joints, the pleural cavity, tissue spaces, or abscess 
cavities where infection is present. The total amount of drug given 
in this fashion must be limited to 15 mg/kg/d because at higher 
doses enough drug may be absorbed to produce systemic toxicity. 
Whether topical application for active infection adds anything to 
appropriate systemic therapy is questionable. Ointments, often 
formulated as a neomycin-polymyxin-bacitracin combination, can 
be applied to infected skin lesions or in the nares for suppression 
of staphylococci but they are largely ineffective. 
 B. Oral Administration 
 In preparation for elective bowel surgery, 1 g of neomycin is given 
orally every 6–8 hours for 1–2 days, often combined with 1 g of 
erythromycin base. This reduces the aerobic bowel flora with little 
effect on anaerobes. In hepatic encephalopathy, coliform flora can be 
suppressed by giving 1 g every 6–8 hours together with reduced 
protein intake, thus reducing ammonia production. Use of neomycin 
for hepatic encephalopathy has been largely supplanted by lactulose 
and other medications that are less toxic. Use of paromomycin in the 
treatment of protozoal infections is discussed in  Chapter 52 . 
 Adverse Reactions 
 All members of the neomycin group have significant nephrotoxic-
ity and ototoxicity. Auditory function is affected more than ves-
tibular function. Deafness has occurred, especially in adults with 
impaired renal function and prolonged elevation of drug levels. 
 The sudden absorption of postoperatively instilled kanamycin 
from the peritoneal cavity (3–5 g) has resulted in curare-like neu-
romuscular blockade and respiratory arrest. Calcium gluconate 
and neostigmine can act as antidotes. 
 Although hypersensitivity is not common, prolonged applica-
tion of neomycin-containing ointments to skin and eyes has 
resulted in severe allergic reactions. 
■  SPECTINOMYCIN 
 Spectinomycin is an aminocyclitol antibiotic that is structurally 
related to aminoglycosides. It lacks amino sugars and glycosidic 
bonds. 
 
NH
HN
CH3
O
O
CH3
Spectinomycin
O
CH3
HO
O
OH
OH
 Spectinomycin is active in vitro against many gram-positive 
and gram-negative organisms, but it is used almost solely as an 
alternative treatment for drug-resistant gonorrhea or gonorrhea in 
penicillin-allergic patients. The majority of gonococcal isolates are 
inhibited by 6 mcg/mL of spectinomycin. Strains of gonococci 
may be resistant to spectinomycin, but there is no cross-resistance 
with other drugs used in gonorrhea. Spectinomycin is rapidly 
absorbed after intramuscular injection. A single dose of 40 mg/kg 
up to a maximum of 2 g is given. There is pain at the injection site 
and, occasionally, fever and nausea. Nephrotoxicity and anemia 
have been observed rarely. Spectinomycin is no longer available for 
use in the United States but may be available elsewhere. 
828    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
Amikacin (generic, Amikin)
Parenteral: 50, 250 mg (in vials) for IM, IV injection
Gentamicin (generic, Garamycin)
Parenteral: 10, 40 mg/mL vials for IM, IV injection
Kanamycin (Kantrex)
Parenteral: 500, 1000 mg for IM, IV injection; 75 mg for pediatric 
injection
Neomycin (generic, Mycifradin)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
Amikacin (generic, Amikin)
Parenteral: 50, 250 mg (in vials) for IM, IV injection
Gentamicin (generic, Garamycin)
Parenteral: 10, 40 mg/mL vials for IM, IV injection
Kanamycin (Kantrex)
Parenteral: 500, 1000 mg for IM, IV injection; 75 mg for pediatric 
injection
Neomycin (generic, Mycifradin)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Paromomycin (Humatin)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Streptomycin (generic)
Parenteral: 400 mg/mL for IM injection
Tobramycin (generic, Nebcin)
Parenteral: 10, 40 mg/mL for IM, IV injection; powder to reconsti-
tute for injection
Solution for inhalation (TOBI): 300 mg in 5 mL sodium chloride 
solution
 REFERENCES 
 Busse H-J, Wöstmann C, Bakker EP: The bactericidal action of streptomycin: 
Membrane permeabilization caused by the insertion of mistranslated pro-
teins into the cytoplasmic membrane of  Escherichia coli and subsequent 
caging of the antibiotic inside the cells due to degradation of these proteins. 
J Gen Microbiol 1992;138:551. 
 Cheer SM, Waugh J, Noble S: Inhaled tobramycin (TOBI): A review of its use in 
the management of  Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in patients with cystic 
fibrosis. Drugs 2003;63:2501. 
 Contopoulos-Ioannidis DG et al: Extended-interval aminoglycoside administra-
tion for children: A meta-analysis. Pediatrics 2004;114:111. 
 Kaye D: Current use for old antibacterial agents: Polymyxins, rifampin, and 
aminoglycosides. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2004;18:669. 
 Le T, Bayer AS: Combination antibiotic therapy for infective endocarditis. Clin 
Infect Dis 2003;36:615. 
 Olsen KM et al: Effect of once-daily dosing vs. multiple daily dosing of tobramycin 
on enzyme markers of nephrotoxicity. Crit Care Med 2004;32:1678. 
 Pappas G et al: Brucellosis. N Engl J Med 2005;352:2325. 
 Paul M et al: Beta lactam monotherapy versus beta lactam-aminoglycoside combi-
nation therapy for sepsis in immunocompetent patients: Systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ 2004;328:668. 
 Paul M, Soares-Weiser K, Leibovici L: Beta lactam monotherapy versus beta 
lactam-aminoglycoside combination therapy for fever with neutropenia: 
Systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2003;326:1111. 
 Poole K: Aminoglycoside resistance in  Pseudomonas aeruginosa . Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2005;49:479. 
SUMMARY Aminoglycosides
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
AMINOGLYCOSIDES & SPECTINOMYCIN
 • Gentamicin
Prevents bacterial protein 
synthesis by binding to 
the 30S ribosomal subunit
Bactericidal activity against susceptible 
bacteria • synergistic effects against 
gram-positive bacteria when combined 
with β lactams or vancomycin 
• concentration-dependent killing and a 
significant post-antibiotic effect
Sepsis caused by aerobic 
gram-negative bacteria 
• synergistic activity in 
endocarditis caused by 
streptococci, staphylococci, 
and enterococci
IV • renal clearance (half-life 2.5 h) 
• conventional dosing 1.3–1.7 mg/kg 
q8h with goal peak levels 5–8 mcg/
mL • trough levels < 2 mcg/mL • 
once-daily dosing at 5–7 mg/kg as 
effective and may have less toxicity 
than conventional dosing • Toxicity: 
Nephrotoxicity (reversible), ototox-
icity (irreversible), neuromuscular 
blockade
 • Tobramycin: Intravenous; more active than gentamicin versus Pseudomonas; may also have less nephrotoxicity
 • Amikacin: Intravenous; resistant to many enzymes that inactivate gentamicin and tobramycin; higher doses and target peaks and troughs than gentamicin and 
         tobramycin
 • Streptomycin: Intramuscular, widespread resistance limits use to specific indications such as tuberculosis and enterococcal endocarditis
 • Neomycin: Oral or topical, poor bioavailability; used before bowel surgery to decrease aerobic flora; also used to treat hepatic encephalopathy
 • Spectinomycin: Intramuscular; sole use is for treatment of antibiotic-resistant gonococcal infections or gonococcal infections in penicillin-allergic patients
CHAPTER 45 Aminoglycosides & Spectinomycin   829
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient has normal renal function and thus qualifies for 
once-daily dosing. Tobramycin could be administered as a 
single once-daily injection at a dose of 350–490 mg (5–7 mg/
kg). A serum level between 1.5 and 6 mcg/mL measured 8 
hours after infusion correlates with an appropriate trough 
level. Alternatively, the same total daily dose could be divided 
and administered every 8 hours, as a conventional dosing 
strategy. With conventional dosing, peak and trough con-
centrations should be monitored with the target peak 
concentration of 5–10 mcg/mL and the target trough con-
centration of < 2 mcg/mL.
This page intentionally left blank 
831
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 ■ ANTIFOLATE DRUGS 
 SULFONAMIDES 
 Chemistry 
 The basic formulas of the sulfonamides and their structural similar-
ity to  p -aminobenzoic acid (PABA) are shown in  Figure 46–1 . 
Sulfonamides with varying physical, chemical, pharmacologic, and 
antibacterial properties are produced by attaching substituents to 
the amido group (–SO 2 –NH–R) or the amino group (–NH 2 ) of 
the sulfanilamide nucleus. Sulfonamides tend to be much more 
soluble at alkaline than at acid pH. Most can be prepared as 
sodium salts, which are used for intravenous administration. 
 Mechanism of Action & 
Antimicrobial Activity 
 Sulfonamide-susceptible organisms, unlike mammals, cannot use 
exogenous folate but must synthesize it from PABA. This pathway 
( Figure 46–2 ) is thus essential for production of purines and 
nucleic acid synthesis. As structural analogs of PABA, sulfon-
amides inhibit dihydropteroate synthase and folate production. 
Sulfonamides inhibit both gram-positive and gram-negative 
bacteria,  Nocardia sp,  Chlamydia trachomatis, and some protozoa. 
Some enteric bacteria, such as  Escherichia coli,  Klebsiella pneumo-
niae,  Salmonella ,  Shigella , and  Enterobacter sp are also inhibited. It 
is interesting that rickettsiae are not inhibited by sulfonamides but 
are instead stimulated in their growth. Activity is poor against 
anaerobes.  Pseudomonas aeruginosa is intrinsically resistant to 
sulfonamide antibiotics. 
 Combination of a sulfonamide with an inhibitor of dihydro-
folate reductase (trimethoprim or pyrimethamine) provides syn-
ergistic activity because of sequential inhibition of folate synthesis 
( Figure 46–2 ). 
46
Sulfonamides, 
Trimethoprim, 
& Quinolones
 Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, & Lisa G. Winston, MD∗ 
 ∗ The authors thank Henry F. Chambers, MD, for his contributions to 
previous editions.
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 59-year-old woman presents to an urgent care clinic with 
a 4-day history of frequent and painful urination. She has 
had fevers, chills, and flank pain for the past 2 days. Her 
physician advised her to come immediately to the clinic for 
evaluation. In the clinic she is febrile (38.5°C [101.3°F]) but 
otherwise stable and states she is not experiencing any nau-
sea or vomiting. Her urine dipstick test is positive for leuko-
cyte esterase. Urinalysis and urine culture are ordered. Her 
past medical history is significant for three urinary tract 
infections in the past year. Each episode was uncomplicated, 
treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and promptly 
resolved. She also has osteoporosis for which she takes a 
daily calcium supplement. The decision is made to treat her 
with oral antibiotics for a complicated urinary tract infection 
with close follow-up. Given her history, what would be a 
reasonable empiric antibiotic choice? Depending on the anti-
biotic choice are there potential drug interactions? 
832    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Resistance 
 Mammalian cells (and some bacteria) lack the enzymes required 
for folate synthesis from PABA and depend on exogenous sources 
of folate; therefore, they are not susceptible to sulfonamides. 
Sulfonamide resistance may occur as a result of mutations that 
(1) cause overproduction of PABA, (2) cause production of a folic 
acid-synthesizing enzyme that has low affinity for sulfonamides, 
or (3) impair permeability to the sulfonamide. Dihydropteroate 
synthase with low sulfonamide affinity is often encoded on a plas-
mid that is transmissible and can disseminate rapidly and widely. 
Sulfonamide-resistant dihydropteroate synthase mutants also can 
emerge under selective pressure. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Sulfonamides can be divided into three major groups: (1) oral, 
absorbable; (2) oral, nonabsorbable; and (3) topical. The oral, 
absorbable sulfonamides can be classified as short-, intermediate-, or 
long-acting on the basis of their half-lives ( Table 46–1 ). They are 
absorbed from the stomach and small intestine and distributed 
widely to tissues and body fluids (including the central nervous 
system and cerebrospinal fluid), placenta, and fetus. Protein bind-
ing varies from 20% to over 90%. Therapeutic concentrations are 
in the range of 40–100 mcg/mL of blood. Blood levels generally 
peak 2–6 hours after oral administration. 
 A portion of absorbed drug is acetylated or glucuronidated in 
the liver. Sulfonamides and inactive metabolites are then excreted 
into the urine, mainly by glomerular filtration. In significant renal 
failure, the dosage of sulfonamide must be reduced. 
SO2NH2
COOH
Sulfanilamide
NH2
p-Aminobenzoic acid (PABA)
NH2
N
SO2N
N
O
CH3
N
CH3
Sulfadiazine
NH2
Sulfisoxazole
NH2
SO2NH
Sulfathalidine
(phthalylsulfathiazole)
Sulfamethoxazole
SO2NH
NH2
SO2NH
N
COOH
S
NHCO
NH2
CH3
O
N
SO2NH
 FIGURE 46–1  Structures of some sulfonamides and 
 p- aminobenzoic acid. 
−
−
Dihydropteroate
synthase
Dihydrofolate
reductase
p-Aminobenzoic acid
Sulfonamides
(compete
with PABA)
Dihydrofolic acid
Trimethoprim
Tetrahydrofolic acid
Purines
DNA
 FIGURE 46–2 Actions of sulfonamides and trimethoprim. 
TABLE 46–1  Pharmacokinetic properties of some 
sulfonamides and pyrimidines.
Drug
Half-Life
Oral Absorption
Sulfonamides
 Sulfacytine
Short
Prompt (peak levels 
in 1–4 hours)
 Sulfisoxazole
Short (6 hours)
Prompt
 Sulfamethizole
Short (9 hours)
Prompt
 Sulfadiazine
Intermediate 
(10–17 hours)
Slow (peak levels in 
4–8 hours)
 Sulfamethoxazole
Intermediate 
(10–12 hours)
Slow
 Sulfapyridine
Intermediate (17 hours)
Slow
 Sulfadoxine
Long (7–9 days)
Intermediate
Pyrimidines
 Trimethoprim
Intermediate (11 hours)
Prompt
 Pyrimethamine
Long (4–6 days)
Prompt
CHAPTER 46 Sulfonamides, Trimethoprim, & Quinolones    833
 Clinical Uses 
 Sulfonamides are infrequently used as single agents. Many strains 
of formerly susceptible species, including meningococci, pneu-
mococci, streptococci, staphylococci, and gonococci, are now 
resistant. The fixed-drug combination of trimethoprim-sulfamethox- 
azole is the drug of choice for infections such as  Pneumocystis 
jiroveci (formerly  P carinii ) pneumonia, toxoplasmosis, nocardiosis, 
and occasionally other bacterial infections. 
 A. Oral Absorbable Agents 
 Sulfisoxazole and sulfamethoxazole are short- to medium-acting 
agents used almost exclusively to treat urinary tract infections. The 
usual adult dosage is 1 g of sulfisoxazole four times daily or 1 g of 
sulfamethoxazole two or three times daily. 
 Sulfadiazine in combination with pyrimethamine is first-line 
therapy for treatment of acute toxoplasmosis. The combination of 
sulfadiazine with pyrimethamine, a potent inhibitor of dihydrofo-
late reductase, is synergistic because these drugs block sequential 
steps in the folate synthetic pathway blockade ( Figure 46–2 ). The 
dosage of sulfadiazine is 1 g four times daily, with pyrimethamine 
given as a 75-mg loading dose followed by a 25-mg once-daily 
dose. Folinic acid, 10 mg orally each day, should also be adminis-
tered to minimize bone marrow suppression. 
 Sulfadoxine is the only long-acting sulfonamide currently 
available in the USA and only as a combination formulation with 
pyrimethamine (Fansidar), a second-line agent in the treatment of 
malaria (see  Chapter 52 ). 
 B. Oral Nonabsorbable Agents 
 Sulfasalazine (salicylazosulfapyridine) is widely used in ulcerative 
colitis, enteritis, and other inflammatory bowel disease (see 
 Chapter 62 ). 
 C. Topical Agents 
 Sodium sulfacetamide ophthalmic solution or ointment is effec-
tive in the treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis and as adjunctive 
therapy for trachoma. Another sulfonamide, mafenide acetate, is 
used topically but can be absorbed from burn sites. The drug and 
its primary metabolite inhibit carbonic anhydrase and can cause 
metabolic acidosis, a side effect that limits its usefulness. Silver 
sulfadiazine is a much less toxic topical sulfonamide and is pre-
ferred to mafenide for prevention of infection of burn wounds. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 All sulfonamides, including antimicrobial sulfas, diuretics, diazox-
ide, and the sulfonylurea hypoglycemic agents, have been consid-
ered to be partially cross-allergenic. However, evidence for this is 
not extensive. The most common adverse effects are fever, skin 
rashes, exfoliative dermatitis, photosensitivity, urticaria, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, and difficulties referable to the urinary tract 
(see below). Stevens-Johnson syndrome, although relatively uncom-
mon (< 1% of treatment courses), is a particularly serious and 
potentially fatal type of skin and mucous membrane eruption 
associated with sulfonamide use. Other unwanted effects include 
stomatitis, conjunctivitis, arthritis, hematopoietic disturbances (see 
below), hepatitis, and, rarely, polyarteritis nodosa and psychosis. 
 A. Urinary Tract Disturbances 
 Sulfonamides may precipitate in urine, especially at neutral or acid 
pH, producing crystalluria, hematuria, or even obstruction. This 
is rarely a problem with the more soluble sulfonamides (eg, 
sulfisoxazole). Sulfadiazine when given in large doses, particularly 
if fluid intake is poor, can cause crystalluria. Crystalluria is treated 
by administration of sodium bicarbonate to alkalinize the urine 
and fluids to increase urine flow. Sulfonamides have also been 
implicated in various types of nephrosis and in allergic nephritis. 
 B. Hematopoietic Disturbances 
 Sulfonamides can cause hemolytic or aplastic anemia, granulocy-
topenia, thrombocytopenia, or leukemoid reactions. Sulfonamides 
may provoke hemolytic reactions in patients with glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Sulfonamides taken near the 
end of pregnancy increase the risk of kernicterus in newborns. 
 TRIMETHOPRIM & TRIMETHOPRIM-
SULFAMETHOXAZOLE MIXTURES 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Trimethoprim, a trimethoxybenzylpyrimidine, selectively inhibits 
bacterial dihydrofolic acid reductase, which converts dihydrofolic 
acid to tetrahydrofolic acid, a step leading to the synthesis of 
purines and ultimately to DNA ( Figure 46–2 ). Trimethoprim is 
about 50,000 times less efficient in inhibition of mammalian 
dihydrofolic acid reductase. Pyrimethamine, another benzylpy-
rimidine, selectively inhibits dihydrofolic acid reductase of proto-
zoa compared with that of mammalian cells. As noted above, 
trimethoprim or pyrimethamine in combination with a sulfon-
amide blocks sequential steps in folate synthesis, resulting in 
marked enhancement (synergism) of the activity of both drugs. 
The combination often is bactericidal, compared with the bacte-
riostatic activity of a sulfonamide alone. 
 
CI
C2H5
Pyrimethamine
CH2
Trimethoprim
OCH3
OCH3
OCH3
H2N
NH2
N
N
H2N
NH2
N
N
 
834    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Resistance 
 Resistance to trimethoprim can result from reduced cell permea-
bility, overproduction of dihydrofolate reductase, or production of 
an altered reductase with reduced drug binding. Resistance can 
emerge by mutation, although more commonly it is due to plas-
mid-encoded trimethoprim-resistant dihydrofolate reductases. 
These resistant enzymes may be coded within transposons on 
conjugative plasmids that exhibit a broad host range, accounting 
for rapid and widespread dissemination of trimethoprim resis-
tance among numerous bacterial species. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Trimethoprim is usually given orally, alone or in combination 
with sulfamethoxazole, which has a similar half-life. Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole can also be given intravenously. Trimethoprim is 
well absorbed from the gut and distributed widely in body fluids 
and tissues, including cerebrospinal fluid. 
Because trimethoprim is more lipid-soluble than sulfamethox-
azole, it has a larger volume of distribution than the latter drug. 
 Therefore, when 1 part of trimethoprim is given with 5 parts of 
sulfamethoxazole (the ratio in the formulation), the peak plasma 
concentrations are in the ratio of 1:20, which is optimal for the 
combined effects of these drugs in vitro. About 30–50% of the 
sulfonamide and 50–60% of the trimethoprim (or their respec-
tive metabolites) are excreted in the urine within 24 hours. The 
dose should be reduced by half for patients with creatinine clear-
ances of 15–30 mL/min. 
 Trimethoprim (a weak base) concentrates in prostatic fluid and 
in vaginal fluid, which are more acidic than plasma. Therefore, it 
has more antibacterial activity in prostatic and vaginal fluids than 
many other antimicrobial drugs. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Oral Trimethoprim 
 Trimethoprim can be given alone (100 mg twice daily) in acute 
urinary tract infections. Many community-acquired organisms are 
susceptible to the high concentrations that are found in the urine 
(200–600 mcg/mL). 
 B. Oral Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) 
 A combination of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is effective 
treatment for a wide variety of infections including  P jiroveci 
pneumonia, shigellosis, systemic salmonella infections, urinary 
tract infections, prostatitis, and some nontuberculous mycobacte-
rial infections. It is active against most  Staphylococcus aureus 
strains, both methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant, and 
against respiratory tract pathogens such as pneumococcus, 
 Haemophilus sp,  Moraxella catarrhalis, and  K pneumoniae (but not 
 Mycoplasma pneumoniae ). However, the increasing prevalence of 
strains of  E coli (up to 30% or more) and pneumococci that are 
resistant to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole must be considered 
before using this combination for empiric therapy of upper uri-
nary tract infections or pneumonia. 
 One double-strength tablet (each tablet contains trimethoprim 
160 mg plus sulfamethoxazole 800 mg) given every 12 hours is 
effective treatment for urinary tract infections and prostatitis. One 
half of the regular (single-strength) tablet given three times weekly 
for many months may serve as prophylaxis in recurrent urinary 
tract infections of some women. One double-strength tablet every 
12 hours is effective treatment for infections caused by susceptible 
strains of shigella and salmonella. The dosage for children treated 
for shigellosis, urinary tract infection, or otitis media is 8 mg/kg 
trimethoprim and 40 mg/kg sulfamethoxazole every 12 hours. 
 Infections with  P jiroveci and some other pathogens can be 
treated orally with high doses of the combination (dosed on the 
basis of the trimethoprim component at 15–20 mg/kg/d) or can 
be prevented in immunosuppressed patients by one double-
strength tablet daily or three times weekly. 
 C. Intravenous Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole 
 A solution of the mixture containing 80 mg trimethoprim plus 
400 mg sulfamethoxazole per 5 mL diluted in 125 mL of 5% 
dextrose in water can be administered by intravenous infusion 
over 60–90 minutes. It is the agent of choice for moderately severe 
to severe pneumocystis pneumonia. It may be used for gram-
negative bacterial sepsis, including that caused by some multidrug-
resistant species such as enterobacter and serratia; shigellosis; 
typhoid fever; or urinary tract infection caused by a susceptible 
organism when the patient is unable to take the drug by mouth. 
The dosage is 10–20 mg/kg/d of the trimethoprim component. 
 D. Oral Pyrimethamine with Sulfonamide 
 Pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine have been used for treatment of 
leishmaniasis and toxoplasmosis. In falciparum malaria, the com-
bination of pyrimethamine with sulfadoxine (Fansidar) has been 
used (see  Chapter 52 ). 
 Adverse Effects 
 Trimethoprim produces the predictable adverse effects of an antifolate 
drug, especially megaloblastic anemia, leukopenia, and granulocy-
topenia. The combination trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole may 
cause all of the untoward reactions associated with sulfonamides. 
Nausea and vomiting, drug fever, vasculitis, renal damage, and cen-
tral nervous system disturbances occasionally occur also. Patients 
with AIDS and pneumocystis pneumonia have a particularly high 
frequency of untoward reactions to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 
especially fever, rashes, leukopenia, diarrhea, elevations of hepatic 
aminotransferases, hyperkalemia, and hyponatremia. 
 ■ DNA GYRASE INHIBITORS  
 FLUOROQUINOLONES 
 The important quinolones are synthetic fluorinated analogs of 
nalidixic acid ( Figure 46–3 ). They are active against a variety of 
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. 
CHAPTER 46 Sulfonamides, Trimethoprim, & Quinolones    835
 Mechanism of Action 
 Quinolones block bacterial DNA synthesis by inhibiting bacterial 
topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and topoisomerase IV. Inhibition of 
DNA gyrase prevents the relaxation of positively supercoiled DNA 
that is required for normal transcription and replication. Inhibition 
of topoisomerase IV interferes with separation of replicated chromo-
somal DNA into the respective daughter cells during cell division. 
 Antibacterial Activity 
 Earlier quinolones such as nalidixic acid did not achieve systemic 
antibacterial levels and were useful only in the treatment of lower 
urinary tract infections. Fluorinated derivatives (ciprofloxacin, 
levofloxacin, and others;  Figure 46–3 and  Table 46–2 ) have greatly 
improved antibacterial activity compared with nalidixic acid and 
achieve bactericidal levels in blood and tissues. 
 Fluoroquinolones were originally developed because of their 
excellent activity against gram-negative aerobic bacteria; they had 
limited activity against gram-positive organisms. Several newer 
agents have improved activity against gram-positive cocci. This 
relative activity against gram-negative versus gram-positive species 
is useful for classification of these agents. Norfloxacin is the least 
active of the fluoroquinolones against both gram-negative and 
gram-positive organisms, with minimum inhibitory concentrations 
(MICs) fourfold to eightfold higher than those of ciprofloxacin. 
Ciprofloxacin, enoxacin, lomefloxacin, levofloxacin, ofloxacin, and 
pefloxacin comprise a second group of similar agents possessing 
excellent gram-negative activity and moderate to good activity 
against gram-positive bacteria. MICs for gram-negative cocci and 
bacilli, including  Enterobacter sp,  P aeruginosa ,   Neisseria menin-
gitidis ,  Haemophilus sp, and  Campylobacter jejuni , are 1–2 mcg/mL 
and often less. Methicillin-susceptible strains of  S aureus are gener-
ally susceptible to these fluoroquinolones, but methicillin-resistant 
strains of staphylococci are often resistant. Streptococci and entero-
cocci tend to be less susceptible than staphylococci, and efficacy in 
infections caused by these organisms is limited. Ciprofloxacin is the 
most active agent of this group against gram-negative organisms, 
 P aeruginosa in particular. Levofloxacin, the L-isomer of ofloxacin, 
has superior activity against gram-positive organisms, including 
 Streptococcus pneumoniae. 
 Gatifloxacin, gemifloxacin, and moxifloxacin make up a third 
group of fluoroquinolones with improved activity against gram-
positive organisms, particularly  S pneumoniae and some staphylo-
cocci. Gemifloxacin is active in vitro against ciprofloxacin-resistant 
strains of  S pneumoniae, but in vivo efficacy is unproven. Although 
MICs of these agents for staphylococci are lower than those of 
ciprofloxacin (and the other compounds mentioned in the para-
graph above), it is not known whether the enhanced activity is 
sufficient to permit use of these agents for treatment of infections 
caused by ciprofloxacin-resistant strains. In general, none of these 
agents is as active as ciprofloxacin against gram-negative organ-
isms. Fluoroquinolones also are active against agents of atypical 
pneumonia (eg, mycoplasmas and chlamydiae) and against intra-
cellular pathogens such as  Legionella  pneumophila and some myco-
bacteria, including  Mycobacterium tuberculosis and  Mycobacterium 
avium complex. Moxifloxacin also has modest activity against 
anaerobic bacteria. Because of toxicity, gatifloxacin is no longer 
available in the United States. 
 Resistance 
 During fluoroquinolone therapy, resistant organisms emerge in 
about one of every 10 7 –10 9 organisms, especially among staphylo-
cocci,  P aeruginosa , and  Serratia marcescens . Resistance is due to one 
or more point mutations in the quinolone binding region of the 
target enzyme or to a change in the permeability of the organism. 
However, this does not account for the relative ease with which 
resistance develops in exquisitely susceptible bacteria. More recently 
two types of plasmid-mediated resistance have been described. The 
first type utilizes Qnr proteins, which protect DNA gyrase from the 
fluoroquinolones. The second is a variant of an aminoglycoside 
acetyltransferase capable of modifying ciprofloxacin. Both mecha-
nisms confer low-level resistance that may facilitate the point muta-
tions that confer high-level resistance. Resistance to one 
fluoroquinolone, particularly if it is of high level, generally confers 
cross-resistance to all other members of this class. 
Gemifloxacin
N
N
N
N
O
CO2H
CH2O
H2N
F
N
N
N
Levofloxacin
CH3
CH3
O
O
F
COOH
N
N
HN
Ciprofloxacin
O
F
COOH
N
N
HN
Gatifloxacin
O
O
CH3
CH3
F
COOH
N
C2H5
HN
Norfloxacin
O
F
COOH
N
N
N
O
Nalidixic acid
COOH
CH3
C2H5
N
N
Moxifloxacin
H3C
H
N
COOH
F
O
 FIGURE 46–3  Structures of nalidixic acid and some 
fluoroquinolones. 
836    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Pharmacokinetics 
 After oral administration, the fluoroquinolones are well absorbed 
(bioavailability of 80–95%) and distributed widely in body fluids 
and tissues ( Table 46–2 ). Serum half-lives range from 3 to 10 hours. 
The relatively long half-lives of levofloxacin, gemifloxacin, gati-
floxacin, and moxifloxacin permit once-daily dosing. Oral absorp-
tion is impaired by divalent and trivalent cations, including those 
in antacids. Therefore, oral fluoroquinolones should be taken 2 
hours before or 4 hours after any products containing these cat-
ions. Serum concentrations of intravenously administered drug 
are similar to those of orally administered drug. Most fluoroqui-
nolones are eliminated by renal mechanisms, either tubular secre-
tion or glomerular filtration ( Table 46–2 ). Dosage adjustment is 
required for patients with creatinine clearances less than 50 mL/min, 
the exact adjustment depending on the degree of renal impair-
ment and the specific fluoroquinolone being used. Dosage adjust-
ment for renal failure is not necessary for moxifloxacin. Nonrenally 
cleared fluoroquinolones are relatively contraindicated in patients 
with hepatic failure. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Fluoroquinolones (other than moxifloxacin, which achieves rela-
tively low urinary levels) are effective in urinary tract infections 
caused by many organisms, including  P aeruginosa . These agents 
are also effective for bacterial diarrhea caused by  Shigella ,  Salmonella , 
toxigenic  E coli, and  Campylobacter . Fluoroquinolones (except 
norfloxacin, which does not achieve adequate systemic concentra-
tions) have been used in infections of soft tissues, bones, and joints 
and in intra-abdominal and respiratory tract infections, including 
those caused by multidrug-resistant organisms such as  Pseudomonas 
and  Enterobacter . Ciprofloxacin is a drug of choice for prophylaxis 
and treatment of anthrax, although the newer fluoroquinolones are 
active in vitro and very likely in vivo as well. 
 Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin are no longer recommended for 
the treatment of gonococcal infection in the United States as resis-
tance is now common. However, both drugs are effective in treat-
ing chlamydial urethritis or cervicitis. Ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, 
or moxifloxacin is occasionally used for treatment of tuberculosis 
and atypical mycobacterial infections. These agents may be suit-
able for eradication of meningococci from carriers or for prophy-
laxis of infection in neutropenic cancer patients. 
 With their enhanced gram-positive activity and activity against 
atypical pneumonia agents (chlamydiae,  Mycoplasma , and  Legionella ), 
levofloxacin, gatifloxacin, gemifloxacin, and moxifloxacin—
so-called respiratory fluoroquinolones—are effective and used 
increasingly for treatment of upper and lower respiratory tract 
infections. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Fluoroquinolones are generally well tolerated. The most common 
effects are nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Occasionally, headache, 
dizziness, insomnia, skin rash, or abnormal liver function tests 
develop. Photosensitivity has been reported with lomefloxacin and 
pefloxacin. QT c prolongation may occur with gatifloxacin, levo-
floxacin, gemifloxacin, and moxifloxacin, which should be avoided 
or used with caution in patients with known QT c interval prolon-
gation or uncorrected hypokalemia; in those receiving class IA (eg, 
quinidine or procainamide) or class III antiarrhythmic agents 
(sotalol, ibutilide, amiodarone); and in patients receiving other 
agents known to increase the QT c interval (eg, erythromycin, tricy-
clic antidepressants). Gatifloxacin has been associated with hyper-
glycemia in diabetic patients and with hypoglycemia in patients 
also receiving oral hypoglycemic agents. Because of these serious 
effects (including some fatalities), gatifloxacin was withdrawn from 
sales in the United States in 2006; it may be available elsewhere. 
 Fluoroquinolones may damage growing cartilage and cause an 
arthropathy. Thus, these drugs are not routinely recommended for 
patients under 18 years of age. However, the arthropathy is revers-
ible, and there is a growing consensus that fluoroquinolones may 
be used in children in some cases (eg, for treatment of pseudomonal 
infections in patients with cystic fibrosis). Tendonitis, a rare com-
plication that has been reported in adults, is potentially more seri-
ous because of the risk of tendon rupture. Risk factors for 
tendonitis include advanced age, renal insufficiency, and concur-
rent steroid use. Fluoroquinolones should be avoided during preg-
nancy in the absence of specific data documenting their safety. 
TABLE 46–2  Pharmacokinetic properties of some fluoroquinolones.
Drug
Half-Life (h)
Oral 
Bioavailability (%)
Peak Serum 
Concentration (mcg/mL)
Oral Dose (mg)
Primary Route of 
Excretion
Ciprofloxacin
3–5
70
2.4
500
Renal
Gatifloxacin
8
98
3.4
400
Renal
Gemifloxacin
8
70
1.6
320
Renal and nonrenal
Levofloxacin
5–7
95
5.7
500
Renal
Lomefloxacin
8
95
2.8
400
Renal
Moxifloxacin
9–10
> 85
3.1
400
Nonrenal
Norfloxacin
3.5–5
80
1.5
400
Renal
Ofloxacin
5–7
95
2.9
400
Renal
CHAPTER 46 Sulfonamides, Trimethoprim, & Quinolones    837
SUMMARY Sulfonamides, Trimethoprim, and Fluoroquinolones
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
FOLATE ANTAGONISTS
 • Trimethoprim-
         sulfamethoxazole
Synergistic combination of 
folate antagonists blocks purine 
production and nucleic acid 
synthesis
Bactericidal activity 
against susceptible 
bacteria
Urinary tract infections 
• P jiroveci pneumonia 
• toxoplasmosis • nocardiosis
Oral, IV • renal clearance (half-life 8 h) 
• dosed every 8–12 h • formulated in a 
5:1 ratio of sulfamethoxazole to 
trimethoprim • Toxicity: Rash, fever, 
bone marrow suppression, 
hyperkalemia
 • Sulfisoxazole: Oral; used only for lower urinary tract infections
 • Sulfadiazine: Oral; first-line therapy for toxoplasmosis when combined with pyrimethamine
 • Trimethoprim: Oral; used only for lower urinary tract infections; may be safely prescribed to patients with sulfonamide allergy
 • Pyrimethamine: Oral; first-line therapy for toxoplasmosis when combined with sulfadiazine; coadminister with leucovorin to limit bone marrow toxicity
 • Pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine: Oral; second-line malaria treatment
FLUOROQUINOLONES
 • Ciprofloxacin
Inhibits DNA replication by 
binding to DNA gyrase and 
topoisomerase IV
Bactericidal activity 
against susceptible 
bacteria
Urinary tract infections 
• gastroenteritis • osteomy-
elitis • anthrax
Oral, IV • mixed clearance (half-life 4 h) 
• dosed every 12 h • divalent and tri-
valent cations impair oral absorption 
• Toxicity: Gastrointestinal upset, 
neurotoxicity, tendonitis
 • Ofloxacin: Oral; has improved pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics; use is limited to urinary tract infections and nongonococcal urethritis and cervicitis
 • Levofloxacin: Oral, IV; L-isomer of ofloxacin; once-daily dosing; renal clearance; “respiratory” fluoroquinolone with improved activity versus pneumococcus
 • Moxifloxacin: Oral, IV; “respiratory” fluoroquinolone; once-daily dosing; improved activity versus anaerobes and M tuberculosis; hepatic clearance results in lower urinary 
        levels so use in urinary tract infections is not recommended
 • Gemifloxacin: Oral; “respiratory” fluoroquinolone
GENERAL-PURPOSE SULFONAMIDES
Sulfadiazine (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Sulfisoxazole (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets; 500 mg/5 mL syrup
SULFONAMIDES FOR SPECIAL 
APPLICATIONS
Mafenide (Sulfamylon)
Topical: 85 mg/g cream; 5% solution
Silver sulfadiazine (generic, Silvadene)
Topical: 10 mg/g cream
Sulfacetamide sodium (generic)
Ophthalmic: 1, 10, 15, 30% solutions; 10% ointment
TRIMETHOPRIM
Trimethoprim (generic, Proloprim, Trimpex)
Oral: 100, 200 mg tablets
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole [co-trimoxazole, TMP-SMZ] 
(generic, Bactrim, Septra, others)
Oral: 80 mg trimethoprim + 400 mg sulfamethoxazole per single-
strength tablet; 160 mg trimethoprim + 800 mg sulfamethoxazole 
per double-strength tablet; 40 mg trimethoprim + 200 mg sul-
famethoxazole per 5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 80 mg trimethoprim + 400 mg sulfamethoxazole per 5 
mL for infusion (in 5 mL ampules and 5, 10, 20 mL vials)
PYRIMETHAMINE
Pyrimethamine (generic, Daraprim)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine (Fansidar)
Oral: 25 mg pyrimethamine + 500 mg sulfadoxine per tablet
QUINOLONES & FLUOROQUINOLONES
Ciprofloxacin (generic, Cipro, Cipro I.V.)
Oral: 100, 250, 500, 750 mg tablets; 500, 1000 mg extended-
release tablet; 50, 100 mg/mL suspension
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Ophthalmic (Ciloxan): 3 mg/mL solution; 3.3 mg/g ointment
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
GENERAL-PURPOSE SULFONAMIDES
Sulfadiazine (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Sulfisoxazole (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets; 500 mg/5 mL syrup
SULFONAMIDES FOR SPECIAL 
APPLICATIONS
Mafenide (Sulfamylon)
Topical: 85 mg/g cream; 5% solution
Silver sulfadiazine (generic, Silvadene)
Topical: 10 mg/g cream
Sulfacetamide sodium (generic)
Ophthalmic: 1, 10, 15, 30% solutions; 10% ointment
TRIMETHOPRIM
Trimethoprim (generic, Proloprim, Trimpex)
Oral: 100, 200 mg tablets
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole [co-trimoxazole, TMP-SMZ] 
(generic, Bactrim, Septra, others)
Oral: 80 mg trimethoprim + 400 mg sulfamethoxazole per single-
strength tablet; 160 mg trimethoprim + 800 mg sulfamethoxazole
per double-strength tablet; 40 mg trimethoprim + 200 mg sul-
famethoxazole per 5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 80 mg trimethoprim + 400 mg sulfamethoxazole per 5
mL for infusion (in 5 mL ampules and 5, 10, 20 mL vials)
PYRIMETHAMINE
Pyrimethamine (generic, Daraprim)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine (Fansidar)
Oral: 25 mg pyrimethamine + 500 mg sulfadoxine per tablet
QUINOLONES & FLUOROQUINOLONES
Ciprofloxacin (generic, Cipro, Cipro I.V.)
Oral: 100, 250, 500, 750 mg tablets; 500, 1000 mg extended-
release tablet; 50, 100 mg/mL suspension
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Ophthalmic (Ciloxan): 3 mg/mL solution; 3.3 mg/g ointment
838    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 REFERENCES 
 Davidson R et al: Resistance to levofloxacin and failure of treatment of pneumo-
coccal pneumonia. N Engl J Med 2002;346:747. 
 Frothingham R: Rates of torsades de pointes associated with ciprofloxacin, 
ofloxacin, levofloxacin, gatifloxacin, and moxifloxacin. Pharmacotherapy 
2001;21:1468. 
 Keating GM, Scott LJ: Moxifloxacin: A review of its use in the management of 
bacterial infections. Drugs 2004;64:2347. 
 Mandell LA et al: Update of practice guidelines for the management of community- 
acquired pneumonia in immunocompetent adults. Clin Infect Dis 
2003;37:1405. 
 Mwenya DM et al: Impact of cotrimoxazole on carriage and antibiotic resistance 
of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae in HIV-infected 
children in Zambia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010;54:3756 
 Nouira S et al: Standard versus newer antibacterial agents in the treatment of severe 
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A randomized 
trial of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole versus ciprofloxacin. Clin Infect Dis 
2010;51:143. 
 Robicsek A et al: The worldwide emergence of plasmid-mediated quinolone resis-
tance. Lancet ID 2006;6:629. 
 Scheld WM: Maintaining fluoroquinolone class efficacy: Review of influencing 
factors. Emerg Infect Dis 2003;9:1. 
 Schmitz GR et al: Randomized controlled trial of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
for uncomplicated skin abscesses in patients at risk for community-associated 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection. Ann Emerg Med 
2010;56:283. 
 Strom BL et al: Absence of cross-reactivity between sulfonamide antibiotics and 
sulfonamide nonantibiotics. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1628. 
 Talan DA et al: Prevalence of and risk factor analysis of trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole- and fluoroquinolone-resistant  E. coli infection among 
emergency department patients with pyelonephritis. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 
47:1150. 
 Yoo BK et al: Gemifloxacin: A new fluoroquinolone approved for treatment of 
respiratory infections. Ann Pharmacother 2004;38:1226. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
A fluoroquinolone that achieves good urinary levels 
(ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin) would be a reasonable choice 
for empiric treatment of this patient’s complicated urinary 
tract infection. Her recent exposure to multiple courses of 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole increases her chances of 
having a urinary tract infection with an isolate that is resistant 
to this antibiotic, making trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole a 
poor choice. The patient should be told to take the oral 
fluoroquinolone 2 hours before or 4 hours after her calcium 
supplement as divalent and trivalent cations can significantly 
impair the absorption of oral fluoroquinolones.
Gemifloxacin (Factive)
Oral: 320 mg tablet
Levofloxacin (Levaquin)
Oral: 250, 500, 750 mg tablets; 25 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 5, 25 mg/mL for IV injection
Ophthalmic (Quixin): 5 mg/mL solution
Lomefloxacin (Maxaquin)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Moxifloxacin (Avelox, Avelox I.V.)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Parenteral: 400 mg in IV bag
Norfloxacin (Noroxin)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Ofloxacin (Floxin)
Oral: 200, 300, 400 mg tablets
Ophthalmic (Ocuflox): 3 mg/mL solution
Otic (Floxin Otic): 0.3% solution
Gemifloxacin (Factive)
Oral: 320 mg tablet
Levofloxacin (Levaquin)
Oral: 250, 500, 750 mg tablets; 25 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 5, 25 mg/mL for IV injection
Ophthalmic (Quixin): 5 mg/mL solution
Lomefloxacin (Maxaquin)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Moxifloxacin (Avelox, Avelox I.V.)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Parenteral: 400 mg in IV bag
Norfloxacin (Noroxin)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Ofloxacin (Floxin)
Oral: 200, 300, 400 mg tablets
Ophthalmic (Ocuflox): 3 mg/mL solution
Otic (Floxin Otic): 0.3% solution
839
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Mycobacteria are intrinsically resistant to most antibiotics. Because 
they grow more slowly than other bacteria, antibiotics that are most 
active against rapidly growing cells are relatively ineffective. 
Mycobacterial cells can also be dormant and thus completely resis-
tant to many drugs or killed only very slowly. The lipid-rich myco-
bacterial cell wall is impermeable to many agents. Mycobacterial 
species are intracellular pathogens, and organisms residing within 
macrophages are inaccessible to drugs that penetrate these cells 
poorly. Finally, mycobacteria are notorious for their ability to 
develop resistance. Combinations of two or more drugs are 
required to overcome these obstacles and to prevent emergence of 
resistance during the course of therapy. The response of mycobac-
terial infections to chemotherapy is slow, and treatment must be 
administered for months to years, depending on which drugs are 
used. The drugs used to treat tuberculosis, atypical mycobacterial 
infections, and leprosy are described in this chapter. 
 ■ DRUGS USED IN TUBERCULOSIS 
 Isoniazid (INH), rifampin (or other rifamycin), pyrazinamide, 
ethambutol, and  streptomycin are the five first-line agents for 
treatment of tuberculosis ( Table 47–1 ). Isoniazid and rifampin are 
the most active drugs. An isoniazid-rifampin combination admin-
istered for 9 months will cure 95–98% of cases of tuberculosis 
caused by susceptible strains. The addition of pyrazinamide to an 
isoniazid-rifampin combination for the first 2 months allows the 
total duration of therapy to be reduced to 6 months without loss 
of efficacy ( Table 47–2 ). In practice, therapy is initiated with a 
four-drug regimen of isoniazid, rifampin, and pyrazinamide plus 
either ethambutol or streptomycin until susceptibility of the clinical 
isolate has been determined. Neither ethambutol nor streptomycin 
adds substantially to the overall activity of the regimen (ie, the 
duration of treatment cannot be further reduced if either drug is 
used), but they provide additional coverage if the isolate proves to 
be resistant to isoniazid, rifampin, or both. The prevalence of 
isoniazid resistance among clinical isolates in the United States is 
approximately 10%. Prevalence of resistance to both isoniazid and 
rifampin (ie, multidrug resistance) is about 3%. 
47
Antimycobacterial Drugs
 Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, & Lisa G. Winston, MD∗ 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 45-year-old homeless man presents to the emergency 
department complaining of a 2-month history of fatigue, 
weight loss (10 kg), fevers, night sweats, and a productive 
cough. He is currently living on the street but has spent time 
in homeless shelters and prison in the last several years. He 
reports drinking 2–3 pints of hard alcohol per day for the last 
15 years, and also reports a history of intravenous drug use. 
In the emergency department, a chest x-ray shows a right 
apical infiltrate. Given the high suspicion for pulmonary 
tuberculosis, the patient is placed in respiratory isolation. 
His first sputum smear shows many acid-fast bacilli, and a 
rapid HIV antibody test returns with a positive result. What 
drugs should be started for treatment of presumptive pulmo-
nary tuberculosis? Does the patient have a heightened risk of 
developing medication toxicity? If so, which medication(s) 
would be likely to cause toxicity? 
 ∗ The authors thank Henry F. Chambers, MD, for his contributions to 
previous editions.
840    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 ISONIAZID 
 Isoniazid is the most active drug for the treatment of tuberculosis 
caused by susceptible strains. It is a small molecule (MW 137) that 
is freely soluble in water. The structural similarity to pyridoxine is 
shown below. 
CH3
OH
CH2OH
HOH2C
Pyridoxine
Isoniazid
CONHNH2
N
N
 In vitro, isoniazid inhibits most tubercle bacilli at a concentra-
tion of 0.2 mcg/mL or less and is bactericidal for actively growing 
tubercle bacilli. It is less effective against atypical mycobacterial 
species. Isoniazid penetrates into macrophages and is active against 
both extracellular and intracellular organisms. 
 Mechanism of Action & 
Basis of Resistance 
 Isoniazid inhibits synthesis of mycolic acids, which are essential 
components of mycobacterial cell walls. Isoniazid is a prodrug that 
is activated by KatG, the mycobacterial catalase-peroxidase. The 
activated form of isoniazid forms a covalent complex with an acyl 
carrier protein (AcpM) and KasA, a beta-ketoacyl carrier protein 
synthetase, which blocks mycolic acid synthesis and kills the cell. 
Resistance to isoniazid is associated with mutations resulting in 
overexpression of  inhA , which encodes an NADH-dependent acyl 
carrier protein reductase; mutation or deletion of the  katG gene; 
promoter mutations resulting in overexpression of  ahpC , a puta-
tive virulence gene involved in protection of the cell from oxida-
tive stress; and mutations in  kasA . Overproducers of  inhA express 
low-level isoniazid resistance and cross-resistance to ethionamide. 
 KatG mutants express high-level isoniazid resistance and often are 
not cross-resistant to ethionamide. 
 Drug-resistant mutants are normally present in susceptible 
mycobacterial populations at about 1 bacillus in 10 6 . Since tubercu-
lous lesions often contain more than 10 8 tubercle bacilli, resistant 
mutants are readily selected if isoniazid or any other drug is given as 
a single agent. The use of two independently acting drugs in com-
bination is much more effective. The probability that a bacillus is 
initially resistant to both drugs is approximately 1 in 10 6 × 10 6 , or 
1 in 10 12 , several orders of magnitude greater than the number of 
infecting organisms. Thus, at least two (or more in certain cases) 
active agents should always be used to treat active tuberculosis to 
prevent emergence of resistance during therapy. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Isoniazid is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. A 
300-mg oral dose (5 mg/kg in children) achieves peak plasma 
concentrations of 3–5 mcg/mL within 1–2 hours. Isoniazid dif-
fuses readily into all body fluids and tissues. The concentration in 
the central nervous system and cerebrospinal fluid ranges between 
20% and 100% of simultaneous serum concentrations. 
 Metabolism of isoniazid, especially acetylation by liver 
 N -acetyltransferase, is genetically determined (see  Chapter 4 ). 
TABLE 47–1  Antimicrobials used in the treatment of 
tuberculosis.
Drug
Typical Adult Dosage1
First-line agents (in approximate order of preference)
 Isoniazid
300 mg/d
 Rifampin
600 mg/d
 Pyrazinamide
25 mg/kg/d
 Ethambutol
15–25 mg/kg/d
 Streptomycin
15 mg/kg/d
Second-line agents
 Amikacin
15 mg/kg/d
 Aminosalicylic acid
8–12 g/d
 Capreomycin
15 mg/kg/d
 Ciprofloxacin
1500 mg/d, divided
 Clofazimine
200 mg/d
 Cycloserine
500–1000 mg/d, divided
 Ethionamide
500–750 mg/d
 Levofloxacin
500 mg/d
 Rifabutin
300 mg/d2
 Rifapentine
600 mg once or twice weekly
1Assuming normal renal function.
2150 mg/d if used concurrently with a protease inhibitor.
TABLE 47–2  Recommended duration of therapy for 
tuberculosis.
Regimen (in Approximate Order 
of Preference)
Duration in Months
Isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide
6
Isoniazid, rifampin
9
Rifampin, ethambutol, 
pyrazinamide
6
Rifampin, ethambutol
12
Isoniazid, ethambutol
18
All others
≥ 24
CHAPTER 47 Antimycobacterial Drugs    841
the standard 300-mg adult dose. Peripheral neuropathy is more 
likely to occur in slow acetylators and patients with predisposing 
conditions such as malnutrition, alcoholism, diabetes, AIDS, and 
uremia. Neuropathy is due to a relative pyridoxine deficiency. 
Isoniazid promotes excretion of pyridoxine, and this toxicity is 
readily reversed by administration of pyridoxine in a dosage as low 
as 10 mg/d. Central nervous system toxicity, which is less com-
mon, includes memory loss, psychosis, and seizures. These effects 
may also respond to pyridoxine. 
 Miscellaneous other reactions include hematologic abnormali-
ties, provocation of pyridoxine deficiency anemia, tinnitus, and 
gastrointestinal discomfort. Isoniazid can reduce the metabolism 
of phenytoin, increasing its blood level and toxicity. 
 RIFAMPIN 
 Rifampin is a semisynthetic derivative of rifamycin, an antibiotic 
produced by  Streptomyces mediterranei . It is active in vitro against 
gram-positive and gram-negative cocci, some enteric bacteria, 
mycobacteria, and chlamydiae. Susceptible organisms are inhib-
ited by less than 1 mcg/mL. Resistant mutants are present in all 
microbial populations at approximately 1 in 10 6 organisms and 
are rapidly selected out if rifampin is used as a single drug, espe-
cially in a patient with active infection. There is no cross-resistance 
to other classes of antimicrobial drugs, but there is cross-resistance 
to other rifamycin derivatives, eg, rifabutin and rifapentine. 
 Mechanism of Action, Resistance, 
& Pharmacokinetics 
 Rifampin binds to the β subunit of bacterial DNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase and thereby inhibits RNA synthesis. Resistance results 
from any one of several possible point mutations in  rpoB , the gene 
for the β subunit of RNA polymerase. These mutations result in 
reduced binding of rifampin to RNA polymerase. Human RNA 
polymerase does not bind rifampin and is not inhibited by it. 
Rifampin is bactericidal for mycobacteria. It readily penetrates most 
tissues and penetrates into phagocytic cells. It can kill organisms 
that are poorly accessible to many other drugs, such as intracellular 
organisms and those sequestered in abscesses and lung cavities. 
 Rifampin is well absorbed after oral administration and excreted 
mainly through the liver into bile. It then undergoes enterohepatic 
recirculation, with the bulk excreted as a deacylated metabolite in 
feces and a small amount excreted in the urine. Dosage adjustment 
for renal or hepatic insufficiency is not necessary. Usual doses result 
in serum levels of 5–7 mcg/mL. Rifampin is distributed widely in 
body fluids and tissues. The drug is relatively highly protein-
bound, and adequate cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are 
achieved only in the presence of meningeal inflammation. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Mycobacterial Infections 
 Rifampin, usually 600 mg/d (10 mg/kg/d) orally, must be adminis-
tered with isoniazid or other antituberculous drugs to patients with 
The average plasma concentration of isoniazid in rapid acetylators 
is about one third to one half of that in slow acetylators, and aver-
age half-lives are less than 1 hour and 3 hours, respectively. More 
rapid clearance of isoniazid by rapid acetylators is usually of no 
therapeutic consequence when appropriate doses are administered 
daily, but subtherapeutic concentrations may occur if drug is 
administered as a once-weekly dose or if there is malabsorption. 
 Isoniazid metabolites and a small amount of unchanged drug 
are excreted, mainly in the urine. The dose need not be adjusted 
in renal failure. Dose adjustment is not well defined in patients 
with severe preexisting hepatic insufficiency (isoniazid is contrain-
dicated if it is the cause of the hepatitis) and should be guided by 
serum concentrations if a reduction in dose is contemplated. 
 Clinical Uses 
 The typical dosage of isoniazid is 5 mg/kg/d; a typical adult dose 
is 300 mg given once daily. Up to 10 mg/kg/d may be used for 
serious infections or if malabsorption is a problem. A 15 mg/kg 
dose, or 900 mg, may be used in a twice-weekly dosing regimen 
in combination with a second antituberculous agent (eg, rifampin 
600 mg). Pyridoxine, 25–50 mg/d, is recommended for those 
with conditions predisposing to neuropathy, an adverse effect of 
isoniazid. Isoniazid is usually given by mouth but can be given 
parenterally in the same dosage. 
 Isoniazid as a single agent is also indicated for treatment of 
latent tuberculosis. The dosage is 300 mg/d (5 mg/kg/d) or 900 mg 
twice weekly for 9 months. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 The incidence and severity of untoward reactions to isoniazid are 
related to dosage and duration of administration. 
 A. Immunologic Reactions 
 Fever and skin rashes are occasionally seen. Drug-induced sys-
temic lupus erythematosus has been reported. 
 B. Direct Toxicity 
 Isoniazid-induced hepatitis is the most common major toxic effect. 
This is distinct from the minor increases in liver aminotransferases 
(up to three or four times normal), which do not require cessation 
of the drug and which are seen in 10–20% of patients, who usu-
ally are asymptomatic. Clinical hepatitis with loss of appetite, 
nausea, vomiting, jaundice, and right upper quadrant pain occurs 
in 1% of isoniazid recipients and can be fatal, particularly if the 
drug is not discontinued promptly. There is histologic evidence of 
hepatocellular damage and necrosis. The risk of hepatitis depends 
on age. It occurs rarely under age 20, in 0.3% of those aged 
21–35, 1.2% of those aged 36–50, and 2.3% for those aged 50 
and above. The risk of hepatitis is greater in individuals with alco-
hol dependence and possibly during pregnancy and the postpar-
tum period. Development of isoniazid hepatitis contraindicates 
further use of the drug. 
 Peripheral neuropathy is observed in 10–20% of patients given 
dosages greater than 5 mg/kg/d, but it is infrequently seen with 
842    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
active tuberculosis to prevent emergence of drug-resistant mycobac-
teria. In some short-course therapies, 600 mg of rifampin is given 
twice weekly. Rifampin, 600 mg daily or twice weekly for 6 months, 
also is effective in combination with other agents in some atypical 
mycobacterial infections and in leprosy. Rifampin, 600 mg daily for 
4 months as a single drug, is an alternative to isoniazid for patients 
with latent tuberculosis who are unable to take isoniazid or who 
have had exposure to a case of active tuberculosis caused by an iso-
niazid-resistant, rifampin-susceptible strain. 
 B. Other Indications 
 Rifampin has other uses in bacterial infections. An oral dosage of 
600 mg twice daily for 2 days can eliminate meningococcal car-
riage. Rifampin, 20 mg/kg/d for 4 days, is used as prophylaxis in 
contacts of children with  Haemophilus influenzae type b disease. 
Rifampin combined with a second agent is used to eradicate 
staphylococcal carriage. Rifampin combination therapy is also 
indicated for treatment of serious staphylococcal infections such as 
osteomyelitis and prosthetic valve endocarditis. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Rifampin imparts a harmless orange color to urine, sweat, and tears 
(soft contact lenses may be permanently stained). Occasional 
adverse effects include rashes, thrombocytopenia, and nephritis. 
Rifampin may cause cholestatic jaundice and occasionally hepatitis, 
and it commonly causes light-chain proteinuria. If administered less 
often than twice weekly, rifampin may cause a flu-like syndrome 
characterized by fever, chills, myalgias, anemia, and thrombocytope-
nia. Its use has been associated with acute tubular necrosis. Rifampin 
strongly induces most cytochrome P450 isoforms (1A2, 2C9, 
2C19, 2D6, and 3A4), which increases the elimination of numer-
ous other drugs including methadone, anticoagulants, cyclosporine, 
some anticonvulsants, protease inhibitors, some nonnucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitors, contraceptives, and a host of others 
(see  Chapters 4 and  66 ). Co-administration of rifampin results in 
significantly lower serum levels of these drugs. 
 ETHAMBUTOL 
 Ethambutol is a synthetic, water-soluble, heat-stable compound, 
the dextro-isomer of the structure shown below, dispensed as the 
dihydrochloride salt. 
 
Ethambutol
H
C
NH
(CH2)2
CH2OH
C2H5
C2H5
C
H
NH
CH2OH
 Mechanism of Action & Clinical Uses 
 Susceptible strains of  Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other myco-
bacteria are inhibited in vitro by ethambutol, 1–5 mcg/mL. 
Ethambutol inhibits mycobacterial arabinosyl transferases, which 
are encoded by the  embCAB operon. Arabinosyl transferases are 
involved in the polymerization reaction of arabinoglycan, an 
essential component of the mycobacterial cell wall. Resistance to 
ethambutol is due to mutations resulting in overexpression of  emb 
gene products or within the  embB structural gene. 
 Ethambutol is well absorbed from the gut. After ingestion of 
25 mg/kg, a blood level peak of 2–5 mcg/mL is reached in 2–4 
hours. About 20% of the drug is excreted in feces and 50% in 
urine in unchanged form. Ethambutol accumulates in renal fail-
ure, and the dose should be reduced by half if creatinine clearance 
is less than 10 mL/min. Ethambutol crosses the blood-brain bar-
rier only when the meninges are inflamed. Concentrations in 
cerebrospinal fluid are highly variable, ranging from 4% to 64% 
of serum levels in the setting of meningeal inflammation. 
 As with all antituberculous drugs, resistance to ethambutol 
emerges rapidly when the drug is used alone. Therefore, ethambutol 
is always given in combination with other antituberculous drugs. 
 Ethambutol hydrochloride, 15–25 mg/kg, is usually given as a 
single daily dose in combination with isoniazid or rifampin. The 
higher dose is recommended for treatment of tuberculous menin-
gitis. The dose of ethambutol is 50 mg/kg when a twice-weekly 
dosing schedule is used. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Hypersensitivity to ethambutol is rare. The most common serious 
adverse event is retrobulbar neuritis, resulting in loss of visual 
acuity and red-green color blindness. This dose-related adverse 
effect is more likely to occur at dosages of 25 mg/kg/d continued 
for several months. At 15 mg/kg/d or less, visual disturbances are 
very rare. Periodic visual acuity testing is desirable if the 25 mg/kg/d 
dosage is used. Ethambutol is relatively contraindicated in chil-
dren too young to permit assessment of visual acuity and red-
green color discrimination. 
 PYRAZINAMIDE 
 Pyrazinamide (PZA) is a relative of nicotinamide. It is stable and 
slightly soluble in water. It is inactive at neutral pH, but at pH 
5.5 it inhibits tubercle bacilli at concentrations of approximately 
20 mcg/mL. The drug is taken up by macrophages and exerts its 
activity against mycobacteria residing within the acidic environ-
ment of lysosomes. 
 Pyrazinamide (PZA)
N
C
O
NH2
N
 Mechanism of Action & Clinical Uses 
 Pyrazinamide is converted to pyrazinoic acid—the active form of 
the drug—by mycobacterial pyrazinamidase, which is encoded by 
CHAPTER 47 Antimycobacterial Drugs    843
 pncA . The specific drug target is unknown, but pyrazinoic acid 
disrupts mycobacterial cell membrane metabolism and transport 
functions. Resistance may be due to impaired uptake of pyrazin-
amide or mutations in  pncA that impair conversion of pyrazin-
amide to its active form. 
 Serum concentrations of 30–50 mcg/mL at 1–2 hours after 
oral administration are achieved with dosages of 25 mg/kg/d. 
Pyrazinamide is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and 
widely distributed in body tissues, including inflamed meninges. 
The half-life is 8–11 hours. The parent compound is metabolized 
by the liver, but metabolites are renally cleared; therefore, pyra-
zinamide should be administered at 25–35 mg/kg three times 
weekly (not daily) in hemodialysis patients and those in whom the 
creatinine clearance is less than 30 mL/min. In patients with nor-
mal renal function, a dose of 40–50 mg/kg is used for thrice-
weekly or twice-weekly treatment regimens. 
 Pyrazinamide is an important front-line drug used in conjunc-
tion with isoniazid and rifampin in short-course (ie, 6-month) 
regimens as a “sterilizing” agent active against residual intracellular 
organisms that may cause relapse. Tubercle bacilli develop resis-
tance to pyrazinamide fairly readily, but there is no cross-resistance 
with isoniazid or other antimycobacterial drugs. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Major adverse effects of pyrazinamide include hepatotoxicity (in 
1–5% of patients), nausea, vomiting, drug fever, and hyperurice-
mia. The latter occurs uniformly and is not a reason to halt ther-
apy. Hyperuricemia may provoke acute gouty arthritis. 
 STREPTOMYCIN 
 The mechanism of action and other pharmacologic features of 
streptomycin are discussed in  Chapter 45 . The typical adult dose 
is 1 g/d (15 mg/kg/d). If the creatinine clearance is less than 30 
mL/min or the patient is on hemodialysis, the dose is 15 mg/kg 
two or three times per week. Most tubercle bacilli are inhibited by 
streptomycin, 1–10 mcg/mL, in vitro. Nontuberculosis species of 
mycobacteria other than  Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) 
and  Mycobacterium kansasii are resistant. All large populations of 
tubercle bacilli contain some streptomycin-resistant mutants. On 
average, 1 in 10 8 tubercle bacilli can be expected to be resistant to 
streptomycin at levels of 10–100 mcg/mL. Resistance is due to a 
point mutation in either the  rpsL gene encoding the S12 ribo-
somal protein gene or the  rrs gene encoding 16S ribosomal rRNA, 
which alters the ribosomal binding site. 
 Streptomycin penetrates into cells poorly and is active mainly 
against extracellular tubercle bacilli. Streptomycin crosses the 
blood-brain barrier and achieves therapeutic concentrations with 
inflamed meninges. 
 Clinical Use in Tuberculosis 
 Streptomycin sulfate is used when an injectable drug is needed or 
desirable and in the treatment of infections resistant to other drugs. 
The usual dosage is 15 mg/kg/d intramuscularly or intravenously 
daily for adults (20–40 mg/kg/d, not to exceed 1–1.5 g for chil-
dren) for several weeks, followed by 1–1.5 g two or three times 
weekly for several months. Serum concentrations of approximately 
40 mcg/mL are achieved 30–60 minutes after intramuscular injec-
tion of a 15 mg/kg dose. Other drugs are always given in combina-
tion to prevent emergence of resistance. 
 Adverse Reactions 
 Streptomycin is ototoxic and nephrotoxic. Vertigo and hearing 
loss are the most common adverse effects and may be permanent. 
Toxicity is dose-related, and the risk is increased in the elderly. As 
with all aminoglycosides, the dose must be adjusted according to 
renal function (see  Chapter 45 ). Toxicity can be reduced by limit-
ing therapy to no more than 6 months whenever possible. 
 SECOND-LINE DRUGS FOR 
TUBERCULOSIS 
 The alternative drugs listed below are usually considered only 
(1) in case of resistance to first-line agents; (2) in case of failure of 
clinical response to conventional therapy; and (3) in case of serious 
treatment-limiting adverse drug reactions. Expert guidance to deal 
with the toxic effects of these second-line drugs is desirable. For 
many drugs listed in the following text, the dosage, emergence of 
resistance, and long-term toxicity have not been fully established. 
 Ethionamide 
 Ethionamide is chemically related to isoniazid and similarly blocks 
the synthesis of mycolic acids. It is poorly water soluble and avail-
able only in oral form. It is metabolized by the liver. 
 
C
N
Ethionamide
NH2
H5C2
S
 Most tubercle bacilli are inhibited in vitro by ethionamide, 
2.5 mcg/mL or less. Some other species of mycobacteria also are 
inhibited by ethionamide, 10 mcg/mL. Serum concentrations in 
plasma and tissues of approximately 20 mcg/mL are achieved by a 
dosage of 1 g/d. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are equal to 
those in serum. 
 Ethionamide is administered at an initial dose of 250 mg once 
daily, which is increased in 250-mg increments to the recom-
mended dosage of 1 g/d (or 15 mg/kg/d), if possible. The 1 g/d 
dosage, though theoretically desirable, is poorly tolerated because 
of the intense gastric irritation and neurologic symptoms that 
commonly occur, and one often must settle for a total daily dose 
of 500–750 mg. Ethionamide is also hepatotoxic. Neurologic 
symptoms may be alleviated by pyridoxine. 
844    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Resistance to ethionamide as a single agent develops rapidly in 
vitro and in vivo. There can be low-level cross-resistance between 
isoniazid and ethionamide. 
 Capreomycin 
 Capreomycin is a peptide protein synthesis inhibitor antibiotic 
obtained from  Streptomyces capreolus . Daily injection of 1 g intra-
muscularly results in blood levels of 10 mcg/mL or more. Such 
concentrations in vitro are inhibitory for many mycobacteria, 
including multidrug-resistant strains of  M tuberculosis . 
 Capreomycin (15 mg/kg/d) is an important injectable agent for 
treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis. Strains of  M tuberculosis 
that are resistant to streptomycin or amikacin usually are suscep-
tible to capreomycin. Resistance to capreomycin, when it occurs, 
may be due to an  rrs mutation. 
 Capreomycin is nephrotoxic and ototoxic. Tinnitus, deafness, 
and vestibular disturbances occur. The injection causes significant 
local pain, and sterile abscesses may occur. 
 Dosing of capreomycin is the same as that of streptomycin. 
Toxicity is reduced if 1 g is given two or three times weekly after an 
initial response has been achieved with a daily dosing schedule. 
 Cycloserine 
 Cycloserine is an inhibitor of cell wall synthesis and is discussed in 
 Chapter 43 . Concentrations of 15–20 mcg/mL inhibit many 
strains of  M tuberculosis . The dosage of cycloserine in tuberculosis 
is 0.5–1 g/d in two divided oral doses. Cycloserine is cleared 
renally, and the dose should be reduced by half if creatinine clear-
ance is less than 50 mL/min. 
 The most serious toxic effects are peripheral neuropathy and 
central nervous system dysfunction, including depression and psy-
chotic reactions. Pyridoxine, 150 mg/d, should be given with 
cycloserine because this ameliorates neurologic toxicity. Adverse 
effects, which are most common during the first 2 weeks of therapy, 
occur in 25% or more of patients, especially at higher doses. Adverse 
effects can be minimized by monitoring peak serum concentrations. 
The peak concentration is reached 2–4 hours after dosing. The 
recommended range of peak concentrations is 20–40 mcg/mL. 
 Aminosalicylic Acid (PAS) 
 Aminosalicylic acid is a folate synthesis antagonist that is active almost 
exclusively against  M  tuberculosis . It is structurally similar to  p -amino-
benzoic acid (PABA) and to the sulfonamides (see  Chapter 46 ). 
 Aminosalicylic acid (PAS)
OH
NH2
COOH
 Tubercle bacilli are usually inhibited in vitro by aminosalicylic 
acid, 1–5 mcg/mL. Aminosalicylic acid is readily absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract. Serum levels are 50 mcg/mL or more 
after a 4-g oral dose. The dosage is 8–12 g/d orally for adults and 
300 mg/kg/d for children. The drug is widely distributed in tissues 
and body fluids except the cerebrospinal fluid. Aminosalicylic acid 
is rapidly excreted in the urine, in part as active aminosalicylic acid 
and in part as the acetylated compound and other metabolic prod-
ucts. Very high concentrations of aminosalicylic acid are reached 
in the urine, which can result in crystalluria. 
 Aminosalicylic acid is used infrequently because other oral drugs 
are better tolerated. Gastrointestinal symptoms are common and 
may be diminished by giving the drug with meals and with antacids. 
Peptic ulceration and hemorrhage may occur. Hypersensitivity 
reactions manifested by fever, joint pains, skin rashes, hepatosple-
nomegaly, hepatitis, adenopathy, and granulocytopenia often 
occur after 3–8 weeks of aminosalicylic acid therapy, making it 
necessary to stop aminosalicylic acid administration temporarily 
or permanently. 
 Kanamycin & Amikacin 
 The aminoglycoside antibiotics are discussed in  Chapter 45 . 
Kanamycin has been used for treatment of tuberculosis caused by 
streptomycin-resistant strains, but the availability of less toxic alter-
natives (eg, capreomycin and amikacin) has rendered it obsolete. 
 The role of amikacin in treatment of tuberculosis has 
increased with the increasing incidence and prevalence of 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Prevalence of amikacin-resis-
tant strains is low (< 5%), and most multidrug-resistant strains 
remain amikacin-susceptible.  M tuberculosis is inhibited at con-
centrations of 1 mcg/mL or less. Amikacin is also active against 
atypical mycobacteria. There is no cross-resistance between strep-
tomycin and amikacin, but kanamycin resistance often indicates 
resistance to amikacin as well. Serum concentrations of 30–50 
mcg/mL are achieved 30–60 minutes after a 15 mg/kg intravenous 
infusion. Amikacin is indicated for treatment of tuberculosis sus-
pected or known to be caused by streptomycin-resistant or multi-
drug-resistant strains. Amikacin must be used in combination 
with at least one and preferably two or three other drugs to which 
the isolate is susceptible for treatment of drug-resistant cases. The 
recommended dosages are the same as those for streptomycin. 
 Fluoroquinolones 
 In addition to their activity against many gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria (discussed in  Chapter 46 ), ciprofloxacin, levofloxa-
cin, gatifloxacin, and moxifloxacin inhibit strains of  M tuberculosis at 
concentrations less than 2 mcg/mL. They are also active against 
atypical mycobacteria. Moxifloxacin is the most active against  M 
tuberculosis by weight in vitro. Levofloxacin tends to be slightly more 
active than ciprofloxacin against  M tuberculosis , whereas ciprofloxa-
cin is slightly more active against atypical mycobacteria. 
 Fluoroquinolones are an important addition to the drugs avail-
able for tuberculosis, especially for strains that are resistant to 
first-line agents. Resistance, which may result from any one of 
several single point mutations in the gyrase A subunit, develops 
rapidly if a fluoroquinolone is used as a single agent; thus, the 
drug must be used in combination with two or more other active 
CHAPTER 47 Antimycobacterial Drugs    845
agents. The standard dosage of ciprofloxacin is 750 mg orally 
twice a day. The dosage of levofloxacin is 500–750 mg once a day. 
The dosage of moxifloxacin is 400 mg once a day. 
 Linezolid 
 Linezolid (discussed in  Chapter 44 ) inhibits strains of  M tuberculosis 
in vitro at concentrations of 4–8 mcg/mL. It achieves good intra-
cellular concentrations, and it is active in murine models of 
tuberculosis. Linezolid has been used in combination with other 
second- and third-line drugs to treat patients with tuberculosis 
caused by multidrug-resistant strains. Conversion of sputum 
cultures to negative was associated with linezolid use in these 
cases, and some may have been cured. Significant and at times 
treatment-limiting adverse effects, including bone marrow sup-
pression and irreversible peripheral and optic neuropathy, have 
been reported with the prolonged courses of therapy that are 
necessary for treatment of tuberculosis. A 600-mg (adult) dose 
administered once a day (half of that used for treatment of other 
bacterial infections) seems to be sufficient and may limit the 
occurrence of these adverse effects. Although linezolid may even-
tually prove to be an important new agent for treatment of tuber-
culosis, at this point it should be considered a drug of last resort 
for infection caused by multidrug-resistant strains that also are 
resistant to several other first- and second-line agents. 
 Rifabutin 
 Rifabutin is derived from rifamycin and is related to rifampin. It 
has significant activity against  M tuberculosis , MAC, and 
 Mycobacterium fortuitum (see below). Its activity is similar to that 
of rifampin, and cross-resistance with rifampin is virtually com-
plete. Some rifampin-resistant strains may appear susceptible to 
rifabutin in vitro, but a clinical response is unlikely because the 
molecular basis of resistance,  rpoB mutation, is the same. Rifabutin 
is both substrate and inducer of cytochrome P450 enzymes. 
Because it is a less potent inducer, rifabutin is indicated in place of 
rifampin for treatment of tuberculosis in patients with HIV infec-
tion who are receiving antiretroviral therapy with a protease 
inhibitor or with a nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor 
(eg, efavirenz), drugs that also are cytochrome P450 substrates. 
 The typical dosage of rifabutin is 300 mg/d unless the patient is 
receiving a protease inhibitor, in which case the dosage should be 
reduced to 150 mg/d. If efavirenz (also a cytochrome P450 inducer) 
is used, the recommended dosage of rifabutin is 450 mg/d. 
 Rifabutin is effective in prevention and treatment of dissemi-
nated atypical mycobacterial infection in AIDS patients with CD4 
counts below 50/μL. It is also effective for preventive therapy of 
tuberculosis, either alone in a 3–4 month regimen or with pyrazi-
namide in a 2-month regimen. 
 Rifapentine 
 Rifapentine is an analog of rifampin. It is active against both 
 M tuberculosis and MAC. As with all rifamycins, it is a bacterial 
RNA polymerase inhibitor, and cross-resistance between rifampin 
and rifapentine is complete. Like rifampin, rifapentine is a potent 
inducer of cytochrome P450 enzymes, and it has the same drug 
interaction profile. Toxicity is similar to that of rifampin. 
Rifapentine and its microbiologically active metabolite, 25-
desacetylrifapentine, have an elimination half-life of 13 hours. 
Rifapentine, 600 mg (10 mg/kg) once weekly, is indicated for 
treatment of tuberculosis caused by rifampin-susceptible strains 
during the continuation phase only (ie, after the first 2 months of 
therapy and ideally after conversion of sputum cultures to negative). 
Rifapentine should not be used to treat patients with HIV infec-
tion because of an unacceptably high relapse rate with rifampin-
resistant organisms. 
■ RIFAXIMIN
Rifaximin is a rifampin derivative that is not absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract. It is approved for oral administration in the 
prevention of hepatic encephalopathy and for the treatment of 
travelers’ diarrhea caused by noninvasive strains of Escherichia coli 
in patients 12 years of age and older. It has also been used off label 
for irritable bowel syndrome and for Clostridium difficile colitis 
not responsive to other drugs.
 ■ DRUGS ACTIVE AGAINST 
ATYPICAL MYCOBACTERIA 
 About 10% of mycobacterial infections seen in clinical practice in 
the United States are caused by nontuberculous or “atypical” 
mycobacteria. These organisms have distinctive laboratory charac-
teristics, are present in the environment, and are generally not 
communicable from person to person. As a rule, these mycobacte-
rial species are less susceptible than  M tuberculosis to antitubercu-
lous drugs. On the other hand, agents such as erythromycin, 
sulfonamides, or tetracycline, which are not active against 
 M tuberculosis , may be effective for infections caused by atypical 
mycobacteria. Emergence of resistance during therapy is also a 
problem with these mycobacterial species, and active infection 
should be treated with combinations of drugs.  M kansasii is sus-
ceptible to rifampin and ethambutol, partially resistant to isoni-
azid, and completely resistant to pyrazinamide. A three-drug 
combination of isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol is the con-
ventional treatment for  M kansasii infection. A few representative 
pathogens, with the clinical presentation and the drugs to which 
they are often susceptible, are given in  Table 47–3 . 
 M avium complex (MAC), which includes both  M avium and 
 M intracellulare , is an important and common cause of dissemi-
nated disease in late stages of AIDS (CD4 counts < 50/μL).  MAC 
is much less susceptible than  M tuberculosis to most antitubercu-
lous drugs. Combinations of agents are required to suppress the 
infection. Azithromycin, 500 mg once daily, or clarithromycin, 500 
mg twice daily, plus ethambutol, 15–25 mg/kg/d, is an effective and 
well-tolerated regimen for treatment of disseminated disease. Some 
authorities recommend use of a third agent, such as ciprofloxacin, 750 
mg twice daily, or rifabutin, 300 mg once daily. Other agents that 
may be useful are listed in  Table 47–3 . Azithromycin and clarithro-
mycin are the drugs of choice for reducing the incidence of MAC 
846    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
bacteremia in AIDS patients with CD4 cell counts less than 
100/μL. Rifabutin in a single daily dose of 300 mg has been 
shown to reduce the incidence of MAC bacteremia but is less 
effective than macrolides. 
 ■ DRUGS USED IN LEPROSY 
 Mycobacterium leprae has never been grown in vitro, but animal 
models, such as growth in injected mouse footpads, have permit-
ted laboratory evaluation of drugs. Only those drugs with the 
widest clinical use are presented here. Because of increasing reports 
of dapsone resistance, treatment of leprosy with combinations of 
the drugs listed below is recommended. 
 DAPSONE & OTHER SULFONES 
 Several drugs closely related to the sulfonamides have been used 
effectively in the long-term treatment of leprosy. The most widely 
used is dapsone (diaminodiphenylsulfone). Like the sulfonamides, it 
inhibits folate synthesis. Resistance can emerge in large populations 
of  M leprae , eg, in lepromatous leprosy, if very low doses are given. 
Therefore, the combination of dapsone, rifampin, and clofazimine is 
recommended for initial therapy. Dapsone may also be used to pre-
vent and treat  Pneumocystis  jiroveci pneumonia in AIDS patients. 
 
O
O
S
Dapsone
NH2
NH2
 Sulfones are well absorbed from the gut and widely distributed 
throughout body fluids and tissues. Dapsone’s half-life is 1–2 days, 
and drug tends to be retained in skin, muscle, liver, and kidney. 
Skin heavily infected with  M leprae may contain several times more 
drug than normal skin. Sulfones are excreted into bile and reab-
sorbed in the intestine. Excretion into urine is variable, and most 
excreted drug is acetylated. In renal failure, the dose may have to 
be adjusted. The usual adult dosage in leprosy is 100 mg daily. For 
children, the dose is proportionately less, depending on weight. 
 Dapsone is usually well tolerated. Many patients develop some 
hemolysis, particularly if they have glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-
genase deficiency. Methemoglobinemia is common, but usually is 
not a problem clinically. Gastrointestinal intolerance, fever, pruri-
tus, and various rashes occur. During dapsone therapy of leproma-
tous leprosy, erythema nodosum leprosum often develops. It is 
sometimes difficult to distinguish reactions to dapsone from 
manifestations of the underlying illness. Erythema nodosum lep-
rosum may be suppressed by  corticosteroids or by  thalidomide . 
 RIFAMPIN 
 Rifampin (see earlier discussion) in a dosage of 600 mg daily is highly 
effective in lepromatous leprosy. Because of the probable risk of 
emergence of rifampin-resistant  M leprae , the drug is given in com-
bination with dapsone or another antileprosy drug. A single monthly 
dose of 600 mg may be beneficial in combination therapy. 
 CLOFAZIMINE 
 Clofazimine is a phenazine dye that can be used as an alternative 
to dapsone. Its mechanism of action is unknown but may involve 
DNA binding. 
 Absorption of clofazimine from the gut is variable, and a major 
portion of the drug is excreted in feces. Clofazimine is stored 
widely in reticuloendothelial tissues and skin, and its crystals can 
be seen inside phagocytic reticuloendothelial cells. It is slowly 
released from these deposits, so that the serum half-life may be 2 
months. 
 Clofazimine is given for sulfone-resistant leprosy or when 
patients are intolerant to sulfones. A common dosage is 100 mg/d 
orally. The most prominent untoward effect is skin discoloration 
ranging from red-brown to nearly black. Gastrointestinal intoler-
ance occurs occasionally. 
TABLE 47–3  Clinical features and treatment options 
for infections with atypical 
mycobacteria.
Species
Clinical Features
Treatment Options
M kansasii
Resembles 
tuberculosis
Ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, 
ethambutol, isoniazid, 
rifampin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
M marinum
Granulomatous 
cutaneous disease
Amikacin, clarithromycin, 
ethambutol, doxycycline, 
minocycline, rifampin, 
trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
M scrofulaceum
Cervical adenitis in 
children
Amikacin, erythromycin (or 
other macrolide), rifampin, 
streptomycin (Surgical 
excision is often curative 
and the treatment of 
choice.)
M avium complex
Pulmonary disease 
in patients with 
chronic lung dis-
ease; disseminated 
infection in AIDS
Amikacin, azithromycin, 
clarithromycin, ciprofloxacin, 
ethambutol, rifabutin
M chelonae
Abscess, sinus 
tract, ulcer; bone, 
joint, tendon 
infection
Amikacin, doxycycline, 
imipenem, macrolides, 
tobramycin
M fortuitum
Abscess, sinus 
tract, ulcer; bone, 
joint, tendon infec-
tion
Amikacin, cefoxitin,
ciprofloxacin, doxycycline, 
ofloxacin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
M ulcerans
Skin ulcers
Isoniazid, streptomycin, 
rifampin, minocycline 
(Surgical excision may be 
effective.)
CHAPTER 47 Antimycobacterial Drugs    847
SUMMARY First-Line Antimycobacterial Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
ISONIAZID
Inhibits synthesis of 
mycolic acids, an essen-
tial component of 
mycobacterial cell walls
Bactericidal activity against 
susceptible strains of
M tuberculosis
First-line agent for tuberculosis 
• treatment of latent infection • less 
active against other mycobacteria
Oral, IV • hepatic clearance 
(half-life 1 h) • reduces levels of 
phenytoin • Toxicity: 
Hepatotoxic, peripheral neurop-
athy (give pyridoxine to prevent)
RIFAMYCINS
 • Rifampin
Inhibits DNA-dependent 
RNA polymerase, 
thereby blocking 
production of RNA
Bactericidal activity against 
susceptible bacteria and 
mycobacteria • resistance 
rapidly emerges when used 
as a single drug in the treat-
ment of active infection
First-line agent for tuberculosis 
• atypical mycobacterial infections 
• eradication of meningococcal coloni-
zation, staphylococcal infections
Oral, IV • hepatic clearance (half-
life 3.5 h) • potent cytochrome 
P450 inducer • turns body fluids 
orange color • Toxicity: Rash, 
nephritis, thrombocytopenia, 
cholestasis, flu-like syndrome 
with intermittent dosing
 • Rifabutin: Oral; similar to rifampin but less cytochrome P450 induction and fewer drug interactions
 • Rifapentine: Oral; long-acting analog of rifampin that may be given once weekly in the continuation phase of tuberculosis treatment
PYRAZINAMIDE
Not fully understood 
• pyrazinamide is 
converted to the active 
pyrazinoic acid under 
acidic conditions in 
macrophage lysosomes
Bacteriostatic activity 
against susceptible strains 
of M tuberculosis • may be 
bactericidal against actively 
dividing organisms
“Sterilizing” agent used during first 
2 months of therapy • allows total 
duration of therapy to be shortened to 
6 months
Oral • hepatic clearance (half-life 
9 h), but metabolites are renally 
cleared so use doses 3 × weekly 
if creatinine clearance < 30 mL/
min • Toxicity: Hepatotoxic, 
hyperuricemia
ETHAMBUTOL
Inhibits mycobacterial 
arabinosyl transferases, 
which are involved in 
the polymerization reac-
tion of arabinoglycan, 
an essential component 
of the mycobacterial cell 
wall
Bacteriostatic activity 
against susceptible 
mycobacteria
Given in four-drug initial combination 
therapy for tuberculosis until drug 
sensitivities are known • also used for 
atypical mycobacterial infections
Oral • mixed clearance (half-life 
4 h) • dose must be reduced in 
renal failure • Toxicity: 
Retrobulbar neuritis
STREPTOMYCIN
Prevents bacterial 
protein synthesis by 
binding to the S12 
ribosomal subunit (see 
also Chapter 45)
Bactericidal activity against 
susceptible mycobacteria
Used in tuberculosis when an injectable 
drug is needed or desirable and in 
treatment of drug-resistant strains
IM, IV • renal clearance (half-life 
2.5 h) • administered daily 
initially, then 2 × week • Toxicity: 
Nephrotoxic, ototoxic
848    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
DRUGS USED IN TUBERCULOSIS
Aminosalicylate sodium (Paser)
Oral: 4 g delayed-release granules
Capreomycin (Capastat Sulfate)
Parenteral: 1 g powder to reconstitute for injection
Cycloserine (Seromycin Pulvules)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Ethambutol (Myambutol)
Oral: 100, 400 mg tablets
Ethionamide (Trecator-SC)
Oral: 250 mg tablets
Isoniazid (generic)
Oral: 100, 300 mg tablets; syrup, 50 mg/5 mL
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for injection
Pyrazinamide (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Rifabutin (Mycobutin)
Oral: 150 mg capsules
Rifampin (generic, Rifadin, Rimactane)
Oral: 150, 300 mg capsules
Parenteral: 600 mg powder for IV injection
Rifapentine (Priftin)
Oral: 150 mg tablets
Rifaximin (Xifaxan)
Oral: 200, 550 mg tablets
Streptomycin (generic)
Parenteral: 1 g lyophilized for IM injection
DRUGS USED IN LEPROSY
Clofazimine (Lamprene)
Oral: 50 mg capsules
Dapsone (generic)
Oral: 25, 100 mg tablets
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E 1
DRUGS USED IN TUBERCULOSIS
Aminosalicylate sodium (Paser)
Oral: 4 g delayed-release granules
Capreomycin (Capastat Sulfate)
Parenteral: 1 g powder to reconstitute for injection
Cycloserine (Seromycin Pulvules)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Ethambutol (Myambutol)
Oral: 100, 400 mg tablets
Ethionamide (Trecator-SC)
Oral: 250 mg tablets
Isoniazid (generic)
Oral: 100, 300 mg tablets; syrup, 50 mg/5 mL
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for injection
Pyrazinamide (generic)
Oral: 500 mg tablets
Rifabutin (Mycobutin)
Oral: 150 mg capsules
Oral: 150, 300 mg capsules
Parenteral: 600 mg powder for IV injection
Rifapentine (Priftin)
Oral: 150 mg tablets
Rifaximin (Xifaxan)
Oral: 200, 550 mg tablets
Streptomycin (generic)
Parenteral: 1 g lyophilized for IM injection
DRUGS USED IN LEPROSY
Clofazimine (Lamprene)
Oral: 50 mg capsules
Dapsone (generic)
Oral: 25, 100 mg tablets
Rifampin (generic, Rifadin, Rimactane)
 REFERENCES 
 Diagnosis and treatment of disease caused by nontuberculous mycobacteria. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156 (2 Part 2):S1. 
 Gillespie SH et al: Early bactericidal activity of a moxifloxacin and isoniazid com-
bination in smear-positive pulmonary tuberculosis. J Antimicrob Chemother 
2005;56:1169. 
 Hugonnet J-E et al: Meropenem-clavulanate is effective against extensively drug-
resistant  Mycobacterium tuberculosis . Science 2009;323:1215. 
 Jasmer RM, Nahid P, Hopewell PC: Latent tuberculosis infection. N Engl J Med 
2002;347:1860. 
 Kinzig-Schippers M et al: Should we use N-acetyltransferase type 2 genotyping to 
personalize isoniazid doses? Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005;49:1733. 
 Mitnick CD et al: Comprehensive treatment of extensively drug-resistant tubercu-
losis. N Engl J Med 2008;359:563. 
 Sulochana S, Rahman F, Paramasivan CN: In vitro activity of fluoroquinolones 
against  Mycobacterium tuberculosis . J Chemother 2005;17:169. 
 Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161(4 Part 2):S221. 
 Update: Adverse event data and revised American Thoracic Society/CDC recom-
mendations against the use of rifampin and pyrazinamide for treatment of 
latent tuberculosis infection—United States, 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2003;52:735. 
 von der Lippe B, Sandven P, Brubakk O: Efficacy and safety of linezolid in multi-
drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB)—a report of ten cases. J Infect 
2006;52:92. 
 Zhang Y, Yew WW: Mechanisms of drug resistance in  Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2009;13:1320. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient should be started on four-drug therapy with 
rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. If a 
protease-inhibitor-based antiretroviral regimen is used to 
treat his HIV, rifabutin should replace rifampin because of 
the serious drug-drug interaction between rifampin and 
protease inhibitors. The patient is at increased risk of devel-
oping hepatotoxicity from both isoniazid and pyrazinamide 
given his history of chronic alcohol dependence.
1Drugs used against atypical mycobacteria are listed in Chapters 43–46.
849
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Human fungal infections have increased dramatically in incidence 
and severity in recent years, owing mainly to advances in surgery, 
cancer treatment, treatment of patients with solid organ and bone 
marrow transplantation, the HIV epidemic, and increasing use of 
broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy in critically ill patients. 
These changes have resulted in increased numbers of patients at 
risk for fungal infections. 
 For many years,  amphotericin B was the only efficacious anti-
fungal drug available for systemic use. While highly effective in 
many serious infections, it is also quite toxic. In the last several 
decades, pharmacotherapy of fungal disease has been revolution-
ized by the introduction of the relatively nontoxic  azole drugs 
(both oral and parenteral formulations) and the  echinocandins 
(only available for parenteral administration). The new agents in 
these classes offer more targeted, less toxic therapy than older 
agents such as amphotericin B for patients with serious systemic 
fungal infections. Combination therapy is being reconsidered, and 
new formulations of old agents are becoming available. 
Unfortunately, the appearance of azole-resistant organisms, as well 
as the rise in the number of patients at risk for mycotic infections, 
has created new challenges. 
 The antifungal drugs presently available fall into the following 
categories: systemic drugs (oral or parenteral) for systemic infec-
tions, oral systemic drugs for mucocutaneous infections, and 
topical drugs for mucocutaneous infections. 
 ■ SYSTEMIC ANTIFUNGAL DRUGS 
FOR SYSTEMIC INFECTIONS 
 AMPHOTERICIN B 
 Amphotericin A and B are antifungal antibiotics produced by 
 Streptomyces nodosus. Amphotericin A is not in clinical use. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Amphotericin B is an amphoteric polyene macrolide (polyene = 
containing many double bonds; macrolide = containing a large 
lactone ring of 12 or more atoms). It is nearly insoluble in water 
and is therefore prepared as a colloidal suspension of amphotericin 
B and sodium desoxycholate for intravenous injection. Several 
formulations have been developed in which amphotericin B is 
48
Antifungal Agents
 Don Sheppard, MD, & Harry W. Lampiris, MD 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 55-year-old man presents to the emergency department 
with a 2-week history of an expanding ulcer on his left lower 
leg. He has a history of chronic neutropenia and transfusion-
dependent anemia secondary to myelodysplastic syndrome 
requiring chronic therapy with deferoxamine for hepatic iron 
overload. He first noticed a red bump on his leg while fishing 
at his cabin in the woods and thought it was a bug bite. It 
rapidly enlarged, first as a red swollen area, and then began 
to ulcerate. He was given dicloxacillin orally, but with no 
improvement. In the emergency department he is febrile to 
39°C (102.2°F), and looks unwell. On his left leg he has a 
6 by 12 cm black ulcer with surrounding swelling and 
erythema that is quite tender. His complete blood count 
demonstrates an absolute neutrophil count of 300 and a total 
white blood cell count of 1000. An immediate operative deb-
ridement yields pathologic specimens demonstrating broad 
club-like nonseptate hyphae and extensive tissue necrosis. 
What initial medical therapy would be most appropriate? 
850    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
TABLE 48–1 Properties of conventional amphotericin B and some lipid formulations.1
Drug
Physical 
Form
Dosing 
(mg/kg/d)
Cmax
Clearance
Nephrotoxicity
Infusional 
Toxicity
Daily Cost ($)
Conventional formulation
Fungizone
Micelles
1
…
…
…
…
24
Lipid formulations
AmBisome
Spheres
3–5
↑
↓
↓
↓
1300
Amphotec
Disks
5
↓
↑
↓
↑(?)
660
Abelcet
Ribbons
5
↓
↑
↓
↓(?)
570
1Changes in Cmax (peak plasma concentration), clearance, nephrotoxicity, and infusional toxicity are relative to conventional amphotericin B.
 Liposomal Amphotericin B 
 Therapy with amphotericin B is often limited by toxicity, espe-
cially drug-induced renal impairment. This has led to the devel-
opment of lipid drug formulations on the assumption that 
lipid-packaged drug binds to the mammalian membrane less 
readily, permitting the use of effective doses of the drug with 
lower toxicity. Liposomal amphotericin preparations package the 
active drug in lipid delivery vehicles, in contrast to the colloidal 
suspensions, which were previously the only available forms. 
Amphotericin binds to the lipids in these vehicles with an affinity 
between that for fungal ergosterol and that for human choles-
terol. The lipid vehicle then serves as an amphotericin reservoir, 
reducing nonspecific binding to human cell membranes. This 
preferential binding allows for a reduction of toxicity without 
sacrificing efficacy and permits use of larger doses. Furthermore, 
some fungi contain lipases that may liberate free amphotericin B 
directly at the site of infection. 
 Three such formulations are now available and have differing 
pharmacologic properties as summarized in  Table 48–1 . Although 
clinical trials have demonstrated different renal and infusion-
related toxicities for these preparations compared with regular 
amphotericin B, there are no trials comparing the different for-
mulations with each other. Limited studies have suggested at 
best a moderate improvement in the clinical efficacy of the lipid 
formulations compared with conventional amphotericin B. 
Because the lipid preparations are much more expensive, their 
use is usually restricted to patients intolerant to, or not respond-
ing to, conventional amphotericin treatment. 
packaged in a lipid-associated delivery system ( Table 48–1 and 
Box: Liposomal Amphotericin B). 
Amphotericin B
NH2
O
O
O
O
CH3
CH3
CH3
COOH
O
CH3
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
37
1
 Amphotericin B is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal 
tract. Oral amphotericin B is thus effective only on fungi within 
the lumen of the tract and cannot be used for treatment of systemic 
disease. The intravenous injection of 0.6 mg/kg/d of amphotericin 
B results in average blood levels of 0.3–1 mcg/mL; the drug is 
more than 90% bound by serum proteins. Although it is mostly 
metabolized, some amphotericin B is excreted slowly in the urine 
over a period of several days. The serum half-life is approximately 
15 days. Hepatic impairment, renal impairment, and dialysis have 
little impact on drug concentrations, and therefore no dose adjust-
ment is required. The drug is widely distributed in most tissues, 
but only 2–3% of the blood level is reached in cerebrospinal fluid, 
thus occasionally necessitating intrathecal therapy for certain types 
of fungal meningitis. 
 Mechanisms of Action & Resistance 
 Amphotericin B is selective in its fungicidal effect because it exploits 
the difference in lipid composition of fungal and mammalian cell 
membranes.  Ergosterol, a cell membrane sterol, is found in the cell 
membrane of fungi, whereas the predominant sterol of bacteria and 
human cells is  cholesterol. Amphotericin B binds to ergosterol and 
alters the permeability of the cell by forming amphotericin 
B-associated pores in the cell membrane ( Figure 48–1 ). As sug-
gested by its chemistry, amphotericin B combines avidly with 
CHAPTER 48 Antifungal Agents    851
lipids (ergosterol) along the double bond-rich side of its structure 
and associates with water molecules along the hydroxyl-rich side. 
This amphipathic characteristic facilitates pore formation by mul-
tiple amphotericin molecules, with the lipophilic portions around 
the outside of the pore and the hydrophilic regions lining the 
inside. The pore allows the leakage of intracellular ions and mac-
romolecules, eventually leading to cell death. Some binding to 
human membrane sterols does occur, probably accounting for the 
drug’s prominent toxicity. 
 Resistance to amphotericin B occurs if ergosterol binding is 
impaired, either by decreasing the membrane concentration of 
ergosterol or by modifying the sterol target molecule to reduce its 
affinity for the drug. 
 Antifungal Activity & Clinical Uses 
 Amphotericin B remains the antifungal agent with the broadest 
spectrum of action. It has activity against the clinically significant 
yeasts, including  Candida albicans and  Cryptococcus neoformans ; 
the organisms causing endemic mycoses, including  Histoplasma 
capsulatum ,  Blastomyces dermatitidis , and  Coccidioides  immitis ; 
and the pathogenic molds, such as  Aspergillus fumigatus and the 
agents of mucormycosis. Some fungal organisms such as  Candida 
lusitaniae and  Pseudallescheria  boydii display intrinsic amphoteri-
cin B resistance. 
 Owing to its broad spectrum of activity and fungicidal action, 
amphotericin B remains a useful agent for nearly all life-threatening 
mycotic infections, although newer, less toxic agents have 
largely replaced it for most conditions. Amphotericin B is often 
used as the initial induction regimen to rapidly reduce fungal 
burden and then replaced by one of the newer azole drugs 
(described below) for chronic therapy or prevention of relapse. 
Such induction therapy is especially important for immunosup-
pressed patients and those with severe fungal pneumonia, severe 
cryptococcal meningitis, or disseminated infections with one of 
the endemic mycoses such as histoplasmosis or coccidioidomy-
cosis. Once a clinical response has been elicited, these patients 
then often continue maintenance therapy with an azole; therapy 
may be lifelong in patients at high risk for disease relapse. For 
treatment of systemic fungal disease, amphotericin B is given by 
slow intravenous infusion at a dosage of 0.5–1 mg/kg/d. It is 
usually continued to a defined total dose (eg, 1–2 g), rather 
than a defined time span, as used with other antimicrobial 
drugs. 
 Intrathecal therapy for fungal meningitis is poorly tolerated 
and fraught with difficulties related to maintaining cerebrospinal 
fluid access. Thus, intrathecal therapy with amphotericin B is 
being increasingly supplanted by other therapies but remains an 
option in cases of fungal central nervous system infections that 
have not responded to other agents. 
 Local or topical administration of amphotericin B has been 
used with success. Mycotic corneal ulcers and keratitis can be 
cured with topical drops as well as by direct subconjunctival injec-
tion. Fungal arthritis has been treated with adjunctive local injection 
Fungal cell
Fungal cell membrane and cell wall
β-glucans
Cell membrane
bilayer
Squalene
Squalene epoxide
Lanosterol
Ergosterol
Terbinafine
Azoles
Amphotericin B,
nystatin
Flucytosine
β-glucan
synthase
Echinocandins
–
–
–
–
Proteins
Chitin
DNA, RNA
synthesis
 FIGURE 48–1  Targets of antifungal drugs. Except for flucytosine (and possibly griseofulvin, not shown), all currently available antifungals 
target the fungal cell membrane or cell wall. 
852    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
directly into the joint. Candiduria responds to bladder irrigation 
with amphotericin B, and this route has been shown to produce 
no significant systemic toxicity. 
 Adverse Effects 
 The toxicity of amphotericin B can be divided into two broad 
categories: immediate reactions, related to the infusion of the 
drug, and those occurring more slowly. 
 A. Infusion-Related Toxicity 
 Infusion-related reactions are nearly universal and consist of 
fever, chills, muscle spasms, vomiting, headache, and hypoten-
sion. They can be ameliorated by slowing the infusion rate or 
decreasing the daily dose. Premedication with antipyretics, anti-
histamines, meperidine, or corticosteroids can be helpful. When 
starting therapy, many clinicians administer a test dose of 1 mg 
intravenously to gauge the severity of the reaction. This can 
serve as a guide to an initial dosing regimen and premedication 
strategy. 
 B. Cumulative Toxicity 
 Renal damage is the most significant toxic reaction. Renal impair-
ment occurs in nearly all patients treated with clinically significant 
doses of amphotericin. The degree of azotemia is variable and 
often stabilizes during therapy, but it can be serious enough to 
necessitate dialysis. A reversible component is associated with 
decreased renal perfusion and represents a form of prerenal renal 
failure. An irreversible component results from renal tubular 
injury and subsequent dysfunction. The irreversible form of 
amphotericin nephrotoxicity usually occurs in the setting of pro-
longed administration (> 4 g cumulative dose). Renal toxicity 
commonly manifests as renal tubular acidosis and severe potas-
sium and magnesium wasting. There is some evidence that the 
prerenal component can be attenuated with sodium loading, and 
it is common practice to administer normal saline infusions with 
the daily doses of amphotericin B. 
 Abnormalities of liver function tests are occasionally seen, as is 
a varying degree of anemia due to reduced erythropoietin produc-
tion by damaged renal tubular cells. After intrathecal therapy with 
amphotericin, seizures and a chemical arachnoiditis may develop, 
often with serious neurologic sequelae. 
 FLUCYTOSINE 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Flucytosine (5-FC) was discovered in 1957 during a search for 
novel antineoplastic agents. Though devoid of anticancer proper-
ties, it became apparent that it was a potent antifungal agent. 
Flucytosine is a water-soluble pyrimidine analog related to the 
chemotherapeutic agent 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Its spectrum of 
action is much narrower than that of amphotericin B. 
F
N
N
H
Flucytosine
NH2
O
 
 Flucytosine is currently available in North America only in an 
oral formulation. The dosage is 100–150 mg/kg/d in patients with 
normal renal function. It is well absorbed (> 90%), with serum 
concentrations peaking 1–2 hours after an oral dose. It is poorly 
protein-bound and penetrates well into all body fluid compart-
ments, including the cerebrospinal fluid. It is eliminated by glom-
erular filtration with a half-life of 3–4 hours and is removed by 
hemodialysis. Levels rise rapidly with renal impairment and can 
lead to toxicity. Toxicity is more likely to occur in AIDS patients 
and those with renal insufficiency. Peak serum concentrations 
should be measured periodically in patients with renal insuffi-
ciency and maintained between 50 and 100 mcg/mL. 
 Mechanisms of Action & Resistance 
 Flucytosine is taken up by fungal cells via the enzyme cytosine 
permease. It is converted intracellularly first to 5-FU and then to 
5-fluorodeoxyuridine monophosphate (FdUMP) and fluorouridine 
triphosphate (FUTP), which inhibit DNA and RNA synthesis, 
respectively ( Figure 48–1 ). Human cells are unable to convert the 
parent drug to its active metabolites, resulting in selective toxicity. 
 Synergy with amphotericin B has been demonstrated in vitro 
and in vivo. It may be related to enhanced penetration of the flu-
cytosine through amphotericin-damaged fungal cell membranes. 
In vitro synergy with azole drugs has also been seen, although the 
mechanism is unclear. 
 Resistance is thought to be mediated through altered metabo-
lism of flucytosine, and, though uncommon in primary isolates, it 
develops rapidly in the course of flucytosine monotherapy. 
 Clinical Uses & Adverse Effects 
 The spectrum of activity of flucytosine is restricted to  C neofor-
mans , some  Candida sp, and the dematiaceous molds that cause 
chromoblastomycosis. Flucytosine is not used as a single agent 
because of its demonstrated synergy with other agents and to 
avoid the development of secondary resistance. Clinical use at 
present is confined to combination therapy, either with ampho-
tericin B for cryptococcal meningitis or with itraconazole for 
chromoblastomycosis. 
 The adverse effects of flucytosine result from metabolism 
(possibly by intestinal flora) to the toxic antineoplastic compound 
fluorouracil. Bone marrow toxicity with anemia, leukopenia, and 
thrombocytopenia are the most common adverse effects, with 
derangement of liver enzymes occurring less frequently. A form of 
toxic enterocolitis can occur. There seems to be a narrow therapeutic 
window, with an increased risk of toxicity at higher drug levels and 
CHAPTER 48 Antifungal Agents    853
resistance developing rapidly at subtherapeutic concentrations. The 
use of drug concentration measurements may be helpful in reducing 
the incidence of toxic reactions, especially when flucytosine is com-
bined with nephrotoxic agents such as amphotericin B. 
 AZOLES 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Azoles are synthetic compounds that can be classified as either 
imidazoles or triazoles according to the number of nitrogen 
atoms in the five-membered azole ring, as indicated below. The 
imidazoles consist of ketoconazole, miconazole, and clotrimazole 
( Figure 48–2 ). The latter two drugs are now used only in topical 
therapy. The triazoles include itraconazole, fluconazole, voricon-
azole, and posaconazole. 
 
R
N
X
X = C, imidazole
X = N, triazole
N
Azole nucleus
 
 The pharmacology of each of the azoles is unique and accounts 
for some of the variations in clinical use.  Table 48–2 summarizes 
the differences among five of the azoles. 
 Mechanisms of Action & Resistance 
 The antifungal activity of azole drugs results from the reduction of 
ergosterol synthesis by inhibition of fungal cytochrome P450 
enzymes ( Figure 48–1 ). The selective toxicity of azole drugs results 
Clotrimazole
N
N
C
Cl
N
N
H2C
H
C
O
CH2
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Miconazole
Itraconazole
N
N
C
Cl
N
CH2
Cl
O
O
CH2
O
N
N
N
N
CH
CH2
CH3
CH3
O
N
N
N
H2C
Cl
Cl
Ketoconazole
O
O
CH2
O
N
N
C
CH3
O
F
F
N
N
N
C
CH2
OH
CH2
N
N
N
Fluconazole
F
F
N
N
N
CH3
N
N
F
HO
Voriconazole
 FIGURE 48–2  Structural formulas of some antifungal azoles. 
854    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
from their greater affinity for fungal than for human cytochrome 
P450 enzymes. Imidazoles exhibit a lesser degree of selectivity 
than the triazoles, accounting for their higher incidence of drug 
interactions and adverse effects. 
 Resistance to azoles occurs via multiple mechanisms. Once rare, 
increasing numbers of resistant strains are being reported, suggest-
ing that increasing use of these agents for prophylaxis and therapy 
may be selecting for clinical drug resistance in certain settings. 
 Clinical Uses, Adverse Effects, 
& Drug Interactions 
 The spectrum of action of azole medications is broad, including 
many species of  Candida,  C neoformans , the endemic mycoses 
(blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis), the dermato-
phytes, and, in the case of itraconazole and voriconazole, even 
 Aspergillus infections. They are also useful in the treatment of 
intrinsically amphotericin-resistant organisms such as  P boydii. 
 As a group, the azoles are relatively nontoxic. The most com-
mon adverse reaction is relatively minor gastrointestinal upset. All 
azoles have been reported to cause abnormalities in liver enzymes 
and, very rarely, clinical hepatitis. Adverse effects specific to indi-
vidual agents are discussed below. 
 All azole drugs are prone to drug interactions because they 
affect the mammalian cytochrome P450 system of enzymes to 
some extent. The most significant reactions are indicated below. 
 KETOCONAZOLE 
 Ketoconazole was the first oral azole introduced into clinical use. 
It is distinguished from triazoles by its greater propensity to 
inhibit mammalian cytochrome P450 enzymes; that is, it is less 
selective for fungal P450 than are the newer azoles. As a result, 
systemic ketoconazole has fallen out of clinical use in the USA and 
is not discussed in any detail here. Its dermatologic use is discussed 
in  Chapter 61 . 
 ITRACONAZOLE 
 Itraconazole is available in oral and intravenous formulations and 
is used at a dosage of 100–400 mg/d. Drug absorption is increased 
by food and by low gastric pH. Like other lipid-soluble azoles, it 
interacts with hepatic microsomal enzymes, though to a lesser 
degree than ketoconazole. An important drug interaction is 
reduced bioavailability of itraconazole when taken with rifamycins 
(rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentine). It does not affect mammalian 
steroid synthesis, and its effects on the metabolism of other hepat-
ically cleared medications are much less than those of ketoconazole. 
While itraconazole displays potent antifungal activity, effective-
ness can be limited by reduced bioavailability. Newer formula-
tions, including an oral liquid and an intravenous preparation, 
have utilized cyclodextran as a carrier molecule to enhance solubil-
ity and bioavailability. Like ketoconazole, itraconazole penetrates 
poorly into the cerebrospinal fluid. Itraconazole is the azole of 
choice for treatment of disease due to the dimorphic fungi 
 Histoplasma,  Blastomyces , and  Sporothrix. Itraconazole has activity 
against  Aspergillus sp, but it has been replaced by voriconazole as 
the azole of choice for aspergillosis. Itraconazole is used extensively 
in the treatment of dermatophytoses and onychomycosis. 
 FLUCONAZOLE 
 Fluconazole displays a high degree of water solubility and good 
cerebrospinal fluid penetration. Unlike ketoconazole and itracon-
azole, its oral bioavailability is high. Drug interactions are also less 
common because fluconazole has the least effect of all the azoles 
on hepatic microsomal enzymes. Because of fewer hepatic enzyme 
interactions and better gastrointestinal tolerance, fluconazole has 
the widest therapeutic index of the azoles, permitting more aggres-
sive dosing in a variety of fungal infections. The drug is available 
in oral and intravenous formulations and is used at a dosage of 
100–800 mg/d. 
 Fluconazole is the azole of choice in the treatment and second-
ary prophylaxis of cryptococcal meningitis. Intravenous flucon-
azole has been shown to be equivalent to amphotericin B in 
treatment of candidemia in ICU patients with normal white blood 
cell counts. Fluconazole is the agent most commonly used for the 
treatment of mucocutaneous candidiasis. Activity against the 
dimorphic fungi is limited to coccidioidal disease, and in particu-
lar for meningitis, where high doses of fluconazole often obviate 
the need for intrathecal amphotericin B. Fluconazole displays no 
activity against  Aspergillus or other filamentous fungi. 
TABLE 48–2 Pharmacologic properties of five systemic azole drugs.
Water Solubility
Absorption
CSF: Serum 
Concentration Ratio
t½ (hours)
Elimination
Formulations
Ketoconazole
Low
Variable
< 0.1
7–10
Hepatic
Oral
Itraconazole
Low
Variable
< 0.01
24–42
Hepatic
Oral, IV
Fluconazole
High
High
> 0.7
22–31
Renal
Oral, IV
Voriconazole
High
High
…
6
Hepatic
Oral, IV
Posaconazole
Low
High
…
25
Hepatic
Oral
CHAPTER 48 Antifungal Agents    855
 Prophylactic use of fluconazole has been demonstrated to 
reduce fungal disease in bone marrow transplant recipients and 
AIDS patients, but the emergence of fluconazole-resistant fungi 
has raised concerns about this indication. 
 VORICONAZOLE 
 Voriconazole is available in intravenous and oral formulations. 
The recommended dosage is 400 mg/d. The drug is well absorbed 
orally, with a bioavailability exceeding 90%, and it exhibits less 
protein binding than itraconazole. Metabolism is predominantly 
hepatic. Voriconazole is a clinically relevant inhibitor of mamma-
lian CYP3A4, and dose reduction of a number of medications is 
required when voriconazole is started. These include cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus, and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Observed 
toxicities include rash and elevated hepatic enzymes. Visual dis-
turbances are common, occurring in up to 30% of patients receiv-
ing intravenous voriconazole, and include blurring and changes in 
color vision or brightness. These visual changes usually occur 
immediately after a dose of voriconazole and resolve within 30 
minutes. Photosensitivity dermatitis is commonly observed in 
patients receiving chronic oral therapy. 
 Voriconazole is similar to itraconazole in its spectrum of action, 
having excellent activity against  Candida sp (including fluconazole-
resistant species such as  Candida krusei ) and the dimorphic fungi. 
Voriconazole is less toxic than amphotericin B and is the treatment 
of choice for invasive aspergillosis. 
 POSACONAZOLE 
 Posaconazole is the newest triazole to be licensed in the USA. It is 
available only in a liquid oral formulation and is used at a dosage 
of 800 mg/d, divided into two or three doses. Absorption is 
improved when taken with meals high in fat. Posaconazole is rap-
idly distributed to the tissues, resulting in high tissue levels but 
relatively low blood levels. Visual changes have not been reported, 
but drug interactions with increased levels of CYP3A4 substrates 
such as tacrolimus and cyclosporine have been documented. 
 Posaconazole is the broadest spectrum member of the azole 
family, with activity against most species of  Candida and  Aspergillus . 
It is the only azole with significant activity against the agents of 
mucormycosis. It is currently licensed for salvage therapy in inva-
sive aspergillosis, as well as prophylaxis of fungal infections during 
induction chemotherapy for leukemia, and for allogeneic bone 
marrow transplant patients with graft-versus-host disease. 
 ECHINOCANDINS 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Echinocandins are the newest class of antifungal agents to be 
developed. They are large cyclic peptides linked to a long-chain 
fatty acid.  Caspofungin, micafungin, and  anidulafungin are the 
only licensed agents in this category of antifungals, although other 
drugs are under active investigation. These agents are active 
against  Candida and  Aspergillus, but not  C neoformans or the 
agents of zygomycosis and mucormycosis. 
 Echinocandins are available only in intravenous formulations. 
Caspofungin is administered as a single loading dose of 70 mg, 
followed by a daily dose of 50 mg. Caspofungin is water soluble 
and highly protein-bound. The half-life is 9–11 hours, and the 
metabolites are excreted by the kidneys and gastrointestinal tract. 
Dosage adjustments are required only in the presence of severe 
hepatic insufficiency. Micafungin displays similar properties with 
a half-life of 11–15 hours and is used at a dose of 150 mg/d for 
treatment of esophageal candidiasis, 100 mg/d for treatment of 
candidemia, and 50 mg/d for prophylaxis of fungal infections. 
Anidulafungin has a half-life of 24–48 hours. For esophageal 
candidiasis, it is administered intravenously at 100 mg on the first 
day and 50 mg/d thereafter for 14 days. For candidemia, a loading 
dose of 200 mg is recommended with 100 mg/d thereafter for at 
least 14 days after the last positive blood culture. 
 Mechanism of Action 
 Echinocandins act at the level of the fungal cell wall by inhibiting 
the synthesis of β(1–3)-glucan ( Figure 48–1 ). This results in dis-
ruption of the fungal cell wall and cell death. 
 Clinical Uses & Adverse Effects 
 Caspofungin is currently licensed for disseminated and mucocuta-
neous candidal infections, as well as for empiric antifungal therapy 
during febrile neutropenia, and has largely replaced amphotericin 
B for the latter indication. Of note, caspofungin is licensed for use 
in invasive aspergillosis only as salvage therapy in patients who have 
failed to respond to amphotericin B, and not as primary therapy. 
Micafungin is licensed for mucocutaneous candidiasis, candidemia, 
and prophylaxis of candidal infections in bone marrow transplant 
patients. Anidulafungin is approved for use in esophageal candidi-
asis and invasive candidiasis, including candidemia. 
 Echinocandin agents are extremely well tolerated, with minor 
gastrointestinal side effects and flushing reported infrequently. 
Elevated liver enzymes have been noted in several patients receiving 
caspofungin in combination with cyclosporine, and this combina-
tion should be avoided. Micafungin has been shown to increase 
levels of nifedipine, cyclosporine, and sirolimus. Anidulafungin 
does not seem to have significant drug interactions, but histamine 
release may occur during intravenous infusion. 
 ■ ORAL SYSTEMIC ANTIFUNGAL 
DRUGS FOR MUCOCUTANEOUS 
INFECTIONS 
 GRISEOFULVIN 
 Griseofulvin is a very insoluble fungistatic drug derived from a 
species of penicillium. Its only use is in the systemic treatment of 
dermatophytosis (see  Chapter 61 ). It is administered in a micro-
crystalline form at a dosage of 1 g/d. Absorption is improved when 
856    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
it is given with fatty foods. Griseofulvin’s mechanism of action at 
the cellular level is unclear, but it is deposited in newly forming 
skin where it binds to keratin, protecting the skin from new infec-
tion. Because its action is to prevent infection of these new skin 
structures, griseofulvin must be administered for 2–6 weeks for 
skin and hair infections to allow the replacement of infected kera-
tin by the resistant structures. Nail infections may require therapy 
for months to allow regrowth of the new protected nail and is 
often followed by relapse. Adverse effects include an allergic syn-
drome much like serum sickness, hepatitis, and drug interactions 
with warfarin and phenobarbital. Griseofulvin has been largely 
replaced by newer antifungal medications such as itraconazole and 
terbinafine. 
 TERBINAFINE 
 Terbinafine is a synthetic allylamine that is available in an oral 
formulation and is used at a dosage of 250 mg/d. It is used in the 
treatment of dermatophytoses, especially onychomycosis (see 
 Chapter 61 ). Like griseofulvin, terbinafine is a keratophilic medi-
cation, but unlike griseofulvin, it is fungicidal. Like the azole 
drugs, it interferes with ergosterol biosynthesis, but rather than 
interacting with the P450 system, terbinafine inhibits the fungal 
enzyme squalene epoxidase ( Figure 48–1 ). This leads to the accu-
mulation of the sterol squalene, which is toxic to the organism. 
One tablet given daily for 12 weeks achieves a cure rate of up to 
90% for onychomycosis and is more effective than griseofulvin 
or itraconazole. Adverse effects are rare, consisting primarily of 
gastrointestinal upset and headache. Terbinafine does not seem to 
affect the P450 system and has demonstrated no significant drug 
interactions to date. 
 ■ TOPICAL ANTIFUNGAL 
THERAPY  
 NYSTATIN 
 Nystatin is a polyene macrolide much like amphotericin B. It is too 
toxic for parenteral administration and is only used topically. 
Nystatin is currently available in creams, ointments, suppositories, 
and other forms for application to skin and mucous membranes. It 
is not absorbed to a significant degree from skin, mucous mem-
branes, or the gastrointestinal tract. As a result, nystatin has little 
toxicity, although oral use is often limited by the unpleasant taste. 
 Nystatin is active against most  Candida sp and is most com-
monly used for suppression of local candidal infections. Some 
common indications include oropharyngeal thrush, vaginal can-
didiasis, and intertriginous candidal infections. 
 TOPICAL AZOLES 
 The two azoles most commonly used topically are clotrimazole and 
miconazole; several others are available (see Preparations Available). 
Both are available over-the-counter and are often used for vul-
vovaginal candidiasis. Oral clotrimazole troches are available for 
treatment of oral thrush and are a pleasant-tasting alternative to 
nystatin. In cream form, both agents are useful for dermatophytic 
infections, including tinea corporis, tinea pedis, and tinea cruris. 
Absorption is negligible, and adverse effects are rare. 
 Topical and shampoo forms of ketoconazole are also available 
and useful in the treatment of seborrheic dermatitis and pityriasis 
versicolor. Several other azoles are available for topical use (see 
Preparations Available). 
 TOPICAL ALLYLAMINES 
 Terbinafine and naftifine are allylamines available as topical creams 
(see  Chapter 61 ). Both are effective for treatment of tinea cruris 
and tinea corporis. These are prescription drugs in the USA. 
CHAPTER 48 Antifungal Agents    857
SUMMARY Antifungal Drugs
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
POLYENE MACROLIDE
 • Amphotericin B
Forms pores in fungal 
membranes (which contain 
ergosterol) but not in 
mammalian (cholesterol-
containing) membranes
Loss of intracellular 
contents through pores is 
fungicidal • broad 
spectrum of action
Localized and systemic 
candidemia • Cryptococcus 
• Histoplasma • Blastomyces 
• Coccidioides • Aspergillus
Oral but not absorbed • IV for systemic use 
• intrathecal for fungal meningitis • topical 
for ocular and bladder infections • duration, 
days • Toxicity: Infusion reactions • renal 
impairment • Interactions: Additive with 
other renal toxic drugs
 • Lipid formulations: Lower toxicity, higher doses can be used
PYRIMIDINE ANALOG
 • Flucytosine
Interferes with DNA and RNA 
synthesis selectively in fungi
Synergistic with 
amphotericin • systemic 
toxicity in host due to 
DNA and RNA effects
Cryptococcus and 
chromoblastomycosis 
infections
Oral • duration, hours • renal excretion 
• Toxicity: Myelosuppression
AZOLES
 • Ketoconazole
Blocks fungal P450 enzymes 
and interferes with ergosterol 
synthesis
Poorly selective • inter-
feres with mammalian 
P450 function
Broad spectrum but toxic-
ity restricts use to topical 
therapy
Oral, topical • Toxicity and interactions: 
Interferes with steroid hormone synthesis 
and phase I drug metabolism
 • Itraconazole
Same as for ketoconazole
Much more selective 
than ketoconazole
Broad spectrum: Candida, 
Cryptococcus, blastomycosis, 
coccidioidomycosis, 
histoplasmosis
Oral and IV • duration, 1–2 d • poor entry 
into central nervous system (CNS) • Toxicity 
and interactions: Low toxicity
 • Fluconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole: Fluconazole has excellent CNS penetration, used in fungal meningitis
ECHINOCANDINS
 • Caspofungin
Blocks β-glucan synthase
Prevents synthesis of 
fungal cell wall
Fungicidal Candida sp • also 
used in aspergillosis
IV only • duration, 11–15 h • Toxicity: Minor 
gastrointestinal effects, flushing 
• Interactions: Increases cyclosporine levels 
(avoid combination)
 • Micafungin, anidulafungin: Micafungin increases levels of nifedipine, cyclosporine, sirolimus; anidulafungin is relatively free of this interaction
ALLYLAMINE
 • Terbinafine
Inhibits epoxidation of 
squalene in fungi • increased 
levels are toxic to them
Reduces ergosterol • 
prevents synthesis of 
fungal cell membrane
Mucocutaneous fungal 
infections
Oral • duration, days • Toxicity: 
Gastrointestinal upset, headache, hepato-
toxicity • Interactions: None reported
858    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
Amphotericin B
Parenteral:
 Conventional formulation (Amphotericin B, Fungizone): 50 mg 
 powder for injection
Lipid formulations:
 (Abelcet): 100 mg/20 mL suspension for injection
 (AmBisome): 50 mg powder for injection
 (Amphotec): 50, 100 mg powder for injection
Topical: 3% cream, lotion, ointment
Anidulafungin (Eraxis)
Parenteral: 50 mg powder for injection
Butenafine (Lotrimin Ultra, Mentax)
Topical: 1% cream
Butoconazole (Gynazole-1, Mycelex-3)
Topical: 2% vaginal cream
Caspofungin (Cancidas)
Parenteral: 50, 70 mg powder for injection
Clotrimazole (generic, Lotrimin)
Topical: 1% cream, solution, lotion; 100, 200 mg vaginal 
suppositories
Econazole (generic, Spectazole)
Topical: 1% cream
Fluconazole (Diflucan)
Oral: 50, 100, 150, 200 mg tablets; powder for 10, 40 mg/mL 
suspension
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL in 100 and 200 mL vials
Flucytosine (Ancobon)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules
Griseofulvin (Grifulvin, Grisactin, Fulvicin P/G)
Oral microsize: 125, 250 mg tablets; 250 mg capsule, 125 mg/5 mL 
suspension
Oral ultramicrosize:1 125, 165, 250, 330 mg tablets
Itraconazole (Sporanox)
Oral: 100 mg capsules; 10 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Ketoconazole (generic, Nizoral)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Topical: 2% cream, shampoo
Micafungin (Mycamine)
Parenteral: 50 mg powder for injection
Miconazole (generic, Micatin)
Topical: 2% cream, powder, spray; 100, 200 mg vaginal suppositories
Naftifine (Naftin)
Topical: 1% cream, gel
Natamycin (Natacyn)
Topical: 5% ophthalmic suspension
Nystatin (generic, Mycostatin)
Oral: 500,000 unit tablets
Topical: 100,000 units/g cream, ointment, powder; 100,000 units 
vaginal tablets
Oxiconazole (Oxistat)
Topical: 1% cream, lotion
Posaconazole (Noxafil)
Oral: suspension 40 mg/mL
Sulconazole (Exelderm)
Topical: 1% cream, solution
Terbinafine (Lamisil)
Oral: 250 mg tablets
Topical: 1% cream, gel
Terconazole (Terazol 3, Terazol 7)
Topical: 0.4%, 0.8% vaginal cream; 80 mg vaginal suppositories
Tioconazole (Vagistat-1, Monistat 1)
Topical: 6.5% vaginal ointment
Tolnaftate (generic, Aftate, Tinactin)
Topical: 1% cream, gel, solution, aerosol powder
Voriconazole (Vfend)
Oral: 50, 200 mg tablets; oral suspension 40 mg/mL
Parenteral: 200 mg vials, reconstituted to a 5 mg/mL solution
1Ultramicrosize formulations of griseofulvin are approximately 1.5 times more potent, milligram for milligram, than the microsize preparations.
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Amphotericin B
Parenteral:
 Conventional formulation (Amphotericin B, Fungizone): 50 mg 
powder for injection
Lipid formulations:
 (Abelcet): 100 mg/20 mL suspension for injection
 (AmBisome): 50 mg powder for injection
 (Amphotec): 50, 100 mg powder for injection
Topical: 3% cream, lotion, ointment
Anidulafungin (Eraxis)
Parenteral: 50 mg powder for injection
Butenafine (Lotrimin Ultra, Mentax)
Topical: 1% cream
Butoconazole (Gynazole-1, Mycelex-3)
Topical: 2% vaginal cream
Caspofungin (Cancidas)
Parenteral: 50, 70 mg powder for injection
Clotrimazole (generic, Lotrimin)
Topical: 1% cream, solution, lotion; 100, 200 mg vaginal
suppositories
Econazole (generic, Spectazole)
Topical: 1% cream
Fluconazole (Diflucan)
Oral: 50, 100, 150, 200 mg tablets; powder for 10, 40 mg/mL
suspension
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL in 100 and 200 mL vials
Flucytosine (Ancobon)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules
Griseofulvin (Grifulvin, Grisactin, Fulvicin P/G)
Oral microsize: 125, 250 mg tablets; 250 mg capsule, 125 mg/5 mL 
suspension
Oral ultramicrosize:1 125, 165, 250, 330 mg tablets
Itraconazole (Sporanox)
Oral: 100 mg capsules; 10 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Ketoconazole (generic, Nizoral)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Topical: 2% cream, shampoo
Micafungin (Mycamine)
Parenteral: 50 mg powder for injection
Miconazole (generic, Micatin)
Topical: 2% cream, powder, spray; 100, 200 mg vaginal suppositories
Naftifine (Naftin)
Topical: 1% cream, gel
Natamycin (Natacyn)
Topical: 5% ophthalmic suspension
Nystatin (generic, Mycostatin)
Oral: 500,000 unit tablets
Topical: 100,000 units/g cream, ointment, powder; 100,000 units
vaginal tablets
Oxiconazole (Oxistat)
Topical: 1% cream, lotion
Posaconazole (Noxafil)
Oral: suspension 40 mg/mL
Sulconazole (Exelderm)
Topical: 1% cream, solution
Terbinafine (Lamisil)
Oral: 250 mg tablets
Topical: 1% cream, gel
Terconazole (Terazol 3, Terazol 7)
Topical: 0.4%, 0.8% vaginal cream; 80 mg vaginal suppositories
Tioconazole (Vagistat-1, Monistat 1)
Topical: 6.5% vaginal ointment
Tolnaftate (generic, Aftate, Tinactin)
Topical: 1% cream, gel, solution, aerosol powder
Voriconazole (Vfend)
Oral: 50, 200 mg tablets; oral suspension 40 mg/mL
Parenteral: 200 mg vials, reconstituted to a 5 mg/mL solution
 REFERENCES 
 Brüggemann RJ et al: Clinical relevance of the pharmacokinetic interactions of 
azole antifungal drugs with other coadministered agents. Clin Infect Dis 
2009;48:1441. 
 Cornely OA et al: Posazonacole vs. fluconazole or itraconazole prophylaxis in 
patients with neutropenia. N Engl J Med 2007;356:348. 
 Diekema DJ et al: Activities of caspofungin, itraconazole, posaconazole, ravucon-
azole, voriconazole, and amphotericin B against 448 recent clinical isolates 
of filamentous fungi. J Clin Microbiol 2003;41:3623. 
 Groll A, Piscitelli SC, Walsh TJ: Clinical pharmacology of systemic antifungal 
agents: A comprehensive review of agents in clinical use, current investiga-
tional compounds, and putative targets for antifungal drug development. 
Adv Pharmacol 1998;44:343. 
 Herbrecht R et al: Voriconazole versus amphotericin B for primary therapy of 
invasive aspergillosis. N Engl J Med 2002;347:408. 
 Kim R, Khachikian D, Reboli AC: A comparative evaluation of properties and 
clinical efficacy of the echinocandins. Expert Opin Pharmacother 
2007;8:1479. 
 Pasqualotto AC, Denning DW: New and emerging treatments for fungal infection. 
J Antimicrob Chemoth 2008;61(Suppl 1):i19. 
 Rogers TR: Treatment of zygomycosis: Current and new options. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2008;61(Suppl 1):i35. 
 Wong-Beringer A, Jacobs RA, Guglielmo BJ: Lipid formulations of amphotericin B. 
Clinical efficacy and toxicities. Clin Infect Dis 1998;27:603. 
CHAPTER 48 Antifungal Agents    859
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The club-like nonseptate hyphae observed in cultures of 
intraoperative specimens from this patient are characteristic 
of  Rhizopus , one of the agents of mucormycosis. This patient 
should be treated with an initial, prolonged course of therapy 
with liposomal amphotericin B and caspofungin and subse-
quent chronic suppressive therapy with posaconazole.
This page intentionally left blank 
861
 Antiviral Agents 
 Sharon Safrin, MD 
abnormalities. White blood cell count is 5800 cells/mm 3 with 
a normal differential, hemoglobin is 11.8 g/dL, all liver 
 function tests are within normal limits, CD4 cell count is 
278 cells/mm 3 , and viral load (HIV RNA) is 110,000 copies/
mL. What other laboratory tests should be ordered? Which 
antiretroviral medications would you begin?
C A S E  S T U D Y
A 35-year-old white woman who recently tested seropositive 
for both HIV and hepatitis B virus surface antigen is referred 
for evaluation. She is feeling well overall but reports a 
25-pack-year smoking history. She drinks 3–4 beers per 
week and has no known medication allergies. She has a 
 history of heroin use and is currently receiving methadone. 
Physical examination reveals normal vital signs and no 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites; their replication depends 
primarily on synthetic processes of the host cell. Therefore, to be 
effective, antiviral agents must either block viral entry into or exit 
from the cell or be active inside the host cell. As a corollary, non-
selective inhibitors of virus replication may interfere with host cell 
function and result in toxicity. 
 Progress in antiviral chemotherapy began in the early 1950s, when 
the search for anticancer drugs generated several new compounds 
capable of inhibiting viral DNA synthesis. The two first-generation 
antiviral agents, 5-iododeoxyuridine and trifluorothymidine, had 
poor specificity (ie, they inhibited host cell DNA as well as viral 
DNA) that rendered them too toxic for systemic use. However, both 
agents are effective when used topically for the treatment of herpes 
keratitis. 
 Knowledge of the mechanisms of viral replication has provided 
insights into critical steps in the viral life cycle that can serve as 
potential targets for antiviral therapy. Recent research has focused 
on identifying agents with greater selectivity, higher potency, in 
vivo stability, and reduced toxicity. Antiviral therapy is now avail-
able for herpesviruses, hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis B virus 
(HBV), papillomavirus, influenza, and human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV). Antiviral drugs share the common property of being 
virustatic; they are active only against replicating viruses and do not 
affect latent virus. Whereas some infections require monotherapy 
for brief periods of time (eg, acyclovir for herpes simplex virus), 
others require dual therapy for prolonged periods of time (inter-
feron alfa/ribavirin for HCV), whereas still others require multiple 
drug therapy for indefinite periods (HIV). In chronic illnesses such 
49
ACRONYMS & OTHER NAMES
3TC
Lamivudine
AZT
Zidovudine (previously azidothymidine)
CMV
Cytomegalovirus
CYP
Cytochrome P450
d4T
Stavudine
ddC
Zalcitabine
ddI
Didanosine
EBV
Epstein-Barr virus
FTC
Emtricitabine
HBeAg
Hepatitis e antigen
HBV
Hepatitis B virus
HCV
Hepatitis C virus
HHV-6
Human herpesvirus-6
HIV
Human immunodefi ciency virus
HSV
Herpes simplex virus
NNRTI
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
NRTI
Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor
PI
Protease inhibitor
RSV
Respiratory syncytial virus
SVR
Sustained viral response
UGT1A1 UDP-glucuronosyl transferase 1A1
VZV
Varicella-zoster virus
862    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
as viral hepatitis and HIV infection, potent inhibition of viral rep-
lication is crucial in limiting the extent of systemic damage. 
 Viral replication requires several steps ( Figure 49–1 ): (1) attach-
ment of the virus to receptors on the host cell surface; (2) entry of 
the virus through the host cell membrane; (3) uncoating of viral 
nucleic acid; (4) synthesis of early regulatory proteins, eg, nucleic 
acid polymerases; (5) synthesis of new viral RNA or DNA; (6) syn-
thesis of late, structural proteins; (7) assembly (maturation) of viral 
particles; and (8) release from the cell. Antiviral agents can poten-
tially target any of these steps. 
 ■ AGENTS TO TREAT HERPES 
SIMPLEX VIRUS HSV & 
VARICELLAZOSTER VIRUS VZV 
INFECTIONS 
 Three oral nucleoside analogs are licensed for the treatment of HSV 
and VZV infections: acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir. They 
have similar mechanisms of action and comparable indications for 
clinical use; all are well tolerated. Acyclovir has been the most exten-
sively studied; it was licensed first and is the only one of the three 
that is available for intravenous use in the United States. Comparative 
trials have demonstrated similar efficacies of these three agents for 
the treatment of HSV but modest superiority of famciclovir and 
valacyclovir for the treatment of herpes zoster infections. 
 ACYCLOVIR 
 Acyclovir ( Figure 49–2 ) is an acyclic guanosine derivative with 
clinical activity against HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV, but it is approx-
imately 10 times more potent against HSV-1 and HSV-2 than 
against VZV. In vitro activity against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), 
cytomegalovirus (CMV), and human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6) is 
present but weaker. 
 Acyclovir requires three phosphorylation steps for activation. It 
is converted first to the monophosphate derivative by the virus-
specified thymidine kinase and then to the di- and triphosphate 
compounds by host cell enzymes ( Figure 49–3 ). Because it 
requires the viral kinase for initial phosphorylation, acyclovir is 
selectively activated—and the active metabolite accumulates—
only in infected cells. Acyclovir triphosphate inhibits viral DNA 
synthesis by two mechanisms: competition with deoxyGTP for 
the viral DNA polymerase, resulting in binding to the DNA tem-
plate as an irreversible complex; and chain termination following 
incorporation into the viral DNA. 
 The bioavailability of oral acyclovir is low (15–20%) and is 
unaffected by food. An intravenous formulation is available. 
Topical formulations produce high concentrations in herpetic 
lesions, but systemic concentrations are undetectable by this 
route. 
 Acyclovir is cleared primarily by glomerular filtration and 
tubular secretion. The half-life is 2.5–3 hours in patients with 
normal renal function and 20 hours in patients with anuria. 
Viral 
attachment
and entry
Viral
release
Uncoating
Early protein
synthesis
Nucleic acid 
synthesis
Late protein
synthesis and
processing
Packaging
and
assembly
Mammalian
cell
Blocked by
amantadine,
rimantadine
(influenza)
Penetration
Blocked by NRTIs 
(HIV, HBV),
NNRTIs (HIV),
acyclovir (HSV),
foscarnet (CMV)
Blocked by 
protease inhibitors
(HIV)
Blocked by
neuraminidase
inhibitors
(influenza)
Blocked by
enfuvirtide (HIV),
maraviroc (HIV); 
docosanol (HSV),
palivizumab (RSV)
Blocked by 
interferon-alfa 
(HBV, HCV)
 FIGURE 49–1  The major sites of antiviral drug action. Note: Interferon alfas are speculated to have multiple sites of action. (Modified and repro-
duced, with permission, from Trevor AJ, Katzung BG, Masters SB:  Pharmacology: Examination & Board Review, 9th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2010.) 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    863
Acyclovir diffuses readily into most tissues and body fluids. 
Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are 20–50% of serum values. 
 Oral acyclovir has multiple uses. In first episodes of genital 
herpes, oral acyclovir shortens the duration of symptoms by 
approximately 2 days, the time to lesion healing by 4 days, and the 
duration of viral shedding by 7 days. In recurrent genital herpes, 
the time course is shortened by 1–2 days. Treatment of first- 
episode genital herpes does not alter the frequency or severity of 
recurrent outbreaks. Long-term suppression with oral acyclovir in 
patients with frequent recurrences of genital herpes decreases the 
O
N
N
N
NH
NH2
H2N
O
HO
Acyclovir
A. Antiherpes agents
B. Anti-HIV NRTI agents
C. Anti-HBV agents
O
N
NH
NH2
O
HO
OH
Ganciclovir
O
O
O
N
N
N
N
N
NH
NH2
O
Valacyclovir (prodrug)
O
O
N
N
NH2
Famciclovir (prodrug)
Zidovudine (AZT)
Cidofovir
Penciclovir
N
N
N
N
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
O
O
HO
O
O
HO
N
N
N
NH
NH2
O
OH
O
N
N
O
NH2
N
NH
O
N3
OH
Foscarnet
O
OH
HO
HO
P
O
O
P
HO
HO
O
P
O
OH
HO
N
N
N
N
O
O
Stavudine (d4T)
HO
N
NH
O
O
Zalcitabine (ddC)
HO
N
N
O
O
O
O
Didanosine (ddl)
Adefovir
Entecavir
HO
N
NH
N
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
Abacavir
Tenofovir disoproxil
Emtricitabine
OH
N
N
NH
N
N
N
NH
O
N
N
N
N
O
O
N
NH2
CH2
H2N
O
O
OH
N
F
S
O
Lamivudine (3TC)
OH
N
N
S
HO
H2N
O
N
N
N
NH
NH2
O
Valganciclovir (prodrug)
O
O
HO
HO
 FIGURE 49–2  Chemical structures of some antiviral nucleoside and nucleotide analogs. 
864    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
frequency of symptomatic recurrences and of asymptomatic viral 
shedding, thus decreasing the rate of sexual transmission. However, 
outbreaks may resume upon discontinuation of suppressive 
 acyclovir. Oral acyclovir is only modestly beneficial in recurrent 
herpes labialis. In contrast, acyclovir therapy significantly decreases 
the total number of lesions, duration of symptoms, and viral shed-
ding in patients with varicella (if begun within 24 hours after the 
onset of rash) or cutaneous zoster (if begun within 72 hours). 
However, because VZV is less susceptible to acyclovir than HSV, 
higher doses are required ( Table 49–1 ). When given prophylacti-
cally to patients undergoing organ transplantation, oral or intrave-
nous acyclovir prevents reactivation of HSV infection. Evidence 
from recent clinical trials suggests that the use of daily acyclovir 
(400 mg twice daily) may reduce the plasma viral load of HIV-1 
and the risk of HIV-associated disease progression in individuals 
dually infected with HSV-2 and HIV-1. 
 Intravenous acyclovir is the treatment of choice for herpes 
simplex encephalitis, neonatal HSV infection, and serious HSV or 
VZV infections ( Table 49–1 ). In immunocompromised patients 
with VZV infection, intravenous acyclovir reduces the incidence 
of cutaneous and visceral dissemination. 
 Topical acyclovir cream is substantially less effective than oral 
therapy for primary HSV infection. It is of no benefit in treating 
recurrent genital herpes. 
 Resistance to acyclovir can develop in HSV or VZV through 
alteration in either the viral thymidine kinase or the DNA 
 polymerase, and clinically resistant infections have been reported in 
immunocompromised hosts. Most clinical isolates are resistant on 
the basis of deficient thymidine kinase activity and thus are cross-
resistant to valacyclovir, famciclovir, and ganciclovir. Agents such as 
foscarnet, cidofovir, and trifluridine do not require activation by 
viral thymidine kinase and thus have preserved activity against the 
most prevalent acyclovir-resistant strains ( Figure 49–3 ). 
 Acyclovir is generally well tolerated. Nausea, diarrhea, and 
headache have occasionally been reported. Intravenous infusion 
may be associated with reversible renal toxicity (ie, crystalline 
nephropathy or interstitial nephritis) or neurologic effects (eg, 
tremors, delirium, seizures). However, these are uncommon with 
adequate hydration and avoidance of rapid infusion rates. High 
doses of acyclovir cause chromosomal damage and testicular 
 atrophy in rats, but there has been no evidence of teratogenicity, 
reduction in sperm production, or cytogenetic alterations in 
peripheral blood lymphocytes in patients receiving daily suppres-
sion of genital herpes for more than 10 years. A recent study found 
no evidence of increased birth defects in 1150 infants who were 
exposed to acyclovir during the first trimester. 
 Concurrent use of nephrotoxic agents may enhance the poten-
tial for nephrotoxicity. Probenecid and cimetidine decrease acyclo-
vir clearance and increase exposure. Somnolence and lethargy may 
occur in patients receiving concomitant zidovudine and acyclovir. 
 VALACYCLOVIR 
 Valacyclovir is the L-valyl ester of acyclovir ( Figure 49–2 ). It is 
rapidly converted to acyclovir after oral administration via first-
pass enzymatic hydrolysis in the liver and intestine, resulting in 
serum levels that are three to five times greater than those achieved 
with oral acyclovir and approximate those achieved with intrave-
nous acyclovir. Oral bioavailability is 54–70%, and cerebrospinal 
fluid levels are about 50% of those in serum. Elimination half-life 
is 2.5–3.3 hours. 
 Approved uses of valacyclovir include treatment of first 
or recurrent genital herpes, suppression of frequently recurring 
genital herpes, as a 1-day treatment for orolabial herpes, and as 
treatment for varicella and herpes zoster ( Table 49–1 ). Once-daily 
dosing of valacyclovir for chronic suppression in persons with 
recurrent genital herpes has been shown to markedly decrease the 
risk of sexual transmission. In comparative trials with acyclovir for 
the treatment of patients with zoster, rates of cutaneous healing 
were similar, but valacyclovir was associated with a shorter dura-
tion of zoster-associated pain. Higher doses of valacyclovir (2 g 
four times daily) have also been shown to be effective in prevent-
ing CMV disease after organ transplantation when compared with 
placebo. 
 Valacyclovir is generally well tolerated, although nausea, 
headache, vomiting, or rash occasionally occur. At high doses, 
confusion, hallucinations, and seizures have been reported. 
AIDS patients who received high-dosage valacyclovir chronically 
(ie, 8 g/d) had an increased incidence of gastrointestinal intoler-
ance as well as thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and 
hemolytic-uremic syndrome; this dose has also been associated 
with confusion and hallucinations in transplant patients. In a 
recent study, there was no evidence of increased birth defects in 
181 infants who were exposed to valacyclovir during the first 
trimester. 
Foscarnet
Acyclovir
penciclovir
ganciclovir
Trifluridine
cidofovir
Monophosphate
Diphosphate
Competitive inhibition
of viral DNA polymerase
Triphosphate
Host
kinases
Inhibition of viral 
DNA synthesis
Incorporation into
viral DNA
Virus-specified
enzymes
(eg, thymidine
kinase, UL97)
Chain
termination
 FIGURE 49–3  Mechanism of action of antiherpes agents. 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    865
TABLE 49–1 Agents to treat or prevent herpes simplex virus (HSV) and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infections.
Route of 
Administration
Use
Recommended Adult Dosage and Regimen
Acyclovir1
Oral
First episode genital herpes treatment
400 mg tid or 200 mg 5 times daily × 7–10 days
Recurrent genital herpes treatment
400 mg tid or 200 mg 5 times daily or 800 mg 
bid × 3–5 days or 800 mg tid × 2 days
Genital herpes in the HIV-infected 
host treatment
400 mg 3–5 times daily × 5–10 days
Genital herpes suppression in the 
HIV-infected host
400–800 mg bid–tid
Herpes proctitis treatment
400 mg 5 times daily until healed
Orolabial herpes treatment
400 mg 5 times daily × 5 days
Varicella treatment (age ≥ 2 years)
800 mg qid × 5 days
Zoster treatment
800 mg 5 times daily × 7–10 days
Intravenous
Severe HSV treatment
5 mg/kg q8h × 7–10 days
Mucocutaneous herpes in the 
immunocompromised host treatment
10 mg/kg q8h × 7–14 days
Herpes encephalitis treatment
10–15 mg/kg q8h × 14–21 days
Neonatal HSV infection treatment
10–20 mg/kg q8h × 14–21 days
Varicella or zoster in the immunosuppressed 
host treatment
10 mg/kg q8h × 7 days
Topical (5% cream)
Herpes labialis treatment
Thin film covering lesion 5 times daily × 4 days
Famciclovir1
Oral
First episode genital herpes treatment
500 mg tid × 5–10 days
Recurrent genital herpes treatment
1000 mg bid × 1 day
Genital herpes in the HIV-infected host treatment
500 mg bid × 5–10 days
Genital herpes suppression
250 mg bid
Genital herpes suppression in the 
HIV-infected host
500 mg bid
Orolabial herpes treatment
1500 mg once
Orolabial or genital herpes suppression
250-500 mg bid
Zoster
500 mg tid × 7 days
Valacyclovir1
Oral
First episode genital herpes treatment
1000 mg bid × 10 days
Recurrent genital herpes treatment
500 mg bid × 3 days
Genital herpes in the HIV-infected 
host treatment
500–1000 mg bid × 5–10 days
Genital herpes suppression
500–1000 mg once daily
Genital herpes suppression in the HIV-infected host
500 mg bid
Orolabial herpes
2000 mg bid × 1 day
Varicella (age ≥ 12 years)
20 mg/d tid × 5 days (maximum, 1 g tid)
Zoster
1 g tid × 7 days
Foscarnet1
Intravenous
Acyclovir-resistant HSV and VZV infections
40 mg/kg q8h until healed
Docosanol
Topical (10% cream)
Recurrent herpes labialis
Thin film covering lesion q2h × 4 days
Penciclovir
Topical (1% cream)
Herpes labialis or herpes genitalis
Thin film covering lesions q2h × 4 days
Trifluridine
Topical (1% solution)
Acyclovir-resistant HSV infection
Thin film covering lesion 5 times daily until 
healed
1Dosage must be reduced in patients with renal insufficiency.
HSV, herpes simplex virus; VZV, varicella-zoster virus.
866    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 FAMCICLOVIR 
 Famciclovir is the diacetyl ester prodrug of 6-deoxypenciclovir, an 
acyclic guanosine analog ( Figure 49–2 ). After oral administration, 
famciclovir is rapidly deacetylated and oxidized by first-pass metabo-
lism to penciclovir. It is active in vitro against HSV-1, HSV-2, VZV, 
EBV, and HBV. As with acyclovir, activation by phosphorylation is 
catalyzed by the virus-specified thymidine kinase in infected cells, 
followed by competitive inhibition of the viral DNA polymerase to 
block DNA synthesis. Unlike acyclovir, however, penciclovir does 
not cause chain termination. Penciclovir triphosphate has lower 
affinity for the viral DNA polymerase than acyclovir triphosphate, 
but it achieves higher intracellular concentrations. The most com-
monly encountered clinical mutants of HSV are thymidine kinase-
deficient; these are cross-resistant to acyclovir and famciclovir. 
 The bioavailability of penciclovir from orally administered 
famciclovir is 70%. The intracellular half-life of penciclovir 
triphosphate is prolonged, at 7–20 hours. Penciclovir is excreted 
primarily in the urine. 
 Oral famciclovir is effective for the treatment of first and recur-
rent genital herpes, for chronic daily suppression of genital herpes, 
for treatment of herpes labialis, and for the treatment of acute 
zoster ( Table 49–1 ). One-day usage of famciclovir significantly 
accelerates time to healing of recurrent genital herpes and of herpes 
labialis. Comparison of famciclovir to valacyclovir for treatment of 
herpes zoster in immunocompetent patients showed similar rates of 
cutaneous healing and pain resolution; both agents shortened the 
duration of zoster-associated pain compared with acyclovir. 
 Oral famciclovir is generally well tolerated, although headache, 
nausea, or diarrhea may occur. As with acyclovir, testicular toxicity 
has been demonstrated in animals receiving repeated doses. 
However, men receiving daily famciclovir (250 mg every 12 hours) 
for 18 weeks had no changes in sperm morphology or motility. In 
a recent study, there was no evidence of increased birth defects in 
32 infants who were exposed to famciclovir during the first trimes-
ter. The incidence of mammary adenocarcinoma was increased in 
female rats receiving famciclovir for 2 years. 
 PENCICLOVIR 
 The guanosine analog penciclovir, the active metabolite of famci-
clovir, is available for topical use. Penciclovir cream (1%) shortens 
the duration of recurrent herpes labialis or genitalis ( Table 49–1 ). 
When applied within 1 hour of the onset of prodromal symptoms 
and continued every 2 hours during waking hours for 4 days, 
median time until healing was shortened by 17 hours compared 
with placebo. Adverse effects are uncommon, although applica-
tion site reactions occur in about 1% of patients. 
 DOCOSANOL 
 Docosanol is a saturated 22-carbon aliphatic alcohol that inhibits 
fusion between the plasma membrane and the HSV envelope, 
thereby preventing viral entry into cells and subsequent viral 
 replication. Topical docosanol 10% cream is available without a 
prescription; application site reactions occur in approximately 2% of 
patients. When applied within 12 hours of the onset of prodromal 
symptoms, five times daily, median healing time was shortened by 
18 hours compared with placebo in recurrent orolabial herpes. 
 TRIFLURIDINE 
 Trifluridine (trifluorothymidine) is a fluorinated pyrimidine 
nucleoside that inhibits viral DNA synthesis in HSV-1, HSV-2, 
CMV, vaccinia, and some adenoviruses. It is phosphorylated intra-
cellularly by host cell enzymes, and then competes with thymidine 
triphosphate for incorporation by the viral DNA polymerase 
( Figure 49–3 ). Incorporation of trifluridine triphosphate into 
both viral and host DNA prevents its systemic use. Application of 
a 1% solution is effective in treating keratoconjunctivitis and 
recurrent epithelial keratitis due to HSV-1 or HSV-2. Cutaneous 
application of trifluridine solution, alone or in combination with 
interferon alfa, has been used successfully in the treatment of 
acyclovir-resistant HSV infections. 
 INVESTIGATIONAL AGENTS 
 Valomaciclovir is an inhibitor of the viral DNA polymerase; it is 
currently under clinical evaluation for the treatment of patients 
with acute VZV infection (shingles) and acute EBV infection 
(infectious mononucleosis). 
 ■ AGENTS TO TREAT 
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS CMV 
INFECTIONS 
 CMV infections occur primarily in the setting of advanced immu-
nosuppression and are typically due to reactivation of latent infec-
tion. Dissemination of infection results in end-organ disease, 
including retinitis, colitis, esophagitis, central nervous system 
disease, and pneumonitis. Although the incidence in HIV-infected 
patients has markedly decreased with the advent of potent anti-
retroviral therapy, clinical reactivation of CMV infection after 
organ transplantation is still prevalent. 
 The availability of oral valganciclovir and the ganciclovir intraoc-
ular implant has decreased the use of intravenous ganciclovir, intra-
venous foscarnet, and intravenous cidofovir for the treatment of 
end-organ CMV disease ( Table 49–2 ). Oral valganciclovir has 
largely replaced oral ganciclovir because of its lower pill burden. 
 GANCICLOVIR 
 Ganciclovir is an acyclic guanosine analog ( Figure 49–2 ) that 
requires activation by triphosphorylation before inhibiting the 
viral DNA polymerase. Initial phosphorylation is catalyzed by 
the virus-specified protein kinase phosphotransferase UL97 in 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    867
CMV-infected cells. The activated compound competitively 
inhibits viral DNA polymerase and causes termination of viral 
DNA elongation ( Figure 49–3 ). Ganciclovir has in vitro activity 
against CMV, HSV, VZV, EBV, HHV-6, and HHV-8. Its activity 
against CMV is up to 100 times greater than that of acyclovir. 
 Ganciclovir may be administered intravenously, orally, or via 
intraocular implant. The bioavailability of oral ganciclovir is poor. 
Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are approximately 50% of 
serum concentrations. The elimination half-life is 4 hours, and the 
intracellular half-life is prolonged at 16–24 hours. Clearance of 
the drug is linearly related to creatinine clearance. Ganciclovir is 
readily cleared by hemodialysis. 
 Intravenous ganciclovir has been shown to delay progression of 
CMV retinitis in patients with AIDS. Dual therapy with foscarnet 
and ganciclovir is more effective in delaying progression of retinitis 
than either drug alone (see Foscarnet), although adverse effects are 
compounded. Intravenous ganciclovir is also used to treat CMV 
colitis, esophagitis, and pneumonitis (the latter often treated with 
a combination of ganciclovir and intravenous cytomegalovirus 
immunoglobulin) in immunocompromised patients. Intravenous 
ganciclovir, followed by either oral ganciclovir or high-dose oral 
acyclovir, reduces the risk of CMV infection in transplant recipi-
ents. Oral ganciclovir is indicated for prevention of end-organ 
CMV disease in AIDS patients and as maintenance therapy of 
CMV retinitis after induction. Although less effective than intrave-
nous ganciclovir, the oral form carries a diminished risk of myelo-
suppression and of catheter-related complications. The risk of 
Kaposi’s sarcoma is reduced in AIDS patients receiving long-term 
ganciclovir, presumably because of activity against HHV-8. 
 Ganciclovir may also be administered intraocularly to treat 
CMV retinitis, either by direct intravitreal injection or by intraoc-
ular implant. The implant has been shown to delay progression of 
retinitis to a greater degree than systemic ganciclovir therapy. 
Surgical replacement of the implant is required at intervals of 
5–8 months. Concurrent therapy with a systemic anti-CMV agent 
is recommended to prevent other sites of end-organ CMV disease. 
 Resistance to ganciclovir increases with duration of usage. The 
more common mutation, in UL97, results in decreased levels of 
the triphosphorylated (ie, active) form of ganciclovir. The less 
common UL54 mutation in DNA polymerase results in higher 
levels of resistance and potential cross-resistance with cidofovir 
and foscarnet. Antiviral susceptibility testing is recommended in 
patients in whom resistance is suspected clinically, as is the substi-
tution of alternative therapies and concomitant reduction in 
immunosuppressive therapies, if possible. The addition of CMV 
hyperimmune globulin may also be considered. 
 The most common adverse effect of systemic ganciclovir treat-
ment, particularly after intravenous administration, is myelosup-
pression. Myelosuppression may be additive in patients receiving 
concurrent zidovudine, azathioprine, or mycophenolate mofetil. 
Other potential adverse effects are nausea, diarrhea, fever, rash, 
headache, insomnia, and peripheral neuropathy. Central nervous 
system toxicity (confusion, seizures, psychiatric disturbance) and 
hepatotoxicity have been rarely reported. Ganciclovir is mutagenic 
in mammalian cells and carcinogenic and embryotoxic at high 
doses in animals and causes aspermatogenesis; the clinical signifi-
cance of these preclinical data is unclear. 
 Levels of ganciclovir may rise in patients concurrently taking 
probenecid or trimethoprim. Concurrent use of ganciclovir with 
didanosine may result in increased levels of didanosine. 
 VALGANCICLOVIR 
 Valganciclovir is an L-valyl ester prodrug of ganciclovir that exists 
as a mixture of two diastereomers ( Figure 49–2 ). After oral admin-
istration, both diastereomers are rapidly hydrolyzed to ganciclovir 
by esterases in the intestinal wall and liver. 
TABLE 49–2 Agents to treat cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.
Agent
Route of 
Administration
Use
Recommended Adult Dosage1
Valganciclovir
Oral
CMV retinitis treatment
Induction: 900 mg bid × 21 days
Maintenance: 900 mg daily
Oral
CMV prophylaxis (transplant patients)
900 mg daily
Ganciclovir
Intravenous
CMV retinitis treatment
Induction: 5 mg/kg q12h × 14–21 days
Maintenance: 5 mg/kg/d or 6 mg/kg 
five times per week
Oral
CMV prophylaxis
1 g tid
CMV retinitis treatment
1 g tid
Intraocular implant
CMV retinitis treatment
4.5 mg every 5–8 months
Foscarnet
Intravenous
CMV retinitis treatment
Induction: 60 mg/kg q8h or 90 mg/kg 
q12h × 14–21 days
Maintenance: 90–120 mg/kg/d
Cidofovir
Intravenous
CMV retinitis treatment
Induction: 5 mg/kg/wk × 2 weeks 
Maintenance: 5 mg/kg every week
1Dosage must be reduced in patients with renal insufficiency.
868    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Valganciclovir is well absorbed and rapidly metabolized in the 
intestinal wall and liver to ganciclovir; no other metabolites have 
been detected. The bioavailability of oral valganciclovir is 60%; it 
is recommended that the drug be taken with food. The AUC 0–24h 
resulting from valganciclovir (900 mg once daily) is similar to that 
after 5 mg/kg once daily of intravenous ganciclovir and approxi-
mately 1.65 times that of oral ganciclovir. The major route of 
elimination is renal, through glomerular filtration and active 
tubular secretion. Plasma concentrations of valganciclovir are 
reduced approximately 50% by hemodialysis. 
 Valganciclovir is indicated for the treatment of CMV retinitis 
in patients with AIDS and for the prevention of CMV disease in 
high-risk kidney, heart, and kidney-pancreas transplant patients. 
Adverse effects, drug interactions, and resistance patterns are the 
same as those associated with ganciclovir. 
 FOSCARNET 
 Foscarnet (phosphonoformic acid) is an inorganic pyrophosphate 
analog ( Figure 49–2 ) that inhibits herpesvirus DNA polymerase, 
RNA polymerase, and HIV reverse transcriptase directly without 
requiring activation by phosphorylation. Foscarnet blocks the 
pyrophosphate binding site of these enzymes and inhibits cleavage 
of pyrophosphate from deoxynucleotide triphosphates. It has in 
vitro activity against HSV, VZV, CMV, EBV, HHV-6, HHV-8, 
HIV-1, and HIV-2. 
 Foscarnet is available in an intravenous formulation only; poor 
oral bioavailability and gastrointestinal intolerance preclude oral 
use. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are 43–67% of steady-
state serum concentrations. Although the mean plasma half-life is 
3–7 hours, up to 30% of foscarnet may be deposited in bone, with 
a half-life of several months. The clinical repercussions of this are 
unknown. Clearance of foscarnet is primarily renal and is directly 
proportional to creatinine clearance. Serum drug concentrations 
are reduced approximately 50% by hemodialysis. 
 Foscarnet is effective in the treatment of CMV retinitis, CMV 
colitis, CMV esophagitis, acyclovir-resistant HSV infection, and 
acyclovir-resistant VZV infection. The dosage of foscarnet must 
be titrated according to the patient’s calculated creatinine clear-
ance before each infusion. Use of an infusion pump to control the 
rate of infusion is important to prevent toxicity, and large 
 volumes of fluid are required because of the drug’s poor solubility. 
The combination of ganciclovir and foscarnet is synergistic in 
vitro against CMV and has been shown to be superior to either 
agent alone in delaying progression of retinitis; however, toxicity 
is also increased when these agents are administered concurrently. 
As with ganciclovir, a decrease in the incidence of Kaposi’s 
 sarcoma has been observed in patients who have received long-
term foscarnet. 
 Foscarnet has been administered intravitreally for the treat-
ment of CMV retinitis in patients with AIDS, but data regarding 
efficacy and safety are incomplete. 
 Resistance to foscarnet in HSV and CMV isolates is due to 
point mutations in the DNA polymerase gene and is typically 
associated with prolonged or repeated exposure to the drug. 
Mutations in the HIV-1 reverse transcriptase gene have also been 
described. Although foscarnet-resistant CMV isolates are typically 
cross-resistant to ganciclovir, foscarnet activity is usually main-
tained against ganciclovir- and cidofovir-resistant isolates of 
CMV. 
 Potential adverse effects of foscarnet include renal impairment, 
hypo- or hypercalcemia, hypo- or hyperphosphatemia, hypokalemia, 
and hypomagnesemia. Saline preloading helps prevent nephrotox-
icity, as does avoidance of concomitant administration of drugs 
with nephrotoxic potential (eg, amphotericin B, pentamidine, 
aminoglycosides). The risk of severe hypocalcemia, caused by 
chelation of divalent cations, is increased with concomitant use of 
pentamidine. Genital ulcerations associated with foscarnet therapy 
may be due to high levels of ionized drug in the urine. Nausea, 
vomiting, anemia, elevation of liver enzymes, and fatigue have been 
reported; the risk of anemia may be additive in patients receiving 
concurrent zidovudine. Central nervous system toxicity includes 
headache, hallucinations, and seizures; the risk of seizures may 
be increased with concurrent use of imipenem. Foscarnet caused 
chromosomal damage in preclinical studies. 
 CIDOFOVIR 
 Cidofovir ( Figure 49–2 ) is a cytosine nucleotide analog with in 
vitro activity against CMV, HSV-1, HSV-2, VZV, EBV, HHV-6, 
HHV-8, adenovirus, poxviruses, polyomaviruses, and human 
papillomavirus. In contrast to ganciclovir, phosphorylation of 
cidofovir to the active diphosphate is independent of viral enzymes 
( Figure 49–3 ); thus activity is maintained against thymidine 
kinase-deficient or -altered strains of CMV or HSV. Cidofovir 
diphosphate acts both as a potent inhibitor of and as an alternative 
substrate for viral DNA polymerase, competitively inhibiting 
DNA synthesis and becoming incorporated into the viral DNA 
chain. Cidofovir-resistant isolates tend to be cross-resistant with 
ganciclovir but retain susceptibility to foscarnet. 
 Although the terminal half-life of cidofovir is approximately 
2.6 hours, the active metabolite cidofovir diphosphate, has a pro-
longed intracellular half-life of 17–65 hours, thus allowing infre-
quent dosing. A separate metabolite, cidofovir phosphocholine, 
has a half-life of at least 87 hours and may serve as an intracellular 
reservoir of active drug. Cerebrospinal fluid penetration is poor. 
Elimination is by active renal tubular secretion. High-flux hemo-
dialysis reduces serum levels of cidofovir by approximately 75%. 
 Intravenous cidofovir is effective for the treatment of CMV 
retinitis and is used experimentally to treat adenovirus, human 
papillomavirus, and poxvirus infections. Intravenous cidofovir 
must be administered with high-dose probenecid (2 g at 3 hours 
before the infusion and 1 g at 2 and 8 hours after), which blocks 
active tubular secretion and decreases nephrotoxicity. Before each 
infusion, cidofovir dosage must be adjusted for alterations in the 
calculated creatinine clearance or for the presence of urine protein, 
and aggressive adjunctive hydration is required. Initiation of 
 cidofovir therapy is contraindicated in patients with existing renal 
insufficiency. Direct intravitreal administration of cidofovir is not 
recommended because of ocular toxicity. 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    869
 The primary adverse effect of intravenous cidofovir is a dose-
dependent proximal tubular nephrotoxicity, which may be reduced 
with prehydration using normal saline. Proteinuria, azotemia, 
metabolic acidosis, and Fanconi’s syndrome may occur. Concurrent 
administration of other potentially nephrotoxic agents (eg, ampho-
tericin B, aminoglycosides, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 
pentamidine, foscarnet) should be avoided. Prior administration 
of foscarnet may increase the risk of nephrotoxicity. Other poten-
tial adverse effects include uveitis, ocular hypotony, and neutrope-
nia (15–24%). Concurrent probenecid use may result in other 
toxicities or drug-drug interactions (see  Chapter 36 ). Cidofovir is 
mutagenic, gonadotoxic, and embryotoxic, and caused mammary 
adenocarcinomas in rats. 
 ■ ANTIRETROVIRAL AGENTS 
 Substantial advances have been made in antiretroviral therapy since 
the introduction of the first agent, zidovudine, in 1987 
( Table 49–3 ). Greater knowledge of viral dynamics through the use 
of viral load and resistance testing has made it clear that combina-
tion therapy with maximally potent agents will reduce viral replica-
tion to the lowest possible level and decrease the likelihood of 
emergence of resistance. Thus, administration of combination 
antiretroviral therapy, typically comprising at least three antiretro-
viral agents, has become the standard of care. Viral susceptibility to 
specific agents varies among patients and may change with time, 
owing to development of resistance. Therefore, such combinations 
must be chosen with care and tailored to the individual, as must 
changes to a given regimen. In addition to potency and susceptibil-
ity, important factors in the selection of agents for any given patient 
are tolerability, convenience, and optimization of adherence. 
 The retroviral genomic RNA serves as the template for synthe-
sis of a double-stranded DNA copy, the provirus ( Figure 49–4 ). 
Synthesis of the provirus is mediated by a virus-encoded RNA-
dependent DNA polymerase, or “reverse transcriptase.” The 
 provirus is translocated to the nucleus and integrated into host 
DNA. Transcription of this integrated DNA is regulated primarily 
by cellular machinery. 
 Six classes of antiretroviral agents are currently available for use: 
nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), 
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs), protease 
inhibitors (PIs), fusion inhibitors, CCR5 receptor antagonists, and 
integrase inhibitors. As new agents have become available, several 
older ones have had diminished usage, because of either suboptimal 
safety profile or inferior antiviral potency. It is important to recog-
nize that the high rate of mutation of HIV-1 per replication cycle 
results in a great potential for genotypic variation. Genotypic resis-
tance has been reported for each of the antiretroviral agents cur-
rently in use. Treatment that slows or stops replication is critical in 
reducing the number of cumulative mutations, as is the use of 
combinations of agents with differing susceptibility patterns. 
 Discussion of antiretroviral agents in this chapter is specific to 
HIV-1. It should be noted that in vitro susceptibility of HIV-2 to 
the NRTIs is similar to that of HIV-1, albeit with a lower genetic 
barrier to resistance. There is innate resistance of HIV-2 to the 
NNRTIs, due to a different structure of the reverse transcriptases’ 
NNRTI binding pockets; enfuvirtide (see below) has no activity 
against HIV-2. Data on the activity of PI agents and maraviroc 
against HIV-2 are sparse and inconclusive. 
 NUCLEOSIDE & NUCLEOTIDE 
REVERSE TRANSCRIPTASE 
INHIBITORS 
 The NRTIs act by competitive inhibition of HIV-1 reverse tran-
scriptase; incorporation into the growing viral DNA chain causes 
premature chain termination due to inhibition of binding with 
the incoming nucleotide ( Figure 49–4 ). Each agent requires intra-
cytoplasmic activation via phosphorylation by cellular enzymes to 
the triphosphate form. 
 Typical resistance mutations include M184V, L74V, D67N, 
and M41L. Lamivudine or emtricitabine therapy tends to select 
rapidly for the M184V mutation in regimens that are not fully 
suppressive. While the M184V mutation confers reduced suscep-
tibility to abacavir, didanosine, and zalcitabine, its presence may 
restore phenotypic susceptibility to zidovudine. The K65R muta-
tion is associated with reduced susceptibility to tenofovir, abacavir, 
lamivudine, and emtricitabine. 
 All NRTIs may be associated with mitochondrial toxicity, prob-
ably owing to inhibition of mitochondrial DNA polymerase 
gamma. Less commonly, lactic acidosis with hepatic steatosis may 
occur, which can be fatal. NRTI treatment should be suspended in 
the setting of rapidly rising aminotransferase levels, progressive 
hepatomegaly, or metabolic acidosis of unknown cause. The thymi-
dine analogs zidovudine and stavudine may be particularly associ-
ated with dyslipidemia and insulin resistance. Also, some evidence 
suggests an increased risk of myocardial infarction in patients 
receiving abacavir or didanosine; this bears further investigation. 
 ABACAVIR 
 Abacavir is a guanosine analog ( Figure 49–2 ) that is well absorbed 
following oral administration (83%) and is unaffected by food. 
The serum half-life is 1.5 hours. The drug undergoes hepatic 
glucuronidation and carboxylation. Cerebrospinal fluid levels are 
approximately one third those of plasma. 
 Abacavir is often co-administered with lamivudine, and a once-
daily, fixed-dose combination formulation is available. Abacavir is 
also available in a fixed-dose combination with lamivudine and 
zidovudine. 
 High-level resistance to abacavir appears to require at least two 
or three concomitant mutations and thus tends to develop 
slowly. 
 Hypersensitivity reactions, occasionally fatal, have been 
reported in up to 8% of patients receiving abacavir and may be 
more severe in association with once-daily dosing. Symptoms, 
which generally occur within the first 6 weeks of therapy, include 
fever, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. 
870    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
TABLE 49–3 Currently available antiretroviral agents.
Agent
Class of 
Agent
Recommended 
Adult Dosage
Administration 
Recommendation
Characteristic 
Adverse Effects
Comments
Abacavir
NRTI1
300 mg bid or 
600 mg qd
Testing to rule out the 
presence of the HLA-
B5701 allele is recom-
mended prior to the 
initiation of therapy
Rash, hypersensitivity 
reaction, nausea. Possible 
increase in myocardial 
infarction
Avoid alcohol
Atazanavir
PI2
400 mg qd or 300 mg qd 
with ritonavir 
100 mg qd. Adjust dose 
in hepatic insufficiency
Take with food. Separate 
dosing from ddI or 
antacids by 1 h. Separate 
dosing from cimetidine 
and other acid-reducing 
agents by 12 h
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, headache, 
peripheral neuropathy, skin 
rash, indirect hyperbiliru-
binemia, prolonged PR 
and/or QTc interval
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Also 
avoid etravirine, fosampre-
navir, nevirapine, and proton 
pump inhibitors. Avoid in 
severe hepatic insufficiency
Darunavir
PI2
Treatment- experienced: 
600 mg bid with ritona-
vir 100 mg bid. 
Treatment-naïve: 
800 mg qd with 
ritonavir 100 mg qd. 
Tablets can be 
 dissolved in water
Take with food
Diarrhea, headache, nausea, 
rash, hyperlipidemia, ↑ liver 
enzymes, ↑ serum amylase
Avoid in patients with sulfa 
allergy. See footnote 4 for 
contraindicated medications
Delavirdine
NNRTI
400 mg tid
Separate dosing from ddI 
or antacids by 1 h
Rash, ↑ liver enzymes, 
headache, nausea, diarrhea
See footnote 4 for contra-
indicated medications. Also 
avoid concurrent fosampre-
navir and rifabutin. 
Teratogenic in rats
Didanosine (ddI)
NRTI1
Tablets, 400 mg qd or 
200 mg bid,3 adjusted 
for weight. Buffered 
powder, 250 mg bid3
30 min before or 2 h after 
meals. Separate dosing 
from fluoroquinolones 
and tetracyclines by 2 h
Peripheral neuropathy, 
pancreatitis, diarrhea, 
 nausea, hyperuricemia. 
Possible increase in 
 myocardial infarction
Avoid concurrent neuro-
pathic drugs (eg, stavudine, 
zalcitabine, isoniazid), ribavi-
rin, and alcohol. Do not 
administer with tenofovir
Efavirenz
NNRTI
600 mg qd
Take on an empty stom-
ach. Bedtime dosing 
 recommended initially to 
minimize central nervous 
system side effects
Central nervous system 
effects, rash, ↑ liver 
enzymes, headache, nausea
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. 
Teratogenic in primates
Emtricitabine
NRTI1
200 mg qd.3 Tablets can 
be dissolved in water
Oral solution should be 
refrigerated
Headache, diarrhea, 
nausea, asthenia, skin 
hyperpigmentation
Do not administer concur-
rent lamivudine. Avoid disul-
firam and metronidazole 
with oral solution
Enfuvirtide
Fusion 
inhibitor
90 mg subcutaneously 
bid
Store at room 
temperature as a powder; 
refrigerate once 
 reconstituted
Local injection site 
reactions, hypersensitivity 
reaction
Etravirine
NNRTI
200 mg bid
Take after a meal; do 
not take on an empty 
stomach
Rash, nausea, diarrhea
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Do not 
administer with other 
NNRTIs, indinavir, atazanavir-
ritonavir, fosamprenavir- 
ritonavir, tipranavir-ritonavir, 
or any unboosted PI
Fosamprenavir
PI2
1400 mg bid or 700 mg 
bid with ritonavir 
100 mg bid or 1400 mg 
daily with ritonavir 
100–200 mg qd. 
Adjust dose in hepatic 
insufficiency
Separate dosing from 
antacids or didanosine by 
≥ 1 h. Avoid concurrent 
high-fat meals
Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, 
hypertriglyceridemia, rash, 
headache, perioral 
 paresthesias, ↑ liver enzymes
See footnote 4 for contraindi-
cated medications. Do not 
administer with etravirine; do 
not administer with lopinavir/
ritonavir or in severe hepatic 
insufficiency. Also avoid 
cimetidine, disulfiram, 
metronidazole, vitamin E, rito-
navir oral solution, and alcohol 
when using the oral solution
(continued )
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    871
Indinavir
PI2
800 mg tid or 800 mg 
bid with ritonavir 
100–200 mg bid. Adjust 
dose in hepatic 
insufficiency
Best on an empty stomach. 
Drink at least 48 oz liquid 
daily. Separate dosing from 
ddI by 1 h. Store in original 
container, which contains 
desiccant
Nephrolithiasis, nausea, 
indirect hyperbilirubinemia, 
headache, asthenia, blurred 
vision
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Do not 
administer with etravirine
Lamivudine
NRTI1
150 mg bid or 300 mg 
qd3
Nausea, headache, 
 dizziness, fatigue
Do not administer with 
zalcitabine
Lopinavir/ritonavir
PI/PI2
Treatment-experienced: 
400 mg/100 mg bid. 
Treatment-naïve: 
800 mg/200 mg qd. 
May need dose 
adjustment in hepatic 
insufficiency
Take with food. Separate 
dosing from ddI by 
1 h. Store capsules and 
solution in refrigerator
Diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
nausea, hypertriglyceri-
demia, headache, ↑ liver 
enzymes
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Also 
avoid fosamprenavir. Avoid 
disulfiram and metronida-
zole with oral solution
Maraviroc
CCR5 
inhibitor
300 mg bid; 150 bid 
with CYP3A inhibitors; 
600 mg bid with CYP3A 
inducers3
Muscle and joint pain, 
 diarrhea, sleep disturbance, 
↑ liver enzymes
See footnote 4 for 
medications that must be 
co-administered with 
 caution. Avoid rifampin
Nelfinavir
PI2
750 mg tid or 
1250 mg bid
Take with food
Diarrhea, nausea, flatulence
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Do not 
administer with etravirine
Nevirapine
NNRTI
200 mg bid. Adjust 
dose in hepatic 
 insufficiency
Dose-escalate from 
200 mg daily over 14 days 
to decrease frequency of 
rash
Rash, hepatitis (occasionally 
fulminant), nausea, 
 headache
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Do not 
administer with atazanavir
Raltegravir
Integrase 
inhibitor
400 mg bid. Increase 
dose to 800 mg bid if 
administered with 
rifampin
Separate dosing from 
 antacids by ≥ 4 h
Diarrhea, nausea, fatigue, 
headache, dizziness, muscle 
aches, ↑ creatine kinase
Avoid rifampin
Ritonavir
PI2
600 mg bid
Take with food. Separate 
dosing with ddI by 2 h. 
Dose-escalate from 
300 mg bid over 1–2 weeks 
to improve tolerance. 
Refrigerate capsules but 
not oral solution
Nausea, diarrhea, 
 paresthesias, hepatitis
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Avoid 
disulfiram and metronida-
zole with oral solution
Saquinavir
PI2
1000 mg bid with 
ritonavir 100 mg bid
Take within 2 h of a full 
meal. Refrigeration 
recommended
Nausea, diarrhea, rhinitis, 
abdominal pain, dyspepsia, 
rash
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Avoid 
in severe hepatic insuffi-
ciency. Use sunscreen owing 
to an increase in photosen-
sitivity. Avoid concomitant 
garlic capsules
Stavudine
NRTI1
30–40 mg bid, 
depending on weight3
Peripheral neuropathy, 
 lipodystrophy, hyperlipidemia, 
rapidly progressive 
 ascending neuromuscular 
 weakness (rare), pancreatitis
Avoid concurrent zidovu-
dine and neuropathic 
drugs (eg, ddI, zalcitabine, 
isoniazid)
Tenofovir
NRTI1
300 mg qd3
Take with food
Nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, 
flatulence, headache, renal 
insufficiency
Avoid concurrent atazanavir, 
probenecid, didanosine
Tipranavir
PI2
500 mg bid with 
 ritonavir 200 mg bid. 
Avoid use in hepatic 
insufficiency
Take with food. Separate 
from ddI by at least 2 h. 
Avoid antacids. Avoid in 
patients with sulfa allergy. 
Refrigeration required
Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, rash, 
↑ liver enzymes, 
hypercholesterolemia, 
hypertriglyceridemia
See footnote 4 for contrain-
dicated medications. Avoid 
concurrent fosamprenavir, 
saquinavir, etravirine. Do not 
administer to patients at risk 
for bleeding
TABLE 49–3 Currently available antiretroviral agents. (Continued)
Agent
Class of 
Agent
Recommended 
Adult Dosage
Administration 
Recommendation
Characteristic 
Adverse Effects
Comments
(continued )
872    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
Respiratory symptoms such as dyspnea, pharyngitis, and cough 
may also be present, and skin rash occurs in about 50% of 
patients. The laboratory abnormalities of a mildly elevated serum 
aminotransferase or creatine kinase level may be present but are 
nonspecific. Although the syndrome tends to resolve quickly with 
discontinuation of medication, rechallenge with abacavir results in 
return of symptoms within hours and may be fatal. Testing for the 
HLA-B5701 allele before initiation of abacavir therapy is recom-
mended to identify patients with an increased risk for an abacavir-
associated hypersensitivity reaction. Although the positive 
predictive value of this test is only about 50%, it has a negative 
predictive value of approximately 100%. 
 Other potential adverse events are rash, fever, nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, headache, dyspnea, fatigue, and pancreatitis (rare). 
Abacavir should be used cautiously in patients with existing cardiac 
risk factors due to a possible increased risk of myocardial events. 
Since abacavir may lower methadone levels, patients receiving these 
two agents concurrently should be monitored for signs of opioid 
withdrawal and may require an increased dose of methadone. 
 DIDANOSINE 
 Didanosine (ddI) is a synthetic analog of deoxyadenosine 
( Figure 49–2 ). Oral bioavailability is approximately 40%; dosing on 
an empty stomach is optimal, but buffered formulations are neces-
sary to prevent inactivation by gastric acid ( Table 49–3 ). Cerebrospinal 
fluid concentrations of the drug are approximately 20% of serum 
concentrations. Serum half-life is 1.5 hours, but the intracellular 
half-life of the activated compound is as long as 20–24 hours. The 
drug is eliminated by both cellular metabolism and renal excretion. 
 The major clinical toxicity associated with didanosine therapy is 
dose-dependent pancreatitis. Other risk factors for pancreatitis 
(eg, alcohol abuse, hypertriglyceridemia) are relative contraindications, 
and concurrent drugs with the potential to cause pancreatitis, includ-
ing zalcitabine, stavudine, ribavirin, and hydroxyurea, should be 
avoided ( Table 49–3 ). The risk of peripheral distal sensory neuropa-
thy, another potential toxicity, may be increased with concurrent use 
of stavudine, isoniazid, vincristine, or ribavirin. Other reported 
adverse effects include diarrhea (particularly with the buffered formu-
lation), hepatitis, esophageal ulceration, cardiomyopathy, central 
nervous system toxicity (headache, irritability, insomnia), and hyper-
triglyceridemia. Previously asymptomatic hyperuricemia may precipi-
tate attacks of gout in susceptible individuals; concurrent use of 
allopurinol may increase levels of didanosine. Reports of retinal 
changes and optic neuritis in patients receiving didanosine, particularly 
in adults receiving high doses and in children, mandate periodic retinal 
examinations. Lipoatrophy appears to be more common in patients 
receiving didanosine or other thymidine analogs. As with abacavir, 
didanosine should be used cautiously in patients with cardiac risk fac-
tors due to a possibly increased risk of myocardial infarction. 
 The buffer in didanosine tablets and powder interferes with 
absorption of indinavir, delavirdine, atazanavir, dapsone, itracon-
azole, and fluoroquinolone agents; therefore, administration 
should be separated in time. Serum levels of didanosine are 
increased when co-administered with tenofovir or ganciclovir, and 
are decreased by atazanavir, delavirdine, ritonavir, tipranavir, and 
methadone ( Table 49–4 ). 
 EMTRICITABINE 
 Emtricitabine (FTC) is a fluorinated analog of lamivudine with a 
long intracellular half-life (> 24 hours), allowing for once-daily 
dosing ( Figure 49–2 ). Oral bioavailability of the capsules is 93% 
and is unaffected by food, but penetration into the cerebrospinal 
Zalcitabine
NRTI1
0.75 mg tid3
Administer 1 h before or 
2 h after an antacid
Peripheral neuropathy; oral 
ulcerations, pancreatitis, 
headache, nausea, rash, 
arthralgias
Avoid concurrent cimeti-
dine; avoid concurrent 
 neuropathic drugs (eg, ddI, 
stavudine, isoniazid). Do not 
administer with lamivudine
Zidovudine
NRTI1
200 mg tid or 300 mg 
bid3
Macrocytic anemia, neutro-
penia, nausea, headache, 
insomnia, asthenia
Avoid concurrent stavudine 
and myelosuppressive drugs 
(eg, ganciclovir, ribavirin)
1All NRTI agents, including tenofovir, carry the risk of lactic acidosis with hepatic steatosis as a potential adverse event.
2All PI agents, with the possible exception of fosamprenavir, carry the risk of hyperlipidemia, fat maldistribution, hyperglycemia, and insulin resistance as potential adverse 
events.
3Adjust dose in renal insufficiency.
4Because of altered systemic exposures, contraindicated concurrent drugs generally include antiarrhythmics (flecainide, propafenone), antihistamines (astemizole, terfenadine), 
sedative-hypnotics (alprazolam, diazepam, flurazepam, midazolam, triazolam, trazodone, clorazepate), neuroleptics (pimozide), ergot alkaloid derivatives, HMG-CoA reductase 
inhibitors (atorvastatin, simvastatin, lovastatin, rosuvastatin), anticonvulsants (phenobarbital, phenytoin), oral contraceptives (ethinyl estradiol/norethindrone acetate), cisapride, 
rifampin, rifapentine, and St. John’s wort. Drugs that should be used with caution owing to altered levels include amiodarone, bepridil, quinidine, lidocaine, nifedipine, nicar-
dipine, felodipine, sildenafil, vardenafil, tadalafil, warfarin, levodopa, tacrolimus, cyclosporine, rapamycin, voriconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, carbamazepine, desipramine, 
bupropion, dofetilide, fluticasone, atovaquone, dapsone, dexamethasone, methadone, omeprazole, and lansoprazole. The dosages of rifabutin and clarithromycin should be 
decreased when administered concurrently.
NNRTI, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor; NRTI, nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor; PI, protease inhibitor.
TABLE 49–3 Currently available antiretroviral agents. (Continued)
Agent
Class of 
Agent
Recommended 
Adult Dosage
Administration 
Recommendation
Characteristic 
Adverse Effects
Comments
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    873
fluid is low. Elimination is by both glomerular filtration and active 
tubular secretion. The serum half-life is about 10 hours. 
 The oral solution, which contains propylene glycol, is contraindi-
cated in young children, pregnant women, patients with renal or 
hepatic failure, and those using metronidazole or disulfiram. Also, 
because of its activity against HBV, patients co-infected with HIV and 
HBV should be closely monitored if treatment with emtricitabine is 
interrupted or discontinued, owing to the likelihood of hepatitis flare. 
 Emtricitabine is often co-administered with tenofovir, and a 
once-daily, fixed-dose combination formulation is available, both 
alone and in combination with efavirenz. In a recent placebo-
controlled study, use of emtricitabine and tenofovir was effective 
as preexposure prophylaxis, reducing HIV acquisition in men who 
have sex with men. 
 Like lamivudine, the M184V/I mutation is most frequently 
associated with emtricitabine use and may emerge rapidly in 
Binding
Reverse
transcription
Integration
Transcription
DNA
Translation
RNA
Virion
assembly
Budding and
maturation
Blocked by protease and maturation inhibitors
Fusion and
uncoating
Blocked by
fusion inhibitors
Blocked by
NRTIs, NNRTIs
Blocked by integrase inhibitors
gp120
gp41
Chemokine receptors
Host cell membrane
Blocked by CCR5 receptor antagonists
CD4
Nucleus
RNA
 FIGURE 49–4  Life cycle of HIV. Binding of viral glycoproteins to host cell CD4 and chemokine receptors leads to fusion of the viral and host 
cell membranes via gp41 and entry of the virion into the cell. After uncoating, reverse transcription copies the single-stranded HIV RNA genome 
into double-stranded DNA, which is integrated into the host cell genome. Gene transcription by host cell enzymes produces messenger RNA, 
which is translated into proteins that assemble into immature noninfectious virions that bud from the host cell membrane. Maturation into fully 
infectious virions is through proteolytic cleavage. NNRTIs, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors; NRTIs, nucleoside/nucleotide reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors. 
874    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
patients receiving regimens that are not fully suppressive. Because of 
their similar mechanisms of action and resistance profiles, the com-
bination of lamivudine and emtricitabine is not recommended. 
 The most common adverse effects observed in patients receiv-
ing emtricitabine are headache, diarrhea, nausea, and rash. In 
addition, hyperpigmentation of the palms or soles may be 
observed (∼ 3%), particularly in African-Americans (up to 13%). 
No drug-drug interactions of note have been reported to date. 
 LAMIVUDINE 
 Lamivudine (3TC) is a cytosine analog ( Figure 49–2 ) with in vitro 
activity against HIV-1 that is synergistic with a variety of antiret-
roviral nucleoside analogs—including zidovudine and stavudine—
against both zidovudine-sensitive and zidovudine-resistant HIV-1 
strains. As with emtricitabine, lamivudine has activity against 
HBV; therefore, discontinuation in patients that are co-infected 
with HIV and HBV may be associated with a flare of hepatitis. 
 Oral bioavailability exceeds 80% and is not food-dependent. 
In children, the average cerebrospinal fluid:plasma ratio of 
 lamivudine was 0.2. Serum half-life is 2.5 hours, whereas the 
intracellular half-life of the triphosphorylated compound is 
11–14 hours. Most of the drug is eliminated unchanged in the urine. 
 Lamivudine is often co-administered with abacavir, and a 
once-daily, fixed-dose combination formulation is available. 
Lamivudine is also available in a fixed-dose combination with 
zidovudine, either alone or in combination with abacavir. 
 Lamivudine therapy rapidly selects for the M184V mutation in 
regimens that are not fully suppressive. 
 Potential adverse effects are headache, dizziness, insomnia, 
fatigue, dry mouth, and gastrointestinal discomfort, although 
these are typically mild and infrequent. Lamivudine’s bioavail-
ability increases when it is co-administered with trimethoprim- 
sulfamethoxazole. Lamivudine and zalcitabine may inhibit the 
intracellular phosphorylation of one another; therefore, their 
concurrent use should be avoided if possible. Short-term safety 
of lamivudine has been demonstrated for both mother and 
infant. 
 STAVUDINE 
 The thymidine analog stavudine (d4T) ( Figure 49–2 ) has high oral 
bioavailability (86%) that is not food-dependent. The serum half-life 
is 1.1 hours, the intracellular half-life is 3.0–3.5 hours, and mean 
cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are 55% of those of plasma. 
Excretion is by active tubular secretion and glomerular filtration. 
TABLE 49–4 Clinically significant drug-drug interactions pertaining to two-drug antiretroviral combinations. 1
Agent
Drugs That Increase Its Serum Levels
Drugs That Decrease Its Serum Levels
Abacavir
Tipranavir
Atazanavir
Ritonavir
Didanosine, efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, ritonavir, 
stavudine, tenofovir, tipranavir
Darunavir
Indinavir
Lopinavir/ritonavir, saquinavir
Delavirdine
Etravirine
Didanosine, fosamprenavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir
Didanosine
Tenofovir
Atazanavir, delavirdine, ritonavir, tipranavir
Efavirenz
Darunavir
Etravirine, nelfinavir, nevirapine
Etravirine
Delavirdine
Darunavir, efavirenz, nevirapine, ritonavir, saquinavir, tipranavir
Fosamprenavir
Atazanavir, delavirdine, etravirine, indinavir, 
nelfinavir
Efavirenz, lopinavir/ritonavir, nevirapine, tipranavir
Indinavir
Darunavir, delavirdine, nelfinavir, tipranavir, 
zidovudine
Didanosine, fosamprenavir, efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine
Lopinavir/ritonavir
Darunavir, delavirdine, indinavir, ritonavir
Efavirenz, nelfinavir, nevirapine, tenofovir, tipranavir
Maraviroc
Atazanavir, darunavir, delavirdine, 
lopinavir/ritonavir, nevirapine
Efavirenz, etravirine
Nelfinavir
Delavirdine, etravirine, indinavir, ritonavir
Nevirapine
Nevirapine
Atazanavir, fosamprenavir, lopinavir
Etravirine
Ritonavir
Delavirdine
Tenofovir
Saquinavir
Atazanavir, delavirdine, indinavir, lopinavir, 
nelfinavir, ritonavir
Efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, tipranavir
Tenofovir
Atazanavir, lopinavir/ritonavir
Tipranavir
Enfuvirtide
Efavirenz
1Dose adjustment may be necessary if co-administered.
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    875
 The major toxicity is a dose-related peripheral sensory 
 neuropathy. The incidence of neuropathy may be increased when 
stavudine is administered with other neuropathy-inducing drugs 
such as didanosine, zalcitabine, vincristine, isoniazid, or ribavirin, 
or in patients with advanced immunosuppression. Symptoms 
typically resolve upon discontinuation of stavudine; in such cases, 
a reduced dosage may be cautiously restarted. Other potential 
adverse effects are pancreatitis, arthralgias, and elevation in serum 
aminotransferases. Lactic acidosis with hepatic steatosis, as well as 
lipodystrophy, appear to occur more frequently in patients receiv-
ing stavudine than in those receiving other NRTI agents. 
Moreover, because the co-administration of stavudine and didanos-
ine may increase the incidence of lactic acidosis and pancreatitis, 
concurrent use should be avoided. This combination has been 
implicated in several deaths in HIV-infected pregnant women. A 
rare adverse effect is a rapidly progressive ascending neuromuscu-
lar weakness. Since zidovudine may reduce the phosphorylation of 
stavudine, these two drugs should not be used together. There is 
no evidence of human teratogenicity in those taking stavudine. 
 TENOFOVIR 
 Tenofovir is an acyclic nucleoside phosphonate (ie, nucleotide) 
analog of adenosine ( Figure 49–2 ). Like the nucleoside analogs, 
tenofovir competitively inhibits HIV reverse transcriptase and 
causes chain termination after incorporation into DNA. However, 
only two rather than three intracellular phosphorylations are 
required for active inhibition of DNA synthesis. Tenofovir is also 
approved for the treatment of patients with HBV infection. 
 Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is a water-soluble prodrug of 
active tenofovir. The oral bioavailability in fasted patients is 
approximately 25% and increases to 39% after a high-fat meal. 
The prolonged serum (12–17 hours) and intracellular half-lives 
allow once-daily dosing. Elimination occurs by both glomerular 
filtration and active tubular secretion. 
 Tenofovir is often co-administered with emtricitabine, and a 
once-daily, fixed-dose combination formulation is available, 
either alone or in combination with efavirenz. A recent placebo-
controlled study found that use of emtricitabine and tenofovir 
was effective as preexposure prophylaxis, reducing HIV acquisi-
tion in men who have sex with men. In another placebo-con-
trolled study, use of the experimental 1% tenofovir gel as a 
vaginal microbicide was effective in decreasing the incidence of 
heterosexual HIV acquisition. 
 The primary mutation associated with resistance to tenofovir is 
K65R. 
 Gastrointestinal complaints (eg, nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, 
flatulence) are the most common adverse effects but rarely require 
discontinuation of therapy. Since tenofovir is formulated with 
 lactose, these may occur more frequently in patients with lactose 
intolerance. Other potential adverse effects include headache and 
asthenia. Tenofovir-associated proximal renal tubulopathy causes 
excessive renal phosphate and calcium losses and 1-hydroxylation 
defects of vitamin D, and preclinical studies in several animal spe-
cies have demonstrated bone toxicity (eg, osteomalacia). Monitoring 
of bone mineral density should be considered with long-term use 
in those with risk factors for or with known osteoporosis, as well as 
in children. Reduction of renal function over time, as well as cases 
of acute renal failure and Fanconi’s syndrome, have been reported in 
patients receiving tenofovir alone or in combination with emtricit-
abine. For this reason, tenofovir should be used with caution in 
patients at risk for renal dysfunction. Tenofovir may  compete with 
other drugs that are actively secreted by the kidneys, such as cidofovir, 
acyclovir, and ganciclovir. Concurrent use of atazanavir or lopinavir/
ritonavir may increase serum levels of tenofovir ( Table 49–4 ). 
 Tenofovir is associated with decreased fetal growth and reduc-
tion in fetal bone porosity in monkeys. There is significant placental 
 passage in humans. 
 ZALCITABINE 
 Zalcitabine (ddC) is a cytosine analog with high oral bioavailabil-
ity (87%) and a serum half-life of 1–2 hours ( Figure 49–2 ). An 
intracellular half-life of 2.6 hours necessitates thrice-daily dosing, 
which limits its usefulness. Plasma levels decrease by 25–39% 
when the drug is administered with food or antacids. The drug is 
excreted renally. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations are approxi-
mately 20% of those in the plasma. 
 Although a variety of mutations associated with in vitro resis-
tance to zalcitabine have been described, phenotypic resistance 
appears to be rare. 
 Zalcitabine therapy is associated with a dose-dependent periph-
eral neuropathy that can be treatment-limiting in 10–20% of 
patients but appears to be slowly reversible if treatment is stopped 
promptly. The potential for causing peripheral neuropathy consti-
tutes a relative contraindication to use with other drugs that may 
cause neuropathy, including stavudine, didanosine, isoniazid, 
 vincristine, and ribavirin. Decreased creatinine clearance or concur-
rent use of potential nephrotoxins (eg, amphotericin B, foscarnet, 
and aminoglycosides) may increase the risk of zalcitabine neuropa-
thy, as does more advanced immunosuppression. The other major 
reported toxicity is oral and esophageal ulceration. Pancreatitis 
occurs less frequently than with didanosine administration, but co-
administration of other drugs that cause pancreatitis may increase 
the frequency of this adverse effect. Headache, nausea, rash, and 
arthralgias may occur but tend to be mild or to resolve during 
therapy. Zalcitabine causes thymic lymphoma in rodents, as well as 
hydrocephalus at high doses; clinical relevance is unclear. The AUC 
of zalcitabine increases when co-administered with probenecid or 
cimetidine, and bioavailability decreases with concurrent antacids or 
metoclopramide. Lamivudine inhibits the phosphorylation of 
 zalcitabine in vitro, potentially interfering with its efficacy. 
 ZIDOVUDINE 
 Zidovudine ( azidothymidine; AZT ) is a deoxythymidine analog 
( Figure 49–2 ) that is well absorbed (63%) and distributed to most 
body tissues and fluids, including the cerebrospinal fluid, where 
drug levels are 60–65% of those in serum. Although the serum 
876    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
half-life averages 1 hour, the intracellular half-life of the phospho-
rylated compound is 3–4 hours, allowing twice-daily dosing. 
Zidovudine is eliminated primarily by renal excretion following 
glucuronidation in the liver. 
 Zidovudine is available in a fixed-dose combination formulation 
with lamivudine, either alone or in combination with abacavir. 
 Zidovudine was the first antiretroviral agent to be approved 
and has been well studied. The drug has been shown to decrease 
the rate of clinical disease progression and prolong survival in 
HIV-infected individuals. Efficacy has also been demonstrated in 
the treatment of HIV-associated dementia and thrombocytope-
nia. In pregnancy ( Table 49–5 ), a regimen of oral zidovudine 
beginning between 14 and 34 weeks of gestation, intravenous 
zidovudine during labor, and zidovudine syrup to the neonate 
from birth through 6 weeks of age has been shown to reduce the 
rate of vertical (mother-to-newborn) transmission of HIV by up 
to 23%. 
 High-level zidovudine resistance is generally seen in strains 
with three or more of the five most common mutations: M41L, 
D67N, K70R, T215F, and K219Q. However, the emergence of 
certain mutations that confer decreased susceptibility to one drug 
(eg, L74V for didanosine and M184V for lamivudine) may 
enhance zidovudine susceptibility in previously zidovudine- 
resistant strains. Withdrawal of zidovudine may permit the rever-
sion of zidovudine-resistant HIV-1 isolates to the susceptible 
wild-type phenotype. 
 The most common adverse effect of zidovudine is myelosup-
pression, resulting in macrocytic anemia (1–4%) or neutropenia 
(2–8%). Gastrointestinal intolerance, headaches, and insomnia 
may occur but tend to resolve during therapy. Lipoatrophy 
appears to be more common in patients receiving zidovudine or 
other thymidine analogs. Less common toxicities include throm-
bocytopenia, hyperpigmentation of the nails, and myopathy. High 
doses can cause anxiety, confusion, and tremulousness. Zidovudine 
causes vaginal neoplasms in mice; however, no human cases of 
genital neoplasms have been reported to date. Short-term safety 
has been demonstrated for both mother and infant. 
 Increased serum levels of zidovudine may occur with concomi-
tant administration of probenecid, phenytoin, methadone, flucon-
azole, atovaquone, valproic acid, and lamivudine, either through 
inhibition of first-pass metabolism or through decreased clearance. 
Zidovudine may decrease phenytoin levels. Hematologic toxicity 
may be increased during co-administration of other myelosuppres-
sive drugs such as ganciclovir, ribavirin, and cytotoxic agents. 
Combination regimens containing zidovudine and stavudine 
should be avoided due to in vitro antagonism. 
 NONNUCLEOSIDE REVERSE 
TRANSCRIPTASE INHIBITORS 
 The NNRTIs bind directly to HIV-1 reverse transcriptase 
( Figure 49–4 ), resulting in allosteric inhibition of RNA- and DNA-
dependent DNA polymerase activity. The binding site of NNRTIs is 
near to but distinct from that of NRTIs. Unlike the NRTI agents, 
NNRTIs neither compete with nucleoside triphosphates nor require 
phosphorylation to be active. 
 Baseline genotypic testing is recommended prior to initiating 
NNRTI treatment because primary resistance rates range from 
approximately 2% to 8%. NNRTI resistance occurs rapidly with 
monotherapy and can result from a single mutation. The K103N 
and Y181C mutations confer resistance across the entire class of 
NNRTIs, with the exception of the newest agent, etravirine. Other 
mutations (eg, L100I, Y188C, G190A) may confer cross-resistance 
among the NNRTI class. However, there is no cross-resistance 
between the NNRTIs and the NRTIs; in fact, some nucleoside-
resistant viruses display hypersusceptibility to NNRTIs. 
 As a class, NNRTI agents tend to be associated with varying 
levels of gastrointestinal intolerance and skin rash, the latter of 
which may infrequently be serious (eg, Stevens-Johnson  syndrome). 
A further limitation to use of NNRTI agents as a component of 
antiretroviral therapy is their metabolism by the CYP450 system, 
leading to innumerable potential drug-drug interactions ( Tables 
49–3 and  49–4 ). All NNRTI agents are substrates for CYP3A4 
and can act as inducers (nevirapine), inhibitors (delavirdine), or 
mixed inducers and inhibitors  (efavirenz, etravirine). Given the 
large number of non-HIV medications that are also metabolized 
by this pathway (see  Chapter 4 ), drug-drug interactions must be 
expected and looked for; dosage adjustments are frequently 
required and some combinations are contraindicated. 
 DELAVIRDINE 
 Delavirdine has an oral bioavailability of about 85%, but this is 
reduced by antacids or H 2 -blockers. It is extensively bound 
(∼ 98%) to plasma proteins and has correspondingly low cerebrospi-
nal fluid levels. Serum half-life is approximately 6 hours. 
 Skin rash occurs in up to 38% of patients receiving delavirdine; 
it typically occurs during the first 1–3 weeks of therapy and does 
not preclude rechallenge. However, severe rash such as erythema 
multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome have rarely been 
reported. Other possible adverse effects are headache, fatigue, 
nausea, diarrhea, and increased serum aminotransferase levels. 
TABLE 49–5  The use of antiretroviral agents in 
pregnancy. 1
Recommended Agents
Alternate Agents
Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs)
Lamivudine, zidovudine
Abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, 
stavudine
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs)
Nevirapine
Protease inhibitors (PIs)
Lopinavir/ritonavir
Atazanavir/ritonavir, indinavir/ritonavir, 
nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir
1Data are insufficient to recommend the use of entry inhibitors or integrase inhibitors 
in pregnancy at the present time.
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    877
Delavirdine has been shown to be teratogenic in rats, causing 
ventricular septal defects and other malformations at dosages not 
unlike those achieved in humans. Thus, pregnancy should be 
avoided when taking delavirdine. 
 Delavirdine is extensively metabolized by the CYP3A and 
CYP2D6 enzymes and also inhibits CYP3A4 and 2C9. 
Therefore, there are numerous potential drug-drug interactions 
to consider ( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). The concurrent use of 
delavirdine with fosamprenavir and rifabutin is not recom-
mended because of decreased delavirdine levels. Other medica-
tions likely to alter delavirdine levels include didanosine, 
lopinavir, nelfinavir, and ritonavir. Co-administration of dela-
virdine with indinavir or saquinavir prolongs the elimination 
half-life of these protease inhibitors, thus allowing them to be 
dosed twice rather than thrice daily. 
 EFAVIRENZ 
 Efavirenz can be given once daily because of its long half-life 
(40–55 hours). It is moderately well absorbed following oral 
administration (45%). Since toxicity may increase owing to 
increased bioavailability after a high-fat meal, efavirenz should be 
taken on an empty stomach. Efavirenz is principally metabolized 
by CYP3A4 and CYP2B6 to inactive hydroxylated metabolites; 
the remainder is eliminated in the feces as unchanged drug. It is 
highly bound to albumin (∼ 99%), and cerebrospinal fluid levels 
range from 0.3% to 1.2% of plasma levels. 
 The principal adverse effects of efavirenz involve the central 
nervous system. Dizziness, drowsiness, insomnia, nightmares, and 
headache tend to diminish with continued therapy; dosing at 
bedtime may also be helpful. Psychiatric symptoms such as depres-
sion, mania, and psychosis have been observed and may necessi-
tate discontinuation. Skin rash has also been reported early in 
therapy in up to 28% of patients; the rash is usually mild to 
 moderate in severity and typically resolves despite continuation. 
Rarely, rash has been severe or life-threatening. Other potential 
adverse reactions are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, crystalluria, ele-
vated liver enzymes, and an increase in total serum cholesterol by 
10–20%. High rates of fetal abnormalities occurred in pregnant 
monkeys exposed to efavirenz in doses roughly equivalent to the 
human dosage; several cases of congenital anomalies have been 
reported in humans. Therefore, efavirenz should be avoided in 
pregnant women, particularly in the first trimester. 
 As both an inducer and an inhibitor of CYP3A4, efavirenz 
induces its own metabolism and interacts with the metabolism of 
many other drugs ( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). Since efavirenz may 
lower methadone levels, patients receiving these two agents con-
currently should be monitored for signs of opioid withdrawal and 
may require an increased dose of methadone. 
 ETRAVIRINE 
 In 2008, etravirine was approved in the United States for use in 
treatment-experienced patients with HIV infection. Etravirine 
may be effective against strains of HIV that have developed resis-
tance to first-generation NNRTIs, depending on the number of 
mutations present. Although etravirine has a higher genetic barrier 
to resistance than the other NNRTIs, mutations selected by 
 etravirine usually are associated with resistance to efavirenz, 
 nevirapine, and delavirdine. 
 The most common adverse effects of etravirine are rash, nausea, 
and diarrhea. The rash is typically mild and usually resolves after 
1–2 weeks without discontinuation of therapy. Rarely, rash has 
been severe or life-threatening. Laboratory abnormalities include 
elevations in serum cholesterol, triglyceride, glucose, and hepatic 
transaminase levels. Transaminase elevations are more common in 
patients with HBV or HCV co-infection. 
 Etravirine is a substrate as well as an inducer of CYP3A4 and 
an inhibitor of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19; it has many therapeuti-
cally significant drug-drug interactions ( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). 
Some of the interactions are difficult to predict. For example, 
etravirine may decrease itraconazole and ketoconazole concentra-
tions but increase voriconazole concentrations. 
 NEVIRAPINE 
 The oral bioavailability of nevirapine is excellent (> 90%) and is 
not food-dependent. The drug is highly lipophilic and achieves 
cerebrospinal fluid levels that are 45% of those in plasma. Serum 
half-life is 25–30 hours. It is extensively metabolized by the 
CYP3A isoform to hydroxylated metabolites and then excreted, 
primarily in the urine. 
 A single dose of nevirapine (200 mg) is effective in the preven-
tion of transmission of HIV from mother to newborn when 
administered to women at the onset of labor and followed by a 
2 mg/kg oral dose to the neonate within 3 days after delivery. 
There is no evidence of human teratogenicity. However, resistance 
has been documented after this single dose. 
 Rash, usually a maculopapular eruption that spares the palms 
and soles, occurs in up to 20% of patients, usually in the first 
4–6 weeks of therapy. Although typically mild and self-limited, 
rash is dose-limiting in about 7% of patients. Women appear to 
have an increased incidence of rash. When initiating therapy, 
gradual dose escalation over 14 days is recommended to decrease 
the incidence of rash. Severe and life-threatening skin rashes have 
been rarely reported, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome and 
toxic epidermal necrolysis. Nevirapine therapy should be immedi-
ately discontinued in patients with severe rash and in those with 
accompanying constitutional symptoms; since rash may accom-
pany hepatotoxicity, liver function tests should be assessed. 
Symptomatic liver toxicity may occur in up to 4% of patients and 
is more frequent in those with higher pretherapy CD4 cell counts 
(ie, > 250 cells/mm 3 in women and > 400 cells/mm 3 in men), in 
women, and in those with HBV or HCV co-infection. Fulminant, 
life-threatening hepatitis has been reported, typically within the 
first 18 weeks of therapy. Other adverse effects include fever, nau-
sea, headache, and somnolence. 
 Nevirapine is a moderate inducer of CYP3A metabolism, 
resulting in decreased levels of amprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, 
878    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
saquinavir, efavirenz, and methadone. Drugs that induce the 
CYP3A system, such as rifampin, rifabutin, and St. John’s wort, 
can decrease levels of nevirapine, whereas those that inhibit 
CYP3A activity, such as fluconazole, ketoconazole, and clarithro-
mycin, can increase nevirapine levels. Since nevirapine may lower 
methadone levels, patients receiving these two agents concurrently 
should be monitored for signs of opioid withdrawal and may 
require an increased dose of methadone. 
 PROTEASE INHIBITORS 
 During the later stages of the HIV growth cycle, the  gag and 
 gag - pol gene products are translated into polyproteins, and these 
become immature budding particles. The HIV protease is respon-
sible for cleaving these precursor molecules to produce the final 
structural proteins of the mature virion core. By preventing post-
translational cleavage of the Gag-Pol polyprotein, protease inhibi-
tors (PIs) prevent the processing of viral proteins into functional 
conformations, resulting in the production of immature, nonin-
fectious viral particles ( Figure 49–4 ). Unlike the NRTIs, PIs do 
not need intracellular activation. 
 Specific genotypic alterations that confer phenotypic resistance 
are fairly common with these agents, thus contraindicating mono-
therapy. Some of the most common mutations conferring broad 
resistance to PIs are substitutions at the 10, 46, 54, 82, 84, and 
90 codons; the number of mutations may predict the level of phe-
notypic resistance. The I50L substitution emerging during atazana-
vir therapy has been associated with  increased susceptibility to other 
PIs. Darunavir and tipranavir appear to have improved virologic 
activity in patients harboring HIV-1 resistant to other PIs. 
 A syndrome of redistribution and accumulation of body fat 
that results in central obesity, dorsocervical fat enlargement 
 (buffalo hump), peripheral and facial wasting, breast enlargement, 
and a cushingoid appearance has been observed in patients receiv-
ing antiretroviral therapy. These abnormalities may be particularly 
associated with the use of PIs, although the recently licensed 
 atazanavir appears to be an exception (see below). Concurrent 
increases in triglyceride and low-density lipoprotein levels, along 
with hyperglycemia and insulin resistance, have also been noted. 
The cause is not yet known. 
 Whether PI agents are associated with bone loss and osteoporosis 
after long-term use is controversial and under investigation. PIs have 
been associated with increased spontaneous bleeding in patients with 
hemophilia A or B; an increased risk of intracranial hemorrhage has 
been reported in patients receiving tipranavir with ritonavir. 
 The concurrent use of saquinavir and ritonavir has recently 
been found to be associated with QT and PR interval prolonga-
tion, and is contraindicated. QT prolongation may result in life-
threatening torsades de pointes arrhythmia. 
 All of the antiretroviral PIs are extensively metabolized by 
CYP3A4, with ritonavir having the most pronounced inhibitory 
effect and saquinavir the least. Some PI agents, such as amprenavir 
and ritonavir, are also inducers of specific CYP isoforms. As a 
result, there is enormous potential for drug-drug interactions with 
other antiretroviral agents and other commonly used medications 
( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). Expert resources about drug-drug inter-
actions should be consulted, as dosage adjustments are frequently 
required and some combinations are contraindicated. It is note-
worthy that the potent CYP3A4 inhibitory properties of ritonavir 
are used to clinical advantage by having it “boost” the levels of 
other PI agents when given in combination, thus acting as a phar-
macokinetic enhancer rather than an antiretroviral agent. Ritonavir 
boosting increases drug exposure, thereby prolonging the drug’s 
half-life and allowing reduction in frequency; in addition, the 
genetic barrier to resistance is raised. 
 ATAZANAVIR 
 Atazanavir is an azapeptide PI with a pharmacokinetic profile that 
allows once-daily dosing. It should be taken with a light meal to 
enhance bioavailability. Atazanavir requires an acidic medium for 
absorption and exhibits pH-dependent aqueous solubility; there-
fore, separation of ingestion from acid-reducing agents by at least 
12 hours is recommended and concurrent proton pump inhibitors 
are contraindicated. Atazanavir is able to penetrate both the cerebro-
spinal and seminal fluids. The plasma half-life is 6–7 hours, which 
increases to approximately 11 hours when co-administered with 
ritonavir. The primary route of elimination is biliary; atazanavir 
should not be given to patients with severe hepatic insufficiency. 
 Resistance to atazanavir has been associated with various known 
PI mutations as well as with the novel I50L substitution. Whereas 
some atazanavir resistance mutations have been associated in vitro 
with decreased susceptibility to other PIs, the I50L mutation has 
been associated with increased susceptibility to other PIs. 
 The most common adverse effects in patients receiving ataza-
navir are diarrhea and nausea; vomiting, abdominal pain, head-
ache, peripheral neuropathy, and skin rash may also occur. As with 
indinavir, indirect hyperbilirubinemia with overt jaundice may 
occur in approximately 10% of patients, owing to inhibition of 
the UGT1A1 glucuronidation enzyme. Elevation of hepatic 
enzymes has also been observed, usually in patients with underly-
ing HBV or HCV co-infection. Nephrolithiasis has recently been 
described in association with atazanavir use. In contrast to the 
other PIs, atazanavir does not appear to be associated with dys-
lipidemia, fat redistribution, or the metabolic syndrome. Atazanavir 
may be associated with prolongation of the electrocardiographic 
PR interval, which is usually inconsequential but may be exacer-
bated by other causative agents such as calcium channel blockers 
and may result in AV block QT prolongation is another potential 
electrocardiographic effect of atazanavir but is rarely clinically 
significant. 
 As an inhibitor of CYP3A4 and CYP2C9, the potential for 
drug-drug interactions with atazanavir is great ( Tables 49–3 and 
 49–4 ). Atazanavir AUC is reduced by up to 76% when combined 
with a proton pump inhibitor; thus, these combinations are to be 
avoided. In addition, co-administration of atazanavir with other 
drugs that inhibit UGT1A1, such as irinotecan, may increase its 
levels. Tenofovir and efavirenz should not be co-administered with 
atazanavir unless ritonavir is added to boost levels. 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    879
 DARUNAVIR 
 Darunavir is licensed as a PI that must be co-administered with 
ritonavir. It was initially licensed for use in treatment-experienced 
patients only; thus there is less clinical experience with its use in 
treatment-naïve patients. Darunavir may be administered once 
daily in treatment-naïve patients. 
 Symptomatic adverse effects of darunavir include diarrhea, 
nausea, headache, and rash. Laboratory abnormalities include 
dyslipidemia (though possibly less frequent than with other 
boosted PI regimens) and increases in amylase and hepatic 
transaminase levels. Liver toxicity, including severe hepatitis, has 
been reported in some patients taking darunavir; the risk of 
 hepatotoxicity may be higher for persons with HBV, HCV, or 
other chronic liver disease. 
 Darunavir contains a sulfonamide moiety and should be used 
cautiously in patients with sulfonamide allergy. 
 Darunavir both inhibits and is metabolized by the CYP3A 
enzyme system, conferring many possible drug-drug interactions 
( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). In addition, the co-administered ritona-
vir is a potent inhibitor of CYP3A and CYP2D6, and an inducer 
of other hepatic enzyme systems. 
 FOSAMPRENAVIR 
 Fosamprenavir is a prodrug of amprenavir that is rapidly hydro-
lyzed by enzymes in the intestinal epithelium. Because of its sig-
nificantly lower daily pill burden, fosamprenavir tablets have 
replaced amprenavir capsules for adults. Fosamprenavir is most 
often administered in combination with low-dose ritonavir. 
 Amprenavir is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, 
and its prodrug can be taken with or without food. However, 
high-fat meals decrease absorption and thus should be avoided. 
The plasma half-life is relatively long (7–11 hours). Amprenavir is 
metabolized in the liver by CYP3A4 and should be used with 
 caution in the setting of hepatic insufficiency. 
 The most common adverse effects of fosamprenavir are headache, 
nausea, diarrhea, perioral paresthesias, depression, and rash. Up to 
3% of patients may experience rashes (including Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome) severe enough to warrant drug discontinuation. 
 Amprenavir is both an inducer and an inhibitor of CYP3A4 
and is contraindicated with numerous drugs ( Tables 49–3 and 
 49–4 ). The oral solution, which contains propylene glycol, is con-
traindicated in young children, pregnant women, patients with 
renal or hepatic failure, and those using metronidazole or disul-
firam. Also, the oral solutions of amprenavir and ritonavir should 
not be co-administered because the propylene glycol in one and 
the ethanol in the other may compete for the same metabolic 
pathway, leading to accumulation of either. Because the oral solu-
tion also contains vitamin E at several times the recommended 
daily dosage, supplemental vitamin E should be avoided. 
Amprenavir, a sulfonamide, is contraindicated in patients with a 
history of sulfa allergy. Lopinavir/ritonavir should not be co- 
administered with amprenavir owing to decreased amprenavir and 
altered lopinavir exposures. An increased dosage of amprenavir is 
recommended when co-administered with efavirenz (with or 
without the addition of ritonavir to boost levels). 
 INDINAVIR 
 Indinavir requires an acidic environment for optimum solubility 
and therefore must be consumed on an empty stomach or with a 
small, low-fat, low-protein meal for maximal absorption (60–65%). 
The serum half-life is 1.5–2 hours, protein binding is approxi-
mately 60%, and the drug has a high level of cerebrospinal fluid 
penetration (up to 76% of serum levels). Excretion is primarily 
fecal. An increase in AUC by 60% and in half-life to 2.8 hours in 
the setting of hepatic insufficiency necessitates dose reduction. 
 The most common adverse effects of indinavir are indirect 
hyperbilirubinemia and nephrolithiasis due to urinary crystalliza-
tion of the drug. Nephrolithiasis can occur within days after initiat-
ing therapy, with an estimated incidence of approximately 10%. 
Consumption of at least 48 ounces of water daily is important to 
maintain adequate hydration. Thrombocytopenia, elevations of 
serum aminotransferase levels, nausea, diarrhea, insomnia, dry 
throat, dry skin, and indirect hyperbilirubinemia have also been 
reported. Insulin resistance may be more common with indinavir 
than with the other PIs, occurring in 3–5% of patients. There have 
also been rare cases of acute hemolytic anemia. In rats, high doses of 
indinavir are associated with development of thyroid adenomas. 
 Since indinavir is an inhibitor of CYP3A4, numerous and 
complex drug interactions can occur ( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). 
Combination with ritonavir (boosting) allows for twice-daily 
rather than thrice-daily dosing and eliminates the food restriction 
associated with use of indinavir. However, there is potential for an 
increase in nephrolithiasis with this combination compared with 
indinavir alone; thus, a high fluid intake (1.5–2 L/d) is advised. 
 LOPINAVIR 
 Lopinavir is currently formulated only in combination with ritonavir, 
which inhibits the CYP3A-mediated metabolism of lopinavir, thereby 
resulting in increased exposure to lopinavir. In addition to improved 
patient compliance due to reduced pill burden, lopinavir/ritonavir is 
generally well tolerated. 
 Lopinavir should be taken with food to enhance bioavailability. 
The drug is highly protein bound (98–99%), and its half-life is 
5–6 hours. Lopinavir is extensively metabolized by CYP3A, which 
is inhibited by ritonavir. Serum levels of lopinavir may be increased 
in patients with hepatic impairment. 
 The most common adverse effects of lopinavir are diarrhea, 
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and asthenia. Elevations in serum 
cholesterol and triglycerides are common. Potential drug-drug inter-
actions are extensive ( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). Increased dosage of 
lopinavir/ritonavir is recommended when co-administered with 
 efavirenz or nevirapine, which induce lopinavir metabolism. 
Concurrent use of fosamprenavir should be avoided owing to altered 
880    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
exposure to lopinavir with decreased levels of amprenavir. Also, con-
comitant use of lopinavir/ritonavir and rifampin is contraindicated 
due to an increased risk for hepatotoxicity. Since the oral solution of 
lopinavir/ritonavir contains alcohol, concurrent disulfiram and 
metronidazole are contraindicated. There is no evidence of human 
teratogenicity of lopinavir/ritonavir; short-term safety in pregnant 
women has been demonstrated for mother and infant. 
 NELFINAVIR 
 Nelfinavir has high absorption in the fed state (70–80%), under-
goes metabolism by CYP3A, and is excreted primarily in the feces. 
The plasma half-life in humans is 3.5–5 hours, and the drug is 
more than 98% protein-bound. 
 The most common adverse effects associated with nelfinavir 
are diarrhea and flatulence. Diarrhea often responds to anti-
diarrheal medications but can be dose-limiting. Nelfinavir is an 
inhibitor of the CYP3A system, and multiple drug interactions 
may occur ( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). An increased dosage of nelfi-
navir is recommended when co-administered with rifabutin (with 
a decreased dose of rifabutin), whereas a decrease in saquinavir 
dose is suggested with concurrent nelfinavir. Co-administration 
with efavirenz should be avoided due to decreased nelfinavir levels. 
Nelfinavir has a favorable safety and pharmacokinetic profile for 
pregnant women compared with that of other PIs ( Table 49–5 ); 
there is no evidence of human teratogenicity. 
 RITONAVIR 
 Ritonavir has a high bioavailability (about 75%) that increases 
with food. It is 98% protein-bound and has a serum half-life of 
3–5 hours. Metabolism to an active metabolite occurs via the 
CYP3A and CYP2D6 isoforms; excretion is primarily in the feces. 
Caution is advised when administering the drug to persons with 
impaired hepatic function. 
 Potential adverse effects of ritonavir, particularly when adminis-
tered at full dosage, are gastrointestinal disturbances, paresthesias 
(circumoral or peripheral), elevated serum aminotransferase levels, 
altered taste, headache, and elevations in serum creatine kinase. 
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal pain typically occur 
 during the first few weeks of therapy but may diminish over time 
or if the drug is taken with meals. Dose escalation over 1–2 weeks 
is recommended to decrease the dose-limiting side effects. Liver 
 adenomas and carcinomas have been induced in male mice receiv-
ing ritonavir; no similar effects have been observed to date in 
humans. 
 Ritonavir is a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, resulting in many 
potential drug interactions ( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). However, this 
characteristic has been used to great advantage when ritonavir is 
administered in low doses (100–200 mg twice daily) in combina-
tion with any of the other PI agents, in that increased blood levels 
of the latter agents permit lower or less frequent dosing (or both) 
with greater tolerability as well as the potential for greater efficacy 
against resistant virus. Therapeutic levels of digoxin and theophyl-
line should be monitored when co-administered with ritonavir 
owing to a likely increase in their concentrations. The concurrent 
use of saquinavir and ritonavir is contraindicated due to an increased 
risk of QT prolongation (with torsades de pointes arrhythmia) and 
PR interval prolongation. There is limited experience with full-dose 
ritonavir during pregnancy to date; however, low-dose ritonavir as a 
“booster” has appeared to be well tolerated in mother and infant. 
 SAQUINAVIR 
 In its original formulation as a hard gel capsule (saquinavir-H; 
Invirase), oral saquinavir was poorly bioavailable (only about 4% 
after food). However, reformulation of saquinavir-H for once-daily 
dosing in combination with low-dose ritonavir has both improved 
antiviral efficacy and decreased gastrointestinal adverse effects. 
 Saquinavir should be taken within 2 hours after a fatty meal for 
enhanced absorption. Saquinavir is 97% protein-bound, and 
serum half-life is approximately 2 hours. Saquinavir has a large 
volume of distribution, but penetration into the cerebrospinal 
fluid is negligible. Excretion is primarily in the feces. Reported 
adverse effects include gastrointestinal discomfort (nausea, 
 diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, dyspepsia) and rhinitis. When 
administered in combination with low-dose ritonavir, there 
appears to be less dyslipidemia or gastrointestinal toxicity than 
with some of the other boosted PI regimens. However, the concur-
rent use of saquinavir and ritonavir is newly recognized to confer 
an increased risk of QT prolongation (with torsades de pointes 
arrhythmia) and PR interval prolongation. 
 Saquinavir is subject to extensive first-pass metabolism by 
CYP3A4 and functions as a CYP3A4 inhibitor as well as a sub-
strate; thus, there are many potential drug-drug interactions 
( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). A decreased dose of saquinavir is recom-
mended when co-administered with nelfinavir. Increased saquina-
vir levels when co-administered with omeprazole necessitate close 
monitoring for toxicities. Digoxin levels may increase if co- 
administered with saquinavir and should therefore be monitored. 
Liver function tests should be monitored if saquinavir is co- 
administered with delavirdine or rifampin. There is no evidence of 
human teratogenicity from saquinavir; there is short-term safety 
data for both mother and infant. 
 TIPRANAVIR 
 Tipranavir is a newer PI indicated for use in treatment-experienced 
HIV-1-infected patients who harbor strains resistant to other PI 
agents. It is used in combination with ritonavir to achieve effective 
serum levels and is not approved for treatment-naïve patients. 
 Bioavailability is poor but is increased when taken with a high-
fat meal. The drug is metabolized by the liver microsomal system 
and is contraindicated in patients with hepatic insufficiency. 
Tipranavir contains a sulfonamide moiety and should not be 
administered to patients with known sulfa allergy. 
 The most common adverse effects from tipranavir are diarrhea, 
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. An urticarial or maculo-
papular rash is more common in women and may be accompanied 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    881
by systemic symptoms or desquamation. Liver toxicity, including 
life-threatening hepatic decompensation, has been observed and is 
more common in patients with chronic HBV or HCV infection. 
Tipranavir should be discontinued in patients who have increased 
serum transaminase levels that are more than 10 times the upper 
limit of normal or more than 5 times normal in combination with 
increased serum bilirubin. Because of an increased risk for intra-
cranial hemorrhage in patients receiving tipranavir/ritonavir, the 
drug should be avoided in patients with head trauma or bleeding 
diathesis. Other potential adverse effects include depression, eleva-
tion in amylase, and decreased white blood cell count. 
 Tipranavir both inhibits and induces the CYP3A4 system. 
When used in combination with ritonavir, its net effect is inhibi-
tion. Tipranavir also induces P-glycoprotein transporter and thus 
may alter the disposition of many other drugs ( Table 49–4 ). 
Concurrent administration of tipranavir with fosamprenavir or 
saquinavir should be avoided owing to decreased blood levels of 
the latter drugs. Tipranavir/ritonavir may also decrease serum 
levels of valproic acid and omeprazole. Levels of lovastatin, simva-
statin, atorvastatin, and rosuvastatin may be increased, increasing 
the risk for rhabdomyolysis and myopathy. Tipranavir contains a 
sulfonamide moiety and should be used cautiously in patients 
with sulfonamide allergy. 
 ENTRY INHIBITORS 
 The process of HIV-1 entry into host cells is complex; each step 
presents a potential target for inhibition. Viral attachment to the 
host cell entails binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein com-
plex gp160 (consisting of gp120 and gp41) to its cellular receptor 
CD4. This binding induces conformational changes in gp120 that 
enable access to the chemokine receptors CCR5 or CXCR4. 
Chemokine receptor binding induces further conformational 
changes in gp120, allowing exposure to gp41 and leading to 
fusion of the viral envelope with the host cell membrane and sub-
sequent entry of the viral core into the cellular cytoplasm. 
 ENFUVIRTIDE 
 Enfuvirtide is a synthetic 36-amino-acid peptide fusion inhibitor 
that blocks HIV entry into the cell ( Figure 49–4 ). Enfuvirtide 
binds to the gp41 subunit of the viral envelope glycoprotein, pre-
venting the conformational changes required for the fusion of the 
viral and cellular membranes. Enfuvirtide, which must be admin-
istered by subcutaneous injection, is the only parenterally adminis-
tered antiretroviral agent. Metabolism appears to be by proteolytic 
hydrolysis without involvement of the CYP450 system. Elimination 
half-life is 3.8 hours. 
 Resistance to enfuvirtide can result from mutations in gp41; 
the frequency and significance of this phenomenon are being 
investigated. However, enfuvirtide lacks cross-resistance with the 
other currently approved antiretroviral drug classes. 
 The most common adverse effects associated with enfuvirtide 
therapy are local injection site reactions, consisting of painful 
erythematous nodules. Although frequent, these are typically mild 
to moderate and rarely lead to discontinuation. Other symptom-
atic side effects may include insomnia, headache, dizziness, and 
nausea. Hypersensitivity reactions may rarely occur, are of varying 
severity, and may recur on rechallenge. Eosinophilia is the primary 
laboratory abnormality seen with enfuvirtide administration. In 
prospective clinical trials, an increased rate of bacterial pneumonia 
was noted in patients receiving enfuvirtide. No drug-drug interac-
tions have been identified that would require the alteration of the 
dosage of concomitant antiretroviral or other drugs. 
 MARAVIROC 
 Maraviroc binds specifically and selectively to the host protein 
CCR5, one of two chemokine receptors necessary for entrance 
of HIV into CD4+ cells. Maraviroc is approved for adults with 
CCR5-tropic (also known as R5) HIV-1 infection who are expe-
riencing virologic failure due to resistance to other antiretroviral 
agents. Studies have shown that 52–60% of patients in whom at 
least two antiviral regimens had failed were infected with R5 
HIV. Since maraviroc is active against HIV that uses the CCR5 
co-receptor exclusively, and not against HIV strains with 
CXCR4, dual, or mixed tropism, tropism testing should be per-
formed before initiating treatment with maraviroc. Clinical 
experience with the use of maraviroc in treatment-naïve patients 
is limited. 
 The absorption of maraviroc is rapid but variable, with the 
time to maximum absorption generally being 1–4 hours after 
ingestion of the drug. Most of the drug (≥ 75%) is excreted in the 
feces, whereas approximately 20% is excreted in urine. The recom-
mended dose of maraviroc varies according to renal function and 
the concomitant use of CYP3A inducers or inhibitors. Maraviroc 
is contraindicated in patients with severe or end-stage renal 
impairment who are taking concurrent CYP3A inhibitors or 
inducers, and caution is advised when used in patients with preex-
isting hepatic impairment and in those co-infected with HBV or 
HCV. Maraviroc has been shown to have excellent penetration 
into the cervicovaginal fluid, with levels almost four times higher 
than the corresponding concentrations in blood plasma. 
 Resistance to maraviroc is associated with one or more mutations 
in the V3 loop of gp120. There appears to be no cross-resistance with 
drugs from any other class, including the fusion inhibitor enfu-
virtide. However, virologic failure of regimens containing maraviroc 
may potentially be caused by emergence of non–CCR5-tropic virus 
(eg, CXCR4-tropic virus) or by changes in viral tropism, owing to 
the development of multiple mutations throughout gp160. 
 Maraviroc is a substrate for CYP3A4 and therefore requires 
adjustment in the presence of drugs that interact with these 
enzymes ( Tables 49–3 and  49–4 ). It is also a substrate for 
P-glycoprotein, which limits intracellular concentrations of the 
drug. The dosage of maraviroc must be decreased if it is co- 
administered with strong CYP3A inhibitors (eg, delavirdine, 
ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, or any protease inhibi-
tor other than tipranavir) and must be increased if co-administered 
with CYP3A inducers (eg, efavirenz, etravirine, rifampin, car-
bamazepine, phenytoin, or St. John’s wort). 
882    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Potential adverse effects include cough, upper respiratory tract 
infections, postural hypotension (particularly in the setting of 
renal insufficiency), muscle and joint pain, abdominal pain, 
 diarrhea, and sleep disturbance. Due to reports of hepatotoxicity, 
which may be preceded by evidence of a systemic allergic reaction 
(ie, pruritic rash, eosinophilia, or elevated IgE), discontinuation of 
maraviroc should be considered promptly if this constellation of 
signs occurs. Myocardial ischemia and infarction have been 
observed in patients receiving maraviroc; therefore caution is 
advised in patients at increased cardiovascular risk. 
 There has been some concern that blockade of the chemokine 
CCR5 receptor—a human protein—may result in decreased 
immune surveillance, with a subsequent increased risk of malig-
nancy (eg, lymphoma) or infection. To date, however, there has 
been no evidence of an increased risk of either malignancy or 
infection in patients receiving maraviroc. 
 INTEGRASE STRAND TRANSFER 
INHIBITORS  
 RALTEGRAVIR 
 Raltegravir is a pyrimidinone analog that binds integrase, a viral 
enzyme essential to the replication of both HIV-1 and HIV-2. By 
doing so, it inhibits strand transfer, the third and final step of 
provirus integration, thus interfering with the integration of 
reverse-transcribed HIV DNA into the chromosomes of host cells 
( Figure 49–4 ). It was initially licensed for use in treatment-experi-
enced adult patients infected with strains of HIV-1 resistant to 
multiple other agents, but more recently has received approval for 
use in initial therapy as well. However, clinical experience is lim-
ited in treatment-naïve patients. 
 Absolute bioavailability of raltegravir has not been established 
but does not appear to be food-dependent. The drug is metabo-
lized by glucuronidation and does not interact with the cyto-
chrome P450 system; therefore, it is expected to have fewer 
drug-drug interactions than many of the other antiretroviral 
agents. However, in combination with rifampin, a strong inducer 
of UDP-glucuronosyl transferase 1A1 (UGT1A1), the dose of 
raltegravir should be increased from 400 mg twice daily to 800 mg 
twice daily. Since polyvalent cations (eg, magnesium, calcium, and 
iron) may bind integrase inhibitors and interfere with their activ-
ity, antacids should be used cautiously and taken separately from 
raltegravir. 
 Although virologic failure has been uncommon in clinical trials 
of raltegravir to date, in vitro resistance requires only a single point 
mutation (eg, at codons 148 or 155). The low genetic barrier to 
resistance emphasizes the importance of combination therapies 
and of adherence. Integrase mutations are not expected to affect 
sensitivity to other classes of antiretroviral agents. 
 Potential adverse effects of raltegravir include insomnia, 
 headache, diarrhea, nausea, dizziness, and fatigue. Increases in cre-
atine kinase may occur, with potential myopathy or rhabdomyolysis; 
there is minimal effect on serum lipids. 
NEW & INVESTIGATIONAL 
ANTIRETROVIRAL AGENTS 
 New therapies are continually being sought that exploit other 
HIV targets, have activity against resistant viral strains, have a 
lower incidence of adverse effects, and offer convenient dosing. 
Newly approved agents and those currently in advanced stages 
of clinical development include the NRTI agents  elvucitabine , 
 racivir , and  apricitabine; the NNRTI agent  rilpivirine ; entry 
inhibitors such as the CCR5 receptor antagonists  vicriviroc 
and  PRO 140, the fusion inhibitor  TNX-355 ( ibalizumab ); 
and integrase inhibitors such as  elvitegravir . In addition, new 
drug classes such as maturation inhibitors ( bevirimat ) are 
under investigation. 
 ■ ANTIHEPATITIS AGENTS 
 Several agents effective against HBV and HCV are now available 
( Table 49–6 ). Current treatment is suppressive rather than cura-
tive and the high prevalence of these infections worldwide, with 
their concomitant morbidity and mortality, reflect a critical need 
for improved therapeutics. 
 INTERFERON ALFA 
 Interferons are host cytokines that exert complex antiviral, immuno-
modulatory, and antiproliferative actions (see  Chapter 55 ). 
Interferon alfa appears to function by induction of intracellular 
signals following binding to specific cell membrane receptors, 
resulting in inhibition of viral penetration, translation, transcrip-
tion, protein processing, maturation, and release, as well as 
increased host expression of major histocompatibility complex 
antigens, enhanced phagocytic activity of macrophages, and aug-
mentation of the proliferation and survival of cytotoxic T cells. 
 Injectable preparations of interferon alfa are available for treat-
ment of both HBV and HCV infections ( Table 49–6 ). Interferon 
alfa-2a and interferon alfa-2b may be administered either subcu-
taneously or intramuscularly; interferon alfacon-1 is administered 
subcutaneously. Elimination half-life is 2–5 hours for interferon 
alfa-2a and -2b, depending on the route of administration. The 
half-life of interferon alfacon-1 in patients with chronic HCV 
ranges from 6 to 10 hours. Alfa interferons are filtered at the 
glomerulus and undergo rapid proteolytic degradation during 
tubular reabsorption, such that detection in the systemic circula-
tion is negligible. Liver metabolism and subsequent biliary excre-
tion are considered minor pathways. 
 A meta-analysis of clinical trials in patients with chronic HBV 
infection showed that treatment with interferon alfa is associated 
with a higher incidence of hepatitis e antigen (HBeAg) serocon-
version and undetectable HBV DNA levels compared with 
 placebo. The addition of the pegylated moiety results in further 
increases in the proportion of patients with HBeAg seroconver-
sion (∼ 30%) and a decline by approximately 4 log copies/mL 
(a 99.99% reduction) in HBV DNA after 1 year. 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    883
TABLE 49–6 Drugs used to treat viral hepatitis.
Agent
Indication
Recommended Adult Dosage
Route of Administration
Hepatitis B
 Lamivudine1
Chronic hepatitis B
100 mg once daily (150 mg once daily if 
co-infection with HIV is present)
Oral
 Adefovir1
Chronic hepatitis B
10 mg once daily
Oral
 Entecavir1
Chronic hepatitis B
0.5–1 mg once daily
Oral
 Tenofovir1
Chronic hepatitis B
300 mg once daily
Oral
 Telbivudine1
Chronic hepatitis B
600 mg once daily
Oral
 Interferon alfa-2b
Chronic hepatitis B
5 million units once daily or 
10 million units three times weekly
Subcutaneous or intramuscular
 Pegylated interferon alfa-2a1
Chronic hepatitis B
180 mcg once weekly
Subcutaneous
Hepatitis C
 Pegylated interferon alfa-2a1
Chronic hepatitis C
180 mcg once weekly plus ribavirin 
(800–1200 mg/d)
Subcutaneous
 Pegylated interferon alfa-2b1
Chronic hepatitis C
1.5 mcg/kg once weekly with ribavirin 
(800–1200 mg/d)
Subcutaneous
 Interferon alfa-2b1
Acute hepatitis C
5 million units once daily for 3–4 weeks, 
then 5 million units three times weekly
Subcutaneous or intramuscular
1Dose must be reduced in patients with renal insufficiency.
 The use of pegylated (polyethylene glycol-complexed) interferon 
alfa-2a and pegylated interferon alfa-2b results in slower clearance 
and longer terminal half-lives and steadier concentrations, which 
allows for less frequent  dosing in patients with chronic HCV infec-
tion. Renal elimination accounts for about 30% of clearance, and 
clearance is approximately halved in subjects with impaired renal 
function; dosage must therefore be adjusted. 
 The adverse effects of interferon alfa include a flu-like 
 syndrome (ie, headache, fevers, chills, myalgias, and malaise) 
that typically occurs within 6 hours after dosing; this syndrome 
occurs in more than 30% of patients during the first week of 
therapy and tends to resolve upon continued administration. 
Transient hepatic enzyme elevations may occur in the first 8–12 
weeks of therapy and appear to be more common in responders. 
Potential adverse effects during chronic therapy include neuro-
toxicities (mood  disorders, depression, somnolence, confusion, 
seizures), myelosuppression, profound fatigue, weight loss, rash, 
cough, myalgia, alopecia, tinnitus, reversible hearing loss, retin-
opathy, pneumonitis, and possibly cardiotoxicity. Induction of 
autoantibodies may occur, causing exacerbation or unmasking of 
autoimmune disease (particularly thyroiditis). The polyethylene 
glycol molecule is a nontoxic polymer that is readily excreted in 
the urine. 
 Contraindications to interferon alfa therapy include hepatic de-
compensation, autoimmune disease, and history of cardiac arrhyth-
mia. Caution is advised in the setting of psychiatric disease, epilepsy, 
thyroid disease, ischemic cardiac disease, severe renal insufficiency, 
and cytopenia. Alfa interferons are abortifacient in primates and 
should not be administered in pregnancy. Potential drug-drug interac-
tions include increased theophylline and methadone levels. 
Co-administration with didanosine is not recommended because of a 
risk of hepatic failure, and co-administration with zidovudine may 
exacerbate cytopenias. 
 TREATMENT OF HEPATITIS B 
VIRUS INFECTION 
 The goals of chronic HBV therapy are to sustain suppression of 
HBV replication, resulting in slowing of progression of hepatic disease 
(with retardation of hepatic fibrosis and even reversal of cirrhosis), 
prevention of complications (ie, cirrhosis, hepatic failure, and hepa-
tocellular carcinoma), and reduction of the need for liver transplanta-
tion. This translates into suppression of HBV DNA to undetectable 
levels, seroconversion of HBeAg (or more rarely, HBsAg) from posi-
tive to negative, and reduction in elevated hepatic transaminase lev-
els. These end points are correlated with improvement in 
necroinflammatory disease, a decreased risk of hepatocellular carci-
noma and cirrhosis, and a decreased need for liver transplantation. 
All the currently licensed therapies achieve these goals. However, 
because current therapies suppress HBV replication without eradi-
cating the virus, initial responses may not be durable. The covalently 
closed circular (ccc) viral DNA exists in stable form indefinitely 
within the cell, serving as a reservoir for HBV throughout the life of 
the cell and resulting in the capacity to reactivate. Relapse is more 
common in patients co-infected with HBV and hepatitis D virus. 
 As of 2010 seven drugs were approved for treatment of chronic 
HBV infection in the United States: five oral nucleoside/nucleotide 
analogs (lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil, tenofovir, entecavir, 
 telbivudine) and two injectable interferon drugs (interferon alfa-2b, 
pegylated interferon alfa-2a) ( Table 49–6 ). The use of interferon 
has been supplanted by long-acting pegylated interferon, allowing 
884    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
once-weekly rather than daily or thrice-weekly dosing. In general, 
nucleoside/nucleotide analog therapies have better tolerability and 
ultimately produce a higher response rate than the interferons 
(though less rapid); however, response may be less sustained after 
discontinuation of the nucleoside/nucleotide therapies, and emer-
gence of resistance may be problematic. The nucleotides are effec-
tive in nucleoside resistance and vice versa. In addition, oral agents 
may be used in patients with decompensated liver disease, and the 
therapy is chronic rather than finite as with interferon therapy. 
 Several anti-HBV agents have anti-HIV activity as well, includ-
ing lamivudine, adefovir dipivoxil, and tenofovir. Emtricitabine, an 
antiretroviral NRTI, is under clinical evaluation for HBV treat-
ment in combination with tenofovir, which may be particularly 
suited to individuals co-infected with HIV and HBV. Because 
NRTI agents may be used in patients co-infected with HBV and 
HIV, it is important to note that acute exacerbation of hepatitis 
may occur upon discontinuation or interruption of these agents. 
 ADEFOVIR DIPIVOXIL 
 Although initially and abortively developed for treatment of HIV 
infection, adefovir dipivoxil gained approval, at lower and less 
toxic doses, for treatment of HBV infection. Adefovir dipivoxil is 
the diester prodrug of adefovir, an acyclic phosphonated adenine 
nucleotide analog ( Figure 49–2 ). It is phosphorylated by cellular 
kinases to the active diphosphate metabolite and then competi-
tively inhibits HBV DNA polymerase and causes chain termina-
tion after incorporation into viral DNA. Adefovir is active in vitro 
against a wide range of DNA and RNA viruses, including HBV, 
HIV, and herpesviruses. 
 Oral bioavailability of adefovir dipivoxil is about 59% and is 
unaffected by meals; it is rapidly and completely hydrolyzed to the 
parent compound by intestinal and blood esterases. Protein bind-
ing is low (< 5%). The intracellular half-life of the diphosphate is 
prolonged, ranging from 5 to 18 hours in various cells; this makes 
once-daily dosing feasible. Adefovir is excreted by a combination 
of glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion and requires 
dose adjustment for renal dysfunction; however, it may be admin-
istered to patients with decompensated liver disease. 
 Of the oral agents, adefovir may be slower to suppress HBV 
DNA levels and the least likely to induce HBeAg seroconversion. 
Although emergence of resistance is rare during the first year of 
therapy, it approaches 30% at the end of 4 years. Naturally occur-
ring (ie, primary) adefovir-resistant rt233 HBV mutants have 
recently been described. There is no cross-resistance between 
adefovir and lamivudine. 
 Adefovir dipivoxil is well tolerated. A dose-dependent nephro-
toxicity has been observed in clinical trials, manifested by 
increased serum creatinine with decreased serum phosphorous and 
more common in patients with baseline renal insufficiency and 
those receiving high doses (60 mg/d). Other potential adverse 
effects are headache, diarrhea, asthenia, and abdominal pain. As 
with other NRTI agents, lactic acidosis and hepatic steatosis are 
considered a risk owing to mitochondrial dysfunction. No clini-
cally important drug-drug interactions have been recognized to 
date; however, co-administration with drugs that reduce renal 
function or compete for active tubular secretion may increase 
serum concentrations of adefovir or the co-administered drug. 
Pivalic acid, a by-product of adefovir dipivoxil metabolism, can 
esterify free carnitine and result in decreased carnitine levels. 
However, it is not felt necessary to administer carnitine supple-
mentation with the low doses used to treat patients with HBV 
(10 mg/d). Adefovir is embryotoxic in rats at high doses and is 
genotoxic in preclinical studies. 
 ENTECAVIR 
 Entecavir is an orally administered guanosine nucleoside analog 
( Figure 49–2 ) that competitively inhibits all three functions of 
HBV DNA polymerase, including base priming, reverse transcrip-
tion of the negative strand, and synthesis of the positive strand of 
HBV DNA. Oral bioavailability approaches 100% but is decreased 
by food; therefore, entecavir should be taken on an empty stomach. 
The intracellular half-life of the active phosphorylated compound is 
15 hours. It is excreted by the kidney, undergoing both glomerular 
filtration and net tubular secretion. 
 Comparison with lamivudine in patients with chronic HBV 
infection demonstrated similar rates of HBeAg seroconversion but 
significantly higher rates of HBV DNA viral suppression with 
entecavir, normalization of serum alanine aminotransferase levels, 
and histologic improvement in the liver. Entecavir appears to have 
a higher barrier to the emergence of resistance than lamivudine. 
Although selection of resistant isolates with the S202G mutation 
has been documented during therapy, clinical resistance is rare 
(< 1% at 4 years). Also, decreased susceptibility to entecavir may 
occur in association with lamivudine resistance. 
 Entecavir is well tolerated. The most frequent adverse events are 
headache, fatigue, dizziness, and nausea. Lung adenomas and carci-
nomas in mice, hepatic adenomas and carcinomas in rats and mice, 
vascular tumors in mice, and brain gliomas and skin fibromas in rats 
have been observed at varying exposures. Co-administration of 
entecavir with drugs that reduce renal function or compete for 
active tubular secretion may increase serum concentrations of either 
entecavir or the co-administered drug. 
 LAMIVUDINE 
 The pharmacokinetics of lamivudine are described earlier in this 
chapter (see section, Nucleoside and Nucleotide Reverse 
Transcriptase Inhibitors). The more prolonged intracellular half-
life in HBV cell lines (17–19 hours) than in HIV-infected cell 
lines (10.5–15.5 hours) allows for lower doses and less frequent 
administration. Lamivudine can be safely administered to patients 
with decompensated liver disease. 
 Lamivudine inhibits HBV DNA polymerase and HIV reverse 
transcriptase by competing with deoxycytidine triphosphate for 
incorporation into the viral DNA, resulting in chain termination. 
Lamivudine achieves 3–4 log decreases in viral replication in most 
patients and suppression of HBV DNA to undetectable levels in 
about 44% of patients. Seroconversion of HBeAg from positive to 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    885
negative occurs in about 17% of patients and is durable at 3 years 
in about 70% of responders. Continuation of treatment for 
4–8 months after seroconversion may improve the durability 
of response. Response in HBeAg-negative patients is initially high 
but less durable. 
 Although lamivudine initially results in rapid and potent virus 
suppression, chronic therapy may ultimately be limited by the emer-
gence of lamivudine-resistant HBV isolates (eg, L180M or M204I/V), 
estimated to occur in 15–30% of patients at 1 year and 70% at 5 
years of therapy. Resistance has been associated with flares of hepati-
tis and progressive liver disease. Cross-resistance between lamivudine 
and emtricitabine or entecavir may occur; however, adefovir main-
tains activity against lamivudine-resistant strains of HBV. 
 In the doses used for HBV infection, lamivudine has an excel-
lent safety profile. Headache, nausea, and dizziness are rare. 
Co-infection with HIV may increase the risk of pancreatitis. No 
evidence of mitochondrial toxicity has been reported. 
 TELBIVUDINE 
 Telbivudine is a thymidine nucleoside analog with activity against 
HBV DNA polymerase. It is phosphorylated by cellular kinases to 
the active triphosphate form, which has an intracellular half-life of 
14 hours. The phosphorylated compound competitively inhibits 
HBV DNA polymerase, resulting in incorporation into viral DNA 
and chain termination. It is not active in vitro against HIV-1. 
 Oral bioavailability is unaffected by food. Plasma protein-
binding is low (3%) and distribution wide. The serum half-life is 
approximately 15 hours and excretion is renal. There are no 
known metabolites and no known interactions with the CYP450 
system or other drugs. 
 In a comparative trial against lamivudine in patients with 
chronic HBV infection, significantly more patients receiving 
 telbivudine achieved the combined end point of suppression of 
HBV DNA to less than 5 log copies/mL plus loss of serum 
HBeAg. The mean reduction in HBV DNA from baseline, the 
proportion with ALT normalization, and HBeAg seroconversion 
all were greater in those receiving telbivudine. Liver biopsies per-
formed 1 year later showed less scarring. However, emergence of 
resistance, typically due to the M204I mutation, may occur in up 
to 22% of patients with durations of therapy exceeding 1 year, and 
may result in virologic rebound. 
 Adverse effects are mild; they include fatigue, headache, 
abdominal pain, upper respiratory infection, increased creatine 
kinase levels, and nausea and vomiting. Both uncomplicated 
myalgia and myopathy have been reported, as has peripheral 
 neuropathy. As with other nucleoside analogs, lactic acidosis and 
severe hepatomegaly with steatosis may occur during therapy as 
well as flares of hepatitis after discontinuation. 
 TENOFOVIR 
 Tenofovir, a nucleotide analog of adenosine in use as an antiretro-
viral agent, has recently gained licensure for the treatment of 
patients with chronic HBV infection. The characteristics of teno-
fovir are described earlier in this chapter. Tenofovir maintains 
activity against lamivudine- and entecavir-resistant hepatitis virus 
isolates but has reduced activity against adefovir-resistant strains. 
Although similar in structure to adefovir dipivoxil, comparative 
trials showed a significantly higher rate of complete response, 
defined as serum HBV DNA levels less than 400 copies/mL, as 
well as of histologic improvement, in patients with chronic HBV 
infection receiving tenofovir than in those receiving adefovir 
dipivoxil. The emergence of resistance appears to be substantially 
less frequent during therapy with tenofovir than with adefovir. 
 INVESTIGATIONAL AGENTS 
 Compounds in clinical development for the treatment of patients 
with HBV infection include the nucleoside analogs  emtricitabine 
and clevudine , as well as the immunologic modulator  thymosin 
alpha-1, agents that facilitate uptake by the liver using conjuga-
tion to ligands, and RNA interference compounds. 
 TREATMENT OF HEPATITIS C 
INFECTION 
 In contrast to the treatment of patients with chronic HBV infection, 
the primary goal of treatment in patients with HCV infection is viral 
eradication. In clinical trials, the primary efficacy end point is typi-
cally achievement of sustained viral response (SVR), defined as the 
absence of detectable viremia for 6 months after completion of 
therapy. SVR is associated with improvement in liver histology, 
reduction in risk of hepatocellular carcinoma, and, occasionally, with 
regression of cirrhosis as well. Late relapse occurs in less than 5% of 
patients who achieve SVR. 
 In acute hepatitis C, the rate of clearance of the virus without 
therapy is estimated at 15–30%. In one (uncontrolled) study, 
treatment of acute infection with interferon alfa-2b, in doses 
higher than those used for chronic hepatitis C, resulted in a sus-
tained rate of clearance of 95% at 6 months. Therefore, if HCV 
RNA testing documents persistent viremia 12 weeks after initial 
seroconversion, antiviral therapy is recommended. 
 Treatment of patients with chronic HCV infection is recom-
mended for those with an increased risk for progression to cirrhosis. 
The parameters for selection are complex. In those who are to be 
treated, the current standard of treatment is once-weekly  pegylated 
interferon alfa in combination with daily oral ribavirin. Pegylated 
interferon alfa-2a and -2b have replaced their unmodified inter-
feron alfa counterparts because of superior efficacy in combination 
with ribavirin, regardless of genotype. It is also clear that combina-
tion therapy with oral ribavirin is more effective than monother-
apy with either interferon or ribavirin alone. Therefore, 
monotherapy with pegylated interferon alfa is recommended only 
in patients who cannot tolerate ribavirin. Factors associated with 
a favorable therapeutic response include HCV genotype 2 or 3, 
absence of cirrhosis on liver biopsy, and low pretreatment HCV 
RNA levels. 
886    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 RIBAVIRIN 
 Ribavirin is a guanosine analog that is phosphorylated intracellu-
larly by host cell enzymes. Although its mechanism of action has 
not been fully elucidated, it appears to interfere with the synthesis 
of guanosine triphosphate, to inhibit capping of viral messenger 
RNA, and to inhibit the viral RNA-dependent polymerase of 
certain viruses. Ribavirin triphosphate inhibits the replication of a 
wide range of DNA and RNA viruses, including influenza A and 
B, parainfluenza, respiratory syncytial virus, paramyxoviruses, 
HCV, and HIV-1. 
 The absolute oral bioavailability of ribavirin is 45–64%, 
increases with high-fat meals, and decreases with co-administration 
of antacids. Plasma protein binding is negligible, volume of distri-
bution is large, and cerebrospinal fluid levels are about 70% of 
those in plasma. Ribavirin elimination is primarily through the 
urine; therefore, clearance is decreased in patients with creatinine 
clearances less than 30 mL/min. 
 Higher doses of ribavirin (ie, 1000–1200 mg/d, according to 
weight, rather than 800 mg/d) or a longer duration of therapy or 
both may be more efficacious in those with a lower likelihood of 
response to therapy (eg, those with genotype 1 or 4) or in those 
who have relapsed. This must be balanced with an increased likeli-
hood of toxicity. A dose-dependent hemolytic anemia occurs in 
10–20% of patients. Other potential adverse effects are depres-
sion, fatigue, irritability, rash, cough, insomnia, nausea, and 
 pruritus. Contraindications to ribavirin therapy include anemia, 
end-stage renal failure, ischemic vascular disease, and pregnancy. 
Ribavirin is teratogenic and embryotoxic in animals as well as 
mutagenic in mammalian cells. Patients exposed to the drug 
should not conceive children for at least 6 months thereafter. 
NEW & INVESTIGATIONAL AGENTS 
 Among the agents for the treatment of HCV infection, those 
holding the greatest promise currently are the HCV NS3 protease 
inhibitors  telaprevir and  boceprevir . These highly potent agents 
are likely to decrease the overall duration of therapy, with possibly 
greater tolerability than current regimens. Another class of prom-
ising agents is the HCV NS5B polymerase inhibitors, including 
both nucleoside and nonnucleoside analogs. 
 ■ ANTIINFLUENZA AGENTS 
 Influenza virus strains are classified by their core proteins (ie, A, B, 
or C), species of origin (eg, avian, swine), and geographic site of 
isolation. Influenza A, the only strain that causes pandemics, is 
classified into 16 H (hemagglutinin) and 9 N (neuraminidase) 
known subtypes based on surface proteins. Although influenza B 
viruses usually infect only people, influenza A viruses can infect a 
variety of animal hosts. Current influenza A subtypes that are 
circulating among worldwide populations include H1N1, H1N2, 
and H3N2. Fifteen subtypes are known to infect birds, providing 
an extensive reservoir. Although avian influenza subtypes are 
 typically highly species-specific, they have on rare occasions 
crossed the species barrier to infect humans and cats. Viruses of 
the H5 and H7 subtypes (eg, H5N1, H7N7, and H7N3) may 
rapidly mutate within poultry flocks from a low to high patho-
genic form and have recently expanded their host range to cause 
both avian and human disease. Of particular concern is the avian 
H5N1 virus, which first caused human infection (including severe 
disease and death) in 1997 and has become endemic in Southeast 
Asian poultry since 2003. To date, the spread of H5N1 virus from 
person to person has been rare, limited, and unsustained. 
However, the emergence of the 2009 H1N1 influenza virus (pre-
viously called “swine flu”) in 2009–2010 caused the first influenza 
 pandemic (ie, global outbreak of disease caused by a new flu virus) 
in more than 40 years. 
 Although antiviral drugs available for influenza have activity 
against influenza A, many or most of the circulating strains of avian 
H5N1, as well as H1 and H3 strains causing seasonal influenza in 
the United States, are resistant to amantadine and rimantadine. 
Resistance to oseltamivir has also increased dramatically. 
 OSELTAMIVIR & ZANAMIVIR 
 The neuraminidase inhibitors oseltamivir and zanamivir, analogs 
of sialic acid, interfere with release of progeny influenza virus 
from infected host cells, thus halting the spread of infection 
within the respiratory tract. These agents competitively and 
reversibly interact with the active enzyme site to inhibit viral 
neuraminidase activity at low nanomolar concentrations. 
Inhibition of viral neuraminidase results in clumping of newly 
released influenza virions to each other and to the membrane of 
the infected cell. Unlike amantadine and rimantadine, oseltami-
vir and zanamivir have activity against both influenza A and 
influenza B viruses. Early administration is crucial because repli-
cation of influenza virus peaks at 24–72 hours after the onset of 
illness. When a 5-day course of therapy is initiated within 36–48 
hours after the onset of symptoms, the duration of illness is 
decreased by 1–2 days compared with those on placebo, severity 
is diminished, and the incidence of secondary complications in 
children and adults decreases. Once-daily prophylaxis is 70–90% 
effective in preventing disease after exposure. Oseltamivir is 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for 
patients 1 year and older, whereas zanamivir is approved in 
patients 7 years or older. 
 Oseltamivir is an orally administered prodrug that is activated 
by hepatic esterases and widely distributed throughout the body. 
The dosage is 75 mg twice daily for 5 days for treatment and 
75 mg once daily for prevention; dosage must be modified in 
patients with renal insufficiency. Oral bioavailability is approximately 
80%, plasma protein binding is low, and concentrations in the 
middle ear and sinus fluid are similar to those in plasma. The half-
life of oseltamivir is 6–10 hours, and excretion is by glomerular 
filtration and tubular secretion in the urine. Probenecid reduces 
renal clearance of oseltamivir by 50%. Serum concentrations of 
oseltamivir carboxylate, the active metabolite of oseltamivir, 
increase with declining renal function; therefore, dosage should be 
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    887
adjusted in such patients. Potential adverse effects include nausea, 
vomiting, and abdominal pain, which occur in 5–10% of patients 
early in therapy but tend to resolve spontaneously. Taking oselta-
mivir with food does not interfere with absorption and may 
decrease nausea and vomiting. Headache, fatigue, and diarrhea 
have also been reported and appear to be more common with 
prophylactic use. Rash is rare. Transient neuropsychiatric events 
(self-injury or delirium) have been reported, particularly in adoles-
cents and adults living in Japan. 
 Zanamivir is delivered directly to the respiratory tract via 
 inhalation. Ten to twenty percent of the active compound reaches 
the lungs, and the remainder is deposited in the oropharynx. The 
concentration of the drug in the respiratory tract is estimated to 
be more than 1000 times the 50% inhibitory concentration for 
neuraminidase, and the pulmonary half-life is 2.8 hours. Five to 
fifteen percent of the total dose (10 mg twice daily for 5 days for 
treatment and 10 mg once daily for prevention) is absorbed and 
excreted in the urine with minimal metabolism. Potential adverse 
effects include cough, bronchospasm (occasionally severe), revers-
ible decrease in pulmonary function, and transient nasal and 
throat discomfort. Zanamivir administration is not recommended 
for patients with underlying airway disease. 
 Resistance to oseltamivir may be associated with point muta-
tions in the viral hemagglutinin or neuraminidase (eg, the H275Y 
mutation) genes. Rates of resistance to oseltamivir among seasonal 
H1N1 viruses have risen abruptly and dramatically worldwide, 
reaching 97.4% in tested strains in the United States from 2008 
to 2009. Resistance to oseltamivir in pandemic H1N1 viruses and 
resistance to zanamivir in seasonal and pandemic H1N1 viruses 
are rare. All influenza A (H3N2) and influenza B viruses were 
susceptible to both oseltamivir and zanamivir. Swine-origin 
 influenza A (H1N1) viruses are nearly always susceptible to both 
oseltamivir and zanamivir. 
 AMANTADINE & RIMANTADINE 
 Amantadine (1-aminoadamantane hydrochloride) and its α-methyl 
derivative, rimantadine, are tricyclic amines of the adamantane 
family that block the M2 proton ion channel of the virus particle 
and inhibit uncoating of the viral RNA within infected host cells, 
thus preventing its replication. They are active against influenza A 
only. Rimantadine is four to ten times more active than amanta-
dine in vitro. Amantadine is well absorbed and 67% protein-
bound. Its plasma half-life is 12–18 hours and varies by creatinine 
clearance. Rimantadine is about 40% protein-bound and has a 
half-life of 24–36 hours. Nasal secretion and salivary levels 
approximate those in the serum, and cerebrospinal fluid levels are 
52–96% of those in the serum; nasal mucus concentrations of 
rimantadine average 50% higher than those in plasma. Amantadine 
is excreted unchanged in the urine, whereas rimantadine under-
goes extensive metabolism by hydroxylation, conjugation, and 
glucuronidation before urinary excretion. Dose reductions are 
required for both agents in the elderly and in patients with renal 
insufficiency, and for rimantadine in patients with marked hepatic 
insufficiency. 
 In the absence of resistance, both amantadine and rimantadine, 
at 100 mg twice daily or 200 mg once daily, are 70–90% protective 
in the prevention of clinical illness when initiated before exposure. 
When begun within 1–2 days after the onset of illness, the duration 
of fever and systemic symptoms is reduced by 1–2 days. 
 The primary target for both agents is the M2 protein within 
the viral membrane, incurring both influenza A specificity and a 
mutation-prone site that results in the rapid development of resis-
tance in up to 50% of treated individuals. Resistant isolates with 
single-point mutations are genetically stable, retain pathogenicity, 
can be transmitted to close contacts, and may be shed chronically 
by immunocompromised patients. The marked increase in the 
prevalence of resistance to both agents in clinical isolates over the 
last decade, in influenza A H1N1 as well as H3N2, has limited 
the usefulness of these agents for either the treatment or the pre-
vention of influenza. Cross-resistance to zanamivir and oseltamivir 
does not occur. 
 The most common adverse effects are gastrointestinal (nausea, 
anorexia) and central nervous system (nervousness, difficulty in 
concentrating, insomnia, light-headedness); side effects are dose-
related and may diminish or disappear after the first week of 
treatment despite continued drug ingestion. More serious side 
effects (eg, marked behavioral changes, delirium, hallucinations, 
agitation, and seizures) may be due to alteration of dopamine 
neurotransmission (see  Chapter 28 ); are less frequent with riman-
tadine than with amantadine; are associated with high plasma 
concentrations; may occur more frequently in patients with renal 
insufficiency, seizure disorders, or advanced age; and may increase 
with concomitant antihistamines, anticholinergic drugs, hydro-
chlorothiazide, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Clinical 
manifestations of anticholinergic activity tend to be present in 
acute amantadine overdose. Both agents are teratogenic and 
embryotoxic in rodents, and birth defects have been reported 
after exposure during pregnancy. 
 INVESTIGATIONAL AGENTS 
 The neuraminidase inhibitor  peramivir , a cyclopentane analog, 
has activity against both influenza A and B viruses. Peramivir 
received temporary emergency use authorization by FDA for 
intravenous administration in November 2009 due to the H1N1 
pandemic. The drug is marketed in South Korea but has not yet 
been licensed in the United States. Clinical data on cross-resistance 
to oseltamivir and zanamivir are not yet available. Reported side 
effects include diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, and neutropenia. 
 ■ OTHER ANTIVIRAL AGENTS  
 INTERFERONS 
 Interferons have been studied for numerous clinical indications. In 
addition to HBV and HCV infections (see Antihepatitis Agents), 
intralesional injection of interferon alfa-2b or alfa-n3 may be used 
for treatment of condylomata acuminata (see  Chapter 61 ). 
888    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 RIBAVIRIN 
 In addition to oral administration for HCV infection in combina-
tion with interferon alfa (see Antihepatitis Agents), aerosolized 
 ribavirin is administered by nebulizer (20 mg/mL for 12–18 hours 
per day) to children and infants with severe respiratory syncytial virus 
(RSV) bronchiolitis or pneumonia to reduce the severity and dura-
tion of illness. Aerosolized ribavirin has also been used to treat influ-
enza A and B infections but has not gained widespread use. Systemic 
absorption is low (< 1%). Aerosolized ribavirin is generally well toler-
ated but may cause conjunctival or bronchial irritation. Health care 
workers should be protected against extended inhalation exposure. 
The aerosolized drug may precipitate on contact lenses. 
 Intravenous ribavirin decreases mortality in patients with Lassa 
fever and other viral hemorrhagic fevers if started early. High con-
centrations inhibit West Nile virus in vitro, but clinical data are 
lacking. Clinical benefit has been reported in cases of severe measles 
pneumonitis and certain encephalitides, and continuous infusion 
of ribavirin has decreased virus shedding in several patients with 
severe lower respiratory tract influenza or parainfluenza infections. 
At steady state, cerebrospinal fluid levels are about 70% of those in 
plasma. 
 PALIVIZUMAB 
 Palivizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against 
an epitope in the A antigen site on the F surface protein of RSV. It 
is licensed for the prevention of RSV infection in high-risk infants 
and children, such as premature infants and those with bronchopul-
monary dysplasia or congenital heart disease. A placebo-controlled 
trial using once-monthly intramuscular injections (15 mg/kg) for 
5 months beginning at the start of the RSV season demonstrated a 
55% reduction in the risk of hospitalization for RSV in treated 
patients, as well as decreases in the need for supplemental oxygen, 
the illness severity score, and the need for intensive care. Although 
resistant strains have been isolated in the laboratory, no resistant 
clinical isolates have yet been identified. Potential adverse effects 
include upper respiratory tract infection, fever, rhinitis, rash, 
 diarrhea, vomiting, cough, otitis media, and elevation in serum 
aminotransferase levels. 
 A number of other agents are under investigation for the treat-
ment or prophylaxis of patients with RSV infection, including the 
RNA interference (RNAi) therapeutic ALN-RSV01, the human-
ized monoclonal antibody motavizumab, and the benzodiazepine 
RSV604. 
 IMIQUIMOD 
 Imiquimod is an immune response modifier shown to be effective 
in the topical treatment of external genital and perianal warts (ie, 
condyloma acuminatum; see  Chapter 61 ). The 5% cream is 
applied three times weekly and washed off 6–10 hours after each 
application. Recurrences appear to be less common than after 
ablative therapies. Imiquimod may also be effective against mol-
luscum contagiosum but is not licensed in the United States for 
this indication. Local skin reactions are the most common adverse 
effect; these tend to resolve within weeks after therapy. However, 
pigmentary skin changes may persist. Systemic adverse effects such 
as fatigue and influenza-like syndrome have occasionally been 
reported. 
Abacavir
Oral (Ziagen): 300 mg tablets; 20 mg/mL solution
Oral (Epzicom): 600 mg plus 300 mg lamivudine
Oral (Trizivir): 300 mg tablets in combination with 150 mg 
 lamivudine and 300 mg zidovudine
Acyclovir (generic, Zovirax)
Oral: 200 mg capsules; 400, 800 mg tablets; 200 mg/5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL; powder to reconstitute for injection (500, 
1000 mg/vial)
Topical: 5% ointment
Adefovir (Hepsera)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
Amantadine (generic, Symmetrel)
Oral: 100 mg capsules, tablets; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Atazanavir (Reyataz)
Oral: 100, 150, 200 mg capsules
Boceprivir (Victrelis)
Oral: 375 mg tablets
Cidofovir (Vistide)
Parenteral: 375 mg/vial (75 mg/mL) for IV injection
Darunavir (Prezista)
Oral: 300 mg tablets (must be taken with ritonavir)
Delavirdine (Rescriptor)
Oral: 100, 200 mg tablets
Didanosine (dideoxyinosine, ddI)
Oral (Videx): 25, 50, 100, 150, 200 mg tablets; 100, 167, 250 mg 
powder for oral solution; 2, 4 g powder for pediatric solution
Oral (Videx-EC): 125, 200, 250, 400 mg delayed-release capsules
Docosanol (Abreva) (over-the-counter)
Topical: 10% cream
Efavirenz (Sustiva)
Oral: 50, 100, 200 mg capsules; 600 mg tablets
Emtricitabine
Oral (Emtriva): 200 mg tablets
Oral (Truvada): 200 mg plus 300 mg tenofovir tablets
Oral (Atripla): 200 mg plus 300 mg tenofovir plus 600 mg efavirenz
Enfuvirtide (Fuzeon)
Parenteral: 90 mg/mL for injection
Entecavir (Baraclude)
Oral: 0.5, 1 mg tablets; 0.05 mg/mL oral solution
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Abacavir
Oral (Ziagen): 300 mg tablets; 20 mg/mL solution
Oral (Epzicom): 600 mg plus 300 mg lamivudine
Oral (Trizivir): 300 mg tablets in combination with 150 mg 
lamivudine and 300 mg zidovudine
Acyclovir (generic, Zovirax)
Oral: 200 mg capsules; 400, 800 mg tablets; 200 mg/5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL; powder to reconstitute for injection (500,
1000 mg/vial)
Topical: 5% ointment
Adefovir (Hepsera)
Oral: 10 mg tablets
Amantadine (generic, Symmetrel)
Oral: 100 mg capsules, tablets; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Atazanavir (Reyataz)
Oral: 100, 150, 200 mg capsules
Boceprivir (Victrelis)
Oral: 375 mg tablets
Cidofovir (Vistide)
Parenteral: 375 mg/vial (75 mg/mL) for IV injection
Darunavir (Prezista)
Oral: 300 mg tablets (must be taken with ritonavir)
Delavirdine (Rescriptor)
Oral: 100, 200 mg tablets
Didanosine (dideoxyinosine, ddI)
Oral (Videx): 25, 50, 100, 150, 200 mg tablets; 100, 167, 250 mg 
powder for oral solution; 2, 4 g powder for pediatric solution
Oral (Videx-EC): 125, 200, 250, 400 mg delayed-release capsules
Docosanol (Abreva) (over-the-counter)
Topical: 10% cream
Efavirenz (Sustiva)
Oral: 50, 100, 200 mg capsules; 600 mg tablets
Emtricitabine
Oral (Emtriva): 200 mg tablets
Oral (Truvada): 200 mg plus 300 mg tenofovir tablets
Oral (Atripla): 200 mg plus 300 mg tenofovir plus 600 mg efavirenz
Enfuvirtide (Fuzeon)
Parenteral: 90 mg/mL for injection
Entecavir (Baraclude)
Oral: 0.5, 1 mg tablets; 0.05 mg/mL oral solution
CHAPTER 49 Antiviral Agents    889
Etravirine (Intelence)
Oral: 100 mg tablets
Famciclovir (Famvir)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mg tablets
Fosamprenavir (Lexiva)
Oral: 700 mg tablets
Foscarnet (Foscavir)
Parenteral: 24 mg/mL for IV injection
Ganciclovir (Cytovene)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules
Parenteral: 500 mg/vial for IV injection
Intraocular implant (Vitrasert): 4.5 mg ganciclovir/implant
Imiquimod (Aldara)
Topical: 5% cream
Indinavir (Crixivan)
Oral: 100, 200, 333, 400 mg capsules
Interferon alfa-2a (Roferon-A)
Parenteral: 3, 6, 9, 36 million IU vials
Interferon alfa-2b (Intron A)
Parenteral: 3, 5, 10, 18, 25, and 50 million IU vials
Interferon alfa-2b (Rebetron)
Parenteral: 3 million IU vials (supplied with oral ribavirin, 200 mg 
capsules)
Interferon alfa-n3 (Alferon N)
Parenteral: 5 million IU/vial
Interferon alfacon-1 (Infergen)
Parenteral: 9 and 15 mcg vials
Lamivudine
Oral (Epivir): 150, 300 mg tablets; 10 mg/mL oral solution
Oral (Epivir-HBV): 100 mg tablets; 5 mg/mL solution
Oral (Combivir): 150 mg tablets in combination with 300 mg 
 zidovudine
Oral (Trizivir): 150 mg tablets in combination with 300 mg abacavir 
and 300 mg zidovudine
Lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra)
Oral: 133.3 mg/33.3 mg capsules; 80 mg/20 mg per mL solution
Maraviroc (Selzentry)
Oral: 150, 300 mg tablets
Nelfinavir (Viracept)
Oral: 250, 625 mg tablets; 50 mg/g powder
Nevirapine (Viramune)
Oral: 200 mg tablets; 50 mg/5 mL suspension
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu)
Oral: 75 mg capsules; powder to reconstitute as suspension 
(12 mg/mL)
Palivizumab (Synagis)
Parenteral: 50, 100 mg/vial
Peginterferon alfa-2a (pegylated interferon alfa-2a, Pegasys)
Parenteral: 180 mcg/mL
Peginterferon alfa-2b (pegylated interferon alfa-2b, PEG-Intron)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute as 100, 160, 240, 300 mcg/mL 
injection
Penciclovir (Denavir)
Topical: 1% cream
Raltegravir (Isentress)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Ribavirin
Aerosol (Virazole): powder to reconstitute for aerosol; 6 g/100 mL vial
Oral (Rebetol, generic): 200 mg capsules, tablets; 40 mg/mL oral 
solution
Oral (Rebetron): 200 mg in combination with 3 million units 
 interferon alfa-2b (Intron-A)
Rilpivirine
Oral (Edurant): 25 mg tablets
Oral (Complera): 200 mg emtricitabine, 25 mg rilpivirine, 300 mg 
tenofovir) tablets
Rimantadine (Flumadine)
Oral: 100 mg tablets; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Ritonavir (Norvir)
Oral: 100 mg capsules; 80 mg/mL oral solution
Saquinavir
Oral (Invirase): 200 mg hard gel capsules, 500 mg tablets
Stavudine
Oral (Zerit): 15, 20, 30, 40 mg capsules; powder for 1 mg/mL oral 
solution
Oral extended-release (Zerit XR): 37.5, 50, 75, 100 mg capsules
Telaprivir (Incivik)
Oral: 200 mg capsules
Telbivudine (Tyzeka)
Oral: 600 mg tablets
Tenofovir (Viread)
Oral: 300 mg tablets
Tipranavir (Aptivus)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Trifluridine (Viroptic)
Topical: 1% ophthalmic solution
Valacyclovir (Valtrex)
Oral: 500, 1000 mg tablets
Valganciclovir (Valcyte)
Oral: 450 mg capsules
Zalcitabine (dideoxycytidine, ddC) (Hivid)
Oral: 0.375, 0.75 mg tablets
Zanamivir (Relenza)
Inhalational: 5 mg/blister
Zidovudine (azidothymidine, AZT) (Retrovir)
Oral: 100 mg capsules, 300 mg tablets, 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Oral (Combivir): 300 mg tablets in combination with 150 mg 
 lamivudine
Oral (Trizivir): 300 mg tablets in combination with 150 mg 
 lamivudine and 300 mg zidovudine
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL
Etravirine (Intelence)
Oral: 100 mg tablets
Famciclovir (Famvir)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mg tablets
Fosamprenavir (Lexiva)
Oral: 700 mg tablets
Foscarnet (Foscavir)
Parenteral: 24 mg/mL for IV injection
Ganciclovir (Cytovene)
Oral: 250, 500 mg capsules
Parenteral: 500 mg/vial for IV injection
Intraocular implant (Vitrasert): 4.5 mg ganciclovir/implant
Imiquimod (Aldara)
Topical: 5% cream
Indinavir (Crixivan)
Oral: 100, 200, 333, 400 mg capsules
Interferon alfa-2a (Roferon-A)
Parenteral: 3, 6, 9, 36 million IU vials
Interferon alfa-2b (Intron A)
Parenteral: 3, 5, 10, 18, 25, and 50 million IU vials
Interferon alfa-2b (Rebetron)
Parenteral: 3 million IU vials (supplied with oral ribavirin, 200 mg
capsules)
Interferon alfa-n3 (Alferon N)
Parenteral: 5 million IU/vial
Interferon alfacon-1 (Infergen)
Parenteral: 9 and 15 mcg vials
Lamivudine
Oral (Epivir): 150, 300 mg tablets; 10 mg/mL oral solution
Oral (Epivir-HBV): 100 mg tablets; 5 mg/mL solution
Oral (Combivir): 150 mg tablets in combination with 300 mg 
zidovudine
Oral (Trizivir): 150 mg tablets in combination with 300 mg abacavir
and 300 mg zidovudine
Lopinavir/ritonavir (Kaletra)
Oral: 133.3 mg/33.3 mg capsules; 80 mg/20 mg per mL solution
Maraviroc (Selzentry)
Oral: 150, 300 mg tablets
Nelfinavir (Viracept)
Oral: 250, 625 mg tablets; 50 mg/g powder
Nevirapine (Viramune)
Oral: 200 mg tablets; 50 mg/5 mL suspension
Oseltamivir (Tamiflu)
Oral: 75 mg capsules; powder to reconstitute as suspension 
(12 mg/mL)
Palivizumab (Synagis)
Parenteral: 50, 100 mg/vial
Peginterferon alfa-2a (pegylated interferon alfa-2a, Pegasys)
Parenteral: 180 mcg/mL
Peginterferon alfa-2b (pegylated interferon alfa-2b, PEG-Intron)
Parenteral: powder to reconstitute as 100, 160, 240, 300 mcg/mL
injection
Penciclovir (Denavir)
Topical: 1% cream
Raltegravir (Isentress)
Oral: 400 mg tablets
Ribavirin
Aerosol (Virazole): powder to reconstitute for aerosol; 6 g/100 mL vial
Oral (Rebetol, generic): 200 mg capsules, tablets; 40 mg/mL oral 
solution
Oral (Rebetron): 200 mg in combination with 3 million units
interferon alfa-2b (Intron-A)
Rilpivirine
Oral (Edurant): 25 mg tablets
Oral (Complera): 200 mg emtricitabine, 25 mg rilpivirine, 300 mg
tenofovir) tablets
Rimantadine (Flumadine)
Oral: 100 mg tablets; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Ritonavir (Norvir)
Oral: 100 mg capsules; 80 mg/mL oral solution
Saquinavir
Oral (Invirase): 200 mg hard gel capsules, 500 mg tablets
Stavudine
Oral (Zerit): 15, 20, 30, 40 mg capsules; powder for 1 mg/mL oral
solution
Oral extended-release (Zerit XR): 37.5, 50, 75, 100 mg capsules
Telaprivir (Incivik)
Oral: 200 mg capsules
Telbivudine (Tyzeka)
Oral: 600 mg tablets
Tenofovir (Viread)
Oral: 300 mg tablets
Tipranavir (Aptivus)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Trifluridine (Viroptic)
Topical: 1% ophthalmic solution
Valacyclovir (Valtrex)
Oral: 500, 1000 mg tablets
Valganciclovir (Valcyte)
Oral: 450 mg capsules
Zalcitabine (dideoxycytidine, ddC) (Hivid)
Oral: 0.375, 0.75 mg tablets
Zanamivir (Relenza)
Inhalational: 5 mg/blister
Zidovudine (azidothymidine, AZT) (Retrovir)
Oral: 100 mg capsules, 300 mg tablets, 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Oral (Combivir): 300 mg tablets in combination with 150 mg 
lamivudine
Oral (Trizivir): 300 mg tablets in combination with 150 mg
lamivudine and 300 mg zidovudine
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL
890    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Combination antiviral therapy against both HIV and hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) is indicated in this patient, given the high viral 
load and low CD4 cell count. However, the use of methadone 
and possibly excessive alcohol consumption necessitate cau-
tion. Tenofovir and emtricitabine (two nucleoside/nucleotide 
reverse transcriptase inhibitors) would be a potentially excel-
lent choice as components of an initial regimen, since both 
are active against HIV-1 and HBV, do not interact with 
methadone, and are available in a once-daily, fixed-dose 
combination. Efavirenz, a nonnucleoside reverse tran-
scriptase inhibitor, could be added and still maintain a once-
daily regimen. Prior to initiation of this regimen, renal 
function should be checked, and a bone mineral density test 
should be considered. Pregnancy should be ruled out, and 
the patient should be counseled that efavirenz should not be 
taken during pregnancy. The potential for lowered metha-
done levels with efavirenz necessitates close monitoring and 
possibly an increased dose of methadone.
 REFERENCES 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Sexually transmitted diseases treat-
ment guidelines, 2006. MMWR 2006;55(RR-11):16. 
 Drugs for non-HIV viral infections. Med Lett Drugs Ther 2010;98:71. 
 Ghany MG et al: Diagnosis, management, and treatment of hepatitis C: An 
update. Hepatology 2009;49:1335. 
 Hirsch MS: Antiviral drug resistance testing in adult HIV-1 infection: 2008 rec-
ommendations of an international AIDS society-USA panel. Clin Infect Dis 
2008;47:266. 
 Lok ASF, McMahon BJ: Chronic hepatitis B: Update 2009. Hepatology 
2009;50:1. 
 Moss RB et al: Targeting pandemic influenza: A primer on influenza antivirals  and 
drug resistance. J Anitimicrob Chemother 2010;5:1086. 
 Panel on Treatment of HIV-Infected Pregnant Women and Prevention of Perinatal 
Transmission:  Recommendations for Use of Antiretroviral Drugs in Pregnant 
HIV-1-Infected Women for Maternal Health and Interventions to Reduce 
Perinatal HIV Transmission in the United States. May 24, 2010;1. Available at 
 http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/PerinatalGL.pdf . 
 Thompson MA et al: Antiretroviral treatment of adult HIV infection: 2010 recom-
mendations of the International AIDS Society USA panel. JAMA 
2010;304:321. 
 RELEVANT WEB SITES 
 http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov 
 http://www.hiv-druginteractions.org 
 http://www.hivinsite.com 
 http://www.iasusa.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
891
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 ■ METRONIDAZOLE, 
MUPIROCIN, POLYMYXINS, & 
URINARY ANTISEPTICS 
 METRONIDAZOLE 
 Metronidazole is a nitroimidazole antiprotozoal drug (see  Chapter 
52 ) that also has potent antibacterial activity against anaerobes, 
including  Bacteroides and  Clostridium species. Metronidazole is 
selectively absorbed by anaerobic bacteria and sensitive protozoa. 
Once taken up by anaerobes, it is nonenzymatically reduced by 
reacting with reduced ferredoxin. This reduction results in prod-
ucts that are toxic to anaerobic cells, and allows for their selective 
accumulation in anaerobes. The metabolites of metronidazole are 
taken up into bacterial DNA, forming unstable molecules. This 
action only occurs when metronidazole is partially reduced, and 
because this reduction usually happens only in anaerobic cells, it 
has relatively little effect on human cells or aerobic bacteria. 
 Metronidazole is well absorbed after oral administration, is widely 
distributed in tissues, and reaches serum levels of 4–6 mcg/mL after 
a 250-mg oral dose. It can also be given intravenously or by rectal 
suppository. The drug penetrates well into the cerebrospinal fluid 
and brain, reaching levels similar to those in serum. Metronidazole 
is metabolized in the liver and may accumulate in hepatic insuf-
ficiency. 
 Metronidazole is indicated for treatment of anaerobic or mixed 
intra-abdominal infections (in combination with other agents 
with activity against aerobic organisms), vaginitis (trichomonas 
infection, bacterial vaginosis),  Clostridium difficile colitis, and 
brain abscess. The typical dosage is 500 mg three times daily orally 
or intravenously (30 mg/kg/d). Vaginitis may respond to a single 
2 g dose. A vaginal gel is available for topical use. 
 Adverse effects include nausea, diarrhea, stomatitis, and 
peripheral neuropathy with prolonged use. Metronidazole has a 
disulfiram-like effect, and patients should be instructed to avoid 
50
Miscellaneous 
Antimicrobial Agents; 
Disinfectants, Antiseptics, 
& Sterilants
 Daniel H. Deck, PharmD, & Lisa G. Winston, MD∗ 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 66-year-old man is admitted to the intensive care unit of a 
hospital for treatment of community-acquired pneumonia. He 
receives ceftriaxone and azithromycin upon admission, rapidly 
improves, and is transferred to a semiprivate ward room. On 
day 7 of his hospitalization, he develops copious diarrhea with 
eight bowel movements that day but is otherwise clinically 
stable.  Clostridium difficile- associated colitis is suspected and a 
toxin assay is sent to confirm this diagnosis. What is an accept-
able treatment for the patient’s diarrhea? The patient is 
transferred to a single-bed room the following day. The house-
keeping staff asks if the old room should be cleaned with 
alcohol or bleach. Which product should be chosen? Why? 
 ∗ The authors thank Henry F. Chambers, MD, the author of this chapter 
in previous editions, for his contributions.
892    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
alcohol. Although teratogenic in some animals, metronidazole has 
not been associated with this effect in humans. Other properties 
of metronidazole are discussed in  Chapter 52 . 
 A structurally similar agent,  tinidazole , is a once-daily drug 
approved for treatment of trichomonas infection, giardiasis, and 
amebiasis. It also is active against anaerobic bacteria, but is not 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treat-
ment of anaerobic infections. 
 MUPIROCIN 
 Mupirocin (pseudomonic acid) is a natural substance produced by 
 Pseudomonas fluorescens. It is rapidly inactivated after absorption, 
and systemic levels are undetectable. It is available as an ointment 
for topical application. 
 Mupirocin is active against gram-positive cocci, including 
methicillin-susceptible and methicillin-resistant strains of 
 Staphylococcus aureus . Mupirocin inhibits staphylococcal isoleucyl 
tRNA synthetase. Low-level resistance, defined as a minimum 
inhibitory concentration (MIC) of up to 100 mcg/mL, is due to 
point mutation in the gene of the target enzyme. Low-level resis-
tance has been observed after prolonged use. However, local con-
centrations achieved with topical application are well above this 
MIC, and this level of resistance does not lead to clinical failure. 
High-level resistance, with MICs exceeding 1000 mcg/mL, is due 
to the presence of a second isoleucyl tRNA synthetase gene, which 
is plasmid-encoded. High-level resistance results in complete loss 
of activity. Strains with high-level resistance have caused hospital-
associated (nosocomial) outbreaks of staphylococcal infection and 
colonization. Although higher rates of resistance are encountered 
with intensive use of mupirocin, more than 95% of staphylococcal 
isolates are still susceptible. 
 Mupirocin is indicated for topical treatment of minor skin 
infections, such as impetigo (see  Chapter 61 ). Topical application 
over large infected areas, such as decubitus ulcers or open surgical 
wounds, is an important factor leading to emergence of mupiro-
cin-resistant strains and is not recommended. Mupirocin effec-
tively eliminates  S aureus nasal carriage by patients or health care 
workers, but results are mixed with respect to its ability to prevent 
subsequent staphylococcal infection. 
 POLYMYXINS 
 The polymyxins are a group of basic peptides active against gram-
negative bacteria and include  polymyxin B and  polymyxin E 
(colistin) . Polymyxins act as cationic detergents. They attach to 
and disrupt bacterial cell membranes. They also bind and inacti-
vate endotoxin. Gram-positive organisms,  Proteus sp, and  Neisseria sp 
are resistant. 
 Owing to their significant toxicity with systemic administra-
tion, polymyxins are largely restricted to topical use. Ointments 
containing polymyxin B, 0.5 mg/g, in mixtures with bacitracin or 
neomycin (or both) are commonly applied to infected superficial 
skin lesions. Emergence of strains of  Acinetobacter baumannii , 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacteriaceae that are resistant 
to all other agents has renewed interest in polymyxins as a paren-
teral agents for salvage therapy of infections caused by these 
organisms. 
 FIDAXOMICIN 
 Fidaxomicin is a narrow-spectrum, macrocyclic antibiotic that is 
active against gram-positive aerobes and anaerobes but lacks 
activity against gram-negative bacteria. Fidaxomicin inhibits bac-
terial protein synthesis by binding to the sigma subunit of RNA 
polymerase. When administered orally, systemic absorption is 
negligible but fecal concentrations are high. Fidaxomicin has been 
approved by the FDA for the treatment for  C difficile colitis in 
adults. Preliminary data have demonstrated it is as effective as oral 
vancomycin and may be associated with lower rates of relapsing 
disease. The FDA has granted orphan drug designation to all for-
mulations of fidaxomicin for the treatment of  C difficile infection 
in pediatric patients aged 16 years and younger. Fidaxomicin is 
administered as 200 mg orally twice daily. 
 URINARY ANTISEPTICS 
 Urinary antiseptics are oral agents that exert antibacterial activity 
in the urine but have little or no systemic antibacterial effect. 
Their usefulness is limited to lower urinary tract infections. 
Prolonged suppression of bacteriuria with urinary antiseptics may 
be desirable in chronic or recurrent urinary tract infections in 
which eradication of infection by short-term systemic therapy has 
not been possible. 
 Nitrofurantoin 
 At therapeutic doses,  nitrofurantoin is bactericidal for many 
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria; however,  P aeruginosa 
and many strains of  Proteus are inherently resistant. Nitrofurantoin 
has a complex mechanism of action that is not fully understood. 
Antibacterial activity appears to correlate with rapid intracellular 
conversion of nitrofurantoin to highly reactive intermediates by 
bacterial reductases. These intermediates react nonspecifically 
with many ribosomal proteins and disrupt the synthesis of pro-
teins, RNA, DNA, and metabolic processes. It is not known 
which of the multiple actions of nitrofurantoin is primarily 
responsible for its bactericidal activity. 
 There is no cross-resistance between nitrofurantoin and other 
antimicrobial agents, and resistance emerges slowly. As resistance 
to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones has 
become more common in  Escherichia coli , nitrofurantoin has 
become an important alternative oral agent for treatment of 
uncomplicated urinary tract infection. 
 Nitrofurantoin is well absorbed after ingestion. It is metabo-
lized and excreted so rapidly that no systemic antibacterial action 
is achieved. The drug is excreted into the urine by both glomerular 
CHAPTER 50 Miscellaneous Antimicrobial Agents; Disinfectants, Antiseptics, & Sterilants    893
filtration and tubular secretion. With average daily doses, concen-
trations of 200 mcg/mL are reached in urine. In renal failure, 
urine levels are insufficient for antibacterial action, but high blood 
levels may cause toxicity. Nitrofurantoin is contraindicated in 
patients with significant renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance 
< 60 mL/min). 
 The dosage for urinary tract infection in adults is 100 mg 
orally taken four times daily. The drug should not be used to treat 
upper urinary tract infection. Oral nitrofurantoin can be given for 
months for the suppression of chronic urinary tract infection. It is 
desirable to keep urinary pH below 5.5, which greatly enhances 
drug activity. A single daily dose of nitrofurantoin, 100 mg, can 
prevent recurrent urinary tract infections in some women. 
 Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting are the principal side effects of 
nitrofurantoin. Neuropathies and hemolytic anemia occur in 
patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. 
Nitrofurantoin antagonizes the action of nalidixic acid. Rashes, 
pulmonary infiltration and fibrosis, and other hypersensitivity 
reactions have been reported. 
 Methenamine Mandelate & 
Methenamine Hippurate 
 Methenamine mandelate is the salt of mandelic acid and methe-
namine and possesses properties of both of these urinary antisep-
tics. Methenamine hippurate is the salt of hippuric acid and 
methenamine. Below pH 5.5, methenamine releases formalde-
hyde, which is antibacterial (see Aldehydes, below). Mandelic acid 
or hippuric acid taken orally is excreted unchanged in the urine, 
in which these drugs are bactericidal for some gram-negative 
bacteria when pH is less than 5.5. 
 Methenamine mandelate, 1 g four times daily, or methenamine 
hippurate, 1 g twice daily by mouth (children, 50 mg/kg/d or 30 
mg/kg/d, respectively), is used only as a urinary antiseptic to sup-
press, not treat, urinary tract infection. Acidifying agents (eg, 
ascorbic acid, 4–12 g/d) may be given to lower urinary pH below 
5.5. Sulfonamides should not be given at the same time because 
they may form an insoluble compound with the formaldehyde 
released by methenamine. Persons taking methenamine mandelate 
may exhibit falsely elevated tests for catecholamine metabolites. 
 ■ DISINFECTANTS, 
ANTISEPTICS, & STERILANTS 
 Disinfectants are strong chemical agents that inhibit or kill micro-
organisms ( Table 50–1 ). Antiseptics are disinfecting agents with 
sufficiently low toxicity for host cells that they can be used directly 
on skin, mucous membranes, or wounds. Sterilants kill both veg-
etative cells and spores when applied to materials for appropriate 
times and temperatures. Some of the terms used in this context are 
defined in  Table 50–2 . 
 Disinfection prevents infection by reducing the number of 
potentially infective organisms by killing, removing, or diluting 
them. Disinfection can be accomplished by application of chemi-
cal agents or use of physical agents such as ionizing radiation, dry 
or moist heat, or superheated steam (autoclave, 120°C) to kill 
microorganisms. Often a combination of agents is used, eg, water 
and moderate heat over time (pasteurization); ethylene oxide and 
moist heat (a sterilant); or addition of disinfectant to a detergent. 
Prevention of infection also can be achieved by washing, which 
dilutes the potentially infectious organism, or by establishing a 
TABLE 50–1 Activities of disinfectants.
Bacteria
Viruses
Other
Gram-
Positive
Gram-
Negative
Acid-
Fast
Spores
Lipophilic
Hydrophilic
Fungi
Amebic 
Cysts
Prions
Alcohols (isopropa-
nol, ethanol)
HS
HS
S
R
S
V
…
…
R
Aldehydes (glutaral-
dehyde, formalde-
hyde)
HS
HS
MS
S (slow)
S
MS
S
…
R
Chlorhexidine 
gluconate
HS
MS
R
R
V
R
…
…
R
Sodium hypochlo-
rite, chlorine dioxide
HS
HS
MS
S (pH 7.6)
S
S (at high 
conc)
MS
S
MS (at high 
conc)
Hexachlorophene
S (slow)
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
Povidone, iodine
HS
HS
S
S (at high 
conc)
S
R
S
S
R
Phenols, quaternary 
ammonium 
compounds
HS
HS
MS
R
S
R
S
…
R
HS, highly susceptible; S, susceptible; MS, moderately susceptible; R, resistant; V, variable; …, no data.
894    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
barrier, eg, gloves, condom, or respirator, which prevents the 
pathogen from gaining entry to the host. 
 Hand hygiene is the most important means of preventing 
transmission of infectious agents from person to person or from 
regions of high microbial load, eg, mouth, nose, or gut, to poten-
tial sites of infection. Soap and warm water efficiently and effec-
tively remove bacteria. Skin disinfectants along with detergent and 
water are usually used preoperatively as a surgical scrub for sur-
geons’ hands and the patient’s surgical incision. 
 Evaluation of effectiveness of antiseptics, disinfectants, and 
sterilants, although seemingly simple in principle, is very complex. 
Factors in any evaluation include the intrinsic resistance of the 
microorganism, the number of microorganisms present, mixed 
populations of organisms, amount of organic material present (eg, 
blood, feces, tissue), concentration and stability of disinfectant or 
sterilant, time and temperature of exposure, pH, and hydration 
and binding of the agent to surfaces. Specific, standardized assays 
of activity are defined for each use. Toxicity for humans also must 
be evaluated. In the United States, the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) regulates disinfectants and sterilants and the FDA 
regulates antiseptics. 
 Users of antiseptics, disinfectants, and sterilants need to con-
sider their short-term and long-term toxicity because they may 
have general biocidal activity and may accumulate in the environ-
ment or in the body of the patient or caregiver using the agent. 
Disinfectants and antiseptics may also become contaminated by 
resistant microorganisms—eg, spores,  P aeruginosa , or  Serratia 
marcescens —and actually transmit infection. Most topical antisep-
tics interfere with wound healing to some degree. Simple cleansing 
of wounds with soap and water is less damaging than the applica-
tion of antiseptics. Topical antibiotics with a narrow spectrum of 
action and low toxicity (eg, bacitracin and mupirocin) can be used 
for temporary control of bacterial growth and are generally pre-
ferred to antiseptics. Methenamine-containing agents release 
formaldehyde in a low antibacterial concentration at acid pH and 
can be an effective urinary antiseptic for long-term control of 
urinary tract infections. 
 Some of the chemical classes of antiseptics, disinfectants, and 
sterilants are described briefly in the text that follows. The reader 
is referred to the general references for descriptions of physical 
disinfection and sterilization methods. 
 ALCOHOLS 
 The two alcohols most frequently used for antisepsis and disinfec-
tion are  ethanol and  isopropyl alcohol ( isopropanol ). They are 
rapidly active, killing vegetative bacteria,  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis , 
and many fungi, and inactivating lipophilic viruses. The optimum 
bactericidal concentration is 60–90% by volume in water. They 
probably act by denaturation of proteins. They are not used as 
sterilants because they are not sporicidal, do not penetrate protein-
containing organic material, may not be active against hydrophilic 
viruses, and lack residual action because they evaporate com-
pletely. The alcohols are useful in situations in which sinks with 
running water are not available for washing with soap and water. 
Their skin-drying effect can be partially alleviated by addition of 
emollients to the formulation. Use of alcohol-based hand rubs has 
been shown to reduce transmission of health care-associated bacte-
rial pathogens and is recommended by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) as the preferred method of hand 
decontamination. Alcohol-based hand rubs are ineffective against 
spores of  C difficile, and assiduous handwashing with soap and 
water is still required for decontamination after caring for a 
patient with infection from this organism. 
 Alcohols are flammable and must be stored in cool, well-
ventilated areas. They must be allowed to evaporate before cau-
tery, electrosurgery, or laser surgery. Alcohols may be damaging if 
applied directly to corneal tissue. Therefore, instruments such as 
tonometers that have been disinfected in alcohol should be rinsed 
with sterile water, or the alcohol should be allowed to evaporate 
before they are used. 
 CHLORHEXIDINE 
 Chlorhexidine is a cationic biguanide with very low water solubil-
ity. Water-soluble chlorhexidine digluconate is used in water-
based formulations as an antiseptic. It is active against vegetative 
bacteria and mycobacteria and has moderate activity against fungi 
and viruses. It strongly adsorbs to bacterial membranes, causing 
leakage of small molecules and precipitation of cytoplasmic 
proteins. It is active at pH 5.5–7.0. Chlorhexidine gluconate is 
slower in its action than alcohols, but, because of its persistence, it 
has residual activity when used repeatedly, producing bactericidal 
action equivalent to alcohols. It is most effective against gram-
positive cocci and less active against gram-positive and gram-
negative rods. Spore germination is inhibited by chlorhexidine. 
Chlorhexidine digluconate is resistant to inhibition by blood and 
organic materials. However, anionic and nonionic agents in 
TABLE 50–2  Commonly used terms related to 
chemical and physical killing of 
microorganisms.
Antisepsis
Application of an agent to living tissue for 
the purpose of preventing infection
Decontamination
Destruction or marked reduction in number 
or activity of microorganisms
Disinfection
Chemical or physical treatment that destroys 
most vegetative microbes or viruses, but not 
spores, in or on inanimate surfaces
Sanitization
Reduction of microbial load on an inanimate 
surface to a level considered acceptable for 
public health purposes
Sterilization
A process intended to kill or remove all types 
of microorganisms, including spores, and 
usually including viruses, with an acceptably 
low probability of survival
Pasteurization
A process that kills nonsporulating micro-
organisms by hot water or steam at 65–100°C
CHAPTER 50 Miscellaneous Antimicrobial Agents; Disinfectants, Antiseptics, & Sterilants    895
moisturizers, neutral soaps, and surfactants may neutralize its 
action. Chlorhexidine digluconate formulations of 4% concentra-
tion have slightly greater antibacterial activity than newer 2% 
formulations. The combination of chlorhexidine gluconate in 
70% alcohol, available in some countries including the United 
States, is the preferred agent for skin antisepsis in many surgical 
and percutaneous procedures. The advantage of this combination 
over povidone-iodine may derive from its more rapid action after 
application, its retained activity after exposure to body fluids, and 
its persistent activity on the skin. Chlorhexidine has a very low 
skin-sensitizing or irritating capacity. Oral toxicity is low because 
it is poorly absorbed from the alimentary tract. Chlorhexidine 
must not be used during surgery on the middle ear because it 
causes sensorineural deafness. Similar neural toxicity may be 
encountered during neurosurgery. 
 HALOGENS 
 Iodine 
 Iodine in a 1:20,000 solution is bactericidal in 1 minute and kills 
spores in 15 minutes. Tincture of iodine USP contains 2% iodine 
and 2.4% sodium iodide in alcohol. It is the most active antiseptic 
for intact skin. It is not commonly used because of serious hyper-
sensitivity reactions that may occur and because of its staining of 
clothing and dressings. 
 Iodophors 
 Iodophors are complexes of iodine with a surface-active agent such 
as  polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP; povidone-iodine) . Iodophors 
retain the activity of iodine. They kill vegetative bacteria, myco-
bacteria, fungi, and lipid-containing viruses. They may be spori-
cidal upon prolonged exposure. Iodophors can be used as 
antiseptics or disinfectants, the latter containing more iodine. The 
amount of free iodine is low, but it is released as the solution is 
diluted. An iodophor solution must be diluted according to the 
manufacturer’s directions to obtain full activity. 
 Iodophors are less irritating and less likely to produce skin 
hypersensitivity than tincture of iodine. They require drying time 
on skin before becoming active, which can be a disadvantage. 
Although iodophors have a somewhat broader spectrum of activ-
ity than chlorhexidine, including sporicidal action, they lack its 
persistent activity on skin. 
 Chlorine 
 Chlorine is a strong oxidizing agent and universal disinfectant that 
is most commonly provided as a 5.25%  sodium hypochlorite 
solution, a typical formulation for  household bleach . Because 
formulations may vary, the exact concentration should be verified on 
the label. A 1:10 dilution of household bleach provides 5000 ppm of 
available chlorine. The CDC recommends this concentration for 
disinfection of blood spills. Less than 5 ppm kills vegetative bac-
teria, whereas up to 5000 ppm is necessary to kill spores. A con-
centration of 1000–10,000 ppm is tuberculocidal. One hundred 
ppm kills vegetative fungal cells in 1 hour, but fungal spores 
require 500 ppm. Viruses are inactivated by 200–500 ppm. 
Dilutions of 5.25% sodium hypochlorite made up in pH 7.5–8.0 
tap water retain their activity for months when kept in tightly 
closed, opaque containers. Frequent opening and closing of the 
container reduces the activity markedly. 
 Because chlorine is inactivated by blood, serum, feces, and 
protein-containing materials, surfaces should be cleaned before 
chlorine disinfectant is applied. Undissociated hypochlorous acid 
(HOCl) is the active biocidal agent. When pH is increased, the 
less active hypochlorite ion, OCl – , is formed. When hypochlorite 
solutions contact formaldehyde, the carcinogen bischloromethyl is 
formed. Rapid evolution of irritating chlorine gas occurs when 
hypochlorite solutions are mixed with acid and urine. Solutions 
are corrosive to aluminum, silver, and stainless steel. 
 Alternative chlorine-releasing compounds include  chlorine 
dioxide and  chloramine  T . These agents retain chlorine longer 
and have a prolonged bactericidal action. 
 PHENOLICS 
 Phenol itself (perhaps the oldest of the surgical antiseptics) is no 
longer used even as a disinfectant because of its corrosive effect on 
tissues, its toxicity when absorbed, and its carcinogenic effect. These 
adverse actions are diminished by forming derivatives in which a 
functional group replaces a hydrogen atom in the aromatic ring. 
The phenolic agents most commonly used are  o -phenylphenol, 
 o -benzyl- p -chlorophenol , and  p -tertiary amylphenol . Mixtures 
of phenolic derivatives are often used. Some of these are derived 
from coal tar distillates, eg, cresols and xylenols. Skin absorption 
and skin irritation still occur with these derivatives, and appropri-
ate care is necessary in their use. Detergents are often added to 
formulations to clean and remove organic material that may 
decrease the activity of a phenolic compound. 
 Phenolic compounds disrupt cell walls and membranes, pre-
cipitate proteins, and inactivate enzymes. They are bactericidal 
(including mycobacteria) and fungicidal and are capable of inacti-
vating lipophilic viruses. They are not sporicidal. Dilution and 
time of exposure recommendations of the manufacturer must be 
followed. 
 Phenolic disinfectants are used for hard surface decontamina-
tion in hospitals and laboratories, eg, floors, beds, and counter or 
bench tops. They are not recommended for use in nurseries and 
especially in bassinets, where their use has been associated with 
hyperbilirubinemia. Use of  hexachlorophene as a skin disinfec-
tant has caused cerebral edema and convulsions in premature 
infants and, occasionally, in adults. 
 QUATERNARY AMMONIUM 
COMPOUNDS 
 The quaternary ammonium compounds (“quats”) are cationic 
surface-active detergents. The active cation has at least one long 
water-repellent hydrocarbon chain, which causes the molecules to 
896    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
concentrate as an oriented layer on the surface of solutions and 
colloidal or suspended particles. The charged nitrogen portion of 
the cation has high affinity for water and prevents separation out 
of solution. The bactericidal action of quaternary compounds has 
been attributed to inactivation of energy-producing enzymes, 
denaturation of proteins, and disruption of the cell membrane. 
These agents are fungistatic and sporistatic and also inhibit algae. 
They are bactericidal for gram-positive bacteria and moderately 
active against gram-negative bacteria. Lipophilic viruses are inacti-
vated. They are not tuberculocidal or sporicidal, and they do not 
inactivate hydrophilic viruses. Quaternary ammonium com-
pounds bind to the surface of colloidal protein in blood, serum, 
and milk and to the fibers in cotton, mops, cloths, and paper 
towels used to apply them, which can cause inactivation of the 
agent by removing it from solution. They are inactivated by 
anionic detergents (soaps), by many nonionic detergents, and by 
calcium, magnesium, ferric, and aluminum ions. 
 Quaternary compounds are used for sanitation of noncritical 
surfaces (floors, bench tops, etc). Their low toxicity has led to their 
use as sanitizers in food production facilities. The CDC recom-
mends that quaternary ammonium compounds such as  benzalko-
nium chloride  not be used as antiseptics because several outbreaks 
of infections have occurred that were due to growth of  Pseudomonas 
and other gram-negative bacteria in quaternary ammonium anti-
septic solutions. 
 ALDEHYDES 
 Formaldehyde and  glutaraldehyde are used for disinfection or 
sterilization of instruments such as fiberoptic endoscopes, respira-
tory therapy equipment, hemodialyzers, and dental handpieces 
that cannot withstand exposure to the high temperatures of steam 
sterilization. They are not corrosive for metal, plastic, or rubber. 
These agents have a broad spectrum of activity against microor-
ganisms and viruses. They act by alkylation of chemical groups in 
proteins and nucleic acids. Failures of disinfection or sterilization 
can occur as a result of dilution below the known effective concen-
tration, the presence of organic material, and the failure of liquid 
to penetrate into small channels in the instruments. Automatic 
circulating baths are available that increase penetration of alde-
hyde solution into the instrument while decreasing exposure of 
the operator to irritating fumes. 
 Formaldehyde is available as a 40% weight per volume solution 
in water (100%  formalin) . An 8% formaldehyde solution in 
water has a broad spectrum of activity against bacteria, fungi, and 
viruses. Sporicidal activity may take as long as 18 hours. Its rapid-
ity of action is increased by solution in 70% isopropanol. 
Formaldehyde solutions are used for high-level disinfection of 
hemodialyzers, preparation of vaccines, and preservation and 
embalming of tissues. The 4% formaldehyde (10% formalin) 
solutions used for fixation of tissues and embalming may not be 
mycobactericidal. 
 Glutaraldehyde is a dialdehyde (1,5-pentanedial). Solutions of 
2% weight per volume glutaraldehyde are most commonly used. 
The solution must be alkalinized to pH 7.4–8.5 for activation. 
Activated solutions are bactericidal, sporicidal, fungicidal, and 
virucidal for both lipophilic and hydrophilic viruses. Glutaraldehyde 
has greater sporicidal activity than formaldehyde, but its tubercu-
locidal activity may be less. Lethal action against mycobacteria and 
spores may require prolonged exposure. Once activated, solutions 
have a shelf life of 14 days, after which polymerization reduces 
activity. Other means of activation and stabilization can increase 
the shelf life. Because glutaraldehyde solutions are frequently 
reused, the most common reason for loss of activity is dilution and 
exposure to organic material. Test strips to measure residual activ-
ity are recommended. 
 Formaldehyde has a characteristic pungent odor and is highly 
irritating to respiratory mucous membranes and eyes at concentra-
tions of 2–5 ppm. The United States Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration (OSHA) has declared that formaldehyde is 
a potential carcinogen and has established an employee exposure 
standard that limits the 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA) 
exposure to 0.75 ppm. Protection of health care workers from 
exposure to glutaraldehyde concentrations greater than 0.2 ppm is 
advisable. Increased air exchange, enclosure in hoods with 
exhausts, tight-fitting lids on exposure devices, and use of protec-
tive personal equipment such as goggles, respirators, and gloves 
may be necessary to achieve these exposure limits. 
 Ortho-phthalaldehyde (OPA) is a phenolic dialdehyde chem-
ical sterilant with a spectrum of activity comparable to glutaralde-
hyde, although it is several times more rapidly bactericidal. OPA 
solution typically contains 0.55% OPA. Its label claim is that 
high-level disinfection can be achieved in 12 minutes at room 
temperature compared with 45 minutes for 2.4% glutaraldehyde. 
Unlike glutaraldehyde, OPA requires no activation, is less irritat-
ing to mucous membranes, and does not require exposure moni-
toring. It has good materials compatibility and an acceptable 
environmental safety profile. OPA is useful for disinfection or 
sterilization of endoscopes, surgical instruments, and other 
medical devices. 
 SUPEROXIDIZED WATER 
 Electrolysis of saline yields a mixture of oxidants, primarily 
hypochlorous acid and chlorine, with potent disinfectant and ste-
rilant properties. The solution generated by the process, which has 
been commercialized and marketed as Sterilox for disinfection of 
endoscopes and dental materials, is rapidly bactericidal, fungicidal, 
tuberculocidal, and sporicidal. High-level disinfection is achieved 
with a contact time of 10 minutes. The solution is nontoxic and 
nonirritating and requires no special disposal precautions. 
 PEROXYGEN COMPOUNDS 
 The peroxygen compounds,  hydrogen peroxide and  peracetic 
acid , have high killing activity and a broad spectrum against bac-
teria, spores, viruses, and fungi when used in appropriate concen-
tration. They have the advantage that their decomposition 
products are not toxic and do not injure the environment. They 
CHAPTER 50 Miscellaneous Antimicrobial Agents; Disinfectants, Antiseptics, & Sterilants    897
are powerful oxidizers that are used primarily as disinfectants and 
sterilants. 
 Hydrogen peroxide is a very effective disinfectant when used 
for inanimate objects or materials with low organic content such 
as water. Organisms with the enzymes catalase and peroxidase 
rapidly degrade hydrogen peroxide. The innocuous degradation 
products are oxygen and water. Concentrated solutions containing 
90% weight per volume H 2 O 2 are prepared electrochemically. 
When diluted in high-quality deionized water to 6% and 3% and 
put into clean containers, they remain stable. Hydrogen peroxide 
has been proposed for disinfection of respirators, acrylic resin 
implants, plastic eating utensils, soft contact lenses, and cartons 
intended to contain milk or juice products. Concentrations of 
10–25% hydrogen peroxide are sporicidal. Vapor phase hydrogen 
peroxide (VPHP) is a cold gaseous sterilant that has the potential 
to replace the toxic or carcinogenic gases ethylene oxide and 
formaldehyde. VPHP does not require a pressurized chamber and 
is active at temperatures as low as 4°C and concentrations as low 
as 4 mg/L. It is incompatible with liquids and cellulose products. 
It penetrates the surface of some plastics. Automated equipment 
using vaporized hydrogen peroxide (eg, Sterrad) or hydrogen 
peroxide mixed with formic acid (Endoclens) is available for 
sterilizing endoscopes. 
 Peracetic acid (CH 3 COOOH) is prepared commercially from 
90% hydrogen peroxide, acetic acid, and sulfuric acid as a catalyst. 
It is explosive in the pure form. It is usually used in dilute solution 
and transported in containers with vented caps to prevent 
increased pressure as oxygen is released. Peracetic acid is more 
active than hydrogen peroxide as a bactericidal and sporicidal 
agent. Concentrations of 250–500 ppm are effective against a 
broad range of bacteria in 5 minutes at pH 7.0 at 20°C. Bacterial 
spores are inactivated by 500–30,000 ppm peracetic acid. Only 
slightly increased concentrations are necessary in the presence of 
organic matter. Viruses require variable exposures. Enteroviruses 
require 2000 ppm for 15–30 minutes for inactivation. 
 An automated machine (Steris) that uses buffered peracetic acid 
liquid of 0.1–0.5% concentration has been developed for steriliza-
tion of medical, surgical, and dental instruments. Peracetic acid 
sterilization systems have also been adopted for hemodialyzers. The 
food processing and beverage industries use peracetic acid exten-
sively because the breakdown products in high dilution do not 
produce objectionable odor, taste, or toxicity. Because rinsing is 
not necessary in this use, time and money are saved. 
 Peracetic acid is a potent tumor promoter but a weak carcino-
gen. It is not mutagenic in the Ames test. 
 HEAVY METALS 
 Heavy metals, principally mercury and silver, are now rarely used 
as disinfectants. Mercury is an environmental hazard, and some 
pathogenic bacteria have developed plasmid-mediated resistance 
to mercurials. Hypersensitivity to thimerosal is common, possibly 
in up to 40% of the population. These compounds are absorbed 
from solution by rubber and plastic closures. Nevertheless, 
 thimerosal 0.001–0.004% is still used safely as a preservative of 
vaccines, antitoxins, and immune sera. Although a causative link 
to autism has never been established, thimerosal-free vaccines are 
available for use in children and pregnant woman. 
 Inorganic silver salts are strongly bactericidal.  Silver nitrate , 
1:1000, has been most commonly used, particularly as a preven-
tive for gonococcal ophthalmitis in newborns. Antibiotic oint-
ments have replaced silver nitrate for this indication.  Silver 
sulfadiazine slowly releases silver and is used to suppress bacterial 
growth in burn wounds (see  Chapter 46 ). 
 STERILANTS 
 For many years, pressurized  steam (autoclaving) at 120°C for 
30 minutes has been the basic method for sterilizing instruments 
and other heat-resistant materials. When autoclaving is not possible, 
as with lensed instruments and materials containing plastic and rub-
ber,  ethylene oxide —diluted with either fluorocarbon or carbon 
dioxide to diminish explosive hazard—is used at 440–1200 mg/L at 
45–60°C with 30–60% relative humidity. The higher concentra-
tions have been used to increase penetration. 
 Ethylene oxide is classified as a mutagen and carcinogen. The 
OSHA permissible exposure limit (PEL) for ethylene oxide is 1 ppm 
calculated as a time-weighted average. Alternative sterilants now 
being used increasingly include vapor phase hydrogen peroxide, 
peracetic acid, ozone, gas plasma, chlorine dioxide, formaldehyde, 
and propylene oxide. Each of these sterilants has potential advan-
tages and problems. Automated peracetic acid systems are being 
used increasingly for high-level decontamination and sterilization 
of endoscopes and hemodialyzers because of their effectiveness, 
automated features, and the low toxicity of the residual products 
of sterilization. 
 PRESERVATIVES 
 Disinfectants are used as preservatives to prevent the overgrowth 
of bacteria and fungi in pharmaceutical products, laboratory sera 
and reagents, cosmetic products, and contact lenses. Multi-use 
vials of medication that may be reentered through a rubber dia-
phragm, and eye and nose drops, require preservatives. Preservatives 
should not be irritating or toxic to tissues to which they will be 
applied, they must be effective in preventing growth of microor-
ganisms likely to contaminate them, and they must have sufficient 
solubility and stability to remain active. 
 Commonly used preservative agents include organic acids 
such as  benzoic acid and salts, the  parabens , (alkyl esters of 
 p -hydroxybenzoic acid), sorbic acid and salts, phenolic compounds, 
quaternary ammonium compounds, alcohols, and mercurials 
such as thimerosal in 0.001–0.004% concentration. 
898    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
SUMMARY Miscellaneous Antimicrobials
Subclass
Mechanism of 
Action
Effects
Clinical 
Applications
Pharmacokinetics, Toxicities, 
Interactions
NITROIMIDAZOLE
 • Metronidazole
Disruption of electron 
transport chain
Bactericidal activity 
against susceptible 
anaerobic bacteria and 
protozoa
Anaerobic infec-
tions • vaginitis 
• C difficile colitis
Oral or IV • hepatic clearance (half-life = 8 h) 
• disulfiram-like reaction when given with 
alcohol • Toxicity: Gastrointestinal upset 
• metallic taste • neuropathy • seizures
 • Tinidazole: Oral; similar to metronidazole but dosed once daily; approved for trichomonas, giardiasis, and amebiasis
URINARY ANTISEPTICS
 • Nitrofurantoin
Not fully understood 
• disrupts protein 
synthesis and inhibits 
multiple bacterial 
enzyme systems
Bacteriostatic or bacteri-
cidal activity against 
susceptible bacteria
Uncomplicated uri-
nary tract infec-
tions • long-term 
prophylaxis
Oral • rapid renal clearance (half-life = 0.5 h) 
• blood levels are negligible • contraindicated 
in renal failure • Toxicity: Gastrointestinal 
upset • neuropathies • hypersensitivity in 
patients with pulmonary fibrosis
 • Methenamine hippurate and methenamine mandelate: Oral; release formaldehyde at acidic pH in the urine; used only for suppression, not treatment, of urinary 
        tract infections
MACROLIDE
 • Fidaxomicin
Inhibits bacterial RNA 
polymerase
Bactericidal in gram posi-
tive bacteria
C difficile colitis
Oral •  blood levels negligible
MISCELLANEOUS ANTIMICROBIAL DRUGS
Colistimethate sodium (Coly-Mycin M)
Parenteral: 150 mg for injection
Fidaxomicin (Dificid)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Methenamine hippurate (Hiprex, Urex)
Oral: 1.0 g tablets
Methenamine mandelate (generic)
Oral: 0.5, 1 g tablets; 0.5 g/5 mL suspension
Metronidazole (generic, Flagyl)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; 375 mg capsules; 750 mg extended-release 
tablets
Topical: 0.75% gel
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL; 500 mg for injection
Mupirocin (Bactroban)
Topical: 2% ointment, cream
Nitrofurantoin (generic, Macrodantin)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg capsules, 25 mg/5 mL suspension
Polymyxin B (Polymyxin B Sulfate)
Parenteral: 500,000 units per vial for injection
Ophthalmic: 500,000 units per vial
DISINFECTANTS, ANTISEPTICS, 
& STERILANTS
Benzalkonium (generic, Zephiran)
Topical: 17% concentrate; 50% solution; 1:750 solution
Benzoyl peroxide (generic)
Topical: 2.5%, 5%, 10% liquid; 5%, 5.5%, 10% lotion; 5%, 10% cream; 
2.5%, 4%, 5%, 6%, 10%, 20% gel
Chlorhexidine gluconate (Hibiclens, Hibistat, others)
Topical: 2%, 4% cleanser, sponge; 0.5% rinse in 70% alcohol
Oral rinse (Peridex, Periogard): 0.12%
Glutaraldehyde (Cidex)
Instruments: 2%, 3.2% solution
Hexachlorophene (pHisoHex)
Topical: 3% liquid; 0.23% foam
Iodine aqueous (generic, Lugol’s Solution)
Topical: 2–5% in water with 2.4% sodium iodide or 10% potassium 
iodide
Iodine tincture (generic)
Topical: 2% iodine or 2.4% sodium iodide in 47% alcohol, in 15, 30, 
120 mL and in larger quantities
Nitrofurazone (generic, Furacin)
Topical: 0.2% solution, ointment, and cream
Ortho-phthalaldehyde (Cidex OPA)
Instruments: 0.55% solution
Povidone-iodine (generic, Betadine)
Topical: available in many forms, including aerosol, ointment, 
antiseptic gauze pads, skin cleanser (liquid or foam), solution, and 
swabsticks
Silver nitrate (generic)
Topical: 10, 25, 50% solution
Thimerosal (generic, Mersol)
Topical: 1:1000 tincture and solution
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
MISCELLANEOUS ANTIMICROBIAL DRUGS
Colistimethate sodium (Coly-Mycin M)
Parenteral: 150 mg for injection
Fidaxomicin (Dificid)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Methenamine hippurate (Hiprex, Urex)
Oral: 1.0 g tablets
Methenamine mandelate (generic)
Oral: 0.5, 1 g tablets; 0.5 g/5 mL suspension
Metronidazole (generic, Flagyl)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; 375 mg capsules; 750 mg extended-release 
tablets
Topical: 0.75% gel
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL; 500 mg for injection
Mupirocin (Bactroban)
Topical: 2% ointment, cream
Nitrofurantoin (generic, Macrodantin)
Oral: 25, 50, 100 mg capsules, 25 mg/5 mL suspension
Polymyxin B (Polymyxin B Sulfate)
Parenteral: 500,000 units per vial for injection
Ophthalmic: 500,000 units per vial
DISINFECTANTS, ANTISEPTICS, 
& STERILANTS
Benzalkonium (generic, Zephiran)
Topical: 17% concentrate; 50% solution; 1:750 solution
Benzoyl peroxide (generic)
Topical: 2.5%, 5%, 10% liquid; 5%, 5.5%, 10% lotion; 5%, 10% cream; 
2.5%, 4%, 5%, 6%, 10%, 20% gel
Chlorhexidine gluconate (Hibiclens, Hibistat, others)
Topical: 2%, 4% cleanser, sponge; 0.5% rinse in 70% alcohol
Oral rinse (Peridex, Periogard): 0.12%
Glutaraldehyde (Cidex)
Instruments: 2%, 3.2% solution
Hexachlorophene (pHisoHex)
Topical: 3% liquid; 0.23% foam
Iodine aqueous (generic, Lugol’s Solution)
Topical: 2–5% in water with 2.4% sodium iodide or 10% potassium 
iodide
Iodine tincture (generic)
Topical: 2% iodine or 2.4% sodium iodide in 47% alcohol, in 15, 30,
120 mL and in larger quantities
Nitrofurazone (generic, Furacin)
Topical: 0.2% solution, ointment, and cream
Ortho-phthalaldehyde (Cidex OPA)
Instruments: 0.55% solution
Povidone-iodine (generic, Betadine)
Topical: available in many forms, including aerosol, ointment,
antiseptic gauze pads, skin cleanser (liquid or foam), solution, and
swabsticks
Silver nitrate (generic)
Topical: 10, 25, 50% solution
Thimerosal (generic, Mersol)
Topical: 1:1000 tincture and solution
CHAPTER 50 Miscellaneous Antimicrobial Agents; Disinfectants, Antiseptics, & Sterilants    899
 REFERENCES 
 Bischoff WE et al: Handwashing compliance by health care workers: The impact 
of introducing an accessible, alcohol-based hand antiseptic. Arch Intern Med 
2000;160:1017. 
 Chambers HF, Winston LG: Mupirocin prophylaxis misses by a nose. Ann Intern 
Med 2004;140:484. 
 Humphreys PN: Testing standards for sporicides. J Hosp Infect 2011;77:193. 
 Louie TJ et al. Fidaxomicin versus vancomycin for  Clostridium difficile infection. 
N Engl J Med 2011;364:422. 
 Gordin FM et al: Reduction in nosocomial transmission of drug-resistant bacteria 
after introduction of an alcohol-based hand-rub. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 2005;26:650. 
 Noorani A et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of preoperative antisepsis 
with chlorhexidine versus povidone-iodine in clean-contaminated surgery. 
Br J Surg 2010;97:1614. 
 Rutala WA, Weber DJ: New disinfection and sterilization methods. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2001;7:348. 
 Tinidazole. Med Lett Drugs Ther 2004;46:70. 
 Widmer AF, Frei R: Decontamination, disinfection, and sterilization. In: Murray 
PR et al (editors).  Manual of Clinical Microbiology , 7th ed. American Society 
for Microbiology, 1999. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The patient should be treated with oral metronidazole, 
which is considered the preferred drug for mild to moderate 
cases of  C difficile -associated colitis. The room should not be 
cleaned with alcohol since it does not kill  C difficile spores. A 
concentrated bleach solution (5000 ppm) would be preferred 
because it is sporicidal.
This page intentionally left blank 
901
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 The development of antimicrobial drugs represents one of the 
most important advances in therapeutics, both in the control or 
cure of serious infections and in the prevention and treatment of 
infectious complications of other therapeutic modalities such as 
cancer chemotherapy, immunosuppression, and surgery. However, 
evidence is overwhelming that antimicrobial agents are vastly 
overprescribed in outpatient settings in the United States, and the 
availability of antimicrobial agents without prescription in many 
developing countries has—by facilitating the development of 
resistance—already severely limited therapeutic options in the 
treatment of life-threatening infections. Therefore, the clinician 
should first determine whether antimicrobial therapy is warranted 
for a given patient. The specific questions one should ask include 
the following: 
 1. Is an antimicrobial agent indicated on the basis of clinical find-
ings? Or is it prudent to wait until such clinical findings 
become apparent? 
 2. Have appropriate clinical specimens been obtained to establish 
a microbiologic diagnosis? 
 3. What are the likely etiologic agents for the patient’s illness? 
 4. What measures should be taken to protect individuals exposed 
to the index case to prevent secondary cases, and what mea-
sures should be implemented to prevent further exposure? 
 5. Is there clinical evidence (eg, from well-executed clinical trials) that 
antimicrobial therapy will confer clinical benefit for the patient? 
 Once a specific cause is identified based on specific microbio-
logic tests, the following further questions should be considered: 
 1. If a specific microbial pathogen is identified, can a narrower-
spectrum agent be substituted for the initial empiric drug? 
 2. Is one agent or a combination of agents necessary? 
 3. What are the optimal dose, route of administration, and dura-
tion of therapy? 
 4. What specific tests (eg, susceptibility testing) should be under-
taken to identify patients who will not respond to treatment? 
 5. What adjunctive measures can be undertaken to eradicate the 
infection? For example, is surgery feasible for removal of devi-
talized tissue or foreign bodies—or drainage of an abscess—
into which antimicrobial agents may be unable to penetrate? 
51
Clinical Use of 
Antimicrobial Agents
 Harry W. Lampiris, MD, & 
Daniel S. Maddix, PharmD 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 51-year-old alcoholic patient presents to the emergency 
department with fever, headache, neck stiffness, and altered 
mental status for 12 hours. Vital signs are blood pressure 
90/55 mm Hg, pulse 120/min, respirations 30/min, tempera-
ture 40°C [104°F] rectal. The patient is minimally responsive 
to voice and does not follow commands. Examination is sig-
nificant for a right third cranial nerve palsy and nuchal rigid-
ity. Laboratory results show a white blood cell count of 
24,000/mm 3 with left shift, but other hematologic and chem-
istry values are within normal limits. An emergency CT scan 
of the head is normal. Blood cultures are obtained, and a 
lumbar puncture reveals the following cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) values: white blood cells 5000/mm 3 , red blood cells 
10/mm 3 , protein 200 mg/dL, glucose 15 mg/dL (serum glu-
cose 96 taken at same time). CSF Gram stain reveals gram-
positive cocci in pairs. What is the most likely diagnosis in 
this patient? What organisms should be treated empirically? 
Are there other pharmacologic interventions to consider 
before initiating antimicrobial therapy? 
 
902    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
Is it possible to decrease the dosage of immunosuppressive 
therapy in patients who have undergone organ transplanta-
tion? Is it possible to reduce morbidity or mortality due to the 
infection by reducing host immunologic response to the infec-
tion (eg, by the use of corticosteroids for the treatment of se-
vere  Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia or meningitis due to 
 Streptococcus pneumoniae )? 
 ■ EMPIRIC ANTIMICROBIAL 
THERAPY 
 Antimicrobial agents are frequently used before the pathogen 
responsible for a particular illness or the susceptibility to a par-
ticular antimicrobial agent is known. This use of antimicrobial 
agents is called empiric (or presumptive) therapy and is based on 
experience with a particular clinical entity. The usual justification 
for empiric therapy is the hope that early intervention will 
improve the outcome; in the best cases, this has been established 
by placebo-controlled, double-blind prospective clinical trials. For 
example, treatment of febrile episodes in neutropenic cancer 
patients with empiric antimicrobial therapy has been demon-
strated to have impressive morbidity and mortality benefits even 
though the specific bacterial agent responsible for fever is deter-
mined for only a minority of such episodes. 
 Finally, there are many clinical entities, such as certain epi-
sodes of community-acquired pneumonia, in which it is diffi-
cult to identify a specific pathogen. In such cases, a clinical 
response to empiric therapy may be an important clue to the 
likely pathogen. 
 Frequently, the signs and symptoms of infection diminish as a 
result of empiric therapy, and microbiologic test results become 
available that establish a specific microbiologic diagnosis. At the 
time that the pathogenic organism responsible for the illness is 
identified, empiric therapy is optimally modified to  definitive 
therapy, which is typically narrower in coverage and is given for 
an appropriate duration based on the results of clinical trials or 
experience when clinical trial data are not available. 
 Approach to Empiric Therapy 
 Initiation of empiric therapy should follow a specific and system-
atic approach. 
 A. Formulate a Clinical Diagnosis of Microbial Infection 
 Using all available data, the clinician should determine that there is 
anatomic evidence of infection (eg, pneumonia, cellulitis, sinusitis). 
 B. Obtain Specimens for Laboratory Examination 
 Examination of stained specimens by microscopy or simple 
examination of an uncentrifuged sample of urine for white blood 
cells and bacteria may provide important etiologic clues in a very 
short time. Cultures of selected anatomic sites (blood, sputum, 
urine, cerebrospinal fluid, and stool) and nonculture methods 
(antigen testing, polymerase chain reaction, and serology) may 
also confirm specific etiologic agents. 
 C. Formulate a Microbiologic Diagnosis 
 The history, physical examination, and immediately available 
laboratory results (eg, Gram stain of urine or sputum) may pro-
vide highly specific information. For example, in a young man 
with urethritis and a Gram-stained smear from the urethral 
meatus demonstrating intracellular gram-negative diplococci, the 
most likely pathogen is  Neisseria gonorrhoeae . In the latter instance, 
however, the clinician should be aware that a significant number 
of patients with gonococcal urethritis have uninformative Gram 
stains for the organism and that a significant number of patients 
with gonococcal urethritis harbor concurrent chlamydial infection 
that is not demonstrated on the Gram-stained smear. 
 D. Determine the Necessity for Empiric Therapy 
 Whether or not to initiate empiric therapy is an important clinical 
decision based partly on experience and partly on data from clini-
cal trials. Empiric therapy is indicated when there is a significant 
risk of serious morbidity if therapy is withheld until a specific 
pathogen is detected by the clinical laboratory. 
 In other settings, empiric therapy may be indicated for public 
health reasons rather than for demonstrated superior outcome of 
therapy in a specific patient. For example, urethritis in a young 
sexually active man usually requires treatment for  N gonorrhoeae 
and  Chlamydia  trachomatis despite the absence of microbiologic 
confirmation at the time of diagnosis. Because the risk of noncom-
pliance with follow-up visits in this patient population may lead 
to further transmission of these sexually transmitted pathogens, 
empiric therapy is warranted. 
 E. Institute Treatment 
 Selection of empiric therapy may be based on the microbiologic 
diagnosis or a clinical diagnosis without available microbiologic 
clues. If no microbiologic information is available, the antimicro-
bial spectrum of the agent or agents chosen must necessarily be 
broader, taking into account the most likely pathogens responsible 
for the patient’s illness. 
 Choice of Antimicrobial Agent 
 Selection from among several drugs depends on  host factors that 
include the following: (1) concomitant disease states (eg, AIDS, 
neutropenia due to the use of cytotoxic chemotherapy, organ 
transplantation, severe chronic liver or kidney disease) or the use 
of immunosuppressive medications; (2) prior adverse drug effects; 
(3) impaired elimination or detoxification of the drug (may be 
genetically predetermined but more frequently is associated with 
impaired renal or hepatic function due to underlying disease); 
(4) age of the patient; (5) pregnancy status; and (6) epidemiologic 
exposure (eg, exposure to a sick family member or pet, recent 
hospitalization, recent travel, occupational exposure, or new sexual 
partner). 
 Pharmacologic factors include (1) the kinetics of absorption, 
distribution, and elimination; (2) the ability of the drug to be 
delivered to the site of infection; (3) the potential toxicity of an 
agent; and (4) pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interactions 
with other drugs. 
CHAPTER 51 Clinical Use of Antimicrobial Agents    903
 Knowledge of the  susceptibility of an organism to a specific 
agent in a hospital or community setting is important in the selec-
tion of empiric therapy. Pharmacokinetic differences among agents 
with similar antimicrobial spectrums may be exploited to reduce 
the frequency of dosing (eg, ceftriaxone may be conveniently given 
once every 24 hours). Finally, increasing consideration is being 
given to the cost of antimicrobial therapy, especially when multiple 
agents with comparable efficacy and toxicity are available for a 
specific infection. Changing from intravenous to oral antibiotics 
for prolonged administration can be particularly cost-effective. 
 Brief guides to empiric therapy based on presumptive microbial 
diagnosis and site of infection are given in  Tables 51–1 and  51–2 . 
 ■ ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY OF 
INFECTIONS WITH KNOWN 
ETIOLOGY  
 INTERPRETATION OF CULTURE RESULTS 
 Properly obtained and processed specimens for culture frequently 
yield reliable information about the cause of infection. The lack of a 
confirmatory microbiologic diagnosis may be due to the following: 
 1. Sample error, eg, obtaining cultures after antimicrobial agents 
have been administered, or contamination of specimens sent 
for culture 
 2. Noncultivable or slow-growing organisms ( Histoplasma capsula-
tum, Bartonella or  Brucella species ), in which cultures are often 
discarded before sufficient growth has occurred for detection 
 3. Requesting  bacterial cultures when infection is due to other 
organisms 
 4. Not recognizing the need for special media or isolation tech-
niques (eg, charcoal yeast extract agar for isolation of legion-
ella species, shell-vial tissue culture system for rapid isolation 
of cytomegalovirus) 
 Even in the setting of a classic infectious disease for which 
isolation techniques have been established for decades (eg, pneu-
mococcal pneumonia, pulmonary tuberculosis, streptococcal 
pharyngitis), the sensitivity of the culture technique may be inad-
equate to identify all cases of the disease. 
 GUIDING ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY 
OF ESTABLISHED INFECTIONS 
 Susceptibility Testing 
 Testing bacterial pathogens in vitro for their susceptibility to anti-
microbial agents is extremely valuable in confirming susceptibility, 
ideally to a narrow-spectrum nontoxic antimicrobial drug. Tests 
measure the concentration of drug required to inhibit growth of 
the organism ( minimal inhibitory concentration [MIC] ) or to 
kill the organism ( minimal bactericidal concentration [MBC] ). 
The results of these tests can then be correlated with known drug 
concentrations in various body compartments. Only MICs are 
routinely measured in most infections, whereas in infections in 
which bactericidal therapy is required for eradication of infection 
(eg, meningitis, endocarditis, sepsis in the granulocytopenic host), 
MBC measurements occasionally may be useful. 
 Specialized Assay Methods 
 A. Beta-Lactamase Assay 
 For some bacteria (eg,  Haemophilus species), the susceptibility pat-
terns of strains are similar except for the production of β lacta-
mase. In these cases, extensive susceptibility testing may not be 
required, and a direct test for β lactamase using a chromogenic 
β-lactam substrate (nitrocephin disk) may be substituted. 
 B. Synergy Studies 
 Synergy studies are in vitro tests that attempt to measure synergis-
tic, additive, indifferent, or antagonistic drug interactions. In 
general, these tests have not been standardized and have not cor-
related well with clinical outcome. (See section on Antimicrobial 
Drug Combinations for details.) 
 MONITORING THERAPEUTIC RESPONSE: 
DURATION OF THERAPY 
 The therapeutic response may be monitored microbiologically or 
clinically. Cultures of specimens taken from infected sites should 
eventually become sterile or demonstrate eradication of the patho-
gen and are useful for documenting recurrence or relapse. 
Follow-up cultures may also be useful for detecting superinfec-
tions or the development of resistance. Clinically, the patient’s 
systemic manifestations of infection (malaise, fever, leukocytosis) 
should abate, and the clinical findings should improve (eg, as 
shown by clearing of radiographic infiltrates or lessening hypox-
emia in pneumonia). 
 The duration of definitive therapy required for cure depends on 
the pathogen, the site of infection, and host factors (immunocom-
promised patients generally require longer courses of treatment). 
Precise data on duration of therapy exist for some infections (eg, 
streptococcal pharyngitis, syphilis, gonorrhea, tuberculosis, and 
cryptococcal meningitis). In many other situations, duration of 
therapy is determined empirically. For recurrent infections (eg, sinus-
itis, urinary tract infections), longer courses of antimicrobial therapy 
or surgical intervention are frequently necessary for eradication. 
 Clinical Failure of Antimicrobial Therapy 
 When the patient has an inadequate clinical or microbiologic 
response to antimicrobial therapy selected by in vitro susceptibility 
testing, systematic investigation should be undertaken to deter-
mine the cause of failure. Errors in susceptibility testing are rare, 
but the original results should be confirmed by repeat testing. 
Drug dosing and absorption should be scrutinized and tested 
directly using serum measurements, pill counting, or directly 
observed therapy. 
 The clinical data should be reviewed to determine whether the 
patient’s immune function is adequate and, if not, what can be 
904    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
TABLE 51–1 Empiric antimicrobial therapy based on microbiologic etiology.
Suspected or Proven Disease or Pathogen
Drugs of First Choice
Alternative Drugs
Gram-negative cocci (aerobic)
 
Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis
TMP-SMZ,1 cephalosporin 
(second- or third-generation)2
Quinolone,3 macrolide4
 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Ceftriaxone, cefixime
Spectinomycin, azithromycin
 
Neisseria meningitides
Penicillin G
Chloramphenicol, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime
Gram-negative rods (aerobic)
 
E coli, Klebsiella, Proteus
Cephalosporin (first- or second-
generation),2 TMP-SMZ1
Quinolone,3 aminoglycoside5
 
Enterobacter, Citrobacter, Serratia
TMP-SMZ,1 quinolone,3 
carbapenem6
Antipseudomonal penicillin,7 aminoglycoside,5 cefepime
 
Shigella
Quinolone3
TMP-SMZ,1 ampicillin, azithromycin, ceftriaxone
 
Salmonella
Quinolone,3 ceftriaxone
Chloramphenicol, ampicillin, TMP-SMZ1
 
Campylobacter jejuni
Erythromycin or azithromycin
Tetracycline, quinolone3
 
Brucella species
Doxycycline + rifampin or 
aminoglycoside5
Chloramphenicol + aminoglycoside5 or TMP-SMZ1
 
Helicobacter pylori
Proton pump inhibitor + amoxi-
cillin + clarithromycin
Bismuth + metronidazole + tetracycline + proton pump 
inhibitor
 
Vibrio species
Tetracycline
Quinolone,3 TMP-SMZ1
 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Antipseudomonal penicillin ± 
aminoglycoside5
Antipseudomonal penicillin ± quinolone,3 cefepime, 
ceftazidime, antipseudomonal carbapenem,6 or aztreonam 
± aminoglycoside5
 
Burkholderia cepacia (formerly Pseudomonas 
    cepacia)
TMP-SMZ1
Ceftazidime, chloramphenicol
 
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (formerly 
    Xanthomonas maltophilia)
TMP-SMZ1
Minocycline, ticarcillin-clavulanate, tigecycline, 
ceftazidime, quinolone3
 
Legionella species
Azithromycin or quinolone3
Clarithromycin, erythromycin
Gram-positive cocci (aerobic)
 
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Penicillin8
Doxycycline, ceftriaxone, antipneumococcal quinolone,3 
macrolide,4 linezolid
 
Streptococcus pyogenes (group A)
Penicillin, clindamycin
Erythromycin, cephalosporin (first-generation)2
 
Streptococcus agalactiae (group B)
Penicillin (± aminoglycoside5)
Vancomycin
 
Viridans streptococci
Penicillin
Cephalosporin (first- or third-generation),2 vancomycin
 
Staphylococcus aureus
  β-Lactamase negative
Penicillin
Cephalosporin (first-generation),2 vancomycin
  β-Lactamase positive
Penicillinase-resistant penicillin9
As above
 
 
Methicillin-resistant
Vancomycin
TMP-SMZ,1 minocycline, linezolid, daptomycin, tigecycline
 
Enterococcus species10
Penicillin ± aminoglycoside5
Vancomycin ± aminoglycoside5
Gram-positive rods (aerobic)
 
Bacillus species (non-anthracis)
Vancomycin
Imipenem, quinolone,3 clindamycin
 
Listeria species
Ampicillin (± aminoglycoside5)
TMP-SMZ1
 
Nocardia species
Sulfadiazine, TMP-SMZ1
Minocycline, imipenem, amikacin, linezolid
Anaerobic bacteria
 Gram-positive (clostridia, Peptococcus, 
      Actinomyces, Peptostreptococcus)
Penicillin, clindamycin
Vancomycin, carbapenem,6 chloramphenicol
 
Clostridium difficile
Metronidazole
Vancomycin, bacitracin
 
Bacteroides fragilis
Metronidazole
Chloramphenicol, carbapenem,6 β-lactam–β-lactamase-
inhibitor combinations, clindamycin
(continued )
CHAPTER 51 Clinical Use of Antimicrobial Agents    905
TABLE 51–1 Empiric antimicrobial therapy based on microbiologic etiology.
Suspected or Proven Disease or Pathogen
Drugs of First Choice
Alternative Drugs
 
Fusobacterium, Prevotella, Porphyromonas
Metronidazole, clindamycin, 
penicillin
As for B fragilis
Mycobacteria
 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Isoniazid + rifampin + 
ethambutol + pyrazinamide
Streptomycin, moxifloxacin, amikacin, ethionamide, 
cycloserine, PAS, linezolid
 
Mycobacterium leprae
  Multibacillary
Dapsone + rifampin + 
clofazimine
  Paucibacillary
Dapsone + rifampin
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Tetracycline, erythromycin
Azithromycin, clarithromycin, quinolone3
Chlamydia
 
C trachomatis
Tetracycline, azithromycin
Clindamycin, ofloxacin
 
C pneumoniae
Tetracycline, erythromycin
Clarithromycin, azithromycin
 
C psittaci
Tetracycline
Chloramphenicol
Spirochetes
 
Borrelia recurrentis
Doxycycline
Erythromycin, chloramphenicol, penicillin
 
Borrelia burgdorferi
  Early
Doxycycline, amoxicillin
Cefuroxime axetil, penicillin
  Late
Ceftriaxone
 
Leptospira species
Penicillin
Tetracycline
 
Treponema species
Penicillin
Tetracycline, azithromycin, ceftriaxone
Fungi
 
Aspergillus species
Voriconazole
Amphotericin B, itraconazole, caspofungin
 
Blastomyces species
Amphotericin B
Itraconazole, fluconazole
 
Candida species
Amphotericin B, echinocandin11
Fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole
 
Cryptococcus
Amphotericin B ± flucytosine 
(5-FC)
Fluconazole, voriconazole
 
Coccidioides immitis
Amphotericin B
Fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole
 
Histoplasma capsulatum
Amphotericin B
Itraconazole
 
Mucoraceae (Rhizopus, Absidia)
Amphotericin B
Posaconazole
 
Sporothrix schenckii
Amphotericin B
Itraconazole
1Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) is a mixture of one part trimethoprim plus five parts sulfamethoxazole.
2First-generation cephalosporins: cefazolin for parenteral administration; cefadroxil or cephalexin for oral administration. Second-generation cephalosporins: cefuroxime for 
parenteral administration; cefaclor, cefuroxime axetil, cefprozil for oral administration. Third-generation cephalosporins: ceftazidime, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone for parenteral 
administration; cefixime, cefpodoxime, ceftibuten, cefdinir, cefditoren for oral administration. Fourth-generation cephalosporin: cefepime for parenteral administration. 
Cephamycins: cefoxitin and cefotetan for parenteral administration.
3Quinolones: ciprofloxacin, gemifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin. Norfloxacin is not effective for the treatment of systemic infections. Gemifloxacin, 
levofloxacin, and moxifloxacin have excellent activity against pneumococci. Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin have good activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
4Macrolides: azithromycin, clarithromycin, dirithromycin, erythromycin.
5Generally, streptomycin and gentamicin are used to treat infections with gram-positive organisms, whereas gentamicin, tobramycin, and amikacin are used to treat infections 
with gram-negatives.
6Carbapenems: doripenem, ertapenem, imipenem, meropenem. Ertapenem lacks activity against enterococci, Acinetobacter, and P aeruginosa.
7Antipseudomonal penicillin: piperacillin, piperacillin/tazobactam, ticarcillin/clavulanic acid.
8See footnote 3 in Table 51–2 for guidelines on the treatment of penicillin-resistant pneumococcal meningitis.
9Parenteral nafcillin or oxacillin; oral dicloxacillin.
10There is no regimen that is reliably bactericidal for vancomycin-resistant enterococcus for which there is extensive clinical experience; daptomycin has bactericidal activity in 
vitro. Regimens that have been reported to be efficacious include nitrofurantoin (for urinary tract infection); potential regimens for bacteremia include daptomycin, linezolid, 
and dalfopristin/quinupristin.
11Echinocandins: anidulafungin, caspofungin, micafungin.
(Continued)
906    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
TABLE 51–2 Empiric antimicrobial therapy based on site of infection.
Presumed Site of Infection
Common Pathogens
Drugs of First Choice
Alternative Drugs
Bacterial endocarditis
 Acute
Staphylococcus aureus
Vancomycin + gentamicin
Penicillinase-resistant 
penicillin1 + gentamicin
 Subacute
Viridans streptococci, enterococci
Penicillin + gentamicin
Vancomycin + gentamicin
Septic arthritis
 Child
H influenzae, S aureus, β-hemolytic 
streptococci
Ceftriaxone
Ampicillin-sulbactam
 Adult
S aureus, Enterobacteriaceae
Cefazolin
Vancomycin, quinolone
Acute otitis media, 
sinusitis
H influenzae, S pneumoniae, 
M catarrhalis
Amoxicillin
Amoxicillin-clavulanate, 
cefuroxime axetil, TMP-SMZ
Cellulitis
S aureus, group A streptococcus
Penicillinase-resistant penicillin, 
cephalosporin (first-generation)2
Vancomycin, clindamycin, 
linezolid, daptomycin
Meningitis
 Neonate
Group B streptococcus, E coli, Listeria
Ampicillin + cephalosporin (third-
generation)
Ampicillin + aminoglycoside, 
chloramphenicol, meropenem
 Child
H influenzae, pneumococcus, 
meningococcus
Ceftriaxone or cefotaxime ± 
vancomycin3
Chloramphenicol, meropenem
 Adult
Pneumococcus, meningococcus
Ceftriaxone, cefotaxime
Vancomycin + ceftriaxone or 
cefotaxime3
Peritonitis due to 
ruptured viscus
Coliforms, B fragilis
Metronidazole + cephalosporin 
(third-generation), piperacillin/
tazobactam
Carbapenem, tigecycline
Pneumonia
 Neonate
As in neonatal meningitis
 Child
Pneumococcus, S aureus, H influenzae
Ceftriaxone, cefuroxime, cefotaxime
Ampicillin-sulbactam
 Adult (community-
 acquired)
Pneumococcus, Mycoplasma, 
Legionella, H influenzae, S aureus, 
C pneumonia, coliforms
Outpatient: Macrolide,4 amoxicillin, 
tetracycline
Outpatient: Quinolone
Inpatient: Macrolide4 + cefotaxime, 
ceftriaxone, ertapenem, or ampicillin
Inpatient: Doxycycline + 
cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, 
ertapenem, or ampicillin; 
respiratory quinolone5
Septicemia6
Any
Vancomycin + cephalosporin (third-generation) or piperacillin/
tazobactam or imipenem or meropenem
Septicemia with 
granulocytopenia
Any
Antipseudomonal penicillin + aminoglycoside; ceftazidime; cefepime; 
imipenem or meropenem; consider addition of systemic antifungal therapy 
if fever persists beyond 5 days of empiric therapy
1See footnote 9, Table 51–1.
2See footnote 2, Table 51–1.
3When meningitis with penicillin-resistant pneumococcus is suspected, empiric therapy with this regimen is recommended.
4Erythromycin, clarithromycin, or azithromycin (an azalide) may be used.
5Quinolones used to treat pneumonococcal infections include levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, and gemifloxacin.
6Adjunctive immunomodulatory drugs such as drotrecogin-alfa can also be considered for patients with severe sepsis.
done to maximize it. For example, are adequate numbers of 
granulocytes present and are HIV infection, malnutrition, or 
underlying malignancy present? The presence of abscesses or for-
eign bodies should also be considered. Finally, culture and suscep-
tibility testing should be repeated to determine whether 
superinfection has occurred with another organism or whether the 
original pathogen has developed drug resistance. 
 ANTIMICROBIAL PHARMACODYNAMICS 
 The time course of drug concentration is closely related to the anti-
microbial effect at the site of infection and to any toxic effects. 
Pharmacodynamic factors include pathogen susceptibility testing, 
drug bactericidal versus bacteriostatic activity, drug synergism, antag-
onism, and postantibiotic effects. Together with pharmacokinetics, 
CHAPTER 51 Clinical Use of Antimicrobial Agents    907
pharmacodynamic information permits the selection of optimal anti-
microbial dosage regimens. 
 Bacteriostatic versus Bactericidal Activity 
 Antibacterial agents may be classified as bacteriostatic or bacteri-
cidal ( Table 51–3 ). For agents that are primarily bacteriostatic, 
inhibitory drug concentrations are much lower than bactericidal 
drug concentrations. In general, cell wall-active agents are bacteri-
cidal, and drugs that inhibit protein synthesis are bacteriostatic. 
 The classification of antibacterial agents as bactericidal or bac-
teriostatic has limitations. Some agents that are considered to be 
bacteriostatic may be bactericidal against selected organisms. On 
the other hand, enterococci are inhibited but not killed by vanco-
mycin, penicillin, or ampicillin used as single agents. 
 Bacteriostatic and bactericidal agents are equivalent for the 
treatment of most infectious diseases in immunocompetent hosts. 
Bactericidal agents should be selected over bacteriostatic ones in 
circumstances in which local or systemic host defenses are 
impaired. Bactericidal agents are required for treatment of endo-
carditis and other endovascular infections, meningitis, and infec-
tions in neutropenic cancer patients. 
 Bactericidal agents can be divided into two groups: agents that 
exhibit  concentration-dependent killing (eg, aminoglycosides 
and quinolones) and agents that exhibit  time-dependent killing 
(eg, β lactams and vancomycin). For drugs whose killing action is 
concentration-dependent, the rate and extent of killing increase 
with increasing drug concentrations. Concentration-dependent 
killing is one of the pharmacodynamic factors responsible for the 
efficacy of once-daily dosing of aminoglycosides. 
 For drugs whose killing action is time-dependent, bactericidal 
activity continues as long as serum concentrations are greater than 
the MBC. Drug concentrations of time-dependent killing agents 
that lack a postantibiotic effect should be maintained above the 
MIC for the entire interval between doses. 
 Postantibiotic Effect 
 Persistent suppression of bacterial growth after limited exposure to 
an antimicrobial agent is known as the postantibiotic effect (PAE). 
The PAE can be expressed mathematically as follows: 
 PAE = T – C
 where T is the time required for the viable count in the test (in 
vitro) culture to increase tenfold above the count observed imme-
diately before drug removal and C is the time required for the 
count in an untreated culture to increase tenfold above the count 
observed immediately after completion of the same procedure 
used on the test culture. The PAE reflects the time required for 
bacteria to return to logarithmic growth. 
 Proposed mechanisms include (1) slow recovery after reversible 
nonlethal damage to cell structures; (2) persistence of the drug at 
a binding site or within the periplasmic space; and (3) the need to 
synthesize new enzymes before growth can resume. Most antimi-
crobials possess significant in vitro PAEs (≥ 1.5 hours) against 
susceptible gram-positive cocci ( Table 51–4 ). Antimicrobials with 
significant PAEs against susceptible gram-negative bacilli are lim-
ited to carbapenems and agents that inhibit protein or DNA 
synthesis. 
 In vivo PAEs are usually much longer than in vitro PAEs. This 
is thought to be due to  postantibiotic leukocyte enhancement 
(PALE) and exposure of bacteria to subinhibitory antibiotic con-
centrations. The efficacy of once-daily dosing regimens is in part 
due to the PAE. Aminoglycosides and quinolones possess concen-
tration-dependent PAEs; thus, high doses of aminoglycosides 
given once daily result in enhanced bactericidal activity and 
extended PAEs. This combination of pharmacodynamic effects 
allows aminoglycoside serum concentrations that are below the 
MICs of target organisms to remain effective for extended periods 
of time. 
 PHARMACOKINETIC CONSIDERATIONS 
 Route of Administration 
 Many antimicrobial agents have similar pharmacokinetic proper-
ties when given orally or parenterally (ie, tetracyclines, trimetho-
prim-sulfamethoxazole, quinolones, chloramphenicol, metronid-
azole, clindamycin, rifampin, linezolid, and fluconazole). In most 
cases, oral therapy with these drugs is equally effective, is less costly, 
and results in fewer complications than parenteral therapy. 
 The intravenous route is preferred in the following situations: 
(1) for critically ill patients; (2) for patients with bacterial menin-
gitis or endocarditis; (3) for patients with nausea, vomiting, gast-
rectomy, or diseases that may impair oral absorption; and (4) when 
giving antimicrobials that are poorly absorbed following oral 
administration. 
TABLE 51–3  Bactericidal and bacteriostatic 
antibacterial agents.
Bactericidal Agents
Bacteriostatic Agents
Aminoglycosides
Chloramphenicol
Bacitracin
Clindamycin
β-Lactam antibiotics
Ethambutol
Daptomycin
Macrolides
Glycopeptide antibiotics
Nitrofurantoin
Isoniazid
Novobiocin
Ketolides
Oxazolidinones
Metronidazole
Sulfonamides
Polymyxins
Tetracyclines
Pyrazinamide
Tigecycline
Quinolones
Trimethoprim
Rifampin
Streptogramins
908    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Drug Concentrations in Body Fluids 
 Most antimicrobial agents are well distributed to most body 
tissues and fluids. Penetration into the cerebrospinal fluid is an 
exception. Most do not penetrate uninflamed meninges to an 
appreciable extent. In the presence of meningitis, however, the 
cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of many antimicrobials increase 
( Table 51–6 ). 
 Monitoring Serum Concentrations 
of Antimicrobial Agents 
 For most antimicrobial agents, the relation between dose and 
therapeutic outcome is well established, and serum concentration 
monitoring is unnecessary for these drugs. To justify routine 
serum concentration monitoring, it should be established (1) that 
a direct relationship exists between drug concentrations and effi-
cacy or toxicity; (2) that substantial interpatient variability exists 
in serum concentrations on standard doses; (3) that a small differ-
ence exists between therapeutic and toxic serum concentrations; 
(4) that the clinical efficacy or toxicity of the drug is delayed or 
difficult to measure; and (5) that an accurate assay is available. 
 In clinical practice, serum concentration monitoring is rou-
tinely performed on patients receiving aminoglycosides. Despite 
the lack of supporting evidence for its usefulness or need, serum 
vancomycin concentration monitoring is also widespread. 
Flucytosine serum concentration monitoring has been shown to 
reduce toxicity when doses are adjusted to maintain peak concen-
trations below 100 mcg/mL. 
 ■ MANAGEMENT OF 
ANTIMICROBIAL DRUG TOXICITY 
 Owing to the large number of antimicrobials available, it is usually 
possible to select an effective alternative in patients who develop 
serious drug toxicity ( Table 51–1 ). However, for some infections 
there are no effective alternatives to the drug of choice. For 
example, in patients with neurosyphilis who have a history of 
TABLE 51–4  Antibacterial agents with in vitro 
postantibiotic effects ≥ 1.5 hours.
Against Gram-Positive Cocci
Against Gram-Negative Bacilli
Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycosides
Carbapenems
Carbapenems
Cephalosporins
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol
Quinolones
Clindamycin
Rifampin
Daptomycin
Tetracyclines
Glycopeptide antibiotics
Tigecycline
Ketolides
Macrolides
Oxazolidinones
Penicillins
Quinolones
Rifampin
Streptogramins
Sulfonamides
Tetracyclines
Tigecycline
Trimethoprim
TABLE 51–5  Antimicrobial agents that require dosage adjustment or are contraindicated in patients with renal 
or hepatic impairment.
Dosage Adjustment Needed in Renal Impairment
Contraindicated in Renal 
Impairment
Dosage Adjustment Needed in 
Hepatic Impairment
Acyclovir, amantadine, aminoglycosides, aztreonam, carbapenems, 
cephalosporins,1 clarithromycin, colistin, cycloserine, daptomycin, 
didanosine, emtricitabine, ethambutol, ethionamide, famciclovir, 
fluconazole, flucytosine, foscarnet, ganciclovir, lamivudine, penicillins,3 
pyrazinamide, quinolones, 4 rimantadine, stavudine, telavancin, 
telbivudine, telithromycin, tenofovir, terbinafine, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, valacyclovir, vancomycin, zidovudine
Cidofovir, methenamine, nalidixic 
acid, nitrofurantoin, sulfonamides 
(long-acting), tetracyclines2
Amprenavir, atazanavir, chloram-
phenicol, clindamycin, erythromycin, 
fosamprenavir, indinavir, metronida-
zole, rimantadine, tigecycline
1Except ceftriaxone.
2Except doxycycline and possibly minocycline.
3Except antistaphylococcal penicillins (eg, nafcillin and dicloxacillin).
4Except moxifloxacin.
 Conditions That Alter Antimicrobial 
Pharmacokinetics 
 Various diseases and physiologic states alter the pharmacokinetics 
of antimicrobial agents. Impairment of renal or hepatic function 
may result in decreased elimination.  Table 51–5 lists drugs that 
require dosage reduction in patients with renal or hepatic insuffi-
ciency. Failure to reduce antimicrobial agent dosage in such 
patients may cause toxic effects. Conversely, patients with burns, 
cystic fibrosis, or trauma may have increased dosage requirements 
for selected agents. The pharmacokinetics of antimicrobials is also 
altered in the elderly, in neonates, and in pregnancy. 
CHAPTER 51 Clinical Use of Antimicrobial Agents    909
anaphylaxis to penicillin, it is necessary to perform skin testing 
and desensitization to penicillin. It is important to obtain a clear 
history of drug allergy and other adverse drug reactions. A patient 
with a documented antimicrobial allergy should carry a card with 
the name of the drug and a description of the reaction. Cross-
reactivity between penicillins and cephalosporins is less than 10%. 
Cephalosporins may be administered to patients with penicillin-
induced maculopapular rashes but should be avoided in patients 
with a history of penicillin-induced immediate hypersensitivity 
reactions. On the other hand, aztreonam does not cross-react with 
penicillins and can be safely administered to patients with a his-
tory of penicillin-induced anaphylaxis. For mild reactions, it may 
be possible to continue therapy with use of adjunctive agents or 
dosage reduction. 
 Adverse reactions to antimicrobials occur with increased 
frequency in several groups, including neonates, geriatric patients, 
renal failure patients, and AIDS patients. Dosage adjustment of 
the drugs listed in  Table 51–5 is essential for the prevention of 
adverse effects in patients with renal failure. In addition, several 
agents are contraindicated in patients with renal impairment 
because of increased rates of serious toxicity ( Table 51–5 ). See the 
preceding chapters for discussions of specific drugs. 
 Polypharmacy also predisposes to drug interactions. Although 
the mechanism is not known, AIDS patients have an unusually 
high incidence of toxicity to a number of drugs, including clin-
damycin, aminopenicillins, and sulfonamides. Many of these reac-
tions, including rash and fever, may respond to dosage reduction or 
TABLE 51–6   Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) penetration 
of selected antimicrobials.
Antimicrobial 
Agent
CSF Concentration 
(Uninflamed 
Meninges) as % of 
Serum 
Concentration
CSF Concentration 
(Inflamed 
Meninges) as % of 
Serum 
Concentration
Ampicillin
2–3
2–100
Aztreonam
2
5
Cefepime
0–2
4–12
Cefotaxime
22.5
27–36
Ceftazidime
0.7
20–40
Ceftriaxone
0.8–1.6
16
Cefuroxime
20
17–88
Ciprofloxacin
6–27
26–37
Imipenem
3.1
11–41
Meropenem
0–7
1–52
Nafcillin
2–15
5–27
Penicillin G
1–2
8–18
Sulfamethoxazole
40
12–47
Trimethoprim
< 41
12–69
Vancomycin
0
1–53
treatment with corticosteroids and antihistamines. Other examples 
are discussed in the preceding chapters and in  Chapter 66 . 
 ■ ANTIMICROBIAL DRUG 
COMBINATIONS  
 RATIONALE FOR COMBINATION 
ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY 
 Most infections should be treated with a single antimicrobial 
agent. Although indications for combination therapy exist, anti-
microbial combinations are often overused in clinical practice. 
The unnecessary use of antimicrobial combinations increases tox-
icity and costs and may occasionally result in reduced efficacy due 
to antagonism of one drug by another. Antimicrobial combina-
tions should be selected for one or more of the following reasons: 
 1. To provide broad-spectrum empiric therapy in seriously ill 
patients. 
 2. To treat polymicrobial infections (such as intra-abdominal 
abscesses, which typically are due to a combination of anaero-
bic and aerobic gram-negative organisms, and enterococci). 
The antimicrobial combination chosen should cover the most 
common known or suspected pathogens but need not cover all 
possible pathogens. The availability of antimicrobials with 
excellent polymicrobial coverage (eg, β-lactamase inhibitor 
combinations or carbapenems) may reduce the need for com-
bination therapy in the setting of polymicrobial infections. 
 3. To decrease the emergence of resistant strains. The value of 
combination therapy in this setting has been clearly demon-
strated for tuberculosis. 
 4. To decrease dose-related toxicity by using reduced doses of one 
or more components of the drug regimen. The use of flucyto-
sine in combination with amphotericin B for the treatment of 
cryptococcal meningitis in non–HIV-infected patients allows 
for a reduction in amphotericin B dosage with decreased 
amphotericin B-induced nephrotoxicity. 
5.  To obtain enhanced inhibition or killing. This use of antimicro-
bial combinations is discussed in the paragraphs that follow. 
 SYNERGISM & ANTAGONISM 
 When the inhibitory or killing effects of two or more antimicrobi-
als used together are significantly greater than expected from their 
effects when used individually, synergism is said to result. Synergism 
is marked by a fourfold or greater reduction in the MIC or MBC 
of each drug when used in combination versus when used alone. 
Antagonism occurs when the combined inhibitory or killing effects 
of two or more antimicrobial drugs are significantly less than 
observed when the drugs are used individually. 
 Mechanisms of Synergistic Action 
 The need for synergistic combinations of antimicrobials has been 
clearly established for the treatment of enterococcal endocarditis. 
Bactericidal activity is essential for the optimal management of 
910    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
bacterial endocarditis. Penicillin or ampicillin in combination with 
gentamicin or streptomycin is superior to monotherapy with a 
penicillin or vancomycin. When tested alone, penicillins and van-
comycin are only bacteriostatic against susceptible enterococcal 
isolates. When these agents are combined with an aminoglycoside, 
however, bactericidal activity results. The addition of gentamicin or 
streptomycin to penicillin allows for a reduction in the duration of 
therapy for selected patients with viridans streptococcal endocardi-
tis. Some evidence exists that synergistic combinations of antimi-
crobials may be of benefit in the treatment of gram-negative 
bacillary infections in febrile neutropenic cancer patients and in 
systemic infections caused by  Pseudomonas aeruginosa . 
 Other synergistic antimicrobial combinations have been 
shown to be more effective than monotherapy with individual 
components. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole has been success-
fully used for the treatment of bacterial infections and  P jiroveci 
( carinii ) pneumonia. ∗  β-Lactamase inhibitors restore the activ-
ity of intrinsically active but hydrolyzable β lactams against 
organisms such as  Staphylococcus aureus and  Bacteroides  fragilis . 
Three major mechanisms of antimicrobial synergism have been 
established: 
 1. Blockade of sequential steps in a metabolic sequence: 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is the best-known example of 
this mechanism of synergy (see  Chapter 46 ). Blockade of the 
two sequential steps in the folic acid pathway by trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole results in a much more complete inhibition 
of growth than achieved by either component alone. 
 2. Inhibition of enzymatic inactivation: Enzymatic inactivation 
of β-lactam antibiotics is a major mechanism of antibiotic 
resistance. Inhibition of β lactamase by β-lactamase inhibitor 
drugs (eg, sulbactam) results in synergism. 
 3. Enhancement of antimicrobial agent uptake: Penicillins and 
other cell wall-active agents can increase the uptake of amino-
glycosides by a number of bacteria, including staphylococci, 
enterococci, streptococci, and  P aeruginosa . Enterococci are 
thought to be intrinsically resistant to aminoglycosides because 
of permeability barriers. Similarly, amphotericin B is thought 
to enhance the uptake of flucytosine by fungi. 
 Mechanisms of Antagonistic Action 
 There are few clinically relevant examples of antimicrobial antago-
nism. The most striking example was reported in a study of 
patients with pneumococcal meningitis. Patients who were treated 
with the combination of penicillin and chlortetracycline had a 
mortality rate of 79% compared with a mortality rate of 21% in 
patients who received penicillin monotherapy (illustrating the first 
mechanism set forth below). 
 The use of an antagonistic antimicrobial combination does not 
preclude other potential beneficial interactions. For example, 
rifampin may antagonize the action of anti-staphylococcal penicil-
lins or vancomycin against staphylococci. However, the aforemen-
tioned antimicrobials may prevent the emergence of resistance to 
rifampin. 
 Two major mechanisms of antimicrobial antagonism have been 
established: 
 1. Inhibition of cidal activity by static agents: Bacteriostatic 
agents such as tetracyclines and chloramphenicol can antago-
nize the action of bactericidal cell wall-active agents because 
cell wall-active agents require that the bacteria be actively grow-
ing and dividing. 
 2. Induction of enzymatic inactivation: Some gram-negative 
bacilli, including enterobacter species,  P aeruginosa, Serratia 
marcescens, and  Citrobacter freundii, possess inducible β lacta-
mases. β-Lactam antibiotics such as imipenem, cefoxitin, and 
ampicillin are potent inducers of β-lactamase production. If an 
inducing agent is combined with an intrinsically active but 
hydrolyzable β lactam such as piperacillin, antagonism may 
result. 
 ■ ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS 
 Antimicrobial agents are effective in preventing infections in many 
settings. Antimicrobial prophylaxis should be used in circum-
stances in which efficacy has been demonstrated and benefits 
outweigh the risks of prophylaxis. Antimicrobial prophylaxis may 
be divided into surgical prophylaxis and nonsurgical prophylaxis. 
 Surgical Prophylaxis 
 Surgical wound infections are a major category of nosocomial 
infections. The estimated annual cost of surgical wound infections 
in the United States is $1.5 billion. 
 The National Research Council (NRC) Wound Classification 
Criteria have served as the basis for recommending antimicrobial 
prophylaxis. NRC criteria consist of four classes [see Box: National 
Research Council (NRC) Wound Classification Criteria]. 
 The Study of the Efficacy of Nosocomial Infection Control 
(SENIC) identified four independent risk factors for postopera-
tive wound infections: operations on the abdomen, operations 
lasting more than 2 hours, contaminated or dirty wound classifi-
cation, and at least three medical diagnoses. Patients with at least 
two SENIC risk factors who undergo clean surgical procedures 
have an increased risk of developing surgical wound infections and 
should receive antimicrobial prophylaxis. 
 Surgical procedures that necessitate the use of antimicrobial 
prophylaxis include contaminated and clean-contaminated opera-
tions, selected operations in which postoperative infection may be 
catastrophic such as open heart surgery, clean procedures that 
involve placement of prosthetic materials, and any procedure in an 
immunocompromised host. The operation should carry a signifi-
cant risk of postoperative site infection or cause significant bacte-
rial contamination. 
 General principles of antimicrobial surgical prophylaxis include 
the following: 
 1. The antibiotic should be active against common surgical 
wound pathogens; unnecessarily broad coverage should be 
avoided. 
 2. The antibiotic should have proved efficacy in clinical trials. 
 * Pneumocystis jiroveci is a fungal organism found in humans ( P carinii 
infects animals) that responds to antiprotozoal drugs. See  Chapter 52 .
CHAPTER 51 Clinical Use of Antimicrobial Agents    911
TABLE 51–7 Recommendations for surgical antimicrobial prophylaxis.
Type of Operation
Common Pathogens
Drug of Choice
Cardiac (with median sternotomy)
Staphylococci, enteric gram-negative rods
Cefazolin
Noncardiac, thoracic
Staphylococci, streptococci, enteric gram-negative 
rods
Cefazolin
Vascular (abdominal and lower extremity)
Staphylococci, enteric gram-negative rods
Cefazolin
Neurosurgical (craniotomy)
Staphylococci
Cefazolin
Orthopedic (with hardware insertion)
Staphylococci
Cefazolin
Head and neck (with entry into the oropharynx)
S aureus, oral flora
Cefazolin + metronidazole
Gastroduodenal (high-risk patients1)
S aureus, oral flora, enteric gram-negative rods
Cefazolin
Biliary tract (high-risk patients2)
S aureus, enterococci, enteric gram-negative rods
Cefazolin
Colorectal (elective surgery)
Enteric gram-negative rods, anaerobes
Oral erythromycin plus neomycin3
Colorectal (emergency surgery or obstruction)
Enteric gram-negative rods, anaerobes
Cefoxitin, cefotetan, or cefazolin + 
metronidazole
Appendectomy, nonperforated
Enteric gram-negative rods, anaerobes
Cefoxitin or cefazolin + metronidazole
Hysterectomy
Enteric gram-negative rods, anaerobes, enterococci, 
group B streptococci
Cefazolin or cefoxitin
Cesarean section
Enteric gram-negative rods, anaerobes, enterococci, 
group B streptococci
Cefazolin4
1Gastric procedures for cancer, ulcer, bleeding, or obstruction; morbid obesity; suppression of gastric acid secretion.
2Age > 60, acute cholecystitis, prior biliary tract surgery, common duct stones, jaundice, or diabetes mellitus.
3In conjunction with mechanical bowel preparation.
4Administer immediately following cord clamping.
 National Research Council (NRC) Wound 
Classification Criteria 
 Clean: Elective, primarily closed procedure; respiratory, gas-
trointestinal, biliary, genitourinary, or oropharyngeal tract not 
entered; no acute inflammation and no break in technique; 
expected infection rate ≤ 2%. 
 Clean contaminated: Urgent or emergency case that is oth-
erwise clean; elective, controlled opening of respiratory, gas-
trointestinal, biliary, or oropharyngeal tract; minimal spillage 
or minor break in technique; expected infection rate ≤ 10%. 
 Contaminated: Acute nonpurulent inflammation; major 
technique break or major spill from hollow organ; penetrat-
ing trauma less than 4 hours old; chronic open wounds to be 
grafted or covered; expected infection rate about 20%. 
Dirty: Purulence or abscess; preoperative perforation of 
respiratory, gastrointestinal, biliary, or oropharyngeal tract; 
penetrating trauma more than 4 hours old; expected infec-
tion rate about 40%. 
 3. The antibiotic must achieve concentrations greater than the 
MIC of suspected pathogens, and these concentrations must 
be present at the time of incision. 
 4. The shortest possible course—ideally a single dose—of the 
most effective and least toxic antibiotic should be used. 
 5. The newer broad-spectrum antibiotics should be reserved for 
therapy of resistant infections. 
6.  If all other factors are equal, the least expensive agent should 
be used. 
 The proper selection and administration of antimicrobial pro-
phylaxis are of utmost importance. Common indications for sur-
gical prophylaxis are shown in  Table 51–7 . Cefazolin is the 
prophylactic agent of choice for head and neck, gastroduodenal, 
biliary tract, gynecologic, and clean procedures. Local wound 
infection patterns should be considered when selecting antimicro-
bial prophylaxis. The selection of vancomycin over cefazolin may 
be necessary in hospitals with high rates of methicillin-resistant  S 
aureus or  S epidermidis infections. The antibiotic should be present 
in adequate concentrations at the operative site before incision 
and throughout the procedure; initial dosing is dependent on the 
volume of distribution, peak levels, clearance, protein binding, 
and bioavailability. Parenteral agents should be administered dur-
ing the interval beginning 60 minutes before incision; administra-
tion up to the time of incision is preferred. In cesarean section, the 
antibiotic is administered after umbilical cord clamping. If short-
acting agents such as cefoxitin are used, doses should be repeated 
if the procedure exceeds 3–4 hours in duration. Single-dose pro-
phylaxis is effective for most procedures and results in decreased 
toxicity and antimicrobial resistance. 
 Improper administration of antimicrobial prophylaxis leads to 
excessive surgical wound infection rates. Common errors in anti-
biotic prophylaxis include selection of the wrong antibiotic, 
912    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
TABLE 51–8 Recommendations for nonsurgical antimicrobial prophylaxis.
Infection to Be Prevented
Indication(s)
Drug of Choice
Efficacy
Anthrax
Suspected exposure
Ciprofloxacin or doxycycline
Proposed effective
Cholera
Close contacts of a case
Tetracycline
Proposed effective
Diphtheria
Unimmunized contacts
Penicillin or erythromycin
Proposed effective
Endocarditis
Dental, oral, or upper respiratory tract procedures1 in at-risk 
patients2
Amoxicillin or clindamycin
Proposed effective
Genital herpes simplex
Recurrent infection (≥ 4 episodes per year)
Acyclovir
Excellent
Perinatal herpes simplex type 2 
infection
Mothers with primary HSV or frequent recurrent genital HSV
Acyclovir
Proposed effective
Group B streptococcal (GBS) 
infection
Mothers with cervical or vaginal GBS colonization and their 
newborns with one or more of the following: (a) onset of 
labor or membrane rupture before 37 weeks’ gestation, 
(b) prolonged rupture of membranes (> 12 hours), (c) mater-
nal intrapartum fever, (d) history of GBS bacteriuria during 
pregnancy, (e) mothers who have given birth to infants who 
had early GBS disease or with a history of streptococcal bac-
teriuria during pregnancy
Ampicillin or penicillin
Excellent
Haemophilus influenzae type B 
infection
Close contacts of a case in incompletely immunized children 
(> 48 months old)
Rifampin
Excellent
HIV infection
Health care workers exposed to blood after needle-stick 
injury
Tenofovir/emtricitabine ± 
lopinavir/ritonavir
Good
Pregnant HIV-infected women who are at ≥ 14 weeks of ges-
tation; newborns of HIV-infected women for the first 6 weeks 
of life, beginning 8–12 hours after birth
HAART3
Excellent
Influenza A and B
Unvaccinated geriatric patients, immunocompromised hosts, 
and health care workers during outbreaks
Oseltamivir
Good
Malaria
Travelers to areas endemic for chloroquine-susceptible disease
Chloroquine
Excellent
Travelers to areas endemic for chloroquine-resistant disease
Mefloquine, doxycycline, or 
atovaquone/proguanil
Excellent
Meningococcal infection
Close contacts of a case
Rifampin, ciprofloxacin, or 
ceftriaxone
Excellent
Mycobacterium avium complex
HIV-infected patients with CD4 count < 75/μL
Azithromycin, clarithromy-
cin, or rifabutin
Excellent
Otitis media
Recurrent infection
Amoxicillin
Good
Pertussis
Close contacts of a case
Azithromycin
Excellent
Plague
Close contacts of a case
Tetracycline
Proposed effective
Pneumococcemia
Children with sickle cell disease or asplenia
Penicillin
Excellent
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumo-
nia (PCP)
High-risk patients (eg, AIDS, leukemia, transplant)
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, dapsone, 
or atovaquone
Excellent
Rheumatic fever
History of rheumatic fever or known rheumatic heart disease
Benzathine penicillin
Excellent
Toxoplasmosis
HIV-infected patients with IgG antibody to Toxoplasma and 
CD4 count < 100/μL
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Good
Tuberculosis
Persons with positive tuberculin skin tests and one or more 
of the following: (a) HIV infection, (b) close contacts with 
newly diagnosed disease, (c) recent skin test conversion, 
(d) medical conditions that increase the risk of developing 
tuberculosis, (e) age < 35
Isoniazid, rifampin, or 
pyrazinamide
Excellent
Urinary tract infections (UTI)
Recurrent infection
Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Excellent
1Prophylaxis is recommended for the following: dental procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the periapical region of teeth or perforation of the oral mucosa, 
and invasive procedure of the respiratory tract that involves incision or biopsy of the respiratory mucosa, such as tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy.
2Prophylaxis should be targeted to those with the following risk factors: prosthetic heart valves, previous bacterial endocarditis, congenital cardiac malformations, cardiac trans-
plantation patients who develop cardiac valvulopathy.
3Highly active antiretroviral therapy. See http://www.hivatis.org/ for updated guidelines.
CHAPTER 51 Clinical Use of Antimicrobial Agents    913
administering the first dose too early or too late, failure to repeat 
doses during prolonged procedures, excessive duration of prophy-
laxis, and inappropriate use of broad-spectrum antibiotics. 
 Nonsurgical Prophylaxis 
 Nonsurgical prophylaxis includes the administration of antimicro-
bials to prevent colonization or asymptomatic infection as well as 
the administration of drugs following colonization by or inocula-
tion of pathogens but before the development of disease. Nonsurgical 
prophylaxis is indicated in individuals who are at high risk for 
temporary exposure to selected virulent pathogens and in patients 
who are at increased risk for developing infection because of under-
lying disease (eg, immunocompromised hosts). Prophylaxis is most 
effective when directed against organisms that are predictably sus-
ceptible to antimicrobial agents. Common indications and drugs 
for nonsurgical prophylaxis are listed in  Table 51–8 . 
 REFERENCES 
 American Thoracic Society: Guidelines for the management of adults with hospital-
acquired, ventilator-associated, and healthcare-associated pneumonia. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171:388. 
 Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery. Treat Guidel Med Lett 2009;7:47. 
 Baddour LM et al: Infective endocarditis: Diagnosis, antimicrobial therapy, and 
management of complications. Circulation 2005;111:3167. 
 Blumberg HM et al: American Thoracic Society/Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of America: Treatment of tuberculo-
sis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;167:603. 
 Bochner BS et al: Anaphylaxis. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1785. 
 Bratzler DW et al: Antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery: An advisory statement 
from the National Surgical Infection Prevention Project. Clin Infect Dis 
2004;38:1706. 
 Gonzales R et al: Principles of appropriate antibiotic use for treatment of acute 
respiratory tract infections in adults: Background, specific aims, and meth-
ods. Ann Intern Med 2001;134:479. 
 Guidelines for prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections in HIV-infected 
adults and adolescents. Recommendations of the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the HIV 
Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America (HIVMA/
IDSA). AIDSinfo April 10, 2009.  http://AIDSinfo.nih.gov 
 Jones RN, Pfaller MA: Bacterial resistance: A worldwide problem. Diagn Microbiol 
Infect Dis 1998;31:379. 
 Kaye KS, Kaye D: Antibacterial therapy and newer agents. Infect Dis Clin North 
Am 2009;23:757. 
 Mandell LA et al: Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic 
Society Consensus guidelines on the management of community-acquired 
pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis 2007;44:S27. 
 Mazuski JE: Surgical infections. Surg Clin North Am 2009;89:295. 
 National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System Report, Data 
Summary from January 1992–June 2004, issued October 2004. Am J Infect 
Control 2004;32:470. 
 Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines 2006. Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2006;54(RR-11):1. 
 Tunkel AR et al: Practice guidelines for the management of bacterial meningitis. 
Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:1267. 
 Wilson W et al: Prevention of infective endocarditis: Guidelines from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation 2007;116:1736. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The most likely diagnosis for this patient is  Streptococcus 
pneumoniae meningitis, the most common bacterial cause of 
meningitis in adults. Other possible microbiologic etiologies 
include  Neisseria meningitidis, Listeria monocytogenes, and 
enteric gram-negative bacilli. Intravenous antimicrobials to 
which local strains of these organisms are sensitive should be 
started while awaiting culture and sensitivity results. In addi-
tion, the use of dexamethasone has also been demonstrated 
to reduce mortality in adults with pneumococcal meningitis 
in conjunction with appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
This page intentionally left blank 
915
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 ■ MALARIA 
 Malaria is the most important parasitic disease of humans and causes 
hundreds of millions of illnesses per year. Four species of plasmo-
dium typically cause human malaria:  Plasmodium falciparum, 
P vivax, P malariae, and P ovale. A fifth species,  P knowlesi, is pri-
marily a pathogen of monkeys, but has recently been recognized to 
cause illness, including severe disease, in humans in Asia. Although 
all of the latter species may cause significant illness,  P falciparum is 
responsible for the majority of serious complications and deaths. 
Drug resistance is an important therapeutic problem, most notably 
with  P falciparum. 
 PARASITE LIFE CYCLE 
 An anopheline mosquito inoculates plasmodium sporozoites to 
initiate human infection ( Figure 52–1 ). Circulating sporozoites 
rapidly invade liver cells, and exoerythrocytic stage tissue schizonts 
mature in the liver. Merozoites are subsequently released from the 
liver and invade erythrocytes. Only erythrocytic parasites cause 
clinical illness. Repeated cycles of infection can lead to the infec-
tion of many erythrocytes and serious disease. Sexual stage game-
tocytes also develop in erythrocytes before being taken up by 
mosquitoes, where they develop into infective sporozoites. 
 In  P falciparum and  P malariae infection, only one cycle of 
liver cell invasion and multiplication occurs, and liver infection 
ceases spontaneously in less than 4 weeks. Thus, treatment that 
eliminates erythrocytic parasites will cure these infections. In 
 P vivax and  P ovale infections, a dormant hepatic stage, the hyp-
nozoite, is not eradicated by most drugs, and subsequent relapses 
can therefore occur after therapy directed against erythrocytic 
parasites. Eradication of both erythrocytic and hepatic parasites is 
required to cure these infections and usually requires two or more 
drugs. 
 DRUG CLASSIFICATION 
 Several classes of antimalarial drugs are available ( Table 52–1 and 
 Figure 52–2 ). Drugs that eliminate developing or dormant liver 
forms are called  tissue schizonticides; those that act on erythro-
cytic parasites are  blood schizonticides; and those that kill sexual 
stages and prevent transmission to mosquitoes are  gametocides. 
No single available agent can reliably effect a  radical cure, ie, 
eliminate both hepatic and erythrocytic stages. Few available agents 
are  causal prophylactic drugs, ie, capable of preventing erythro-
cytic infection. However, all effective chemoprophylactic agents 
kill erythrocytic parasites before they increase sufficiently in num-
ber to cause clinical disease. 
52
Antiprotozoal Drugs
 Philip J. Rosenthal, MD 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 5-year-old American girl presents with a 1-week history of 
intermittent chills, fever, and sweats. She had returned home 
2 weeks earlier after leaving the United States for the first 
time to spend 3 weeks with her grandparents in Nigeria. She 
received all standard childhood immunizations, but no addi-
tional treatment before travel, since her parents have returned 
to their native Nigeria frequently without medical conse-
quences. Three days ago, the child was seen in an outpatient 
clinic and diagnosed with a viral syndrome. Examination 
reveals a lethargic child, with a temperature of 39.8°C (103.6°F) 
and splenomegaly. She has no skin rash or lymphadenopathy. 
Initial laboratory studies are remarkable for hematocrit 29.8%, 
platelets 45,000/mm 3 , creatinine 2.5 mg/dL (220 μmol/L), and 
mildly elevated bilirubin and transaminases. A blood smear 
shows ring forms of  Plasmodium falciparum at 1.5% para-
sitemia. What treatment should be started? 
916    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
which are widely available internationally (and, in the case of 
Coartem ∗∗ , in the USA); Malarone; mefloquine; and quinine. 
Most authorities do not recommend routine terminal chemopro-
phylaxis with primaquine to eradicate dormant hepatic stages of 
 P vivax and  P ovale after travel, but this may be appropriate in 
some circumstances, especially for travelers with major exposure to 
these parasites. 
 Multiple drugs are available for the treatment of malaria that 
presents in the USA ( Table 52–3 ). Most nonfalciparum infections 
and falciparum malaria from areas without known resistance 
should be treated with chloroquine. For vivax malaria from areas 
with suspected chloroquine resistance, including Indonesia and 
Papua New Guinea, other therapies effective against falciparum 
malaria may be used. Vivax and ovale malaria should subsequently 
be treated with primaquine to eradicate liver forms. Uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria from most areas is typically treated with 
Malarone or oral quinine, but new artemisinin-based combina-
tions are increasingly the international standard of care, and one 
combination, Coartem, is now available in the USA. Other agents 
that are generally effective against resistant falciparum malaria 
include mefloquine and halofantrine, both of which have toxicity 
concerns at treatment dosages. Severe falciparum malaria is treated 
with intravenous artesunate, quinidine, or quinine (intravenous 
quinine is not available in the USA). 
 CHLOROQUINE 
 Chloroquine has been the drug of choice for both treatment and 
chemoprophylaxis of malaria since the 1940s, but its usefulness 
against  P falciparum has been seriously compromised by drug 
resistance. It remains the drug of choice in the treatment of sensi-
tive  P falciparum and other species of human malaria parasites. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Chloroquine is a synthetic 4-aminoquinoline ( Figure 52–2 ) for-
mulated as the phosphate salt for oral use. It is rapidly and almost 
completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, reaches maxi-
mum plasma concentrations in about 3 hours, and is rapidly dis-
tributed to the tissues. It has a very large apparent volume of 
distribution of 100–1000 L/kg and is slowly released from tissues 
and metabolized. Chloroquine is principally excreted in the urine 
with an initial half-life of 3–5 days but a much longer terminal 
elimination half-life of 1–2 months. 
 Antimalarial Action & Resistance 
 When not limited by resistance, chloroquine is a highly effective 
blood schizonticide. It is also moderately effective against gameto-
cytes of  P vivax,  P ovale, and  P malariae but not against those of 
 P falciparum. Chloroquine is not active against liver stage para-
sites. Chloroquine probably acts by concentrating in parasite food 
 ∗ Malarone is a proprietary formulation of atovaquone plus proguanil.
 ∗∗ Coartem is a proprietary formulation of artemether and lumefantrine.
Blood
schizonticide
Tissue
schizonticide
Blood
Gametocide
Liver
Schizonts
Hypnozoites
 FIGURE 52–1 Life cycle of malaria parasites. Only the asexual 
erythrocytic stage of infection causes clinical malaria. All effective 
antimalarial treatments are blood schizonticides that kill this stage. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Baird JK: Effectiveness of antimalarial drugs. 
N Engl J M 2005;352:1565.) 
 CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS & TREATMENT 
 When patients are counseled on the prevention of malaria, it is 
imperative to emphasize measures to prevent mosquito bites (eg, 
with insect repellents, insecticides, and bed nets), because parasites 
are increasingly resistant to multiple drugs and no chemoprophy-
lactic regimen is fully protective. Current recommendations from 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) include 
the use of chloroquine for chemoprophylaxis in the few areas 
infested by only chloroquine-sensitive malaria parasites (princi-
pally the Caribbean and Central America west of the Panama 
Canal), mefloquine or Malarone ∗ for most other malarious areas, 
and doxycycline for areas with a very high prevalence of multidrug-
resistant falciparum malaria (principally border areas of Thailand) 
( Table 52–2 ). CDC recommendations should be checked regu-
larly (Phone: 770-488-7788; Internet:  http://www.cdc.gov/
malaria ), because these may change in response to changing resis-
tance patterns and increasing experience with new drugs. In some 
circumstances, it may be appropriate for travelers to carry supplies 
of drugs with them in case they develop a febrile illness when 
medical attention is unavailable. Regimens for self-treatment 
include new artemisinin-based combination therapies (see below), 
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    917
vacuoles, preventing the biocrystallization of the hemoglobin 
breakdown product, heme, into hemozoin, and thus eliciting 
parasite toxicity due to the buildup of free heme. 
 Resistance to chloroquine is now very common among strains 
of  P falciparum and uncommon but increasing for  P vivax. In  P 
falciparum, mutations in a putative transporter, PfCRT, have been 
correlated with resistance. Chloroquine resistance can be reversed 
by certain agents, including verapamil, desipramine, and chlor-
pheniramine, but the clinical value of resistance-reversing drugs is 
not established. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Treatment 
 Chloroquine is the drug of choice in the treatment of nonfalci-
parum and sensitive falciparum malaria. It rapidly terminates 
fever (in 24–48 hours) and clears parasitemia (in 48–72 hours) 
caused by sensitive parasites. It is still used to treat falciparum 
malaria in some areas with widespread resistance, in particular 
much of Africa, owing to its safety, low cost, antipyretic proper-
ties, and partial activity, but continued use of chloroquine for this 
purpose is discouraged, especially in nonimmune individuals. 
Chloroquine has been replaced by other drugs, principally 
artemisinin-based combination therapies, as the standard therapy 
to treat falciparum malaria in most endemic countries. 
Chloroquine does not eliminate dormant liver forms of  P vivax 
and  P ovale, and for that reason primaquine must be added for 
the radical cure of these species. 
 B. Chemoprophylaxis 
 Chloroquine is the preferred chemoprophylactic agent in malari-
ous regions without resistant falciparum malaria. Eradication of 
 P vivax and  P ovale requires a course of primaquine to clear 
hepatic stages. 
 C. Amebic Liver Abscess 
 Chloroquine reaches high liver concentrations and may be used 
for amebic abscesses that fail initial therapy with metronidazole 
(see below). 
 Adverse Effects 
 Chloroquine is usually very well tolerated, even with prolonged 
use. Pruritus is common, primarily in Africans. Nausea, vomit-
ing, abdominal pain, headache, anorexia, malaise, blurring of 
vision, and urticaria are uncommon. Dosing after meals may 
reduce some adverse effects. Rare reactions include hemolysis in 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)-deficient persons, 
impaired hearing, confusion, psychosis, seizures, agranulocytosis, 
exfoliative dermatitis, alopecia, bleaching of hair, hypotension, 
TABLE 52–1 Major antimalarial drugs.
Drug
Class
Use
Chloroquine
4-Aminoquinoline
Treatment and chemoprophylaxis of infection with sensitive parasites
Amodiaquine1
4-Aminoquinoline
Treatment of infection with some chloroquine-resistant P falciparum 
strains and in fixed combination with artesunate
Piperaquine1
Bisquinoline
Treatment of P falciparum infection in fixed combination with 
dihydroartemisinin
Quinine
Quinoline methanol
Oral and intravenous1 treatment of P falciparum infections
Quinidine
Quinoline methanol
Intravenous therapy of severe infections with P falciparum
Mefloquine
Quinoline methanol
Chemoprophylaxis and treatment of infections with P falciparum
Primaquine
8-Aminoquinoline
Radical cure and terminal prophylaxis of infections with P vivax and 
P ovale; alternative chemoprophylaxis for all species
Sulfadoxine-
pyrimethamine (Fansidar)
Folate antagonist combination
Treatment of infections with some chloroquine-resistant P falciparum, 
including combination with artesunate; intermittent preventive 
therapy in endemic areas
Atovaquone-proguanil 
(Malarone)
Quinone-folate antagonist combination
Treatment and chemoprophylaxis of P falciparum infection
Doxycycline
Tetracycline
Treatment (with quinine) of infections with P falciparum; 
chemoprophylaxis
Halofantrine1
Phenanthrene methanol
Treatment of P falciparum infections
Lumefantrine2
Amyl alcohol
Treatment of P falciparum malaria in fixed combination with 
artemether (Coartem)
Artemisinins (artesunate, 
artemether,2 dihydro-
artemisinin1)
Sesquiterpene lactone endoperoxides
Treatment of P falciparum infections; oral combination therapies for 
uncomplicated disease; intravenous artesunate for severe disease
1Not available in the USA.
2Available in the USA only as the fixed combination Coartem.
918    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
CH3O
CH
N
HO
N
CH2
CH2
CH
CH2
Quinine
N
Cl
NH
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
N
C2H5
C2H5
CH3
Chloroquine
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
NH
CH2
N
C2H5
C2H5
Amodiaquine
Piperaquine
OH
Cl
Cl
Cl
N
NH
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH2
CH3
Primaquine
CH3O
CF3
HC
N
HO
N
H
Mefloquine
CF3
Cl
C2H5
NH2
H2N
Pyrimethamine
N
N
Cl
NH
HC
N
N
H2N
NH2
H3C
CH3
Proguanil
Quinoline methanols
4-Aminoquinolines
8-Aminoquinoline
Folate antagonists
CH2CH2CH2CH3
CH2CH2CH2CH3
CH3
CH3
HOCHCH2CH2N
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
HO
Cl
F3C
Halofantrine
Lumefantrine
Quinone
Phenanthrene methanol
H2N
N
H
N
N
OCH3
OCH3
Sulfadoxine
O
O
OH
Cl
Atovaquone
Endoperoxides
O
O
O
O
R2
R1
Artemisinins
(multiple structures)
CH3
H3C
CH3
S
O
O
 FIGURE 52–2  Structural formulas of antimalarial drugs. 
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    919
TABLE 52–2 Drugs for the prevention of malaria in travelers. 1
Drug
Use2
Adult Dosage3
Chloroquine
Areas without resistant P falciparum
500 mg weekly
Malarone
Areas with chloroquine-resistant P falciparum
1 tablet (250 mg atovaquone/100 mg proguanil) daily
Mefloquine
Areas with chloroquine-resistant P falciparum
250 mg weekly
Doxycycline
Areas with multidrug-resistant P falciparum
100 mg daily
Primaquine4
Terminal prophylaxis of P vivax and P ovale infections; 
alternative for primary prevention
52.6 mg (30 mg base) daily for 14 days after travel; for primary pre-
vention 52.6 mg (30 mg base) daily
1Recommendations may change, as resistance to all available drugs is increasing. See text for additional information on toxicities and cautions. For additional details and pedi-
atric dosing, see CDC guidelines (phone: 877-FYI-TRIP; http://www.cdc.gov). Travelers to remote areas should consider carrying effective therapy (see text) for use if they develop 
a febrile illness and cannot reach medical attention quickly.
2Areas without known chloroquine-resistant P falciparum are Central America west of the Panama Canal, Haiti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, and most malarious countries of the 
Middle East. Malarone or mefloquine are currently recommended for other malarious areas except for border areas of Thailand, where doxycycline is recommended.
3For drugs other than primaquine, begin 1–2 weeks before departure (except 2 days before for doxycycline and Malarone) and continue for 4 weeks after leaving the endemic 
area (except 1 week for Malarone). All dosages refer to salts.
4Screen for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency before using primaquine.
TABLE 52–3 Treatment of malaria.
Clinical Setting
Drug Therapy1
Alternative Drugs
Chloroquine-sensitive P falciparum 
and P malariae infections
Chloroquine phosphate, 1 g, followed by 500 
mg at 6, 24, and 48 hours
or
Chloroquine phosphate, 1 g at 0 and 24 hours, 
then 0.5 g at 48 hours
P vivax and P ovale infections
Chloroquine (as above), then (if G6PD normal) 
primaquine, 52.6 (30 mg base) for 14 days
For infections from Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, and 
other areas with suspected resistance: therapies listed for 
uncomplicated chloroquine-resistant P falciparum plus 
primaquine
Uncomplicated infections with 
chloroquine-resistant P falciparum
Coartem (artemether, 20 mg, plus lumefantrine, 
120 mg), four tablets twice daily for 3 days
Malarone, four tablets (total of 1 g atovaquone, 400 mg 
proguanil) daily for 3 days
or
Mefloquine, 15 mg/kg once or 750 mg, then 500 mg in 
6–8 hours
or
Quinine sulfate, 650 mg 3 times daily for 3 days, plus 
doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily for 7 days, or clindamycin, 
600 mg twice daily for 7 days
or
Other artemisinin-based combination regimens (see Table 
52–4)
Severe or complicated infections 
with P falciparum
Artesunate,2 2.4 mg/kg IV, every 12 hours for 1 
day, then daily for 2 additional days; follow with 
7-day oral course of doxycycline or clindamycin 
or full treatment course of Coartem, Malarone, 
or mefloquine
Artemether,3 3.2 mg/kg IM, then 1.6 mg/kg/d IM; follow 
with oral therapy as for artesunate
or
or
Quinidine gluconate,4,5 10 mg/kg IV over 1–2 
hours, then 0.02 mg/kg IV/min
Quinine dihydrochloride,3–5 20 mg/kg IV, then 10 mg/kg 
every 8 hours
or
Quinidine gluconate4,5 15 mg/kg IV over 4 hours, 
then 7.5 mg/kg IV over 4 hours every 8 hours
1All dosages are oral and refer to salts unless otherwise indicated. See text for additional information on all agents, including toxicities and cautions. See CDC guidelines (phone: 
770-488-7788; http://www.cdc.gov) for additional information and pediatric dosing.
2Available in the United States only on an investigational basis through the CDC (phone: 770-488-7788).
3Not available in the USA.
4Cardiac monitoring should be in place during intravenous administration of intravenous quinidine or quinine. Change to an oral regimen as soon as the patient can tolerate it.
5Avoid loading doses in persons who have received quinine, quinidine, or mefloquine in the prior 24 hours.
G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
920    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
and electrocardiographic changes (QRS widening, T-wave abnor-
malities). The long-term administration of high doses of chloro-
quine for rheumatologic diseases (see  Chapter 36 ) can result in 
irreversible ototoxicity, retinopathy, myopathy, and peripheral 
neuropathy. These abnormalities are rarely if ever seen with stan-
dard-dose weekly chemoprophylaxis, even when given for pro-
longed periods. Large intramuscular injections or rapid intravenous 
infusions of chloroquine hydrochloride can result in severe 
hypotension and respiratory and cardiac arrest. Parenteral admin-
istration of chloroquine is best avoided, but if other drugs are not 
available for parenteral use, it should be infused slowly. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 Chloroquine is contraindicated in patients with psoriasis or por-
phyria, in whom it may precipitate acute attacks of these diseases. 
It should generally not be used in those with retinal or visual field 
abnormalities or myopathy. Chloroquine should be used with cau-
tion in patients with a history of liver disease or neurologic or 
hematologic disorders. The antidiarrheal agent kaolin and cal-
cium- and magnesium-containing antacids interfere with the 
absorption of chloroquine and should not be co-administered 
with the drug. Chloroquine is considered safe in pregnancy and 
for young children. 
 OTHER QUINOLINES 
 Amodiaquine is closely related to chloroquine, and it probably 
shares mechanisms of action and resistance with that drug. 
Amodiaquine has been widely used to treat malaria because of its 
low cost, limited toxicity, and, in some areas, effectiveness against 
chloroquine-resistant strains of  P falciparum. Reports of toxicities 
of amodiaquine, including agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, and 
hepatotoxicity, have limited use of the drug in recent years. 
However, recent reevaluation has shown that serious toxicity from 
amodiaquine is rare, and it may be used as a replacement for chlo-
roquine in areas with high rates of resistance but limited resources. 
The most important current use of amodiaquine is in combination 
therapy. The World Health Organization (WHO) lists amodiaquine 
plus artesunate as a recommended therapy for falciparum malaria 
in areas with resistance to older drugs ( Table 52–4 ). This combina-
tion is now available as a single tablet (ASAQ, Arsucam, Coarsucam) 
and is the first-line therapy for the treatment of uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria in many countries in Africa. Another combina-
tion, amodiaquine plus sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, remains 
reasonably effective for the treatment of falciparum malaria in 
many areas with some resistance to the individual drugs, and it is 
a preferred alternative treatment if artemisinin-containing thera-
pies are unavailable. Chemoprophylaxis with amodiaquine is 
best avoided because of its apparent increased toxicity with 
long-term use. 
 Piperaquine is a bisquinoline that was used widely to treat 
chloroquine-resistant falciparum malaria in China in the 1970s 
through the 1980s, but its use waned after resistance became 
widespread. Recently, piperaquine has been combined with 
dihydroartemisinin in co-formulated tablets (Artekin, 
Duocotecxin) that have shown excellent efficacy and safety for 
the treatment of falciparum malaria, without apparent drug 
resistance. Piperaquine has a longer half-life (∼ 28 days) than 
amodiaquine (∼ 14 days), mefloquine (∼ 14 days), or lumefan-
trine (∼ 4 days), leading to a longer period of post-treatment 
prophylaxis with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine than with the 
other leading artemisinin-based combinations; this feature 
should be particularly advantageous in high transmission areas. 
Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine is now the first-line therapy for 
the treatment of uncomplicated malaria in Vietnam. 
 ARTEMISININ & ITS DERIVATIVES 
 Artemisinin  (qinghaosu) is a sesquiterpene lactone endoperoxide 
( Figure 52–2 ), the active component of an herbal medicine that 
has been used as an antipyretic in China for over 2000 years. 
Artemisinin is insoluble and can only be used orally. Analogs have 
been synthesized to increase solubility and improve antimalarial 
efficacy. The most important of these analogs are  artesunate 
(water-soluble; useful for oral, intravenous, intramuscular, and 
rectal administration),  artemether (lipid-soluble; useful for oral, 
intramuscular, and rectal administration), and  dihydroartemisinin 
(water-soluble; useful for oral administration). 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Artemisinin and its analogs are rapidly absorbed, with peak 
plasma levels occurring in 1–2 hours and half-lives of 1–3 hours 
after oral administration. Artemisinin, artesunate, and artemether 
are rapidly metabolized to the active metabolite dihydroartemisi-
nin. Drug levels appear to decrease after a number of days of 
therapy. 
TABLE 52–4  WHO recommendations for the 
treatment of falciparum malaria.
Regimen
Notes
Artemether-lumefantrine 
(Coartem, Riamet)
Co-formulated; first-line therapy in 
many countries; approved in the 
USA
Artesunate-amodiaquine 
(ASAQ, Arsucam, Coarsucam)
Co-formulated; first-line therapy in 
many African countries
Artesunate-mefloquine
Co-formulated; first-line therapy in 
parts of Southeast Asia and South 
America
Dihydroartemisinin-
piperaquine (Artekin, 
Duocotecxin)
Co-formulated; first-line therapy in 
some countries in Southeast Asia
Artesunate-sulfadoxine-
pyrimethamine
First-line therapy in some countries, 
but efficacy lower than other regi-
mens in most areas
World Health Organization: Guidelines for the Treatment of Malaria. World Health 
Organization. Geneva, 2010.
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    921
 Antimalarial Action & Resistance 
 The artemisinins are now widely available around the world. 
However, artemisinin monotherapy for the treatment of uncompli-
cated malaria is now strongly discouraged. Rather, co-formulated 
artemisinin-based combination therapies are recommended to 
improve efficacy and prevent the selection of artemisinin-resistant 
parasites. The oral combination regimen Coartem (artemether-
lumefantrine) was approved by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) in 2009, and may be considered the new first-line therapy 
in the USA for uncomplicated falciparum malaria, although the 
drug may not be widely available. Intravenous artesunate was 
made available by the CDC in 2007; use of the drug can be initi-
ated by contact with the CDC, which will release the drug for 
appropriate indications (falciparum malaria with signs of severe 
disease or inability to take oral medications) from stocks stored 
around the USA. 
 Artemisinin and its analogs are very rapidly acting blood sch-
izonticides against all human malaria parasites. Artemisinins have 
no effect on hepatic stages. The antimalarial activity of artemisinins 
may result from the production of free radicals that follows the 
iron-catalyzed cleavage of the artemisinin endoperoxide bridge in 
the parasite food vacuole or from inhibition of a parasite calcium 
ATPase. Artemisinin resistance is not yet an important problem, but 
 P falciparum isolates with diminished in vitro susceptibility to arte-
mether have recently been described. In addition, increasing rates of 
treatment failure and increases in parasite clearance times after use 
of artesunate or artesunate-mefloquine in parts of Cambodia may 
be early signs of a worrisome decrease in artesunate efficacy .
 Clinical Uses 
 Artemisinin-based combination therapy is now the standard for 
treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in nearly all areas 
endemic for falciparum malaria. These regimens were developed 
because the short plasma half-lives of the artemisinins led to unac-
ceptably high recrudescence rates after short-course therapy, 
which were reversed by inclusion of longer-acting drugs. 
Combination therapy also helps to protect against the selection of 
artemisinin resistance. However, with completion of dosing after 
3 days, the artemisinin components are rapidly eliminated, and so 
selection of resistance to partner drugs is of concern. 
 The WHO recommends five artemisinin-based combinations for 
the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria ( Table 52–4 ). 
One of these, artesunate-sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is not rec-
ommended in many areas owing to unacceptable levels of resis-
tance to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, but it is the first-line therapy 
in some countries in Asia, South America, and North Africa. The 
other four recommended regimens are now all available as combi-
nation formulations, although manufacturing standards may vary. 
Artesunate-mefloquine is highly effective in Southeast Asia, where 
resistance to many antimalarials is common; it is the first-line 
therapy in some countries in Southeast Asia and South America. 
This regimen is less practical for other areas, particularly Africa, 
because of its relatively high cost and poor tolerability. Either 
artesunate-amodiaquine or artemether-lumefantrine is now the 
standard treatment for uncomplicated falciparum malaria in most 
countries in Africa and some additional endemic countries on 
other continents. Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine is a newer regi-
men that has shown excellent efficacy; it is the first-line therapy 
for falciparum malaria in Vietnam. 
 The relative efficacy and safety of artemisinin-based combina-
tion therapies are now under active investigation. In general, the 
leading regimens are highly efficacious, safe, and well tolerated, 
and they are the new standard of care for the treatment of uncom-
plicated falciparum malaria. 
 Artemisinins are also proving to have outstanding efficacy in 
the treatment of complicated falciparum malaria. Large random-
ized trials and meta-analyses have shown that intramuscular 
artemether has an efficacy equivalent to that of quinine and that 
intravenous artesunate is superior to intravenous quinine in terms 
of parasite clearance time and—most important—patient sur-
vival. Intravenous artesunate also has a superior side-effect profile 
compared with that of intravenous quinine or quinidine. Thus, 
intravenous artesunate will likely replace quinine as the standard 
of care for the treatment of severe falciparum malaria, although it 
is not yet widely available in most areas. Artesunate and arte-
mether have also been effective in the treatment of severe malaria 
when administered rectally, offering a valuable treatment modality 
when parenteral therapy is not available. 
 Adverse Effects & Cautions 
 Artemisinins are generally very well tolerated. The most commonly 
reported adverse effects are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and dizzi-
ness, and these may often be due to underlying malaria rather than 
the medications. Rare serious toxicities include neutropenia, ane-
mia, hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and allergic reactions. 
Irreversible neurotoxicity has been seen in animals, but only after 
doses much higher than those used to treat malaria. Artemisinins 
have been embryotoxic in animal studies, but rates of congenital 
abnormalities, stillbirths, and abortions were not elevated, com-
pared with those of controls, in women who received artemisinins 
during pregnancy. Based on this information and the significant risk 
of malaria during pregnancy, the WHO recommends artemisinin-
based combination therapies for the treatment of uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria during the second and third trimesters of preg-
nancy, intravenous artesunate or quinine for the treatment of severe 
malaria during the first trimester, and intravenous artesunate for 
treatment of severe malaria during the second and third trimesters. 
 QUININE & QUINIDINE 
 Quinine and quinidine remain important therapies for falciparum 
malaria—especially severe disease—although toxicity may compli-
cate therapy. Resistance to quinine is uncommon but may be 
increasing. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Quinine is derived from the bark of the cinchona tree, a tradi-
tional remedy for intermittent fevers from South America. The 
922    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
alkaloid quinine was purified from the bark in 1820, and it has 
been used in the treatment and prevention of malaria since that 
time. Quinidine, the dextrorotatory stereoisomer of quinine, is at 
least as effective as parenteral quinine in the treatment of severe 
falciparum malaria. After oral administration, quinine is rapidly 
absorbed, reaches peak plasma levels in 1–3 hours, and is widely 
distributed in body tissues. The use of a loading dose in severe 
malaria allows the achievement of peak levels within a few hours. 
The pharmacokinetics of quinine varies among populations. 
Individuals with malaria develop higher plasma levels of the drug 
than healthy controls, but toxicity is not increased, apparently 
because of increased protein binding. The half-life of quinine also 
is longer in those with severe malaria (18 hours) than in healthy 
controls (11 hours). Quinidine has a shorter half-life than qui-
nine, mostly as a result of decreased protein binding. Quinine is 
primarily metabolized in the liver and excreted in the urine. 
 Antimalarial Action & Resistance 
 Quinine is a rapid-acting, highly effective blood schizonticide 
against the four species of human malaria parasites. The drug is 
gametocidal against  P vivax and  P ovale but not  P falciparum. It is 
not active against liver stage parasites. The mechanism of action of 
quinine is unknown. 
 Increasing in vitro resistance of parasites from a number of 
areas suggests that quinine resistance will be an increasing prob-
lem. Resistance to quinine is already common in some areas of 
Southeast Asia, especially border areas of Thailand, where the drug 
may fail if used alone to treat falciparum malaria. However, qui-
nine still provides at least a partial therapeutic effect in most 
patients. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Parenteral Treatment of Severe Falciparum Malaria 
 For many years, quinine dihydrochloride or quinidine gluconate 
have been the treatments of choice for severe falciparum malaria, 
although intravenous artesunate now provides an alternative for 
this indication. Quinine can be administered slowly intravenously 
or, in a dilute solution, intramuscularly, but parenteral prepara-
tions of this drug are not available in the USA. Quinidine has been 
the standard therapy in the USA for the parenteral treatment of 
severe falciparum malaria. The drug can be administered in 
divided doses or by continuous intravenous infusion; treatment 
should begin with a loading dose to rapidly achieve effective 
plasma concentrations. Because of its cardiac toxicity and the rela-
tive unpredictability of its pharmacokinetics, intravenous quini-
dine should be administered slowly with cardiac monitoring. 
Therapy should be changed to an effective oral agent as soon as 
the patient has improved and can tolerate oral medications. 
 B. Oral Treatment of Falciparum Malaria 
 Quinine sulfate is appropriate therapy for uncomplicated falci-
parum malaria except when the infection was transmitted in an 
area without documented chloroquine-resistant malaria. Quinine 
is commonly used with a second drug (most often doxycycline or, 
in children, clindamycin) to shorten quinine’s duration of use 
(usually to 3 days) and limit toxicity. Quinine is less effective than 
chloroquine against other human malarias and is more toxic. 
Therefore, it is not used to treat infections with these parasites. 
 C. Malarial Chemoprophylaxis 
 Quinine is not generally used in chemoprophylaxis owing to its 
toxicity, although a daily dose of 325 mg is effective. 
 D. Babesiosis 
 Quinine is first-line therapy, in combination with clindamycin, in 
the treatment of infection with  Babesia microti or other human 
babesial infections. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Therapeutic dosages of quinine and quinidine commonly cause 
tinnitus, headache, nausea, dizziness, flushing, and visual distur-
bances, a constellation of symptoms termed  cinchonism. Mild 
symptoms of cinchonism do not warrant the discontinuation of 
therapy. More severe findings, often after prolonged therapy, 
include more marked visual and auditory abnormalities, vomiting, 
diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Hypersensitivity reactions include 
skin rashes, urticaria, angioedema, and bronchospasm. Hematologic 
abnormalities include hemolysis (especially with G6PD defi-
ciency), leukopenia, agranulocytosis, and thrombocytopenia. 
Therapeutic doses may cause hypoglycemia through stimulation 
of insulin release; this is a particular problem in severe infections 
and in pregnant patients, who have increased sensitivity to insulin. 
Quinine can stimulate uterine contractions, especially in the third 
trimester. However, this effect is mild, and quinine and quinidine 
remain drugs of choice for severe falciparum malaria even during 
pregnancy. Intravenous infusions of the drugs may cause throm-
bophlebitis. 
 Severe hypotension can follow too-rapid intravenous infusions 
of quinine or quinidine. Electrocardiographic abnormalities (QT 
interval prolongation) are fairly common with intravenous quini-
dine, but dangerous arrhythmias are uncommon when the drug is 
administered appropriately in a monitored setting. 
 Blackwater fever is a rare severe illness that includes marked 
hemolysis and hemoglobinuria in the setting of quinine therapy 
for malaria. It appears to be due to a hypersensitivity reaction to 
the drug, although its pathogenesis is uncertain. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 Quinine (or quinidine) should be discontinued if signs of severe 
cinchonism, hemolysis, or hypersensitivity occur. It should be 
avoided if possible in patients with underlying visual or auditory 
problems. It must be used with great caution in those with under-
lying cardiac abnormalities. Quinine should not be given concur-
rently with mefloquine and should be used with caution in a 
patient with malaria who has previously received mefloquine 
chemoprophylaxis. Absorption may be blocked by aluminum-
containing antacids. Quinine can raise plasma levels of warfarin 
and digoxin. Dosage must be reduced in renal insufficiency. 
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    923
 MEFLOQUINE 
 Mefloquine is effective therapy for many chloroquine-resistant 
strains of  P falciparum and against other species. Although toxicity 
is a concern, mefloquine is one of the recommended chemopro-
phylactic drugs for use in most malaria-endemic regions with 
chloroquine-resistant strains. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Mefloquine hydrochloride is a synthetic 4-quinoline methanol 
that is chemically related to quinine. It can only be given orally 
because severe local irritation occurs with parenteral use. It is well 
absorbed, and peak plasma concentrations are reached in about 
18 hours. Mefloquine is highly protein-bound, extensively distrib-
uted in tissues, and eliminated slowly, allowing a single-dose treat-
ment regimen. The terminal elimination half-life is about 20 days, 
allowing weekly dosing for chemoprophylaxis. With weekly dos-
ing, steady-state drug levels are reached over a number of weeks; 
this interval can be shortened to 4 days by beginning a course with 
three consecutive daily doses of 250 mg, although this is not stan-
dard practice. Mefloquine and acid metabolites of the drug are 
slowly excreted, mainly in the feces. The drug can be detected in 
the blood for months after the completion of therapy. 
 Antimalarial Action & Resistance 
 Mefloquine has strong blood schizonticidal activity against 
P falciparum and  P vivax, but it is not active against hepatic stages 
or gametocytes. The mechanism of action of mefloquine is 
unknown. Sporadic resistance to mefloquine has been reported 
from many areas. At present, resistance appears to be uncommon 
except in regions of Southeast Asia with high rates of multidrug 
resistance (especially border areas of Thailand). Mefloquine resis-
tance appears to be associated with resistance to quinine and 
halofantrine but not with resistance to chloroquine. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Chemoprophylaxis 
 Mefloquine is effective in prophylaxis against most strains of 
 P falciparum and probably all other human malarial species. 
Mefloquine is therefore among the drugs recommended by the 
CDC for chemoprophylaxis in all malarious areas except for those 
with no chloroquine resistance (where chloroquine is preferred) 
and some rural areas of Southeast Asia with a high prevalence of 
mefloquine resistance. As with chloroquine, eradication of  P vivax 
and  P ovale requires a course of primaquine. 
 B. Treatment 
 Mefloquine is effective in treating most falciparum malaria. The 
drug is not appropriate for treating individuals with severe or 
complicated malaria, since quinine, quinidine, and artemisinins 
are more rapidly active, and since drug resistance is less likely with 
those agents. The combination of artesunate plus mefloquine 
showed excellent antimalarial efficacy in regions of Southeast Asia 
with some resistance to mefloquine, and this regimen is now one 
of the combination therapies recommended by the WHO for the 
treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria ( Table 52–4 ). 
Artesunate-mefloquine is the first-line therapy for uncomplicated 
malaria in a number of countries in Asia and South America. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Weekly dosing with mefloquine for chemoprophylaxis may cause 
nausea, vomiting, dizziness, sleep and behavioral disturbances, 
epigastric pain, diarrhea, abdominal pain, headache, rash, and diz-
ziness. Neuropsychiatric toxicities have received a good deal of 
publicity, but despite frequent anecdotal reports of seizures and 
psychosis, a number of controlled studies have found the fre-
quency of serious adverse effects from mefloquine to be no higher 
than that with other common antimalarial chemoprophylactic 
regimens. Leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and aminotransferase 
elevations have been reported. 
 The latter adverse effects are more common with the higher 
dosages required for treatment. These effects may be lessened by 
administering the drug in two doses separated by 6–8 hours. The 
incidence of neuropsychiatric symptoms appears to be about ten 
times more common than with chemoprophylactic dosing, with 
widely varying frequencies of up to about 50% being reported. 
Serious neuropsychiatric toxicities (depression, confusion, acute 
psychosis, or seizures) have been reported in less than 1 in 1000 
treatments, but some authorities believe that these toxicities are 
actually more common. Mefloquine can also alter cardiac conduc-
tion, and arrhythmias and bradycardia have been reported. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 Mefloquine is contraindicated in a patient with a history of epi-
lepsy, psychiatric disorders, arrhythmia, cardiac conduction defects, 
or sensitivity to related drugs. It should not be co-administered 
with quinine, quinidine, or halofantrine, and caution is required 
if quinine or quinidine is used to treat malaria after mefloquine 
chemoprophylaxis. Theoretical risks of mefloquine must be bal-
anced with the risk of contracting falciparum malaria. The CDC 
no longer advises against mefloquine use in patients receiving 
β-adrenoceptor antagonists. Mefloquine is also now considered 
safe in young children. Available data suggest that mefloquine is 
safe throughout pregnancy, although experience in the first trimes-
ter is limited. An older recommendation to avoid mefloquine use 
in those requiring fine motor skills (eg, airline pilots) is controver-
sial. Mefloquine chemoprophylaxis should be discontinued if sig-
nificant neuropsychiatric symptoms develop. 
 PRIMAQUINE 
 Primaquine is the drug of choice for the eradication of dormant 
liver forms of  P vivax and  P ovale and can also be used for chemo-
prophylaxis against all malarial species. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Primaquine phosphate is a synthetic 8-aminoquinoline ( Figure 52–2 ). 
The drug is well absorbed orally, reaching peak plasma levels in 
924    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
1–2 hours. The plasma half-life is 3–8 hours. Primaquine is widely 
distributed to the tissues, but only a small amount is bound there. 
It is rapidly metabolized and excreted in the urine. Its three major 
metabolites appear to have less antimalarial activity but more 
potential for inducing hemolysis than the parent compound. 
 Antimalarial Action & Resistance 
 Primaquine is active against hepatic stages of all human malaria 
parasites. It is the only available agent active against the dormant 
hypnozoite stages of  P vivax and  P ovale. Primaquine is also gameto-
cidal against the four human malaria species. Primaquine acts against 
erythrocytic stage parasites, but this activity is too weak to play an 
important role. The mechanism of antimalarial action is unknown. 
 Some strains of  P vivax in New Guinea, Southeast Asia, 
Central and South America, and other areas are relatively resistant 
to primaquine. Liver forms of these strains may not be eradicated 
by a single standard treatment with primaquine and may require 
repeated therapy. Because of decreasing efficacy, the standard dos-
age of primaquine for radical cure of  P vivax infection was recently 
doubled to 30 mg base daily for 14 days. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Therapy (Radical Cure) of Acute Vivax and Ovale 
Malaria 
 Standard therapy for these infections includes chloroquine to eradi-
cate erythrocytic forms and primaquine to eradicate liver hypnozo-
ites and prevent a subsequent relapse. Chloroquine is given acutely, 
and therapy with primaquine is withheld until the G6PD status of 
the patient is known. If the G6PD level is normal, a 14-day course 
of primaquine is given. Prompt evaluation of the G6PD level is 
helpful, since primaquine appears to be most effective when insti-
tuted before completion of dosing with chloroquine. 
 B. Terminal Prophylaxis of Vivax and Ovale Malaria 
 Standard chemoprophylaxis does not prevent a relapse of vivax or 
ovale malaria, because the hypnozoite forms of these parasites are 
not eradicated by chloroquine or other available blood schizonti-
cide agents. To markedly diminish the likelihood of relapse, some 
authorities advocate the use of primaquine after the completion of 
travel to an endemic area. 
 C. Chemoprophylaxis of Malaria 
 Primaquine has been studied as a daily chemoprophylactic agent. 
Daily treatment with 30 mg (0.5 mg/kg) of base provided good 
levels of protection against falciparum and vivax malaria. However, 
potential toxicities of long-term use remain a concern, and pri-
maquine is generally recommended for this purpose only when 
mefloquine, Malarone, and doxycycline cannot be used. 
 D. Gametocidal Action 
 A single dose of primaquine (45 mg base) can be used as a control 
measure to render  P falciparum gametocytes noninfective to mos-
quitoes. This therapy is of no clinical benefit to the patient but 
will disrupt transmission. 
 E.   Pneumocystis jiroveci Infection 
 The combination of clindamycin and primaquine is an alternative 
regimen in the treatment of pneumocystosis, particularly mild to 
moderate disease. This regimen offers improved tolerance com-
pared with high-dose trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or pentami-
dine, although its efficacy against severe pneumocystis pneumonia 
is not well studied. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Primaquine in recommended doses is generally well tolerated. It 
infrequently causes nausea, epigastric pain, abdominal cramps, 
and headache, and these symptoms are more common with higher 
dosages and when the drug is taken on an empty stomach. More 
serious but rare adverse effects are leukopenia, agranulocytosis, 
leukocytosis, and cardiac arrhythmias. Standard doses of pri-
maquine may cause hemolysis or methemoglobinemia (manifested 
by cyanosis), especially in persons with G6PD deficiency or other 
hereditary metabolic defects. 
 Contraindications & Cautions 
 Primaquine should be avoided in patients with a history of granu-
locytopenia or methemoglobinemia, in those receiving potentially 
myelosuppressive drugs (eg, quinidine), and in those with disor-
ders that commonly include myelosuppression. It is never given 
parenterally because it may induce marked hypotension. 
 Patients should be tested for G6PD deficiency before pri-
maquine is prescribed. When a patient is deficient in G6PD, treat-
ment strategies may consist of withholding therapy and treating 
subsequent relapses, if they occur, with chloroquine; treating 
patients with standard dosing, paying close attention to their hema-
tologic status; or treating with weekly primaquine (45 mg base) for 
8 weeks. G6PD-deficient individuals of Mediterranean and Asian 
ancestry are most likely to have severe deficiency, whereas those of 
African ancestry usually have a milder biochemical defect. This 
difference can be taken into consideration in choosing a treatment 
strategy. In any event, primaquine should be discontinued if there 
is evidence of hemolysis or anemia. Primaquine should be avoided 
in pregnancy because the fetus is relatively G6PD-deficient and 
thus at risk of hemolysis. 
 ATOVAQUONE 
 Atovaquone, a hydroxynaphthoquinone ( Figure 52–2 ), was ini-
tially developed as an antimalarial agent, and as a component of 
 Malarone is recommended for treatment and prevention of 
malaria. Atovaquone has also been approved by the FDA for the 
treatment of mild to moderate  P jiroveci pneumonia. 
 The drug is only administered orally. Its bioavailability is low 
and erratic, but absorption is increased by fatty food. The drug is 
heavily protein-bound and has a half-life of 2–3 days. Most of the 
drug is eliminated unchanged in the feces. Atovaquone acts 
against plasmodia by disrupting mitochondrial electron transport. 
It is active against tissue and erythrocytic schizonts, allowing 
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    925
chemoprophylaxis to be discontinued only 1 week after the end of 
exposure (compared with 4 weeks for mefloquine or doxycycline, 
which lack activity against tissue schizonts). 
 Initial use of atovaquone to treat malaria led to disappointing 
results, with frequent failures, apparently due to the selection of 
resistant parasites during therapy. In contrast, Malarone, a fixed 
combination of atovaquone (250 mg) and proguanil (100 mg), is 
highly effective for both the treatment and chemoprophylaxis of 
falciparum malaria, and it is now approved for both indications in 
the USA. For chemoprophylaxis, Malarone must be taken daily 
( Table 52–2 ). It has an advantage over mefloquine and doxycy-
cline in requiring shorter periods of treatment before and after the 
period at risk for malaria transmission, but it is more expensive 
than the other agents. It should be taken with food. 
 Atovaquone is an alternative therapy for  P jiroveci infection, although 
its efficacy is lower than that of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. 
Standard dosing is 750 mg taken with food twice daily for 21 days. 
Adverse effects include fever, rash, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
headache, and insomnia. Serious adverse effects appear to be mini-
mal, although experience with the drug remains limited. Atovaquone 
has also been effective in small numbers of immunocompromised 
patients with toxoplasmosis unresponsive to other agents, although 
its role in this disease is not yet defined. 
 Malarone is generally well tolerated. Adverse effects include 
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, and rash, 
and these are more common with the higher dosage required for 
treatment. Reversible elevations in liver enzymes have been 
reported. The safety of atovaquone in pregnancy is unknown. 
Plasma concentrations of atovaquone are decreased about 50% by 
co-administration of tetracycline or rifampin. 
 INHIBITORS OF FOLATE SYNTHESIS 
 Inhibitors of enzymes involved in folate metabolism are used, 
generally in combination regimens, in the treatment and preven-
tion of malaria. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Pyrimethamine is a 2,4-diaminopyrimidine related to trimetho-
prim (see  Chapter 46 ).  Proguanil is a biguanide derivative 
( Figure 52–2 ). Both drugs are slowly but adequately absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract. Pyrimethamine reaches peak plasma lev-
els 2–6 hours after an oral dose, is bound to plasma proteins, and 
has an elimination half-life of about 3.5 days. Proguanil reaches 
peak plasma levels about 5 hours after an oral dose and has an 
elimination half-life of about 16 hours. Therefore, proguanil must 
be administered daily for chemoprophylaxis, whereas pyrimethamine 
can be given once a week. Pyrimethamine is extensively metabolized 
before excretion. Proguanil is a prodrug; only its triazine metabolite, 
cycloguanil, is active.  Fansidar, a fixed combination of the sulfon-
amide  sulfadoxine (500 mg per tablet) and  pyrimethamine (25 mg 
per tablet), is well absorbed. Its components display peak plasma 
levels within 2–8 hours and are excreted mainly by the kidneys. The 
average half-life of sulfadoxine is about 170 hours. 
 Antimalarial Action & Resistance 
 Pyrimethamine and proguanil act slowly against erythrocytic 
forms of susceptible strains of all four human malaria species. 
Proguanil also has some activity against hepatic forms. Neither 
drug is adequately gametocidal or effective against the persistent 
liver stages of  P vivax or  P ovale. Sulfonamides and sulfones are 
weakly active against erythrocytic schizonts but not against liver 
stages or gametocytes. They are not used alone as antimalarials but 
are effective in combination with other agents. 
 The mechanism of action of pyrimethamine and proguanil 
involves selective inhibition of plasmodial dihydrofolate reductase, 
a key enzyme in the pathway for synthesis of folate. Sulfonamides 
and sulfones inhibit another enzyme in the folate pathway, dihy-
dropteroate synthase. As described in  Chapter 46 and shown in 
 Figure 46–2 , combinations of inhibitors of these two enzymes 
provide synergistic activity. 
 Resistance to folate antagonists and sulfonamides is common 
in many areas for  P falciparum and less common for  P vivax. 
Resistance is due primarily to mutations in dihydrofolate reductase 
and dihydropteroate synthase, with increasing numbers of muta-
tions leading to increasing levels of resistance. At present, resis-
tance seriously limits the efficacy of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine 
(Fansidar) for the treatment of malaria in most areas, but in Africa 
most parasites exhibit an intermediate level of resistance, such that 
antifolates may continue to offer some preventive efficacy against 
malaria. Because different mutations may mediate resistance to 
different agents, cross-resistance is not uniformly seen. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Chemoprophylaxis 
 Chemoprophylaxis with single folate antagonists is no longer rec-
ommended because of frequent resistance, but a number of agents 
are used in combination regimens. The combination of chloroquine 
(500 mg weekly) and proguanil (200 mg daily) was previously 
widely used, but with increasing resistance to both agents it is no 
longer recommended. Fansidar and Maloprim (the latter is a com-
bination of pyrimethamine and the sulfone dapsone) are both 
effective against sensitive parasites with weekly dosing, but they 
are no longer recommended because of resistance and toxicity. 
Considering protection of populations in endemic regions, 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, an antifolate combination that 
is more active against bacteria than malaria parasites, is increas-
ingly used as a daily prophylactic therapy for HIV-infected 
patients in developing countries. Although it is administered 
primarily to prevent typical HIV opportunistic and bacterial 
infections, this regimen offers partial preventive efficacy against 
malaria in Africa. 
 B. Intermittent Preventive Therapy 
 A new strategy for malaria control is intermittent preventive 
therapy, in which high-risk patients receive intermittent treatment 
for malaria, regardless of their infection status, typically with 
Fansidar, which benefits from simple dosing and prolonged activ-
ity. Considering the two highest risk groups for severe malaria in 
926    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
Africa, this strategy is best validated in pregnant women and is 
increasingly studied in young children. Typical schedules include 
single doses of Fansidar during the second and third trimesters of 
pregnancy and monthly doses whenever children present for 
scheduled immunizations or, in areas with seasonal malaria, 
monthly doses during the transmission season. However, optimal 
preventive dosing schedules have not been established. 
 C. Treatment of Chloroquine-Resistant Falciparum 
Malaria 
 Fansidar is commonly used to treat uncomplicated falciparum 
malaria and until recently it was a first-line therapy for this indica-
tion in some tropical countries. Advantages of Fansidar are ease of 
administration (a single oral dose) and low cost. However, rates of 
resistance are increasing, and Fansidar is no longer a recom-
mended therapy. In particular, Fansidar should not be used for 
severe malaria, since it is slower-acting than other available agents. 
Fansidar is also not reliably effective in vivax malaria, and its use-
fulness against  P ovale and  P malariae has not been adequately 
studied. A new antifolate-sulfone combination, chlorproguanil-
dapsone (Lapdap), was until recently available in some African 
countries for the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria, 
and the combination of chlorproguanil-dapsone and artesunate 
(Dacart) was under development. However, this project was dis-
continued in 2008 as a result of concerns about hematologic tox-
icity in those with G6PD deficiency, and chlorproguanil-dapsone 
will no longer be marketed. 
 D. Toxoplasmosis 
 Pyrimethamine, in combination with sulfadiazine, is first-line 
therapy in the treatment of toxoplasmosis, including acute infec-
tion, congenital infection, and disease in immunocompromised 
patients. For immunocompromised patients, high-dose therapy is 
required followed by chronic suppressive therapy. Folinic acid is 
included to limit myelosuppression. Toxicity from the combina-
tion is usually due primarily to sulfadiazine. The replacement of 
sulfadiazine with clindamycin provides an effective alternative 
regimen. 
 E. Pneumocystosis 
 P jiroveci is the cause of human pneumocystosis and is now recog-
nized to be a fungus, but this organism is discussed in this chapter 
because it responds to antiprotozoal drugs, not antifungals. (The 
related species  P carinii is now recognized to be the cause of ani-
mal infections.) First-line therapy of pneumocystosis is trimetho-
prim plus sulfamethoxazole (see also  Chapter 46 ). Standard 
treatment includes high-dose intravenous or oral therapy (15 mg 
trimethoprim and 75 mg sulfamethoxazole per day in three or 
four divided doses) for 21 days. High-dose therapy entails signifi-
cant toxicity, especially in patients with AIDS. Important toxici-
ties include nausea, vomiting, fever, rash, leukopenia, hyponatremia, 
elevated hepatic enzymes, azotemia, anemia, and thrombocytope-
nia. Less common effects include severe skin reactions, mental 
status changes, pancreatitis, and hypocalcemia. Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole is also the standard chemoprophylactic drug for 
the prevention of  P jiroveci infection in immunocompromised 
individuals. Dosing is one double-strength tablet daily or three 
times per week. The chemoprophylactic dosing schedule is much 
better tolerated than high-dose therapy in immunocompromised 
patients, but rash, fever, leukopenia, or hepatitis may necessitate 
changing to another drug. 
 Adverse Effects & Cautions 
 Most patients tolerate pyrimethamine and proguanil well. 
Gastrointestinal symptoms, skin rashes, and itching are rare. 
Mouth ulcers and alopecia have been described with proguanil. 
Fansidar is no longer recommended for chemoprophylaxis because 
of uncommon but severe cutaneous reactions, including erythema 
multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal 
necrolysis. Severe reactions appear to be much less common with 
single-dose or intermittent therapy, and use of the drug has been 
justified by the risks associated with falciparum malaria. 
 Rare adverse effects with a single dose of Fansidar are those 
associated with other sulfonamides, including hematologic, gas-
trointestinal, central nervous system, dermatologic, and renal 
toxicity. Maloprim is no longer recommended for chemoprophy-
laxis because of unacceptably high rates of agranulocytosis. Folate 
antagonists should be used cautiously in the presence of renal or 
hepatic dysfunction. Although pyrimethamine is teratogenic in 
animals, Fansidar has been safely used in pregnancy for therapy 
and as an intermittent chemoprophylactic regimen to improve 
pregnancy outcomes. Proguanil is considered safe in pregnancy. 
Folate supplements should be routinely administered during preg-
nancy, but in women receiving Fansidar preventive therapy, high-
dose folate supplementation (eg, 5 mg daily) should probably be 
avoided because it may limit preventive efficacy. The standard 
recommended dosage of 0.4–0.6 mg daily is less likely to affect 
Fansidar’s protective efficacy. 
 ANTIBIOTICS 
 A number of antibiotics in addition to the folate antagonists and 
sulfonamides are modestly active antimalarials. The antibiotics 
that are bacterial protein synthesis inhibitors appear to act against 
malaria parasites by inhibiting protein synthesis in a plasmodial 
prokaryote-like organelle, the apicoplast. None of the antibiotics 
should be used as single agents in the treatment of malaria because 
their action is much slower than that of standard antimalarials. 
 Tetracycline and doxycycline (see  Chapter 44 ) are active 
against erythrocytic schizonts of all human malaria parasites. They 
are not active against liver stages. Doxycycline is used in the treat-
ment of falciparum malaria in conjunction with quinine, allowing 
a shorter and better-tolerated course of that drug. Doxycycline is 
also used to complete treatment courses after initial treatment of 
severe malaria with intravenous quinine, quinidine, or artesunate. 
In all of these cases a 1-week treatment course of doxycycline is 
carried out. Doxycycline has also become a standard chemopro-
phylactic drug, especially for use in areas of Southeast Asia with 
high rates of resistance to other antimalarials, including mefloquine. 
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    927
Doxycycline adverse effects include gastrointestinal symptoms, 
candidal vaginitis, and photosensitivity. Its safety in long-term 
chemoprophylaxis has not been extensively evaluated. 
 Clindamycin (see  Chapter 44 ) is slowly active against erythro-
cytic schizonts and can be used after treatment courses of quinine, 
quinidine, or artesunate in those for whom doxycycline is not 
recommended, such as children and pregnant women. 
Azithromycin (see  Chapter 44 ) also has antimalarial activity and is 
now under study as an alternative chemoprophylactic drug. 
Antimalarial activity of fluoroquinolones has been demonstrated, 
but efficacy for the therapy or chemoprophylaxis of malaria has 
been suboptimal. 
 Antibiotics also are active against other protozoans. Tetracycline 
and erythromycin are alternative therapies for the treatment of 
intestinal amebiasis. Clindamycin, in combination with other 
agents, is effective therapy for toxoplasmosis, pneumocystosis, and 
babesiosis. Spiramycin is a macrolide antibiotic that is used to 
treat primary toxoplasmosis acquired during pregnancy. Treatment 
lowers the risk of the development of congenital toxoplasmosis. 
 HALOFANTRINE & LUMEFANTRINE 
 Halofantrine hydrochloride, a phenanthrene-methanol, is effec-
tive against erythrocytic (but not other) stages of all four human 
malaria species. Oral absorption is variable and is enhanced with 
food. Because of toxicity concerns, it should not be taken with 
meals. Plasma levels peak 16 hours after dosing, and the half-life 
is about 4 days. Excretion is mainly in the feces. The mechanism 
of action of halofantrine is unknown. The drug is not available in 
the USA (although it has been approved by the FDA), but it is 
widely available in malaria-endemic countries. 
 Halofantrine (three 500-mg doses at 6-hour intervals, repeated 
in 1 week for nonimmune individuals) is rapidly effective against 
most strains of  P falciparum, but its use is limited by irregular 
absorption and cardiac toxicity. It should not be used for chemopro-
phylaxis. Halofantrine is generally well tolerated. The most com-
mon adverse effects are abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, cough, 
rash, headache, pruritus, and elevated liver enzymes. Of greater 
concern, the drug alters cardiac conduction, with dose-related pro-
longation of QT and PR intervals. This effect is seen with standard 
doses and is worsened by prior mefloquine therapy. Rare instances 
of dangerous arrhythmias and deaths have been reported. The drug 
is contraindicated in patients who have cardiac conduction defects 
or who have recently taken mefloquine. Halofantrine is embryo-
toxic in animals and therefore contraindicated in pregnancy. 
 Lumefantrine, an aryl alcohol related to halofantrine, is avail-
able only as a fixed-dose combination with artemether (Coartem), 
which is now the first-line therapy for uncomplicated falciparum 
malaria in many countries. In addition, Coartem is approved in 
many nonendemic countries, including the USA. The half-life of 
lumefantrine, when used in combination, is approximately 4 days. 
Drug levels may be altered by interactions with other drugs, 
including those that affect CYP3A4 metabolism, but this area has 
not been well studied. As with halofantrine, oral absorption is 
highly variable and improved when the drug is taken with food. 
Since lumefantrine does not engender the dangerous toxicity con-
cerns of halofantrine, Coartem should be administered with fatty 
food to maximize antimalarial efficacy. Coartem is highly effective 
in the treatment of falciparum malaria when administered twice 
daily for 3 days. Coartem can cause minor prolongation of the QT 
interval, but this appears to be clinically insignificant, and the 
drug does not carry the risk of dangerous arrhythmias seen with 
halofantrine and quinidine. Indeed, Coartem is very well toler-
ated. The most commonly reported adverse events in drug trials 
have been gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, dizziness, rash, 
and pruritus, and in many cases these toxicities may have been due 
to underlying malaria or concomitant medications rather than to 
Coartem. 
 ■ AMEBIASIS 
 Amebiasis is infection with  Entamoeba histolytica. This organism 
can cause asymptomatic intestinal infection, mild to moderate 
colitis, severe intestinal infection (dysentery), ameboma, liver 
abscess, and other extraintestinal infections. The choice of drugs 
for amebiasis depends on the clinical presentation ( Table 52–5 ). 
 Treatment of Specific Forms of Amebiasis 
 A. Asymptomatic Intestinal Infection 
 Asymptomatic carriers generally are not treated in endemic areas, 
but in nonendemic areas they are treated with a luminal amebi-
cide. A tissue amebicidal drug is unnecessary. Standard luminal 
amebicides are diloxanide furoate, iodoquinol, and paromomycin. 
Each drug eradicates carriage in about 80–90% of patients with a 
single course of treatment. Therapy with a luminal amebicide is 
also required in the treatment of all other forms of amebiasis. 
 B. Amebic Colitis 
 Metronidazole plus a luminal amebicide is the treatment of choice 
for amebic colitis and dysentery. Tetracyclines and erythromycin 
are alternative drugs for moderate colitis but are not effective 
against extraintestinal disease. Dehydroemetine or emetine can 
also be used, but are best avoided because of toxicity. 
 C. Extraintestinal Infections 
 The treatment of choice for extraintestinal infections is metron-
idazole plus a luminal amebicide. A 10-day course of metronida-
zole cures over 95% of uncomplicated liver abscesses. For unusual 
cases in which initial therapy with metronidazole has failed, aspi-
ration of the abscess and the addition of chloroquine to a repeat 
course of metronidazole should be considered. Dehydroemetine 
and emetine are toxic alternative drugs. 
 METRONIDAZOLE & TINIDAZOLE 
 Metronidazole, a nitroimidazole ( Figure 52–3 ), is the drug of 
choice in the treatment of extraluminal amebiasis. It kills tropho-
zoites but not cysts of  E histolytica and effectively eradicates 
928    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
intestinal and extraintestinal tissue infections. Tinidazole, a related 
nitroimidazole available in the USA since 2004, appears to have 
similar activity and a better toxicity profile than metronidazole. It 
offers simpler dosing regimens and can be substituted for the 
indications listed below. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Mechanism of Action 
 Oral metronidazole and tinidazole are readily absorbed and permeate 
all tissues by simple diffusion. Intracellular concentrations rapidly 
approach extracellular levels. Peak plasma concentrations are reached 
in 1–3 hours. Protein binding of both drugs is low (10–20%); the 
half-life of unchanged drug is 7.5 hours for metronidazole and 
12–14 hours for tinidazole. Metronidazole and its metabolites are 
excreted mainly in the urine. Plasma clearance of metronidazole is 
decreased in patients with impaired liver function. 
 The nitro group of metronidazole is chemically reduced in 
anaerobic bacteria and sensitive protozoans. Reactive reduction 
products appear to be responsible for antimicrobial activity. The 
mechanism of tinidazole is assumed to be the same. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Amebiasis 
 Metronidazole or tinidazole is the drug of choice in the treatment 
of all tissue infections with  E histolytica . Neither drug is reliably 
effective against luminal parasites and so must be used with a 
luminal amebicide to ensure eradication of the infection. 
 B. Giardiasis 
 Metronidazole is the treatment of choice for giardiasis. The dosage 
for giardiasis is much lower—and the drug thus better tolerated—
than that for amebiasis. Efficacy after a single treatment is about 
90%. Tinidazole is at least equally effective. 
 C. Trichomoniasis 
 Metronidazole is the treatment of choice. A single dose of 2 g is 
effective. Metronidazole-resistant organisms can lead to treatment 
failures. Tinidazole may be effective against some of these resistant 
organisms. 
TABLE 52–5 Treatment of amebiasis. Not all preparations are available in the USA.1
Clinical Setting
Drugs of Choice and Adult Dosage
Alternative Drugs and Adult Dosage
Asymptomatic intesti-
nal infection
Luminal agent: Diloxanide furoate,2 500 mg 3 times daily 
for 10 days
or
Iodoquinol, 650 mg 3 times daily for 21 days
or
Paromomycin, 10 mg/kg 3 times daily for 7 days
Mild to moderate 
intestinal infection
Metronidazole, 750 mg 3 times daily (or 500 mg
IV every 6 hours) for 10 days
Luminal agent (see above)
or
Tinidazole, 2 g daily for 3 days
plus
Luminal agent (see above)
plus either
Tetracycline, 250 mg 3 times daily for 10 days
or
Erythromycin, 500 mg 4 times daily for 10 days
Severe intestinal 
infection
Metronidazole, 750 mg 3 times daily (or 500 mg
IV every 6 hours) for 10 days
or
Tinidazole, 2 g daily for 3 days
plus
Luminal agent (see above)
Luminal agent (see above)
plus either
Tetracycline, 250 mg 3 times daily for 10 days
or
Dehydroemetine2 or emetine,2 1 mg/kg SC or IM for 3–5 days
Hepatic abscess, ame-
boma, and other 
extraintestinal disease
Metronidazole, 750 mg 3 times daily (or 500 mg IV every 
6 hours) for 10 days
or
Dehydroemetine2 or emetine,2 1 mg/kg SC or IM for 
8–10 days, followed by (liver abscess only) chloroquine, 
500 mg twice daily for 2 days, then 500 mg daily for 21 days
Tinidazole, 2 g daily for 5 days
plus
plus
Luminal agent (see above)
Luminal agent (see above)
1Route is oral unless otherwise indicated. See text for additional details and cautions.
2Not available in the USA.
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    929
 Adverse Effects & Cautions 
 Nausea, headache, dry mouth, or a metallic taste in the mouth 
occurs commonly. Infrequent adverse effects include vomiting, 
diarrhea, insomnia, weakness, dizziness, thrush, rash, dysuria, 
dark urine, vertigo, paresthesias, and neutropenia. Taking the drug 
with meals lessens gastrointestinal irritation. Pancreatitis and 
severe central nervous system toxicity (ataxia, encephalopathy, 
seizures) are rare. Metronidazole has a disulfiram-like effect, so 
that nausea and vomiting can occur if alcohol is ingested during 
therapy. The drug should be used with caution in patients with 
central nervous system disease. Intravenous infusions have rarely 
caused seizures or peripheral neuropathy. The dosage should be 
adjusted for patients with severe liver or renal disease. Tinidazole 
has a similar adverse-effect profile, although it appears to be some-
what better tolerated than metronidazole. 
 Metronidazole has been reported to potentiate the anticoagu-
lant effect of coumarin-type anticoagulants. Phenytoin and phe-
nobarbital may accelerate elimination of the drug, whereas 
cimetidine may decrease plasma clearance. Lithium toxicity may 
occur when the drug is used with metronidazole. 
 Metronidazole and its metabolites are mutagenic in bacteria. 
Chronic administration of large doses led to tumorigenicity in 
mice. Data on teratogenicity are inconsistent. Metronidazole is 
thus best avoided in pregnant or nursing women, although con-
genital abnormalities have not clearly been associated with use in 
humans. 
 IODOQUINOL 
 Iodoquinol (diiodohydroxyquin) is a halogenated hydroxyquino-
line. It is an effective luminal amebicide that is commonly used 
with metronidazole to treat amebic infections. Pharmacokinetic 
data are incomplete but 90% of the drug is retained in the intes-
tine and excreted in the feces. The remainder enters the circula-
tion, has a half-life of 11–14 hours, and is excreted in the urine as 
glucuronides. 
 The mechanism of action of iodoquinol against trophozoites is 
unknown. It is effective against organisms in the bowel lumen but not 
against trophozoites in the intestinal wall or extraintestinal tissues. 
 Infrequent adverse effects include diarrhea—which usually 
stops after several days—anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain, headache, rash, and pruritus. The drug may increase protein-
bound serum iodine, leading to a decrease in measured  131 I uptake 
that persists for months. Some halogenated hydroxyquinolines can 
produce severe neurotoxicity with prolonged use at greater than 
recommended doses. Iodoquinol is not known to produce these 
Metronidazole
I
I
Paromomycin
Pentamidine
3Na
Sodium stibogluconate
N
N
C
C
C
CH3
CH2CH2OH
O2N
H
Iodoquinol
OH
CH2OH
OH
O
OH
HO
NH2
O
H2N
O
NH2
O
OH
O
CH2OH
O
H2N
OH
OH
CH2NH2
O
COO
N
CH3
COCHCl2
Diloxanide furoate
C
HN
H2N
OCH2(CH2)3CH2O
C
NH
NH2
CH2OH
CHOH
CHO
CHO
CHO
COO–
+
Sb
OH
O
Sb
O–
HOH2C
HOHC
OHC
OHC
OHC
OOC
–
N
 FIGURE 52–3  Structural formulas of other antiprotozoal drugs. 
930    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
effects at its recommended dosage, and this dosage should never 
be exceeded. 
 Iodoquinol should be taken with meals to limit gastrointestinal 
toxicity. It should be used with caution in patients with optic neu-
ropathy, renal or thyroid disease, or nonamebic hepatic disease. 
The drug should be discontinued if it produces persistent diarrhea 
or signs of iodine toxicity (dermatitis, urticaria, pruritus, fever). It 
is contraindicated in patients with intolerance to iodine. 
 DILOXANIDE FUROATE 
 Diloxanide furoate is a dichloroacetamide derivative. It is an effec-
tive luminal amebicide but is not active against tissue trophozo-
ites. In the gut, diloxanide furoate is split into diloxanide and 
furoic acid; about 90% of the diloxanide is rapidly absorbed and 
then conjugated to form the glucuronide, which is promptly 
excreted in the urine. The unabsorbed diloxanide is the active 
antiamebic substance. The mechanism of action of diloxanide 
furoate is unknown. 
 Diloxanide furoate is considered by many the drug of choice for 
asymptomatic luminal infections. It is not available commercially 
in the USA, but can be obtained from some compounding phar-
macies. It is used with a tissue amebicide, usually metronidazole, to 
treat serious intestinal and extraintestinal infections. Diloxanide 
furoate does not produce serious adverse effects. Flatulence is com-
mon, but nausea and abdominal cramps are infrequent and rashes 
are rare. The drug is not recommended in pregnancy. 
 PAROMOMYCIN SULFATE 
 Paromomycin sulfate is an aminoglycoside antibiotic (see also 
 Chapter 45 ) that is not significantly absorbed from the gastroin-
testinal tract. It is used only as a luminal amebicide and has no 
effect against extraintestinal amebic infections. The small amount 
absorbed is slowly excreted unchanged, mainly by glomerular fil-
tration. However, the drug may accumulate with renal insuffi-
ciency and contribute to renal toxicity. Paromomycin is an 
effective luminal amebicide that appears to have similar efficacy 
and probably less toxicity than other agents; in a recent study, it 
was superior to diloxanide furoate in clearing asymptomatic infec-
tions. Adverse effects include occasional abdominal distress and 
diarrhea. Parenteral paromomycin is now used to treat visceral 
leishmaniasis and is discussed separately in the text that follows. 
 EMETINE & DEHYDROEMETINE 
 Emetine, an alkaloid derived from ipecac, and dehydroemetine, 
a synthetic analog, are effective against tissue trophozoites of 
 E histolytica, but because of major toxicity concerns their use is 
limited to unusual circumstances in which severe amebiasis 
requires effective therapy and metronidazole cannot be used. 
Dehydroemetine is preferred because of its somewhat better toxic-
ity profile. The drugs should be used for the minimum period 
needed to relieve severe symptoms (usually 3–5 days) and should 
be administered subcutaneously (preferred) or intramuscularly in 
a supervised setting. Emetine and dehydroemetine should not be 
used intravenously. Adverse effects, which are generally mild with 
use for 3–5 days, increase over time and include pain, tenderness, 
and sterile abscesses at the injection site; diarrhea, nausea, and 
vomiting; muscle weakness and discomfort; and minor electrocar-
diographic changes. Serious toxicities include cardiac arrhythmias, 
heart failure, and hypotension. The drugs should not be used in 
patients with cardiac or renal disease, in young children, or in 
pregnancy unless absolutely necessary. 
 ■ OTHER ANTIPROTOZOAL DRUGS 
 The primary drugs used to treat African trypanosomiasis are set 
forth in  Table 52–6 , and those for other protozoal infections are 
listed in  Table 52–7 . Important drugs that are not covered else-
where in this or other chapters are discussed below. 
 PENTAMIDINE 
 Pentamidine has activity against trypanosomatid protozoans and 
against  P jiroveci, but toxicity is significant. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Pentamidine is an aromatic diamidine ( Figure 52–3 ) formulated 
as an isethionate salt. Pentamidine is only administered parenter-
ally. The drug leaves the circulation rapidly, with an initial half-life 
of about 6 hours, but it is bound avidly by tissues. Pentamidine 
thus accumulates and is eliminated very slowly, with a terminal 
elimination half-life of about 12 days. The drug can be detected 
in urine 6 or more weeks after treatment. Only trace amounts of 
pentamidine appear in the central nervous system, so it is not 
TABLE 52–6 Treatment of African trypanosomiasis.
Disease
Stage
First-Line Drugs
Alternative Drugs
West African
Early
Pentamidine
Suramin, eflornithine
CNS involvement
Eflornithine
Melarsoprol,1 eflornithine-nifurtimox1
East African
Early
Suramin1
Pentamidine
CNS involvement
Melarsoprol1
1Available in the USA from the Drug Service, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia (phone: 404-639-3670; http://www.cdc.gov/laboratory/drugservice/index.html).
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    931
TABLE 52–7 Treatment of other protozoal infections. Not all preparations are available in the USA.1
Organism or Clinical Setting
Drugs of Choice2
Alternative Drugs
Babesia species
Clindamycin, 600 mg 3 times daily for 7 days
Atovaquone or azithromycin
plus
Quinine, 650 mg for 7 days
Balantidium coli
Tetracycline, 500 mg 4 times daily for 10 days
Metronidazole, 750 mg 3 times daily for 5 days
Cryptosporidium species
Paromomycin, 500–750 mg 3 or 4 times daily for 10 days
Azithromycin, 500 mg daily for 21 days
Cyclospora cayetanensis
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, one double-strength 
tablet 4 times daily for 7–14 days
Dientamoeba fragilis
Iodoquinol, 650 mg 3 times daily for 20 days
Tetracycline, 500 mg 4 times daily for 10 days
or
Paromomycin, 500 mg 3 times daily for 7 days
Giardia lamblia
Metronidazole, 250 mg 3 times daily for 5 days
Furazolidone, 100 mg 4 times daily for 7 days
or
or
Tinidazole, 2 g once
Albendazole, 400 mg daily for 5 days
Isospora belli
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, one double-strength 
tablet 4 times daily for 10 days, then twice daily for 21 days
Pyrimethamine, 75 mg daily for 14 days
plus
Folinic acid, 10 mg daily for 14 days
Microsporidia
Albendazole, 400 mg twice daily for 20–30 days
Leishmaniasis
 Visceral (L donovani, L chagasi, 
 L infantum) or mucosal (L braziliensis)
Sodium stibogluconate, 20 mg/kg/d IV or IM for 28 days
Meglumine antimoniate
or
Pentamidine
or
Amphotericin
or
Miltefosine
or
Paromomycin
 Cutaneous 
 (L major, L tropica, L mexicana, 
     L braziliensis)
Sodium stibogluconate, 20 mg/kg/d IV or IM for 20 days
Meglumine antimoniate
or
Amphotericin
or
Pentamidine
or
Topical or intralesional therapies
Pneumocystis jiroveci, P carinii3
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 15–20 mg trimethoprim 
component/kg/d IV, or two double-strength tablets every 
8 hours for 21 days
Pentamidine
or
Trimethoprim-dapsone
or
Clindamycin plus primaquine
or
Atovaquone
Toxoplasma gondii
(continued)
932    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
effective against central nervous system African trypanosomiasis. 
Pentamidine can also be inhaled as a nebulized powder for the 
prevention of pneumocystosis. Absorption into the systemic circu-
lation after inhalation appears to be minimal. The mechanism of 
action of pentamidine is unknown. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Pneumocystosis 
 Pentamidine is a well-established alternative therapy for pulmo-
nary and extrapulmonary disease caused by  P jiroveci. The drug 
has somewhat lower efficacy and greater toxicity than trimetho-
prim-sulfamethoxazole. The standard dosage is 3 mg/kg/d intrave-
nously for 21 days. Significant adverse reactions are common, and 
with multiple regimens now available to treat  P jiroveci infection, 
pentamidine is best reserved for patients with severe disease who 
cannot tolerate or fail other drugs. 
 Pentamidine is also an alternative agent for primary or second-
ary prophylaxis against pneumocystosis in immunocompromised 
individuals, including patients with advanced AIDS. For this indi-
cation, pentamidine is administered as an inhaled aerosol (300 mg 
inhaled monthly). The drug is well tolerated in this form. Its effi-
cacy is very good but clearly less than that of daily trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole. Because of its cost and ineffectiveness against 
nonpulmonary disease, it is best reserved for patients who cannot 
tolerate oral chemoprophylaxis with other drugs. 
 B. African Trypanosomiasis (Sleeping Sickness) 
 Pentamidine has been used since 1940 and is the drug of choice to 
treat the early hemolymphatic stage of disease caused by  Trypanosoma 
brucei gambiense (West African sleeping sickness). The drug is infe-
rior to suramin for the treatment of early East African sleeping sick-
ness. Pentamidine should not be used to treat late trypanosomiasis 
with central nervous system involvement. A number of dosing regi-
mens have been described, generally providing 2–4 mg/kg daily or 
on alternate days for a total of 10–15 doses. Pentamidine has also 
been used for chemoprophylaxis against African trypanosomiasis, 
with dosing of 4 mg/kg every 3–6 months. 
 C. Leishmaniasis 
 Pentamidine is an alternative to sodium stibogluconate in the 
treatment of visceral leishmaniasis, with similar efficacy, although 
resistance has been reported. The drug has been successful in 
some cases that have failed therapy with antimonials. The dosage 
is 2–4 mg/kg intramuscularly daily or every other day for up to 15 
doses, and a second course may be necessary. Pentamidine has also 
shown success against cutaneous leishmaniasis, but it is not rou-
tinely used for this purpose. 
 Adverse Effects & Cautions 
 Pentamidine is a highly toxic drug, with adverse effects noted in 
about 50% of patients receiving 4 mg/kg/d. Rapid intravenous 
administration can lead to severe hypotension, tachycardia, dizzi-
ness, and dyspnea, so the drug should be administered slowly (over 
2 hours), and patients should be recumbent and monitored closely 
during treatment. With intramuscular administration, pain at the 
injection site is common, and sterile abscesses may develop. 
 Pancreatic toxicity is common. Hypoglycemia due to inappro-
priate insulin release often appears 5–7 days after onset of treat-
ment, can persist for days to several weeks, and may be followed 
by hyperglycemia. Reversible renal insufficiency is also common. 
Other adverse effects include rash, metallic taste, fever, gastro-
intestinal symptoms, abnormal liver function tests, acute pancrea-
titis, hypocalcemia, thrombocytopenia, hallucinations, and cardiac 
arrhythmias. Inhaled pentamidine is generally well tolerated but 
may cause cough, dyspnea, and bronchospasm. 
TABLE 52–7 Treatment of other protozoal infections. Not all preparations are available in the USA.1
Organism or Clinical Setting
Drugs of Choice2
Alternative Drugs
 Acute, congenital, immunocompro-
 mised
Pyrimethamine plus clindamycin plus folinic acid
Pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine plus folinic 
acid
 Pregnancy
Spiramycin, 3 g daily until delivery
Trichomonas vaginalis
Metronidazole, 2 g once or 250 mg 3 times daily for 7 days
or
Tinidazole, 2 g once
Trypanosoma cruzi
Nifurtimox
or
Benznidazole
1Additional information may be obtained from the Parasitic Disease Drug Service, Parasitic Diseases Branch, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia (phone: 404-639-3670; http://www.cdc.gov/
laboratory/drugservice/index.html).
2Established, relatively simple dosing regimens are provided. Route is oral unless otherwise indicated. See text for additional information, toxicities, cautions, and discussions of 
dosing for the more rarely used drugs, many of which are highly toxic.
3P jiroveci (carinii in animals) has traditionally been considered a protozoan because of its morphology and drug sensitivity, but recent molecular analyses have shown it to be 
most closely related to fungi.
(Continued)
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    933
 SODIUM STIBOGLUCONATE 
 Pentavalent antimonials, including sodium stibogluconate (pen-
tostam;  Figure 52–3 ) and meglumine antimoniate, are generally 
considered first-line agents for cutaneous and visceral leishmania-
sis except in parts of India, where the efficacy of these drugs has 
diminished greatly. The drugs are rapidly absorbed and distributed 
after intravenous (preferred) or intramuscular administration and 
eliminated in two phases, with short initial (about 2-hour) half-
life and much longer terminal (> 24-hour) half-life. Treatment is 
given once daily at a dosage of 20 mg/kg/d intravenously or intra-
muscularly for 20 days in cutaneous leishmaniasis and 28 days in 
visceral and mucocutaneous disease. 
 The mechanism of action of the antimonials is unknown. 
Their efficacy against different species may vary, possibly based on 
local drug resistance patterns. Cure rates are generally quite good, 
but resistance to sodium stibogluconate is increasing in some 
endemic areas, notably in India where other agents (eg, amphot-
ericin or miltefosine) are generally recommended. 
 Few adverse effects occur initially, but the toxicity of stibogluconate 
increases over the course of therapy. Most common are gastrointestinal 
symptoms, fever, headache, myalgias, arthralgias, and rash. 
Intramuscular injections can be very painful and lead to sterile 
abscesses. Electrocardiographic changes may occur, most commonly 
T-wave changes and QT prolongation. These changes are generally 
reversible, but continued therapy may lead to dangerous arrhythmias. 
Thus, the electrocardiogram should be monitored during therapy. 
Hemolytic anemia and serious liver, renal, and cardiac effects are rare. 
 NITAZOXANIDE 
 Nitazoxanide is a nitrothiazolyl-salicylamide prodrug. Nitazoxanide 
was recently approved in the USA for use against  Giardia lamblia 
and  Cryptosporidium parvum. It is rapidly absorbed and converted 
to tizoxanide and tizoxanide conjugates, which are subsequently 
excreted in both urine and feces. The active metabolite, tizox-
anide, inhibits the pyruvate-ferredoxin oxidoreductase pathway. 
Nitazoxanide appears to have activity against metronidazole-
resistant protozoal strains and is well tolerated. Unlike metronida-
zole, nitazoxanide and its metabolites appear to be free of 
mutagenic effects. Other organisms that may be susceptible to 
nitazoxanide include  E histolytica,  Helicobacter pylori, Ascaris lum-
bricoides, several tapeworms, and  Fasciola hepatica. The recom-
mended adult dosage is 500 mg twice daily for 3 days. 
 OTHER DRUGS FOR TRYPANOSOMIASIS 
& LEISHMANIASIS 
 Available therapies for all forms of trypanosomiasis are seriously 
deficient in efficacy, safety, or both. Availability of these therapies 
is also a concern, since they are supplied mainly through donation 
or nonprofit production by pharmaceutical companies. For vis-
ceral leishmaniasis, three new promising therapies are liposomal 
amphotericin, miltefosine, and paromomycin. 
 A. Suramin 
 Suramin is a sulfated naphthylamine that was introduced in the 
1920s. It is the first-line therapy for early hemolymphatic East 
African trypanosomiasis ( T brucei rhodesiense infection), but 
because it does not enter the central nervous system, it is not effec-
tive against advanced disease. Suramin is less effective than pent-
amidine for early West African trypanosomiasis. The drug’s 
mechanism of action is unknown. It is administered intravenously 
and displays complex pharmacokinetics with very tight protein 
binding. Suramin has a short initial half-life but a terminal elimi-
nation half-life of about 50 days. The drug is slowly cleared by 
renal excretion. 
 Suramin is administered after a 200-mg intravenous test dose. 
Regimens that have been used include 1 g on days 1, 3, 7, 14, and 
21 or 1 g each week for 5 weeks. Combination therapy with pen-
tamidine may improve efficacy. Suramin can also be used for 
chemoprophylaxis against African trypanosomiasis. Adverse effects 
are common. Immediate reactions can include fatigue, nausea, 
vomiting, and, more rarely, seizures, shock, and death. Later reac-
tions include fever, rash, headache, paresthesias, neuropathies, 
renal abnormalities including proteinuria, chronic diarrhea, hemo-
lytic anemia, and agranulocytosis. 
 B. Melarsoprol 
 Melarsoprol is a trivalent arsenical that has been available since 
1949 and is first-line therapy for advanced central nervous system 
East African trypanosomiasis, and second-line therapy (after 
eflornithine) for advanced West African trypanosomiasis. After 
intravenous administration it is excreted rapidly, but clinically 
relevant concentrations accumulate in the central nervous system 
within 4 days. Melarsoprol is administered in propylene glycol by 
slow intravenous infusion at a dosage of 3.6 mg/kg/d for 3–4 days, 
with repeated courses at weekly intervals, if needed. A new regi-
men of 2.2 mg/kg daily for 10 days had efficacy and toxicity 
similar to what was observed with three courses over 26 days. 
Melarsoprol is extremely toxic. The use of such a toxic drug is 
justified only by the severity of advanced trypanosomiasis and the 
lack of available alternatives. Immediate adverse effects include 
fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, and arthralgias. The most impor-
tant toxicity is a reactive encephalopathy that generally appears 
within the first week of therapy (in 5–10% of patients) and is 
probably due to disruption of trypanosomes in the central nervous 
system. Common consequences of the encephalopathy include 
cerebral edema, seizures, coma, and death. Other serious toxicities 
include renal and cardiac disease and hypersensitivity reactions. 
Failure rates with melarsoprol appear to have increased recently in 
parts of Africa, suggesting the possibility of drug resistance. 
 C. Eflornithine 
 Eflornithine (difluoromethylornithine), an inhibitor of ornithine 
decarboxylase, is the only new drug registered to treat African 
trypanosomiasis in the last half-century. It is now the first-line 
drug for advanced West African trypanosomiasis, but is not effec-
tive for East African disease. Eflornithine is less toxic than melar-
soprol but not as widely available. The drug had very limited 
934    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
availability until recently, when it was developed for use as a topi-
cal depilatory cream, leading to donation of the drug for the treat-
ment of trypanosomiasis. Eflornithine is administered 
intravenously, and good central nervous system drug levels are 
achieved. The elimination half-life is about 3 hours. The usual 
regimen is 100 mg/kg intravenously every 6 hours for 7–14 days 
(14 days was superior for a newly diagnosed infection). Eflornithine 
appears to be as effective as melarsoprol against advanced  T brucei 
gambiense infection, but its efficacy against  T brucei rhodesiense is 
limited by drug resistance. Toxicity from eflornithine is signifi-
cant, but considerably less than that from melarsoprol. Adverse 
effects include diarrhea, vomiting, anemia, thrombocytopenia, 
leukopenia, and seizures. These effects are generally reversible. 
Increased experience with eflornithine and increased availability of 
the compound in endemic areas may lead to its replacement of 
suramin, pentamidine, and melarsoprol in the treatment of  T 
brucei gambiense infection. 
 D. Nifurtimox 
 Nifurtimox, a nitrofuran, is the most commonly used drug for 
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas’ disease). Nifurtimox is also 
under study in the treatment of African trypanosomiasis, particu-
larly in combination with eflornithine. Nifurtimox is well absorbed 
after oral administration and eliminated with a plasma half-life of 
about 3 hours. The drug is administered at a dosage of 8–10 mg/
kg/d (divided into three to four doses) orally for 3–4 months in the 
treatment of acute Chagas’ disease. Nifurtimox decreases the sever-
ity of acute disease and usually eliminates detectable parasites, but it 
is often ineffective in fully eradicating infection. Thus, it often fails 
to prevent progression to the gastrointestinal and cardiac syndromes 
associated with chronic infection that are the most important clini-
cal consequences of  Trypanosoma cruzi infection. Efficacy may vary 
in different parts of South America, possibly related to drug resis-
tance in some areas. Nifurtimox has not been proved effective in the 
treatment of chronic Chagas’ disease. Toxicity related to nifurtimox 
is common. Adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain, fever, rash, restlessness, insomnia, neuropathies, and seizures. 
These effects are generally reversible but often lead to cessation of 
therapy before completion of a standard course. 
 E. Benznidazole 
 Benznidazole is an orally administered nitroimidazole that appears 
to have efficacy similar to that of nifurtimox in the treatment of 
acute Chagas’ disease. Availability of the drug is currently limited. 
Important toxicities include peripheral neuropathy, rash, gastro-
intestinal symptoms, and myelosuppression. 
 F. Amphotericin 
 This important antifungal drug (see  Chapter 48 ) is an alternative 
therapy for visceral leishmaniasis, especially in parts of India with 
high-level resistance to sodium stibogluconate. Liposomal ampho-
tericin has shown excellent efficacy at a dosage of 3 mg/kg/d 
intravenously on days 1–5, 14, and 21. Nonliposomal amphoteri-
cin (1 mg/kg intravenously every other day for 30 days) is much 
less expensive, also efficacious, and widely used in India. 
Amphotericin is also used for cutaneous leishmaniasis in some 
areas. The use of amphotericin, and especially liposomal prepara-
tions, is limited in developing countries by difficulty of adminis-
tration, cost, and toxicity. 
 G. Miltefosine 
 Miltefosine is an alkylphosphocholine analog that is the first effec-
tive oral drug for visceral leishmaniasis. It has recently shown 
excellent efficacy in the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis in 
India, where it is administered orally (2.5 mg/kg/d with varied 
dosing schedules) for 28 days. It was also recently shown to be 
effective in regimens including a single dose of liposomal ampho-
tericin followed by 7–14 days of miltefosine. A 28-day course of 
miltefosine (2.5 mg/kg/d) was also effective for the treatment of 
New World cutaneous leishmaniasis. Vomiting and diarrhea are 
common but generally short-lived toxicities. Transient elevations 
in liver enzymes and nephrotoxicity are also seen. The drug should 
be avoided in pregnancy (or in women who may become pregnant 
within 2 months of treatment) because of its teratogenic effects. 
Miltefosine is registered for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis 
in India and some other countries, and—considering the serious 
limitations of other drugs, including parenteral administration, 
toxicity, and resistance—it may become the treatment of choice 
for that disease. Resistance to miltefosine develops readily in vitro. 
To circumvent this problem, various drug combinations, includ-
ing miltefosine with antimonials, amphotericin, or paromomycin, 
are under study. 
 H. Paromomycin 
 Paromomycin sulfate is an aminoglycoside antibiotic that until 
recently was used in parasitology only for oral therapy of intestinal 
parasitic infections (see previous text). It has recently been devel-
oped for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis. A phase 3 trial in 
India showed excellent efficacy for this disease, with a daily intra-
muscular dosage of 11 mg/kg for 21 days yielding a 95% cure rate, 
and noninferiority compared with amphotericin. The drug was 
registered for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis in India in 
2006. However, a recent trial showed poorer efficacy in Africa, 
with the cure rate for paromomycin significantly inferior to that 
with sodium stibogluconate. In initial studies, paromomycin was 
well tolerated, with common mild injection pain, uncommon 
ototoxicity and reversible liver enzyme elevations, and no nephro-
toxicity. Paromomycin is much less expensive than liposomal 
amphotericin or miltefosine, the other promising new therapies 
for visceral leishmaniasis. 
CHAPTER 52 Antiprotozoal Drugs    935
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 Drugs for parasitic infections. Med Lett Drugs Ther 2010;Supplement. 
 Malaria 
 Baird JK: Effectiveness of antimalarial drugs. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1565. 
 Baird JK: Resistance to therapies for infection by  Plasmodium vivax . Clin 
Microbiol Rev 2009;22:508. 
 Barnes KI et al: Efficacy of rectal artesunate compared with parenteral quinine in 
initial treatment of moderately severe malaria in African children and adults: 
A randomised study. Lancet 2004;363:1598. 
 Boggild AK et al: Atovaquone-proguanil: Report from the CDC expert meeting on 
malaria chemoprophylaxis (II). Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007;76:208. 
 Dondorp AM et al: Artemisinin resistance in Plasmodium falciparum malaria. N 
Engl J Med 2009;361:455. 
 Dondorp A et al: Artesunate versus quinine for treatment of severe falciparum 
malaria: A randomised trial. Lancet 2005;366:717. 
 Dondorp AM et al: Artesunate versus quinine in the treatment of severe falciparum 
malaria in African children (AQUAMAT): An open-label, randomised trial. 
Lancet 2010;376:1647. 
 Dorsey G et al: Combination therapy for uncomplicated falciparum malaria in 
Ugandan children: A randomized trial. JAMA 2007;297:2210. 
 Efferth T, Kaina B: Toxicity of the antimalarial artemisinin and its derivatives. Crit 
Rev Toxicol 2010;40:405. 
 Freedman DO: Malaria prevention in short-term travelers. N Engl J Med 
2008;359:603. 
 Greenwood BM et al: Malaria. Lancet 2005;365:1487. 
 Hill DR et al: Primaquine: Report from CDC expert meeting on malaria chemo-
prophylaxis I. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2006;75:402. 
 Nosten F, White NJ: Artemisinin-based combination treatment of falciparum 
malaria. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007;77(Suppl 6):181. 
 Nosten F et al: Antimalarial drugs in pregnancy: A review. Curr Drug Saf 
2006;1:1. 
 Rosenthal PJ: Artesunate for the treatment of severe falciparum malaria. N Engl J 
Med 2008;358:1829. 
 Stepniewska K, White NJ: Pharmacokinetic determinants of the window of selec-
tion for antimalarial drug resistance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
2008;52:1589. 
 Taylor WR, White NJ: Antimalarial drug toxicity: A review. Drug Saf 
2004;27:25. 
 White NJ: Cardiotoxicity of antimalarial drugs. Lancet Infect Dis 2007;7:549. 
 White NJ: Qinghaosu (artemisinin): The price of success. Science 2008;320:330. 
 Whitty CJ, et al: Malaria: An update on treatment of adults in non-endemic coun-
tries. Br Med J 2006;333:241. 
 World Health Organization: Guidelines for the treatment of malaria. Geneva. 
2010.  http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/9789241547925/en/
index.html 
 Intestinal Protozoal Infections 
 Blessmann J et al: Treatment of amoebic liver abscess with metronidazole alone or 
in combination with ultrasound-guided needle aspiration: A comparative, 
prospective and randomized study. Trop Med Int Health 2003;8:1030. 
 Fox LM, Saravolatz LD: Nitazoxanide: A new thiazolide antiparasitic agent. Clin 
Infect Dis 2005;40:1173. 
 Haque R et al: Amebiasis. N Engl J Med 2003;348:1565. 
*Available in the USA only from the Drug Service, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia (phone: 404-639-3670; http://www.cdc.gov/laboratory/drugservice/index.html).
Albendazole (Albenza)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Artemether/lumefantrine (Coartem)
Oral: 20 mg artemether/120 mg lumefantrine tablets
Artesunate*
Atovaquone (Mepron)
Oral: 750 mg/5 mL suspension
Atovaquone-proguanil (Malarone)
Oral: 250 mg atovaquone + 100 mg proguanil tablets; pediatric 
62.5 mg atovaquone + 25 mg proguanil tablets
Chloroquine (generic, Aralen)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets (equivalent to 150, 300 mg base, 
respectively)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL (equivalent to 40 mg/mL base) for injection
Clindamycin (generic, Cleocin)
Oral: 75, 150, 300 mg capsules; 75 mg/5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 150 mg/mL for injection
Doxycycline (generic, Vibramycin)
Oral: 20, 50, 100 mg capsules; 50, 100 mg tablets; 25 mg/5 mL 
suspension; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 100, 200 mg for injection
Eflornithine (Ornidyl)
Parenteral: 200 mg/mL for injection
Iodoquinol (Yodoxin)
Oral: 210, 650 mg tablets
Mefloquine (generic, Lariam)
Oral: 250 mg tablets
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Albendazole (Albenza)
Oral: 200 mg tablets
Artemether/lumefantrine (Coartem)
Oral: 20 mg artemether/120 mg lumefantrine tablets
Artesunate*
Atovaquone (Mepron)
Oral: 750 mg/5 mL suspension
Atovaquone-proguanil (Malarone)
Oral: 250 mg atovaquone + 100 mg proguanil tablets; pediatric 
62.5 mg atovaquone + 25 mg proguanil tablets
Chloroquine (generic, Aralen)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets (equivalent to 150, 300 mg base,
respectively)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL (equivalent to 40 mg/mL base) for injection
Clindamycin (generic, Cleocin)
Oral: 75, 150, 300 mg capsules; 75 mg/5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 150 mg/mL for injection
Doxycycline (generic, Vibramycin)
Oral: 20, 50, 100 mg capsules; 50, 100 mg tablets; 25 mg/5 mL 
suspension; 50 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 100, 200 mg for injection
Eflornithine (Ornidyl)
Parenteral: 200 mg/mL for injection
Iodoquinol (Yodoxin)
Oral: 210, 650 mg tablets
Mefloquine (generic, Lariam)
Oral: 250 mg tablets
Melarsoprol (Mel B)*
Metronidazole (generic, Flagyl)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; 375 mg capsules; extended-release 
750 mg tablets
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL
Nifurtimox*
Nitazoxanide (Alinia)
Oral: 500 mg tablets, powder for 100 mg/5 mL oral solution
Paromomycin (Humatin)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Pentamidine (Pentam 300, Pentacarinat, pentamidine isethionate)
Parenteral: 300 mg powder for injection
Aerosol (Nebupent): 300 mg powder
Primaquine (generic)
Oral: 26.3 mg (equivalent to 15 mg base) tablet
Pyrimethamine (Daraprim)
Oral: 25 mg tablets
Quinidine gluconate (generic)
Parenteral: 80 mg/mL (equivalent to 50 mg/mL base) for injection
Quinine (generic)
Oral: 260 mg tablets; 200, 260, 325 mg capsules
Sodium stibogluconate*
Sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine (Fansidar)
Oral: 500 mg sulfadoxine plus 25 mg pyrimethamine tablets
Suramin*
Tinidazole (Tindamax)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets
936    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
This child has acute falciparum malaria, and her lethargy 
and abnormal laboratory tests are consistent with progres-
sion to severe disease. She should be hospitalized and treated 
urgently with intravenous artesunate or, if this is unavailable, 
intravenous quinine or quinidine. She should be followed 
closely for progression of severe malaria, in particular neuro-
logic, renal, or pulmonary complications, and if treated with 
quinine or quinidine should have cardiac monitoring for 
potential toxicities.
 Petri WA: Therapy of intestinal protozoa. Trends Parasitol 2003;19:523. 
 Pierce KK et al: Update on human infections caused by intestinal protozoa. Curr 
Opin Gastroenterol 2009;25:12. 
 Pritt BS, Clark DG: Amebiasis. Mayo Clin Proc 2008;83:1154. 
 Rossignol JF:  Cryptosporidium and  Giardia : Treatment options and prospects for 
new drugs. Exp Parasitol 2010;124:45. 
 Other Protozoal Infections 
 Amato VS et al: Treatment of mucosal leishmaniasis in Latin America: Systematic 
review. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007;77:266. 
 Aronson NE et al: A randomized controlled trial of local heat therapy versus intra-
venous sodium stibogluconate for the treatment of cutaneous Leishmania 
major infection. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2010;4:e628. 
 Bhattacharya SK et al: Phase 4 trial of miltefosine for the treatment of Indian vis-
ceral leishmaniasis. J Infect Dis 2007;196:591. 
 Bisser S et al: Equivalence trial of melarsoprol and nifurtimox monotherapy and 
combination therapy for the treatment of second-stage  Trypanosoma brucei 
gambiense sleeping sickness. J Infect Dis 2007;195:322. 
 Brun R et al: Human African trypanosomiasis. Lancet 2010;375:148. 
 Chappuis F et al: Visceral leishmaniasis: What are the needs for diagnosis, treat-
ment and control? Nat Rev Microbiol 2007;5:873. 
 Croft SL, Barrett MP, Urbina JA: Chemotherapy of trypanosomiases and leishma-
niasis. Trends Parasitol 2005;21:508. 
 Hailu A et al: Geographical variation in the response of visceral leishmaniasis to 
paromomycin in East Africa: A multicentre, open-label, randomized trial. 
PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2010;4:e709. 
 Jackson Y et al: Tolerance and safety of nifurtimox in patients with chronic Chagas 
disease. Clin Infect Dis 2010;51:e69. 
 Lescure FX et al: Chagas disease: Changes in knowledge and management. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2010;10:556. 
 Murray HW et al: Advances in leishmaniasis. Lancet 2005;366:1561. 
 Priotto G et al: Nifurtimox-eflornithine combination therapy for second-stage 
African  Trypanosoma brucei gambiense trypanosomiasis: A multicentre, ran-
domised, phase III, non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2009;374:56. 
 Rassi A et al: Chagas disease. Lancet. 2010;375:1388. 
 Reithinger R et al: Cutaneous leishmaniasis. Lancet Infect Dis 2007;7:581. 
 Schmid C et al: Effectiveness of a 10-day melarsoprol schedule for the treatment 
of late-stage human African trypanosomiasis: Confirmation from a multina-
tional study (IMPAMEL II). J Infect Dis 2005;191:1922. 
 Soto J et al: Efficacy of miltefosine for Bolivian cutaneous leishmaniasis. Am J Trop 
Med Hyg 2008;78:210. 
 Sundar S et al: Injectable paromomycin for visceral leishmaniasis in India. N Engl 
J Med 2007;356:2571. 
 Sundar S et al: New treatment approach in Indian visceral leishmaniasis: Single-
dose liposomal amphotericin B followed by short-course oral miltefosine. 
Clin Infect Dis 2008;47:1000. 
 Sundar S et al: Oral miltefosine for Indian visceral leishmaniasis. N Engl J Med 
2002;347:1739. 
 Tuon FF et al: Treatment of New World cutaneous leishmaniasis—a systematic 
review with a meta-analysis. Int J Dermatol 2008;47:109. 
 van Griensven J, et al: Combination therapy for visceral leishmaniasis. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2010;10:184. 
 Vélez I et al: Efficacy of miltefosine for the treatment of American cutaneous 
leishmaniasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010;83:351. 
 Wortmann G et al: Liposomal amphotericin B for treatment of cutaneous leishma-
niasis. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2010;83:1028. 
 
937
 Clinical Pharmacology of 
the Antihelminthic Drugs 
 Philip J. Rosenthal, MD 
 
ago, the patient emigrated to the United States from a rural 
area of Peru where his family trades in sheepskins. His father 
and sister have undergone resection of abdominal masses, 
but details of their diagnoses are unavailable. What is your 
differential diagnosis? What are your diagnostic and thera-
peutic plans?
C A S E  S T U D Y
A 29-year-old Peruvian man presents with the incidental 
finding of a 10 by 8 by 8 cm liver cyst on an abdominal com-
puted tomography (CT) scan. The patient had noted 2 days 
of abdominal pain and fever, and his clinical evaluation and 
CT scan were consistent with appendicitis. His clinical find-
ings resolved after laparoscopic appendectomy. Ten years 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
  ■ CHEMOTHERAPY OF 
HELMINTHIC INFECTIONS 
 Helminths (worms) are multicellular organisms that infect very 
large numbers of humans and cause a broad range of diseases. Over 
1 billion people are infected with intestinal nematodes, and many 
millions are infected with filarial nematodes, flukes, and tape-
worms. They are an even greater problem in domestic animals. 
Many drugs, which are directed against a number of different tar-
gets, are available to treat helminthic infections. In many cases, 
especially in the developing world, the goal is control of infection, 
with elimination of most parasites controlling disease symptoms 
and decreasing the transmission of infection. In other cases, com-
plete elimination of parasites is the goal of therapy, although this 
goal can be challenging with certain helminthic infections, because 
of both limited efficacy of drugs and frequent reinfection after 
therapy in endemic areas. 
 Table 53–1 lists the major helminthic infections and provides 
a guide to the drug of choice and alternative drugs for each infec-
tion. In the text that follows, these drugs are arranged alphabeti-
cally. In general, parasites should be identified before treatment is 
started. 
53
 ALBENDAZOLE 
 Albendazole, a broad-spectrum oral antihelminthic, is the drug of 
choice and is approved in the USA for treatment of hydatid disease 
and cysticercosis. It is also used in the treatment of pinworm and 
hookworm infections, ascariasis, trichuriasis, and strongyloidiasis. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Albendazole is a benzimidazole carbamate. After oral administra-
tion, it is erratically absorbed (increased with a fatty meal) and 
then rapidly undergoes first-pass metabolism in the liver to the 
active metabolite albendazole sulfoxide. It reaches variable maxi-
mum plasma concentrations about 3 hours after a 400-mg oral 
dose, and its plasma half-life is 8–12 hours. The sulfoxide is 
mostly protein-bound, distributes well to tissues, and enters bile, 
cerebrospinal fluid, and hydatid cysts. Albendazole metabolites are 
excreted in the urine. 
 Benzimidazoles are thought to act against nematodes by 
inhibiting microtubule synthesis. Albendazole also has larvicidal 
effects in hydatid disease, cysticercosis, ascariasis, and hookworm 
infection and ovicidal effects in ascariasis, ancylostomiasis, and 
trichuriasis. 
938    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Clinical Uses 
 Albendazole is administered on an empty stomach when used 
against intraluminal parasites but with a fatty meal when used 
against tissue parasites. 
 A.  Ascariasis, Trichuriasis, and Hookworm and Pinworm 
Infections 
 For adults and children older than 2 years of age with ascariasis and 
hookworm infections, the treatment is a single dose of 400 mg 
TABLE 53–1 Drugs for the treatment of helminthic infections. 1
Infecting Organism
Drug of Choice
Alternative Drugs
Roundworms (nematodes)
 
Ascaris lumbricoides (roundworm)
Albendazole or pyrantel pamoate 
or mebendazole
Ivermectin, piperazine
 
Trichuris trichiura (whipworm)
Mebendazole or albendazole
Ivermectin
 
Necator americanus (hookworm); Ancylostoma 
 
duodenale (hookworm)
Albendazole or mebendazole or 
pyrantel pamoate
 
Strongyloides stercoralis (threadworm)
Ivermectin
Albendazole or thiabendazole
 
Enterobius vermicularis (pinworm)
Mebendazole or pyrantel pamoate
Albendazole
 
Trichinella spiralis (trichinosis)
Mebendazole or albendazole; add 
corticosteroids for severe infection
 
Trichostrongylus species
Pyrantel pamoate or mebendazole
Albendazole
 
Cutaneous larva migrans (creeping eruption)
Albendazole or ivermectin
Thiabendazole (topical)
 
Visceral larva migrans
Albendazole
Mebendazole
 
Angiostrongylus cantonensis
Albendazole or mebendazole
 
Wuchereria bancrofti (filariasis); Brugia malayi 
 
(filariasis); tropical eosinophilia; Loa loa (loiasis)
Diethylcarbamazine
Ivermectin
 
Onchocerca volvulus (onchocerciasis)
Ivermectin
 
Dracunculus medinensis (guinea worm)
Metronidazole
Thiabendazole or mebendazole
 
Capillaria philippinensis (intestinal capillariasis)
Albendazole
Mebendazole
Flukes (trematodes)
 
Schistosoma haematobium (bilharziasis)
Praziquantel
Metrifonate
 
Schistosoma mansoni
Praziquantel
Oxamniquine
 
Schistosoma japonicum
Praziquantel
 
Clonorchis sinensis (liver fluke); Opisthorchis species
Praziquantel
Albendazole
 
Paragonimus westermani (lung fluke)
Praziquantel
Bithionol
 
Fasciola hepatica (sheep liver fluke)
Bithionol or triclabendazole
 
Fasciolopsis buski (large intestinal fluke)
Praziquantel or niclosamide
 
Heterophyes heterophyes; Metagonimus 
 
yokogawai (small intestinal flukes)
Praziquantel or niclosamide
Tapeworms (cestodes)
 
Taenia saginata (beef tapeworm)
Praziquantel or niclosamide
Mebendazole
 
Diphyllobothrium latum (fish tapeworm)
Praziquantel or niclosamide
 
Taenia solium (pork tapeworm)
Praziquantel or niclosamide
 
Cysticercosis (pork tapeworm larval stage)
Albendazole
Praziquantel
 
Hymenolepis nana (dwarf tapeworm)
Praziquantel
Niclosamide, nitazoxanide
 
Echinococcus granulosus (hydatid disease); 
 
Echinococcus multilocularis
Albendazole
1Additional information may be obtained from the Parasitic Disease Drug Service, Parasitic Diseases Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, 30333. 
Telephone: (404) 639-3670. Some of the drugs listed are not generally available in the USA.
CHAPTER 53 Clinical Pharmacology of the Antihelminthic Drugs    939
orally (repeated for 2–3 days for heavy ascaris infections and in 
2 weeks for pinworm infections). These treatments typically 
achieve good cure rates and marked reduction in egg counts in 
those not cured. For trichuriasis, three daily 400-mg oral doses of 
albendazole are now recommended. A recent meta-analysis showed 
albendazole to be superior to mebendazole or pyrantel pamoate for 
treatment of hookworm infection; other studies showed that three 
doses of mebendazole and albendazole increased stool clearance of 
eggs compared with single treatments, with albendazole superior to 
mebendazole. Cure rates for trichuriasis with single-dose albenda-
zole or mebendazole were less than 30%, which suggests that the 
three-dose regimen just noted, or other drugs (eg, ivermectin), 
might be superior. 
 B. Hydatid Disease 
 Albendazole is the treatment of choice for medical therapy and is 
a useful adjunct to surgical removal or aspiration of cysts. It is 
more active against  Echinococcus granulosus than against  E mul-
tilocularis . Dosing is 400 mg twice daily with meals for 1 month 
or longer. Daily therapy for up to 6 months has been well toler-
ated. One reported therapeutic strategy is to treat with albenda-
zole and praziquantel, to assess response after 1 month or more, 
and, depending on the response, to then manage the patient with 
continued chemotherapy or combined surgical and drug therapy. 
 C. Neurocysticercosis 
 Indications for medical therapy for neurocysticercosis are contro-
versial, since antihelminthic therapy is not clearly superior to 
therapy with corticosteroids alone and may exacerbate neurologic 
disease. Therapy is probably most appropriate for symptomatic 
parenchymal or intraventricular cysts. Corticosteroids are usually 
given with the antihelminthic drug to decrease inflammation 
caused by dying organisms. Albendazole is now generally consid-
ered the drug of choice over praziquantel because of its shorter 
course, lower cost, improved penetration into the subarachnoid 
space, and increased drug levels (as opposed to decreased levels of 
praziquantel) when administered with corticosteroids. Albendazole 
is given in a dosage of 400 mg twice daily for up to 21 days. 
 D. Other Infections 
 Albendazole is the drug of choice in the treatment of cutaneous 
larva migrans (400 mg daily for 3 days), visceral larva migrans 
(400 mg twice daily for 5 days), intestinal capillariasis (400 mg 
daily for 10 days), microsporidial infections (400 mg twice daily 
for 2 weeks or longer), and gnathostomiasis (400 mg twice daily 
for 3 weeks). It also has activity against trichinosis (400 mg twice 
daily for 1–2 weeks) and clonorchiasis (400 mg twice daily for 
1 week). There have been reports of some effectiveness in treat-
ment of opisthorchiasis, toxocariasis, and loiasis, and conflicting 
reports of effectiveness in giardiasis and taeniasis. Albendazole is 
included in programs to control lymphatic filariasis, but it appears 
to be less active than diethylcarbamazine or ivermectin for this 
purpose. Albendazole has been recommended as empiric therapy 
to treat those who return from the tropics with persistent unex-
plained eosinophilia. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 When used for 1–3 days, albendazole is nearly free of significant 
adverse effects. Mild and transient epigastric distress, diarrhea, 
headache, nausea, dizziness, lassitude, and insomnia can occur. In 
long-term use for hydatid disease, albendazole is well tolerated, 
but it can cause abdominal distress, headaches, fever, fatigue, alo-
pecia, increases in liver enzymes, and pancytopenia. 
 Blood counts and liver function studies should be monitored 
during long-term therapy. The drug should not be given to patients 
with known hypersensitivity to other benzimidazole drugs or to 
those with cirrhosis. The safety of albendazole in pregnancy and in 
children younger than 2 years of age has not been established. 
 BITHIONOL 
 Bithionol is an alternative to triclabendazole for the treatment of 
fascioliasis (sheep liver fluke). Bithionol is also an alternative drug 
in the treatment of pulmonary paragonimiasis. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 After ingestion, bithionol reaches peak blood levels in 4–8 hours. 
Excretion appears to be mainly via the kidney. 
 Clinical Uses 
 For treatment of paragonimiasis and fascioliasis, the dosage of 
bithionol is 30–50 mg/kg in two or three divided doses, given 
orally after meals on alternate days for 10–15 doses. For pulmo-
nary paragonimiasis, cure rates are over 90%. For cerebral parago-
nimiasis, repeat courses of therapy may be necessary. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Adverse effects, which occur in up to 40% of patients, are gener-
ally mild and transient, but occasionally their severity requires 
interruption of therapy. These problems include diarrhea, abdom-
inal cramps, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and headache. 
Skin rashes may occur after a week or more of therapy, suggesting 
a reaction to antigens released from dying worms. 
 Bithionol should be used with caution in children younger 
than 8 years of age because there has been limited experience in 
this age group. 
 DIETHYLCARBAMAZINE CITRATE 
 Diethylcarbamazine is a drug of choice in the treatment of filari-
asis, loiasis, and tropical eosinophilia. It has been replaced by 
ivermectin for the treatment of onchocerciasis. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Diethylcarbamazine, a synthetic piperazine derivative, is marketed 
as a citrate salt. It is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal 
940    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
tract; after a 0.5 mg/kg dose, peak plasma levels are reached within 
1–2 hours. The plasma half-life is 2–3 hours in the presence of 
acidic urine but about 10 hours if the urine is alkaline, a 
Henderson-Hasselbalch trapping effect (see  Chapter 1 ). The drug 
rapidly equilibrates with all tissues except fat. It is excreted, prin-
cipally in the urine, as unchanged drug and the N-oxide metabo-
lite. Dosage may have to be reduced in patients with persistent 
urinary alkalosis or renal impairment. 
 Diethylcarbamazine immobilizes microfilariae and alters their 
surface structure, displacing them from tissues and making them 
more susceptible to destruction by host defense mechanisms. The 
mode of action against adult worms is unknown. 
 Clinical Uses 
 The drug should be taken after meals. 
 A.  Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, Brugia timori, 
and  Loa loa 
 Diethylcarbamazine is the drug of choice for treatment of infections 
with these parasites because of its efficacy and lack of serious toxicity. 
Microfilariae of all species are rapidly killed; adult parasites are killed 
more slowly, often requiring several courses of treatment. The drug is 
highly effective against adult  L loa . The extent to which  W bancrofti 
and  B malayi adults are killed is not known, but after appropriate 
therapy microfilariae do not reappear in the majority of patients. 
 These infections are treated for 2 or (for  L loa ) 3 weeks, with 
initial low doses to reduce the incidence of allergic reactions to 
dying microfilariae. This regimen is 50 mg (1 mg/kg in children) on 
day 1, three 50 mg doses on day 2, three 100 mg doses (2 mg/kg in 
children) on day 3, and then 2 mg/kg three times daily to complete 
the 2–3 week course. 
 Antihistamines may be given for the first few days of therapy 
to limit allergic reactions, and corticosteroids should be started 
and doses of diethylcarbamazine lowered or interrupted if severe 
reactions occur. Cures may require several courses of treatment. 
For patients with high  L loa worm burdens (more than 2500 cir-
culating parasites/mL), strategies to decrease risks of severe toxicity 
include apheresis, if available, to remove microfilariae before treat-
ment with diethylcarbamazine or therapy with albendazole, which 
is slower acting and better tolerated, before therapy with diethyl-
carbamazine or ivermectin. 
 Diethylcarbamazine may also be used for chemoprophylaxis 
(300 mg weekly or 300 mg on 3 successive days each month for 
loiasis; 50 mg monthly for bancroftian and Malayan filariasis). 
 B. Other Uses 
 For tropical eosinophilia, diethylcarbamazine is given orally at a 
dosage of 2 mg/kg three times daily for 7 days. Diethylcarbamazine 
is effective in  Mansonella streptocerca infections, since it kills both 
adults and microfilariae. Limited information suggests that the 
drug is not effective, however, against adult  M ozzardi or  M per-
stans and that it has limited activity against microfilariae of these 
parasites. An important application of diethylcarbamazine has 
been mass treatment to reduce the prevalence of  W bancrofti infec-
tion, generally in combination with ivermectin or albendazole. 
This strategy has led to excellent progress in disease control in a 
number of countries. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Reactions to diethylcarbamazine, which are generally mild and 
transient, include headache, malaise, anorexia, weakness, nausea, 
vomiting, and dizziness. Adverse effects also occur as a result of the 
release of proteins from dying microfilariae or adult worms. 
Reactions are particularly severe with onchocerciasis, but diethyl-
carbamazine is no longer commonly used for this infection, 
because ivermectin is equally efficacious and less toxic. Reactions 
to dying microfilariae are usually mild in  W bancrofti , more 
intense in  B malayi , and occasionally severe in  L loa infections. 
Reactions include fever, malaise, papular rash, headache, gastroin-
testinal symptoms, cough, chest pain, and muscle or joint pain. 
Leukocytosis is common. Eosinophilia may increase with treat-
ment. Proteinuria may also occur. Symptoms are most likely to 
occur in patients with heavy loads of microfilariae. Retinal hemor-
rhages and, rarely, encephalopathy have been described. 
 Between the third and twelfth days of treatment, local reactions 
may occur in the vicinity of dying adult or immature worms. 
These include lymphangitis with localized swellings in  W bancrofti 
and  B malayi , small wheals in the skin in  L loa , and flat papules in 
 M streptocerca infections. Patients with attacks of lymphangitis due 
to  W bancrofti or  B malayi should be treated during a quiescent 
period between attacks. 
 Caution is advised when using diethylcarbamazine in patients 
with hypertension or renal disease. 
 DOXYCYCLINE 
 This tetracycline antibiotic is described in more detail in  Chapter 44 . 
Doxycycline has recently been shown to have significant macro-
filaricidal activity against  W bancrofti , suggesting better activity 
than any other available drug against adult worms. Activity is also 
seen against onchocerciasis. Doxycycline acts indirectly, by killing 
 Wolbachia, an intracellular bacterial symbiont of filarial parasites. 
It may prove to be an important drug for filariasis, both for treat-
ment of active disease and in mass chemotherapy campaigns. 
 IVERMECTIN 
 Ivermectin is the drug of choice in strongyloidiasis and onchocer-
ciasis. It is also an alternative drug for a number of other helmin-
thic infections. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Ivermectin, a semisynthetic macrocyclic lactone, is a mixture of 
avermectin B 1a and B 1b . It is derived from the soil actinomycete 
 Streptomyces avermitilis . 
 Ivermectin is used only orally in humans. The drug is rapidly 
absorbed, reaching maximum plasma concentrations 4 hours after a 
CHAPTER 53 Clinical Pharmacology of the Antihelminthic Drugs    941
12 mg dose. The drug has a wide tissue distribution and a volume of 
distribution of about 50 L. Its half-life is about 16 hours. Excretion 
of the drug and its metabolites is almost exclusively in the feces. 
 Ivermectin appears to paralyze nematodes and arthropods by 
intensifying γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)–mediated transmission 
of signals in peripheral nerves. In onchocerciasis, ivermectin is 
microfilaricidal. It does not effectively kill adult worms but blocks 
the release of microfilariae for some months after therapy. After a 
single standard dose, microfilariae in the skin diminish rapidly 
within 2–3 days, remain low for months, and then gradually 
increase; microfilariae in the anterior chamber of the eye decrease 
slowly over months, eventually clear, and then gradually return. 
With repeated doses of ivermectin, the drug appears to have a low-
level macrofilaricidal action and to permanently reduce microfi-
larial production. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Onchocerciasis 
 Treatment is with a single oral dose of ivermectin, 150 mcg/kg, 
with water on an empty stomach. Doses are repeated; regimens 
vary from monthly to less frequent (every 6–12 months) dosing 
schedules. After acute therapy, treatment is repeated at 12-month 
intervals until the adult worms die, which may take 10 years or 
longer. With the first treatment only, patients with microfilariae in 
the cornea or anterior chamber may be treated with corticoster-
oids to avoid inflammatory eye reactions. 
 Ivermectin also now plays a key role in onchocerciasis control. 
Annual mass treatments have led to major reductions in disease 
transmission. However, evidence of diminished responsiveness 
after mass administration of ivermectin has raised concern regard-
ing selection of drug-resistant parasites. 
 B. Strongyloidiasis 
 Treatment consists of two daily doses of 200 mcg/kg. In immuno-
suppressed patients with disseminated infection, repeated treat-
ment is often needed, and cure may not be possible. In this case, 
suppressive therapy—ie, once monthly—may be helpful. 
 C. Other Parasites 
 Ivermectin reduces microfilariae in  B malayi and  M ozzardi infec-
tions but not in  M perstans infections. It has been used with dieth-
ylcarbamazine and albendazole for the control of  W bancrofti , but 
it does not kill adult worms. In loiasis, although the drug reduces 
microfilaria concentrations, it can occasionally induce severe reac-
tions and appears to be more dangerous in this regard than dieth-
ylcarbamazine. Ivermectin is also effective in controlling scabies, 
lice, and cutaneous larva migrans and in eliminating a large pro-
portion of ascarid worms. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 In strongyloidiasis treatment, infrequent adverse effects include 
fatigue, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and rashes. 
In onchocerciasis treatment, adverse effects are principally from 
the killing of microfilariae and can include fever, headache, dizzi-
ness, somnolence, weakness, rash, increased pruritus, diarrhea, 
joint and muscle pains, hypotension, tachycardia, lymphadenitis, 
lymphangitis, and peripheral edema. This reaction starts on the 
first day and peaks on the second day after treatment. This reac-
tion occurs in 5–30% of persons and is generally mild, but it may 
be more frequent and more severe in individuals who are not long-
term residents of onchocerciasis-endemic areas. A more intense 
reaction occurs in 1–3% of persons and a severe reaction in 0.1%, 
including high fever, hypotension, and bronchospasm. 
Corticosteroids are indicated in these cases, at times for several 
days. Toxicity diminishes with repeated dosing. Swellings and 
abscesses occasionally occur at 1–3 weeks, presumably at sites of 
adult worms. 
 Some patients develop corneal opacities and other eye lesions 
several days after treatment. These are rarely severe and generally 
resolve without corticosteroid treatment. 
 It is best to avoid concomitant use of ivermectin with other 
drugs that enhance GABA activity, eg, barbiturates, benzodiaz-
epines, and valproic acid. Ivermectin should not be used during 
pregnancy. Safety in children younger than 5 years has not been 
established. 
 MEBENDAZOLE 
 Mebendazole is a synthetic benzimidazole that has a wide spec-
trum of antihelminthic activity and a low incidence of adverse 
effects. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Less than 10% of orally administered mebendazole is absorbed. 
The absorbed drug is protein-bound (> 90%), is rapidly converted 
to inactive metabolites (primarily during its first pass in the liver), 
and has a half-life of 2–6 hours. It is excreted mostly in the urine, 
principally as decarboxylated derivatives. In addition, a portion of 
absorbed drug and its derivatives are excreted in the bile. 
Absorption is increased if the drug is ingested with a fatty meal. 
 Mebendazole probably acts by inhibiting microtubule synthe-
sis; the parent drug appears to be the active form. Efficacy of the 
drug varies with gastrointestinal transit time, with intensity of 
infection, and perhaps with the strain of parasite. The drug kills 
hookworm, ascaris, and trichuris eggs. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Mebendazole is indicated for use in ascariasis, trichuriasis, hook-
worm and pinworm infections, and certain other helminthic 
infections. It can be taken before or after meals; the tablets should 
be chewed before swallowing. For pinworm infection, the dose is 
100 mg once, repeated at 2 weeks. For ascariasis, trichuriasis, 
hookworm, and trichostrongylus infections, a dosage of 100 mg 
twice daily for 3 days is used for adults and for children older than 
2 years of age. Cure rates are good for pinworm infections and 
ascariasis, but have been disappointing in recent studies of trichu-
riasis. Cure rates are also lower for hookworm infections, but a 
942    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
marked reduction in the worm burden occurs in those not cured. 
For intestinal capillariasis, mebendazole is used at a dosage of 200 
mg twice daily for 21 or more days. In trichinosis, limited reports 
suggest efficacy against adult worms in the intestinal tract and tis-
sue larvae. Treatment is three times daily, with fatty foods, at 
200–400 mg per dose for 3 days and then 400–500 mg per dose 
for 10 days; corticosteroids should be coadministered for severe 
infections. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Short-term mebendazole therapy for intestinal nematodes is nearly 
free of adverse effects. Mild nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdom-
inal pain have been reported infrequently. Rare side effects, usually 
with high-dose therapy, are hypersensitivity reactions (rash, urti-
caria), agranulocytosis, alopecia, and elevation of liver enzymes. 
 Mebendazole is teratogenic in animals and therefore contrain-
dicated in pregnancy. It should be used with caution in children 
younger than 2 years of age because of limited experience and rare 
reports of convulsions in this age group. Plasma levels may be 
decreased by concomitant use of carbamazepine or phenytoin and 
increased by cimetidine. Mebendazole should be used with cau-
tion in patients with cirrhosis. 
 METRIFONATE (TRICHLORFON) 
 Metrifonate is a safe, low-cost alternative drug for the treatment 
of  Schistosoma haematobium infections. It is not active against 
S mansoni or S japonicum . It is not available in the USA. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Metrifonate, an organophosphate compound, is rapidly absorbed after 
oral administration. After the standard oral dose, peak blood levels are 
reached in 1–2 hours; the half-life is about 1.5 hours. Clearance 
appears to be through nonenzymatic transformation to dichlorvos, its 
active metabolite. Metrifonate and dichlorvos are well distributed to 
the tissues and are completely eliminated in 24–48 hours. 
 The mode of action is thought to be related to cholinesterase 
inhibition. This inhibition temporarily paralyzes the adult worms, 
resulting in their shift from the bladder venous plexus to small 
arterioles of the lungs, where they are trapped, encased by 
the immune system, and die. The drug is not effective against 
 S haematobium eggs; live eggs continue to pass in the urine for 
several months after all adult worms have been killed. 
 Clinical Uses 
 In the treatment of  S haematobium , an oral dose of 7.5–10 mg/kg 
is given three times at 14-day intervals. Cure rates on this schedule 
are 44–93%, with marked reductions in egg counts in those not 
cured. Metrifonate was also effective as a prophylactic agent when 
given monthly to children in a highly endemic area, and it has 
been used in mass treatment programs. In mixed infections with 
 S haematobium and  S mansoni , metrifonate has been successfully 
combined with oxamniquine. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Some studies note mild and transient cholinergic symptoms, 
including nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, bron-
chospasm, headache, sweating, fatigue, weakness, dizziness, and 
vertigo. These symptoms may begin within 30 minutes and persist 
up to 12 hours. 
 Metrifonate should not be used after recent exposure to insec-
ticides or drugs that might potentiate cholinesterase inhibition. 
Metrifonate is contraindicated in pregnancy. 
 NICLOSAMIDE 
 Niclosamide is a second-line drug for the treatment of most tape-
worm infections, but it is not available in the USA. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Niclosamide is a salicylamide derivative. It appears to be mini-
mally absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract—neither the drug 
nor its metabolites have been recovered from the blood or 
urine. 
 Adult worms (but not ova) are rapidly killed, presumably due 
to inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation or stimulation of 
ATPase activity. 
 Clinical Uses 
 The adult dose of niclosamide is 2 g once, given in the morning 
on an empty stomach. The tablets must be chewed thoroughly 
and then swallowed with water. 
 A.  Taenia saginata (Beef Tapeworm),  T solium (Pork 
Tapeworm), 
and 
 Diphyllobothrium latum 
(Fish 
Tapeworm) 
 A single 2 g dose of niclosamide results in cure rates of over 85% 
for  D latum and about 95% for  T saginata . It is probably equally 
effective against  T solium . Cysticercosis can theoretically occur 
after treatment of  T solium infections, because viable ova are 
released into the gut lumen after digestion of segments, but no 
such cases have been reported. 
 B. Other Tapeworms 
 Most patients treated with niclosamide for  Hymenolepsis diminuta 
and  Dipylidium  caninum infections are cured with a 7-day course 
of treatment; a few require a second course. Praziquantel is supe-
rior for  Hymenolepis nana (dwarf tapeworm) infection. Niclosamide 
is not effective against cysticercosis or hydatid disease. 
 C. Intestinal Fluke Infections 
 Niclosamide can be used as an alternative drug in the treatment of 
 Fasciolopsis buski ,  Heterophyes heterophyes , and  Metagonimus 
yokogawai infections. The standard dose is given every other day 
for three doses. 
CHAPTER 53 Clinical Pharmacology of the Antihelminthic Drugs    943
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Infrequent, mild, and transitory adverse events include nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort. The consumption 
of alcohol should be avoided on the day of treatment and for 1 day 
afterward. The safety of the drug has not been established in preg-
nancy or for children younger than 2 years of age. 
 OXAMNIQUINE 
 Oxamniquine is an alternative to praziquantel for the treatment of 
 S mansoni infections. It has also been used extensively for mass 
treatment. It is not effective against  S haematobium or  S japoni-
cum . It is not available in the USA. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Oxamniquine, a semisynthetic tetrahydroquinoline, is readily 
absorbed orally; it should be taken with food. Its plasma half-life 
is about 2.5 hours. The drug is extensively metabolized to inactive 
metabolites and excreted in the urine—up to 75% in the first 
24 hours. Intersubject variations in serum concentration have 
been noted, which may explain some treatment failures. 
 Oxamniquine is active against both mature and immature stages 
of  S mansoni but does not appear to be cercaricidal. The mechanism 
of action is unknown. Contraction and paralysis of the worms 
results in detachment from terminal venules in the mesentery and 
transit to the liver, where many die; surviving females return to the 
mesenteric vessels but cease to lay eggs. Strains of  S mansoni in dif-
ferent parts of the world vary in susceptibility. Oxamniquine has 
been effective in instances of praziquantel resistance. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Oxamniquine is safe and effective in all stages of  S mansoni dis-
ease, including advanced hepatosplenomegaly. In the acute 
(Katayama) syndrome, treatment results in disappearance of acute 
symptoms and clearance of the infection. The drug is generally less 
effective in children, who require higher doses than adults. It is 
better tolerated with food. 
 Optimal dosage schedules vary for different regions of the 
world. In the western hemisphere and western Africa, the adult 
oxamniquine dosage is 12–15 mg/kg given once. In northern and 
southern Africa, standard schedules are 15 mg/kg twice daily for 
2 days. In eastern Africa and the Arabian peninsula, standard dos-
age is 15–20 mg/kg twice in 1 day. Cure rates are 70–95%, with 
marked reduction in egg excretion in those not cured. In mixed 
schistosome infections, oxamniquine has been successfully used in 
combination with metrifonate. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Mild symptoms, starting about 3 hours after a dose and lasting for 
several hours, occur in more than one third of patients. Central 
nervous system symptoms (dizziness, headache, drowsiness) are 
most common; nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, colic, pruritus, and 
urticaria also occur. Infrequent adverse effects are low-grade fever, 
an orange to red discoloration of the urine, proteinuria, micro-
scopic hematuria, and a transient decrease in leukocytes. Seizures 
have been reported rarely. 
 Since the drug makes many patients dizzy or drowsy, it should 
be used with caution in patients whose work or activity requires 
mental alertness (eg, no driving for 24 hours). It should be used 
with caution in those with a history of epilepsy. Oxamniquine is 
contraindicated in pregnancy. 
 PIPERAZINE 
 Piperazine is an alternative for the treatment of ascariasis, with 
cure rates over 90% when taken for 2 days, but it is not recom-
mended for other helminth infections. Piperazine is available as 
the hexahydrate and as a variety of salts. It is readily absorbed, and 
maximum plasma levels are reached in 2–4 hours. Most of the 
drug is excreted unchanged in the urine in 2–6 hours, and excre-
tion is complete within 24 hours. 
 Piperazine causes paralysis of ascaris by blocking acetylcholine 
at the myoneural junction; unable to maintain their position in 
the host, live worms are expelled by normal peristalsis. 
 For ascariasis, the dosage of piperazine (as the hexahydrate) is 
75 mg/kg (maximum dose, 3.5 g) orally once daily for 2 days. For 
heavy infections, treatment should be continued for 3–4 days or 
repeated after 1 week. 
 Occasional mild adverse effects include nausea, vomiting, diar-
rhea, abdominal pain, dizziness, and headache. Neurotoxicity and 
allergic reactions are rare. Piperazine compounds should not be 
given to women during pregnancy, to patients with impaired renal 
or hepatic function, or to those with a history of epilepsy or 
chronic neurologic disease. 
 PRAZIQUANTEL 
 Praziquantel is effective in the treatment of schistosome infections 
of all species and most other trematode and cestode infections, 
including cysticercosis. The drug’s safety and effectiveness as a 
single oral dose have also made it useful in mass treatment of sev-
eral infections. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Praziquantel is a synthetic isoquinoline-pyrazine derivative. It is 
rapidly absorbed, with a bioavailability of about 80% after oral 
administration. Peak serum concentrations are reached 1–3 hours 
after a therapeutic dose. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of prazi-
quantel reach 14–20% of the drug’s plasma concentration. About 
80% of the drug is bound to plasma proteins. Most of the drug is 
rapidly metabolized to inactive mono- and polyhydroxylated prod-
ucts after a first pass in the liver. The half-life is 0.8–1.5 hours. 
Excretion is mainly via the kidneys (60–80%) and bile (15–35%). 
Plasma concentrations of praziquantel increase when the drug is 
944    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
taken with a high-carbohydrate meal or with cimetidine; bioavail-
ability is markedly reduced with some antiepileptics (phenytoin, 
carbamazepine) or with corticosteroids. 
 Praziquantel appears to increase the permeability of trematode 
and cestode cell membranes to calcium, resulting in paralysis, 
dislodgement, and death. In schistosome infections of experimen-
tal animals, praziquantel is effective against adult worms and 
immature stages, and it has a prophylactic effect against cercarial 
infection. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Praziquantel tablets are taken with liquid after a meal; they should 
be swallowed without chewing because their bitter taste can 
induce retching and vomiting. 
 A. Schistosomiasis 
 Praziquantel is the drug of choice for all forms of schistosomiasis. 
The dosage is 20 mg/kg per dose for two ( S mansoni and  S haema-
tobium ) or three ( S japonicum and  S mekongi ) doses at intervals of 
4–6 hours. High cure rates (75–95%) are achieved when patients 
are evaluated at 3–6 months; there is marked reduction in egg 
counts in those not cured. The drug is effective in adults and 
children and is generally well tolerated by patients in the hepatos-
plenic stage of advanced disease. There is no standard regimen for 
acute schistosomiasis (Katayama syndrome), but standard doses as 
described above, often with corticosteroids to limit inflammation 
from the acute immune response and dying worms, are recom-
mended. Increasing evidence indicates rare  S mansoni drug resis-
tance, which may be countered with extended courses of therapy 
(eg, 3–6 days at standard dosing) or treatment with oxamniquine. 
Effectiveness of praziquantel for chemoprophylaxis has not been 
established. 
 B. Clonorchiasis, Opisthorchiasis, and Paragonimiasis 
 Standard dosing is 25 mg/kg three times daily for 2 days for each 
of these fluke infections. 
 C. Taeniasis and Diphyllobothriasis 
 A single dose of praziquantel, 5–10 mg/kg, results in nearly 100% 
cure rates for  T saginata ,  T solium , and  D latum infections. 
Because praziquantel does not kill eggs, it is theoretically possible 
that larvae of  T solium released from eggs in the large bowel could 
penetrate the intestinal wall and give rise to cysticercosis, but this 
hazard is probably minimal. 
 D. Neurocysticercosis 
 Albendazole is now the preferred drug, but when it is not appropri-
ate or available, praziquantel has similar efficacy. Indications for 
praziquantel are similar to those for albendazole. The praziquantel 
dosage is 100 mg/kg/d in three divided doses for 1 day, then 50 mg/
kg/d to complete a 2- to 4-week course. Clinical responses to ther-
apy vary from dramatic improvements of seizures and other neuro-
logic findings to no response and even progression of the disease. 
Praziquantel—but not albendazole—has diminished bioavailability 
when taken concurrently with a corticosteroid. Recommendations 
on use of both antihelminthics and corticosteroids in neurocysticer-
cosis vary. 
 E.  Hymenolepis nana 
 Praziquantel is the drug of choice for  H nana infections and the 
first drug to be highly effective. A single dose of 25 mg/kg is taken 
initially and repeated in 1 week. 
 F. Hydatid Disease 
 In hydatid disease, praziquantel kills protoscoleces but does not 
affect the germinal membrane. Praziquantel is being evaluated as 
an adjunct with albendazole pre- and postsurgery. In addition to 
its direct action, praziquantel enhances the plasma concentration 
of albendazole. 
 G. Other Parasites 
 Limited trials at a dosage of 25 mg/kg three times daily for 
1–2 days indicate effectiveness of praziquantel against fasciolopsia-
sis, metagonimiasis, and other forms of heterophyiasis. Praziquantel 
was not effective for fascioliasis, however, even at dosages as high as 
25 mg/kg three times daily for 3–7 days. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Mild and transient adverse effects are common. They begin within 
several hours after ingestion of praziquantel and may persist for 
about 1 day. Most common are headache, dizziness, drowsiness, 
and lassitude; others include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
loose stools, pruritus, urticaria, arthralgia, myalgia, and low-grade 
fever. Mild and transient elevations of liver enzymes have been 
reported. Several days after starting praziquantel, low-grade fever, 
pruritus, and skin rashes (macular and urticarial), sometimes asso-
ciated with worsened eosinophilia, may occur, probably due to the 
release of proteins from dying worms rather than direct drug tox-
icity. The intensity and frequency of adverse effects increase with 
dosage such that they occur in up to 50% of patients who receive 
25 mg/kg three times in 1 day. 
 In neurocysticercosis, neurologic abnormalities may be exac-
erbated by inflammatory reactions around dying parasites. 
Common findings in patients who do not receive corticoster-
oids, usually presenting during or shortly after therapy, are head-
ache, meningismus, nausea, vomiting, mental changes, and 
seizures (often accompanied by increased cerebrospinal fluid 
pleocytosis). More serious findings, including arachnoiditis, 
hyperthermia, and intracranial hypertension, may also occur. 
Corticosteroids are commonly used with praziquantel in the 
treatment of neurocysticercosis to decrease the inflammatory 
reaction, but this is controversial and complicated by knowledge 
that corticosteroids decrease the plasma level of praziquantel up 
to 50%. Praziquantel is contraindicated in ocular cysticercosis, 
because parasite destruction in the eye may cause irreparable 
damage. Some workers also caution against use of the drug in 
spinal neurocysticercosis. 
CHAPTER 53 Clinical Pharmacology of the Antihelminthic Drugs    945
 The safety of praziquantel in children younger than age 4 years 
is not established, but no specific problems in young children have 
been documented. Indeed, the drug appears to be better tolerated 
in children than in adults. Praziquantel increased abortion rates in 
rats and therefore should be avoided in pregnancy if possible. 
Because the drug induces dizziness and drowsiness, patients 
should not drive during therapy and should be warned regarding 
activities requiring particular physical coordination or alertness. 
 PYRANTEL PAMOATE 
 Pyrantel pamoate is a broad-spectrum antihelminthic highly effec-
tive for the treatment of pinworm, ascaris, and  Trichostrongylus 
 orientalis infections. It is moderately effective against both species 
of hookworm. It is not effective in trichuriasis or strongyloidiasis. 
Oxantel pamoate, an analog of pyrantel not available in the USA, 
has been used successfully in the treatment of trichuriasis; the two 
drugs have been combined for their broad-spectrum antihelmint-
hic activity. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Pyrantel pamoate is a tetrahydropyrimidine derivative. It is poorly 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and active mainly against 
luminal organisms. Peak plasma levels are reached in 1–3 hours. 
Over half of the administered dose is recovered unchanged in the 
feces. 
 Pyrantel is effective against mature and immature forms of 
susceptible helminths within the intestinal tract but not against 
migratory stages in the tissues or against ova. The drug is a neuro-
muscular blocking agent that causes release of acetylcholine and 
inhibition of cholinesterase; this results in paralysis of worms, 
which is followed by expulsion. 
 Clinical Uses 
 The standard dose is 11 mg (base)/kg (maximum, 1 g), given 
orally once with or without food. For pinworm, the dose is 
repeated in 2 weeks, and cure rates are greater than 95%. The drug 
is available in the USA without prescription for this indication. 
 For ascariasis, a single dose yields cure rates of 85–100%. 
Treatment should be repeated if eggs are found 2 weeks after treat-
ment. For hookworm infections, a single dose is effective against 
light infections; but for heavy infections, especially with  Necator 
americanus , a 3-day course is necessary to reach 90% cure rates. A 
course of treatment can be repeated in 2 weeks. 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Adverse effects are infrequent, mild, and transient. They include 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, dizziness, 
drowsiness, headache, insomnia, rash, fever, and weakness. 
Pyrantel should be used with caution in patients with liver dys-
function, because low, transient aminotransferase elevations 
have been noted in a small number of patients. Experience with 
the drug in pregnant women and children younger than 2 years 
of age is limited. 
 THIABENDAZOLE 
 Thiabendazole is an alternative to ivermectin or albendazole for 
the treatment of strongyloidiasis and cutaneous larva migrans. 
 Basic Pharmacology 
 Thiabendazole is a benzimidazole compound. Although it is a 
chelating agent that forms stable complexes with a number of 
metals, including iron, it does not bind calcium. 
 Thiabendazole is rapidly absorbed after ingestion. With a stan-
dard dose, drug concentrations in plasma peak within 1–2 hours; 
the half-life is 1.2 hours. The drug is almost completely metabo-
lized in the liver to the 5-hydroxy form; 90% is excreted in the 
urine in 48 hours, largely as the glucuronide or sulfonate conju-
gate. Thiabendazole can also be absorbed from the skin. 
 The mechanism of action of thiabendazole is probably the 
same as that of other benzimidazoles (see above). The drug has 
ovicidal effects against some parasites. 
 Clinical Uses 
 The standard dosage, 25 mg/kg (maximum 1.5 g) twice daily, 
should be given after meals. Tablets should be chewed. For 
strongyloides infection, treatment is for 2 days. Cure rates are 
reportedly 93%. A course can be repeated in 1 week if indicated. 
In patients with hyperinfection syndrome, the standard dose is 
continued twice daily for 5–7 days. For cutaneous larva migrans, 
thiabendazole cream can be applied topically, or the oral drug can 
be given for 2 days (although albendazole is less toxic and there-
fore preferred). 
 Adverse Reactions, Contraindications, & 
Cautions 
 Thiabendazole is much more toxic than other benzimidazoles 
and more toxic than ivermectin, so other agents are now preferred 
for most indications. Common adverse effects include dizziness, 
anorexia, nausea, and vomiting. Less common problems are epi-
gastric pain, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, pruritus, headache, 
drowsiness, and neuropsychiatric symptoms. Irreversible liver 
failure and fatal Stevens-Johnson syndrome have been reported. 
 Experience with thiabendazole is limited in children weighing 
less than 15 kg. The drug should not be used in pregnancy or in 
the presence of hepatic or renal disease 
946    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 REFERENCES 
 Bagheri H et al: Adverse drug reactions to anthelmintics. Ann Pharmacother 
2004;38:383. 
 Basáñez MG et al: Effect of single-dose ivermectin on  Onchocerca volvulus : A sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2008;8:310. 
 Bethony J et al: Soil-transmitted helminth infections: Ascariasis, trichuriasis, and 
hookworm. Lancet 2006;367:1521. 
 Bockarie MJ et al: Efficacy of single-dose diethylcarbamazine compared with 
diethylcarbamazine combined with albendazole against  Wuchereria bancrofti
infection in Papua New Guinea. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007;76:62. 
 Bockarie MJ et al: Mass treatment to eliminate filariasis in Papua New Guinea. N 
Engl J Med 2002;347:1841. 
 Craig P, Ito A: Intestinal cestodes. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2007;20:524. 
 Danso-Appiah A et al: Drugs for treating urinary schistosomiasis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2008:CD000053 
 Dayan AD: Albendazole, mebendazole and praziquantel. Review of non-clinical 
toxicity and pharmacokinetics. Acta Trop 2003;86:141. 
 Drugs for parasitic infections. Med Lett Drugs Ther 2007;(Suppl 1). 
 Flohr C et al: Low efficacy of mebendazole against hookworm in Vietnam: Two 
randomized controlled trials. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2007;76:732. 
 Fox LM: Ivermectin: Uses and impact 20 years on. Curr Opin Infect Dis 
2006;19:588. 
 Garcia HH et al: Current consensus guidelines for treatment of neurocysticercosis. 
Clin Microbiol Rev 2002;15:747. 
 Garcia HH et al: A trial of antiparasitic treatment to reduce the rate of seizures due 
to cerebral cysticercosis. N Engl J Med 2004;350:249. 
 Horton J: Albendazole: A broad spectrum anthelminthic for treatment of indi-
viduals and populations. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2002;15:599. 
 Keiser J, Utzinger J: Efficacy of current drugs against soil-transmitted helm-
inth infections: Systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 2008;
299:1937. 
 Matthaiou DK et al: Albendazole versus praziquantel in the treatment of neuro-
cysticercosis: A meta-analysis of comparative trials. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 
2008;2:e194. 
 Meltzer E et al: Eosinophilia among returning travelers: A practical approach. Am 
J Trop Med Hyg 2008;78:702. 
 Osei-Atweneboana MY: Prevalence and intensity of  Onchocerca volvulus infection 
and efficacy of ivermectin in endemic communities in Ghana: A two-phase 
epidemiological study. Lancet 2007;369:2021. 
 Ramzy RM et al: Effect of yearly mass drug administration with diethylcarbamaz-
ine and albendazole on bancroftian filariasis in Egypt: A comprehensive 
assessment. Lancet 2006;367:992. 
 Reddy M et al: Oral drug therapy for multiple neglected tropical diseases: A sys-
tematic review. JAMA 2007;298:1911. 
 Smego RA Jr, Sebanego P: Treatment options for hepatic cystic echinococcosis. Int 
J Infect Dis 2005;9:69. 
 Supali T et al: Doxycycline treatment of  Brugia malayi -infected persons reduces 
microfilaremia and adverse reactions after diethylcarbamazine and albenda-
zole treatment. Clin Infect Dis 2008;46:1385. 
 Taylor MJ et al: Macrofilaricidal activity after doxycycline treatment of  Wuchereria 
bancrofti : A double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 
2005;365:2116. 
 Tisch DJ, Michael E, Kazura JW: Mass chemotherapy options to control lym-
phatic filariasis: A systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis 2005;5:514. 
 Udall DN: Recent updates on onchocerciasis: Diagnosis and treatment. Clin Infect 
Dis 2007;44:53. 
 
 
 
 
 
Albendazole (Albenza)
Oral: 200 mg tablets; 100 mg/5 mL suspension
Note: Albendazole is approved in the USA for the treatment of 
cysticercosis and hydatid disease.
Bithionol (Bitin)1
Diethylcarbamazine (Hetrazan)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Ivermectin (Mectizan, Stromectol)
Oral: 3, 6 mg tablets
Note: Ivermectin is approved for use in the USA for the treatment 
of onchocerciasis and strongyloidiasis. See Chapter 65 for com-
ment on the unlabeled use of drugs.
Mebendazole (generic, Vermox)
Oral: 100 mg chewable tablets; outside the USA, 100 mg/5 mL 
 suspension
Metrifonate (trichlorfon, Bilarcil)1
Niclosamide (Niclocide)1
Oxamniquine (Vansil, Mansil)1
Oxantel pamoate (Quantrel); oxantel/pyrantel pamoate 
(Telopar)
Oral: tablets containing 100 mg (base) of each drug; suspensions 
containing 20 or 50 mg (base) per mL
Note: Oxantel pamoate and oxantel/pyrantel pamoate are not avail-
able in the USA.
Piperazine (generic, Vermizine)1
Praziquantel (Biltricide; others outside the USA)
Oral: 600 mg tablets (other strengths outside the USA)
Pyrantel pamoate (Antiminth, Combantrin, Pin-rid, Pin-X)
Oral: 50 mg (base)/mL suspension; 180 mg; 62.5 mg (base) capsules 
(available without prescription in the USA)
Suramin (Bayer 205, others)1
Thiabendazole (Mintezol)
Oral: 500 mg chewable tablets; suspension, 500 mg/mL
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E 1
Albendazole (Albenza)
Oral: 200 mg tablets; 100 mg/5 mL suspension
Note: Albendazole is approved in the USA for the treatment of 
cysticercosis and hydatid disease.
Bithionol (Bitin)1
Diethylcarbamazine (Hetrazan)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Ivermectin (Mectizan, Stromectol)
Oral: 3, 6 mg tablets
Note: Ivermectin is approved for use in the USA for the treatment
of onchocerciasis and strongyloidiasis. See Chapter 65 for com-
ment on the unlabeled use of drugs.
Mebendazole (generic, Vermox)
Oral: 100 mg chewable tablets; outside the USA, 100 mg/5 mL 
suspension
Metrifonate (trichlorfon, Bilarcil)1
Niclosamide (Niclocide)1
Oxamniquine (Vansil, Mansil)1
Oxantel pamoate (Quantrel); oxantel/pyrantel pamoate
(Telopar)
Oral: tablets containing 100 mg (base) of each drug; suspensions 
containing 20 or 50 mg (base) per mL
Note: Oxantel pamoate and oxantel/pyrantel pamoate are not avail-
able in the USA.
Piperazine (generic, Vermizine)1
Praziquantel (Biltricide; others outside the USA)
Oral: 600 mg tablets (other strengths outside the USA)
Pyrantel pamoate (Antiminth, Combantrin, Pin-rid, Pin-X)
Oral: 50 mg (base)/mL suspension; 180 mg; 62.5 mg (base) capsules
(available without prescription in the USA)
Suramin (Bayer 205, others)1
Thiabendazole (Mintezol)
Oral: 500 mg chewable tablets; suspension, 500 mg/mL
1Additional information may be obtained from the Parasitic Disease Drug Service, Parasitic Diseases Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia, 30333. Telephone: (404) 639-3670.
CHAPTER 53 Clinical Pharmacology of the Antihelminthic Drugs    947
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The presentation is highly suggestive of cystic hydatid dis-
ease (infection with  Echinococcus granulosis ), which is trans-
mitted by eggs from the feces of dogs in contact with 
livestock. Other causes of liver fluid collections include ame-
bic and pyogenic abscesses, but these are usually not cystic in 
appearance. For echinococcosis, a typical cystic lesion and 
positive serology support the diagnosis, and treatment gen-
erally entails albendazole in conjunction with cautious sur-
gery or percutaneous aspiration. One approach entails 
treatment with albendazole followed by aspiration to con-
firm the diagnosis and, if it is confirmed, to remove most of 
the infecting worms.
This page intentionally left blank 
949
 Cancer Chemotherapy 
 Edward Chu, MD, & 
 Alan C. Sartorelli, PhD 
 
he receive adjuvant chemotherapy? The patient receives a 
combination of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), leucovorin, and oxali-
platin as adjuvant therapy. One week after receiving the first 
cycle of therapy, he experiences significant toxicity in the 
form of myelosuppression, diarrhea, and altered mental sta-
tus. What is the most likely explanation for this increased 
toxicity? Is there any role for genetic testing to determine the 
etiology of this level of toxicity?
C A S E  S T U D Y
A 55-year-old man presents with increasing fatigue, 15-pound 
weight loss, and a microcytic anemia. Colonoscopy identifies 
a mass in the ascending colon, and biopsy specimens reveal 
well-differentiated colorectal cancer (CRC). He undergoes 
surgical resection and is found to have high-risk stage III 
CRC with five positive lymph nodes. After surgery, he feels 
entirely well with no symptoms. Of note, he has no other 
comorbid illnesses. What is this patient’s prognosis? Should 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Cancer continues to be the second leading cause of mortality from 
disease in the USA, accounting for nearly 500,000 deaths in 2008. 
Cancer is a disease characterized by a loss in the normal control 
mechanisms that govern cell survival, proliferation, and differen-
tiation. Cells that have undergone neoplastic transformation usu-
ally express cell surface antigens that may be of normal fetal type, 
may display other signs of apparent immaturity, and may exhibit 
qualitative or quantitative chromosomal abnormalities, including 
various translocations and the appearance of amplified gene 
sequences. It is now well established that a small subpopulation of 
cells, referred to as tumor stem cells, reside within a tumor mass. 
They retain the ability to undergo repeated cycles of proliferation 
as well as to migrate to distant sites in the body to colonize various 
organs in the process called metastasis. Such tumor stem cells thus 
can express clonogenic (colony-forming) capability, and they are 
characterized by chromosome abnormalities reflecting their genetic 
instability, which leads to progressive selection of subclones that 
can survive more readily in the multicellular environment of the 
host. This genetic instability also allows them to become resistant 
to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The invasive and metastatic 
processes as well as a series of metabolic abnormalities associated 
with the cancer result in tumor-related symptoms and eventual 
death of the patient unless the neoplasm can be eradicated with 
treatment. 
54
 CAUSES OF CANCER 
 The incidence, geographic distribution, and behavior of specific 
types of cancer are related to multiple factors, including sex, age, 
race, genetic predisposition, and exposure to environmental car-
cinogens. Of these factors,  environmental exposure is probably 
most important. Exposure to ionizing radiation has been well 
documented as a significant risk factor for a number of cancers, 
including acute leukemias, thyroid cancer, breast cancer, lung 
cancer, soft tissue sarcoma, and basal cell and squamous cell skin 
cancers. Chemical carcinogens (particularly those in tobacco 
smoke) as well as azo dyes, aflatoxins, asbestos, benzene, and 
radon have all been well documented as leading to a wide range of 
human cancers. 
 Several  viruses have been implicated in the etiology of various 
human cancers. For example, hepatitis B and hepatitis C are asso-
ciated with the development of hepatocellular cancer; HIV is 
associated with Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas; human 
papillomavirus is associated with cervical cancer and head and 
neck cancer; and Ebstein-Barr virus is associated with nasopharyn-
geal cancer. Expression of virus-induced neoplasia may also 
depend on additional host and environmental factors that modu-
late the transformation process. Cellular genes are known that are 
homologous to the transforming genes of the retroviruses, a family 
950    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
of RNA viruses, and induce oncogenic transformation. These 
mammalian cellular genes, known as  oncogenes, have been shown 
to code for specific growth factors and their corresponding recep-
tors. These genes may be amplified (increased number of gene 
copies) or mutated, both of which can lead to constitutive overex-
pression in malignant cells. The  bcl -2 family of genes represents a 
series of pro-survival genes that promotes survival by directly 
inhibiting apoptosis, a key pathway of programmed cell death. 
 Another class of genes, known as  tumor suppressor genes, may 
be deleted or mutated, which gives rise to the neoplastic phenotype. 
The  p53 gene is the best-established tumor suppressor gene identi-
fied to date, and the normal wild-type gene appears to play an 
important role in suppressing neoplastic transformation. Of note, 
 p53 is mutated in up to 50% of all human solid tumors, including 
liver, breast, colon, lung, cervix, bladder, prostate, and skin. 
 CANCER TREATMENT MODALITIES 
 With present methods of treatment, about one third of patients 
are cured with local treatment strategies, such as surgery or radio-
therapy, when the tumor remains localized at the time of diagno-
sis. Earlier diagnosis might lead to increased cure rates with such 
local treatment. In the remaining cases, however, early microme-
tastasis is a characteristic feature, indicating that a systemic 
approach with chemotherapy is required for effective cancer man-
agement. In patients with locally advanced disease, chemotherapy 
is often combined with radiotherapy to allow for surgical resection 
to take place, and such a combined modality approach has led to 
improved clinical outcomes. At present, about 50% of patients 
who are initially diagnosed with cancer can be cured. In contrast, 
chemotherapy alone is able to cure less than 10% of all cancer 
patients when the tumor is diagnosed at an advanced stage. 
 Chemotherapy is presently used in three main clinical settings: 
(1) primary induction treatment for advanced disease or for can-
cers for which there are no other effective treatment approaches, 
(2) neoadjuvant treatment for patients who present with localized 
disease, for whom local forms of therapy such as surgery or radia-
tion, or both, are inadequate by themselves, (3) adjuvant treat-
ment to local methods of treatment, including surgery, radiation 
therapy, or both. 
 Primary induction chemotherapy refers to chemotherapy 
administered as the primary treatment in patients who present 
with advanced cancer for which no alternative treatment exists. 
This has been the main approach in treating patients with 
advanced metastatic disease, and in most cases, the goals of ther-
apy are to relieve tumor-related symptoms, improve overall quality 
of life, and prolong time to tumor progression. Studies in a wide 
range of solid tumors have shown that chemotherapy in patients 
with advanced disease confers survival benefit when compared 
with supportive care, providing sound rationale for the early ini-
tiation of drug treatment. However, cancer chemotherapy can be 
curative in only a small subset of patients who present with 
advanced disease. In adults, these curable cancers include Hodgkin’s 
and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, acute myelogenous leukemia, 
germ cell cancer, and choriocarcinoma, while the curable child-
hood cancers include acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Burkitt’s 
lymphoma, Wilms’ tumor, and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma. 
 Neoadjuvant chemotherapy refers to the use of chemotherapy 
in patients who present with localized cancer for which alternative 
local therapies, such as surgery, exist but which are less than com-
pletely effective. At present, neoadjuvant therapy is most often 
administered in the treatment of anal cancer, bladder cancer, 
breast cancer, esophageal cancer, laryngeal cancer, locally advanced 
non-small cell lung cancer, and osteogenic sarcoma. For some of 
these diseases, such as anal cancer, gastroesophageal cancer, laryn-
geal cancer, and non-small cell lung cancer, optimal clinical ben-
efit is derived when chemotherapy is administered with radiation 
therapy either concurrently or sequentially. 
 One of the most important roles for cancer chemotherapy is as 
an adjuvant to local treatment modalities such as surgery or radia-
tion therapy, and this has been termed  adjuvant chemotherapy. 
The goal of chemotherapy in this setting is to reduce the incidence 
of both local and systemic recurrence and to improve the overall 
survival of patients. In general, chemotherapy regimens with 
clinical activity against advanced disease may have curative poten-
tial following surgical resection of the primary tumor, provided 
the appropriate dose and schedule are administered. Adjuvant 
chemotherapy is effective in prolonging both disease-free survival 
(DFS) and overall survival (OS) in patients with breast cancer, 
colon cancer, gastric cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, Wilms’ 
tumor, anaplastic astrocytoma, and osteogenic sarcoma. Patients 
with primary malignant melanoma at high risk of local recurrence 
ACRONYMS
ABVD
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin, hydroxydaunorubicin), bleo-
mycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine
CHOP
Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (hydroxydaunorubi-
cin, Adriamycin), vincristine (Oncovin), prednisone
CMF
Cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, fl uorouracil
COP
Cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin), prednisone
FAC
5-Fluorouracil, doxorubicin (Adriamycin, hydroxydauno-
rubicin), cyclophosphamide
FEC
5-Fluorouracil, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide
5-FU
5-Fluorouracil
FOLFIRI
5-Fluorouracil, leucovorin, irinotecan
FOLFOX 5-Fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin
MP
Melphalan, prednisone
6-MP
6-Mercaptopurine
MOPP
Mechlorethamine, vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine, 
prednisone
MTX
Methotrexate
PCV
Procarbazine, lomustine, vincristine
PEB
Cisplatin (platinum), etoposide, bleomycin
6-TG
6-Thioguanine
VAD
Vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), dexamethasone
XELOX
Capecitabine, oxaliplatin
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    951
or systemic metastases derive clinical benefit from adjuvant treat-
ment with the biologic agent α-interferon, although this treat-
ment must be given for 1 year’s duration for maximal clinical 
efficacy. Finally, the antihormonal agents tamoxifen, anastrozole, 
and letrozole are effective in the adjuvant therapy of postmeno-
pausal women with early-stage breast cancer whose breast tumors 
express the estrogen receptor (see  Chapter 40 for additional 
detail). However, because these agents are cytostatic rather than 
cytocidal, they must be administered on a long-term basis, with 
the standard recommendation being 5 years’ duration. 
 ROLE OF CELL CYCLE KINETICS & 
ANTICANCER EFFECT 
 The key principles of cell cycle kinetics were initially developed 
using the murine L1210 leukemia as the experimental model 
 system ( Figure 54–1 ). However, drug treatment of human cancers 
requires a clear understanding of the differences between the char-
acteristics of this rodent leukemia and of human cancers, as well as 
an understanding of the differences in growth rates of normal 
 target tissues between mice and humans. For example, L1210 is a 
rapidly growing leukemia with a high percentage of cells synthesiz-
ing DNA, as measured by the uptake of tritiated thymidine (the 
labeling index). Because L1210 leukemia has a growth fraction of 
100% (ie, all its cells are actively progressing through the cell cycle), 
its life cycle is consistent and predictable. Based on the murine 
L1210 model, the cytotoxic effects of anticancer drugs follow log 
cell-kill kinetics. As such, a given agent would be predicted to kill 
a constant fraction of cells as opposed to a constant number. 
 Thus, if a particular dose of an individual drug leads to a 3 log 
kill of cancer cells and reduces the tumor burden from 10 10 to 10 7 
cells, the same dose used at a tumor burden of 10 5 cells reduces 
the tumor mass to 10 2 cells. Cell kill is, therefore, proportional, 
regardless of tumor burden. The cardinal rule of chemotherapy—
the invariable inverse relation between cell number and 
 curability—was established with this model, and this relationship 
is applicable to other hematologic malignancies. 
 Although growth of murine leukemias simulates exponential 
cell kinetics, mathematical modeling data suggest that most 
human  solid tumors do not grow in such an exponential manner. 
Taken together, the experimental data in human solid cancers 
support a Gompertzian model of tumor growth and regression. 
The critical distinction between Gompertzian and exponential 
growth is that the growth fraction of the tumor is not constant 
with Gompertzian kinetics but instead decreases exponentially 
with time (exponential growth is matched by exponential retarda-
tion of growth, due to blood supply limitations and other fac-
tors). The growth fraction peaks when the tumor is approximately 
one third its maximum size. Under the Gompertzian model, when 
a patient with advanced cancer is treated, the tumor mass is larger, 
its growth fraction is low, and the fraction of cells killed is, there-
fore, small. An important feature of Gompertzian growth is 
that response to chemotherapy in drug-sensitive tumors depends, 
in large measure, on where the tumor is in its particular growth 
curve. 
 Information on cell and population kinetics of cancer cells 
explains, in part, the limited effectiveness of most available anti-
cancer drugs. A schematic summary of cell cycle kinetics is pre-
sented in  Figure 54–2 . This information is relevant to the mode of 
action, indications, and scheduling of cell cycle-specific (CCS) 
and cell cycle-nonspecific (CCNS) drugs. Agents falling into these 
two major classes are summarized in  Table 54–1 . 
 The Role of Drug Combinations 
 With rare exceptions (eg, choriocarcinoma and Burkitt’s lym-
phoma), single drugs at clinically tolerable doses have been unable 
to cure cancer. In the 1960s and early 1970s, drug combination 
regimens were developed based on the known biochemical actions 
1012
1010
108
 106
104
102
100
Number of cancer cells (log scale)
Time
Symptoms
Death
Diagnosis
Subclinical
Surgery
FIGURE 54–1 The log-kill hypothesis. Relationship of tumor cell 
number to time of diagnosis, symptoms, treatment, and survival. 
Three alternative approaches to drug treatment are shown for 
 comparison with the course of tumor growth when no treatment is 
given (dashed line). In the protocol diagrammed at top, treatment 
(indicated by the arrows) is given infrequently, and the result is 
 manifested as prolongation of survival but with recurrence of 
 symptoms between courses of treatment and eventual death of the 
patient. The combination chemotherapy treatment diagrammed in 
the middle section is begun earlier and is more intensive. Tumor cell 
kill exceeds regrowth, drug resistance does not develop, and “cure” 
results. In this example, treatment has been continued long after all 
clinical evidence of cancer has disappeared (1–3 years). This 
approach has been established as effective in the treatment of 
 childhood acute leukemia, testicular cancers, and Hodgkin’s 
 lymphoma. In the treatment diagrammed near the bottom of the 
graph, early surgery has been employed to remove the primary 
tumor and intensive adjuvant chemotherapy has been administered 
long enough (up to 1 year) to eradicate the remaining tumor cells 
that comprise the occult  micrometastases.
952    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
of available anticancer drugs rather than on their clinical efficacy. 
Such regimens were, however, largely ineffective. The era of effec-
tive combination chemotherapy began when a number of active 
drugs from different classes became available for use in combina-
tion in the treatment of the acute leukemias and lymphomas. 
Following this initial success with hematologic malignancies, com-
bination chemotherapy was extended to the treatment of solid 
tumors. 
 The use of combination chemotherapy is important for several 
reasons. First, it provides maximal cell kill within the range of 
toxicity tolerated by the host for each drug as long as dosing is not 
compromised. Second, it provides a broader range of interaction 
between drugs and tumor cells with different genetic abnormali-
ties in a heterogeneous tumor population. Finally, it may prevent 
or slow the subsequent development of cellular drug resistance. 
The same principles apply to the therapy of chronic infections, 
such as HIV and tuberculosis. 
 Certain principles have guided the selection of drugs in the 
most effective drug combinations, and they provide a paradigm 
for the development of new drug therapeutic programs. 
 1. Efficacy: Only drugs known to be somewhat effective when 
used alone against a given tumor should be selected for use in 
combination. If available, drugs that produce complete remis-
sion in some fraction of patients are preferred to those that 
produce only partial responses. 
 2. Toxicity: When several drugs of a given class are available and 
are equally effective, a drug should be selected on the basis of 
toxicity that does not overlap with the toxicity of other drugs 
in the combination. Although such selection leads to a wider 
range of adverse effects, it minimizes the risk of a lethal effect 
caused by multiple insults to the same organ system by differ-
ent drugs and allows dose intensity to be maximized. 
 3. Optimum scheduling: Drugs should be used in their optimal 
dose and schedule, and drug combinations should be given at 
consistent intervals. Because long intervals between cycles 
negatively affect dose intensity, the treatment-free interval 
between cycles should be the shortest time necessary for recov-
ery of the most sensitive normal target tissue, which is usually 
the bone marrow. 
 4. Mechanism of interaction: There should be a clear under-
standing of the biochemical, molecular, and pharmacokinetic 
mechanisms of interaction between the individual drugs in a 
given combination, to allow for maximal effect. Omission of a 
drug from a combination may allow overgrowth by a tumor 
clone sensitive to that drug alone and resistant to other drugs 
in the combination. 
D
N
A
 
s
y
n
t
h
e
s
i
s
Synthesis
of cellular
components
for mitosis
Synthesis
of cellular
components
needed for
DNA synthesis
Replication
of DNA genome 
Differentiation
G0
2%
Mitosis
40%
39%
19%
G2
S
G1
M
The cell
cycle
 FIGURE 54–2  The cell cycle and cancer. A conceptual depiction 
of the cell cycle phases that all cells—normal and neoplastic—must 
traverse before and during cell division. The percentages given 
 represent the approximate percentage of time spent in each phase 
by a typical malignant cell; the duration of G 1 , however, can vary 
markedly. Many of the effective anticancer drugs exert their action 
on cells traversing the cell cycle and are called cell cycle-specific 
(CCS) drugs (see  Table 54–1 ). A second group of agents called cell 
cycle-nonspecific (CCNS) drugs can sterilize tumor cells whether they 
are cycling or resting in the G 0 compartment. CCNS drugs can kill 
both G 0 and cycling cells (although cycling cells are more sensitive). 
TABLE 54–1  Cell cycle effects of major classes of 
anticancer drugs.
Cell Cycle-Specific 
(CCS) Agents
Cell Cycle-Nonspecific 
(CCNS) Agents
Antimetabolites (S phase)
Alkylating agents
 Capecitabine
 Altretamine
 Cladribine
 Bendamustine
 Clofarabine
 Busulfan
 Cytarabine (ara-C)
 Carmustine
 Fludarabine
 Chlorambucil
 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU)
 Cyclophosphamide
 Gemcitabine
 Dacarbazine
 6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP)
 Lomustine
 Methotrexate (MTX)
 Mechlorethamine
 Nelarabine
 Melphalan
 Pralatrexate
 Temozolomide
 6-Thioguanine (6-TG)
 Thiotepa
Epipodophyllotoxin (topoisomerase II 
inhibitor) (G1–S phase)
 Etoposide
Taxanes (M phase)
 Albumin-bound paclitaxel
 Cabazitaxel
 Paclitaxel
Vinca alkaloids (M phase)
 Vinblastine
 Vincristine
 Vinorelbine
Antimicrotubule inhibitor (M phase)
 Ixabepilone
Antitumor antibiotics (G2–M phase)
 Bleomycin
Antitumor antibiotics
 Dactinomycin
 Mitomycin
Camptothecins (topoi-
somerase I inhibitors)
 Irinotecan
 Topotecan
Platinum analogs
 Carboplatin
 Cisplatin
 Oxaliplatin
Anthracyclines
 Daunorubicin
 Doxorubicin
 Epirubicin
 Idarubicin
 Mitoxantrone
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    953
 5. Avoidance of arbitrary dose changes: An arbitrary reduction 
in the dose of an effective drug in order to add other less effec-
tive drugs may reduce the dose of the most effective agent 
below the threshold of effectiveness and destroy the ability of 
the combination to cure disease in a given patient. 
 Dosage Factors 
 Dose intensity is one of the main factors limiting the ability of 
chemotherapy or radiation therapy to achieve cure. The dose- 
response curve in biologic systems is usually sigmoidal in shape, 
with a threshold, a linear phase, and a plateau phase. For chemo-
therapy, therapeutic selectivity is dependent on the difference 
between the dose-response curves of normal and tumor tissues. In 
experimental animal models, the dose-response curve is usually 
steep in the linear phase, and a reduction in dose when the tumor 
is in the linear phase of the dose-response curve almost always 
results in a loss in the capacity to cure the tumor effectively before 
a reduction in the antitumor activity is observed. Although com-
plete remissions continue to be observed with dose reduction as 
low as 20%, residual tumor cells may not be entirely eliminated, 
thereby allowing for eventual relapse. Because anticancer drugs are 
associated with toxicity, it is often appealing for clinicians to avoid 
acute toxicity by simply reducing the dose or by increasing the 
time interval between each cycle of treatment. However, such 
empiric modifications in dose represent a major cause of treatment 
failure in patients with drug-sensitive tumors. 
 A positive relationship between dose intensity and clinical effi-
cacy has been documented in several solid tumors, including 
advanced ovarian, breast, lung, and colon cancers, as well as in 
hematologic malignancies, such as the lymphomas. At present, there 
are three main approaches to dose-intense delivery of chemotherapy. 
The first approach,  dose escalation, involves increasing the doses of 
the respective anticancer agents. The second strategy is administra-
tion of anticancer agents in a dose-intense manner by  reducing the 
interval between treatment cycles, while the third approach involves 
 sequential scheduling of either single agents or of combination 
regimens. Each of these strategies is presently being applied to a 
wide range of solid cancers, including breast, colorectal, and non-
small cell lung, and in general, such dose-intense regimens have 
significantly improved clinical outcomes. 
 DRUG RESISTANCE 
 A fundamental issue in cancer chemotherapy is the development 
of cellular drug resistance. Some tumor types, eg, malignant mela-
noma, renal cell cancer, and brain cancer, exhibit  primary resis-
tance, ie, absence of response on the first exposure, to currently 
available agents. The presence of inherent drug resistance was first 
proposed by Goldie and Coleman in the early 1980s and was 
thought to result from the genomic instability associated with the 
development of most cancers. For example, mutations in the  p53 
tumor suppressor gene occur in up to 50% of all human tumors. 
Preclinical and clinical studies have shown that loss of  p53 func-
tion leads to resistance to radiation therapy as well as resistance to 
a wide range of anticancer agents. Defects in the mismatch repair 
enzyme family, which are tightly linked to the development of 
familial and sporadic colorectal cancer, lead to resistance to several 
unrelated anticancer agents, including the fluoropyrimidines, the 
thiopurines, and cisplatin/carboplatin. In contrast to  primary 
resistance,  acquired resistance develops in response to exposure to 
a given anticancer agent. Experimentally, drug resistance can be 
highly specific to a single drug and is usually based on a specific 
change in the genetic machinery of a given tumor cell with ampli-
fication or increased expression of one or more genes. In other 
instances, a multidrug-resistant phenotype occurs, associated with 
increased expression of the  MDR1 gene, which encodes a cell 
surface transporter glycoprotein (P-glycoprotein, see  Chapter 1 ). 
This form of drug resistance leads to enhanced drug efflux and 
reduced intracellular accumulation of a broad range of structurally 
unrelated anticancer agents, including the anthracyclines, vinca 
alkaloids, taxanes, camptothecins, epipodophyllotoxins, and even 
small molecule inhibitors, such as imatinib. 
 ■ BASIC PHARMACOLOGY OF 
CANCER CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC 
DRUGS 
 ALKYLATING AGENTS 
 The major clinically useful alkylating agents ( Figure 54–3 ) have a 
structure containing a bis(chloroethyl)amine, ethyleneimine, or 
nitrosourea moiety, and they are classified in several different 
groups. Among the bis(chloroethyl)amines, cyclophosphamide, 
mechlorethamine, melphalan, and chlorambucil are the most use-
ful. Ifosfamide is closely related to cyclophosphamide but has a 
somewhat different spectrum of activity and toxicity. Thiotepa 
and busulfan are used to treat breast and ovarian cancer, and 
chronic myeloid leukemia, respectively. The major nitrosoureas 
are carmustine (BCNU) and lomustine (CCNU). 
 Mechanism of Action 
 As a class, the alkylating agents exert their cytotoxic effects via 
transfer of their alkyl groups to various cellular constituents. 
Alkylations of DNA within the nucleus probably represent the 
major interactions that lead to cell death. However, these drugs 
react chemically with sulfhydryl, amino, hydroxyl, carboxyl, and 
phosphate groups of other cellular nucleophiles as well. The general 
mechanism of action of these drugs involves intramolecular cycliza-
tion to form an ethyleneimonium ion that may directly or through 
formation of a carbonium ion transfer an alkyl group to a cellular 
constituent ( Figure 54–4 ). In addition to alkylation, a secondary 
mechanism that occurs with nitrosoureas involves carbamoylation 
of lysine residues of proteins through formation of isocyanates. 
 The major site of alkylation within DNA is the N7 position of 
guanine; however, other bases are also alkylated albeit to lesser 
degrees, including N1 and N3 of adenine, N3 of cytosine, and O6 
of guanine, as well as phosphate atoms and proteins associated 
with DNA. These interactions can occur on a single strand or on 
954    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
R
N
CH2CH2CI
CH2CH2CI
P
O
O
H
N
CH3
Cyclophosphamide
Mechlorethamine
(CH2)3
HOC
O
Chlorambucil
CH2
HOC
O
Melphalan
NH2
C
H
Where R is:
Bis(chloroethyl)amines
CH2CH2CI
BCNU
(carmustine)
CCNU
(lomustine)
CH3
Methyl-CCNU
(semustine)
Where R is:
Nitrosoureas
O
C
NH
N
O
N
CH2
CH2CI
R
Thiotepa
Aziridines
Alkylsulfonate
Busulfan
S
O
O
O
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
S
O
O
O
CH3
CH2
N
P
S
N
N
Triethylenemelamine
N
N
N
N
N
N
 FIGURE 54–3  Structures of major classes of alkylating agents. 
OH
N
R
HO
N
N
H2N
N
N
N
N
DNA
(Cross-linked guanine residues)
DNA
OH
N
N
N
DNA
+
(Alkylated guanine)
N
R
CH2
N
R
N
R
N
R
N
N
NH
DNA
O
3
1
7
9
CH2CH2Cl
CH2CH2Cl
CH2CH2Cl
CH2CH2Cl
CH2CH2Cl
CH2
CH2
CH2
N
CH2
CH2
N
CH2
CH2
N
N+
CH2
CH2
+
+
+
Cl–
NH2
NH2
NH2
 FIGURE 54–4  Mechanism of alkylation of DNA guanine. A bis(chloroethyl)amine forms an ethyleneimonium ion that reacts with a base 
such as N7 of guanine in DNA, producing an alkylated purine. Alkylation of a second guanine residue, through the illustrated mechanism, 
results in cross-linking of DNA strands. 
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    955
both strands of DNA through cross-linking, as most major alky-
lating agents are bifunctional, with two reactive groups. Alkylation 
of guanine can result in miscoding through abnormal base pairing 
with thymine or in depurination by excision of guanine residues. 
The latter effect leads to DNA strand breakage through scission of 
the sugar-phosphate backbone of DNA. Cross-linking of DNA 
appears to be of major importance to the cytotoxic action of alky-
lating agents, and replicating cells are most susceptible to these 
drugs. Thus, although alkylating agents are not cell cycle specific, 
cells are most susceptible to alkylation in late G 1 and S phases of 
the cell cycle. 
 Resistance 
 The mechanism of acquired resistance to alkylating agents may 
involve increased capability to repair DNA lesions, decreased trans-
port of the alkylating drug into the cell, and increased expression 
or activity of glutathione and glutathione-associated proteins, 
which are needed to conjugate the alkylating agent, or increased 
glutathione  S -transferase activity, which catalyzes the conjugation. 
 Adverse Effects 
 The adverse effects usually associated with alkylating agents are 
generally dose-related and occur primarily in rapidly growing tis-
sues such as bone marrow, gastrointestinal tract, and reproductive 
system. Nausea and vomiting can be a serious issue with a number 
of these agents. In addition, they are potent vesicants and can 
damage tissues at the site of administration as well as produce 
systemic toxicity. As a class, alkylating agents are carcinogenic in 
nature, and there is an increased risk of secondary malignancies, 
especially acute myelogenous leukemia. 
 Cyclophosphamide is one of the most widely used alkylating 
agents. One of the potential advantages of this compound relates 
to its high oral bioavailability. As a result, it can be administered 
via the oral and intravenous routes with equal clinical efficacy. It 
is inactive in its parent form, and must be activated to cytotoxic 
forms by liver microsomal enzymes ( Figure 54–5 ). The cyto-
chrome P450 mixed-function oxidase system converts cyclophos-
phamide to 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide, which is in equilibrium 
with aldophosphamide. These active metabolites are delivered to 
both tumor and normal tissue, where nonenzymatic cleavage of 
aldophosphamide to the cytotoxic forms—phosphoramide mus-
tard and acrolein—occurs. The liver appears to be protected 
through the enzymatic formation of the inactive metabolites 
4-ketocyclophosphamide and carboxyphosphamide. 
 The major toxicities of the individual alkylating agents are 
outlined in  Table 54–2 and discussed below. 
 NITROSOUREAS 
 These drugs appear to be non-cross-resistant with other alkylating 
agents; all require biotransformation, which occurs by nonenzy-
matic decomposition, to metabolites with both alkylating and 
carbamoylating activities. The nitrosoureas are highly lipid-soluble 
and are able to cross the blood-brain barrier, making them effective 
NH
P
O
O
N(CH2CH2Cl)2
N(CH2CH2Cl)2
N(CH2CH2Cl)2
Cyclophosphamide
NH
P
O
O
OH
4-Hydroxycyclophosphamide
(active)
NH
P
O
O
O
4-Ketocyclophosphamide
(inactive)
CH
O
CH2
CH2
O
P
H2N
O
Aldophosphamide
(active)
Aldehyde oxidase
O
P
H2N
O
Carboxyphosphamide
(inactive)
2
CH2
CH
HOC
O
CH
CHO
CH2
Acrolein
(cytotoxic)
+
HO
P
H2N
O
Phosphoramide mustard
(cytotoxic)
Nonenzymatic
Liver cytochrome
P450 oxidase
N(CH2CH2Cl)2
N(CH2CH2Cl)2
N(CH2CH2Cl)2
 FIGURE 54–5 Cyclophosphamide metabolism. 
956    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
TABLE 54–2 Alkylating agents and platinum analogs: Clinical activity and toxicities.
Alkylating Agent
Mechanism of Action
Clinical Applications
Acute Toxicity
Delayed Toxicity
Mechlorethamine
Forms DNA cross-links, 
resulting in inhibition of DNA 
synthesis and function
Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma
Nausea and vomiting
Moderate depression of 
peripheral blood count; 
excessive doses produce 
severe bone marrow 
depression with leuko-
penia, thrombocytope-
nia, and bleeding; 
alopecia and hemor-
rhagic cystitis occasion-
ally occur with 
cyclophosphamide; cys-
titis can be prevented 
with adequate hydra-
tion;  busulfan is 
associated with skin 
pigmentation, pulmo-
nary fibrosis, and 
adrenal insufficiency
Chlorambucil
Same as above
CLL and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Nausea and vomiting
Cyclophosphamide
Same as above
Breast cancer, ovarian cancer, 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, CLL, 
soft tissue sarcoma, neuroblas-
toma, Wilms’ tumor, rhabdomyo-
sarcoma
Nausea and vomiting
Bendamustine
Same as above
CLL, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Nausea and vomiting
Melphalan
Same as above
Multiple myeloma, breast 
cancer, ovarian cancer
Nausea and vomiting
Thiotepa
Same as above
Breast cancer, ovarian cancer, 
superficial bladder cancer
Nausea and vomiting
Busulfan
Same as above
CML
Nausea and vomiting
Carmustine
Same as above
Brain cancer, Hodgkin’s and 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Nausea and vomiting
Myelosuppression; rarely 
interstitial lung disease 
and interstitial nephritis
Lomustine
Same as above
Brain cancer
Nausea and vomiting
Altretamine
Same as above
Ovarian cancer
Nausea and vomiting
Myelosuppression, periph-
eral neuropathy, flu-like 
syndrome
Temozolomide
Methylates DNA and inhibits 
DNA synthesis and function
Brain cancer, melanoma
Nausea and vomiting, 
headache and fatigue
Myelosuppression, mild 
elevation in liver function 
tests, photosensitivity
Procarbazine
Methylates DNA and inhibits 
DNA synthesis and function
Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, brain tumors
Central nervous 
system depression
Myelosuppression, 
hypersensitivity reactions
Dacarbazine
Methylates DNA and inhibits 
DNA synthesis and function
Hodgkin’s lymphoma, melanoma, 
soft tissue sarcoma
Nausea and vomiting
Myelosuppression, 
central nervous system 
toxicity with neuropathy, 
ataxia, lethargy, and
confusion
Cisplatin
Forms intrastrand and inter-
strand DNA  cross-links; binding 
to nuclear and cytoplasmic 
proteins
Non-small cell and small cell lung 
cancer, breast cancer, bladder can-
cer, cholangiocarcinoma, gastroe-
sophageal cancer, head and neck 
cancer, ovarian cancer, germ cell 
cancer
Nausea and vomiting
Nephrotoxicity, peripheral 
sensory neuropathy, 
ototoxicity, nerve
dysfunction
Carboplatin
Same as cisplatin
Non-small cell and small cell lung 
cancer, breast cancer, bladder 
cancer, head and neck 
cancer, ovarian cancer
Nausea and vomiting
Myelosuppression; rarely 
peripheral neuropathy, 
renal toxicity, hepatic 
dysfunction
Oxaliplatin
Same as cisplatin
Colorectal cancer, gastroeso-
phageal cancer, pancreatic cancer
Nausea and vomiting, 
laryngopharyngeal 
dysesthesias
Myelosuppression, periph-
eral sensory neuropathy, 
diarrhea
CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia.
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    957
in the treatment of brain tumors. Although the majority of alkyla-
tions by the nitrosoureas are on the N7 position of guanine in 
DNA, the critical alkylation responsible for cytotoxicity appears to 
be on the O6 position of guanine, which leads to G-C crosslinks 
in DNA. After oral administration of lomustine, peak plasma levels 
of metabolites appear within 1–4 hours; central nervous system 
concentrations reach 30–40% of the activity present in the plasma. 
Urinary excretion appears to be the major route of elimination 
from the body. One naturally occurring sugar-containing nitrosou-
rea, streptozocin, is interesting because it has minimal bone mar-
row toxicity. This agent has activity in the treatment of 
insulin-secreting islet cell carcinoma of the pancreas. 
 NONCLASSIC ALKYLATING AGENTS 
 Several other compounds have mechanisms of action that 
involve DNA alkylation as their cytotoxic mechanism of action. 
These agents include procarbazine, dacarbazine, and bendamus-
tine. Their respective clinical activities and associated toxicities are 
listed in  Table 54–2 . 
 Procarbazine 
 Procarbazine is an orally active methylhydrazine derivative, and in 
the clinical setting, it is used in combination regimens for 
Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma as well as brain tumors. 
 The precise mechanism of action of procarbazine is uncertain; 
however, it inhibits DNA, RNA, and protein biosynthesis; pro-
longs interphase; and produces chromosome breaks. Oxidative 
metabolism of this drug by microsomal enzymes generates azopro-
carbazine and H 2 O 2 , which may be responsible for DNA strand 
scission. A variety of other drug metabolites are formed that may 
be cytotoxic. One metabolite is a weak monoamine oxidase (MAO) 
inhibitor, and adverse events can occur when procarbazine is given 
with other MAO inhibitors as well as with sympathomimetic 
agents, tricyclic antidepressants, antihistamines, central nervous 
system depressants, antidiabetic agents, alcohol, and tyramine-
containing foods. 
 There is an increased risk of secondary cancers in the form of 
acute leukemia, and its carcinogenic potential is thought to be 
higher than that of most other alkylating agents. 
 Dacarbazine 
 Dacarbazine is a synthetic compound that functions as an alkylat-
ing agent following metabolic activation in the liver by oxidative 
 N -demethylation to the monomethyl derivative. This metabolite 
spontaneously decomposes to diazomethane, which generates a 
methyl carbonium ion that is believed to be the key cytotoxic spe-
cies. Dacarbazine is administered parenterally and is used in the 
treatment of malignant melanoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, soft tis-
sue sarcomas, and neuroblastoma. In terms of safety profile, the 
main dose-limiting toxicity is myelosuppression, but nausea and 
vomiting can be severe in some cases. This agent is a potent vesi-
cant, and care must be taken to avoid extravasation during drug 
administration. 
 Bendamustine 
 Bendamustine is a bifunctional alkylating agent consisting of a 
purine benzimidazole ring and a nitrogen mustard moiety. As with 
other alkylating agents, it forms cross-links with DNA resulting in 
single- and double-stranded breaks, leading to inhibition of DNA 
synthesis and function. This molecule also inhibits mitotic check-
points and induces mitotic catastrophe, which leads to cell death. 
Of note, the cross-resistance between bendamustine and other 
alkylating agents is only partial, thereby providing a rationale for 
its clinical activity despite the development of resistance to other 
alkylating agents. This agent is approved for use in chronic lym-
phocytic leukemia, with activity also observed in Hodgkin’s and 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and breast cancer. 
The main dose-limiting toxicities include myelosuppression and 
mild nausea and vomiting. Hypersensitivity infusion reactions, 
skin rash, and other skin reactions occur rarely. 
 PLATINUM ANALOGS 
 Three platinum analogs are currently used in clinical practice: cis-
platin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin. Cisplatin (cis-diamminedichlo-
roplatinum [II]) is an inorganic metal complex that was initially 
discovered through a serendipitous observation that neutral plati-
num complexes inhibited division and filamentous growth of 
 Escherichia coli. Several platinum analogs were subsequently synthe-
sized. Although the precise mechanism of action of the platinum 
analogs is unclear, they are thought to exert their cytotoxic effects in 
the same manner as alkylating agents. As such, they kill tumor cells 
in all stages of the cell cycle and bind DNA through the formation 
of intrastrand and interstrand cross-links, thereby leading to inhibi-
tion of DNA synthesis and function. The primary binding site is the 
N7 position of guanine, but covalent interaction with the N3 posi-
tion of adenine and O6 position of cytosine can also occur. In addi-
tion to targeting DNA, the platinum analogs have been shown to 
bind to both cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, which may also 
contribute to their cytotoxic and antitumor effects. The platinum 
complexes appear to synergize with certain other anticancer drugs, 
including alkylating agents, fluoropyrimidines, and taxanes. 
Cl
Pt
Cl
H3N
H3N
Cisplatin
 Cisplatin has major antitumor activity in a broad range of solid 
tumors, including non-small cell and small cell lung cancer, 
esophageal and gastric cancer, cholangiocarcinoma, head and neck 
cancer, and genitourinary cancers, particularly testicular, ovarian, 
and bladder cancer. When used in combination regimens, cispla-
tin-based therapy has led to the cure of nonseminomatous testicu-
lar cancer. Cisplatin and the other platinum analogs are extensively 
cleared by the kidneys and excreted in the urine. As a result, dose 
modification is required in patients with renal dysfunction. 
 Carboplatin is a second-generation platinum analog whose 
mechanisms of cytotoxic action, mechanisms of resistance, and 
clinical pharmacology are identical to those described for cisplatin. 
958    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
As with cisplatin, carboplatin has broad-spectrum activity against a 
wide range of solid tumors. However, in contrast to cisplatin, it 
exhibits significantly less renal toxicity and gastrointestinal toxicity. 
Its main dose-limiting toxicity is myelosuppression. It has therefore 
been widely used in transplant regimens to treat refractory hema-
tologic malignancies. Moreover, since vigorous intravenous hydra-
tion is not required for carboplatin therapy, carboplatin is viewed 
as an easier agent to administer to patients, and as such, it has 
replaced cisplatin in various combination chemotherapy regimens. 
 Oxaliplatin is a third-generation diaminocyclohexane plati-
num analog. Its mechanism of action and clinical pharmacology 
are identical to those of cisplatin and carboplatin. However, 
tumors that are resistant to cisplatin or carboplatin on the basis of 
mismatch repair defects are not cross-resistant to oxaliplatin, and 
this finding may explain the activity of this platinum compound 
in colorectal cancer. Oxaliplatin was initially approved for use as 
second-line therapy in combination with the fluoropyrimidine 
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and leucovorin, termed the FOLFOX regi-
men, for metastatic colorectal cancer. The FOLFOX regimen was 
subsequently (2005) approved for the first-line treatment of meta-
static colorectal cancer. At this time, oxaliplatin-based chemo-
therapy has also been approved in the adjuvant therapy of 
high-risk stage II and stage III colon cancer. Clinical activity has 
been observed in other gastrointestinal cancers, such as pancreatic, 
gastroesophageal, and hepatocellular cancer. In the side effect 
profile, neurotoxicity is the main dose-limiting toxicity, and is 
manifested by a peripheral sensory neuropathy. There are two 
forms of neurotoxicity, an acute form that is often triggered and 
worsened by exposure to cold, and a chronic form that is dose-
dependent. Although this chronic form is dependent on the 
cumulative dose of drug administered, it tends to be reversible, in 
contrast to cisplatin-induced neurotoxicity. 
 The major toxicities of the individual platinum analogs are 
outlined in  Table 54–2 . 
 ANTIMETABOLITES 
 The development of drugs with actions on intermediary metabolism 
of proliferating cells has been important both conceptually and clini-
cally. While biochemical properties unique to all cancer cells have yet 
to be discovered, there are a number of quantitative differences in 
metabolism between cancer cells and normal cells that render cancer 
cells more sensitive to the antimetabolites. Many of these agents have 
been rationally designed and synthesized based on knowledge of 
critical cellular processes involved in DNA biosynthesis. 
 The individual antimetabolites and their respective clinical 
spectrum and toxicities are presented in  Table 54–3 and are dis-
cussed below. 
 ANTIFOLATES 
 Methotrexate 
 Methotrexate (MTX) is a folic acid analog that binds with high affin-
ity to the active catalytic site of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). 
This results in inhibition of the synthesis of tetrahydrofolate (THF), 
the key one-carbon carrier for enzymatic processes involved in de 
novo synthesis of thymidylate, purine nucleotides, and the amino 
acids serine and methionine. Inhibition of these various metabolic 
processes thereby interferes with the formation of DNA, RNA, and 
key cellular proteins (see  Figure 33–3 ). Intracellular formation of 
polyglutamate metabolites, with the addition of up to 5–7 glutamate 
residues, is critically important for the therapeutic action of MTX, 
and this process is catalyzed by the enzyme folylpolyglutamate syn-
thase (FPGS). MTX polyglutamates are selectively retained within 
cancer cells, and they display increased inhibitory effects on enzymes 
involved in de novo purine nucleotide and thymidylate biosynthesis, 
making them important determinants of MTX’s cytotoxic action. 
N
H
C
NH2
N
N
N
N
C
O
N
H
CH
CH2
CH2
COOH
COOH
Folic acid
H2
OH
N
CH3
C
NH2
N
N
N
N
C
O
N
H
CH
CH2
CH2
COOH
COOH
Methotrexate
H2
NH2
 Resistance to MTX has been attributed to (1) decreased drug trans-
port via the reduced folate carrier or folate receptor protein, 
(2) decreased formation of cytotoxic MTX polyglutamates, (3) 
increased levels of the target enzyme DHFR through gene amplification 
and other genetic mechanisms, and (4) altered DHFR protein with 
reduced affinity for MTX. Recent studies have suggested that decreased 
accumulation of drug through activation of the multidrug resistance 
transporter P170 glycoprotein may also result in drug resistance. 
 MTX is administered by the intravenous, intrathecal, or oral 
route. However, oral bioavailability is saturable and erratic at doses 
greater than 25 mg/m 2 . Renal excretion is the main route of 
elimination and is mediated by glomerular filtration and tubular 
secretion. As a result, dose modification is required in the setting 
of renal dysfunction. Care must also be taken when MTX is used 
in the presence of drugs such as aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory agents, penicillin, and cephalosporins, as these agents 
inhibit the renal excretion of MTX. The biologic effects of MTX 
can be reversed by administration of the reduced folate leucovorin 
(5-formyltetrahydrofolate) or by  L -leucovorin, which is the active 
enantiomer. Leucovorin rescue is used in conjunction with high-
dose MTX therapy to rescue normal cells from undue toxicity, and 
it has also been used in cases of accidental drug overdose. The 
main adverse effects are listed in  Table 54–3 . 
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    959
 Pemetrexed 
 Pemetrexed is a pyrrolopyrimidine antifolate analog with activity in 
the S phase of the cell cycle. As in the case of MTX, it is trans-
ported into the cell via the reduced folate carrier and requires 
activation by FPGS to yield higher polyglutamate forms. While 
this agent targets DHFR and enzymes involved in de novo purine 
nucleotide biosynthesis, its main mechanism of action is inhibition 
of thymidylate synthase. At present, this antifolate is approved for 
use in combination with cisplatin in the treatment of mesothe-
lioma, as a single agent in the second-line therapy of non-small cell 
lung cancer, and in combination with cisplatin for the first-line 
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer. As with MTX, pemetrexed 
is mainly excreted in the urine, and dose modification is required 
in the setting of renal dysfunction. The main adverse effects 
include myelosuppression, skin rash, mucositis, diarrhea, fatigue, 
and hand-foot syndrome. Of note, vitamin supplementation with 
folic acid and vitamin B 12 appear to reduce the toxicities associated 
with pemetrexed, while not interfering with clinical efficacy. The 
hand-foot syndrome is manifested by painful erythema and swell-
ing of the hands and feet, and dexamethasone treatment has been 
shown to be effective in reducing the incidence and severity of this 
toxicity. 
 Pralatrexate 
 Pralatrexate is a 10-deaza-aminopterin antifolate analog, and as in 
the case of MTX, it is transported into the cell via the reduced 
folate carrier (RFC) and requires activation by FPGS to yield 
higher polyglutamate forms. However, this molecule was designed 
to be a more potent substrate for the RFC-1 carrier protein as well 
as an improved substrate for FPGS. It inhibits DHFR, inhibits 
enzymes involved in de novo purine nucleotide biosynthesis, and 
also inhibits thymidylate synthase. Although pralatrexate was 
TABLE 54–3 Antimetabolites: Clinical activity and toxicities.
Drug
Mechanism of Action
Clinical Applications
Toxicity
Capecitabine
Inhibits TS; incorporation of FUTP into RNA 
resulting in alteration in RNA processing; 
incorporation of FdUTP into DNA resulting in 
inhibition of DNA synthesis and function
Breast cancer, colorectal cancer, gas-
troesophageal cancer, hepatocellular 
cancer, pancreatic cancer
Diarrhea, hand-foot syndrome, 
myelosuppression, nausea and 
vomiting
5-Fluorouracil
Inhibits TS; incorporation of FUTP into RNA result-
ing in alteration in RNA processing; incorporation 
of FdUTP into DNA resulting in inhibition of DNA 
synthesis and function
Colorectal cancer, anal cancer, breast 
cancer, gastroesophageal cancer, head 
and neck cancer, hepatocellular cancer
Nausea, mucositis, diarrhea, bone 
marrow depression, neurotoxicity
Methotrexate
Inhibits DHFR; inhibits TS; inhibits de novo purine 
nucleotide synthesis
Breast cancer, head and neck cancer, 
osteogenic sarcoma, primary central 
nervous system lymphoma, non-Hodg-
kin’s lymphoma, bladder cancer, chori-
ocarcinoma
Mucositis, diarrhea, myelosup-
pression with neutropenia and 
thrombocytopenia
Pemetrexed
Inhibits TS, DHFR, and purine nucleotide synthesis
Mesothelioma, non-small cell lung 
cancer
Myelosuppression, skin rash, 
mucositis, diarrhea, fatigue, hand-
foot syndrome
Cytarabine
Inhibits DNA chain elongation, DNA synthesis and 
repair; inhibits ribonucleotide reductase with 
reduced formation of dNTPs; incorporation of 
cytarabine triphosphate into DNA
AML, ALL, CML in blast crisis
Nausea and vomiting, myelosup-
pression with neutropenia and 
thrombocytopenia, cerebellar 
ataxia
Gemcitabine
Inhibits DNA synthesis and repair; inhibits 
ribonucleotide reductase with reduced formation 
of dNTPs; incorporation of gemcitabine triphos-
phate into DNA resulting in inhibition of DNA 
synthesis and function
Pancreatic cancer, bladder cancer, 
breast cancer, non-small cell lung can-
cer, ovarian cancer, non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma, soft tissue sarcoma
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
myelosuppression
Fludarabine
Inhibits DNA synthesis and repair; inhibits ribonu-
cleotide reductase; incorporation of fludarabine 
triphosphate into DNA; induction of apoptosis
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, CLL
Myelosuppression, 
immunosuppression, fever, 
myalgias, arthralgias
Cladribine
Inhibits DNA synthesis and repair; inhibits 
ribonucleotide reductase; incorporation of cladrib-
ine triphosphate into DNA; induction of apoptosis
Hairy cell leukemia, CLL, non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma
Myelosuppression, nausea 
and vomiting, and 
immunosuppression
6-Mercaptopu-
rine (6-MP)
Inhibits de novo purine nucleotide synthesis; 
incorporation of triphosphate into RNA; 
incorporation of triphosphate into DNA
AML
Myelosuppression, 
immunosuppression, and 
hepatotoxicity
6-Thioguanine
Same as 6-MP
ALL, AML
Same as above
ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myelogenous leukemia; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia; DHFR, dihydrofolate reductase; 
dNTP, deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate; FdUTP, 5-fluorodeoxyuridine-5’-triphosphate; FUTP, 5-fluorouridine-5’-triphosphate; TS, thymidine synthase.
960    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
originally developed for non-small lung cancer, it is presently 
approved for use in the treatment of relapsed or refractory periph-
eral T-cell lymphoma. As with the other antifolate analogs, prala-
trexate is mainly excreted in the urine, and dose modification is 
required in the setting of renal dysfunction. The main adverse 
effects include myelosuppression, skin rash, mucositis, diarrhea, 
and fatigue. Vitamin supplementation with folic acid and vitamin 
B 12 appear to reduce the toxicities associated with pralatrexate, 
while not interfering with clinical efficacy. 
 FLUOROPYRIMIDINES 
 5-Fluorouracil 
 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is inactive in its parent form and requires 
activation via a complex series of enzymatic reactions to ribosyl 
and deoxyribosyl nucleotide metabolites. One of these metabo-
lites, 5-fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine-5′-monophosphate (FdUMP), 
forms a covalently bound ternary complex with the enzyme thy-
midylate synthase and the reduced folate 5,10-methylenetetrahy-
drofolate, a reaction critical for the de novo synthesis of 
thymidylate. This results in inhibition of DNA synthesis through 
“thymineless death.” 5-FU is converted to 5-fluorouridine-5′-
triphosphate (FUTP), which is then incorporated into RNA, 
where it interferes with RNA processing and mRNA translation. 
5-FU is also converted to 5-fluorodeoxyuridine-5′-triphosphate 
(FdUTP), which can be incorporated into cellular DNA, resulting 
in inhibition of DNA synthesis and function. Thus, the cytotoxic-
ity of 5-FU is thought to be the result of combined effects on both 
DNA- and RNA-mediated events. 
 5-FU is administered intravenously, and the clinical activity of 
this drug is highly schedule-dependent. Because of its extremely 
short half-life, on the order of 10–15 minutes, infusional schedules 
of administration have been generally favored over bolus schedules. 
Up to 80–85% of an administered dose of 5-FU is catabolized by 
the enzyme dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD). Of note, a 
pharmacogenetic syndrome involving partial or complete defi-
ciency of the DPD enzyme is seen in up to 5% of cancer patients; 
in this setting, severe toxicity in the form of myelosuppression, 
diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, and neurotoxicity is observed. 
Uracil
N
H
HN
O
O
H
5-FU
N
H
HN
O
O
F
 5-FU remains the most widely used agent in the treatment of 
colorectal cancer, both as adjuvant therapy and for advanced disease. 
It also has activity against a wide variety of solid tumors, including 
cancers of the breast, stomach, pancreas, esophagus, liver, head and 
neck, and anus. Major toxicities include myelosuppression, gastro-
intestinal toxicity in the form of mucositis and diarrhea, skin toxic-
ity manifested by the hand-foot syndrome, and neurotoxicity. 
 Capecitabine 
 Capecitabine is a fluoropyrimidine carbamate prodrug with 
70–80% oral bioavailability. It undergoes extensive metabolism in 
the liver by the enzyme carboxylesterase to an intermediate, 
5′-deoxy-5-fluorocytidine. This metabolite is then converted to 
5′-deoxy-5-fluorouridine by the enzyme cytidine deaminase. 
These two initial steps occur mainly in the liver. The 5′-deoxy-5-
fluorouridine metabolite is finally hydrolyzed by thymidine phos-
phorylase to 5-FU directly in the tumor. The expression of 
thymidine phosphorylase has been shown to be significantly 
higher in a broad range of solid tumors than in corresponding 
normal tissue, particularly in breast cancer and colorectal cancer. 
 This oral fluoropyrimidine is used in the treatment of meta-
static breast cancer either as a single agent or in combination with 
other anticancer agents, including docetaxel, paclitaxel, lapatinib, 
ixabepilone, and trastuzumab. It is also approved for use in the 
adjuvant therapy of stage III and high-risk stage II colon cancer as 
well as for treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer as monother-
apy. At this time, significant efforts are directed at combining this 
agent with other active cytotoxic agents, including irinotecan and 
oxaliplatin. In Europe and Asia, the capecitabine/oxaliplatin 
(XELOX) regimen is approved for the first-line treatment of meta-
static colorectal cancer, and this regimen is now widely used in the 
USA. The main toxicities of capecitabine include diarrhea and the 
hand-foot syndrome. While myelosuppression, nausea and vomit-
ing, and mucositis are also observed with this agent, their incidence 
is significantly less than that observed with intravenous 5-FU. 
 DEOXYCYTIDINE ANALOGS 
 Cytarabine 
 Cytarabine (ara-C) is an S phase-specific antimetabolite that is con-
verted by deoxycytidine kinase to the 5'-mononucleotide (ara-CMP). 
Ara-CMP is further metabolized to the diphosphate and triphos-
phate metabolites, and the ara-CTP triphosphate is felt to be the 
main cytotoxic metabolite. Ara-CTP competitively inhibits DNA 
polymerase-α and DNA polymerase-β, thereby resulting in blockade 
of DNA synthesis and DNA repair, respectively. This metabolite is 
also incorporated into RNA and DNA. Incorporation into DNA 
leads to interference with chain elongation and defective ligation of 
fragments of newly synthesized DNA. The cellular retention of ara-
CTP appears to correlate with its lethality to malignant cells. 
Cytosine
deoxyriboside
N
N
O
NH2
O
HO
HOCH2
Cytosine
arabinoside
(cytarabine)
N
N
O
NH2
O
HO
HOCH2
HO
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    961
 After intravenous administration, the drug is cleared rapidly, 
with most of an administered dose being deaminated to inactive 
forms. The stoichiometric balance between the level of activation 
and catabolism of cytarabine is important in determining its even-
tual cytotoxicity. 
 The clinical activity of cytarabine is highly schedule-dependent 
and because of its rapid degradation, it is usually administered via 
continuous infusion over a 5–7 day period. Its activity is limited 
exclusively to hematologic malignancies, including acute myelog-
enous leukemia and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. This agent has 
absolutely no activity in solid tumors. The main adverse effects 
associated with cytarabine therapy include myelosuppression, 
mucositis, nausea and vomiting, and neurotoxicity when high-
dose therapy is administered. 
 Gemcitabine 
 Gemcitabine is a fluorine-substituted deoxycytidine analog that is 
phosphorylated initially by the enzyme deoxycytidine kinase to 
the monophosphate form and then by other nucleoside kinases to 
the diphosphate and triphosphate nucleotide forms. The antitu-
mor effect is considered to result from several mechanisms: inhibi-
tion of ribonucleotide reductase by gemcitabine diphosphate, 
which reduces the level of deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates 
required for DNA synthesis; inhibition by gemcitabine triphos-
phate of DNA polymerase-α and DNA polymerase-β, thereby 
resulting in blockade of DNA synthesis and DNA repair; and 
incorporation of gemcitabine triphosphate into DNA, leading to 
inhibition of DNA synthesis and function. Following incorpora-
tion of the gemcitabine triphosphate into DNA, only one addi-
tional nucleotide can be added to the growing DNA strand, 
resulting in chain termination. 
N
N
O
NH2
O
HOCH2
OH
F
F
Gemcitabine
 This nucleoside analog was initially approved for use in 
advanced pancreatic cancer but is now widely used to treat a broad 
range of malignancies, including non-small cell lung cancer, blad-
der cancer, ovarian cancer, soft tissue sarcoma, and non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma. Myelosuppression in the form of neutropenia is the 
principal dose-limiting toxicity. Nausea and vomiting occur in 
70% of patients and a flu-like syndrome has also been observed. 
In rare cases, renal microangiopathy syndromes, including hemo-
lytic-uremic syndrome and thrombotic thrombocytopenic pur-
pura have been reported. 
 PURINE ANTAGONISTS 
 6-Thiopurines 
 6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP) was the first of the thiopurine analogs 
found to be effective in cancer therapy. This agent is used primarily 
in the treatment of childhood acute leukemia, and a closely related 
analog, azathioprine, is used as an immunosuppressive agent (see 
 Chapter 55 ). As with other thiopurines, 6-MP is inactive in its 
parent form and must be metabolized by hypoxanthine-guanine 
phosphoribosyl transferase (HGPRT) to form the monophosphate 
nucleotide 6-thioinosinic acid, which in turn inhibits several 
enzymes of de novo purine nucleotide synthesis ( Figure 54–6 ). The 
monophosphate form is eventually metabolized to the triphosphate 
form, which can then be incorporated into both RNA and DNA. 
Significant levels of thioguanylic acid and 6-methylmercaptopurine 
ribotide (MMPR) are also formed from 6-MP. These metabolites 
may contribute to its cytotoxic action. 
 6-Thioguanine (6-TG) also inhibits several enzymes in the de 
novo purine nucleotide biosynthetic pathway ( Figure 54–6 ). 
Various metabolic lesions result, including inhibition of purine 
nucleotide interconversion; decrease in intracellular levels of gua-
nine nucleotides, which leads to inhibition of glycoprotein synthe-
sis; interference with the formation of DNA and RNA; and 
incorporation of thiopurine nucleotides into both DNA and 
RNA. 6-TG has a synergistic action when used together with 
cytarabine in the treatment of adult acute leukemia. 
 6-MP is converted to an inactive metabolite (6-thiouric acid) by 
an oxidation reaction catalyzed by xanthine oxidase, whereas 6-TG 
undergoes deamination. This is an important issue because the 
purine analog allopurinol, a potent xanthine oxidase inhibitor, is 
frequently used as a supportive care measure in the treatment of 
acute leukemias to prevent the development of hyperuricemia that 
often occurs with tumor cell lysis. Because allopurinol inhibits xan-
thine oxidase, simultaneous therapy with allopurinol and 6-MP 
would result in increased levels of 6-MP, thereby leading to excessive 
Inosinate
(IMP)
Adenylosuccinate
Adenylate
(AMP)
Xanthylate
(XMP)
Guanylate
(GMP)
DNA
Mercaptopurine
Thioguanine
Mercaptopurine
Hydroxyurea
–
–
–
–
 FIGURE 54–6  Mechanism of action of 6-mercaptopurine and 
6-thioguanine. 
962    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
toxicity. In this setting, the dose of mercaptopurine must be reduced 
by 50–75%. In contrast, such an interaction does not occur with 
6-TG, which can be used in full doses with allopurinol. 
Hypoxanthine
N
N
N
H
N
OH
6-Mercaptopurine
N
N
N
H
N
SH
Allopurinol
N
N
N
H
N
OH
Guanine
N
N
N
H
N
OH
H2N
6-Thioguanine
N
N
N
H
N
SH
H2N
 The thiopurines are also metabolized by the enzyme thiopurine 
methyltransferase (TPMT), in which a methyl group is attached to 
the thiopurine ring. Patients who have a pharmacogenetic syndrome 
involving partial or complete deficiency of this enzyme are at increased 
risk for developing severe toxicities in the form of myelosuppression 
and gastrointestinal toxicity with mucositis and diarrhea. 
 Fludarabine 
 Fludarabine phosphate is rapidly dephosphorylated to 2-fluoro-arab-
inofuranosyladenosine and then phosphorylated intracellularly by 
deoxycytidine kinase to the triphosphate. The triphosphate metabo-
lite interferes with the processes of DNA synthesis and DNA repair 
through inhibition of DNA polymerase-α and DNA polymerase-β. 
The triphosphate form can also be directly incorporated into DNA, 
resulting in inhibition of DNA synthesis and function. The diphos-
phate metabolite of fludarabine inhibits ribonucleotide reductase, 
leading to inhibition of essential deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates. 
Finally, fludarabine induces apoptosis in susceptible cells through as 
yet undetermined mechanisms. This purine nucleotide analog is used 
mainly in the treatment of low-grade non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). It is given parenterally, and up 
to 25–30% of parent drug is excreted in the urine. The main dose-
limiting toxicity is myelosuppression. This agent is a potent immuno-
suppressant with inhibitory effects on CD4 and CD8 T cells. Patients 
are at increased risk for opportunistic infections, including fungi, 
herpes, and  Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PCP). Patients should 
receive PCP prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (dou-
ble strength) at least three times a week, and this should continue for 
up to 1 year after stopping fludarabine therapy. 
 Cladribine 
 Cladribine (2-chlorodeoxyadenosine) is a purine nucleoside analog 
with high specificity for lymphoid cells. Inactive in its parent form, 
it is initially phosphorylated by deoxycytidine kinase to the mono-
phosphate form and eventually metabolized to the triphosphate 
form, which can then be incorporated into DNA. The triphos-
phate metabolite can also interfere with DNA synthesis and DNA 
repair by inhibiting DNA polymerase-α and DNA polymerase-β, 
respectively. Cladribine is indicated for the treatment of hairy cell 
leukemia, with activity in other low-grade lymphoid malignancies 
such as CLL and low-grade non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. It is nor-
mally administered as a single continuous 7-day infusion; under 
these conditions, it has a very manageable safety profile with the 
main toxicity consisting of transient myelosuppression. As with 
other purine nucleoside analogs, it has immunosuppressive effects, 
and a decrease in CD4 and CD8 T cells, lasting for over 1 year, is 
observed in patients. 
 NATURAL PRODUCT CANCER 
CHEMOTHERAPY DRUGS 
 VINCA ALKALOIDS 
 Vinblastine 
 Vinblastine is an alkaloid derived from the periwinkle plant  Vinca 
rosea . Its mechanism of action involves inhibition of tubulin polym-
erization, which disrupts assembly of microtubules, an important 
part of the cytoskeleton and the mitotic spindle. This inhibitory 
effect results in mitotic arrest in metaphase, bringing cell division to 
a halt, which then leads to cell death. Vinblastine and other vinca 
alkaloids are metabolized by the liver P450 system, and the majority 
of the drug is excreted in feces via the hepatobiliary system. As such, 
dose modification is required in the setting of liver dysfunction. The 
main adverse effects are outlined in  Table 54–4 , and they include 
nausea and vomiting, bone marrow suppression, and alopecia. This 
agent is also a potent vesicant, and care must be taken in its admin-
istration. It has clinical activity in the treatment of Hodgkin’s and 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, breast cancer, and germ cell cancer. 
 Vincristine 
 Vincristine is another alkaloid derivative of  V rosea and is closely 
related in structure to vinblastine. Its mechanism of action, 
mechanism of resistance, and clinical pharmacology are identical 
to those of vinblastine. Despite these similarities to vinblastine, 
vincristine has a strikingly different spectrum of clinical activity 
and safety profile. 
R: CH3
N
H
N
CH3O
N
R
H
OCOCH3
H
OH
C
O
CH3
O
CH2CH3
H
N
H
C
CH3O
O
HO
CH2
CH3
Vinblastine
R: O
Vincristine
C
H
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    963
 Vincristine has been effectively combined with prednisone for 
remission induction in acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children. 
It is also active in various hematologic malignancies such as 
Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, and multiple myeloma, 
and in several pediatric tumors including rhabdomyosarcoma, 
neuroblastoma, Ewing’s sarcoma, and Wilms’ tumor. 
 The main dose-limiting toxicity is neurotoxicity, usually expressed 
as a peripheral sensory neuropathy, although autonomic nervous 
system dysfunction with orthostatic hypotension, urinary retention, 
and paralytic ileus or constipation, cranial nerve palsies, ataxia, seizures, 
and coma have been observed. While myelosuppression occurs, it is 
generally milder and much less significant than with vinblastine. 
TABLE 54–4 Natural product cancer chemotherapy drugs: Clinical activity and toxicities.
Drug
Mechanism of Action
Clinical Applications1
Acute Toxicity
Delayed Toxicity
Bleomycin
Oxygen free radicals bind to DNA 
causing single- and double-strand 
DNA breaks
Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma, germ cell cancer, head 
and neck cancer
Allergic reactions, 
fever, hypotension
Skin toxicity, pulmonary 
fibrosis, mucositis, alopecia
Daunorubicin
Oxygen free radicals bind to DNA 
causing single- and double-strand 
DNA breaks; inhibits topoisomerase 
II; intercalates into DNA
AML, ALL
Nausea, fever, red 
urine (not hematuria)
Cardiotoxicity (see text), 
alopecia, myelosuppression
Docetaxel
Inhibits mitosis
Breast cancer, non-small cell lung 
cancer, prostate cancer, gastric can-
cer, head and neck cancer, ovarian 
cancer, bladder cancer
Hypersensitivity
Neurotoxicity, fluid 
retention, myelosuppression 
with neutropenia
Doxorubicin
Oxygen free radicals bind to DNA 
causing single- and double-strand 
DNA breaks; inhibits topoisomerase 
II; intercalates into DNA
Breast cancer, Hodgkin’s and 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, soft tissue 
sarcoma, ovarian cancer, non-small 
cell and small cell lung cancer, 
thyroid cancer, Wilms’ tumor, 
neuroblastoma
Nausea, red urine 
(not hematuria)
Cardiotoxicity (see text), 
alopecia, myelosuppression, 
stomatitis
Etoposide
Inhibits topoisomerase II
Non-small cell and small cell lung 
cancer; non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, 
gastric cancer
Nausea, vomiting, 
hypotension
Alopecia, myelosuppression
Idarubicin
Oxygen free radicals bind to DNA 
causing single- and double-strand 
DNA breaks; inhibits topoisomerase 
II; intercalates into DNA
AML, ALL, CML in blast crisis
Nausea and vomiting
Myelosuppression, 
mucositis, cardiotoxicity
Irinotecan
Inhibits topoisomerase I
Colorectal cancer, gastroesophageal 
cancer, non-small cell and small cell 
lung cancer
Diarrhea, nausea, 
vomiting
Diarrhea, myelosuppression, 
nausea and vomiting
Mitomycin
Acts as an alkylating agent and 
forms cross-links with DNA; forma-
tion of oxygen free radicals, which 
target DNA
Superficial bladder cancer, gastric 
cancer, breast cancer, non-small cell 
lung cancer, head and neck cancer (in 
combination with radiotherapy)
Nausea and 
vomiting
Myelosuppression, mucosi-
tis, anorexia and fatigue, 
hemolytic-uremic syndrome
Paclitaxel
Inhibits mitosis
Breast cancer, non-small cell and 
small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, 
gastroesophageal cancer, prostate 
cancer, bladder cancer, head and 
neck cancer
Nausea, vomiting, 
hypotension, 
arrhythmias, 
hypersensitivity
Myelosuppression, 
peripheral sensory 
neuropathy
Topotecan
Inhibits topoisomerase I
Small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer
Nausea and vomiting
Myelosuppression
Vinblastine
Inhibits mitosis
Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma, germ cell cancer, breast 
cancer, Kaposi’s sarcoma
Nausea and vomiting
Myelosuppression, mucosi-
tis, alopecia, syndrome of 
inappropriate secretion of 
antidiuretic hormone 
(SIADH), vascular events
Vincristine
Inhibits mitosis
ALL, Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, 
neuroblastoma, Wilms’ tumor
None
Neurotoxicity with periph-
eral neuropathy, paralytic 
ileus, myelosuppression, 
alopecia, SIADH
Vinorelbine
Inhibits mitosis
Non-small cell lung cancer, breast 
cancer, ovarian cancer
Nausea and 
vomiting
Myelosuppression, 
constipation, SIADH
1See Table 54–3 for acronyms.
964    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
The other adverse effect that may develop is the syndrome of inap-
propriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH). 
 Vinorelbine 
 Vinorelbine is a semisynthetic derivative of vinblastine whose 
mechanism of action is identical to that of vinblastine and vincris-
tine, ie, inhibition of mitosis of cells in the M phase through 
inhibition of tubulin polymerization. This agent has activity in 
non-small cell lung cancer, breast cancer, and ovarian cancer. 
Myelosuppression with neutropenia is the dose-limiting toxicity, 
but other adverse effects include nausea and vomiting, transient 
elevations in liver function tests, neurotoxicity, and SIADH. 
 TAXANES & RELATED DRUGS 
 Paclitaxel is an alkaloid ester derived from the Pacific yew ( Taxus 
brevifolia ) and the European yew ( Taxus baccata ). The drug func-
tions as a mitotic spindle poison through high-affinity binding to 
microtubules with  enhancement of tubulin polymerization. This 
promotion of microtubule assembly by paclitaxel occurs in the 
absence of microtubule-associated proteins and guanosine triphos-
phate and results in inhibition of mitosis and cell division. 
 Paclitaxel has significant activity in a broad range of solid 
tumors, including ovarian, advanced breast, non-small cell and 
small cell lung, head and neck, esophageal, prostate, and bladder 
cancers and AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma. It is metabolized 
extensively by the liver P450 system, and nearly 80% of the drug 
is excreted in feces via the hepatobiliary route. Dose reduction is 
required in patients with liver dysfunction. The primary dose-
limiting toxicities are listed in  Table 54–4 . Hypersensitivity reac-
tions may be observed in up to 5% of patients, but the incidence 
is significantly reduced by premedication with dexamethasone, 
diphenhydramine, and an H 2 blocker. 
 A novel albumin-bound paclitaxel formulation (Abraxane) is 
approved for use in metastatic breast cancer. In contrast to paclitaxel, 
this formulation is not associated with hypersensitivity reactions, and 
premedication to prevent such reactions is not required. Moreover, 
this agent has significantly reduced myelosuppressive effects com-
pared with paclitaxel, and the neurotoxicity that results appears to be 
more readily reversible than is typically observed with paclitaxel. 
 Docetaxel is a semisynthetic taxane derived from the European 
yew tree. Its mechanism of action, metabolism, and elimination 
are identical to those of paclitaxel. It is approved for use as second-
line therapy in advanced breast cancer and non-small cell lung 
cancer, and it also has major activity in head and neck cancer, 
small cell lung cancer, gastric cancer, advanced platinum-refrac-
tory ovarian cancer, and bladder cancer. Its major toxicities are 
listed in  Table 54–4 . 
 Cabazitaxel is a semisynthetic taxane produced from a precursor 
extracted from the yew tree. Its mechanism of action, metabolism, 
and elimination are identical to those of the other taxanes. However, 
unlike other taxanes, cabazitaxel is a poor substrate for the multi-
drug resistance P-glycoprotein efflux pump and may therefore be 
useful for treating multidrug-resistant tumors. It is approved for use 
in combination with prednisone in the second-line therapy of hor-
mone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer previously treated with a 
docetaxel-containing regimen. Its major toxicities include myelo-
suppression, neurotoxicity, and allergic reactions. 
 Although not strictly a taxane, ixabepilone is a semisynthetic 
epothilone B analog that functions as a microtubule inhibitor and 
binds directly to β-tubulin subunits on microtubules, leading to 
inhibition of normal microtubule dynamics. As such, it is active in 
the M phase of the cell cycle. This agent is presently approved for 
metastatic breast cancer in combination with the oral fluoropy-
rimidine capecitabine or as monotherapy. Of note, this agent 
continues to have activity in drug-resistant tumors that overex-
press P-glycoprotein or tubulin mutations. The main adverse 
effects include myelosuppression, hypersensitivity reactions, and 
neurotoxicity in the form of peripheral sensory neuropathy. 
 EPIPODOPHYLLOTOXINS 
 Etoposide is a semisynthetic derivative of podophyllotoxin, which 
is extracted from the mayapple root ( Podophyllum peltatum ). 
Intravenous and oral formulations of etoposide are approved for 
clinical use in the USA. The oral bioavailability is about 50%, 
requiring the oral dose to be twice that of an intravenous dose. Up 
to 30–50% of drug is excreted in the urine, and dose reduction is 
required in the setting of renal dysfunction. The main site of 
action is inhibition of the DNA enzyme topoisomerase II. 
Etoposide has clinical activity in germ cell cancer, small cell and 
non-small cell lung cancer, Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phomas, and gastric cancer. In addition, it is effective in high-dose 
regimens in the transplant setting for breast cancer and lympho-
mas. Major toxicities are listed in  Table 54–4 . 
 CAMPTOTHECINS 
 The camptothecins are natural products derived from the 
 Camptotheca acuminata tree originally found in China; they 
inhibit the activity of topoisomerase I, the key enzyme responsible 
for cutting and religating single DNA strands. Inhibition of this 
enzyme results in DNA damage. Topotecan and irinotecan are 
the two camptothecin analogs used in clinical practice in the USA. 
Although they both inhibit the same molecular target, their spec-
trum of clinical activity is quite different. Topotecan is indicated 
in the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer as second-line therapy 
following initial treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy. It 
is also approved as second-line therapy of small cell lung cancer. 
The main route of elimination is renal excretion, and dosage must 
be adjusted in patients with renal impairment. 
 Irinotecan is a prodrug that is converted mainly in the liver by 
the carboxylesterase enzyme to the SN-38 metabolite, which is 
1000-fold more potent as an inhibitor of topoisomerase I than the 
parent compound. In contrast to topotecan, irinotecan and SN-38 
are mainly eliminated in bile and feces, and dose reduction is 
required in the setting of liver dysfunction. Irinotecan was originally 
approved as second-line monotherapy in patients with metastatic 
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    965
colorectal cancer who had failed fluorouracil-based therapy. It is 
now approved as first-line therapy when used in combination with 
5-FU and leucovorin. Myelosuppression and diarrhea are the two 
most common adverse events ( Table 54–4 ). There are two forms of 
diarrhea: an early form that occurs within 24 hours after administra-
tion and is thought to be a cholinergic event effectively treated with 
atropine, and a late form that usually occurs 2–10 days after treat-
ment. The late diarrhea can be severe, leading to significant electro-
lyte imbalance and dehydration in some cases. 
 ANTITUMOR ANTIBIOTICS 
 Screening of microbial products has led to the discovery of a num-
ber of growth-inhibiting compounds that have proved to be clini-
cally useful in cancer chemotherapy. Many of these antibiotics 
bind to DNA through intercalation between specific bases and 
block the synthesis of RNA, DNA, or both; cause DNA strand 
scission; and interfere with cell replication. All of the anticancer 
antibiotics now being used in clinical practice are products of 
various strains of the soil microbe  Streptomyces . These include the 
anthracyclines, bleomycin, and mitomycin. 
 ANTHRACYCLINES 
 The anthracycline antibiotics, isolated from  Streptomyces peucetius 
var  caesius , are among the most widely used cytotoxic anticancer 
drugs. The structures of two congeners, doxorubicin and daunoru-
bicin, are shown below. Several other anthracycline analogs have 
entered clinical practice, including idarubicin, epirubicin, and 
mitoxantrone. The anthracyclines exert their cytotoxic action 
through four major mechanisms: (1) inhibition of topoisomerase 
II; (2) high-affinity binding to DNA through intercalation, with 
consequent blockade of the synthesis of DNA and RNA, and DNA 
strand scission; (3) generation of semiquinone free radicals and 
oxygen free radicals through an iron-dependent, enzyme-mediated 
reductive process; and (4) binding to cellular membranes to alter 
fluidity and ion transport. While the precise mechanisms by which 
the anthracyclines exert their cytotoxic effects remain to be defined 
(and may depend upon the specific tumor type), it is now well-es-
tablished that the free radical mechanism is the cause of the cardio-
toxicity associated with the anthracyclines ( Table 54–4 ). 
Doxorubicin
OH
O
OH
O
O
CH3
O
H
R
OH
C
CH2OH
O
R:
Daunorubicin
C
CH3
O
R:
HO
NH2
O
CH3
 In the clinical setting, anthracyclines are administered via the 
intravenous route. The anthracyclines are metabolized extensively 
in the liver, with reduction and hydrolysis of the ring substituents. 
The hydroxylated metabolite is an active species, whereas the agly-
cone is inactive. Up to 50% of drug is eliminated in the feces via 
biliary excretion, and dose reduction is required in the setting of 
liver dysfunction. Although anthracyclines are usually administered 
on an every-3-week schedule, alternative schedules such as low-
dose weekly or 72- to 96-hour continuous infusions have been 
shown to yield equivalent clinical efficacy with reduced toxicity. 
 Doxorubicin is one of the most important anticancer drugs in 
clinical practice, with major clinical activity in cancers of the breast, 
endometrium, ovary, testicle, thyroid, stomach, bladder, liver, and 
lung; in soft tissue sarcomas; and in several childhood cancers, 
including neuroblastoma, Ewing’s sarcoma, osteosarcoma, and 
rhabdomyosarcoma. It also has clinical activity in hematologic 
malignancies, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia, multiple 
myeloma, and Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. It is gen-
erally used in combination with other anticancer agents (eg, cyclo-
phosphamide, cisplatin, and 5-FU), and clinical activity is improved 
with combination regimens as opposed to single-agent therapy. 
 Daunorubicin was the first agent in this class to be isolated, 
and it is still used in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia. In 
contrast to doxorubicin, its efficacy in solid tumors is limited. 
 Idarubicin is a semisynthetic anthracycline glycoside analog of 
daunorubicin, and it is approved for use in combination with 
cytarabine for induction therapy of acute myeloid leukemia. When 
combined with cytarabine, idarubicin appears to be more active 
than daunorubicin in producing complete remissions and in 
improving survival in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia. 
 Epirubicin is an anthracycline analog whose mechanism of 
action and clinical pharmacology are identical to those of all 
other anthracyclines. It was initially approved for use as a compo-
nent of adjuvant therapy in early-stage, node-positive breast 
cancer but is also used in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer 
and gastroesophageal cancer. 
 Mitoxantrone (dihydroxyanthracenedione) is an anthracene 
compound whose structure resembles the anthracycline ring. It 
binds to DNA to produce strand breakage and inhibits both DNA 
and RNA synthesis. It is currently used in the treatment of 
advanced, hormone-refractory prostate cancer and low-grade non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. It is also indicated in breast cancer and in 
pediatric and adult acute myeloid leukemias. Myelosuppression 
with leukopenia is the dose-limiting toxicity, and mild nausea and 
vomiting, mucositis, and alopecia also occur. Although the drug is 
thought to be less cardiotoxic than doxorubicin, both acute and 
chronic cardiac toxicity are reported. A blue discoloration of the 
fingernails, sclera, and urine is observed 1–2 days after drug 
administration. 
 The main dose-limiting toxicity of all anthracyclines is myelo-
suppression, with neutropenia more commonly observed than 
thrombocytopenia. In some cases, mucositis is dose-limiting. Two 
forms of cardiotoxicity are observed. The acute form occurs within 
the first 2–3 days and presents as arrhythmias and conduction 
abnormalities, other electrocardiographic changes, pericarditis, 
and myocarditis. This form is usually transient and in most cases 
966    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
is asymptomatic. The chronic form results in a dose-dependent, 
dilated cardiomyopathy associated with heart failure. The chronic 
cardiac toxicity appears to result from increased production of free 
radicals within the myocardium. This effect is rarely seen at total 
doxorubicin dosages below 500–550 mg/m 2 . Use of lower weekly 
doses or continuous infusions of doxorubicin appear to reduce the 
incidence of cardiac toxicity. In addition, treatment with the iron-
chelating agent  dexrazoxane (ICRF-187) is currently approved to 
prevent or reduce anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity in women 
with metastatic breast cancer who have received a total cumulative 
dose of doxorubicin of 300 mg/m 2 . The anthracyclines can also 
produce a “radiation recall reaction,” with erythema and desqua-
mation of the skin observed at sites of prior radiation therapy. 
 MITOMYCIN 
 Mitomycin (mitomycin C) is an antibiotic isolated from 
 Streptomyces caespitosus . It undergoes metabolic activation through 
an enzyme-mediated reduction to generate an alkylating agent 
that cross-links DNA. Hypoxic tumor stem cells of solid tumors 
exist in an environment conducive to reductive reactions and are 
more sensitive to the cytotoxic effects of mitomycin than normal 
cells and oxygenated tumor cells. It is active in all phases of the cell 
cycle, and is the best available drug for use in combination with 
radiation therapy to attack hypoxic tumor cells. Its main clinical 
use is in the treatment of squamous cell cancer of the anus in 
combination with 5-FU and radiation therapy. In addition, it is 
used in combination chemotherapy for squamous cell carcinoma 
of the cervix and for breast, gastric, and pancreatic cancer. One 
special application of mitomycin has been in the intravesical treat-
ment of superficial bladder cancer. Because virtually none of the 
agent is absorbed systemically, there is little to no systemic toxicity 
when used in this setting. 
 The common toxicities of mitomycin are outlined in 
 Table 54–4 . Hemolytic-uremic syndrome, manifested as microan-
giopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and renal failure, 
as well as occasional instances of interstitial pneumonitis have 
been reported. 
 BLEOMYCIN 
 Bleomycin is a small peptide that contains a DNA-binding region 
and an iron-binding domain at opposite ends of the molecule. It 
acts by binding to DNA, which results in single- and double-
strand breaks following free radical formation, and inhibition of 
DNA biosynthesis. The fragmentation of DNA is due to oxida-
tion of a DNA-bleomycin-Fe(II) complex and leads to chromo-
somal aberrations. Bleomycin is a cell cycle-specific drug that 
causes accumulation of cells in the G 2 phase of the cell cycle. 
 Bleomycin is indicated for the treatment of Hodgkin’s and 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, germ cell tumor, head and neck can-
cer, and squamous cell cancer of the skin, cervix, and vulva. One 
advantage of this agent is that it can be given subcutaneously, 
intramuscularly, or intravenously. Elimination of bleomycin is 
mainly via renal excretion, and dose modification is recommended 
in patients with renal dysfunction. 
 Pulmonary toxicity is dose-limiting for bleomycin and usually 
presents as pneumonitis with cough, dyspnea, dry inspiratory 
crackles on physical examination, and infiltrates on chest X-ray. 
The incidence of pulmonary toxicity is increased in patients older 
than 70 years of age, in those who receive cumulative doses greater 
than 400 units, in those with underlying pulmonary disease, and 
in those who have received prior mediastinal or chest irradiation. 
In rare cases, pulmonary toxicity can be fatal. Other toxicities are 
listed in  Table 54–4 . 
 MISCELLANEOUS ANTICANCER 
DRUGS 
 A large number of anticancer drugs that do not fit traditional 
categories have been approved for clinical use by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA); they are listed in  Table 54–5 . 
 IMATINIB, DASATINIB, & NILOTINIB 
 Imatinib is an inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase domain of the Bcr-
Abl oncoprotein and prevents phosphorylation of the kinase sub-
strate by ATP. It is indicated for the treatment of chronic 
myelogenous leukemia (CML), a pluripotent hematopoietic stem 
cell disorder characterized by the t(9:22) Philadelphia chromo-
somal translocation. This translocation results in the Bcr-Abl 
fusion protein, the causative agent in CML, and is present in up 
to 95% of patients with this disease. This agent also inhibits other 
receptor tyrosine kinases for platelet-derived growth factor recep-
tor (PDGFR), stem cell factor, and c-kit. 
 Imatinib is well absorbed orally, and it is metabolized in the 
liver, with elimination of metabolites occurring mainly in feces via 
biliary excretion. This agent is approved for use as first-line ther-
apy in chronic phase CML, in blast crisis, and as second-line 
therapy for chronic phase CML that has progressed on prior 
interferon-alfa therapy. Imatinib is also effective in the treatment 
of gastrointestinal stromal tumors expressing the c-kit tyrosine 
kinase. The main adverse effects are listed in  Table 54–5 . 
 Dasatinib is an oral inhibitor of several tyrosine kinases, includ-
ing Bcr-Abl, Src, c-kit, and PDGFR-α. It differs from imatinib in 
that it binds to the active and inactive conformations of the Abl 
kinase domain and overcomes imatinib resistance resulting from 
mutations in the Bcr-Abl kinase. It is approved for use in CML and 
Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia 
(ALL) with resistance or intolerance to imatinib therapy. 
 Nilotinib is a second-generation phenylamino-pyrimidine mol-
ecule that inhibits Bcr-Abl, c-kit, and PDGFR-β tyrosine kinases. 
It has a higher binding affinity (up to 20- to 50-fold) for the Abl 
kinase when compared with imatinib, and it overcomes imatinib 
resistance resulting from Bcr-Abl mutations. It was originally 
approved for chronic phase and accelerated phase CML with resis-
tance or intolerance to prior therapy that included imatinib and 
was recently approved as first-line therapy of chronic phase CML. 
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    967
 Imatinib, dasatinib, and nilotinib are all metabolized in the liver, 
mainly by the CYP3A4 liver microsomal enzyme. A large fraction 
of each drug is eliminated in feces via the hepatobiliary route. It is 
important to review the patient’s current list of prescription and 
nonprescription drugs because these agents have potential drug-
drug interactions, especially with those that are also metabolized by 
the CYP3A4 system. In addition, patients should avoid grapefruit 
products and the use of St. John’s wort, as they may alter the 
metabolism of these small molecule inhibitors (see  Chapter 4 ). 
 GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR 
INHIBITORS 
 Cetuximab & Panitumumab 
 The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a member of the 
erb-B family of growth factor receptors, and it is overexpressed in a 
number of solid tumors, including colorectal cancer, head and neck 
cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and pancreatic cancer. Activation 
of the EGFR signaling pathway results in downstream activation of 
several key cellular events involved in cellular growth and prolifera-
tion, invasion and metastasis, and angiogenesis. In addition, this 
pathway inhibits the cytotoxic activity of various anticancer agents 
and radiation therapy, presumably through suppression of key 
apoptotic mechanisms, thereby leading to the development of cel-
lular drug resistance. 
 Cetuximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against 
the extracellular domain of the EGFR, and it is presently approved 
for use in combination with irinotecan for metastatic colon cancer 
in the refractory setting or as monotherapy in patients who are 
deemed to be irinotecan-refractory. Because cetuximab is of the 
G 1 isotype, its antitumor activity may also be mediated, in part, 
by immunologic-mediated mechanisms. There is growing evi-
dence that cetuximab can be effectively and safely combined with 
irinotecan- and oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy in the first-line 
TABLE 54–5 Miscellaneous anticancer drugs: Clinical activity and toxicities.
Drug
Mechanism of Action1
Clinical Applications1
Acute Toxicity
Delayed Toxicity
Asparaginase
Hydrolyzes circulating L-asparagine, 
resulting in rapid inhibition of 
protein synthesis
ALL
Nausea, fever, allergic 
reactions
Hepatotoxicity, increased risk 
of bleeding and clotting, 
mental depression, 
pancreatitis, renal toxicity
Erlotinib
Inhibits EGFR tyrosine kinase lead-
ing to inhibition of EGFR signaling
Non-small cell lung cancer, 
pancreatic cancer
Diarrhea
Skin rash, diarrhea, anorexia, 
interstitial lung disease
Gefitinib
Same as erlotinib
Non-small cell lung cancer
Hypertension, diarrhea
Same as above
Imatinib
Inhibits Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase 
and other receptor tyrosine 
kinases, including PDGFR, stem 
cell factor, and c-kit
CML, gastrointestinal stromal 
tumor (GIST), Philadelphia 
chromosome-positive ALL
Nausea and vomiting
Fluid retention with ankle and 
periorbital edema, diarrhea, 
myalgias, congestive heart 
failure
Cetuximab
Binds to EGFR and inhibits down-
stream EGFR signaling; enhances 
response to chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy
Colorectal cancer, head and neck 
cancer (used in combination with 
radiotherapy), non-small cell lung 
cancer
Infusion reaction
Skin rash, hypomagnesemia, 
fatigue, interstitial lung 
disease
Panitumumab
Binds to EGFR and inhibits down-
stream EGFR signaling; enhances 
response to chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy
Colorectal cancer
Infusion reaction 
(rarely)
Skin rash, hypomagnesemia, 
fatigue, interstitial lung 
disease
Bevacizumab
Inhibits binding of VEGF to 
VEGFR leading to inhibition of 
VEGF signaling; inhibits tumor 
vascular permeability; enhances 
tumor blood flow and drug 
delivery
Colorectal cancer, breast cancer, 
non-small cell lung cancer, renal 
cell cancer
Hypertension, infusion 
reaction
Arterial thromboembolic 
events, gastrointestinal 
perforations, wound healing 
complications, proteinuria
Sorafenib
Inhibits multiple RTKs, including 
raf kinase, VEGF-R2, VEGF-R3, and 
PDGFR-β leading to inhibition of 
angiogenesis, invasion, and 
metastasis
Renal cell cancer, hepatocellular 
cancer
Nausea, hypertension
Skin rash, fatigue and 
asthenia, bleeding complica-
tions, hypophosphatemia
Sunitinib
Inhibits multiple RTKs, including 
VEGF-R1, VEGF-R2, VEGF-R3, 
PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β leading to 
inhibition of angiogenesis, 
invasion, and metastasis
Renal cell cancer, GIST
Hypertension
Skin rash, fatigue and 
asthenia, bleeding complica-
tions, cardiac toxicity leading 
to congestive heart failure in 
rare cases
1See text for acronyms.
968    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer as well. Of note, the 
efficacy of cetuximab is restricted to only those patients whose 
tumors express wild-type  KRAS . Regimens combining cetuximab 
with cytotoxic chemotherapy may be of particular benefit in the 
neoadjuvant therapy of patients with liver-limited disease. 
Although this antibody was initially approved to be administered 
on a weekly schedule, pharmacokinetic studies have shown that an 
every-2-week schedule provides the same level of clinical activity 
as the weekly schedule. This agent is also approved for use in 
combination with radiation therapy in patients with locally 
advanced head and neck cancer. Cetuximab is well tolerated, with 
the main adverse effects being an acneiform skin rash, hypersensi-
tivity infusion reaction, and hypomagnesemia. 
 Panitumumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody directed 
against the EGFR and works through inhibition of the EGFR 
signaling pathway. In contrast to cetuximab, this antibody is of the 
G 2 isotype, and as such, it would not be expected to exert any 
immunologic-mediated effects. Presently, panitumumab is approved 
for patients with refractory metastatic colorectal cancer who have 
been treated with all other active agents, and as with cetuximab, 
this antibody is only effective in patients whose tumors express 
wild-type  KRAS . Recent clinical studies have shown that this anti-
body is effectively and safely combined with oxaliplatin- and irino-
tecan-based chemotherapy in the first- and second-line treatment 
of metastatic colorectal cancer. Acneiform skin rash and hypomag-
nesemia are the two main adverse effects associated with its use. 
Because this is a fully human antibody, infusion-related reactions 
are rarely observed. 
 Gefitinib & Erlotinib 
 Gefitinib and erlotinib are small molecule inhibitors of the tyrosine 
kinase domain associated with the EGFR, and both are used in the 
treatment of non-small cell lung cancer that is refractory to at least 
one prior chemotherapy regimen. Patients who are nonsmokers 
and who have a bronchoalveolar histologic subtype appear to be 
more responsive to these agents. In addition, erlotinib has been 
approved for use in combination with gemcitabine for the treat-
ment of advanced pancreatic cancer. Both agents are metabolized 
in the liver by the CYP3A4 enzyme system, and elimination is 
mainly hepatic with excretion in feces. Caution must be taken 
when using these agents with drugs that are also metabolized by the 
liver CYP3A4 system, such as phenytoin and warfarin, and the use 
of grapefruit products should be avoided. An acneiform skin rash, 
diarrhea, and anorexia and fatigue are the most common adverse 
effects observed with these small molecules ( Table 54-5 ). 
 Bevacizumab, Sorafenib, Sunitinib, & 
Pazopanib 
 The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is one of the most 
important angiogenic growth factors. The growth of both primary 
and metastatic tumors requires an intact vasculature. As a result, the 
VEGF-signaling pathway represents an attractive target for chemo-
therapy. Several approaches have been taken to inhibit VEGF sig-
naling; they include inhibition of VEGF interactions with its 
receptor by targeting either the VEGF ligand with antibodies or 
soluble chimeric decoy receptors, or by direct inhibition of the 
VEGF receptor-associated tyrosine kinase activity by small mole-
cule inhibitors. 
 Bevacizumab is a recombinant humanized monoclonal anti-
body that targets all forms of VEGF-A. This antibody binds to 
and prevents VEGF-A from interacting with the target VEGF 
receptors. Bevacizumab can be safely and effectively combined 
with 5-FU-, irinotecan-, and oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy in 
the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. Bevacizumab is FDA 
approved as a first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer 
in combination with any intravenous fluoropyrimidine-contain-
ing regimen and is now also approved in combination with che-
motherapy for metastatic non-small lung cancer and breast cancer. 
One potential advantage of this antibody is that it does not appear 
to exacerbate the toxicities typically observed with cytotoxic che-
motherapy. The main safety concerns associated with bevacizumab 
include hypertension, an increased incidence of arterial throm-
boembolic events (transient ischemic attack, stroke, angina, and 
myocardial infarction), wound healing complications, gastrointes-
tinal perforations, and proteinuria. 
 Sorafenib is a small molecule that inhibits multiple receptor 
tyrosine kinases (RTKs), especially VEGF-R2 and VEGF-R3, 
platelet-derived growth factor-β (PDGFR-β), and raf kinase. It 
was initially approved for advanced renal cell cancer and is also 
approved for advanced hepatocellular cancer. 
 Sunitinib is similar to sorafenib in that it inhibits multiple RTKs, 
although the specific types are somewhat different. They include 
PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, VEGF-R1, VEGF-R2, VEGF-R3, and 
c-kit. It is approved for the treatment of advanced renal cell cancer 
and for the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) after 
disease progression on or with intolerance to imatinib. 
 Pazopanib is a small molecule that inhibits multiple RTKs, espe-
cially VEGF-R2 and VEGF-R3, PDGFR-β, and raf kinase. This oral 
agent is approved for the treatment of advanced renal cell cancer. 
 Sorafenib, sunitinib, and pazopanib are metabolized in the 
liver by the CYP3A4 system, and elimination is primarily hepatic 
with excretion in feces. Each of these agents has potential interac-
tions with drugs that are also metabolized by the CYP3A4 system, 
especially warfarin. In addition, patients should avoid grapefruit 
products and the use of St. John’s wort, as they may alter the 
clinical activity of these agents. Hypertension, bleeding complica-
tions, and fatigue are the most common adverse effects seen with 
both agents. With respect to sorafenib, skin rash and the hand-
foot syndrome are observed in up to 30–50% of patients. For 
sunitinib, there is also an increased risk of cardiac dysfunction, 
which in some cases can lead to congestive heart failure .
 ASPARAGINASE 
 Asparaginase ( L -asparagine amidohydrolase) is an enzyme used to 
treat childhood ALL. The drug is isolated and purified from 
 Escherichia coli or  Erwinia chrysanthemi for clinical use. It hydro-
lyzes circulating  L -asparagine to aspartic acid and ammonia. 
Because tumor cells in ALL lack asparagine synthetase, they 
require an exogenous source of  L -asparagine. Thus, depletion of 
 L -asparagine results in effective inhibition of protein synthesis. In 
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    969
contrast, normal cells can synthesize  L -asparagine and thus are less 
susceptible to the cytotoxic action of asparaginase. The main 
adverse effect of this agent is a hypersensitivity reaction manifested 
by fever, chills, nausea and vomiting, skin rash, and urticaria. 
Severe cases can present with bronchospasm, respiratory failure, 
and hypotension. Other side effects include an increased risk of 
both clotting and bleeding as a result of alterations in various clot-
ting factors, pancreatitis, and neurologic toxicity with lethargy, 
confusion, hallucinations, and in severe cases, coma. 
 ■ CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY OF 
CANCER CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC 
DRUGS 
 A thorough knowledge of the kinetics of tumor cell proliferation 
along with an understanding of the pharmacology and mechanism 
of action of cancer chemotherapeutic agents is important in 
designing optimal regimens for patients with cancer. The strategy 
for developing drug regimens also requires knowledge of the spe-
cific characteristics of individual tumors. For example, is there a 
high growth fraction? Is there a high spontaneous cell death rate? 
Are most of the cells in G 0 ? Is a significant fraction of the tumor 
composed of hypoxic stem cells? Are their normal counterparts 
under hormonal control? Similarly, an understanding of the phar-
macology of specific drugs is important. Are the tumor cells sensi-
tive to the drug? Is the drug cell cycle specific? Does the drug 
require activation in certain normal tissue such as the liver (cyclo-
phosphamide), or is it activated in the tumor tissue itself (capecit-
abine)? Knowledge of specific pathway abnormalities (eg, EGFR 
mutations,  KRAS mutations) for intracellular signaling may prove 
important for the next generation of anticancer drugs. 
 For some tumor types, knowledge of receptor expression is 
important. In patients with breast cancer, analysis of the tumor for 
expression of estrogen or progesterone receptors is important in 
guiding therapy with selective estrogen receptor modulators. In 
addition, analysis of breast cancer for expression of the HER-
2/ neu growth factor receptor can determine whether the human-
ized monoclonal anti-HER-2/ neu antibody, trastuzumab, would 
be appropriate therapy. In the case of prostate cancer, chemical 
suppression of androgen secretion with gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone agonists or antagonists is important. The basic pharma-
cology of hormonal therapy is discussed in  Chapter 40 . The use of 
specific cytotoxic and biologic agents for each of the main cancers 
is discussed in this section. 
 THE LEUKEMIAS 
 ACUTE LEUKEMIA 
 Childhood Leukemia 
 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the main form of leukemia 
in childhood, and it is the most common form of cancer in chil-
dren. Children with this disease have a relatively good prognosis. 
A subset of patients with neoplastic lymphocytes expressing surface 
antigenic features of T lymphocytes has a poor prognosis (see 
 Chapter 55 ). A cytoplasmic enzyme expressed by normal thymo-
cytes, terminal deoxycytidyl transferase (terminal transferase), is 
also expressed in many cases of ALL. T-cell ALL also expresses high 
levels of the enzyme adenosine deaminase (ADA). This led to inter-
est in the use of the ADA inhibitor pentostatin (deoxycoformycin) 
for treatment of such T-cell cases. Until 1948, the median length 
of survival in ALL was 3 months. With the advent of methotrexate, 
the length of survival was greatly increased. Subsequently, cortico-
steroids, 6-mercaptopurine, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, dauno-
rubicin, and asparaginase have all been found to be active against 
this disease. A combination of vincristine and prednisone plus 
other agents is currently used to induce remission. Over 90% of 
children enter complete remission with this therapy with only 
minimal toxicity. However, circulating leukemic cells often migrate 
to sanctuary sites located in the brain and testes. The value of pro-
phylactic intrathecal methotrexate therapy for prevention of central 
nervous system leukemia (a major mechanism of relapse) has been 
clearly demonstrated. Intrathecal therapy with methotrexate should 
therefore be considered as a standard component of the induction 
regimen for children with ALL. 
 Adult Leukemia 
 Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) is the most common leuke-
mia in adults. The single most active agent for AML is cytarabine; 
however, it is best used in combination with an anthracycline, 
which leads to complete remissions in about 70% of patients. 
While there are several anthracyclines that can be effectively com-
bined with cytarabine, idarubicin is preferred. 
 Patients often require intensive supportive care during the 
period of induction chemotherapy. Such care includes platelet 
transfusions to prevent bleeding, the granulocyte colony-stimulat-
ing factor filgrastim to shorten periods of neutropenia, and anti-
biotics to combat infections. Younger patients (eg, age < 55) who 
are in complete remission and have an HLA-matched donor are 
candidates for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. The trans-
plant procedure is preceded by high-dose chemotherapy and total 
body irradiation followed by immunosuppression. This approach 
may cure up to 35–40% of eligible patients. Patients over age 60 
respond less well to chemotherapy, primarily because their toler-
ance for aggressive therapy and resistance to infection are lower. 
 Once remission of AML is achieved, consolidation chemotherapy 
is required to maintain a durable remission and to induce cure. 
 CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA 
 Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) arises from a chromosomally 
abnormal hematopoietic stem cell in which a balanced translocation 
between the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22, t(9:22), is 
observed in 90–95% of cases. This translocation results in constitu-
tive expression of the Bcr-Abl fusion oncoprotein with a molecular 
weight of 210 kDa. The clinical symptoms and course are related to 
the white blood cell count and its rate of increase. Most patients with 
970    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
white cell counts over 50,000/μL should be treated. The goals of 
treatment are to reduce the granulocytes to normal levels, to raise the 
hemoglobin concentration to normal, and to relieve disease-related 
symptoms. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib is considered as 
standard first-line therapy in previously untreated patients with 
chronic phase CML. Nearly all patients treated with imatinib exhibit 
a complete hematologic response, and up to 40–50% of patients 
show a complete cytogenetic response. As described previously, this 
drug is generally well tolerated and is associated with relatively minor 
adverse effects. Initially, dasatinib and nilotinib were approved for 
patients who were intolerant or resistant to imatinib; each shows 
clinical activity, but both are now also indicated as first-line treat-
ment of chronic phase CML. In addition to these tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors, other treatment options include interferon-α, busulfan, 
other oral alkylating agents, and hydroxyurea. 
 CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA 
 Patients with early-stage chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) have 
a relatively good prognosis, and therapy has not changed the course 
of the disease. However, in the setting of high-risk disease or in the 
presence of disease-related symptoms, treatment is indicated. 
 Chlorambucil and cyclophosphamide are the two most widely 
used alkylating agents for this disease. Chlorambucil is frequently 
combined with prednisone, although there is no clear evidence that 
the combination yields better response rates or survival compared 
with chlorambucil alone. In most cases, cyclophosphamide is com-
bined with vincristine and prednisone (COP), or it can also be 
given with these same drugs along with doxorubicin (CHOP). 
Bendamustine is the newest alkylating agent to be approved for use 
in this disease, either as monotherapy or in combination with pred-
nisone. The purine nucleoside analog fludarabine is also effective in 
treating CLL. This agent can be given alone, in combination with 
cyclophosphamide and with mitoxantrone and dexamethasone, or 
combined with the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab. 
 Monoclonal antibody-targeted therapies are being widely used 
in CLL, especially in relapsed or refractory disease. Rituximab is an 
anti-CD20 antibody that has documented clinical activity in this 
setting. This chimeric antibody appears to enhance the antitumor 
effects of cytotoxic chemotherapy and is also effective in settings in 
which resistance to chemotherapy has developed. Alemtuzumab is 
a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against the CD52 
antigen and is approved for use in CLL that is refractory to alkylat-
ing agent or fludarabine therapy. Response rates up to 30–35% are 
observed, with disease stabilization in another 30% of patients. 
 HODGKIN’S & NON-HODGKIN’S 
LYMPHOMAS 
 HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA 
 The treatment of Hodgkin’s lymphoma has undergone dramatic 
evolution over the last 30 years. This lymphoma is now widely rec-
ognized as a B-cell neoplasm in which the malignant Reed-Sternberg 
cells have rearranged  VH genes. In addition, the Epstein-Barr virus 
genome has been identified in up to 80% of tumor specimens. 
 Complete staging evaluation is required before a definitive 
treatment plan can be made. For patients with stage I and stage 
IIA disease, there has been a significant change in the treatment 
approach. Initially, these patients were treated with extended-field 
radiation therapy. However, given the well-documented late 
effects of radiation therapy, which include hypothyroidism, an 
increased risk of secondary cancers, and coronary artery disease, 
combined-modality therapy with a brief course of combination 
chemotherapy and involved field radiation therapy is now the 
recommended approach. The main advance for patients with 
advanced stage III and IV Hodgkin’s lymphoma came with the 
development of MOPP (mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarba-
zine, and prednisone) chemotherapy in the 1960s. This regimen 
resulted initially in high complete response rates, on the order of 
80–90%, with cures in up to 60% of patients. More recently, the 
anthracycline-containing regimen termed ABVD (doxorubicin, 
bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine) has been shown to be 
more effective and less toxic than MOPP, especially with regard to 
the incidence of infertility and secondary malignancies. In general, 
four cycles of ABVD are given to patients. An alternative regimen, 
termed Stanford V, utilizes a 12-week course of combination che-
motherapy (doxorubicin, vinblastine, mechlorethamine, vincris-
tine, bleomycin, etoposide, and prednisone), followed by involved 
radiation therapy. 
 With all of these regimens, over 80% of previously untreated 
patients with advanced Hodgkin’s lymphoma (stages III and IV) 
are expected to go into complete remission, with disappearance of 
all disease-related symptoms and objective evidence of disease. In 
general, approximately 50–60% of all patients with Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma are cured of their disease. 
 NON-HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA 
 Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma is a heterogeneous disease, and the 
clinical characteristics of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma subsets are 
related to the underlying histopathologic features and the extent 
of disease involvement. In general, the nodular (or follicular) lym-
phomas have a far better prognosis, with a median survival up to 
7 years, compared with the diffuse lymphomas, which have a 
median survival of about 1–2 years. 
 Combination chemotherapy is the treatment standard for 
patients with diffuse non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The anthracy-
cline-containing regimen CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubi-
cin, vincristine, and prednisone) has been considered the best 
treatment in terms of initial therapy. Randomized phase III clini-
cal studies have now shown that the combination of CHOP with 
the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab results in improved 
response rates, disease-free survival, and overall survival compared 
with CHOP chemotherapy alone. 
 The nodular follicular lymphomas are low-grade, relatively 
slow-growing tumors that tend to present in an advanced stage 
and are usually confined to lymph nodes, bone marrow, and 
spleen. This form of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, when presenting 
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    971
at an advanced stage, is considered incurable, and treatment is 
generally palliative. To date, there is no evidence that immediate 
treatment with combination chemotherapy offers clinical benefit 
over close observation and “watchful waiting” with initiation of 
chemotherapy at the onset of disease symptoms. 
 MULTIPLE MYELOMA 
 This plasma cell malignancy is one of the models of neoplastic 
disease in humans as it arises from a single tumor stem cell. 
Moreover, the tumor cells produce a marker protein (myeloma 
immunoglobulin) that allows the total body burden of tumor cells 
to be quantified. Multiple myeloma principally involves the bone 
marrow and bone, causing bone pain, lytic lesions, bone fractures, 
and anemia as well as an increased susceptibility to infection. 
 Most patients with multiple myeloma are symptomatic at the 
time of initial diagnosis and require treatment with cytotoxic che-
motherapy. Treatment with the combination of the alkylating 
agent melphalan and prednisone (MP protocol) has been a stan-
dard regimen for nearly 30 years. About 40% of patients respond 
to the MP combination, and the median remission is on the order 
of 2–2.5 years. Recently, combination regimens incorporating 
 lenalidomide plus dexamethasone or the proteosome inhibitor 
 bortezomib plus melphalan and prednisone have been shown to 
be more effective as first-line therapy. 
 In patients who are considered candidates for high-dose therapy 
with stem cell transplantation, melphalan and other alkylating 
agents are to be avoided, as they can affect the success of stem cell 
harvesting. 
 Thalidomide is a well-established agent for treating refractory or 
relapsed disease, and about 30% of patients will achieve a response 
to this therapy. More recently, thalidomide has been used in combi-
nation with dexamethasone, and response rates on the order of 65% 
have been observed. Studies are now under way to directly compare 
the combination of vincristine, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone 
(VAD protocol) with the combination of thalidomide and dexa-
methasone. In some patients, especially those with poor performance 
status, single-agent pulse dexamethasone administered on a weekly 
basis can be effective in palliating symptoms. Bortezomib was first 
approved for use in relapsing or refractory multiple myeloma and is 
now widely used in the first-line treatment of multiple myeloma. 
This agent is thought to exert its main cytotoxic effects through 
inhibition of the 26 S proteosome, which results in down-regulation 
of the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) signaling pathway. Of note, 
inhibition of NF-κB has been shown to restore chemosensitivity. 
Based on this site of action, further efforts are focused on developing 
bortezomib in various combination regimens. 
 BREAST CANCER 
 STAGE I & STAGE II DISEASE 
 The management of primary breast cancer has undergone a 
remarkable evolution as a result of major efforts at early diagnosis 
(through encouragement of self-examination as well as through 
the use of cancer detection centers) and the implementation of 
combined modality approaches incorporating systemic chemo-
therapy as an adjuvant to surgery and radiation therapy. Women 
with stage I disease (small primary tumors and negative axillary 
lymph node dissections) are currently treated with surgery alone, 
and they have an 80% chance of cure. 
 Women with node-positive disease have a high risk of both local 
and systemic recurrence. Thus, lymph node status directly indicates 
the risk of occult distant micrometastasis. In this situation, postop-
erative use of systemic adjuvant chemotherapy with six cycles of 
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil (CMF proto-
col) or of fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FAC) 
has been shown to significantly reduce the relapse rate and prolong 
survival. Alternative regimens with equivalent clinical benefit 
include four cycles of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide and six 
cycles of fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FEC). 
Each of these chemotherapy regimens has benefited women with 
stage II breast cancer with one to three involved lymph nodes. 
Women with four or more involved nodes have had limited benefit 
thus far from adjuvant chemotherapy. Long-term analysis has 
clearly shown improved survival rates in node-positive premeno-
pausal women who have been treated aggressively with multiagent 
combination chemotherapy. The results from three randomized 
clinical trials clearly show that the addition of trastuzumab, a 
monoclonal antibody directed against the HER-2/ neu receptor, to 
anthracycline- and taxane-containing adjuvant chemotherapy ben-
efits women with HER-2-overexpressing breast cancer with respect 
to disease-free and overall survival. 
 Breast cancer was the first neoplasm shown to be responsive to 
hormonal manipulation. Tamoxifen is beneficial in postmeno-
pausal women when used alone or in combination with cytotoxic 
chemotherapy. The present recommendation is to administer 
tamoxifen for 5 years of continuous therapy after surgical resec-
tion. Longer durations of tamoxifen therapy do not appear to add 
additional clinical benefit. Postmenopausal women who complete 
5 years of tamoxifen therapy should be placed on an aromatase 
inhibitor such as anastrozole for at least 2.5 years, although the 
optimal duration is unknown. In women who have completed 
2–3 years of tamoxifen therapy, treatment with an aromatase 
inhibitor for a total of 5 years of hormonal therapy is now recom-
mended (see  Chapter 40 ). 
 Results from several randomized trials for breast cancer have 
established that adjuvant chemotherapy for premenopausal women 
and adjuvant tamoxifen for postmenopausal women are of benefit 
to women with stage I (node-negative) breast cancer. While this 
group of patients has the lowest overall risk of recurrence after 
surgery alone (about 35–50% over 15 years), this risk can be fur-
ther reduced with adjuvant therapy. 
 STAGE III & STAGE IV DISEASE 
 The approach to women with advanced breast cancer remains a 
major challenge, as current treatment options are only palliative. 
Combination chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, or a combination 
of both results in overall response rates of 40–50%, but only a 
972    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
10–20% complete response rate. Breast cancers expressing estro-
gen receptors (ER) or progesterone receptors (PR), retain the 
intrinsic hormonal sensitivities of the normal breast—including 
the growth-stimulatory response to ovarian, adrenal, and pituitary 
hormones. Patients who show improvement with hormonal abla-
tive procedures also respond to the addition of tamoxifen. The 
aromatase inhibitors anastrozole and letrozole are now approved as 
first-line therapy in women with advanced breast cancer whose 
tumors are hormone-receptor positive. In addition, these agents 
and exemestane are approved as second-line therapy following 
treatment with tamoxifen. 
 Patients with significant involvement of the lung, liver, or brain 
and those with rapidly progressive disease rarely benefit from hor-
monal maneuvers, and initial systemic chemotherapy is indicated 
in such cases. For the 25–30% of breast cancer patients whose 
tumors express the HER-2/ neu cell surface receptor, the human-
ized monoclonal anti-HER-2/ neu antibody, trastuzumab, is avail-
able for therapeutic use alone or in combination with cytotoxic 
chemotherapy. 
 About 50–60% of patients with metastatic disease respond to 
initial chemotherapy. A broad range of anticancer agents have 
activity in this disease, including the anthracyclines (doxorubicin, 
mitoxantrone, and epirubicin), the taxanes (docetaxel, paclitaxel, 
and albumin-bound paclitaxel) along with the microtubule inhib-
itor ixabepilone, navelbine, capecitabine, gemcitabine, cyclophos-
phamide, methotrexate, and cisplatin. The anthracyclines and the 
taxanes are two of the most active classes of cytotoxic drugs. 
Combination chemotherapy has been found to induce higher and 
more durable remissions in up to 50–80% of patients, and anthra-
cycline-containing regimens are now considered the standard of 
care in first-line therapy. With most combination regimens, partial 
remissions have a median duration of about 10 months and com-
plete remissions have a duration of about 15 months. Unfortunately, 
only 10–20% of patients achieve complete remissions with any of 
these regimens, and as noted, complete remissions are usually not 
long-lasting. 
 PROSTATE CANCER 
 Prostate cancer was the second cancer shown to be responsive to 
hormonal manipulation. The treatment of choice for patients with 
advanced prostate cancer is elimination of testosterone production 
by the testes through either surgical or chemical castration. Bilateral 
orchiectomy or estrogen therapy in the form of diethylstilbestrol 
was previously used as first-line therapy. Presently, the use of 
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists— 
including leuprolide and goserelin agonists, alone or in combina-
tion with an antiandrogen (eg, flutamide, bicalutamide, or 
nilutamide)—is the preferred approach. There appears to be no 
survival advantage of total androgen blockade using a combination 
of LHRH agonist and antiandrogen agent compared with single-
agent therapy. Hormonal treatment reduces symptoms—especially 
bone pain—in 70–80% of patients and may cause a significant 
reduction in the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level, which is now 
widely accepted as a surrogate marker for response to treatment in 
prostate cancer. Although initial hormonal manipulation is able to 
control symptoms for up to 2 years, patients usually develop pro-
gressive disease. Second-line hormonal therapies include aminoglu-
tethimide plus hydrocortisone, the antifungal agent ketoconazole 
plus hydrocortisone, or hydrocortisone alone. 
 Unfortunately, nearly all patients with advanced prostate cancer 
eventually become refractory to hormone therapy. A regimen of 
mitoxantrone and prednisone is approved in patients with hor-
mone-refractory prostate cancer because it provides effective pallia-
tion in those who experience significant bone pain. Estramustine is 
an antimicrotubule agent that produces an almost 20% response 
rate as a single agent. However, when used in combination with 
either etoposide or a taxane such as docetaxel or paclitaxel, response 
rates are more than doubled to 40–50%. The combination of doc-
etaxel and prednisone was recently shown to confer survival advan-
tage when compared with the mitoxantrone-prednisone regimen, 
and this combination has now become the standard of care for 
hormone-refractory prostate cancer. 
 GASTROINTESTINAL CANCERS 
 Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the most common type of gastrointesti-
nal malignancy. Nearly 145,000 new cases are diagnosed each year 
in the USA; worldwide, nearly one million cases are diagnosed each 
year. At the time of initial presentation, only about 40–45% of 
patients are potentially curable with surgery. Patients presenting 
with high-risk stage II disease and stage III disease are candidates for 
adjuvant chemotherapy with an oxaliplatin-based regimen in com-
bination with 5-FU plus leucovorin (FOLFOX or FLOX) or with 
oral capecitabine (XELOX) and are generally treated for 6 months 
following surgical resection. Treatment with this combination regi-
men reduces the recurrence rate after surgery by 35% and clearly 
improves overall patient survival compared with surgery alone. 
 Significant advances have been made over the past 10 years 
with respect to treatment of metastatic CRC. There are four active 
cytotoxic agents—5-FU, the oral fluoropyrimidine capecitabine, 
oxaliplatin, and irinotecan; and three active biologic agents—the 
anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab and the anti-EGFR antibodies 
cetuximab and panitumumab. In general, a fluoropyrimidine with 
either intravenous 5-FU or oral capecitabine serves as the main 
foundation of cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens. Recent clinical 
studies have shown that FOLFOX/FOLFIRI regimens in combi-
nation with the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab or with the 
anti-EGFR antibody cetuximab result in significantly improved 
clinical efficacy with no worsening of the toxicities normally 
observed with chemotherapy. In order for patients to derive maxi-
mal benefit, they should be treated with each of these active agents 
in a continuum of care approach. Using this strategy, median 
survivals now are in the 24–28 month range, and in some cases, 
approach 3 years. One of the main challenges facing clinicians at 
present is to begin to identify which patients would benefit from 
these various cytotoxic and biologic agents as well as identify those 
who might experience increased toxicity. 
 The incidence of gastric cancer, esophageal cancer, and pancre-
atic cancer is much lower than for CRC, but these malignancies 
tend to be more aggressive and result in greater tumor-related 
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    973
symptoms. In most cases, they cannot be completely resected 
surgically, as most patients present with either locally advanced or 
metastatic disease at the time of their initial diagnosis. 5-FU-based 
chemotherapy, using either intravenous 5-FU or oral capecitabine, 
is generally considered the main backbone for regimens targeting 
gastroesophageal cancers. In addition, cisplatin-based regimens in 
combination with either irinotecan or one of the taxanes (pacli-
taxel or docetaxel) also exhibit clinical activity. Response rates in 
the 40–50% range are now being reported. Recent studies have 
shown that the addition of the biologic agent trastuzumab to cis-
platin-containing chemotherapy regimens provides significant 
clinical benefit in gastric cancer patients whose tumors overexpress 
the HER-2/ neu receptor. In addition, neoadjuvant approaches 
with combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy prior to 
surgery appear to have promise in selected patients. 
 Although gemcitabine is approved for use as a single agent in 
metastatic pancreatic cancer, the overall response rate is less than 
10%, with complete responses being quite rare. Intense efforts con-
tinue to be placed on incorporating gemcitabine into various com-
bination regimens and on identifying novel agents that target signal 
transduction pathways thought to be critical for the growth of pan-
creatic cancer. One such agent is the small molecule inhibitor erlo-
tinib, which targets the EGFR-associated tyrosine kinase. This agent 
is now approved for use in combination with gemcitabine in locally 
advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer although the improvement 
in clinical benefit is relatively small. There is also evidence to sup-
port the use of adjuvant chemotherapy with either single-agent 
gemcitabine or 5-FU/leucovorin in patients with early-stage pancre-
atic cancer who have undergone successful surgical resection. 
 LUNG CANCER 
 Lung cancer is divided into two main histopathologic subtypes, 
non-small cell and small cell. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
makes up about 75–80% of all cases of lung cancer, and this group 
includes adenocarcinoma, squamous cell cancer, and large cell 
cancer, while small cell lung cancer (SCLC) makes up the remain-
ing 20–25%. When NSCLC is diagnosed in an advanced stage 
with metastatic disease, the prognosis is extremely poor, with a 
median survival of about 8 months. It is clear that prevention (pri-
marily through avoidance of cigarette smoking) and early detection 
remain the most important means of control. When diagnosed at 
an early stage, surgical resection results in patient cure. Moreover, 
recent studies have shown that adjuvant platinum-based chemo-
therapy provides a survival benefit in patients with pathologic stage 
IB, II, and IIIA disease. However, in most cases, distant metastases 
have occurred at the time of diagnosis. In certain instances, radia-
tion therapy can be offered for palliation of pain, airway obstruc-
tion, or bleeding and to treat patients whose performance status 
would not allow for more aggressive treatments. 
 In patients with advanced disease, systemic chemotherapy is gen-
erally recommended. Combination regimens that include a plati-
num agent (“platinum doublets”) appear superior to non-platinum 
doublets, and either cisplatin or carboplatin are appropriate platinum 
agents for such regimens. For the second drug, paclitaxel and vino-
relbine appear to have activity independent of histology, while the 
antifolate pemetrexed should be used for non-squamous cell cancer, 
and gemcitabine for squamous cell cancer. For patients with good 
performance status and those with non-squamous histology, the 
combination of the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab with carbo-
platin and paclitaxel is a standard treatment option. In patients 
deemed not to be appropriate candidates for bevacizumab therapy 
and those with squamous cell histology, a platinum-based chemo-
therapy regimen in combination with the anti-EGFR antibody 
cetuximab is a reasonable treatment strategy. Maintenance chemo-
therapy with pemetrexed is now used in patients with non-squamous 
NSCLC whose disease has not progressed after four cycles of plati-
num-based first-line chemotherapy. Finally, first-line therapy with an 
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, such as erlotinib or gefitinib, sig-
nificantly improves outcomes in NSCLC patients with sensitizing 
EGFR mutations. 
 Small cell lung cancer is the most aggressive form of lung cancer, 
and it is exquisitely sensitive, at least initially, to platinum-based 
combination regimens, including cisplatin and etoposide or cisplatin 
and irinotecan. When diagnosed at an early stage, this disease is 
potentially curable using a combined modality approach of chemo-
therapy and radiation therapy. Unfortunately, drug resistance eventu-
ally develops in nearly all patients with extensive disease. The 
topoisomerase I inhibitor topotecan is used as second-line mono-
therapy in patients who have failed a platinum-based regimen. 
 OVARIAN CANCER 
 In the majority of patients, ovarian cancer remains occult and 
becomes symptomatic only after it has already metastasized to the 
peritoneal cavity. At this stage, it usually presents with malignant 
ascites. It is important to accurately stage this cancer with laparos-
copy, ultrasound, and CT scanning. Patients with stage I disease 
appear to benefit from whole-abdomen radiotherapy and may 
receive additional benefit from combination chemotherapy with 
cisplatin and cyclophosphamide. 
 Combination chemotherapy is the standard approach to stage 
III and stage IV disease. Randomized clinical studies have shown 
that the combination of paclitaxel and cisplatin provides survival 
benefit compared with the previous standard combination of cis-
platin plus cyclophosphamide. More recently, carboplatin plus 
paclitaxel has become the treatment of choice. In patients who 
present with recurrent disease, the topoisomerase I inhibitor topo-
tecan, the alkylating agent altretamine, and liposomal doxorubicin 
are used as single agent monotherapy. 
 TESTICULAR CANCER 
 The introduction of platinum-based combination chemotherapy 
has made an impressive change in the treatment of patients with 
advanced testicular cancer. Presently, chemotherapy is recom-
mended for patients with stage IIC or stage III seminomas and 
nonseminomatous disease. Over 90% of patients respond to che-
motherapy and, depending upon the extent and severity of dis-
ease, complete remissions are observed in up to 70–80% of 
patents. Over 50% of patients achieving complete remission are 
cured with chemotherapy. In patients with good risk features, 
974    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
three cycles of cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB protocol) 
or four cycles of cisplatin and etoposide yield virtually identical 
results. In patients with high-risk disease, the combination of cis-
platin, etoposide, and ifosfamide can be used as well as etoposide 
and bleomycin with high-dose cisplatin. 
 MALIGNANT MELANOMA 
 Malignant melanoma is curable when it presents locally, with surgi-
cal resection being the main treatment approach. However, once 
spread to metastatic sites has been diagnosed, it is one of the most 
difficult cancers to treat because it is a relatively drug-resistant 
tumor. While dacarbazine, temozolomide, and cisplatin are the 
most active cytotoxic agents for this disease, the overall response 
rates to these agents remain low. Biologic agents, including 
interferon-α and interleukin-2 (IL-2), have greater activity than 
traditional cytotoxic agents, and treatment with high-dose IL-2 has 
led to cures, albeit in a relatively small subset of patients. Significant 
efforts have focused on utilizing biologic therapy with combination 
chemotherapy in what have been labeled biochemotherapy regi-
mens. Although overall response rates as well as complete response 
rates appear to be much higher with biochemotherapy regimens 
compared with chemotherapy alone, treatment toxicity also seems 
to be increased. As such, this approach remains investigational. 
 The BRAFV600E mutation has been identified in the large 
majority of melanomas. This mutation results in constitutive acti-
vation of BRAF kinase, which then leads to activation of down-
stream signaling pathways involved in cell growth and proliferation. 
In August 2011, the FDA approved a novel, oral, and highly selec-
tive small molecule inhibitor of BRAFV600E  (vemurafenib) with 
highly promising activity in metastatic melanoma. Further studies 
are ongoing to confirm its activity as a single agent as well as in 
combination with other cytotoxic and biologic agents. 
 BRAIN CANCER 
 Chemotherapy has only limited efficacy in the treatment of malig-
nant gliomas. In general, the nitrosoureas, because of their ability 
to cross the blood-brain barrier, are the most active agents in this 
disease. Carmustine (BCNU) can be used as a single agent, or 
lomustine (CCNU) can be used in combination with procarbazine 
and vincristine (PCV regimen). In addition, the newer alkylating 
agent temozolomide is active when combined with radiotherapy 
and used in patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma multi-
forme (GBM) as well as in those with recurrent disease. The histo-
pathologic subtype oligodendroglioma has been shown to be 
especially chemosensitive, and the PCV regimen is the treatment of 
choice for this disease. There is growing evidence that the anti-
VEGF antibody bevacizumab alone or in combination with che-
motherapy has promising activity in adult GBM, and bevacizumab 
was recently approved as a single agent for GBM in the setting of 
progressive disease following first-line chemotherapy. Of note, 
small molecule inhibitors of VEGFR-TKs are also undergoing 
active clinical development because they show interesting activity 
in adult brain tumors. 
 SECONDARY MALIGNANCIES & 
CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY 
 The development of secondary malignancies is a late complication 
of the alkylating agents and the epipodophyllotoxin etoposide. 
The most frequent secondary malignancy is acute myelogenous 
leukemia (AML). In general, AML develops in up to 15% of 
patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma who have received radiother-
apy plus MOPP chemotherapy and in patients with multiple 
myeloma, ovarian carcinoma, or breast carcinoma treated with 
melphalan. The increased risk of AML is observed as early as 2–4 
years after the initiation of chemotherapy and typically peaks at 5 
and 9 years. With improvements in the clinical efficacy of various 
combination chemotherapy regimens resulting in prolonged sur-
vival and in some cases actual cure of cancer, the issue of how 
second cancers may affect long-term survival assumes greater 
importance. There is already evidence that certain alkylating 
agents (eg, cyclophosphamide) may be less carcinogenic than oth-
ers (eg, melphalan). In addition to AML, other secondary malig-
nancies have been well-described, including non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma and bladder cancer, the latter most typically associated 
with cyclophosphamide therapy. 
The reader is referred to the manufacturer’s literature for the most recent information on preparations available.
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E
The reader is referred to the manufacturer’s literature for the most recent information on preparations available.
SUMMARY Anticancer Drugs
See Tables 54-2, -3, -4, -5
CHAPTER 54 Cancer Chemotherapy    975
 REFERENCES 
 Books & Monographs 
 Abeloff MD et al:  Clinical Oncology, 4th ed. Elsevier, 2008. 
 Chabner BA, Longo DL:  Cancer Chemotherapy and Biotherapy: Principles and 
Practice , 4th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006. 
 Chu E, DeVita VT Jr:  Cancer Chemotherapy Drug Manual  2011, 11th ed. Jones & 
Bartlett, 2010. 
 DeVita VT Jr, Hellman S, Rosenberg SA:  Cancer: Principles and Practice of 
Oncology, 9th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011. 
 Harris JR et al:  Diseases of the Breast , 4th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
2009. 
 Hoppe R et al:  Textbook of Radiation Oncology , 3rd ed. Elsevier, 2010. 
 Hoskins WJ, Perez CA, Young RC:  Principles and Practice of Gynecologic Oncology , 
4th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2004. 
 Kantoff PW et al:  Prostate Cancer: Principles and Practice . Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2001. 
 Kelsen DP et al:  Gastrointestinal Oncology: Principles and Practices , 2nd ed. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2007. 
 Kufe D et al:  Cancer Medicine , 7th ed. BC Decker, 2006. 
 Mendelsohn J et al:  The Molecular Basis of Cancer . WB Saunders, 2008. 
 Pass HI et al:  Principles and Practice of Lung Cancer: The Official Reference Text of 
the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC), 4th ed. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010. 
 Pizzo PA, Poplack AG:  Principles and Practice of Pediatric Oncology, 6th ed. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010. 
 Weinberg RA:  Biology of Cancer . Taylor & Francis, 2006. 
 Articles & Reviews 
 DeVita VT, Chu E: The history of cancer chemotherapy. Cancer Res 
2008;68:8643. 
 Redmond KM et al: Resistance mechanisms to cancer chemotherapy. Front Biosci 
2008;13:5138. 
 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The 5-year survival rate for patients with high-risk stage 
III CRC is on the order of 25–30%. Because the patient has 
no symptoms after surgery and has no comorbid illnesses, 
he would be an appropriate candidate to receive aggressive 
adjuvant chemotherapy. The usual recommendation would 
be to administer 6 months of oxaliplatin-based chemo-
therapy using either infusional 5-FU or oral capecitabine 
as the fluoropyrimidine base in combination with oxalipla-
tin. Adjuvant chemotherapy is usually begun 4–6 weeks 
after surgery to allow sufficient time for surgical wound to 
heal.
 Patients with partial or complete deficiency in the enzyme 
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) experience an 
increased incidence of severe toxicity to fluoropyrimidines in 
the form of myelosuppression, gastrointestinal toxicity, and 
neurotoxicity. Although mutations in DPD can be identified 
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, nearly 50% of patients 
who exhibit severe 5-FU toxicity do not have a defined muta-
tion in the DPD gene. In addition, such mutations may not 
result in reduced expression of the DPD protein or in altered 
enzymatic activity. For this reason, genetic testing is not rec-
ommended at this time as part of routine clinical practice.
This page intentionally left blank 
977
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Agents that suppress the immune system play an important role in 
preventing the rejection of organ or tissue grafts and in the treatment 
of certain diseases that arise from dysregulation of the immune 
response. While precise details of the mechanisms of action of a 
number of these agents are still obscure, knowledge of the elements 
of the immune system is useful in understanding their effects. Agents 
that augment the immune response or selectively alter the balance of 
various components of the immune system are also becoming impor-
tant in the management of certain diseases such as cancer, AIDS, and 
autoimmune or inflammatory diseases. A growing number of other 
conditions (infections, cardiovascular diseases, organ transplanta-
tion) may also be candidates for immune manipulation. 
 ■ ELEMENTS OF THE IMMUNE 
SYSTEM  
 NORMAL IMMUNE RESPONSES 
 The immune system has evolved to protect the host from invading 
pathogens and to eliminate disease. At its functioning best, the 
immune system is exquisitely responsive to invading pathogens while 
retaining the capacity to recognize self tissues and antigens to which 
it is tolerant. Protection from infection and disease is provided by the 
collaborative efforts of the innate and adaptive immune systems. 
 The Innate Immune System 
 The innate immune system is the first line of defense against 
invading pathogens (eg, bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites) and 
consists of mechanical, biochemical, and cellular components. 
Mechanical components include skin/epidermis and mucus; bio-
chemical components include antimicrobial peptides and proteins 
(eg, defensins), complement, enzymes (eg, lysozyme, acid hydro-
lases), interferons, acidic pH, and free radicals (eg, hydrogen per-
oxide, superoxide anions); cellular components include neutrophils, 
monocytes, macrophages, natural killer (NK), and natural killer-T 
(NKT) cells. Unlike adaptive immunity, the innate immune 
response exists prior to infection, is not enhanced by repeated 
infection, and is generally not antigen-specific. An intact skin or 
mucosa is the first barrier to infection. When this barrier is 
breached, an immediate innate immune response, referred to as 
“inflammation” is provoked that ultimately leads to destruction of 
the pathogen. The process of pathogen destruction can be accom-
plished, for example, by biochemical components such as lysozyme 
(which breaks down the protective peptidoglycan cell wall) and 
the split products arising from complement activation. 
Complement components ( Figure 55–1 ) enhance macrophage 
and neutrophil phagocytosis by acting as opsonins (C3b) and 
chemoattractants (C3a, C5a), which recruit immune cells from 
the bloodstream to the site of infection. The activation of comple-
ment eventually leads to pathogen lysis via the generation of a 
membrane attack complex that creates holes in the membrane and 
results in leakage of cellular components. 
 During the inflammatory response triggered by infection, neu-
trophils and monocytes enter the tissue sites from peripheral circula-
tion. This cellular influx is mediated by the action of 
 chemoattractant cytokines (chemokines) (eg, interleukin-8 [IL-8; 
CXCL8], macrophage chemotactic protein-1 [MCP-1; CCL2], 
55
Immunopharmacology
 Douglas F. Lake, PhD, Adrienne D. Briggs, MD, & 
Emmanuel T. Akporiaye, PhD 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 30-year-old woman has one living child, age 6. Her child 
and her husband are Rh positive and she is Rh o (D) and D u 
negative. She is now in her ninth month of pregnancy and is 
in the labor room having frequent contractions. Her Rh 
antibody test taken earlier in the pregnancy was negative. 
What immunotherapy is appropriate for this patient? When 
and how should it be administered? 
978    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
and macrophage inflammatory protein-1α [MIP-1α; CCL3]) 
released from activated endothelial cells and immune cells (mostly 
tissue macrophages) at the inflammatory site. Egress of the 
immune cells from blood vessels into the inflammatory site is 
mediated by adhesive interactions between cell surface receptors 
(eg,  L -selectin, integrins) on the immune cells and ligands (eg, 
sialyl-Lewis x, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 [ICAM-1]) on 
the activated endothelial cell surface. The tissue macrophages as 
well as dendritic cells express pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) 
that include Toll-like receptors (TLRs), nucleotide-binding oli-
gomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs), scavenger 
receptors, mannose receptors, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-
binding protein, which recognize key evolutionarily conserved 
pathogen components referred to as pathogen-associated molecu-
lar patterns (PAMPs). Examples of PAMPs include microbe-
derived unmethylated CpG DNA, flagellin, double-stranded 
RNA, peptidoglycan, and LPS. The PRRs recognize PAMPs in 
various components of pathogens and stimulate the release of 
proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and interferons. If the 
innate immune response is successfully executed, the invading 
pathogen is ingested, degraded, and eliminated, and disease is 
either prevented or is of short duration. 
 In addition to monocytes and neutrophils,  natural killer (NK), 
 natural killer-T (NKT), and  gamma-delta T (fc T) cells recruited 
to the inflammatory site contribute to the innate response by secret-
ing interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and IL-17, which activate resident 
tissue macrophages and dendritic cells and recruit neutrophils 
respectively to successfully eliminate invading pathogens. NK cells 
are so called because they are able to recognize and destroy virus-
infected normal cells as well as tumor cells without prior stimula-
tion. This activity is regulated by “killer cell immunoglobulin-like 
receptors” (KIRs) on the NK cell surface that are specific for major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. When NK 
cells bind self MHC class I proteins (expressed on all nucleated 
cells), these receptors deliver inhibitory signals, preventing them 
from killing normal host cells. Tumor cells or virus-infected cells 
that have down-regulated MHC class I expression do not engage 
these KIRs, resulting in activation of NK cells and subsequent 
destruction of the target cell. NK cells kill target cells by releasing 
cytotoxic granules such as perforins and granzymes that induce 
programmed cell death. 
 NKT cells express T-cell receptors as well as receptors com-
monly found on NK cells. NKT cells recognize microbial lipid 
antigens presented by a unique class of MHC-like molecules 
known as CD1 and have been implicated in host defense against 
microbial agents, autoimmune diseases, and tumors. 
 The Adaptive Immune System 
 The adaptive immune system is mobilized by cues from the innate 
response when the innate processes are incapable of coping with 
an infection. The adaptive immune system has a number of char-
acteristics that contribute to its success in eliminating pathogens. 
These include the ability to (1) respond to a variety of antigens, 
each in a specific manner; (2) discriminate between foreign (“non-
self”) antigens (pathogens) and self antigens of the host; and (3) 
respond to a previously encountered antigen in a learned way by 
initiating a vigorous memory response. This adaptive response 
culminates in the production of  antibodies, which are the effec-
tors of  humoral immunity; and the activation of  T lymphocytes, 
which are the effectors of  cell-mediated immunity. 
 The induction of specific adaptive immunity requires the par-
ticipation of professional  antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which 
include dendritic cells (DCs), macrophages, and B lymphocytes. 
These cells play pivotal roles in the induction of an adaptive 
immune response because of their capacity to phagocytize particu-
late antigens (eg, pathogens) or endocytose protein antigens, and 
enzymatically digest them to generate peptides, which are then 
loaded onto class I or class II MHC proteins and “presented” to 
the cell surface T-cell receptor (TCR) ( Figure 55–2 ). CD8 T cells 
recognize class I-MHC peptide complexes while CD4 T cells rec-
ognize class II-MHC peptide complexes. At least two signals are 
necessary for the activation of T cells. The first signal is delivered 
following engagement of the TCR with peptide-bound MHC 
molecules. In the absence of a second signal, the T cells become 
unresponsive (anergic) or undergo apoptosis. The second signal 
involves ligation of costimulatory molecules (CD40, CD80 [also 
known as B7-1], and CD86 [also known as B7-2]) on the APC to 
A C R O N Y M S
ADA
Adenosine deaminase
ALG
Antilymphocyte globulin
APC
Antigen-presenting cell
ATG
Antithymocyte globulin
CD
Cluster of differentiation
CSF
Colony-stimulating factor
CTL
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
DC
Dendritic cell
DTH
Delayed-type hypersensitivity
FKBP
FK-binding protein
HAMA
Human antimouse antibody
HLA
Human leukocyte antigen
IFN
Interferon
IGIV
Immune globulin intravenous
IL
Interleukin
LFA
Leukocyte function-associated antigen
MAB
Monoclonal antibody
MHC
Major histocompatibility complex
NK cell
Natural killer cell
SCID
Severe combined immunodeficiency disease
TCR
T-cell receptor
TGF-a
Transforming growth factor-β
TH1, TH2
T helper cell types 1 and 2
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    979
their respective ligands (CD40L for CD40, CD28 for CD80 or 
CD86). Activation of T cells is regulated via a negative feedback 
loop involving another molecule known as T-lymphocyte-
associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4). Following engagement of CD28 
with CD80 or CD86, CTLA-4 in the cytoplasm is mobilized to 
the cell surface where, because of its higher affinity of binding to 
CD80 and CD86, it outcompetes or displaces CD28 resulting in 
suppression of T-cell activation and proliferation. This property of 
CTLA-4 has been exploited as a strategy for sustaining a desirable 
immune response such as that directed against cancer. A recombi-
nant humanized antibody that binds CTLA-4 (ipilimumab) pre-
vents its association with CD80/CD86. In so doing, the activated 
state of T cells is sustained. Recently completed vaccine trials in 
metastatic melanoma patients receiving anti-CTLA-4 antibody 
reported objective and durable clinical responses in a few patients. 
Unfortunately, these beneficial responses were associated with the 
development of autoimmune toxicity in some patients, raising 
concern about this approach. 
 T lymphocytes develop and learn to recognize self and non-self 
antigens in the thymus; those T cells that bind with high affinity 
to self antigens in the thymus undergo apoptosis (negative selection), 
Antigen-
presenting cell
CD40
T lymphocyte
T cell
TCR
MHC
CD40L
ICAM-1
LFA-1
CD28
CD80/86
CTLA-4
CD2
LFA-3
Dendritic 
cell
1
2
Macrophage
Opsonization
Macrophage
Inflammatory 
site
Bacteria
Monocyte
Bloodstream
Endothelial cell
2
1
3
2
1
3
C3a,
C5a
C3a,
C5a
C3a, C5a
Chemotaxis
Complement (C1–C9)
C5b, C6, C7, C8, C9
Bacterial lysis
Release of salts,
proteins, water, etc
Bacterial destruction
C3b
receptor
C3b
A
B
C
C3b
(MAC)
 FIGURE 55–1 Role of complement in innate immunity. Complement is made up of nine proteins (C1–C9), which are split into fragments 
during activation.  A: Complement components (C3a, C5a) attract phagocytes (1) to inflammatory sites (2), where they ingest and degrade 
pathogens (3).  B: Complement components C5b, C6, C7, C8, and C9 associate to form a membrane attack complex (MAC) that lyses bacteria, 
causing their destruction.  C: Complement component C3b is an opsonin that coats bacteria (1) and facilitates their ingestion (2) and digestion 
(3) by phagocytes. 
 FIGURE 55–2  T-cell activation by an antigen-presenting cell 
requires engagement of the T-cell receptor by the MHC-peptide 
complex (signal 1) and binding of the costimulatory molecules (CD80, 
CD86) on the dendritic cell to CD28 on the T cell (signal 2). The activation 
signals are strengthened by CD40/CD40L and ICAM-1/LFA-1 interac-
tions. In a normal immune response, T-cell activation is regulated by 
T-cell-derived CTLA-4, which binds to CD80 or CD86 with higher affinity 
than CD28 and sends inhibitory signals to the nucleus of the T cell. 
980    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
while those that are capable of recognizing foreign antigens in the 
presence of self MHC molecules are retained and expanded (posi-
tive selection) for export to the periphery (lymph nodes, spleen, 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, peripheral blood), where they 
become activated after encountering MHC-presented peptides 
( Figures 55–2 and  55–3 ). 
 Studies using murine T-cell clones have demonstrated the pres-
ence of two subsets of T helper lymphocytes  (T H 1 and  T H 2) based 
on the cytokines they secrete after activation. This demarcation is 
not so clear-cut in humans. The T H 1 subset characteristically 
produces IFN-γ, IL-2, and IL-12 and induces cell-mediated 
immunity by activation of macrophages, cytotoxic T cells (CTLs), 
and NK cells. The T H 2 subset produces IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, and 
IL-10 (and sometimes IL-13), which induce B-cell proliferation 
and differentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells. IL-10 
produced by T H 2 cells inhibits cytokine production by T H 1 cells 
via the down-regulation of MHC expression by APCs. Conversely, 
IFN-γ produced by T H 1 cells inhibits the proliferation of T H 2 
cells ( Figure 55–3 ). Although these subsets have been well 
described in vitro, the nature of the antigenic challenge that elicits 
Opsonized
bacteria
Macrophage
Lysosome
IL-2
IL-10
IFN-γ
IL-2
IL-4, IL-5
Activated
macrophage
(kills bacteria)
Activated
NK cell
(kills virus-
infected cells
and tumor
cells)
Activated
cytotoxic T cell
(kills tumor 
cells and 
virus-infected
cells)
Cell-mediated immunity
Plasma cells
Humoral immunity
Memory B cells
B lymphocyte
Class II MHC
Peptide
Immunoglobulin
 classes
IgG
IgM
IgA
IgD
IgE
Antigen-
presenting
cell
IL-1
TH
TH1
TH2
IL-2
T lymphocyte
Proliferation
IFN-γ
IFN-γ
TNF-β
Differentiation
 FIGURE 55–3  Scheme of cellular interactions during the generation of cell-mediated and humoral immune responses (see text). The 
cell-mediated arm of the immune response involves the ingestion and digestion of antigen by antigen-presenting cells such as macrophages. 
Activated T H cells secrete IL-2, which causes proliferation and activation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and T H 1 and T H 2 cell subsets. T H 1 cells also 
produce IFN-γ and TNF-β, which can directly activate macrophages and NK cells. The humoral response is triggered when B lymphocytes bind 
antigen via their surface immunoglobulin. They are then induced by T H 2-derived IL-4 and IL-5 to proliferate and differentiate into memory cells 
and antibody-secreting plasma cells. Regulatory cytokines such as IFN-γ and IL-10 down-regulate T H 2 and T H 1 responses, respectively. 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    981
a T H 1 or T H 2 phenotype is less clear. Extracellular bacteria typi-
cally cause the elaboration of T H 2 cytokines, culminating in the 
production of neutralizing or opsonic antibodies. In contrast, 
intracellular organisms (eg, mycobacteria) elicit the production of 
T H 1 cytokines, which lead to the activation of effector cells such 
as macrophages. A less well-defined T-cell subset (T H 3) has been 
described that produces transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), 
whose numerous functions include down-regulation of prolifera-
tion and differentiation of T lymphocytes. 
 Recently, a subset of CD4 T cells that secrete IL-17 (T H 17) has 
been implicated in neutrophil recruitment to sites of inflamma-
tion. A population of CD4 T cells that is essential for preventing 
autoimmunity and allergy as well as maintaining homeostasis and 
tolerance to self antigens is the regulatory (Treg) T cell. In the 
mouse, this cell population exists as natural Treg (nTreg), derived 
directly from the thymus, and induced (adaptive) Treg (iTreg), 
generated from naïve CD4 T cells in the periphery. Both popula-
tions have also been shown to inhibit antitumor immune responses 
and are implicated in fostering tumor growth and progression. 
Recent attempts to distinguish both populations have resulted in 
the discovery of a transcription factor, Helios, in nTreg but not in 
iTreg cells. 
 CD8 T lymphocytes recognize endogenously processed pep-
tides presented by virus-infected cells or tumor cells. These pep-
tides are usually nine-amino-acid fragments derived from virus or 
protein tumor antigens in the cytoplasm and are loaded onto 
MHC class I molecules ( Figure 55–2 ) in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum. In contrast, class II MHC molecules present peptides (usu-
ally 11–22 amino acids) derived from extracellular (exogenous) 
pathogens to CD4 T helper cells. In some instances, exogenous 
antigens, upon ingestion by APCs, can be presented on class I 
MHC molecules to CD8 T cells. This phenomenon, referred to as 
“cross-presentation,” involves retro-translocation of antigens from 
the endosome to the cytosol for peptide generation in the prote-
osome and is thought to be useful in generating effective immune 
responses against infected host cells that are incapable of priming 
T lymphocytes. Upon activation, CD8 T cells induce target cell 
death via lytic granule enzymes (“granzymes”), perforin, and the 
Fas-Fas ligand (Fas-FasL) apoptosis pathways. 
 B lymphocytes undergo selection in the bone marrow, during 
which self-reactive B lymphocytes are clonally deleted while 
B-cell clones specific for foreign antigens are retained and 
expanded. The repertoire of antigen specificities by T cells is 
genetically determined and arises from T-cell  receptor gene rear-
rangement while the specificities of B cells arise from  immuno-
globulin gene rearrangement; for both types of cells, these 
determinations occur prior to encounters with antigen. Upon an 
encounter with antigen, a mature B cell binds the antigen, inter-
nalizes and processes it, and presents its peptide—bound to class 
II MHC—to CD4 helper cells, which in turn secrete IL-4 and 
IL-5. These interleukins stimulate B-cell proliferation and dif-
ferentiation into memory B cells and antibody-secreting plasma 
cells. The primary antibody response consists mostly of IgM-class 
immunoglobulins. Subsequent antigenic stimulation results in a 
vigorous “booster” response accompanied by class (isotype) 
switching to produce IgG, IgA, and IgE antibodies with diverse 
effector functions ( Figure 55–3 ). These antibodies also undergo 
affinity maturation, which allows them to bind more efficiently 
to the antigen. With the passage of time, this results in acceler-
ated elimination of microorganisms in subsequent infections. 
Antibodies mediate their functions by acting as opsonins to 
enhance phagocytosis and cellular cytotoxicity and by activating 
complement to elicit an inflammatory response and induce bacte-
rial lysis ( Figure 55–4 ). 
 ABNORMAL IMMUNE RESPONSES 
 Whereas the normally functioning immune response can success-
fully neutralize toxins, inactivate viruses, destroy transformed 
cells, and eliminate pathogens, inappropriate responses can lead to 
extensive tissue damage (hypersensitivity) or reactivity against self 
antigens (autoimmunity); conversely, impaired reactivity to appro-
priate targets (immunodeficiency) may occur and abrogate essen-
tial defense mechanisms. 
 Hypersensitivity 
 Hypersensitivity can be classified as antibody-mediated or cell-
mediated. Three types of hypersensitivity are antibody-mediated 
(types I–III), while the fourth is cell-mediated (type IV). 
Hypersensitivity occurs in two phases: the sensitization phase and 
the effector phase. Sensitization occurs upon initial encounter 
with an antigen; the effector phase involves immunologic memory 
and results in tissue pathology upon a subsequent encounter with 
that antigen. 
 1. Type I— Immediate, or type I, hypersensitivity is IgE-mediated, 
with symptoms usually occurring within minutes following the 
patient’s reencounter with antigen. Type I hypersensitivity results 
from cross-linking of membrane-bound IgE on blood basophils or 
tissue mast cells by antigen. This cross-linking causes cells to degran-
ulate, releasing substances such as histamine, leukotrienes, and 
eosinophil chemotactic factor, which induce anaphylaxis, asthma, 
hay fever, or urticaria (hives) in affected individuals ( Figure 55–5 ). A 
severe type I hypersensitivity reaction such as systemic anaphylaxis 
(eg, from insect envenomation, ingestion of certain foods, or drug 
hypersensitivity) requires immediate medical intervention. 
 2. Type II— Type II hypersensitivity results from the formation 
of antigen-antibody complexes between foreign antigen and IgM 
or IgG immunoglobulins. One example of this type of hypersen-
sitivity is a blood transfusion reaction that can occur if blood is 
not cross-matched properly. Preformed antibodies bind to red 
blood cell membrane antigens that activate the complement cas-
cade, generating a membrane attack complex that lyses the trans-
fused red blood cells. In hemolytic disease of the newborn, 
anti-Rh IgG antibodies produced by an Rh-negative mother cross 
the placenta, bind to red blood cells of an Rh-positive fetus, and 
damage them. The disease is prevented in subsequent pregnancies 
by the administration of anti-Rh antibodies to the mother 24–48 
hours after delivery (see Immunosuppressive Antibodies, below). 
982    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
Type II hypersensitivity can also be drug-induced and may occur 
during the administration of penicillin (for example) to allergic 
patients. In these patients, penicillin binds to red blood cells or 
other host tissue to form a neoantigen that evokes production of 
antibodies capable of inducing complement-mediated red cell 
lysis. In some circumstances, subsequent administration of the 
drug can lead to systemic anaphylaxis (type I hypersensitivity). 
 3. Type III— Type III hypersensitivity is due to the presence of 
elevated levels of antigen-antibody complexes in the circulation 
that ultimately deposit on basement membranes in tissues and 
vessels. Immune complex deposition activates complement to 
produce components with anaphylatoxic and chemotactic activi-
ties (C5a, C3a, C4a) that increase vascular permeability and 
recruit neutrophils to the site of complex deposition. Complex 
deposition and the action of lytic enzymes released by neutrophils 
can cause skin rashes, glomerulonephritis, and arthritis in these 
individuals. If patients have type III hypersensitivity against a 
particular antigen, clinical symptoms usually occur 3–4 days after 
exposure to the antigen. 
 4. Type IV: Delayed-type hypersensitivity— Unlike type I, 
II, and III hypersensitivities, delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) 
is cell-mediated, and responses occur 2–3 days after exposure to 
the sensitizing antigen. DTH is caused by antigen-specific DTH 
T H 1 cells and induces a local inflammatory response that causes 
tissue damage characterized by the influx of antigen- non specific 
inflammatory cells, especially macrophages. These cells are 
–S-S–
–S-S–
Fc receptor
Fc region
Opsonization
Antigen-
binding
region
Hinge
region
Bacteria
C
B
A
Epitope
Macrophage
Bacterial lysis
Complement 
activation
–S-S–
–S-S–
Complementarity-
determining
region (CDR)
CH1 VH
CH2
CH3
VL
CL
 FIGURE 55–4 Antibody has multiple functions. The prototypical antibody consists of two heavy (H) and two light (L) chains, each sub-
divided into constant (C L , C H ) and variable (V L , V H ) domains. The structure is held together by intra- and interchain disulfide bridges.  A: The 
complementarity-determining region (CDR) of the antigen-binding portion of the antibody engages the antigenic determinant (epitope) in 
a lock and key fashion.  B: Antigen-antibody complexes activate complement to produce split complement components that cause bacterial 
lysis.  C: The Fc portion of antibodies binds to Fc receptors on phagocytes (eg, macrophages, neutrophils) and facilitates uptake of bacteria 
(opsonization). 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    983
recruited under the influence of T H 1-produced cytokines 
( Figure 55–6 ), which chemoattract circulating monocytes and 
neutrophils, induce myelopoiesis, and activate macrophages. The 
activated macrophages are primarily responsible for the tissue 
damage associated with DTH. Although widely considered to be 
deleterious, DTH responses are very effective in eliminating infec-
tions caused by intracellular pathogens such as  Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis and  Leishmania species. Clinical manifestations of 
DTH include  tuberculin and  contact  hypersensitivities . 
Tuberculosis exposure is determined using a DTH skin test. 
Positive responses show erythema and induration caused by accu-
mulation of macrophages and DTH T (T DTH ) cells at the site of 
the tuberculin injection.  Poison ivy is the most common cause of 
contact hypersensitivity, in which pentadecacatechol, the lipo-
philic chemical in poison ivy, modifies cellular tissue and results in 
a DTH T-cell response. 
 Autoimmunity 
 Autoimmune disease arises when the body mounts an immune 
response against itself due to failure to distinguish self tissues and 
cells from foreign (nonself) antigens or loss of tolerance to self. 
This phenomenon derives from the activation of self-reactive T and 
B lymphocytes that generate cell-mediated or humoral immune 
responses directed against self antigens. The pathologic conse-
quences of this reactivity constitute several types of autoimmune 
diseases. Autoimmune diseases are highly complex due to MHC 
genetics, environmental conditions, infectious entities, and dys-
functional immune regulation. Examples of such diseases include 
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple scle-
rosis, and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (type 1 diabetes). In 
rheumatoid arthritis, IgM antibodies (rheumatoid factors) are pro-
duced that react with the Fc portion of IgG and may form immune 
complexes that activate the complement cascade, causing chronic 
Effects
    Smooth muscle contraction 
    Vasodilation
    Increased vascular 
         permeability
    Platelet aggregation
    Complement activation
    Mucus secretion
Mediators
    Histamine
    Serotonin
    Leukotrienes
    Prostaglandins
    Bradykinins
    Proteases
    Eosinophil chemotactic factor
    Neutrophil chemotactic factor
    
Clinical symptoms
    Asthma
    Hay fever
    Skin rashes
    Local anaphylaxis
    Systemic anaphylaxis
Naive B cell
+IL-4,-5
T helper cell
IgE binds IgE Fcε
receptors on mast
cells or basophils
IgE-secreting plasma cell
IgE is specific for allergen
Allergen cross-links IgE on mast 
cell (or basophil) and triggers 
degranulation and release of 
pharmacologic mediators
Sensitization phase
Effector phase
 FIGURE 55–5  Mechanism of type I hypersensitivity. Initial exposure to allergen  (sensitization phase) leads to production of IgE by plasma 
cells differentiated from allergen-specific B cells (not shown). The secreted IgE binds IgE-specific receptors (FcεR) on blood basophils and tissue 
mast cells. Reexposure to allergen leads to cross-linking of membrane-bound IgE  (effector phase). This cross-linking causes degranulation of 
cytoplasmic granules and release of mediators that induce vasodilation, smooth muscle contraction, and increased vascular permeability. These 
effects lead to the clinical symptoms characteristic of type I hypersensitivity. 
984    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
inflammation of the joints and kidneys. In systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, antibodies are made against DNA, histones, red blood 
cells, platelets, and other cellular components. In multiple sclerosis 
and type 1 diabetes, cell-mediated autoimmune attack destroys 
myelin surrounding nerve cells and insulin-producing islet beta 
cells of the pancreas, respectively. In type 1 diabetes, activated CD4 
T DTH cells that infiltrate the islets of Langerhans and recognize self 
islet beta cell peptides are thought to produce cytokines that stimu-
late macrophages to produce lytic enzymes, which destroy islet beta 
cells. Autoantibodies directed against the islet beta cell antigens are 
produced, but do not contribute significantly to disease. 
 A number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain auto-
immunity: 
1.  Exposure of antigens previously sequestered from the immune 
system (eg, lens protein, myelin basic protein) to self-reactive T 
lymphocytes. 
2.  Molecular mimicry by invading pathogens, in which immune 
responses are directed at antigenic determinants on pathogens 
that share identical or similar epitopes with normal host tissue. 
This phenomenon occurs in rheumatic fever following 
 Streptococcus pyogenes infection, in which heart damage is 
thought to arise from an immune response directed against 
streptococcal antigens shared with heart muscle. The suggested 
viral etiology of autoimmune diseases has been ascribed to 
immune responses (both cell-mediated and humoral) directed 
against virus epitopes that mimic self antigens. 
3.  Inappropriate expression of class II MHC molecules on the 
membranes of cells that normally do not express class II MHC 
(eg, islet beta cells). Increased expression of MHC II may 
increase presentation of self peptides to T helper cells, which in 
turn induce CTL, T DTH , and B-lymphocyte cells that react 
against self antigens. 
 Immunodeficiency Diseases 
 Immunodeficiency diseases result from inadequate function in the 
immune system; the consequences include increased susceptibility 
to infections and prolonged duration and severity of disease. 
Immunodeficiency diseases are either congenital or arise from 
extrinsic factors such as bacterial or viral infections or drug treat-
ment. Affected individuals frequently succumb to infections caused 
by opportunistic organisms of low pathogenicity for the immuno-
competent host. Examples of congenitally acquired immunodefi-
ciency diseases include X-linked agammaglobulinemia, DiGeorge’s 
syndrome, and severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) 
due to adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency. 
 X-linked agammaglobulinemia is a disease affecting males that is 
characterized by a failure of immature B lymphocytes to mature into 
antibody-producing plasma cells. These individuals are susceptible 
to recurrent bacterial infections, although the cell-mediated 
responses directed against viruses and fungi are preserved. DiGeorge’s 
syndrome is due to failure of the thymus to develop, resulting in 
diminished T-cell responses (T DTH , CTL), while the humoral 
response remains functional, but does not benefit from T-cell help. 
 The ADA enzyme normally prevents the accumulation of 
toxic deoxy-ATP in cells. Deoxy-ATP is particularly toxic to lym-
phocytes, and leads to death of T and B cells. Absence of the 
enzyme therefore results in SCID. Infusion of the purified 
enzyme ( pegademase, from bovine sources) and transfer of ADA 
Sensitization phase: 
initial contact 
with antigen
Effector phase: 
secondary contact 
with antigen
Macrophage
Antigen-presenting
cell (eg, macrophage,
Langerhans cell)
Class II MHC
TCR
CD4
IL-1
IL-1
IL-2
IL-2
IL-2
Memory TDTH
IL-2 receptor
Allergen
Proliferation and
    differentiation
T helper
cell (TH1)
TDTH
Cytokines
Chemotaxis
of macrophage
Activation of 
macrophages
(increased 
phagocytic
and microbicidal 
activities)
Induction of 
myelopoiesis of 
macrophage and 
neutrophil precursors
Chemotaxis and 
extravasation of 
macrophages
  IL-8
  MIF
  MCP
  IFN-γ
  TNF-β
  
  IL-3
  GM-CSF
  IL-8
  TNF-α
  MIP
Effects
 FIGURE 55–6 Mechanism of type IV hypersensitivity (DTH). In the  sensitization phase, the processed allergen (eg, from poison oak) is 
presented to CD4 T H 1 cells by antigen-presenting cells in association with class II MHC. T cells are induced to express IL-2 receptors and are stim-
ulated to proliferate and differentiate into memory T DTH cells. Secondary contact with antigen triggers the  effector phase, in which memory 
T DTH cells release cytokines that attract and activate nonspecific inflammatory macrophages and neutrophils. These cells display increased 
phagocytic and microbicidal activities and release large quantities of lytic enzymes that cause extensive tissue damage. 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    985
gene-modified lymphocytes have both been used successfully to 
treat this disease. 
 AIDS represents the classic example of immunodeficiency dis-
ease caused by extrinsic viral infection, in this instance the human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This virus exhibits a strong tro-
pism for CD4 T helper cells; these become depleted, giving rise to 
increased frequency of opportunistic infections and malignancies 
in infected individuals. AIDS is also characterized by an imbalance 
in T H 1 and T H 2 cells, and the ratios of cells and their functions 
are skewed toward T H 2. This results in loss of cytotoxic 
T-lymphocyte activity, loss of delayed hypersensitivity, and hyper-
gammaglobulinemia. 
 ■ IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE 
AGENTS 
 Immunosuppressive agents have proved very useful in minimizing 
the occurrence or impact of deleterious effects of exaggerated or 
inappropriate immune responses. Unfortunately, these agents also 
have the potential to cause disease and to increase the risk of infec-
tion and malignancies. 
 GLUCOCORTICOIDS 
 Glucocorticoids (corticosteroids) were the first hormonal agents 
recognized as having lympholytic properties. Administration of 
any glucocorticoid reduces the size and lymphoid content of the 
lymph nodes and spleen, although it has no toxic effect on prolif-
erating myeloid or erythroid stem cells in the bone marrow. 
 Glucocorticoids are thought to interfere with the cell cycle of 
activated lymphoid cells. The mechanism of their action is 
described in  Chapter 39 . Glucocorticoids are quite cytotoxic to 
certain subsets of T cells, but their immunologic effects are prob-
ably due to their ability to modify cellular functions rather than to 
direct cytotoxicity. Although cellular immunity is more affected 
than humoral immunity, the primary antibody response can be 
diminished, and with continued use, previously established anti-
body responses are also decreased. Additionally, continuous 
administration of corticosteroid increases the fractional catabolic 
rate of IgG, the major class of antibody immunoglobulins, thus 
lowering the effective concentration of specific antibodies. Contact 
hypersensitivity mediated by T DTH cells, for example, is usually 
abrogated by glucocorticoid therapy. 
 Glucocorticoids are used in a wide variety of conditions 
( Table 55–1 ). It is thought that the immunosuppressive and anti-
TABLE 55–1 Clinical uses of immunosuppressive agents.
Source
Immunopharmacologic Agents Used
Response
Autoimmune diseases
 Idiopathic thrombocytopenic 
 purpura (ITP)
Prednisone,1 vincristine, occasionally cyclophosphamide, mercaptopurine, or 
azathioprine; commonly high-dose gamma globulin, plasma immunoadsorption 
or plasma exchange
Usually good
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Prednisone,1 cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil, mercaptopurine, azathioprine, 
high-dose gamma globulin
Usually good
 Acute glomerulonephritis
Prednisone,1 mercaptopurine, cyclophosphamide
Usually good
 Acquired factor XIII antibodies
Cyclophosphamide plus factor XIII
Usually good
 Autoreactive tissue disorders 
 (autoimmune diseases)2
Prednisone, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, interferon-α and -β, azathioprine, 
cyclosporine, infliximab, etanercept, adalimumab
Often good, variable
Isoimmune disease
 Hemolytic disease of the newborn
Rho(D) immune globulin
Excellent
Organ transplantation
 Renal
Cyclosporine, azathioprine, prednisone, ALG, OKT3, tacrolimus, basiliximab,3 
daclizumab,3 sirolimus
Very good
 Heart
Cyclosporine, azathioprine, prednisone, ALG, OKT3, tacrolimus, basiliximab,3 
daclizumab,3 sirolimus
Good
 Liver
Cyclosporine, prednisone, azathioprine, tacrolimus, sirolimus
Fair
 Bone marrow
Cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, prednisone, methotrexate, ALG
Good
Prevention of cell proliferation
 Coronary stents
Sirolimus (impregnated stent)
Good
 Neovascular macular degeneration
Ranibizumab (labeled), bevacizumab (off-label)
Fair
1Drug of choice.
2Including systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, dermatomyositis, mixed tissue disorder, multiple sclerosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, chronic active 
hepatitis, lipoid nephrosis, and inflammatory bowel disease.
3Basiliximab and daclizumab are approved for renal transplant only.
986    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
inflammatory properties of corticosteroids account for their ben-
eficial effects in diseases like idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura 
and rheumatoid arthritis. Glucocorticoids modulate allergic reac-
tions and are useful in the treatment of diseases like asthma or as 
premedication for other agents (eg, blood products, chemother-
apy) that might cause undesirable immune responses. Gluco-
corticoids are first-line immunosuppressive therapy for both solid 
organ and hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, with vari-
able results. The toxicities of long-term glucocorticoid therapy can 
be severe and are discussed in  Chapter 39 . 
 CALCINEURIN INHIBITORS 
 Cyclosporine 
 Cyclosporine (cyclosporin A, CSA) is an immunosuppressive 
agent with efficacy in human organ transplantation, in the treat-
ment of graft-versus-host disease after hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation, and in the treatment of selected autoimmune 
disorders. Cyclosporine is a peptide antibiotic that appears to act 
at an early stage in the antigen receptor-induced differentiation of 
T cells and blocks their activation. Cyclosporine binds to  cyclo-
philin , a member of a class of intracellular proteins called immu-
nophilins. Cyclosporine and cyclophilin form a complex that 
inhibits the cytoplasmic phosphatase, calcineurin, which is neces-
sary for the activation of a T-cell-specific transcription factor. This 
transcription factor, NF-AT, is involved in the synthesis of inter-
leukins (eg, IL-2) by activated T cells. In vitro studies have indi-
cated that cyclosporine inhibits the gene transcription of IL-2, 
IL-3, IFN-γ, and other factors produced by antigen-stimulated T 
cells, but it does not block the effect of such factors on primed T 
cells nor does it block interaction with antigen. 
 Cyclosporine may be given intravenously or orally, though it is 
slowly and incompletely absorbed (20–50%). The absorbed drug 
is primarily metabolized by the P450 3A enzyme system in the 
liver with resultant multiple drug interactions. This propensity for 
drug interaction contributes to significant interpatient variability 
in bioavailability, such that cyclosporine requires individual 
patient dosage adjustments based on steady-state blood levels and 
the desired therapeutic ranges for the drug. Cyclosporine ophthal-
mic solution is now available for severe dry eye syndrome, as well 
as ocular graft-versus-host disease. Inhaled cyclosporine is being 
investigated for use in lung transplantation. 
 Toxicities are numerous and include nephrotoxicity, hyperten-
sion, hyperglycemia, liver dysfunction, hyperkalemia, altered 
mental status, seizures, and hirsutism. However, cyclosporine 
causes very little bone marrow toxicity. While an increased inci-
dence of lymphoma and other cancers (Kaposi’s sarcoma, skin 
cancer) have been observed in transplant recipients receiving 
cyclosporine, other immunosuppressive agents may also predis-
pose recipients to cancer. Some evidence suggests that tumors may 
arise after cyclosporine treatment because the drug induces 
TGF-β, which promotes tumor invasion and metastasis. 
 Cyclosporine may be used alone or in combination with other 
immunosuppressants, particularly glucocorticoids. It has been used 
successfully as the sole immunosuppressant for cadaveric transplan-
tation of the kidney, pancreas, and liver, and it has proved extremely 
useful in cardiac transplantation as well. In combination with 
methotrexate, cyclosporine is a standard prophylactic regimen to 
prevent graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic stem cell trans-
plantation. Cyclosporine has also proved useful in a variety of 
autoimmune disorders, including uveitis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
psoriasis, and asthma. Its combination with newer agents is show-
ing considerable efficacy in clinical and experimental settings where 
effective and less toxic immunosuppression is needed. Newer for-
mulations of cyclosporine have been developed that are improving 
patient compliance (smaller, better tasting pills) and increasing 
bioavailability. 
 Tacrolimus 
 Tacrolimus (FK 506) is an immunosuppressant macrolide antibi-
otic produced by  Streptomyces tsukubaensis. It is not chemically 
related to cyclosporine, but their mechanisms of action are similar. 
Both drugs bind to cytoplasmic peptidylprolyl isomerases that are 
abundant in all tissues. While cyclosporine binds to cyclophilin, 
tacrolimus binds to the immunophilin  FK-binding protein 
(FKBP). Both complexes inhibit calcineurin, which is necessary 
for the activation of the T-cell-specific transcription factor 
NF-AT. 
 On a weight basis, tacrolimus is 10–100 times more potent 
than cyclosporine in inhibiting immune responses. Tacrolimus is 
utilized for the same indications as cyclosporine, particularly in 
organ and stem cell transplantation. Multicenter studies in the 
USA and in Europe indicate that both graft and patient survival 
are similar for the two drugs. Tacrolimus has proved to be effective 
therapy for preventing rejection in solid-organ transplant patients 
even after failure of standard rejection therapy, including anti-T-
cell antibodies. It is now considered a standard prophylactic agent 
(usually in combination with methotrexate or mycophenolate 
mofetil) for graft-versus-host disease. 
 Tacrolimus can be administered orally or intravenously. The 
half-life of the intravenous form is approximately 9–12 hours. 
Like cyclosporine, tacrolimus is metabolized primarily by P450 
enzymes in the liver, and there is potential for drug interactions. 
The dosage is determined by trough blood level at steady state. Its 
toxic effects are similar to those of cyclosporine and include neph-
rotoxicity, neurotoxicity, hyperglycemia, hypertension, hyper-
kalemia, and gastrointestinal complaints. 
 Because of the effectiveness of systemic tacrolimus in some 
dermatologic diseases, a topical preparation is now available. 
Tacrolimus ointment is currently used in the therapy of atopic 
dermatitis and psoriasis. 
 MAMMALIAN TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN 
(mTOR) INHIBITORS 
 The mTOR inhibitors include  sirolimus (rapamycin) as well as its 
analogs (called “rapalogs”) such as everolimus and temsirolimus. 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    987
Sirolimus is an immunosuppressant macrolide antibiotic produced 
by  Streptomyces hygroscopicus and is structurally similar to tacroli-
mus. Sirolimus binds the circulating immunophilin FK506-
binding protein 12, resulting in an active complex that inhibits the 
kinase activity of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). The 
mTOR is a key component of a complex intracellular signaling 
pathway involved in cellular processes such as cell growth and pro-
liferation, angiogenesis, and metabolism. Thus, blockade of mTOR 
ultimately can, for example, lead to inhibition of interleukin-
driven T-cell proliferation. The signaling pathways involved in 
mTor are an active area of investigation in immunotherapy and 
targeted cancer therapy. Sirolimus is available only as an oral drug. 
Its half-life is about 60 hours, while that of everolimus is about 
43 hours. Both drugs are rapidly absorbed and elimination is 
similar to that of cyclosporine and tacrolimus, being substrates for 
both cytochrome P450 3A and P-glycoprotein. Hence, significant 
drug interactions can occur. For example, use with cyclosporine 
can increase the plasma levels of both sirolimus and everolimus 
such that drug levels need to be monitored. The target dose-range 
of these drugs will vary depending on clinical use. 
 Sirolimus has been used effectively alone and in combination 
with other immunosuppressants (corticosteroids, cyclosporine, 
tacrolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil) to prevent rejection of 
solid organ allografts. It is used as prophylaxis and as therapy for 
steroid-refractory acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease in 
hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Topical sirolimus is 
also used in some dermatologic disorders and, in combination 
with cyclosporine, in the management of uveoretinitis. Recently, 
sirolimus-eluting coronary stents have been shown to reduce rest-
enosis and other adverse cardiac events in patients with severe 
coronary artery disease. These benefits appear to be due to its 
antiproliferative effects. Everolimus is a rapalog with better bio-
availability than sirolimus, but it appears that its clinical efficacy is 
similar to sirolimus in solid organ transplant recipients. 
Temsirolimus is not currently used as an immunosuppressant. 
Both temsirolimus and everolimus are used and being investigated 
as targeted therapy for various cancers. 
 Toxicities of the mTOR inhibitors can include profound 
myelosuppression (especially thrombocytopenia), hepatotoxicity, 
diarrhea, hypertriglyceridemia, pneumonitis, and headache. 
Because nephrotoxicity is of major concern when administering 
calcineurin inhibitors, sirolimus is frequently employed as first-
line immunosuppressant therapy in both solid organ and stem 
cell transplantation because renal toxicity is usually not seen. 
However, increased use in stem cell transplantation regimens as 
graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis, particularly when combined 
with tacrolimus, has revealed an increased incidence of hemolyt-
ic-uremic syndrome. 
 MYCOPHENOLATE MOFETIL 
 Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is a semisynthetic derivative of 
mycophenolic acid, isolated from the mold  Penicillium glaucus . In 
vitro, it inhibits T- and B-lymphocyte responses, including mito-
gen and mixed lymphocyte responses, probably by inhibition of 
de novo synthesis of purines. Mycophenolate mofetil is hydrolyzed 
to mycophenolic acid, the active immunosuppressive moiety; it is 
synthesized and administered as MMF to enhance bioavailability. 
 Mycophenolate mofetil is available in both oral and intrave-
nous forms. The oral form is rapidly metabolized to mycophenolic 
acid. Although the cytochrome P450 3A system is not involved, 
some drug interactions still occur. Plasma drug levels are fre-
quently monitored, similar to the calcineurin inhibitors and 
PSIs. 
 Mycophenolate mofetil is used in solid organ transplant 
patients for refractory rejection and, in combination with predni-
sone, as an alternative to cyclosporine or tacrolimus in patients 
who do not tolerate those drugs. Its antiproliferative properties 
make it the first-line drug for preventing or reducing chronic 
allograft vasculopathy in cardiac transplant recipients. Myco-
phenolate mofetil is used as prophylaxis for and treatment of 
both acute and chronic graft-versus-host disease in hematopoietic 
stem cell transplant patients. Newer immunosuppressant applica-
tions for MMF include lupus nephritis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
inflammatory bowel disease, and some dermatologic disorders. 
 Toxicities include gastrointestinal disturbances (nausea and 
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain) headache, hypertension, and 
reversible myelosuppression (primarily neutropenia). 
 IMMUNOMODULATORY DERIVATIVES OF 
THALIDOMIDE (IMiDs) 
 Thalidomide is a sedative drug that was withdrawn from the 
market in the 1960s because of its disastrous teratogenic effects 
when used during pregnancy. Nevertheless, it has significant 
immunomodulatory actions and is currently in active use or in 
clinical trials for over 40 different illnesses. Thalidomide inhibits 
angiogenesis and has anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory 
effects. It inhibits tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), reduces 
phagocytosis by neutrophils, increases production of IL-10, alters 
adhesion molecule expression, and enhances cell-mediated immu-
nity via interactions with T cells. The complex actions of thalido-
mide continue to be studied as its clinical use evolves. Owing to 
thalidomide’s serious toxicity profile, considerable effort has been 
expended in the development of analogs. Immunomodulatory 
derivatives of thalidomide are termed  IMiDs. Some IMiDs are 
much more potent than thalidomide in regulating cytokines and 
affecting T-cell proliferation. 
 Thalidomide is currently used in the treatment of multiple 
myeloma at initial diagnosis and for relapsed-refractory disease. 
Patients generally show signs of response within 2–3 months of 
starting the drug, with response rates from 20% to 70%. When 
combined with dexamethasone, the response rates in myeloma are 
90% or more in some studies. Many patients have durable 
responses—up to 12–18 months in refractory disease and even 
longer in some patients treated at diagnosis. The success of thali-
domide in myeloma has led to numerous clinical trials in other 
diseases such as myelodysplastic syndrome, acute myelogenous 
leukemia, and graft-versus-host disease, as well as in solid tumors 
like colon cancer, renal cell carcinoma, melanoma, and prostate 
988    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
cancer, with variable results to date. Thalidomide has been used 
for many years in the treatment of some manifestations of leprosy 
and has been reintroduced in the USA for erythema nodosum 
leprosum; it is also useful in management of the skin manifesta-
tions of lupus erythematosus. 
 The adverse effect profile of thalidomide is extensive. The most 
important toxicity is teratogenesis. Because of this effect, thalido-
mide prescription and use are closely regulated by the manufac-
turer. Other adverse effects of thalidomide include peripheral 
neuropathy, constipation, rash, fatigue, hypothyroidism, and 
increased risk of deep vein thrombosis. Thrombosis is sufficiently 
frequent, particularly in the hematologic malignancy population, 
that most patients are placed on some type of anticoagulant when 
thalidomide treatment is initiated.  Lenalidomide is an IMiD that 
in animal and in vitro studies has been shown to be similar to 
thalidomide in action, but with less toxicity, especially teratoge-
nicity. Lenalidomide was approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) in late 2005 as a consequence of trials that 
showed its effectiveness in the treatment of the myelodysplastic 
syndrome with the chromosome 5q31 deletion. Clinical trials 
using lenalidomide to treat newly diagnosed as well as relapsed or 
refractory multiple myeloma showed similar efficacy, leading to 
FDA approval for myeloma as well. Its side effect profile is similar 
to that of thalidomide, although with less teratogenic effect and 
fewer thromboembolic events. Pomalidomide (CC4047) is another 
oral IMiD that is being investigated for the treatment of multiple 
myeloma and myelodysplasia. The only IMiD currently used as an 
immunosuppressive medication (ie, in transplant recipients) is 
thalidomide. 
 CYTOTOXIC AGENTS 
 Azathioprine 
 Azathioprine is a prodrug of mercaptopurine and, like mercap-
topurine, functions as an antimetabolite (see  Chapter 54 ). 
Although its action is presumably mediated by conversion to mer-
captopurine and further metabolites, it has been more widely used 
than mercaptopurine for immunosuppression in humans. These 
agents represent prototypes of the antimetabolite group of cyto-
toxic immunosuppressive drugs, and many other agents that kill 
proliferative cells appear to work at a similar level in the immune 
response. 
 Azathioprine is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract 
and is metabolized primarily to mercaptopurine. Xanthine oxidase 
splits much of the active material to 6-thiouric acid prior to excre-
tion in the urine. After administration of azathioprine, small 
amounts of unchanged drug and mercaptopurine are also excreted 
by the kidney, and as much as a twofold increase in toxicity may 
occur in anephric or anuric patients. Since much of the drug’s 
inactivation depends on xanthine oxidase, patients who are also 
receiving allopurinol (see  Chapters 36 and  54 ) for control of 
hyperuricemia should have the dose of azathioprine reduced to 
one-fourth to one-third the usual amount to prevent excessive 
toxicity. 
 Azathioprine and mercaptopurine appear to produce immuno-
suppression by interfering with purine nucleic acid metabolism at 
steps that are required for the wave of lymphoid cell proliferation 
that follows antigenic stimulation. The purine analogs are thus 
cytotoxic agents that destroy stimulated lymphoid cells. Although 
continued messenger RNA synthesis is necessary for sustained 
antibody synthesis by plasma cells, these analogs appear to have 
less effect on this process than on nucleic acid synthesis in prolif-
erating cells. Cellular immunity as well as primary and secondary 
serum antibody responses can be blocked by these cytotoxic 
agents. 
 Azathioprine and mercaptopurine appear to be of definite 
benefit in maintaining renal allografts and may be of value in 
transplantation of other tissues. These antimetabolites have been 
used with some success in the management of acute glomerulone-
phritis and in the renal component of systemic lupus erythemato-
sus. They have also proved useful in some cases of rheumatoid 
arthritis, Crohn’s disease, and multiple sclerosis. The drugs have 
been of occasional use in prednisone-resistant antibody-mediated 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and autoimmune hemo-
lytic anemias. 
 The chief toxic effect of azathioprine and mercaptopurine is 
bone marrow suppression, usually manifested as leukopenia, 
although anemia and thrombocytopenia may occur. Skin rashes, 
fever, nausea and vomiting, and sometimes diarrhea occur, with 
the gastrointestinal symptoms seen mainly at higher dosages. 
Hepatic dysfunction, manifested by very high serum alkaline 
phosphatase levels and mild jaundice, occurs occasionally, particu-
larly in patients with preexisting hepatic dysfunction. 
 Cyclophosphamide 
 The alkylating agent cyclophosphamide is one of the most effica-
cious immunosuppressive drugs available. Cyclophosphamide 
destroys proliferating lymphoid cells (see  Chapter 54 ) but also 
appears to alkylate DNA and other molecules in some resting 
cells. It has been observed that very large doses (eg, > 120 mg/kg 
intravenously over several days) may induce an apparent specific 
tolerance to a new antigen if the drug is administered simultane-
ously with, or shortly after, the antigen. In smaller doses, it has 
been effective against autoimmune disorders (including systemic 
lupus erythematosus) and in patients with acquired factor XIII 
antibodies and bleeding syndromes, autoimmune hemolytic ane-
mia, antibody-induced pure red cell aplasia, and Wegener’s granu-
lomatosis. 
 Treatment with large doses of cyclophosphamide carries con-
siderable risk of pancytopenia and hemorrhagic cystitis and 
therefore is generally combined with stem cell rescue (trans-
plant) procedures. Although cyclophosphamide appears to 
induce tolerance for marrow or immune cell grafting, its use 
does not prevent the subsequent graft-versus-host disease syn-
drome, which may be serious or lethal if the donor is a poor 
histocompatibility match (despite the severe immunosuppres-
sion induced by high doses of cyclophosphamide). Other adverse 
effects of cyclophosphamide include nausea, vomiting, cardiac 
toxicity, and electrolyte disturbances. 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    989
 Leflunomide 
 Leflunomide is a prodrug of an inhibitor of pyrimidine synthesis 
(rather than purine synthesis). It is orally active, and the active 
metabolite has a long half-life of several weeks. Thus, the drug 
should be started with a loading dose, but it can be taken once 
daily after reaching steady state. It is approved only for rheuma-
toid arthritis at present, although studies are underway combining 
leflunomide with mycophenolate mofetil for a variety of autoim-
mune and inflammatory skin disorders, as well as preservation of 
allografts in solid organ transplantation. Leflunomide also appears 
(from murine data) to have antiviral activity. 
 Toxicities include elevation of liver enzymes with some risk of 
liver damage, renal impairment, and teratogenic effects. A low 
frequency of cardiovascular effects (angina, tachycardia) was 
reported in clinical trials of leflunomide. 
 Hydroxychloroquine 
 Hydroxychloroquine is an antimalarial agent with immunosup-
pressant properties. It is thought to suppress intracellular antigen 
processing and loading of peptides onto MHC class II molecules 
by increasing the pH of lysosomal and endosomal compartments, 
thereby decreasing T-cell activation. 
 Because of these immunosuppressant activities, hydroxychloro-
quine is used to treat some autoimmune disorders, eg, rheumatoid 
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. It has also been used 
to both treat and prevent graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic 
stem cell transplantation. 
 Other Cytotoxic Agents 
 Other cytotoxic agents, including  vincristine, methotrexate, 
and  cytarabine (see  Chapter 54 ), also have immunosuppressive 
properties. Methotrexate has been used extensively in rheuma-
toid arthritis (see  Chapter 36 ) and in the treatment of graft-
versus-host disease. Although the other agents can be used for 
immunosuppression, their use has not been as widespread as the 
purine antagonists, and their indications for immunosuppres-
sion are less certain. The use of methotrexate (which can be 
given orally) appears reasonable in patients with idiosyncratic 
reactions to purine antagonists. The antibiotic dactinomycin has 
also been used with some success at the time of impending renal 
transplant rejection. Vincristine appears to be quite useful in 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura refractory to prednisone. 
The related vinca alkaloid  vinblastine has been shown to pre-
vent mast cell degranulation in vitro by binding to microtubule 
units within the cell and to prevent release of histamine and 
other vasoactive compounds. 
 Pentostatin is an adenosine deaminase inhibitor primarily 
used as an antineoplastic agent for lymphoid malignancies, and 
produces a profound lymphopenia. It is now frequently used for 
steroid-resistant graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic stem cell 
transplantation, as well as in preparative regimens prior to those 
transplants to provide severe immunosuppression to prevent 
allograft rejection. 
 IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE ANTIBODIES 
 The development of hybridoma technology by Milstein and 
Kohler in 1975 revolutionized the antibody field and radically 
increased the purity and specificity of antibodies used in the clinic 
and for diagnostic tests in the laboratory. Hybridomas consist of 
antibody-forming cells fused to immortal plasmacytoma cells. 
Hybrid cells that are stable and produce the required antibody can 
be subcloned for mass culture for antibody production. Large-
scale fermentation facilities are now used for this purpose in the 
pharmaceutical industry. 
 More recently, molecular biology has been used to develop 
monoclonal antibodies. Combinatorial libraries of cDNAs encod-
ing immunoglobulin heavy and light chains expressed on bacterio-
phage surfaces are screened against purified antigens. The result is 
an antibody fragment with specificity and high affinity for the 
antigen of interest. This technique has been used to develop anti-
bodies specific for viruses (eg, HIV), bacterial proteins, tumor 
antigens, and even cytokines. Several antibodies developed in this 
manner are FDA-approved for use in humans. 
 Other genetic engineering techniques involve production of 
chimeric and humanized versions of murine monoclonal antibod-
ies in order to reduce their antigenicity and increase the half-life 
of the antibody in the patient. Murine antibodies administered as 
such to human patients elicit production of human antimouse 
antibodies (HAMAs), which clear the original murine proteins 
very rapidly. Humanization involves replacing most of the murine 
antibody with equivalent human regions while keeping only the 
variable, antigen-specific regions intact. Chimeric mouse-human 
antibodies have similar properties with less complete replacement 
of the murine components. The current naming convention for 
these engineered substances uses the suffix “-umab” or “-zumab” 
for humanized antibodies, and “-imab” or “-ximab” for chimeric 
products. These procedures have been successful in reducing or 
preventing HAMA production for many of the antibodies dis-
cussed below. 
 Antilymphocyte & Antithymocyte 
Antibodies 
 Antisera directed against lymphocytes have been prepared spo-
radically for over 100 years. With the advent of human organ 
transplantation as a therapeutic option, heterologous antilympho-
cyte globulin (ALG) took on new importance. ALG and antithy-
mocyte globulin (ATG) are now in clinical use in many medical 
centers, especially in transplantation programs. The antiserum is 
usually obtained by immunization of horses, sheep, or rabbits with 
human lymphoid cells. 
 ALG acts primarily on the small, long-lived peripheral lym-
phocytes that circulate between the blood and lymph. With con-
tinued administration, “thymus-dependent” (T) lymphocytes 
from lymphoid follicles are also depleted, as they normally par-
ticipate in the recirculating pool. As a result of the destruction or 
inactivation of T cells, an impairment of delayed hypersensitivity 
and cellular immunity occurs while humoral antibody formation 
remains relatively intact. ALG and ATG are useful for suppressing 
990    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
certain major compartments (ie, T cells) of the immune system 
and play a definite role in the management of solid organ and 
bone marrow transplantation. 
 Monoclonal antibodies directed against specific cell surface and 
soluble proteins such as CD3, CD4, CD25, CD40, IL-2 receptor, 
and TNF-α (discussed below) much more selectively influence 
T-cell subset function. The high specificity of these antibodies 
improves selectivity and reduces toxicity of the therapy and alters 
the disease course in several different autoimmune disorders. 
 In the management of transplants, ALG and monoclonal anti-
bodies can be used in the induction of immunosuppression, in 
the treatment of initial rejection, and in the treatment of steroid-
resistant rejection. There has been some success in the use of ALG 
and ATG plus cyclosporine to prepare recipients for bone marrow 
transplantation. In this procedure, the recipient is treated with 
ALG or ATG in large doses for 7–10 days prior to transplantation 
of bone marrow cells from the donor. ALG appears to destroy the 
T cells in the donor marrow graft, and the probability of severe 
graft-versus-host syndrome is reduced. 
 The adverse effects of ALG are mostly those associated with 
injection of a foreign protein. Local pain and erythema often 
occur at the injection site (type III hypersensitivity). Since the 
humoral antibody mechanism remains active, skin-reactive and 
precipitating antibodies may be formed against the foreign IgG. 
Similar reactions occur with monoclonal antibodies of murine 
origin, and reactions thought to be caused by the release of cytok-
ines by T cells and monocytes have also been described. 
 Anaphylactic and serum sickness reactions to ALG and murine 
monoclonal antibodies have been observed and usually require ces-
sation of therapy. Complexes of host antibodies with horse ALG 
may precipitate and localize in the glomeruli of the kidneys. The 
incidence of lymphoma as well as other forms of cancer is increased 
in kidney transplant patients. It appears likely that part of the 
increased risk of cancer is related to the suppression of a normally 
potent defense system against oncogenic viruses or transformed 
cells. The preponderance of lymphoma in these cancer cases is 
thought to be related to the concurrence of chronic immune sup-
pression with chronic low-level lymphocyte proliferation. 
 Muromonab-CD3 
 Monoclonal antibodies against T-cell surface proteins are increas-
ingly being used in the clinic for autoimmune disorders and in 
transplantation settings. Clinical studies have shown that the 
murine monoclonal antibody muromonab-CD3 (OKT3) directed 
against the CD3 molecule on the surface of human T cells can be 
useful in the treatment of renal transplant rejection. In vitro, 
muromonab CD3 blocks killing by cytotoxic human T cells and 
several other T-cell functions. In a prospective randomized multi-
center trial with cadaveric renal transplants, use of muromonab-
CD3 (along with lower doses of steroids or other immunosuppressive 
drugs) proved more effective at reversing acute rejection than did 
conventional steroid treatment. Muromonab-CD3 is approved for 
the treatment of acute renal allograft rejection and steroid-resistant 
acute cardiac and hepatic transplant rejection. Many other mono-
clonal antibodies directed against surface markers on lymphocytes 
are approved for certain indications (see monoclonal antibody sec-
tion below), while others are in various stages of development. 
 Immune Globulin Intravenous (IGIV) 
 A different approach to immunomodulation is the intravenous use 
of polyclonal human immunoglobulin. This immunoglobulin 
preparation (usually IgG) is prepared from pools of thousands of 
healthy donors, and no single, specific antigen is the target of the 
“therapeutic antibody.” Rather, one expects that the pool of differ-
ent antibodies will have a normalizing effect upon the patient’s 
immune networks. 
 IGIV in high doses (2 g/kg) has proved effective in a variety of 
different applications ranging from immunoglobulin deficiencies 
to autoimmune disorders to HIV disease to bone marrow trans-
plantation. In patients with Kawasaki’s disease, it has been shown 
to be safe and effective, reducing systemic inflammation and pre-
venting coronary artery aneurysms. It has also brought about good 
clinical responses in systemic lupus erythematosus and refractory 
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Possible mechanisms of 
action of IGIV include a reduction of T helper cells, increase of 
regulatory T cells, decreased spontaneous immunoglobulin pro-
duction, Fc receptor blockade, increased antibody catabolism, and 
idiotypic-anti-idiotypic interactions with “pathologic antibodies.” 
Although its precise mechanism of action is still unknown, IGIV 
brings undeniable clinical benefit to many patients with a variety 
of immune syndromes. 
 Rh o (D) Immune Globulin Micro-Dose 
 One of the earliest major advances in immunopharmacology was 
the development of a technique for preventing Rh hemolytic disease 
of the newborn. The technique is based on the observation that a 
 primary antibody response to a foreign antigen can be blocked if 
specific antibody to that antigen is administered passively at the 
time of exposure to antigen. Rh o (D) immune globulin is a concen-
trated (15%) solution of human IgG containing a higher titer of 
antibodies against the Rh o (D) antigen of the red cell. 
 Sensitization of Rh-negative mothers to the D antigen occurs 
usually at the time of birth of an Rh o (D)-positive or D u -positive 
infant, when fetal red cells leak into the mother’s bloodstream. 
Sensitization might also occur occasionally with miscarriages or 
ectopic pregnancies. In subsequent pregnancies, maternal anti-
body against Rh-positive cells is transferred to the fetus during the 
third trimester, leading to the development of erythroblastosis 
fetalis (hemolytic disease of the newborn). 
 If an injection of Rh o (D) antibody is administered to the mother 
within 24–72 hours after the birth of an Rh-positive infant, the 
mother’s own antibody response to the foreign Rh o (D)-positive cells 
is suppressed because the infant’s red cells are cleared from circulation 
before the mother can generate a B-cell response against Rh o (D). 
Therefore she has no memory B cells that can activate upon subse-
quent pregnancies with an Rh o (D)-positive fetus. 
 When the mother has been treated in this fashion, Rh hemo-
lytic disease of the newborn has not been observed in subsequent 
pregnancies. For this prophylactic treatment to be successful, the 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    991
mother must be Rh o (D)-negative and D u -negative and must not 
already be immunized to the Rh o (D) factor. Treatment is also 
often advised for Rh-negative mothers antepartum at 26–28 
weeks’ gestation who have had miscarriages, ectopic pregnancies, 
or abortions, when the blood type of the fetus is unknown.  Note: 
 Rh o (D) immune globulin is administered  to the mother and must not 
be given to the infant. 
 The usual dose of Rh o (D) immune globulin is 2 mL intramus-
cularly, containing approximately 300 mcg anti-Rh o (D) IgG. 
Adverse reactions are infrequent and consist of local discomfort at 
the injection site or, rarely, a slight temperature elevation. 
 Hyperimmune Immunoglobulins 
 Hyperimmune immunoglobulins are IGIV preparations made 
from pools of selected human or animal donors with high titers of 
antibodies against particular agents of interest such as viruses or 
toxins (see also Appendix I). Various hyperimmune IGIVs are 
available for treatment of respiratory syncytial virus, cytomegalo-
virus, varicella zoster, human herpesvirus 3, hepatitis B virus, 
rabies, tetanus, and digoxin overdose. Intravenous administration 
of the hyperimmune globulins is a passive transfer of high titer 
antibodies that either reduces risk or reduces the severity of infec-
tion. Rabies hyperimmune globulin is injected around the wound 
and given intravenously. Tetanus hyperimmune globulin is admin-
istered intravenously when indicated for prophylaxis. Rattlesnake 
and coral snake hyperimmune globulins (antivenoms) are of 
equine or ovine origin and are effective for North and South 
American rattlesnakes and some coral snakes (but not Arizona 
coral snake). Equine and ovine antivenoms are available for rattle-
snake envenomations, but only equine antivenom is available for 
coral snake bite. The ovine antivenom is a Fab preparation and is 
less immunogenic than whole equine IgG antivenoms, but retains 
the ability to neutralize the rattlesnake venom. 
 MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES (MABs )
 Recent advances in the ability to manipulate the genes of immu-
noglobulins have resulted in development of a wide array of 
humanized and chimeric monoclonal antibodies directed against 
therapeutic targets. The only murine elements of humanized 
monoclonal antibodies are the complementarity-determining 
regions in the variable domains of immunoglobulin heavy and 
light chains. Complementarity-determining regions are primarily 
responsible for the antigen-binding capacity of antibodies. 
Chimeric antibodies typically contain antigen-binding murine 
variable regions and human constant regions. The following are 
brief descriptions of the engineered antibodies that have been 
approved by the FDA. 
 Antitumor MABs 
 Alemtuzumab is a humanized IgG 1 with a kappa chain that binds 
to CD52 found on normal and malignant B and T lymphocytes, 
NK cells, monocytes, macrophages, and a small population of 
granulocytes. Currently, alemtuzumab is approved for the treatment 
of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia in patients who have 
been treated with alkylating agents and have failed fludarabine 
therapy. Alemtuzumab appears to deplete leukemic and normal 
cells by direct antibody-dependent lysis. Patients receiving this 
antibody become lymphopenic and may also become neutro-
penic, anemic, and thrombocytopenic. As a result patients should 
be closely monitored for opportunistic infections and hemato-
logic toxicity. 
 Bevacizumab is a humanized IgG 1 monoclonal antibody that 
binds to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and inhibits 
VEGF from binding to its receptor, especially on endothelial cells. 
It is an antiangiogenic drug that has been shown to inhibit growth 
of blood vessels (angiogenesis) in tumors. It is approved for first-
line treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer alone 
or in combination with 5-FU-based chemotherapy. It is also 
approved for treatment of non-small cell lung cancer, glioblastoma 
multiforme that has progressed after prior treatment, and meta-
static kidney cancer when used with interferon-alpha. Since beva-
cizumab is antiangiogenic, it should not be administered until 
patients heal from surgery. Patients taking the drug should be 
watched for hemorrhage, gastrointestinal perforations, and wound 
healing problems. Bevacizumab has also been used off label by 
intravitreal injection to slow progression of neovascular macular 
degeneration (see ranibizumab under Other MABs, below). 
 Cetuximab is a human-mouse chimeric monoclonal antibody 
that targets epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Binding of 
cetuximab to EGFR inhibits tumor cell growth by a variety of 
mechanisms, including decreases in kinase activity, matrix metal-
loproteinase activity, and growth factor production, and increased 
apoptosis. It is indicated for use in patients with EGFR-positive 
metastatic colorectal cancer and, along with radiation therapy, in 
patients with head and neck cancer. Cetuximab may be adminis-
tered in combination with irinotecan or alone in patients who 
cannot tolerate irinotecan. HAMAs are generated by about 4% of 
patients being treated with cetuximab. 
 Ofatumumab is a human IgG 1 monoclonal antibody directed 
against a different epitope on CD20 than rituximab. It is approved 
for patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) who are 
refractory to fludarabine and alemtuzumab. Ofatumumab binds 
to all B cells including B-CLL. It is thought to lyse B-CLL cells in 
the presence of complement and to mediate antibody-dependent 
cellular cytotoxicity. There is a slight risk of hepatitis B virus reac-
tivation in patients taking ofatumumab. 
 Panitumumab is a fully human IgG 2 kappa light chain mono-
clonal antibody. It is approved for the treatment of EGFR-
expressing metastatic colorectal carcinoma with disease progression 
on or following fluoropyrimidine-, oxaliplatin-, and irinotecan-
containing chemotherapy regimens. Panitumumab binds to 
EGFR (similar to cetuximab), inhibiting epidermal growth factor 
from binding to its receptor, and prevents ligand-induced receptor 
autophosphorylation and activation of receptor-associated kinases. 
It inhibits cell growth, induces apoptosis, decreases vascular 
growth factor production, and suppresses internalization of the 
EGFR. Although some dermatologic and infusion-related toxici-
ties have been observed following infusion of panitumumab, the 
distinct advantage over cetuximab is that it is fully human, and 
992    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
therefore does not elicit HAMAs. This is the first FDA-approved 
monoclonal antibody produced from transgenic mice expressing 
the human immunoglobulin gene loci. 
 Rituximab is a chimeric murine-human monoclonal IgG 1 
(human Fc) that binds to the CD20 molecule on normal and 
malignant B lymphocytes and is approved for the therapy of 
patients with relapsed or refractory low-grade or follicular B-cell 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. It 
is also approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in 
combination with methotrexate in patients for whom anti-
TNF-α therapy has failed. The mechanism of action includes 
complement-mediated lysis, antibody-dependent cellular cyto-
toxicity, and induction of apoptosis in the malignant lymphoma 
cells. In lymphoma this drug appears to be synergistic with che-
motherapy (eg, fludarabine, CHOP, see  Chapter 54 ). Recent 
reports indicate that rituximab may also be very useful in auto-
immune diseases such as multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus 
erythematosus. 
 Trastuzumab is a recombinant DNA-derived, humanized 
monoclonal antibody that binds to the extracellular domain of the 
human epidermal growth factor receptor HER-2/ neu . This anti-
body blocks the natural ligand from binding and down-regulates 
the receptor. Trastuzumab is approved for the treatment of 
HER-2 /neu -positive tumors in patients with breast cancer and 
patients with metastatic gastric or gastroesophageal junction ade-
nocarcinoma. As a single agent it induces remission in about 
15–20% of breast cancer patients; in combination with chemo-
therapy, it increases response rates and duration as well as 1-year 
survival. Trastuzumab is under investigation for other tumors that 
express HER-2/neu (see  Chapter 54 ). 
 MABs Used to Deliver Isotopes to Tumors 
 Arcitumomab is a murine Fab fragment from an anti- 
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) antibody labeled with techne-
tium 99m ( 99m Tc) that is used for imaging patients with metastatic 
colorectal carcinoma (immunoscintigraphy) to determine extent 
of disease. CEA is often upregulated on tumor in patients with 
gastrointestinal carcinomas. The use of the Fab fragment decreases 
the immunogenicity of the agent so that it can be given more than 
once; intact murine monoclonal antibodies would elicit stronger 
HAMA. 
 Capromab pendetide is a murine monoclonal antibody spe-
cific for prostate specific membrane antigen. It is coupled to isoto-
pic indium ( 111 In) and is used in immunoscintigraphy for patients 
with biopsy-confirmed prostate cancer and post-prostatectomy in 
patients with rising prostate specific antibody level to determine 
extent of disease. 
 Ibritumomab tiuxetan is an anti-CD20 murine monoclonal 
antibody labeled with isotopic yttrium ( 90 Y) or  111 In. The radia-
tion of the isotope coupled to the antibody provides the major 
antitumor activity. Ibritumomab is approved for use in patients 
with relapsed or refractory low-grade, follicular, or B-cell non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma, including patients with rituximab-refrac-
tory follicular disease. It is used in conjunction with rituximab in 
a two-step therapeutic regimen. 
 Tositumomab is another anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody 
and is complexed with iodine 131 ( 131 I). Tositumomab is used in 
two-step therapy in patients with CD20-positive, follicular non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma whose disease is refractory to rituximab and 
standard chemotherapy. Toxicities are similar to those for ibritu-
momab and include severe cytopenias such as thrombocytopenia 
and neutropenia. Tositumomab should not be administered to 
patients with greater than 25% bone marrow involvement. 
 MABs Used as Immunosuppressants and 
Anti-Inflammatory Agents 
 A. Anti-TNF-Alpha MABs 
 Adalimumab, certolizumab pegol, etanercept, golimumab, and 
infliximab are antibodies that bind TNF-α, a proinflammatory 
cytokine that is important in rheumatoid arthritis and similar 
inflammatory diseases (see  Chapter 36 ). Blocking TNF-α from 
binding to TNF receptors on inflammatory cells results in suppres-
sion of downstream inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 and IL-6 
and adhesion molecules involved in leukocyte activation and 
migration. An increased risk of infection or reactivation of  M tuber-
culosis, hepatitis B virus, and invasive systemic fungi is common to 
each of these anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies. Patients may also 
be at increased risk for malignancies including lymphoma. 
 Adalimumab is a completely human IgG 1 approved for use in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, 
psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, Crohn’s disease, and 
plaque psoriasis. Like the other anti-TNF-α biologicals, adali-
mumab blocks the interaction of TNF-α with TNF receptors on 
cell surfaces; it does not bind TNF-β. Adalimumab lyses cells 
expressing TNF-α in the presence of complement. Pharmacodynamic 
studies showed that administration of adalimumab reduced levels 
of C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum IL-6, 
and matrix metalloproteinases MMP-1 and MMP-3. 
 Certolizumab pegol is a recombinant humanized Fab frag-
ment that binds to TNF-α. It is coupled to a 40-kDa polyethylene 
glycol. It neutralizes the activity of membrane-associated and sol-
uble TNF-α without lysing cells. Certolizumab is indicated for 
patients with Crohn’s disease and rheumatoid arthritis. 
 Etanercept is a dimeric fusion protein composed of human IgG 1 
constant regions fused to the TNF receptor. Etanercept binds to 
both TNF-α and TNF-β and appears to have effects similar to those 
of adalimumab and infliximab, ie, inhibition of TNF-α-mediated 
inflammation, but its half-life is shorter due to its physical form 
(fusion protein) and the route of injection (subcutaneously, twice 
weekly). Etanercept is approved for adult rheumatoid arthritis, 
polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis 
and psoriatic arthritis. It may be used in combination with meth-
otrexate in some patients with arthritis. 
 Golimumab is a human IgG monoclonal antibody that also 
binds to soluble and membrane-associated TNF-α. It is an intact 
human IgG 1 and, like certolizumab pegol, it does not lyse cells 
expressing membrane-associated TNF-α. It is indicated for patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and psoriatic 
arthritis. It has the advantage of increased half-life such that subcu-
taneous injections may be self-administered only once per month. 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    993
 Infliximab is a human-mouse chimeric IgG 1 monoclonal anti-
body possessing human constant (Fc) regions and murine variable 
regions. It is administered intravenously but has the same anti-
TNF-α activity as adalimumab and etanercept. Infliximab is cur-
rently approved for use in Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, 
rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, plaque psoriasis, and 
psoriatic arthritis. 
 B. Abatacept 
 Abatacept is a recombinant fusion protein composed of the extra-
cellular domain of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 
(CTLA-4) fused to hinge, CH 2 , and CH 3 domains of human 
IgG 1 . CTLA-4 delivers an inhibitory signal to T cells. It binds 
more tightly to CD80/86 than CD28 ( Figure 55–7 ). This fusion 
protein blocks activation of T cells by binding to CD80 or CD86 
so that CD28 on T cells cannot bind and stimulate the T cell and 
lead to cytokine release. Abatacept is approved for patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Patients 
should not take other anti-TNF drugs or anakinra while taking 
abatacept. As with anti-TNF monoclonal agents, patients should 
be screened and treated for latent tuberculosis infection before 
starting abatacept. 
 C. Alefacept 
 Alefacept is an engineered protein consisting of the CD2-binding 
portion of leukocyte-function-associated antigen-3 (LFA-3) fused 
to a human IgG 1 Fc region (hinge, CH 2 , and CH 3 ). It is approved 
for the treatment of plaque psoriasis. It inhibits activation of T cells 
by binding to cell surface CD2, inhibiting the normal CD2/LFA-3 
interaction ( Figure 55–7 ). Treatment of patients with alefacept also 
results in a dose-dependent reduction of the total number of circu-
lating T cells, especially CD4 and CD8 memory effector subsets 
that predominate in psoriatic plaques. Peripheral T-cell counts of 
patients receiving alefacept must be monitored and the drug dis-
continued if CD4 lymphocyte levels fall below 250 cells/μL. 
 D. Basiliximab and Daclizumab 
 Basiliximab is a chimeric mouse-human IgG 1 that binds to CD25, 
the IL-2 receptor alpha chain on activated lymphocytes. 
Daclizumab is a humanized IgG 1 that also binds to the alpha 
subunit of the IL-2 receptor. Both agents function as IL-2 antago-
nists, blocking IL-2 from binding to activated lymphocytes, and 
are therefore immunosuppressive. They are indicated for prophy-
laxis of acute organ rejection in renal transplant patients and either 
may be used as part of an immunosuppressive regimen that also 
includes glucocorticoids and cyclosporine A. 
 E. Natalizumab 
 Natalizumab is a humanized IgG4 monoclonal antibody that 
binds to the α4-subunit of α4β1 and α4β7 integrins expressed on 
the surfaces of all leukocytes except neutrophils, and inhibits the 
α4-mediated adhesion of leukocytes to their cognate receptor. It is 
indicated for patients with multiple sclerosis and Crohn’s disease 
who have not tolerated or had inadequate responses to conven-
tional treatments. 
 F. Omalizumab 
 Omalizumab is an anti-IgE recombinant humanized monoclonal 
antibody that is approved for the treatment of allergic asthma in 
adult and adolescent patients whose symptoms are refractory to 
inhaled corticosteroids (see  Chapter 20 ). The antibody blocks the 
binding of IgE to the high-affinity Fc ε receptor on basophils and 
mast cells, which suppresses IgE-mediated release of type I allergy 
mediators such as histamine and leukotrienes. Total serum IgE 
levels may remain elevated in patients for up to 1 year after admin-
istration of this antibody. 
 G. Tocilizumab 
 Tocilizumab is recombinant humanized IgG 1 that binds to soluble 
and membrane-associated IL-6 receptors. It inhibits IL-6-mediated 
signaling on lymphocytes, suppressing inflammatory processes. It 
is indicated for treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
who are refractory to other anti-TNF-α biologicals. It may be 
used alone or in combination with methotrexate or other disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs. Patients taking tocilizumab have 
the same increased risk of infection as those taking anti-TNF-α 
monoclonal antibodies. 
 H. Ustekinumab 
 Ustekinumab is a human IgG 1 monoclonal antibody that binds to 
the p40 subunit of IL-12 and IL-23 cytokines. It blocks IL-12 and 
IL-23 from binding to their receptors, therefore inhibiting recep-
tor-mediated signaling in lymphocytes. Ustekinumab is indicated 
for patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. The advantage 
Antigen-
presenting cell
CD40
T lymphocyte
T cell
TCR
MHC
CD40L
Dendritic 
cell
Basiliximab
and
Daclizumab
ICAM-1
LFA-1
CD28
CD80/86
CTLA-4
CD2
Alefacept
Abatacept
Ipilimumab
LFA-3
 FIGURE 55–7 Actions of some monoclonal antibodies ( shown in 
red ). CTLA-4-lgFc fusion protein (CTLA-4-lg, abatacept) binds to 
CD80/86 on DC and inhibits T-cell costimulation. Alefacept inhibits 
activation of T cells by blocking the interaction of LFA-3 and CD2. 
Basiliximab and daclizumab block IL-2 from binding to the IL-2 receptor 
(CD25) on T cells, preventing activation; CD25 is also important for the 
survival of T regulatory cells. T-cell activation can be maintained or 
restored if CTLA-4 interaction with CD80/86 is blocked using an 
anti-CTLA-4 antibody (ipilimumab, currently in phase 3 clinical trials); 
ipilimumab inhibits CTLA-4 signaling and prolongs activation. 
994    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 SOLID ORGAN & BONE MARROW 
TRANSPLANTATION 
 In organ transplantation, tissue typing—based on donor and 
recipient histocompatibility matching with the human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) haplotype system—is required. Close histocompat-
ibility matching reduces the likelihood of graft rejection and may 
also reduce the requirements for intensive immunosuppressive 
therapy. Prior to transplant, patients may receive an immunosup-
pressive regimen, including antithymocyte globulin, muromonab-
CD3, daclizumab, or basiliximab. Four types of rejection can occur 
in a solid organ transplant recipient:  hyperacute, accelerated, 
acute, and  chronic. Hyperacute rejection is due to preformed 
antibodies against the donor organ, such as anti-blood group anti-
bodies. Hyperacute rejection occurs within hours of the transplant 
and cannot be stopped with immunosuppressive drugs. It results in 
rapid necrosis and failure of the transplanted organ. Accelerated 
rejection is mediated by both antibodies and T cells, and it also 
cannot be stopped by immunosuppressive drugs. Acute rejection of 
an organ occurs within days to months and involves mainly cellular 
immunity. Reversal of acute rejection is usually possible with 
general immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine, myco-
phenolate mofetil, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, glucocorticoids, cyclo- 
phosphamide, methotrexate, and sirolimus. Recently, biologic 
agents such as anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies have been used to 
stem acute rejection. Chronic rejection usually occurs months or 
even years after transplantation. It is characterized by thickening 
and fibrosis of the vasculature of the transplanted organ, involving 
both cellular and humoral immunity. Chronic rejection is treated 
with the same drugs as those used for acute rejection. 
 Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is a well-
established treatment for many malignant and nonmalignant dis-
eases. An HLA-matched donor, usually a family member, is 
located, patients are conditioned with high-dose chemotherapy or 
radiation therapy, and then donor stem cells are infused. The con-
ditioning regimen is used not only to kill cancer cells in the case of 
malignant disease, but also to totally suppress the immune system 
so that the patient does not reject the donor stem cells. As patients’ 
blood counts recover (after reduction by the conditioning regimen) 
they develop a new immune system that is created from the donor 
stem cells. Rejection of donor stem cells is uncommon, and can 
only be treated by infusion of more stem cells from the donor. 
 Graft-versus-host disease, however, is very common, occurring in 
the majority of patients who receive an allogeneic transplant. Graft-
versus-host disease occurs as donor T cells fail to recognize the 
patient’s skin, liver, and gut (usually) as self and attack those tissues. 
Although patients are given immunosuppressive therapy 
(cyclosporine, methotrexate, and others) early in the transplant 
course to help prevent this development, it usually occurs despite 
these medications. Acute graft-versus-host disease occurs within the 
first 100 days, and is usually manifested as a skin rash, severe diar-
rhea, or hepatotoxicity. Additional medications are added, invari-
ably starting with high-dose corticosteroids, and adding drugs such 
as mycophenolate mofetil, sirolimus, tacrolimus, daclizumab, and 
others, with variable success rates. Patients generally progress to 
of ustekinumab over anti-TNF-α drugs for psoriasis is faster and 
longer term improvement in symptoms along with very infre-
quent dosing. 
 Other MABs 
 Abciximab is a Fab fragment of a murine-human monoclonal 
antibody that binds to the integrin GPIIb/IIIa receptor on acti-
vated platelets and inhibits fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, and 
other adhesion molecules from binding to activated platelets, thus 
preventing their aggregation. It is indicated as an adjunct to per-
cutaneous coronary intervention for the prevention of cardiac 
ischemic complications. See  Chapter 34 for additional details. 
 Denosumab is a human IgG 2 monoclonal antibody specific for 
human RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B 
ligand). By binding RANKL it inhibits the maturation of osteoclasts, 
the cells responsible for bone resorption. Denosumab is indicated for 
treatment of postmenopausal women with osteoporosis at high risk 
for fracture. Before starting denosumab, patients must be evaluated 
to be sure they are not hypocalcemic. During treatment, patients 
should receive supplements of calcium and vitamin D. 
 Eculizumab is a humanized IgG monoclonal antibody that 
binds the C5 complement component, inhibiting its cleavage into 
C5a and C5b thereby inhibiting the terminal pore-forming lytic 
activity of complement. Eculizumab is approved for patients with 
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and dramatically 
reduces the need for red blood cell transfusions. It prevents PNH 
symptoms of anemia, fatigue, thrombosis, and hemoglobinemia 
by inhibiting intravascular hemolysis due to red cell lysis. 
Clinicians must be aware of increased risk of meningococcal infec-
tion in patients receiving this anti-C5 monoclonal antibody. 
 Palivizumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to the fusion 
protein of respiratory syncytial virus, preventing infection in sus-
ceptible cells in the airways. It is used in neonates at risk for this 
viral infection and reduces the frequency of infection and hospi-
talization by about 50% (see  Chapter 49 ). 
 Ranibizumab is a recombinant human IgG 1 Fab that binds to 
VEGF-A. It also prevents new blood vessel formation by blocking 
VEGF from binding to its receptor. Ranibizumab is labeled for 
intravitreal injection in patients with neovascular age-related macu-
lar degeneration and sudden blurring or vision loss secondary to 
macular edema following retinal vein occlusion.  Pegaptanib is a 
pegylated oligonucleotide that binds extracellular VEGF and is also 
given by intravitreous injection to slow macular degeneration. 
 ■ CLINICAL USES OF 
IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE DRUGS 
 Immunosuppressive agents are commonly used in two clinical cir-
cumstances: transplantation and autoimmune disorders. The agents 
used differ somewhat for the specific disorders treated (see specific 
agents and  Table 55–1 ), as do administration schedules. Because 
autoimmune disorders are very complex, optimal treatment sched-
ules have yet to be established in many clinical situations. 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    995
chronic graft-versus-host disease (after 100 days) and require ther-
apy for variable periods thereafter. Unlike solid organ transplant 
patients, however, most stem cell transplant patients are able to 
eventually discontinue immunosuppressive drugs as graft-versus-
host disease resolves (usually 1–2 years after their transplant). 
 AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS 
 The effectiveness of immunosuppressive drugs in autoimmune 
disorders varies widely. Nonetheless, with immunosuppressive 
therapy, remissions can be obtained in many instances of autoim-
mune hemolytic anemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, 
type 1 diabetes, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, and temporal arteritis. 
Improvement is also often seen in patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus, acute glomerulonephritis, acquired factor VIII 
inhibitors (antibodies), rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory myo-
pathy, scleroderma, and certain other autoimmune states. 
 Immunosuppressive therapy is utilized in chronic severe 
asthma, where cyclosporine is often effective and sirolimus is 
another alternative. Omalizumab (anti-IgE antibody) has been 
approved for the treatment of severe asthma (see previous section). 
Tacrolimus is currently under clinical investigation for the man-
agement of autoimmune chronic active hepatitis and of multiple 
sclerosis, where IFN-β has a definitive role. 
 IMMUNOMODULATION THERAPY 
 The development of agents that modulate the immune response 
rather than suppress it has become an important area of pharma-
cology. The rationale underlying this approach is that such drugs 
may increase the immune responsiveness of patients who have 
either selective or generalized immunodeficiency. The major poten-
tial uses are in immunodeficiency disorders, chronic infectious 
diseases, and cancer. The AIDS epidemic has greatly increased 
interest in developing more effective immunomodulating drugs. 
 Cytokines 
 The cytokines are a large and heterogeneous group of proteins 
with diverse functions. Some are immunoregulatory proteins syn-
thesized within lymphoreticular cells and play numerous interact-
ing roles in the function of the immune system and in the control 
of hematopoiesis. The cytokines that have been clearly identified 
are summarized in  Table 55–2 . In most instances, cytokines medi-
ate their effects through receptors on relevant target cells and 
appear to act in a manner similar to the mechanism of action of 
hormones. In other instances, cytokines may have antiprolifera-
tive, antimicrobial, and antitumor effects. 
 The first group of cytokines discovered, the interferons (IFNs), 
were followed by the colony-stimulating factors (CSFs, discussed 
in  Chapter 33 ). The latter regulate the proliferation and differen-
tiation of bone marrow progenitor cells. Most of the more recently 
discovered cytokines have been classified as interleukins (ILs) and 
numbered in the order of their discovery. Cytokines are produced 
using gene cloning techniques. 
TABLE 55–2 The cytokines.
Cytokine
Properties
Interferon-α (IFN-α)
Antiviral, oncostatic, activates NK cells
Interferon-β (IFN-β)
Antiviral, oncostatic, activates NK cells
Interferon-γ (IFN-γ)
Antiviral, oncostatic, secreted by and acti-
vates or up-regulates TH1 cells, NK cells, 
CTLs, and macrophages
Interleukin-1 (IL-1)
T-cell activation, B-cell proliferation and 
differentiation
Interleukin-2 (IL-2)
T-cell proliferation, TH1, NK, and LAK cell 
activation
Interleukin-3 (IL-3)
Hematopoietic precursor proliferation and 
differentiation
Interleukin-4 (IL-4)
TH2 and CTL activation, B-cell proliferation
Interleukin-5 (IL-5)
Eosinophil proliferation, B-cell prolifera-
tion and differentiation
Interleukin-6 (IL-6)
HCF, TH2, CTL, and B-cell proliferation
Interleukin- 7 (IL-7)
CTL, NK, LAK, and B-cell proliferation, thy-
mic precursor stimulation
Interleukin-8 (IL-8)
Neutrophil chemotaxis, proinflammatory
Interleukin-9 (IL-9)
T-cell proliferation
Interleukin-10 (IL-10)
TH1 suppression, CTL activation, B-cell 
proliferation
Interleukin-11 (IL-11)
Megakaryocyte proliferation, B-cell differ-
entiation
Interleukin-12 (IL-12)
TH1 and CTL proliferation and activation
Interleukin-13 (IL-13)
Macrophage function modulation, B cell 
proliferation
Interleukin-14 (IL-14)
B-cell proliferation and differentiation
Interleukin-15 (IL-15)
TH1, CTL, and NK/LAK activation, expan-
sion of T-cell memory pools
Interleukin-16 (IL-16)
T-lymphocyte chemotaxis, suppresses HIV 
replication
Interleukin-17 (IL-17)
Stromal cell cytokine production
Interleukin-18 (IL-18)
Induces TH1 responses
Interleukin-19 (IL-19)
Proinflammatory
Interleukin-20 (IL-20)
Promotes skin differentiation
Interleukin-21 (IL-21)
Promotes proliferation of activated T cells, 
maturation of NK cells
Interleukin-22 (IL-22)
Regulator of TH2 cells
Interleukin-23 (IL-23)
Promotes proliferation of TH1 memory 
cells
Interleukin-24 (IL-24)
Induces tumor apoptosis, induces TH1 
responses
Interleukin-27 (IL-27)
Stimulates naive CD4 cells to produce 
IFN-γ
Interleukin-28 and -29 
(IL-28, IL-29)
Antiviral, interferon-like properties
Interleukin-30 (IL-30)
p28 subunit of IL-27
Interleukin-31 (IL-31)
Contributes to type I hypersensitivities 
and TH2 responses
(continued )
996    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
 Most cytokines (including TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-2, granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor [G-CSF], and granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF]) have very short serum half-
lives (minutes). The usual subcutaneous route of administration 
provides slower release into the circulation and a longer duration of 
action. Each cytokine has its own unique toxicity, but some toxicities 
are shared. For example, IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-γ, IL-2, and TNF-α all 
induce fever, flu-like symptoms, anorexia, fatigue, and malaise. 
 Interferons are proteins that are currently grouped into three 
families:  IFN-` ,  IFN-a , and  IFN-f . The IFN-α and IFN-β fami-
lies comprise type I IFNs, ie, acid-stable proteins that act on the 
same receptor on target cells. IFN-γ, a type II IFN, is acid-labile 
and acts on a separate receptor on target cells. Type I IFNs are 
usually induced by virus infections, with leukocytes producing 
IFN-α. Fibroblasts and epithelial cells produce IFN-β. IFN-γ is 
usually the product of activated T lymphocytes. 
 IFNs interact with cell receptors to produce a wide variety of 
effects that depend on the cell and IFN types. IFNs, particularly 
IFN-γ, display immune-enhancing properties, which include 
increased antigen presentation and macrophage, NK cell, and 
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activation. IFNs also inhibit cell prolifera-
tion. In this respect, IFN-α and IFN-β are more potent than 
IFN-γ. Another striking IFN action is increased expression of 
MHC molecules on cell surfaces. While all three types of IFN 
induce MHC class I molecules, only IFN-γ induces class II expres-
sion. In glial cells, IFN-β antagonizes this effect and may, in fact, 
decrease antigen presentation within the nervous system. 
 IFN-α is approved for the treatment of several neoplasms, 
including hairy cell leukemia, chronic myelogenous leukemia, 
TABLE 55–2 The cytokines.
Cytokine
Properties
Interleukin-32 (IL-32)
Involved in inflammation
Interleukin-34 (IL-34)
Stimulates monocyte proliferation via the 
CSF-1 receptor (CSF-1R)
Interleukin-35 (IL-35)
Induces regulatory T cells (iTR35)
Tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNF-α)
Oncostatic, macrophage activation, 
proinflammatory
Tumor necrosis factor-β 
(TNF-β)
Oncostatic, proinflammatory, chemotactic
Granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor
Granulocyte production
Granulocyte-
macrophage colony-
stimulating factor
Granulocyte, monocyte, eosinophil 
production
Macrophage colony-
stimulating factor
Monocyte production, activation
Erythropoietin (epoetin, 
EPO)
Red blood cell production
Thrombopoietin (TPO)
Platelet production
HCF, hematopoietic cofactor; LAK, lymphokine-activated killer cell.
Note: Many interleukin activities overlap and are influenced by each other.
malignant melanoma, and Kaposi’s sarcoma, and for use in hepati-
tis B and C infections. It has also shown activity as an anticancer 
agent in renal cell carcinoma, carcinoid syndrome, and T-cell leu-
kemia. IFN-β is approved for use in relapsing-type multiple sclero-
sis. IFN-γ is approved for the treatment of chronic granulomatous 
disease and IL-2, for metastatic renal cell carcinoma and malignant 
melanoma. Clinical investigations of other cytokines, including 
IL-1, -3, -4, -6, -10, -11, and -12, are ongoing. Toxicities of IFNs, 
which include fever, chills, malaise, myalgias, myelosuppression, 
headache, and depression, can severely restrict their clinical use. 
 TNF-α has been extensively tested in the therapy of various 
malignancies, but results have been disappointing due to dose-
limiting toxicities. One exception is the use of intra-arterial high-
dose TNF-α for malignant melanoma and soft tissue sarcoma of 
the extremities. In these settings, response rates greater than 80% 
have been noted. 
 Cytokines have been under clinical investigation as adjuvants 
to vaccines, and IFNs and IL-2 have shown some positive effects 
in the response of human subjects to hepatitis B vaccine. 
Denileukin diftitox is IL-2 fused to diphtheria toxin, used for the 
treatment of patients with CD25+ cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. 
IL-12 and GM-CSF have also shown adjuvant effects with vac-
cines. GM-CSF is of particular interest because it promotes 
recruitment of professional antigen-presenting cells such as the 
dendritic cells required for priming naive antigen-specific 
T-lymphocyte responses. There are some claims that GM-CSF can 
itself stimulate an antitumor immune response, resulting in tumor 
regression in melanoma and prostate cancer. 
 It is important to emphasize that cytokine interactions with 
target cells often result in the release of a cascade of different 
endogenous cytokines, which exert their effects sequentially or 
simultaneously. For example, IFN-γ exposure increases the num-
ber of cell-surface receptors on target cells for TNF-α. Therapy 
with IL-2 induces the production of TNF-α, while therapy with 
IL-12 induces the production of IFN-γ. 
 Cytokine Inhibitors 
 A more recent application of immunomodulation therapy involves 
the use of cytokine inhibitors for inflammatory diseases and septic 
shock, conditions in which cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF-α (see 
above) are involved in the pathogenesis. Drugs now in use or under 
investigation include anticytokine antibodies and soluble cytokine 
receptors.  Anakinra is a recombinant form of the naturally occur-
ring IL-1 receptor antagonist that prevents IL-1 from binding to its 
receptor, stemming the cascade of cytokines that would otherwise 
be released. Anakinra is approved for use in adult rheumatoid arthri-
tis patients who have failed treatment with one or more disease-
modifying antirheumatic drugs.  Canakinumab is a recombinant 
human anti-IL-1β monoclonal antibody. It binds to human IL-1β 
and prevents it from binding to IL-1 receptors.  Rilonacept is a 
dimeric fusion protein consisting of the ligand-binding domains of 
the extracellular portions of the human interleukin-1 receptor com-
ponent (IL-1RI) and IL-1 receptor accessory protein (IL-1RAcP) 
fused to the Fc portion of human IgG1. These molecules are indi-
cated for treatment of cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes. 
(Continued)
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    997
 Patients must be carefully monitored for serious infections or 
malignancies if they are also taking an anti-TNF-α drug, have 
chronic infections, or are otherwise immunosuppressed. 
 ■ IMMUNOLOGIC REACTIONS TO 
DRUGS & DRUG ALLERGY 
 The basic immune mechanism and the ways in which it can be sup-
pressed or stimulated by drugs have been discussed in previous 
sections of this chapter. Drugs also activate the immune system in 
undesirable ways that are manifested as adverse drug reactions. 
These reactions are generally grouped in a broad classification as 
“drug allergy.” Indeed, many drug reactions such as those to penicil-
lin, iodides, phenytoin, and sulfonamides are allergic in nature. 
These drug reactions are manifested as skin eruptions, edema, ana-
phylactoid reactions, glomerulonephritis, fever, and eosinophilia. 
 Drug reactions mediated by immune responses can have sev-
eral different mechanisms. Thus, any of the four major types of 
hypersensitivity discussed earlier in this chapter (pages  981-982) 
can be associated with allergic drug reactions: 
 • Type I: IgE-mediated acute allergic reactions to stings, pollens, 
and drugs, including anaphylaxis, urticaria, and angioedema. 
IgE is fixed to tissue mast cells and blood basophils, and after 
interaction with antigen the cells release potent mediators. 
 • Type II: Drugs often modify host proteins, thereby eliciting 
antibody responses to the modified protein. These allergic 
responses involve IgG or IgM in which the antibody becomes 
fixed to a host cell, which is then subject to complement-depen-
dent lysis or to antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. 
 • Type III: Drugs may cause serum sickness, which involves 
immune complexes containing IgG complexed with a foreign 
antigen and is a multisystem complement-dependent vasculitis 
that may also result in urticaria. 
 • Type IV: Cell-mediated allergy is the mechanism involved in al-
lergic contact dermatitis from topically applied drugs or indura-
tion of the skin at the site of an antigen injected intradermally. 
 In some drug reactions, several of these hypersensitivity 
responses may occur simultaneously. Some adverse reactions to 
drugs may be mistakenly classified as allergic or immune when 
they are actually genetic deficiency states or are idiosyncratic and 
not mediated by immune mechanisms (eg, hemolysis due to pri-
maquine in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, or 
aplastic anemia caused by chloramphenicol). 
 IMMEDIATE (TYPE I) DRUG ALLERGY 
 Type I (immediate) sensitivity allergy to certain drugs occurs when the 
drug, not capable of inducing an immune response by itself, cova-
lently links to a host carrier protein (hapten). When this happens, the 
immune system detects the drug-hapten conjugate as “modified self” 
and responds by generating IgE antibodies specific for the drug-
hapten. It is not known why some people mount an IgE response to 
a drug, while others mount IgG responses. Under the influence of 
IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 secreted by T H 2 cells, B cells specific for the drug 
secrete IgE antibody. The mechanism for IgE-mediated immediate 
hypersensitivity is diagrammed in  Figure 55–5 . 
 Fixation of the IgE antibody to high-affinity Fc receptors 
(FcεRs) on blood basophils or their tissue equivalent (mast cells) 
sets the stage for an acute allergic reaction. The most important 
sites for mast cell distribution are skin, nasal epithelium, lung, and 
gastrointestinal tract. When the offending drug is reintroduced 
into the body, it binds and cross-links basophil and mast cell-
surface IgE to signal release of the mediators (eg, histamine, leu-
kotrienes; see  Chapters 16 and  18 ) from granules. Mediator 
release is associated with calcium influx and a fall in intracellular 
cAMP within the mast cell. Many of the drugs that block media-
tor release appear to act through the cAMP mechanism (eg, cate-
cholamines, glucocorticoids, theophylline), others block histamine 
release, and still others block histamine receptors. Other vasoac-
tive substances such as kinins may also be generated during hista-
mine release. These mediators initiate immediate vascular smooth 
muscle relaxation, increased vascular permeability, hypotension, 
edema, and bronchoconstriction. 
 Drug Treatment of Immediate Allergy 
 One can test an individual for possible sensitivity to a drug by a 
simple scratch test, ie, by applying an extremely dilute solution of 
the drug to the skin and making a scratch with the tip of a needle. 
If allergy is present, an immediate (within 10–15 minutes) wheal 
(edema) and flare (increased blood flow) will occur. However, skin 
tests may be negative in spite of IgE hypersensitivity to a hapten 
or to a metabolic product of the drug, especially if the patient is 
taking steroids or antihistamines. 
 Drugs that modify allergic responses act at several links in this 
chain of events. Prednisone, often used in severe allergic reactions, 
is immunosuppressive; it blocks proliferation of the IgE-producing 
clones and inhibits IL-4 production by T helper cells in the IgE 
response, since glucocorticoids are generally toxic to lymphocytes. 
In the efferent limb of the allergic response, isoproterenol, epi-
nephrine, and theophylline reduce the release of mediators from 
mast cells and basophils and produce bronchodilation. Epinephrine 
opposes histamine; it relaxes bronchiolar smooth muscle and con-
tracts vascular muscle, relieving both bronchospasm and hypoten-
sion. The antihistamines competitively inhibit histamine, which 
would otherwise produce bronchoconstriction and increased cap-
illary permeability in the end organ. Glucocorticoids may also act 
to reduce tissue injury and edema in the inflamed tissue, as well as 
facilitating the actions of catecholamines in cells that may have 
become refractory to epinephrine or isoproterenol. Several agents 
directed toward the inhibition of leukotrienes may be useful in 
acute allergic and inflammatory disorders (see  Chapter 20 ). 
 Desensitization to Drugs 
 When reasonable alternatives are not available, certain drugs (eg, 
penicillin, insulin) must be used for life-threatening illnesses even 
in the presence of known allergic sensitivity. In such cases, desen-
sitization (also called hyposensitization) can sometimes be accom-
plished by starting with very small doses of the drug and gradually 
998    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
increasing the dose over a period of hours to the full therapeutic 
range (see  Chapter 43 ). This practice is hazardous and must be 
performed under direct medical supervision, as anaphylaxis may 
occur before desensitization has been achieved. It is thought that 
slow and progressive administration of the drug gradually binds all 
available IgE on mast cells, triggering a gradual release of granules. 
Once all of the IgE on the mast cell surfaces has been bound and 
the cells have been degranulated, therapeutic doses of the offend-
ing drug may be given with minimal further immune reaction. 
Therefore, a patient is only desensitized during administration of 
the drug. 
 AUTOIMMUNE (TYPE II) 
REACTIONS TO DRUGS 
 Certain autoimmune syndromes can be induced by drugs. 
Examples include systemic lupus erythematosus following hydral-
azine or procainamide therapy, “lupoid hepatitis” due to cathartic 
sensitivity, autoimmune hemolytic anemia resulting from methyl-
dopa administration, thrombocytopenic purpura due to quini-
dine, and agranulocytosis due to a variety of drugs. As indicated 
in other chapters of this book, a number of drugs are associated 
with type I and type II reactions. In these drug-induced autoim-
mune states, IgG antibodies bind to drug-modified tissue and are 
destroyed by the complement system or by phagocytic cells with 
Fc receptors. Fortunately, autoimmune reactions to drugs usually 
subside within several months after the offending drug is with-
drawn. Immunosuppressive therapy is warranted only when the 
autoimmune response is unusually severe. 
 SERUM SICKNESS & VASCULITIC 
(TYPE III) REACTIONS 
 Immunologic reactions to drugs resulting in serum sickness are 
more common than immediate anaphylactic responses, but type II 
and type III hypersensitivities often overlap. The clinical features 
of serum sickness include urticarial and erythematous skin erup-
tions, arthralgia or arthritis, lymphadenopathy, glomerulone-
phritis, peripheral edema, and fever. The reactions generally last 
6–12 days and usually subside once the offending drug is elimi-
nated. Antibodies of the IgM or IgG class are usually involved. 
The mechanism of tissue injury is immune complex formation 
and deposition on basement membranes (eg, lung, kidney), fol-
lowed by complement activation and infiltration of leukocytes, 
causing tissue destruction. Glucocorticoids are useful in attenuat-
ing severe serum sickness reactions to drugs. In severe cases plas-
mapheresis can be used to remove the offending drug and immune 
complexes from circulation. 
 Immune vasculitis can also be induced by drugs. The sulfon-
amides, penicillin, thiouracil, anticonvulsants, and iodides have all 
been implicated in the initiation of hypersensitivity angiitis. 
Erythema multiforme is a relatively mild vasculitic skin disorder 
that may be secondary to drug hypersensitivity. Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome is probably a more severe form of this hypersensitivity 
reaction and consists of erythema multiforme, arthritis, nephritis, 
central nervous system abnormalities, and myocarditis. It has fre-
quently been associated with sulfonamide therapy. Administration 
of nonhuman monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies such as rattle-
snake antivenin may cause serum sickness. 
CHAPTER 55 Immunopharmacology    999
Abatacept (Orencia)
Parenteral: 250 mg/vial lyophilized powder
Abciximab (ReoPro)
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL solution for IV injection
Adalimumab (Humira)
Parenteral: 20, 40 mg/vial for SC injection
Alefacept (Amevive)
Parenteral: 15 mg for IV injection
Alemtuzumab (Campath)
Parenteral: 30 mg/mL vial for IV injection
Anakinra (Kineret)
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL prefilled glass syringes for SC injection
Antithymocyte globulin (Thymoglobulin)
Parenteral: 25 mg/vial for IV injection
Azathioprine (generic, Imuran)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Parenteral: 100 mg/vial for IV injection
Basiliximab (Simulect)
Parenteral: 20 mg powder; reconstitute for IV injection
Bevacizumab (Avastin)
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL for injection
Canakinumab (Ilaris)
Parenteral: 180 mg lyophilized powder for SC injection
Certolizumab (Cimzia)
Parenteral: 200 mg powder for SC injection
Cetuximab (Erbitux)
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL in 50 mL vials
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Neoral, SangCya)
Oral: 25, 100 mg capsules; 100 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IV administration
Daclizumab (Zenapax)
Parenteral: 25 mg/5 mL vial for IV infusion
Denileukin dititox (Ontak)
Parenteral: 150 mcg/mL for SC injection
Denosumab (Prolia)
Parenteral: 60 mg/mL for SC injection
Etanercept (Enbrel)
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg lyophilized powder for SC injection
Golimumab (Simponi)
Parenteral: 50 mg/0.5 mL prefilled syringes for SC injection
Ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin)
Parenteral: 3.2 mg/2 mL for injection
Immune globulin intravenous [IGIV] (various)
Parenteral: 5, 10% solutions; 2.5, 5, 6, 10, 12 g powder for injection
Infliximab (Remicade)
Parenteral: 100 mg lyophilized powder for IV injection
Interferon alfa-2a (Roferon)
Parenteral: 3, 6, 9 million IU
Interferon alfa-2b (Intron-A)
Parenteral: 3–50 million units/vial
Interferon beta-1a (Avonex, Rebif)
Parenteral: 22, 33, 44 mcg powder for IV injection
Interferon beta-1b (Betaseron, Extavia)
Parenteral: 0.3 mg powder for SC injection
Interferon gamma-1b (Actimmune)
Parenteral: 100 mcg vials
Interleukin-2 [IL-2, aldesleukin] (Proleukin)
Parenteral: 22 million unit vials
Leflunomide (Arava)
Oral: 10, 20, 100 mg tablets
Lenalidomide (Revlimid)
Oral: 5, 10, 15, mg capsules
Lymphocyte immune globulin (Atgam)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection (in 5 mL ampules)
Muromonab-CD3 [OKT3] (Orthoclone OKT3)
Parenteral: 5 mg/5 mL ampule for injection
Mycophenolate mofetil (CellCept, Myfortic)
Oral: 250 mg capsules; 500 mg tablets; 200 mg powder for suspen-
sion; 180, 360 mg delayed-release tablets
Parenteral: 500 mg powder; reconstitute for injection
Natalizumab (Tysabri)
Parenteral: 300 mg/15 mL for dilution and IV infusion
Ofatumumab (Arzerra)
Parenteral: 100 mg/5 mL vial; dilute for IV infusion
Omalizumab (Xolair)
Parenteral: 150 mg powder for SC injection
Panitumumab (Vectibix)
Parenteral: single-use 20 mg/mL vials
Pegademase bovine (Adagen)
Parenteral: 250 units/mL for IM injection
Note: Pegademase is bovine adenosine deaminase.
Pegaptanib (Macugen)
Parenteral: 0.3 mL for intravitreal injection
Peginterferon alfa-2a (Pegasys)
Parenteral: 180 mcg/mL
Peginterferon alfa-2b (PEG-Intron)
Parenteral: 50, 80, 120, 150 mcg/0.5 mL
Ranibizumab (Lucentis)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for intravitreal injection
Rho(D) immune globulin micro-dose (RhoGam, others)
Parenteral: in single-dose and micro-dose vials
Rilonacept (Arcalyst)
Parenteral: 220 mg lyophilized powder for SC injection
Rituximab (Rituxan)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Sirolimus (Rapamune)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets; 1 mg/mL solution
Tacrolimus [FK 506] (Prograf)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 5 mg capsules
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL
Topical (Protopic): 0.03%, 0.1% ointment
Thalidomide (Thalomid)
Oral: 50, 100, 200 mg capsules
Note: Thalidomide is labeled for use only in erythema nodosum lep-
rosum in the USA.
Tocilizumab (Actemra)
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL vials for dilution and IV infusion
Trastuzumab (Herceptin)
Parenteral: 440 mg powder; reconstitute for IV infusion
Ustekinumab (Stelara)
Parenteral: 45 mg/0.5 mL, 90 mg/mL in prefilled syringes for SC 
injection
P R E P A R A T I O N S  A V A I L A B L E *
Abatacept (Orencia)
Parenteral: 250 mg/vial lyophilized powder
Abciximab (ReoPro)
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL solution for IV injection
Adalimumab (Humira)
Parenteral: 20, 40 mg/vial for SC injection
Alefacept (Amevive)
Parenteral: 15 mg for IV injection
Alemtuzumab (Campath)
Parenteral: 30 mg/mL vial for IV injection
Anakinra (Kineret)
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL prefilled glass syringes for SC injection
Antithymocyte globulin (Thymoglobulin)
Parenteral: 25 mg/vial for IV injection
Azathioprine (generic, Imuran)
Oral: 50 mg tablets
Parenteral: 100 mg/vial for IV injection
Basiliximab (Simulect)
Parenteral: 20 mg powder; reconstitute for IV injection
Bevacizumab (Avastin)
Parenteral: 25 mg/mL for injection
Canakinumab (Ilaris)
Parenteral: 180 mg lyophilized powder for SC injection
Certolizumab (Cimzia)
Parenteral: 200 mg powder for SC injection
Cetuximab (Erbitux)
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL in 50 mL vials
Cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Neoral, SangCya)
Oral: 25, 100 mg capsules; 100 mg/mL solution
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for IV administration
Daclizumab (Zenapax)
Parenteral: 25 mg/5 mL vial for IV infusion
Denileukin dititox (Ontak)
Parenteral: 150 mcg/mL for SC injection
Denosumab (Prolia)
Parenteral: 60 mg/mL for SC injection
Etanercept (Enbrel)
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg lyophilized powder for SC injection
Golimumab (Simponi)
Parenteral: 50 mg/0.5 mL prefilled syringes for SC injection
Ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin)
Parenteral: 3.2 mg/2 mL for injection
Immune globulin intravenous [IGIV] (various)
Parenteral: 5, 10% solutions; 2.5, 5, 6, 10, 12 g powder for injection
Infliximab (Remicade)
Parenteral: 100 mg lyophilized powder for IV injection
Interferon alfa-2a (Roferon)
Parenteral: 3, 6, 9 million IU
Interferon alfa-2b (Intron-A)
Parenteral: 3–50 million units/vial
Interferon beta-1a (Avonex, Rebif)
Parenteral: 22, 33, 44 mcg powder for IV injection
Interferon beta-1b (Betaseron, Extavia)
Parenteral: 0.3 mg powder for SC injection
Interferon gamma-1b (Actimmune)
Parenteral: 100 mcg vials
Interleukin-2 [IL-2, aldesleukin] (Proleukin)
Parenteral: 22 million unit vials
Leflunomide (Arava)
Oral: 10, 20, 100 mg tablets
Lenalidomide (Revlimid)
Oral: 5, 10, 15, mg capsules
Lymphocyte immune globulin (Atgam)
Parenteral: 50 mg/mL for injection (in 5 mL ampules)
Muromonab-CD3 [OKT3] (Orthoclone OKT3)
Parenteral: 5 mg/5 mL ampule for injection
Mycophenolate mofetil (CellCept, Myfortic)
Oral: 250 mg capsules; 500 mg tablets; 200 mg powder for suspen-
sion; 180, 360 mg delayed-release tablets
Parenteral: 500 mg powder; reconstitute for injection
Natalizumab (Tysabri)
Parenteral: 300 mg/15 mL for dilution and IV infusion
Ofatumumab (Arzerra)
Parenteral: 100 mg/5 mL vial; dilute for IV infusion
Omalizumab (Xolair)
Parenteral: 150 mg powder for SC injection
Panitumumab (Vectibix)
Parenteral: single-use 20 mg/mL vials
Pegademase bovine (Adagen)
Parenteral: 250 units/mL for IM injection
Note: Pegademase is bovine adenosine deaminase.
Pegaptanib (Macugen)
Parenteral: 0.3 mL for intravitreal injection
Peginterferon alfa-2a (Pegasys)
Parenteral: 180 mcg/mL
Peginterferon alfa-2b (PEG-Intron)
Parenteral: 50, 80, 120, 150 mcg/0.5 mL
Ranibizumab (Lucentis)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for intravitreal injection
Rho(D) immune globulin micro-dose (RhoGam, others)
Parenteral: in single-dose and micro-dose vials
Rilonacept (Arcalyst)
Parenteral: 220 mg lyophilized powder for SC injection
Rituximab (Rituxan)
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for IV infusion
Sirolimus (Rapamune)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets; 1 mg/mL solution
Tacrolimus [FK 506] (Prograf)
Oral: 0.5, 1, 5 mg capsules
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL
Topical (Protopic): 0.03%, 0.1% ointment
Thalidomide (Thalomid)
Oral: 50, 100, 200 mg capsules
Note: Thalidomide is labeled for use only in erythema nodosum lep-
rosum in the USA.
Tocilizumab (Actemra)
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL vials for dilution and IV infusion
Trastuzumab (Herceptin)
Parenteral: 440 mg powder; reconstitute for IV infusion
Ustekinumab (Stelara)
Parenteral: 45 mg/0.5 mL, 90 mg/mL in prefilled syringes for SC
injection
∗Several drugs discussed in this chapter are available as orphan drugs but are not listed here. Other drugs not listed here will be found in other chapters 
(see Index).
1000    SECTION VIII Chemotherapeutic Drugs
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Within 24–72 hours postpartum, the woman should be given 
a 2-mL intramuscular injection of 300 mcg anti-Rh o (D) 
immune globulin. This will clear any fetal Rh-positive red 
cells from her circulation so she does not generate anti-
Rh o (D) B cells that might jeopardize any future pregnancy.
 REFERENCES 
 General Immunology 
 Bonneville M et al: γδ T cell effector functions: A blend of innate programming 
and acquired plasticity. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:467. 
 Kumar H, Kawai T, Akira S: Toll-like receptors and innate immunity. Biochem 
Biophys Res Comm 2009;388:621. 
 Levinson WE, Jawetz E:  Medical Microbiology and Immunology, 7th ed. McGraw-
Hill, 2008. 
 Murphy KM, Travers P, Walport M (editors):  Janeway’s Immunobiology, 7th ed. 
Garland Science, 2008. 
 Thornton AM et al: Expression of helios, an ikaros transcription factor family 
member, differentiates thymic-derived from peripherally induced Foxp3+ T 
regulatory cells. J Immunol 2010;184:3433. 
 Hypersensitivity 
 Hausmann O: Drug hypersensitivity reactions involving skin. Handbk Exper 
Pharmacol 2010;196:29. 
 Phillips EJ: Pharmacogenetics of drug hypersensitivity. Pharmacogenomics 
2010;11:973. 
 Autoimmunity 
 Bousvaros A: Use of immunomodulators and biologic therapies in children with 
inflammatory bowel disease. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2010;6:659. 
 Carroll WM: Clinical trials of multiple sclerosis therapies: Improvements to dem-
onstrate long-term patient benefit. Mult Scler 2009;15:951. 
 Kircik LH et al: How and when to use biologics in psoriasis. J Drugs Dermatol 
2010;9:s106. 
 La Cava A: Anticytokine therapies in systemic lupus erythematosus. Immunotherapy 
2010;2:575. 
 Ma MH et al: Remission in early rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 
2010;37:1444. 
 Immunodeficiency Diseases 
 Wood PM: Primary antibody deficiency syndromes. Curr Opin Hematol 
2010;17:356. 
 Immunosuppressive Agents 
 Braun J: Optimal administration and dosage of methotrexate. Clin Exp Rheumatol 
2010;28:S46. 
 Galustian C: The anticancer agents lenalidomide and pomalidomide inhibit the 
proliferation and function of T regulatory cells. Cancer Immunol 
Immunother 2009;58:1033. 
 Li S, Gill N, Lentzch S: Recent advances of IMiDs in cancer therapy. Curr Opin 
Oncol 2010;22:579. 
 Ponticelli C: Calcineurin inhibitors in renal transplantation still needed but in 
reduced doses: A review. Transplant Proc 2010;42:2205. 
 Vicari-Christensen M: Tacrolimus: Review of pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynam-
ics, and pharmacogenetics to facilitate practitioners’ understanding and offer 
strategies for educating patients and promoting adherence. Prog Transplant 
2009;19:277. 
 Zhou H: Updates of mTOR inhibitors. Anticancer Agents Med Chem 
2010;10:571. 
 Antilymphocyte Globulin & Monoclonal Antibodies 
 Cummings SR: Denosumab for prevention of fractures in postmenopausal women 
with osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 2009;361:756. 
 Gürcan HM: Information for healthcare providers on general features of IGIV 
with emphasis on differences between commercially available products. 
Autoimmunity Rev 2010;9:553. 
 Nelson AL: Development trends for human monoclonal antibody therapeutics. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010;9:767. 
 Taylor PC: Pharmacology of TNF blockade in rheumatoid arthritis and other 
chronic inflammatory diseases. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2010;10:308. 
 Weiner LM: Monoclonal antibodies: Versatile platforms for cancer immunother-
apy. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:317. 
 Cytokines 
 Foster GR: Pegylated interferons for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C: 
Pharmacological and clinical differences between peginterferon-alpha-2a and 
peginterferon-alpha-2b. Drugs 2010;70:147. 
 Gabay C: IL-1 pathways in inflammation and human diseases. Nat Rev Rheumatol 
2010;6:232. 
 Drug Allergy 
 Hamilton RG: Human IgE antibody serology: A primer for the practicing North 
American allergist/immunologist. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;126:33. 
 Khan DA: Drug allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:S126. 
1001
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
56
 Humans live in a chemical environment and inhale, ingest, or 
absorb from the skin many of these chemicals. Toxicology is con-
cerned with the deleterious effects of these chemical agents on all 
living systems. In the biomedical area, however, the toxicologist is 
primarily concerned with adverse effects in humans resulting from 
exposure to drugs and other chemicals as well as the demonstra-
tion of safety or hazard associated with their use. 
 Occupational Toxicology 
 Occupational toxicology deals with the chemicals found in the 
workplace. The major emphasis of occupational toxicology is to 
identify the agents of concern, identify the acute and chronic 
diseases that they cause, define the conditions under which they 
may be used safely, and prevent absorption of harmful amounts of 
these chemicals. Occupational toxicologists may also define and 
carry out programs for the surveillance of exposed workers and the 
environment in which they work. Regulatory limits and voluntary 
guidelines have been elaborated to establish safe ambient air con-
centrations for many chemicals found in the workplace. 
Governmental and supragovernmental bodies throughout the 
world have generated workplace health and safety rules, including 
short-and long-term exposure limits for workers. These permissi-
ble exposure limits (PELS) have the power of law. Copies of the 
United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) standards may be found on OSHA’s website at 
 http://www.osha.gov . Copies of the United States Mine Safety and 
Health Administration (MSHA) standards may be found at 
 http://www.msha.gov . 
 Voluntary organizations, such as the American Conference of 
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), periodically pre-
pare lists of recommended  threshold limit values (TLVs) for 
many chemicals. These guidelines are periodically updated, but 
regulatory imperatives in the United States are not updated except 
under certain extraordinary circumstances. These TLV guidelines 
are useful as reference points in the evaluation of potential work-
place exposures. Copies of current TLV lists may be obtained from 
the ACGIH at  http://www.acgih.org . 
 Environmental Toxicology 
 Environmental toxicology deals with the potentially deleterious 
impact of chemicals, present as pollutants of the environment, on 
SECTION IX TOXICOLOGY
Introduction to 
Toxicology: Occupational 
& Environmental
Daniel T. Teitelbaum, MD∗
∗The author thanks Gabriel L. Plaa, PhD, the previous author of this 
chapter, for his contributions.
1002    SECTION IX Toxicology
 Risk is defined as the expected frequency of the occurrence of 
an undesirable effect arising from exposure to a chemical or 
physical agent. Estimation of risk makes use of dose-response data 
and extrapolation from the observed relationships to the expected 
responses at doses occurring in actual exposure situations. The 
quality and suitability of the biologic data used in such estimates 
are major limiting factors. 
 Routes of Exposure 
 The route of entry for chemicals into the body differs in different 
exposure situations. In the industrial setting, inhalation is the 
major route of entry. The transdermal route is also quite impor-
tant, but oral ingestion is a relatively minor route. Consequently, 
primary prevention should be designed to reduce or eliminate 
absorption by inhalation or by topical contact. Atmospheric pol-
lutants gain entry by inhalation and by dermal contact. Water and 
soil pollutants are absorbed through inhalation, ingestion, and 
dermal contact. 
 Duration of Exposure 
 Toxic reactions may differ qualitatively depending on the duration 
of the exposure. A single exposure—or multiple exposures occur-
ring over a brief period from seconds to 1 or 2 days—represents 
acute exposure. Multiple exposures continuing over a longer 
period of time represent chronic exposure. In the occupational 
setting, both acute (eg, accidental discharge) and chronic (eg, 
repetitive handling of a chemical) exposures occur. Exposures to 
chemicals found in the environment such as air and water pollut-
ants often cause chronic exposure, but sudden large chemical 
releases may result in acute massive population exposure with seri-
ous or lethal consequences. 
 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 Certain chemical and physical characteristics are important for 
estimating the potential hazard involved for environmental 
toxicants. In addition to information regarding effects on differ-
ent organisms, knowledge about the following properties is 
essential to predict the environmental impact: the degradability 
of the substance; its mobility through air, water, and soil; 
whether or not bioaccumulation occurs; and its transport and 
biomagnification through food chains. (See Box: Bioaccumulation 
& Biomagnification.) Chemicals that are poorly degraded (by 
abiotic or biotic pathways) exhibit environmental persistence and 
thus can accumulate. Typical examples of such chemicals include 
the persistent organic pollutants (POP) such as polychlorinated 
biphenyls and similar substances. Lipophilic substances such as 
the once-widespread organochlorine pesticides (eg, DDT) tend to 
bioaccumulate in body fat, resulting in tissue residues. Slowly 
released over time, these residues and their metabolites may have 
chronic adverse effects such as endocrine disruption. When the 
toxicant is incorporated into the food chain, biomagnification 
occurs as one species feeds on others and concentrates the chemi-
cal. Humans stand at the apex of the food chain. They may be 
living organisms. The term environment includes all the sur-
roundings of an individual organism, but particularly the air, soil, 
and water. Although humans are considered a target species of 
particular interest, other species are of considerable importance as 
potential biologic targets. 
 Air pollution is a product of industrialization, technologic 
development, and increased urbanization. Humans may also be 
exposed to chemicals used in the agricultural environment as 
pesticides or in food processing that may persist as residues or 
ingredients in food products. Air contaminants are regulated in 
the United States by the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) based on both health and esthetic considerations. Tables 
of regulated air contaminants and other regulatory issues that 
relate to air contaminants in the United States may be found at 
 http://www.epa.gov . Many states also have individual air con-
taminant regulations that may be more rigorous than those of 
the EPA. Many other nations and some supragovernmental orga-
nizations regulate air contaminants. 
 The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the World Health Organization (FAO/WHO) Joint Expert 
Commission on Food Additives adopted the term  acceptable 
daily intake (ADI) to denote the daily intake of a chemical 
from food that, during an entire lifetime, appears to be without 
appreciable risk. These guidelines are reevaluated as new infor-
mation becomes available. In the United States, the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) and the Department of Agriculture 
are responsible for the regulation of contaminants such as pes-
ticides, drugs, and chemicals in foods. Major international 
problems have occurred because of traffic among nations in 
contaminated or adulterated foods from countries whose regu-
lations and enforcement of pure food and drug laws are lax or 
nonexistent. 
 Ecotoxicology 
 Ecotoxicology is concerned with the toxic effects of chemical and 
physical agents on populations and communities of living organ-
isms within defined ecosystems; it includes the transfer pathways 
of those agents and their interactions with the environment. 
Traditional toxicology is concerned with toxic effects on individ-
ual organisms; ecotoxicology is concerned with the impact on 
populations of living organisms or on ecosystems. 
 TOXICOLOGIC TERMS & DEFINITIONS 
 Hazard & Risk 
 Hazard is the ability of a chemical agent to cause injury in a given 
situation or setting; the conditions of use and exposure are pri-
mary considerations. To assess hazard, one needs to have know-
ledge about both the inherent toxicity of the substance and the 
amounts to which individuals are liable to be exposed. Humans 
may be able to use potentially toxic substances when the necessary 
conditions minimizing absorption are established and respected. 
However, hazard is often a description based on subjective esti-
mates rather than objective evaluation. 
CHAPTER 56 Introduction to Toxicology: Occupational & Environmental    1003
exposed to highly concentrated pollutant loads as bioaccumula-
tion and biomagnification occur. The pollutants that have the 
widest environmental impact are poorly degradable; are relatively 
mobile in air, water, and soil; exhibit bioaccumulation; and also 
exhibit biomagnification. 
 ■ SPECIFIC CHEMICALS 
 AIR POLLUTANTS 
 Five major substances account for about 98% of air pollution: 
carbon monoxide (CO, about 52%), sulfur oxides (about 
14%), hydrocarbons (about 14%), nitrogen oxides (about 
14%), and particulate matter (about 4%). The sources of 
these chemicals include transportation, industry, generation 
of electric power, space heating, and refuse disposal. Sulfur 
dioxide and smoke resulting from incomplete combustion of 
coal have been associated with acute adverse effects, particu-
larly among the elderly and individuals with preexisting car-
diac or respiratory disease. Ambient air pollution has been 
implicated as a contributing factor in bronchitis, obstructive 
ventilatory disease, pulmonary emphysema, bronchial asthma, 
and lung cancer. EPA standards for these substances apply to 
the general environment, and OSHA standards apply to 
workplace exposure. 
 Carbon Monoxide 
 Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless, tasteless, odorless, and 
nonirritating gas, a byproduct of incomplete combustion. The 
average concentration of CO in the atmosphere is about 0.1 ppm; 
in heavy traffic, the concentration may exceed 100 ppm. The 
recommended 2008 threshold limit values (TLV-TWA and TLV-
STEL) are shown in  Table 56–1 . 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 CO combines reversibly with the oxygen-binding sites of hemo-
globin and has an affinity for hemoglobin that is about 220 times 
that of oxygen. The product formed—carboxyhemoglobin— 
cannot transport oxygen. Furthermore, the presence of carboxyhe-
moglobin interferes with the dissociation of oxygen from the 
remaining oxyhemoglobin, thus reducing the transfer of oxygen to 
tissues. The brain and the heart are the organs most affected. 
Normal nonsmoking adults have carboxyhemoglobin levels of less 
than 1% saturation (1% of total hemoglobin is in the form of 
carboxyhemoglobin); this level has been attributed to the endog-
enous formation of CO from heme catabolism. Smokers may 
exhibit 5–10% saturation, depending on their smoking habits. A 
person breathing air containing 0.1% CO (1000 ppm) would 
have a carboxyhemoglobin level of about 50%. 
 B. Clinical Effects 
 The principal signs of CO intoxication are those of hypoxia and 
progress in the following sequence: (1) psychomotor impairment; 
(2) headache and tightness in the temporal area; (3) confusion and 
loss of visual acuity; (4) tachycardia, tachypnea, syncope, and coma; 
and (5) deep coma, convulsions, shock, and respiratory failure. 
There is great variability in individual responses to a given carboxy-
hemoglobin concentration. Carboxyhemoglobin levels below 15% 
may produce headache and malaise; at 25% many workers com-
plain of headache, fatigue, decreased attention span, and loss of fine 
motor coordination. Collapse and syncope may appear at around 
40%; with levels above 60%, death may ensue as a result of irrevers-
ible damage to the brain and myocardium. The clinical effects may 
be aggravated by heavy labor, high altitudes, and high ambient 
temperatures. Although CO intoxication is usually thought of as a 
form of acute toxicity, there is some evidence that chronic exposure 
to low levels may lead to undesirable effects, including the develop-
ment of atherosclerotic coronary disease in cigarette smokers. The 
fetus may be quite susceptible to the effects of CO exposure. 
Bioaccumulation & Biomagnification
If the intake of a long-lasting contaminant by an organism 
exceeds the latter’s ability to metabolize or excrete the substance, 
the chemical accumulates within the tissues of the organism. This 
is called bioaccumulation.
Although the concentration of a contaminant may be virtually 
undetectable in water, it may be magnified hundreds or thou-
sands of times as the contaminant passes up the food chain. This 
is called biomagnification.
The biomagnification of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in 
the Great Lakes of North America is illustrated by the following 
residue values available from Environment Canada, a report pub-
lished by the Canadian government, and other sources.
Thus, the biomagnification for this substance in the food 
chain, beginning with phytoplankton and ending with the  herring 
gull, is nearly 50,000-fold. Domestic animals and humans may eat 
fish from the Great Lakes, resulting in PCB residues in these spe-
cies as well.
Source
PCB 
Concentration 
(ppm)1
Concentration 
Relative to 
Phytoplankton
Phytoplankton
0.0025
1
Zooplankton
0.123
49.2
Rainbow smelt
1.04
416
Lake trout
4.83
1,932
Herring gull
124
49,600
1Sources: Environment Canada, The State of Canada’s Environment, 1991, 
Government of Canada, Ottawa; and other publications.
1004    SECTION IX Toxicology
 C. Treatment 
 In cases of acute intoxication, removal of the individual from the 
exposure source and maintenance of respiration are essential, fol-
lowed by administration of oxygen—the specific antagonist to 
CO—within the limits of oxygen toxicity. With room air at 1 atm, 
the elimination half-time of CO is about 320 minutes; with 100% 
oxygen, the half-time is about 80 minutes; and with hyperbaric 
oxygen (2–3 atm), the half-time can be reduced to about 20 min-
utes. If a hyperbaric oxygen chamber is readily available, it should 
be used in the treatment of CO poisoning for severely poisoned 
patients; however, there remain questions about its effectiveness. 
Progressive recovery from effectively treated CO poisoning, even 
of a severe degree, is often complete, although some patients dem-
onstrate persistent impairment for a prolonged period of time. 
 Sulfur Dioxide 
 Sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) is a colorless, irritant gas generated primarily 
by the combustion of sulfur-containing fossil fuels. The 2008 
TLVs are given in  Table 56–1 . 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 On contact with moist membranes, SO 2 forms sulfurous acid, which 
is responsible for its severe irritant effects on the eyes, mucous mem-
branes, and skin. Approximately 90% of inhaled SO 2 is absorbed in 
the upper respiratory tract, the site of its principal effect. The inhala-
tion of SO 2 causes bronchial constriction; parasympathetic reflexes 
and altered smooth muscle tone appear to be involved. Exposure to 
5 ppm SO 2 for 10 minutes leads to increased resistance to airflow in 
most humans. Exposures of 5–10 ppm are reported to cause severe 
bronchospasm; 10–20% of the healthy young adult population is 
estimated to be reactive to even lower concentrations. The phenom-
enon of adaptation to irritating concentrations has been reported in 
workers. However, current studies have not confirmed this phenom-
enon. Asthmatic individuals are especially sensitive to SO 2 . 
 B. Clinical Effects and Treatment 
 The signs and symptoms of intoxication include irritation of the 
eyes, nose, and throat and reflex bronchoconstriction. In asth-
matic subjects, exposure to SO 2 may result in an acute asthmatic 
episode. If severe exposure has occurred, delayed-onset pulmonary 
edema may be observed. Cumulative effects from chronic low-
level exposure to SO 2 are not striking, particularly in humans but 
these effects have been associated with aggravation of chronic 
cardiopulmonary disease. When combined exposure to high respi-
rable particulate loads and SO 2 occurs, the mixed irritant load 
may increase the toxic respiratory response. Treatment is not spe-
cific for SO 2 but depends on therapeutic maneuvers used in the 
treatment of irritation of the respiratory tract and asthma. 
 Nitrogen Oxides 
 Nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) is a brownish irritant gas sometimes asso-
ciated with fires. It is formed also from fresh silage; exposure of 
farmers to NO 2 in the confines of a silo can lead to silo-filler’s 
disease. The 2008 TLVs are shown in  Table 56–1 . 
 A. Mechanism of Action 
 NO 2 is a relatively insoluble deep lung irritant capable of produc-
ing pulmonary edema. The type I cells of the alveoli appear to be 
the cells chiefly affected on acute exposure. At higher exposure, 
both type I and type II alveolar cells are damaged. Exposure to 
25 ppm of NO 2 is irritating to some individuals; 50 ppm is mod-
erately irritating to the eyes and nose. Exposure for 1 hour to 
50 ppm can cause pulmonary edema and perhaps subacute or 
chronic pulmonary lesions; 100 ppm can cause pulmonary edema 
and death. 
 B. Clinical Effects and Treatment 
 The signs and symptoms of acute exposure to NO 2 include irrita-
tion of the eyes and nose, cough, mucoid or frothy sputum produc-
tion, dyspnea, and chest pain. Pulmonary edema may appear 
within 1–2 hours. In some individuals, the clinical signs may sub-
side in about 2 weeks; the patient may then pass into a second stage 
of abruptly increasing severity, including recurring pulmonary 
edema and fibrotic destruction of terminal bronchioles (bronchi-
olitis obliterans). Chronic exposure of laboratory animals to 10–25 
ppm NO 2 has resulted in emphysematous changes; thus, chronic 
effects in humans are of concern. There is no specific treatment for 
acute intoxication by NO 2 ; therapeutic measures for the manage-
ment of deep lung irritation and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema 
are used. These measures include maintenance of gas exchange 
with adequate oxygenation and alveolar ventilation. Drug therapy 
may include bronchodilators, sedatives, and  antibiotics. 
TABLE 56–1  Threshold limit values (TLVs) of some 
common air pollutants and solvents.
TLV (ppm)
Compound
TWA1
STEL2
Benzene
0.5
2.5
Carbon monoxide
25
NA
Carbon tetrachloride
5
10
Chloroform
10
NA
Nitrogen dioxide
3
5
Ozone
0.05
NA
Sulfur dioxide
2
5
Tetrachloroethylene
25
100
Toluene
50
NA
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
350
450
Trichloroethylene
50
100
1TLV-TWA (time weighted average) is the concentration for a normal 8-hour workday 
or 40-hour workweek to which workers may be repeatedly exposed without adverse 
effects.
2TLV-STEL (short-term exposure limit) is the maximum concentration that should not 
be exceeded at any time during a 15-minute exposure period.
NA, none assigned.
CHAPTER 56 Introduction to Toxicology: Occupational & Environmental    1005
 Ozone 
 Ozone (O 3 ) is a bluish irritant gas that occurs normally in the 
earth’s atmosphere, where it is an important absorbent of ultravio-
let light. In the workplace, it can occur around high-voltage elec-
trical equipment and around ozone-producing devices used for air 
and water purification. It is also an important oxidant found in 
polluted urban air. There is a near-linear gradient between expo-
sure (1-hour level, 20–100 ppb) and response. See  Table 56–1 for 
2008 TLVs. 
 A. Clinical Effects and Treatment 
 O 3 is an irritant of mucous membranes. Mild exposure produces 
upper respiratory tract irritation. Severe exposure can cause deep 
lung irritation, with pulmonary edema when inhaled at sufficient 
concentrations. Ozone penetration in the lung depends on tidal 
volume; consequently, exercise can increase the amount of ozone 
reaching the distal lung. Some of the effects of O 3 resemble those 
seen with radiation, suggesting that O 3 toxicity may result from 
the formation of reactive free radicals. The gas causes shallow, 
rapid breathing and a decrease in pulmonary compliance. 
Enhanced sensitivity of the lung to bronchoconstrictors is also 
observed. 
 Exposure around 0.1 ppm O 3 for 10–30 minutes causes irrita-
tion and dryness of the throat; above 0.1 ppm, one finds changes 
in visual acuity, substernal pain, and dyspnea. Pulmonary function 
is impaired at concentrations exceeding 0.8 ppm. Airway hyper-
responsiveness and airway inflammation have been observed in 
humans. 
 The response of the lung to O 3 is a dynamic one. The mor-
phologic and biochemical changes are the result of both direct 
injury and secondary responses to the initial damage. Long-term 
exposure in animals results in morphologic and functional pul-
monary changes. Chronic bronchitis, bronchiolitis, fibrosis, and 
emphysematous changes have been reported in a variety of spe-
cies, including humans, exposed to concentrations above 1 ppm. 
There is no specific treatment for acute O 3 intoxication. 
Management depends on therapeutic measures used for deep 
lung irritation and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema (see 
Nitrogen Oxides, above). 
 SOLVENTS 
 Halogenated Aliphatic Hydrocarbons 
 These agents once found wide use as industrial solvents, degreas-
ing agents, and cleaning agents. The substances include carbon 
tetrachloride, chloroform, trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene 
(perchloroethylene), and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (methyl chloro-
form). However, because of the likelihood that halogenated ali-
phatic hydrocarbons are carcinogenic to humans, carbon 
tetrachloride and trichloroethylene have largely been removed 
from the workplace. Perchloroethylene and trichloroethane are 
still in use for dry cleaning and solvent degreasing, but it is likely 
that their use will be very limited in the future. Dry cleaning as an 
occupation is listed as a class 2B carcinogenic activity by the 
International Agency for Research Against Cancer (IARC). 
Fluorinated aliphatics such as the freons and closely related com-
pounds have also been used in the workplace and in consumer 
goods, but because of the severe environmental damage they 
cause, their use has been limited or eliminated by international 
treaty agreements. The common halogenated aliphatic solvents 
also create serious problems as persistent water pollutants. They 
are widely found in both groundwater and drinking water as a 
result of poor disposal practices. 
 See  Table 56–1 for recommended TLVs. 
 A. Mechanism of Action and Clinical Effects 
 In laboratory animals, the halogenated hydrocarbons cause central 
nervous system depression, liver injury, kidney injury, and some 
degree of cardiotoxicity. Several are also carcinogenic in animals and 
are considered probable carcinogens in humans. Trichloroethylene 
and tetrachloroethylene are listed as “reasonably anticipated to be a 
human carcinogen” by the US National Toxicology Program, and 
as class 2A probable human carcinogens by IARC. These sub-
stances are depressants of the central nervous system in humans; 
chloroform is the most potent. Chronic exposure to tetrachloro-
ethylene and possibly 1,1,1-trichloroethane can cause impaired 
memory and peripheral neuropathy. Hepatotoxicity is also a com-
mon toxic effect that can occur in humans after acute or chronic 
exposures; carbon tetrachloride is the most potent of the series. 
Nephrotoxicity can occur in humans exposed to carbon tetrachlo-
ride, chloroform, and trichloroethylene. With chloroform, carbon 
tetrachloride, trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene, carcino-
genicity has been observed in lifetime exposure studies performed 
in rats and mice and in some human epidemiologic studies. 
Reviews of the epidemiologic literature on the occupational expo-
sure of workers to various halogenated aliphatic hydrocarbon sol-
vents including trichloroethylene and tetrachloroethylene have 
found significant associations between exposure to the agent and 
renal, prostate, and testicular cancer. Other cancers have been 
found to be increased but their incidence has not reached statisti-
cal significance. 
 B. Treatment 
 There is no specific treatment for acute intoxication resulting 
from exposure to halogenated hydrocarbons. Management 
depends on the organ system involved. 
 Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
 Benzene is used for its solvent properties and as an intermediate 
in the synthesis of other chemicals. The 2008 recommended TLVs 
are given in  Table 56–1 . Benzene remains an important compo-
nent of gasoline and may be found in premium gasolines at con-
centrations as high as 2%. In cold climates such as Alaska, benzene 
concentrations in gasoline may reach 5%. The PEL promulgated 
by OSHA is 1 ppm in the air and a 5 ppm limit for skin exposure. 
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) and others have recommended that the exposure limits 
1006    SECTION IX Toxicology
for benzene be further reduced to 0.1 ppm because excess blood 
cancers occur at the current PEL. The acute toxic effect of benzene 
is depression of the central nervous system. Exposure to 7500 ppm 
for 30 minutes can be fatal. Exposure to concentrations larger 
than 3000 ppm may cause euphoria, nausea, locomotor problems, 
and coma; vertigo, drowsiness, headache, and nausea may occur at 
concentrations ranging from 250 to 500 ppm. No specific treat-
ment exists for the acute toxic effect of benzene. 
 Chronic exposure to benzene can result in very serious toxic 
effects, the most significant of which is bone marrow injury. 
Aplastic anemia, leukopenia, pancytopenia, and thrombocytopenia 
occur at higher levels of exposure, as does leukemia. Chronic expo-
sure to much lower levels has been associated with leukemia of 
several types as well as lymphomas, myeloma, and myelodysplastic 
syndrome. Recent studies have shown the occurrence of leukemia 
following exposures as low as 2 ppm-years. The pluri-potent bone 
marrow stem cells appear to be a target of benzene or its metabo-
lites and other stem cells may also be targets. Epidemiologic data 
confirm a causal association between benzene exposure and an 
increased incidence of leukemia in workers. Most organizations 
now classify benzene as a known human carcinogen. 
 Toluene (methylbenzene) does not possess the myelotoxic 
properties of benzene, nor has it been associated with leukemia. It 
is, however, a central nervous system depressant and a skin and eye 
irritant. It is also fetotoxic. See  Table 56–1 for the TLVs. Exposure 
to 800 ppm can lead to severe fatigue and ataxia; 10,000 ppm can 
produce rapid loss of consciousness. Chronic effects of long-term 
toluene exposure are unclear because human studies indicating 
behavioral effects usually concern exposures to several solvents. In 
limited occupational studies, however, metabolic interactions and 
modification of toluene’s effects have not been observed in work-
ers also exposed to other solvents. Less refined grades of toluene 
contain benzene. 
 Xylene (dimethylbenzene) has been substituted for benzene in 
many solvent degreasing operations. Like toluene, the three 
xylenes do not possess the myelotoxic properties of benzene, nor 
have they been associated with leukemia. Xylene is a central ner-
vous system depressant and a skin irritant. Less refined grades of 
xylene contain benzene. Estimated TLV-TWA and TLV-STEL are 
100 and 150 ppm, respectively. 
 PESTICIDES 
 Organochlorine Pesticides 
 These agents are usually classified into four groups: DDT (chlo-
rophenothane) and its analogs, benzene hexachlorides, cyclo-
dienes, and toxaphenes ( Table 56–2 ). They are aryl, carbocyclic, 
or heterocyclic compounds containing chlorine substituents. 
The individual compounds differ widely in their biotransforma-
tion and capacity for storage in tissues; toxicity and storage are 
not always correlated. They can be absorbed through the skin as 
well as by inhalation or oral ingestion. There are, however, 
important quantitative differences between the various deriva-
tives; DDT in solution is poorly absorbed through the skin, 
whereas dieldrin absorption from the skin is very efficient. 
Organochlorine pesticides have largely been abandoned because 
they cause severe environmental damage. DDT continues to 
have very restricted use for domestic mosquito elimination in 
malaria-infested areas of Africa. This use is controversial, but it 
is very effective and is likely to remain in place for the foresee-
able future. Organochlorine pesticide residues in humans, ani-
mals, and the environment present long-term problems that are 
not yet fully understood. 
 A. Human Toxicology 
 The acute toxic properties of all the organochlorine pesticides in 
humans are qualitatively similar. These agents interfere with 
inactivation of the sodium channel in excitable membranes and 
TABLE 56–2 Organochlorine pesticides.
Chemical Class
Compounds
Toxicity Rating1
ADI
DDT and analogs
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)
4
0.005
Methoxychlor
3
0.1
Tetrachlorodiphenylethane (TDE)
3
…
Benzene hexachlorides
Benzene hexachloride (BHC; hexachlorocyclohexane)
4
0.008
Lindane
4
0.008
Cyclodienes
Aldrin
5
0.0001
Chlordane
4
0.0005
Dieldrin
5
0.0001
Heptachlor
4
0.0001
Toxaphenes
Toxaphene (camphechlor)
4
…
1Toxicity rating: Probable human oral lethal dosage for class 3 = 500−5000 mg/kg, class 4 = 50−500 mg/kg, and class 5 = 5−50 mg/kg. (See Gosselin et al, 1984.)
ADI, acceptable daily intake (mg/kg/d).
CHAPTER 56 Introduction to Toxicology: Occupational & Environmental    1007
cause rapid repetitive firing in most neurons. Calcium ion trans-
port is inhibited. These events affect repolarization and enhance 
the excitability of neurons. The major effect is central nervous 
system stimulation. With DDT, tremor may be the first manifes-
tation, possibly continuing to convulsions, whereas with the 
other compounds convulsions often appear as the first sign of 
intoxication. There is no specific treatment for the acute intoxi-
cated state, and management is symptomatic. 
 The potential carcinogenic properties of organochlorine pesti-
cides have been extensively studied, and results indicate that 
chronic administration to laboratory animals over long periods 
results in enhanced oncogenesis. Endocrine pathway disruption is 
the postulated mechanism. Extrapolation of the animal observa-
tions to humans is controversial. However, several large epidemio-
logic studies found no significant association between the risk of 
breast cancer and serum levels of DDE, the major metabolite of 
DDT. Similarly, the results of a case-control study conducted to 
investigate the relation between DDE and DDT breast adipose 
tissue levels and breast cancer risk did not support a positive asso-
ciation. In contrast, recent work supports an association between 
prepubertal exposure to DDT and brain cancer. In addition, 
recent studies suggest that the risk of testicular cancer is increased 
in persons with elevated DDE levels. The risk of non-Hodgkin’s 
lymphoma (NHL) also seems to be increased in persons with 
elevated oxychlordane residues. Therefore, increased cancer risk in 
people exposed to the halogenated hydrocarbon pesticides is of 
concern. 
 B. Environmental Toxicology 
 The organochlorine pesticides are considered persistent chemicals. 
Degradation is quite slow when compared with other pesticides, 
and bioaccumulation, particularly in aquatic ecosystems, is well 
documented. Their mobility in soil depends on the composition 
of the soil; the presence of organic matter favors the adsorption of 
these chemicals onto the soil particles, whereas adsorption is poor 
in sandy soils. Once adsorbed, they do not readily desorb. These 
compounds induce significant abnormalities in the endocrine bal-
ance of sensitive animal and bird species, in addition to their 
adverse impact on humans. Their use is appropriately banned in 
most areas. 
 Organophosphorus Pesticides 
 These agents, some of which are listed in  Table 56–3 , are used to 
combat a large variety of pests. They are useful pesticides when in 
direct contact with insects or when used as  plant systemics, where 
the agent is translocated within the plant and exerts its effects on 
insects that feed on the plant. These agents are based on com-
pounds such as soman, sarin, and tabun, which were developed for 
use as war gases. Some of the less toxic organophosphorus com-
pounds are used in human and veterinary medicine as local or 
systemic antiparasitics (see  Chapters 7 and  53 ). The compounds 
are absorbed by the skin as well as by the respiratory and gastroin-
testinal tracts. Biotransformation is rapid, particularly when com-
pared with the rates observed with the chlorinated hydrocarbon 
pesticides. Storm and collaborators reviewed current and suggested 
human inhalation occupational exposure limits for 30 organo-
phosphate pesticides (see References). 
 A. Human Toxicology 
 In mammals as well as insects, the major effect of these agents is 
inhibition of acetylcholinesterase through phosphorylation of the 
esteratic site. The signs and symptoms that characterize acute 
intoxication are due to inhibition of this enzyme and accumula-
tion of acetylcholine; some of the agents also possess direct cholin-
ergic activity. These effects and their treatment are described in 
 Chapters 7 and  8 of this book. Altered neurologic and cognitive 
functions, as well as psychological symptoms of variable duration, 
have been associated with exposure to these pesticides. Furthermore, 
there is some indication of an association of low arylesterase activ-
ity with neurologic symptom complexes in Gulf War veterans. 
 In addition to—and independently of—inhibition of acetyl-
cholinesterase, some of these agents are capable of phosphorylat-
ing another enzyme present in neural tissue, the so-called 
 neuropathy target esterase . This results in progressive demyelina-
tion of the longest nerves. Associated with paralysis and axonal 
degeneration, this lesion is sometimes called organophosphorus 
ester-induced delayed polyneuropathy (OPIDP). Delayed central 
and autonomic neuropathy may occur in some poisoned patients. 
Hens are particularly sensitive to these properties and have proved 
very useful for studying the pathogenesis of the lesion and for 
identifying potentially neurotoxic organophosphorus derivatives. 
In humans, neurotoxicity has been observed with  triorthocresyl 
phosphate (TOCP), a noninsecticidal organophosphorus com-
pound. It is also thought to occur with the pesticides dichlorvos, 
trichlorfon, leptophos, methamidophos, mipafox, trichloronat, 
and others. The polyneuropathy usually begins with burning and 
tingling sensations, particularly in the feet, with motor weakness a 
few days later. Sensory and motor difficulties may extend to the 
TABLE 56–3 Organophosphorus pesticides.
Compound
Toxicity Rating1
ADI
Azinphos-methyl
5
0.005
Chlorfenvinphos
…
0.002
Diazinon
4
0.002
Dichlorvos
…
0.004
Dimethoate
4
0.01
Fenitrothion
…
0.005
Malathion
4
0.02
Parathion
6
0.005
Parathion-methyl
5
0.02
Trichlorfon
4
0.01
1Toxicity rating: Probable human oral lethal dosage for class 4 = 50-500 mg/kg, class 
5 = 5-50 mg/kg, and class 6 = ≤ 5 mg/kg. (See Gosselin et al, 1984.)
ADI, acceptable daily intake (mg/kg/d).
1008    SECTION IX Toxicology
legs and hands. Gait is affected, and ataxia may be present. Central 
nervous system and autonomic changes may develop even later. 
There is no specific treatment for this form of delayed neurotoxic-
ity. The long-term prognosis of neuropathy target esterase inhibi-
tion is highly variable. Reports of this type of neuropathy (and 
other toxicities) in pesticide manufacturing workers and in agri-
cultural pesticide applicators have been published. 
 B. Environmental Toxicology 
 Organophosphorus pesticides are not considered to be persistent 
pesticides. They are relatively unstable and break down in the 
environment as a result of hydrolysis and photolysis. As a class 
they are considered to have a small impact on the environment in 
spite of their acute effects on organisms. 
 Carbamate Pesticides 
 These compounds ( Table 56–4 ) inhibit acetylcholinesterase by 
carbamoylation of the esteratic site. Thus, they possess the toxic 
properties associated with inhibition of this enzyme as described 
for the organophosphorus pesticides. The effects and treatment 
are described in  Chapters 7 and  8 . The clinical effects due to car-
bamates are of shorter duration than those observed with organo-
phosphorus compounds. The range between the doses that cause 
minor intoxication and those that result in lethality is larger with 
carbamates than with the organophosphorus agents. Spontaneous 
reactivation of cholinesterase is more rapid after inhibition by the 
carbamates. Although the clinical approach to carbamate poison-
ing is similar to that for organophosphates, the use of pralidoxime 
is not recommended. 
 The carbamates are considered to be nonpersistent pesticides. 
They exert only a small impact on the environment. 
 Botanical Pesticides 
 Pesticides derived from natural sources include  nicotine, rote-
none, and  pyrethrum. Nicotine is obtained from the dried leaves 
of  Nicotiana tabacum and  N rustica . It is rapidly absorbed from 
mucosal surfaces; the free alkaloid, but not the salt, is readily 
absorbed from the skin. Nicotine reacts with the acetylcholine 
receptor of the postsynaptic membrane (sympathetic and para-
sympathetic ganglia, neuromuscular junction), resulting in depo-
larization of the membrane. Toxic doses cause stimulation rapidly 
followed by blockade of transmission. These actions are described 
in  Chapter 7 . Treatment is directed toward maintenance of vital 
signs and suppression of convulsions. 
 Rotenone ( Figure 56–1 ) is obtained from  Derris elliptica , 
 D mallaccensis ,  Lonchocarpus utilis, and  L urucu. The oral ingestion 
of rotenone produces gastrointestinal irritation. Conjunctivitis, 
dermatitis, pharyngitis, and rhinitis can also occur. Treatment is 
symptomatic. 
 Pyrethrum consists of six known insecticidal esters: pyrethrin I 
( Figure 56–1 ), pyrethrin II, cinerin I, cinerin II, jasmolin I, and 
jasmolin II. Synthetic pyrethroids account for an increasing percent-
age of worldwide pesticide usage. Pyrethrum may be absorbed after 
inhalation or ingestion; absorption from the skin is not significant. 
The esters are extensively biotransformed. Pyrethrum pesticides are 
not highly toxic to mammals. When absorbed in sufficient quanti-
ties, the major site of toxic action is the central nervous system; 
excitation, convulsions, and tetanic paralysis can occur. Voltage-
gated sodium, calcium, and chloride channels are considered tar-
gets, as well as peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptors. Treatment 
of exposure is usually directed at management of symptoms. 
Anticonvulsants are not consistently effective. The chloride channel 
agonist, ivermectin, is of use, as are pentobarbital and mephenesin. 
The pyrethroids are highly irritating to the eyes, skin, and respira-
tory tree. They may cause irritant asthma and, potentially, reactive 
airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS) and even anaphylaxis. The 
most common injuries reported in humans result from their aller-
genic and irritant effects on the airways and skin. Cutaneous par-
esthesias have been observed in workers spraying synthetic 
pyrethroids. The use of persistent synthetic pyrethroids for aircraft 
disinfection to comply with international rules regarding prevention 
of transfer of insect vectors has resulted in respiratory and skin 
problems, as well as some neurologic complaints in flight attendants 
and other aircraft workers. Severe occupational exposures to syn-
thetic pyrethroids in China resulted in marked effects on the central 
nervous system, including convulsions. 
 HERBICIDES 
 Chlorophenoxy Herbicides 
 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), 2,4,5-trichlorophe-
noxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T), and their salts and esters are com-
pounds of interest as herbicides used for the destruction of weeds 
( Figure 56–1 ). They have been assigned toxicity ratings of 4 or 3, 
respectively, which place the probable human lethal dosages at 
50–500 or 500–5000 mg/kg, respectively. 
TABLE 56–4 Carbamate pesticides.
Compound
Toxicity Rating1
ADI
Aldicarb
   6
0.005
Aminocarb
   5
…
Carbaryl
   4
0.01
Carbofuran
   5
0.01
Dimetan
   4
…
Dimetilan
   4
…
Isolan
   5
…
Methomyl
   5
…
Propoxur
   4
0.02
Pyramat
   4
…
Pyrolan
   5
…
Zectran
   5
…
1Toxicity rating: Probable human oral lethal dosage for class 4 = 50−500 mg/kg, class 
5 = 5−50 mg/kg, and class 6 = ≤ 5 mg/kg. (See Gosselin et al, 1984.)
ADI, acceptable daily intake (mg/kg/d).
CHAPTER 56 Introduction to Toxicology: Occupational & Environmental    1009
 Because 2,4,5-T is often contaminated with dioxins and other 
polychlorinated compounds, it is no longer used. It was the com-
pound used in “Agent Orange” and caused severe agricultural 
damage and social disruption. 
 In humans, 2,4-D in large doses can cause coma and general-
ized muscle hypotonia. Rarely, muscle weakness and marked 
hypotonia may persist for several weeks. In laboratory animals, 
signs of liver and kidney dysfunction have also been reported 
with chlorphenoxy herbicides. Several epidemiologic studies 
performed by the US National Cancer Institute confirmed the 
causal link between 2,4-D and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. 
Evidence for a causal link to soft tissue sarcoma, however, is 
considered equivocal. 
 The toxicologic profile for these agents, particularly that of 
2,4,5-T, is complicated by the presence of chemical contaminants 
( dioxins ) produced during the manufacturing process (see below). 
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo- p -dioxin (dioxin, TCDD) is the most 
important of these contaminants. Dioxin is a potent animal car-
cinogen and a likely human carcinogen. 
 Glyphosate 
 Glyphosate (N-[phosphonomethyl] glycine,  Figure 56–1 ) is now the 
most widely used herbicide in the world. It functions as a contact 
herbicide and is absorbed through the leaves and roots of plants. 
Because it is nonselective, it may damage important crops even when 
used as directed. Therefore, genetically modified plants such as soy-
bean, corn, and cotton that are glyphosate-resistant have been devel-
oped and patented. They are widely grown throughout the world. 
 Glyphosate-related poisoning incidents are commonly reported. 
Most injuries are minor, although some lethal outcomes have been 
reported. 
 Glyphosate is a significant eye and skin irritant. It has caused 
lethal outcomes, although it is far less potent than the bipyridyl 
FIGURE 56–1 Chemical structures of selected herbicides and pesticides.
CH3
N+
2CI–
Paraquat dichloride
H3C
+N
CI
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)
CI
C
CCI3
H
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD)
CI
CI
O
O
CI
CI
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D)
CI
O
CH2
COOH
CI
2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T)
CI
O
CH2
COOH
CI
CI
O
CH3
O
H3C
O
O
O
H
O
H
C
CH3
CH2
Rotenone
H
H
CH2
CH
CH
CH
CH2
CH3
COO
H
CH3
H3C
H
C
C
H
H3C
H3C
Pyrethrin I
O
Glyphosate
HO
OH
CH2
CH2
OH
O
C
P
NH
O
1010    SECTION IX Toxicology
herbicides. Although the pure chemical seems to have little persis-
tence and lower toxicity than other herbicides, the commercial 
formulations of glyphosate often contain surfactants and other 
active compounds that complicate the toxicity of the product. No 
specific treatment is available for glyphosate toxicity. 
 Bipyridyl Herbicides 
 Paraquat is the most important agent of this class ( Figure 56–1 ). 
Its mechanism of action is said to be similar in plants and animals 
and involves single-electron reduction of the herbicide to free 
radical species. It has been given a toxicity rating of 4, which 
places the probable human lethal dosage at 50–500 mg/kg. Lethal 
human intoxications (accidental or suicidal) have been reported. 
Paraquat accumulates slowly in the lung by an active process and 
causes lung edema, alveolitis, and progressive fibrosis. It probably 
inhibits superoxide dismutase, resulting in intracellular free radical 
oxygen toxicity. 
 In humans, the first signs and symptoms after oral exposure are 
hematemesis and bloody stools. Within a few days, however, 
delayed toxicity occurs, with respiratory distress and the develop-
ment of congestive hemorrhagic pulmonary edema accompanied 
by widespread cellular proliferation. Hepatic, renal, or myocardial 
involvement may also be evident. The interval between ingestion 
and death may be several weeks. Because of the delayed pulmo-
nary toxicity, prompt removal of paraquat from the digestive tract 
is important. Gastric lavage, the use of cathartics, and the use of 
adsorbents to prevent further absorption have all been advocated; 
after absorption, treatment is successful in fewer than 50% of 
cases. Oxygen should be used cautiously to combat dyspnea or 
cyanosis, because it may aggravate the pulmonary lesions. Patients 
require prolonged observation, because the proliferative phase 
begins 1–2 weeks after ingestion. Management of severe paraquat 
poisoning is complex and largely symptomatic. Many approaches 
have been used, including immunosuppressive therapy to slow or 
stop the progressive pulmonary fibrosis. None of the currently 
proposed methods of treatment is universally successful. 
 ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTANTS 
 Polychlorinated Biphenyls 
 The  polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs, coplanar biphenyls) have 
been used in a large variety of applications as dielectric and heat trans-
fer fluids, lubricating oils, plasticizers, wax extenders, and flame retar-
dants. Unfortunately, PCBs persist in the environment. Their 
industrial use and manufacture in the USA were terminated by 1977. 
The products used commercially were actually mixtures of PCB iso-
mers and homologs containing 12–68% chlorine. These chemicals 
are highly stable and highly lipophilic, poorly metabolized, and very 
resistant to environmental degradation; they bioaccumulate in food 
chains. Food is the major source of PCB residues in humans. 
 A serious exposure to PCBs—lasting several months—occurred 
in Japan in 1968 as a result of cooking oil contamination with 
PCB-containing transfer medium (Yusho disease). Possible effects 
on the fetus and on the development of the offspring of poisoned 
women were reported. It is now known that the contaminated 
cooking oil contained not only PCBs but also polychlorinated 
dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and polychlorinated quaterphenyls 
(PCQs). Consequently, the effects that were initially attributed to 
the presence of PCBs are now thought to have been caused by a 
mixture of contaminants. Workers occupationally exposed to 
PCBs have exhibited the following clinical signs: dermatologic 
problems (chloracne, folliculitis, erythema, dryness, rash, hyper-
keratosis, hyperpigmentation), some hepatic involvement, and 
elevated plasma triglycerides. 
 The effects of PCBs alone on reproduction and development, 
as well as their carcinogenic effects, have yet to be established in 
humans—whether workers or the general population—even 
though some subjects have been exposed to very high levels of 
PCBs. Repeated epidemiologic studies have found some increases 
in various cancers including melanoma, breast, pancreatic, and 
thyroid cancers, but the small number of cases and uncertain 
exposure status have left the carcinogenicity question unclear. In 
1977, the IARC recommended that PCBs be regarded as likely 
carcinogenic to man, although the evidence for this classification 
was lacking. Some adverse behavioral effects in infants have been 
reported. An association between prenatal exposure to PCBs and 
deficits in childhood intellectual function was described for chil-
dren born to mothers who had eaten large quantities of contami-
nated fish. The  polychlorinated dibenzo - p -dioxins (PCDDs), 
or  dioxins , have been mentioned as a group of congeners of which 
the most important is  2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo - p -dioxin 
(TCDD). In addition, there is a larger group of dioxin-like com-
pounds, including certain  polychlorinated dibenzofurans 
(PCDFs) and  coplanar biphenyls . While PCBs were used com-
mercially, PCDDs and PCDFs are unwanted byproducts that 
appear in the environment and in manufactured products as con-
taminants because of improperly controlled combustion processes. 
PCDD and PCDF contamination of the global environment is 
considered to represent a contemporary problem produced by 
human activities. Like PCBs, these chemicals are very stable and 
highly lipophilic. They are poorly metabolized and very resistant 
to environmental degradation. 
 In laboratory animals, TCDD administered in suitable doses 
has produced a wide variety of toxic effects, including a wasting 
syndrome (severe weight loss accompanied by reduction of muscle 
mass and adipose tissue), thymic atrophy, epidermal changes, 
hepatotoxicity, immunotoxicity, effects on reproduction and 
development, teratogenicity, and carcinogenicity. The effects 
observed in workers involved in the manufacture of 2,4,5-T (and 
therefore presumably exposed to TCDD) consisted of contact 
dermatitis and chloracne. In severely TCDD-intoxicated patients, 
discrete chloracne may be the only manifestation. 
 The presence of TCDD in 2,4,5-T is believed to be largely 
responsible for other human toxicities associated with the herbi-
cide. There is epidemiologic evidence indicating an association 
between occupational exposure to the phenoxy herbicides and an 
excess incidence of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The TCDD con-
taminant in these herbicides seems to play a role in a number of 
cancers such as soft tissue sarcomas, lung cancer, Hodgkin’s lym-
phomas, and others. 
CHAPTER 56 Introduction to Toxicology: Occupational & Environmental    1011
 Endocrine Disruptors 
 The potential hazardous effects of some chemicals in the envi-
ronment are receiving considerable attention because of their 
estrogen-like or antiandrogenic properties. Compounds that 
affect thyroid function are also of concern. Since 1998, the pro-
cess of prioritization, screening, and testing of chemicals for such 
actions has been undergoing worldwide development. These 
chemicals mimic, enhance, or inhibit a hormonal action. They 
include a number of plant constituents (phytoestrogens) and 
some mycoestrogens as well as industrial chemicals, particularly 
persistent organochlorine agents such as DDT and PCBs. Some 
brominated flame retardants are now being investigated as pos-
sible endocrine disrupters. Concerns exist because of their 
increasing contamination of the environment, the appearance of 
bioaccumulation, and their potential for toxicity. In vitro assays 
alone are unreliable for regulatory purposes, and animal studies 
are considered indispensable. Modified endocrine responses in 
some reptiles and marine invertebrates have been observed. In 
humans, however, a causal relation between exposure to a spe-
cific environmental agent and an adverse health effect due to 
endocrine modulation has not been established. Epidemiologic 
studies of populations exposed to higher concentrations of endo-
crine disrupting environmental chemicals are underway. There 
are indications that breast and other reproductive cancers are 
increased in these patients. Prudence dictates that exposure to 
environmental chemicals that disrupt endocrine function should 
be reduced. 
 Asbestos 
 Asbestos in many of its forms has been widely used in industry 
for over 100 years. All forms of asbestos that have been used in 
industry have been shown to cause progressive lung disease that 
is characterized by a fibrotic process. Higher levels of exposure 
produce the process called asbestosis. Lung damage develops 
even at low concentrations of shorter fibers, whereas higher con-
centrations of longer fibers are required to cause lung damage. 
Every form of asbestos, including chrysotile asbestos, causes an 
increase in lung cancer. Lung cancer occurs in people exposed at 
fiber concentrations well below concentrations that produce 
asbestosis. Cigarette smoking and exposure to radon daughters 
increase the incidence of asbestos-caused lung cancer in a syner-
gistic fashion. 
 All forms of asbestos also cause mesothelioma of the pleura or 
peritoneum at very low doses. Other cancers including colon can-
cer, laryngeal cancer, stomach cancer, and perhaps even lymphoma 
are increased in asbestos-exposed patients. The mechanism for 
asbestos-caused cancer is not yet delineated. Arguments that 
chrysotile asbestos does not cause mesothelioma are contradicted 
by many epidemiologic studies of worker populations. Recognition 
that all forms of asbestos are dangerous and carcinogenic has led 
many countries to ban all uses of asbestos. Countries such as 
Canada, Zimbabwe, and others that still produce asbestos argue 
that asbestos can be used safely with careful workplace environ-
mental controls. However, studies of industrial practice make the 
“safe use” of asbestos highly improbable. 
 METALS 
 Occupational and environmental poisoning with metals, metal-
loids, and metal compounds is a major health problem. Exposure 
in the workplace is found in many industries, and exposure in the 
home and elsewhere in the nonoccupational environment is wide-
spread. The classic metal poisons (arsenic, lead, and mercury) 
continue to be widely used. (Treatment of their toxicities is dis-
cussed in  Chapter 57 .) Occupational exposure and poisoning due 
to beryllium, cadmium, manganese, and uranium are relatively 
new occupational problems, which present new and previously 
unaddressed problems. 
 Beryllium 
 Beryllium (Be) is a light alkaline metal that confers special proper-
ties on the alloys and ceramics in which it is incorporated. One 
attractive property of beryllium is its nonsparking quality, which 
makes it useful in such diverse applications as the manufacture of 
dental appliances and of nuclear weapons. Beryllium-copper alloys 
find use as components of computers, in the encasement of the 
first stage of nuclear weapons, in devices that require hardening 
such as missile ceramic nose cones, and in the space shuttle heat 
shield tiles. Because of the use of beryllium in dental appliances, 
dentists and dental appliance makers are often exposed to beryl-
lium dust in toxic concentrations. 
 Beryllium is highly toxic by inhalation and is classified by 
IARC as a class 1, known human carcinogen. Inhalation of 
beryllium particles produces progressive pulmonary fibrosis and 
may lead to cancer. Skin disease also develops in workers over-
exposed to beryllium. The pulmonary disease is called chronic 
beryllium disease (CBD) and is a chronic granulomatous pul-
monary fibrosis. In the 5–15% of the population that is sensi-
tive to beryllium, chronic beryllium disease is the result of 
activation of an autoimmune attack on the skin and lungs. The 
disease is progressive and may lead to severe disability and 
death. Although some treatment approaches to the manage-
ment of chronic beryllium disease show promise, the prognosis 
is poor in most cases. 
 The current permissible exposure levels for beryllium of 0.01 
mcg/m 3 averaged over a 30-day period or 2 mcg/m 3 over an 
8-hour period are insufficiently protective to prevent chronic 
beryllium disease. Both NIOSH and the ACGIH have recom-
mended that the PEL and TLV be reduced to 0.05 mcg/m 3 . These 
recommendations have not yet been implemented. 
 Environmental beryllium exposure is not generally thought to 
be a hazard to human health except in the vicinity of industrial 
sites where air, water and soil pollution have occurred. 
 Cadmium 
 Cadmium (Cd) is a transition metal widely used in industry. 
Workers are exposed to cadmium in the manufacture of nickel 
cadmium batteries, pigments, low-melting-point eutectic materi-
als; in solder; in television phosphors; and in plating operations. It 
is also used extensively in semiconductors and in plastics as a sta-
bilizer. Cadmium smelting is often done from residual dust from 
1012    SECTION IX Toxicology
lead smelting operations, and cadmium smelter workers often face 
both lead and cadmium toxicity. 
 Cadmium is toxic by inhalation and by ingestion. When met-
als that have been plated with cadmium or welded with cadmium-
containing materials are vaporized by the heat of torches or 
cutting implements, the fine dust and fumes released produce an 
acute respiratory disorder called  cadmium fume fever . This disor-
der, common in welders, is usually characterized by shaking chills, 
cough, fever, and malaise. Although it may produce pneumonia, 
it is usually transient. However, chronic exposure to cadmium 
dust produces a far more serious progressive pulmonary fibrosis. 
Cadmium also causes severe kidney damage, including renal fail-
ure if exposure continues. Cadmium is a human carcinogen and is 
listed as a group 1, known human carcinogen by the IARC. 
 The current OSHA PEL for cadmium is 5 mcg/m 3 . This PEL, 
considered by OSHA to be the lowest feasible limit for the dust, 
is insufficiently protective of worker health. 
 REFERENCES 
 Birnbaum LS, Staska DF: Brominated flame retardants: Cause for concern? 
Environ Health Perspect 2004;112:9. 
 Buckley A et al: Hyperbaric oxygen for carbon monoxide poisoning: A systematic 
review and critical analysis of the evidence. Toxicol Rev 2005;24:75. 
 Casals-Casas C, Desvergne B: Endocrine disruptors: from endocrine to metabolic 
disruption. Annu Rev Physiol 2011;73:135. 
 Crisp TM et al: Environmental endocrine disruption: An effects assessment and 
analysis. Environ Health Perspect 1998;106(Suppl 1):11. 
 Degen GH, Bolt HM: Endocrine disruptors: Update on xenoestrogens. Int Arch 
Occup Environ Health 2000;73:433. 
 Ecobichon DJ: Our changing perspectives on benefits and risks of pesticides: A 
historical overview. Neurotoxicology 2000;21:211. 
 Geusau A et al: Severe 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo- p -dioxin (TCDD) intoxication: 
Clinical and laboratory effects. Environ Health Perspect 2001;109:865. 
 Gosselin RE, Smith RP, Hodge HC:  Clinical Toxicology of Commercial Products , 5th 
ed. Williams & Wilkins, 1984. 
 Haley RW et al: Association of low PON1 type Q (type A) arylesterase activity 
with neurologic symptom complexes in Gulf War veterans. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol 1999;157:227. 
 Hamm JI, Chen CY, Birnbaum LS: A mixture of dioxin, furans, and non-ortho 
PCBs based upon consensus toxic equivalency factors produces dioxin-like 
reproductive effects. Toxicol Sci 2003;74:182. 
 Jacobson JL, Jacobson SW: Association of prenatal exposure to an environmental 
contaminant with intellectual function in childhood. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 
2002;40:467. 
 Kao JW, Nanagas KA: Carbon monoxide poisoning. Emerg Med Clin North Am 
2004;22:985. 
 Klaassen CD (editor): Casarett and Doull’s  Toxicology , 7th ed. McGraw-Hill, 
2007. 
 Lavin AL, Jacobson OF, DeSesso JM: An assessment of the carcinogenic potential 
of trichloroethylene in humans. Human Ecol Risk Assess 2000;6:575. 
 Lévesque B et al: Cancer risk associated with household exposure to chloroform. J 
Toxicol Environ Health A 2002;65:489. 
 Lotti M, Moretto A: Organophosphate-induced delayed polyneuropathy. Toxicol 
Rev 2005;24:37. 
 MacMahon B: Pesticide residues and breast cancer? J Natl Cancer Inst 
1994;86:572. 
 Mundt KA, Birk T, Burch MT: Critical review of the epidemiological literature on 
occupational exposure to perchloroethylene and cancer. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health 2003;76:473. 
 Olson KR et al (editors):  Poisoning & Drug Overdose , 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, 
2006. 
 Raub JA et al: Carbon monoxide poisoning—a public health perspective. 
Toxicology 2000;145:1. 
 Ray DE, Fry JR: A reassessment of the neurotoxicity of pyrethroid insecticides. 
Pharmacol Ther 2006;111:174. 
 Safe SH: Endocrine disruptors and human health—is there a problem? An update. 
Environ Health Perspect 2000;108:487. 
 Soderlund DM et al: Mechanisms of pyrethroid neurotoxicity: Implications for 
cumulative risk assessment. Toxicology 2002;171:3. 
 St Hilaire S et al: Estrogen receptor positive breast cancers and their association 
with environmental factors. Int J Health Geogr 2011;10:10. 
 Storm JE, Rozman KK, Doull J: Occupational exposure limits for 30 organophos-
phate pesticides based on inhibition of red blood cell acetylcholinesterase. 
Toxicology 2000;150:1. 
 
 
 
1013
1013
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
lines may increase the lead concentration of tap water. 
Environmental lead exposure, ubiquitous by virtue of the anthropo-
genic distribution of lead to air, water, and food, has declined con-
siderably in the last three decades as a result of the elimination of lead 
as an additive in gasoline, as well as diminished contact with lead-
based paint and other lead-containing consumer products, such as 
lead solder in canned food. Although these public health measures, 
together with improved workplace conditions, have decreased the 
incidence of serious overt lead poisoning, there remains considerable 
concern over the effects of low-level lead exposure. Extensive evi-
dence indicates that lead may have subtle subclinical adverse effects 
on neurocognitive function and on blood pressure at low blood lead 
concentrations formerly not recognized as harmful. Lead serves no 
useful purpose in the human body. In key target organs such as the 
developing central nervous system, no level of lead exposure has been 
shown to be without deleterious effects. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Inorganic lead is slowly but consistently absorbed via the respiratory 
and gastrointestinal tracts. Inorganic lead is poorly absorbed through 
the skin. Absorption of lead dust via the respiratory tract is the most 
common cause of industrial poisoning. The intestinal tract is the 
primary route of entry in nonindustrial exposure ( Table 57–1 ). 
Absorption via the gastrointestinal tract varies with the nature of the 
lead compound, but in general, adults absorb about 10–15% of the 
ingested amount, whereas young children absorb up to 50%. Low 
dietary calcium, iron deficiency, and ingestion on an empty stomach 
all have been associated with increased lead absorption. 
57
 
C A S E  S T U D Y
A 48-year-old painter is referred for evaluation of recent 
onset of severe abdominal pains, headaches, and myalgias. 
For the last week, he has been removing old paint from an 
iron bridge using grinding tools and a blow torch. His 
employer states that all the bridge workers are provided with 
the equivalent of “haz-mat” (hazardous materials) suits. 
What tests should be carried out? Assuming positive test 
results, what therapy would be appropriate?
 Some metals such as iron are essential for life, whereas others such 
as lead are present in all organisms but serve no useful biologic 
purpose. Some of the oldest diseases of humans can be traced to 
heavy metal poisoning associated with metal mining, refining, and 
use. Even with the present recognition of the hazards of heavy 
metals, the incidence of intoxication remains significant, and the 
need for preventive strategies and effective therapy remains high. 
Toxic heavy metals interfere with the function of essential cations, 
cause enzyme inhibition, generate oxidative stress, and alter gene 
expression. As a result, multisystem signs and symptoms are a 
hallmark of heavy metal intoxication. 
 When intoxication occurs, chelator molecules (from  chela 
“claw”), or their in vivo biotransformation products, may be used 
to bind the metal and facilitate its excretion from the body. 
Chelator drugs are discussed in the second part of this chapter. 
 ■ TOXICOLOGY OF HEAVY 
METALS 
 LEAD 
 Lead poisoning is one of the oldest occupational and environmen-
tal diseases in the world. Despite its recognized hazards, lead 
continues to have widespread commercial application, including 
production of storage batteries (nearly 90% of US consumption), 
ammunition, metal alloys, solder, glass, plastics, pigments, and 
ceramics. Corrosion of lead plumbing in older buildings or supply 
Heavy Metal Intoxication 
& Chelators
 Michael J. Kosnett, MD, MPH 
1014    SECTION IX Toxicology
 Once absorbed from the respiratory or gastrointestinal tract, 
lead enters the bloodstream, where approximately 99% is bound 
to erythrocytes and 1% is present in the plasma. Lead is subse-
quently distributed to soft tissues such as the bone marrow, brain, 
kidney, liver, muscle, and gonads; then to the subperiosteal surface 
of bone; and later to bone matrix. Lead also crosses the placenta 
and poses a potential hazard to the fetus. The kinetics of lead 
clearance from the body follows a multicompartment model, 
composed predominantly of the blood and soft tissues, with a 
half-life of 1–2 months; and the skeleton, with a half-life of years 
to decades. Approximately 70% of the lead that is eliminated 
appears in the urine, with lesser amounts excreted through the 
bile, skin, hair, nails, sweat, and breast milk. The fraction not 
undergoing prompt excretion, approximately half of the absorbed 
lead, may be incorporated into the skeleton, the repository of 
more than 90% of the body lead burden in most adults. In 
patients with high bone lead burdens, slow release from the skel-
eton may elevate blood lead concentrations for years after expo-
sure ceases, and pathologic high bone turnover states such as 
hyperthyroidism or prolonged immobilization may result in frank 
lead intoxication. Migration of retained lead bullet fragments into 
a joint space or adjacent to bone has been associated with the 
development of lead poisoning signs and symptoms years or 
decades after an initial gunshot injury. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Lead exerts multisystemic toxic effects that are mediated by mul-
tiple modes of action, including inhibition of enzymatic function; 
interference with the action of essential cations, particularly cal-
cium, iron, and zinc; generation of oxidative stress; changes in 
gene expression; alterations in cell signaling; and disruption of the 
integrity of membranes in cells and organelles. 
 A. Nervous System 
 The developing central nervous system of the fetus and young 
child is the most sensitive target organ for lead’s toxic effect. 
Epidemiologic studies suggest that blood lead concentrations even 
less than 5 mcg/dL may result in subclinical deficits in neurocog-
nitive function in lead-exposed young children, with no demon-
strable threshold for a “no effect” level. The dose response between 
TABLE 57–1 Toxicology of selected arsenic, lead, and mercury compounds.
Form Entering 
Body
Major Route of 
Absorption
Distribution
Major Clinical 
Effects
Key Aspects of 
Mechanism
Metabolism and 
Elimination
Arsenic
Inorganic arsenic 
salts
Gastrointestinal, 
respiratory (all 
mucosal surfaces)
Predominantly 
soft tissues 
(highest in liver, 
kidney). Avidly 
bound in skin, 
hair, nails
Cardiovascular: shock, 
arrhythmias. CNS: 
encephalopathy, 
peripheral 
neuropathy. 
Gastroenteritis; pan-
cytopenia; cancer 
(many sites)
Inhibits enzymes; 
interferes with 
oxidative 
phosphorylation; 
alters cell signaling, 
gene expression
Methylation. Renal 
(major); sweat and 
feces (minor)
Lead
Inorganic lead 
oxides and salts
Gastrointestinal, 
respiratory
Soft tissues; 
redistributed to 
skeleton (> 90% 
of adult body 
burden)
CNS deficits; 
peripheral 
neuropathy; ane-
mia; nephropathy; 
hypertension; 
reproductive 
toxicity
Inhibits enzymes; 
interferes with 
essential cations; 
alters membrane 
structure
Renal (major); feces 
and breast milk 
(minor)
Organic (tetraethyl 
lead)
Skin, gastrointesti-
nal, respiratory
Soft tissues, 
especially liver, 
CNS
Encephalopathy
Hepatic dealkylation 
(fast) → trialkyme-
tabolites (slow) → 
dissociation to lead
Urine and feces 
(major); sweat 
(minor)
Mercury
Elemental mercury
Respiratory tract
Soft tissues, 
especially kidney, 
CNS
CNS: tremor, 
behavioral 
 (erethism); gingivo- 
stomatitis; 
peripheral neuropa-
thy; acrodynia; 
pneumonitis 
(high-dose)
Inhibits enzymes; 
alters membranes
Elemental Hg 
converted to Hg2+. 
Urine (major); feces 
(minor)
Inorganic: Hg+ 
(less toxic); Hg2+ 
(more toxic)
Gastrointestinal, 
skin (minor)
Soft tissues, 
especially kidney
Acute tubular 
necrosis; gastroen-
teritis; CNS effects 
(rare)
Inhibits enzymes; 
alters membranes
Urine
Organic: alkyl, aryl
Gastrointestinal, 
skin, respiratory 
(minor)
Soft tissues
CNS effects, birth 
defects
Inhibits enzymes; 
alters microtubules, 
neuronal structure
Deacylation. Fecal 
(alkyl, major); urine 
(Hg2+ after deacyla-
tion, minor)
CHAPTER 57 Heavy Metal Intoxication & Chelators    1015
low blood lead concentrations and cognitive function in young 
children is nonlinear, such that the decrement in intelligence associ-
ated with an increase in blood lead from less than 1 to 10 mcg/dL 
(6.2 IQ points) exceeds that associated with a change from 
10 to 30 mcg/dL (3.0 IQ points). 
 Adults are less sensitive to the central nervous system effects of 
lead, but long-term exposure to blood lead concentrations in the 
range of 10–30 mcg/dL may be associated with subtle, subclinical 
effects on neurocognitive function. At blood lead concentrations 
higher than 30 mcg/dL, behavioral and neurocognitive signs or 
symptoms may gradually emerge, including irritability, fatigue, 
decreased libido, anorexia, sleep disturbance, impaired visual-
motor coordination, and slowed reaction time. Headache, arthral-
gias, and myalgias are also common complaints. Tremor occurs 
but is less common. Lead encephalopathy, usually occurring at 
blood lead concentrations higher than 100 mcg/dL, is typically 
accompanied by increased intracranial pressure and may cause 
ataxia, stupor, coma, convulsions, and death. Recent epidemio-
logical studies suggest that lead may accentuate an age-related 
decline in cognitive function in older adults. In experimental ani-
mals, developmental lead exposure has been associated with 
increased expression of beta-amyloid, oxidative DNA damage, and 
Alzheimer’s-type pathology in the aging brain. There is wide inter-
individual variation in the magnitude of lead exposure required to 
cause overt lead-related signs and symptoms. 
 Overt peripheral neuropathy may appear after chronic high-
dose lead exposure, usually following months to years of blood 
lead concentrations higher than 100 mcg/dL. Predominantly 
motor in character, the neuropathy may present clinically with 
painless weakness of the extensors, particularly in the upper 
extremity, resulting in classic wrist-drop. Preclinical signs of lead-
induced peripheral nerve dysfunction may be detectable by elec-
trodiagnostic testing. 
 B. Blood 
 Lead can induce an anemia that may be either normocytic or 
microcytic and hypochromic. Lead interferes with heme synthesis 
by blocking the incorporation of iron into protoporphyrin IX and 
by inhibiting the function of enzymes in the heme synthesis path-
way, including aminolevulinic acid dehydratase and ferrochelatase. 
Within 2–8 weeks after an elevation in blood lead concentration 
(generally to 30–50 mcg/dL or greater), increases in heme precur-
sors, notably free erythrocyte protoporphyrin or its zinc chelate, 
zinc protoporphyrin, may be detectable in whole blood. Lead also 
contributes to anemia by increasing erythrocyte membrane fragil-
ity and decreasing red cell survival time. Frank hemolysis may 
occur with high exposure. Basophilic stippling on the peripheral 
blood smear, thought to be a consequence of lead inhibition of the 
enzyme 3’,5’-pyrimidine nucleotidase, is sometimes a suggestive—
albeit insensitive and nonspecific—diagnostic clue to the presence 
of lead intoxication. 
 C. Kidneys 
 Chronic high-dose lead exposure, usually associated with months 
to years of blood lead concentrations greater than 80 mcg/dL, may 
result in renal interstitial fibrosis and nephrosclerosis. Lead neph-
ropathy may have a latency period of years. Lead may alter uric 
acid excretion by the kidney, resulting in recurrent bouts of gouty 
arthritis (“saturnine gout”). Acute high-dose lead exposure some-
times produces transient azotemia, possibly as a consequence of 
intrarenal vasoconstriction. Studies conducted in general popula-
tion samples have documented an association between blood lead 
concentration and measures of renal function, including serum 
creatinine and creatinine clearance. The presence of other risk fac-
tors for renal insufficiency, including hypertension and diabetes, 
may increase susceptibility to lead-induced renal dysfunction. 
 D. Reproductive Organs 
 High-dose lead exposure is a recognized risk factor for stillbirth or 
spontaneous abortion. Epidemiologic studies of the impact of 
low-level lead exposure on reproductive outcome such as low birth 
weight, preterm delivery, or spontaneous abortion have yielded 
mixed results. However, a well-designed nested case-control study 
detected an odds ratio for spontaneous abortion of 1.8 (95% CI 
1.1–3.1) for every 5 mcg/dL increase in maternal blood lead across 
an approximate range of 5–20 mcg/dL. Recent studies have linked 
prenatal exposure to low levels of lead (eg, maternal blood lead 
concentrations of 5–15 mcg/dL) to decrements in physical and 
cognitive development assessed during the neonatal period and 
early childhood. In males, blood lead concentrations higher than 
40 mcg/dL have been associated with diminished or aberrant 
sperm production. 
 E. Gastrointestinal Tract 
 Moderate lead poisoning may cause loss of appetite, constipation, 
and, less commonly, diarrhea. At high dosage, intermittent bouts of 
severe colicky abdominal pain (“lead colic”) may occur. The mecha-
nism of lead colic is unclear but is believed to involve spasmodic 
contraction of the smooth muscles of the intestinal wall, mediated 
by alteration in synaptic transmission at the smooth muscle-neuro-
muscular junction. In heavily exposed individuals with poor dental 
hygiene, the reaction of circulating lead with sulfur ions released by 
microbial action may produce dark deposits of lead sulfide at the 
gingival margin (“gingival lead lines”). Although frequently men-
tioned as a diagnostic clue in the past, in recent times this has been 
a relatively rare sign of lead exposure. 
 F. Cardiovascular System 
 Epidemiologic, experimental, and in vitro mechanistic data indi-
cate that lead exposure elevates blood pressure in susceptible indi-
viduals. In populations with environmental or occupational lead 
exposure, blood lead concentration is linked with increases in 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Studies of middle-aged and 
elderly men and women have identified relatively low levels of lead 
exposure sustained by the general population to be an indepen-
dent risk factor for hypertension. In addition, epidemiologic stud-
ies suggest that low to moderate levels of lead exposure are risk 
factors for increased cardiovascular mortality. Lead can also elevate 
blood pressure in experimental animals. The pressor effect of lead 
1016    SECTION IX Toxicology
may be mediated by an interaction with calcium mediated con-
traction of vascular smooth muscle, as well as generation of oxida-
tive stress and an associated interference in nitric oxide signaling 
pathways. 
 Major Forms of Lead Intoxication 
 A. Inorganic Lead Poisoning ( Table 57–1 ) 
 1. Acute— Acute inorganic lead poisoning is uncommon today. It 
usually results from industrial inhalation of large quantities of lead 
oxide fumes or, in small children, from ingestion of a large oral 
dose of lead in the form of lead-based paint chips; small objects, eg, 
toys coated or fabricated from lead; or contaminated food or drink. 
The onset of severe symptoms usually requires several days or 
weeks of recurrent exposure and manifests as signs and symptoms 
of encephalopathy or colic. Evidence of hemolytic anemia (or ane-
mia with basophilic stippling if exposure has been subacute) and 
elevated hepatic aminotransferases may be present. 
 The diagnosis of acute inorganic lead poisoning may be diffi-
cult, and depending on the presenting symptoms, the condition 
has sometimes been mistaken for appendicitis, peptic ulcer, biliary 
colic, pancreatitis, or infectious meningitis. Subacute presenta-
tion, featuring headache, fatigue, intermittent abdominal cramps, 
myalgias, and arthralgias, has often been mistaken for a flu-like 
viral illness. When there has been recent ingestion of lead-contain-
ing paint chips, glazes, or weights, radiopacities may be visible on 
abdominal radiographs. 
 2. Chronic— The patient with chronic lead intoxication usually 
presents with multisystemic findings, including complaints of 
anorexia, fatigue, and malaise; neurologic complaints, including 
headache, difficulty in concentrating, and irritability or depressed 
mood; weakness, arthralgias, or myalgias; and gastrointestinal 
symptoms. Lead poisoning should be strongly suspected in any 
patient presenting with headache, abdominal pain, and anemia; 
and less commonly with motor neuropathy, gout, and renal insuf-
ficiency. Chronic lead intoxication should be considered in any 
child with neurocognitive deficits, growth retardation, or develop-
mental delay. It is important to recognize that adverse effects of 
lead that are of considerable public health significance, such as 
subclinical decrements in neurodevelopment in children and 
hypertension in adults, are usually nonspecific and may not come 
to medical attention. 
 The diagnosis of lead intoxication is best confirmed by measur-
ing lead in whole blood. Although this test reflects lead currently 
circulating in blood and soft tissues and is not a reliable marker of 
either recent or cumulative lead exposure, most patients with lead-
related disease have blood lead concentrations higher than the 
normal range. Average background blood lead concentrations in 
North America and Europe have declined by 90% in recent 
decades, and the geometric mean blood lead concentration in the 
United States in 2005–2006 was estimated to be 1.29 mcg/dL. 
Though predominantly a research tool, the concentration of lead 
in bone assessed by noninvasive K X-ray fluorescence measurement 
of lead has been correlated with long-term cumulative lead expo-
sure, and its relationship to numerous lead-related disorders is a 
subject of ongoing investigation. Measurement of lead excretion in 
the urine after a single dose of a chelating agent (sometimes called 
a “chelation challenge test”) primarily reflects the lead content of 
soft tissues and may not be a reliable marker of long-term lead 
exposure, remote past exposure, or skeletal lead burden. Because of 
the lag time associated with lead-induced elevations in circulating 
heme precursors, the finding of a blood lead concentration of 
30 mcg/dL or more with no concurrent increase in zinc protopor-
phyrin suggests that the lead exposure was of recent onset. 
 B. Organolead Poisoning 
 Poisoning from organolead compounds is now very rare, in large 
part because of the worldwide phase-out of tetraethyl and tetra-
methyl lead as antiknock additives in gasoline. However, organo-
lead compounds such as lead stearate or lead naphthenate are still 
used in certain commercial processes. Because of their volatility or 
lipid solubility, organolead compounds tend to be well absorbed 
through either the respiratory tract or the skin. Organolead com-
pounds predominantly target the central nervous system, producing 
dose-dependent effects that may include neurocognitive deficits, 
insomnia, delirium, hallucinations, tremor, convulsions, and death. 
 Treatment 
 A. Inorganic Lead Poisoning 
 Treatment of inorganic lead poisoning involves immediate termi-
nation of exposure, supportive care, and the judicious use of chela-
tion therapy. (Chelation is discussed later in this chapter.) Lead 
encephalopathy is a medical emergency that requires intensive 
supportive care. Cerebral edema may improve with corticosteroids 
and mannitol, and anticonvulsants may be required to treat sei-
zures. Radiopacities on abdominal radiographs may suggest the 
presence of retained lead objects requiring gastrointestinal decon-
tamination. Adequate urine flow should be maintained, but over-
hydration should be avoided. Intravenous edetate calcium 
disodium (CaNa 2 EDTA) is administered at a dosage of 1000–
1500 mg/m 2 /d (approximately 30–50 mg/kg/d) by continuous 
infusion for up to 5 days. Some clinicians advocate that chelation 
treatment for lead encephalopathy be initiated with an intramus-
cular injection of dimercaprol, followed in 4 hours by concurrent 
administration of dimercaprol and EDTA. Parenteral chelation is 
limited to 5 or fewer days, at which time oral treatment with 
another chelator, succimer, may be instituted. In symptomatic 
lead intoxication without encephalopathy, treatment may some-
times be initiated with succimer. The end point for chelation is 
usually resolution of symptoms or return of the blood lead con-
centration to the premorbid range. In patients with chronic expo-
sure, cessation of chelation may be followed by an upward 
rebound in blood lead concentration as the lead re-equilibrates 
from bone lead stores. 
 Although most clinicians support chelation for symptomatic 
patients with elevated blood lead concentrations, the decision to 
chelate asymptomatic subjects is more controversial. Since 1991, 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has rec-
ommended chelation for all children with blood lead concentra-
tions of 45 mcg/dL or greater. However, a recent randomized, 
CHAPTER 57 Heavy Metal Intoxication & Chelators    1017
double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of succimer in chil-
dren with blood lead concentrations between 25 mcg/dL and 
44 mcg/dL found no benefit on neurocognitive function or long-
term blood lead reduction. Prophylactic use of chelating agents in 
the workplace should never be a substitute for reduction or pre-
vention of excessive exposure. 
 Management of elevated blood lead levels in children and 
adults should include a conscientious effort to identify and reduce 
all potential sources of future lead exposure. Many local, state, or 
national governmental agencies maintain lead poisoning preven-
tion programs that can assist in case management. Blood lead 
screening of family members or coworkers of a lead poisoning 
patient is often indicated to assess the scope of the exposure. 
Although the CDC blood lead level of concern for childhood lead 
poisoning of 10 mcg/dL has not been revised since 1991, the 
adverse impact of lower levels on children is widely acknowledged, 
and primary prevention of lead exposure is receiving increased 
emphasis. Although the US Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) lead regulations introduced in the late 
1970s mandate that workers be removed from lead exposure for 
blood lead levels higher than 50–60 mcg/dL, an expert panel in 
2007 recommended that removal be initiated for a single blood 
lead level greater than 30 mcg/dL, or when two successive blood 
lead levels measured over a 4-week interval are 20 mcg/dL or 
more. The longer-term goal should be for workers to maintain 
blood lead levels at lower than 10 mcg/dL, and for pregnant 
women to avoid occupational or avocational exposure that would 
result in blood lead levels higher than 5 mcg/dL. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) regulations effective since 2010 require 
that contractors who perform renovation, repair, and painting 
projects that disturb lead-based paint in pre-1978 residences and 
child-occupied facilities must be certified and must follow specific 
work practices to prevent lead contamination. 
 B. Organic Lead Poisoning 
 Initial treatment consists of decontaminating the skin and pre-
venting further exposure. Treatment of seizures requires appropri-
ate use of anticonvulsants. Empiric chelation may be attempted if 
high blood lead concentrations are present. 
 Arsenic 
 Arsenic is a naturally occurring element in the earth’s crust with a 
long history of use as a constituent of commercial and industrial 
products, as a component in pharmaceuticals, and as an agent of 
deliberate poisoning. Recent commercial applications of arsenic 
include its use in the manufacture of semiconductors, wood pre-
servatives for industrial applications (eg, marine timbers or utility 
poles), nonferrous alloys, glass, gel-based insecticidal ant baits, and 
veterinary pharmaceuticals. In some regions of the world, ground-
water may contain high levels of arsenic that has leached from 
natural mineral deposits. Arsenic in drinking water in the Ganges 
delta of India and Bangladesh is now recognized as one of the 
world’s most pressing environmental health problems. Arsine, an 
arsenous hydride (AsH 3 ) gas with potent hemolytic effects, is manu-
factured predominantly for use in the semiconductor industry but 
may also be generated accidentally when arsenic-containing ores 
come in contact with acidic solutions. 
 It is of historical interest that Fowler’s solution, which contains 
1% potassium arsenite, was widely used as a medicine for many 
conditions from the eighteenth century through the mid- twentieth 
century. Organic arsenicals were the first pharmaceutical antimi-
crobials ∗ and were widely used for the first half of the twentieth 
century until supplanted by sulfonamides and other more effective 
and less toxic agents. 
 Other organoarsenicals, most notably lewisite (dichloro-
[2-chlorovinyl]arsine), were developed in the early twentieth cen-
tury as chemical warfare agents. Arsenic trioxide was reintroduced 
into the United States Pharmacopeia in 2000 as an orphan drug for 
the treatment of relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia and is find-
ing expanded use in experimental cancer treatment protocols (see 
 Chapter 54 ). Melarsoprol, another trivalent arsenical, is used in the 
treatment of advanced African trypanosomiasis (see  Chapter 52 ). 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Soluble arsenic compounds are well absorbed through the respira-
tory and gastrointestinal tracts ( Table 57–1 ). Percutaneous absorp-
tion is limited but may be clinically significant after heavy exposure 
to concentrated arsenic reagents. Most of the absorbed inorganic 
arsenic undergoes methylation, mainly in the liver, to monomethyl-
arsonic acid and dimethylarsinic acid, which are excreted, along 
with residual inorganic arsenic, in the urine. When chronic daily 
absorption is less than 1000 mcg of soluble inorganic arsenic, 
approximately two thirds of the absorbed dose is excreted in the 
urine within 2–3 days. After massive ingestions, the elimination 
half-life is prolonged. Inhalation of arsenic compounds of low solu-
bility may result in prolonged retention in the lung and may not 
be reflected by urinary arsenic excretion. Arsenic binds to sulfhy-
dryl groups present in keratinized tissue, and following cessation of 
exposure, hair, nails, and skin may contain elevated levels after 
urine values have returned to normal. However, arsenic in hair and 
nails as a result of external deposition may be indistinguishable 
from that incorporated after internal absorption. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Arsenic compounds are thought to exert their toxic effects by 
several modes of action. Interference with enzyme function may 
result from sulfhydryl group binding by trivalent arsenic or by 
substitution for phosphate. Inorganic arsenic or its metabolites 
may induce oxidative stress, alter gene expression, and interfere 
with cell signal transduction. Although on a molar basis, inorganic 
trivalent arsenic (As 3+ , arsenite) is generally two to ten times more 
acutely toxic than inorganic pentavalent arsenic (As 5+ , arsenate), 
in vivo interconversion is known to occur, and the full spectrum 
of arsenic toxicity has occurred after sufficient exposure to either 
form. Recent studies suggest that the trivalent form of the methy-
lated metabolites (eg, monomethylarsonous acid [MMA III ]) 
 ∗ Paul Ehrlich’s “magic bullet” for syphilis (arsphenamine, Salvarsan) was 
an arsenical.
1018    SECTION IX Toxicology
may be more toxic than the inorganic parent compounds. 
Reduced efficiency in the methylation of MMA to DMA, result-
ing in an elevated percentage of MMA in the urine, has been 
associated with an increased risk of chronic adverse effects. Arsenic 
methylation requires S-adenosylmethionine, a universal methyl 
donor in the body, and arsenic-associated perturbations in one-
carbon metabolism may underlie some arsenic-induced epigenetic 
effects such as altered gene expression. 
 Arsine gas is oxidized in vivo and exerts a potent hemolytic 
effect associated with alteration of ion flux across the erythrocyte 
membrane; it also disrupts cellular respiration in other tissues. 
Arsenic is a recognized human carcinogen and has been associated 
with cancer of the lung, skin, and bladder. Marine organisms may 
contain large amounts of a well-absorbed trimethylated organo-
arsenic, arsenobetaine, as well as a variety of arsenosugars and 
arsenolipids. Arsenobetaine exerts no known toxic effects when 
ingested by mammals and is excreted in the urine unchanged; 
arsenosugars are partially metabolized to dimethylarsinic acid. 
Thio-dimethylarsinic acid has recently been identified as a com-
mon but minor human arsenic metabolite of uncertain toxico-
logical significance. 
 Major Forms of Arsenic Intoxication 
 A. Acute Inorganic Arsenic Poisoning 
 Within minutes to hours after exposure to high doses (tens to 
hundreds of milligrams) of soluble inorganic arsenic compounds, 
many systems are affected. Initial gastrointestinal signs and symp-
toms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. 
Diffuse capillary leak, combined with gastrointestinal fluid loss, 
may result in hypotension, shock, and death. Cardiopulmonary 
toxicity, including congestive cardiomyopathy, cardiogenic or 
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, and ventricular arrhythmias, 
may occur promptly or after a delay of several days. Pancytopenia 
usually develops within 1 week, and basophilic stippling of eryth-
rocytes may be present soon after. Central nervous system effects, 
including delirium, encephalopathy, and coma, may occur within 
the first few days of intoxication. An ascending sensorimotor 
peripheral neuropathy may begin to develop after a delay of 
2–6 weeks. This neuropathy may ultimately involve the proximal 
musculature and result in neuromuscular respiratory failure. 
Months after an acute poisoning, transverse white striae (Aldrich-
Mees lines) may be visible in the nails. 
 Acute inorganic arsenic poisoning should be considered in an 
individual presenting with abrupt onset of gastroenteritis in com-
bination with hypotension and metabolic acidosis. Suspicion 
should be further heightened when these initial findings are fol-
lowed by cardiac dysfunction, pancytopenia, and peripheral neu-
ropathy. The diagnosis may be confirmed by demonstration of 
elevated amounts of inorganic arsenic and its metabolites in the 
urine (typically in the range of several thousand micrograms in the 
first 2–3 days after acute symptomatic poisoning). Arsenic disap-
pears rapidly from the blood, and except in anuric patients, blood 
arsenic levels should not be used for diagnostic purposes. 
Treatment is based on appropriate gut decontamination, intensive 
supportive care, and prompt chelation with unithiol, 3–5 mg/kg 
intravenously every 4–6 hours, or dimercaprol, 3–5 mg/kg intra-
muscularly every 4–6 hours. In animal studies, the efficacy of 
chelation has been highest when it is administered within minutes 
to hours after arsenic exposure; therefore, if diagnostic suspi-
cion is high, treatment should not be withheld for the 
several days to weeks often required to obtain laboratory 
confirmation. 
 Succimer has also been effective in animal models and has a 
higher therapeutic index than dimercaprol. However, because it is 
available in the United States only for oral administration, its use 
may not be advisable in the initial treatment of acute arsenic poi-
soning, when severe gastroenteritis and splanchnic edema may 
limit absorption by this route. 
 B. Chronic Inorganic Arsenic Poisoning 
 Chronic inorganic arsenic poisoning also results in multisystemic 
signs and symptoms. Overt noncarcinogenic effects may be evi-
dent after chronic absorption of more than 0.01 mg/kg/d 
(∼ 500–1000 mcg/d in adults). The time to appearance of symp-
toms varies with dose and interindividual tolerance. Constitutional 
symptoms of fatigue, weight loss, and weakness may be present, 
along with anemia, nonspecific gastrointestinal complaints, and a 
sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy, particularly featuring a 
stocking glove pattern of dysesthesia. Skin changes—among the 
most characteristic effects—typically develop after years of expo-
sure and include a “raindrop” pattern of hyperpigmentation, and 
hyperkeratoses involving the hands and feet ( Figure 57–1 ). 
Peripheral vascular disease and noncirrhotic portal hypertension 
may also occur. Epidemiologic studies suggest a possible link to 
hypertension, diabetes, chronic nonmalignant respiratory disease, 
and adverse reproductive outcomes. Cancer of the lung, skin, 
bladder, and possibly other sites, may appear years after exposure 
to doses of arsenic that are not high enough to elicit other acute 
or chronic effects. 
 Administration of arsenite in cancer chemotherapy regimens, 
often at a daily dose of 10–20 mg for weeks to a few months, has 
been associated with prolongation of the QT interval on the elec-
trocardiogram and occasionally has resulted in malignant ventric-
ular arrhythmias such as torsades de pointes. 
 The diagnosis of chronic arsenic poisoning involves inte-
gration of the clinical findings with confirmation of exposure. 
The urine concentration of the sum of inorganic arsenic and 
its primary metabolites MMA and DMA is less than 20 mcg/L 
in the general population. High urine levels associated with 
overt adverse effects may return to normal within days to 
weeks after exposure ceases. Because it may contain large 
amounts of nontoxic organoarsenic, all seafood should be 
avoided for at least 3 days before submission of a urine sample 
for diagnostic purposes. The arsenic content of hair and nails 
(normally less than 1 ppm) may sometimes reveal past elevated 
exposure, but results should be interpreted cautiously in view of 
the potential for external contamination. 
 Management of chronic arsenic poisoning consists primarily of 
termination of exposure and nonspecific supportive care. Although 
CHAPTER 57 Heavy Metal Intoxication & Chelators    1019
empiric short-term oral chelation with unithiol or succimer for 
symptomatic individuals with elevated urine arsenic concentra-
tions may be considered, it has no proven benefit beyond removal 
from exposure alone. Preliminary studies suggest that dietary 
supplementation of folate—thought to be a cofactor in arsenic 
methylation—might be of value in arsenic-exposed individuals, 
particularly men, who are also deficient in folate. 
 C. Arsine Gas Poisoning 
 Arsine gas poisoning produces a distinctive pattern of intoxication 
dominated by profound hemolytic effects. After a latent period 
that may range from 2 hours to 24 hours postinhalation (depend-
ing on the magnitude of exposure), massive intravascular hemoly-
sis may occur. Initial symptoms may include malaise, headache, 
dyspnea, weakness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, jaundice, 
and hemoglobinuria. Oliguric renal failure, a consequence of 
hemoglobin deposition in the renal tubules, often appears within 
1–3 days. In massive exposures, lethal effects on cellular respira-
tion may occur before renal failure develops. Urinary arsenic levels 
are elevated but are seldom available to confirm the diagnosis dur-
ing the critical period of illness. Intensive supportive care— 
including exchange transfusion, vigorous hydration, and, in the case 
of acute renal failure, hemodialysis—is the mainstay of therapy. 
Currently available chelating agents have not been demonstrated 
to be of clinical value in arsine poisoning. 
 MERCURY 
 Metallic mercury as “quicksilver”—the only metal that is liquid 
under ordinary conditions—has attracted scholarly and scientific 
interest from antiquity. The mining of mercury was early recog-
nized as being hazardous to health. As industrial use of mercury 
became common during the last 200 years, new forms of toxicity 
were recognized that were found to be associated with various 
transformations of the metal. In the early 1950s, a mysterious 
epidemic of birth defects and neurologic disease occurred in the 
Japanese fishing village of Minamata. The causative agent was 
determined to be methylmercury in contaminated seafood, traced 
to industrial discharges into the bay from a nearby factory. In 
addition to elemental mercury and alkylmercury (including meth-
ylmercury), other key mercurials include inorganic mercury salts 
and aryl mercury compounds, each of which exerts a relatively 
unique pattern of clinical toxicity. 
 Mercury is mined predominantly as HgS in cinnabar ore and 
is then converted commercially to a variety of chemical forms. Key 
industrial and commercial applications of mercury are found in 
the electrolytic production of chlorine and caustic soda; the 
manufacture of electrical equipment, thermometers, and other 
instruments; fluorescent lamps; and dental amalgam. The wide-
spread use of elemental mercury in artisanal gold production is a 
growing problem in many developing countries. Mercury use in 
pharmaceuticals and in biocides has declined substantially in 
recent years, but occasional use in antiseptics and folk medicines 
is still encountered. Thimerosal, an organomercurial preservative 
that is metabolized in part to ethylmercury, has been removed 
from almost all the vaccines in which it was formerly present. 
Environmental exposure to mercury from the burning of fossil 
fuels, or the bioaccumulation of methylmercury in fish, remains a 
concern in some regions of the world. Low-level exposure to mer-
cury released from dental amalgam fillings occurs, but systemic 
toxicity from this source has not been established. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The absorption of mercury varies considerably depending on the 
chemical form of the metal. Elemental mercury is quite volatile 
and can be absorbed from the lungs ( Table 57–1 ). It is poorly 
absorbed from the intact gastrointestinal tract. Inhaled mercury is 
the primary source of occupational exposure. Organic short-chain 
alkylmercury compounds are volatile and potentially harmful by 
inhalation as well as by ingestion. Percutaneous absorption of 
metallic mercury and inorganic mercury can be of clinical concern 
following massive acute or long-term chronic exposure. 
Alkylmercury compounds appear to be well absorbed through the 
skin, and acute contact with a few drops of dimethylmercury has 
resulted in severe, delayed toxicity. After absorption, mercury is 
distributed to the tissues within a few hours, with the highest 
concentration occurring in the kidney. Inorganic mercury is 
 FIGURE 57–1  Dermatologic lesions associated with chronic inges-
tion of arsenic in drinking water. (Photo courtesy of Dipankar Chakraborti, PhD.) 
1020    SECTION IX Toxicology
excreted through the urine and feces. Excretion of inorganic mer-
cury follows a multicompartment model: most is excreted within 
weeks to months, but a fraction may be retained in the kidneys 
and brain for years. After inhalation of elemental mercury vapor, 
urinary mercury levels decline with a half-life of approximately 
1–3 months. Methylmercury, which has a blood and whole body 
half-life of approximately 50 days, undergoes biliary excretion and 
enterohepatic circulation, with more than two thirds eventually 
excreted in the feces. Mercury binds to sulfhydryl groups in kera-
tinized tissue, and as with lead and arsenic, traces appear in the 
hair and nails. 
 Major Forms of Mercury Intoxication 
 Mercury interacts with sulfhydryl groups in vivo, inhibiting 
enzymes and altering cell membranes. The pattern of clinical 
intoxication from mercury depends to a great extent on the chem-
ical form of the metal and the route and severity of exposure. 
 A. Acute 
 Acute inhalation of elemental mercury vapors may cause chemical 
pneumonitis and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. Acute gingivo-
stomatitis may occur, and neurologic sequelae (see following text) 
may also ensue. Acute ingestion of inorganic mercury salts, such 
as mercuric chloride, can result in a corrosive, potentially life-
threatening hemorrhagic gastroenteritis followed within hours to 
days by acute tubular necrosis and oliguric renal failure. 
 B. Chronic 
 Chronic poisoning from inhalation of mercury vapor results in a 
classic triad of tremor, neuropsychiatric disturbance, and gingivo-
stomatitis. The tremor usually begins as a fine intention tremor of 
the hands, but the face may also be involved, and progression to 
choreiform movements of the limbs may occur. Neuropsychiatric 
manifestations, including memory loss, fatigue, insomnia, and 
anorexia, are common. There may be an insidious change in mood 
to shyness, withdrawal, and depression along with explosive anger 
or blushing (a behavioral pattern referred to as  erethism ). Recent 
studies suggest that low-dose exposure may produce subclinical 
neurologic effects. Gingivostomatitis, sometimes accompanied by 
loosening of the teeth, may be reported after high-dose exposure. 
Evidence of peripheral nerve damage may be detected on elec-
trodiagnostic testing, but overt peripheral neuropathy is rare. 
Acrodynia is an uncommon idiosyncratic reaction to subacute or 
chronic mercury exposure and occurs mainly in children. It is 
characterized by painful erythema of the extremities and may be 
associated with hypertension, diaphoresis, anorexia, insomnia, 
irritability or apathy, and a miliary rash. Chronic exposure to 
inorganic mercury salts, sometimes via topical application in cos-
metic creams, has been associated with neurological symptoms 
and renal toxicity in case reports and case series. 
 Methylmercury intoxication affects mainly the central nervous 
system and results in paresthesias, ataxia, hearing impairment, 
dysarthria, and progressive constriction of the visual fields. Signs 
and symptoms of methylmercury intoxication may first appear 
several weeks or months after exposure begins. Methylmercury is 
a reproductive toxin. High-dose prenatal exposure to methylmer-
cury may produce mental retardation and a cerebral palsy-like 
syndrome in the offspring. Low-level prenatal exposures to meth-
ylmercury have been associated with a risk of subclinical neurode-
velopmental deficits. 
 A 2004 report by the Institute of Medicine’s Immunization 
Safety Review Committee concluded that available evidence favored 
rejection of a causal relation between thimerosal-containing vac-
cines and autism. In like manner, a recent retrospective cohort study 
conducted by the CDC did not support a causal association 
between early prenatal or postnatal exposure to mercury from 
thimerosal-containing vaccines and neuropsychological functioning 
later in childhood. 
 Dimethylmercury is a rarely encountered but extremely 
neurotoxic form of organomercury that may be lethal in small 
quantities. 
 The diagnosis of mercury intoxication involves integration of 
the history and physical findings with confirmatory laboratory 
testing or other evidence of exposure. In the absence of occu-
pational exposure, the urine mercury concentration is usually less 
than 5 mcg/L, and whole blood mercury is less than 5 mcg/L. In 
1990, the Biological Exposure Index (BEI) Committee of the 
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists 
(ACGIH) recommended that workplace exposures should result 
in urinary mercury concentrations less than 35 mcg per gram of 
creatinine and end-of-work-week whole blood mercury concen-
trations less than 15 mcg/L. To minimize the risk of developmen-
tal neurotoxicity from methylmercury, the US Environmental 
Protection Agency and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
have advised pregnant women, women who might become preg-
nant, nursing mothers, and young children to avoid consumption 
of fish with high mercury levels (eg, swordfish) and to limit con-
sumption of fish with lower levels of mercury to no more than 12 
ounces (340 g, or two average meals) per week. 
 Treatment 
 A. Acute Exposure 
 In addition to intensive supportive care, prompt chelation with 
oral or intravenous unithiol, intramuscular dimercaprol, or oral 
succimer may be of value in diminishing nephrotoxicity after 
acute exposure to inorganic mercury salts. Vigorous hydration 
may help to maintain urine output, but if acute renal failure 
ensues, days to weeks of hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration in 
conjunction with chelation may be necessary. Because the efficacy 
of chelation declines with time since exposure, treatment should 
not be delayed until the onset of oliguria or other major systemic 
effects. 
 B. Chronic Exposure 
 Unithiol and succimer increase urine mercury excretion following 
acute or chronic elemental mercury inhalation, but the impact of 
such treatment on clinical outcome is unknown. Dimercaprol has 
been shown to redistribute mercury to the central nervous system 
CHAPTER 57 Heavy Metal Intoxication & Chelators    1021
from other tissue sites, and since the brain is a key target organ, 
dimercaprol should not be used in treatment of exposure to ele-
mental or organic mercury. Limited data suggest that succimer, 
unithiol, and  N -acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) may enhance body clear-
ance of methylmercury. 
 ■ PHARMACOLOGY OF 
CHELATORS 
 Chelating agents are drugs used to prevent or reverse the toxic 
effects of a heavy metal on an enzyme or other cellular target, or 
to accelerate the elimination of the metal from the body. By form-
ing a complex with the heavy metal, the chelating agent renders 
the metal unavailable for toxic interactions with functional groups 
of enzymes or other proteins, coenzymes, cellular nucleophiles, 
and membranes. Chelating agents contain one or more coordinat-
ing atoms, usually oxygen, sulfur, or nitrogen, which donate a pair 
of electrons to a cationic metal ion to form one or more coordi-
nate-covalent bonds. Depending on the number of metal-ligand 
bonds, the complex may be referred to as mono-, bi-, or polyden-
tate.  Figure 57–2 depicts the hexadentate chelate formed by inter-
action of edetate (ethylenediaminetetraacetate) with a metal atom, 
such as lead. 
 In some cases, the metal-mobilizing effect of a therapeutic 
chelating agent may not only enhance that metal’s excretion—a 
desired effect—but may also redistribute some of the metal to other 
vital organs. This has been demonstrated for dimercaprol, which 
redistributes mercury and arsenic to the brain while also enhancing 
urinary mercury and arsenic excretion. Although several chelating 
agents have the capacity to mobilize cadmium, their tendency to 
redistribute cadmium to the kidney and increase nephrotoxicity has 
negated their therapeutic value in cadmium intoxication. 
 In addition to removing the target metal that is exerting toxic 
effects on the body, some chelating agents may enhance excretion of 
essential cations, such as zinc in the case of calcium EDTA and 
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), and zinc and copper in 
the case of succimer. No clinical significance of this effect has been 
demonstrated, although some animal data suggest the possibility of 
adverse developmental impact. If prolonged chelation during the 
prenatal period or early childhood period is necessary, judicious 
supplementation of the diet with zinc might be considered. 
 The longer the half-life of a metal in a particular organ, the less 
effectively it will be removed by chelation. For example, in the case 
of lead chelation with calcium EDTA or succimer, or of pluto-
nium chelation with DTPA, the metal is more effectively removed 
from soft tissues than from bone, where incorporation into bone 
matrix results in prolonged retention. 
 In most cases, the capacity of chelating agents to prevent or 
reduce the adverse effects of toxic metals appears to be greatest 
when such agents are administered very soon after an acute metal 
exposure. Use of chelating agents days to weeks after an acute 
metal exposure ends—or their use in the treatment of chronic 
metal intoxication—may still be associated with increased metal 
excretion. However, at that point, the capacity of such enhanced 
excretion to mitigate the pathologic effect of the metal exposure 
may be reduced. 
 The most important chelating agents currently in use in the 
USA are described below. 
 DIMERCAPROL 
(2,3-DIMERCAPTOPROPANOL, BAL) 
 Dimercaprol ( Figure 57–3 ), an oily, colorless liquid with a strong 
mercaptan-like odor, was developed in Great Britain during 
FIGURE 57–2 Salt and chelate formation with edetate (ethyl-
enediaminetetraacetate, EDTA). A: In a solution of calcium disodium 
salt of EDTA, the sodium and hydrogen ions are chemically and bio-
logically available. B: In solutions of calcium disodium edetate, cal-
cium is bound by coordinate-covalent bonds with nitrogens as well 
as by the usual ionic bonds. C: In the lead–edetate chelate, lead is 
incorporated into five heterocyclic rings. (Modified and reproduced, with 
permission, from Meyers FH, Jawetz E, Goldfien A: Review of Medical Pharmacology, 
7th ed. Originally published by Lange Medical Publications. McGraw-Hill, 1980.)
HO
C
O
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
N
C
Na
O
O
N
C
C
OH
Na
O
O
O
A
Ca
O
C
H2C
N
C
Na
O
O
C
O
N
C
  H2
C
  H2
C
  H2
C
O
O
Na
B
Pb
O
N
C
O
O
O
N
O
C
O
O
O
O
1022    SECTION IX Toxicology
World War II as a therapeutic antidote against poisoning by the 
arsenic-containing warfare agent lewisite. It thus became known as 
British anti-Lewisite, or BAL. Because aqueous solutions of di-
mercaprol are unstable and oxidize readily, it is dispensed in 
10% solution in peanut oil and must be administered by intra-
muscular injection, which is often painful. 
 In animal models, dimercaprol prevents and reverses arsenic-
induced inhibition of sulfhydryl-containing enzymes and, if given 
soon after exposure, may protect against the lethal effects of inor-
ganic and organic arsenicals. Human data indicate that it can 
increase the rate of excretion of arsenic and lead and may offer 
therapeutic benefit in the treatment of acute intoxication by arse-
nic, lead, and mercury. 
 Indications & Toxicity 
 Dimercaprol is FDA-approved as single-agent treatment of acute 
poisoning by arsenic and inorganic mercury and for the treatment 
of severe lead poisoning when used in conjunction with edetate 
calcium disodium (EDTA; see below). Although studies of its 
metabolism in humans are limited, intramuscularly administered 
dimercaprol appears to be readily absorbed, metabolized, and 
excreted by the kidney within 4–8 hours. Animal models indicate 
that it may also undergo biliary excretion, but the role of this 
excretory route in humans and other details of its biotransforma-
tion are uncertain. 
 When used in therapeutic doses, dimercaprol is associated with 
a high incidence of adverse effects, including hypertension, tachy-
cardia, nausea, vomiting, lacrimation, salivation, fever (particu-
larly in children), and pain at the injection site. Its use has also 
been associated with thrombocytopenia and increased prothrom-
bin time—factors that may limit intramuscular injection because 
of the risk of hematoma formation at the injection site. Despite its 
protective effects in acutely intoxicated animals, dimercaprol may 
redistribute arsenic and mercury to the central nervous system, 
and it is not advocated for treatment of chronic poisoning. Water-
soluble analogs of dimercaprol—unithiol and succimer—have 
higher therapeutic indices and have replaced dimercaprol in many 
settings. 
 SUCCIMER (DIMERCAPTOSUCCINIC 
ACID, DMSA) 
 Succimer is a water-soluble analog of dimercaprol, and like that 
agent it has been shown in animal studies to prevent and reverse 
metal-induced inhibition of sulfhydryl-containing enzymes and to 
protect against the acute lethal effects of arsenic. In humans, treat-
ment with succimer is associated with an increase in urinary lead 
excretion and a decrease in blood lead concentration. It may also 
decrease the mercury content of the kidney, a key target organ of 
inorganic mercury salts. In the USA, succimer is formulated exclu-
sively for oral use, but intravenous formulations have been used 
successfully elsewhere. It is absorbed rapidly but somewhat vari-
ably after oral administration. Peak blood levels of succimer occur 
at approximately 3 hours. The drug binds in vivo to the amino 
acid cysteine to form 1:1 and 1:2 mixed disulfides, possibly in the 
kidney, and it may be these complexes that are the active chelating 
moieties. Experimental data suggest that multidrug-resistance 
protein 2 (Mrp2), one of a group of transporter proteins involved 
in the cellular excretion of xenobiotics, facilitates the renal excre-
tion of mercury compounds that are bound to the transformed 
succimer and to unithiol. The elimination half-time of trans-
formed succimer is approximately 2–4 hours. 
 Indications & Toxicity 
 Succimer is currently FDA-approved for the treatment of children 
with blood lead concentrations greater than 45 mcg/dL, but it is 
also commonly used in adults. The typical dosage is 10 mg/kg 
orally three times a day. Oral administration of succimer is compa-
rable to parenteral EDTA in reducing blood lead concentration 
and has supplanted EDTA in outpatient treatment of patients who 
are capable of absorbing the oral drug. However, despite the dem-
onstrated capacity of both succimer and EDTA to enhance lead 
elimination, their value in reversing established lead toxicity or in 
otherwise improving therapeutic outcome has yet to be established 
by a placebo-controlled clinical trial. In a recent study in lead-ex-
posed juvenile rats, high-dose succimer did reduce lead-induced 
neurocognitive impairment when administered to animals with 
moderate- and high-dose lead exposure. Conversely, when admin-
istered to the control group that was not lead exposed, succimer 
FIGURE 57–3 Chemical structures of several chelators. 
Ferroxamine (ferrioxamine) without the chelated iron is deferoxam-
ine. It is represented here to show the functional groups; the iron is 
actually held in a caged system. The structures of the in vivo metal-
chelator complexes for dimercaprol, succimer, penicillamine, and uni-
thiol (see text) are not known and may involve the formation of 
mixed disulfides with amino acids. (Modified and reproduced, with permis-
sion from Meyers FH, Jawetz E, and Goldfien A: Review of Medical Pharmacology, 
7th ed. Originally published by Lange Medical Publications. McGraw-Hill, 1980.)
SH
CH
COOH
COOH
OH
O
N
O
C
CONH
(CH2)5
(CH2)5
(CH2)5
(CH2)2
(CH2)2
CONH
O
N
O
C
O
N
O
C
CH3
H2N
Fe3+
Ferroxamine
H2C
H2C
SH
HC
SH
Dimercaprol
(2, 3-dimercaptopropanol)
H3C
C
NH2
Penicillamine
CH3
CH
C
OH
SH
O
SH
CH
Succimer
(DMSA)
CHAPTER 57 Heavy Metal Intoxication & Chelators    1023
was associated with a decrement in neurocognitive performance. 
Based on its protective effects against arsenic in animals and its 
ability to mobilize mercury from the kidney, succimer has also been 
used in the treatment of arsenic and mercury poisoning. 
 In limited clinical trials, succimer has been well tolerated. It has 
a negligible impact on body stores of calcium, iron, and magne-
sium. It induces a mild increase in urinary excretion of zinc and, 
less consistently, copper. This effect on trace metal balance has not 
been associated with overt adverse effects, but its long-term 
impact on neurodevelopment is uncertain. Gastrointestinal dis-
turbances, including anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, are 
the most common side effects, occurring in less than 10% of 
patients. Rashes, sometimes requiring discontinuation of the 
medication, have been reported in less than 5% of patients. Mild, 
reversible increases in liver aminotransferases have been noted in 
6–10% of patients, and isolated cases of mild to moderate neutro-
penia have been reported. 
 EDETATE CALCIUM DISODIUM 
(ETHYLENEDIAMINETETRAACETIC 
ACID, EDTA) 
 Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ( Figure 57–2 ) is an efficient che-
lator of many divalent and trivalent metals in vitro. To prevent 
potentially life-threatening depletion of calcium, the drug should 
be administered only as the calcium disodium salt. 
 EDTA penetrates cell membranes relatively poorly and there-
fore chelates extracellular metal ions much more effectively than 
intracellular ions. 
 The highly polar ionic character of EDTA limits its oral 
absorption. Moreover, oral administration may increase lead 
absorption from the gut. Consequently, EDTA should be admin-
istered by intravenous infusion. In patients with normal renal 
function, EDTA is rapidly excreted by glomerular filtration, with 
50% of an injected dose appearing in the urine within 1 hour. 
EDTA mobilizes lead from soft tissues, causing a marked increase 
in urinary lead excretion and a corresponding decline in blood 
lead concentration. In patients with renal insufficiency, excretion 
of the drug—and its metal-mobilizing effects—may be delayed. 
 Indications & Toxicity 
 Edetate calcium disodium is indicated chiefly for the chelation of 
lead, but it may also have usefulness in poisoning by zinc, manga-
nese, and certain heavy radionuclides. In spite of repeated claims in 
the alternative medicine literature, EDTA has no demonstrated use-
fulness in the treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 
 Because the drug and the mobilized metals are excreted via the 
urine, the drug is relatively contraindicated in anuric patients. In 
such instances, the use of low doses of EDTA in combination with 
high-flux hemodialysis or hemofiltration has been described. 
Nephrotoxicity from EDTA has been reported, but in most cases 
can be prevented by maintenance of adequate urine flow, avoid-
ance of excessive doses, and limitation of a treatment course to 
5 or fewer consecutive days. EDTA may result in temporary zinc 
depletion that is of uncertain clinical significance. Analogs of 
EDTA, the calcium and zinc disodium salts of DTPA, pentetate, 
have been used for removal (“decorporation”) of certain tran-
suranic, rare earth, and transition metal radioisotopes, and in 
2004 were approved by the FDA for treatment of contamination 
with plutonium, americium, and curium. 
 UNITHIOL 
(DIMERCAPTOPROPANESULFONIC 
ACID, DMPS) 
 Unithiol, a dimercapto chelating agent that is a water-soluble 
analog of dimercaprol, has been available in the official formular-
ies of Russia and other former Soviet countries since 1958 and in 
Germany since 1976. It has been legally available from com-
pounding pharmacies in the USA since 1999. Unithiol can be 
administered orally and intravenously. Bioavailability by the oral 
route is approximately 50%, with peak blood levels occurring in 
approximately 3.7 hours. Over 80% of an intravenous dose is 
excreted in the urine, mainly as cyclic DMPS sulfides. The elimi-
nation half-time of total unithiol (parent drug and its transforma-
tion products) is approximately 20 hours. Unithiol exhibits 
protective effects against the toxic action of mercury and arsenic 
in animal models, and it increases the excretion of mercury, arse-
nic, and lead in humans. Animal studies and a few case reports 
suggest that unithiol may also have usefulness in the treatment of 
poisoning by bismuth compounds. 
CH2
Unithiol
SH
CH
SH
CH2
SO2H
 Indications & Toxicity 
 Unithiol has no FDA-approved indications, but experimental 
studies and its pharmacologic and pharmacodynamic profile 
suggest that intravenous unithiol offers advantages over intra-
muscular dimercaprol or oral succimer in the initial treatment 
of severe acute poisoning by inorganic mercury or arsenic. 
Aqueous preparations of unithiol (usually 50 mg/mL in sterile 
water) can be administered at a dosage of 3–5 mg/kg every 4 
hours by slow intravenous infusion over 20 minutes. If a few 
days of treatment are accompanied by stabilization of the 
patient’s cardiovascular and gastrointestinal status, it may be 
possible to change to oral administration of 4–8 mg/kg every 
6–8 hours. Oral unithiol may also be considered as an alterna-
tive to oral succimer in the treatment of lead intoxication. 
 Unithiol has been reported to have a low overall incidence of 
adverse effects (< 4%). Self-limited dermatologic reactions (drug 
exanthems or urticaria) are the most commonly reported adverse 
effects, although isolated cases of major allergic reactions, includ-
ing erythema multiforme and Stevens-Johnson syndrome, have 
1024    SECTION IX Toxicology
been reported. Because rapid intravenous infusion may cause 
vasodilation and hypotension, unithiol should be infused slowly 
over an interval of 15–20 minutes. 
 PENICILLAMINE (D-DIMETHLCYSTEINE) 
 Penicillamine ( Figure 57–3 ) is a white crystalline, water-soluble 
derivative of penicillin. D-Penicillamine is less toxic than the L 
isomer and consequently is the preferred therapeutic form. 
Penicillamine is readily absorbed from the gut and is resistant to 
metabolic degradation. 
 Indications & Toxicity 
 Penicillamine is used chiefly for treatment of poisoning with cop-
per or to prevent copper accumulation, as in Wilson’s disease 
(hepatolenticular degeneration). It is also used occasionally in the 
treatment of severe rheumatoid arthritis (see  Chapter 36 ). Its abil-
ity to increase urinary excretion of lead and mercury had occa-
sioned its use in outpatient treatment for intoxication with these 
metals, but succimer, with its stronger metal-mobilizing capacity 
and lower adverse-effect profile, has generally replaced pen-
icillamine for these purposes. 
 Adverse effects have been seen in up to one third of patients 
receiving penicillamine. Hypersensitivity reactions include rash, 
pruritus, and drug fever, and the drug should be used with 
extreme caution, if at all, in patients with a history of penicillin 
allergy. Nephrotoxicity with proteinuria has also been reported, 
and protracted use of the drug may result in renal insufficiency. 
Pancytopenia has been associated with prolonged drug intake. 
Pyridoxine deficiency is a frequent toxic effect of other forms of 
the drug but is rarely seen with the D form. An acetylated deriva-
tive,  N -acetylpenicillamine, has been used experimentally in mer-
cury poisoning and may have superior metal-mobilizing capacity, 
but it is not commercially available. 
 DEFEROXAMINE 
 Deferoxamine is isolated from Streptomyces pilosus. It binds iron 
avidly ( Figure 57–3 ) but binds essential trace metals poorly. 
Furthermore, though competing for loosely bound iron in iron-
carrying proteins (hemosiderin and ferritin), it fails to compete for 
biologically chelated iron, as in microsomal and mitochondrial 
cytochromes and hemoproteins. Consequently, it is the parenteral 
chelator of choice for iron poisoning (see  Chapters 33 and  58 ). 
Deferoxamine plus hemodialysis may also be useful in the treat-
ment of aluminum toxicity in renal failure. Deferoxamine is 
poorly absorbed when administered orally and may increase iron 
absorption when given by this route. It should therefore be admin-
istered intramuscularly or, preferably, intravenously. It is believed 
to be metabolized, but the pathways are unknown. The iron- 
chelator complex is excreted in the urine, often turning the urine 
an orange-red color. 
 Rapid intravenous administration may result in hypotension. 
Adverse idiosyncratic responses such as flushing, abdominal 
 discomfort, and rash have also been observed. Pulmonary compli-
cations (eg, acute respiratory distress syndrome) have been 
reported in some patients undergoing deferoxamine infusions last-
ing longer than 24 hours, and neurotoxicity and increased suscep-
tibility to certain infections (eg, with Yersinia enterocolitica) have 
been described after long-term therapy of iron overload conditions 
(eg, thalassemia major). 
 DEFERASIROX 
 Deferasirox is a tridentate chelator with a high affinity for iron and 
low affinity for other metals, eg, zinc and copper. It is orally active 
and well absorbed. In the circulation, it binds iron, and the com-
plex is excreted in the bile. Deferasirox was approved by the FDA 
in 2005 for the oral treatment of iron overload caused by blood 
transfusions, a problem in the treatment of thalassemia and 
myelodysplastic syndrome. More than five years of clinical experi-
ence suggest that daily long-term usage is generally well tolerated, 
with the most common adverse effects consisting of mild to mod-
erate gastrointestinal disturbances (< 15% of patients) and skin 
rash (≈ 5% of patients). 
 PRUSSIAN BLUE (FERRIC 
HEXACYANOFERRATE) 
 Ferric hexacyanoferrate (insoluble Prussian blue) is a hydrated 
crystalline compound in which Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ atoms are coordi-
nated with cyanide groups in a cubic lattice structure. Although 
used as a dark blue commercial pigment for nearly 300 years, it 
was only three decades ago that its potential usefulness as a phar-
maceutical chelator was recognized. Primarily by ion exchange, 
and secondarily by mechanical trapping or adsorption, the com-
pound has high affinity for certain univalent cations, particularly 
cesium and thallium. Used as an oral drug, insoluble Prussian blue 
undergoes minimal gastrointestinal absorption (< 1%). Because 
the complexes it forms with cesium or thallium are nonabsorb-
able, oral administration of the chelator diminishes intestinal 
absorption or interrupts enterohepatic and enteroenteric circula-
tion of these cations, thereby accelerating their elimination in the 
feces. In clinical case series, the use of Prussian blue has been asso-
ciated with a decline in the biologic half-life (ie, in vivo retention) 
of radioactive cesium and thallium. 
 Indications & Toxicity 
 In 2003, the FDA approved Prussian blue for the treatment of 
contamination with radioactive cesium ( 137 Cs) and intoxication 
with thallium salts. Approval was prompted by concern over 
potential widespread human contamination with radioactive 
cesium caused by terrorist use of a radioactive dispersal device 
(“dirty bomb”). The drug is part of the Strategic National 
Stockpile of pharmaceuticals and medical material maintained 
by the CDC ( http://www.bt.cdc.gov/stockpile/#material ). 
( Note : Although soluble forms of Prussian blue, such as potassium 
CHAPTER 57 Heavy Metal Intoxication & Chelators    1025
ferric hexacyanoferrate, may have better utility in thallium poi-
soning, only the insoluble form is currently available as a phar-
maceutical.) 
 After exposure to  137 Cs or thallium salts, the approved adult 
dosage is 3 g orally three times a day; the corresponding pediatric 
dosage (2–12 years of age) is 1 g orally three times a day. Serial 
monitoring of urine and fecal radioactivity ( 137 Cs) and urinary 
thallium concentrations can guide the recommended duration of 
therapy. Adjunctive supportive care for possible acute radiation 
illness ( 137 Cs) or systemic thallium toxicity should be instituted as 
needed. 
 Prussian blue has not been associated with significant adverse 
effects. Constipation, which may occur in some cases, should be 
treated with laxatives or increased dietary fiber. 
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
Deferasirox (Exjade)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mg tablets
Deferoxamine (Desferal)
Parenteral: Powder to reconstitute, 500, 2000 mg/vial
Dimercaprol (BAL in Oil)
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for IM injection
Edetate calcium [calcium EDTA] (Calcium Disodium Versenate)
Parenteral: 200 mg/mL for injection
Penicillamine (Cuprimine, Depen)
Oral: 125, 250 mg capsules; 250 mg tablets
Pentetate Calcium Trisodium ([calcium DTPA] and Pentetate Zinc 
Trisodium [zinc DTPA])
Parenteral: 200 mg/mL for injection
Prussian Blue (Radiogardase)
Oral: 500 mg capsules
Succimer (Chemet)
Oral: 100 mg capsules
Unithiol (Dimaval)
Bulk powder available for compounding as oral capsules, or for 
infusion (50 mg/mL)
Deferasirox (Exjade)
Oral: 125, 250, 500 mg tablets
Deferoxamine (Desferal)
Parenteral: Powder to reconstitute, 500, 2000 mg/vial
Dimercaprol (BAL in Oil)
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for IM injection
Edetate calcium [calcium EDTA] (Calcium Disodium Versenate)
Parenteral: 200 mg/mL for injection
Penicillamine (Cuprimine, Depen)
Oral: 125, 250 mg capsules; 250 mg tablets
Pentetate Calcium Trisodium ([calcium DTPA] and Pentetate Zinc 
Trisodium [zinc DTPA])
Parenteral: 200 mg/mL for injection
Prussian Blue (Radiogardase)
Oral: 500 mg capsules
Succimer (Chemet)
Oral: 100 mg capsules
Unithiol (Dimaval)
Bulk powder available for compounding as oral capsules, or for 
infusion (50 mg/mL)
 REFERENCES 
 Lead 
 Brubaker CJ et al: The influence of age of lead exposure on adult gray matter 
volume. Neurotoxicology 2010;31:259. 
 Carlisle JC et al: A blood lead benchmark for assessing risks from childhood lead 
exposure. J Environ Sci Health Part A 2009;44:1200. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Guidelines for the 
Identification and Management of Lead Exposure in Pregnant and Lactating 
Women. CDC, 2010.  http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/publications/
LeadandPregnancy2010.pdf 
 Kosnett MJ et al: Recommendations for medical management of adult lead expo-
sure. Environ Health Perspect 2007;115:463. 
 Lanphear BP et al: Low-level environmental lead exposure and children’s intellec-
tual development: An international pooled analysis. Environ Health Perspect 
2005;113:894. 
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Air Quality Criteria for Lead (Final). EPA: 
Washington, DC, 2006.  http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/cfm/recordisplay.
cfm?deid=158823 
 Weisskopf MG et al: A prospective study of bone lead concentration and 
death from all causes, cardiovascular diseases, and cancer in the 
Department of Veterans Affairs Normative Aging Study. Circulation 
2009;120:1056. 
 Weuve J et al: Cumulative exposure to lead in relation to cognitive function in 
older women. Environ Health Perspect 2009;117:574. 
 Arsenic 
 Caldwell KL et al: Levels of urinary total and speciated arsenic in the US popula-
tion: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2003–2004. J Exp 
Sci Environ Epid 2009;19:59. 
 Chen CJ et al: Arsenic and diabetes and hypertension in human populations. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2007;222:298. 
 Gamble MV: Folate and arsenic metabolism: A double-blind, placebo-controlled 
folic acid supplementation trial in Bangladesh. Am J Clin Nutr 
2006;84:1093. 
 Lindberg AL et al: The risk of arsenic induced skin lesions in Bangladeshi men and 
women is affected by arsenic metabolism and the age at first exposure. Tox 
Appl Pharmacol 2008;230:9. 
 Parvez F et al: A prospective study of respiratory symptoms associated with chronic 
arsenic exposure in Bangladesh: findings from the Health Effects of Arsenic 
Longitudinal Study (HEALS). Thorax 2010;65:528. 
 Vahter M: Effects of arsenic on maternal and fetal health. Annu Rev Nutr 
2009;29:381. 
 Mercury 
 Bellinger DC et al: Dental amalgam restorations and children’s neuropsychological 
function: The New England Children’s Amalgam Trial. Environ Health 
Perspect 2007;115:440. 
 Caldwell KL et al: Total blood mercury concentrations in the U.S. population: 
1999–2006. Int J Hyg Environ Health 2009;212:588. 
 Clarkson TW, Magos L: The toxicology of mercury and its chemical compounds. 
Crit Rev Toxicol 2006;36:609. 
 EPA website: What You Need to Know about Mercury in Fish and Shellfish. 
 http://water.epa.gov/scitech/swguidance/fishshellfish/outreach/advice_
index.cfm 
 Hertz-Picciotto I et al: Blood mercury concentrations in CHARGE study children 
with and without autism. Environ Health Perspect 2010;118:161. 
 Lederman SA et al: Relation between cord blood mercury levels and early child 
development in a World Trade Center cohort. Environ Health Perspect 
2008;116:1085. 
1026    SECTION IX Toxicology
 Yorifuji T et al: Long-term exposure to methylmercury and neurologic signs in 
Minamata and neighboring communities. Epidemiology 2008;19:3. 
 Chelating Agents 
 Agarwal MB: Deferasirox: Oral, once daily iron chelator—an expert opinion. 
Indian J Pediatr 2010;77:185. 
 Bradberry S, Vale A: A comparison of sodium calcium edetate (edetate calcium 
disodium) and succimer (DMSA) in the treatment of inorganic lead poison-
ing. Clin Toxicol 2009;47:841. 
 Dargan PI et al: Case report: Severe mercuric sulphate poisoning treated with 
2,3-dimercaptopropane-1-sulphonate and haemodiafiltration. Crit Care 
2003;7:R1. 
 Gong Z et al: Determination of arsenic metabolic complex excreted in human 
urine after administration of sodium 2,3-dimercapto-1-propane sulfonate. 
Chem Res Toxicol 2002;15:1318. 
 Kosnett MJ: Chelation for heavy metals (arsenic, lead, and mercury): Protective or 
perilous? Clin Pharmacol Ther 2010;88:412. 
 Stangle DE et al: Succimer chelation improves learning, attention, and arousal 
regulation in lead-exposed rats but produces lasting cognitive impairment in 
the absence of lead exposure. Environ Health Perspect 2007;115:201. 
 Thompson DF, Called ED: Soluble or insoluble prussian blue for radiocesium and 
thallium poisoning? Ann Pharmacother 2004;38:1509. 
 
 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
This scenario is highly suspicious for acute lead intoxica-
tion. Lead-based paints have been commonly used as 
anticorrosion coatings on iron and steel structures, and 
grinding and torch cutting can result in high-dose expo-
sure to inhaled lead dust and fumes. Measurement of a 
whole blood lead concentration would be a key diagnostic 
test. If an elevated blood lead concentration is confirmed, 
the primary therapeutic intervention will be removal of 
the individual from further work exposure until blood 
lead concentration has declined and symptoms resolved. 
If the blood lead concentration is in excess of 80 mcg/dL 
(∼ 4 μmol/L), treatment with a chelating agent, such as 
oral succimer or parenteral edetate calcium disodium, 
should be strongly considered. Upon return to work, use 
of proper respiratory protection and adherence to protec-
tive work practices are essential.
1027
 SPECIAL ASPECTS OF TOXICOKINETICS 
 Volume of Distribution 
 The volume of distribution (V d ) is defined as the apparent volume 
into which a substance is distributed in the body (see  Chapter 3 ). 
A large V d implies that the drug is not readily accessible to mea-
sures aimed at purifying the blood, such as hemodialysis. Examples 
of drugs with large volumes of distribution (> 5 L/kg) include 
antidepressants, antipsychotics, antimalarials, opioids, propra-
nolol, and verapamil. Drugs with a relatively small V d (< 1 L/kg) 
include salicylate, ethanol, phenobarbital, lithium, valproic acid, 
and phenytoin (see  Table 3–1 ). 
 Clearance 
 Clearance is a measure of the volume of plasma that is cleared of drug 
per unit time (see  Chapter 3 ). The total clearance for most drugs is 
the sum of clearances via excretion by the kidneys and metabolism 
by the liver. In planning a detoxification strategy, it is important to 
know the contribution of each organ to total clearance. For example, 
if a drug is 95% cleared by liver metabolism and only 5% cleared by 
renal excretion, even a dramatic increase in urinary concentration of 
the drug will have little effect on overall elimination. 
 Overdosage of a drug can alter the usual pharmacokinetic pro-
cesses, and this must be considered when applying kinetics to 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Over 1 million cases of acute poisoning occur in the USA each year, 
although only a small number are fatal. Most deaths are due to 
intentional suicidal overdose by an adolescent or adult. Childhood 
deaths due to accidental ingestion of a drug or toxic household 
product have been markedly reduced in the last 40 years as a result 
of safety packaging and effective poisoning prevention education. 
 Even with a serious exposure, poisoning is rarely fatal if the 
victim receives prompt medical attention and good supportive 
care. Careful management of respiratory failure, hypotension, 
seizures, and thermoregulatory disturbances has resulted in 
improved survival of patients who reach the hospital alive. 
 This chapter reviews the basic principles of poisoning, initial 
management, and specialized treatment of poisoning, including 
methods of increasing the elimination of drugs and toxins. 
 ■ TOXICOKINETICS & 
TOXICODYNAMICS 
 The term  toxicokinetics denotes the absorption, distribution, excre-
tion, and metabolism of toxins, toxic doses of therapeutic agents, and 
their metabolites. The term  toxicodynamics is used to denote the 
injurious effects of these substances on body functions. Although 
many similarities exist between the pharmacokinetics and toxicoki-
netics of most substances, there are also important differences. The 
same caution applies to pharmacodynamics and toxicodynamics. 
58
Management of the 
Poisoned Patient
 Kent R. Olson, MD 
administers a drug intravenously, followed by another substance 
via a nasogastric tube. The patient is admitted to the intensive 
care unit for continued supportive care and recovers the next 
morning. What drug might be used intravenously to prevent 
further seizures? What substance is commonly used to adsorb 
drugs still present in the gastrointestinal tract?
C A S E  S T U D Y
A 62-year-old woman with a history of depression is found in 
her apartment in a lethargic state. An empty bottle of bupro-
pion is on the bedside table. In the emergency department, 
she is unresponsive to verbal and painful stimuli. She has a 
brief generalized seizure, followed by a respiratory arrest. The 
emergency physician performs endotracheal intubation and 
1028    SECTION IX Toxicology
poisoned patients. For example, dissolution of tablets or gastric 
emptying time may be slowed so that absorption and peak toxic 
effects are delayed. Drugs may injure the epithelial barrier of the 
gastrointestinal tract and thereby increase absorption. If the capac-
ity of the liver to metabolize a drug is exceeded, the first-pass effect 
will be reduced and more drug will be delivered to the circulation. 
With a dramatic increase in the concentration of drug in the 
blood, protein-binding capacity may be exceeded, resulting in an 
increased fraction of free drug and greater toxic effect. At normal 
dosage, most drugs are eliminated at a rate proportional to the 
plasma concentration (first-order kinetics). If the plasma concen-
tration is very high and normal metabolism is saturated, the rate 
of elimination may become fixed (zero-order kinetics). This 
change in kinetics may markedly prolong the apparent serum half-
life and increase toxicity. 
 SPECIAL ASPECTS OF TOXICODYNAMICS 
 The general dose-response principles described in  Chapter 2 are 
relevant when estimating the potential severity of an intoxication. 
When considering quantal dose-response data, both the therapeutic 
index and the overlap of therapeutic and toxic response curves must 
be considered. For instance, two drugs may have the same therapeu-
tic index but unequal safe dosing ranges if the slopes of their dose-
response curves are not the same. For some drugs, eg, 
sedative-hypnotics, the major toxic effect is a direct extension of the 
therapeutic action, as shown by their graded dose-response curve 
(see  Figure 22–1 ). In the case of a drug with a linear dose-response 
curve (drug A), lethal effects may occur at 10 times the normal 
therapeutic dose. In contrast, a drug with a curve that reaches a 
plateau (drug B) may not be lethal at 100 times the normal dose. 
 For many drugs, at least part of the toxic effect may be different 
from the therapeutic action. For example, intoxication with drugs 
that have atropine-like effects (eg, tricyclic antidepressants) 
reduces sweating, making it more difficult to dissipate heat. In 
tricyclic antidepressant intoxication, there may also be increased 
muscular activity or seizures; the body’s production of heat is thus 
enhanced, and lethal hyperpyrexia may result. Overdoses of drugs 
that depress the cardiovascular system, eg, β blockers or calcium 
channel blockers, can profoundly alter not only cardiac function 
but all functions that are dependent on blood flow. These include 
renal and hepatic elimination of the toxin and that of any other 
drugs that may be given. 
 ■ APPROACH TO THE POISONED 
PATIENT  
 HOW DOES THE POISONED PATIENT DIE? 
 An understanding of common mechanisms of death due to poisoning 
can help prepare the caregiver to treat patients effectively. Many toxins 
depress the central nervous system (CNS), resulting in obtundation or 
coma. Comatose patients frequently lose their airway protective 
reflexes and their respiratory drive. Thus, they may die as a result of 
airway obstruction by the flaccid tongue, aspiration of gastric contents 
into the tracheobronchial tree, or respiratory arrest. These are the most 
common causes of death due to overdoses of narcotics and sedative-
hypnotic drugs (eg, barbiturates and alcohol). 
 Cardiovascular toxicity is also frequently encountered in poison-
ing. Hypotension may be due to depression of cardiac contractility; 
hypovolemia resulting from vomiting, diarrhea, or fluid sequestra-
tion; peripheral vascular collapse due to blockade of α-adrenoceptor-
mediated vascular tone; or cardiac arrhythmias. Hypothermia or 
hyperthermia due to exposure as well as the temperature-dysregulat-
ing effects of many drugs can also produce hypotension. Lethal 
arrhythmias such as ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation can 
occur with overdoses of many cardioactive drugs such as ephedrine, 
amphetamines, cocaine, digitalis, and theophylline; and drugs not 
usually considered cardioactive, such as tricyclic antidepressants, 
antihistamines, and some opioid analogs. 
 Cellular hypoxia may occur in spite of adequate ventilation and 
oxygen administration when poisoning is due to cyanide, hydrogen 
sulfide, carbon monoxide, and other poisons that interfere with 
transport or utilization of oxygen. Such patients may not be cyan-
otic, but cellular hypoxia is evident by the development of tachy-
cardia, hypotension, severe lactic acidosis, and signs of ischemia on 
the electrocardiogram. 
 Seizures, muscular hyperactivity, and rigidity may result in 
death. Seizures may cause pulmonary aspiration, hypoxia, and 
brain damage. Hyperthermia may result from sustained muscular 
hyperactivity and can lead to muscle breakdown and myoglobinu-
ria, renal failure, lactic acidosis, and hyperkalemia. Drugs and 
poisons that often cause seizures include antidepressants, isoniazid 
(INH), diphenhydramine, cocaine, and amphetamines. 
 Other organ system damage may occur after poisoning and is 
sometimes delayed in onset. Paraquat attacks lung tissue, resulting 
in pulmonary fibrosis, beginning several days after ingestion. 
Massive hepatic necrosis due to poisoning by acetaminophen or 
certain mushrooms results in hepatic encephalopathy and death 
48–72 hours or longer after ingestion. 
 Finally, some patients may die before hospitalization because 
the behavioral effects of the ingested drug may result in traumatic 
injury. Intoxication with alcohol and other sedative-hypnotic 
drugs is a common contributing factor to motor vehicle accidents. 
Patients under the influence of hallucinogens such as phencycli-
dine (PCP) or lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) may suffer trauma 
when they become combative or fall from a height. 
 ■ INITIAL MANAGEMENT OF THE 
POISONED PATIENT 
 The initial management of a patient with coma, seizures, or oth-
erwise altered mental status should follow the same approach 
regardless of the poison involved: supportive measures are the 
basics ( “ABCDs” ) of poisoning treatment. 
 First, the  airway should be cleared of vomitus or any other 
obstruction and an oral airway or endotracheal tube inserted if 
CHAPTER 58 Management of the Poisoned Patient    1029
needed. For many patients, simple positioning in the lateral, left-
side-down position is sufficient to move the flaccid tongue out of the 
airway.  Breathing should be assessed by observation and pulse oxi-
metry and, if in doubt, by measuring arterial blood gases. Patients 
with respiratory insufficiency should be intubated and mechanically 
ventilated. The  circulation should be assessed by continuous moni-
toring of pulse rate, blood pressure, urinary output, and evaluation 
of peripheral perfusion. An intravenous line should be placed and 
blood drawn for serum glucose and other routine determinations. 
 At this point, every patient with altered mental status should 
receive a challenge with concentrated  dextrose , unless a rapid 
bedside blood glucose test demonstrates that the patient is not 
hypoglycemic. Adults are given 25 g (50 mL of 50% dextrose 
solution) intravenously, children 0.5 g/kg (2 mL/kg of 25% dex-
trose). Hypoglycemic patients may appear to be intoxicated, and 
there is no rapid and reliable way to distinguish them from poi-
soned patients. Alcoholic or malnourished patients should also 
receive 100 mg of thiamine intramuscularly or in the intravenous 
infusion solution at this time to prevent Wernicke’s syndrome. 
 The opioid antagonist naloxone may be given in a dose of 
0.4–2 mg intravenously. Naloxone reverses respiratory and CNS 
depression due to all varieties of opioid drugs (see  Chapter 31 ). It 
is useful to remember that these drugs cause death primarily by 
respiratory depression; therefore, if airway and breathing assistance 
have already been instituted, naloxone may not be necessary. Larger 
doses of naloxone may be needed for patients with overdose involv-
ing propoxyphene, codeine, and some other opioids. The benzodi-
azepine antagonist flumazenil (see  Chapter 22 ) may be of value in 
patients with suspected benzodiazepine overdose, but it should not 
be used if there is a history of tricyclic antidepressant overdose or a 
seizure disorder, as it can induce convulsions in such patients. 
 History & Physical Examination 
 Once the essential initial ABCD interventions have been instituted, 
one can begin a more detailed evaluation to make a specific diagno-
sis. This includes gathering any available history and performing a 
toxicologically oriented physical examination. Other causes of coma 
or seizures such as head trauma, meningitis, or metabolic abnor-
malities should be sought and treated. Some common intoxications 
are described under Common Toxic Syndromes. 
 A. History 
 Oral statements about the amount and even the type of drug 
ingested in toxic emergencies may be unreliable. Even so, family 
members, police, and fire department or paramedical personnel 
should be asked to describe the environment in which the toxic 
emergency occurred and should bring to the emergency depart-
ment any syringes, empty bottles, household products, or over-
the-counter medications in the immediate vicinity of the possibly 
poisoned patient. 
 B. Physical Examination 
 A brief examination should be performed, emphasizing those areas 
most likely to give clues to the toxicologic diagnosis. These include 
vital signs, eyes and mouth, skin, abdomen, and nervous system. 
 1. Vital signs— Careful evaluation of vital signs (blood pressure, 
pulse, respirations, and temperature) is essential in all toxicologic 
emergencies. Hypertension and tachycardia are typical with 
amphetamines, cocaine, and antimuscarinic (anticholinergic) 
drugs. Hypotension and bradycardia are characteristic features of 
overdose with calcium channel blockers, β blockers, clonidine, 
and sedative hypnotics. Hypotension with tachycardia is common 
with tricyclic antidepressants, trazodone, quetiapine, vasodilators, 
and β agonists. Rapid respirations are typical of salicylates, carbon 
monoxide, and other toxins that produce metabolic acidosis or 
cellular asphyxia. Hyperthermia may be associated with sympath-
omimetics, anticholinergics, salicylates, and drugs producing sei-
zures or muscular rigidity. Hypothermia can be caused by any 
CNS-depressant drug, especially when accompanied by exposure 
to a cold environment. 
 2. Eyes— The eyes are a valuable source of toxicologic information. 
Constriction of the pupils (miosis) is typical of opioids, clonidine, 
phenothiazines, and cholinesterase inhibitors (eg, organophosphate 
insecticides), and deep coma due to sedative drugs. Dilation of the 
pupils (mydriasis) is common with amphetamines, cocaine, LSD, 
and atropine and other anticholinergic drugs. Horizontal nystagmus 
is characteristic of intoxication with phenytoin, alcohol, barbiturates, 
and other sedative drugs. The presence of both vertical and horizon-
tal nystagmus is strongly suggestive of phencyclidine poisoning. 
Ptosis and ophthalmoplegia are characteristic features of botulism. 
 3. Mouth— The mouth may show signs of burns due to corro-
sive substances, or soot from smoke inhalation. Typical odors of 
alcohol, hydrocarbon solvents, or ammonia may be noted. 
Poisoning due to cyanide can be recognized by some examiners as 
an odor like bitter almonds. 
 4. Skin— The skin often appears flushed, hot, and dry in poison-
ing with atropine and other antimuscarinics. Excessive sweating 
occurs with organophosphates, nicotine, and sympathomimetic 
drugs. Cyanosis may be caused by hypoxemia or by methemoglo-
binemia. Icterus may suggest hepatic necrosis due to acetamino-
phen or  Amanita phalloides mushroom poisoning. 
 5. Abdomen— Abdominal examination may reveal ileus, which 
is typical of poisoning with antimuscarinic, opioid, and sedative 
drugs. Hyperactive bowel sounds, abdominal cramping, and diar-
rhea are common in poisoning with organophosphates, iron, 
arsenic, theophylline,  A phalloides , and  A muscaria . 
 6. Nervous system— A careful neurologic examination is essen-
tial. Focal seizures or motor deficits suggest a structural lesion (eg, 
intracranial hemorrhage due to trauma) rather than toxic or meta-
bolic encephalopathy. Nystagmus, dysarthria, and ataxia are typi-
cal of phenytoin, carbamazepine, alcohol, and other sedative 
intoxication. Twitching and muscular hyperactivity are common 
with atropine and other anticholinergic agents, and cocaine and 
other sympathomimetic drugs. Muscular rigidity can be caused by 
haloperidol and other antipsychotic agents, and by strychnine or 
by tetanus. Generalized hypertonicity of muscles and lower 
extremity clonus are typical of serotonin syndrome. Seizures are 
1030    SECTION IX Toxicology
often caused by overdose with antidepressants (especially tricyclic 
antidepressants and bupropion [as in the case study]), cocaine, 
amphetamines, theophylline, isoniazid, and diphenhydramine. 
Flaccid coma with absent reflexes and even an isoelectric electro-
encephalogram may be seen with deep coma due to sedative-
hypnotic or other CNS depressant intoxication and may be 
mistaken for brain death. 
 Laboratory & Imaging Procedures 
 A. Arterial Blood Gases 
 Hypoventilation results in an elevated  PCO2 (hypercapnia) and 
a low  PO2 (hypoxia). The  PO2 may also be low in a patient with 
aspiration pneumonia or drug-induced pulmonary edema. Poor 
tissue oxygenation due to hypoxia, hypotension, or cyanide 
poisoning will result in metabolic acidosis. The  PO2 measures 
only oxygen dissolved in the plasma and not total blood oxygen 
content or oxyhemoglobin saturation and may appear normal 
in patients with severe carbon monoxide poisoning. Pulse oxi-
metry may also give falsely normal results in carbon monoxide 
intoxication. 
 B. Electrolytes 
 Sodium, potassium, chloride, and bicarbonate should be mea-
sured. The anion gap is then calculated by subtracting the mea-
sured anions from cations: 
Anion gap = (Na+ + K+) – (HCO3– + Cl–)
 Normally, the sum of the cations exceeds the sum of the anions 
by no more than 12–16 mEq/L (or 8–12 mEq/L if the formula used 
for estimating the anion gap omits the potassium level). A larger-
than expected anion gap is caused by the presence of unmeasured 
anions (lactate, etc) accompanying metabolic acidosis. This may 
occur with numerous conditions, such as diabetic ketoacidosis, renal 
failure, or shock-induced lactic acidosis. Drugs that may induce an 
elevated anion gap metabolic acidosis ( Table 58–1 ) include aspirin, 
metformin, methanol, ethylene glycol, isoniazid, and iron. 
 Alterations in the serum potassium level are hazardous because 
they can result in cardiac arrhythmias. Drugs that may cause hyper-
kalemia despite normal renal function include potassium itself, β 
blockers, digitalis glycosides, potassium-sparing diuretics, and fluo-
ride. Drugs associated with hypokalemia include barium, β ago-
nists, caffeine, theophylline, and thiazide and loop diuretics. 
 C. Renal Function Tests 
 Some toxins have direct nephrotoxic effects; in other cases, renal 
failure is due to shock or myoglobinuria. Blood urea nitrogen and 
creatinine levels should be measured and urinalysis performed. 
Elevated serum creatine kinase (CK) and myoglobin in the urine 
suggest muscle necrosis due to seizures or muscular rigidity. 
Oxalate crystals in large numbers in the urine suggest ethylene 
glycol poisoning. 
 D. Serum Osmolality 
 The calculated serum osmolality is dependent mainly on the 
serum sodium and glucose and the blood urea nitrogen and can 
be estimated from the following formula: 
2 × Na+ (mEq/L) +
+
Glucose (mg/dL)
18
BUN (mg/dL)
3
 
 This calculated value is normally 280–290 mOsm/L. Ethanol 
and other alcohols may contribute significantly to the measured 
serum osmolality but, since they are not included in the calcula-
tion, cause an osmol gap: 
Osmolar
gap
Measured
osmolality
Calculated
osmolality
–
=
 Table 58–2 lists the concentration and expected contribution 
to the serum osmolality in ethanol, methanol, ethylene glycol, and 
isopropanol poisonings. 
 E. Electrocardiogram 
 Widening of the QRS complex duration (to more than 100 milli-
seconds) is typical of tricyclic antidepressant and quinidine over-
doses ( Figure 58–1 ). The QT c interval may be prolonged (to more 
than 440 milliseconds) in many poisonings, including quinidine, 
antidepressants and antipsychotics, lithium, and arsenic (see also 
 http://www.torsades.org/ ). Variable atrioventricular (AV) block and 
TABLE 58–2  Some substances that can cause an 
osmol gap.
Substance1
Serum Level 
(mg/dL)
Corresponding Osmol 
Gap (mOsm/kg)
Ethanol
  350
  75
Methanol
  80
  25
Ethylene glycol
  200
  35
Isopropanol
  350
  60
1Other substances that can increase the osmol gap include propylene glycol and 
other glycols, acetone, mannitol, and magnesium.
TABLE 58–1  Examples of drug-induced anion gap 
acidosis.
Type of Elevation 
of the Anion Gap
Agents
Organic acid 
metabolites
Methanol, ethylene glycol, diethylene glycol
Lactic acidosis
Cyanide, carbon monoxide, ibuprofen, isoniazid, 
metformin, salicylates, valproic acid; any drug-
induced seizures, hypoxia, or hypotension
Note: The normal anion gap calculated from (Na+ + K+) − (HCO3
− + Cl−) is 12–16 mEq/L; 
calculated from (Na+) − (HCO3
− + Cl−), it is 8–12 mEq/L.
CHAPTER 58 Management of the Poisoned Patient    1031
a variety of atrial and ventricular arrhythmias are common with 
poisoning by digoxin and other cardiac glycosides. Hypoxemia due 
to carbon monoxide poisoning may result in ischemic changes on 
the electrocardiogram. 
 F. Imaging Findings 
 A plain film of the abdomen may be useful because some tablets, 
particularly iron and potassium, may be radiopaque. Chest radio-
graphs may reveal aspiration pneumonia, hydrocarbon pneumo-
nia, or pulmonary edema. When head trauma is suspected, a 
computed tomography (CT) scan is recommended. 
 Toxicology Screening Tests 
 It is a common misconception that a broad toxicology “screen” is 
the best way to diagnose and manage an acute poisoning. 
Unfortunately, comprehensive toxicology screening is time- 
consuming and expensive and results of tests may not be available 
for days. Moreover, many highly toxic drugs such as calcium chan-
nel blockers, β blockers, and isoniazid are not included in the 
screening process. The clinical examination of the patient and 
selected routine laboratory tests are usually sufficient to generate a 
tentative diagnosis and an appropriate treatment plan. Although 
screening tests may be helpful in confirming a suspected intoxica-
tion or for ruling out intoxication as a cause of apparent brain 
death, they should not delay needed treatment. 
 When a specific antidote or other treatment is under consid-
eration, quantitative laboratory testing may be indicated. For 
example, determination of the acetaminophen level is useful in 
assessing the need for antidotal therapy with acetylcysteine. 
Serum levels of salicylate (aspirin), ethylene glycol, methanol, 
theophylline, carbamazepine, lithium, valproic acid, and other 
drugs and poisons may indicate the need for hemodialysis 
( Table 58–3 ). 
 Decontamination 
 Decontamination procedures should be undertaken simultane-
ously with initial stabilization, diagnostic assessment, and labora-
tory evaluation. Decontamination involves removing toxins from 
the skin or gastrointestinal tract. 
 A. Skin 
 Contaminated clothing should be completely removed and 
 double-bagged to prevent illness in health care providers and for 
possible laboratory analysis. Wash contaminated skin with soap 
and water. 
 B. Gastrointestinal Tract 
 Controversy remains regarding the efficacy of gut emptying by 
emesis or gastric lavage, especially when treatment is initiated 
more than 1 hour after ingestion. For most ingestions, clinical 
toxicologists recommend simple administration of activated char-
coal to bind ingested poisons in the gut before they can be 
absorbed (as in the case study). In unusual circumstances, induced 
emesis or gastric lavage may also be used. 
 1. Emesis— Emesis can be induced with ipecac  syrup (never 
 extract of ipecac), and this method was previously used to treat 
some childhood ingestions at home under telephone supervision 
of a physician or poison control center personnel. However, the 
risks involved with inappropriate use outweighed the unproven 
TABLE 58–3  Hemodialysis in drug overdose and 
poisoning.1
Hemodialysis may be indicated depending on the severity of 
 poisoning or the blood concentration:
 Carbamazepine
 Ethylene glycol
 Lithium
 Methanol
 Metformin
 Phenobarbital
 Salicylate
 Theophylline
 Valproic acid
Hemodialysis is ineffective or is not useful:
 Amphetamines
 Antidepressants
 Antipsychotic drugs
 Benzodiazepines
 Calcium channel blockers
 Digoxin
 Metoprolol and propranolol
 Opioids
1This listing is not comprehensive.
A
B
C
 FIGURE 58–1  Changes in the electrocardiogram in tricyclic anti-
depressant overdosage.  A : Slowed intraventricular conduction results 
in prolonged QRS interval (0.18 s; normal, 0.08 s).  B and  C: 
Supraventricular tachycardia with progressive widening of QRS com-
plexes mimics ventricular tachycardia. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Benowitz NL, Goldschlager N: Cardiac disturbances in the toxicologic patient. In: 
Haddad LM, Winchester JF [editors].  Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug 
Overdose. WB Saunders, 1983.) 
1032    SECTION IX Toxicology
benefits, and this treatment is rarely used in the home or hospital. 
Ipecac should not be used if the suspected intoxicant is a corrosive 
agent, a petroleum distillate, or a rapid-acting convulsant. 
Previously popular methods of inducing emesis such as fingertip 
stimulation of the pharynx, salt water, and apomorphine are inef-
fective or dangerous and should not be used. 
 2. Gastric lavage— If the patient is awake or if the airway is 
protected by an endotracheal tube, gastric lavage may be per-
formed using an orogastric or nasogastric tube—as large a tube as 
possible. Lavage solutions (usually 0.9% saline) should be at body 
temperature to prevent hypothermia. 
 3. Activated charcoal— Owing to its large surface area, acti-
vated charcoal can adsorb many drugs and poisons. It is most 
effective if given in a ratio of at least 10:1 of charcoal to estimated 
dose of toxin by weight. Charcoal does not bind iron, lithium, or 
potassium, and it binds alcohols and cyanide only poorly. It does 
not appear to be useful in poisoning due to corrosive mineral acids 
and alkali. Studies suggest that oral activated charcoal given alone 
may be just as effective as gut emptying (eg, ipecac-induced emesis 
or gastric lavage) followed by charcoal. Repeated doses of oral 
activated charcoal may enhance systemic elimination of some 
drugs (including carbamazepine, dapsone, and theophylline) by a 
mechanism referred to as “gut dialysis,” although the clinical ben-
efit is unproved. 
 4. Cathartics— Administration of a cathartic (laxative) agent 
may hasten removal of toxins from the gastrointestinal tract and 
reduce absorption, although no controlled studies have been done. 
Whole bowel irrigation with a balanced polyethylene glycol- 
electrolyte solution (GoLYTELY, CoLyte) can enhance gut decon-
tamination after ingestion of iron tablets, enteric-coated medicines, 
illicit drug-filled packets, and foreign bodies. The solution is 
administered orally at 1–2 L/h (500 mL/h in children) for several 
hours until the rectal effluent is clear. 
 Specific Antidotes 
 There is a popular misconception that there is an antidote for 
every poison. Actually, selective antidotes are available for only a 
few classes of toxins. The major antidotes and their characteristics 
are listed in  Table 58–4 . 
 Methods of Enhancing Elimination 
of Toxins 
 After appropriate diagnostic and decontamination procedures and 
administration of antidotes, it is important to consider whether 
measures for enhancing elimination, such as hemodialysis or uri-
nary alkalinization, can improve the clinical outcome.  Table 58–3 
lists intoxications for which dialysis may be beneficial. 
 A. Dialysis Procedures 
 1. Peritoneal dialysis— Although it is a relatively simple and 
available technique, peritoneal dialysis is inefficient in removing 
most drugs. 
 2. Hemodialysis— Hemodialysis is more efficient than perito-
neal dialysis and has been well studied. It assists in correction of 
fluid and electrolyte imbalance and may also enhance removal of 
toxic metabolites (eg, formic acid in methanol poisoning; oxalic 
and glycolic acids in ethylene glycol poisoning). The efficiency of 
both peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis is a function of the 
molecular weight, water solubility, protein binding, endogenous 
clearance, and distribution in the body of the specific toxin. 
Hemodialysis is especially useful in overdose cases in which the 
precipitating drug can be removed and fluid and electrolyte imbal-
ances are present and can be corrected (eg, salicylate intoxication). 
 B. Forced Diuresis and Urinary pH Manipulation 
 Previously popular but of unproved value, forced diuresis may cause 
volume overload and electrolyte abnormalities and is not recom-
mended. Renal elimination of a few toxins can be enhanced by 
alteration of urinary pH. For example, urinary alkalinization is use-
ful in cases of salicylate overdose. Acidification may increase the 
urine concentration of drugs such as phencyclidine and amphet-
amines but is not advised because it may worsen renal complications 
from rhabdomyolysis, which often accompanies the intoxication. 
 ■ COMMON TOXIC SYNDROMES  
 ACETAMINOPHEN 
 Acetaminophen is one of the drugs commonly involved in suicide 
attempts and accidental poisonings, both as the sole agent and in 
combination with other drugs. Acute ingestion of more than 
150–200 mg/kg (children) or 7 g total (adults) is considered 
potentially toxic. A highly toxic metabolite is produced in the liver 
(see  Figure 4–5 ). 
 Initially, the patient is asymptomatic or has mild gastrointestinal 
upset (nausea, vomiting). After 24–36 hours, evidence of liver injury 
appears, with elevated aminotransferase levels and hypoprothrom-
binemia. In severe cases, fulminant liver failure occurs, leading to 
hepatic encephalopathy and death. Renal failure may also occur. 
 The severity of poisoning is estimated from a serum acetamin-
ophen concentration measurement. If the level is greater than 
150–200 mg/L approximately 4 hours after ingestion, the patient 
is at risk for liver injury. (Chronic alcoholics or patients taking 
drugs that enhance P450 production of toxic metabolites are at 
risk with lower levels.) The antidote acetylcysteine acts as a gluta-
thione substitute, binding the toxic metabolite as it is produced. 
It is most effective when given early and should be started within 
8–10 hours if possible. Liver transplantation may be required for 
patients with fulminant hepatic failure. 
 AMPHETAMINES & OTHER STIMULANTS 
 Stimulant drugs commonly abused in the USA include metham-
phetamine (“crank,” “crystal”), methylenedioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA, “ecstasy”), and cocaine (“crack”) as well as pharmaceu-
ticals such as pseudoephedrine (Sudafed) and ephedrine (as such 
CHAPTER 58 Management of the Poisoned Patient    1033
and in the herbal agent  Ma-huang ) (see  Chapter 32 ). Caffeine is 
often added to dietary supplements sold as “metabolic enhancers” 
or “fat-burners.” Newer synthetic analogs of amphetamines such 
as 3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV) and various deriva-
tives of methcathinone are becoming popular drugs of abuse, 
often sold on the street as “bath salts” with names like “Ivory 
Wave,” “Bounce,” “Bubbles,” “Mad Cow,” and “Meow Meow.” 
 At the doses usually used by stimulant abusers, euphoria and 
wakefulness are accompanied by a sense of power and well-being. 
At higher doses, restlessness, agitation, and acute psychosis may 
occur, accompanied by hypertension and tachycardia. Prolonged 
muscular hyperactivity or seizures may contribute to hyperthermia 
and rhabdomyolysis. Body temperatures as high as 42°C (107.6°F) 
have been recorded. Hyperthermia can cause brain damage, 
hypotension, coagulopathy, and renal failure. 
 Treatment for stimulant toxicity includes general supportive 
measures as outlined earlier. There is no specific antidote. Seizures 
and hyperthermia are the most dangerous manifestations and 
must be treated aggressively. Seizures are usually managed with 
intravenous benzodiazepines (eg, lorazepam). Temperature is 
TABLE 58–4 Examples of specific antidotes.
Antidote
Poison(s)
Comments
Acetylcysteine 
(Acetadote, Mucomyst)
Acetaminophen
Best results if given within 8–10 hours of overdose. Follow liver function tests 
and acetaminophen blood levels. Acetadote is given intravenously; Mucomyst is 
given orally.
Atropine
Anticholinesterase intoxication: 
organophosphates, carbamates
An initial dose of 1–2 mg (for children, 0.05 mg/kg) is given IV, and if there is no 
response, the dose is doubled every 10–15 minutes, with decreased wheezing 
and pulmonary secretions as therapeutic end points.
Bicarbonate, sodium
Membrane-depressant cardiotoxic 
drugs (tricyclic antidepressants, 
quinidine, etc)
1–2 mEq/kg IV bolus usually reverses cardiotoxic effects (wide QRS, hypotension). 
Give cautiously in heart failure (avoid sodium overload).
Calcium
Fluoride; calcium channel blockers
Large doses may be needed in severe calcium channel blocker overdose. Start 
with 15 mg/kg IV.
Deferoxamine
Iron salts
If poisoning is severe, give 15 mg/kg/h IV. 100 mg of deferoxamine binds 8.5 mg 
of iron.
Digoxin antibodies
Digoxin and related cardiac 
glycosides
One vial binds 0.5 mg digoxin; indications include serious arrhythmias, hyper-
kalemia.
Esmolol
Theophylline, caffeine, 
metaproterenol
Short-acting β blocker. Infuse 25–50 mcg/kg/min IV.
Ethanol
Methanol, ethylene glycol
A loading dose is calculated so as to give a blood level of at least 100 mg/dL (42 
g/70 kg in adults). Fomepizole (see below) is easier to use.
Flumazenil
Benzodiazepines
Adult dose is 0.2 mg IV, repeated as necessary to a maximum of 3 mg. Do not give 
to patients with seizures, benzodiazepine dependence, or tricyclic overdose.
Fomepizole
Methanol, ethylene glycol
More convenient than ethanol. Give 15 mg/kg; repeat every 12 hours.
Glucagon
β blockers
5–10 mg IV bolus may reverse hypotension and bradycardia.
Hydroxocobalamin
Cyanide
Adult dose is 5 g IV over 15 minutes. Converts cyanide to cyanocobalamin 
(vitamin B12).
Naloxone
Narcotic drugs, other opioid 
derivatives
A specific antagonist of opioids; give 0.4–2 mg initially by IV, IM, or SC injection. 
Larger doses may be needed to reverse the effects of overdose with propoxy-
phene, codeine, or fentanyl derivatives. Duration of action (2–3 hours) may be 
significantly shorter than that of the opioid being antagonized.
Oxygen
Carbon monoxide
Give 100% by high-flow nonrebreathing mask; use of hyperbaric chamber is con-
troversial but often recommended for severe poisoning.
Physostigmine
Suggested for delirium caused by 
anticholinergic agents
Adult dose is 0.5–1 mg IV slowly. The effects are transient (30–60 minutes), and 
the lowest effective dose may be repeated when symptoms return. May cause 
bradycardia, increased bronchial secretions, seizures. Have atropine ready to 
reverse excess effects. Do not use for tricyclic antidepressant overdose.
Pralidoxime (2-PAM)
Organophosphate (OP) 
cholinesterase inhibitors
Adult dose is 1 g IV, which should be repeated every 3–4 hours as needed or 
preferably as a constant infusion of 250–400 mg/h. Pediatric dose is approxi-
mately 250 mg. No proved benefit in carbamate poisoning; uncertain benefit in 
established OP poisoning.
1034    SECTION IX Toxicology
reduced by removing clothing, spraying with tepid water, and 
encouraging evaporative cooling with fanning. For very high body 
temperatures (eg, > 40–41°C [104–105.8°F]), neuromuscular 
paralysis is used to abolish muscle activity quickly. 
 ANTICHOLINERGIC AGENTS 
 A large number of prescription and nonprescription drugs, as well 
as a variety of plants and mushrooms, can inhibit the effects of 
acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors. Some drugs used for other 
purposes (eg, antihistamines) also have anticholinergic effects, in 
addition to other potentially toxic actions. For example, antihista-
mines such as diphenhydramine can cause seizures; tricyclic anti-
depressants, which have anticholinergic, quinidine-like, and 
α-blocking effects, can cause severe cardiovascular toxicity. 
 The classic anticholinergic (technically, “antimuscarinic”) syn-
drome is remembered as “red as a beet” (skin flushed), “hot as a 
hare” (hyperthermia), “dry as a bone” (dry mucous membranes, no 
sweating), “blind as a bat” (blurred vision, cycloplegia), and “mad 
as a hatter” (confusion, delirium). Patients usually have sinus tachy-
cardia, and the pupils are usually dilated (see  Chapter 8 ). Agitated 
delirium or coma may be present. Muscle twitching is common, 
but seizures are unusual unless the patient has ingested an antihis-
tamine or a tricyclic antidepressant. Urinary retention is common, 
especially in older men. 
 Treatment for anticholinergic syndrome is largely supportive. 
Agitated patients may require sedation with a benzodiazepine or 
an antipsychotic agent (eg, haloperidol). The specific antidote for 
peripheral and central anticholinergic syndrome is physostigmine, 
which has a prompt and dramatic effect and is especially useful for 
patients who are very agitated. Physostigmine is given in small 
intravenous doses (0.5–1 mg) with careful monitoring, because it 
can cause bradycardia and seizures if given too rapidly. 
Physostigmine should not be given to a patient with suspected 
tricyclic antidepressant overdose because it can aggravate cardio-
toxicity, resulting in heart block or asystole. Catheterization may 
be needed to prevent excessive distention of the bladder. 
 ANTIDEPRESSANTS 
 Tricyclic antidepressants (eg, amitriptyline, desipramine, doxe-
pin, many others; see  Chapter 30 ) are among the most common 
prescription drugs involved in life-threatening drug overdose. 
Ingestion of more than 1 g of a tricyclic (or about 15–20 mg/kg) 
is considered potentially lethal. 
 Tricyclic antidepressants are competitive antagonists at musca-
rinic cholinergic receptors, and anticholinergic findings (tachycar-
dia, dilated pupils, dry mouth) are common even at moderate 
doses. Some tricyclics are also strong α blockers, which can lead to 
vasodilation. Centrally mediated agitation and seizures may be 
followed by depression and hypotension. Most important is the 
fact that tricyclics have quinidine-like cardiac depressant effects on 
the sodium channel that cause slowed conduction with a wide 
QRS interval and depressed cardiac contractility. This cardiac 
toxicity may result in serious arrhythmias ( Figure 58–1 ), including 
ventricular conduction block and ventricular tachycardia. 
 Treatment of tricyclic antidepressant overdose includes general 
supportive care as outlined earlier. Endotracheal intubation and 
assisted ventilation may be needed. Intravenous fluids are given 
for hypotension, and dopamine or norepinephrine is added if 
necessary. Many toxicologists recommend norepinephrine as the 
initial drug of choice for tricyclic-induced hypotension. The anti-
dote for quinidine-like cardiac toxicity (manifested by a wide 
QRS complex) is sodium bicarbonate: a bolus of 50–100 mEq 
(or 1–2 mEq/kg) provides a rapid increase in extracellular sodium 
that helps overcome sodium channel blockade.  Do not use physo-
stigmine ! Although this agent does effectively reverse anticholin-
ergic symptoms, it can aggravate depression of cardiac conduction 
and cause seizures. 
 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (eg, tranylcypromine, phenel-
zine) are older antidepressants that are occasionally used for resis-
tant depression. They can cause severe hypertensive reactions 
when interacting foods or drugs are taken (see  Chapters 9 and  30 ), 
and they can interact with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibi-
tors (SSRIs). 
 Newer antidepressants (eg, fluoxetine, paroxetine, citalopram, 
venlafaxine) are mostly SSRIs and are generally safer than the tri-
cyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors, although 
they can cause seizures.  Bupropion (not an SSRI) has caused sei-
zures even in therapeutic doses. Some antidepressants have been 
associated with QT prolongation and torsades de pointes arrhyth-
mia. SSRIs may interact with each other or especially with mono-
amine oxidase inhibitors to cause the  serotonin syndrome, 
characterized by agitation, muscle hyperactivity, and hyperthermia 
(see  Chapter 16 ). 
 ANTIPSYCHOTICS 
 Antipsychotic drugs include the older phenothiazines and butyro-
phenones, as well as newer atypical drugs. All of these can cause 
CNS depression, seizures, and hypotension. Some can cause QT 
prolongation. The potent dopamine D 2 blockers are also associ-
ated with parkinsonian movement disorders (dystonic reactions) 
and in rare cases with the neuroleptic malignant syndrome, char-
acterized by “lead-pipe” rigidity, hyperthermia, and autonomic 
instability (see  Chapters 16 and  29 ). 
 ASPIRIN (SALICYLATE) 
 Salicylate poisoning (see  Chapter 36 ) is a much less common 
cause of childhood poisoning deaths since the introduction of 
child-resistant containers and the reduced use of children’s aspirin. 
It still accounts for numerous suicidal and accidental poisonings. 
Acute ingestion of more than 200 mg/kg is likely to produce 
intoxication. Poisoning can also result from chronic overmedica-
tion; this occurs most commonly in elderly patients using salicy-
lates for chronic pain who become confused about their dosing. 
Poisoning causes uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation and 
disruption of normal cellular metabolism. 
CHAPTER 58 Management of the Poisoned Patient    1035
 The first sign of salicylate toxicity is often hyperventilation and 
respiratory alkalosis due to medullary stimulation. Metabolic aci-
dosis follows, and an increased anion gap results from accumula-
tion of lactate as well as excretion of bicarbonate by the kidney to 
compensate for respiratory alkalosis. Arterial blood gas testing 
often reveals a mixed respiratory alkalosis and metabolic acidosis. 
Body temperature may be elevated owing to uncoupling of oxida-
tive phosphorylation. Severe hyperthermia may occur in serious 
cases. Vomiting and hyperpnea as well as hyperthermia contribute 
to fluid loss and dehydration. With very severe poisoning, pro-
found metabolic acidosis, seizures, coma, pulmonary edema, and 
cardiovascular collapse may occur. Absorption of salicylate and 
signs of toxicity may be delayed after very large overdoses or inges-
tion of enteric coated tablets. 
 General supportive care is essential. After massive aspirin inges-
tions (eg, more than 100 tablets), aggressive gut decontamination 
is advisable, including gastric lavage, repeated doses of activated 
charcoal, and consideration of whole bowel irrigation. Intravenous 
fluids are used to replace fluid losses caused by tachypnea, vomit-
ing, and fever. For moderate intoxications, intravenous sodium 
bicarbonate is given to alkalinize the urine and promote salicylate 
excretion by trapping the salicylate in its ionized, polar form. For 
severe poisoning (eg, patients with severe acidosis, coma, and 
serum salicylate level > 100 mg/dL), emergency hemodialysis is 
performed to remove the salicylate more quickly and restore acid-
base balance and fluid status. 
 BETA BLOCKERS 
 In overdose, β blockers inhibit both β 1 and β 2 adrenoceptors; 
selectivity, if any, is lost at high dosage. The most toxic β blocker 
is propranolol. As little as two to three times the therapeutic dose 
can cause serious toxicity. This may be because propranolol in 
high doses may cause sodium channel blocking effects similar to 
those seen with quinidine-like drugs, and it is lipophilic, allowing 
it to enter the CNS (see  Chapter 10 ). 
 Bradycardia and hypotension are the most common manifesta-
tions of toxicity. Agents with partial agonist activity (eg, pindolol) can 
cause tachycardia and hypertension. Seizures and cardiac conduction 
block (wide QRS complex) may be seen with propranolol overdose. 
 General supportive care should be provided as outlined earlier. 
The usual measures used to raise the blood pressure and heart rate, 
such as intravenous fluids, β-agonist drugs, and atropine, are gener-
ally ineffective. Glucagon is a useful antidote that—like β 
 agonists—acts on cardiac cells to raise intracellular cAMP but does 
so independent of β adrenoceptors. It can improve heart rate and 
blood pressure when given in high doses (5–20 mg intravenously). 
 CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS 
 Calcium antagonists can cause serious toxicity or death with rela-
tively small overdoses. These channel blockers depress sinus node 
automaticity and slow AV node conduction (see  Chapter 12 ). 
They also reduce cardiac output and blood pressure. Serious 
hypotension is mainly seen with nifedipine and related dihydro-
pyridines, but in severe overdose all of the listed cardiovascular 
effects can occur with any of the calcium channel blockers. 
 Treatment requires general supportive care. Since most ingested 
calcium antagonists are in sustained-release form, it may be pos-
sible to expel them before they are completely absorbed; initiate 
whole bowel irrigation and oral activated charcoal as soon as pos-
sible, before calcium antagonist-induced ileus intervenes. Calcium, 
given intravenously in doses of 2–10 g, is a useful antidote for 
depressed cardiac contractility but less effective for nodal block or 
peripheral vascular collapse. Other treatments reported to be help-
ful in managing hypotension associated with calcium channel 
blocker poisoning include glucagon and high-dose insulin 
(0.5–1 unit/kg/h) plus glucose supplementation to maintain eugly-
cemia. Recently case reports have suggested benefit from adminis-
tration of lipid emulsion (Intralipid, normally used as an intravenous 
dietary fat supplement) for severe verapamil overdose. 
 CARBON MONOXIDE & OTHER TOXIC 
GASES 
 Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless, odorless gas that is ubiqui-
tous because it is created whenever carbon-containing materials 
are burned. Carbon monoxide poisoning is the leading cause of 
death due to poisoning in the USA. Most cases occur in victims of 
fires, but accidental and suicidal exposures are also common. The 
diagnosis and treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning are 
described in  Chapter 56 . Many other toxic gases are produced in 
fires or released in industrial accidents ( Table 58–5 ). 
 CHOLINESTERASE INHIBITORS 
 Organophosphate and carbamate cholinesterase inhibitors (see 
 Chapter 7 ) are widely used to kill insects and other pests. Most 
cases of serious organophosphate or carbamate poisoning result 
from intentional ingestion by a suicidal person, but poisoning has 
also occurred at work (pesticide application or packaging) or, 
rarely, as a result of food contamination or terrorist attack (eg, 
release of the chemical warfare nerve agent sarin in the Tokyo 
subway system in 1995). 
 Stimulation of muscarinic receptors causes abdominal cramps, 
diarrhea, excessive salivation, sweating, urinary frequency, and 
increased bronchial secretions (see  Chapters 6 and  7 ). Stimulation 
of nicotinic receptors causes generalized ganglionic activation, 
which can lead to hypertension and either tachycardia or brady-
cardia. Muscle twitching and fasciculations may progress to weak-
ness and respiratory muscle paralysis. CNS effects include 
agitation, confusion, and seizures. The mnemonic DUMBELS 
(diarrhea, urination, miosis and muscle weakness, bronchospasm, 
excitation, lacrimation, and seizures, sweating, and salivation) 
helps recall the common findings. Blood testing may be used to 
document depressed activity of red blood cell (acetylcholinest-
erase) and plasma (butyrylcholinesterase) enzymes, which provide 
an indirect estimate of synaptic cholinesterase activity. 
1036    SECTION IX Toxicology
 General supportive care should be provided as outlined above. 
Precautions should be taken to ensure that rescuers and health care 
providers are not poisoned themselves by exposure to contami-
nated clothing or skin. This is especially critical for the most 
potent substances such as parathion or nerve gas agents. Antidotal 
treatment consists of atropine and pralidoxime (see  Table 58–4 ). 
Atropine is an effective competitive inhibitor at muscarinic sites 
but has no effect at nicotinic sites. Pralidoxime given early enough 
may be capable of restoring the cholinesterase activity and is active 
at both muscarinic and nicotinic sites. 
 CYANIDE 
 Cyanide (CN − ) salts and hydrogen cyanide (HCN) are highly 
toxic chemicals used in chemical synthesis, as rodenticides (eg, 
“gopher getter”), formerly as a method of execution, and as agents 
of suicide or homicide. Hydrogen cyanide is formed from the 
burning of plastics, wool, and many other synthetic and natural 
products. Cyanide is also released after ingestion of various plants 
(eg, cassava) and seeds (eg, apple, peach, and apricot). 
 Cyanide binds readily to cytochrome oxidase, inhibiting oxy-
gen utilization within the cell and leading to cellular hypoxia and 
lactic acidosis. Symptoms of cyanide poisoning include shortness 
of breath, agitation, and tachycardia followed by seizures, coma, 
hypotension, and death. Severe metabolic acidosis is characteristic. 
The venous oxygen content may be elevated because oxygen is not 
being taken up by cells. 
 Treatment of cyanide poisoning includes rapid administration 
of activated charcoal (although charcoal binds cyanide poorly, it 
can reduce absorption) and general supportive care. The conven-
tional antidote kit available in the USA includes two forms of 
nitrite (amyl nitrite and sodium nitrite) and sodium thiosulfate. 
The nitrites induce methemoglobinemia, which binds to free CN − 
creating the less toxic cyanomethemoglobin; thiosulfate is a cofac-
tor in the enzymatic conversion of CN − to the much less toxic 
thiocyanate (SCN − ). 
 In 2006 the FDA approved a new cyanide antidote, a concen-
trated form of hydroxocobalamin, which is now available as the 
Cyanokit (EMD Pharmaceuticals, Durham, North Carolina). 
Hydroxocobalamin (one form of vitamin B 12 ) combines rapidly 
with CN − to form cyanocobalamin (another form of vitamin 
B 12 ). 
 DIGOXIN 
 Digitalis and other cardiac glycosides and cardenolides are found 
in many plants (see  Chapter 13 ) and in the skin of some toads. 
Toxicity may occur as a result of acute overdose or from accumula-
tion of digoxin in a patient with renal insufficiency or from taking 
a drug that interferes with digoxin elimination. Patients receiving 
long-term digoxin treatment are often also taking diuretics, which 
can lead to electrolyte depletion (especially potassium). 
 Vomiting is common in patients with digitalis overdose. 
Hyperkalemia may be caused by acute digitalis overdose or severe 
poisoning, whereas hypokalemia may be present in patients as a 
result of long-term diuretic treatment. (Digitalis does not cause 
hypokalemia.) A variety of cardiac rhythm disturbances may 
occur, including sinus bradycardia, AV block, atrial tachycardia 
with block, accelerated junctional rhythm, premature ventricular 
beats, bidirectional ventricular tachycardia, and other ventricular 
arrhythmias. 
 General supportive care should be provided. Atropine is often 
effective for bradycardia or AV block. The use of digoxin antibod-
ies (see  Chapter 13 ) has revolutionized the treatment of digoxin 
toxicity; they should be administered intravenously in the dosage 
indicated in the package insert. Symptoms usually improve within 
TABLE 58–5 Characteristics of poisoning with some gases.
Gas
Mechanism of Toxicity
Clinical Features and Treatment
Irritant gases (eg, chlorine, 
ammonia, sulfur dioxide, 
nitrogen oxides)
Corrosive effect on upper 
and lower airways
Cough, stridor, wheezing, pneumonia 
Treatment: Humidified oxygen, bronchodilators
Carbon monoxide
Binds to hemoglobin, 
reducing oxygen delivery to 
tissues
Headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, seizures, coma 
Treatment: 100% oxygen; consider hyperbaric oxygen
Cyanide
Binds to cytochrome, blocks 
cellular oxygen use
Headache, nausea, vomiting, syncope, seizures, coma 
Treatment: Conventional antidote kit consists of nitrites to induce methemoglobine-
mia (which binds cyanide) and thiosulfate (which hastens conversion of cyanide to 
less toxic thiocyanate); a newer antidote kit (Cyanokit) consists of concentrated 
hydroxocobalamin, which directly converts cyanide into cyanocobalamin
Hydrogen sulfide
Similar to cyanide
Similar to cyanide. Smell of rotten eggs 
Treatment: No specific antidote; some authorities recommend the nitrite portion of 
the conventional cyanide antidote kit.
Oxidizing agents 
(eg, nitrogen oxides)
Can cause 
methemoglobinemia
Dyspnea, cyanosis (due to brown color of methemoglobin), syncope, seizures, coma 
Treatment: Methylene blue (which hastens conversion back to normal 
hemoglobin)
CHAPTER 58 Management of the Poisoned Patient    1037
30–60 minutes after antibody administration. Digoxin antibodies 
may also be tried in cases of poisoning by other cardiac glycosides 
(eg, digitoxin, oleander), although larger doses may be needed due 
to incomplete cross-reactivity. 
 ETHANOL & SEDATIVE-HYPNOTIC 
DRUGS 
 Overdosage with ethanol and sedative-hypnotic drugs (eg, benzo-
diazepines, barbiturates, γ-hydroxybutyrate [GHB], carisoprodol 
[Soma]; see  Chapters 22 and  23 ) occurs frequently because of 
their common availability and use. 
 Patients with ethanol or other sedative-hypnotic overdose may 
be euphoric and rowdy (“drunk”) or in a state of stupor or coma 
(“dead drunk”). Comatose patients often have depressed respira-
tory drive. Depression of protective airway reflexes may result in 
pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents leading to pneumonia. 
Hypothermia may be present because of environmental exposure 
and depressed shivering. Ethanol blood levels greater than 
300 mg/dL usually cause deep coma, but regular users are often tol-
erant to the effects of ethanol and may be ambulatory despite even 
higher levels. Patients with GHB overdose are often deeply comatose 
for 3–4 hours and then awaken fully in a matter of minutes. 
 General supportive care should be provided. With careful 
attention to protecting the airway (including endotracheal intuba-
tion) and assisting ventilation, most patients recover as the drug 
effects wear off. Hypotension usually responds to intravenous 
fluids, body warming if cold, and, if needed, dopamine. Patients 
with isolated benzodiazepine overdose may awaken after intrave-
nous flumazenil, a benzodiazepine antagonist. However, this drug 
is not widely used as empiric therapy for drug overdose because it 
may precipitate seizures in patients who are addicted to benzodi-
azepines or who have ingested a convulsant drug (eg, a tricyclic 
antidepressant). There are no antidotes for ethanol, barbiturates, 
or most other sedative-hypnotics. 
 ETHYLENE GLYCOL & METHANOL 
 Ethylene glycol and methanol are alcohols that are important 
toxins because of their metabolism to highly toxic organic acids 
(see  Chapter 23 ). They are capable of causing CNS depression 
and a drunken state similar to ethanol overdose. In addition, 
their products of metabolism—formic acid (from methanol) or 
hippuric, oxalic, and glycolic acids (from ethylene glycol)—
cause a severe metabolic acidosis and can lead to coma and 
blindness (in the case of formic acid) or renal failure (from 
oxalic acid and glycolic acid). Initially, the patient appears 
drunk, but after a delay of up to several hours, a severe anion 
gap metabolic acidosis becomes apparent, accompanied by 
hyperventilation and altered mental status. Patients with meth-
anol poisoning may have visual disturbances ranging from 
blurred vision to blindness. 
 Metabolism of ethylene glycol and methanol to their toxic prod-
ucts can be blocked by inhibiting the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase 
with a competing drug, such as fomepizole (4-methylpyrazole). 
Ethanol is also an effective antidote, but it can be difficult to achieve 
a safe and effective blood level. 
 IRON & OTHER METALS 
 Iron is widely used in over-the-counter vitamin preparations and 
is a leading cause of childhood poisoning deaths. As few as 10–12 
prenatal multivitamins with iron may cause serious illness in a 
small child. Poisoning with other metals (lead, mercury, arsenic) is 
also important, especially in industry. See Chapters 33, 56, and 57 
for detailed discussions of poisoning by iron and other metals. 
 OPIOIDS 
 Opioids (opium, morphine, heroin, meperidine, methadone, etc) 
are common drugs of abuse (see  Chapters 31 and  32 ), and over-
dose is a common result of using the poorly standardized prepara-
tions sold on the street. See  Chapter 31 for a detailed discussion 
of opioid overdose and its treatment. 
 RATTLESNAKE ENVENOMATION 
 In the USA, rattlesnakes are the most common venomous reptiles. 
Bites are rarely fatal, and 20% do not involve envenomation. 
However, about 60% of bites cause significant morbidity due to 
the destructive digestive enzymes found in the venom. Evidence of 
rattlesnake envenomation includes severe pain, swelling, bruising, 
hemorrhagic bleb formation, and obvious fang marks. Systemic 
effects include nausea, vomiting, muscle fasciculations, tingling 
and metallic taste in the mouth, shock, and systemic coagulopathy 
with prolonged clotting time and reduced platelet count. 
 Studies have shown that emergency field remedies such as inci-
sion and suction, tourniquets, and ice packs are far more damag-
ing than useful. Avoidance of unnecessary motion, on the other 
hand, does help to limit the spread of the venom. Definitive 
therapy relies on intravenous antivenom (also known as antivenin) 
and this should be started as soon as possible. 
 THEOPHYLLINE 
 Although it has been largely replaced by inhaled β agonists, theo-
phylline continues to be used for the treatment of bronchospasm 
by some patients with asthma and bronchitis (see  Chapter 20 ). A 
dose of 20–30 tablets can cause serious or fatal poisoning. Chronic 
or subacute theophylline poisoning can also occur as a result of 
accidental overmedication or use of a drug that interferes with 
theophylline metabolism (eg, cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, erythro-
mycin; see  Chapter 4 ). 
 In addition to sinus tachycardia and tremor, vomiting is com-
mon after overdose. Hypotension, tachycardia, hypokalemia, and 
hyperglycemia may occur, probably owing to β 2 -adrenergic activa-
tion. The cause of this activation is not fully understood, but the 
1038    SECTION IX Toxicology
effects can be ameliorated by β blockers (see below). Cardiac 
arrhythmias include atrial tachycardias, premature ventricular 
contractions, and ventricular tachycardia. In severe poisoning (eg, 
acute overdose with serum level > 100 mg/L), seizures often occur 
and are usually resistant to common anticonvulsants. Toxicity may 
be delayed in onset for many hours after ingestion of sustained-
release tablet formulations. 
 General supportive care should be provided. Aggressive gut 
decontamination should be carried out using repeated doses of 
activated charcoal and whole bowel irrigation. Propranolol or 
other β blockers (eg, esmolol) are useful antidotes for β-mediated 
hypotension and tachycardia. Phenobarbital is preferred over 
phenytoin for convulsions; most anticonvulsants are ineffective. 
Hemodialysis is indicated for serum concentrations greater than 
100 mg/L and for intractable seizures in patients with lower 
levels. 
 REFERENCES 
 Dart RD (editor):  Medical Toxicology , 3rd ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
2004. 
 Goldfrank LR et al (editors):  Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies , 9th ed. McGraw-
Hill, 2010. 
 Olson KR et al (editors):  Poisoning & Drug Overdose , 6th ed. McGraw-Hill, 
2011. 
 POISINDEX . (Revised Quarterly.) Thomson/Micromedex. 
 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Overdose of bupropion can cause seizures that are often 
recurrent or prolonged. Drug-induced seizures are treated 
with an intravenous benzodiazepine such as lorazepam or 
diazepam. If this is not effective, phenobarbital or another 
more efficacious central nervous system depressant may be 
used. To prevent ingested drugs and poisons from being 
absorbed systemically, a slurry of activated charcoal is often 
given orally or by nasogastric tube.
1039
 The effects of drugs on the fetus and newborn infant are based on 
the general principles set forth in Chapters 1–4 of this book. 
However, the physiologic contexts in which these pharmacologic 
laws operate are different in pregnant women and in rapidly 
maturing infants. At present, the special pharmacokinetic factors 
operative in these patients are beginning to be understood, 
whereas information regarding pharmacodynamic differences (eg, 
receptor characteristics and responses) is still incomplete. 
 DRUG THERAPY IN PREGNANCY 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 Most drugs taken by pregnant women can cross the placenta and 
expose the developing embryo and fetus to their pharmacologic 
and teratogenic effects. Critical factors affecting placental drug 
transfer and drug effects on the fetus include the following: (1) the 
physicochemical properties of the drug; (2) the rate at which the 
drug crosses the placenta and the amount of drug reaching the fetus; 
(3) the duration of exposure to the drug; (4) distribution charac-
teristics in different fetal tissues; (5) the stage of placental and fetal 
development at the time of exposure to the drug; and (6) the 
effects of drugs used in combination. 
 A. Lipid Solubility 
 As is true also of other biologic membranes, drug passage across the 
placenta is dependent on lipid solubility and the degree of drug 
ionization. Lipophilic drugs tend to diffuse readily across the pla-
centa and enter the fetal circulation. For example, thiopental, a drug 
commonly used for cesarean sections, crosses the placenta almost 
immediately and can produce sedation or apnea in the newborn 
infant. Highly ionized drugs such as succinylcholine and tubocura-
rine, also used for cesarean sections, cross the placenta slowly and 
achieve very low concentrations in the fetus. Impermeability of the 
placenta to polar compounds is relative rather than absolute. If high 
enough maternal-fetal concentration gradients are achieved, polar 
compounds cross the placenta in measurable amounts. Salicylate, 
which is almost completely ionized at physiologic pH, crosses the 
placenta rapidly. This occurs because the small amount of salicylate 
that is not ionized is highly lipid-soluble. 
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
59
SECTION X SPECIAL TOPICS
Special Aspects of 
Perinatal & Pediatric 
Pharmacology
 Gideon Koren, MD∗ 
 * Supported by a grant from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, 
and by the Research Leadership for Better Pharmacotherapy During 
Pregnancy and Lactation.
1040    SECTION X Special Topics
 B. Molecular Size and pH 
 The molecular weight of the drug also influences the rate of trans-
fer and the amount of drug transferred across the placenta. Drugs 
with molecular weights of 250–500 can cross the placenta easily, 
depending upon their lipid solubility and degree of ionization; 
those with molecular weights of 500–1000 cross the placenta with 
more difficulty; and those with molecular weights greater than 
1000 cross very poorly. An important clinical application of this 
property is the choice of heparin as an anticoagulant in pregnant 
women. Because it is a very large (and polar) molecule, heparin is 
unable to cross the placenta. Unlike warfarin, which is teratogenic 
and should be avoided during the first trimester and even beyond 
(as the brain continues to develop), heparin may be safely given to 
pregnant women who need anticoagulation. Yet the placenta con-
tains drug transporters, which can carry larger molecules to the 
fetus. For example, a variety of maternal antibodies cross the pla-
centa and may cause fetal morbidity, as in Rh incompatibility. 
 Because maternal blood has a pH of 7.4 and that of the fetal 
blood is 7.3, weakly basic drugs with pKa above 7.4 will be more 
ionized in the fetal compartment, leading to ion trapping and, 
hence, to higher fetal levels (see  Chapter 1 ). 
 C. Placental Transporters 
 During the last decade, many drug transporters have been identified 
in the placenta, with increasing recognition of their effects on drug 
transfer to the fetus. For example, the P-glycoprotein transporter 
encoded by the  MDR1 gene pumps back into the maternal circula-
tion a variety of drugs, including cancer drugs (eg, vinblastine, doxo-
rubicin) and other agents. Similarly, viral protease inhibitors, which 
are substrates of P-glycoprotein, achieve only low fetal concentra-
tions—an effect that may increase the risk of vertical HIV infection 
from the mother to the fetus. The hypoglycemic drug glyburide 
shows much lower concentrations in the fetus as compared to the 
mother. Recent work has documented that this agent is effluxed from 
the fetal circulation by the BCRP transporter as well as by the MRP3 
transporter located in the placental brush border membrane. 
 D. Protein Binding 
 The degree to which a drug is bound to plasma proteins (particu-
larly albumin) may also affect the rate of transfer and the amount 
transferred. However, if a compound is very lipid-soluble (eg, 
some anesthetic gases), it will not be affected greatly by protein 
binding. Transfer of these more lipid-soluble drugs and their over-
all rates of equilibration are more dependent on (and proportion-
ate to) placental blood flow. This is because very lipid-soluble 
drugs diffuse across placental membranes so rapidly that their 
overall rates of equilibration do not depend on the free drug con-
centrations becoming equal on both sides. If a drug is poorly lipid-
soluble and is ionized, its transfer is slow and will probably be 
impeded by its binding to maternal plasma proteins. Differential 
protein binding is also important since some drugs exhibit greater 
protein binding in maternal plasma than in fetal plasma because 
of a lower binding affinity of fetal proteins. This has been shown 
for sulfonamides, barbiturates, phenytoin, and local anesthetic 
agents. In addition, very high maternal protein binding of glyburide 
(> 98.8%) also contributes to lower fetal levels as compared to 
maternal concentrations, as mentioned above. 
 E. Placental and Fetal Drug Metabolism 
 Two mechanisms help protect the fetus from drugs in the maternal 
circulation: (1) The placenta itself plays a role both as a semiperme-
able barrier and as a site of metabolism of some drugs passing 
through it. Several different types of aromatic oxidation reactions 
(eg, hydroxylation,  N -dealkylation, demethylation) have been 
shown to occur in placental tissue. Pentobarbital is oxidized in this 
way. Conversely, it is possible that the metabolic capacity of the 
placenta may lead to creation of toxic metabolites, and the placenta 
may therefore augment toxicity (eg, ethanol, benzpyrenes). (2) 
Drugs that have crossed the placenta enter the fetal circulation via 
the umbilical vein. Approximately 40–60% of umbilical venous 
blood flow enters the fetal liver; the remainder bypasses the liver 
and enters the general fetal circulation. A drug that enters the liver 
may be partially metabolized there before it enters the fetal circula-
tion. In addition, a large proportion of drug present in the umbili-
cal artery (returning to the placenta) may be shunted through the 
placenta back to the umbilical vein and into the liver again. It 
should be noted that metabolites of some drugs may be more active 
than the parent compound and may affect the fetus adversely. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A. Maternal Drug Actions 
 The effects of drugs on the reproductive tissues (breast, uterus, etc) 
of the pregnant woman are sometimes altered by the endocrine 
environment appropriate for the stage of pregnancy. Drug effects on 
other maternal tissues (heart, lungs, kidneys, central nervous system, 
etc) are not changed significantly by pregnancy, although the 
physiologic context (cardiac output, renal blood flow, etc) may be 
altered, requiring the use of drugs that are not needed by the same 
woman when she is not pregnant. For example, cardiac glycosides 
and diuretics may be needed for heart failure precipitated by the 
increased cardiac workload of pregnancy, or insulin may be required 
for control of blood glucose in pregnancy-induced diabetes. 
 B. Therapeutic Drug Actions in the Fetus 
 Fetal therapeutics is an emerging area in perinatal pharmacology. 
This involves drug administration to the pregnant woman with 
the fetus as the target of the drug. At present, corticosteroids are 
used to stimulate fetal lung maturation when preterm birth is 
expected. Phenobarbital, when given to pregnant women near 
term, can induce fetal hepatic enzymes responsible for the 
glucuronidation of bilirubin, and the incidence of jaundice is 
lower in newborns when mothers are given phenobarbital than 
when phenobarbital is not used. Before phototherapy became the 
preferred mode of therapy for neonatal indirect hyperbilirubine-
mia, phenobarbital was used for this indication. Administration of 
phenobarbital to the mother was suggested recently as a means of 
decreasing the risk of intracranial bleeding in preterm infants. 
However, large randomized studies failed to confirm this effect. 
Antiarrhythmic drugs have also been given to mothers for treatment 
of fetal cardiac arrhythmias. Although their efficacy has not yet 
CHAPTER 59 Special Aspects of Perinatal & Pediatric Pharmacology    1041
been established by controlled studies, digoxin, flecainide, pro-
cainamide, verapamil, and other antiarrhythmic agents have been 
shown to be effective in case series. During the last two decades it 
has been shown that maternal use of zidovudine decreases by two 
thirds transmission of HIV from the mother to the fetus, and use 
of combinations of three antiretroviral agents can eliminate fetal 
infection almost entirely (see  Chapter 49 ). 
 C. Predictable Toxic Drug Actions in the Fetus 
 Chronic use of opioids by the mother may produce dependence in 
the fetus and newborn. This dependence may be manifested after 
delivery as a neonatal withdrawal syndrome. A less well under-
stood fetal drug toxicity is caused by the use of angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors during pregnancy. These drugs can 
result in significant and irreversible renal damage in the fetus and 
are therefore contraindicated in pregnant women. Adverse effects 
may also be delayed, as in the case of female fetuses exposed to 
diethylstilbestrol, who may be at increased risk for adenocarci-
noma of the vagina after puberty. 
 D. Teratogenic Drug Actions 
 A single intrauterine exposure to a drug can affect the fetal struc-
tures undergoing rapid development at the time of exposure. 
Thalidomide is an example of a drug that may profoundly affect 
the development of the limbs after only brief exposure. This expo-
sure, however, must be at a critical time in the development of the 
limbs. The thalidomide phocomelia risk occurs during the fourth 
through the seventh weeks of gestation because it is during this 
time that the arms and legs develop ( Figure 59–1 ). 
 1. Teratogenic mechanisms— The mechanisms by which 
different drugs produce teratogenic effects are poorly understood 
and are probably multifactorial. For example, drugs may have a 
direct effect on maternal tissues with secondary or indirect effects 
on fetal tissues. Drugs may interfere with the passage of oxygen 
or nutrients through the placenta and therefore have effects on 
the most rapidly metabolizing tissues of the fetus. Finally, drugs 
may have important direct actions on the processes of differentia-
tion in developing tissues. For example, vitamin A (retinol) has 
been shown to have important differentiation-directing actions in 
normal tissues. Several vitamin A analogs (isotretinoin, etretinate) 
are powerful teratogens, suggesting that they alter the normal 
processes of differentiation. Finally, deficiency of a critical sub-
stance appears to play a role in some types of abnormalities. For 
example, folic acid supplementation during pregnancy appears to 
reduce the incidence of neural tube defects (eg, spina bifida). 
20-38
Full term
Fetal period (weeks)
Embryonic period (weeks)
38
16
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Heart
CNS
Eye
Eye
Heart
Arm
Leg
Teeth
Ear
External genitalia
Central nervous system
Arms
Eyes
Legs
Teeth
Palate
External genetalia
Ear
Major morphologic abnormalities
Prenatal death
Usually not
susceptible to
teratogen
Brain
Physiologic defects and
minor morphologic abnormalities
Period of dividing
zygote, implantation,
and bilaminar embryo
Palate
Indicates common site of action of teratogen
Heart
 FIGURE 59–1  Schematic diagram of critical periods of human development. (Reproduced, with permission, from Moore KL:  The Developing Human: 
Clinically Oriented Embryology, 4th ed. Saunders, 1988.) 
1042    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 59–1 Drugs with significant teratogenic or other adverse effects on the fetus.
Drug
Trimester
Effect
ACE inhibitors
All, especially sec-
ond and third
Renal damage
Aminopterin
First
Multiple gross anomalies
Amphetamines
All
Suspected abnormal developmental patterns, decreased school performance
Androgens
Second, third
Masculinization of female fetus
Antidepressants, tricyclic
Third
Neonatal withdrawal symptoms have been reported in a few cases with clomipramine, 
desipramine, and imipramine
Barbiturates
All
Chronic use can lead to neonatal dependence
Busulfan
All
Various congenital malformations; low birth weight
Carbamazepine
First
Neural tube defects
Chlorpropamide
All
Prolonged symptomatic neonatal hypoglycemia
Clomipramine
Third
Neonatal lethargy, hypotonia, cyanosis, hypothermia
Cocaine
All
Increased risk of spontaneous abortion, abruptio placentae, and premature labor; neonatal 
cerebral infarction, abnormal development, and decreased school performance
Cyclophosphamide
First
Various congenital malformations
Cytarabine
First, second
Various congenital malformations
Diazepam
All
Chronic use may lead to neonatal dependence
Diethylstilbestrol
All
Vaginal adenosis, clear cell vaginal adenocarcinoma
Ethanol
All
Risk of fetal alcohol syndrome and alcohol-related neurodevelopmental defects
Etretinate
All
High risk of multiple congenital malformations
Heroin
All
Chronic use leads to neonatal dependence
Iodide
All
Congenital goiter, hypothyroidism
Isotretinoin
All
Extremely high risk of CNS, face, ear, and other malformations
Lithium
First, third
Ebstein’s anomaly, neonatal toxicity after third trimester
Methadone
All
Chronic use may lead to neonatal abstinence
 Continued exposure to a teratogen may produce cumulative 
effects or may affect several organs going through varying stages of 
development. Chronic consumption of high doses of ethanol dur-
ing pregnancy, particularly during the first and second trimesters, 
may result in the fetal alcohol syndrome (see  Chapter 23 ). In this 
syndrome, the central nervous system, growth, and facial develop-
ment may be affected. 
 2. Defining a teratogen— To be considered teratogenic, a 
candidate substance or process should (1) result in a characteristic 
set of malformations, indicating selectivity for certain target 
organs; (2) exert its effects at a particular stage of fetal develop-
ment, eg, during the limited time period of organogenesis of the 
target organs ( Figure 59–1 ); and (3) show a dose-dependent inci-
dence. Some drugs with known teratogenic or other adverse 
effects in pregnancy are listed in  Table 59–1 . Teratogenic effects 
are not limited only to major malformations, but also include 
intrauterine growth restriction (eg, cigarette smoking), miscarriage 
(eg, alcohol), stillbirth (eg, cigarette smoke), and neurocognitive 
delay (eg, alcohol). 
 The widely cited Food and Drug Administration (FDA) sys-
tem for teratogenic potential ( Table 59–2 ) is an attempt to quan-
tify teratogenic risk from A (safe) to X (definite human teratogenic 
risk). This system has been criticized as inaccurate and impracti-
cal. For example, several drugs have been labeled “X” despite 
extensive opposite human safety data (eg, oral contraceptives). 
Diazepam and other benzodiazepines are labeled as “D” despite 
lack of positive evidence of human fetal risk. Presently the FDA is 
changing its system from the A, B, C grading system to narrative 
statements that will summarize evidence-based knowledge about 
each drug in terms of fetal risk and safety. 
 3. Counseling women about teratogenic risk— Since the 
thalidomide disaster, medicine has been practiced as if every drug 
were a potential human teratogen when, in fact, fewer than 30 
such drugs have been identified, with hundreds of agents proved 
safe for the unborn. Owing to high levels of anxiety among preg-
nant women—and because half of the pregnancies in North 
America are unplanned—every year many thousands of women 
need counseling about fetal exposure to drugs, chemicals, and 
(continued )
CHAPTER 59 Special Aspects of Perinatal & Pediatric Pharmacology    1043
TABLE 59–1 Drugs with significant teratogenic or other adverse effects on the fetus.
Drug
Trimester
Effect
Methotrexate
First
Multiple congenital malformations
Methylthiouracil
All
Hypothyroidism
Metronidazole
First
May be mutagenic (from animal studies; there is no evidence for mutagenic or teratogenic 
effects in humans)
Misoprostol
First
Möbius sequence
Mycophenolate mofetil
First
Major malformations of the face, limbs, and other organs
Organic solvents
First
Multiple malformations
Penicillamine
First
Cutis laxa, other congenital malformations
Phencyclidine
All
Abnormal neurologic examination, poor suck reflex and feeding
Phenytoin
All
Fetal hydantoin syndrome
Propylthiouracil
All
Congenital goiter
Smoking (constituents of 
tobacco smoke)
All
Intrauterine growth retardation; prematurity; sudden infant death syndrome; perinatal 
complications
Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)
Third
Neonatal abstinence syndrome, persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn
Tamoxifen
All
Increased risk of spontaneous abortion or fetal damage
Tetracycline
All
Discoloration and defects of teeth and altered bone growth
Thalidomide
First
Phocomelia (shortened or absent long bones of the limbs) and many internal malformations
Trimethadione
All
Multiple congenital anomalies
Valproic acid
All
Neural tube defects, cardiac and limb malformations
Warfarin
First
Hypoplastic nasal bridge, chondrodysplasia
Second
CNS malformations
Third
Risk of bleeding. Discontinue use 1 month before delivery.
TABLE 59–2 FDA teratogenic risk categories.
Category
Description
A
Controlled studies in women fail to demonstrate a risk to the fetus in the first trimester (and there is no evidence of a risk in late 
trimesters), and the possibility of fetal harm appears remote.
B
Either animal-reproduction studies have not demonstrated a fetal risk, but there are no controlled studies in pregnant women, or 
animal-reproduction studies have shown an adverse effect (other than a decrease in fertility) that was not confirmed in controlled 
studies in women in the first trimester (and there is no evidence of a risk in later trimesters).
C
Either studies in animals have revealed adverse effects on the fetus (teratogenic or embryocidal or other) and there are no controlled 
studies in women or studies in women and animals are not available. Drugs should be given only if the potential benefit justifies the 
potential risk to the fetus.
D
There is positive evidence of human fetal risk, but the benefits from use in pregnant women may be acceptable despite the risk (eg, if 
the drug is needed in a life-threatening situation or for a serious disease for which safer drugs cannot be used or are ineffective).
X
Studies in animals or human beings have demonstrated fetal abnormalities or there is evidence of fetal risk based on human 
experience or both, and the risk of the use of the drug in pregnant women clearly outweighs any possible benefit. The drug is 
contraindicated in women who are or may become pregnant.
radiation. In the Motherisk program in Toronto, thousands of 
women are counseled every month, and the ability of appropriate 
counseling to prevent unnecessary abortions has been docu-
mented. Clinicians who wish to provide such counsel to pregnant 
women must ensure that their information is up-to-date and 
evidence-based and that the woman understands that the baseline 
teratogenic risk in pregnancy (ie, the risk of a neonatal abnormal-
ity in the absence of any known teratogenic exposure) is about 
3%. It is also critical to address the maternal-fetal risks of the 
untreated condition if a medication is avoided. Recent studies 
show serious morbidity in women who discontinued selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor therapy for depression in pregnancy. 
(Continued)
1044    SECTION X Special Topics
 DRUG THERAPY IN INFANTS & CHILDREN 
 Physiologic processes that influence pharmacokinetic variables in 
the infant change significantly in the first year of life, particularly 
during the first few months. Therefore, special attention must be 
paid to pharmacokinetics in this age group. Pharmacodynamic 
differences between pediatric and other patients have not been 
explored in great detail and are probably small except for those 
specific target tissues that mature at birth or immediately thereaf-
ter (eg, the ductus arteriosus). 
 Drug Absorption 
 Drug absorption in infants and children follows the same general 
principles as in adults. Unique factors that influence drug absorp-
tion include blood flow at the site of administration, as deter-
mined by the physiologic status of the infant or child; and, for 
orally administered drugs, gastrointestinal function, which changes 
rapidly during the first few days after birth. Age after birth also 
influences the regulation of drug absorption. 
 A. Blood Flow at the Site of Administration 
 Absorption after intramuscular or subcutaneous injection depends 
mainly, in neonates as in adults, on the rate of blood flow to the 
muscle or subcutaneous area injected. Physiologic conditions that 
might reduce blood flow to these areas are cardiovascular shock, 
vasoconstriction due to sympathomimetic agents, and heart failure. 
However, sick preterm infants requiring intramuscular injections 
may have very little muscle mass. This is further complicated by 
diminished peripheral perfusion to these areas. In such cases, 
absorption becomes irregular and difficult to predict, because the 
drug may remain in the muscle and be absorbed more slowly than 
expected. If perfusion suddenly improves, there can be a sudden and 
unpredictable increase in the amount of drug entering the circula-
tion, resulting in high and potentially toxic concentrations of drug. 
Examples of drugs especially hazardous in such situations are cardiac 
glycosides, aminoglycoside antibiotics, and anticonvulsants. 
 B. Gastrointestinal Function 
 Significant biochemical and physiologic changes occur in the neo-
natal gastrointestinal tract shortly after birth. In full-term infants, 
gastric acid secretion begins soon after birth and increases gradu-
ally over several hours. In preterm infants, the secretion of gastric 
acid occurs more slowly, with the highest concentrations appear-
ing on the fourth day of life. Therefore, drugs that are usually 
partially or totally inactivated by the low pH of gastric contents 
should not be administered orally. 
 Gastric emptying time is prolonged (up to 6 or 8 hours) in the 
first day or so after delivery. Therefore, drugs that are absorbed 
primarily in the stomach may be absorbed more completely than 
anticipated. In the case of drugs absorbed in the small intestine, 
therapeutic effect may be delayed. Peristalsis in the neonate is 
irregular and may be slow. The amount of drug absorbed in the 
small intestine may therefore be unpredictable; more than the usual 
amount of drug may be absorbed if peristalsis is slowed, and this 
could result in potential toxicity from an otherwise standard dose. 
 Table 59–3 summarizes data on oral bioavailability of various 
drugs in neonates compared with older children and adults. An 
increase in peristalsis, as in diarrheal conditions, tends to decrease 
the extent of absorption, because contact time with the large 
absorptive surface of the intestine is decreased. 
 Gastrointestinal enzyme activities tend to be lower in the new-
born than in the adult. Activities of α-amylase and other pancre-
atic enzymes in the duodenum are low in infants up to 4 months 
of age. Neonates also have low concentrations of bile acids and 
lipase, which may decrease the absorption of lipid-soluble drugs. 
 Drug Distribution 
 As body composition changes with development, the distribution 
volumes of drugs are also changed. The neonate has a higher per-
centage of its body weight in the form of water (70–75%) than 
does the adult (50–60%). Differences can also be observed 
between the full-term neonate (70% of body weight as water) and 
the small preterm neonate (85% of body weight as water). 
Similarly, extracellular water is 40% of body weight in the neo-
nate, compared with 20% in the adult. Most neonates will experi-
ence diuresis in the first 24–48 hours of life. Since many drugs are 
distributed throughout the extracellular water space, the size (vol-
ume) of the extracellular water compartment may be important in 
determining the concentration of drug at receptor sites. This is 
especially important for water-soluble drugs (such as aminoglyco-
sides) and less crucial for lipid-soluble agents. 
 Preterm infants have much less fat than full-term infants. Total 
body fat in preterm infants is about 1% of total body weight, 
compared with 15% in full-term neonates. Therefore, organs that 
generally accumulate high concentrations of lipid-soluble drugs in 
adults and older children may accumulate smaller amounts of 
these agents in less mature infants. 
 Another major factor determining drug distribution is drug 
binding to plasma proteins. Albumin is the plasma protein with 
the greatest binding capacity. In general, protein binding of drugs 
is reduced in the neonate. This has been seen with local anesthetic 
drugs, diazepam, phenytoin, ampicillin, and phenobarbital. 
Therefore, the concentration of free (unbound) drug in plasma is 
TABLE 59–3  Oral drug absorption (bioavailability) of 
various drugs in the neonate compared 
with older children and adults.
Drug
Oral Absorption
Acetaminophen
Decreased
Ampicillin
Increased
Diazepam
Normal
Digoxin
Normal
Penicillin G
Increased
Phenobarbital
Decreased
Phenytoin
Decreased
Sulfonamides
Normal
CHAPTER 59 Special Aspects of Perinatal & Pediatric Pharmacology    1045
increased initially. Because the free drug exerts the pharmacologic 
effect, this can result in greater drug effect or toxicity despite a 
normal or even low plasma concentration of total drug (bound 
plus unbound). Consider a therapeutic dose of a drug (eg, diaze-
pam) given to a patient. The concentration of total drug in the 
plasma is 300 mcg/L. If the drug is 98% protein-bound in an 
older child or adult, then 6 mcg/L is the concentration of free 
drug. Assume that this concentration of free drug produces the 
desired effect in the patient without producing toxicity. However, 
if this drug is given to a preterm infant in a dosage adjusted for 
body weight and it produces a total drug concentration of 300 
mcg/L—and protein binding is only 90%—then the free drug 
concentration will be 30 mcg/L, or five times higher. Although the 
higher free concentration may result in faster elimination (see 
 Chapter 3 ), this concentration may be quite toxic initially. 
 Some drugs compete with serum bilirubin for binding to albu-
min. Drugs given to a neonate with jaundice can displace biliru-
bin from albumin. Because of the greater permeability of the 
neonatal blood-brain barrier, substantial amounts of bilirubin may 
enter the brain and cause kernicterus. This was in fact observed 
when sulfonamide antibiotics were given to preterm neonates as 
prophylaxis against sepsis. Conversely, as the serum bilirubin rises 
for physiologic reasons or because of a blood group incompatibil-
ity, bilirubin can displace a drug from albumin and substantially 
raise the free drug concentration. This may occur without altering 
the total drug concentration and would result in greater therapeu-
tic effect or toxicity at normal concentrations. This has been 
shown to happen with phenytoin. 
 Drug Metabolism 
 The metabolism of most drugs occurs in the liver (see  Chapter 4 ). 
The drug-metabolizing activities of the cytochrome P450-
dependent mixed-function oxidases and the conjugating enzymes 
are substantially lower (50–70% of adult values) in early neonatal 
life than later. The point in development at which enzymatic 
activity is maximal depends upon the specific enzyme system in 
question. Glucuronide formation reaches adult values (per kilo-
gram body weight) between the third and fourth years of life. 
Because of the neonate’s decreased ability to metabolize drugs, 
many drugs have slow clearance rates and prolonged elimination 
half-lives. If drug doses and dosing schedules are not altered 
appropriately, this immaturity predisposes the neonate to adverse 
effects from drugs that are metabolized by the liver.  Table 59–4 
demonstrates how neonatal and adult drug elimination half-lives 
can differ and how the half-lives of phenobarbital and phenytoin 
decrease as the neonate grows older. The process of maturation 
must be considered when administering drugs to this age group, 
especially in the case of drugs administered over long periods. 
 Another consideration for the neonate is whether or not the 
mother was receiving drugs (eg, phenobarbital) that can induce 
early maturation of fetal hepatic enzymes. In this case, the ability 
of the neonate to metabolize certain drugs will be greater than 
expected, and one may see less therapeutic effect and lower plasma 
drug concentrations when the usual neonatal dose is given. 
During toddlerhood (12–36 months), the metabolic rate of many 
drugs exceeds adult values, often necessitating larger doses per 
kilogram than later in life. 
 Drug Excretion 
 The glomerular filtration rate is much lower in newborns than in 
older infants, children, or adults, and this limitation persists during 
the first few days of life. Calculated on the basis of body surface 
area, glomerular filtration in the neonate is only 30–40% of the 
adult value. The glomerular filtration rate is even lower in neonates 
born before 34 weeks of gestation. Function improves substantially 
during the first week of life. At the end of the first week, the glom-
erular filtration rate and renal plasma flow have increased 50% 
from the first day. By the end of the third week, glomerular filtra-
tion is 50–60% of the adult value; by 6–12 months, it reaches adult 
values (per unit surface area). Therefore, drugs that depend on 
renal function for elimination are cleared from the body very 
slowly in the first weeks of life. Subsequently, during toddlerhood, 
it exceeds adult values, often necessitating larger doses per kilogram 
than in adults, as described previously for drug-metabolic rate.  
 Penicillins, for example, are cleared by preterm infants at 17% of 
the adult rate based on comparable surface area and 34% of the 
adult rate when adjusted for body weight. The dosage of ampicillin 
for a neonate less than 7 days old is 50–100 mg/kg/d in two doses 
at 12-hour intervals. The dosage for a neonate over 7 days old is 
100–200 mg/kg/d in three doses at 8-hour intervals. A decreased 
rate of renal elimination in the neonate has also been observed with 
aminoglycoside antibiotics (kanamycin, gentamicin, neomycin, and 
streptomycin). The dosage of gentamicin for a neonate less than 7 
days old is 5 mg/kg/d in two doses at 12-hour intervals. The dosage 
for a neonate over 7 days old is 7.5 mg/kg/d in three doses at 8-hour 
intervals. Total body clearance of digoxin is directly dependent upon 
adequate renal function, and accumulation of digoxin can occur 
when glomerular filtration is decreased. Since renal function in a 
sick infant may not improve at the predicted rate during the first 
TABLE 59–4  Comparison of elimination half-lives of 
various drugs in neonates and adults.
Drug
Neonatal Age
Neonates 
t1/2 (hours)
Adults 
t1/2 (hours)
Acetaminophen
2.2–5
0.9–2.2
Diazepam
25–100
40–50
Digoxin
60–70
30–60
Phenobarbital
0–5 days
200
64–140
5–15 days
100
1–30 months
50
Phenytoin
0–2 days
80
12–18
3–14 days
18
14–50 days
6
Salicylate
4.5–11
10–15
Theophylline
Neonate
13–26
5–10
Child
3–4
1046    SECTION X Special Topics
weeks and months of life, appropriate adjustments in dosage and 
dosing schedules may be very difficult. In this situation, adjust-
ments are best made on the basis of plasma drug concentrations 
determined at intervals throughout the course of therapy. 
 Although great focus is naturally concentrated on the neonate, 
it is important to remember that toddlers may have  shorter elimi-
nation half-lives of drugs than older children and adults, due 
probably to  increased renal elimination and metabolism. For 
example, the dose per kilogram of digoxin is much higher in tod-
dlers than in adults. The mechanisms for these developmental 
changes are still poorly understood. 
 Special Pharmacodynamic 
Features in the Neonate 
 The appropriate use of drugs has made possible the survival of neo-
nates with severe abnormalities who would otherwise die within days 
or weeks after birth. For example, administration of indomethacin 
(see  Chapter 35 ) causes the rapid closure of a patent ductus arterio-
sus, which would otherwise require surgical closure in an infant with 
a normal heart. Infusion of prostaglandin E 1 , on the other hand, 
causes the ductus to remain open, which can be lifesaving in an 
infant with transposition of the great vessels or tetralogy of Fallot (see 
 Chapter 18 ). An unexpected effect of such infusion has been 
described. The drug caused antral hyperplasia with gastric outlet 
obstruction as a clinical manifestation in 6 of 74 infants who received 
it. This phenomenon appears to be dose-dependent. Neonates are 
also more sensitive to the central depressant effects of opioids than 
are older children and adults, necessitating extra caution when they 
are exposed to some narcotics (eg, codeine) through breast milk. 
 PEDIATRIC DOSAGE FORMS & 
COMPLIANCE 
 The form in which a drug is manufactured and the way in which 
the parent dispenses the drug to the child determine the actual 
dose administered. Many drugs prepared for children are in the 
form of elixirs or suspensions.  Elixirs are alcoholic solutions in 
which the drug molecules are dissolved and evenly distributed. No 
shaking is required, and unless some of the vehicle has evaporated, 
the first dose from the bottle and the last dose should contain 
equivalent amounts of drug.  Suspensions contain undissolved 
particles of drug that must be distributed throughout the vehicle 
by shaking. If shaking is not thorough each time a dose is given, 
the first doses from the bottle may contain less drug than the last 
doses, with the result that less than the expected plasma concen-
tration or effect of the drug may be achieved early in the course of 
therapy. Conversely, toxicity may occur late in the course of ther-
apy, when it is not expected. This uneven distribution is a poten-
tial cause of inefficacy or toxicity in children taking phenytoin 
suspensions. It is thus essential that the prescriber know the form 
in which the drug will be dispensed and provide proper instruc-
tions to the pharmacist and patient or parent. 
 Compliance may be more difficult to achieve in pediatric practice 
than otherwise, since it involves not only the parent’s conscientious 
effort to follow directions but also such practical matters as mea-
suring errors, spilling, and spitting out. For example, the measured 
volume of “teaspoons” ranges from 2.5 to 7.8 mL. The parents 
should obtain a calibrated medicine spoon or syringe from the 
pharmacy. These devices improve the accuracy of dose measure-
ments and simplify administration of drugs to children. 
 When evaluating compliance, it is often helpful to ask if an 
attempt has been made to give a further dose after the child has 
spilled half of what was offered. The parents may not always be 
able to say with confidence how much of a dose the child actually 
received. The parents must be told whether or not to wake the 
infant for its every-6-hour dose day or night. These matters should 
be discussed and made clear, and no assumptions should be made 
about what the parents may or may not do. Noncompliance fre-
quently occurs when antibiotics are prescribed to treat otitis media 
or urinary tract infections and the child feels well after 4 or 5 days 
of therapy. The parents may not feel there is any reason to con-
tinue giving the medicine even though it was prescribed for 10 or 
14 days. This common situation should be anticipated so the 
parents can be told why it is important to continue giving the 
medicine for the prescribed period even if the child seems to be 
“cured.” 
 Practical and convenient dosage forms and dosing schedules 
should be chosen to the extent possible. The easier it is to admin-
ister and take the medicine and the easier the dosing schedule is to 
follow, the more likely it is that compliance will be achieved. 
 Consistent with their ability to comprehend and cooperate, 
children should also be given some responsibility for their own 
health care and for taking medications. This should be discussed in 
appropriate terms both with the child and with the parents. 
Possible adverse effects and drug interactions with over-the-counter 
medicines or foods should also be discussed. Whenever a drug 
does not achieve its therapeutic effect, the possibility of noncom-
pliance should be considered. There is ample evidence that in such 
cases parents’ or children’s reports may be grossly inaccurate. 
Random pill counts and measurement of serum concentrations 
may help disclose noncompliance. The use of computerized pill 
containers, which record each lid opening, has been shown to be 
very effective in measuring compliance. 
 Because many pediatric doses are calculated—eg, using body 
weight—rather than simply read from a list, major dosing errors 
may result from incorrect calculations. Typically, tenfold errors 
due to incorrect placement of the decimal point have been 
described. In the case of digoxin, for example, an intended dose of 
0.1 mL containing 5 mcg of drug, when replaced by 1.0 mL— 
which is still a small volume—can result in fatal overdosage. A 
good rule for avoiding such “decimal point” errors is to use a lead-
ing “0” plus decimal point when dealing with doses less than “1” 
and to avoid using a zero after a decimal point (see  Chapter 65 ). 
 DRUG USE DURING LACTATION 
 Despite the fact that most drugs are excreted into breast milk in 
amounts too small to adversely affect neonatal health, thou-
sands of women taking medications do not breast-feed because 
CHAPTER 59 Special Aspects of Perinatal & Pediatric Pharmacology    1047
of misperception of risk. Unfortunately, physicians contribute 
heavily to this bias. It is important to remember that formula feed-
ing is associated with higher morbidity and mortality in all socio-
economic groups. 
 Most drugs administered to lactating women are detectable in 
breast milk. Fortunately, the concentration of drugs achieved in 
breast milk is usually low ( Table 59–5 ). Therefore, the total 
amount the infant would receive in a day is substantially less than 
what would be considered a “therapeutic dose.” If the nursing 
mother must take medications and the drug is a relatively safe 
one, she should optimally take it 30–60 minutes after nursing 
and 3–4 hours before the next feeding. This allows time for many 
drugs to be cleared from the mother’s blood, and the concentra-
tions in breast milk will be relatively low. Drugs for which no data 
are available on safety during lactation should be avoided or 
breast-feeding discontinued while they are being given. 
 Most antibiotics taken by nursing mothers can be detected in 
breast milk. Tetracycline concentrations in breast milk are approx-
imately 70% of maternal serum concentrations and present a risk 
of permanent tooth staining in the infant. Isoniazid rapidly 
reaches equilibrium between breast milk and maternal blood. The 
concentrations achieved in breast milk are high enough so that 
signs of pyridoxine deficiency may occur in the infant if the 
mother is not given pyridoxine supplements. 
 Most sedatives and hypnotics achieve concentrations in breast 
milk sufficient to produce a pharmacologic effect in some infants. 
Barbiturates taken in hypnotic doses by the mother can produce 
lethargy, sedation, and poor suck reflexes in the infant. Chloral 
hydrate can produce sedation if the infant is fed at peak milk 
concentrations. Diazepam can have a sedative effect on the nurs-
ing infant, but, most importantly, its long half-life can result in 
significant drug accumulation. 
 Opioids such as heroin, methadone, and morphine enter breast 
milk in quantities potentially sufficient to prolong the state of 
neonatal narcotic dependence if the drug was taken chronically by 
the mother during pregnancy. If conditions are well controlled 
and there is a good relationship between the mother and the phy-
sician, an infant could be breast-fed while the mother is taking 
methadone. She should not, however, stop taking the drug 
abruptly; the infant can be tapered off the methadone as the 
mother’s dose is tapered. The infant should be watched for signs 
of narcotic withdrawal. Although codeine has been believed to be 
safe, a recent case of neonatal death from opioid toxicity revealed 
that the mother was an ultra rapid metabolizer of cytochrome 
2D6 substrates, producing substantially higher amounts of mor-
phine. Hence, polymorphism in maternal drug metabolism may 
affect neonatal exposure and safety. A subsequent case control 
study has shown that this situation is not rare. The FDA has pub-
lished a warning to lactating mothers to exert extra caution while 
using painkillers containing codeine. 
 Minimal use of alcohol by the mother has not been reported to 
harm nursing infants. Excessive amounts of alcohol, however, can 
produce alcohol effects in the infant. Nicotine concentrations in 
the breast milk of smoking mothers are low and do not produce 
effects in the infant. Very small amounts of caffeine are excreted in 
the breast milk of coffee-drinking mothers. 
 Lithium enters breast milk in concentrations equal to those in 
maternal serum. Clearance of this drug is almost completely depen-
dent upon renal elimination, and women who are receiving lithium 
may expose the infant to relatively large amounts of the drug. 
 Radioactive substances such as iodinated  125 I albumin and 
other forms of radioiodine can cause thyroid suppression in 
infants and may increase the risk of subsequent thyroid cancer as 
much as tenfold. Breast-feeding is contraindicated after large doses 
and should be withheld for days to weeks after small doses. 
Similarly, breast-feeding should be avoided in mothers receiving 
cancer chemotherapy or being treated with cytotoxic or immuno-
modulating agents for collagen diseases such as lupus erythemato-
sus or after organ transplantation. 
 PEDIATRIC DRUG DOSAGE 
 Because of differences in pharmacokinetics in infants and chil-
dren, simple proportionate reduction in the adult dose may not be 
adequate to determine a safe and effective pediatric dose. The 
most reliable pediatric dose information is usually that provided 
by the manufacturer in the package insert. However, such infor-
mation is not available for the majority of products, even when 
studies have been published in the medical literature, reflecting 
the reluctance of manufacturers to label their products for chil-
dren. Recently, the FDA has moved toward more explicit expecta-
tions that manufacturers test their new products in infants and 
children. Still, most drugs in the common formularies, eg, 
 Physicians’ Desk Reference , are not specifically approved for chil-
dren, in part because manufacturers often lack the economic 
incentive to evaluate drugs for use in the pediatric market. 
 Most drugs approved for use in children have recommended 
pediatric doses, generally stated as milligrams per kilogram or per 
pound. In the absence of explicit pediatric dose recommendations, 
an approximation can be made by any of several methods based 
on age, weight, or surface area. These rules are not precise and 
should not be used if the manufacturer provides a pediatric dose. 
When pediatric doses are calculated (either from one of the meth-
ods set forth below or from a manufacturer’s dose), the pediatric 
dose should never exceed the adult dose. 
 With the current epidemic of child obesity, a fresh and careful 
look at pediatric drug dosing will be needed. Studies in adults 
indicate that dosing based on per kilogram of body weight may 
constitute overdosing, because most drugs are distributed based 
on lean body weight, rather than total (obese) weight. 
 Surface Area, Age, & Weight 
 Calculations of dosage based on age or weight (see below) are con-
servative and tend to underestimate the required dose. Doses based 
on surface area ( Table 59–6 ) are more likely to be adequate. 
 Age (Young’s rule): 
 
Dose
Adult dose
Age (years)
Age
12
+
--------------------------
×
=
1048    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 59–5 Drugs often used during lactation and possible effects on the nursing infant.
Drug
Effect on Infant
Comments
Ampicillin
Minimal
No significant adverse effects; possible occurrence of diarrhea or allergic sensitization.
Aspirin
Minimal
Occasional doses probably safe; high doses may produce significant concentration in breast milk.
Caffeine
Minimal
Caffeine intake in moderation is safe; concentration in breast milk is low.
Chloral hydrate
Significant
May cause drowsiness if infant is fed at peak concentration in milk.
Chloramphenicol
Significant
Concentrations too low to cause gray baby syndrome; possibility of bone marrow suppression 
does exist; recommend not taking chloramphenicol while breast-feeding.
Chlorothiazide
Minimal
No adverse effects reported.
Chlorpromazine
Minimal
Appears insignificant.
Codeine
Variable, based on 
genetic polymorphism
Safe in most cases. Neonatal toxicity described when the mother is an ultra rapid 2D6 metabolizer, 
producing substantially more morphine from codeine.
Diazepam
Significant
Will cause sedation in breast-fed infants; accumulation can occur in newborns.
Dicumarol
Minimal
No adverse side effects reported; may wish to follow infant’s prothrombin time.
Digoxin
Minimal
Insignificant quantities enter breast milk.
Ethanol
Moderate
Moderate ingestion by mother unlikely to produce effects in infant; large amounts consumed by 
mother can produce alcohol effects in infant.
Heroin
Significant
Enters breast milk and can prolong neonatal narcotic dependence.
Iodine (radioactive)
Significant
Enters milk in quantities sufficient to cause thyroid suppression in infant.
Isoniazid (INH)
Minimal
Milk concentrations equal maternal plasma concentrations. Possibility of pyridoxine deficiency 
developing in the infant.
Kanamycin
Minimal
No adverse effects reported.
Lithium
Variable
In some cases, large amounts in milk, but not in others.
Methadone
Significant
(See heroin.) Under close physician supervision, breast-feeding can be continued. Signs of opioid 
withdrawal in the infant may occur if mother stops taking methadone or stops breast-feeding 
abruptly.
Oral contraceptives
Minimal
May suppress lactation in high doses.
Penicillin
Minimal
Very low concentrations in breast milk.
Phenobarbital
Moderate
Hypnotic doses can cause sedation in the infant.
Phenytoin
Moderate
Amounts entering breast milk are not sufficient to cause adverse effects in infant.
Prednisone
Moderate
Low maternal doses (5 mg/d) probably safe. Doses 2 or more times physiologic amounts 
(> 15 mg/d) should probably be avoided.
Propranolol
Minimal
Very small amounts enter breast milk.
Propylthiouracil
Variable
Rarely may suppress thyroid function in infant.
Spironolactone
Minimal
Very small amounts enter breast milk.
Tetracycline
Moderate
Possibility of permanent staining of developing teeth in the infant. Should be avoided during 
lactation.
Theophylline
Moderate
Can enter breast milk in moderate quantities but not likely to produce significant effects.
Thyroxine
Minimal
No adverse effects in therapeutic doses.
Tolbutamide
Minimal
Low concentrations in breast milk.
Warfarin
Minimal
Very small quantities found in breast milk.
CHAPTER 59 Special Aspects of Perinatal & Pediatric Pharmacology    1049
 Weight (somewhat more precise is Clark’s rule):  
 
Dose
Adult dose
Weight (kg)
70
----------------------------
×
=
 or 
 
Dose
Adult dose
Weight (lb)
150
---------------------------
×
=
 In spite of these approximations, only by conducting studies in 
children can safe and effective doses for a given age group and 
condition be determined. 
 REFERENCES 
 American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR) and emergency cardiovascular care (ECC) of pediatric and neonatal 
patients: Pediatric basic life support. Circulation 2005;112(24 Suppl):IV1. 
 Benitz WE, Tatro DS:  The Pediatric Drug Handbook, 3rd ed. Year Book, 1995. 
 Bennett PN:  Drugs and Human Lactation, 2nd ed. Elsevier, 1996. 
 Berlin CM Jr: Advances in pediatric pharmacology and toxicology. Adv Pediatr 
1997;44:545. 
 Besunder JB, Reed MD, Blumer JL: Principles of drug biodisposition in the neo-
nate: A critical evaluation of the pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic inter-
face. (Two parts.) Clin Pharmacokinet 1988;14:189, 261. 
 Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Yaffe SJ: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation.  A Reference 
Guide to Fetal and Neonatal Risk, 6th ed. Williams & Wilkins, 2002. 
 Gavin PJ, Yogev R: The role of protease inhibitor therapy in children with HIV 
infection. Paediatr Drugs 2002;4:581. 
 Hansten PD, Horn JR:  Drug Interactions ,  Analysis and Management. Facts & 
Comparisons. [Quarterly.] 
 Hendrick V et al: Birth outcomes after prenatal exposure to antidepressant medica-
tion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003;188:812. 
 Iqbal MM, Sohhan T, Mahmud SZ: The effects of lithium, valproic acid, and 
carbamazepine during pregnancy and lactation. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 
2001;39:381. 
 Ito S: Drug therapy for breast feeding women. N Engl J Med 2000;343:118.
 Ito S, Koren G: Fetal drug therapy. Perinat Clin North Am 1994;21:1. 
 Kearns GL et al: Developmental pharmacology—drug disposition, action and 
therapy in infants and children. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1157. 
 Koren G:  Medication Safety during Pregnancy and Breastfeeding ;  A Clinician’s Guide, 
4th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2006. 
 Koren G, Klinger G, Ohlsson A: Fetal pharmacotherapy. Drugs 2002;62:757. 
 Koren G, Pastuszak A: Prevention of unnecessary pregnancy terminations by coun-
seling women on drug, chemical, and radiation exposure during the first 
trimester. Teratology 1990;41:657. 
 Koren G, Pastuszak A, Ito E: Drugs in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1128. 
 Loebstein R, Koren G: Clinical pharmacology and therapeutic drug monitoring in 
neonates and children. Pediatr Rev 1998;19:423. 
 Madadi P et al: Pharmacogenetics of neonatal opioid toxicity following maternal 
use of codeine during breastfeeding: A case control study. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther 2009;85:31. 
 Neubert D: Reproductive toxicology: The science today. Teratog Carcinog 
Mutagen 2002;22:159. 
 Nottarianni LJ: Plasma protein binding of drugs in pregnancy and in neonates. 
Clin Pharmacokinet 1990;18:20. 
 Paap CM, Nahata MC: Clinical pharmacokinetics of antibacterial drugs in neo-
nates. Clin Pharmacokinet 1990;19:280. 
 Peled N et al: Gastric-outlet obstruction induced by prostaglandin therapy in 
neonates. N Engl J Med 1992;327:505. 
 Rousseaux CG, Blakely PM: Fetus. In: Haschek WM, Rousseaux CG (editors). 
 Handbook of Toxicologic Pathology. Academic Press, 1991. 
 Van Lingen RA et al: The effects of analgesia in the vulnerable infant during the 
perinatal period. Clin Perinatol 2002;29:511. 
TABLE 59–6   Determination of drug dosage from 
surface area.1
Weight
(kg)
(lb)
Approximate 
Age
Surface 
Area (m2)
Percent of 
Adult Dose
3
6.6
Newborn
0.2
12
6
13.2
3 months
0.3
18
10
22
1 year
0.45
28
20
44
5.5 years
0.8
48
30
66
9 years
1
60
40
88
12 years
1.3
78
50
110
14 years
1.5
90
60
132
Adult
1.7
102
70
154
Adult
1.76
103
1For example, if adult dose is 1 mg/kg, dose for 3-month-old infant would be 0.18 
mg/kg or 1.1 mg total.
Reproduced, with permission, from Silver HK, Kempe CH, Bruyn HB: Handbook of 
Pediatrics, 14th ed. Originally published by Lange Medical Publications. Copyright © 
1983 by the McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
This page intentionally left blank 
1051
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Society has traditionally classified everyone over 65 as “elderly,” 
but most authorities consider the field of geriatrics to apply to 
persons over 75—even though this too is an arbitrary definition. 
Furthermore, chronologic age is only one determinant of the 
changes pertinent to drug therapy that occur in older people. In 
addition to the chronic diseases of adulthood, the elderly have an 
increased incidence of many conditions, including Alzheimer’s 
disease, Parkinson’s disease, and vascular dementia; stroke; visual 
impairment, especially cataracts and macular degeneration; ath-
erosclerosis, coronary heart disease, and heart failure; diabetes; 
arthritis, osteoporosis, and fractures; cancer; and incontinence. As 
a result, the need for drug treatment is great in this age group. 
 Important changes in responses to some drugs occur with 
increasing age in many individuals. For other drugs, age-related 
changes are minimal, especially in the “healthy old.” Drug usage 
patterns also change as a result of the increasing incidence of dis-
ease with age and the tendency to prescribe heavily for patients in 
nursing homes. General changes in the lives of older people have 
significant effects on the way drugs are used. Among these changes 
are the increased incidence with advancing age of several simulta-
neous diseases, nutritional problems, reduced financial resources, 
and—in some patients—decreased dosing adherence (also called 
compliance) for a variety of reasons. The health practitioner 
should be aware of the changes in pharmacologic responses that 
may occur in older people and should know how to deal with 
these changes. 
 PHARMACOLOGIC CHANGES 
ASSOCIATED WITH AGING 
 In the general population, measurements of functional capacity of 
most of the major organ systems show a decline beginning in 
young adulthood and continuing throughout life. As shown in 
 Figure 60–1 , there is no “middle-age plateau” but rather a linear 
decrease beginning no later than age 45. However, these data reflect 
the mean and do not apply to every person above a certain age; 
approximately one third of healthy subjects have no age-related 
decrease in, for example, creatinine clearance up to the age of 75. 
Thus, the elderly do not lose specific functions at an accelerated rate 
compared with young and middle-aged adults but rather accumulate 
more deficiencies with the passage of time. Some of these changes 
result in altered pharmacokinetics. For the pharmacologist and the 
clinician, the most important of these is the decrease in renal func-
tion. Other changes and concurrent diseases may alter the pharma-
codynamic characteristics of particular drugs in certain patients. 
60
Special Aspects of 
Geriatric Pharmacology
 Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 77-year-old man comes to your office at his wife’s insis-
tence. He has had documented moderate hypertension for 10 
years but does not like to take his medications. He says he has 
no real complaints, but his wife remarks that he has become 
much more forgetful lately and has almost stopped reading 
the newspaper and watching television. A Mini-Mental 
Examination reveals that he is oriented as to name and place 
but is unable to give the month or year. He cannot remember 
the names of his three adult children nor three random 
words (tree, flag, chair) for more than 2 minutes. No cata-
racts are visible, but he is unable to read standard newsprint 
without a powerful magnifier. Why doesn’t he take his anti-
hypertensive medications? What therapeutic measures are 
available for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease? How 
might macular degeneration be treated? 
1052    SECTION X Special Topics
 Pharmacokinetic Changes 
 A. Absorption 
 There is little evidence of any major alteration in drug absorption 
with age. However, conditions associated with age may alter the rate 
at which some drugs are absorbed. Such conditions include altered 
nutritional habits, greater consumption of nonprescription drugs 
(eg, antacids and laxatives), and changes in gastric emptying, which 
is often slower in older persons, especially in older diabetics. 
 B. Distribution 
 Compared with young adults, the elderly have reduced lean body 
mass, reduced body water, and increased fat as a percentage of 
body mass. Some of these changes are shown in  Table 60–1 . There 
is usually a decrease in serum albumin, which binds many drugs, 
especially weak acids. There may be a concurrent  increase in serum 
orosomucoid (α-acid glycoprotein), a protein that binds many 
basic drugs. Thus, the ratio of bound to free drug may be signifi-
cantly altered. As explained in  Chapter 3 , these changes may alter 
the appropriate loading dose of a drug. However since both the 
clearance and the effects of drugs are related to the free concentra-
tion, the steady-state effects of a maintenance dosage regimen 
should not be altered by these factors alone. For example, the 
loading dose of digoxin in an elderly patient with heart failure 
should be reduced (if used at all) because of the decreased apparent 
volume of distribution. The maintenance dose may have to be 
reduced because of reduced clearance of the drug. 
 C. Metabolism 
 The capacity of the liver to metabolize drugs does not appear to 
decline consistently with age for all drugs. Animal studies and some 
clinical studies have suggested that certain drugs are metabolized 
more slowly; some of these drugs are listed in  Table 60–2 . The great-
est changes are in phase I reactions, ie, those carried out by 
microsomal P450 systems. There are much smaller changes in the 
ability of the liver to carry out conjugation (phase II) reactions (see 
 Chapter 4 ). Some of these changes may be caused by decreased liver 
blood flow ( Table 60–1 ), an important variable in the clearance of 
drugs that have a high hepatic extraction ratio. In addition, there is 
Maximal
breathing
capacity
Cardiac
index
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
Glomerular
filtration
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Age (y)
Percent function remaining
 FIGURE 60–1  Effect of age on some physiologic functions. 
(Modified and reproduced, with permission, from Kohn RR:  Principles of Mammalian 
Aging. Prentice-Hall, 1978.) 
TABLE 60–1  Some changes related to aging that 
affect pharmacokinetics of drugs.
Variable
Young Adults 
(20–30 years)
Older Adults 
(60–80 years)
Body water (% of body weight)
61
53
Lean body mass (% of body 
weight)
19
12
Body fat (% of body weight)
26–33 (women)
38–45
18–20 (men)
36–38
Serum albumin (g/dL)
4.7
3.8
Kidney weight (% of young 
adult)
(100)
80
Hepatic blood flow (% of 
young adult)
(100)
55–60
TABLE 60–2  Effects of age on hepatic clearance of 
some drugs.
Age-Related Decrease in 
Hepatic Clearance Found
No Age-Related Difference Found
Alprazolam
Ethanol
Barbiturates
Isoniazid
Carbenoxolone
Lidocaine
Chlordiazepoxide
Lorazepam
Chlormethiazole
Nitrazepam
Clobazam
Oxazepam
Desmethyldiazepam
Prazosin
Diazepam
Salicylate
Flurazepam
Warfarin
Imipramine
Meperidine
Nortriptyline
Phenylbutazone
Propranolol
Quinidine, quinine
Theophylline
Tolbutamide
CHAPTER 60 Special Aspects of Geriatric Pharmacology    1053
a decline with age of the liver’s ability to recover from injury, eg, that 
caused by alcohol or viral hepatitis. Therefore, a history of recent 
liver disease in an older person should lead to caution in dosing with 
drugs that are cleared primarily by the liver, even after apparently 
complete recovery from the hepatic insult. Finally, malnutrition and 
diseases that affect hepatic function—eg, heart failure—are more 
common in the elderly. Heart failure may dramatically alter the abil-
ity of the liver to metabolize drugs by reducing hepatic blood flow. 
Similarly, severe nutritional deficiencies, which occur more often in 
old age, may impair hepatic function. 
 D. Elimination 
 Because the kidney is the major organ for clearance of drugs from 
the body, the age-related decline of renal functional capacity is 
very important. The decline in creatinine clearance occurs in 
about two thirds of the population. It is important to note that 
this decline is not reflected in an equivalent rise in serum creati-
nine because the production of creatinine is also reduced as muscle 
mass declines with age; therefore, serum creatinine alone is not an 
adequate measure of renal function. The practical result of this 
change is marked prolongation of the half-life of many drugs, and 
the possibility of accumulation to toxic levels if dosage is not 
reduced in size or frequency. Dosing recommendations for the 
elderly often include an allowance for reduced renal clearance. If 
only the young adult dosage is known for a drug that requires 
renal clearance, a rough correction can be made by using the 
 Cockcroft-Gault formula, which is applicable to patients from 
ages 40 through 80: 
Creatinine clearance (mL/min)
(140
Age)
(Weight in kg)
×
–
72
Serum creatinine in mg/dL
×
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
=
 
 For women, the result should be multiplied by 0.85 (because 
of reduced muscle mass). It must be emphasized that this estimate 
is, at best, a  population estimate and may not apply to a particular 
patient. If the patient has normal renal function (up to one third 
of elderly patients), a dose corrected on the basis of this estimate 
will be too low—but a low dose is initially desirable if one is 
uncertain of the renal function in any patient. If a precise measure 
is needed, a standard 12- or 24-hour creatinine clearance determi-
nation should be obtained. As indicated above, nutritional 
changes alter pharmacokinetic parameters. A patient who is 
severely dehydrated (not uncommon in patients with stroke or 
other motor impairment) may have an additional marked reduc-
tion in renal drug clearance that is completely reversible by 
rehydration. 
 The lungs are important for the excretion of volatile drugs. As 
a result of reduced respiratory capacity ( Figure 60–1 ) and the 
increased incidence of active pulmonary disease in the elderly, the 
use of inhalation anesthesia is less common and parenteral agents 
more common in this age group. (See  Chapter 25 .) 
 Pharmacodynamic Changes 
 It was long believed that geriatric patients were much more 
“sensitive” to the action of many drugs, implying a change in the 
pharmacodynamic interaction of the drugs with their receptors. 
It is now recognized that many—perhaps most—of these appar-
ent changes result from altered pharmacokinetics or diminished 
homeostatic responses. Clinical studies have supported the idea 
that the elderly are more sensitive to  some sedative-hypnotics and 
analgesics. In addition, some data from animal studies suggest 
actual changes with age in the characteristics or numbers of a few 
receptors. The most extensive studies suggest a decrease in 
responsiveness to β-adrenoceptor agonists. Other examples are 
discussed below. 
 Certain homeostatic control mechanisms appear to be blunted 
in the elderly. Since homeostatic responses are often important 
components of the overall response to a drug, these physiologic 
alterations may change the pattern or intensity of drug response. 
In the cardiovascular system, the cardiac output increment 
required by mild or moderate exercise is successfully provided 
until at least age 75 (in individuals without obvious cardiac dis-
ease), but the increase is the result primarily of increased stroke 
volume in the elderly and not tachycardia, as in young adults. 
Average blood pressure goes up with age (in most Western coun-
tries), but the incidence of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension 
also increases markedly. It is thus particularly important to check 
for orthostatic hypotension on every visit. Similarly, the average 
2-hour postprandial blood glucose level increases by about 1 mg/dL 
for each year of age above 50. Temperature regulation is also 
impaired, and hypothermia is poorly tolerated by the elderly. 
 Behavioral & Lifestyle Changes 
 Major changes in the conditions of daily life accompany the aging 
process and have an impact on health. Some of these (eg, forget-
ting to take one’s pills) are the result of cognitive changes associ-
ated with vascular or other pathology. Others relate to economic 
stresses associated with greatly reduced income and, possibly, 
increased expenses due to illness. One of the most important 
changes is the loss of a spouse. 
 ■ MAJOR DRUG GROUPS 
 CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DRUGS 
 Sedative-Hypnotics 
 The half-lives of many benzodiazepines and barbiturates increase 
by 50–150% between ages 30 and 70. Much of this change occurs 
during the decade from 60 to 70. For some of the benzodiaz-
epines, both the parent molecule and its metabolites (produced in 
the liver) are pharmacologically active (see  Chapter 22 ). The age-
related decline in renal function and liver disease, if present, both 
contribute to the reduction in elimination of these compounds. In 
addition, an increased volume of distribution has been reported 
for some of these drugs. Lorazepam and oxazepam may be less 
affected by these changes than the other benzodiazepines. In addi-
tion to these pharmacokinetic factors, it is generally believed that 
the elderly vary more in their sensitivity to the sedative-hypnotic 
1054    SECTION X Special Topics
drugs on a pharmacodynamic basis as well. Among the toxicities 
of these drugs, ataxia and other signs of motor impairment should 
be particularly watched for in order to avoid accidents. 
 Analgesics 
 The opioid analgesics show variable changes in pharmacokinetics 
with age. However, the elderly are often markedly more sensitive 
to the respiratory effects of these agents because of age-related 
changes in respiratory function. Therefore, this group of drugs 
should be used with caution until the sensitivity of the particular 
patient has been evaluated, and the patient should then be dosed 
appropriately for full effect. Unfortunately, studies show that opi-
oids are consistently  underutilized in patients who require strong 
analgesics for chronic painful conditions such as cancer. There is 
no justification for underutilization of these drugs, especially in 
the care of the elderly, and good pain management plans are read-
ily available (see Morrison, 2006; Rabow, 2011). 
 Antipsychotic & Antidepressant Drugs 
 The traditional antipsychotic agents (phenothiazines and haloperi-
dol) have been very heavily used (and probably misused) in the 
management of a variety of psychiatric diseases in the elderly. There 
is no doubt that they are useful in the management of schizophre-
nia in old age, and also in the treatment of some symptoms associ-
ated with delirium, dementia, agitation, combativeness, and a 
paranoid syndrome that occurs in some geriatric patients (see 
Chapter 29). However, they are not fully satisfactory in these 
geriatric conditions, and dosage should not be increased on the 
assumption that full control is possible. There is no evidence that 
these drugs have any beneficial effects in Alzheimer’s dementia, 
and on theoretical grounds the antimuscarinic effects of the phe-
nothiazines might be expected to worsen memory impairment 
and intellectual dysfunction (see below). 
 Much of the apparent improvement in agitated and combative 
patients may simply reflect the sedative effects of the drugs. When 
a sedative antipsychotic is desired, a phenothiazine such as thior-
idazine is appropriate. If sedation is to be avoided, haloperidol or 
an atypical antipsychotic is more appropriate. Haloperidol has 
increased extrapyramidal toxicity, however, and should be avoided 
in patients with preexisting extrapyramidal disease. The phenothi-
azines, especially older drugs such as chlorpromazine, often induce 
orthostatic hypotension because of their α-adrenoceptor-blocking 
effects. They are even more prone to do so in the elderly. Dosage 
of these drugs should usually be started at a fraction of that used 
in young adults. 
 Lithium is often used in the treatment of mania in the aged. 
Because it is cleared by the kidneys, dosages must be adjusted 
appropriately and blood levels monitored. Concurrent use of thi-
azide diuretics reduces the clearance of lithium and should be 
accompanied by further reduction in dosage and more frequent 
measurement of lithium blood levels. 
 Psychiatric depression is thought to be underdiagnosed and 
undertreated in the elderly. The suicide rate in the over-65 age 
group (twice the national average) supports this view. Unfortunately, 
the apathy, flat affect, and social withdrawal of major depression 
may be mistaken for senile dementia. Clinical evidence suggests 
that the elderly are as responsive to antidepressants (of all types) as 
younger patients but are more likely to experience toxic effects. 
This factor along with the reduced clearance of some of these 
drugs underlines the importance of careful dosing and strict atten-
tion to the appearance of toxic effects. If a tricyclic antidepressant 
is to be used, a drug with reduced antimuscarinic effects should be 
selected, eg, nortriptyline or desipramine (see  Table 30–2 ). To 
minimize autonomic effects, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibi-
tor (SSRI) may be chosen. 
 Drugs Used in Alzheimer’s Disease 
 Alzheimer’s disease is characterized by progressive impairment of 
memory and cognitive functions and may lead to a completely 
vegetative state, resulting in massive socioeconomic disruption, 
and early death. Prevalence increases with age and may be as high 
as 20% in individuals over 85. Both familial and sporadic forms 
have been identified. Early onset of Alzheimer’s disease is associ-
ated with several gene defects, including trisomy 21 (chromosome 
21), a mutation of the gene for presenilin-1 on chromosome 14, 
and an abnormal allele, ε4, for the lipid-associated protein, ApoE, 
on chromosome 19. Unlike the normal form, ApoE ε2, the ε4 
form facilitates the formation of amyloid β deposits. 
 Pathologic changes include increased deposits of amyloid β 
peptide in the cerebral cortex, which eventually forms extracellular 
plaques and cerebral vascular lesions, and intraneuronal fibrillary 
tangles consisting of the tau protein ( Figure 60–2 ). There is a 
progressive loss of neurons, especially cholinergic neurons, and 
thinning of the cortex. The loss of cholinergic neurons results in a 
marked decrease in choline acetyltransferase and other markers of 
cholinergic activity. Patients with Alzheimer’s disease are often 
exquisitely sensitive to the central nervous system toxicities of 
drugs with antimuscarinic effects. Some evidence implicates excess 
excitation by glutamate as a contributor to neuronal death. In 
addition, abnormalities of mitochondrial function may contribute 
to neuronal death. 
 Many methods of treatment of Alzheimer’s disease have been 
explored ( Table 60–3 ). Most attention has been focused on the 
cholinomimetic drugs because of the evidence of loss of cholin-
ergic neurons. Monoamine oxidase (MAO) type B inhibition with 
selegiline (L-deprenyl) has been suggested to have some beneficial 
effects. One drug that inhibits  N -methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
glutamate receptors is available (see below), and “ampakines,” 
substances that facilitate synaptic activity at glutamate AMPA 
receptors, are under intense study. Some evidence suggests that 
lipid-lowering statins are beneficial. Rosiglitazone, a PPAR-γ (per-
oxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma) agent, has also 
been reported to have beneficial effects in a preliminary study. 
Unfortunately, this drug is associated with increased cardiovascu-
lar risk and its use has been restricted (see  Chapter 41 ). So-called 
cerebral vasodilators are ineffective. 
 Tacrine (tetrahydroaminoacridine, THA), a long-acting cho-
linesterase inhibitor and muscarinic modulator, was the first drug 
CHAPTER 60 Special Aspects of Geriatric Pharmacology    1055
shown to have any benefit in Alzheimer’s disease. Because of its 
hepatic toxicity, tacrine has been almost completely replaced in 
clinical use by newer cholinesterase inhibitors:  donepezil, rivastig-
mine, and  galantamine. These agents are orally active, have ade-
quate penetration into the central nervous system, and are much 
less toxic than tacrine. Although evidence for the benefit of cho-
linesterase inhibitors (and memantine; see below) is statistically 
significant, the clinical benefit from these drugs is modest and 
temporary. 
 The cholinesterase inhibitors cause significant adverse effects, 
including nausea and vomiting, and other peripheral cholinomi-
metic effects. These drugs should be used with caution in patients 
receiving other drugs that inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes (eg, 
ketoconazole, quinidine; see  Chapter 4 ). Preparations available are 
listed in  Chapter 7 . 
 Excitotoxic activation of glutamate transmission via NMDA 
receptors has been postulated to contribute to the pathophysiol-
ogy of Alzheimer’s disease.  Memantine binds to NMDA receptor 
channels in a use-dependent manner and produces a noncompeti-
tive blockade. This drug appears to be better tolerated and less 
toxic than the cholinesterase inhibitors. Memantine is available as 
Namenda in 5 and 10 mg oral tablets. 
Neurofibrillary
tangles
Tau
Impaired
synapse
Truncated E4
Mitochondrion
ApoE4
Amyloid
plaque
Oligomers
Aβ
Microglia
Neuron
Nucleus
Neurite
Signaling
molecules
 FIGURE 60–2 Some processes involved in Alzheimer’s disease. From the left: mitochondrial dysfunction, possibly involving glucose utiliza-
tion; synthesis of protein tau and aggregation in filamentous tangles; synthesis of amyloid β (Aβ) and secretion into the extracellular space, 
where it may interfere with synaptic signaling and accumulates in plaques. (Reproduced, with permission, from Robertson ED and Mucke L: 100 years and 
counting: Prospects for defeating Alzheimer’s disease. Science 2006;314:781.) 
TABLE 60–3  Some potential strategies for the 
prevention or treatment of Alzheimer’s 
disease.
Therapy
Comment
Cholinesterase inhibitors
Increase cholinergic activity; four 
drugs approved
N-methyl-D-aspartate 
glutamate antagonists
Inhibit glutamate excitotoxicity; 
1 drug approved
Modifiers of glucose utilization
PPAR-γ agonists
Antilipid drugs
Statins (off-label use)
NSAIDs
Disappointing results with cyclooxy-
genase (COX)-2 inhibitors but 
interest continues
Anti-amyloid vaccines
In clinical trials
Anti-amyloid antibodies
Bapineuzumab in clinical trials
Inhibitors of amyloid 
β synthesis
γ-Secretase modulator studies in 
progress
Antioxidants
Disappointing results
Nerve growth factor
One very small trial
PPAR-γ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma.
1056    SECTION X Special Topics
 CARDIOVASCULAR DRUGS 
 Antihypertensive Drugs 
 Blood pressure, especially systolic pressure, increases with age in 
Western countries and in most cultures in which salt intake is 
high. In women, the increase is more marked after age 50. 
Although treated conservatively in the past, most clinicians now 
believe that hypertension should be treated vigorously in the 
elderly. 
 The basic principles of therapy are not different in the geriatric 
age group from those described in  Chapter 11 , but the usual cau-
tions regarding altered pharmacokinetics and blunted compensa-
tory mechanisms apply. Because of its safety, nondrug therapy 
(weight reduction in the obese and salt restriction) should be 
encouraged. Thiazides are a reasonable first step in drug therapy. 
The hypokalemia, hyperglycemia, and hyperuricemia caused by 
these agents are more relevant in the elderly because of the higher 
incidence in these patients of arrhythmias, type 2 diabetes, and 
gout. Thus, use of low antihypertensive doses—rather than maxi-
mum diuretic doses—is important. Calcium channel blockers are 
effective and safe if titrated to the appropriate response. They are 
especially useful in patients who also have atherosclerotic angina 
(see  Chapter 12 ). Beta blockers are potentially hazardous in 
patients with obstructive airway disease and are considered less use-
ful than calcium channel blockers in older patients unless heart 
failure is present. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are 
also considered less useful in the elderly unless heart failure or dia-
betes is present. The most powerful drugs, such as minoxidil, are 
rarely needed. Every patient receiving antihypertensive drugs 
should be checked regularly for orthostatic hypotension because of 
the danger of cerebral ischemia and falls. 
 Positive Inotropic Agents 
 Heart failure is a common and particularly lethal disease in the 
elderly. Fear of this condition may be one reason why physicians 
overuse cardiac glycosides in this age group. The toxic effects of 
digoxin are particularly dangerous in the geriatric population, since 
the elderly are more susceptible to arrhythmias. The clearance of 
digoxin is usually decreased in the older age group, and although 
the volume of distribution is often decreased as well, the half-life of 
this drug may be increased by 50% or more. Because the drug is 
cleared mostly by the kidneys, renal function must be considered 
in designing a dosage regimen. There is no evidence that there is 
any increase in pharmacodynamic sensitivity to the therapeutic 
effects of the cardiac glycosides; in fact, animal studies suggest a 
possible decrease in therapeutic sensitivity. On the other hand, 
there is probably an increase in sensitivity to the toxic arrhyth-
mogenic actions. Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypoxemia 
(from pulmonary disease), and coronary atherosclerosis all contrib-
ute to the high incidence of digitalis-induced arrhythmias in geri-
atric patients. The less common toxicities of digitalis such as 
delirium, visual changes, and endocrine abnormalities (see  Chapter 
13 ) also occur more often in older than in younger patients. 
 Antiarrhythmic Agents 
 The treatment of arrhythmias in the elderly is particularly chal-
lenging because of the lack of good hemodynamic reserve, the 
frequency of electrolyte disturbances, and the high prevalence of 
severe coronary disease. The clearances of quinidine and procain-
amide decrease and their half-lives increase with age. Disopyramide 
should probably be avoided in the geriatric population because its 
major toxicities—antimuscarinic action, leading to voiding prob-
lems in men; and negative inotropic cardiac effects, leading to 
heart failure—are particularly undesirable in these patients. The 
clearance of lidocaine appears to be little changed, but the half-life 
is increased in the elderly. Although this observation implies an 
increase in the volume of distribution, it has been recommended 
that the loading dose of this drug be reduced in geriatric patients 
because of their greater sensitivity to its toxic effects. 
 Recent evidence indicates that many patients with atrial 
fibrillation—a very common arrhythmia in the elderly—do as 
well with simple control of ventricular rate as with conversion to 
normal sinus rhythm. Measures (such as anticoagulant drugs) 
should be taken to reduce the risk of thromboembolism in chronic 
atrial fibrillation. 
 ANTIMICROBIAL DRUGS 
 Several age-related changes contribute to the high incidence of 
infections in geriatric patients. There appears to be a reduction in 
host defenses in the elderly, manifested in the increase in both 
serious infections and cancer. This may reflect an alteration in 
T-lymphocyte function. In the lungs, a major age and tobacco-
dependent decrease in mucociliary clearance significantly increases 
susceptibility to infection. In the urinary tract, the incidence of 
serious infection is greatly increased by urinary retention and 
catheterization in men. 
 Since 1940, the antimicrobial drugs have contributed more to 
the prolongation of life than any other drug group because they 
can compensate to some extent for this deterioration in natural 
defenses. The basic principles of therapy of the elderly with these 
agents are no different from those applicable in younger patients 
and have been presented in  Chapter 51 . The major pharmacoki-
netic changes relate to decreased renal function; because most of 
the β-lactam, aminoglycoside, and fluoroquinolone antibiotics are 
excreted by this route, important changes in half-life may be 
expected. This is particularly important in the case of the amino-
glycosides, because they cause concentration- and time-dependent 
toxicity in the kidney and in other organs. The half-lives of gen-
tamicin, kanamycin, and netilmicin are more than doubled. The 
increase may not be so marked for tobramycin. 
 ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS 
 Osteoarthritis is a very common disease of the elderly. Rheumatoid 
arthritis is less exclusively a geriatric problem, but the same drug 
therapy is usually applicable. The basic principles laid down in 
CHAPTER 60 Special Aspects of Geriatric Pharmacology    1057
 Chapter 36 and the properties of the anti-inflammatory drugs 
described there apply fully here. 
 The nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) must be 
used with special care in geriatric patients because they cause tox-
icities to which the elderly are very susceptible. In the case of aspi-
rin, the most important of these is gastrointestinal irritation and 
bleeding. In the case of the newer NSAIDs, the most important is 
renal damage, which may be irreversible. Because they are cleared 
primarily by the kidneys, these drugs accumulate more rapidly in 
the geriatric patient and especially in the patient whose renal func-
tion is already compromised beyond the average range for his or 
her age. A vicious circle is easily set up in which cumulation of the 
NSAID causes more renal damage, which causes more cumula-
tion. There is no evidence that the cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 selec-
tive NSAIDs are safer with regard to renal function. Elderly 
patients receiving high doses of any NSAID should be carefully 
monitored for changes in renal function. 
 Corticosteroids are extremely useful in elderly patients who 
cannot tolerate full doses of NSAIDs. However, they consistently 
cause a dose- and duration-related increase in osteoporosis, an 
especially hazardous toxic effect in the elderly. It is not certain 
whether this drug-induced effect can be reduced by increased 
calcium and vitamin D intake, but it would be prudent to con-
sider these agents (and bisphosphonates if osteoporosis is already 
present) and to encourage frequent exercise in any patient taking 
corticosteroids. 
 OPHTHALMIC DRUGS 
 Drugs Used in Glaucoma 
 Glaucoma is more common in the elderly, but its treatment does 
not differ from that of glaucoma of earlier onset. Management of 
glaucoma is discussed in  Chapter 10 . 
 Macular Degeneration 
 Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most common 
cause of blindness in the elderly in the developed world. Two 
forms of advanced AMD are recognized: the neovascular “wet” 
form, which is associated with intrusion of new blood vessels in 
the subretinal space, and a more common “dry” form, which is not 
associated with abnormal vascularization. Although the cause of 
AMD is not known, smoking is a documented risk factor, and 
oxidative stress has long been thought to play a role. On this 
premise, antioxidants have been used to prevent or delay the onset 
of AMD. Proprietary oral formulations of vitamins C and E, 
β-carotene, zinc oxide, and cupric oxide are available. Evidence for 
the efficacy of these antioxidants is modest or absent. Oral drugs 
in clinical trials include the carotenoids lutein and zeaxanthin, and 
n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
 In advanced AMD, treatment has been moderately successful 
but only for the neovascular form. Neovascular AMD can now be 
treated with laser phototherapy or with antibodies against vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Two antibodies are available: 
bevacizumab (Avastin, used off-label) and ranibizumab (Lucentis), 
as well as the oligopeptide pegaptanib (Macugen). The latter two are 
approved for neovascular AMD. These agents are injected into the 
vitreous for local effect. Ranibizumab is extremely expensive. Fusion 
proteins and RNA agents that bind VEGF are under study. 
 ■ ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS 
IN THE ELDERLY 
 The relation between the number of drugs taken and the inci-
dence of adverse drug reactions has been well documented. In 
long-term care facilities, in which a high percentage of the popula-
tion is elderly, the average number of prescriptions per patient 
varies between 6 and 8. Studies have shown that the percentage of 
patients with adverse reactions increases from about 10% when a 
single drug is being taken to nearly 100% when 10 drugs are 
taken. Thus, it may be expected that about half of patients in 
long-term care facilities will have recognized or unrecognized reac-
tions at some time. Patients living at home may see several differ-
ent practitioners for different conditions and accumulate multiple 
prescriptions for drugs with overlapping actions. It is useful to 
conduct a “brown bag” analysis in such patients. The brown bag 
analysis consists of asking the patient to bring to the practitioner 
a bag containing  all the medications, supplements, vitamins, etc, 
that he or she is currently taking. Some prescriptions will be found 
to be duplicates, others unnecessary. The total number of medica-
tions taken can often be reduced by 30–50%. 
 The overall incidence of drug reactions in geriatric patients is 
estimated to be at least twice that in the younger population. 
Reasons for this high incidence undoubtedly include errors in 
prescribing on the part of the practitioner and errors in drug usage 
by the patient. Practitioner errors sometimes occur because the 
physician does not appreciate the importance of changes in phar-
macokinetics with age and age-related diseases. Some errors occur 
because the practitioner is unaware of incompatible drugs pre-
scribed by other practitioners for the same patient. For example, 
cimetidine, an H 2 -blocking drug heavily prescribed (or recom-
mended in its over-the-counter form) to the elderly, causes a much 
higher incidence of untoward effects (eg, confusion, slurred 
speech) in the geriatric population than in younger patients. It 
also inhibits the hepatic metabolism of many drugs, including 
phenytoin, warfarin, β blockers, and other agents. A patient who 
has been taking one of the latter agents without untoward effect 
may develop markedly elevated blood levels and severe toxicity if 
cimetidine is added to the regimen without adjustment of dosage 
of the other drugs. Additional examples of drugs that inhibit liver 
microsomal enzymes and lead to adverse reactions are described in 
 Chapters 4 and  66 . 
 Patient errors may result from nonadherence for reasons 
described below. In addition, they often result from use of nonpre-
scription drugs taken without the knowledge of the physician. As 
noted in  Chapters 63 and  64 , many over-the-counter agents and 
herbal medications contain “hidden ingredients” with potent 
1058    SECTION X Special Topics
pharmacologic effects. For example, many antihistamines have 
significant sedative effects and are inherently more hazardous in 
patients with impaired cognitive function. Similarly, their antimus-
carinic action may precipitate urinary retention in geriatric men or 
glaucoma in patients with a narrow anterior chamber angle. If the 
patient is also taking a metabolism inhibitor such as cimetidine, the 
probability of an adverse reaction is greatly increased. A patient 
taking an herbal medication containing gingko is more likely to 
experience bleeding while taking low doses of aspirin. 
 ■ PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF 
GERIATRIC PHARMACOLOGY 
 The quality of life in elderly patients can be greatly improved and 
life span can be prolonged by the intelligent use of drugs. 
However, the prescriber must recognize several practical obstacles 
to compliance. 
 The expense of drugs can be a major disincentive in patients 
receiving marginal retirement incomes who are not covered or 
inadequately covered by health insurance. The prescriber must be 
aware of the cost of the prescription and of cheaper alternative 
therapies. For example, the monthly cost of arthritis therapy with 
newer NSAIDs may exceed $100, whereas that for generic aspirin 
is about $5 and for ibuprofen and naproxen, two older NSAIDs, 
about $20. 
 Nonadherence may result from forgetfulness or confusion, 
especially if the patient has several prescriptions and different dos-
ing intervals. A survey carried out in 1986 showed that the popu-
lation over 65 years of age accounted for 32% of drugs prescribed 
in the USA, although these patients represented only 11–12% of 
the population at that time. Since the prescriptions are often writ-
ten by several different practitioners, there is usually no attempt to 
design “integrated” regimens that use drugs with similar dosing 
intervals for the conditions being treated. Patients may forget 
instructions regarding the need to complete a fixed duration of 
therapy when a course of anti-infective drug is being given. The 
disappearance of symptoms is often regarded as the best reason to 
halt drug taking, especially if the prescription was expensive. 
 Nonadherence may also be deliberate. A decision not to take a 
drug may be based on prior experience with it. There may be 
excellent reasons for such “intelligent” noncompliance, and the 
practitioner should try to elicit them. Such efforts may also 
improve compliance with alternative drug regimens, because 
enlisting the patient as a participant in therapeutic decisions 
increases the motivation to succeed. 
 Some errors in drug taking are caused by physical disabilities. 
Arthritis, tremor, and visual problems may all contribute. Liquid 
medications that are to be measured “by the spoonful” are espe-
cially inappropriate for patients with any type of tremor or motor 
disability. Use of a dosing syringe may be helpful in such cases. 
Because of decreased production of saliva, older patients often 
have difficulty swallowing large tablets. “Childproof” containers 
are often “elder-proof” if the patient has arthritis. Cataracts and 
macular degeneration occur in a large number of patients over 70. 
Therefore, labels on prescription bottles should be large enough 
for the patient with diminished vision to read or should be color-
coded if the patient can see but can no longer read. 
 Drug therapy has considerable potential for both helpful and 
harmful effects in the geriatric patient. The balance may be tipped 
in the right direction by adherence to a few principles: 
 1.  Take a careful drug history. The disease to be treated may be 
drug-induced, or drugs being taken may lead to interactions 
with drugs to be prescribed. 
 2. Prescribe only for a specific and rational indication. Do not 
prescribe omeprazole for “dyspepsia.” Expert guidelines are 
published regularly by national organizations and websites 
such as UpToDate.com. 
3.  Define the goal of drug therapy. Then start with small doses 
and titrate to the response desired. Wait at least three half-lives 
(adjusted for age) before increasing the dose. If the expected 
response does not occur at the normal adult dosage, check 
blood levels. If the expected response does not occur at the 
appropriate blood level, switch to a different drug. 
 4. Maintain a high index of suspicion regarding drug reactions 
and interactions. Know what other drugs the patient is taking, 
including over-the-counter and botanical (herbal) drugs. 
 5. Simplify the regimen as much as possible. When multiple 
drugs are prescribed, try to use drugs that can be taken at the 
same time of day. Whenever possible, reduce the number of 
drugs being taken. 
 REFERENCES 
 American College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force: ACCF/AHA 2011 
Expert consensus document on hypertension in the elderly. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2011;57:2037.  http://content.onlinejacc.org/cgi/content/full/j.jacc. 
2011.01.008v1 
 Ancolli-Israel S, Ayalon L: Diagnosis and treatment of sleep disorders in older 
adults. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2006;14:95. 
 Aronow WS: Drug treatment of systolic and diastolic heart failure in elderly per-
sons. J Gerontol A Biol Med Sci 2005;60:1597. 
 Birnbaum LS: Pharmacokinetic basis of age-related changes in sensitivity to toxi-
cants. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 1991;31:101. 
 Calcado RT, Young NS: Telomere diseases. N Engl J Med 2009;361:2353. 
 Chatap G, Giraud K, Vincent JP: Atrial fibrillation in the elderly: Facts and man-
agement. Drugs Aging 2002;19:819. 
 Cockcroft DW, Gault MH: Prediction of creatinine clearance from serum creati-
nine. Nephron 1976;16:31. 
 Dergal JM et al: Potential interactions between herbal medicines and conventional 
drug therapies used by older adults attending a memory clinic. Drugs Aging 
2002;19:879. 
 Docherty JR: Age-related changes in adrenergic neuroeffector transmission. Auton 
Neurosci 2002;96:8. 
 Drugs in the elderly. Med Lett Drugs Ther 2006;48:6. 
 Ferrari AU: Modifications of the cardiovascular system with aging. Am J Geriatr 
Cardiol 2002;11:30. 
 Goldberg TH, Finkelstein MS: Difficulties in estimating glomerular filtration rate 
in the elderly. Arch Intern Med 1987;147:1430. 
 Jager RD, Mieler WF, Miller JW: Age-related macular degeneration. N Engl J Med 
2008;358:2606. 
 Karlsson I: Drugs that induce delirium. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 
1999;10:412. 
 Kirby J et al: A systematic review of the clinical and cost-effectiveness of meman-
tine in patients with moderately severe to severe Alzheimer’s disease. Drugs 
Aging 2006;23:227. 
 Mangoni AA: Cardiovascular drug therapy in elderly patients: Specific age-related 
pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic and therapeutic considerations. Drugs 
Aging 2005;22:913. 
CHAPTER 60 Special Aspects of Geriatric Pharmacology    1059
 McLean AJ, LeCouteur DG: Aging biology and geriatric clinical pharmacology. 
Pharmacol Rev 2004;56:163. 
 Morrison LJ, Morrison RS: Palliative care and pain management. Med Clin N Am 
2006;90:983. 
 Palmer AM: Neuroprotective therapeutics for Alzheimer’s disease: Progress and 
prospects. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2011;32:141. 
 Rabow MW, Pantilat SZ: Care at the end of life.  Current Medical Diagnosis & 
Treatment , 50th ed., McPhee SJ, Papadakis MA, eds. McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 Robertson ED, Mucke L: 100 Years and counting: Prospects for defeating 
Alzheimer’s disease. Science 2006;314:781. 
 Rodriguez EG et al: Use of lipid-lowering drugs in older adults with and without 
dementia: A community-based epidemiological study. J Am Geriatr Soc 
2002;50:1852. 
 Sawhney R, Sehl M, Naeim A: Physiologic aspects of aging: Impact on cancer 
management and decision making, part I. Cancer J 2005;11:449. 
 Staskin DR: Overactive bladder in the elderly: A guide to pharmacological man-
agement. Drugs Aging 2005;22:1013. 
 Steinman MA, Hanlon JT: Managing medications in clinically complex elders. 
JAMA 2010;304:1592. 
 Van Marum RJ: Current and future therapy in Alzheimer’s disease. Fund Clin 
Pharmacol 2008;22:265. 
 Vik SA et al: Medication nonadherence and subsequent risk of hospitalisation and 
mortality among older adults. Drugs Aging 2006;23:345. 
 Wade PR: Aging and neural control of the GI tract. I. Age-related changes in the 
enteric nervous system. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 
2002;283:G489. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
This patient has several conditions that warrant careful treat-
ment. Hypertension is eminently treatable; the steps described 
in  Chapter 11 are appropriate and effective in the elderly as 
well as in young patients. Patient education is critical in com-
bating his reluctance to take his medications. Alzheimer’s 
disease may respond temporarily to one of the anticholinest-
erase agents (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine). 
Alternatively, memantine may be tried. Unfortunately, age-
related macular degeneration (the most likely cause of his 
visual difficulties) is not readily treated, but the “wet” 
(neovascular) variety may respond well to one of the drugs 
currently available (bevacizumab, ranibizumab, pegaptanib). 
However, these therapies are expensive.
This page intentionally left blank 
1061
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 Diseases of the skin offer special opportunities to the clinician. In 
particular, the topical administration route is especially appropri-
ate for skin diseases, although some dermatologic diseases respond 
as well or better to drugs administered systemically. 
 The general pharmacokinetic principles governing the use of 
drugs applied to the skin are the same as those involved in other 
routes of administration (see  Chapters 1 and  3 ). Although often 
depicted as a simple three-layered structure ( Figure 61–1 ), human 
skin is a complex series of diffusion barriers. Quantitation of the 
flux of drugs and drug vehicles through these barriers is the basis 
for pharmacokinetic analysis of dermatologic therapy, and tech-
niques for making such measurements are rapidly increasing in 
number and sensitivity. 
 Major variables that determine pharmacologic response to 
drugs applied to the skin include the following: 
 1. Regional variation in drug penetration: For example, the 
scrotum, face, axilla, and scalp are far more permeable than the 
forearm and may require less drug for equivalent effect. 
 2. Concentration gradient: Increasing the concentration gradi-
ent increases the mass of drug transferred per unit time, just as 
in the case of diffusion across other barriers (see  Chapter 1 ). 
Thus, resistance to topical corticosteroids can sometimes be 
overcome by use of higher concentrations of drug. 
 3. Dosing schedule: Because of its physical properties, the skin 
acts as a reservoir for many drugs. As a result, the “local half-
life” may be long enough to permit once-daily application of 
drugs with short systemic half-lives. For example, once-daily 
application of corticosteroids appears to be just as effective as 
multiple applications in many conditions. 
 4. Vehicles and occlusion: An appropriate vehicle maximizes the 
ability of the drug to penetrate the outer layers of the skin. In 
addition, through their physical properties (moistening or dry-
ing effects), vehicles may themselves have important therapeu-
tic effects. Occlusion (application of a plastic wrap to hold the 
drug and its vehicle in close contact with the skin) is extremely 
effective in maximizing efficacy. 
 ■ REACTIONS TO DERMATOLOGIC 
MEDICATIONS 
 The skin reacts to many systemic medications with a variety of 
symptom-generating responses. In addition, some dermatologic 
medications themselves cause skin reactions. The major types of 
reactions are summarized in  Table 61–1 . 
 ■ DERMATOLOGIC VEHICLES 
 Topical medications usually consist of active ingredients incorpo-
rated in a vehicle that facilitates cutaneous application. Important 
considerations in vehicle selection include the solubility of the 
active agent in the vehicle; the rate of release of the agent from the 
vehicle; the ability of the vehicle to hydrate the stratum corneum, 
thus enhancing penetration; the stability of the therapeutic agent 
in the vehicle; and interactions, chemical and physical, of the 
vehicle, stratum corneum, and active agent. 
61
Dermatologic 
Pharmacology
 Dirk B. Robertson, MD, & Howard I. Maibach, MD 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 22-year-old woman presents with a complaint of worsen-
ing psoriasis. She has a strong family history of the disease 
and has had lesions on her scalp and elbows for several years. 
She recently noted new lesions developing on her knees and 
the soles of her feet. She has been using topical over-the-
counter hydrocortisone cream but admits that this treatment 
does not seem to help. What therapeutic options are available 
for the treatment of this chronic disease? 
 
1062    SECTION X Special Topics
 Depending upon the vehicle, dermatologic formulations may 
be classified as tinctures, wet dressings, lotions, gels, aerosols, 
powders, pastes, creams, foams, and ointments. The ability of the 
vehicle to retard evaporation from the surface of the skin increases 
in this series, being least in tinctures and wet dressings and greatest 
in ointments. In general, acute inflammation with oozing, vesicu-
lation, and crusting is best treated with drying preparations such 
as tinctures, wet dressings, and lotions, whereas chronic inflamma-
tion with xerosis, scaling, and lichenification is best treated with 
more lubricating preparations such as creams and ointments. 
Tinctures, lotions, gels, foams, and aerosols are convenient for 
application to the scalp and hairy areas. Emulsified vanishing-
type creams may be used in intertriginous areas without causing 
maceration. 
 Emulsifying agents provide homogeneous, stable prepara-
tions when mixtures of immiscible liquids such as oil-in-water 
creams are compounded. Some patients develop irritation from 
these agents. Substituting a preparation that does not contain 
them or using one containing a lower concentration may resolve 
the problem. 
Drug
Drug diffuses
through stratum
corneum
Metabolized ?
Drug partitions
into dermis
Drug binds
to receptor
Drug binds
to receptor
Drug partitions into
stratum spinosum
Absorbed into bloodstream
Drug partitions
into subcutaneous
tissue
Vehicle
Skin surface
Stratum
corneum
Stratum
spinosum
Basement
membrane
zone
Subcutaneous
fat
Reservoir
Metabolized ?
 FIGURE 61–1  Schematic diagram of percutaneous absorption. (Redrawn from Orkin M, Maibach HI, Dahl MV:  Dermatology . Appleton & Lange, 1991.) 
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1063
 ■ ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS  
 TOPICAL ANTIBACTERIAL 
PREPARATIONS 
 Topical antibacterial agents may be useful in preventing infections 
in clean wounds, in the early treatment of infected dermatoses and 
wounds, in reducing colonization of the nares by staphylococci, in 
axillary deodorization, and in the management of acne vulgaris. 
The efficacy of antibiotics in these topical applications is not uni-
form. The general pharmacology of the antimicrobial drugs is 
discussed in Chapters 43–51. 
 Some topical anti-infectives contain corticosteroids in addition 
to antibiotics. There is no convincing evidence that topical corti-
costeroids inhibit the antibacterial effect of antibiotics when the 
two are incorporated in the same preparation. In the treatment of 
secondarily infected dermatoses, which are usually colonized with 
streptococci, staphylococci, or both, combination therapy may 
prove superior to corticosteroid therapy alone. Antibiotic-
corticosteroid combinations may be useful in treating diaper der-
matitis, otitis externa, and impetiginized eczema. 
 The selection of a particular antibiotic depends upon the diag-
nosis and, when appropriate, in vitro culture and sensitivity stud-
ies of clinical samples. The pathogens isolated from most infected 
dermatoses are group A β-hemolytic streptococci,  Staphylococcus 
aureus , or both. The pathogens present in surgical wounds will be 
those resident in the environment. Information about regional 
patterns of drug resistance is therefore important in selecting a 
therapeutic agent. Prepackaged topical antibacterial preparations 
that contain multiple antibiotics are available in fixed dosages well 
above the therapeutic threshold. These formulations offer the 
advantages of efficacy in mixed infections, broader coverage for 
infections due to undetermined pathogens, and delayed microbial 
resistance to any single component antibiotic. 
 BACITRACIN & GRAMICIDIN 
 Bacitracin and gramicidin are peptide antibiotics, active against 
gram-positive organisms such as streptococci, pneumococci, and 
staphylococci. In addition, most anaerobic cocci, neisseriae, teta-
nus bacilli, and diphtheria bacilli are sensitive. Bacitracin is com-
pounded in an ointment base alone or in combination with 
neomycin, polymyxin B, or both. The use of bacitracin in the 
anterior nares may temporarily decrease colonization by patho-
genic staphylococci. Microbial resistance may develop following 
prolonged use. Bacitracin-induced contact urticaria syndrome, 
including anaphylaxis, occurs rarely. Allergic contact dermatitis 
occurs frequently, and immunologic allergic contact urticaria 
rarely. Bacitracin is poorly absorbed through the skin, so systemic 
toxicity is rare. 
 Gramicidin is available only for topical use, in combination 
with other antibiotics such as neomycin, polymyxin, bacitracin, 
and nystatin. Systemic toxicity limits this drug to topical use. The 
incidence of sensitization following topical application is exceed-
ingly low in therapeutic concentrations. 
 MUPIROCIN 
 Mupirocin (pseudomonic acid A) is structurally unrelated to other 
currently available topical antibacterial agents. Most gram-positive 
aerobic bacteria, including methicillin-resistant  S aureus (MRSA), 
are sensitive to mupirocin (see  Chapter 50 ). It is effective in the 
treatment of impetigo caused by  S aureus and group A β-hemolytic 
streptococci. 
 Intranasal mupirocin ointment for eliminating nasal carriage of 
 S aureus may be associated with irritation of mucous membranes 
caused by the polyethylene glycol vehicle. Mupirocin is not appre-
ciably absorbed systemically after topical application to intact skin. 
 RETAPAMULIN 
 Retapamulin is a semisynthetic pleromutilin derivative effective in 
the treatment of uncomplicated superficial skin infection caused 
by group A β-hemolytic streptococci and  S aureus , excluding 
MRSA. Topical retapamulin 1% ointment is indicated for use in 
adult and pediatric patients, 9 months or older, for the treatment 
of impetigo. Recommended treatment regimen is twice-daily 
application for 5 days. Retapamulin is well tolerated with only 
occasional local irritation of the treatment site. To date only four 
cases of allergic contact dermatitis have been reported. 
 POLYMYXIN B SULFATE 
 Polymyxin B is a peptide antibiotic effective against gram-negative 
organisms, including  Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli , 
enterobacter, and klebsiella. Most strains of proteus and serratia 
are resistant, as are all gram-positive organisms. Topical prepara-
tions may be compounded in either a solution or ointment base. 
TABLE 61–1  Local cutaneous reactions to topical 
medications.
Reaction type
Mechanism
Comment
Irritation
Non-allergic
Most common local reaction
Photoirritation
Non-allergic
Phototoxicity; usually requires 
UVA exposure
Allergic contact 
dermatitis
Allergic
Type IV delayed 
hypersensitivity
Photoallergic 
contact dermatitis
Allergic
Type IV delayed hypersensitivity; 
usually requires UVA exposure
Immunologic 
contact urticaria
Allergic
IgE-mediated type I immediate 
hypersensitivity; may result in 
anaphylaxis
Non-immunologic 
contact urticaria
Non-allergic
Most common contact 
urticaria; occurs without prior 
sensitization
1064    SECTION X Special Topics
Numerous prepackaged antibiotic combinations containing poly-
myxin B are available. Detectable serum concentrations are diffi-
cult to achieve from topical application, but the total daily dose 
applied to denuded skin or open wounds should not exceed 
200 mg in order to reduce the likelihood of neurotoxicity and 
nephrotoxicity. Allergic contact dermatitis to topically applied 
polymyxin B sulfate is uncommon. 
 NEOMYCIN & GENTAMICIN 
 Neomycin and gentamicin are aminoglycoside antibiotics active 
against gram-negative organisms, including  E coli , proteus, kleb-
siella, and enterobacter. Gentamicin generally shows greater activ-
ity against  P aeruginosa than neomycin. Gentamicin is also more 
active against staphylococci and group A β-hemolytic strepto-
cocci. Widespread topical use of gentamicin, especially in a hospi-
tal environment, should be avoided to slow the appearance of 
gentamicin-resistant organisms. 
 Neomycin is available in numerous topical formulations, both 
alone and in combination with polymyxin, bacitracin, and other 
antibiotics. It is also available as a sterile powder for topical use. 
Gentamicin is available as an ointment or cream. 
 Topical application of neomycin rarely results in detectable 
serum concentrations. However, in the case of gentamicin, serum 
concentrations of 1–18 mcg/mL are possible if the drug is applied 
in a water-miscible preparation to large areas of denuded skin, as 
in burned patients. Both drugs are water-soluble and are excreted 
primarily in the urine. Renal failure may permit the accumulation 
of these antibiotics, with possible nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, 
and ototoxicity. 
 Neomycin frequently causes allergic contact dermatitis, par-
ticularly if applied to eczematous dermatoses or if compounded in 
an ointment vehicle. When sensitization occurs, cross-sensitivity 
to streptomycin, kanamycin, paromomycin, and gentamicin is 
possible. 
 TOPICAL ANTIBIOTICS IN ACNE 
 Several systemic antibiotics that have traditionally been used in 
the treatment of acne vulgaris have been shown to be effective 
when applied topically. Currently, four antibiotics are so utilized: 
clindamycin phosphate, erythromycin base, metronidazole, and 
sulfacetamide. The effectiveness of topical therapy is less than that 
achieved by systemic administration of the same antibiotic. 
Therefore, topical therapy is generally suitable only in mild to 
moderate cases of inflammatory acne. 
 Clindamycin 
 Clindamycin has in vitro activity against  Propionibacterium acnes ; 
this has been postulated as the mechanism of its beneficial effect 
in acne therapy. Approximately 10% of an applied dose is 
absorbed, and rare cases of bloody diarrhea and pseudomembra-
nous colitis have been reported following topical application. The 
hydroalcoholic vehicle and foam formulation (Evoclin) may cause 
drying and irritation of the skin, with complaints of burning and 
stinging. The water-based gel and lotion formulations are well 
tolerated and less likely to cause irritation. Allergic contact der-
matitis is uncommon. Clindamycin is also available in fixed-
combination topical gels with benzoyl peroxide (Acanya, 
BenzaClin, Duac), and with tretinoin (Ziana). 
 Erythromycin 
 In topical preparations, erythromycin base rather than a salt is 
used to facilitate penetration. The mechanism of action of topical 
erythromycin in inflammatory acne vulgaris is unknown but is 
presumed to be due to its inhibitory effects on  P acnes . One of the 
possible complications of topical therapy is the development of 
antibiotic-resistant strains of organisms, including staphylococci. 
If this occurs in association with a clinical infection, topical eryth-
romycin should be discontinued and appropriate systemic antibi-
otic therapy started. Adverse local reactions to erythromycin 
solution may include a burning sensation at the time of applica-
tion and drying and irritation of the skin. The topical water-based 
gel is less drying and may be better tolerated. Allergic contact 
dermatitis is uncommon. Erythromycin is also available in a fixed 
combination preparation with benzoyl peroxide (Benzamycin) for 
topical treatment of acne vulgaris. 
 Metronidazole 
 Topical metronidazole is effective in the treatment of rosacea. The 
mechanism of action is unknown, but it may relate to the inhibi-
tory effects of metronidazole on  Demodex brevis ; alternatively, the 
drug may act as an anti-inflammatory agent by direct effect on 
neutrophil cellular function. Oral metronidazole has been shown 
to be a carcinogen in susceptible rodent species, and topical use 
during pregnancy and by nursing mothers and children is there-
fore not recommended. 
 Adverse local effects of the water-based gel formulation 
(MetroGel) include dryness, burning, and stinging. Less drying 
formulations may be better tolerated (MetroCream, MetroLotion, 
and Noritate cream). Caution should be exercised when applying 
metronidazole near the eyes to avoid excessive tearing. 
 Sodium Sulfacetamide 
 Topical sulfacetamide is available alone as a 10% lotion (Klaron) 
and as a 10% wash (Ovace), and in several preparations in combi-
nation with sulfur for the treatment of acne vulgaris and acne 
rosacea. The mechanism of action is thought to be inhibition of  P 
acnes by competitive inhibition of  p -aminobenzoic acid utiliza-
tion. Approximately 4% of topically applied sulfacetamide is 
absorbed percutaneously, and its use is therefore contraindicated 
in patients having a known hypersensitivity to sulfonamides. 
 Dapsone 
 Topical dapsone is available as a 5% gel (Aczone) for the treatment 
of acne vulgaris. The mechanism of action is unknown. Topical 
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1065
use in patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency has not been shown to cause clinically relevant hemoly-
sis or anemia. However, a slight decrease in hemoglobin concen-
tration was noted in patients with G6PD deficiency, suggestive of 
mild hemolysis. To date, serious adverse reactions associated with 
oral dapsone use as delineated in  Chapter 47 have not been 
reported with topical use. Adverse local side effects include mild 
dryness, redness, oiliness, and skin peeling. Application of dap-
sone gel followed by benzoyl peroxide may result in a temporary 
yellow discoloration of the skin and hair. 
 ■ ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS 
 The treatment of superficial fungal infections caused by dermato-
phytic fungi may be accomplished (1) with topical antifungal 
agents, eg, clotrimazole, miconazole, econazole, ketoconazole, 
oxiconazole, sulconazole, sertaconazole, ciclopirox olamine, nafti-
fine, terbinafine, butenafine, and tolnaftate; or (2) with orally 
administered agents, ie, griseofulvin, terbinafine, ketoconazole, 
fluconazole, and itraconazole. Superficial infections caused by 
candida species may be treated with topical applications of clotri-
mazole, miconazole, econazole, ketoconazole, oxiconazole, 
ciclopirox olamine, nystatin, or amphotericin B. Chronic general-
ized mucocutaneous candidiasis is responsive to long-term therapy 
with oral ketoconazole. 
 TOPICAL ANTIFUNGAL 
PREPARATIONS  
 TOPICAL AZOLE DERIVATIVES 
 The topical imidazoles, which currently include clotrimazole, 
econazole, ketoconazole, miconazole, oxiconazole, sulconazole, 
and sertaconazole, have a wide range of activity against dermato-
phytes (epidermophyton, microsporum, and trichophyton) and 
yeasts, including  Candida albicans and  Pityrosporum orbiculare (see 
 Chapter 48 ). 
 Miconazole (Monistat, Micatin) is available for topical applica-
tion as a cream or lotion and as vaginal cream or suppositories for 
use in vulvovaginal candidiasis. Clotrimazole (Lotrimin, Mycelex) 
is available for topical application to the skin as a cream or lotion 
and as vaginal cream and tablets for use in vulvovaginal candidia-
sis. Econazole (Spectazole) is available as a cream for topical appli-
cation. Oxiconazole (Oxistat) is available as a cream and lotion for 
topical use. Ketoconazole (Nizoral) is available as a cream for 
topical treatment of dermatophytosis and candidiasis and as a 
shampoo or foam for the treatment of seborrheic dermatitis. 
Sulconazole (Exelderm) is available as a cream or solution. 
Sertaconazole (Ertaczo) is available as a cream. Topical antifungal-
corticosteroid fixed combinations have been introduced on the 
basis of providing more rapid symptomatic improvement than an 
antifungal agent alone. Clotrimazole-betamethasone dipropionate 
cream (Lotrisone) is one such combination. 
 Once- or twice-daily application to the affected area will gen-
erally result in clearing of superficial dermatophyte infections in 
2–3 weeks, although the medication should be continued until 
eradication of the organism is confirmed. Paronychial and inter-
triginous candidiasis can be treated effectively by any of these 
agents when applied three or four times daily. Seborrheic derma-
titis should be treated with twice-daily applications of ketocon-
azole until clinical clearing is obtained. 
 Adverse local reactions to the imidazoles may include stinging, 
pruritus, erythema, and local irritation. Allergic contact dermatitis 
is uncommon. 
 CICLOPIROX OLAMINE 
 Ciclopirox olamine is a synthetic broad-spectrum antimycotic 
agent with inhibitory activity against dermatophytes, candida spe-
cies, and  P orbiculare . This agent appears to inhibit the uptake of 
precursors of macromolecular synthesis; the site of action is prob-
ably the fungal cell membrane. 
 Pharmacokinetic studies indicate that 1–2% of the dose is 
absorbed when applied as a solution on the back under an occlu-
sive dressing. Ciclopirox olamine is available as a 1% cream and 
lotion (Loprox) for the topical treatment of dermatomycosis, can-
didiasis, and tinea versicolor. The incidence of adverse reactions 
has been low. Pruritus and worsening of clinical disease have been 
reported. The potential for allergic contact dermatitis is small. 
 Topical 8% ciclopirox olamine (Penlac nail lacquer) has been 
approved for the treatment of mild to moderate onychomycosis of 
fingernails and toenails. Although well tolerated with minimal side 
effects, the overall cure rates in clinical trials are less than 12%. 
 ALLYLAMINES: NAFTIFINE & 
TERBINAFINE 
 Naftifine hydrochloride and terbinafine (Lamisil) are allylamines 
that are highly active against dermatophytes but less active against 
yeasts. The antifungal activity derives from selective inhibition of 
squalene epoxidase, a key enzyme for the synthesis of ergosterol 
(see  Figure 48–1 ). 
 They are available as 1% creams and other forms for the topical 
treatment of dermatophytosis, to be applied on a twice-daily dos-
ing schedule. Adverse reactions include local irritation, burning 
sensation, and erythema. Contact with mucous membranes 
should be avoided. 
 BUTENAFINE 
 Butenafine hydrochloride (Mentax) is a benzylamine that is struc-
turally related to the allylamines. As with the allylamines, buten-
afine inhibits the epoxidation of squalene, thus blocking the 
synthesis of ergosterol, an essential component of fungal cell 
membranes. Butenafine is available as a 1% cream to be applied 
once daily for the treatment of superficial dermatophytosis. 
1066    SECTION X Special Topics
 TOLNAFTATE 
 Tolnaftate is a synthetic antifungal compound that is effective 
topically against dermatophyte infections caused by epidermophy-
ton, microsporum, and trichophyton. It is also active against  P 
orbiculare but not against candida. 
 Tolnaftate (Aftate, Tinactin) is available as a cream, solution, 
powder, or powder aerosol for application twice daily to infected 
areas. Recurrences following cessation of therapy are common, 
and infections of the palms, soles, and nails are usually unrespon-
sive to tolnaftate alone. The powder or powder aerosol may be 
used chronically following initial treatment in patients susceptible 
to tinea infections. Tolnaftate is generally well tolerated and rarely 
causes irritation or allergic contact dermatitis. 
 NYSTATIN & AMPHOTERICIN B 
 Nystatin and amphotericin B are useful in the topical therapy of  C 
albicans infections but ineffective against dermatophytes. Nystatin is 
limited to topical treatment of cutaneous and mucosal candida infec-
tions because of its narrow spectrum and negligible absorption from 
the gastrointestinal tract following oral administration. Amphotericin 
B has a broader antifungal spectrum and is used intravenously in the 
treatment of many systemic mycoses (see  Chapter 48 ) and to a lesser 
extent in the treatment of cutaneous candida infections. 
 The recommended dosage for topical preparations of nystatin 
in treating paronychial and intertriginous candidiasis is applica-
tion two or three times a day. Oral candidiasis (thrush) is treated 
by holding 5 mL (infants, 2 mL) of nystatin oral suspension in the 
mouth for several minutes four times daily before swallowing. An 
alternative therapy for thrush is to retain a vaginal tablet in the 
mouth until dissolved four times daily. Recurrent or recalcitrant 
perianal, vaginal, vulvar, and diaper area candidiasis may respond 
to oral nystatin, 0.5–1 million units in adults (100,000 units in 
children) four times daily in addition to local therapy. Vulvovaginal 
candidiasis may be treated by insertion of 1 vaginal tablet twice 
daily for 14 days, then nightly for an additional 14–21 days. 
 Amphotericin B (Fungizone) is available for topical use in 
cream and lotion form. The recommended dosage in the treat-
ment of paronychial and intertriginous candidiasis is application 
two to four times daily to the affected area. 
 Adverse effects associated with oral administration of nystatin 
include mild nausea, diarrhea, and occasional vomiting. Topical appli-
cation is nonirritating, and allergic contact hypersensitivity is exceed-
ingly uncommon. Topical amphotericin B is well tolerated and only 
occasionally locally irritating. The drug may cause a temporary yellow 
staining of the skin, especially when the cream vehicle is used. 
 ORAL ANTIFUNGAL AGENTS  
 ORAL AZOLE DERIVATIVES 
 Azole derivatives currently available for oral treatment of systemic 
mycosis include fluconazole (Diflucan), itraconazole (Sporanox), 
ketoconazole (Nizoral), and others. As discussed in  Chapter 48 , 
imidazole derivatives act by affecting the permeability of the cell 
membrane of sensitive cells through alterations of the biosynthesis 
of lipids, especially sterols, in the fungal cell. 
 Patients with chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis respond well 
to a once-daily dose of 200 mg of ketoconazole, with a median 
clearing time of 16 weeks. Most patients require long-term main-
tenance therapy. Variable results have been reported in treatment 
of chromomycosis. 
 Ketoconazole is effective in the therapy of cutaneous infections 
caused by epidermophyton, microsporum, and trichophyton spe-
cies. Infections of the glabrous skin often respond within 2–3 weeks 
to a once-daily oral dose of 200 mg. Palmar-plantar skin is slower to 
respond, often taking 4–6 weeks at a dosage of 200 mg twice daily. 
Infections of the hair and nails may take even longer before resolv-
ing, with low cure rates noted for tinea capitis. Tinea versicolor is 
responsive to short courses of a once-daily dose of 200 mg. 
 Nausea or pruritus occurs in approximately 3% of patients tak-
ing ketoconazole. More significant adverse effects include gyneco-
mastia, elevations of hepatic enzyme levels, and hepatitis. Caution 
is advised when using ketoconazole in patients with a history of 
hepatitis. Routine evaluation of hepatic function is advisable for 
patients on prolonged therapy. 
 Fluconazole is well absorbed following oral administration, 
with a plasma half-life of 30 hours. In view of this long half-life, 
daily doses of 100 mg are sufficient to treat mucocutaneous can-
didiasis; alternate-day doses are sufficient for dermatophyte infec-
tions. The plasma half-life of itraconazole is similar to that of 
fluconazole, and detectable therapeutic concentrations remain in 
the stratum corneum for up to 28 days following termination of 
therapy. Itraconazole is effective for the treatment of onychomyco-
sis in a dosage of 200 mg daily taken with food to ensure maxi-
mum absorption for 3 consecutive months. Recent reports of 
heart failure in patients receiving itraconazole for onychomycosis 
have resulted in recommendations that it not be given for treat-
ment of onychomycosis in patients with ventricular dysfunction. 
Additionally, routine evaluation of hepatic function is recom-
mended for patients receiving itraconazole for onychomycosis. 
 Administration of oral azoles with midazolam or triazolam has 
resulted in elevated plasma concentrations and may potentiate 
and prolong hypnotic and sedative effects of these agents. 
Administration with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors has been 
shown to cause a significant risk of rhabdomyolysis.  Therefore, 
administration of the oral azoles with midazolam, triazolam, or 
HMG-CoA inhibitors is contraindicated. 
 GRISEOFULVIN 
 Griseofulvin is effective orally against dermatophyte infections 
caused by epidermophyton, microsporum, and trichophyton. It is 
ineffective against candida and  P orbiculare. Griseofulvin’s mecha-
nism of antifungal action is not fully understood, but it is active 
only against growing cells. 
 Following the oral administration of 1 g of micronized griseoful-
vin, drug can be detected in the stratum corneum 4–8 hours later. 
Reducing the particle size of the medication greatly increases 
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1067
absorption of the drug. Formulations that contain the smallest particle 
size are labeled “ultramicronized.” Ultramicronized griseofulvin achieves 
bioequivalent plasma levels with half the dose of micronized drug. In 
addition, solubilizing griseofulvin in polyethylene glycol enhances 
absorption even further. Micronized griseofulvin is available as 250 mg 
and 500 mg tablets, and ultramicronized drug is available as 125 mg, 
165 mg, 250 mg, and 330 mg tablets and as 250 mg capsules. 
 The usual adult dosage of the micronized (“microsize”) form of the 
drug is 500 mg daily in single or divided doses with meals; occasion-
ally, 1 g/d is indicated in the treatment of recalcitrant infections. The 
pediatric dosage is 10 mg/kg of body weight daily in single or divided 
doses with meals. An oral suspension is available for use in children. 
 Griseofulvin is most effective in treating tinea infections of the 
scalp and glabrous (nonhairy) skin. In general, infections of the 
scalp respond to treatment in 4–6 weeks, and infections of gla-
brous skin will respond in 3–4 weeks. Dermatophyte infections of 
the nails respond only to prolonged administration of griseoful-
vin. Fingernails may respond to 6 months of therapy, whereas 
toenails are quite recalcitrant to treatment and may require 8–18 
months of therapy; relapse almost invariably occurs. 
 Adverse effects seen with griseofulvin therapy include head-
aches, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, photosensitivity, peripheral 
neuritis, and occasionally mental confusion. Griseofulvin is derived 
from a penicillium mold, and cross-sensitivity with penicillin may 
occur. It is contraindicated in patients with porphyria or hepatic 
failure or those who have had hypersensitivity reactions to it in the 
past. Its safety in pregnant patients has not been established. 
Leukopenia and proteinuria have occasionally been reported. 
Therefore, in patients undergoing prolonged therapy, routine 
evaluation of the hepatic, renal, and hematopoietic systems is 
advisable. Coumarin anticoagulant activity may be altered by 
griseofulvin, and anticoagulant dosage may require adjustment. 
 TERBINAFINE 
 Terbinafine (described above) is quite effective given orally for the 
treatment of onychomycosis. Recommended oral dosage is 250 mg 
daily for 6 weeks for fingernail infections and 12 weeks for toenail 
infections. Patients receiving terbinafine for onychomycosis should 
be monitored closely with periodic laboratory evaluations for pos-
sible hepatic dysfunction. 
 ■ TOPICAL ANTIVIRAL AGENTS  
 ACYCLOVIR, VALACYCLOVIR, 
PENCICLOVIR, & FAMCICLOVIR 
 Acyclovir, valacyclovir, penciclovir, and famciclovir are synthetic 
guanine analogs with inhibitory activity against members of the 
herpesvirus family, including herpes simplex types 1 and 2. Their 
mechanism of action, indications, and usage in the treatment of 
cutaneous infections are discussed in  Chapter 49 . 
 Topical acyclovir (Zovirax) is available as a 5% ointment; topical 
penciclovir (Denavir), as a 1% cream for the treatment of recurrent 
orolabial herpes simplex virus infection in immunocompetent 
adults. Adverse local reactions to acyclovir and penciclovir may 
include pruritus and mild pain with transient stinging or burning. 
 ■ IMMUNOMODULATORS  
 IMIQUIMOD 
 Imiquimod is available as 5% cream (Aldara) for the treatment of 
external genital and perianal warts in adults, actinic keratoses on the 
face and scalp, and biopsy-proven primary basal cell carcinomas on 
the trunk, neck, and extremities. A lower 3.75% concentration 
cream (Zyclara) is available for the treatment of face and scalp actinic 
keratoses. The mechanism of its action is thought to be related to 
imiquimod’s ability to stimulate peripheral mononuclear cells to 
release interferon-α and to stimulate macrophages to produce inter-
leukins-1, -6, and -8, and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). 
 Imiquimod should be applied to the wart tissue three times per 
week and left on the skin for 6–10 hours prior to washing off with 
mild soap and water. Treatment should be continued until eradi-
cation of the warts is accomplished, but not for more than a total 
of 16 weeks. Recommended treatment of actinic keratoses consists 
of twice-weekly applications of the 5% cream on the contiguous 
area of involvement or nightly applications of the 3.75% cream. 
The cream is removed after approximately 8 hours with mild soap 
and water. Treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma consists of 
five-times-per-week application to the tumor, including a 1-cm 
margin of surrounding skin, for a 6-week course of therapy. 
 Percutaneous absorption is minimal, with less than 0.9% 
absorbed following a single-dose application. Adverse side effects 
consist of local inflammatory reactions, including pruritus, ery-
thema, and superficial erosion. 
 TACROLIMUS & PIMECROLIMUS 
 Tacrolimus (Protopic) and pimecrolimus (Elidel) are macrolide 
immunosuppressants that have been shown to be of significant 
benefit in the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Both agents inhibit 
T-lymphocyte activation and prevent the release of inflammatory 
cytokines and mediators from mast cells in vitro after stimulation 
by antigen-IgE complexes. Tacrolimus is available as 0.03% and 
0.1% ointments, and pimecrolimus is available as a 1% cream. 
Both are indicated for short-term and intermittent long-term 
therapy for mild to moderate atopic dermatitis. Tacrolimus 0.03% 
ointment and pimecrolimus 1% cream are approved for use in 
children older than 2 years of age, although all strengths are 
approved for adult use. Recommended dosing of both agents is 
twice-daily application to affected skin until clearing is noted. 
Neither medication should be used with occlusive dressings. The 
most common side effect of both drugs is a burning sensation in 
the applied area that improves with continued use. The Food and 
Drug Administration has added a black box warning regarding the 
long-term safety of topical tacrolimus and pimecrolimus because 
of animal tumorigenicity data. 
1068    SECTION X Special Topics
 ■ ECTOPARASITICIDES 
 PERMETHRIN 
 Permethrin is toxic to  Pediculus humanus, Pthirus pubis , and  Sarcoptes 
scabiei . Less than 2% of an applied dose is absorbed percutaneously. 
Residual drug persists up to 10 days following application. 
 It is recommended that permethrin 1% cream rinse (Nix) be 
applied undiluted to affected areas of pediculosis for 10 minutes 
and then rinsed off with warm water. For the treatment of scabies, 
a single application of 5% cream (Elimite, Acticin) is applied to the 
body from the neck down, left on for 8–14 hours, and then washed 
off. Adverse reactions to permethrin include transient burning, 
stinging, and pruritus. Cross-sensitization to pyrethrins or chrysan-
themums has been alleged but inadequately documented. 
 LINDANE (HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE) 
 The gamma isomer of hexachlorocyclohexane was commonly 
called gamma benzene hexachloride, a misnomer, since no benzene 
ring is present in this compound. Percutaneous absorption studies 
using a solution of lindane in acetone have shown that almost 10% 
of a dose applied to the forearm is absorbed, to be subsequently 
excreted in the urine over a 5-day period. After absorption, lindane 
is concentrated in fatty tissues, including the brain. 
 Lindane (Kwell, etc) is available as a shampoo or lotion. For 
pediculosis capitis or pubis, 30 mL of shampoo is applied to dry 
hair on the scalp or genital area for 4 minutes and then rinsed off. 
No additional application is indicated unless living lice are present 
1 week after treatment. Then reapplication may be required. 
 Recent concerns about the toxicity of lindane have altered 
treatment guidelines for its use in scabies; the current recommen-
dation calls for a single application to the entire body from the 
neck down, left on for 8–12 hours, and then washed off. Patients 
should be retreated only if active mites can be demonstrated, and 
never within 1 week of initial treatment. 
 Concerns about neurotoxicity and hematotoxicity have resulted 
in warnings that lindane should be used with caution in infants, 
children, and pregnant women. The current USA package insert 
recommends that it not be used as a scabicide in premature infants 
and in patients with known seizure disorders. California has prohib-
ited the medical use of lindane following evaluation of its toxico-
logic profile. The risk of adverse systemic reactions to lindane 
appears to be minimal when it is used properly and according to 
directions in adult patients. However, local irritation may occur, and 
contact with the eyes and mucous membranes should be avoided. 
 CROTAMITON 
 Crotamiton,  N -ethyl- o -crotonotoluidide, is a scabicide with some 
antipruritic properties. Its mechanism of action is not known. Studies 
on percutaneous absorption have revealed detectable levels of crotami-
ton in the urine following a single application on the forearm. 
 Crotamiton (Eurax) is available as a 10% cream or lotion. 
Suggested guidelines for scabies treatment call for two applications 
to the entire body from the chin down at 24-hour intervals, with a 
cleansing bath 48 hours after the last application. Crotamiton is an 
effective agent that can be used as an alternative to lindane. Allergic 
contact dermatitis and primary irritation may occur, necessitating 
discontinuance of therapy. Application to acutely inflamed skin or 
to the eyes or mucous membranes should be avoided. 
 SULFUR 
 Sulfur has a long history of use as a scabicide. Although it is non-
irritating, it has an unpleasant odor, is staining, and is thus dis-
agreeable to use. It has been replaced by more aesthetic and 
effective scabicides in recent years, but it remains a possible alter-
native drug for use in infants and pregnant women. The usual 
formulation is 5% precipitated sulfur in petrolatum. 
 MALATHION 
 Malathion is an organophosphate cholinesterase inhibitor that is 
hydrolyzed and inactivated by plasma carboxylesterases much faster 
in humans than in insects, thereby providing a therapeutic advan-
tage in treating pediculosis (see  Chapter 7 ). Malathion is available 
as a 0.5% lotion (Ovide) that should be applied to the hair when 
dry; 4–6 hours later, the hair is combed to remove nits and lice. 
 BENZYL ALCOHOL 
 Benzyl alcohol (Ulesfia) is available as a 5% lotion for the treat-
ment of head lice in patients older than 6 months. The lotion is 
applied to dry hair and left on for 10 minutes prior to rinsing off 
with water. Because the drug is not ovacidal, the treatment must 
be repeated after 7 days. Eye irritation and allergic contact derma-
titis have been reported. 
 ■ AGENTS AFFECTING 
PIGMENTATION  
 HYDROQUINONE, MONOBENZONE, & 
MEQUINOL 
 Hydroquinone, monobenzone (Benoquin, the monobenzyl ether 
of hydroquinone), and mequinol (the monomethyl ether of hydro-
quinone) are used to reduce hyperpigmentation of the skin. Topical 
hydroquinone and mequinol usually result in temporary lighten-
ing, whereas monobenzone causes irreversible depigmentation. 
 The mechanism of action of these compounds appears to involve 
inhibition of the enzyme tyrosinase, thus interfering with the bio-
synthesis of melanin. In addition, monobenzone may be toxic to 
melanocytes, resulting in permanent loss of these cells. Some percu-
taneous absorption of these compounds takes place, because 
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1069
monobenzone may cause hypopigmentation at sites distant from 
the area of application. Both hydroquinone and monobenzone 
may cause local irritation. Allergic contact dermatitis to these 
compounds can occur. Prescription combinations of hydroqui-
none, fluocinolone acetonide, and retinoic acid (Tri-Luma) and 
mequinol and retinoic acid (Solagé) are more effective than their 
individual components. 
 TRIOXSALEN & METHOXSALEN 
 Trioxsalen and methoxsalen are psoralens used for the repigmenta-
tion of depigmented macules of vitiligo. With the recent develop-
ment of high-intensity long-wave ultraviolet fluorescent lamps, 
photochemotherapy with oral methoxsalen for psoriasis and with 
oral trioxsalen for vitiligo has been under intensive investigation. 
 Psoralens must be photoactivated by long-wavelength ultravio-
let light in the range of 320–400 nm (ultraviolet A [UVA]) to 
produce a beneficial effect. Psoralens intercalate with DNA and, 
with subsequent UVA irradiation, cyclobutane adducts are formed 
with pyrimidine bases. Both monofunctional and bifunctional 
adducts may be formed, the latter causing interstrand cross-links. 
These DNA photoproducts may inhibit DNA synthesis. The 
major long-term risks of psoralen photochemotherapy are cata-
racts and skin cancer. 
 ■ SUNSCREENS 
 Topical medications useful in protecting against sunlight contain 
either chemical compounds that absorb ultraviolet light, called sun-
screens, or opaque materials such as titanium dioxide that reflect 
light, called sunshades. The three classes of chemical compounds 
most commonly used in sunscreens are  p -aminobenzoic acid (PABA) 
and its esters, the benzophenones, and the dibenzoylmethanes. 
 Most sunscreen preparations are designed to absorb ultraviolet 
light in the ultraviolet B (UVB) wavelength range from 280 to 320 
nm, which is the range responsible for most of the erythema and 
sunburn associated with sun exposure and tanning. Chronic expo-
sure to light in this range induces aging of the skin and photocarcino-
genesis. Para-aminobenzoic acid and its esters are the most effective 
available absorbers in the B region. Ultraviolet in the longer UVA 
range, 320–400 nm, is also associated with skin aging and cancer. 
 The benzophenones include oxybenzone, dioxybenzone, and 
sulisobenzone. These compounds provide a broader spectrum of 
absorption from 250 to 360 nm, but their effectiveness in the 
UVB erythema range is less than that of PABA. The dibenzoyl-
methanes include Parasol and Eusolex. These compounds absorb 
wavelengths throughout the longer UVA range, with maximum 
absorption at 360 nm. Patients particularly sensitive to UVA 
wavelengths include individuals with polymorphous light erup-
tion, cutaneous lupus erythematosus, and drug-induced photo-
sensitivity. In these patients, dibenzoylmethane-containing 
sunscreen may provide improved photoprotection. Ecamsule 
(Mexoryl) appears to provide greater UVA protection than the 
dibenzoylmethanes and is less prone to photodegradation. 
 The sun protection factor (SPF) of a given sunscreen is a mea-
sure of its effectiveness in absorbing erythrogenic ultraviolet light. 
It is determined by measuring the minimal erythema dose with 
and without the sunscreen in a group of normal people. The ratio 
of the minimal erythema dose with sunscreen to the minimal 
erythema dose without sunscreen is the SPF. 
 Recently updated FDA regulations limit the claimed maximum 
SPF value on sunscreen labels to 50+ because there is not sufficient 
data to show that products with SPF values higher than 50 provide 
greater protection for users. These new FDA regulations require 
that sunscreens labeled as “broad spectrum” sunscreens will have to 
pass a standard test comparing the amount of UVA radiation pro-
tection in relation to the amount of UVB radiation. Broad spec-
trum sunscreens with SPF values of 15 or higher help protect 
against not only sunburn, but also skin cancer and early skin aging 
when used as directed. Sunscreens with an SPF value between 2 
and 14 will only be allowed to claim to help prevent sunburn. In 
addition, products claiming to be water resistant must indicate 
whether they remain effective for 40 minutes or 80 minutes while 
swimming or sweating, based on standard testing. 
 ■ ACNE PREPARATIONS  
 RETINOIC ACID & DERIVATIVES 
 Retinoic acid, also known as  tretinoin or  all-trans -retinoic acid, is 
the acid form of vitamin A. It is an effective topical treatment for 
acne vulgaris. Several analogs of vitamin A, eg, 13- cis -retinoic acid 
(isotretinoin), have been shown to be effective in various dermato-
logic diseases when given orally. Vitamin A alcohol is the physio-
logic form of vitamin A. The topical therapeutic agent,  retinoic 
acid, is formed by the oxidation of the alcohol group, with all four 
double bonds in the side chain in the  trans configuration as 
shown. 
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
Retinoic acid
COOH
13
9
 
 Retinoic acid is insoluble in water but soluble in many organic 
solvents. Topically applied retinoic acid remains chiefly in the epi-
dermis, with less than 10% absorption into the circulation. The 
small quantities of retinoic acid absorbed following topical applica-
tion are metabolized by the liver and excreted in bile and urine. 
 Retinoic acid has several effects on epithelial tissues. It stabi-
lizes lysosomes, increases ribonucleic acid polymerase activity, 
increases prostaglandin E 2 , cAMP, and cGMP levels, and increases 
the incorporation of thymidine into DNA. Its action in acne has 
been attributed to decreased cohesion between epidermal cells and 
increased epidermal cell turnover. This is thought to result in the 
expulsion of open comedones and the transformation of closed 
comedones into open ones. 
1070    SECTION X Special Topics
 Topical retinoic acid is applied initially in a concentration suf-
ficient to induce slight erythema with mild peeling. The concen-
tration or frequency of application may be decreased if too much 
irritation occurs. Topical retinoic acid should be applied to dry 
skin only, and care should be taken to avoid contact with the 
corners of the nose, eyes, mouth, and mucous membranes. During 
the first 4–6 weeks of therapy, comedones not previously evident 
may appear and give the impression that the acne has been aggra-
vated by the retinoic acid. However, with continued therapy, the 
lesions will clear, and in 8–12 weeks optimal clinical improvement 
should occur. A timed-release formulation of tretinoin containing 
microspheres (Retin-A Micro) delivers the medication over time 
and may be less irritating for sensitive patients. 
 The effects of tretinoin on keratinization and desquamation 
offer benefits for patients with photo damaged skin. Prolonged use 
of tretinoin promotes dermal collagen synthesis, new blood vessel 
formation, and thickening of the epidermis, which helps diminish 
fine lines and wrinkles. Specially formulated moisturizing 0.05% 
cream (Renova, Refissa) is marketed for this purpose. 
 The most common adverse effects of topical retinoic acid are ery-
thema and dryness that occur in the first few weeks of use, but these 
can be expected to resolve with continued therapy. Animal studies 
suggest that this drug may increase the tumorigenic potential of ultra-
violet radiation. In light of this, patients using retinoic acid should be 
advised to avoid or minimize sun exposure and use a protective sun-
screen. Allergic contact dermatitis to topical retinoic acid is rare. 
 Adapalene (Differin) is a derivative of naphthoic acid that resem-
bles retinoic acid in structure and effects. It is available for daily appli-
cation as a 0.1% gel, cream, or lotion and a 0.3% gel. Unlike tretinoin, 
adapalene is photochemically stable and shows little decrease in efficacy 
when used in combination with benzoyl peroxide. Adapalene is less 
irritating than tretinoin and is most effective in patients with mild to 
moderate acne vulgaris. Adapalene is also available in a fixed-dose 
combination gel with benzoyl peroxide (Epiduo). 
 Tazarotene (Tazorac) is an acetylenic retinoid that is available 
as a 0.1% gel and cream for the treatment of mild to moderately 
severe facial acne. Topical tazarotene should be used by women of 
childbearing age only after contraceptive counseling. It is recom-
mended that tazarotene should not be used by pregnant women. 
 ISOTRETINOIN 
 Isotretinoin is a synthetic retinoid currently restricted to the oral 
treatment of severe cystic acne that is recalcitrant to standard 
therapies. The precise mechanism of action of isotretinoin in cys-
tic acne is not known, although it appears to act by inhibiting 
sebaceous gland size and function. The drug is well absorbed, 
extensively bound to plasma albumin, and has an elimination 
half-life of 10–20 hours. 
 Most patients with cystic acne respond to 1–2 mg/kg, given in 
two divided doses daily for 4–5 months. If severe cystic acne per-
sists following this initial treatment, after a period of 2 months, a 
second course of therapy may be initiated. Common adverse 
effects resemble hypervitaminosis A and include dryness and itch-
ing of the skin and mucous membranes. Less common side effects 
are headache, corneal opacities, pseudotumor cerebri, inflamma-
tory bowel disease, anorexia, alopecia, and muscle and joint pains. 
These effects are all reversible on discontinuance of therapy. 
Skeletal hyperostosis has been observed in patients receiving iso-
tretinoin with premature closure of epiphyses noted in children 
treated with this medication. Lipid abnormalities (triglycerides, 
high-density lipoproteins) are frequent; their clinical relevance is 
unknown at present. 
 Teratogenicity is a significant risk in patients taking isotretin-
oin; therefore, women of childbearing potential  must use an effec-
tive form of contraception for at least 1 month before, throughout 
isotretinoin therapy, and for one or more menstrual cycles follow-
ing discontinuance of treatment. A negative serum pregnancy test 
 must be obtained within 2 weeks before starting therapy in these 
patients, and therapy should be initiated only on the second or 
third day of the next normal menstrual period. In the USA, health 
care professionals, pharmacists, and patients must utilize the man-
datory iPLEDGE registration and follow-up system. 
 BENZOYL PEROXIDE 
 Benzoyl peroxide is an effective topical agent in the treatment of 
acne vulgaris. It penetrates the stratum corneum or follicular 
openings unchanged and is converted metabolically to benzoic 
acid within the epidermis and dermis. Less than 5% of an applied 
dose is absorbed from the skin in an 8-hour period. It has been 
postulated that the mechanism of action of benzoyl peroxide in 
acne is related to its antimicrobial activity against  P acnes and to 
its peeling and comedolytic effects. 
 To decrease the likelihood of irritation, application should be 
limited to a low concentration (2.5%) once daily for the first week 
of therapy and increased in frequency and strength if the prepara-
tion is well tolerated. Fixed-combination formulations of 5% 
benzoyl peroxide with 3% erythromycin base (Benzamycin) or 
1% clindamycin (BenzaClin, Duac), and 2.5% benzoyl peroxide 
with 1.2% clindamycin (Acanya) or 0.1% adapalene (Epiduo) 
appear to be more effective than individual agents alone. 
 Benzoyl peroxide is a potent contact sensitizer in experimental 
studies, and this adverse effect may occur in up to 1% of acne 
patients. Care should be taken to avoid contact with the eyes and 
mucous membranes. Benzoyl peroxide is an oxidant and may 
rarely cause bleaching of the hair or colored fabrics. 
 AZELAIC ACID 
 Azelaic acid is a straight-chain saturated dicarboxylic acid that is 
effective in the treatment of acne vulgaris (in the form of Azelex) 
and acne rosacea (Finacea). Its mechanism of action has not been 
fully determined, but preliminary studies demonstrate antimicro-
bial activity against  P acnes as well as in vitro inhibitory effects on 
the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. Initial therapy 
is begun with once-daily applications of the 20% cream or 15% gel 
to the affected areas for 1 week and twice-daily applications thereafter. 
Most patients experience mild irritation with redness and dryness 
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1071
of the skin during the first week of treatment. Clinical improvement 
is noted in 6–8 weeks of continuous therapy. 
 ■ DRUGS FOR PSORIASIS  
 ACITRETIN 
 Acitretin (Soriatane), a metabolite of the aromatic retinoid etreti-
nate, is quite effective in the treatment of psoriasis, especially 
pustular forms. It is given orally at a dosage of 25–50 mg/d. 
Adverse effects attributable to acitretin therapy are similar to those 
seen with isotretinoin and resemble hypervitaminosis A. Elevations 
in cholesterol and triglycerides may be noted with acitretin, and 
hepatotoxicity with liver enzyme elevations has been reported. 
Acitretin is more teratogenic than isotretinoin in the animal spe-
cies studied to date, which is of special concern in view of the 
drug’s prolonged elimination time (more than 3 months) after 
chronic administration. In cases where etretinate is formed by 
concomitant administration of acitretin and ethanol, etretinate 
may be found in plasma and subcutaneous fat for many years. 
 Acitretin must not be used by women who are pregnant or may 
become pregnant while undergoing treatment or at any time for 
at least 3 years after treatment is discontinued. Ethanol must be 
strictly avoided during treatment with acitretin and for 2 months 
after discontinuing therapy. Patients must not donate blood dur-
ing treatment and for 3 years after acitretin is stopped. 
 TAZAROTENE 
 Tazarotene (Tazorac) is a topical acetylenic retinoid prodrug that 
is hydrolyzed to its active form by an esterase. The active metabo-
lite, tazarotenic acid, binds to retinoic acid receptors, resulting in 
modified gene expression. The precise mechanism of action in 
psoriasis is unknown but may relate to both anti-inflammatory 
and antiproliferative actions. Tazarotene is absorbed percutane-
ously, and teratogenic systemic concentrations may be achieved if 
applied to more than 20% of total body surface area. Women of 
childbearing potential must therefore be advised of the risk prior 
to initiating therapy, and adequate birth control measures must be 
utilized while on therapy. 
 Treatment of psoriasis should be limited to once-daily application 
of either 0.05% or 0.1% gel not to exceed 20% of total body surface 
area. Adverse local effects include a burning or stinging sensation 
(sensory irritation) and peeling, erythema, and localized edema of 
the skin (irritant dermatitis). Potentiation of photosensitizing medi-
cation may occur, and patients should be cautioned to minimize 
sunlight exposure and to use sunscreens and protective clothing. 
 CALCIPOTRIENE & CALCITRIOL 
 Calcipotriene (Dovonex) is a synthetic vitamin D 3 derivative 
(available as a 0.005% cream or scalp lotion) that is effective in the 
treatment of plaque-type psoriasis vulgaris of moderate severity. 
Improvement of psoriasis was generally noted following 2 weeks 
of therapy, with continued improvement for up to 8 weeks of 
treatment. However, fewer than 10% of patients demonstrate total 
clearing while on calcipotriene as single-agent therapy. Adverse 
effects include burning, itching, and mild irritation, with dryness 
and erythema of the treatment area. Care should be taken to avoid 
facial contact, which may cause ocular irritation. A once-daily 
two-compound ointment containing calcipotriene and betame-
thasone dipropionate (Taclonex) is available. This combination is 
more effective than its individual ingredients and is well tolerated, 
with a safety profile similar to betamethasone dipropionate. 
 Calcitriol (Vectical) contains 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, 
the hormonally active form of vitamin D 3 . Calcitriol 3 mcg/g 
ointment is similar in efficacy to calcipotriene 0.005% ointment 
for the treatment of plaque-type psoriasis on the body and is better 
tolerated in intertriginous and sensitive areas of the skin. Clinical 
studies show comparable safety data regarding adverse cutaneous 
and systemic reactions between topical calcitriol and calcipotriene 
ointment. 
 BIOLOGIC AGENTS 
 Biologic agents useful in treating adult patients with moderate to 
severe chronic plaque psoriasis include the T-cell modulator ale-
facept, the TNF-α inhibitors etanercept, infliximab, and adali-
mumab, and the cytokine inhibitor ustekinumab. TNF-α 
inhibitors are also discussed in  Chapters 36 and 55 . 
 ALEFACEPT 
 Alefacept (Amevive) is an immunosuppressive dimeric fusion pro-
tein that consists of the extracellular CD2-binding portion of the 
human leukocyte function antigen-3 linked to the Fc portion of 
human IgG 1 . Alefacept interferes with lymphocyte activation, 
which plays a role in the pathophysiology of psoriasis, and causes a 
reduction in subsets of CD2 T lymphocytes and circulating total 
CD4 and CD8 T-lymphocyte counts. The recommended dosage is 
7.5 mg given once weekly as an intravenous bolus or 15 mg once 
weekly as an intramuscular injection for a 12-week course of treat-
ment. Patients should have CD4 lymphocyte counts monitored 
weekly while taking alefacept, and dosing should be withheld if 
CD4 counts are below 250 cells/μL. The drug should be discontin-
ued if the counts remain below 250 cells/μL for 1 month. Alefacept 
is an immunosuppressive agent and should not be administered to 
patients with clinically significant infection. Because of the possi-
bility of an increased risk of malignancy, it should not be adminis-
tered to patients with a history of systemic malignancy. 
 TNF INHIBITORS: ETANERCEPT, 
INFLIXIMAB, & ADALIMUMAB 
 Etanercept (Enbrel) is a dimeric fusion protein consisting of the 
extracellular ligand-binding portion of the human TNF receptor 
linked to the Fc portion of human IgG 1 . Etanercept binds selectively 
1072    SECTION X Special Topics
to TNF-α and -β and blocks interaction with cell surface TNF 
receptors that play a role in the inflammatory process of plaque 
psoriasis. The recommended dosage of etanercept in psoriasis is a 
50 mg subcutaneous injection given twice weekly for 3 months 
followed by a maintenance dose of 50 mg weekly. 
 Infliximab (Remicade) is a chimeric IgG 1 monoclonal anti-
body composed of human constant and murine variable regions. 
Infliximab binds to the soluble and transmembrane forms of 
TNF-α and inhibits binding of TNF-α with its receptors. The 
recommended dose of infliximab is 5 mg/kg given as an intrave-
nous infusion followed by similar doses at 2 and 6 weeks after the 
first infusion and then every 8 weeks thereafter. 
 Adalimumab (Humira) is a recombinant 1gG 1 monoclonal 
antibody that binds specifically to TNF-α and blocks its interac-
tion with cell surface TNF receptors. The recommended dose for 
adalimumab in psoriasis is an initial dose of 80 mg administered 
subcutaneously followed by 40 mg given every other week starting 
1 week after the initial dose. 
 Serious life-threatening infections, including sepsis and pneu-
monia, have been reported with the use of TNF inhibitors. 
Patients should be evaluated for tuberculosis risk factors and tested 
for latent tuberculosis infection prior to starting therapy. 
Concurrent use with other immunosuppressive therapy should be 
avoided. In clinical trials of all TNF-blocking agents more cases of 
lymphoma were observed compared with control patients. Patients 
with a prior history of prolonged phototherapy treatment should 
be monitored for nonmelanoma skin cancers. 
 USTEKINUMAB 
 Ustekinumab (Stelara) is a human IgG1κ monoclonal antibody that 
binds with high affinity and specificity to interleukin (IL)-12 and 
IL-23 cytokines inhibiting TH1 and TH17 cell-mediated responses, 
which are involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. The recom-
mended treatment protocol is 45 mg for patients weighing less than 
100 kg and 90 mg for patients weighing more than 100 kg given as 
a subcutaneous injection initially, followed by the same dose 4 weeks 
later, and then once every 12 weeks. Serious allergic reactions includ-
ing angioedema and anaphylaxis have occurred and caution should 
be exercised in patients receiving allergy immunotherapy. Serious 
infections, especially from mycobacterial organisms, are possible and 
patients must be evaluated for tuberculosis prior to initiating therapy. 
Live vaccines, including Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG), should 
not be given with ustekinumab. One case of reversible posterior 
leukoencephalopathy syndrome (RPLS) has been reported. 
 ■ ANTIINFLAMMATORY AGENTS  
 TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS 
 The remarkable efficacy of topical corticosteroids in the treatment 
of inflammatory dermatoses was noted soon after the introduction 
of hydrocortisone in 1952. Numerous analogs are now available 
that offer extensive choices of potencies, concentrations, and 
vehicles. The therapeutic effectiveness of topical corticosteroids is 
based primarily on their anti-inflammatory activity. Definitive 
explanations of the effects of corticosteroids on endogenous 
mediators of inflammation await further experimental clarifica-
tion. The antimitotic effects of corticosteroids on human epider-
mis may account for an additional mechanism of action in 
psoriasis and other dermatologic diseases associated with increased 
cell turnover. The general pharmacology of these endocrine agents 
is discussed in  Chapter 39 . 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 The original topical glucocorticosteroid was hydrocortisone, the 
natural glucocorticosteroid of the adrenal cortex. The 9α-fluoro 
derivative of hydrocortisone was active topically, but its salt-
retaining properties made it undesirable even for topical use. 
Prednisolone and methylprednisolone are as active topically as 
hydrocortisone ( Table 61–2 ). The 9α-fluorinated steroids dexam-
ethasone and betamethasone did not have any advantage over 
hydrocortisone. However, triamcinolone and fluocinolone, the 
acetonide derivatives of the fluorinated steroids, do have a distinct 
efficacy advantage in topical therapy. Similarly, betamethasone is 
not very active topically, but attaching a 5-carbon valerate chain to 
the 17-hydroxyl position results in a compound over 300 times as 
active as hydrocortisone for topical use. Fluocinonide is the 
21-acetate derivative of fluocinolone acetonide; the addition of 
the 21-acetate enhances the topical activity about five-fold. 
Fluorination of the corticoid is not required for high potency. 
 Corticosteroids are only minimally absorbed following applica-
tion to normal skin; for example, approximately 1% of a dose of 
hydrocortisone solution applied to the ventral forearm is absorbed. 
Long-term occlusion with an impermeable film such as plastic 
wrap is an effective method of enhancing penetration, yielding a 
tenfold increase in absorption. There is a marked regional ana-
tomic variation in corticosteroid penetration. Compared with the 
absorption from the forearm, hydrocortisone is absorbed 0.14 
times as well through the plantar foot arch, 0.83 times as well 
through the palm, 3.5 times as well through the scalp, 6 times as 
well through the forehead, 9 times as well through vulvar skin, and 
42 times as well through scrotal skin. Penetration is increased 
severalfold in the inflamed skin of atopic dermatitis; and in severe 
exfoliative diseases, such as erythrodermic psoriasis, there appears 
to be little barrier to penetration. 
 Experimental studies on the percutaneous absorption of hydro-
cortisone fail to reveal a significant increase in absorption when 
applied on a repetitive basis and a single daily application may be 
effective in most conditions. Ointment bases tend to give better 
activity to the corticosteroid than do cream or lotion vehicles. 
Increasing the concentration of a corticosteroid increases the pen-
etration but not proportionately. For example, approximately 1% 
of a 0.25% hydrocortisone solution is absorbed from the forearm. 
A 10-fold increase in concentration causes only a fourfold increase 
in absorption. Solubility of the corticosteroid in the vehicle is a 
significant determinant of the percutaneous absorption of a topi-
cal steroid. Marked increases in efficacy are noted when optimized 
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1073
TABLE 61–2 Relative efficacy of some topical corticosteroids in various formulations.
Concentration in 
Commonly Used 
Preparations
Drug
Concentration in 
Commonly Used 
Preparations
Drug
Lowest efficacy
Intermediate efficacy (continued)
0.25–2.5%
0.25%
0.1%
1.0%
0.5%
0.2%
Hydrocortisone
Methylprednisolone acetate (Medrol)
Dexamethasone1 (Decaderm)
Methylprednisolone acetate (Medrol)
Prednisolone (MetiDerm)
Betamethasone1 (Celestone)
0.05%
0.05%
0.025%
0.05%
0.05%
0.1%
0.025%
Fluticasone propionate (Cutivate)
Desonide (Desowen)
Halcinonide1 (Halog)
Desoximetasone1 (Topicort L.P.)
Flurandrenolide1 (Cordran)
Triamcinolone acetonide1
Fluocinolone acetonide1
Low efficacy
0.01%
0.01%
0.025%
0.05%
0.025%
0.1%
0.03%
Fluocinolone acetonide1 (Fluonid, Synalar)
Betamethasone valerate1 (Valisone)
Fluorometholone1 (Oxylone)
Alclometasone dipropionate (Aclovate)
Triamcinolone acetonide1 (Aristocort, Kenalog, 
Triacet)
Clocortolone pivalate1 (Cloderm)
Flumethasone pivalate1 (Locorten)
High efficacy
0.05%
0.05%
0.1%
0.25%
0.5%
0.2%
0.05%
0.1%
Fluocinonide1 (Lidex)
Betamethasone dipropionate1 (Diprosone, 
Maxivate)
Amcinonide1 (Cyclocort)
Desoximetasone1 (Topicort)
Triamcinolone acetonide1
Fluocinolone acetonide1 (Synalar-HP)
Diflorasone diacetate1 (Florone, Maxiflor)
Halcinonide1 (Halog)
Intermediate efficacy
0.2%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.025%
0.025%
0.1%
0.1%
Hydrocortisone valerate (Westcort)
Mometasone furoate (Elocon)
Hydrocortisone butyrate (Locoid)
Hydrocortisone probutate (Pandel)
Betamethasone benzoate1 (Uticort)
Flurandrenolide1 (Cordran)
Betamethasone valerate1 (Valisone)
Prednicarbate (Dermatop)
Highest efficacy
0.05%
0.05%
0.05%
0.05%
Betamethasone dipropionate in 
optimized vehicle (Diprolene)1
Diflorasone diacetate1 in optimized 
vehicle (Psorcon)
Halobetasol propionate1 (Ultravate)
Clobetasol propionate1 (Temovate)
1Fluorinated steroids.
vehicles are used, as demonstrated by newer formulations of 
betamethasone dipropionate and diflorasone diacetate. 
 Table 61–2 groups topical corticosteroid formulations accord-
ing to approximate relative efficacy.  Table 61–3 lists major derma-
tologic diseases in order of their responsiveness to these drugs. In 
the first group of diseases, low- to medium-efficacy corticosteroid 
preparations often produce clinical remission. In the second 
group, it is often necessary to use high-efficacy preparations, 
occlusion therapy, or both. Once a remission has been achieved, 
every effort should be made to maintain the improvement with a 
low-efficacy corticosteroid. 
 The limited penetration of topical corticosteroids can be over-
come in certain clinical circumstances by the intralesional injec-
tion of relatively insoluble corticosteroids, eg, triamcinolone 
acetonide, triamcinolone diacetate, triamcinolone hexacetonide, 
and betamethasone acetate-phosphate. When these agents are 
injected into the lesion, measurable amounts remain in place and 
are gradually released for 3–4 weeks. This form of therapy is often 
effective for the lesions listed in  Table 61–3 that are generally 
unresponsive to topical corticosteroids. The dosage of the triam-
cinolone salts should be limited to 1 mg per treatment site, ie, 0.1 
mL of 10 mg/mL suspension, to decrease the incidence of local 
atrophy (see below). 
 Adverse Effects 
 All absorbable topical corticosteroids possess the potential to sup-
press the pituitary-adrenal axis (see  Chapter 39 ). Although most 
patients with pituitary-adrenal axis suppression demonstrate only 
a laboratory test abnormality, cases of severely impaired stress 
1074    SECTION X Special Topics
response can occur. Iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome may occur as a 
result of protracted use of topical corticosteroids in large quanti-
ties. Applying potent corticosteroids to extensive areas of the body 
for prolonged periods, with or without occlusion, increases the 
likelihood of systemic effects. Fewer of these factors are required 
to produce adverse systemic effects in children, and growth retar-
dation is of particular concern in the pediatric age group. 
 Adverse local effects of topical corticosteroids include the fol-
lowing: atrophy, which may present as depressed, shiny, often 
wrinkled “cigarette paper”-appearing skin with prominent telang-
iectases and a tendency to develop purpura and ecchymosis; corti-
coid rosacea, with persistent erythema, telangiectatic vessels, 
pustules, and papules in central facial distribution; perioral derma-
titis, steroid acne, alterations of cutaneous infections, hypopig-
mentation, hypertrichosis; increased intraocular pressure; and 
allergic contact dermatitis. The latter may be confirmed by patch 
testing with high concentrations of corticosteroids, ie, 1% in pet-
rolatum, because topical corticosteroids are not irritating. Screening 
for allergic contact dermatitis potential is performed with tixocor-
tol pivalate, budesonide, and hydrocortisone valerate or butyrate. 
Topical corticosteroids are contraindicated in individuals who 
demonstrate hypersensitivity to them. Some sensitized subjects 
develop a generalized flare when dosed with adrenocorticotropic 
hormone or oral prednisone. 
 TAR COMPOUNDS 
 Tar preparations are used mainly in the treatment of psoriasis, 
dermatitis, and lichen simplex chronicus. The phenolic constitu-
ents endow these compounds with antipruritic properties, making 
them particularly valuable in the treatment of chronic lichenified 
dermatitis. Acute dermatitis with vesiculation and oozing may be 
irritated by even weak tar preparations, which should be avoided. 
However, in the subacute and chronic stages of dermatitis and 
psoriasis, these preparations are quite useful and offer an alterna-
tive to the use of topical corticosteroids. 
 The most common adverse reaction to coal tar compounds is 
an irritant folliculitis, necessitating discontinuance of therapy to 
the affected areas for a period of 3–5 days. Photoirritation and 
allergic contact dermatitis may also occur. Tar preparations should 
be avoided in patients who have previously exhibited sensitivity to 
them. 
 ■ KERATOLYTIC & DESTRUCTIVE 
AGENTS  
 SALICYLIC ACID 
 Salicylic acid has been extensively used in dermatologic therapy as 
a keratolytic agent. The mechanism by which it produces its kera-
tolytic and other therapeutic effects is poorly understood. The 
drug may solubilize cell surface proteins that keep the stratum 
corneum intact, thereby resulting in desquamation of keratotic 
debris. Salicylic acid is keratolytic in concentrations of 3–6%. In 
concentrations greater than 6%, it can be destructive to tissues. 
 Salicylic acid
OH
COOH
 Salicylism and death have occurred following topical applica-
tion. In an adult, 1 g of a topically applied 6% salicylic acid 
preparation will raise the serum salicylate level not more than 
0.5 mg/dL of plasma; the threshold for toxicity is 30–50 mg/dL. 
Higher serum levels are possible in children, who are therefore at 
a greater risk for salicylism. In cases of severe intoxication, hemo-
dialysis is the treatment of choice (see  Chapter 58 ). It is advisable 
TABLE 61–3  Dermatologic disorders responsive to 
topical corticosteroids ranked in order 
of sensitivity.
Very responsive
 Atopic dermatitis
 Seborrheic dermatitis
 Lichen simplex chronicus
 Pruritus ani
 Later phase of allergic contact dermatitis
 Later phase of irritant dermatitis
 Nummular eczematous dermatitis
 Stasis dermatitis
 Psoriasis, especially of genitalia and face
Less responsive
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
 Psoriasis of palms and soles
 Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum
 Sarcoidosis
 Lichen striatus
 Pemphigus
 Familial benign pemphigus
 Vitiligo
 Granuloma annulare
Least responsive: Intralesional injection required
 Keloids
 Hypertrophic scars
 Hypertrophic lichen planus
 Alopecia areata
 Acne cysts
 Prurigo nodularis
 Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1075
to limit both the total amount of salicylic acid applied and the 
frequency of application. Urticarial, anaphylactic, and erythema 
multiforme reactions may occur in patients who are allergic to 
salicylates. Topical use may be associated with local irritation, 
acute inflammation, and even ulceration with the use of high 
concentrations of salicylic acid. Particular care must be exercised 
when using the drug on the extremities of patients with diabetes 
or peripheral vascular disease. 
 PROPYLENE GLYCOL 
 Propylene glycol is used extensively in topical preparations because 
it is an excellent vehicle for organic compounds. It has been used 
alone as a keratolytic agent in 40–70% concentrations, with plas-
tic occlusion, or in gel with 6% salicylic acid. 
 Only minimal amounts of a topically applied dose are absorbed 
through normal stratum corneum. Percutaneously absorbed pro-
pylene glycol is oxidized by the liver to lactic acid and pyruvic 
acid, with subsequent utilization in general body metabolism. 
Approximately 12–45% of the absorbed agent is excreted 
unchanged in the urine. 
 Propylene glycol is an effective keratolytic agent for the removal 
of hyperkeratotic debris. It is also an effective humectant and 
increases the water content of the stratum corneum. The hygro-
scopic characteristics of propylene glycol may help it to develop an 
osmotic gradient through the stratum corneum, thereby increas-
ing hydration of the outermost layers by drawing water out from 
the inner layers of the skin. 
 Propylene glycol is used under polyethylene occlusion or with 
6% salicylic acid for the treatment of ichthyosis, palmar and plan-
tar keratodermas, psoriasis, pityriasis rubra pilaris, keratosis pilaris, 
and hypertrophic lichen planus. 
 In concentrations greater than 10%, propylene glycol may act 
as an irritant in some patients; those with eczematous dermatitis 
may be more sensitive. Allergic contact dermatitis occurs with 
propylene glycol, and a 4% aqueous propylene glycol solution is 
recommended for the purpose of patch testing. 
 UREA 
 Urea in a compatible cream vehicle or ointment base has a soft-
ening and moisturizing effect on the stratum corneum. It has 
the ability to make creams and lotions feel less greasy, and this 
has been utilized in dermatologic preparations to decrease the 
oily feel of a preparation that otherwise might feel unpleasant. 
It is a white crystalline powder with a slight ammonia odor 
when moist. 
 Urea is absorbed percutaneously, although the amount absorbed 
is minimal. It is distributed predominantly in the extracellular 
space and excreted in urine. Urea is a natural product of metabo-
lism, and systemic toxicities with topical application do not occur. 
 Urea increases the water content of the stratum corneum, pre-
sumably as a result of the hygroscopic characteristics of this natu-
rally occurring molecule. Urea is also keratolytic. The mechanism 
of action appears to involve alterations in prekeratin and keratin, 
leading to increased solubilization. In addition, urea may break 
hydrogen bonds that keep the stratum corneum intact. 
 As a humectant, urea is used in concentrations of 2–20% in 
creams and lotions. As a keratolytic agent, it is used in 20% con-
centration in diseases such as ichthyosis vulgaris, hyperkeratosis of 
palms and soles, xerosis, and keratosis pilaris. Concentrations of 
30–50% applied to the nail plate have been useful in softening the 
nail prior to avulsion. 
 PODOPHYLLUM RESIN & PODOFILOX 
 Podophyllum resin, an alcoholic extract of  Podophyllum peltatum , 
commonly known as mandrake root or May apple, is used in the 
treatment of condyloma acuminatum and other verrucae. It is a 
mixture of podophyllotoxin, α and β peltatin, desoxypodophyl-
lotoxin, dehydropodophyllotoxin, and other compounds. It is 
soluble in alcohol, ether, chloroform, and compound tincture of 
benzoin. 
 Percutaneous absorption of podophyllum resin occurs, par-
ticularly in intertriginous areas and from applications to large 
moist condylomas. It is soluble in lipids and therefore is distrib-
uted widely throughout the body, including the central nervous 
system. 
 The major use of podophyllum resin is in the treatment of 
condyloma acuminatum. Podophyllotoxin and its derivatives are 
active cytotoxic agents with specific affinity for the microtubule 
protein of the mitotic spindle. Normal assembly of the spindle is 
prevented, and epidermal mitoses are arrested in metaphase. A 
25% concentration of podophyllum resin in compound tincture 
of benzoin is recommended for the treatment of condyloma 
acuminatum. Application should be restricted to wart tissue only, 
to limit the total amount of medication used and to prevent severe 
erosive changes in adjacent tissue. In treating cases of large condy-
lomas, it is advisable to limit application to sections of the affected 
area to minimize systemic absorption. The patient is instructed to 
wash off the preparation 2–3 hours after the initial application, 
because the irritant reaction is variable. Depending on the indi-
vidual patient’s reaction, this period can be extended to 6–8 hours 
on subsequent applications. If three to five applications have not 
resulted in significant resolution, other methods of treatment 
should be considered. 
 Toxic symptoms associated with excessively large applications 
include nausea, vomiting, alterations in sensorium, muscle weak-
ness, neuropathy with diminished tendon reflexes, coma, and 
even death. Local irritation is common, and inadvertent contact 
with the eye may cause severe conjunctivitis. Use during preg-
nancy is contraindicated in view of possible cytotoxic effects on 
the fetus. 
 Pure podophyllotoxin (podofilox) is approved for use as either 
a 0.5% solution or gel (Condylox) for application by the patient 
in the treatment of genital condylomas. The low concentration of 
podofilox significantly reduces the potential for systemic toxicity. 
Most men with penile warts may be treated with less than 70 μL 
per application. At this dose, podofilox is not routinely detected 
1076    SECTION X Special Topics
in the serum. Treatment is self-administered in treatment cycles of 
twice-daily application for 3 consecutive days followed by a 4-day 
drug-free period. Local adverse effects include inflammation, ero-
sions, burning pain, and itching. 
 SINECATECHINS 
 Sinecatechins 15% ointment (Veregen) is a prescription botanical 
drug product of a partially purified fraction of the water extract of 
green tea leaves from  Camellia sinensis containing a mixture of 
catechins. Sinecatechins ointment is indicated for the topical treat-
ment of external genital and perianal warts in immunocompetent 
patients 18 years and older. The mechanism of action is unknown. 
Sinecatechins ointment should be applied three times daily to the 
warts until complete clearance, not to exceed 16 weeks of therapy. 
 FLUOROURACIL 
 Fluorouracil is a fluorinated pyrimidine antimetabolite that 
resembles uracil, with a fluorine atom substituted for the 5-methyl 
group. Its systemic pharmacology is described in  Chapter 54 . 
Fluorouracil is used topically for the treatment of multiple actinic 
keratoses. 
 Approximately 6% of a topically applied dose is absorbed—an 
amount insufficient to produce adverse systemic effects. Most of 
the absorbed drug is metabolized and excreted as carbon dioxide, 
urea, and α-fluoro-β-alanine. A small percentage is eliminated 
unchanged in the urine. Fluorouracil inhibits thymidylate syn-
thetase activity, interfering with the synthesis of DNA and, to a 
lesser extent, RNA. These effects are most marked in atypical, 
rapidly proliferating cells. 
 Fluorouracil is available in multiple formulations containing 
0.5%, 1%, 2%, and 5% concentrations. The response to treatment 
begins with erythema and progresses through vesiculation, erosion, 
superficial ulceration, necrosis, and finally reepithelialization. 
Fluorouracil should be continued until the inflammatory reaction 
reaches the stage of ulceration and necrosis, usually in 3–4 weeks, at 
which time treatment should be terminated. The healing process 
may continue for 1–2 months after therapy is discontinued. Local 
adverse reactions may include pain, pruritus, a burning sensation, 
tenderness, and residual postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. 
Excessive exposure to sunlight during treatment may increase the 
intensity of the reaction and should be avoided. Allergic contact 
dermatitis to fluorouracil has been reported, and its use is contrain-
dicated in patients with known hypersensitivity. 
 NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY 
DRUGS 
 A topical 3% gel formulation of the nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drug diclofenac (Solaraze) has shown moderate effectiveness 
in the treatment of actinic keratoses. The mechanism of action is 
unknown. As with other NSAIDs, anaphylactoid reactions may 
occur with diclofenac, and it should be given with caution to 
patients with known aspirin hypersensitivity (see  Chapter 36 ). 
 AMINOLEVULINIC ACIDS 
 Aminolevulinic acid (ALA) is an endogenous precursor of photo-
sensitizing porphyrin metabolites. When exogenous ALA is pro-
vided to the cell through topical applications, protoporphyrin IX 
(PpIX) accumulates in the cell. When exposed to light of appro-
priate wavelength and energy, the accumulated PpIX produces a 
photodynamic reaction resulting in the formation of cytotoxic 
superoxide and hydroxyl radicals. Photosensitization of actinic 
keratoses using ALA (Levulan Kerastick) and illumination with a 
blue light photodynamic therapy illuminator (BLU-U) is the basis 
for ALA photodynamic therapy. 
 Treatment consists of applying ALA 20% topical solution to 
individual actinic keratoses followed by blue light photodynamic 
illumination 14–18 hours later. Transient stinging or burning at 
the treatment site occurs during the period of light exposure. 
Patients  must avoid exposure to sunlight or bright indoor lights for 
at least 40 hours after ALA application. Redness, swelling, and 
crusting of the actinic keratoses will occur and gradually resolve 
over a 3- to 4-week time course. Allergic contact dermatitis to 
methyl ester may occur. 
 ■ ANTIPRURITIC AGENTS  
 DOXEPIN 
 Topical doxepin hydrochloride 5% cream (Zonalon) may provide 
significant antipruritic activity when utilized in the treatment of 
pruritus associated with atopic dermatitis or lichen simplex 
chronicus. The precise mechanism of action is unknown but may 
relate to the potent H 1 - and H 2 -receptor antagonist properties of 
dibenzoxepin tricyclic compounds. Percutaneous absorption is 
variable and may result in significant drowsiness in some patients. 
In view of the anticholinergic effect of doxepin, topical use is 
contraindicated in patients with untreated narrow-angle glaucoma 
or a tendency to urinary retention. 
 Plasma levels of doxepin similar to those achieved during oral 
therapy may be obtained with topical application; the usual drug 
interactions associated with tricyclic antidepressants may occur. 
Therefore, monoamine oxidase inhibitors must be discontinued at 
least 2 weeks prior to the initiation of doxepin cream. Topical 
application of the cream should be performed four times daily for 
up to 8 days of therapy. The safety and efficacy of chronic dosing 
has not been established. Adverse local effects include marked 
burning and stinging of the treatment site which may necessitate 
discontinuation of the cream in some patients. Allergic contact 
dermatitis appears to be frequent, and patients should be moni-
tored for symptoms of hypersensitivity. 
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1077
 PRAMOXINE 
 Pramoxine hydrochloride is a topical anesthetic that can provide 
temporary relief from pruritus associated with mild eczematous 
dermatoses. Pramoxine is available as a 1% cream, lotion, or gel and 
in combination with hydrocortisone acetate. Application to the 
affected area two to four times daily may provide short-term relief 
of pruritus. Local adverse effects include transient burning and 
stinging. Care should be exercised to avoid contact with the eyes. 
 ■ TRICHOGENIC & 
ANTITRICHOGENIC AGENTS  
 MINOXIDIL 
 Topical minoxidil (Rogaine) is effective in reversing the progres-
sive miniaturization of terminal scalp hairs associated with andro-
genic alopecia. Vertex balding is more responsive to therapy than 
frontal balding. The mechanism of action of minoxidil on hair 
follicles is unknown. Chronic dosing studies have demonstrated 
that the effect of minoxidil is not permanent, and cessation of 
treatment will lead to hair loss in 4–6 months. Percutaneous 
absorption of minoxidil in normal scalp is minimal, but possible 
systemic effects on blood pressure (see  Chapter 11 ) should be 
monitored in patients with cardiac disease. 
 FINASTERIDE 
 Finasteride (Propecia) is a 5α-reductase inhibitor that blocks the 
conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (see  Chapter 40 ), 
the androgen responsible for androgenic alopecia in genetically 
predisposed men. Oral finasteride, 1 mg/d, promotes hair growth 
and prevents further hair loss in a significant proportion of men 
with androgenic alopecia. Treatment for at least 3–6 months is 
necessary to see increased hair growth or prevent further hair loss. 
Continued treatment with finasteride is necessary to sustain bene-
fit. Reported adverse effects include decreased libido, ejaculation 
disorders, and erectile dysfunction, which resolve in most men who 
remain on therapy and in all men who discontinue finasteride. 
 There are no data to support the use of finasteride in women 
with androgenic alopecia. Pregnant women should not be exposed 
to finasteride either by use or by handling crushed tablets because 
of the risk of hypospadias developing in a male fetus. 
 BIMATOPROST 
 Bimatoprost (Latisse) is a prostaglandin analog that is available as 
a 0.03% ophthalmic solution to treat hypotrichosis of the eye-
lashes. The mechanism of action is unknown. Treatment consists 
of nightly application to the skin of the upper eyelid margins at 
the base of the eyelashes using a separate disposable applicator for 
each eyelid. Contact lenses should be removed prior to bimato-
prost application. Side effects include pruritus, conjunctival hype-
remia, skin pigmentation, and erythema of the eyelids. Although 
iris darkening has not been reported with applications confined to 
the upper eyelid skin, increased brown iris pigmentation, which is 
likely to be permanent, has occurred when bimatoprost ophthal-
mic solution was instilled onto the eye. 
 EFLORNITHINE 
 Eflornithine (Vaniqa) is an irreversible inhibitor of ornithine 
decarboxylase, which catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the biosyn-
thesis of polyamines. Polyamines are required for cell division and 
differentiation, and inhibition of ornithine decarboxylase affects 
the rate of hair growth. Topical eflornithine has been shown to be 
effective in reducing facial hair growth in approximately 30% of 
women when applied twice daily for 6 months of therapy. Hair 
growth was observed to return to pretreatment levels 8 weeks after 
discontinuation. Local adverse effects include stinging, burning, 
and folliculitis. 
 ■ ANTINEOPLASTIC AGENTS 
 Alitretinoin (Panretin) is a topical formulation of 9- cis -retinoic 
acid which is approved for the treatment of cutaneous lesions in 
patients with AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma. Localized reactions 
may include intense erythema, edema, and vesiculation necessitat-
ing discontinuation of therapy. Patients who are applying alitretin-
oin should not concurrently use products containing DEET, a 
common component of insect repellant products. 
 Bexarotene (Targretin) is a member of a subclass of retinoids 
that selectively binds and activates retinoid X receptor subtypes. It 
is available both in an oral formulation and as a topical gel for the 
treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Teratogenicity is a sig-
nificant risk for both systemic and topical treatment with bexaro-
tene, and women of childbearing potential must avoid becoming 
pregnant throughout therapy and for at least 1 month following 
discontinuation of the drug. Bexarotene may increase levels of 
triglycerides and cholesterol; therefore, lipid levels must be moni-
tored during treatment. 
 Vorinostat (Zolinza) and  romidepsin (Istodax) are histone 
deacetylase inhibitors that are approved for the treatment of cuta-
neous T-cell lymphoma in patients with progressive, persistent, or 
recurrent disease after prior systemic therapy. Adverse effects 
include thrombocytopenia, anemia, and gastrointestinal distur-
bances. Pulmonary embolism, which has occurred with vorino-
stat, has not been reported to date with romidepsin. 
 ■ ANTISEBORRHEA AGENTS 
 Table 61–4 lists topical formulations for the treatment of seb-
orrheic dermatitis. These are of variable efficacy and may 
1078    SECTION X Special Topics
necessitate concomitant treatment with topical corticosteroids 
for severe cases. 
 ■ MISCELLANEOUS 
MEDICATIONS 
 A number of drugs used primarily for other conditions also find 
use as oral therapeutic agents for dermatologic conditions. A few 
such preparations are listed in  Table 61–5 . 
TABLE 61–4 Antiseborrhea agents.
Active Ingredient
Typical Trade Name
Betamethasone valerate foam
Luxiq
Chloroxine shampoo
Capitrol
Coal tar shampoo
Ionil-T, Pentrax, Theraplex-T, 
T-Gel
Fluocinolone acetonide shampoo
FS Shampoo
Ketoconazole shampoo and gel
Nizoral, Xolegel
Selenium sulfide shampoo
Selsun, Exsel
Zinc pyrithione shampoo
DHS-Zinc, Theraplex-Z
TABLE 61–5  Miscellaneous medications and the dermatologic conditions in which they are used.
Drug or Group
Conditions
Comment
Alitretinoin
AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma
See also Chapter 49.
Antihistamines
Pruritus (any cause), urticaria
See also Chapter 16.
Antimalarials
Lupus erythematosus, photosensitization
See also Chapter 36.
Antimetabolites
Psoriasis, pemphigus, pemphigoid
See also Chapter 54.
Becaplermin
Diabetic neuropathic ulcers
See also Chapter 41.
Bexarotene
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
See also Chapter 54.
Corticosteroids
Pemphigus, pemphigoid, lupus erythematosus, 
allergic contact dermatoses, and certain other 
dermatoses
See also Chapter 39.
Cyclosporine
Psoriasis
See also Chapter 55.
Dapsone
Dermatitis herpetiformis, erythema elevatum 
diutinum, pemphigus, pemphigoid, bullous lupus 
erythematosus
See also Chapter 47.
Denileukin diftitox
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
See also Chapter 54.
Drospirenone/ethinyl estradiol
Moderate female acne
See also Chapter 39.
Interferon
Melanoma, viral warts
See also Chapter 55.
Mycophenolate mofetil
Bullous disease
See also Chapter 55.
Romidepsin
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
See also Chapter 54.
Thalidomide
Erythema nodosum leprosum
See also Chapters 47 and 55.
Vorinostat
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
See also Chapter 54
 REFERENCES 
 General 
 Bronaugh R, Maibach HI: Percutaneous Penetration:  Principles and Practices , 4th 
ed. Taylor & Francis, 2005. 
 Wakelin S, Maibach HI:  Systemic Drugs in Dermatology . Manson, 2004. 
 Wolverton S:  Comprehensive Dermatologic Drug Therapy , 2nd ed. Saunders, 2007. 
 Antibacterial, Antifungal, & Antiviral Drugs 
 Aly R, Beutner K, Maibach HI:  Cutaneous Microbiology . Marcel Dekker, 1996. 
 James WD: Clinical practice. Acne. N Engl J Med 2005;352:1463. 
 McClellan KJ et al: Terbinafine. An update of its use in superficial mycoses. Drugs 
1999;58:179. 
 Ectoparasiticides 
 Elgart ML: A risk-benefit assessment of agents used in the treatment of scabies. 
Drug Saf 1996;14:386. 
 Agents Affecting Pigmentation 
 Levitt J: The safety of hydroquinone. J Am Acad Dermatol 2007;57:854. 
 Stolk LML, Siddiqui AH: Biopharmaceutics, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacol-
ogy of psoralens. Gen Pharmacol 1988;19:649. 
 Retinoids & Other Acne Preparations 
 Leyden JJ: Topical treatment of acne vulgaris: Retinoids and cutaneous irritation. 
J Am Acad Dermatol 1998;38:S1. 
CHAPTER 61 Dermatologic Pharmacology    1079
 Shalita AR et al: Tazarotene gel is safe and effective in the treatment of acne vul-
garis. A multicenter, double-blind, vehicle-controlled study. Cutis 
1999;63:349. 
 Thami GP, Sarkar R: Coal tar: Past, present and future. Clin Exp Dermatol 
2002;27:99. 
 Weinstein GD et al: Topical tretinoin for treatment of photodamaged skin. Arch 
Dermatol 1991;127:659. 
 Anti-Inflammatory Agents 
 Brazzini B, Pimpinelli N: New and established topical corticosteroids in dermatol-
ogy: Clinical pharmacology and therapeutic use. Am J Clin Dermatol 
2002;3:47. 
 Surber C, Maibach HI:  Topical Corticosteroids . Karger, 1994. 
 Williams JD, Griffiths CE: Cytokine blocking agents in dermatology. Clin Exp 
Dermatol 2002;27:585. 
 Keratolytic & Destructive Agents 
 Roenigk H, Maibach HI (editors):  Psoriasis , 3rd ed. Marcel Dekker, 1998. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Initial therapy consisting of twice-daily applications of a 
medium-strength topical corticosteroid combined with 
once-daily topical calcipotriene or calcitriol should provide 
adequate control for this patient’s localized psoriasis. A coal 
tar shampoo should be initiated for her scalp psoriasis with 
nightly application of a corticosteroid solution to recalcitrant 
plaques.
This page intentionally left blank 
1081
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 Many of the drug groups discussed elsewhere in this book have 
important applications in the treatment of diseases of the gastro-
intestinal tract and other organs. Other groups are used almost 
exclusively for their effects on the gut; these are discussed in the 
following text according to their therapeutic uses. 
 ■ DRUGS USED IN ACIDPEPTIC 
DISEASES 
 Acid-peptic diseases include gastroesophageal reflux, peptic ulcer 
(gastric and duodenal), and stress-related mucosal injury. In all 
these conditions, mucosal erosions or ulceration arise when the 
caustic effects of aggressive factors (acid, pepsin, bile) overwhelm 
the defensive factors of the gastrointestinal mucosa (mucus and 
bicarbonate secretion, prostaglandins, blood flow, and the pro-
cesses of restitution and regeneration after cellular injury). Over 
90% of peptic ulcers are caused by infection with the bacterium 
 Helicobacter pylori or by use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs). Drugs used in the treatment of acid-peptic dis-
orders may be divided into two classes: agents that reduce intra-
gastric acidity and agents that promote mucosal defense. 
 AGENTS THAT REDUCE 
INTRAGASTRIC ACIDITY  
 PHYSIOLOGY OF ACID SECRETION 
 The parietal cell contains receptors for gastrin (CCK-B), histamine 
(H 2 ), and acetylcholine (muscarinic, M 3 ) ( Figure 62–1 ). When 
acetylcholine (from vagal postganglionic nerves) or gastrin (released 
from antral G cells into the blood) bind to the parietal cell recep-
tors, they cause an increase in cytosolic calcium, which in turn 
stimulates protein kinases that stimulate acid secretion from a H + /
K + -ATPase (the proton pump) on the canalicular surface. 
62
Drugs Used in 
the Treatment of 
Gastrointestinal Diseases
 Kenneth R. McQuaid, MD 
 C A S E  S T U D Y 
 A 21-year-old woman comes with her parents to discuss 
therapeutic options for her Crohn’s disease. She was diag-
nosed with Crohn’s disease 2 years ago, and it involves her 
terminal ileum and proximal colon, as confirmed by colonos-
copy and small bowel radiography. She was initially treated 
with mesalamine and budesonide with good response, but 
over the last 2 months, she has had a relapse of her symp-
toms. She is experiencing fatigue, cramping, abdominal 
pains, and nonbloody diarrhea up to 10 times daily, and she 
has had a 15-lb weight loss. 
 She has no other significant medical or surgical history. 
Her current medications are mesalamine 2.4 g/d and budes-
onide 9 mg/d. She appears thin and tired. Abdominal exam-
ination reveals tenderness without guarding in the right 
lower quadrant; no masses are palpable. On perianal exami-
nation, there is no tenderness, fissure, or fistula. Her labora-
tory data are notable for anemia and elevated C-reactive 
protein. What are the options for immediate control of her 
symptoms and disease? What are the long-term management 
options? 
1082    SECTION X Special Topics
 In close proximity to the parietal cells are gut endocrine cells 
called  enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells . ECL cells also have recep-
tors for gastrin and acetylcholine, which stimulate histamine 
release. Histamine binds to the H 2 receptor on the parietal cell, 
resulting in activation of adenylyl cyclase, which increases intra-
cellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and activates 
protein kinases that stimulate acid secretion by the H + /K + -
ATPase. In humans, it is believed that the major effect of gastrin 
upon acid secretion is mediated indirectly through the release of 
histamine from ECL cells rather than through direct parietal cell 
stimulation. In contrast, acetylcholine provides potent direct 
parietal cell stimulation. 
 ANTACIDS 
 Antacids have been used for centuries in the treatment of patients 
with dyspepsia and acid-peptic disorders. They were the mainstay 
of treatment for acid-peptic disorders until the advent of 
H 2− receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors. They con-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
H+ H+ H+ H+
H+
Lumen of fundus
Luminal acid
Lumen of antrum
Luminal acid
Dietary peptides
G cell
D cell
Somatostatin-R
Somatostatin
Gastrin
GRP-R
Antrum blood vessel
Antrum of stomach
Vagus
preganglionic
nerve
Vagus
preganglionic
nerve
Fundus of stomach
Fundic blood  vessel
Gastrin
Gastrin
Parietal cell
ACh
H2-R
G/CCK-B-R
Histamine
Histamine
ECL
cell
M3-R
M3-R
G/CCK-B-R
ACh-R
H+
H+/K+
K+
K+
ATPase
 FIGURE 62–1  Schematic model for physiologic control of hydrogen ion (acid) secretion by the parietal cells of the gastric fundic glands. 
Parietal cells are stimulated to secrete acid (H + ) by gastrin (acting on gastrin/CCK-B receptor), acetylcholine (M 3 receptor), and histamine (H 2 
receptor). Acid is secreted across the parietal cell canalicular membrane by the H + /K + -ATPase proton pump into the gastric lumen. Gastrin is 
secreted by antral G cells into blood vessels in response to intraluminal dietary peptides. Within the gastric body, gastrin passes from the blood 
vessels into the submucosal tissue of the fundic glands, where it binds to gastrin-CCK-B receptors on parietal cells and enterochromaffin-like 
(ECL) cells. The vagus nerve stimulates postganglionic neurons of the enteric nervous system to release acetylcholine (ACh), which binds to M 3 
receptors on parietal cells and ECL cells. Stimulation of ECL cells by gastrin (CCK-B receptor) or acetylcholine (M 3 receptor) stimulates release of 
histamine. Within the gastric antrum, vagal stimulation of postganglionic enteric neurons enhances gastrin release directly by stimulation of 
antral G cells (through gastrin-releasing peptide, GRP) and indirectly by inhibition of somatostatin secretion from antral D cells. Acid secretion 
must eventually be turned off. Antral D cells are stimulated to release somatostatin by the rise in intraluminal H + concentration and by CCK that 
is released into the bloodstream by duodenal I cells in response to proteins and fats (not shown). Binding of somatostatin to receptors on 
adjacent antral G cells inhibits further gastrin release. ATPase, H + /K + -ATPase proton pump; CCK, cholecystokinin; M 3 , muscarinic receptors. 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1083
tinue to be used commonly by patients as nonprescription remedies 
for the treatment of intermittent heartburn and dyspepsia. 
 Antacids are weak bases that react with gastric hydrochloric acid to 
form a salt and water. Their principal mechanism of action is reduc-
tion of intragastric acidity. After a meal, approximately 45 mEq/h of 
hydrochloric acid is secreted. A single dose of 156 mEq of antacid 
given 1 hour after a meal effectively neutralizes gastric acid for up to 
2 hours. However, the acid-neutralization capacity among different 
proprietary formulations of antacids is highly variable, depending on 
their rate of dissolution (tablet versus liquid), water solubility, rate of 
reaction with acid, and rate of gastric emptying. 
 Sodium bicarbonate (eg, baking soda, Alka Seltzer) reacts rap-
idly with hydrochloric acid (HCL) to produce carbon dioxide and 
sodium chloride. Formation of carbon dioxide results in gastric 
distention and belching. Unreacted alkali is readily absorbed, poten-
tially causing metabolic alkalosis when given in high doses or to 
patients with renal insufficiency. Sodium chloride absorption may 
exacerbate fluid retention in patients with heart failure, hyperten-
sion, and renal insufficiency.  Calcium carbonate (eg, Tums, Os-Cal) 
is less soluble and reacts more slowly than sodium bicarbonate with 
HCl to form carbon dioxide and calcium chloride (CaCl 2 ). Like 
sodium bicarbonate, calcium carbonate may cause belching or meta-
bolic alkalosis. Calcium carbonate is used for a number of other 
indications apart from its antacid properties (see  Chapter 42 ). 
Excessive doses of either sodium bicarbonate or calcium carbonate 
with calcium-containing dairy products can lead to hypercalcemia, 
renal insufficiency, and metabolic alkalosis (milk-alkali syndrome). 
 Formulations containing  magnesium hydroxide or  aluminum 
hydroxide react slowly with HCl to form magnesium chloride or 
aluminum chloride and water. Because no gas is generated, belching 
does not occur. Metabolic alkalosis is also uncommon because of the 
efficiency of the neutralization reaction. Because unabsorbed magne-
sium salts may cause an osmotic diarrhea and aluminum salts may 
cause constipation, these agents are commonly administered together 
in proprietary formulations (eg, Gelusil, Maalox, Mylanta) to mini-
mize the impact on bowel function. Both magnesium and aluminum 
are absorbed and excreted by the kidneys. Hence, patients with renal 
insufficiency should not take these agents long-term. 
 All antacids may affect the absorption of other medications by 
binding the drug (reducing its absorption) or by increasing intra-
gastric pH so that the drug’s dissolution or solubility (especially 
weakly basic or acidic drugs) is altered. Therefore, antacids should 
not be given within 2 hours of doses of tetracyclines, fluoroquino-
lones, itraconazole, and iron. 
 H 2 -RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 From their introduction in the 1970s until the early 1990s, H 2 -
receptor antagonists (commonly referred to as H 2 blockers) were 
the most commonly prescribed drugs in the world (see Clinical 
Uses). With the recognition of the role of  H pylori in ulcer disease 
(which may be treated with appropriate antibacterial therapy) and 
the advent of proton pump inhibitors, the use of prescription H 2 
blockers has declined markedly. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Four H 2 antagonists are in clinical use: cimetidine, ranitidine, famo-
tidine, and nizatidine. All four agents are rapidly absorbed from the 
intestine. Cimetidine, ranitidine, and famotidine undergo first-pass 
hepatic metabolism resulting in a bioavailability of approximately 
50%. Nizatidine has little first-pass metabolism. The serum half-
lives of the four agents range from 1.1 to 4 hours; however, dura-
tion of action depends on the dose given ( Table 62–1 ). H 2 
antagonists are cleared by a combination of hepatic metabolism, 
glomerular filtration, and renal tubular secretion. Dose reduction 
is required in patients with moderate to severe renal (and possibly 
severe hepatic) insufficiency. In the elderly, there is a decline of up 
to 50% in drug clearance as well as a significant reduction in vol-
ume of distribution. 
N
S
NH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
HC
C
N
HN
Cimetidine
NH
C
 
TABLE 62–1 Clinical comparisons of H2–receptor blockers.
Drug
Relative 
Potency
Dose to Achieve > 50% 
Acid Inhibition for 
10 Hours
Usual Dose for 
Acute Duodenal or 
Gastric Ulcer
Usual Dose for 
Gastroesophageal 
Reflux Disease
Usual Dose for Prevention 
of Stress–Related 
Bleeding
Cimetidine
1
400–800 mg
800 mg HS or 
400 mg bid
800 mg bid
50 mg/h continuous 
infusion
Ranitidine
4–10
150 mg
300 mg HS or 
150 mg bid
150 mg bid
6.25 mg/h continuous 
infusion or 50 mg IV every 
6–8 h
Nizatidine
4–10
150 mg
300 mg HS or 
150 mg bid
150 mg bid
Not available
Famotidine
20–50
20 mg
40 mg HS or 
20 mg bid
20 mg bid
20 mg IV every 12 h
BID, twice daily; HS, bedtime.
1084    SECTION X Special Topics
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The H 2 antagonists exhibit competitive inhibition at the parietal 
cell H 2 receptor and suppress basal and meal-stimulated acid 
secretion ( Figure 62–2 ) in a linear, dose-dependent manner. They 
are highly selective and do not affect H 1 or H 3 receptors (see 
 Chapter 16 ). The volume of gastric secretion and the concentra-
tion of pepsin are also reduced. 
 H 2 antagonists reduce acid secretion stimulated by histamine 
as well as by gastrin and cholinomimetic agents through two 
mechanisms. First, histamine released from ECL cells by gastrin or 
vagal stimulation is blocked from binding to the parietal cell H 2 
receptor. Second, direct stimulation of the parietal cell by gastrin 
or acetylcholine has a diminished effect on acid secretion in the 
presence of H 2 -receptor blockade. 
 The potencies of the four H 2 -receptor antagonists vary over a 
50-fold range ( Table 62–1 ). When given in usual prescription 
doses however, all inhibit 60–70% of total 24-hour acid secretion. 
H 2 antagonists are especially effective at inhibiting nocturnal acid 
secretion (which depends largely on histamine), but they have a 
modest impact on meal-stimulated acid secretion (which is stimu-
lated by gastrin and acetylcholine as well as histamine). Therefore, 
nocturnal and fasting intragastric pH is raised to 4–5 but the 
impact on the daytime, meal-stimulated pH profile is less. 
Recommended prescription doses maintain greater than 50% acid 
inhibition for 10 hours; hence, these drugs are commonly given 
twice daily. At doses available in over-the-counter formulations, 
the duration of acid inhibition is less than 6 hours. 
 Clinical Uses 
 H 2 -receptor antagonists continue to be prescribed but proton 
pump inhibitors (see below) are steadily replacing H 2 antagonists 
for most clinical indications. However, the over-the-counter 
preparations of the H 2 antagonists are heavily used by the public. 
 A. Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) 
 Patients with infrequent heartburn or dyspepsia (fewer than 3 
times per week) may take either antacids or intermittent H 2 
antagonists. Because antacids provide rapid acid neutralization, 
they afford faster symptom relief than H 2 antagonists. However, 
the effect of antacids is short-lived (1–2 hours) compared with H 2 
antagonists (6–10 hours). H 2 antagonists may be taken prophylac-
tically before meals in an effort to reduce the likelihood of heart-
burn. Frequent heartburn is better treated with twice-daily H 2 
antagonists ( Table 62–1 ) or proton pump inhibitors. In patients 
with erosive esophagitis (approximately 50% of patients with 
GERD), H 2 antagonists afford healing in less than 50% of 
patients; hence proton pump inhibitors are preferred because of 
their superior acid inhibition. 
 B. Peptic Ulcer Disease 
 Proton pump inhibitors have largely replaced H 2 antagonists in 
the treatment of acute peptic ulcer disease. Nevertheless, H 2 
antagonists are still sometimes used. Nocturnal acid suppression 
by H 2 antagonists affords effective ulcer healing in most patients 
Breakfast
Coffee
Lunch
Tea
Dinner
Light snack
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Median hourly acidity (mmol liter −1)
0900
1200
1500
1800
2100
Time of day
2400
0300
H2 block
PPI
Acid (control)
0600
0800 hours
 FIGURE 62–2 Twenty-four-hour median intragastric acidity pretreatment (red) and after 1 month of treatment with either ranitidine, 150 mg 
twice daily (blue, H 2 block), or omeprazole, 20 mg once daily (green, PPI). Note that H 2 -receptor antagonists have a marked effect on nocturnal 
acid secretion but only a modest effect on meal-stimulated secretion. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) markedly suppress meal-stimulated and 
nocturnal acid secretion. (Redrawn from data in Lanzon-Miller S et al: Twenty-four-hour intragastric acidity and plasma gastrin concentration before and during 
treatment with either ranitidine or omeprazole. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1987;1:239.) 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1085
with uncomplicated gastric and duodenal ulcers. Hence, all the 
agents may be administered once daily at bedtime, resulting in 
ulcer healing rates of more than 80–90% after 6–8 weeks of 
therapy. For patients with ulcers caused by aspirin or other 
NSAIDs, the NSAID should be discontinued. If the NSAID must 
be continued for clinical reasons despite active ulceration, a pro-
ton pump inhibitor should be given instead of an H 2 antagonist 
to more reliably promote ulcer healing. For patients with acute 
peptic ulcers caused by  H pylori, H 2 antagonists no longer play a 
significant therapeutic role.  H pylori should be treated with a 10- 
to 14-day course of therapy including a proton pump inhibitor 
and two antibiotics (see below). This regimen achieves ulcer heal-
ing and eradication of the infection in more than 90% of patients. 
For the minority of patients in whom  H pylori cannot be success-
fully eradicated, H 2 antagonists may be given daily at bedtime in 
half of the usual ulcer therapeutic dose to prevent ulcer recurrence 
(eg, ranitidine, 150 mg; famotidine, 20 mg). 
 C. Nonulcer Dyspepsia 
 H 2 antagonists are commonly used as over-the-counter agents and 
prescription agents for treatment of intermittent dyspepsia not 
caused by peptic ulcer. However, benefit compared with placebo 
has never been convincingly demonstrated. 
 D. Prevention of Bleeding from Stress-Related Gastritis 
 Clinically important bleeding from upper gastrointestinal erosions 
or ulcers occurs in 1–5% of critically ill patients as a result of 
impaired mucosal defense mechanisms caused by poor perfusion. 
Although most critically ill patients have normal or decreased acid 
secretion, numerous studies have shown that agents that increase 
intragastric pH (H 2 antagonists or proton pump inhibitors) reduce 
the incidence of clinically significant bleeding. However, the opti-
mal agent is uncertain at this time. For patients without a nasoen-
teric tube or with significant ileus, intravenous H 2 antagonists are 
preferable over intravenous proton pump inhibitors because of 
their proven efficacy and lower cost. Continuous infusions of H 2 
antagonists are generally preferred to bolus infusions because they 
achieve more consistent, sustained elevation of intragastric pH. 
 Adverse Effects 
 H 2 antagonists are extremely safe drugs. Adverse effects occur in 
less than 3% of patients and include diarrhea, headache, fatigue, 
myalgias, and constipation. Some studies suggest that intravenous 
H 2 antagonists (or proton pump inhibitors) may increase the risk 
of nosocomial pneumonia in critically ill patients. 
 Mental status changes (confusion, hallucinations, agitation) 
may occur with administration of intravenous H 2 antagonists, 
especially in patients in the intensive care unit who are elderly or 
who have renal or hepatic dysfunction. These events may be more 
common with cimetidine. Mental status changes rarely occur in 
ambulatory patients. 
 Cimetidine inhibits binding of dihydrotestosterone to andro-
gen receptors, inhibits metabolism of estradiol, and increases 
serum prolactin levels. When used long-term or in high doses, it 
may cause gynecomastia or impotence in men and galactorrhea in 
women. These effects are specific to cimetidine and do not occur 
with the other H 2 antagonists. 
 Although there are no known harmful effects on the fetus, H 2 
antagonists cross the placenta. Therefore, they should not be 
administered to pregnant women unless absolutely necessary. The 
H 2 antagonists are secreted into breast milk and may therefore 
affect nursing infants. 
 H 2 antagonists may rarely cause blood dyscrasias. Blockade of 
cardiac H 2 receptors may cause bradycardia, but this is rarely of 
clinical significance. Rapid intravenous infusion may cause brady-
cardia and hypotension through blockade of cardiac H 2 receptors; 
therefore, intravenous injections should be given over 30 minutes. 
H 2 antagonists rarely cause reversible abnormalities in liver 
chemistry. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Cimetidine interferes with several important hepatic cytochrome 
P450 drug metabolism pathways, including those catalyzed by 
CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4 (see  Chapter 4 ). 
Hence, the half-lives of drugs metabolized by these pathways may 
be prolonged. Ranitidine binds 4–10 times less avidly than cime-
tidine to cytochrome P450. Negligible interaction occurs with 
nizatidine and famotidine. 
 H 2 antagonists compete with creatinine and certain drugs (eg, 
procainamide) for renal tubular secretion. All of these agents 
except famotidine inhibit gastric first-pass metabolism of ethanol, 
especially in women. Although the importance of this is debated, 
increased bioavailability of ethanol could lead to increased blood 
ethanol levels. 
 PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS 
 Since their introduction in the late 1980s, these efficacious acid 
inhibitory agents have assumed the major role for the treatment of 
acid-peptic disorders. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are now 
among the most widely prescribed drugs worldwide due to their 
outstanding efficacy and safety. 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Six proton pump inhibitors are available for clinical use:  omepra-
zole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, dexlansoprazole, rabepra-
zole, and  pantoprazole. All are substituted benzimidazoles that 
resemble H 2 antagonists in structure ( Figure 62–3 ) but have a 
completely different mechanism of action. Omeprazole and lanso-
prazole are racemic mixtures of  R - and  S -isomers. Esomeprazole is 
the  S -isomer of omeprazole and dexlansoprazole the  R -isomer of 
lansoprazole. All are available in oral formulations. Esomeprazole 
and pantoprazole are also available in intravenous formulations 
( Table 62–2 ). 
 Proton pump inhibitors are administered as inactive prodrugs. 
To protect the acid-labile prodrug from rapid destruction within 
the gastric lumen, oral products are formulated for delayed release 
as acid-resistant, enteric-coated capsules or tablets. After passing 
through the stomach into the alkaline intestinal lumen, the enteric 
1086    SECTION X Special Topics
coatings dissolve and the prodrug is absorbed. For children or 
patients with dysphagia or enteral feeding tubes, capsule formula-
tions (but not tablets) may be opened and the microgranules 
mixed with apple or orange juice or mixed with soft foods (eg, 
applesauce). Lansoprazole is also available as a tablet formulation 
that disintegrates in the mouth, or it may be mixed with water and 
administered via oral syringe or enteral tube. Omeprazole is also 
available as a powder formulation (capsule or packet) that contains 
sodium bicarbonate (1100–1680 mg NaHCO 3 ; 304–460 mg of 
sodium) to protect the naked (non-enteric-coated) drug from acid 
degradation. When administered on an empty stomach by mouth 
or enteral tube, this “immediate-release” suspension results in 
rapid omeprazole absorption (T max < 30 minutes) and onset of 
acid inhibition. 
 The proton pump inhibitors are lipophilic weak bases (pK a 4–5) 
and after intestinal absorption diffuse readily across lipid 
membranes into acidified compartments (eg, the parietal cell 
canaliculus). The prodrug rapidly becomes protonated within the 
canaliculus and is concentrated more than 1000-fold by 
Henderson-Hasselbalch trapping (see  Chapter 1 ). There, it rapidly 
undergoes a molecular conversion to the active form, a reactive 
thiophilic sulfenamide cation, which forms a covalent disulfide 
bond with the H + /K + -ATPase, irreversibly inactivating the 
enzyme. 
 The pharmacokinetics of available proton pump inhibitors are 
shown in  Table 62–2 . Immediate-release omeprazole has a faster 
onset of acid inhibition than other oral formulations. Although 
differences in pharmacokinetic profiles may affect speed of onset 
and duration of acid inhibition in the first few days of therapy, 
they are of little clinical importance with continued daily admin-
istration. The bioavailability of all agents is decreased approxi-
mately 50% by food; hence, the drugs should be administered on 
O
S
H
N
N
N
CH2
OCH3
OCH3
OCF2H
O
S
Na
N
N
N
CH2
O
CH2
O
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
O
S
H
N
N
N
CH2
CH3
CH3
OCH3
OCH3
O
CH2
CF3
O
S
H
N
N
N
CH2
CH3
Omeprazole
Pantoprazole
Lansoprazole
 Rabeprazole
 FIGURE 62–3 Molecular structure of the proton pump inhibitors: omeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, and the sodium salt of rabepra-
zole. Omeprazole and esomeprazole have the same chemical structure (see text). 
TABLE 62–2 Pharmacokinetics of proton pump inhibitors.
Drug
pKa
Bioavailability (%)
t1/2 (h)
Tmax (h)
Usual Dosage for 
Peptic Ulcer or GERD
Omeprazole
4
40–65
0.5–1.0
1–3
20–40 mg qd
Esomeprazole
4
> 80
1.5
1.6
20–40 mg qd
Lansoprazole
4
> 80
1.0–2.0
1.7
30 mg qd
Dexlansoprazole
4
NA
1.0–2.0
5.0
30–60mg qd
Pantoprazole
3.9
77
1.0–1.9
2.5–4.0
40 mg qd
Rabeprazole
5
52
1.0–2.0
3.1
20 mg qd
GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease; NA, data not available.
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1087
an empty stomach. In a fasting state, only 10% of proton pumps 
are actively secreting acid and susceptible to inhibition. Proton 
pump inhibitors should be administered approximately 1 hour 
before a meal (usually breakfast), so that the peak serum concen-
tration coincides with the maximal activity of proton pump secre-
tion. The drugs have a short serum half-life of about 1.5 hours, 
but acid inhibition lasts up to 24 hours owing to the irreversible 
inactivation of the proton pump. At least 18 hours are required for 
synthesis of new H + /K + -ATPase pump molecules. Because not all 
proton pumps are inactivated with the first dose of medication, up 
to 3–4 days of daily medication are required before the full acid-
inhibiting potential is reached. Similarly, after stopping the drug, 
it takes 3–4 days for full acid secretion to return. 
 Proton pump inhibitors undergo rapid first-pass and systemic 
hepatic metabolism and have negligible renal clearance. Dose 
reduction is not needed for patients with renal insufficiency or 
mild to moderate liver disease but should be considered in patients 
with severe liver impairment. Although other proton pumps exist 
in the body, the H + /K + -ATPase appears to exist only in the parietal 
cell and is distinct structurally and functionally from other H + -
transporting enzymes. 
 The intravenous formulations of esomeprazole and pantopra-
zole have characteristics similar to those of the oral drugs. When 
given to a fasting patient, they inactivate acid pumps that are 
actively secreting, but they have no effect on pumps in quiescent, 
nonsecreting vesicles. Because the half-life of a single injection of 
the intravenous formulation is short, acid secretion returns several 
hours later as pumps move from the tubulovesicles to the canali-
cular surface. Thus, to provide maximal inhibition during the first 
24–48 hours of treatment, the intravenous formulations must be 
given as a continuous infusion or as repeated bolus injections. The 
optimal dosing of intravenous proton pump inhibitors to achieve 
maximal blockade in fasting patients is not yet established. 
 From a pharmacokinetic perspective, proton pump inhibitors 
are ideal drugs: they have a short serum half-life, they are concen-
trated and activated near their site of action, and they have a long 
duration of action. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 In contrast to H 2 antagonists, proton pump inhibitors inhibit 
both fasting and meal-stimulated secretion because they block the 
final common pathway of acid secretion, the proton pump. In 
standard doses, proton pump inhibitors inhibit 90–98% of 
24-hour acid secretion ( Figure 62–2 ). When administered at 
equivalent doses, the different agents show little difference in 
clinical efficacy. In a crossover study of patients receiving long-
term therapy with five proton pump inhibitors, the mean 24-hour 
intragastric pH varied from 3.3 (pantoprazole, 40 mg) to 4.0 
(esomeprazole, 40 mg) and the mean number of hours the pH was 
higher than 4 varied from 10.1 (pantoprazole, 40 mg) to 14.0 
(esomeprazole, 40 mg). Although dexlansoprazole has a delayed-
release formulation that results in a longer T max and greater AUC 
than other proton pump inhibitors, it appears comparable to 
other agents in the ability to suppress acid secretion. This is 
because acid suppression is more dependent upon irreversible 
inactivation of the proton pump than the pharmacokinetics of 
different agents. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD) 
 Proton pump inhibitors are the most effective agents for the treat-
ment of nonerosive and erosive reflux disease, esophageal compli-
cations of reflux disease (peptic stricture or Barrett’s esophagus), 
and extraesophageal manifestations of reflux disease. Once-daily 
dosing provides effective symptom relief and tissue healing in 
85–90% of patients; up to 15% of patients require twice-daily 
dosing. 
 GERD symptoms recur in over 80% of patients within 
6 months after discontinuation of a proton pump inhibitor. For 
patients with erosive esophagitis or esophageal complications, 
long-term daily maintenance therapy with a full-dose or half-dose 
proton pump inhibitor is usually needed. Many patients with 
nonerosive GERD may be treated successfully with intermittent 
courses of proton pump inhibitors or H 2 antagonists taken as 
needed (“on demand”) for recurrent symptoms. 
 In current clinical practice, many patients with symptomatic 
GERD are treated empirically with medications without prior 
endoscopy, ie, without knowledge of whether the patient has ero-
sive or nonerosive reflux disease. Empiric treatment with proton 
pump inhibitors provides sustained symptomatic relief in 70–80% 
of patients, compared with 50–60% with H 2 antagonists. Because 
of recent cost reductions, proton pump inhibitors are being used 
increasingly as first-line therapy for patients with symptomatic 
GERD. 
 Sustained acid suppression with twice-daily proton pump 
inhibitors for at least 3 months is used to treat extraesophageal 
complications of reflux disease (asthma, chronic cough, laryngitis, 
and noncardiac chest pain). 
 B. Peptic Ulcer Disease 
 Compared with H 2 antagonists, proton pump inhibitors afford 
more rapid symptom relief and faster ulcer healing for duodenal 
ulcers and, to a lesser extent, gastric ulcers. All the pump inhibi-
tors heal more than 90% of duodenal ulcers within 4 weeks and a 
similar percentage of gastric ulcers within 6–8 weeks. 
 1. H pylori-associated ulcers— For  H pylori -associated ulcers, 
there are two therapeutic goals: to heal the ulcer and to eradicate 
the organism. The most effective regimens for  H pylori eradication 
are combinations of two antibiotics and a proton pump inhibitor. 
Proton pump inhibitors promote eradication of  H pylori through 
several mechanisms: direct antimicrobial properties (minor) 
and—by raising intragastric pH—lowering the minimal inhibi-
tory concentrations of antibiotics against  H pylori. The best treat-
ment regimen consists of a 14-day regimen of “triple therapy”: a 
proton pump inhibitor twice daily; clarithromycin, 500 mg twice 
daily; and either amoxicillin, 1 g twice daily, or metronidazole, 
500 mg twice daily. After completion of triple therapy, the proton 
pump inhibitor should be continued once daily for a total of 
4–6 weeks to ensure complete ulcer healing. Alternatively, 10 days 
1088    SECTION X Special Topics
of “sequential treatment” consisting on days 1–5 of a proton 
pump inhibitor twice daily plus amoxicillin, 1 g twice daily, and 
followed on days 6–10 by five additional days of a proton pump 
inhibitor twice daily, plus clarithromycin, 500 mg twice daily, and 
tinidazole, 500 mg twice daily, has been shown to be a highly 
effective treatment regimen. 
 2. NSAID-associated ulcers— For patients with ulcers caused 
by aspirin or other NSAIDs, either H 2 antagonists or proton 
pump inhibitors provide rapid ulcer healing so long as the NSAID 
is discontinued; however continued use of the NSAID impairs 
ulcer healing. In patients with NSAID-induced ulcers who require 
continued NSAID therapy, treatment with a once- or twice-daily 
proton pump inhibitor more reliably promotes ulcer healing. 
 Asymptomatic peptic ulceration develops in 10–20% of people 
taking frequent NSAIDs, and ulcer-related complications (bleed-
ing, perforation) develop in 1–2% of persons per year. Proton 
pump inhibitors taken once daily are effective in reducing the 
incidence of ulcers and ulcer complications in patients taking 
aspirin or other NSAIDs. 
 3. Prevention of rebleeding from peptic ulcers— In patients 
with acute gastrointestinal bleeding due to peptic ulcers, the risk 
of rebleeding from ulcers that have a visible vessel or adherent clot 
is increased. Rebleeding of this subset of high-risk ulcers is reduced 
significantly with proton pump inhibitors administered for 3–5 
days either as high-dose oral therapy (eg, omeprazole, 40 mg orally 
twice daily) or as a continuous intravenous infusion. It is believed 
that an intragastric pH higher than 6 may enhance coagulation 
and platelet aggregation. The optimal dose of intravenous proton 
pump inhibitor needed to achieve and maintain this level of near-
complete acid inhibition is unknown; however, initial bolus 
administration of esomeprazole or pantoprazole (80 mg) followed 
by constant infusion (8 mg/h) is commonly recommended. 
 C. Nonulcer Dyspepsia 
 Proton pump inhibitors have modest efficacy for treatment of non-
ulcer dyspepsia, benefiting 10–20% more patients than placebo. 
Despite their use for this indication, superiority to H 2 antagonists 
(or even placebo) has not been conclusively demonstrated. 
 D. Prevention of Stress-Related Mucosal Bleeding 
 As discussed previously (see H 2 -Receptor Antagonists) proton 
pump inhibitors (given orally, by nasogastric tube, or by intrave-
nous infusions) may be administered to reduce the risk of clini-
cally significant stress-related mucosal bleeding in critically ill 
patients. The only proton pump inhibitor approved by the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) for this indication is an oral 
immediate-release omeprazole formulation, which is administered 
by nasogastric tube twice daily on the first day, then once daily. 
For patients with nasoenteric tubes, immediate-release omeprazole 
may be preferred to intravenous H 2 antagonists or other proton 
pump inhibitors because of comparable efficacy, lower cost, and 
ease of administration. 
 For patients without a nasoenteric tube or with significant ileus, 
intravenous H 2 antagonists are preferred to intravenous proton 
pump inhibitors because of their proven efficacy and lower cost. 
Although proton pump inhibitors are increasingly used, there are 
no controlled trials demonstrating efficacy or optimal dosing. 
 E. Gastrinoma and Other Hypersecretory Conditions 
 Patients with isolated gastrinomas are best treated with surgical 
resection. In patients with metastatic or unresectable gastrinomas, 
massive acid hypersecretion results in peptic ulceration, erosive 
esophagitis, and malabsorption. Previously, these patients required 
vagotomy and extraordinarily high doses of H 2 antagonists, which 
still resulted in suboptimal acid suppression. With proton pump 
inhibitors, excellent acid suppression can be achieved in all 
patients. Dosage is titrated to reduce basal acid output to less than 
5–10 mEq/h. Typical doses of omeprazole are 60–120 mg/d. 
 Adverse Effects 
 A. General 
 Proton pump inhibitors are extremely safe. Diarrhea, headache, 
and abdominal pain are reported in 1–5% of patients, although 
the frequency of these events is only slightly increased compared 
with placebo. Increasing cases of acute interstitial nephritis have 
been reported. Proton pump inhibitors do not have teratogenicity 
in animal models; however, safety during pregnancy has not been 
established. 
 B. Nutrition 
 Acid is important in releasing vitamin B 12 from food. A minor 
reduction in oral cyanocobalamin absorption occurs during pro-
ton pump inhibition, potentially leading to subnormal B 12 levels 
with prolonged therapy. Acid also promotes absorption of food-
bound minerals (non-heme iron, insoluble calcium salts, magne-
sium). Several case-control studies have suggested a modest 
increase in the risk of hip fracture in patients taking proton pump 
inhibitors over a long term compared with matched controls. 
Although a causal relationship is unproven, proton pump inhibi-
tors may reduce calcium absorption or inhibit osteoclast function. 
Pending further studies, patients who require long-term proton 
pump inhibitors—especially those with risk factors for osteoporo-
sis—should have monitoring of bone density and should be pro-
vided calcium supplements. Cases of severe, life-threatening 
hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia due to proton 
pump inhibitors have been reported; however, the mechanism of 
action is unknown. 
 C. Respiratory and Enteric Infections 
 Gastric acid is an important barrier to colonization and infection 
of the stomach and intestine from ingested bacteria. Increases in 
gastric bacterial concentrations are detected in patients taking 
proton pump inhibitors, which is of unknown clinical signifi-
cance. Some studies have reported an increased risk of both com-
munity-acquired respiratory infections and nosocomial pneumonia 
among patients taking proton pump inhibitors. 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1089
 There is a 2- to 3-fold increased risk for hospital- and community-
acquired  Clostridium difficile infection in patients taking proton 
pump inhibitors. There also is a small increased risk of other 
enteric infections (eg,  Salmonella, Shigella, E coli, Campylobacter ), 
which should be considered particularly when traveling in under-
developed countries. 
 D. Potential Problems Due to Increased Serum Gastrin 
 Gastrin levels are regulated by intragastric acidity. Acid suppres-
sion alters normal feedback inhibition so that median serum gas-
trin levels rise 1.5- to 2-fold in patients taking proton pump 
inhibitors. Although gastrin levels remain within normal limits in 
most patients, they exceed 500 pg/mL (normal, < 100 pg/mL) in 
3%. Upon stopping the drug, the levels normalize within 4 weeks. 
The rise in serum gastrin levels may stimulate hyperplasia of ECL 
and parietal cells, which may cause transient rebound acid hyper-
secretion with increased dyspepsia or heartburn after drug discon-
tinuation, which abate within 2–4 weeks after gastrin and acid 
secretion normalize. In female rats given proton pump inhibitors 
for prolonged periods, hypergastrinemia caused gastric carcinoid 
tumors that developed in areas of ECL hyperplasia. Although 
humans who take proton pump inhibitors for a long time also 
may exhibit ECL hyperplasia, carcinoid tumor formation has not 
been documented. At present, routine monitoring of serum gas-
trin levels is not recommended in patients receiving prolonged 
proton pump inhibitor therapy. 
 E. Other Potential Problems Due to Decreased Gastric 
Acidity 
 Among patients infected with  H pylori , long-term acid suppres-
sion leads to increased chronic inflammation in the gastric body 
and decreased inflammation in the antrum. Concerns have been 
raised that increased gastric inflammation may accelerate gastric 
gland atrophy (atrophic gastritis) and intestinal metaplasia—
known risk factors for gastric adenocarcinoma. A special FDA 
Gastrointestinal Advisory Committee concluded that there is no 
evidence that prolonged proton pump inhibitor therapy produces 
the kind of atrophic gastritis (multifocal atrophic gastritis) or 
intestinal metaplasia that is associated with increased risk of ade-
nocarcinoma. Routine testing for  H pylori is not recommended in 
patients who require long-term proton pump inhibitor therapy. 
Long-term proton pump inhibitor therapy is associated with the 
development of small benign gastric fundic-gland polyps in a 
small number of patients, which may disappear after stopping the 
drug and are of uncertain clinical significance. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Decreased gastric acidity may alter absorption of drugs for which 
intragastric acidity affects drug bioavailability, eg, ketoconazole, 
itraconazole, digoxin, and atazanavir. All proton pump inhibitors 
are metabolized by hepatic P450 cytochromes, including CYP2C19 
and CYP3A4. Because of the short half-lives of proton pump 
inhibitors, clinically significant drug interactions are rare. 
Omeprazole may inhibit the metabolism of warfarin, diazepam, 
and phenytoin. Esomeprazole also may decrease metabolism of 
diazepam. Lansoprazole may enhance clearance of theophyl-
line. Rabeprazole and pantoprazole have no significant drug 
interactions. 
 The FDA has issued a warning about a potentially important 
adverse interaction between clopidogrel and proton pump inhibi-
tors. Clopidogrel is a prodrug that requires activation by the 
hepatic P450 CYP2C19 isoenzyme, which also is involved to 
varying degrees in the metabolism of proton pump inhibitors 
(especially omeprazole, esomeprazole, lansoprazole, and dexlanso-
prazole). Thus, proton pump inhibitors could reduce clopidogrel 
activation (and its antiplatelet action) in some patients. Several 
large retrospective studies have reported an increased incidence of 
serious cardiovascular events in patients taking clopidogrel and a 
proton pump inhibitor. In contrast, three smaller prospective 
randomized trials have not detected an increased risk. Pending 
further studies, proton pump inhibitors should be prescribed to 
patients taking clopidogrel only if they have an increased risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding or require them for chronic gastro-
esophageal reflux or peptic ulcer disease, in which case agents with 
minimal CYP2C19 inhibition (pantoprazole or rabeprazole) are 
preferred. 
 MUCOSAL PROTECTIVE AGENTS 
 The gastroduodenal mucosa has evolved a number of defense 
mechanisms to protect itself against the noxious effects of acid and 
pepsin. Both mucus and epithelial cell-cell tight junctions restrict 
back diffusion of acid and pepsin. Epithelial bicarbonate secretion 
establishes a pH gradient within the mucous layer in which the 
pH ranges from 7 at the mucosal surface to 1–2 in the gastric 
lumen. Blood flow carries bicarbonate and vital nutrients to sur-
face cells. Areas of injured epithelium are quickly repaired by res-
titution, a process in which migration of cells from gland neck 
cells seals small erosions to reestablish intact epithelium. Mucosal 
prostaglandins appear to be important in stimulating mucus and 
bicarbonate secretion and mucosal blood flow. A number of agents 
that potentiate these mucosal defense mechanisms are available for 
the prevention and treatment of acid-peptic disorders. 
 SUCRALFATE 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Sucralfate is a salt of sucrose complexed to sulfated aluminum 
hydroxide. In water or acidic solutions it forms a viscous, tena-
cious paste that binds selectively to ulcers or erosions for up to 
6 hours. Sucralfate has limited solubility, breaking down into 
sucrose sulfate (strongly negatively charged) and an aluminum 
salt. Less than 3% of intact drug and aluminum is absorbed from 
the intestinal tract; the remainder is excreted in the feces. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 A variety of beneficial effects have been attributed to sucralfate, 
but the precise mechanism of action is unclear. It is believed that 
the negatively charged sucrose sulfate binds to positively charged 
1090    SECTION X Special Topics
proteins in the base of ulcers or erosion, forming a physical barrier 
that restricts further caustic damage and stimulates mucosal pros-
taglandin and bicarbonate secretion. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Sucralfate is administered in a dosage of 1 g four times daily on an 
empty stomach (at least 1 hour before meals). At present, its 
clinical uses are limited. Sucralfate (administered as a slurry 
through a nasogastric tube) reduces the incidence of clinically 
significant upper gastrointestinal bleeding in critically ill patients 
hospitalized in the intensive care unit, although it is slightly less 
effective than intravenous H 2 antagonists. Sucralfate is still used 
by many clinicians for prevention of stress-related bleeding 
because of concerns that acid inhibitory therapies (antacids, H 2 
antagonists, and proton pump inhibitors) may increase the risk of 
nosocomial pneumonia. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Because it is not absorbed, sucralfate is virtually devoid of systemic 
adverse effects. Constipation occurs in 2% of patients due to the 
aluminum salt. Because a small amount of aluminum is absorbed, 
it should not be used for prolonged periods in patients with renal 
insufficiency. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Sucralfate may bind to other medications, impairing their absorption. 
 PROSTAGLANDIN ANALOGS 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 The human gastrointestinal mucosa synthesizes a number of pros-
taglandins (see  Chapter 18 ); the primary ones are prostaglandins 
E and F.  Misoprostol, a methyl analog of PGE 1 , has been approved 
for gastrointestinal conditions. After oral administration, it is rap-
idly absorbed and metabolized to a metabolically active free acid. 
The serum half-life is less than 30 minutes; hence, it must be 
administered 3–4 times daily. It is excreted in the urine; however, 
dose reduction is not needed in patients with renal insufficiency. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 Misoprostol has both acid inhibitory and mucosal protective prop-
erties. It is believed to stimulate mucus and bicarbonate secretion 
and enhance mucosal blood flow. In addition, it binds to a prosta-
glandin receptor on parietal cells, reducing histamine-stimulated 
cAMP production and causing modest acid inhibition. 
Prostaglandins have a variety of other actions, including stimula-
tion of intestinal electrolyte and fluid secretion, intestinal motility, 
and uterine contractions. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Peptic ulcers develop in approximately 10–20% of patients who 
receive long-term NSAID therapy (see Proton Pump Inhibitors, 
above). Misoprostol reduces the incidence of NSAID-induced 
ulcers to less than 3% and the incidence of ulcer complications by 
50%. It is approved for prevention of NSAID-induced ulcers in 
high-risk patients; however, misoprostol has never achieved wide-
spread use owing to its high adverse-effect profile and need for 
multiple daily dosing. As discussed, proton pump inhibitors may 
be as effective as and better tolerated than misoprostol for this 
indication. Cyclooxygenase-2-selective NSAIDs, which may have 
less gastrointestinal toxicity (see  Chapter 36 ), offer another option 
for patients at high risk for NSAID-induced complications. 
 Adverse Effects & Drug Interactions 
 Diarrhea and cramping abdominal pain occur in 10–20% of 
patients. Because misoprostol stimulates uterine contractions (see 
 Chapter 18 ), it should not be used during pregnancy or in women 
of childbearing potential unless they have a negative serum preg-
nancy test and are compliant with effective contraceptive mea-
sures. No significant drug interactions are reported. 
 BISMUTH COMPOUNDS 
 Chemistry & Pharmacokinetics 
 Two bismuth compounds are available:  bismuth subsalicylate , a 
nonprescription formulation containing bismuth and salicylate, 
and  bismuth subcitrate potassium. In the USA, bismuth subci-
trate is available only as a combination prescription product that 
also contains metronidazole and tetracycline for the treatment of 
 H pylori . Bismuth subsalicylate undergoes rapid dissociation 
within the stomach, allowing absorption of salicylate. Over 99% 
of the bismuth appears in the stool. Although minimal (< 1%), 
bismuth is absorbed; it is stored in many tissues and has slow renal 
excretion. Salicylate (like aspirin) is readily absorbed and excreted 
in the urine. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The precise mechanisms of action of bismuth are unknown. 
Bismuth coats ulcers and erosions, creating a protective layer 
against acid and pepsin. It may also stimulate prostaglandin, 
mucus, and bicarbonate secretion. Bismuth subsalicylate reduces 
stool frequency and liquidity in acute infectious diarrhea, due to 
salicylate inhibition of intestinal prostaglandin and chloride secre-
tion. Bismuth has direct antimicrobial effects and binds enterotox-
ins, accounting for its benefit in preventing and treating traveler’s 
diarrhea. Bismuth compounds have direct antimicrobial activity 
against  H pylori. 
 Clinical Uses 
 In spite of the lack of comparative trials, nonprescription bismuth 
compounds (eg, Pepto-Bismol, Kaopectate) are widely used by 
patients for the nonspecific treatment of dyspepsia and acute diar-
rhea. Bismuth subsalicylate also is used for the prevention of 
traveler’s diarrhea (30 mL or 2 tablets four times daily). 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1091
 Bismuth compounds are used in 4-drug regimens for the 
eradication of  H pylori infection. One regimen consists of a proton 
pump inhibitor twice daily combined with bismuth subsalicylate 
(2 tablets; 262 mg each), tetracycline (250–500 mg), and metron-
idazole (500 mg) four times daily for 10–14 days. Another regi-
men consists of a proton pump inhibitor twice daily combined 
with three capsules of a combination prescription formulation 
(each capsule containing bismuth subcitrate 140 mg, metronida-
zole 125 mg, and tetracycline 125 mg) taken four times daily for 
10 days. Although these are effective, standard “triple therapy” 
regimens (ie, proton pump inhibitor, clarithromycin, and amoxi-
cillin or metronidazole twice daily for 14 days) generally are pre-
ferred for first-line therapy because of twice-daily dosing and 
superior compliance. Bismuth-based quadruple therapies are com-
monly used as second-line therapies. 
 Adverse Effects 
 All bismuth formulations have excellent safety profiles. Bismuth 
causes harmless blackening of the stool, which may be confused 
with gastrointestinal bleeding. Liquid formulations may cause 
harmless darkening of the tongue. Bismuth agents should be used 
for short periods only and should be avoided in patients with renal 
insufficiency. Prolonged usage of some bismuth compounds may 
rarely lead to bismuth toxicity, resulting in encephalopathy (ataxia, 
headaches, confusion, seizures). However, such toxicity is not 
reported with bismuth subsalicylate or bismuth citrate. High dos-
ages of bismuth subsalicylate may lead to salicylate toxicity. 
 ■ DRUGS STIMULATING 
GASTROINTESTINAL MOTILITY 
 Drugs that can selectively stimulate gut motor function ( prokinetic 
agents) have significant potential clinical usefulness. Agents that 
increase lower esophageal sphincter pressures may be useful for 
GERD. Drugs that improve gastric emptying may be helpful for 
gastroparesis and postsurgical gastric emptying delay. Agents that 
stimulate the small intestine may be beneficial for postoperative 
ileus or chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction. Finally, agents that 
enhance colonic transit may be useful in the treatment of consti-
pation. Unfortunately, only a limited number of agents in this 
group are available for clinical use at this time. 
 PHYSIOLOGY OF THE ENTERIC 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 
 The enteric nervous system (see also  Chapter 6 ) is composed of 
interconnected networks of ganglion cells and nerve fibers mainly 
located in the submucosa (submucosal plexus) and between the 
circular and longitudinal muscle layers (myenteric plexus). These 
networks give rise to nerve fibers that connect with the mucosa and 
muscle. Although extrinsic sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves 
project onto the submucosal and myenteric plexuses, the enteric 
nervous system can independently regulate gastrointestinal motility 
and secretion. Extrinsic primary afferent neurons project via the 
dorsal root ganglia or vagus nerve to the central nervous system 
( Figure 62–4 ). Release of serotonin (5-HT) from intestinal mucosa 
enterochromaffin (EC) cells stimulates 5-HT 3 receptors on the 
extrinsic afferent nerves, stimulating nausea, vomiting, or abdomi-
nal pain. Serotonin also stimulates submucosal 5-HT 1P receptors of 
the intrinsic primary afferent nerves (IPANs), which contain calci-
tonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and acetylcholine and project to 
myenteric plexus interneurons. 5-HT 4 receptors on the presynaptic 
terminals of the IPANs appear to enhance release of CGRP or ace-
tylcholine. The myenteric interneurons are important in controlling 
the peristaltic reflex, promoting release of excitatory mediators 
proximally and inhibitory mediators distally. Motilin may stimulate 
excitatory neurons or muscle cells directly. Dopamine acts as an 
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the gastrointestinal tract, decreasing 
the intensity of esophageal and gastric contractions. 
To CNS
Dorsal root
or cranial
nerve afferent
ENS neuron
ACh, CGRP
5HT4R
5HT3R
5HTIPR
Alosetron
5HT
Tegaserod
Submucosal
IPAN
Pressure,
other stimuli
EC
Gut
lumen
–
+
 FIGURE 62–4 Release of serotonin (5-HT) by enterochromaffin 
(EC) cells from gut distention stimulates submucosal intrinsic primary 
afferent neurons (IPANs) via 5-HT 1P receptors and extrinsic primary 
afferent neurons via 5-HT 3 receptors (5-HT 1P R, 5-HT 3 R). Submucosal 
IPANs activate the enteric neurons responsible for peristaltic and 
secretory reflex activity. Stimulation of 5-HT 4 receptors (5-HT 4 R) on 
presynaptic terminals of IPANs enhances release of acetylcholine 
(ACh) and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), promoting reflex 
activity. CNS, central nervous system; ENS, enteric nervous system. 
(Redrawn from Gershon MD: Serotonin and its implication for the management of 
irritable bowel syndrome. Rev Gastroenterol Dis 2003;3[Suppl 2]:S25.) 
1092    SECTION X Special Topics
 Although there are at least 14 serotonin receptor subtypes, 
5-HT drug development for gastrointestinal applications to date 
has focused on  5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists and 5-HT 4 -receptor 
agonists. These agents—which have effects on gastrointestinal 
motility and visceral afferent sensation—are discussed under 
Drugs Used for the Treatment of Irritable Bowel Syndrome and 
Antiemetic Agents. Other drugs acting on 5-HT receptors are 
discussed in Chapters 16, 29, and 30. 
 CHOLINOMIMETIC AGENTS 
 Cholinomimetic agonists such as bethanechol stimulate muscarinic 
M 3 receptors on muscle cells and at myenteric plexus synapses (see 
 Chapter 7 ). Bethanechol was used in the past for the treatment of 
GERD and gastroparesis. Owing to multiple cholinergic effects 
and the advent of less toxic agents, it is now seldom used. The 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor neostigmine can enhance gastric, 
small intestine, and colonic emptying. Intravenous neostigmine 
has enjoyed a resurgence in clinical usage for the treatment of hos-
pitalized patients with acute large bowel distention (known as acute 
colonic pseudo-obstruction or Ogilvie’s syndrome). Administration 
of 2 mg results in prompt colonic evacuation of flatus and feces in 
the majority of patients. Cholinergic effects include excessive sali-
vation, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and bradycardia. 
 METOCLOPRAMIDE & DOMPERIDONE 
 Metoclopramide and domperidone are dopamine D 2 -receptor 
antagonists. Within the gastrointestinal tract activation of dop-
amine receptors inhibits cholinergic smooth muscle stimulation; 
blockade of this effect is believed to be the primary prokinetic 
mechanism of action of these agents. These agents increase esoph-
ageal peristaltic amplitude, increase lower esophageal sphincter 
pressure, and enhance gastric emptying but have no effect on 
small intestine or colonic motility. Metoclopramide and domperi-
done also block dopamine D 2 receptors in the chemoreceptor 
trigger zone of the medulla (area postrema), resulting in potent 
antinausea and antiemetic action. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease 
 Metoclopramide is available for clinical use in the USA; domperi-
done is available in many other countries. These agents are some-
times used in the treatment of symptomatic GERD but are not 
effective in patients with erosive esophagitis. Because of the supe-
rior efficacy and safety of antisecretory agents in the treatment of 
heartburn, prokinetic agents are used mainly in combination with 
antisecretory agents in patients with regurgitation or refractory 
heartburn. 
 B. Impaired Gastric Emptying 
 These agents are widely used in the treatment of patients with delayed 
gastric emptying due to postsurgical disorders (vagotomy, antrectomy) 
and diabetic gastroparesis. Metoclopramide is sometimes adminis-
tered in hospitalized patients to promote advancement of nasoenteric 
feeding tubes from the stomach into the duodenum. 
 C. Nonulcer Dyspepsia 
 These agents lead to symptomatic improvement in a small num-
ber of patients with chronic dyspepsia. 
 D. Prevention of Vomiting 
 Because of their potent antiemetic action, metoclopramide and 
domperidone are used for the prevention and treatment of emesis. 
 E. Postpartum Lactation Stimulation 
 Domperidone is sometimes recommended to promote postpartum 
lactation (see also Adverse Effects). 
 Adverse Effects 
 The most common adverse effects of metoclopramide involve the 
central nervous system. Restlessness, drowsiness, insomnia, anxiety, 
and agitation occur in 10–20% of patients, especially the elderly. 
Extrapyramidal effects (dystonias, akathisia, parkinsonian features) 
due to central dopamine receptor blockade occur acutely in 25% 
of patients given high doses and in 5% of patients receiving long-
term therapy. Tardive dyskinesia, sometimes irreversible, has devel-
oped in patients treated for a prolonged period with metoclopramide. 
For this reason, long-term use should be avoided unless absolutely 
necessary, especially in the elderly. Elevated prolactin levels (caused 
by both metoclopramide and domperidone) can cause galactor-
rhea, gynecomastia, impotence, and menstrual disorders. 
 Domperidone is extremely well tolerated. Because it does not 
cross the blood-brain barrier to a significant degree, neuropsychi-
atric and extrapyramidal effects are rare. 
 MACROLIDES 
 Macrolide antibiotics such as  erythromycin directly stimulate 
motilin receptors on gastrointestinal smooth muscle and promote 
the onset of a migrating motor complex. Intravenous erythromycin 
(3 mg/kg) is beneficial in some patients with gastroparesis; how-
ever, tolerance rapidly develops. It may be used in patients with 
acute upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage to promote gastric emp-
tying of blood before endoscopy. 
 ■ LAXATIVES 
 The overwhelming majority of people do not need laxatives; yet 
they are self-prescribed by a large portion of the population. For 
most people, intermittent constipation is best prevented with a 
high-fiber diet, adequate fluid intake, regular exercise, and the 
heeding of nature’s call. Patients not responding to dietary changes 
or fiber supplements should undergo medical evaluation before 
initiating long-term laxative treatment. Laxatives may be classified 
by their major mechanism of action, but many work through 
more than one mechanism. 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1093
 BULK-FORMING LAXATIVES 
 Bulk-forming laxatives are indigestible, hydrophilic colloids that 
absorb water, forming a bulky, emollient gel that distends the 
colon and promotes peristalsis. Common preparations include 
natural plant products ( psyllium, methylcellulose ) and synthetic 
fibers  (polycarbophil). Bacterial digestion of plant fibers within 
the colon may lead to increased bloating and flatus. 
 STOOL SURFACTANT AGENTS 
(SOFTENERS) 
 These agents soften stool material, permitting water and lipids to 
penetrate. They may be administered orally or rectally. Common 
agents include  docusate (oral or enema) and  glycerin suppository. 
In hospitalized patients, docusate is commonly prescribed to pre-
vent constipation and minimize straining.  Mineral oil is a clear, 
viscous oil that lubricates fecal material, retarding water absorp-
tion from the stool. It is used to prevent and treat fecal impaction 
in young children and debilitated adults. It is not palatable but 
may be mixed with juices. Aspiration can result in a severe lipid 
pneumonitis. Long-term use can impair absorption of fat-soluble 
vitamins (A, D, E, K). 
 OSMOTIC LAXATIVES 
 The colon can neither concentrate nor dilute fecal fluid: fecal 
water is isotonic throughout the colon. Osmotic laxatives are sol-
uble but nonabsorbable compounds that result in increased stool 
liquidity due to an obligate increase in fecal fluid. 
 Nonabsorbable Sugars or Salts 
 These agents may be used for the treatment of acute constipation 
or the prevention of chronic constipation.  Magnesium hydroxide 
(milk of magnesia) is a commonly used osmotic laxative. It 
should not be used for prolonged periods in patients with renal 
insufficiency due to the risk of hypermagnesemia.  Sorbitol and 
 lactulose are nonabsorbable sugars that can be used to prevent or 
treat chronic constipation. These sugars are metabolized by 
colonic bacteria, producing severe flatus and cramps. 
 High doses of osmotically active agents produce prompt bowel 
evacuation (purgation) within 1–3 hours. The rapid movement 
of water into the distal small bowel and colon leads to a high 
volume of liquid stool followed by rapid relief of constipation. 
The most commonly used purgatives are  magnesium citrate and 
 sodium phosphate. Sodium phosphate is available as a nonpre-
scription liquid formulation and by prescription as a tablet for-
mulation. When taking these agents, it is very important that 
patients maintain adequate hydration by taking increased oral 
liquids to compensate for fecal fluid loss. Sodium phosphate fre-
quently causes hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, hypernatremia, 
and hypokalemia. Although these electrolyte abnormalities are 
clinically insignificant in most patients, they may lead to cardiac 
arrhythmias or acute renal failure due to tubular deposition of 
calcium phosphate (nephrocalcinosis). Sodium phosphate prepa-
rations should not be used in patients who are frail or elderly, have 
renal insufficiency, have significant cardiac disease, or are unable 
to maintain adequate hydration during bowel preparation. 
 Balanced Polyethylene Glycol 
 Lavage solutions containing  polyethylene glycol (PEG) are used 
for complete colonic cleansing before gastrointestinal endoscopic 
procedures. These balanced, isotonic solutions contain an inert, 
nonabsorbable, osmotically active sugar (PEG) with sodium sulfate, 
sodium chloride, sodium bicarbonate, and potassium chloride. The 
solution is designed so that no significant intravascular fluid or 
electrolyte shifts occur. Therefore, they are safe for all patients. The 
solution should be ingested rapidly (2–4 L over 2–4 hours) to pro-
mote bowel cleansing. For treatment or prevention of chronic con-
stipation, smaller doses of PEG powder may be mixed with water or 
juices (17 g/8 oz) and ingested daily. In contrast to sorbitol or lactu-
lose, PEG does not produce significant cramps or flatus. 
 STIMULANT LAXATIVES 
 Stimulant laxatives (cathartics) induce bowel movements through 
a number of poorly understood mechanisms. These include direct 
stimulation of the enteric nervous system and colonic electrolyte 
and fluid secretion. There has been concern that long-term use of 
cathartics could lead to dependence and destruction of the myen-
teric plexus, resulting in colonic atony and dilation. More recent 
research suggests that long-term use of these agents probably is 
safe in most patients. Cathartics may be required on a long-term 
basis, especially in patients who are neurologically impaired and in 
bed-bound patients in long-term care facilities. 
 Anthraquinone Derivatives 
 Aloe, senna, and  cascara occur naturally in plants. These laxa-
tives are poorly absorbed and after hydrolysis in the colon, pro-
duce a bowel movement in 6–12 hours when given orally and 
within 2 hours when given rectally. Chronic use leads to a charac-
teristic brown pigmentation of the colon known as “melanosis 
coli.” There has been some concern that these agents may be car-
cinogenic, but epidemiologic studies do not suggest a relation to 
colorectal cancer. 
 Diphenylmethane Derivatives 
 Bisacodyl is available in tablet and suppository formulations for 
the treatment of acute and chronic constipation. It also is used in 
conjunction with PEG solutions for colonic cleansing prior to 
colonoscopy. It induces a bowel movement within 6–10 hours 
when given orally and 30–60 minutes when taken rectally. It has 
minimal systemic absorption and appears to be safe for acute and 
long-term use. Phenolphthalein, another agent in this class, was 
removed from the market owing to concerns about possible 
cardiac toxicity. 
1094    SECTION X Special Topics
 CHLORIDE CHANNEL ACTIVATOR 
 Lubiprostone is a prostanoic acid derivative labeled for use in 
chronic constipation and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) with pre-
dominant constipation. It acts by stimulating the type 2 chloride 
channel (ClC-2) in the small intestine. This increases chloride-rich 
fluid secretion into the intestine, which stimulates intestinal motil-
ity and shortens intestinal transit time. Over 50% of patients 
experience a bowel movement within 24 hours of taking one dose. 
There appears to be no loss of efficacy with long-term therapy. 
After discontinuation of the drug, constipation may return to its 
pretreatment severity. Lubiprostone has minimal systemic absorp-
tion but is designated category C for pregnancy because of 
increased fetal loss in guinea pigs. Lubiprostone may cause nausea 
in up to 30% of patients due to delayed gastric emptying. 
 OPIOID RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 Acute and chronic therapy with opioids may cause constipation by 
decreasing intestinal motility, which results in prolonged transit 
time and increased absorption of fecal water (see  Chapter 31 ). Use 
of opioids after surgery for treatment of pain as well as endogenous 
opioids also may prolong the duration of postoperative ileus. These 
effects are mainly mediated through intestinal mu (μ)-opioid recep-
tors. Two selective antagonists of the μ-opioid receptor are com-
mercially available:  methylnaltrexone bromide and  alvimopan. 
Because these agents do not readily cross the blood-brain barrier, 
they inhibit peripheral μ-opioid receptors without impacting anal-
gesic effects within the central nervous system. Methylnaltrexone is 
approved for the treatment of opioid-induced constipation in 
patients receiving palliative care for advanced illness who have had 
inadequate response to other agents. It is administered as a subcuta-
neous injection (0.15 mg/kg) every 2 days. Alvimopan is approved 
for short-term use to shorten the period of postoperative ileus in 
hospitalized patients who have undergone small or large bowel 
resection. Alvimopan (12 mg capsule) is administered orally within 
5 hours before surgery and twice daily after surgery until bowel 
function has recovered, but for no more than 7 days. Because of 
possible cardiovascular toxicity, alvimopan currently is restricted to 
short-term use in hospitalized patients only. 
 SEROTONIN 5-HT 4 -RECEPTOR AGONISTS 
 Stimulation of 5-HT 4 receptors on the presynaptic terminal of 
submucosal intrinsic primary afferent nerves enhances the release 
of their neurotransmitters, including calcitonin gene-related pep-
tide, which stimulate second-order enteric neurons to promote the 
peristaltic reflex ( Figure 62–4 ). These enteric neurons stimulate 
proximal bowel contraction (via acetylcholine and substance P) 
and distal bowel relaxation (via nitric oxide and vasoactive intesti-
nal peptide). 
 Tegaserod is a serotonin 5-HT 4 partial agonist that has high 
affinity for 5-HT 4 receptors but no appreciable binding to 5-HT 3 
or dopamine receptors. Tegaserod was approved for the treatment 
of patients with chronic constipation and IBS with predominant 
constipation. Although tegaserod initially appeared to be extremely 
safe, it was voluntarily removed from the general market in 2007 
because of an increased incidence of serious cardiovascular events. 
These adverse events have been attributed to inhibition of the 
5-HT 1B receptor. Another partial 5-HT 4 agonist,  cisapride, was 
also associated with an increased incidence of cardiovascular 
events that was attributed to inhibition of cardiac hERG (human 
ether-a-go-go-related gene) K + channels, which resulted in QT c 
prolongation in some patients. 
 Prucalopride is a high-affinity 5-HT 4 agonist that is available 
in Europe (but not in the USA) for the treatment of chronic con-
stipation in women. In contrast to cisapride and tegaserod, it does 
not appear to have significant affinities for either hERG channels 
or 5-HT 1B . In three 12-week clinical trials of patients with severe 
chronic constipation, it resulted in a significant increase in bowel 
movements compared with placebo. The long-term efficacy and 
safety of this agent require further study. 
 GUANYLATE CYCLASE C AGONISTS 
 Linaclotide is a poorly absorbed 14-amino-acid peptide that binds 
to the guanylate cylase C receptor on the luminal surface of intesti-
nal enterocytes, activating the cystic fibrosis transmembrane con-
ductance channel and stimulating intestinal fluid secretion. 
Preliminary results of phase 3 clinical trials confirm its efficacy in 
patients with chronic constipation. Further studies are anticipated. 
 ■ ANTIDIARRHEAL AGENTS 
 Antidiarrheal agents may be used safely in patients with mild to 
moderate acute diarrhea. However, these agents should not be 
used in patients with bloody diarrhea, high fever, or systemic tox-
icity because of the risk of worsening the underlying condition. 
They should be discontinued in patients whose diarrhea is wors-
ening despite therapy. Antidiarrheals are also used to control 
chronic diarrhea caused by such conditions as irritable bowel syn-
drome (IBS) or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). 
 OPIOID AGONISTS 
 As previously noted, opioids have significant constipating effects 
(see  Chapter 31 ). They increase colonic phasic segmenting activity 
through inhibition of presynaptic cholinergic nerves in the sub-
mucosal and myenteric plexuses and lead to increased colonic 
transit time and fecal water absorption. They also decrease mass 
colonic movements and the gastrocolic reflex. Although all opi-
oids have antidiarrheal effects, central nervous system effects and 
potential for addiction limit the usefulness of most. 
 Loperamide is a nonprescription opioid agonist that does not 
cross the blood-brain barrier and has no analgesic properties or 
potential for addiction. Tolerance to long-term use has not been 
reported. It is typically administered in doses of 2 mg taken one to 
four times daily.  Diphenoxylate is a prescription opioid agonist 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1095
that has no analgesic properties in standard doses; however, higher 
doses have central nervous system effects, and prolonged use can 
lead to opioid dependence. Commercial preparations commonly 
contain small amounts of atropine to discourage overdosage (2.5 mg 
diphenoxylate with 0.025 mg atropine). The anticholinergic prop-
erties of atropine may contribute to the antidiarrheal action. 
 COLLOIDAL BISMUTH COMPOUNDS 
 See the section under Mucosal Protective Agents in earlier text. 
 BILE SALT-BINDING RESINS 
 Conjugated bile salts are normally absorbed in the terminal ileum. 
Disease of the terminal ileum (eg, Crohn’s disease) or surgical 
resection leads to malabsorption of bile salts, which may cause 
colonic secretory diarrhea. The bile salt-binding resins  cho-
lestyramine, colestipol, or  colesevelam, may decrease diarrhea 
caused by excess fecal bile acids (see  Chapter 35 ). These products 
come in a variety of powder and pill formulations that may be 
taken one to three times daily before meals. Adverse effects include 
bloating, flatulence, constipation, and fecal impaction. In patients 
with diminished circulating bile acid pools, further removal of bile 
acids may lead to an exacerbation of fat malabsorption. 
Cholestyramine and colestipol bind a number of drugs and reduce 
their absorption; hence, they should not be given within 2 hours 
of other drugs. Colesevelam does not appear to have significant 
effects on absorption of other drugs. 
 OCTREOTIDE 
 Somatostatin is a 14-amino-acid peptide that is released in the 
gastrointestinal tract and pancreas from paracrine cells, D cells, and 
enteric nerves as well as from the hypothalamus (see  Chapter 37 ). 
Somatostatin is a key regulatory peptide that has many physiologic 
effects: 
1.  It inhibits the secretion of numerous hormones and transmit-
ters, including gastrin, cholecystokinin, glucagon, growth 
hormone, insulin, secretin, pancreatic polypeptide, vasoactive 
intestinal peptide, and 5-HT. 
 2. It reduces intestinal fluid secretion and pancreatic secretion. 
 3. It slows gastrointestinal motility and inhibits gallbladder con-
traction. 
 4. It reduces portal and splanchnic blood flow. 
 5. It inhibits secretion of some anterior pituitary hormones. 
 The clinical usefulness of somatostatin is limited by its short 
half-life in the circulation (3 minutes) when it is administered by 
intravenous injection.  Octreotide is a synthetic octapeptide with 
actions similar to somatostatin. When administered intravenously, 
it has a serum half-life of 1.5 hours. It also may be administered 
by subcutaneous injection, resulting in a 6- to 12-hour duration 
of action. A longer-acting formulation is available for once-
monthly depot intramuscular injection. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Inhibition of Endocrine Tumor Effects 
 Two gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors (carcinoid, VIPoma) 
cause secretory diarrhea and systemic symptoms such as flushing 
and wheezing. For patients with advanced symptomatic tumors 
that cannot be completely removed by surgery, octreotide decreases 
secretory diarrhea and systemic symptoms through inhibition of 
hormonal secretion and may slow tumor progression. 
 B. Other Causes of Diarrhea 
 Octreotide inhibits intestinal secretion and has dose-related effects 
on bowel motility. In low doses (50 mcg subcutaneously), it stimu-
lates motility, whereas at higher doses (eg, 100–250 mcg subcuta-
neously), it inhibits motility. Octreotide is effective in higher doses 
for the treatment of diarrhea due to vagotomy or dumping syn-
drome as well as for diarrhea caused by short bowel syndrome or 
AIDS. Octreotide has been used in low doses (50 mcg subcutane-
ously) to stimulate small bowel motility in patients with small 
bowel bacterial overgrowth or intestinal pseudo-obstruction sec-
ondary to scleroderma. 
 C. Other Uses 
 Because it inhibits pancreatic secretion, octreotide may be of value 
in patients with pancreatic fistula. The role of octreotide in the 
treatment of pituitary tumors (eg, acromegaly) is discussed in 
 Chapter 37 . Octreotide is sometimes used in gastrointestinal 
bleeding (see below). 
 Adverse Effects 
 Impaired pancreatic secretion may cause steatorrhea, which can 
lead to fat-soluble vitamin deficiency. Alterations in gastrointesti-
nal motility cause nausea, abdominal pain, flatulence, and diar-
rhea. Because of inhibition of gallbladder contractility and 
alterations in fat absorption, long-term use of octreotide can cause 
formation of sludge or gallstones in over 50% of patients, which 
rarely results in the development of acute cholecystitis. Because 
octreotide alters the balance among insulin, glucagon, and growth 
hormone, hyperglycemia or, less frequently, hypoglycemia (usually 
mild) can occur. Prolonged treatment with octreotide may result 
in hypothyroidism. Octreotide also can cause bradycardia. 
 ■ DRUGS USED IN THE 
TREATMENT OF IRRITABLE 
BOWEL SYNDROME 
 IBS is an idiopathic chronic, relapsing disorder characterized by 
abdominal discomfort (pain, bloating, distention, or cramps) in 
association with alterations in bowel habits (diarrhea, constipa-
tion, or both). With episodes of abdominal pain or discomfort, 
patients note a change in the frequency or consistency of their 
bowel movements. 
 Pharmacologic therapies for IBS are directed at relieving 
abdominal pain and discomfort and improving bowel function. 
1096    SECTION X Special Topics
For patients with predominant diarrhea, antidiarrheal agents, 
especially loperamide, are helpful in reducing stool frequency and 
fecal urgency. For patients with predominant constipation, fiber 
supplements may lead to softening of stools and reduced straining; 
however, increased gas production may exacerbate bloating and 
abdominal discomfort. Consequently, osmotic laxatives, especially 
milk of magnesia, are commonly used to soften stools and pro-
mote increased stool frequency. 
 For chronic abdominal pain, low doses of tricyclic antidepres-
sants (eg, amitriptyline or desipramine, 10–50 mg/d) appear to be 
helpful (see  Chapter 30 ). At these doses, these agents have no 
effect on mood but may alter central processing of visceral afferent 
information. The anticholinergic properties of these agents also 
may have effects on gastrointestinal motility and secretion, reduc-
ing stool frequency and liquidity. Finally, tricyclic antidepressants 
may alter receptors for enteric neurotransmitters such as sero-
tonin, affecting visceral afferent sensation. 
 Several other agents are available that are specifically intended 
for the treatment of IBS. 
 ANTISPASMODICS (ANTICHOLINERGICS) 
 Some agents are promoted as providing relief of abdominal pain 
or discomfort through antispasmodic actions. However, small or 
large bowel spasm has not been found to be an important cause of 
symptoms in patients with IBS. Antispasmodics work primarily 
through anticholinergic activities. Commonly used medications in 
this class include  dicyclomine and  hyoscyamine (see  Chapter 8 ). 
These drugs inhibit muscarinic cholinergic receptors in the enteric 
plexus and on smooth muscle. The efficacy of antispasmodics for 
relief of abdominal symptoms has never been convincingly dem-
onstrated. At low doses, they have minimal autonomic effects. 
However, at higher doses they exhibit significant additional anti-
cholinergic effects, including dry mouth, visual disturbances, uri-
nary retention, and constipation. For these reasons, antispasmodics 
are infrequently used. 
 SEROTONIN 5-HT 3 -RECEPTOR 
ANTAGONISTS 
 5-HT 3 receptors in the gastrointestinal tract activate visceral affer-
ent pain sensation via extrinsic sensory neurons from the gut to 
the spinal cord and central nervous system. Inhibition of afferent 
gastrointestinal 5-HT 3 receptors may reduce unpleasant visceral 
afferent sensation, including nausea, bloating, and pain. Blockade 
of central 5-HT 3 receptors also reduces the central response to 
visceral afferent stimulation. In addition, 5-HT 3 -receptor block-
ade on the terminals of enteric cholinergic neurons inhibits 
colonic motility, especially in the left colon, increasing total 
colonic transit time. 
 Alosetron is a 5-HT 3 antagonist that has been approved for the 
treatment of patients with severe IBS with diarrhea ( Figure 62–5 ). 
Four other 5-HT 3 antagonists (ondansetron, granisetron, dolase-
tron, and palonosetron) have been approved for the prevention 
and treatment of nausea and vomiting (see Antiemetics); however, 
their efficacy in the treatment of IBS has not been determined. 
The differences between these 5-HT 3 antagonists that determine 
their pharmacodynamic effects have not been well studied. 
 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics 
 Alosetron is a highly potent and selective antagonist of the 5-HT 3 
receptor. It is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract with 
a bioavailability of 50–60% and has a plasma half-life of 1.5 hours 
but a much longer duration of effect. It undergoes extensive 
hepatic cytochrome P450 metabolism with renal excretion of 
most metabolites. Alosetron binds with higher affinity and disso-
ciates more slowly from 5-HT 3 receptors than other 5-HT 3 
antagonists, which may account for its long duration of action. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Alosetron is approved for the treatment of women with severe IBS 
in whom diarrhea is the predominant symptom (“diarrhea-
predominant IBS”). Its efficacy in men has not been established. 
In a dosage of 1 mg once or twice daily, it reduces IBS-related lower 
abdominal pain, cramps, urgency, and diarrhea. Approximately 
50–60% of patients report adequate relief of pain and discomfort 
with alosetron compared with 30–40% of patients treated with 
placebo. It also leads to a reduction in the mean number of bowel 
movements per day and improvement in stool consistency. 
Alosetron has not been evaluated for the treatment of other causes 
of diarrhea. 
 Adverse Events 
 In contrast to the excellent safety profile of other 5-HT 3 -receptor 
antagonists, alosetron is associated with rare but serious gastroin-
testinal toxicity. Constipation occurs in up to 30% of patients 
with diarrhea-predominant IBS, requiring discontinuation of the 
drug in 10%. Serious complications of constipation requiring 
hospitalization or surgery have occurred in 1 of every 1000 patients. 
Episodes of ischemic colitis—some fatal—have been reported in 
up to 3 per 1000 patients. Given the seriousness of these adverse 
events, alosetron is restricted to women with severe diarrhea-
predominant IBS who have not responded to conventional thera-
pies and who have been educated about the relative risks and 
benefits. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Despite being metabolized by a number of CYP enzymes, alose-
tron does not appear to have clinically significant interactions with 
other drugs. 
 SEROTONIN 5-HT 4 -RECEPTOR AGONISTS 
 The pharmacology of tegaserod was discussed previously under 
Laxatives. This agent was approved for the short-term treatment of 
women with IBS who had predominant constipation. Controlled 
studies demonstrated a modest improvement (approximately 15%) 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1097
in patient global satisfaction and a reduction in severity of pain and 
bloating in patients treated with tegaserod, 6 mg twice daily, com-
pared with placebo. Owing to an increased number of cardiovascu-
lar deaths observed in post-marketing studies in patients taking 
tegaserod, it was voluntarily removed from the market. 
 CHLORIDE CHANNEL ACTIVATOR 
 As discussed previously, lubiprostone is a prostanoic acid deriva-
tive that stimulates the type 2 chloride channel (ClC-2) in the 
small intestine and is used in the treatment of chronic constipa-
tion. Lubiprostone recently was approved for the treatment of 
women with IBS with predominant constipation. Its efficacy for 
men with IBS is unproven. The approved dose for IBS is 8 mcg 
twice daily (compared with 24 mcg twice daily for chronic consti-
pation). Lubiprostone has not been compared with other less 
expensive laxatives (eg, milk of magnesia). Lubiprostone is listed 
as category C for pregnancy and should be avoided in women of 
child-bearing age. 
 ■ ANTIEMETIC AGENTS 
 Nausea and vomiting may be manifestations of a wide variety of 
conditions, including adverse effects from medications; systemic 
disorders or infections; pregnancy; vestibular dysfunction; central 
nervous system infection or increased pressure; peritonitis; hepa-
tobiliary disorders; radiation or chemotherapy; and gastrointesti-
nal obstruction, dysmotility, or infections. 
 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
 The brainstem “vomiting center” is a loosely organized neuronal 
region within the lateral medullary reticular formation and coor-
dinates the complex act of vomiting through interactions with 
cranial nerves VIII and X and neural networks in the nucleus 
tractus solitarius that control respiratory, salivatory, and vasomo-
tor centers. High concentrations of muscarinic M 1 , histamine H 1 , 
neurokinin 1 (NK 1 ), and serotonin 5-HT 3 receptors have been 
identified in the vomiting center ( Figure 62–6 ). 
NH
NH2
OH
O
N
N
N
NH
CH3
CH3
O
N
N
N
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH3
O
NH
N
N
N
O
H
N
H
O
N
O
Serotonin
Ondansetron
Tegaserod
Granisetron
Dolasetron
Alosetron
NH
NH
NH
NH
CH3
N
CH3
 FIGURE 62–5 Chemical structure of serotonin; the 5-HT 3 antagonists ondansetron, granisetron, dolasetron, and alosetron; and the 5-HT 4 
partial agonist tegaserod. 
1098    SECTION X Special Topics
 There are four important sources of afferent input to the vom-
iting center: 
 1. The “chemoreceptor trigger zone” or area postrema is located 
at the caudal end of the fourth ventricle. This is outside the 
blood-brain barrier but is accessible to emetogenic stimuli in 
the blood or cerebrospinal fluid. The chemoreceptor trigger 
zone is rich in dopamine D 2 receptors and opioid receptors, 
and possibly serotonin 5-HT 3 receptors and NK 1 receptors. 
2.  The vestibular system is important in motion sickness via cra-
nial nerve VIII. It is rich in muscarinic M 1 and histamine H 1 
receptors. 
 3. Vagal and spinal afferent nerves from the gastrointestinal tract 
are rich in 5-HT 3 receptors. Irritation of the gastrointestinal 
mucosa by chemotherapy, radiation therapy, distention, or 
acute infectious gastroenteritis leads to release of mucosal sero-
tonin and activation of these receptors, which stimulate vagal 
afferent input to the vomiting center and chemoreceptor trig-
ger zone. 
4.  The central nervous system plays a role in vomiting due to 
psychiatric disorders, stress, and anticipatory vomiting prior to 
cancer chemotherapy. 
 Identification of the different neurotransmitters involved with 
emesis has allowed development of a diverse group of antiemetic 
agents that have affinity for various receptors. Combinations of 
antiemetic agents with different mechanisms of action are often 
used, especially in patients with vomiting due to chemotherapeu-
tic agents. 
 SEROTONIN 5-HT 3 ANTAGONISTS 
 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics 
 Selective 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists have potent antiemetic 
properties that are mediated in part through central 5-HT 3 -receptor 
blockade in the vomiting center and chemoreceptor trigger zone 
but mainly through blockade of peripheral 5-HT 3 receptors on 
extrinsic intestinal vagal and spinal afferent nerves. The anti-
emetic action of these agents is restricted to emesis attributable to 
vagal stimulation (eg, postoperative) and chemotherapy; other 
emetic stimuli such as motion sickness are poorly controlled. 
 Four agents are available in the USA: ondansetron, granise-
tron, dolasetron, and palonosetron. (Tropisetron is another 
agent available outside the USA.) The first three agents (ondanse-
tron, granisetron, and dolasetron,  Figure 62–5 ) have a serum half-
life of 4–9 hours and may be administered once daily by oral or 
intravenous routes. All three drugs have comparable efficacy and 
Central nervous system
Gastrointestinal tract and heart
Vestibular system
Fourth ventricle
Medulla oblongata
Parasympathetic and
motor efferent activity
Vomiting
center
Chemoreceptor
trigger zone
H1 receptor
M1 receptor
NK1 receptor?
(5-HT3 receptor)
Vomiting center (nucleus of
tractus solitarius)
Chemoreceptors
D2 receptor
NK1 receptor?
(5-HT3 receptor)
Chemoreceptor trigger zone
(area postrema)
H1 receptor?
M1 receptor
Mechanoreceptors
Chemoreceptors
5-HT3 receptor
Cortex
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Meninges
C
r
a
n
i
a
l 
n
e
r
v
e 
I
X 
or
 X
 FIGURE 62–6 Neurologic pathways involved in pathogenesis of nausea and vomiting (see text). (Modified and reproduced, with permission, from 
Krakauer EL et al: Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. N Engl J Med 2005;352:817.) 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1099
tolerability when administered at equipotent doses. Palonosetron 
is a newer intravenous agent that has greater affinity for the 5-HT 3 
receptor and a long serum half-life of 40 hours. All four drugs 
undergo extensive hepatic metabolism and are eliminated by renal 
and hepatic excretion. However, dose reduction is not required in 
geriatric patients or patients with renal insufficiency. For patients 
with hepatic insufficiency, dose reduction may be required with 
ondansetron. 
 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists do not inhibit dopamine or mus-
carinic receptors. They do not have effects on esophageal or gastric 
motility but may slow colonic transit. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting 
 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists are the primary agents for the preven-
tion of acute chemotherapy-induced nausea and emesis. When 
used alone, these drugs have little or no efficacy for the prevention 
of delayed nausea and vomiting (ie, occurring > 24 hours after 
chemotherapy). The drugs are most effective when given as a single 
dose by intravenous injection 30 minutes prior to administration 
of chemotherapy in the following doses: ondansetron, 8 mg; gran-
isetron, 1 mg; dolasetron, 100 mg; or palonosetron, 0.25 mg. A 
single oral dose given 1 hour before chemotherapy may be equally 
effective in the following regimens: ondansetron 8 mg twice daily 
or 24 mg once; granisetron, 2 mg; dolasetron, 100 mg. Although 
5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists are effective as single agents for the 
prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, their 
efficacy is enhanced by combination therapy with a corticosteroid 
(dexamethasone) and NK 1 -receptor antagonist (see below). 
 B. Postoperative and Postradiation Nausea and 
Vomiting 
 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists are used to prevent or treat postoperative 
nausea and vomiting. Because of adverse effects and increased restric-
tions on the use of other antiemetic agents, 5-HT 3 -receptor antago-
nists are increasingly used for this indication. They are also effective 
in the prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting in patients 
undergoing radiation therapy to the whole body or abdomen. 
 Adverse Effects 
 The 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists are well-tolerated agents with excel-
lent safety profiles. The most commonly reported adverse effects are 
headache, dizziness, and constipation. All four agents cause a small 
but statistically significant prolongation of the QT interval, but this 
is most pronounced with dolasetron. Although cardiac arrhythmias 
have not been linked to dolasetron, it should not be administered to 
patients with prolonged QT or in conjunction with other medica-
tions that may prolong the QT interval (see  Chapter 14 ). 
 Drug Interactions 
 No significant drug interactions have been reported with 5-HT 3 -
receptor antagonists. All four agents undergo some metabolism by 
the hepatic cytochrome P450 system but they do not appear to 
affect the metabolism of other drugs. However, other drugs may 
reduce hepatic clearance of the 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists, alter-
ing their half-life. 
 CORTICOSTEROIDS 
 Corticosteroids (dexamethasone, methylprednisolone) have antie-
metic properties, but the basis for these effects is unknown. The 
pharmacology of this class of drugs is discussed in  Chapter 39 . These 
agents appear to enhance the efficacy of 5-HT 3 -receptor antagonists 
for prevention of acute and delayed nausea and vomiting in patients 
receiving moderately to highly emetogenic chemotherapy regimens. 
Although a number of corticosteroids have been used, dexame-
thasone, 8–20 mg intravenously before chemotherapy, followed 
by 8 mg/d orally for 2–4 days, is commonly administered. 
 NEUROKININ RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
 Neurokinin 1 (NK 1 )-receptor antagonists have antiemetic proper-
ties that are mediated through central blockade in the area pos-
trema.  Aprepitant (an oral formulation) is a highly selective 
NK 1 -receptor antagonist that crosses the blood-brain barrier and 
occupies brain NK 1 receptors. It has no affinity for serotonin, 
dopamine, or corticosteroid receptors.  Fosaprepitant is an intra-
venous formulation that is converted within 30 minutes after 
infusion to aprepitant. 
 Pharmacokinetics 
 The oral bioavailability of aprepitant is 65%, and the serum half-
life is 12 hours. Aprepitant is metabolized by the liver, primarily 
by the CYP3A4 pathway. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Aprepitant is used in combination with 5-HT 3 -receptor antago-
nists and corticosteroids for the prevention of acute and delayed 
nausea and vomiting from highly emetogenic chemotherapeutic 
regimens. Combined therapy with aprepitant, a 5-HT 3 -receptor 
antagonist, and dexamethasone prevents acute emesis in 80–90% 
of patients compared with less than 70% treated without aprepi-
tant. Prevention of delayed emesis occurs in more than 70% of 
patients receiving combined therapy versus 30–50% treated with-
out aprepitant. NK 1 -receptor antagonists may be administered for 
3 days as follows: oral aprepitant 125 mg or intravenous fosa-
prepitant 115 mg given 1 hour before chemotherapy, followed by 
oral aprepitant 80 mg/d for 2 days after chemotherapy. 
 Adverse Effects & Drug Interactions 
 Aprepitant may be associated with fatigue, dizziness, and diarrhea. 
The drug is metabolized by CYP3A4 and may inhibit the metabo-
lism of other drugs metabolized by the CYP3A4 pathway. Several 
chemotherapeutic agents are metabolized by CYP3A4, including 
docetaxel, paclitaxel, etoposide, irinotecan, imatinib, vinblastine, 
and vincristine. Drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 metabolism may 
1100    SECTION X Special Topics
significantly increase aprepitant plasma levels (eg, ketoconazole, 
ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, nefazodone, ritonavir, nelfinavir, 
verapamil, and quinidine). Aprepitant decreases the international 
normalized ratio (INR) in patients taking warfarin. 
 PHENOTHIAZINES & BUTYROPHENONES 
 Phenothiazines are antipsychotic agents that can be used for their 
potent antiemetic and sedative properties (see  Chapter 29 ). The 
antiemetic properties of phenothiazines are mediated through 
inhibition of dopamine and muscarinic receptors. Sedative prop-
erties are due to their antihistamine activity. The agents most 
commonly used as antiemetics are  prochlorperazine, promethaz-
ine, and  thiethylperazine. 
 Antipsychotic butyrophenones also possess antiemetic proper-
ties due to their central dopaminergic blockade (see  Chapter 29 ). 
The main agent used is  droperidol, which can be given by intra-
muscular or intravenous injection. In antiemetic doses, droperidol 
is extremely sedating. Previously, it was used extensively for post-
operative nausea and vomiting, in conjunction with opiates and 
benzodiazepines for sedation for surgical and endoscopic proce-
dures, for neuroleptanalgesia, and for induction and maintenance 
of general anesthesia. Extrapyramidal effects and hypotension may 
occur. Droperidol may prolong the QT interval, rarely resulting in 
fatal episodes of ventricular tachycardia including torsades de 
pointes. Therefore, droperidol should not be used in patients with 
QT prolongation and should be used only in patients who have 
not responded adequately to alternative agents. 
 SUBSTITUTED BENZAMIDES 
 Substituted benzamides include  metoclopramide (discussed pre-
viously) and  trimethobenzamide. Their primary mechanism of 
antiemetic action is believed to be dopamine-receptor blockade. 
Trimethobenzamide also has weak antihistaminic activity. For 
prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting, metoclo-
pramide may be given in the relatively high dosage of 10–20 mg 
orally or intravenously every 6 hours. The usual dose of 
trimethobenzamide is 300 mg orally, or 200 mg by intramuscular 
injection. The principal adverse effects of these central dopamine 
antagonists are extrapyramidal: restlessness, dystonias, and parkin-
sonian symptoms. 
 H 1 ANTIHISTAMINES & 
ANTICHOLINERGIC DRUGS 
 The pharmacology of anticholinergic agents is discussed in 
 Chapter 8 and that of H 1 antihistaminic agents in  Chapter 16 . As 
single agents, these drugs have weak antiemetic activity, although 
they are particularly useful for the prevention or treatment of 
motion sickness. Their use may be limited by dizziness, sedation, 
confusion, dry mouth, cycloplegia, and urinary retention. 
 Diphenhydramine and one of its salts,  dimenhydrinate, are first-
generation histamine H 1 antagonists that also have significant 
anticholinergic properties. Because of its sedating properties, 
diphenhydramine is commonly used in conjunction with other 
antiemetics for treatment of emesis due to chemotherapy. 
 Meclizine is an H 1 antihistaminic agent with minimal anticholin-
ergic properties that also causes less sedation. It is used for the 
prevention of motion sickness and the treatment of vertigo due to 
labyrinth dysfunction. 
 Hyoscine (scopolamine), a prototypic muscarinic receptor 
antagonist, is one of the best agents for the prevention of motion 
sickness. However, it has a very high incidence of anticholinergic 
effects when given orally or parenterally. It is better tolerated as a 
transdermal patch. Superiority to dimenhydrinate has not been 
proved. 
 BENZODIAZEPINES 
 Benzodiazepines such as lorazepam or diazepam are used before 
the initiation of chemotherapy to reduce anticipatory vomiting or 
vomiting caused by anxiety. The pharmacology of these agents is 
presented in  Chapter 22 . 
 CANNABINOIDS 
 Dronabinol is Δ 9 -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the major psy-
choactive chemical in marijuana (see  Chapter 32 ). After oral 
ingestion, the drug is almost completely absorbed but undergoes 
significant first-pass hepatic metabolism. Its metabolites are 
excreted slowly over days to weeks in the feces and urine. Like 
crude marijuana, dronabinol is a psychoactive agent that is used 
medically as an appetite stimulant and as an antiemetic, but the 
mechanisms for these effects are not understood. Because of the 
availability of more effective agents, dronabinol now is uncom-
monly used for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea 
and vomiting. Combination therapy with phenothiazines provides 
synergistic antiemetic action and appears to attenuate the adverse 
effects of both agents. Dronabinol is usually administered in a 
dosage of 5 mg/m 2 just prior to chemotherapy and every 2–4 hours 
as needed. Adverse effects include euphoria, dysphoria, sedation, 
hallucinations, dry mouth, and increased appetite. It has some 
autonomic effects that may result in tachycardia, conjunctival 
injection, and orthostatic hypotension. Dronabinol has no signifi-
cant drug-drug interactions but may potentiate the clinical effects 
of other psychoactive agents. 
 Nabilone is a closely related THC analog that has been avail-
able in other countries and is now approved for use in the USA. 
 ■ DRUGS USED TO TREAT 
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE 
 Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) comprises two distinct disorders: 
ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. The etiology and pathogenesis 
of these disorders remain unknown. For this reason, pharmacologic 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1101
treatment of inflammatory bowel disorders often involves drugs that 
belong to different therapeutic classes and have different but non-
specific mechanisms of anti-inflammatory action. Drugs used in 
inflammatory bowel disease are chosen on the basis of disease sever-
ity, responsiveness, and drug toxicity ( Figure 62–7 ). 
 AMINOSALICYLATES 
 Chemistry & Formulations 
 Drugs that contain  5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) have been 
used successfully for decades in the treatment of inflammatory 
bowel diseases ( Figure 62–8 ). 5-ASA differs from salicylic acid 
only by the addition of an amino group at the 5 (meta) position. 
Aminosalicylates are believed to work topically (not systemically) 
in areas of diseased gastrointestinal mucosa. Up to 80% of unfor-
mulated, aqueous 5-ASA is absorbed from the small intestine and 
does not reach the distal small bowel or colon in appreciable quan-
tities. To overcome the rapid absorption of 5-ASA from the 
proximal small intestine, a number of formulations have been 
designed to deliver 5-ASA to various distal segments of the small 
bowel or the colon. These include  sulfasalazine, olsalazine, bal-
salazide, and various forms of  mesalamine. 
 A. Azo Compounds 
 Sulfasalazine, balsalazide, and olsalazine contain 5-ASA bound by 
an azo (N=N) bond to an inert compound or to another 5-ASA 
molecule ( Figure 62–8 ). In sulfasalazine, 5-ASA is bound to sul-
fapyridine; in balsalazide, 5-ASA is bound to 4-aminobenzoyl-β-
alanine; and in olsalazine, two 5-ASA molecules are bound 
together. The azo structure markedly reduces absorption of the 
parent drug from the small intestine. In the terminal ileum and 
colon, resident bacteria cleave the azo bond by means of an azore-
ductase enzyme, releasing the active 5-ASA. Consequently, high 
Severe
Moderate
Mild
Responsive
Refractory
Disease
severity
Surgery
Natalizumab
Cyclosporine
TNF antagonists
Intravenous corticosteroids
Budesonide (ileitis)
Topical corticosteroids (proctitis)
Antibiotics
5-Aminosalicylates
TNF antagonists
Oral corticosteroids
Methotrexate
Azathioprine / 6-Mercaptopurine
Therapy
Responsiveness
to therapy
Balsalazide sodium 
N = N 
NaOOCCH2CH2NH
C 
OH 
COONa
O
Olsalazine
N = N 
HO 
OH
COONa
NaCOO
Sulfasalazine
5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA)
Mesalamine
NH2
OH
COOH
CH2CONH
OH
COOH
N = N 
NHSO2
OH
COOH
N
Sulfapyridine
NH2
NHSO2
N
5-Acetylaminosalicylic acid
(Ac-5-ASA) 
 FIGURE 62–7 Therapeutic pyramid approach to inflammatory 
bowel diseases. Treatment choice is predicated on both the severity 
of the illness and the responsiveness to therapy. Agents at the 
bottom of the pyramid are less efficacious but carry a lower risk of 
serious adverse effects. Drugs may be used alone or in various 
combinations. Patients with mild disease may be treated with 
5-aminosalicylates (with ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s colitis), topical 
corticosteroids (ulcerative colitis), antibiotics (Crohn’s colitis or 
Crohn’s perianal disease), or budesonide (Crohn’s ileitis). Patients with 
moderate disease or patients who fail initial therapy for mild disease 
may be treated with oral corticosteroids to promote disease 
remission; immunomodulators (azathioprine, mercaptopurine, 
methotrexate) to promote or maintain disease remission; or anti-TNF 
antibodies. Patients with moderate disease who fail other therapies 
or patients with severe disease may require intravenous corticosteroids, 
anti-TNF antibodies, or surgery. Natalizumab is reserved for patients 
with severe Crohn’s disease who have failed immunomodulators and 
TNF antagonists. Cyclosporine is used primarily for patients with 
severe ulcerative colitis who have failed a course of intravenous 
corticosteroids. TNF, tumor necrosis factor. 
 FIGURE 62–8 Chemical structures and metabolism of aminosalicylates. Azo compounds (balsalazide, olsalazine, sulfasalazine) are con-
verted by bacterial azoreductase to 5-aminosalicylic acid (mesalamine), the active therapeutic moiety. 
1102    SECTION X Special Topics
concentrations of active drug are made available in the terminal 
ileum or colon. 
 B. Mesalamine Compounds 
 Other proprietary formulations have been designed that package 
5-ASA itself in various ways to deliver it to different segments of 
the small or large bowel. These 5-ASA formulations are known 
generically as mesalamine.  Pentasa is a mesalamine formulation 
that contains timed-release microgranules that release 5-ASA 
throughout the small intestine ( Figure 62–9 ).  Asacol and  Apriso 
have 5-ASA coated in a pH-sensitive resin that dissolves at pH 6-7 
(the pH of the distal ileum and proximal colon).  Lialda also uses 
a pH-dependent resin that encases a multimatrix core. On dissolu-
tion of the pH-sensitive resin in the colon, water slowly penetrates 
its hydrophilic and lipophilic core, leading to slow release of 
mesalamine throughout the colon. 5-ASA also may be delivered in 
high concentrations to the rectum and sigmoid colon by means of 
enema formulations  (Rowasa) or suppositories  (Canasa). 
 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics 
 Although unformulated 5-ASA is readily absorbed from the small 
intestine, absorption of 5-ASA from the colon is extremely low. In 
contrast, approximately 20–30% of 5-ASA from current oral 
mesalamine formulations is systemically absorbed in the small 
intestine. Absorbed 5-ASA undergoes N-acetylation in the gut 
epithelium and liver to a metabolite that does not possess signifi-
cant anti-inflammatory activity. The acetylated metabolite is 
excreted by the kidneys. 
 Of the azo compounds, 10% of sulfasalazine and less than 1% 
of balsalazide are absorbed as native compounds. After azore-
ductase breakdown of sulfasalazine, over 85% of the carrier mol-
ecule sulfapyridine is absorbed from the colon. Sulfapyridine 
undergoes hepatic metabolism (including acetylation) followed by 
renal excretion. By contrast, after azoreductase breakdown of bal-
salazide, over 70% of the carrier peptide is recovered intact in the 
feces and only a small amount of systemic absorption occurs. 
 The mechanism of action of 5-ASA is not certain. The primary 
action of salicylate and other NSAIDs is due to blockade of 
prostaglandin synthesis by inhibition of cyclooxygenase. However, 
the aminosalicylates have variable effects on prostaglandin produc-
tion. It is thought that 5-ASA modulates inflammatory mediators 
derived from both the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways. 
Other potential mechanisms of action of the 5-ASA drugs relate 
to their ability to interfere with the production of inflammatory 
cytokines. 5-ASA inhibits the activity of nuclear factor-κB 
(NF-κB), an important transcription factor for proinflammatory 
cytokines. 5-ASA may also inhibit cellular functions of natural 
killer cells, mucosal lymphocytes, and macrophages, and it may 
scavenge reactive oxygen metabolites. 
 Clinical Uses 
 5-ASA drugs induce and maintain remission in ulcerative colitis 
and are considered to be the first-line agents for treatment of mild 
to moderate active ulcerative colitis. Their efficacy in Crohn’s 
disease is unproven, although many clinicians use 5-ASA agents as 
first-line therapy for mild to moderate disease involving the colon 
or distal ileum. 
 The effectiveness of 5-ASA therapy depends in part on achiev-
ing high drug concentration at the site of active disease. Thus, 
5-ASA suppositories or enemas are useful in patients with ulcer-
ative colitis or Crohn’s disease confined to the rectum (proctitis) 
or distal colon (proctosigmoiditis). In patients with ulcerative 
colitis or Crohn’s colitis that extends to the proximal colon, both 
the azo compounds and mesalamine formulations are useful. For 
the treatment of Crohn’s disease involving the small bowel, mesal-
amine compounds, which release 5-ASA in the small intestine, 
have a theoretic advantage over the azo compounds. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Sulfasalazine has a high incidence of adverse effects, most of which 
are attributable to systemic effects of the sulfapyridine molecule. 
Slow acetylators of sulfapyridine have more frequent and more 
severe adverse effects than fast acetylators. Up to 40% of patients 
cannot tolerate therapeutic doses of sulfasalazine. The most com-
mon problems are dose-related and include nausea, gastrointestinal 
 FIGURE 62–9  Sites of 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) release from different formulations in the small and large intestines. 
Stomach
Small Intestine
Jejunum
Ileum
Colon
Proximal
Distal
Rectum
Sulfasalazine
Balsalazide
5-ASA suppository (Canasa)
5-ASA enema
(Rowasa)
5-ASA pH-dependent release (Asacol, Lialda)
5-ASA delayed-release capsules (Pentasa)
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1103
upset, headaches, arthralgias, myalgias, bone marrow suppression, 
and malaise. Hypersensitivity to sulfapyridine (or, rarely, 5-ASA) 
can result in fever, exfoliative dermatitis, pancreatitis, pneumoni-
tis, hemolytic anemia, pericarditis, or hepatitis. Sulfasalazine has 
also been associated with oligospermia, which reverses upon dis-
continuation of the drug. Sulfasalazine impairs folate absorption 
and processing; hence, dietary supplementation with 1 mg/d folic 
acid is recommended. 
 In contrast to sulfasalazine, other aminosalicylate formulations 
are well tolerated. In most clinical trials, the frequency of drug 
adverse events is similar to that in patients treated with placebo. 
For unclear reasons, olsalazine may stimulate a secretory diar-
rhea—which should not be confused with active inflammatory 
bowel disease—in 10% of patients. Rare hypersensitivity reactions 
may occur with all aminosalicylates but are much less common 
than with sulfasalazine. Careful studies have documented subtle 
changes indicative of renal tubular damage in patients receiving 
high doses of aminosalicylates. Rare cases of interstitial nephritis 
are reported, particularly in association with high doses of mesala-
mine formulations; this may be attributable to the higher serum 
5-ASA levels attained with these drugs. Sulfasalazine and other 
aminosalicylates rarely cause worsening of colitis, which may be 
misinterpreted as refractory colitis. 
 GLUCOCORTICOIDS 
 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics 
 In gastrointestinal practice, prednisone and prednisolone are the most 
commonly used oral glucocorticoids. These drugs have an intermedi-
ate duration of biologic activity allowing once-daily dosing. 
 Hydrocortisone enemas, foam, or suppositories are used to 
maximize colonic tissue effects and minimize systemic absorption 
via topical treatment of active inflammatory bowel disease in the 
rectum and sigmoid colon. Absorption of hydrocortisone is 
reduced with rectal administration, although 15–30% of the 
administered dosage is still absorbed. 
 Budesonide is a potent synthetic analog of prednisolone that 
has high affinity for the glucocorticoid receptor but is subject to 
rapid first-pass hepatic metabolism (in part by CYP3A4), resulting 
in low oral bioavailability. A controlled-release oral formulation of 
budesonide (Entocort) is available that releases the drug in the 
distal ileum and colon, where it is absorbed. The bioavailability of 
controlled-release budesonide capsules is approximately 10%. 
 As in other tissues, glucocorticoids inhibit production of 
inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1) and chemokines (IL-8); 
reduce expression of inflammatory cell adhesion molecules; and 
inhibit gene transcription of nitric oxide synthase, phospholipase 
A 2 , cyclooxygenase-2, and NF-κB. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Glucocorticoids are commonly used in the treatment of patients 
with moderate to severe active inflammatory bowel disease. 
Active disease is commonly treated with an initial oral dosage of 
40–60 mg/d of prednisone or prednisolone. Higher doses have 
not been shown to be more efficacious but have significantly 
greater adverse effects. Once a patient responds to initial therapy 
(usually within 1–2 weeks), the dosage is tapered to minimize 
development of adverse effects. In severely ill patients, the drugs 
are usually administered intravenously. 
 For the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease involving the 
rectum or sigmoid colon, rectally administered glucocorticoids are 
preferred because of their lower systemic absorption. 
 Oral controlled-release budesonide (9 mg/d) is commonly used 
in the treatment of mild to moderate Crohn’s disease involving the 
ileum and proximal colon. It appears to be slightly less effective 
than prednisolone in achieving clinical remission, but has signifi-
cantly less adverse systemic effects. 
 Corticosteroids are not useful for maintaining disease remis-
sion. Other medications such as aminosalicylates or immunosup-
pressive agents should be used for this purpose. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Adverse effects of glucocorticoids are reviewed in  Chapter 39 . 
 PURINE ANALOGS: AZATHIOPRINE & 
6-MERCAPTOPURINE 
 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics 
 Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) are purine anti-
metabolites that have immunosuppressive properties (see  Chapters 
54 and  55 ). 
 The bioavailability of azathioprine (80%) is superior to 6-MP 
(50%). After absorption azathioprine is rapidly converted by a non-
enzymatic process to 6-MP. 6-Mercaptopurine subsequently under-
goes a complex biotransformation via competing catabolic enzymes 
(xanthine oxidase and thiopurine methyltransferase) that produce 
inactive metabolites and anabolic pathways that produce active 
thioguanine nucleotides. Azathioprine and 6-MP have a serum half-
life of less than 2 hours; however, the active 6-thioguanine nucle-
otides are concentrated in cells resulting in a prolonged half-life of 
days. The prolonged kinetics of 6-thioguanine nucleotide results 
in a median delay of 17 weeks before onset of therapeutic benefit 
from oral azathioprine or 6-MP is observed in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Azathioprine and 6-MP are important agents in the induction and 
maintenance of remission of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease. 
Although the optimal dose is uncertain, most patients with normal 
thiopurine-S-methyltransferase (TPMT) activity (see below) are 
treated with 6-MP, 1–1.5 mg/kg/d, or azathioprine, 2–2.5 mg/kg/d. 
After 3–6 months of treatment, 50–60% of patients with active 
disease achieve remission. These agents help maintain remission 
in up to 80% of patients. Among patients who depend on long-
term glucocorticoid therapy to control active disease, purine 
analogs allow dose reduction or elimination of steroids in the 
majority. 
1104    SECTION X Special Topics
 Adverse Effects 
 Dose-related toxicities of azathioprine or 6-MP include nausea, 
vomiting, bone marrow depression (leading to leukopenia, macro-
cytosis, anemia, or thrombocytopenia), and hepatic toxicity. 
Routine laboratory monitoring with complete blood count and 
liver function tests is required in all patients. Leukopenia or eleva-
tions in liver chemistries usually respond to medication dose 
reduction. Severe leukopenia may predispose to opportunistic 
infections; leukopenia may respond to therapy with granulocyte 
stimulating factor. Catabolism of 6-MP by TPMT is low in 11% 
and absent in 0.3% of the population, leading to increased pro-
duction of active 6-thioguanine metabolites and increased risk of 
bone marrow depression. TPMT levels can be measured before 
initiating therapy. These drugs should not be administered to 
patients with no TPMT activity and should be initiated at lower 
doses in patients with intermediate activity. Hypersensitivity reac-
tions to azathioprine or 6-MP occur in 5% of patients. These 
include fever, rash, pancreatitis, diarrhea, and hepatitis. 
 As with transplant recipients receiving long-term 6-MP or 
azathioprine therapy, there appears to be an increased risk of lym-
phoma among patients with inflammatory bowel disease. These 
drugs cross the placenta; however, there are many reports of suc-
cessful pregnancies in women taking these agents, and the risk of 
teratogenicity appears to be small. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Allopurinol markedly reduces xanthine oxide catabolism of the 
purine analogs, potentially increasing active 6-thioguanine nucle-
otides that may lead to severe leukopenia. Allopurinol should not 
be given to patients taking 6-MP or azathioprine except in care-
fully monitored situations. 
 METHOTREXATE 
 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics 
 Methotrexate is another antimetabolite that has beneficial 
effects in a number of chronic inflammatory diseases, including 
Crohn’s disease and rheumatoid arthritis (see  Chapter 36 ), and 
in cancer (see  Chapter 54 ). Methotrexate may be given orally, 
subcutaneously, or intramuscularly. Reported oral bioavailabil-
ity is 50–90% at doses used in chronic inflammatory diseases. 
Intramuscular and subcutaneous methotrexate exhibit nearly 
complete bioavailability. 
 The principal mechanism of action is inhibition of dihydrofolate 
reductase, an enzyme important in the production of thymidine and 
purines. At the high doses used for chemotherapy, methotrexate 
inhibits cellular proliferation. However, at the low doses used in the 
treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (12–25 mg/wk), the anti-
proliferative effects may not be evident. Methotrexate may inter-
fere with the inflammatory actions of interleukin-1. It may also 
stimulate increased release of adenosine, an endogenous anti-
inflammatory autacoid. Methotrexate may also stimulate apopto-
sis and death of activated T lymphocytes. 
 Clinical Uses 
 Methotrexate is used to induce and maintain remission in patients 
with Crohn’s disease. Its efficacy in ulcerative colitis is uncertain. 
To induce remission, patients are treated with 15–25 mg of 
methotrexate once weekly by subcutaneous injection. If a satisfac-
tory response is achieved within 8–12 weeks, the dose is reduced 
to 15 mg/wk. 
 Adverse Effects 
 At higher dosage, methotrexate may cause bone marrow depres-
sion, megaloblastic anemia, alopecia, and mucositis. At the doses 
used in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, these events 
are uncommon but warrant dose reduction if they do occur. Folate 
supplementation reduces the risk of these events without impair-
ing the anti-inflammatory action. 
 In patients with psoriasis treated with methotrexate, hepatic 
damage is common; however, among patients with inflammatory 
bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis, the risk is significantly 
lower. Renal insufficiency may increase risk of hepatic accumula-
tion and toxicity. 
 ANTI-TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR 
THERAPY 
 Pharmacokinetics & Pharmacodynamics 
 A dysregulation of the helper T cell type 1 (TH1) response and 
regulatory T cells (Tregs) is present in inflammatory bowel disease, 
especially Crohn’s disease. One of the key proinflammatory cyto-
kines in inflammatory bowel disease is tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF). TNF is produced by the innate immune system (eg, den-
dritic cells, macrophages), the adaptive immune system (especially 
TH1 cells), and nonimmune cells (fibroblasts, smooth muscle 
cells). TNF exists in two biologically active forms: soluble TNF 
and membrane-bound TNF. The biologic activity of soluble and 
membrane-bound TNF is mediated by binding to TNF receptors 
(TNFR) that are present on some cells (especially TH1 cells, 
innate immune cells, and fibroblasts). Binding of TNF to TNFR 
initially activates components including NF-κB that stimulate 
transcription, growth, and expansion. Biologic actions ascribed to 
TNFR activation include release of proinflammatory cytokines 
from macrophages, T-cell activation and proliferation, fibroblast 
collagen production, up-regulation of endothelial adhesion mole-
cules responsible for leukocyte migration, and stimulation of 
hepatic acute phase reactants. Activation of TNFR may later lead 
to apoptosis (programmed cell death) of activated cells. 
 Three monoclonal antibodies to human TNF are approved for 
the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease: infliximab, adali-
mumab, and certolizumab ( Table 62–3 ). Infliximab and adali-
mumab are antibodies of the IgG 1 subclass. Certolizumab is a 
recombinant antibody that contains an Fab fragment that is conju-
gated to polyethylene glycol (PEG) but lacks an Fc portion. The 
Fab portions of infliximab and certolizumab are chimeric mouse-
human antibodies but adalimumab is fully humanized. Infliximab 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1105
TABLE 62–3 Anti-TNF antibodies used in inflammatory bowel disease.
Infliximab
Adalimumab
Certolizumab
Class
Monoclonal antibody
Monoclonal antibody
Monoclonal antibody
% Human
75%
100%
95%
Structure
IgG1
IgG1
Fab fragment attached to PEG (lacks 
Fc portion)
Route of administration
Intravenous
Subcutaneous
Subcutaneous
Half–life
8–10 days
10–20 days
14 days
Neutralizes soluble TNF
Yes
Yes
Yes
Neutralizes membrane-bound TNF
Yes
Yes
Yes
Induces apoptosis of cells 
expressing membrane-bound TNF
Yes
Yes
No
Complement-mediated 
cytotoxicity of cells expressing 
membrane–bound TNF
Yes
Yes
No
Induction dose
5 mg/kg at 0, 2, and 6 weeks
160 mg, 80 mg, and 40 mg 
at 0, 2, and 4 weeks
400 mg at 0, 2, and 4 weeks
Maintenance dose
5 mg/kg every 8 weeks
40 mg every 2 weeks
400 mg every 4 weeks
TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
is administered as an intravenous infusion. At therapeutic doses of 
5–10 mg/kg, the half-life of infliximab is approximately 8–10 days, 
resulting in plasma disappearance of antibodies over 8–12 weeks. 
Adalimumab and certolizumab are administered by subcutaneous 
injection. The half-life for both is approximately 2 weeks. 
 All three agents bind to soluble and membrane-bound TNF 
with high affinity, preventing the cytokine from binding to its 
receptors. Binding of all three antibodies to membrane-bound 
TNF also causes reverse signaling that suppresses cytokine release. 
When infliximab or adalimumab bind to membrane-bound TNF, 
the Fc portion of the human IgG 1 region promotes antibody-
mediated apoptosis, complement activation, and cellular cytotox-
icity of activated T lymphocytes and macrophages. Certolizumab, 
without an Fc portion, lacks these properties. 
 Clinical Uses 
 All three agents are approved for the acute and chronic treatment 
of patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease who have had 
an inadequate response to conventional therapies. Infliximab also 
is approved for the acute and chronic treatment of moderate to 
severe ulcerative colitis. With induction therapy, all three agents 
lead to symptomatic improvement in 60% and disease remission 
in 30% of patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease, 
including patients who have been dependent on glucocorticoids 
or who have not responded to 6-MP or methotrexate. The median 
time to clinical response is 2 weeks. Induction therapy is generally 
given as follows: infliximab 5 mg/kg intravenous infusion at 0, 2, 
and 6 weeks; adalimumab 160 mg (in divided doses) initially and 
80 mg subcutaneous injection at 2 weeks; and certolizumab 
400 mg subcutaneous injection at 0, 2, and 4 weeks. Patients who 
respond may be treated with chronic maintenance therapy, as fol-
lows: infliximab 5 mg/kg intravenous infusion every 8 weeks; 
adalimumab 40 mg subcutaneous injection every 2 weeks; certoli-
zumab 400 mg subcutaneous injection every 4 weeks. With 
chronic, regularly scheduled therapy, clinical response is main-
tained in more than 60% of patients and disease remission in 
40%. However, one-third of patients eventually lose response 
despite higher doses or more frequent injections. Loss of response 
in many patients may be due to the development of antibodies to 
the TNF antibody or to other mechanisms. 
 Infliximab is approved for the treatment of patients with mod-
erate to severe ulcerative colitis who have had inadequate response 
to mesalamine or corticosteroids. After induction therapy of 
5–10 mg/wk at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, 70% of patients have a clinical 
response and one third achieve a clinical remission. With contin-
ued maintenance infusions every 8 weeks, approximately 50% of 
patients have continued clinical response. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Serious adverse events occur in up to 6% of patients with anti-
TNF therapy. The most important adverse effect of these drugs is 
infection due to suppression of the TH1 inflammatory response. 
This may lead to serious infections such as bacterial sepsis, tuber-
culosis, invasive fungal organisms, reactivation of hepatitis B, 
listeriosis, and other opportunistic infections. Reactivation of 
latent tuberculosis, with dissemination, has occurred. Before 
administering anti-TNF therapy, all patients must undergo testing 
with tuberculin skin tests or interferon gamma release assays. 
Prophylactic therapy for tuberculosis is warranted for patients 
with positive test results before beginning anti-TNF therapy. 
1106    SECTION X Special Topics
More common but usually less serious infections include upper 
respiratory infections (sinusitis, bronchitis, and pneumonia) and 
cellulitis. The risk of serious infections is increased markedly in 
patients taking concomitant corticosteroids. 
 Antibodies to the antibody (ATA) may develop with all three 
agents. These antibodies may attenuate or eliminate the clinical 
response and increase the likelihood of developing acute or 
delayed infusion or injection reactions. Antibody formation is 
much more likely in patients given episodic anti-TNF therapy 
than regular scheduled injections. In patients on chronic mainte-
nance therapy, the prevalence of ATA with infliximab is 10%, 
certolizumab 8%, and adalimumab 3%. Antibody development 
also is less likely in patients who receive concomitant therapy with 
immunomodulators (ie, 6-MP or methotrexate). Concomitant 
treatment with anti-TNF agents and immunomodulators may 
increase the risk of lymphoma. 
 Infliximab intravenous infusions result in acute adverse infusion 
reactions in up to 10% of patients, but discontinuation of the infu-
sion for severe reactions is required in less than 2%. Infusion reac-
tions are more common with the second or subsequent infusions 
than with the first. Early mild reactions include fever, headache, 
dizziness, urticaria, or mild cardiopulmonary symptoms that 
include chest pain, dyspnea, or hemodynamic instability. Reactions 
to subsequent infusions may be reduced with prophylactic admin-
istration of acetaminophen, diphenhydramine, or corticosteroids. 
Severe acute reactions include significant hypotension, shortness of 
breath, muscle spasms, and chest discomfort; such reactions may 
require treatment with oxygen, epinephrine, and corticosteroids. 
 A delayed serum sickness-like reaction may occur 1–2 weeks 
after anti-TNF therapy in 1% of patients. These reactions consist 
of myalgia, arthralgia, jaw tightness, fever, rash, urticaria, and 
edema and usually require discontinuation of that agent. Positive 
antinuclear antibodies and anti-double-stranded DNA develop in 
a small number of patients. Development of a lupus-like syn-
drome is rare and resolves after discontinuation of the drug. 
 Rare but serious adverse effects of all anti-TNF agents also 
include severe hepatic reactions leading to acute hepatic failure, 
demyelinating disorders, hematologic reactions, and new or wors-
ened congestive heart failure in patients with underlying heart 
disease. Anti-TNF agents may cause a variety of psoriatic skin 
rashes, which usually resolve after drug discontinuation. 
 Lymphoma appears to be increased in patients with untreated 
inflammatory bowel disease. Anti-TNF agents may further 
increase the risk of lymphoma in this population, although the 
relative risk is uncertain. An increased number of cases of hepato-
splenic T-cell lymphoma, a rare but usually fatal disease, have been 
noted in children and young adults, virtually all of whom have 
been on combined therapy with immunomodulators, anti-TNF 
agents, or corticosteroids. 
 ANTI-INTEGRIN THERAPY 
 Integrins are a family of adhesion molecules on the surface of leu-
kocytes that may interact with another class of adhesion molecules 
on the surface of the vascular endothelium known as selectins, 
allowing circulating leukocytes to adhere to the vascular endothe-
lium and subsequently move through the vessel wall into the tis-
sue. Integrins consist of heterodimers that contain two subunits, 
alpha and beta.  Natalizumab is a humanized IgG 4 monoclonal 
antibody targeted against the α4 subunit, and thereby blocks sev-
eral integrins on circulating inflammatory cells and thus prevents 
binding to the vascular adhesion molecules and subsequent migra-
tion into surrounding tissues. 
 Natalizumab has shown significant efficacy for a subset of 
patients with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease. Unfortunately, 
in initial clinical trials of patients with Crohn’s disease and multi-
ple sclerosis, 3 of 3100 patients treated with natalizumab devel-
oped progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy due to 
reactivation of a human polyomavirus (JC virus), which is present 
in latent form in over 80% of adults. All three patients were 
receiving concomitant therapy with other immunomodulators. 
After voluntary withdrawal and review of the drug by the manu-
facturer in 2005, it was approved by the FDA in 2008 for patients 
with moderate to severe Crohn’s disease who have failed other 
therapies through a carefully restricted program. The approved 
dosage is 300 mg every 4 weeks by intravenous infusion, and 
patients should not be on other immune suppressant agents. 
Approximately 50% of patients respond to initial therapy with 
natalizumab. Of patients with an initial response, long-term 
response is maintained in 60% and remission in over 40%. Other 
adverse effects include acute infusion reactions and a small risk of 
opportunistic infections. 
 ■ PANCREATIC ENZYME 
SUPPLEMENTS 
 Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is most commonly caused by 
cystic fibrosis, chronic pancreatitis, or pancreatic resection. When 
secretion of pancreatic enzymes falls below 10% of normal, fat and 
protein digestion is impaired and can lead to steatorrhea, azotor-
rhea, vitamin malabsorption, and weight loss. Pancreatic enzyme 
supplements, which contain a mixture of amylase, lipase, and 
proteases, are the mainstay of treatment for pancreatic enzyme 
insufficiency. Two major types of preparations in use are  pancre-
atin and  pancrelipase. Pancreatin is an alcohol-derived extract of 
hog pancreas with relatively low concentrations of lipase and pro-
teolytic enzymes, whereas pancrelipase is an enriched preparation. 
On a per-weight basis, pancrelipase has approximately 12 times 
the lipolytic activity and more than 4 times the proteolytic activity 
of pancreatin. Consequently, pancreatin is no longer in common 
clinical use. Only pancrelipase is discussed here. 
 Pancrelipase is available worldwide in both non-enteric-coated 
and enteric-coated preparations. Formulations are available in 
sizes containing varying amounts of lipase, amylase, and protease. 
However, manufacturers’ listings of enzyme content do not always 
reflect true enzymatic activity. Pancrelipase enzymes are rapidly 
and permanently inactivated by gastric acids. Therefore, non-
enteric-coated preparations (eg, Viokase tablets or powder) should 
be given concomitantly with acid suppression therapy (proton 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1107
pump inhibitor or H 2 antagonist) to reduce acid-mediated 
destruction within the stomach. Enteric-coated formulations are 
more commonly used because they do not require concomitant 
acid suppression therapy. In 2006, the FDA announced that all 
products must undergo an approval process to demonstrate prod-
uct quality, safety, and efficacy. At present, three formulations (all 
enteric-coated capsules) are approved for use (Creon, Pancreaze, 
Zenpep). 
 Pancrelipase preparations are administered with each meal and 
snack. Enzyme activity may be listed in international units (IU) or 
USP units. One IU is equal to 2–3 USP units. Dosing should be 
individualized according to the age and weight of the patient, the 
degree of pancreatic insufficiency, and the amount of dietary fat 
intake. Therapy is initiated at a dose that provides 60,000–90,000 
USP units (20–30,000 IU) of lipase activity in the prandial and 
postprandial period—a level that is sufficient to reduce steatorrhea 
to a clinically insignificant level in most cases. Suboptimal 
response to enteric-coated formulations may be due to poor mix-
ing of granules with food or slow dissolution and release of 
enzymes. Gradual increase of dose, change to a different formula-
tion, or addition of acid suppression therapy may improve 
response. For patients with feeding tubes, microspheres may be 
mixed with enteral feeding prior to administration. 
 Pancreatic enzyme supplements are well tolerated. The capsules 
should be swallowed, not chewed, because pancreatic enzymes 
may cause oropharyngeal mucositis. Excessive doses may cause 
diarrhea and abdominal pain. The high purine content of pancreas 
extracts may lead to hyperuricosuria and renal stones. Several cases 
of colonic strictures were reported in patients with cystic fibrosis 
who received high doses of pancrelipase with high lipase activity. 
These high-dose formulations have since been removed from the 
market. 
 ■ BILE ACID THERAPY FOR 
GALLSTONES 
 Ursodiol (ursodeoxycholic acid) is a naturally occurring bile acid 
that makes up less than 5% of the circulating bile salt pool in 
humans and a much higher percentage in bears. After oral admin-
istration, it is absorbed, conjugated in the liver with glycine or 
taurine, and excreted in the bile. Conjugated ursodiol undergoes 
extensive enterohepatic recirculation. The serum half-life is 
approximately 100 hours. With long-term daily administration, 
ursodiol constitutes 30–50% of the circulating bile acid pool. A 
small amount of unabsorbed conjugated or unconjugated ursodiol 
passes into the colon, where it is either excreted or undergoes 
dehydroxylation by colonic bacteria to lithocholic acid, a sub-
stance with potential hepatic toxicity. 
 Pharmacodynamics 
 The solubility of cholesterol in bile is determined by the relative 
proportions of bile acids, lecithin, and cholesterol. Although pro-
longed ursodiol therapy expands the bile acid pool, this does not 
appear to be the principal mechanism of action for dissolution of 
gallstones. Ursodiol decreases the cholesterol content of bile by 
reducing hepatic cholesterol secretion. Ursodiol also appears to 
stabilize hepatocyte canalicular membranes, possibly through a 
reduction in the concentration of other endogenous bile acids or 
through inhibition of immune-mediated hepatocyte destruction. 
 Clinical Use 
 Ursodiol is used for dissolution of small cholesterol gallstones in 
patients with symptomatic gallbladder disease who refuse chole-
cystectomy or who are poor surgical candidates. At a dosage of 
10 mg/kg/d for 12–24 months, dissolution occurs in up to 50% 
of patients with small (< 5–10 mm) noncalcified gallstones. It is 
also effective for the prevention of gallstones in obese patients 
undergoing rapid weight loss therapy. Several trials demonstrate 
that ursodiol 13–15 mg/kg/d is helpful for patients with early-
stage primary biliary cirrhosis, reducing liver function abnormali-
ties and improving liver histology. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Ursodiol is practically free of serious adverse effects. Bile salt-
induced diarrhea is uncommon. Unlike its predecessor, chenode-
oxycholate, ursodiol has not been associated with hepatotoxicity. 
 ■ DRUGS USED TO TREAT 
VARICEAL HEMORRHAGE 
 Portal hypertension most commonly occurs as a consequence of 
chronic liver disease. Portal hypertension is caused by increased 
blood flow within the portal venous system and increased resis-
tance to portal flow within the liver. Splanchnic blood flow is 
increased in patients with cirrhosis due to low arteriolar resistance 
that is mediated by increased circulating vasodilators and decreased 
vascular sensitivity to vasoconstrictors. Intrahepatic vascular resis-
tance is increased in cirrhosis due to fixed fibrosis within the 
spaces of Disse and hepatic veins as well as reversible vasoconstric-
tion of hepatic sinusoids and venules. Among the consequences of 
portal hypertension are ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, and the 
development of portosystemic collaterals—especially gastric or 
esophageal varices. Varices can rupture, leading to massive upper 
gastrointestinal bleeding. 
 Several drugs are available that reduce portal pressures. These 
may be used in the short term for the treatment of active variceal 
hemorrhage or long term to reduce the risk of hemorrhage. 
 SOMATOSTATIN & OCTREOTIDE 
 The pharmacology of octreotide is discussed above under 
Antidiarrheal Agents. In patients with cirrhosis and portal hyper-
tension, intravenous somatostatin (250 mcg/h) or octreotide (50 
mcg/h) reduces portal blood flow and variceal pressures; however, 
the mechanism by which they do so is poorly understood. They do 
1108    SECTION X Special Topics
not appear to induce direct contraction of vascular smooth muscle. 
Their activity may be mediated through inhibition of release of 
glucagon and other gut peptides that alter mesenteric blood flow. 
Although data from clinical trials are conflicting, these agents are 
probably effective in promoting initial hemostasis from bleeding 
esophageal varices. They are generally administered for 3–5 days. 
 VASOPRESSIN & TERLIPRESSIN 
 Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) is a polypeptide hormone 
secreted by the hypothalamus and stored in the posterior pituitary. 
Its pharmacology is discussed in  Chapters 17 and  37 . Although its 
primary physiologic role is to maintain serum osmolality, it is also 
a potent arterial vasoconstrictor. When administered intravenously 
by continuous infusion, vasopressin causes splanchnic arterial vaso-
constriction that leads to reduced splanchnic perfusion and low-
ered portal venous pressures. Before the advent of octreotide, 
vasopressin was commonly used to treat acute variceal hemorrhage. 
However, because of its high adverse-effect profile, it is no longer 
used for this purpose. In contrast, for patients with acute gastroin-
testinal bleeding from small bowel or large bowel vascular ectasias 
or diverticulosis, vasopressin may be infused—to promote vasos-
pasm—into one of the branches of the superior or inferior mesen-
teric artery through an angiographically placed catheter. Adverse 
effects with systemic vasopressin are common. Systemic and 
peripheral vasoconstriction can lead to hypertension, myocardial 
ischemia or infarction, or mesenteric infarction. These effects may 
be reduced by coadministration of nitroglycerin, which may fur-
ther reduce portal venous pressures (by reducing portohepatic 
vascular resistance) and may also reduce the coronary and periph-
eral vascular vasospasm caused by vasopressin. Other common 
adverse effects are nausea, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea (due to 
intestinal hyperactivity). Furthermore, the antidiuretic effects of 
vasopressin promote retention of free water, which can lead to 
hyponatremia, fluid retention, and pulmonary edema. 
 Terlipressin is a vasopressin analog that appears to have similar 
efficacy to vasopressin with fewer adverse effects. Although this 
agent is available in other countries, it has never been approved for 
use in the USA. 
 BETA-RECEPTOR-BLOCKING DRUGS 
 The pharmacology of β-receptor-blocking agents is discussed in 
 Chapter 10 . Beta-receptor antagonists reduce portal venous pres-
sures via a decrease in portal venous inflow. This decrease is due to 
a decrease in cardiac output (β 1 blockade) and to splanchnic 
vasoconstriction (β 2 blockade) caused by the unopposed effect 
of systemic catecholamines on α receptors. Thus, nonselective 
β blockers such as propranolol and nadolol are more effective 
than selective β 1 blockers in reducing portal pressures. Among 
patients with cirrhosis and esophageal varices who have not previ-
ously had an episode of variceal hemorrhage, the incidence of 
bleeding among patients treated with nonselective β blockers is 
15% compared with 25% in control groups. Among patients with 
a history of variceal hemorrhage, the likelihood of recurrent hem-
orrhage is 80% within 2 years. Nonselective β blockers signifi-
cantly reduce the rate of recurrent bleeding, although a reduction 
in mortality is unproved. 
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1109
SUMMARY Drugs Used Primarily for Gastrointestinal Conditions
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
DRUGS USED IN ACID-PEPTIC DISEASES
 •  Proton pump 
    inhibitors (PPIs), eg, 
    omeprazole, lanso
    prazole
Irreversible blockade of H
+, 
K
+-ATPase pump in active 
parietal cells of stomach
Long-lasting reduction of 
stimulated and nocturnal 
acid secretion
Peptic ulcer, gastroesopha-
geal reflux disease, erosive 
gastritis
Half-lives much shorter than 
duration of action • low toxicity 
• reduction of stomach acid may 
reduce absorption of some drugs 
and increase that of others
 • H2-receptor blockers, eg, cimetidine: Effective reduction of nocturnal acid but less effective against stimulated secretion; very safe, available over the counter (OTC). 
        Cimetidine, but not other H2 blockers, is a weak antiandrogenic agent and a potent CYP enzyme inhibitor
 • Sucralfate: Polymerizes at site of tissue damage (ulcer bed) and protects against further damage; very insoluble with no systemic effects; must be given four times daily
 • Antacids: Popular OTC medication for symptomatic relief of heartburn; not as useful as PPI and H2 blockers in peptic diseases
DRUGS STIMULATING MOTILITY
 • Metoclopramide
D2-receptor blocker • removes 
inhibition of acetylcholine 
neurons in enteric nervous 
system
Increases gastric emptying 
and intestinal motility
Gastric paresis (eg, in 
diabetes) • antiemetic 
(see below)
Parkinsonian symptoms due to 
block of central nervous system 
(CNS) D2 receptors
 • Domperidone: Like metoclopramide, but less CNS effect; not available in USA
 • Cholinomimetics: Neostigmine often used for colonic pseudo-obstruction in hospitalized patients
 • Macrolides: Erythromycin useful in diabetic gastroparesis but tolerance develops
LAXATIVES
 •  Magnesium hydrox
   ide, other nonabsorb
   able salts and sugars
Osmotic agents increase water 
content of stool
Usually causes evacuation 
within 4–6 h, sooner in large 
doses
Simple constipation; bowel 
prep for endoscopy 
(especially PEG solutions)
Magnesium may be absorbed and 
cause toxicity in renal impairment
 • Bulk-forming laxatives: Methylcellulose, psyllium, etc: increase volume of colon, stimulate evacuation
 • Stimulants: senna, cascara; stimulate activity; may cause cramping
 • Stool surfactants: Docusate, mineral oil; lubricate stool, ease passage
 • Chloride channel activator: Lubiprostone, prostanoic acid derivative, stimulates chloride secretion into intestine, increasing fluid content
 • Opioid receptor antagonists: Alvimopan, methylnaltrexone; block intestinal m-opioid receptors but do not enter CNS, so analgesia is maintained
 • 5-HT4 agonists: Tegaserod; activates enteric 5-HT4 receptors and increases intestinal motility
ANTIDIARRHEAL DRUGS
 • Loperamide
Activates μ-opioid receptors in 
enteric nervous system
Slows motility in gut with 
negligible CNS effects
Nonspecific, noninfectious 
diarrhea
Mild cramping but little or no CNS 
toxicity
 • Diphenoxylate: Similar to loperamide, but high doses can cause CNS opioid effects and toxicity
 • Colloidal bismuth compounds: Subsalicylate and citrate salts available. OTC preparations popular and have some value in travelers’ diarrhea due to adsorption of toxins
 • Kaolin + pectin: Adsorbent compounds available OTC in some countries
DRUGS FOR IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME (IBS)
 • Alosetron
5-HT3 antagonist of high 
potency and duration of 
binding
Reduces smooth muscle 
activity in gut
Approved for severe 
diarrhea-predominant IBS 
in women
Rare but serious constipation • 
ischemic colitis • infarction
 • Anticholinergics: Nonselective action on gut activity, usually associated with typical antimuscarinic toxicity
 • Chloride channel activator: Lubiprostone (see above); useful in constipation-predominant IBS in women
(continued )
1110    SECTION X Special Topics
Subclass
Mechanism of Action
Effects
Clinical Applications
Pharmacokinetics, 
Toxicities, Interactions
ANTIEMETIC DRUGS
 • Ondansetron, other  
       5-HT3 antagonists
5-HT3 blockade in gut and CNS 
with shorter duration of 
binding than alosetron
Extremely effective in 
preventing chemotherapy-
induced and postoperative 
nausea and vomiting
First-line agents in cancer 
chemotherapy; also useful 
for postop emesis
Usually given IV but orally active in 
prophylaxis • 4–9 h duration of 
action • very low toxicity but may 
slow colonic transit
 • Aprepitant
NK1-receptor blocker in CNS
Interferes with vomiting 
reflex • no effect on 5-HT, 
dopamine, or steroid 
receptors
Effective in reducing both 
early and delayed emesis 
in cancer chemotherapy
Given orally • IV fosaprepitant 
available • fatigue, dizziness, 
diarrhea • CYP interactions
 • Corticosteroids: Mechanism not known but useful in antiemetic IV cocktails
 • Antimuscarinics (scopolamine): Effective in emesis due to motion sickness; not other types
 • Antihistaminics: Moderate efficacy in motion sickness and chemotherapy-induced emesis
 • Phenothiazines: Act primarily through block of D2 and muscarinic receptors
 • Cannabinoids: Dronabinol is available for use in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, but is associated with CNS marijuana effects
DRUGS USED IN INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE (IBD)
 • 5-Aminosalicylates, 
       eg, mesalamine in 
       many formulations
 • Sulfasalazine
Mechanism uncertain • may be 
inhibition of eicosanoid inflam-
matory mediators
Topical therapeutic action • 
systemic absorption may 
cause toxicity
Mild to moderately severe 
Crohn’s disease and ulcer-
ative colitis
Sulfasalazine causes sulfonamide 
toxicity and may cause GI upset, 
myalgias, arthralgias, 
myelosuppression • other 
aminosalicylates much less toxic
 • Purine analogs and 
        antimetabolites, eg, 
        6-mercaptopurine, 
        methotrexate
Mechanism uncertain • may 
promote apoptosis of immune 
cells • Methotrexate blocks 
dihydrofolate reductase
Generalized suppression of 
immune processes
Moderately severe to 
severe Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis
GI upset, mucositis • 
myelosuppression • purine analogs 
may cause hepatotoxicity, but rare 
with methotrexate at the low 
doses used
 • Anti-TNF antibodies, 
       eg, infliximab, others
Bind tumor necrosis factor and 
prevent it from binding to its 
receptors
Suppression of several 
aspects of immune function, 
especially TH1 lymphocytes
Infliximab: Moderately 
severe to severe Crohn’s 
disease and ulcerative 
colitis • others approved in 
Crohn’s disease
Infusion reactions • reactivation of 
latent tuberculosis • increased risk 
of dangerous systemic fungal and 
bacterial infections
 • Corticosteroids: Generalized anti-inflammatory effect; see Chapter 39
PANCREATIC SUPPLEMENTS
 • Pancrelipase
Replacement enzymes from 
animal pancreatic extracts
Improves digestion of 
dietary fat, protein, and 
carbohydrate
Pancreatic insufficiency 
due to cystic fibrosis, pan-
creatitis, pancreatectomy
Taken with every meal • may 
increase incidence of gout
 • Pancreatin: Similar pancreatic extracts but much lower potency; rarely used
BILE ACID THERAPY FOR GALLSTONES
 • Ursodiol
Reduces cholesterol secretion 
into bile
Dissolves gallstones
Gallstones in patients 
refusing or not eligible for 
surgery
May cause diarrhea
DRUGS USED TO TREAT VARICEAL HEMORRHAGE
 • Octreotide
Somatostatin analog • 
mechanism not certain
May alter portal blood flow 
and variceal pressures
Patients with bleeding 
varices or at high risk of 
repeat bleeding
Reduced endocrine and exocrine 
pancreatic activity • other 
endocrine abnormalities • GI upset
 • b Blockers: Reduce cardiac output and splanchnic blood flow; see Chapter 10
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1111
ANTACIDS
Aluminum hydroxide gel* (AlternaGEL, others)
Oral: 300, 500, 600 mg tablets; 400, 500 mg capsules; 320, 450, 
675 mg/5 mL suspension
Calcium carbonate* (Tums, others)
Oral: 350, 420, 500, 600, 650, 750, 1000, 1250 mg chewable tablets; 
1250 mg/5 mL suspension
Combination aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide 
preparations* (Maalox, Mylanta, Gaviscon, Gelusil, others)
Oral: 400 to 800 mg combined hydroxides per tablet, capsule, or 
5 mL suspension
H2 HISTAMINE RECEPTOR BLOCKERS
Cimetidine (generic, Tagamet, Tagamet HB*)
Oral: 200,* 300, 400, 800 mg tablets; 300 mg/5 mL liquid 
Parenteral: 300 mg/2 mL, 300 mg/50 mL for injection
Famotidine (generic, Pepcid, Pepcid AC,* Pepcid Complete*)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets,* gelcaps*; powder to reconstitute for 40 mg/
5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Nizatidine (generic, Axid, Axid AR*)
Oral: 75 mg tablets*; 150, 300 mg capsules
Ranitidine (generic, Zantac, Zantac 75*)
Oral: 75,* 150, 300 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1, 25 mg/mL for injection
SELECTED ANTICHOLINERGIC DRUGS
Atropine (generic)
Oral: 0.4 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.8, 1 mg/mL for injection
Belladonna alkaloids tincture (generic)
Oral: 0.27–0.33 mg/mL liquid
Dicyclomine (generic, Bentyl, others)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules; 20 mg tablets; 10 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Glycopyrrolate (generic, Robinul)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.2 mg/mL for injection
Hyoscyamine (Anaspaz, Levsin, others)
Oral: 0.125, 0.15 mg tablets; 0.375 mg timed-release capsules; 
0.125 mg/5 mL oral elixir and solution
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for injection
Scopolamine (generic, Transderm Scop)
Oral: 0.4 mg tablets
Transdermal patch: 1.5 mg/2.5 cm2
Parenteral: 0.4, 1 mg/mL for injection
PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS
Esomeprazole (Nexium)
Oral: 20, 40 mg delayed-release capsules
Parenteral: 20, 40 mg vial powder for IV injection
Omeprazole (Prilosec, Prilosec OTC,* Zegerid)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg delayed-release capsules; 20 mg delayed-release 
tablet∗
P R E P A R A T I O N S
A V A I L A B L E
ANTACIDS
Aluminum hydroxide gel* (AlternaGEL, others)
Oral: 300, 500, 600 mg tablets; 400, 500 mg capsules; 320, 450,
675 mg/5 mL suspension
Calcium carbonate* (Tums, others)
Oral: 350, 420, 500, 600, 650, 750, 1000, 1250 mg chewable tablets;
1250 mg/5 mL suspension
Combination aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide 
preparations* (Maalox, Mylanta, Gaviscon, Gelusil, others)
Oral: 400 to 800 mg combined hydroxides per tablet, capsule, or
5 mL suspension
H2 HISTAMINE RECEPTOR BLOCKERS
Cimetidine (generic, Tagamet, Tagamet HB*)
Oral: 200,* 300, 400, 800 mg tablets; 300 mg/5 mL liquid 
Parenteral: 300 mg/2 mL, 300 mg/50 mL for injection
Famotidine (generic, Pepcid, Pepcid AC,* Pepcid Complete*)
Oral: 10, 20 mg tablets,* gelcaps*; powder to reconstitute for 40 mg/
5 mL suspension
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Nizatidine (generic, Axid, Axid AR*)
Oral: 75 mg tablets*; 150, 300 mg capsules
Ranitidine (generic, Zantac, Zantac 75*)
Oral: 75,* 150, 300 mg tablets
Parenteral: 1, 25 mg/mL for injection
SELECTED ANTICHOLINERGIC DRUGS
Atropine (generic)
Oral: 0.4 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.8, 1 mg/mL for injection
Belladonna alkaloids tincture (generic)
Oral: 0.27–0.33 mg/mL liquid
Dicyclomine (generic, Bentyl, others)
Oral: 10, 20 mg capsules; 20 mg tablets; 10 mg/5 mL syrup
Parenteral: 10 mg/mL for injection
Glycopyrrolate (generic, Robinul)
Oral: 1, 2 mg tablets
Parenteral: 0.2 mg/mL for injection
Hyoscyamine (Anaspaz, Levsin, others)
Oral: 0.125, 0.15 mg tablets; 0.375 mg timed-release capsules;
0.125 mg/5 mL oral elixir and solution
Parenteral: 0.5 mg/mL for injection
Scopolamine (generic, Transderm Scop)
Oral: 0.4 mg tablets
Transdermal patch: 1.5 mg/2.5 cm2
Parenteral: 0.4, 1 mg/mL for injection
PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS
Esomeprazole (Nexium)
Oral: 20, 40 mg delayed-release capsules
Parenteral: 20, 40 mg vial powder for IV injection
Omeprazole (Prilosec, Prilosec OTC,* Zegerid)
Oral: 10, 20, 40 mg delayed-release capsules; 20 mg delayed-release 
tablet∗
Lansoprazole (Prevacid)
Oral: 15, 30 mg delayed-release capsules; 15, 30 mg orally disintegrating 
tablet containing delayed-release granules; 15, 30 mg delayed-release 
granules for oral suspension
Parenteral: 30 mg powder for injection
Dexlansoprazole (Dexilant)
Oral: 30, 60 mg delayed-release capsules
Pantoprazole (Protonix)
Oral: 20, 40 mg delayed-release tablets; 40 mg delayed-release granules 
for oral suspension
Parenteral: 40 mg/vial powder for IV injection
Rabeprazole (Aciphex)
Oral: 20 mg delayed-release tablets
MUCOSAL PROTECTIVE AGENTS
Misoprostol (Cytotec)
Oral: 100, 200 mcg tablets
Sucralfate (generic, Carafate)
Oral: 1 g tablets; 1 g/10 mL suspension
DIGESTIVE ENZYMES
Pancrelipase (Creon, Pancrease, Zenpep)
Oral: Delayed-release capsules containing varying amounts of lipase, 
protease, and amylase activity. See manufacturers’ literature for details.
DRUGS FOR MOTILITY DISORDERS & 
SELECTED ANTIEMETICS
5-HT3-RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Alosetron (Lotronex)
Oral: 0.5, 1 mg tablets
Dolasetron (Anzemet)
Oral: 50, 100 mg tablets
Parenteral: 20 mg/mL for injection
Granisetron (generic, Kytril)
Oral: 1 mg tablets; 2 mg/10 mL oral solution
Parenteral: 0.1, 1 mg/mL for injection
Ondansetron (generic, Zofran)
Oral: 4, 8, 16, 24 mg tablets; 4, 8 mg orally disintegrating tablets; 4 mg/
5 mL oral solution
Parenteral: 2 mg/mL, 32 mg/50 mL for IV injection
Palonosetron (Aloxi)
Oral: 0.5 mg capsules
Parenteral: 0.05 mg/mL for injection
OTHER MOTILITY AND ANTIEMETIC AGENTS
Aprepitant (Emend)
Oral: 80, 125 mg capsules
Dronabinol (Marinol)
Oral: 2.5, 5, 10 mg capsules
Fosaprepitant (Emend)
Parenteral: 115 mg/10 mL for IV injection
1112    SECTION X Special Topics
Metoclopramide (generic, Reglan, others)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 5 mg/5 mL syrup, 10 mg/mL concentrated 
solution
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Nabilone (Cesamet)
Oral: 1 mg tablets
Prochlorperazine (Compazine)
Oral: 5, 10, 25 mg tablets; 10, 15, 30 mg capsules; 1 mg/mL solution
Rectal: 2.5, 5, 25 mg suppositories
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Promethazine (generic, Phenergan, others)
Oral: 10, 13.2, 25, 50 mg tablets; 5, 6.25, 10 mg/5 mL syrup
Rectal: 10, 12.5, 25, 50 mg suppositories
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg/mL for IM or IV injection
Scopolamine (Transderm Scop)
Transdermal patch: 1.5 mg/2.5 cm2
Tegaserod (Zelnorm)
Oral: 2, 6 mg tablets
Trimethobenzamide (generic, Tigan, others)
Oral: 250, 300 mg capsules
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for injection
SELECTED ANTI–INFLAMMATORY DRUGS 
USED IN GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE 
(SEE ALSO CHAPTER 55)
Adalimumab (Humira)
Parenteral: 40 mg/0.8 mL for subcutaneous injection by syringe or 
auto-pen
Balsalazide (Colazal)
Oral: 750 mg capsules
Budesonide (Entocort)
Oral: 3 mg capsules
Certolizumab (Cimzia)
Parenteral: 200 mg powder (reconstituted with 1 mL) for subcutane-
ous injection
Hydrocortisone (Cortenema, Cortifoam, Proctofoam–HC)
Rectal: 100 mg/60 mL unit retention enema; 90 mg/applicatorful 
intrarectal foam
Anal: 1% hydrocortisone/1% pramoxine as aerosol application
Infliximab (Remicade)
Parenteral: 100 mg powder for intravenous injection
Mesalamine (5–ASA)
Oral: Asacol: 400 mg, 800 mg delayed-release tablets; Pentasa: 250 
mg controlled-release capsules; Lialda: 1.2 g delayed-release tablets; 
Apriso: 375 mg delayed-release capsules
Rectal: Rowasa: 4 g/60 mL suspension
Canasa: 1000 mg suppositories
Methylprednisolone (Medrol Enpack)
Rectal: 40 mg/bottle retention enema
Olsalazine (Dipentum)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Sulfasalazine (generic, Azulfidine)
Oral: 500 mg tablets and delayed-release enteric-coated tablets
SELECTED ANTIDIARRHEAL DRUGS
Bismuth subsalicylate* (Pepto–Bismol, others)
Oral: 262 mg caplets, chewable tablets; 130, 262, 524 mg/15 mL 
suspension
Difenoxin (Motofen)
Oral: 1 mg (with 0.025 mg atropine sulfate) tablets
Diphenoxylate (generic, Lomotil, others)
Oral: 2.5 mg (with 0.025 mg atropine sulfate) tablets and liquid
Loperamide* (generic, Imodium)
Oral: 2 mg tablets, capsules; 1 mg/5 mL liquid
BULK-FORMING LAXATIVES*
Methylcellulose (generic, Citrucel)
Oral: bulk powder, capsules
Psyllium (generic, Serutan, Metamucil, others)
Oral: granules, bulk powder, wafer
OTHER SELECTED LAXATIVE DRUGS
Alvimopan (Entereg)
Oral: 12 mg capsules
Bisacodyl* (generic, Dulcolax, others)
Oral: 5 mg enteric-coated tablets
Rectal: 5 mg, 10 mg suppositories
Cascara sagrada* (generic)
Oral: 325 mg tablets; 5 mL per dose fluid extract (approximately 
18% alcohol)
Docusate* (generic, Colace, others)
Oral: 50, 100, 250 mg capsules; 100 mg tablets; 20, 50, 60, 
150 mg/15 mL syrup
Lactulose (Chronulac, Cephulac)
Oral: 10 g/15 mL syrup
Lubiprostone (Amitiza)
Oral: 8, 24 mcg capsules
Magnesium hydroxide [milk of magnesia, Epsom Salt]* 
(generic)
Oral: 400, 800 mg/5 mL aqueous suspension
Methylnaltrexone bromide (Relistor)
Parenteral: 12 mg/0.6 mL
Polycarbophil* (Equalactin, Mitrolan, FiberCon, Fiber–Lax)
Oral: 500, 625 mg tablets; 500 mg chewable tablets
Polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution (Co–Lyte, GoLYTELY, 
HalfLytely, Moviprep, others)
Oral: Powder for oral solution, makes 2L or 4L
Senna* (Senokot, ExoLax, others)
Oral: 8.6, 15, 17, 25 mg tablets; 8.8, 15 mg/mL liquid
Sodium Phosphate (Fleets Phospho-soda, OsmoPrep, Visicol)
Oral: 1.5 g tablets; 10 g/15 mL liquid
DRUGS THAT DISSOLVE GALLSTONES
Ursodiol (generic, Actigall, URSO)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; 300 mg capsules
Metoclopramide (generic, Reglan, others)
Oral: 5, 10 mg tablets; 5 mg/5 mL syrup, 10 mg/mL concentrated 
solution
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Nabilone (Cesamet)
Oral: 1 mg tablets
Prochlorperazine (Compazine)
Oral: 5, 10, 25 mg tablets; 10, 15, 30 mg capsules; 1 mg/mL solution
Rectal: 2.5, 5, 25 mg suppositories
Parenteral: 5 mg/mL for injection
Promethazine (generic, Phenergan, others)
Oral: 10, 13.2, 25, 50 mg tablets; 5, 6.25, 10 mg/5 mL syrup
Rectal: 10, 12.5, 25, 50 mg suppositories
Parenteral: 25, 50 mg/mL for IM or IV injection
Scopolamine (Transderm Scop)
Transdermal patch: 1.5 mg/2.5 cm2
Tegaserod (Zelnorm)
Oral: 2, 6 mg tablets
Trimethobenzamide (generic, Tigan, others)
Oral: 250, 300 mg capsules
Parenteral: 100 mg/mL for injection
SELECTED ANTI–INFLAMMATORY DRUGS 
USED IN GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE 
(SEE ALSO CHAPTER 55)
Adalimumab (Humira)
Parenteral: 40 mg/0.8 mL for subcutaneous injection by syringe or
auto-pen
Balsalazide (Colazal)
Oral: 750 mg capsules
Budesonide (Entocort)
Oral: 3 mg capsules
Certolizumab (Cimzia)
Parenteral: 200 mg powder (reconstituted with 1 mL) for subcutane-
ous injection
Hydrocortisone (Cortenema, Cortifoam, Proctofoam–HC)
Rectal: 100 mg/60 mL unit retention enema; 90 mg/applicatorful 
intrarectal foam
Anal: 1% hydrocortisone/1% pramoxine as aerosol application
Infliximab (Remicade)
Parenteral: 100 mg powder for intravenous injection
Mesalamine (5–ASA)
Oral: Asacol: 400 mg, 800 mg delayed-release tablets; Pentasa: 250 
mg controlled-release capsules; Lialda: 1.2 g delayed-release tablets; 
Apriso: 375 mg delayed-release capsules
Rectal: Rowasa: 4 g/60 mL suspension
Canasa: 1000 mg suppositories
Methylprednisolone (Medrol Enpack)
Rectal: 40 mg/bottle retention enema
Olsalazine (Dipentum)
Oral: 250 mg capsules
Sulfasalazine (generic, Azulfidine)
Oral: 500 mg tablets and delayed-release enteric-coated tablets
SELECTED ANTIDIARRHEAL DRUGS
Bismuth subsalicylate* (Pepto–Bismol, others)
Oral: 262 mg caplets, chewable tablets; 130, 262, 524 mg/15 mL 
suspension
Difenoxin (Motofen)
Oral: 1 mg (with 0.025 mg atropine sulfate) tablets
Diphenoxylate (generic, Lomotil, others)
Oral: 2.5 mg (with 0.025 mg atropine sulfate) tablets and liquid
Loperamide* (generic, Imodium)
Oral: 2 mg tablets, capsules; 1 mg/5 mL liquid
BULK-FORMING LAXATIVES*
Methylcellulose (generic, Citrucel)
Oral: bulk powder, capsules
Psyllium (generic, Serutan, Metamucil, others)
Oral: granules, bulk powder, wafer
OTHER SELECTED LAXATIVE DRUGS
Alvimopan (Entereg)
Oral: 12 mg capsules
Bisacodyl* (generic, Dulcolax, others)
Oral: 5 mg enteric-coated tablets
Rectal: 5 mg, 10 mg suppositories
Cascara sagrada* (generic)
Oral: 325 mg tablets; 5 mL per dose fluid extract (approximately 
18% alcohol)
Docusate* (generic, Colace, others)
Oral: 50, 100, 250 mg capsules; 100 mg tablets; 20, 50, 60,
150 mg/15 mL syrup
Lactulose (Chronulac, Cephulac)
Oral: 10 g/15 mL syrup
Lubiprostone (Amitiza)
Oral: 8, 24 mcg capsules
Magnesium hydroxide [milk of magnesia, Epsom Salt]* 
(generic)
Oral: 400, 800 mg/5 mL aqueous suspension
Methylnaltrexone bromide (Relistor)
Parenteral: 12 mg/0.6 mL
Polycarbophil* (Equalactin, Mitrolan, FiberCon, Fiber–Lax)
Oral: 500, 625 mg tablets; 500 mg chewable tablets
Polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution (Co–Lyte, GoLYTELY, 
HalfLytely, Moviprep, others)
Oral: Powder for oral solution, makes 2L or 4L
Senna* (Senokot, ExoLax, others)
Oral: 8.6, 15, 17, 25 mg tablets; 8.8, 15 mg/mL liquid
Sodium Phosphate (Fleets Phospho-soda, OsmoPrep, Visicol)
Oral: 1.5 g tablets; 10 g/15 mL liquid
DRUGS THAT DISSOLVE GALLSTONES
Ursodiol (generic, Actigall, URSO)
Oral: 250, 500 mg tablets; 300 mg capsules
∗Over-the-counter formulations.
CHAPTER 62 Drugs Used in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal Diseases    1113
 REFERENCES 
 Acid-Peptic Diseases 
 Boparai V et al: Guide to the use of proton pump inhibitors in adult patients. 
Drugs 2008;68:925. 
 Kahrilas PJ: Gastroesophageal reflux disease. N Engl J Med 2008;359:1700. 
 Kahrilas PJ et al: American Gastroenterological Association Medical Position 
Statement on the management of gastroesophageal reflux disease. 
Gastroenterology 2008;135:1383. 
 Kwok CS et al: Meta-analysis: The effects of proton pump inhibitors on cardiovas-
cular events and mortality in patients receiving clopidogrel. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther 2010;31:810. 
 Lanza FI et al: Guidelines for the prevention of NSAID-related ulcer complica-
tions. Am J Gastronterol 2009;104:728. 
 McColl KE:  Helicobacter pylori infection. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1597. 
 Schubert ML et al: Control of gastric acid secretion in health and disease. 
Gastroenterology 2008;134:1872. 
 Wu DC et al: Sequential and concomitant therapy with four drugs is equally effec-
tive for eradication of  H pylori infection. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2010;8:36. 
 Yang YX et al: Safety of proton pump inhibitor exposure. Gastroenterology 
2010;139:1115. 
 Motility Disorders 
 DeMaeyer JH et al: 5-HT 4 receptor agonists: Similar but not the same. 
Neurogastroenterol Motil 2008;20:99. 
 Patrick A et al: Review article: Gastroparesis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2008;27:724. 
 Reddymasu SC et al: Severe gastroparesis: medical therapy or gastric electrical 
stimulation. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;8:117. 
 Laxatives 
 American College of Gastroenterology Task Force: An evidence-based approach to 
the management of chronic constipation in North America. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2005;100(Suppl 1):S1. 
 Becker G et al: Novel opioid antagonists for opioid-induced bowel dysfunction 
and postoperative ileus. Lancet 2009;373:1198. 
 Bouras EP et al: Chronic constipation in the elderly. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 
2009;38:463. 
 Camilleri M et al: Prucalopride for constipation. Expert Opin Pharmacother 
2010;11:451. 
 Johanson JF et al: Multicenter, 4-week, double-blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled trial of lubiprostone, a locally-active type-2 chloride channel 
activator, in patients with chronic constipation. Am J Gastroenterol 
2008;103:170. 
 Lembo A et al: Efficacy of linaclotide for patients with chronic constipation. 
Gastroenterology 2010;138:886. 
 Rao SS: Constipation: Evaluation and treatment of colonic and anorectal motility 
disorders. Gastrointest Endosc Clin North Am 2009;19:117. 
 Thomas J et al: Methylnaltrexone for opioid-induced constipation in advanced 
illness. N Engl J Med 2008;358:2332. 
 Wald A: A 27-year old woman with constipation: Diagnosis and treatment. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;8:838. 
 Antidiarrheal Agents 
 Baker DE: Loperamide: A pharmacologic review. Rev Gastroenterol Disord 
2007;7(Suppl 3):S11. 
 Odunsi-Shiyanbade ST et al: Effects of chenodeoxycholate and a bile acid seques-
trant, colesevelam, on intestinal transit and bowel function. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2010;8:159. 
 Schiller LR: Diarrhea and malabsorption in the elderly. Gastroenterol Clin North 
Am 2009;38:481. 
 Drugs Used for Irritable Bowel Syndrome 
 Camilleri M: Review article: New receptor targets for medical therapy in irritable 
bowel syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2010;31;35. 
 Grundman O et al: Irritable bowel syndrome: Epidemiology, diagnosis and treat-
ment: an update for health-care practitioners. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2010;25:691. 
 Mayer EA: Clinical practice. Irritable bowel syndrome. N Engl J Med 
2008;358:1692. 
 Antiemetic Agents 
 Hasketh PJ: Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. N Engl J Med 
2008;358:2482. 
 Le TP et al: Update on the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting and 
postdischarge nausea vomiting in ambulatory surgery. Anesthesiol Clin 
2010;28:225. 
 Roila F et al; Guideline update for MASCC and ESMO in the prevention of 
chemotherapy- and radiotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: Results of 
the Perugia consensus conference. Ann Oncol 2010;21(Suppl 5):v232. 
 Drugs Used for Inflammatory Bowel Disease 
 Abraham C et al: Inflammatory bowel disease. N Engl J Med 2009;361:2066. 
 Benchimol EI et al: Traditional corticosteroids for induction of remission in 
Crohn’s disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008 Apr 16(2):CD006792. 
 Bernstein CN et al: World Gastroenterology Organization Practice Guidelines for 
the diagnosis and management of IBD in 2010. Inflamm Bowel Dis 
2010;16:112. 
 Columbel JF et al: Infliximab, azathioprine, or combination therapy for Crohn’s 
disease. N Engl J Med 2010;362:1383. 
 De Silva S et al: Optimizing the safety of biologic therapy for IBD. Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;7:93. 
 Devlin SM et al: Evolving inflammatory bowel disease treatment paradigms: Top-
down versus step-up. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2009;38:577. 
 Etchevers MJ et al: Optimizing the use of tumor necrosis factor inhibitors in 
Crohn’s disease: a practical approach. Drugs 2010;70:190. 
 Hanauer SB: Evolving concepts in treatment and disease modification in ulcerative 
colitis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2008;27(Suppl 1):15. 
 Kornbluth A et al: Ulcerative colitis guidelines in adults: American College of 
Gastroenterology, Practice Parameters Committee. Am J Gastroenterol 
2010;105:501. 
 Patel V et al: Methotrexate for maintenance of remission in Crohn’s disease. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;7:CD006884. 
 Peyrin-Biroulet L et al: Efficacy and safety of tumor necrosis factor antagonists in 
Crohn’s disease: Meta-analysis of placebo-controlled trials. Clin Gastroenterol 
Hepatol 2008;6:644. 
 Prefontaine E et al: Azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine for induction of remission 
in Crohn’s disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;16:CD000545. 
 Rosenberg LN et al: Efficacy and safety of drugs in ulcerative colitis. Expert Opin 
Drug Saf 2010;9:573. 
 Sandborn WJ et al: Once-daily dosing of delayed-release oral mesalamine (400-mg 
tablet) is as effective as twice-daily dosing for maintenance of remission for 
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 2010;138:1286. 
 Pancreatic Enzyme Supplements 
 Whitcomb DC et al: Pancrelipase delayed-release capsules (CREON) for exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency due to chronic pancreatitis or pancreatic surgery: A 
double-blind randomized trial. Am J Gastroenterol 2010;105:2276. 
 Bile Acids for Gallstone Therapy 
 Hempfling W, Dilger K, Beuers U: Systematic review: Ursodeoxycholic acid—
adverse effects and drug interactions. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 
2003;18:963. 
1114    SECTION X Special Topics
 Drugs for Portal Hypertension 
 Dell’Era A et al: Acute variceal bleeding: Pharmacological treatment and primary/
secondary prophylaxis. Best Pract Clin Gastronterol 2008;22:279. 
 Garcia-Tsao G et al: Management of varices and variceal hemorrhage in cirrhosis. 
N Engl J Med 2010;362:823. 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
The immediate goals of therapy are to improve this young 
woman’s symptoms of abdominal pain, diarrhea, weight loss, 
and fatigue. Equally important goals are to reduce the intes-
tinal inflammation in hopes of preventing progression to 
intestinal stenosis, fistulization, and need for surgery. One 
option now is to “step up” her therapy by giving her a slow, 
tapering course of systemic corticosteroids (eg, prednisone) 
for 8–12 weeks in order to quickly bring her symptoms and 
inflammation under control while also initiating therapy 
with an immunomodulator (eg, azathioprine or mercaptopu-
rine) in hopes of achieving long-term disease remission. If 
satisfactory disease control is not achieved within 3–6 months, 
therapy with an anti-TNF agent then would be recom-
mended. Alternatively, patients with moderate-to-severe 
Crohn’s disease who have failed mesalamine may be treated 
upfront with  both an anti-TNF agent and immunomodula-
tors, which achieves higher remission rates than either agent 
alone and may improve long-term outcomes.
1115
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
 A 66-year-old man presents to his primary care provider for 
worsening shortness of breath, chest congestion, and symptoms 
of a severe cold (cough, rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, drowsiness) 
over the past week. His past medical history is significant for 
heart failure, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. His current 
medications include lisinopril 20 mg daily, simvastatin 40 mg 
daily, furosemide 40 mg daily, and potassium chloride 20 mEq 
daily. The patient reports sporadic compliance with his pre-
scribed medications but admits to taking several over-the-counter 
(OTC) medications over the past 5 days for his recent cold 
symptoms, including Alka-Seltzer Plus Cold Formula (2 tablets 
63
Therapeutic & 
Toxic Potential of 
Over-the-Counter Agents
Robin L. Corelli, PharmD
C A S E  S T U D Y
every 4 hours during the day), Sudafed (60 mg every 6 hours), 
and Advil PM (2 tablets at bedtime). His social history is 
significant for alcohol use (3–4 beers/night). His vital signs 
include the following: afebrile, blood pressure 172/94 mm Hg, 
pulse 84 bpm, respiratory rate 16/min. On physical examination 
an S 3 gallop is heard; 3+ pitting edema is noted in his lower 
extremities, and a chest examination reveals inspiratory rales 
bilaterally. What drugs do OTC “cold” preparations typically 
contain? Which of the OTC medications might have contributed 
to the patient’s current hypertension? Are any of these preparations 
implicated in the signs of heart failure? 
 In the USA, drugs are divided by law into two classes: those 
restricted to sale by prescription only and those for which direc-
tions for safe use by the public can be written. The latter category 
constitutes the nonprescription or over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. 
In 2010, the American public spent approximately $17 billion on 
over 100,000 OTC products to medicate themselves for ailments 
ranging from acne to warts. These products contain approximately 
1000 active ingredients in various forms and combinations. 
 It is apparent that many OTC drugs are no more than “me too” 
products advertised to the public in ways that suggest significant 
differences between them. For example, there are over 100 different 
systemic analgesic products, almost all of which contain aspirin, 
acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 
such as ibuprofen, or a combination of these agents as primary 
ingredients. They are made different from one another by the 
addition of questionable ingredients such as caffeine or antihista-
mines; by brand names chosen to suggest a specific use or strength 
(“women’s,” “migraine,” “arthritis,” “maximum”); or by special dos-
age formulations (enteric-coated tablets, geltabs, liquids, orally 
disintegrating strips and tablets, sustained-release products, pow-
ders, seltzers). There is a price attached to all of these features, and 
in most cases a less expensive generic product can be equally effec-
tive. It is probably safe to assume that the public is generally 
overwhelmed and confused by the wide array of products pre-
sented and will probably use those that are most heavily adver-
tised. 
 Over the past four decades the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has been engaged in a methodical review of OTC ingredi-
ents for both safety and efficacy. There have been two major out-
comes of this review: (1) Ingredients designated as ineffective or 
unsafe for their claimed therapeutic use are being eliminated from 
OTC product formulations (eg, antimuscarinic agents have been 
eliminated from OTC sleep aids, attapulgite and polycarbophil 
can no longer be marketed as OTC antidiarrheal products); and 
(2) agents previously available by prescription only have been 
made available for OTC use because they were judged by the 
review panel to be generally safe and effective for consumer use 
without medical supervision ( Table 63–1 ). The prescription-to-OTC 
1116    SECTION X Special Topics
switch process has significantly enhanced and expanded self-care 
options for US consumers. Indeed, more than 700 OTC products 
contain ingredients and dosages that were available only by pre-
scription less than 30 years ago. Some agents such as doco-
sanol and the nicotine polacrilex lozenge have bypassed the 
prescription route altogether and have been released directly to the 
OTC market. Other OTC ingredients previously available in low 
doses only are now available in higher-strength or original pre-
scription strength formulations. Examples of other prescription 
drugs with the potential for future OTC reclassification include 
nicotine replacement therapy (oral inhaler, nasal spray) for 
smoking cessation, proton-pump inhibitors (pantoprazole) for 
heartburn, and second-generation nonsedating antihistamines 
(desloratadine, fexofenadine, levocetirizine) for relief of allergy 
and cold symptoms. The frequency of prescription-to-OTC 
switches, while commonplace in the mid-1990s, has largely 
declined over the past decade. The prescription-to-OTC reclassifi-
cation process is both costly and rigorous and fewer prescription 
medications are appropriate candidates for a switch (eg, a consumer 
can self-diagnose and safely treat the condition). For example, the 
cholesterol-lowering agents cholestyramine, lovastatin, and pravas-
tatin were denied OTC status on the basis that these agents could 
not be used safely and effectively in an OTC setting. The nonpre-
scription drug advisory committee believed that diagnosis and 
ongoing management by a health care professional was necessary 
for the management of hyperlipidemia, a chronic, asymptomatic 
TABLE 63–1 Selected agents switched from prescription to OTC status by the Food and Drug Administration.
Ingredient
Indication
Year Ingredient 
First Switched
Single-Ingredient Product Examples
Systemic agents
Cetirizine
Antihistamine
2007
Zyrtec
Cimetidine
Acid reducer (H2 blocker)
1995
Tagamet HB
Clemastine
Antihistamine
1992
Tavist Allergy
Famotidine
Acid reducer (H2 blocker)
1995
Pepcid AC
Fexofenadine
Antihistamine
2011
Allegra 12 Hour, Allegra 24 Hour
Ibuprofen
Analgesic, antipyretic (NSAID)
1984
Advil, Motrin IB
Lansoprazole
Acid reducer (proton pump inhibitor)
2009
Prevacid 24 HR
Levonorgestrel
Emergency contraceptive
2006
Plan B One-Step
Loratadine
Antihistamine
2002
Claritin, Alavert
Naproxen sodium
Analgesic, antipyretic (NSAID)
1994
Aleve
Nicotine transdermal system
Smoking cessation
1996
Nicoderm CQ
Nicotine polacrilex gum
Smoking cessation
1996
Nicorette
Nizatidine
Acid reducer (H2 blocker)
1996
Axid AR
Omeprazole
Acid reducer (proton pump inhibitor)
2003
Prilosec OTC, Zegerid OTC
Orlistat
Weight loss aid
2007
Alli
Polyethylene glycol
Laxative
2006
MiraLax
Ranitidine
Acid reducer (H2 blocker)
1995
Zantac 75, Zantac 150
Topical agents
Butenafine
Antifungal (topical)
2001
Lotrimin Ultra
Butoconazole
Antifungal (vaginal)
1995
Femstat-3
Clotrimazole
Antifungal (vaginal)
1990
Gyne-Lotrimin-7, Gyne-Lotrimin-3
Cromolyn
Nasal antiallergy
1997
Nasalcrom
Ketoconazole
Dandruff shampoo
1997
Nizoral A-D
Ketotifen fumarate
Ophthalmic antihistamine
2006
Alaway, Zaditor
Miconazole
Antifungal (vaginal)
1991
Monistat-7, Monistat-3
Minoxidil
Hair growth stimulant
1996
Rogaine Regular and Extra Strength For Men, 
Rogaine For Women
Naphazoline/Pheniramine
Ophthalmic decongestant antihistamine
1994
Naphcon A, Opcon A, Visine-A
Terbinafine
Antifungal (topical)
1999
Lamisil AT
Tioconazole
Antifungal (vaginal)
1997
Monistat-1, Vagistat-1
CHAPTER 63 Therapeutic & Toxic Potential of Over-the-Counter Agents    1117
condition with potentially life-threatening consequences. In a 
similar recommendation, oral acyclovir for OTC use in the treat-
ment of recurrent genital herpes was not approved because of 
concerns about misdiagnosis and inappropriate use leading to 
increased viral resistance. 
 There are three reasons why it is essential for clinicians to be 
familiar with the OTC class of products. First, many OTC medica-
tions are effective in treating common ailments, and it is important 
to be able to help the patient select a safe, effective product. 
Because managed-care practices encourage clinicians to limit the 
cost of drugs they prescribe, many will recommend effective OTC 
treatments to their patients, since these drugs are rarely paid for by 
the insurance plan ( Table 63–2 ). Second, many of the active ingre-
dients contained in OTC drugs may worsen existing medical con-
ditions or interact with prescription medications. (See  Chapter 66 , 
Important Drug Interactions & Their Mechanisms.) Finally, the 
misuse or abuse of OTC products may actually produce significant 
medical complications. Phenylpropanolamine, for example, a sym-
pathomimetic previously found in many cold, allergy, and weight 
control products, was withdrawn from the United States market by 
the FDA based on reports that the drug increased the risk of hem-
orrhagic stroke. Dextromethorphan, an antitussive found in many 
cough and cold preparations, has been increasingly abused in high 
doses (eg, > 5–10 times the recommended antitussive dose) by 
adolescents as a hallucinogen. Although severe complications asso-
ciated with dextromethorphan as a single agent in overdose are 
uncommon, many dextromethorphan-containing products are 
formulated with other ingredients (acetaminophen, antihistamines, 
and sympathomimetics) that can be fatal in overdose. Additionally, 
pseudoephedrine, a decongestant contained in numerous OTC 
cold preparations, has been used in the illicit manufacture of meth-
amphetamine. A general awareness of these products and their 
formulations will enable clinicians to more fully appreciate the 
potential for OTC drug-related problems in their patients. 
 Table 63–2 lists examples of OTC products that may be used 
effectively to treat common medical problems. The selection of one 
ingredient over another may be important in patients with certain 
medical conditions or in patients taking other medications. These 
are discussed in detail in other chapters. The recommendations 
listed in  Table 63–2 are based on the efficacy of the ingredients and 
on the principles set forth in the following paragraphs. 
 1. Select the product that is simplest in formulation with regard 
to ingredients and dosage form. In general, single-ingredient 
products are preferred. Although some combination products 
contain effective doses of all ingredients, others contain thera-
peutic doses of some ingredients and subtherapeutic doses of 
others. Furthermore, there may be differing durations of action 
among the ingredients, and there is always a possibility that the 
clinician or patient is unaware of the presence of certain active 
ingredients in the product. Acetaminophen, for example, is in 
many cough and cold preparations; a patient unaware of 
this may take separate doses of analgesic in addition to that 
contained in the cold preparation, potentially leading to 
hepatotoxicity. 
 2. Select a product that contains a therapeutically effective dose. 
 3.  Consumers and providers should carefully read the “Drug 
Facts” label to determine which ingredients are appropriate 
based on the patient’s symptoms, underlying health conditions, 
and whatever is known about the medications the patient is 
already taking. This is critical because many products with the 
same brand name contain different ingredients that are labeled 
for different uses. For example, multiple laxative products 
(with different active ingredients) carry the Dulcolax name 
including Dulcolax Balance (polyethylene glycol), Dulcolax 
Laxative (bisacodyl), and Dulcolax Stool Softener (docusate 
sodium). This marketing practice of “extending a brand name” 
across product lines, while legal, is confusing and can lead to 
medication errors. 
 4. Recommend a generic product if one is available. 
 5. Be wary of “gimmicks” or advertising claims of specific superi-
ority over similar products. 
 6.  For children, the dose, dosage form, and palatability of the 
product are prime considerations. 
 Certain ingredients in OTC products should be avoided or 
used with caution in selected patients because they may exacerbate 
existing medical problems or interact with other medications the 
patient is taking. Many of the more potent OTC ingredients are 
hidden in products where their presence would not ordinarily be 
expected ( Table 63–3 ). Although OTC medications have stan-
dardized label formatting and content requirements that specify 
the indications for use, dosage, warnings, and active and inactive 
ingredients contained in the product, many consumers do not 
carefully read or comprehend this information. Lack of awareness 
of the ingredients in OTC products and the belief by many pro-
viders that OTC products are ineffective and harmless may cause 
diagnostic confusion and perhaps interfere with therapy. For 
example, innumerable OTC products, including analgesics and 
allergy, cough, and cold preparations, contain sympathomi-
metics. These agents should be avoided or used cautiously by 
type 1 diabetics and patients with hypertension, angina, or hyper-
thyroidism. Aspirin should not be used in children and adoles-
cents for viral infections (with or without fever) because of an 
increased risk of Reye’s syndrome. Aspirin and other NSAIDs 
should be avoided by individuals with active peptic ulcer disease, 
certain platelet disorders, and patients taking oral anticoagulants. 
Cimetidine, an H 2 -receptor antagonist, is a well-known inhibitor 
of hepatic drug metabolism and can increase the blood levels and 
toxicity of drugs such as phenytoin, theophylline, and warfarin. 
 Overuse or misuse of OTC products may induce significant 
medical problems. A prime example is rebound congestion from 
the regular use of decongestant nasal sprays for more than 3 days. 
The improper and long-term use of some antacids (eg, aluminum 
hydroxide) may cause constipation and even impaction in elderly 
people, as well as hypophosphatemia. Laxative abuse can result in 
abdominal cramping and fluid and electrolyte disturbances. 
Insomnia, nervousness, and restlessness can result from the use of 
sympathomimetics or caffeine hidden in many OTC products 
( Table 63–3 ). The long-term use of some analgesics containing 
large amounts of caffeine may produce rebound headaches, and 
long-term use of analgesics has been associated with interstitial 
nephritis. OTC products containing aspirin, other salicylates, acet-
aminophen, ibuprofen, or naproxen may increase the risk of hepa-
totoxicity and gastrointestinal hemorrhage in individuals who 
consume three or more alcoholic drinks daily. Recent evidence 
1118    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 63–2 Ingredients of known efficacy for selected OTC classes.
OTC Category
Ingredient and Usual Adult 
Dosage
Product Examples
Comments
Acid reducers 
(H2 antagonists)
Cimetidine, 200 mg once or twice 
daily
Famotidine, 10–20 mg once or 
twice daily
Nizatidine, 75 mg once or twice 
daily
Ranitidine, 75–150 mg once or 
twice daily
Tagamet HB, various generic
Pepcid AC, Maximum 
Strength Pepcid AC, various 
generic
Axid AR
Zantac 75, Zantac 150, 
various generic
These products have been approved for the relief of 
“heartburn associated with acid indigestion, and sour 
stomach.” They should not be taken for longer than 
2 weeks and are not recommended for children 
< 12 years of age.
Acid reducers 
(proton pump
inhibitors)
Lansoprazole, 15 mg once daily for 
14 days
Omeprazole magnesium, 20.6 mg 
once daily for 14 days
Omeprazole (20 mg) with sodium 
bicarbonate (1100 mg), once daily 
for 14 days
Prevacid 24 HR
Prilosec OTC, various generic
Zegerid OTC
Proton pump inhibitors are approved for the treat-
ment of frequent heartburn in adults (≥ 18 years of 
age) with symptoms of heartburn 2 or more days per 
week. These products are not intended for immediate 
relief of heartburn, as they may take 1–4 days for full 
effect. They should not be taken for more than 
14 days or more often than every 4 months unless 
directed by a physician. Omeprazole magnesium 
20.6 mg is equivalent to 20 mg of omeprazole 
(prescription strength).
Acne preparations
Benzoyl peroxide, 5%, 10%
Clearasil, Oxy-10, various 
generic
One of the most effective acne preparations. Apply 
sparingly once or twice daily. Decrease concentration 
or frequency if excessive skin irritation occurs.
Allergy and “cold” 
preparations
Chlorpheniramine, 4 mg every 
4–6 hours; 8 mg (extended-
release) every 8–12 hours; 12 mg 
(extended-release) every 12 hours
Clemastine, 1.34 mg every 
12 hours
Cetirizine, 10 mg every 24 hours
Diphenhydramine, 25–50 mg 
every 4–6 hours
Fexofenadine 60 mg every 12 
hours; 180 mg every 24 hours
Loratadine, 10 mg every 24 hours
Brompheniramine (4 mg) with 
phenylephrine (10 mg) every 
4 hours
Cetirizine (5 mg) with pseu-
doephedrine (120 mg) every 
12 hours
Chlorpheniramine (4 mg) with 
phenylephrine (10 mg) every 
4 hours
Fexofenadine 60 mg every 12 
hours; 180 mg every 24 hours
Loratadine (5 mg) with pseu-
doephedrine (120 mg) every 
12 hours
Loratadine (10 mg) with pseu-
doephedrine (240 mg) every 
24 hours
Chlor-Trimeton Allergy, 
various generic
Tavist Allergy
Zyrtec, various generic
Benadryl Allergy, various 
generic
Allegra 12 Hour, Allegra 
24 Hour
Alavert, Claritin, various 
generic
Dimetapp Cold & Allergy, 
various generic
Zyrtec-D
Allerest PE, Sudafed PE Sinus 
& Allergy, various generic
Allegra-D 12 Hour
Claritin-D 12 Hour
Claritin-D 24 Hour
Antihistamines alone relieve most symptoms associ-
ated with allergic rhinitis or hay fever. 
Chlorpheniramine, brompheniramine, and clemastine 
may cause less drowsiness than diphenhydramine. 
Cetirizine, fexofenadine and loratadine (second gener-
ation antihistamines), are therapeutically comparable 
to first-generation agents; these agents have minimal 
anti-cholinergic effects and are therefore associated 
with a lower incidence of sedation. Occasionally, 
symptoms unrelieved by the antihistamine respond to 
the addition of a sympathomimetic decongestant. OTC 
sale of products containing pseudoephedrine is 
restricted (see comments under Decongestants, systemic).
Triprolidine (2.5 mg) with 
phenylephrine (10 mg) every
4 hours
Actifed Cold & Allergy, 
various generic
(continued)
CHAPTER 63 Therapeutic & Toxic Potential of Over-the-Counter Agents    1119
TABLE 63–2 Ingredients of known efficacy for selected OTC classes.
OTC Category
Ingredient and Usual Adult 
Dosage
Product Examples
Comments
Analgesics and 
antipyretics
Acetaminophen, 325–650 mg every 
4–6 hours; 650–1300 mg (extended- 
release) every 8 hours
Aspirin, 325–650 mg every 
4–6 hours
Ibuprofen, 200–400 mg every 
4–6 hours (not to exceed 1200 mg 
in a 24-hour period)
Naproxen sodium, 220 mg every 
8–12 hours (not to exceed 660 mg 
in a 24-hour period)
Panadol, Tylenol, Extra 
Strength Tylenol, Tylenol 
8-Hour, various generic
Bayer Aspirin, Ecotrin, 
Bufferin, various generic
Advil, Motrin IB, various 
generic
Aleve, various generic
Acetaminophen lacks anti-inflammatory activity but is 
available as a liquid; this dosage form is used primarily 
for infants and children who cannot chew or swallow 
tablets. Use of products containing acetaminophen 
may increase the risk of severe liver damage in individ-
uals who ingest more than 4 g in 24 hours, take with 
other drugs containing acetaminophen, or consume
≥ three alcoholic drinks daily. In January 2011, the FDA 
announced that manufacturers of prescription acet-
aminophen combination products must limit the maxi-
mum amount of acetaminophen in these formulations 
to 325 mg per dosage unit to reduce the risk of severe 
liver injury from acetaminophen overdosing. There are 
numerous product modifications, including the addi-
tion of antacids and caffeine; enteric-coated tablets 
and seltzers; long-acting or extra-strength formula-
tions; and various mixtures of analgesics. None has any 
substantial advantage over a single-ingredient product. 
Aspirin should be used cautiously in certain individuals 
(see text). Use of products containing aspirin may 
increase the risk of severe gastrointestinal hemorrhage 
in individuals who consume ≥ 3 alcoholic drinks daily. 
Use of products containing NSAIDs may increase the risk of 
severe gastrointestinal hemorrhage in individuals who are 
age 60 or older, have had stomach ulcers or bleeding 
problems, take anticoagulant or steroid drugs, take other 
drugs containing prescription or nonprescription NSAIDs, 
consume 3 or more alcoholic drinks daily or take more or 
for a longer time than directed. Long-term continuous use 
of NSAIDs may increase the risk of heart attack or stroke.
Antacids
Magnesium hydroxide and
aluminum hydroxide alone or in 
combination; calcium carbonate, 
dosage varies; consult product 
labeling
Alternagel, Maalox, Milk of 
Magnesia, Mylanta, Tums, 
various generic
Combinations of magnesium and aluminum hydroxide 
are less likely to cause constipation or diarrhea and 
offer high neutralizing capacity. Some preparations 
include simethicone, an antiflatulent to relieve symp-
toms of bloating and pressure.
Antihelminthics 
(pinworm infection)
Pyrantel pamoate, 11 mg/kg
(maximum: 1 g)
Pin-X, Reese’s Pinworm
Treat all members of the household. Consult physician 
for children < 2 years of age or < 25 lb. Undergarments, 
pajamas, and linens should be washed daily until the 
infection is resolved. If symptoms persist beyond 2 
weeks, contact a physician to determine if a repeat 
dose is indicated.
Antidiarrheal agents
Bismuth subsalicylate, 524 mg 
every 30–60 minutes as needed 
up to 8 doses daily
Loperamide, 4 mg initially, then 
2 mg after each loose stool, not to 
exceed 8 mg in 24 hours
Kaopectate, Pepto-Bismol, 
various generics
Imodium A-D, various 
generic
Antidiarrheals should not be used if diarrhea is accom-
panied by fever > 101°F or if blood or mucus is present 
in stool. Bismuth salts can cause dark discoloration of 
the tongue and/or stools. Salicylates are absorbed and 
can cause tinnitus if coadministered with aspirin.
Loperamide, a synthetic opioid, acts on intestinal 
smooth muscle to decrease motility allowing for 
absorption of water and electrolytes. Poorly penetrates 
the CNS and has a lower risk of side effects compared 
with diphenoxylate or opiates. Not considered a con-
trolled substance.
(continued)
(Continued)
1120    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 63–2 Ingredients of known efficacy for selected OTC classes.
OTC Category
Ingredient and Usual Adult 
Dosage
Product Examples
Comments
Antifungal topical 
preparations
Butenafine, 1% (cream) apply to 
affected areas once daily
Clotrimazole, 1% (cream, powder, 
solution), apply to affected areas 
twice daily (morning and evening)
Miconazole, 2% (cream, powder, 
solution), apply to affected areas 
twice daily (morning and night)
Terbinafine, 1% (cream, gel, solu-
tion), apply to affected areas once 
daily (ringworm/jock itch) or twice 
daily (athlete’s foot)
Tolnaftate, 1% (cream, powder, 
spray, solution), apply to affected 
areas twice daily (morning and 
night)
Undecylenic acid, 12–25% 
(powder, solution) apply to 
affected areas twice daily
Lotrimin Ultra
Lotrimin AF (various formula-
tions), various generic
Cruex, Desenex, Lotrimin AF 
(powder, spray), Zeasorb-AF
Lamisil AT
Lamisil AF Defense (pow-
der), Tinactin, Ting cream, 
various generic
Blis-To-Sol, Elon Dual 
Defense Anti-Fungal
Effective for the treatment of tinea pedis (athlete’s 
foot), tinea cruris (jock itch), and tinea corporis 
(ringworm). Clotrimazole and miconazole also effective 
against Candida albicans. Clinicians should be aware 
that products carrying the same brand name do not 
necessarily contain the same active ingredient.
Antifungal vaginal 
preparations
Clotrimazole (1%, 2% vaginal 
cream, 100 mg, 200 mg tablet); 
see comments for dosage
Miconazole (2%, 4% vaginal 
cream; 100 mg, 200 mg, 1200 mg 
vaginal suppositories); see com-
ments for dosage
Tioconazole, 6.5% vaginal oint-
ment, one applicatorful intravagi-
nally at bedtime (single dose)
Gyne-Lotrimin-7, Gyne-
Lotrimin-3, various generic
Monistat-7, Monistat-3, 
Vagistat-3, various generic
Monistat-1, Vagistat-1, 
various generic
Topical vaginal antifungals should only be used for 
treatment of recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis in 
otherwise healthy, nonpregnant women previously 
diagnosed by a clinician. Insert one applicatorful 
(1%) or one tablet (100 mg) intravaginally at bed-
time for 7 consecutive days. Alternatively: Insert one 
applicatorful (2%) or one tablet (200 mg) intravagi-
nally at bedtime for 3 consecutive days.
Insert one applicatorful intravaginally at bedtime 
for 3 consecutive days (4%) or 7 consecutive days (2%). 
Alternatively: Insert one suppository intravaginally at 
bedtime for 1 day (1200 mg), 3 consecutive days
(200 mg), or 7 consecutive days (100 mg).
Anti-inflammatory 
topical preparations
Hydrocortisone, 0.5% (cream, oint-
ment, lotion), 1% (cream, gel, oint-
ment, lotion, spray)
Cortaid, Cortizone-10, 
Preparation H, 
Hydrocortisone, various 
generic
Used to temporarily relieve itching and inflamma-
tion associated with minor rashes due to contact or 
allergic dermatitides, insect bites, and hemorrhoids. 
Apply sparingly to affected areas two to four times 
daily.
Antiseborrheal 
agents
Coal tar, 0.5-5% shampoo, dosage 
varies; consult product labeling
Ketoconazole, 1% shampoo, apply 
every 3–4 days
Denorex Therapeutic, Ionil T 
Plus, various generic
Nizoral A-D
Tar derivatives inhibit epidermal proliferation and may 
possess antipruritic and antimicrobial activity.
Synthetic azole antifungal agent with activity versus 
Pityrosporum ovale, a fungus that may cause seborrhea 
and dandruff. Massage over entire scalp for 3 minutes. 
Rinse thoroughly and repeat application.
Pyrithione zinc, 1–2% shampoo, 
apply once or twice weekly
Selenium sulfide, 1% shampoo, 
apply once or twice weekly
Head & Shoulders, Selsun 
Blue Salon, various generic
Head & Shoulders Intensive 
Treatment, Selsun Blue 
Medicated, various generic
Both selenium sulfide and zinc pyrithione are cytostatic 
agents that decrease epidermal turnover rates. Massage 
into wet scalp for 2–3 minutes. Rinse thoroughly and 
repeat application. Selenium sulfide can be irritating to the 
eyes and skin.
(continued)
(Continued)
CHAPTER 63 Therapeutic & Toxic Potential of Over-the-Counter Agents    1121
TABLE 63–2 Ingredients of known efficacy for selected OTC classes.
OTC Category
Ingredient and Usual Adult 
Dosage
Product Examples
Comments
Antitussives
Codeine, 10–20 mg every 4–6 
hours, not to exceed 120 mg 
in 24 hours (with guaifenesin)
Guiatuss AC, Mytussin AC, 
various generic
Acts centrally to increase the cough threshold. In doses 
required for cough suppression, the addiction liability 
associated with codeine is low. Codeine-containing 
antitussive combinations are schedule V narcotics, and 
OTC sale is restricted in some states.
Dextromethorphan, 10–20 mg 
every 4 hours or 30 mg every 
6–8 hours; 60 mg (extended-
release suspension) every 
12 hours
Delsym 12-Hour Cough, 
Hold DM, Robitussin Cough, 
Vicks 44 Dry Cough, various 
generic
Dextromethorphan is a nonopioid congener of levor-
phanol without analgesic or addictive properties. Often 
is used with antihistamines, decongestants, and expec-
torants in combination products. In high dosages 
(> 2 mg/kg) dextromethorphan can induce phencyclidine-
like hallucinogenic effects.
Decongestants,
topical
Oxymetazoline, 0.05% nasal 
solution, 2–3 sprays per nostril 
not more often than every 
10–12 hours
Phenylephrine (0.5%, 1%), nasal 
solution, 2–3 sprays per nostril no 
more often than every 4 hours
Afrin, Dristan, Neo-
Synephrine Nighttime 
12 Hour, Sudafed OM, Vicks 
Sinex, various generic
Neo-Synephrine, various 
generic
Topical sympathomimetics are effective for the tempo-
rary acute management of rhinorrhea associated with 
common colds and allergies. Long-acting agents 
(oxymetazoline-containing products) are generally pre-
ferred, although phenylephrine is equally effective. 
Topical decongestants should not be used for longer 
than 3 days to prevent rebound nasal congestion.
Decongestants, 
systemic
Phenylephrine, 10 mg every 4 hours
Pseudoephedrine, 60 mg every 
4–6 hours or 120 mg (extended- 
release) every 12 hours, or 240 mg 
(extended-release) every 24 hours
Sudafed PE, various generic 
combination products
Sudafed, various generic
Oral decongestants have a prolonged duration of 
action but may cause more systemic effects, including 
nervousness, excitability, restlessness, and insomnia. 
Also available in antihistamine, antitussive, expecto-
rant, and analgesic combination products. Federal reg-
ulations established to discourage the illicit 
manufacture of methamphetamine specify that all 
drug products containing pseudoephedrine must be 
stored in locked cabinets or behind the pharmacy 
counter and can only be sold in limited quantities to 
consumers after they provide photo identification and 
sign a logbook.
Emergency
contraceptive
Levonorgestrel, 1.5 mg tablet 
taken as soon as possible within 
72 hours after unprotected
intercourse
Plan B One-Step
Levonorgestrel prevents ovulation and may inhibit fer-
tilization or implantation. Reduces the chance of preg-
nancy by up to 89% when taken as directed within 72 
hours after unprotected intercourse. Plan B is available 
behind the counter at pharmacies and sold under the 
supervision of a licensed pharmacist. A prescription is 
needed for women ≤ 17 years of age.
Expectorants
Guaifenesin, 200–400 mg every 4 
hours; 600–1200 mg (extended- 
release) every 12 hours
Mucinex, Robitussin, various 
generic
The only OTC expectorant recognized as safe and effec-
tive by the FDA. Often used with antihistamines, 
decongestants, and antitussives in combination 
products.
Hair growth
stimulants
Minoxidil, 2% solution (for 
women), 5% foam, solution (for 
men), apply 1/2 capful (foam) or 1 
mL (solution) to affected areas of 
scalp twice daily
Rogaine for Men, Rogaine 
for Women, Rogaine Extra 
Strength for Men
Minoxidil appears to directly stimulate hair follicles 
resulting in increased hair thickness and reduced hair 
loss. Treatment for 4 months or longer may be neces-
sary to achieve visible results. If new hair growth is 
observed, continued treatment is necessary as hair 
density returns to pretreatment levels within months 
following drug discontinuation.
(continued)
(Continued)
1122    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 63–2 Ingredients of known efficacy for selected OTC classes.
OTC Category
Ingredient and Usual Adult 
Dosage
Product Examples
Comments
Laxatives
Bulk formers: Polycarbophil, psyl-
lium, and methylcellulose prepara-
tions. Dosage varies; consult 
product labeling
Hyperosmotics: Glycerin, 2–3 g 
suppository per rectum daily. 
Polyethylene glycol 3350 (powder), 
17 g dissolved in 4–8 oz of 
beverage daily
Stool softeners: Docusate sodium, 
50–500 mg daily. Docusate cal-
cium, 240 mg daily
Stimulant laxatives: Bisacodyl, 
5–15 mg daily. Senna, dosage 
varies, consult product labeling
Citrucel, Fibercon, Konsyl, 
Metamucil, various generic
Fleet Glycerin Suppository, 
various generic; Dulcolax 
Balance, MiraLax
Colace, Dulcolax, Surfak, 
various generic
Dulcolax, Ex-Lax, Senokot, 
various generic
The safest laxatives for chronic use include the bulk 
formers and stool softeners. Saline laxatives and stimu-
lants may be used acutely but not chronically (see text). 
Bulk formers hold water and expand in stool, promot-
ing peristalsis.
Glycerin induces a local irritant effect in combination 
with an osmotic effect. Polyethylene glycol formula-
tions are large, poorly absorbed molecules that induce 
an osmotic effect causing distention and catharsis.
Softens fecal material via detergent action that allows 
water to penetrate stool.
Stimulant laxative actions include direct irritation of 
intestinal mucosa or stimulation of the myenteric 
plexus, resulting in peristalsis. These agents may also 
cause alteration of fluid and electrolyte absorption, 
resulting in luminal fluid accumulation and bowel 
evacuation.
Pediculicides (head 
lice)
Permethrin 1%
Pyrethrins (0.3%) combined with 
piperonyl butoxide (3–4%)
Nix
A-200, RID
Instructions for use vary; consult product labeling. 
Avoid contact with eyes. Comb out nits. Linens, 
pajamas, combs, and brushes should be washed daily 
until the infestation is eliminated. For pyrethrin prod-
ucts, retreat in 7–10 days to kill any newly hatched 
nits. Permethrin products have residual effects for up 
to 10 days; therefore, reapplication is not required 
unless live nits are visible 7 days or more after the initial 
treatment.
Sleep aids
Diphenhydramine, 25–50 mg at 
bedtime
Doxylamine, 25 mg 30 minutes 
before bedtime
Nytol, Simply Sleep, 
Sominex, various generic
Unisom, various generic
Diphenhydramine and doxylamine are antihistamines with 
well-documented CNS depressant effects. Because insom-
nia may be indicative of a serious underlying condition 
requiring medical attention, patients should consult a phy-
sician if insomnia persists continuously for longer than 2 
weeks.
Smoking cessation 
aids
Nicotine polacrilex gum; dosage 
varies; consult product labeling
Nicotine polacrilex lozenge, 
dosage varies, consult product 
labeling
Nicotine (transdermal system), 
dosage varies; consult product 
labeling
Nicorette, various generic
Nicorette, various generic
Nicoderm CQ, various 
generic
Nicotine replacement products in combination with 
behavioral support approximately double long-term 
cessation rates compared with placebo. Review direc-
tions for use carefully, since product strengths vary and 
self-titration and tapering may be necessary.
Weight loss aids
Orlistat, 60 mg with each meal 
containing fat (not to exceed 180 
mg/d)
Alli
Approved for weight loss in overweight adults ≥ 18 years 
of age when used in combination with a reduced-
calorie, low-fat diet and exercise program. Orlistat is a 
nonsystemically absorbed inhibitor of gastrointestinal 
lipase that blocks the absorption of dietary fat. OTC 
formulation is a half-strength version of the prescription 
product (Xenical).
(Continued)
CHAPTER 63 Therapeutic & Toxic Potential of Over-the-Counter Agents    1123
TABLE 63–3 Hidden ingredients in OTC products.
Hidden Drug or Drug Class
OTC Class Containing Drug
Product Examples
Alcohol (percent ethanol)
Cough syrups, cold preparations
Mouthwashes
Theraflu Nighttime (10%); Vicks NyQuil Cold & Flu Liquid 
(10%); Vicks NyQuil Cough (10%)
Listerine (27%); Scope (15%); Cepacol (14%)
Antihistamines
Analgesics
Menstrual products
Sleep aids
Advil PM; Alka-Seltzer PM; Excedrin PM; Bayer PM; Extra 
Strength Doan’s PM; Goody’s PM Pain Relief Powder; Tylenol PM
Midol Menstrual Complete; Pamprin Multi-Symptom
Nytol; Simply Sleep; Sominex; Unisom
Aspirin and other salicylates
Antidiarrheals
Cold/allergy preparations
Pepto-Bismol (bismuth subsalicylate); Kaopectate (bismuth 
subsalicylate)
Alka-Seltzer Plus Flu
Caffeine (mg/tablets or as stated)
Analgesics
Menstrual products
Stimulants
Anacin (32); Anacin Maximum Strength (32); Arthritis Strength 
BC (65/pre-measured packet); BC Powder (65/pre-measured 
packet); Excedrin Extra Strength (65); Excedrin Migraine (65); 
Excedrin Tension Headache (65); Goody’s Extra Strength 
Headache Powder (33/pre-measured packet); Goody’s Cool 
Orange (65/pre-measured packet)
Excedrin Menstrual Complete (65); Midol Menstrual Complete 
(60); Pamprin Max (65)
NoDoz (200); Vivarin (200)
Local anesthetics (usually benzocaine)
Antitussives/lozenges
Dermatologic preparations
Hemorrhoidal products
Toothache, cold sore, and teething 
products
Cepacol Sore Throat Lozenges; Chloraseptic Sore Throat; 
Sucrets Sore Throat; Sucrets Complete
Americaine; Bactine; Dermoplast; Lanacane; Solarcaine
Americaine Ointment; Nupercainal; Tronolane; Tucks Ointment
Anbesol; Kank-A; Orajel; Zilactin-B
Sodium (mg/tablet or as stated)
Analgesics
Antacids
Cold/cough preparations
Laxatives
Alka-Seltzer Original Effervescent Tablet (567); Alka-Seltzer 
Extra Strength Effervescent Tablet (588); Bromo-Seltzer 
Granules (959/pre-measured packet)
Alka-Seltzer Original Effervescent Tablet (567); Alka-Seltzer 
Extra Strength Effervescent Tablet (588); Alka-Seltzer Gold 
(309); Alka-Seltzer Heartburn Relief (575); Brioschi (500/6 g 
dose); Bromo-Seltzer Granules (959/pre-measured packet)
Alka-Seltzer Plus Formulations: Day Cold (416); Cold & Cough 
(415); Flu (387); Night Cold (474)
Fleets Enema (4,439 mg, of which 275-400 mg/enema is 
absorbed)
Sympathomimetics
Analgesics
Asthma products
Cold/cough/allergy preparations
Hemorrhoidal products
Excedrin Sinus Headache; Sine-Off; Sinutab; Tylenol 
Congestion & Pain; Tylenol Sinus Severe Congestion
Bronkaid Dual Action; Primatene Mist; Primatene Tablets
Advil Cold & Sinus; Alka-Seltzer Plus (many); Comtrex Severe 
Cold & Sinus; Congestac; Contac Cold+Flu; Dimetapp (many); 
Dristan Cold; PediaCare (many); Robitussin Cough, Cold & Flu; 
Robitussin Cough & Cold CF; Sudafed PE Cold & Cough; 
Theraflu (many); Triaminic (many); Tylenol Cold (many); 
Tylenol Sinus (many); Tylenol Allergy (many); Vicks (many)
Hemorid; Preparation H (cream, ointment, suppository)
1124    SECTION X Special Topics
suggests the long-term use of certain NSAIDs may increase the risk 
of heart attack or stroke. Furthermore, acute ingestion of large 
amounts of acetaminophen by adults or children can cause serious, 
and often fatal, hepatotoxicity. Antihistamines may cause sedation 
or drowsiness, especially when taken concurrently with sedative-
hypnotics, tranquilizers, alcohol, or other central nervous system 
depressants. Antihistamines and other substances contained in 
OTC topical and vaginal products may induce allergic reactions. 
 Finally, use of OTC cough and cold preparations in the pedi-
atric population has been under scrutiny by the FDA based on a 
lack of efficacy data in children less than 12 years of age and 
reports of serious toxicity in children. In 2008, the FDA issued an 
advisory alert recommending that OTC cough and cold agents 
(eg, products containing antitussives, expectorants, decongestants, 
and antihistamines) not be used in infants and children less than 
2 years of age because of the potential for serious and possibly life-
threatening adverse events. More recently, in October 2008, lead-
ing pharmaceutical manufacturers voluntarily modified product 
labels on OTC cough and cold preparations to state, “do not use” 
in children under 4 years of age. Further safety reviews by the 
FDA regarding the use of these agents in children between the 
ages of 2 and 11 are ongoing. 
 There are three major drug information sources for OTC 
products.  Handbook of Nonprescription Drugs is the most com-
prehensive resource for OTC medications; it evaluates ingre-
dients contained in major OTC drug classes and lists the 
ingredients included in many OTC products. Nonprescription 
Drug Therapy is an online reference that is updated monthly; 
it provides detailed OTC product information and patient 
counseling instructions.  Physicians’ Desk Reference for 
Nonprescription Drugs, Dietary  Supplements and Herbs , a com-
pendium of manufacturers’ information regarding OTC prod-
ucts, is published annually but is somewhat incomplete with 
regard to the number of products included. Any health care 
provider who seeks more specific information regarding OTC 
products may find useful the references listed below. 
 REFERENCES 
 Consumer Healthcare Products Association website:  http://www.chpa-info.org/ 
 Handbook of Nonprescription Drugs , 17th ed. American Pharmacists Association, 
2011. 
 Lessenger JE, Feinberg SD: Abuse of prescription and over-the-counter medica-
tions. J Am Board Fam Med 2008;21:45. 
 Nonprescription Drug Therapy . Facts and Comparisons 4.0 (online). Wolters 
Kluwer Health, 2011. 
 Physicians’ Desk Reference for Nonprescription Drugs ,  Dietary Supplements and Herbs , 
32nd ed. Thomson Healthcare, 2011. 
 Sharfstein JM, North M, Serwint JR: Over the counter but no longer under the 
radar—pediatric cough and cold medications. N Engl J Med 
2007;357:232. 
 US Food and Drug Administration: Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. 
Office of Nonprescription Products website:  http://www.fda.gov/cder/
offices/otc/default.htm 
 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
OTC cold medications typically contain antihistamines (eg, 
brompheniramine, chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine), 
antitussives (eg, dextromethorphan), expectorants (eg, 
guaifenesin), and nasal decongestants (eg, phenylephrine, 
pseudoephedrine). Systemic nasal decongestants 
(contained in Alka-Seltzer and Sudafed) stimulate 
α 1 -adrenoceptors and may raise blood pressure through 
direct vasoconstrictor effects. Additionally, NSAIDs (con-
tained in Advil PM) increase blood pressure and may 
reduce the effectiveness of antihypertensive agents. NSAIDs 
may also exacerbate heart failure through increased fluid 
retention and elevated blood pressure. Alka-Seltzer cold 
preparations should be avoided in patients with heart fail-
ure due to the high sodium content, which can lead to fluid 
retention. The sodium content in one dose of Alka-Seltzer 
Plus cold medicine (948 mg/dose) provides approximately 
half of the maximum recommended sodium allowance for 
patients with heart failure.
1125
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
64
Dietary Supplements & 
Herbal Medications∗
Cathi E. Dennehy, PharmD, & Candy Tsourounis, PharmD
C A S E  S T U D Y
 The medical use of plants in their natural and unprocessed form 
undoubtedly began when the first intelligent animals noticed that 
certain food plants altered particular body functions. While there is 
a great deal of historical information about the use of plant-based 
supplements, there is also much unreliable information from poorly 
designed clinical studies that do not account for randomization 
errors, confounders, and—most importantly—a placebo effect that 
can contribute 30–50% of the observed response. Since the literature 
surrounding dietary supplements is evolving and much of it is not 
peer-reviewed, it is recommended that reputable evidence-based 
resources be used to help guide treatment decisions. An unbiased and 
regularly updated compendium of basic and clinical reports regarding 
botanicals is  Pharmacists Letter/Prescribers Letter Natural Medicines 
Comprehensive  Database (see references). Another evidence-based 
resource is  Natural Standard , which includes an international, multi-
disciplinary collaborative website,  http://www.naturalstandard.com . 
Unfortunately, the evidence available to these objective and unbi-
ased evaluators is rarely adequate to permit clear conclusions. As a 
result, all statements regarding positive benefits should be regarded 
as preliminary and even conclusions regarding safety should be 
considered tentative at this time. 
 For legal purposes, “dietary supplements” are distinguished 
from “prescription drugs” derived from plants (morphine, digitalis, 
atropine, etc) by virtue of being available without a prescription 
and, unlike “over-the-counter medications,” are legally considered 
dietary supplements rather than drugs. This distinction eliminates 
the need for proof of efficacy and safety prior to marketing and also 
places the burden of proof on the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) to prove that a supplement is harmful before its use can be 
restricted or removed from the market. Although manufacturers 
are prohibited from marketing unsafe or ineffective products, the 
FDA has met significant challenges from the supplement industry 
largely due to the strong lobbying effort by supplement manufac-
turers and the variability in interpretation of the Dietary Supplement 
Health and Education Act (DSHEA). DSHEA defines dietary 
supplements as vitamins, minerals, herbs or other botanicals, 
amino acids or dietary supplements used to supplement the diet by 
increasing dietary intake, or concentrates, metabolites, constituents, 
extracts, or any combination of these ingredients. For the purposes 
of this chapter, plant-based substances and synthetic purified 
 A 65-year-old man with a history of coronary artery 
disease, high cholesterol, type 2 diabetes, and hypertension 
presents with a question about a dietary supplement. He is 
in good health, exercises regularly, and eats a low-fat, low-
salt diet. His most recent laboratory values show that his 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is still slightly 
above goal at 120 mg/dL (goal < 100 mg/dL) and his 
hemoglobin A 1C is well controlled at 6%. His blood pressure 
is also well controlled. His medications include simvastatin, 
metformin, benazepril, and aspirin. He also regularly takes 
a vitamin B complex supplement and coenzyme Q10. He 
asks you if taking a garlic supplement could help to bring 
his LDL cholesterol down to less than 100 mg/dL. What are 
two rationales for why he might be using a coenzyme Q10 
supplement? Are there any supplements that could increase 
bleeding risk if taken with aspirin? 
 ∗ The industry marketing these materials is replacing the terms “herbal 
medication” and “botanical medication” with the term “dietary supple-
ment” in order to avoid legal liability and added governmental regula-
tion. For the purposes of this chapter, they are identical.
1126    SECTION X Special Topics
chemicals will be referred to as dietary supplements. Among the 
purified chemicals, glucosamine, coenzyme Q10, and melatonin 
are of significant pharmacologic interest. 
 This chapter provides some historical perspective and describes 
the evidence provided by randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials, meta-analyses, and systematic reviews involving 
several of the most commonly used agents in this class. Ephedrine, 
the active principle in Ma-huang, is discussed in  Chapter 9 . 
 HISTORICAL & REGULATORY FACTORS 
 Under the DSHEA, dietary supplements are not considered over-
the-counter drugs in the USA but rather food supplements used for 
health maintenance. Although dietary supplements are regulated as 
food, consumers may use them in the same fashion as drugs and 
even use them in place of drugs or in combination with drugs. 
 In 1994, the United States Congress, influenced by growing 
“consumerism” as well as strong manufacturer lobbying efforts, 
passed the DSHEA. DSHEA required the establishment of Good 
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards for the supplement 
industry; however, it was not until 2007 that the FDA issued a final 
rule on the proposed GMP standards. This 13-year delay allowed 
supplement manufacturers to self-regulate the manufacturing pro-
cess and resulted in many instances of adulteration, misbranding, 
and contamination. Therefore, much of the criticism regarding the 
dietary supplement industry involves a lack of product purity and 
variations in potency. Under the new GMP standards, large and 
small dietary supplement manufacturers should now be in compli-
ance with this legislation. The FDA, however, has limited resources 
to adequately investigate and oversee compliance with manufactur-
ing standards, particularly since many ingredient suppliers are based 
overseas. Furthermore, the dietary supplement ingredient supply 
chain is complex and federal regulators are not able to adequately 
inspect manufacturing facilities in a timely or efficient matter. 
 Because of the problems that resulted from self-regulation, 
another law, the Dietary Supplement and Non-Prescription Drug 
Consumer Protection Act, was approved in 2006. This law requires 
manufacturers, packers, or distributors of supplements to submit 
reports of serious adverse events to the FDA. Serious adverse events 
are defined as death, a life-threatening event, hospitalization, a 
persistent or significant disability or incapacity, congenital anomaly 
or birth defect, or an adverse event that requires medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent such outcomes based on reasonable medical 
judgment. These reports are intended to identify trends in adverse 
effects and would help to alert the public to safety issues. 
 CLINICAL ASPECTS OF THE USE 
OF BOTANICALS 
 Many United States consumers have embraced the use of dietary 
supplements as a “natural” approach to their health care. 
Unfortunately, misconceptions regarding safety and efficacy of the 
agents are common, and the fact that a substance can be called 
“natural” does not of course guarantee its safety. In fact, these 
products may be inherently inert, toxic, or may have been adulter-
ated, misbranded, or contaminated either intentionally or unin-
tentionally in a variety of ways. 
 Adverse effects have been documented for a variety of dietary 
supplements; however, under-reporting of adverse effects is likely 
since consumers do not routinely report, and do not know how to 
report an adverse effect if they suspect that the event was caused 
by consumption of a supplement. Furthermore, chemical analysis 
is rarely performed on the products involved, including those 
products that are described in the literature as being linked to an 
adverse event. This leads to confusion about whether the primary 
ingredient or an adulterant caused the adverse effect. In some 
cases, the chemical constituents of the herb can clearly lead to 
toxicity. Some of the herbs that should be used cautiously or not 
at all are listed in  Table 64–1 . 
 An important risk factor in the use of dietary supplements is 
the lack of adequate testing for drug interactions. Since botanicals 
may contain hundreds of active and inactive ingredients, it is very 
difficult and costly to study potential drug interactions when they 
are combined with other medications. This may present signifi-
cant risks to patients. 
 ■ BOTANICAL SUBSTANCES 
 ECHINACEA ( ECHINACEA PURPUREA ) 
 Chemistry 
 The three most widely used species of  Echinacea are Echinacea 
purpurea, E pallida, and  E angustifolia . The chemical constituents 
include flavonoids, lipophilic constituents (eg, alkamides, poly-
acetylenes), water-soluble polysaccharides, and water-soluble 
caffeoyl conjugates (eg, echinacoside, cichoric acid, caffeic acid). 
Within any marketed echinacea formulation, the relative amounts 
of these components are dependent upon the species used, the 
method of manufacture, and the plant parts used.  E purpurea has 
been the most widely studied in clinical trials. Although the active 
constituents of echinacea are not completely known, cichoric acid 
from  E purpurea and echinacoside from  E pallida and E angustifolia , 
as well as alkamides and polysaccharides, are most often noted 
as having immune-modulating properties. Most commercial 
formulations, however, are not standardized for any particular 
constituent. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Immune Modulation 
 The effect of echinacea on the immune system is controversial. In 
vivo human studies using commercially marketed formulations of 
 E purpurea have shown increased phagocytosis, total circulating 
white blood cells, monocytes, neutrophils, and natural killer cells 
but not immunostimulation. In vitro,  E purpurea juice increased 
production of interleukins-1, -6, and -10, and tumor necrosis 
factor-α by human macrophages. Enhanced natural killer cell 
activity and antibody-dependent cellular toxicity was also observed 
CHAPTER 64 Dietary Supplements & Herbal Medications    1127
with  E purpurea extract in cell lines from both healthy and immu-
nocompromised patients. Studies using the isolated purified poly-
saccharides from  E purpurea have also shown cytokine activation. 
Polysaccharides by themselves, however, are unlikely to accurately 
reproduce the activity of the entire extract. 
 B. Anti-Inflammatory Effects 
 Certain echinacea constituents have demonstrated anti-inflammatory 
properties in vitro. Inhibition of cyclooxygenase, 5-lipoxygenase, 
and hyaluronidase may be involved. In animals, application of 
 E purpurea prior to application of a topical irritant reduced 
TABLE 64–1 Various supplements and some associated risks.
Commercial Name, 
Scientific Name, Plant 
Parts
Intended Use
Toxic Agents, Effects
Comments
Aconite
Aconitum species
Analgesic
Alkaloid, cardiac and central 
nervous system effects
Avoid
Aristolochic acid
Aristolochia species
Traditional Chinese medicine; 
various uses
Carcinogen, 
nephrotoxicity
Avoid
Black cohosh 
Cimicifuga racemosa
Menopausal symptoms
Hepatotoxicity
Avoid1
Borage
Borago officinalis
Tops, leaves
Anti-inflammatory; diuretic
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 
hepatotoxicity
Avoid
Chaparral
Larrea tridentata
Twigs, leaves
Anti-infective; antioxidant;
anticancer
Hepatotoxicity
Avoid
Coltsfoot 
Tussilago farfara
Leaves, flower
Upper respiratory tract infections
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 
hepatotoxicity
Avoid ingestion of any parts of plant; leaves 
may be used topically for anti-inflammatory 
effects for up to 4–6 weeks
Comfrey 
Symphytum species
Leaves and roots
Internal digestive aid; topical for 
wound healing
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 
hepatotoxicity
Avoid ingestion; topical use should be limited to 
4–6 weeks
Ephedra, Ma-huang 
Ephedra species
Diet aid; stimulant; bronchodilator
Central nervous system 
toxicity, cardiac toxicity
Avoid in patients at risk for stroke, myocardial 
infarction, uncontrolled blood pressure, seizures, 
general anxiety disorder
Germander 
Teucrium chamaedrys
Leaves, tops
Diet aid
Hepatotoxicity
Avoid
Gland-derived extracts (thy-
mus, adrenal, thyroid)
Hormone replacement
Risk of bacterial, viral, or 
prion transmission; vari-
able hormone content
Avoid
Human placenta derivatives
Antirheumatic; anti-inflammatory
Risk of bacterial, viral, or 
prion transmission
Avoid
Jin Bu Huan
Analgesic; sedative
Hepatotoxicity
Avoid
Kava-kava
Anxiety
Hepatotoxicity
Avoid
Pennyroyal
Mentha pulegium or 
Hedeoma pulegioides
Extract
Digestive aid; induction of men-
strual flow; abortifacient
Pulegone and pulegone 
metabolite, liver failure, 
renal failure
Avoid
Poke root 
Phytolacca americana
Antirheumatic
Hemorrhagic gastritis
Avoid
Royal jelly 
Apis mellifera (honeybee)
Tonic
Bronchospasm, 
anaphylaxis
Avoid in patients with chronic allergies or respira-
tory diseases; asthma, chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease, emphysema, atopy
Sassafras 
Sassafras albidum
Root bark
Blood thinner
Safrole oil, hepatocarcino-
gen in animals
Avoid
1Cases of hepatotoxicity have occurred; these cases are rare given the widespread use of black cohosh
1128    SECTION X Special Topics
both paw and ear edema. Despite these laboratory findings, 
randomized, controlled clinical trials involving echinacea for 
wound healing have not been performed in humans. 
 C. Antibacterial, Antifungal, Antiviral, and
Antioxidant Effects 
 In vitro studies have reported some antibacterial, anti-fungal, 
antiviral, and antioxidant activity with echinacea constituents. In 
vitro, a standardized extract of the aerial parts of  E purpurea dem-
onstrated potent virucidal (MIC 100 < 1 μg/mL) against influenza 
and herpes simplex viruses and potent bactericidal activity against 
 Streptococcus pyogenes ,  Haemophilus influenzae, and  Legionella 
pneumophila in human bronchial cells. The pro-inflammatory 
cytokine release caused by these viruses and bacteria were also 
reversed by echinacea. 
 Clinical Trials 
 Echinacea is most often used to enhance immune function in 
individuals who have colds and other respiratory tract infections. 
 Two recent reviews have assessed the efficacy of echinacea for 
this primary indication. A review by the Cochrane Collaboration 
involved 16 randomized trials with 22 comparisons. Trials were 
included if they involved monopreparations of echinacea for cold 
treatment or prevention. Prevention trials involving rhinovirus 
inoculation versus natural cold development were excluded. 
Overall, the review concluded that there was some evidence of 
efficacy for the aerial (above-ground) parts of  E purpurea plants in 
the early treatment of colds but that efficacy for prevention and 
for other species of echinacea was not clearly shown. Among the 
placebo-controlled comparisons for cold treatment, echinacea was 
superior in nine trials, showed a positive trend in one trial, and 
was insignificant in six trials. 
 A separate meta-analysis involving 14 randomized, placebo-
controlled trials of echinacea for cold treatment or prevention was 
published in  Lancet . In this review, echinacea decreased the odds 
of developing clear signs and symptoms of a cold by 58% and 
decreased symptom duration by 1.25 days. This review, however, 
was confounded by the inclusion of four clinical trials involving 
multi-ingredient echinacea preparations, as well as three studies 
using rhinovirus inoculation versus natural cold development. 
 Echinacea has been used investigationally to enhance hemato-
logic recovery following chemotherapy. It has also been used as an 
adjunct in the treatment of urinary tract and vaginal fungal infec-
tions. These indications require further research before they can be 
accepted in clinical practice.  E purpurea is ineffective in treating 
recurrent genital herpes. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Flu-like symptoms (eg, fever, shivering, headache, vomiting) have 
been reported following the intravenous use of echinacea extracts. 
Adverse effects with oral commercial formulations are minimal 
and most often include unpleasant taste, gastrointestinal upset, or 
rash. In one large clinical trial, pediatric patients using an oral 
echinacea product were significantly more likely to develop a rash 
(∼ 5%) than those taking placebo. 
 Drug Interactions & Precautions 
 Until the role of echinacea in immune modulation is better 
defined, this agent should be avoided in patients with immune 
deficiency disorders (eg, AIDS, cancer), autoimmune disorders 
(eg, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis), and patients with 
tuberculosis. While there are no reported drug interactions for 
echinacea, some preparations have a high alcohol content and 
should not be used with medications known to cause a disulfiram-
like reaction. In theory, echinacea should also be avoided in per-
sons taking immunosuppressant medications (eg, organ transplant 
recipients). 
 Dosage 
 It is recommended to follow the dosing on the package label, as 
there may be slight variations in dose based on the product 
manufacturer. Standardized preparations made from the above-
ground parts of  E purpurea (Echinaforce, Echinaguard) as an 
alcoholic extract or fresh pressed juice have some clinical support 
and may be taken within the first 24 hours of cold symptoms. It 
should not be used as a preventative agent or for longer than 
10–14 days. 
 GARLIC ( ALLIUM SATIVUM ) 
 Chemistry 
 The pharmacologic activity of garlic involves a variety of organo-
sulfur compounds. Dried and powdered formulations contain 
many of the organosulfur compounds found in raw garlic and will 
likely be standardized to allicin or alliin content. Allicin is respon-
sible for the characteristic odor of garlic, and alliin is its chemical 
precursor. Dried powdered formulations are often enteric-coated 
to protect the enzyme allinase (the enzyme that converts alliin to 
allicin) from degradation by stomach acid. Aged garlic extract has 
also been studied in clinical trials, but to a lesser degree than dried, 
powdered garlic. Aged garlic extract contains no alliin or allicin 
and is odor-free. Its primary constituents are water-soluble 
organosulfur compounds, and packages may carry a standardiza-
tion to the compound  S -allylcysteine. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Cardiovascular Effects 
 In vitro, allicin and related compounds inhibit HMG-CoA 
reductase, which is involved in cholesterol biosynthesis (see 
 Chapter 35 ), and exhibit antioxidant properties. Several clinical 
trials have investigated the lipid-lowering potential of garlic. The 
most recent meta-analysis involved 29 randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trials and found a small but significant reduc-
tion in both total cholesterol (−0.19 mmol/L) and triglycerides 
(−0.011 mmol/L), but no effect on low- or high-density lipopro-
teins. These results echoed another review in patients with baseline 
hypercholesterolemia (total cholesterol > 200 mg/dL) that found a 
significant reduction in total cholesterol of 5.8% using garlic for 
CHAPTER 64 Dietary Supplements & Herbal Medications    1129
2–6 months. The effect of garlic became insignificant, however, 
when dietary controls were in place. Results of a study by the 
National Center of Complementary and Alternative Medicine 
(NCCAM) evaluating three different sources of garlic (fresh, pow-
dered, and aged garlic extract) in adults with moderately elevated 
cholesterol contradicted the findings of these reviews and found no 
effect of any formulation of garlic versus placebo on LDL choles-
terol. Cumulatively, these data indicate that garlic is unlikely to be 
effective in reducing cholesterol to a clinically significant extent. 
Clinical trials report antiplatelet effects (possibly through inhibi-
tion of thromboxane synthesis or stimulation of nitric oxide syn-
thesis) following garlic ingestion. A majority of human studies also 
suggest enhancement of fibrinolytic activity. These effects in com-
bination with antioxidant effects (eg, increased resistance to low-
density lipoprotein oxidation) and reductions in total cholesterol 
might be beneficial in patients with atherosclerosis. A randomized, 
controlled trial among persons with advanced coronary artery 
disease who consumed dried powdered garlic for 4 years showed 
significant reductions in secondary markers (plaque accumulation 
in the carotid and femoral arteries) as compared with placebo, but 
primary endpoints (death, stroke, myocardial infarction) were not 
assessed. 
 Garlic constituents may affect blood vessel elasticity and blood 
pressure. A variety of mechanisms have been proposed. There 
have been a limited number of randomized, controlled trials in 
humans for this indication. Ten trials were included in a system-
atic review and meta-analysis that found no effect on systolic or 
diastolic pressure in patients without elevated systolic blood pres-
sure but a significant reduction in systolic and diastolic pressure 
among the three trials involving patients with elevated systolic 
blood pressure. 
 B. Endocrine Effects 
 The effect of garlic on glucose homeostasis does not appear to be 
significant in persons with diabetes. Certain organosulfur con-
stituents in garlic, however, have demonstrated hypoglycemic 
effects in nondiabetic animal models. 
 C. Antimicrobial Effects 
 The antimicrobial effect of garlic has not been extensively studied 
in clinical trials. Allicin has been reported to have in vitro activity 
against some gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria as well as 
fungi ( Candida albicans ), protozoa ( Entamoeba histolytica ), and 
certain viruses. The primary mechanism involves the inhibition of 
thiol-containing enzymes needed by these microbes. Given the 
availability of safe and effective prescription antimicrobials, the 
usefulness of garlic in this area appears limited. 
 D. Antineoplastic Effects 
 In rodent studies, garlic inhibits procarcinogens for colon, esopha-
geal, lung, breast, and stomach cancer, possibly by detoxification 
of carcinogens and reduced carcinogen activation. Several epide-
miologic case-control studies demonstrate a reduced incidence of 
stomach, esophageal, and colorectal cancers in persons with high 
dietary garlic consumption. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Following oral ingestion, adverse effects may include nausea (6%), 
hypotension (1.3%), allergy (1.1%), and bleeding (rare). Breath and 
body odor have been reported with an incidence of 20–40% at recom-
mended doses using enteric-coated powdered garlic formulations. 
Contact dermatitis may occur with the handling of raw garlic. 
 Drug Interactions & Precautions 
 Because of reported antiplatelet effects, patients using anticlotting 
medications (eg, warfarin, aspirin, ibuprofen) should use garlic 
cautiously. Additional monitoring of blood pressure and signs and 
symptoms of bleeding is warranted. Garlic may reduce the 
bioavailability of saquinavir, an antiviral protease inhibitor, but it 
does not appear to affect the bioavailability of ritonavir. 
 Dosage 
 Dried, powdered garlic products should be standardized to con-
tain 1.3% alliin (the allicin precursor) or have an allicin-generating 
potential of 0.6%. Enteric-coated formulations are recommended 
to minimize degradation of the active substances. A daily dose of 
600–900 mg/d of powdered garlic is most common. This is 
equivalent to one clove of raw garlic (2–4 g) per day. 
 GINKGO ( GINKGO BILOBA ) 
 Chemistry 
 Ginkgo biloba extract is prepared from the leaves of the ginkgo 
tree. The most common formulation is prepared by concentrating 
50 parts of the crude leaf to prepare one part of extract. The active 
constituents in ginkgo are flavone glycosides and terpenoids (ie, 
ginkgolides A, B, C, J, and bilobalide). 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Cardiovascular Effects 
 In animal models and some human studies, ginkgo has been 
shown to increase blood flow, reduce blood viscosity, and promote 
vasodilation, thus enhancing tissue perfusion. Enhancement of 
endogenous nitric oxide (see  Chapter 19 ) and antagonism of 
platelet-activating factor have been observed in animal models. 
 Ginkgo biloba has been studied for its effects on mild to mod-
erate occlusive peripheral arterial disease. Among 11 randomized, 
placebo-controlled studies involving 477 participants using stan-
dardized ginkgo leaf extract (EGb761) for up to 6 months, a 
nonsignificant trend toward improvements in pain-free walking 
distance (increase of 64.5 meters) was observed (p = .06). 
 The Ginkgo Evaluation of Memory (GEM) study evaluated 
cardiovascular outcomes associated with the long-term use of 
ginkgo for 6 years in 3069 patients over 75 years of age. Daily use 
of 240 mg/d EGb761 did not affect the incidence of hypertension 
or reduce blood pressure among persons with hypertension or 
prehypertension. No significant effects in cardiovascular disease 
1130    SECTION X Special Topics
mortality or events or hemorrhagic stroke were observed. There 
was, however, a significant reduction in peripheral vascular disease 
events in the ginkgo arm versus the placebo arm. 
 B. Metabolic Effects 
 Antioxidant and radical-scavenging properties have been observed 
for the flavonoid fraction of ginkgo as well as some of the terpene 
constituents. In vitro, ginkgo has been reported to have superoxide 
dismutase-like activity and superoxide anion- and hydroxyl radical-
scavenging properties. The flavonoid fraction has also been observed 
to have anti-apoptotic properties. In some studies, it has also dem-
onstrated a protective effect in limiting free radical formation in 
animal models of ischemic injury and in reducing markers of oxida-
tive stress in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery. 
 C. Central Nervous System Effects 
 In aged animal models, chronic administration of ginkgo for 
3–4 weeks led to modifications in central nervous system recep-
tors and neurotransmitters. Receptor densities increased for mus-
carinic, α 2 , and 5-HT 1a receptors and decreased for β adrenoceptors. 
Increased serum levels of acetylcholine and norepinephrine and 
enhanced synaptosomal reuptake of serotonin have also been 
reported. Additional effects include reduced corticosterone syn-
thesis and inhibition of amyloid-beta fibril formation. 
 Ginkgo has been used to treat cerebral insufficiency and demen-
tia of the Alzheimer type. The term  cerebral insufficiency , however, 
includes a variety of manifestations ranging from poor concentra-
tion and confusion to anxiety and depression as well as physical 
complaints such as hearing loss and headache. For this reason, 
studies evaluating cerebral insufficiency tend to be more inclusive 
and difficult to assess than trials evaluating dementia. An updated 
meta-analysis of ginkgo for cognitive impairment or dementia was 
performed by the Cochrane Collaboration. They reviewed 36 ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials ranging in length 
from 3 to 52 weeks. Significant improvements in cognition and 
activities of daily living were observed at 12 but not 24 weeks. 
Significant improvements in clinical global improvement, however, 
were observed at 24 but not 12 weeks. The authors concluded that 
the effects of ginkgo in the treatment of cognitive impairment and 
dementia were unpredictable and unlikely to be clinically relevant. 
In the GEM study, the effects of gingko as a prophylactic agent to 
prevent progression to dementia were assessed. No benefit was 
observed with 6 years of ginkgo treatment. To date, there is no 
known therapy that prevents progression to dementia. 
 D. Miscellaneous Effects 
 Ginkgo has been studied for its effects in allergic and asthmatic 
bronchoconstriction, short-term memory in healthy, non-demented 
adults, erectile dysfunction, tinnitus and hearing loss, and macular 
degeneration. For each of these conditions, there is insufficient 
evidence to warrant clinical use. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Adverse effects have been reported with a frequency comparable to 
that of placebo. These include nausea, headache, stomach upset, 
diarrhea, allergy, anxiety, and insomnia. A few case reports noted 
bleeding complications in patients using ginkgo. In a few of these 
cases, the patients were also using either aspirin or warfarin. 
 Drug Interactions & Precautions 
 Ginkgo may have antiplatelet properties and should not be used 
in combination with antiplatelet or anticoagulant medications. 
One case of an enhanced sedative effect was reported when ginkgo 
was combined with trazodone. Seizures have been reported as a 
toxic effect of ginkgo, most likely related to seed contamination in 
the leaf formulations. Uncooked ginkgo seeds are epileptogenic 
due to the presence of ginkgotoxin. Ginkgo formulations should 
be avoided in individuals with preexisting seizure disorders. 
 Dosage 
 Ginkgo biloba dried leaf extract is usually standardized to contain 
24% flavone glycosides and 6% terpene lactones. The daily dose 
ranges from 120 to 240 mg of the dried extract in two or three 
divided doses. 
 GINSENG 
 Chemistry 
 Ginseng may be derived from any of several species of the genus 
 Panax. Of these, crude preparations or extracts of  Panax ginseng , 
the Chinese or Korean variety, and  P quinquefolium , the American 
variety, are most often available to consumers in the United States. 
The active principles appear to be the triterpenoid saponin glyco-
sides called ginsenosides or panaxosides, of which there are 
approximately 30 different types. It is recommended that com-
mercial  P ginseng formulations be standardized to contain 4–10% 
ginsenosides. 
 Other plant materials are commonly sold under the name 
ginseng but are not from  Panax species. These include Siberian 
ginseng ( Eleutherococcus senticosus ) and Brazilian ginseng ( Pfaffia 
paniculata ). Of these, Siberian ginseng is more widely available in 
the USA. Siberian ginseng contains eleutherosides but no ginseno-
sides. Currently, there is no recommended standardization for 
eleutheroside content in Siberian ginseng products. 
 Pharmacology 
 An extensive literature exists on the potential pharmacologic 
effects of ginsenosides. Unfortunately, the studies differ widely in 
the species of  Panax used, the ginsenosides studied, the degree of 
purification applied to the extracts, the animal species studied, 
and the measurements used to evaluate the responses. A remark-
able list of reported beneficial pharmacologic effects include 
modulation of immune function (induced mRNA expression for 
interleukins-2 and -1α, interferon-γ, and granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor; activated B and T cells, natural killer 
cells, and macrophages); central nervous system effects (increased 
proliferating ability of neural progenitors; increased central levels 
of acetylcholine, serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine in the 
CHAPTER 64 Dietary Supplements & Herbal Medications    1131
cerebral cortex); antioxidant activity; anti-inflammatory effects 
(inhibition of TNF-α, interleukin-1β, and vascular and intracel-
lular cell adhesion molecules); antistress activity (ie, stimulation of 
pituitary-adreno-cortical system, agonist at glucocorticoid receptor); 
analgesia (inhibition of substance P); vasoregulatory effects 
(increased endothelial nitric oxide and inhibition of prostacyclin 
production); cardioprotective activity (reduced ventricular remod-
eling and cardiac hypertrophy in animal models of myocardial 
ischemia); antiplatelet activity; improved glucose homeostasis 
(increased insulin release, number of insulin receptors, and insulin 
sensitivity); and anticancer properties (reduced tumor angiogene-
sis, increased tumor cell apoptosis). 
 Clinical Trials 
 Ginseng is most often claimed to help improve physical and men-
tal performance or to function as an “adaptogen,” an agent that 
helps the body to return to normal when exposed to stressful or 
noxious stimuli. Unfortunately, the clinical trials evaluating gin-
seng for these indications have shown few if any benefits. Some 
randomized controlled trials evaluating “quality of life” have 
claimed significant benefits in some subscale measures of quality 
of life but rarely in overall composite scores using  P ginseng . Better 
results have been observed with  P quinquefolium and  P ginseng in 
lowering postprandial glucose indices in subjects with and without 
diabetes. This was the subject of a recent systematic review in 
which 15 studies (13 randomized and 2 nonrandomized) were 
evaluated. Nine of the studies reported significant reductions in 
blood glucose. Newer randomized, placebo-controlled trials have 
reported some immunomodulating benefits of  P quinquefolium 
(four trials) and  P ginseng (one trial) in preventing upper respira-
tory tract infections. Use of ginseng for 2–4 months in healthy 
seniors may reduce the incidence of acquiring the common cold 
as well as the duration of symptoms. Because of heterogeneity 
in these trials, however, these findings are insufficient to war-
rant recommending the use of ginseng for this indication at this 
time. Two case-control studies, a cohort study and one randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study, also suggest a non-organ-
specific cancer preventative effect with long-term administration of 
 P ginseng. In summary, the strongest support for use of
 P ginseng or  P quinquefolium currently relates to its effects in cold 
prevention, lowering postprandial glucose, and nonspecific cancer 
prevention. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Vaginal bleeding and mastalgia have been described in case reports. 
Central nervous system stimulation (eg, insomnia, nervousness) 
and hypertension have been reported in patients using high doses 
(more than 3 g/d) of  P ginseng . Methylxanthines found in the 
ginseng plant may contribute to this effect. Vasoregulatory effects 
of ginseng are unlikely to be clinically significant. 
 Drug Interactions & Precautions 
 Irritability, sleeplessness, and manic behavior have been reported 
in psychiatric patients using ginseng in combination with other 
medications (phenelzine, lithium, neuroleptics). Ginseng should 
be used cautiously in patients taking any psychiatric, estrogenic, or 
hypoglycemic medications. Ginseng has antiplatelet properties 
and should not be used in combination with warfarin. Cytokine 
stimulation has been claimed for both  P ginseng and  P quinquefo-
lium in vitro and in animal models. In a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled study,  P ginseng significantly increased 
natural killer cell activity versus placebo with 8 and 12 weeks of 
use. Immunocompromised individuals, those taking immune 
stimulants, and those with autoimmune disorders should use ginseng 
products with caution. 
 Dosing 
 One to two grams of the crude  P ginseng root or its equivalent is 
considered standard dosing. Two hundred milligrams of standard-
ized  P ginseng extract is equivalent to 1 g of the crude root. 
Ginsana has been used as a standardized extract in some clinical 
trials and is available in the USA. 
 MILK THISTLE ( SILYBUM MARIANUM ) 
 Chemistry 
 The fruit and seeds of the milk thistle plant contain a lipophilic 
mixture of flavonolignans known as silymarin. Silymarin com-
prises 2–3% of the dried herb and is composed of three primary 
isomers, silybin (also known as silybinin or silibinin), silychristin 
(silichristin), and silydianin (silidianin). Silybin is the most preva-
lent and potent of the three isomers and accounts for about 50% 
of the silymarin complex. Products should be standardized to 
contain 70–80% silymarin. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Liver Disease 
 In animal models, milk thistle purportedly limits hepatic injury 
associated with a variety of toxins, including  Amanita mushrooms, 
galactosamine, carbon tetrachloride, acetaminophen, radiation, 
cold ischemia, and ethanol. In vitro studies and some in vivo stud-
ies demonstrate that silymarin reduces lipid peroxidation, scav-
enges free radicals, and enhances glutathione and superoxide 
dismutase levels. This may contribute to membrane stabilization 
and reduce toxin entry. 
 Milk thistle appears to have anti-inflammatory properties. In 
vitro, silybin strongly and noncompetitively inhibits lipoxygenase 
activity and reduces leukotriene formation. Inhibition of leuko-
cyte migration has been observed in vivo and may be a factor 
when acute inflammation is present. Silymarin also inhibits tumor 
necrosis factor-α-mediated activation of nuclear factor kappa B 
(NF-κB), which promotes inflammatory responses. One of the 
most unusual mechanisms claimed for milk thistle involves an 
increase in RNA polymerase I activity in nonmalignant hepato-
cytes but not in hepatoma or other malignant cell lines. By 
increasing this enzyme’s activity, enhanced protein synthesis and 
cellular regeneration may occur in healthy but not malignant cells. 
1132    SECTION X Special Topics
In an animal model of cirrhosis, it reduced collagen accumulation, 
and in an in vitro model it reduced expression of the fibrogenic 
cytokine transforming growth factor-β. If confirmed, milk thistle 
may have a role in the treatment of hepatic fibrosis. 
 In animal models, silymarin has a dose-dependent stimulatory 
effect on bile flow that could be beneficial in cases of cholestasis. 
To date, however, there is insufficient evidence to warrant the use 
of milk thistle for these indications. 
 B. Chemotherapeutic Effects 
 Preliminary in vitro and animal studies of the effects of silymarin 
and silybinin have been carried out with several cancer cell lines. In 
murine models of skin cancer, silybinin and silymarin were said to 
reduce tumor initiation and promotion. Induction of apoptosis has 
also been reported using silymarin in a variety of malignant human 
cell lines (eg, melanoma, prostate, leukemia cells, bladder transitional-
cell papilloma cells, and hepatoma cells). Inhibition of cell growth 
and proliferation by inducing a G 1 cell cycle arrest has also been 
claimed in cultured human breast and prostate cancer cell lines. The 
use of milk thistle in the clinical treatment of cancer has not yet 
been adequately studied but preliminary trials are under way. 
 C. Lactation 
 Historically, milk thistle has been used by herbalists and midwives to 
induce lactation in pregnant or postpartum women. In female rats, 
milk thistle increases prolactin production. As such, it is possible that 
it could have an effect on human breast milk production. Clinical 
trial data are lacking, however, for this indication, as are safety data 
on nursing mothers and infants. Until further data become available, 
milk thistle should not be used for this indication. 
 Clinical Trials 
 Milk thistle has been used to treat acute and chronic viral hepatitis, 
alcoholic liver disease, and toxin-induced liver injury in human 
patients. A systematic review of 13 randomized trials involving 
915 patients with alcoholic liver disease or hepatitis B or C found 
no significant reductions in all-cause mortality, liver histopathology, 
or complications of liver disease with 6 months of use. A significant 
reduction in liver-related mortality was claimed using the data from 
all the surveyed trials, but not when the data were limited to trials 
of better design and controls. It was concluded that the effects of 
milk thistle in improving liver function or mortality from liver 
disease are currently poorly substantiated. Until additional well-
designed clinical trials (possibly exploring higher doses) can be 
performed, a clinical effect can be neither supported nor ruled out. 
 Although milk thistle has not been confirmed as an antidote 
following acute exposure to liver toxins in humans, parenteral 
silybin is nevertheless marketed and used in Europe as an antidote 
in  Amanita phalloides mushroom poisoning. This use is based on 
favorable outcomes reported in case-control studies. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Milk thistle has rarely been reported to cause adverse effects when 
used at recommended doses. In clinical trials, the incidence of 
adverse effects (eg, gastrointestinal upset, dermatologic, headaches) 
was comparable to that of placebo. At high doses (> 1500 mg), it 
can have a laxative effect caused by stimulation of bile flow and 
secretion. 
 DRUG INTERACTIONS, PRECAUTIONS, 
& DOSING 
 There are no reported drug-drug interactions or precautions for 
milk thistle. Recommended dosage is 280–420 mg/d, calculated 
as silybin, in three divided doses. 
 ST. JOHN’S WORT ( HYPERICUM 
PERFORATUM ) 
 Chemistry 
 St. John’s wort, also known as hypericum, contains a variety of 
constituents that might contribute to its claimed pharmacologic 
activity in the treatment of depression. Hypericin, a marker of 
standardization for currently marketed products, was thought to 
be the primary antidepressant constituent. Recent attention has 
focused on hyperforin, but a combination of several compounds 
is probably involved. Commercial formulations are usually pre-
pared by soaking the dried chopped flowers in methanol to create 
a hydroalcoholic extract that is then dried. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 A. Antidepressant Action 
 The hypericin fraction was initially reported to have MAO-A and 
-B inhibitor properties. Later studies found that the concentration 
required for this inhibition was higher than that achieved with 
recommended dosages. In vitro studies using the commercially 
formulated hydroalcoholic extract have shown inhibition of nerve 
terminal reuptake of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine. 
While the hypericin constituent did not show reuptake inhibition 
for any of these systems, the hyperforin constituent did. Chronic 
administration of the commercial extract has also been reported to 
significantly down-regulate the expression of cortical β adrenocep-
tors and up-regulate the expression of serotonin receptors (5-HT 2 ) 
in a rodent model. 
 Other effects observed in vitro include sigma receptor binding 
using the hypericin fraction and GABA receptor binding using the 
commercial extract. Interleukin-6 production is also reduced in 
the presence of the extract. 
 1. Clinical trials for depression— The most recent systematic 
review and meta-analysis involved 29 randomized, double-blind, 
controlled trials (18 compared St. John’s wort to placebo, 5 to 
tricyclic antidepressants, and 12 to selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors [SSRIs]). Only studies meeting defined classification 
criteria for major depression were included. St. John’s wort was 
reported to be more efficacious than placebo and equivalent to 
prescription reference treatments including the SSRIs for mild to 
CHAPTER 64 Dietary Supplements & Herbal Medications    1133
moderate depression but with fewer side effects. Most trials used 
900 mg/d of St. John’s wort for 4–12 weeks. Depression severity 
was mild to moderate in 19 trials, moderate to severe in 9 trials, 
and not stated in one trial. These data support a role for St. John’s 
wort in relieving symptoms of major depression. 
 St. John’s wort has been studied for several other indications 
related to mood, including premenstrual dysphoric disorder, cli-
macteric complaints, somatoform disorders, and anxiety. These 
studies are too few in number, however, to draw any firm conclu-
sions regarding efficacy. 
 B. Antiviral and Anticarcinogenic Effects 
 The hypericin constituent of St. John’s wort is photolabile and can 
be activated by exposure to certain wavelengths of visible or ultra-
violet A light. Parenteral formulations of hypericin (photoactivated 
just before administration) have been used investigationally to treat 
HIV infection (given intravenously) and basal and squamous cell 
carcinoma (given by intralesional injection). In vitro, photoacti-
vated hypericin inhibits a variety of enveloped and non-enveloped 
viruses as well as the growth of cells in some neoplastic tissues. 
Inhibition of protein kinase C and inhibition of singlet oxygen 
radical generation have been proposed as possible mechanisms. 
The latter could inhibit cell growth or cause cell apoptosis. These 
studies were carried out using the isolated hypericin constituent of 
St. John’s wort; the usual hydroalcoholic extract of St. John’s wort 
has not been studied for these indications and should not be rec-
ommended for patients with viral illness or cancer. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Photosensitization is related to the hypericin and pseudohypericin 
constituents in St. John’s wort. Consumers should be instructed to 
wear sunscreen and eye protection while using this product when 
exposed to the sun. Hypomania, mania, and autonomic arousal 
have also been reported in patients using St. John’s wort. 
 Drug Interactions & Precautions 
 Inhibition of reuptake of various amine transmitters has been high-
lighted as a potential mechanism of action for St. John’s wort. Drugs 
with similar mechanisms (ie, antidepressants, stimulants) should be 
used cautiously or avoided in patients using St. John’s wort due to 
the risk of serotonin syndrome (see  Chapters 16 and  30 ). This herb 
may induce hepatic CYP enzymes (3A4, 2C9, 1A2) and the 
P-glycoprotein drug transporter. This has led to case reports of sub-
therapeutic levels of numerous drugs, including digoxin, birth 
control drugs (and subsequent pregnancy), cyclosporine, HIV pro-
tease and nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, warfarin, 
irinotecan, theophylline, and anticonvulsants. 
 Dosage 
 The most common commercial formulation of St. John’s wort is 
the dried hydroalcoholic extract. Products should be standardized 
to 2–5% hyperforin, although most still bear the older standardized 
marker of 0.3% hypericin. The recommended dosing for mild to 
moderate depression is 900 mg of the dried extract per day in three 
divided doses. Onset of effect may take 2–4 weeks. Long-term 
benefits beyond 12 weeks have not been sufficiently studied. 
 SAW PALMETTO ( SERENOA REPENS OR 
SABAL SERRULATA ) 
 Chemistry 
 The active constituents in saw palmetto berries are not well 
defined. Phytosterols (eg, β-sitosterol), aliphatic alcohols, poly-
prenic compounds, and flavonoids are all present. Marketed 
preparations are dried lipophilic extracts that are generally stan-
dardized to contain 85–95% fatty acids and sterols. 
 Pharmacologic Effects 
 Saw palmetto is most often promoted for the treatment of benign 
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Enzymatic conversion of testoster-
one to dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by 5α-reductase is inhibited 
by saw palmetto in vitro. Specifically, saw palmetto shows a non-
competitive inhibition of both isoforms (I and II) of this enzyme, 
thereby reducing DHT production. In vitro, saw palmetto also 
inhibits the binding of DHT to androgen receptors. Additional 
effects that have been observed in vitro include inhibition of 
prostatic growth factors, blockade of α 1 adrenoceptors, and inhi-
bition of inflammatory mediators produced by the 5-lipoxygenase 
pathway. 
 The clinical pharmacology of saw palmetto in humans is not 
well defined. One week of treatment in healthy volunteers failed 
to influence 5α-reductase activity, DHT concentration, or testos-
terone concentration. Six months of treatment in patients with 
BPH also failed to affect prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels, a 
marker that is typically reduced by enzymatic inhibition of 
5α-reductase. In contrast, other researchers have reported a reduc-
tion in epidermal growth factor, DHT levels, and antagonist activ-
ity at the nuclear estrogen receptor in the prostate after 3 months 
of treatment with saw palmetto in patients with BPH. 
 Clinical Trials 
 The most recent review involved 30 randomized controlled trials 
in men with symptoms consistent with BPH. Fourteen trials used 
saw palmetto monotherapy compared to placebo and found no 
significant improvement in most urologic symptoms (eg, interna-
tional prostate symptom scores, peak flow, prostate size). Although 
nocturia was significantly improved with saw palmetto compared 
to placebo, when studies were limited to those of higher quality 
and larger sample size, this significance was lost. In contrast, saw 
palmetto, 320 mg/d, was shown to have comparable efficacy to 
5 mg/d of finasteride (a prescription 5α-reductase inhibitor) and 
0.4 mg/d of tamsulosin (a prescription α blocker) in one random-
ized, double-blind, clinical trial each, lasting 6 months and 1 year, 
respectively. These two trials lacked placebo controls. 
1134    SECTION X Special Topics
 Adverse Effects 
 Adverse effects are reported with an incidence of 1–3%. The most 
common include abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, head-
ache, decreased libido, and rhinitis. Saw palmetto has been associ-
ated with a few rare case reports of pancreatitis, liver damage, and 
increased bleeding risk, but due to confounding factors, causality 
remains inconclusive. In comparison to tamsulosin and finas-
teride, saw palmetto was claimed to be less likely to affect sexual 
function (eg, ejaculation). 
 Drug Interactions, Precautions, & Dosing 
 No drug-drug interactions have been reported for saw palmetto. 
Because saw palmetto has no effect on the PSA marker, it will not 
interfere with prostate cancer screening using this test. 
Recommended dosing of a standardized dried extract (containing 
85–95% fatty acids and sterols) is 160 mg orally twice daily. 
Patients should be instructed that it may take 4–6 weeks for onset 
of clinical effects. 
 ■ PURIFIED NUTRITIONAL 
SUPPLEMENTS 
 COENZYME Q10 
 Coenzyme Q10, also known as CoQ, CoQ10, and ubiquinone, is 
found in the mitochondria of many organs, including the heart, 
kidney, liver, and skeletal muscle. After ingestion, the reduced 
form of coenzyme Q10, ubiquinol, predominates in the systemic 
circulation. Coenzyme Q10 is a potent antioxidant and may have 
a role in maintaining healthy muscle function, although the clini-
cal significance of this effect is unknown. Reduced serum levels 
have been reported in Parkinson’s disease. 
 Clinical Uses 
 A. Hypertension 
 In early clinical trials, small but significant reductions in systolic 
and diastolic blood pressure were reported after 8–10 weeks of 
coenzyme Q10 supplementation. The exact mechanism is 
unknown but, if correct, might be related to the antioxidant and 
vasodilating properties of coenzyme Q10. In three well-designed 
randomized, placebo-controlled trials, coenzyme Q10 was 
reported to significantly lower systolic blood pressure and dia-
stolic blood pressure by 11 mm Hg and 7 mm Hg, respectively, 
as compared with no change in the placebo groups. Whether 
coenzyme Q10 can be used to lower blood pressure remains 
unclear. Since all three clinical trials have shown a benefit, it is 
possible that publication bias may be present. Furthermore, an 
exaggerated treatment effect may occur as adequate randomiza-
tion, blinding, and concealment of allocation have been ques-
tioned for these studies. 
 B. Heart Failure 
 Low endogenous coenzyme Q10 levels have been associated with 
worse heart failure outcomes, but this association is likely because 
low levels are a marker for more advanced heart failure, rather 
than a predictor of disease. Despite these findings, coenzyme 
Q10 is often advocated to improve heart muscle function in 
patients with heart failure. According to the most recent meta-
analysis, coenzyme Q10 was shown to improve ejection fraction 
by 3.7% with a more significant effect being observed in patients 
not receiving angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. It is 
unclear whether the improvements in ejection fraction are appli-
cable to all patients with heart failure, as more research is required 
to assess the role of coenzyme Q10 in heart failure and its impact 
on disease severity. 
 C. Ischemic Heart Disease 
 The effects of coenzyme Q10 on coronary artery disease and 
chronic stable angina are modest but appear promising. A theo-
retical basis for such benefit could be metabolic protection of the 
ischemic myocardium. Double-blind, placebo-controlled trials 
have demonstrated that coenzyme Q10 supplementation improved 
a number of clinical measures in patients with a history of acute 
myocardial infarction (AMI). Improvements have been observed in 
lipoprotein a, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, exercise toler-
ance, and time to development of ischemic changes on the electro-
cardiogram during stress tests. In addition, very small reductions in 
cardiac deaths and rate of reinfarction in patients with previous 
AMI have been reported (absolute risk reduction 1.5%). 
 D. Prevention of Statin-Induced Myopathy 
 Statins reduce cholesterol by inhibiting the HMG-CoA reductase 
enzyme (see  Chapter 35 ). This enzyme is also required for synthe-
sis of coenzyme Q10. Initiating statin therapy has been shown to 
reduce endogenous coenzyme Q10 levels, which may block steps 
in muscle cell energy generation, possibly leading to statin-related 
myopathy. It is unknown whether a reduction in intramuscular 
coenzyme Q10 levels leads to statin myopathy or if the myopathy 
causes cellular damage that reduces intramuscular coenzyme Q10 
levels. In one of the largest studies, when rosuvastatin was used in 
patients with heart failure, there was no association between 
statin-induced low coenzyme Q10 levels and a worse heart failure 
outcome. Furthermore, the study found no observable difference 
in the incidence of statin-induced myopathy regardless of endog-
enous coenzyme Q10 levels. More information is needed to deter-
mine which patients with statin-related myopathy might benefit 
most from coenzyme Q10 especially as it relates to the specific 
statin, the dose, and the duration of therapy. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Coenzyme Q10 is well tolerated, rarely leading to any adverse 
effects at doses as high as 3000 mg/d. In clinical trials, gastrointes-
tinal upset, including diarrhea, nausea, heartburn, and anorexia, 
has been reported with an incidence of less than 1%. Cases of 
CHAPTER 64 Dietary Supplements & Herbal Medications    1135
maculopapular rash and thrombocytopenia have very rarely been 
observed. Other rare adverse effects include irritability, dizziness, 
and headache. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Coenzyme Q10 shares a structural similarity with vitamin K, and 
an interaction has been observed between coenzyme Q10 and 
warfarin. Coenzyme Q10 supplements may decrease the effects of 
warfarin therapy. This combination should be avoided or very 
carefully monitored. 
 Dosage 
 As a dietary supplement, 30 mg of coenzyme Q10 is adequate to 
replace low endogenous levels. For cardiac effects, typical dosages 
are 100–600 mg/d given in two or three divided doses. These 
doses increase endogenous levels to 2–3 mcg/mL (normal for 
healthy adults, 0.7–1 mcg/mL). 
 GLUCOSAMINE 
 Glucosamine is found in human tissue, is a substrate for the pro-
duction of articular cartilage, and serves as a cartilage nutrient. 
Glucosamine is commercially derived from crabs and other 
crustaceans. As a dietary supplement, glucosamine is primarily 
used for pain associated with knee osteoarthritis. Sulfate and 
hydrochloride forms are available, but recent research has shown 
the hydrochloride form to be ineffective. 
 Pharmacologic Effects & Clinical Uses 
 Endogenous glucosamine is used for the production of gly-
cosaminoglycans and other proteoglycans in articular cartilage. In 
osteoarthritis, the rate of production of new cartilage is exceeded 
by the rate of degradation of existing cartilage. Supplementation 
with glucosamine is thought to increase the supply of the neces-
sary glycosaminoglycan building blocks, leading to better mainte-
nance and strengthening of existing cartilage. 
 Many clinical trials have been conducted on the effects of both 
oral and intra-articular administration of glucosamine. Early studies 
reported significant improvements in overall mobility, range of 
motion, and strength in patients with osteoarthritis. More recent 
studies have reported mixed results, with both positive and nega-
tive outcomes. One of the largest and well-designed clinical trials, 
which compared glucosamine, chondroitin sulfate, the combina-
tion, celecoxib, and placebo, found no benefit for glucosamine 
therapy in mild to moderate disease. Unfortunately the investiga-
tors studied the glucosamine hydrochloride formulation, which 
has been shown to be inferior to the sulfate formulation. The 
formulation of glucosamine appears to play an important role 
with regard to efficacy. More research is needed to better define 
the specific patient populations that stand to benefit from glu-
cosamine sulfate. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Glucosamine sulfate is very well tolerated. In clinical trials, mild 
diarrhea and nausea were occasionally reported. Cross allergenicity 
in people with shellfish allergies is a potential concern; however, 
this is unlikely if the formulation has been properly manufactured 
and purified. 
 Drug Interactions & Precautions 
 Glucosamine sulfate may increase the international normalized 
ratio (INR) in patients taking warfarin, increasing the risk for 
bruising and bleeding. The mechanism is not well understood and 
may be dose-related as increases in INR have occurred when the 
glucosamine dose was increased. Until more is known, the combi-
nation should be avoided or very carefully monitored. 
 Dosage 
 The dosage used most often in clinical trials is 500 mg three times 
daily or 1500 mg once daily. Glucosamine does not have direct 
analgesic effects, and improvements in function, if any, may not 
be observed for 1–2 months. 
 MELATONIN 
 Melatonin, a serotonin derivative produced by the pineal gland 
and some other tissues (see also  Chapter 16 ), is believed to be 
responsible for regulating sleep-wake cycles. Release coincides 
with darkness; it typically begins around 9 PM and lasts until about 
4 AM. Melatonin release is suppressed by daylight. Melatonin 
has also been studied for a number of other functions, including 
contraception, protection against endogenous oxidants, prevention 
of aging, treatment of depression, HIV infection, and a variety of 
cancers. Currently, melatonin is most often used to prevent jet lag 
and to induce sleep. 
 Pharmacologic Effects & Clinical Uses 
 A. Jet Lag 
 Jet lag, a disturbance of the sleep-wake cycle, occurs when there is 
a disparity between the external time and the traveler’s endogenous 
circadian clock (internal time). The internal time regulates not 
only daily sleep rhythms but also body temperature and many 
metabolic systems. The synchronization of the circadian clock 
relies on light as the most potent “zeitgeber” (time giver). 
 Jet lag is especially common among frequent travelers and 
airplane cabin crews. Typical symptoms of jet lag may include 
daytime drowsiness, insomnia, frequent awakenings, and gastroin-
testinal upset. Clinical studies with administration of melatonin 
have reported subjective reduction in daytime fatigue, improved 
mood, and a quicker recovery time (return to normal sleep 
patterns, energy, and alertness). Although taking melatonin has 
not been shown to adjust circadian patterns of melatonin release, 
1136    SECTION X Special Topics
it may have a role in helping people fall asleep once they arrive at 
their new destination. When traveling across five or more time 
zones, jet lag symptoms are reduced when taking melatonin close 
to the target bedtime (10 PM to midnight) at the new destination. 
The benefit of melatonin is thought to be greater as more time 
zones are crossed. In addition, melatonin appears more effective 
for eastbound travel than for westward travel. Finally, maximizing 
exposure to daylight on arrival at the new destination can also aid 
in resetting the internal clock. 
 B. Insomnia 
 Melatonin has been studied in the treatment of various sleep 
disorders, including insomnia and delayed sleep-phase syn-
drome. It has been reported to improve sleep onset, duration, 
and quality when administered to healthy volunteers, suggesting 
a pharmacologic hypnotic effect. Melatonin has also been shown 
to increase rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep. These observa-
tions have been applied to the development of ramelteon, a 
prescription hypnotic, which is an agonist at melatonin receptors 
(see  Chapter 22 ). 
 Clinical studies in patients with primary insomnia have shown 
that oral melatonin supplementation may alter sleep architecture. 
Subjective improvements in sleep quality and improvements in 
sleep onset and sleep duration have been reported. Specifically, 
melatonin taken at the desired bedtime, with bedroom lights off, 
has been shown to improve morning alertness and quality of sleep 
as compared to placebo. These effects have been observed in both 
young and older adults (18–80 years of age). Interestingly, baseline 
endogenous melatonin levels were not predictive of exogenous 
melatonin efficacy. 
 C. Female Reproductive Function 
 Melatonin receptors have been identified in granulosa cell mem-
branes, and significant amounts of melatonin have been detected 
in ovarian follicular fluid. Melatonin has been associated with 
midcycle suppression of luteinizing hormone surge and secretion. 
This may result in partial inhibition of ovulation. Nightly doses 
of melatonin (75–300 mg) given with a progestin through days 
1–21 of the menstrual cycle resulted in lower mean luteinizing 
hormone levels. Therefore, melatonin should not be used by 
women who are pregnant or attempting to conceive. Furthermore, 
melatonin supplementation may decrease prolactin release in 
women and therefore should be used cautiously or not at all while 
nursing. 
 D. Male Reproductive Function 
 In healthy men, chronic melatonin administration (≥ 6 months) 
decreased sperm quality, possibly by aromatase inhibition in the 
testes. However, when endogenous melatonin levels were measured 
in healthy men, high endogenous melatonin concentrations were 
associated with enhanced sperm quality and short-term in vitro 
exposure to melatonin improved sperm motility. Until more is 
known, melatonin should not be used by couples who are actively 
trying to conceive. 
 Adverse Effects 
 Melatonin appears to be well tolerated and is often used in pref-
erence to over-the-counter “sleep-aid” drugs. Although mela-
tonin is associated with few adverse effects, some next-day 
drowsiness has been reported as well as fatigue, dizziness, head-
ache, and irritability. Melatonin may affect blood pressure as 
both increases and decreases in blood pressure have been 
observed. Careful monitoring is recommended, particularly in 
patients initiating melatonin therapy while taking antihyperten-
sive medications. 
 Drug Interactions 
 Melatonin drug interactions have not been formally studied. 
Various studies, however, suggest that melatonin concentrations 
are altered by a variety of drugs, including nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, antidepressants, β-adrenoceptor agonists and 
antagonists, scopolamine, and sodium valproate. The relevance of 
these effects is unknown. Melatonin is metabolized by CYP450 
1A2 and may interact with other drugs that either inhibit or 
induce the 1A2 isoenzyme, including fluvoxamine. Melatonin 
may decrease prothrombin time and may theoretically decrease 
the effects of warfarin therapy. A dose-response relationship 
between the plasma concentration of melatonin and coagulation 
activity has been suggested according to one in vitro analysis. If 
combination therapy is desired, careful monitoring is recom-
mended especially if melatonin is being used on a short-term 
basis. Melatonin may interact with nifedipine, possibly leading to 
an increased blood pressure and heart rate. The exact mechanism 
is unknown. 
 Dosage 
 A. Jet Lag 
 Daily doses of 0.5–5 mg appear to be equally effective for jet 
lag; however, the 5-mg dose resulted in a faster onset of sleep 
and better sleep quality than lower doses. The immediate-
release formulation is preferred and should be given at the 
desired sleep time (10 PM–midnight) upon arrival at the new 
destination and for 1–3 nights after arrival. The value of 
extended-release formulations remains unknown, as evidence 
suggests the short-acting, high-peak effect of the immediate-
release formulation to be more effective. Exposure to daylight 
at the new time zone is also important to regulate the sleep-
wake cycle. 
 B. Insomnia 
 Doses of 0.3–10 mg of the immediate-release formulation orally 
given once nightly have been tried. The lowest effective dose 
should be used first and may be repeated in 30 minutes up to a 
maximum of 10–20 mg. Sustained-release formulations are effec-
tive and may be used but currently do not appear to offer any 
advantages over the immediate-release formulations. Sustained-
release formulations are also more costly. 
CHAPTER 64 Dietary Supplements & Herbal Medications    1137
 REFERENCES 
 Abenavoli L et al: Milk thistle in liver diseases: Past, present, and future. Phytother 
Res 2010;24:1423. 
 Agbabiaka TB et al: Serenoa repens (saw palmetto): A systematic review of adverse 
events. Drug Saf 2009;32:637. 
 Alpers DH: Garlic and its potential for prevention of colorectal cancer and other 
conditions. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2009;25:116. 
 Barnes J et al: Echinacea species (Echinacea angustifolia (DC.) Hell., Echinacea 
pallida (Nutt.) Nutt., Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench): A review of their 
chemistry, pharmacology and clinical properties. Pharm Pharmacol 
2005;57:929. 
 Bent S: Herbal medicine in the United States: Review of efficacy, safety, and regu-
lation: Grand rounds at University of California, San Francisco Medical 
Center. J Gen Intern Med 2008;23:854. 
 Bent S et al: Saw palmetto for benign prostatic hyperplasia. N Engl J Med 
2006;354:557. 
 Birks J et al: Ginkgo biloba for cognitive impairment and dementia. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2009;(1):CD003120. 
 Brzezinski A et al: Effects of exogenous melatonin on sleep: A meta-analysis. Sleep 
Med Rev 2005;9:41. 
 Buck AC: Is there a scientific basis for the therapeutic effects of Serenoa repens in 
benign prostatic hyperplasia? Mechanisms of action. J Urol 2004;172:1792. 
 Butterweck V, Schmidt M: St John’s wort: Role of active compounds for its 
mechanism of action and efficacy. Wien Med Wochenschr 2007;157:356. 
 DeKosky ST et al:  Gingko biloba for prevention of dementia. A randomized con-
trolled trial. JAMA 2008;300:2253. 
 De Smet PA: Herbal remedies. N Engl J Med 2002;347:2046. 
 Geng J et al: Ginseng for cognition. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2010, 
Issue 12. Art. No.: CD007769. DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD007769.pub2. 
 Goel V et al: A proprietary extract from the Echinacea plant (Echinacea purpurea) 
enhances systemic immune response during a common cold. Phytother Res 
2005;19:689. 
 Herxheimer A, Petrie KJ. Melatonin for the prevention and treatment of jet lag. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002, issue 2:CD001520. 
 Ho MJ, Bellusci A, Wright JM: Blood pressure lowering efficacy of coenzyme Q10 
for primary hypertension. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009, issue 
4:CD007435. 
 Jellin JM et al: Pharmacist’s Letter/Prescriber’s Letter Natural Medicines 
Comprehensive Database, 14th ed. Therapeutic Research Faculty, 2010. 
 Krebs Seida J et al: North American (Panax quinquefolius) and Asian ginseng 
(Panax ginseng) preparations for prevention of the common cold in healthy 
adults: a systematic review. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2011, 
article ID 282151. DOI:10.1093/ecam/nep068. 
 Linde K et al: Echinacea for preventing and treating the common cold. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2006;(1):CD000530. 
 Linde K et al: St. John’s wort for major depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2008, issue 4:CD000448. 
 Linde K: St John’s wort—an overview. Forsch Komplementmed 2009;16:146. 
 McMurray JV, et al: Coenzyme Q10, rosuvastatin, and clinical outcomes in heart 
failure: A pre-specified substudy of CORONA (controlled rosuvastatin mul-
tinational study in heart failure). J Am Coll Cardiol 2010;56:1196. 
 Natural Standard:  http://www.naturalstandard.com . (Evidence-based compen-
dium authored by academics, available to institutions.) 
 Nicolai SP et al: From the Cochrane library: Ginkgo biloba for intermittent 
claudication. Vasa 2010;39:153. 
 Radad K et al: Ginsenosides and their CNS targets. CNS Neurosci Ther 2010;17. 
DOE:10.1111/j.1755-5949.2010.00208x. 
 Rambaldi A et al: Milk thistle for alcoholic and/or hepatitis B or C virus liver 
diseases. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007;(4):CD003620. 
 Reinhart KM et al: Effects of garlic on blood pressure in patients with and without 
systolic hypertension: A meta-analysis. Ann Pharmacother 2008;42:1766. 
 Reinhart KH et al: The impact of garlic on lipid parameters: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Nutr Res Rev 2009;22:39. 
 Saller R et al: An updated systematic review with meta-analysis for the clinical 
evidence of silymarin. Forsch Komplementarmed 2008;15:9. 
 Sharma M et al: Bactericidal and anti-inflammatory properties of a standardized 
Echinacea extract (Echinaforce): Dual actions against respiratory bacteria. 
Phytomed 2010;17:563. 
 Shi C et al: Ginkgo biloba extract in Alzheimer’s disease: From action mechanisms 
to medical practice. Int J Mol Sci 2010;11:107. 
 Stevinson C, Pittler MH, Ernst E: Garlic for treating hypercholesterolemia. A 
meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Ann Intern Med 2000;133:420. 
 Tacklind J et al: Serenoa repens for benign prostatic hyperplasia. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2009;(15):CD001423. 
 Towheed T et al: Glucosamine therapy for treating osteoarthritis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2005, issue 2:CD002946. 
 Yun TK: Non-organ specific preventative effect of long-term administration of 
Korean Red Ginseng extract on incidence of human cancers. J Med Food 
2010;13:489. 
 
C A S E  S T U D Y  A N S W E R
Garlic has not been shown to significantly lower LDL choles-
terol. It has been shown to have a small but significant lower-
ing effect on total cholesterol, but only when dietary controls 
were not in place. There is limited evidence to suggest that 
garlic may lower plaque burden in patients with coronary 
artery disease (CAD). It is advisable to monitor blood pressure 
for 2 weeks after initiating a garlic supplement since he is on 
prescription medications for hypertension. This patient might 
be using coenzyme Q10 for CAD or hypertension, or because 
he takes simvastatin. Current literature does not support a 
reduced risk of statin-related myopathy. The data supporting 
benefits of coenzyme Q10 in patients with CAD are prelimi-
nary and limited to studies in persons with a previous myocar-
dial infarction. Several of the dietary supplements reviewed in 
this chapter (garlic, ginkgo, and ginseng) have antiplatelet 
effects that could be additive with aspirin. If this patient were 
also taking warfarin, additional interactions could occur with 
coenzyme Q10 (vitamin K-like structure), St. John’s wort 
(cytochrome P450 1A2, 2C9, 3A4 inducer), and melatonin (in 
vitro decreased prothrombin time), leading to a decreased 
warfarin effect, or with glucosamine (increased international 
normalized ratio), leading to an increased warfarin effect.
This page intentionally left blank 
1139
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
65
Rational Prescribing & 
Prescription Writing
Paul W. Lofholm, PharmD, & 
Bertram G. Katzung, MD, PhD
 Once a patient with a clinical problem has been evaluated and a 
diagnosis has been reached, the practitioner can often select from 
a variety of therapeutic approaches. Medication, surgery, psychiat-
ric treatment, radiation, physical therapy, health education, coun-
seling, further consultation, and no therapy are some of the 
options available. Of these options, drug therapy is by far the one 
most frequently chosen. In most cases, this requires the writing of 
a prescription. A written prescription is the prescriber’s order to 
prepare or dispense a specific treatment—usually medication—for 
a specific patient. When a patient comes for an office visit, the 
physician or other authorized health professional prescribes medi-
cations 67% of the time, and an average of one prescription per 
office visit is written because more than one prescription may be 
written at a single visit. 
 In this chapter, a plan for prescribing is presented. The physical 
form of the prescription, common prescribing errors, and legal 
requirements that govern various features of the prescribing pro-
cess are then discussed. Finally, some of the social and economic 
factors involved in prescribing and drug use are described. 
 RATIONAL PRESCRIBING 
 Like any other process in health care, writing a prescription should 
be based on a series of rational steps. 
 1. Make a specific diagnosis: Prescriptions based merely on a 
desire to satisfy the patient’s psychological need for some type 
of therapy are often unsatisfactory and may result in adverse 
effects. A specific diagnosis, even if it is tentative, is required to 
move to the next step. For example, in a patient with a prob-
able diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, the diagnosis and the 
reasoning underlying it should be clear and should be shared 
with the patient. 
 2. Consider the pathophysiologic implications of the diagnosis: If 
the disorder is well understood, the prescriber is in a much better 
position to offer effective therapy. For example, increasing knowl-
edge about the mediators of inflammation makes possible more 
effective use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 
and other agents used in rheumatoid arthritis. The patient should 
be provided with the appropriate level and amount of informa-
tion about the pathophysiology. Many pharmacies, websites, and 
disease-oriented public and private agencies (eg, American Heart 
Association, American Cancer Society, Arthritis Foundation) 
provide information sheets suitable for patients. 
3.  Select a specific therapeutic objective: A therapeutic objec-
tive should be chosen for each of the pathophysiologic pro-
cesses defined in the preceding step. In a patient with 
rheumatoid arthritis, relief of pain by reduction of the inflam-
matory process is one of the major therapeutic goals that iden-
tifies the drug groups that will be considered. Arresting the 
course of the disease process in rheumatoid arthritis is a differ-
ent therapeutic goal, which might lead to consideration of 
other drug groups and prescriptions. 
 4. Select a drug of choice: One or more drug groups will be sug-
gested by each of the therapeutic goals specified in the preceding 
step. Selection of a drug of choice from among these groups fol-
lows from a consideration of the specific characteristics of the 
patient and the clinical presentation. For certain drugs, charac-
teristics such as age, other diseases, and other drugs being taken 
are extremely important in determining the most suitable drug 
for management of the present complaint. In the example of the 
patient with probable rheumatoid arthritis, it would be impor-
tant to know whether the patient has a history of aspirin intoler-
ance or ulcer disease, whether the cost of medication is an 
especially important factor and the nature of the patient’s insur-
ance coverage, and whether there is a need for once-daily dosing. 
Based on this information, a drug would probably be selected 
from the NSAID group. If the patient is intolerant of aspirin and 
does not have ulcer disease but does have a need for low-cost 
treatment, ibuprofen or naproxen would be a rational choice. 
 5. Determine the appropriate dosing regimen: The dosing 
regimen is determined primarily by the pharmacokinetics of 
the drug in that patient. If the patient is known to have disease 
of the organs required for elimination of the drug selected, 
adjustment of the average regimen is needed. For a drug such 
as ibuprofen, which is eliminated mainly by the kidneys, renal 
function should be assessed. If renal function is normal, the 
1140    SECTION X Special Topics
half-life of ibuprofen (about 2 hours) requires administration 
three or four times daily. The dose suggested in this book, drug 
handbooks, and the manufacturer’s literature is 400–800 mg 
four times daily. 
 6. Devise a plan for monitoring the drug’s action and deter-
mine an end point for therapy: The prescriber should be able 
to describe to the patient the kinds of drug effects that will be 
monitored and in what way, including laboratory tests (if 
necessary) and signs and symptoms that the patient should 
report. For conditions that call for a limited course of therapy 
(eg, most infections), the duration of therapy should be made 
clear so that the patient does not stop taking the drug prema-
turely and understands why the prescription probably need not 
be renewed. For the patient with rheumatoid arthritis, the need 
for prolonged—perhaps indefinite—therapy should be 
explained. The prescriber should also specify any changes in 
the patient’s condition that would call for changes in therapy. 
For example, in the patient with rheumatoid arthritis, develop-
ment of gastrointestinal bleeding would require an immediate 
change in drug therapy and a prompt workup of the bleeding. 
Major toxicities that require immediate attention should be 
explained clearly to the patient. 
 7. Plan a program of patient education: The prescriber and 
other members of the health team should be prepared to repeat, 
extend, and reinforce the information transmitted to the 
patient as often as necessary. The more toxic the drug pre-
scribed, the greater the importance of this educational program. 
The importance of informing and involving the patient in each 
of the above steps must be recognized, as shown by experience 
with teratogenic drugs (see  Chapter 59 ). Many pharmacies rou-
tinely provide this type of information with each prescription 
filled, but the prescriber must not assume that this will occur. 
 THE PRESCRIPTION 
 Although a prescription can be written on any piece of paper (as 
long as all of the legal elements are present), it usually takes a 
specific form. A typical printed prescription form for outpatients 
is shown in  Figure 65–1 . 
 In the hospital setting, drugs are prescribed on a particular page 
of the patient’s hospital chart called the  physician’s order sheet 
(POS) or  chart order. The contents of that prescription are 
specified in the medical staff rules by the hospital’s Pharmacy and 
Therapeutics Committee. The patient’s name is typed or written 
on the form; therefore, the orders consist of the name and strength 
of the medication, the dose, the route and frequency of adminis-
tration, the date, other pertinent information, and the signature of 
the prescriber. If the duration of therapy or the number of doses 
is not specified (which is often the case), the medication is contin-
ued until the prescriber discontinues the order or until it is termi-
nated as a matter of policy routine, eg, a stop-order policy. 
 A typical chart order might be as follows: 
 11/15/08 
 10:30 a.m. 
 
(1) Ampicillin 500 mg IV q6h × 5 days 
  (2) Aspirin 0.6 g per rectum q6h prn temp over 101 
 [Signed] Janet B. Doe, MD 
 Thus, the elements of the hospital chart order are equivalent to 
the central elements (5, 8–11, 15) of the outpatient prescription. 
 Elements of the Prescription 
 The first four elements (see circled numerals in  Figure 65–1 ) of 
the outpatient prescription establish the identity of the prescriber: 
name, license classification (ie, professional degree), address, and 
office telephone number. Before dispensing a prescription, the 
pharmacist must establish the prescriber’s bona fides and should 
be able to contact the prescriber by telephone if any questions 
arise. Element [5] is the date on which the prescription was writ-
ten. It should be near the top of the prescription form or at the 
beginning (left margin) of the chart order. Since the order has legal 
significance and usually has some temporal relationship to the 
date of the patient-prescriber interview, a pharmacist should refuse 
to fill a prescription without verification by telephone if too much 
time has elapsed since its writing. 
 Elements [6] and [7] identify the patient by name and address. 
The patient’s name and full address should be clearly spelled out. 
 The body of the prescription contains the elements [8] to [11] 
that specify the medication, the strength and quantity to be 
dispensed, the dosage, and complete directions for use. When 
writing the drug name (element [8]), either the brand name 
(proprietary name) or the generic name (nonproprietary name) 
may be used. Reasons for using one or the other are discussed 
below. The strength of the medication [9] should be written in 
metric units. However, the prescriber should be familiar with both 
 FIGURE 65–1  Common form of outpatient prescription. Circled 
numbers are explained in the text. 
JOHN B. DOE, MD
1234 SOUTH NORTHEAST DR
WEST CITY, CA 94999
(234) 555 - 6789
FOR:
AD1234567
STATE LICENSE NO.
ADDRESS:
REFILL
SIG:
WARNING:
OR 
UNTIL
NO 
CHILDPROOF
CONTAINER
TIMES
DATE:
, MD
(DRUG NAME AND STRENGTH)
(QUANTITY)
10
11
9
8
1
2
3
4
6
7
5
12
13
14
15
16
17
CHAPTER 65 Rational Prescribing & Prescription Writing    1141
systems now in use: metric and apothecary. For practical purposes, 
the following approximate conversions are useful: 
 1 grain (gr) = 0.065 grams (g), often rounded to
60 milligrams (mg) 
 15 gr = 1 g 
 1 ounce (oz) by volume = 30 milliliters (mL) 
 1 teaspoonful (tsp) = 5 mL 
 1 tablespoonful (tbsp) = 15 mL 
 1 quart (qt) = 1000 mL 
 1 minim = 1 drop (gtt) 
 20 drops = 1 mL 
 2.2 pounds (lb) = 1 kilogram (kg) 
 The strength of a solution is usually expressed as the quantity 
of solute in sufficient solvent to make 100 mL; for instance, 20% 
potassium chloride solution is 20 grams of KCl per deciliter (g/dL) 
of final solution. Both the concentration and the volume should 
be explicitly written out. 
 The quantity of medication prescribed should reflect the 
anticipated duration of therapy, the cost, the need for continued 
contact with the clinic or physician, the potential for abuse, and 
the potential for toxicity or overdose. Consideration should be 
given also to the standard sizes in which the product is available 
and whether this is the initial prescription of the drug or a repeat 
prescription or refill. If 10 days of therapy are required to effec-
tively cure a streptococcal infection, an appropriate quantity for 
the full course should be prescribed. Birth control pills are often 
prescribed for 1 year or until the next examination is due; how-
ever, some patients may not be able to afford a year’s supply at one 
time; therefore, a 3-month supply might be ordered, with refill 
instructions to renew three times or for 1 year (element [12]). 
Some third-party (insurance) plans limit the amount of medicine 
that can be dispensed—often to only a month’s supply. Finally, 
when first prescribing medications that are to be used for the treat-
ment of a chronic disease, the initial quantity should be small, 
with refills for larger quantities. The purpose of beginning treat-
ment with a small quantity of drug is to reduce the cost if the 
patient cannot tolerate it. Once it is determined that intolerance 
is not a problem, a larger quantity purchased less frequently is 
sometimes less expensive. 
 The directions for use (element [11]) must be both drug-specific 
and patient-specific. The simpler the directions, the better; and the 
fewer the number of doses (and drugs) per day, the better. Patient 
noncompliance (also known as nonadherence, failure to adhere to 
the drug regimen) is a major cause of treatment failure. To help 
patients remember to take their medications, prescribers often give 
an instruction that medications be taken at or around mealtimes 
and at bedtime. However, it is important to inquire about the 
patient’s eating habits and other lifestyle patterns, because many 
patients do not eat three regularly spaced meals a day. 
 The instructions on how and when to take medications, the 
duration of therapy, and the purpose of the medication must be 
explained to each patient both by the prescriber and by the phar-
macist. (Neither should assume that the other will do it.) 
Furthermore, the drug name, the purpose for which it is given, and 
the duration of therapy should be written on each label so that the 
drug may be identified easily in case of overdose. An instruction to 
“take as directed” may save the time it takes to write the orders out 
but often leads to noncompliance, patient confusion, and medica-
tion error. The directions for use must be clear and concise to 
prevent toxicity and to obtain the greatest benefits from therapy. 
 Although directions for use are no longer written in Latin, 
many Latin apothecary abbreviations (and some others included 
below) are still in use. Knowledge of these abbreviations is essential 
for the dispensing pharmacist and often useful for the prescriber. 
Some of the abbreviations still used are listed in  Table 65–1 . 
 Note: It is always safer to write out the direction without 
abbreviating. 
 Elements [12] to [14] of the prescription include refill infor-
mation, waiver of the requirement for childproof containers, and 
additional labeling instructions (eg, warnings such as “may cause 
drowsiness,” “do not drink alcohol”). Pharmacists put the name of 
the medication on the label unless directed otherwise by the pre-
scriber, and some medications have the name of the drug stamped 
or imprinted on the tablet or capsule. Pharmacists must place the 
expiration date for the drug on the label. If the patient or pre-
scriber does not request waiver of childproof containers, the phar-
macist or dispenser must place the medication in such a container. 
Pharmacists may not refill a prescription medication without 
authorization from the prescriber. Prescribers may grant authori-
zation to renew prescriptions at the time of writing the prescrip-
tion or over the telephone. Elements [15] to [17] are the 
prescriber’s signature and other identification data. 
 PRESCRIBING ERRORS 
 All prescription orders should be legible, unambiguous, dated 
(and timed in the case of a chart order), and signed clearly for 
optimal communication between prescriber, pharmacist, and 
nurse. Furthermore, a good prescription or chart order should 
contain sufficient information to permit the pharmacist or 
nurse to discover possible errors before the drug is dispensed or 
administered. 
 Several types of prescribing errors are particularly common. 
These include errors involving omission of needed information; 
poor writing perhaps leading to errors of drug dose or timing; 
and prescription of drugs that are inappropriate for the specific 
situation. 
 Omission of Information 
 Errors of omission are common in hospital orders and may include 
instructions to “resume pre-op meds,” which assumes that a full 
and accurate record of the “pre-op meds” is available; “continue 
present IV fluids,” which fails to state exactly what fluids are to be 
given, in what volume, and over what time period; or “continue eye 
drops,” which omits mention of which eye is to be treated as well 
as the drug, concentration, and frequency of administration. Chart 
orders may also fail to discontinue a prior medication when a new 
1142    SECTION X Special Topics
one is begun; may fail to state whether a regular or long-acting 
form is to be used; may fail to specify a strength or notation for 
long-acting forms; or may authorize “as needed” (prn) use that fails 
to state what conditions will justify the need. 
 Poor Prescription Writing 
 Poor prescription writing is traditionally exemplified by illegible 
handwriting. However, other types of poor writing are common 
and often more dangerous. One of the most important is the 
misplaced or ambiguous decimal point. Thus “.1” is easily misread 
as “1,” a tenfold overdose, if the decimal point is not unmistakably 
clear. This danger is easily avoided by always preceding the deci-
mal point with a zero. On the other hand, appending an unneces-
sary zero after a decimal point increases the risk of a tenfold 
overdose, because “1.0 mg” is easily misread as “10 mg,” whereas 
“1 mg” is not. The slash or virgule (“/”) was traditionally used as 
a substitute for a decimal point. This should be abandoned 
TABLE 65–1 Abbreviations used in prescriptions and chart orders.
Abbreviation
Explanation
Abbreviation
Explanation
a
before
PO
by mouth
ac
before meals
PR
per rectum
agit
shake, stir
prn
when needed
Aq
water
q
every
Aq dest
distilled water
qam, om
every morning
bid
twice a day
qd (do not use)
every day (write “daily”)
c
with
qh, q1h
every hour
cap
capsule
q2h, q3h, etc
every 2 hours, every 3 hours, etc
D5W, D5W
dextrose 5% in water
qhs
every night at bedtime
dil
dissolve dilute
qid
four times a day
disp, dis
dispense
qod (do not use)
every other day
elix
elixir
qs
sufficient quantity
ext
extract
rept, repet
may be repeated
g
gram
Rx
take
gr
grain
s
without
gtt
drops
SC, SQ
subcutaneous
h
hour
sid (veterinary)
once a day
hs
at bedtime
Sig, S
label
IA
intra-arterial
sos
if needed
IM
intramuscular
ss, ss
one-half
IV
intravenous
stat
at once
IVPB
IV piggyback
sup, supp
suppository
kg
kilogram
susp
suspension
mcg, μg (do not use)   
microgram (always write out “microgram”)  
tab
tablet
mEq, meq
milliequivalent
tbsp, T (do not use)
tablespoon (always write out “15 mL”)
mg
milligram  
tid
three times a day
no
number
Tr, tinct
tincture
non rep
do not repeat
tsp (do not use)
teaspoon (always write out “5 mL”)
OD
right eye
U (do not use)
units (always write out “units”)
OS, OL
left eye
vag
vaginal
OTC
over-the-counter
i, ii, iii, iv, etc
one, two, three, four, etc
OU
both eyes
 (do not use)
dram (in fluid measure 3.7 mL)
p
after
 (do not use)
ounce (in fluid measure 29.6 mL)
pc
after meals
CHAPTER 65 Rational Prescribing & Prescription Writing    1143
because it is too easily misread as the numeral “1.” Similarly, the 
abbreviation “U” for units should never be used because “10U” is 
easily misread as “100”; the word “units” should  always be written 
out. Doses in micrograms should always have this unit written out 
because the abbreviated form (“μg”) is very easily misread as “mg,” 
a 1000-fold overdose! Orders for drugs specifying only the num-
ber of dosage units and not the total dose required should not be 
filled if more than one size dosage unit exists for that drug. For 
example, ordering “one ampule of furosemide” is unacceptable 
because furosemide is available in ampules that contain 20, 40, or 
100 mg of the drug. The abbreviation “OD” should be used (if at 
all) only to mean “the right eye”; it has been used for “every day” 
and has caused inappropriate administration of drugs into the eye. 
Similarly, “Q.D.” or “QD” should not be used because it is often 
read as “QID,” resulting in four daily doses instead of one. 
Acronyms and abbreviations such as “ASA” (aspirin), “5-ASA” 
(5-aminosalicylic acid), “6MP” (6-mercaptopurine), etc, should 
not be used; drug names should be written out. Unclear handwrit-
ing can be lethal when drugs with similar names but very different 
effects are available, eg, acetazolamide and acetohexamide, metho-
trexate and metolazone. In this situation, errors are best avoided 
by noting the indication for the drug in the body of the prescrip-
tion, eg, “acetazolamide, for glaucoma.” 
 Inappropriate Drug Prescriptions 
 Prescribing an inappropriate drug for a particular patient results 
from failure to recognize contraindications imposed by other dis-
eases the patient may have, failure to obtain information about 
other drugs the patient is taking (including over-the-counter 
drugs), or failure to recognize possible physicochemical incompat-
ibilities between drugs that may react with each other. 
Contraindications to drugs in the presence of other diseases or 
pharmacokinetic characteristics are listed in the discussions of the 
drugs described in this book. The manufacturer’s package insert 
usually contains similar information. Some of the important drug 
interactions are listed in  Chapter 66 of this book as well as in 
package inserts. 
 Physicochemical incompatibilities are of particular concern 
when parenteral administration is planned. For example, certain 
insulin preparations should not be mixed. Similarly, the simulta-
neous administration of antacids or products high in metal con-
tent may compromise the absorption of many drugs in the 
intestine, eg, tetracyclines. The package insert and the  Handbook 
on Injectable Drugs (see References) are good sources for this 
information. 
 E-PRESCRIBING 
 Electronic prescribing of prescriptions is gaining momentum in 
the USA. Congress has passed legislation to support this health 
care initiative. Essentially e-prescribing provides an electronic flow 
of information between the prescriber, intermediary, pharmacy, 
and health plan. The health plan can provide information on 
patient eligibility, formulary, benefits, costs, and sometimes, a 
medication history. The prescriber selects the medication, strength, 
dosage form, quantity, and directions for use and the prescription 
is transmitted to the pharmacy where the appropriate data fields 
are populated. The pharmacist reviews the order and, if appropri-
ate, dispenses the prescription. The electronic system must be 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)-
compliant, and there needs to be a business association agreement 
between the parties involved. 
 Prescribers can obtain decision support information such as 
disease-drug and drug-drug interaction information or cost infor-
mation prior to prescribing as part of the health plan information. 
Prescriptions can be clear in their writing, but pull-down drug lists 
can create new errors. Prescription renewals can be processed 
electronically and drug misuse or abuse may be identifiable. 
Theoretically, time to process prescription orders should be 
reduced and patients would have their medication ready when 
they arrive at the pharmacy. 
 The Drug Enforcement Administration has begun to issue 
tentative rules for e-prescribing of controlled substances. Currently, 
only registered prescribers can e-prescribe, and there will be several 
independent identification proofing sources required: a unique 
pin number, or retinal scan, or a finger print. The objective is to 
prevent drug diversion. Pharmacies currently can order controlled 
drugs via computer using a specific form once they are certified. 
 COMPLIANCE 
 Compliance (sometimes called adherence) is the extent to which 
patients follow treatment instructions. There are four types of 
noncompliance leading to medication errors. 
 1.  The patient fails to obtain the medication. Some studies sug-
gest that one third of patients never have their prescriptions 
filled. Some patients leave the hospital without obtaining their 
discharge medications, whereas others leave the hospital without 
having their prehospitalization medications resumed. Some 
patients cannot afford the medications prescribed. 
 2.  The patient fails to take the medication as prescribed. Examples 
include wrong dosage, wrong frequency of administration, 
improper timing or sequencing of administration, wrong route 
or technique of administration, or taking medication for 
the wrong purpose. This usually results from inadequate 
communication between the patient and the prescriber and the 
pharmacist. 
 3.  The patient prematurely discontinues the medication. This can 
occur, for instance, if the patient incorrectly assumes that 
the medication is no longer needed because the bottle is empty 
or symptomatic improvement has occurred. 
 4.  The patient (or another person) takes medication inappropri-
ately. For example, the patient may share a medication with 
others for any of several reasons. 
 Several factors encourage noncompliance. Some diseases cause 
no symptoms (eg, hypertension); patients with these diseases 
therefore have no symptoms to remind them to take their medica-
tions. Patients with painful conditions such as arthritis may con-
tinually change medications in the hope of finding a better one. 
1144    SECTION X Special Topics
Characteristics of the therapy itself can limit the degree of compliance; 
patients taking a drug once a day are much more likely to be compliant 
than those taking a drug four times a day. Various patient factors also 
play a role in compliance. Patients living alone are much less likely to 
be compliant than married patients of the same age. Packaging may 
also be a deterrent to compliance—elderly arthritic patients often have 
difficulty opening their medication containers. Lack of transportation 
as well as various social or personal beliefs about medications are like-
wise barriers to compliance. 
 Strategies for improving compliance include enhanced com-
munication between the patient and health care team members; 
assessment of personal, social, and economic conditions (often 
reflected in the patient’s lifestyle); development of a routine for 
taking medications (eg, at mealtimes if the patient has regular 
meals); provision of systems to assist taking medications (ie, 
containers that separate drug doses by day of the week, or medica-
tion alarm clocks that remind patients to take their medications); 
and mailing of refill reminders by the pharmacist to patients tak-
ing drugs chronically. The patient who is likely to discontinue a 
medication because of a perceived drug-related problem should 
receive instruction about how to monitor and understand the 
effects of the medication. Compliance can often be improved by 
enlisting the patient’s active participation in the treatment. 
 LEGAL FACTORS (USA) 
 The United States government recognizes two classes of drugs: 
(1) over-the-counter (OTC) drugs and (2) those that require a 
prescription from a licensed prescriber (Rx Only). OTC drugs are 
those that can be safely self-administered by the layman for self-
limiting conditions and for which appropriate labels can be writ-
ten for lay comprehension (see  Chapter 63 ). Half of all drug doses 
consumed by the American public are OTC drugs. 
 Physicians, dentists, podiatrists, and veterinarians—and, in 
some states, specialized pharmacists, nurses, physician’s assistants, 
and optometrists—are granted authority to prescribe dangerous 
drugs (those bearing the federal legend statement, “Rx Only”) on 
the basis of their training in diagnosis and treatment (see Box: 
Who May Prescribe?). Pharmacists are authorized to dispense 
prescriptions pursuant to a prescriber’s order provided that the 
medication order is appropriate and rational for the patient. 
Nurses are authorized to administer medications to patients subject 
to a prescriber’s order ( Table 65–2 ). 
 Because of the multiplicity of third-party payers (health 
insurers) and Medicare and Medicaid claimants, the concept of 
electronic processing of prescriptions (“e-prescribing”) has become 
urgent. (Further information about e-prescribing may be found at 
TABLE 65–2 Prescribing authority of certain allied health professionals in selected states.
State
Pharmacists
Nurse Practitioners
Physician’s 
Assistants
Optometrists
California
Yes, under protocol1; must be 
trained in clinical practice
Yes2
Yes, under 
protocol1
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
Florida
Yes, according to state formu-
lary; protocol not required
Yes2
Yes2
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
Michigan
Yes, under protocol; must be 
specially qualified by education, 
training, or experience
Yes; do not need physician 
supervision
Yes2
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
Mississippi
Yes, under protocol in an insti-
tutional setting
Yes,2 under narrowly speci-
fied conditions
No
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
Nevada
Yes, under protocol, within a 
licensed medical facility
Yes2
Yes2
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
New Mexico
Yes, under protocol, must be 
“pharmacist clinician”
Yes; do not need physician 
supervision
Yes2
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
North Dakota
Yes, under protocol in an insti-
tutional setting
Yes; do not need physician 
supervision
Yes
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
Oregon
Yes, under guidelines set by the 
state board
Yes; do not need physician 
supervision
Yes2
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
Texas
Yes, under protocol set for a 
particular patient in an institu-
tional setting
Yes; do not need physician 
supervision
Yes
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
Washington
Yes, under guidelines set by the 
state board
Yes; do not need physician 
supervision
Yes2
Yes; limited to certain drug classes
1Under protocol; see Box: Who May Prescribe?
2In collaboration with or under the supervision of a physician.
CHAPTER 65 Rational Prescribing & Prescription Writing    1145
 http://www.cms.hhs.gov/eprescribing/ .) To further standardize 
electronic prescription transmission and billing, the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) issued regulations effective in 
2008 requiring all US health care providers to obtain a National 
Provider Identification (NPI) number. This 10-digit identifier is 
issued by the National Plan and Provider Enumeration System 
(NPPES) at  https://NPPES.cms.hhs.gov . The purpose of the NPI 
is to identify all health care transactions (and associated costs) 
incurred by a particular practitioner with a single number. 
 In addition to a health care provider’s unique identification 
number, some states require that prescriptions for controlled sub-
stances be written on tamper-resistant security prescription forms. 
The purpose of this legislation is to prevent forgeries and to 
tighten the control of prescription order forms. 
 The concept of a “secure” prescription form was expanded by 
the federal government in 2008 to all prescriptions written for 
Medicaid patients. Any prescription for a Medicaid patient must 
be written on a security form if the pharmacist is to be compen-
sated for the prescription service. In turn, the use of “triplicate” 
prescription forms was eliminated and replaced with an online 
electronic transmission system whereby orders for Schedule II and 
Schedule III prescriptions are transmitted to a company that acts 
as a repository for these transactions. In California, it is called the 
CURES program (Controlled Substances Utilization Review and 
Evaluation System). Additional information about CURES may 
be found at  http://ag.ca.gov/bne/trips.php . 
 Prescription drugs are controlled by the United States Food 
and Drug Administration as described in  Chapter 5 . The federal 
legend statement as well as the package insert is part of the packag-
ing requirements for all prescription drugs. The package insert is 
the official brochure setting forth the indications, contraindica-
tions, warnings, and dosing for the drug. 
 The prescriber, by writing and signing a prescription order, 
controls who may obtain prescription drugs. The pharmacist may 
purchase these drugs, but they may be dispensed only on the order 
of a legally qualified prescriber. Thus, a  prescription is actually 
three things: the  physician’s order in the patient’s chart, the 
 written order to which the pharmacist refers when dispensing, 
and the patient’s  medication container  with a label affixed. 
 Whereas the federal government controls the drugs and their 
labeling and distribution, the state legislatures control who may 
prescribe drugs through their licensing boards, eg, the Board of 
Medical Examiners. Prescribers must pass examinations, pay 
fees, and—in the case of some states and some professions—
meet other requirements for relicensure such as continuing 
education. If these requirements are met, the prescriber is 
licensed to order dispensing of drugs. 
 The federal government and the states further impose special 
restrictions on drugs according to their perceived potential for 
abuse ( Table 65–3 ). Such drugs include opioids, hallucinogens, 
stimulants, depressants, and anabolic steroids. Special requirements 
 The right to prescribe drugs has traditionally been the respon-
sibility of the physician, dentist, podiatrist, or veterinarian. 
Prescribing now includes—in a number of states and in 
varying degrees—pharmacists, nurse practitioners, nurse 
midwives, physician’s assistants, and optometrists (see 
 Table 65–2 ). In the future, physical therapists may be licensed 
to prescribe drugs relevant to their practice. The development 
of large health maintenance organizations has greatly 
strengthened this expansion of prescribing rights because it 
offers these extremely powerful economic bodies a way to 
reduce their expenses. 
 The primary organizations controlling the privilege of pre-
scribing in the USA are the state boards, under the powers 
delegated to them by the state legislatures. As indicated in 
 Table 65–2 , many state boards have attempted to reserve 
some measure of the primary responsibility for prescribing to 
physicians by requiring that the ancillary professional work 
with or under a physician according to a specific protocol. In 
the state of California, this protocol must include a statement 
of the training, supervision, and documentation requirements 
of the arrangement and must specify referral requirements, 
limitations to the list of drugs that may be prescribed (ie, a 
formulary), and a method of evaluation by the supervising 
physician. The protocol must be in writing and must be peri-
odically updated (see reference: An Explanation of the Scope 
of RN Practice, 1994). 
Who May Prescribe?
TABLE 65–3 Classification of controlled substances. (See Inside Front Cover for examples.)
Schedule
Potential for Abuse
Other Comments
I
High
No accepted medical use; lack of accepted safety as drug.
II
High
Current accepted medical use. Abuse may lead to psychological or physical dependence.
III
Less than I or II
Current accepted medical use. Moderate or low potential for physical dependence and high potential 
for psychological dependence.
IV
Less than III
Current accepted medical use. Limited potential for dependence.
V
Less than IV
Current accepted medical use. Limited dependence possible.
1146    SECTION X Special Topics
must be met when these drugs are to be prescribed. The 
Controlled Drug Act requires prescribers and dispensers to 
register with the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), pay a fee, 
receive a personal registration number, and keep records of all 
controlled drugs prescribed or dispensed. Every time a con-
trolled drug is prescribed, a valid DEA number must appear 
on the prescription blank. 
 Prescriptions for substances with a high potential for abuse 
(Schedule II drugs) cannot be refilled. However, multiple pre-
scriptions for the same drug may be written with instructions 
not to dispense before a certain date and up to a total of 90 
days. Prescriptions for Schedules III, IV, and V can be refilled 
if ordered, but there is a five-refill maximum, and in no case 
may the prescription be refilled after 6 months from the date 
of writing. Schedule II drug orders may not be transmitted 
over the telephone, and some states require a tamper-resistant 
security prescription blank to reduce the chances for drug 
diversion. 
 These restrictive prescribing laws are intended to limit 
the amount of drugs of abuse that are made available to the 
public. 
 Unfortunately, the inconvenience occasioned by these laws—
and an unwarranted fear by medical professionals themselves 
regarding the risk of patient tolerance and addiction—continues 
to hamper adequate treatment of patients with terminal condi-
tions. This has been shown to be particularly true in children and 
elderly patients with cancer.  There is no excuse for inadequate treat-
ment of pain in a terminal patient; not only is addiction irrelevant in 
such a patient, it is actually uncommon in patients who are being 
treated for pain (see  Chapter 31 ). 
 Some states have recognized the underutilization of pain 
medications in the treatment of pain associated with chronic and 
terminal conditions. California, for example, has enacted an 
“intractable pain treatment” act that reduces the difficulty of 
renewing prescriptions for opioids. Under the provisions of this 
act, upon receipt of a copy of the order from the prescriber, eg, by 
fax, a pharmacist may write a prescription for a Schedule II sub-
stance for a patient under hospice care or living in a skilled nursing 
facility or in cases in which the patient is expected to live less than 
6 months, provided that the prescriber countersigns the order (by 
fax); the word “exemption” with regulatory code number is writ-
ten on a typical prescription, thus providing easier access for the 
terminally ill. 
 Medication Therapy Management 
 The Medicare Modernization Act of 2003 established the 
requirement that Medicare Part D plan sponsors offer a 
Medication Therapy Management (MTM) program to their 
beneficiaries. The MTM program is targeted for patients who 
have at least two chronic diseases and have used multiple drugs 
at significant expense (initially a $4000 annual drug expense and 
now lowered to $3000/yr). The pharmacist collects the patient’s 
drug information and analyzes the drug history and drug utiliza-
tion information with the objective to optimize drug therapy, 
lower costs, improve drug safety, and improve the patients’ 
understanding of their medications. Pharmacists collaborate 
with physicians to address the drug therapy challenges in these 
high-use groups. 
 Labeled & Off-Labeled Uses of Drugs 
 In the USA, the FDA approves a drug only for the specific uses 
proposed and documented by the manufacturer in its New Drug 
Application (see  Chapter 5 ). These approved (labeled) uses or 
indications are set forth in the package insert that accompanies 
the drug. For a variety of reasons, these labeled indications may 
not include all the conditions in which the drug might be useful. 
Therefore, a clinician may wish to prescribe the agent for some 
other, unapproved (off-label), clinical condition, often on the 
basis of adequate or even compelling scientific evidence. Federal 
laws governing FDA regulations and drug use place no restric-
tions on such unapproved use. ∗ 
 Even if the patient suffers injury from the drug, its use for an 
unlabeled purpose does not in itself constitute “malpractice.” 
However, the courts may consider the package insert labeling as 
a complete listing of the indications for which the drug is con-
sidered safe unless the clinician can show that other use is con-
sidered safe by competent expert testimony. 
 Drug Safety Surveillance 
 Governmental drug-regulating agencies have responsibility for 
monitoring drug safety. In the USA, the FDA-sponsored Med 
Watch program collects data on safety and adverse drug effects 
(ADEs) through mandatory reporting by drug manufacturers and 
voluntary reporting by health care practitioners. Practitioners may 
submit reports on any suspected adverse drug (or medical device) 
effect using a simple form obtainable from  http://www.fda.gov/
medwatch/index.html . The FDA is expected to use these data to 
establish an adverse effect rate. It is not clear that the FDA has 
sufficient resources at present to carry out this mandate, but they 
are empowered to take further regulatory actions if deemed neces-
sary. A similar vaccine reporting program is in place to monitor 
vaccine safety. 
 The FDA has also increased requirements for labeling on 
drugs that carry special risks. Dispensers of medications are 
required to distribute “Med Guides” to patients when these 
medications are dispensed. These guides are provided by the 
manufacturers of the medications. In addition, pharmacists often 
provide patient educational materials that describe the drug, its 
∗“Once a product has been approved for marketing, a physician may 
prescribe it for uses or in treatment regimens or patient populations that 
are not included in the approved labeling. Such ‘unapproved’ or, more 
precisely, ‘unlabeled’ uses may be appropriate and rational in certain 
circumstances, and may, in fact, reflect approaches to drug therapy that 
have been extensively reported in medical literature.”—FDA Drug Bull 
1982;12:4.
CHAPTER 65 Rational Prescribing & Prescription Writing    1147
use, adverse effects, storage requirements, methods of administra-
tion, what to do when a dose is missed, and the potential need 
for ongoing therapy. 
 SOCIOECONOMIC FACTORS 
 Generic Prescribing 
 Prescribing by generic name offers the pharmacist flexibility in 
selecting the particular drug product to fill the order and offers the 
patient a potential savings when there is price competition. For 
example, the brand name of a popular sedative is  Valium , manu-
factured by Hoffmann-LaRoche. The generic (public nonpropri-
etary) name of the same chemical substance adopted by United 
States Adopted Names (USAN) and approved by the FDA is  diaz-
epam . All diazepam drug products in the USA meet the pharma-
ceutical standards expressed in the  United States Pharmacopeia 
(USP). However, there are several manufacturers, and prices vary 
greatly. For drugs in common use, the difference in cost between 
the trade-named product and generic products varies from less 
than twofold to more than 100-fold. 
 In most states and in most hospitals, pharmacists have the 
option of supplying a generically equivalent drug product 
even if a proprietary name has been specified in the order. If 
the prescriber wants a particular brand of drug product dis-
pensed, handwritten instructions to “dispense as written” or 
words of similar meaning are required. Some government-
subsidized health care programs and many third-party insur-
ance payers  require that pharmacists dispense the cheapest 
generically equivalent product in the inventory (generic sub-
stitution). However, the principles of drug product selection 
by private pharmacists do not permit substituting one thera-
peutic agent for another (therapeutic substitution); that is, 
dispensing trichlormethiazide for hydrochlorothiazide would 
not be permitted without the prescriber’s permission even 
though these two diuretics may be considered pharmacody-
namically equivalent. Pharmacists within managed care orga-
nizations may follow different policies; see below. 
 It cannot be assumed that every generic drug product is as 
satisfactory as the trade-named product, although examples of 
unsatisfactory generics are rare. Bioavailability—the effective 
absorption of the drug product—varies between manufacturers 
and sometimes between different lots of a drug produced by the 
same manufacturer. In spite of the evidence, many practitioners 
avoid generic prescribing, thereby increasing medical costs. In the 
case of a very small number of drugs, which usually have a low 
therapeutic index, poor solubility, or a high ratio of inert ingredi-
ents to active drug content, a specific manufacturer’s product may 
give more consistent results. In the case of life-threatening dis-
eases, the advantages of generic substitution may be outweighed 
by the clinical urgency so that the prescription should be filled as 
written. 
 In an effort to codify bioequivalence information, the FDA 
publishes  Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence 
Evaluations , with monthly supplements, commonly called “the 
Orange Book.” The book contains listings of multi-source 
products in one of two categories: Products given a code begin-
ning with the letter “A” are considered bioequivalent to a refer-
ence standard formulation of the same drug and to all other 
versions of that product with a similar “A” coding. Products not 
considered bioequivalent are coded “B.” Of the approximately 
8000 products listed, 90% are coded “A.” Additional code let-
ters and numerals are appended to the initial “A” or “B” and 
indicate the approved route of administration and other 
variables. 
 Mandatory drug product selection on the basis of price is 
common practice in the USA because third-party payers (insur-
ance companies, health maintenance organizations, etc) enforce 
money-saving regulations. If outside a managed care organiza-
tion, the prescriber can sometimes override these controls by 
writing “dispense as written” on a prescription that calls for a 
brand-named product. However, in such cases, the patient may 
have to pay the difference between the dispensed product and 
the cheaper one. 
 Within most managed care organizations, formulary controls 
have been put in place that force the selection of less expensive 
medications whenever they are available. In a managed care envi-
ronment, the prescriber often selects the drug group rather than a 
specific agent, and the pharmacist dispenses the formulary drug 
from that group. For example, if a prescriber in such an organiza-
tion decides that a patient needs a thiazide diuretic, the pharma-
cist automatically dispenses the single thiazide diuretic carried on 
the organization’s formulary. As noted below, the choice of drugs 
for the organization’s formulary may change from time to time, 
depending on negotiation of prices and rebates with different 
manufacturers. 
 Other Cost Factors 
 The private pharmacy bases its charges on the cost of the drug 
plus a fee for providing a professional service. Each time a 
prescription is dispensed, there is a fee. The prescriber con-
trols the frequency of filling prescriptions by authorizing 
refills and specifying the quantity to be dispensed. However, 
for medications used for chronic illnesses, the quantity 
covered by insurance may be limited to the amount used in 
1 month. Thus, the prescriber can save the patient money by 
prescribing standard sizes (so that drugs do not have to be 
repackaged) and, when chronic treatment is involved, by 
ordering the largest quantity consistent with safety, expense, 
and third-party plan. Optimal prescribing for cost savings 
often involves consultation between the prescriber and the 
pharmacist. Because of continuing increases in the whole-
sale prices of drugs in the USA, prescription costs have risen 
dramatically over the past 3 decades; and from 1999 to 
2009, the number of prescriptions purchased has increased 
39% while the population grew 9% (see Box: The Cost of 
Prescriptions). 
1148    SECTION X Special Topics
 REFERENCES 
  American Pharmacists Association and The National Association of Chain Drug 
Stores: MTM in Pharmacy Practice, Core Elements v. 2, 2008. 
 An explanation of the scope of RN practice including standardization procedures. 
Board of Registered Nursing, State of California, August 1994. 
Avorn J: Part “D” for “defective”—The Medicare drug benefit chaos. N Engl J 
Med 2006;354:1339. 
 Bell, D: A toolset for e-prescribing implementation. Rand Health, US AHRQ, 2011. 
 California Business and Professions Code, Chapter 9, Division 2, Pharmacy Law. 
Department of Consumer Affairs, Sacramento, California, 2011. 
 Conroy S et al: Educational interventions to reduce prescribing errors. Arch Dis 
Child 2008;93:313. 
 Do we pay too much for prescriptions? Consumer Reports 1993;58:668. 
 Graber MA, Easton-Carr R: Poverty and pain: Ethics and the lack of opioid pain 
medications in fixed-price, low-cost prescription plans. Ann Pharmacother 
2008;42:1913. 
 Hendrickson R (editor):  Remington’s Practice and Science of Pharmacy . Advanced 
Concepts Institute, 2005. 
 Jerome JB, Sagan P: The USAN nomenclature system. JAMA 1975;232:294. 
 Kesselheim AS et al: Clinical equivalence of generic and brand-name drugs used in 
cardiovascular disease. A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 
2008;300:2514. 
 Lesar TS, Briceland L, Stein DS: Factors related to errors in medication prescrib-
ing. JAMA 1997;277:312. 
 Prescription drug costs. http://www.kaiseredu.org/Issue-Modules/Prescription-
Drug-Costs/Background-Brief.aspx 
 Schnipper JL et al: Role of pharmacist counseling in preventing adverse drug 
events after hospitalization. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:565. 
 Trissel LA:  Handbook on Injectable Drugs , 13th ed. American Society of Hospital 
Pharmacists, 2005. (With supplements.) 
 Use of approved drugs for unlabeled indications. FDA Drug Bull 1982;12:4. 
 WHO Drug Action Committee: Model  Guide to  Good Prescribing . WHO, 1994. 
 
The Cost of Prescriptions
 The cost of prescriptions has risen dramatically in the last 
several decades. The average price for a single prescription in 
the USA in 2004 was $55. By 2006, this average cost had risen to 
$75. In the California Medicaid Sector, the average charge was 
over $80, with generic products being under $40 per prescrip-
tion and brand-name products over $140. This rise is occasioned 
by new technology, marketing costs, and stockholder expecta-
tions. The pharmaceutical industry typically posts profits of 
10-15% annually, whereas the retail business sector shows a 3% 
profit. The cost to the patient for many new drugs such as sta-
tins exceeds $1000 per year. The cost of some therapeutic anti-
body products (eg, MABs) is more than $10,000 per year. 
Pharmaceuticals tend to be the highest out-of-pocket health-
related cost because other health care services are covered by 
health insurance, whereas prescriptions often are not, although 
this is changing. 
 Because of public and political pressure resulting from this 
problem, the US Congress enacted the Medicare Modernization 
Act in 2003 establishing the Medicare Part D plan. This voluntary 
prescription plan provides for partial payment by private medical 
insurance companies for some prescriptions for patients who are 
Medicare-eligible. Unfortunately, the complexity of the legisla-
tion and the resulting confusing insurance plans with gaps in 
coverage, formulary and quantity limits, and the favored eco-
nomic treatment given the pharmaceutical industry, prevent this 
plan from solving the high drug cost problem. 
 High drug costs have caused payers and consumers alike to 
do without or seek alternative sources. Because most other gov-
ernments, eg, Canada, have done a better job in controlling drug 
prices, the prices for the same drug are usually less in other coun-
tries than those in the United States. This fact has caused a num-
ber of US citizens to purchase their drugs “off-shore” in a variety 
of countries for “personal use” in quantities up to a 3-month 
supply—at substantial savings, often as much as 50%. However, 
there is no assurance that these drugs are always what they are 
purported to be, or that they will be delivered in a timely man-
ner, or that there is a traditional doctor-pharmacist-patient rela-
tionship and the safeguards that such a relationship offers. 
 Without a true universal health care program, the cost of drugs 
in the USA will continue to be subject to the negotiating power (or 
lack thereof) of the purchasing group-insurance company, hospital 
consortium, HMO, small retail pharmacy, etc, and will be driven 
primarily by the economic policies of the large manufacturers. In 
most companies, these policies favor executive compensation 
and stockholder dividends above the interests of consumers or 
employees. Thus far, only the US Veterans Administration system, 
the larger HMOs, and a few “big box” stores have proved strong 
enough to control costs through bulk purchases of drugs and seri-
ous negotiation of prices with manufacturers. Until new legisla-
tion gives other organizations the same power to negotiate, or 
pricing policies are made more equitable, no real solution to the 
drug cost problem can be expected. 
1149
 
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 
66
Important Drug 
Interactions & Their 
Mechanisms
 John R. Horn, PharmD, FCCP 
 One of the factors that can alter the response to drugs is the con-
current administration of other drugs. There are several mecha-
nisms by which drugs may interact, but most can be categorized 
as pharmacokinetic (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excre-
tion), pharmacodynamic (additive, synergistic, or antagonistic 
effects), or combined interactions. The general principles of 
pharmacokinetics are discussed in  Chapters 3 and  4 ; the general 
principles of pharmacodynamics in  Chapter 2 . 
 Botanical medications (“herbals”) may interact with each other 
or with conventional drugs. Unfortunately, botanicals are much 
less well studied than other drugs, so information about their 
interactions is scanty. Pharmacodynamic interactions are described 
in  Chapter 64 . Pharmacokinetic interactions that have been docu-
mented (eg, St. John’s wort) are listed in  Table 66–1 . 
 Knowledge of the mechanism by which a given drug interac-
tion occurs is often clinically useful, since the mechanism may 
influence both the time course and the methods of circumventing 
the interaction. Some important drug interactions occur as a result 
of two or more mechanisms. 
 PREDICTABILITY OF DRUG 
INTERACTIONS 
 The designations listed in  Table 66–1 are used here to  estimate the 
predictability of the drug interactions. These estimates are 
intended to indicate simply whether or not the interaction will 
occur, and they do not always mean that the interaction is likely 
to produce an adverse effect. Whether or not the interaction 
occurs (precipitant drug produces a measurable change in the 
object drug) and produces an adverse effect depends on both 
patient- and drug-specific factors. Patient factors can include 
intrinsic drug clearance, genetics, gender, concurrent diseases, and 
diet. Drug-specific factors include dose, route of administration, 
drug formulation, and the sequence of drug administration. The 
most important factor that can mitigate the risk of patient harm 
is recognition by the prescriber of a potential interaction followed 
by appropriate action. 
 Pharmacokinetic Mechanisms 
 The gastrointestinal  absorption of drugs may be affected by con-
current use of other agents that (1) have a large surface area upon 
which the drug can be adsorbed, (2) bind or chelate, (3) alter 
gastric pH, (4) alter gastrointestinal motility, or (5) affect transport 
proteins such as P-glycoprotein and organic anion transporters. 
One must distinguish between effects on absorption  rate and 
effects on  extent of absorption. A reduction in only the absorption 
rate of a drug is seldom clinically important, whereas a reduction 
in the extent of absorption is clinically important if it results in 
subtherapeutic serum concentrations. 
 The mechanisms by which drug interactions alter drug 
 distribution include (1) competition for plasma protein binding, 
(2) displacement from tissue binding sites, and (3) alterations in 
local tissue barriers, eg, P-glycoprotein inhibition in the blood-
brain barrier. Although competition for plasma protein binding 
can increase the free concentration (and thus the effect) of the 
displaced drug in plasma, the increase will be transient owing to a 
compensatory increase in drug disposition. The clinical impor-
tance of protein binding displacement has been overemphasized; 
current evidence suggests that such interactions are unlikely to 
result in adverse effects. Displacement from tissue binding sites 
would tend to transiently increase the blood concentration of the 
displaced drug. 
 The  metabolism of drugs can be stimulated or inhibited by 
concurrent therapy, and the importance of the effect varies 
from negligible to dramatic. Drug metabolism primarily occurs 
in the liver and the wall of the small intestine, but other sites 
include plasma, lung, and kidney. Induction (stimulation) of 
cytochrome P450 isozymes in the liver and small intestine can 
be caused by drugs such as barbiturates, bosentan, carbam-
azepine, efavirenz, nevirapine, phenytoin, primidone, rifampin, 
1150    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Alcohol
Chronic alcoholism results in enzyme induction. 
Acute alcoholic intoxication tends to inhibit 
drug metabolism (whether person is alcoholic or 
not). Severe alcohol-induced hepatic dysfunction 
may inhibit ability to metabolize drugs. 
Disulfiram-like reaction in the presence of 
certain drugs. Additive central nervous system 
depression with other central nervous system 
depressants.
Acetaminophen: [NE] Increased formation of hepatotoxic acetamino-
phen metabolites (in chronic alcoholics).
Acitretin: [P] Increased conversion of acitretin to etretinate 
(teratogenic).
Anticoagulants, oral: [NE] Increased hypoprothrombinemic effect 
with acute alcohol intoxication.
Central nervous system depressants: [HP] Additive or synergistic 
central nervous system depression.
Insulin: [NE] Acute alcohol intake may increase hypoglycemic effect of 
insulin (especially in fasting patients).
Drugs that may produce a disulfiram-like reaction:
Cephalosporins: [NP] Disulfiram-like reactions are noted with 
cefamandole, cefoperazone, cefotetan, and moxalactam.
Chloral hydrate: [NP] Mechanism not established.
Disulfiram: [HP] Inhibited aldehyde dehydrogenase.
Metronidazole: [NP] Mechanism not established.
Sulfonylureas: [NE] Chlorpropamide is most likely to produce a 
disulfiram-like reaction; acute alcohol intake may increase hypoglyce-
mic effect (especially in fasting patients).
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
rifabutin, and St. John’s wort. Enzyme inducers can also increase the 
activity of phase II metabolism such as glucuronidation. Enzyme 
induction does not take place quickly; maximal effects usually occur 
after 7–10 days and require an equal or longer time to dissipate after 
the enzyme inducer is stopped. Rifampin, however, may produce 
enzyme induction after only a few doses. Inhibition of metabolism 
generally takes place more quickly than enzyme induction and may 
begin as soon as sufficient tissue concentration of the inhibitor is 
achieved. However, if the half-life of the affected (object) drug is 
long, it may take a week or more (three to four half-lives) to reach a 
new steady-state serum concentration. Drugs that may inhibit the 
cytochrome P450 metabolism of other drugs include amiodarone, 
androgens, atazanavir, chloramphenicol, cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, 
clarithromycin, cyclosporine, delavirdine, diltiazem, diphenhy-
dramine, disulfiram, enoxacin, erythromycin, fluconazole, fluox-
etine, fluvoxamine, furanocoumarins (substances in grapefruit 
juice), indinavir, isoniazid, itraconazole, ketoconazole, metronida-
zole, mexiletine, miconazole, nefazodone, omeprazole, paroxetine, 
propoxyphene, quinidine, ritonavir, sulfamethizole, verapamil, 
voriconazole, zafirlukast, and zileuton. 
 The  renal excretion of active drug can also be affected by 
concurrent drug therapy. The renal excretion of certain drugs that 
are weak acids or weak bases may be influenced by other drugs 
that affect urinary pH. This is due to changes in ionization of the 
drug, as described in  Chapter 1 under Ionization of Weak Acids 
and Weak Bases; the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. For some 
drugs, active secretion into the renal tubules is an important 
elimination pathway. P-glycoprotein, organic anion transporters, 
and organic cation transporters are involved in active tubular 
secretion of some drugs, and inhibition of these transporters can 
inhibit renal elimination with attendant increase in serum drug 
concentrations. 
 Pharmacodynamic Mechanisms 
 When drugs with similar pharmacologic effects are administered 
concurrently, an additive or synergistic response is usually seen. 
The two drugs may or may not act on the same receptor to pro-
duce such effects. In theory, drugs acting on the same receptor or 
process are usually additive, eg, benzodiazepines plus barbiturates. 
Drugs acting on different receptors or sequential processes may be 
synergistic, eg, nitrates plus sildenafil or sulfonamides plus 
trimethoprim. Conversely, drugs with opposing pharmacologic 
effects may reduce the response to one or both drugs. 
Pharmacodynamic drug interactions are relatively common in 
clinical practice, but adverse effects can usually be minimized if 
one understands the pharmacology of the drugs involved. In this 
way, the interactions can be anticipated and appropriate counter-
measures taken. 
 Combined Toxicity 
 The combined use of two or more drugs, each of which has toxic 
effects on the same organ, can greatly increase the likelihood of 
organ damage. For example, concurrent administration of two 
nephrotoxic drugs can produce kidney damage, even though the 
dose of either drug alone may have been insufficient to produce 
toxicity. Furthermore, some drugs can enhance the organ toxicity 
of another drug, even though the enhancing drug has no intrinsic 
toxic effect on that organ. 
CHAPTER 66 Important Drug Interactions & Their Mechanisms    1151
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Allopurinol
Inhibits hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes. 
Febuxostat (another drug used in gout) will also 
inhibit the metabolism of azathioprine and 
mercaptopurine.
Anticoagulants, oral: [NP] Increased hypoprothrombinemic 
effect.
Azathioprine: [P] Decreased azathioprine detoxification resulting in 
increased azathioprine toxicity.
Mercaptopurine: [P] Decreased mercaptopurine metabolism 
resulting in increased mercaptopurine toxicity.
Antacids
Antacids may adsorb drugs in gastrointestinal 
tract, thus reducing absorption. Antacids tend to 
speed gastric emptying, thus delivering drugs to 
absorbing sites in the intestine more quickly. 
Some antacids (eg, magnesium hydroxide with 
aluminum hydroxide) alkalinize the urine some-
what, thus altering excretion of drugs sensitive 
to urinary pH.
Atazanavir: [NP] Decreased absorption of atazanavir (requires acid for 
absorption).
Digoxin: [NP] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of digoxin.
Indinavir: [NP] Decreased absorption of indinavir (requires acid for 
absorption).
Iron: [P] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of iron with 
calcium-containing antacids.
Itraconazole: [P] Reduced gastrointestinal absorption of 
itraconazole due to increased pH (itraconazole requires acid for 
dissolution).
Ketoconazole: [P] Reduced gastrointestinal absorption of ketocon-
azole due to increased pH (ketoconazole requires acid for dissolution).
Quinolones: [HP] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of 
ciprofloxacin, norfloxacin, and enoxacin (and probably other 
quinolones).
Salicylates: [P] Increased renal clearance of salicylates due to 
increased urine pH; occurs only with large doses of salicylates.
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate: [NE] Binds antacid cation in gut, 
resulting in metabolic alkalosis.
Tetracyclines: [HP] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of 
tetracyclines.
Thyroxine: [NP] Reduced gastrointestinal absorption of thyroxine.
Anticoagulants, oral
Metabolism inducible. Susceptible to inhibition 
of CYP2C9-mediated metabolism. Highly bound 
to plasma proteins. Anticoagulation response 
altered by drugs that affect clotting factor 
synthesis or catabolism.
Drugs that may increase anticoagulant effect:
Acetaminophen: [NE] Impaired synthesis of clotting factors.
Amiodarone: [P] Inhibited anticoagulant metabolism.
Anabolic steroids: [P] Altered clotting factor disposition?
Chloramphenicol: [NE] Decreased dicumarol metabolism (probably 
also warfarin).
Cimetidine: [HP] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
Clofibrate: [P] Mechanism not established.
Clopidogrel: [NP] Decreased warfarin metabolism and inhibits 
platelet function.
Danazol: [NE] Impaired synthesis of clotting factors?
Dextrothyroxine: [P] Enhanced clotting factor catabolism?
Disulfiram: [P] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
Erythromycin: [NP] Probably inhibits anticoagulant metabolism.
Fluconazole: [P] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
Fluoxetine: [P] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
Gemfibrozil: [NE] Mechanism not established.
Lovastatin: [NP] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
Metronidazole: [P] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
Miconazole: [NE] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
1152    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Anticoagulants, oral 
(cont.)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: [P] Inhibition of platelet 
function, gastric erosions; some agents increase hypoprothrombine-
mic response (unlikely with diclofenac, ibuprofen, or naproxen).
Propafenone: [NE] Probably decreases anticoagulant metabolism.
Quinidine: [NP] Additive hypoprothrombinemia.
Salicylates: [HP] Platelet inhibition with aspirin but not with other 
salicylates; [P] large doses have hypoprothrombinemic effect.
Simvastatin: [NP] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
Sulfinpyrazone: [NE] Inhibited warfarin metabolism.
Sulfonamides: [NE] Inhibited warfarin metabolism.
Thyroid hormones: [P] Enhanced clotting factor catabolism.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole: [P] Inhibited warfarin metabolism; 
displaces from protein binding.
Voriconazole: [NP] Decreased warfarin metabolism.
See also Alcohol; Allopurinol.
Drugs that may decrease anticoagulant effect:
Aminoglutethimide: [P] Enzyme induction.
Barbiturates: [P] Enzyme induction.
Bosentan: [P] Enzyme induction.
Carbamazepine: [P] Enzyme induction.
Cholestyramine: [P] Reduced absorption of anticoagulant.
Glutethimide: [P] Enzyme induction.
Nafcillin: [NE] Enzyme induction.
Phenytoin: [NE] Enzyme induction; anticoagulant effect may increase 
transiently at start of phenytoin therapy due to protein-binding 
displacement.
Primidone: [P] Enzyme induction.
Rifabutin: [P] Enzyme induction.
Rifampin: [P] Enzyme induction.
St. John’s wort: [NE] Enzyme induction.
Effects of anticoagulants on other drugs:
Hypoglycemics, oral: [P] Dicumarol inhibits hepatic metabolism of 
tolbutamide and chlorpropamide.
Phenytoin: [P] Dicumarol inhibits metabolism of phenytoin.
Antidepressants, 
tricyclic and 
heterocyclic
Inhibition of amine uptake into postganglionic 
adrenergic neuron. Antimuscarinic effects may 
be additive with other antimuscarinic drugs. 
Metabolism inducible. Susceptible to inhibition 
of metabolism via CYP2D6, CYP3A4, and other 
CYP450 enzymes.
Amiodarone: [P] Decreased antidepressant metabolism.
Barbiturates: [P] Increased antidepressant metabolism.
Bupropion: [NE] Decreased antidepressant metabolism.
Carbamazepine: [NE] Enhanced metabolism of antidepressants.
Cimetidine: [P] Decreased antidepressant metabolism.
Clonidine: [P] Decreased clonidine antihypertensive effect.
Guanadrel: [P] Decreased uptake of guanadrel into sites of action.
Guanethidine: [P] Decreased uptake of guanethidine into sites of 
action.
Haloperidol: [P] Decreased antidepressant metabolism.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: [NP] Some cases of excitation, 
hyperpyrexia, mania, and convulsions, especially with serotonergic 
antidepressants such as clomipramine and imipramine, but many 
patients have received combination without ill effects.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
CHAPTER 66 Important Drug Interactions & Their Mechanisms    1153
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Antidepressants, 
tricyclic and 
heterocyclic (cont.)
Quinidine: [NE] Decreased antidepressant metabolism.
Rifampin: [P] Increased antidepressant metabolism.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): [P] Fluoxetine and 
paroxetine inhibit CYP2D6 and decrease metabolism of antidepressants 
metabolized by this enzyme (eg, desipramine). Citalopram, sertraline, 
and fluvoxamine are only weak inhibitors of CYP2D6, but fluvoxamine 
inhibits CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 and thus can inhibit the metabolism of 
antidepressants metabolized by these enzymes.
Sympathomimetics: [P] Increased pressor response to norepineph-
rine, epinephrine, and phenylephrine.
Terbinafine: [P] Decreased antidepressant metabolism.
Azole antifungals
Inhibition of CYP3A4 (itraconazole = 
ketoconazole > posaconazole > voriconazole 
> fluconazole). Inhibition of CYP2C9 (flucon-
azole, voriconazole). Susceptible to enzyme 
inducers (itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
voriconazole). Gastrointestinal absorption 
pH-dependent (itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
posaconazole). Inhibition of P-glycoprotein 
(itraconazole, ketoconazole, posaconazole).
Barbiturates: [P] Increased metabolism of itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
voriconazole.
Calcium channel blockers: [P] Decreased calcium channel blocker 
metabolism.
Carbamazepine: [P] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism. Potential 
increased metabolism of azole antifungal. 
Cisapride: [NP] Decreased metabolism of cisapride; possible 
ventricular arrhythmias.
Colchicine: [P] Decreased metabolism and transport of colchicine.
Cyclosporine: [P] Decreased metabolism of cyclosporine.
Digoxin: [NE] Increased plasma concentrations of digoxin with 
itraconazole, posaconazole, and ketoconazole.
H2-receptor antagonists: [NE] Decreased absorption of itraconazole, 
ketoconazole, and posaconazole.
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors: [HP] Decreased metabolism of 
lovastatin, simvastatin, and, to a lesser extent, atorvastatin.
Phenytoin: [P] Decreased metabolism of phenytoin with fluconazole 
and probably voriconazole.
Pimozide: [NE] Decreased pimozide metabolism.
Proton pump inhibitors: [P] Decreased absorption of itraconazole, 
ketoconazole, and posaconazole.
Rifabutin: [P] Decreased rifabutin metabolism. Increased metabolism 
of itraconazole, ketoconazole, and voriconazole.
Rifampin: [P] Increased metabolism of itraconazole, ketoconazole, 
and voriconazole.
See also Antacids; Anticoagulants, oral.
Barbiturates
Induction of hepatic microsomal drug metabo-
lizing enzymes. Additive central nervous system 
depression with other central nervous system 
depressants.
Beta-adrenoceptor blockers: [P] Increased β-blocker metabolism.
Calcium channel blockers: [P] Increased calcium channel blocker 
metabolism.
Central nervous system depressants: [HP] Additive central nervous 
system depression.
Corticosteroids: [P] Increased corticosteroid metabolism.
Cyclosporine: [NE] Increased cyclosporine metabolism.
Delavirdine: [P] Increased delavirdine metabolism.
Doxycycline: [P] Increased doxycycline metabolism.
Estrogens: [P] Increased estrogen metabolism.
Methadone: [NE] Increased methadone metabolism.
Phenothiazine: [P] Increased phenothiazine metabolism.
Protease inhibitors: [NE] Increased protease inhibitor metabolism.
Quinidine: [P] Increased quinidine metabolism.
Sirolimus: [NE] Increased sirolimus metabolism.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
1154    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Barbiturates (cont.)
Tacrolimus: [NE] Increased tacrolimus metabolism.
Theophylline: [NE] Increased theophylline metabolism; reduced 
theophylline effect.
Valproic acid: [P] Decreased phenobarbital metabolism.
See also Anticoagulants, oral; Antidepressants, tricyclic.
Beta-adrenoceptor 
blockers
Beta-blockade (especially with nonselective 
agents such as propranolol) alters response to 
sympathomimetics with β-agonist activity (eg, 
epinephrine). Beta blockers that undergo exten-
sive first-pass metabolism may be affected by 
drugs capable of altering this process. Beta 
blockers may reduce hepatic blood flow.
Drugs that may increase β-blocker effect:
Cimetidine: [P] Decreased metabolism of β blockers that are cleared 
primarily by the liver, eg, propranolol. Less effect (if any) on those 
cleared by the kidneys, eg, atenolol, nadolol.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): [P] Fluoxetine and 
paroxetine inhibit CYP2D6 and increase concentrations of timolol, 
propranolol, metoprolol, carvedilol, and labetalol.
Drugs that may decrease β-blocker effect:
Enzyme inducers: [P] Barbiturates, phenytoin, and rifampin may 
enhance β-blocker metabolism; other enzyme inducers may produce 
similar effects.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: [P] Indomethacin reduces 
antihypertensive response; other prostaglandin inhibitors probably 
also interact.
Effects of  β blockers on other drugs:
Clonidine: [NE] Hypertensive reaction if clonidine is withdrawn while 
patient is taking propranolol.
Insulin: [P] Inhibition of glucose recovery from hypoglycemia; inhibi-
tion of symptoms of hypoglycemia (except sweating); increased blood 
pressure during hypoglycemia.
Prazosin: [P] Increased hypotensive response to first dose of prazosin.
Sympathomimetics: [P] Increased pressor response to epinephrine 
(and possibly other sympathomimetics); this is more likely to occur 
with nonselective β blockers.
See also Barbiturates; Theophylline.
Bile acid–binding resins
Resins may bind with orally administered drugs 
in gastrointestinal tract. Resins may bind in gas-
trointestinal tract with drugs that undergo 
enterohepatic circulation, even if the latter are 
given parenterally.
Acetaminophen: [NE] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of 
acetaminophen.
Digitalis glycosides: [NE] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of 
digitoxin (possibly also digoxin).
Furosemide: [P] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of furosemide.
Methotrexate: [NE] Reduced gastrointestinal absorption of 
methotrexate.
Mycophenolate: [P] Reduced gastrointestinal absorption of 
mycophenolate.
Thiazide diuretics: [P] Reduced gastrointestinal absorption of thiazides.
Thyroid hormones: [P] Reduced thyroid absorption.
See also Anticoagulants, oral.
Calcium channel 
blockers
Verapamil, diltiazem, and perhaps nicardipine 
(but not nifedipine) inhibit hepatic drug-
metabolizing enzymes. Metabolism (via CYP3A4) 
of diltiazem, felodipine, nicardipine, nifedipine, 
verapamil, and probably other calcium channel 
blockers subject to induction and inhibition.
Atazanavir: [NE] Decreased metabolism of calcium channel blockers.
Carbamazepine: [P] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism with 
diltiazem and verapamil; possible increase in calcium channel blocker 
metabolism.
Cimetidine: [NP] Decreased metabolism of calcium channel blockers.
Clarithromycin: [P] Decreased metabolism of calcium channel 
blockers.
Colchicine: Decreased colchicine metabolism and transport with 
diltiazem and verapamil.
Conivaptan: [NE] Decreased metabolism of calcium channel blockers.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
CHAPTER 66 Important Drug Interactions & Their Mechanisms    1155
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Calcium channel 
blockers (cont.)
Cyclosporine: [P] Decreased cyclosporine metabolism with diltiazem, 
nicardipine, verapamil.
Erythromycin: [P] Decreased metabolism of calcium channel 
blockers. Phenytoin: [NE] Increased metabolism of calcium channel 
blockers.
Rifampin: [P] Increased metabolism of calcium channel blockers.
Sirolimus: [P] Decreased sirolimus metabolism with diltiazem, 
nicardipine, verapamil.
Tacrolimus: [P] Decreased tacrolimus metabolism with diltiazem, 
nicardipine, verapamil.
See also Azole antifungals; Barbiturates; Theophylline; Digitalis
glycosides.
Carbamazepine
Induction of hepatic microsomal drug-
metabolizing enzymes. Susceptible to inhibition 
of metabolism, primarily by CYP3A4.
Atazanavir: [NE] Decreased metabolism of carbamazepine.
Cimetidine: [P] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism.
Clarithromycin: [P] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism.
Corticosteroids: [P] Increased corticosteroid metabolism.
Cyclosporine: [P] Increased cyclosporine metabolism and possible 
decreased carbamazepine metabolism.
Danazol: [P] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism.
Doxycycline: [P] Increased doxycycline metabolism.
Erythromycin: [NE] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism.
Fluvoxamine: [NE] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism.
Estrogens: [P] Increased estrogen metabolism.
Haloperidol: [P] Increased haloperidol metabolism.
Isoniazid: [P] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism.
Nefazodone: [NE] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism.
Propoxyphene: [HP] Decreased carbamazepine metabolism and 
possible increased propoxyphene metabolism.
Rifampin: [P] Increased carbamazepine metabolism.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): [NE] Fluoxetine and 
fluvoxamine decrease carbamazepine metabolism.
Sirolimus: [P] Increased sirolimus metabolism.
St. John’s wort: [P] Increased carbamazepine metabolism.
Tacrolimus: [P] Increased tacrolimus metabolism.
Theophylline: [NE] Increased theophylline metabolism.
See also Anticoagulants, oral; Antidepressants, tricyclic; Azole 
antifungals; Calcium channel blockers.
Chloramphenicol
Inhibits hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes.
Phenytoin: [P] Decreased phenytoin metabolism.
Sulfonylurea hypoglycemics: [P] Decreased sulfonylurea metabolism.
See also Anticoagulants, oral.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
1156    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Cimetidine
Inhibits hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing 
enzymes. (Ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine 
do not.) May inhibit the renal tubular secretion 
of weak bases.
Atazanavir: [NP] Decreased absorption of atazanavir (requires acid for 
absorption; other H2 blockers and proton pump inhibitors would be 
expected to have the same effect).
Benzodiazepines: [P] Decreased metabolism of alprazolam, 
chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, halazepam, prazepam, and clorazepate 
but not oxazepam, lorazepam, or temazepam.
Carmustine: [NE] Increased bone marrow suppression.
Indinavir: [NP] Decreased absorption of indinavir (requires acid for 
absorption; other H2 blockers and proton pump inhibitors would be 
expected to have the same effect).
Lidocaine: [P] Decreased metabolism of lidocaine; increased serum 
lidocaine concentrations.
Phenytoin: [NE] Decreased phenytoin metabolism; increased serum 
phenytoin concentrations.
Procainamide: [P] Decreased renal excretion of procainamide; 
increased serum procainamide concentrations. 
Quinidine: [P] Decreased metabolism of quinidine; increased serum 
quinidine concentrations.
Theophylline: [P] Decreased theophylline metabolism; increased 
plasma theophylline concentrations.
See also Anticoagulants, oral; Antidepressants, tricyclic; Azole
antifungals; Beta-adrenoceptor blockers; Calcium channel blockers; 
Carbamazepine.
Cisapride
Susceptible to inhibition of metabolism by 
CYP3A4 inhibitors. High cisapride serum con-
centrations can result in ventricular arrhythmias.
Atazanavir: [NE] Decreased metabolism of cisapride; possible 
ventricular arrhythmia.
Clarithromycin: [NP] Decreased metabolism of cisapride; possible 
ventricular arrhythmia.
Cyclosporine: [NE] Decreased metabolism of cisapride; possible 
ventricular arrhythmia.
Erythromycin: [NP] Decreased metabolism of cisapride; possible 
ventricular arrhythmia.
Nefazodone: [NP] Possibly decreased metabolism of cisapride by 
CYP3A4; possible ventricular arrhythmia.
Ritonavir: [NE] Decreased metabolism of cisapride; possible ventricular 
arrhythmia.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): [NP] Fluvoxamine 
inhibits CYP3A4 and probably decreases cisapride metabolism; possible 
ventricular arrhythmia.
See also Azole antifungals.
Colchicine
Susceptible to inhibition of CYP3A4 metabolism 
and P-glycoprotein transport.
Amiodarone: [NP] Decreased colchicine metabolism and transport.
Amprenavir: [P] Decreased colchicine metabolism.
Carbamazepine: [P] Increased metabolism of colchicine.
Clarithromycin: [P] Decreased colchicine metabolism and transport.
Cyclosporine: [P] Decreased colchicine metabolism and transport.
Dronedarone: [NE] Decreased colchicine transport.
Erythromycin: [P] Decreased colchicine metabolism and transport.
Nefazodone: [NE] Decreased colchicine metabolism.
Rifampin: [P] Increased colchicine metabolism.
Ritonavir: [P] Decreased colchicine metabolism.
See also Azole antifungals, Calcium channel blockers.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
CHAPTER 66 Important Drug Interactions & Their Mechanisms    1157
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Cyclosporine
Metabolism inducible. Susceptible to inhibition 
of metabolism by CYP3A4. (Tacrolimus and 
sirolimus appear to have similar interactions.)
Aminoglycosides: [NE] Possible additive nephrotoxicity.
Amphotericin B: [NE] Possible additive nephrotoxicity.
Amprenavir: [P] Increased cyclosporine metabolism.
Androgens: [NE] Increased serum cyclosporine.
Atazanavir: [NE] Decreased metabolism of cyclosporine.
Barbiturates: [P] Increased cyclosporine metabolism.
Carbamazepine: [P] Increased cyclosporine metabolism.
Clarithromycin: [P] Decreased cyclosporine metabolism.
Erythromycin: [NP] Decreased cyclosporine metabolism.
Lovastatin: [NP] Decreased metabolism of lovastatin. Myopathy and 
rhabdomyolysis noted in patients taking lovastatin and cyclosporine.
Nefazodone: [P] Decreased cyclosporine metabolism.
Phenytoin: [NE] Increased cyclosporine metabolism.
Pimozide: [NE] Decreased pimozide metabolism.
Quinupristin: [P] Increased cyclosporine metabolism.
Rifampin: [P] Increased cyclosporine metabolism.
Ritonavir: [P] Decreased cyclosporine metabolism.
Simvastatin: [NP] Decreased metabolism of simvastatin. Myopathy 
and rhabdomyolysis noted in patients taking simvastatin and 
cyclosporine.
St. John’s wort: [NP] Increased cyclosporine metabolism.
See also Azole antifungals; Barbiturates; Calcium channel blockers.
Digitalis glycosides
Digoxin susceptible to alteration of gastrointes-
tinal absorption. Digitalis toxicity may be 
increased by drug-induced electrolyte imbal-
ance (eg, hypokalemia). Digitoxin metabolism 
inducible. Renal and nonrenal excretion of 
digoxin susceptible to inhibition.
Drugs that may increase digitalis effect:
Amiodarone: [P] Increased plasma digoxin concentrations.
Azithromycin: [NP] Increased plasma concentration of digoxin.
Clarithromycin: [P] Increased plasma concentration of digoxin.
Diltiazem: [P] Increased plasma digoxin and additive AV conduction 
effects.
Erythromycin: [NP] Increased plasma concentration of digoxin.
Potassium-depleting drugs: [P] Increases likelihood of digitalis 
toxicity.
Propafenone: [P] Increases plasma digoxin levels.
Quinidine: [HP] Increased digoxin plasma concentrations; displaces 
digoxin from tissue binding sites.
Spironolactone: [NE] Decreased renal digoxin excretion and interferes 
with some serum digoxin assays.
Verapamil: [P] Increased plasma digoxin levels and additive AV 
conduction effects.
See also Azole antifungals.
Drugs that may decrease digitalis effect:
Kaolin-pectin: [P] Decreased gastrointestinal digoxin absorption.
Rifampin: [NE] Increased metabolism of digitoxin and elimination 
digoxin.
Sulfasalazine: [NE] Decreased gastrointestinal digoxin absorption.
See also Antacids; Bile acid–binding resins.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
1158    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Disulfiram
Inhibits hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing 
enzymes. Inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase.
Benzodiazepines: [P] Decreased metabolism of chlordiazepoxide and 
diazepam but not lorazepam and oxazepam.
Metronidazole: [NE] Confusion and psychoses reported in patients 
receiving this combination; mechanisms unknown.
Phenytoin: [P] Decreased phenytoin metabolism.
See also Alcohol; Anticoagulants, oral.
Estrogens
Metabolism inducible. Enterohepatic circulation 
of estrogen may be interrupted by alteration in 
bowel flora (eg, due to antibiotics).
Ampicillin: [NP] Interruption of enterohepatic circulation of estrogen; 
possible reduction in oral contraceptive efficacy. Some other oral 
antibiotics may have a similar effect.
Bosentan: [NP] Enzyme induction leading to reduced estrogen effect.
Corticosteroids: [P] Decreased metabolism of corticosteroids 
leading to increased corticosteroid effect.
Griseofulvin: [NE] Possible inhibition of oral contraceptive efficacy; 
mechanism unknown.
Phenytoin: [NP] Increased estrogen metabolism; possible reduction 
in oral contraceptive efficacy.
Primidone: [NP] Increased estrogen metabolism; possible reduction 
in oral contraceptive efficacy.
Rifabutin: [NP] Increased estrogen metabolism; possible reduction in 
oral contraceptive efficacy.
Rifampin: [NP] Increased estrogen metabolism; possible reduction in 
oral contraceptive efficacy.
St. John’s wort: [NE] Increased estrogen metabolism; possible reduction 
in oral contraceptive efficacy.
See also Barbiturates; Carbamazepine.
HMG-CoA reductase 
inhibitors
Lovastatin, simvastatin, and, to a lesser extent, 
atorvastatin are susceptible to CYP3A4 inhibi-
tors; lovastatin, simvastatin, and, to a lesser 
extent, atorvastatin are susceptible to CYP3A4 
inducers; increased risk of additive myopathy 
risk with other drugs that can cause myopathy.
Amiodarone: [NP] Decreased statin metabolism.
Atazanavir: [NP] Decreased statin metabolism.
Carbamazepine: [P] Increased statin metabolism.
Clarithromycin: [P] Decreased statin metabolism.
Clofibrate: [NP] Increased risk of myopathy.
Cyclosporine: [P] Decreased statin metabolism.
Diltiazem: [NE] Decreased statin metabolism.
Erythromycin: [P] Decreased statin metabolism.
Gemfibrozil: [NP] Increased plasma lovastatin and simvastatin and 
increase the risk of myopathy.
Indinavir: [NE] Decreased statin metabolism.
Nefazodone: [NE] Decreased statin metabolism.
Rifampin: [P] Increased statin metabolism.
Ritonavir: [NE] Decreased statin metabolism.
St. John’s wort: [NP] Increased statin metabolism.
Verapamil: [NE] Decreased statin metabolism.
See also Azole antifungals; Cyclosporine.
Iron
Binds with drugs in gastrointestinal tract, reduc-
ing absorption.
Methyldopa: [NE] Decreased methyldopa absorption.
Mycophenolate: [P] Decreased absorption of mycophenolate.
Quinolones: [P] Decreased absorption of ciprofloxacin and other 
quinolones.
Tetracyclines: [P] Decreased absorption of tetracyclines; decreased 
efficacy of iron.
Thyroid hormones: [P] Decreased thyroxine absorption.
See also Antacids.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
CHAPTER 66 Important Drug Interactions & Their Mechanisms    1159
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Levodopa
Levodopa degraded in gut prior to reaching 
sites of absorption. Agents that alter gastrointes-
tinal motility may alter degree of intraluminal 
degradation. Anti-parkinsonism effect of 
levodopa susceptible to inhibition by other 
drugs.
Clonidine: [NE] Inhibited antiparkinsonism effect.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: [P] Hypertensive reaction (carbidopa 
prevents the interaction).
Papaverine: [NE] Inhibited antiparkinsonism effect.
Phenothiazines: [P] Inhibited antiparkinsonism effect.
Phenytoin: [NE] Inhibited antiparkinsonism effect.
Pyridoxine: [P] Inhibited antiparkinsonism effect (carbidopa 
prevents the interaction).
See also Antimuscarinics.
Lithium
Renal lithium excretion sensitive to changes in 
sodium balance. (Sodium depletion tends to 
cause lithium retention.) Susceptible to drugs 
enhancing central nervous system lithium 
toxicity.
ACE inhibitors: [NE] Probably reduce renal clearance of lithium; 
increase lithium effect.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers: [NE] Probably reduce renal 
clearance of lithium; increase lithium effect.
Diuretics (especially thiazides): [P] Decreased excretion of lithium; 
furosemide may be less likely to produce this effect than thiazide 
diuretics.
Haloperidol: [NP] Occasional cases of neurotoxicity in manic patients, 
especially with large doses of one or both drugs.
Methyldopa: [NE] Increased likelihood of central nervous system 
lithium toxicity.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: [NE] Reduced renal 
lithium excretion (except sulindac and salicylates).
Theophylline: [P] Increased renal excretion of lithium; reduced 
lithium effect.
Macrolides
The macrolides clarithromycin and erythromycin 
are known to inhibit CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein. 
Azithromycin does not appear to inhibit CYP3A4 
but is a modest inhibitor of P-glycoprotein. 
Pimozide: [NE] Increased pimozide concentrations.
Quinidine: [P] Increased serum quinidine concentrations.
Theophylline: [P] Decreased metabolism of theophylline.
See also Anticoagulants, oral; Calcium channel blockers; 
Carbamazepine; Cisapride; Colchicine; Cyclosporine; Digitalis 
glycosides; HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. 
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors (MAOIs)
Increased norepinephrine stored in adrenergic 
neuron. Displacement of these stores by other 
drugs may produce acute hypertensive 
response. MAOIs have intrinsic hypoglycemic 
activity.
Anorexiants: [P] Hypertensive episodes due to release of stored 
norepinephrine (benzphetamine, diethylpropion, mazindol, 
phendimetrazine, phentermine).
Antidiabetic agents: [P] Additive hypoglycemic effect.
Buspirone: [NE] Possible serotonin syndrome; avoid concurrent use.
Dextromethorphan: [NE] Severe reactions (hyperpyrexia, coma, 
death) have been reported.
Guanethidine: [P] Reversal of the hypotensive action of 
guanethidine.
Mirtazapine: [NE] Possible serotonin syndrome; avoid concurrent use.
Narcotic analgesics: [NP] Some patients develop hypertension, 
rigidity, excitation; meperidine may be more likely to interact than 
morphine.
Nefazodone: [NE] Possible serotonin syndrome; avoid concurrent use.
Phenylephrine: [P] Hypertensive episode, since phenylephrine is 
metabolized by monoamine oxidase.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): [P] Fatalities have 
occurred due to serotonin syndrome; contraindicated in patients 
taking MAOIs.
Sibutramine: [NE] Possible serotonin syndrome; avoid concurrent use.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
(Continued)
1160    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors (MAOIs) 
(cont.)
Sympathomimetics (indirect-acting): [HP] Hypertensive episode 
due to release of stored norepinephrine (amphetamines, ephedrine, 
isometheptene, phenylpropanolamine, pseudoephedrine).
Tramadol: [NE] Possible serotonin syndrome; avoid concurrent use.
Venlafaxine: [NE] Possible serotonin syndrome; avoid concurrent use.
See also Antidepressants, tricyclic and heterocyclic; Levodopa.
Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)
Prostaglandin inhibition may result in reduced 
renal sodium excretion, impaired resistance to 
hypertensive stimuli, and reduced renal lithium 
excretion. Most NSAIDs inhibit platelet function; 
may increase likelihood of bleeding due to other 
drugs that impair hemostasis.
ACE inhibitors: [P] Decreased antihypertensive response.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers: [P] Decreased antihypertensive 
response.
Furosemide: [P] Decreased diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive 
response to furosemide.
Hydralazine: [NE] Decreased antihypertensive response to 
hydralazine.
Methotrexate: [NE] Possibly increased methotrexate toxicity 
(especially with anticancer doses of methotrexate).
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): Increased risk of 
bleeding due to platelet inhibition.
Thiazide diuretics: [P] Decreased diuretic, natriuretic, and 
antihypertensive response.
Triamterene: [NE] Decreased renal function noted with triamterene 
plus indomethacin in both healthy subjects and patients.
See also Anticoagulants, oral; Beta-adrenoceptor blockers; Lithium.
Phenytoin
Induces hepatic microsomal drug metabolism. 
Susceptible to inhibition of metabolism by 
CYP2C9 and, to a lesser extent, CYP2C19.
Drugs whose metabolism is stimulated by phenytoin:
Corticosteroids: [P] Decreased serum corticosteroid levels.
Doxycycline: [P] Decreased serum doxycycline levels.
Methadone: [P] Decreased serum methadone levels; watch for 
withdrawal symptoms.
Mexiletine: [NE] Decreased serum mexiletine levels.
Quinidine: [P] Decreased serum quinidine levels.
Theophylline: [NE] Decreased serum theophylline levels.
See also Calcium channel blockers; Cyclosporine; Estrogens.
Drugs that inhibit phenytoin metabolism:
Amiodarone: [P] Increased serum phenytoin; possible reduction in 
serum amiodarone.
Capecitabine: [NE] Increased serum phenytoin.
Chloramphenicol: [P] Increased serum phenytoin.
Felbamate: [P] Increased serum phenytoin.
Fluorouracil: [NE] Increased serum phenytoin.
Fluvoxamine: [NE] Increased serum phenytoin.
Isoniazid: [NP] Increased serum phenytoin; problem primarily with 
slow acetylators of isoniazid.
Metronidazole: [NP] Increased serum phenytoin.
Ticlopidine: [NP] Increased serum phenytoin.
See also Azole antifungals; Cimetidine; Disulfiram.
Drugs that enhance phenytoin metabolism:
Carbamazepine: [P] Decreased serum phenytoin levels.
Rifampin: [P] Decreased serum phenytoin levels.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(Continued)
(continued )
CHAPTER 66 Important Drug Interactions & Their Mechanisms    1161
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Pimozide
Susceptible to CYP3A4 inhibitors; may exhibit 
additive effects with other agents that prolong 
QTc interval.
Nefazodone: [NE] Decreased pimozide metabolism.
See also Azole antifungals; Cyclosporine; Macrolides.
Potassium-sparing 
diuretics (amiloride, 
eplerenone, 
spironolactone, 
triamterene)
Additive effects with other agents increasing 
serum potassium concentration. May alter renal 
excretion of substances other than potassium 
(eg, digoxin, hydrogen ions).
ACE inhibitors: [NP] Additive hyperkalemic effect.
Angiotensin II receptor blockers: [NP] Additive hyperkalemic effect.
Potassium-sparing diuretics: [P] Additive hyperkalemic effect.
Potassium supplements: [P] Additive hyperkalemic effect; especially a 
problem in presence of renal impairment.
See also Digitalis glycosides; Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Probenecid
Interference with renal excretion of drugs that 
undergo active tubular secretion, especially 
weak acids. Inhibition of glucuronide conjuga-
tion of other drugs.
Clofibrate: [P] Reduced glucuronide conjugation of clofibric acid.
Methotrexate: [P] Decreased renal methotrexate excretion; possible 
methotrexate toxicity.
Palatrexate: [P] Decreased renal palatrexate excretion; possible 
palatrexate toxicity.
Penicillin: [P] Decreased renal penicillin excretion.
Salicylates: [P] Decreased uricosuric effect of probenecid (interaction 
unlikely with less than 1.5 g of salicylate daily).
Quinidine
Substrate of CYP3A4. Inhibits CYP2D6. Renal 
excretion susceptible to changes in urine pH. 
Additive effects with other agents that prolong 
the QTc interval.
Acetazolamide: [P] Decreased renal quinidine excretion due to 
increased urinary pH; elevated serum quinidine.
Amiodarone: [NP] Increased serum quinidine levels.
Kaolin-pectin: [NE] Decreased gastrointestinal absorption of 
quinidine.
Rifampin: [P] Increased hepatic quinidine metabolism.
Thioridazine: [NE] Decreased thioridazine metabolism; additive 
prolongation of QTc interval.
See also Anticoagulants, oral; Antidepressants, tricyclic; Barbiturates; 
Cimetidine; Digitalis glycosides; Macrolides; Phenytoin.
Quinolone antibiotics
Susceptible to inhibition of gastrointestinal 
absorption. Some quinolones inhibit CYP1A2.
Caffeine: [P] Ciprofloxacin, enoxacin, pipedemic acid, and, to a lesser 
extent, norfloxacin inhibit caffeine metabolism.
Sucralfate: [HP] Reduced gastrointestinal absorption of ciprofloxacin, 
norfloxacin, and probably other quinolones.
Theophylline: [P] Ciprofloxacin, enoxacin, and, to a lesser extent, 
norfloxacin inhibit theophylline metabolism; gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, 
lomefloxacin, ofloxacin, and sparfloxacin appear to have little effect.
See also Antacids; Anticoagulants, oral; Iron.
Rifampin
Inducer (strong) of hepatic microsomal drug-
metabolizing enzymes.
Corticosteroids: [P] Increased corticosteroid hepatic metabolism; 
reduced corticosteroid effect.
Mexiletine: [NE] Increased mexiletine metabolism; reduced 
mexiletine effect.
Sulfonylurea hypoglycemics: [P] Increased hepatic metabolism of 
tolbutamide and probably other sulfonylureas metabolized by the 
liver (including chlorpropamide).
Theophylline: [P] Increased theophylline metabolism; reduced 
theophylline effect.
See also Anticoagulants, oral; Azole antifungals; Beta-adrenoceptor  
blockers; Calcium channel blockers; Cyclosporine; Digitalis glycosides; 
Estrogens.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
(continued )
1162    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE 66–1 Important drug interactions. 
Drug or Drug Group
Properties Promoting Drug Interaction
Clinically Documented Interactions
Salicylates
Interference with renal excretion of drugs that 
undergo active tubular secretion. Salicylate renal 
excretion dependent on urinary pH when large 
doses of salicylate used. Aspirin (but not other 
salicylates) interferes with platelet function. 
Large doses of salicylates have intrinsic hypogly-
cemic activity.
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors: [NE] Increased acetazolamide serum 
concentrations; increase salicylate toxicity due to decreased blood pH.
Corticosteroids: [P] Increased salicylate elimination; possible additive 
toxic effect on gastric mucosa.
Heparin: [NE] Increased bleeding tendency with aspirin, but probably 
not with other salicylates.
Methotrexate: [P] Decreased renal methotrexate clearance; increases 
methotrexate toxicity (primarily at anticancer doses).
Sulfinpyrazone: [HP] Decreased uricosuric effect of sulfinpyrazone 
(interaction unlikely with less than 1.5 g of salicylate daily).
See also Antacids; Anticoagulants, oral; Probenecid.
Selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) 
can lead to excessive serotonin response when 
administered with other serotonergic drugs (eg, 
MAOIs). Some SSRIs inhibit various cytochrome 
P450s including CYP2D6, CYP1A2, CYP3A4, and 
CYP2C19.
Theophylline: [P] Decreased metabolism by fluvoxamine-induced 
inhibition of CYP.
See also Anticoagulants, oral; Antidepressants, tricyclic and heterocy-
clic; Beta-adrenoceptor blockers; Carbamazepine; Cisapride; 
Colchicine; Cyclosporine; HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors; Monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors; Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; Phenytoin; 
Pimozide.
Theophylline
Susceptible to inhibition of hepatic metabolism 
by CYP1A2. Metabolism inducible.
Benzodiazepines: [NE] Inhibition of benzodiazepine sedation.
Beta-adrenoceptor blockers: [NP] Decreased theophylline broncho-
dilation especially with nonselective β blockers.
Diltiazem: [NP] Decreased theophylline metabolism.
Smoking: [HP] Increased theophylline metabolism.
Tacrine: [NP] Decreased theophylline metabolism.
Ticlopidine: [NE] Decreased theophylline metabolism.
Verapamil: [NP] Decreased theophylline metabolism.
Zileuton: [NP] Decreased theophylline metabolism.
See also Barbiturates; Carbamazepine; Cimetidine; Lithium; Macrolides; 
Phenytoin; Quinolones; Rifampin.
HP, Highly predictable. Interaction occurs in almost all patients receiving the interacting combination; P, Predictable. Interaction occurs in most patients receiving the 
combination; NP, Not predictable. Interaction occurs only in some patients receiving the combination; NE, Not established. Insufficient data available on which to base estimate 
of predictability.
 REFERENCES 
 Asberg A: Interactions between cyclosporin and lipid-lowering drugs: Implications 
for organ transplant recipients. Drugs 2003;63:367. 
 Blanchard N et al: Qualitative and quantitative assessment of drug-drug interac-
tion potential in man, based on Ki, IC50 and inhibitor concentration. Curr 
Drug Metab 2004;5:147. 
 deMaat MM et al: Drug interactions between antiretroviral drugs and comedicated 
agents. Clin Pharmacokinet 2003;42:223. 
 DuBuske LM: The role of P-glycoprotein and organic anion-transporting polypep-
tides in drug interactions. Drug Saf 2005;28:789. 
 Egger SS et al: Potential drug-drug interactions in the medication of medical 
patients at hospital discharge. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2003;58:773. 
 Hansten PD: Understanding drug interactions. Sci Med 1998;5:16. 
 Hansten PD, Horn JR:  Drug Interactions Analysis and Management. Facts & 
Comparisons. 2011. [Quarterly.] 
 Hansten PD, Horn JR:  The Top 100 Drug Interactions. A Guide to Patient 
Management. H&H Publications, 2011. 
 Juurlink DN et al: Drug-drug interactions among elderly patients hospitalized for 
drug toxicity. JAMA 2003;289:1652. 
 Kim RB (editor):  The Medical Letter Handbook of Adverse Interactions. Medical 
Letter, 2003. 
 Leucuta SE, Vlase L: Pharmacokinetics and metabolic drug interactions. Curr Clin 
Pharmacol 2006;1:5. 
 Levy RH et al (editors):  Metabolic Drug Interactions . Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins, 2000. 
 Lin JH, Yamazaki M: Role of P-glycoprotein in pharmacokinetics: Clinical impli-
cations. Clin Pharmacokinet 2003;42:59. 
 Tatro DS (editor):  Drug Interaction Facts. Facts & Comparisons. 2011. 
[Quarterly.] 
 Thelen K, Dressman JB: Cytochrome P540-mediated metabolism in the human 
gut wall. J Pharm Pharmacol 2009;61:541. 
 Williamson EM: Drug interactions between herbal and prescription medicines. 
Drug Saf 2003;26:1075. 
 
1163
Appendix: Vaccines, 
Immune Globulins, 
& Other Complex 
Biologic Products
Harry W. Lampiris, MD, & Daniel S. Maddix, PharmD
 Vaccines and related biologic products constitute an important 
group of agents that bridge the disciplines of microbiology, infec-
tious diseases, immunology, and immunopharmacology. A list of 
the most important preparations is provided here. The reader who 
requires more complete information is referred to the sources 
listed at the end of this appendix. 
 ACTIVE IMMUNIZATION 
 Active immunization consists of the administration of antigen 
to the host to induce formation of antibodies and cell-mediated 
immunity. Immunization is practiced to induce protection 
against many infectious agents and may utilize either inacti-
vated (killed) materials or live attenuated agents ( Table A–1 ). 
Desirable features of the ideal immunogen include complete 
prevention of disease, prevention of the carrier state, production 
of prolonged immunity with a minimum of immunizations, 
absence of toxicity, and suitability for mass immunization (eg, 
cheap and easy to administer). Active immunization is generally 
preferable to passive immunization—in most cases because 
higher antibody levels are sustained for longer periods of time, 
requiring less frequent immunization, and in some cases because 
of the development of concurrent cell-mediated immunity. 
However, active immunization requires time to develop and is 
therefore generally inactive at the time of a specific exposure 
(eg, for parenteral exposure to hepatitis B, concurrent hepatitis 
B IgG [passive antibodies] and active immunization are given to 
prevent illness). 
 Current recommendations for routine active immunization of 
children are given in  Table A–2 . 
 PASSIVE IMMUNIZATION 
 Passive immunization consists of transfer of immunity to a host 
using preformed immunologic products. From a practical stand-
point, only immunoglobulins have been used for passive immu-
nization, because passive administration of cellular components 
of the immune system has been technically difficult and associ-
ated with graft-versus-host reactions. Products of the cellular 
immune system (eg, interferons) have also been used in the 
therapy of a wide variety of hematologic and infectious diseases 
(see  Chapter 55 ). 
 Passive immunization with antibodies may be accomplished 
with either animal or human immunoglobulins in varying degrees 
of purity. These may contain relatively high titers of antibodies 
directed against a specific antigen or, as is true for pooled immune 
globulin, may simply contain antibodies found in most of the 
population. Passive immunization is useful for (1) individuals 
unable to form antibodies (eg, congenital agammaglobulinemia); 
(2) prevention of disease when time does not permit active immu-
nization (eg, postexposure); (3) for treatment of certain diseases 
normally prevented by immunization (eg, tetanus); and (4) for 
treatment of conditions for which active immunization is unavail-
able or impractical (eg, snakebite). 
 Complications from administration of  human immunoglobu-
lins are rare. The injections may be moderately painful and rarely 
a sterile abscess may occur at the injection site. Transient hypoten-
sion and pruritus occasionally occur with the administration of 
intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) products, but generally are 
mild. Individuals with certain immunoglobulin deficiency states 
(IgA deficiency, etc) may occasionally develop hypersensi-
tivity reactions to immune globulin that may limit therapy. 
TABLE A–1 Materials commonly used for active immunization in the United States.1
Vaccine
Type of Agent
Route of 
Administration
Primary Immunization
Booster2
Indications
Diphtheria tetanus acellular 
pertussis (DTaP)
Toxoids and inactivated 
bacterial components
Intramuscular
See Table A–2
None
For all children
Haemophilus influenzae type b 
conjugate (Hib)3
Bacterial polysaccharide 
conjugated to protein
Intramuscular
One dose (see Table A–2 for 
childhood schedule)
Not recommended
1. For all children
2. Asplenia and other at-risk conditions
Hepatitis A
Inactivated virus
Intramuscular
One dose (see Table A–2 for 
childhood schedule)
(administer at least 2–4 
weeks before travel to 
endemic areas)
At 6–12 months for 
long-term immunity
1. Travelers to hepatitis A endemic areas
2. Homosexual and bisexual men
3. Injection drug users
4. Chronic liver disease or clotting factor disorders
5. Persons with occupational risk for infection
6.  Persons living in, or relocating to, endemic
areas
7. Household and sexual contacts of individu-
als with acute hepatitis A (with additional 
gamma globulin in select patients)
8. For all children
Hepatitis B
Inactive viral antigen, 
recombinant
Intramuscular (subcuta-
neous injection is 
acceptable in individu-
als with bleeding 
disorders)
Three doses at 0, 1, and 6 
months (see Table A–2 for 
childhood schedule)
Not routinely recom-
mended
1.  For all infants
2. Preadolescents, adolescents, and young 
adults
3. Persons with occupational, lifestyle, or 
environmental risk
4. Hemophiliacs
5. Persons with end-stage renal disease, HIV, or 
chronic liver disease
6. Postexposure prophylaxis
7. Household and sexual contacts of individu-
als with acute and chronic hepatitis B
Human papillomavirus (HPV)4
Virus-like particles of the 
major capsid protein
Intramuscular
Three doses at 0, 2, and 
6 months (HPV4) or 0, 1, and 
6 months (HPV2)4
None
HPV2 or HPV4 for females between 9 and 
26 years of age; HPV4 for males aged 9– 
26 years
Influenza, inactivated
Inactivated virus or viral 
components
Intramuscular
One dose (Children < 9 years 
who are receiving influenza 
vaccine for the first time 
should receive two doses 
administered at least 
1 month apart.)
Yearly with current 
vaccine
1. Adults > 18 years
2. Persons with high-risk conditions 
(eg, asthma)
3. Health care workers and others in contact 
with high-risk groups
4. Residents of nursing homes and other 
residential chronic care facilities
5. All children aged 6 months to 18 years
6. Women who will be pregnant during the 
influenza season
1164
1165
Influenza, live attenuated
Live virus
Intranasal
Split dose in each nostril. 
Children age 5–8 who are 
receiving influenza vaccine 
for the first time should 
receive two doses adminis-
tered 6–10 weeks apart
Yearly with current 
vaccine
Healthy persons aged 19–49 years who desire 
protection against influenza. May be substi-
tuted for inactivated vaccine in healthy 
children 2–18 years
Measles-mumps-rubella 
(MMR)
Live virus
Subcutaneous
See Table A–2
None
1. For all children
2. Adults born after 1956
Meningococcal conjugate 
vaccine
Bacterial polysaccharides 
conjugated to diphtheria 
toxoid
Intramuscular
One dose
Unknown
1. All adolescents
2.  Preferred over polysaccharide vaccine in 
persons aged 11–55 years
Meningococcal polysaccha-
ride vaccine
Bacterial polysaccharides 
of serotypes A/C/Y/W-135
Subcutaneous
One dose
Every 5 years if there is 
continuing high risk of 
exposure
1. Military recruits
2.  Travelers to areas with hyperendemic or 
epidemic meningococcal disease
3.  Individuals with asplenia, complement 
deficiency, or properdin deficiency
4.  Control of outbreaks in closed or semiclosed 
populations
5. College freshmen who live in dormitories
6. Microbiologists who are routinely exposed 
to isolates of Neisseria meningitidis
Pneumococcal conjugate 
vaccine
Bacterial polysaccharides 
conjugated to protein
Intramuscular or 
subcutaneous
See Table A–2
None
For all children
Pneumococcal polysaccharide 
vaccine
Bacterial polysaccharides 
of 23 serotypes
Intramuscular or 
subcutaneous
One dose
Repeat after 5 years in 
patients at high risk
1.  Adults ≥ 65 years
2. Persons at increased risk for pneumococcal 
disease or its complications
Poliovirus vaccine, inactivated 
(IPV)
Inactivated viruses of all 
three serotypes
Subcutaneous
See Table A–2 for childhood 
schedule. Adults: Two doses 
4–8 weeks apart, and a third 
dose 6–12 months after the 
second
One-time booster 
dose for adults at 
increased risk of 
exposure
1. For all children
2. Previously unvaccinated adults at increased 
risk for occupational or travel exposure to 
polioviruses
Rabies
Inactivated virus
Intramuscular 
Preexposure: Three doses at 
days 0, 7, and 21 or 28
Postexposure: Four doses 
at days 0, 3, 7, and 14
Serologic testing every 
6 months to 2 years in 
persons at high risk
1. Preexposure prophylaxis in persons at risk 
for contact with rabies virus
2. Postexposure prophylaxis (administer with 
rabies immune globulin)
Rotavirus
Live virus
Oral
See Table A–2
None
For all infants. The series of 3 doses should be 
initiated by age 14 weeks and completed by 
age 32 weeks
None
Tetanus-diphtheria (Td or DT)5
Toxoids
Intramuscular
Two doses 4–8 weeks apart, 
and a third dose 6–12 
months after the second
Every 10 years or a 
single booster at 
age 50
1. All adults
2.  Postexposure prophylaxis if > 5 years has 
passed since last dose
(continued )
TABLE A–1 Materials commonly used for active immunization in the United States.1 (Continued)
Vaccine
Type of Agent
Route of 
Administration
Primary Immunization
Booster2
Indications
Tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis 
(Tdap)
Toxoids and inactivated 
bacterial components
Intramuscular
Substitute 1 dose of Tdap for 
Td in patients 19–64 years of 
age
None
All adults < 65 years
Typhoid, Ty21a oral
Live bacteria
Oral
Four doses administered 
every other day
Four doses every 
5 years
Risk of exposure to typhoid fever
Typhoid, Vi capsular 
polysaccharide
Bacterial polysaccharide
Intramuscular
One dose
Every 2 years
Risk of exposure to typhoid fever
Varicella
Live virus
Subcutaneous
Two doses 4–8 weeks apart 
in persons past their 13th 
birthday (see Table A–2 for 
childhood schedule)
Unknown
1. For all children
2.  Persons past their 13th birthday without a 
history of varicella infection or immunization
3.  Postexposure prophylaxis in susceptible 
persons
Yellow fever
Live virus
Subcutaneous
One dose 10 years to 
10 days before travel
Every 10 years
1. Laboratory personnel who may be exposed 
to yellow fever virus
2. Travelers to areas where yellow fever occurs
Zoster
Live virus
Subcutaneous
One dose
None
All adults ≥ 60 years of age
1Dosages for the specific product, including variations for age, are best obtained from the manufacturer’s package insert.
2One dose unless otherwise indicated.
3Three Hib conjugate vaccines are available for use: (1) oligosaccharide conjugate Hib vaccine (HbOC), (2) polyribosylribitol phosphate-tetanus toxoid conjugate (PRP-T), and (3) Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate vaccine 
(meningococcal protein conjugate) (PRP-OMP).
4Two HPV vaccines are available for use: (1) quadrivalent vaccine (HPV4) for the prevention of cervical, vaginal, and vulvar cancers (in females) and genital warts (in males and females), and (2) bivalent vaccine (HPV2) for the 
prevention of cervical cancers in females.
5Td is tetanus and diphtheria toxoids for use in persons ≥ 7 years of age (contains less diphtheria toxoid than DPT and DT). DT is tetanus and diphtheria toxoids for use in persons < 7 years of age (contains the same amount of 
diphtheria toxoid as DPT).
1166
Appendix: Vaccines, Immune Globulins, & Other Complex Biologic Products    1167
TABLE A–2 Recommended routine childhood immunization schedule.
Age
Immunization
Comments
Birth to 2 months
Hepatitis B vaccine (HBV)
Infants born to seronegative mothers: Administration should 
begin at birth, with the second dose administered at least 4 weeks 
after the first dose.
Infants born to seropositive mothers: Should receive the first 
dose within 12 hours after birth (with hepatitis B immune globulin), 
the second dose at 1–2 months of age, and the third dose at 
6–18 months of age.
2 months
Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular
pertussis vaccine (DTaP), inactivated poliovirus 
vaccine (IPV), Haemophilus influenzae type b 
conjugate vaccine (Hib),1 pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine (PCV), rotavirus vaccine (RV)
1–2 months
HBV
The second dose should be given at least 4 weeks after the first 
dose.
4 months
DTaP, Hib,1 IPV, PCV, RV
6 months
DTaP, Hib,1 PCV, RV
6–18 months
HBV, IPV, influenza
The third dose of HBV should be given at least 16 weeks after the 
first dose and at least 8 weeks after the second dose, but not before 
age 6 months. Influenza vaccine should be administered annually 
to children aged 6 months to 18 years.
12–15 months
Measles-mumps-rubella vaccine (MMR), Hib,1 PCV, 
varicella vaccine
The second dose of varicella vaccine should be administered at age 
4–6 years
12–18 months
DTaP at 15–18 months
DTaP may be given as early as age 12 months.
12–23 months
Hepatitis A vaccine
Two doses ≥ 6 months apart.
4–6 years
DTaP IPV, MMR, varicella vaccine
The second dose of MMR should be routinely administered at age 
4–6 years but may be given during any visit if at least 4 weeks have 
elapsed since administration of the first dose. The second dose 
should be given no later than age 11–12 years.
11–12 years
Tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis (Tdap) vaccine, 
human papillomavirus vaccine (HPV),2
meningococcal conjugate vaccine
Three doses of HPV should be administered to females at 0, 1–2, 
and 6 months. HPV4 may be administered to males aged 9–18 
years to reduce the likelihood of developing genital warts.
1Three Hib conjugate vaccines are available for use: (1) oligosaccharide conjugate Hib vaccine (HbOC), (2) polyribosylribitol phosphate-tetanus toxoid conjugate (PRP-T), and 
(3) Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate vaccine (meningococcal protein conjugate) (PRP-OMP). Children immunized with PRP-OMP at 2 and 4 months of age do not require 
a dose at 6 months of age.
2Two HPV vaccines are available for use: (1) quadrivalent vaccine (HPV4) for the prevention of cervical, vaginal, and vulvar cancers (in females) and genital warts (in males and 
females), and (2) bivalent vaccine (HPV2) for the prevention of cervical cancers in females.
Adapted from MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2010;58:(51&52).
Conventional immune globulin contains aggregates of IgG; it will 
cause severe reactions if given intravenously. However, if the pas-
sively administered antibodies are derived from  animal sera, 
hypersensitivity reactions ranging from anaphylaxis to serum sick-
ness may occur. Highly purified immunoglobulins, especially 
from rodents or lagomorphs, are the least likely to cause reac-
tions. To avoid anaphylactic reactions, tests for hypersensitivity 
to the animal serum must be performed. If an alternative prepara-
tion is not available and administration of the specific antibody is 
deemed essential, desensitization can be carried out. 
 Antibodies derived from human serum not only avoid the risk 
of hypersensitivity reactions but also have a much longer half-life 
in humans (about 23 days for IgG antibodies) than those from 
animal sources (5–7 days or less). Consequently, much smaller 
doses of human antibody can be administered to provide thera-
peutic concentrations for several weeks. These advantages point to 
the desirability of using human antibodies for passive protection 
whenever possible. Materials available for passive immunization 
are summarized in  Table A–3 . 
 LEGAL LIABILITY FOR UNTOWARD 
REACTIONS 
 It is the physician’s responsibility to inform the patient of the risk 
of immunization and to use vaccines and antisera in an appropri-
ate manner. This may require skin testing to assess the risk of an 
untoward reaction. Some of the risks previously described are, 
1168    SECTION X Special Topics
TABLE A–3 Materials available for passive immunization. 1
Indication
Product
Dosage
Comments
Black widow spider bite
Aontivenin (Latrodectus mactans), 
equine
One vial (6000 units) IV or IM.
For persons with hypertensive cardiovas-
cular disease or age < 16 or > 60 years.
Bone marrow 
transplantation
Immune globulin (intravenous 
[IV])2
500 mg/kg IV on days 7 and 2 prior to 
transplantation and then once weekly 
through day 90 after transplantation.
Prophylaxis to decrease the risk of infec-
tion, interstitial pneumonia, and acute 
graft-versus-host disease in adults 
undergoing bone marrow 
transplantation.
Botulism
Botulism antitoxin, equine
Botulism immune globulin (IV)
Consult the CDC.3
50 mg/kg IV.
Treatment and prophylaxis of botulism. 
Available from the CDC.3 Incidence of 
serum reactions is 10–20%.
For the treatment of patients < 1 year of 
age with infant botulism caused by toxin 
type A or B.
Chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia (CLL)
Immune globulin (IV)2
400 mg/kg IV every 3–4 weeks. Dosage 
should be adjusted upward if bacterial 
infections occur.
CLL patients with hypogammaglobuline-
mia and a history of at least one serious 
bacterial infection.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Cytomegalovirus immune 
globulin (IV)
Consult the manufacturer’s dosing 
recommendations.
Prophylaxis of CMV infection in bone 
marrow, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, and 
heart transplant recipients.
Diphtheria
Diphtheria antitoxin, equine
20,000–120,000 units IV or IM depend-
ing on the severity and duration of 
illness.
Early treatment of respiratory diphtheria. 
Available from the CDC.3 Anaphylactic 
reactions in ≥ 7% of adults and serum 
reactions in ≥ 5–10% of adults.
Hepatitis A
Immune globulin (intramuscular 
[IM])
Preexposure prophylaxis: 0.02 mL/kg 
IM for anticipated risk of ≤ 3 months, 
0.06 mL/kg for anticipated risk of 
> 3 months, repeated every 4–6 months 
for continued exposure.
Postexposure: 0.02 mL/kg IM as soon 
as possible after exposure up to 2 weeks.
Preexposure and postexposure hepatitis 
A prophylaxis. The availability of hepati-
tis A vaccine has greatly reduced the 
need for preexposure prophylaxis. 
Patients > 40 years should receive hepa-
titis A vaccine in addition to immune 
globulin for postexposure prophylaxis
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis B immune globulin 
(HBIG)
0.06 mL/kg IM as soon as possible after 
exposure up to 1 week for percutaneous 
exposure or 2 weeks for sexual 
exposure. 0.5 mL IM within 12 hours 
after birth for perinatal exposure.
Postexposure prophylaxis in nonimmune 
persons following percutaneous, 
mucosal, sexual, or perinatal exposure. 
Hepatitis B vaccine should also be 
administered.
HIV-infected children
Immune globulin (IV)2
400 mg/kg IV every 28 days.
HIV-infected children with recurrent 
serious bacterial infections or 
hypogammaglobulinemia.
Idiopathic thrombocy-
topenic purpura (ITP)
Immune globulin (IV)2
Consult the manufacturer’s dosing rec-
ommendations for the specific product 
being used.
Response in children with ITP is greater 
than in adults. Corticosteroids are the 
treatment of choice in adults, except for 
severe pregnancy-associated ITP.
Kawasaki disease
Immune globulin (IV)2
400 mg/kg IV daily for 4 consecutive 
days within 4 days after the onset of 
illness. A single dose of 2 g/kg IV over 
10 hours is also effective.
Effective in the prevention of coronary 
aneurysms. For use in patients who meet 
strict criteria for Kawasaki disease.
Measles
Immune globulin (IM)
Normal hosts: 0.25 mL/kg IM.
Immunocompromised hosts: 0.5 mL/
kg IM (maximum 15 mL for all patients).
Postexposure prophylaxis (within 6 days 
after exposure) in nonimmune contacts 
of acute cases.
Primary immunodefi-
ciency disorders
Immune globulin (IV)2
Consult the manufacturer’s dosing rec-
ommendations for the specific product 
being used.
Primary immunodeficiency disorders 
include specific antibody deficiencies 
(eg, X-linked agammaglobulinemia) and 
combined deficiencies (eg, severe 
combined immunodeficiencies).
(continued)
Appendix: Vaccines, Immune Globulins, & Other Complex Biologic Products    1169
TABLE A–3 Materials available for passive immunization. 1
Indication
Product
Dosage
Comments
Rabies
Rabies immune globulin
20 IU/kg. The full dose should be infil-
trated around the wound and any 
remaining volume should be given IM 
at an anatomic site distant from vaccine 
administration.
Postexposure rabies prophylaxis in 
persons not previously immunized with 
rabies vaccine. Must be combined with 
rabies vaccine.
Respiratory syncytial 
virus (RSV)
Palivizumab
15 mg/kg IM once prior to the begin-
ning of the RSV season and once 
monthly until the end of the season.
For use in infants and children 
< 24 months with chronic lung disease 
or a history of premature birth 
(≤ 35 weeks’ gestation).
Rubella
Immune globulin (IM)
0.55 mL/kg IM.
Nonimmune pregnant women exposed 
to rubella who will not consider thera-
peutic abortion. Administration does not 
prevent rubella in the fetus of an 
exposed mother.
Snake bite (coral snake)
Antivenom (Micrurus fulvius), 
equine
At least 3–5 vials (30–50 mL) IV initially 
within 4 hours after the bite. Additional 
doses may be required.
Neutralizes venom of eastern coral snake 
and Texas coral snake. Serum sickness 
occurs in almost all patients who receive 
> 7 vials.
Snake bite (pit vipers)
Antivenom (Crotalidae) polyva-
lent immune Fab, ovine
An initial dose of 4–6 vials should be 
infused intravenously over 1 hour. The 
dose should be repeated if initial con-
trol is not achieved. After initial control, 
2 vials should be given every 6 hours for 
up to 3 doses.
For the management of minimal to 
moderate North American crotalid 
envenomation.
Tetanus
Tetanus immune globulin
Postexposure prophylaxis: 250 units 
IM. For severe wounds or when there 
has been a delay in administration, 
500 units is recommended.
Treatment: 3000–6000 units IM.
Treatment of tetanus and postexposure 
prophylaxis of nonclean, nonminor 
wounds in inadequately immunized 
persons (less than two doses of tetanus 
toxoid or less than three doses if wound 
is > 24 hours old).
Vaccinia
Vaccinia immune globulin
Consult the CDC.3
Treatment of severe reactions to vaccinia 
vaccination, including eczema vaccina-
tum, vaccinia necrosum, and ocular 
vaccinia. Available from the CDC.3
Varicella
Varicella-zoster immune 
globulin
Weight (kg) 
Dose (units)
≤ 10 
125 IM
10.1–20 
250 IM
20.1–30 
375 IM
30.1–40 
500 IM
≥ 40 
625 IM
Postexposure prophylaxis (preferably 
within 48 hours but no later than within 
96 hours after exposure) in susceptible 
immunocompromised hosts, selected 
pregnant women, and perinatally 
exposed newborns.
1Passive immunotherapy or immunoprophylaxis should always be administered as soon as possible after exposure. Prior to the administration of animal sera, patients should 
be questioned and tested for hypersensitivity.
2See the following references for an analysis of additional uses of intravenously administered immune globulin: Ratko TA et al: Recommendations for off-label use of intrave-
nously administered immunoglobulin preparations. JAMA 1995;273:1865; and Feasby T et al: Guidelines on the use of intravenous immune globulin for neurologic conditions. 
Transfus Med Rev 2007;21(2 Suppl 1)S57.
3Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 404-639-3670 during weekday business hours; 770-488-7100 during nights, weekends, and holidays (emergency requests only).
(Continued)
1170    SECTION X Special Topics
however, currently unavoidable; on balance, the patient and soci-
ety are clearly better off accepting the risks for routinely adminis-
tered immunogens (eg, influenza and tetanus vaccines). 
 Manufacturers should be held legally accountable for failure to 
adhere to existing standards for production of biologicals. However, 
in the present litigious atmosphere of the USA, the filing of large 
liability claims by the statistically inevitable victims of good public 
health practice has caused many manufacturers to abandon efforts 
to develop and produce low-profit but medically valuable thera-
peutic agents such as vaccines. Since the use and sale of these 
products are subject to careful review and approval by government 
bodies such as the Surgeon General’s Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices and the Food and Drug Administration, 
“strict product liability” (liability without fault) may be an 
inappropriate legal standard to apply when rare reactions to 
biologicals, produced and administered according to government 
guidelines, are involved. 
 RECOMMENDED IMMUNIZATION OF 
ADULTS FOR TRAVEL 
 Every adult, whether traveling or not, should be immunized with 
tetanus toxoid and should also be fully immunized against polio-
myelitis, measles (for those born after 1956), and diphtheria. In 
addition, every traveler must fulfill the immunization require-
ments of the health authorities of the countries to be visited. These 
are listed in  Health Information for International Travel , available 
from the Superintendent of Documents, United States Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402. A useful website is 
 http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/vaccinations.aspx .  The Medical 
Letter on Drugs and Therapeutics also offers periodically updated 
recommendations for international travelers (see  Treatment 
Guidelines from The Medical Letter, 2006;4:25). Immunizations 
received in preparation for travel should be recorded on the 
International Certificate of Immunization.  Note: Smallpox vacci-
nation is not recommended or required for travel in any country. 
 REFERENCES 
 Ada G: Vaccines and vaccination. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1042. 
 Advice for travelers. Treat Guidel Med Lett 2009;7:83. 
 Avery RK: Immunizations in adult immunocompromised patients: Which to use 
and which to avoid. Cleve Clin J Med 2001;68:337. 
 CDC Website:  http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/ 
 Dennehy PH: Active immunization in the United States: Developments over the 
past decade. Clin Micro Rev 2001;14:872. 
 Gardner P, Peter G: Vaccine recommendations: Challenges and controversies. 
Infect Dis Clin North Am 2001;15:1. 
 Gardner P et al: Guidelines for quality standards for immunization. Clin Infect Dis 
2002;35:503. 
 General recommendations on immunization. Recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2011;60(2):1. 
 Hill DR et al: The practice of travel medicine: Guidelines by the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2006;43:1499. 
 Keller MA, Stiehm ER: Passive immunity in prevention and treatment of infec-
tious diseases. Clin Microbiol Rev 2000;13:602. 
 Pickering LK et al: Immunization programs for infants, children, adolescents, and 
adults: Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Clin Infect Dis 2009;49:817. 
 Recommended adult immunization schedule—United States, 2010. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2010;59:1. 
 Recommended immunization schedules for persons aged 0 through 18 years—
United States, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2007;58(51&52). 
 
1171
1171
A
Abacavir, 863f, 869, 870t, 872, 888
drug interactions with, 874t
Abatacept, 643, 656, 993, 993f, 999
Abbokinase, 617. See also Urokinase
Abbreviated new drug application 
(ANDA), 75–76
Abciximab, 613, 994, 617, 999
Abdomen, poisoning effects on, 1029
Abelcet
properties of, 850t
Abilify, 519. See also Aripiprazole
Abiraterone, 710, 738
Abortion
eicosanoids and, 324
Abreva, 888. See also Docosanol
Abscess(es)
amebic liver
chloroquine for, 917
Absence seizures, 421
Absorption of drugs. See also specific drugs
bioavailability effects on, 43
in the elderly, 1052
in infants and children, 1044, 1044t
percutaneous, 1061, 1062f
pharmacokinetic mechanisms of, 1149
as pharmacokinetic variable, 47–48
Abstinence syndrome, 549
Abuse
alcohol
prevalence of, 389
prevention of
drugs in, 400
drugs of, 565–580. See also specific drugs 
and Drug abuse
Acamprosate
in alcoholism management, 397
Acarbose, 766
for diabetes mellitus, 759
Acceptable daily intake (ADI), 1002
Accolate, 328, 355. See also Zafirlukast
Accumulation factors, 43
Accumulation of drugs, 42–43, 42f
Accupril, 190, 225. See also Quinapril
ACE inhibitors. See Angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Acebutolol
as antihypertensive drug, 179
preparations available, 167, 189, 249
Aceon, 190, 225. See also Perindopril
Acephen, 656. See also Acetaminophen
Acetaldehyde
metabolism of, 390–391, 390f
Acetaminophen
half-life of
in neonates and adults, 1045t
ionization constants of, 11t
metabolism of
to hepatotoxic metabolites, 
60–61, 61f
oral absorption of
in neonates vs. older children and 
adults, 1044t
overdose of, 1032
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 39t
Acetazolamide, 257, 270
for epilepsy, 420
ionization constants of, 11t
5-Acetylaminosalicylic acid
structure of, 1101f
Acetylation, 60t
Acetylcholine (ACh), 99f, 124f, 
467f, 112
activation of endothelial cell muscarinic 
receptors by, 103, 103f
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 80f, 
81f, 83f, 84t
as CNS neurotransmitter, 366t, 369
effects of, 92t
properties of, 99, 100t
Acetylcholine-blocking drugs. See 
Antimuscarinic drugs
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 84
Acetylcysteine
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Acetylsalicylic acid, 656. See also Aspirin
N-Acetyltransferases (NATs), 60
Acid(s). See also specific types
secretion of
physiology of, 1081–1082, 1082f
weak
defined, 10
ionization of, 10–12, 11t, 12f, 12t
Acid-peptic diseases
drugs used for, 1081–1091
Acid reducers
ingredients in, 1118t
Acid secretion
physiology of, 1081–1082, 1082f
Acidity
intragastric
drugs for reducing, 1081–1089
Acidosis
anion gap
drug-induced, 1030, 1030t
metabolic. See Metabolic acidosis
Aciphex, 1111. See also Rabeprazole
Acitretin
for psoriasis, 1071
Acne preparations, 1069–1071
ingredients in, 1118t
topical antibiotics, 1064–1065
Aconite
risks associated with, 1127t
Acromegaly, 665
dopamine agonists for, 673
Actemra, 656, 999. See also Tocilizumab
ACTH. See also Adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH)
Acthar Gel, 678. See also Corticotropin
Acthrel, 678. See also Corticorelin ovine 
triflutate
Actigall, 1112. See also Ursodiol
Actimmune, 999 
Action potential(s)
resting potential effects on, 231–233, 
232f, 233f, 233t
Activase, 617. See also Alteplase 
recombinant
Activated charcoal
in decontamination of poisoned patient, 
1032
Activated partial thromboplastin time 
(aPTT), 605
Active cell membrane, 230–231, 231f
Activin, 726
Actonel, 786. See also Risedronate sodium
Actos, 766. See also Pioglitazone
Acute coronary syndrome, 193
clinical pharmacology of, 207
Acute heart failure
management of, 222
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 
144
Acute mountain sickness
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for, 
257–258
Acute pulmonary edema
opioid analgesics for, 553
Acute renal failure
loop diuretics for, 259
potassium-sparing drugs 
and, 263
Index
Note: Page numbers in boldface type indicate major discussions. A t following a page number indicates tabular material, and an f
following a page number indicates a figure. 
1172    Index
Acyclovir, 863f, 888
dosage of, 865t
for HSV and VZV infections, 862–864, 
863f, 864f
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 39t
topical, 1067
Adagen, 999. See also Pegademase bovine
Adalat, 190, 209. See also Nifedipine
Adalimumab, 647–648, 647f, 992
for inflammatory bowel disease, 
1104–1106, 1105t
preparations available, 656, 999, 1112
for psoriasis, 1072
Adapalene
for acne, 1070
Adcirca, 209. See also Tadalafil
Addiction
animal models of, 566
clinical pharmacology of, 578
defined, 565
dopamine hypothesis of, 568
dopamine level effects of, 565–566, 
567f, 569f, 569t
synaptic plasticity and, 571
Addison’s disease
synthetic corticosteroids for, 703–704
Adefovir, 863f, 888
for HBV infection, 883t, 884
Adenocard, 250. See also Adenosine
Adenosine
for cardiac arrhythmias, 245–246
inhibitory effects of, 92t
membrane actions of, 237t
pharmacologic properties of, 238t
in renal tubule transport, 256
Adenosine A1-receptor antagonists, 258
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
in coagulation, 601, 602f
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 80f, 
81f, 83f, 84t
S-Adenosyl-L-methionine (SAMe), 60
ADH. See Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
ADHD
sympathomimetic drugs for, 146
Adherence
in clinical trials, 73
ADI. See Acceptable daily intake (ADI)
Adipose tissue
insulin effects on, 746, 747t
Adjuvant chemotherapy, 950–951
Adrenal androgens, 709
Adrenal cortex
angiotensin II effects on, 298
Adrenal steroid inhibitors, 712
Adrenal suppression
synthetic corticosteroids and, 707
Adrenalin, 148, 355. 
See also Epinephrine
Adrenergic nerves
cotransmitters in, 87
Adrenergic-neuron-blocking drugs
as antihypertensive drugs, 175t, 
177–178
Adrenergic receptors, 87, 89t
Adrenergic transmission, 84–87, 85f, 86f
Adrenoceptor(s), 87, 89t
agonists of, 129–149.See also 
Sympathomimetic drugs
antagonists of, 151–168
alpha-receptor antagonists, 151–157
as antihypertensive drugs, 178
beta-receptor antagonists. See also Beta 
receptors, antagonists of
basic pharmacology of, 157–161
beta. See Beta adrenoceptors
Adrenoceptor-blocking actions
of H1-receptor antagonists, 278
Adrenocortical agents
antagonists of, 709–711.
See also specific drugs
structures of, 709f
Adrenocortical hypo- and hyperfunction
synthetic corticosteroids for, 704
Adrenocortical insufficiency
synthetic corticosteroids for, 703–704
Adrenocorticosteroids, 697–709. See also 
specific drugs
ACTH vs., 707
mineralocorticoids, 708–709
synthetic corticosteroids, 703–708
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
661, 661t
adrenocorticosteroids vs., 707
biosynthesis of
major pathways in, 698, 698f
diagnostic uses of, 662t
Adrenomedullin, 308
Advair Diskus, 355. See also Salmeterol/
fluticasone
Adverse drug reactions (ADRs). 
See also specific drugs
during drug development, 76–77
in the elderly, 1057–1058
Advicor, 633
Advil, 655. See also Ibuprofen
AeroBid, 355. See also Flunisolide
Aerosol corticosteroids, 355
Aerospan, 355. See also Flunisolide
African trypanosomiasis
drugs used for, 930–934, 
930t, 932t
Afrin, 148. See also Oxymetazoline
Aftate, 858. See also Tolnaftate
Afterdepolarization(s)
delayed, 233f, 234
Afterload
in cardiac performance, 
215, 215f
Agammaglobulinemia
X-linked, 984–985
Age
as factor in drug dosage in infants and 
children, 1047, 1049, 1049t
as factor in drug metabolism, 66
Aggrastat, 617. See also Tirofiban
Aging. See also Elderly
androgen production effects of, 736
behavioral and lifestyle changes, 1053
hepatic clearance of drugs and, 1052t
pharmacologic changes associated with, 
1051–1053, 1052f, 1052t
practical aspects of, 1058
phosphorylated enzyme complex of, 107
physiologic function effects of, 1051, 
1052f
Agomelatine, 283
Agonist(s), 6–8, 7f, 8f
binding molecule inhibitors, 6
defined, 4
full, 7, 8f, 19, 20f
inverse, 8, 8f
opioids with, 552
partial, 6–7, 8f, 19–20, 20f
receptor binding of
concentration-effect curves and, 
16, 17f
receptors in mediation of, 15
AIDS, 985. See also HIV
antimicrobial drugs in patients with, 909
antiretroviral drugs in, 869
Air pollutants, 1002–1005, 1005t
TLVs of, 1005t
Airways
lipoxygenase effects on, 323
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 320
Akathisia
tardive, 496
Akinesia
end-of-dose, 487
Akineton, 499. See also Biperidine
Albendazole
adverse effects of, 939
clinical uses of, 938–939
contraindications to, 939
for helminthic infections, 937–939, 938t
pharmacology of, 937
precautions with, 939
Albenza, 935, 946. See also Albendazole
Albumin
concentration of
in drug concentration measurements, 
49
Albuterol, 343f, 355
for asthma, 344
ionization constants of, 11t
Albuterol/ipratropium, 355
Alcaine, 463. See also Proparacaine
Index    1173
Alcohol(s), 389–401. See also Ethanol
abuse of. See also Alcohol abuse; 
Alcoholism
animal studies of, 392
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 893t, 894
benzyl, 1068
clinical pharmacology of, 395–397
drug interactions with, 395, 1150t
durations of action of, 106t
neurotoxicity of, 393
in OTC products, 1123t
therapeutic uses for, 106t
tolerance to, 393
Alcohol abuse, 569t, 575
acute intoxication
management of, 395
prevalence of, 389
prevention of
drugs in, 400
treatment for, 575
Alcohol dehydrogenase pathway, 
390, 390f
Alcoholism
prevalence of, 389
treatment of, 396–397
Aldactazide
dosage of, 262t
Aldactone, 225, 270. See also 
Spironolactone
dosage of, 262t
Aldara, 889. See also Imiquimod
Aldehydes
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 893t, 896
Aldicarb
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Aldosterone, 697, 708
antagonists of, 225
sites of action of, 252f
Aldosteronism
synthetic corticosteroids for, 
704–705
Aldrin
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Alefacept, 993
for psoriasis, 1071
Alemtuzumab, 991
Alendronate
for osteoporosis, 775, 783
Alendronate sodium, 786
Aleve, 656. See also Naproxen
Alfenta, 562. See also Alfentanil
Alfentanil, 557
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Alferon N, 889. See also Interferon alfa-n3
Alfuzosin, 155
Alinia, 935. See also Nitazoxanide
Aliskiren, 300
in heart failure management, 219
Alitretinoin, 1077
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
Alkaloid(s)
belladonna, 127
vinca
for cancer, 962–964, 963t
Alkalosis
metabolic
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for, 
257, 257t
hypokalemic
thiazide diuretics and, 261
Alkylamine(s), 279t
Alkylamine derivative, 278f
Alkylating agents. See also specific drugs
adverse effects of, 955, 955f, 956t
for cancer, 953–958
Alkylsulfonate, 954f
Allegra, 292. See also Fexofenadine
Allergic contact dermatitis
topical dermatologic medications and, 
1063t
Allergic drug reactions
to antipsychotic drugs, 512
autoimmune (type II), 998
to cephalosporins, 800
to H1-receptor antagonists, 279–280
immediate (type I), 997
desensitization to drugs, 997–998
treatment of, 997
immunologic, 997–998
to insulin, 753
to loop diuretics, 260
serum sickness due to, 998
to thiazide diuretics, 261
vascular (type III), 998
Allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, 349
Allergy preparations
ingredients in, 1118t
Allied health professionals
prescribing authority of, 1144–1145, 1144t
Allopurinol, 653–654, 962f
for angina pectoris, 206
drug interactions with, 654, 1150t
ionization constants of, 11t
Allosteric modulators, 19
Allylamines
topical, 856, 1065
Almotriptan
pharmacokinetics of, 286t
Aloe
in constipation management, 1093
Alosetron
for irritable bowel syndrome, 1096
Aloxil, 1111. See also Palonosetron
Alpha1-acid glycoprotein
concentration of
in drug concentration measurements, 
49
Alpha adrenoceptors, 87, 89t
antagonists of
as antihypertensive drugs, 180
Alpha1 adrenoceptors
antagonists of, 189
Alpha agonists
for open-angle glaucoma, 161t
Alpha2 antagonists
applications of, 157
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
for diabetes mellitus, 759–760, 759t
structures of, 759t
Alpha receptor(s), 131, 131t, 132f, 137t
Alpha1 receptor(s)
activation of
cardiovascular effects of, 137, 138t, 
139f, 140f
Alpha2 receptor(s)
activation of
cardiovascular effects of, 137
Alpha receptor antagonists, 151–157
Alpha1 responses
activation of, 130, 130f
Alpha2-selective agonists, 141
Alphagan, 148. See also Brimonidine
Alphanate, 617. See also Antihemophilic 
factor
AlphaNine SD, 617. See also Factor IX 
complex, human
Alprazolam
dosages of, 383t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
pharmacokinetic properties of, 377t
for tremors, 494
Alprenolol
ionization constants of, 11t
Alprostadil, 315, 326
for erectile dysfunction, 199
Altace, 190, 225. See also Ramipril
Alteplase
pharmacology of, 612
Alteplase recombinant, 617
AlternaGEL, 1111. See also Aluminum 
hydroxide gel
Altretamine
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Aluminum hydroxide
as antacid, 1083
Aluminum hydroxide gel, 1111
Aluminum hydroxide/magnesium 
hydroxide, 1111
Alupent, 355. See also Metaproterenol
Alveolar ventilation
of inhaled anesthetics, 430–432, 432f
Alvimopan, 560
in constipation management, 1094
preparations available, 562, 1112
Alzheimer’s disease
antipsychotic drugs for, 509
in the elderly
drugs used for, 1054–1055, 
1055f, 1055t
1174    Index
Amantadine
for influenza, 887
for parkinsonism, 491
Amaryl, 766. See also Glimepiride
Ambenonium
duration of action of, 106t
therapeutic uses for, 106t
Ambien, 387. See also Zolpidem
AmBisome
properties of, 850t
Ambrisentan, 305
Amebiasis
drugs used for, 927–930, 928t, 
929f
types of, 927
Amebic colitis
drugs used for, 927
Amebic liver abscess
chloroquine for, 917
Amerge, 292. See also Naratriptan
Amevive, 999. See also Alefacept
Amicar, 617. See also Aminocaproic acid
Amidate, 446. See also Etomidate
Amide(s), local anesthetics,
structures of, 451t
Amikacin, 826
dosage of, 840t
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 
39t
for tuberculosis, 840t, 844
Amikin, 828. See also Amikacin
Amiloride, 261–263
ionization constants of, 11t
Amine(s)
biogenic
drugs binding to transporters of
abuse of, 576–578, 577f
primary, secondary, etc 11
Amino acids
as CNS neurotransmitters, 366–369, 
366t–367t, 368f
Amino group
sympathomimetic drug substitution on, 
135
p-Aminobenzoic acid (PABA), 
832f
Aminocaproic acid, 604
for bleeding disorders, 604f, 616
Aminocarb
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Aminoglutethimide, 709–710
Aminoglycosides, 821–827
Aminolevulinic acids, 1076
Aminopenicillins
clinical uses of, 796
Aminophylline
for asthma, 345
Aminopterin
fetal effects of, 1042t
4-Aminoquinolones, 918f
Aminosalicylate(s)
for inflammatory bowel disease. See 
5-Aminosalicyclic acid 
(5-ASA)
5-Aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA)
adverse effects of, 1102–1103
Azo compounds, 1101–1102, 
1101f
chemistry and formulations of, 
1101–1102, 1101f
clinical uses of, 1102
dosage of, 840t
for inflammatory bowel disease, 
1101–1103, 1101f, 1102f
mesalamine compounds, 1102, 
1102f
metabolism of, 1101–1102, 1101f, 
1102f
pharmacodynamics of, 1102
pharmacokinetics of, 1102
for tuberculosis, 840t, 844
Amiodarone
for cardiac arrhythmias, 242–243
drug interactions with, 610t
ionization constants of, 11t
thyrotoxicosis due to, 693–694
Amlodipine
clinical pharmacology of, 202t
clinical uses of, 205
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t
Amitiza, 1112. See also Lubiprostone
Amitriptyline
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t
pharmacokinetics of, 529t
Amnesia
anesthesia and, 435
Amobarbital, 387
Amodiaquine
clinical uses of, 917t
for malaria, 920
Amoxapine, 528f, 539
pharmacology of, 527–530, 530t
Amoxicillin
dosage of, 795t
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 
39t
Amoxicillin/potassium clavulanate, 795t, 
807
Amoxil, 807. See also Amoxicillin
Amphetamines
abuse of, 569t, 576–577, 577f
effects, 136f, 142
fetal effects of, 1042t
ionization constants of, 11t
overdose of, 1032–1034
Amphotec
properties of, 850t
Amphotericin
clinical uses of, 934
Amphotericin (Cont.):
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 
39t
Amphotericin B, 850f, 858
for systemic infections, 849–852
topical, 1066
Ampicillin
clinical uses of, 796
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
oral absorption of
in neonates vs. older children and 
adults, 1044t
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 
39t
Ampicillin/sulbactam sodium, 807
Amrix, 481. See also Cyclobenzaprine
AmVaz, 209
Amyl nitrite, 197
Amylin, 743, 763
Amylin analogs
for diabetes mellitus, 760
Amyloid β synthesis
inhibitors of
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
Amytal, 387. See also Amobarbital
Anabolic steroids, 734–737
Anacetrapib, 631
Anafranil, 539. See also Clomipramine
Anakinra, 996, 999
Analgesia/analgesics
in the elderly, 1054
ingredients in, 1119t
opioid, 446, 543–564. See also Opioid 
analgesics
patient-controlled, 554
Anaphylactic shock
sympathomimetic drugs for, 145
Anaphylaxis
sympathomimetic drugs for, 145
Anaprox, 656. See also Naproxen
Anaspaz, 127, 1111. See also Hyoscyamine
Anastrozole, 733, 740
Ancef, 807. See also Cefazolin
Ancobon, 858. See also Flucytosine
ANDA, 75–76
Androgen(s), 726, 734–737. See also 
Testosterone
adrenal, 709
fetal effects of, 1042t
Androgen suppression, 737
Androl-50, 740. See also Oxymetholone
Anectine, 481. See also Succinylcholine
Anemia(s). See also specific types
agents used in, 581–599.See also specific 
drugs
folic acid/folates, 588–590, 589f
iron, 582–586
vitamin B12, 584t, 586–588
androgens in, 736
Index    1175
Anemia(s). (Cont.):
defined, 582
iron deficiency
treatment of, 585–586, 586t
microcytic hypochromic, 582
nutritional
features of, 584, 584t
pernicious, 588
Anesthesia/anesthetics
general, 429–447. See also specific drugs 
and General anesthetics
inhaled, 430–438. See also Inhaled 
anesthetics
intravenous, 438–446. See also specific 
drugs and Intravenous 
anesthetics
local, 449–464.See also specific drugs and 
Local anesthesia/anesthetics
H1-receptor antagonists in, 279
monitored care, 429, 430
neuromuscular blocking drugs with, 475
opioid analgesics in, 553–554
premedication before clonidine as, 146
sedative-hypnotic drugs as, 380
sites of action of, 435
Angina pectoris
drugs used for. See also specific drugs
pharmacology of, 193–208
vasodilators, 193–210.See also specific 
types and drugs
Angiomax, 617. See also Bivalirudin
Angiotensin, 295–300
agents blocking production or action of, 
172
inhibitors of
as antihypertensive drugs, 183–185
mechanism and sites of action of, 
183–184
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors, 299
as antihypertensive drugs, 184–185
fetal effects of, 1042t
in heart failure management, 219, 220
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t, 185
Angiotensin I, 296f, 297
Angiotensin II
actions of, 298
excitatory effects of, 92t
Angiotensin receptor(s)
mechanism of action of, 299
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), 
299–300
as antihypertensive drugs, 185
in heart failure management, 219, 220
Angiotensinase, 298
Angiotensinogen, 296f, 297
Anidulafungin, 855, 858
Anion(s)
overdose of
loop diuretics for, 259
Anion gap acidosis
drug-induced, 1030, 1030t
Anion inhibitors, 689
Anisindione, 617
Anistreplase, 612
ANOs, 2
ANS. See Autonomic nervous system (ANS)
Ansaid, 655. See also Flurbiprofen
Antabuse, 400. See also Disulfiram
Antacids
for acid-peptic diseases, 1082–1083
drug interactions with, 1150t
Antagonism
among antimicrobial drugs, 910
drug
mechanisms of, 20
neutral, 7
physiologic, 20
Antagonist(s), 6, 8f
adrenoceptor, 151–168.See also 
Adrenoceptor(s), antagonists of
chemical, 20
defined, 4
competitive, 18–19, 18f
defined, 4
drugs acting as, 15–16
irreversible, 18f, 19
opioids with, 552
pure, 15–16
receptors in mediation of, 15
Antagonist-precipitated withdrawal, 555
Antara, 633. See also Fenofibrate
Anterior pituitary hormones, 660–673
Anthracyclines
for cancer, 965–966
Anthraquinone derivatives
in constipation management, 1093
Anti-amyloid antibodies
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
Anti-amyloid vaccines
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
Antiandrogens, 737–739
receptor inhibitors, 738–739
steroid synthesis inhibitors, 737
Antiarrhythmic drugs, 227–250. See also 
specific drugs
for atrial fibrillation, 246
basic pharmacology of, 235–237
benefits of, 247
beta-adrenoceptor antagonists, 242
calcium channel blockers, 245
in the elderly, 1056
mechanisms of action of, 235–237, 
236f
neuromuscular blocking drugs with, 
475
pharmacologic properties of, 238t
prolonging effective refractory period, 
242–245
risks associated with, 247
Antibacterial drugs
topical, 1063–1065
Antibiotics. See specific drugs and 
Antimicrobial drugs
Antibody, 978
antithymocyte, 989–990
anti-amyloid
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
antilymphocyte, 989–990
digitalis, 225
digoxin
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
functions of, 981, 982f
immunosuppressive, 989–991
monoclonal. See Monoclonal antibodies 
(MABs)
Anticholinergic drugs
for irritable bowel syndrome, 1096
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
overdose of, 1034
Anticholinergic syndrome, 1034
Anticholinoceptor actions
of H1-receptor antagonists, 278
Anticoagulants, 601–618. See also specific 
drugs
coumarin, 608–611
direct thrombin inhibitors, 607–608
indirect thrombin inhibitors, 604–607, 
605f
oral
drug interactions with, 
1151t–1152t
oral direct factor XA inhibitors, 607
warfarin, 608–611
Anticonvulsants
sedative-hypnotic drugs as, 381
Antidepressant(s), 521–541. See also specific 
drugs
drug interactions with, 536–537, 537t, 
1152t
in the elderly, 1054
heterocyclic
drug interactions with, 1152t
overdose of, 536, 1034
SNRIs. See Serotonin-norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
SSRIs. See Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)
subgroups of, 525–528, 526f–528f
summary table, 538
tetracyclic. See Tetracyclic antidepressants
tricyclic. See Tricyclic antidepressants 
(TCAs)
unicyclic. See Unicyclic antidepressants
Antidepressant–CYP450 drug interactions, 
537t
Antidiabetic drugs
oral, 753–762.See also specific drugs and 
Diabetes mellitus, oral 
antidiabetic drugs for
1176    Index
Antidiarrheal agents, 1094–1095. See also 
specific drugs
ingredients in, 1119t
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 674–675
agonists of, 264
antagonists of, 264–265
elevated
causes of, 264–265
Antiemetic drugs, 1097–1100. 
See also specific drugs
5-HT3-receptor antagonists, 1097–1098
neurokinin receptor antagonists, 
1099–1100
pathophysiology of, 1097–1098, 1098f
phenothiazines, 1100
substituted benzamides, 1100
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), 403–427. 
See also Antiseizure drugs
Antifolate drugs, 831–834, 958–960, 
959t. See also specific drugs
for cancer, 958–960, 959t
Antifungal drugs, 849–859, 1065–1067. 
See also specific drugs and 
indications
drug interactions with, 1152t
topical, 856, 1065–1066
ingredients in, 1120t
vaginal preparations
ingredients in, 1120t
Antigen-presenting cells (APCs), 978
Antihelminthic drugs
clinical pharmacology of, 937–947
ingredients in, 1119t
Antihemophilic factor, 617
Antihepatitis drugs, 882–886. 
See also specific drugs
Antihistamines. See also H1-receptor 
antagonists; H2-receptor 
antagonists
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
in OTC products, 1123t
preparations available, 292
Antihypertensive drugs, 169–191. 
See also specific drugs
in the elderly, 1056
Anti-IgE monoclonal antibodies
for asthma, 350, 352
Anti-inflammatory drugs, 1072–1074. 
See also specific drugs
antimicrobial drugs, 1056–1057
MABs as, 992–994, 993f
topical
ingredients in, 1120t
Anti-influenza drugs, 886–887
Anti-inhibitor coagulant complex, 617
Anti-integrin therapy
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1106
Antilipid drugs
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
Antilymphocyte antibodies, 989–990
Antimalarial drugs, 915–927. 
See also specific drugs
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
Antimetabolites. See also specific drugs
for cancer, 958–962
Antimicrobial drugs, 891–899. 
See also specific drugs
bacteriostatic vs. bactericidal, 907, 907t
clinical uses of, 901–913
combinations of, 908–910
in the elderly, 1056
introduction to, 789
for malaria, 926–927
neuromuscular blocking drugs with, 475
prophylaxis with, 910–913, 
911t, 912t
topical
for acne, 1064–1065
toxicity of
management of, 908–909, 908t
Antiminth, 946. See also Pyrantel pamoate
Antimuscarinic drugs, 115–124
clinical uses of, 347, 492
intoxication by
cholinomimetic drugs in management 
of, 109
for parkinsonism, 491–492
Antimycobacterial drugs, 839–848
for leprosy, 845–846
for tuberculosis, 839–845.See also specific 
drugs and Tuberculosis, drugs 
used for
Antineoplastic agents, 1077
Antioxidants
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
Antiplatelet drugs
basic pharmacology of, 612–614
Antiprotozoal drugs, 914–936. See also 
specific drugs and indications
Antipruritic drugs, 1076–1077
Antipsychotic drugs, 501–520. See also 
specific drugs
in the elderly, 1054
overdose of, 513, 517, 1034
Antipyretics
ingredients in, 1119t
Antiretroviral drugs, 869–882. See also 
specific drugs and indications
Antiseborrhea agents, 1077–1078, 1078t
ingredients in, 1120t
Antiseizure drugs, 403–427. See also specific 
drugs
Antisense oligonucleotides (ANOs), 2
Antisepsis, 89t
Antiseptic drugs, 896–897
Antispasmodics
for irritable bowel syndrome, 1096
Antithrombin, 603–604
Antithrombin III, 617
Antithymocyte antibodies, 989–990
Antithymocyte globulin, 999
Antithyroid drugs, 681–696. 
See also specific drugs
Antitrichogenic agents, 1077
Antitumor antibiotics
for cancer, 965–966
Anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) therapy
for inflammatory bowel disease, 
1104–1106, 1105t
Antitussives, 559
ingredients in, 1121t
Antivert, 292. See also Meclizine
Antiviral drugs, 861–890. See also specific 
drugs and indications
anti-influenza agents, 886–887
for CMV infections, 866–869
for HBV and HCV infections, 
882–886
for HSV and VZV infections, 862–866
topical, 1067
Antizol, 400. See also Fomepizole
Anturane, 656. See also Sulfinpyrazone
Anxiety
performance
beta-receptor antagonists for, 164
Anxiety disorders
antidepressants for, 532–533
sedative-hypnotic drugs for, 382, 382t
Anzemet, 1111. See also Dolasetron
Apixaban, 607
Apocrine sweat glands
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 139
Apokyn, 499. See also Apomorphine
Apolipoprotein (apo) B-100, 619
Apomorphine
for parkinsonism, 491
Apraclonidine
for ophthalmic disorders, 145
preparations available, 148
Aprepitant
for nausea and vomiting, 1099
Apresoline, 189. See also Hydralazine
Apriso, 1102
Aprotinin
for bleeding disorders, 617
Aptivus, 889. See also Tipranavir
aPTT, 605
Aquachloral Supprettes, 387. See also 
Chloral hydrate
Aquaretics, 263–265
Aquatensen, 270. See also Methyclothiazide
Aqueous diffusion, 9, 9f
Arachidonic acid, 313, 314f–316f
metabolism of
dietary manipulation of, 328
release and metabolism of, 313, 314f
Aralen, 935. See also Chloroquine
Aramine, 148. See also Metaraminol
Aranesp, 598. See also Darbepoetin alfa
Arava, 656, 999. See also Leflunomide
Index    1177
ARBs. See Angiotensin receptor blockers 
(ARBs)
Arcalyst, 999. See also Rilonacept
Arcitumomab, 992
Area under the curve (AUC), 41
Aredia, 786. See also Pamidronate sodium
Arfonad, 127. See also Trimethaphan
Arformoterol, 355
Argatroban, 608, 617
Arginine vasopressin, 673f
Aricept, 112. See also Donepezil
Arimidex, 740. See also Anastrozole
Aripiprazole, 504f, 509–510, 519
Aristospan, 712. See also Triamcinolone 
hexacetonide
Arixtra, 606. See also Fondaparinux
Armodafinil, 148
Armour, 695. See also Thyroid desiccated
Aromasin, 740. See also Exemestane
Aromatic (4)-hydroxylation, 64
Aromatic hydrocarbons
TLVs of, 1005t
toxic exposure to, 1005–1006
Arrestin(s), 133–134
Arrhythmia(s), 227–250. See also Cardiac 
arrhythmias
alcohol and, 394
Arsenic, 1014t, 1017–1019
Arsine gas poisoning, 1019
Artane, 499. See also Trihexyphenidyl
Artemether, 920
Artemether/lumefantrine, 935
Artemisinin(s), 919t, 920–921
Arterial blood gases
in poisoning assessment, 1030
Arterial thrombosis, 614
Artesunate, 920
Arthritis
rheumatoid
eicosanoids and, 328
Articaine, 451t, 459–460, 463
Arzerra, 999. See also Ofatumumab
5-ASA. See 5-Aminosalicyclic acid (5-ASA)
Asacol, 1102, 1102f
Asbestos
as environmental pollutant, 
1011
Ascariasis
albendazole for, 938–939
Asenapine, 519
Asmanex Twisthaler, 355. See also 
Mometasone
Asparaginase
for cancer, 967–969
Aspirin, 638–640
as antiplatelet agent, 612
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
in OTC products, 1123t
overdose of, 1034–1035
Aspirin (Cont.):
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 638, 
638t, 639f
resistance to, 613
Association-dissociation process, 10
Asthma
acute
management of, 352–353
drugs used for, 339–357.See also 
specific drugs
sympathomimetic drugs, 145, 
341–344, 343f
Atacand, 190, 225. See also Candesartan
Atarax, 387. See also Hydroxyzine
Atazanavir, 870t, 878
drug interactions with, 874t
Atenolol, 158f, 157–163, 
167, 189
as antihypertensive drug, 175t, 179
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 39t
Atgam, 999. See also Lymphocyte immune 
globulin
Athetosis, 483, 495
Athletes
androgen and anabolic steroid abuse in, 
736
Ativan, 387, 400, 427, 446. See also 
Lorazepam
Atomoxetine
sympathomimetic drug effects, 143
Atonic seizures, 421
Atorvastatin, 633
Atovaquone, 918f, 935
for malaria, 924–925
Atovaquone-proguanil
clinical uses of, 917t
ATP
inhibitory effects of, 92t
Atracurium
pharmacology of, 467–468, 470t
Atrial fibrillation
antiarrhythmic drug-use principles 
applied to, 246
Atropine
pharmacology of, 115–124
ionization constants of, 11t
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
preparations available, 127, 1111
Atropine fever, 120
Atrovent, 127, 355. See also 
Ipratropium
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD)
sympathomimetic drugs for, 146
AUC (area under the curve), 41
Augmentin, 807. See also Amoxicillin/
potassium clavulanate
Auranofin, 656
Aurolate, 656. See also Gold sodium 
thiomalate
Aurothioglucose, 656
Autacoid(s), 273
renal
in renal tubule transport, 255–256
Autoclaving, 897
Autoimmune diseases
immunosuppressive drugs for, 985t, 995
Autoimmunity, 983–984
Autologous stem cell transplantation
myeloid growth factors in, 593, 593f
Automatisms, 421
Autonomic drugs, 79–168
Autonomic junctions
anatomy of, 82
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 79–96
activity of
systemic effects of, 90t
anatomy of, 80–82, 80f, 81f
antipsychotic drugs effects on, 507t, 508, 
512
functional organization of, 88–93
neurotransmitter chemistry of, 82–87
Autonomic pharmacology
introduction to, 79–96. See also 
Autonomic nervous system 
(ANS)
Autonomic receptors, 87, 89t
types of, 89t
Autonomic synapses
anatomy of, 82
Autonomic transmission
drug effects of, 93, 94t
Autoplex
for bleeding disorders, 616
Autoplex T, 617. See also Anti-inhibitor 
coagulant complex
Autoreceptor(s), 92, 92t
Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemia, 
783
Avandamet, 766. See also Rosiglitazone plus 
metformin
Avandaryl, 766. See also Rosiglitazone plus 
glimepiride
Avandia, 766. See also Rosiglitazone
Avapro, 190, 225. See also Irbesartan
Avastin, 999. See also Bevacizumab
Avelox, 838. See also Moxifloxacin
Avodart, 740. See also Dutasteride
Avonex, 999 
Axert, 292. See also Almotriptan
Axid, 1111. See also Nizatidine
Aygestin, 740. See also Norethindrone 
acetate
Azactam, 807. See also Aztreonam
Azathioprine, 643–644
adverse effects of, 644, 1104
clinical uses of, 1103
drug interactions with, 1104
as immunosuppressive drug, 985t, 988
indications for, 644
1178    Index
Azathioprine (Cont.):
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1103–1104
mechanism of action of, 643, 1103
Azelaic acid
for acne, 1070–1071
Azelastine, 292
Azidothymidine (AZT). See Zidovudine
Azilect, 499. See also Rasagiline
Azilsartan, 190
Azinphos-methyl
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Azithromycin, 814, 819
Azmacort, 355. See also Triamcinolone
Azo compounds, 1101–1102, 1101f
Azole(s)
for systemic infections, 853–855. 
See also specific drugs
topical, 856, 1065–66
Azopt, 270. See also Brinzolamide
Aztreonam, 801, 807
Azulfidine, 656, 1112. See also Sulfasalazine
B
B-48, 620
B-100, 620
Babesia spp.
drugs used for, 931t
Babesiosis
quinine for, 922
Bacitracin, 805
topical, 1063
Baclofen, 477, 477f, 478f, 481
in addiction management, 578
Bacterial cell wall synthesis, 792, 792f
Bactrim, 837. See also Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ)
Bactroban, 898. See also Mupirocin
BAL in Oil, 1025. See also Dimercaprol
Balanced anesthesia, 429, 438
Balantidium coli
drugs used for, 931t
Ballismus, 495
Balsalazide, 1112
Balsalazide sodium, 1101f
Banthine, 127. See also Methantheline
Banzel, 427. See also Rufinamide
Baraclude, 889. See also Entecavir
Barbiturate(s), 377, 387, 441
abuse of, 575
biotransformation of, 377
chemistry of, 373–374
clinical uses of, 442
dosage of, 442
drug interactions with, 1153t
fetal effects of, 1042t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
as intravenous anesthetic, 441–442
neuropharmacology of, 379
tolerance and dependence of, 381
Barbiturate nucleus, 375f
Baroreceptor
renal
in renin release, 296, 297f
Baroreflex
postural, 171, 171f
Basal ganglia
circuitry of, 483, 484f
Base(s)
weak
ionization of, 10–12, 11t, 
12f, 12t
Basiliximab, 993, 999
BCHE, 65
BDNF. See Brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF)
Becaplermin
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
Beclomethasone, 355
Bedulin VH, 617. See also Factor IX 
complex, human
Behavior(s)
antipsychotic drug effects on, 511
levodopa effects on, 487
Behavioral effects
of aging, 1053
Belladonna alkaloids, 127, 1111
Benadryl, 292. See also Diphenhydramine
Benazepril
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t
preparations available, 190, 225
Bendamustine
for cancer, 957
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Bendroflumethiazide, 270
dosage of, 261t
Benefix, 617. See also Factor IX complex, 
human
Benicar, 190, 225. See also Olmesartan
Bentyl, 127, 1111. See also Dicyclomine
Benylin DM, 563. See also 
Dextromethorphan
Benzalkonium, 898
Benzalkonium chloride, 896
Benzamides
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Benzathine penicillin
clinical uses of, 795
pharmacokinetics of, 794
Benzene
TLVs of, 1005t
toxic exposure to, 1005–1006
Benzene hexachlorides
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Benzisoxazole
advantages and disadvantages of, 
509t
chemical structure effects on potency 
and toxicity of, 505t
Benznidazole, clinical uses of, 934
Benzocaine, 451t, 460, 463
Benzodiazepine(s), 373–387
abuse of, 569t, 575
for alcohol abuse, 575
clinical uses of, 443
dosage of, 443
for epilepsy, 419–420
as intravenous anesthetic, 442–443
inverse agonists of, 379
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
pharmacodynamics of, 378–381, 378f, 
442
Benzodiazepine antagonists, 381–382
Benzoic acid, 897
Benzomorphans
with mixed receptor actions, 559
Benzoyl peroxide
for acne, 1070
preparations available, 898
Benztropine, 117f , 492t, 499
Benzyl alcohol, 1068
o-Benzyl-p-chlorophenol, 895
Beryllium
as environmental pollutant, 1011
Beta adrenoceptor(s), 87, 89t
agonists of
in heart failure management, 218
antagonists of
for angina pectoris, 205
as antihypertensive drugs, 178–180
for cardiac arrhythmias, 242
cardiac effects of, 242
in heart failure management, 219, 
221
for open-angle glaucoma, 161t
overdose of, 1035
glucagon for, 763
preparations available, 189, 225, 249
rapid desensitization, resensitization, and 
down-regulation of, 26, 27f
Beta blockers. See Beta adrenoceptor(s), 
antagonists of
Beta carbon
sympathomimetic drug substitution on, 
136
Beta-lactam compounds, 790–797
carbapenems, 801–802
cephalosporins, 797–801
cephamycins, 797–801
monobactams, 801
penicillins, 790–797. See also Penicillin(s)
Beta-lactamase assay
for infections with known etiology, 903
Beta-lactamase inhibitors, 801
Beta receptor(s), 131–132, 131t, 132f, 137t
activation of
cardiovascular effects of, 137–138, 
138t, 139f
Beta-receptor antagonists
basic pharmacology of, 157–161
Index    1179
Beta-receptor antagonists (Cont.):
clinical pharmacology of, 162–164, 163f
drug interactions with, 1153t
specific agents, 159t, 161–162
for variceal hemorrhage, 1108
Beta-selective agonists, 133t, 141
Betadine, 898. See also Povidone-iodine
Betagan Liquifilm, 167. See also 
Levobunolol
Betamethasone
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
Betamethasone sodium phosphate, 712
Betapace, 167, 249. See also Sotalol
Betaseron, 999 
Betaxolol, 159t, 161, 167, 189
as antihypertensive drug, 179
Bethanechol, 99f, 112
properties of, 99, 100t
Bevacizumab, 991, 999
for cancer, 968
clinical activity and toxicities of, 967t
Bexarotene, 1077
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
Bezold-Jarisch reflex, 283
Bias
in clinical trials, 72–73
Biaxin, 819. See also Clarithromycin
Bicalutamide, 739, 740
Bicarbonate
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Bicillin, 807. See also Penicillin G 
benzathine
Biguanides, 
for diabetes mellitus, 757
Bile acid–binding resins
chemistry and pharmacokinetics of, 629
for diabetes mellitus, 760
drug interactions with, 1153t
for hyperlipidemias, 629–630
mechanism of action of, 624f, 629–630
therapeutic uses and dosage of, 630
toxicity of, 630
Bile salt–binding resins
for diarrhea, 1095
Biliary tract
opioid analgesics effects on, 552
Biltricide, 946. See also Praziquantel
Bimatoprost, for glaucoma, 328, 1077
Bioaccumulation
defined, 1003
Bioavailability, 39t–40t, 43–44, 43f, 43t. 
See also specific drugs
absorption and, 43, 43f, 44
defined, 43
first-pass elimination and, 43–44
Bioclate, 617. See also Antihemophilic 
factor
Biogenic amines
drugs binding to transporters of
abuse of, 576–578, 577f
Biologic agents
for psoriasis, 1071–1072
Biological License Application, 75
Biomagnification
defined, 1003
Biotransformation of drugs, 53–68. See also 
Drug metabolism; Metabolism
phase I reactions, 53–54, 54f
phase II reactions, 54, 54f, 59–60, 59f, 
60t
Biperiden, for parkinsonism, 492t
Biperidine, 499
Biphenyl(s)
coplanar, 1010
polychlorinated
as environmental pollutants, 1010
Bipolar (affective) disorder
antipsychotic drugs for, 508, 513–517
lithium for, 513–518.See also Lithium
Bipyridines, in heart failure management, 
218
Bipyridyl herbicides, 1010
Bisacodyl, 1112
Bismuth compounds
for acid-peptic diseases, 1090–1091
Bisoprolol
as antihypertensive drug, 179
preparations available, 167, 189, 225
properties of, 159t
Bisphosphonates
in bone mineral homeostasis, 776
Bithionol
for helminthic infections, 938t, 939
Bitolterol, 355
Bivalirudin, 607–608, 617
Black cohosh
risks associated with, 1127t
Black widow spider bite
passive immunization for, 1168t
Blackwater fever, 922
Bleeding
heparin and, 605–606
mucosal
stress-related
proton pump inhibitors in 
prevention of, 1088
uterine
estrogen and, 722
Bleeding disorders
aprotinin in, 617
drugs used for, 614–617, 615t
fibrinolytic inhibitors in, 604f, 616
plasma fractions in, 615–616, 615t
recombinant factor VIIA in, 603f, 616
serine protease inhibitors in, 617
vitamin K for, 614–615
Bleomycin
for cancer, 966
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Blocadren, 189. See also Timolol
Blood alcohol concentration (BAC)
clinical effects of
in nontolerant persons, 391, 391t
Blood cells
lipoxygenase and, 323
Blood clotting
initiation of, 602–604, 603f
Blood coagulation, 601–602
disorders of
drugs used for, 601–618.See also 
specific drugs and Anticoagulants
estrogen effects on, 720
Blood coagulation cascade, 602, 603f, 603t
Blood gases
arterial
in poisoning assessment, 1030
Blood pressure
regulation of, 169–171, 170f, 170t, 171f
Blood schizonticides, 915
Blood vessels
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 90t
BMI
calculation of, 664
Boceprevir
for HCV infection, 886
Body mass index (BMI)
calculation of, 664
Bond(s)drug-receptor, 4
Bone(s)
Paget’s disease of, 784
PTH, FGF23, and vitamin D effects on, 
774t
tetracyclines effects on, 812
Bone marrow transplantation
immunosuppressive drugs in, 994–995
passive immunization for, 1168t
Bone metabolism
prostaglandins effects on, 322
Bone mineral homeostasis, 769–785
FGF23 in, 770, 770f, 771f, 773
hormonal interactions controlling, 771f
hormonal regulators of
principal, 770–774
secondary, 774–775
mechanisms contributing to, 770f
nonhormonal agents affecting, 776–778, 
776f
parathyroid hormone and, 770
vitamin D and, 772
Bone mineral–regulating hormones
disorders involving, 780–785
Boniva, 786. See also Ibandronate sodium
Borage
risks associated with, 1127t
Bortezomib
for multiple myeloma, 971
Bosentan, 305, 305f, 255
in heart failure management, 219
Botanical pesticides, 1008, 1009f
Botanical substances, 1126–1134
1180    Index
Botox, 481. See also Botulinum toxin, type A
Botulinum toxin, 84, 479, 481
Botulism
passive immunization for, 1168t
Brain
cellular organization of, 364–366, 365f
hierarchical systems in, 365, 365f
nonspecific/diffuse neuronal systems 
in, 365–366
Brain cancer
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 974
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
in major depression, 522–523, 522t
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)
in heart failure management, 219
Bravelle, 678. See also Urofollitropin
Breast(s)
oral contraceptives effects on, 727
Breast cancer
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 971–972
Brethine, 355. See also Terbutaline
BreviBloc, 167, 189, 249. See also Esmolol
Brevital, 446. See also Methohexital
Brimonidine, for ophthalmic disorders, 
145, 148
Brinzolamide, 270
Bromfenac, 655
Bromocriptine, 672
for parkinsonism, 489, 499
Bromocriptine mesylate, 678
Brompheniramine
dosage of, 279t, 292
Bronchiolar smooth muscle
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 90t
histamine effects on, 276
Bronchodilation
sympathomimetic drugs and, 
137t, 138
Bronchodilators
for asthma, 351
Brovano, 355. See also Arformoterol
Brovex, 292. See also Brompheniramine
Brugia spp.
diethylcarbamazine citrate for, 940
Bucindolol, 162
Bucladin-S Softabs, 292. See also Buclizine
Buclizine, 292
Budesonide
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1103
preparations available, 355, 1112
Bulk-forming laxatives, 1093, 1112
Bumetanide
dosage of, 259t, 270
Bumex, 270. See also Bumetanide
Bupivacaine, 451t, 460, 463
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetic properties of, 452t
toxicity of
reversal of, 458
Buprenex, 562. See also Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine, 558–559, 562
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Bupropion, 527–531, 539
dosage of, 535t
in nicotine addiction management, 575
overdose of, 1034
Burimamide, 276–277
BuSpar, 387. See also Buspirone
Buspirone, 283–285, 374, 376, 387
Busulfan
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
fetal effects of, 1042t
Butenafine
preparations available, 858
from prescription to OTC status, 
1116t
topical, 1065
Butoconazole, 858
from prescription to OTC status, 
1116t
Butorphanol, 559, 562
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Butoxamine, 162
Butyrophenone(s)antipsychotics, 503f, 
504–505, 505t
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
chemical structure effects on potency 
and toxicity of, 505t
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE), 65
Byetta, 766. See also Exenatide
Bystolic, 167, 189, 225. See also Nebivolol
C
Cabazitaxel
for cancer, 963t, 964
Cabergoline, 672, 678
Calcineurin inhibitors
as immunosuppressive drugs, 985t, 986
Calcitonin
in bone mineral homeostasis, 774–775
Cadmium
as environmental pollutant, 
1011–1012
Cadmium fume fever, 1012
Cafergot, 292. See also Ergotamine 
mixtures
Caffeine, 344–345
during lactation, 1048t
in OTC products, 1123t
Cal-Sup, 786. See also Calcium carbonate
Calan, 190, 209, 249. See also Verapamil
Calciferol, 786. See also Ergocalciferol
Calcimimetics
in bone mineral homeostasis, 777
Calcionate, 786. See also 
Calcium glubionate
Calcipotriene
for psoriasis, 1071
Calciquid, 786. See also Calcium glubionate
Calcitonin
for hypercalcemia, 778, 786
Calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP), 
308
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 
81f, 84t
in migraine, 285
Calcitonin-Salmon, 786
Calcitriol, 786
for psoriasis, 1071
Calcium
abnormal levels of
in bone mineral homeostasis, 778–780
contractile proteins sensitivity to, 212
digitalis with, 218
for hypocalcemia, 779–780
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
as second messengers, 28–29, 28f
stored in and released from sarcoplasmic 
reticulum, 212
trigger
amount of, 212
Calcium salts, 786
Calcium carbonate as antacid, 1083
Calcium channel(s)
voltage-activated
properties of, 201t
Calcium channel blockers. See also specific 
drugs
for angina pectoris, 201–205
as antihypertensive drug, 183
for cardiac arrhythmias, 245
in control of smooth muscle contraction, 
194, 195f
drug interactions with, 1154t
overdose of, 1035
Calcium Disodium Versenate, 1025. 
See also Edetate calcium
Calcium ion, 25
cAMP, 25
Campath, 999. See also Alemtuzumab
Campral, 400. See also Acamprosate 
calcium
Camptothecins
for cancer, 963t, 964–965
Canakinumab, 996, 999
Canasa, 1102, 1102f
Cancer(s). See also specific types and sites
alcohol effects on, 395
causes of, 949–950
cell cycle and, 951, 952f
estrogen and, 722
garlic effects on, 1129
insulin and, 753
oral contraceptives and, 730
prostaglandins effects on, 322
treatment modalities for, 950–951.
See also Cancer chemotherapy
Cancer chemotherapy, 949–976. See also 
specific drugs and types of cancer
Index    1181
Cancer chemotherapy (Cont.):
alkylating agents, 953–958
antimetabolites, 958–962
antitumor antibiotics, 965–966
cell cycle kinetics and, 951–953, 951f, 
952f, 952t
cell cycle–nonspecific drugs, 951, 952t
cell cycle–specific drugs, 951, 952t
drug combinations in, 951–953
drug resistance in, 953
milk thistle effects on, 1132
nausea and vomiting due to
5-HT3-receptor antagonists for, 1099
Cancidas, 858. See also Caspofungin
Candesartan, 190, 225
Cannabinoids
abuse of, 569t, 572–573
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Cantil, 127. See also Mepenzolate
Capacity-limited elimination, 39t–40t, 
41–42
Capacity-limited protein binding
in drug concentration measurements, 49
Capastat Sulfate, 848. See also Capreomycin
Capecitabine
for cancer, 960
clinical activity and toxicities of, 959t
Capoten, 190, 225. See also Captopril
Capreomycin
for tuberculosis, 840t, 844
Capromab pendetide, 992
Captopril, 190, 225, 299
as antihypertensive drug, 184–185
dosage of, 175t, 185
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 175t, 185
Carafate, 1111. See also Sucralfate
Carbachol, 99f, 112
properties of, 99, 100t
Carbamate(s)
durations of action of, 106t
therapeutic uses for, 106t
Carbamate pesticides, 1008, 1008t
Carbamazepine, 409–410, 427, 517, 519
for bipolar disorder, 517
drug interactions with, 410, 1154t
fetal effects of, 1042t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 410
for seizures, 409–410
therapeutic levels/dosage of, 410
Carbapenem(s), 791f, 801–802, 
807–808
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
801–802
Carbaryl, structure of, 105f
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Carbenicillin
clinical uses of, 796
Carbenoxolone
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
Carbidopa, 485, 499
Carbidopa/levodopa, 499
Carbidopa/levodopa/entacapone, 499
Carbimazole
structure of, 688f
Carbinoxamine, 292
dosage of, 279t
Carbocaine, 463. See also Mepivacaine
Carbofuran
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Carbohydrate(s)
impaired tolerance for
thiazide diuretics and, 261
metabolism of
oral contraceptives effects on, 728
Carbon monoxide, TLVs of, 1005t
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 1003–1004, 
1035, 1036t
Carbon tetrachloride, TLVs of, 1005t
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 256–258, 
257t
for open-angle glaucoma, 161t
Carboplatin
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Carboprost, 328
Carboprost tromethamine, 324, 325f
Cardene, 190, 209. See also Nicardipine
Cardiac arrhythmias
beta-receptor antagonists for, 
162, 163f
drugs used for, 227–250.See also 
Antiarrhythmic drugs
mechanisms of, 233–235, 
233f–236f
disturbances of impulse conduction, 
234–235, 234f–236f
disturbances of impulse formation, 
233f, 234
nonpharmacologic therapy of, 228
Cardiac disease. See Heart disease
Cardiac muscle
calcium channel blockers effects on, 
203–204
Cardiac output
in heart failure, 212–213
inhaled anesthetics effects on, 433
Cardiac resynchronization therapy
in chronic heart failure management, 
221
Cardiac rhythm
normal
electrophysiology of, 227–233
Cardiac stress test
dobutamine in, 144
Cardiogenic shock
sympathomimetic drugs for, 144
Cardiomyopathy
alcohol and, 393–394
Cardioquin, 249. See also Quinidine 
polygalacturonate
Cardiovascular disorders
antimuscarinic drugs for, 121
beta-receptor antagonists for, 163
sympathomimetic drugs for, 144–145
Cardiovascular drugs
in the elderly, 1056
Cardiovascular system, see specific drugs
Cardizem, 189, 209, 250. See also 
Diltiazem
Cardura, 167, 189. See also Doxazosin
Carisoprodol, 481
Carmustine, 954f
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Carperitide
in heart failure management, 219
Carteolol, 159t, 161
as antihypertensive drug, 179
Cartrol, 189. See also Carteolol
Carvedilol, 159t, 162
as antihypertensive drug, 179
preparations available, 167, 189, 225
racemate of, 5, 5t
Cascara
in constipation management, 1093
Cascara sagrada, 1112
Casodex, 740. See also Bicalutamide
Caspofungin, 855, 858
Cataflam, 655. See also Diclofenac
Catapres, 189. See also Clonidine
Catechol, 136f
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT)
in catecholamine metabolism, 87, 88f
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) 
inhibitors
for parkinsonism, 490–491
Catecholamine(s)
biosynthesis of, 84–86, 86f
endogenous, 138t, 140–141
Catecholamine reuptake inhibitors
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 143
Cathartics
activated, 1032
in constipation management, 1093
Causal prophylactic drugs, 915
Ceclor, 807. See also Cefaclor
Cedax, 807. See also Ceftibuten
Cefaclor, 807, 797f
Cefadroxil, 797f, 807
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 797, 
798t
Cefazolin, 797f, 807
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
799
Cefdinir, 797f , 807
Cefditoren, 807
Cefepime, 797f, 807
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
800
Cefixime, 807
Cefizox, 807. See also Ceftizoxime
1182    Index
Cefmetazole, 807
Cefotan, 807. See also Cefotetan
Cefotaxime, 797f, 807
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 
798t, 800
Cefotetan, 797f, 807   
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t
Cefoxitin, 797f, 807    
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 
798t
Cefpodoxime, 797f
Cefprozil, 797f, 807
Ceftaroline, 797f, 800
Ceftaroline fosamil 
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
800
Ceftazidime, 797f, 807
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
800
Ceftibuten, 797f, 807Ceftin, 807. See also 
Cefuroxime
Ceftizoxime, 797f,  807
Ceftriaxone, 797f,  807    
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
800
Cefuroxime, 797f,  807    
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t
Cefzil, 807. See also Cefprozil
Celebrex, 655. See also Celecoxib
Celecoxib, 638t, 640, 655
Celestone, 712. See also Betamethasone
Celestone Phosphate, 712. See also 
Betamethasone sodium 
phosphate
Celexa, 539. See also Citalopram
Celiprolol, properties of, 159t
Celivarone, 242
Cell cycle kinetics
in cancer chemotherapy, 951–953, 951f, 
952f, 952t
Cell growth
angiotensin II effects on, 298
Cell-mediated immunity, 978
Cell proliferation
prevention of
immunosuppressive drugs for, 985t
CellCept, 999. See also Mycophenolate 
mofetil
Celontin, 427. See also Methsuximide
Cenestin, 740. See also Esterified estrogens
Central integration
in functional organization of autonomic 
activity, 81f, 89
Central nervous system (CNS)
alcohol effects on, 391, 391t
angiotensin II effects on, 298
antimuscarinic drug effects on, 116, 118
antipsychotic drugs effects on, 507t, 508
barbiturates effects on, 441
benzodiazepines effects on, 442
Central nervous system (Cont.):
dexmedetomidine effects on, 445
digitalis effects on, 217
direct-acting cholinomimetic drug effects 
on, 102t, 104
disorders of
antimuscarinic drugs for, 120–121
cholinomimetic drugs for, 109
sympathomimetic drugs for, 146
drugs acting in, 359–580.See also 
Central nervous system (CNS) 
drugs
ergot alkaloids effects on, 288–289
etomidate effects on, 443
ganglion-blocking drug effects on, 124
ginkgo effects on, 1130
indirect-acting cholinomimetic drug 
effects on, 107
ketamine effects on, 444
local anesthetics effects on, 
457–458
methylxanthines effects on, 345
morphine effects on, 549–551, 551t
nitric oxide effects on, 336
oral contraceptives effects on, 727
propofol effects on, 440
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 321
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 140
Central nervous system (CNS) drugs, 
359–580. See also specific types 
and drugs
in the elderly, 1053–1055
pharmacology of, 359–371
in cellular organization of brain, 
364–366, 365f
central neurotransmitters in, 
366–371, 366t–367t
identification of, 364
ion channels in, 360–361, 362f
methods for study of, 359–360, 361f
neurotransmitter receptors in, 
360–361, 362f
synapses and synaptic potentials in, 
361–363, 362f, 363f
sites of action of, 363–364, 364f
Central neurotransmitters
identification of
CNS drugs and, 364
Central precocious puberty
gonadotropins in, 670–671
Cephalexin, dosage of, 797, 798t
pharmacodynamics of, 797, 798t
Cephalosporin(s), 797–801. See also specific 
drugs
active against methicillin-resistant 
staphylococci, 800
adverse effects of, 800–801
chemistry of, 797, 797f
toxicity of, 800–801
Cephalothin, pharmacokinetics 39t
Cephamycins, 797–801
Cephradine, pharmacokinetics and dosage 
of, 797
Cephulac, 1112. See also Lactulose
Cerebral vasospasm
following subarachnoid hemorrhage
calcium channel blockers effects on, 204
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
antimicrobial drugs in, 908, 909t
Cerebrovascular disease
oral contraceptives and, 729
Cerebyx, 427. See also Fosphenytoin
Certolizumab, 648
for inflammatory bowel disease, 
1104–1106, 1105t
preparations available, 656, 999, 1112
Certolizumab pegol, 992
Cervidil, 328. See also Dinoprostone
Cesamet, 1112. See also Nabilone
Cestodes
drugs used for, 938t
Cetirizine, 292
dosage of, 279t
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Cetrorelix, 671, 678
Cetrotide, 678. See also Cetrorelix acetate
Cetuximab, 991
for cancer, 967–968
Cevimeline, 112
cGMP
as second messengers, 29
Channel(s)
ligand-gated, 23–24, 24f, 362f
voltage-gated, 23–24, 24f, 362f
Chantix, 112. See also Varenicline
Chaparral
risks associated with, 1127t
Charcoal
activated
in decontamination of poisoned 
patient, 1032
ChAT, 82, 83f
Chelators
pharmacology of, 1021–1025. See also 
specific drugs
Chemet, 1025. See also Succimer
Chemical(s)
toxic exposure to, 1003–1005, 1005t
Chemical antagonists, 20
defined, 4
Chemical contraception
in men, 739
Chemoattractant cytokines, 977–978
Chemokines, 977–978
Chemoreceptor reflex, 283
Chemotherapeutic drugs, 789–1000. 
See also specific drugs, types of 
cancer, and Cancer 
chemotherapy
Index    1183
Children. See Pediatric patients
Chirality, 4–5
Chirocaine, 463. See also Levobupivacaine
Chlor-Trimeton, 292. See also 
Chlorpheniramine
Chloral hydrate, 375f, 387
during lactation, 1048t
Chlorambucil
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Chloramine T
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 895
Chloramphenicol, 816–817, 819
drug interactions with, 1154t
during lactation, 1048t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 816
Chlordane
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Chlordiazepoxide
dosages of, 383t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 377t
Chlorfenvinphos
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Chlorhexidine
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 893t, 894–895
Chloride channel activator
in constipation management, 1094
for irritable bowel syndrome, 1097
Chloride channel GABA receptor complex, 
378f, 380
Chlorine
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 893t, 895
Chlorine dioxide
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 893t, 895
Chlormethiazole
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
Chloroform
TLVs of, 1005t
Chloromycetin, 819. See also 
Chloramphenicol
Chlorophenoxy herbicides, 1008–1009, 
1009f
Chloroprocaine, 460, 463
Chloroquine, 644, 916–920, 917t, 918f, 
919t, 920, 935
ionization constants of, 11t
for malaria, 916–920, 917t, 918f, 919t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 644, 916, 918f
Chlorothiazide, 261t, 270
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
Chlorotrianisene, 718f, 719t
Chlorpheniramine, 278f, 279t, 292
ionization constants of, 11t
Chlorpromazine, 155, 503f, 519
advantages and disadvantages of, 
509t–510t
Chlorpromazine (Cont.):
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
Chlorpropamide, 755t, 766
for diabetes mellitus, 754, 755t
fetal effects of, 1042t
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 39t
Chlorthalidone, 261t, 270
Chlorzoxazone, 481
Cholecalciferol, 786
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
in ANS, ENS, and NANC 
neurons, 84t
Cholesterol, 619
Cholesteryl ester(s), 619
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) 
inhibitors
for hyperlipidemias, 631
Cholestyramine, 629–630, 633
for diarrhea, 1095
Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), 
82, 83f
Choline esters
properties of, 99, 100t
Choline salicylate, 655
Choline transporter, 82, 83f
Cholinergic fibers, 80f, 82
Cholinergic nerves
cotransmitters in, 87
Cholinergic poisoning
antimuscarinic drugs for, 122–123
Cholinergic receptors, 87, 89t
Cholinergic transmission, 82–84, 83f, 84t
Cholinesterase inhibitors, 105f,  110–112
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
overdose of, 1035–1036
Cholinesterase regenerator(s), 127
Cholinesterase regenerator compounds
antimuscarinic drugs for, 123
Cholinoceptor, 84
characteristics of, 98t
subtypes of, 98t
Cholinoceptor-activating drugs, 97–113. 
See also Cholinomimetic drugs
Cholinoceptor-blocking drugs, 115–128. 
See also Cholinoreceptor 
antagonists
Cholinomimetic drugs, 97–113
clinical pharmacology of, 108–110
clinical uses of, 108–110
direct-acting, 99–105
in gastrointestinal motility stimulation, 
1092
groups of, 97, 98f
indirect-acting, 105–107
mode of action of, 99
for open-angle glaucoma, 161t
spectrum of action of, 97–98, 98t
toxicity of, 109–110
Cholinoreceptor antagonists, 115–128
ganglion-blocking drugs, 124–125
muscarinic receptor–blocking drugs, 
115–120. See also 
Antimuscarinic drugs
Chorea
described, 483
forms of, 495
Choriogonadotropin alfa, 667
preparations available, 678
Chorionic gonadotropin, 678
Chronic kidney disease, 
vitamin D for, 781–782
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
passive immunization for, 1168t
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD)
antimuscarinic drugs for, 121
treatment of, 353
Chronic orthostatic hypotension
sympathomimetic drugs for, 144
Chronotropic effect
positive, 138
Chronulac, 1112. See also Lactulose
Chrousos syndrome
synthetic corticosteroids for, 704
Chylomicron(s), 620
Chylomicronemia
primary, 623
drugs used for, 622t
Cialis, 209. See also Tadalafil
Ciclesonide, 348
Ciclopirox olamine
topical, 1065
Cidex, 898. See also Glutaraldehyde
Cidex OPA, 898. See also Ortho-
phthalaldehyde (OPA)
Cidofovir, 863f, 867t, 888
for CMV infections, 868–869
Cigarette smoking
coronary disease related to, 619
Cilastatin, 802
Cilostazol, 209, 617
as antiplatelet agent, 614
for intermittent claudication, 207
Cimetidine, 1083t, 1111
drug interactions with, 610t, 1155t
pharmacokinetics, 39t
from prescription to OTC status, 
1116t
Cimzia, 999, 1112. See also Certolizumab
Cinacalcet, 780, 786
Cinchonism, 922
Cipro, 837. See also Ciprofloxacin
Ciprofloxacin 
clinical uses of, 836
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 836, 836t
Circus movement, 234, 234f
Cirrhosis, hepatic, diuretics for, 267
1184    Index
Cisapride, 286
in constipation management, 1094
Cisatracurium, 468–470, 481
Cisplatin
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
drug interactions with, 1155t
Citalopram
dosage of, 535t
pharmacokinetics of, 529t
Citanest, 463. See also Prilocaine
Citracal, 786. See also Calcium citrate
Citrucel, 1112. See also Methylcellulose
Cladribine
for cancer, 962
clinical activity and toxicities of, 959t
Clarinex, 292. See also Desloratadine
Clarithromycin, 814, 819
Claritin, 292. See also Loratadine
Classic angina, 193
Claudication, intermittent treatment of, 
207
Clavulanic acid, 801f
Clearance, 38–42, 39t–41t, 1027–1028
capacity-limited elimination and, 
39t–40t, 41–42
defined, 38
drug accumulation and
time course of, 42–43, 42f
in drug concentration measurements, 
49, 50
in the elderly, 1052f, 1052t, 1053
flow-dependent elimination and, 
39t–40t, 42
in infants and children, 1045–1046
models of, 38, 41f
pharmacokinetic mechanisms of, 1161
as pharmacokinetic variable, 48
Clemastine,  292
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Cleocin, 819, 935. See also Clindamycin; 
Lincomycin
Clevidipine, 189, 209
Cleviprex, 189, 209. See also Clevidipine
Clidinium, 127
Clindamycin, 815, 815f
for acne, 1064
Clinical trials, 72–77
controlled, 2
types of evidence in, 73
Clinoril, 656. See also Sulindac
Clobazam, for epilepsy, 420
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
Clofazimine, dosage of, 840t
for leprosy, 846
Clomid, 740. See also Clomiphene
Clomiphene, 731, 732f, 733–734, 740
Clomipramine, 527f, 539
dosage of, 535t
fetal effects of, 1042t
Clomipramine (Cont.):
pharmacodynamics of, 530t
pharmacokinetics of, 529t
Clonazepam, 387, 427
for epilepsy, 420
Clonidine, 176,176f,  189
for hypertension, 146, 176–177
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 175t, 177
as premedication before anesthesia, 146
for tics, 495
Clonorchiasis
praziquantel for, 944
Clopidogrel, 617
as antiplatelet agent, 613
Clorazepate, 387
dosages of, 383t
pharmacokinetic properties of, 377t
Clorazepate dipotassium
for epilepsy, 420, 427
Clotrimazole,  853f, 858
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Cloxacillin, dosage of, 795t
Clozapine, 504f, 519
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
dosage of, 510t
Clozaril, 519. See also Clozapine
CMV infections. See Cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) infections
CNS. See Central nervous system (CNS)
Co-Lyte, 1112. See also Polyethylene glycol 
electrolyte solution
Coagulation
disorders of
drugs used for, 601–618, 615t. 
See also specific drugs and 
Anticoagulants
mechanisms of, 601–602, 602f
Coagulation factor VIIa recombinant, 617
Coartem, 935. See also Artemether/
lumefantrine
for malaria, 919t
Cocaine, 451t, 460, 463
abuse of, 569t, 576
fetal effects of, 1042t
ionization constants of, 11t
sympathomimetic drug effects of, 143
Cockcroft-Gault formula, 1053
Codeine, 558, 559, 562, 563
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Codeine/acetaminophen, 562
Codeine/aspirin, 562
Coenzyme Q10, 1134–1135
Cogentin, 499. See also Benztropine
Cognex, 112. See also Tacrine
Cognitive remediation
antipsychotic drugs in, 513
Colace, 1112. See also Docusate
Colazal, 1112. See also Balsalazide
Colchicine, 656
drug interactions with, 1155t
Colcrys, 656. See also Colchicine
“Cold” preparations
ingredients in, 1118t
Colesevelam, 629–630, 633
for diabetes mellitus, 760
for diarrhea, 1095
Colestid, 633. See also Colestipol
Colestipol, 629–630
for diarrhea, 1095
Colistimethate sodium, 898
Colitis
amebic
drugs used for, 927
Collecting tubule system
in renal tubule transport, 252t, 
254–255, 254f
Colorectal cancer
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 972
Coltsfoot
risks associated with, 1127t
Coly-mycin M, 898. See also Colistimethate 
sodium
Coma
hyperosmolar
nonketotic, 744
myxedema, 691
Combantrin, 946. See also Pyrantel 
pamoate
Combivent, 355. See also Albuterol/
ipratropium
Comfrey
risks associated with, 1127t
Compazine, 1112. See also Prochlorperazine
Complement
in innate immunity, 979f
Complex partial seizures, 421
Compliance
in clinical trials, 73
in prescribing drugs, 1143–1144
Compound(s)
with estrogenic activity, 718, 718f
Compound F, 698–702. See also Cortisol
COMT inhibitors
for parkinsonism, 490–491
Comtan, 499. See also Entacapone
Concentration, target, 45
Concentration-dependent killing, 823, 907
Concentration-effect curves
receptor binding of agonists and, 
16, 17f
Concentration gradient
as factor in pharmacologic response to 
dermatologic drugs, 1061
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
synthetic corticosteroids for, 704
Congestive heart failure
sympathomimetic drugs in, 225
Index    1185
Conivaptan, 264, 270, 675, 678
in acute heart failure management, 222
Conjugated estrogens
dosage of, 731t
Conscious sedation, 430
Consciousness
anesthesia and, 435
Constitutive activity, 7
Contact dermatitis
topical dermatologic medications and, 
1063t
topical dermatologic medications and, 
1063t
Contact hypersensitivity, 983
Contact urticaria
topical dermatologic medications and, 
1063t
Context-sensitive half-time, 440
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion 
(CSII) devices, 750–751
Contraception
chemical
in men, 739
hormonal, 725t, 726–731
“morning after,” 731
Contraceptives
emergency
ingredients in, 1121t
implantable, 725f
oral, 725f
postcoital, 731, 731t
Contractile proteins
sensitivity to calcium, 212
Contractility
in cardiac performance, 215, 215f
Controlled clinical trial, 2
Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation, 667, 
668f
gonadotropins in, 670
Controlled substances
classification of, 1145–1146, 1145t
Converting enzyme, 297–298, 298f
Convulsion(s)
neuromuscular blocking 
drugs for, 476
COPD. See Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD)
Coplanar biphenyls, 1010
Cordarone, 249. See also Amiodarone
Coreg, 167, 189, 225. See also Carvedilol
Corgard, 167, 189. See also Nadolol
Corlopam, 148, 189. See also Fenoldopam
Coronary artery disease
alcohol and, 394
myxedema and, 690–691
smoking and, 619
Coronary blood flow
determinants of, 194
Cortef, 712. See also Hydrocortisone
Cortenema, 1112. See also Hydrocortisone
Cortex
circuitry of, 483, 484f
Corticorelin ovine triflutate, 678
Corticosteroids, 355, 697–709
aerosol
for asthma, 347–348, 351–352
clinical uses of, 347–348, 703–706
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
in the elderly, 1057
mechanism of actions of, 347
for nausea and vomiting, 1099
synthetic, 703–708
topical, 1072–1074, 1073t, 1074t
Corticotropin, 678
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), 
661, 661f
clinical uses of, 661t
Cortifoam, 1112. See also Hydrocortisone
Cortisol, 697, 698–702
Cortisone, 712
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
Cortone Acetate, 712. See also Cortisone
Cortrosyn, 678. See also Cosyntropin
Corvert, 249. See also Dronedarone
Cosyntropin, 678
Cotransmitter(s)
in cholinergic and adrenergic nerves, 
84t, 87
Cotransmitter substances, 82
Cough suppression. See also Antitussives
opioid analgesics in, 551, 553
Coumadin, 617. See also Warfarin
Coumarin anticoagulants, 608–611
Coupling
receptor-effector
spare receptors and, 16–18, 17f
COX-2 inhibitors
selective, 640
COX inhibitors
nonselective, 640–642
Cozaar, 190, 225. See also Losartan
Creon, 1111. See also Pancrelipase
Crestor, 633. See also Rosuvastatin
CRH. See Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH)
Crixivan, 889. See also Indinavir
Cromolyn
for asthma, 348–349, 352
ionization constants of, 11t
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Crotamiton, 1068
Cryoablation
for cardiac arrhythmias, 228
Cryoprecipitate
for bleeding disorders, 616
Cryptosporidium spp.
drugs used for, 931t
Cubicin, 808. See also Daptomycin
Cuprimine, 499, 656, 1025. See also 
Penicillamine
Cushing’s syndrome
synthetic corticosteroids for, 704
Cyanide
poisoning by, 1036, 1036t
Cyanocobalamin, 586
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
as second messenger, 25, 26, 28, 28f
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)
as second messenger, 29
Cyclizine, 292
dosage of, 279t
ionization constants of, 11t
Cyclobenzaprine, 481
Cyclodienes
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Cyclogyl, 127. See also Cyclopentolate
Cyclooxygenase(s), 314–316, 315f
Cyclopentolate, 127
Cyclophilin, 986
Cyclophosphamide, 644
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
fetal effects of, 1042t
as immunosuppressive drugs, 985t, 
988–989
metabolism of, 955f
structure of, 954f
Cycloplegia, 118, 119f
Cycloserine, 805, 808, 848
dosage of, 840t
for tuberculosis, 840t, 844
Cyclospasm, 93, 95f
Cyclospora cayetanensis
drugs used for, 931t
Cyclosporine, 644, 999
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
drug interactions with, 1156t
as immunosuppressive drug, 
985t, 986
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 644
Cyklokapron, 617. See also Tranexamic acid
Cymbalta, 539. See also Duloxetine
CYP. See Cytochrome P450 (CYP)
Cyproheptadine, 279, 286
dosage of, 279t
preparations available. See also Cyclizine
Cyproterone, 738
Cyproterone acetate, 738
Cystospaz-M, 127. See also Hyoscyamine
Cytarabine
for cancer, 960–961
clinical activity and toxicities of, 959t
fetal effects of, 1042t
as immunosuppressive drug, 989
Cytisine
in nicotine addiction management, 574
Cytochrome P450 (CYP), 55–64
in enzyme induction, 57–59, 58t
in enzyme inhibition, 58t, 59
Cytochrome P450 (CYP)–antidepressant 
drug interactions, 537t
1186    Index
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) cycle
in drug oxidation, 55, 55f
Cytochrome P450 (CYP)–dependent 
oxidations, 56t–57t
Cytochrome P450 (CYP)–independent 
oxidations, 57t
Cytochrome P450–derived metabolites
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 322–323
Cytokine(s)
chemoattractant, 977–978
in immunomodulation therapy, 
995–996, 995t–996t
Cytokine inhibitors
in immunomodulation therapy, 
996–997
Cytokine receptors, 23, 24f
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections
drugs used for, 866–869
passive immunization for, 1168t
Cytomel, 695. See also Liothyronine
Cytosine arabinoside, 960f
Cytosine deoxyriboside, 960f
Cytotec, 328, 1111. See also Misoprostol
Cytotoxic agents
as immunosuppressive drugs, 985t, 
988–989
Cytovene, 889. See also Ganciclovir
D
Dabigatran etexilate mesylate, 608
Dacarbazine
for cancer, 957
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Daclizumab, 999
DAG. See Diacylglycerol (DAG)
Dalbavancin, 803
Dalcetrapib, 631
Dalmane, 387. See also Flurazepam
Dalteparin, 617
Danaparoid, 617
Danazol, 732–733
Danocrine, 740. See also Danazol
Dantrium, 481. See also Dantrolene
Dantrolene, 479
Dapsone, 846
for acne, 1064–1065
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
for leprosy, 846
Daptomycin, 803–804, 808
Daranide, 270. See also Dichlorphenamide
Daraprim, 837, 935. See also 
Pyrimethamine
Darbepoetin alfa, 598
Darifenacin
for urinary disorders, 122, 122t
Darunavir, 870t, 879
drug interactions with, 874t
Dasatinib
for cancer, 966–967, 967t
Daunorubicin
for cancer, 963t, 965
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Daypro, 656. See also Oxaprozin
DDT
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Dealkylation
oxidative, 56t
Deamination, 56t
Debrisoquin-sparteine oxidation, 63
Decadron, 712. See also Dexamethasone
Decadron-LA, 712. See also Dexamethasone 
acetate
Decadron Phosphate, 712. See also 
Dexamethasone sodium 
phosphate
Declomycin, 270, 819. See also 
Demeclocycline
Decongestants
ingredients in, 1121t
Decontamination
defined, 894t
of poisoned patients, 1031–1032
Deep sedation, 430
Deferasirox, 598, 1024, 1025
for iron poisoning, 586
Deferoxamine, 1024
for iron poisoning, 586
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Degarelix, 671, 678
Degree of spareness, receptors, 18
Dehydration
osmotic diuretics and, 264
Dehydroemetine
for amebiasis, 930
Delatestryl, 740. See also Testosterone 
enanthate in oil
Delavirdine, 870t, 876–877, 888
Delayed afterdepolarizations (DADs), 216, 
218f, 233f, 234
Delirium tremens, 393
Delsym, 563. See also Dextromethorphan
Delta-Cortef, 712. See also Prednisolone
Delta-D, 786. See also Cholecalciferol
Demadex, 270. See also Torsemide
Demecarium
duration of action of, 106t
preparations available, 112
therapeutic uses for, 106t
Demeclocycline, 812, 270, 819
Demerol, 562. See also Meperidine
Demser, 167. See also Metyrosine
Denavir, 889. See also Penciclovir
Denervation supersensitivity, 92
Denileukin diftitox, 999
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
Denosumab, 771, 786, 994, 999
in bone mineral homeostasis, 
776–777
for osteoporosis, 775, 783
Deoxycorticosterone, 708–709
Deoxycytidine analogs
for cancer, 960–961
Depade, 561. See also Naltrexone
Depakene, 427, 519. See also Valproic acid/
valproate
Depakote, 519. See also Divalproex
Depen, 499, 656, 1025. See also 
Penicillamine
Dependence
addiction vs., 565
clinical pharmacology of, 578
defined, 565
Depo-Estradiol, 740. See also Estradiol 
cypionate in oil
Depo-testosterone, 740. See also 
Testosterone cypionate
Depolarization(s)
delayed after, 216, 218f, 233f
early after, 233f
premature, 216, 218f
Depo-Medrol, 712. See also 
Methylprednisolone acetate
Depression
antidepressants for. See Antidepressant(s)
major, 521–522. See also Major 
depressive disorder
oral contraceptives and, 730
pathophysiology of
hypotheses integration in, 525
neuroendocrine factors in, 524–525
psychotic
antipsychotic drugs for, 509
recurrent endogenous
lithium for, 516
St. John’s wort for, 1132–1133
unipolar
lithium for, 516
Dermatitis
contact
allergic, photoallergic
topical dermatologic medications 
and, 1063t
Dermatologic drugs, 1061–1079
for acne, 1069–1071
affecting pigmentation, 1068–1069
anti-inflammatory drugs, 1072–1074
antibacterial drugs, 1063–1065
antifungal drugs, 1065–1067
antineoplastic agents, 1077
antipruritic agents, 1076–1077
antiseborrhea agents, 1077–1078, 1078t
antiviral drugs, 1067
ectoparasiticides, 1068
immunomodulators, 1067
keratolytic and destructive agents, 
1074–1076
for psoriasis, 1071–1072
reactions to, 1061–1063, 1063t
sunscreens, 1069
Index    1187
Dermatologic drugs (Cont.):
trichogenic and antitrichogenic agents, 
1077
vehicles for, 1061–1062
as factor in pharmacologic response to 
dermatologic drugs, 1061
Dermopathy
thyroid disease–related, 693
Desensitization
heterologous, of receptors, 133
homologous, of receptors, 133
to drugs, 997–998
Desferal, 598, 1025. See also Deferoxamine
Desflurane, 432f, 446
pharmacologic properties of, 433t
Desoxycorticosterone acetate
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
Desipramine
chemistry of, 526, 527f
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t
Desirudin, 617
Desloratadine, 292
Desmethyldiazepam, 374f
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
Desmopressin, 616, 674, 678
Desogestrel, 719f
properties of, 723t
Desoxyn, 148. See also Methamphetamine
Desulfuration, 56t–57t
Desvenlafaxine
dosage of, 535t
Desyrel, 539. See also Trazodone
Detrol, 127. See also Tolterodine
Development, fetal 
critical periods of, 1041f
Dexamethasone, 712
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
Dexamethasone suppression test, 705
Dexchlorpheniramine, 292
Dexedrine, 148. See also Dextroamphetamine
Dexfenfluramine, 285
Dexilant, 1111. See also Dexlansoprazole
Dexlansoprazole
pharmacokinetics of, 1086t
Dexmedetomidine, 141, 148, 446
as intravenous anesthetic, 445–446
for sedation, 146
Dexmethylphenidate, 148
Dexrazoxane
in cancer therapy, 966
Dextroamphetamine, 148
Dextromethorphan, 559
Diaβeta, 766. See also Glyburide
Diabetes insipidus
diuretics for, 268
nephrogenic
ADH antagonists and, 265
lithium effects on, 516–517
Diabetes mellitus
defined, 743
drugs used for, 764–765
glucagon in, 743, 762–763. See also 
Glucagon
glycemic control in
benefits of, 751, 752
insulin for, 743, 744–745. See also 
Insulin
oral antidiabetic drugs for, 753–762. 
See also specific drugs
alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, 
759–760, 759t
amylin analog, 760
biguanides, 757
bile acid sequestrants, 760
combination therapy with, 761–762
DPP-4 inhibitors, 761
GLP-1 receptor antagonists, 760–761
insulin secretagogues, 754–756
meglitinide, 756, 756t
D-phenylalanine derivative, 756, 756t
sulfonylureas, 754–756, 755t
thiazolidinediones, 757–759
type 1 (insulin-dependent), 743–744
combination therapy for, 762
type 2 (noninsulin-dependent), 744
combination therapy for, 761–762
type 3, 744
type 4 (gestational), 744
Diabetic ketoacidosis, 744
insulin for, 751–752
Diabinese, 766. See also Chlorpropamide
Diacetylmonoxime, 123f
for cholinergic poisoning, 123
Diacomit, 427. See also Stiripentol
Diacylglycerol (DAG), 131, 131t, 132f, 
137t
as second messengers, 28–29, 28f
Dialysis
peritoneal
in decontamination of poisoned 
patient, 1032
Diamox, 270. See also Acetazolamide
Diarrhea
drugs used for, 1094–1095.See also spe-
cific agents and Antidiarrheal 
agents
opioid analgesics for, 553
Diastat, 481. See also Diazepam
Diastolic heart failure, 211
Diazepam, 476
dosages of, 383t
for epilepsy, 420
fetal effects of, 1042t
half-life of
in neonates and adults, 1045t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
ionization constants of, 11t
Diazepam (Cont.):
during lactation, 1048t
oral absorption of
in neonates vs. older children and 
adults, 1044t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 377t
pharmacologic properties of, 378, 439t
preparations available, 387, 400, 427, 
446, 481
Diazinon
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Diazoxide, 182f, 189
as antihypertensive drug, 182–183
Dibenamine
cardiovascular effects of, 153f
Dibenzo-p-dioxins
polychlorinated, 1010
Dibenzodiazepine
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
chemical structure effects on potency 
and toxicity of, 505t
Dibenzofurans
polychlorinated, 1010
Dibenzothiazepine
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
chemical structure effects on potency 
and toxicity of, 505t
Dibenzoxazepine
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
Dibenzyline, 167. See also 
Phenoxybenzamine
Dibucaine, 463
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), 
1009f
toxicity rating for, 1006t
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, 
1008–1009
Dichlorphenamide, 270
dosage of, 257t
Dichlorvos
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Diclofenac, 640
properties of, 638t
Dicloxacillin
dosage of, 795t
Dicumarol, structure of, 609f
during lactation, 1048t
Dicyclomine, 117f, 127, 1111
for irritable bowel syndrome, 1096
Didanosine, 863f, 870t, 872, 888
drug interactions with, 874t
Didronel, 786. See also Etidronate 
disodium
Dieldrin
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Dientamoeba fragilis
drugs used for, 931t
Diet
in drug metabolism, 65–66
in hyperlipidemia, 625
1188    Index
Dietary Supplement and Non-Prescription 
Drug Consumer Protection 
Act, 1126
Dietary Supplement Health and Education 
Act (DSHEA), 74t, 1125–1126
Dietary supplements, 1125–1138. See also 
specific types
Diethylcarbamazine, for helminthic 
infections, 938t, 939–940
Diethylstilbestrol, 718f, 740
dosage of, 731t
fetal effects of, 1042t
Difenoxin, 558, 1112
Diffuse neuronal systems
of CNS, 365–366
Diffusible second messenger, 361, 362f
Diffusion
aqueous, 9, 9f
lipid, 9, 9f
Diflucan, 858. See also Fluconazole
Diflunisal, 641, 655
properties of, 638t
Digestive enzymes, 1111
Digibind, 225 
DigiFab, 225
Digitalis
in heart failure management, 215–218, 
221
Digitalis antibody, 225
Digitalis glycosides
drug interactions with, 1156t
Digoxin
in chronic heart failure management, 
215–218, 221
half-life of
in neonates and adults, 1045t
during lactation, 1048t
oral absorption of
in neonates vs. older children and 
adults, 1044t
overdose of, 1036–1037
pharmacokinetics, 39t
Digoxin antibodies, as poisoning antidote, 
1033t
Digoxin immune fab, 225
Dihydroartemisinin, 920
Dihydrocarbostyril
advantages and disadvantages of, 
509t
chemical structure effects on potency 
and toxicity of, 505t
Dihydrocodeine, 558
Dihydroergotamine, 155, 292
Dihydroindolone
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
chemical structure effects on potency 
and toxicity of, 505t
Dihydropyridine(s), 202t
Dihydroxyphenylalanine, 485f
Diiodotyrosine (DIT), 682
Dilacor, 250. See also Diltiazem
Dilantin, 427. See also Phenytoin
Dilaudid, 562. See also Hydromorphone
Diloxanide furoate
for amebiasis, 929–930
Diltiazem
for angina, 202t
for cardiac arrhythmias, 245
clinical pharmacology of, 202t
membrane actions of, 237t
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t
pharmacologic properties of, 238t
preparations available, 189, 
209, 250
Dimaval, 1025. See also Unithiol
Dimenhydrinate, 278f, 292
dosage of, 279t
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Dimercaprol, 1021–1022, 1022f, 1025
indications and toxicity of, 1022
Dimercaptopropanesulfonic acid. 
See Unithiol
2,3-Dimercaptopropanol. 
See Dimercaprol
Dimercaptosuccinic acid. See Succimer
Dimetan
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Dimethisterone, 719f
properties of, 723t
Dimethoate
toxicity rating for, 1007t
D-Dimethylcysteine. See Penicillamine
Dimetilan
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Dinoprostone, 324, 325f, 328
Diovan, 190, 225. See also Valsartan
Dioxins, 1009
Dipentum, 1112. See also Olsalazine
Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors
for diabetes mellitus, 761
Diphenhydramine, 278f, 292
dosage of, 279t
ionization constants of, 11t
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Diphenoxylate, 558, 1112
for diarrhea, 1094–1095
ionization constants of, 11t
Diphenylmethane derivatives
in constipation management, 1093
Diphtheria
passive immunization for, 1168t
Diphtheria tetanus acellular pertussis 
(DTaP) vaccine, 1164t
Diphyllobothriasis
praziquantel for, 944
Diphyllobothrium latum
niclosamide for, 942
Diprivan, 446. See also Propofol
Dipyridamole, 617
as antiplatelet agent, 613–614
Direct thrombin inhibitors, 607–608. 
See also specific drugs
oral, 608
parenteral, 607–608
Direct vasodilators, 172
Disalcid, 656. See also Salsalate
Disease-modifying antirheumatic 
drugs (DMARDs), 
643–650, 656
in inflammation reduction, 636
Disinfectants, 893–896, 898
Disinfection
defined, 894t
Disopyramide
for cardiac arrhythmias, 239–240
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(DIC), 604
Dissociation constants (KD)
of enantiomers, 5, 5t
Distal convoluted tubule
in renal tubule transport, 252t, 254, 
254f
Distribution of drugs. See Volume of 
distribution
Disulfiram
in alcoholism management, 397, 400
drug interactions with, 610t, 1156t
Ditropan, 127. See also Oxybutynin
Diurese, 270. See also Trichlormethiazide
Diuresis forced for poisoned patient, 1032
saline
for hypercalcemia, 778
Diuretic(s), 251–271. See also specific drugs
adenosine A1-receptor antagonists, 258
as antihypertensive drugs, 172–174, 
174f
basic pharmacology of, 256–265
clinical pharmacology of, 265–268
for diabetes insipidus, 268
for edematous states, 265–267
in heart failure management, 219, 
265–266
hemodynamic effects of, 173
toxicity of, 174, 258–263
use of, 173–174
Diuril, 270. See also Chlorothiazide
Divalproex, 519
DMARDs. See Disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs 
(DMARDs)
DNA gyrase inhibitors, 834–836. See also 
specific drugs
Doan’s Pills, 655. See also Magnesium 
salicylate
Dobutamine, 141, 142f, 148, 225
in cardiac stress test, 144
in heart failure management, 218
Dobutrex, 148. See also Dobutamine
Docetaxel
for cancer, 963t, 964
Index    1189
Docosanol
dosage of, 865t
for HSV and VZV infections, 866
Docusate, 1093, 1112
Dofetilide
for cardiac arrhythmias, 237–244
Dolasetron, 1097f, 1111
for nausea and vomiting, 1098–1099
Dolobid, 655. See also Diflunisal
Dolophine, 562. See also Methadone
Domperidone
in gastrointestinal motility stimulation, 
1092
Donepezil, 112
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055
Dopamine, 136f, 138t, 141, 148, 225, 
661, 661t
addictive drugs effects on, 565–566, 
567f, 569f, 569t
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
as CNS neurotransmitter, 366t, 370
inhibitory effects of, 92t
Dopamine agonists, 143–144, 278, 
488–490, 672–673 
for parkinsonism, 488–490, 488f
Dopamine hypothesis
of addiction, 568
of schizophrenia, 502
Dopamine receptor(s), 87, 89t, 131, 
132, 137t
activation of
cardiovascular effects of, 138
antagonists of, 506
antipsychotic drugs and, 506–507, 
506f
Dopamine transporter, 576
Dopaminergic systems
antipsychotic drugs and, 506
Dopar, 499. See also Levodopa
Doral, 387. See also Quazepam
Doribax, 807. See also Doripenem
Doripenem
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
801–802
Dorzolamide, 270
Dose, 16–18
reducing interval between cancer 
treatment cycles, 953
Dose axis, 30, 30f
Dose-effect curves
graded, 16–18
quantal, 31–32, 31f
Dose escalation, 953
Dose-response curves, 16–18
for sedative-hypnotic drugs, 374f
shape of, 30f, 31
Dose-response relationship, 30–34, 30f, 31f
Dosing schedule
as factor in pharmacologic response to 
dermatologic drugs, 1061
Dostinex, 678. See also Cabergoline
Double-blind design, 72
Down-regulation
receptor, 23
Doxazosin, 154, 167, 189
Doxepin, 1076
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t
Doxercalciferol, 786
Doxorubicin
for cancer, 963t, 965
Doxycycline, 810–813, 819, 935
antiparasitic uses of, 917t
for helminthic infections, 938t, 940
in malaria prevention in travelers, 919t
DPP-4 inhibitors. See Dipeptidyl 
peptidase-4 (DPP-4) 
inhibitors
Dramamine, 292. See also Dimenhydrinate
Drisdol, 786. See also Ergocalciferol
Dromotropic effect, positive, 138
Dronabinol, 1111 abuse of, 572
Dronedarone, 242, 249
for cardiac arrhythmias, 243
membrane actions of, 237t
Droperidol, 446
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Drospirenone, 711
Drospirenone/ethinyl estradiol
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
Drug(s). See also specific types, indications, 
and agents
of abuse, 565–580. See also specific drugs 
and Drug abuse
with actions on smooth muscle, 
273–357
autonomic, 79–168
autonomic transmission effects of, 93, 
94t
biotransformation of, 53–68. See also 
Biotransformation of drugs
CNS-related, 359–580. See also Central 
nervous system (CNS) drugs
development of, 69–77. See also Drug 
development
discovery of, 70–71, 70f
efficacy of, 30f, 31
excretion of. See Clearance
ionization constants of, 11t
labeled and off-label uses of
legal issues related to, 1146
legislation pertaining to
in USA, 73, 74t
lipid:aqueous partition coefficient of,
9, 9f
nature of, 3–6, 5f, 5t
orphan
development of, 77
permeation of
mechanisms of, 9–10, 9f
Drug(s) (Cont.):
physical nature of, 4
potency of, 30–31, 30f
rational design of, 6
reactivity of, 4
shape of, 4–5, 5f, 5t
size of, 4
Drug abuse, 565–580. See also specific drugs 
and Addiction
nonaddictive, 571
tolerance in, 566–567
withdrawal in, 567
Drug accumulation, 42–43, 42f
Drug action
duration of, 8
signaling mechanisms and, 21–29, 
21f–28f, 26t
time course of, 37–51
Drug antagonism
mechanisms of, 7–8, 20
Drug concentration
drug response and
relationship between, 16–20, 17f, 18f, 
20f
measurements of
interpretation of, 49–50
Drug conjugates, 59, 60t
Drug development, 69–77
clinical trials in, 72–77. See also 
Clinical trials
orphan drugs in, 77
pharmaceutical industry in, 69–70
preclinical safety and toxicity testing in, 
71–72, 71t
for rare diseases, 77
receptor classes and, 22f, 29–30
translational research in, 76
Drug disposition
biotransformation of drugs in, 53–54, 54f
Drug distribution
models of, 38, 41f
physical volumes of body compartments 
in, 38, 41t
Drug dose
clinical response and
relationship between, 30–34, 30f, 31f.
See also Dose-response 
relationship
individualization of
pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics in, 47–49
rational
time course of drug action related to, 
37–51
regimen for
target concentration approach to 
designing of, 45–47, 47f
Drug-drug interactions
during drug metabolism, 66–67, 66t, 
67t
1190    Index
Drug groups, 12–13
Drug holidays, 488
Drug interactions, 1149–1162, 
1150t–1161t. See also 
specific drugs
combined toxicity, 1161–1162
pharmacodynamic mechanisms of, 1161
pharmacokinetic mechanisms of, 1149, 
1161
predictability of, 1149–1162
Drug metabolism, 61–68
diseases affecting, 67–68, 67t
in the elderly, 1052–1053, 1052t
fetal
during pregnancy, 1040
in infants and children, 1045, 1045t
pharmacokinetic mechanisms of, 1149, 
1161
placental
during pregnancy, 1040
to toxic products, 60–61, 61f
Drug overdose. See also specific drugs
hemodialysis in, 1031, 1031t, 1032
Drug penetration
regional variation in
as factor in pharmacologic response to 
dermatologic drugs, 1061
Drug receptor(s), 2. See specific types and 
Receptor(s)
Drug-receptor bonds, 4
Drug resistance
in cancer chemotherapy, 953
Drug response
drug concentration and
relationship between, 16–20, 17f, 18f, 
20f
idiosyncratic, 32
variations in, 32–33
Drug screening, 70–71
Drug tolerance, 32, 66, 566–567
Drug “trapping”
through pH-partitioning phenomenon, 
11, 12t
Drug withdrawal, 567
Drug-body interactions, 6–12, 7f–9f, 
10t–12t, 12f
Drug-receptor interactions
types of, 6, 7f
DSHEA. See Dietary Supplement Health 
and Education Act (DSHEA)
Duetact, 766. See also Pioglitazone plus 
glimepiride
Dulcolax, 1112. See also Bisacodyl
Duloxetine, 526f, 539
dosage of, 535t
pharmacokinetics of, 528, 529t
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 143
Duocaine, 463. See also Lidocaine and 
bupivacaine
DuoNeb, 355. See also Albuterol/ipratropium
Duricef, 807. See also Cefadroxil
Dutasteride, 738, 740
Dyazide
dosage of, 262t
Dyclone, 463. See also Dyclonine
Dyclonine, 463
Dylix, 355. See also Dyphylline
DynaCirc, 190, 209. See also Isradipine
Dynorphin(s), 543–544, 544t
CREB-mediated up-regulation
during withdrawal from dependence, 
568, 570f
Dyphylline, 355
Dyrenium, 270. See also Triamterene
dosage of, 262t
Dysbetalipoproteinemia
familial, 623–624
drugs used for, 622t
Dyskinesia(s)
dopamine receptor agonists and, 489
drug-induced, 495–496
levodopa and, 487
tardive, 496
antipsychotic drugs and, 511
Dyslipidemia(s)
drugs used in, 619–633.See also 
specific disorders, e.g., 
Hyperlipidemia(s)
Dysmenorrhea
eicosanoids and, 326
Dysmorphogenesis, 1041–1043
antipsychotic drugs and, 512
Dyspepsia
nonulcer. See Nonulcer dyspepsia
Dystonia(s), 495
described, 483
tardive, 496
E
E-prescribing, 1143
Early afterdepolarizations (EADs), 233f, 
234
Easprin, 655. See also Aspirin
Eating disorders
antidepressants for, 533
Ecallantide, 302
Echinacea, 1126–1128
Echinocandins, 849
for systemic infections, 855
Echothiophate, 106f, 112
durations of action of, 106t
therapeutic uses for, 106t
Econazole, 858
Ecotoxicology, 1002
Ecstasy
abuse of, 569t, 577–578
Ectoparasiticides, 1068
Eculizumab, 994
Edarbi, 190. See also Azilsartan
Edecrin, 270. See also Ethacrynic acid
Edema
idiopathic
diuretics for, 267
lithium and, 517
pulmonary, acute, 
opioid analgesics for, 553
Edematous states
diuretics for, 265–267
Edetate calcium disodium, 1021f, 1023
indications and toxicity of, 1023
Edrophonium, 105–107, 112
durations of action of, 106t
Efavirenz, 870t, 877, 888
drug interactions with, 874t
Effector(s)
of G proteins, 25, 26t
Effector mechanism, 6
Effector pathways
beneficial and toxic drug effects related 
to, 34
Effexor, 539. See also Venlafaxine
Efficacy
intrinsic, 7
Effient, 617. See also Prasugrel
Effort angina, 193
clinical pharmacology of, 206–207, 206f, 
207t
nitrate effects in, 200
Eflornithine, 935, 1077
clinical uses of, 933–934
EGF receptor
mechanism of activation of, 22, 23f
Eicosanoid(s). See also Leukotriene(s); 
Prostaglandin(s)
basic pharmacology of, 317–324
clinical pharmacology of, 324–328
Eicosanoid receptors, 319–320, 319t
Elavil, 539. See also Amitriptyline
Eldepryl, 499. See also Selegiline
Elderly. See also Aging
ADRs in, 1057–1058
anti-inflammatory drugs in, 1056–1057
antimicrobial drugs in, 1056
cardiovascular drugs in, 1056
CNS drugs in, 1053–1055.See also 
Central nervous system (CNS) 
drugs, in the elderly
ophthalmic drugs in, 1057
Electrocardiography (ECG)
in poisoning assessment, 1030–1031, 
1031f
Electroencephalography (EEG)
antipsychotic drugs effects on, 508
Electrolyte(s)
lithium effects on, 514
in poisoning assessment, 1030, 1030t
Electrolyte balance
alcohol effects on, 394
Electrostatic bonding, 4
Elestat, 292. See also Epinastine
Index    1191
Eletriptan, 286t, 292
Eligard, 678. See also Leuprolide acetate
Elimination of drugs. See also Clearance
capacity-limited, 39t–40t, 41–42
flow-dependent, 39t–40t, 42
models of, 38, 41f
Elixirs
in pediatric patients, 1046
Elixophyllin, 355. See also Theophylline
Eltrombopag, 595, 598
Emadine, 292. See also Emedastine
Emedastine, 292
Emend, 1111. See also Aprepitant
Emergency contraceptives
ingredients in, 1121t
Emesis
in decontamination of poisoned patient, 
1031–1032
Emetine
for amebiasis, 930
EMLA (eutectic mixture of local 
anesthetics), 461
Empiric therapy, antimicrobials, 
902–906
Empirin Compound, 562. See also 
Codeine/aspirin
Emtricitabine, 863f, 870t, 872–874, 888
Enablex, 127. See also Darofemacom
Enalapril, 190, 225, 299
as antihypertensive drug, 184, 190
pharmacokinetics, 39t
Enantiomers, 5, 5f, 5t
Enbrel, 656, 999. See also Etanercept
End-of-dose akinesia, 487
Endocannabinoids
as CNS neurotransmitter, 367t, 371
Endocrine disorders
diagnosis of
glucagon in, 763
Endocrine disruptors
as environmental pollutants, 1011
Endocrine drugs, 659–787. See also specific 
types, drugs, and indications
Endocrine glands
kinins effects on, 301
Endocrine pancreas, 743–744
Endocrine system
alcohol effects on, 394
antipsychotic drugs effects on, 507t, 508, 
512
beta-receptor antagonists effects on, 160
etomidate effects on, 444
garlic effects on, 1129
oral contraceptives effects on, 727
properties in common with nervous 
system, 80
Endocytosis, 9–10, 9f
Endogenous catecholamines, 138t, 
140–141
Endogenous opioid peptides, 543–544, 544t
Endometriosis
gonadotropins in, 670
Endomorphin-1, 544
Endomorphin-2, 544
Endoperoxides
structures of, 918f
Endorphin(s), 543–544, 544t
Endothelial-derived relaxing factor 
(EDRF), 103, 331
Endothelin(s), 304–306
Endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing 
factors, 317
Endotracheal intubation, 476
Enduron, 270. See also Methyclothiazide
Entecavir, 863f
Enflurane, 432f, 446
pharmacologic properties of, 433t
Enfuvirtide, 870t, 881, 888
Enjuvia, 740. See also Esterified estrogens
Enkephalin(s), 543–544, 544t
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
inhibitory effects of, 92t
Enoxaparin, 617
ENS. See Enteric nervous system (ENS)
Entacapone
for parkinsonism, 488f, 490, 499
Entecavir
for HBV infection, 883t, 884, 889
Entereg, 562, 1112. See also Alvimopan
Enteric infections
proton pump inhibitors and, 1088–1089
Enteric nervous system (ENS), 81–82, 
81f, 84t
physiology of, 1091–1092, 1092f
transmitter substances found in, 84t
Enteric oxaluria, 785
Enterochromaffin-like (ECL) cells, 81f, 
1082, 1082f
Enteroglucagon, 762
Entocort, 1112. See also Budesonide
Entry inhibitors, 870t–871t, 881–882. 
See also specific drugs
Environmental factors
cancer related to, 949
in drug metabolism, 65–66
Environmental pollutants, 1010–1011
asbestos, 1011
endocrine disruptors, 1011
metals, 1011–1012
polychlorinated biphenyls, 1010
Environmental toxicology, 1001–1003
Enzyme(s), 16, 1111
converting, 297–298, 298f
digestive
human liver P450, 55–59. See also 
Human liver P450 enzymes
lithium effects on, 514, 515t
transmembrane
ligand-regulated, 22–23, 23f
Ziegler’s, 65
Enzyme induction
P450 in, 57–59, 58t
Enzyme inhibition, 58t, 59
Ephedra
risks associated with, 1127t
Ephedrine, 136f, 148, 355
for asthma, 343–344
ionization constants of, 11t
sympathomimetic drug effects of, 136f, 
141–142
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor
mechanism of activation of, 22, 23f
Epilepsy
drug development for, 403–404, 405f, 
406f
drugs used for, 419–420, 422–423
prevalence of, 403
VNS for, 404
Epinastine, 292
Epinephrine, 138t, 140–141
for anaphylactic shock, 145
for asthma, 343
cardiovascular responses to, 138t
excitatory effects of, 92t
ionization constants of, 11t
Epinephrine reversal, 152
Epipodophyllotoxins
for cancer, 963t, 964
Epirubicin
for cancer, 965
Eplerenone, 711, 225, 270
Epoetin alfa, 598
Epoetin beta, 598
Epogen. See also Epoetin alfa
Epoprostenol, 328, 325f
Epoxidation, 56t
Epoxide hydrolases, 60
Epoxygenase products, 317
Eprosartan, 190, 225
Epsom Salt, 1112. See also Magnesium 
hydroxide
Eptifibatide, 613, 617
Equalactin, 1112. See also Polycarbophil
Equanil, 387. See also Meprobamate
Eraxis, 858. See also Anidulafungin
Erbitux, 999. See also Cetuximab
Erectile dysfunction
drugs used for, 199
alpha-receptor antagonists, 156–157
Erethism, 1020
Ergocalciferol, 786
Ergomar, 292. See also Ergotamine tartrate
Ergonovine, 292
Ergosterol, 850
Ergot alkaloids, 287–290
Ergot poisoning, 287
Ergotamine, 155
ionization constants of, 11t
Ergotamine mixtures, 292
Ergotamine tartrate, 292
1192    Index
Ergotism, 287
Ergotrate, 292. See also Ergonovine
Erlotinib
for cancer, 968
clinical activity and toxicities of, 967t
Epogen, 598
Ertapenem
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
801–802
Erythromycin, 813–814
for acne, 1064
in gastrointestinal motility stimulation, 
1092
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 813
Erythropoietin, 591–592
Escitalopram, 529t
dosage of, 535t, 539
Eserine, 112. See also Physostigmine
Esidrix, 270. See also Hydrochlorothiazide
Eskalith. See also Lithium carbonate
Eslicarbazepine, 427
for seizures, 411
Esmolol, 162, 167, 189, 249
as antihypertensive drug, 180
cardiac effects of, 242
membrane actions of, 237t
pharmacologic properties of, 238t
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
properties of, 159t
Esomeprazole, 1111
pharmacokinetics of, 1086t
Essential tremor, 493–494
Estazolam, preparations available, 387
Ester(s), 
choline, properties of, 99, 100t
Esterified estrogens, 740
Estrace, 740. See also Estradiol
Estraderm, 740. See also Estradiol transdermal
Estradiol, 716f, 717–718, 717f
Estradiol cypionate
dosage of, 719t
Estriol, 716f, 717–718, 717f
Estrogen(s), 716–723, 740
blood coagulation effects of, 720
in bone mineral homeostasis, 775
drug interactions with, 1157t
Estrogen inhibitors, 731–734
Estrogen replacement therapy
for osteoporosis, 775
Estrogen response elements (EREs), 719
Estrone, 716f, 717–718, 717f, 740
Estropipate
dosage of, 719t
Eszopiclone, 374
biotransformation of, 378
pharmacokinetic properties of, 377t
Etanercept, 647, 656, 992, 999
for psoriasis, 1071–1072
Ethacrynic acid, 259f, 270
dosage of, 259t
Ethambutol,
  for tuberculosis, 840t, 842
Ethanol. See also Alcohol(s)
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 893t, 894
pharmacology of, 390–397
fetal effects of, 1042t
during lactation, 1048t
metabolism of, 390, 390f
overdose of, 1037
pharmacokinetics of, 390–391, 390f
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Ethanolamines (antihistamines)
dosage of, 279t
Ethinyl estradiol, dosage of, 719t, 731t
17-Ethinyl testosterone derivatives
properties of, 723t
Ethionamide, 843f, 848
dosage of, 840t
for tuberculosis, 840t, 843–844
Ethosuximide
for seizures, 417–418, 422–423
Ethotoin
for seizures, 409
Ethrane, 446. See also Enflurane
Ethylene glycol
in alcoholism, 398
poisoning by, 1037
Ethylene oxide, 897
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. See 
Edetate calcium disodium
Ethyleneimonium intermediate, 
152, 152f
Ethynodiol diacetate
properties of, 723t
Etidocaine, 460
Etidronate, 776f
Etidronate disodium, 786
Etodolac, 641, 655
properties of, 638t
Etomidate, 438f, 446
as intravenous anesthetic, 439t, 443–444
Etoposide
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Etravirine, 870t, 877, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
Etretinate
fetal effects of, 1042t
Eulexin, 740. See also Flutamide
Euphoria
opioid analgesics and, 550
Evista, 740. See also Raloxifene
Evoxac, 112. See also Cevimeline
Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), 
92, 93f, 362–363
Exelderm, 858. See also Sulconazole
Exelon, 112. See also Rivastigmine
Exemestane, 733, 740
Exenatide
for diabetes mellitus, 760
Exjade, 598, 1025. See also Deferasirox
Exocrine glands
kinins effects on, 301
Exocytosis, 9–10, 9f
Ex-Lax, 1112. See also Senna
Expectorants
ingredients in, 1121t
Experimental pharmacology, 2
Experimental physiology, 2
Extavia, 999 
Extensive metabolizers, 64
Extracellular volume expansion
osmotic diuretics and, 264
Extraction ratio, 44
Extrinsic factor, 586
Eye(s). See also Ophthalmic disorders; 
Ophthalmologic disorders
anterior chamber of
structures of, 95f
antimuscarinic drug effects on, 118, 119f
antipsychotic drugs effects on, 512
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 90t
beta-receptor antagonists effects on, 160, 
161t
cholinomimetic drug effects on
direct-acting, 102, 102t
indirect-acting, 107
disorders of
cholinomimetic drugs for, 108
ganglion-blocking drug effects on, 125
pharmacology of, 93, 95f
poisoning effects on, 1029
prostaglandins effects on, 322
serotonin effects on, 284
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 138
Ezetimibe
for hyperlipidemias, 630–631
Ezogabine (retigabine), 415
F
Factive, 838. See also Gemifloxacin
Factor IX complex, human, 617
Factrel, 678. See also Gonadorelin 
hydrochloride
Fadrozole, 733
Famciclovir, 865t
for HSV and VZV infections, 866
topical, 1067
Familial combined hyperlipoproteinemia, 
623, 624
drugs used for, 622t
Familial dysbetalipoproteinemia, 
623–624
drugs used for, 622t
Familial hypercholesterolemia, 624, 624f
drugs used for, 622t
Familial hypertriglyceridemia, 623
drugs used for, 622t
Familial ligand-defective apo B
drugs used for, 622t
Familial ligand-defective apo B-100, 624
Index    1193
Famotidine, 1083
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Famvir, 889. See also Etravirine
Fansidar, 837, 925–926, 935. See also 
Pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine
Fareston, 740. See also Toremifene
Faslodex, 740. See also Fulvestrant
Fasudil
for angina pectoris, 206
Fatty acids
omega-3, 633
FDA
in clinical trials, 73–74, 74t
review of OTC drug ingredients by, 
1115–1124
Febuxostat
for gout, 654
preparations available, 656
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 
1938, 73, 74t
FEIBA (factor eight inhibitor bypassing 
activity)
for bleeding disorders, 616
Feiba VH Immuno, 617. See also Anti-inhibitor 
coagulant complex
Felbamate, for seizures, 412–413, 427
Felbatol, 427. See also Felbamate
Feldene, 656. See also Piroxicam
Felodipine
clinical pharmacology of, 202t, 190, 209
Female infertility
GnRH agonists for, 669–670
Female maturation
estrogen effects on, 719–720
Female reproductive system
eicosanoid effects on, 324–326
melatonin effects on, 1136
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 321
Femara, 740. See also Letrozole
Fenitrothion
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Fenofibrate, 628f, 633
in drug combinations, 631
for hyperlipidemias, 628–629
Fenoldopam
as antihypertensive drug, 183, 189
sympathomimetic drug effects of, 144, 148
Fenoprofen
properties of, 638t
Fentanyl, 557,557f,  562, 563
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Ferric hexacyanoferrate. See Prussian blue
Ferrioxamine, 1022f
Fesoterodine
for urinary disorders, 122, 122t
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 394
Fetal drug metabolism
during pregnancy, 1040
Fetal hydantoin syndrome, 424
Fetus
adverse drug effects on, 1042t–1043t
lung maturation in
corticosteroids in stimulation of, 705
predictable toxic drug actions in, 1041
teratogenic drug action effects on, 
1042t–1043t
therapeutic drug actions in
during pregnancy, 1040–1041
Fever
atropine, 120
Blackwater, 922
cadmium fume, 1012
prostaglandins and, 321
Fexmid, 481. See also Cyclobenzaprine
Fexofenadine dosage of, 279t
FGF23. See Fibroblast growth factor 23 
(FGF23)
Fiber-Lax, 1112. See also Polycarbophil
FiberCon, 1112. See also Polycarbophil
Fibrates
in drug combinations, 631
for hyperlipidemias, 628–629, 629f
Fibric acid derivatives. See Fibrates
Fibrinolysis, 604, 604f
Fibrinolytic drugs
basic pharmacology of, 611–612
Fibrinolytic inhibitors
for bleeding disorders, 604f, 616
Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)
in bone mineral homeostasis, 770–774
Fibroids
uterine
gonadotropins in, 670
Fick’s law of diffusion, 10
Fidaxomicin, 892
Filgrastim, 598
Finasteride, 738, 1077
Firmagon, 678. See also Degarelix
First-pass effect, 44, 54
alternative routes of administration and, 
44
First-pass elimination
bioavailability and, 43–44
FK-binding protein (FKBP), 986
Flagyl, 898, 935. See also Metronidazole
Flavin monooxygenase, 65
Flavoxate, 127
Flecainide
for cardiac arrhythmias, 237t, 241
Fleets Phospho-soda, 1112. See also Sodium 
phosphate
Flexeril, 481. See also Cyclobenzaprine
Flexible regulation, 29
Flolan, 328. See also Epoprostenol
Flomax, 167. See also Tamsulosin
Florinef Acetate, 712. See also 
Fludrocortisone acetate
Flovent, 355. See also Fluticasone
Flow-dependent elimination, 39t–40t, 42
Floxin, 838. See also Ofloxacin
Fluconazole
for skin infections, 1066
for systemic infections, 854–855
Flucytosine
for systemic infections, 852–853
Fludarabine
for cancer, 962
clinical activity and toxicities of, 959t
Fludrocortisone, 709
clinical uses and dosage of, 
703t, 712
Fluke(s)
drugs used for, 938t
Flumadine, 889. See also Rimantadine
Flumazenil, 379, 381–382
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Flunarizine
for migraine, 285
Flunisolide, 355
Fluoride
in bone mineral homeostasis, 777
Fluoropyrimidines
for cancer, 960
Fluoroquinolones, 834–836
for tuberculosis, 840t, 844–845
Fluorouracil, 1076
5-Fluorouracil
for cancer, 960
Fluothane, 446. See also Halothane
Fluoxetine, 528–529, 539
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 39t, 530t
Fluoxymesterone, dosage of, 736t
Fluphenazine
advantages and disadvantages of, 
509t
dosage of, 510t
ionization constants of, 11t
Fluphenazine decanoate, 519
Fluprednisolone
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
Flurazepam
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
pharmacokinetic properties of, 377t
Flurbiprofen,637f,  641, 655
properties of, 638t
Flutamide, 738, 740
Fluticasone, 355
Fluvastatin, 633
Fluvoxamine
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t
pharmacokinetics of, 529t
Focalin, 148. See also Dexmethylphenidate
Folate antagonists, 918f
Folate synthesis
inhibitors of
for malaria, 925–926
1194    Index
Folic acid/folates, 589f, 598, 958f, 
for anemia, 588–590, 589f
deficiency of
anemia due to, 584t
supplementation with, 589
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 
666–669, 715
Follistim, 678. See also Follitropin beta
Follitropin, 667, 678
Fomepizole, 398, 398f, 400
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Fondaparinux, 605f, 606, 617
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
in clinical trials, 73–74, 74t
review of OTC drug ingredients by, 
1115–1124
Foradil, 355. See also Formoterol
Forane, 446. See also Isoflurane
Formaldehyde
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 893t, 896
Formalin, 896
Formoterol
for asthma, 344, 355
Fortaz, 807. See also Ceftazidime
Forteo, 786. See also Teriparatide
Fosamax, 786. See also Alendronate sodium
Fosamprenavir, 870t, 879, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
Fosaprepitant, 307
for nausea and vomiting, 1099
Foscarnet
for CMV infections, 868, 889
dosage of, 863f, 865t, 867t, 889
Foscavir, 889. See also Foscarnet
Fosfomycin, 805, 808
Fosinopril, 190, 225
Fosphenytoin, 407, 427
Fospropofol, 441, 446
Fragmin, 617. See also Dalteparin
Frova, 292. See also Frovatriptan
Frovatriptan
pharmacokinetics of, 286t
Full agonists, 19, 20f
Fulvestrant, 733, 740
Fulvicin P/G, 858. See also Griseofulvin
Fungizone
properties of, 850t
Furacin, 898. See also Nitrofurazone
Furosemide, 259f, 270
in chronic heart failure management, 220
dosage of, 259t
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics, 39t
Fuzeon, 888. See also Enfuvirtide
G
Gi0-coupled receptors, drugs of abuse and, 
572–573
G-CSF. See Granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor (G-CSF)
G protein(s), 25–26, 25f, 26f, 26t
G protein–coupled receptor(s) (GPCRs), 
25, 26f
G protein–coupled receptor kinase (GRK), 
133
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
as CNS neurotransmitter, 366t, 369
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor
heterogeneity and pharmacologic 
selectivity of, 379
GABAA receptor
molecular pharmacology of, 378–379, 
378f
GABAB agonist, 477
Gabapentin, 413, 478
for seizures, 413
for tremors, 494
Gabapentin/pregabalin
for chronic pain, 550
Gabitril, 427. See also Tiagabine
Gablofen, 481. See also Baclofen
Galanin
in ANS, ENS, and NANC 
neurons, 84t
Galantamine, 112
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055
Gallamine
tissue effects of, 474t
Gallium nitrate
for hypercalcemia, 778–779, 786
Gallstones, 1112
bile acid therapy for, 1107
Gametocides, 915
Gamma-delta T cells, 978
Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid
abuse of, 569t, 573, 574f
Ganciclovir, 863f, 889
for CMV infections, 866–867
dosage of, 867t
Ganglion
prevertebral, 81
Ganglion-blocking drugs, 124–125
as antihypertensive drug, 177
Ganirelix, 671, 678
Ganite, 786. See also Gallium nitrate
Gantacurium
pharmacokinetics of, 468
Garamycin, 828. See also Gentamicin
Garlic, 1128–1129
Gas(es)
irritant poisoning by, 1036t
toxic poisoning by, 1035, 1036t
Gastric acidity
decreased
proton pump inhibitors and, 1089
Gastric emptying
impaired
domperidone for, 1092
metoclopramide for, 1092
Gastric lavage
in decontamination of poisoned patient, 
1032
Gastrin, 743, 1082f
Gastrinoma
proton pump inhibitors for, 1088
Gastritis
stress-related
prevention of bleeding from
H2-receptor antagonists in, 1085
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
domperidone for, 1092
H2-receptor antagonists for, 1083t, 1084
metoclopramide for, 1092
proton pump inhibitors for, 1087
Gastrointestinal cancers. See also specific 
types
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 972–973
Gastrointestinal diseases
drugs used for, 1081–1114. See also 
specific drugs and diseases
acid-peptic disease, 1081–1091
antidiarrheal agents, 1094–1095
antiemetic drugs, 1097–1100
antimuscarinic drugs, 121–122, 122t
cholinomimetic drugs, 108
gastrointestinal motility stimulation, 
1091–1092, 1091f
inflammatory bowel disease, 
1100–1106, 1101f, 1102f, 
1105t
irritable bowel syndrome, 
1095–1097, 1097f
laxatives, 1092–1094
oral contraceptives and, 730
Gastrointestinal tract
alcohol effects on, 392–393
antimuscarinic drug effects on, 120, 120f
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 90t
cholinomimetic drug effects on
direct-acting, 102t, 104
indirect-acting, 107
decontamination of poisoned patient, 
1031–1032
disorders of
cholinomimetic drugs for, 108
dopamine receptor agonists effects on, 
489
drug absorption effects on
in infants and children, 1044, 1044t
eicosanoid effects on, 327
ganglion-blocking drug effects on, 125
lead poisoning effects on, 1015
levodopa effects on, 487
lipoxygenase effects on, 323
methylxanthines effects on, 346
opioid analgesics effects on, 551t, 552
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 320
serotonin effects on, 284
Index    1195
Gastrointestinal tract (Cont.):
smooth muscle of
histamine effects on, 276
stimulation of motility of
drugs used for, 1091–1092, 1091f
tetracyclines effects on, 812
Gatifloxacin, 835
pharmacokinetics of, 836t
Gaviscon, 1111. See also Aluminum 
hydroxide/magnesium 
hydroxide
Gefitinib
for cancer, 967–968
Gelusil, 1111. See also Aluminum hydroxide/ 
magnesium hydroxide
Gemcitabine
for cancer, 959–961
Gemfibrozil
for hyperlipidemias, 628–629
Gemifloxacin, 835
pharmacokinetics of, 836t
Gender
in drug metabolism, 66
Gene therapy, 3
for parkinsonism, 492
General anesthetics, 429–447. See also 
specific drugs
in current clinical practice, 446
inhaled, 430–438
intravenous, 438–446
mechanism of action of, 429–430
Generalized seizures
drugs used for, 417–418, 422–423
Generalized tonic-clonic seizures, 421
drugs used for, 407–417, 422
Generic prescriptions, 1147
Generic products, 75–76
Genetic(s)
pharmacology of, 3
Genetic factors
in drug metabolism, 61–65, 62t–63t, 64f
phase I enzyme polymorphisms, 
61–65, 62t–63t, 64f
phase II enzyme polymorphisms, 65
Genitourinary smooth muscle
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 90t
Genitourinary system
antimuscarinic drug effects on, 120, 120f
direct-acting cholinomimetic drug effects 
on, 102t, 104
disorders of
sympathomimetic drugs for, 145–146
ganglion-blocking drug effects on, 125
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 139
Gentamicin, 825–826
pharmacokinetics, 39t
topical, 825, 1064
Gentamicin, netilmicin, 822f
Geocillin, 807. See also Carbenicillin
Geodon, 519. See also Ziprasidone
GERD. See Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
(GERD)
Geriatric patients. See Aging; Elderly
Germander
risks associated with, 1127t
GHRH. See Growth hormone–releasing 
hormone (GHRH)
Giardia lamblia
drugs used for, 931t
Giardiasis
drugs used for, 928
Gigantism, 665
Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome, 495
Ginkgo, 1129–1130
Ginseng, 1130–1131
Gland-derived extracts
risks associated with, 1127t
Glaucoma
drugs used for, 160, 161t, 1057
beta-receptor antagonists, 
163–164
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 257, 
257t
eicosanoid effects on, 328
treatment of, 160, 161t, 1057
Glicentin, 762
Glimepiride, 755t, 766
for diabetes mellitus, 756
Glipizide, 755t, 766
for diabetes mellitus, 755–756
Glipizide plus metformin, 766
Globulin
antithymocyte, 999
GLP-1 receptor antagonists. See 
Glucagon-like polypeptide-1 
(GLP-1) receptor agonists
Glucagon, 743, 762–763
“gut,” 762
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Glucagon-like polypeptide-1 (GLP-1) 
receptor agonists
for diabetes mellitus, 760–761, 
766
Glucocorticoid(s), 697, 700f, 712
antagonists of, 709–711
anti-inflammatory effects of, 636
in bone mineral homeostasis, 775
clinical uses of, 703–706
for diagnostic purposes, 705
for gout, 655
for hypercalcemia, 779
as immunosuppressive drugs, 985–986, 
985t
for inflammatory bowel disease, 
1103
mechanism of action of, 21–22, 22f
pharmacodynamics of, 699–701
pharmacokinetics of, 698, 703
Glucocorticoid receptor elements (GREs), 
699
Glucophage, 766. See also Metformin
Glucosamine, 1135
Glucose
in acute alcohol intoxication 
management, 395
Glucose transporters, 746, 746t
Glucotrol, 766. See also Glipizide
Glucovance, 766. See also Glyburide plus 
metformin
Glucuronidation, 60t
Glutamate, 365
as CNS neurotransmitter, 366t, 
367–369, 368f
Glutamate hypothesis
of schizophrenia, 502–503
Glutaraldehyde, 893t, 896, 898
Glutathione conjugation, 60t
Glutethimide, structure of, 375f
Glyburide
for diabetes mellitus, 754–755, 766
Glyburide plus metformin, 766
Glycemic control
benefits of, 751, 752
Glycemic memory, 752
Glycerin suppository, 1093
Glycine, 365, 478
as CNS neurotransmitter, 
366t, 369
Glycine conjugation, 60t
Glycol poisoning, 398, 1037
Glycopeptide(s), 802–803
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
802–803
Glycoprotein IIB/IIIA receptors
blockade of, 613
Glycopyrrolate, 117f, 127, 1111
Glycosides
digitalis, 215–218
drug interactions with, 1156t
Glynase PresTab, 766. See also Glyburide
Glyphosphate, 1009–1010
Glyset, 766. See also Miglitol
GM-CSF. See Granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF)
GnRH. See Gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone (GnRH)
Goiter(s)
nontoxic, 694
toxic multinodular, 692
toxic uninodular, 692
Gold sodium thiomalate, 656
Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation, 230
Golimumab, 648–649, 992–993
adverse effects of, 649
indications for, 649
mechanism of action of, 648–649
pharmacokinetics of, 649
GoLYTELY, 1112. See also Polyethylene 
glycol electrolyte solution
1196    Index
Gonadal hormones, 715–741
inhibitors of, 731–734, 737–739
Gonadarche, 715
Gonadorelin, 669–671
Gonadorelin hydrochloride, 678
Gonadotropin(s), 666–669. See also specific 
types
Gonadotropin antagonists, 678
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 
661, 661t, 669–671, 
715, 733
receptor agonists, 671–672
Gonal-f, 678. See also Follitropin alfa
Goserelin acetate, 678
Gossypol, 739
Gout 
drugs used for, 656
Graft-versus-host disease, 994–995
Gramicidin
topical, 1063
Grand mal seizures, 421
drugs used for, 404–417, 422
Granisetron
for nausea and vomiting, 1098–1099, 
1111
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor 
(G-CSF), 591t, 593–594, 
593f
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF), 
591t, 593–594, 593f
Graves’ disease, 691–692
Gray baby syndrome, 817
Grifulvin, 858. See also Griseofulvin
Grisactin, 858. See also Griseofulvin
Griseofulvin
for mucocutaneous infections, 
855–856
oral, 1066–1067
Growth factor(s)
megakaryocyte, 594–595
Growth factor receptor inhibitors
for cancer, 967–968
Growth hormone, 660, 661t, 662–665, 
678
Growth hormone antagonists, 665–666, 
665f, 678
Growth hormone–releasing hormone 
(GHRH), 661, 661t
Growth stimulators
androgens as, 736
Guanabenz, 176, 189
Guanadrel, 189
Guanethidine
as antihypertensive drug, 175t, 177
Guanfacine, 176, 189
Guanine, 962f
Guanylate cyclase C agonists
in constipation management, 1094
Gynazole-1, 858. See also Butoconazole
Gynecologic disorders
androgens in, 736
Gynecomastia
potassium-sparing drugs and, 263
H
H2 antagonists
ingredients in, 1118t
H2-histamine receptor blockers, 1111
H1-receptor antagonists, 277–280, 279t
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
H2-receptor antagonists, 280–281, 292
for acid-peptic diseases, 1083–1085, 
1083t, 1084f
serotonin-blocking actions of, 278–279
H3-receptor antagonists, 281
H4-receptor antagonists, 281
Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate 
vaccine, 1164t
Hair growth stimulants
ingredients in, 1121t
Halazepam
dosages of, 383t
Halcion, 387. See also Triazolam
Haldol, 519. See also Haloperidol
Half-life, 39t–40t, 42, 42f
as pharmacokinetic variable, 48
HalfLytely, 1112. See also Polyethylene 
glycol electrolyte solution
Halofantrine
clinical uses of, 917t
for malaria, 927
structure of, 918f
Halogen(s)
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 893t, 895
Halogenated aliphatic hydrocarbons
TLVs of, 1005t
toxic exposure to, 1005
Haloperidol, 155
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
dosage of, 510t
for Huntington’s disease, 495
for tics, 495
Halothane
pharmacologic properties of, 433t, 446
Halothane hepatitis, 437
Hand hygiene, 894
Haplotype(s), 134
Hashish
abuse of, 572
Hazard
defined, 1002
HDLs. See High-density lipoproteins 
(HDLs)
Headache(s)
migraine
5-HT1D/1B agonists for, 285–286, 285f
Heart
alcohol effects on, 391
antipsychotic drugs effects on, 512
Heart (Cont.):
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 90t
contractility of
control of, 212, 213f
digitalis effects on, 216–217, 217f, 217t
glucagon effects on, 763
lipoxygenase effects on, 323
lithium effects on, 517
performance of
pathophysiology of, 215, 215f
Heart disease
alcohol and, 394
cholinomimetic drugs for, 109
ischemic
beta-receptor antagonists for, 162, 
163f
coenzyme Q10 for, 1134
Heart failure
acute
management of, 222
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 144
alcohol and, 393–394
cardiac resynchronization therapy for, 
221
chronic
classification of, 220t
management of, 220–221, 220t
coenzyme Q10 for, 1134
diastolic, 211
management of, 221–222
drugs used in, 211–226, 212t.See also 
specific drugs
ACE inhibitors, 219
ARBs, 219
basic pharmacology of, 215–219
beta-adrenoceptor antagonists, 219
beta-adrenoceptor stimulants, 218
beta-receptor antagonists, 162–163
bipyridines, 218
digitalis, 215–218
diuretics, 219, 265–266
positive inotropic drugs, 212t, 218
vasodilators, 219
without positive inotropic effects, 
212t, 218–219
“high-output” failure, 214
pathophysiology of, 212, 214–215, 214f
systolic, 211
Heart muscle
calcium channel blockers effects on, 
203–204
Heart rate
in cardiac performance, 215
Heart rhythm
normal
electrophysiology of, 227–233
Heavy metals
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 897
toxicology of, 1013–1321. See also 
specific types
Index    1197
Heavy metals, toxicology of (Cont.):
lead, 1013–1017
mercury, 1014t, 1019–1021
Hectorol, 786. See also Doxercalciferol
Helicobacter pylori ulcers
proton pump inhibitors for, 1087–1088
Helixate, 617. See also Antihemophilic 
factor
Helminthic infections
chemotherapy of, 937–947. See also 
specific drugs
Hemabate, 328. See also Carboprost
Hematopoiesis
sulfonamides effects on, 833
Hematopoietic growth factors, 590–595. 
See also specific types
erythropoietin, 591–592
megakaryocyte growth factors, 594–595
myeloid growth factors, 592–594
Hemicholiniums, 82, 83f
Hemochromatosis
causes of, 586
Hemodialysis
in drug overdose and poisoning, 1031, 
1031t, 1032
Hemofil M, 617. See also Antihemophilic 
factor
Hemorrhage
postpartum
ergot alkaloids for, 290
subarachnoid
cerebral vasospasm and infarct 
following
calcium channel blockers effects on, 
204
variceal
drugs used for, 1107–1108
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 10, 449
Heparin, 604–607, 605f
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, 606
Hepatic cirrhosis
diuretics for, 267
Hepatic injury
milk thistle effects on, 1131
Hepatitis
halothane, 437
isoniazid-induced, 841
viral
drugs used for, 882–886. See also 
specific drugs
Hepatitis A
passive immunization for, 1168t
Hepatitis A vaccine, 1164t
Hepatitis B
passive immunization for, 1168t
Hepatitis B vaccine, 1164t
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection
drugs used for, 883–885, 883t
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection
drugs used for, 883t, 885–886
Hepoxillin(s), 317
Hepsera, 888. See also Adefovir
Heptachlor
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Herbal medications, 1125–1138. See also 
specific types
Herbicides, 1008–1010
bipyridyl, 1010
chlorophenoxy, 1008–1009, 1009f
glyphosphate, 1009–1010
Herceptin, 999. See also Trastuzumab
Hereditary vitamin D–resistant rickets, 
783–784
Heroin, 557
fetal effects of, 1042t
during lactation, 1048t
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection
drugs used for, 862–866
Heterocyclic antidepressants
drug interactions with, 1152t
Heterodimers, 25
Heterologous desensitization, 133
Heteroreceptor(s), 92, 92t
Hetrazan, 946. See also Diethylcarbamazine
Hexachlorocyclohexane, 1068
Hexachlorophene, 895, 898
Hexamethonium, 124
Hibiclens, 898. See also Chlorhexidine 
gluconate
Hibistat, 898. See also Chlorhexidine 
gluconate
High-density lipoproteins (HDLs), 
619–621
deficiency of, 625
“High-output” heart failure, 214
Hirudin, 607
Histamine, 274–277
basic pharmacology of, 274–277
as CNS neurotransmitter, 367t
inhibitory effects of, 92t
“triple response” of, 276
Histamine antagonists, 277. See also specific 
types
Histamine receptors
subtypes of, 275, 275t
Histamine receptor antagonists, 277–281. 
See also specific antagonists, e.g., 
H1-receptor antagonists
Histex, 292. See also Carbinoxamine
Histrelin acetate, 678
HIV
life cycle of, 873f
HIV infection, 985
in children
IGIV passive immunization, 1168t
Hivid, 889. See also Zalcitabine
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, 
625–627, 626f
in drug combinations, 631
drug interactions with, 1157t
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 970
Homatropine, 127
Homeostasis
bone mineral, 769–785
Homodimers, 25
Homologous desensitization, 133
Hookworm infections
albendazole for, 938–939
Hormonal contraception, 725t, 726–731. 
See also specific types and Oral 
contraceptives
Hormonal therapy
postmenopausal
estrogen in, 720–722
Hormone(s). See also specific types
adrenal, 697–713
bone mineral–regulating
disorders involving, 780–785
defined, 4
gonadal, 750–741
inhibitors of, 750–741
hypothalamic-pituitary, 659–679
ovarian, 726
thyroid, 684–688. See also Thyroid 
hormones
Hormone secretion
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 
139–140
HSV infection. See Herpes simplex virus 
(HSV) infection
5-HT agonists, 292
5-HT1D/1B agonists
for migraine, 285–286, 285f
5-HT2 antagonists, 286, 526–531, 539
adverse effects of, 536
5-HT3-receptor antagonists, 1092–1098, 
1111
5-HT4-receptor agonists, 1092
in constipation management, 1094
for irritable bowel syndrome, 1096–1097
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), 
666–669
Human development
critical periods of
schematic diagram of, 1041f
Human liver P450 enzymes, 55–59
described, 55–57
enzyme induction, 57–59, 58t
enzyme inhibition, 58t, 59
Human menopausal gonadotropins 
(hMGs), 666
Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, 
1164t
Human placenta derivatives
risks associated with, 1127t
Humatin, 828, 935. See also Paromomycin
Humira, 656, 999, 1112. See also 
Adalimumab
Humoral immunity, 978
1198    Index
Humorsol, 112. See also Demecarium
Huntington’s disease, 494–495, 494f
Hydatid disease
albendazole for, 939
praziquantel for, 944
Hydeltrasol, 712. See also Prednisolone 
sodium phosphate
Hydralazine, 181, 181f, 189
as antihypertensive drug, 181
in chronic heart failure management, 220
dosage of, 175t, 181
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 175t, 181
Hydrazines
chemistry of, 527–528
Hydro-Diuril, 270. See also 
Hydrochlorothiazide
Hydrocarbons
aromatic
TLVs of, 1005t
toxic exposure to, 1005
halogenated aliphatic
TLVs of, 1005t
toxic exposure to, 1005–1006, 1005t
Hydrochlorothiazide, 260f, 270
dosage of, 261t
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t
Hydrocodone, 558
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
mixtures, 562
Hydrocortisone, 698–702. See also Cortisol
preparations available, 712, 1112
Hydroflumethiazide, 270
Hydrogen peroxide
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 896–897
Hydrogen sulfide
poisoning by, 1036t
Hydrolyses, 57t
Hydromorphone, 556, 562, 563
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Hydromox, 270. See also Quinethazone
Hydrophobic bonds, 4
Hydroquinone, 1068–1069
Hygroton, 270. See also Chlorthalidone
Hydroxocobalamin, 586
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Hydroxyamphetamine, 148
Hydroxychloroquine, 644
as immunosuppressive drug, 989
Hydroxyprogesterone
structure of, 719f
Hydroxyprogesterone caproate
properties of, 723t
5-Hydroxytryptamine, 281–287. See also 
Serotonin
Hydroxyurea, 582, 961f
Hydroxyzine, 292, 387
dosage of, 279t
Hygiene
hand, 894
Hylorel, 189. See also Guanadrel
Hymenolepis nana
praziquantel for, 944
Hyoscine
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Hyoscyamine, 127, 1111
for irritable bowel syndrome, 1096
Hypercalcemia, 778–779
diuretics for, 267–268
Hypercalciuria
idiopathic, 784
Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and, 257t, 
258
potassium-sparing drugs and, 263
Hypercholesterolemia(s)
familial, 624, 624f
drugs used for, 622t
primary, 624–625
Hyperhidrosis
antimuscarinic drugs for, 123
Hyperimmune immunoglobulins, 991
Hyperkalemia
heart rhythm and, 230
loop diuretics for, 259
neuromuscular blocking drugs and, 474
osmotic diuretics and, 264
potassium-sparing drugs and, 263
Hyperlipidemia(s), 619
drugs used for, 625–631
thiazide diuretics and, 261
Hyperlipoproteinemia(s), 619
dietary management of, 625
drugs used for, 622t
familial combined, 623, 624
drugs used for, 622t
lipoprotein(a), 624
drugs used for, 622t
pathophysiology of, 620–625
secondary, 625
causes of, 622, 623t
Hypernatremia
osmotic diuretics and, 264
Hyperosmolar coma
nonketotic, 744
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome
insulin for, 752
Hyperparathyroidism
primary, 780
Hyperphosphatemia, 780
Hyperplasia
congenital adrenal
synthetic corticosteroids for, 704
prostatic, 738–739
Hyperprolactinemia
dopamine agonists for, 672–673, 
672f
ergot alkaloids for, 290
Hypersecretory conditions
proton pump inhibitors for, 1088
Hypersensitivity, 981–983, 983f, 984f
contact, 983
defined, 32
tuberculin, 983
type I, 981, 983f
type II, 981–982
type III, 982
type IV (delayed-type), 982–983, 984f
Hyperstat IV, 189. See also Diazoxide
Hypertension, 169–171
alcohol and, 394
alpha-receptor antagonists for, 156
causes of, 170
classification of, 170t
coenzyme Q10 for, 1134
diagnosis of, 169–170, 170t
diuretics for, 172–174, 174f, 267
outpatient therapy in, 186
prevalence of, 169
pulmonary
eicosanoids and, 326
resistant
polypharmacy for, 173
treatment of, 171–187
Hypertensive emergencies, 187
alpha-receptor antagonists for, 156
Hyperthermia, 284, 284t, 479. See 
Malignant hyperthermia
Hyperthyroidism, 691–694
beta-receptor antagonists for, 164
Hypertriglyceridemia(s)
familial, 623
drugs used for, 622t
primary, 622–624
Hyperuricemia
gout and, 651–655
loop diuretics and, 260
thiazide diuretics and, 261
Hypnosis
sedative-hypnotic drugs causing, 380
Hypocalcemia, 259, 779–780
calcium for, 779–780
vitamin D for, 780
Hypoglycemia
glucagon for, 763
insulin and, 753
Hypogonadism
primary
estrogens for, 720
Hypokalemia, 230
Hypokalemic metabolic acidosis
loop diuretics and, 257t, 260
Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis
thiazide diuretics and, 261
Hypomagnesemia
loop diuretics and, 260
Hyponatremia
osmotic diuretics and, 264
thiazide diuretics and, 261
Hypoparathyroidism, 780–781
Index    1199
Hypophosphatemia, 780
autosomal dominant, 783
X-linked, 783
Hypotension, sympathomimetic drugs for, 
144
Hypothalamic hormones, 659–679
clinical uses of, 661t
receptors of, 660–673
Hypothalamic-pituitary endocrine system, 
659, 660f
Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, 684f
Hypothyroidism, 687t, 690–691
Hypoxanthine, 962f
Hytrin, 167, 189. See also Terazosin
I
Ibandronate
for osteoporosis, 775, 783, 786
Ibritumomab tiuxetan, 992, 999
Ibuprofen, 641, 655
ionization constants of, 11t
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
properties of, 638t
Ibutilide
for cardiac arrhythmias, 244–245
membrane actions of, 237t
pharmacologic properties of, 238t
Icatibant, 302
Idarubicin
for cancer, 963t, 965
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Idiopathic edema
diuretics for, 267
Idiopathic hypercalciuria, 784
Idiopathic short stature
growth hormone for, 663, 663t
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
passive immunization for, 1168t
IDLs. See Intermediate-density lipoproteins 
(IDLs)
Idrocilamide, 478
IGIV. See Immune globulin intravenous 
(IGIV)
Ilaris, 999. See also Canakinumab
Iloprost, 325f, 326, 328
Imatinib
for cancer, 966–967, 967t
Imidazoline receptor, 176
IMiDs. See Immunomodulatory derivatives 
of thalidomide (IMiDs)
Imipenem
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
801–802
Imipenem/cilastatin, 807
Imipramine, 525–530, 539
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 529t
for urinary disorders, 122, 122t
Imiquimod, 888, 1067, 889
Imitrex, 292. See also Sumatriptan
Immobility
anesthesia and, 435
Immune globulin intravenous (IGIV), 990, 
999, 1163, 1168t
Immune insulin resistance, 753
Immune modulation
echinacea in, 1126–1128
Immune response(s), 635–636
abnormal, 981–985, 982f–984f
normal, 977–981, 979f, 980f
Immune system
adaptive, 978–981, 979f, 980f
alcohol effects on, 394–395
eicosanoid effects on, 327–328
elements of, 977–985
innate, 977–978, 979f
isoniazid effects on, 841
Immunity
cell-mediated, 978
humoral, 978
innate
complement in, 979f
prostaglandins and, 322
Immunization(s), 1163–1170. See also 
specific vaccines
active, 1163, 1164t–1167t
materials used for, 1164t–1166t
passive, 1163, 1167, 1168t–1169t
materials used for, 1168t–1169t
routine childhood schedule, 1167t
for travel, 1170
untoward reactions to
legal liability for, 1167, 1170
Immunodeficiency diseases, 984–985
primary
passive immunization for, 1168t
Immunoglobulin(s)
hyperimmune, 991
Immunologic contact urticaria
topical dermatologic medications and, 
1063t
Immunologic reactions to drugs and drug 
allergy, 997–998
Immunomodulation therapy
immunosuppressive drugs in, 995–997, 
995t–996t
Immunomodulators, 1067
Immunomodulatory derivatives of 
thalidomide (IMiDs)
as immunosuppressive drugs, 987–988
Immunopharmacology, 977–1000
Immunosuppressive antibodies, 989–991
Immunosuppressive drugs, 985–994. 
See also specific drugs
in autoimmune diseases, 995
Imodium, 1112. See also Loperamide
Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD)
for cardiac arrhythmias, 228
Impulse conduction
disturbances of, 234–235, 234f–236f
Impulse formation
disturbances of, 233f, 234
Imuran, 999
Inamrinone, 225
Inapsine, 446. See also Droperidol
Incertohypothalamic pathway, 506
Increlex, 678. See also Mecasermin
IND (Investigational new drug), 74–76
Indapamide, 260f, 270
dosage of, 261t
Inderal, 167, 189, 249. See also Propranolol
Indinavir, 871t, 879
drug interactions with, 874t
Indirect thrombin inhibitors, 604–607, 
605f. See also specific drugs
heparin, 604–607, 605f
Indocin, 655. See also Indomethacin
Indomethacin, 641, 638t
pharmacokinetic, 39t
Indoramin, 155
Infant(s)
drug therapy in, 1044–1046
Infantile spasms, 421
drugs used for, 423
Infarction(s)
following subarachnoid hemorrhage
calcium channel blockers effects on, 
204
Infection(s). See also specific types
eicosanoids and, 328
Infergen, 889
Infertility
female
GnRH agonists for, 669–670
male
GnRH agonists for, 670
gonadotropins for, 668
Inflammation
echinacea for, 1127–1128
eicosanoids and, 328
kinins role in, 302
lipoxygenase and, 323
nitric oxide and, 335–336
prostaglandins and, 322
systemic
treatment of, 636
Inflammatory bowel disease
described, 1100–1101
drugs used for, 1100–1106, 1101f, 
1102f, 1105t
pancreatic enzyme supplementation, 
1106–1107
for variceal hemorrhage, 1107–1108
Infliximab, 649, 993
for inflammatory bowel disease, 
1104–1106, 1105t
for rheumatoid arthritis, 649
for psoriasis, 1072
1200    Index
Influenza
drugs used for, 886–887
Influenza vaccine, 1164t–1165t
Inhalant(s)
abuse of, 576
Inhaled anesthetics, 430–438. See also 
specific drugs
Inhibin, 726
Inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), 
92, 93f, 363, 363f
Innohep, 617. See also Tinzaparin
INOmax, 337. See also Nitric oxide
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), 28, 
131, 131t, 132f, 
137t
as second messenger, 28–29, 28f
Inotropic drugs
positive
in the elderly, 1056
in heart failure management, 212t, 
218
Inotropic effect
positive, 138
Insomnia
melatonin for, 1136
Inspired concentration of inhaled 
anesthetics, 430–432, 432f
Inspra, 225, 262t, 270. 
See also Eplerenone
Insulin, 743, 744–753
targets for
effects of, 747, 747f
treatment with, 751
Insulin aspart, 747, 748t, 749
Insulin delivery systems, 748t, 750–751
insulin pumps, 750–751
portable pen injectors, 748t, 750
Insulin detemir, 748t, 750
Insulin glargine, 748t, 749–750
Insulin glulisine, 747, 748t, 749
Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), 661, 
661f
Insulin lispro, 747, 748t, 749
Insulin pumps, 750–751
Insulin receptor, 746–747, 746f, 746t
Insulin resistance
immune, 753
Insulin secretagogues, 754–756. See also 
specific types, eg, Sulfonylureas
Integrase strand transfer inhibitors, 871t, 
882
Integrilin, 617. See also Eptifibatide
Intention tremor, 494
Interferon alfa-2a
for HBV infection, 883t
Interferon alfa-2b
for HBV infection, 883t
Interferon(s), 882–887, 995
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
properties of, 995t
Interleukin(s)
properties of, 995t–996t
Interleukin-1 inhibitors
for gout, 655
Interleukin-2, 999
Interleukin-11
agents mimicking actions of, 591t, 
594–595
clinical uses of, 591t, 594–595
Intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDLs), 
619
Intermittent claudication
treatment of, 207
Intestinal osteodystrophy, 782
Intestine
actions of PTH, FGF23, and vitamin D 
on, 774t
disorders of, 1091–1114
Intracellular signaling pathways
in renin release, 296, 297f
Intracellular sodium
concentration of, 212
Intracranial pressure
reduction of
osmotic diuretics for, 264
Intragastric acidity
reducing of
drugs used for, 1081–1089
Intragastric pressure
increased
neuromuscular blocking drugs and, 474
Intraocular pressure
increased
neuromuscular blocking drugs 
and, 474
reduction of
osmotic diuretics for, 264
Intravenous anesthetics, 438–446. See also 
specific drugs
pharmacologic properties of, 439t
Intrinsic efficacy, 7
Intrinsic factor, 586
Intron-A, 889, 999. See also Interferon 
alfa-2b
Intropin, 148, 225. See also Dopamine
Invanz, 807. See also Ertapenem
Invega, 519. See also Paliperidone
Inverse agonists, 8, 8f
Inversine, 127, 189. See also Mecamylamine
Iodide(s)
antithyroid activity of, 689
fetal effects of, 1042t
metabolism of, 681
Iodide organification, 682
Iodine
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 895
during lactation, 1048t
radioactive
antithyroid activity of, 689
for Graves’ disease, 692
Iodophor(s)
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 895
Iodoquinol, 929f, 935
for amebiasis, 929–930
Iodotope, 695. See also Radioactive iodine 
sodium
Ion channel(s)
characterization of
tools for, 360–360t
CNS drugs and, 360–361
novel analgesic targets and, 550
Ion channel blockers
in chronic heart failure 
management, 221
Ion transport
lithium effects on, 514
Ionization
of weak acids and bases, 10–12, 11t, 12f, 
12t
Ionization constant
of common drugs, 11t
Ionotropic receptors, 360–361
drugs mediating their effects via
abuse of, 573–576
Iopidine, 148. See also Apraclonidine
Ipratropium, 127, 347, 355
for COPD, 121, 353
Iprivask, 617. See also Desirudin
IPSP. See Inhibitory postsynaptic potential 
(IPSP)
Irbesartan, 190, 225
Irinotecan
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Iron, 582–586, 598
drug interactions with, 1157t
poisoning by, 1037
Iron deficiency anemia
treatment of, 585–586, 586t
Iron dextran, 585
Iron-sucrose complex, 585–586
Irritable bowel syndrome
drugs used for, 1095–1097, 1097f
Irritant(s)
gases
poisoning by, 1036t
topical dermatologic medications as, 
1063t
Ischemic heart disease
beta-receptor antagonists for, 162, 163f
coenzyme Q10 for, 1134
Isentress, 889. See also Raltegravir
Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP), 743, 763
Ismelin, 189. See also Guanethidine
Ismo, 209. See also Isosorbide mononitrate
Isocarboxazid
dosage of, 535t
Isoeicosanoids, 317
Isoetharine, 355
Isoflurane, 432f, 446
pharmacologic properties of, 432f, 433t
Index    1201
Isoimmune disease
immunosuppressive drugs for, 985t
Isolan
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Isoniazid, 840–841, 848
during lactation, 1048t
for tuberculosis, 840–841, 840t
Isophane insulin, 748t, 749
Isopropyl alcohol
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 
893t, 894
Isoproterenol, 136f, 138t, 139f, 141, 148, 
343f, 355
for asthma, 343
cardiovascular responses to, 138t
ionization constants of, 11t 
Isoptin, 190, 209, 249. See also Verapamil
Isopto Carpine, 112. See also Pilocarpine
Isopto Homatropine, 127. See also 
Homatropine
Isordil, 209. See also Isosorbide dinitrate
Isosorbide dinitrate, 196, 209
Isosorbide mononitrate, 197, 209
Isospora belli
drugs used for, 931t
Isotretinoin
for acne, 1070
fetal effects of, 1042t
Isradipine
clinical pharmacology of, 202t
Istaroxime
in heart failure management, 218
Isuprel, 148, 355. See also Isoproterenol
Itraconazole, 853f, 858
pharmacologic properties of, 854t
for systemic infections, 854
Ivermectin, 940–941
for helminthic infections, 938t, 
940–941
J
Janumet, 766. See also Sitagliptin plus 
metformin
Janus-kinase (JAK) family, 23, 24f
Januvia, 766. See also Sitagliptin
Jerking
myotonic, 421
Jet lag
melatonin for, 1135–1136
Jin Bu Huan
risks associated with, 1127t
K
Kaletra, 889. See also Lopinavir/ritonavir
Kallikrein(s), 300
Kallikrein-kinin system
drugs affecting, 302–303
Kanamycin, 822f, 826–827, 828
for tuberculosis, 840t, 844
Kantrex, 828. See also Kanamycin
Kava-kava
risks associated with, 1127t
Kawasaki disease
passive immunization for, 1168t
Kefauver-Harris Amendments of 1962, 74, 
74t
Keflex, 807. See also Cephalexin
Kefurox, 807. See also Cefuroxime
Kefzol, 807. See also Cefazolin
Kemadrin, 499. See also Procyclidine
Kenalog, 712. See also Triamcinolone 
Keppra, 427. See also Levetiracetam
Keratolytic agents, 1074–1076
Kerlone, 189. See also Betaxolol
Ketalar, 446. See also Ketamine
Ketamine, 438f, 444–445, 446
abuse of, 569t, 575–576, 577f
for chronic pain, 550
as intravenous anesthetic, 444–445
pharmacologic properties of, 439t
Ketanserin, 286
Ketek, 819. See also Telithromycin
Ketoacidosis
diabetic, 744
insulin for, 751–752
Ketoconazole, 709f, 710, 712, 737, 
853f, 858
oral, 1066
pharmacologic properties of, 854t
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
for systemic infections, 854
Ketolides, 814–815, 819
Ketoprofen, 641–642, 655
properties of, 638t
Ketorolac, 642, 655
properties of, 638t
Ketotifen, 292
Ketotifen fumarate
from prescription to OTC status, 
1116t
Kidney(s). See also under Renal
actions of PTH, FGF23, and vitamin D 
on, 774t
angiotensin II effects on, 298
inhaled anesthetics effects on, 436–437
lead poisoning effects on, 1015
lipoxygenase effects on, 323
lithium effects on, 516–517
methylxanthines effects on, 346
opioid analgesics effects on, 552
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 320–321
Kidney disease
chronic, 781–782
vitamin D for, 781–782
diuretics for, 266–267
Kidney stones
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and, 258
potassium-sparing drugs and, 263
Kineret, 999. See also Anakinra
Kinin(s), 300–303
Kinin receptors
mechanisms of action of, 302
Kininogen(s), 301
Klonopin, 387, 427. See also Clonazepam
Knockin mice, 3
Knockout mice, 3
adrenoceptor subtypes and, 133
Koate-HP, 617. See also Antihemophilic 
factor
Kogenate, 617. See also Antihemophilic 
factor
Kombiglyze, 766. See also Saxagliptin plus 
metformin
Konyne 80, 617. See also Factor IX 
complex, human
Krystexxa, 656. See also Pegloticase
Kytril, 1111. See also Granisetron
L
Labetalol, 155, 158f, 159t,  161–162, 167, 
189
as antihypertensive drug, 179
for hypertensive emergencies, 156
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 39t
Labor, obstetrical
facilitation of
eicosanoids in, 325–326
premature
suppression of
sympathomimetic drugs for, 145
Lacosamide
for seizures, 413–414
Lactation
drug use during, 1046–1047, 1048t
milk thistle effects on, 1132
physiologic
dopamine agonists for, 673
Lactation stimulation
postpartum
domperidone for, 1092
Lactulose
in constipation management, 1093
Lamictal, 427, 519. See also Lamotrigine
Lamisil, 858. See also Terbinafine
Lamivudine, 863f, 871t, 874, 889
for HBV infection, 883t, 884–885
during pregnancy, 876, 876t
Lamotrigine, 414f, 427, 519
for bipolar disorder, 517
for seizures, 414
Lamprene, 848. See also Clofazimine
Lanoxicaps, 225. See also Digoxin
Lanoxin, 225. See also Digoxin
Lanreotide, 666, 678
Lansoprazole, 1086f, 1111
pharmacokinetics of, 1086t
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Lariam, 935. See also Mefloquine
1202    Index
Lasix, 270. See also Furosemide
Latanoprost, 315, 328
Laxative(s), 1092–1094. See also specific 
types
ingredients in, 1122t
LDLs. See Low-density lipoprotein(s) 
(LDLs)
Lead
toxicology of, 1013–1017
Lead compounds, 71
toxicology of, 1014t
Lead poisoning, 1013–1017
Learning
maladaptive
addiction as, 568–571
Leflunomide, 645, 656, 999
as immunosuppressive drug, 989, 999
Legal issues
immunization-related, 1167, 1170
in prescribing drugs, 1144–1147, 1144t, 
1145t
Leiomyomata
uterine
gonadotropins in, 670
Leishmaniasis
drugs used for, 931t, 933–934
pentamidine for, 932
Lenalidomide, 988, 999
for multiple myeloma, 971
Lepirudin, 607, 617
Leprosy
drugs used for, 845–846, 848
Lescol, 633. See also Fluvastatin
Lethal dose
median, 31–32, 31f, 71–72
minimum, 71
Letrozole, 733, 740
Leu-enkephalin, 543–544, 544t
Leukemias
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 
969–970
chronic lymphocytic
passive immunization for, 1168t
Leukine, 598. See also Sargramostim
Leukotriene antagonists
for asthma, 352
Leukotriene inhibitors, 349–350
Leuprolide acetate, 678
Levalbuterol, 355
Levaquin, 838. See also Levofloxacin
Levatol, 167, 189. See also Penbutolol
Levetiracetam, 414f, 427
for seizures, 414–415
Levitra, 209. See also Vardenafil
Levo-Dromoran, 562. See also Levorphanol
Levo-T, 695. See also Levothyroxine
Levobunolol, 161, 167
Levobupivacaine, 460, 463
Levocabastine, 292
Levocetirizine, 292
Levodopa
drug interactions with, 488, 1157t
ionization constants of, 11t
for parkinsonism, 484–488, 485f, 486f
sympathomimetic drug effects of, 143
Levofloxacin, 835f, 838
clinical uses of, 836
dosage of, 840t, 838
pharmacokinetics of, 836t
Levolet, 695. See also Levothyroxine
Levomethadyl acetate, 562
Levonorgestrel, 740
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Levophed, 148. See also Norepinephrine
Levopropoxyphene, 559
Levorphanol, 557, 562
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Levosimendan, 212
in heart failure management, 218
Levothroid, 695. See also Levothyroxine
Levothyroxine, 687–688, 695
Levoxyl, 695. See also Levothyroxine
Levsin, 127, 1111. See also Hyoscyamine
Lexapro, 539. See also Escitalopram
Lexiva, 889. See also Fosamprenavir
Lialda, 1102, 1102f
Librium, 387, 400. See also 
Chlordiazepoxide
Lidocaine, 240f, 249, 451t, 460, 463
for cardiac arrhythmias, 237–241
cardiac effects of, 237t, 240, 240f
for chronic pain, 550
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 452t
Lidocaine mixtures, 463
Lifestyle changes
aging and, 1053
Ligand-gated channels, 23–24, 24f, 
360–361
Linaclotide
in constipation management, 1094
Linagliptin
for diabetes mellitus, 761, 766
Lincomycin, 819
Lindane, 1068
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Linezolid, 817, 819
for tuberculosis, 840t, 845
Lioresal, 481. See also Baclofen
Liothyronine, 687–688, 695
Liotrix, 695
Lipid diffusion, 9, 9f
Lipid metabolism
oral contraceptives effects on, 728
Lipid resuscitation
local anesthetics and, 459
Lipid-soluble drugs
intracellular receptors for, 21–22, 21f
during pregnancy, 1039
Lipid:aqueous partition coefficient, 9, 9f
Lipodystrophy
insulin and, 753
Lipopeptides
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
802–803
Lipoprotein(s), 619. See also specific types, 
e.g., High-density lipoproteins 
(HDLs)
disorders of, 621–622, 622t, 623t
metabolism of, 620–621, 621f
structure of, 630
synthesis and catabolism of, 620, 621f
Lipoprotein lipase, 620
Lipoprotein(a), 619, 620
Lipoprotein(a) hyperlipoproteinemia, 624
drugs used for, 622t
Lipoxin(s), 317
Lipoxygenase(s)
products of, 316–317, 316f
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 322–323
Liquaemin, 617. See also Heparin sodium
Liraglutide
for diabetes mellitus, 760–761, 766
Lisinopril
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t, 
190, 225
Lithium
for bipolar disorder, 513–517
drug interactions with, 516, 1158t
fetal effects of, 1042t
during lactation, 1048t
pharmacokinetics of, 39t, 514, 514t
Lithium carbonate, 519
Liver
alcohol effects on, 392–393
inhaled anesthetics effects on, 437
insulin effects on, 746, 747t
oral contraceptives effects on, 727–728
Liver abcess, amebic, chloroquine for, 917
Liver impairment
antimicrobial drugs in patients with, 
908t, 909
Livostin, 292. See also Levocabastine
Loa loa
diethylcarbamazine citrate for, 940
Loading dose, 46–47, 47f
Lobeline, 100f
Local anesthesia/anesthetics, 449–464. 
See also specific drugs
H1-receptor antagonists in, 279
neuromuscular blocking drugs with, 475
neuronal factors affecting, 455
in OTC products, 1123t
transient neurologic symptoms of, 459
Local circuit neurons, 365, 365f
Lodine, 655. See also Etodolac
Lodosyn, 499. See also Carbidopa
Lofibra, 633. See also Fenofibrate
Log-kill hypothesis, 951, 951f
Index    1203
Lomefloxacin
pharmacokinetics of, 836t, 838
Lomotil, 1112. See also Diphenoxylate
Lomustine
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Long-term potentiation (LTP), 369, 571
Loniten, 189. See also Minoxidil
Loop diuretics, 258–260
sites of action of, 252f
thiazide diuretics and, 265
toxicity of, 260
Loop of Henle
in renal tubule transport, 252t, 
253–254, 254f
sites of action of, 252t
Loperamide, 558
for diarrhea, 1094, 1112
Lopid, 633. See also Gemfibrozil
Lopinavir, 871t, 879–880
Lopinavir/ritonavir, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
during pregnancy, 876, 876t
Lopressor, 167, 189, 225. See also 
Metoprolol
Lorabid, 807. See also Loracarbef
Loracarbef, 807
Loratadine
dosage of, 279t, 292
from prescription to OTC status, 
1116t
Lorazepam
dosages of, 383t
for epilepsy, 420
pharmacology of, 377t, 439t
preparations available, 387, 400, 427, 
446
Lorcaserin
in obesity management, 664, 665t
Lortab, 562. See also Hydrocodone/acet-
aminophen
Losartan
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t, 185, 
190, 225
Lotensin, 190, 225. See also Benazepril
Lotrimin, 858. See also Clotrimazole
Lotrimin Ultra, 858. See also Butenafine
Lotronex, 1111. See also Alosetron
Lovastatin, 626f, 633
Lovaza, 633. See also Omega-3 fatty acids
Lovenox, 617. See also Enoxaparin
Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), 619, 620
5-LOX-activating protein (FLAP), 316, 
316f
Loxapine
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
dosage of, 510t, 519
Loxitane, 519. See also Loxapine
Lozol, 270. See also Indapamide
LSD
abuse of, 569t, 573
LTP. See Long-term potentiation (LTP)
Lubiprostone
in constipation management, 
1094
for irritable bowel syndrome, 1097, 
1112
Lucentis, 999. See also Ranibizumab
Lufyllin, 355. See also Dyphylline
Lugol’s Solution, 898. See also Iodine 
Lumefantrine, 918f
clinical uses of, 917t
for malaria, 927
Lumigan, 328. See also Bimatoprost
Luminal Sodium, 387, 427. See also 
Phenobarbital
Lunesta, 387. See also Eszopiclone
Lung(s)
maturation of, fetal, corticosteroids and, 
705–706, 706t
Lung cancer
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 973
Lupron, 678. See also Leuprolide acetate
Lusedra, 446. See also Fospropofol
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 
666–669, 715
Lutropin alfa, 667, 678
Luveris, 678. See also Lutropin alfa
Lymphocyte(s)
T, 978–981, 979f, 980f
Lymphocyte immune globulin, 999
Lymphoma(s)
Hodgkin’s
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 970
non-Hodgkin’s
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 
970–971
Lynestrenol, 723t
Lyrica, 427. See also Pregabalin
Lysodren, 712. See also Mitotane
M
Ma-huang
risks associated with, 1127t
Maalox, 1111 
MABs. See Monoclonal antibodies (MABs)
Macrodantin, 898. See also 
Nitrofurantoin
Macrolides, 813–815. See also specific drugs
drug interactions with, 1158t
in gastrointestinal motility stimulation, 
1092
Macrophage colony-stimulating factor
properties of, 996t
Macugen, 999. See also Pegaptanib
Macula densa
in renin release, 296, 297f
Macular degeneration
drugs used in, 1057
Mafenide, 837
Magan, 655. See also Magnesium salicylate
Magnesium
for cardiac arrhythmias, 246
digitalis with, 218
Magnesium citrate
in constipation management, 1093
Magnesium hydroxide
as antacid, 1083
in constipation, 1093, 1112
Magnesium salicylate, 655
Magnesium sulfate, 250
Maintenance dose, 46
Major depressive disorder. See also 
Depression
antidepressants for, 521–541. See also 
Antidepressants(s)
BDNF in, 522–523, 522f
characteristics of, 521
monoamine(s) and, 523, 524f
monoamine hypothesis of, 522, 523, 
523f
neurotransmitters and, 523, 524f
neurotrophic hypothesis of, 522–523, 
522f
pathophysiology of, 522
neuroendocrine factors in, 524–525
prevalence of, 521
Maladaptive learning
addiction as, 568–571
Malaoxon, 106f
Malaria, 915–927
chemoprophylaxis of, 922, 924
drugs used for, 915–927. See also specific 
drugs and Antimalarial drugs
falciparum
chloroquine-resistant
treatment of, 926
treatment of, 920, 920t, 922
ovale
treatment of, 924
parasites carrying
life cycle of, 915, 916f
prevention of
drugs used for, 919t
vivax
treatment of, 924
Malarone, 935. See also 
Atovaquone-proguanil
for malaria, 924
in malaria prevention in travelers, 919t
Malathion, 1068
structure of, 106f
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Male chemical contraception, 739
Male infertility
GnRH agonists for, 670
gonadotropins for, 668
Male reproductive system
eicosanoid effects on, 326
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 321
1204    Index
Malignancy(ies)
secondary
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 974
Malignant hyperthermia, 284, 284t, 475
inhaled anesthetics and, 437
treatment of
dantrolene in, 479
Malignant melanoma
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 974
Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
inhibitors, 985t, 986–987
Mannitol, 270
MAOIs. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs)
Maprotiline, 527–530
Maraviroc, 871t, 881–882, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
Marcaine, 463. See also Bupivacaine
Marezine. See also Cyclizine
Marijuana
abuse of, 572
Marinol, 1111. See also Dronabinol
Marplan, 539. See also Isocarboxazid
Materia medica
defined, 2
Maternal drug actions
during pregnancy, 1040
Maturation
female
estrogen effects on, 719–720
male, 735
Mavik, 190, 225. See also Trandolapril
Maxair, 355. See also Pirbuterol
Maxaquin, 838. See also Lomefloxacin
Maximum effect
as pharmacodynamic variable, 48
Maxipime, 807. See also Cefepime
Maxzide, 262t
Mean arterial pressure, 89
Measles
passive immunization for, 1168t
Measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, 
1165t
Mebaral, 387, 427. See also Mephobarbital
Mebendazole, 941–942, 946
for helminthic infections, 938t, 941–942
Met-enkephalin, 543–544, 544t
Mecamylamine, 124, 127, 189
Mecasermin, 665, 678
Mechlorethamine, 954f
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Meclizine
dosage of, 279t, 292
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Meclofenamate sodium, 656
Meclofenamic acid, 637f
Mectizan, 946. See also Ivermectin
Med Watch program, 1146
Median effective dose (ED50), 31–32, 31f
Median lethal dose (LD50), 31–32, 31f, 71–72
Median toxic dose (TD50), 31–32
Medicare Modernization Act of 2003, 1146
Medication Therapy Management (MTM) 
program, 1146
Medrol, 712. See also Methylprednisolone
Medrol Enpack, 1112. See also 
Methylprednisolone
Medroxalol, 162
Medroxyprogesterone, 719f
properties of, 723t
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, 725, 740
Medullary-periventricular pathway, 506
Mefenamic acid, 656
Mefloquine
clinical uses of, 917t
for malaria, 919t, 923
in malaria prevention in travelers, 919t
Mefoxin, 807. See also Cefoxitin
Megace, 740. See also Megestrol acetate
Megakaryocyte growth factors, 591t, 
594–595
Megestrol acetate, 723t, 740
Meglitinide
for diabetes mellitus, 756, 756t, 766
Melagatran, 607
Melanoma(s)
malignant
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 974
Melarsoprol
clinical uses of, 933
Melatonin, 283, 1135–1136
Melatonin receptor agonists, 292
Mellaril, 519. See also Thioridazine
Meloxicam, 640, 656
properties of, 638t
Melphalan, 954f
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Memantine
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055
Membrane-delimited pathways, 361, 362f
Membrane electrical activity
ionic basis of, 229–230, 229f
Menest, 740. See also Esterified estrogens; 
Estrone
Meningococcal conjugate vaccine, 1165t
Menopause, 715, 716f
Menopur, 678. See also Menotropins
Menotropins, 666, 678
Menstrual cycle, 715, 716f
Mental disturbances
dopamine receptor agonists and, 
489–490
Mentax, 858. See also Butenafine
Mepenzolate, 127
Meperidine,40t,  557, 562
abuse of, 572
cardiovascular system effects of, 551–552
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 545t
Mephenytoin
for seizures, 409, 427
Mephobarbital, 387, 427
Mepivacaine, 451t, 460–461, 463
pharmacokinetic properties of, 452t
Meprednisone
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
Meprobamate, 375f
Mepron, 935. See also Atovaquone
Mequinol, 1068–1069
6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP)
for inflammatory bowel disease, 
1103–1104
mechanism of action of, 961, 961f
Mercury poisoning, 1014t, 1019–1021
Meropenem
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 
801–802
Merrem, 807. See also Meropenem
Mersol, 898. See also Thimerosal
Mesalamine, 1112
Mesalamine compounds, 1102, 1102f
Mesantoin, 427. See also Mephenytoin
Mescaline
abuse of, 569t, 573
Mesolimbic-mesocortical pathway, 506
Mestinon, 112. See also Pyridostigmine
Mestranol, 718f
Metabolic acidosis
hyperchloremic
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and, 
257t, 258
potassium-sparing drugs and, 263
hypokalemic
loop diuretics and, 257t, 260
Metabolic alkalosis
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for, 257, 
257t
hypokalemic
thiazide diuretics and, 261
Metabolic functions
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 90t
Metabolic syndrome, 664
Metabolism
antipsychotic drugs effects on, 512
beta-receptor antagonists effects on, 
160
bone
prostaglandins effects on, 322
estrogen effects on, 720
ginkgo effects on, 1130
glucagon effects on, 762–763
histamine effects on, 276
oral contraceptive effects on, 728
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 139
synthetic corticosteroids effects on, 706
Metabolizers, drug
extensive, 64
poor, 63 
ultrarapid, 63–64
Index    1205
Metabotropic receptors, 361
Metaglip, 766. See also Glipizide plus 
metformin
Metal(s)
as environmental pollutant, 
1011–1012
Metalloprotein(s)
nitric oxide interactions with, 331–332
Metamucil, 1112. See also Psyllium
Metaproterenol
for asthma, 344, 355
Metaraminol, 148
ionization constants of, 11t
Metaxalone, 481
Metformin, 757, 766
Methacholine
properties of, 99, 100t
Methadone, 557, 562
fetal effects of, 1042t
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Methallenestril
dosage of, 719t
Methamphetamine, 148
ionization constants of, 11t
sympathomimetic drug effects of, 142
Methanol
pharmacology of, 397–398, 
398f, 400
Methanol poisoning, 1037
Methantheline, 127
Methazolamide, 270
dosage of, 257t
Methenamine, 898
as urinary antiseptic, 893
Methergine, 292. See also Methylergonovine
Methimazole
for Graves’ disease, 691–692, 695
Methocarbamol, 481
Methohexital, 446
pharmacologic properties of, 439t
Methomyl
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Methotrexate, 645, 958
adverse effects of, 645, 1104
for cancer, 958
clinical activity and toxicities of, 959t
clinical uses of, 1104
fetal effects of, 1043t
as immunosuppressive drug, 989
indications for, 645
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1104
ionization constants of, 11t
mechanism of action of, 645
pharmacodynamics of, 40t, 1104
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 645, 1104
Methoxamine, 136f,  141
for acute hypotension, 144
Methoxsalen, 1069
Methoxychlor
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Methscopolamine, 127
Methsuximide, 427
for seizures, 418
N-Methyl-D-aspartate glutamate 
antagonists
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
Methylation, 60t
Methylcellulose, 1093, 1112
Methyclothiazide, 270
dosage of, 261t
Methyldopa
as antihypertensive drug, 
175–176, 175t
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t, 176
Methylene-dioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA)
abuse of, 569f, 577–578
Methylergonovine, 292
Methylnaltrexone, 560, 562
Methylnaltrexone bromide
in constipation management, 1094, 
1112
Methylphenidate, 142
for ADHD, 146
Methylprednisolone
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
preparations available, 712, 1112
Methyltestosterone, 735t, 740
in replacement therapy
dosage of, 736t
Methylthiouracil
fetal effects of, 1043t
Methylxanthine(s)
for asthma, 344–346
Meticorten, 712. See also Prednisone
Metipranolol, 167
Metoclopramide
in gastrointestinal motility stimulation, 
1092
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Metolazone
dosage of, 261t
Metoprolol, 159t, 161
as antihypertensive drug, 175t, 179
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics, 40t
preparations available, 167, 189, 225
Metrifonate, 942
for helminthic infections, 938t, 942
Metronidazole, 891–892
for acne, 1064
adverse effects of, 929
for amebiasis, 927–929, 928t
drug interactions with, 610t
fetal effects of, 1043t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 928
preparations available, 898, 935
Metyrapone, 710
Metyrosine, 85
for pheochromocytoma, 156, 167
Mevacor, 633. See also Lovastatin
Mevalonate, 626f
Mexiletine
for cardiac arrhythmias, 241
for chronic pain, 550
membrane actions of, 237t
Mexitil, 249. See also Mexiletine
Mibefradil, 203
Micafungin, 855, 858
Micardis, 190, 225. See also Telmisartan
Micatin, 858. See also Miconazole
Michaelis-Menten elimination, 42
Miconazole, 858
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Microcytic hypochromic anemia, 582
Micronase, 766. See also Glyburide
Micronized estradiol
dosage of, 719t
Microorganisms
chemical and physical killing of
terms related to, 894t
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), 2
Microsomal ethanol oxidizing system 
(MEOS), 390
Microsomal mixed function 
oxidase system
phase I reactions and, 54–55, 55f, 
56t–57t
Microsporidia
drugs used for, 931t
Midamor, 270. See also Amiloride
dosage of, 262t
Midazolam, 438f
pharmacokinetics, 40t
preparations available, 387, 446
Midodrine, 141, 148
Mifeprex, 712, 740. See also 
Mifepristone
Mifepristone (RU-486), 710–711, 
731–732
Miglitol
for diabetes mellitus, 759, 766
Migraine(s)
beta-receptor antagonists for, 164
ergot alkaloids for, 290
5-HT1D/1B agonists for, 285–286, 285f
Milk of magnesia, 1112
in constipation management, 1093
Milk thistle, 1131–1132
Milnacipran, 525–529
dosage of, 535t, 539
sympathomimetic drug effects of, 143
Milophene, 740. See also Clomiphene
Milrinone, 225
Miltefosine
clinical uses of, 934
Miltown, 387. See also Meprobamate
1206    Index
Mineral oil
as stool softener, 1093
Mineralocorticoids, 708–709. See also 
specific drugs
aldosterone, 708
antagonists of, 711
fludrocortisone, 709
Minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC), 
903
Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), 
792, 903
Minimum lethal dose, 71
Minipress, 167, 189. See also Prazosin
Minirin, 678. See also Desmopressin acetate
Minocin, 819. See also Minocycline
Minocycline, 812, 819
Minoxidil
as antihypertensive drug, 181, 
181f, 189
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t, 181
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Mintezol, 946. See also Thiabendazole
Miochol-E, 112. See also Acetylcholine 
(ACh)
Miosis
opioid analgesics and, 551, 551t
Miradon, 617. See also Anisindione
Mirapex, 499. See also Pramipexole
Mircera, 598. See also Epoetin beta
miRNAs, 2
Mirtazapine, 527, 530
dosage of, 535t
Misoprostol, 315, 327, 1090
fetal effects of, 1043t
preparations available, 328, 1111
Mithracin, 786. See also Plicamycin
Mitomycin
for cancer, 966
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Mitotane, 711
Mitoxantrone
for cancer, 965
Mitrolan, 1112. See also Polycarbophil
Mivacron, 481. See also Mivacurium
Mivacurium
pharmacodynamics of, 470t
pharmacokinetics of, 468, 470t
tissue effects of, 474t
Mixed function oxidases, 55
Moban, 519. See also Molindone
Mobic, 656. See also Meloxicam
Mobidin, 655. See also Magnesium 
salicylate
Modafinil
for narcolepsy, 146, 148
sympathomimetic drug effects of, 
142–143
Moduretic, dosage of, 262t
Moexipril
preparations available, 190, 225
Molecular weight
of drugs, 4
Molecule(s)
special carrier, 9, 9f
transport, 9, 10t
Molindone
dosage of, 510t, 519
Mometasone, 355
Monistat 1, 858. See also Tioconazole
Monoamine(s)
as CNS neurotransmitters, 370
major depression and, 523, 524f
Monoamine hypothesis
of major depression, 522, 523, 523f
Monoamine oxidase (MAO)
metabolism of catecholamines by, 
87, 88f
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
for depression, 527–528, 528f
overdose of, 1034
for parkinsonism, 490
Monoamine transporters
pharmacologic targeting of, 
134, 135f
Monobactam(s), 801, 807–808
Monobenzone, 1068–1069
Monoclate, 617. See also Antihemophilic 
factor
Monoclonal antibodies (MABs), 991–994, 
993f
actions of, 993, 993f
anti-IgE
for asthma, 350, 352
antitumor, 991–992
to deliver isotopes to tumors, 992
described, 989–990
as immunosuppressants and 
anti-inflammatory agents, 
992–994, 993f
Monoiodotyrosine (MIT), 682
Mononine, 617. See also Factor IX 
complex, human
Monooxygenase(s), 55
Monopril, 190, 225. See also Fosinopril
Montelukast, 328, 349, 349f, 355
Monurol, 808. See also Fosfomycin
Mood stabilizers, 519
Moricizine
for cardiac arrhythmias, 242
“Morning after” contraception, 731
Morphinans
with mixed receptor actions, 559
strong, 557
Morphine, 556. See also 
Opioid analgesics
ionization constants of, 11t
mechanism of action of, 546–549, 
547f–549f
metabolism of, 545–546
organ system effects of, 549–552
Morphine (Cont.):
pharmacodynamics of, 40t, 546–552
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 40t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 545t
source of, 543
Motility disorders
drugs used for, 1111
Motion sickness
antimuscarinic drugs for, 121
H1-receptor antagonists for, 280
Motofen, 1112. See also Difenoxin
Motrin, 655. See also Ibuprofen
Mountain sickness
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for, 
257–258
Mouth
poisoning effects on, 1029
Movement disorders, 493–497, 498, 499
drugs used for, 483–500. See also specific 
drugs and Parkinsonism, drugs 
used for
MoviPrep, 1112. See also Polyethylene 
glycol electrolyte solution
Moxifloxacin, 835, 835f, 838
pharmacokinetics of, 836t
Mozobil, 598. See also Plerixafor
6-MP, 961. See also 6-Mercaptopurine
mTOR inhibitors. See Mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors
Mucocutaneous infections
oral systemic antifungal drugs for, 
855–856
Mucosal bleeding
stress-related, 1088
Mucosal protective agents, 1111
Multidrug resistance type 1 (MDR1) 
transporter, 9, 10t
Multidrug resistance–associated protein 
(MRP) transporter, 9, 10t
Multiple myeloma
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 971
Mupirocin, 892, 898
topical, 1063
Muromonab-CD3, 990, 999
Muscarine, 100f
Muscarinic agonists, 99–110
Muscarinic antagonists, 115–124
for asthma, 351
Muscarinic receptors, 87, 89t
Muscarinic signaling, 101f
Muscle
insulin effects on, 746, 747t
Muscle pain
neuromuscular blocking drugs and, 
474–475
Muscle relaxants, 465–482. See also specific 
drugs
neuromuscular blocking drugs, 465–476
nondepolarizing vs. depolarizing, 471t
Index    1207
Muscle relaxants (Cont.):
sedative-hypnotic drugs, 381
spasmolytic drugs, 476–479
tizanidine, 146
Muscle spasm
acute local
drugs for, 479
Mushroom poisoning
antimuscarinic drugs for, 123
Myambutol, 848. See also Ethambutol
Mycamine, 858. See also Micafungin
Mycelex-3, 858. See also Butoconazole
Mycifradin, 828. See also Neomycin
Mycobacteria
atypical
drugs active against, 
845, 846t
Mycobacterial infections
drugs used for, 845, 846t
isoniazid, 840–841
rifampin, 841–842
streptomycin, 824, 843
Mycobutin, 848. See also Rifabutin
Mycophenolate mofetil, 645–646
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
fetal effects of, 1043t
as immunosuppressive drug, 985t, 987, 
999
Mycostatin, 858. See also Nystatin
Mydriacyl Ophthalmic, 127. See also 
Tropicamide
Mydriasis, 118, 119f
Myeloid growth factors, 592–594
Myeloma multiple, 
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 971
Myenteric plexus, 81f, 82
Myfortic, 999. See also Mycophenolate 
mofetil
Mykrox, 270. See also Metolazone
Mylanta, 1111 
Myobloc, 481. See also Botulinum toxin 
type B
Myocardial infarction
acute
thrombolytic drugs for, 
611, 612
oral contraceptives and, 729
Myocardial oxygen demand
determinants of, 194, 194t
Myocardial oxygen supply
determinants of, 194
Myoclonic jerking, 421
Myopathy
coenzyme Q10 in, 1134
Mysoline, 427. See also Primidone
Mytelase, 112. See also Ambenonium
Myxedema
coronary artery disease and, 
690–691
Myxedema coma, 691
N
Na+/K+-ATPase
activity of, 212
Nabilone
abuse of, 572–573
for nausea and vomiting, 1100, 1112
Nabumetone, 642
Nadolol, 161
as antihypertensive drug, 179
properties of, 159t
NADPH-cytochrome P450 
oxidoreductase, 55
Nafarelin acetate, 678
Nafcillin
adverse effects of, 796–797
dosage of, 795t
pharmacokinetics of, 794–795
Naftifine, 858
topical, 1065
Naftin, 858. See also Naftifine
Nalbuphine, 558, 562
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Nalfon, 655. See also Fenoprofen
Nalidixic acid, 835f
Nalmefene, 559–560
Naloxone, 559–560
clinical uses of, 560
for opioid abuse, 572
pharmacokinetics of, 560
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Naltrexone, 559–560
in addiction management, 578
in alcoholism management, 396–397
NANC neurons
transmitter substances found in, 83f, 84t, 
87–88
Nandrolone decanoate, 735t, 740
Naphazoline, 148
Naphazoline/pheniramine
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Naprosyn, 656. See also Naproxen
Naproxen, 638t, 642
preparations available, 656
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Naqua, 270. See also Trichlormethiazide
Naratriptan
pharmacokinetics of, 286t
Narcan, 562. See also Naloxone
Narcolepsy
modafinil for, 146
Nardil, 539. See also Phenelzine
Naropin, 463. See also Ropivacaine
Natacyn, 858. See also Natamycin
Natalizumab, 993, 999
Natamycin, 858
Nateglinide
for diabetes mellitus, 756, 766
National Cholesterol Education Program: 
Adult Treatment Guidelines 
(2011), 622t
National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH), 
1005–1006
National Research Council (NRC) Wound 
Classification Criteria, 911
Natrecor, 225, 270. See also Nesiritide
Natriuretic peptides, 303–304
Natural estrogens, 716f, 717–718, 717f
Natural killer (NK) cells, 978
Natural killer–T (NKT) cells, 978
Natural products
for cancer, 962–965, 963t
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Natural progestins, 723
Natural toxins, 360, 360t
Nature-Throid, 695. See also Thyroid 
desiccated
Naturetin, 270. See also 
Bendroflumethiazide
Nausea
H1-receptor antagonists for, 278, 279t
Nausea and vomiting
chemotherapy-induced
5-HT3-receptor antagonists for, 1099
drugs used for, 1097–1100. See also 
specific drugs and Antiemetic 
drugs
opioid analgesics and, 551, 551t
pathogenesis of
neurologic pathways involved in, 
1097, 1098f
postoperative and postradiation
5-HT3-receptor antagonists for, 1099
of pregnancy
H1-receptor antagonists for, 280
Navane, 519. See also Thiothixene
NDA, 75–76
Nebcin, 828. See also Tobramycin
Nebivolol, 161
as antihypertensive drug, 179–180
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 175t
preparations available, 167, 
189, 225
properties of, 159t
Nedocromil
for asthma, 348–349, 352
Nefazodone
chemistry of, 526, 527f
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t, 531
pharmacokinetics of, 529, 529t
Nelfinavir, 871t, 880, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
Nematodes
drugs used for, 938t
Nembutal, 427. See also Pentobarbital
Nembutal Sodium, 387. 
See also Pentobarbital
Neo-Synephrine, 148. 
See also Oxymetazoline
1208    Index
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 950
Neoendorphin(s)
alpha and beta, 544
Neomycin, 826–827, 828
topical, 827, 1064
Neonate(s)
Graves’ disease in, 693
half-lives of drugs in, 1045t
oral drug absorption in, 1044, 1044t
special pharmacodynamic features in, 
1046
Neoplasm(s), 949
thyroid, 694
Neoral, 999. See also Cyclosporine
Neostigmine, 105–106, 112
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
ADH antagonists and, 265
lithium effects on, 516–517
Nephrolithiasis
diuretics for, 267
Nephron
segments of, 252t
Nephrotic syndrome, 784
Neptazane, 270. See also Methazolamide
Nernst equation, 230
Nerve growth factor
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
Nervous system. See also Autonomic 
nervous system (ANS); 
Central nervous system 
(CNS); Enteric nervous 
system; Peripheral nervous 
system
alcohol effects on, 393
antipsychotic drugs effects on, 511
histamine effects on, 275
inhaled anesthetics effects on, 434–436
lead poisoning effects on, 1014–1015
lithium effects on, 516
local anesthetics effects on, 458–459
poisoning effects on, 1029–1030
properties in common, endocrine 
system, 80
serotonin effects on, 282–283
Nesacaine, 463. See also Chloroprocaine
Nesiritide
in heart failure management, 219
preparations available, 225, 270
Netilmicin, 826
Neulasta, 598. See also Pegfilgrastim
Neumega, 598. See also Oprelvekin
Neupogen, 598. See also Filgrastim
Neural injury
local anesthetics and, 458–459
Neurocysticercosis
albendazole for, 939
praziquantel for, 944
Neuroendocrine system
in depression, 524–525
opioid analgesics effects on, 551t, 552
Neuroendocrine tumors
diarrhea due to
octreotide for, 1095
Neurokinin A, 307
Neurokinin B, 307
Neurokinin receptor antagonists
for nausea and vomiting, 1099–1100
Neuroleptanesthesia, 509
Neuroleptic(s), 501
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 284, 
284t, 496
antipsychotic drugs and, 512–513
Neurologic diseases
beta-receptor antagonists for, 164
Neuromuscular blocking drugs, 465–476. 
See also specific drugs
depolarizing, 468–469, 470f, 
470t, 473
neuromuscular transmission of
assessment of, 471f, 472–473
nondepolarizing, 467–468, 
468f, 470t
Neuromuscular junction
cholinomimetic drug effects on
direct-acting, 102t, 104–105
indirect-acting, 107
disorders of
cholinomimetic drugs for, 108–109
Neuromuscular response
aging effects on, 475
disease effects on, 475
Neuron(s)
local circuit, 365, 365f
NANC
transmitter substances found in, 83f, 
84t, 87–88
in parkinsonism, 483, 485f
projection, 365, 365f
relay, 365, 365f
Neurontin, 427, 481. See also Gabapentin
Neuropathy target esterase, 1007
Neuropeptide Y, 308–309
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
inhibitory effects of, 92t
Neuroprotective therapy
for parkinsonism, 492
Neurotensin, 307–308
Neurotransmission
prostaglandins effects on, 321
Neurotransmitter(s)
central
identification of
CNS drugs and, 364
major depression and, 523, 524f
Neurotransmitter receptors
CNS drugs and, 360–361, 362f
Neurotransmitter uptake carriers, 87
Neurotrophic hypothesis
of major depression, 522–523, 522f
Neutral antagonism, 7
Neutropenia, 582
chemotherapy-induced
G-CSF for, 593, 593f
Nevirapine, 871t, 877–878, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
during pregnancy, 876, 876t
New Drug Application (NDA), 75–76
Nexium, 1111. See also Esomeprazole
Niacin
for hyperlipidemias, 627–628
Nicardipine
clinical pharmacology of, 202t
organ system effects of, 204
Niclosamide, for helminthic infections, 
938t, 942–943
Nicotine
abuse of, 569t, 573–575
treatment of, 574–575
ionization constants of, 11t
as pesticide, 1008
structure of, 100f
toxicity of
acute, 109–110
chronic, 110
Nicotine polacrilex gum
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Nicotine transdermal system
from prescription to OTC status, 
1116t
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR), 
24, 24f
Nicotinic acid, 627–628. See also Niacin
Nicotinic receptors, 87, 89t
Nicotinic signaling, 101f
Nicotinic stimulants
direct-acting
toxicity of, 109–110
Nifedipine, 190, 203f, 209
clinical pharmacology of, 202t
dosage of, 175t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 175t
Nifurtimox
clinical uses of, 934
Nigrostriatal pathway, 506
Nilandron, 740. See also Nilutamide
Nilotinib
for cancer, 966–967, 967t
Nilutamide, 739, 740
Nimbex, 481. See also Cisatracurium
Nirvanol, 409
Nisoldipine, 209
clinical pharmacology of, 202t
Nitazoxanide, 933
Nitrates/nitrites
for angina pectoris, 195–201
carcinogenicity of, 200, 200t
in chronic heart failure management, 
220
Nitrazepam
for epilepsy, 420
Index    1209
Nitrendipine
clinical pharmacology of, 202t
Nitric oxide, 331–337
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
as CNS neurotransmitter, 370–371
Nitric oxide donors, 334
Nitric oxide gas inhalation, 334
Nitric oxide synthase (NOS)
isoforms of
properties of, 331, 332t
Nitro-vasodilators
for angina pectoris, 201
Nitrofurantoin, 898
as urinary antiseptic, 892–893
Nitrofurazone, 898
Nitrogen dioxide
TLVs of, 1005t
Nitrogen oxides, 332, 333t
toxic exposure to, 1004–1005
Nitroglycerin, 195–201
Nitropress, 189. See also Nitroprusside
Nitroprusside, 189. See also Sodium 
nitroprusside
Nitrosourea(s)
for cancer, 955, 957
Nitrous oxide
pharmacologic properties of, 433t
Nizatidine, 1111
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
vs. other H2-receptor antagonists, 1083t
Nizoral, 712, 858. See also Ketoconazole
NNRTIs. See Nonnucleoside reverse tran-
scriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs)
No-effect dose, 71
Nolahist, 292. See also Phenindamine
Nolvadex, 740. See also Tamoxifen
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 970–971
Non-immunologic contact urticaria
topical dermatologic medications and, 
1063t
Nonadrenal disorders
synthetic corticosteroids for, 705–706, 
706t
Nonadrenergic, noncholinergic (NANC) 
neurons
transmitter substances found in, 83f, 84t, 
87–88
Nonketotic hyperosmolar coma, 744
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibi-
tors (NNRTIs), 870t–871t, 
876–878
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs), 636–643, 1076. 
See also specific drugs
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055t
drug interactions with, 1159t
in the elderly, 1057
ulcers due to
proton pump inhibitors for, 1088
Nontoxic goiter, 694
Nontuberculous infections
streptomycin for, 824
Nonulcer dyspepsia
domperidone for, 1092
H2-receptor antagonists for, 1085
metoclopramide for, 1092
proton pump inhibitors for, 1088
NOP (nociceptin receptor), 544
Noradrenergic fibers, 80f, 82
Norco, 562. See also Hydrocodone/
acetaminophen
Norcuron, 481. See also Vecuronium
Norepinephrine, 136f, 138t, 141, 148
for acute hypotension, 144
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
as CNS neurotransmitter, 367t, 370
dose-response curves to, 152, 153f
inhibitory effects of, 92t
ionization constants of, 11t
Norepinephrine transporter (NET), 85–87, 
134
Norethindrone, properties of, 719f, 723t
Norethindrone acetate, 740
properties of, 723t
Norethynodrel
properties of, 723t
Norflex, 481. See also Orphenadrine
Norfloxacin, 835, 836t, 838 
Norgestrel
dosage of, 731t
L-Norgestrel
dosage of, 731t
properties of, 723t
Normodyne, 167, 189. See also Labetalol
Noroxin, 838. See also Norfloxacin
Norpace, 249. See also Disopyramide
Norplant, 740. See also Levonorgestrel
Norpramin, 539. See also Desipramine
19-Nortestosterone derivatives
properties of, 723t
Nortriptyline, 527f, 539
dosage of, 535t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
pharmacodynamics of, 40t, 530t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t
Norvasc, 189, 209. See also Amlodipine
Norvir, 889. See also Ritonavir
Notice of Claimed Investigational 
Exemption for a New Drug 
(IND), 74–76
Novo-Seven, 617. See also Coagulation 
factor VIIa recombinant
Novocain, 463. See also Procaine
Novothyrox, 695. See also Levothyroxine
Noxafil, 858. See also Posaconazole
NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn), 748t, 
749
Nplate, 598. See also Romiplostim
NRC. See National Research Council 
(NRC)
NRTIs. See Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors 
(NRTIs)
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drugs (NSAIDs)
Nubain, 562. See also Nalbuphine
Nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (NRTIs), 869–876, 
870t–872t. See also specific 
drugs
during pregnancy, 876, 876t
Nucleus accumbens, 565–566
Nucynta, 562. See also Tapentadol
Numorphan, 562. See also Oxymorphone
Nupercainal, 463. See also Dibucaine
Nuprin, 655. See also Ibuprofen
Nurse practitioners
prescribing authority of, 1144–1145, 
1144t
Nutrition
proton pump inhibitors effects on, 1088
Nutritional supplements
purified, 1134–1136
coenzyme Q10, 1134–1135
glucosamine, 1135
melatonin, 1135–1136
Nuvigil, 148. See also Armodafinil
Nystatin, 858
topical, 856, 1066
O
Obesity
management of, 664, 665t
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
antidepressants for, 532
Occlusion
as factor in pharmacologic response to 
dermatologic drugs, 1061
Octreotide, 665–666, 665f, 678
adverse effects of, 1095
clinical uses of, 1095
for diarrhea, 1095
for variceal hemorrhage, 
1107–1108
Ofatumumab, 991, 999
Ofloxacin, 838
pharmacokinetics of, 836t
Ogen, 740. See also Estropipate
Olanzapine, 504f, 519
advantages and disadvantages of, 
509t
dosage of, 510t
for Huntington’s disease, 495
Oligonucleotide(s)
antisense, 2
Olmesartan, 190, 225
Olopatadine, 292
Olsalazine, 1101f, 1112
1210    Index
Omalizumab, 993
for asthma, 350
preparations available, 355, 999
Omecantiv mecarbil, 212
Omega-3 fatty acids, marine, 633
Omeprazole
pharmacokinetics of, 1086t
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Omnicef, 807. See also Cefdinir
On-off phenomenon, 487
Onchocerciasis
ivermectin for, 941
Oncogenes
cancer related to, 950
Ondansetron, 287, 1097f, 1111
for nausea and vomiting, 1098–1099
Onglyza, 766. See also Saxagliptin
Ontak, 999. See also Denileukin diftitox
Ophthalmologic disorders. See also Eye(s)
antimuscarinic drugs for, 121, 121t 
in the elderly
drugs for, 1057
sympathomimetic drugs for, 145
Ophthalmopathy
thyroid disease–related, 693
Opioid(s), 572
abuse of, 569t, 572
treatment of, 572
overdose of, 1037
Opioid agonists
for diarrhea, 1094–1095
Opioid analgesics, 446, 543–564, 545t, 
549–550, 553. See also specific 
drugs
with agonist and antagonist actions
effects of, 552
antitussives, 559
basic pharmacology of, 543–552
classification of, 543, 544t
clinical pharmacology of, 552–560
CNS effects of, 549–551, 551t
contraindications to, 556
dependence on, 549, 551t, 555
mechanism of action of, 546–549, 
547f–549f
sites of action of, 548, 548f
source of, 543
specific agents, 556–560
supraspinal actions of, 548
tolerance to, 549, 551t, 554–555
toxicity of, 554–556, 554t
Opioid antagonists, 559–560, 562
Opioid peptides
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
as CNS neurotransmitter, 367t
endogenous, 543–544, 544t
Opioid receptor antagonists
in constipation management, 1094
Opisthorchiasis
praziquantel for, 944
Opium, 543
Oprelvekin, 594, 598
Optipranolol, 167. See also Metipranolol
Optometrists
prescribing authority of, 1144–1145, 
1144t
Oral contraceptives, 725t, 726–731
during lactation, 1048t
Oral direct factor XA inhibitors, 607
Orap, 519. See also Pimozide
Orencia, 656, 999. See also Abatacept
Organ transplant rejection
cell-mediated
eicosanoids and, 327
Organ transplantation
immunosuppressive drugs in, 985t, 
994–995
Organic nitrates, 334
Organic nitrites, 334
Organic solvents
fetal effects of, 1043t
Organochlorine pesticides, 1006–1007
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Organolead poisoning, 1014t, 1016
Organon, 678. See also Ganirelix acetate
Organophosphate(s)
for cholinergic poisoning, 123
durations of action of, 106t
therapeutic uses for, 106t
Organophosphorus pesticides, 1007–1008
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Orgaran, 617. See also Danaparoid
Orinase, 766. See also Tolbutamide
Orlaam, 562. See also Levomethadyl acetate
Orlistat
in obesity management, 664, 665t
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Ornidyl, 935. See also Eflornithine
Orphan drugs
development of, 77
Orphan receptors, 16
Orphanin FQ, 544
Orphanin opioid-receptor-like subtype I, 
544
Orphenadrine
for parkinsonism, 492t, 499
Ortho-phthalaldehyde, 896, 898
Orthoclone OKT3, 999. See also 
Muromonab-CD3
Orudis, 655. See also Ketoprofen
Os-Cal, 786. See also Calcium carbonate
Oseltamivir
for influenza, 886–887, 889
Osmitrol, 270. See also Mannitol
Osmol gap
causes of, 1030, 1030t
OsmoPrep, 1112. See also Sodium 
phosphate
Osmotic agents
sites of action of, 252f
Osmotic diuretics, 263–264
Osmotic laxatives, 1093
Osteoarthritis
in the elderly, 1056–1057
Osteodystrophy
intestinal, 782
Osteoporosis, 782–783, 782f
androgens in, 736
OTC drugs. See Over-the-counter (OTC) 
drugs
Ototoxicity
aminoglycosides and, 824
loop diuretics and, 260
Otrivin, 148. See also Xylometazoline
Ovarian cancer
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 973
Ovarian hormones, 726
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, 667, 
668f
gonadotropins and, 668–669
Ovary, 715–731
functions of, 715–716
disturbances in, 716
mechanism of action of, 718–719
oral contraceptives effects on, 727
Over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, 
1115–1124
ingredients in
to be avoided in selected patients, 
1117, 1123t
FDA review of, 1115–1124
hidden, 1117, 1123t
of known efficacy, 1117, 
1118t–1122t
overuse/misuse of, 1117, 1123t, 1124
switched from prescription to, 
1115–1117, 1116t
Ovidrel, 678. See also Choriogonadotropin 
alfa
Ovulation induction
drugs for, 733–734
gonadotropins for, 667–668, 668f
Oxacillin
dosage of, 795t
Oxaliplatin
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Oxaluria enteric, 785
Oxamniquine, 943
for helminthic infections, 
938t, 943
Oxandrin, 740. See also Oxandrolone
Oxandrolone, 735t, 740
Oxantel pamoate, 946
Oxaprozin, 642, 656
properties of, 638t
Oxazepam
dosages of, 383t
pharmacokinetic properties of, 377t
Oxazolidinediones
    for seizures, 419
Index    1211
Oxazolidinones, 
for infection, 817
Oxcarbazepine
for seizures, 410–411, 427
Oxiconazole, 858
Oxidase(s)
mixed function, 55
N-Oxidation, 56t
S-Oxidation, 56t
Oxidative dealkylation, 56t
Oxidizing agents
poisoning by, 1036t
Oxistat, 858. See also Oxiconazole
Oxybutynin
for urinary disorders, 122, 122t, 127
Oxycodone, 558
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Oxycodone mixtures, 562
Oxygen
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Oxymetazoline, 141, 148
Oxymetholone, 735t, 740
Oxymorphone, 556
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Oxytocin, 673–674
Oxytocin antagonists, 674
Ozone
TLVs of, 1005t
toxic exposure to, 1004–1005
P
P-glycoprotein transporter, 9, 10t
Paclitaxel
for cancer, 963t, 964
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Paget’s disease of bone, 784
Pain. See also Analgesia/Analgesics
acetaminophen and, 650
chronic
opioid analgesics for, 550
kinins role in, 302
muscle
neuromuscular blocking drugs and, 
474–475
Pain disorders
antidepressants for, 533
Paliperidone, 519
Palivizumab, 888, 889, 994
Palonosetron
for nausea and vomiting, 1098–1099
Palosuran, 309
Pamelor, 539. See also Nortriptyline
Pamidronate, 776f, 786
Pamine, 127. See also Methscopolamine
Panadol, 656. See also Acetaminophen
Pancreas
endocrine, 743–744
Pancrease, 1111. See also Pancrelipase
Pancreatic cancer
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 973
Pancreatic enzyme supplementation, 
1106–1107
Pancreatic islet cells, 744t
Pancreatic peptide, 743
Pancreatin, 1106–1107
Pancrelipase, 1106–1107, 1111
Pancuronium
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
properties of, 470t
tissue effects of, 474t
Panitumumab, 991–992, 999
for cancer, 967–968
Pantoprazole,1086f, 1111
pharmacokinetics of, 1086t
Papaverine
for erectile dysfunction, 156–157
Parabens, 897
Paragonimiasis
praziquantel for, 944
Paraldehyde, 387
Paramethasone
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
Paraoxon
structure of, 106f
Paraquat, 1009f, 1010
Parathion, 106f
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Parathion-methyl
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
in bone mineral homeostasis, 769–771, 
770f, 771f
vitamin D and FGF23 interactions with, 
773–774
Paravertebral chains, 81
Paremyd, 148. See also 
Hydroxyamphetamine
Paricalcitol, 786
Parkinsonism
drug-induced, 493
drugs used for, 483–500. See also 
specific drugs
gene therapy for, 492
neurons involved in, 483, 485f
neuroprotective therapy for, 492
nonmotor manifestations of
therapy for, 492
pathogenesis of, 484
surgical procedures for, 492
Parlodel, 499, 678. See also 
Bromocriptine
Parnate, 539. See also Tranylcypromine
Paromomycin
clinical uses of, 934
preparations available, 828, 935
structure of, 929f
Paromomycin sulfate
for amebiasis, 930
Paroxetine, 526–530, 535t, 539
Partial agonists, 19–20, 20f
Partial seizures
clinical pharmacology of, 420–421
Paser, 848. See also 5-Aminosalicylic acid
Pasteurization
defined, 894t
Patanol, 292. See also Olopatadine
Patent ductus arteriosus
eicosanoids and, 326
Pathilon, 127. See also Tridihexethyl
Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), 554
Paxil, 539. See also Paroxetine
Pazopanib
for cancer, 968
Pediatric patients
clinical pharmacology of, 1039–1049
immunization for, 1167t
passive immunization for, 1168t
Pediculicides
ingredients in, 1122t
PEG-Intron, 889, 999. See also 
Peginterferon alfa-2b
Pegademase, 985, 999
Peganone, 427. See also Ethotoin
Pegaptanib, 994, 999
Pegasys, 889, 999. See also Peginterferon 
alfa-2a
Pegfilgrastim, 598
Peginterferon alfa-2a
for HBV infection, 883t
preparations available, 889, 999
Peginterferon alfa-2b
for HBV infection, 883t
preparations available, 
889, 999
Pegloticase
for gout, 654–655
Pegvisomant, 665, 666
Pen-Vee K, 807. See also Penicillin V
Penbutolol, 159t
as antihypertensive drug, 179
Penciclovir
dosage of, 865t
for HSV and VZV infections, 866
topical, 1067
Penicillamine, 1024
fetal effects of, 1043t
indications and toxicity of, 1024
ionization constants of, 11t
for Wilson’s disease, 496–497
Penicillin(s), 790–797. See also specific types
adverse effects of, 796–797
clinical uses of, 795–796
during lactation, 1048t
mechanism of action of, 792, 
792f–794f
units and formulations of, 791–792
Penicillin G, 790
Penicillin G benzathine, 807
Penicillin G procaine, 807
clinical uses of, 795
1212    Index
Penicillin V, 807
dosage of, 795t
Pennyroyal
risks associated with, 1127t
Pentacarinat, 935. See also Pentamidine
Pentam 300, 935. See also Pentamidine
Pentamidine, 929f, 930–932, 935
for trypanosomiasis, 930–932
Pentasa, 1102, 1102f
Pentazocine, 545t, 559
ionization constants of, 11t
Pentetate calcium trisodium
preparations available, 1025
Pentetate Zinc Trisodium, 1025. See also 
Pentetate calcium trisodium
Pentids, 807. See also Penicillin G
Pentobarbital, 375f, 387, 427
ionization constants of, 11t
Pentostatin
as immunosuppressive drug, 989
Pentothal, 446. See also Thiopental
Pentoxifylline, 209, 346, 355
for intermittent claudication, 207
Pepcid, 1111. See also Famotidine
Peptic ulcer disease
H2-receptor antagonists for, 1084–1085
proton pump inhibitors for, 1087–1088
Peptide(s)
as CNS neurotransmitters, 370
natriuretic, 303–304. See also Natriuretic 
peptides
opioid
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 
84t
as CNS neurotransmitter, 367t
endogenous, 543–544, 544t
pancreatic, 743
in renal tubule transport, 256
vasoactive, 295–312. See also specific 
drugs and Vasoactive peptides
vasoactive intestinal
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 
84t
Pepto-Bismol, 1112. See also Bismuth 
subsalicylate
Peracetic acid, 896–897
Peramivir
for influenza, 887
Percocet, 562. See also Oxycodone mixtures
Percodan, 562. See also Oxycodone 
mixtures
Performance anxiety
beta-receptor antagonists for, 164
Pergolide
for parkinsonism, 489, 499
Perinatal pharmacology, 1039–1045
Perindopril, 190, 225
Peripheral artery disease
drugs used for, 209
treatment of, 207
Peripheral blood stem cells, 592
Peripheral nervous system
direct-acting cholinomimetic drug effects 
on, 102t, 104
nitric oxide effects on, 336
opioid analgesics effects on, 551–552
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 321
Peripheral tissues
muscarinic receptor subgroups important 
in, 118t
Peripheral vascular disease
alpha-receptor antagonists for, 156
eicosanoids and, 326
Peritoneal dialysis
in decontamination of poisoned patient, 
1032
Permapen, 807. See also Penicillin G 
benzathine
Permax, 499. See also Pergolide
Permeation
drug, 9–10, 9f
Permethrin, 1068
Pernicious anemia, 588
Peroxisome proliferator–activated 
receptor-gamma (PPAR-γ)
in diabetes mellitus, 757–758
Peroxygen compounds
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 896–897
Perphenazine, 503f
dosage of, 510t, 519
for Huntington’s disease, 495
Persantine, 617. See also Dipyridamole
Pesticide(s)
botanical, 1008, 1009f
carbamate, 1008, 1008t
organochlorine, 1006–1007
organophosphorus, 1007–1008
toxic exposure to, 1006–1008, 
1006t–1008t
Petit mal seizures, 421
Pfizerpen, 807. See also Penicillin G
pFOX inhibitors
for angina pectoris, 205
pH
of drugs
during pregnancy, 1040
pH-partitioning phenomenon
body fluids with potential for drug 
“trapping” through, 11, 12t
Pharmaceutical industry
described, 69–70
pharmacology and, 3
Pharmacists
prescribing authority of, 1144–1145, 
1144t
Pharmacodynamics
components in, 38f
defined, 6
in dose individualization, 47–49
Pharmacodynamics (Cont.):
drug receptors and, 15–35
principles of, 6–8, 7f, 8f
processes involved in, 2f, 6
variables related to, 48–49
Pharmacogenetic testing
in drug therapy, 65
Pharmacogenomics
defined, 2, 3
Pharmacokinetics, 37–48
bioavailability and, 39t–40t, 43–44, 43f, 
43t
clearance and, 38–42, 39t–41t
components in, 38, 38f
defined, 6
in dose individualization, 47–49
drug accumulation and, 42–43, 42f
drug effects, 44–45, 45f. See also Drug 
effects, time course of
extraction ratio and, 44
first-pass effect and, 44
half-life and, 39t–40t, 42, 42f
primary processes of, 38, 38f
principles of, 8–12, 9f, 10t–12t, 12f
variables related to, 47–48
volume of distribution and, 38, 
39t–41t
Pharmacology
areas of study in, 2f
autonomic
introduction to, 79–96. See also 
Autonomic nervous system 
(ANS)
basic principles of, 1–77
defined, 1
dermatologic, 1061–1079
experimental, 2
general principles of, 3–12
genetics and, 3
history of, 1–3
medical
defined, 1, 2f
pediatric, 1039–1045
perinatal, 1039–1045
pharmaceutical industry and, 3
sources of information, 13
transport molecules in, 9, 10t
Phase I reactions, 56t–57t. See also 
Biotransformation of drugs, 
phase I reactions
Phase II reactions, 59–60, 59f, 60t
Phenacemide
for seizures, 409
Phenanthrene analgesics
mild to moderate agonists, 558
with mixed receptor actions, 558–559
strong, 556–557
Phencyclidine (PCP)
abuse of, 569t, 575–576, 577f
fetal effects of, 1043t
Index    1213
Phenelzine
dosage of, 535t
pharmacokinetics of, 529t
Phenergan, 292, 1112. See also 
Promethazine
Phenindamine, 292
Phenindione, 609f
Phenmetrazine, 142
Phenobarbital
clinical uses of, 411
dosages of, 383t, 411
half-life of
in neonates and adults, 1045t
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
mechanism of action of, 411
oral absorption of
in neonates vs. older children and 
adults, 1044t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 411
for seizures, 411
therapeutic levels/dosage of, 411
Phenolics
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 893t, 895
Phenothiazine(s)
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
potency and toxicity of
chemical structure effects on, 505t
Phenothiazine derivatives
of antipsychotic drugs, 503–504, 503f, 
505t
Phenoxybenzamine, 154, 286
mechanism of action of, 151–152
for pheochromocytoma, 155–156, 156f
Phensuximide
for seizures, 418
Phentolamine, 154
cardiovascular effects of, 152, 153f
for erectile dysfunction, 156–157, 199
D-Phenylalanine derivative
for diabetes mellitus, 756, 756t
Phenylbutazone
drug interactions with, 610t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
Phenylephrine, 133t, 136f, 141, 148
for acute hypotension, 144
cardiovascular responses to, 138t
ionization constants of, 11t
Phenylethylamine, 134, 136f
Phenylethylmalonamide (PEMA)
structure of, 412f
Phenylheptylamine analgesics
mild to moderate agonists, 558
strong, 557
O-Phenylphenol, 895
Phenylpiperidine analgesics
mild to moderate, 558
strong, 557
Phenylpropanolamine
sympathomimetic drug effects of, 142
Phenytoin, 407–409, 427
drug interactions with, 409, 1159t
fetal effects of, 1043t
half-life of
in neonates and adults, 1045t
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
oral absorption of
in neonates vs. older children and 
adults, 1044t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 408, 408f
Pheochromocytoma, 155–156, 156f
pHisoHex, 898. See also Hexachlorophene
PhosLo, 786. See also Calcium acetate
Phosphate, 786
for hypercalcemia, 779
3′-Phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate 
(PAPS), 60
Phosphodiesterase(s)
in heart failure management, 218
Phosphoinositide(s), 25
as second messengers, 28–29, 28f
Phospholine, 112. See also Echothiophate
Phosphorus
for hypocalcemia, 780
Phosphorylation
second messenger signaling in, 29
Photoallergic contact dermatitis
topical dermatologic medications and, 
1063t
Photoirritation
topical dermatologic medications and, 
1063t
Physician’s assistants
prescribing authority of, 1144–1145, 1144t
Physiologic antagonism, 20
Physostigmine, 105–106, 112
ionization constants of, 11t
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Phytonadione, 609f
Pigmentation
drugs affecting, 1068–1069
Pilocarpine, 100f, 112
ionization constants of, 11t
Pimecrolimus, 1067
Pimozide, 504, 519
drug interactions with, 1159t
for tics, 495
Pin-rid, 946. See also Pyrantel pamoate
Pin-X, 946. See also Pyrantel pamoate
Pindolol, 159t, 167, 189
as antihypertensive drug, 179
ionization constants of, 11t
Pinworm infections
albendazole for, 938–939
Pioglitazone, 758t, 786
for diabetes mellitus, 758
Pioglitazone mixtures, 766
Pipecuronium, 469f
Piperacillin, 791f, 807
dosage of, 795t
Piperacillin and tazobactam sodium, 807
Piperaquine, 918f
clinical uses of, 917t
for malaria, 920
Piperazine, 943
for helminthic infections, 
938t, 943
Piperazine antihistamines, 279t
Piperidine antipsychotics, 
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
Piperidine antihistamines, 278f
Pipracil, 807. See also Piperacillin
Pirbuterol, 355
for asthma, 344
Pirenzepine, 117f
Piroxicam, 637f, 642, 656
preparations available
properties of, 638t
Pitavastatin, 633
Pitocin, 678. See also Oxytocin
Pitressin, 678. See also Vasopressin
Pituitary hormones, 659–679
anterior, 660–673
posterior, 673–675
Placental drug metabolism
during pregnancy, 1040
Placental transporters
of drugs, 1040
Plant(s)
medical use of
history of, 1125
Plant systemic pesticides, 1007
Plasma fractions
for bleeding disorders, 615–616, 615t
Plasma protein binding
importance of, 49
Platelet(s)
nitroglycerin effects on, 198
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 320
Platelet-rich thrombi, 601–602
Platinum analogs
for cancer, 957–958
Plavix, 617. See also Clopidogrel
Plendil, 190, 209. See also Felodipine
Plerixafor
G-CSF with
clinical uses for, 594
preparations available, 598
Pletal, 209, 617. See also Cilostazol
Plexus
myenteric, 81f
submucous, 81f, 82
Plicamycin
in bone mineral homeostasis, 777
for hypercalcemia, 779
preparations available, 786
1214    Index
PLX4032, 974
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, 
1165t
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, 
1165t
Pneumocystis spp.
P. carinii
drugs used for, 931t
P. jiroveci
drugs used for, 924, 931t
Pneumocystosis
drugs used for, 924, 926
pentamidine, 932
Podofilox, 1075–1076
Podophyllum resin, 1075–1076
Poison ivy
contact hypersensitivity due to, 983
Poisoning(s). See also specific types
arsenic, 1014t, 1017–1019
arsine gas, 1019
cholinergic
antimuscarinic drugs for, 122–123
death due to, 1028
ergot, 287
heavy metals, 1013–1021.See also specific 
types and Heavy metals
hemodialysis in, 1031, 1031t, 1032
lead, 1013–1017
management of, 1027–1038
mercury, 1014t, 1019–1021
mushroom
antimuscarinic drugs for, 123
organolead, 1014t, 1016
sulfur dioxide, 1004
Poisons, 4
Poke root
risks associated with, 1127t
Poliovirus vaccine, 1165t
Pollutant(s)
air, 1002–1005, 1005t
TLVs of, 1005t
environmental, 1010–1011.See also 
specific types and 
Environmental pollutants
Polycarbophil, 1093, 1112
Polychlorinated biphenyls
as environmental pollutants, 
1010
Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins 
(PCDDs), 1010
Polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), 
1010
Polyethylene glycol
balanced
in constipation management, 1093
from prescription to OTC status, 
1116t
Polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution, 
1112
Polymyxin(s), 892
Polymyxin B, 892, 898
topical, 1063–1064
Polymyxin E, 892
Polythiazide, 270
dosage of, 261t
Polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP)
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 895
Ponstel, 656. See also Mefenamic acid
Pontocaine, 463. See also Tetracaine
Portable pen injectors
in insulin delivery, 748t, 750
Posaconazole, 858
pharmacologic properties of, 854t
for systemic infections, 855
Positive chronotropic effect, 138
Positive dromotropic effect, 138
Positive inotropic drugs
in the elderly, 1056
in heart failure management, 212t, 218
Positive inotropic effect, 138
Postantibiotic effects, 823
Postantibiotic leukocyte enhancement, 907
Postcoital contraceptives, 731, 731t
Postganglionic sympathetic nerve terminal 
blockers, 189
Postmenopausal hormonal therapy
estrogen in, 720–722
Postpartum hemorrhage
ergot alkaloids for, 290
Postsynaptic density, 369
Postsynaptic regulation
functional organization of, 92–93, 93f
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
antidepressants for, 533
Postural baroreflex, 87, 171, 171f
Posture, 786. See also Tricalcium phosphate
Potassium
for cardiac arrhythmias, 246
digitalis with, 218
effects of, 230
Potassium iodide
preparations available, 695
Potassium-sparing diuretics, 261–265
drug interactions with, 1159t
Povidone-iodine
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 895
preparations available, 898
Prader-Willi syndrome
growth hormone for, 663, 663t
Pralatrexate
for cancer, 959–960
Pralidoxime, 123f, 127
for cholinergic poisoning, 123
as poisoning antidote, 1033t
Pramipexole, 489f,  499
for parkinsonism, 489
for restless legs syndrome, 496
Pramlintide, 760, 763, 766
for diabetes mellitus
combination therapy with, 762
Pramoxine, 1077
local anesthetic, 463
Prandin, 766. See also Repaglinide
Prasugrel, 617
as antiplatelet agent, 613
Pravachol, 633. See also Pitavastatin
Praziquantel, 943–945, 946
for helminthic infections, 938t, 
943–945
Prazosin, 152f, 154, 167,189
as antihypertensive drug, 180
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 175t, 180
Precedex, 148, 446. See also 
Dexmedetomidine
Precocious puberty
gonadotropins in, 670–671
Precose, 766. See also Acarbose
Prednisolone
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t, 712
Prednisone
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t, 712
during lactation, 1048t
Pregabalin, 413f, 427
mechanism of action of, 413
for seizures, 413
Pregnancy
drug therapy during, 1039–1043
antipsychotic drugs, 512
antiretroviral drugs, 876, 876t
lithium, 517
opioid analgesics, 556
pharmacodynamics of, 1040–1043
pharmacokinetics of, 1039–1040
hypothyroidism during, 691
multiple
gonadotropins and, 668–669
nausea and vomiting of
H1-receptor antagonists for, 280
thyrotoxicosis during, 693
Pregnyl, 678. See also Chorionic 
gonadotropin
Preload
in cardiac performance, 215, 215f
Prelone, 712. See also Prednisolone
Premarin, 740. See also Conjugated 
estrogens
Premature depolarizations, 216, 218f
Premature labor
suppression of
sympathomimetic drugs for, 145
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
antidepressants for, 533
Pemetrexed
for cancer, 959
Prenalterol, 141, 142f
Prepidil, 328. See also Dinoprostone
Prescribing, 1139–1148. See also 
Prescription(s)
compliance issues in, 1143–1144
cost factors in, 1147–1148
Index    1215
Prescribing (Cont.):
E-prescribing, 1143
errors in, 1141–1143
generic, 1147
legal issues in, 1144–1147, 1144t, 1145t
rational, 1139–1141, 1140f
socioeconomic factors in, 1147–1148
Prescription(s), 1139–1148. See also 
Prescribing
abbreviations for, 1142t
costs of, 1147–1148
elements of, 1140–1141, 1140f
generic, 1147
inappropriate, 1143
writing of, 1139–1141, 1140f
poor, 1142–1143
Prescription drug(s)
dietary supplements vs., 1125
Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) 
of 1992, 76
Preservatives
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 897
Presynaptic inhibition, 363
Presynaptic regulation
in functional organization of autonomic 
activity, 91–92, 92t
Prevacid, 1111. See also Lansoprazole
Prevertebral ganglia, 81
Prezista, 888. See also Darunavir
Prialt, 562. See also Ziconotide
Priftin, 848. See also Rifapentine
Prilocaine, 461
pharmacokinetic properties of, 452t
preparations available, 463
Prilosec, 1111. See also Omeprazole
Primacor, 225. See also Milrinone
Primaquine, 919t, 923–924
for malaria, 919t, 923–924
in malaria prevention in travelers, 919t
Primary amine, 11
Primary chylomicronemia, 623
drugs used for, 622t
Primary generalized glucocorticoid 
resistance
synthetic corticosteroids for, 704
Primary hyperparathyroidism, 780
Primary immunodeficiency disorders
passive immunization for, 1168t
Primary induction chemotherapy, 950
Primaxin, 807. See also Imipenem/cilastatin
Primidone
for seizures, 411–412
for tremors, 494
Prinivil, 190, 225. See also Lisinopril
Prinzmetal angina, 193
Priscoline, 167. See also Tolazoline
Pristiq, 539. See also Desvenlafaxine
Privine, 148. See also Naphazoline
Pro-Banthine, 127. See also Propantheline
ProAmatine, 148. See also Midodrine
Probenecid, 656
drug interactions with, 1160t
Procainamide
for cardiac arrhythmias, 238–239
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 239
pharmacologic properties of, 238t
Procaine, 451t, 463
ionization constants of, 11t
Procaine penicillin, 794, 807
Procarbazine
for cancer, 957
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Procardia, 190, 209. See also Nifedipine
Prochlorperazine
preparations available, 1112
Procrit, 598. See also Epoetin alfa
ProctoFoam-HC, 1112. See also 
Hydrocortisone
Procyclidine
for parkinsonism, 492t
Prodrug, 8
Profasi, 678. See also Chorionic 
gonadotropin
Profenal, 656. See also Suprofen
Profilnine, 617
Profilnine SD, 617. See also Factor IX 
complex, human
Progabide, 478
Progesterone, 719f, 723, 740
effects of, 724
Progesterone inhibitors, 731–734
Progestin(s), 723–726
contraception with, 725t, 730–731
preparations available, 740
Prograf, 999. See also Tacrolimus
Proguanil, 925, 918f
Proinsulin, 744f
Projection neurons, 365, 365f
Prokinetic agents, 1091
Prolactin, 660, 672
Prolactin antagonists
preparations available, 678
Proleukin, 999. See also Interleukin-2
Prolia, 786, 999. See also Denosumab
Prolixin, 519. See also Fluphenazine
Proloprim, 837. See also Trimethoprim
Promacta, 598. See also Eltrombopag
Promethazine, 279, 1100
ionization constants of, 11t
Pronestyl, 249. See also Procainamide
Propafenone
for cardiac arrhythmias, 242
membrane actions of, 237t
pharmacologic properties of, 
238t
Propantheline, 117f, 127
Proparacaine, 463
Prophylactic drugs, in malaria, causal, 
915
Propiverine
for urinary disorders, 122, 122t
Proplex SX-T, 617. See also Factor IX 
complex, human
Proplex T, 617. See also Factor IX complex, 
human
Propofol, 438–441
as intravenous anesthetic, 438–441
Propoxur
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Propoxyphene
mild to moderate agonists, 558
Propranolol, 161, 178–179, 238t
as antihypertensive drug, 178
cardiac effects of, 242
dosage of, 175t, 179
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
membrane actions of, 237t
properties of, 159t
structure of, 158f
for tremors, 493
Propylene glycol, 1075
Propylthiouracil, 688f, 695
fetal effects of, 1043t
for Graves’ disease, 691–692
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
Prorenin receptors, 300
ProSom, 387. See also Estazolam
Prostacyclin, 315
Prostaglandin(s). See also Eicosanoid(s)
for open-angle glaucoma, 161t
organ system effects of, 320–322
PGE2, 315
PGF2α, 315
PGF2α, 325f
in renal tubule transport, 256
Prostaglandin analogs
for acid-peptic diseases, 1090
Prostaglandin E1, E2
inhibitory effects of, 92t
Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthases
products of, 314–316, 315f
Prostanoid(s)
biosynthesis of, 315f
Prostanoid receptors
signaling pathways of, 318f
Prostate cancer
advanced
GnRH receptor agonists in, 
671
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 
972
gonadotropins in, 670
Prostigmin, 112. See also Neostigmine
Prostin E2, 328. See also Dinoprostone
Protamine sulfate, 607, 617
1216    Index
Protease inhibitors, 870t–871t, 878–881. 
See also specific drugs
during pregnancy, 876, 876t
Protein(s)
contractile
sensitivity to calcium, 212
FK-binding, 986
G. See G proteins
regulatory, 16
structural, 16
synaptosomal nerve–associated, 82–83
transport, 16
Protein anabolic agents
androgens and anabolic steroids as, 736
Protein binding
capacity-limited
in drug concentration measurements, 49
of drugs
during pregnancy, 1040
plasma
importance of, 49
Protein C, 604
Protein S, 604
Proton pump inhibitors
for acid-peptic diseases, 1085–1089, 
1086f, 1086t
ingredients in, 1118t
Protonix, 1111. See also Pantoprazole
Protopam, 127. See also Pralidoxime
Protozoal infections
drugs used for, 915–936. See also specific 
drugs and indications
Protriptyline, 527f, 539
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t
Proventil, 355. See also Albuterol
Provera, 740. See also Medroxyprogesterone 
acetate
Provigil, 148. See also Modafinil
Proximal tubule
in renal tubule transport, 251–253, 252f, 
252t, 253f
Proximal tubule diuretics
combination therapy, 265
Prozac, 539. See also Fluoxetine
Prucalopride
in constipation management, 1094
Pruritus
opioid analgesics and, 552
treatment of, 1076
Prussian blue, 1024
indications and toxicity of, 1024–1025
preparations available, 1025
Pseudoephedrine, 142, 148
ionization constants of, 11t
Pseudovitamin D deficiency rickets, 783–784
Psilocybin
abuse of, 569t, 573
Psoriasis
drugs used for, 1071–1072
Psychosis(es)
nature of, 502
Psychotic depression
antipsychotic drugs for, 509
Psyllium, 1093
preparations available, 1112
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
PTSD
antidepressants for, 533
Puberty
precocious
central
gonadotropins in, 670–671
Pulmicort, 355. See also Budesonide
Pulmonary edema
acute
diuretics for, 265–266
opioid analgesics for, 553
Pulmonary hypertension
eicosanoids and, 326
Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906, 
73, 74t
Purified nutritional supplements, 
1134–1136. See also 
Nutritional supplements, 
purified
Purine analogs
for inflammatory bowel disease, 
1103–1104
Purine antagonists
for cancer, 961–962
Pyramat
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Pyrantel pamoate, 945, 946
for helminthic infections, 
938t, 945
Pyrazinamide
for tuberculosis, 840t, 842–843
Pyrethrin I, 1009f
Pyrethrum, 1008
Pyridostigmine
durations of action of, 106t
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 40t
therapeutic uses for, 106t
Pyridoxine, 840f
Pyrimethamine, 833, 925–926
ionization constants of, 11t
mechanism of action of, 833
Pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine
clinical uses of, 917t
preparations available, 837, 925–926, 
935
Pyrimidines
pharmacokinetics of, 832t
Pyrithione zinc
in OTC products, 1120t
Pyrolan
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Pyrophosphate, 776f
Q
Qinghaosu, 919t, 920–921. See also 
Artemisinin(s)
Quantrel, 946. See also Oxantel pamoate
Quarzan, 127. See also Clidinium
Quaternary amines, 11
Quaternary ammonium compounds
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 893t, 
895–896
Quazepam, 387
Quelicin, 481. See also Succinylcholine
Questran, 633. See also Cholestyramine
Quetiapine, 504f, 519
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
dosage of, 510t
Quinagolide, 672
Quinapril, 190, 225
Quinestrol, 718f
dosage of, 719t
Quinethazone, 270
dosage of, 261t
Quinidine, 238, 921–922
for cardiac arrhythmias, 238
chemistry of, 918f, 921–922
drug interactions with, 1160t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
ionization constants of, 11t
for malaria, 921–922
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 239, 921–922
Quinine, 918f, 921–922, 935
for babesiosis, 922
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
for malaria, 921–922
Quinoline methanols, 918f
Quinolones
antibacterial activity of, 835
described, 834, 834f
drug interactions with, 1160t
Quinupristin-dalfopristin, 815–816, 819
QVAR, 355. See also Beclomethasone
R
Rabbit syndrome, 496
Rabeprazole, 1086f, 111
pharmacokinetics of, 1086t
Rabies vaccine, 1165t
passive immunization for, 1169t
Radical cure, malaria, 915
Radioactive iodine
antithyroid activity of, 689
for Graves’ disease, 692
Radiofrequency catheter ablation
for cardiac arrhythmias, 228
Radiogardase, 1025. See also Prussian blue
Raloxifene, 731, 740
for osteoporosis, 783
Raltegravir, 871t, 882, 889
Ramelteon, 283, 374, 376, 387
Index    1217
Ramipril, 190, 225
Ranexa, 209. See also Ranolazine
Ranibizumab, 994, 999
Ranitidine, 1083t, 1111
pharmacokinetics, 40t
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
RANK ligand (RANKL), 771
Ranolazine, 209
for angina pectoris, 205
Rapaflo, 167. See also Silodosin
Rapamune, 999. See also Sirolimus
Rare diseases
drugs for
development of, 77
Rasagiline, 499
for parkinsonism, 488f, 490
Rattlesnake envenomation, 1037
Razadyne, 112. See also Galantamine
Rebetron, 889. See also Interferon alfa-2b
Rebif, 999 
Reboxetine
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 143
Receptor(s). See also specific types
beneficial and toxic drug effects related 
to, 34
classes of
drug development and, 22f, 29–30
consequences of, 15
cytokine, 23, 24f
defined, 4, 15
EGF
mechanism of action of, 22, 23f
of G proteins, 25, 26t
inert binding sites vs., 8
intracellular
for lipid-soluble agents, 21–22, 21f
macromolecular nature of, 16
nomenclature of, 6
“orphan,” 16
pharmacodynamics and, 15–35
“spare,” 17–18, 17f
Receptor down-regulation, 23
Receptor-effector coupling
spare receptors and, 16–18, 17f
Receptor-effector mechanism
beneficial and toxic drug effects related 
to, 33–34
Receptor recycling, 549
Receptor regulation, 25, 133–134
Receptor selectivity, 133, 133t
stereo (chiral), 4–5
Receptor tyrosine kinase(s)
inhibitors of, 22–23, 23f
Receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathway, 
22–23, 23f
Receptor uncoupling, opioid, 549
Recombinant activated factor VII
for bleeding disorders, 616
Recombinant factor VIIA
for bleeding disorders, 603f, 616
Recombinate, 617. See also Antihemophilic 
factor
Rectal suppositories
opioid analgesic, 554
Recurrent endogenous depression
lithium for, 516
Red thrombi, 602
Reductions, metabolic, 57t
Reentry
defined, 234, 234f
Reflex(es). See specific types
Refludan, 617. See also Lepirudin
Refractory period, 231
Reglan, 1112. See also Metoclopramide
Regonol, 112. See also Pyridostigmine
Regulation of receptors
flexible, 29
Regulatory proteins, 16
Relaxin, 726
Relay neurons, 365, 365f
Relcovaptan, 303
Relenza, 889. See also Zanamivir
Relistor, 562, 1112. See also 
Methylnaltrexone
Relpax, 292. See also Eletriptan
Remeron, 539. See also Mirtazapine
Remicade, 656, 999, 1112. See also 
Infliximab
Remifentanil, 557, 562
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Reminyl, 112. See also Galantamine
Remodulin, 328. See also Treprostinil
Renagel, 786. See also Sevelamer carbonate
Renal autacoids
in renal tubule transport, 255–256
Renal baroreceptor
in renin release, 296, 297f
Renal failure
acute
loop diuretics for, 259
potassium-sparing drugs and, 263
ADH antagonists and, 265
diuretics for, 266–267
Renal function tests
in poisoning assessment, 1030
Renal impairment
antimicrobial drugs in patients with, 
908t, 909
Renal potassium wasting
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors and, 258
Renal stones. See Kidney stones
Renal system
eicosanoid effects on, 326
lipoxygenase effects on, 323
Renal tubule
transport mechanisms in, 251–256
adenosine, 256
collecting tubule system, 252t, 
254–255, 254f
distal convoluted tubule, 252t, 254, 254f
Renal tubule, transport mechanisms in (Cont.):
loop of Henle, 252t
peptides, 256
prostaglandins, 256
proximal tubule, 251–253, 252f, 252t, 
253f
renal autacoids, 255–256
Renese, 270. See also Polythiazide
Renin, 295–297, 296f, 297f
release of
control of, 296–297, 297f
drugs blocking, 299
pharmacologic alteration of, 297
Renin-angiotensin system
chemistry of, 296f
inhibition of, 299–300
Renin inhibitors, 190, 300
Renvela, 786. See also Sevelamer carbonate
ReoPro, 617, 999. See also Abciximab
Repaglinide
for diabetes mellitus, 756, 756t
Repaglinide plus metformin, 766
Repinotan, 282
Reproduction
inhaled anesthetics effects on, 437–438
Reproductive smooth muscle
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 320
Reproductive system
female
eicosanoid effects on, 324–326
hormones and, 715–734
melatonin effects on, 1136
lead poisoning effects on, 1015
male
eicosanoid effects on, 326
hormones and, 734–739
melatonin effects on, 1136
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 321
Repronex, 678. See also Menotropins
Requip, 499. See also Ropinirole
Rescriptor, 888. See also Delavirdine
Research
translational, 70
in drug development, 76
Reserpine
as antihypertensive drug, 178
for Huntington’s disease, 494
mechanism and sites of action of 83f, 178
Resin(s)
bile acid–binding. See Bile acid–binding 
resins
bile salt–binding
for diarrhea, 1095
podophyllum, 1075–1076
Respiration
sedative-hypnotic drugs effects on, 381
Respiratory depression
opioid analgesics in, 551
1218    Index
Respiratory disorders
antimuscarinic drugs for, 121
nitric oxide effects on, 336
Respiratory infections
proton pump inhibitors and, 1088–1089
Respiratory syncytial virus
passive immunization for, 1169t
Respiratory system
antimuscarinic drug effects on, 119–120
barbiturates effects on, 442
benzodiazepines effects on, 443
beta-receptor antagonists effects on, 158, 
160
cholinomimetic drug effects on
direct-acting, 102t, 103
indirect-acting, 107
dexmedetomidine effects on, 445
eicosanoid effects on, 327
etomidate effects on, 444
inhaled anesthetics effects on, 436
ketamine effects on, 445
propofol effects on, 440
serotonin effects on, 283
Response elements, 21
Rest tremor, 494
Resting potential
effect on action potentials, 231–233, 
232f, 233f, 233t
Restless legs syndrome, 496
Restoril, 387. See also Temazepam
Resuscitation
lipid
local anesthetics and, 459
Retapamulin
topical, 1063
Retavase, 617. See also Reteplase
Reteplase
pharmacology of, 612
preparations available, 617
Retigabine (ezogabine), 415
Retinoic acid, derivatives of,
for acne, 1069–1070
Retrograde signaling, 363
Retrovir, 889. See also Zidovudine
Revatio, 209. See also Sildenafil
Reverse potential, 230
Revex, 562. See also Nalmefene
ReVia, 400, 562. See also Naltrexone
Revlimid, 999. See also Lenalidomide
Revonto, 481. See also Dantrolene
Rexolate, 656. See also Sodium thiosalicylate
Reyataz, 888. See also Atazanavir
Rheumatoid arthritis
eicosanoids and, 328
Rheumatrex, 656. See also Methotrexate
Rhinoconjunctivitis
allergic, 349
RHo(D) immune globulin micro-dose, 
990–991
preparations available, 999
RhoGam, 999. See also RHo(D) immune 
globulin micro-dose
Ribavirin, 888
for HCV infection, 886
Rickets
pseudovitamin D deficiency, 783–784
vitamin D–dependent
types I and II, 783–784
vitamin D–resistant
hereditary, 783–784
Ridaura, 656. See also Auranofin
Rifabutin
dosage of, 840t
for tuberculosis, 840t, 845
Rifadin, 848. See also Rifampin
Rifampin, 840t, 841–842, 848
drug interactions with, 1160t
for leprosy, 846
Rifapentine, 848
dosage of, 840t
for tuberculosis, 840t, 845
Rifaximin, 845
Rigidity
truncal
opioid analgesics and, 551, 551t
Rilonacept, 996, 999
Rilutek, 481. See also Riluzole
Riluzole, 478, 481
Rimactane, 848. See also Rifampin
Rimantadine, 889
for influenza, 887
Rimonabant
in addiction management, 578
Risedronate
for osteoporosis, 775, 783
Risk
defined, 1002
Risperidone, 504f, 519
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
dosage of, 510t
Ritalin, 148. See also Methylphenidate
Ritanserin, 286–287
Ritodrine, 142f
in premature labor suppression, 145
Ritonavir, 871t, 880, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
Rituxan, 656, 999. See also Rituximab
Rituximab, 646, 656, 992, 999
Rivaroxaban, 607
Rivastigmine
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1055, 112
Rizatriptan, 292
pharmacokinetics of, 286t
Robaxin, 481. See also Methocarbamol
Robinul, 127, 1111. See also 
Glycopyrrolate
Rocephin, 807. See also Ceftriaxone
Rocuronium, 469f, 481
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
properties of, 470t
Rocuronium (Cont.):
tissue effects of, 474t
Roferon, 999. See also Interferon alfa-2a
Roferon-A, 889. See also Interferon alfa-2a
Romidepsin, 1077
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
Romiplostim
clinical uses of, 591t, 594–595
Ropinirole, 489f, 499
for parkinsonism, 487
for restless legs syndrome, 496
Ropivacaine, 451t, 461, 463
pharmacokinetic properties of, 452t
Rosiglitazone, 758t, 766
for diabetes mellitus, 758
Rosiglitazone mixtures, 766
Rosuvastatin, 633
Rotavirus vaccine, 1165t
Rotenone, 1009f
as pesticide, 1008
Rotigotine
for parkinsonism, 489
Roundworms
drugs used for, 938t
Routes of administration. See also specific types
alternative
first-pass effect and, 44
Rowasa, 1102, 1102f
Royal jelly
risks associated with, 1127t
Rozerem, 387. See also Ramelteon
RU-486. See Mifepristone (RU-486)
Rubella
passive immunization for, 1169t
Rufen, 655. See also Ibuprofen
Rufinamide, 415f, 427
clinical uses of, 415
mechanism of action of, 415
for seizures, 415
Ryanodine receptor (RyR) channel, 479
Rythmol, 249. See also Propafenone
S
Safety tests
in drug development, 71–72, 71t
Salicylate(s)
drug interactions with, 1160t
half-life of
in neonates and adults, 1045t
metabolism of, 638, 639f
nonacetylated, 640
in OTC products, 1123t
overdose of, 1034–1035
properties of, 638t
structure of, 639f
Salicylic acid, 1074–1075
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 40t
structure of, 1074f
Index    1219
Salicylsalicylic acid, 656
Saline diuresis
for hypercalcemia, 778
Salivary glands
sympathomimetic drug effects on, 139
Salmeterol, 343f, 355
for asthma, 344
Salmeterol/fluticasone, 355
Salsalate
preparations available, 656
Salt(s)
nonabsorbable
in constipation management, 1093
Saluron, 270. See also Hydroflumethiazide
Samsca, 270, 678. See also Tolvaptan
Sanctura, 127. See also Trospium
Sandimmune, 999. See also Cyclosporine
Sandostatin, 678. See also Octreotide acetate
SangCya, 999. See also Cyclosporine
Sanitization
defined, 894t
Saphris, 519. See also Asenapine
Saquinavir, 871t, 880, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
Saralasin, 299
Sarcomere(s)
cardiac muscle, 213f
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
calcium stored in and released from, 212
Sargramostim
preparations available, 598
Sassafras
risks associated with, 1127t
Savella, 539. See also Milnacipran
Saw palmetto, 1133–1134
Saxagliptin
for diabetes mellitus, 761
Saxagliptin plus metformin, 766
Scavenger receptors, 619
Schistosomiasis
praziquantel for, 944
Schizoaffective disorder
antipsychotic drugs for, 508
lithium for, 516
Schizonticides
blood, 915
tissue, 915
Schizophrenia
antipsychotic drugs for, 508
basic pharmacology of, 503–508, 509t, 
510t
clinical pharmacology of, 508–513
dopamine hypothesis of, 502
glutamate hypothesis of, 503
lithium for, 516
nature of, 502
serotonin hypothesis of, 502
Scopolamine, 116, 127, 1111
ionization constants of, 11t
organ system effects of, 116, 118
Screening
drug, 70–71
Secobarbital, 375f, 387
Seconal, 387. See also Secobarbital
Second messengers, 25–26, 25f, 26f, 26t
calcium, 28–29, 28f
cAMP, 26, 28, 28f
cGMP, 29
DAG, 28–29, 28f
described, 25
lithium effects on, 514–515, 515f, 514t
phosphoinositides, 28–29, 28f
well-established, 26, 28–29, 28f
Secondarily generalized seizure attack, 421
Secondary amine, 11
Secretory glands
direct-acting cholinomimetic drug effects 
on, 102t, 104
Secretory tissue
smooth muscle of, 276
Sectral, 167, 189, 249. See also Acebutolol
Sedation
conscious, 430
deep, 430
dexmedetomidine for, 146
H1-receptor antagonists for, 278, 279t
monitored anesthesia care and, 430
opioid analgesics in, 550–551
Sedative-hypnotic drugs, 373–388. See also 
specific drugs
in the elderly, 1053–1054
overdose of, 1037
Seizure(s)
absence, 421
antipsychotic drugs and, 511
atonic, 421
classification of, 404t, 420–421
complex partial, 421
described, 403
drugs used for, 403–427. See also 
Antiseizure drugs
generalized
clinical pharmacology of, 421
drugs used for, 417–418, 422–423
generalized tonic-clonic, 421
drugs used for, 407–417, 422
grand mal, 421
drugs used for, 407–417, 422
partial
clinical pharmacology of, 420–421
petit mal, 421
types of, 404t
Selective estrogen receptor modulators 
(SERMs), 731
in bone mineral homeostasis, 775
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs)
adverse effects of, 535
chemistry of, 525, 526f
dosage of, 535t
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(Cont.):
drug interactions with, 536, 537t, 1161t
fetal effects of, 1043t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t, 531
pharmacokinetics of, 528, 529t
Selegiline
dosage of, 535t
for parkinsonism, 488f, 490, 499
pharmacokinetics of, 529t, 530
Selenium sulfate
in OTC products, 1120t
Selzentry, 889. See also Maraviroc
Semustine, 954f
Senile cerebral insufficiency
ergot alkaloids for, 290
Senna
in constipation management, 1093, 
1112
Senokot, 1112. See also Senna
Sensipar, 786. See also Cinacalcet
Sensitivity
as pharmacodynamic variable, 48–49
Sensorcaine, 463. See also Bupivacaine
Septic shock
nitric oxide in, 335, 335t
Septocaine, 463. See also Articaine
Septra, 837. See also Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ)
Serevent, 355. See also Salmeterol
Serine protease inhibitors
for bleeding disorders, 617
Seromycin Pulvules, 808, 848. See also 
Cycloserine
Serophene, 740. See also Clomiphene
Seroquel, 519. See also Quetiapine
Serotonin, 281–287
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
basic pharmacology of, 281–284
chemistry of, 281, 281f
clinical pharmacology of, 284–286
as CNS neurotransmitter, 366t–377t, 
370
in coagulation, 601, 602f
inhibitory effects of, 92t
mechanisms of action of, 282, 282t
pharmacodynamics of, 282–284, 282t, 
284t
pharmacokinetics of, 281–282
tissue and organ system effects of, 
282–284, 284t
Serotonin agonists, 284–285
Serotonin antagonists, 286
Serotonin-blocking actions
of H1-receptor antagonists, 278–279
Serotonin hypothesis
of schizophrenia, 502
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs)
adverse effects of, 535
1220    Index
Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors (Cont.):
chemistry of, 525–526, 527f
dosage of, 535t
drug interactions with, 536–537
pharmacodynamics of, 530t, 531
pharmacokinetics of, 528–529, 529t
Serotonin receptor(s)
subtypes of, 282t
Serotonin syndrome, 284, 284t, 537, 
1034
Serotonin transporter, 577
Serotonin-receptor antagonists, 286–287
Sertoli cells, 734
Sertraline, 526f, 539
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t
pharmacokinetics of, 529t
Serum gastrin
increased
proton pump inhibitors and, 
1089
Serum osmolality
in poisoning assessment, 1030, 1031t
Serum sickness
immunologic reactions to drugs and, 
998
Serutan, 1112. See also Psyllium
Sevelamer, 780, 786
Seven-transmembrane (7-TM) receptors, 
25, 26f
Sevoflurane, 432f, 446
pharmacologic properties of, 433t
Shivering
reducing
opioid analgesics for, 553
Shock
anaphylactic
sympathomimetic drugs for, 145
cardiogenic
sympathomimetic drugs for, 144
septic
nitric oxide in, 335, 335t
sympathomimetic drugs for, 144
Short stature
growth hormone for children with, 
662–663, 663t
idiopathic
growth hormone for, 663, 
663t
SIADH secretion
ADH antagonists for, 264
Sibutramine
in obesity management, 664, 665t
sympathomimetic drug 
effects on, 143
Sickle cell disease, 582
Signal transducers and activators of 
transcription (STATs), 
23, 24f
Signaling mechanisms
cytokine receptors, 23, 24f
drug action and, 21–29, 21f–28f, 26t
G proteins, 25–26, 25f, 26f, 26t
interplay among, 29
intracellular receptors for lipid-soluble 
agents, 21–22, 21f
ligand-gated channels, 23–24, 24f
ligand-regulated transmembrane 
enzymes, 22–23, 23f
phosphorylation and, 29
receptor regulation, 25–26, 27f
second messengers, 25–26, 25f, 26f, 26t, 
28–29, 28f
transmembrane, 21, 21f
voltage-gated channels, 23–24, 24f
Sildenafil
for erectile dysfunction, 199
preparations available, 209
Silodosin, 155, 167
Silvadene, 837. See also Silver sulfadiazine
Silver nitrate, 897, 898
Silver sulfadiazine, 897, 837
Simcor, 633
Simponi, 656, 999. See also Golimumab
Simulect, 999. See also Basiliximab
Simvastatin, 633
Sinecatechins, 1076
Sinemet, 499. See also Carbidopa/levodopa
Sinequan, 539. See also Doxepin
Single-blind design, 72
Singulair, 328, 355. See also Montelukast
siRNAs, 2
Sirolimus
as immunosuppressive drug, 985t, 
986–987
Sisomicin, 825
Sitagliptin
for diabetes mellitus, 761
Sitagliptin plus metformin, 766
Skelaxin, 481. See also Metaxalone
Skeletal muscle
calcium channel blockers effects on, 204
dantrolene effects on, 479
methylxanthines effects on, 346
serotonin effects on, 284
Skeletal muscle paralysis, 472
Skeletal muscle relaxants, 465–482. See also 
Muscle relaxants
Skelid, 786. See also Tiludronate disodium
Skin
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 90t
decontamination of poisoned patient, 
1031–1032
isoniazid effects on, 841
oral contraceptives effects on, 728
poisoning effects on, 1029
Skin diseases
drugs used for, 1061–1079.See also 
Dermatologic drugs
Sleep
prostaglandins and, 321
sedative-hypnotics and, 382
Sleep aids
ingredients in, 1122t
Sleep disorders
sedative-hypnotic drugs for, 382–383
Slo-Phyllin, 355. See also Theophylline
Slow acetylator phenotype, 65
Slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis 
(SRS-A), 317
Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), 2
Smoking
cigarette
coronary disease related to, 619
fetal effects of, 1043t
Smoking cessation
aids for
ingredients in, 1122t
antidepressants in, 533
varenicline in, 110
Smooth muscle
alcohol effects on, 391
bronchiolar
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 
90t
histamine effects on, 276
calcium channel blockers effects on, 203
contraction of
calcium channel blockers in control 
of, 194, 195f
digitalis effects on, 217
drugs with important actions on, 
273–357
genitourinary
autonomic nerve activity effects on, 
90t
glucagon effects on, 763
lipoxygenase effects on, 323
methylxanthines effects on, 346
nitrates/nitrites in
mechanism of action of, 196f, 197
reproductive
prostaglandins and thromboxanes 
effects on, 320
uterine
ergot alkaloids effects on, 289
inhaled anesthetics effects on, 437
vascular
ergot alkaloids effects on, 288t, 
289, 289f
nitroglycerin effects on, 196f, 197
vascular
nitrates/nitrites effects on, 196f, 197
nitroglycerin effects on, 196f, 197
prostaglandins and thromboxanes 
effects on, 320
Snake bite
passive immunization for, 1169t
SNAPs, 82–83
Index    1221
SNRIs. See Serotonin-norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
Social anxiety disorder
antidepressants for, 532
Socioeconomic factors
in prescribing drugs, 1147
Sodium
intracellular
concentration of, 212
in OTC products, 1123t
Sodium balance
drugs altering, 172–174, 174f
Sodium bicarbonate
as antacid, 1083
Sodium-calcium exchanger
activity of, 212
Sodium channel blockers, 238–242. See 
also specific drugs
preparations available, 209, 249
Sodium ferric gluconate complex, 585–586
Sodium fluoride, 786
Sodium Iodide I 131, 695. See also 
Radioactive iodine sodium
Sodium nitroprusside, 182, 334. See also 
Nitroprusside
as antihypertensive drug, 182
pharmacokinetics/dosage of, 182
Sodium phosphate
in constipation management, 1093
Sodium removal
in chronic heart failure management, 
220
Sodium salicylate, 656
Sodium stibogluconate,929f,  933
Sodium sulfacetamide
for acne, 1064
Sodium thiosalicylate, 656
Sodium valproate
for seizures, 418
therapeutic levels/dosage of, 419
Solganal, 656. See also Aurothioglucose
Solid organ transplantation
immunosuppressive drugs in, 
994–995
Solifenacin
for urinary disorders, 122, 122t
Solu-Cortef, 712. See also Hydrocortisone 
sodium succinate
Solu-Medrol, 712. See also 
Methylprednisolone sodium 
succinate
Solvents
organic
fetal effects of, 1043t
TLVs of, 1005t
toxic exposure to, 1005–1006, 
1005t
Soma, 481. See also Carisoprodol
Soman, 106f
Somatomedin C, 662
Somatostatin, 661, 661f, 743
for diarrhea, 1095
for variceal hemorrhage, 1107–1108
Somatostatin analogs, 665–666, 665f
Somatotropin
structure of, 662
Somatropin, 678
Somatuline Depot, 678. See also Lanreotide 
acetate
Somavert, 678. See also Pegvisomant
Sonata, 387. See also Zaleplon
Sorafenib
for cancer, 968
clinical activity and toxicities of, 967t
Sorbitol
in constipation management, 1093
Sotalol
for cardiac arrhythmias, 244
cardiac effects of, 242
membrane actions of, 237t
pharmacologic properties of, 238t
properties of, 159t
Spare receptors, 17–18, 17f
receptor-effector coupling and, 
16–18, 17f
Spasm(s)
acute local
drugs for, 479
infantile, 421
drugs used for, 423
Spasmex, 127. See also Trospium
Spasmolytic drugs, 476–479, 481. See also 
specific drugs
Special carrier molecules, 9, 9f
Spectazole, 858. See also Econazole
Spectinomycin, 827
structure of, 827f
Spectracef, 807. See also Cefditoren
Spiriva, 127, 355. See also Tiotropium
Spironolactone, 261–263, 711, 739
during lactation, 1048t
Spontaneously resolving hyperthyroidism, 
692
Sporanox, 858. See also Itraconazole
SRS-A, 317
SRX251, 303
St. Anthony’s fire, 287
St. John’s wort, 1132–1133
Stadol, 562. See also Butorphanol
Stage fright
beta-receptor antagonists for, 164
Stalevo, 499. See also Carbidopa/levodopa/
entacapone
for parkinsonism, 491
Staphylococcus(i)
methicillin-resistant
cephalosporins active against, 800
Starlix, 766. See also Nateglinide
State-dependent drug action, 
235, 236f
Statin-induced myopathy
prevention of
coenzyme Q10 in, 1134
STATs (signal transducers and activators of 
transcription), 23, 24f
Status epilepticus
drugs used for, 423
Stavudine, 863f, 871t, 874–875, 889
Stedesa, 427. See also Eslicarbazepine
Stelara, 999. See also Ustekinumab
Sterilants
as antiseptics/disinfectants, 897
preparations available, 898
Sterilization, 894t
Stereoisomerism, 4–5
Steroid(s)
anabolic, 734–737. See also Anabolic 
steroids
Steroid synthesis inhibitors, 709–711, 737
Sterol(s)
intestinal absorption of
inhibitors of
for hyperlipidemias, 630–631
Stilphostrol, 740. See also Diethylstilbestrol
Stimate, 678. See also Desmopressin acetate
Stimulant(s)
overdose of, 1032–1034
Stimulant laxatives, 1093
Stiripentol, 427
for seizures, 415
Stool softeners, 1093
STOP-NIDDM trial, 752, 759
Streptase, 617. See also Streptokinase
Streptogramins, 815–816
Streptokinase, 604, 604f, 617
pharmacology of, 611
Streptomycin, 822f, 824–825, 828, 848
for tuberculosis, 840t, 843
Stress
bleeding due to
proton pump inhibitors in prevention 
of, 1088
gastritis due to
prevention of bleeding from
H2-receptor antagonists in, 1085
Stress test
cardiac
dobutamine in, 144
Stretch reflex arc
structures involved in, 476, 477f
Stromectol, 946. See also Ivermectin
Strongyloidiasis
ivermectin for, 941
Strontium ranelate
in bone mineral homeostasis, 
777–778
for osteoporosis, 783
Structural proteins, 16
Structure-activity relationship
of drug congeners, 22f, 29–30
1222    Index
Strychnine, 366t
ionization constants of, 11t
Subacute thyroiditis, 692
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
cerebral vasospasm and infarct following
calcium channel blockers effects on, 
204
Submucous plexus, 81f, 82
Substance P, 307
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
Substituted benzamides
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Succimer, 1022–1023, 1025
indications and toxicity of, 1022–1023
Succinylcholine, 466, 467f, 481
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
properties of, 470t
tissue effects of, 474t
Sucralfate
for acid-peptic diseases, 1089–1090
Sudafed, 148. See also Pseudoephedrine
Sufenta, 562. See also Sufentanil
Sufentanil, 557, 562
pharmacokinetics of, 545t
Sugar(s)
nonabsorbable
in constipation management, 1093
Suicidality, 536
antiseizure drugs and, 424
Suicide inhibitors, of enzymes, 59
Sular, 190, 209. See also Nisoldipine
Sulbactam, 801f
Sulconazole, 858
Sulfacetamide sodium, 837
Sulfacytine
pharmacokinetics of, 832t
Sulfadiazine
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 832t
Sulfadoxine, 918f, 925
pharmacokinetics of, 832t
Sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine. See 
Pyrimethamine/sulfadoxine
Sulfamethizole, 832t
Sulfamethoxazole
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 832t
Sulfamylon, 837. See also Mafenide
Sulfanilamide, 832f
Sulfapyridine, 1101f
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetics of, 832t
Sulfasalazine, 646, 1101
Sulfathalidine, 832f
Sulfation, 60t
Sulfinpyrazone, 656
drug interactions with, 610t
Sulfisoxazole, 832f, 837
pharmacokinetics of, 832t
Sulfonamides, 831–833, 837
antimicrobial activity of, 831, 832f
Sulfonamides (Cont.):
oral absorption of
in neonates vs. older children and 
adults, 1044t
Sulfonylureas, 754–756, 755t, 766
Sulfur, for scabies, 1068
Sulfur dioxide
TLVs of, 1005t
Sulfur dioxide poisoning, 1004
Sulindac, 642, 656
properties of, 638t
Sulthiame, 420
Sumatriptan, 285f, 292
for migraine, 285
pharmacokinetics of, 286t
Sunitinib
for cancer, 967t, 968
Sunscreens, 1069
Superoxidized water
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 896
Supersensitivity
denervation, 92
Supprelin LA, 678. See also Histrelin 
acetate
Suprane, 446. See also Desflurane
Suprax, 807. See also Cefixime
Suprofen, 656
Suramin
clinical uses of, 933
Surface area
as factor in drug dosage in 
infants and children, 1047, 
1049, 1049t
Surgical relaxation
neuromuscular blocking drugs for, 476
Surmontil, 539. See also Trimipramine
Susceptibility testing
of pathogens to antimicrobial drugs, 903
Suspensions
in pediatric patients, 1046
Sustiva, 888. See also Efavirenz
Sweat glands
antimuscarinic drug effects on, 120
Symlin, 766. See also Pramlintide
Symmetrel, 499, 888. See also Amantadine
Sympathetic nervous system
function of
drugs altering, 174–175
in renin release, 296, 297f
Sympathomimetic drugs, 129–149, 355
actions of
molecular pharmacology underlying, 
130–134
alpha receptors, 131, 131t, 132f, 137t
amphetamine-like, 136f, 142–143, 143t
for anaphylaxis, 145
for asthma, 341–344, 343f
beta receptors, 131–132, 
beta2-selective drugs, 343–344, 343f
cardiovascular applications of, 144–145
Sympathomimetic drugs (Cont.):
cardiovascular system effects of, 136–138, 
137t, 138t, 139f, 140f
catecholamine reuptake inhibitors, 
143
CNS applications of, 146
in congestive heart failure, 225
described, 129–130
desensitization of, 133
direct-acting, 133t, 136f, 141
dopamine agonists, 143–144
dopamine receptors, 131, 132, 137t
genitourinary applications of, 145–146
indirect-acting, 136f, 142–143, 143t
mixed-acting, 136f, 141–142
noncardiac effects of, 138–140
norepinephrine transporter of, 134
ophthalmic applications of, 145
organ system effects of, 136–140
in OTC products, 1123t
pulmonary applications of, 145
receptors
regulation of, 133–134
selectivity of, 133, 133t
subtypes of, 131
distribution of, 136, 137t
physiologic functions of, 133
polymorphisms of, 134
therapeutic uses for, 144–146
toxicities of, 344
types of, 131
Sympathoplegic drugs, 172, 189
as antihypertensive drugs, 174–175
centrally acting, 175–177
mechanisms and sites of action of, 
175–176
Synagis, 889. See also Palivizumab
Synapse(s)
CNS drugs and, 361–363, 362f, 363f
Synaptic plasticity
addiction and, 571
Synaptic potentials
CNS drugs and, 361–363, 362f, 363f
Synaptobrevin, 83
Synaptosomal nerve–associated proteins 
(SNAPs), 82–83
Synaptotagmin, 84
Synarel, 678. See also Nafarelin acetate
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH (SIADH) 
secretion
ADH antagonists for, 264
Synercid, 819. See also 
Quinupristin-dalfopristin
Synergism
among antimicrobial drugs, 909–910
Synergistic killing, 823
Synergy studies
for infections with known etiology, 903
Syntaxin, 83
Synthetic estrogens, 718, 718f
Index    1223
Synthetic progestins, 723
physiologic effects of, 724, 725t
Synthetic steroids
with androgenic and anabolic action, 
735, 735t
Synthroid, 695. See also Levothyroxine
Syprine, 499. See also Trientine
Systemic infections
antifungal drugs for, 849–855
Systolic failure, 211
T
T lymphocytes, 978–981, 979f, 980f
t-PA. See Tissue plasminogen activator 
(t-PA)
Tachykinins
as CNS neurotransmitters, 367t
Tachyphylaxis, 32
Tacrine
for Alzheimer’s disease, 1054–1055, 112
Tacrolimus, 999, 1067
as immunosuppressive drug, 985t, 986
Tadalafil
for erectile dysfunction, 199
Taenia spp.
niclosamide for, 942
Taeniasis
praziquantel for, 944
Tagamet, 1111. See also Cimetidine
Talwin, 562. See also Pentazocine
Tambocor, 249. See also Flecainide
Tamiflu, 889. See also Oseltamivir
Tamoxifen, 731, 740
fetal effects of, 1043t
Tamsulosin, 152f, 154–155, 167
Tapazole, 695. See also Methimazole
Tapentadol, 559, 562
Tapeworms
drugs used for, 938t
Tar compounds, 1074
Tardive akathisia, 496
Tardive dyskinesia, 496
antipsychotic drugs and, 511
Tardive dystonia, 496
Target concentration, 45
Target concentration intervention, 47–49
in designing rational dosage regimen, 
45–47, 47f
loading dose, 46–47, 47f
maintenance dose, 46
Target concentration strategy, 48
Tasmar, 499. See also Tolcapone
Tavist, 292. See also Clemastine
Taxanes
for cancer, 963t, 964
Tazarotene
for acne, 1070
for psoriasis, 1071
Tazidime, 807. See also Ceftazidime
Tazobactam, 801f
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
Teeth
fluoride effects on, 777
tetracyclines effects on, 812
Teflaro, 807. See also Ceftaroline fosamil
Tegaserod, 286
in constipation management, 1094, 
1097f, 1112
Tegretol, 427, 519. See also Carbamazepine
Teicoplanin, 803
Tekturna, 190. See also Aliskiren
Telaprevir
for HCV infection, 886
Telavancin, 798t, 803, 808
pharmacokinetics and dosage of, 798t, 803
Telbivudine
for HBV infection, 883t, 885
Telithromycin, 814–815, 819
Telmisartan, 190, 225
Temazepam
pharmacokinetic properties of, 377t
Temozolomide
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
Temperature
hyperthermia, 284t
opioid analgesics effects on, 551, 551t
Tempra, 656. See also Acetaminophen
Tenecteplase
pharmacology of, 612
Tenex, 189. See also Guanfacine
Tenofovir, 863f, 871t, 875, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
for HBV infection, 883t, 885
Tenormin, 167, 189. See also Atenolol
Tensilon, 112. See also Edrophonium
Teratogen(s)
defined, 1042
FDA risk categories for, 1042, 1043t
risks associated with
counseling women about, 1042–1043
Teratogenic drug actions
during pregnancy, 1041–1043, 1041f, 
1042t–1043t
Terazol 3, 858. See also Terconazole
Terazol 7, 858. See also Terconazole
Terazosin, 154, 189
Terbinafine
for mucocutaneous infections, 856
oral, 1067
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
topical, 1065
Terbutaline
for asthma, 344
ionization constants of, 11t
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 40t
in premature labor suppression, 145
structure of, 142f, 343f
Terconazole, 858
Teriparatide, 771
for osteoporosis, 775, 783
Terlipressin, 303
for variceal hemorrhage, 1108
Tertiary amine, 11
p-Tertiary amylphenol, 895
Testicular cancer
chemotherapeutic drugs for, 973–974
Testis(es), 734–739
Testopel, 740. See also Testosterone pellets
Testosterone, 734–737. See also 
Androgen(s)
preparations available, 735t, 740
Tetanus
passive immunization for, 1169t
Tetanus-diphtheria-pertussis vaccine, 1166t
Tetanus-diphtheria vaccine, 1165t
Tetrabenazine
for Huntington’s disease, 494–495
preparations available, 499
Tetracaine, 463, 451t
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin 
(TCDD), 1010, 1009f
Tetrachlorodiphenylethane (TDE)
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Tetrachloroethylene
TLVs of, 1005t
Tetracyclic antidepressants
dosage of, 535t
drug interactions with, 537
pharmacodynamics of, 530t, 531
pharmacokinetics of, 529–530, 529t
Tetracycline(s), 810–813
fetal effects of, 1043t
during lactation, 1048t
Tetraethylammonium, 124
Tetrahydrocannabinol
abuse of, 572
for chronic pain, 550
Tetrahydrozoline
preparations available, 148
Tetraiodothyronine (T4), 681
Tetrathiomolybdate
for Wilson’s disease, 497
Teveten, 190, 225. See also Eprosartan
Tezosentan
in heart failure management, 219
Thalamus
circuitry of, 483, 484f
Thalidomide
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
fetal effects of, 1043t
immunomodulatory derivatives of, 
987–988
as immunosuppressive drug, 987–988
Thalitone, 270. See also Chlorthalidone
Thalomid, 999. See also Thalidomide
Theo-24, 355. See also Theophylline
Theo-Dur, 355. See also Theophylline
Theobromine, 345f
Theophylline, 344–346, 355
drug interactions with, 1161t
1224    Index
Theophylline (Cont.):
half-life of
in neonates and adults, 1045t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
overdose of, 1037–1038
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 40t
Therapeutic index, 32
Thiabendazole, 945
for helminthic infections, 938t, 945
Thiamine
in acute alcohol intoxication 
management, 395
Thiazide diuretics, 260–261
in bone mineral homeostasis, 777
Thiazolidinedione(s)
combination therapy with
preparations available, 766
for diabetes mellitus, 757–759
Thiazolidinedione derivatives, 766
Thienobenzodiazepine antipsychotics
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
chemical structure effects on potency 
and toxicity of, 505t
Thimerosal, 897, 898
Thioamides
antithyroid activity of, 688–689
6-Thioguanine
clinical activity and toxicities of, 959t
mechanism of action of, 961, 961f
Thiol(s)
nitric oxide interactions with, 332–333
Thiopental
pharmacologic properties of, 439t
6-Thiopurines
for cancer, 961–962, 961f
Thioridazine
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
dosage of, 510t
ionization constants of, 11t
Thiotepa
clinical activity and toxicities of, 956t
structure of, 954f
Thiothixene
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
dosage of, 510t
Thioxanthene antipsychotics, 503f, 504
advantages and disadvantages of, 509t
chemical structure effects on potency 
and toxicity of, 505t
Thorazine, 519. See also Chlorpromazine
Threshold limit values (TLVs), 1001
of air pollutants and solvents, 1005t
Thrombate III, 617. See also Antithrombin 
III
Thrombin inhibitors
direct, 607–608. See also specific drugs
Thrombocytopenia, 582
heparin-induced, 606
Thrombolytic drugs
for acute myocardial infarction, 611, 612
Thrombopoietin
properties of, 996t
Thrombosis, treatment of
arterial, 614
venous, 614
Thromboxane(s), 315. See also 
Eicosanoid(s)
organ system effects of, 320–322
Thromboxane A2, 315, 320, 601, 612
Thrombus(i)
platelet-rich, 601–602
red, 602
white, 601–602
Thymoglobulin, 999. See also 
Antithymocyte globulin
Thyrogen, 678, 695. See also Thyrotropin
Thyroid. See also Antithyroid drugs
autoregulation of, 684
drug effects on, 684, 685t
function of
lithium effects on, 516
physiology of, 681–684
Thyroid desiccated, 695
Thyroid disease, 695
Thyroid drugs, 681–696. See also specific 
drugs and Antithyroid drugs
Thyroid function tests
values for, 683–684, 683t
Thyroid hormones, 684–688
Thyroid neoplasms, 694
Thyroid-pituitary relationships, 683–684, 
684f
Thyroid stimulators
abnormal, 684
Thyroid storm, 692–693
Thyroidectomy
for Graves’ disease, 692
Thyroiditis
subacute, 692
Thyrolar, 695. See also Liotrix
Thyrotoxicosis
amiodarone-induced, 693–694
manifestations of, 687t
during pregnancy, 693
treatment of, 691–694
Thyrotropin, 695
Thyrotropin alfa, 678
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 
661, 661t
clinical uses of, 661t
diagnostic uses of, 662t
Thyroxine, 681
during lactation, 1048t
peripheral metabolism of, 682, 682f
Tiagabine, 415f, 416
for seizures, 415–416
Ticar, 807. See also Ticarcillin
Ticarcillin
dosage of, 795t, 807
Ticarcillin/clavulanate potassium, 807
Ticlid, 617. See also Ticlopidine
Ticlopidine
as antiplatelet agent, 612–613, 617
Tics, 495
described, 483
treatment of, 495
Tigan, 1112. See also Trimethobenzamide
Tigecycline, 810f , 812
Tikosyn, 249. See also Dofetilide
Tiludronate disodium, 786
Time-dependent killing, 907
Timentin, 807. See also Ticarcillin/
clavulanate potassium
Timolol, 159t, 161, 167, 189
Tinactin, 858. See also Tolnaftate
Tindamax, 935. See also Tinidazole
Tinidazole, 892
adverse effects of, 929
for amebiasis, 927–929, 928t
Tinzaparin, 617
Tioconazole, 858
from prescription to OTC status, 1116t
Tiotropium, 117f ,127, 347,355
for COPD, 121
Tipranavir, 871t, 880–881, 889
drug interactions with, 874t
Tirofiban, 613, 617
Tirosint, 695. See also Levothyroxine
Tissue factor-VIIa complex, 602–604, 603f
Tissue plasminogen activators (t-PAs), 604, 
604f
pharmacology of, 612
Tissue schizonticides, 915
Tizanidine, 141, 148, 477–478, 481
as muscle relaxant, 146
TLVs. See Threshold limit values (TLVs)
TMP-SMZ. See also Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ)
TNKase, 617. See also Tenecteplase
Tobramycin, 822f, 826, 828
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 40t
Tocainide
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 40t
Tocilizumab, 646–647, 993
Tofranil, 539. See also Imipramine
Tolazamide
for diabetes mellitus, 754, 755t
Tolazoline
cardiovascular effects of, 153f
Tolbutamide
for diabetes mellitus, 754, 755t
hepatic clearance of
aging effects on, 1052t
ionization constants of, 11t
Index    1225
Tolbutamide (Cont.):
during lactation, 1048t
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
parameters for, 40t
Tolcapone
for parkinsonism, 488f, 490, 499
Tolectin, 656. See also Tolmetin
Tolerance, 66
Tolinase, 766. See also Tolazamide
Tolmetin, 642
Tolnaftate, 858
topical, 1066
Tolterodine
for urinary disorders, 122, 122t
Toluene, 1006
TLVs of, 1005t
Tolvaptan, 264, 675
in heart failure, 222
preparations available, 270, 678
Tonic-clonic seizures
generalized, 421
drugs used for, 407–417, 422
Topamax, 427, 519. See also Topiramate
Topiramate, 416f, 427, 519
for seizures, 416
for tremors, 494
Topotecan
clinical activity and toxicities of, 963t
Toprol, 167. See also Metoprolol
Toprol XL, 225. See also Metoprolol
Toradol, 655. See also Ketorolac
Torcetrapib, 631
Toremifene, 731, 740
Tornalate, 355. See also Bitolterol
Torsemide
dosage of, 259t, 270
Tositumomab, 992
Tourette’s syndrome, 495
antipsychotic drugs for, 509
Toviaz, 127. See also Fesoterodine
Toxaphenes
toxicity rating for, 1006t
Toxic dose
median (TD50), 31–32
Toxic multinodular goiter, 692
Toxic products
metabolism of drugs to, 
60–61, 61f
Toxic syndromes, 1032–1038
Toxic uninodular goiter, 692
Toxicodynamics, 1027–1028
Toxicokinetics, 1027–1028
Toxicology, 1001–1038
chemicals, 1003–1005, 1005t
defined, 1, 2f
environmental, 1001–1003
herbicides, 1008–1010
occupational, 1001
pesticides, 1006–1008, 1006t–1008t
screening tests, 1031, 1031t
Toxicology (Cont.):
solvents, 1005–1006, 1005t
terminology related to, 1002
Toxin(s)
defined, 4
exposure to
duration of, 1002
routes of, 1002
ion channel effects, 360, 360t
Toxoplasma gondii
drugs used for, 932t
Toxoplasmosis
drugs used for, 926
Tracheal intubation
neuromuscular blocking drugs for, 476
Tracleer, 225. See also Bosentan
Trademark, 76
Tradjenta, 766. See also Linagliptin
Tramadol, 559, 562
Trandate, 167, 189. See also Labetalol
Trandolapril, 190, 225
Tranexamic acid
for bleeding disorders, 616
Transderm Scop, 127, 1111, 1112. See also 
Scopolamine
Transdermal patch
opioid analgesic, 554
Transferrin, 583f, 584
Transient neurologic symptoms
of local anesthetics, 459
Translational research, 70
in drug development, 76
Transmembrane enzymes
ligand-regulated, 22–23, 23f
Transmembrane signaling mechanisms, 
21, 21f
Transplantation
autologous stem cell
myeloid growth factors in, 
593, 593f
bone marrow
immunosuppressive drugs in, 
994–995
organ
immunosuppressive drugs in, 985t
solid organ
immunosuppressive drugs in, 
994–995
Transport molecules, 9, 10t
Transport proteins, 16
Transporter(s)
drug, 9, 10t
Tranxene, 387, 427. See also Clorazepate
Tranylcypromine, 528f, 539
chemistry of, 527–528
dosage of, 535t
pharmacokinetics of, 530
Trastuzumab, 992
preparations available, 999
Travatan, 328. See also Travoprost
Travelers
immunizations recommended for, 1170
malaria prevention in
drugs used for, 919t
Travoprost, 328
Trazodone, 155, 529
chemistry of, 526, 527f
dosage of, 535t
Trecator-SC, 848. See also Ethionamide
Trelstar, 678. See also Triptorelin pamoate
Trematodes
drugs used for, 938t
Tremor(s), 493–494
beta-receptor antagonists for, 164
described, 483, 493
essential, 493–494
intention, 494
lithium and, 516
rest, 494
Trental, 209, 355. See also Pentoxifylline
Treprostinil, 326, 328
Treprostinil sodium, 325f
TRH. See Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
(TRH)
Triamcinolone, 700f, 712
clinical uses and dosage of, 703t
Triamterene, 270
Triazolam, 374f
pharmacokinetic properties of, 377t
Tricalcium phosphate
preparations available, 786
Trichlorfon, 942
for helminthic infections, 938t, 942
toxicity rating for, 1007t
Trichlormethiazide
dosage of, 261t
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
TLVs of, 1005t
Trichloroethylene
TLVs of, 1005t
2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid, 
1008–1009
structure of, 1009f
Trichogenic agents, 1077
Trichomonas vaginalis
drugs used for, 932t
Trichomoniasis
drugs used for, 928
Trichuriasis
albendazole for, 938–939
Trichlormethiazide, 270
Tricor, 633. See also Fenofibrate
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) 526, 
527f, 539
adverse effects of, 535
dosage of, 535t
drug interactions with, 536–537, 1152t
fetal effects of, 1042t
overdose of, 1034
pharmacodynamics of, 530t, 531
1226    Index
Tridihexethyl, 127
Tridione, 427. See also Trimethadione
Trientine
for Wilson’s disease, 497, 499
Triethylenemelamine, 954f
Trifluoperazine, 503f
dosage of, 510t
Trifluridine
dosage of, 865t, 889
for HSV and VZV infections, 866
Trihexyphenidyl
for parkinsonism, 492t, 499
Triiodothyronine (T3), 681
Trileptal, 427. See also Oxcarbazepine
Trilostane, 710
Trimethadione
fetal effects of, 1043t
for seizures, 419
Trimethaphan, 127
Trimethobenzamide
for nausea and vomiting, 1100
Trimethoprim, 833–834, 837
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 832t, 834
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
(TMP-SMZ), 833–834
drug interactions with, 610t
Trimipramine
pharmacodynamics of, 530t
Trimipramine maleate
dosage of, 535t
Trimpex, 837. See also Trimethoprim
Triorthocresyl phosphate (TOCP), 110, 
1007–1008
Trioxsalen, 1069
“Triple response”
of histamine, 276
Triprolidine, 292
Triptan(s), 285–286
Triptorelin pamoate, 678
Tronothane, 463. See also Pramoxine
Tropicamide, 117f, 127
Trospium, 127
for urinary disorders, 122, 122t
TRPV1, 550
Truncal rigidity
opioid analgesics and, 551, 551t
Trusopt, 270. See also Dorzolamide
Trypanosoma cruzi
drugs used for, 932t
Trypanosomiasis
African
drugs used for, 930–934, 930f, 932t
L-Tryptophan
structure of, 281f
Tuberculin hypersensitivity, 983
Tuberculosis
drugs used for, 839–845.See also specific 
drugs
adverse reactions to, 843
amikacin, 840t, 844
Tuberculosis, drugs used for (Cont.):
aminosalicylic acid, 840t, 844
capreomycin, 840t, 844
cycloserine, 840t, 844
dosages of, 840t
duration of therapy, 840t
ethambutol, 840t, 842
ethionamide, 840t, 843–844
fluoroquinolones, 840t, 844–845
isoniazid, 840–841, 840t
kanamycin, 840t, 844
linezolid, 840t, 845
preparations available, 848
pyrazinamide, 840t, 842–843
rifabutin, 840t, 845
rifampin, 840t, 841–842
rifapentine, 840t, 845
second-line drugs, 840t, 843–845
streptomycin, 840t, 843
Tuberoinfundibular system, 506
Tubocurarine, 466–470, 468f, 481
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 470t
tissue effects of, 474t
Tumor(s)
neuroendocrine
diarrhea due to
octreotide for, 1095
Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)
properties of, 996t
Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) 
antagonists, 647–649, 647f. 
See also specific drugs
for psoriasis, 1071–1072
Tumor suppressor genes
cancer related to, 950
Tums, 786, 1111. See also Calcium 
carbonate
Turner syndrome
growth hormone for, 663, 663t
Tygacil, 819. See also Tetracycline
Tylenol, 656. See also Acetaminophen
Tylenol with Codeine, 562. (Oxycodone/
acetaminophen)
Tylox, 562. (Oxycodone/acetaminophen)
Typhoid vaccine, 1166t
Tyramine, 143, 143t
Tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitors, 167
Tyrosine nitration
nitric oxide interactions with, 
333, 333t
Tysabri, 999. See also Natalizumab
Tyzeka, 889. See also Telbivudine
U
Ularitide, 256
in heart failure management, 219
Ulcer(s)
H. pylori
proton pump inhibitors for, 
1087–1088
Ulcer(s) (Cont.):
NSAID–associated
proton pump inhibitors for, 1088
peptic. See Peptic ulcer(s)
Uloric, 656. See also Febuxostat
Ultane, 446. See also Sevoflurane
Ultiva, 562. See also Remifentanil
Ultram, 562. See also Tramadol
Ultrarapid metabolism, 63–64
Unasyn, 807. (Ampicillin/sulbactam)
Unicyclic antidepressants
effects of, 531, 536
chemistry of, 527, 528f
dosage of, 535t
Uniphyl, 355. See also Theophylline
Unipolar depression
lithium for, 516
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes 
Study (UKPDS), 752
United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization and the World 
Health Organization (FAO/
WHO) Joint Expert 
Commission on Food 
Additives, 1002
Unithiol, 1023–1024
Unithroid, 695. See also Levothyroxine
Univasc, 190, 225. See also Moexipril
Unstable angina, 193
clinical pharmacology of, 207
nitrate effects in, 200
Uracil, 960f
Urantide, 309
Urapidil, 155
Urea as drug, 1075
Urecholine, 112. See also Bethanechol
Uricosuric drugs
for gout, 651f, 652–653
Uridine 5′-diphosphate 
(UDP)-glucuronosyl 
transferases (UGTs), 
59–60, 60f
Urinary alkalinization
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for, 257, 
257t
Urinary antiseptics, 892–893
Urinary disorders
antimuscarinic drugs for, 122, 
122t
Urinary obstruction
alpha-receptor antagonists for, 156
Urinary pH manipulation
in decontamination of poisoned patient, 
1032
Urinary tract
disorders of
cholinomimetic drugs for, 108
indirect-acting cholinomimetic drug 
effects on, 107
sulfonamides effects on, 833
Index    1227
Urine volume
increase in
osmotic diuretics for, 263–264
Urispas, 127. See also Flavoxate
Urofollitropin, 666–667, 678
Urokinase, 604, 604f
pharmacology of, 611
Urotensin, 309
Ursodiol
for gallstones, 1107
Uroxatral, 167. See also Alfuzosin
Urticaria
contact
immunologic
topical dermatologic medications 
and, 1063t
non-immunologic
topical dermatologic medications 
and, 1063t
Use-dependent drug action, 235, 236f
Ustekinumab, 993–994, 999
for psoriasis, 1072
Uterine bleeding
estrogen and, 722
Uterine fibroids
gonadotropins in, 670
Uterine leiomyomata
gonadotropins in, 670
Uterus
ergot alkaloids effects on, 289
inhaled anesthetics effects on, 437
opioid analgesics effects on, 552
oral contraceptives effects on, 727
V
V-Cillin, 807. See also Penicillin V
Vaccine(s), 1163–1170. See also specific 
types and Immunization(s)
Vaccinia
passive immunization for, 1169t
Vagistat-1, 858. See also Tioconazole
Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS)
for seizures, 404
Valacyclovir, 863f, 889
dosage of, 865t
for HSV and VZV infections, 864
topical, 1067
Valcyte, 889. See also Valganciclovir
Valganciclovir, 863f, 889
for CMV infections, 867–868
Valium, 387, 400, 427. See also Diazepam
Valproic acid/valproate, 418, 
427, 519
for bipolar disorder, 517
fetal effects of, 1043t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 418–419
for seizures, 418
Valsartan
preparations available, 190, 225
Valtrex, 889. See also Valacyclovir
VAMPs, 82
Vancocin, 808. See also Vancomycin
Vancoled, 808. See also Vancomycin
Vancomycin, 802–803, 808
dosage of, 798t, 802
mechanisms of action of, 802
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 798t, 802
Vantas, 678. See also Histrelin acetate
Vantin, 807. See also Cefotaxime
Vaprisol, 270, 678. See also Conivaptan
Vardenafil
for erectile dysfunction, 199
Varenicline
in nicotine addiction, 574–575
in smoking cessation, 110, 112
Variant angina, 193
diagnosis of
ergot alkaloids in, 290
nitrate effects in, 200
Variceal hemorrhage
drugs used for, 1107–1108
Varicella vaccine, 1166t
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection
drugs used for, 862–866
passive immunization for, 1169t
Vascular disorders
oral contraceptives and, 729
peripheral
alpha-receptor antagonists for, 156
Vascular smooth muscle
ergot alkaloids effects on, 288t, 289, 289f
nitrates/nitrites effects on, 196f, 197
nitroglycerin effects on, 196f, 197
peptides and, 295–312
prostaglandins and thromboxanes effects 
on, 320
Vascular tone
determinants of, 194–195, 194t
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), 
306–307
in ANS, ENS, and NANC neurons, 84t
Vasoactive peptides, 295–312. See also 
specific drugs
adrenomedullin, 308
angiotensin, 295–300
CGRP, 308
endothelins, 304–306
kinins, 300–303
natriuretic peptides, 303–304
neuropeptide Y, 308–309
neurotensin, 307–308
substance P, 307
urotensin, 309
vasopeptidase inhibitors, 304
vasopressin, 303
VIP, 306–307
Vasoconstriction
induction of
sympathomimetic drugs for, 
144–145
Vasodilator(s). See also specific drugs
for angina pectoris, 193–210
as antihypertensive drugs, 180–183
calcium channel blockers, 183
diazoxide, 182–183
direct
described, 172
fenoldopam, 183
in heart failure management, 219, 220
hydralazine, 181
mechanism and sites of action of, 174f, 
180, 181t
minoxidil, 181
sodium nitroprusside, 182
Vasopeptidase inhibitors, 304
Vasopressin, 303, 674–675
clinical pharmacology of, 674–675
contraindications to, 675
for variceal hemorrhage, 1108
Vasopressin agonists, 678
Vasopressin antagonists, 303, 675, 678
Vasopressin receptors, 303
Vasospasm(s)
cerebral
following subarachnoid hemorrhage
calcium channel blockers effects on, 
204
Vasospastic angina, 193
clinical pharmacology of, 207
Vasotec, 190, 225. See also Enalapril
Vectibix, 999. See also Panitumumab
Vecuronium
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
properties of, 469f, 470t, 474t
Venlafaxine, 526f, 539
dosage of, 535t
pharmacodynamics of, 530t, 531
pharmacokinetics of, 528, 529t
Venous thromboembolic disease
oral contraceptives and, 729
Venous thrombosis, 614
Ventavis, 328. See also Iloprost
Ventilation
alveolar
of inhaled anesthetics, 430–432, 432f
control of
neuromuscular blocking drugs for, 
476
Ventolin, 355. See also Albuterol
Ventral tegmental area (VTA), 565
Verapamil
for angina, 201–205
for cardiac arrhythmias, 245
clinical pharmacology of, 202t
dosage of, 175t, 245
for hypertension, 183
membrane actions of, 237t
for migraine, 285
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 175t, 245
pharmacologic properties of, 238t
1228    Index
Verapamil (Cont.):
therapeutic use of, 245
toxicity of, 245
Vermox, 946. See also Mebendazole
Vernakalant
for cardiac arrhythmias, 243–244
Versed, 387, 446. See also Midazolam
Very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), 
619, 620, 621f
Vesamicol, 82
Vesicare, 127. See also Solifenacin
Vesicle-associated membrane proteins 
(VAMPs), 82
Vesicle-associated transporter, 82, 83f
Vesicular glutamate transporter, 367
Vesicular monoamine transporter, 85
Vesicular proteoglycan, 82
Vestibular disturbances
H1-receptor antagonists for, 280
Vfend, 858. See also Voriconazole
Viagra, 209. See also Sildenafil
Vibativ, 808. See also Telavancin
Vibramycin, 819, 935. See also Doxycycline
Vicodin, 562. See also Hydrocodone/
acetaminophen
Vicoprofen, 562. See also Hydrocodone/
ibuprofen
Victoza, 766. See also Liraglutide
Vigabatrin
for seizures, 416–417
Viibryd, 539. See also Vilazodone
Vilazodone, 539
Vimpat, 427. See also Lacosamide
Vinblastine
for cancer, 962, 963t
as immunosuppressive drug, 989
Vinca alkaloids
for cancer, 962–964, 963t
Vincristine
for cancer, 962–964, 963t
as immunosuppressive drug, 989
Vinorelbine
for cancer, 963t, 964
VIP. See Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)
Viracept, 889. See also Nelfinavir
Viral infections
drugs used for, 861–890. See also specific 
drugs, indications, and 
Antiviral drugs
Viral replication, 861–862
Viramune, 889. See also Nevirapine
Viread, 889. See also Tenofovir
Viroptic, 889. See also Trifluridine
Virus(es)
cancer related to, 949–950
described, 861
Visicol, 1112. See also Sodium phosphate
Visine, 148. See also Tetrahydrozoline
Visken, 167, 189. See also Pindolol
Vistaril, 292, 387. See also Hydroxyzine
Vistide, 888. See also Cidofovir
Vitamin B12
for anemia, 584t, 586–588
Vitamin D
in bone mineral homeostasis, 770, 770f, 
771f, 772–773, 772f
for chronic kidney disease, 781–782
deficiency of
nutritional, 781
for hypocalcemia, 780
metabolites and analogs of, 772–773, 
773t
PTH and FGF23 interactions with, 
773–774
Vitamin D–dependent rickets
hereditary, 783–784
types I and II, 783–784
Vitamin K
for bleeding disorders, 614–615
Vitamin K1, 609f
Vitamin K cycle, 609, 609f
Vivactil, 539. See also Protriptyline
VLDLs. See Very-low-density lipoproteins 
(VLDLs)
VNS. See Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS)
Voltage-gated channels, 23–24, 24f
Volume of distribution, 38, 39t–41t, 1027
defined, 38
in drug concentration measurements, 50
in the elderly, 1052, 1052t
in infants and children, 1044–1045
pharmacokinetic mechanisms of, 1149
as pharmacokinetic variable, 48
Vomiting
nausea and. See Nausea and vomiting
prevention of
domperidone in, 1092
metoclopramide in, 1092
Voriconazole, 853f, 858
for systemic infections, 855
Vorinostat, 1077
dermatologic uses of, 1078t
Vytorin
preparations available, 633
VZV infection. See Varicella-zoster virus 
(VZV) infection
W
Warfarin, 608–611, 609f, 617
fetal effects of, 1043t
ionization constants of, 11t
during lactation, 1048t
pharmacokinetics of, 40t, 
608–609, 609f
Water
superoxidized
as antiseptic/disinfectant, 896
Water balance. See also Diuretics
drugs altering, 172–174, 174f
Water conjugation, 60t
Water excretion
agents altering, 263–265. See also 
specific diuretics
Wearing-off reactions, 487
Weight
as factor in drug dosage in infants and 
children, 1047, 1049, 1049t
Weight loss aids
ingredients in, 1122t
WelChol, 633. See also Colesevelam
Wellbutrin, 539. See also Bupropion
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, 393
Westhroid, 695. See also Thyroid desiccated
White thrombi, 601–602
Whole bowel irrigation
for iron poisoning, 586
Wilson’s disease, 496–497
Withdrawal syndrome, 549, 565
Wound(s)
classification criteria for
of NRC, 911
Wuchereria bancrofti
diethylcarbamazine citrate for, 940
Wytensin, 189. See also Guanabenz
X
X-linked agammaglobulinemia, 984–985
X-linked hypophosphatemia, 783
Xalatan, 328. See also Latanoprost
Xanax, 387. See also Alprazolam
Xanthine, 345f
Xenazine, 499. See also Tetrabenazine
Xenobiotics, 4, 53
Xenopex, 355. See also Levalbuterol
Xibrom, 655. See also Bromfenac
Xifaxan, 848. See also Rifaximin
Xolair, 355, 999. See also Omalizumab
Xylocaine, 249, 463. See also Lidocaine
Xylometazoline, 141, 148
Xyzal, 292. See also Levocetirizine
Y
Yellow fever vaccine, 1166t
Yodoxin, 935. See also Iodoquinol
Yohimbine, 155
Z
Zaditor, 292. See also Ketotifen
Zafirlukast, 328, 349, 355
Zalcitabine, 863f, 872t, 875, 889
Zaleplon
biotransformation of, 374, 375f, 378, 
387
pharmacokinetic properties of, 377t
Zanaflex, 148, 481. See also Tizanidine
Zanamivir
for influenza, 886–887
Zantac, 1111. See also Ranitidine
Zarontin, 427. See also Ethosuximide
Zaroxolyn, 270. See also Metolazone
Index    1229
Zebeta, 167, 189, 225. See also Bisoprolol
Zectran
toxicity rating for, 1008t
Zefazone, 807. See also Cefmetazole
Zegerid, 1111. See also Omeprazole
Zelnorm, 1112. See also Tegaserod
Zemplar, 786. See also Paricalcitol
Zemuron, 481. See also Rocuronium
Zenapax, 999. See also Daclizumab
Zenpep, 1111. See also Pancrelipase
Zephiran, 898. See also Benzalkonium
Zestril, 190, 225. See also Lisinopril
Zetia, 633. See also Ezetimibe
Zevalin, 999. See also Ibritumomab tiuxetan
Ziconotide, 562
for chronic pain, 550, 562
Zidovudine, 863f, 872t, 875–876, 
889
pharmacokinetic parameters for, 40t
during pregnancy, 876, 876t
Ziegler’s enzyme, 65
Zileuton, 349, 328, 355
Zinacef, 807. See also Cefuroxime
Zinc
for Wilson’s disease, 497
Ziprasidone, 504f, 519
advantages and disadvantages of, 
509t
dosage of, 510t
Zithromax, 819. See also 
Azithromycin
Zocor, 633. See also Simvastatin
Zofran, 1111. See also Ondansetron
Zoladex, 678. See also Goserelin acetate
Zoledronate, zoledronic acid
for osteoporosis, 
775, 783
Zolmitriptan
pharmacokinetics of, 286t
Zoloft, 539. See also Sertraline
Zolpidem, 374
biotransformation of, 377–378
pharmacokinetic properties of, 
377t
Zometa, 786. See also Zoledronic acid
Zomig, 292. See also Zolmitriptan
Zonegran, 427. See also Zonisamide
Zonisamide
for seizures, 417, 427
Zoster vaccine, 1166t
Zosyn, 807. See also Piperacillin 
and tazobactam 
sodium
Zovirax, 888. See also Acyclovir
Zyflo, 328, 355. See also Zileuton
Zyloprim, 656. See also Allopurinol
Zymine, 292. See also Triprolidine
Zyprexa, 519. See also Olanzapine
Zyrtec, 292. See also Cetirizine
Zyvox, 819. See also Linezolid
